BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  Problem  and  Its  Setting


Philura  Gould  Baldwin
MEMORIAL  Library


\


N


M


National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Inc.

Publications  in  the  order  of  their  issue

INCOME  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES

By  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  Willford  I.  King,  FREDiaucK  R.  Macaulay  and  Oswald  W.
Knauth

Volume  I.  A  summary  of  an  Investigation  of  the  Amount  and  Distribution  of  Income
in  the  United  States,  1909-1919,  intended  for  readers  who  are  primarily  interested
in  the  results. 152 pages, (Fifth  printing) $1.58 postpaid.

Volume  II.  A  report  giving  in  full  the  method  and  estimates  on  which  the  results
shown  in  Volume  I  are  based. 440  pages, (Second  printing) $5.15  postpaid.

DISTRIBUTION  OF  INCOME  BY  STATES  IN  1919
By  Oswald  W.  Knauth

A  study  of  the  share  of  each  state  in  the  national  income  with  a  special  analysis  of
the  amount  and  relative  importance  of farmers' income. 32 pages, (Out  of  print.)

BUSINESS  cycles  AND  UNEMPLOYMENT

By  the  staff  of  the  Bureau  with  16  collaborators.

Results  of  an  investigation  made  for  the  President's  Conference  on  Unemployment.
Twenty-one  topics  covered.  This  report  summarizes  the  known  facts  of  unemployment
and  describes  the  various  methods  suggested  to  alleviate  cyclical  unemployment.  405
pages,  $4.10  postpaid.

EMPLOYMENT,  HOURS,  AND  EARNINGS
IN  PROSPERITY  AND  DEPRESSION
By  Willford  I.  King

Results  of  an  inquiry  conducted  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  with
the  help  of  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Markets  and  Crop  Estimates  and  the  Bureau  of
Census,  for  the  President's  Conference  on  Unemployment.  Gives  full  details  of  investi-
gation summarized  in  Business  Cycles  and  Unemployment  to  which  it  is  a  companion
volume. 147  pages,  (Out  of  print.)

THE GROWTH  OF  AMERICAN  TRADE UNIONS, 1880-1923
By  Leo  Wolman

Results  of  a  comprehensive  investigation  of  trade  union  membership  year  by  year ;
its  fluctuations  with  the  business  cycle  ;  effects  *of  World  War  conditions ;  women  in
trade  unions.  Contains  also  a  detailed  analysis  of  the  total  working  population.  170
pages,  $3  postpaid.

INCOME  IN  THE  VARIOUS  STATES

ITS  SOURCES  AND  DISTRIBUTION,  1919,  1920  AND  1921

By  Maurice  Leven  and  Willford  I.  King

This  volume  gives  the  total  and  per  capita  income  carefully  adjusted  for  every  state,
with  special  tables  showing  the  incomes  of  farmers,  wage  earners,  persons  of  large
means,  and  other  matter  relevant  to  the  purchasing  power  and  economic  conditions
of  the  different  parts  of  the  country. 306  pages,  $5  postpaid.

BUSINESS  ANNALS

By  Willard  L.  Thorp  and  Wesley  C. Mitchell

A  descriptive  summary  of  business  conditions  in  United  States,  England,  France,
Germany,  Austria,  Russia,  Sweden,  Netherlands,  Italy,  Argentina,  Brazil,  Canada,  South
Africa,  Australia,  India,  Japan  and  China,  for  periods  of  36  to  136  years  with  an
introduction  Business  Cycles  as  Revealed  by  Business  Annals.  384  pages,  (Second
printing), $4 postpaid.

MIGRATION AND BUSINESS CYCLES

By  Harry  Jerome

A  statistical  study  of  the  shortage  and  surplus  of  labor  in  the  United  States  in  relation
to  immigration  and  emigration. 256  pages, $3.50  postpaid.

Copies  of  available  reports  may  be  obtained  upon  application
accompanied  by  remittance  to

NATIONAL  BUREAU  OF  ECONOMIC  RESEARCH,  Inc.
474  West  24th  Street,  New  York


PUBLICATIONS OF THE NATIONAL BUREAU OF
ECONOMIC RESEARCH,  INCORPORATED


No.  10


BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  Problem  and  Its  Setting


LIBRARY

BMiwiLiK  mm

BEAU.  OHIO


National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Inc.

Incorporated  under  the  Membership  Corporation  Laws  of  the  State  of  New  York,  January  29,  1920
ITS  ORGANIZATION  AND  PURPOSES

THE  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  was  organized  in  1920  in
response  to  a  growing  demand  for  exact  and  impartial  determinations
of  facts  bearing  on  economic,  social,  and  industrial  problems.

It  seeks  not  only  to  find  facts  and  make  them  known,  but  to  determine
them  in  such  manner  and  under  such  supervision  as  to  make  its  findings  carry
conviction  to  Liberal and Conservative alike.

Entire  control  of  the  Bureau  is  vested  in  a  Board  of  twenty-two  directors,
representing  universities,  learned  and  scientific  societies,  financial,  industrial,
agricultural,  commercial,  labor,  and  technical  organizations.

Rigid  provisions  in  the  Charter  and  By-Laws  guard  the  Bureau  from
becoming  a  source  of  profit  to  its  members,  directors,  or  officers  and  from
becoming  an  agency  for  propaganda.  No  report  of  the  Research,  Staff  may
be  published  without  the  approval  of  the  Directors  and  any  Director  who
dissents  from  any  finding  approved  by  a  majority  of  the  Board  may  have  such
dissent  published  with  the  majority  report.

The  members  of  the  Board  of  Directors  are  as  follows :
DIRECTORS  AT  LARGE
Harry  W.  Laidler,  Executive  Director,  The  League for Industrial  Democracy, Vice

President,
Thomas  W.  Lamont,  Member  of  the  Firm  of  J.  P.  Morgan  and  Company.
George  O.  May,  Senior  Partner,  Price,  Waterhouse  and  Company,  New  York,  Chairman

of  the  Board.
Elwood  Mead,  United  States  Commissionei  of  Reclamation,  Washington,  D.  C.
George  Soule,  Director,  The  Labor  Bureau,  Inc.
N.  I.  Stone,  Industrial  and  Financial  Consultant,  New  York.
Allyk  a.  Young,  Professor  of  Economics,  London  School  of  Economics.
Matthew  Woll,  President,  Union  Labor  Life  Insurance  Company.

DIRECTORS  BY  UNIVERSITY  APPOINTMENT

T.  S.  Adams,  Professor  of  Political  Economy,  Yale  University,  President.

John  R.  Commons,  Professor  of  Economics,  University  of  Wisconsin.

Edwin  F.  Gay,  Professor  of  Economic  History,  Harvard  University,  Director  of  Re-
search.

Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  Professor  of  Economics,  Columbia  University,  Director  of  Re-
search.

L.  C.  Marshall,  Director  of  Economics  and  Business,  University  of  Chicago.

Joseph  H.  Willits,  Professor  of  Industry,  and  Director,  Department  of  Industrial
Research,  Wharton  School  of  Finance  and  Commerce,  University  of  Pennsylvania.

DIRECTORS  BY  APPOINTMENT  OF  OTHER  REPRESENTATIVE
ORGANIZATIONS
Hugh  Frayne,  American  Federation  of  Labor.
David  Friday,  American  Economic  Association.
Lee  Galloway,  American  Management  Association.
Robert  B.  Wolf,  American Engineering  Council.
George  E.  Roberts,  American  Bankers  Association,  Treasurer.
Malcolm  C.  Rorty,  American  Statistical  Association.
A.  W.  Shaw,  National  Publishers'  Association.
Gray  Silver,  American  Farm  Bureau  Federation.


Oswald  W.  Knauth,  Recording  Secretary.  Gustav  R.  Stahl,  Executive  Secretary.

RESEARCH  STAFF
Edwin  F.  Gay,  Director.  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  Director.

WiLLFORD  I.  King. Frederick  C.  Mills. Frederick  R.  Macaulay. Harry  Jerome.
Leo  Wolman.  Willard  L.  Thorp. Walter  F.  Willcox.  Simon  Kuznets.


BUSINESS CYCLES

The  Problem  and  Its  Setting


By
WESLEY  C.  MITCHELL

DIRECTOR  OF  RESEARCH

IN THE

NATIONAL  BUREAU  OF  ECONOMIC  RESEARCH


With  a  Foreword  by
EDWIN  F.  GAY

DIRECTOR OF RESEARCH


LIBRARY

BMIH-llLACE  COLLEGE

BEBtA.  OHIO

NEW  YORK

NATIONAL  BUREAU  OF  ECONOMIC
RESEARCH,  INC.

1928


Copyright,  1927,  by

National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  Inc.

All  rights  reserved

First  Printing,  July,  1927

Second  Printing,  August,  1927

Third  Printing,  November,  1927

Fourth  Printing,  March,  1928

Fifth  Printing,  October,  1928


Printed  in  the  United  States  of  America  by

J. J. LITTLE AND IVES COMPANY, NEW YORK


.0  0,^^  fiiiiaWIII-MLIiet  COLLESl


FOREWORD

There  is  printed  with  this  volume  a  resolution  on  the  relation
of  the  directors  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  to  the
economic  work  of  the  Bureau.  Since  the  establishment  of  the  Na-
tional Bureau  it  has  been  the  practice  to  submit  for  the  approval  of
the  Board  of  Directors  or  their  executive  committee  all  proposals
for  new  work  to  be  undertaken  by  the  staff,  and  reports  on  work  in
progress  have  been  made  regularly  to  the  executive  committee  and
to  the  annual  meeting  of  the  Board.  The  completed  studies  in  draft
form  have  been  circulated  for  staff  criticism  and  amendment  and
then  have  been  sent  by  the  directors  of  research  to  all  the  members
of  the  Board.  Only  when  the  study  had  been  approved  in  writ-
ing by  a  majority  of  the  Board  could  it  be  released  for  publication,
and  dissenting  views,  if  not  accepted  by  the  staff,  were  published
with  the  book.  The  new  resolution  defines  more  precisely  the  steps
in  this  procedure,  by  requiring  a  preliminary  written  statement  of
principles  and  methods  and  a  synopsis  to  accompany  the  final  manu-
script. It  states  accurately  the  responsibility  of  the  Board.  It  also
fixes  a  time-limit  on  its  voting.

The  action  of  the  Board  implies  a  recognition  of  the  success  of  the
National  Bureau's  plan  for  securing  from  men  of  very  divergent
opinions  a  guarantee  of  the  impartiality  of  its  findings.  Some  friends
of  the  enterprise  feared  at  the  outset  that  the  plan  might  prove  to
be  unworkable — for  opposite  reasons.  Either,  they  said,  the  dis-
agreements would  be  so  serious  as  to  embarass  the  staff  and  impede
publication,  or  it  would  be  found  impossible  to  induce  busy  men  to
give  the  time  necessary  for  such  scientific  jury-service.  But  such  men
have  been  found,  and  their  differences  have  been  a  source  of  strength
instead  of  embarrassment.  In  practice,  it  is  true,  some  members  of
the  Board  have  occasionally  given  their  approval  after  merely  cursory
examination  of  the  work  submitted  to  them.  It  is  for  the  alleviation
of  conscience  in  such  cases  that  the  briefer  synopsis  is  to  be  provided
and  that  the  last  clause  of  the  sixth  paragraph  of  the  resolution  has
been  inserted.  But  the  responsibility  of  the  Board  toward  the  public
is  obviously  too  great  and  too  keenly  realized  to  permit  any  relaxation


"^


A


vi  FOREWORD

in  the  established  custom.  The  majority  of  the  members  of  the
Board  will  in  the  future,  as  in  the  past,  continue  to  read  and  criticize
the  manuscripts,  often  bulky,  which  are  submitted  by  the  staff  of
the  National  Bureau.  Our  jurymen,  fairly  representative  of  the
various  currents  of  thought  in  American  economic  life,  have  effec-
tively manifested  their  desire,  not  to  accommodate  their  opinions,
but  to  seek  a  common  basis  of  agreed  facts.  Since  the  staff  of  the
National  Bureau  is  animated  by  the  same  purpose,  it  has  welcomed
gratefully  the  criticism  and  cooperation  of  its  governing  Board,  and
it  counts  on  the  continuation  of  a  relationship,  unique  in  scientific
research,  which  the  new  and  more  precise  regulations  promise  to  make
even  closer  and  more  helpful.

It  happens  that  Professor  Mitchell's  book,  "Business  Cycles,
The  Problem  and  Its  Setting,''  is  the  first  to  which  the  new  regula-
tions apply.  Since,  therefore,  it  carries  the  first  publication  of  the
Board's  resolution,  it  has  seemed  desirable  to  make  this  accompany-
ing explanation.  The  coincidence,  fortunately,  gives  me  an  oppor-
tunity to  express  on  behalf  of  the  National  Bureau  our  lively  satis-
faction in  presenting  the  first  section  of  Professor  Mitchell's  work,
which  will  give  on  its  completion  a  rewriting,  based  on  new  and  fuller
statistical  material,  of  his  book  on  "Business  Cycles,"  published  in
1913.  The  National  Bureau  had  already,  in  1921,  requested  Pro-
fessor Mitchell  to  undertake,  with  the  assistance  of  its  available  re-
sources, a  comprehensive  analysis  of  business  cycles,  when  Mr.
Hoover  turned  to  it  for  aid  in  the  work  of  the  President's  Commission
on  Unemployment.  The  Bureau's  staff,  under  Professor  Mitchell's
direction,  produced  the  report  on  "Business  Cycles  and  Unemploy-
ment" which  appeared  as  volume  IV  of  the  National  Bureau's  pub-
lications and  was  also  issued  by  the  Commission.  The  National
Bureau  was  glad  to  make  in  this  way  its  contribution,  then  especially
timely,  to  that  diffusion  of  knowledge  which  is  essential  if  the  se-
verity of  recurring  business  cycles  is  to  be  mitigated.  But  since  its
original  undertaking,  however  much  stimulated  by  the  economic
situation  of  1921,  was  motivated  primarily  by  scientific  interest,  it
was  also  glad  in  1923  to  turn  to  the  patient  labor  of  fact  collection
and  analysis.  The  first  of  the  series  of  studies  of  business  cycles.
Dr.  Thorp's  "Business  Annals,"  was  published  last  year.  The  pres-
ent volume  will  be  followed  by  the  publication,  in  successive  install-
ments, of  an  exceptionally  complete  collection  of  statistical  material,


FOREWORD  vii

now  being  utilized  by  Professor  Mitchell  in  the  preparation  of  the
final  section  of  his  work.

Just  as  the  estimating  of  the  national  income,  which  had  been  the
first  and  remains  the  continuing  task  of  the  National  Bureau,  led
to  the  need  of  inquiry  into  the  causes  of  fluctuations  in  that  income,
and  thus  to  the  related  study  of  business  cycles,  so  Professor  MitchelFs
interest  in  business  cycles  was  closely  linked  with  his  earlier  investi-
gation of  prices  and  monetary  instability.  His  book  of  1908  on
^^Gold  Prices  and  Wages  under  the  Greenback  Standard'^  was  thus
the  forerunner  of  his  "Business  Cycles"  of  1913  and  of  his  fresh
attack  upon  the  problem  which  he  has  undertaken  with  the  National
Bureau  of  Economic  Research.  Two  decades  of  a  life-time,  so  con-
sistently employed,  approach,  in  statistical  parlance,  to  the  dignity  of
a  "trend, '*  and  there  are  many,  in  addition  to  the  professional  statis-
ticians, who  will  watch  with  keen  interest  this  particular  curve  of
development.

Edwin  F.  Gay.


RESOLUTION

ON  THE  Relation  of  the  Directors  to  the
Economic  Work  of  the  Bureau


1 — ^The  object  of  the  Bureau  is  to  ascertain  and  to  present  to  the  public  important
economic  facts  and  the  interpretation  thereof  in  a  scientific  and  impartial  man-
ner, free  from  bias  and  propaganda.  The  Board  of  Directors  is  charged  with  the
responsibility  of  ensuring  and  guaranteemg  to  the  pubhc  that  the  work  of  the
Bureau  IS  carried  out  in  strict  conformity  with  this  object.

2 — The  Directors  shall  appoint  one  or  more  directors  of  research  chosen  upon  con-
siderations of  integrity,  ability,  character,  and  freedom  from  prejudice,  who  shall
undertake  to  conduct  economic  researches  in  conformity  with  the  principles  of
the  Bureau.

3 — The  director  or  directors  of  research  shall  submit  to  the  members  of  the  Board,  or
to  its  executive  committee  when  such  is  constituted  and  to  which  authority  has
been  delegated  by  the  Board,  proposals  in  respect  to  researches  to  be  instituted;
and  no  research  shall  be  instituted  without  the  approval  of  the  Board,  or  of  its
executive  committee.

4 — Following  approval  by  the  Board,  or  its  executive  committee,  of  a  research  pro-
posed, the  director  or  directors  of  research  shall  as  soon  as  possible  submit  to
the  members  of  the  Board,  by  written  communication,  a  statement  of  the  prin-
ciples to  be  pursued  in  the  study  of  the  problem  and  the  methods  to  be  em-
ployed; and  the  director  or  directors  of  research  shall  not  proceed  to  investigate,
study,  and  report  in  detail,  until  the  plan  so  outlined  has  been  approved  by  the
board  or  the  executive  committee  thereof.

5 — Before  the  publication  of  the  results  of  any  inquiry  the  director  or  directors  of
research  shall  submit  to  the  Board  a  synopsis  of  such  results,  drawing  attention
to  the  main  conclusions  reached,  the  major  problems  encountered,  and  the  solu-
tions adopted,  the  nature  of  the  sources  from  which  the  basic  facts  have  been  de-
rived, and  such  other  information  as  in  their  opinion  shall  have  a  material  bearing
on  the  validity  of  the  conclusions  and  their  suitability  for  publication  in  accord-
ance with  the  principles  of  the  Bureau.

6 — A  copy  of  any  manuscript  proposed  to  be  published  shall  also  be  submitted  to
each  member  of  the  Board,  and  every  member  shall  be  entitled,  if  publication  be
approved,  to  have  published  also  a  memorandum  of  any  dissent  or  reservation  he
may  express,  together  with  a  brief  statement  of  his  reasons  therefore,  should  he
so  desire.  The  publication  of  a  volume  does  not,  however,  imply  that  each  mem-
ber of  the  Board  of  Directors  has  read  the  manuscript  and  passed  upon  its  va-
lidity in  every  detail.

7— The  results  of  any  inquiry  shall  not  be  published  except  with  the  approval  of  at
least  a  majority  of  the  entire  Board  and  a  two-thirds  majority  of  all  those  mem-
bers of  the  Board  who  shall  have  voted  on  the  proposal  within  the  time  fixed
for  the  receipt  of  votes  on  the  publication  proposed;  such  limit  shall  be  45  days
from  the  date  of  the  submission  of  the  synopsis  and  manuscript  of  the  proposed
publication,  except  that  the  Board  may  extend  the  limit  in  its  absolute  discretion,
and  shall  upon  the  request  of  any  member  extend  the  limit  for  a  period  not
exceeding  30  days.

8— A  copy  of  this  memorandum  shall,  unless  otherwise  determined  by  the  Board,
be  printed  in  each  copy  of  every  work  published  by  the  Bureau.


PREFACE

Much  has  been  learned  about  business  cycles  since  1913,  when  my
first  book  on  that  problem  was  published.  Economic  theorists  have
been  studying  the  phenomena  with  increasing  energy  and  thorough-
ness— Albert  Aftalion  and  Jean  Lescure  in  France;  Mentor  Bounia-
tian  and  S.  A.  Pervushin  in  Russia;  Gustav  Cassel  in  Sweden;  John
Maurice  Clark,  William  T.  Foster,  Waddill  Catchings,  Alvin  H.  Han-
sen, and  Henry  L.  Moore  in  America;  R.  H.  Hawtrey,  John  A.  Hob-
son,  A.  C.  Pigou,  and  Dennis  H.  Robertson  in  England ;  Emil  Lederer,
Joseph  Schumpeter  and  Arthur  Spiethoff  in  Germany,  to  name  but
a  few.  Economic  statisticians  have  made  rapid  progress  in  analyzing
time  series — witness  the  accomplishment  of  Warren  M.  Persons  and
his  many  co-workers  here  and  abroad.  Most  important  of  all  in
promise  for  the  future,  the  leading  commercial  nations  are  learning
to  keep  more  adequate  records  of  their  economic  activities.  Of  the
extraordinary  business  fluctuations  through  which  the  world  has  been
passing  of  late,  we  have  fuller  knowledge  than  of  any  earlier  cycles.

For  perhaps  ten  years  my  unwieldy  quarto  has  been  out  of  print.
At  least  as  long  it  has  been  out  of  date.  Nor  could  it  be  brought
abreast  of  current  research  by  mere  revision.  It  became  plain  that  if
I  could  add  anything  of  value  to  the  work  in  process  it  would  be  only
by  writing  a  new  book.  But  single-handed,  I  could  not  manage  the
wealth  of  new  materials,  or  apply  the  improved  methods  of  statistical
analysis.  From  this  quandary  I  was  rescued  by  the  National  Bureau
of  Economic  Research,  which  offered  to  collect  and  analyze  the  data
I  needed,  and  to  supply  the  gaps  in  my  equipment.

Despite  the  National  Bureau^s  efficient  aid,  my  resurvey  of  the
field  is  taking  more  time  than  the  first  survey  took.  This  work  has
been  my  chief  concern  since  1923,  yet  only  one  volume  is  ready  for
publication.  It  deals,  as  the  sub-title  indicates,  with  "The  Problem
and  its  Setting."  A  second  volume  on  "The  Rhythm  of  Business  Ac-
tivity" will  follow  as  soon  as  I  can  finish  it.

The  present  treatise  resembles  its  forerunner  in  general  plan.
But  the  statistical  data  prove  so  extensive  that  they  must  be  pub-


X  PREFACE

lished  separately  in  a  series  of  volumes,  instead  of  being  included  as
before  with  the  theoretical  discussion.  There  is  the  more  reason  for
this  change  in  that  the  National  Bureau's  collection  of  tables  prom-
ises to  be  a  source  book  of  great  value  to  many  workers  concerned
with  other  problems  than  business  cycles.  Also,  the  collection  of
annals,  which  in  the  earlier  treatise  covered  only  four  countries  and
23  years,  has  grown  into  a  survey  embracing  17  countries  and  extend-
ing back  to  1790  in  the  United  States  and  England.  That  collection,
made  by  Dr.  Willard  L.  Thorp,  has  already  appeared  in  print.

I  have  not  been  able  to  devise  a  new  way  of  conducting  the  in-
quiry which  seemed  better  than  the  way  followed  in  1913.  My  earlier
impressions  that  business  cycles  consist  of  exceedingly  complex  inter-
actions among  a  considerable  number  of  economic  processes,  that  to
gain  insight  into  these  interactions  one  must  combine  historical  studies
with  quantitative  and  qualitative  analysis,  that  the  phenomena  are
peculiar  to  a  certain  form  of  economic  organization,  and  that  under-
standing of  this  scheme  of  institutions  is  prerequisite  to  an  under-
standing of  cyclical  fluctuations — these  impressions  have  been  con-
firmed by  my  efforts  to  treat  the  subject  in  a  simpler  fashion.  Hence
the  new  version  is  not  shorter  or  easier  than  its  predecessor.  Much
to  my  regret,  it  makes  even  heavier  demands  upon  a  reader^s  time
and  effort.

From  the  Staff  and  the  Directors  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Eco-
nomic Research  I  have  had  most  generous  help.  Among  the  staff
members  Drs.  Frederick  C.  Mills,  Willford  I.  King,  Willard  L.  Thorp
and  Simon  S.  Kuznets  have  put  their  technical  skill  freely  at  my
disposal.  Among  the  Directors,  Professor  Allyn  A.  Young  and  Colonel
Malcolm  C.  Rorty  have  made  especially  searching  criticisms  of  the
first  draft.  Dr.  Edwin  F.  Gay,  Director  of  Research,  has  been  my
mainstay  for  counsel  from  the  beginning  of  the  undertaking.  Several
other  friends  have  read  parts  of  the  manuscript  and  suggested  im-
provements— Messrs.  Carl  Snyder  and  Karl  Karsten,  Professors  Wal-
ter F.  Willcox,  Warren  M.  Persons,  Vladimir  G.  Simkhovitch,  and
James  W.  Angell.  The  Harvard  Committee  on  Economic  Research
through  its  chairman  Professor  Charles  J.  Bullock,  the  American
Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company  through  its  statistician  Mr.
Seymour  L.  Andrew,  Sir  WilHam  Beveridge,  Mr.  Snyder,  and  Dr.
Dorothy  S.  Thomas  have  kindly  consented  to  the  free  use  I  have
made  of  their  contributions. Miss  Edith  Handler  of  the  National


PREFACE  xi

Bureau  has  made  most  of  the  charts.  My  secretary,  Miss  Catherine
Lochhead,  has  shared  in  the  labors  of  proof  reading  and  indexing.
To  all  these  men  and  women,  and  to  the  many  co-workers  by
whose  criticisms  and  constructive  suggestions  I  have  sought  to  profit,
my  hearty  thanks  are  due.

Wesley  C.  Mitchell.
New  York  City,  June  1st,  1927.


CONTENTS


VAGB


Chapter  I. The  Processes  Involved  in  Business  Cycles

I.  The  Plan  of  Attack 1

II.  The  Discovery  of  the  Problem 3

III.  The  Multiplying  Solutions 7

IV.  The  Theories  now  Current 11

1.  The  Weather 12

2.  Uncertainty 16

3.  The  Emotional  Factor  in  Business  Decisions ...  17

4.  Innovations,  Promotion,  Progress 20

5.  The  Processes  of  Saving  and  Investing 23

6.  Construction  Work 26

7.  Generalized  Over-Production 29

8.  Banking  Operations 31

9.  Production  and  the  Flow  of  Money  Incomes  ...  35
10. The  Role  Played  by  Profit-Making 42

V.  Plans  for  Further  Work

1.  Problems  Raised  by  the  Diversity  of  Explanations  . .  47

2.  A  Classification  of  the  Theories 49

3.  The  Necessity  for  Making  Measurements ....  53

4.  Causal  Theory  and  Analytic  Description ....  54

5.  History and Theory 55

6.  The  Framework  of  the  Investigation 58

Chapter  II. Economic  Organization  and  Business  Cycles

I.  The  Historical  Connection  between  Business  Cycles  and  the

Use  of  Money 61

1.  A  Preliminary  Statement 61

2.  The  Meaning  of  "Business  Economy" 63

3.  The  Evolution  of  Business  Economy 66

4.  When  Business  Cycles  First  Appear 75

II.  The  Modem  Organization  for  Making  Money 82

1.  The  Money-Making  Population 82

2.  The  Business  Enterprise 86

xiii


xiv  CONTENTS


PAGE


3.  The  Size  of  Business  Enterprises  and  Business  Cycles  86

4.  Economic  Resources  and  the  National  Dividend  . .  90

5.  The  Interdependence  of  Business  Enterprises  . . .  100

6.  Profits  as  the  Clue  to  Business  Fluctuations  ....  105

7.  Factors  Affecting  Business  Profits 107

III.  The  System  of  Prices 108

1.  The  Prices  of  Consumers'  Commodities 108

2.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods  in  Relation  to  the

Prices  of  Consumers'  Commodities 110

3.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods  in  Relation  to  Ante-

cedent Prices 110

4.  The  Prices  of  Business  Enterprises Ill

5.  The  Prices  of  Services  to  Persons 112

6.  The  Interrelations  Among  Prices 113

7.  The  Role  of  Prices  in  Economic  Life 116

IV.  The  Monetary  Mechanism 116

1.  Ambiguity  of  the  Terms  "Money"  and  ^'Currency"  .  117

2.  The  Relative  Importance  of  Checks  and  of  Coin  and

Paper  Money  in  Making  Payments 117

3.  The  Elasticity  of  the  Circulating  Medium  . . . .119

4.  The  Velocity  of  Circulation 122

5.  The  Quantity  Theory  and  Business  Cycles  ....  128

V.  The  Flow  of  Money  Payments 139

1.  Production  and  Purchasing  Power 139

2.  The  Flow  of  Money  Incomes  to  Individuals  ....  140

0.  The  Outflow  of  Personal  Incomes 146

4.  The  Flow  of  Payments  Among  Business  Enterprises  .  149

5.  Saving  and  Spending 151

VI.  The  Guidance  of  Economic  Activity 154

1.  The  Problem  of  Adjusting  Supply  to  Demand  in  a

Business  Economy 154

2.  The  Role  Played  by  Business  Managements  ....  157

3.  The  Role  Played  by  Technical  Experts 159

4.  The  Role  Played  by  Lenders 162

5.  The  Role  Played  by  Consumers .  163

6.  The  Role  Played  by  Government 167

7.  The  Alleged  "Planlessness"  of  Production  ....  169


CONTENTS  XV


PAGE


VII.  International  Differences  in  Economic  Organization  . . .  174

1.  The  Uneven  Development  of  Business  Economy . .  174

2.  The  Proportion  of  the  Workers  Engaged  in  Farming  .  175

3.  Enterprise  and  Thrift 177

4.  Monetary  and  Banking  Systems 178

5.  Government's  Share  in  Directing  Economic  Activity  .  179

VIII.  Conclusion 180

1.  The  Raison  d'Etre  of  Chapter  II 180

2.  A  Summary 182

3.  The  Conception  of  Equilibrium 186

Chapter  III. The  Contribution  of  Statistics

I.  The  Current  Distinction  between  Theoretical  and  Statistical

Work 189

II.  Development  of  the  Statistical  Approach 190

1.  Why  the  Early  Writers  upon  Business  Cycles  Made

Slight  Use  of  Statistics 190

2.  The  Growth  of  Statistical  Technique 193

3.  The  Accumulation  of  Statistical  Data 197

4.  The  Present  Situation 199

III.  The  Analysis  of  Time  Series 202

1.  The  Quality  and  Quantity  of  Economic  Statistics  . .  202

2.  Time  Series  in  Their  Raw  State 205

3.  The  Problem  of  Secular  Trends 212

(1)  The  Empirical  Approach  to  the  Problem  . . .  213

(2)  The  Interpretation  of  Secular  Trends ...  221

(3)  The  Hypotheses  of  '^Secondary  Trends"  and  of

''Long  Waves" 226

(4)  Conclusion 230

4.  The  Problem  of  Seasonal  Variations 233

(1)  The  Causes  and  Pervasiveness  of  Seasonal  Varia-

tions 236

(2)  Methods  of  Measuring  Average  Seasonal  Varia-

tions 240

(3)  Efforts  to  Measure  Changing  Seasonal  Varia-

tions 243

(4)  Conclusion 245

5.  The  Problem  of  Irregular  Fluctuations 249

(1)  The  Concept  of  Irregular  Fluctuations  . . .  249


xvi  CONTENTS


PAOK


(2)  Irregular  Fluctuations  in  the  Theory  of  Busi-
ness Cycles 252

6. The  Problem  of  Isolating  Cyclical  Fluctuations  . . . 255

IV.  On  Measuring  the  Relationships  Among  Time  Series  . . . 261

1.  The  Correlation  of  Time  Series  and  Its  Pitfalls  ... 262

2.  Transformations  of  Time  Series  in  the  Investigation

of  their  Relationships 265

3.  Conclusion 269

V.  The  Amplitude  and  the  Timing  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluc-
tuations in  Different  Processes 270

1.  The  Amplitude  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  . .  271

2.  The  Time  Sequence  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  280

VI.  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions 290

1.  A  Collection  of  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions . . 291

(1)  Beveridge's  Chart  of  'The  Pulse  of  the  Nation,"

Great  Britain,  1856-1907 291

(2)  Persons'  ''Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"

United  States,  1903-1914 293

(3)  The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Com-

pany's "Index  of  General  Business  Compared
with  Normal,"  United  States,  1877  to  date  . 294

(4)  Snyder's  "Index  of  the  Volume  of  Trade,"  United

States,  1919-1925 295

(5)  Persons'  "Index  of  Trade,"  United  States,  1903-

1925 297

(6)  Miss  Thomas'  Quarterly  Index  of  ''British  Busi-

ness Cycles,"  1855-1914 299

(7)  Axe  and  Flinn's  "Index  of  General  Business  Con-

ditions for  Germany,"  1898-1914  .... 302

(8)  Annual  Indexes  of  Business  Cycles  .... 302

(9)  Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business,"  United

States,  1875-1924 304

(10)  Frickey's  "Index  of  Outside  Clearings,"  United

States,  1875-1914 305

(11)  Snyder's  "Index  of  Deposits  Activity,"  United

States,  1875-1924 . 307

2.  A  Critique  of  the  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions  . . 307

(1)  Indexes  of  the  Pecuniary  Volume  of  Business  . 312


CONTENTS  xvii


FAGB


(2)  Indexes  of  the  Physical  Volume  of  Trade  or

of  Production 315

(3)  Indexes  of  ^'General  Business  Conditions"  . .  320

(4)  Forecasting  Sequences 324

3. What  the  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions  Show  about

Business  Cycles 326

(1)  The  ''Saw-Tooth"  Contour  of  the  Business  In-

dexes 329

(2)  Month-to-Month  Changes 330

(3)  On  Identifying  Business  Cycles  by  the  Use  of

the  Business  Indexes 334

(4)  Time  Relationships  Among  the  Business  Indexes  336

(5)  Duration  of  Periods  of  Expansion  and  Contrac-

tion 337

(6)  The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles 339

(7)  The  Amplitude  of  Business  Cycles ....  343

(8)  The Distinctive Character  of Each Business

Cycle 354

VII.  The  Need  of  Combining  Theory,  Statistics  and  History .  357

Chapter  IV. The  Contribution  of  Business  Annals

I.  The  National  Bureau's  Collection  of  Business  Annals  . .  361

II.  The  Trustworthiness  of  the  Annals 363

1.  Sources  and  Methods  of  Compilation 363

2.  A  Comparison  of  Business  Annals  and  Business  Indexes  365

III.  The  Cyclical  Character  of  Business  Fluctuations  ....  376

1.  The  ^'Normal  State  of  Trade"  a  Figment  ....  376

2.  Use  of  the  Term  ''Cycles" 377

3.  The  Phases  of  Business  Cycles 378

4.  "Crises"  and  "Recessions" 378

5.  ''Prosperity" and  "Depression" 381

6.  The  Uniformity  and  Variability  of  Business  Cycles  .  382

IV.  The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles 383

1.  Current  Estimates  of  Average  Length 383

2.  Measurements  Based  upon  the  Annals 386

3.  Frequency  Distributions  of  the  Measurements  Based

upon  the  Annals 391

4.  The  Relative  Duration  of  Prosperity  and  Depression  .  407


xviii  LIST  OF  TABLES

PAGD

5.  Secular  Changes  in  the  Average  Duration  of  Business

Cycles 412

6.  Conclusions 416

V.  International  Relationships  Among  Business  Cycles  . . .  424

1.  A Conspectus of Business Conditions in Different

Countries 424

2.  How  Closely  the  Cycles  in  Different  Countries  Agree  .  438

3.  Domestic  and  Foreign  Factors  in  Business  Cycles  . .  446

Chapter  V. Results  and  Plans

I.  The  Concept  of  Business  Cycles 451

1.  Evolution  of  the  Concept 451

2.  A  Working  Concept  of  Business  Cycles 455

(1)  Elements  Derived  from  Business  Reports . . 455

(2)  Elements  Derived from  Theories of  Business

Cycles 459

(3)  Elements  Derived  from  Statistical  Analysis .  463

3.  Two Criticisms Considered 464

4.  A  Definition  of  Business  Cycles 468

II.  Tentative  Working  Plans .  469

Addenda . 475

Index 481

LIST  OF  TABLES

Table  1. A  Conspectus  of  the  Population  of  the  United  States  in

1920 83

Table  2.  Cyclical  Decline  in  the  Volume  of  Employment  Offered  by
Different  Industries,  and  by  Establishments  of  Different  Sizes,
from  the  Peak  of  Prosperity  in  1920  to  the  Trough  of  Depression
in  1921-1922 88

Table  3.  The  Velocity  of  Deposit  Currency,  Estimated  from  Total
Payments  by  Check  and  Average  Deposits  Subject  to  Check.  The
United  States,  1919-1926 126

Table  4. Estimates  of  Income  Received  in  Money  by  Individuals.

The  United  States,  1919-1926 . 141

Table  5. Personal  Incomes  Reported  to  the  United  States  Bureau  of

Internal  Revenue,  Classified  by  Sources. 1919-1924  .... 142


LIST  OF  TABLES  xix

PAGB

Table  6. Relative  Variability  of  the  Flow  of  Money  Incomes  from

Different  Sources. The  United  States,  1919-1924 144

Table  7. Channels  Through  Which  Family  Expenditures  Flow  . . 147

Table  8. Estimated  Proportion  of  Income  Received  in  Money  Spent

in  Retail  Shops. The  United  States,  1919-1923 ...".. 148

Table  9.  Comparison  of  the  Estimated  Volume  of  Payments,  Income
Received  in  Money,  and  Volume  of  Retail  Sales.  The  United
States,  1919  to  1923  or  1926 150

Table  10. Proportion of Gainfully Employed Males Engaged in

Agricultural  Pursuits  in  Various  Countries 176

Table  11. Relative  Amplitude  of  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations

of  Various  Economic  Processes 273

A.  American  Series,  1860,  1862  or  1866  to  1880 273

B.  American  Series,  1903-1914  or  1903-1918,  by  months  . .  274

C.  American  Series,  1879-1896  and  1897-1913 274

D.  American  National  Banking  Series,  1901-1914,  by  5  "calls"

yearly 275

E.  Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits  in  American  Cities,  by  Months,

1919-February,  1923 275

F.  American  Series  Showing  Volume  of  Wholesale  and  Retail

Trade  by  Months,  1919-1925 276

G.  British  Series,  by  Quarters,  before  1850 276

H. British  Series,  by  Quarters,  1903- June  30,  1914  .... 277

I. British  Series,  by  Years,  various  dates  to  1913  ....  277

J. British  Series,  by  Quarters,  various  dates  to  1914  . . .  278
K. German  Series,  by  Quarters  or  Months,  various  dates  to

1913-14 . 278

Table  12. Time  Sequences  in  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  of

Various  Economic Series 282

A.  American  Series,  by  Months,  January,  1903-July,  1914  .  282

B.  American  Series,  by  Months,  January,  1902-December,  1908  283

Table  13.  Coefficients  of  Correlation  between  the  Cyclical-Irregular
Fluctuations  of  Industrial  Stock  Prices  and  an  Index  of  ''General
Business" 284

Table  14.  Dates  of  the  Troughs  and  the  Crests  of  American  Business
Cycles  in  1878-1924  according  to  Five  Monthly  Indexes  of  Busi-
ness Activity 335

Table  15.  Duration  of  Alternate  Periods  of  Business  Expansion  and
Business  Contraction  in  the  United  States,  1878-1923,  according
to  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity 338


^


XX  LIST  OF  TABLES

PAGE

Table  16. Duration  of  Business  Cycles  in  the  United  States,  1878-

1925,  according  to  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity  .... 340

Table  17.  Percentage  Deviations  from  their  Base  Lines  of  Five  In-
dexes of  Business  Activity  at  the  Crests  and  Troughs  of  Succes-
sive Business  Cycles. United  States,  1878-1923 346

Table  18.  Amplitude  of  the  Rise  from  Trough  to  Crest  and  of  the
Decline  from  Crest  to  Trough  in  the  American  Business  Cycles
of  1878-1923,  as  shown  by  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity  . . 347

Table  19.  Dates  of  the  Most  and  the  Least  Violent  Cyclical  Fluctua-
tions in  American  Business,  1878-1923,  according  to  Five  Indexes
of  Business  Activity 348

Table  20. Amplitude  of  Combined  Rise  and  Fall  in  Violent  Business

Cycles,  according  to  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity  . . . 348

Table  21.  Frequency  Distributions  of  111  Observations  upon  the
Amplitude  of  the  Percentage  Deviations  of  Five  Business  In-
dexes from  their  Respective  Trends  at  the  Troughs  and  Crests
of  American  Business  Cycles: 1878-1923 351

Table  22.  Frequency  Distribution  of  106  Observations  made  from
Five  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions,  upon  the  Amplitude  of  the
Rise  from  Trough  to  Crest  and  the  Decline  from  Crest  to  Trough
in  American  Business  Cycles,  1878-1923,  reckoned  in  Percentages
of  Trend  Values 353

Table  23. Business  Recessions  in  the  United  States  and  Approximate

Duration  of  Business  Cycles, 1790-1925 387

Table  24.  Business  Recessions  in  England  and  Approximate  Dura-
tion of  Business  Cycles,  1790-1925 390

Table  25. Dates  of  Business  Recessions  in  Fifteen  Countries:  Various

Years  to  1925 ' 391

Table  26. Frequency  Distribution  of  Business  Cycles  according  to

Duration  in  Years 398

Table  27.  Frequency  Distribution  of  Business  Cycles  according  to
Approximate  Duration  in  Years:  by  Countries,  Groups  of  Coun-
tries and  Periods 399

Table  28. Relative  Duration  of  Different  Phases  of  Business  Cycles

in  Seventeen  Countries,  1890-1925 408

Table  29.  Relative  Duration  of  the  Prosperous  and  Depressed  Phases
in  the  Business  Cycles  of  Seventeen  Countries  during  Various
Periods. 410

able  30.  Relative  Duration  of  the  Prosperous  and  the  Depressed
Phases  of  Business  Cycles  in  Periods  of  Rising  and  Declining
Trends  of  Wholesale  Prices:  England  and  the  United  States,
1790-1925 411


LIST  OF  CHARTS  ixi

PAGS

Table  31. Relative  Duration  of  Phases  of  Depression  and  Phases  of

Prosperity  in  Business  Cycles  Lasting  Nine  Years  or  More  . . 412

Table  32.  Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Coun-
tries 425

Table  33.  Agreement  and  Difference  of  Phase  in  English,  French,
German,  Austrian  and  American  Business  Cycles.  Various
Periods 441


LIST  OF  CHARTS

Chart  1. Sample  Time  Series  Plotted  on  a  Logarithmic  Vertical  Scale 211

Chart  2. Examples  of  Secular  Trends  of  Time  Series  Fitted  by  Various

Methods 217

Chart  3. Samples  of  Time  Series  Plotted  as  Deviations  from  Secular

Trends  Represented  by  Horizontal  Lines 222

Chart  4. A  Collection  of  Time  Series  to  Illustrate  Differences  in

Seasonal  Variations 234

Chart  5. Examples  of  Seasonal  Variations  which  Have  Changed  in

the  Course  of  Time 241

Chart  6. Indexes  of  Seasonal  Variations  Made  by  the  Moving-average

median  Method  and  the  Link-relative  Method 246

Chart  7. Indexes  of  Seasonal  Variations  Made  by  Various  Methods  . 248

Chart  8. Residual  Fluctuations  of  Time  Series  after  Elimination  of

Trends  and  Seasonal  Variations 258

Chart  9. Sir  William  H.  Beveridge's  Chart  of  "The  Pulse  of  the

Nation" 292

Chart  10. Persons'  "Index  of  General  Business  Conditions"  . . . 294

Chart  11.  The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  Index,

of  ''General  Business  Compared  with  Normal" 296

Chart  12. Carl  Snyder's  Index  of  the  Volume  of  Trade  .... 298

Chart  13. Persons'  Index  of  Trade 300

Chart  14. Miss  Thomas'  Index  of  "British  Business  Cycles"  ... 301

Chart  15. Axe  and  Flinn's  "Index  of  General  Business  Conditions

for  Germany" 303

Chart  16. Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business"  and  Frickey's  "In-
dex of  Outside  Clearings" 306

Chart  17. Snyder's  'Index  of  Deposits  Activity"  compared  with  his

"Clearings  Index  of  Business" 308


xxii  LIST  OF  CHARTS


PAGE


Chart  18. One  Business  Cycle,  United  States,  1919-1921,  shown  by  a

Plot  of  27  of  its  Components 310

Chart  19. Frequency  Distribution  of  Month-to-Month  Changes  in

Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity 332

Chart  20. Frequency Distribution of 101 Observations upon the

Duration  of  Business  Cycles:  United  States,  1878-1923  ... 344

Chart  21. Business  Fluctuations  in  the  United  States,  as  shown  by

the  Annals  and  by  Two  Statistical  Indexes,  1875-1925  .... 368

Chart  22.  Business  Fluctuations  in  England,  as  shown  by  the  Annals
and  Dr.  Dorothy  S.  Thomas'  ''Quarterly  Index  of  British  Cy-
cles,"  1855-1914 372

Chart  23. Approximate  Duration  of  Business  Cycles, arranged  in

Chronological  Sequence 393

Chart  24.  Percentage  Distribution  of  Business  Cycles  in  Various
Countries  and  Various  Periods  according  to  their  Approximate
Duration  in  Years 402

Chart  25.  Logarithmic  Normal  Curve  Fitted  by  Davies'  Method  to
the  Frequency  Distribution  of  166  Observations  upon  the  Dura-
tion of  Business  Cycles 419

Chart  26.  Percentage  Distribution  of  Measurements  of  the  Duration
of  Business  Cycles  in  the  United  States,  based  upon  Business  In-
dexes, 1875-1925,  and  Business  Annals,  1790-1925 423

Chart  27. Conspectus  of  Business  Cycles  in  Various  Countries,  1790-

1925 444


BUSINESS  CYCLES

CHAPTER  I.
THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES.

I.  The  Plan  of  Attack.

As  knowledge  of  business  cycles  grows,  more  effort  is  required  to
master  it.  Formerly,  an  attack  upon  the  problem  required  no  special
preparations.  Early  writers  upon  "commercial  crises"  could  assume
that  they  and  their  readers  were  familiar  with  the  phenomena  to  be
explained  and  the  methods  to  be  used.  They  felt  no  need  of  collecting
statistics,  of  compiling  business  annals,  of  comparing  the  amplitude
and  the  timing  of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  different  activities,  of  de-
veloping and  defining  technical  concepts.  After  the  briefest  of  intro-
ductions, they  plunged  into  a  discussion  of  the  cause  of  crises,  and
worked  such  evidence  as  they  cited  into  their  argumentation.  In
consequence,  their  discussions  had  an  agreeable  directness,  which  our
generation  may  envy,  but  cannot  wisely  imitate.

Elaborate  preparations  have  become  necessary,  not  because  the
direct  attacks  upon  the  problem  proved  futile,  but  because  they  won
so  many  and  such  different  results.  Every  investigator  of  the  cause
of  commercial  crises  seemed  to  make  out  a  case  for  the  hypothesis
he  favored.  In  trying  to  prove  their  divergent  explanations  correct,
successive  theorists  did  prove  that  business  cycles  were  more  intricate
phenomena  than  any  of  them  had  surmised.  These  cycles  turned
out  to  be  complexes,  made  up  of  divergent  fluctuations  in  many
processes.  Familiarity  with  the  phenomena  to  be  explained  came  to
mean  familiarity  with  the  interrelations  among  cyclical  fluctuations
in  the  production  of  raw  materials,  industrial  equipment  and  con-
sumers^ goods ;  in  the  volume  of  savings  and  investments ;  in  the  pro-
motion of  new  enterprises,  in  banking,  in  the  disbursement  of  incomes
to  individuals  and  the  spending  of  incomes,  in  prices,  costs,  profits
and  the emotional  aberrations of  business judgments. However


2  BUSINESS  CYCLES

conversant  he  may  be  with  practical  affairs  and  economic  theory,  no
competent  investigator  now  supposes  that  he  can  explain  the  fluctua-
tions of  these  interrelated  factors  on  the  basis  of  his  general
knowledge.

This  lesson  from  experience  in  making  theories  of  business  cycles
has  been  confirmed  in  recent  years  by  work  with  statistics.  Serried
tables  of  figures,  and  charts  drawn  from  them,  have  made  our  knowl-
edge of  cyclical  fluctuations  much  more  definite.  Year  by  year  the
range  covered  by  statistical  compilations  has  grown  wider,  the
accuracy  of  reporting  has  improved,  and  the  technical  methods  of
analysis  have  become  more  refined  and  more  powerful.  But  we  have
no  statistical  evidence  of  business  cycles  as  wholes.  What  the  data
show  us  are  the  fluctuations  of  particular  processes — producing  pig
iron,  transporting  freight,  clearing  bank  checks,  selling  goods  by  mail,
declaring  dividends,  and  so  on.  And  these  fluctuations  differ  widely.
In  certain  cases  we  assemble  or  average  the  data  for  various  processes,
and  say  that  we  have  "indexes'^  of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  wholesale
prices,  physical  production,  the  volume  of  trade,  or  even  ^^general
business  conditions."  Yet  the  most  inclusive  indexes  we  can  make
fall  far  short  of  showing  all  that  we  mean  by  business  cycles.  The
more  intensively  we  work,  the  more  we  realize  that  this  term  is  a
synthetic  product  of  the  imagination — a  product  whose  history  is
characteristic  of  our  ways  of  learning.  Overtaken  by  a  series  of
strange  experiences  our  predecessors  leaped  to  a  broad  conception,
gave  it  a  name,  and  began  to  invent  explanations,  as  if  they  knew
what  their  words  meant.  But  in  the  process  of  explaining  they  dem-
onstrated how  inadequate  their  knowledge  was.  From  their  work
we  can  learn  much;  the  first  lesson  is  that  we  must  find  out  more
about  the  facts  before  we  can  choose  among  the  old  explanations,  or
improve  upon  them.

An  inquiry  into  business  cycles,  then,  cannot  wisely  begin  by  de-
fining the  general  concept,  and  proceed  systematically  to  take  up  one
part  of  the  whole  after  another.  It  should  begin  rather  with  the  in-
dividual processes  which  can  be  studied  objectively,  seeking  to  find
what  these  processes  are,  how  they  affect  each  other,  and  what  sort  of
whole  they  make  up.

The  best  way  to  learn  what  processes  are  involved  in  business
cycles  is  to  profit  by  the  discoveries  of  earlier  workers.  Most  of  these
men  found  the  clue  to  business  cycles  in  the  recurrent  fluctuations  of
some  single  economic  process. All  together  they  may  not  have


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 3

covered  the  whole  field.  But  in  no  other  way  can  we  get  so  compre-
hensive a  view  of  business  cycles,  or  such  vivid  insight  into  their  com-
plexities, as  by  following  a  series  of  persuasive  demonstrations  that
each  one  of  a  dozen  different  processes  reveals  the  factor  of  crucial
importance.

It  is  not  advisable  to  attack  the  statistical  data  until  we  have
made  this  survey  of  theories.  For  while  the  statistics  will  come  to
seem  scanty  as  our  demands  develop,  they  are  sufficiently  abundant
and  diverse,  susceptible  of  enough  transformations  and  combinations,
to  make  hopeless  a  purely  empirical  investigation.  At  every  turn,
we  shall  need  working  hypotheses  to  guide  our  selection  of  data^  and
to  suggest  ways  of  analyzing  and  combining  them.  Our  survey  of
theories  will  provide  us  with  the  most  promising  hypotheses  ^which
have  been  invented.  Not  until  we  are  thus  equipped  can  w^  begin
constructive  work  upon  the  problem  of  business  cycles,  confident  that
we  are  not  overlooking  elements  already  proved  to  be  important.

XL  The  Discovery  of  the  Problem.

Serious  efforts  to  explain  business  crises  and  depressions  began
amid  the  violent  fluctuations  in  trade  which  followed  the  Napoleonic
Wars.  For  a  century  or  more  Western  Europe  had  been  experiencing
at  intervals  speculative  manias,  glutted  markets,  and  epidemics  of
bankruptcy.  The  Mississippi  Bubble  and  the  South  Sea  Scheme
which  had  burst  in  France  and  England  in  1720,  and  the  commercial
crises  of  1763,  1772,  1783  and  1793,  not  to  mention  less  notable  cases,
had  excited  much  discussion.^  But  the  eighteenth-century  writers
dealt  mainly  with  the  dramatic  surface  events ;  concerning  the  under-
lying causes  they  developed  no  arresting  ideas.  By  1815  progressive
changes  in  economic  organization  were  forcing  the  problem  to  the
fore,  and  men  were  better  equipped  to  attack  it.  The  Physiocrats
and  Adam  Smith  had  made  political  economy  a  branch  of  philosophy,
if  not  of  science,  and  when  the  wars  ended  Ricardo  was  recasting  the
theory  into  the  form  which  is  still  dominant.

It  was  not  the  orthodox  economists,  however,  who  gave  the  prob-
lem of  crises  and  depressions  its  place  in  economics,  but  sceptics
who  had  profited  by  and  then  reacted  against  their  teachings.  From
Adam  Smith  to  Mill,  and  even  to  Alfred  Marshall,  the  classical  mas-

*See  Mentor  Bouniatian,  Studien  zur  Tkeorie  und  Geschichte  der  Wirtschaftskrisen.
II  Geschichte  der  Handelskrisen  in  England,  I64O-I84O. Munich,  1908.


4  BUSINESS  CYCLES

ters  have  paid  but  incidental  attention  to  the  rhythmical  oscillations
of  trade  in  their  systematic  treatises.  They  have  been  concerned
primarily  to  elucidate  principles  which  hold  "in  the  long  run/'  or
apply  to  the  "normal  state."  To  them  crises  and  depressions  have
been  of  secondary  interest — proper  subjects  for  special  study  or  oc-
casional reference,  but  not  among  the  central  problems  of  economic
theory.^  To  force  into  prominence  the  fact  that  economic  activities
are  subject  to  recurring  phases  of  contraction  and  expansion  was  the
work  primarily  of  men  who  were  critics,  not  merely  of  orthodox
economics,  but  also  of  modern  society — men  such  as  Sismondi  and
Rodbertus.

J.  C.  L.  Simonde  de  Sismondi  was  an  Italian  Swiss  who  had  early
become  enamored  of  Adam  Smith's  doctrines  and  expounded  them  for
continental  readers  in  a  treatise  De  la  Richesse  Commerciale.  After
publishing  this  book  in  1803,  Sismondi  had  turned  to  medieval  re-
search and  won  European  celebrity  as  the  historian  of  the  Italian
Republics.  Then  an  invitation  from  the  Scotch  physicist.  Sir  David
Brewster,  to  write  an  article  on  "Political  Economy"  for  the  new
Edinburgh  Encyclopcedia,  recalled  him  to  his  first  theme  in  1818.

The  time  was  one  of  widespread  distress.  As  Napoleon's  fall  drew
near,  English  manufacturers  and  merchants,  anticipating  the  reopen-
ing of  hungry  continental  markets,  accumulated  large  stores  of  goods
for  export.  Waterloo  was  fought  in  June,  1815.  There  followed
several  months  of  brisk  trade  and  optimistic  speculation.  But  before
the  year  was  out  it  became  clear  that  European  consumers  lacked
the  means  to  buy  freely.  Heavy  consignments  of  British  goods  over-
stocked the  markets  and  many  of  the  consignors  went  bankrupt.  The
year  after  Waterloo  was  one  of  distress  from  beginning  to  end.
Recovery  began  in  the  spring  of  1817  and  made  rapid  progress,  so
that  1818  showed  great  industrial  activity.  But  in  1819  fresh  diffi-
culties occurred,  and  depression  returned  to  last  through  1820. Not

*Thus  Adam  Smith  mentions  the  "knavery  and  extravagance"  of  the  South  Sea
Company's  "stock-jobbing  projects,"  (Wealth  of  Nations,- Ca^nnan's  ed.,  vol.  ii,  p.  236) ;
Ricardo  speaks  of  "revulsions  in  trade"  accompanying  the  outbreaks  or  the  ending  of
great  wars  (Principles  of  Political  Economy,  Conner's  ed.,  pp.  250,  251);  Mill  discusses
"commercial  crises"  in  his  chapters  on  the  Rate  of  Interest  and  on  the  Tendency  of
Profits  to  a  Minimum,  besides  mentioning  them  incidentally  in  several  other  passages
(Pnnciples  of  Political  Economy,  Ashley's  ed.,  pp.  561,  641,  644,  651,  709,  734-735,  845) ;
Marshall  puts  a  book  on  "Fluctuations  of  Industry,  Trade  and  Credit,"  not  into  his
Principles  of  Economics,  but  into  his  volume  on  Money,  Credit  and  Commerce,  Lon-
don, 1923,  pp.  234-263.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 5

until  1821  did  a  sustained  revival  begin, — and  the  prosperity  which
presently  reigned  ended  in  the  panic  of  December,  1825.^

Sismondi  had  accepted  Brewster's  invitation  readily,  thinking  he
had  merely  to  write  a  brief  exposition  of  "principles  universally  ad-
mitted." But  as  he  studied  current  developments  he  was  assailed  by
doubts  concerning  the  theories  he  had  accepted  from  Adam  Smith.

I  was  deeply  affected,  (he  wrote),  by  the  commercial  crisis
which  Europe  had  experienced  of  late,  by  the  cruel  sufferings
of  the  industrial  workers  which  I  had  witnessed  in  Italy,
Switzerland  and  France,  and  which  all  reports  showed  to  have
been  at  least  as  severe  in  England,  in  Germany  and  in  Belgium.

The  case  of  England  was  to  him  particularly  significant — that  "sur-
prising country  which  seemed  to  be  undergoing  a  great  experiment
for  the  instruction  of  the  rest  of  the  world/'  If  the  land  of  the
economists,  the  land  where  the  doctrine  of  economic  liberty  had
freest  sway  in  government,  the  land  where  the  new  methods  of  ma-
chine production  had  scored  their  greatest  triumphs — if  that  land  was
plunged  in  want  by  the  return  of  peace,  must  there  not  be  something
wrong  in  the  philosophy  of  laissez  fairef  When  everyone  was  free
to  produce  as  much  as  he  could,  it  seemed  that  no  one  could  buy
what  he  needed  to  consume.  How  could  this  be?  Sismondi  set  him-
self to  solve  the  problem.  The  result  was  his  Nouveaux  Principes
d'Sconomie  Politique,  published  in  1819.*

We  should  not  expect  the  first  efforts  to  explain  so  complicated  a
phenomenon  as  a  business  crisis  to  be  free  from  crudities.  Nor  was
Sismondi  fully  equipped  to  solve  the  problem  he  had  posed;  though
an  excellent  observer,  he  lacked  analytic  finesse.  Yet  he  made  several
suggestions,  ill  coordinated  with  each  other,  which  were  developed
and  combated  by  later  writers,  and  which  continue  to  play  roles
of  importance  in  theories  now  current.

One  of  these  suggestions  is  that  commercial  organization  is  at
fault.  The  business  man,  as  Sismondi  phrases  it,  caters  to  a  "meta-
physical public" — customers  whose  numbers,  tastes,  consumption  and
purchasing  power  are  all  unknown  to  him,  and  all  variable.  The
only  guide  he  has  in  planning  how  much  to  produce  is  prices. By

'See  the  conspectus  of  English  business  annals  in  Chapter  IV  below,  or  better  the
chapter  on  England  in  Business  Annals,  by  Willard  L.  Thorp,  National  Bureau  of  Eco-
nomic Research,  1926.

*See  the  prefaces  to  the  first  and  second  editions. The  latter  appeared  in  1827.


6  BUSINESS  CYCLES

comparing  present  prices  with  costs,  he  decides  whether  to  increase  or
restrict  his  output  in  the  near  future.

Unfortunately  this  comparison  is  made  by  all  the  producers
at  the  same  time  .  .  .  and  all  of  them  together,  ignorant  of
how  much  their  competitors  will  undertake,  nearly  always
exceed  the  limit  which  they  had  in  view.^

A  second  suggestion  is  that  in  periods  of  industrial  activity  the
income  available  for  buying  consumers'  goods  falls  short  of  the  value
of  the  goods  sent  to  market.  This  idea  sounds  modern,  but  Sismondi's
supporting  analysis  offered  a  broad  target  to  his  detractors.  The
purchasing  power  available  to  absorb  the  produce  of  any  year,  he
stoutly  contended,  is  the  aggregate  income  of  the  preceding  year — a
notion  probably  suggested  by  his  life  among  the  peasants  of  Italy.
When  capacity  to  produce  is  increasing  rapidly  through  the  introduc-
tion of  machinery,  the  markets  must  become  glutted  frequently.  For
the  faster  the  increase  in  production,  the  wider  will  be  the  gap  between
last  year's  income  and  this  year's  output.^

Still  a  third  suggestion  embodies  in  quaint  form  the  "over-saving'*
theory  of  crises.  In  opulent  nations,  production  often  goes  astray
because  its  volume  is  determined  by  the  abundance  of  capital  seeking
investment  rather  than  by  the  demand  of  consumers.  Of  course  the
latter  demand  is  the  only  safe  guide;  the  fact  that  merchants  and
manufacturers  have  money  to  invest  in  new  ventures  does  not  guar-
antee a  market  for  their  wares.*^

Sismondi  laid  most  stress,  however,  upon  an  idea  often  repeated
but  never  clearly  worked  out  in  his  book:  the  fundamental  cause  of
crises  is  inequality  in  the  distribution  of  incomes.

It  is  a  serious  error  into  which  most  of  the  modern  economists
have  fallen  to  represent  consumption  as  a  power  without  limits,
always  ready  to  devour  an  infinite  output.  .  .  .  The  needs  of
the  laboring  man  are  narrowly  limited  of  necessity.

The  masses  do  not  wish  luxuries  so  much  as  they  wish  respite  from
toil.  But  when  methods  of  production  are  improved,  our  economic
institutions,  instead  of  giving  the  workers  leisure,  keep  them  busy  as
long  as  ever  and  increase  the  volume  of  products  offered  for  sale.

"  Nouveaux  Principes,  2d  ed.,  I,  325-330.
•The  same,  I,  106,  121-124.
'The  same,  I.  367-368.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 7

Who  is  to  buy?  After  food,  clothing  and  housing  on  a  meager  scale
have  been  provided  for  the  wage-earners,  the  chief  market  for  further
goods  is  the  market  for  luxuries.  The  desire  for  such  goods  is  indeed
without  limit.  But  the  increase  of  trade  in  luxuries  puts  a  nation's
industry  in  a  precarious  position.  Domestic  consumers  of  luxuries
prefer  foreign  wares,  and  domestic  producers  must  seek  foreign  out-
lets. Recent  experience  of  unsalable  consignments  all  over  the  globe
has  shown  the  English  how  undependable  is  the  export  trade.  Every-
one would  be  better  off  if  the  workers  had  incomes  sufl&cient  to  give
the  home  demand  a  broad  base.^


III.  The  Multiplying  Solutions.

In  a  generation  addicted  to  economic  speculation,  events  which
affected  so  many  fortunes  as  did  the  vicissitudes  of  trade  were  certain
to  be  explained  in  different  ways.  Sismondi  was  but  the  most  sug-
gestive among  a  numerous  company  of  writers,  most  of  whom  had
their  own  explanations  to  offer  and  their  own  remedies  to  urge.  Nor
did  the  differences  of  opinion  grow  less  with  the  passing  of  time.  On
the  contrary,  as  later  crises  brought  new  men  and  new  materials  into
the  discussion,  the  explanations  multiplied.  Gradually  the  plausible
views  became  standardized  into  several  types  of  theory,  each  repre-
sented in  the  growing  literature  by  a  number  of  variants.  Before  the
end  of  the  nineteenth  century  there  had  accumulated  a  body  of  ob-
servations and  speculations  sufficient  to  justify  the  writing  of  histories
of  the  theories  of  crises.^

A  simple  form  of  the  "over-production"  or  "under-consumption"
theory  was  widely  held.  Throu^  the  adoption  of  modern  machinery,
it  was  said,  the  power  of  society  to  produce  has  outgrown  its  power  to
consume.  Hence  the  periodical  occurrence  of  "general  gluts'' — para-
doxical episodes  in  which  superabundance  causes  want. Unable  to

•The  same,  I,  75-78,  357-372.  The  best  modern  account  of  Sismondi's  views  is  given
by  Albert  Aftalion,  L'Oeuvre  Economique  de  Simonde  de  Sismondi,  Paris,  1899.

*The  most  elaborate  of  these  histories  is  Eugen  von  Bergmann's  Die  WirtschaftS'
krisen:  Geschichte  der  nationalokonomischen  Krisentheorien,  Stuttgart,  1895.  The  best
accounts  in  English  and  French  are  Edward  D.  Jones'  Economic  Crises,  New  York,
1900,  and  Jean  Lescure's  Des  Crises  Generales  et  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  3rd  ed.,
Paris,  1923,  pp.  313-412.

See  also  Harry  E.  Miller's  paper  on  "Earlier  Theories  of  Crises  and  Cycles  in  the
United  States."  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  FehTuavy,  1924  (xxxviii,  pp.  294-329),
and  Adolf  Lowe's  review  of  recent  German  contributions,  "Der  gegenwartige  Stand  der
Konjunkturforschung  in  Deutschland,"  in  Festgabe  far  L/UJo  Brentano,  Munich  and
Leipzig,  1925,  vol.  ii,  pp.  329-377.


8  BUSINESS  CYCLES

sell  their  increasing  output  of  goods  at  remunerative  prices,  em-
ployers are  forced  to  close  their  factories  and  turn  away  their  hands —
a  remedy  which  aggravates  the  disease  by  reducing  yet  further  the
community's  power  to  purchase  for  consumption.

To  most  of  the  classical  economists,  the  theory  of  general  over-
production was  a  heresy,  which  they  sought  to  extirpate  by  demon-
strating that  the  supply  of  goods  of  one  sort  necessarily  constitutes
demand  for  goods  of  other  sorts.^  But  maladjusted  production  they
allowed  to  be  possible,  and  their  brief  references  to  crises  usually
aimed  to  show  how  production  becomes  maladjusted  through  the
sinking  of  capital  in  unremunerative  investments.  They  often  held
that  such  misuse  of  capital  was  one  result  of  "the  tendency  of  profits
to  a  minimum. '^  When  the  current  rate  of  profits  has  fallen  to  an
unaccustomed  level,  the  less  sagacious  capitalists  become  dissatisfied
and  embark  on  ill-considered  schemes.  There  result  the  production  of
goods  for  which  no  market  can  be  found,  business  failures,  and  loss  of
confidence — in  short,  a  crisis  which  extends  over  all  lines  of  trade.

Another  group  of  writers,  among  whom  Schaffle  was  prominent,
accepted  ill-adjusted  production  as  the  cause  of  crises;  but  accounted
for  it  by  the  complexity  of  modern  business  organization — the  first  of
Sismondi's  suggestions.  Not  only  are  manufacturers  compelled  to
produce  goods  months  in  advance  for  markets  whose  changes  they
cannot  forecast,  but  investors  are  compelled  years  in  advance  to  put
their  funds  into  enterprises  the  need  of  which  is  uncertain.  A  close
adjustment  of  supply  to  demand  cannot  be  maintained.  Mistakes  are
inevitable,  and  should  be  ascribed  less  to  bad  judgment  than  to  the
planlessness  of  capitalistic  production.

The  most  vigorous  attempt  to  prove  that  crises  are  a  chronic
disease  of  capitalism,  however,  was  that  made  by  Rodbertus  and
elaborated  by  Karl  Marx.  The  germ  of  this  theory  also  is  found  in
Sismondi  and  Robert  Owen.  Wages  form  but  a  fraction  of  the  value
of  the  product  and  increase  less  rapidly  than  power  to  produce.
Since  the  masses  dependent  upon  wages  constitute  the  bulk  of  the
population,  it  follows  that  consumers'  demand  cannot  keep  pace

*Upon  this  point,  as  upon  many  others,  Malthus  dissented  from  the  "orthodox"
opinion.  See  his  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  1st  ed.,  London,  1820,  351-375;  2d  ed.,
London,  1836,  314-330.  Mill  admitted  that  "there  may  really  be,  though  only  while  the
crisis  lasts,  an  extreme  depression  of  general  prices,  from  what  may  be  indiscriminately
called  a  glut  of  commodities  or  a  dearth  of  money.  But  (he  added)  it  is  a  great  error
to  suppose,  with  Sismondi,  that  a  commercial  crisis  is  the  effect  of  a  general  excess  of
production.  It  is  simply  the  consequence  of  an  excess  of  speculative  purchases."  Prin-
ciples of  Political  Economy,  Ashley's  ed.,  p.  561.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 9

with  current  supply  in  seasons  when  factories  are  running  at  full
blast.  Meanwhile  the  capitalist-employers  are  investing  their  current
savings  in  new  productive  enterprises,  which  presently  add  their
quotas  to  the  goods  seeking  sale.  This  process  of  over-stocking  the
market  runs  cumulatively  until  the  time  comes  when  the  patent
impossibility  of  selling  goods  at  a  profit,  or  even  at  cost,  brings  on  a
crisis.^

A  wider  acceptance  was  accorded  to  the  "inflation"  theory.  An
increase  in  gold,  in  irredeemable  paper  money,  in  bank  notes,  or  in
deposit  currency  was  held  to  start  an  advance  in  prices.  The  latter
in  turn  stimulates  business  to  great  activity,  which  runs  to  extremes
in  reckless  investments  and  foolish  speculation,  and  ends  in  a  crash
of  credit  and  widespread  bankruptcy.

The  "psychological"  type  of  explanation  was  elaborated  in  John
Mills'  paper  "On  Credit  Cycles  and  the  Origin  of  Commercial
Panics,"  pubHshed  in  1867.^  On  this  view  the  fundamental  cause  of
crises  lies  less  in  the  character  or  abuse  of  economic  institutions,  than
in  the  emotional  aberrations  to  which  business  judgments  are  subject.
Fair  trade  breeds  optimism,  optimism  breeds  recklessness,  recklessness
breeds  disaster.  In  their  turn,  the  disasters  of  a  crisis  breed  pessimism
and  pessimism  breeds  stagnation.  From  depression  business  picks  up
only  when  men's  spirits  recover  on  finding  that  matters  have  gone
less  badly  than  they  had  feared.

As  John  Mills  sought  the  fundamental  cause  of  commercial  fluctu-
ations in  psychology,  so  W.  Stanley  Jevons  sought  it  in  physics.  His
theory  that  the  activity  of  solar  radiation  controls  mundane  weather,
weather  controls  crops,  and  crops  control  business  conditions,  was
first  announced  in  1875.

Finally,  some  economists,  for  example  Wilhelm  Roscher,  despaired
of  finding  any  theory  which  would  account  for  all  crises  in  the  same
way.  To  these  men  a  crisis  is  an  "abnormal"  event  produced  by
some  "disturbing  cause,"  such  as  the  introduction  of  revolutionary
inventions,  the  development  of  new  transportation  lines,  wars,  the
return  of  peace,  tariff  revisions,  monetary  changes,  crop  failures,
changes  in  fashion,  and  the  like.  This  view  assumes  that  the  equilib-
rium of  economic  processes  has  become  so  delicate  that  it  may  be
upset  by  untoward  conjunctures  of  the  most  dissimilar  kinds,  and

'For  a  recent  statement  of  the  Marxian  theory  of  crises  by  a  sympathetic  inter-
preter, see  Otto  Leichter,  "Zur  Analyse  der  Weltwirtschaftskrise,"  in  Der  lebendige
Marxismus,  Festgabe  zum  70.  Geburtstage  yon  Karl  Kautsky,  Jena,  1924,  pp.  45-100.

*  Transactions  of  the  Manchester  Statistical  Society,  1867-68,  pp.  5-40.


10  BUSINESS  CYCLES

points  to  the  conclusion  that  each  crisis  has  its  own  special  cause
which  must  be  sought  among  the  events  of  the  preceding  year  or  two.

While  all  these  speculations  and  others  unmentioned  concerning
the  cause  of  crises  and  depressions  were  being  debated,  some  progress
was  made  toward  more  exact  observation  and  description  of  the
phenomena.  The  most  distinguished  pioneer  in  work  of  this  sort
was  Clement  Juglar,  whose  elaborate  treatise  Des  Crises  Commerdales
et  de  leur  Retour  Periodique  was  published  in  1860  and  again  in  1889.
Max  Wirth  emphasized  the  international  character  of  the  major
crises  in  his  Geschichte  der  Handelskrisen  (Frankfort  a,  M.  1858;  4th
ed.,  1890),  Tugan-Baranovski  made  an  intensive  study  of  English
crises  in  the  nineteenth  century,^  and  numerous  observers  wrote
pamphlets  or  books  on  single  crises.

In  this  descriptive  work,  much  freer  use  was  generally  made  of
statistical  materials  than  in  the  theoretical  essays.  As  the  century
wore  on,  the  data  available  concerning  prices,  currency,  banking,  in-
terest rates,  foreign  trade,  production  and  employment  grew  wider
in  range,  more  reliable,  and  more  precise.  Meanwhile  statisticians
like  Jevons  and  Edgeworth  were  developing  a  better  technique  for
wresting  significant  conclusions  from  masses  of  seemingly  chaotic
data.  But  the  use  of  these  methods  in  theoretical  inquiries  was  slow
to  develop.

The  most  fundamental  change  to  which  the  use  of  statistics  con-
tributed was  a  change  in  the  conception  of  the  problem  to  be  solved.
The  earlier  writers  had  sought  for  the  cause  merely  of  crises,  or  of
crises  and  depressions.  It  is  true  that  a  wider  view  had  been  sug-
gested occasionally.  In  1833,  an  English  journalist,  John  Wade,
remarked  casually  that

The  commercial  cycle  is  ordinarily  completed  in  five  or  seven
years,  within  which  terms  it  will  be  found,  by  reference  to
our  commercial  history  during  the  last  seventy  years,  alternate
periods  of  prosperity  and  depression  have  been  experienced.^

Presently  this  idea  of  cyclical  oscillations  was  amplified  by  more
influential  writers — Lord  Overstone,  Hyde  Clark,  William  Langton,

"Published  first  in  Russian  (1894),  then  in  German  (1901)  and  finally  in  French
under  the  title  Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Angleterre  (Paris,  1913).

"  John  Wade,  History  of  the  Middle  and  Working  Classes,  2d  ed.,  London,  1834,  p.  211-


I


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 11

John  Mills,  Condy  Raguet  and  Amasa  Walker:  "^  it  was  indeed  implied
in  the  numerous  discussions  of  the  "periodicity  of  crises/^  One  could
talk  about  credit  cycles  and  "periodic"  crises,  however,  without  de-
voting much  attention  to  business  revivals  after  depression,  or  the
process  by  which  revivals  grow  into  prosperity.  But  one  could  scarcely
use  time  series,  showing  the  fluctuations  of  activity  year  after  year,
without  seeing  that  the  developments  in  the  non-crisis  periods  offered
quite  as  much  a  problem  as  did  the  crises  themselves.  Thus  the  use
of  statistics  hastened  the  time  when  economists  passed  on  from  the
theory  of  crises  to  the  theory  of  business  cycles.  Clement  Juglar^s
great  "book  of  facts"  made  clear  the  need  of  the  step.^

So  bald  a  statement  as  the  preceding  falls  far  short  of  doing  justice
to  the  nineteenth  century  writers;  but  it  suffices  to  indicate  the
foundations  upon  which  our  contemporaries  have  built  their  more
elaborate  theories.  The  latter  conserve  all  of  permanent  value  which
the  older  economists  achieved,  and  contain  in  addition  certain  fresh
contributions  to  the  subject.  Accordingly,  a  more  detailed  account  of
the  leading  explanations  which  have  been  offered  recently  will  put
us  in  possession  of  the  ideas  most  likely  to  prove  useful  in  further
work.

IV.  The  Theories  Now  Current.

Recent  writers  upon  business  cycles  differ  from  one  another  less  in
principle  than  in  emphasis.  Everyone  who  studies  the  problem  with
care  must  realize  that  many  processes  are  involved  in  the  alternations
of  prosperity  and  depression.  But  each  investigator  decides  for
himself  the  question :  What  among  these  many  processes  is  the  prime
mover  in  producing  cyclical  oscillations,  and  what  processes  merely
adapt  themselves  as  best  may  be  to  changes  produced  elsewhere?

'Lord  Overstone's  statement  may  be  quoted:

"The  history  of  what  we  are  in  the  habit  of  calling  the  'state  of  trade'  is  an  instruc-
tive lesson.  We  find  it  subject  to  various  conditions  which  are  periodically  returning;  it
revolves  apparently  in  an  established  cycle.  First,  we  find  it  in  a  state  of  quiescence, —
next  improvement, — growing  confidence, — prosperity, — excitement, — overtrading, — con-
vulsion,— pressure, — stagnation, — distress, — ending  again  in  quiescence."  Reflections
suggested  by  a  perusal  oj  Mr.  J.  Horsley  Palmers'  pamphlet  on  the  Causes  and  Conse-
quences of  the  Pressure  on  the  Money  Market. By  Samuel  Jones  Loyd,  London,  1837.

On  the  American  observations,  see  Harry  E.  Miller,  "Earlier  Theories  of  Crises  and
Cycles  in  the  United  States,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February,  1924,  voL
xxxviii,  p.  300.

•  Des  Crises  Commerciales,  2d  ed.,  Paris,  1889,  chapter  i  and  passim.


12  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Each  gives  chief  attention  to  the  one  or  more  factors  which  he  be-
lieves to  play  the  chief  causal* role;  but  many  writers  also  show  how
the  changes  produced  by  their  chosen  causes  affect  other  processes,
and  in  so  doing  they  are  likely  to  find  use  for  the  work  of  men  whose
distribution  of  emphasis  differs  from  their  own.

Among  the  factors  to  which  the  leading  role  in  causing  business
cycles  has  been  assigned  by  competent  inquirers  within  the  past
decade  are  the  weather,  the  uncertainty  which  beclouds  all  plans  that
stretch  into  the  future,  the  emotional  aberrations  to  which  business
decisions  are  subject,  the  innovations  characteristic  of  modern  so-
ciety, the  "progressive^'  character  of  our  age,  the  magnitude  of  savings,
the  construction  of  industrial  equipment,  "generalized  over-produc-
tion," the  operations  of  banks,  the  flow  of  money  incomes,  and  the
conduct  of  business  for  profits.  Each  of  these  explanations  merits  at-
tention from  those  who  seek  to  understand  business  cycles;  for  each
should  throw  light  upon  some  feature  or  aspect  of  these  complex
phenomena.

We  need  not,  however,  review  the  full  analysis  of  the  writers  by
whose  ideas  we  seek  to  profit.  That  would  be  the  task  of  a  treatise
upon  theories  of  business  cycles.  This  book  deals  with  the  cycles
themselves,  and  to  it  the  theories  are  tools  to  be  used  in  construc-
tive work.  The  following  pages,  therefore,  aim  merely  to  borrow
from  the  recent  books  and  articles  upon  business  cycles  those  sug-
gestions which  promise  to  enlarge  our  understanding  of  the  prob-
lem as  a  whole.

1. The  Weather.

Most  elegant  among  current  explanations  of  business  cycles  are
the  meteorological  theories.

In  1801  Sir  William  Herschel  suggested  that  changes  in  sun-spots
may  affect  the  weather,  hence  crops,  and  hence  prices.^  This  idea,
coupled  with  Schwabe's  discovery  (recognized  by  the  Royal  As-
tronomical Society  in  1857)  that  sun-spots  are  cyclical,  fascinated
the  speculative  mind  of  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  and  led  him  to  the  hy-
pothesis that  business  cycles  are  caused  by  solar  cycles.  To  test  this
notion,  Jevons  studied  the  records  of  English  trade  from  1721  to

*  Observations  tending  to  investigate  the  nature  of  the  Sun  in  order  to  find  the
Causes  or  Symptoms  of  its  variable  Emission  of  Light  and  Heat ;  with  Remarks  on  the
Use  that  may  possibly  be  drawn  from  Solar  Observations.  Philosophical  Transactions
of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  1801,  vol.  xci,  pp.  265-318.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 13

1878  to  see  how  closely  the  two  cycles  agreed  with  each  other.  He
concluded  that  there  had  been  16  crises  in  this  period  of  157  years.
Thus  he  obtained  an  average  length  of  10.466  years  for  the  commercial
cycle,  which  agreed  almost  exactly  with  the  length  then  assigned  to
the  sun-spot  cycle,  10.45  years. Jevons  declared  himself

perfectly  convinced  that  these  decennial  crises  do  depend  upon
meteorological  variations  of  like  period,  which  again  depend,
in  all  probability  upon  cosmical  variations  of  which  we  have
evidence  in  the  frequency  of  sunspots,  auroras,  and  magnetic
perturbations.^

Unfortunately  for  this  theory,  since  1878  astronomers  have  revised
their  computations  of  the  sun-spot  cycle  (the  average  now  commonly
accepted  is  11  +  years), ^  and  commercial  cycles  have  departed  still
further  from  the  decennial  norm.  Hence  in  1909,  Jevons'  son.  Pro-
fessor Herbert  Stanley  Jevons,  suggested  a  modification  of  the  solar
hypothesis.  He  believed  that  meteorologists  had  demonstrated  the
existence  of  a  3%  year  period  in  solar  radiation  and  in  barometric
pressure.  By  analyzing  agricultural  data  he  found  evidence  of  a  31/2
year  periodicity  in  crop  yields  also.  Trade  cycles,  he  held,  are  either
7  or  101/^  years  in  length.  He  tied  these  two  results  together  by  ob-
serving that  a  single  period  of  good  crops  does  not  suffice  to  produce
an  unhealthy  boom  in  business,  but  that  two  or  at  most  three  such
periods  following  each  other  will  do  so.  In  this  revised  form,  he
concluded  that  his  father's  meteorological  theory  of  the  business
cycle  remains  valid.'*

Since  Professor  Jevons  had  relied  largely  upon  American  data
to  establish  his  weather  cycle  of  3y2  years,  surprise  was  felt  when
Professor  Henry  L.  Moore  announced  in  1914  that  harmonic  analysis
of  rainfall  data  from  the  grain  areas  of  Ohio  and  Illinois  shows  the
existence  of  a  33-year  and  an  8-year  cycle.  His  supplemental  com-
putations showed  high  coefficients  of  correlation  between  crop  yields
per  acre  and  other  indices  of  business  conditions,  such  as  wholesale

'Jevons'  leading  papers  on  this  topic,  dating  from  1875  to  1882,  are  reprinted  in  hia
Investigations  in  Currency  and  Finance,  edited  by  H.  S.  Foxwell,  London,  1884,  pp.  194-
243.  The  passage  quoted  is  on  pp.  235,  236.  Jevons'  first  investigation,  by  a  different
method,  will  be  referred  to  in  Chapter  IV,  section  iv,  1,  below.

'  Sir  William  H.  Beveridge,  "Wheat  Prices  and  Rainfall  in  Western  Europe,"  Journal
oj  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  May,  1922,  vol.  Ixxxv,  pp.  434-437.

*See  "The  Causes  of  Unemployment:  III,  Trade  Fluctuations  and  Solar  Activity,"
Contemporary  Review,  August,  1909,  vol.  xcvi,  pp.  165  ff.  Reprinted  with  added  preface
and  summary,  as  The  Sun's  Heat  and  Trade  Activity,  London,  1910.


14  BUSINESS  CYCLES

prices  and  pig-iron  production. Professor  Moore  formulated  his  con-
clusions in  the  following  "law":

The  weather  conditions  represented  by  the  rainfall  in  the  cen-
tral part  of  the  United  States,  and  probably  in  other  continental
areas,  pass  through  cycles  of  approximately  thirty-three  years
and  eight  years  in  duration,  causing  like  cycles  in  the  yield  per
acre  of  the  crops;  these  cycles  of  crops  constitute  the  natural,
material  current  which  drags  upon  its  surface  the  lagging,
rhythmically  changing  values  and  prices  with  which  the  econo-
mist is  more  immediately  concerned.^

Later,  Professor  Moore  extended  his  investigations  to  other  parts
of  the  United  States,  to  England  and  to  France,  finding  confirmation
for  his  8-year,  but  seemingly  not  for  his  33-year  cycle.  He  also  sug-
gested an  astronomical  cause  for  this  dominant  weather  cycle  more
daring  than  the  sunspot  theory.  At  intervals  of  8  years  Venus  comes
directly  into  the  path  of  solar  radiations  to  the  earth.  Its  magnetic
field,  thinks  Professor  Moore,  may  affect  the  stream  of  electrons
flowing  from  the  sun  and  so  produce  an  effect  on  earthly  magnetism
and  weather.^

To  complete  the  record  of  divergencies  among  the  economists  who
have  utilized  meteorological  data,  it  must  be  added  that  Sir  William
H.  Beveridge  has  applied  harmonic  analysis  to  European  wheat  prices
for  the  three  centuries  from  1545  to  1844,  and  found  evidence  that
there  are,  not  one  or  two,  but  many  cycles  in  the  weather.  Of  these
cycles  a  few  of  the  best  accredited  have  lengths  (1)  of  5.1  and  35.5
years  (shown  by  harmonic  analysis  and  confirmed  by  independent
meteorological  data),  and  (2)  of  5.671,  9.750,  12.840,  19.900,  54.000
and  possibly  68.000  years  (clearly  shown  by  harmonic  analysis,  but
not  yet  confirmed  by  meteorological  observations).  There  is  no  8-
year  period  in  the  cycles  for  which  Sir  William  Beveridge  finds  the
strongest  evidence.  But  a  period  of  8.050  years  occurs  in  his  third
group,  for  which  there  is  "some,  but  not  first-rate,  evidence  both  in
wheat  prices  and  in  meteorology."

Sir  William's  conclusion  is  that,

Somewhere  or  other  in  the  solar  system  there  are  periodic
movements  affecting  our  weather  and  crops,  10  or  20  or  more

*  Economic  Cycles:  Their  Law  and  Cause. New  York,  1914,  p.  149.

•  These  later  investigations  are  summed  up  in  Professor  Moore's  volume,  Generating
Economic  Cycles,  New  York,  1923.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 15

in  number,  far  more  regular  than  had  ever  been  believed,
possibly  approaching  in  some  cases  the  regularity  and  per-
sistence of  free  orbital  motion,  subject  in  other  cases  to  sudden
birth  and  death.  These  movements  may  be  of  one  type,  or  of
several  types;  they  may  be  in  the  sun  or  the  planets  or  the
moon ;  in  the  earth  or  in  the  air  or  water  upon  its  surfaced

A  novel  variant  of  the  weather  theories  was  propounded  by  Pro-
fessor Ellsworth  Huntington  in  1919.  Starting  to  collect  statistical
evidence  of  the  effect  of  business  conditions  upon  health,  Huntington
convinced  himself  that  "Health  is  a  caiLse  far  more  than  an  effect"  of
economic  conditions.

The  statistics  from  1870  to  the  Great  War  show  that  a  high
death  rate  regularly  precedes  hard  times,  while  a  low  death  rate
precedes  prosperity.

He  also  found  that  his  death-rate  curve,  when  inverted,  agreed  well
with  the  fluctuations  of  school  attendance  one  year  later.  New  York
bank  clearings  three  years  later,  wholesale  prices  and  National  Bank
deposits  four  years  later,  and  immigration  five  years  later.

Business  cycles  (Professor  Huntington  concluded)  appear  to
depend  largely  on  the  mental  attitude  of  the  community,
.  .  .  the  mental  attitude  depends  on  health  .  .  .  and  health
depends  largely  upon  the  weather.^

Professor  Werner  Sombart's  theory  of  the  dissimilarity  in  the
rhythm  of  production  of  organic  and  inorganic  goods  may  be  regarded
as  a  view  intermediate  between  the  preceding  group  of  theories  which
trace  business  cycles  to  physical  causes  and  the  following  groups  which
trace  them  to  economic  factors.  He  points  out  that  the  inorganic
industries,  typified  by  the  steel  trade,  can  expand  enormously  within
a  brief  period  without  being  seriously  hampered  by  scarcity  of  raw
materials.  The  organic  industries,  typified  by  cotton-spinning,  on
the  contrary  are  always  in  precarious  dependence  upon '^^ the  yearns
harvests.  In  the  organic  industries,  one  may  say,  the  condition  of
business  is  determined  largely  by  the  yield  of  raw  materials;  in  the
inorganic  industries,  the  condition  of  business  itself  determines  how

'  Sir  William  H.  Beveridge,  "Wheat  Prices  and  Rainfall  in  Western  Europe,"  Journal
of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  May,  1922,  vol.  Ixxxv,  pp.  412-459.  The  quotation  is
from  p.  452.

•Ellsworth  Huntington,  World-Power  and  Evolution.  New  Haven,  1919,  chapters
ii-iv. The  passages  cited  are  on  pp.  29  and  42.


16  BUSINESS  CYCLES

much  of  the  raw  materials  shall  be  produced.  In  a  period  of  pros-
perity, the  organic  industries  dependent  upon  uncertain  harvests  for
their  supplies  may  be  unable  to  keep  pace  with  the  inorganic  trades,
which  are  being  rapidly  expanded  by  heavy  investments  of  capital.
There  results  a  disturbance  of  the  proportion  which  must  be  main-
tained in  the  production  of  the  two  types  of  goods,  if  the  current  sup-
plies of  both  types  are  to  find  a  profitable  market.  The  modern  crisis,
therefore,  is  at  bottom  the  result  of  a  clash  between  the  workings  of
physical  and  economic  processes.®

2.  Uncertainty.

Of  the  theories  which  trace  business  cycles  to  economic  rather
than  physical  conditions,  the  simplest  is  that  which  develops  Sis-
mondi's  indictment  of  prices  as  guides  to  production.  A  fresh  state-
ment of  this  familiar  idea  is  given  by  Dr.  Charles  0.  Hardy  of  the
Institute  of  Economics  in  his  book  on  Risk  and  Risk-Bearing,

The  business  man's  ^'principal  devices  for  securing  a  balanced  out-
put," Dr.  Hardy  points  out,  "are  prices  and  advance  orders."  Both
are  fallible  guides.

Prices  and  orders  give  information  concerning  the  prospective
state  of  demand  compared  with  the  known  facts  of  present  and
future  supply,  but  they  give  no  clue  to  the  changes  in  supply
which  they  are  themselves  likely  to  cause.

This  situation  results  in  "a  tendency  to  alternations  of  over-  and
under-production.'^  When  prices  and  orders  indicate  an  expansion
of  demand,

the  tendency  is  for  an  increasing  number  of  persons  to  try  to
take  advantage  of  the  situation,  each  more  or  less  in  ignorance
of  the  other's  plans,  and  no  force  intervenes  to  check  the  con-
tinued increase  of  production  till  it  reflects  itself  in  declining
orders  and  falling  prices.  By  that  time,  however,  investments
have  been  made,  contracts  let,  and  operations  started  which
will  result  in  further  augmentation  of  the  supply.  Time  is
required  to  check  this  increase  in  the  volume  of  production,
and  during  this  time  production  outruns  consumption  unless

•See  Werner  Sombart,  "Die  Storungen  im  deutschen  Wirtschaftsleben  wahrend  der
Jahre  1900  fif."  Schrijten  des  Vereins  fiir  Socialpolitik,  September,  1903,  vol.  cxiii,  pp.
130-133.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 17

consumption  is  stimulated  by  unprofitably  low  prices.  More^
over,  just  as  was  the  case  on  the  upswing,  the  indications  that
production  is  being  overdone  result  in  curtailment  of  operations
by  independent  producers  in  ignorance  of  each  other's  inten-
tions, and  this  tendency  continues  till  output  is  decreased  to  a
rate  below  that  which  is  economically  justified.

Speculative  purchases  and  sales  form  a  quite  independent  cause
of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  business,  reenforcing  the  first  cause.  For
the  speculators  must  base  their  judgments  on  substantially  the  same
data  as  the  producers.  Hence  their  operations  grow  rapidly  in  pros-
perity and  shrink  rapidly  in  depression.

The  effect  of  this  tendency  to  mass  movements  of  buying  and
selling  is  greatly  to  accentuate  the  effect  of  the  producers'  un-
certainty concerning  one  another's  plans.  .  .  .  For  an  increase
in  middlemen's  stocks  gives  the  producers  twice  a  false  index
of  the  amount  of  production  which  is  economically  justifiable.
When  the  increase  in  buying  takes  place  it  swells  the  volume
of  orders  and  creates  a  false  appearance  of  expansion  in  the
market,  and  whenever  the  excess  stock  is  utilized  it  again  gives
a  false  indication,  this  time  of  contraction  in  the  market.

At  bottoiUy-theft-,  business  cycles  result  from

uncertainty,  chiefly  uncertainty  on  the  part  of  producers  and
middlemen  concerning  the  conditions  that  will  prevail  in  the
market  when  they  are  ready  to  dispose  of  their  goods.^

3.  The  Emotional  Factor  in  Business  Decisions.

Everyone  recognizes  the  uncertainties  with  which  business  men
must  contend  in  planning  their  operations;  but  most  writers  on  busi-
ness cycles  hold  that  uncertainty  merely  provides  opportunity  for
the  working  of  other  factors  to  which  they  attach  greater  significance.
One  of  these  factors  is  the  ^^psychological,"  or  more  accurately,  the
emotional  influences  which  warp  business  judgment.  The  best  ex-
position along  this  line  is  that  given  by  Professor  A.  C.  Pigou  of  Cam-
bridge University. In  his  opinion  "the  movement  of  business  confi-

*  Charles  0.  Hardy,  Risk  and  Risk-Bearing,  Chicago,  1923,  chapter  v.  The  passages
quoted  are  on  pp.  72-75.

Dr.  Hardy's  exposition  may  be  regarded  as  an  elaborated  form  of  "the  competition
theory"  set  forth  by  Sir  William  H.  Beveridge  in  Unemployment,  a  Problem  of  In-
dustry, London,  1908,  2d  ed.,  1910,  chapter  iv.


18  BUSINESS  CYCLES

dence"  is  "the  dominant  cause  of  the  rhythmic  fluctuations  that  are
experienced  in  industry":  "optimistic  error  and  pessimistic  error,
when  discovered,  give  birth  to  one  another  in  an  endless  chain."

After  stating  the  conditions  which  make  it  difficult  to  avoid  errors
in  planning  production,  Professor  Pigou  attacks  the  problem  why  the
majority  of  these  errors  run  in  the  same  direction,  instead  of  cancelling
each  other.  It  is  at  this  point  that  his  explanation  diverges  from  the
path  that  contents  Dr.  Hardy.  While  the  latter  relies  upon  the  J
similarity  of  the  price  and  order  data  used  by  producers  and  by  specu-  ^
lators  to  account  for  the  similarity  of  their  errors.  Professor  Pigou  has
recourse  to  waves  of  elation  and  discouragement  which  sweep  over  the
business  community.

Let  us  suppose  the  business  world  to  be  in  a  neutral  po-
sition, not  suffering  from  either  type  of  error.  On  this  situa-
tion there  supervenes  some  real  cause  for  increase  in  the
demand  for  business  activity.

Then,  because  business  men  cannot  foresee  the  results  which  will  be
produced  by  their  own  and  other  men's  response  to  the  stimulus,
errors  of  the  optimistic  type  will  begin  to  be  made.  But  why  should
these  errors  multiply  so  rapidly  and  grow  so  huge?

When  an  error  of  optimism  has  been  generated,  (Pro-
fessor Pigou  answers)  it  tends  to  spread  and  grow,  as  a  result
of  reactions  between  different  parts  of  the  business  community.
This  comes  about  through  two  principal  influences.  First,
experience  suggests  that,  apart  altogether  from  the  financial
ties  by  which  different  business  men  are  bound  together,  there
exists  among  them  a  certain  measure  of  psychological  inter-
dependence. A  change  of  tone  in  one  part  of  the  business
world  diffuses  itself,  in  a  quite  unreasoning  manner,  over  other
and  wholly  disconnected  parts.  .  .  .  Secondly  ...  an  error  of
optimism  on  the  part  of  one  group  of  business  men  itself  creates
a  justification  for  some  improved  expectation  on  the  part  of
other  groups.

Thus  the  optimistic  error  once  born  grows  in  scope  and  magnitude.
But  since  the  prosperity  has  been  built  largely  upon  error,  a  day
of  reckoning  must  come.  This  day  does  not  dawn  until  after  a  time
long  enough  to  construct  new  industrial  equipment  on  a  large  scale,
to  bring  the  products  of  the  new  equipment  to  market,  and  to  find
that  they  cannot  be  disposed  of  promptly  at  profitable  prices. Then


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 19

the  past  miscalculation  becomes  patent — patent  to  creditors  as  well
as  to  debtors,  and  the  creditors  apply  pressure  for  repayment.  Thus
prosperity  ends  in  a  crisis.  The  error  of  optimism  dies  in  the  crisis,
but  in  dying  it

gives  birth  to  an  error  of  pessimism.  This  new  error  is  born,
not  an  infant,  but  a  giant;  for  an  industrial  boom  has  neces-
sarily been  a  period  of  strong  emotional  excitement,  and  an
excited  man  passes  from  one  form  of  excitement  to  another
more  rapidly  than  he  passes  to  quiescence.

Under  the  influence  of  the  new  error,  business  is  unduly  depressed.
For  a  time  there  is  relatively  slow  extension  of  facilities  for  produc-
tion. In  consequence,

a  general  shortage  of  a  number  of  important  commodities
gradually  makes  itself  apparent,  and  those  persons  who  have
them  to  sell  are  seen  to  be  earning  a  good  real  return.  There-
upon, certain  of  the  bolder  spirits  in  industry  see  an  oppor-
tunity and  seize  it.

Business  begins  to  pick  up  slowly  and  gradually.

The  first  year  or  two,  say,  is  taken:  up  with  a  wholly  justified
expansion.  But,  after  the  first  year  or  two,  further  expansion
represents,  not  a  correction  of  the  past  error,  but  the  creation
of  a  new  one.

And  the  new  error  grows  until  it  has  betrayed  business  men  into
courses  which  end  in  a  fresh  crisis.^

Professor  Pigou  represents  waves  of  elation  and  depression  as
arising  from  changes  in  the  business  situation,  changes  which  are
magnified  into  business  cycles  by  the  emotions  they  excite.  Dr.
Maurice  Beck  Hexter,  Director  of  the  Federated  Jewish  Charities  of
Boston,  has  thrown  out  the  suggestion  that  these  waves  of  feeling
have  an  origin  independent  of  the  business  world.

By  an  elaborate  statistical  analysis  of  vital  and  economic  data.
Dr.  Hexter  has  reached  the  conclusion  that

*  A.  C.  Pigou,  The  Economics  of  Welfare,  1st  ed.,  London,  1920,  Part  vi,  chapter  vi.
The  quotations  are  from  pp.  833,  839,  840,  843  and  844.  In  companion  chapters,  Professor
Pigou  shows  how  the  results  of  the  "dominant  cause"  are  modified  by  other  factors,  such
as  harvest  fluctuations,  and  the  workings  of  the  monetary  system.  Professor  Pigou  has
dropped  this  discussion  from  his  second  edition,  hoping  to  incorporate  it  "in  the  next
year  or  two"  in  "a  study  of  industrial  fluctuations." See  preface  of  the  2d  ed.,  1924.


/


20  BUSINESS  CYCLES

.  .  .  fluctuations  in  conceptions  precede  fluctuations  in  whole-
sale prices  by  about  eight  months;  fluctuations  in  the  birth-
rate precede  fluctuations  in  unemployment  by  about  seventeen
months  .  .  .  fluctuations  in  the  death-rate  precede  fluctua-
tions in  wholesale  prices  about  seventeen  months;  and  .  .  .
fluctuations  in  the  death-rate  precede  fluctuations  in  unem-
ployment by  about  ten  months.

A  causal  explanation  of  these  relations  is  suggested  by  the  powers
ful  emotional  reactions  excited  in  men  by  the  death  of  friends  and
the  prospect  of  having  children. Dr.  Hexter  argues  thus:

Business  enterprise  is  the  application  of  mental  effort  to  the
transformation  of  our  physical  environment.  Anything  which
affects  the  emotions  of  men  must  necessarily  affect  their  ability
to  make  decisions,  anticipate  decisions,  or  postpone  decisions.
If  these  times  of  postponed  decisions  or  accelerated  judgments
or  stimulated  efforts  are  not  isolated,  but,  on  the  contrary,
run  in  wave-like  movements,  we  think  that  there  may  be  some-
thing to  {sic)  the  suggestion  that  varying  birth-rates  and
fluctuating  death-rates  can  and  do  affect  business  cycles.  The
errors  of  optimism  and  the  errors  of  pessimism  may  be  closely
connected  with  these  variations  in  human  emotions.  It  may
very  well  be  that  these  waves  of  emotion  which  run  through
society  from  time  to  time  are  very  closely  related  to  these
variations  in  births  and  deaths.^

It  will  be  noticed  that  Dr.  Hexter's  hypothesis  is  related  to  Pro-
fessor Huntington's  quite  as  closely  as  to  Professor  Pigou's.  But
Hexter  differs  from  Huntington  in  that  he  does  not  seek  to  connect
fluctuations  in  vital  statistics  with  fluctuations  in  the  weather.


4.  Innovations,  Promotion,  Progress.

Professor  Joseph  Schumpeter  of  Bonn  holds  that  to  explain  busi-
ness cycles  by  errors  bred  of  uncertainty  and  nourished  by  mass
psychology  is  superficial.  That  errors  are  made,  that  they  wax  with
prosperity,  and  that  they  play  a  considerable  role  in  the  cycle  he
admits;  but,  he  adds,  crises  and  depressions  would  continue  to  run
their  round  if  miscalculation  were  eliminated.

The  fundamental  cause  of  business  fluctuations  Schumpeter  finds

*  Maurice  B.  Hexter,  Social  Consequences  of  Business  Cycles. Boston  and  New  York,
1925,  Part  ii. The  quotations  are  from  pp.  169,  174  and  175.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 21

in  the  innovations  made  from  time  to  time  by  the  relatively  small
number  of  exceptionally  energetic  business  men — their  practical  ap-
plications of  scientific  discoveries  and  mechanical  inventions,  their
development  of  new  forms  of  industrial  and  commercial  organization,
their  introduction  of  unfamihar  products,  their  conquests  of  new
markets,  exploitation  of  new  resources,  shiftings  of  trade  routes,  and
the  like.  Changes  of  this  sort,  when  made  on  a  large  scale,  alter  the
data  on  which  the  mass  of  routine  business  men  have  based  their
plans.  These  plans  doubtless  involve  a  certain  element  of  error;  but
business  innovations  produce  a  far  graver  situation.

Somehow,  all  enterprises  must  adapt  themselves  to  the  novel  con-
ditions now  confronting  them,  or  go  to  the  wall.  Considerable  num-
bers do  fail.  A  far  larger  number  manage  to  work  out  new  plans
based  on  the  new  data  concerning  prices,  costs,  methods  and  markets.
But  this  process  of  feeling  out  the  novel  conditions  and  making
adjustments  to  them  takes  time.  While  the  readjusting  is  under
way,  the  making  of  innovations  slows  down;  even  the  most  restless
of  enterprisers  cannot  get  the  capital  and  cooperation  required  to
carry  out  their  schemes.  This  is  the  period  of  depression.  It  lasts
until  the  readjustments  have  gone  far  enough  to  produce  a  fairly
stable  condition  of  affairs,  stable  enough  to  let  men  regain  confidence
in  the  futui;g^

But  the  very  restoration  of  quasi-stability  makes  it  possible  for
the  disturbers  of  the  business  peace  to  resume  operations  on  a  large
scale.  By  borrowing  for  their  new  projects  the  innovators  raise  in-
terest rates;  by  investing  capital  they  raise  the  prices  of  industrial
equipment  and  increase  payroll  disbursements.  There  follows  an
increase  of  demand  and  a  rise  in  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods.  The
general  activity  thus  initiated  brings  prosperity  to  the  mass  of  en-
terprises— and  stimulates  further  innovations.  Prosperity  continues
until  the  unsettling  consequences  of  the  business  changes  begin  to
appear  en  masse  in  the  shape  of  large  supplies  flooding  the  market,
high  costs  of  materials  and  labor,  shifting  of  demand  to  new  products,
the  supersession  of  old  sources  of  production  by  new  sources,  and
so  on. Then  comes  a  new  crisis  and  a  new  period  of  readjustments.

To  complete  this  theory  it  is  necessary  to  show  why  innovations
themselves  come  in  waves.  Schumpeter  explains  that  the  combina-
tion of  capacities  required  for  conceiving  new  undertakings  and  carry-
ing them  through  all  obstacles  and  hazards  is  rare  among  men;  but
that  when  a  few  highly  endowed  individuals  have  achieved  success.


22  BUSINESS  CYCLES

their  example  makes  the  way  easier  for  a  crowd  of  imitators.  The
rising  prices,  the  increasing  demand,  the  spread  of  optimism  make
borrowers  more  eager  and  lenders  less  cautious.  Men  who  do  not
have  the  capacity  to  originate  new  schemes  may  have  the  wit  to
profit  by  and  even  improve  upon  the  work  of  the  pioneers.  So,  once
started,  a  wave  of  innovation  gains  momentum — until  it  is  checked
by  the  consequences  which  it  produces.^

The  "promotion  theory''  of  business  cycles,  developed  by  Pro-
fessor Minnie  T.  England  of  the  University  of  Nebraska,  rests  upon
the  same  foundations  as  Schumpeter's  theory  of  innovations.  While
less  complete  in  its  formal  logic,  Mrs.  England's  exposition  runs  in
more  realistic  terms  and  cites  more  evidence.  It  should  be  studied
by  those  who  feel  that  Schumpeter's  sketch  lacks  substance.^

While  Mrs.  England  represents  promoters  and  Professor  Schum-
peter  represents  a  less  specialized  group  of  innovators  as  responsible
for  business  crises.  Dr.  Emanuel  H.  Vogel,  late  of  Vienna  University,
lays  the  responsibility  upon  "progress"  at  large.

In  his  eyes,  crises  are  accidents  which  are  bound  to  happen  every
now  and  then  in  a  growing  society  based  on  private  enterprise.  For
when  such  a  society  is  expanding  year  after  year,  prosperity  requires
the  maintenance  of  an  economic  equilibrium  which  is  itself  moving.
The  rates  at  which  the  important  industries  are  growing  must  be
kept  in  adjustment  to  each  other;  so  also  must  the  rates  at  which  the
incomes  of  all  classes  of  the  people  and  their  consumption  of  goods
are  growing.

Such  a  consummation  of  adjustment.  Dr.  Vogel  argues,  is  think-
able only  in  a  society  whose  changes  are  always  in  the  same  direction
and  at  the  same  pace.  It  is  not  thinkable  in  a  society  whose  fortunes
are  represented  by  an  ascending  saw-toothed  curve.  We  know  that
expansion  at  a  constant  rate  never  continues  unbroken  long  at  a

*Dr.  Schumpeter's  first  version  of  this  theory  was  published  in  May,  1910:  "Ueber
das  Wesen  der  Wirtschaftskrisen,"  Zeitschrift  fur  Volkswirtschaft,  Sozialpolitik  und
Verwaltung,  vol.  xix,  p.  271.  Successive  revisions  appear  in  his  Theorie  der  wirtschajt-
lichen  Entwicklung,  Leipzig,  1912,  chapter  vi;  "Die  Wellenbewegung  des  Wirtschafts-
lebens,"  Archiv  fiir  Sozialtvissenschaft  und  Sozialpolitik,  July,  1914,^  vol.  xxxix,  pp.  1-32,
and  in  the  second  edition  of  his  Theorie  der  wirtschaftlichen  Entwicklung,  Munich  and
Leipzig,  1926,  chapter  vi.  This  latest  version  includes  replies  to  several  critics  of  the
theory,  £^nd  is  written  in  the  most  emphatic  tone.

*See  "Fisher's  Theory  of  Crises,"  Qunrterly  Journal  of  Economics,  November,  1912,
vol.  xxvii,  pp.  95-106;  "Promotion  as  the  Cause  of  Crises,"  the  same,  August,  1915,  vol.
xxix,  pp.  631-641 ;  "Economic  Crises,"  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  April,  1913,  vol.  xxi,
pp.  345-354;  "An  Analysis  of  the  Crisis  Cycle,"  the  same,  October,  1913,  vol.  xxi,  pp.
712-734.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 23

time;  every  community  experiences  setbacks  which  check  its  economic
progress.  Unfavorable  political  events,  mistaken  forecasts  of  the
future,  the  disturbances  caused  by  improvements  in  technical  meth-
ods, discoveries  of  new  sources  of  supply,  alterations  in  consumers*
tastes,  suggest  how  various  are  the  factors  which  are  changing  the
pace  of  growth  and  occasionally  causing  shrinkage.
^  Irregularities  of  change,  then,  are  rooted  deep  in  modern  economic
organization.  And  to  these  irregularities  it  is  quite  impossible  that
all  the  different  rates  of  growth  should  adjust  themselves  promptly
and  in  such  a  way  as  to  maintain  among  themselves  a  moving
equilibrium.  A  serious  rupture  of  equilibrium  produces  an  economic
crisis  followed  by  a  period  of  declining  activity.  Gradually  men  work
out  a  fresh  series  of  adjustments,  equilibrium  is  re-established,  and
wogress  resumes  its  course  until  something  new  happens  to  which
the  rates  of  growth  cannot  adjust  themselves  without  losing  adjust-
ment to  each  other.^

5.  The  Processes  of  Saving  and  Investing.

One  of  the  explanations  of  crises  most  in  favor  among  business
ir\en  is  that  they  are  caused  by  ^^scarcity  of  capital."  Investments
during  prosperity  are  so  heavy  that  the  supply  of  loan  funds  is  grad-
ually exhausted.  When  this  stage  is  reached,  borrowers  are  unable
to  complete  their  financing  and  the  boom  ends  in  a  crisis.  This
idea  has  been  elaborated  by  Professor  Michel  Tugan-Baranovski,
whose  Russian  treatise  of  1894  has  been  repeatedly  revised  and  trans-
lated into  French  and  German.

It  is  necessary  to  distinguish,  Tugan-Baranovski  begins,  between
loan  funds  and  capital  invested  in  production.  The  loan  fund  is
the  aggregate  of  savings  made  by  individuals  belonging  to  all  classes,
and  by  business  enterprises.  During  depressions  the  savings  of  busi-
ness enterprises,  business  men,  stockholders  and  wage-earners  decline.
But  there  is  an  important  class  of  savers  whose  incomes  are  little
affected  by  depression — landlords,  bond-holders,  salaried  officials ;  in-
deed their  savings  are  augmented  by  the  lower  cost  of  living.  Thus
saving  continues  on  a  large  scale  during  depression,  and  (the  vital
point)  if  the  aggregate  declines  below  the  records  of  prosperity,  it
certainly  decHnes  less  than  does  investing. Hence  depression  brings

•Die  Theorie  des  volkswirtschaftlichen  Entmckelungsprozesses  und  das  Krisenprob-
lem. By  Dr.  Emanuel  Hugo  Vogel. Vienna  and  Leipzig,  1917.


24  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  gradual  accumulation  of  a  huge  uninvested  fund  of  loan  capital.
Evidence  of  this  accumulation  appears  in  the  swollen  bank  reserves
and  in  the  low  rates  of  interest  and  bank  discount.

Of  course,  the  reason  why  these  savings  are  not  invested  as  they
are  made  is  found  in  the  disorganized  state  of  business.  Few  business
men  wish  to  borrow  on  a  large  scale  during  depression,  gut  let
savers  become  eager  enough  to  get  their  funds  into  profitable  use,
let  the  rates  of  interest  which  they  will  accept  drop  low  enough,  the
dam  behind  which  the  loan  fund  has  been  accumulating  will  give  way,
and  money  will  begin  to  flow  into  investment.

When  this  time  comes  the  huge  purchases  made  with  borrowed
loan  funds  bring  prosperity.  Stimulated  by  its  own  effects,  invest-
ment keeps  expanding  and  presently  attains  a  scale  so  large  as  to
exceed  current  savings.  Hence  the  uninvested  loan  fund  is  grad-
ually exhausted.  When  the  point  of  exhaustion  is  neared,  available
capital  becomes  so  scarce  that  pending  plans  for  further  business  ex-
tensions cannot  be  financed.  Interest  rates  rise  to  prohibitive  levels,
bank  reserves  drop  to  the  danger  point,  the  makers  of  industrial
equipment  get  no  new  orders,  and  prosperity  ends  in  a  crisis.^

While  giving  the  preceding  account  of  the  process  by  which  crises
are  bred  periodically,  Tugan-Baranovski  holds  that  the  alternate
accumulation  and  exhaustion  of  the  loan  fund  could  not  occur  were
income  more  evenly  distributed.

(It  is  the  inadequate  remuneration  of  labor  .  .  .  which  is  th0
fundamental  cause  of  the  rapid  accumulation  of  social  capitaL
which  in  its  turn  provokes  crises.^  ^y

This  is  the  idea  which  an  English  publicist,  Mr.  John  A.  Hobson,  has
developed  into  the  theory  that  business  cycles  are  due  to  "over-saving"
— a  theory  quite  different  from  Tugan-Baranovski's.

Mr.  Hobson  holds  that  at  any  given  time

there  is  an  exact  proportion  of  the  current  income  which,  in
accordance  with  existing  arts  of  production  and  existing  fore-
sight, is  required  to  set  up  new  capital  so  as  to  make  provision
for  the  maximum  consumption  throughout  the  near  future.

*The  latest  exposition  known  to  me  is  the  French  edition  of  Tugan-Baranovski's
treatise,  Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Angleterre,  traduit  par  Joseph  Schapiro  (Biblio-
theque  Internationale  d'ficonomie  Politique),  Paris,  1913. See  especially  Part  II.

"The  same,  p.  279.


i


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 25

If  in  a  period  of  prosperity,  the  rate  of  consumption  should  rise  pari
passu  with  the  rate  of  production,  there  is  no  inherent  reason  why
the  prosperity  might  not  continue  indefinitely.  But  in  modern  so-
cieties, a  large  portion  of  the  wealth  produced  belongs  to  a  small  class.
In  active  times  their  incomes  rise  more  rapidly  than  their  consump-
tion, and  the  surplus  income  is  perforce  saved.  There  results  for  the
community  as  a  whole  a  slight  deficiency  of  spending  and  a  corre-
sponding excess  of  saving.  The  wealthy  class  seeks  to  invest  its  new
savings  in  productive  enterprises — thereby  increasing  the  supply  of
goods  and  also  increasing  the  incomes  from  which  further  savings
will  be  made.  This  process  runs  cumulatively  during  the  years  of
prosperity  until  finally  the  markets  become  congested  with  goods
which  cannot  be  sold  at  a  profit.  Then  prices  fall,  liquidation  ensues,
capital  is  written  down,  and  the  incomes  of  the  wealthy  class  are  so
reduced  that  savings  fall  below  the  proper  proportion  to  spending.

During  the  period  of  depression,  the  glut  of  goods  weighing  upon
the  market  is  gradually  worked  off  and  the  prospect  of  profitable  in-
vestment slowly  returns.  Savings  rise  again  to  the  right  proportion
to  spending  and  good  times  prevail  for  a  season.  But  after  a  while
the  chronic  impulse  toward  over-saving  becomes  fully  operative  once
more;  soon  or  late  it  begets  another  congestion  of  the  markets,  and
this  congestion  begets  another  depression.

Proximately  then,  the  cause  of  alternating  prosperity  and  depres-
sion is  the  tendency  toward  over-saving;  ultimately  it  is  the  existence
of  the  surplus  incomes  which  lead  to  over-saving.^

'Mr.  Hobson  has  presented  his  theory  in  several  books,  but  most  fully  in  The  /n-
dustrial  System,  London,  1909,  chapters  iii  and  xviii,  and  in  Economics  of  Unemploy"
ment,  London,  1922. The  passage  quoted  is  from  p.  53  of  the  earlier  volume.

Another  form  of  the  savings  theory  is  presented  by  Mr.  N.  Johannsen.  The  act  of
saving  by  itself,  means  the  withdrawal  of  purchasing  power  from  the  market,  and  so
always  tends  to  produce  business  depression.  But  when  the  sums  saved  are  promptly
invested  "in  the  creation  of  new  productive  capital,"  the  deficiency  of  purchasing
power  is  offset,  and  the  community's  wealth  is  increased.  No  such  offsetting  occurs,
however,  when  savings  are  used  to  buy  property  from  embarrassed  owners,  or  loaned
to  people  in  distress.  Those  who  get  the  money  expend  it;  but  their  expenditures
merely  offset  their  own  losses,  and  the  withdrawal  of  purchasing  power  caused  by
the  act  of  saving  is  not  compensated  for.  Whether  saving  tends  to  sustain  prosperity
or  to  cause  depression  thus  "depends  upon  the  manner  of  investment." "Impair  sav-

•  ings,"  as  Mr.  Johannsen  calls  savings  which  are  not  used  to  create  new  capital,  "always
hurt  business,  and  if  sufficiently  large,  thoy  cause  a  general  depression."  See  N.  Johann-
sen, A  Neglected  Point  in  Connection  with  Crises,  New  York,  1908,  and  Business  De-
pressions: Their  Cause. A  Discovery  in  Economics,  Stapleton,  New  York,  1925.

Dr.  Rudolf  Stucken  of  the  XJniversity  of  Kiel  argues  in  a  somewhat  similar  vein
that,  if  a  period  of  expansion  in  business  activity  is  checked  for  any  reason,  savings
will  not  be  invested  in  productive  enterprises,  but  used  to  repay  bank  loans. The

!  immediate  result  is  to  reduce  the  purchasing  power  offered  for  goods  below  the  current
supply  seeking  sale,  and  so  to  convert  the  check  upon  expansion  into  a  contraction.


26  BUSINESS  CYCLES

6.  Construction  Work.

Among  the  numerous  theorists  who  have  been  influenced  by
Tugan-Baranovski  are  writers  who  have  sought  to  show  what  his

But  the  reduction  of  bank  loans,  and  the  concomitant  reduction  of  demand  liabilities
enables  the  banks  to  increase  their  credit  advances  to  business  men  liberally  when  a
revival  begins,  and  thus  to  convert  revival  into  prosperity.  See  Rudolf  Stucken,
Theorie  der  Konjunkturschwankungen,  Jena,  1926.

While  Mr.  D.  H.  Robertson  cannot  be  classified  with  the  savings  theorists,  since
he  believes  that  other  factors  have  a  leading  share  in  producing  cyclical  oscillations  in
trade,  the  most  notable  feature  of  his  recent  book  on  Banking  Policy  and  the  Price
Level,  (London,  1926),  is  an  analysis  of  the  role  played  by  savings  in  ''trade  cycles."

For  this  analysis  he  invents  a  curious  terminology.

"The  essence  of  the  activity  of  providing  capital"  is  "Lacking."  "A  man
is  lacking  if  during  a  given  period  he  consumes  less  than  the  value  of  his
current  economic  output,  .  .  .  The  amount  of  Lacking  done  in  a  given
period  may  be  measured  by  the  volume  of  consumable  goods  lacked.  .  .  .
The  things  in  the  provision  of  which  Lacking  eventuates  I  propose  to  call
Capital.  .  .  .  Long  Lacking  is  directed  towards  providing  society  with  the
use  ...  of  the  fixed  and  durable  instruments  of  production :  Short  Lacking
towards"  providing  society  with  the  use  of  circulating  capital,  which,  like
fixed  capital,  consists  of  commodities. (Pp.  40-42.)

Equipped  with  these  definitions,  Mr.  Robertson  argues:

"From  our  present  point  of  view,  the  fundamental  feature  of  the  upward
swing  of  a  trade  cycle  is  a  large  and  discontinuous  increase  in  the  demand
for  Short  Lacking,  occurring  as  the  essential  preliminary  to  an  expansion
of  output  .  .  .  the  supply  of  (Spontaneous)  Short  Lacking  is  not  sufficiently
elastic  to  cope  with  such  pronounced  and  discontinuous  increases  in  demand,
and  .  .  .  the  responsibility  for  meeting  them  rests  almost  entirely  upon
the  banking-system  (Pp.  71,  72)  .  ,  .  Now  the  banking-system  can,  of
course,  only  'provide'  .  .  .  Short  Lacking  ...  by  extorting  it  from  the
general  public  through  the  multiplication  of  currency." (Pp.  88,  89.)

The  meaning  seems  to  be  that  current  output  cannot  be  expanded  freely  in  a
period  of  prosperity  unless  there  has  been  an  increase  in  the  commodities  which
constitute  circulating  capital;  that  these  commodities  cannot  be  provided  in  sufficient
quantity  unless  the  general  public  is  prevented  from  increasing  its  consumption  as  fast
as  output  rises,  and  that  the  banks  put  the  necessary  brake  upon  consumption  by  rais-
ing prices  through  an  increase  of  the  currency.

Mr.  Robertson  holds  that  most  periods  of  prosperity  bring  also  a  rapid  increase
in  the  demand  for  fixed  capital,  and  therefore  for  the  Long  Lacking  which  provides  it.
Part  of  this  demand  is  met  by  investors,  but  part  falls  on  the  banks. The  latter  +■
can  provide  Long  Lacking  only  by  the  means  which  they  use  to  provide  Short  Lacking,  j
that  is,  they  must  extort  Long  Lacking  from  the  public  by  expanding  the  currency  i
and  raising  prices. (Pp.  84-89).  ^  i

But  the  rise  of  prices  through  which  the  banks  extort  Lacking,  Short  and  Long,  from  I
the  public  increases  the  money  value  of  the  circulating  and  fixed  capital  required  by  ,
business  enterprises,  and  therefore  makes  necessary  a  greater  rise  of  prices.  (Obviously  j
a  self-inflating  process  of  this  sort  cannot  be  sustained  indefinitely.  To  keep  the  process  |
under  control,  the  banks  raise  interest  rates,  sell  government  securities,  and,  at  need,  J
limit  new  money  loans.  Despite  the  skill  which  modern  banking-systems  have  ac-  I
quired  in  promoting  equilibrium  between  th9  demand  for  and  supply  of  Lacking,  \
many  crises  are  still  characterized  by  what  is  popularly  called  "an  acute  shortage  *'
of  capital,"  and  what  is  properly  called  "a  deficiency  in  the  activity  Lacking."  (Pp.
79,  90).

I  offer  this  interpretation  of  Mr.  Robertson's  analysis  with  a  diffidence  which
readers  of  his  book  will  understand. It  is  certainly  incomplete;  I  hope  it  is  not  wrong.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 27

analysis  of  savings  means  in  terms  of  production.  By  so  doing  they
have  shifted  the  emphasis  from  over-saving  to  over-production  of
one  type  of  goods  in  comparison  with  another  type.  This  variant  of
business-cycle  theory  is  represented  in  Germany  by  Professor  Arthur
Spiethoff  of  the  University  of  Berlin ;  ^  but  it  will  suffice  to  cite  the
less  technical  exposition  given  by  Mr.  George  H.  Hull,  an  American
business  man.

High  prices  of  construction,  runs  HulPs  thesis,  is  the  hitherto
"unknown  cause  of  the  mysterious  depressions'*  from  which  the  in-
dustrial nations  suffer. The  greater  part  of  modern  trade  fluctuates
within  relatively  narrow  limits. Agriculture  provides  the  necessities
of  life,  commerce  distributes  them,  and  finance  adjusts  the  bills. The
volume  of  all  this  business  is  fairly  constant,  because  the  demand  for
necessities  is  incapable  of  sudden  expansion  or  contraction. Indus-
try, on  the  contrary,  may  expand  or  contract  indefinitely,  especially
that  part  of  industry  devoted  to  construction  work. For  the  sources-^
of  booms  and  depressions,  therefore,  we  must  look  to  the  enterprises )
which  build  and  equip  houses,  stores,  factories,  railways,  docks,  andx
the  like.

Of  the  huge  total  of  construction,  which  Mr.  Hull  believes  to  make
"say  77  per  cent  of  all  industrial  products  of  the  nation"  after  "de-
ducting land  and  the  necessities  of  life,"  about  two-thirds,  even  in
the  busiest  of  years,  consists  of  repairs,  replacements,  and  such  ex-
tensions as  are  required  by  the  growth  of  population.  This  portion
of  construction  is  necessary  and  must  be  executed  every  year.  But
the  remaining  portion  is  "optional  construction,"  and  is  undertaken
or  not  according  as  investors  see  a  liberal  or  a  meager  profit  in  pro-
viding new  building  and  equipment.

When  the  costs  of  construction  fall  low  enough  to  arouse  "the
bargain-counter  instinct,"  many  of  the  "far-seeing  ones  who  hold
the  purse-strings  of  the  country"  let  heavy  contracts,  and  their  ex-
ample is  followed  by  the  less  shrewd.  The  addition  of  this  new  busi-
ness to  the  volume  of  "necessity  construction"  and  the  provision  of
consumers'  goods,  creates  a  boom. But,  after  a  year  or  two,  con-

*  Professor  Spiethoff  published  his  analysis  in  a  series  of  articles  in  Schmoller'8
Jahrbuch  fur  Gesetzgehung,  1902,  pp.  721-759;  1903,  pp.  670-708;  1909,  pp.  445-467,  927-
951,  1417-1437.  See  also  Spiethoff 's  article  "Krisen"  in  the  4th  edition  of  the  Hand-
worterbuch  der  Staatsvnssenschajten,  Jena,  1925,  vol.  vi,  pp.  8-91.  Mr.  Dennis  H.
Robertson  has  developed  a  theory  of  "constructional  relapse"  which  runs  on  similar
lines. See  A  Study  of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  London,  1915,  pp.  170-198.

A  summary  of  Spiethoff's  theory  may  be  found  in  the  earlier  edition  of  this  book,
pp.  10, 11.


28  BUSINESS  CYCLES

tractors  discover  that  their  order  books  call  for  more  work  than
they  can  get  labor  and  materials  to  finish  within  the  contract  time.
When  this  oversold  condition  of  the  contracting  trades  is  realized,
the  prices  of  labor  and  raw  materials  rise  rapidly.  The  estimated  cost
of  construction  on  new  contracts  then  becomes  excessive.  Shrewd
investors  therefore  begin  to  postpone  the  execution  of  their  plans  for
extending  permanent  equipment,  and  the  letting  of  fresh  contracts
declines  apace.  While  the  contractors  are  gradually  completing  work
on  their  old  orders,  all  the  enterprises  making  iron,  steel,  lumber,
cement,  brick,  stone,  etc.,  begin  to  suffer  a  serious  shrinkage  of  new
business.  Just  as  the  execution  of  the  large  contracts  for  "optional
construction,"  let  in  the  low-price  period,  brought  on  prosperity,  so
the  smallness  of  such  contracts,  let  in  the  high-price  period,  now  brings
on  depression.  Then  the  costs  of  construction  work  fall  until  they
arouse  "the  bargain-counter  instinct"  of  investors  once  more,  and
the  cycle  begins  afresh.^

Colonel  Malcolm  C.  Rorty  has  suggested  that  the  over-construc-
tion theory  should  be  expanded  into  an  "over-commitment"  theory,
and  strengthened  by  analysis  of  financial  processes.  At  an  early
stage  in  many  periods  of  prosperity,  he  points  out,  simultaneous  over-
commitments to  business  extensions  and  new  ventures  are  made  in
most,  if  not  in  all,  branches  of  industry.  Each  such  commitment  in-
volves the  creation,  through  credit  extensions,  of  new  purchasing
power.  Since  the  additional  purchasing  power  is  not  offset  promptly
by  a  corresponding  increase  in  production,  prices  rise.  This  process
of  extending  commitments,  expanding  credit  and  raising  prices  con-
tinues until  it  is  checked  by  shortage  of  credit  facilities,  or  until  prices
have  reached  a  level  at  which  experienced  business  men  see  danger
in  making  further  additions  to  their  stocks  of  goods.  Then  comes  a
contraction  of  purchases,  and  a  crisis.

Such  are  the  essential  features  of  a  typical  boom  and  crisis,  arising
from  causes  inherent  in  the  business  organization.  But  Colonel  Rorty
adds  that  we  have  cycles  of  two  other  types.  The  milder  periods  of
prosperity  and  recession  arise  from  mere  current  readjustments  of
production,  distribution  and  consumption.  Still  other  cycles  arise
primarily  from  non-business  causes,  such  as  wars.  Admitting  that
[sometimes  it  is  difficult  to  decide  to  which  of  these  three  types  a

*  George  H.  Hull,  Industrial  Depressions,  New  York,  1911. The  passages  quoted  arc
from  pp.  103-107.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 29

given  case  belongs,  Colonel  Rorty  holds  that  this  classification  clarifies
the  problem,  and  explains  why  no  one  theory  accounts  in  satisfactory
fashion  for  all  cycles.^


7.  Generalized  Over-Production.

The  emphasis  which  Spiethoff  and  Hull  put  upon  the  difference  be-
tween the  roles  played  by  industrial  equipment  and  consumers^  goods
in  business  cycles  has  become  a  commonplace  in  later  writings.  Two
theorists  in  particular  have  developed  this  idea,  and  in  developing
it  have  reached  results  which  differ  sharply  from  those  of  Tugan-
Baranovski  and  Hull.  Against  the  first  they  contend  that  there
is  and  can  be  no  accumulation  of  uninvested  loan-capital;  against
the  second  they  contend  that  crises  result  from  a  general,  not
a  partial  over-production  of  goods,  and  that  the  seat  of  difficulty  is
in  the  industries  making  consumers'  goods  rather  than  in  those  making
industrial  equipment.  Mentor  Bouniatian,  professor  at  the  Poly-
technic Institute  of  Tiflis  was  perhaps  the  earlier  to  publish ;  but  the
clearer  exposition  has  been  supplied  by  Albert  Aftalion,  professor  at
the  University  of  Paris.  ^

When  the  price  level  rises  after  a  period  of  depression — ^why  it
should  rise  will  appear  later — business  men  see  that  current  demand
for  consumers'  goods  is  larger  than  current  supply  at  the  old  prices.
To  secure  their  shares  of  the  good  profits  in  prospect,  manufacturers
enlarge  the  volume  of  their  orders  for  industrial  equipment.  These
orders  increase  employment,  thus  stimulate  consumers'  demand,  and
so  encourage  the  placing  of  still  larger  orders  for  equipment.

To  construct  the  equipment  which  is  typical  of  modern  industry,
however,  requires  months  and  often  years.  Hence  a  considerable  time
must  pass  before  notable  additions  can  be  made  to  the  current  supply

'See  M.  C.  Rorty,  Some  Problems  in  Current  Economics,  Chicago,  1922,  pp.  73-84,
and  the  report  of  Colonel  Rorty's  address  to  the  National  Founders  Association,  in
The  Iron  Age,  November  25,  1926,  pp.  1478-1482.

*0n  the  relations  between  the  ideas  of  these  two  writers  see  the  preface  of  Les
Crises  l^conomiques,  par  Mentor  Bouniatian,  Traduit  du  Russe,  (Moscow,  1915)  par
J.  Bernard  (Bibliotheque  Internationale  d'Economie  Politique),  Paris,  1922.  Bounia-
tian's  first  book  on  the  subject  was  Wirtschaftskrisen  und  Ueberkapitalisation,  Munich,
1908.  Aftalion  published  first  a  series  of  articles  on  **La  realite  des  surproductions  gen-
^rales"  in  the  Revue  d'Economie  Politique,  1908-09  (vol.  xxii,  pp.  696-706;  vol.  xxiii,
pp.  81-117,  201-229,  241-259) ;  then  an  Essai  cfune  theorie  des  crises  generates  et  perio-
digues,  Paris,  1909,  and  finally  a  treatise,  Les  Crises  periodiques  de  Surproduction,
2  vols.,  Paris,  1913.


30  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  consumers'  goods.  During  this  "period  of  gestation,"  ^  the  supply
of  consumers'  goods  continues  inadequate,  prices  keep  advancing,
employment  grows  fuller,  large  incomes  are  disbursed  and  prosperity
reigns.

After  prosperity  has  grown  at  an  increasing  pace  for  some  time,
however,  large  quantities  of  new  equipment  are  ready  for  use  and
the  current  supply  of  consumers'  goods  is  augmented.  Then  trouble
begins.  For,  according  to  "the  laws  of  value,"  these  increments  added
to  the  supply  of  consumers'  goods  cannot  be  sold  at  prices  such  as
have  recently  prevailed.  When  the  supply  of  any  commodity  in-
creases, the  wants  satisfied  by  consuming  new  increments  are  less
intense  than  the  marginal  wants  recently  satisfied.  The  later  days
of  prosperity  are  therefore  characterized  by  a  decline  in  the  marginal
utility  of  consumers'  goods.  This  decline  brings  with  it  a  reduction
in  the  prices  consumers  are  willing  to  pay — a  fall  which  is  rendered
greater  by  the  concomitant  rise  in  the  marginal  utility  of  money,
caused  by  the  increasing  demands  upon  the  circulating  medium  made
by  active  trade.  Presently  it  becomes  clear  that  general  over-produc-
tion prevails.  The  fall  of  prices  extends  from  one  field  to  another
and  prosperity  ends  in  a  crisis.

General  over-production  accompanied  by  a  declining  price  level
lasts  for  a  year  or  so  after  the  crisis,  because  the  new  equipment  has
cost  so  much  money  that  it  must  be  kept  running,  if  that  is  anywise
possible.  Indeed,  over-production  increases  for  a  time,  since  part  of
the  equipment  ordered  in  the  latter  part  of  the  boom  is  not  finished
until  after  the  crisis,  and  when  it  is  delivered  it  must  be  made  to
give  some  return  upon  the  capital  locked  up  in  it.  The  fall  of  prices
is  now  opposed  by  a  decline  in  the  marginal  utihty  of  money,  which
is  less  needed  in  depression ;  but  the  decline  in  the  marginal  utility
of  consumers'  goods  more  than  offsets  this  factor.

Recovery  from  depression  comes  after  three  or  four  years,  be-
cause, while  prices  are  falling,  there  is  little  inducement  to  order  new
equipment. It  is  true  that  some  new  orders  are  placed  even  in  the

"The  phrase  is  borrowed  from  Mr.  D.  H.  Robertson,  who  has  developed  this  point
more  fully  than  Aftalion  or  Bouniatian.  In  particular  Mr.  Robertson  suggests  that  the
recurrence  of  business  cycles  may  be  due  in  large  part  to  the  more  or  less  simultaneous
wearing-out  and  re-ordering  of  large  masses  of  equipment  made  in  an  earlier  period  of
prosperity. See  A  Study  of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  pp.  13-25,  London,  1915.

Professor  Pigou,  who  also  makes  much  of  the  "period  of  gestation,"  ventures  the
statement  that  "ten  years  seem  to  be,  not  merely  the  average,  but  also  the  markedly
predominant"  length  of  life  of  machinery.  The  Economics  of  Welfare,  1st  ed.,  pp.  827-
830.  841-848.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 31

worst  of  times;  but  the  volume  shrinks  greatly  in  comparison  with
that  of  the  preceding  period  of  prosperity.  Meanwhile  the  demand
for  consumers'  goods  continues  to  grow,  though  at  a  slightly  slower
pace  than  in  prosperity.  Let  this  situation  persist  for  a  few  years,
and  gradually  the  current  demand  for  consumers'  goods  at  the  low
prices  which  depression  causes  will  come  to  exceed  current  supply.
When  this  happens,  prices  turn  upward  again.  Then  business  men
seek  to  increase  their  output  and  begin  ordering  equipment  more
freely.  But  while  their  orders  are  being  executed,  the  current  supply
of  consumers'  goods  becomes  scantier  in  comparison  with  the  growing
demand,  prices  rise  further,  and  another  period  of  prosperity  dawns.

8. Banking  Operations.

All  the  explanations  summarized  in  the  preceding  sections  take
for  granted  that  the  processes  which  they  trace  run  in  communities
equipped  with  modern  monetary  and  banking  systems.  From  their
viewpoints,  however,  money  and  bank  credit  are  simply  mechanisms
through  which  the  economic  forces  causing  business  cycles  ^vork
their  effects.  At  most  these  theories  admit  that  the  monetary
mechanism  accentuates  the  wave  movements  which  are  started  by
more  fundamental  factors.^  The  explanations  which  make  business
cycles  a  direct  consequence  of  banking  operations  therefore  consti-
tute a  distinct  variety  of  cycle  theories.

No  one  has  contented  himself  with  a  briefer  statement  of  the
reason  for  adopting  this  type  of  explanation  than  Professor  Alvin  H.
Hansen  of  the  University  of  Minnesota.

Demand,  (he  argues),  is  based  on  purchasing  power.  The
source  of  purchasing  power  is  income,  and  the  source  of  income
is  the  production  of  material  goods  and  services.  ...  In  short,
goods  and  services  are  exchanged  against  goods  and  services.
On  this  basis  one  would  expect  production  to  run  an  even
course,  and  not  to  run  in  cycles.  And  indeed  in  the  barter
economy  there  were  no  business  cycles.

But  how  does  the  rise  of  money  economy  produce  cyclical  oscilla-
tions? Under  modern  conditions.  Professor  Hansen  answers,

*See,  for  example,  Professor  Pigou's  chapter  on  "Accentuation  of  Wave  Movements
due  to  the  Working  of  the  Monetary  System."  The  Economics  of  Welfare,  1st  ed.,
pp.  849-864,  and  Mr.  Robertson's  chapter  on  "The  Wage  and  Money  Systems,"  A  Study
of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  pp.  206-238.


32  BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  nominal  purchasing  power  obtaining  in  any  society  at
any  given  moment  may  be  measured  substantially  by  the
amount  of  money  in  hand-to-hand  circulation  and  the  volume
of  bank  credit  in  the  form  of  deposit  currency.

The  amount  of  purchasing  power,  and  therefore  of  demand,  made
available  by  the  banks  is  limited

by  two  things:  first,  by  the  quantity  of  reserves;  second,  by
the  desirability  of  converting  personal  credit  into  bank  credit,
and  this  depends  upon  the  discount  rate  and  the  profitableness
of  the  employment  of  capital  in  industry.

Plainly  neither  these  limits  themselves  nor  the  closeness  with  which
they  are  approached  is  fixed;  hence  the  purchasing  power  which
the  banks  provide  can  fluctuate  through  a  wide  range.

When  the  banks  increase  nominal  purchasing  power  by  granting
more  credit,  they  add  to  the  circulating  media.

The  effect  is  an  increase  in  prices  and  therefore  no  increase  in
real  purchasing  power.  The  nominal  incomes  of  people  gen-
erally are  as  before,  but  their  real  purchasing  power  is  reduced
because  of  the  increase  in  prices.  The  issuance  of  bank  credit
simply  redistributes  purchasing  power,  reducing  the  real  pur-
chasing power  of  income  receivers  generally,  and  increasing
the  purchasing  power  of  entrepreneurs  able  to  secure  bank
credit.  It  is  this  redistribution  of  purchasing  power,  accom-
plished through  the  instrumentality  of  banking  institutions,
that  changes  demand,  upsets  prices,  affects  the  profit  margin,
and  therefore  production.  Here,  in  short,  may  be  found  the
fundamental  cause  of  the  business  cycle.

To  complete  the  theory,  it  is  necessary  to  follow  the  round  of
events:

When  accumulated  stocks  have  run  out,  when  costs  are  fall-
ing, when  labor  is  easily  obtainable,  when  loanable  funds  are
plentiful  and  interest  rates  run  low,  then  prospects  for  profit-
making  are  bright  and  entrepreneurs  apply  for  bank  credit.
The  issuance  of  bank  credit  increases  the  purchasing  power
of  entrepreneurs.  The  result  is  increased  bidding  for  raw  ma-
terials, capital  equipment,  construction  work,  etc.,  with  a
consequent  increase  in  prices.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 33

The  business  men,  who  profit  by  the  increased  demand,  in  their  turn
apply  for  bank  loans  and  so  the  process  runs  expansively  for  a  time.
"This  upward  movement  comes  to  a  close  only  when  bank  credit
can  no  longer  be  further  extended,  for  the  reason  that  it  has  already
reached  the  limit  of  banking  safety."  But  this  limit  can  hardly  be
reached  without  being  overrun ;  for  the  activity  of  trade  causes  more
money  to  be  drawn  into  hand-to-hand  circulation,  at  the  expense  of
bank  reserves.  "It  therefore  becomes  necessary  not  merely  to  stop
the  expansion  of  bank  credit,  but  actually  to  reduce  the  outstanding
volume."  The  resulting  contraction  causes  prices  to  fall,  the  volume
of  business  to  shrink,  and  the  demand  for  bank  credit  itself  to  slacken
— once  more  a  self-propagating  process.

But  as  the  upward  movement  culminated  because  of  the  strain
placed  upon  bank  reserves  through  an  undue  extension  of
bank  credit,  so  the  downward  movement  comes  to  a  close  be-
cause of  the  great  accumulation  of  bank  reserves  due  to  the
reduction  of  outstanding  bank  credit  and  the  return  of  money
from  hand-to-hand  circulation  following  the  decline  of  prices.
This  continued  accumulation  of  reserves  leads  bankers  pro-
gressively to  lower  discount  rates  to  a  point  low  enough  to
make  the  employment  of  bank  credit  again  profitable.  New
securities  are  freely  issued,  bank  loans  are  readily  obtainable,
and  the  purchasing  power  of  business  enterprises  increases.
Thus  the  upward  swing  returns  and  the  cycle  repeats  itself.^

Like  Professor  Hansen,  Mr.  R.  G.  Hawtrey  of  the  British  Treasury
thinks  he  has  "proved  that  there  is  an  inherent  tendency  toward
fluctuations  in  the  banking  institutions  which  prevail  in  the  world
as  it  is."  But  Hawtrey  lays  more  stress  than  Hansen  upon  the  im-
portance of  changes  in  discount  rates.

"An  expansion  of  trade  occurs,"  Mr.  Hawtrey  explains,  "when  the
amount  of  credit  money  in  existence  is  less  than  the  bankers  think
prudent,  having  regard  to  their  holdings  of  cash,  and  they  lower  the
rate  of  interest  in  order  to  encourage  borrowing."  This  reduction  in
the  cost  of  loans  starts  a  long  train  of  consequences:  dealers  give
larger  orders  to  producers,  producers  increase  output  and  raise  prices,
employment  becomes  fuller  and  wages  rise,  the  increase  of  incomes
augments  retail  demand,  the  prosperous  business  classes  borrow  more

"Cycles  of  Prosperity  and  Depression  in  the  United  States,  Great  Britain  and  Ger-
many, by  Alvin  H.  Hansen  (University  of  Wisconsin  Studies  in  the  Social  Sciences  and
History,  No.  5). Madison,  1921. The  quotations  are  from  pp.  104-108.


34  BUSINESS  CYCLES

freely — and  so  on  progressively,  until  the  banks,  having  lent  all  the
credit  they  think  prudent,

no  longer  need  to  keep  down  the  rate  of  interest.  The  rate  of
interest  is  then  raised  to  the  ''profit  rate,"  and  the  inducement
(for  dealers)  to  increase  stocks  of  goods  is  removed.

Trade  expansion  is  followed  by  trade  depression,  because  the  high
rates  of  interest  tempt  the  banks  to  lend  as  much  as  possible.  For
a  time  they  can  expand  loans  without  losing  much  cash;  but  when
the  lagging  rise  of  wage  rates  gets  under  way,  bank  reserves  are
reduced.  Further,  high  prices  are  likely  to  stimulate  imports,  check
exports  and  so  cause  an  outflow  of  gold  from  the  country  enjoying
prosperity.  When  their  reserves  decline  appreciably,  the  banks  are
forced  to  contract  outstanding  loans.  For  this  purpose  they  raise
the  rate  of  interest  still  further  and  withdraw  funds  loaned  on  the
investment  market.  Then  securities  fall  and  dealers  in  commodities
seek  to  reduce  stocks  on  which  the  carrying  charge  has  become  heavy.
They  give  fewer  orders  to  producers,  producers  decrease  output  and
cut  down  their  working  forces ;  retail  demand  falls  off ;  stocks  threaten
to  become  redundant  again  because  of  fewer  sales,  and  the  process
starts  all  over  again.  During  this  period  of  depression  business  men
need  less  credit  and  the  reduced  wage  disbursements  allow  cash  to
accumulate  in  the  banks.  Thus  the  banks  win  back  to  an  easy  con-
dition, and  "no  longer  need  to  keep  up  the  rate  of  interest."  By  the
fall  in  interest  rates  the  way  is  prepared  for  a  new  expansion  of
trade.^

'  Good  and  Bad  Trade.  An  Inquiry  into  ike  Causes  of  Trade  Fluctuations,  by  R.  G.
Hawtrey,  London,  1913. The  quotations  are  from  pp.  3,  199,  268  and  269.

In  a  later  volume,  Mr.  Hawtrey  seems  to  have  changed  his  fundamental  thesis
somewhat.  "Far  from  causing  the  cyclical  fluctuations,"  he  says  on  p.  425  of  Currency
and  Credit  (2d  ed.,  London,  1923),  "a  banking  system  diminishes  their  violence  and
facilitates  their  control."  The  "instability  of  credit"  is  due  "not  so  much  to  the  banker
as  to  the  merchant  and  the  promoter."  (p.  423).  But  he  adds,  "though  credit  institu-
tions are  not  themselves  the  cause  of  this  phenomenon,  yet  where  such  institutions  exist
it  is  through  them  that  the  fluctuations  take  effect."  (p.  425).  For  present  purposes,
it  is  Mr.  Hawtrey's  analysis  of  the  process  by  which  cyclical  fluctuations  come  to  pass  in
modern  communities,  rather  than  his  brief  discussion  of  their  causes,  which  is  helpful.
To  this  analysis  he  adheres  in  Currency  and  Credit  (see  p.  130  and  chapters  ix,  x),  with
minor  modifications,  of  which  I  have  incorporated  the  most  important  into  my  sum-
mary made  from  his  Good  and  Bad  Trade.

Mr.  Hawtrey's  theory  has  much  in  common  with  views  formerly  held  by  Professor
Irving  Fisher.  But  there  is  a  significant  difference.  Professor  Fisher  built  upon  what
he  believed  to  be  a  statistically  demonstrated  fact  that  changes  in  interest  rates  lag
behind  price  movements.  This  lag  increases  the  profits  of  business  borrowers  when
prices  are  rising  and  stimulates  activity.  When  prices  are  falling,  the  lagging  of  interest
rates  reduces  profits  and  augments  depression. Mr.  Hawtrey,  on  the  other  hand,  repre-


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 35


9. Production  and  the  Flow  of  Money  Incomes.

In  a  sense,  all  of  the  theories  so  far  reviewed  are  ways  of  explain-
ing why  the  people  of  a  country  sometimes  cannot  or  will  not  buy  at
profitable  prices  all  they  produce;  or,  what  comes  to  the  same  thing,
why  they  produce  more  than  they  can  sell.  But  the  most  direct
way  of  solving  the  problem  when  stated  in  this  way  has  still  to  be
noticed.  It  consists  in  giving  new  reasons  for  Sismondi's  contention
that  in  periods  of  activity  money  incomes  lag  behind  the  money  value
of  the  goods  produced.

The  suggestion  of  Mr.  R.  E.  May  introduces  the  subtle  recent
theories  which  follow  this  line.  May  builds  upon  two  corner  stones :
(1)  in  a  modern  industrial  community  wages  form  by  far  the  largest
of  the  income  streams,  (2)  wages  increase  less  rapidly  in  prosperity
than  the  aggregate  value  of  goods  produced.  Thus  the  purchasing
power  of  the  most  important  class  of  consumers  fails  to  keep  pace
with  the  volume  of  goods  seeking  sale.  Let  the  resulting  excess  of
dollar  supply  over  dollar  demand  accumulate  for  a  year  or  two,
and  it  is  inevitable  that  the  market  for  consumers^  goods  will  be
glutted.  Then  come  a  crisis  and  depression  which  restore  the  body
economic  to  health,  by  forcing  down  prices  to  the  point  where  the
wage-earning  consumers  can  buy  what  is  offered. And  Mr.  May

sents  changes  in  bank-discount  rates  as  themselves  the  active  force  in  initiating  trade
fluctuations,  with  their  concomitant  price  fluctuations.

For  Professor  Fisher's  theory,  see  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  New  York,  1911,
chapters  iv  and  xi,  sections  15-17 ;  and  "Gold  Depreciation  and  Interest  Rates,"  Moody's
Magazine,  1909,  pp.  110-114  (a  summary  statement).  As  late  as  December,  1923,  Fisher
still  suspected  "that  the  principal  force  affecting  the  cycle  is  the  real  rate  of  interest,
the  sum  of  the  money  rate  of  interest  and  the  rate  of  appreciation  (positive  or  nega-
tive) of  the  purchasing  power  of  the  dollar."  (See  "The  Business  Cycle  Largely  a  'Dance
of  the  Dollar',"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  vol.  xviii,  p.  1024).
Recently,  however,  Professor  Fisher  has  come  to  believe  that  "the"  business  cycle  is  a
myth.  Fluctuations  in  "trade,"  (which  remain  genuine  in  his  eyes),  are  due  primarily
to  "price-change";  but  the  next  most  important  influence  "is  probably  that  of  the  rate
of  interest."  See  "Our  Unstable  Dollar  and  the  So-called  Business  Cycle,"  Journal  of
the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  191,  198.

Professor  Wilhelm  Ropke  of  Jena  has  suggested  an  interesting  combination  of  the
savings  and  the  banking  theories  of  business  cycles.  The  "real  cyclical  bacillus"  he
finds  in  periodic  variations  in  the  ratio  between  accumulation  and  consumption,  which
cannot  be  altered  much  without  producing  serious  disturbances  in  the  process  of  ex-
change. But  these  periodic  variations  in  the  ratio  between  accumulation  and  consump-
tion are  due  in  large  part  to  periodic  changes  in  the  volume  of  credit — changes  which
appear  in  discrepancies  between  the  real  and  the  nominal  rates  of  interest,  in  the
liquidity  of  the  credit-granting  banks,  and  in  their  operating  policies.  See  his  paper  on
"Kredit  und  Konjunktur,"  in  Jahrbilcher  fur  Nationalokonomie  und  Statistik,  March-
April,  1926,  vol.  cxxiv,  pp.  243-285.


36  BUSINESS  CYCLES

follows  the  logic  of  his  diagnosis  to  the  point  of  recommending  a  legar
limitation  of  profits,  in  order  that  producers  may  be  forced  to  reduce
selling  prices  as  they  increase  output.^

A  more  adequate  development  of  this  theme  has  been  provi(
by  Professor  Emil  Lederer  of  Heidelberg.

Depression  is  characterized,  he  begins,  by  a  decline  in  physical
production  and  in  prices.  Though  general,  the  price  dechne  is  not
uniform.  The  prices  which  constitute  the  incomes  of  the  propertied
and  salaried  classes  shrink  but  little.  Nor  do  wage  cuts  and  unem-
ployment reduce  the  money  incomes  of  the  working  masses  so  much
as  the  cost  of  living  falls.  Farmers,  also,  as  a  rule  lose  less  than  they
gain  by  the  price  movements.  Thus,  the  discrepancies  characteristic
of  the  decline  in  prices  enable  consumers  to  buy  perhaps  a  larger
physical  quantity  of  commodities,  certainly  a  larger  quota  of  the  cur-
rent output.  Business  profits,  on  the  other  hand,  fall  heavily,  just
because  wages,  rent  and  interest  charges  lag  behind  the  decline  of
selHng  prices.  The  unprofitableness  of  business,  and  the  consequent
reduction  of  savings  check  the  expansion  of  industrial  equipment.
But  the  increasing  purchasing  power  of  the  majority  of  income  re-
ceivers gradually  absorbs  whatever  stocks  of  consumers*  goods  were
carried  over  from  the  prosperous  phase  of  the  cycle  in  addition  to
the  reduced  current  output,  and  so  produces  a  condition  which  favors
a  resumption  of  activity.

A  business  revival,  as  it  gets  under  way,  reverses  the  trend  of
prices.  Rising  prices  and  the  growing  volume  of  trade  call  for  larger
payments.  To  a  limited  extent,  the  increase  in  payments  can  be
effected  by  quickening  the  circulation  of  money  and  credit,  which
had  become  sluggish  during  depression.  Further  expansion  may  be
provided  for  by  additions  to  the  gold  supply.  Seldom,  however,  are
these  resources  adequate  to  the  need.  Broadly  speaking,  periods  of
prosperity  are  made  possible  only  by  "additional  credit" — that  is,
purchasing  power,  provided  chiefly  by  banks,  which  is  not  based  upon
previous  production.

Supported  by  "additional  credit,"  the  advance  of  prices  gains
momentum  as  activity  waxes.  But  the  advance  is  no  less  unequal
than  the  decline  had  been.  The  prices  which  make  up  the  incomes
of  the  propertied,  the  salaried,  and  the  wage-earning  classes  lag

*R.  E.  May,  Das  Grundgesetz  der  Wirtschajtskrisen  und  ihr  Vorbeugensmittel  im
Zeitalter  des  Monopols,  Berlin,  1902.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 37

behind  the  prices  of  commodities.  Hence  the  buying  power  of  these
classes  is  reduced,  or,  at  least,  fails  to  keep  pace  with  the  expansion
of  output.  Meanwhile  the  lagging  of  those  prices  which  constitute
costs  to  business  enterprises  behind  the  prices  which  constitute  re-
ceipts is  enhancing  profits.  Larger  profits  lead  to  larger  savings,
larger  mvestments  in  industrial  equipment,  and,  when  this  equipment
is  ready  for  use,  to  larger  supplies  of  consumers'  goods,  for  which  the
demand  is  growing  less  rapidly,  if  not  actually  shrinking.  Under
such  circumstances  a  crisis  is  inevitable,  and  a  crisis  reverses  the  trend
of  prices  once  more,  starting  the  processes  with  which  the  analysis
began.

According  to  Lederer,  then,  the  most  important  cause  of  business
cycles  lies  in  the  inequalities  characteristic  of  price  movements — in-
equalities which  alter  the  distribution  of  purchasing  power  among
income  classes,  the  demand  for  different  types  of  products,  the  rate
at  which  industrial  equipment  grows,  and  the  trend  of  price  move-
ments themselves.  "Disproportionality  of  production"  is  as  char-
acteristic of  business  fluctuations  as  "disproportionality  of  income";
but  the  two  developments  have  quite* different  effects.  Over-produc-
tion of  certain  goods  in  comparison  with  others  leads  to  price  changes,
which  affect  profits,  force  alterations  in  production  schedules,  and
so  restore  proper  balance.  "Disproportionality  of  incomes"  is  not  self-
rectifying;  its  consequences  cumulate  until  they  reach  the  critical
point  at  which  they  convert  depression  into  prosperity,  or  prosperity
into  depression.2

Like  Professor  Lederer,  Messrs.  Catchings,  Foster  and  Hastings
of  the  PoUak  Foundation  for  Economic  Research  hold  that  prosperity
is  checked  by  the  failure  of  consumers'  incomes  to  keep  pace  with  the
output  of  consumers'  goods.  But  the  Pollak  group  give  an  explana-
tion of  this  deficiency  of  consumer  buying  which  differs  from  Lederer's
theory  of  the  inequalities  in  the  rates  at  which  different  prices
advance.

To  keep  business  active,  the  Pollak  theory  begins,  consumers  must
receive  and  spend  incomes  equal  to  the  full  value,  at  current  retail
prices,  of  the  consumers'  goods  sent  to  market.  Were  industry  con-
fined to  providing  consumers'  goods,  this  requirement  would  mean
(1)  that  the  total  selling  value  of  all  products  must  be  paid  out

"Emil  Lederer,  "Konjunktur  und  Krisen,"  Grundriss  der  Sozialokonomik,  Part  iv,
Section  i,  Tiibingen,  1925,  pp.  354-413.


38  BUSINESS  CYCLES

promptly  by  business  enterprises  as  costs  (that  is,  as  wages,  salaries,
rent,  interest,  taxes,  etc.)  or  as  dividends;  (2)  that  all  the  money
received  by  individuals  must  be  paid  back  promptly  to  business  enter-
prises for  their  products.

In  the  real  world,  of  course,  many  business  enterprises  make  goods
which  are  not  offered  to  consumers,  and  in  so  doing  disburse  incomes
to  individuals.  It  may  seem  that  these  disbursements,  plus  the  in-
comes disbursed  by  industries  making  consumers'  goods,  must  exceed
the  value  of  consumers'  goods  sent  to  market.  But  in  so  far  as  pro-
ducers' goods  are  raw  materials  or  supplies  used  up  currently  in  con-
tributing toward  the  making  of  consumers'  goods,  their  full  selling
prices  must  be  charged  into  the  prices  of  the  latter  products,  and  the
incomes  disbursed  for  making  the  materials  and  supplies  can  do  no
more  than  equal  this  element  in  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods.  There
remain  some  things  which  consumers  are  not  called  upon  to  buy  on
completion;  for  example,  public  works  and  industrial  equipment.
Incomes  disbursed  in  making  such  goods  add  to  consumer  purchasing
power  without  adding  an  equivalent  supply  of  consumers'  goods.  In
periods  of  active  construction,  income  payments  on  this  account,  plus
the  payment  of  wages  before  products  are  sent  to  market,  for  a  time
provide  consumers  with  incomes  exceeding  the  supplies  of  consumers'
goods  then  on  sale.  Such  a  situation,  however,  soon  produces  conse-
quences which  end  it.  Prices  of  consumers'  goods  rise,  that  rise  stimu-
lates production  at  once,  and  the  difficulty  reappears  of  main-
taining consumer  purchasing  power  adequate  to  absorb  the  larger
output  at  the  higher  price  level.  The  difficulty  is  further  accentuated
as  soon  as  the  new  industrial  equipment  on  which  men  have  been
working  begins  adding  its  quota,  directly  or  indirectly,  to  the  con-
sumers' goods  flowing  to  market.

Thus  "overproduction — a  supply  in  excess  of  demand — is  a  purely
monetary  phenomenon,"  and,  as  such,  might  be  prevented  by  mone-
tary adjustments.

If  corporations  went  on  forever  increasing  their  output,  and,
in  the  process,  expanding  the  volume  of  money  in  circulation
at  a  sufficient  rate,  and  if  the  flow  of  the  output  to  the  markets
sufficiently  lagged  behind  the  flow  of  the  new  money  as  wages
to  consumers,  consumers  might  continue  to  buy  all  that  the
markets  actually  offered.  Such  an  expansion  of  money,  how-
ever, does  not  long  take  place.  Business  men  always  fear  a
slump  in  demand;  and  when  they  doubt  the  capacity  of  con-


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 39

sumers  to  buy  current  output,  they  have  no  incentive  for  in-
creasing output — ^no  motive  for  using  bank  loans  for  that  pur-
pose.

But  why  should  not  business  enterprises  pay  out  the  full  values
received  for  their  products,  and  thus  prevent  a  deficiency  of  con-
sumer purchasing  power?  Because  under  modern  conditions,  a  thriv-
ing enterprise  must  provide  for  expansion,  and  the  safest  way  to
finance  expansion  is  ''to  plough  part  of  the  profits  into  the  business."
Messrs.  Foster  and  Catchings  believe  that,  on  the  average,  American
corporations  do  not  disburse  as  dividends  much  over  half  of  their
profits.  Nor  would  the  situation  necessarily  be  better  if  corporations
paid  out  all  their  profits  as  dividends,  and  financed  their  extensions
by  selling  stock  to  their  shareholders.  For  in  that  case,  consumers
would  divert  income  which  is  needed  to  sustain  the  demand  for  con-
sumers' goods  into  demand  for  equipment,  in  order  to  make  still  more
consumers'  goods  in  the  future.  Even  as  matters  stand,  consumers
are  continually  saving  current  income,  for  reasons  as  sound  as  those
which  justify  the  financial  conservatism  of  corporations.  And  their
savings  are  as  much  responsible  for  the  deficient  demand  for  con-
sumers' goods  as  is  the  dividend  policy  of  business  enterprises.

To  sum  up :

Progress  toward  greater  total  production  and  resultant  higher
standards  of  living  is  retarded  because  consumer  buying  does
not  keep  pace  with  production.  Consumer  buying  lags  behind
for  two  reasons :  first,  because,  on  account  of  corporate  savings
industry  does  not  disburse  to  consumers  enough  money  to  buy
the  goods  produced,  without  a  fall  in  the  price-level;  second,
because  consumers,  under  the  necessity  of  saving,  cannot  spend
even  as  much  money  as  they  receive.  Partly  on  account  of
these  savings,  there  is  not  an  even  flow  of  money  from  pro-
ducer to  consumer,  and  from  consumer  back  to  producer.
Furthermore,  the  savings  of  corporations  and  individuals  are
not  used  to  purchase  the  goods  already  in  the  markets,  but  to
bring  about  the  production  of  more  goods.  The  expansion  of
the  volume  of  money  does  not  fully  make  up  the  deficit,  for
money  is  expanded  mainly  to  facilitate  production,  and  the
product  must  be  sold  to  consumers  for  more  money  than  the
expansion  has  provided.  Consequently  we  make  progress  only
while  we  are  filling  the  shelves  with  goods  which  must  either
remain  on  the  shelves  as  stock  in  trade  or  be  sold  at  a  loss.


40  BUSINESS  CYCLES

and  while  we  are  building  more  industrial  equipment  than  wo
can  use.  Inadequacy  of  consumer  income  is,  therefore,  the
main  reason,  though  not  the  only  reason,  why  we  do  not  long
continue  to  produce  the  wealth  which  natural  resources,  capi-
tal facilities,  improvements  in  the  arts  and  the  self-interest  of
employers  and  employees  would  otherwise  enable  us  to  pro-
duce. Chiefly  because  of  shortage  of  consumer  demand,  both
capital  and  labor  restrict  output,  and  nations  engage  in  those
struggles  for  outside  markets  and  spheres  of  commercial  influ-
ence which  are  the  chief  causes  of  war.^

While  the  Pollak  group  were  developing  their  theory  of  business
cycles  in  this  country,  Mr.  P.  W.  Martin  of  the  International  Labour
Office  was  working  on  similar  lines  in  Switzerland.  Martin  holds
that  the  factor  which  ends  phases  of  prosperity,  and,  he  adds,  the
factor  which  keeps  production  even  in  prosperous  years  far  below
its  attainable  levels,  is  the  impossibility  of  selling  what  we  desire
to  produce.  In  turn,  the  lack  of  markets  is  due  to  lack  of  "buying
power."  But  Martin  differs  from  Foster  and  Catchings  in  paying
slight  attention  to  the  distinction,  which  they  stress,  between  con-
sumers' and  producers'  goods.  To  maintain  prosperity,  it  is  quite  as
necessary  to  have  an  adequate  market  for  industrial  equipment  as
for  clothing.  And  Martin  ascribes  the  deficiency  of  buying  power,
not  to  saving  by  corporations  and  individuals,  but  to  the  need  of
larger  "liquid  capital"  which  prosperity  brings. His  summary  runs:

So  long  as  the  community's  buying  power  is  used  exclusively
to  pay  for  goods,  the  price  system  works.  But  from  time  to
time  industry  must  increase  its  liquid  capital.  This  means
that  part  of  the  community's  buying  power,  which  is  needed
to  pay  for  goods  if  equilibrium  between  the  flow  of  buying
power  and  the  flow  of  prices  is  to  be  maintained,  goes  instead

'  A  brief  sketch  of  this  theory  was  given  in  1923  by  William  T.  Foster  and  Waddill
Catchings  in  chapter  xx  of  Money  (No.  2  of  the  Publications  of  the  Pollak  Foundation
for  Economic  Research).  A  more  elaborate  exposition  was  worked  out  by  Hudson  B.
Hastings  in  Costs  and  Profits  (No.  3  of  the  same  series),  1923.  A  later  and  somewhat
different  statement  is  found  in  Foster  and  Catchings,  Profits  (No.  8  of  the  Pollak
series),  1925.  The  quotations  are  from  p.  320  of  Profits  and  pp.  16,  17,  28,  and  29  of
"The  Dilemma  of  Thrift,"  a  summary  of  their  theory  by  Foster  and  Catchings,  re-
printed from  the  Atlantic  Monthly,  April,  1926.  Business  Without  a  Buyer,  Foster  and
Catchings'  latest  exposition,  appeared  after  this  chapter  had  been  set  up.  (No.  10
of  the  Pollak  series).

The  Pollak  theory  relates  to  crises  rather  than  to  business  cycles:  it  does  not  ex-
plain how  activity  revives  after  depression,  or  how  revival  grows  into  prosperity.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 41

to  induce  the  production  of  more  goods  for  sale.  As  a  conse-
quence, goods  are  produced  for  which  no  buying  power  exists.

This  '^flaw  in  the  price  system"  can  be  remedied  by  supplying
buyers  with  money  enough  to  purchase  what  is  offered  for  sale.

The  first  step  will  be  for  the  Government,  acting  in  agreement
with  the  banks,  to  increase  buying  power  how,  when,  where
and  to  what  extent  the  best  available  information  shows  to  be
advisable,  until  unemployment  is  reduced  to  its  minimum.
From  that  time  on  the  Government  and  the  banks  will  en-
deavour to  adjust  the  additions  to  the  community's  buying
power  so  that  it  shall  always  be  exactly  sufficient  to  provide
an  adequate  market  for  the  goods  offered  for  sale.  Their  guide
in  this  will  be  the  price  level.  If  the  price  level  falls,  the  nat-
ural indicator  of  a  lack  of  markets,  they  will  pump  in  addi-
tional buying  power  until  the  lack  of  markets  is  completely
obviated  (as  shown  by  the  price  level  regaining  its  former
position).  If  prices  rise,  the  signal  of  inflation,  additions  to
buying  power  will  be  made  more  slowly  (if  necessary  buying
power  will  be  drained  out  even),  until  the  price  level  is  brought
back  to  ^^normal,''  until,  that  is  to  say,  all  symptoms  of  infla-
tion have  been  totally  eliminated.  These  measures  will  be
applied  by  special  offices  using  the  best  knowledge  and  most
scientific  instruments  available.  Supporting  their  efforts  at
every  turn  will  be  the  automatic  action  of  the  psychological
factor  in  industry,  tending  to  be,  not  as  now,  an  inflationary
agency  during  prosperity,  a  depressing  agency  during  depres-
sion, but  an  automatic  stabiliser  of  both  prices  and  markets.^

Still  another  variation  upon  the  income  theme  has  been  composed
by  Dean  Arthur  B.  Adams  of  the  University  of  Oklahoma.  An  in-
crease in  the  buying  of  consumers'  goods  may  lead  to  recovery  from
depression;  but  it  cannot  initiate  a  period  of  prosperity.  For  busi-
ness in  consumers'  goods  cannot  give  rise  to  money  incomes  which
exceed  the  sales  value  of  the  current  output,  and  prosperity  requires
that  consumers  be  able  to  buy  an  increasing  output  at  rising  prices.
Therefore,  it  is  an  error  to  think  that  ^ Recovery  generates  a  period  of

*See  P.  W.  Martin,  The  Flaw  in  the  Price  System,  London,  1924,  and  The  Limited
Market,  London,  1926. The  quotations  are  from  the  later  book,  pp.  53,  54,  69,  70.

The  theory  expounded  by  Major  C.  H.  Douglas  of  the  Royal  Air  Force  in  a  series
of  books  seems  to  be  an  adumbration  of  the  ideas  worked  out  by  the  Pollak  Foundation
group  and  by  Mr.  Martin.  See,  for  example.  Major  Douglas'  volumes,  Credit  Power
and  Democracy,  London,  1921,  and  Social  Credit,  London,  1924.


»


42  BUSINESS  CYCLES

prosperity/'  or  that  "business  is  always  going  through  some  phase
of  a  business  cycle.'*  The  end  of  one  cycle  is  sometimes  separated
from  the  beginning  of  the  next  by  a  prolonged  period  of  "oscillating
equilibrium/'  A  new  cycle  does  not  start  until  something  happens
to  give  consumers  incomes  exceeding  the  value  of  the  consumers'
goods  on  sale.  The  factor  which  most  often  plays  this  role  is  "rapid
expansion  of  capital  equipment,"  financed  by  expansion  of  bank
credit.  Periods  of  prosperity,  initiated  by  such  developments,  grow
more  intense  for  a  time,  but  are  finally  terminated  by  the  following
"forces,"  working  singly  or  together:  (1)  the  output  of  consumers'
goods  eventually  overtakes  and  exceeds  the  volume  of  consumers'
incomes,  (2)  costs  of  production  per  unit  eventually  rise  faster  than
selling  prices,  (3)  the  banks  eventually  reach  the  limit  of  their
ability  to  increase  loans.^

10. The  Role  Played  by  Profit-Making

There  remain  the  theories  which  explain  business  cycles  by  the
fact  that  the  producing,  transporting  and  distributing  of  goods  are
conducted  mainly  by  business  enterprises  which  aim  at  making  money.
Of  course  the  theories  already  reviewed  take  the  quest  of  profits  for
granted;  but  they  treat  business  enterprise  as  an  organization  through
which  more  fundamental  forces  operate.  The  distinguishing  char-
acteristic of  the  theories  now  to  be  noticed  is  that  they  represent
the  alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression  as  arising  from  certain
technical  exigencies  of  profit-making  itself.  This  view  was  developed
in  1904  by  Dr.  Thorstein  Veblen,  of  the  New  School  for  Social  Re-
search, and  in  1906  by  Professor  Jean  Lescure  of  the  University  of
Bordeaux.^

Dr.  Veblen  begins  his  discussion  of  "the  theory  of  modem  wel-
fare" by  pointing  out  that  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression

are  primarily  phenomena  of  price  disturbance,  .  .  .  They
affect  industry  because  industry  is  managed  on  a  business
footing,  in  terms  of  price  and  for  the  sake  of  profits.

A  period  of  prosperity  is  ushered  in  by  a  rise  of  prices,  caused,  for
example,  by  an  increased  supply  of  gold,  or  by  heavy  government

"See  A.  B.  Adams,  Economics  of  Business  Cycles,  New  York,  1925.

*  The  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  New  York,  1904,  chapter  vii ;  Des  Crises  Gen^
erales  et  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  Paris,  1906,  3rd  ed.,  1923.  A  summary  of  Les-
cure's  version  is  given  in  the  first  edition  of  the  present  book,  p.  13.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 43

purchases.  This  rise  affects  first  some  one  industry  or  line  of  business,
which  responds  with  a  burst  of  activity  and  increased  investment  by
business  men  eager  to  exploit  the  profitable  field.  Partly  by  actual
increase  of  demand,  partly  by  lively  anticipation  of  future  increases,
aggressive  business  enterprise  extends  its  ventures  and  pushes  up
prices  in  remoter  branches  of  trade.

Now  the  growing  demand  and  enhanced  prices  increase  the  pro-
spective profits  of  the  business  enterprises  in  each  trade  as  they  reach
it.  Larger  prospective  profits  lead  to  higher  market  capitalization
of  the  business  enterprises,  and,  of  course,  higher  market  capitaliza-
tion means  an  increased  value  of  the  properties  as  collateral  security.
Thus  the  way  is  paved  for  the  marked  extension  of  credit  on  which
the  active  trade  is  largely  dependent.

This  sequence  of  growing  demand,  rising  prices,  increasing  ex-
pectations of  profit,  swelling  capitalization  of  business  enterprises,
and  expanding  credit  keeps  repeating  itself  on  an  ever  growing  scale
so  long  as  its  basis  lasts — an  anticipated  increase  in  demand  or  selling
prices  greater  than  the  anticipated  increase  in  costs.  But  eventually
the  process  undermines  its  basis.  For  the  expense  of  doing  business
rises  with  the  increasing  cost  of  labor,  and  with  the  gradual  extension
of  the  advance  in  prices  to  all  the  commodities  which  business
enterprises  buy.  In  the  end,  these  costs  gain  so  much  upon  prospec-
tive selling  prices  as  to  narrow  the  anticipated  margins  of  profit.
Then  the  enhanced  market  capitalization  of  the  business  enterprises
begins  to  seem  excessive.  Consequently,  the  security  behind  the  loans
which  have  been  granted  shrinks  in  the  estimation  of  the  business
community,  and  ceases  to  be  regarded  as  an  adequate  guarantee  of
repayment.  The  confident  tone  of  business  expectations  which  char-
acterized the  period  of  prosperity  yields  to  nervousness.  To  bring
on  a  general  crisis,  it  needs  but  that  some  considerable  creditor  should
conclude  that  the  present  earning  capacity  of  his  debtors  no  longer
warrants  the  capitalization  upon  which  their  collateral  is  appraised.
When  this  happens  liquidation  begins,  extending  from  one  industry
to  another  and  converting  prosperity  into  depression.

Veblen  differs  from  most  writers  in  holding  that,  once  begun,  busi-
ness depression  tends  to  perpetuate  itself,  instead  of  tending  to  pro-
duce a  resumption  of  activity.  The  financial  reorganization  of  em-
barrassed enterprises  reduces  their  fixed  charges,  and  turns  the
weakest  competitors  into  the  most  dangerous.  Yet  more  important
is  the  unceasing  advance  in  technical  perfection  which  characterizes


44  BUSINESS  CYCLES  .

modern  machine  industry,  and  which  enables  the  new  plants  which
are  built  from  time  to  time  to  start  with  a  marked  initial  advantage
in  equipment  over  their  partially  antiquated  predecessors.^  The
difficulty  of  earning  a  fair  profit  without  submitting  to  a  reduction
of  capitalization  is  made  chronic  by  these  conditions.  Hence  periods
of  prosperity  are  taking  on  the  character  of  episodes,  initiated  by
some  extraordinary  increase  in  the  demand  for  goods,  and  running
out  presently  into  the  normal  state  of  depression  through  the  sequence
of  events  which  has  been  recited.

To  Veblen,  then,  the  important  factor  in  determining  the  char-
acter of  a  business  period  is  the  relation  between  current  capitalization
and  anticipated  earning  capacity.  When  prospective  profits  rise,  busi-
ness has  a  season  of  prosperity,  during  which  capitalization  expands
rapidly.  But  rising  costs  always  undermine  the  basis  for  anticipating
high  profits  and  then  capitalization  is  left  higher  than  prospective
profits  warrant. The  latter  situation  characterizes  depression.

The  "profits  theory"  of  business  cycles  has  been  accepted,  or  in-
dependently arrived  at,  by  several  writers  since  the  publication  of
Veblen's  and  Lescure's  books.  These  recent  versions  differ  from  the
earlier  models  and  from  each  other  in  the  emphasis  which  they  put
upon  various  factors  affecting  profits.  Thus  Professor  Gustav  Cassel
of  the  University  of  Stockholm  ascribes  especial  importance  to  the
fluctuations  in  both  interest  rates  and  construction  work.^  Mr.  F.
Lavington  of  the  University  of  Cambridge,  following  Professor  Pigou,
emphasizes  fluctuations  in  business  confidence.*  Major  J.  R.  Bellerby
of  the  International  Labour  Office  stresses  the  expansion  of  the  cur-
rency as  a  factor  in  breeding  booms,  and  the  reduction  of  surplus
stocks  of  commodities  and  the  artificial  support  of  consumers'  demand
as  factors  in  starting  revivals  of  activity.^  Professor  John  Maurice
Clark  of  Columbia  University  has  fitted  into  the  profits  theory  his
acute  analysis  of  the  relation  between  the  orders  for  new  industrial
equipment  and  the  rate  of  growth  or  shrinkage  in  the  demand  for

'Dr.  Robert  Liefmann  suggests  that  this  factor,  the  introduction  of  technical  im-
provements in  production  and  the  consequent  "scrapping"  of  equipment  not  yet  amor-
tized, is  the  most  fundamental  cause  of  crises.  See  his  Grundsdtze  der  Volkswirtschafts^
lehre,  2nd  ed.,  Stuttgart  and  Berlin,  1922,  vol.  ii,  pp.  840,  841.

•  The  Theory  of  Social  Economy,  New  York,  1924,  Fourth  Book.  (First  published
in  Leipzig,  1918,  Theoretische  Sozialokonomie.)

*  The  Trade  Cycle,  an  Account  of  the  Causes  Producing  Rhythmical  Changes  in  the
Activity  of  Bv^ness. London,  1922.

"  The  Controlling  Factor  in  Trade  Cycles.  Reprinted  with  additions  from  the
Economic  Journal,  September,  1923,  vol.  xxxiii,  pp.  305-331.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 45

finished  products.®  Finally,  Mr.  Lawrence  K.  Frank  has  given  a
"behavioristic"  interpretation  of  business  cycles  which  has  so  definite
a  bearing  upon  current  statistical  work  that  it  must  be  summarized.

The  ^cause'  (Mr.  Frank  remarks),  if  we  wish  to  use  that
term,  of  business  cycles  ...  is  to  be  found  in  the  habits  and
customs  (institutions)  of  men  which  make  up  the  money
economy,  with  its  money  and  credit,  prices,  private  property,
buying  and  selling,  and  so  on,  all  loaded,  so  to  speak,  on  the
industrial  process.

This  institutional  situation  gives  rise  to  alternations  of  "over-
buying" and  "under-buying'^  by  business  men  in  this  way:  In  a
depression  retail  purchases  of  consumers'  goods  do  not  shrink  greatly,
certainly  not  so  much  as  the  current  production  of  these  goods  shrinks.
Hence  depression  sees  a  gradual  dwindling  of  current  stocks  of  finished
goods,  and  also  a  dwindling  of  the  stocks  of  materials  carried  by
producers.  Given  that  situation,  it  is  merely  a  question  of  time  when
retail  merchants  will  find  their  assortments  growing  meager  and  will
be  forced  to  increase  their  current  orders  for  goods,  even  though  their
current  sales  remain  constant  or  contract  slowly.  When  this  time
does  come,  production  of  consumers'  goods  will  pick  up  a  bit.  Be-
fore long,  the  producers  from  whom  the  retailers  or  wholesalers  bought
will  exhaust  their  supplies  of  materials  and  must  increase  the  orders
they  place  with  other  producers.  So  an  increase  of  buying,  started
by  retail  merchants,  spreads  from  group  to  group,  and  grows  as  it
spreads^

Each  business  man,  as  he  sees  his  sales  increasing,  thinks  it  well
to  acquire  a  larger  stock  of  the  goods  he  sells  or  uses.  "Moreover,
speculator-traders  place  orders  for  future  delivery  and  begin  to  ac-
cumulate stocks."  The  consequence  is  that  rates  of  production  are
increased.  Statistical  evidence  seems  to  show  that  this  acceleration
of  production  becomes  more  rapid  as  it  travels  back  from  consumers*
goods  through  semi-finished  commodities  to  raw  materials  and  in-
dustrial equipment.  But  just  as  retail  trade  did  not  shrink  greatly
during  the  depression,  so  now  it  does  not  expand  greatly  during
prosperity. Presently  the  rate  of  production  exceeds  the  rate  of

*  Studies  in  the  Economics  of  Overhead  Costs,  Chicago,  1923,  chapter  xix.  See  also
Professor  Clark's  paper,  "Business  Acceleration  and  the  Law  of  Demand:  A  Technical
Factor  in  Economic  Cycles."  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  March,  1917,  vol.  xxv,  pp.
217-235.


46  BUSINESS  CYCLES

consumption,  and  so  produces  an  accumulation  of  stocks  which  grows
larger  as  long  as  the  processes  in  question  continue.

But  these  accumulations  are  limited  by  storage  capacity  and  the
willingness  of  banks  to  lock  up  their  funds  in  doubtfully  liquid  loans.
As  these  limits  are  approached,  purchases  decline.  Then  the  stocks
of  commodities  are  discovered  to  be  overlarge  for  the  reduced  volume
of  sales.  To  reduce  stocks,  men  fill  their  current  orders  from  goods
on  hand  and  curtail  production  or  orders  from  producers.  Current
production  then  falls  below  current  consumption.  The  business
groups  which  have  accumulated  the  largest  stocks — those  furthest
from  the  retailers — will  almost  stop  buying.

Hence  the  rates  of  production  in  the  several  stages  will  decrease
progressively  faster  going  backward  to  raw  materials,  until  the
end  of  the  ensuing  depression  brings  a  revival  again.*^

To  this  exposition  of  Mr.  Frank's,  Dr.  Thomas  Warner  Mitchell
of  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  has  made  an  important  addition
by  explaining  how  fluctuations  in  demand  are  amplified  as  they  run
back  through  the  channels  of  trade  from  consumers  to  producers  of
raw  materials. His  explanation  runs  as  follows:

(1)  Because  of  the  length,  in  time,  of  the  whole  production
process  from  the  natural  resources  to  the  ultimate  consumer,
and  the  length  of  time  required  for  selecting  and  training  per-
sonnel in  building  up  a  production  organization,  production
rates  that  have  fallen  below  demand  rates  cannot  quickly  be
augmented  to  equal  the  demand  rates,  but  require  jnany
months  to  be  so  augmented.  (2)  There  is  deception  and
illusion  all  along  the  line  as  to  the  real  extent  of  demand,  due
to  over-ordering  by  customers.  (3)  The  illusion  is  accentuated
under  our  atomistic  competitive  system  by  counting  the  same
demand  several  times  over  as  it  is  presented  to  different  atoms
in  the  industrial  organization.  All  three  operate  together  to
produce  a  grossly  exaggerated  measurement  of  demand  in  the
boom  period,  followed  automatically  by  a  crisis  and  by  a  gross
under-measurement  of  demand  during  the  crisis  and  depres-

*  "A  Theory  of  Business  Cycles,"  by  Lawrence  K.  Frank,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Eccfi
nomics,  August,  1923,  vol.  xxxvii,  pp.  625-642.

Before  Mr.  Frank  wrote,  Mr.  Henry  S.  Dennison  had  sketched  a  similar  theory.
See  "Management  and  the  Business  Cycle,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Asso-
ciation, March,  1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  20-31.  Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets  enriches  the  analysis
and  shows  its  statistical  support  in  his  volume  on  Cyclical  Fluctuations,  Retail  and
Wholesale  Trade,  United  States,  1919-1925,  New  York,  1926.


I


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 47

sion;  and  that  followed  automatically,  in  turn,  by  another
boom.  Consumers'  psychology,  manifested  in  the  form  of  re-
sistance to  the  rising  cost  of  living  and  a  slowing-up  of  their
demand  near  the  end  of  a  boom  period,  accentuates  the  effect
of  the  superabundance  with  which  the  merchants'  orders  for
goods  are  eventually  filled,  and  materially  assists  in  precipitat-
ing a  crisis.  The  cyclical  movement,  once  started,  tends  to
complete  and  repeat  itself  automatically  and  perpetually.^

V. Plans  for  Further  Work.
1. Problems  Raised  by  the  Diversity  of  Explanations.

We  began  the  preceding  survey  of  current  theories  to  find  what
economic  activities  are  involved  in  business  cycles,  and  to  get  work-
ing hypotheses  for  use  in  a  fresh  attack  upon  the  problem.  It  may
seem  that  we  have  been  too  successful:  we  have  found  so  many
processes  involved  and  have  collected  so  many  explanations  that
the  materials  threaten  to  be  confusing  rather  than  illuminating.
What  we  sought  was  aid  toward  solving  one  problem:  we  now  find
on  our  hands  a  new  puzzle — to  determine  the  relations  among  a  lot
of  theories.  What  explanations  are  incompatible  with  each  other,
what  are  complementary?  Each  theory  taken  by  itself  seems  plaus-
ible; but  how  can  we  work  with  so  many  hypotheses?  Is  it  necessary
to  test  each  hypothesis  in  turn?  Must  we  plan  an  eclectic  theory,
selecting  useful  elements  from  several  different  writers?  Or  can  we
find  some  way  of  developing  a  thoroughly  unified  explanation  of
business  cycles,  and  yet  incorporate  the  seemingly  diverse  hypotheses
with  which  we  have  become  acquainted?  *

'"Competitive  Illusion  as  a  Cause  of  Business  Cycles,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Eco-
nomics,  August,  1924,  vol.  xxxviii,  pp.  631-652.

*The  humorous  reader  is  invited  to  observe  at  this  point  what  care  has  been  taken
to  economize  his  effort.  In  place  of  ten  types  of  theories  in  some  twenty  variant  forms,
twice  or  five  times  that  number  might  have  been  put  forward  as  having  claims  on  his
attention.  A  look  at  the  table  of  contents  in  von  Bergman's  Geschichte  der  National-
okonomischen  Krisentheorien  (Stuttgart,  1895),  or  at  the  catalogue  of  any  large  library
of  books  on  economics  will  show  how  much  literature  has  been  omitted.  The  list  of
theories  reviewed  above  is  a  most  exclusive  list,  admitting  only  (with  one  diverting
exception)  those  explanations  which  can  show  the  best  of  credentials.

Among  the  recent  books  passed  over  for  one  reason  or  another  are  the  following :
Ludwig  Pohle,  Bevolkerungshewegung,  Kapitalbildung  und  periodische  WirtschajtS"

krisen. Gottingen,  1902.
Pierre  Vialles,  La  Consommation  et  les  Crises  J^conomiques. Paris,  1903.
Hugo  Bilgram  and  Louis  E.  Levy,  The  Cause  of  Business  Depressions. Philadelphia,

1914.
Daniel  Bellet,  Crises  Economiques,  Paris,  1918.
Wilhelm  Ropke,  Die  Konjunktur, Jena,  1922.


48  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Embarrassing  as  the  multiplicity  of  explanations  may  seem  at
this  stage,  it  is  an  embarrassment  which  must  be  faced,  because  it
arises  from  the  complexity  of  the  problem  itself.  Everyone  who
has  had  practical  experience  in  business  knows  that  business  is  af-
fected by  numberless  factors  physical,  psychological,  political,  eco-
nomic or  social  in  origin;  local,  national  or  world-wide  in  scope;
obvious  or  obscure  in  character  and  working;  temporary  or  enduring
in  effect.  And  everyone  who  has  studied  economics  realizes  that  busi-
ness activity  depends  upon  the  smoothly  coordinated  functioning  of
many  processes,  the  extraction  or  growing  of  raw  materials;  the
fabricating,  distributing,  transporting  and  consuming  of  goods;  the
paying  and  spending  of  money  incomes;  the  saving  and  investing  of
capital;  the  granting  and  canceling  of  credits.  Any  of  these  factors
or  any  of  these  processes  can  be  made  to  yield  a  plausible  theory  of
business  cycles,  provided  some  investigator  can  show  that  it  is  an
independent  source  of  recurrent  fluctuations  in  the  activity  of  trade.
And  that  is  what  each  of  our  theorists  believes  himself  to  have  done
with  reference  to  the  factor  of  his  choice.  Nor  can  we  be  sure  in
advance  that  any  one  of  them  is  wrong.

An  easy  affirmation  that  business  cycles  are  exceedingly  complex
phenomena  is  not  an  adequate  preparation  for  constructive  work.
To  plan  this  work  wisely  we  need  to  know  what  the  complexities  are.
Such  knowledge  we  get  in  the  most  convincing  way  from  the  conclu-
sions reached  by  earlier  investigators.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  study
of  current  theories  forms  the  best  introduction  to  the  subject,  at  its
present  stage  of  development.  Knowing  what  we  now  do,  we  should
be  effectually  guarded  against  the  besetting  sin  of  theorists  in  this

Hugh  W.  Sanford,  The  Business  of  Life,  New  York,  1924. Vol.  i,  pp.  1-222.

Paul  Mombert,  Einjuhrung  in  das  Studium  der  Konjunktur. Leipzig,  1925.

Moreover,  several  important  contributions  have  been  mentioned  but  incidentally,
because  they  stress  the  joint  importance  of  two  or  more  processes  which  are  exploited
separately  in  other  writings.  Comprehensiveness  of  view  ig  certainly  no  defect;  but  the
complexity  of  business  cycles  can  be  exhibited  most  effectively  by  following  many
leaders,  each  of  whom  focuses  attention  upon  some  single  process  and  represents  all
other  developments  as  subordinate  to,  or  as  contributing  to,  his  chosen  chain  of  cause
and  effect.  If  this  chapter  were  intended  to  evaluate  recent  studies  of  business  cycles,
the  following  books  would  have  conspicuous  places:

Dennis  H.  Robertson,  A  Study  of  Industrial  Fluctuation,  London,  1915;  Banking
Policy  and  the  Price  Level,  London,  1926.

Gustav  Cassel,  The  Theory  of  Social  Economy,  Translated  by  Joseph  McCabe,  New
York,  1924. (First  published  in  German,  Leipzig,  1918.)

John  Maurice  Clark,  The  Economics  of  Overhead  Costs,  Chicago,  1923.

Arthur  Spiethoff,  "Krisen,"  Handworterbuch  der  Staatswissenschaften,  4th  ed.,  Jena,
1925. Vol.  vi,  pp.  8-91.

Simon  S.  Kuznets,  Cyclical  Fluctuations,  New  York,  1926.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 49

field — neglecting  phenomena  which  do  not  fit  neatly  into  precon-
ceived schemes.

Realizing  how  many  lines  of  analysis  we  must  be  ready  to  test  and
perhaps  to  accept,  we  cannot  regard  the  planning  of  our  work  as  an
easy,  or  a  brief  task.  We  must  provide  a  place  for  every  line  of
analysis  which  may  prove  important  in  the  sequel,  and  yet  not  lose
our  way  in  a  maze  of  interactions.  How  to  draw  up  such  a  plan  is  our
next  concern.

2. A  Classification  of  the  Theories.

As  the  first  step  in  this  systematic  planning  of  our  work,  we  must
set  our  collection  of  working  hypotheses  in  order.  The  exposition
given  above  proceeds  as  far  as  feasible  from  the  simpler  to  the  more
intricate  theories.  Now  we  can  rearrange  the  theories  on  logical  lines,
according  to  the  processes  which  they  stress.

First,  the  different  theories  may  be  classified  as  physical,  emo-
tional and  institutional  explanations.^  The  large  third  class  may  then
be  subdivided  into  (1)  theories  which  find  the  source  of  fluctuations
in  institutional  change,  and  (2)  theories  which  find  the  source  of
fluctuations  in  the  functioning  of  institutions  in  their  present  form.
Finally,  the  last  named  group  may  be  further  divided  into  four  or
five  species  according  to  the  economic  processes  in  which  fluctuations
are  held  to  start:  namely,  theories  concerned  with  (1)  the  quest  of
profits,  (2)  the  flow  of  incomes  from  business  enterprises  to  indi-

*  Compare  E.  M.  Patterson,  "The  Theories  Advanced  in  Explanation  of  Economic
Crises,"  Annals  of  the  American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social  Science,  May,  1915,
vol.  lix,  pp.  133-147.

Since  this  chapter  was  written,  Professor  Warren  M.  Persons  has  published  a  classi-
fication of  "theories  of  business  fluctuations"  which  resembles  the  present  classification
of  theories  of  business  cycles.  See  Quarterly  Journal  of  EconomicSj  November,  1926,
vol.  xli,  pp.  94-128.

Persons'  classification  is  the  first  stage  of  a  critical  examination  of  "the  theories
of  business  fluctuations."  My  classification  is  the  first  stage  of  a  constructive  study  of
business  cycles.  Persons  is  interested  primarily  in  the  causes  of  business  fluctuations
stressed  by  different  writers :  I  am  interested  primarily  in  those  parts  of  a  theory  which
offer  working  hypotheses  which  I  can  use.  This  difference  between  our  aims  leads  us
at  times  to  classify  the  same  writer  under  quite  different  heads.  To  give  a  single
example:  Professor  Persons  ranks  Dr.  Veblen  among  those  who  emphasize  "factors
other  than  economic  institutions,"  because  Veblen  holds  that  revivals  "are  pretty
uniformly  traceable  to  specific  causes  extraneous  to  the  process  of  industrial  business
proper."  However,  Persons  notes  that  Veblen's  analysis  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  de-
pression runs  in  terms  of  economic  activities.  For  my  purposes,  it  is  this  analysis
which  is  most  significant  in  Veblen's  theory.  I  therefore  rank  Veblen  among  the
writers  who  treat  business  cycles  in  terms  of  institutional  factors,  and  merely  mention
his  view  that  some  "disturbing  cause"  from  outside  the  system  of  business  dealings  is
necessary  to  revive  activity  after  a  depression. (See  above  section  iv,  10).


50  BUSINESS  CYCLES

viduals  and  frcm  individuals  back  to  business  enterprises,  (3)  the
balance  between  rates  of  production  and  of  consumption  at  large,
(4)  the  special  balance  between  personal  consumption  and  the  pro-
duction of  industrial  equipment  (the  under-  and  over-savings,  as
well  as  the  construction  theories),  and  (5)  the  functioning  of  the
banks  in  relation  to  the  rest  of  the  community.

For  ready  reference  from  time  to  time,  it  will  be  convenient  to
have  this  classification,  with  some  elaboration  of  detail,  set  out  in
tabular  form.

A  Classification  of  Current  Theories  of  Business  Cycles.

I. Theories  which  trace  business  cycles  to  physical  processes

1.  Three-and-a-half-year  cycles  of  solar  radiation  produce  similar

cycles  of  crop  yields,  and  so  seven-  or  ten-year  cycles  of  business
activity. H.  S.  Jevons.

2.  Eight-year  periods  in  the  conjunction  of  Venus  produce  similar

cycles  in  mundane  weather,  crop  yields,  and  business.  Henry
L.  Moore.

3.  Weather  cycles  affect  health,  health  affects  mental  attitudes,  and

mental  attitudes  affect  business.  Ellsworth  Huntington.
A  theory  intermediate  between  the  groups  stressing  physical  and  in-
stitutional processes.
Industries  which  depend  upon  organic,  and  industries  which  de-
pend upon  inorganic  materials  have  unlike  rhythms.  The  re-
sulting disturbances  and  restorations  of  balance  produce  busi-
ness cycles. Werner  Sombart.

II. Theories  which  trace  business  cycles  to  emotional  processes

1.  '^Optimistic  error  and  pessimistic  error,  when  discovered,  give  birth

to  one  another  in  an  endless  chain." A.  C.  Pigou.

2.  The  fluctuations  of  birth  rates  and  death  rates  are  chiefly  responsi-

ble for  mass  alternations  of  optimism  and  pessimism,  and  thus
indirectly  responsible  for  alternations  of  prosperity  and  depres-
sion. M.  B.  Hexter.

III. Theories  which  trace  business  cycles  to  institutional  processes
1. Cycles  arise  from  the  change  of  institutions.

(1)  Social  progress  is  by  nature  jerky:  changes  in  its  pace  and

direction  produce  disturbances  from  time  to  time  in  the
moving  equiUbrium  of  economic  processes.  Emanuel  H.
Vogel.

(2)  Innovations  come  in  waves,  and  initiate  periods  of  activity

followed  by  crises  and  depressions.  Joseph  Schumpeter.
Minnie  T.  England.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 61

2. Cycles  arise  from  the  functioning  of  existing  institutions.

(1)  From  the  technical  exigencies  of  money-making:
Fluctuations  in  prospective  profits  cause  fluctuations  in  busi-
ness capitalization  and  confidence;  the  latter  in  turn  give
rise  to  new  fluctuations  in  prospective  profits. Thorstein
Veblen,  Jean  Lescure.

'the  money  economy  leads  to  fluctuations  in  mercantile  orders,
manufacturing  and  the  production  of  raw  materials  which
are  progressively  larger  than  the  fluctuations  in  consumers'
purchases,  upon  which  all  business  depends,  directly  or  in-
directly, for  its  market.  Henry  S.  Dennison,  Lawrence  K.
Frank,  Simon  S.  Kuznets.

The  reason  why  the  aforesaid  fluctuations  grow  wide  as  one
passes  from  consumer  demand  toward  the  production  of
raw  materials  lies  in  the  competitive  illusion  to  which  our
business  system  gives  rise. Thomas  W.  Mitchell.

(2)  From  lack  of  equifibrium  in  the  processes  of  disbursing  and

spending  incomes  and  of  producing  values:

Incomes  paid  to  wage  earners  lag  behind  changes  in  the  money
value  of  goods  produced,  thus  making  consumers'  demand
alternately  larger  and  smaller  than  current  supply.  R.  E.
May.

Inequalities  in  the  rates  at  which  prices  rise  and  fall  cause
consumers'  incomes  to  lag  behind  the  output  of  consumers'
goods  in  prosperity,  and  to  exceed  that  output  in  depres-
sion. Emil  Lederer.

Incomes  disbursed  by  business  enterprises  to  individuals  are
alternately  less  and  more  than  the  full  value  of  the  goods
produced  for  sale;  the  fluctuations  thus  initiated  are  en-
hanced by  the  savings  of  individuals.  Waddill  Catchings.
William  ILFoster  and  Hudson  B.  Hastings.

Prosperity  requires  an  increase  of  liquid  capital,  which  can
be  provided  only  out  of  funds  which  must  be  spent  for
consumers'  goods  if  prosperity  is  to  continue.  Recovery
comes  because  depression  checks  the  growth  of  liquid  capi-
tal P.W.Martin.

Consumers'  incomes  can  be  made  to  exceed  the  value  output
of  consumers'  goods  only  by  expansion  of  capital  equip-
ment, financed  by  expansion  of  bank  credit.  But  this  con-
dition, which  characterizes  prosperity,  works  its  own  un-
doing. A.  B.  Adams.

(3)  From  lack  of  equilibrium  in  the  process  of  producing  and

consuming  goods  in  general:
Waves  of  general  over-production  result  from  ^'the  well-nigh


52  BUSINESS  CYCLES

universal  fact  of  industrial  competition."  Sir  William  H.
Beveridge.

The  uncertainty  involved  in  all  business  planning  leads  to
alternate  over-  and  under-production  of  goods.  Charles  0.
Hardy.

Good  trade  leads  to  rapid  increase  in  industrial  equipment  and
later  in  output,  and  finally  to  a  decline  in  the  marginal  de-
mand prices  for  consumers'  goods.  A  depression  follows
in  which  the  growth  of  industrial  equipment  and  output  is
checked.  The  marginal  demand  prices  for  consumers'  goods
finally  rise  again,  and  a  new  period  of  activity  begins.
Albert  Aftalion,  Mentor  Bouniatian.

(4)  From  lack  of  equilibrium  in  the  processes  of  consuming,  sav-

ing, and  investing  capital  in  new  construction:

In  prosperity  the  demand  for  capital  exceeds  current  savings;
the  resulting  scarcity  of  capital  brings  on  a  crisis.  In  de-
pression, investment  falls  below  current  savings;  free  capital
accumulates  until  investing  becomes  aggressive  once  more
and  starts  a  new  period  of  activity.  Michel  Tugan-Bara-
novski.

Large  incomes,  which  grow  rapidly  in  prosperity,  lead  to  over-
saving and  over-investment  in  new  plants,  so  that  supply
exceeds  current  demand.  Depression  follows,  in  which  the
large  incomes  are  reduced,  and  over-saving  ceases,  so  that
consumption  catches  up  with  output  and  starts  a  revival.
John  A.  Hobson.

Crises  are  caused  by  over-production  of  industrial  equipment
and  concomitant  under-production  of  the  goods  necessary
to  use  that  equipment. Arthur  Spiethoff.

Relatively  slight  changes  in  demand  for  consumers'  goods
and  in  costs  of  construction  cause  far  more  violent  changes
in  the  volume  of  construction  work:  the  latter  changes  react
to  heighten  and  propagate  changes  in  the  demand  for  con-
sumers' goods. George  H.  Hull.

Over-commitments  to  business  extensions  of  all  sorts  involve
additions  to  purchasing  power  not  counterbalanced  by  in-
creased production.  Prices  rise  until  they  reach  a  level  at
which  men  see  danger  in  adding  to  their  stocks.  Then
purchasing  contracts  and  a  crisis  comes. Malcom  C.  Rorty.

(5)  From  the  processes  of  banking:

Banks  increase  the  purchasing  power  of  business  men,  when
prospects  are  favorable,  by  lending  credit;  the  activity  thus
stimulated  grows  cumulatively  until  the  banks  are  forced
to  restrict  advances. Then  comes  a  crisis  and  depression,


I


i


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 53

during  which  idle  funds  accumulate  in  the  banks  and  enable
them  to  start  a  new  movement  of  expansion.  Alvin  H.
Hansen.
When  banks  have  large  reserves  they  reduce  discount  rates,
and  thus  encourage  borrowing  and  business  expansion,
which  grows  cumulatively  until  the  banks  find  that  larger
cash  requirements  are  impairing  their  reserves.  Then  banks
raise  discount  rates,  restrict  loans  and  thus  reduce  business
activity.  Funds  again  accumulate  in  the  banks  because
cash  requirements  are  now  smaller,  and  the  cycle  starts
afresh. R.  G.  Hawtrey.

The  exceedingly  condensed  summaries  in  this  table  do  no  more
than  suggest  the  central  theses  maintained  by  the  writers  named.
One  who  has  not  read  the  books  drawn  upon,  or  at  least  read  the
preceding  section  on  "Current  Theories  of  Business  Cycles,"  will  find
the  entries  scarcely  intelligible  and  may  well  distrust  his  own  guesses
at  their  meaning.  Of  course  the  classification  provides  no  single  niche
for  men  like  Mr.  Robertson,  Mr.  Lavington,  Professor  Cassel,  Pro-
fessor J.  M.  Clark  and  Major  Bellerby  who  make  large  use  of  several
different  causes  of  fluctuations.  Nor  does  the  table  show  the  effective
supplementary  use  made  by  many  writers  of  ideas  other  than  their
leading  theses.

3. The  Necessity  for  Making  Measurements.

Regarding  the  technical  methods  to  be  used  in  the  investigation
one  broad  conclusion  is  already  clear.  The  conception  of  business
cycles  as  congeries  of  changes  in  numerous  processes  running  abreast
or  following  each  other — a  conception  made  vivid  by  the  review  of
current  theories — shows  the  need  of  quantitative  knowledge.  What  is
the  relative  importance  of  the  factors  represented  as  causes  of
fluctuations?  What  is  the  relative  amplitude  of  the  fluctuations
characteristic  of  these  factors  and  of  the  effects  which  they  are  said
to  produce?  In  what  sequence  do  the  fluctuations  appear  and  at
what  intervals  of  time?  These  are  but  samples  of  the  quantitative
problems  which  become  crucial  in  an  effort  either  to  test  a  given
theory  or  to  do  constructive  work.  Such  problems  can  be  solved  only
by  appeal  to  statistics.

Indeed,  our  best  chance  of  improving  upon  the  work  of  earlier
writers  lies  in  this  direction. Because  each  year  as  it  passes  extends


54  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  record  for  study,  because  of  the  widening  scope  of  statistical
compilations  and  the  progressive  refinement  of  statistical  technique,
the  latest  investigator  has  a  quasi-mechanical  advantage  over  his
predecessors,  plus  the  advantage  of  profiting  by  his  predecessors'  ideas.
Nor  is  this  advantage  of  more  precise  knowledge  limited  to  recent
cycles.  To-day  we  have  better  data  concerning  the  trade  fluctuations
after  the  Napoleonic  Wars  than  were  available  to  Sismondi,  or  Jevons,
or  Tugan-Baranovski.  Obviously  we  should  exploit  this  advantage
to  the  full,  not  forgetting  that  the  figures  are  of  little  use  except  as
they  are  illuminated  by  theory.

4. Causal  Theory  and  Analytic  Description.

The  next  step  in  planning  our  work  is  to  drag  into  the  light  for
inspection  the  tangled  problem  of  cause  and  effect  which  most  of
the  theorists  have  tried  to  solve.

The  usual  aim  of  writers  upon  business  cycles  is  to  show  where
and  how  wave  movements  start — that  is,  to  discover  "the  cause"  of
business  cycles.  A  second  aim,  followed  in  the  full-length  discussions,
is  to  show  how  the  original  wave  movement  spreads  from  its  source
over  all  the  processes  of  industry,  commerce,  and  finance.  This  spread
is  also  treated  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect,  but  the  causal  relations
grow  intricate.  The  first  effects  become  causes  producing  new  effects,
which  act  as  new  causes,  and  so  on.  Often  the  analysis  moves  con-
sciously in  a  circle  or  a  spiral ;  the  final  effects  reenf orce  the  first  cause,
or  after  a  lapse  of  time  start  the  first  cause  into  activity  again,  or
even  produce  the  first  cause  afresh.^

This  broadening  of  business-cycle  theories  from  the  effort  to  dis-
cover causes  into  an  effort  to  explain  the  full  round  of  events  is  de-
manded by  both  our  scientific  and  our  practical  interests.  But  as  our
knowledge  grows  wider  and  more  intimate,  our  attitude  toward  the
discussion  of  causes  undergoes  a  subtle  change.  When  we  have  ac-
counted in  casual  terms  for  each  stage  in  a  lengthy  series  of  actions
and  reactions,  we  find  that  our  analysis  deals  with  many  causes,  each
one  of  which  is  logically  indispensable  to  the  theory  we  have  elabo-
rated. On  reflection,  we  see  the  application  to  our  work  of  the  old
contention  that  the  idea  of  causation  has  pragmatic,  rather  than

*0f  course  there  is  nothing  "vicious"  in  a  circle  of  this  sort.  The  argument  is  not
circular  in  the  sense  of  depending  upon  itself,  but  in  the  sense  of  following  a  process
which  is  conceived  to  be  rhythmical.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 55

scientific,  warrant.  All  the  conditions  which  are  indispensable  to
produce  a  certain  result  stand  on  much  the  same  footing  from  the
viewpoint  of  science.  But  there  may  be  practical  reasons  why,  from
the  many  conditions  indispensable  to  produce  certain  results,  we
should  single  out  some  one  or  more  for  special  attention,  and  call
them  "the  cause'*  or  "the  causes."  We  stand  a  better  chance  of
making  a  wise  selection  of  factors  for  special  attention,  however,  if
we  have  already  gained  a  scientific  understanding  of  the  process  as
a  whole.

In  the  progress  of  knowledge,  causal  explanations  are  commonly
an  early  stage  in  the  advance  toward  analytic  description.  The  more
complete  the  theory  of  any  subject  becomes  in  content,  the  more
mathematical  in  form,  the  less  it  invokes  causation.  In  business-
cycle  theory,  the  transformation  from  causal  explanations  into  analytic
description  is  being  hastened  by  free  use  of  statistical  materials  and
methods.  What  time  series  can  be  made  to  show  are  functional  re-
lationships. We  are  always  reading  something  into  statistics,  when
we  assert  that  the  process  represented  by  one  series  exercises  a  causal
influence  upon  the  process  represented  by  a  second  series.  Yet  a  stiff
refusal  to  employ  causal  expressions  in  the  detail  of  our  investigation
might  often  hamper  us.  In  the  present  stage  of  our  knowledge,  we
can  probably  make  more  rapid  progress  toward  attaining  insight  into
business  cycles,  by  using  the  thought-forms  of  daily  life  than  by
trying  to  express  ideas  at  which  we  are  grasping  in  the  form  which
may  ultimately  prevail.

5. History  and  Theory.

A  few  business-cycle  theorists  not  only  work  forward  from  "the
cause"  of  wave  movements  to  its  effects,  but  also  work  backward
from  "the  cause"  to  its  cause.  As  already  noted.  Professor  Tugan-
Baranovski,  after  expounding  his  theory  of  the  alternate  accumula-
tion and  exhaustion  of  uninvested  loan  funds,  adds,

...  it  is  the  inadequate  remuneration  of  labor,  and  the
consequent  misery  of  the  working  classes,  that  is  the  funda-
mental cause  of  the  rapid  accumulation  of  social  capital  which
provokes  crises.^

Similarly,  Professor  Aftalion,  after  tracing  the  origin  and  development
of  general  over-production  through  two  volumes,  remarks  at  the  end,

^Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Angleterre,  p.  279.


56  BUSINESS  CYCLES

It  is  to  the  conditions  established  by  the  capitahst  technique
of  production  that  we  must  attribute  the  great  difficulty  of
avoiding  error.  It  is  this  technique,  after  all,  which  must  bear
the  responsibility  for  the  appearance  of  over-production.^

And  Mr.  Frank,  after  exploiting  the  difference  in  the  rhythms  of
consumption  and  production,  concludes  by  saying,

The  ^cause,'  if  we  wish  to  use  that  term,  of  business  cycles
...  is  to  be  found  in  the  habits  and  customs  (institutions)
of  men  which  make  up  the  money  economy  .  .  .^

Presumably,  this  contention,  that  business  cycles  arise  from  that
peculiar  form  of  economic  organization  which  has  come  to  prevail  in
England  within  the  last  two  centuries,  and  over  much  of  the  world
in  more  recent  times,  would  be  admitted  by  most  theorists.  On  this
view,  of  course,  the  cause  of  business  cycles  lies  enmeshed  among
the  causes  that  produced  modern  money  economy,  or  capitalism.

Needless  to  say,  our  theorists  have  not  followed  the  logical  im-
plications of  this  historical  perspective.  No  one  writes  an  economic
history  of  mankind  as  a  prolegomenon  to  a  theory  of  business  cycles.
The  current  practice  is  to  take  the  existing  scheme  of  institutions
for  granted,  and  to  show  how  cyclical  oscillations  come  to  pass  under
this  regime.

Nor  do  our  theorists  treat  business  cycles  as  episodes  each  of
which  is  to  be  fully  accounted  for  on  historical  grounds. On  the
contrary,  they  consciously  endeavor  to  abstract  from  the  peculiarities  ■
of  particular  cycles,  in  order  that  they  may  arrive  at  a  clearer  under-
standing of  the  generic  features. The  statistical  investigator  does
the  best  he  can  to  segregate  the  cyclical  oscillations  in  his  time  series  ^
from  all  complicating  features,  and  for  this  purpose  he  has  developed  j
an  elaborate  technique.^ The  man  of  speculative  temper  does  his
abstracting  in  bolder  fashion. Surveying  the  phenomena  of  concrete
experience,  he  seeks  to  fasten  on  the  factors  of  chief  moment,  and
to  isolate  these  factors  in  his  thoughts. By  a  series  of  imaginary
experiments,  he  develops  a  synthetic  account  of  cyclical  oscillations
which  contains  enough  of  reality  to  be  enlightening  and  not  so  much
as  to  be  confusing.

'  Les  Crises  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  vol.  ii,  pp.  359,  360.

*  "A  Theory  of  Business  Cycles,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,  1923,  vol.
xxxvii,  p.  639.

*  See  Chapter  III  below.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 57

Of  course,  there  is  no  logical  opposition  between  the  theoretical
and  the  historical  viewpoints,  any  more  than  there  is  opposition  be-
tween causation  and  analytic  description.  On  the  contrary,  history
and  theory  supplement  each  other.  The  theorist  who  wishes  to
analyze  the  workings  of  current  economic  institutions  needs  a  vivid,
objective  view  of  their  characteristics.  That  view  he  can  obtain  most
effectively  by  a  study  of  their  evolution.  Nor  is  current  history  less
important  to  him  than  history  of  the  past.  It  is  only  by  historical
observations  that  he  can  determine  what  features  of  business  cycles
are  common  and  what  are  occasional,  a  matter  upon  which  he  should
satisfy  himself  before  he  devises  his  imaginary  experiments.  So,  too,
the  statistical  worker  appeals  to  history  for  help  in  performing  the
most  difficult  of  his  technical  tasks — separating  "irregular"  from
cyclical  fluctuations.  And  by  whatever  methods  a  theorist  works,  he
may — and  should — -check  his  explanations  by  seeing  how  far  they
account  for  the  cycles  of  history.

Several  distinguished  theorists  have  prepared  themselves  for  ex-
plaining cyclical  phenomena  by  elaborate  historical  investigations.
For  example,  Tugan-Baranovski  wrote  the  history  of  English  crises
from  1825  to  1910;  Bouniatian  carried  the  account  back  to  1640;
Lescure  begins  his  treatise  with  a  history  of  French,  German,  Eng-
lish, and  American  crises  from  1810  to  1922.^  Doubtless  many
theorists,  without  making  first-hand  historical  researches  for  them-
selves, have  studied  such  historical  accounts.  To  follow  the  prece-
dent is  an  obvious  piece  of  common  sense.  Indeed,  we  should  strive
to  achieve  a  closer  blending  than  our  predecessors  have  accomplished
of  the  data  and  the  suggestions  afforded  by  history  with  the  hypoth-
eses suggested  by  economic  theory.  The  statistical  series  we  shall
analyze  are  fragments  of  the  historical  record.  The  business  annals
summarized  in  a  later  chapter  are  a  condensed  account  of  cyclical
fluctuations  in  numerous  countries  at  different  stages  of  development.
These  collections  of  historical  materials,  and  economic  history  in  its
more  elaborate  form,  we  can  use  to  exhibit  the  general  characteristics
of  modern  economic  organization,  to  aid  in  determining  what  features
are  common  to  business  cycles  at  large,  to  suggest  hypotheses,  and
to  test  our  conclusions.

'See  M.  Tugan-Baranovski,  Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Anglete.re,  Paris,  1913,  Part
i;  M.  Bouniatian^  Geschichte  der  Handelskrisen  in  England,  I64O-I84O,  Munich,  1908;
J.  Lescure,  Des  Crises  Generates  et  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  3d  ed.,  Paris,  1923,
pp.  3-312.


58  BUSINESS  CYCLES

6. The  Framework  of  the  Investigation.

Another  step  in  planning  our  work  is  to  decide  whether  we  shall
use  a  framework  provided  by  the  theories  we  have  reviewed,  or  a
framework  provided  by  the  subject  matter.

It  is  possible  to  take  up  the  theories  one  by  one,  make  a  critical
examination  of  the  evidence  offered  in  support  of  each,  at  need
devise  new  tests,  and  treat  conclusions  regarding  the  validity  of  each
theory  as  our  main  objective.  It  is  also  possible  to  take  up  the  suc-
cessive phases  of  business  cycles  one  by  one,  collect  facts  regarding
periods  of  jDrosperity,  crisis,  depression  and  revival  in  different  coun-
tries at  different  times,  use  the  theories  to  suggest  facts  which 'should
be  gathered  and  relations  looked  for,  and  make  conclusions  regarding
the  fluctuations  our  main  objective,  treating  verdicts  upon  the  theories
as  by-products  to  be  turned  out  when  convenient.

Between  these  two  procedures  it  is  easy  to  choose.  What  we
want  is  insight  into  the  facts.  We  care  about  the  theories  only  as
aids  toward  attaining  such  insight.  The  plan  of  testing  theories  would
indeed  lead  to  work  with  the  facts,  but  in  an  artificial  order,  and
one  involving  much  repetition.  At  best  it  would  turn  into  a  study
of  one  or  two  processes  at  a  time  in  successive  phases  of  the  cycle,
whereas  we  are  concerned  primarily  with  these  phases,  and  wish  to
discover  the  relations  among  different  processes  which  give  each
phase  its  character  and  at  the  same  time  transform  it  into  the  fol-
lowing phase.^

But  if  we  are  to  use  the  phases  of  business  cycles  as  a  framework,
we  run  grave  risk  of  getting  hopelessly  confused  in  a  maze  of  inter-
acting processes.  That  danger  the  review  of  current  theories  has
made  startlingly  clear.  The  physical  processes  of  making  and  con-
suming goods  of  numberless  kinds,  the  business  processes  of  buying
and  selling,  the  flow  of  money  incomes  to  and  from  individuals,
the  circulation  of  money  and  credit,  borrowing  and  lending,  saving
and  investing  must  all  be  watched  in  relation  to  each  other — and
each  of  these  processes  is  itself  a  complex  of  variables.

To  guard  against  losing  our  way  in  this  tangle,  we  must  get  as
clear  a  view  as  possible  of  the  organic  relations  among  these  various

*  There  is  the  less  need  for  making  a  critical  study  of  the  several  theories  because
Professor  Warren  M.  Persons  has  promised  to  perform  that  arduous  task.  See  the
first  paper  in  the  series,  "Theories  of  Business  Fluctuations,"  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics,  November,  1926,  vol.  xli,  pp.  94-128.


THE  PROCESSES  INVOLVED  IN  BUSINESS  CYCLES 59

processes  before  we  begin  to  study  their  fluctuations  from  phase  to
phase  of  the  cycle.  That  is,  we  must  survey  that  form  of  economic
organization  which  has  come  to  prevail  in  all  "advanced"  communi-
ties as  if  it  were  a  curiosity  instead  of  our  familiar  environment.  In
particular,  we  must  get  what  light  existing  statistics  shed  upon  the
relative  magnitude  of  those  factors  which  our  survey  of  current
theories  has  pointed  out  as  playing  important  roles  in  business
cycles.^

*  In  his  recent  critique  of  current  German  studies  of  business  cycles,  Dr.  Adolf  Lowe
makes  the  following  comment  upon  the  treatment  of  facts  and  theory  in  my  earlier
book  upon  business  cycles:

As  in  all  social-economic  work,  so  in  our  narrower  field,  the  analysis  of  facts
forms  the  second  chapter  of  an  exposition. It  must  be  preceded  by  a  chapter  on  the
theory  of  business  cycles. Such  is  always  the  order  in  truth,  even  though  the  first
chapter  remains  unwritten,  and  though  (worse  still)  the  writer  is  not  conscious  that
his  mind  harbors  a  theory. For  it  is  theory  which  provides  the  principles  by  which
the  irreproducible  fullness  of  reality  can  be  set  in  order;  it  is  theory  which  formu-
lates the  questions  which  the  facts  must  answer. (See  "Der  gegenwartige  Stand  der
Konjunkturforschung in Deutschland," in Die Wirtschaftvnssenschaft nach dem
Kriege,  Festgabe  fur  Lujo  Brentano. Munich  and  Leipzig,  1925,  vol.  ii,  p.  367. I
have  translated  freely  in  an  effort  to  preserve  the  vigor  of  the  original.)
I  cannot  claim  to  heed  Dr.  Lowe's  counsel  in  the  present  volume,  unless  my  vague
impressions  concerning  what  phenomena  should  be  looked  into  deserve  to  be  called  a
theory. Of  course  Chapter  I  does  treat  theories  of  business  cycles,  but  it  uses  these
theories  to  reveal  certain  facts — that  is^  to  show  how  many  processes  run  side  by  side
in  cyclical  fluctuations. In  the  light  of  these  results,  I  pass  on  in  Chapter  II  to  discuss
modem  economic  organization,  in  Chapter  III  to  treat  statistical  problems,  and  in
Chapter  IV  to  draw  conclusions  from  business  annals,  all  before  I  undertake  in  Chapter
V  to  formulate  a  definite  conception  of  business  cycles. As  for  a  theory  of  the  subject,
that  is  deferred  to  Volume  II. This  order  seems  to  me  more  likely  to  lead  to  the
discovery  of  new  truth  than  a  treatment  which  begins  with  a  "theory"  and  then  looks
for  "facts."

Dr.  Lowe's  view  of  the  relations  between  facts  and  theory  in  scientific  work  is  a
common  one.  But  it  seems  to  me  over-schematic.  Against  the  statement,  "One  cannot
set  economic  facts  in  order  unless  one  has  a  theory"  (I  should  prefer  to  say  "hypothe-
sis"), can  be  put  the  statement,  "One  cannot  form  an  economic  theory  unless  one  knows
some  facts."  And  both  these  statements  overlook  the  fact  that  the  two  categories  are
1  not  mutually  exclusive.  The  theories  with  which  science  works  cannot  be  conceived  as
existing  apart  from  the  facts  of  human  experience,  and  men  can  apprehend  facts  only
in  terms  of  the  notions  with  which  their  minds  are  furnished.  The  more  thoughtfully
one  considers  the  relations  between  these  two  phases  of  knowing,  the  less  separable
they  become.  Even  on  the  basis  of  the  crude  usage  which  contrasts  fact  and  theory,
it  is  futile  to  debate  which  of  the  two  comes  first  in  the  history  of  the  race,  in  the  life
of  an  individual,  in  the  growth  of  a  science,  or  in  the  progress  of  an  investigation.
What  is  clear  is  that  in  scientific  work  these  two  blends,  knowledge  of  fact  and  theo-
retical conceptions,  keep  stimulating,  extending  and  enriching  each  other.  An  investi-
gator who  starts  with  what  purports  to  be  an  exposition  of  theory  is  tacitly  using  the
facts  by  which  the  ideas  have  been  molded.  And  one  who  starts  with  what  purports
to  be  an  exposition  of  facts,  is  tacitly  using  the  theoretical  conceptions  by  which  facts
have  been  apprehended.  Whether  it  is  better  to  begin  a  particular  task  by  elaborating
upon  the  theoretical  conceptions  employed,  saying  little  about  the  facts  for  the
moment;  or  to  begin  by  elaborating  upon  the  facts,  saying  little  about  theories  for  the
moment,  depends  upon  the  problem  in  hand  and  upon  the  contribution  which  the
investigator  hopes  to  make  toward  its  solution. In  an  investigation  of  moment,  both


457


Os


60  BUSINESS  CYCLES

This  survey  is  the  most  important  step  in  preparing  for  the  con-
structive work  we  hope  to  accomphsh.  To  it  is  devoted  the  next
chapter.

the  theory  and  the  facts  are  elaborated  at  various  stages  of  the  proceedings,  each  by  the
aid  of  the  other,  and  later  workers  start  with  a  fact-theory  blend  improved  by  the  new
contribution.


CHAPTER  II.

ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES.

I. The  Historical  Connection  Between  Business  Cycles  and  the

Use  of  Money.

1. A  Preliminary  Statement.

That  business  cycles  occur  only  in  communities  having  a  dis-
tinctively modem  type  of  economic  organization  is  explicitly  recog-
nized by  several  of  the  writers  cited  in  Chapter  I,  and  is  implied  by
all  who  trace  these  cycles  to  institutional  factors  of  recent  develop-
ment. Even  the  theories  which  resort  to  physical  causes  need  not
be  taken  as  dissenting  opinions.  Whatever  cycles  occur  in  the  weather
produce  cycles  in  economic  activities  only  where  economic  activities
are  organized  upon  a  business  basis.

This  dependence  of  business  cycles  upon  a  particular  scheme  of
institutions  must  be  a  fact  of  the  highest  theoretical  significance.
But  what  we  can  learn  from  it  will  depend  upon  our  understanding
of  the  institutional  scheme  in  question.  Modern  economic  organiza-
tion is  so  bewildering  a  complex  that  it  explains  nothing.  Before
we  can  make  the  historical  connection  illuminate  our  problem,  we
must  find  some  way  of  breaking  the  complex  into  comprehensible
elements,  related  to  each  other  in  a  comprehensible  fashion.  Is  there
not,  then,  some  feature  of  the  economic  organization  found  in  all
communities  subject  to  business  cycles,  which  will  help  us  to  plan
our  inquiry  into  the  various  processes  marked  for  investigation  in
the  first  chapter?

Two  suggestions  are  provided  by  Chapter  I.  Many  economists
have  held  that  crises  and  depressions  are  a  result  of  "capitalism,"
or,  as  others  phrase  it,  "a  disease  of  capitalism."  A  few  recent  writers
have  preferred  to  say  that  business  cycles  are  produced  by  "money
economy."  ^  Neither  of  these  statements  professes  to  be  a  theory
of  business  cycles. But  both  statements  suggest  working  programs

*For  illustrative  citations,  see  the  section  of  Chapter  I  called  "Causal  Theory  and
Analytic  Description."

61


62  BUSINESS  CYCLES

which  we  might  follow.  Can  we  organize  our  inquiry  into  the  vari-
ous processes  involved  in  business  cycles  more  eflficiently  if  we  relate
these  processes  to  ^'capitalism/^  or  if  we  relate  them  to  "money
economy"?

The  view  which  will  be  developed  here  runs  as  follows:  The
feature  of  modern  economic  organization  which  throws  most  light
upon  business  cycles  is  that  economic  activities  are  now  carried  on
mainly  by  making  and  spending  money.  This  condition  is  charac-
teristic of  capitalism ;  but  that  term  puts  its  stress  upon  other  features
of  the  present  scheme  of  institutions — such  as  the  ownership  of  the
means  of  production — features  of  primary  importance  in  certain
problems,  and  not  to  be  neglected  here,  but  features  of  less  service
in  the  effort  to  understand  alternations  of  business  prosperity  and
depression  than  the  feature  stressed  by  the  term  "money  economy."
Accordingly,  we  shall  seek  a  less  ambiguous  term  for  this  concept,
analyze  its  meaning,  and  use  it  in  exploring  the  maze  of  processes
which  we  have  found  to  be  involved  in  business  cycles.

One  reason  why  the  connection  between  business  cycles  and
pecuniary  organization  was  long  overlooked  is  that  the  difference
between  the  use  of  money  in  communities  which  do  not  and  in  com-
munities which  do  suffer  from  business  cycles  is  a  difference  in  degree,
not  a  difference  in  kind.  Economists  accustomed  to  depend  upon
what  Alfred  Marshall  called  "qualitative  analysis"  were  prone  to
overlook  the  significance  of  differences  in  degree,  and  to  concentrate
attention  upon  differences  in  kind,  or  what  they  took  to  be  such.
Capitalism  seemed  to  many  men  in  the  nineteenth  century,  men  not
versed  in  economic  history,  a  new  portent  in  economic  life.  They
fastened  upon  it  as  an  explanation  of  many  phenomena  which  seemed
to  them  equally  new — commercial  crises  among  others.

As  will  be  shown  below,  the  coming  of  business  cycles  is  a  gradual
development.  It  can  be  explained  only  by  some  change  which  pro-
ceeds by  degrees.  Communities  slowly  become  subject  to  recurrent
alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression  as  a  large  proportion  of  the
people  begin  to  rely  upon  making  and  spending  money  in  a  large
proportion  of  their  activities.  We  lack  the  data  which  might  enable
us  to  assign  a  critical  point,  or  a  critical  range,  in  the  growth  of  money
economy  at  which  business  cycles  appear.  But  we  can  tell  in  what
period  the  critical  range  was  reached  in  various  countries.^

'Capitalism  also  developed  gradually,  and,  so  far  as  that  goes,  might  serve  as  well
to  explain  the  coming  of  business  cycles  as  does  the  cumulative  growth  of  pecuniary


I


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 63

Just  because  its  development  has  been  so  gradual,  "money
economy"  has  many  meanings.  It  calls  to  mind  certain  features  in
the  dissimilar  economic  organizations  of  states  which  have  flourished
at  various  times  through  several  thousand  years  of  history.  A  term
which  can  be  taken  to  cover  all  the  successive  stages  in  a  long  and
checkered  evolution  is  not  an  apt  term  to  characterize  the  peculiarities
of  the  latest  stage  in  the  series.  To  suggest  the  differentiating  fea-
tures of  that  highly  developed  form  of  money  economy  within  which
business  cycles  occur,  we  shall  do  well  to  use  words  which  have  modem
associations  in  our  minds.  Perhaps  the  combination  "profits  econ-
omy" or  "business  economy"  is  most  suggestive  and  least  misleading.
The  second  of  these  terms  will  be  used  in  this  discussion,  but  with
frequent  reminders  that  what  seems  to  count  in  producing  business
cycles  is  the  common  practice  of  money-making  and  money-spending
by  the  population  as  a  whole,  not  merely  by  a  limited  class  of  business
men.

2. The  Meaning  of  "Business  Economy."

To  repeat:  we  do  not  say  that  a  business  economy  has  developed
in  any  community  until  most  of  its  economic  activities  have  taken
on  the  form  of  making  and  spending  money.  That  way  of  organizing
production,  distribution  and  consumption  is  the  matter  of  importance
— ^not  the  use  of  money  as  a  medium  of  exchange.^

Instead  of  making  the  goods  their  families  need,  men  "make"
money,  and  with  their  money  incomes  buy  for  their  own  use  goods
made  by  unknown  hands.  The  exceptions  to  this  rule  presented  by
the  domestic  work  of  housewives,  by  the  consumption  of  their  own
produce  by  farmers,  by  the  raising  of  vegetables  in  family  gardens,

organization.  As  said  above,  the  reason  for  organizing  the  present  inquiry  around  the
use  of  money,  rather  than  around  the  ownership  of  the  means  of  production,  is  that
the  former  plan  puts  the  problems  to  be  faced  in  a  way  which  makes  them  more  open
to  attack.  Of  course  no  contention  of  this  sort  can  be  justified  in  advance.  It  must
stand  or  fall  by  the  results  to  which  it  leads.

*  One  of  the  objections  to  the  term  "money  economy"  is  that  it  is  often  contrasted
with  a  "credit  economy."  Thus  Bruno  Hildebrand,  who  seems  to  have  introduced  the
terms,  distinguished  three  stages  of  economic  development:  Naturalwirtschaft,  Geld-
wirtschajt,  and  Kreditmrtschaft  Udhrhiicher  fur  Nationalokonomie  und  Statistik,  vol.
ii,  pp.  1-24).  But  Hildebrand's  stages  have  not  proved  of  much  use  either  in  economic
history  or  in  economic  theory,  and  his  term  Geldwirtschaft  seems  now  to  be  used  in
Germany  much  as  "business  economy"  is  used  here.  In  this  sense,  of  course,  the  pre-
dominant use  of  credit  instruments  in  effecting  payments  is  merely  one  feature  of  a
highly  developed  money  economy.


64  BUSINESS  CYCLES

and  by  agricultural  leases  for  shares  of  the  crops,  are  continuations
of  an  earlier  order,  in  which  most  families  subsisted  chiefly  upon
goods  produced  by  their  own  efforts  and  themselves  consumed  most
of  what  they  produced.

It  is  characteristic  of  the  dominating  role  played  by  money  in
economic  planning  that  the  nation  collects  hardly  any  data  concern-
ing these  surviving  elements  of  "real"  income  which  families  produce
for  themselves.  Housewives  form  by  far  the  largest  occupation  group,
outnumbering  farmers  three  to  one,  and  the  group  whose  work  affects
welfare  most  intimately.  Yet  the  census  of  occupations  does  not
count  the  number  of  housewives  working  at  home.  Enumerators  are
instructed  to  include  only  "gainful  occupations,"  those  from,  which
people  get  money  incomes.  When  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research -made  its  first  studies  of  income,  it  could  do  no  more  than
estimate  the  number  of  housewives,  and  apply  to  this  number  the
average  wages  of  a  group  of  paid  workers  consisting  mainly  of  women
who  do  some  of  the  multifarious  tasks  of  the  housewife.  The  rough
results  thus  obtained  ran  above  18  billion  dollars  in  1919,  more  than
a  quarter  of  the  total  money  income.  But  the  whole  procedure  was
so  conjectural  that  the  National  Bureau  did  not  venture  to  add  the
housewife  item  to  its  other  figures.^

The  other  elements  of  family-produced  income  can  be  priced
without  hesitation,  because  they  consist  of  goods  such  as  pass  through
the  markets.  Yet  we  know  their  magnitude  but  vaguely.  In  1914,
Mr.  W.  C.  Funk  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture  made  a  careful
study  of  the  incomes  of  483  farm  families,  and  estimated  the  value  of
their  own  produce  which  these  families  consumed.^  With  the  aid  of
Funk's  data,  Dr.  W.  I.  King  has  figured  that  the  non-monetary  in-
come of  American  farmers  amounted  to  nearly  2  billion  dollars  in
1913  and  nearly  4%  billions  in  1920 — say  6  per  cent  of  the  national
income  in  the  latter  year.  Much  smaller  values,  not  reaching  half  a
billion,  are  produced  for  their  own  consumption  by  urban  and  village

'  See  Income  in  the  United  States,  by  the  Staff  of  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research,  New  York,  1921,  vol.  i,  pp.  57-60.

'See  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture,  Farmers'  Bulletin  No.  635,  Decem-
ber, 1914.  More  recently  Messrs.  L.  M.  Bean  and  0.  C.  Stine  of  the  United  States
Bureau  of  Agricultural  Economics  have  estimated  that  the  income  "consumed  on  farms
for  family  living"  has  varied  between  21.6  per  cent  of  "operators'  gross  income  from
agricultural  production"  in  1919-20  and  27.6  per  cenf  in  1921-22.  "Income  from  Agri-
cultural Production,"  The  Annals  of  the  American  Academy  of  Political  and  Social
Science. January,  1925,  vol.  cxvii,  p.  33.


I


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 65

families  which  cultivate  kitchen  gardens,  or  keep  cows,  pigs  and
poultry.^

Finally,  as  the  most  important  survival  of  exchange  by  barter,  it
may  be  noted  that  rather  more  than  a  quarter  of  the  6,450,000  farms
in  the  United  States  were  cultivated  in  1920  by  tenants  who  paid  as
rent  a  share  in  the  produce.^

Despite  the  considerable  importance  of  these  continuations  of  an
earlier  order,  the  economic  comfort  or  misery  of  a  family  now  de-
pends more  upon  its  ability  to  command  an  adequate  money  income
and  upon  its  pecuniary  thrift,  than  upon  its  efficiency  in  making  useful
goods  and  its  skill  in  husbanding  supplies.  Even  in  years  when  crops
are  short  and  mills  are  idle,  the  family  with  money  need  not  be
uncomfortable.  The  family  without  money  leads  a  wretched  life
even  in  years  of  abundance.^

To  the  family,  then,  prosperity  and  .depression  appear  less  as
problems  of  the  adequacy  of  the  goods  produced  by  itself  or  by  the
community  as  a  whole,  than  as  problems  of  the  adequacy  of  its  money
income.  To  the  nation,  the  making  of  money  is  important  in  a  way
quite  different.  Comfort  and  misery  do  not  depend  upon  the  aggre-
gate of  money  incomes  received  by  its  citizens;  they  depend  upon
the  abundance  of  useful  goods.  Efficiency  in  producing  goods  is  im-
portant to  an  individual  chiefly  because  of  its  bearing  on  his  ability
to  make  money;  money-making  is  important  to  a  nation  chiefly  be-
cause of  its  bearing  upon  efficiency  in  production.  Natural  resources,
mechanical  equipment,  workmanlike  skill,  and  scientific  technique
are  factors  of  fundamental  importance  under  any  form  of  organiza-
tion. But  where  business  economy  prevails  natural  resources  are  not
developed,  mechanical  equipment  is  not  utilized,  workmanlike  skill

*See  Income  in  the  United  States,  vol.  ii,  p.  231.  There  are  other  items  of  income,
particularly,  the  rental  value  of  owned  homes  and  the  use  of  other  consumption  goods
such  as  furniture,  which  do  not  figure  in  the  money  income  and  outgo  of  a  family  each
year.  But  most  of  these  goods  have  been  bought  for  money  in  the  past,  and  the  real
income  derived  from  them  cannot  be  regarded  as  produced  by  the  recipients.  The  esti-
mate of  the  non-monetary  income  of  farmers  given  in  the  text  does  not  include  the
rental  value  of  farm  homes.

^Fourteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  Agriculture,  Washington,  1922,  vol.  v.  p.
124.

*  Compare  Dr.  Robert  L.  Hale's  statement:  "All  incomes,  in  the  last  analysis,  whether
derived  from  ownership  of  property  or  from  personal  services,  are  not  'products'  created
by  the  recipients;  they  are  payments  derived  from  the  rest  of  the  community  by  the
exertion  of  some  sort  of  pressure.  To  say  this  is  not  to  condemn  the  exertion  of  such
pressure;  it  is  the  only  means  a  man  has  under  present  arrangements,  and  perhaps
under  any  workable  scheme  of  things,  for  keeping  alive."  "Economic  Theory  and  the
Statesman,"  The  Trend  of  Economics,  edited  by  R.  G.  Tugwell,  New  York,  1924,  p.  216.


66  BUSINESS  CYCLES

is  not  exercised,  scientific  discoveries  are  not  applied,  unless  conditions
are  such  as  to  promise  a  money  profit  to  those  who  direct  production.
The  elaborate  cooperative  processes  by  which  a  nation's  people
provide  for  the  meeting  of  each  other's  needs  are  thus  brought  into
dependence  upon  factors  which  have  but  an  indirect  connection  with
the  material  conditions  of  well-being — factors  which  determine  the
prospects  of  making  money.

3.  The  Evolution  op  Business  Economy.

To  grasp  the  role  played  in  our  lives  by  this  form  of  organization
is  diflficult,  because  we  who  have  grown  up  in  a  business  economy
have  had  our  minds  molded  by  it.  In  studying  the  institution  as  it
now  exists,  we  are  practicing  a  sort  of  introspection  into  our  own
mental  processes.  To  get  an  objective  view  of  the  present  situation,
our  best  course  is  to  trace  the  stages  by  which  the  uses  of  money
have  grown.  What  is  so  familiar  and  organic  a  whole  to  us  that  we
hardly  see  the  need  of  analyzing  it,  will  dissolve  into  thought-suggest-
ing parts  as  we  note  how  our  race  has  slowly  evolved  one  element  in
the  complex  after  another.

The  faltering  first  steps  toward  the  use  of  money  were  taken  in
those  dim  stretches  of  time  when  men  were  beginning  to  exchange
gifts  and  then  to  barter  for  the  sake  of  goods,  to  evolve  the  concept
of  ownership,  to  express  values  in  a  common  denominator,  to  use
some  commodity  as  currency,  to  hold  markets,  to  develop  specialized
occupations,  and  to  mix  trading  as  a  business  with  cattle  lifting,  man
stealing  and  town  sacking.  Of  all  these  slow  developments  what
little  information  is  available  comes  mainly  from  anthropologists  and
archaeologists  and  is  loosely  tied  together  by  conjecture.

When  written  history  begins  in  Babylonia  and  Egypt,  in  China
and  India,  in  Europe,  in  Mexico  and  Peru,  it  shows  us  a  more  ad-
vanced stage.  Men  are  using  copper,  silver  or  gold  as  currency ;  they
are  making  contracts  involving  the  future;  they  are  buying  and
selling,  borrowing  and  lending  on  a  considerable  scale;  they  are  keep-
ing rude  accounts.  Very  slowly  these  practices  diffuse  from  the
centers  of  cultural  achievement,  and  quite  as  slowly  the  shifting  cul-
tural centers  score  advances.  The  epochal  invention  of  coinage  was
probably  made  in  western  Asia  Minor  about  700  B.  C,  and  was
carried  by  Phoenician  traders  round  the  Mediterranean  world.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 67

Having  passed  through  these  earHer  stages,  the  uses  of  money
entered  a  phase  of  rapid  development  in  Phoenicia,  Carthage,  and
Greece  and  upon  a  still  more  notable  expansion  in  Rome.  Money-
changing,  letters  of  exchange,  simple  banking,  production  of  staple
goods  on  a  large  scale  for  a  wide  market,  speculation,  business  enter-
prises not  only  in  trading,  but  also  in  mining  and  manufacturing,  be-
came common.  Large  fortunes  were  built  up  by  private  people  and
invested  for  profit.  Despite  the  prevalence  of  slavery,  many  men
worked  for  wages.  It  was,  indeed,  a  business-like  society  that  flour-
ished under  the  Pax  Romana.

But  with  the  disintegration  of  Roman  culture,  pecuniary  organ-
ization declined  as  decisively  as  any  other  phase  of  civilization.  In
economic,  as  in  political  life,  a  sharp  contrast  appeared  between  East
and  West.  Over  those  parts  of  the  empire  which  were  later  to  assume
leadership  in  culture,  central  authority  dissolved  into  a  shifting  multi-
tude of  local  controls;  petty  warfare  became  a  chronic  misery;  the
admirable  Roman  roads  fell  into  disrepair;  commerce  shrank  to  a
dribble  of  luxuries  for  the  powerful  and  a  local  exchange  of  indispens-
ables  like  iron,  salt  and  tar  for  the  commonalty;  manufacturing  for
a  wide  market  almost  disappeared ;  coinage  became  scanty,  irregular,
and  incredibly  confused;  the  use  of  money  was  superseded  in  large
part  by  the  payment  of  feudal  and  manorial  dues  in  personal  services
and  commodities.  The  vast  majority  of  the  population  lived  in
village  communities,  each  of  which  produced  most  of  the  things  its
low  standard  of  living  required,  and  consumed  mo^t  of  its  own
products.  Even  the  kings  and  other  magnates  spent  much  of  their
time  moving  about  from  one  manor  to  another,  eating  up  the  local
produce  on  the  spot.  All  the  more  elaborate  achievements  of  pe-
cuniary organization  had  to  be  won  over  again.

Quite  different  was  the  situation  in  the  area  dominated  by  Con-
stantinople. There  the  money  economy  suffered  no  such  eclipse  as
in  western  and  northern  Europe.  Gold  coinage,  a  banking  system,
manufacturing  on  a  considerable  scale,  a  commerce  which  tapped  the
Orient  on  one  side  and  the  western  Mediterranean  on  the  other  side
were  maintained  and  in  some  respects  elaborated.  It  was  due  largely
to  this  continuation  that  the  reestablishment  of  money  economy  in
western  and  northern  Europe  was  a  far  more  rapid  process  than  its
original  growth,  requiring  scarcely  a  thousand  years.  What  the
Byzantines  had  conserved  they,  and  the  Saracens,  passed  on.  After
the  sack  of  Constantinople  by  crusaders  and  Venetians  in  1204,  and


68  BUSINESS  CYCLES

more  decisively  after  the  capture  of  Constantinople  by  the  Ottoman
Turks  in  1453,  commercial  leadership  passed  to  the  Italian  cities.
Many  merchants  emigrated  to  Venice,  Amalfi,  Genoa,  and  other
towns,  carrying  with  them  their  capital,  as  well  as  their  skill  in
commerce  and  finance.  A  vigorous  development  of  money  economy
began  in  the  lands  bordering  the  western  Mediterranean  and  spread
by  degrees  to  northern  countries.

The  stages  of  this  revival  are  imperfectly  known,  though  they
have  been  lived  through  so  recently.  Economic  history  is  a  young
specialty,  and  the  men  devoted  to  it  have  not  been  fully  alert  to  the
importance  of  pecuniary  institutions.  Nor  do  the  surviving  materials
on  which  their  work  is  based  pay  much  attention  to  the  homely  de-
tails of  the  life  of  the  peasant,  the  craftsman  and  the  merchant,  ex-
cept as  these  humble  people  had  relations  with  their  lords.  Yet
enough  is  known,  particularly  regarding  England,  to  reveal  the  broad
features  of  the  story.

In  economic  development,  the  leaders  were  successively  the  Italian
cities,  Spain,  Southern  Germany,  France  and  the  Low  Countries.
England  lagged  behind  until  the  18th  century,  when  London  finally
displaced  Amsterdam  as  the  greatest  financial  center,  and  the  English
began  to  live  by  making  and  spending  money  incomes  as  generally  as
the  Dutch.  In  a  history  of  money  economy,  English  developments
would  form  but  one  strand  in  a  complicated  fabric — a  strand  which
does  not  fairly  represent"  the  whole.  But  the  very  slowness  of  English
developments  serves  the  present  purpose.  For  that  purpose  is  not  to
sketch  the  history  of  pecuniary  organization  as  a  whole;  but  to  make
clear  the  complex  character  of  the  institutions  which  we  are  wont
to  take  as  a  simple  matter  of  course.  Also,  the  English  have  peculiar
interest  for  us,  because,  when  they  finally  took  the  lead,  pecuniary
organization  was  just  reaching  that  stage  which  ushers  in  the  business
cycles  of  our  historical  record.

Even  in  Anglo-Saxon  times,  the  Enghsh  kings  were  finding  that
the  use  of  money  was  a  more  efficient  method  of  administration  than
levying  upon  commodities  and  requiring  feudal  services.  They  early
began  to  commute  the  duties  in  kind  upon  exports  and  imports,  for
example,  so  many  tuns  of  wine  or  bales  of  wool  in  a  cargo,  into  money
payments,  and  to  collect  in  money  as  much  of  the  internal  taxes,
fines,  and  dues  as  their  officers  could.  The  Danegeld,  for  instance,
was  levied  and  paid  in  silver. The  Anglo-Saxon  kings  struck  a  cur-


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 69

rency  of  silver  pennies  based  on  the  Carolingian  pound.  (It  was  not
until  1343  that  gold  coins  were  issued  in  England  and  the  gold  stand-
ard was  not  established  until  nearly  400  years  more  had  passed.)
Besides  taxing,  the  English  kings  borrowed  on  a  considerable  scale
from  religious  establishments,  from  the  Jews  until  their  expulsion
in  1290,  and  later  from  Italian  merchants  and  bankers  who  did  busi-
ness in  London.

Another  great  step  in  pecuniary  organization  was  taken  when  the
kings  began  to  replace  the  unreliable  feudal  levies  with  paid  profes-
sional soldiers.  This  change  involved  commuting  the  tenant^s  obliga-
tion to  render  military  service  in  person  with  his  retainers  at  his
back  into  money  payments  by  the  tenant-in-chief  and  his  knights.
And  a  similar  change  was  effected  gradually  in  the  management  of
the  crown  lands.  On  royal  manors  the  villeins  were  allowed  to  com-
mute their  dues  in  labor  and  commodities  into  sums  of  money  which
constituted  a  revenue  the  king  could  use  where  convenient.

Meanwhile  the  reorganization  of  life  among  the  common  people
on  the  basis  of  buying  and  selling  was  proceeding  spontaneously  in
the  towns.  Here  the  differentiation  of  crafts  could  develop  only  so
fast  as  the  exchanging  of  products  increased.  As  they  devoted  more
and  more  time  to  their  specialties,  the  master  craftsmen  had  to  buy
their  raw  materials  and  most  of  the  food  for  their  families,  appren-
tices and  in-working  journeymen.  The  towns  were  also  the  centers
of  what  foreign  or  inter-regional  trade  was  carried  on,  and  the  volume
of  such  trade  grew  unsteadily  larger  with  each  generation.  Thus
the  towns  came  to  be  "islands  of  money  economy"  in  a  sea  of  custo-
mary duties  and  rights — foci  from  which  organization  on  a  monetary
basis  diffused  itself  gradually  over  the  countryside.

In  the  rural  districts  the  epochal  change  was  the  extension  of
commutation  into  money  rents  of  the  week-work,  boon-work  and
commodity  payments  required  of  the  masses  of  villeins  and  cotters.
From  the  manors  held  by  the  crown  and  the  great  religious  houses,
this  change  spread  slowly  and  unevenly  to  manors  held  by  lesser
magnates.  The  process  was  piecemeal,  marked  by  pauses  and  spurts,
but  cumulative.  It  was  accompanied  by  the  rise  of  estate  manage-
ment for  revenue,  instead  of  for  subsistence.  More  slowly  still  the
masses  of  the  peasantry  moved,  or  were  shoved,  into  a  new  manner
of  life.  Holdings  of  scattered  strips  in  the  common  fields  were  amal-
gamated into  blocks.  The  waste  lands,  the  commons  and  the  common
fields  themselves  were  enclosed. On  many  manors,  the  old  three-


70  BUSINESS  CYCLES

field  system  of  cultivation  was  abandoned  in  favor  of  the  more  lucra-
tive grazing  of  sheep  for  the  export  commodity,  wool,  and  later  for
methods  involving  more  use  of  fertilizers  and  the  rotation  of  crops.^
Specialization  in  animal  husbandry  and  crops  increased.  Those  of
the  old  population  who  could  not  master  the  new  arts  of  making  and
living  on  money,  sank  to  the  position  of  wage-workers  on  the  land,
or  drifted  away  to  the  towns.  The  more  adaptable  men  turned  into
business-like  farmers,  paying  money  rents,  using  hired  laborers  and
selling  most  of  their  produce.  So  slow  and  so  uneven  was  the  process
of  transformation  that  over  much  of  England  these  changes  were  still
going  on  in  the  18th  and  early  19th  centuries.  Perhaps  four-fifths
of  English  acreage  was  enclosed  after  1760.

Even  by  the  16th  century,  however,  the  uses  of  money  had  devel-
oped far  enough  in  England  to  make  the  inflow  of  Mexican  and  Pe-
ruvian silver  from  Spain  produce  grave  social  results.  The  "price
revolution"  of  the  16th  and  17th  centuries  reduced  the  value  of  the
money  payments  into  which  many  dues  had  been  commuted  and  so
forced  a  reorganization  of  estate  management  upon  many  reluctant
landlords.  On  the  other  hand,  it  gave  increased  opportunities  for
profit  by  dealings  between  the  districts  where  silver  was  abundant
and  the  districts  where  it  was  scanty.  Thus  the  new  supplies  of  the
precious  metals  (for  presently  gold  began  to  come  in  considerable
volume  from  the  Brazilian  placers)  gave  a  powerful  impetus  to
commercial  enterprise.  England,  which  had  been  mainly  a  self-con-
tained agricultural  state,  entered  upon  a  career  of  colonizing,  devel-
oped a  mercantile  marine,  and  in  the  18th  century  became  the
foremost  commercial  power.

As  commerce  increased,  financial  organization  became  more  elabo-
rate. Lending  at  interest,  which  had  been  permitted  only  under  con-
ditions carefully  stipulated  by  the  Church,  became  a  legalized
practice  as  the  benefits  of  investment  of  capital  grew  clearer.  Pres-
ently banking  arose  in  England.  During  the  17th  century  the  London
goldsmiths,  whose  business  with  precious  metals  made  strong  boxes
necessary,  were  resorted  to  more  and  more  frequently  by  merchants
and  other  wealthy  men  for  the  safekeeping  of  moneys.  The  gold-
smiths who  accepted  deposits  found  that  they  were  never  required  to

*  Dr.  Harriett  Bradley  in  The  Enclosures  in  England,  New  York,  1918,  cites  evidence
to  show  that  wool  growing  became  more  profitable  than  wheat  raising  only  on  lands
whose  fertility  had  been  depleted  by  long  continued  cropping.  The  price  of  wool  was
low  in  comparison  with  the  price  of  wheat  during  the  enclosure  period  of  the  15th  and
16th  centuries. See  chapter  ii,  and  pp.  97-100.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 71

pay  back  more  than  a  fraction  of  the  total  in  any  day  or  week.  They
could  make  profits  by  lending  part  of  the  sums  in  their  hands.  To
increase  the  funds  which  they  could  lend,  they  presently  began  to  pay
interest  upon  deposits.  Soon  they  discovered  that  it  was  as  easy  to
lend  their  promises  to  pay  as  it  was  to  lend  coin.  Goldsmiths'  notes
became  familiar  currency  among  well-to-do  people,  and  London  had  a
flourishing  set  of  banks  of  deposit,  lending,  and  issue  some  decades
before  the  Bank  of  England  was  established  in  1694.

With  the  increased  scale  and  growing  intricacy  of  business  dealings,
there  was  need  for  more  accurate  bookkeeping.  On  large  estates  the
stewards  had  perforce  kept  simple  accounts  of  the  work  done  and  the
commodities  received  from  the  numerous  tenantry.  Doubtless  mer-
chants and  many  craftsmen  had  made  more  elaborate  records  of  their
transactions.  But  the  mystery  of  double-entry  bookkeeping — an
Italian  invention  first  published  in  1494 — was  both  a  marked  techni-
cal advance  in  itself  and  an  incitement  to  the  further  improvements
which  led  to  modern  accounting.  That  mystery  'the  mercantile
classes  of  England  began  to  acquire  in  the  16th  century.

Commerce  came  home  to  the  mass  of  English  people  while  it  was
extending  to  the  ends  of  the  earth.  The  periodical  markets  and  fairs,
which  made  such  a  picturesque  feature  of  medieval  life,  became  in-
adequate to  meet  the  needs  as  communities  became  less  self-sufl&cient.
Weekly  markets  became  common,  then  daily  markets,  then  retail
shops.  By  1700  not  only  London  but  also  several  other  towns  had  a
variety  of  shops  doing  business  with  a  wide  clientele.

Lagging  not  very  far  behind  the  development  of  new  economic
practices  came  their  recognition  and  enforcement  at  law.  Through
their  dealings  with  foreign  traders  abroad  and  at  home,  EngUsh  mer-
chants early  became  acquainted  with  the  law  merchant — a  highly
developed  commercial  code  which  had  grown  up  during  the  Middle
Ages  in  the  great  continental  fairs.  In  his  Legal  Foundations  of  Cap-
italism, Professor  John  R.  Commons  has  shown  how  the  English
judges  gradually  reshaped  the  old  feudal  conceptions  of  suzerainty  to
fit  the  nascent  conception  of  private  property  in  land;  how  side  by
side  with  the  law  of  prerogative  they  built  up  the  common  law  to
regulate  the  relations  among  individuals;  how  they  legitimized  prop-
erty in  promises  to  pay,  in  good  will,  in  going  concerns.  The  great
development  of  mercantile  law  by  Chief  Justice  Mansfield  came  in
the  middle  of  the  18th  century.

Trade,  and  to  a  less  extent  mining  and  colonial  schemes,  had  been


72  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  favorite  field  of  what  business  enterprise  appeared  in  the  16th
and  17th  centuries.  Manufacturing,  banking  and  insurance  were
added  to  this  list  in  the  17th  and  18th  centuries.  Capitalistic  organ-
ization of  various  industries,  as  opposed  to  the  earlier  craft  organiza-
tion, developed  with  the  widening  of  markets,  and  the  consequent
opportunity  for  mass  production  and  standardization  of  products.
Thus  it  antedated  the  "Great  Inventions'^  by  two  or  three  genera-
tions. But  the  introduction  of  power  machinery  and  the  building  of
factories  quickened  and  broadened  the  process.  Adam  Smith  could
take  it  for  granted  that  a  capitalist  employer  was  the  typical  figure  in
industry,  just  as  he  took  it  for  granted  that  a  capitaHst  farmer  paying
money  rent  was  the  typical  figure  in  agriculture.  The  proportion  of
men  working  on  their  own  account  shrank  in  all  fields  of  enterprise,
as  did  the  number  who  consumed  their  own  products,  while  the  pro-
portion of  men  working  for  wages  increased.

As  the  scale  of  business  undertakings  grew,  the  one-man  enterprise,
and  even  the  partnership,  became  inadequate.  Large  and  hazardous
ventures  in  foreign  trade  were  carried  on  in  the  15th  and  16th  cen-
turies commonly  by  "regulated  companies"  enjoying  certain  privileges
conferred  by  government,  but  composed  of  merchants  each  of  whom
traded  on  his  own  account.  In  the  latter  half  of  the  16th  century,
the  joint-stock  form  of  organization  began  its  conquering  career  in
England  with  the  Russia  Company  and  the  Adventurers  to  Africa.
The  Bank  of  England  (preceded  by  several  continental  institutions)
adapted  this  form  to  banking  and  it  spread  slowly  to  other  fields.
But  in  1776  Adam  Smith  argued  that,  in  most  lines  of  business,  the
joint-stock  company  was  necessarily  less  efiicient  than  the  simpler
organization  in  which  one  man  or  a  few  partners  were  giving  strict
attention  to  their  personal  interests.  The  enlarged  capital  needs  of
factories,  however,  the  coming  of  railroads  and  the  rapid  growth  in
the  volume  of  business,  so  altered  the  situation  that  within  a  century
after  the  Wealth  of  Nations  was  published  the  joint-stock  company  in
some  of  its  proliferating  variants  became  the  dominating  form  of
business  organization  outside  of  farming,  retail  trade,  and  the  pro-
fessions. The  spread  of  this  form  was  much  more  rapid  after  1862,
when  Parliament  accepted  the  principle  of  limited  liability  of  stock
holders.

An  investment  market  evolved  with  the  growth  of  capital.  Stock-
brokers had  long  been  known  in  London  before  the  great  outburst  of
speculation  in  the  shares  of  the  South  Sea  Company  in  1720. The


I ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 73

,  development  of  their  business  owed  much  to  the  rise  of  high-grade
i  investments,  particularly  the  manifold  forms  of  government  obliga-
tions. In  1773  the  London  brokers  organized  the  Stock  Exchange,
and  so  had  the  financial  machinery  ready  to  handle  the  great  increase
of  investment  and  speculative  transactions  in  securities  which  came
with  the  Napoleonic  Wars,  the  spreading  of  joint-stock  companies,
and  the  building  of  railways.  These  facilities  gave  a  stronger  impetus
and  a  wider  scope  to  two  processes  already  familiar  to  Englishmen.
A  new  leisure  class  of  people  who  had  inherited  "money"  developed
in  each  generation  from  the  families  of  successful  business  men,  and
the  old  leisure  class  of  landowners  could  strengthen  their  position  by
participating  silently  in  business  ventures  or  by  intermarrying  with
the  new  rich.

When  European  settlers  came  to  America  they  brought  with  them
the  monetary  usages  of  their  various  home  countries  in  the  17th  cen-
tury. But  under  the  rough  conditions  of  frontier  life  the  colonists
suffered  a  temporary  recession  to  simpler  forms  of  organization.  They
were  short  of  coin  and  had  to  use  commodity  currencies  at  times —
tobacco,  wampum,  beaver  skins.  They  had  to  live  more  on  their  own,
somewhat  after  the  fashion  of  medieval  villagers;  the  differentiation
of  occupations  was  simpler;  financial  machinery  was  scarcely  needed'
and  scarcely  existed ;  the  chief  business  of  life  was  to  get  enough  food
and  clothing,  to  build  houses  and  clear  land,  to  keep  off  the  Indians.

This  recession  was  relatively  short-lived  on  the  Atlantic  seaboard,
but  it  remained  characteristic  of  life  on  the  westward-moving  frontier
as  long  as  the  frontier  lasted.  Always  the  fur  traders,  the  trappers
and  hunters,  the  early  settlers,  had  to  get  or  make  much  of  what  they
consumed,  though  they  could  draw  upon  trading  posts  for  their  arms,
tools  and  firewater,  and  barter  or  sell  such  of  their  products  as  were
easily  transportable.  Even  the  more  thickly-settled  Eastern  colonies,
despite  their  rapid  progress  in  economic  matters,  continued  to  lag
behind  England  in  the  drastic  thoroughness  with  which  they  prac-
ticed monetary  habits,  and  the  refinement  with  which  they  developed
financial  organization.  It  was  not  until  late  in  the  nineteenth  cen-
tury that  the  United  States  drew  fairly  abreast  of  the  mother  country
in  this  respect.  Even  to-day  our  farming  is  not  quite  so  business-like
as  the  English,  except  for  our  large-scale  ventures  in  cooperative
marketing  of  agricultural  products.  Our  investors  have  not  evolved
or  borrowed  all  of  the  British  institutions  to  look  after  their  interests-


74  BUSINESS  CYCLES

our  foreign  financial  connections  are  le&s  perfect,  and  our  technique
in  foreign  trade  is  inferior.  But  on  the  other  hand,  retail  trade  on
the  whole  is  more  highly  organized  than  in  England,  and  our  indus-
trial corporations  probably  excel  the  English  not  only  in  the  scale
of  their  operations  but  also  in  systematic  organization.

This  sketch  is  all  too  brief  and  too  simple  to  give  an  adequate  im-
pression of  the  way  in  which  the  developing  uses  of  money  have
altered  the  life  of  mankind,  and  how  they  have  fitted  into  the  growth
of  other  institutions,  checking  some  and  stimulating  others.  Still
less  does  it  show  how  the  development  of  monetary  practices  in  Eng-
land was  related  to  the  larger  growth  in  Europe.  But  with  all  its
omissions,  the  sketch  suggests  how  "fearfully  and  wonderfully  made"
is  the  complex  of  pecuniary  practices  which  seems  to  us  so  natural.
The  commutation  of  feudal  dues  into  money  payments,  the  corre-
sponding commutation  of  labor  and  commodity  rents  into  money,  the
development  of  crafts  with  exchange  of  products,  the  rise  of  towns
as  trading  centers,  the  invention  of  banking,  the  growth  of  retail  shops,
the  excogitation  of  business  law,  the  organization  of  joint-stock  com-
panies and  their  rise  to  dominance  in  most  fields  of  business  enter-
prise, the  adoption  of  accounting  as  the  technique  for  controlling
economic  ventures,  the  evolution  of  special  organizations  to  provide
for  investment  and  speculation,  the  differentiation  of  the  whole  popu-
lation into  those  who  live  on  wages,  on  profits,  on  income  from  in-
vestments, or  on  an  income  which  combines  these  types,  the  shifting
of  power  from  men  of  prowess  or  high  birth  to  men  of  great  wealth
or  marked  business  ability,  the  discomforting  of  those  whose  talents
are  not  such  as  to  command  considerable  incomes  in  a  money-making
world — all  these  developments  have  combined  to  produce  the  current
form  of  business  economy.  Nor  can  we  assume  that  this  current  stage
is  the  final  pattern.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  probable  that  pecuniary
institutions  are  now  changing  as  rapidly  as  at  any  period  of  their
long  history.^

^Although  the  literature  of  money  is  reputed  to  be  more  extensive  than  that  upon
any  other  branch  of  economics,  we  have  no  comprehensive  treatise  upon  the  develop-
ment of  pecuniary  institutions.  In  default  of  adequate  guidance,  I  have  had  to  compose
the  best  sketch  I  could  by  piecing  together  bits  drawn  from  many  sources.  To  give  a
list  of  the  books  used  would  take  much  space  and  render  little  help  to  anyone  ac-
quainted with  economic  history.  My  heaviest  obligations  are  to  Dr.  Edwin  F.  Gay  who
made  many  critical  and  constructive  suggestions  concerning  my  first  draft.

I  hope  that  better  equipped  investigators  will  presently  take  up  the  study  of  this
subject,  which  is  as  fascinating  as  it  is  important,  and  which  promises  large  returns  *i?


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 75


4.  When  Business  Cycles  First  Appear.

It  is  not  until  the  uses  of  money  have  reached  an  advanced  stage
m  a  country  that  its  economic  vicissitudes  take  on  the  character  of
business  cycles.

This  remark  does  not  mean  that  the  economic  life  of  communities
with  simpler  organization  is  free  from  crises,  or  from  alternations  of
good  and  bad  times.  On  the  contrary,  life  seems  to  have  been  more
precarious,  economic  fortune  more  fluctuating,  in  a  medieval  town
than  in  a  modern  city.  But  until  a  large  part  of  a  population  is  living
by  getting  and  spending  money  incomes,  producing  wares  on  a  con-
siderable scale  for  wide  markets,  using  credit  devices,  organizing  in
business  enterprises  with  relatively  few  employers  and  many  em-
j  ployees,  the  economic  fluctuations  which  occur  do  not  have  the  char-
acteristics of  business  cycles  described  in  the  preceding  chapter.

If  the  coming  of  business  cycles  depends  upon  the  gradual  devel-
opment of  a  specific  form  of  economic  organization,  it  must  be  dif-
ficult to  date  their  first  appearance  in  any  country  with  precision.
And  so  it  is.  To  take  the  best  explored  case:  Dr.  William  Robert
Scott  of  St.  Andrews  has  made  a  minute  study  of  British  business
records  in  manuscripts,  ofiicial  reports,  books,  pamphlets  and  news-
papers from  the  middle  of  the  16th  century  to  1720.  From  these
materials  he  has  compiled  a  summary  showing  the  periods  of  good  and
bad  trade  and  of  crisis  during  the  163  years  he  has  covered.  The
I  table  on  pages  76  and  77  gives  Scott's  list  of  crises,  and  his  '^remarks"
[  concerning  each.  In  a  few  cases  where  his  entries  are  very  brief,  I
have  added  in  brackets  explanations  drawn  from  his  text.  Also,  I
have  inserted  a  column  showing  the  number  of  years  from  the  be-
ginning of  one  crisis  to  the  beginning  of  the  next.

With  Dr.  Scott's  remarks  upon  English  crises  from  1558  to  1720,
,  we  may  compare  Dr.  Willard  L.  Thorp's  concise  descriptions  of  Eng-
lish crises  from  1793  to  1925,  published  in  the  National  Bureau's
volume  of  Business  Annals, Several  differences  appear.

competent  workers. Anyone  who  contemplates  an  investigation  will  find  that  Georg

.  Simmel's  Philosophie  des  Celdes  (2d  ed.,  Leipzig,  1907)  is  a  most  suggestive  book  to

!  read  before  plunging  into  the  historical  sources. An  interesting  sidelight  upon  devel-

;  opments  in  Europe  is  thrown  by  a  forthcoming  monograph  in  the  Columbia  University

Studies  in  History,  Economics  and  Public  Law:  The  Penetration  of  Money  Economy  in

Japan  and  its  Effects  upon  Social  and  Political  Institutions,  by  Matsuyo  Takizawa.


i


76


BUSINESS  CYCLES


A  List  op  Crises  in  England  from  1558  to  1720
From  William  R.  Scott,  The  Constitution  and  Finance  of  English,  Scottish  and  Irish
Joint'Stock  Companies  to  1720,  vol.  i,  Cambridge,  1912,  pp.  465-467.
"Serious  crises"  are  marked  with  an  asterisk
The  "number  of  years  between  crises"  is  counted  from  the  beginning  of  one crisis
to  the  beginning  of  the  next.

No.  of
Years
between
Dates  of  Crises  Crises  Remarks

155S-9 Famine  1556-8.

1560 2 English  bills  refused  abroad  [because  of  the  financial

difficulties  of  Government].

1563  (Aug.)  to  1564  (Aug.)  *. 3 Plague  (the  number  of  deaths  said  to  be  20,000),

interruption  of  trade  with  Flanders,  famine.

1569  (Jan.)  to  1574  * 6 Seizures of English goods in Flanders, January,

1569,  followed  by  failures.  Norfolk's  insurrection,
December,  1569,  followed  by  failures.  Bad  har-
vests from  1571  to  1574.  It  is  shghtly  uncertain
whether  the  years  1570-4  should  be  classed  as  a
part  of  the  crisis  or  of  the  subsequent  depression.

1586-7  * 17 Babington  plot,  failures,  bad  harvest,  1587.

1596-7  * 10 Famine,  1595-8.

1603  * 7 Plague,  deaths  in  London,  30,561.

1616-17 13 Crisis  in  cloth  trade  [disorganized  by  manipulations

of  James  I].

1620-5  * 4 Effects  of  crisis  in  cloth  trade,  Dutch  competition

in  foreign  trade,  default  of  East  India  and  Russia  i
companies,  bad  harvests,  plague,  deaths  in  Lon-  *
don,  35,403.

1630  * 10 Famine,  tonnage  dispute,  plague,  deaths  in  London,

1,317.  '

1636-7 6 Depression  through  the  monopolies  of  Charles  I,

plague,  deaths  in  London,  10,400.

1640  * 4 Seizure  of  bullion  by  Charles  I. (July),  of  pepper

(Aug.),  plague,  deaths  1,450.

1646-9  * 6 Exhaustion  of  the  country  through  the  Civil  War,

great  dearth,  high  taxation.

1652-4 6 Losses  of  shipping  in  the  Dutch  War,  possibly  too

effects  of  the  Navigation  Act.

1659-60 7 Losses  in  Spanish  War,  especially  in  cloth  trade,

strain  of  continued  high  taxation.

1664  (Winter)  to  1667  (July)* 5 Dutch  War, plague (deaths  68,596), Great  Fire,

Dutch  fleet  in  the  Thames,  1667.  Run  on  bankers.

1672  * 8 Stop  of  the  Exchequer,  failure  of  bankers.

1678 6 Prohibition  of  trade  with  France,  expectation  of  war

with  Holland,  run  on  bankers.

1682 4 Run  on  bankers  occasioned  by  state  of  home  politic9-

foreign  trade  httle  affected.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 77

A  List  op  Crises  in  England  prom  1558  to  1720— Contintied

No.  of
Years
between
Dates  of  Crises  Crises  Remarks

4 Depression  in  cloth  trade,  failure  of  Corporation

bank  [1685,  on  news  of  Monmouth's  rebellion],
foreign  trade  still  fairly  prosperous.

1688 2 Revolution — run  on  bankers.

1696-7  * 8 The  financial  strain  of  the  war,  exaggerated  ideas  of

the  nature  of  credit,  bad  harvests,  suspension  of
cash  payments  by  Bank  of  England,  failure  of
Land  bank  schemes.

1701  (Feb.)  * 5 Tension  between  East  India  companies, political

situation,  run  on  banks  and  consequent  failures.

1704  (Oct.)  to  1708  (Feb.)  *. 3 Losses  in  the  war,  financial  strain,  tension  between

England  and  Scotland,  fears  of  a  French  invasion,
run  on  Bank  of  England.

1710-11  (Winter) 6 Financial  strain  of  the  war,  change  of  ministry.

1714  (Jan.  to  April) 4 Fears  as  to  the  succession,  reported  death  of  Anne,

run  on  Bank  of  England.

1715  (Oct.) 1 Rebellion.

1717  (Jan.  to  March) 2 Walpole's  conversion  scheme.

1718  (Oct.) 1 Fears  of  an  invasion.

1720  (Sept.)  * 2 Panic,  following  the  collapse  of  speculation  [South

Sea  Bubble].

(1)  Dr.  Scott  connects  almost  all  of  the  early  crises  with  famines,
outbreaks  of  the  plague,  wars,  civil  disorders,  irregularities  of  public
finance,  or  high-handed  acts  of  Government.  Dr.  Thorp  notes  the
occurrence  of  bad  harvests,  epidemics,  wars,  political  unrest,  and
changes  in  public  policy  from  time  to  time  in  1790-1925,  and  now
and  then  suggests  a  connection  between  such  events  and  a  crisis.  But
disasters  of  non-business  origin,  which  occupy  the  foreground  in  Dr.
Scott's  remarks,  recede  into  the  background  of  Dr.  Thorp's  account.
They  continue  to  influence  economic  activities ;  but  the  sources  which
Dr.  Thorp  condenses  put  developments  within  the  world  of  business
foremost  among  the  factors  responsible  for  crises.

It  may  be  that,  because  of  shortcomings  in  his  sources.  Dr.  Scott
over-stresses  the  influence  of  "disturbing  causes."  He  has  cheeked
contemporary  opinions  by  actual  business  records  and  by  such  statis-
tics as  he  could  find.  But  these  materials  are  less  abundant  in  his
period  than  they  have  since  become,  and  he  must  depend  in  part
upon  commentators  who  were  prone  to  hold  Government  or  nature
responsible  for  whatever  went  amiss. To  make  sure  that  our  con-


78  BUSINESS  CYCLES

elusions  concerning  the  character  of  earlier  and  of  later  English  crises
are  not  warped  by  differences  between  the  economic  insight  of  ob-
servers in  1558-1720  and  of  observers  in  1790-1926,  we  may  note
further  contrasts  between  the  pictures  drawn  by  Scott  and  Thorp.

(2)  Dr.  Scott  represents  a  fifth  of  his  crises  as  lasting  three  years
or  more— 1569-74,  1620-25,  1646-49,  1652-54,  1664-67,  and  1704-08.
Since  periods  of  ''depressed  trade"  are  entered  in  a  separate  column
of  Scott's  summary,  the  implication  is  that  trade  continued  to  be  not
merely  dull,  but  seriously  disturbed  during  the  periods  cited.  Ref-
erence to  the  fuller  accounts  given  in  Scott's  earlier  chapters  justifies
this  interpretation.  In  Thorp's  annals,  it  is  difficult  to  find  a  parallel
to  these  long  crises.

(3)  In  modern  business  cycles,  the  crisis  or  recession  follows  a
period  of  prosperity.  It  still  happens  occasionally,  that  a  season  of
acute  strain,  such  as  Dr.  Scott  presumably  would  enter  as  a  crisis,
occurs  in  a  period  of  depression.  The  most  striking  recent  instance  is
the  trouble  caused  by  the  outbreak  of  war  in  1914 — an  episode  which
Dr.  Thorp  does  not  list  as  a  crisis,  just  because  it  came  in  the  trough
of  a  cycle  which  had  culminated  in  1913.^  In  Scott's  summary,  no
less  than  12  out  of  30  crises  listed  were  preceded  by  periods,  not  of
prosperity,  but  of  ''depressed  trade."

Of  course,  this  difference  between  the  earlier  and  the  later  crises
is  connected  with  that  first  noted.  It  confirms  Scott's  conclusion
concerning  the  dominant  role  played  in  business  fluctuations  of  16th-
to  18th-century  England  by  non-business  factors.  Crises  which  are
due  primarily  to  such  economic  processes  as  are  considered  in  Chapter
I  can  occur  only  after  prosperity  has  produced  certain  stresses  within
the  business  system.  Crises  which  are  dominated  by  events  of  a  non-
business character  can  occur  equally  well  in  any  phase  of  a  cycle.
Whether  crises  due  to  wars,  famines,  epidemics,  or  the  like  will  occur
more  often  when  trade  is  good  or  when  trade  is  poor,  must  depend
in  the  long  run  upon  the  relative  number  of  fat  and  lean  years.  The
number  of  crises  listed  by  Scott  as  following  years  of  depressed  trade
is  greater  than  the  ratio  of  lean  years  to  fat  years  would  lead  one  to
expect.^

*For  other  cases  of  financial  strain  occurring  during  depressions,  see  below,  Chapter !
IV,  section  iii,  4.

^  As  closely  as  I  can  reckon  from  Scott's  table,  the  periods  of  good  trade  in  1558-1720

covered  about  64  years,  the  periods  of  depressed  trade  about  38  years. On  this  basis,

the  crises  breaking  out  when  trade  is  good  should  have  exceeded  in  number  the  crises

breaking  out  when  trade  was  bad  by  1.8:  1. The  actual  excess  was  not  over  1.5:  1.

This  computation  cannot  be  made  with  precision. Scott  does  not  report  the  con-


J


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 79

(4)  Dr.  Scott  calls  attention  to  the  fact  that

a  time  of  good  trade  tended  to  persist,  once  it  had  set  in,  with
a  long  interval  between  crises,  while  in  the  converse  case  the
interval  between  them  was  reduced.  For  instance,  in  the
eleven  good  years  from  1575  to  1585,  there  was,  as  far  as  is
known,  no  crisis,  again  in  seventeen  prosperous  years  (1603
to  1620),  there  was  only  one,  whereas  in  an  equal  number  of
bad  years  (1586  to  1603)  there  were  three,  and  again  from
1696  to  1708,  there  were  only  four  years  free  from  very  great
disturbances  of  trade.^

Modern  business  history  does  not  run  in  such  considerable
stretches  of  good  times  free  from  crises,  serious  or  mild,  and  of  bad
times  in  which  serious  crises  crowd  one  another.  The  longest  period
of  prosperity  revealed  in  Thorp's  English  annals  for  1793-1920  lasted
only  four  years.  Nowadays  it  is  periods  of  depression  which  "tend
to  persist" — if  that  expression  is  permissible  at  all.  Yet  the  longest
English  depression  in  our  record  lasted  less  than  six  years.*

(5)  The  intervals  between  the  beginnings  of  crises  in  Scott's  list
and  the  intervals  between  recessions  (which  include  both  mild  and
severe  crises)  in  Thorp's  annals  give  similar  averages:  5.6  years  in
1558-1720,  5.8  years  in  1793-1920.  But  the  intervals  are  decidedly
more  irregular  in  the  earlier  period.  They  run  from  1  to  17  years
in  Scott's  list,  from  2  to  10  years  in  Thorp's.  The  coefficient  of
variation — perhaps  the  best  measure  of  variability  for  this  comparison
— is  63  per  cent  in  the  one  case  and  39  per  cent  in  the  other.^

(6)  In  a  business  cycle,  the  order  of  events  is  crisis,  depression,
revival,  prosperity,  and  another  crisis  (or  recession).  That  Scott
does  not  enter  revivals  separately  in  his  summary  means  little;  for
scant  attention  has  commonly  been  given  to  that  least  dramatic  phase
of  the  recurrence.  But  it  is  significant  that  in  only  5  cases  out  of
his  29  does  Scott  report  a  crisis  as  followed  by  depression,  prosperity

dition  of  trade  preceding  the  first  of  his  crises,  1558-9;  he  does  not  always  show  the
month  or  quarter  of  a  year  when  business  conditions  changed;  there  are  several  inter-
vals scattered  through  his  summary,  totaling  some  7^  years,  for  which  he  makes  no
report.

The  time  covered  by  Scott's  30  crises  is  49  years — ^more  than  all  his  periods  of  de-
pressed trade  put  together.

*W.  R.  Scott,  Constitution  and  Finance  of  English,  Scottish  and  Irish  Joint-Stoch
Companies  to  1720,  vol.  i,  Cambridge,  1912,  p.  470.

*  Chapter  IV,  section  iv,  below,  "The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles."

''The  coefficient  of  variation  in  a  statistical  array  is  the  standard  deviation  expressed
as  a  percentage  of  the  arithmetic  mean.  On  the  standard  deviation  see  Chapter  III,
section  v,  1,  "The  Amplitude  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations."


80  BUSINESS  CYCLES

and  another  crisis,  in  the  modern  order.  Eleven  of  his  intervals  be-
tween crises  contain  no  period  of  "good  trade'^*  12  intervals  contain
no  period  of  depression;  one  interval  runs:  crisis,  "good  trade/'  "de-
pressed trade,"  crisis.  No  reasonable  discount  for  the  stereotyping
influence  which  the  concept  of  business  cycles  exercises  upon  the
minds  of  modern  business  annalists  will  reduce  the  record  of  English
business  since  1790  to  such  irregularity  of  sequence  as  Dr.  Scott
records.

It  seems  clear,  then,  that  the  English  crises  of  1558-1720  were  not
business  crises  of  the  modern  type,  and  that  the  intervals  between
these  crises  were  not  occupied  by  business  cycles.^

Were  Dr.  Scott's  investigations  carried  backward  in  time,  they
would  doubtless  continue  to  show  frequent  crises  of  a  sort  as  far  as
records  of  business  transactions  could  be  followed  in  England.  And
since  England  lagged  behind  other  countries  in  developing  business
traffic,  crises  of  the  type  Scott  describes  must  run  back  to  earlier  times
in  the  Low  Countries,  France,  Southern  Germany,  and  the  Italian
towns."^  Still  earlier  chapters  in  the  same  story  appear  in  the  economic
histories  of  Constantinople,  of  Rome,  of  Athens.  Indeed,  we  may
feel  sure  that  crises,  in  the  sense  of  serious  trade  disturbances,  are
just  as  old  as  trade  itself.  They  must  have  been  familiar  phenomena
in  ancient  Babylonia  and  ancient  Egypt.  But  if  the  crises  of  17th-
and  even  18th-century  England  differed  from  the  crises  of  19th-  and
20th-century  England  as  much  as  Dr.  Scott's  results  suggest,  it  seems
most  improbable  that  the  crises  of  earlier  date  in  any  country  re-
sembled recent  crises  closely.  Such  accounts  as  I  have  read  of  early
crises  strengthen  the  inferential  doubt. In  certain  respects  interest-

°In  view  of  the  dififerences  pointed  out  in  the  text,  it  is  not  surprising  that  Dr.
Scott  finds  the  modem  theories  of  crises  inapplicable  to  his  period.  "Occurrence  of
the  unforeseen"  is  the  explanation  which  best  fits  the  facts  in  his  opinion.

It  is  when  the  forecast  of  the  majority  of  traders  is  in  error  that  a  crisis  results.
The  cause  of  the  miscalculation  may  lie  either  mainly  in  the  men  who  judge  or  in
the  events  to  be  judged.  ...  At  later  periods  the  importance  of  man's  judgment
and  calculation  becomes  marked  in  the  period  of  speculative  activity  which  precedes
a  crisis.  But,  prior  to  the  development  of  banking,  such  intense  activity  is  scarcely
to  be  expected.  .  .  .  Analyzing  the  crises  up  to  1720  ...  it  will  be  seen  that,  owing
to  defective  intelligence  in  the  form  of  news  or  to  bad  government,  the  objective
aspect  tends  to  predominate.
See  Joint-Stock  Companies,  vol.  i,  pp.  469-471.

'For  example,  the  second  volume  of  Richard  Ehrenberg's  Das  Zeitalter  der  Fugger
gives  a  most  interesting  account  of  the  great  16th  century  crises  in  Antwerp  and  Lyons,
precipitated  by  the  debt  repudiations  of  the  Spanish,  French  and  Austrian  monarcha.
Not  less  vivid  is  Alfred  Doren's  history  of  the  checkered  fortunes  of  business  in
Florence  at  the  height  of  her  prosperity  in  the  13th  and  14th  centuries.  Studien  aus  der
Florentiner  Wirtschaftsgeschichte,  Stuttgart,  1901;  Entwicklung  und  Organisation  der
Florentiner  Zunfte  in  13.  und  14-  Jahrhundert,  1896.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 81

ing  parallels  can  be  drawn  between  the  business  difficulties  with  which
we  are  familiar,  and  the  business  difficulties  of  which  we  read  iri  early
modern  times,  in  the  Middle  Ages,  or  even  in  classical  antiquity.  But
the  differences  are  striking — most  obviously,  the  difference  in  the
role  played  by  events  of  a  non-business  type.

The  difficulty  of  deciding  when  the  transition  from  crises  domi-
nated by  crop  failures,  epidemics,  wars,  public  finance  and  political
struggles,  to  recurrent  cycles  dominated  by  business  processes  took
place  in  England  is  increased  by  a  gap  in  our  detailed  knowledge.
There  is  no  adequate  record  for  the  years  between  1720,  when  Dr.
Scott  stops,  and  1790,  when  Dr.  Thorp  begins.  Jevons'  list  of  Eng-
lish crises  in  the  18th  century  is  too  meager  and  too  uncertain  to  be
of  much  service.^  The  chief  study  of  later  date,  Mentor  Bouniatian's
Geschichte  der  Handelskrisen  in  England,  1640-1840,  is  based  on  no
such  thorough  examination  of  the  original  sources  as  Scott  made,  and
mentions  only  the  most  impressive  cases.^  Possibly  a  close  year-by-
year  record  of  developments  would  give  a  more  modern  impression
than  does  an  account  limited  to  half-a-dozen  dramatic  episodes.  That
must  remain  uncertain  until  some  thorough  investigator  closes  the
gap  between  Scott  and  Thorp.  Meanwhile,  we  have  Bouniatian^s  opin-
ion that  no  crisis  of  really  modern  type  can  be  found  before  the  close
of  the  18th  century.

According  to  this  authority,  the  next  memorable  crisis  after  1720
occurred  in  1745,  when  the  Pretender  with  his  Highlanders  got  within
120  miles  of  London.  The  end  of  the  Seven  Years  War  was  followed
in  1763  by  lively  speculation  and  collapse.  Again  in  1772,  England
and  Scotland  suffered  a  banking  crash  after  a  period  of  wild  specula-
tion— a  crash  which  extended  next  year  to  Holland,  Hamburg  and
other  continental  centers  of  trade.  Six  years  later,  losses  brought  on
by  war  with  the  American  colonies  caused  serious  difficulties  in  Eng-
land. When  the  war  ended  in  1783,  peace  once  more  gave  rise  to  a
sudden  expansion  of  business,  and  expansion  led  to  a  crisis.  Finally,
in  1793,  came  what  Bouniatian  ventures  to  call  the  first  of  England^s
great  industrial  crises,  followed  by  depression  in  general  business.^®

'"The  Periodicity  of  Commercial  Crises  and  Its  Physical  Explanation,"  1878.  See
W.  S.  Jevons,  Investigations  in  Currency  and  Fi.iance,  London,  1884,  pp.  207-215.

"  Bouniatian's  book  was  published  at  Munich  in  1908.  During  the  period  treated
by  both  Bouniatian  and  Scott  (1640-1720),  the  former  includes  only  five  crises,  the
latter  nineteen.

"Bouniatian,  as  cited  above,  p.  171.


82  BUSINESS  CYCLES

As  further  evidence  of  the  historical  connection  between  business
cycles  and  an  advanced  stage  of  pecuniary  organization,  I  may  refer
to  the  National  Bureau's  collection  of  Business  Annals  at  large,
These  annals  show  that  in  the  countries  which  lag  furthest  behind
in  pecuniary  organization — China,  India,  Brazil,  South  Africa,  Russia
— the  vicissitudes  of  economic  life  have  least  of  business  character.
Droughts  and  floods,  epidemics  among  men  and  cattle,  or  civil  dis-
order are  responsible  for  a  large  part  of  the  economic  troubles  which
are  recorded.  Indeed,  Thorp's  record  for  China  in  1890-1925  is  curi-
ously like  Scott^s  record  for  England  in,  say,  1558-1660.  Such  mis-
fortunes have  consequences  more  serious  in  the  less  business-like  com-
munities than  similar  events  have  in  western  Europe  or  in  North
America.  But,  mingling  with  these  phenomena  of  the  natural  econ-
omy, we  find  even  in  China  indications  that  the  nascent  business
activities  of  the  people  are  subject  to  fluctuations  arising  from  other
sources.  The  merchants  of  the  coast  cities,  at  least,  have  their  share
of  troubles  with  fluctuating  commodity  prices  and  exchange  rates;
some  producers  find  the  export  demand  for  their  produce  falling  and
rising  with  conditions  in  other  countries;  the  banks  feel  the  reaction
of  developments  in  Lombard  and  Wall  Streets.  Thus  the  beginnings  of
business  cycles  in  the  laggard  countries  appear  largely  as  reflections
of  the  cycles  in  more  advanced  countries,  and  are  perhaps  over-
emphasized by  foreign  observers.  But  these  beginnings  promise  to
grow  in  significance  as  the  backward  lands  organize  a  larger  and
larger  part  of  their  economic  life  on  the  basis  of  making  and  spending
money  incomes.


II.  The  Modern  Organization  for  Making  Money.
1. The  Money-Making  Population.

Table  1,  compiled  from  the  Fourteenth  Census  eked  out  by  an
estimate,  shows  broadly  how  the  American  people  use  their  time.

Children  under  ten  years  of  age  form  more  than  a  fifth  of  the
population.  Their  chief  business  is  to  develop  into  future  citizens;
for  the  time  being  they  must  be  cared  for  and  trained  by  adults  in
the  family  and  the  school.  Any  contributions  they  may  make  toward
the  community's  support  are  incidental.

Leaving  out  this  group  of  young  children,  the  census  indicates
that  95  people  in  the  hundred  are  either  getting  educated,  or  are


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 83

contributing  to  the  country's  real  income.  The  money  makers  form
50  per  cent  of  this  group,  the  home  makers  form  27  per  cent,  the
students  form  17  per  cent,  and  those  not  accounted  for  in  the  table
form  5  per  cent.

The  4,610,000  persons  not  accounted  for  include  some  400,000
children  over  9  neither  at  school  nor  at  work,  a  much  larger  number
of  the  infirm  in  body  or  mind,^  the  ''leisure  class''  among  the  rich
and  among  the  poor,  those  reported  as  following  disreputable  occupa-
tions, together  with  workers  concerning  whom  the  enumerators  learned
nothing  but  their  names  and  residences.

TABLE 1

A  Conspectus  op  the  Population  of  the  United  States  in  1920

Not  ac-
counted for,
Keeping  10  years

Total  Attending House  Gainful of  age

Number  School (estimated) Workers and  over

Totals 105,700,000 21,800,000 22,500,000 41,600,000 4,610,000

Under  10  years  of  age

Under  5  years 11,600,000

5-9  years 11,400,000 7,800,000

10-19  years  of  age

10-14  years 10,600,000. 9,800,000 600,000 200,000

15-19  years 9,400,000 3,700,000 1,100,000 4,400,000 200,000

20-64  years  of  age

Males 29,800,000 280,000 28,300,000 1,220,000

Females 28,000,000 210,000 20,100,000 ^,600,000 1,090,000

Over  64  years  of  age

Males 2,500,000 1,500,000 1,000,000

Females 2,400,000 1,300,000 200,000 900,000

In  Percentages  of  the  Total
Population

Totals 100.0%  20.6%  21.3%  39.4%  4.4%

Under  10  years  of  age

Under  5  years 11.0

5-9  years 10.8  7.4

*"The  Department  of  Commerce  announces  that  on  or  about  January  1,  1923,  there
were  893,679  persons  confined  in  Federal,  state,  city,  county  and  private  institutions  for
defectives,  dependents,  criminals,  and  juvenile  delinquents,  hospitals  for  mentally
diseased,  institutions  for  feebleminded  and  epileptics,  homes  for  adults  and  dependent
or  neglected  children,  institutions  for  juvenile  delinquents,  penal  institutions  and  alms-
houses," Of  this  total  229,780  were  children.  Needless  to  say  a  large,  though  unknown,
number  of  the  infirm  in  body  or  mind  are  cared  for  by  their  families  and  do  not  appear
in  a  census  of  institutions.  The  quotation  is  from  an  official  press  release  of  July
14,  1924.


84


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  1  — Continued
A  Conspectus  of  the  Population  op  the  United  States  in  1920


10-19  years  of  age

10-14  years

15-19  years

20-64  years  of  age

Males

Females

Over  64  years  of  age

Males

Females

In  Percentages  of  the  Age  and

Sex  Classes
Under  10  years  of  age

Under  5  years

5-9  years

10-19  years

10-14  years

15-19  years

20-64  years  of  age

Males

Females

Over  64  years  of  age

Males

Females

In  Percentages  of  the  Occupa-
tion Classes

Totals

Under  10  years  of  age

Under  5  years

5-9  years

10-19  years  of  age

10-14  years

15-19  years

20-64  years  of  age

Males

Females

Over  64  years  of  age

Males

Females


Total
Number


10.0
8.9

28.2
26.5

2.4
2.3


100.0
100.0

100.0
100.0

100.0
100.0

100.0
100.0


100.0%

11.0
10.8

10.0
8.9

28.2
26.5

2.4
2.3


Attending
School


9.3
3.5


Keeping

House

(estimated)


1.0


68.4

92.4
39.4

.9

.7


45.0
17.0

1.3
1.0


19.0


1.2


11.7


71.8


54.2


Gainful
Workers


.6
4.2

26.8

6.2

1.4
.2


Not  ac-
counted for,
10  years
of  age
and  over


.2
.2

1.2
1.0

.9
.9


6.7

1.9

46.8

2.1

95.0

4.1

23.6

3.9

60.0

40.0

8.3

37.5

100.0% 100.0% 100.0% 100.0%


35.8


4.9


89.3


5.8


1.4

4.3

10.6

4.3

68.0

26.5

15.9

23.6

3.6

21.7

.5

19.5

Persons  of  unknown  age  are  included  in  the  group  20-64  years  of  age.

Notes  on  Table  1  continued  on  page  85.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 85

The  14,000,000  students  10  years  of  age  and  over  are  made  up
mainly  of  children  under  15.  About  that  age  half  or  more  of  the
children  drop  out  of  school  and  begin  earning  money  or  helping  with
housework.  Less  than  half  a  million  persons  over  19  years  are  re-
ported as  attending  school,  and  not  a  few  of  them  are  also  doing
other  work.

The  22,500,000  housewives  are  mainly  women  in  the  middle  years
of  life;  but  there  seem  to  be  over  a  million  girls  and  a  somewhat
larger  number  of  elderly  women  who  devote  themselves  primarily  to
maintaining  homes  for  their  families.

Finally,  the  41,600,000  money  earners  include  nearly  half  of  the
children  between  15  and  19  years,  not  quite  a  quarter  of  the  women
of  20-64,  nearly  all  of  the  men  within  these  ages,  more  than  half  of
the  older  men  and  a  small  part  of  the  older  women.  Arranged  in
another  way,  the  data  show  that  of  the  gainful  workers  12  per  cent  are
under  20  years,  16  per  cent  are  adult  women,  and  72  per  cent  are  adult
men.

Our  concern,  as  students  of  business  cycles,  is  mainly  with  this
group  of  money  makers.  But  we  must  not  conceive  the  money  makers
as  '^supporting"  the  whole  population ;  housewives  contribute  a  large
slice  of  real  income.  For  the  matter  of  that,  the  work  young  people
do  in  school  is  of  vital  concern  to  economic  welfare  in  the  long  run.
A.nd  as  consumers,  the  whole  population  comes  into  our  reckoning.

Notes  on  Table  1  continued :

The  number  of  women  entered  as  "keeping  house"  without  pay  is  based  on  estimates
kindly  made  at  the  writer's  request  by  Dr.  Alba  M.  Edwards  of  the  Bureau  of  the  Census
and  by  Dr.  Ralph  G.  HurUn  of  the  Russell  Sage  Foundation.  One  of  Dr.  Edwards'
methods,  utilizing  various  population  returns,  yielded  23,000,000  housewives;  the  second,
starting  with  the  number  of  "honies"  reported  by  the  census,  deducting  for  institutions
enumerated  as  homes,  and  for  family  homes  maintained  by  single  men,  paid  housekeepers
and  by  women  having  gainful  occupations,  and  adding  for  homes  managed  by  two  women,
yielded  22,300,000  housewives.  Dr.  Hurlin  also  tried  two  ways  of  approximating  the
number  of  unpaid  housewives.  His  first  method  was  to  estimate  the  number  of  women
occupied  in  other  ways;  by  ehmination,  there  seemed  to  be  some  21,900,000  housewives.
A  second  method,  which  Dr.  Hurlin  prefers,  applies  the  American  ratio  of  private  to  cen-
sus famihes  in  1900  and  the  British  ratio  of  private  families  to  "all  occupiers"  in  1911
to  the  1920  count  of  homes,  and  after  deductions  for  homes  not  managed  by  unpaid  women,
yields  22,500,000  housewives.  The  round  figure  adopted  in  the  table  is  a  little  higher
than  the  mean  of  these  four  estimates.

Some  persons  are  reported  both  as  attending  school  and  as  having  gainful  occupations.
These  cases  are  counted  twice  in  the  table.  Their  number  is  not  known;  but  probably
is  not  large  enough  to  affect  the  results  seriously.  The  gainfully-occupied  women  who  also
keep  house  are  not  counted  as  housekeepers.

The  gainful  workers  include  persons  temporarily  unemployed,  and  inmates  of  institu-
tions who  have  specific  work  to  perform.  They  do  not  include  people  of  independent
means  who  report  no  regular  money-making  occupation.


86  BUSINESS  CYCLES

2.  The  Business  Enterprise.

In  spending  money,  the  family  is  still  the  dominant  unit  of  or-
ganization. But  as  the  dominant  unit  of  organization  for  making
money,  the  family  has  been  definitely  superseded  by  the  business
enterprise,  except  perhaps  in  farming,  petty  trade,  and  the  professions.
The  business  enterprise  commonly  draws  its  members  from  several
or  many  families,  paying  each  individual  a  money  income,  and  weld-
ing them  into  a  new  unit  organized  to  make  profits.

A  business  enterprise  is  an  organization  which  seeks  to  realize
pecuniary  profits  upon  an  investment  of  capital,  by  a  series  of  trans-
actions concerned  with  the  purchase  and  sale  of  goods  in  terms  of
money. ^  The  goods  dealt  in  may  be  commodities  of  any  vendible
kind  from  coal  to  newspapers;  they  may  be  services,  such  as  trans-
portation, storage,  or  technical  advice;  they  may  be  rights,  such  as
bank  credit,  securities,  or  insurance  against  specified  risks.  The
enterprise  may  ''produce,"  or  fabricate,  or  store,  or  transport,  or  dis-
tribute, or  merely  hold  the  title  to  the  goods  in  which  it  deals.

3.  The  Size  of  Business  Enterprises  and
Business  Cycles.

Business  enterprises  of  a  highly  organized  type  have  come  to
t)ccupy  almost  the  whole  field  in  railway  and  marine  transportation.
They  dominate  mining,  lumbering,  construction  work,  warehousing,
most  branches  of  manufacturing,  the  public  utilities  not  managed  by
government,  wholesale  trade,  insurance,  banking  and  finance  at  large.
They  play  an  important,  if  not  a  controlling,  role  in  retail  trade,  jour-
nalism, market  gardening,  fishing,  hotel  keeping,  and  various  amuse^
ment  trades.  They  are  invading  dairying,  fruit  raising,  general  farm-
ing, and  the  learned  professions — engineering,  architecture,  law,  edu-
cation, medicine.

Of  course,  everyone  who  is  working  on  his  own  account — the  ped-l
dler,  the  cobbler,  the  farmer,  the  doctor  and  lawyer,  the  boarding-
house  keeper,  the  newsboy — may  be  regarded  as  running  a  business
enterprise.  All  these  people,  and  those  whom  they  suggest,  get  their}
money  incomes  by  buying  and  selling  goods,  or  by  selling  their  services]
to  numerous  buyers. But  there  are  broad  differences  between  the]

''Compare  Werner  Sombart,  Der  Moderne  Kapitalismus,  1st  ed.,  Leipzig,  1902,  vol,  K
p.  195.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 87

industries  dominated  by  small-scale  and  those  dominated  by  large-
scale  enterprises.  In  commercial  alertness  and  business  method,  in
complexity  of  organization,  in  dependence  upon  the  money  market,
the  typical  farm,  repair  shop,  neighborhood  store,  and  boarding  house
are  in  a  different  class  from  the  enterprises  typical  of  mining,  manu-
facturing, commerce  and  finance.  Most  professional  men  engaged  in
private  practice  hold,  what  some  business  men  deny,  that  there  is  also
a  significant  difference  between  professional  and  commercial  aims.

In  the  study  of  business  cycles,  this  uneven  development  of  busi-
ness enterprise  in  various  fields  is  important.  It  is  within  the  circle
of  full-fledged  business  enterprise  that  the  alternations  of  prosperity
and  depression  appear  most  clearly  and  produce  their  most  striking
effects.  All  of  the  authorities  whose  theories  were  reviewed  in  Chap-
ter I  seem  to  agree  tacitly,  if  not  explicitly,  upon  this  fundamental
point.  They  deal  primarily  with  processes  that  run  their  rounds  with-
in the  centers  of  commerce,  industry,  construction  work,  transporta-
tion, and  finance.  Farming,  the  professions,  personal  service,  repair
work,  and  petty  trade  are  in  the  background  of  the  picture.  Even  the
|writers  who  regard  changes  in  crop  yields  as  the  cause  of  business
fluctuations  are  no  real  exception;  for  while  they  hold  that  cyclical
fluctuations  arise  in  agriculture,  they  recognize  that  these  fluctua-
tions manifest  themselves  chiefly  in  commercial  dealings,  manufac-
turing activity,  transportation,  and  financial  operations.

Statistical  evidence  for  this  view  that  business  cycles  are  pri-
marily phenomena  of  large-scale  enterprise  was  provided  incidentally
in  1923  by  one  of  the  investigations  made  by  the  National  Bureau  of
Economic  Research  for  the  President's  Conference  on  Unemploy-
ment. The  pertinent  results  are  assembled  in  Table  2.  While  the
figures  in  this  table  are  estimates  based  upon  rather  slender  samples;
while  they  refer  to  but  one  cycle  in  one  country,  and  cover  but  one
aspect  of  business — shrinkage  in  the  hours  worked  by  employees  in
depression — they  give  the  most  comprehensive  statistical  view  yet
presented  of  the  relation  between  scale  of  organization  and  degree  of
cyclical  fluctuations.

Two  conclusions  are  indicated  by  the  table.  (1)  When  arranged
according  to  the  severity  of  the  decline  in  employment  after  the  crisis
of  1920,  the  leading  industries  form  three  groups.  Manufacturing,
railroading,  mining,  and  construction  work  were  most  disastrously
affected  by  the  depression. A  second  group,  in  which  the  shrinkage


I


88  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  employment  was  far  less  serious,  but  substantial,  included  finance,
wholesale  trade,  and  transportation  other  than  by  railroad.  These
two  groups  of  industries  constitute  the  sphere  of  business  par  excel-
lence. The  remaining  industries,  among  them  agriculture  and  retail-
ing, are  characterized  by  small-scale  organization,  or  by  the  prom-
inence of  non-commercial  aims,  or  by  both  features. These  industries

TABLE  2

Cyclical  Decline  in  the  Volume  of  Employment  Offered  by  Different  Industries,
AND  BY  Establishments  of  Different  Sizes,  prom  the  Peak  of  Prosperity  in
1920  to  the  Trough  of  Depression  in  1921-22.

Establish-  Establish-  Establish-
ments with  ments  with  ments  with
All  estab- 0-20  21-100 over  100

lishments employees  employees  employees
Per  cent Per  cent Per  cent Per  cent
decline decUne decline decline

Alllndustries 16.50  3.08  13.84  28.23

All  Factories 29.97  8.21  19.21  38.56

Steam  Railways 29.68 »  *  29.68

Extraction  of  Minerals 29.66 «  »  30.18

Building  and  Construction 18.92  14.66  °  »

Finance 7.14  0.00  0.00  25.58

Transportation  other  than  railways 6.77  3.72  9.80  8.17

Wholesale  Trade 5.64  0.00  12.31  7.77

PubUc  and  Professional  Service 4.57 "  <»  *»

Domestic  and  Personal  Service 4.11  5.40  4.48  3.92

Agriculture 3.18  2.15  «  «

Retaa  Trade 2.75  1.31  4.66  10.84

Hand  Trades  other  than  Building 0.00  2.11  4.67

°  Reports  received  from  less  than  20  enterprises.

The  comparisons  are  based  upon  quarterly  reports  from  9,289  enterprises,  and  cover
the  full  years  1920  and  1921,  and  the  first  three  months  of  1922.

Adapted  from  Willford  I.  King,  Employment,  Hours  and  Earnings  in  Prosperity  and
Depression.  United  States,  1920-1922.  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  New
York,  2d  ed.,  1923,  pp.  55-58,  60. (x  have  corrected  a  misprint  in  the  source.)

reduced  the  amount  of  employment  offered  but  slightly.  (2)  The
correspondence  between  scale  of  organization  and  violence  of  fluctua-
tions holds  not  merely  among  industries  as  wholes,  but  also  among  the
establishments  within  an  industry.  As  a  rule,  large  establishments
were  more  affected  by  the  depression  than  medium-sized  establish-
ments, and  the  latter  were  more  affected  than  small  establishments.
These  conclusions  cannot  be  regarded  as  definitely  proven,  until
they  have  stood  the  test  of  further  investigations.  They  harmonize,
however,  not  only  with  the  assumptions  of  theoretical  writers,  bu^


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 89

also  with  what  is  known  about  the  fluctuations  of  prices,  production,
stocks,  and  the  Hke  in  different  industries.  At  a  later  stage,  these
fluctuations  will  be  analyzed  at  length.  In  the  meantime  it  is  impor-
tant to  inquire  what  proportion  of  economic  activity  is  exposed  to  a
large  business-cycle  hazard  and  what  part  to  a  slight  one.

Well  over  one-half  of  all  employees  in  the  United  States  seem  to
depend  for  work  upon  manufacturing,  mining,  railroading  and  build-
ing and  construction,  the  industries  in  which  the  cyclical  oscillations
appear  to  be  most  violent.^  Within  these  industries  probably  three-
fourths  or  more  of  the  employees  are  in  concerns  which  have  over
100  hands — the  subdivision  most  exposed  to  the  business-cycle  haz-
ard.^ The  middle  group  of  industries  shown  in  Table  2  has  a  much
smaller  body  of  employees,  perhaps  as  much  as  one-tenth,  perhaps  as
little  as  one-twentieth  of  the  total.  There  remain  in  the  industries
least  exposed  to  cyclical  fluctuations  something  like  a  third  or  two-
fifths  of  all  wage  and  salary  earners.  And  a  large  majority  of  these
workers  are  employed  in  the  smallest  and  least-affected  class  of
enterprises.^

Very  different  is  the  distribution  of  men  working  on  their  own
account.  Estimates  based  upon  the  1920  census  of  occupations  indi-
cate that  the  number  of  such  persons  in  the  United  States  was  a  little
more  than  10,000,000.^ Certainly  less  than  one-tenth,  perhaps  not

^  See  Dr.  King's  estimate  of  the  number  of  employees  working  in  various  industries
in  1920,  Employment,  Hours  and  Earnings,  p.  20.

J  The  Fourteenth  Census  gives  definite  data  for  manufactures,  mines,  and  quarries,
which  may  be  summarized  thus :

Mantjpacturing  Establishments  and  Mines  and  Quarries:  Classified  Accgrdinq
TO  Number  of  Employees:  United  States,  1919
Number  of  Employees  per Manufacturing  Estab-

EstaShshment hshments  Mines  and  Quarries

Per  cent Per  cent  Per  cent  Per  cent

of of  Total  of  of  Total

Number Employees  Number  Employees

20  or  less 81 10  73  6

21-100 13 19  17  18

Over  100 6 71  10  76

100  100  100  100

Actual  numbers 290,000 9,096,000  21,300  982,000

Compiled  from  Fourteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  vols,  viii,  Manufactures,  p.  90,
and  xi,  Mines  and  Quarries,  p.  31.

All  the  operating  railroads,  of  course,  employ  more  than  100  men.  Concerning  build-
ing and  construction,  the  data  are  meager;  but  Dr.  King  has  made  a  very  rough  estimate
that  in  1920,  not  quite  one-third  of  the  employees  were  working  for  concerns  having  more
than  100  persons  on  the  payrolls. See  Employment,  Hours  and  Earnings,  p.  20.

'  Once  more  see  Dr.  King's  estimates  on  p.  20  of  Employment,  Hours  and  Earnings.

*  See  the  three  estimates  compared  by  Dr.  Leo  Wolman  in  The  Growth  of  American
Trade  Unions,  1880-1923. New  York,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  1924,  pp.


90  BUSINESS  CYCLES

one-twentieth,  of  these  enterprisers  ^  were  in  those  branches  of  busi-
ness most  exposed  to  the  business-cycle  hazard.  About  nine-tenths,  on
the  other  hand,  were  in  the  least  exposed  group  of  industries, —
farming,  retail  trade,  and  professional,  domestic  and  personal  service.®

4.  Economic  Resources  and  the  National  Dividend.

Of  the  vast  array  of  natural  resources  and  man-made  equipment
used  by  our  41,600,000  money-earners  and  our  22,500,000  housewives
— to  keep  the  1920  census  figures  of  Table  1 — many  writers  upon  busi-
ness cycles  have  emphasized  one  category,  and  taken  the  others  for
granted.  Hobson's  theory  of  over-savings  and  over-investment  in
industrial  equipment,  Tugan-Baranovski's  theory  of  the  alternate
accumulation  and  exhaustion  of  loan-funds,  Hull's  theory  of  the
changing  costs  of  construction  work,  the  numerous  theories  which
stress  the  effects  of  extending  plant  capacity,  Foster  and  Catchings*
theory  of  the  inability  of  consumers  to  buy  the  goods  offered  them,  all
build  in  one  way  or  another  upon  a  contrast  between  the  process  of
supplying  current  income  and  the  process  of  increasing  the  appliances
for  future  production.^

To  lay  a  factual  basis  for  testing  these  views,  we  should  find  out
what  we  can  about  the  relative  magnitude  of  (1)  the  value  of  the
equipment  with  which  the  population  works,  (2)  the  income  pro-
duced, and  (3)  the  annual  additions  made  to  working  equipment  out
of  income.  The  present  section  deals  with  the  first  two  magnitudes;
a  later  section  will  deal  with  savings.

For  summaries  of  the  resources  which  the  population  uses  in  its
work,  we  must  turn  to  inventories  of  the  national  wealth. Two  esti-

78-81.  Mr.  Carl  Hookstadt's  figures  cited  here  are  raised  well  above  10,000,000  by  in-
cluding 1,850,119  "home  farm  laborers"  with  the  employers.  Monthly  Labor  Review,
July,  1923,  vol.  xvii,  p.  2,  footnote.

"Of  the  various  aliases  under  which  the  man  who  is  doing  business  on  his  own
account  passes  in  current  economic  literature  (entrepreneur,  undertaker,  capitalist-
employer,  business  man),  the  name  enterpriser  seems  least  objectionable.  It  is  an  old
English  word,  recently  brought  back  into  current  use  at  almost  the  same  time  by
Professors  Frank  A.  Fetter  {Principles  of  Economics,  New  York,  1904),  and  H.  Stanley
Jevons  {Essays  on  Economics,  London,  1905).

"  Compare  the  estimates  given  by  Dr.  W.  I.  King  in  the  first  chapter  of  Dr.  Maurice
Leven's  Distribution  of  Income  by  States,  New  York,  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research,  1925,  and  by  Dr.  Leo  Wolman  in  his  monograph  cited  above,  p.  77.

^  See  the  references  to  the  writers  named  in  Chapter  I,  section  iv.  Among  the  men
who  assign  much  importance  to  the  construction  of  additional  equipment  are  Veblen,
Spiethoff,  Bouniatian,  Aftalion,  J.  M.  Clark,  Robertson,  Cassel,  and  A.  B.  Adams.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 91

mates  for  the  United  States  as  of  December  31,  1922,  have  recently
been  made  by  the  Bureau  of  the  Census  and  the  Federal  Trade  Com-
mission. Both  organizations  recognize  that  their  results  are  rough
approximations  at  best.  The  concept  "national  wealth"  is  so  vague
that  statisticians  differ  about  the  items  to  be  included,  and  about  the
proper  methods  of  ascertaining  values.  Also,  the  data  with  which
they  must  work  leave  much  to  be  desired  in  comprehensiveness  and
accuracy.  Under  such  circumstances,  it  is  not  to  be  expected  that
different  estimates  will  agree  closely,  or  that  any  estimate  can  com-
mand full  confidence.  The  Federal  Trade  Commission's  total  for
1922  is  some  10  per  cent  greater  than  that  of  the  Census,  primarily
because  the  Commission  includes  "land  and  improvements  in  streets
and  public  roads,"  which  the  Census  omits,  and  because  the  Com-
mission values  "public  service  enterprises"  at  46  billion  dollars,  while
the  Census  values  them  at  35  billions.^  But  the  10  per  cent  difference
between  the  two  totals  does  not  represent  the  margin  of  uncertainty
surrounding  both  results.  Accordingly,  I  shall  use  the  figures  only  in
the  broadest  fashion  to  indicate  the  great  classes  of  resources  with
which  the  population  works,  the  order  of  magnitude  among  these
classes,  and  the  relative  value  of  man-made  equipment  and  of  annual
income.

'  See  Estimated  National  Wealth,  Bureau  of  the  Census,  Washington,  1925 ;  National
Wealth  and  Income,  A  Report  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  (Senate  Document
No.  126,  69th  Congress,  1st  session),  Washington,  1926.  The  Federal  Trade  Commis-
sion's estimate  is  rather  a  reworking  of  and  supplement  to  the  basic  Census  figures
than  an  independent  investigation  of  the  whole  field.

With  these  official  estimates  compare  the  inventory  of  "Physical  Property  in  the
United  States"  in  1920,  made  by  Dr.  Walter  Renton  Ingalls,  Wealth  and  Income  of  the
American  People,  2d  ed.,  York,  Pennsylvania,  1923,  p.  79.  Dr.  Ingalls'  total  of  273
billion  dollars  is  18  per  cent  less  than  the  Census  total  and  29  per  cent  less  than  the
Federal  Trade  Commission  total.  These  differences  are  smaller  than  one  would  expect
in  view  of  the  facts  that  (1)  Ingalls'  estimates  are  for  1920,  the  Census  and  Commission
estimates  for  the  end  of  1922;  (2)  Ingalls  used  1913  values,  so  far  as  possible,  the
Census  and  Commission  tried  to  use  current  values;  (3)  Ingalls  made  relatively  freer
use  of  estimates  as  contrasted  with  enumerations,  than  did  the  Census  and  Commission.
(For  example,  to  arrive  at  the  value  of  manufacturing  machinery,  Ingalls  estimated
that  7,750,000  workers  used  plant  of  average  cost  of  $2,000  per  worker,  while  the  Census
summed  up  many  thousands  of  reports  from  manufacturing  enterprises  concerning
the  value  of  their  machinery.)  On  the  other  hand,  it  should  be  noted  (1)  that  the
period  1920-22  included  a  severe  crisis  and  depression,  during  which  the  increase  of
wealth  was  retarded;  (2)  that  the  money  values  of  real  estate,  buildings,  heavy  ma-
chinery, and  the  like  were  far  less  affected  by  price  fluctuations  than  our  current  index
numbers  might  lead  one  to  think,  and  that  none  of  the  estimators  can  hold  rigorously
to  values  of  a  given  date;  (3)  that  several  of  the  items  must  be  guessed  at,  and  it  may
make  little  difference  (as  in  the  machinery  item)  whether  the  guess  is  based  on  elaborate
study  of  a  sample,  or  on  the  estimate  of  an  expert  who  has  had  long  experience  in
valuation  work.  Needless  to  say,  in  some  items  the  percentage  differences  among
the  three  estimates  are  far  larger  than  the  differences  among  the  three  totals.  But  it
is  not  feasible  to  enter  into  details  in  this  place.


92  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Since  our  national  inventories  refer  to  the  end  of  1922,  it  seems
well  to  compare  them  with  the  mean  income  of  the  two  calendar
years,  1922  and  1923.  For  national  income  in  these  years,  we  have
three  estimates,  one  made  by  the  Federal  Trade  Commission,  one
made  by  Dr.  W.  R.  Ingalls,  and  preliminary  figures  made  by  Dr.  W.
I.  King  for  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research.  These  esti-
mates are  not  strictly  comparable;  for  the  Federal  Trade  Commis-
sion and  Dr.  Ingalls  omit  two  items  which  Dr.  King  includes — the
rental  value  of  homes  occupied  by  their  owners  and  interest  upon  the
value  of  consumers'  goods  owned  by  families.  Since  the  inventories
we  are  using  include  both  family  dwellings  and  personal  effects  as
considerable  items  of  national  wealth,  consistency  requires  that  we
include  the  services  rendered  by  these  goods  in  the  income  estimates
which  we  compare  with  the  wealth  estimates.  This  consideration
points  to  the  use  of  King's  figures.  But  King's  figures  for  1922-23  are
preliminary  estimates,  while  the  Federal  Trade  Commission's  figures
are  the  result  of  elaborate  investigation.  It  seems  best,  therefore,  to
use  the  Commission's  estimate  as  basic,  but  to  add  King's  figures  for
the  two  items  in  question.  This  procedure  gives  70  billion  dollars
as  the  average  income  for  1922-23.^

We  may  begin  our  canvass  of  economic  resources  with  an  item  on
which  no  one  can  set  a  price — the  knowledge  which  enables  men  to
use  other  resources  as  they  now  do.  What  count  here  are  not  merely
the  engineering  applications  of  modern  science,  but  also  the  organiz-

'For  the  three  estimates,  see  Walter  Renton  Ingalls,  "An  Estimate  of  National  In-
come for  1925,"  The  Annalist,  September  24,  1926,  p.  395,  and  the  National  Bureau's
News-Bulletin,  February,  1927.

The  figures  for  1922-23  are  as  follows :

Estimates  of  National  Income  in  the  United  States
In  billions  of  Dollars.

Federal  Trade
Ingalls

1922 60.5

1923 71.9

♦Preliminary  estimates,  subject  to  revision.

King's  estimates  for  the  two  items  omitted  by  the  other  authorities  are,  in  billions
of  dollars :

Interest  upon  value  of
Rental  value  of  homes consumers'  goods
occupied  by  owners, owned  by  consum.ers.

1922 1.8  2.6

1923 1.9  2.8

The  addition  of  these  items  to  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  estimates  brings  their
average  for  1922-23  within  P/4  per  cent  of  King's  corresponding  figure  (70.3  billions  ia
one  case  and  71.2  billions  in  the  other).


National  Bureau

Commission

65.6*

61.7

76.8*

69.8

ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 93

ing  capacity  of  business  men,  the  skill  of  mechanics,  the  ability  of
housewives  as  both  managers  and  manual  workers — indeed  the  whole
mass  of  commonplace  and  of  specialized  knowledge  which  enables
people  to  work  in  disciplined  harmony  for  each  other  and  to  make
use  of  each  others'  products.

In  a  discussion  of  secular  trends  in  economic  life,  past  or  future,
this  resource  would  take  first  place.  Man's  ability  to  multiply  and
to  raise  his  standard  of  living,  in  a  world  where  many  natural  re-
sources appear  to  be  exhaustible,  depends  upon  the  progress  of  his
knowledge.  In  treating  business  cycles  we  need  not  face  this  issue  at
large.  Yet  several  of  the  working  hypotheses  which  other  investi-
gators have  suggested  show  that  we  cannot  set  knowledge  aside  as  a
factor  of  no  concern  to  us.  Vogel,  Schumpeter,  Mrs.  England,  and
Cassel  regard  business  cycles  as  by-products  of  progress  in  the  arts
of  production  and  of  business  organization.^

Though  we  cannot  value  the  inestimable,  we  can  make  contact
between  the  maintenance  cost  of  knowledge  and  our  measuring  stick,
the  national  income.  Knowledge  is  one  of  the  resources  which  must
be  continuously  renewed.  According  to  the  occupation  tables,  one
money-earner  in  every  fifty  is  a  school  or  college  teacher,  and  ac-
cording to  the  Educational  Finance  Inquiry  one  fiftieth  of  our  na-
tional income  is  spent  upon  schools.^  But  these  figures  give  a  most
inadequate  impression  of  the  effort  we  make  as  a  nation  to  educate
ourselves.  The  census  figures  of  Table  1  show  that  more  than  a  fifth
of  the  total  population  are  attending  school.  For  every  two  persons
earning  money,  one  person  is  studying.  The  discount  upon  this  com-
parison for  the  brevity  and  irregularity  of  school  attendance  by  many
children  is  partly  offset  by  the  irregularity  of  the  work  done  by  many
adults.  It  is  a  common  aim  of  state  laws  to  give  every  child  eight  or
nine  years  of  schooling.  There  must  be  several  millions  of  Americans
who  have  spent  fifteen  years  or  more  primarily  in  study.^  Nine  years
make  a  fifth,  and  fifteen  years  make  a  third  of  an  active  working  life
of  45  years. And  besides  the  years  we  devote  to  formal  training,  each

*See  Chapter  I,  section  iv.

"  Mabel  Newcomer,  Financial  Statistics  of  Public  Education  in  the  United  States,
(Educational  Finance  Inquiry,  vol.  vi)  New  York,  1924,  pp.  11-29.

Dr.  Newcomer  estimates  the  governmental  expenditures  upon  schools  (1.220  million
dollars  in  1920)  at  1.6  per  cent  of  the  national  income  in  1910,  2.0  per  cent  in  1915,  and
1.7  per  cent  in  1920.  No  one  knows  how  large  are  the  educational  expenditures  of
endowments  and  private  schools.  I  take  one-fiftieth  of  the  national  income  to  indicate
merely  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  money  outlay  upon  this  item.

Table  I  shows  that  in  1920,  490,000  persons  over  19  years  of  age  were  reported  aa
attending  school."


94  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  us  spends  much  time  in  learning  and  in  teaching  others  how  to  do
specific  jobs  at  home  or  where  we  are  employed.

To  all  this  effort  spent  upon  imparting  our  inherited  store  of
knowledge  must  be  added  a  further  item,  much  smaller  in  amount,
but  doubtless  involving  a  direct  money  outlay  of  hundreds  of  millions
annually  upon  efforts  to  improve  and  extend  knowledge.  Here  be^
longs  all  the  energy  put  into  research  proper,  and  the  endless  experi
menting  with  new  devices  and  methods  for  doing  the  world's  work.^

To  come  to  the  tangible  resources:  (1)  In  the  national  inventories
for  1922,  an  item  of  nearly  40  billion  dollars  is  entered  as  ''furniture
and  personal  effects/'  If  we  add  a  rough  figure  for  pleasure  automo^
biles,  this  item  rises  to  42  or  43  billions — say  two-thirds  of  one  year's
national  income.

How  rapidly  the  goods  in  question  are  worn  out  and  replaced  on
the  average,  we  do  not  know.  But  family  budgets  throw  some  light
on  that  problem.  In  1924,  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics
published  tables  summarizing  the  expenditures  of  over  12,000  white
families  living  in  92  industrial  centers,  and  having  incomes  which
averaged  about  $1,500.  Of  their  total  outlays,  23  per  cent  was  spent
for  clothing,  furniture,  furnishings,  and  miscellaneous  items  which
can  be  classified  as  ''personal  effects."  ^  The  representative  value  of
these  figures  is  open  to  question.  Negro  and  farm  families  probably
spend  a  smaller  proportion  of  their  money  for  clothing  and  personal
effects  than  do  white  urban  families ;  but  well-to-do  families  probably
spend  more  than  wage-earners.^  Also,  the  period  covered  by  the
Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics'  budgets — mainly  the  calendar  year  1918 —
was  peculiar  in  several  ways. Hence  we  cannot  trust  wholly  the

''  Secretary  Hoover  has  recently  ventured  the  following  estimates :

"We  are  spending  in  industry,  in  government,  national  and  local,  probably  $200,-
000,000  a  year  in  search  for  applications  of  scientific  knowledge — with  perhaps  30,000
men  engaged  in  the  work  .  .  ,  the  whole  sum  which  we  have  available  to  support  pure
science  research  is  less  than  $10,000,000  a  year,  with  probably  less  than  4,000  men  en-
gaged in  it,  most  of  them  dividing  their  time  between  it  and  teaching."

Herbert  Hoover,  "The  Nation  and  Science,"  Science,  January  14,  1927,  vol.  Ixv,
pp.  26,  27.

*See  "The  Cost  of  Living  in  the  United  States,"  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of
Labor^  Statistics,  No.  357,  p.  5,  and  last  section  of  Table  G.  The  largest  miscellaneous
item  is  "automobiles,  motor  cycles,  bicycles."  The  budgets  were  collected  in  1918-1&
from  places  scattered  over  42  states.

®In  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics'  table  the  percentages  of  outlay  for  clothing,,
furniture  and  furnishings,  and  miscellaneous  objects  all  rise  with  family  income.  Also
see  the  table  on  p.  26  of  the  National  Bureau's  report  on  Income  in  the  Various  States,
1925. These  figures,  compiled  by  Dr.  King,  indicate  that  expenditures  on  automobiles


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 95

conclusions  that  upwards  of  a  quarter  of  family  income  is  spent  for
quasi-durable  consumers'  commodities,  and  that  the  stock  of  these
commodities  on  hand  is  between  two  and  three  years'  purchases.  But
such  are  the  indications  of  what  data  we  have.

(2)  At  all  times  there  is  a  huge  stream  of  raw  materials,  partially-
fabricated  products  and  finished  goods  flowing  through  the  country's
industrial  and  commercial  enterprises  on  its  way  toward  family  or
business  consumers.  The  1922  inventories  value  this  flow  at  about  36
billion  dollars.  That  sum  is  equivalent  to  half  of  the  national  income
in  the  year  concerned,  and  is  not  much  smaller  than  the  value  as-
signed to  the  furniture  and  personal  effects  owned  by  families.

The  contrast  drawn  by  writers  like  Henry  S.  Dennison,  Lawrence
K.  Frank,  T.  W.  Mitchell,  and  Simon  S.  Kuznets  between  the  fairly
even  pace  of  consumer  purchasing  and  the  fluctuating  course  of  pro-
duction suggests  that  the  volume  of  merchandise  and  materials  on
hand,  on  wheels,  and  in  process,  undergoes  large  changes.  The  rough
comparison  which  the  national  inventories  let  us  make  between  the
value  of  "products,  merchandise,  etc."  at  a  given  time  and  the  na-
tional income  for  one  year  indicates  that  a  check  upon  production
need  not  check  consumption  at  once.  But  we  need  more  continuous,
specific,  and  reliable  data  than  an  occasional  inventory  can  give.  For-
tunately, we  have  a  clear  view  of  the  flow  of  goods  in  at  least  one
industry.

By  checking  the  input  of  copper  by  smelters  against  the  deliveries
of  copper  by  refiners,  the  American  Bureau  of  Metal  Statistics  is  able
to  make  a  continuous  record  of  the  flow  of  copper  through  the  metal-
lurgical system.  This  record  commands  the  confidence  even  of  its
compilers — a  virtue  rare  in  industrial  statistics.  The  reports  show  for
the  first  of  each  month  the  quantity  of  copper  at  five  successive  stages
of  its  trip  toward  consumers — blister  at  smelteries,  blister  in  transit,
blister  at  refineries,  metal  in  process  of  being  refined,  and  refined
copper  on  hand  at  refineries.  The  total  tonnage  reported  at  these
five  stages  month  by  month  varies  considerably — for  example,  it
shrank  in  1922  from  427,000  tons  at  the  beginning  of  the  year  to
344,000  tons  at  the  close.  The  general  level  of  the  tonnage  in  this
flow  is  about  one-third  to  one-half  of  the  annual  output  of  virgin
copper.

(including  tires),  books,  clothing,  diamonds,  furs,  house  furnishings,  and  pianos  made
up  about  28  per  cent  of  the  outlays  of  urban  employees,  29  per  cent  of  the  outlays  of
families  spending  $5,000  annually,  and  32  per  cent  of  the  outlays  of  families  spending
$25,000  annually.


96  BUSINESS  CYCLES

All  this  refers  solely  to  the  metallurgical  system,  which  is  con-
strued as  ending  at  the  exit  gates  of  the  refineries.  After  passing
through  these  gates  into  the  manufacturing  system,  copper  travels
to  mills  wherein  by  itself,  or  as  brass,  bronze,  or  nickel  silver,  it  is
made  into  sheets,  rod,  wire,  tubing,  or  castings.  From  the  mills,  basic
fabricated  products  go  partly  into  direct  consumption  (for  example,
electrical  transmission  wire),  but  more  largely  to  other  manufacturer&
who  make  finished  goods,  such  as  electrical  motors  and  automobiles.
Many  products  (for  example,  hardware  and  house  fittings)  pass  from
secondary  manufacturers  through  jobbers  to  the  shelves  of  retailers.
A  complete  report  would  show  copper  in  transit,  in  stock,  in  process,
and  ready  for  delivery  at  each  of  these  supplemental  stages  before  it
passes  into  actual  use  in  a  myriad  of  forms.  Moreover,  in  the  manu-
facturing processes  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  copper  worked
up  passes  into  scrap,  turnings,  borings,  etc.  This  scrap  is  reworked,
so  that  an  appreciable  fraction  of  our  copper  is  continuously  going
round  and  round  in  the  manufacturing  system.  It  is  computed  that
in  1923  the  quantity  of  such  scrap  was  about  one-third  of  the  manu-
facture, which  would  mean  a  lockup  of  about  four  months'  supply  in
this  form  alone,  in  addition  to  the  lockup  of  from  three  months'  to  six
months'  supply  in  the  metallurgical  system.  The  copper  in  transit,  in
processes,  and  in  stock  in  the  manufacturing  and  distributing  systems,
for  which  there  is  no  statistical  accounting,  should  be  added.  The
director  of  the  American  Bureau  of  Metal  Statistics,  Dr.  W.  R.
Ingalls,  believes  that  "the  normal  stock  of  copper  in  the  United
States  is  equivalent  to  something  between  six  months'  and  twelve
months'  production,  and  more  nearly  the  latter  than  the  former."  ^^

How  representative  the  copper  industry  is  in  this  respect,  we  shall
not  know  until  other  industries  develop  similar  statistical  services.
Meantime,  we  may  take  this  case  as  illustrating,  though  not  as  meas-
uring, a  feature  of  economic  activity  too  often  overlooked.

(3)  Business-cycle  theorists  have  concentrated  their  attention  pri-
marily upon  the  next  item — movable  equipment — though  its  value
in  the  inventory  is  a  little  smaller  than  the  value  of  "furniture  and
personal  effects,"  and  only  a  little  larger  than  the  value  put  on
"products,  merchandise,  etc."  As  movable  equipment  we  count  some
16  billion  dollars  worth  of  manufacturing  machinery,  tools,  and  im-

"  See  W.  R.  Ingalls,  Wealth  and  Income  of  the  American  People,  2d  ed.,  1923,  p.  150.
It  is  to  Dr.  Ingalls  that  I  am  indebted  for  information  concerning  the  work  of  the
American  Bureau  of  Metal  Statistics.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 97

plements;  11  to  14  billions  of  public  service  equipment  (apart  from
improvements  upon  land);  6  billions  of  live  stock;  2^/2  billions  of
farm  implements  and  machinery,  and  1  or  2  billion  dollars  worth
of  motor  trucks  and  cars  used  wholly  or  largely  for  business.  The
total  runs  to  about  37  billion  dollars  according  to  the  Census,  and  to
about  40  billions  according  to  the  Federal  Trade  Commission — some-
what over  half  of  one  year's  national  income.

(4)  The  value  of  * 'improvements  upon  land,^^  including  much
besides  buildings,  is  a  highly  conjectural  figure.^ ^  Doubtless  we  are
safe  in  accepting  the  conclusion  that  this  item  is  much  larger  than
any  of  the  preceding,  and  is  every  year  larger  than  the  current  na-
tional income.  The  Census  figures  give  a  total  of  89  billion  dollars;
the  Commission  figures  mount  to  108  bilhons.

(5)  The  value  of  land  itself  is  estimated  by  the  Census  method  at
112  billion  dollars  in  1922,  and  by  the  Commission  method  at  122
billions.  With  these  imposing  sums  we  have  little  concern.  Land
values  are  unquestionably  influenced  by  changes  in  business  activity,
and  excited  real-estate  speculation  is  a  familiar  feature  of  ''booms."
But  what  men  get  out  of  land  year  by  year,  and  what  improvements
they  make  upon  it,  are  matters  of  greater  moment  in  the  study  of
business  cycles  than  are  the  money  values  imputed  to  land.

One  point,  however,  we  should  notice.  On  the  face  of  the  returns,
agriculture  is  capitalized  at  a  higher  figure  than  manufacturing.
According  to  Dr.  King's  figures,  by  1920  the  number  of  money-earners
who  depended  upon  manufactures  for  their  living  had  become  de-
cidedly larger  than  the  number  who  depended  upon  agriculture —
11,500,000  persons  against  8,900,000.^-  Of  machinery  and  implements,
the  factory  workers  used  in  1922  a  value  six  times  that  of  the  farm
workers — 15.8  billion  dollars  against  2.6  billions.  Adding  5.8  billions
for  live  stock  still  leaves  the  farm  workers  with  far  less  movable
equipment.  But  the  value  assigned  to  farm  real  estate  is  more  than
double  that  assigned  to  the  real  estate  used  in  manufacturing — 53
billion  dollars  against  24  billions.  Of  course,  the  farm  is  a  home  as
well  as  an  income-making  enterprise ;  but  even  if  we  subtract  a  fifth
from  the  real-estate  value  of  farms  to  cover  this  item,  we  have  left  a
difference  of  17  or  18  billions  between  agricultural  and  manufacturing
real  estate^ — more  than  enough  to  offset  the  excess  in  the  value  of

^  On  its  derivation,  see  the  Federal  Trade  Commission's  report  on  National  Wealth
and  Income,  pp.  31-34.

"  See  his  introduction  to  Income  in  the  Various  States,  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research,  1925,  pp.  21  and  23.


98  BUSINESS  CYCLES

movable  equipment  used  in  manufacturing.^^  Of  the  real  estate  used
in  these  two  great  branches  of  industry,  it  is  safe  to  assume  that  im-
provements constitute  a  larger  percentage  in  manufacturing  than  in
farming.  Thus  the  high  capitalization  of  agriculture  is  due  wholly  to
the  greater  value  imputed  to  land  itself.  If  we  could  separate  the
value  of  all  man-made  equipment  (including  live  stock)  from  the
value  of  natural  resources,  we  would  find  that  the  average  factory
worker  uses  a  far  larger  stock  of  the  first  in  his  work  than  does  the
average  farm  worker,  but  that  the  nominal  value  of  the  average  farm
worker^s  total  equipment  is  the  greater.

(6)  Finally,  our  inventories  include  a  small  item,  4.3  bilhon  dol-
lars, representing  the  value  of  gold  and  silver  coins  and  bullion.  From
the  national  viewpoint,  this  resource  must  be  regarded  as  part  of  the
permanent  equipment  for  production.  But  it  is  a  peculiar  type  of
equipment.  It  renders  its  service  as  it  changes  ownership,  or  as  it
lies  in  vaults  as  a  ^'reserve''  supporting  a  larger  volume  of  credit
currency.  It  is  one  of  the  most  durable  man-made  resources,  so  that
the  supply  consists  mainly  of  past  accumulations.  The  changes  in
any  country's  stock  during  a  year  are  usually  due  more  to  a  redistri-
bution of  the  world  stock  than  to  fresh  production  minus  wastage.
Both  the  redistribution  and  the  annual  production  of  the  precious
metals  bear  upon  price  fluctuations.  That  fact  secures  this  item,  small
as  it  is  in  comparison  with  other  resources,  a  leading  place  in  studies
of  business  fluctuations.

The  chief  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  this  survey  of  economic
resources  is  that  the  physical,  man-made  equipment  with  which  the
American  population  works  represents  a  value  equivalent  to  between
three  and  four  years'  effort  of  its  money-earners. Barring  land,  the

"  The  estimates  used  are  given  in  a  footnote  on  p.  29  of  the  Federal  Trade  Commis-
sion's report  on  National  Wealth  and  Income.  Even  the  1920  Census  figure  of  44
billion  dollars  for  the  "capital"  of  manufacturing  establishments — a  figure  against  which
the  Bureau  of  the  Census  itself  warns  us — falls  far  short  of  the  value  of  farm  property-
minus  an  allowance  for  farm  homes.  A  third  figure  showing  the  "estimated  value  of
wealth  used  in  corporate  business"  by  manufacturing  industries  (33.7  billions  of  dollars)
is  derived  by  the  Commission  from  tax  reports  made  to  the  Bureau  of  Internal  Revenue
(see  p.  135  of  National  Wealth  and  Income).  According  to  the  Census  of  Manufactures
i'n  1920,  incorporated  enterprises  produced  87.7  per  cent  of  the  total  value  of  manu-
factured goods.  If  we  apply  this  ratio  to  the  above  estimate  of  "the  value  of  wealth
used"  by  manufacturing  corporations,  we  get  some  38  billion  dollars  as  "the  value  of
wealth  used"  by  all  manufacturing  enterprises.  That  figure  agrees  fairly  well  with
the  estimates  used  in  the  text  (15.8  billion  dollars  worth  of  movable  equipment,  plus
24  billion  dollars  worth  of  real  estate).

The  estimate  of  the  value  of  farm  real  estate  in  1922  (53  billions)  was  made  by  the
Department  of  Agriculture.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 99

Bureau  of  the  Census  values  our  tangible  man-made  resources  at  209
billion  dollars  in  1922.  The  Federal  Trade  Commission  puts  the
figure  at  231  billions.^*  To  raise  the  first  estimate  to  three  times  the
national  income  of  1922-23,  we  should  have  to  add  to  it  a  billion
dollars.  To  raise  the  second  estimate  to  four  times  the  national
income  we  should  have  to  add  49  billions.  But  though  our  conclusion
is  protected  by  these  margins  (one  of  which  is  narrow),  we  should
view  it  as  no  more  than  a  rough  approximation  based  upon  imperfect
data.1^

"  A  tabular  recapitulation  of  the  figures  may  be  useful.  I  have  rearranged  the  items
to  serve  the  present  purpose,  but  have  not  altered  the  figures.  The  slight  discrepancies
between  the  totals  entered  and  the  sums  of  the  items  are  due  to  the  dropping  of  fractions.

Estimates  of  the  National  Wealth  of  the  United  States  in  1922
In  billions  of  dollars

Land

Improvements  on  land

Movable  equipment

Live  stock 5.8

Farm  implements  and  machinery 2.6

Manufacturing  implements  and  machinery 15.8

Public  service  equipment 10.6

Motor  cars  and  trucks 2.0

Products  and  merchandise

Furniture  and  personal  effects  (including  automobiles)
Gold  and  silver  coin  and  bullion

Total  man-made  equipment 209  231

Grand  Total 321  353

For  more  detailed  estimates,  see  the  Federal  Trade  Commission's  report  on  National
Wealth  and  Income,  1926,  pp.  28  and  34.

*^  One  would  expect  to  find  the  accumulated  stock  of  wealth  larger  in  proportion  to
current  income  in  western  Europe  than  in  the  United  States.  This  surmise  is  supported
by  computations  based  on  the  data  collected  by  Sir  Josiah  Stamp  in  "The  Wealth  and
Income  of  the  Chief  Powers,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  July,  1919,  vol.
bcxxii,  pp.  441-493.  From  Sir  Josiah's  summary  table  (p.  491)  and  from  land  values
given  in  his  text  (pp.  455,  467  and  475),  the  best  figures  I  can  make  run  as  follows:

Ratio  of  One  Year's  National  Income  to:


United  Kingdom 1914

Germany  1914

France  1914

Australia  1914

United  States 1914

United  States 1922-23

Although  the  results  answer  expectations,  and  although  I  have  included  only  the
countries  for  which  tolerably  good  estimates  of  wealth  and  income  are  available,  the
comparison  is  hazardous. In  particular,  it  seems  that  the  valuation  of  lands  must  be


Federal  Trade

Census

Commission

112

122

89

108

5.8

2.6

15.8

13.6

2.0

37

40

36

36

42

42

4

4

National  Wealth

National

minus  value

Wealth

of  land

6.4

1:5.9

7.7

1:6.1

8.0

1:5.9

5.9

....

5.8

5.0

1:3.3

100  BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  possession  of  this  equipment  gives  a  modern  community
not  only  vastly  enhanced  power  of  producing  income,  but  also  power
to  consume  for  a  time  more  than  it  produces.  Even  a  private  family
can  fall  back  at  need  upon  its  store  of  "furniture  and  private  effects'^
— a  store  which  our  estimates  make  equal  to  nearly  two-thirds  of  a
year's  income  on  the  average.  They  can  suspend  renewals  and  repairs
upon  such  goods,  and  even  turn  some  goods  into  food  at  a  pinch —
though  seldom  without  heavy  loss.  A  farmer  can  sell  part  of  his
live  stock,  let  his  buildings  run  down,  and  make  shift  with  his  old
implements — not  to  speak  of  depleting  the  fertility  of  his  land.  A
business  enterprise  can  pursue  the  same  policy — particularly  it  can
reduce  its  inventories  of  materials,  products  or  merchandise  on  hand.
Of  course,  neglect  of  maintenance  usually  incurs  heavy  economic  pen-
alties; but  there  are  times  when  families  and  business  men  have  no
choice  in  the  matter. They  must  live  "on  their  fat"  for  a  while.

Nor  is  that  all.  While  current  net  additions  to  man-made  equip-
ment are  probably  smaller  in  value  one  year  with  another  than  are
current  renewals,  these  additions  can  be  nearly  suspended  at  need,
and  made  in  large  volume  when  conditions  are  favorable.  In  prac-
tice, the  fluctuations  in  extension  and  betterment  work  doubtless  have
far  larger  amplitudes  than  the  fluctuations  in  repairs  and  renewals.
Added  to  the  latter,  they  make  the  cyclical  swings  in  production  con-
siderably greater  than  the  cyclical  swings  in  consumption.

What  the  present  section  adds  to  common  knowledge  is  that,  in
dealing  with  business  cycles,  (1)  attention  should  be  paid  to  several
types  of  resources  besides  buildings,  machinery,  and  public-utility
equipment,  (2)  account  should  be  taken  of  fluctuations  in  outlay  upon
maintenance,  as  well  as  of  fluctuations  in  outlay  upon  extensions,
and  (3)  the  value  of  all  tangible  man-made  resources  in  use  at  a
given  time  seems  in  the  United  States  to  be  less  than  four  times  the
value  of  one  year's  national  income,  as  that  income  is  usually
reckoned.

5.  The  Interdependence  of  Business  Enterprises.

Every  business  enterprise  for  which  a  set  of  books  is  kept  may  be
treated  as  an  independent  unit. Indeed,  the  Bureau  of  the  Census

made  on  different  principles  in  the  four  countries  for  which  figures  are  given.  On  the
face  of  the  figures,  land  values  make  8  per  cent  of  total  wealth  in  the  United  Kingdom,
21  per  cent  in  Germany,  26  per  cent  in  France,  and  35  per  cent  in  the  United  States.
Probably  the  ratios  of  income  to  total  wealth  are  less  reliable  approximations  than
the  ratios  of  income  to  wealth  minus  land  values.


i


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  101

accepts  this  test  of  separate  bookkeeping  as  its  chief  criterion  in  de-
ciding how  many  ''establishments''  to  recognize  in  its  enumerations  of
mines,  factories  and  farms.  Yet  all  business  enterprises  are  so  bound
to  each  other  by  industrial,  commercial,  and  financial  ties  that  none
can  prosper  and  none  can  suffer  without  affecting  others.

As  an  industrial  plant  handling  commodities,  the  typical  enter-
prise is  one  wheel  in  a  great  machine.  Our  wants  are  supplied  by
series  of  nominally  independent  plants  which  pass  on  goods  to  each
other  in  succession.  One  series,  for  example,  embraces  wheat  farms,
elevators,  railways,  flour  mills,  wholesale  dealers  in  provisions,
bakeries,  and  retail  distributors.  Each  set  of  members  in  such  a  series
is  dependent  upon  the  preceding  set  for  its  chief  supplies  and  upon
the  succeeding  set  for  its  chief  vent.  The  wheat,  as  grain,  flour  and
bread,  flows  through  the  successive  sets  of  enterprises  in  an  unceasing
stream,  though  the  volume  of  flow  is  far  from  steady.

Further,  no  industrial  series  is  self-sufficing.  Each  set  of  enter-
prises in  the  example,  from  farms  to  retail  shops,  is  dependent  upon
other  industrial  series  for  buildings,  machinery,  fuel,  office  supplies,
transportation,  insurance,  professional  services,  and  sundries.  An
especially  intimate  dependence  exists  between  all  other  industrial
enterprises  and  the  railways.  Coal  mining  and  the  steel  trade  also
serve  almost  all  industrial  enterprises  in  one  way  or  another.  So  far,
indeed,  have  industrial  differentiation  and  integration  been  carried
that  "the  whole  concert  of  industrial  operations  is  to  be  taken  as  a
machine  process,  made  up  of  interlocking  detailed  processes,  rather
than  as  a  multiplicity  of  mechanical  appliances  each  doing  its  par-
ticular work  in  severalty."  ^

To  the  public  the  unbroken  flow  of  goods  from  plant  to  plant
until  they  finally  reach  consumers  is  the  matter  of  prime  concern.
But  business  men  are  concerned  more  with  the  commercial  than  with
the  industrial  aspects  of  this  flow.  The  movement  of  goods  through
successive  sets  of  enterprises  which  form  industrial  series,  and  between
enterprises  which  belong  to  different  industries,  is  maintained  by
purchase  and  sale.  Hence  the  commercial  bonds  which  unite  business
enterprises  to  one  another  in  varying  degrees  of  intimacy.  Each  enter-
prise is  affected  by  the  fortunes  of  its  customers,  its  competitors,  and
the  purveyors  of  its  supplies.

*Thorstein  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  New  York,  1904,  p.  7.


102  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Financial  interdependence  is  in  part  but  a  third  aspect  of  these
industrial-commercial  bonds.  Complicated  relationships  of  creditor
and  debtor  arise  from  the  purchase  and  sale  of  goods  upon  credit,
and  make  the  disaster  of  one  enterprise  a  menace  to  many.  On  this
financial  side  of  their  operations,  the  banks  bear  a  relation  to  all
other  enterprises  not  unlike  that  which  the  railways  bear  on  the
industrial  side;  for  most  enterprises  need  bank  credit  not  less  than
they  need  freight  service.  As  a  serious  congestion  of  railway  trafiic
applies  the  brake  to  industrial  operations,  so  any  hampering  of  bank-
ing operations  applies  the  brake  to  business  dealings.

There  is  a  further  set  of  financial  bonds  which  need  not  run
parallel  with  industrial-commercial  relationships.  The  corporate
form  of  business  organization  facilitates  the  acquisition  of  common
ownership  in  enterprises  nominally  independent  of  each  other.  The
same  capitalist  or  group  of  capitalists  often  owns  a  large  or  even  a
controlling  interest  in  companies  doing  different  kinds  of  business,  or
the  same  kind  in  different  places.  Thus  the  selling  agent  may  acquire
an  interest  in  the  factory  whose  output  he  handles ;  the  manufacturer
may  open  his  own  retail  stores,  or  buy  stock  in  a  competing  company,
or  secure  his  raw  materials  by  taking  over  timber  lands  or  mines ;  the
large  capitalist  may  invest  in  steel  and  real  estate,  in  railways  and
banks,  in  newspapers  and  hotels,  in  mines  and  moving  pictures.  Thus
ulso  we  have  our  chain  shops,  chain  banks,  chain  newspapers,  chain
theaters,  chain  lumberyards,  and  the  like.  Often  the  financial  bond
is  made  less  personal,  but  more  direct,  by  one  corporation  holding
stock  in  tributary  or  even  in  rival 'companies.

How  dominant  the  corporate  form  of  organization  has  become  in
certain  fields,  the  census  shows.  In  1920  corporations  owned  32  per
cent  of  American  manufacturing  establishments,  employed  87  per
cent  of  the  wage-earners  and  turned  out  88  per  cent  of  the  value
produced.  In  mining,  corporations  were  even  more  important,  own-
ing 51  per  cent  of  the  mines,  employing  94  per  cent  of  the  men,  and
producing  94  per  cent  of  the  product.^  Of  course  in  railway  trans-
portation corporations  cover  the  whole  field,  and  they  probably  do
more  than  half  of  the  business  in  all  branches  characterized  by  large-
scale  organization.  In  1920,  345,600  corporations  filed  tax  returns
showing  an  aggregate  gross  income  of  some  $126,000,000,000.^ Even

*  Fourteenth  Census  of  the  United  States,  vol.  viii,  Manufactures,  p.  119,  and  vol.
xi,  Mines  and  Quarries,  p.  29.

^Statistics  of  Income  from  Returns  of  Net  Income  for  1920.  United  States  Internal
Revenue,  p.  61. The  gross  income  of  all  corporations  has  been  increased  as  suggested  on


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  103

in  agriculture,  retail  trade,  domestic,  personal  and  professional  service,
corporations  cut  an  appreciable  figure.^

The  tangle  of  financial  relationships  among  business  enterprises
which  has  arisen  from  the  prevalence  of  corporate  organization  is  so
complicated  that  it  never  has  been,  and  perhaps  cannot  be,  adequately-
represented  in  figures.  Many  corporations  are  owned,  in  whole  or  in
large  part,  by  some  parent  company  or  holding  concern.  In  other
cases,  formerly  independent  enterprises  have  cemented  a  financial
alliance  by  exchanging  stocks.  In  still  other  cases,  two  or  more  com-
panies are  owned  largely  by  a  common  group  of  stockholders.  Some
of  these  financial  bonds  are  close  and  permanent,  others  are  loose
and  shifting.  The  reasons  for  the  financial  alliance,  whatever  its
form,  are  sometimes  far  from  obvious — business  makes  strange  bed
fellows  as  well  as  politics.^  The  alliance  may  be  used  to  safeguard
the  interests  of  all  the  participants,  or  it  may  result  from  and  be
used  to  enhance  the  power  and  profit  of  some  preponderating  interest.
Under  the  corporate  form  of  organization  an  investor  may  reduce
his  risks  by  spreading  his  holdings  among  numerous  enterprises  and
industries;  a  corporation  may  enlist  the  interest  of  thousands  of
customers  or  employees  in  its  welfare  by  seeking  a  wide  distribution
of  its  shares ;  a  group  of  financiers  which  has  won  prestige  may  con-
trol the  use  of  business  capital  far  larger  than  its  members  own;
unscrupulous  managers  may  run  an  enterprise  primarily  for  their
personal  advantage  through  stock-exchange  operations  in  its  securities
or  through  corrupt  bargains  with  other  concerns  in  which  they  hold
shares.  These  are  indeed  but  suggestive  examples  of  the  many  oppor-
tunities, wholesome  or  injurious,  which  the  rise  of  joint-stock  com-
panies has  brought  to  the  denizens  of  a  business  economy.

The  one  fact  of  commanding  importance  for  the  present  purpose
which  emerges  from  this  tangle  of  relationships  and  opportunities  is
that  interlocking  ownership  organizes  many  nominally  independent
enterprises  into  communities  of  interest.  While  such  bonds  are  far
less  comprehensive  than  the  industrial-commercial-credit  bonds  which

p.  8  of  this  document,  to  correct  the  incomplete  returns  of  railroad  and  other  public
utility  corporations.

*The  number  of  corporations  reporting  in  these  fields  were  as  follows:  farming,
12,376;  retail  trade,  not  including  department  stores,  50,604;  domestic  service,  7,298  £
amusements,  5,258;  professional  and  other  service,  10,510. See  as  above,  pp.  62-69.

''Compare  the  diverse  reasons  found  by  Dr.  Willard  L.  Thorp  for  the  formation  of
"central-office  concerns" — groups  of  industrial  establishments  operated  from  a  single
office.  The  Integration  of  Industrial  Operation,  Census  Monographs,  iii,  Washington,
1924,  pp.  159-265.


104  BUSINESS  CYCLES

embrace  practically  all  enterprises,  they  are  important,  both  because
they  affect  particularly  the  largest  corporations,  and  because  they
give  to  close-knit  groups  enhanced  strategic  influence  upon  business
activity  as  a  whole.

Besides  the  close  bonds  based  upon  commercial  dealings,  credit
arrangements  and  ownership,  there  are  looser  ties  which  make  the
fortunes  of  business  enterprises  interdependent.

(1)  Business  enterprises  must  buy  what  they  need  in  a  common
market,  and  compete  against  each  other  for  possession  of  the  common
stock  of  the  numerous  goods  which  almost  every  enterprise  requires.
Among  these  goods  we  must  list  not  only  railway  transportation,  coal,
steel  and  bank  credit,  but  also  many  other  widely  used  commodities,
investment  funds,  land,  common  labor,  and  certain  highly  skilled
services,  for  example,  those  of  business  executives,  salesmen,  engi-
neers, lawyers,  and  accountants.  When  business  is  slack  this  inter-
relation through  dependence  upon  a  common  source  of  supply  is
scarcely  noticed;  but  at  the  peak  of  an  intense  boom  its  importance
becomes  manifest.

(2)  Business  enterprises  must  also  sell  in  a  common  market,  bid-
ding against  each  other  for  the  money  of  customers.  This  tie  be-
comes closest  in  periods  of  depression.  It  is  not  simply  that  the
clothier  feels  the  competition  of  his  trade  rival,  but  also  that  the
clothing  industry  feels  the  competition  of  the  automobile  industry,
theaters  fear  the  inroads  of  motion  pictures  and  radios  upon  their
market,  insurance  companies  find  their  claims  upon  family  incomes
endangered  by  the  claims  of  landlords,  labor  unions  and  the  makers
of  automatic  machines  contest  for  the  same  work,  and  so  on.

(3)  If  in  these  two  respects  the  relations  of  business  enterprises
are  competitive,  it  is  not  less  true  that  business  enterprises  draw
their  support  from  one  another.  All  business  depends  in  the  last  resort
upon  the  demands  of  personal  consumers^ — even  the  enterprises  which
make  products  like  mining  machinery  or  bank  equipment.  And  the
bulk  of  the  incomes  which  enable  consumers  to  buy  are  incomes  dis-
bursed by  business  enterprises  as  wages,  rents,  interest  or  profits.
Any  serious  reduction  in  the  flow  of  incomes  from  business  enterprises
to  consumers  reacts  promptly  upon  the  concerns  which  provide  con-
sumers' goods  and  through  them  upon  the  corxcerns  which  cater  to
business  needs.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  105

All  the  interrelations  among  business  enterprises  here  spoken  of
are  matters  of  common  knowledge.  But  since  the  study  of  business
cycles  is  concerned  with  the  spreading  of  given  changes  from  their
points  of  origin,  it  is  well  to  note  explicitly  the  variety  of  the  bonds
which  unite  all  the  enterprises  of  a  country  into  a  loose  system.  For
these  bonds  are  also  channels  through  which  the  quickening  or  slack-
ening of  activity  in  one  part  of  a  business  economy  spreads  to  other
parts.

6. Profits  as  the  Clue  to  Business  Fluctuations.

Not  less  important  for  the  present  purpose  than  the  interrelations
among  all  business  enterprises,  is  the  relation  between  the  making  of
goods  and  the  making  of  money  within  each  enterprise.  A  business
enterprise  can  serve  the  community  by  making  goods  only  on  condi-
tion that,  over  a  period  of  years,  its  operations  yield  a  profit.^

The  subordination  of  service  to  money-making  is  not  grounded
in  the  mercenary  motives  of  business  men,  but  is  one  of  the  neces-
sary results  of  pecuniary  organization.  A  business  man  may  be  aa
public  spirited  or  as  scientifically  minded  as  any  one  in  the  com-
munity, he  may  get  his  personal  satisfaction  chiefly  from  the  contribu-
tion his  enterprise  renders  to  human  well-being;  yet  he  must  so  order
affairs  that  his  receipts  exceed  his  expenses,  or  he  will  be  put  out  of
business  and  lose  his  chance  to  render  service.  Probably  in  the  long
run  scrupulous  maintenance  of  quality  of  output,  avoidance  of  all
misrepresentation,  fairness  in  dealing  with  customers,  liberal 'treat-
ment of  employees,  and  similar  policies  conducive  to  well-being  are
more  profitable  in  dollars  and  cents  than  are  sharp  practices.  Prob-
ably the  man  who  thinks  of  little  else  than  the  money  he  is  making
on  each  deal  is  less  likely  to  achieve  large  business  success  than  the
man  who  thinks  much  about  the  wants  of  others  and  how  they  can
be  satisfied.  But  the  fact  remains  that  the  survival  or  extinction  of
a  business  enterprise  or  policy  is  determined  by  a  financial  test.  Only
Government  and  philanthropy  can  provide  services  which  do  not

*  Of  course  there  are  ways  of  making  money  which  contribute  nothing  toward  human
welfare,  and  ways  which  are  detrimental  to  welfare.  Business  men  themselves,  social
reformers,  legislators,  and  the  courts  are  continually  striving  to  check  abuses  as  they
develop,  or  as  they  are  recognized,  by  amending  the  rules  of  the  business  game.  In
this^  process  of  modifying  the  business  economy,  the  results  of  economic  analysis  play
a  role.  But  in  trying  to  understand  how  business  cycles  develop,  it  is  confusing  to  mix
considerations  of  welfare  with  considerations  of  process.


106  BUSINESS  CYCLES

pay.  In  business  the  useful  goods  produced  by  an  enterprise  are  not
the  ends  of  endeavor,  but  the  means  toward  earning  profits.  And
the  business  economy  ruthlessly  enforces  that  subordination.

The  profits  which  count  in  determining  solvency  are  not  merely
the  profits  or  losses  realized  in  the  recent  past,  but  also  the  profits
anticipated  in  the  near  future.  Indeed,  business  looks  forward  more
than  it  looks  backward.  Even  a  concern  which  has  been  losing  money
for  several  years  is  likely  to  get  the  financial  support  required  for
continued  operations,  if  its  principals  and  backers  believe  that  its
fortunes  will  mend.  And  anticipated  profits  play  the  decisive  role  in
fixing  the  direction  to  be  taken  by  business  expansion.  It  is  the  enter-
prises with  faith  in  their  future  which  finance  extensions  out  of  their
own  funds  or  out  of  funds  borrowed  from  investors.  Among  the  new
ventures  continually  being  organized  by  promoters,  it  is  the  ones
which  people  with  money  to  invest  think  likely  to  prove  most  profit-
able that  get  beyond  the  paper  stage.^  Finally,  it  is  at  those  stages
of  business  cycles  when  the  profits  anticipated  from  such  operations
are  most  attractive  that  extensions  of  old  and  launchings  of  new  enter-
prises reach  their  highest  points.

It  follows  that  an  account  of  economic  fluctuations  in  a  business
economy  must  deal  primarily  with  business  conditions — with  the
pecuniary  aspect  of  economic  activity.  This  conclusion  runs  counter
to  one  of  the  traditions  of  economic  theory.  Most  economists  have
exphcitly  subordinated  the  pecuniary  aspect  of  behavior,  on  the
ground  that  money  is  merely  a  symbol  the  use  of  which  makes  no
difference  save  one  of  convenience,  so  long  as  the  monetary  system
is  not  in  disorder.^  The  classical  masters  and  the  masters  of  utility
analysis  thought  that  they  were  delving  deeper  into  the  secrets  of
behavior  when,  with  scarcely  a  glance  at  the  ^'money  surface  of
things,"  they  took  up  the  labor  and  commodities,  or  the  sacrifices
and  utilities,  which  they  held  to  be  the  controlling  factors.  When
followed  in  the  present  field  of  study,  this  practice  diverts  attention

'Men  can  often  be  induced  to  put  money  into  ventures  in  public  welfare  which
promise  only  a  meager  return — for  example,  model  tenements  or  liberty  bonds; — •
but  such  mixing  of  philanthropy  or  patriotism  with  business  is  limited  in  scale,  except
in  great  national  crises.

^  Compare  John  Stuart  Mill's  dicta  to  this  effect,  Principles  of  Political  Economy,
book  iii,  chapter  vii  (Ashley's  edition,  1909,  pp.  483-488).  See  also  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,
"The  Role  of  Money  in  Economic  Theory,"  American  Economic  Review,  Supplement,
March,  1916,  vol.  vi,  pp.  140-161.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 107

from  the  way  in  which  business  cycles  come  about,  and  concentrates
attention  upon  alleged  non-business  causes  of  fluctuation.

Of  course,  business  prospects  are  continually  being  influenced  by
changes  in  crops,  and  in  methods  of  manufacturing,  storing,  shipping
and  distributing  goods — as  well  as  by  changes  in  politics,  fashion,
education,  recreation,  and  health.  But  it  is  only  as  these  changes
affect  the  prospects  of  making  money  that  they  affect  business  activ-
ity. To  take  profits  as  the  leading  clue  to  business  cycles  does  not
rule  out  in  advance  causes  of  fluctuation  which  arise  from  non-
business sources;  what  it  does  is  to  focus  attention  upon  the  process
through  which  any  cause  that  stimulates  or  retards  activity  in  a
business  economy  must  exercise  its  influence.  And  that  is  a  desirable
result.  For  it  is  only  by  study  of  the  processes  concerned  that  we
stand  much  chance  of  discovering  how  recurrent  business  fluctuations
come  about.


7. Factors  Affecting  Business  Profits.

Economic  activity  in  a  money-making  world,  then,  depends  upon
the  factors  which  affect  present  or  prospective  profits.  Profits  are
made  by  connected  series  of  purchases  and  sales  of  goods — whether
in  merchandising  or  manufacturing,  mining  or  farming,  railroading
or  insurance.  Accordingly,  the  margins  between  the  prices  at  which
goods  can  be  bought  and  products  sold  are  one  fundamental  condi-
tion of  business  activity.  Closely  connected  with  price  margins  is
the  second  fundamental  condition — the  present  and  prospective
volume  of  transactions.

Just  as  the  ever-recurring  changes  in  prices  affect  business  activity
and  through  it  the  volume  of  goods  produced  and  distributed,  so  do
changes  in  the  volume  of  business  react  upon  prices.  A  period  of
expansion  starts  an  interminable  series  of  readjustments  in  the  prices
of  various  goods.  These  readjustments  in  their  turn  alter  the
pecuniary  prospects  of  the  business  enterprises  which  buy  or  sell
the  commodities  affected  and  lead  to  new  changes  in  the  volume  of
trade.  As  the  latter  changes  take  place,  the  whole  process  keeps
starting  over  again.  Prices  once  more  undergo  an  uneven  readjust-
ment, prospects  of  profits  become  brighter  or  darker,  the  volume  of
transactions  expands  or  contracts,  prices  feel  the  reflex  influences  of
the  new  situation — and  so  on  without  end.


108  BUSINESS  CYCLES


III. The  System  of  Prices.

The  prices  ruHng  at  any  moment  for  the  infinite  variety  of  com-
modities, services,  and  rights  which  are  being  bought  and  sold
constitute  a  system  in  the  full  meaning  of  that  term.  That  is,  the
prices  paid  for  goods  of  all  sorts  are  so  related  to  each  other  as  to
make  a  regular  and  connected  whole.  Our  knowledge  of  these  rela-
tions is  curiously  inexact,  for  a  matter  so  important  and  so  open  to
investigation.  1  What  follows  is  merely  a  sketch  designed  to  indicate
the  organic  character  of  the  relationships  among  different  parts  of
the  system  of  prices.

1. The  Prices  of  Consumers'  Commodities.

The  prices  which  retail  merchants  charge  for  consumers'  com-
modities afford  the  best  starting-point  for  a  survey  of  this  system.

For  most  commodities  in  a  given  market  at  a  given  time,  there
is  not  a  single  retail  price,  but  a  variety  of  retail  prices.  It  is  only
by  an  elaborate  policy  devised  for  the  purpose,  that  a  uniform  price
can  be  maintained,  and  the  frequent  infractions  of  price-maintenance
schemes  attest  the  strength  of  the  commercial  forces  which  make  for
price  variety.  Yet  the  differences  among  the  prices  charged  for  the
same  article  by  various  shops  are  kept  within  fairly  definite  limits.
For  inexpensive  articles,  the  differences  may  form  a  large  percentage
of  the  mean  price,  but  they  seldom  amount  to  many  cents.  For
costly  articles,  the  differences  may  amount  to  many  dollars,  but  they
seldom  form  a  large  percentage  of  the  mean.  In  other  words,  though
the  retail  prices  at  which  a  given  article  is  sold  by  different  shops
on  the  same  day  in  the  same  town  are  not  identical  in  the  majority
of  cases,  they  are  closely  related  to  each  other.

A  much  looser,  but  still  significant,  bond  connects  the  retail  prices
charged  for  goods  of  unlike  kinds.  An  advance  in  the  price  of  any
commodity  usually  diverts  a  part  of  the  demand  for  it  to  other  com-
modities which  can  be  used  as  substitutes  in  certain  of  its  uses,  and
thus  creates  business  conditions  which  favor  an  advance  in  the  price
of  the  substitutes.

*At  the  present  time,  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  is  carrying  on
certain  studies  in  this  neglected  field.  The  investigator  in  charge,  Dr.  Frederick  C.
Mills,  hopes  to  have  his  first  results  ready  for  submission  to  the  directors  with  a
view  to  publication  before  the  end  of  1927.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES 109

Retail  prices  are  also  related  to  the  prices  for  the  same  goods
which  shopkeepers  pay  to  wholesale  merchants  and  the  latter  to
manufacturers.  In  most  cases,  the  wholesale  prices  for  a  given  article,
also  constitute  arrays  rather  than  single  quotations.  The  series  of
successively  smaller  prices  for  the  same  commodities  in  different
hands  often  has  more  or  less  than  three  members,  because  of  the
intervention  of  more  than  one  wholesaler  or  jobber,  or  of  an  importer
in  the  traffic,  or  because  of  direct  selling  by  manufacturers  to  retailers
or  even  to  consumers.

There  is  wide  diversity  in  the  margins  between  the  successive
prices  in  these  series.  The  margins  are  generally  wider  in  retail  than
in  wholesale  trade;  wider  in  ''charge-and-deliver"  than  in  "cash-and-
carry"  shops ;  wider  on  goods  limited  in  sale,  slow  in  turnover,  perish-
able, sold  in  small  lots,  requiring  a  large  assortment,  subject  to
changes  in  fashion  or  season,  than  on  durable,  standardized  staples
handled  in  bulk.^  A  manufacturer  who  sells  directly  to  consumers
must  charge  a  wider  margin  than  does  any  one  of  the  several  dealers
who  commonly  intervene.  Perhaps  also  the  margins  average  wider
when  a  large  advertiser  or  quasi-monopolist  dominates  a  trade  than
under  conditions  of  keen  competition;  that  is  not  certain,  for  com-
petition may  be  carried  to  a  pitch  which  leaves  each  enterprise  with
so  small  a  volume  of  business,  or  with  such  heavy  selling  expenses,
that  wide  margins  between  buying  and  selling  prices  are  made  neces-
sary for  all  concerned.  It  is  notorious  that  wide  margins  do  not
always  mean  large  profits.

These  diversities  in  the  margins  are  themselves  established  and
kept  tolerably  regular  by  the  quest  of  profits.  Controlled  in  this
way,  the  margins  between  the  successive  prices  in  the  series  for  each
kind  of  consumers'  commodities  form  a  feasible  basis  for  making
money  out  of  the  process  of  supplying  the  community  with  the  goods
it  uses.

*  Recent  investigations  by  the  Bureau  of  Agricultural  Economics  and  the  Port  of
New  York  Authority  have  shown  that  the  factor  of  chief  moment  in  fixing  retailers'
margins  upon  perishable  food  products  is  the  average  size  of  the  package  sold.  Seem-
ingly, the  retailer  must  impose  a  service  charge,  which  varies  little  from  the  mean,  10
cents,  upon  every  package  handed  to  a  customer.  On  goods  usually  sold  in  small  lots,
for  example  fresh  onions,  this  service  charge  constitutes  a  much  larger  percentage
advance  upon  the  jobbers'  price,  than  on  goods  (like  potatoes)  sold  in  larger  lots.
Perhaps  this  generalization  will  be  found  to  apply  to  many  other  branches  of  retailing.

See  Dr.  Charles  E.  Artman,  Food  Costs  and  City  Consumers  (Columbia  Studies  in
History,  Economics  and  Public  Law,  No.  280),  New  York,  1926,  chapter  iii.


110  BUSINESS  CYCLES

2.  The  Prices  of  Producers^  Goods  in  Relation  to  the  Prices

OF  Consumers'  Commodities.

The  business  enterprises  engaged  in  squeezing  money  profits  out
of  these  price  margins  are  seldom,  if  ever,  able  to  keep  the  whole
differences  between  their  selling  and  buying  prices.  From  retailers
back  to  manufacturers,  unless  they  are  operating  on  a  minute  scale,
they  must  purchase  various  commodities,  services  and  rights  for  the
efficient  conduct  of  their  business.  For  such  producers'  goods  they
have  to  pay  out  prices  which  commonly  absorb  the  greater  part  of
the  price  margins  on  the  consumers'  commodities  in  which  they  deal.
The  most  important  classes  of  these  producers'  goods  are  raw  mate-
rials and  such  current  supplies  as  coal  and  stationery,  buildings  with
proper  machinery  or  other  equipment,  manual  and  clerical  labor,
loans,  leases,  transportation,  advertising  and  insurance.

To  all  business  enterprises,  the  prices  which  they  pay  for  these
producers'  goods  are  important  factors  in  fixing  the  margins  between
the  buying  and  selling  prices  of  the  commodities  in  which  they  deal.
But,  save  in  the  case  of  transportation  and  certain  kinds  of  labor,  men
who  handle  a  variety  of  goods  require  elaborate  accounting  systems
to  connect  the  prices  which  constitute  costs  with  the  margins  upon
which  they  sell  particular  goods.  For  the  cost  prices  of  producers'
goods  are  paid  for  the  advantage  of  the  enterprise  as  a  whole,  and
the  accruing  benefits  extend  to  many  transactions  and  often  cover
a  long  time.

3.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods  in  Relation  to  Antecedent

Prices.

With  the  exception  of  labor,  producers'  goods  are  provided,  like
consumers'  commodities,  chiefly  by  business  enterprises,  large  or
small,  operating  on  the  basis  of  margins  between  buying  and  selling
prices.  Hence  the  price  of  any  given  producers'  good  is  related  not
only  to  the  prices  of  the  consumers'  commodities  to  the  production
or  distribution  of  which  it  must  finally  contribute  in  some  way,  but
also  to  the  prices  of  the  various  other  producers'  goods  employed  in
its  own  manufacture  and  distribution.  Thus  the  prices  of  producers'
goods  do  not  end  the  series  of  price  relationships ;  at  most  they  begin
new  series  of  relationships,  which  run  backward  with  countless  rami-


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  111

fications  and  never  reach  definite  stopping  points.  Even  the  prices
of  raw  materials  in  the  hands  of  first  ^'producers''  are  related  sys-
tematically to  the  prices  of  the  labor,  current  supplies,  machinery,
buildings,  land,  loans,  leases,  and  so  on,  which  the  farmers,  miners,
quarrymen,  lumbermen,  and  fishermen  employ.

Concerning  the  prices  of  such  producers'  goods  as  consist  of  mate-
rial commodities  no  more  need  be  said.  And  most  of  the  less  tangible
services — loans,  advertising,  transportation,  insurance — require  but
a  word.  They  are  the  subjects  of  an  organized  business  trafiie,  in
which  price  margins  play  the  same  role  as  in  the  buying  and  selling  of
commodities.  Therefore,  the  prices  charged  by  the  bank,  the  ad-
vertising agency,  the  railway  and  the  insurance  company,  are  sys-
tematically related  both  to  the  prices  which  these  enterprises  must
pay  for  their  own  producers'  goods,  and  to  the  prices  of  the  wares
dealt  in  by  the  enterprises  which  borrow  money,  use  publicity,  ship
goods  and  carry  insurance.

The  prices  of  labor — manual,  clerical,  professional  and  managerial
— may  seem  to  bring  the  series  to  a  definite  stop,  at  least  along  one
line.  For  men  do  not  have  a  business  attitude  toward  the  production
of  their  own  energy,  and  not  wholly  a  business  attitude  toward  the
acquisition  of  their  own  training.  But  the  prices  which  wage-  and
salary-earners  can  command  are  indubitably  connected  with  the  prices
of  the  consumers'  goods  which  established  habit  has  made  into  stand-
ards of  living  for  the  classes  to  which  they  belong,  as  well  as  with
the  prices  of  the  goods  they  help  to  make.  Along  this  line,  therefore,
analysis  of  the  interrelations  among  prices  brings  us,  not  to  a  full
stop,  but  back  to  our  starting  point — the  prices  of  consumers'  com-
modities.

4. The  Prices  of  Business  Enterprises.

Connected  with  the  prices  of  consumers'  commodities,  of  raw
materials,  and  of  other  producers'  commodities  or  services,  are  the
prices  of  business  enterprises.

Occasionally,  established  business  enterprises  are  sold  outright  as
going  concerns.  Promoters  are  also  constantly  offering  for  sale  new
business  organizations  or  reorganizations  of  old  enterprises.  But  far
the  most  numerous  transactions  of  this  type  are  dealings  in  the  shares
of  corporations.

Closely  associated  with  the  prices  of  such  shares  are  the  prices  of


112  BUSINESS  CYCLES

corporate  notes,  bonds  and  debentures.  Theoretically,  a  sharp  line
may  be  drawn  between  ownership  of  common  stock  in  an  enterprise
(carrying  no  right  except  to  vote  at  its  meetings,  and  to  share  in  its
dividends,  if  any),  and  ownership  of  its  mortgage-assured  bonds.  But
many  tj^pes  of  securities  have  been  invented  intermediate  between
these  extremes — stocks  "preferred'^  in  various  ways,  convertible  bonds,
voting  bonds,  bonds  secured  by  second  or  third  mortgages,  and  so
on  through  a  long  list.  All  of  these  securities  carry  an  interest  in
the  corporation  with  them,  some  risk,  and  the  possibility  of  having
to  assume  control  under  certain  contingencies.  Indeed,  the  common
stocks  of  some  corporations  are  rated  a  safer  investment  than  the
first-mortgage  bonds  of  others.  An  effort  to  classify  all  these  securi-
ties on  logical  lines  would  involve  much  elaboration.  In  a  summary
view  of  the  system  of  prices  it  is  permissible  to  pass  over  such  details
and  treat  the  traffic  in  corporate  securities  of  all  kinds  under  one
head.

That  the  prices  of  whole  business  enterprises,  of  shares  in  them,
and  of  their  promises  to  pay  are  intimately  related  to  the  prices
already  discussed,  is  clear.  For  the  value  of  an  enterprise  is  deter-
mined primarily  by  capitalizing  its  present  and  prospective  profits.
Profits  depend  primarily  upon  price  margins  times  the  volume  of
business  transacted.  The  rate  of  interest  at  which  prospective  profits
are  capitalized  is  determined  by  the  going  price  for  the  use  of  invest-
ment loan  funds,  and  as  such  is  related  to  the  whole  complex  of
prices  which  affect  the  investment  markets.

5. The  Prices  of  Services  to  Persons.

There  remains  one  other  grand  division  of  the  system  of  prices —
a  division  which  has  much  in  common  with  the  price  of  consumers'
commodities  on  the  one  hand,  and  with  the  prices  of  personal  services
to  business  enterprises  on  the  other  hand.  It  consists  of  the  prices
of  the  heterogeneous  services  which  are  rendered  to  persons.  Here
belong  the  prices  of  domestic  service,  medical  attendance,  most  life
insurance,  much  instruction,  some  legal  advice,  many  forms  of  recrea-
tion, passenger  transportation,  hotel  accommodation,  and  so  on.

In  part,  this  field  is  cultivated  by  large-scale  business  enterprises,
conducted  methodically  for  the  profit  to  be  made  out  of  price  margins.
Hotels,  amusement  places,  travel  bureaus,  life-insurance  companies,
standardize  their  goods,  watch  their  operating  expenses,  and  com-


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  113

pete  for  custom  on  a  price  basis  in  much  the  same  way  as  department
stores.  But  in  other  parts  of  the  field,  business  trafiic  can  scarcely
be  said  to  exist.  Contacts  are  made  and  maintained  largely  on  a
personal  basis,  the  services  are  not  and  often  cannot  be  standardized,
the  sellers  often  deprecate  commercial  motives,  and  prices  are  often
varied  according  to  the  individual  buyer's  capacity  to  pay.  Con-
sumers do  not  shop  about  for  the  services  of  family  lawyers,  doctors,
or  even  cooks,  as  they  shop  for  shoes.  Hence,  the  prices  of  non-
business services  to  persons  form  the  most  loosely  organized  and  ir-
regular division  of  the  system  of  prices.

6. The  Interrelations  Among  Prices.

The  aim  of  this  classification  of  prices  is  not  to  set  up  different
categories,  but  rather  to  emphasize  the  relations  which  bind  all  prices
together  and  make  of  them  one  system.  The  close  relations  (1)  be-
tween the  prices  of  consumers'  commodities  in  the  hands  of  retailers,
wholesalers  and  manufacturers;  (2)  between  these  prices  and  those
of  producers'  goods,  whether  used  directly  or  indirectly  in  making
consumers'  commodities,  and  (3)  between  the  buying  and  selling
prices  in  any  branch  of  trade  and  the  prices  of  securities  of  the  busi-
ness enterprises  engaged  in  it,  are  sufficiently  clear,  and  enough  has
been  said  about  (4)  the  looser  bonds  which  unite  the  prices  of  services
to  persons  with  the  larger  field  of  business  dealings.  But  several
other  lines  of  relationship  should  be  called  to  attention.

(5)  On  the  side  of  demand,  almost  every  good  has  its  possible
substitutes  in  some  or  in  all  of  its  uses.  Through  the  shiftings  of
demand  among  commodities  thus  made  possible,  changes  in  the  price
of  one  commodity  are  passed  on  to  the  prices  of  its  substitutes,  from
the  latter  to  the  prices  of  their  substitutes,  and  so  on.  An  initial
price  change  usually — though  not  always — becomes  smaller  as  it
spreads  out  over  these  widening  circles.

(6)  Similarly,  on  the  side  of  supply,  almost  every  good  has  genetic
relationships  with  other  goods,  made  from  the  same  materials,  or
supplied  by  the  same  set  of  enterprises.  Along  these  genetic  lines
also,  price  changes  radiate  from  the  points  of  disturbance  over  a
wide  field.  Particularly  important  because  particularly  wide  are  the
genetic  relationships  arising  from  the  use  of  certain  producers'  goods
in  many  lines  of  business.  Land,  loan  funds  and  transportation  most
of  all;  with  somewhat  less  universality,  coal,  steel,  certain  types  of


114  BUSINESS  CYCLES

labor,  and  insurance  enter  into  the  cost  of  most  commodities.  Ac-
cordingly, a  changed  price  established  for  one  of  these  well-nigh  uni-
versal producers'  goods  in  any  important  use  will  extend  to  a  wide
variety  of  other  uses,  and  may  produce  further  price  changes  without
assignable  limit.

(7)  Closely  connected  with  this  genetic  relationship  through  com-
mon producers'  goods,  is  the  relationship  through  business  competi-
tion, both  actual  and  potential.  Price  margins  which  make  one  trade
decidedly  more  or  less  profitable,  all  things  considered,  than  other
trades  in  the  same  market  area  cannot  long  continue  in  the  lines  of
business  which  anyone  controlling  capital  really  can  ''break  into"  if
he  so  desires.  For,  after  a  time  which  varies  with  technical  and  busi-
ness conditions  in  the  trade  which  is  out  of  step,  the  influx  or  efflux
of  capital  changes  the  supply  of  commodities  in  question  and  brings
the  price  margins  into  closer  adjustment  with  those  prevailing  in  other
trades.

This  familiar  proposition  does  not  mean  that  competition  tends
to  bring  the  price  margins  on  which  all  goods  are  handled  to  a
common  level.  On  the  contrary,  the  tendency  is  to  make  these
margins  differ  from  each  other, — differ  in  whatever  way  is  necessary
to  keep  the  prospects  of  return  to  capital  and  enterprise,  everything
considered  and  over  whatever  periods  men  think  of  in  planning  their
ventures,  so  nearly  alike  that  no  one  of  the  lines  open  to  investment
seems  much  more  attractive  to  the  average  enterpriser  than  its
alternatives.

Nor  does  this  proposition  imply  that  there  is  a  tendency  toward
an  equality  of  profits  in  business.  Whatever  such  tendency  exists  is
limited  to  equalizing  the  prospective  opportunities  for  making  profits
on  fresh  investments.  In  every  branch  of  business  followed  by  numer-
ous enterprises,  and  in  every  year,  experience  shows  a  marked  di-
versity of  returns,  running  from  liberal  profit  percentages  to  sub-
stantial losses.  There  seems  to  be  no  tendency  for  these  divergencies
to  disappear,  except  perhaps  when  a  trade  becomes  concentrated  in
the  hands  of  very  few  concerns.  Where  there  are  many  concerns,
the  tendency  toward  equalizing  the  prices  of  similar  producers'  goods
and  similar  products — and  in  the  given  market  areas  this  tendency
is  real — ^makes  profits  depend  upon  the  skill  of  managements  and
the  particular  circumstances  under  which  each  management  operates.
Since  neither  skill  nor  circumstances  are  uniform,  the  differences  in
profit  rates  which  they  produce  tend  to  recur  indefinitely.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  115

(8)  Present  prices  are  affected  by  prices  of  the  recent  past  and
also  by  the  anticipated  prices  of  the  near  future.  Indeed,  present
prices  are  determined  largely  by  past  bargains,  many  of  which  estab-
lished time  contracts  still  in  operation.  Over  a  wider  field,  our  ideas
of  what  is  a  ^'fair  price"  to  ask  come  from  past  experience  to  affect
present  and  future  conduct.  Thus  the  price  system  has  no  definable
limits  in  time.  No  analysis  can  get  back  to  the  earliest  term  in  the
endless  series  of  bargains  which  helped  to  make  the  prices  of  to-day,
nor  can  anyone  say  how  much  influence  is  exerted  to-day  by  the
anticipations  of  what  prices  will  be  to-morrow,  or  how  many
to-morrows  are  taken  into  business  reckonings.

(9)  Nor  has  the  price  system  any  logical  beginning  or  end.  At
whatever  point  analysis  may  begin  tracing  the  interlocking  links  of
the  price  chain,  to  that  point  will  it  come  round  again  if  it  proceeds
far  enough.  The  above  analysis,  for  example,  started  from  the  prices
of  consumers'  commodities  at  retail.  These  prices  are  paid  out  of
personal  incomes.  But  personal  incomes  are  themselves  aggregates
of  prices  received  for  labor,  for  the  use  of  loan  funds,  or  for  the  use
of  rented  property;  or  they  are  aggregates  of  the  net  price  differences
which  yield  profits.

Thus  all  the  prices  in  a  business  economy  are  continually  influenc-
ing one  another.  To  account  for  any  one  item  in  the  system,  one
must  invoke  the  whole.  Realization  of  that  fact  has  made  economic
theorists  dissatisfied  with  efforts  to  explain  the  prices  of  particular
goods  in  terms  of  their  respective  costs,  or  utilities,  or  supply  and
demand.  In  1874  Leon  Walras  showed  how  any  number  of  prices  can
be  conceived  as  simultaneously  determined,  under  certain  imaginary
conditions.  Mathematical  economists  are  now  seeking  to  make  his
method  of  approach  (the  use  of  several  sets  of  simultaneous  equations
equal  in  number  to  the  number  of  the  "unknowns")  applicable  to  real
life.^  These  efforts  may  provide  students  of  business  cycles  with  a
better  technique  than  they  now  possess  for  treating  the  problem  of
price  changes.  But  even  as  matters  stand,  we  can  trace  the  main
channels  through  which  price  fluctuations  propagate  themselves  by
using  statistical  data  in  ways  suggested  by  the  preceding  analysis.

*See  Walras,  Elements  d'Economie  Politique  Pure,  1874;  4th  ed.,  Lausaunne  and
Paris,  1900;  Gustav  Cassel,  Theory  of  Social  Economy,  New  York,  1924;  Henry  L.
Moore,  "A  Theory  of  Economic  Oscillations,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  Novem-
ber, 1926,  vol.  xli,  pp.  1-29.

Among  writers  who  make  no  use  of  mathematical  symbols,  Herbert  J.  Davenport
has  faced  the  mutual  interdependence  of  all  prices  perhaps  more  frankly  than  anyone
else. See  his  Economics  of  Enterprise,  New  York,  1913.


116  BUSINESS  CYCLES


7. The  Role  of  Prices  in  Economic  Life.

Prices,  then,  form  a  system — a  highly  complex  system  of  many
parts  connected  with  one  another  in  divers  ways,  a  system  infinitely
flexible  in  details  yet  with  a  fairly  stable  equilibrium  among  its  parts,
a  system  like  a  living  organism  in  its  capacity  to  repair  the  serious
disorders  into  which  it  recurrently  falls.

So  much  for  the  structure  of  the  system  of  prices;  concerning  its
functions  in  economic  life  a  few  words  must  be  added.  The  system
of  prices  is  our  mechanism  for  regulating  the  process  of  producing,
and  distributing  goods.  Prices  make  possible  the  elaborate  exchanges,
and  the  consequent  specialization  and  cooperation  in  production  which
characterize  the  present  age,  and  so  are  one  of  the  factors  contributing
to  its  relative  comfort.  They  are  the  means  by  which  all  consumers
in  concert  make  known  what  goods  the  community  wants  and  in  what
quantities;  the  signs  which  enable  all  business  enterprises  in  concert
to  come  as  near  as  they  do  toward  achieving  a  satisfactory  allocation
of  productive  energies  amidst  the  million  channels  into  which  these
energies  might  flow.  Prices  are  the  source  from  which  family  income
is  derived,  and  the  means  by  which  goods  are  obtained  for  family
consumption;  for  both  income  and  cost  of  living — the  jaws  of
the  vise  in  which  the  family  feels  itself  squeezed — are  aggregates  of
prices.  Prices  also  render  possible  the  rational  control  of  economic
activity  by  accounting;  for  accounting  is  based  upon  the  plan  of
representing  all  the  unlike  commodities,  services  and  rights  with
which  an  enterprise  is  concerned  as  buyer  or  seller  in  terms  of  a  money
price.  Most  important  of  all  for  the  present  purpose,  the  margins
between  different  prices  within  the  system  hold  out  that  prospect
of  money  profit,  which  is  the  motive  power  that  drives  our  business
world.


IV. The  Monetary  Mechanism.

Monetary  and  banking  systems  are  such  obvious  features  of  the
business  economy  that  they  require  little  attention  here.  It  is  well,
however,  to  state  the  sense  in  which  certain  terms  will  be  used,  to
note  the  relative  magnitude  of  important  variables,  and  to  indicate
the  bearings  of  a  famous  controversy  upon  the  problem  of  business
cycles.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  117

1. Ambiguity  of  the  Terms  "Money"  and  "Currency."

Business  men,  economists  at  large,  and  writers  upon  business
cycles  in  particular,  use  the  word  money  in  a  confusing  variety  of
meanings.  The  variants  important  here  are  illustrated  by  Professor
Irving  Fisher  on  the  one  side  and  by  Messrs.  Foster  and  Catchings
on  the  other.  Fisher  defines  money  as  "what  is  generally  acceptable
in  exchange  for  goods,"  thus  distinguishing  money  from  bank  de-
posits subject  to  check.  "Currency"  is  Fisher's  broad  term  for  all
the  common  media  of  exchange.  On  the  contrary,  Foster  and  Catch-
ings use  the  word  money  in  the  broad  sense  assigned  by  Fisher  to
currency,  and  the  word  currency  in  the  narrow  sense  assigned  by
Fisher  to  money.^

Needless  to  say,  both  of  these  opposing  usages  can  be  defended
Dy  abundant  precedents,  drawn  from  the  world  of  books  and  from
the  world  of  affairs.  To  follow  either  usage,  however,  is  to  invite
misunderstanding  by  those  accustomed  to  the  other.  Care  in  stating
definitions  in  one  chapter  and  consistency  in  adhering  to  them  in
later  passages  may  be  a  logical  defense  against  the  misinterpretations
of  readers  who  have  "skipped"  or  forgotten  the  formal  definitions;
but  it  is  better  to  give  no  opening  for  mistake  when  that  is  feasible.
The  shortest  unambiguous  term  for  what  Fisher  calls  money  and
what  Foster  and  Catchings  call  currency  seems  to  be  "coin  and  paper
money."  We  must  choose  between  the  unattractive  alternatives  of
using  some  such  cumbrous  expression  or  of  facilitating  misunder-
standing. Of  these  two  evils,  the  latter  seems  the  greater.

Accordingly,  in  the  chapters  which  follow,  the  terms  "coin  and
paper  money"  and  "deposit  currency"  will  be  used.  All  the  common
means  of  making  monetary  payments  taken  together  will  be  called
the  "circulating  medium."

2. The  Relative  Importance  of  Checks  and  of  Coin  and  Paper
Money  in  Making  Payments.

Our  knowledge  on  this  head  has  not  been  advanced  materially
since  1909,  when  Professor  (now  President)  David  Kinley  of  the
University  of  Illinois  superintended  an  investigation  made  by  the
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  for  the  National  Monetary  Commis-

*See  Irving  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  New  York,  1911,  pp.  8-13;
W.  T.  Foster  and  Waddill  Catchings,  Money,  Boston  and  New  York,  1923,  pp.  17-18.


118  BUSINESS  CYCLES

sion.  The  Comptroller  secured  reports  from  some  11,500  banks  of
all  kinds  concerning  the  character  of  the  funds  deposited  with  them
on  Tuesday,  March  16,  1909,  by  retail  merchants,  wholesale  mer-
chants, and  customers  of  other  occupations.  From  these  returns,  sup-
plemented by  estimates  of  deposits  in  the  non-reporting  banks  and
vaguer  approximations  to  the  transactions  of  people  without  bank
accounts,  Kinley  concluded  that  we  may  "safely  accept  an  average
of  80  to  85  per  cent  as  the  probable  percentage  of  business  in  this
country  done  by  check."  In  wholesale  trade  the  percentage  was
above  90,  in  the  business  of  non-mercantile  depositors  it  was  ''close
up  to  that  of  the  wholesale  trade,"  in  retail  trade  it  was  50  to  60  per
cent,  and  even  of  the  pay  rolls  made  up  by  banks  30  per  cent  were
in  checks.  On  comiparing  the  1909  returns  with  those  secured  in  a
similar  investigation  which  he  had  supervised  in  1896,  Kinley  also
concluded  ''that  the  percentage  of  the  volume  of  ordinary  payments
made  by  check  has  been  increasing  somewhat."  ^

Of  course  estimates  based  upon  the  transactions  of  a  single  day
are  especially  unsatisfactory  to  students  of  business  cycles,  since  they
are  much  concerned  with  the  magnitude  of  seasonal,  cyclical,  secular
and  random  fluctuations  in  business  processes.  Probably  the  per-
centage of  payments  made  by  checks  is  higher  on  dates  when  rents,
salaries,  dividends,  bond  coupons,  and  income  taxes  are  being  paid
in  large  amounts  than  on  a  mid-month  day,  like  March  16th.  Full
records  over  a  period  of  years  might  show  fairly  regular  seasonal
variations  in  the  percentage,  corresponding  in  timing  to  the  seasonal
variations  in  bank  clearings.  There  may  also  be  cyclical  fluctuations
in  the  relative  use  of  checks  and  coin  or  paper  money,  as  well  as  a
rising  secular  trend  for  the  first  and  a  declining  secular  trend  for  the
second.  But  all  this  is  surmise.  What  we  know  with  certainty  is
that  the  great  bulk  of  payments  in  the  United  States  is  made  with
checks.  Probably  coin  and  paper  money  do  not  more  than  a  tenth
or  at  most  a  fifth  of  the  "money  work."  The  figure  intermediate
between  these  limits,  15  per  cent,  seems  to  fit  well  with  the  run  of
the  estimates  presented  in  the  following  sections.

*  David  Kinley,  The  Use  of  Credit  Instruments  in  Payments  in  the  United  States.
National  Monetary  Commission.  61st  Congress,  2d  session,  Senate  Document  399,
Washington,  1910,  pp.  197-201.  (The  critical  reader  may  be  warned  that  the  percentag**
of  pay  rolls  in  checks  is  misstated  on  p.  200;  the  correct  figures  are  given  on  p.  103).
Kinley  gives  percentages  for  checks  on  p.  198  which  run  somewhat  higher  than  his
final  conclusions  quoted  above.  It  is  these  higher  figures  which  Professor  Irving
Fisher  uses  in  his  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  revised  ed.,  p.  491,  to  support  his
own  estimate  that  91  per  cent  of  all  business  in  1909  was  done  with  checks.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  119

3. The  Elastictty  of  the  Circulating  Medium.

How  far  the  money  mechanism  responds  to  the  changing  require-
ments of  business  from  phase  to  phase  of  a  cycle,  and  how  far  the
money  mechanism  may  start,  augment  or  hmit  business  fluctuations,
are  among  the  problems  raised  in  Chapter  I.  Presumably,  these
problems  have  no  single  solution,  since  so  much  depends  upon  what
the  changing  requirements  of  business  are,  upon  how  the  money
mechanism  is  arranged,  and  upon  the  skill  with  which  it  is  managed.
All  three  conditions  differ  from  country  to  country,  and  in  any  one
country  they  may  differ  from  time  to  time.  Close  attention  must
be  paid  to  this  factor  in  business  cycles  later  on.  At  present  it  will
suffice  to  show  that  the  currency  which  the  business  community  pro-
vides for  itself  through  the  banks  rises  and  falls  with  the  activity
of  trade  more  regularly  than  coin  and  paper  money  provided  through
government  agencies.

The  fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  gold  in  monetary  use  in  any
country  during  a  given  year  depend  mainly  upon  (1)  the  current
output  of  such  gold  mines  as  it  possesses,  (2)  the  country's  gain  or
loss  of  gold  by  international  shipments,  and  (3)  the  quantity  of  gold
which  goes  into  industrial  uses.  No  one  of  these  factors  can  be  de-
pended upon  to  increase  the  supply  of  gold  currency  when  trade  is
brisk,  or  to  diminish  the  supply  when  trade  is  dull.

(1)  Changes  in  gold  production  are  controlled  mainly  by  the
discovery  and  exhaustion  of  deposits,  by  improvements  in  the  arts
of  mining  and  metallurgy  which  make  it  possible  to  work  lower  grade
ores  at  a  profit,  and  by  conditions  which  facilitate  or  hinder  industrial
operations  in  the  mining  districts.  None  of  these  factors  are  or-
ganically related  to  business  fluctuations.  Of  secondary  importance
are  financial  conditions  which  affect  the  raising  of  capital  for  invest-
ment in  gold  mining,  and  price  conditions  which  affect  the  cost  of
operating  mines.  Prosperity  facilitates  the  raising  of  capital,  but
increases  operating  costs.  In  turn,  high  operating  costs  give  mining
engineers  a  stronger  incentive  to  develop  improved  methods  of  work,
and  thus  may  lead  presently  to  increased  output.  All  in  all,  one
would  not  expect  a  close  correspondence  between  business  cycles  and
gold  production,  and  when  one  examines  the  statistics  over  a  period
of  years  this  negative  expectation  seems  to  accord  with  experience.

Over  periods  much  longer  than  those  typical  of  business  cycles,


120  BUSINESS  CYCLES

however,  there  seems  to  be  an  organic  relation  between  gold  produc-
tion and  the  rate  of  economic  expansion.  The  periods  of  large  addi-
tions to  the  world's  gold  supply  have  been  accompanied  or  followed
by  periods  in  which  the  prosperous  phases  of  business  cycles  have
been  relatively  long  and  intense  and  the  depressed  phases  have  been
relatively  short.  The  reverse  also  seems  true:  periods  of  declining  gold
production  have  been  accompanied  or  followed  by  periods  in  which
the  phases  of  prosperity  have  been  relatively  short  and  the  phases
of  depression  relatively  long.  Thus  the  fluctuations  of  gold  output
are  important  in  the  study  of  business  cycles;  but  important  as  a
part  of  the  economic  environment  in  which  cycles  run  their  course,
rather  than  as  part  of  the  cycles  themselves.  But  this  relationship
we  can  study  to  better  advantage  after  we  have  won  such  insight
as  we  can  into  the  character  of  cyclical  fluctuations.

(2)  The  industrial  demand  for  gold  is  decidedly  sensitive  to
business  conditions;  it  rises  in  prosperity  and  falls  in  depression.
Since  the  general  level  around  which  this  percentage  fluctuates  seems
to  approximate  a  quarter  of  the  annual  output,  and  since  the  plus
and  minus  departures  from  this  average  are  considerable,  we  have
here  a  not  unimportant  factor  of  ^^perverse  elasticity"  in  the  mone-
tary supply  of  gold.

(3)  The  amount  of  gold  shipped  into  and  out  of  any  country  in
the  course  of  a  year  is  the  net  resultant  of  a  multitude  of  factors.
Among  the  more  important  are  the  relative  magnitudes  of  payments
and  receipts  on  merchandise  account,  freight  account,  travelers'  ac-
count, migration  account,  and  banking  account.  While  every  one
of  these  items  may  be  directly  affected  by  the  state  of  trade  in  the
country  in  question,  it  is  hard  in  most  cases  to  be  sure  whether  the
state  of  trade  will  affect  the  credit  side  more  than  the  debit  side  of
that  item.  Moreover,  the  problem  is  never  limited  to  the  influence
exercised  by  the  state  of  trade  in  any  one  country;  it  includes  also
the  influence  exercised  by  the  state  of  trade  in  every  one  of  the  other
countries  with  which  the  first  has  extensive  dealings.  Of  especial
importance  to  the  Western  world  is  the  highly  variable  flow  of  gold
to  the  Orient,  especially  to  British  India — a  flow  which  depends  less
upon  business  conditions  in  the  West  than  upon  conditions  in  the
East.  The  net  resultants  of  all  these  complicated  factors,  as  summed
up  by  official  statistics,  show  that  no  simple  conclusion  can  be  drawn
concerning  the  relation  between  international  gold  movements  and
business  conditions,  except  in  severe  crises.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  121

The  exception  is  important.  In  times  of  peace,  any  nation
menaced  by  a  credit  collapse  has  usually  been  able  to  secure  within
a  few  weeks  a  large  inflow  of  gold  from  the  "free  gold  market''  of
London,  or,  in  recent  years.  New  York.  International  business  has
developed  a  rudimentary  centralized  gold  reserve,  which  any  com-
n^ercial  nation  can  draw  upon,  after  negotiation  and  somewhat
tardily,  to  meet  emergencies.  Perhaps  this  constitutes  the  world's
most  considerable  achievement  toward  adjusting  the  supply  of  gold
currency  to  the  demands  of  business.

As  for  government  paper  money,  it  is  notorious  that  the  large
changes  in  issues  are  controlled  by  the  exigencies  of  public  finance.
Paper  standards  occur  as  episodes  in  monetary  history.  The  sus-
pensions of  specie  payment,  by  which  they  are  ushered  in,  are  usually
forced  by  wars,  political  revolutions,  or  national  bankruptcies.  A
return  to  specie  payments  becomes  an  aim  of  fiscal  policy  after  the
emergency  has  passed,  though  an  aim  which  is  often  pursued  in  a
wavering  and  dilatory  fashion.  Of  course,  the  developments  which
lead  to  suspensions,  the  depreciation  of  the  monetary  unit  which
usually  follows  suspensions,  and  the  appreciation  which  usually  pre-
cedes resumption,  all  influence  the  activity  of  trade.  But  these  in-
fluences, like  the  influence  exerted  by  marked  changes  in  the  rate  of
gold  production,  must  be  classed  among  the  "disturbing  causes,"  by
which  theorists  explain  the  divergencies  characteristic  of  different
business  cycles.

Government  paper  money  as  an  element  of  monetary  systems
having  a  metallic  standard  is  seldom  controlled  in  such  a  way  as
to  make  its  volume  regularly  responsive  to  changing  needs.  But
much  as  the  gold  supply  of  a  country  has  often  been  increased  in
severe  crises  by  huge  importations,  so  governments  have  sometimes
aided  business  in  emergencies  by  increasing  their  paper  issues,  or  by
shifting  paper  money  from  the  public  treasury  to  the  banks.

The  broad  conclusion  from  the  preceding  analysis  is  that,  except
in  severe  crises,  business  must  depend  primarily  upon  bank  notes,
checking  deposits,  and  bills  of  exchange  to  keep  the  supply  of  the
circulating  medium  adjusted  to  its  changing  pace.

This  adjustment  is  made  possible  within  certain  limits  by  the
fact  that  bank  notes  are  issued  and  bank  deposits  created  chiefly  by
the  granting  of  bank  loans,  while  bank  notes  are  retired  and  bank
deposits  are  canceled  chiefly  by  the  repayment  of  bank  loans. The


122  BUSINESS  CYCLES

drawing  of  a  check  against  his  deposit  by  the  customer  of  a  bank
no  more  reduces  the  volume  of  deposit  currency  than  the  payment  of
a  bank  note  by  one  man  to  another  reduces  the  volume  of  notes  in
circulation.  In  both  cases  a  part  of  the  circulating  medium  is  merely
transferred  from  one  holder  to  another — unless  the  check  or  note  is
used  to  repay  bank  loans.  Now  a  period  of  prosperity,  during  which
production  expands,  prices  rise,  and  profits  swell,  increases  the  money
value  of  the  security  upon  which  banks  make  their  loans,  and  so
provides  a  basis  for  the  increase  of  bank  currency  which  is  required
by  trade.  A  period  of  depression,  on  the  contrary,  diminishes  the
business  demands  for  bank  loans,  and  through  their  repayment  con-
tracts the  volume  of  notes  and  deposit  currency  as  the  requirements
for  means  of  payment  decline.  The  qualifications  to  which  these
sweeping  statements  must  be  subjected  in  later  chapters  prevent  the
adjustment  of  bank  currency  to  the  needs  of  business  from  being
always  prompt  and  precise;  but  the  broad  contrast  between  the  re-
sponsiveness to  changes  in  business  activity  of  bank  currency  and
the  unresponsiveness  of  coin  and  government  notes  remains  valid.
Of  course,  the  limits  within  which  bank  notes,  checking  deposits,
and  bills  of  exchange  can  be  thus  adjusted  to  the  changing  volume
of  trade  depend  upon  the  organization  and  management  of  a  coun-
try's banking  system.  Mistakes  in  adjustment  disastrous  to  business
can  be  made  within  these  limits,  as  well  as  by  failure  to  heed  them.
Hence  we  may  expect  to  find  that  the  development  of  banking  legis-
lation and  of  banking  practice  has  played  an  important  role  in  the
history  of  every  country's  business  cycles.

4. The  Velocity  of  Circulation.

Fluctuations  in  the  activity  of  business  lead  to  changes  not  only
in  the  volume  of  deposit  currency  and  bank  notes,  but  also  in  the
average  rate  at  which  all  forms  of  circulating  media  pass  from  hand
to  hand.  An  increase  in  the  volume  of  payments  can  be  effected  in
either  of  these  ways,  and  in  practice  is  usually  effected  both  by  an
expansion  in  the  quantity  of  bank  currency  and  by  a  quicker  turnover
of  coin,  paper  money  and  deposits.  Changes  in  the  velocity  of
circulation  are  not  limited  by  technical  factors  as  are  changes  in  the
quantity  of  the  circulating  medium.  Broadly  speaking,  anyone  in
receipt  of  current  funds  can  spend  them  again  as  quickly  or  as  slowly
as  suits  him. But  like  most  phenomena  produced  by  the  actions


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  123

of  millions  of  men,  the  average  velocity  of  circulation  is  markedly
regular  in  its  changes.

It  is  only  of  late  that  we  have  attained  even  rough  measurements
of  this  factor  in  business  processes.  In  1907  Professor  E.  W.  Kem-
merer  summed  up  a  few  preceding  studies  and  made  the  best  esti-
mate of  velocity  which  the  data  then  permitted.  Kinley's  study  of
credit  instruments  for  the  National  Monetary  Commission  enabled
Irving  Fisher  in  1911  to  improve  upon  Kemmerer^s  results.  In  turn,
certain  recent  investigations  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New
York  have  made  it  possible  for  Dr.  W.  Randolph  Burgess  to  supersede
Professor  Fisher's  figures.^

The  New  York  Reserve  Bank  has  collected  monthly  data  concern-
ing the  volume  of  individual  demand  deposits  and  the  debits  to
individual  accounts  in  the  banks  of  eight  cities,  ranging  in  size  from
New  York  to  Syracuse  and  in  location  from  Boston  to  San  Francisco.
The  data,  beginning  in  January,  1919,  and  extending  by  months  to
February,  1923,  when  they  were  analyzed  by  Dr.  Burgess,  covered
somewhat  more  than  one  full  business  cycle,  and  so  gave  a  basis  for
approximating  not  only  the  mean  velocity  of  bank  deposits  but  also
the  variations  about  the  mean.

Dr.  Burgess  found  that  there  is  a  close  relationship  between  the
amount  of  bank  deposits  in  a  city  and  the  rapidity  of  their  turnover.
In  New  York  the  velocities  ran  six  to  eight  times  as  high  as  in  Syra-
cuse. Between  these  extremes,  the  velocities  in  other  towns  (except-
ing Albany)  varied  so  neatly  with  the  volume  of  deposits  that  it
seemed  justifiable  to  use  this  relationship  as  a  basis  for  estimating
the  average  velocity  of  deposits  in  the  United  States.  Computations
following  the  line  thus  suggested  indicated  that  a  reasonable  estimate
would  place  the  velocity  of  circulation  for  the  country  as  a  whole
at  a  rate  somewhere  between  25  and  35  times  a  year,  and  probably
under  rather  than  over  30.

Not  less  important  for  our  purpose  than  the  general  average
reached  by  Dr.  Burgess,  are  the  seasonal  and  cyclical  variations  which
he  found  to  characterize  deposit  velocities.  The  seasonal  swings
ranged  from  12  per  cent  of  the  annual  mean  in  San  Francisco  and
14  per  cent  in  Chicago  to  29  per  cent  in  Boston  and  31  per  cent  in
Albany. After  these  seasonal  changes  had  been  eliminated  from  the

*See  E.  W.  Kemmerer,  Money  and  Credit  Instruments  in  their  Relation  to  General
Prices,  New  York,  1907,  pp.  108-119;  Irving  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,
New  York,  1911,  pp.  441-477;  W.  Randolph  Burgess,  "The  Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits,*
Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  727-740.


124  BUSINESS  CYCLES

series,  the  cyclical  swings  remaining  were  even  larger.  They  ranged
from  22  per  cent  of  the  average  value  for  the  whole  period  in  Chi-
cago, and  26  per  cent  in  San  Francisco  to  63  per  cent  in  Syracuse
and  68  per  cent  in  Albany.  New  York,  which  is  often  thought  of
as  subject  to  exceedingly  wide  seasonal  and  cyclical  variations  in  all
financial  matters,  was  near  the  center  of  the  range  in  both  the  sea-
sonal and  cyclical  array.^

Certain  of  Dr.  Burgess'  results  can  be  tested  by  using  other  recent
data.  The  Federal  Reserve  Board  now  compiles  the  total  ^'debits  to
individual  accounts"  in  the  banks  of  many  cities.  These  figures  come
far  closer  to  showing  the  volume  of  payments  made  by  check  in  the
United  States  than  do  any  earlier  data: — among  other  advantages^
debits  include  the  millions  of  checks  which  are  deposited  in  the  banks
against  which  they  are  drawn,  and  which  therefore  do  not  pass
through  a  clearing  house.  By  careful  analysis  of  these  returns  from
240  cities  in  1922,  Mr.  Carl  Snyder  has  shown  that  the  total  debits
for  the  whole  country  in  that  year  were  about  534  billion  dollars.
This  is  probably  a  close  approximation  as  such  matters  go;  for  the
actually  recorded  amounts  not  only  cover  banks  holding  more  than

2  The  leading  results  of  this  important  paper  may  be  presented  in  tabular  form as
follows:

Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits,  January,  1919,  to  February,  1923

San
New  York  Albany Buffalo  Rochester  Syracuse  Boston  Chicago  Francisco
Original  data

Average 73.7 29.9 19.7 20.2  9.9 34.1 46.1 39.9

Maximum 91.3 49.0 25.1 23.6  15.3 47.6  51.5  44.9

Minimum 62.1 21.6 16.1  16.7  7.0 24.7 38.4 34.0

Range 29.2 27.4  9.0  6.9  8.3 22.9  13.1  10.9

Range  as  per  cent

of  average.... 39.6 91.6 45.7 34.2 83.8 67.2 28.4 27.3

Seasonal  Fluctuations

Average  month. . 100  100  100  100  100  100  100  100

Maximum 112  117  112  109  113  113  106  106

Minimum 91  86  92  92  89  84  92  94

Range 21  31  20  17  24  29  . 14  12

Cyclical  Fluctuations
(Seasonals  eUminated)

Average 73.7 29.9 19.8 20.2  9.9 34.1 46.0 40.0

Maximum 84.8 43.0 26.1 22.8 13.5 42.1  52.0 45.9

Minimum 63.4 22.7  16.3  16.9  7.3 29.0 41.7 35.5

Range,  per  cent  of

average 29.0 67.9 50.0 29.2 62.6 38.4 22.4 26.9

W.  Randolph  Burgess,  "Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statisti-
cal Association,  June,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  727-740.

All  of  the  velocities  in  this  table  are  computed  on  a  yearly  basis.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  125

four-fifths  of  the  total  deposits,  but  also  afford  a  good  basis  for
making  estimates  for  the  missing  banks.^  If  we  had  equally  trust-
worthy figures  of  the  average  volume  of  deposit  currency  to  compare
with  this  total,  we  could  compute  its  velocity  of  circulation  with
confidence.  Once  a  year  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  does  com-
pile a  nearly  complete  table  of  deposits  in  all  kinds  of  banks  in  the
country;  but  the  portion  of  these  deposits  subject  to  check  is  not
stated  for  all  kinds  of  banks  and  must  be  estimated  in  part.  Then
these  partially  estimated  figures  for  June  30th  must  be  made  into
annual  averages  as  well  as  may  be  by  using  an  index  based  upon  a
comparison  between  the  individual  deposits  of  the  National  Banks
on  June  30th  and  the  average  of  such  deposits  in  the  five  (or  four)
reports  to  the  Comptroller.  Figures  made  in  this  fashion  must  be
accepted  as  subject  to  a  margin  of  uncertainty;  but  an  error  of  a
billion  dollars  one  way  or  the  other  would  not  make  5  per  cent  of
the  total.  Indeed,  this  method  of  approximating  the  velocity  of
deposit  currency  involves  less  estimating  than  Dr.  Burgess'  more
elaborate  method,  which  builds  upon  returns  that  are  more  precise,
but  include  only  8  cities.

Table  3  shows  that  the  results  to  which  this  method  leads  agree
well  with  Dr.  Burgess'  conclusion  that  the  average  turnover  of  deposit
currency  for  the  country  as  a  whole  is  somewhere  between  25  and  35
times  a  year,  and  probably  under  rather  than  over  30.  In  view  of
its  firmer  foundation,  this  estimate  has  better  claim  to  acceptance
than  the  pioneer  figures  of  Professor  Irving  Fisher,  who  had  set  the
velocity  of  bank  deposit  currency  at  nearly  37  in  1896,  53  in  1909  and
96  in  1918.^  The  table  also  confirms  the  conclusion  that  the  velocity
of  deposit  currency  rises  and  falls  with  business  activity,  though  of
of  course  these  annual  figures  do  not  move  through  nearly  so  wide  a
range  as  the  data  which  Dr.  Burgess  presents  by  months.

If  80-85  per  cent  of  the  country's  payments  are  made  with  checks,
if  the  volume  of  checking  deposits  rises  and  falls  with  the  activity
of  trade,  and  if  the  circulation  of  these  deposits  is  quickened  in
prosperity  and  retarded  in  depression,  it  may  seem  that  the  money

'Compare  Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Index  of  the  General  Price  Level  from  1875/*
Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  189,  190.

*See  his  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  New  York,  1911,  p.  304,  and  "The  Equation
of  Exchange  for  1918,"  American  Economic  Review,  June,  1919,  vol.  ix,  p.  407.  Even
before  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  data  on  bank-deposit  velocity  were  gathered.  Pro-
fessor Fisher  had  become  skeptical  of  his  own  values,  at  least  for  years  far  from  his
basing  points,  1896  and  1909. See  the  article  just  cited.


126  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE  3

The  Velocity  op  Deposit  Currency,  Estimated  prom  Total  Payments  by  Check
^  AND  Average  Deposits  Subject  to  Check

The  United  States,  1919-1926

Estimated  Volume  Estimated  Average Estimated  Aver-
of  Payments  made  Volume  of  Deposits age  Velocity
by  Check  Subject  to  Check of  Deposits

BiUions  of  Dollars Billions  of  Dollars
(As  of  July  1st)

1919 546.8  18.99  28.8

1920 587.7  21.08  27.9

1921 484.0  19.63  24.7

1922 533.9  20.47  26.1

1923 570.3  22.11  25.8

1924 600.1  23.53  25.5

1925 653.4  25.98  25.1

1926 695.3  25.57  27.2

Note:  The  data  used  in  this  table  were  supplied  by  Mr.  Carl  Snyder  of  the  Federal
Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.  For  the  1922  estimate  of  payments  by  check,  see  text.
The  figures  in  other  years  for  the  country  outside  of  New  York  were  made  from  the  1922
estimate  by  means  of  an  index  based  upon  debits  in  140  cities.  Mr.  Snyder  believes  that
the  margin  of  error  in  these  estimates  may  be  10  per  cent.

economy  has  developed  a  mechanism  adequate  to  the  changing  re-
quirements made  upon  it  from  phase  to  phase  of  business  cycles.
Whether  this  impression  is  sound  depends,  of  course,  upon  the  relative
magnitudes  involved.  And  these  magnitudes  vary  from  cycle  to
cycle  and  from  country  to  country.  Here,  then,  is  another  problem
which  we  must  treat  on  a  quantitative  basis,  with  the  expectation
that  the  results  will  not  be  the  same  in  all  cases,  or  in  all  phases  of
the  cycle.

While  the  payments  made  in  coin  and  paper  money  seem  not
to  exceed  one-tenth  or  one-fifth  of  the  total,  these  payments  must
be  made,  and  they  cannot  be  made  in  checks  without  a  mass  change
in  monetary  habits  and  arrangements.  The  velocity  of  coin  and
paper  money  is,  therefore,  a  highly  important  variable.  Concerning
its  average  magnitude  and  its  limits  of  fluctuation  scarcely  anything
has  been  learned  since  1911  when  Professor  Fisher  was  studying  the
equation  of  exchange.  His  final  result  for  1909  was  that  coin  and
paper  money  changed  hands  against  goods  on  the  average  21.1  times,
as  compared  with  52.8  times  for  deposit  currency.^  Our  next  prob-
lem is  whether  the  first  of  these  figures  is  as  far  out  of  the  way  as
later  data  show  the  second  to  be.

*The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  p.  304.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  127

Professor  Fisher's  method  of  approximating  the  velocity  of  coin
and  paper  money  involved  (1)  an  estimate  of  the  amount  of  coin
and  paper  money  flowing  into  and  out  of  the  banks  in  a  year — an
estimate  built  up  from  the  deposits  made  in  a  part  of  the  banks  in
one  day;  (2)  an  estimate  of  the  sums  withdrawn  from  the  banks
which  are  paid  to  non-depositors,  and  (3)  estimates  of  the  average
number  of  times  the  cash  received  by  depositors  and  by  non-depositors
exchanges  against  goods  before  it  is  redeposited  in  banks.  Fisher's
final  picture  of  the  circulation  in  1909  is  as  follows:


Coin  and  paper

money  withdrawn

from  banks


8  billions
12 "
1 "


Use  made  of  the  funds
withdrawn


Paid  to  depositors
Paid  to  non-depositors
Paid  to  non-depositors


Average  circula-
tion of  the
funds  with-
drawn before
they  are
redeposited

Once

Twice
Three  times


Volume  of  pay-
ments made  out-
side of  banks  by
coin  and  paper
money

8  billions
24 "
3 "


21  billions


35  biUions


To  get  the  average  velocity  of  coin  and  paper  money  in  this  year,
he  divided  this  total  of  35  billions  by  his  estimate  of  the  amount
of  money  in  circulation,  1.63  billions,  and  thus  got  21.5 — a  figure
which  he  scaled  down  in  the  final  adjustments  to  21.1.^

Little  confidence  can  be  felt  in  results  resting  upon  so  many  con-
jectural estimates.  And  the  best  test  that  we  can  make  by  the  use
of  later  data,  while  somewhat  less  conjectural,  yields  but  vague  re-
sults. As  said  above,  Mr.  Snyder  has  shown  that  the  check  payments
in  the  United  States  in  1922  totaled  about  534  bilHon  dollars.  If  we
accept  Kinley's  estimates  that  payments  made  by  check  constitute
80-85  per  cent  of  all  payments,  then  we  must  put  the  payments  made
by  coin  and  paper  money  in  1922  at  from  94  to  133  billions.  If,  as
Professor  Fisher  thinks  proper,  we  take  at  least  90  per  cent  as  the
proportion  of  payments  by  check,  the  payments  in  coin  and  paper
money  shrink  to  59  billions.  The  average  amount  of  money  in  circu-
lation that  year  outside  of  the  treasury  and  the  banks  was  3.67  billion
dollars.*^ Division  gives  the  average  velocity  of  coin  and  paper  money

'  For  the  details  of  this  elaborate  computation,  see  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,
pp.  448-477.

'On  the  assumption  that  the  coin  and  paper  money  in  all  commercial  banks  on
June  30th,  bore  the  same  ratio  to  the  average  for  the  year  as  is  borne  by  the  coin  and
paper  money  outside  the  Treasury  and  the  Federal  Reserve  System  to  the  average
for  the  year.


128  BUSINESS  CYCLES

in  1922  as  16,  26,  or  36  times,  according  as  we  take  90,  85,  or  80  as
the  percentage  of  payments  by  check.  Professor  Fisher's  figures —
21.1  in  1909  and  30  in  1918 — fall  within  this  range.  There  seems  to
be  no  such  difference  as  he  surmised  between  the  velocity  of  deposit
currency  and  of  paper  money  and  coin.  The  middle  figure  in  the
range,  26,  seems  the  most  plausible.  It  coincides  with  the  velocity
of  deposit  currency  in  1922  shown  by  Table  3.  But  of  course  this
is  a  most  uncertain  guess.  Whatever  figure  we  accept  as  representing
the  average  velocity  of  coin  and  paper  money,  we  may  suppose  that
the  annual  rate  rises  and  falls  with  the  activity  of  trade,  though
probably  in  less  degree  than  the  velocity  of  bank  deposits.


5. The  Quantity  Theory  and  Business  Cycles.

So  far  we  have  been  concerned  with  the  way  in  which  the  circu-
lating medium  responds  to  the  changes  which  business  cycles  bring
in  the  volume  of  trade.  We  cannot  leave  this  topic,  however,  without
noting  the  contention  that  fluctuations  in  the  quantity  of  the  circu-
lating medium  are  causes  of  price  changes  and  so  of  business  cycles,
rather  than  adaptations  to  the  needs  of  business.  This  view  is  most
picturesquely  put  in  the  title  of  one  of  Professor  Fisher's  recent
articles,  'The  Business  Cycle  Largely  'A  Dance  of  the  Dollar.'* "  ^

The  problem  can  best  be  presented  by  using  the  equation  of  ex-
change as  formulated  by  Fisher:  MV  +  WY'  =  PT.  M  stands  for
the  quantity  of  coin  and  paper  money  in  circulation  and  M'  for  the
amount  of  deposits  subject  to  check.  V  and  V^  are  the  respective
velocities  at  which  these  media  are  exchanged  for  goods.  P  represents
the  price  level  and  T  the  physical  volume  of  goods  exchanged.  Thus
the  equation  means  that  the  total  volume  of  payments  made  in  coin,
paper  money  and  checks  in  a  given  time  equals  the  money  value  of
the  goods  bought  and  sold.

For  the  moment  we  are  not  concerned  with  the  conditions  under
which  this  equation  is  valid,  but  with  the  causal  relationship  among
the  several  magnitudes  represented  in  the  equation.  Professor  Fisher
holds  that

The  price  level  is  normally  the  one  absoluteli/  passive  element
in  the  equation  of  exchange. It  is  controlled  solely  by  the

*See  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  December, 1923,  vol.  xyiii,
pp.  1024-1028.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  129

other  elements  and  the  causes  antecedent  to  them,  but  exerts
no  control  over  them.^

In  this  proposition  the  word  ^^normally"  is  important:  for  Professor
Fisher  admits  that  'Ho  a  limited  extent  during  transition  periods,  or
during  a  passing  season  (e.g.  the  fall)''  the  "price  level  is  an  inde-
pendent cause  of  changes"  in  other  magnitudes  in  the  equation.^

What,  then,  are  "transition  periods,"  and  what  fraction  do  they
make  of  time? Professor  Fisher's  answer  begins  as  follows:

The  change  which  constitutes  a  transition  may  be  a  change
in  the  quantity  of  money,  or  in  any  other  factor  of  the  equation
of  exchange,  or  in  all.*

The  discussion  of  transition  periods,  thus  introduced,  gives  him  occa-
sion to  expound  a  theory  of  "credit  cycles,"  which  stresses  the  lag  in
the  adjustment  of  interest  rates  to  changes  in  the  price  level. And

*  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  p.  172, Italics  as  in  original.

Through  a  most  ingenious  statistical  study,  of  which  some  account  will  be  given
in  the  next  chapter,  Professor  Fisher  has  recently  come  to  the  "conclusion  that  changes
in  price  level  almost  completely  explain  fluctuations  in  trade,  for  the  period  1915-23,"
and  that  they  "dominate"  fluctuations  in  trade  from  1877  to  1914.  See  "Our  Unstable
Dollar  and  the  So-called  Business  Cycle,"  Journal  of  the  Ameriaan  Statistical  Associa-
tion, June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  191  and  201.

Without  inquiring  for  the  moment  into  the  significance  of  Professor  Fisher's  sta-
tistical researches,  it  is  pertinent  to  ask  whether  his  two  conclusions  (1)  that  the
price  level  is  normally  "absolutely  passive"  and  "exerts  no  control  over"  other  elements
in  the  equation  of  exchange,  and  (2)  that  changes  in  the  price  level  "dominate"
fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  trade,  are  consistent  with  each  other.

The  two  conclusions  can  be  reconciled  formally  by  putting  a  strict  construction
upon  the  word  "normal."  My  understanding  is  that  Professor  Fisher  draws  a  sharp
line  between  what  is  normally  true  and  what  is  historically  true.  What  is  normall;^
true  is  that  which  would  happen  under  certain  hypothetical  conditions  which  are  never
fulfilled  absolutely.  What  is  historically  true  is  that  which  actually  happens  under
conditions  which  combine  the  factors  represented  in  the  theorist's  imaginary  case  with
a  continually  changing  host  of  other  factors.  Hence  relations  which  hold  normally
may  never  be  realized  historically.

Granted  the  logical  validity  of  this  distinction,  the  question  remains  how  an  in-
vestigator should  choose  the  hypothetical  conditions  to  be  assumed  in  his  theorizing.
One  who  is  interested  in  pure  theory  for  its  own  sake  may  choose  any  hypothetical
conditions  which  provide  the  basis  of  an  interesting  argument,  whether  that- argument
will  illuminate  experience  or  not.  But  I  take  it  Professor  Fisher  is  not  interested
in  pure  theory  for  its  own  sake;  he  desires  that  his  theorizing  shall  give  insight  into
actual  experience.  On  this  interpretation,  it  seems  doubtful  whether  hypothetical  as-
sumptions are  well  chosen  for  his  purposes  when  they  lead  to  conclusions  concerning
what  is  normally  true  which  run  counter  over  long  periods  to  the  results  of  hi3
statistical  studies  of  historical  processes.  By  altering  the  assumptions  underlying  hi3
theorizing  about  the  relations  among  the  factors  in  the  equation  of  exchange,  Pro-
fessor Fisher  might  draw  a  different  set  of  conclusions  concerning  what  is  normally
;true  which  would  harmonize  better  with  his  version  of  historical  truth.

'  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  p.  169. Italics  as  in  the  original.

*The  same,  p.  55.


130  BUSINESS  CYCLES

while  he  is  dealing  with  this  subject,  Professor  Fisher  observes  that
^'periods  of  transition  are  the  rule  and  those  of  equilibrium  the
exception/'  ^

On  this  showing,  there  seems  to  be  no  reason  from  the  viewpoint
of  a  quantity  theorist,  why  a  student  of  business  cycles  should  treat
the  price  level  as  a  "passive  element"  in  the  equation  of  exchange.
His  business  is  with  "transition  periods,"  these  periods  are  "the  rule,"
and  during  them  the  price  level  may  be  "an  independent  cause  of
changes"  in  other  factors  of  the  equation  of  exchange.  Thus,  the
quantity  theory  interposes  no  bar  to  following  any  leads  which  the
analysis  of  business  dealings  may  suggest.

We  cannot  rest  content,  however,  with  so  negative  a  conclusion.
What  we  need  is  insight  into  the  relations  between  changes  in  prices
and  changes  in  the  circulating  medium  under  modern  business  condi-
tions. Our  best  chance  of  getting  such  insight  is  to  follow  the  process
of  determining  prices,  transferring  goods,  and  making  payments.

The  three  quantities  represented  in  the  equation  of  exchange  as
simultaneous — payments,  prices,  and  physical  volume  of  trade — are
in  fact  three  stages  through  which  business  transactions  pass  in  time.
When  a  sale  is  made,  the  parties  agree,  tacitly  or  explicitly,  upon  the
price,  upon  the  quantity  of  goods  to  be  transferred,  upon  the  date  of
delivery,  and  upon  the  date  when  payment  is  due.  In  retail  trade,
all  three  stages  are  frequently  completed  in  a  few  minutes — the  cus-
tomer assents  to  the  price,  receives  his  bundle,  and  pays  cash.  But
delivery  is  deferred  when  consumers'  goods  are  made  to  order,  and
payment  is  often  deferred  to  the  end  of  the  month,  or  spread  over
several  months  on  some  "installment  plan."  In  wholesale  trade,  weeks
or  months  commonly  elapse  between  the  date  when  a  sale  is  made  at
an  agreed-upon  price,  the  date  when  the  goods  are  delivered  to  the
buyer,  and  the  still  later  date  when  the  seller  receives  a  check.  In
other  types  of  business  the  time  relations  between  the  three  stages
present  a  wide  variety,  ranging  from  prepayment  for  goods  to  be  de-
livered in  the  future  to  long  deferred  payments  for  goods  delivered  in
the  past.  How  long  are  the  average  lags  of  deliveries  behind  price
agreements,  and  of  payments  behind  deliveries;  how  these  lags  vary
from  trade  to  trade,  from  district  to  district  and  from  period  to  period,
are  matters  about  which  little  is  known;  but  that  such  lags  play  a
prominent  role  in  business  planning  is  certain. Time  is  therefore  a

'The  same,  p.  71.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  131

factor  which  cannot  be  disregarded  in  studying  the  relations  between
prices  and  the  circulating  medium.

In  terms  of  the  equation  of  exchange,  these  observations  mean  that
of  the  payments  (MV  +  M'VO  made  to-day,  the  bulk  are  payments
for  goods  transferred  (T)  some  time  ago,  at  prices  (P)  most  of  which
were  agreed  upon  still  earlier;  a  considerable  fraction  are  payments
for  goods  transferred  to-day  at  prices  now  agreed  upon;  a  minute
fraction  are  payments  for  goods  which  will  be  transferred  later.  Sim-
ilarly, of  the  goods  transferred  (T)  to-day,  a  few  have  been  paid  for
in  advance,  more  are  paid  for  now,  but  the  bulk  will  be  paid  for  in  the
future.  Once  more,  of  the  prices  (P)  agreed  upon  to-day,  a  part  are
paid  at  once,  but  a  larger  part  will  be  paid  in  weeks,  months,  and
years  to  come.

Though  merely  a  suggestion  of  the  complications  of  business  prac-
tice, what  has  been  said  suffices  to  show  that  on  every  business  day
the  payments  then  made,  the  transfers  then  effected,  and  the  prices
then  agreed  upon  refer  to  three  different  aggregates  of  transactions.
In  other  words,  the  day-by-day  relations  between  MV  +  M'V  and
FT  are  indeterminate — the  payments  made  to-day  are  most  unlikely
to  equal  the  prices  quoted  to-day  multiplied  by  the  goods  exchanged
to-day.^  The  only  way  to  maintain  the  equation  for  such  brief  inter-
vals is  to  interpret  the  PT  of  a  given  day  as  meaning  the  exchanges
for  which  payments  are  then  being  made,  instead  of  the  current  ex-
changes and  prices.  But  on  that  interpretation,  the  relation  between
the  time  intervals  covered  by  the  two  parts  of  the  equation  becomes
indeterminate.  An  expression  which  shows  nothing  about  time  gives
slight  help  toward  solving  problems  in  which  time  relations  are
important.

Quite  different  is  the  position  when  we  test  the  equation  of  ex-
change as  summarizing  the  transactions  of  a  large  community  for
some  such  interval  as  a  year — the  longer  the  interval,  the  better  for
the  equation.  On  that  basis,  we  can  say  both  that  the  payments,
prices  and  transfers  represented  all  refer  to  approximately  the  same
period  of  time,  and  that  the  two  sides  of  the  equation  are  nearly  equal
in  fact. To  be  concrete,  the  payments  made  each  year  in  the  United

'Indeed,  on  a  day-to-day  basis  the  expression  PT  is  nonsense;  for  only  a  part
of  the  goods  which  change  hands  on  a  given  day  change  hands  at  the  prices  which
are  current  on  that  day — the  P's  then  quoted  refer  in  large  part  to  T's  which  will
come  later.  Also  the  expression  MV  +  M'V  may  have  a  different  interpretation
on  a  day-to-day  basis  from  that  assigned  it  on  an  annual  basis.  Of  course,  the  equation
was  not  made  to  represent  the  transactions  of  a  single  day,  and  its  inadequacy  for  that
purpose  is  not  surprising.


132  BUSINESS  CYCLES

States  are  mainly  payments  for  goods  transferred  within  that  year  at
prices  then  current.  Some  tranfers  and  some  payments  are  made
under  price  agreements  entered  into  before  January  1st;  some  price
agreements  are  made  before  December  31st  in  transactions  which  are
not  completed  by  transfers  and  payments  until  the  following  year  or
later.  But  the  difference  between  these  two  '^carry  overs"  is  small
in  comparison  with  the  aggregate  volume  of  transactions  completed
within  the  year.

So  much  seems  clear.  The  critical  question  is:  What  period  of
time  should  we  consider  in  trying  to  discover  the  relations  between
prices  and  the  circulating  medium?  If  we  consider  periods  of  a  year's
duration,  we  shall  have  the  equation  of  exchange  to  aid  us.  But  we
cannot  follow  business  processes  in  annual  summations.  To  learn
how  changes  in  prices,  physical  volume  of  trade,  and  dollar  volume
of  payments  are  related  to  each  other,  we  must  watch  these  changes
going  on  as  they  go  on  in  every  hour  of  every  business  day.  Accord-
ingly we  must  concentrate  attention  upon  what  happens  in,  or  rather
through,  brief  intervals  of  time.  If  an  analysis  of  the  day-by-day
processes  of  agreeing  upon  prices,  transferring  goods,  and  making  pay-
ments is  sound,  we  can  be  sure  that  it  will  prove  consistent  with  the
relations  which  the  equation  of  exchange  reveals  over  longer  periods.

Consider,  then,  a  business  man  buying  raw  materials  or  goods  for
resale — one  of  those  commercial  transactions  which  reach  a  money
total  far  exceeding  the  volume  of  retail  trade.  How  are  such  a  man's
decisions  regarding  prices  related  to  the  quantity  of  coin,  paper  money
and  deposit  currency  in  his  possession?

The  one  definite  remark  we  can  make  in  answer  is  that,  if  our
business  man  must  pay  in  cash  and  cannot  borrow,  the  means  of  pay-
ment in  his  possession  set  an  upper  limit  lipon  the  dollar  volume  of
his  purchases.  Note  that  the  price  he  can  offer  per  unit  is  not  lim-
ited, unless  the  price  of  a  single  unit  would  exhaust  his  funds.  Nor
is  the  number  of  units  he  can  buy  limited,  with  the  same  exception.
The  limit  is  imposed  not  upon  prices  as  such,  nor  upon  physical  vol-
ume of  trade  as  such,  but  upon  prices  times  physical  volume.  Below
this  limit,  even  our  cash-paying,  non-borrowing  business  man  has
free  play  for  judgment  concerning  what  price  to  pay  and  how  much
to  buy.  His  range  of  discretion  is  further  enlarged  by  the  factor  of
time.  He  can  increase  or  diminish  the  scale  of  his  purchases  accord-
ing as  he  thinks  prices  will  rise  or  fall  in  the  near  future;  he  need  not


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  133

spend  his  funds  as  he  receives  them,  but  can  buy  on  a  hand-to-mouth
schedule  for  a  while  and  wait  for  a  favorable  opportunity  to  make  a
large  purchase.  Yet  we  must  note,  also,  what  our  business  man  is
not  likely  to  forget,  that  the  more  goods  he  can  buy  and  sell  at  given
margins  the  more  money  he  will  make.  Thus  he  has  a  standing  in-
centive to  expand  his  transactions  to  the  limit  set  by  his  circum-
stances. These  limiting  circumstances  are  numerous  and  shifting;
but  among  them  the  amount  of  his  funds  is  a  factor  of  the  first  rank
under  the  conditions  we  are  discussing.

Of  course,  these  conditions  are  not  typical ;  nearly  every  business
man  can  both  buy  on  time  and  borrow.  That  fact  makes  the  rela-
tions between  prices  and  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium  still
more  elastic.  The  upper  limit  upon  an  individual's  purchasing  power
is  set  by  the  funds  in  his  hands  plus  the  credit  he  can  get  from  sellers
and  banks.  The  credit  he  can  get  depends  not  merely  on  his  financial
position  at  a  given  moment,  but  also  on  his  financial  prospects  over  a
period  which  varies  considerably  from  case  to  case,  and  on  the  finan-
cial position  and  prospects  of  those  from  whom  he  seeks  credit.  Thus
the  consideration  of  an  individual  business  man's  ability  to  buy
widens  out  into  consideration  of  the  business  community's  ability  to
provide  him  with  the  means  to  pay.

If  the  financial  positions  and  prospects  of  both  seekers  and  grantors
of  credit  are  important  factors  in  determining  the  purchasing  power
of  business  men,  then  the  problem  of  prices  and  the  circulating  medi-
um will  change  its  complexion  as  these  positions  and  prospects  shift.
For  the  business  community  as  a  whole,  we  know  that  the  financial
position  and  prospect  changes  from  phase  to  phase  of  business  cycles.
Therefore  in  dealing  with  the  problem  of  prices  and  the  circulating
medium,  we  must  not  merely  consider  brief  intervals  of  time,  but
must  recognize  also  that  what  is  true  of  one  brief  interval  may  be  false
of  another.  What  present  knowledge  enables  us  to  do  is  to  discuss
the  problem  with  reference  to  intervals  characterized  by  business
depression,  revival,  prosperity,  and  recession.  Of  the  facts  required
for  such  a  discussion,  the  more  important  have  been  suggested  by  the
preceding  sections,  or  by  the  "banking  theories"  of  business  cycles
summarized  in  Chapter  I.

During  a  period  of  depression,  the  quantity  of  coin  and  paper
money  which  was  in  hand-to-hand  use  toward  the  close  of  the  pre-
ceding period  of  prosperity,  exceeds  current  requirements.  The  velocity


134  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  circulation  declines;  "idle  money''  accumulates  in  the  banks,  swell-
ing their  cash  reserves ;  if  the  bank-note  currency  is  elastic,  it  is  con-
tracted; if  business  remains  more  active  in  other  countries,  gold  is
likely  to  be  exported.  What  happens  to  coin  and  paper  money  hap-
pens also  to  deposit  currency  and  to  commercial  credits.  Business
men  turn  over  their  funds  less  rapidly,  require  less  working  capital,
repay  part  of  their  bank  loans  (despite  the  lower  discount  rates),  and
reduce  their  accounts  payable.  The  reduction  of  bank  loans  com-
monly exceeds  the  net  flow  of  idle  cash  to  the  banks,  so  that  deposits
subject  to  check  decline  somewhat.  Accordingly,  the  limit  upon  coin
and  paper  money  in  circulation  is  fixed,  not  by  the  monetary  stock
and  bank-note  policy,  but  by  the  current  demands  of  trade.  Sim-
ilarly, the  limit  upon  deposit  currency  is  fixed,  not  by  what  the
banks  can  provide,  but  by  what  business  men  care  to  use.  In  Pro-
fessor Fisher's  terms,  the  fall  of  prices  and  the  concomitant  shrinkage
in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  are,  for  the  time  being,  the  "active"
factors  in  the  equation  of  exchange.  To  the  conditions  which  they
produce,  the  monetary  and  banking  factors  adjust  themselves  in
whatever  way  the  organization  of  the  monetary  and  banking  systems
permits.

These  banking  and  monetary  adjustments  to  business  depression
are  among  the  developments  which  facilitate  a  revival  of  activity.
The  low  discount  rates,  the  reserve  lending-power  of  the  banks,  the
redundant  quantity  of  coin  and  paper  money,  the  low  velocities  of
circulation  mean  that  an  increase  in  business  transactions  will  en-
counter no  check  from  the  inadequacy  of  the  circulating  medium.
Business  men  who  see  a  prospect  of  profit  in  enlarging  their  pur-
chases have  no  difficulty  in  securing  means  of  payment  if  their  bankers
share  their  confidence.  The  physical  volume  of  trade  and  prices  can
enter  an  ascending  spiral,  every  increase  in  the  one  promoting  an  in-
crease in  the  other.  As  the  dollar  volume  of  business  expands,  a  new
series  of  adjustments  is  worked  out  in  the  distribution  of  coin  and
paper  money  between  the  banks  and  the  public,  in  the  issue  of  bank
notes,  perhaps  in  the  international  distribution  of  gold,  certainly  in
the  volume  of  deposits  subject  to  check,  and  in  the  velocities  of  cir-
culation. Monetary  and  banking  conditions  may  be  said  to  "permit"
these  developments,  and  even  to  "favor"  them ;  but  the  "active"  role
is  still  played  by  prices  and  the  physical  volume  of  trade.

Not  until  the  dollar  volume  of  business  has  grown  so  large  that  it
taxes  the  elasticity  of  the  monetary  and  banking  system,  do  the


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  135

monetary  factors  in  the  equation  of  exchange  begin  to  dominate
business  transactions.  That  point  is  sure  to  be  reached  in  business
cycles,  however,  provided  some  non-monetary  factor  does  not  put  an
earher  close  upon  the  expansion  of  trade.  Even  in  the  centers  of
finance,  the  velocity  of  circulation  cannot  be  increased  indefinitely.
There  is  little  assurance  that  the  monetary  stock  of  gold  will  grow
with  the  need  of  bank  reserves,  and  there  is  full  assurance  that  pros-
perity will  draw  an  increasing  quantity  of  coin  and  paper  money
into  hand-to-hand  circulation.  If  bank  reserves  do  not  decline,  at
least  they  fail  to  expand  as  rapidly  as  do  demand  liabilities.  There
are  limits,  more  or  less  definite,  fixed  partly  by  law,  partly  by  practi-
cal experience,  upon  the  minimum  ratios  between  bank  reserves  on  the
one  hand  and  bank  notes  and  deposits  on  the  other  hand.  When  these
minima  are  approached,  bankers  must  check  the  expansion  of  loans.
On  the  development  of  such  conditions  it  ceases  to  be  true  that  the
business  man  can  count  upon  obtaining  funds  to  finance  what  prom-
ise to  be  profitable  transactions.  It  then  becomes  true  that  both
prices  and  the  physical  volume  of  trade  are  "passive'^  factors,  con-
trolled for  the  time  being  by  monetary  and  banking  conditions.  And
this  domination  becomes  more  absolute  if  the  stringency  develops
into  a  financial  panic,  and  many  business  men  fear  lest  they  cannot
obtain  funds  to  meet  their  maturing  obligations.

In  numerous  business  cycles,  we  shall  find  that  prosperity  wanes
from  other  causes  before  the  dollar  volume  of  trade  has  attained  di-
mensions which  overtax  the  monetary  and  banking  systems.  Many
recessions  show  slight  traces  of  monetary  stringency.  Thus  the
periods  when  monetary  and  banking  factors  dominate  prices  and  the
physical  volume  of  trade  are  brief,  and  they  recur  less  regularly  than
the  periods  of  depression,  revival,  and  moderate  prosperity,  when
prices  and  the  physical  volume  of  trade  play  the  "active"  roles.  Nev-
ertheless, the  intervals  of  monetary  domination  have  had  critical  im-
portance in  the  history  of  prices.*^  How  that  has  come  about  may  be
stated  in  terms  of  the  foregoing  analysis,  though  not  without  some
repetition.

The  net  shifts  of  price  levels  between  two  dates  separated  by
decades  depend  upon  the  relative  duration  of  the  several  intervening
periods  of  prosperity  and  the  corresponding  periods  of  depression,

'This  whole  discussion  relates  to  metallic-standard  monetary  systems,  supplemented
by  banks  of  deposit  and  issue.  Inconvertible  paper-money  standards  present  certain
special  problems  which  it  is  not  necessary  to  consider  here.


136  BUSINESS  CYCLES

together  with  the  rates  at  which  prices  rise  in  the  first  set  of  periods
and  fall  in  the  second  set.  Hence,  a  factor  which  helps  to  lengthen
the  prosperous  periods  of  successive  cycles,  to  shorten  the  periods  of
monetary  stringency,  and  to  provide  financial  conditions  which  favor
early  revivals,  tends  to  give  the  undulating  curve  of  prices  a  rising
secular  trend.  Under  gold-standard  monetary  systems,  an  increase  in
the  current  output  of  gold  is  such  a  factor.  A  large  flow  of  gold  into
bank  reserves  and  general  circulation  postpones  the  time  when  an
expansion  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade  will  overtax  the  monetary
and  banking  resources  for  making  payments.  When  a  monetary
stringency  does  occur,  such  a  flow  brings  quicker  relief,  and  hastens
the  day  when  a  revival  of  activity  becomes  financially  possible.  A
dwindling  of  the  current  additions  to  the  monetary  stock  of  gold  has
the  opposite  effects,  and  tends  to  give  the  undulating  course  of  prices
a  declining  secular  trend.  We  now  have  index  numbers  of  wholesale
prices  covering  some  century  and  a  half  in  countries  which  most  of
that  time  have  had  gold  standards.  The  correspondence  between  the
secular  trends  of  these  index  numbers  and  the  secular  trends  of  gold
production  has  been  fairly  close.  When  the  world  output  of  gold
has  been  increasing  rapidly,  or  has  been  fluctuating  about  a  high  level,
prices  have  moved  up  and  down  with  the  alternations  of  business
prosperity  and  depression ;  but  they  have  risen  more  than  they  have
fallen.  When  the  annual  output  of  gold  has  declined,  remained  on  a
relatively  low  level,  or  increased  slowly,  prices  have  continued  their
cyclical  oscillations;  but  the  declines  have  exceeded  the  advances.^

To  sum  up:  the  lag  of  deliveries  behind  price  agreements,  and  of
payments  behind  deliveries,  gives  business  men  time  to  arrange  the
financing  of  their  transactions.  In  periods  of  depression,  revival,  mod-
erate prosperity,  and  even  mild  recession,  the  man  who  buys  skillfully
knows  that  the  possession  of  goods  which  can  be  sold  at  a  profit
will  help  him  to  borrow  part  of  the  funds  wherewith  to  make  pay-

®To  enter  into  further  details  concerning  this  well-known  correspondence  would
divert  attention  from  what  is  at  present  the  main  issue.  Yet  it  may  be  noted  that
there  are  grounds  for  hoping  that  men  may  free  themselves  from  dependence  upon
fortuitous  changes  in  the  annual  output  of  gold  by  more  skillful  management  of  their
monetary  and  banking  systems.  Whether  such  policies  as  have  recently  been  adopted
by  the  Federal  Reserve  Banks  of  the  United  States  to  prevent  a  huge  supply  of  gold
from  producing  such  an  inflation  of  prices  as  might  have  been  expected  from  historical
precedents  can  be  generally  applied  and  further  developed  is  a  matter  for  the  future
to  determine.  Seen  in  historical  perspective,  these  experiments  appear  as  the  current
stage  in  that  long  and  gradual  process  by  which  men  are  learning  to  keep  money,
the  good  servant,  from  becoming  at  times  a  bad  master.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  157

ment.  It  is  the  current  and  prospective  money  value  of  merchan-
dise that  counts  to  the  credit  man.  Thus  an  increase  of  P,  which
swells  the  value  of  inventories,  becomes  a  basis  for  an  increase  of  M',
and  of  that  part  of  M  which  consists  of  bank  notes.  An  increase  of
T  (physical  volume  of  trade)  plays  the  same  role,  unless  it  is  offset  by
a  decline  of  prices.  Usually,  though  not  always,  these  two  factors
rise  and  decline  together — a  close  study  of  their  shifting  relations
from  phase  to  phase  of  business  cycles  is  one  of  the  leading  problems
for  later  chapters.  When  the  pecuniary  volume  of  business  expands,
it  not  only  swells  the  volume  of  credit  currency,  but  also  quickens  the
velocities  of  circulation.  Thus,  most  of  the  time,  P  and  T  are  the
"active"  factors  in  the  equation  of  exchange ;  they  bring  about  changes
in  M',  V  and  V;  to  a  less  extent  they  affect  even  M.

Modern  monetary  and  banking  systems  provide  a  considerable
measure  of  elasticity  in  all  the  factors  which  affect  payments,  except
gold  and  certain  types  of  government  paper  money.  Gold  is  par-
ticularly important  because  under  monetary  systems  of  the  approved
type  it  provides  the  critical  reserve  for  M'.  The  free  movements  of
P  and  T  are  confined  within  the  range  provided  by  this  elasticity.
When  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade  has  reached  limits  which  tax
MV  +  M'V,  then  monetary  and  banking  factors  assume  the  "active"
role,  and  force  a  reduction  in  PT.  Not  every  business  cycle  reaches
a  pitch  of  intensity  which  brings  on  a  financial  stringency.  But  in
the  past  that  point  has  been  reached  with  regularity  sufl&cient  to  let
the  secular  trends  of  gold  production  control  the  secular  trends  of
wholesale  prices.

These  conclusions  may  be  repeated  in  slightly  different  form:
Because  of  the  lag  of  deliveries  behind  price-agreements  and  of  pay-
ments behind  deliveries,  the  payments  made  on  a  given  day  are  most
unHkely  to  equal  the  prices  then  current  times  the  transfers  then  in
process.  But  in  buying  goods,  business  men  must  plan  to  pay  for
them  by  the  dates  set  by  trade  practices  or  formal  contract.  This
means  that  the  equation  of  exchange,  which,  as  commonly  inter-
preted, does  not  hold  for  short  periods,  is  substantially  valid  for
periods  such  as  a  year  or  more.  Nor  does  it  matter  whether  the
years  be  years  of  depression  or  prosperity,  crisis  or  revival,  save  that
the  proportion  of  bad  debts  may  become  appreciable  in  a  year  of
severe  crisis.  All  the  time,  business  men  have  an  incentive  to  buy  as
many  goods  as  they  can  resell  at  a  profit,  and  to  charge  prices  as
high  as  the  trafl&c  will  bear. In  depression,  revival,  moderate  pros-


138  BUSINESS  CYCLES

perity  and  mild  recessions,  the  effective  limit  upon  their  transactions
is  set  by  commercial  demand.  Monetary  and  banking  conditions
would  permit  a  larger  volume  of  business.  But  in  intense  booms,
the  commercial  demand  may  become  so  active  that  transactions  reach
the  limit  set  by  the  monetary  and  banking  systems.  Over  long  periods
of  time,  prices  and  the  physical  volume  of  trade  have  tended  to  ex-
pand up  to  these  limits — not  steadily,  but  in  recurrent  spurts  of  ac-
tivity. And  that  fact  has  given  changes  in  the  annual  output  of  gold
a  dominant  influence  upon  the  secular  trends  of  wholesale  prices,  and
seemingly  some  influence  upon  the  secular  trends  of  the  physical
volume  of  trade.

Time,  then,  is  of  the  utmost  consequence  in  considering  the  rela-
tions between  prices  and  "the  quantity  of  money.'^  Relations  which
hold  in  long  periods  do  not  hold  in  short  ones.  Nor  are  all  short
periods  alike;  what  is  true  in  certain  phases  of  business  cycles  is  not
true  in  all  phases.  Yet  most  of  the  seemingly  contradictory  state-
ments which  fill  the  long  controversy  over  this  problem  can  be  recon-
ciled when  put  in  their  proper  relation  to  time.  For  example,  I  do
not  think  that  anything  said  here  is  incompatible  with  Professor
Fisher's  exposition  of  the  causal  relations  between  the  factors  in  his
equation  of  exchange,  provided  his  term  "normally"  is  not  taken  in
the  sense  of  usually.  Nor  is  the  present  discussion  inconsistent  with
the  celebrated  theorem:  "Other  things  being  equal,  prices  vary  di-
rectly as  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation.'^  That  theorem  is
formally  valid.  Equally  valid  are  a  number  of  other  theorems  similar
in  form :  for  example :  "Other  things  being  equal,  the  quantity  of  the
circulating  medium  varies  directly  as  prices:"  "Other  things  being
equal,  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium  varies  directly  as  the
physical  volume  of  trade."  Any  of  these  propositions  can  be  devel-
oped into  an  adequate  theory  of  the  "relations  between  money  and
prices"  by  analyzing  the  "other  things"  which  are  supposed  to  re-
main equal.  Yet  it  is  an  awkward  way  of  working  to  start  with  a
proposition  which  suggests  so  limited  a  view  of  the  problem,  and  it  is
misleading  to  end  with  a  proposition  which  contains  so  limited  a  ver-
sion of  the  truth.  The  orthodox  formulation  of  the  quantity  theory
owes  its  prominence  to  the  fact  that  economists  have  given  most  at-
tention to  the  long-period  relations  between  gold-supply  and  prices
at  wholesale.  For  that  particular  problem,  the  proposition  "other
things  being  equal,  prices  vary  Qirectly  as  the  quantity  of  money  ip


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  139

circulation"  is  both  valid  and  important.  But  for  the  periods  with
which  the  theory  of  business  cycles  is  concerned,  we  need  a  far  more
discriminating  statement  of  the  relations  among  prices,  the  physical
volume  of  trade,  the  quantity  and  the  velocity  of  the  circulating
medium — a  statement  which  takes  into  account  changes  in  these  re-
lations produced  by  depression,  revival,  prosperity  and  recession.®


V.  The  Flow  of  Money  Payments.
1.  Production  and  Purchasing  Power.

To  make  the  business  economy  function  smoothly,  it  is  necessary
not  only  that  the  volume  and  velocity  of  the  circulating  medium
shall  respond  to  the  changing  pace  of  business,  but  also  that  coin,
paper  money,  and  deposit  currency  shall  keep  flowing  through  the
hands  of  business  enterprises  and  individuals  in  exchange  for  goods.
The  flow,  moreover,  must  be  kept  adjusted  to  the  counter  flow  of
goods  offered  for  sale,  in  detail  as  well  as  in  gross.  If  the  dollar
volume  of  any  kind  of  goods  flowing  to  market  exceeds  the  flow  of
purchasing  power  which  the  prospective  buyers  are  receiving  and
expending  for  that  kind  of  goods,  business  troubles  result — troubles
that  are  trifling  or  grave  as  the  quantities  involved  are  small  or  large.

As  we  saw  in  Chapter  I,  two  sets  of  theorists  have  found  an  ex-
planation of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  this  feature  of  the  business
economy.  The  Pollak  Foundation  group  contend  that  in  prosperity
the  flow  of  money  incomes  to  consumers,  and  from  consumers  to  the
sellers  of  consumers^  goods,  lags  behind  the  dollar  volume  of  the
consumers'  goods  poured  into  the  markets.  Mr.  P.  W.  Martin  holds
a  similar  thesis  with  regard  to  money  incomes  at  large  and  goods  of
all  kinds.  The  over-production  theorists  look  at  the  process  from
the  other  side;  they  offer  a  variety  of  reasons  why  the  flow  of  goods
to  market  exceeds  the  markets'  ability  or  willingness  to  buy  at  profit-
able prices. To  make  use  of  these  hypotheses  in  interpreting  business

'  Much  the  best  survey  of  the  literature  concerning  the  quantity  theory  of  the  value
of  money  known  to  me  is  given  by  Professor  James  W.  Angell's  recent  treatise  on
The  Theory  of  International  Prices,  Cambridge  (Massachusetts),  1926.  Although  he
shows  that  attention  has  frequently  been  called  to  the  factor  of  time  in  discussions  of
the  relations  between  money  and  prices,  Angell  notes  that  writers  upon  monetary
theory  have  neglected  the  problems  presented  to  them  by  cyclical  fluctuations  in
trade.  (See  pp.  127,  134,  181.)  The  leading  exception  is  Mr.  R.  G.  Hawtrey,  whose
Currency  and  Credit  (2d  ed.,  London,  1923)  deals  acutely  with  the  topic.  Writers
upon  business  cycles  have  done  little  to  supply  what  the  monetary  theorists  have
omitted.


140  BUSINESS  CYCLES

activities  we  need  to  know  the  basic  facts  about  the  jBow  of  pur-
chasing power.

Our  knowledge  on  this  head  is  just  beginning  to  attain  quanti-
tative form.  Every  year,  the  volume  of  monetary  payments  vastly
exceeds  the  money  value  of  the  goods  produced — that  is  a  matter  of
course.  Some  progress  has  been  made  toward  tracing  and  measuring
the  currents  which  are  parts  of  this  general  circulation.  One  current
of  especial  importance  is  the  disbursement  of  money  incomes  to  con-
sumers and  the  spending  of  these  incomes  by  consumers.  Large  as  it
is,  this  current  is  but  a  minor  part  of  the  total  circulation  of  pur-
chasing power.  Much  greater  are  the  payments  made  by  business
enterprises  to  each  other,  as  they  pass  products  through  the  suc-
cessive links  of  the  chains  which  connect  producers  of  raw  materials
with  retail  shops,  or  with  final  business  buyers.  Even  the  "savings^'
of  individuals  and  business  enterprises  are  almost  all  paid  out  for
goods  in  some  form,  constituting  another  current  of  strategic  interest.
There  are  also  the  payments  from  one  individual  to  another  for  per-
sonal service,  and  the  payments  involved  in  collecting  government
revenues  and  making  government  disbursements.  Finally,  not  only
current  products  and  services,  but  also  a  portion  of  the  accumulated
property  rights  in  real  estate,  business  enterprises,  government  loans
and  the  like  change  hands  each  year.  So  huge  is  the  aggregate  value
of  these  properties,  that  a  shift  of  ownership  in  a  minor  fraction
creates  a  current  of  payments  running  in  the  tens  of  billions  of
dollars.

2.  The  Flow  of  Money  Incomes  to  Individuals.

The  magnitude  we  have  now  to  measure  as  best  we  may — incomes
received  by  individuals  in  money — is  considerably  smaller  than  the
country's  income  as  estimated  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic
Research.  It  does  not  include  the  value  of  their  own  produce  con-
sumed by  farm  families;  commodity  income  from  family  gardens,
poultry  and  cows;  the  rental  value  of  homes  occupied  by  their  own-
ers, or  any  allowance  for  the  use  of  household  furnishings  and  per-
sonal effects.  As  estimated  by  Dr.  King,  these  items  have  an  aggre-
gate value  which  ranges  from  nearly  7  to  slightly  over  8  billion
dollars  per  annum  in  1919-26.  By  subtracting  the  sums  in  question
from  the  corresponding  estimates  of  current  income,  we  get  estimates
of  income  received  in  money. Table  4  shows  these  results,  together


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  141

with  King's  estimates  of  total  payments  to  employees  as  wages,  sal-
aries, pensions,  compensation  for  injuries,  and  the  like.  It  should
be  noted  that  all  the  figures  for  1922-26  are  preliminary,  and  subject
to  revision  on  the  basis  of  a  more  detailed  analysis  of  the  underlying
data,  which  is  now  being  made  in  the  National  Bureau.


1919.

1920.
1921.
1922,
1923.
1924,
1925,
1926.


TABLE

4

[ncome  Received
United  States,

IN  Money  by  Individuals
1919-1926

Total  Income

Received  in  Money

Billions  of  Dollars

Payments  to

Employees

Billions  of  Dollars

Percentage  of

Total  Paid  to

Employees

59.9

34.8

58  per  cent

65.9

41.6

63 " "

55.4

34.7

63 " "

58.9*

35.3*

60  *  " "

69.7*

39.4*

57  *  " "

72.0*

39.6*

65  *  " "

78.9*

43.0*

54  *  " "

82.1*

44.5*

54  *  « "

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  change.

All  the  entries  are  estimates  made  by  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,
under  the  supervision  of  Dr.  Willford  I.  King.

According  to  these  estimates,  payments  to  employees  must  be  by
far  the  largest  of  the  income  streams.  Supplementary  studies  of  the
National  Bureau  indicate  that  salaries  of  officials  average  between
7  and  9  per  cent  of  total  payrolls  in  the  highly  organized  branches  of
trade  (where  they  are  most  important),  and  probably  less  than  3
per  cent  of  all  income  received  in  money. ^  Even  if  we  subtract  such
salaries  from  payrolls,  the  remainder  exceeds  all  the  other  money-
income  streams  put  together.  Another  conclusion  of  importance  for
students  of  business  cycles  is  that  the  ratio  of  wages  and  salaries  to
total  income  paid  in  money  rises  decidedly  in  depression  and  declines
in  prosperity.

A  less  comprehensive,  but  more  detailed,  view  of  the  relative
magnitude  of  the  several  money-income  streams  can  be  had  from  the
statistical  reports  of  the  Tax  Division  of  the  Bureau  of  Internal
Revenue.  Table  5  summarizes  the  pertinent  data.  Of  course  these
figures  must  be  considered  critically.  (1)  They  include  less  than
half  of  the  aggregate  money  incomes  of  individuals,  according  to

*See  Income  in  the  United  States,  vol.  i,  p.  99,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Re-
search, 1921.


142  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  estimates  of  the  National  Bureau,  mainly,  though  l)y  no  means
solely  because  tens  of  millions  of  small  incomes  are  exempt  from  the
tax,  and  are  not  reported  to  the  federal  authorities.  (2)  Since  these
small  incomes  are  composed  largely  of  wages,  the  percentages  of
wages  and  salaries  in  Table  5  run  somewhat  lower  than  in  Table  4,
though  not  so  much  lower  as  one  might  expect.  (3)  Relatively  few
farmers  and  other  small  business  men  report.  The  deficiency  in
profits  which  results  is  believed  to  be  offset  in  part  by  the  inclusion
under  this  head  of  considerable  interest  payments.  (4)  Interest  is
rather  low,  not  only  for  the  reason  just  suggested,  but  also  because
interest  upon  the  large  sum  of  tax-exempt  bonds  is  not  reported
fully. (5)  Finally,  efforts  to  avoid  and  to  evade  taxation  distort  the

TABLE  5

Personal  Incomes  Reported  to  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Internal
Revenue,  Classified  by  Sources

1919-1924

Billions  of  Dollars

1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924

Total 22.4 26.7 23.3 24.9 29.3 29.6

Salaries,  wages,  commissions,  bonuses,

directors' fees,  etc 10.8 15.3 13.8 13.7 14.2 13.6

Business,  trade,  commerce,  partner-
ships, farming,  and  profits  from  in-
cidental sales  of  property 6.7  5.9  4.2  5.3  7.6  8.0J

Dividends 2.5  2.7  2.5  2.7  3.1  3.3

Rents  and  royalties 1.0  1.0  1.2  1.2  1.8  2.o|

Interest,  investment,  and  fiduciary  in-
come 1.5  1.7  1.7  2.0  2.6  2.6!

Percentages  of  the  Total

1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924]
Total.! 100  100  100  100  100  lOo!

Salaries,  wages,  commissions,  bonuses,

directors'  fees,  etc 48  57  59  55  49  49

Business,  trade,  commerce,  partner-
ships, farming,  and  profits  from  in-
cidental sales  of  property 30  22  18  21  26  27

Dividends 11  10  11  11  11  11

Rents  and  royalties 4  4  5  5  6  7

Interest,  investment,  and  fiduciary  in-
come 7  6  7  8  9  91

Compiled  from  Statistics  of  Income  from  Returns  of  Net  Income  for  1924^  Washington, ,
1926,  pp.  8,  32-33.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  143

income  returns  to  an  unknown  extent,  and  one  which  may  vary
appreciably  with  changes  in  tax  rates,  efficiency  of  administration,  and
perhaps  with  business  conditions.

Even  in  incomes  large  enough  to  be  subject  to  the  federal  tax,
wages  and  salaries  average  slightly  more  than  half  of  the  total  one
year  with  another.  Profits  come  second,  despite  the  omission  of  nearly
99  per  cent  of  the  farmers,  and  equal  or  exceed  dividends,  rent  and
interest  added  together  in  the  years  of  business  activity.  Interest
payments  are  smaller  than  dividends,  but  that  appearance  may  be  due
to  a  difference  in  the  degrees  of  under-reporting.  Finally,  of  the
commonly  recognized  sources  of  incomes,  rent  is  the  smallest  accord-
ing to  these  figures.

A  second  question  can  be  answered  in  general  terms  by  rearrang-
ing the  data  in  Table  5:  How  are  the  money  incomes  of  individuals
from  different  sources  affected  by  business  cycles?  If  we  reduce  the
yearly  figures  for  the  various  income  streams  to  relatives  based  upon
their  respective  average  values,  and  also  compute  the  percentage
change  from  one  year  to  the  next,  we  can  see  which  streams  have
been  fairly  steady  and  which  have  been  highly  variable.  Table  6
serves  this  purpose.

In  view  of  the  extraordinary  price  gyrations  of  1919-21,  the  figures
in  Table  6  have  no  claim  to  stand  as  typical  of  the  changes  in  money
incomes  which  accompany  the  business  cycles  of  less  disturbed  times.
A  supplementary  table  covering  pre-war  years  would  be  useful;  but
the  data  for  making  estimates  of  money  income  command  less  confi-
dence prior  to  1914  than  the  data  for  recent  years,  and  the  latter  re-
quire confirmation.  Under  these  circumstances,  we  must  make  the
most  of  the  fact  that  a  case  which  magnifies  the  changes  has  its
advantages.

When  an  individual  is  considering  the  investment  of  his  funds,  he
thinks  of  bonds  as  yielding  a  fixed  rate  of  interest  (in  dollars),  and
of  stocks  as  yielding  dividends  which  may  change  in  any  quarter
year.  If  he  buys  real  estate,  he  may  be  expecting  an  income  fixed
by  a  long  lease  as  rigidly  as  interest  on  a  bond;  or  he  may  be  ex-
pecting an  income  subject  to  many  fiuctuations — all  depends  upon
the  character  of  the  property  he  acquires.  If  he  goes  into  business
on  his  own  account,  he  expects  a  higher  average  return  upon  his
investment  than  he  could  get  from  income  yielding  bonds,  stocks  or


144


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  6

Relative  Variability  op  the  Flow  op  Money  Incomes  from  Different  Sources

United  States,  1919-1924

Based  upon  Table  5

Percentages  of  the  Average  Values  during  the  Period  Covered
Average

Values  in  Percentages  of  the  Average  Values

Billions
of  Dollars 1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924

Total 26.0  86  103  90  96  113  114

Salaries,  wages,  commissions,
etc 13.6  80  113  102  101  105  100

Business,  trade,  profits  on
sales  of  property,  etc 6.3 107  94  67  84  121  127

Dividends 2.8  89  96  89  96  111  118

Rents  and  royalties 1.4  73  73  88  88  132  146

Interest,  investment,  and  fi-
duciary income 2.0  74  85  85  99  129  129

Percentage  Rise  (+)  or  Fall  (— )  from  Value  in  Preceding  Year

1919-  1920-  1921-  1922-  1923"

1920  1921  1922  1923  1924

Total +19% -13%  +7% +18%  +1%

Salaries,  wages,  commissions,  etc. ..  +42  —10  —1  +4  —4
Business,  trade,  profits  on  sales  of

property,  etc -12  -29  +26  +43  +5

Dividends +8  -7  +8  +15  +  6

Rents  and  royalties 0  +20  0  +50  +11

Interest,  investment,  and  fiduciary

income +13  0  +18  +30  0

Total  income  from  dividends,  rents,

and  interest +8  0  +9  +27  +  5

The  percentages  have  been  computed  from  figures  carried  to  more  places  than  are
flhown  here.

real  estate ;  but  he  must  expect  that  his  profits  will  vary  widely  from
year  to  year.

These  expectations  regarding  the  relative  steadiness  of  incomes
from  interest,  dividends,  rents,  and  profits  are  based  upon  the  returns
per  dollar  invested  in  different  ways.  That  is  not  what  Table  6
shows.  It  purports  to  give  changes  in  the  total  incomes  received  under
various  captions  by  all  individuals  who  report  to  the  Internal  Rev-
enue. The  total  receipts  are  affected  each  year  by  the  investment  of
new  funds  in  bonds,  stocks,  real  estate,  and  business. More  than


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  145

that,  the  tax  returns  include  ^'investment  income"  and  "fiduciary
income'^  with  interest,  they  include  royalties  with  rents,  and  they
include  gains  from  the  shifting  of  investments  with  business  profits.
Hence  differences  between  prevailing  opinions  regarding  the  relative
steadiness  of  returns  upon  investments  of  the  various  sorts  on  the
one  hand,  and  the  conclusions  suggested  by  the  totals  on  the  other
hand,  need  not  be  taken  as  discrediting  either  the  opinions  or  the
statistics.  In  studying  the  flow  of  incomes  to  individuals,  we  are
concerned  with  the  total  payments,  rather  than  with  the  returns  per
dollar  invested.

(1)  Profits  appear  to  be,  as  one  expects,  much  the  most  variable
type  of  income.  They  fall  nearly  30  per  cent  in  one  year  and  increase
over  40  per  cent  in  another  year.  (2)  Rents  and  royalties  rank  next
in  average  variations;  but  these  figures  may  not  be  representative,
because,  during  the  years  covered,  rents  seem  to  have  been  under-
going a  belated  adjustment  to  the  change  in  the  general  level  of
prices  brought  about  by  the  war.  They  make  spasmodic  advances  in
1921,  1923  and  1924,  while  in  two  other  years  they  show  no  change.
(3)  Interest,  investment  and  fiduciary  income  varies  much  more  than
one  would  expect.  All  the  changes  are  increases.  Even  in  the
severe  depression  of  1921,  in':erest  receipts  did  not  fall  off.  (4)  Divi-
dends, while  moving  up  or  down  every  year,  proved  decidedly  the
stablest  type  of  money  income  in  this  period.  That  is,  the  changes,
though  frequent,  were  small  in  comparison  with  the  maximum
changes  in  the  other  types  of  income.  Particularly  striking,  and
particularly  important  for  our  problem,  is  the  contrast  between  the
extreme  variability  of  profits  and  the  relative  steadiness  of  dividends.
Nor  does  Table  6  bring  out  this  contrast  in  full.  The  profits  there
shown  are  the  profits  of  individuals  and  partnerships,  while  dividends
are  paid  by  corporations.  If  we  subtract  the  deficits  reported  each
year  to  the  Internal  Revenue  by  the  corporations  which  lost  money
from  the  profits  reported  by  the  corporations  which  made  money,  we
get  net  corporate  incomes  of  8.4  billion  dollars  in  1919,  5.9  billions  in
1920,  0.5  billions  in  1921,  4.8  billions  in  1922,  6.3  billions  in  1923  and
5.4  bilhons  in  1924.^  Dividends  reported  by  individual  taxpayers
were  far  less  than  net  corporate  incomes  as  computed  here  in  the
relatively  good  business  years,  and  far  more  than  net  corporate  in-
comes in  1921.

*See  the  appropriate  text  tables  in  the  official  Statistics  of  Income  for  these  years.


146  BUSINESS  CYCLES

While  the  differences  in  variability  of  dividends,  interest,  and  rent
are  interesting,  they  are  not  of  great  importance  to  us.  Most  men
of  property  diversify  their  investments,  holding  some  bonds,  some
stocks,  and  perhaps  some  real  estate.  Hence  the  changes  in  the
money  incomes  of  the  investing  classes  are  best  ascertained  by  adding
together  interest,  dividends  and  rents.  On  so  doing  we  get  an  income
stream  whose  average  volume  (according  to  the  Internal  Revenue
figures)  is  about  equal  to  the  volume  of  profits,  but  which  varies  not
much  more  than  dividends.  This  is  the  flow  which  we  should  com-
pare with  profits  on  the  one  hand  and  wages  on  the  other.

That  comparison  indicates  that  the  largest  of  the  income  streams,
payments  to  employees,  as  wages,  salaries,  commissions,  bonuses,
pensions,  and  the  like,  was  decidedly  less  variable  than  profits  in
1919-24,  and  decidedly  more  variable  than  income  from  investments
in  securities  and  real  estate.  More  precise  statements  would  have
little  meaning,  because  we  know  that  our  data  are  open  to  question
and  that  the  period  covered  is  peculiar.  But  it  seems  improbable  that
the  variations  of  wages  and  salaries  in  this  period  were  more  exag-
gerated than  the  variations  of  interest  and  rents.  Thus  the  conclusion
is  probably  valid  that  the  largest  of  the  money-income  streams  are
also  the  most  variable  in  flow.  According  to  Table  6,  wages,  salaries
and  profits,  added  together,  make  over  three-quarters  of  taxable  in-
come; of  total  income  received  in  money  they  probably  make  four-
fifths.  And  their  aggregate  volume  may  change  by  15,  or  20  per  cent,
or,  in  extreme  cases  even  more,  in  a  single  year.

3.  The  Outflow  of  Personal  Incomes.

All  business  enterprises  disburse  money  incomes  directly  to  indi-
viduals ;  but  only  a  few  classes  of  enterprises  share  directly  in  the  re-
flow  of  purchasing  power  from  individuals.  By  far  the  greatest  col-
lectors of  consumers'  funds  are  the  retail  merchants.  A  much  smaller
stream  flows  to  the  landlords,  who  may  or  may  not  be  business  enter-
prises, and  still  smaller  streams  to  enterprises  which  render  personal
services  of  various  descriptions,  and  to  public  utilities.

Our  most  detailed  information  on  this  head  comes  from  the
analysis  of  family  expenditures.  In  1918-19  the  United  States  Bureau
of  Labor  Statistics  collected  budgets  from  over  12,000  famihes.  On
rearranging  the  data  according  to  channels  of  expenditure,  we  get
the  following  results:


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  147

TABLE  7

CHANNELa THROUGH WhICH FaMILT EXPENDITURES FlOW. BaSED UPON BUDQETS OF

12,096  American  Families  in  1918-19,  Collected  by  the  U.  S.  Bureau  op Labor
Statistics.

Average  Percentage

Expenditures  of  Total
Payments  made  to

Retail  shops $994.37  66.1

Service  agencies  (insurance,  laundry,  amusement,  etc.) — 83.03  5.5

Public  utOities 56.07  3.7

$1,133.47  75.3

Landlords 186.55  12.4

Professional  men  (doctors,  dentists,  nurses,  etc.) 43.42  2.9

Organizations  (churches,  trade  unions,  lodges,  etc.) 18.22  1.2

Servants 4.01  .3

Government  (postage,  taxes) 3.62  .2

Undistributed  ("patriotic,"  gifts,  vacations,  etc.) 36.98  2.5

Surplus 78.93  5.2

Total $1,505.20  100.0

Compiled  from  Cost  of  Living  in  the  United  States,  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  Bureau
of  Labor  Statistics,  No.  357,  Washington,  1924.

While  these  data  are  doubtless  representative  of  the  important
class  whose  expenditures  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  wished  to
cover  (white  families  in  industrial  centers,  depending  mainly  upon
wages  or  small  salaries),  they  are  certainly  not  representative  of  the
population  as  a  whole.  The  budgets  collected  by  Dr.  King  for  the
income  studies  of  the  National  Bureau  indicate  that,  as  incomes  in-
crease, families  devote  larger  percentages  of  their  expenditures  to
housing,  to  domestic  service,  to  travel  and  amusement,  and  smaller
percentages  to  purchases  from  retail  shops  and  public  utilities.  The
expenditures  of  farmers  probably  follow  still  a  different  pattern,  but
the  data  available  do  not  suffice  to  show  details.^  In  short  we  lack
budgets  representative  of  the  population  as  a  whole.

We  can,  however,  get  at  the  point  most  important  for  us — the
proportion  of  money  income  spent  at  retail  shops  by  the  population
as  a  whole — in  a  different  way.  Mr.  Lawrence  B.  Mann,  formerly  of
the  Federal  Reserve  system,  Professor  Paul  H.  Nystrom  of  the  Retail

*See  the  weights  used  in  making  index  numbers  of  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods
bought  by  families  which  expend  $25,000  per  year  and  $5,000  per  year;  by  families  of
urban  employees,  and  by  farm  families;  introduction  to  Income  in  the  Various  States,
National  Bureau  of  Economic  Researchj  1925.  These  figures  do  not  profess  to  be  com-
plete budgets;  but  they  do  cover  the  main  heads  of  family  expenditure,  and  justify
the  statements  made  in  the  text.


148  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Research  Bureau,  and  the  Federal  Trade  Commission  have  made  esti-
mates of  the  money  volume  of  retail  trade  in  the  United  States,  esti-
mates which  we  can  compare  with  the  estimates  of  money  income
made  by  the  National  Bureau.  The  results,  given  in  Table  8,  show
what  the  preceding  paragraph  makes  one  expect — that  the  proportion
of  money  income  which  flows  to  the  retail  shops  is  somewhat  smaller
in  the  case  of  the  whole  population  than  in  the  case  of  urban  wage
earners.

TABLE  8
Estimated  Proportion  op  Income  Received  in  Money  Spent  in  Retail  Shops

United  States,  1919-23

Estimated  Volume  oi  Percentage  of  Money

Estimated  Income Retail  Trade  Income  Spent  in

Received  Retail  Shops

in  Money Billions  of  Dollars  Per  Cent

Federal  Federal

Billions  of  Dollars  Nystrom- Trade  Nystrom- Trade

Trom  Table  4 Mann Commission  Mann Commission

1919 59.9  32.6  34.8  54  58

1920 65.9  38.3  38.3  5S  58

1921 55.4  33.6  30.7  61  55

1922 58.9  *  33.5  32.5  57  55

1923 69.7*  35.0  38.2  50  55

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  change.

Note:  I  have  taken  Paul  H.  Nystrom's  figure  for  1923  (35  billion  dollars)  as  basic,
and  used  Lawrence  B.  Mann's  figures  for  1919-22  as  an  index  for  carrying  the  series  back-
ward. The  connecting  link  is  an  estimate,  which  Professor  Nystrom  made  at  my  request,
that  the  volume  of  retail  trade  was  4  or  5  per  cent  larger  in  1923  than  in  1922.  See  Mann,
"The  Importance  of  Retail  Trade  in  the  United  States,"  American  Economic  Review,
December,  1923,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  609-617;  Nystrom,  "An  Estimate  of  the  Volume  of  Retail
Trade  in  the  United  States,"  Harvard  Business  Review,  January,  1925,  vol.  iii,  pp.  150-159.

The  Federal  Trade  Commission's  estimate  is  part  of  their  report  upon  National  Wealth
and  Income,  Senate  Document  No.  126,  69th  Congress,  1st  Session,  Washington,  1926,
pp.  306-313.

Of  the  three  estimates,  Professor  Nystrom's  seems  to  rest  upon  the
broadest  study  of  the  relevant  materials.  The  Federal  Trade  Com-
mission figures  are  built  up  by  a  bold  combination  of  various  bits  of
evidence  which  may  not  be  an  adequate  foundation  for  the  super-
structure. It  seems  improbable  that  the  percentage  of  money  income
spent  at  retail  shops  fell  off  in  the  bad  year  1921,  as  the  Commission
figures  indicate.  An  increase  in  this  percentage,  such  as  Mann's
estimates  show,  is  more  plausible.

The  general  conclusions  which  seem  justified  by  the  data  may  be
put  in  this  form:  (1)  More  than  half  of  the  money  incomes  received
by  individuals  flow  back  to  the  world  of  business  through  retail  mer-
chants, (2)  probably  this  proportion  rises  somewhat  in  dull  times,


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  149

(3)  other  business  enterprises,  such  as  public  utilities  and  service
agencies,  collect  probably  less  than  a  tenth  of  the  money  income,

(4)  more  than  a  quarter,  perhaps  nearly  a  third,  is  paid  to  landlords
(some  of  whom  are  corporations),  professional  men,  voluntary  or-
ganizations, servants,  and  the  government,  or  is  invested  as  savings.

4.  The  Flow  of  Payments  Among  Business  Enterprises.

Business-cycle  theorists  have  concerned  themselves  more  with  the
circuit  flow  of  payments  from  business  enterprises  to  consumers  and
from  consumers  back  to  business  enterprises  than  with  the  flow  of
payments  from  one  enterprise  to  another.  Yet  the  latter  flow  is
certainly  several  times  as  great  as  the  former.  In  preceding  sections
we  have  obtained  rough  estimates  for  recent  years  of  the  payments
made  by  check  in  the  United  States,  of  the  volume  of  money  income,
and  of  the  volume  of  retail  trade.  These  figures,  supplemented  by  a
new  (and  hazardous)  estimate  of  payments  made  in  coin  and  paper
money,  are  assembled  for  comparison  in  Table  9.

Inspection  of  these  figures  may  inspire  more  confidence  in  their
accuracy  than  is  merited.  The  percentage  relationships  among  the
quantities  are  fairly  stable;  but  such  is  likely  to  be  the  case  when
one  expresses  any  set  of  figures  as  percentages  of  much  larger  sums.
A  considerable  margin  of  uncertainty  surrounds  every  series  in  the
table — a  margin  which  is  broadest  in  the  estimates  of  payments
made  in  coin  and  paper  money.  Yet  the  estimates  are  probably
trustworthy  concerning  the  order  of  magnitude  of  the  three  quantities,
and  that  is  the  point  at  issue.

On  the  face  of*  the  figures,  retail  sales  account  for  not  much  more
than  one-twentieth  of  the  aggregate  volume  of  payments,  and  the
payment  of  money  incomes  to  individuals  for  about  one-tenth.  Even
the  round-flow  of  money  incomes  to  individuals  and  from  individuals
seems  to  make  only  a  fifth  of  the  aggregate  payments  in  average
business  years.  While  these  rather  precise  ratios  may  be  faulty,  it
seems  certain  that  the  payments  arising  from  other  business  transac-
tions are  several  times  the  volume  of  payments  involved  in  receiving
and  spending  personal  incomes.

All  business  is  said  to  depend  in  the  last  resort  upon  consumers'
demand,  and  the  statement  is  doubtless  valid  in  a  broad  sense.  Yet
there  is  no  mystery  in  the  fact  that  retail  trade  itself  is  but  a  small


150


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  9

Comparison  op  the  Estimated  Volume  of  Payments,  Income  Received  in  Money,

AND  Volume  of  Retail  Sales

United  States,  1919  to  1923  or  1926

Percentages  of
Estimated  Volume  of  Payments Estimated  the  Estimated

in  Incomes Estimated Total  Volume

in  Coin  and  Received Retail of  Payments

Checks Paper  Total in  Money Sales Income

Money  Received

Billions Billions Billions BiUions Billions  in Retail

of  of  of  of  of  Money Sales

Dollars Dollars Dollars Dollars Dollars  Per  Cent

1919 547  106  653  59.9  32.6 9.2 5.0

1920 588  121  709  65.9  38.3 9.3 5.4

1921 484  97  581  55.4  33.6 9.5 5.8

1922 534  93  627  58.9  *  33.5 9.4 5.3

1923 570  102  672  69.7  *  35.0 10.4 5.2

1924 600  98  698  72.0* 10.3

1925 653  95  748  78.9* 10.5

1926 695  105  800  82.1  * 10.3

♦  Preliminary  estimates,  subject  to  revision.

The  estimated  payments  in  checks  are  taken  from  Table  3.

The  estimated  payments  in  coin  and  paper  money  are  computed  by  assuming  that
the  average  volunie  of  these  media  outside  of  the  Treasury  and  the  banks  has  the
same  velocity  of  circulation  each  year  as  is  shown  by  the  estimates  of  deposit  velocity
in  Table  3.  This  assumption  is  as  plausible  as  any  other,  but  it  may  be  considerably
in  error.  The  results  it  yields  happen  to  agree  with  the  view  that  85  per  cent  of
American  payments  are  made  in  checks.  That  is,  sums  of  the  above  estimates  for
8  years  make  the  payments  in  coin  and  paper  money  14.9  per  cent  of  the  grand  totals.
On  Mr,  Carl  Snyder's  advice,  I  have  used  the  official  statements  of  coin  and  paper
money  in  circulation,  except  in  1919  and  1920.  Adjustments  of  the  official  figures  for
certain  bank  holdings  of  coin  and  paper  money  give  respectively  3.67  and  4.33  billion
dollars  in  these  two  years.

The  estimated  incomes  received  in  money  are  taken  from  Table  4.

The  estimated  retail  sales  are  the  Nystrom-Mann  figures  from  Table  8.

fraction  of  business.  In  most  cases  the  components  of  the  goods
which  the  consumer  finally  buys  have  been  bought  and  sold  several
times  over  by  wholesale  merchants,  jobbers,  manufacturers,  and  pro-
ducers of  raw  materials.  These  successive  turnovers  much  more  than
counterbalance  the  higher  prices  which  consumers  pay.* Then  there

*KinIey  found  the  deposits  of  wholesalers  to  be  more  than  twice  the  deposits  of
retail  dealers— $124,824,000  against  $60,447,000  on  March  16,  1909.  He  also  found
that  "all  other  deposits"  were  upwards  of  three  times  the  volume  of  retail  and  whole-
sale deposits  added  together — $502,817,000.  The  Use  of  Credit  Instruments  in  Payments
in  the  United  States  (Senate  Document  No.  399,  61st  Congress,  2d  session).  Washington,
1910;  pp.  85,  133,  171.

Building  upon  admittedly  questionable  taxation  returns  from  Pennsylvania,  the
Federal  Trade  Commission  estimates  the  dollar  volume  of  wholesale  trade  at  63.22
per  cent  of  the  dollar  volume  of  retail  trade  in  1923.  Presumably  this  estimate  takes
account  only  of  the  sales  by  wholesale  merchants  to  retailers.  See  National  Wealth
and  Income,  69th  Congress,  1st  Session,  Senate  Document  No.  126,  pp.  308,  314,  315.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  151

are  all  the  incidental  payments  involved  in  running  an  enterprise
which  deals  in  consumers'  goods,  from  freight  and  insurance  to  re-
pairs and  credit  transactions.  Next  we  must  add  in  the  business  in
producers'  goods,  including  the  construction  of  industrial  equipment.
Changes  in  the  ownership  of  securities  and  real  estate  call  for  another
vast  sum  of  payments.  So  also  does  the  investment  of  fresh  savings,
and  the  making  and  repaying  of  loans.  These  items  are  not  inde-
pendent of  each  other — for  example,  the  investing  of  fresh  savings  is
largely  the  paying  for  new  industrial  equipment — and  we  cannot
measure  them  as  yet.  But  the  list,  though  incomplete,  shows  that
there  is  no  reason  to  discredit  the  conclusions  drawn  from  Table  9.

For  the  smooth  working  of  the  business  economy  it  is  as  necessary
that  the  immensely  larger  flow  of  payments  among  business  enter-
prises shall  be  maintained  as  it  is  necessary  that  the  smaller  flow  of
payments  from  consumers  to  retail  merchants  shall  continue  un-
checked. The  strategic  importance  of  the  two  flows,  however,  cannot
be  judged  from  their  relative  volumes.  Indeed,  the  greater  the  volume
of  all  business  payments  in  comparison  with  the  volume  of  retail
trade,  the  more  delicate  may  become  the  equilibrium,  if  all  types  of
business  are  really  concerned  indirectly  with  satisfying  personal
wants.  Here  we  have  developed  yet  another  problem  which  we  must
face  when  we  come  to  study  the  interrelations  among  the  processes  of
business  expansion  and  contraction.

5.  Saving  and  Spending.

We  commonly  think  of  spending  money  and  saving  money  as  activ-
ities the  opposite  of  each  other.  But  every  kind  of  saving  except
actual  hoarding  involves  spending.  In  the  business  economy,  indeed,
the  process  of  saving  is  one  current  in  the  flow  of  money  payments.

This  process,  also,  has  been  made  to  yield  theories  of  business
cycles.  Professor  Tugan-Baranovski  contends  that  crises  come  be-
cause people  do  not  save  enough  money  to  meet  the  huge  capital  re-
quirements of  prosperity.  Professor  Spiethoff  holds  that  crises  come
because  people  put  their  savings  into  too  much  industrial  equipment
and  not  enough  consumption  goods.  Mr.  Hobson  says  simply  that,
when  incomes  expand  in  prosperity,  rich  people  save  too  much,  and
by  their  investments  in  productive  enterprises  overstock  the  markets
with  wares.

Data  concerning  saving  are  among  the  most  difficult  of  economic


152  BUSINESS  CYCLES

records  to  obtain  with  precision.  The  very  word  "saving"  has  half
a  dozen  different  meanings.  The  most  ingenious  effort  so  far  made
to  surmount  these  difl&culties,  conceptual  and  statistical,  is  that  of
Dr.  Willford  I.  King.  Taking  as  his  basic  data  the  doubtful  census
returns  of  wealth,  and  subtracting  or  adding  the  estimated  foreign
debits  or  credits  of  the  country,  Dr.  King  finds  a  total  increase  of
wealth  between  1909  and  1918  of  122  billion  dollars.  But  correction
for  price  fluctuations  reduces  that  huge  sum  to  46  billions.  These
savings  equal  14  per  cent,  or  one-seventh  of  the  estimated  income  of
the  country  during  this  nine-year  period.  We  might  doubt  this  result
because  of  the  admitted  inaccuracies  of  the  census  data,  inaccuracies
which  may  or  may  not  be  sufficiently  different  in  the  reports  for  1909
and  1918  to  make  the  estimate  of  increase  in  wealth  far  wrong.  But
Dr.  King  has  made  a  second,  quite  independent,  estimate  which  con-
firms the  first.  He  has  computed  the  percentage  of  increase  in  all  the
important  items  of  wealth  for  which  he  could  get  reliable  data  in
physical  units  over  the  same  years,  and  found  that  the  average  in-
crease was  even  higher  than  his  first  method  indicated.  He  concludes,
accordingly,  that  'The  normal  fraction  of  the  national  income  saved
is  about  one-seventh."

If  this  percentage  seems  large,  it  must  be  remembered  (1)  that
about  40  per  cent  of  the  country's  savings  are  made  by  business  enter-
prises, through  the  retention  and  reinvestment  of  profits  which  might
otherwise  have  been  distributed  to  individuals,  and  (2)  that  about  9
per  cent  more  seems  to  consist  in  the  accumulation  of  larger  stocks
of  clothing,  personal  ornaments,  furniture,  and  automobiles.  Thus
only  half  of  the  total  corresponds  to  what  many  have  in  mind  when
they  speak  of  the  savings  of  people.  Finally  it  should  be  said  that
defects  of  the  data  lead  Dr.  King  to  present  his  results  as  rough  ap-
proximations, which  require  confirmation  or  revision  in  the  light  of
later  and  fuller  statistics.  Certainly  his  estimate  covers  an  excep-
tional period;  in  1916  Dr.  King  finds  that  savings  jumped  to  twice  the
pre-war  average  even  after  he  had  allowed  for  the  rise  of  prices,  and
in  1918  he  finds  that  the  war  wastes  more  than  offset  savings.  While
these  exceptional  cases  tend  to  cancel  each  other,  there  is  small  as-
surance that  ten  years  of  post-war  experience  will  yield  averages  agree-
ing closely  with  1910-18.

Little  can  be  gained  by  attempting  to  refine  upon  rough  approxi-
mations; but  it  must  be  pointed  out  that  Dr.  King's  average  of  14
per  cent  of  income  saved  means  14  per  cent  of  income  as  estimated  by


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  153

the  National  Bureau  in  its  first  report.  If  the  savings  were  compared
with  money  income,  the  percentage  would  run  somewhat  higher.  On
the  other  hand,  Dr.  King  quite  properly  treats  an  increase  in  the
stock  of  durable  consumption  goods  as  savings.  But  we  have  just
been  considering  what  part  of  money  incomes  is  spent  in  buying
goods  at  retail,  without  reference  to  the  problem  of  saving.  Subtract-
ing the  increase  of  consumption  goods  (9  per  cent  of  savings,  accord-
ing to  Dr.  King),  would  make  the  savings  which  flow  into  revenue-
producing  investments  a  lower  percentage  of  money  income.  In  view
of  the  partial  offsetting  of  these  two  items,  we  have  no  clear  reason
for  saying  that  the  proportion  of  money  income  invested  to  produce
income  is  greater  or  less  than  one-seventh.

On  the  basis  of  Dr.  King's  estimates,  it  seems  that  on  the  average
employees  *'save"  about  5  per  cent  of  their  annual  wages  and  salaries;
farmers,  together  with  owners  of  farm  lands  and  mortgages,  "save"
about  12  per  cent  of  their  net  income  from  agriculture;  other  business
men  "save''  about  33  per  cent  of  their  annual  incomes.  That  is,  these
classes  spend  the  respective  percentages  of  their  income  in  ways
which  increase  their  stocks  of  semi-durable  consumption  goods,  or  bet-
ter their  equipment  for  making  money,  or  buy  securities  which  enable
some  enterpriser  to  better  his  equipment,  or  acquire  revenue-bringing
claims  against  other  people.  Of  the  total  savings  in  his  period  Dr.
King  attributes  20  per  cent  to  employees,  12  per  cent  to  the  agricul-
tural interest,  and  68  per  cent  to  business  men  and  property  owners
in  non-agricultural  lines.  Two-fifths  of  all  the  saving  is  done  directly
by  business  enterprises,  without  the  funds  ever  passing  into  the  hands
of  individuals.  Dr.  King  also  finds,  and  this  point  is  of  especial  in-
terest here,  that  "the  volume  of  saving  by  business  concerns  varies
directly  with  the  waves  of  business  activity,"  but  that  "the  extent  of
private  saving  is  much  less  closely  correlated  with  the  economic
cycle."  1

Another  study  of  American  savings,  made  on  a  different  plan  by
Dr.  Walter  Renton  Ingalls,  confirms  King's  chief  results.  Using  the
National  Bureau's  and  his  own  estimates  of  national  income  from
1912  to  1922  on  the  one  side,  and  on  the  other  side  David  Friday's
and  his  own  estimates  of  savings.  Dr.  Ingalls  computes  that,  before
the  war,  savings  made  about  15  per  cent  of  annual  income,  one  year

*Willford  I.  King,  "The  Net  Volume  of  Saving  in  the  United  States,"  Journal
of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  September  and  December,  1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.
305-323  and  455-470.


154  BUSINESS  CYCLES

with  another.  This  percentage  agrees  closely  with  Dr.  King's  fraction
— one-seventh.  Again  like  King,  Dr.  Ingalls  finds  that  nominal  sav-
ings were  greatly  enhanced  by  the  war,  but  that  the  war  savings  were
mostly  spent  in  destroying  lives  and  property,  or  lost  in  the  post-war
readjustments.  Finally,  in  1920-22,  Dr.  Ingalls  thinks  that  savings
shrank  to  about  half  their  pre-war  proportion — say  7  or  8  per  cent  of
the  national  income.^  Of  course,  a  marked  decline  of  savings  in  a
three-year  period  which  includes  a  great  crisis  followed  by  a  severe
depression  is  not  out  of  line  with  Dr.  King's -results.

Both  of  these  investigations  indicate  that  saving,  whether  meas-
ured in  dollars  or  in  percentages  of  national  income,  belongs  among
the  highly  variable  factors  in  our  problem.  Any  average  which  we
may  take  to  represent  the  general  run  of  affairs  will  differ  widely  from
the  figures  for  years  of  great  prosperity  and  deep  depression.  Yet
we  must  use  some  average  in  order  to  compare  current  savings  with
the  accumulations  of  the  past.  If  we  take  Ingalls'  pre-war  estimate
of  15  per  cent,  or  King's  estimate  of  one-seventh,  as  a  fair  average  of
the  part  of  income  saved  annually,  and  if  we  accept  the  estimate  pre-
sented in  an  earlier  section  that  the  value  of  man-made  equipment
possessed  by  our  people  is  equal  to  the  national  income  of  three  or
four  years,  it  follows  that,  in  the  United  States,  the  man-made  equip-
ment on  hand  represents  a  value  equivalent  to  the  average  savings
of  between  20  and  30  current  years.^

VI.  The  Guidance  of  Economic  Activity.

1.  The  Problem  of  Adjusting  Supply  to  Demand  in  a
Business  Economy.

The  discussion  of  the  flow  of  money  payments  in  the  preceding  sec-
tion provides  a  basis  for  treating  one  aspect  of  the  protean  problem]
of  supply  and  demand  in  a  business  economy. Another  aspect  of]
this  problem  must  now  be  faced — the  difficulty  of  keeping  the  rate  a1

^See  W.  R.  Ingalls,  Wealth  and  Income  of  the  American  People,  2d  ed.,  York,;
Pennsylvania,  1923,  pp.  202-204,  252-254,  and  Current  Economic  Affairs,  1924,  pp.  82,  152.1

^Professor  Cassel  believes  that  in  Sweden  annual  savings  average  approximatelyi
one-fifth  of  national  income,  and  that  national  income  averages  approximately  one-j
seventh  of  national  wealth. I  judge  that  the  estimate  of  wealth  used  includes  the]
value  of  land. On  this  basis,  the  accumulated  wealth  of  Sweden  equals  the  average
savings  of  some  35  years. The  National  Defense  Commission  estimated  the  average
annual  increase  of  wealth  in  1885-1908  at  3.18  per  cent. See  Gustav  Cassel,  Theoretiscl
SoziaWkonomie,  3d  ed.,  Erlangen  and  Leipzig,  1923,  p.  52.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  155

which  each  kind  of  goods  is  being  produced  adjusted  to  the  rate  at
which  each  kind  is  being  bought.

Within  the  hundred  years  since  Sismondi  wrote  about  the  uncer-
tainties of  catering  to  a  ''metaphysical  pubUc,"  this  problem  has  been
growing  ever  more  intricate.  Factory  production  has  taken  over  one
household  industry  after  another,  market  areas  have  widened,  the
variety  of  products  has  multiplied,  industrial  equipment  has  become
more  elaborate  and  more  specialized.  On  one  side  of  the  market  stand
the  millions  of  money-income  receivers,  who  provide  for  most  of  their
families'  want  by  buying  goods  which  others  make.  On  the  other
side  stand  these  same  millions  with  their  diversified  capabilities  as
workers,  their  diversified  properties  in  natural  resources  and  industrial
equipment,  and  their  fluid  investment  funds,  seeking  the  most  profit-
able markets  for  all  these  productive  energies.  The  buyers  of  goods
and  the  sellers  of  goods  are  the  same  persons;  but  this  identity  does
not  enable  them  to  keep  their  efforts  as  producers,  organized  in  busi-
ness enterprises,  adjusted  to  their  wants  as  consumers,  organized  in
families.

So  pervasive  is  this  problem  in  a  business  economy  and  so  con-
stant its  pressure,  that  generation  by  generation  a  large  part  of  the
routine  shrewdness  and  a  large  part  of  the  innovating  energy  of  busi-
ness men  are  absorbed  in  keeping  abreast  of  it.  Many-sided  progress
has  been  achieved  in  the  course  of  this  effort.  Communication  has
become  incomparably  more  rapid  within  the  century,  and  made  to
yield  vastly  better  reports  of  demand  in  widely  separate  markets.
Improvements  in  transportation  have  rendered  possible  a  more  satis-
factory distribution  of  supplies.  The  collection  and  analysis  of
commercial  statistics  are  beginning  to  aid  the  distribution  of  goods
through  time,  as  the  telegraph,  railway  and  steamship  aid  distribution
in  space.  Trade  associations  make  competition  less  blind,  and  indus-
trial integration  makes  planning  of  production  more  systematic.  In-
surance has  expanded  to  equalize  the  burden  of  carrying  a  vast
variety  of  economic  risks.  The  standardization  of  goods,  which
comes  with  mass  production,  partially  offsets  the  diversification  of
products.  One  use  of  advertising  is  to  control  demand  for  goods,  so
far  as  may  be.  Combined  with  all  these  technical  improvements,  is
the  day-by-day  effort  of  every  responsible  business  man  to  follow
current  demand  with  vigilance,  to  take  advantage  of  every  favorable
change,  to  guard  against  every  decline,  with  all  the  skill  which
mother  wit  and  practical  experience  can  muster.


156  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Yet  it  is  not  certain  that  those  efforts  all  put  together  have  gained
upon  the  growing  difficulties  of  the  problem.  For,  on  the  side  of
business  administration  itself,  there  are  forces  which  keep  the  markets
from  attaining  equilibrium.  So  long  as  free  enterprise  prevails  on  a
competitive  basis,  there  cannot  be  a  stable  adjustment  of  supply  to
demand.  As  Dr.  Schumpeter  has  pointed  out,  every  business  innova-
tion disturbs  the  preceding  basis  of  adjustment.^  New  products  and
new  styles  or  brands  of  old  goods,  new  sources  of  supply,  new  methods
of  production,  even  new  competitors  turning  out  familiar  goods  by
familiar  methods,  keep  forcing  changes  in  the  production  and  market-
ing schedules  of  established  houses.  And  there  is  no  evidence  that  the
current  of  business  innovations  is  becoming  less  swift.

In  the  trades  which  cater  to  personal  needs,  the  trend  seems  to  be
toward  offering  to  consumers  an  ever  wider  variety  of  wares  and
services  ready  for  immediate  delivery.  Trade  goes  largely,  perhaps
increasingly,  to  enterprises  which  enable  consumers  to  buy  "what
they  want  when  they  want  it.^'  To  make  such  buying  possible,  some
business  enterprise  must  provide  goods  in  anticipation  of  the  demand.
If  the  manufacturer  does  not  make  to  stock,  then  the  wholesale  mer-
chant or  the  retailer  must  assume  the  hazard.

Nor  is  the  case  widely  different  in  trades  which  make  goods  only
to  order.  There  the  business  enterprise  must  provide  facilities  for
executing  orders  before  it  can  get  them.  Inventory  hazards  may  be
reduced;  but  not  the  larger  and  longer  hazards  upon  investment  of
capital  and  time.  Business  men  who  embark  in  any  productive  enter-
prise, investors  who  advance  capital,  and  wage-earners  who  learn
trades  are  all  taking  a  chance  that  the  demand  for  their  services  at  a
satisfactory  price  will  prove  less  than  the  supply  they  offer.  This
hazard  is  faced  even  in  an  enterprise  which  has  a  complete  monopoly
of  its  special  field.

"Uncertainty,"  to  use  Dr.  Hardy's  term,  is  thus  an  all-pervading
phase  of  every  business  undertaking.^  Its  tap  root  is  uncertainty  con-
cerning what  people  will  buy  at  what  prices.  Its  lateral  roots  are  un-
certainty what  competitors,  direct  and  indirect,  will  sell  at  what
prices;  uncertainty  what  supplies  of  all  the  needed  kinds  can  be
bought  at  what  prices,  and  uncertainty  what  will  happen  within  the
enterprise,  or  within  its  business  connection,  to  affect  its  profits.

*See  Chapter  I,  section  iv,  4.

'See  Chapter  I,  section  iv,  2. On  the  distinction  between  risk  and  uncertainty,  see
Frank  H.  Knight,  Risk,  Uncertainty  and  Profitj  Boston,  1921.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  157

The  fruits  of  uncertainty  appear  in  the  emotional  aberrations  of
business  judgments  and  competitive  illusions,  by  which  Professor
Pigou  and  Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell  explain  business  cycles.^  And  under
the  pressure  of  uncertainty  men  have  evolved  that  elaborate  co-
operative system  of  guiding  economic  activity,  which  we  have  next
to  consider.

2.  The  Role  Played  by  Business  Managements.

The  most  active  role  in  determining  what  use  shall  be  made  of  the
country's  natural  resources,  industrial  equipment,  investment  funds,
brains  and  brawn  is  played  by  business  men.

When  the  earliest  theories  of  crises  were  being  formulated,  econ-
omists could  assume  that  there  stood  at  the  head  of  the  typical  busi-
ness enterprise  a  capitalist-employer,  who  provided  a  large  part  of  the
invested  funds,  carried  the  brunt  of  the  hazard,  performed  the  ''work
of  superintendence,'^  and  pocketed  the  profits.  Millions  of  enter-
prisers of  this  versatile  type  are  still  in  business;  but  they  are  most
numerous  in  industries  where  the  scale  of  organization  has  remained
what  it  was  in  the  days  of  Sismondi  and  Ricardo.  These  are  indus-
tries in  which  the  business-cycle  hazard  is  small. ^  In  the  industries
dominated  by  large-scale  organization,  the  single  capitalist-employer
has  ceased  to  be  typical;  though  in  mining,  manufacturing,  and
construction  work  such  men  can  be  counted  by  the  tens  or  the  hun-
dreds of  thousands.  In  this  field  which  particularly  concerns  us,  be-
cause of  the  wide  oscillations  in  business  activity  to  which  it  is  sub-
ject, quite  a  different  form  of  business  leadership  has  evolved.

The  corporations,  which  now  handle  the  bulk  of  large-scale  busi-
ness, are  usually  owned  by  a  miscellaneous  and  shifting  body  of
stockholders.  The  funds  required  for  fixed  investment  are  provided
in  some  measure  by  these  owners,  but  in  large  part  by  bondholders,
who  may  or  may  not  own  shares  as  well  as  bonds.  The  immediate
pecuniary  hazards  are  borne  by  the  shareholders ;  but  ordinarily  under
provisions  which  limit  their  liability  to  loss  of  the  sums  which  they
have  put  into  their  shares,  and  under  conditions  which  enable  them
to  throw  a  large  part  of  the  business-cycle  hazard  upon  the  em-
ployees. The  work  of  management  is  largely  dissociated  from  owner-
ship and  financial  responsibihty. The  stockholders  delegate  the  super-

'See  Chapter  I,  section  iv,  3  and  10.
*See  above  in  this  chapter,  section  ii,  3.


158  BUSINESS  CYCLES

vision  of  the  corporation's  affairs  to  a  committee — the  directors —
and  the  directors  turn  over  the  task  of  administration  to  a  set  of
general  officers.  The  latter  are  paid  fixed  salaries,  though  they  may-
receive  in  addition  a  percentage  of  the  profits,  or  hold  stock  in  their
own  right.

In  such  an  organization  it  is  difficult  to  find  anyone  who  corre-
sponds closely  to  the  capitalist-employer.  Certainly  stockholders
who  take  no  part  in  managing  the  corporation  beyond  sending  in  their
proxies  to  be  voted  at  the  annual  meeting,  do  not  fill  the  bill.  Neither
do  directors  who  confine  such  attention  as  they  may  give  the  cor-
poration's affairs  to  passing  on  questions  of  general  policy,  selecting
officers,  criticizing  or  approving  reports,  and  the  like.  Finally,  the
general  officers,  dependent  on  the  directors,  remunerated  largely  if
not  wholly  by  salaries,  and  practicing  among  themselves  an  elaborate
division  of  labor,  have  no  such  discretion  and  carry  no  such  responsi-
bihty  as  the  capitalist-employer.  The  latter,  in  fine,  has  been  re-
placed by  a  "management,"  which  includes  the  more  active  directors
and  high  officials,  often  with  the  addition  of  one  or  two  financial  ad-
visers, legal  counsel,  and  large  stockholders.  Practically,  it  is  this
group  which  decides  what  the  corporation  shall  do.

There  are,  however,  many  small  and  a  few  large  corporations  in
which  a  single  person  dominates  affairs.  The  stockholders  elect  his
candidates  to  office,  the  directors  defer  to  his  judgment,  the  officials
act  as  his  agents.  His  position  may  be  entrenched  by  outright  own-
ership of  a  majority  of  the  voting  shares,  or  it  may  rest  upon  his  in-
fluence with  those  who  "own  the  control."  In  these  "one-man"  cor-
porations, the  theoretical  division  of  responsibility  and  function  be-
comes a  legal  fiction.  Yet  the  position  of  such  a  captain  of  industry
usually  differs  from  the  position  of  the  old  capitalist-employer,  in
that  he  furnishes  a  smaller  proportion  of  the  capital,  assumes  a
smaller  proportion  of  the  detailed  labor  of  superintendence,  and  shares
the  uncertainties  and  the  profits  with  more  associates.  Instead  of
restricting,  these  limitations  enhance  his  power;  they  mean  that  the
individual  who  controls  a  corporation  can  determine  the  use  of  a
mass  of  property  and  labor  vastly  greater  than  his  own  capital  would
permit.

Thus,  while  the  corporate  form  of  organization  has  produced  a
division  of  the  leadership  of  business  enterprises  among  several  parties
at  interest,  it  has  made  possible  greater  centralization  of  power.  The
captains  of  finance  and  industry  wield  an  influence  increased  by  the


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  159

capital  which  their  prestige  attracts  from  thousands  of  investors,  and
sometimes  augmented  still  further  by  working  alliances  among
themselves.

Another  development  to  be  noted  is  the  partial  differentiation  of
a  class  of  enterprisers  who  play  an  exceptionally  active  role  in  guiding
economic  activity — promoters.  The  promoter's  special  province  is  to
find  and  bring  to  the  attention  of  investors  new  opportunities  for
making  money ;  new  natural  resources  to  be  exploited,  new  processes
to  be  developed,  new  products  to  be  manufactured,  new  organizations
of  existing  business  enterprises  to  be  arranged.  Bui  the  typical
promoter  is  merely  an  explorer  who  points  out  the  way  for  fresh
advances  of  the  army  of  industry.  When  an  enterprise  of  his  imagi-
nation has  been  organized  and  begun  operations,  the  promoter  seldom
retains  the  leadership  for  long.  As  permanent  officers,  men  of  more
cautious  temper  and  more  systematic  habits  commonly  take  command.

3.  The  Role  Played  by  Technical  Experts.

The  "labor  of  superintendence"  which  men  like  Richard  Ark-
wright  and  Robert  Owen  undertook  in  the  early  nineteenth  century
involved  oversight  of  industrial,  as  well  as  commercial  and  financial,
plans  and  operations.  But  under  the  impetus  of  scientific  discoveries
and  mechanical  inventions,  the  technique  of  industrial  processes  rap-
idly became  so  elaborate  that  this  combination  of  functions  ceased  to
be  feasible.  A  few,  very  few,  men  possessed  the  versatility  and  the
energy  to  keep  abreast  both  of  the  increasingly  exacting  business  prob-
lems and  of  the  increasingly  exacting  industrial  problems.  Almost
with  the  start  of  the  Industrial  Revolution,  there  began  a  division  of
labor  between  the  men  skilled  in  designing  and  operating  machinery,
and  the  men  skilled  in  dealing  with  the  markets  for  wares  and  money.
While  the  old  capitalist-employer  has  evolved  on  the  one  side  into
a  business  management,  he  has  evolved  on  the  other  side  into  a  set
of  technical  experts.

As  early  as  the  middle  of  the  18th  century,  the  civil  engineers  in
England  had  branched  off  from  the  military  engineers.  The  civil
engineers  were  concerned  mainly  with  the  construction  of  roads,
bridges,  aqueducts,  canals,  harbors,  docks  and  lighthouses.  From
this  parent  stock,  there  were  differentiated  successively  the  mechani-
cal, mining,  marine,  sanitary,  gas,  chemical,  and  electrical  engineers.
By  applying  the  results  and  the  methods  of  modern  science  to  the


160  BUSINESS  CYCLES

everyday  work  of  the  world,  these  men  led  that  rapid  advance  in  the
making  of  goods  which  characterizes  the  present  age.  They  became
the  chief  directors  of  productive  energies,  on  the  technical  side.

The  prompt  rise  of  the  engineering  professions  must  be  ascribed
to  the  relatively  advanced  stage  of  physical  science,  and  the  obvious
advantage  of  applying  its  discoveries  to  industry.  The  social  sciences
lag  far  behind  mechanics,  chemistry  and  electro-physics  in  certainty
and  precision,  and  hence  in  the  practical  usefulness  of  the  knowledge
they  convey.  But  in  recent  years  they  too  have  begun  to  yield
results  applicable  to  practice.  At  least  as  rapidly  as  they  have  grown
ripe  for  the  task,  these  sciences  have  been  put  to  work  by  new  groups
of  experts,  who  are  gradually  gaining  something  of  the  self-confidence
and  the  recognition  enjoyed  for  decades  by  engineers.  Personnel
managers  are  being  trained  to  select  and  deal  with  employees,  to  study
the  requirements  of  different  jobs,  and  to  supervise  working  conditions,
with  the  double  object  of  increasing  output  and  diminishing  friction.
Marketing — the  art  of  winning  and  keeping  customers — is  becoming  a
field  for  specialists  in  advertising  and  selling.  Business  statisticians
give  advice  on  many  phases  of  planning  and  current  operations.
'^Scientific  management"  calls  for  a  combination  of  so  many  kinds  of
expertness  that  perhaps  it  will  contribute  to  the  growth  of  half-a-
dozen  professions  rather  than  one.  Indeed,  these  developments  are
all  so  recent,  so  much  in  process,  that  one  can  be  sure  of  little  except
that  new  professions  are  growing  up  which  offer  guidance  to  economic
activity  based  on  the  still  modest  achievements  of  the  social
disciplines.

Thus  a  business  management  is  now  able  to  command  supposedly
expert  advice  in  the  direction  of  its  affairs,  not  only  from  its  old
counsellors  in  law  and  accounting,  but  also  from  a  bewildering  array
of  talent  versed  in  the  sciences  of  nature  and  man.  Perhaps  the  time
is  coming  when  the  chief  function  of  the  business  executive  will  be
deciding  whose  advice  to  ask  and  what  advice  to  accept,  what  experts]
to  enroll  in  his  staff  and  what  to  consult  on  occasion.  If  the  multipli-
cation of  technical  professions  continues,  that  function  itself  may|
evolve  into  a  profession.

In  1923,  the  National  Industrial  Conference  Board  made  an  effort!
to  estimate  the  number  of  men  in  the  United  States  who  can  fairly]
be  "included  in  the  category  of  those  who  plan,  supervise  and  ad-
minister the  business  of  the  nation.'' As  such  it  counted


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  161

major  officials,  managers,  superintendents,  technical  engineers,
designers,  draftsmen,  inventors,  architects,  chemists,  assayers,
metallurgists,  and  auditors,  together  with  one-quarter  of  the
number  of  foremen,  overseers  and  inspectors  in  agriculture,
mining,  construction,  trade,  transportation  and  public  service.

Even  with  this  liberal  definition  of  business  and  industrial  guides,  the
Board  found,  on  analyzing  the  census  data  for  1920,  that  only  a  mil-
lion and  a  half  persons  could  be  included.  This  number  is  much
smaller  than  the  number  of  men  engaged  in  business  on  their  own
account — some  10,000,000.^  But  the  proportion  of  all  persons  having
gainful  occupations  who  are  "administrators,  supervisors  and  tech-
nical experts"  has  been  rising  steadily  each  decade;  it  stood  at  1.25
per  cent  in  1870  and  3.80  per  cent  in  1920.  And  this  percentage  is
decidedly  higher  in  the  large-scale  industries  subject  to  a  considerable
business-cycle  hazard,  than  in  small-scale  industries  like  agriculture.^

While  the  technical  experts  who  build  upon  the  natural  sciences
know  most  about  the  making  of  goods  and  the  technical  experts  who
build  upon  social  sciences  are  coming  to  know  most  about  the  man-
aging of  men,  they  remain  for  the  most  part  merely  advisers  to  the

*See  above,  section  ii,  3.

'  The  chief  results  of  this  report  are  shown  in  the  following  table :

The  Gainfully  Occupied  Compared  with  Administrators,  Supervisors  and

Technical  Experts

The  United  States,  1920

Total  Administrators,

Persons  Supervisors,  and
Gainfully  Technical

Occupied  Experts Percentage

Thousands  Thousands

Agriculture  and  animal  husbandry 10,953  200<»  1.83

Extraction  of  minerals 1,090  44  4.00

Manufacturing  and  mechanical  industries 12,819  600  4.68

Transportation 3,064  105  3.42

Trade 4,243  229  5.39

PubUc  service 770  34  4.41

Professional  service 2,144  265''  12.36

Domestic  and  personal  service 3,405  5  .14

Clerical  occupations 3,127  30  .95

Total 41,614  1,510  3.63

»  Rough  approximation.

^  Includes  engineers  and  other  technical  persons.

See  Engineering  Education  and  American  Industry,  Special  Report  No.  25, National
Industrial  Conference  Board,  New  York,  1923,  p.  6.


162  BUSINESS  CYCLES

captains  of  industry.  Higher  authority  belongs  to  the  business  men.
That  is  an  inevitable  result  of  economic  organization  on  the  basis  of
money  economy  in  its  present  form.  For  the  crucial  factor  in  deciding
the  fate  of  a  business  enterprise  is  not  the  perfection  of  its  mechanical
processes,  the  excellence  of  its  personnel  work,  or  even  the  cleverness
of  its  selling  methods.  All  such  excellencies  contribute  toward  busi-
ness success,  and  it  is  on  this  ground  that  the  technical  professions
get  their  chance  to  share  in  the  guidance  of  economic  activity.  But
the  final  test  is  the  ability  of  an  enterprise  as  a  whole  to  make  profits.
This  fact  entrenches  the  business  men  in  their  position  as  the  authori^
tative  leaders  of  the  industrial  army.

4.  The  Role  Played  by  Lenders.

Business  managements,  however,  must  often  submit  their  decisions
to  review  by  a  higher  court.  Most  enterprises  need  to  borrow,  and
this  fact  gives  the  lenders  an  effective  veto  power  over  proposals  which
do  not  meet  their  approval.

Whenever  an  enterpriser  applies  to  an  individual  capitalist  to  take
an  interest  in  some  project,  to  a  bank  to  discount  his  notes,  or  to  the
investing  public  to  buy  bonds,  he  must  satisfy  the  lenders  of  his
ability  to  pay  the  interest  and  to  safeguard  the  principal.  Even  when
the  applicant  can  provide  collateral  security  for  the  loan,  and  ob-
viously when  he  cannot,  the  lender's  decision  depends  largely  upon
his  own  judgment  regarding  the  business  prospects  of  the  intended
venture.  To  aid  their  officers  in  forming  intelligent  decisions,  banks
require  applicants  for  loans  to  make  statements  of  their  financial
position.  In  addition,  the  banks  and  the  houses  which  grant  mercan-
tile credits  subscribe  to  commercial  agencies  and  maintain  credit  de-
partments of  their  own,  to  collect  and  analyze  information  about  the
business  prospects  of  their  customers.  Similarly,  corporations  which
offer  bonds  or  stocks  for  sale  furnish  circulars  setting  forth  their  finan-
cial records,  the  purposes  for  which  money  is  being  raised,  and  the
anticipated  profitableness  of  the  extensions  in  view.  Affidavits  from
certified  public  accountants,  legal  counsel,  and  consulting  engineers
are  often  appended  to  lend  these  statements  greater  force.  Credit
men  perform  a  technical  function  for  large  lenders  similar  to  the
function  performed  by  engineers  for  industrial  companies.

This  review  of  the  projects  of  enterprises  by  lenders,  then,  is  no
perfunctory  affair. Nor  is  its  practical  influence  upon  the  guidance  of


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  163

economic  activity  slight.  There  are  always  being  launched  more
schemes  than  can  be  financed  with  the  available  funds.  In  rejecting
some  and  accepting  other  schemes,  the  men  of  money  are  taking  an
important,  though  not  a  conspicuous,  part  in  determining  how  labor
shall  be  employed,  what  products  shall  be  made,  and  what  localities
built  up.

Not  all  lenders,  however,  are  able  to  make  intelhgent  decisions.
The  great  mass  of  small  investors,  and  not  a  few  of  the  large,  lack
the  experience,  or  ability,  or  time  to  discriminate  wisely  between
profitable  and  unprofitable  schemes.  Many  such  folk  put  their  funds
into  savings  banks,  rely  upon  the  advice  of  friends  who  are  better
equipped,  consult  with  their  banks  and  lawyers,  study  the  financial
press,  employ  investment  counsel,  or  follow  what  they  suppose  to  be
the  lead  of  some  conspicuous  figure  in  high  finance.  Investors  who
lack  independent  judgment  are  peculiarly  subject  to  the  influence  of
feeling  in  the  matters  where  feeling  is  a  dangerous  guide.  The  alter-
nating waves  of  confidence  and  timidity  which  sweep  over  the  market
for  securities  are  among  the  most  characteristic  phenomena  of  busi-
ness cycles.  Even  those  who  are  relied  upon  for  advice  are  not  wholly
immune  from  the  emotional  contagion.  Thus  the  guidance  of  eco-
nomic activity  by  the  investing  class  is  only  in  part  an  intelligent  re-
view of  plans  by  competent  experts.

A  more  vigorous  and  more  intelligent  leadership  is  exercised  by  the
larger  capitalists.  They  excel  the  investing  public  not  only  in  means
of  securing  information  and  in  business  sagacity,  but  also  in  the
efficiency  with  which  they  follow  up  their  investments.  The  greatest
lenders  become  perforce  much  more  than  lenders.  Over  the  enter-
prises in  which  their  fortunes  and  their  prestige  are  at  stake  they
keep  close  watch.  On  the  highest  levels  of  business  success,  indeed,
the  functions  of  the  investor  and  the  enterpriser  merge  into  each
other.

5.  The  Role  Played  by  Consumers.

The  court  of  last  resort  in  deciding  what  goods  shall  be  made  is
the  whole  body  of  consumers  with  money  incomes  to  spend.

Since  retail  merchants,  public  utilities,  personal  service  agencies,
and  professional  men  strive  to  supply  what  the  public  will  buy,  this
rule  applies  immediately  to  the  production  of  goods  which  gratify
personal  wants. Less  strictly,  the  rule  applies  also  to  the  production


164  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  the  materials  from  which  consumers'  goods  are  made,  to  the  pro-
duction of  all  producers'  goods  used  in  making  consumers'  goods,  and
even  to  the  production  of  producers'  goods  used  in  making  producers^
goods.  But  the  farther  the  remove  from  personal  wants,  the  less  is
the  control  of  consumers  over  demand  and  the  larger  the  element  of
business  discretion.  Business  managements  and  their  technical  ad-
visers have  considerable  leeway  in  choosing  what  locations,  what
materials,  what  equipment  and  what  services  they  shall  use  in  pro-
duction, and  in  what  proportions  they  shall  combine  the  several
factors.  Nor  is  the  timing  of  business  purchases  rigidly  bound  by
the  timing  of  consumers'  purchases.  Thus  the  accurate  form  of  state-
ment is:  production  is  guided  by  forecasts  of  what  consumers  will
buy,  supplemented  by  judgments  concerning  profitable  methods  of
providing  both  consumers'  goods  and  the  endless  variety  of  producers'
goods  which  modern  technique  requires.

What  proportion  of  current  effort  goes  directly  to  the  making  of
consumers'  goods,  and  so  falls  most  strictly  under  the  rule  of  con-
sumers' demand,  we  do  not  know.  Of  course,  the  preceding  estimate
that  some  such  fraction  as  one-seventh  of  the  total  money  income  of
the  American  people  is  "saved"  on  the  average  does  not  mean  that
six-sevenths  of  productive  effort  is  spent  directly  upon  consumers'
goods.  Still  less  does  the  estimate  that  the  receipt  of  money  incomes
constitutes  only  a  tenth  of  business  transactions  mean  that  nine-
tenths  of  productive  effort  goes  into  making  producers'  goods.  But
where  between  these  wide  limits  consumers'  control  fades  into  a
mere  sphere  of  influence. we  have  no  means  of  telling.  The  one  cer-
tainty is  that  the  development  of  modern  technique  directs  an  even
larger  amount  of  energy  to  the  production  of  goods  for  making  goods,
and  to  the  training  of  men  to  plan  and  supervise  the  directly  pro-
ductive efforts  of  other  men.^

Even  within  the  range  where  their  control  is  most  direct,  con-
sumers exert  their  authority  as  guides  of  production  in  a  passive
fashion.  Usually  they  reveal  what  they  want  made  only  by  buying
briskly  certain  of  the  finished  goods  offered  them,  and  by  buying

*Mr.  H.  Gordon  Hayes  has  estimated  from  the  American  Census  of  Occupations
that  about  a  quarter  of  "gainfully  occupied"  persons  are  engaged  in  the  production  of
"durable  goods" — including  "all  household  furnishings  and  all  household  equipment  that
is  made  of  wood  or  metal."  He  also  estimates  that  about  4.25  per  cent  of  the
gainfully  occupied  are  engaged  in  the  construction  and  repair  of  factory  buildings,
machinery,  railway  roadway  and  rolling  stock,  and  agricultural  implements.  "Produc-
tion After  the  War,"  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  December,  1918,  vol.  xxvi,  pp.
941-951.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  165

other  goods  slowly.  Producers  follow  the  leads  thus  given  as  closely
as  they  can,  but  also  endeavor  to  stimulate  demand  and  to  direct  it
into  profitable  channels.  Indeed,  it  seems  that  consumers  often  learn
what  they  want  by  looking  over  the  wares  displayed  in  the  shops.
People  are  conscious  of  the  general  character  of  their  needs,  rather
than  of  the  specific  goods  which  they  desire.  To  decide  precisely
what  foods,  garments,  furnishings,  ornaments,  or  amusements  one
will  buy  is  a  difficult  task.  The  picture  given  by  so  many  economic
treatises  of  buyers  coming  to  market  with  their  minds  already  made
up  about  what  goods  they  wish,  and  what  price  they  are  willing  to
pay  at  need  for  successive  units  of  each  kind,  is  an  undeserved  com-
pliment to  the  mental  energy  of  mankind.  Even  to  canvass  the
market^s  offerings  thoroughly  takes  more  time  and  thought  than
the  average  shopper  will  devote  to  the  task.  So  people  follow  an
easier  course,  buying  what  they  have  bought  before,  what  they  see
others  using,  or  what  advertisements  and  salesmen  urge  them  to
buy.  The  psychological  categories  important  to  the  understanding
of  consumers'  demand  are  habit,  imitation  and  suggestion — not  re-
flective choice.  In  particular,  new  products  are  seldom  called  for
by  consumers  conscious  of  ungratified  wants;  they  are  pushed
upon  consumers  by  business  enterprises,  which  often  spend  large  sums
in  "educating  the  market,"  or  "creating  demand."

One  reason  why  spending  money  is  a  backward  art  in  comparison
with  making  money  was  suggested  early  in  this  chapter; — the  family
continues  to  be  the  dominant  unit  of  organization  for  spending  money,
whereas  for  making  money  the  family  has  been  superseded  largely  by
a  more  highly  organized  unit.  The  housewife,  who  does  a  large  frac-
tion of  the  world's  shopping,  is  not  selected  for  her  efficiency  as  a
manager,  is  not  dismissed  for  inefficiency,  and  has  small  chance  of
extending  her  sway  over  other  households  if  she  proves  capable.  She
must  buy  so  many  different  kinds  of  goods  that  she  cannot  become  a
good  judge  of  qualities  and  prices,  like  the  buyers  for  business  houses.
She  is  usually  a  manual  laborer  in  several  crafts,  as  well  as  a  man-
ager— a  combination  of  functions  not  conducive  to  efficiency.  From
the  sciences  of  most  importance  to  consumption,  physiology  and
psychology,  she  cannot  get  as  much  practical  help  as  the  business
man  can  get  from  the  more  mature  sciences  of  physics  and  chemistry.
Above  all,  she  cannot  systematize  all  her  planning  on  the  basis  of
accounting  like  the  business  man ;  for  while  the  dollar  is  a  satisfactory
unit  for  reckoning  profits  as  well  as  costs,  it  is  not  a  satisfactory  unit


166  BUSINESS  CYCLES

for  expressing  family  welfare.  Under  these  conditions,  it  is  not  sur-
prising that  what  the  world  has  learned  in  the  art  of  consumption
has  been  due  less  to  the  initiative  of  consumers,  than  to  the  initiative
of  producers  striving  to  win  a  market  for  their  wares.^

Yet  with  all  their  puzzles,  consumers  are  in  a  strong  market  posi-
tion. Their  formal  freedom  to  spend  their  money  incomes  as  they
like,  combined  with  their  massive  inertia,  keeps  producers  under  pres-
sure to  solicit  custom,  to  teach  the  public  to  want  more  goods  and
new  goods.  This  task  of  stimulating  demand  is  never  done;  for  the
march  of  technical  improvement  is  ever  increasing  our  capacity  to
produce,  and  before  we  have  learned  to  distribute  and  to  use  what
has  just  been  added  to  our  output,  new  advances  have  been  scored.
Hence  the  chronic  complaint  of  business  men  that  our  industries  are
"over-built."  The  classical  economists  had  logic  of  a  sort  on  their
side  when  they  argued  that  general  over-production  is  impossible  in
an  exchange  economy,  because  a  supply  of  one  kind  of  goods  con-
stitutes demand  for  goods  of  other  kinds.  But  keener  insight  was
revealed  by  Sismondi,  and  by  Malthus  who  said,

That  an  efficient  taste  for  luxuries  and  conveniences,  that  is,
such  a  taste  as  will  properly  stimulate  industry,  instead  of
being  ready  to  appear  at  the  moment  it  is  required,  is  a  plant
of  slow  growth,  the  history  of  human  society  sufficiently
shows.^

If  anyone  falters  at  reviewing  the  evidence  which  Malthus  airily
cites,  he  can  try  the  conclusion  by  work-a-day  business  experience.
Testimony  abounds  that  the  crucial  difficulty  in  modern  business  lies
in  the  "selling  end,"  and  the  sincerity  of  this  opinion  is  attested  by
the  rapidly-increasing  volume  of  selling  costs.^

This  pressure  passively  put  by  consumers  upon  producers  is  re-
laxed occasionally  by  the  wasteful  consumption  of  wars,  and  more
frequently  in  booms,  when  the  volume  of  demand  is  speciously  magni-

^  Compare  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  "The  Backward  Art  of  Spending  Money,"  American
Economic  Review,  June,  1912,  vol.  ii,  pp.  269-281 ;  Henry  Harap,  The  Education  of  the
Consumer,  New  York,  1924  (a  demonstration  of  how  much  a  consumer  needs  to  know),
and  Hazel  Kyrk,  A  Theory  of  Consumption,  Boston,  1923  (a  demonstration  that  the
economic  theory  of  consumption  is  as  laggard  as  the  practice).

'T.  R.  Malthus,  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  2d  ed.,  London,  1836,  p.  321.
For  Sismondi's  similar  views,  see  above,  Chapter  I,  section  ii.

*  For  an  effective  presentation  of  the  sellers'  problem  in  modem  business  by  an
economist  who  has  had  practical  experience,  see  George  Binney  Dibblee,  The  Laws  of
Supply  and  Demand,  London,  1912,  chapters  x-xv.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  167

fied  for  a  while  by  business  illusions.  But  most  of  the  time  the  pres-
sure is  felt  to  be  severe  by  the  bulk  of  business  enterprises.  And  that
fact  keeps  consumers'  demand  the  final  arbiter  of  production,  both  in
amount  and  in  kind.

Back  of  consumers'  demand,  of  course,  stands  the  congeries  of
factors  which  control  the  distribution  of  income  and  the  habits  of
spending.  But  this  remark  means  merely  that  society's  ways  to-day
are  conditioned  by  its  ways  yesterday,  coupled  with  its  inability  to
make  quick  adjustments  to  altered  conditions.  To  follow  this  fasci-
nating line  of  analysis  further  would  not  be  irrelevant,  but  the  bare
suggestion  must  suffice.

6. The  Role  Played  by  Government.

Concomitantly  with  the  growth  of  money  economy  in  Europe
after  the  Middle  Ages,  the  role  which  Government  played  in  guiding
economic  activity  became  less  active.  The  time  had  been  when  all
men  believed  that  the  state  should  direct  and  regulate  the  economic
life  of  its  people  for  the  good  of  the  commonweal,  quite  as  much  as  it
should  provide  for  the  common  defense.  But  as  money  economy  ex-
tended, it  began  to  appear  that  the  merchant  and  the  craftsman,  in
order  to  make  money  for  themselves,  must  provide  goods  which  the
public  wanted,  and  that  in  competing  with  each  other  for  trade  these
private  agents  would  keep  down  prices.  The  economic  theory  of
laissez  faire,  as  expounded  by  the  Physiocrats,  Adam  Smith  and  the
classical  school,  was  an  intellectual  reflection  of  these  accumulating
facts  of  experience.  By  rationalizing  the  policy  of  private  initiative
in  search  of  profits,  which  had  developed  spontaneously  within  the
old  scheme  of  governmental  control,  the  economists  expedited  the
transition  in  progress.  Matters  moved  so  fast,  indeed,  that  the  be-
ginnings of  reaction  against  extreme  laissez  faire  appeared  within  the
generation  of  Ricardo.  The  unrestricted  pursuit  of  profits  led  at
certain  points  to  shocking  ills,  which  Parliament  intervened  to  check.
England,  and  after  her  the  world,  in  the  fumbling  fashion  charac-
teristic of  social  experimentation,  presently  attacked  the  problem
of  finding  in  detail  what  part  of  economic  activity  is  best  left  to  the
guidance  of  business  managements,  and  what  part  is  best  directed  by
the  state.  With  that  problem  the  leading  nations  are  wrestling  to-day
as  vigorously  as  ever. They  seem  to  be  no  nearer  a  uniform  and


168  BUSINESS  CYCLES

satisfactory  solution  than  they  were  in  the  transition  days  of  Adam
Smith;  for,  though  progress  is  doubtless  made,  the  problem  keeps
developing  new  difficulties.

Of  course,  the  great  argument  for  confiding  economic  activity  to
the  Government's  guidance  is  that  Government  aims  at  promoting
public  welfare,  while  business  enterprises  must  make  money.  Gov-
ernment can  consider  what  needs  it  is  most  important  to  satisfy  and
can  assess  the  cost  upon  those  most  able  to  bear  it ;  whereas  business
enterprises  must  consider  what  demands  it  is  profitable  to  meet,  and
cannot  serve  those  who  cannot  pay.  Were  that  the  whole  story,
Government  would  to-day  play  a  more  active  role  in  economic  life
than  it  played  in  the  era  of  Mercantilism.  But  most  people  prefer  to
buy  what  they  like,  rather  than  to  pay  for  what  the  authorities  think
ought  to  be  produced.  And  most  men  are  skeptical  of  Government's
efficiency  in  pursuing  its  aims.  Hence  the  scope  of  Government
activities  varies  from  country  to  country  and  from  time  to  time  with
changes  in  public  opinion — not  to  say  public  sentiment^ — on  these
fundamental  issues.

At  present  Government  in  the  United  States,  including  the  federal,
state  and  local  authorities,  constitutes  one  of  the  leading  branches
of  production.  Government  owns  a  huge  amount  of  property,  em-
ploys about  9  per  cent  of  all  wage-  and  salary-earners,  and  pays
about  8  per  cent  of  the  current  income  of  individuals.  These  are
post-war  figures.^

The  few  services  which  are  almost  everywhere  performed  by  Gov-
ernment are  services  in  which  management  for  profit  is  deemed  in-
compatible with  public  welfare.  Schools  run  for  profit  would  not
teach  the  children  of  the  very  poor;  sanitary  bureaus  run  for  profit
could  not  force  their  services  upon  communities  which  need  attention.
The  longer  list  of  services  which  in  some  places  are  assumed  by
Government  and  in  others  left  to  business  enterprises  fall  mainly  into
four  classes:  undertakings  like  water  supply,  street  cars,  and  railways
which  are  most  economically  managed  as  monopolies,  and  are  there-
fore open  to  the  suspicion  of  practicing  extortion;  undertakings  like
the  management  of  forests,  in  which  the  community  is  interested  in
conserving  sources  of  supply  over  a  longer  period  than  competing
business  enterprises  find  it  profitable  to  regard;  undertakings  like  the

*The  percentage  for  incomes  is  an  average  for  the  years  1919-21.  The  percentage
for  employees  refers  to  1921.  Both  figures  are  drawn  from  Dr.  King's  estimates.  See
his  introductory  chapter  to  Dr.  Leven's  Income  in  the  Various  States,  National  Bureau
of  Economic  Research,  New  York,  1925.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  169

improvements  of  rivers  and  harbors,  the  reclamation  of  waste  lands,
and  the  buildings  of  canals  in  which  the  prospects  of  profits  are  not
sufficiently  bright  to  attract  the  requisite  amount  of  private  capital;
and  undertakings  like  the  salt,  tobacco,  mining  and  lottery  monopolies
of  Europe,  which  are  frankly  exploited  by  Government  for  the  sake
of  raising  revenue.

Over  a  far  wider  field.  Government  affects  the  guidance  of  eco-
nomic activity  by  trying  to  prevent  the  pursuit  of  private  profit  from
clashing  with  public  welfare.  Factories  are  required  to  adopt  ex-
pensive safeguards  for  the  benefit  of  their  employees  or  patrons ;  they
are  forbidden  to  employ  the  cheap  labor  of  young  children,  to  keep
women  at  work  more  than  eight  hours  a  day,  and  so  on,  with  many
variations  from  country  to  country  and  state  to  state.  Certain  prod-
ucts are  often  forbidden,  such  as  impure  foods  and  drugs.  So  too,  in
this  country,  are  business  practices  restrictive  of  competition.

Most  economic  regulations  of  Government  are  negative  in  char-
acter; but  Governments  sometimes  attempt  to  direct  business  enter-
prise into  undertakings  which  are  believed  by  the  majority  of  the
moment  to  be  socially  advantageous,  though  unprofitable  without
assistance  from  the  state.  Protective  tariffs  upon  imports,  bounties
upon  the  production  of  sugar,  and  ship  subsidies  are  examples  in
point.  In  other  cases,  the  Government  provides  producers  with  ex-
pert technical  advice — exporters  and  farmers,  for  example.

Still  more  in  general,  the  whole  plan  of  raising  public  revenues
and  apportioning  public  expenditures,  the  methods  of  providing  for
the  public  defense  and  maintaining  domestic  order,  the  monetary
system  and  even  the  form  of  political  institutions,  in  short,  everything
Government  is  and  does,  influences  the  direction  of  economic  activity.
For  the  business  economy  is  so  flexible  a  form  of  organization  that
the  prospects  of  profits,  and  therefore  the  direction  of  economic  activ-
ity by  private  initiative,  are  affected  by  a  thousand  acts  of  Govern-
ment done  for  other  than  economic  ends.  Indeed,  it  is  mainly  as  a
"disturbing  factor"  that  Government  figures  in  the  theory  of  business
cycles.  Its  own  economic  operations  are  perhaps  freer  from  cyclical
fluctuations  than  those  of  any  industry.

7. The  Alleged  "Planlessness"  of  Production.

With  technical  experts  to  plan  the  processes  of  production,  busi-
ness experts  to  guide  the  making  of  money,  lenders  to  review  all


170  BUSINESS  CYCLES

projects  requiring  large  investments,  Government  to  care  for  the
public  welfare,  and  with  the  whole  buying  public  as  a  final  arbiter,
it  may  seem  as  if  the  business  economy  provides  a  staff  and  a  pro-
cedure adequate  to  the  task  of  directing  economic  activity,  vast  and
intricate  as  that  task  is.

This  impression  is  strengthened  by  observing  that  each  class  of
guides  is  spurred  to  efficiency  by  hope  of  gain,  and  deterred  from
recklessness  by  fear  of  loss.  The  engineer  who  blunders  is  discharged,
the  enterpriser  who  blunders  goes  into  bankruptcy,  the  lender  who
blunders  loses  his  money,  and  even  the  administration  which  blunders
may  lose  office^ — though  that  is  less  sure.  Thus  the  guides  who  mis-
direct the  industrial  army  are  always  being  eliminated  from  the  num-
ber of  those  who  lead.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  succeed  are
always  being  promoted  to  posts  of  wider  power.

Nor  does  all  this  apply  merely  to  the  leaders  of  economic  activity.
In  theory,  every  adult  is  free  to  choose  whatever  lawful  ways  of
making  a  money  income  he  thinks  wise,  and  to  change  as  often  as  he
likes.  Thus  every  worker  is  supposed  to  have  a  modest  share  in
directing  production.  In  practice,  of  course,  the  range  of  occupations
for  which  anyone  can  qualify  is  limited  both  by  his  native  capacity
and  by  his  opportunities  to  get  the  requisite  training  and  social  con-
nection. But  the  pressure  which  the  business  economy  applies  to
the  rank  and  file  of  the  industrial  army  to  develop  efficiency  in  work-
ing and  spending  money  is  certainly  not  less  severe  than  the  pressure
it  applies  to  the  captains.  The  older  writers  who  expounded  the
philosophy  of  individualism  emphasized  the  need  of  such  pressure
to  make  men  work  and  save,  at  the  same  time  as  they  argued  that
each  man  is  the  best  judge  of  his  own  interests.  Later  writers,  who
credit  men  with  less  rationality  than  was  the  fashion  a  century  ago,
hold  that  economic  individualism,  involved  in  the  current  money
economy,  is  a  safeguard  against  failures  to  recognize  where  self-inter-
est lies.  Professor  John  Maurice  Clark's  remark  on  this  head  is
whimsical  only  in  part:

Individualism  may  be  regarded,  not  so  much  as  the  system  cal-
culated to  get  the  utmost  out  of  a  people  of  extremely  high
intelligence,  as  the  system  in  which  human  stupidity  can  do
the  least  harm.^

*  "The  Socializing  of  Economics"  in  The  Trend  of  Economics,  edited  by  R.  G.  Tug-l
well,  New  York,  1924,  p.  97.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  171

With  this  powerful  stimulation  of  individual  efl&ciency,  the  busi-
ness economy  unites  an  opportunity  for  cooperation  on  a  grand  scale.
By  paying  money  prices,  the  leaders  can  enlist  the  aid  of  laborers
who  contribute  work  of  all  kinds,  of  expert  advisers  who  contribute
special  knowledge,  of  landlords  who  contribute  the  uses  of  their  prop-
erty, and  of  investors  who  contribute  the  uses  of  their  funds.  And
all  these  classes  can  be  made  to  work  in  disciplined  order  toward  the
execution  of  a  single  plan.  The  fusing  of  incitements  to  individual
efficiency  with  opportunity  for  wide  cooperation  is  the  great  merit
of  the  business  economy.

That  men  like  making  and  spending  money  as  a  way  of  organizing
economic  activity  on  the  whole  better  than  any  other  system  they
have  yet  practiced  on  a  large  scale,  is  indicated  by  history.  The  first
section  of  this  chapter  suggests  that  the  business  economy  grew
out  of  the  preferences  of  millions  of  men  in  successive  generations
in  all  quarters  of  the  world.  The  medieval  king  and  his  tenants,
the  lord  of  the  manor  and  his  serfs,  seem  all  to  have  gained  by  sub-
stituting monetary  payments  for  the  rendering  of  personal  services.
No  one  forced  the  housewife  to  give  up  making  her  own  bread  and
her  candles ;  no  one  forced  the  frontiersman  to  buy  clothing  in  place
of  dressing  in  buckskin.  It  was  because  they  preferred  the  new  way
of  providing  for  their  wants  when  the  opportunity  to  choose  was
presented,  that  consumers  patronized  the  retail  shop  selling  factory
products.  So,  too,  banking  could  develop  only  as  great  numbers  of
people  year  after  year  found  it  useful.  Not  that  the  growth  of  money
economy  has  involved  no  coercion,  loss,  and  injustice — witness,  for
example,  the  tragic  side  of  the  enclosures  which  made  possible  farm-
ing for  profit,  the  sufferings  of  peasants  who  could  not  learn  the  art  of
living  on  money,  the  oppressions  exercised  by  money  lenders,  and  the
tragic  struggle  of  the  hand-loom  weavers  against  the  power  loom.
But  broadly  speaking,  it  seems  clear  that  this  feature  of  culture  could
have  attained  such  general  acceptance  by  the  most  advanced  peoples
of  the  world  after  so  thorough  a  trial  only  because  it  seemed  to  meet
their  needs  more  adequately  than  the  other  forms  of  economic  organi-
zation with  which  they  have  had  experience.

Nevertheless,  the  business  economy  has  obvious  limitations  as  a
system  of  organizing  economic  effort  for  the  satisfaction  of  wants —
limitations  which  must  be  noticed  because  they  bear  on  the  problem
of  business  cycles.


172  BUSINESS  CYCLES

1.  The  business  economy  provides  for  effective  coordination  of
effort  within  each  business  enterprise,  but  not  for  effective  coordina-
tion of  effort  among  independent  enterprises.

The  two  schemes  of  coordination  differ  in  almost  all  respects.  Co-
ordination within  an  enterprise  is  the  result  of  careful  planning  by
experts;  coordination  among  independent  enterprises  cannot  be  said
to  be  planned  at  all;  rather  is  it  the  unplanned  result  of  natural
selection  in  a  struggle  for  business  survival.  Coordination  within  an
enterprise  has  a  definite  aim — the  making  of  profits;  coordination
among  independent  enterprises  is  limited  by  the  conflicting  aims  of
the  several  units.  Coordination  within  an  enterprise  is  maintained
by  a  single  authority  possessed  of  power  to  carry  its  plans  into  effect ;
coordination  among  independent  enterprises  depends  on  many  dif-
ferent authorities  which  have  no  power  to  enforce  a  common  pro-
gram, except  so  far  as  one  can  persuade  or  coerce  others.  As  a  result
of  these  conditions,  coordination  within  an  enterprise  is  characterized
by  economy  of  effort ;  coordination  among  independent  enterprises  by
waste.

In  detail,  then,  economic  activity  is  planned  and  directed  with
skill;  but  in  the  large  there  is  neither  general  plan  nor  central  direc-
tion. The  charge  that  "capitalistic  production  is  planless"  therefore
contains  both  an  important  element  of  truth  and  a  large  element  of
error.  Apart  from  the  transient  programs  of  economic  mobilization
adopted  under  stress  of  war,  civilized  nations  have  not  yet  developed
systematic  plans  for  the  sustenance  of  their  populations;  they  con-
tinue to  rely  on  the  badly  coordinated  efforts  of  private  initiative.
Marked  progress  has  been  made,  however,  in  the  skill  with  which
the  latter  efforts  are  directed,  and  also  in  the  scale  on  which  they
are  organized.  The  growth  in  the  size  of  business  enterprises  con-
trolled by  a  single  management  is  a  gain,  because  it  increases  the
portion  of  the  field  in  which  close  coordination  of  effort  is  feasible.

2.  But  the  managerial  skill  of  business  enterprises  is  devoted  to
making  money. If  the  test  of  efficiency  in  the  direction  of  economic
activity  be  that  of  determining  what  needs  are  most  important  for
the  common  welfare  and  satisfying  them  in  the  most  economical
manner,  the  present  system  is  subject  to  a  further  criticism. For,  inj
nations  where  a  few  have  incomes  sufficient  to  gratify  trifling  whimt
and  where  many  cannot  buy  things  required  to  maintain  their  owi
efficiency  or  to  give  proper  training  to  their  children,  it  can  hardl]
be  argued  that  the  goods  which  pay  best  are  the  goods  most  needed.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  173

It  is  no  fault  of  the  individual  business  leaders  that  they  take  prospec-
tive profits  as  their  own  guide.  On  the  contrary,  they  are  compelled
to  do  so;  for  the  men  who  mix  too  much  philanthropy  with  business
soon  cease  to  be  leaders.  But  a  system  of  economic  organization
which  forces  men  to  accept  so  technical  an  aim  as  pecuniary  profit
cannot  guide  their  efforts  with  certainty  toward  their  own  ideals  of
public  welfare. And  Government  can  remedy  this  defect  only  in  part.

3.  Even  from  the  point  of  view  of  business,  prospective  profit  is
an  uncertain,  flickering  light.  For  profits  depend  upon  two  variables
— on  margins  between  selling  and  buying  prices  and  on  the  volume  of
trade^ — related  to  each  other  in  unstable  fashion,  and  each  subject  to
perturbations  from  a  multitude  of  unpredictable  causes.  That  the
system  of  prices  has  its  own  order  is  clear ;  but  it  is  not  less  clear  that
this  order  fails  to  afford  certainty  of  business  success.  Men  of  long
experience  and  proved  sagacity  often  find  their  calculations  of  profit
upset  by  conjunctures  which  they  could  not  anticipate.  Thus  the
business  economy  confuses  the  guidance  of  economic  activity  by  inter-
jecting a  large  element  of  uncertainty  into  business  ventures.

4.  The  hazards  to  be  assumed  grow  greater  with  the  extent  of
the  market  and  with  the  time  which  elapses  between  the  initiation
and  the  fruition  of  an  enterprise.  But  the  progress  of  industrial  tech-
nique is  steadily  widening  markets,  and  requiring  heavier  investments
of  capital  for  future  production.  Hence  the  share  in  economic  leader-
ship which  falls  to  lenders,  that  of  reviewing  the  various  chances
offered  them  for  investment,  presents  increasing  difficulties.  And,
as  has  been  shown,  a  large  proportion  of  these  lenders,  particularly
of  the  lenders  on  long  time,  lack  the  capacity  and  training  for  the
successful  performance  of  such  work.

These  defects  in  the  system  of  guiding  economic  activity  and  the
bewildering  complexity  of  the  task  itself  allow  the  processes  of  eco-
nomic life  to  fall  into  those  recurrent  disorders  which  constitute
crises  and  depressions.  To  recognize  this  fact,  however,  is  but  the
beginning  of  wisdom.  Much  patient  analysis  is  required  to  discover
just  how  these  disorders  arise,  and  why,  instead  of  becoming  chronic,
they  lead  after  a  time  to  the  return  of  prosperity.


174  BUSINESS  CYCLES

VII. International  Differences  in  Economic  Organization.

1. The  Uneven  Development  of  Business  Economy.

All  the  highly  civilized  nations  of  the  world  to-day  have  sub-
stantially the  same  form  of  economic  organization.  The  business
economy,  sketched  in  this  chapter  with  particular  reference  to  the
United  States,  prevails  in  Great  Britain,  France,  Belgium,  the  Nether-
lands, Switzerland,  the  Scandinavian  countries,  Germany,  Austria,
and  the  great  British  colonies  with  white  populations.  A  somewhat
less  mature  stage  of  the  money  economy  has  been  reached  by  the
other  European  countries,  by  the  Spanish-  and  Portuguese-speaking
peoples  of  South  America,  and  by  the  European  colonists  in  South
Africa.  A  still  less  mature  stage  prevails  in  the  Orient,  aside  from
Japan.^

In  no  country  is  the  development  of  the  business  economy  uniform
over  all  sections.  Everywhere  the  city  dwellers  carry  on  more  of  their
activities  by  making  and  spending  money  incomes  than  the  country
folk.  Nearly  every  country,  even  in  the  Orient,  has  its  centers  of
large-scale  industry  and  trade,  and  every  country  has  its  areas  where
production  is  organized  rather  on  a  family  basis  than  on  the  basis  of
full-fledged  business  enterprises.

This  uneven  development  of  business  economy  influences  the
course  run  by  business  cycles  in  different  parts  of  the  world.  It  has
been  shown  that  alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression  occur  with
increasing  regularity  as  business  economy  extends  in  scope,  and  seem
to  arise  more  from  economic  processes  and  less  from  political  or
physical  events.^  It  will  be  shown  in  the  fourth  chapter  that  the
business  cycles  of  countries  which  have  highly  developed  business
economies  correspond  to  each  other  in  timing  and  intensity  rather
closely;  between  countries  where  pecuniary  organization  is  less  ma-
ture the  correspondence  is  distinctly  less  close.  Finally,  within  every
large  country,  there  are  measurable  differences  in  the  timing  and
the  intensity  of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  different  sections — differences
which  appear  to  correlate  with  the  differences  in  thoroughness  of
pecuniary  organization.

*  These  statements  are  based  upon  rather  vague  and  general  impressions.  Perhaps
the  grouping  suggested  is  not  quite  fair  in  all  cases;  certainly  it  is  subject  to  revision
as  conditions  develop  in  the  countries  which  we  now  count  laggard.

*See  section  i,  4,  of  this  chapter.


I


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  175

The  history  of  the  past  two  hundred  years  suggests  that  the
international  and  sectional  differences  in  economic  organization  are
gradually  becoming  less.  In  all  quarters  of  the  globe  business  economy
has  been  gaining  ground.  But  the  approach  toward  uniformity  is
slow,  not  only  because  the  laggard  peoples  learn  new  habits  de-
liberately, but  also  because  the  advanced  peoples  keep  elaborating
their  pecuniary  institutions.  For  as  long  a  time  as  we  can  envisage,
differences  will  maintain  themselves  on  a  scale  sufficient  to  prevent
business  cycles  from  reaching  in  all  quarters  of  the  world  even  the
measure  of  uniformity  which  they  now  possess  among  the  central
European  nations,  Great  Britain,  Canada  and  the  United  States.

2. The  Proportion  of  the  Worikers  Engaged  in  Farming.

A  second  set  of  conditions  which  make  business  cycles  differ  from
country  to  country  is  found  in  the  character  of  the  occupations  fol-
lowed by  their  peoples.  Of  course,  all  the  major  industries  are  repre-
sented in  every  large  population;  but  the  proportions  of  the  people
engaged  in  agriculture,  manufacturing,  mining,  transportation,  trade,
and  the  professions,  vary  widely.  Because  of  the  divergencies  noted
above  in  the  business-cycle  hazards  to  which  various  industries  are
subject,^  it  is  pertinent  to  make  international  comparisons  of  occupa-
tion groups.

Unfortunately,  occupations  are  classified  in  such  unUke  ways  by
different  countries  that  close  comparisons  are  out  of  the  question.
But  the  point  of  most  importance — the  percentage  of  male  workers
engaged  in  farming^ — can  be  ascertained  roughly  for  the  countries
whose  business  annals  will  be  presented  in  a  later  chapter.  The
figures  are  given  in  Table  10.  While  the  foreign  data  have  been
rearranged  to  fit  the  American  census  classification  as  nearly  as  may
be,  the  percentages  can  be  trusted  only  as  showing  the  existence  of
very  wide  differences  in  dependence  upon  agriculture,  and,  by  infer-
ence, upon  other  industries,  particularly  manufacturing.

England  and  Wales  here  stand  in  a  class  by  themselves,  with
only  one-ninth  of  their  workers  on  farms.  This  does  not  mean  that
business  cycles  in  England  are  more  exempt  from  agricultural  influ-
ences than  business  cycles  in  the  European  countries  or  the  United

*See  section  ii,  3,  of  this  chapter.

'Much  better  figures  can  be  found  for  men  than  for  women  in  several  of  the
countries  included.


176  BUSINESS  CYCLES

States  which  have  from  a  quarter  to  a  third  of  their  men  in  the  fields,
but  that  the  harvests  which  affect  English  cycles  are  the  harvests  in

TABLE 10

Propobtion  op  Gainfully  Employed  Males  Engaged  in  Agricultural  Pursuits

IN  Various  Countries

Per  Cent  in
Country  Date  Agriculture

China 1911  75.0"

India 1911  71.4

Russia 1897  61.6*

Japan 1908  58.5«

Union  of  South  Africa 1911  55.4

Italy 1911  53.8'*

Sweden 1910  49.1«

Austria 1910  45.5

Brazil 1920  45.0^*

Canada 1911  41.0^

France 1911  40.0

United  States 1910  35.8^

Argentina 1914  30.0"

Netherlands 1909  29.4

Australia 1911  29.0'^

Germany 1907  28.3

England  and  Wales 1911  11.0^

Notes  :

"  Estimated.  See  China  Year  Book,  1916,  p.  3;  Journal  of  the  American  Asiatic  Asso-
eiationy  1911,  vol.  xi,  p.  203;  Statesman s  Year  Book,  1923,  p.  771.

*  Data  for  the  entire  Empire,  including  Siberia  and  the  Caucasus.

*  Percentage  represents  the  proportion  of  all  households  engaged  in  agriculture  to  the
total  number.

•*  Males  over  10  years  of  age.

*  Males  over  15  years  of  age.

f  Males  10  years  of  age  and  over.

^  Occupation  data  do  not  include  workers  in  occupations  not  sufficiently  specified,
such  as  day-laborers,  which  tends  to  lower  the  percentage  of  agriculturally  employed.
The  surprisingly  low  percentage  is  somewhat  substantiated  by  the  fact  that  55  per  cent
of  the  population  is  classed  as  urban.  A  considerable  part  of  the  town  and  city  dwellers
consists  of  landlords  and  their  dependents.

^  "Exclusive  of  full-blooded  aboriginals."

Compiled  by  Willard  L.  Thorp  from  censuses  or  official  year  books  of  the  several
countries,  except  in  the  cases  of  China  and  Russia.  For  the  Chinese  sources,  see  above
note  (").  The  Russian  data  were  obtained  from  the  French  population  census  of  1911,
I,  part  iii,  p.  176.

The  occupation  data  in  the  various  censuses  have  been  regrouped  to  conform  as  nearly
as  may  be  to  the  category  in  the  United  States  Census  of  Occupations,  1910,  entitled
"Agriculture,  Forestry  and  Animal  Husbandry,"  not  including  fishermen  and  oystermen.
In  order  to  make  the  records  as  comparable  as  possible,  the  data  were  taken  from  the
census  nearest  to  1910  for  each  country.

the  countries  from  which  England  buys  the  bulk  of  her  foodstuffs
and  to  which  she  sells  the  bulk  of  her  exports.


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  177

At  the  other  extreme  are  the  great  Oriental  populations  of  China
and  India,  followed  by  the  Russian  Empire  and  Japan.  Several  of
the  European  countries  in  the  list  depend  more  upon  farming  than
does  the  United  States.  More  surprising  are  the  low  percentages  for
Argentina  and  Australia.  Defects  in  the  original  data  (particularly
from  Argentina,  which  omits  from  her  occupation  tables  workers
whose  trades  are  not  definitely  specified)  may  be  partly  responsible
for  this  result;  but  few  North  Americans  realize  how  large  a  propor-
tion of  the  people  in  these  two  southern  lands  live  in  cities.

3. Enterprise  and  Thrift.

Observers  generally  agree  upon  two  temperamental  differences
which  are  revealed  in  the  business  behavior  of  the  foremost  com-
mercial nations.  The  French  are  held  to  show  less  business  enterprise
than  the  Americans  (who  are  inclined  to  credit  themselves  with  pre-
eminence in  this  quality),  or  the  English,  or  the  Germans.  Their
railways  could  not  be  built  without  a  state  guarantee  of  dividends;
their  merchant  marine  relies  upon  bounties;  their  great  credit  com-
panies, founded  largely  to  aid  in  establishing  new  enterprises,  have
gone  over  mainly  to  the  less  hazardous  business  of  accepting  deposits
and  handling  investments  for  customers;  their  private  banks  are
concerned  chiefly  with  transactions  in  foreign  exchange  and  short-
time  credits.  The  Frenchman  seems  to  have  no  great  fondness  for
the  game  of  business.  He  aims  to  secure  a  competency  by  the  thrifty
conduct  of  his  affairs  along  conservative  lines,  then  to  retire  and  in-
vest his  accumulations  in  rentes.  It  may  be  largely  for  this  reason
that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  in  French  business  are  relatively  narrow
in  scope,  and  seldom  marked  by  severe  crises.^

On  the  other  hand,  the  French  are  believed  to  surpass  Americans,
English,  and  even  Germans  in  thrift.  In  the  years  preceding  the  war,
France  seemed  to  be  displacing  England  as  the  world's  greatest  lender.
The  relative  lack  of  domestic  business  enterprise,  combined  with  an
enormous  aggregate  of  small  savings,  provided  each  year  hundreds  of
millions  of  francs  which  sought  investment  in  foreign  securities.  And
in  the  selection  of  their  investments  the  French  preferred  what  they
believed  to  be  a  conservative  policy.  Occasionally  they  might  buy
freely  of  speculative  stocks,  like  ''Kaffirs";  but  the  bulk  of  their  sav-

*  Compare  K.  Wiedenfeld,  "Das  Personliche  im  Modernen  Untemehmertum,"  SchmoU
ler's  Jahrbuch  fur  Gesetzgebung,  1910,  pp.  229-233,


178  BUSINESS  CYCLES

ings  went  into  government  obligations,  high-grade  railway  and  indus-
trial bonds,  or  into  shares  long  established  as  dividend  payers.^

It  would  be  easy  to  elaborate  by  pointing  out  various  contrasts
between  the  business  traits  commonly  believed  to  characterize  the
North  and  the  South  Americans,  the  Japanese  and  the  Chinese,  or
the  Russians  and  the  Scandinavians.  Nor  can  it  be  doubted  that
whatever  differences  exist  among  national  temperaments  have  their
bearing  upon  the  whole  economic  life  of  the  peoples  in  question.  But
such  elaboration  would  not  sensibly  promote  the  present  inquiry.
For,  after  showing  in  the  fourth  chapter  what  relations  exist  among
business  cycles  in  different  parts  of  the  world,  we  shall  concentrate
attention  upon  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and  Germany.
And  about  the  differences  in  their  business  traits  what  has  been  said
will  suffice.

4. Monetary  and  Banking  Systems.

Before  the  Great  War  it  was  thought  that  all  the  commercial
nations  of  the  world  would  soon  have  monetary  systems  of  the  same
type.  One  country  after  another  had  gone  over  to  the  single  gold
standard,  with  supplementary  use  of  silver  coins,  and  of  paper  money
issued  by  the  Government,  by  the  banks,  or  both.  China  was  the
greatest  nation  remaining  on  the  silver  basis;  there  were  no  bi-
metallic standards,  and  irredeemable  paper  standards  seemed  to  be
rare  episodes.  While  the  war  produced  wild  confusion  in  monetary
systems  and  forced  many  of  the  European  nations  to  suspend  specie
payments,  it  now  seems  probable  that  within  a  few  years  the  earlier  j
uniformity  will  be  restored  in  large  measure.  If  so,  the  old  facility  of
international  transactions  will  return,  and  the  financial  bonds  which
connect  the  business  fortunes  of  the  great  commercial  nations  will
become  closer  than  they  have  been  since  1914 — unless  non-businesSj
forces  again  intervene  to  prevent.

Banking  systems,  also,  had  been  growing  more  alike  before  the
war,  as  various  countries  strove  to  adapt  features  which  had  suc-
ceeded elsewhere  to  their  pecuHar  needs. The  last  great  step  in  this:
direction  was  the  establishing  of  the  Federal  Reserve  System  by  thej

^Compare,  for  example,  A.  Neymarch,  French  Savings  and  Their  Influence,  pp.
163-181;  publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission  (Senate  Document  No.
494,  61st  Congress,  2d  Session).


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  179

United  States  in  1914 — a  measure  which  introduced  a  modified  form
of  centralization  into  a  system  theretofore  composed  of  some  29,000
independent  banks.  But  banking  systems  and  banking  usages  had
never  attained  such  similarity  as  characterized  monetary  systems.
The  difference  of  chief  moment  to  the  student  of  business  cycles  is
between  the  preponderant  use  of  bank  checks  in  making  payments
among  the  Anglo-Saxon  communities,  and  the  relatively  slight  use
of  checks  in  other  countries.  But  it  should  also  be  recalled  that
outside  of  Europe,  North  America  and  Australia,  the  use  of  banking
facilities  is  confined  mainly  to  the  commercial  centers  and  so  touches
the  bulk  of  the  people  only  by  indirection.

5. Government's  Share  in  Directing  Economic  Activity.

Finally,  there  are  considerable  differences  even  among  those  mod-
ern nations  whose  pecuniary  institutions  are  most  alike,  in  the  share
which  central  and  local  Governments  take  in  directing  economic
activities.

Partly  because  of  limitations  placed  by  constitutional  law  upon
the  powers  of  Government,  partly  it  would  seem  because  of  a  tem-
peramental restiveness  under  control,  Americans  have  made  fewer
and  less  bold  experiments  in  municipal  operation  of  public  utilities,
or  in  state  operation  of  railways,  telegraphs,  telephones,  mines,  and
the  like,  than  have  the  Germans,  French,  or  British.  Perhaps,  how-
ever, this  difference  is  growing  less  decade  by  decade.  Certainly,  the
rise  of  public  commissions  as  agencies  for  regulating  privately-owned
enterprises  has  given  the  federal,  state  and  municipal  Governments
of  the  Union  a  share  in  directing  several  branches  of  business.

While  later  chapters  will  show  that  all  the  international  differ-
ences in  economic  organization  and  practice  which  have  been  pointed
out  possess  some  significance,  by  far  the  most  important  is  the  uneven
development  of  business  economy.  There  are,  indeed,  close  organic
relations  between  this  uneven  development  and  the  proportion  of
men  engaged  in  agriculture,  the  prevalence  of  an  enterprising  spirit
in  business  affairs,  the  use  of  banking  facilities,  and  perhaps  even  the
share  which  Government  takes  in  directing  economic  activity.  Yet
all  these  differences  together  account  only  for  a  part  of  the  diver-
gencies which  the  fourth  chapter  will  show  among  the  business  annals
of  various  countries. Another  part  must  be  ascribed  to  factors  of  a


180  BUSINESS  CYCLES

political  or  physical  type.  About  the  relative  importance  of  the
forces  which  produce  divergencies  among  business  cycles,  however,
and  about  their  interactions,  our  knowledge  is  meager.  Perhaps  we
are  overlooking  forces  which  will  some  day  be  found  to  play  domi-
nating roles.  But  the  way  to  hasten  the  day  of  fuller  understanding
is  to  make  the  best  use  we  can  of  our  present  insights,  imperfect
though  they  are.

VIII. Conclusion.

1. The  Raison  D'ETRE  of  Chapter  II.

Taken  one  at  a  time,  most  of  the  theories  of  business  cycles  re-
viewed in  Chapter  I  seem  plausible,  not  to  say  convincing.  Certainly
each  theory,  this  time  without  exception,  illuminates  some  angle  of
the  problem.  Taken  all  together,  the  theories  render  a  different  ser-
vice— one  which  is  welcome  only  to  the  man  who  has  the  courage
and  time  to  enter  upon  a  thorough  investigation.  They  show  that
business  cycles  are  congeries  of  diverse  fluctuations  in  numerous  proc-
esses— physical,  psychological,  and  economic.  Indeed,  upon  reflection
the  theories  figure  less  as  rival  explanations  of  a  single  phenomenon
than  as  complementary  explanations  of  closely  related  phenomena.
The  processes  with  which  they  severally  deal  are  all  characteristic
features  of  the  whole.  These  processes  not  only  run  side  by  side,  but
also  influence  and  (except  for  the  weather)  are  influenced  by  each
other.  Thus  the  diversity  of  explanations,  which  at  first  seems  con-
fusing, becomes  an  aid  toward  envisaging  the  complex  character  of
the  problem.

Complexity  is  no  proof  of  multiplicity  of  causes.  Perhaps  some
single  factor  is  responsible  for  all  the  phenomena.  An  acceptable
explanation  of  this  simple  type  would  constitute  the  ideal  theory  of
business  cycles  from  the  practical,  as  well  as  from  the  scientific,  view-
point. But  if  there  be  one  cause  of  business  cycles,  we  cannot  make
sure  of  its  adequacy  as  an  explanation  without  knowing  what  are
the  phenomena  to  be  explained,  and  how  the  single  cause  produces  its
complex  effects,  direct  and  indirect.  Neither  on  the  single-cause
hypothesis,  nor  on  the  hypothesis  of  multiple  causes,  are  we  equipped
to  deal  with  the  problem  of  causation  until  we  have  learned  what  are
the  processes  characteristic  of  business  cycles,  and  how  these  processes
are  related  to  one  another.  Chapter  I  indicated  what  the  leading  proc-


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  181

esses  are.  The  way  to  discover  their  relations  is  to  study  the  develop-
ment and  the  functioning  of  the  economic  organization  within  which
business  cycles  run  their  courses.  Hence  the  sketch  of  the  business
economy  drawn  in  this  chapter.

Few  writers  upon  business  cycles  deem  such  an  introduction
necessary.  None  of  them  question  that  most  processes  of  modern
life,  social  and  political  as  well  as  economic,  have  some  share  in  the
alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression.  But  most  investigators
take  the  complexities  for  granted,  credit  themselves  and  their  readers
with  a  knowledge  of  economic  organization  sufficient  for  their  pur-
pose, and  concentrate  upon  demonstrating  the  source  from  which
comes  the  dominant  impetus  to  cyclical  fluctuations.  A  theorist  who
has  satisfied  himself  upon  that  central  issue  is  prone  to  adduce  only
the  evidence  and  arguments  which  seem  to  prove  his  explanation,
spending  little  time  upon  processes  which  adjust  themselves  to  his
ruling  cause.  A  skillful  exposition  of  this  type  is  likely  to  convince
the  reader  also,  unless  he  is  acquainted  with  one  or  several  equally
confident  demonstrations  that  some  other  cause  is  primarily  re-
sponsible. In  the  latter  case,  the  reader  must  give  up  the  puzzle,  or
choose  among  the  explanations  on  inadequate  grounds,  or  study  for
himself  the  interrelations  among  the  processes  exploited  by  his  various
authorities.

Our  debt  to  men  who  have  written,  and  even  thought,  in  this
summary  fashion  is  heavy.  It  profits  us  less  to  dwell  upon  their  lack
of  circumspection  than  to  dwell  upon  their  positive  achievements.
When  the  problem  of  business  cycles  was  first  attacked  it  was  in-
evitable that  the  hypotheses  offered  would  be  inadequately  worked
out.  The  complexities  of  the  problem,  the  possibility  of  making
numerous  hypotheses,  had  to  be  discovered.  Contemporaries  who
still  follow  out  a  single  line  of  causation  without  careful  examination
of  other  lines,  may  seem  a  trifle  quaint;  yet  they  too  may  add  new
discoveries  to  the  growing  stock  of  knowledge,  or  new  ideas  on  which
to  work.  ^We  must  choose,  however,  between  following  their  methods
and  making  use  of  their  results.  If  we  see  a  promise  of  usefulness  in
the  seemingly  divergent  conclusions  reached  by  several  different
groups  of  investigators,  we  must  set  about  our  own  constructive  work
with  more  care  than  our  guides  deemed  necessary.


182  BUSINESS  CYCLES


2. A  Summary.

Now  that  the  sketch  of  economic  organization  is  completed,  we
may  sum  up  the  leading  results  in  form  for  future  use.

Business  cycles  do  not  become  a  prominent  feature  of  economic
experience  in  any  community  until  a  large  proportion  of  its  members
have  begun  to  live  by  making  and  spending  money  incomes.  On  the
other  hand,  such  cycles  seem  to  appear  in  all  countries  when  economic
activity  becomes  organized  predominantly  in  this  fashion.  These  ob-
servations suggest  that  there  is  an  organic  connection  between  that
elaborate  form  of  economic  organization  which  we  may  call  "business
economy,'^  and  recurrent  cycles  of  prosperity  and  depression.

As  a  money  economy  attains  high  development,  consumption  con-
tinues to  be  carried  on  mainly  by  families;  but  production  comes  to
be  carried  on  mainly  by  a  new  unit — the  business  enterprise.  Further,
there  is  evidence  that  business  cycles  are  most  pronounced  in  those
industries  which  are  dominated  by  full-fledged  business  enterprises,
and  that  within  these  industries  they  affect  large  enterprises  more
seriously  than  small  ones.

According  to  the  best  available  estimates,  the  man-made  equip-
ment which  American  workers  now  use  has  an  aggregate  value  of
about  three  years^  current  income.  This  equipment  includes  not
only  buildings,  transportation  system,  factories,  and  implements
of  all  kinds,  but  also  roads,  the  products  and  merchandise  on  their
way  toward  consumers,  and  the  personal  effects  owned  by  individuals.
The  possession  of  this  stock  of  accumulated  wealth  makes  it  possible
for  the  population  to  consume  for  a  time  more  than  it  is  producing.
Every  year  the  population  eats  about  the  same  amount  of  food  per
capita;  but  the  expenditure  upon  maintaining  and  extending  the
equipment  used  for  business  purposes  need  not  be,  and  in  practice  is
not,  kept  so  nearly  uniform.  Thus  modern  industrial  methods  and
modern  business  organization  in  combination  open  the  door  to  wide
cyclical  fluctuations  in  at  least  one  important  field  of  economic
activity.

To  prosper,  even  to  survive,  business  enterprises  must  make  profits
—not  every  year,  but  on  the  average.  Hence  the  making  of  profits
is  of  necessity  the  controlling  aim  of  business  management.  The
industrial  processes  which  enterprises  carry  on  in  producing,  trans-
porting, storing,  and  distributing  goods  are  means  toward  this  end.


i


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  183

In  other  phrases:  industry  is  subordinated  to  business,  the  making
of  goods  to  the  making  of  money.

Yet  the  quantity  of  goods  handled  within  a  given  period  is  a
matter  of  primary  concern,  even  from  the  strictest  business  viewpoint.
Profits  are  the  difference  between  the  prices  which  an  enterprise  pays
for  all  the  things  it  must  buy,  and  the  prices  which  the  enterprise
receives  for  all  the  things  it  sells.  Thus  profits  depend  upon  the
physical  volume  of  goods  bought  and  sold,  as  well  as  upon  the
margins  between  buying  and  selling  prices.

The  prices  of  the  innumerable  kinds  of  goods  made  and  consumed
in  a  business  economy  constitute  an  orderly  system.  The  active
agency  in  maintaining  the  relations  among  the  various  parts  of  this
system  is  the  quest  for  profits  itself.  Business  men  are  ever  looking
for  opportunities  which  promise  a  large  volume  of  trade  at  wide  price
margins.  Where  the  margins  seem  wide  and  demand  active,  new
enterprisers  crowd  in  if  they  can,  and  their  competition  presently
raises  buying  and  lowers  selling  prices.  When  margins  seem  narrow,
new  investments  are  avoided,  and  such  of  the  old  investments  as
can  be  withdrawn  are  shifted  to  more  promising  fields.  In  conse-
quence, buying  prices  are  likely  to  fall  and  selling  prices  to  rise.  The
result  of  these  shiftings  of  investment,  which  are  always  in  progress,
is  not  to  make  uniform  the  percentage  margins  on  which  all  classes  of
goods  are  handled;  but  so  to  adjust  buying  and  selling  prices  that
the  net  price  margins,  together  with  the  volume  of  trade  which  can  be
handled  with  a  given  investment,  will  hold  out  similar  prospects  of
profits  in  all  branches  of  business  open  to  newcomers.  This  uni-
formity never  is  attained  in  fact;  but  the  plus  and  minus  departures
from  the  prevailing  level  of  prospective  profits  are  the  guides  which
business  men  try  to  follow  in  planning  investments.

In  our  analysis  of  business  cycles,  then,  we  must  recognize  that
profit  making  is  the  central  process  among  the  congeries  that  con-
stitute the  activities  of  a  business  economy.  Weather  conditions
count  in  so  far  as  they  affect  profits,  so  do  emotional  aberrations,  so
do  the  production  and  consumption  of  consumers'  goods,  and  so
do  a  thousand  other  factors.  On  the  other  hand,  the  prospects  of
making  profits  react  upon  all  these  other  processes,  in  so  far  as  they
are  affected  by  human  behavior.  Even  the  factors  which  we  classify
as  political  or  social  rather  than  economic  are  influenced  in  varying
measure  by  the  profitableness  of  business.  But,  of  course,  attention
must  be  concentrated  upon the  relations  among  the  processes  which


184  BUSINESS  CYCLES

are  of  outstanding  importance  as  affecting  and  affected  by  prospective
profits.  In  this  chapter,  an  effort  is  made  to  get  as  good  estimates  as
possible  of  the  relative  magnitude  of  a  few  fundamental  factors.

The  elaborate  exchanges  required  by  the  system  of  "production
for  the  use  of  others  and  acquisition  for  the  use  of  self'  are  managed
in  relatively  small  part  by  the  use  of  coin  and  paper  money,  and
mainly  by  the  use  of  credit  instruments.  In  the  United  States  it
seems  that  something  like  85  per  cent  of  payments  are  made  by
check.  Deposit  currency  is  adapted  to  the  varying  activity  of  busi-
ness, because  both  its  volume  and  its  rate  of  turnover  rise  and  fall
with  prosperity  and  depression.

The  goods  produced  by  business  enterprises  are  distributed  among
the  community  by  the  continual  paying  and  spending  of  money
incomes.  Of  the  several  income  streams,  wages  and  salaries  is  much
the  largest,  averaging  over  one-half  of  total  money  income.  Profits
ranks  second,  and  is  approximately  equal  to  dividends,  interest,  and
rents  put  together.  From  the  money  incomes  received  by  individuals,
upwards  of  60  per  cent  seems  to  be  spent  at  retail  shops  in  average
years;  the  rest  is  distributed  among  various  channels,  of  which  rent
is  the  most  important.

It  is  characteristic  of  the  business  economy  that  the  process  of
providing  goods  to  meet  human  needs  gives  rise  to  business  transac-
tions which  far  exceed  current  income.  Recent  data  indicate  that  the
total  volume  of  payments  in  the  United  States  is  perhaps  ten  times
the  aggregate  money  incomes  of  all  individuals,  or  five  times  the
transactions  involved  in  both  receiving  and  spending  personal  incomes.

A  not  inconsiderable  fraction  of  current  income  is  "saved''  every
year — that  is,  expended  in  ways  which  increase  the  community's  stock
of  fairly  durable  consumers'  goods  or  increase  its  capacity  to  produce
future  income.  The  best  available  estimate  for  the  United  States,
which  is  none  too  certain,  makes  this  fraction  average  about  one-
seventh  of  current  income.  Two-fifths  of  the  saving  is  done  not  by
individuals,  but  by  business  enterprises.  The  indications  are  that  the
accumulated  wealth  of  the  United  States  (excluding  the  value  of
land)  is  equal  to  the  savings  of  some  20  to  30  years.

An  economic  organization  which  distributes  incomes  in  money,
and  lets  the  recipients  spend  the  money  in  any  way  they  like,  makes
extremely  difficult  the  task  of  adjusting  the  supply  of  each  kind  of
goods  to  the  profit-paying  demand  for  it.  To  cope  with  this  task
of  directing  production  in  detail^  the  business  economy  has  evolved


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  185

an  elaborate  system.  Business  managements  play  the  most  active
role  in  guiding  production ;  but  they  have  the  assistance  of  technical
experts  of  various  sorts,  and  they  must  submit  most  of  their  important
projects  to  review  by  lenders  of  credit  or  investment  funds.  In  the
last  resort  consumers  determine  what  shall  be  made,  by  buying  certain
products  freely  and  others  sparingly;  their  choices,  however,  can
be  and  are  influenced  in  considerable  measure  by  business  enterprises,
and  business  managements  decide  the  technical  question  what  pro-
ducers' goods,  direct  and  indirect,  they  had  best  use  in  making  con-
sumers' commodities.

As  the  money  economy  developed  in  Europe,  the  share  which
Government  took  in  guiding  economic  activity  gradually  shrank.  The
turning  point  seems  to  have  come  in  the  17th  century  in  England,
early  in  the  18th  century  in  France  and  late  in  the  18th  century  in
Germany.  Governments  now  render  certain  services  which  the
community  will  not  confide  to  commercial  exploitation — a  list  that
varies  considerably  from  place  to  place — and  for  the  rest  endeavor  to
check  methods  of  making  money  which  are  deemed  incompatible
with  public  welfare.  Aside  from  schemes  of  economic  mobilization
during  wars,  no  country  has  developed  a  comprehensive  plan  for
the  direction  of  its  economic  energies.  The  scheme  of  guidance  by
business  managements,  technical  experts,  lenders,  and  consumers,
which  has  been  evolved  in  the  later  stages  of  the  money  economy,  is
confined  within  the  limits  of  single  business  enterprises,  or  groups
of  enterprises  dominated  by  a  common  control.  The  relations  among
the  undertakings  of  independent  money-makers  are  not  planned,  but
are  established  and  altered  by  the  mutual  competition  of  these  enter-
prises— in  which  anyone  who  can  command  the  necessary  capital  is
free  to  join,  and  in  which  some  enterprisers  win  more  or  less  monopo-
listic advantages.  Business  cycles  are  among  the  unplanned  results
of  this  scheme  of  organization.

Business  economy  nowadays  prevails  in  much  the  same  form
among  the  nations  in  which  Euro-American  culture  is  highly  de-
veloped. It  seems  also  to  be  making  headway  in  other  countries;
but  in  the  Orient,  aside  from  Japan,  and  in  less  civilized  regions,  it
has  not  reached  the  point  at  which  business  cycles  attain  marked
significance.  Even  among  the  great  commercial  nations  there  are
minor  differences  in  economic  organization,  respecting  such  matters
as  the  percentage  of  the  population  engaged  in  farming,  the  relative
development  of  thrift  and  enterprise,  monetary  and  banking  habits,


186  BUSINESS  CYCLES

and  the  economic  policy  of  Government.  These  differences  combine
with  a  multitude  of  non-economic  factors  to  prevent  the  business
cycles  of  any  two  countries  from  being  precisely  alike.

3. Thh  Conception  of  Equilibrium.

To  repeat  once  more:  by  showing  that  business  cycles  are  intricate
complexes  made  up  of  diverse  fluctuations  in  numerous  activities,
Chapter  I  forced  us  to  seek  some  orderly  scheme  for  conceiving  the
relations  of  these  processes  to  each  other.  The  scheme  which  Chap-
ter II  presents  centers  on  the  pursuit  of  money  profits.  All  the
"causes''  of  business  cycles  stressed  by  the  theories  reviewed  owe
whatever  influence  they  exert  upon  economic  activity  to  their  bear-
ing upon  profits,  and  the  like  must  hold  concerning  any  other  "causes"
which  future  investigation  reveals.  Thus  we  have  a  pattern  to
follow  in  future  chapters,  a  pattern  which  should  enable  us  to  dis-
cuss the  wide  diversity  of  processes  involved  in  business  cycles  with-
out falling  into  confusion.

A  further  device  for  keeping  order  in  the  discussion  is  to  treat  the
detailed  problems  marked  out  by  our  pattern  as  having  all  the  same
form — problems  of  equilibrium.  The  conception  that  business  cycles
consist  in  rhythmical  ruptures  and  restorations  of  balance  in  some
fundamental  process  is  explicitly  presented  by  several  of  the  theories
reviewed,  and  may  be  read  into  others. Can  we  make  use  of  this  idea?

Doubtless  it  was  a  mechanical  analogy  which  gave  its  vogue  to
the  notion  of  economic  equilibria.  Everyone  admits  that  analogies,
though  often  most  suggestive  in  scientific  inquiries,  are  dangerous
guides.  The  usefulness  of  the  analogy  in  question  was  greatest  and
its  dangers  least  when  economists  were  treating  what  they  called
"static"  problems.  Such  problems  can  be  given  a  quasi-mechanical
character,  for  they  are  not  taken  from  life,  but  made  in  an  inquirer's
head  to  suit  his  purposes,  and  mechanical  analogies  are  appropriate
to  mechanical  problems.  But  the  problems  of  business  cycles  are  the
opposite  of  "static."  If  we  are  to  conceive  of  them  in  terms  of  an
equilibrium  of  mechanical  forces,  we  must  conceive  of  an  equilibrium
among  numerous  forces  which  are  constantly  changing,  changing  at
different  rates,  and  influencing  one  another  as  they  change.  Perhaps
an  ingenious  person  who  thought  the  game  worth  while  might  design
a  mechanical  contrivance  which  would  work  somewhat  after  the
fashion  of  cyclical  business  fluctuations. If  he  did  so,  however,  most


ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  AND  BUSINESS  CYCLES  187

economists  would  find  his  machine  so  difficult  to  understand,  and
the  real  similarity  of  its  operations  to  business  processes  so  uncertain,
that  they  would  leave  its  intricacies  to  the  pleased  contemplation
of  the  inventor.

Yet  there  is  a  different  conception  of  equilibrium  which  may  help
us — the  equilibrium  of  a  balance  sheet,  or  better,  of  an  income  and
expenditures  statement.  Such  a  statement  has  nothing  to  do  with
mechanical  forces,  and  that  is  a  safeguard  against  false  analogies.
It  deals  with  pecuniary  quantities,  and  they  are  genuine  elements  in
our  problem.  It  sums  up  the  results  of  numerous  processes  which
concern  us,  through  periods  of  time  which  we  can  divide  according
to  their  business  characteristics.  More  than  that,  the  statements
for  successive  periods  of  time  link  into  each  other,  as  they  should
do  for  our  purposes.  The  statement  for  one  period  shows  what  has
happened  to  certain  items  included  in  its  predecessor,  and  shows  also
certain  items  the  disposition  of  which  will  appear  in  its  successor.
Finally,  the  balance  which  is  struck  is  really  a  device  for  finding  how
much  the  expenditures  and  the  receipts  are  out  of  balance.  The
difference  between  these  two  aggregates  of  items  is  put  down  on  the
income  side  as  profit  or  loss,  a  positive  or  a  negative  sum.  That  fea-
ture, too,  serves  our  needs.  We  have  no  more  warrant  for  assuming
in  advance  that  business  processes  "tend^^  to  maintain  an  equilibrium
than  to  assume  that  they  "tend"  to  get  out  of  balance.  What  we
need  when  we  employ  the  concept  of  equilibrium,  is  a  device  for  show-
ing the  relations  between  the  aggregates  which  stand  opposite  each
other  in  various  processes,  as  expenditures  and  receipts  stand  opposite
each  other  in  bookkeeping.  Having  found  equaUty,  or  having  found
one  set  of  items  in  excess  of  the  other,  our  problem  is  to  trace  the
consequences.  It  is  not  a  foregone  conclusion  that  these  consequences
will  always  be  of  the  sort  which  tend  to  restore  a  balance,  any  more
than  losses  suffered  by  a  business  enterprise  one  year  tend  to  give  it
profits  in  the  year  following.  Yet  we  know  that  the  modern  business
system  does  not  function  smoothly  when  the  aggregates  of  the  oppos-
ing items  in  certain  pairs  get  too  much  out  of  balance.

To  indicate  the  uses  of  this  conception  of  equilibrium  in  discussing
business  cycles  is  to  review  again  the  leading  conclusions  of  the  present
chapter.  The  central  proposition  is  the  one  to  which  the  statement
of  receipts  and  expenditures  applies  directly:  business  enterprises
cannot  "carry  on"  unless  in  the  long  run  their  incomes  exceed  their
outlays  by  a  satisfactory  margin  of  profits. In  order  that  this  relation


188  BUSINESS  CYCLES

(which  the  bookkeeper  expresses  as  a  balance)  may  be  maintained,  an
indefinite  number  of  other  changing  aggregates  must  be  kept  in  due
relation  to  each  other.  For  example,  the  selling  prices  of  each  of  the
million  kinds  of  goods  produced  and  sold  must  be  adjusted  severally
to  their  costs  of  production.  So,  too,  the  physical  quantities  of  each
kind  of  goods  turned  out  must  be  adjusted  severally  to  the  physical
quantities  that  can  be  sold.  That  payments  may  be  made,  the  quan-
tity and  turnover  of  coin,  paper  money,  and  deposit  currency  must
be  adjusted  to  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade,  or  the  pecuniary  volume
of  trade  to  the  circulating  medium.  Also,  the  means  of  payment
must  be  disbursed  to  buyers  as  money  incomes,  or  as  loans,  in  pro-
portions duly  adjusted  to  the  value  of  goods  sent  to  market.  To
provide  for  expansion  of  industrial  equipment,  a  portion  of  the  income
and  loans  must  be  saved  and  invested,  but  that  proportion  must
not  be  excessive.

So  we  might  go  on  indefinitely,  translating  perhaps  all  of  the
theories  of  business  cycles  into  terms  of  equilibrium.  Clearly  that
form  of  statement  has  advantages,  and  may  be  resorted  to  freely
without  danger,  if  we  remember  that  the  equilibria  in  mind  are  akin
to  the  balances  of  bookkeeping  rather  than  to  the  equilibria  of
mechanics.  Our  balances  take  place  in  time,  over  periods  which  vary
from  case  to  case,  and  which  are  seldom  definite.  The  balances  need
not  be  exact ;  business  plans  seek  to  provide  liberal  factors  of  safety ;
if  results  fall  out  in  the  neighborhood  of  expectations,  all  is  well.
When  balances  fail  persistently  by  wide  margins  for  a  considerable
period  of  time,  men  can  restore  them  in  many  cases  by  writing  certain
constituents  up  or  writing  them  down.  For  business  balances  usually
combine  both  estimates  of  certain  values  and  records  of  certain  trans-
actions; they  look  to  the  future  as  well  as  the  past;  they  are  used  to
control  plans  quite  as  much  as  to  register  results;  their  reliability
depends  upon  judgments  not  less  than  on  arithmetic.


CHAPTER  III.

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS.*

I. The  Current  Distinction  Between  Theoretical  and
Statistical  Work.

The  review  of  current  theories  in  Chapter  I  barely  mentions  the
type  of  work  upon  business  cycles  which  is  most  characteristic  of
the  present  and  seems  most  promising  for  the  future — analysis  of
statistical  data.  A  few  of  the  theorists — notably  Henry  L.  Moore —
make  skilled  and  elaborate  use  of  quantitative  methods,  and  almost
all  cite  statistical  evidence  upon  occasion.  But  most  theories  of
business  cycles  are  still  built  up  by  methods  which  would  have  seemed
familiar  to  Sismondi  and  Ricardo.

On  the  other  hand,  there  has  recently  appeared  a  group  of  busi-
ness-cycle statisticians  who  as  yet  have  sought,  not  to  construct  gen-
eral theories,  but  to  establish  more  precisely  the  facts  concerning
cyclical  fluctuations  in  particular  economic  processes.  By  their  de-
tailed researches,  the  statistical  workers  are  building  up  a  literature
more  like  the  current  literature  of  the  natural  sciences  than  like  that
of  economic  theory.  It  contains  few  treatises,  but  a  multitude  of  tech-
nical papers;  it  is  mathematical  in  form  and  empirical  in  spirit;  it
deals  with  restricted  problems,  lays  stress  upon  measurements,  and
aspires  to  prediction.

Between  these  two  groups  of  workers,  the  theorists  and  the  sta-
tisticians, there  has  been  less  communion  than  their  mutual  interests
require.  Many  of  the  statisticians  pay  little  heed  to  current  theories
of  business  cycles,  and  many  of  the  theorists  make  little  use  of
statistical  methods.  A  similar  divergence  of  outlook,  associated  with
a  similar  division  of  labor,  seems  not  uncommon  in  modern  science.
Experimentalists  and  pure  theorists  often  have  difficulty  in  under-
standing each  other;  but  in  the  long  run  each  group  provides  grist
for  the  other's  mill,  and  scientific  progress  is  a  joint  product  of  the

2  In  writing  this  chapter,  I  have  had  generous  help  from  the  Staff  of  the  National
Bureau,  particularly  from  Dr.  Frederick  C.  Mills,  and  from  the  Directors,  particularly
from  Professor  AUyn  A.  Young.

189


190  BUSINESS  CYCLES

two  lines  of  attack  upon  the  unknown. Such  must  prove  to  be  the
case  in  work  upon  business  cycles.

Statistical  analysis  affords  the  surest  means  of  determining  the
relations  among  and  the  relative  importance  of  the  numerous  factors
stressed  by  business-cycle  theories.  In  turn,  rational  hypotheses  are
the  best  guides  of  statistical  research,  and  theoretical  significance
is  the  ultimate  test  of  statistical  results.  Aside  from  the  limitations
of  investigators  or  of  their  resources,  the  line  commonly  drawn  be-
tween statistical  and  theoretical  work  has  no  justification.


II. Development  of  the  Statistical  Approach.

1. Why  the  Early  Writers  Upon  Business  Cycles  Made  Sltght

Use  of  Statistics.

A  promising  beginning  of  statistical  work  upon  social  problems
had  been  made  in  England  by  contemporaries  of  Sir  Isaac  Newton.
The  most  conspicuous  figure  in  the  group,  Sir  William  Petty,  dealt
with  "Political  Arithmetick,"  sought  to  express  himself  in  "Terms  of
Number,  Weight,  or  Measure,"  and  to  "bottom"  his  discourses  upon
quantitative  "Observations  or  Positions"  which  are  "either  true,  or
not  apparently  false  .  .  .  and  if  they  are  false,  not  so  false  as  to
destroy  the  Argument  they  are  brought  for."  ^  But  political  arith-
metic had  not  prospered  greatly.  "Observations  .  .  .  expressed  by
Number,  Weight,  or  Measure''  were  scarce,  and  the  "Positions,"
"either  true,  or  not  apparently  false,"  upon  which  Petty's  followers
bottomed  their  discourses  sometimes  led  to  contradictory  conclu-
sions. While  Adam  Smith  was  writing  the  Wealth  of  Nations,  Dr.
Richard  Price  was  proving  that  the  population  of  England  and  Wales
had  decreased  near  a  quarter  since  the  Revolution,  and  Arthur  Young
was  proving  that  the  population  had  increased.  It  is  not  surprising
that  Adam  Smith  had  "no  great  faith  in  political  arithmetic,"  and
made  sparing  use  of  it  in  expounding  "the  obvious  and  simple  sys-
tem of  natural  liberty."  ^

Yet  it  is  an  exaggeration  to  picture  the  generation  which  de-
veloped the  first  theories  of  business  cycles  as  virtually  destitute  of

^From  the  preface  to  Political  Arithmetick,  1690. See  The  Economic  Writings  of
Sir  William  Petty,  edited  by  Charles  H.  Hull. Cambridge,  1899;  vol.  i,  pp.  244,  245.
■  The  Wealth  of  Nations,  Cannan's  edition,  vol.  ii.  pp.  36  and  184.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  191

significant  statistics.  One  has  but  to  look  into  such  volumes  as  George
Chalmers'  Estimate  of  the  Comparative  Strength  of  Great  Britain,
1782,  Sir  Frederick  M.  Eden's  State  of  the  Poor,  1797,  the  second
edition  of  Malthus'  Essay  on  the  Principle  of  Population,  1803,  or
Thomas  Tooke's  Thoughts  and  Details  on  the  High  and  Low  Prices
of  the  Last  Thirty  Years,  1823,  to  assure  himself  that  men  who  had
an  aptitude  for  that  type  of  inquiry  could  gather  and  use  critically  a
considerable  quantity  of  data  covering  a  considerable  range  of  prob-
lems. And  the  books  mentioned  are  but  prominent  examples  of  a
type  of  work  which  was  rapidly  increasing  in  volume,  improving  in
quality,  and  gaining  public  support.  In  1801  the  first  census  of
Great  Britain  was  taken,  and  in  1832  a  Statistical  Department  was
added  to  the  Board  of  Trade.  How  voluminous  and  how  varied  were
the  statistical  materials  which  had  been  quietly  accumulating  in
official  sources  between  these  two  dates  was  shown  in  1833,  when
John  Marshall  published  his  quarto  Digest  of  all  the  Accounts  Relat-
ing to  the  Population,  Productions,  Revenues,  Financial  Operations,
Manufactures,  Shipping,  Colonies,  Commerce,  etc.,  etc.,  of  the  United
Kingdom,  diffused  through  more  than  600  volumes  of  Journals,  Re-
ports, and  Papers  presented  to  Parliament  during  the  last  Thirty-
five  Years.

It  is  also  a  mistake  to  think  of  the  early  nineteenth  century  as
altogether  lacking  in  statistical  technique.  In  Chronicon  Preciosum,
published  in  1707  and  more  than  once  reprinted,  Bishop  Fleetwood
had  shown  how  to  treat  changes  in  the  purchasing  power  of  money
m  a  quantitative  basis.  A  definite  plan  for  making  index  numbers  of
prices  had  been  put  before  the  Royal  Society  by  Sir  George  Schuck-
burg-Evelyn  in  1798.^  William  Playfair  had  used  graphic  methods
of  presenting  time  series  in  the  successive  editions  of  his  Commercial
and  Political  Atlas,  representing,  by  Means  of  Stained  Copper-plate
Charts,  the  Progress  of  the  Commerce,  Revenues,  Expenditures,  and
Debts  of  England,  during  the  whole  of  the  Eighteenth  Century  (1786,
1787,  and  1801).  Joseph  Fourier  had  developed  harmonic  analysis
in  a  memoir  crowned  by  the  Academic  des  Sciences  in  1812.*  Most
important  of  all,  Laplace  had  published  his  Essai  Philosophique  sur
les  Probabilites  in  1814.  In  this  charming  essay,  the  most  celebrated
mathematician  of  the  age  summed  up  the  analytic  methods  de-

'  "An  Account  of  Some  Endeavors  to  Ascertain  a  Standard  of  Weight  and  Measure,"
Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of  London,  1798.  Part  I,  art.  viii,  pp.
132-186,  especially  pp.  175,  176.

Theorie  des  mouvements  de  la  chaleur  dans  les  corps  solides.


192  BUSINESS  CYCLES

veloped  by  his  predecessors  and  himself,  and  proposed  their  use  in
dealing  with  social  problems.

Let  us  apply  to  the  political  and  social  sciences  (he  wrote)  the
method  founded  upon  observations  and  calculus,  a  method
which  has  served  us  so  well  in  the  natural  sciences.

And  to  that  end,  Laplace  urged  that  the  compilation  of  social  statis-
tics be  made  systematic.  It  is  highly  important  to  keep  in  every
branch  of

public  administration  an  accurate  record  of  the  effects  pro-
duced by  the  various  measures  taken,  which  are  so  many  ex-
periments tried  on  a  large  scale  by  governments.^

Thus  it  is  an  over-simple  explanation  to  ascribe  the  neglect  of
measurements  by  early  business-cycle  theorists  wholly  to  the  lack
of  pertinent  data  or  to  the  immaturity  of  statistical  technique.  Had
they  taken  the  line  suggested  by  Laplace,  these  writers  might  have
used  and  added  to  the  available  data;  they  might  have  learned  and
developed  the  analytic  methods  which  had  been  suggested.  But  like
other  economists  of  the  day,  most  writers  upon  crises  had  an  easier,  a
quicker,  and,  as  it  seemed  to  them,  a  more  effective  method  of  work-
ing. Observers  had  no  trouble  in  conceiving  plausible  explanations
of  crises,  and  they  could  rapidly  expand  their  conjectures  into  im-
posing theories  by  selecting  from  the  facts  generally  known  those
which  accorded  with  their  leading  ideas.  In  this  way  they  avoided
a  host  of  doubts  and  difficulties  which  would  crop  up  if  they  tried
to  bottom  their  work  upon  the  stubborn  data  of  statistics.  With
the  contemporary  writers  of  economic  treatises,  they  might  admit,
when  discussing  problems  of  method,  that  their  '^deductive"  reasoning
required  "inductive  verification";  but  they  somewhat  easily  excused
themselves  from  going  through  the  second  and  more  arduous  opera-
tion.^ Perhaps  still  more  important  is  the  fact  that  writers  who  prac-
ticed the  "deductive"  method  were  apt  to  formulate  their  problems
in  ways  which  raised  obstacles  to  "inductive  verification," — obstacles

^  Essai  Philosophique,  6th  ed.,  Paris,  1840,  p.  135.

*Note,  for  example,  the  difference  between  the  procedure  which  John  Stuart  Mill
recommended  in  his  System  of  Logic,  1843,  and  the  procedure  which  he  practiced  in
The  Principles  of  Political  Economy,  1848.  In  but  few  chapters  does  Mill  really
carry  out  the  "concrete-deductive  method."


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  193

which  might  have  been  avoided  by  a  different  approach  J  Statistical
method  could  not  develop  its  full  eflBciency  so  long  as  it  was  called
in  only  at  the  end  of  an  inquiry,  and  asked  to  answer  questions  it
had  no  share  in  framing.

2. The  Growth  of  Statistical  Technique.

The  mathematical  statisticians  of  the  early  19th  century  did  not
enter  the  economic  field.  The  social  phenomena  to  which  Laplace
applied  the  theory  of  probabilities  in  his  Essai  Philosophique  were
such  matters  as  the  credibility  of  the  evidence  given  by  witnesses,  the
decisions  of  assemblies,  mortality,  and  the  average  duration  of  mar-
riages. Adolphe  Quetelet  dealt  with  physical,  intellectual  and  moral
qualities  in  his  two  volumes  Sur  VHomme,  1835.  Henry  Thomas
Buckle  sought  to  introduce  statistical  method  into  historical  research,
holding  in  his  History  of  Civilization  in  England  (1857  and  1861)
that  human  actions  are  ruled  by  laws  as  fixed  and  regular  as  those
which  govern  the  physical  world;  but  that  these  laws  can  be  discov-
ered only  by  a  survey  of  the  facts  so  comprehensive  that  disturbing
factors  will  cancel  one  another.  Meanwhile,  the  chief  contributions
to  statistical  technique  continued  to  come  from  mathematicians
proper.  Gauss  published  the  method  of  least  squares  in  1823.  In
1837,  Poisson  made  the  theory  of  probability  more  applicable  to
social  problems  by  showing  how  the  curve  of  distribution  is  modified

'Consider  Ricardo's  contention  that  it  is  impossible  to  determine  "the  value  of  a
currency"  by  its  "relation,  not  to  one,  but  to  the  mass  of  commodities."

"To  suppose  that  such  a  test  would  be  of  use  in  practice,"  Ricardo  argued,  "arises
from  a  misconception  of  the  difference  between  price  and  value.

"The  price  of  a  commodity  is  its  exchangeable  value  in  money  only.

"The  value  of  a  commodity  is  estimated  by  the  quantity  of  other  things  generally
for  which  it  will  exchange.

"The  price  of  a  commodity  may  rise  while  its  value  falls,  and  vice  versa.  A  hat
may  rise  from  twenty  to  thirty  shillings  in  price,  but  thirty  shillings  may  not  procure
as  much  tea,  sugar,  coffee,  and  all  other  things,  as  twenty  shillings  did  before,  con-
sequently a  hat  cannot  procure  so  much.  The  hat,  then,  has  fallen  in  value,  though  it
has  increased  in  price.

"Nothing  is  so  easy  to  ascertain  as  a  variation  of  price  (sic),  nothing  so  difficult  as
a  variation  of  value;  indeed,  without  an  invariable  measure  of  value,  and  none  such
exists,  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  it  with  any  certainty  or  precision."  ("Proposals
for  an  Economical  and  Secure  Currency,"  2d  ed.,  1816.  Ricardo's  Works,  edited  by  J.  R.
McCulloch,  p.  401.)

Nowadays,  economists  apply  to  money  Ricardo's  definition,  "The  value  of  a  com-
modity is  estimated  by  the  quantity  of  other  things  generally  for  which  it  will  ex-
change," and  proceed  to  the  construction  of  price  indexes.  Then  they  can  compare
the  price  fluctuations  of  single  commodities  with  this  general  index,  and  approximate
Ricardo's  conception  of  measuring  variations  in  value,  without  having  an  "invariable
measure  of  value."


194  BUSINESS  CYCLES

by  dropping  the  assumption  of  equal  a  priori  probabilities  at  every
trial,  and  directed  attention  to  ^'the  law  of  great  numbers."

The  only  economist  concerned  with  the  theoretical  uses  of  statis-
tics in  this  period  was  Augustin  Cournot.  In  considering  the  old
problem  of  variations  in  value,  he  made  a  casual  suggestion  that
'^Here,  as  in  astronomy,  it  is  necessary  to  recognize  secular  variations,
which  are  independent  of  periodic  variations.'^  More  important  was
Cournot's  discussion  of  demand  curves.  While  his  own  dealings  with
this  subject  were  confined  to  mathematical  analysis  '^by  means  of  an
indeterminate  symbol,'^  he  emphasized  the  need  of  statistical  inquiry
into  the  relations  between  demand  (D)  and  price  (p).  In  this  con-
nection, he  suggested  the  technique  by  which  statistical  laws  defining
the  relationships  between  economic  variables  may  be  discovered.

Since  so  many  moral  causes  capable  of  neither  enumeration
nor  measurement  affect  the  law  of  demand  (he  wrote),  it  is
plain  that  we  should  no  more  expect  the  law  to  be  expressible
by  an  algebraic  formula  than  the  law  of  mortality,  and  all  the
laws  whose  determination  enters  into  the  field  of  statistics,  or
what  is  called  social  arithmetic.  Observation  must  therefore  be
depended  on  for  furnishing  the  means  of  drawing  up  between
proper  limits  a  table  of  the  corresponding  values  of  D  and  p;
after  which,  by  the  well-known  methods  of  interpolation  or  by
graphic  processes,  an  empiric  formula  or  a  curve  can  be  made
to  represent  the  function  in  question;  and  the  solution  of
problems  can  be  pushed  as  far  as  numerical  applications.^

Yet  Cournot  made  no  use  of  statistical  data  in  his  Theory  of  Wealth,
and  in  his  Exposition  de  la  Theorie  des  Chances  et  des  Probabilites
(published  in  1843),  he  did  not  apply  the  theory  to  a  much  wider
range  of  social  problems  than  Laplace  had  considered  in  1814.  It  was
left  for  W.  Stanley  Jevons  to  give  the  first  powerful  impetus  to
statistical  work  in  economic  theory.^

^Researches  into  the  Mathematical  Principles  of  the  Theory  of  Wealth.  Translated
by  Nathaniel  T.  Bacon.  New  York,  1897,  pp.  25,  47-49,  and  53,  54.  Originally  pub-
lished in  1838.

*  In  1833  the  British  Association  for  the  Advancement  of  Science  had  set  up  a  Sta-
tistical Section,  and  a  Statistical  Society  had  been  formed  in  Manchester.  But  both
organizations  sought  to  avoid  discussions  of  the  theoretical  implications  of  their  data.
"Several  men  of  eminence  in  statistics  chafed  at  being  thus  relegated  to  the  position  of
'hewers  and  drawers  for  political  economy  and  philosophy,'  so  they  joined  in  promoting
the  Statistical  Society  of  London,  now  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  with  the  view  of
providing  therein  a  wider  scope  for  their  inquiries.  Their  hopes  were  frustrated,  for  a
time  at  least,  by  the  same  spirit  of  caution  which  dictated  the  limitations  imposed  upon


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  195

While  still  a  student  in  the  University  of  London,  Jevons  began
studying  ''periodic  commercial  fluctuations'' — or,  as  we  now  say,  ''sea-
sonal variations."  He  passed  on  quickly  to  an  investigation  of  the
changes  in  the  "value  of  gold"  which  had  followed  the  Califomian  and
Australian  discoveries.

It  has  been  abundantly  shown  by  Quetelet  and  others  (he  re-
marked), that  many  subjects  of  this  nature  are  so  hopelessly
intricate,  that  we  can  only  attack  them  by  the  use  of  averages,
and  by  trusting  to  probabilities.

To  ascertain  what  changes  had  occurred  in  the  "value  of  gold,'*  Jevons
made  index  numbers  of  the  wholesale  prices  of  39  commodities  by
years  from  1845  to  1862.  He  discussed  the  best  type  of  average  to
use;  tested  his  results  by  taking  a  larger  sample  of  118  commodities,
and  invoked  the  theory  of  probabilities  to  find  the  cause  of  the  ad-
vance in  prices,  computing  that

the  odds  are  10,000  to  1  against  a  series  of  disconnected  and
casual  circumstances  having  caused  the  rise  of  prices — one  in
the  case  of  one  commodity,  another  in  the  case  of  another —
instead  of  some  general  cause  acting  over  them  all.^

And  we  may  regard  Jevons'  book  on  The  Coal  Question  (1865)  as
an  important  contribution  to  the  study  of  secular  trends.

The  theory  and  the  use  of  index  numbers  made  slow  progress  for
a  generation  after  Jevons'  pioneer  work  in  1863.  But  in  1887  Pro-
fessor F.  Y.  Edgeworth  began  his  long  series  of  distinguished  con-
tributions to  the  problem,  and  about  the  same  time  Adolf  Soetbeer,
Augustus  Sauerbeck,  and  Roland  P.  Falkner  began  providing  index

the  earlier  institutions."  For  their  Journal  expressed  its  policy  by  the  self-denying
motto,  Aliis  exterendum,  which  was  not  dropped  until  about  1857,  although  the  society
had  re-defined  its  aims  in  a  wider  style  by  1840.

See  Sir  Athelstane  Baines,  "The  History  and  Development  of  Statistics  in  Great
Britain  and  Ireland,"  in  The  History  of  Statistics,  edited  by  John  Koren  (Seventy-fifth
anniversary  volume  of  the  American  Statistical  Association),  New  York,  1918,  pp.
385,  386.

*0n  the  Study  of  Periodic  Commercial  Fluctuations,  1862;  A  Serious  Fall  in  the
Value  of  Gold  Ascertained,  1863;  The  Depreciation  of  Gold,  1869.  Reprinted  in
Investigations  in  Currency  and  Finance,  by  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  London,  1884.  The
quotations  are  from  the  paper  of  1869,  pp.  155-157  of  the  Investigations.

Later  writers  have  questioned  the  applicability  of  the  theory  of  probability  to  index
numbers.  For  citations  and  discussion  of  the  problem,  see  Professor  F.  Y.  Edgeworth,
"The  Element  of  Probability  in  Index  Numbers,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical
Society,  July,  1925,  Vol.  88,  pp.  557-575.


196  BUSINESS  CYCLES

numbers  for  England,  Germany  and  the  United  States.*  Thereafter
this  bit  of  statistical  technique  rapidly  became  current  among  econo-
mists, though  skepticism  concerning  the  trustworthiness  of  the  results
lingered  long  in  certain  quarters.

As  slow  in  winning  general  recognition  was  the  contribution  of
another  economist^ — Wilhelm  Lexis.  Approaching  the  theory  of  prob-
ability from  the  statistical  side,  Lexis  showed  in  a  series  of  investiga-
tions that  the  birth  rates  of  different  populations  are  not  distributed
around  their  mean  values  in  accordance  with  the  so-called  ''normal
curve,''  and  developed  a  mathematical-statistical  explanation  of  the
divergencies.  Thus  the  way  was  opened  for  the  empirical  study  of
actual  distributions — a  type  of  work  which  spread  gradually  from
vital  statistics  into  other  fields.^

The  theoretical  justification  for  applying  the  theory  of  probability
to  economic  data  at  large  was  worked  out  mainly  by  Professor  Edge-
worth. In  1885  he  directed  attention  to  the  fact  that

the  distribution  of  averages  will  be  approximately  normal  even
though  the  distribution  of  the  items  composing  the  averages
deviate  considerably  from  normal.

Later  he  showed  that  the  observations  subjected  to  the  probability
analysis

need  not  be  perfectly  independent  of  each  other,  "it  suffices
that  there  should  be  a  considerable  amount  of  independence" ;
that  they  need  not  be  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude,  "it
suffices  that  no  two  or  three  preponderate" ;  that  the  condition
for  the  absence  of  systematic  errors  is  not  necessary,  "it  suf-
fices that  the  center  of  gravity  for  the  series  of  observations

*  Edge  worth's  early  contributions  were  published  in  the  Reports  of  the  British  Asso-
ciation for  the  Advancement  of  Science,  1887,  1888,  1889  and  1890  (reprinted  in  Papers
Relating  to  Political  Economy,  by  F,  Y.  Edgeworth,  London,  1925,  vol.  i,  pp.  195-343).
Soetbeer's  index  numbers  appeared  first  in  1885,  Sauerbeck's  first  in  1886,  and  Falkner's  in
1893.  For  more  explicit  references,  see  "Index  Numbers  of  Wholesale  Prices  in  the
United  States  and  Foreign  Countries,"  Bulletin  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor
Statistics,  No.  284,  October,  1921.

^See  Wilhelm  Lexis,  Die  franzosischen  Ausfuhrprdmien  in  Zusammenhange  mit  der
Tarifgeschichte  und  der  Handelsentwicklung  Frankreichs  seit  der  Restauration,  Bonn,
1870;  Zur  Theorie  der  Massenerscheinungen  in  der  menschlichen  Gesellschaft,  Freiburg,
1877;  Abhandlungen  zur  Theorie  der  Bevolkerungs-  und  Moralstatistik,  Jena,  1903.
Eugen  Altschul  gives  an  interesting  account  of  Lexis'  later  views  concerning  the  appli-
cation of  statistical  method  to  social  problems  in  a  paper  on  "Konjunkturtheorie  und
Konjunkturstatistik,"  Archiv  fur  Sozialwissenschaft  und  Sozialpolitik,  January,  1926,
vol.  Iv,  pp.  77-82.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  197

indefinitely  prolonged  should  coincide  with  the  true  point  which
forms  the  quaesitum."  ^

Another  technical  contribution  for  which  the  economists  presently
found  use  was  the  theory  of  correlation.  Invented  by  Sir  Francis
Galton  as  a  method  of  studying  the  inheritance  of  characteristics,  it
was  developed  in  the  early  1890's  by  Professors  Karl  Pearson,  F.  Y.
Edgeworth  and  G.  Udny  Yule,  and  later  applied  to  measuring  the
relationship  between  paired  items  in  time  seriesJ

3.  The  Accumulation  of  Statistical  Data.

The  cumulative  growth  of  statistical  technique  adapted  to  the
treatment  of  economic  problems  in  the  second  half  of  the  19th  century
was  paralleled  by  a  cumulative  growth  of  statistical  data.  The  im-
petus toward  the  collection  of  statistics  came  from  practical  activities
rather  than  from  scientific  inquiries.  Most  of  the  ever-shifting  issues
in  the  political  life  of  modern  nations  have  had  their  economic  aspects.
Those  who  urged  or  those  who  opposed  "reforms,"  and  often  both
parties,  sought  to  strengthen  their  cases  by  instituting  special  in-
quiries to  show  the  extent  of  the  evils  to  be  remedied,  or  of  the  evils
which  the  proposed  remedies  would  produce.  And  as  changes  were
made  in  public  policy,  administrative  agencies  were  set  up  which
had  to  keep  continuous  records  not  unlike  those  for  which  Laplace
had  called  in  1814.

Thus  the  history  of  statistics  in  every  country  bears  the  impress  of
its  social  struggles.  The  United  States  owes  its  relatively  abundant
statistics  of  money  and  banking  to  the  currency  problems  which  the
country  has  faced  in  different  forms  from  the  days  of  Alexander
Hamilton  to  the  days  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Board.  The  relative
backwardness  of  vital  statistics  in  the  United  States  arises  from  the
fact  that  the  population  problem  has  been  less  pressing  in  this  coun-
try than  elsewhere.  Our  statistics  of  immigration  and  emigration  re-
mained meager  until  the  country  became  exercised  about  the  millions
of  newcomers  from  Southern  Europe. So,  too,  our  statistics  of  income

"Warren  M.  Persons,  "Statistics  and  Economic  Theory,"  Review  of  Economic  Sta-
tistics,My,  1925,  vol.  vii,  pp.  185-186.

This  paper  contains  the  best  account  known  to  me  of  the  development  of  statistical
methods  now  utilized  by  economists. I  have  drawn  upon  it  freely.

'See  Galton 's  Natural  Inheritance,  1889,  and,  for  later  contributions,  Karl  Pearson,
"Notes  on  the  History  of  Correlation,"  Biometrica,  October,  1920.


198  BUSINESS  CYCLES

were  vastly  improved  by  the  adoption  of  the  federal  income  tax.
Doubtless  one  might  cite  similar  examples  for  any  other  country.

While  Governments  were  being  forced  by  practical  exigencies  to
increase  the  scope  of  their  statistical  work  decade  after  decade,  pri-
vate business  was  expanding  its  quota  of  statistics.  On  this  side,  also,
practical  needs  dominated.  The  closer  integration  of  business  activi-
ties, the  increasing  dependence  of  every  section  and  industry  upon
other  sections  and  industries,  created  a  widespread  interest  in  business
news.  Reports  of  transactions  and  prices  upon  the  stock  and  produce
exchanges,  reports  of  money-market  conditions,  bank  clearings,  se-
curity issues,  bankruptcies  and  the  like  were  wanted  by  a  wide  pub-
lic, and  numerous  agencies  collaborated  to  meet  the  demand.  Trade
journals  found  that  statistical  data  of  technical  interest  to  their
clientele  attracted  subscribers.  Later,  many  trade  associations  began
offering  statistical  service  to  their  members.

In  the  various  branches  of  economic  activity,  the  progress  toward
making  an  adequate  statistical  record  was  influenced  by  the  relative
ease  of  collecting  data.  Highly  organized  central  markets,  like  the
produce  and  stock  exchanges,  made  the  statistician's  task  relatively
simple.  In  the  commodity  field,  price  quotations  were  easier  to  get
than  production  statistics,  wholesale  prices  were  easier  to  get  than
retail  prices,  and  market  prices  were  easier  to  get  than  contract  prices.
On  the  side  of  production,  it  was  easier  to  compile  reports  for  the
highly  standardized  raw  materials  like  coal,  petroleum,  and  agricul-
tural produce,  or  for  partially  fabricated  materials  like  pig  iron,  spel-
ter and  cotton  sheetings,  than  for  the  vast  variety  of  finished  goods
like  machinery,  clothing  and  household  supplies.  In  comparison  with
production,  transportation  presents  a  comparatively  simple  problem.
On  the  contrary,  statistics  of  stocks  on  hand,  of  orders  booked,  of
mercantile  operations,  of  costs  and  of  profits  have  been  very  difl&cult
to  obtain.

Though  the  obstacles  in  the  way  of  collecting  adequate  data  re-
main formidable,  economic  evolution  is  facilitating  the  task.  The
organization  of  workers  in  trade  unions  gave  the  first  opening  for
collecting  significant  and  regular  statistics  of  unemployment,  while
the  concentration  of  an  increasing  proportion  of  employees  in  large
establishments  facilitated  the  collection  of  the  more  significant  data
concerning  numbers  on  payrolls.  The  rise  of  department  and  chain
stores  made  it  feasible  to  gather  the  first  reliable  data  concerning
retail  sales. Obviously,  the  trend  toward  standardization  of  technical


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  199

processes  and  of  products  favors  the  statistician.  So  does  the  trend
toward  the  standardization  of  accounting  methods,  a  trend  which  is
most  marked  in  such  fields  as  banking,  railway  transportation,  and
public  utilities,  where  financial  reports  must  be  submitted  on  official
forms  to  government  bureaus.  The  trend  toward  publicity  of  cor-
porate accounts,  observable  in  business  circles,  promises  to  give  us  in
the  future  more  accurate  knowledge  of  costs  and  profits.  In  the  not
distant  future  we  may  know  more  about  the  arcana  of  business  than
Sismondi's  generation  knew  about  market  prices.  A  policy  which  com-
bines standardization  with  publicity  is  favored  by  modern  methods  of
producing  by  automatic  machinery,  selling  by  national  advertising,
and  financing  by  appeal  to  a  large  circle  of  investors.  Standardiza-
tion and  publicity  give  the  statistician  what  he  wants.^

4.  The  Present  Situation.

Thus  it  happened  that  by  the  time  writers  upon  business  cycles
began  to  make  systematic  use  of  statistics — say  in  the  decade  begin-
ning in  1900 — they  could  utilize  many  methods  already  developed  by
mathematicians,  anthropometrists,  biologists  and  economists,  and
many  data  already  collected  by  public  and  private  agencies.  As
their  work  progressed,  these  men  encountered  problems  which  re-
quired special  adaptations  of  the  methods  used  in  other  fields  and
problems  which  required  data  not  yet  collected.  Yet  so  well  had  the
way  been  paved  for  them  that  they  could  make  rapid  progress  toward
estabhshing  the  study  of  business  cycles  upon  a  quantitative  basis.

To  analyze  time  series  was  the  central  problem.  First,  the  recur-
rent cyclical  fluctuations  had  to  be  isolated  so  far  as  possible  from
the  other  fluctuations  to  which  time  series  are  subject.  Second,  the
relationships  among  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  many  different  series
had  to  be  ascertained.

Jevons  had  made  a  beginning  upon  the  first  task  by  his  studies  of
what  are  now  called  seasonal  variations,  a  beginning  which  George
Clare  had  continued  in  his  brief  treatise  upon  the  London  money

*  The  details  concerning  the  increase  of  statistical  data  since  the  opening  of  the  19th
century  are  far  too  intricate  to  sketch.  Perhaps  the  best  general  view  of  developments
on  this  side  is  given  by  the  volume  published  by  the  American  Statistical  Association  in
commemoration  of  its  75th  Anniversary :  The  History  of  Statistics,  Their  Development
and  Progress  in  Many  Countries,  Collected  and  edited  by  John  Koren,  New  York,  1918.

A  more  detailed  view  of  the  British,  French,  German  and  American  data  relevant  to
business  cycles  is  afforded  by  the  collection  of  statistics  which  the  National  Bureau  of
Economic  Research  has  made  in  preparation  for  the  present  book  and  which  the  Bureau
hopes  to  publish.


200  BUSINESS  CYCLES

market.^  Another  step  was  taken  by  J.  H.  Poynting  and  R.  H.
Hooker,  who  attacked  the  problem  of  determining  secular  trends,
using  for  that  purpose  moving  averages.^  The  second  task,  finding
the  relationships  among  quantities  varying  in  time,  was  undertaken
by  Professor  G.  Udny  Yule  in  1899  and  Mr.  Hooker  in  1901,  both
of  whom  applied  Pearson's  methods  of  correlation  to  economic  data.^

In  1902,  Dr.  John  Pease  Norton  combined  and  improved  upon
these  various  methods  in  his  Statistical  Studies  in  the  New  York
Money  Market."^  Norton  measured  secular  trends  by  fitting  ex-
ponential curves  to  his  data;  he  considered  the  dispersion  as  well  as
the  averages  of  seasonal  variations,  taken  as  percentages  of  his  trends;
he  used  lines  of  regression  as  well  as  coefficients  of  correlation  in  ex-
amining the  relations  among  his  variables.  Another  notable  step  was
taken  by  Professor  Henry  L.  Moore,  who  in  1914  applied  harmonic
analysis  to  time  series.^  The  following  year.  Professor  Warren  M.
Persons  made  the  first  of  his  business  barometers,^  and  in  1917  the
Harvard  Committee  on  Economic  Research  enabled  him  to  begin  a
more  elaborate  analysis  of  economic  statistics  than  had  been  possible
for  any  of  his  predecessors.  By  establishing  the  Review  of  Economic
Statistics  in  January,  1919,  this  committee  provided  an  organ  de-
voted primarily  to  the  quantitative  study  of  business  cycles.  The
models  which  Persons  and  his  colleagues  have  set  in  this  journal  have
been  studied  and  imitated  widely,  not  only  in  the  United  States,  but
also  in  Europe.

This  list  of  men  who  shared  in  adapting  statistical  methods  to  the
analysis  of  economic  time  series  is  far  from  complete;  it  mentions
only  a  few  of  the  most  noteworthy  contributors.  Still  less  justice
can  be  done  to  recent  work. Of  late  the  number  of  economic  statisti-

M  Money-Market  Primer  and  Key  to  the  Exchanges,  London,  1891;  2d  ed.,  1903.

^See  J.  H.  Poynting,  "A  Comparison  of  the  Fluctuations  in  the  Price  of  Wheat  and
in  the  Cotton  and  Silk  Imports  into  Great  Britain,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical
Society,  1884,  vol.  xlvii,  pp.  34-64;  R.  H.  Hooker,  "On  the  Correlation  of  the  Marriage-
rate  with  Trade,"  the  same,  1901,  vol.  Ixiv,  pp.  485-492.  A  sketch  of  the  progressive
improvements  in  ascertaining  secular  trends  will  be  given  in  Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets'  forth-
coming monograph  on  that  subject.

^Hooker  as  cited  in  preceding  note;  Yule,  "An  Investigation  into  the  Causes  of
Changes  in  Pauperism  in  England,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  1899,  vol.
Ixii,  p.  249/.

^Published  for  the  Department  of  Social  Sciences,  Yale  University;  New  York,  1902.

•*  Economic  Cycles: Their  Law  and  Cause,  New  York,  1914.

*  "Construction  of  a  Business  Barometer  Based  upon  Annual  Data"  (presented  in
part  to  a  meeting  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  August  11,  1915),  American
Economic  Review,  December,  1916,  vol.  vi,  pp.  739-769.  See  a  supplemental  paper
"On  the  Variate  Difference  Correlation  Method  and  Curve-fitting."  Publications  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1917,  vol.  xv,  pp.  602-642.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  201

cians  has  grown  rapidly.  Efforts  to  improve  the  technique  in  detail,
and  efforts  to  win  fresh  knowledge  by  more  intensive  and  more  ex-
tensive analysis  are  being  made  constantly.  In  later  sections  I
must  attempt  a  critical  sunamary  of  the  constructive  achievements
of  the  whole  campaign.  Here  it  suffices  to  remark  that  recent  contri-
butions are  to  be  found  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  As-
sociation, the  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  the  Harvard  Business
Review,  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  and  less  fre-
quently in  the  journals  devoted  to  economics  at  large.

On  the  side  of  data,  the  Department  of  Commerce  has  rendered
valuable  service  by  extending  the  collection  of  statistics  into  fresh
fields,  and  by  establishing  the  Survey  of  Current  Business  in  1921.  In
this  source  are  assembled  most  of  the  current  series,  old  and  new,
collected  by  public  or  private  agencies,  which  are  useful  to  students
of  business  cycles.  Of  scarcely  less  interest  are  the  Federal  Reserve
Bulletin  and  the  bulletins  issued  by  the  several  Reserve  Banks.  Many
of  the  most  significant  series,  or  indexes  made  from  them,  are  regu-
larly published  in  "adjusted"  form  by  the  Review  of  Econonmc
Statistics.

As  the  preceding  references  indicate,  the  statistical  study  of  busi-
ness cycles  has  had  its  headquarters  in  the  United  States.  This  coun-
try continued  to  suffer  from  severe  crises  for  a  generation  after  they
had  been  transformed  into  mild  recessions  in  Europe  and  Canada.
Thus  the  problem  was  especially  intriguing  to  Americans.  Further,
Americans  had  rather  fuller  statistics  to  work  with  than  were  available
in  any  other  country,  partly  because  of  the  prominence  of  economic
issues  in  American  politics,  partly  because  of  the  highly  standardized
character  of  American  products.  The  development  was  much  stimu-
lated and  colored  by  a  widespread  demand  for  business  forecasts.
To  improve  the  statistical  technique  of  forecasting  was  Professor
Persons'  chief  aim,  and  the  hope  of  finding  trustworthy  indexes  to
the  future  has  animated  and  secured  financial  support  for  many  in-
genious investigations.

Since  the  war,  interest  both  scientific  and  practical  in  this  type  of
work  has  been  spreading  to  other  countries.  Since  1921,  the  Economic
Bulletin  of  the  Conjuncture  Institute,  edited  by  Professor  N.  D.  Kon-
dratieff,  has  been  compiling,  analyzing  and  interpreting  Russian  data.
In  Great  Britain,  the  London  and  Cambridge  Economic  Service,  co-
operating with  the  Harvard  University  Committee  on  Economic  Re-


202  BUSINESS  CYCLES

search,  began  the  publication  of  a  Monthly  Bulletin  in  1923.  The
Institute  of  Statistics  of  the  University  of  Paris  has  a  similar  plan  of
cooperation  with  the  Harvard  group,  and  publishes  Indices  du  Mouve-
ment  General  des  Affaires  en  France  et  en  Divers  Pays.  Germany  has
an  Institut  fiir  Konjunkturforschung  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Ernst
Wagemann,  which  began  publishing  Vierteljahrshefte  zur  Konjunk-
turforschung in  January,  1926.  Two  Institutes  of  Statistics  connected
with  the  Universities  of  Padua  and  of  Rome  have  joined  forces  to
publish  Indici  del  Movimento  Economico  Italiano  under  the  direction
of  a  Committee  presided  over  by  Professor  Corrado  Gini.  The  League
of  Nations  has  appointed  a  ^'Committee  of  Experts  on  Economic
Barometers,"  Professor  A.  W.  Flux,  chairman,  which  held  its  first
meeting  at  Geneva  in  December,  1926.  Finally,  in  January,  1927,  an
Oesterreichisches  Institut  fiir  Konjunkturforschung  was  organized  in
Vienna,  with  a  scientific  staff  directed  by  Dr.  F.  A.  von  Hayek.

The  present  chapter  aims  neither  to  give  a  full  exposition  of  the
statistical  methods  which  have  been  applied  to  the  study  of  business
cycles — that  would  fill  a  volume  and  exceed  my  competence, —  nor
to  show  what  the  statisticians  have  contributed  toward  our  knowledge
of  cyclical  fluctuations — that  will  be  attempted  in  a  second  book.
It  aims  rather  to  show  what  problems  the  statistical  workers  have
attacked,  how  far  they  have  pushed  their  researches,  and  what  light
they  shed  upon  the  character  of  business  cycles.

III.  The  Analysis  of  Time  Series.

1.  The  Quality  and  Quantity  of  Economic  Statistics.

A  biologist  or  anthropologist  working  upon  statistical  problems  is
often  able  to  collect  his  own  data  by  measuring  material  in  his  lab-
oratory. Such  measurements  can  be  made  to  fit  the  requirements
of  the  problem,  and  their  accuracy  can  be  controlled  within  assign-
able limits.  A  meteorologist  is  dependent  upon  data  collected  mainly
by  other  observers;  but  these  observers  are  men  with  at  least  a
modicum  of  training,  using  scientific  apparatus,  and  working  under
scientific  direction.  The  quantitative  worker  upon  economic  prob-
lems is  less  fortunate  in  respect  to  his  raw  materials.  Seldom  can
he  make  in  his  statistical  laboratory  a  significant  collection  of  meas-
urements. He  deals  not  with  "material,"  but  with  the  behavior  of


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  203

men,  and  that  behavior  must  be  observed  and  recorded  "in  the  field/'
Because  his  phenomena  are  highly  variable,  he  usually  needs  a  large
array  of  cases,  more  than  he  can  collect  by  himself  or  through  the
trained  assistants  at  his  disposal.  Forced  to  rely  upon  observations
made  by  others,  he  must  often  adapt  his  problem  to  the  data,  when
he  wishes  to  adapt  his  data  to  the  problem.

Economic  statistics  are  usually  a  by-product  of  governmental  or
business  administration,  collected  in  a  form,  at  intervals,  and  by
methods  determined  by  some  statute,  official  ruling,  or  business  prac-
tice. Even  when  a  public  bureau  plans  a  statistical  inquiry  with  an
eye  to  the  scientific  use  of  the  results — and  that  happens  with  increas-
ing frequency — it  is  usually  necessary  to  fit  the  results  for  a  variety
of  uses,  and  hence  not  feasible  to  adapt  them  precisely  to  any  specific
use.  Finally,  the  accuracy  attainable  in  most  economic  measurements
leaves  much  to  be  desired.  Often  the  data  consist  of  estimates  or
rough  approximations,  and  when  precision  is  attainable  with  ref-
erence to  the  items  counted  there  may  be  grave  uncertainty  regarding
the  representative  character  of  the  sample.

It  is  sometimes  suggested  that  what  economic  statistics  lack  in
quality  they  make  up  in  quantity.  There  are  grounds  for  arguing
that  a  large  number  of  observations  compensates  for  lack  of  precision
in  each  single  observation,  and  the  volume  of  economic  statistics  is
certainly  imposing — it  is  even  intimidating  at  first  sight.  But  on
closer  inspection  the  mass  proves  to  consist  less  of  a  multiplication
of  independent  observations  upon  particular  phenomena,  than  of
observations  upon  a  vast  variety  of  phenomena,  and  of  the  infinite
detail  in  which  certain  processes  must  be  observed.

To  take  the  last  point  first:  A  student  of  business  cycles  is  con-
cerned largely  with  aggregates,  for  example,  bank  clearings  in  the
United  States,  the  wheat  crops  of  the  world,  pig-iron  output.  On
each  of  these  topics  and  a  hundred  like  them  he  can  find  a  huge  quan-
tity of  figures.  But  the  mass  is  not  for  all  his  purposes  a  large  number
of  observations  upon  one  variable ;  it  consists  of  many  separate  items
which  must  be  added  to  get  one  series  of  totals.  The  investigator  is
glad  to  have  the  figures  in  detail,  for  he  may  find  occasion  to  examine
the  fluctuations  (say)  of  wheat  yields  in  different  countries.  But  he
has  only  one  or  two  estimates  for  each  country  each  year.  Another
type  of  problem  is  exempHfied  by  efforts  to  measure  changes  in  the
"level''  of  wholesale  or  retail  prices.  Again  a  huge  quantity  of  raw
data  is  available — the  prices  of  particular  commodities,  in  particular


204  BUSINESS  CYCLES

markets,  at  particular  dates.  In  Professor  Edgeworth^s  phrase,  the
task  is

to  extricate  from  fallible  observations  a  mean  apt  to  repre-
sent the  "general  trend  of  prices."  ^

But  the  investigator  has  to  take  the  changes  between  every  pair  of
dates  in  every  country  or  smaller  area  as  a  separate  problem,  and  for
no  such  problem  is  his  number  of  "fallible  observations"  very  large.
The  War  Industries  Board's  index  number  of  wholesale  prices  in
1913-18  included  nearly  1500  commodities;  but  that  collection  was  a
tour  de  force,  and  the  largest  of  the  currently  published  series  cover
only  some  400  commodities,  while  in  many  cases  the  commodities
quoted  number  less  than  50.^

Hardly  less  responsible  for  the  bulkiness  of  economic  statistics  is
the  variety  of  activities  covered.  Every  new  attempt  to  systematize
business  operations — and  such  attempts  seem  endless — involves  the
making  of  new  records,  more  and  more  of  which  emerge  from  book-
keeping into  statistics.  Only  a  tiny  fraction  of  the  records  kept
appears  in  published  tables;  yet  in  a  country  like  the  United  States
that  fraction  spreads  over  a  bewildering  diversity  of  processes.  Nor
can  students  of  business  cycles  be  sure  that  they  are  safe  in  ignoring
any  section  of  the  record.  Certainly  they  are  concerned  with  the  pro-
duction, exchange,  transportation,  and  distribution  of  commodities;
with  wages,  rents,  interest  rates,  profits,  bond  yields,  and  dividends;
with  family  incomes  and  expenditures ;  with  prices  of  all  sorts,  finan-
cial operations,  savings,  orders,  bankruptcies,  the  launching  of  new
enterprises,  patents,  construction  work,  banking  in  its  various  aspects,
unemployment,  migration,  imports,  exports,  and  tax  receipts.  In
many  cases  they  need  detailed  data  for  particular  industries  or  locali-
ties. And  they  cannot  properly  neglect  pertinent  figures  from  any
country  which  collects  them.  Even  the  fact  that  certain  series  show
slight  traces  of  cyclical  fluctuations  hardly  lessens  their  task ;  for  that
fact  may  be  highly  significant  in  a  general  view  of  the  problem.  They

*  F.  Y.  Edgeworth,  Papers  Relating  to  Political  Economy,  London,  1925,  vol.  i,  p.  405.

'See  History  of  Prices  during  the  War,  Summary,  by  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  (War  In-
dustries Board  Price  Bulletin,  No.  1)  Washington,  1919,  p.  5.  For  the  number  of  com-
modities contained  in  the  leading  wholesale  price  indexes  of  various  countries  at
present,  see  Institut  International  de  Statistique,  Bulletin  Mensuel.  The  issue  for
October,  1925,  for  example,  pp.  76,  77,  credits  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor
Statistics  with  quoting  404  commodities,  and  the  Canadian  Department  of  Labour  with
quoting  271.  Most  of  the  series  for  the  31  countries  represented  are  made  from  quota*
tions  for  less  than  100  commodities.

It  may  be  noted  that  the  question,  "What  shall  be  counted  a  distinct  commodity  in
a  price  index?"  is  difficult  to  answer.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  205

cannot  even  confine  their  researches  within  the  field  of  economic
statistics.  Hypotheses  concerning  the  causes  of  business  cycles  carry
them  back  into  meteorological  data,  morbidity  rates,  and  what  not,
while  interest  in  the  consequences  of  business  cycles  carries  them  for-
ward into  the  fields  of  vital  statistics,  criminal  statistics,  statistics  of
dependency,  philanthropy,  poor  relief.  And  the  more  they  learn
about  the  problem,  the  wider  grows  the  range  of  data  which  they
deem  it  pertinent  to  study.

As  an  investigator  gets  deeper  into  a  quantitative  analysis  of
business  cycles,  his  first  impression  that  the  statistical  data  to  be
dealt  with  are  embarrassingly  abundant  turns  into  a  conviction  that
they  are  painfully  inadequate.  Each  business  cycle  becomes  to
him  one  case,  one  chance  for  observation.  His  method  is  to  make
measured  observations  upon  as  many  cases  as  he  can,  and  to  draw
such  generalizations  from  the  array  of  observations  as  his  skill  permits.
For  a  very  few  of  the  recent  cycles  in  the  United  States  he  finds  data
which  allow  him  to  observe  with  varying  degrees  of  precision  a  good
many  of  the  processes  involved.  But  seldom  do  the  observations  of  a
given  process  show  marked  uniformity  from  case  to  case.  Hence  the
investigator  becomes  eager  to  increase  the  number  of  his  cases.  But
as  he  passes  from  recent  cycles  in  the  United  States  to  earlier  cycles,
or  as  he  passes  from  American  to  European  cycles,  he  finds  the  supply
of  statistics  rapidly  diminishing,  and  his  doubts  increasing  about  the
trustworthiness  of  what  statistics  there  are.  In  the  end  he  must
content  himself  with  such  data  as  practical  needs  or  accident  have
preserved,  make  the  best  use  of  what  he  finds,  and  hope  that  his  ef-
forts may  at  least  help  toward  getting  for  his  successors  better  figures
than  are  available  to  him.

If  such  an  investigator  does  not  give  up  the  effort  to  frame  a  gen-
eral theory  of  business  cycles,  he  at  least  gives  up  the  effort  to  base
his  theory  wholly  upon  measurements.  What  statistical  results  he
does  attain,  he  presents  as  tentative.  These  results  he  prefaces,
strings  together,  interprets,  and  supplements  with  analysis  based  upon
non-quantitative  observations.

2.  Time  Series  in  Their  Raw  State.

Since  business  cycles  follow  one  another  in  time,  the  statistical
data  of  chief  concern  to  us  are  time  series — data  which  show  the


206  BUSINESS  CYCLES

value  of  some  variable  at  successive  points,  or  during  successive
periods,  of  time.  Occasionally  surveys  showing  the  magnitude  of
some  factor,  or  the  distribution  of  certain  phenomena  at  a  given
moment  are  drawn  upon,  but  the  analysis  of  time  series  remains  the
outstanding  task.

These  time  series  have  many  forms: — prices,  aggregate  money
values,  physical  quantities  (in  units  of  number,  weight,  length,  area,
volume,  energy),  percentages  of  a  total  which  changes  with  time,
percentages  of  a  total  at  some  past  date,  ratios  to  some  other  quan-
tity, and  so  on.  The  intervals  vary  from  the  day,  week  or  month  to
the  year  or  the  decade.  Many  such  series  cover  but  a  year  or  two,
some  have  been  kept  in  fairly  uniform  fashion  for  a  generation,  a
very  few  quasi-continuous  series  run  back  or  can  be  pieced  back,  for
a  century,  two  centuries,  or  even  more.^  Some  series  are  available
in  comparable  form  for  several  different  countries — for  example,  wheat
production,  coal  and  iron  output,  discount  rates; — some  are  avail-
able only  for  one  country — for  example,  the  valuable  German  series
showing  receipts  from  the  tax  on  bills  of  exchange,  the  American
data  concerning  retail  sales,  the  British  statistics  of  outdoor  relief.
It  is  indeed  a  most  miscellaneous  collection  which  the  investigator  of
business  cycles  must  use  as  his  raw  materials.

A  few  of  the  series  which  such  an  investigator  uses  report  the
variations  in  factors  which  are  indivisible  units  in  the  business  situa-
tion. For  example,  the  official  minimum  discount  rate  of  the  Bank
of  England  is  a  single  figure,  known  with  precision  for  every  week
through  long  years.  Many  different  matters  have  been  weighed  by
the  bank's  directors  in  deciding  upon  the  rate  announced  each  Thurs-
day; but  once  announced  there  is  no  analyzing  the  rate  into  con-
stituent parts.  Most  time  series,  however,  are  aggregates,  or  av-
erages, which  the  investigator  can,  and  frequently  should,  analyze.
For  example,  if  bank  clearings  in  the  United  States  fall  five  per  cent
between  July  and  August,  it  may  be  that  in  a  majority  of  the  clearing
houses  transactions  increased;  and  in  the  minority  of  towns  where
transactions  shrank,  the  declines  may  have  varied  from  a  fraction  of
one  per  cent  to  half  the  July  volume. Similarly,  an  index  number  of

*For  example,  Sir  William  H.  Beveridge  has  compiled  an  index  number  of  "Wheat
Prices  in  Western  and  Central  Europe"  by  years  for  the  whole  period,  1500-1869.  See
his  paper  on  "Weather  and  Harvest  Cycles,"  Economic  Journal,  December,  1921,  vol.
xxxi,  pp.  449-451.  I  understand  that  he  has  now  secured  data  which  will  enable  him  to
carry  this  table  much  further  back  than  1500.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


207


wholesale  prices  shows  for  each  date  merely  the  net  resultant  of  most
diverse  changes  in  the  prices  of  individual  commodities — changes
which  nearly  always  run  the  gamut  from  a  considerable  decline  to  a
considerable  rise.^ In  thinking  graphically  of  price  changes  we  should

*By  way  of  illustration  consider  the  following  charts  of  price  changes.  The  first
chart  (adapted  from  the  Bulletin  of  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics,  No.  284)
shows  the  mixture  of  diversity  and  concentration  in  the  fluctuations  of  the  wholesale
prices  of  the  commodities  included  in  the  B.L.S.  index  number,  by  years,  from  1891  to
1919.  Each  year  the  fluctuations  are  ranked  in  order  of  their  magnitude,  and  then
divided  into  ten  groups  containing  equal  numbers  of  commodities.  The  dividing  points,
Called  decils,  and  the  extreme  fluctuations  of  each  year  are  represented  on  the  chart  by
dots.  By  an  arbitrary  convention  the  11  dots  for  each  year  are  connected  by  slanting
lines  with  the  middle  point  of  the  distribution  of  the  preceding  year.  The  vertical  scale
is  logarithmic. While  the  chart  gives  a  lively  impression  of  the  variety  of  price  changes


occurring  every  year,  it  over-simplifies  the  situation  by  picturing  the  annual  changes  as
all  starting  from  the  same  point.  A  chart  which  did  not  over-simplify  some  aspect  of
the  changes  would  be  a  hopeless  tangle  of  lines.

The  second  chart  (adapted  from  History  of  Prices  during  the  War,  Summary,  War


208


BUSINESS  CYCLES


think,  not  of  the  movements  of  a  single  curve,  such  as  represents
adequately  the  Bank  of  England  rate,  but  of  a  broad,  irregular  band,
within  which  many  lines  are  moving,  some  up,  some  down,  some  hori-
zontally— lines  which  are  rather  far  apart  near  the  edges  of  the  band
but  thickly  congregated  near  the  middle,  and  which  keep  crossing
each  other  as  they  shift  their  relative  positions.

It  is  true  that  an  investigator  often  writes  of  series  like  bank  clear-
ings or  price  indexes  as  if  they  represented  magnitudes  not  less  definite
than  the  Bank  of  England  rate.  Doubtless  there  are  problems  which
justify  the  practice — problems  in  which  the  one  matter  of  significance
is  the  net  resultant  of  a  complicated  mass  of  movements.  Yet  such
problems  are  rare,  and  it  is  always  wise  to  ask  explicitly  whether  the
hypothesis  in  use  does  not  require  that  notice  be  taken  of  the  diversity

Industries  Board  Price  Bulletin,  No.  1)  is  another  device  for  illustrating  the  diversity
and  concentration  of  price  changes.  It  shows  the  distribution  of  the  relative  prices  of
1437  commodities  in  1918,  computed  on  the  base  average  prices,  July,  1913,  to  June,
1914  equal  100.  Here  the  horizontal  scale  is  logarithmic.  The  chart  shows,  for  example,
that  one  commodity  fell  64  per  cent  in  price  from  the  pre-war  level  to  1918,  another
commodity  rose  2,991  per  cent,  but  that  nearly  600  commodities  (over  two-fifths)  were
concentrated  in  the  range  of  50  to  109  per  cent  advance.


30


18

1918 DISTRIBUTION OF 1437  COMMODITIES

ACCORDING  TO  THE  MAGNITUDE  OF  THEIR  RELATIVE  PRICES

16

-

c'^

pT

■

.

1  12

b
1  '^

^ 8

?

■

s

Li

■

-

1

* 4

h

2

•

I

L

n

H

\

~i.

200


18


16


14  3

E

i


10


6 i


300 400  500  600 600 IQQQ
700 90Q
SCALE  OF  RELATIVE PRICES


2000 3000 4000


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  209

of  movements  which  are  hidden  in  the  simple-seeming  aggregates  or
averages.  Certainly  we  do  not  get  the  full  benefit  of  the  statistical
approach  to  the  study  of  business  cycles,  unless  we  keep  in  mind  the
range  and  variety  of  the  changes  which  most  of  our  time  series
represent.

The  first  step  toward  using  any  series  is  usually  to  represent  the
figures  by  a  line  drawn  on  a  chart.  The  invention  of  this  device  in
1786  is  claimed  by  William  Playfair,  who  set  forth  its  advantages  as
follows:

As  the  eye  is  the  best  judge  of  proportion,  being  able  to  esti-
mate it  with  more  quickness  and  accuracy  than  any  other  of
our  organs,  it  follows,  that  wherever  relative  quantities  are  in
question,  a  gradual  increase  or  decrease  of  any  .  .  .  value  is
to  be  stated,  this  mode  of  representing  it  is  peculiarly  ap-
plicable; it  gives  a  simple,  accurate,  and  permanent  idea,  by
giving  form  and  shape  to  a  number  of  separate  ideas,  which
are  otherwise  abstract  and  unconnected.^

A  variant  of  Playfair's  method  of  charting  time  series  was  intro-
duced by  Jevons  in  1863-65 — the  use  of  a  logarithmic  vertical  scale
for  showing  degree  of  variation,  combined  with  an  arithmetical  hori-
zontal scale  for  showing  intervals  of  time.^  By  this  device  equal  per-
centage changes  occuring  at  equal  intervals  in  a  time  series  are  rep-
resented by  lines  of  the  same  slope.  Further,  two  or  more  different
series,  expressed  in  non-comparable  units,  when  plotted  upon  a  ratio
chart,  will  have  equal  percentage  changes  in  the  several  series  rep-
resented by  lines  of  the  same  slope.  Since  students  of  business  cycles
are  usually  interested  in  the  relative  changes  which  economic  proc-
esses undergo  recurrently,  rather  than  in  the  absolute  quantities  in-
volved in  the  changes,  the  "ratio  chart'^  is  particularly  useful  to  them.

*  The  Commercial  and  Political  Atlas,  3d  ed.,  London,  1801,  p.  x.

Playfair's  claim  to  be  "actually  the  first  who  applied  the  principles  of  geometry  to
matters  of  Finance"  is  made  on  pp.  viii  and  ix.

M  Serious  Fall  in  the  Value  of  Gold  Ascertained  (1863),  and  The  Variation  of
Prices,  and  the  Value  of  Currency  since  1782  (1865).  Reprinted  in  Investigations  in
Currency  and  Finance,  by  W.  Stanley  Jevons,  London,  1884.  See  especially  pp.  53,  128,
150  and  the  charts  which  follow  pp.  56  and  150.

This  method  of  making  charts  did  not  come  into  common  use  among  economists
until  its  merits  had  been  explained  by  Professors  Irving  Fisher,  "The  'Ratio'  Chart  for
Plotting  Statistics,"  Publications  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1917,  vol.
XV,  pp.  577-601,  and  James  A.  Field,  "Some  Advantages  of  the  Logarithmic  Scale,"
Journal  of  Political  Economy,  October,  1917,  vol.  xxv,  pp.  805-841.


210  BUSINESS  CYCLES

To  illustrate  the  materials  and  problems  before  us,  samples  of  the
time  series  most  useful  in  studying  business  cycles  are  given  in  Chart
1.^  These  series  run  in  units  of  long  tons  of  pig  iron,  pounds  of  cop-
per, changing  percentages  of  unemployment  among  members  of  British
trade  unions,  bushels  of  wheat,  miles  of  railway  track,  percentages  of
the  average  prices  of  commodities  in  1867-77,  billions  of  dollars,  and
percentages  which  the  interest  received  forms  of  the  changing  pur-
chase price  of  bonds.  The  vertical  logarithmic  scale  of  the  chart
makes  comparable  the  percentage  fluctuations  in  all  these  different
quantities.  The  only  bar  to  close  comparison  is  that  some  of  the
series  give  data  only  by  years,  while  others  give  data  by  quarters  or
months.

Looked  at  broadly,  the  curves  show  striking  differences.  Ameri-
can pig-iron  output,  copper  output  and  wheat  crops  present  one  type
of  changes.  The  characteristic  of  this  type  is  its  upward  trend,
more  rapid  in  the  two  metal  curves  than  in  the  other,  and  frequently
broken  in  all  three  curves  by  brief  reactions.  Bank  clearings  give  a
similar  picture  from  1875  to  1914;  but  the  great  inflation  of  the  war
period  introduced  a  sudden  change  of  trend  less  marked  in  the  series
representing  physical  production  unmixed  with  prices.  American
railway  building  presents  a  second  type  of  changes.  After  rising  to  a
peak  in  the  1880's,  it  declined  unsteadily  to  a  level  comparable  with
that  of  the  1850's.  A  third  type,  characterized  by  several  changes  in
the  direction  of  movement,  is  presented  by  British  prices  at  wholesale.
They  rise  from  the  1850's  to  1873,  fall  from  1873  to  1896,  rise  from
1896  to  1913  at  a  rate  then  thought  rapid,  accelerate  their  rise  in
1914  to  1920,  and  later  fall  precipitously.  The  bond-yield  curve  also
shows  several  changes  in  trend;  but  changes  less  marked  than  those
of  the  price  curve.  Finally,  the  British  unemployment  percentages
fluctuate  about  the  same  general  level  through  the  whole  70  years  for
which  they  have  been  compiled.

Except  in  the  unemployment  series  and  perhaps  that  showing
railway  construction,  these  long-period  shiftings  of  level,  or  ^'secular
trends'^  as  they  are  technically  called,  are  the  most  conspicuous  fea-
tures of  the  chart. But  the  conspicuous  feature  of  the  unemployment

°  The  numerical  data  used  in  drawing  the  charts  in  this  volume  are  taken,  with  a  few
exceptions  noted  in  the  proper  connection,  from  the  collection  of  statistical  materials
which  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  is  makmg  and  hopes  to  publish  in
the  near  future.  Since  that  collection  will  have  a  full  index,  and  will  state  the  original
sources  from  which  all  the  series  are  obtained  as  well  as  the  methods  of  compilation,  it
seems  needless  to  publish  the  tables  here.


CHART  1.

Sample  Time  Series  Plotted  on  a  Logarithmic  Vertical  Scale.
Only  the  Relative  Slope,  Not  the  Vertical  Position,  of  These  Curves  Is  Significant.


1850  '60


•70


•90

211


-T —
1900


SCALCOr

PCRCCNTAC^
CHANCE

•0 — I  c

«0— J J


l=:


212  BUSINESS  CYCLES

curve  is  its  wavelike  movement  about  a  nearly  constant  level.  Of
course,  these  wave-like  movements,  or  ''cyclical  fluctuations,"  are  the
center  of  our  interest.  Are  they  present  in  the  other  cases?  Traces  of
them  may  be  seen  in  all  the  curves,  except  perhaps  the  curve  for
wheat  crops,  where  the  fluctuations  seem  capricious.  But  in  all  the
curves,  including  that  for  unemployment,  the  cyclical  fluctuations
are  obscured  by  intermixture  with  changes  of  other  sorts.  Accord-
ingly, the  first  problem  faced  by  the  student  of  business  cycles  in  the
statistical  analysis  of  time  series  is  whether  he  can  develop  a  tech-
nique which  will  enable  him  to  isolate  the  cyclical  fluctuations  for
intensive  observation  and  measurement.

The  clarity  of  the  cyclical  fluctuations  in  the  unemployment  curve
suggests  the  idea  of  seeking  to  reduce  the  secular  trends  in  the  other
curves  to  horizontal  lines. Can  that  be  done?

Were  that  accomplished,  would  the  cyclical  fluctuations  be  iso-
lated? Closer  examination  of  the  unemployment  curve  itself  raises
doubt.  The  percentage  of  men  out  of  work  in  England  seems  to  be
greater  almost  every  year  in  winter  than  in  summer,  whether  times
are  good  or  bad,  though  that  characteristic  is  not  revealed  by  the
annual  figures  used  in  Chart  1.  Indications  of  such  "seasonal  varia-
tions" can  be  traced  in  a  monthly  plot  of  many  time  series.  Can  the
presence  or  absence  of  seasonal  variations  in  a  time  series  be  deter-
mined, and  can  they  be  separated  from  the  cyclical  fluctuations?

Finally,  the  unemployment  curve  shows  sudden  breaks  now  and
then,  which  appear  as  interruptions  in  the  course  which  the  combined
cyclical-seasonal  changes  seem  to  be  following.  Can  these  ''irregular
fluctuations"  be  identified?  Can  they  be  measured  and  separated
from  the  cyclical  fluctuations?

Such  is  the  conventional  list  of  problems  which  statistical  investi-
gators of  business  cycles  have  attacked.  These  workers  have  devised
many  ingenious  methods  of  measuring  and  eliminating  from  time
series  secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations.  In  dealing  with  irregu-
lar perturbations  they  have  made  less  progress.  One  group  has  sought
to  find  periodic  fluctuations  in  the  data  by  applying  harmonic  analy-
sis. Much  of  the  work  is  highly  technical.  Consequently  the  follow-
ing survey  of  what  has  been  done  can  be  neither  brief  nor  easy.

3.  The  Problem  or  Secular  Trends

Secular  trends  of  time  series  have  been  computed  mainly  by  men
who  were  concerned  to  get  rid  of  them. Just  as  economic  theorists


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  213

have  paid  slight  attention  to  the  "other  things'^  in  their  problems
which  they  suppose  to  "remain  the  same,"  so  the  economic  statisti-
cians have  paid  slight  attention  to  their  trends  beyond  converting
them  into  horizontal  lines.  Hence  little  is  yet  known  about  the  trends
themselves,  their  characteristics,  similarities,  and  differences.  Even
their  relations  to  cyclical  fluctuations  have  been  little  considered.
Here  lies  in  obscurity  a  heap  of  problems,  waiting  for  properly
equipped  investigators  to  exploit.^

(1) The  Empirical  Approach  to  the  Problem.

The  procedure  adopted  in  ascertaining  secular  trends  is  usually
empirical  in  high  degree.  Starting  with  a  time  series  plotted  to  a
convenient  scale  on  a  chart,  the  statistician  seeks  to  find  for  that  one
series,  within  the  period  covered  by  his  data,  the  line  which  best  rep-
resents the  "long-time  tendencies"  shown  by  the  plotted  curve.  In
cases  like  that  presented  by  British  wholesale  prices  in  Chart  1,  he
splits  the  whole  period  into  sections,  and  seeks  to  find  lines  of  secular
trend  for  each  section  separately,  or  else  to  find  a  function  which
changes  direction  in  the  manner  of  the  data.

The  technical  process  usually  consists  in  (1)  fitting  a  "matliemati-
cal  curve"  (for  example,  a  straight  line  or  a  third-degree  parabola)
to  the  data,  or  to  the  logarithms  of  the  data,  by  the  method  of  least
squares  or  of  moments;  (2)  computing  moving  or  progressive  arith-
metic means  or  moving  medians,  including  in  the  averages  whatever
number  of  items  seems  to  give  satisfactory  results;  (3)  first  comput-
ing moving  averages  and  then  fitting  trend  lines  to  the  results;  (4)
drawing  a  free-hand  curve  through  the  data  representing  the  investi-
gator's impression,  formed  from  careful  study,  of  the  long-time  ten-
dency; or  (5)  using  ratios  between  the  paired  items  of  series  which
are  believed  to  have  substantially  the  same  secular  trends.^

*  So  far  as  I  know,  the  only  one  working  upon  secular  trends  as  a  problem  in  its  own
right  is  Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets,  one  of  the  Research  Fellows  of  the  Social  Science  Re-
search Council.  Dr.  Kuznets  has  generously  allowed  me  to  profit  by  his  results  in
advance  of  publication.

^Technical  directions  for  computing  secular  trends  by  the  commoner  methods  are
given  in  most  of  the  recent  textbooks  of  economic  statistics.  For  example,  see  Fred-
erick C.  Mills,  Statistical  Methods,  New  York,  1924,  chap,  vii,  W.  L.  Crum  and  A.  C.
Patton,  Economic  Statistics,  Chicago,  1925,  chap,  xx,  or  Edmund  E.  Day,  Statistical
Analysis,  New  York,  1925,  chap.  xvii.

Among  the  recent  contributions  to  the  subject  are  Warren  M.  Persons,  "Indices  of
Business  Conditions,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,
pp.  8-18j  and  the.  following  papers  in  the  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Associor-


214  BUSINESS  CYCLES

When  a  secular  trend  has  been  fitted  by  any  of  these  methods  or
their  variants,  how  can  the  agreement  between  the  line  of  trend  and
the  plotted  data  be  determined?

It  might  be  thought  that  a  trend  can  be  tested  by  breaking  a
series  into  two  parts,  computing  trends  for  the  separate  sections  and
seeing  whether  they  agree.  But  lack  of  agreement  would  not  prove
that  the  trend  for  either  section  of  the  data  was  wrong  for  the  period
it  covered.  Secular  trends  are  ^'subject  to  change  without  notice,"
and  it  is  a  common  experience  that  a  line  which  gives  an  excellent  fit
to  the  data  for  one  period  ceases  to  fit  well  when  carried  backward
in  time,  or  projected  for  a  few  years.  Thus  the  failure  of  a  trend
fitted  now  to  mark  the  line  followed  by  developments  in  the  near
future  need  not  mean  that  to-day's  work  is  wrong.  Perhaps  our  suc-
cessor who  computes  a  new  trend  for  the  longer  series  of  data  avail-
able to  him  will  not  be  able  to  improve  upon  our  fit  for  the  period
we  analyzed.

Then  why  not  break  long  series  into  relatively  brief  segments  and
compute  the  secular  trends  for  each  separately?  That  is  a  device  to
which  the  statistical  student  of  business  cycles  resorts  at  need ;  but  to
go  far  in  that  direction  is  to  give  up  the  problem  of  secular  trends
rather  than  to  solve  it.  Unless  it  is  possible  to  find  trends  which  are
satisfactory  throughout  long  periods — long  in  comparison  with  busi-
ness cycles — the  distinction  between  secular  and  cyclical  fluctuations
is  blurred  and  the  whole  analj^sis  loses  its  point.  Just  how  far  the
process  of  subdividing  periods  for  the  computation  of  trends  shall  be
carried  is  a  question  to  be  decided  by  the  character  of  each  series  and
the  uses  to  which  the  results  are  to  be  put.

There  is,  indeed,  no  single  criterion  for  determining  "goodness  of
fit."  A  mathematical  test  can  be  applied  only  in  certain  cases.  Pro-
vided one  is  choosing  between  two  lines  of  trend  whose  equations  con-
tain the  same  number  of  constants,  one  can  compare  the  standard
deviations  of  the  actual  values  from  the  trend  lines.  A  test  of  wider
application  is  to  consider  the  "reasonableness"  of  the  values  shown
by  projecting  trend  lines  into  the  future,  and  to  choose  lines  which

tion:  W.  L.  Crum,  "The  Determination  of  Secular  Trend,"  June,  1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  210-
215,  and  "The  Least  Squares  Criterion  of  Trend  Lines,"  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  211-222;
Holbrook  Working,  "The  Determination  of  Secular  Trend  Reconsidered,"  December,
1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  497-502;  Willford  I.  King,  "Principles  Underlying  the  Isolation  of
Cycles  and  Trends,"  December,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  468-475;  Lincoln  W.  Hall,  "A  Moving
Secular  Trend  and  Moving  Integration,"  March,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  13-24;  Olin  Ingraham,
"The  Refinement  of  Time  Series,"  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  23A-233.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  215

indicate  results  judged  to  be  probable.  In  forecasting  work  this  test
is  important  for  projections  within  the  period  to  which  the  forecast
applies.  For  the  rest,  statisticians  fall  back  upon  a  visual  comparison
between  the  actual  values  and  the  trend  lines  within  the  time  limits
of  the  data.  Their  confidence  in  a  fitted  curve  seems  to  be  greater
the  simpler  is  its  equation  and  the  longer  the  period  within  which  it
gives  a  reasonable  fit.  But  published  expressions  of  opinion  show  that
a  fit  which  seems  good  to  one  man  would  be  called  poor  by  another.
Personal  equations  play  a  large  role  in  such  judgments.

Nor  is  there  any  general  method  of  deciding  in  advance  what  one
among  the  several  ways  of  determining  trends  will  yield  the  best  fit
to  a  given  time  series,  according  to  these  rather  indefinite  criteria.
In  the  same  piece  of  work,  an  investigator  may  fit  a  straight  line  to
one  series  and  a  parabola  to  a  second,  compute  three-year  moving
medians  of  a  third  and  seven-year  moving  arithmetic  means  of  a
fourth,  run  a  free-hand  curve  through  a  fifth,  use  ratios  to  some
other  series  for  a  sixth,  and  devise  some  novel  method  for  a  seventh.
He  may  even  use  two  or  three  unlike  methods  of  determining  the
trend  in  different  sections  of  the  same  series.  No'r  will  he  hesitate
to  compare  the  deviations  of  the  actual  data  from  the  trends  meas-
ured in  these  different  ways,  if  he  believes  that  each  of  the  trend  lines
expresses  the  long-time  tendency  of  its  data  better  than  would  one
of  the  other  devices.

Each  method  has  technical  advantages,  which  should  be  con-
sidered with  reference  to  the  problem  presented  by  each  investigation.
Subsequent  uses  of  the  data  may  make  it  desirable  to  have  a  trend
which  can  be  expressed  by  a  simple  equation,  as  can  curves  of  known
properties.  The  purpose  in  view  may,  or  may  not,  make  it  important
to  reject  curves  which,  though  they  may  fit  the  data  admirably  for
a  long  period  in  the  past,  would  indicate  results  deemed  absurd  in
the  future.  Ease  of  construction  counts  in  favor  of  free-hand  curves,
and  ratios  to  other  series.  Of  course,  the  last  device  is  of  limited
use,  for  it  can  be  employed  only  when  two  series  are  found  which
seem  to  have  nearly  the  same  trend.  Moving  averages  are  controlled
by  the  data  as  free-hand  curves  are  not,  and  this  independence  of
the  investigator's  personal  equation  gives  comfort  to  many  minds.
In  business-cycle  work,  moving  averages  will  yield  a  satisfactory
line  of  trend,  if  the  trend  is  linear,  if  the  period  of  the  average  cor-
responds to  the  duration  of  the  cycles,  and  if  the  cycles  are  regular
'  both  in  duration  and  intensity. These  conditions  are  seldom  strictly


216  BUSINESS  CYCLES

satisfied.  If  the  true  trend  is  a  convex  curve,  a  moving  average  lies
above  the  curve,  and  so  produces  errors  in  the  cyclical  deviations,
the  magnitude  of  which  increases  with  the  convexity  of  the  curve
and  the  period  of  the  moving  average.  If  the  true  trend  is  con-
cave, errors  of  opposite  sign  result.  Finally,  moving  averages  seldom
yield  trends  that  look  satisfactory  unless  they  are  centered,  and
such  averages  cannot  be  kept  up  to  date  except  by  the  hazardous
practice  of  estimating  figures  for  future  years.^  The  advantage
claimed  for  combining  moving  averages  with  curve  fitting  is  that
it  minimizes  the  influence  of  the  extreme  years,  which  "may  rep-
resent either  the  accident  of  the  particular  phase  of  the  business
cycle  with  which  the  series  begins  or  ends,  or  a  change  in  the  real
secular  trend."  ^  Free-hand  curves,  drawn  with  care,  are  preferred
by  some  statisticians  of  wide  experience,  not  merely  because  they  are
easier  to  make  than  any  other  trend  lines,  but  also  because  they  meet
the  test  of  visual  comparison  with  the  plotted  data  quite  as  well  as
the  more  pretentious  mathematical  constructions.

To  illustrate  the  results  obtained  by  applying  different  methods,
Chart  2  has  been  made.  The  first  section  of  the  chart  shows  several
different  trends  fitted  to  a  single  series^ — pig-iron  production  in  the
United  States;  the  second  section  shows  the  application  of  the  same
method  to  several  different  series,  and  the  third  section  shows  different
methods  applied  to  different  series.

Having  ascertained  the  secular  trend  of  a  time  series,  the  investi-
gator's next  step  is  "to  eliminate  the  trend''  from  the  original  data.*
To  that  end  he  finds  the  numerical  value  represented  by  the  trend
line  at  each  successive  interval  of  time,  through  computation  or  by
readings  from  the  scale  of  his  chart,  and  then  determines  the  plus
and  minus  deviations  of  the  actual  data  from  those  values  in  actual
amounts  or  in  percentages.^  Finally,  he  draws  a  new  chart  in  which
he  represents  the  secular  trend  by  a  horizontal  line,  and  the  devia-

^  For  example,  the  trend  figure  for  1927  in  a  seven-years'  moving  average,  centered,  i3
computed  by  adding  actual  and  estimated  data  for  1924-30  and  dividing  by  seven.

^Olin  Ingraham,  'The  Refinement  of  Time  Series,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statis-
tical Association,  June,  1925,  vol,  xx,  p.  233.

*  Frequently  this  elimination  is  postponed  until  the  seasonal  variations  have  been
computed. But  of  that  later.

**  Professor  Allyn  A.  Young  has  called  attention  to  the  fact  that  the  cyclical  devia-
tions from  a  secular  trend  are  likely  to  be  least  trustworthy  toward  the  extremities  of
the  period  for  which  the  trend  is  fitted.  Further,  it  is  at  the  extremities  that  the  differ-
ences among  the  various  curves  which  may  be  employed  as  trends  commonly  become
most  marked.  See  "An  Analysis  of  Bank  Statistics  for  the  United  States,"  Review  of
Economic  Statistics,  January,  1925,  vol.  vii,  p.  28.


CHART  2.
Examples  of  Secular  Tbbnds  of  Time  Scries  Fitted  by  Various  Mvthoos.

Section  1.
Different  Trends  Fitted  to  the  Same  Series. Pig-iron  Production  in  the  United  States.


1690 1900


»0000

a/?

ft^c

asooo

^<*v^

\  /

^

'H

y.

10000

rsoo

•

^

y^i^

^

v;a

so  00
iSOO

^/

/e

,.^>f

^

>

K/

1000
»»0

»oe

J

.v^i

//^'

^

V

1 1 1 1

1 1 1 1 1  1  ■  1  ■

IB

60

16

70

le

60

16

bo

t9

00

li

10 ij

20

0000  o


7»00  W

&000  3


rOOO
f»0


1  •


PIC  IRON  PPOOUCTIOM

LEAST  SQUMRES  STRAIGHT  LiNEflTTED  TO  UOMRITHMS  (ism. 1926) y-6.TS4t-»  OSTftttK OUCINWO

TWENTY  YEAR  BINOMIALLY WEIGHTED MOVING  AVERAGES  OF  LOGARITHMS

SEVEN YEAR MOVI.NG AVERAGES


kociM.see oraoN^


PIC  IRON  PRODUCTION

MCOiriEO  C0MPERT2 EQUATION  riTTED TO  LOCAfllTHMS  - SUCCESTEO  AND  fITTtD  BT
r  R.  MACAULAY  ^^^  (^  >  ^2^^)  -  LOG  ♦0.73.1000 -(..Oj;/'"**""

THIRD  DECREE  PARABOLA  PITTED TO  LOCaRITMmS T  •6.SMI  f.OUWC-^OOISXax' -4)0e00»MIT)l*

ORIGIN 1890
LOGISTIC  CURVE Y  e  ^0,^03  ^  ORrCIN  1880

I  +  10


217


CHART  2  (Continued).
Examples  of  Sectular  Trends  of  Time  Series  Fitted  by  Various  Mothods.

Section  2.

The  Same  Method  Applied  to  Different  American  Series. Straight-Line  Trends  irom
the  Review  oj  Economic  Statistics.


1905 ,  1906 1907 1908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 .  I9M 1915 ,  19
ANK  CLEARINGS  OF  THE  UNITED^TATES  OUTSI


218


CHART  2  {Continued).
Examples  of  Secular  Trends  of  Time  Series  Fitted  by  Various  Metthods.

Section  3.
Different  Methods  Applied  to  Different  Series.


SAUERBECK'S  INDEX  OF  BRITISH  WHOLESALE  PRICES  (I867-I877»I00)  WITH  TREND
FITTED  BV  STRAIGHT  LINES  (LEAST  SQUARES)  TO  LOOARITHMS.BY  PERIODS


WOCXNUUBUS


SAUERBECK'S  INDEX


less eo


II


RAILROAD  BONO  YIELDS.  UNITED  STATES,  WITH  TREND

riTTCD  BY  A  TWENTY  YEAR  BINOMIALLY WEIGHTED  MOVING  AVERACC
CENTERED  OPPOSITE  THE  ELEVENTH  YEAR  (f.R.MACAULAy)
-  RAILROAD  BOND  YIELDS  ~——  TREND


\^

s

fj

\

li

\

^

K

//

\

K

\,

^J^-

V

\h

V

rrr^

ie&3 '«o


70


10


•20


219


CHART  2  (Continued).
Examples  of  Secular  Trends  of  Time  Series  Fitted  by  Various  MetthodSo

Section  3  (Continued).
Different  Methods  Applied  to  Different  Series.


in


RAItROAO  CONSTRUCTION  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES  WITH  TREND

f  ITTEO  BY  A  SECOND  DECREE  PARABOLA
"•oJiwitT*  — •" RAILROAD  CONSTRUCTION  ■ '  TREND  "roaO  BUIIJ*


f50


1630 '40  '50  '60  '70  '80  '90  1900 MO  '20


IV


PRICE  INDEX  OF  BUSINESS  CYCLES,  U  S.(NARVARD-I0  SENSITIVE  COMMODITIES)  WITH  TREND
REPRESENTED  BY  BRADSTREET'S  WHOLESALE  PRICE  INDEX  X  16.54


PRICE  INDEX I890-I899II00


TREND  INOELX  NUMBER*


1910-1914  1915 -1919


I920H924


220


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  221

tions  by  a  curve  which  fluctuates  about  the  horizontal. Several  ex-
amples of  such  construction  are  given  in  Chart  3.

When  a  statistical  inquirer  into  business  cycles  has  reached  this
point  in  his  work,  he  commonly  goes  on  at  once  to  ascertain  the  sea-
sonal variations  left  in  his  curve  of  deviations  from  the  trend,  or  to
use  the  deviations  as  they  stand.  But  preoccupation  with  theory  re-
quires us  to  pause  here,  and  to  look  at  the  problem  from  another
angle.

(2)  The  Interpretation  of  Secular  Trends.

What  meanings  have  the  secular  trends  fitted  to  time  series  by
empirical  methods?  As  Dr.  Kuznets  remarks,  every  mathematical
curve  used  as  a  trend  has  definite  implications,  whether  the  statistician
notices  them  or  not.  To  take  the  simplest  example:  a  straight  line
sloping  upward  implies  future  increase  without  limit.  Its  constant
rate  of  increase  per  unit  of  time  implies  that  the  size  of  the  variable
at  one  moment  does  not  affect  the  size  of  the  increment  between  that
moment  and  the  next.  Its  percentage  rate  of  increase  diminishes  along
a  hyperbolic  curve.  When  we  find  that  a  straight  line  trend  fits
a  given  series  well,  do  we  accept  these  mathematical  implications  as
characteristic  of  the  economic  process  represented  by  the  data?  Are
successful  fits  of  mathematical  curves  discoveries  in  economics?

These  questions  suggest  another  way  of  treating  the  whole  prob-
lem of  secular  trends.  We  form  various  hypotheses  concerning  the
long-time  tendencies  of  economic  developments  in  population,  pro-
duction, transportation,  exchange,  and  the  like.  These  hypotheses  are
derived  from  and  linked  to  causal  explanations ;  but  ordinary  reason-
ing does  not  enable  us  to  test  them  adequately.  Can  we  choose  curves
whose  mathematical  implications  correspond  to  our  causal  hypotheses,
fit  them  to  time  series,  perhaps  modify  the  hypotheses  in  the  light  of
the  first  results,  experiment  with  other  curves,  and  when  finally  we
have  secured  good  fits  argue  that  we  have  thrown  new  light  upon  the
characteristics  of  economic  evolution?

A  step  toward  such  a  conception  is  represented  by  the  frequent  in-
terpretation of  certain  trend  lines  as  showing  the  "growth  factor."
Statisticians  dwell  with  satisfaction  upon  their  demonstrations  that
certain  industries  have  expanded  decade  after  decade  at  a  substan-
tially uniform  rate,  or  at  a  rate  which  has  changed  in  some  uniform
way.  They  take  almost  as  much  pleasure  in  contemplating  the  some-
what similar  rates  at  which  different  industries  have  grown  in  given


CHART  3.

Samples  op  Timdj  Series  Plotted  as  Deviations  from  Secular  Trends  Reprebentbd  by

Horizontal  Lines.

(Selected  from  Chart  2).

«.„HT  RAILROAD  BOND  YIELDS -UNITED  STATES  «,«,


OeVIATIOMS  FROM  TWENTY  YEAR  BINOMIAU.Y  WEIGHTED  MOV
OylATERIAL  AND METMOO  FRQM  F. R.  MACAUCAY)

NC  AVERAGES

\.

\  /V

. /*\ A

>v

AA .

/S /\

\

\

^  V\  /  yv '^  ^^  V V

^V

V-

\l

1660  1870  ISaO  1090  1900  1910

SAUERBECK'S  INDEX  OF  WHOLESALE  PrtlCES  IN  ENGLAND


OEv'aTIONS  FROM  STRAIGHT  LINES  FITTED  TO  IjOGARITMMS 'bY  PERIODS

A

rA.

-/V,

A^;

o. /

A/

u

aA

l^

y ^"S

' 'V

V7

v/

^V/

^\j

1670  1680  1690  1900  I9K)

PIG-IRON  PRODUCTION  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES


1660  1870  1680  1890  1900  1910  1920

PRICE  INDEX  OF  BUSINESS  CYCLES.UNITED  STATES:  1890-1899=100


1901 -t90>


222


i


CHART  3  (Continued).

Examples  op  Time  Series  Plotted  As  Deviations  from  Secular  Trends
Represented  by  Horizontal  Lines.

(Vertical  Scale— 1/4  of  scale  on  opposite  page).

MONTHLY  NUMBER  OF  SHARES SOLD ON  THE  NEW  YORK  STOCK  EXCHANGE


RAILROAD  CONSTRUCTION (MILES OF  NEW  ROAD  BUILt) UNITED  STATES

DEVIATIONS  'from  a  second  degree  parabola  titt'ed  to  ljocari'thms


tfi40  IdSO  leeo  I870  i860  1890  1900  1910  1920


224


BUSINESS  CYCLES


periods  and  countries.  Nor  are  they  at  a  loss  for  explanations  of
these  uniformities.  In  view  of  the  increase  in  population  character-
istic of  the  great  commercial  nations,  and  of  the  advance  in  industrial
technique,  it  seems  scarcely  fanciful  to  think  of  modern  society  as
"tending'^  to  produce  an  ever  larger  supply  of  goods  for  the  satisfaction
of  its  wants.  On  this  basis,  cyclical  fluctuations  appear  as  alternating
accelerations  and  retardations  in  the  pace  of  a  more  fundamental
process.  Secular  trends,  in  short,  are  taken  to  measure  economic
progress  generation  by  generation.

A  bold  speculation  of  this  sort  has  been  ventured  by  Mr.  Ray-
mond B.  Prescott.  He  suggests  that  perhaps  "all  industries,  whose
growth  depends  directly  or  indirectly  upon  the  ability  of  the  people  to
consume  their  products,"  pass  through  similar  phases  in  the  course
of  their  development. Four  stages  seem  to  be  common:

1.  Period  of  experimentation.

2.  Period  of  growth  into  the  social  fabric.

3.  Through  the  point  where  the  growth  increases,  but  at  a

diminishing  rate.

4.  Period  of  stability.

On  this  basis,  Mr.  Prescott  suggests  that  the  secular  trends  of  all  such
industries  may  be  represented  by  a  single  type  of  curve — that  yielded
by  the  Gompertz  equation.

Every  country  (he  adds)  may  have  a  different  rate  of  growth,
and  so  may  every  industry,  because  no  two  industries  have  the
same  combination  of  influences.  They  will  trace  the  same  type
of  curve,  however,  even  though  the  rate  of  growth  is  different.*

*  "Law  of  Growth  in  Forecasting  Demand,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Asso-
ciation, December,  1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  471-479.

To  illustrate  his  suggestion,  Mr.  Prescott  publishes  the  following  copyrighted
diagram,  of  which  the  caption  is  significant.

CURVE  OF  PROGRESS  OR  LAW
OP  GROWTH  (R.  B.  PRESCOTT)


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  225

Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets,  who  has  fitted  more  Gompertz  or  "logistic'^
curves  (with  three  constants)  to  economic  series  than  anyone  else
known  to  me,  finds  that  the  Gompertz  curve  gives  good  fits  to  a
number  of  series,  but  that  in  more  cases  he  gets  good  fits  by  using  the
three-constant  ^'logistic  curve."  The  important  properties  of  this
curve  are:  (1)  Finite  Hmits,  zero  and  an  upper  value  to  which  the
curve  is  asymptotic.  (2)  The  rate  of  increase  per  unit  of  time  is
directly  proportioned  to  the  size  of  the  variable  at  a  given  point,  mul-
tiplied by  the  distance  between  that  point  and  the  upper  limit.  This
implies  that  (say)  the  output  of  an  industry  grows  in  physical  units
at  a  rate  which  increases  from  the  start  to  the  point  of  inflection  of
the  curve,  and  then  decreases  gradually  to  zero  as  the  curve  ap-
proaches its  upper  asymptote.  (3)  The  percentage  rate  of  increase
declines  steadily  from  the  beginning.  These  three  characteristics,
Dr.  Kuznets  supposes,  appear  in  the  history  of  the  many  economic
processes,  whose  long-time  statistical  record  is  well  described  by  a
logistic  curve.

The  use  of  logistic  and  Gompertz  curves  is  not  limited  to  describing
the  secular  trends  of  growing  industries.  They  can  be  adapted  also
to  the  conditions  of  industries  with  a  shrinking  output.  Such  indus-
tries are  not  unimportant,  even  in  a  highly  prosperous  country  like
the  United  States.  Conspicuous  examples  are  canal  trafiic,  gold  min-
ing, shipbuilding,  bicycle  manufacturing,  and  lumbering.  Indeed,  a
declining  phase  may  be  anticipated  for  most  industries,  if  we  define
an  industry  somewhat  strictly  in  terms  of  its  specific  output  and  its
geographical  location.  The  cause  of  the  decline  may  be  competition
from  some  other  industry  (for  example,  canals  versus  railways,  bicycles
versus  automobiles) ;  the  depletion  of  natural  resources  (for  example,
lumbering  and  gold  mining),  or  the  approximate  satisfaction,  at  least
for  a  time,  of  a  non-recurrent  need  (for  example,  railway  building).
In  adapting  his  analysis  to  such  cases,  Dr.  Kuznets  takes  the  maxi-
mum output  reached  by  the  industry  as  the  upper  limit  of  the  var-
iable, and  supposes  a  decline  toward  zero  along  an  inverted  logistic
curve.  By  introducing  an  additional  constant  into  his  equations  at
need,  he  is  able  to  secure  satisfactory  fits.

There  remain  numerous  time  series  to  which  the  idea  of  growth
and  decay  is  not  applicable.  Such  is  the  case  with  all  series  of  prices
whether  of  commodities  or  other  goods,  and  with  many  series  of
ratios,  such  as  interest  rates,  bond  yields,  percentages  of  bank  reserves
to  deposits,  marriage  rates,  and  credit  ratios. Some  of  these  series


226  BUSINESS  CYCLES

are  highly  important  in  the  study  of  business  cycles.  It  is  a  simple
task  to  find  empirical  trend  lines  which  fit  the  data  reasonably  well.
For  example,  in  Chart  1  the  British  unemployment  series  suggests  the
use  of  a  horizontal  line,  and  the  British  index  of  wholesale  prices  sug-
gests a  series  of  oblique  lines  which  meet  each  other  at  certain  well-
known  dates.  But  it  is  exceedingly  difiicult  to  rationalize  the  pro-
cedure, as  one  can  in  devising  trends  for  quantities  which  grow  or
decay.  Yet  it  may  be  that  certain  recent  investigations  are  laying
foundations  on  which  can  be  built  a  rational  analysis  even  of  changing
price  trends.

(3)  The  Hypotheses  of  "Secondary  Trends"  and  of
"Long  Waves"

In  studying  the  relations  between  the  data  points  of  his  industrial
series,  and  the  logistic  or  Gompertz  trend  lines  he  had  fitted,  Dr.
Kuznets  observed  that  the  annual  deviations  tended  to  have  positive
values  during  the  periods  when  wholesale-price  indexes  followed  rising
trends,  and  to  have  negative  values  when  the  trend  of  the  price  in-
dexes was  declining.  Of  course,  this  observation  seems  to  be  a  statisti-
cal version  of  the  familiar  statement  that  a  long-period  rise  of  whole-
sale prices  stimulates,  and  that  a  long-period  fall  of  wholesale  prices
retards,  industrial  progress.  But  Kuznets  went  further,  extending  his
analysis  to  the  wholesale  prices  of  various  great  staples.  In  dealing
with  these  series  he  had  to  use  empirical  trends.  Again  he  found  that
the  annual  deviations  swerved  upward  from  their  long-period  trends
when  the  general  level  of  wholesale  prices  was  rising,  and  swerved
downward  when  the  general  level  of  prices  was  sagging.

To  test  these  observations,  Kuznets  removed  the  cyclical  fluctua-
tions of  the  annual  deviations  from  the  primary  trends  so  far  as  pos-
sible by  taking  moving  averages  with  periods  slightly  longer  than
business  cycles,  and  measured  the  duration  of  the  swerves,  which  he
called  "secondary  trends."  He  found  that  the  swerves  averaged  a
little  shorter  in  the  production  series  than  in  the  corresponding  price
series — about  11  years  in  the  one  case  and  about  12  years  in  the
other.  Doubling  these  periods  to  get  the  full  period  from  crest  to
crest,  or  trough  to  trough,  of  these  fluctuations,  he  concluded  that  the
average  duration  since  say  the  middle  of  the  19th  century  has  been
a  little  less  than  25  years.

Dr.  Kuznets  inclines  to  treat  these  secondary  trends  as  a  distinct
species  of  business  fluctuations, intermediate  between the  much


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  227

longer  primary  trends  and  the  much  shorter  business  cycles.  To
account  for  them  he  thinks  economists  must  develop  a  special  theory.
His  tentative  explanation  combines  emphasis  upon  factors  of  a  non-
business origin  with  emphasis  upon  the  fact  that  certain  cyclical  de-
velopments in  business  activities  have  effects  which  persist  from  one
cycle  to  the  next.

In  1913,  a  Dutch  economist,  J.  van  Gelderen,  called  attention  to
what  he  named  'large  cycles"  in  economic  development,  covering
about  60  years.  A  compatriot,  S.  de  Wolff,  confirmed  van  Gelderen's
results  in  1924  by  the  use  of  more  technical  statistical  analysis.
Meanwhile  the  Russian  investigator,  N.  D.  Kondratieff,  had  devel-
oped the  same  idea  independently  in  1922.  Not  content  with  his  first
results,  Kondratieff  collected  and  analyzed  all  the  time  series  he  could
find  which  covered  long  periods.  The  results  of  his  work,  which  agree
substantially  with  those  of  van  Gelderen  and  de  Wolff,  were  published
in  Russian  in  1925  and  summarized  in  a  German  article  of  last
December.^

Kondratieff  starts  with  the  "long  waves"  of  British  wholesale
price  indexes;  the  rise  from  1789  to  1814,  the  fall  to  1849,  the  rise  to
1873,  the  fall  to  1896,  the  rise  to  1920.  Similar  waves  appear  in  the
interest  yields  upon  French  rentes  and  British  consols;  also  in  French
and  English  wages.  Turning  to  series  which  show  aggregate  values
or  physical  quantities,  Kondratieff  adjusted  them  to  his  needs  by
reducing  the  original  data  to  a  per-capita  basis,  fitting  mathematical
trend  lines,  computing  deviations  from  the  trends,  and  smoothing  the
deviations  with  9-year  moving  averages.  Such  smoothed  deviations
show  "long  waves"  in  French  imports,  exports,  and  total  foreign  trade ;
British  exports;  French  savings-bank  balances;  the  portfolio  of  the
Bank  of  France;  coal  production  (or  consumption)  in  France,  Eng-
land, the  United  States,  Germany,  and  the  world ;  iron  production  in
England,  the  United  States,  and  the  world;  lead  production  in  Eng-
land; and  the  area  planted  to  oats  in  France  and  to  cotton  in  the
United  States. On  the  other  hand,  "long  waves"  are  not  found  in

*See  Van  Gelderen  (using  the  pen-name  "J.  Fedder"),  "Springvloed  Beschouwingen
over  industrielle  ontwikkeling  en  prijsbeweging,"  De  Nieuwe  Tijd,  1913,  pp.  253-277,
369-384,  445-464;  de  Wolff,  'Trosperitats-  und  Depressionsperioden,"  in  Der  lebendige
Marxismus,  Festgabe  zum  70.  Geburtstage  von  Karl  Kautsky,  Jena,  1924,  pp.  13-43;
Kondratieff,  The  World  Economy  and  its  Conjunctures  during  and  after  the  W^ar
(in  Russian),  Moscow,  1922;  'The  Problem  of  Economic  Conditions,"  Monthly  Eco-
nomic Bulletin  of  the  Conjuncture  Institute,  1925,  Supplement,  pp.  28-79  (in  Russian) ;
"Ejie  langen  Wellen  der  Konjunktur,"  Archiv  fur  Sozialimssenschaft  und  Sozialpolitik,
December,  1926,  vol.  Ivi,  pp.  573-609.


228  BUSINESS  CYCLES

French  cotton  consumption,  American  wool  and  sugar  production,  or
^^in  the  movement  of  certain  other  elements/'

Surveying  the  whole  body  of  his  results,  Kondratieff  concludes  that
the  western  world  has  seen  two-and-a-half  ^'long  waves"  since  the
closing  years  of  the  18th  century.- The  turning  points  are  as  follows:

Trough  of  Crest  of  Trough  of  Approximate

the  wave  the  wave  the  wave  duration

Istlong  wave Late  1780's  or  1810-17 1844-51  50-60  years

early  1790's

2nd  long  wave 1844-51  1870-75 1890-96  40-50  years

3rd  long  wave 1890-96  1914-20

While  Kondratieff  believes  that  his  statistical  results  make  the
existence  of  '^long  waves"  highly  probable,  he  offers  no  hypothesis  to
account  for  them.  But  he  does  regard  these  waves  as  cyclical  phe-
nomena, and  believes  that  they  arise  from  causes  inherent  in  "capital-
istic economy" — not  from  accident.  Like  van  Gelderen  and  de  Wolff,
he  rejects  the  easy  explanation  that  the  "long  waves"  in  prices,  and
hence  in  other  processes,  are  due  to  accidental  discoveries  of  gold  de-
posits combined  with  improvements  in  mining  and  metallurgical
methods.  To  these  economists  it  seems  more  probable  that  the  busi-
ness conditions  characteristic  of  the  ebbing  of  a  "long  wave"  offer
strong  incentives  to  prospecting  for  new  gold  deposits  and  to  im-
proving the  technical  processes  of  exploiting  known  deposits.  Thus
the  ebbing  of  a  "long  wave"  tends  to  produce  effects  which  favor  a
rise  in  prices  and  a  mounting  wave.  Vice  versa,  the  business  condi-
tions which  characterize  the  rising  of  a  "long  wave"  tend  to  make
gold  production  unprofitable,  hence  to  check  the  output,  to  stop  the
rise  of  prices,  and  so  to  reverse  the  direction  of  the  whole  movement
once  more.  In  other  words,  they  treat  the  long-period  swings  in  gold
output  as  themselves  an  organic  part  of  the  40-50-60-year  cycles.  But

2  De  Wolff  suggests  that  each  half  of  the  long  waves  is  composed  of  2  J/^  smaller  cycles,
and  that  the  latter  cycles  are  growing  briefer  according  to  this  schedule:

10  years  10  years  10  years

9 "  9 "  9 "

8 "  8 "  8 "
7 "

Beginning  with  1825  (de  Wolff's  starting  point),  this  scheme  works  out  as  follows:

Beginning  Duration  in  years  Ending

1st  cycle Declining  phase 1825  10+10+5  =25  1850

2nd " Ascending " 1850  5+  9+9  =23  1873

Declining " 1873  9+  8+4  =21  1894

3rd " Ascending " 1894  4+8+7  =  19  1913

See  Der  lehendige  MarxismuSy  pp.  37,  38.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  229

Kondratieff,  at  least,  does  not  regard  this  suggestion  as  an  adequate
theory  of  the  mechanism  by  which  long  cycles  are  alternately  initiated
and  ended.

Until  some  adequate  reason  has  been  shown  why  we  should  ex-
pect more  or  less  regular  recurrences  of  "long  waves"  in  economic  ac-
tivities, we  shall  have  nothing  beyond  empirical  evidence  concerning
their  existence.  We  may  admit  the  probable  validity  of  Kondratieff's
statistical  argument  that  two-and-a-half  "long  waves'^  have  occurred
in  various  economic  processes  since  the  end  of  the  18th  century,  and
yet  hold  open  the  question  whether  the  series  will  be  continued.  Two-
and-a-half  recurrences  do  not  suffice  to  establish  empirically  a  pre-
sumption that  any  feature  of  modern  history  will  repeat  itself.

Another  uncertainty  is  presented  by  the  difference  in  order  of  mag-
nitude between  the  duration  of  the  "long  waves"  found  by  van  Gel-
deren,  de  Wolff  and  Kondratieff,  and  the  duration  of  the  "secondary
trends"  found  by  Kuznets.  It  may  be  that  the  difference  in  the  re-
sults is  due  to  differences  in  methods  of  fitting  trends,  and  computing
and  smoothing  deviations.  Or  perhaps  the  European  investigators,
looking  for  replicas  of  the  major  swings  of  wholesale  prices,  paid
slight  attention  to  swerves  which  attract  notice  in  a  less  preoccupied
mind.  Or  it  may  be  that  there  really  are  two  sets  of  long-term  fluctua-
tions in  economic  activities,  one  of  which  averages  double  the  dura-
tion of  the  second. Further  research  is  needed  to  settle  these  issues.

But  whether  there  be  two  sets  of  long-term  fluctuations  or  only
one  set,  whether  (if  there  be  but  one  set)  the  typical  length  is  about
a  quarter  or  about  half  a  century,  and  whether  these  fluctuations  are
merely  historical  episodes  of  considerable  interest  or  an  inherent  char-
acteristic of  "capitaUst  economy,"  the  investigations  of  van  Gelderen,
de  Wolff,  Kondratieff  and  Kuznets  open  an  alluring  perspective  of
future  work.  Starting  with  the  study  of  commercial  crises,  the  real-
istic students  of  economic  activities  have  discovered  successively  sev-
eral types  of  fluctuations  which,  at  least  for  more  than  a  century,
appear  to  have  been  recurrent — the  seasonal  variations  to  which
Jevons  directed  attention  in  his  youth,  the  inter-crisis  cycles  of  Juglar
and  others,  the  shorter  business  cycles  of  later  writers,  the  secular
trends  of  empirical  statisticians,  the  22-24-year  "secondary  trends"  of
Kuznets,  and  "long  waves."  Of  course,  some  of  these  discoveries  may
prove  to  be  invalid ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  recurrences  of  other  pe-
riods may  be  revealed Sismondi's  problem  was  merely  to  explain


230  BUSINESS  CYCLES

crises :  now  the  problem  is  to  ascertain  how  many  types  of  fluctuations
are  intermixed  in  economic  experience,  to  differentiate  these  types
from  each  other,  to  measure  the  wave-length  of  each  type  and  to  ascer-
tain its  regularity  of  recurrence,  finally  to  construct  a  theory  which
will  account  adequately  for  all  the  types  of  fluctuations  and  make  clear
their  relations  to  each  other.  As  treatises  upon  crises,  or  crises  and
depressions,  are  giving  place  to  treatises  upon  business  cycles,  so  the
latter  may  in  turn  give  place  to  treatises  upon  economic  oscillations.

While  the  time  for  undertakings  of  such  scope  has  not  quite  come,
we  should  keep  constantly  in  mind  the  probable  interconnection  be-
tween business  cycles  and  the  less-studied  fluctuations  of  shorter  or
longer  duration.  One  connection  is  clear.  Our  writers  on  secular
trends  confirm  an  old  contention  when  they  point  out  that  during  the
ebbing  phase  of  a  ^long  wave"  years  of  depression  predominate  in  the
inter-crisis  cycles,  while  during  the  mounting  phase  of  a  *^long  wave"
years  of  prosperity  predominate.^

We  stand  to  learn  more  about  economic  oscillations  at  large  and
about  business  cycles  in  particular,  if  we  approach  the  problem  of
trends  as  theorists,  than  if  we  confine  ourselves  to  strictly  empirical
work.  The  trends  which  promise  the  most  important  additions  to
our  knowledge  are  those  which  correspond  to  rational  hypotheses,
although  they  may  not  "fit  the  data"  so  well  as  empirical  construc-
tions which  are  difficult  to  interpret.  For  it  may  prove  possible  to
integrate  the  rational  hypotheses  which  yield  instructive  trends  with
the  theory  of  business  cycles.

(4)  Conclusion.

The  upshot  of  this  discussion  is  that  lines  of  secular  trend  show
the  effects  of  causes  which,  though  subject  to  change  at  any  moment,
have  influenced  an  economic  process  in  some  regular,  or  regularly
changing,  way  through  periods  of  time  long  in  comparison  with  busi-
ness cycles.  What  these  causes  have  been,  and  whether  they  are  still
in  operation,  are  matters  for  further  inquiry.  The  empirical  inquirer
measures  something  which  he  knows  merely  as  secular  trend;  that
something  is  a  set  of  net  resultants;  he  may  or  we  may  not  try  to
find  out  to  what  that  something  is  due.

If  we  embark  upon  a  search  for  causes  of  secular  trends,  we  must

•See,  for  example,  Kondratieff's  article  cited  above,  Archiv  jur  Sozialwissenschaft
und  Sozialpolitik,  December,  1926,  vol.  Ivi,  p.  591.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  231

expect  to  find  not  one  cause  peculiar  to  each  series,  but  a  peculiar
combination  of  a  multitude  of  interrelated  causes.  These  causes
may  be  classified  as  (1)  causes  related  to  changes  in  the  number  of
population,  (2)  causes  related  to  the  economic  efficiency  of  the  pop-
ulation— its  age,  constitution,  health,  education,  technical  knowledge
and  equipment,  methods  of  cooperation,  methods  of  settling  conflicts
of  interest,  and  many  other  matters;  (3)  causes  related  to  the  quan-
tity and  quality  of  the  natural  resources  exploited  by  the  population.

Not  only  the  second,  but  also  the  first  and  the  third  of  these
categories  consists  of  a  complex  of  factors  which  sustain  all  sorts  of
relations  to  each  other.  Even  kinds  of  causes  which  the  classification
separates  are  interacting.  The  growth  of  population  is  influenced  by
changes  in  industrial  technique  and  in  natural  resources;  the  growth
of  population  also  influences  the  development  of  technique  and  of
resources;  finally,  changes  in  technique  produce  changes  in  resources
(the  iron-ore  ranges  and  water  powers  of  North  America  did  not  exist
for  the  red  men),  and  changes  in  resources  are  ever  stimulating
changes  in  technique.  AU  of  which  means  that  we  must  think  of
every  type  of  economic  activity  in  a  country  as  conditioned  by  a  con-
cert of  fundamental  factors,  albeit  a  concert  in  which  the  ranking  of
the  factors  differs  endlessly  from  case  to  case.

Another  approach  may  make  the  conchision  clearer  and  more  sig-
nificant. There  are  secular  causes  which  affect  many  economic  activi-
ties in  much  the  same  way,  for  example,  changes  in  gold  output,  de-
pletion of  soil  fertility.  There  are  secular  causes  which  affect  eco-
nomic activities  in  different  ways:  the  extension  of  the  railway  net
over  the  United  States  checked  canal  building,  diminished  river  traffic,
and  led  to  the  abandonment  of  many  eastern  farms;  but  it  stimulated
the  settlement  of  western  lands,  built  up  interior  cities,  and  fostered
the  expansion  of  the  coal  and  steel  trades.  There  are  secular  causes
w^hose  direct  effects  are  confined  mainly  to  some  single  line  of  activity:
— a  series  of  inventions  which  cheapens  the  cost  of  producing  some
article  of  secondary  importance  is  an  example.  Those  secular  causes
which  influence  many  activities  in  much  the  same  way  produce  a
measure  of  likeness  among  the  secular  trends  of  different  time  series.
Those  secular  causes  which  influence  various  activities  in  opposite
ways,  and  those  secular  causes  whose  perceptible  influence  is  limited
in  scope  introduce  diversities  in  secular  trends.  There  can  scarcely
be  any  time  series  whose  trend  is  not  a  joint  product  of  factors  which
tend  toward  uniformity  and  factors  which  tend  toward  diversity.


232  BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  most  valuable  contributions  toward  an  understanding  of  the
trends  empirically  established  by  statisticians  have  been  made  by  the
economic  historians.  These  workers  have  studied  in  detail  such
great  movements  as  the  Agricultural  and  the  Industrial  Revolutions,
the  evolution  of  capitalism,  the  world-spread  of  the  European  races,
the  discovery,  utilization  and  impairment  of  natural  resources.  They
have  sought  not  merely  to  record  but  also  to  explain  these  long-period
changes  in  human  affairs,  using  such  statistics  as  they  could  gather
and  such  hypotheses  as  their  materials  suggested.  But  they  have  been
kept  so  busy  mastering  a  vast  mass  of  materials  that  they  have  not  yet
begun  a  systematic  attack  upon  the  problem  of  secular  trends.  Nor
have  they  equipped  themselves  with  the  statistical  technique  needed
for  the  most  effective  use  of  numerical  data.

Economic  theorists  also  have  shown  some  interest  in  secular  trends,
but  their  contributions  have  been  speculations  concerning  the  future,
rather  than  analysis  of  the  past.  The  "pure''  economic  theory  of  re-
cent years  has  dealt  mainly  with  "static"  problems,  from  which  secular
changes  are  barred.  Economic  "dynamics"  has  been  regarded  as  more
treacherous  ground,  and  the  mischances  of  eminent  men  who  have
walked  thereon  by  the  light  of  theory  have  been  discouraging.  Ricar-
do,  for  example,  expected  that  mankind  would  be  forced  to  resort  to
ever  poorer  soils  and  ever  more  intensive  cultivation  to  get  food  for
their  increasing  numbers;  that  in  consequence  real  wages  would  re-
main at  best  constant,  profits  would  decline  unsteadily,  and  rents  rise
until  "almost  the  whole  produce  of  the  country,  after  paying  the
laborers,  will  be  the  property  of  the  owners  of  land  and  the  receivers
of  tithes  and  taxes."  ^  Of  the  numerous  speculations  of  this  type,
those  of  Karl  Marx  are  of  especial  interest  here,  because  they  include
the  increasing  frequency  and  increasing  severity  of  business  crises
among  the  secular  trends  which  are  to  usher  in  the  socialistic  state.^

It  is  no  wonder  that  a  field  which  requires  the  fusion  of  statistical
technique  with  historical  learning  and  theoretical  finesse  has  not  yet

^Principles  of  Political  Economy,  ed.  by  C.  K.  Conner,  London,  1891,  p.  99.

^  Marx's  theory  of  crises  runs  through  all  three  volumes  of  Capital,  not  to  speak  of
his  other  writings.  For  a  brief  statement  of  the  role  of  crises  in  the  scheme  of  economic
revolution,  see  the  preface  which  he  wrote  in  1873  for  the  first  volume  of  Capital
(English  translation  by  Moore  and  Aveling,  Chicago,  1915,  p.  26.)

John  R.  Commons,  H.  L.  McCracken,  and  W.  B.  Zeuch  have  made  a  systematic
study  of  the  ideas  concerning  secular  trends  propounded  by  economic  theorists.  They
hold  that  the  conceptions  of  trends  and  business  cycles  have  been  derived  from  the
theories  of  value  entertained  by  the  writers  they  discuss  and  from  the  types  of  organi-
zation these  writers  had  in  mind.  See  "Secular  Trends  and  Business  Cycles:  a  Classi-
fication of  Theories,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  Preliminary  vol.  iv,  pp.  244-263.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  233

been  explored.  Yet  the  time  may  be  near  when  the  problem  of
secular  trends  will  have  as  definite  a  standing  in  economic  research,
attract  as  many  investigators,  and  yield  as  interesting  results  as  the
problem  of  business  cycles.  In  the  meanwhile,  students  of  the  latter
problem  suffer  the  grave  disadvantage  of  having  to  deal  with  a  factor
which  is  both  important  and  obscure.  They  cannot  anticipate  the
results  of  researches  not  yet  made ;  they  cannot  make  adequate  studies
of  secular  trends  as  an  incident  in  their  studies  of  cyclical  fluctuations,
and  they  cannot  let  the  problem  alone.

One  set  of  questions  is  particularly  insistent.  Is  there  a  definite
relation  between  secular  trends  and  cyclical  fluctuations?  Are  activi-
ties characterized  by  a  rapidly  rising  trend  subject  to  more  frequent,
or  more  violent,  cycles  than  activities  whose  trend  is  nearer  the  hori-
zontal? And  more  at  large,  can  the  trends  of  time  series,  after  they
have  been  measured,  be  discarded  as  of  no  further  interest?  Or  must
the  trends  themselves  be  brought  into  the  explanations  of  cyclical
fluctuations,  as  is  suggested  by  those  theories  which  connect  business
cycles  with  ^^progress"?  ^  Are  the  trends  themselves  generated  by
cyclical  fluctuations,  as  Mr.  Lawrence  K.  Frank  has  argued?  *  While
these  questions  arise  at  this  point,  they  cannot  be  answered  by  any
process  short  of  considering  the  pertinent  evidence  in  detail.  But
the  mere  fact  that  such  problems  must  be  faced  by  the  business-cycle
theorist  suffices  to  show  that  he  cannot  imitate  the  business-cycle
statistician  in  merely  eliminating  secular  trends.


4.  The  Problem  of  Seasonal  Variations.

Chart  4,  drawn  on  a  larger  scale  than  the  charts  illustrating  secular
trends,  shows  how  time  series  differ  in  respect  to  seasonal  variations.
As  in  Chart  1,  the  data  are  plotted  in  their  original  form,  in  order  to
make  clear  the  varied  difficulties  which  confront  the  statistician  who
is  trying  to  isolate  cyclical  fluctuations.

There  are  series  in  the  chart  which  undergo  seasonal  changes  each
year  of  much  the  same  sort,  and  of  an  amplitude  so  large  as  to  ob-
scure the  cyclical  fluctuations,  if  not  the  secular  trends.  There  are
series  in  which  the  seasonal  variations,  while  fairly  regular,  are  not
wide. There  are  others  which  suggest  the  presence  of  seasonal  factors

'Compare  Chapter  I,  section  iv,  4.

*See  Mr.  Frank's  paper,  "Long-Term  Price  Trends,"  Journal  of  the  American  Stc^
tistical  Association,  September,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  904-908.


CHART  4.
A  CoLLBcmoN  OP  Time  Series  to  Illustrate  Differences  in  Seasonal  Vabiations.

GROUP  I-LARGE  AND  REGULAR  SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


JAN. APR. JUU OCt

1921


APR. JUUr OCT.

1922


APR. JVJUr OCT.

1923


APR. JU.V OCT.

1924


APR JWLY OCT.

I92»


GROUP  n- SMALL  AND  FAIRLY  PCGULAR  SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


leA


o  300


y^J'*^^

--^

A

^J\

/-^

CIGARS-CONS

V/N^'*"*^ V

^y'"'''^^^ \

^^-^\

JMPTION  IN  THE

JNITED  STATES

1 1 1

(T
1 I.I

AX-PA  10  wrmoRAWAuis)

1 .  1 1.  ... --I 1 L

1 1. .1  ,.

jut*. APR. JUa OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT. 4AN. APR. JULY OCT.

1921  1922  1923  1924


APR. jua OCT.
1925


600


300  I


40


20


RAILWAY FREIGHT- REVENUE  AND  NON-REVENUE
CLASS  I  -  STfiAM  ROADS  IN  THE  ONITEO  STATES


APR. JUU OCT.

1921


III.

APR. JUUr OCT.

1922


40


20


»R. JULY OCT<

1923


APR. JULY OCT.

1924


JAN. APR. JULY OCT.

1929


234


CHART  4  (Contvnmd)
A  Collection  op  Time  Series  to  Illustrate  Differences  in  Seasonal  Variations.
GROUP  III-  RATHER IRREGULAR SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


400

200
0

1 1 1 , ,.  ..

IMPORTS  OF  MERCHANDISE  INTO  THE  UNITED  STATES

II t

y\ /

^^^

^x^

^-s^

v^.^

1 1 1

1 r 1

Ill

-500

MN. **»R. JULY

1921

OCT JAM. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APB. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JUJ.Y OCT. JAN. APR. JUUY OCT.

1922 1923 1924 1925

A

JTOMOBILE PRO

•

DUCTION IN Th

E UNITED  STAT

, ,  ,  „ ,

:s

375

r\.jK

r\

7T/V

250

tat

0

/y^

r

/  ^^v

^

1

1 \

1 1 1

1  1  1

— 1...  1  _  1 ....

1  1  1

11 1

40b


200


JAN. APR. JUUr OCT

1921


500


-v!


250


125


APR. JULY OCT. JAN APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT.

1922  1923  1924  1925


GROUP  IV -NO  PERCEPTIBLE SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


100


WHOLESALE PRICES  -  ALL  COMMODITIES-  UNITED  STATES
U.S.  BUREAU  OF LABOR STATISTICS  1013:100


J I L


J L


100


JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JUU OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY. OCT.

1921  1922  1923  1924  1925


&

4

y

.r^

^ s

-A^^^

1

\

r^

w

t

V  /

'IG-IRON PRODU

CTION IN  THE -

INITED STATES

1 I 1

1 1 1

.J 1 1

1 f 1

1 1 1

0

JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN. APR. JULY pCT. JAN. APR. JULY OCT.

1921  1922  1923


APR. JULY OCT.

1924


APR. JULY OCT.

1925


235


236  BUSINESS  CYCLES

rather  irregular  in  themselves,  or  so  combined  with  changing  con-
ditions of  other  types  as  to  produce  rather  irregular  results.  Finally,
there  are  series  in  which  it  is  difficult  on  inspection,  or  even  on
analysis,  to  detect  any  semblance  of  regularity  in  the  month  to
month  movements  of  different  years.

To  isolate  cyclical  fluctuations  for  close  study,  we  should  be  able
to  determine  in  doubtful  cases  the  presence  or  absence  of  seasonal
variations,  to  measure  their  amplitudes  where  found,  and  finally  to
get  rid  of  them  when  we  wish.  How  to  accomplish  all  this  is  a  prob-
lem which  the  business-cycle  statisticians  have  attacked  with  vigor.^
Business-cycle  theorists,  on  the  contrary,  have  paid  little  attention  to
these  short-period  oscillations^ — an  omission  which  it  is  unwise  to
imitate.


(1)  The  Causes  and  Pervasiveness  of  Seasonal  Variations.

Two  types  of  seasons  produce  annually  recurring  variations  in
economic  activities — those  which  are  due  to  climates  and  those  which
are  due  to  conventions.  Upon  some  activities  these  seasons  act  di-
rectly, upon  others  indirectly.

(1)  In  the  temperate  zones  at  least,  where  lie  the  areas  of  chief
concern  to  us,  climatic  seasons  control  the  growth  of  crops  and  of
such  animal  products  as  wool.  They  exercise  a  marked  influence  upon
the  current  supply  of  many  other  animal  products,  such  as  fish,  milk,
poultry  and  eggs.  In  varying  degree  they  affect  almost  all  processes
carried  on  out-of-doors,  building,  logging,  transportation,  road  making,
construction  work  at  large.  They  are  a  factor  in  the  efficiency  or  the
cost  of  many  processes  carried  on  indoors.  Certainly  climatic  seasons
influence  the  death  rate ;  doubtless  they  influence  morbidity  rates  and
so  affect  almost  all  activities  in  some  measure.^

Upon  the  demand  for  certain  types  of  goods,  the  effect  of  climatic
seasons  is  not  less  clear  than  its  effects  upon  certain  types  of  produc-

*The  earliest  studies  of  seasonal  variations  known  to  Jevons  were  made  in  1854  to
1856  by  J.  W.  Gilbert  (bank-note  circulation,  Statistical  Journal,  vol.  xvii,  pp.  289-321,
and  vol.  xix,  pp.  144-168)  and  Charles  Babbage  (bank  clearings,  the  same,  vol.  xix,  p.
28).  Jevons  began  his  own  economic  studies  with  a  paper,  "On  the  Study  of  Periodic
Commercial  Fluctuations,"  which  he  sent  to  the  meeting  of  the  British  Association  in
1862.  In  1866  he  read  a  much  more  elaborate  paper,  "On  the  Frequent  Autumnal  Pres-
sure in  the  Money  Market,"  to  the  Statistical  Society  of  London.  See  Investigations
in  Currency  and  Finance,  by  W.  S.  Jevons,  London,  1884,  pp.  1-12,  and  160-193.

*0n  the  seasonal  variations  of  the  death  rate,  see  Maurice  B.  Hexter,  Social  Conse-
quences of  Business  Cycles,  Boston  and  New  York,  1925,  pp.  55-57.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  237

tion.  The  sort  of  clothing  we  wear,  our  sports,  the  amount  of  fuel
we  use,  undergo  radical  changes  from  winter  to  summer.

Market  supply  is  kept  far  steadier  than  the  rate  at  which  goods
subject  to  strong  seasonal  influences  are  produced.  This  steadiness
is  a  triumph  of  economic  planning.  It  is  won  by  arranging  compen-
satory seasonal  variations  in  the  activities  which  intervene  between
producing  and  consuming.  The  processes  of  preserving,  storing,  trans-
porting and  distributing  goods  are  purposely  made  to  vary  in  such  a
way  that  a  highly  unstable  rate  of  production  is  converted  into  a
fairly  even  rate  of  market  supply,  or  into  a  rate  of  market  supply
which  varies  with  seasonal  changes  in  demand.  Some  efforts  are
made  to  counteract  also  the  variations  in  demand  produced  by  cli-
matic seasons.  For  example,  a  seasonal  change  is  made  in  the  price
of  coal  to  stimulate  buying  during  the  summer,  and  most  seasonal
goods  can  be  had  cheaper  in  their  ^'off  seasons."  Thus  the  effects  of
climatic  seasons  are  extended  by  man's  contrivance  over  a  wide  variety
of  economic  processes.

(2)  Conventional  seasons  have  many  origins — ancient  religious
observances,  folk  customs,  fashions,  business  practices,  statute  law.

The  most  pervasive  of  all  the  seasonal  variations  in  time  series  is
due  to  the  calendar.  February  is  nearly  10  per  cent  shorter  than
January,  except  in  leap  years  when  it  is  about  6  per  cent  shorter,  and
April  is  nearly  3  per  cent  shorter  than  March.  Series  of  monthly  ag-
gregates are  thus  made  to  show  a  spurious  seasonal  variation — spuri-
ous in  the  sense  that  it  bears  no  relation  to  the  current  rate  of  activity.
And  this  spurious  variation  is  made  irregular  from  year  to  year  by*
the  different  ways  in  which  Sundays  and  holidays  are  divided  among
the  months.

Many  of  the  conventional  seasons  have  considerable  effects  on
economic  behavior.  We  can  count  on  active  retail  buying  before
Christmas,  on  the  Thanksgiving  demand  for  turkeys,  on  the  July
demand  for  fireworks,  on  the  preparations  for  June  weddings,  on
heavy  dividend  and  interest  payments  at  the  beginning  of  each  quar-
ter, on  an  increase  of  bankruptcies  in  January,  and  so  on.  One  of
these  conventional  seasons  is  especially  troublesome  to  statisticians,
because  it  is  movable.  Easter  may  come  as  early  as  March  22d  or  as
late  as  April  25th.  Seasonal  variations  in  series  affected  by  Easter
buying  are  decidedly  different  in  the  March  and  the  April  years.

From  the  activities  directly  affected  by  climatic  or  conventional
seasons,  acting  separately  or  in  unison,  seasonal  influences  radiate  to


238  BUSINESS  CYCLES

all  other  activities,  probably  without  exception.  In  part  these  radia-
tions are  due  to  the  conscious  efforts  already  spoken  of  to  counteract
seasonal  changes  in  demand  or  supply;  in  part  they  are  unplanned
consequences  of  these  changes.  For  example,  the  fact  that  American
crops  are  harvested  largely  in  the  autumn  gives  rise  to  a  seasonal
demand  for  currency  in  the  farming  districts,  to  seasonal  changes  in
interest  rates  (and  sometimes  stock  prices)  in  the  financial  centers,
to  seasonal  changes  in  railway  trafiic,  to  seasonal  changes  in  farmers*
receipts,  to  seasonal  changes  in  their  payments  to  creditors,  to  seasonal
changes  in  the  business  of  country  merchants,  and  to  seasonal  changes
in  wage  disbursements.  So,  too,  the  expectation  of  heavy  buying  by
consumers  in  the  holiday  season  leads  retailers  to  increase  their  stocks
at  earlier  dates.  In  turn,  the  prospect  of  these  large  orders  injects
still  earlier  seasonal  variations  into  manufacturing,  into  the  demand
for  raw  materials,  into  employment,  and  into  wage  payments,  thus
tending  to  produce  secondary  seasonal  variations  in  retail  buying  itself.

It  seems  probable  that  these  reflex  effects  of  the  primary  seasonal
disturbances  grow  smaller  in  most  cases  as  they  radiate  to  other
processes.  For  example,  manufacturers  of  goods  for  which  the
demand  is  largely  concentrated  in  a  few  weeks  seek  to  spread  the
production  over  a  longer  period.  It  is  far  less  costly  to  provide  a
moderate  equipment  which  can  be  used  continuously  in  making  a
year's  supply  of  goods  than  to  provide  a  large  equipment  which  must
stand  idle  most  of  the  time  in  order  to  produce  a  yearns  supply  in  a
rush.  Of  course  the  ideal  of  continuous  production  is  seldom  attained
in  seasonal  trades;  but  the  business  motives  for  stabilizing  operations
are  clear  enough  and  strong  enough  to  moderate  the  effect  of  seasonal
factors  in  a  notable  degree.^

Not  less  important,  is  the  fact  that  both  the  original  and  the  de-
rived impulses  toward  seasonal  activity  are  well  scattered  over  the
months  of  the  year.  For  example,  coal  mining  and  logging  grow
brisk  while  construction  work  is  falling  off  and  farming  requires
fewer  hands. In  Great  Britain  employment  reaches  its  maximum  in

'  Dr.  N.  I.  Stone  has  pointed  out  that  efforts  to  stabilize  operations  usually  begin  with
seasonal  variations,  and  later  may  or  may  not  extend  to  cyclical  variations.  See  his
chapter  on  "Methods  of  Stabilizing  Production  of  Textiles,  Clothing,  and  Novelties,"  in
Business  Cycles  and  Unemployment,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  1923,
pp.  116-133.

References  to  the  rapidly  growing  literature  upon  methods  of  mitigating  seasonal
and  cyclical  variations  may  be  found  in  the  bibliography  given  by  Lewisohn,  Draper,
Commons  and  Lescohier  in  Can  Business  Prevent  Unemployment?  New  York,  1925,
pp.  217-226,  and  in  the  footnotes  of  H.  Feldman's  The  Regularization  of  Employment,
New  York.  1925.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  239

March  for  shipbuilding;  in  April  and  May  for  the  furnishing  trades;
in  June  and  July  for  engineering;  in  August  for  building;  in  Sep-
tember for  iron  mining  and  iron  and  steel  making;  in  November  for
tin-plate  and  sheet-steel  work,  the  miscellaneous  metal  trades,  and
printing;  in  December  for  coal  mining.^  This  diversity  of  dates
makes  the  business  of  a  country  as  a  whole  far  steadier  from  month
to  month  than  are  most  of  the  component  parts.  As  the  seasonal  im-
pulses produced  by  any  factor  radiate  from  the  center  of  disturbance,
they  encounter  the  radiating  effects  of  the  seasonal  variations  which
have  occurred  or  are  expected  in  other  factors.  If  some  time  series,
like  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  index  number  of  prices  at  whole-
sale or  stock  prices,  seem  to  be  nearly  or  quite  free  from  seasonal
variations,  it  is  presumably  because  they  are  affected  by  many  dif-
ferent seasonal  influences  which  cancel  one  another.

Reflection  upon  the  causes  which  we  assign  for  seasonal  move-
ments suggests  that  few  of  them  will  produce  precisely  the  same
effects  year  after  year.  An  exceptionally  cold  winter  will  increase  the
seasonal  swing  in  coal  consumption,  in  the  sale  of  woolen  underwear,
and  in  construction  work.  The  conventional  seasons  which  have  not
a  fixed  date  in  the  calendar — particularly  Easter — are  responsible  for
other  deviations  from  the  seasonal  pattern.  In  careful  work,  the
months  with  five  Sundays  must  be  treated  differently  from  months
with  four  Sundays.  And  even  the  conventions  tied  to  fixed  dates —
like  holiday  shopping  and  January  and  July  interest  payments-
produce  different  effects  when  they  occur  in  combination  with  dif-
ferent phases  of  business  cycles.  Over  long  periods,  also,  changes  in
industrial  technique,  communication,  transportation,  and  business  or-
ganization alter  seasonal  oscillations.  The  autumnal  drain  upon  the
money  markets  for  moving  the  crops,  for  example,  has  become  de-
cidedly less  of  a  bugbear  to  operators  on  the  New  York  Stock  Ex-
change than  it  was  before  the  organization  of  the  Federal  Reserve
System.  Hence  statisticians  who  break  long  time  series  into  briefer
periods  often  find  that  the  seasonal  variations  of  the  parts  differ
appreciably. Chart  5  gives  two  examples  of  this  sort,  one  taken  from

^See  A.  L.  Bowley  and  K.  C.  Smith,  "Seasonal  Variations  in  Finance,  Prices  and
Industry,"  London  and  Cambridge  Economic  Service,  Special  Memorandum,  No.  7,
July,  1924,  pp.  14,  15.  The  seasonal  variations  are  derived  from  data  for  the  years
1900-1913.


CHART  5.

ExAMPLHS  OF  Seasonal  Variations  Which  Have  Changed  in  the  Course  of  Time.


+I.Ot


UN


employment  in  british  trade  unions
(bowley-smith)


+  1.0


+0.8


+0.6


+0.4


+0.2


-0.2


•0.4


-0.6


JAN.  FEB.  MAR.  APR.  MAT  JUNE JULY  AUG.  SEEJ. OCT.  NOV.  DEC  JAN.


+20


+20


JAN.  FEB. MAR. APR.  MAr  JUNE JULY  AUG.  SEPT. OCT.  NOV.  DEC  JAN.


240


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  241

the  British  unemployment  data,  the  other  from  interest  rates  on  prime
commercial  paper  in  the  New  York  market.*


(2)  Methods  of  Measuring  Average  Seasonal  Variations.

Of  ways  of  measuring  seasonal  variations,  perhaps  the  most  widely
used  is  the  ingenious  ' 'link-relative"  method  invented  by  Professor
Warren  M.  Persons.  This  method  requires  six  successive  operations
upon  the  original  data.  (1)  Compute  the  link  relatives  for  each
successive  month  (week  or  quarter),  that  is,  find  the  percentage  of
each  item  to  the  preceding  item.  (2)  Arrange  the  link  relatives  for
all  the  Januaries  in  a  frequency  table.  Make  similar  tables  for  the
other  months.  (3)  Find  the  median  in  each  of  these  twelve  tables.
(4)  Forge  the  medians  into  a  chain  with  January  represented  by  100.
Carry  the  chain  through  the  twelve  months  back  to  January.  (5)
If,  as  usually  happens,  the  second  January  figure  differs  from  the
first  one,  adjust  the  figures  for  all  the  months  to  make  the  second
January  figure  100.  (6)  Readjust  all  the  figures  once  more  so  that
the  arithmetic  mean  of  the  twelve  monthly  figures  shall  equal  100.^

*See  the  paper  of  Messrs.  Bowley  and  Smith  cited  above,  and  W.  L.  Crum,  "Cycles  of
Rates  on  Commercial  Paper",  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1923,  Preliminary
vol.  V,  p.  29.

The  data  from  which  Chart  5  is  drawn  are  as  follows:

Seasonal  Variations  of
Percentage  of  Members  Interest  Rates  on  Prime

Unemployed  in  British  Commercial  Paper  in

Trade  Unions  New  York

1887-95 1896-1904 1905-13 1866-73 1874-89 1890-1916

January +1.0  +.4  +.5  +4.1  +4.4  -  3.0

February +.5  +.1  +.2  - .7  -4.9  -7.6

March 0  -.4  +.2  +3.2  -2.4  -3.9

April -.4  -.5  0  +6.9  -2.3  -5.6

May -.3  -.5  -.3  -8.7  -11.0 -8.1

June -.6  -.4  -.2  -18.0  -14.4  -10.8

July -  .4  -.4  -.2  -14.6  -14.3  -  4.6

August 0  0  0  -10.9  -1.4 +3.3

September 0  +.3  +.1  - 1.1  +10.2 +10.5

October +.1  +.3  +.1  +10.9  +13.6 +11.8

November -.1  +.2  -.1  +18.0  +10.3  +8.6

December +.3  +.8  +.4  +11.1  +12.1  +10.0

^For  examples  of  this  method  see  Professor  Persons'  papers  in  the  Review  of  Eco-
nomic  Statistics,  particularly  Preliminary  volume  i.  Later  expositions  are  given  by
Professor  Persons  in  "Correlation  of  Time  Series,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical
Association,  June,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  713-726,  and  in  his  contribution  to  the  Handbook
of  Mathematical  Statistics,  edited  by  H.  L.  Rietz,  Boston,  1924,  chapter  x.

A  technical  improvement  upon  Persons'  method  has  been  suggested  by  Professor
W.  L.  Crum. Instead  of  using  the  medians  given  by  the  frequency  tables,  take  "the


242  BUSINESS  CYCLES

It  will  be  noticed  that  Professor  Persons  measures  the  seasonal
variation  of  a  series  before  he  has  computed  its  secular  trend.  It
is  primarily  because  of  the  trend  that  his  second  January  figure  usually
differs  from  the  first,  and  that  his  fifth  step  has  to  be  taken.  Dr.
William  L.  Hart  has  argued  that  it  is  better  first  to  determine  the
trend  of  a  series  by  whatever  method  is  most  appropriate ;  second  to
eliminate  the  trend,  by  subtracting  the  magnitude  it  indicates  from
the  original  item  for  each  month,  and  then  to  compute  the  arithmetic
means  of  all  the  Januaries,  all  the  Februaries,  etc.,  as  shown  by  the
data  in  this  corrected  form.^

Several  statisticians  have  pointed  out  that  Dr.  Hart's  method  of
"monthly  means"  does  not  guard  against  the  influence  upon  the  sea-
sonal index  of  extreme  and  irregular  deviations.^  As  a  remedy  for
this  defect,  Dr.  Lincoln  W.  Hall  and  Miss  Helen  D.  Falkner  pro-
posed what  the  latter  calls  the  "ratio-to-ordinate"  method.  Like  Dr.
Hart,  they  start  by  determining  the  secular  trend.  Next  they  com-
pute the  percentage  of  each  original  item  to  the  corresponding  value
given  by  the  trend  line,  make  frequency  tables  of  these  percentages
for  each  month,  select  from  the  frequency  tables  a  typical  value
(usually  the  mean  of  a  middle  group  of  items),  and  finally  adjust  the
twelve  typical  values  so  that  their  average  for  the  year  is  100.^

Still  another  method,  devised  by  Dr.  Fred  R.  Macaulay,  is  to
make  12-months  moving  averages  of  the  original  items  centered  at
the  seventh  month,  compute  the  ratio  of  the  original  item  for  each
month  to  its  moving-average  value,  find  medians  of  these  ratios  for

mean  of  a  middle  group  of  items  (two  or  four  if  the  series  contains  an  even  number  of
items,  three  if  an  odd  number)."  "Use  of  the  Median  in  Determining  Seasonal  Varia-
tion," Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  March,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  607-614.

Criticisms  of  this  method  may  be  found  in  several  of  the  papers  presently  to  be
cited,  and  on  p.  26  of  the  paper  by  Bowley  and  Smith  cited  above.  "It  is  very  doubtful
.  .  .,"  say  these  writers,  "whether  the  comparison  of  each  month  with  the  preceding  ia
as  appropriate  for  the  measurement  of  seasonal  influence  as  the  comparison  of  each
month  with  the  position  determined  by  the  general  average  or  by  the  line  of  trend."
They  regard  Professor  Persons'  method  as  "specially  suitable  for  correcting  records  for
seasonal  variation"  (since  it  reveals  irregularities  in  the  frequency  tables),  but  hold
that  the  most  accurate  method  of  "measuring  the  seasonal  effects"  is  to  use  deviations
from  a  12-months  moving  average.

^  William  L.  Hart,  "The  Method  of  Monthly  Means  for  Determination  of  a  Seasonal
Variation,"  Journal  oj  the  American  Statistical  Association,  September,  1922,  vol.  xviii,
pp.  341-349.

^See,  for  example,  W.  M.  Persons  in  the  Handbook  of  Mathematical  Statistics,
edited  by  H.  L.  Rietz,  pp.  155-158.

*See  Lincoln  W.  Hall,  "Seasonal  Variation  as  a  Relative  of  Secular  Trend,"  Journal
of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  155-166,  and  Helen  D.
Falkner,  "The  Measurement  of  Seasonal  Variation,"  in  the  same  issue,  pp.  167-179.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  243

all  the  Januaries,  Februaries,  etc.,  and  convert  the  medians  into  per-
centages which  total  1200  for  the  year.^

Choice  among  these  methods  is  to  be  guided,  of  course,  by  the
characteristics  of  the  series  to  be  dealt  with  and  the  specific  purpose
in  view.  As  Messrs.  Bowley  and  Smith  point  out  in  their  systematic
discussion  of  the  problem,  the  first  question  to  be  asked  is  whether
the  seasonal  variation  of  any  month  from  the  annual  average  is  more
appropriately  considered  as  a  given  amount,  or  as  a  given  proportion.
For  example,  do  the  October  imports  of  wheat  into  England  tend
to  be  50,000  tons  more  than  the  average  of  all  months,  or  do  they
tend  to  be  11  per  cent  above  the  average?  If  greater  regularity  is  se-
cured by  considering  amounts,  then  seasonal  variations  should  be
expressed  in  percentages  borne  by  the  absolute  difference  between
the  average  amount  in  each  month  shown  by  the  data  (in  their  origi-
nal form  or  adjusted  for  trend)  and  the  arithmetic  mean  for  the  whole
year.  If  greater  regularity  is  secured  by  considering  proportions,  then
seasonal  variations  should  be  computed  from  ratios,  and  geometric
means  should  be  used.  A  second  question  to  be  considered  in  either
case  is  whether  the  series  shows  an  upward  or  downward  trend.  If
not,  the  absolute  differences  or  the  relative  differences  may  be  com-
puted directly  from  the  original  data.  If  there  is  a  trend  to  be  elimi-
nated, that  can  be  accomplished  by  using  moving  averages  or  by  fit-
ting curves,  and  the  absolute  or  relative  differences  ascertained  from
the  data  corrected  for  trend.  Thus  Bowley  and  Smith  discuss  and
use  in  different  series  six  methods^ — three  based  on  amounts  and  three
on  proportions,  one  of  each  set  without  correction  for  trend,  one  with
the  trend  removed  by  moving  averages,  and  one  with  the  trend
removed  by  the  method  of  least  squares.  Of  these  methods  they
think  the  two  which  use  moving  averages  are  the  most  accurate,
though  the  most  laborious.  In  a  few  cases  they  make  use  also  of
Persons'  link-relative  method.^

(3)  Efforts  to  Measure  Changing  Seasonal  Variations.

In  all  the  preceding  methods  the  object  is  to  find  one  set  of
monthly  figures  which  measures  the  average  seasonal  influence. Oc-

"See  "Index  of  Production  in  Selected  Basic  Industries,"  Federal  Reserve  Bulletin,
December,  1922,  vol.  iii,  pp.  1414,  1415.

'A.  L.  Bowley  and  K.  C.  Smith,  "Seasonal  Variations  in  Finance,  Prices  and  In-
dustry," London  and  Cambridge  Economic  Service,  Special  Memorandum,  No.  7,  July,


244  BUSINESS  CYCLES

casionally  statisticians  who  use  one  of  these  methods  notice  that  the
seasonal  fluctuations  of  their  series  seem  to  undergo  a  change  between
the  beginning  and  the  end  of  their  period.  They  may  then  break  the
whole  period  into  two  or  more  parts,  and  compute  fixed  seasonals  for
each  segment  in  the  fashion  of  Chart  5.  A  more  ambitious  plan,  that
of  measuring  seasonal  variations  as  they  change  from  one  year  to
the  next,  has  been  suggested  by  Dr.  Willford  I.  King.  His  successive
steps  are  as  follows:  (1)  Plot  the  data.  (2)  Draw  a  free  hand  curve
through  the  data  representing  the  cyclical  fluctuations.  (3)  Read
from  this  "preliminary  cycle  curve"  the  numerical  values  which  it
indicates  each  month,  and  (4)  divide  the  actual  data  by  these  values.
The  quotients  give  the  first  approximation  to  the  seasonal  variations.
(5)  Smooth  out  the  irregularities  of  this  rough  approximation  by
using  9-period  moving  averages  of  all  the  Januaries,  all  the  Feb-
ruaries,  etc.  Plot  the  results  and  smooth  out  the  small  irregularities
which  may  still  remain.  (6)  Adjust  the  results  so  that  the  sum  of
the  twelve  seasonal  indexes  for  each  year  shall  equal  1200.^

Dr.  King's  effort  to  take  account  of  the  changes  which  seasonal
variations  undergo  from  time  to  time  has  commended  itself  to  other
statisticians ;  but  his  method  has  been  questioned  because  of  the  free
play  given  to  the  investigator's  personal  equation.^  Dr.  W.  L.  Crum
has  devised  a  method  of  showing  progressive  changes  in  seasonal
variations  which  is  not  open  to  this  objection.  The  essential  feature
of  his  plan  is  to  find  the  secular  trend  of  all  the  January  items  in  a
series,  all  the  February  items,  and  so  on,  and  to  use  the  ordinates  of
these  12  monthly  trends  as  the  basis  for  determining  the  seasonal
variations  in  each  successive  year.^

This  method  is  designed  primarily  to  yield  "seasonal  standards
applicable  to  the  study  of  current  phenomena." It  applies  to  series

*  Willford  I.  King,  "An  Improved  Method  for  Measuring  the  Seasonal  Factor,"
Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  September,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  301-313.

^Compare  O.  Gressens,  "On  the  Measurement  of  Seasonal  Variations,"  Journal  of
the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  p.  205.

'The  details  of  this  method  differ  according  as  the  investigator  works  with  link
relatives  or  with  monthly  means  of  the  data.  See  W.  L.  Crum,  "Progressive  Variation
in  Seasonality,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  March,  1925,  vol.  xx,
pp.  48-64.  As  Dr.  Crum  points  out,  similar  suggestions  have  been  made  by  Dr.  E.  C.
Snow,  "Trade  Forecasting  and  Prices,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  May,
1923,  vol.  Ixxxvi,  p.  334,  and  by  Mr.  Harold  Flynn,  quoted  in  The  Problem  of  Business
Forecasting,  Boston  and  New  York,  1924,  p.  104.

For  an  interesting  application  of  the  method,  see  Edwin  Frickey,  "Bank  Clearings
Outside  New  York  City,  1875-1914,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  October,  1925,  vol.
vii,  pp.  258-262.  Mr.  Frickey  found  seasonal  variations  in  the  terminal  years  of  a
period  by  fitting  straight  line  trends  to  link  relatives  for  each  month,  and  then  made
progressively  changing  seasonals  for  the  intervening  years  by  straight  line  interpolations.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  245

whose  seasonal  variations  change  slowly  and  progressively  for  con-
siderable periods.^  But  it  does  not  take  account  of  yearly  changes
in  seasonal  factors,  such  as  are  produced,  say,  by  warm  and  cold
winters,  or  by  March  and  April  Easters.  Mr.  0.  Gressens  has  pro-
posed a  method  which  will  show  changes  of  the  latter  type.  He
computes  the  ratio  of  a  variable  each  month  to  the  average  monthly
value  for  its  year,  corrects  these  monthly  ratios  when  necessary  for
the  trend  within  the  year,  smooths  them  by  the  use  of  moving  aver-
ages, moderates  any  widely  divergent  items  which  may  remain,  and
adjusts  his  ratios  for  each  year  so  that  their  sum  shall  be  1200.  This
method  he  believes  to  have  the  merits  of  Dr.  King's  procedure,  and
to  be  ''mechanically  more  definite."  ^

(4)  Conclusion.

The  preceding  review  shows  how  much  labor  statisticians  have
devoted  to  the  measurement  of  seasonal  variations.  That  problem
has  an  interest  of  its  own,  apart  from  its  bearing  upon  the  isolating
of  cyclical  fluctuations.  Efforts  to  mitigate  seasonal  reductions  in
employment,  and  to  reduce  costs  of  production  by  "budgeting"  pro-
duction and  marketing  are  stimulated  and  made  more  effective  by
knowledge  of  the  magnitude  and  regularity  of  the  seasonal  variations
in  the  numerous  activities  which  have  to  be  considered  in  laying
plans.  Happily  for  us,  it  is  often  possible  to  turn  results  worked  out
for  practical  ends  to  theoretical  uses.

A  few  illustrations  of  seasonal  variations,  as  measured  by  statistical
investigators  have  already  been  given  in  Chart  5.  Additional  illustra-
tions are  presented  in  Chart  6,  which  shows  the  same  method  applied
to  different  series,  and  Chart  7,  which  shows  various  methods  applied
to  the  same  or  different  series.

Non-technical  readers  who  feel  a  bit  confused  by  the  variety  of
methods  which  have  been  sketched  may  take  comfort  in  Chart  7.
It  illustrates  a  remark  made  by  Messrs.  Bowley  and  Smith.  Having
experimented  with  different  ways  of  measuring  seasonal  variations
perhaps  more  elaborately  than  any  other  investigators,  they  observe

*W.  L.  Crum,  as  cited,  pp.  60,  61.

'0.  Gressens,  "On  the  Measurement  of  Seasonal  Variation,"  Journal  of  the  American
Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  203-210.

Dr.  King,  on  the  other  hand,  points  out  that  it  is  difficult  to  apply  either  Crum's
or  Gressens'  method  to  time  series  in  which  the  seasonal  variations  are  relatively  slight
and  the  cyclical  fluctuations  relatively  violent.


CHART  6.

Indexes  of  Seasonal  Variations.
Made  by  the  moving-average-median  method  (F.  E.  Macaulay),


PIG-IRON  PRODUCTION-U.S.  COTTON  CONSUMPTION -U.S. BITUMINOUS  COAL  PRODUCTION- US


120


80


roo.r-^


.±:.-:^


120


100


80


A^


"V^


120


100


80


120


100


80


JAN.  APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


CALVES  SLAUGHTERED- U.S.  WHEAT  FLOUR  PRODUCTION -US-^ CIGARETTE  PRODUCTION-U.S.

I40i 1 1 \ 1 140 I 1 1 1 1 140 ( 1 1 1 1  140


120


100


80


120


100


80


3:


120


100


80


JAN.  APR  JULY  OCT  JAN.


120


100


80


JAN.  APR. JULY  OCT- JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


SUGAR  MELTINGS -U.S.  HOGS  SLAUGHTERED -U.S.  CEMENT  PRODUCTION -U.S.

1 60  I 1 1 1 160 I 1 1 1 1 160 I \ \ \ 1  160


140


120


100


80


60


ry-i

/  \

/ \

__  "3

140


20


100


80


60


140


120


100


80


60


I I I ' I « t I I I


140


20


100


80


60


JAN. APR. JULY OCT JAN


JAN.  APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT JAN.


COMPUTATION  BASED  ON  DATA FROM JAN.  1913  TO DEC.  1921
♦  COMPUTATION  BASED  ON DATA FROM  JAN.  1914 TO DEC.  1921


246


CHART  6  (Continued).

Indexes  of  Seasonal  Variations.

Made  by  the  link-relative  method  (W.  M.  Persons).


IMPORTS  OF  MERCHANDISE-US. INTEREST  RATE  ON  FOUR-TOSIX  AVERAGE  RESERVES

(TOTAL  VALUE)  MONTHS  COMMERCIAL  PAPER  OF  THE  NEW  YORK  CITY

NEW  YORK  CITY  CLEARING  HOUSE  BANKS

I20| 1 r 1 1 '20 I 1 , 1 1 120  , 1 , , ,120


100


80


^.


JAN.  1 9  03


-JAN.  1917


100


80


100


80


JA

M.18T9

-  JAN.K

14

/

^^

_i  .1

1 1

,,

100


80


I. APR. JUU  OCT. JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


JAN. APR. JULY  OCT JAN.


BANK  CLEARINGS
NEW  YORK  CITY


140


120


100


60


— T" 1

JAN.  1903 -JAN.  19 1 7


V


BANK  CLEARINGS
OUTSIDE  NEW  YORK  CITr


140


120


100


80


140


120


100


80


GROSS  EARNINGS  OF

TEN  LEADING  RAILROADS

U.S.


7^^


140


120


100


80


JAN. APR. JULY OCT.


JAN. APR. JULY  OCT. JAN,


APR. JULY OCT. JAN.


VALUES  OF  BUILX>ING  PERMITS

ISSUED  FOR

TWENTY  LEADING  CITIES-U.S.


160


140


120


100


80


60


BRADSTREET'S

BUSINESS  FAILURES

U.S.


JA

N.I903

-JAN.I

)I7

/

V,

\

\

.

V

k

J

\

.1 1

• 1

_i_l.

JA

N.ie93

-JAN.,

917

140
120
100
80
60

/

I

/

^=^

^

^

, ,

L 1  .

1 1

, ,

DIVIDEND  PAYMENTS
BY  INDUSTRIAL  CORPORATIONS
U.S.
160 I 1 1 1 1  160


40


120


100


80


60


0.

C.I902

-OEC,

)\7

>

/

\l

V

y

y

V

I

y

y

1

1. 1

.  .1-1

.1 1

140


120


100


80


60


JAH APR. JULY  OCT.


JAN. APR. JULY OCT JAN.


JAN. APR JUCY OCT.


247


CHART  7.
Indexes  of  Seasonal  Variations  Made  by  Various  Methods.


RATIO- FROM- TREND- AND- CYCLE  CURVE  (WNQ);

ADJUSTED  MEAN,  LINK-RELATIVE

CPIG-IRON  PRODUCTION -U.S.)


RATIO-FROM-TREND-AND-CYCLE  CURVE.

CHANGING  SEASONAL  (king)

Cpig-iron  product  ion-US)


109!


JAN.  APR.


OCT.  JAN.  JAN.


APR.  JULY


OCT.  JAN.


in

SIMPLE  MONTHiy  MEAN (RUBINOW);
ADJUSTED  FOR  SECULAR  TREND  (CHAPIN)
(MUNICIPAL  LODGING  HOUSE  REGISTRATION,  NEW  YORK  CITV)


IV
ADJUSTED  RATIOS  TO  ORDINATES  OF  SECULAR  TREND.

CHANGING  SEASONAL (GRESSENS)
(GROSS  ELECTRIC  SALES  OF  THE  PUBLIC  SERVICE  ELECTRIC  CO.  Of  a  J)


y

^^

1

\

y

J/

• •

. \

r 1

0911

ji^-«^|920

I904"--

^20  _

1911

1 t

1 1

1 1

1 I

JAN.  APR.  JULY  OCT.


JAN.  APR.  JUUf  OCT.


YI


RATIO-TO-ORDINATE  METHOD  (FALKNER);
AND  MEDIAN-LINK-RELATIVE  METHOD


110

MEDIAN-LINI

-RELATIVE/;;

>V^

100

\A

/-

\

v  \

/

90

1

0*"-n7

V7

RATIO-TO-O

RDINATE

eo

1 1

i 1

1 1

1 1

PROGRESSIVE  LINK-RELATIVE  METHOD  (CRUM)
(COMMERCIAL  PAPER  RATES)

/

^•.^875

\ -«X^

/l^

1914 \

j
1
1

\

1914 - ■

1

120


JAN.  APR.  JULf  OCT.


JAN.  JAN.  APR.  JUUr  OCT.


248


i


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  249

that  ^4n  fact,  these  methods  give  nearly  identical  results  in  most
cases."  ^

5. The  Problem  of  Irregular  Fluctuations.

While  less  progress  has  been  made  in  dealing  with  the  irregular
fluctuations  of  time  series  than  in  dealing  with  secular  trends  and
seasonal  variations,  we  are  not  at  liberty  to  dismiss  this  topic  quite
so  summarily  as  do  most  statisticians.  The  conceptual  difl&culties
with  which  the  problem  bristles  are  significant  for  the  theory  of  busi-
ness cycles.  In  considering  them,  we  shall  find  ourselves  confronting
certain  issues  fundamental  to  our  further  work.

(1)  The  Concept  of  Irregular  Fluctuations.

So  far  as  known,  all  social  time  series  without  exception  present
irregularities  of  contour  in  their  raw  state.  Statisticians  take  these
irregularities  for  granted  without  attempting  to  define  them,  as  they
define  secular  trends,  seasonal  variations,  and  cyclical  fluctuations.^
What  little  they  say  upon  the  subject  concerns  the  causes  of  irregulari-
ties in  particular  series.  For  example,  they  point  out  that  wars  or
civil  insurrections  may  disturb  many  economic  processes  for  a  consid-
erable period.  Less  serious  disturbances  may  be  caused  by  such  events
as  earthquakes,  conflagrations,  floods,  droughts,  epidemics,  insect
pests,  strikes  and  lockouts,  railway  embargoes,  inventions,  changes
in  trade  routes,  discoveries  of  fresh  resources,  changes  in  laws,  judicial
rulings,  and  so  on  through  an  interminable  list.  Nor  should  we
forget  the  effects  of  changes  in  the  method  of  compiling  statistics,  and
of  inaccurate  reporting.  The  addition  of  a  new  town  to  the  list  for
which  bank  clearings  are  published,  the  disruption  of  a  trade  union
which  had  made  unemployment  returns,  changes  in  the  lists  of  com-
modities used  in  a  price  index,  the  failure  of  customs-house  clerks  to
include  all  July  invoices  in  their  July  statement  of  imports,  revisions

^"Seasonal  Variations  in  Finance,  Prices  and  Industry,"  London  and  Cambridge
Economic  Service,  July,  1924,  Special  Memorandum,  No.  7,  p,  3.

*  The  nearest  approach  to  a  definition  has  been  made  by  Professor  Edmund  E.  Day,
who  proposes  to  divide  irregular  fluctuations  into  two  classes — namely,

"Episodic  movements  due  to  specific  causes,  ordinarily  reflected  in  sharp,  pro-
nounced breaks  in  the  record  of  the  variable.  .  .  .

"Fortuitous  or  accidental  movements,  of  unknown  origin,  quite  irregular  in  char-
acter, but  involving  only  minor  disturbances  of  the  general  course  of  the  variable."

See  Day's  Statistical  Analysis,  New  York,  1925,  pp.  285,  302-306,  and  310-312.


250  BUSINESS  CYCLES

in  the  estimates  of  monetary  stocks  to  take  account  of  losses,  re-
classifications of  railroad  freight,  errors  in  addition,  misprints — a
thousand  such  matters  may  produce  purely  artificial  irregularities
in  time  series.

The  idea  suggested  by  this  practice  of  listing  causes  is  that  we
may  classify  as  an  irregular  fluctuation  any  movement  of  a  curve !
which  we  do  not  ascribe  to  secular,  seasonal  or  cyclical  changes. If
we  had  clean-cutting  methods  of  ascertaining  what  changes  in  our '
curves  are  due  to  these  three  sets  of  factors,  the  treatment  of  irregular
fluctuations  as  residuals  would  be  satisfactory. On  that  basis  we
might  rationalize  our  procedure  as  follows :  The  activities  represented ;
by  a  time  series  are  influenced  every  day  by  a  host  of  factors  which |
are  not  secular,  cyclical,  or  seasonal  in  character. Most  of  these
random  factors  are  known  vaguely,  if  at  all. But  the  theory  of  prob-
abilities justifies  the  assumption  that  the  random  factors  acting  at  a
given  moment  cancel  one  another  when  they  are  very  numerous, j
independent  in  origin,  and  of  the  same  order  of  magnitude. Indeed,  \
Professor  Edgeworth  has  shown  that  these  strict  conditions  may  be  ij
relaxed: — there  will  be  much  canceling  if  the  random  factors  are
not  few,  if  there  is  a  considerable  measure  of  independence  among
them,  and  if  no  two  or  three  preponderate  over  the  rest.^ It  often
happens,  however,  that  even  the  relaxed  conditions  are  not  complied
with. At  any  time  a  group  of  mutually  related  factors  may  dominate
the  complex,  or  one  or  two  factors  far  more  powerful  than  the  other
random  influences  may  crop  up. Under  such  circumstances,  the
random  factors  cease  to  cancel  one  another,  even  roughly. Instead,
they  produce  a  large  or  small  deviation  from  the  undulating  curve
marked  out  by  the  secular  trend,  seasonal  variations,  and  cyclical
fluctuations  in  combination. It  is  deviations  caused  by  such  failure
of  mutual  canceling  of  the  random  factors  which  we  call  irregular
fluctuations.

One  doubt  concerning  this  conception  can  be  met  by  an  extension
of  the  argument.  As  we  saw  in  the  last  section,  some  of  the  causes
of  seasonal  variations  vary  from  year  to  year.  Likewise  all  secular
trends  are  admitted  to  be  subject  to  change  without  notice,  and  those
trends  which  are  ascribed  to  growth  may  be  inconstant  by  nature
for  aught  we  know.  Finally,  among  the  numerous  causes  of  cyclical
fluctuations  reviewed  in  the  first  chapter,  there  is  not  one  which  we
should  expect  to  produce  perfectly  regular  cycles. Thus,  once  we

^  Compare  section  ii,  2,  above.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  251

adopt  the  current  practice  of  the  statisticians  and  start  discussing
irregular  fluctuations  in  terms  of  their  causes,  we  seem  forced  to  admit
that  irregularities  may  occur  in  the  movements  which  we  classify  as
secular,  cyclical  and  seasonal.  In  other  words,  an  attempt  to  treat
secular,  seasonal  and  cyclical  changes  as  regular  runs  counter  to  much
that  we  know  and  more  that  we  suspect.

This  conclusion  may  be  admitted,  and  treated  as  a  reason,  not
for  abandoning  the  classification  of  fluctuations  in  time  series  into
the  regular  and  the  irregular,  but  for  making  it  more  rigorous.  That
is,  we  may  conceive  the  causes  of  seasonal,  secular,  and  cyclical
changes  as  so  many  complexes,  each  made  up  of  one  or  more  causes
which  act  regularly  according  to  some  "law,''  and  of  random  factors
which  more  or  less  often  fail  to  cancel  each  other.  Then  we  may
throw  the  irregularities  which  are  connected  with  the  seasons,  with
the  factor  of  growth,  and  with  business  cycles  into  the  same  box  as
the  irregularities  which  we  ascribe  to  wars,  earthquakes,  epidemics
and  misprints.  In  contrast  to  this  heterogeneous  collection  of  irregu-
larities, we  have  left  secular  trends  which,  if  not  constant,  change
in  some  regular  way,  seasonal  variations  which,  if  not  uniform,  change
in  some  regular  way,  and  what  one  who  took  this  view  would  prob-
ably call  "normal"  cycles.

From  the  theoretical  viewpoint  this  conception  seems  clear,  what-
ever difficulties  might  be  encountered  in  applying  it  to  time  series.
But  is  it  the  conception  with  which  business-cycle  statisticians  work?
Perhaps  such  an  idea  is  implicit  in  the  application  of  periodogram
analysis  to  time  series.^  Perhaps  there  are  champions  of  the  "40-
month  cycle''  who  would  accept  the  notion.^  The  majority  of  the
business-cycle  statisticians,  however,  find  certain  features  of  the  idea
ill  adapted  to  their  needs.

The  men  who  analyze  time  series  primarily  with  an  eye  to  fore-
casting the  future  commonly  accept  the  notion  of  regular  trends  and
seasonal  variations.  They  need  standards  by  which  they  can  test
current  developments  and  on  which  they  can  base  reasoned  expecta-
tions. Such  standards  they  can  make  with  trends  and  seasonals  which
change  according  to  some  rule,  but  not  with  irregular  seasonals  and
trends.  The  forecasters  believe  themselves  justified  by  the  past  be-
havior of  many  time  series  in  setting  up  the  standard  trends  and

*  See  the  remarks  on  periodogram  analysis  at  th^  end  of  the  next  section.
*See  below,  section  vi,  3,  (6)  'The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles."


252  BUSINESS  CYCLES

seasonals  they  need,  and  judging  what  departures  from  these  stand-
ards seem  probable  in  the  near  future.  For  while  they  admit  that
actual  trends  have  altered  and  actual  seasonals  have  differed  in  the
past,  they  seldom  find  these  changes  very  sudden,  or  very  great.
But  when  they  come  to  cyclical  fluctuations,  they  find  less  warrant
in  the  past  behavior  of  time  series  for  setting  up  similar  standards.
The  past  changes  in  these  fluctuations  have  been  so  sudden,  so  fre-
quent, and  so  considerable  as  to  make  the  notion  of  a  "normal  cycle"
inappropriate.  Not  feehng  justified  in  imposing  a  "normal  cycle"
upon  their  data,  they  have  no  means  of  distinguishing  the  regular
from  the  irregular  changes  in  cycles,  as  they  distinguish  the  regular
from  the  irregular  changes  in  trends  and  seasonal  variations.  Nor
can  they  distinguish  clearly  between  the  cyclical  fluctuations  and  the
irregular  fluctuations  of  a  non-cyclical  character.  All  they  can  do
is  to  note  occasional  marked  departures  from  the  course  of  events
which  it  seemed  reasonable  to  expect,  and  to  search  through  descrip-
tive materials  for  plausible  explanations  of  these  gross  irregularities.^
The  statistical  analysts  who  are  not  attempting  to  make  business
forecasts  hesitate  to  accept  even  the  idea  of  "normal"  trends  and
seasonals.  As  shown  above,  they  have  suggested  methods  for  measur-
ing seasonal  variations  which  change  from  year  to  year.  Also,  secular
trends  pursue  a  meandering  course  when  made  by  the  use  of  free-
hand curves  or  moving  averages;  they  become  unsteadier  still  when
obtained  by  taking  ratios  to  items  in  other  series.  Such  methods
absorb  into  the  seasonals  and  trends  of  time  series  a  part  of  the  move-
ments which  the  methods  commonly  practiced  by  forecasters  inter-
mingle with  the  cyclical  fluctuations.  But  even  when  changing  sea-
sonal variations  and  meandering  trends  have  been  eliminated,  the
residuals  show  many  irregularities.

(2)  Irregular  Fluctuations  in  the  Theory  of  Business  Cycles.

No  method  seems  to  have  been  devised  for  segregating  and  elimi-
nating from  the  cyclical  fluctuations  the  irregularities  not  absorbed  in
seasonals  and  trends.  The  nearest  approach  to  such  a  method  is  to
distribute  the  irregular  fluctuations  by  the  use  of  moving  averages  or
free-hand  curves.  Such  operations  do  not  show  what  the  cyclical
fluctuations  would  have  been  in  the  absence  of  irregular  fluctuations;

•  Compare  Warren  M.  Persons,  "Indices  of  Business  Conditions,"  Review  of  Economic
Statistics,  January,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,  pp.  33-35.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  253

they  merely  show  the  combined  cyclical  and  irregular  fluctuations
distributed  in  a  new  way  among  the  months  which  are  averaged
together.  And  of  course  we  cannot  find  out  what  the  irregular  fluctua-
tions really  were  by  subtracting  the  successive  values  of  such  a
smoothed  curve  from  the  corresponding  original  items.

Yet  Professor  Persons  has  obtained  one  result  of  much  theoretical
interest  by  an  operation  of  this  character.  Taking  the  value  of  build-
ing permits  granted  in  twenty  American  cities  in  the  156  months  of
1903-16  (a  series  in  which  the  irregular  fluctuations  are  marked),  he
subjected  the  original  data  to  the  following  operations:  (1)  He  elimi-
nated the  secular  trend  and  the  seasonal  variations  by  his  favorite
methods.  The  residuals  showed  the  cyclical  and  irregular  fluctuations
of  the  series  in  combination.  (2)  He  computed  the  percentages  which
the  twelve  months  moving  averages  make  of  the  corresponding  ordi-
nates  of  the  secular  trend.  This  process  (by  averaging)  presumably
eliminates  the  irregular  variations  and  seasonal  variations,  and  (by
taking  ratios)  the  secular  trend ;  but  it  does  not  eliminate  the  cycles.
(3)  He  subtracted  the  items  found  in  (2)  above  from  the  items  de-
scribed in  (1).  The  irregular  variations  were  present  in  (1)  but
not  in  (2).  The  resulting  differences  were,  presumably,  approxima-
tions to  the  irregular  fluctuations.  (4)  He  made  the  differences  thus
ascertained  into  a  frequency  table.  .  .  .  From  the  data  in  this  table,
he  drew  a  rectangular  diagram.  Finally,  to  this  diagram  he  fitted  a
normal  curve.  From  the  closeness  with  which  the  normal  curve  fitted
the  data,  Professor  Persons  concluded  that  "the  distribution  of  the
irregular  fluctuations  of  building  permits  is  normal."  ^

May  we  not  draw  a  further  conclusion?  If  the  irregularities  of
economic  time  series  over  a  considerable  period  are  distributed  in
the  same  way  that  errors  of  observation  are  distributed,  can  we  not
take  the  combined  cyclical  and  irregular  fluctuations  of  a  time  series
without  regard  to  the  temporal  order  of  their  occurrence,  interpret
each  fluctuation  as  one  observation  upon  the  behavior  of  the  cyclical
factors  distorted  in  some  measure  by  an  error,  and  base  our  results
upon  averages  drawn  with  due  caution  from  the  array  of  observations?
The  confidence  we  can  put  in  such  averages  will  depend  of  course
upon  the  number  of  observations  which  each  time  series  yields,  and
upon  the  way  in  which  the  observations  in  each  array  are  distributed
about  their  central  tendency. This  procedure  is  certainly  less  hazard-

*  Warren  M.  Persons,  "An  Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"  Review  of  Eco-
nomic Statistics,  April,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  1,  pp.  137-139.


254  BUSINESS  CYCLES

ous  than  the  attempt  to  decide  what  part  of  a  given  change  in  any
time  series  should  be  ascribed  to  the  failure  of  random  factors  to
cancel  each  other.  It  enables  us  to  utilize  all  the  available  statistics,
and  it  gives  some  basis  for  judging  the  probable  reliability  of  the
inferences  we  may  draw  from  them.^

In  Chapter  V,  this  suggestion  will  be  elaborated,  with  the  aid  of
the  more  adequate  materials  which  will  then  be  in  hand.  Of  course,
there  is  no  thought  of  returning  to  the  idea  of  a  "normal  cycle."  For
between  the  conception  of  an  average  empirically  determined  from
the  study  of  statistical  arrays,  and  the  conception  of  "normal"  phe-
nomena employed  by  economic  theorists  there  is  a  vital  difference.
The  theorist's  normal  is  that  which  complies  with  certain  conditions
which  he  has  laid  down.  It  may  approximate  average  experience,  or
it  may  be  far  removed  from  the  facts  of  life — all  depends  upon  the
manner  in  which  the  theorist  has  chosen  the  ground  for  his  argument.
Even  when  the  two  agree  closely,  they  remain  conceptually  unlike.
To  speak  of  average  conditions  as  "normal"  is  to  introduce  needless
confusion.^

In  our  dealings  with  irregular  fluctuations  as  theorists,  we  are
confronted  again  by  the  problem  mentioned  at  the  end  of  the  section

*  It  may  be  asked :  If  Professor  Persons  is  justified  in  computing  the  irregular  fluctua-
tions of  building  permits  in  order  to  find  how  they  are  distributed  about  their  central
tendency,  would  he  not  be  justified  in  eliminating  these  irregular  fluctuations  from  the
residuals  left  by  taking  out  the  trend  and  the  seasonal  variations?  Would  he  not  thus
isolate  the  cyclical  fluctuations?  And  might  not  his  methods,  with  this  development,
be  applied  freely  to  other  time  series?

The  reason  why  statisticians  hesitate  to  follow  this  obvious  line  is  that  in  dealing
with  cycles  they  cannot  accept  the  rough  approximations  to  irregular  fluctuations  which
will  serve  in  testing  the  types  of  distribution  to  which  the  latter  conform.  With  156
irregularities  in  his  frequency  table.  Professor  Persons  can  suppose  that  the  imperfec-
tions of  his  measurements  of  irregularities  will  cancel  each  other  in  large  degree.  He
could  not  make  such  an  assumption  regarding  the  irregular  fluctuations  which  accom-
panied any  specific  business  cycle.  In  trying  to  get  a  curve  representing  a  succession
of  cycles,  it  is  small  comfort  to  say  that  a  distortion  at  one  point  in  one  cycle,  caused
by  inaccurate  measurement  of  irregular  fluctuations,  is  probably  matched  by  a  dis-
tortion of  the  opposite  sort  at  some  unknown  point  in  the  same,  or  another  cycle.

The  only  way  in  which  we  can  invoke  the  canceling  of  random  effects  in  eliminating
irregular  fluctuations  from  cyclical  fluctuations  is  the  way  suggested  in  the  text :  namely,
by  collecting  numerous  cases  showing  cyclical  and  irregular  fluctuations  in  combination,
and  ascertaining  the  central  tendencies  of  these  arrays.

'There  is,  however,  one  accredited  use  of  this  term  in  statistics,  illustrated  in  the
preceding  quotation  from  Professor  Persons:  namely,  the  "normal  curve  of  error"  and
"normal"  distributions,  that  is,  distributions  which  are  described  approximately  by  the
"normal"  curve.  As  pointed  out  by  Professor  Karl  Pearson,  who  first  applied  the  term
"normal"  to  the  curve  developed  by  Laplace  and  Gauss,  the  choice  was  not  a  happy
one.  (See  Karl  Pearson,  Biometrica,  October,  1920,  p.  25.)  But  the  usage  is  so  firmly
established  by  this  time  that  more  confusion  might  be  caused  by  departing  from  than
by  conforming  to  it.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  255

upon  secular  trends.  While  we  desire  to  discriminate  as  clearly  as
we  can  between  the  irregular  and  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  time
series,  we  cannot  discard  irregular  fluctuations  offhand  as  irrelevant
to  the  understanding  of  business  cycles.  By  doing  so  we  should  be
tacitly  rejecting  without  investigation  some  of  the  working  hypotheses
presented  in  Chapter  I.  Dr.  Veblen,  for  example,  holds  that  in  the
period  from,  say,  1816  to  1873  liquidation  was  "apparently  always
brought  on  by  some  extraneous  disturbance,"  whereas  since  the  1870's
seasons  of  prosperity  "are  pretty  uniformly  traceable  to  specific
causes  extraneous  to  the  process  of  industrial  business  proper."  ^
So  also.  Professors  Arthur  B.  Adams  of  Oklahoma  and  S.  A.  Pervushin
of  Moscow  argue  at  length  that  revival  cannot  blossom  into  full
prosperity  without  the  aid  of  some  favoring  cause  which  the  revival
itself  does  not  generate.^  Several  other  authorities  assign  an  impor-
tant though  less  systematic  role  to  "disturbing  circumstances"  as
factors  in  shaping  the  course  of  busmess  cycles.  In  view  of  these
considered  opinions  we  cannot  take  it  for  granted  that  irregular
fluctuations  are  to  be  eliminated  from  our  theorizing,  much  as  we
should  like  to  eliminate  them  from  our  curves.  Even  statistical
elimination  is  desirable  only  in  the  sense  that  we  should  like  to  isolate
the  irregular  as  well  as  the  cyclical  fluctuations,  in  order  to  study
intensively  both  types  of  changes.


6. The  Problem  of  Isolating  Cyclical  Fluctuations.

From  what  has  been  said  regarding  the  other  types  of  changes
found  in  time  series,  it  is  clear  that  the  ambition  to  isolate  cyclical
fluctuations  has  not  been  attained.  Our  review  of  methods  of  com-
puting secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations  showed  that  even  for
these  movements  we  have  approximations  rather  than  measures.  Our
discussion  of  irregular  fluctuations  showed  that  no  statistician  ven-
tures to  do  more  than  smooth  out  irregularities  in  his  curves  by  using
moving  averages  or  free-hand  constructions.  Inability  to  measure  the
net  effects  of  secular,  seasonal,  and  random  factors  separately,  or  in
combination,  means  that  we  cannot  isolate  the  cyclical  fluctuations
of  time  series  by  eliminating  the  three  other  sets  of  changes  recog-

*Thorstein  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  New  York,  1904,  pp.  249-255.

■*  Arthur  B.  Adams,  Economics  of  Business  Cycles,  New  York,  1925,  pp.  111-158;
S.  A.  Pervushin,  The  Business  Conjuncture,  Moscow,  1925,  pp.  54-61.  I  am  indebted  to
Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets  for  a  synopsis  of  Professor  Pervushin's  discussion.


256  BUSINESS  CYCLES

nized  by  our  classification.  And  no  one  has  yet  devised  a  satisfactory
method  of  measuring  the  cyclical  fluctuations  directly.^

What  we  can  get  from  the  statisticians,  then,  are  the  residual
fluctuations  of  many  American  and  some  foreign  time  series  after  the
secular  trends  and  the  seasonal  variations  (determined  by  some
variant  of  the  methods  described  above)  have  been  eliminated.  The
process  of  eliminating  these  two  types  of  movements  consists  in  com-
puting, or  reading  from  a  chart,  the  values  which  the  trend,  corrected
for  seasonal  variations,  would  have  at  successive  intervals  of  time,  and
then  subtracting  these  values  from  the  corresponding  items  of  the
original  data,  or  expressing  the  deviations  of  the  original  data  from
the  corrected  trend  in  percentages.^

Chart  8  gives  three  examples  of  the  results  obtained  in  this  way.
To  apply  what  has  just  been  said  to  the  chart :  the  deviations  of  the

-It  is  true  that  in  his  plan  for  ascertaining  seasonal  variations  which  change  from
year  to  year,  Dr.  King  draws  a  "preliminary  cycle  curve"  directly  from  the  raw  data —
"a  free-hand  curve  representing  what  was  assumed  to  be  the  course  of  the  cycle."  But
neither  this  curve,  nor  the  "final  cycle  curve"  which  Dr.  King  gets  after  eliminating  his
varying  seasonal  indexes,  purports  to  separate  the  cyclical  from  the  secular  and  irregular
changes.  "An  Improved  Method  for  Measuring  the  Seasonal  Factor,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  September,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  301-313.

^  To  illustrate : Suppose  that  we  have  obtained  the  following  results  by  analyzing  a
series  showing  the  production  of  commodity  X  by  months.
Ordinate  of  secular  trend  January,  1926,  900  tons.
Monthly  increment  of  secular  trend,  5  tons.

Seasonal  variations  expressed  as  percentages  of  mean  monthly  production:
January  90

February  100

March  110

April  80

Suppose  also  that  the  production  reported  in  the  opening  months  of  1926  runs  as  follows:

January  800  tons

February  1000  tons

March  1100  tons

April  700  tons

Then  we  can  make  the  following  computations:

Ordinates  of  Trend  adjusted

secular  Seasonal for  seasonal Original

1926  trend  variations variations  data

January 900  tons X .90 = 810  tons  800  tons

February 905 "  X 1.00 = 905 "  1000 "

March 910 "  X 1.10 = 1001 "  1100 "

AprU 915 "  X .80 = 732 "  700 "

Results  after  eliminating  the  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal  variations.

In  percentages
1926  In  tons  of  adjusted  trend

January -—10  tons  99

February +95 "  110

March +99 "  110

April -32 "  96


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


257


curves  from  their  base  lines  do  not  show  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of
the  series  included.  What  they  do  show  are  the  cyclical  fluctuations
combined  with  the  irregular  fluctuations,  among  which  are  included
the  deviations  of  the  actual  seasonal  and  secular  changes  from  the
curves  chosen  to  represent  them.

Thus  statistical  technique  in  its  present  state  enables  us  to  picture
cyclical  fluctuations  only  in  a  distorting  combination  with  irregular
fluctuations  which  we  cannot  measure.  It  seems  legitimate  to  believe
that  the  cyclical  factor  or  factors  operate  with  greater  regularity  than
the  curves  suggest.  But  we  are  not  entitled  to  believe  that,  were
the  effects  of  all  non-cyclical  factors  excluded,  the  deviation  and
amplitude  of  all  cyclical  fluctuations  would  be  uniform.  For  cyclical
factors  influencing  time  series  may  vary  from  year  to  year,  as  many
of  the  seasonal  factors  vary.  Just  as  our  conviction  that  many  sea-
sonal variations  are  not  uniform  from  year  to  year  rests  upon  what
we  know  about  their  causes,  so  the  opinions  we  may  finally  form
concerning  the  uniformity  or  variability  of  cyclical  fluctuations  must
be  based  upon  what  we  can  learn  about  their  causes,  rather  than
upon  study  of  such  curves  as  are  presented  in  Chart  8.

Graphically  we  can  represent  these  successive  steps  by  the  following  segments  of  charts:


ORIGINAL  DATA


SECULAR TREND


SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


SECULAR  TREND  CORRECTED
FDR  SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


JAN. ftS MAP. APR


JAN FEB. MAR. APR.


JAN. FEB. MAR. APR.


jaST Flo. maS: APR.


SECULAR  TREND  CORRECTED
FOR  SEASONAL  VARIATIONS
TREATED  AS  A  BASE  LINE


RESIDUAL FLUCTUATIONS  AFTER  ELIMINATING  THE
SECUL>>R TREND  CORRECTED  FOR  SEASONAL  VARIATIONS


IN TONS


IN  PER  CENT


FtB. MAR. APR.


258


BUSINESS  CYCLES


Although  the  statistical  segregation  of  the  factors  influencing  time
series  stops  short  of  our  desires,  a  comparison  of  the  refined  curves  of
Chart  8  with  the  ^^raw-data"  curves  of  Chart  1  shows  that  the  cyclical


CHART  8.
Residual  Fluctuations  of  Time  Series  after  Elimination  of  Secular  Trends  and

Seasonal  Variations.
Percentage  deviations  of  original  items  from  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal

variations.

KRCtNT MONTHLY  DIVIDEND  PAYMENTS  BY  INDUSTRIAL  CORPORATIONS-US. ftnctMj
+80 1 1 1 1 — ,+ao


+40


-40


1903 '04 '05 X36 '07 '08 '09 "10 *ll "12 13 '14 15 16 17 16


NUMBER  OF  BUSINESS 'FAILURES-US.CBRADSTREET'S)


-60


1903 '04 X)5 '06 "07 '06 '09 10 U 12 13 14 15 16 17 18


^  MONTHLY  VALUES  OF  BUILDING  PERMITS  ISSUED  FOR  TWENTY  LEADING  CITIES- US »  ^

♦  60  I 1 1 1 1  +60


440


+40


-40


-80


1903  '04 ^5 X)6 Ml ^8 W 10 Ti 12 13 Vi 15 16 17 18


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


259


fluctuations  stand  out  more  clearly  after  the  statistical  trends  and
seasonal  variations  have  been  eliminated,  however  roughly.  We  shall
therefore  make  such  use  as  we  can  of  these  eliminations  in  our  further
work;  but  instead  of  ignoring  trends  and  seasonals  we  shall  study
them  both  in  their  original  combinations  with  cyclical  and  irregular
fluctuations,  and  in  their  segregated  form.

To  readers  trained  in  the  natural  sciences,  it  may  seem  that
periodogram  analysis  should  be  substituted  for  the  cumbersome  and
inexact  procedure  which  has  been  described  as  the  standard  method
of  determining  cyclical  fluctuations.  A  few  economists,  notably  Henry
L.  Moore,  Sir  William  H.  Beveridge,  and  William  L.  Crum,  have  made
significant  experiments  with  this  method.^  It  yields  excellent  results
in  many  physical  processes  which  show  strictly  periodic  fluctuations
of  a  symmetrical  type,  and  it  should  reveal  any  similar  periodicities
which  exist  in  economic  time  series.  Nor  is  the  method  limited  to
the  discovery  of  simple  movements.  A  periodogram  analysis  may
indicate  the  existence  of  several  or  many  periodicities,  which  when
combined  with  each  other  give  a  curve  so  complicated  that  the  un-
initiated reader  would  not  suppose  it  to  be  made  up  of  periodic  ele-
ments.* Perhaps  it  will  be  found  that  many  of  the  time  series  used

*  For  explanations  of  this  rather  elaborate  method  of  analysis,  and  illustrative  results,
see  H.  L.  Moore,  Economic  Cycles:  Their  Law  and  Cause j  New  York,  1914,  and  Gener-
ating Economic  Cycles,  New  York,  1923;  Sir  W.  H.  Beveridge,  "Wheat  Prices  and
Rainfall  in  Western  Europe,"  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  May,  1922,  vol.
Ixxxv,  pp.  412-459;  W.  L.  Crum,  "Cycles  of  Rates  on  Commercial  Paper,"  Review  of
Economic  Statistics,  January,  1923,  Preliminary  vol.  v,  pp.  17-29,  and  "Periodogram
Analysis,"  chapter  xi  in  Handbook  of  Mathematical  Statistics,  edited  by  H.  L.  Rietz,
Boston,  1924.

*For  an  example,  see  the  "synthetic  curve"  made  by  adding  eleven  cycles  of  dif-
ferent lengths,  in  Beveridge 's  paper  referred  to  above.  (Opposite  p.  453.)  A  section  of
this  curve  is  reproduced  here.


1890


1900


1910


1920


260  BUSINESS  CYCLES

by  the  business-cycle  statisticians  can  be  usefully  described  by  "syn-
thetic curves''  formed  by  adding  together  several  periodic  fluctuations
which  differ  in  length.

But  the  systematic  application  of  periodogram  analysis  to  eco-
nomic series  encounters  serious  obstacles.  Comparatively  few  of  the
series  which  we  wish  to  utilize  have  been  maintained  over  a  period
long  enough  to  yield  satisfactory  results  when  treated  in  this  way.
To  establish  the  rather  brief  cycles  in  which  the  business-cycle  stat-
istician is  most  interested,  it  is  necessary  to  have  monthly,  or  at  least
quarterly,  data,  and  long  series  of  that  character  are  few.  When
materials  are  available  in  this  form,  the  seasonal  variations  and  the
irregular  fluctuations  so  characteristic  of  economic  processes  tend  to
blur  the  periodograms.  To  leave  out  the  periods  in  which  irregular
fluctuations  seem  to  alter  the  cyclical  movement  limits  the  data  avail-
able for  study  still  more  narrowly,  and  gives  the  investigator's  per-
sonal judgment  a  considerable  influence.  To  eliminate  secular  trends
and  seasonals  before  applying  periodogram  analysis  is  often  necessary,
but  it  may  bias  the  results.^  There  remain  two  doubts  more  funda-
mental. Can  we  assume  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  economic
processes  are,  or  tend  to  be,  strictly  periodic?  If  there  are  tendencies
toward  periodic  fluctuations  in  given  processes  at  a  given  point  in
economic  evolution,  do  such  tendencies  maintain  themselves  under
changing  conditions  over  a  period  long  enough  to  be  revealed  by
periodogram  analysis?

The  most  obvious  of  these  obstacles  to  the  systematic  use  of  the
periodogram  method  in  business-cycle  work — the  brevity  of  the  ma-
jority of  the  series  which  must  be  analyzed — presumably  will  shrink
with  the  lapse  of  time.  If  the  future  is  less  checkered  by  catastrophes
than  the  past  has  been,  the  troubles  caused  by  irregular  fluctuations
will  diminish  also.  The  doubts  now  harbored  about  the  propriety  of
adjusting  series  to  get  rid  of  trends  and  seasonal  variations  before
beginning  periodogram  analysis  may  be  set  at  rest  by  further  work.
Fuller  knowledge  may  make  us  readier  to  accept  the  working  hy-
pothesis that  there  are  true  periodicities  of  various  lengths  in  economic
processes,  and  that  these  periodicities  maintain  themselves  for  long
periods  of  time.  Certainly  we  cannot  say  that  periodogram  analysis
will  not  play  a  large  role  in  future  economic  work. But  it  seems

•  Compare  Sir  W.  H.  Beveridge's  remarks  upon  this  point  in  the  article  cited  above,
pp.  414-415.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  261

equally  certain  that  we  cannot  yet  make  it  the  standard  procedure
for  studying  cyclical  fluctuations.^

IV. On  Measuring  the  Relationships  Among  Time  Series.

While  the  isolating  of  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  is  the  end  of
one  set  of  statistical  efforts,  it  is  the  beginning  of  a  new  set.  As  we
look  at  Chart  8,  we  grow  eager  to  attack  the  problems  it  presents.
The  curves  resemble  each  other  in  that  all  show  at  least  the  major
fluctuations  in  business  conditions  which  occurred  during  the  periods
they  cover.  But  this  resemblance,  though  clearer  than  in  Chart  1,
before  the  secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations  had  been  eliminated,
is  still  overlaid  by  striking  and  persistent  differences.  If  a  larger  col-
lection is  taken  than  that  offered  by  Chart  8,  it  is  found  that  the
waves  in  the  several  curves  differ  widely  in  amplitude.  They  differ
also  in  timing;  that  is,  the  crests  and  troughs  come  several  months
later  in  some  curves  than  in  others.  They  differ  finally  in  shape —
some  curves  have  roughly  symmetrical  waves,  others  suggest  a  very
choppy  sea. What  use  can  we  make  of  these  results?

One  course  is  to  compile  a  general  index  of  business  cycles  from
as  large  and  varied  a  collection  of  curves  as  we  can  assemble,  all  of
them  in  the  form  illustrated  by  Chart  8.  If  that  is  our  next  step,
ought  we  reduce  the  varying  amplitudes  of  the  cyclical-irregular
fluctuations  characteristic  of  different  series  to  a  common  scale?
Ought  we  try  to  get  rid  also  of  the  differences  in  timing,  and  in  shape?
Or  are  the  differences  in  amplitude,  timing,  and  perhaps  shape,  mat-
ters which  we  do  not  wish  to  get  rid  of,  but  rather  to  investigate  and
use  in  framing  a  theory  of  business  cycles?  Do  we,  indeed,  wish  to
make  a  general  index  of  business  cycles? Shall  we  not  gain  more  by

•Colonel  M.  C.  Rorty  adds  the  following  comment:

"The  harmonic  analysis  can  fairly  safely  be  used  to  segregate  periodicities  which  are
known  to  be  compounded  in  any  series  of  observations;  but  I  do  not  believe  it  can  be
trusted  to  establish  the  existence  of  periodicities  as  to  the  reality  of  which  there  is  no
other  definite  evidence.  The  fundamental  defect  in  the  harmonic  analysis  is  that  it
will  resolve  any  ordinary  business  time  series  into  definite  regular  periodicities,  regard-
less of  whether  any  real  periodicities  exist  or  not.  The  probability  that  such  resolution
has  any  real  meaning  would  seem  to  be  infinitesimal  when  the  number  of  cycles  sub-
jected to  analysis  is  small  and  the  number  of  periodicities  required  for,  say,  a  90%
resolution  of  the  time  series  exceeds  two.  Furthermore,  when  the  element  of  lag  is
introduced,  the  value  of  the  harmonic  analysis  becomes  still  more  tenuous.  I  doubt
whether  it  is  possible  to  set  up  a  complete  and  direct  mathematical  test  of  the  method.
Probably  the  best  indirect  proof  of  the  lack  of  value  of  the  harmonic  analysis  is  to
create  an  artificial  time  series  by  throwing  dice  and  then  analyze  this  series  with  and
without  assumptions  as  to  lag."


262  BUSINESS  CYCLES

concentrating  attention  upon  the  fluctuations  of  particular  processes,
bringing  back  into  the  discussion  even  the  secular  trends  and  the
seasonal  variations  which  we  have  eliminated?

These  rhetorical  questions  suggest  their  own  answers.  If  we  are
to  make  the  most  of  the  statistical  contribution  to  business  cycles,
we  must  learn  all  that  we  can  by  studying  time  series  separately  and
studying  them  with  reference  to  all  their  characteristics;  we  must
also  learn  all  that  we  can  by  studying  them  in  combination,  or  rather
in  varying  combinations.

For  either  purpose  we  need  a  special  technique.  Whether  we  set
about  comparing  the  fluctuations  of  different  series,  or  combining
different  series  into  general  indexes,  we  must  have  some  standard
method  of  measuring  the  relationships  among  the  fluctuations.  Such
a  method  has  been  devised,  and  we  have  merely  to  note  how  care-
fully it  must  be  used.  But  attempts  to  apply  the  method  lead  us  on
to  a  subtler  problem  which  statisticians  are  but  beginning  to  grasp:
Precisely  what  relations  among  the  fluctuations  of  time  series  do  we
wish  to  measure?

1. The  Correlation  of  Time  Series  and  Its  Pitfalls.

Inspection  of  such  curves  as  are  shown  in  Charts  1  to  8  suggests
various  conclusions  regarding  their  relationships.  But  experience
has  shown  that  conclusions  reached  by  visual  study  are  strongly
biased  by  the  investigator's  personal  equation.  Everyone  is  likely
to  see  in  the  curves  what  he  looks  for,  and  not  to  see  relations  of
which  he  has  no  image  in  his  ^^mind's  eye."  Moreover,  visual  com-
parisons are  influenced  much  more  by  the  conspicuous  turning  points
in  the  curves — the  peaks  and  the  troughs — than  by  the  intermediate
segments.  Finally,  the  conclusions  yielded  by  such  comparisons  are
at  best  vague,  and  quite  incapable  of  numerical  expression.  Sta-
tisticians have  therefore  sought  some  method  of  measuring  the  rela-
tionships among  the  fluctuations  of  time  series^ — particularly  among
their  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations — which  will  be  objective,  precise,
and  which  will  allow  due  influence  to  every  segment  of  the  curves
compared.

Such  a  method  they  have  found  in  the  correlation  calculus  in-
vented by  Sir  Francis  Galton  for  the  study  of  inheritance,  developed
by  Karl  Pearson,  F.  Y.  Edgeworth,  and  G.  Udny  Yule,  and  applied
to  time  series  by  J.  Pease  Norton  and  others. The  coefficient  of


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  263

correlation  expresses  the  relationship  between  two  series  on  a  scale
which  runs  from  +  1.00  (signifying  perfect  positive  agreemefnt),
through  0  (meaning  no  agreement),  to  —  1.00  (signifying  perfect  in-
verse agreement). ^  In  adapting  this  device  to  measuring  the  rela-
tionship between  two  time  series,  the  temporal  order  of  the  items
must  of  course  be  kept — a  fact  which  renders  the  theory  of  prob-
abilities inapplicable  to  the  data  and  to  the  interpretation  of  the
results.^  Comparisons  are  made  between  the  deviations  of  each  suc-
cessive pair  of  items  from  the  arithmetic  means  of  their  respective
series.  Thus  every  item  in  each  series  has  its  influence  upon  the
result,  and  this  result  is  a  mathematically  precise  average,  unaffected
(so  far  as  the  computation  is  concerned)  by  the  personal  equation
of  the  investigator.

Yet  the  use  of  coefficients  of  correlation  does  not  substitute  mathe-
matics for  personal  judgment,  or  make  less  necessary  the  visual  study
of  charts.  Just  as  the  representative  value  of  an  arithmetic  mean
must  be  judged  by  the  distribution  of  the  array  from  which  it  is
computed,  so  the  significance  of  a  coefficient  of  correlation  must  be
judged  by  critical  study  of  the  materials  combined  in  getting  it.

This  critical  study  should  begin  with  the  original  data.  When
secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations  have  been  eliminated  in  order
to  correlate  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  two  series,  the  "fit"
of  the  two  trend  lines  requires  close  scrutiny.^  For  in  this  operation
the  correlation  coefficient  averages  the  relationship  between  two  sets
of  cyclical-irregular  deviations  from  two  trends,  and  it  will  show
close  agreement  between  the  two  sets  of  deviations  if  the  two  trend
lines  misfit  their  data  in  similar  fashion.  One  might  expect  simi-
larity in  misfits  to  be  a  rare  occurrence.  On  the  contrary,  it  happens
often,  and  the  "spurious  correlation"  it  produces  vitiates  numerous

*  Compare  Warren  M.  Persons'  chapter  on  "Correlation  of  Time  Series"  in  the
Handbook  of  Mathematical  Statistics,  edited  by  H.  L.  Rietz,  Boston,  1924,  pp.  160-165.
Directions  for  computing  coefficients  of  correlation  can  be  found  in  almost  all  recent
textbooks  of  statistics.  For  a  fuller  treatment  see  A.  A.  Tschuprow,  Grundbegriffe  und
Grundprobleme  der  Korrelationstheorie,  Leipzig  &  Berlin,  1925.

^  Hence  the  significance  of  the  "probable  error"  of  a  coefficient  of  correlation  between
two  time  series  is  not  known.  It  certainly  does  not  represent,  as  in  other  applications,  an
equal  chance  that  a  second  computation,  based  upon  a  different  samjDle,  would  deviate
from  the  coefficient  first  found  by  no  more  than  the  liihits  which  the  probable  error
sets. See  Persons,  as  above,  pp.  162-163.

'There  is,  indeed,  little  point  in  correlating  two  time  series  from  which  the  trends
have  not  been  eliminated,  except  when  both  trends  can  be  representd  by  horizontal
straight  lines.  For  the  results  will  show  primarily  the  relations  of  the  trends  theri-
selves — an  aim  which  can  be  attained  less  ambiguously  by  simpler  devices.  Compare
F.  C.  Mills,  Statistical  Methods,  New  York,  1924,  pp.  410-412.


264  BUSINESS  CYCLES

investigations  in  the  business-cycle  field.  Similar  misfits  of  trend
lines  are  especially  likely  to  occur  in  correlating

economic  series  covering  both  the  period  of  declining  prices
previous  to  1897  and  the  period  of  rising  prices  following  that
year.  Nearly  all  economic  series  dip  below  the  linear  trend  in
the  nineties  so  that  a  correlation  coefficient  between  their
deviations  would  indicate  that  fact  rather  than  the  general
correspondence  of  their  fluctuations.*

Since  there  is  seldom  an  objective  criterion  for  determining  the  good-
ness of  a  trend  line's  fit,  there  is  seldom  an  objective  criterion  for
determining  the  representative  value  of  a  coefficient  of  correlation
between  two  sets  of  deviations  from  two  trends.  All  that  correlation
coefficients  can  do  for  us  is  to  make  more  precise  the  comparisons
which  are  warranted  by  careful  study  of  the  original  data,  the  fit  of
the  trends,  and  the  character  of  the  deviations.

There  is  another  source  of  error  in  interpreting  coefficients  of
correlation  which  statisticians  are  prone  to  overlook.  The  time  rela-
tions between  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  economic  processes
may  shift  from  phase  to  phase  of  business  cycles.  For  example,  the
production  of  industrial  equipment  may  lag  behind  the  production
of  consumers^  goods  during  the  phase  of  recuperation  after  a  depres-
sion, and  yet  decline  earlier  than  the  production  of  consumers'  goods
when  prosperity  begins  to  wane.  Again,  New  York  clearings  have
usually  begun  to  decline  after  periods  of  prosperity  some  months
before  outside  clearings  drop;  in  the  opposite  phase  of  recovery  the
New  York  clearings  show  no  such  lead.^  When  such  changes  in
timing  occur,  a  coefficient  of  correlation  gives  an  average  relationship
which  not  only  has  little  significance,  but  may  actually  put  the  in-
vestigator off  a  promising  trail.  The  only  safeguard  against  being
misled  in  this  way  is  to  study  charts  with  close  attention  to  the  regu-
larity with  which  fluctuations  in  one  curve  precede  or  follow  fluctua-
tions in  the  second.  This  warning  is  needed,  because  the  chief  use
of  coefficients  of  correlation  in  business-cycle  work  has  been  to  deter-
mine the  lag  of  one  series  in  relation  to  another.^

*W.  M.  Persons,  in  Mathematical  Handbook  of  Statistics,  p.  164,  note.
''See  section  v,  2  below,  "The  Time  Sequence  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations.'*
*See  Professor  Allyn  A.  Young's  discussion  of  the  interpretation  of  correlation  co-
efficients in  his  introduction  to  Social  Consequences  of  Business  Cycles,  by  M.  B.  Hexter,
Boston  and  New  York,  1925.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  269

2. Transformations  of  Time  Series  in  the  Investigation  oJ"
Their  Relationships.

When  economists  began  to  study  time  series  they  took  the  data  in
their  original  form,  whatever  that  happened  to  be.  The  difl&culty  of
incommensurable  units — for  example  gold  production  in  million
ounces  and  bank  discount  rates  in  percentages — could  be  met  by
drawing  charts  on  which  two  arbitrarily  adjusted  scales  were  laid  off.
A  neater  shift  was  to  turn  the  original  data  into  the  form  of  "rela-
tives/' with  100  to  represent  the  values  of  both  variables  in  some
period  chosen  as  the  base.  Another  plan  was  to  chart  the  logarithms
of  the  two  series.  Still  another  was  to  drop  the  original  data  and
compare  the  percentage  differences  between  the  successive  items  in
each  series.

Once  started  upon  this  career  of  transforming  time  series  into
new  shapes  for  comparison,  statisticians  have  before  them  a  limitless
field  for  the  exercise  of  ingenuity.  They  are  beginning  to  think  of  the
original  data,  coming  to  them  in  a  shape  determined  largely  by  ad-
ministrative convenience,  as  concealing  uniformities  which  it  is  theirs
to  uncover.  With  more  emphasis  upon  statistical  technique  than
upon  rational  hypothesis,  they  are  experimenting  with  all  sorts  of
data,  recast  in  all  sorts  of  ways.  Starting  with  two  series  having  little
resemblance  in  their  original  shape,  they  can  often  transnmte  one
series  into  "something  new  and  strange,"  which  agrees  closely  with
the  other  series.  In  work  of  this  type,  they  rely  upon  the  coefficient
of  correlation  to  test  the  degree  of  relationship  between  the  successive
transformations.

Two  recent  examples  of  such  researches  may  be  cited.  (1)  Mr.
Karl  G.  Karsten  has  studied  the  relations  between  the  American  data
for  freight-car  surplus  and  shortage  and  for  interest  rates  on  60-90
day  commercial  paper  in  New  York.  Between  the  two  series  in  their
original  form  there  appeared  to  be  no  correspondence,  for  the  co-
efficient of  correlation  was  nearly  zero  (+.02).  By  making  the
freight-car  data  lag  behind  interest  rates  eight  months,  Mr.  Karsten
got  a  coefficient  of  +.402.  By  cumulating  the  deviations  of  the
freight-car  data  from  their  trend,  he  obtained  a  curve  which  gave  a
coefficient  of  +.914  when  correlated  with  the  interest  curve.  By
using  logarithms  of  interest  rates,  he  raised  the  coefficient  to  +.926,
and  by  omitting  the  nine  months,  March  to  November,  1918,  when
interest  rates  were  purposefully  kept  from  rising  above  six  per  cent,


266  BUSINESS  CYCLES

he  obtained  a  coefficient  of  +.950  between  the  cumulatives  of  car
shortages  and  the  moving  annual  averages  of  interest  rates. ^

(2)  Professor  Irving  Fisher  has  studied  the  relation  between
wholesale-price  fluctuations  in  the  United  States  and  the  volume  of
trade.  Starting  with  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  index  of  whole-
sale prices  and  Persons'  index  of  the  physical  volume  of  trade  by
months  from  August,  1915,  to  March,  1923,  he  smoothed  the  latter  by
a  moving  average,  and  found  a  correlation  coefficient  between  the  two
series  of  +.54.  Then  Fisher  turned  the  price  index  into  figures  which
showed  the  rapidity  of  change  in  prices,  gave  this  derivative  series
a  seven-months  lead  over  the  trade  index,  and  got  a  coefficient  of
+.727.  Next  he  made  an  elaborate  set  of  experiments  in  distributing
this  fixed  lag  over  varying  numbers  of  months  weighted  in  different
ways  ^'according  to  the  principles  of  probability."  He  finally  found
a  scheme  of  distributing  the  lag  which  raised  his  coefficient  to  +.941.^

These  interesting  experiments  may  be  the  beginning  of  a  long
series  of  efforts  to  obtain  high  coefficients  of  correlation  between
various  pairs  of  time  series  by  casting  them  into  new  forms.  Work
of  this  sort  is  fascinating  to  the  statistical  technician.  While  very
expensive,  because  of  the  endless  experimental  computations  required,
the  possibility  of  finding  marketable  forecasting  series  may  enable
investigators  to  secure  the  necessary  funds.  And  such  work  may
yield  results  of  theoretical  interest  as  well  as  practical  value.  But
it  may  also  lead  to  grave  mistakes,  unless  soberly  controlled.

The  proposition  may  be  ventured  that  a  competent  statistician,
with  sufficient  clerical  assistance  and  time  at  his  command,  can  take
almost  any  pair  of  time  series  for  a  given  period  and  work  them  into
forms  which  will  yield  coefficients  of  correlation  exceeding  ±.9.  It
has  long  been  known  that  a  mathematician  can  fit  a  curve  to  any
time  series  which  will  pass  through  every  point  of  the  data.  Per-
formances of  the  latter  sort  have  no  significance,  however,  unless  the
mathematically  computed  curve  continues  to  agree  with  the  data
when  projected  beyond  the  period  for  which  it  is  fitted.  So  work
of  the  sort  which  Mr.  Karsten  and  Professor  Fisher  have  shown  how
to  do  must  be  judged,  not  by  the  coefficients  of  correlation  obtained
within  the  periods  for  which  they  have  manipulated  the  data,  but  by

^See  Karl  G.  Karsten,  "The  Theory  of  Quadrature  in  Economics,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  March,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  14-29.

^Irving  Fisher,  "Our  Unstable  Dollar  and  the  So-called  Business  Cycle,"  Journal  oj
the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  179-202.  The  method
devised  for  distributing  the  lag  will  be  described  below  in  section  v,  2.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  267

the  coefficients  which  they  get  in  earlier  or  later  periods  to  which
their  formulas  may  be  applied.  Mr.  Karsten  points  out  that  his  co-
efficient of  correlation  between  adjusted  cumulatives  of  freight-car
shortage  and  the  logarithms  of  the  moving  average  of  interest  rates
sinks  from  +.95  in  1915-23  to  +.856  in  1907-14.  Similarly  Professor
Fisher  shows  that  his  coefficient  between  the  rate  of  change  in  prices
with  a  distributed  lag  and  the  physical  volume  of  trade  sinks  from
+.941  in  1915-23,  to  +.58  in  1877-99,  to  +.67  in  1903-15,  and  to
+.78  in  1923-24.^  Controlled  by  such  tests,  the  methods  of  Karsten
and  Fisher,  or  rather  an  endless  variety  of  methods  not  2ess  intricate,
may  be  applied  to  the  study  of  the  relations  amon^  time  series
ad  libitum  without  scruple — provided  investigators  are  chary  of  in-
terpreting their  coefficients  as  demonstrating  causal  connections.

This  caution  is  important.  Statisticians  know  that  such  an  aver-
age of  relationships  between  paired  items  of  two  time  series  as  the
coefficient  of  correlation  yields  does  not  prove  that  the  changes  in
one  of  the  series  produce  the  changes  in  the  second  series,  even  when
the  latter  series  has  been  made  to  lag  in  the  pairing  of  dates.  Care-
ful workers  bear  this  fact  in  mind.  Mr.  Karsten,  for  example,
though  he  obtained  a  high  coefficient  of  correlation  between  his  two
series  for  years  preceding  his  trial  period,  did  not  suggest  that  the
number  of  idle  freight  cars  is  controlled  by  interest  rates  in  New  York.
Nor  would  a  coefficient  of  correlation,  however  high,  warrant  such  an
inference,  unless  independent  evidence  of  causal  connection  could
be  adduced.  Professor  Fisher  has  reason  to  believe  that  the  rate  of
change  in  prices  influences  the  physical  volume  of  trade,  and  gives  a
causal  interpretation  to  his  results.'^  But  even  in  Professor  Fisher's
position  an  investigator  should  be  cautious.  It  is  not  unlikely  that
by  taking  equal  pains  another  worker  studying  the  relations  between
the  physical  volume  of  trade  and  (say)  reserve  ratios,  interest  rates,
profits,  or  payroll  disbursements  within  Professor  Fisher's  period
might  get  very  high  coefficients  of  correlation,  and  argue  that  he  too
had  found  "an  almost  complete  explanation  of  fluctuations  in  the
volume  of  trade,'' — or  several  "almost  complete"  explanations.^

*See  the  two  papers  cited  above,  pp.  23  (Karsten)  and  201  (Fisher).

*  Something  will  be  said  about  the  causal  relationship  later  in  the  present  chapter  (see
footnote  on  p.  286) ;  but  the  problem  will  be  treated  more  fully  in  the  second  volume.

*  Compare  Professor  Fisher's  conclusion,  "These  correlations  are  so  high  as  to  leave
little  or  no  doubt  that  changes  in  the  price  level  afford  an  almost  complete  explanation
of  fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  trade  for  the  above  period  beginning  in  1915  and
ending  in  1923.  .  .  .  With  a  correlation  of  nearly  100  per  cent  between  trade  and  pro-
jected price-change,  there  is  little  left  to  explain." As  cited  above,  p.  191.


268  BUSINESS  CYCLES

While  we  cannot  account  for  more  than  100  per  cent  of  the  varia-
tions in  one  time  series  by  any  combination  of  causal  relationships,  it
is  not  absurd  to  have  several  coefficients  of  correlation  adding  up  to
more  than  1.00  between  a  given  series  and  a  number  of  other  series
which  are  regarded  as  exercising  a  causal  influence  over  the  first.
Were  such  a  set  of  results  before  us,  we  should  have  two  quite  dif-
ferent lines  of  explanation.  The  more  obvious  explanation  is  that
the  several  variables  correlated  with  the  series  whose  fluctuations
we  are  trying  to  account  for  are  not  independent  of  each  other.  In
other  words,  the  same  causal  influences  are  represented  in  two  or
more  of  the  variables.  There  is  much  overlapping  of  this  sort  among
economic  time  series.  The  second  explanation  is  that  in  a  theo-
retically perfect  case  of  causal  explanation  by  the  joint  action  of
two  or  more  strictly  independent  factors,  the  two  or  more  coefficients
of  correlation  between  the  various  series  which  represent  causes  and
the  one  series  which  represents  effects  will  add  up  to  more  than  1.00.
Coefficients  of  correlation  are  not  percentages,  though  the  fact  that
they  run  on  a  scale  from  — 1.00  to  +  1.00  has  seemed  to  Professor
Fisher  sufficient  warrant  for  calling  them  percentages.  In  the  per-
fect case  of  exhaustive  explanation  referred  to,  it  is  not  the  several
coefficients  which  equal  1.00  but  the  sum  of  their  squares.^ In  con-

'To  illustrate  by  Fisher's  case:  Waiving  all  question  about  the  significance  of  a
relation  made  to  fit  one  period  which  does  not  maintain  itself  in  other  periods,  let  us
accept  his  coefficient  of  "94  per  cent"  between  price-change  with  a  distributed  lag  and
the  volume  of  trade  in  1915-23,  and  ask  what  part  of  the  fluctuations  in  trade  is  left
unaccounted  for.  The  answer  is  not  given  by  the  formula  100  per  cent  —  94  per  cent  =
6  per  cent;  but  by  the  formula  k'-i-r*=l,  in  which  k  stands  for  the  "coefficient  of
alienation"  and  r  for  the  coefficient  of  correlation.  The  coefficient  of  alienation  measures
the  lack  of  agreement  between  two  variables,  as  the  coefficient  of  correlation  measures
the  degrees  of  relationship.  Substituting  .94  for  r  in  the  equation,  we  get  k^  =  1  —  .8836
=  .1164,  and  k  =  .34.  Of  course,  the  coefficient  of  alienation  is  no  more  a  percentage
than  the  coefficient  of  correlation.  We  must  not  add  94  per  cent  and  34  per  cent,
concluding  that  we  have  accounted  for  128  per  cent  of  the  variability  of  trade  1  But
we  may  add  .94*  and  .34',  and  say  that  their  sum,  1.00,  represents  a  theoretically  com-
plete explanation.  If  we  insist  upon  using  a  percentage  scale  it  should  be  that  of  the
squared  coefficients:  .8836  +  .1156=  1.00.

Similarly  with  the  results  which  Professor  Fisher  gets  on  applying  his  method  of
connecting  price-change  with  volume  of  trade  in  other  periods  than  1915-23.  The
significance  of  his  correlation  of  "58  per  cent"  in  1879-99  is  to  be  judged  from  the
equation  .58*  +  .82*  =  .3364  +  .6724  =  1 ;  the  significance  of  his  correlation  of  "67  per
cent"  in  1903-15  is  to  be  judged  from  the  equation  .67*  +  .74*  =  .4489  +  .5476  =  1 ;  and
the  significance  of  his  coefficient  of  "78  per  cent"  in  1923-24  is  to  be  judged  from  the
equation  .78*  +  .63*  =  .6084  +  .3969  =  1.

Though  calling  his  coefficients  of  correlation  percentages.  Professor  Fisher  does  not
commit  the  error  of  saying  that  a  coefficient  of  "94  per  cent"  explains  all  but  6  per  cent
of  the  variations  of  the  series  which  lags;  he  says  merely  that  this  coefficient  affords
"an  almost  complete  explanation."  (See  preceding  note.)

On  the  coefficient  of  alienation  and  its  uses,  see  Truman  L.  Kelley,  Statistical
Method,  New  York,  1923,  pp.  173,  174.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  269

sidering  how  much  significance  attaches  to  a  given  coeflScient  of  cor-
relation, therefore,  one  should  take  the  square  of  that  coefficient,
rather  than  the  coefficient  itself,  as  indicating  the  degree  of  relation-
ship between  the  two  variables,  and  compare  with  it  the  square  of
the  ^^coefficient  of  alienation"  as  indicating  the  lack  of  relationship.
And  one  should  always  remember  that  coefficients  of  correlation,  how-
ever high,  do  not  suffice  to  establish  relationships  of  cause  and  effect.

3. Conclusion

All  these  cautions  about  the  interpretation  of  results  do  not  mean
that  one  should  hesitate  to  turn  any  series  into  a  form  which  will
agree  better  than  the  original  figures  with  some  variable  one  wishes
to  explain.  On  the  contrary,  search  for  relationships  which  are  hidden
by  the  form  in  which  series  happen  to  be  compiled  is  one  of  the  most
promising,  though  one  of  the  most  arduous,  lines  of  statistical  re-
search. Simple  transformations  into  relatives,  logarithms,  and  first
differences  have  long  been  practiced  with  general  approval;  more
elaborate  transformations  need  no  justification  beyond  fruitfulness.

Some  hidden  relationships  between  time  series  may  be  discovered
by  accident  or  by  strictly  empirical  work.  But  the  search  is  most
likely  to  prosper  if  guided  by  rational  hypotheses.  These  hypotheses
usually  occur  to  our  minds  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect.  What  we
know  from  non-statistical  sources  about  business  processes  may  sug-
gest that  the  activities  represented  by  one  time  series  lead  to  conse-
quences shown  by  one  or  more  other  series.  Before  plunging  into
the  computations  which  such  a  notion  suggests,  it  is  wise  to  think  out
the  hypothesis  with  care.  Precisely  what  feature  of  the  first  series
is  causally  important — the  actual  magnitudes  as  reported,  the  changes
in  these  magnitudes  from  date  to  date,  the  percentage  rates  of  change,
the  accumulated  changes,  the  excess  beyond  some  critical  range,  the
ratio  of  the  causal  factor  to  some  other  variable,  or  what?  Similarly:
upon  what  feature  of  the  series  regarded  as  showing  effects  is  the
causal  effect  exercised?  The  suggestions  just  listed  are  possible  an-
swers to  this  question  also.  Is  the  relationship  direct,  or  inverse?
Is  the  effect  immediate  or  postponed?  Is  the  effect  cumulative?  Does
the  effect  change  with  the  phases  of  business  cycles?  All  these  mat-
ters, and  in  many  cases  others,  should  be  considered.  Often  it  is
only  by  trial  computations  that  one  can  decide  the  issues  raised ;  but
they  are  best  raised  before  computations  are  begun,  and  then  thought
out  again  in  the  light  of  what  the  computations  suggest.


270  BUSINESS  CYCLES

In  judging  the  relationship  between  any  two  series,  how  low  a
coefficient  of  correlation  should  one  accept  as  "significant"?  That
is  a  question  which  statisticians  often  raise,  but  to  which  they  do
not  give  categorical  answers,  because  much  depends  upon  the  char-
acter of  the  data  and  the  purpose  in  view.  When  the  aim  is  merely
to  find  whether  two  phenomena  are  unrelated  to  each  other,  or  re-
lated in  some  degree,  interest  centers  less  in  the  absolute  size  of
the  coefficient  obtained,  than  in  its  size  compared  with  that  of  its
standard  (or  probable)  error.  Provided  a  coefficient  is  several  times
its  standard  error,  a  figure  in  the  forties,  or  even  in  the  twenties,
suffices  to  show  the  existence  of  some  relationship.  But  when  the
coefficient  of  correlation  is  used  in  estimating  the  value  of  one  variable
from  given  values  of  other  variables — the  problem  usually  met  in
correlating  time  series — a  much  higher  standard  must  be  set.  Co-
efficients ranging  from  .40  to  .50,  which  often  pleased  earher  students
of  cyclical  fluctuations,  and  even  coefficients  of  .60  to  .70,  are  not
very  imposing  when  squared,  as  they  should  be  in  thinking  about  their
significance  for  making  such  estimates.  In  many  cases  a  result  of
this  order  is  best  taken  as  a  sign  that  the  investigator  has  found  a
promising  trail,  but  is  not  close  to  his  goal.  A  reconsideration  of
the  causal  relationships  involved,  and  further  experimental  com-
putations, may  lead  to  much  higher  coefficients.  An  expert  in  re-
search  of  this  type  becomes  exacting;  Mr.  Karsten,  for  example,  re-
marks: "in  my  own  forecasting  work  I  do  not  consider  of  much  value
a  coefficient  below  .90."  ^

V. The  Amplitude  and  the  Timing  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctua-
tions in  Different  Processes.

From  the  preceding  discussion  of  methods  of  analyzing  time  series
and  their  relations  we  score  two  gains.  One  is  understanding  of  and
ability  to  use  the  results  reached  by  other  investigators.  The  second
is  guidance  in  analytic  work  of  our  own.

Anyone  who  takes  the  statistical  approach  to  business  cycles
develops  a  longing  to  assemble  all  the  pertinent  series  and  analyze
them  afresh  upon  some  consistent  plan,  which  shall  incorporate  the
best  ideas  of  his  predecessors  with  improvements  of  his  own.  But,
as  must  be  clear  by  this  time,  the  analysis  of  time  series  is  a  laborious

*  Karl  G,  Karsten,  "The  Harvard  Business  Indexes— A  New  Interpretation,"  Journal
of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  December,  1926,  vol.  xxi,  p.  409.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  271

and  expensive  process,  only  less  expensive  and  laborious  than  com-
piling the  original  data.  Moreover,  the  changes  made  in  results  by-
alterations  in  method  are  often  slight.  Hence  every  investigator  does
well  to  go  as  far  as  he  can  in  utilizing  the  results  obtained  by  others,
even  when  these  results  are  not  precisely  adapted  to  his  needs.  Limits
are  set  upon  such  borrowings  by  radical  differences  in  methods,  in
periods  covered,  and  in  data  treated.  When  he  approaches  these
limits,  the  investigator  must  give  up  the  quantitative  approach  for
the  qualitative,  or  he  must  undertake  the  heavy  burden  of  making
statistical  analyses  for  himself.

On  three  topics  of  great  interest  we  can  learn  much  by  the  simple
process  of  assembling  and  comparing  the  results  reached  by  others:
the  relative  amplitude  of  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  charac-
teristic of  different  economic  activities,  the  temporal  order  in  which
different  activities  increase  or  diminish,  and  the  way  in  which  series
differing  in  amplitude  and  timing  can  be  combined  to  throw  light  upon
the  cyclical  movement  as  a  whole.

1. The  Amplitude  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations.

While  Chart  8  makes  it  plain  that  economic  processes  differ  widely
in  the  amplitude  of  their  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations,  it  leaves  us
with  rather  vague  impressions,  and  we  want  measurements.  A  con-
siderable variety  of  such  measurements,  however,  lies  ready  to  hand.
Analytic  statisticians  often  compute  the  standard  deviations  of  the
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  their  time  series  expressed  as  per-
centages of  the  ordinates  of  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal
changes.^  These  standard  deviations  may  be  used  as  measures  of  the
average  amplitude  of  cyclical  variations  in  the  economic  processes
concerned,  if  certain  precautions  are  observed.  Technical  defects  in
the  method  of  fitting  trends  and  ascertaining  seasonals  affect  the
percentage  magnitudes  of  the  cyclical-irregular  deviations,  and  there-
fore of  their  standard  deviations.  Differences  in  the  periods  covered
also  may  influence  the  results;  for  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations
of  a  given  time  series  are  likely  to  vary  somewhat  from  decade  to
decade,  even  in  percentage  form. Still  further  doubts  are  raised  by

*The  standard  deviation  of  a  statistical  series,  conventionally  represented  by  sigma
(a),  is  computed  by  taking  the  arithmetic  mean,  finding  the  deviation  of  each  item  from
this  mean,  squaring  the  deviations,  adding  the  squares,  dividing  the  sum  by  the  number
of  items,  and  extracting  the  square  root  of  the  quotient.  All  modern  text-books  of
statistics  discuss  this  device.


272  BUSINESS  CYCLES

differences  in  the  form  of  the  original  data  analyzed,  of  which  more
presently.  But  if  we  make  a  considerable  collection  of  standard
deviations  computed  in  similar  ways  for  various  periods  and  coun-
tries, confine  our  observations  to  broad  differences,  and  avoid  some
obvious  pitfalls,  we  can  reach  conclusions  of  importance.

In  computing  the  standard  deviations  which  we  shall  borrow,
the  aim  of  statisticians  has  usually  been  to  get  similar  units  in  terms
of  which  they  can  express  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  their
time  series,  in  order  to  make  these  fluctuations  more  comparable.
Logically,  the  procedure  is  analogous  to  expressing  the  prices  of  the
different  commodities  used  in  constructing  an  index  number  as  rela-
tives of  the  actual  quotations  for  each  commodity  at  some  base  period.
Our  aim  is  different.  Several  of  the  theories  of  business  cycles  re-
viewed in  Chapter  I,  notably  those  of  Mr.  Lawrence  K.  Frank  and
Dr.  T.  W.  Mitchell,  rely  largely  upon  differences  in  the  amplitude  of
the  cychcal  fluctuations  characteristic  of  different  processes  to  explain
the  origin  or  the  propagation  of  cyclical  impulses.  Like  certain  other
features  of  time  series  which  give  trouble  to  statisticians,  these  dif-
ferences of  amplitude  may  give  help  to  the  theorist.  At  least  we  must
learn  what  we  can  about  them.

In  Table  11  there  are  assembled  several  collections  of  standard
deviations  of  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  measured  by  percentage
deviations  from  ordinates  of  secular  trend  corrected,  when  necessary,
for  seasonal  variations.  The  rather  miscellaneous  array  is  classified
first  by  countries,  secondly  by  periods,  and  thirdly  by  the  magnitude
of  the  standard  deviations  themselves.

A  glance  over  the  various  sections  of  the  table  shows  that  eco-
nomic activities  are  characterized  by  marked  differences  in  the  ampli-
tude of  their  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations.  In  part  these  differences
are  due  to  the  form  in  which  the  original  data  are  gathered.  The
most  notable  case  is  the  extreme  variability  of  employment,  which
is  represented  in  sections  H,  I  and  J  of  the  table  by  percentages  of
reporting  trade-union  membership  unemployed  at  successive  periods.
If  the  same  data  were  converted  into  percentages  employed,  the
standard  deviations  would  be  greatly  reduced.  Again,  the  standard
deviations  of  the  British  series  showing  the  market  values  of  certain
types  of  securities  outstanding  are  not  strictly  comparable  with  the
standard  deviations  of  American  series  showing  the  average  market
prices  of  similar  types  of  securities.  Once  more,  standard  deviations
computed  from  data  in  monthly,  quarterly,  and  annual  form  are  not


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  273

strictly  comparable.  Finally,  there  are  differences  of  business  usage
between  the  United  States,  Great  Britain  and  Germany  which  in-
terfere with  the  comparison  of,  say,  bank  clearings,  bank  loans,  and
discount  rates  in  the  three  countries.  Most  of  our  comparisons  must
be  limited  to  items  within  a  given  section  of  the  table.

Observing  these  restrictions  does  not  much  reduce  the  spread  of
the  standard  deviations;  for  the  differences  between  economic  proc-
esses in  the  same  country  and  period  are  much  wider  than  the  dif-
ferences between  analogous  processes  in  different  countries  and
periods.  In  several  sections  of  the  table,  the  standard  deviations  run
from  2  or  3  per  cent  of  the  ordinates  of  secular  trend  to  30,  40,  50
or  60  per  cent.  Even  in  closely  related  processes,  like  various  banking
operations,  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  the  prices  of  different  types  of
securities,  the  more  variable  series  of  cyclical  irregular  fluctuations
have  standard  deviations  which  are  two  or  three  times  the  standard
deviations  of  the  stabler  series.  This  table  is  the  statistical  justifica-
tion for  the  remark  made  in  Chapter  I,  that  we  must  conceive  of
business  cycles  as  congeries  of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  different  proc-
esses which  have  widely  different  amplitudes.

TABLE 11

Relative  Amplitude  op  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes

A. American  Series,  1860,  1862  or  1866;to  1880

Standard  deviations,  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  of  the  relative  deviations  of  the

original  data  from  lines  of  secular  trend,  corrected  when  necessary  for  seasonal  variations.

Compiled  from  the  Appendix  to  Persons,  Tuttle  and  Frickey,  "Business  and  Financial

Conditions  following  the  Civil  War  in  the  United  States,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,

Preliminary  vol.  ii,  Supplement,  July,  1920.

Standard
Deviations

Call-loan  rate  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  monthly,  1866-80. . . .  38.7

Clearings  of  the  New  York  City  banks,  monthly,  1862-80 24.8

Interest  rates  on  prime  commercial  paper,  New  York  City,  monthly,

1866-80 23.12

Interest  rates  on  prime  commercial  paper,  Boston,  monthly,  1860-80. ,  23.0

Yield  of  U.  S.  Government  6's  of  1881,  monthly,  1862-80 21.4

Price  of  ten  common  railroad  stocks,  monthly,  1866-80 18.1

Reserves  of  all  National  Banks,  5  calls  yearly,  1866-80 11.7

Ratio  of  reserves  to  deposits.  New  York  clearing-house  banks,  monthly

1866-80 9.6

Loans  and  deposits  of  all  National  Banks,  5  calls  yearly,  1866-80 8.9

Loans  of  New  York  clearing-house  banks,  monthly,  1866-80 6.85

Wholesale  price  index  (W.  C.  Mitchell),  quarterly,  1860-80 5.63


274  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE 11— Continued

Relative  Amplitude  of  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes

B. American  Series,  1903-14  or  1903-18,  by  Months
Standard  deviations,  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  of  the  relative  deviations  of  the
original  data  from  lines  of  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal  variation.

Compiled  from  articles  by  Warren  M,  Persons,  Review  of  Economic  Statistics, Pre-
liminary vol.  i,  pp.  36  and  191.

Standard
Deviations

Shares  traded  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange 49.6

Unfilled  orders  of  the  U.  S.  Steel  Corporation  (quarterly  before  1910). .  32.3

Value  of  building  permits  issued  for  20  American  cities 20.4

Bank  clearings  in  New  York  City 20.3

Interest  rates  on  60-  to  90-day  paper  in  New  York  City 19.66

Production  of  pig  iron 19.15

Interest  rates  on  4-  to  6-months  paper  in  New  York  City 16.46

Average  price  of  12  industrial  stocks 15.03

Dividend  payments  by  industrial  corporations 14.96

Number  of  business  failures  (Bradstreet's) 13.55

Imports  of  merchandise 11.91

Reserves  of  the  New  York  clearing-house  banks 10.83

Average  price  of  20  railroad  stocks 10.18

Bank  clearings  outside  of  New  York  City 8.62

Deposits  of  New  York  clearing-house  banks 8.20

Gross  earnings  of  10  leading  railroads 6.07

Loans  of  New  York  clearing-house  banks 5.37

Bradstreet's  wholesale-price  index 3.68

Interest  yield  on  10  railroad  bonds 2.82

Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  wholesale-price  index 2.60

C. American  Series,  1879-96  and  1897-1913
Standard  deviations,  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  of  the  relative  deviations  of  the
original  data  from  lines  of  secular  trend,  corrected  when  necessary  for  seasonal  variations.
From  Warren  M.  Persons,  ''An  Index  of  General  Business Conditions,  1875-1913,"
Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1927,  vol.  ix,  p.  28.

Standard  Deviations
1879-  1897-

1896  1913

New  York  bank  clearings 24.55  18.21

Interest  rates  on  prime  commercial  paper.  New  York 21.71  *  17.53  *

Pig-iron  production 19.30  15.65

Industrial  stock  prices 14.11  15.07

Bank  clearings  outside  New  York  City 12.03  7.98

Average  of  industrial  and  railroad  stock  prices 11.91  11.94

Railroad  stock  prices 10.89  10.12

Wholesale  commodity  prices  (J.  L.  Snider's  series) 7.78  3.77

Loan-deposit  ratios  of  New  York  clearing-house  banks 5.93  3.19

Loan-Hability  ratios  of  National  Banks  outside  New  York  City. 2.22  1.84

*  Computed  from  percentage  deviations  from  5  per  cent,  adjusted  for  seasonal  variations.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


275


TABLE 11— Continued

Relative  Amplitude  op  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes


D. American  National  Banking  Series,  1901-14,  by  5  "calls"  yearly

Standard  deviations  of  percentage  deviations  from  trend,  corrected  for  seasonal  varia-
tion.

From  Allyn  A.  Young,  "An  Analysis  of  Bank  Statistics  for  the  United  States,"  Review
of  Economic  Statistics,  January  and  April,  1925,  vol.  vii,  pp.  36  and  101-104.


New  York

City

Lawful  money  held 1 1 .62

Net  deposits 9.64

Investments 9.59

Individual  deposits 9.12

Loans  and  discounts . . .  6.80


Pacific  states

Southern  states ,

Western  states.

New  England  states 2.98

Eastern  states,  excluding  New  York  City
Middle  Western  states

Money  in  National  Banks

Money  in  circulation  not  in  banks


Standard  Deviations

Outside
New  York

City BostoD

San
Chicago Francisco

4.25

3.41

4.59

3.14 5.51

5.40

17.2

2.96 3.84

4.02

17.0

Individual
deposits  less

clearing-house Loans  and
exchanges discounts

Investments,
except  securities
against  notes  and
U.  S.  deposits

7.09

7.96
5.06
4.92
1.98
2.77

7.29

5.49

7.16

5.36

3.62

2.98

7.55

ity. 2.34

4.19

2.30

2.62

5.9
3.74

6.97

....

E. Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits  in  American  Cities,  by  Months,  1919-February,  1923

Standard  deviations  of  the  monthly  velocity  after  adjustment  for  seasonal  variation.
From  W.  Randolph  Burgess,  "Velocity  of  Bank  Deposits,"  Journal  of  the  American
Staiistical  Association.  June,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  p.  738.


Standard
Deviations

New  York  City 5.98

Syracuse 4.74

Albany 4.36

Boston 3.64


Standard
Deviations

Chicago 2.79

San  Francisco 2.23

Buffalo 1.79

Rochester 1.22


276  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE 11— Contimwd

Relative  Amplitude  op  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes

F.  American  Series  Showing  Volume  of  Wholesale  and  Retail  Trade  by  Months  1919-1925

Standard  deviations  of  percentage  deviations  from  secular  trends  corrected  for  seasonal
variations.

From  Simon  S.  Kuznets,  Cyclical  Fluctuations:  Retail  and  Wholesale Trade,  pp.  37,
41,  102,  114.

Standard  Deviations

Retail  Wholesale
Sales  Sales

Mail-order  houses 16.4  ....

Music-store  chains 11.8  ....

Dry  goods 11.5  16.5

Grocery-store  chains 10.6  14.4

Shoe-store  chains 9.6  18.1

Tobacco-  and  cigar-store  chains 7.9  ....

Candy-store  chains 7.9  14.7

Department  stores 6.3  15.8

Five-  and  ten-cent  store  chains 5.1

Drug-store  chains 4.4  6.2

Hardware 13.4

General  index 14.8

Series  "Deflated"  by  Dividing  Dollar  Volume  of  Sales  by  Appropriate  Index

Number  of  Prices

Standard  Deviations
Retail  Wholesale Production

Trade  Trade

Shoe-store  chains 9.9  14.6  19.3

Department  store  chains

Grocery-store  chains 4.5  7.6  10.8

Dry  Goods

Hardware

Drugs

General  index 6.7


G. British  Series,  by  Quarters,  before  1850

Standard  deviations,  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  of  the  percentage  deviations
from  the  line  of  secular  trend,  adjusted  when  necessary  for  seasonal  variations.

From  Norman  J.  Silberhng,  "British  Prices  and  British  Cycles,  1779-1850,"  Review
of  Economic  Statistics,  October,  1923,  Preliminary  vol.  v,  Supplement  2,  pp.  254-257.

Standard
Deviations

Quarterly  average  market  rate  of  discount  in  London,  best  bills,  1824-1850 30.3
General  commodity  prices  at  wholesale,  by  quarters,  1779-1850 5.3


9.9

14.6

6.3

. . .  •

4.5

7.6

13.3

. . .

10.0

. . .

5.1

I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  277


TABLE 11— Continued

Relative  Amplitude  op  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes

H. British  Series,  by  Quarters,  1903-Juiie  30,  1914

Standard  deviations  of  the  percentage  deviations  from  secular  trends.
Compiled  from  Persons,  SilberUng,  and  Berridge, "An  Index  of British Economic
Conditions,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  Prehminary  vol.  iv.  Supplement  2,  June,  1922,
p.  189.

Standard
Deviations

Stores  of  Cleveland  pig-iron  in  public  warehouses 64.8

Percentage  unemployed  in  all  trades 43.8

Discount  rate  on  3-months  paper  in  London 27.2

London  bank  clearings  on  stock-settling  days 13.3

Exports  of  iron  and  steel  (quantities) 13.2

Number  of  blast  furnaces  in  blast 8.1

Exports  of  British  produce  (values) 7.50

Imports  of  raw  materials,  excluding  cotton  (values) 7.41

Bank  clearings  in  5  provincial  cities 5.99

Sauerbeck  Statist  index  number  of  wholesale  prices  of  "all  materials" 5.68

Market  value  of  securities  yielding  variable  incomes,  Bankers'  Magazine. .  4.3

Market  value  of  selected  British  railway  ordinary  stocks 3.62

County  bank  clearings  through  London 3.34

Market  value  of  local-government  bonds 2.14


I. British  Series,  by  Years,  various  dates — 1913

Standard  deviations  of  the  percentage  deviations  from  secular  trends.
From  Dorothy  S.  Thomas,  Social  Aspects  of  the  Business  Cycle,  London,  1925,  pp.  187,
200,  203  and  211.

Standard
Deviations

Percentage  unemployed,  "all  trades,"  1860-1913 54.6

Emigrants  of  British  origin  leaving  U.  K.  for  U.  S.  A.,  1870-1913 21.3

Total  emigrants  of  British  origin  from  U.  K.,  1862-1913 19.1

Casual  pauperism,  1883-1913 10.5

Production  of  pig  iron,  U.  K.,  1865-1913 8.77

Exports  of  British  produce,  1854-1913 8.08

Sauerbeck's  index  number,  wholesale  prices  of  "all  materials,"  1854-1913. 7.40

Indoor  pauperism,  1857-1913 6.45

Provincial  bank  clearings,  1887-1913 5.25

Outdoor  pauperism,  1857-1913 4.33

Per-capita  consumption  of  spirits,  1856-1913 4.08

Per-capita  consumption  of  beer,  1856-1913 3.83

Production  of  coal,  1865-1913 3.59

Railway  freight  traffic  receipts,  1881-1913 2.69


278  BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE 11— Continued

Relative  Amplitude  op  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Processes

J. British  Series,  by  Quarters,  various  dates  to  1914

Standard  deviations  of  the  percentage  deviations  from  secular  trend  corrected for
seasonal  variations.

From  Dorothy  S.  Thomas,  unpublished  data.

Standard
Deviations

Unemployed  iron  founders,  1855-1914 60.52

Unemployment,  "all  trades,"  1887-1914 45.20

Value  of  total  exports  of  British  produce,  1855-1914 9.25

Sauerbeck's  wholesale-price  index  number,  "all  materials,"  1885-1914.  6.44

Blast  furnaces  in  blast,  1897-1914 6.30

Provincial  bank  clearings  (Manchester  and  Birmingham),  1887-1914. . .  6.03

Railway  freight  traffic  receipts,  1881-1914 3.93


K. German  series  by  Quarters  or  Months,  various  dates  to  1913-14

Standard  deviations,  arranged  in  order  of  magnitude,  of  the  percentage  deviations
from  lines  of  secular  trend  adjusted  when  necessary  for  seasonal  variations.

Compiled  from  Emerson  W.  Axe  and  Harold  M.  Fhnn,  "An  Index  of  General  Busi-
ness Conditions  for  Germany,  1898-1914,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  October,  1925,
vol.  vii,  p.  287.

Standard
Deviations

Market  discount  rates  in  Berlin,  1868-1914 27.90

Discounts  and  advances  of  the  Reichsbank,  1872-1914 10.65

Ten-commodity  price  index  of  business  cycles,  1898-1913 9.43

Index  of  stock  prices  on  the  BerHn  Bourse,  1900-1914 8.45

Receipts  from  the  Wechselstempelsteuer,  1900-1913 7.66

Value  of  commodities  imported  into  Germany,  1892-1914 7.06

German  bank  clearings,  1898-1914 6.83

German  pig-iron  production,  1882-1914 6.64

Value  of  commodities  exported  from  Germany,  1892-1914 5.53

Males  enrolled  in  employees'  insurance  plan,  1904-1913 3.32

Monthly  quotation  of  German  Reichsanleihungt  1899-1914 2.36


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  279

Proceeding  to  particulars,  we  may  set  out  certain  conclusions
which  the  figures  suggest  in  quasi-tabular  form.  Regarding  the  vol-
ume of  trade  and  production,  the  table  indicates  that

Retail  trade  shows  fluctuations  of  smaller  amplitude  than

wholesale  trade  in  the  same  commodities.
Wholesale  trade  shows  fluctuations  of  smaller  amplitude  than

production  of  the  same  commodities,  so  far  as  our  very

limited  evidence  goes.
Judged  by  bank  clearings,  the  volume  of  payments  made  in

the  great  financial  centers  is  far  more  variable  than  the  vol-
ume of  payments  made  in  smaller  towns.
The  volume  of  foreign  trade  seems  to  be  subject  to  wider

fluctuations  than  domestic  business  outside  the  financial

centers.
The  volume  of  construction  work  in  the  United  States,  as

shown  by  building  permits,  varies  about  as  much  as  New

York  clearings.

Regarding  prices  we  have  no  standard  deviations  for  retail  index
numbers,  which  would  presumably  be  small;  but  it  does  appear  that

The  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  wholesale-price  index
numbers  have  low  standard  deviations  when  many  com-
modities are  included,  and  moderate  standard  deviations
(approaching  10.0)  only  when  the  indexes  are  made  on  pur-
pose to  exhibit  cyclical  fluctuations  in  a  clear  light.  The
"general  level  of  wholesale  prices"  is  one  of  the  relatively
stable  factors  in  business,  when  monetary  systems  are  not
subject  to  grave  disturbances,  such  as  those  caused  by  paper
standards  and  great  wars.

Stock  prices  are  highly  variable  as  compared  with  wholesale
commodity  prices,  at  least  in  the  United  States.  (The  Brit-
ish and  German  materials  in  the  table  do  not  admit  of  satis-
factory comparisons  with  other  series.)

Bond  prices  are  even  more  stable  than  wholesale  commodity
prices,  if  we  exclude  the  bonds  of  debtors  whose  credit  is
doubtful.

Regarding  interest  rates  on  short  loans  in  the  financial  centers,  for
which  alone  the  table  gives  data,  we  find  that

The  standard  deviations  are  always  rather  high.^  They  range
from  16.5  to  38.7. The  London  and  Berlin  rates  in  1903-14

*It  does  not  follow  that  the  interest  rates  paid  by  most  commercial  borrowers  are
subject  to  wide  variations.  See  Carl  Snyder,  "The  Influence  of -the  Interest  Rate  on  the
Business  Cycle,"  American  Economic  Review,  December,  1925,  vol.  xv,  pp.  684-699.


280  BUSINESS  CYCLES

fluctuate  even  more  than  the  New  York  rates,  a  statistical
result  which  may  or  may  not  be  significant.


Regarding  banking  operations  we  have  relatively  full  results  for  the
National  Banks  as  a  whole,  and  by  sections  of  the  United  States.


In  all  the  operations  for  which  the  standard  deviations  of
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  have  been  computed,  the  New
York  figures  are  more  than  double  the  "outside"  figures.

As  among  different  operations,  lending  seems  to  be  the  least
variable.  The  most  variable  item  outside  New  York  is  the
volume  of  investments;  in  New  York  it  is  the  amount  of
lawful  money  held.

Another  conclusion  of  theoretical  importance  is  that  the  vol-
ume of  coin  and  paper  money  held  by  the  banks  has  larger
standard  deviations  than  the  volume  of  coin  and  paper
money  in  the  hands  of  the  public.


2. The  Time  Sequence  of  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations.

When  several  time  series  from  which  the  secular  trends  and  the
seasonal  variations  have  been  eliminated  are  plotted  by  months  one
above  another  on  the  same  time  scale  for  a  considerable  period,  the
business  cycles  of  that  period  can  usually  be  traced  in  most  if  not  all
of  the  curves.  But  it  is  highly  improbable  that  all  the  curves  will
reach  the  crests  and  troughs  of  their  successive  cycles  in  the  same
months.  As  a  rule  the  crests  and  the  troughs  of  the  various  curves
are  distributed  over  periods  of  several  months — often  over  periods  of
more  than  a  year.

Closer  inspection  shows  that  the  order  in  which  the  curves  reach
their  crests  and  decline,  or  reach  their  troughs  and  rise,  presents  that
mixture  of  uniformity  and  differences  with  which  economic  statistics
commonly  confront  us.  The  crests  of  a  given  curve  may  precede
those  of  a  second  curve  in  some  cycles  and  follow  those  of  the  latter
curve  in  other  cycles.  But  other  comparisons  show  tolerably  regular
time  relations  over  long  periods.  That  is,  the  cyclical  changes  in
certain  economic  processes  appear  to  lead  or  lag  behind  the  corre-
sponding changes  in  certain  other  economic  processes  by  intervals  of
time  which  are  fairly  constant.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  281

This  feature  of  the  behavior  of  time  series  has  been  turned  to
account  by  statisticians  interested  in  business  forecasting.  Indeed,  it
forms  the  corner-stone  of  several  forecasting  systems.  If  certain
changes  in  banking  operations  regularly  preceded  certain  other
changes  in  discount  rates  by  a  regular  interval,  the  latter  changes
could  be  foretold  as  soon  as  the  former  changes  had  been  reported.
Further,  if  an  invariable  series  of  such  time  relations  between  the
cyclical  fluctuations  of  different  economic  processes  could  be  discov-
ered, and  if  this  series  returned  upon  itself  in  the  sense  that  the  last
set  of  changes  in  one  cycle  preceded  the  first  set  of  changes  in  the
next  cycle  by  a  regular  interval,  then  business  forecasting  could  be
raised  to  a  quasi-mechanical  level.  Needless  to  say,  no  such  chain
of  events  with  links  of  unchanging  length  has  been  discovered.  Per-
haps no  statistician  has  expected  to  find  such  a  chain.  But  it  has
been  a  leading  aim  of  statistical  research  to  determine  the  time
sequence  in  which  important  series  pass  through  the  successive  phases
of  business  cycles,  to  find  cases  in  which  this  sequence  is  fairly  regular,
and  in  such  cases  to  measure  the  average  intervals  by  which  certain
series  or  groups  of  series  lead  or  lag  behind  others.

The  standard  procedure  in  studying  the  time  relationships  among
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  is  to  start  by  plotting  each  series  to  be
studied  on  a  strip  of  translucent  paper  laid  off  with  a  uniform  time
scale.  Any  one  of  these  strips  can  then  be  placed  above  any  other
and  shifted  to  right  or  left  until  that  position  is  found  which  seems
to  make  the  two  series  of  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  match  best
with  each  other.  This  matching  may  be  closest  when  the  same  dates
on  the  two  strips  are  put  together,  or  it  may  be  closest  when  one
series  is  made  to  lag  behind  the  other  by  several  months,  by  a  year,
or  even  more.  Sometimes  the  best  matching  can  be  determined  with
confidence;  sometimes  it  is  so  uncertain  that  two  trained  observers
will  differ  in  their  opinions.

To  test  the  conclusions  suggested  by  this  simple  procedure,  and
to  decide  the  doubtful  cases,  which  are  numerous,  the  statisticians
resort  to  a  more  objective  method.  They  compute  several  coefficients
of  correlation  between  two  series,  pairing  the  items  in  different  ways.
For  example,  if  visual  comparison  of  the  curves  suggests  that  the
cyclical  fluctuations  of  series  A  agree  best  with  those  of  series  B
when  A  lags  two  months  behind  B,  the  investigator  may  compute
(say)  seven  coefficients  between  the  two  series,  one  coefficient  when


282  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE 12

Time  Sequence  in  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  of  Various

Economic  Series

A. American  Series,  by  Months,  January,  1903- July,  1914

Compiled  from  Warren  M.  Persons,  ''An  Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"
Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  April,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,  pp.  129,  182.

All  the  series  included  in  each  group  have  maximum  coefficients  of  inter-correlation
when  concurrent  months  are  paired,  and  these  coefficients  are  of  significant  size.  The
coefficients  are  computed  from  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  after  elimination  of  secular
trends,  and,  when  necessary,  of  seasonal  variations.

Comparison  with
Bradstreet's  price  index
Groups  based  upon  Time  Sequence  of  Lead  or  lag Coefficient

Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  in  months of  correlation

I Series  which  precede  other  groups  in  time  sequence

Yield  of  10  railroad  bonds leads  10  —  .72

Price  of  20  railroad  stocks leads  10  +  .76

Price  of  industrial  stocks leads  10  -f  .63

II Series  which  lag  behind  Group  I  by  2-4  months

Shares  traded  in  the  N.  Y.  Stock  Exchange leads  12  +  .44

Value  of  building  permits  in  20  American  cities leads 6  -j-  .61

New  York  bank  clearings leads 6  -f-  -60

III  Series  which  lag  behind  Group  II  by  2-4  months

Production  of  pig  iron leads  2  -\-  .75

Bank  clearings  outside  of  New  York  City leads  2  -f-  .70

Imports  of  merchandise leads  2  +  .77

Business  failures leads  2  —  .67

IV  Series  which  lag  behind  Group  III  by  2-4  months

Bradstreet's  index  of  wholesale  prices concurrent  -hl.OO

Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  index  of  wholesale  prices . .  concurrent  ....

Gross  earnings  of  railroads concurrent  -f  .77

Reserves  of  New  York  City  ba,nks lags  2  —  .78

V  Series  which  lag  behind  Group  IV  by  4-6  months

Dividend  payments concurrent  -1-  .65

Loans  of  New  York  City  banks lags  4  —  .67

Rate  on  4-  to  6-months  paper lags  4  -f-  .80

the  Augusts  in  series  A  are  paired  with  the  Junes  in  series  B,  the
Septembers  in  A  with  the  Julys  in  B,  the  Octobers  with  the  Augusts,
and  so  on;  a  second  coefficient  when  the  Julys  in  A  are  paired  with
the  Junes  in  B,  etc. ;  a  third  when  the  Junes  in  A  are  paired  with  the
Junes  in  B,  etc. ;  a  fourth  pairing  Mays  in  A  with  Junes  in  B,  etc. ;  a
fifth,  sixth,  and  seventh  when  the  Septembers,  Octobers  and  Novem-
bers in  A  are  paired  successively  with  the  Junes  in  B.  When  all
these  coefficients  have  been  computed,  the  investigator  concludes  that
the  closest  time  relationship  between  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctua-
tions in  the  two  series  is  that  indicated  by  the  highest  of  the  co-


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  283

TABLE 12— Continued

Time  Sequence  in  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations  op  Various

Economic  Series

B. American  Series,  by  Months,  January,  1902,  to  December,  1908
Compiled  from  Alvin  H.  Hansen,  Cycles  of  Prosperity  and  Depression  in  the  United  States,
Great  Britain  and  Germany,  Madison,  Wisconsin,  1921,  pp.  26,  30,  33,  38,  39

Comparison  with  Series
Chosen  as  Standard
for  the  Group
Groups  based  upon  Time-Sequence  Lead  or  lag  Coefficient

of  Fluctuations  in  months  of  correlation

I Banking  Group  which  precedes  other  groups  in  timing
Cash  reserves  of  N. Y. Clearing-house  banks —

Standard concurrent  +1-000

Call-loan  rates.  New  York concurrent  — .477

Deposits  N.  Y.  Clearing-house  banks concurrent  +  .956

Loans  N.  Y.  Clearing-house  banks concurrent  +  .889

*  Commercial  paper  rates  New  York lags  3  —  .686

II Investment  Group,  lags  12  months  behind  Banking

Group

*  Prices  of  10  railroad  bonds leads  2  -f-  .808

Liabilities  of  business  failures leads  1  —  .542

Prices  of  10  investment  stocks. Standard concurrent  +1.000

Prices  of  40  common  stocks concurrent  +  .904

Shares  traded  on  New  York  Stock  Exchange concurrent  +  .580

*  Total  bank  clearings  in  the  U.  S lags  3  +  .557

*  Building  permits  in  20  American  cities lags  3  +  .482

*  Railroad  net  earnings lags  6  +  .473

III Industrial  Group,  lags  8  months  behind  Investment

Group

*  Railroad  net  earnings leads  4  +  .756

*  Unemployment  (Horn ell  Hart) leads  3  —  .719

Pig  iron  production leads  1  +  .797

Imports  of  merchandise leads  1  +  .905

Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  index  of  wholesale  prices.

Standard concurrent  +1.000

Railroad  gross  earnings concurrent  +  .857

Immigration concurrent  +  .696

*  Exports  of  merchandise lags  4  +  .758

Commercial  paper  rates  (see  Group  I)  compared

with  Industrial  Group lags  5  +  .688

*  Series  omitted  from  Group  indexes  because  of  lead  or  lag.

efficients.  If  the  coefficient  is  highest  when  the  Septembers  in  A  are
paired  with  the  Junes  in  B,  the  investigator  will  say  that  series  A
lags  behind  series  B  by  three  months;  if  the  coefficient  is  highest  when
the  Mays  in  A  are  compared  with  the  Junes  in  B,  he  will  say  that


284


BUSINESS  CYCLES


series  A  leads  series  B  by  one  month;  if  the  coefficient  is  highest
when  the  Junes  in  both  series  are  paired,  he  will  say  that  the  two
series  fluctuate  synchronously.

Table  12  shows  two  sets  of  results  reached  in  this  way  by  Pro-
fessors Warren  M.  Persons  and  Alvin  H.  Hansen.  Both  these  men
publish  the  coefficients  for  several  monthly  pairings  of  each  set  of
series,  but  only  the  maximum  coefficients  which  they  take  to  indicate
leads  or  lags  are  entered  in  the  table.  Often  the  maximum  coefficients
are  but  little  greater  than  those  for  a  somewhat  longer  or  shorter
lead  or  lag.  This  fact  raises  a  problem  which  requires  illustration
and  discussion.

A  rather  elaborate  illustration  may  be  borrowed  from  Dr.  Fred-
erick C.  Mills,  who  has  worked  out  not  less  than  twelve  coefficients
of  correlation  for  different  monthly  pairings  of  an  index  of  prices
of  industrial  stocks  and  the  index  of  ''general  business  activity"  com-
piled by  the  statistical  division  of  the  American  Telephone  and  Tele-
graph Company.  Dr.  Mills  gives  these  twelve  coefficients  for  two
separate  periods  and  shows  that  the  results  differ  considerably — a
point  to  which  we  shall  presently  recur.  The  point  of  immediate
interest  is  that  in  both  periods  the  coefficients  are  much  alike  for  no
less  than  five  different  pairings.  In  the  first  period,  with  stock  prices
leading  ''general  business"  by  3,  4,  5,  6,  and  7  months  the  coefficients


TABLE 13

Coefficients  of  Correlation  between  the  Cyclical-Irregular  Fluctuations
OF  Industrial  Stock  Prices  and  an  Index  of  "General  Business"

Based  upon  American  data,  by  Months,  1903-14,  and  1919-23
From  Frederick  C.  Mills,  Statistical  Methods,  New  York,  1924,  pp.  424  and  426

Coefficient  of


Stock  prices  concurrent  with  business  index
Stock  prices  preceding  general  business  by


1  mo. .

2  mos.

3  ",


4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11


correl
1903-14

ation

1919-23

+.55

+.75

+.65

+.83

+.70

+.87

+.73

+.88

+.76

+.85

+.76

+.82

+.76

+.77

+.74

+.72

+.71

+.66

+.67

+.57

+.61

+.46

+.54

+.33

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  285

range  between  +,73  and  +.76.  In  the  second  period,  the  coefficients
range  between  +.82  and  +.88,  when  stock  prices  lead  by  1,  2,  3,  4,
and  5  months.

Whenever  a  close  relation  like  this  is  found  between  the  co-
efficients computed  for  several  different  pairings^  the  statement  that
one  series  lags  behind  another  by  some  definite  interval,  such  as  five
months,  hardly  suggests  the  facts,  and  may  suggest  quite  false  ideas.
The  definite  lag  should  be  thought  of  as  the  central  tendency  of  an
elaborate  array  of  time  relations  between  the  fluctuations  of  two
variables.  When  we  speak  of  a  lag  of  say  five  months  we  should  ac-
custom ourselves  to  bear  in  mind  the  other  intervals  which  may  show
agreements  nearly  as  close.  And  when,  as  sometimes  happens,  the
array  of  coefficients  for  lags  of  different  length  shows  no  central
tendency,  but  varies  in  an  irregular  fashion,  we  should  be  extremely
cautious  about  saying  that  there  is  a  definite  lag.

The  importance  of  the  full  array  of  time  relations  becomes  clearer
when  we  consider  the  causal  interpretation  of  leads  and  lags.  A
theorist  in  thinking  about  the  relations  between  changes  in  the  price
and  changes  in  the  production  of  a  commodity  does  not  suppose  that
an  increase  in  prices  made  in  January  will  affect  production  in  just
one  future  month,  say  June.  On  the  contrary,  he  supposes  that  the
January  increase  will  begin  to  influence  production  policies,  and  per-
haps actual  output,  as  soon  as  it  is  announced,  which  may  be  in  ad-
vance of  the  actual  change  in  prices;  or,  rather,  as  soon  as  it  is
anticipated,  which  may  be  in  advance  of  the  announcement.  The
increase  in  prices  actually  made  in  January  may  have  influenced  pro-
duction in  the  preceding  December.  Nor  is  the  influence  of  the  price
change  upon  output  likely  to  exhaust  itself  quickly;  it  may  grow
stronger  for  several  months,  reach  a  maximum,  and  then  gradually
decline.  Conversely,  the  price  influences  upon  the  production  of  a
given  month,  say,  June,  are  not  the  result  of  changes  made  in  some
one  preceding  month,  say,  January;  but  the  net  resultant  of  price
changes  made  in  many  preceding  months,  combined  perhaps  with
price  changes  which  are  anticipated  in  the  months  to  follow — changes
which  may  not  take  place.  Finally,  the  theorist  does  not  trace  the
causal  relationship  in  one  direction  only.  He  realizes  that  production
reacts  upon  prices.  The  January  change  in  prices,  of  which  we  have
spoken,  was  probably  influenced  by  the  production  of  many  months
which  preceded,  and  by  anticipation  of  the  production  in  months  still
to  come.


286  BUSINESS  CYCLES

So  complicated  a  set  of  causal  interrelationships  can  hardly  be
followed  by  statistical  methods.  But  Professor  Irving  Fisher  has
shown  how  to  take  one  step  in  advance  by  replacing  a  fixed  lag  with  a
lag  which  is  distributed  over  many  months.  On  comparing  the  rate
of  change  from  month  to  month  in  the  wholesale-price  index  of  the
Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  with  Professor  Persons'  index  of  the
physical  volume  of  trade  from  August,  1915,  to  March,  1923,  Fisher
found  that  the  usual  methods  gave  the  highest  coefficient  of  correla-
tion (+.727)  for  a  lag  of  seven  months  in  volume  of  trade.  Six  and
eight  months,  however,  gave  coefficients  nearly  as  high  (+.719  and
+.715).  Giving  a  causal  interpretation  to  the  relation  between  price
change  and  volume  of  trade,  Fisher  conceived  the  hypothesis  that  the
effects  of  a  given  price  change  in  one  month  upon  volume  of  trade
are  distributed  over  succeeding  months  in  accordance  with  the  prob-
ability curve.  He  set  himself  to  find  out  by  experiment  just  what
probability  distribution  of  the  price  changes  over  time  gives  the  index
that  correlates  best  with  the  volume  of  trade.  As  the  result  of  many
trials,  he  concluded  that  the  best  fit  is  obtained  when  the  price
changes  are  distributed  along  a  "normal"  curve  having  a  logarithmic
time  axis,  a  mode  lagging  91/2  months  behind  the  change  in  prices,
and  "probable  error  points"  lagging  about  5  and  18  months.  When
the  price  changes  of  1915-23  were  redistributed  in  this  way,  the  co-
efficient of  correlation  between  the  new  index  and  the  volume  of  trade
index  proved  to  be  +.941.^

*  Irving  Fisher,  "Our  Unstable  Dollar  and  the  So-called  Business  Cycle,"  Journal
of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  179-203.

Our  present  concern  is  with  the  method  of  treating  lags  which  Professor  Fisher  has
devised;  not  with  the  time  relations  between  fluctuations  in  prices  and  "trade."  But
we  should  note  that  statisticians  interested  in  the  latter  problem  have  questioned  the
comparability  of  the  two  series  which  Fisher  uses,  and  the  interpretation  which  he  gives
of  the  results.

Mr.  Carl  Snyder  points  out  that  the  index  of  physical  volume  of  trade  which  Fisher
borrows  from  Persons  represents  essentially  fluctuations  in  basic  industrial  activity,  while
his  price  index  is  very  heavily  weighted  by  agricultural  prices.  That  is,  Fisher  compares
the  price  changes  of  one  list  of  commodities  with  the  trade  in  a  decidedly  different  list.

Dr.  Willford  I.  King  suggests  that  the  lag  may  be  explained  as  follows:  wholesale
prices  are  made  when  orders  are  placed  or  contracts  drawn ;  goods  are  manufactured  at  a
later  date;  shipments  and  transfers  come  later  still.  Price  indexes  are  based  upon
current  quotations.  Volume  of  trade  indexes  are  based  mainly  upon  manufacturing
output  and  deliveries.  Thus  volume-of-trade  indexes  are  "post-dated"  in  comparison
with  the  price  indexes.  If  we  could  take  both  price  and  volume-of-trade  records  at
the  same  stage  of  given  transactions — that  is,  if  we  could  take  volume  of  transactions
entered  into  at  the  time  prices  are  made,  or  if  we  could  take  the  prices  at  which  current
output  and  deliveries  are  being  made — the  relations  between  changes  in  prices  and
changes  in  volume  of  trade  might  appear  in  a  new  light.  As  matters  stand,  what  is
more  natural  than  that  the  changes  in  a  price  index  should  precede  in  date  the
changes  in  a  trade  index?  But  does  this  lead  due  to  post-dating  justify  the  conclusion
that  price  change  causes  changes  in  volume  of  trade?


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  287

As  Professor  Fisher  suggests,  the  principle  involved  in  this  study
of  time  relationship  ''would  seem  to  be  a  general  and  useful  one.''
In  practical  application  to  any  case,  however,  the  method  is  exceed-
ingly laborious  and  costly,  because  there  is  no  way  of  determining,
except  by  actual  computation,  precisely  what  form  of  the  probability
distribution  applied  to  the  curve  which  leads  will  turn  it  into  the
form  which  correlates  best  with  the  curve  which  lags.  Until  some  far
quicker  way  of  distributing  lags  is  devised,  the  method  will  have  but
limited  use.^

The  problem  still  remains  of  treating  statistically  the  influence
of  the  variable  which  lags  upon  the  variable  which  leads.  To  apply
this  remark  to  Professor  Fisher's  problem:  economic  theory  suggests
that  changes  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  react  upon  prices.  Can
this  reaction  be  demonstrated  and  measured  by  the  use  of  time
series?  So  far  as  the  writer  knows,  no  statistician  has  attacked  this
problem.  It  would  be  interesting  to  see  what  results  could  be  ob-
tained, for  example,  by  treating  the  volume-of-trade  index,  or  some
derivative  of  it,  as  the  variable  which  leads,  and  the  price-change
index,  or  some  derivative  of  it,  as  the  variable  which  lags,  pre-
sumably choosing  a  period  in  which  monetary  disturbances  were  less
extraordinary  than  in  the  years  which  Professor  Fisher  took  as  the
base  for  his  experiments.  If  a  significant  relation  were  shown  to  exist
not  only  between  price-change  and  volume  of  trade,  but  also  between
changes  in  volume  of  trade  and  subsequent  changes  in  prices,  the
statistician  would  have  come  nearer  presenting  the  complicated  rela-
tions which  the  theorist  contemplates  as  real.

Time  sequence  among  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  dif-
ferent series  is  no  more  constant  than  are  secular  trends  or  seasonal
variations. One  illustration  of  change  has  already  been  given  in

^Professor  Fisher  himself  suggests  a  "short  cut."

"By  this  method  the  influence  of  any  given  price-change  is  assumed  to  begin  at  a
maximum  immediately  (i.e.,  at  the  very  next  month  or  quarter  following  the  given
price-change),  and  then  to  taper  off  by  equal  reductions  for  each  successive  interval  of
time.  ...  By  having  only  one  parameter  to  vary  .  .  .  the  labor  is  reduced  by  at  least
four-fifths.  The  only  variable  becomes  the  number  of  months  in  which  the  influence
tapers  off  to  zero."

This  short  method  yielded  somewhat  higher  coefficients  of  correlation  than  the
long  method  in  all  cases  which  Fisher  worked  out  in  both  ways.  For  example,  in  1915-23,
the  short  method,  with  a  tapering  off  period  of  25  months,  when  compared  with  the
physical  volume  of  trade,  gave  a  coefficient  of  +.95,  against  +.94  for  the  long  method.
On  Professor  Fisher's  own  logic,  the  short  method  seems  to  be  better  as  well  as  shorter.
But,  though  taking  only  one-fifth  as  much  time  as  the  long  method,  it  is  still  laborious.

See  the  paper  referred  to  above,  p.  198,  note.


288  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Table  13.  While  the  period  covered  by  the  second  column  of  that
table  (1919-23)  is  too  brief  to  yield  final  conclusions,

The  results  indicate  that  since  the  war  the  movements  of  gen-
eral business  have  followed  more  closely  behind  stock-price
movements  than  during  the  pre-war  days.  A  maximum  cor-
relation is  secured  when  stock  prices  precede  the  business  index
by  3  months  (instead  of  4-6  months  as  in  1903-14). ^

So,  too.  Professor  Persons  found  that  the  time  sequences  shown  in
section  A  of  Table  12  were  not  maintained  in  1914-18.

The  systematic  relation  of  the  fluctuations  which  held  during
the  pre-war  period  was  shattered  by  the  outbreak  of  war.^

Apart  from  such  catastrophic  events,  the  improvement  of  communica-
tion and  transportation  speeds  up  many  effects  which  economic  proc-
esses exert  upon  each  other.  Statistically  this  quickening  means  a
gradual  reduction  of  the  intervals  by  which  certain  time  series  lag
behind  others,  as  well  as  a  shifting  of  seasonal  variations.

A  formal  discrepancy  between  the  two  parts  of  Table  12  may  have
troubled  the  reader's  mind.  According  to  Professor  Persons,  in  1903-
14  New  York  City  bank  loans  and  deposits  belonged  in  the  group  of
series  which  fluctuated  last  in  the  sequence,  while  the  reserves  of
these  banks  belonged  in  the  group  which  was  next  to  the  last.  On
the  contrary,  according  to  Professor  Hansen,  in  1902-08  these  three
banking  series  belong  in  the  group  which  preceded  all  other  groups
in  the  time  sequence.  To  reconcile  these  opposing  results  is  easy  on
the  theory  that  business  fluctuations  have  the  character  of  recurrent
cycles.  One  can  break  into  a  round  of  events  which  keeps  repeating
itself  in  time  at  any  point  and  follow  the  sequence  back  to  its  starting
point.  A  second  investigator  can  follow  the  sequence  equally  well  by
starting  where  the  first  man  stopped.  Our  two  authorities  have
merely  chosen  different  starting  points  for  their  analyses  of  time
sequence.  By  linking  Professor  Persons'  last  group  to  his  first,  one
gets  Professor  Hansen's  start;  by  linking  Hansen's  last  group  to  his
first,  one  gets  Persons'  ending.

Another  point  which  requires  notice  here  has  already  been  men-
tioned in  discussing  the  correlation  of  time  series;  ^  but  it  is  so  im-

'  Frederick  C.  Mills,  Statistical  Methods,  New  York,  1924,  p.  426.
■*  Warren M. Persons, "An Index of General Business Conditions," Review of
Economic  Statistics,  April,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,  p.  116.
"See  section  iv,  i,  above.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  289

portant  and  so  seldom  attended  to  that  repetition  is  in  order.  The
time  sequence  of  two  series  sometimes  changes  from  phase  to  phase
of  business  cycles.  For  example,  one  series  may  lead  a  second  in  re-
viving after  depression,  but  lag  behind  the  second  in  declining  after
prosperity.  In  such  cases  a  coefficient  of  correlation  computed  in  the
usual  fashion  will  conceal  in  an  average  two  opposite  sequences  which
may  be  highly  significant.  To  guard  against  such  misfortunes,  the
computation  of  coefficients  of  correlation  to  determine  time  relations
should  always  be  preceded  by  close  study  of  the  plotted  curves  to  see
whether  the  sequence  of  fluctuations  changes  during  the  cycles.  If
such  changes  do  occur  it  may  be  feasible  to  compute  separate  coef-
ficients for  the  periods  of  revival  and  recession,  of  prosperity  and
depression.

Finally,  we  should  recall  in  connection  with  the  study  of  time
sequences  what  was  said  in  the  preceding  section  about  hunting  for
the  particular  phase  of  one  economic  process  which  affects  a  second
process,  and  for  the  particular  phase  of  the  second  process  which  ex-
periences the  causal  effects  of  the  first.  Economic  theorists,  like
economic  statisticians,  have  been  prone  to  argue  from  chronological
priority  to  causal  relationship,  without  intensive  analysis  of  the  way
in  which  the  causal  influence  is  exerted.  To  illustrate  the  danger  of
drawing  hasty  conclusions:  A  decline  in  one  activity  generally  pre-
cedes, and  so  seems  to  cause,  a  decline  in  a  second  activity;  but
changes  in  the  volume  of  the  first  activity  may  be  controlled  by
changes  in  the  rate  of  growth  in  the  second.  In  that  case,  throwing
the  second  time  series  into  the  form  of  first  derivatives  will  show  that
changes  in  its  rate  of  growth  regularly  precede  the  changes  observed
in  the  first  series,  and  reverse  the  inference  concerning  cause  and
effect.  No  feature  of  business  cycles  presents  more  misleading  cues
than  does  the  apparent  chronological  order  among  the  cyclical  fluctua-
tions of  different  processes,  and  no  other  feature  requires  from  the
investigator  a  finer  blend  of  theoretical  insight  with  statistical  skill.®

*A  concrete  example  may  make  clearer  the  type  of  issues  involved  in  such  work.
Mr.  Karl  G.  Karsten's  paper,  "The  Harvard  Business  Indexes — A  New  Interpretation,"
(Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  December,  1926)  will  serve.

The  Harvard  indexes  in  question,  more  fully  described  in  the  next  section,  are
represented  by  three  curves :  Curve  A  showing  changes  in  speculation ;  Curve  B  showing
changes  in  general  business,  and  Curve  C  showing  changes  in  discount  rates.  Index  A
moves  first.  Index  B,  lagging  six  months  behind  A,  shows  a  coefficient  of  correlation
with  A  of  +.77  in  the  pre-war  period  and  of  +.73  in  the  post-war  period.  Index  C,
lagging  four  months  behind  B,  shows  a  coefficient  of  correlation  with  B  of  +.80  in
the  pre-war  period  and  (according  to  Karsten)  of  +.36  in  the  post-war  period.

Mr.  Karsten  develops  a  new  set  of  working  hypotheses  concerning  the  causal  rela-


290  BUSINESS  CYCLES


VI.  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions.

So  far  we  have  been  dealing  with  the  statistical  analysis  of  time
series  taken  one  at  a  time,  or  with  statistical  comparisons  of  time
series  taken  in  pairs.  In  ascertaining  secular  trends  and  seasonal
variations,  in  isolating  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations,  in  turning
series  into  new  forms,  and  in  computing  the  standard  deviations  of
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations,  the  investigator  treats  each  series  by
itself.  In  computing  coefiicients  of  correlation,  and  in  studying  leads
and  lags,  he  works  with  two  series  at  a  time.

The  chief  value  of  statistical  methods  and  results  for  the  theory
of  business  cycles  lies  in  these  intensive  studies  of  the  fluctuations  of
particular  processes  and  of  their  relations  to  each  other.  But  the
theorist  can  profit  also  by  a  further  stage  in  the  statistician's  program
— the  effort  to  combine  time  series  representing  different  economic
processes  into  general  indexes  of  business  conditions.  If  such  indexes
can  really  be  made,  they  should  help  to  solve  many  theoretical
problems.

To  find  what  the  indexes  of  general  business  mean,  what  they  do
and  do  not  tell  about  business  cycles,  it  is  necessary  to  examine  the

tionships  among  the  activities  represented  by  these  indexes.  (1)  He  supposes  changes
in  the  security  prices  of  Curve  A  to  be  determined  primarily  by  the  amount  of  "money"
which  in  dull  times  flows  out  of  business  into  the  stock  market  for  investment,  and
which  in  brisk  times  is  withdrawn  from  the  stock  market  for  business  use.  (2)  What
counts  in  this  causal  relationship  is  not  the  volume  of  money  flowing  into  or  out  of
the  stock  market  in  a  given  month,  but  the  fund  accumulated  in  the  stock  market  by  the
net  influx  and  efflux  of  past  months — just  as  the  amount  of  a  bank  deposit  account  is
determined  by  cumulated  withdrawals  and  deposits  over  a  period.  (3)  On  this  hy-
pothesis, the  movements  of  Index  B  should  lead  the  movements  of  Index  A,  not  lag
behind  the  latter,  as  the  Harvard  interpretation  holds.  (4)  Also,  the  causal  relation
between  general  business  and  speculation  is  inverse.  Dull  business  tends  to  produce
stock-market  activity;  active  business  to  produce  stock-market  dullness.  (5)  Discount
rates  are  controlled  by  the  cumulated  demand  for  loan  funds  from  both  general  business
and  the  securities  market.  The  volume  of  the  former  demand  exceeds  that  of  the
latter,  perhaps  by  three  to  one.

Computations  which  Mr.  Karsten  made  to  test  these  hypotheses  show  that  the
cumulation  of  Index  B,  inverted,  and  given  a  lead  of  two  and  one-half  months  over
Index  A,  yields  coefficients  of  correlation  with  A  of  +.94  in  the  pre-war  period  and  of
-f-.96  in  the  post-war  period.  Similarly,  by  cumulating  Indexes  A  and  B,  weighted
one  and  three  respectively,  Karsten  gets  an  index  which  yields  coefficients  of  +.85
and  +.94  when  correlated  with  Index  C  in  the  pre-war  and  post-war  periods.

Since  these  coefficients  are  on  a  decidedly  higher  level  than  those  obtained  by  the
Harvard  Committee  of  Economic  Research,  Mr.  Karsten  argues  that  his  interpretation
of  the  causal  and  chronological  relationships  among  the  three  Harvard  indexes  has
more  theoretical  justification  and  affords  a  better  basis  for  forecasting  than  the  Harvard
interpretation.

That  Mr.  Karsten's  results  cannot  be  regarded  as  definitely  established  until
they  have  been  subjected  to  critical  examination,  makes  his  paper  all  the  better  as  an
illustration  of  the  argument  in  the  text.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  291

leading  specimens,  beginning  with  simple  devices  and  advancing  to-
ward more  elaborate  constructions.


1.  A  Collection  of  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions.

(1)  Beveridge's  Chart  of  ^The  Pulse  of  the  Nation/'  Great  Britain,

1856-1907.

Sir  William  H.  Beveridge's  chart  of  "The  Pulse  of  the  Nation,"
made  in  1908  and  reproduced  on  the  next  page,  was  one  of  the  early
efforts  to  present  graphically  that  "remarkable  phenomenon  .  .  .
the  .  .  .  cyclical  fluctuation  of  industrial  activity.''  Seven  important
variables  are  represented: — foreign  trade,  the  bank  rate,  employment,
marriage  rate,  indoor  pauperism,  consumption  of  beer,  and  capital  of
new  companies  registered.  Sir  William  puts  the  trade-union  employ-
ment returns  in  the  central  position,  but  he  reverses  the  figures,

so  as  to  represent  an  unemployed  percentage  of  2.5  as  an  em-
ployed percentage  of  97.5  and  so  on.  Lines  drawn  through  the
successive  lowest  points  of  this  curve — 1868,  1879,  1885,  1894,
1904 — cut  it  up  into  waves  of  unequal  length,  representing  suc-
cessive industrial  cycles.  The  crest  of  each  wave  is  at  about
98;  the  depressions  are  anywhere  between  89  and  94.  The
point  of  the  chart  is  this,  that  the  same  lines  cut  up  every  one
of  the  other  curves  into  corresponding  waves.^

No  adjustments  are  practiced  upon  the  data  beyond  reducing  all  the
series,  except  the  percentage  figures,  to  a  per-capita  basis.  Of  course
there  are  differences  in  the  movements  of  the  seven  curves;  but
these  differences  are  matters  of  detail,  and  Sir  William  concludes  his
picture  of  business  cycles  by  remarking,

It  would  be  possible  to  extend  almost  indefinitely  the  .  .  .
review  of  economic  statistics  and  almost  everywhere  to  meet
the  same  familiar  phenomenon.  ...  It  is  hardly  too  much  to
say  that,  apart  from  the  death  rate,  the  only  prominent  social
and  economic  records  in  which  the  pulsation  of  the  nation's
aggregate  activities  cannot  be  traced  as  a  significant  factor,
whether  cause  or  symptom,  are  the  price  of  Consols  and  the
price  of  wheat.^

*Sir  William  H.  Beveridge,  Unemployment,  a  Problem  of  Industry,  2d  ed.,  London,
1910,  p.  41.

'The  same,  pp.  50,  51.


i1


< ^
pq  g


3

2
ft


I


1^


^ £061


f «5I


0031


;^ *68»


0681


9881


0881


CO 6Z8i


0Z8I
8981


2981
0981


"^^ T " is: "  ^-

"^v N^ - ±  L V

j^^ ^ \ > 2 ^

t  I _i^  :  _^ r--^^ ^

\ A t~ 7 / -^ ^

t u -: z  t -/- (- L

-  t 7. z 11  J. 4.

r ^ t . 4. \ ^ ^

\ \ V ^ ^  V J-

\ \ 1 ^ I \ /

1 - \ \ ^ V

5 V -S ^ ^^ ^K "^I ^

J s,._: "^ r ^^

7 : : : \:z t 1~

^ ^^ -iz :  ^^7 ^ -?

y -,^ -,^- -^ 2 -{ i-

^5 Z J ^ 2

V J Jt ^  ^ ^^ 3

^ ^ ^r  - ^  s ^^^"^

4 S "^i T 1 -x

_. _j _ I V vl--l---r--^

J. ^ J ^^ _

^^ i -.-'  - "  2 ^

7 / i-"^ ^ -i. 5-2

f \ Zt - - \ ^4

K A % \ ^_ f^

^ X S. -. 5^ L

S:--fe^ -^5.; :i 2- ^L -Zii.-

>^ 5 — ^^::  ;^^^:::--" ^:

^ ^ / ^^^ J

f X ^^ --.^^"^ ^ -

-^ -^^ t .1  t i

1 t 4I Z^ \ ^ -. ^

^  ^ / ^  -  1 ' ^ •

\ A t ^Xlv. j

^ ^^ S -.^^ ^^ -^ i

^s. s. ^^^ ^vX X

X ^ s , 54-^

I_ ..v i--lt ^I-I-." ±.:. ••••^

iz :  -5 i  ;^ :^: 3 r

--" - ^  ^^  ^' ^-^ y^^

S- ^vi ^^ C ^■'

^^ X X t ^^-S

"^-^ ^5^  "v ^^ ^-

^^» ^^ f>. >

^-'' :zl 2 y^ '

^\ 7 ^ v'"^-'^

^^ ^3 ^

^ ±^::;i.^-^ "^^

^ - ^^ X^J ^ > '"^ t

optoioi <-<o— (O <o (O r9  <si  N  fu  <M  N  (M  csj  Ki

.  ^  ,„»  g  00(0  ^w «g

«  «  .S  *■ «  a


c3 O


Is


o


02 -^
o ^ _i

^  i^^g  a

-^  tc  a;  '^  O

.tj  '-I  -(-i  "-H oC

o^  ^ o

^ ^ ^
•-« O  O) 03

mil

-M Of

^^^"^


2(2 S.f

H  9  «S


as
en


-^ .J. 5!  a

erf c3 Si JT  i-^


'^^ (D


"  g  o  ft^:3
•go  o.SS

— '  co^  O  f3
O)  ^  g  ^.^
"5-0 ;3 <D 0)

Ht3  S  S  a>


292


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  293

With  such  a  picture  before  them  and  with  such  materials  to
handle,  statisticians  wished  to  get  results  better  adapted  to  analytic
work  than  a  collection  of  separate  curves.  Index  numbers  which
reduce  the  price  fluctuations  of  many  commodities  to  a  single  series,
raised  the  question  whether  it  is  possible  to  get  a  single  curve  to
represent  business  cycles.  And  since  business  cycles  cover  but  a
few  years,  the  year  seemed  too  large  a  unit  of  measurement.

(2)  Persons'  ^^Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"  United  States,

1903-14.

By  developing  a  more  elaborate  technique.  Professor  Warren  M.
Persons  was  able  to  draw  a  simpler  chart  of  business  cycles  in  1919.
He  first  isolated  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  a  considerable
number  of  time  series  in  monthly  form  by  the  methods  described
above,  and  expressed  these  fluctuations  as  percentage  deviations  from
the  ordinates  of  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal  variations.  Since
these  deviations  presented  wide  differences  of  amplitude  from  series
to  series,  differences  which  seemed  irrelevant  for  his  purposes.  Per-
sons next  reduced  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  each  series  to
terms  of  their  standard  deviation.  Then  he  made  elaborate  studies  of
the  timing  of  the  fluctuations  of  his  various  series  expressed  in  this
form,  using  coefficients  of  correlation  to  determine  what  series  varied
concurrently,  what  series  lagged  behind  others,  and  how  long  were
the  lags.  Finally,  he  averaged  together  the  series  which  varied  con-
currently. In  this  way  Persons  reduced  thirteen  series  to  three  indexes
which  he  presented  as  "The  Index  of  General  Business  Conditions."
One  index  he  called  an  "index  of  speculation,"  the  second  "an  index
of  physical  productivity  and  commodity  prices  combined,"  the  third
"an  index  of  the  financial  situation  in  New  York."  ^

*  Warren M. Persons, "An Index of General Business Conditions," Review of
Economic  Statistics,  April,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,  pp.  111-114,
The  series  combined  to  make  the  three  curves  are  as  follows:
Index  of  speculation:  yields  of  ten  railroad  bonds,  prices  of  industrial  stocks,  prices

of  twenty  railroad  bonds,  bank  clearings  in  New  York  City.
Index  of  physical  productivity  and  commodity  prices:  pig-iron  production,  outside
clearings,  Bradstreet's  price  index,  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  price  index,  reserves
of  New  York  City  banks.
Index  of  the  financial  situation  in  New  York :  rate  on  4  to  6  months  paper,  rate  on  60
to  90  day  paper,  loans  of  New  York  City  banks,  deposits  of  New  York  City  banks.
For  the  revised  form  of  this  chart  used  for  the  post-war  period,  1919  to  date,  see
W.  L.  Crum,  "The  Interpretation  of  the  Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"  Review
of  Economic  Statistics,  Supplement,  1925,  vol.  vii,  p.  226.

Recently  Professor  Persons  has  made  a  similar  three-curve  index  which  covers  a  much
longer  period  than  his  first  one.  See  his  article,  "An  Index  of  General  Business  Condi-
tions, 1875-1913,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1927,  vol.  ix,  pp.  20-29.


294


BUSINESS  CYCLES


Although  Persons  called  his  chart  "The  Index  of  General  Business
Conditions,"  his  aim  was  less  to  picture  business  cycles  graphically,
than  to  provide  a  basis  for  forecasting  business  changes.  The  merit
of  his  index  for  this  purpose  was  that,  during  the  pre-war  period,  the
cyclical  fluctuations  of  the  index  of  speculation  systematically  pre-
ceded in  time  those  of  the  index  of  physical  productivity  and  com-
modity prices,  and  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  the  latter  index
systematically  preceded  those  of  the  index  of  financial  conditions.^

CHART  10.

Persons'  "Index  of  General  Business  Conditions."

Bi-monthly  Averages,  1903  to  June,  1914.

From  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  April,  1919,  Preliminary  vol.  i,  pp.  112-113.


1903 1904 1905 1906 1907 J908 1909 1910 1911 1912 1913 1914


(3)  The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  "Index  of
General  Business  Compared  with  Normal,''  United  States,

1877  to  date.

Later  investigators  have  used  Professor  Persons'  technique  to  com-
bine numerous  time  series  into  a  single  index  of  business  conditions.
Of  such  constructions  the  one  which  covers  the  longest  period  of
American  business  is  the  chart  of  "General  Business  Compared  with
Normal,"  1877  to  date,  made  by  the  statistical  division  of  the  Ameri-
can Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company.  In  carrying  their  chart  back
to  1877  by  months,  the  statisticians  of  the  telephone  company  had  to
use  such  data  as  they  could  find.  From  1877  to  1884  pig-iron  output
was  the  only  series  available.  In  1885,  bank  clearings  outside  New
York  City  and  blast-furnace  capacity  were  added. In  1892  Brad-

'  See  Professor  Persons'  paper,  cited  above,  p.  114.  Persons'  latest  statements  concern-
ing these  lags  are  quoted  below  in  this  section,  2,  (4)  "Forecasting  Sequences."


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  295

street's  wholesale  price  index  came  in.  Further  changes  were  made
in  1903,  1909,  1913,  1919  and  1921;  but  the  compilers  belierved  that

Variation  in  the  number  of  series  used  and  in  weights  is  of
little  importance,  since  all  the  series  move  together  in  the  busi-
ness cycle.  ^

Finally  in  April,  1922,  it  was  decided  to  drop  all  data  which  contained
a  price  factor,  and  to  add  several  series  of  recent  origin.  As  Colonel
M.  C.  Rorty  explained  in  publishing  the  chart,

...  it  includes  no  measure  of  agricultural  activity  or  retail
trade,  except  as  such  items  are  indirectly  reflected  in  freight
movements  and  bank  clearings,  and  it  includes  only  a  very
limited  list  of  non-agricultural  raw  materials.  It  is,  therefore,
primarily  a  measure  of  manufacturing  activity  and  the  physical
movements  of  commodities.  Nevertheless,  with  all  these  lim-
itations, it  represents,  perhaps,  as  serviceable  an  approach  as
can  be  made  to  a  single  ''all  purpose''  business  index.^

In  making  this  index,  secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations  were
eliminated,  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  were  expressed  as  mul-
tiples of  their  standard  deviations,  in  this  form  the  several  series
were  weighted  according  to  their  values  as  representatives  of  business
conditions,  and  weighted  totals  were  cast.

(4)  Snyder's  "Index  of  the  Volume  of  Trade,"  United  States,  1919-25.

While  the  telephone  company's  statisticians  desired  to  cover
as  long  a  period  as  is  feasible  in  their  index,  in  the  first  of  his  indexes
Mr.  Carl  Snyder  of  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York  sought
to  cover  a  brief  period  as  thoroughly  as  possible.  For  the  years  1919
to  1923  Snyder  was  able  to  find  no  less  than  56  series  in  monthly  form

^Method  of  Construction  of  "General  Business"  Curve.  American  Telephone  and
Telegraph  Company,  Office  of  the  Chief  Statistician,  New  York,  July  8,  1921,  p.  3.
(Manuscript.)

2  M.  C.  Rorty,  "The  Statistical  Control  of  Business  Activities,"  Harvard  Business
Review,  January,  1923,  vol.  i,  pp.  159,  160.  After  the  revisions  of  1922  the  items  included
in  the  index,  and  their  weights,  were  as  follows :

Weight  Weight

Pig-iron  production 20  Cotton  consumption 10

Unfilled  orders,  U.  S.  Steel  Corpora-  Activity  of  wool  machinery 10

tion 10  Paper  production 10

Freight-car  demand 10  T-umber  production 5

Car  loadings 5  T^eather  production 5

Net  freight  ton  miles 5  Power  production 5

Coal  production 5


296


BUSINESS  CYCLES


which  reflected  some  aspect  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  trade.
These  series  he  arranged  in  28  groups,  which  he  classified  in  turn
under  five  general  heads,  namely:  productive  activity,  primary  dis-
tribution, distribution  to  consumers,  general  business,  and  financial


CHART  11.

The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  Index  of  "General  Business

Compared  with  Normal."

By  Months,  1877  to  Date.


1877 '78


1902*03 '04 '05 '06 '07  '08 '09 '10  Ml *I2  -13  M^  '\5.  '16  '17  MB  '19  '20 '21  •2E'23.'24-25 '26


30


•OLD  SERIES  DISCONTINUED  FtB.  1925 .
•NEW  SERIES  JAN. 1923-DEC. 1926  OVERLAPS  OLD
»  CHANGE  IN  COMPOSITION  OF  INDEX


business.  In  working  up  his  materials,  Mr.  Snyder  divided  the  series
expressed  in  dollars  by  appropriate  index  numbers  of  prices  to  elimi-
nate the  wild  price  perturbations  of  his  period,  computed  secular
trends  and  seasonal  variations  where  necessary,  expressed  the  cyclical-
irregular  fluctuations  as  percentages  of  the  trends,  and  weighted  each
series  according  to  the  importance  of  the  element  which  it  represents


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  297

in  the  country's  trade.  He  did  not  reduce  the  percentage  deviations
from  trends  to  multiples  of  their  standard  deviations;  but  averaged
them  as  they  stood.  For  each  of  his  five  general  heads  and  for  each
of  his  28  groups  Mr.  Snyder  computed  an  index,  which  can  be  com-
pared with  his  index  for  all  of  the  series.  Chart  12  gives  his  leading
results  as  revised  and  extended  to  1925.^

(5)  Persons'  ^Tndex  of  Trade,"  United  States,  1903-25.

Valuable  for  comparison  both  with  the  American  Telephone  and
Telegraph  Company's  index,  which  covers  so  many  years,  and  with
Snyder's  index,  which  covers  so  many  processes,  is  the  'Tndex  of
Trade"  which  Warren  Persons  made  in  1923. This  series  is

designed  to  give  a  view  of  the  combined  fluctuations  of  trade,
transportation,  manufacturing  activity  and  industrial  employ-
ment in  the  United  States,  month  by  month,  since  1903.

^  Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Index  of  the  Volume  of  Trade,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statis-
tical Association,  December,  1923,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  949-963,  and  "The  Revised  Index  of
the  Volume  of  Trade,"  the  same,  September,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  397-404.

The  28  series  or  groups  of  series  included  in  the  revised  form  of  the  index  and  their
weights  are  as  follows :

Weights  Weights

Productive  Activity  Distribution  to  Consumers

Producers'  goods 9%  Department  store  sales 8%

Consumers'  goods 8  Chain  store  sales 3

Employment 6  Chain  grocery  sales 6

Motor  vehicles 2  Mail  order  sales 3

Building  permits 4  Life  insurance  written 2

Real  estate  transfers 2

29  Advertising 2

Primary  Distribution

Merchandise  car  loadings 5  26

Other  car  loadings 2

Wholesale  trade 8  Financial  Business

Exports 3  New  securities  issued 2

Imports 2  Stock  sales 2

Cereal  exports 1  Grain  sales 1

Panama  Canal 1  Cotton  sales 1

22  6


General  Business  ==

Debits  outside  N.  Y 8  100

Debits  in  N.  Y 5

Postal  receipts 1

Electrical  power 2

Series  not  pubHshed 1

17

Since  this  chapter  was  written,  Mr.  Snyder  has  assembled  in  a  book  his  various
studies  in  this  field:  Business  Cycles  and  Business  Measurements,  New  York,  1927.


CHART  12.

Carl  Snyder's  Index  of  the  Volume  op  Trade
United  States,  by  Months,  1919-April,  1925.


TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE

tmctwr  (WEJGHT  100%)

130

l^o
no
too

90

eo


A

\,

r\

J

v\/

r^

1

1

1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 t92&


II

(a)  PRIMARY  DISTRIBUTION  (GROUP  WEIGHT 2290
pcRccNT  (b)  TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE  pc«ceif?

130  I — — — 1 1 1 -^ 1 r- ,  130

120 -A 120

100 p^) .NA.  yv\ f/^ \V'./fl^  - 100

90 ^  -=: — \ — —  90

60 I 1 1 1 1 1 I 1 60


1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 I92S


130

120
,110

too

90
60
70


ra  IV

(a)  PRODUCTIVE  ACTIVITY  (group  weight  29X) (a)  DISTRIBUTION  TO  CONSUMER  (GROUP  WEIGHT  281^

(b)  TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE  (b)  TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE

130  j 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 130

120 -~ 120

(b) P^
110  --?)p;jr ■ ■.^. —  h ^^ 116

,00  fp  V  — ^^^^^  .«o

90 ^1 : ^^y^Ll , 90

eo ■■ 80

70 I  I I 1 ! 1 L 170


A

1(a)

(b)

/

V

H

1?

\

■/

k

)\/

ft

V

-7

r

^iw

\

A

r

1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 1925


W  FINANCIAL  CjROUP  weight  6%)
0>)  TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE


1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924 t92&

YI

(a)  GENERAL  BUSINESSfeROUP  weight  I710

(b)  TOTAL  VOLUME  OF  TRADE


1919 I92P 1921 1922 1923 1924 1926


1919 1920 1921 1922 1923 1924  > I92&


298


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  299

The  technical  methods  employed  are  modifications  of  those  used  in
constructing  the  three-curve  'Index  of  General  Business  Conditions."
Changes  in  the  materials  available  for  different  parts  of  his  period,
and  changes  in  economic  conditions  led  Persons  to  make  his  index  in
three  overlapping  segments,  1903-15,  1915-19,  and  1919-23.  Before
the  war  Persons  thought  it  safe  to  use  materials  containing  a  price
factor  (outside  clearings  and  values  of  imports) ;  but  from  1915  on-
ward he  excluded  all  series  expressed  in  dollars.^  Chart  13  shows  his
results.

(6)  Miss  Thomas'  Quarterly  Index  of  "British  Business  Cycles,"

1855-1914.

Indexes  of  business  cycles  similar  in  character  to  the  American
series  reviewed  above  are  available  for  Great  Britain  and  Germany.

The  British  index  made  by  Dr.  Dorothy  Swaine  Thomas,  is  a
mean  of  percentage  deviations  from  secular  trends  corrected  for  sea-
sonal variations  and  expressed  in  units  of  standard  deviations.  The
number  of  series  included  rises  from  two  in  1855-80  to  six  in  1887-96,
and  seven  in  1897  to  1914.  Chart  14  shows  the  quarterly  averages  for
the  full  60  years  covered.^

*  Warren  M.  Persons,  "An  Index  of  Trade  for  the  United  States,"  Review  of  Economic
Statistics,  April,  1923,  Preliminary  vol.  v,  pp.  71-78.
The  materials  and  methods  used  were  as  follows:

Series  used  Character  of  average

1903-15:  Bank  clearings  outside  New  York Simple  arithmetic  means  of  the  percentage
Imports  of  merchandise  deviations  from  ordinates  of  secular  trend

Gross  earnings  of  leading  railroads  corrected for seasonal variations, ex-

Production  of  pig  iron  pressed  in  terms  of  standard  deviations.

Industrial  employment  The  averages  were  multiplied  by  8.62,

the  standard  deviation  of  outside  clear-
ings.
Weights
1915-19:  Net  ton-miles  of  freight  carried  Weighted  arithmetic  means  of  percentage

by  railroads 2  deviations  from  linear  trends  corrected

Production  of  pig  iron 1  for  seasonal  variations.

Raw  cotton  consumed 1

Industrial  employment 2

Weights

1919-23:  Total  railroad  car  loadings 6 Weighted  arithmetic  means  of  percentage

Production  of  pig  iron 1  deviations  from  Unear  trends  corrected

Production  of  steel  ingots .... 1  for  seasonal  variations.

Raw  cotton  consumed 1

Industrial  employment 3

*The  series  used  are  as  follows:

Value  of  total  exports  of  British  produce,  average  of  monthly  items,  1855-1914.
Percentages  of  iron  founders  unemployed,  inverted,  1855-1914.
Railway  freight  traffic  receipts,  1881-1914.
(Continued  on  p.  302.)


PER  CENT


+  20


+  10


0


-10


-20


CHART  13.

Persons'  Index  of  Trade.
United  States,  by  Months,  1903-26.


rN

I

A

r\

V

v/

/

I

/u

\

1/

y

Y

V

*l^

f

V

'\

1/

I

903

'04

•05

•06  -0

7  '08

•09

'10

'II

'12

•13

14

PER  CENT


+  20


+  10


-10


-20


+  20


+  10


-10


-20


1915 '16 '17 '18  "19  '20  '21  '22 '23 '24 '25 '26

OVERLAPPING IND\CES  BASED  UPON  REVISED  STATISTICS


300


CHART  14.

Miss  Thomas'  Index  of  "British  Business  Cycles."
By  Quarters,  1855  to  June,  1914.


9TAN6AAD
♦  3


<f  I

0
-  I
-2

-3


1


1855-1859


1860-1864


1865-1869


1870-1874


STANDARD
OEVIATIONJ
•t-3


+2
+  1
0
-I
-2
-3


1875-1879


1880-1884


1885-1889


1890-1894


+  3


+  2


•f  I


-2


J

\

/\

kY

\

/"  \

„./\

r^

, \ rvv X

1

W

■  .  .  .

1 1 — 1 — 1 —

III!

1 1 1 1

1895-1899  1900-1904

«  CHAN6LIN  COMPOSITION  or  CURVE


1905-1909


1910  -  1914


♦  3


t2


+  1


-I


-2


-3


301


302  BUSINESS  CYCLES

(7)  Axe  and  Flinn's  ^Index  of  General  Business  Conditions  for  Ger-
many, 1898-1914/^

This  is  a  three-curve  index,  covering  the  years  1898  to  June,  1914,
bi-monthly,  corresponding  in  character  to  Persons'  ^' Index  of  General
Business  Conditions  in  the  United  States"  (number  2  above).  It  was
made  by  Emerson  Wirt  Axe  and  Harold  M.  Flinn  from  nine  series
chosen  to  represent  the  fluctuations  of  '^speculation,"  ^'business,"  and
"money."  The  results  are  averages  of  percentage  deviations  from
secular  trends  corrected  for  seasonal  variations  and  expressed  in
units  of  standard  deviations.  In  time  sequence  the  speculation  index
precedes  the  business  index,  and  the  latter  precedes  the  money-mar-
ket index — relations  corresponding  to  those  found  by  Persons  in
America.^ The  three  curves  are  shown  in  Chart  15.

(8)  Annual  Indexes  of  Business  Cycles.

In  addition  to  the  monthly,  bi-monthly,  and  quarterly  indexes  of
business  cycles  made  by  averaging  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations
of  more  or  less  numerous  series,  several  indexes  have  been  made  by
similar  methods  from  annual  data.  The  most  valuable  of  these  series
are:

Sauerbeck's  wholesale  price  index,  "all  materials,"  1885-1914.

Provincial  bank  clearings,  Manchester  and  Birmingham,  1887-1914.

Percentage  unemployed, — "all  trades,"  1887-1914.

Blast  furnaces  in  blast,  averages  of  monthly  items,  1897-1914.

Dr.  Thomas  kindly  put  her  quarterly  index  at  the  disposal  of  the  National  Bureau
in  advance  of  its  publication.  ("An  Index  of  British  Business  Cycles,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  March,  1926,  vol.  xxi,  pp.  60-63).  A  chart  of  all
the  seven  series  which  compose  the  index  forms  the  frontispiece  of  her  Social  Aspects
of  the  Business  Cycle,  London,  1925.

Another  "Index  of  British  Economic  Conditions,"  covering  the  years  1902-14  by
quarters,  has  been  made  by  W.  M.  Persons,  Norman  J.  Silberling,  and  W.  A.  Berridge.
It  is  a  three-curve  construction,  corresponding  to  number  2  above  and  to  number  7
below.  See  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  Preliminary  vol.  iv,  Supplement,  June,
1922,  pp.  158-189.

*  Emerson  Wirt  Axe  and  Harold  M.  Flinn,  "An  Index  of  General  Business  Condi-
tions for  Germany,  1898-1914,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  October,  1925,  vol.  vii,
pp.  263-287.

The  series  used  in  making  the  three  curves  of  the  index  are :

Speculation: Industrial  stock  prices.

Business:  10-commodity  price  index,  averaged  with  a  volume  of  business  index,

made  from  the  following  series:

Pig-iron  production.

Domestic-bill  tax  receipts.

Value  of  merchandise  exports.

Value  of  merchandise  imports.
Money:  Berlin  open-market  discount  rates.

Discounts  and  advances  of  the  Reichsbank.

Bond  prices.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


303


CHART  15.

Axe  and  Flinn's  "Index  op  General  Business  Conditions  for  Germany."

I.

The  Adjusted  Index  of  German  Economic  Conditions,  A — Speculation,  B — Business,
and  C— Money:  Bi-Monthly,  1898-1914.


STANDARD
DEVIATIONS

+3


42

+  1
0
-I
-2
-3


(Cycles).


A

\

^-sF

ECUl

.ATK

t

^  1

^■^

10NE

Y

\

H

/r

\

/
1

1

/\

\

•

/

r

■^

Ay

\

>C^

'A  '

%

v

"»..'  ■■

'A

^

r>i

H>

-JX

7 \ '  '

>

i

V

/B-

3USI  gES^

\

1898  *99  1900 '01 '02  '03  '04  '05  '06  '07  *08  '09  MO 'II '12 '13  '14


STANDARD
DtVIATlONS

+  3


+  2
+  1
0
-I
-2
-3


II.

Volume  of  Business  Activity:  Monthly,  1898-1914.


STANDARD
DEVIATIONS

STANDARD
DEVIATIONS

+3

- +0

+2

K,

(

.  /

^

,1

- <f  1

+  1

^1

'N

A

/

V

\

A*

^A/

k/^

A>

\^.

n

O
1

^

\

/^

^

\/\

r

\

r

^'VV

^

V^

-  —  1

-  1

_0

T

X^

f

-  -o

-2
-3

1898

•99

1900

'01

'02

'03

'04

'05

'06

•07

'08

'09

'10

'M

'12

•13  -\i

t-2

An  index  of  business  cycles  in  the  United  States,  1870-1920,
compiled  by  William  F.  Ogburn  and  Dorothy  S.  Thomas.
Based  upon  9  series.

An  index  of  business  cycles  in  Great  Britain,  1854-1913,  com-
piled by  Dorothy  S.  Thomas. Based  upon  7  series.

"Industrial  Composites"  for  Great  Britain,  Germany  and
Italy,  1870-1913,  compiled  by  Harry  Jerome.  Based  upon
5,  4  and  2  series  respectively.^

*For  detailed  methods  of  construction  and  results  see  Ogburn  and  Thomas,  "The
Influence  of  the  Business  Cycle  on  Certain  Social  Conditions,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  September,  1922,  vol.  xviii,  pp.  324-340,  Reprinted,
without  the  tables,  in  the  book  next  cited,  pp.  53-77.  Thomas,  Social  Aspects  of  the
Business  Cycle,  London,  1925,  pp.  12-19,  and  166-188.  Jerome,  Migration  and  Business
Cycles,  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,  New  York,  1926,  p.  175.


304  BUSINESS  CYCLES

While  annual  indexes  are  well  adapted  to  certain  uses,  and  while
they  may  be  employed  in  business-cycle  work  when  data  for  briefer
intervals  cannot  be  had,  they  frequently  give  misleading  indications
of  the  trend  of  developments.  When  business  activity  declines  rap-
idly in  one  year  from  a  high  to  a  low  point,  and  recuperates  less
rapidly  in  the  next  year,  annual  averages  may  betray  an  investigator
into  thinking  of  the  first  year  as  fairly  prosperous  and  the  second
year  as  very  dull.  Thus  cychcal  fluctuations  get  not  merely  obscured
but  actually  distorted  in  the  annual  indexes.  And  of  course  no  satis-
factory measurement  of  periods  so  short  as  business  cycles  can  be
made  with  a  unit  so  large  as  12  months.  Hence  the  annual  business
indexes  may  be  passed  by  without  more  ado.


(9)  Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business,"  United  States,  1875-1924.

There  remain  the  "single-factor"  indexes,  that  is,  the  indexes
made  by  treating  some  time  series  showing  the  fluctuations  of  an
economic  process  which  is  affected  by  so  many  types  of  business
activity  as  to  become  itself  more  or  less  representative  of  the  general
trend.  The  statistical  case  for  accepting  such  an  index  has  been
presented  by  Mr.  Carl  Snyder.

After  making  his  comprehensive  "Index  of  the  Physical  Volume
of  Trade"  in  1919-23  (number  4  above),  Snyder  sought  some  method
of  getting  comparable  results  for  earlier  years.  He  thought  that  the
record  of  bank  clearings  outside  of  New  York,  which  can  be  followed
by  months  back  to  1875,  might  serve  as  a  basis,  provided  he  could
eliminate  the  influence  of  price  fluctuations.  Of  course  the  volume
of  clearings  is  affected  by  changes  in  the  prices  of  all  the  goods  men
pay  for  in  checks — commodities  at  wholesale  and  retail,  securities,
real  estate,  labor,  and  so  on.  For  the  chief  categories  of  prices,  Mr.
Snyder  could  find,  or  make,  fairly  good  index  numbers.  The  prob-
lem was  how  to  weight  the  several  indexes  so  that  they  would  yield
an  index  of  "the  general  price  level,"  which  could  be  used  to  trans-
form clearings  into  a  record  of  changes  in  the  physical  volume  of
goods  exchanged.  His  criterion  was  that  the  best  scheme  of  weights
would  be  the  one  which,  when  applied  to  "outside  debits,"  would
yield  the  curve  agreeing  most  closely  with  his  comprehensive  index
of  trade  in  1919-23.  After  much  experimenting,  he  concluded  that
the  best  results  were  given  by  weighting  his  index  of  commodity
prices  at  wholesale  by  2,  his  "composite  of  wage  payments"  by  3.5,


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  305

his  series  showing  ^'elements  in  the  cost  of  living'^  by  3.5,  his  index
of  rents  by  1,  and  by  omitting  security  prices.^

Finding  that  "outside  debits"  divided  by  an  "index  of  the  general
price  level,"  made  on  this  plan,  gave  a  curve  which  agreed  closely
with  the  "index  of  the  volume  of  trade"  in  1919-23,  Mr.  Snyder  felt
justified  in  switching  from  "outside  debits"  to  "outside  clearings,"  and
carrying  his  computations  backward  for  45  years.  The  construction
of  the  index  of  the  general  price  level  by  months  for  so  long  a  period
involved  a  bold  use  of  scanty  data.  Even  wholesale  price  indexes
are  not  available  on  a  monthly  basis  before  1900,  and  the  records  of
living  costs,  wages,  salaries,  and  rents  are  meager  indeed.  But  Mr.
Snyder  drove  through  his  computations  with  the  best  materials  he
could  gather,  interpolated  freely,  and  published  his  index  for  every
month  from  1875  to  1924.^

With  his  price  index  in  hand,  Snyder  compiled  the  record  of  out-
side clearings  from  The  Public  and  the  Commercial  and  Financial
Chronicle,  and  divided  the  total  for  each  month  by  the  corresponding
item  in  the  price  index.  To  the  resulting  series,  which  he  interpreted
as  showing  fluctuations  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade,  he  fitted  a
parabolic  trend.  The  percentage  deviations  from  the  trend,  cor-
rected for  seasonal  variations,  and  smoothed  by  a  three-months  mov-
ing average,  constitute  the  "Clearings  Index  of  Business,"  which  is
presented  in  Chart  16.^

(10)  Frickey's  Index  of  Outside  Clearings,  United  States,  1875-1914.

On  the  same  chart  is  presented  a  second  index  of  outside  clearings
made  upon  a  different  plan  by  Mr.  Edwin  Frickey.  Believing  that,  in
the  period  before  1903,  the  introduction  of  new  clearing  houses  at
irregular  dates  appreciably  distorted  the  series,  Frickey  decided  to
base  his  index  upon  the  clearings  in  seven  cities  for  which  substan-
tially complete  figures  can  be  had  monthly  since  1875,  and  which  in
the  test  period  1903-14  give  totals  agreeing  closely  in  their  cyclical-
irregular  fluctuations  with  the  aggregates  for  all  clearing  houses  out-
side of  New  York.  The  cities  selected  are  Baltimore,  Chicago,  Cin-
cinnati,  Cleveland, Philadelphia, Pittsburgh, and San Francisco.

*  It  may  be  noted  that  these  weights  differ  widely  from  those  which  our  data
concerning  the  volume  of  wholesale  and  retail  trade,  and  wage  payments  would
suggest. See  Chapter  II,  section  v.

^  Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Index  of  the  General  Price  Level  from  1875,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  189-195.

*  Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Clearings  Index  of  Business  for  Fifty  Years,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  September,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  329-335.


CHART  16.

Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business"  and  Frickby's  "Index  of  Outside  Clearings."

United  States,  by  Months,  1875-1926  and  1875-1914.


1076


1680


1695


130


100


60


ft

B-C

\

LEA

RIN(

SIN

)EX

)FB

JSIN

ESS

>

/

""'\

fi

i

4

-1

J?

1

J

\

,f»

kH/^

^

/
'••■■

V-t

/I

• •

\

!-.-'

V

/^^

1

\

V

'

Ix

1

\

f\

'i

■^

\

/

<)

\

■'

^Rl^

GS-

A-.lh

JUL)

0\

JUI

ilDL

CLt.

145


130


120


no


100


so


60


70


)9QI


1921


1926


A — Frickey's  "Index  of  Outside  Clearings"  (Aggregate  Bank  Clearings  for  7  Selected
Cities) :  Relatives  to  ordinates  of  trend,  adjusted  for  seasonal  variations.

B — Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business"  (Bank  Clearings  Outside  New  York  City,
1875-1918;  Debits  Outside  New  York  City,  1919-1926):  Three-months'  moving
averages  of  relatives  to  ordinates  of  trend,  adjusted  for  seasonal  variations  and
price  changes.

*  Change  in  composition  of  index.


306


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  307

Casting  up  their  total  clearings  each  month,  Mr.  Frickey  fitted  a  line
of  secular  trend,  made  corrections  for  seasonal  variations,  and  found
the  percentage  deviations  from  the  moving  base  thus  obtained.  Un-
like Mr.  Snyder,  he  attempted  no  correction  for  changes  in  prices;
but  broke  off  his  index  in  1914,  just  before  the  great  price  revolution
began.*

(11)  Snyder^s  "Index  of  Deposits  Activity,''  United  States,  1875-1924.

From  data  collected  by  the  Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,
Dr.  W.  Randolph  Burgess  showed  that  the  rate  of  turnover  of  bank
deposits  in  eight  reporting  cities  is  subject  to  a  wide  cyclical  swing.^
A  comparison  of  the  individual  deposits  in  about  760  banks  belong-
ing to  the  Federal  Reserve  System  with  clearings  in  141  leading  cen-
ters confirmed  this  conclusion.  Further,  the  fluctuations  in  the  turn-
over rate  of  the  deposits  in  these  banks,  duly  adjusted,  agreed  closely
with  the  fluctuations  of  Snyder's  comprehensive  index  of  the  physical
volume  of  trade  in  1919-23.

These  facts  suggested  to  Mr.  Snyder  that  the  velocity  of  bank
deposits  constitutes  another  index  of  business  conditions,  an  index
which  he  determined  to  carry  back  by  months  to  1875  as  a  check
upon  his  Clearings  Index.  As  data  Snyder  used  the  total  bank  clear-
ings of  the  country,  and  the  individual  deposits  of  all  National  Banks,
The  latter  figures  are  given  at  slightly  irregular  intervals  five  (now
four)  times  a  year.  Resorting  to  interpolation,  Mr.  Snyder  made
up  a  table  of  individual  deposits  by  months,  divided  these  figures  by
monthly  clearings,  used  seven-year  moving  averages  as  a  trend,  found
the  percentage  deviations  of  his  ratios  from  this  trend,  corrected  the
percentages  for  seasonal  variations,  and  finally  smoothed  his  curve
by  three-months  moving  averages.  Thus  he  got  an  "Index  of  De-
posits Activity,"  which  he  thought  showed  a  gratifying  correspondence
with  his  Clearings  Index. The  two  curves  are  compared  in  Chart  17.^

2.  A  Critique  of  the  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions.

Before  making  use  of  the  indexes  assembled  in  the  preceding  sec-
tion, we  must  examine  them  critically.

^  Edwin  Frickey,  "Bank  Clearings  Outside  New  York  City,  1875-1914,"  Review  of
Economic  Statistics,  October,  1925,  vol.  vii,  pp.  252-262.

*See  above.  Chapter  II,  section  iv,  4.

'Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Index  of  Business  Activity,"  Journal  of  the  American
Statistical  Association,  March,  1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  36-41,  and  "Deposits  Activity  as  a
Measure  of  Business  Activity,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  October,  1924,  vol.  vi,
pp.  253-259.


CHART  17.

Snyder's  "Index  of  Deposits  Activity"  Compared  with  His  "Clearings  Index  op

Business."

United  States,  by  Months,  1875-1926.


lezs^


1900


140


1

(1-

\/b

\'f

-cu

T^Rl

JG.

IKJDE

X0(

BU

JINE

ss

A

K

M^

k

A

V

yw

1

/^

I,

\h

R/V

ii*

/

In

.V

s\'

7

V

]

"1

i

'/

r —

1/

^

s

V^

//
1  /

3

1/

/^

^d

A)

I

1

/

i.

V

r"

lOEX

OF

)EPC

)SIT

5  AC

TIVI

rv

70
'  )90l


I  no


100


1926


70


A — Index  ot  Deposits  Activity:  three-months'  moving  averages  adjusted  for  seasonal
variations  and  moving  average  trend.

B — Clearings  Index  of  Business  (bank  clearings  outside  New  York  City,  1875-1918;
debits  outside  New  York  City,  1919-1926) :  three-months'  moving  averages
of  deviations  from  trend,  adjusted  for  seasonal  variations  and  price  changes.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  309

At  the  outset,  it  should  be  noted  that  none  of  the  indexes  give,  or
are  meant  to  give,  an  adequate  picture  of  business  cycles.  For,  as
has  been  said  several  times,  business  cycles  are  congeries  of  cyclical
fluctuations  in  a  large  number  of  economic  activities,  fluctuations
which  differ  widely  in  amplitude  and  considerably  in  timing.  Such
intricate  phenomena  cannot  be  presented  adequately  by  any  simple
device.  A  real  chart  of  one  business  cycle  would  be  a  hopelessly
complex  tangle  of  hundreds  of  curves.  Doubtless  the  shading  pro-
duced in  such  a  chart  by  the  concentration  of  lines  in  certain  areas  and
their  dispersion  in  others  would  give  an  interesting  total  effect.  A
faint  impression  of  this  effect  may  be  gathered  by  plotting  on  a  large
ccale  for  one  cycle  the  27  series,  or  groups  of  series,  which  Mr.  Carl
Snyder  uses  in  the  construction  of  his  volume-of-trade  index.

Anyone  who  dwells  upon  the  intricacies  of  Chart  18,  made  in  this
way,  will  grant  not  only  that  the  business  indexes  fail  to  picture  busi-
ness cycles,  but  also  that  faithful  pictures  would  be  of  doubtful  value.
In  dealing  with  price  fluctuations  we  have  learned  to  use  index  num-
bers which  represent  in  a  single  time  series  the  net  resultants  of  very
many  dissimilar  changes.  These  price  indexes  are  far  from  adequate
to  show  all  we  need  to  know  about  price  fluctuations;  but  they  are
an  indispensable  tool  even  to  those  investigators  who  are  beginning
to  go  back  of  them  in  order  to  study  the  successive  arrays  of  price
changes  which  the  index  numbers  condense  into  a  single  set  of
averages.  Business  fluctuations  are  far  more  complicated  than  price
fluctuations ;  for  they  include  the  latter  as  just  one  strand  interwoven
with  fluctuations  in  employment,  incomes,  consumption,  production,
transportation,  commerce,  and  finance.  Precisely  because  the  full
facts  are  so  complicated,  we  need  a  device,  or  devices,  for  showing
simply  the  general  drift  of  all  the  changes.  Such  "indexes  of  general
business  conditions"  may  mislead  us,  of  course,  just  as  price  indexes
may  mislead  the  unwary;  but  they  may  also  prove  a  most  useful
instrument  for  gaining  clear  insights,  if  we  remember  their  limitations.
They  will  not  enable  us  to  dispense  with  more  elaborate  studies  of
the  interrelationships  among  particular  series,  but  they  should  sup-
plement and  summarize  what  we  can  learn  by  more  intensive  analysis.

Do  the  existing  indexes  meet  our  need?  Do  they  show  the  general
drift  of  business  cycles  accurately? How  can  they  be  improved?

It  may  seem  that  the  neatest  way  to  treat  indexes  of  business
conditions  is  to  define  the  purpose  they  serve,  to  show  what  ma-
terials and  methods  are  appropriate  to  that  purpose,  and  to  evaluate


CHART  18.

One  Business  Cycle,  United  States,  1919-21,  Shown  by  a  Plot  of  27  of  Its

Components.

Twelve  of  the  Components  Used  in  Snyder's  Volume-of-Trade Index  to  Represent
Productive  Activity  and  Primary  Distribution.


280


240


200


160


240


120


PRODUCTIVE  activity:

(I)  PRODUCERS' GOODS WCIOHT  9%

(2)-=— =^=CONSUMERS'  GOODS •  6

(3) EMPLOYMENT  •  6

(4) MOTOR  VEHICLES  «  2

(5) BUILDING  PERMITS -  4


1920 1921

PRIMARY  DISTRIBUTION:

(6)— MDSE.CAR  LOADINGS  WtlCMT  St

(7) OTHER  CAR  LOADINGS

• 2

(6) WHOLESALE  TRADE

(9) EXPORTS

,10) IMPORTS

1  1  l) CEREAL  EXPORTS

310


CHART  18  (Continued).

One  Business  Cycle,  United  States, 1919-1921,  Shown  by  a  Plot  op  27  op  Its

Components.

Fifteen  of  the  Components  Used  in  Snyder's  Volume-of-Trade  Index  to  Represent
Distribution  to  Consumers,  Finance,  and  General  Business.


HBO-


*»o-


200-


•zeo


-240


M I M I M 1 I I M I I I M M M I

JAN  JULY  JAN.  J^/L»

(919  1920


M M I I I I I t

JOLT

1921


DISTPIBUTION  TO  CONSUMER:

(l  3)-  ..  --DEPARTMENT  STORES  WtlOMT  e%

04j CHAIN  STORES  • 3

(is) CHAIN  GROCERIES  • 6

(l6) MAILORDER  • 3

0  7) LIFE  INSURANCE  • 2

0  e) REAL  ESTATE  TRANSFERS  «  2

(19) ADVERTISING  • 2


FINANCIAL'

— NEW  SC0UWTIC5 WCIOHT 7%
—STOCK  SALES  •  2

--GRAIN  SALES  •  I

(23) COTTON  SALES  •  I

GENERAL  BUSINESS;*  ■

(24)  DEBITS  OUTSIDE  N.r.C  WCICNT  6%

(25) DEBITS  N.r.C.  •• i

(26) POSTAL  RECEIPTS  • I

(27) ELECTRICAL  POWER • Z

pMC  or  THC  SCRICS  )N  THIS  eOOUP  (WCIOHT  t%)  UN«VAIL«akC


311


312  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  existing  indexes  by  the  canons  thus  provided.  But  that  procedure
assumes  some  single  purpose  to  be  served  by  business-cycle  indexes,
a  purpose  so  definite  that  it  dictates  an  ideal  set  of  materials  and  an
ideal  set  of  methods.  This  assumption  is  no  more  valid  in  our  field
than  in  the  better-explored  field  of  wholesale-price  indexes.  Cer-
tainly the  purposes  for  which  the  statisticians  whose  indexes  we  have
reviewed  designed  their  series  were  not  all  the  same,  and  certainly
there  is  a  use  to  which  every  one  of  their  series  can  be  put.

We  can  accomphsh  more  by  reversing  the  procedure.  Instead  of
starting  with  some  single  purpose  to  be  served  and  criticizing  the
existing  indexes  for  their  ill  adaptation  to  this  use,  we  shall  start
with  the  materials  and  methods  employed  in  making  the  existing
indexes,  and  consider  what  the  results  mean  and  to  what  uses  they  may
be  put.  Constructive  suggestions  of  practical  value  in  future  work
are  more  likely  to  come  out  of  a  discussion  which  regards  divergent
purposes  and  limited  data  than  out  of  a  speculation  spun  from  some
definition.

Round  the  technique  of  making  index  numbers  of  prices  an  ex-
tensive literature  has  grown  up.  This  literature  warns  us  that  we
are  entering  a  field  where  none  but  statistical  experts  feel  comfort-
able. On  the  making  of  business  indexes  there  has  been  but  little
critical  discussion  so  far,  unless  we  put  under  that  head  the  pre-
liminary processes  of  eliminating  secular  trends  and  seasonal  varia-
tions. Our  problem  stands  now  much  as  the  price-index  problem
stood  in  Jevons'  youth.  Having  little  to  guide  me,  I  cannot  go  far,
and  I  may  readily  go  wrong.

The  chief  conclusion  to  which  analysis  leads  is  that  the  various
methods  used  in  making  indexes  of  business  conditions  produce,  not
rival  measures  of  the  same  variable,  but  indexes  of  different  variables.
If  we  can  become  clear  just  what  the  variable  is  which  each  index
relates  to,  we  can  tell  for  what  uses  the  several  indexes  are  adapted.

(1)  Indexes  of  the  Pecuniary  Volume  of  Business.

Of  the  variables  to  which  the  indexes  relate,  the  most  compre-
hensive, and  yet  the  simplest,  is  the  pecuniary  volume  of  business
transactions.  We  conceive  of  it  as  the  aggregate  made  up  of  all  the
values  exchanged  in  a  country  month  by  month — not  merely  com-
modities in  the  usual  sense,  but  also  real  estate,  securities,  funds


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  313

loaned  and  repaid,  interest,  rents,  services  of  all  sorts  from  manual
labor  to  professional  advice,  transportation,  storage,  publicity — to
repeat,  every  good  exchanged  for  a  price,  counted  at  every  exchange.

The  only  measure  of  this  variable  is  its  own  aggregate  value.  In
the  United  States  we  now  have  data  which  enable  us  to  fix  the  order
of  magnitude  attained  by  the  dollar  volume  of  payments,  and  even
to  venture  rough  estimates  of  how  many  billions  it  comes  to.  Such
estimates,  indeed,  have  already  been  given  on  an  annual  basis  in
Chapter  11.^

To  these  rough  estimates  we  might  add  a  monthly  index  of
changes  in  the  dollar  volume  of  payments,  built  up  from  series  show-
ing bank  debits,  retail  sales,  payroll  disbursements,  amusement  re-
ceipts, and  the  like.  We  could  argue  that  such  series,  when  properly
selected  and  combined  with  an  eye  to  their  relative  importance  and  to
overlaps,  give  partial  totals  whose  monthly  variations  probably  rep-
resent approximately  the  variations  in  the  aggregate  volume.

If  we  felt  sufficient  confidence  in  the  figures  to  elaborate  still
further,  we  might  tie  the  monthly  index  to  the  annual  estimates  of
the  aggregate  volume  of  payments,  and  say  that  we  were  approxi-
mating the  monthly  aggregates.  Finally,  we  might  eliminate  the
secular  trend  and  seasonal  variations  of  our  series,  if  we  had  data  for
a  sufficient  period,  and  present  the  results  in  billions  of  dollars  or  in
percentages,  as  showing  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  the
pecuniary  volume  of  transactions.

Only  one  of  the  business  indexes  reviewed  above  relates  directly
to  this  variable^ — Mr.  Frickey's  series  for  bank  clearings  in  seven
American  cities  from  1875  to  1914.  In  technical  parlance,  however,
Frickey's  results  are  not  index  numbers,  but  a  series  of  relatives  com-
puted on  a  moving  base  (each  month  the  ordinate  of  secular  trend,
adjusted  for  seasonal  variation,  equals  100).  Mr.  Frickey  calls  them
^^a  continuous  monthly  index  of  business  activity  as  indicated  by  the
fluctuations  of  bank  clearings."  ^  The  only  form  of  business  activity
which  bank  clearings  show  directly,  is  the  amount  of  payments  made.

Doubtless,  this  partial  record  of  payments  is  the  best  single  indi-
cator of  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade  for  the  years  before  bank
debits  were  compiled. But  we  are  not  sure  whether  bank  clearings,

*  See  Table  9  above,  Chapter  II,  section  v,  4,  "The  Flow  of  Payments  Among  Busi-
ness Enterprises."

^  Edwin  Frickey,  "Bank  Clearings  Outside  New  York  City,  1875-1914,"  Review  of
Economic  Statistics,  October,  1925,  vol.  vii,  p.  252.


314  BUSINESS  CYCLES

even  with  New  York  City  omitted,  give  a  just  impression  of  the  ampli-
tude of  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  the  aggregate  of  pay-
ments. For  the  fluctuations  of  clearings  probably  have  a  larger  ampli-
tude than  the  fluctuations  of  payments  in  coin  and  paper  money.
And  it  must  be  recalled  'that  the  volume  of  payments  made  does
not  parallel  closely  the  dollar  volume  of  goods  exchanged  day  by
day.  Many  of  the  checks  cleared  are  "cash"  payments  for  goods
just  bought;  a  few  are  advance  payments  for  goods  to  be  received  in
the  future,  but  the  majority  are  payments  for  goods  received  some
time  in  the  past.^  Much  business  is  done  three  times  over  so  to
speak,  advance  orders  are  placed,  or  contracts  for  future  performances
are  made;  somewhat  later  the  goods  ordered  are  shipped  or  the  con-
tract work  is  performed;  later  still  the  payments  are  made.  When
borrowed  funds  are  used,  the  scheme  is  still  more  complicated,  and
the  pecuniary  volume  of  exchanging  growing  out  of  a  given  operation
is  enhanced  by  the  making  and  repaying  of  loans.  We  have  little  in-
formation about  the  volume  of  the  several  types  of  operations,  or
about  the  average  lags  of  deliveries  behind  orders,  and  of  payments
behind  deliveries.  An  ideally  complete  index  of  pecuniary  transac-
tions would  have  at  least  three  curves,  one  showing  commitments
entered  into  each  month,  one  showing  current  transfers  of  goods  in
dollar  values,  and  one  showing  payments.  The  third  curve  is  the
only  one  we  can  draw  with  any  confidence.  But  it  is  important  to
remember  that  the  two  curves  we  cannot  draw  represent  actual  proc-
esses of  great  moment,  which  certainly  differ  in  timing,  and  probably
differ  in  amplitude  of  fluctuation  from  the  process  typified  by  bank
clearings.

The  reason  why  few  investigators  have  dealt  with  the  pecuniary
volume  of  trade  must  be  that  they  have  believed  other  aspects  of
business  activity  to  be  more  significant.  Almost  all  of  the  business
indexes  have  been  compiled  since  the  price  revolution  of  the  war
produced  violent  oscillations  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade.  Even
Mr.  Frickey,  it  will  be  noticed,  did  not  think  it  worth  while  to  con-
tinue his  series  beyond  1914.  While  economists  have  been  deeply
interested  in  measuring  price  changes,  they  have  sought  to  measure
the  reaction  of  prices,  not  on  the  amount  of  exchanging  done  in  dollars,
but  on  the  physical  volume  of  goods  exchanged.

•Compare  Chapter  II,  section  iv,  5,  above;  "The  Quantity  Theory  and  Business
Cycles."


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  316

(2)  Indexes  of  the  Physical  Volume  of  Trade  or  of  Production.

Like  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade,  the  physical  volume  of  trade
is  a  definite  quantity.  It  consists  of  all  the  goods  exchanged  in  a
country,  during  specified  intervals,  reckoned  in  physical  units — hours
of  labor,  cubic  feet  of  buildings  occupied  under  leases,  numbers  of
securities  transferred,  ton  miles  of  freight  carried  one  mile,  lines  of
advertising  printed,  and  so  on.  Conceivably  one  might  make  an
inventory  of  the  goods  exchanged  each  month,  expressed  in  such  units.
But  to  make  from  the  inventories  totals  which  could  be  compared
month  by  month,  it  is  necessary  to  assign  each  good  a  money  price.
If  the  prices  are  kept  fixed  month  after  month,  the  aggregates,  though
expressed  in  billions  of  dollars,  will  show  changes  in  the  physical
volume  of  trade  weighted  by  dollar  values.

While  we  lack  data  to  approximate  even  roughly  the  physical
inventories  of  goods  exchanged  annually  in  the  United  States,  we
might  build  up  from  series  now  published  an  aggregative  index  of  the
physical  volume  of  trade  which  would  possess  much  interest.  Such
an  index  would  correspond  in  character  to  the  U.  S.  Bureau  of  Labor
Statistics  index  number  of  wholesale  prices.  That  price  index  shows
changing  prices  weighted  by  fixed  physical  quantities;  the  volume-
of-trade  index  would  show  changing  physical  quantities  weighted  by
fixed  prices.  With  this  series  in  hand,  we  might  eliminate  the  secular
trend  and  seasonal  variations  (if  any),  and  thus  get  an  index  of  the
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade,  ex-
pressed in  dollars,  or  converted  into  ratios  of  the  adjusted  trend
values.

The  current  indexes  of  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  the
physical  volume  of  trade  are  not  made  on  this  simple  plan.  Instead
of  starting  with  an  index  of  the  volume  of  trade  and  ascertaining
its  trend,  the  compilers  ascertain  the  trend  of  each  time  series  sepa-
rately, turn  the  original  data  into  relatives  of  their  trends,  weight
these  relatives,  and  compute  their  arithmetic  means.  Snyder's  index
of  the  volume  of  trade  in  1919-25,  and  the  two  later  segments  of
Persons'  index  of  the  volume  of  trade  (the  segments  for  1915-19,  and
1919-23)  are  made  in  this  way.  Thus  they  are  not  quite  what  their
names  suggest,  indexes  of  the  volume  of  trade,  but  weighted  arith-
metic means  of  the  percentage  deviations  of  certain  time  series  from
their  adjusted  trends.  Their  analogues  among  price  indexes  would
be  a  new  type: — ^weighted  arithmetic  means  of  relative  prices,  com-


316  BUSINESS  CYCLES

puted  on  the  base:  ordinates  of  secular  trends,  corrected  for  seasonal
variations,  equal  100.

It  is  now  generally  recognized  that  weighted  arithmetic  means  of
relatives  are  less  desirable  price  indexes  for  most  uses  than  relatives
made  from  aggregates  of  actual  prices  weighted  by  physical  quan-
tities.^ If  we  wish  to  make  an  index  of  changes  in  the  physical  volume
of  trade,  we  can  apply  this  conclusion  with  confidence,  and  say  that
the  aggregative  form  of  index  is  more  serviceable,  on  the  whole,  than
the  weighted  mean  of  relative  quantities.  But  does  it  follow  that  an
index  of  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  trade  is
better  made  by  the  aggregative  method  than  by  weighting  and  av-
eraging the  relatives  of  the  constituent  series?

It  is  clear  from  their  formulas  that  the  two  methods  do  not
yield  identical  results.^ In  seeking  to  choose  between  them  we  get

*0f  course,  the  averages  of  relatives  have  their  advantages;  but  I  think  the  con-
clusion stated  in  the  text  is  valid.

On  the  relative  merits  of  different  forms  of  price  indexes,  see  Irving  Fisher,  The
Making  of  Index  Numbers,  Boston  and  New  York,  1922,  and  Truman  L.  Kelle:^,
Statistical  Method,  New  York,  1924,  chapter  xiii.  A  summary  of  the  chief  findings  is
given  by  Frederick  C.  Mills,  Statistical  Methods,  New  York,  1924,  pp.  207-221.

'  The  formula  for  an  index  of  deviations  from  a  secular  trend  made  by  the  aggregative
method,  may  be  written:

2^1  pw  (1)


Here  qi  represents  the  quantities  of  the  goods  exchanged  in  time  "1";  pw  represents
the  fixed  prices  used  as  weights,  and  Ti  represents  the  adjusted  ordinate  of  the  secular
trend  of  Sg  pw  in  time  1.  We  may  regard  this  trend  as  itself  the  aggregate  of  the
trends  of  the  constituent  series,  each  weighted  by  its  appropriate  price,  provided  that  the
trends  fitted  to  all  the  constituent  series  and  to  the  aggregate  are  straight  lines,  or
(perhaps)  if  some  single  type  of  curve  other  than  a  straight  line  is  fitted  throughout.
Then  the  formula  becomes:

2^1  Pw  (2)


2^1  Pw

The  formula  for  a  similar  index  made  by  averaging  relatives  weighted  by  fixed  values
ivw)  is:

^(j^)vw  (3)

'Evw

But  the  values  used  as  weights  are  products  of  quantities  and  prices. Therefore  we
may  replace  vw  by  qwpw  and  write :


(^)-


Pw  (4)


HqwPw

If  qw  =  ti,  formula  (4)  reduces  to  formula  (1). That  is,  the  two  methods  yield
identical  results  only  when  the  quantities  used  in  the  value-weights  applied  to  the  rela-


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  317

little  help  from  the  discussions  of  price  indexes,  for  they  deal  with  the
problem  of  comparing  the  relative  values  of  the  same  variables  in
different  periods,  and  our  problem  is  to  compare  two  values  of  the
same  variable  at  the  same  periods — the  values  shown  by  averaging
deviations  from  the  adjusted  trends  of  the  individual  series  and  the
values  shown  by  computing  deviations  from  the  adjusted  trend  of
the  group  aggregate.^  But  by  falling  back  upon  broader  considera-
tions we  can  justify  a  choice.  Ease  of  computation,  and,  what  is  more
important,  ease  of  comprehension,  speak  for  the  aggregative  method.
That  method  requires  the  computation  of  but  one  trend  and  one  set
of  seasonal  variations,  while  the  method  of  averaging  relatives  re-
quires the  computation  of  as  many  trends  and  sets  of  seasonals  as
there  are  component  series.  An  aggregative  index  of  physical  volume
of  trade  is  relatively  easy  to  conceive;  so  are  its  trend,  its  seasonal
variations,  and  the  deviations  from  its  trend  adjusted  for  seasonals.
When  one  tries  to  think  what  reality  is  represented  by  a  weighted  av-
erage of  many  sets  of  deviations  made  in  this  way,  the  conception
grows  more  complicated.  Finally,  we  have  need  of  an  index  of  the
physical  volume  of  trade,  as  well  as  need  of  an  index  of  its  cyclical-
irregular  fluctuations.  The  method  of  aggregates  gives  us  the  first
index  as  well  as  the  second.  The  average  of  relatives  gives  us  the
second  index,  but  not  the  first,  though  in  compensation  it  offers  the
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  all  the  component  series,  for  which
we  can  find  use.  An  ideal  procedure  would  be  to  deal  with  our  quan-
tity series  as  the  federal  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  deals  with  price
series — make  the  general  index  from  weighted  aggregates,  but  also
publish  relatives  for  each  series  separately,  and,  of  course,  add  indexes

tives  equal  the  adjusted  ordinate  of  secular  trend  at  the  time  for  which  the  computation
is  made.  This  coincidence  may  well  happen  once  in  a  period  for  which  two  indexes  are
made  from  identical  materials  by  the  two  methods;  but  it  is  most  unlikely  to  happen
twice.

When  the  trend-lines  used  do  not  make  the  ordinates  of  the  trend  of  the  aggregate
equal  to  the  sum  of  the  ordinates  of  the  trends  of  the  constituent  series,  there  is  no  as-
surance that  the  two  methods  will  give  identical  results.  This  is  the  commoner  case
in  statistical  practice. But  the  differences  between  the  two  sets  of  results  may  be  small.

'  For  example,  in  our  problem  the  time  bias  of  arithmetic  means  of  relative  prices  and
of  various  systems  of  weighting  does  not  enter.  Nor  is  the  "circular  test"  applicable
in  the  usual  way,  if  at  all.  The  "factor  reversal"  test  can  be  used,  but  it  is  inconclusive,
because  neither  method  can  pass  it.  Kelley's  test  of  reliability  is  pertinent:  one  might
divide  a  body  of  data  into  two  samples,  compute  indexes  for  both  samples  by  both
methods,  and  see  which  pair  of  indexes  showed  the  higher  coefficient  of  correlation.
But  the  test  would  be  laborious,  and  trial  with  one  set  of  data  might  not  prove
conclusive.

Mathematical  statisticians  have  in  this  problem  a  promising  field  for  work.


318  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  the  cyclical-irregular  deviations  from  adjusted  trends  both  for  the
aggregates  and  for  all  the  components.*

The  practice  of  expressing  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  in  terms
of  their  standard  deviations  is  not  proper  in  making  volume-of-trade
indexes.  For  differences  in  the  amplitude  of  these  variations  are  pres-
ent in  the  inventories  to  which  such  indexes  relate.  To  cover  up  the
differences  by  reducing  the  fluctuations  of  all  the  series  used  to  a
common  scale,  is  to  make  measurement  of  changes  in  the  aggregate
volume  impossible.  A  series  constructed  in  this  way  may  have  some
interest  as  indicating  the  time  at  which  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations
have  occurred,  and  as  indicating  the  relative  amplitude  of  successive
cycles  as  pictured  by  the  series  in  question,  so  long  as  it  is  made  of
uniform  materials;  but  it  is  of  little  value  for  comparing  the  amplitude
of  fluctuations  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  with  that  of  fluctua-
tions in  production,  employment,  prices,  or  any  other  variable.

To  get  reliable  indexes  of  the  physical  volume  of  trade  and  of
its  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  we  need  representative  samples
drawn  from  all  parts  of  the  field.  Even  for  recent  years  in  the  United
States,  the  materials  are  not  ample.  The  trading  done  by  farmers  is
most  inadequately  covered. There  is  reason  to  suspect  that  the  best

*The  only  practical  test  of  the  agreement  between  the  two  methods  of  which  I
know  is  the  following:

In  making  his  "index  of  physical  production  for  all  manufacture"  in  the  United  States
by  years  since  1899,  Dean  Edmund  E.  Day  started  with  33  time  series  showing  the
output  of  various  types  of  goods. These  series  he  arranged  in  10  industrial  groups.

(1)  For  each  group  he  made  an  "unadjusted  index"  by  reducing  the  annual  items
of  the  component  series  to  relatives  on  the  base,  production  in  1909  equals  100,  weighting
these  relatives,  computing  geometric  means,  and  making  certain  corrections  on  the
basis  of  Census  data  which  do  not  now  concern  us.  Next  he  weighted  the  10  group
indexes,  and  used  their  geometric  means  as  an  "unadjusted  index  of  physical  produc-
tion for  manufacture."

(2)  To  measure  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  manufacturing,  Day  returned  to  his  33
original  series,  fitted  a  trend  line  to  each,  expressed  the  actual  figures  as  percentages  of
the  corresponding  trend  values,  weighted  these  relatives,  computed  averages  (this
time  arithmetic)  for  each  of  the  10  industries,  then  weighted  these  group  averages,
and  finally  took  their  arithmetic  means  as  his  "adjusted  index."

Day  found  two  objections  to  the  latter  procedure.  The  determination  of  the  lines
of  secular  trend  for  the  33  original  series  involved  difficult  choices  of  period  and  line.
The  computations  were  laborious. For  both  reasons  he  sought  a  simpler  method.

(3)  This  method  was  to  fit  a  trend  line  directly  to  the  "unadjusted  index,"  and  turn
its  annual  values  into  percentages  of  the  corresponding  ordinates  of  this  trend.  The
differences  between  the  results  of  methods  (2)  and  (3)  in  the  21  years  1899-1919  did  not
exceed  three  points  in  the  percentage  scale  in  any  year.  Dean  Day  concluded  that
the  "case  for  the  simpler  method  of  getting  the  adjusted  index  is  conclusive."  I
should  be  inclined  to  argue  that  the  simpler  method  is  preferable  on  logical  grounds,
as  well  as  on  practical  grounds.

See  Edmund  E.  Day,  "An  Index  of  the  Physical  Volume  of  Production,"  Review  of
Economic  Statistics,  November  and  December,  1920,  Preliminary  vol.  ii,  pp.  310,  311,
332-337,  362-365.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  319

totals  we  can  now  make  show  variations  somewhat  in  excess  of  the
truth ;  for  the  types  of  trading  not  represented  at  all,  particularly  the
retail  sales  of  the  great  mass  of  small,  independent  shops,  are  prob-
ably rather  steady.  By  long  odds  the  most  comprehensive  index  we
have  is  Snyder's  series  for  1919-25.

When  compilers  go  back  to  pre-war  years,  they  are  forced  to  resort
to  one  of  two  undesirable  shifts.  Either  they  must  change  the  com-
position of  their  indexes  from  time  to  time,  accepting  less  satisfactory
and  smaller  samples  as  they  work  backward,  or  they  must  use  ma-
terials which  do  not  show  the  physical  volume  of  trade.  Mr.  Snyder
chose  the  latter  alternative  in  making  his  "clearings  index  of  business."
Instead  of  treating  bank  clearings  outside  of  New  York  City  as  a
sample  of  fluctuations  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  transactions,  Snyder
sought  to  transmute  these  dollars  figures  into  a  physical-volume  index.
Of  course,  it  is  always  questionable  how  accurately  division  of  such
data  by  a  price  index  really  shows  the  corresponding  changes  in
physical  quantities.  Mr.  Snyder  was  able  to  test  his  procedure  more
adequately  than  is  often  possible  in  such  cases,  by  making  sure  that
his  price  index  when  applied  to  outside  bank  debits  in  1919-23  gave
results  which  fitted  closely  his  physical-volume  index.  Yet  a  doubt
remains  whether  a  "deflating  series"  adjusted  to  bank  debits  in  the
period  of  violent  price  fluctuations  just  after  the  war  is  well  adapted
to  deflating  bank  clearings  for  distant  years,  when  prices  were  rela-
tively stable.  And  at  best,  clearings  is  only  one  sample  of  volume  of
trade — though  the  best  single  sample.^

What  has  been  said  about  methods  of  making  indexes  of  the
physical  volume  of  trade  and  its  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  applies
also  to  indexes  of  physical  production.  Production  is  not  limited  to
the  output  of  tangible  commodities ;  it  includes  such  services  as  fabri-
cation, transportation,  storage,  and  distribution,  which  suggests  that
production  indexes  should  be  made  on  a  "value-added"  basis.  For
example,  if  we  have  data  showing  retail  sales  of  shoes  in  pairs  and
dollars,  wholesale  sales,  and  manufacture  in  the  same  double  form,
leather  used  by  shoemakers  in  physical  units  and  value,  and  hides
and  skins  tanned  into  shoe  leather,  we  can  include  the  output  of  all
these  agencies  in  an  index  of  physical  production. Starting  with  the

•These  doubts  about  the  reliability  of  long-period  indexes  made  from  changing
materials  or  by  deflating  clearings  are  shared  by  the  compilers.  It  is  necessary  to  note
them,  but  it  is  also  just  to  add  that  the  criticisms  apply  to  the  data,  and  not  to  the
men  who  have  sought  to  learn  all  they  can  from  what  records  the  past  provides.


320  BUSINESS  CYCLES

pairs  of  shoes  sold  at  retail,  we  can  weight  the  service  of  the  shop-
keepers by  the  average  value  which  they  add  to  the  wholesale  price,
and  work  back  in  this  way  to  the  fresh  hides.  Of  course,  to  make  the
result  show  changes  in  physical  production,  we  must  keep  constant
the  "values  added"  which  we  use  as  weights.  Constructed  in  this
way  from  exhaustive  data,  production  indexes  would  cover  most  of
the  transactions  included  in  the  volume-of- trade  indexes;  but  the
weights  of  the  two  indexes  would  differ  widely.  For  example,  in  a
trade  index  the  retail  sales  of  shoes  in  pairs  would  be  multiplied  by
the  full  retail  price,  instead  of  by  the  retailers'  margin.  Both  indexes
would  run  in  billions  of  dollars,  but  the  trade  index  would  show  many
more  billions.  There  would  also  be  differences  in  timing.  In  a  trade
index  the  aim  is  to  record  exchanges  when  they  are  made;  in  a  pro-
duction index  the  aim  is  to  record  productive  services  when  they  are
rendered.  Manufacturers  make  goods  before  they  exchange  them,
and  merchants  render  their  productive  service  to  the  community
from  the  time  they  buy  goods  to  the  time  they  deliver  packages  to
the  ultimate  consumer.  These  time  relations  are  of  great  moment  in
the  theory  of  business  cycles.

As  we  should  like  three  indexes  of  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade
showing  commitments  entered  into,  goods  transferred,  and  payments
made,  so  we  should  like  three  indexes  of  production  in  physical  terms,
— one  showing  goods  ordered,  one  showing  productive  services  rend-
ered, and  one  showing  goods  delivered.  To  complete  our  modest  re-
quirements, add  that  these  three  indexes  should  be  made  to  show  sepa-
rately for  each  industry  the  operations  of  retail  dealers,  wholesale
merchants,  manufacturers  of  consumers'  and  producers'  goods,  pro-
ducers of  raw  materials,  and  builders  of  industrial  equipment.  In  all
this  work  adequate  samples  should  be  used,  the  aggregative  method
followed,  and  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  taken  in  their  original
amplitudes,  not  in  units  of  their  standard  deviations.

(3)  Indexes  of  "General  Business  Conditions."

Most  of  the  indexes  under  review  relate  neither  to  the  pecuniary
nor  to  the  physical  volume  of  trade,  but  to  the  "general  condition  of
business."  This  concept  is  much  less  definite  than  the  others.  It
corresponds  to  no  sum  in  dollars,  to  no  inventory  of  goods,  to  nothing
we  can  count.  By  nature  it  is  not  an  aggregate  amount,  but  a  syn-
thesis of  relatives.  We  can  say  that  retail  sales  in  dollars  are  larger
now  than  they  were  last  month  or  last  year,  that  the  percentage  of


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  321

unemployment  is  less,  that  more  tons  of  steel  are  being  produced,  rail-
way traffic  is  heavier,  prices  are  higher,  ''money  is  tighter,"  and  so  on.
Or  we  can  compare  each  of  these  variables  with  the  standard  we  have
made  from  its  secular  trends  and  seasonal  variations.  But  when  we
combine  these  series  we  are  not  measuring  any  quantity,  or  the  varia-
tions in  any  quantity.  We  are  merely  summarizing  our  observations
upon  the  values  of  certain  variables  from  time  to  time  in  terms  of
other  values  of  the  same  variables.  And  these  variables  in  their  origi-
nal form  are  largely  incommensurable,  or  rather  are  divided  among
incommensurable  groups,  prices,  physical  quantities  of  many  sorts,
values,  ratios.

Of  course,  there  is  no  technical  difficulty  in  combining  or  averag-
ing time  series  of  any  sort  when  they  are  expressed  as  relatives,  per-
centage deviations  from  trends,  or  multiples  of  standard  deviations.
Combinations  of  incommensurable  series  are  frequently  made  in  the
business  indexes.  The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Com-
pany's index  for  a  time  included  Bradstreet's  price  series,  the  produc-
tion of  pig  iron  in  tons,  and  bank  clearings  outside  of  New  York,
though  it  is  now  made  of  more  homogeneous  materials.  Persons  also
used  these  three  series,  among  others,  in  making  one  of  the  curves  in
his  "Index  of  General  Business  Conditions."  In  her  British  index,
Miss  Thomas  went  even  further;  she  combined  unemployment  per-
centages with  series  expressed  in  price  relatives,  physical  units,  and
pounds  sterling.

In  defense  of  this  practice,  it  can  be  urged  that  the  phenomena  of
business  cycles  include  changes  in  prices,  physical  quantities,  pecuni-
ary volumes,  and  ratios — for  example,  the  ratio  of  bank  reserves  to
demand  liabilities.  Not  only  do  these  four  types  of  variables  co-
exist ;  they  also  act  and  react  upon  one  another.  When  the  statistician
combines  measurements  of  the  changes  in  these  variables,  he  is
merely  trying  to  represent  in  one  series  of  figures  the  net  resultants
of  changes  which  are  genuine  and  which  do  interact.  Anyone  who
can  conceive  of  business  cycles  as  congeries  of  fluctuations  in  many
processes  should  be  able  to  grasp  what  is  meant  by  an  index  made
from  sample  fluctuations.  It  is  true  that  indexes  confined  to  one
type  of  changes,  such  as  prices,  pecuniary  volume  of  trade,  or  physical
production,  have  a  more  definite  meaning.  But  what  they  gain  in
definiteness  they  lose  in  breadth.  No  business  index  deserves  the
term  "general"  unless  it  includes  samples  of  the  various  types  of
business  activities.


322  BUSINESS  CYCLES

By  considering  the  method  of  weighting  the  series  used  in  a
'^general  business'^  index,  we  can  put  this  elusive  problem  in  the
clearest  light.  Conceivably,  a  logical  basis  for  weighting  even  the
series  which  belong  to  incommensurable  groups  might  be  found  in
the  relation  which  every  business  series  bears  to  the  pecuniary  volume
of  trade.^  But  do  we  wish  such  a  scheme  of  weights?  Certainly  we
do  not  make  an  index  of  general  business  conditions  as  an  indirect  way
of  showing  fluctuations  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  business  transac-
tions. As  said  above,  the  condition  of  business  is  not  itself  an  aggre-
gate of  goods  or  of  values,  and  the  components  we  use  in  making  an
index  do  not  derive  their  importance  from  the  influence  they  exercise
upon  anything  which  can  be  counted.  But  to  what  other  criterion
can  we  appeal  to  make  sure  that  every  series  we  use  shall  have  due
chance  to  influence  the  results?

In  practice,  statisticians  have  not  lingered  long  upon  this  question.
They  usually  proceed  promptly  to  turn  the  original  data  into  per-
centage deviations  from  their  adjusted  secular  trends,  to  express  each
set  of  deviations  in  units  of  its  standard  deviation,  and  to  take  arith-
metic means  of  the  series  in  this  form.  Sometimes  they  apply  rough
weights,  but  more  often  not.^  Reduction  of  the  several  sets  of  devia-
tions to  multiples  of  their  own  standard  deviations  is  itself  a  scheme
of  weighting  which  gives  each  series  a  chance  to  influence  the  results
in  proportion  to  its  variability  in  terms  of  its  standard  deviation;
applying  different  weights  to  these  multiples  gives  each  series  an  in-

-Many  series  are  fractions  of  that  aggregate — ^bank  debits,  railway  receipts,  pay-
roll disbursements,  import  and  export  values,  and  the  like.  Price  data  become  fractions
of  the  aggregate  when  multiplied  by  physical  volume  of  trade;  physical-volume  and
production  data  become  similar  fractions  when  multiplied  by  prices.  A  place  can  be
made  even  for  the  ratios: — unemployment  percentages,  for  instance,  can  be  related
to  payroll  disbursements,  and  bank-reserve  ratios  to  the  volume  of  financial  transac-
tions. The  elaboration  of  a  scheme  of  weights  upon  this  basis  would  require  much
ingenuity,  and  many  conjectural  estimates.  Not  only  are  there  gaps  in  the  data,  but
there  is  also  much  overlapping  to  be  allowed  for,  particularly  between  bank  debits
and  other  factors. Yet  the  task  is  not  an  impossible  one.

*  For  example,  for  some  time  the  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's
"General  Business  Curve"  was  made  from  the  following  series  and  weights:

Weights

Outside  clearings 25

Pig-iron  production 20

Railroad  traffic 15

Failures  (number) 10

Copper  production 5

Cotton  consumption 10

Coal  production 5

Commodity  prices 10

100


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  323

fluence  upon  the  results  proportioned  to  the  investigator's  rating  of  its
relative  importance.  That  is,  the  original  differences  among  the
series  as  components  of  averages  are  wiped  out,  and  new  differences
are  written  in.  No  single  criterion  of  the  importance  of  the  several
series  is  set  up ;  but  statisticians  easily  agree  upon  the  more  important
and  less  important  business  indicators  in  any  list  of  series,  and  agree
also  that  the  rankings  within  these  groups  must  be  rather  arbitrary.
In  some  lists  they  judge  that  even  weighting  is  quite  as  good  as  differ-
ential weighting.

Of  course  such  general  agreement  upon  schemes  of  weights  for
practical  use  is  not  a  satisfactory  solution  of  the  problem  how  to  make
an  index  of  general  business  conditions;  but  it  is  the  nearest  approach
to  a  solution  which  has  been  worked  out.  The  need  of  further  meth-
odological research  at  this  point  is  pressing.

Indexes  made  in  the  way  described  are  clearly  more  representative
of  general  business  conditions  when  they  are  based  upon  large  and
varied  lists  of  series  than  when  the  lists  are  small  or  one-sided.  The
rule  is  sometimes  laid  down  that  only  series  in  which  the  cyclical-
irregular  fluctuations  are  synchronous  should  be  included.  This  rule
is  proper  if  the  compiler  wishes  merely  to  exhibit  the  cyclical  element
in  business  changes;  it  is  not  proper  if  he  wishes  an  index  of  general
business  conditions.  For  we  have  seen  how  considerably  and  how
systematically  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  certain  processes
lag  behind  those  of  other  processes.  To  exclude  any  series  from  the
index  merely  because  it  differs  in  timing  from  others,  and  therefore
blurs  the  cycles,  is  to  distort  the  general  business  index  in  the  interests
of  symmetry.  The  only  way  to  observe  the  rule  and  remain  faithful
to  fact  is  to  give  up  the  plan  of  making  a  single  index,  and  follow
Persons  in  making  a  three-,  possibly  a  four-,  or  a  five-curve  index,  in-
cluding as  many  trustworthy  series  as  possible,  but  throwing  them
into  groups  on  the  basis  of  synchronous  fluctuations.  It  is  not  conso-
nant with  the  aim  of  representing  general  business  conditions  to  ex-
clude even  series  which  show  no  cyclical  characteristics.

Granted  that  general-business  indexes  combining  the  changes  in
many  economic  activities  are  not  irrational,  the  question  remains,
What  are  they  good  for?  One  use  at  least  can  be  claimed  for  them.
So  long  as  such  a  series  is  made  from  uniform  materials  by  uniform
methods,  it  enables  one  to  compare  successive  cycles  with  respect  to
duration,  amplitude  and  the  character  of  their  several  phases. The


324  BUSINESS  CYCLES

wider  the  range  of  materials  included  and  the  longer  the  period  cov-
ered, the  more  significant  these  comparisons  become.  For  intensive
theoretical  work  they  are  of  slight  value.  As  said  before,  they  do  not
measure  any  magnitude.  And  their  value  for  the  extensive  work  to
which  they  are  adapted  is  compromised  by  the  small  number  and
changing  character  of  the  data  available  for  the  long  periods  which
they  should  cover.^

(4)  Forecasting  Sequences.

While  the  three-curve  charts  which  Professor  Persons  and  his  co-
workers have  made  for  the  United  States,  Great  Britain  and  Germany
are  called  ''Indexes  of  General  Business  Conditions,''  they  are  made
primarily  as  forecasting  sequences.  That  is,  the  series  used  in  each
curve  were  chosen  for  the  regularity  with  which  their  cyclical-irregular
fluctuations  are  synchronized,  and  for  the  regularity  with  which  their
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  precede  or  follow  those  of  the  series
used  in  the  other  curves.  Such  constructions  are  to  be  judged  on
principles  somewhat  different  from  those  laid  down  concerning  gen-
eral business  indexes  proper.

'Dr.  Frederick  C.  Mills  points  out  that  when  standard  deviations  are  used  as  units
in  which  to  measure  cyclical  deviations  from  trend  lines,  they  cannot  be  interpreted
in  the  usual  fashion.  The  standard  deviation  of  a  "normal  distribution"  has  a  precise
meaning;  we  know  what  percentage  of  the  total  number  of  cases  in  such  a  distribution
will  deviate  from  the  mean  by  more  (or  less)  than  any  given  multiple  of  the  standard
deviation;  we  know  also  what  the  odds  are  that  a  given  deviation  from  the  mean  will
be  exceeded  by  a  random  observation.  These  precise  rules  of  the  normal  distribution
apply  approximately  to  a  wider  variety  of  actual  distributions.  But  they  are  frequently
violated  by  the  distribution  of  deviations  of  time  series  from  their  secular  trends.

(1)  A  deviation  equal  to  6  standard  deviations  below  the  mean  would  occur  in  a
normal  frequency  distribution  once  in  1,000,000,000  times.  Deviations  of  that  order
occur  not  infrequently  among  deviations  from  a  secular  trend,  in  consequence  of  such
disturbances  as  strikes,  railway  embargoes,  wars,  panics.

(2)  Such  extraordinary  deviations  are  particularly  common  among  deviations  meas-
ured from  projected  trends.  For  example,  in  the  publications  of  the  Harvard  Com-
mittee on  Economic  Research  we  find  the  Bureau  of  Labor  Statistics  index  number
of  prices  at  wholesale  represented  by  a  positive  deviation  of  15.5  times  the  standard
deviation  in  February,  1920,  and  Bradstreet's  price  index  represented  by  a  negative
deviation  of  10.6  times  the  standard  deviation  in  July,  1921.  Deviations  reaching  or
exceeding  4.5  times  the  standard  deviation  are  somewhat  common  in  this  valuable
source.  In  a  normal  distribution,  a  deviation  of  this  size  occurs  three  times  in  a
million.

(3)  Since  these  extreme  deviations  are  commoner  in  some  series  than  in  others,
we  do  not  quite  get  away  from  the  danger  of  distorting  our  averages  by  using  the
standard  deviations  of  the  series  as  units.

In  short.  Professor  Warren  M.  Persons'  argument  concerning  the  non-applicability  of
the  concept  of  the  probable  error  to  time  series  seems  to  apply  to  the  use  of  the
standard  deviation  for  measuring  departures  from  a  projected  trend,  if  not  to  its  use  in
measuring  departures  from  a  fitted  trend.  (For  the  argument  see  above  section  iv,  1,
"The  Correlation  of  Time  Series  and  Its  Pitfalls,"  note  2.)


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  325

A  forecasting  sequence  cannot  be  expected  to  utilize  all  the  ma-
terials which  are  available  for  making  a  general  business  index,  and
which  should  be  included  in  the  latter  to  render  it  "general."  Com-
paratively few  of  the  series  lead  or  lag  behind  others  with  sufl5cient
regularity  to  give  reliable  forecasts.  But  it  may  be  argued  that
slenderness  of  materials  is  no  defect  in  a  forecasting  sequence;  it  is
better  to  limit  the  series  rigidly  to  those  showing  the  closest  approach
to  perfect  regularity  of  sequence  than  to  gain  comprehensiveness  at
the  cost  of  uncertainty.  If  it  does  not  matter  what  is  to  be  fore-
casted, this  view  is  valid.  Strictly  speaking,  all  that  can  be  inferred
from  a  three-curve  chart  is  the  movements  of  the  particular  series  rep-
resented by  the  curves  which  lag.  Both  for  practical  and  for  theoreti-
cal purposes  the  whole  operation  is  highly  important  or  a  curiosity,
according  as  the  curves  whose  movements  are  forecasted  represent
activities  of  large  or  of  slight  significance.

As  for  technical  methods,  the  only  criterion  applicable  to  the  mak-
ing of  forecasting  sequences  is  supplied  by  the  results.  The  original
data  can  be  made  into  aggregates,  treated  as  relatives  to  some  base
period,  computed  as  deviations  from  adjusted  trends,  expressed  in
units  of  their  standard  deviations,  or  thrown  into  any  other  form
which  brings  out  most  clearly  the  regularity  of  the  time  sequences.
The  methods  developed  by  Professor  Persons  serve  well,  and  have
been  accepted  as  models  by  many  other  investigators.

The  chief  difficulty  in  applying  these  methods  lies  in  securing  in-
dexes which  maintain  fairly  regular  relationships  in  the  timing  of
their  movements.  For  the  period  1903  to  1914,  Professor  Persons
finds:

first,  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  curve  B,  business,  lagged
eight  months,  on  the  average,  after  those  of  curve  A,  specula-
tion; second,  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  curve  C,  money
rates,  lagged  four  months,  on  the  average,  after  those  of  curve
B,  business,  and  third,  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  curve  C,
money  rates,  lagged  twelve  months,  on  the  average,  after  those
of  curve  A,  speculation.

To  complete  the  full  round  of  events,  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  the
average  period  by  which  the  movements  of  curve  A,  speculation,  in
one  cycle,  lag  behind  the  movements  of  curve  C,  money  rates,  in  the
preceding  cycle.  Supplemental  computations  made  for  the  purpose
show


326  BUSINESS  CYCLES

that  the  interval  of  lag  of  speculation  after  money  rates  was
extremely  variable  and  averaged  6-12  months.  .  .  .^

All  these  averages  are  ascertained  by  finding  the  period  of  lag
which  yields  the  highest  coefiicient  of  correlation  between  the  indexes
paired.  The  maximum  coefiicients  are  not  exceedingly  high.  They
run  for  curves  B  and  A  +.81;  for  curves  C  and  B  +.83;  for  curves
C  and  A  +.74;  for  curves  A  and  C  — .67.  Moreover,  every  pairing
shows  one  or  two  other  lags  with  coefficients  nearly  equal  to  the
maximum.^  Of  course,  this  means  that  the  time  relationships  among
the  three  indexes  of  the  Harvard  sequence  are  not  sufficiently  regular
to  afford  an  assured  mechanical  forecast  of  the  successive  movements
which  occur  within  a  cycle  and  which  form  the  transition  from  one
cycle  to  the  next. What  is  claimed  for  the  sequence  is  that,

Although  the  lag — the  time  by  which  the  movements  of  one
curve  lag  behind  those  of  another — is  not  invariable  in  length,
it  is  much  more  nearly  uniform  than  is  the  length  of  the  cycle
itself.  Furthermore,  variations  in  the  duration  of  lag  can  in  a
measure  be  foreseen  by  a  careful  examination  of  the  relations
subsisting  between  the  curves  at  the  time  of  forecast.^

3.  What  the  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions  Show
About  Business  Cycles.

A  classification  of  certain  business  indexes  according  to  the  eco-
nomic processes  to  which  they  relate  will  summarize  the  preceding

^  See  Warren  M.  Persons  and  Edwin  Frickey,  "Money  Rates  and  Security  Prices,"
Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1926,  vol.  viii,  pp.  30  and  32.  1

2  The  full  array  of  coefficients  given  by  Professor  Persons  in  the  article  quoted  (pp  30
and  32)  is  as  follows:

Coefficients  of  Correlation  between  Curves  A,  B,  and  C,  of  the  Index
OF  General  Business  Conditions. Bi-monthly,  1903- June,  1914

Lag  in  Months
Curves  Correlated  0  2  4  6  8  10  12 14 16

B  follows  A 72 .80 .81 .76

C " B 75 .83 .81 .70

C " A 69 .74 .71 .62

A " C -.29 -.44 -.58 -.63 -.67 -.65 -.62

Somewhat  different  results  concerning  the  lags  between  curves  A  and  B,  A  and  C,
and  B  and  C  of  the  "revised  index,"  are  given  by  Professor  W.  L.  Crum,  in  "The  Pre-War
Indexes  of  General  Business  Conditions,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1924,
vol.  vi,  p.  19.  But  since  Professor  Persons  uses  the  results  obtained  from  the  old  index
in  the  latest  issue  I  have  seen,  I  follow  his  example.  See  W.  M.  Persons,  "An  Index
of  General  Business  Conditions,  1875-1913,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,
1927,  vol.  ix,  p.  26.

'W.  L.  Crum,  "The  Interpretation  of  the  Index  of  General  Business  Conditions,"
Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  Supplement,  September,  1925,  vol.  vii,  p.  223.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  327

critique  in  part,  and  prepare  for  the  following  constructive  compari-
sons. The  indexes  selected  all  refer  to  the  same  country,  cover  rela-
tively long  periods  by  months,  and  present  their  results  in  readily
comparable  form.

Index  Relating  to  the  Pecuniary  Volume  of  Transactions.

Edwin  Frickey's  "Index  of  Outside  Clearings,"  United  States,  1875-

1914.

Relatives  (not  strictly  an  index)  of  bank  clearings  in  seven  cities
(used  as  a  sample  of  all  clearings  outside  of  New  York) ,  computed
on  the  base,  monthly  ordinate  of  secular  trend,  adjusted  for  seasonal
variation,  equals  100.

The  transactions  which  give  rise  to  the  drawing  of  checks  cover  many
types  of  economic  relations,  but  small  transactions  in  general  and
rural  transactions  in  particular  are  under-represented.  The  exclu-
sion of  New  York  City  reduces  the  representation  of  financial  and
of  speculative  transactions.  In  time,  the  clearings  of  a  particular
day  cover  transactions  ranging  from  the  re-payment  of  debts  in-
curred years  before  to  the  advance  of  funds  to  be  returned  years
later.  On  the  average,  clearings  probably  lag  some  weeks  behind
the  exchange  of  goods  to  which  they  relate.

Indexes  Relating  to  the  Physical  Volume  of  Trade.

Carl  Snyder's  "Clearings  Index  of  Business,"  United  States,  1875-1924.
Relatives  (not  strictly  an  index)  of  all  outside  clearings,  "deflated"
by  an  index  of  the  "general  price  level,"  computed  on  the  base,
monthly  ordinate  of  secular  trend  equals  100,  corrected  for  seasonal
variations,  and  smoothed  by  a  three-months  moving  average.
What  is  said  above  concerning  the  activities  represented  by  outside
clearings  applies  here. It  is,  of  course,  questionable  how  far  an
aggregate  in  dollars  can  be  made  to  show  fluctuations  in  physical
volume  through  division  by  a  price  index.
Warren  M.  Persons'  "Index  of  Trade,"  United  States,  1903-23.
First  segment,  1903-15.
A  mixed  index  of  physical  and  pecuniary  volume  of  trade.

Simple  arithmetic  means  of  relatives  of  seven  series  computed  on
the  base,  monthly  ordinate  of  secular  trend,  corrected  for  sea-
sonal variations,  equals  100,  expressed  in  multiples  of  their
several  standard  deviations.  The  arithmetic  means  are  multi-
plied by  the  standard  deviation  of  outside  clearings  (8.62).
Second  and  third  segments,  1915-19  and  1919-23.
Indexes  of  physical  volume  only.


328  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Weighted  arithemtic  means  of  relatives  of  four  (1915-19)  and  of
five  (1919-23)  series,  computed  on  the  base,  monthly  ordinate  of
linear  trend,  corrected  for  seasonal  variation,  equals  100.

Indexes  Relating  to  General  Business Conditions.

American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  index  of  "General  Busi-
ness Compared  with  Normal,"  United  States,  1877-1925.
From  1877  to  1884,  when  pig-iron  output  is  the  only  series  used,  this
index  relates  to  physical  volume  of  production. From  1922,  when
all  ''dollar  series"  are  dropped,  to  date,  it  relates  to  physical  vol-
ume of  production  and  of  trade. In  the  intervening  years,  1885-
1921,  it  relates  to  ''general  business  conditions."
Weighted  arithmetic  means  of  relatives  computed  on  the  base,  monthly
ordinate  of  secular  trend,  corrected  for  seasonal  variations,  equals
100,  expressed  in  multiples  of  standard  deviations. The  arithmetic
means  are  finally  put  into  percentage  form  through  multiplying  by
10  (the  approximate  weighted  average  of  the  standard  deviations
of  the  constituent  series  in  percentages).
Carl  Snyder's  "Index  of  Deposits  Activity,"  United  States,  1875  to  1924.
Relatives  (not  strictly  an  index)  of  the  ratios  of  individual  deposits
in  all  National  Banks  to  total  clearings,  computed  on  the  base,
monthly  ordinate  of  secular  trend  equals  100,  corrected  for  seasonal
variations,  and  smoothed  by  three-months  moving  averages.
This  interesting  series  is  best  classed  as  relating  to  general  business
conditions. The  inclusion  of  New  York  City  clearings  (as  well  as
New  York  City  deposits) gives  dealings  in  securities far  more
weight  in  this  series  than  they  have  in  Frickey's  and  Snyder's  rela-
tives of  outside  clearings.

None  of  the  series  here  described  is  comprehensive  enough  to  pass
as  an  index  of  business  cycles.  Each  series  relates  to  but  one  or  a  few
economic  activities,  and  these  activities  differ  widely.  In  every  case
the  representative  character  of  the  data  used  is  open  to  question,  and
the  methods  of  isolating  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  lack  precision.
Two  series  change  character  from  period  to  period.  Three  series  are
relatives  measuring  the  fluctuations  of  a  variable  about  its  adjusted
trend ;  two  series  show  arithmetic  means  of  such  relatives  reduced  to
units  of  their  standard  deviations.  By  no  means  uniform  materials,
one  would  say.

If  these  series  made  by  different  hands,  with  different  methods,
from  different  data,  to  show  different  things,  agree  with  each  other  in
large  measure,  it  must  be  that  business  cycles  manifest  themselves


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  329

in  much  the  same  way  over  a  wide  variety  of  economic  activities,  that
these  fluctuations  are  recorded  with  reasonable  accuracy  in  numerous
time  series,  and  that  the  diversities  of  method  make  no  great  difference
in  the  results.  So  far  as  the  series  differ,  we  may  infer  that  variety  of
method  does  make  some  difference  in  the  results;  that  the  data  are
unreliable  in  different  ways;  or  that  the  activities  to  which  the  series
relate  have  characteristically  different  fluctuations.  Perhaps  all  these
explanations,  and  others  too,  are  applicable  to  every  difference.

Thus  in  comparing  the  five  indexes  of  business  conditions  in  the
United  States  which  cover  by  months  the  longest  periods  of  time,
we  shall  be  testing  the  underlying  statistics,  testing  the  methods  of
isolating  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations,  and  testing  the  hypothesis
that  similar  cycles  occur  in  different  economic  activities.  Of  course,
we  should  prefer  to  test  these  matters  separately,  but  must  content
ourselves  with  testing  them  in  combination.  Further,  we  shall  be
testing  in  one  country  for  about  50  years  the  regularity  of  business
cycles  in  respect  to  duration  and  amplitude.

(1)  The  ''Saw-Tooth''  Contour  of  the  Business  Indexes.

All  five  of  our  indexes  present  business  cycles,  not  as  sweeping
smoothly  upward  from  depressions  to  a  single  peak  of  prosperity  and
then  declining  steadily  to  a  new  trough,  but  as  moving  in  a  jerky
fashion.  Even  the  two  curves  which  Snyder  smoothed  by  moving
averages  are  made  up  of  serrated  segments.

Counting  shows  that  the  indexes  change  direction  on  the  average
every  three  months,  every  two  months,  or  even  oftener.^ We  cannot

*  The  following  table  gives  details.
Frequency  of  Changes  in  Direction  of  the  Curves  Traced  by  Five  Monthly
Indexes  of  Business  Conditions  in  the  United  States,  1877-1922


]

!^umber  of  Times  Curves

Proportion

Change  Direction

of  months

From  rise

From  rise  or

Total

in  which

to  fall  or

fall  to  hori-

changes

No.  of

curves

from  fall

zontal,  or

of

months

change

1877-1922

to  rise

vice  versa

direction

covered

direction

A.  T.  andT.  Index

178

134

312

550

57%

Frickey's  Clearings  Index*

222

59

281

456

62

Snyder's  Clearings  Index..

103

87

190

552

34

Snyder's  Deposits  Index.  .

127

141

268

552

49

1903-1922

Persons'  Trade  Index

95

61

156

238

66

A.  T.  and  T.  Index

91

39

130

240

54

Frickey's  Clearings  Index*

69

18

87

144

60

Snyder's  Clearings  Index..

36

86

121

240

50

Snyder's  Deposits  Index . .

47

69

116

240

48

*  To  1914  only.

330


BUSINESS  CYCLES


be  sure  that  these  frequent  minor  irregularities  are  due  wholly  to  the
failure  of  random  influences  to  cancel  each  other.  They  may  be  due
in  part  to  the  averaging  together  of  series  which  differ  in  timing.
And  perhaps  the  cyclical  movements  themselves  keep  producing  and
overcoming  small  checks.

Reversals  of  direction  are  more  frequent  near  the  climax  of  pros-
perity and  in  the  trough  of  depression  than  during  the  transitions  be-
tween these  extreme  states.  Charts  11  to  17  suggest  that  business  has
a  ceiling  and  a  floor,  both  somewhat  elastic  or  irregular.  Between
these  limiting  planes  it  can  glide  up  or  down  on  a  slant  rather
smoothly.  But  when  business  nears  the  ceiling  or  the  floor  it  bumps
up  and  down  in  a  jerky  fashion  for  a  while  before  it  goes  off  on  the
next  glide.

(2)  Month-to-Month  Changes.

A  second  resemblance  among  the  five  indexes  concerns  the  ampli-
tude of  their  month-to-month  changes.  The  "points"  in  which  the
monthly  changes  are  expressed  are  relatives  to  ordinates  of  secular
trend,  averages  of  such  relatives  reduced  to  percentage  form,  or
averages  of  such  relatives  multiplied  by  the  standard  deviations  of
^^outside"  clearings. In  practice,  the  scales  cover  similar  ranges.

Chart  19  shows  the  distribution  of  these  monthly  changes  in
percentages  of  the  total  number  of  cases  covered  by  each  series.^

^  The  data  from  which  the  chart  is  drawn  are  as  follows :

Frequency  Distribution  of  the  Month-to-Month  Changes  in  Five  Indexes

OF  Business  Activity

Unit  in  each  case  is  one  point  in  the  scale  of  deviations  from  adjusted  trends. These
scales  differ  somewhat  from  each  other. See  text.


Direction  and

magnitude  of A.  T.  and  T.
month-to-month Index
changes  1877-1925

-hl7

+16

+15

+14

+13

+12

+11

+10  .2

+  9

+  8  .3

+  7  .8

+  6  1.2


Percentage

Basis

Frickey's

Snyder's

Snyder's

Persons'

Clearings

Clearings

Deposits

Index  of

Index

Index

Index

Trade

1875-1914
.2

1875-1923

1875-1923

1903-1924

.2
.2
.2

.6

.2

.2
.5

.6

.8

.3

.4

1.9

.2

1.2

.7

1.7

1.7

1.5

4.0

.5

1.9

1.5

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


331


As  economic  data  go,  these  distributions  are  remarkably  symmetrical
and  show  a  high  degree  of  concentration  around  their  central  tend-
encies, most  marked  in  Snyder's  Clearings  Index  and  least  marked
in  Frickey's  series.  The  difference  between  the  two  clearings  indexes
in  this  respect  is  probably  due  to  the  facts  (1)  that  Snyder  smoothed
his  index  by  a  three-months  moving  average,  thus  reducing  the  ampli-
tude of  the  extreme  movements  and  increasing  the  number  of  minor
movements,  and  (2)  that  Frickey  used  data  from  only  seven  cities,
while  Snyder  took  all  outside  clearings.  In  each  case,  the  distribution
is  slightly  elongated  toward  the  left;  that  is,  the  most  violent  de-
clines exceed  the  most  considerable  advances. The  abrupt  declines


Frequency  Distribution  of  the  Month-to-Month  Changes  in  Five  Indexes

OF  Business  Activity


Direction  and

Frickey's

Snyder's

Snyder's

Persons'

magnitude  of

A.  T.  and  T.

Clearings

Clearings

Deposits

Index  of

lonth-to-month

Index

Index

Index

Index

Trade

changes

1877-1925

1875-1914

1875-1923

1875-1923

1903-1924

+  5

3.2

5.2

1.7

2.2

2.7

+  4

3.6

5.0

2.2

4.1

6.1

+  3

7.2

7.7

6.2

6.1

7.6

+  2

12.8

10.5

10.4

11.3

12.2

+  1

14.3

7.3

18.3

11.6

13.3

0

17.5

8.8

24.0

13.8

13.3

-  1

13.5

7.3

16.9

15.0

11.8

-  2

9.0

7.3

8.5

9.9

7.6

-  3

6.5

8.4

6.0

8.2

6.5

-  4

3.7

5.0

2.1

4.6

6.1

-  5

2.6

4.6

.9

3.1

2.7

-  6

1.7

4.4

.9

1.5

1.9

-  7

.5

2.5

.3

1.0

.4

-  8

.8

1.3

.5

.7

2.3

-  9

.2

2.1

.2

.7

.4

-10

1.0

.2

.4

-11

.2

.2

-12

.2

.2

.7

-13

-14

.2

-15

^

-16

-17

.2

-18

-19

.2

-27

.2

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

4-  Indicates

a  rise.

—  Indicates

a  fall.

CHART  19.

Frequency  Distribution  of  Month-to-Month  Changes  in  Five  Indexes  of  Business

Activity.


FRICKEY'S CLEARINGS  INDEX
1875  - 1914


-25 -20 -15 -10  ^


•+I0. +15 +20 '+25


SNYDER'S  DEPOSITS  INDEX
1875  -  1923


PERSONS*  INDEX  OF  TRADE
1903  -  1924


-10  -5  0  *b  ♦lO


10  -5  0  +5


AT.  &T.  INDEX
1877  -  1925


SNYDER'S CLEARINGS  INDEX
1875  -  1923


DEVIATION  AND MAGNITUDE OF  MONTM-TO-MONTM  CHANCC


332


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  333

usually  occur  in  crises ;  the  greatest  gains  occur  in  periods  of  revival,
or  come  in  other  phases  of  the  cycle  as  reactions  after  sudden  drops.^
Except  in  Snyder's  deposits  index,  the  number  of  declines  is  smaller
than  the  number  of  advances,  but  the  average  magnitude  of  the
declines  is  greater.^  Business  contraction  seems  to  be  a  briefer  and
more  violent  process  than  business  expansion.  Why  Snyder's  deposits
index  give  opposite  indications  will  appear  presently.  But  most  of
the  monthly  changes  in  both  directions  have  small  amplitudes. Less

^  The  dates  of  the  largest  month-to-month  changes  in  each  of  the  series  have  some
interest.  As  above,  +  indicates  an  advance,  —  a  decline.  Readers  whose  recollection
of  business  chronology  is  hazy  may  care  to  use  the  "Conspectus  of  Business  Conditions,"
given  in  the  next  chapter  to  interpret  this  table.


A.  T.  and  T.

Index
-17  Nov.,  1907
-11  Aug., 1893
-  9  Nov.,  1890

Frickej
Clearings  '.
-27  Nov.,
—  19  June,
-14  July,

;ndex
1907

1884
1881

Snyder's

Clearings  Index

-12  Aug., 1893

-  9  March 1884

-  8  Sept., 1876

-  8  Nov., 1907

-  8  Dec, 1907

+10  June, 1886
+  8  July, 1891
+  8  Aug., 1894

+17  Nov.,
+  16  June,
+15  Oct.,

1880
1881
1875

+  8  June, 1881
+  6  Nov., 1875
+  6  Nov., 1879
+  6  May, 1890

Snyder's  Deposits
Index

Persons'  Index
of  Trade

-15  July, 1901
-10  June, 1901

-  9  Aug., 1875

-  9  June, 1880

-  9  May, 1907

-  9  Sept.,  1914

-12  Jan., 1921
-12  June, 1924
-10  Nov., 1907
-  9  Dec, 1907

+12  April,  1901
+11  Dec, 1880
+11  Dec, 1898
+  11  Dec, 1900
+  9  Feb., 1876
+  9  July, 1897

+  9  March,  1918
+  8  July, 1919
+  8  Nov., 1922
+  7  Feb., 1904
+  7  Oct., 1912
+  7  Dec, 1919
+  7  Dec, 1924

'  The  details  are  as  follows:

Number  and  Average  Magnitude  op  Advances  and  Declines  in  the  Month-to-
MoNTH  Changes  in  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Conditions

Number  of  cases  of  Average  magnitude  of

No  Advance DecUne

Advance Change
A.  T.  and  T.  business  index 256  103

Frickey,  clearings 222  42

Snyder,  clearings 231  141

Snyder,  deposits 241  81

Persons,  trade 121  35


Decline

Points

Points

228

2.5

2.7

215

4.0

4.2

213

2.0

2.2

264

3.0

2.8

107

2.8

3.3

334  BUSINESS  CYCLES

than  half  exceed  two  points  in  the  scales  used,  except  in  Frickey's
index,  and,  with  the  same  exception,  only  a  tenth  exceed  five  points.*

(3)  On  Identifying  Business  Cycles  by  Use  of  the  Business  Indexes.

The  irregularities  of  contour  in  the  business  indexes  cause  con-
siderable difficulty  when  one  tries  to  count  the  number  of  business
cycles  in  a  given  period.  The  memorable  cycles  which  culminated  in
1882,  in  1893,  in  1907,  in  1917,  and  in  1920  stand  out  clearly  in  all
our  curves.  But  in  all  the  curves  there  are  stretches  when  the  cyclical
fluctuations  are  less  easy  to  identify;  for  example,  the  later  1880's,
the  middle  1890's,  the  early  1900's,  the  years  1910-13,  and  1923-24.
While  the  five  monthly  indexes  agree  in  presenting  this  contrast  be-
tween major  and  minor  fluctuations,  it  would  be  hard  from  study  of
the  curves  to  lay  down  rules  for  determining  precisely  what  move-
ments of  an  index  shall  be  counted  a  business  cycle.  In  the  less  pro-
nounced cycles,  the  period  of  greatest  activity  occasionally  (2  times
out  of  56)  remains  below  the  base  line  in  some  one  of  the  indexes.  In
other  cycles,  the  period  of  least  activity  occasionally  (2  times  out  of
55)  remains  above  the  base  line  in  some  index.  Often  there  are
double  or  triple  peaks,  and  double  or  triple  troughs.  At  times  one
suspects  that  irregular  fluctuations  are  dominating  the  cyclical  factors.
Nor  is  the  duration  of  business  cycles  uniform  enough  to  be  used  as
a  criterion  in  doubtful  cases.  But  one  who  studies  all  five  curves  with
care  can  draw  up  a  list  of  business  cycles  which  anyone  else  can
identify  with  confidence  in  every  curve.

Such  a  list  is  best  made  by  noting  the  successive  turning  points
in  the  business  indexes.  One  may  count  either  the  successive  crests,
or  the  successive  troughs  of  the  waves.  These  two  ways  of  reckoning
usually  give  different  measurements  of  duration  for  particular  cycles ;
but  the  average  duration  over  a  period  of  considerable  length  must

*  Once  more  the  details  are  of  interest:

Percentages  of  the  Month-to-Month  Changes  in  Five  Indexes  op  Business
Conditions  Which  Fall  within  Certain  Limits

±1  ±2  ±5  ±10

point  points  points  points

A.  T.  and  T.  business  index 45.3%  67.1%  93.9%  99.6%

Frickey's  clearings  index 23.4  41.2  77.1  97.4

Snyder's  clearings  index 59.2  78.1  97.2  99.8

Snyder's  deposits  index 40.4  61.6  89.9  99.1

Persons' trade  index 38.4  85.2  89.9  99.4


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  335

come  out  nearly  the  same  whether  one  counts  from  trough  to  trough
or  from  crest  to  crest.

Table  14  shows  that  13  business  cycles  occurred  in  the  United

TABLE 14

Dates  op  the  Troughs  and  the  Crests  of  American  Business  Cycles  in  1878-1924
According  to  Five  Monthly  Indexes  of  Business  Activity

A.  T.  and  T. Frickey's  Snyder's  Snyder's  Persons'

business  clearings  clearings  deposits  trade

index  index  index  index  index

Trough Dec.  '78-  Dec.  '78  May  '78  June  and

Apr.  '79  Dec.  '78

Crest June-Aug. '81  June '81  Aug.  '81  Feb.  '81

Trough. . .  .Feb.,  May  '85  Nov.  '84  Apr.  '85  Nov.  '84

Crest March  '87  June  '87  June  '87  Nov.,  Dec.  '86

Trough March  '88  March  '88  March  '88  Feb.  '88

Crest May,  Oct. '90  July  '90  July  '90  June  '90

Trough May  '91  March  '91  March  '91  Jan.,  Feb.  '91

Crest Feb.  '92  June  '92  Jan. '93  Feb.  '93

Jan. '93

Trough.... June  '94  Aug.  '93  Oct. '93  Oct. '94

Crest Oct. '95  Oct. '95  Dec.  '95  June  '95

Trough.... Oct. '96  May  '97  Mar. '97  Apr.  '97

Crest Dec.  '99  March  '99  June  '99  Feb.  '99

Feb.  '00

Trough. . . .  Nov.,  Dec.  '00  Sept.  '00  Sept.  '00  Sept.  '00

Crest Sept. '02  May '01  June '01  Apr. '01

Sept.  '02  May  '01
July  '03

Trough.... Dec.  '03  May  '04  July  '04  Apr.,  May '04 July '04

Crest May,  July '07  May  '07  Feb.  '06  Jan. '06  May '07

Trough....May,  June'08  Dec.  '07  Jan. '08  Dec.  '07  March '08

Crest Jan.,  March '10  March '10  Apr.  '10  Feb.  '10  March '10

Trough.... April' 11  Oct. '11  Dec.  '11  Sept. '10  April '11

Crest Jan. '13  Oct. '12  Feb.  '13  March.,  Apr. '12  Oct. '12

Trough. . .  .Dec.  '14  Nov.  '14  Dec.  '14  Sept.,  Oct.  '14 Nov. '14

Crest Nov.  '16  Dec.  '16  Oct.,  Nov.  '16 May '17

Jan. '17  Jan. '17

Trough March '19  March '19  March '19  June '19

Crest Jan. '20  Aug.,  Sept.  '19 July  '19  March  '20

Trough. . .  .Apr.,  May,  March  '21  Mar.,  July  '21 July '21

July  '21

Crest May  '23  May  '23  March  '23  May '23

Trough June  '24  June '24

States  between  1878  and  1923.  Each  of  these  cycles  is  traced  by  each
of  our  indexes.  The  table  gives  the  dates  both  of  the  crests  and  the
troughs,  as  they  appear  in  the  several  curves. Closer  agreement


336  BUSINESS  CYCLES

among  the  dates  could  be  secured  by  smoothing  out  their  serrations
with  free-hand  curves,  and  making  a  single  crest  and  trough  for  each
successive  cycle.  That  process  is  legitimate;  but  it  is  well  to  show
how  frequent  are  the  multiple  peaks.

(4) Time  Relationships  Among  the  Business  Indexes.

Of  the  several  comparisons  which  Table  14  suggests,  the  simplest
concerns  the  time  sequence  in  which  the  five  indexes  reach  their  turn-
ing points.  For  this  purpose,  we  need  to  replace  the  multiple  peaks
and  troughs  by  single  dates.  The  method  followed  is  arbitrary  and
does  nothing  to  lessen  the  differences  among  the  curves:  we  place
the  crest  midway  between  the  months  showing  the  highest  points
revealed  by  a  given  wave  of  activity,  and  date  the  troughs  in  corre-
sponding fashion.^  With  this  simplification,  we  can  manage  the
data  easily.

On  no  occasion  do  all  of  our  indexes  reach  the  crest  or  the  trough
of  a  given  wave  in  the  same  month.  Four  times  three  out  of  four
series  then  available  agree ;  ^  but  there  is  always  one  series  which  leads
or  lags  behind  the  others  by  a  month  or  more.  Seemingly,  we  should
think,  not  of  turning  points  in  business  cycles,  but  of  turning  periods.
As  a  rule,  these  turning  periods  are  relatively  long  in  the  violent
cycles  and  relatively  short  in  the  mild  cycles.  If  we  count  from  the
date  when  the  first  of  our  indexes  turns  a  given  corner  to  the  date
when  the  last  one  turns  the  same  corner,  we  get  periods  which  run
from  one  month  in  the  trough  of  1888,  or  two  months  in  the  trough
of  1914  and  in  the  crests  of  1890,  1910,  and  1923,  to  14  months  in  the
trough  of  1893-94,  15  months  in  the  trough  of  1910-11,  16  months  in
the  crests  of  1901-02,  and  17  months  in  the  crest  of  1906-07.  On  the
average  these  turning  periods  are  longer  at  the  crest  (8.0  months)
than  in  the  troughs  (6.1  months).

Snyder's  deposits  index  is  the  first  to  reach  the  crest  12  times  out
of  13  (the  exception  occurred  in  1892-93).  It  also  leads  8  times  out
of  13  in  reaching  the  troughs.  It  will  be  recalled  that  this  index  is
made  by  dividing  individual  deposits  in  all  National  Banks  into
total  clearings. Of  total  clearings,  the  New  York  City  figures  make

*If  there  is  a  double  crest  in  two  adjacent  months  (for  example,  October  and
November,  1916),  we  choose  the  later  month  to  avoid  fractions.  Similarly,  in  dealing
with  a  double  crest  in  May  and  October,  1890,  we  put  the  single  crest  in  August,
instead  of  July.  There  are  23  double  or  multiple  crests  or  troughs  among  111  turning
points  in  Table  14.

*  These  dates  are  March,  1888,  September,  1900,  March,  1919,  and  May.  1923.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  337

roughly  half,  and  the  New  York  City  figures  are  influenced  largely
by  the  current  volume  of  transactions  on  the  Stock  Exchange.  In
the  other  indexes  this  type  of  business  activity  counts  for  little.  We
may  infer,  then,  that  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trading  in  stocks  almost
always  reaches  its  peak  and  begins  to  decline  in  a  business  cycle,  before
other  types  of  business  have  culminated.  With  decidedly  less  reg-
ularity, trading  in  stocks  also  precedes  other  types  of  business  in
recovering  from  a  depression.

As  for  the  other  indexes,  their  average  order  in  reaching  peaks
and  troughs  is  (2)  Snyder's  clearings  index,  (3)  Frickey's  clearings
index,  (4)  the  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  gen-
eral business  index,  and  (5)  Person's  index  of  trade.  In  each  of  these
cases  the  lags  average  longer  at  the  crests  than  in  the  troughs.^

(5)  Duration  of  Periods  of  Expansion  and  Contraction.

Since  all  five  indexes  never  reach  the  crests  or  the  troughs  of
cyclical  waves  at  the  same  time,  and  since  neither  the  time  sequences
among  the  indexes  nor  the  lags  are  constant,  we  find  considerable
differences  among  our  measurements  of  the  duration  of  periods  of
rising  and  declining  activity. Table  15  presents  the  details.

Here  we  have  a  double  complexity — five  different  measures  of
phenomena  which  themselves  vary  widely  from  case  to  case.  But
when  we  strike  averages  we  approach  uniformity.  According  to  four
of  the  indexes,  periods  of  business  expansion  have  lasted  about  two
years  on  the  average  (23-25  months) ;  while  periods  of  business  con-
traction have  averaged  little  more  than  a  year  and  a  half  ( 18,  18,  19
and  21  months  according  to  the  several  indexes).  That  the  longest
periods  of  decline  are  greater  than  the  longest  periods  of  advance
makes  this  average  the  more  striking.  It  links  with  what  has  already
been  said  about  the  greater  number  and  smaller  average  value  of  the
upward  month-to-month  changes.  The  average  (and  the  modal)
American  .cycle  seems  to  be  made  up  of  two  unequal  segments,  a
two-year  period  of  gradually  increasing  activity,  and  a  period,  four
to  six  months  shorter,  of  less  gradually  shrinking  activity.

*  The  average  lags  of  the  several  indexes  behind  the  leaders  are  as  follows :

A.  T.  and  T. Frickey  Snyder  Snyder  Persons

clearings  deposits

In  troughs 3.7  mo.  3.2  mo.  3.0  mo.  2.4  mo.  4.2  mo.

At  crests 5.8 ''  6.1 "  4.2 "  0.9 "  6.5 "

Number  of  cases 26  21  26  26  12


338  BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  15

Duration  op  Alternate  Periods  of  Business  Expansion  and  Business  Contrac-
tion IN  the  United  States,  1878-1923,  According  to  Five  Indexes  of  Busi-
ness Activity.

Based  upon  Table  14

A.  T.  and  T.  Frickey's  Snyder's  Snyder's  Persons'

business clearings  clearings  deposits trade

Business index index  index  index index

Cycles  of Months Months  Months  Months  Months

Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall

1878-85  Rise 29  30  39  29

Fall 45  41  44  45

1885-88  Rise 23  31  26  25

Fall 12  9  9  14

1888-91 Rise 29  28  28  28

Fall 9  8  8  8

1891-94  Rise 9  19  22  24

Fall 28  10  9  20

1894-97 Rise 16  26  26  8

Fall 12  19  15  22

1897-00  Rise 39  22  27  22

Fall 11  18  15  19

1900-04  Rise 21  22  9  8

Fall 15  22  37  36

1904-08  Rise 42  36  19  20  34

Fall 12  7  23  23  10

1908-11 Rise 20  27  27  26  24

Fall 14  19  20  7  13

1911-14  Rise 21  12  14  19  18

Fall 23  25  22  30  25

1914-19  Rise 24  25  25  30

Fall 27  26  28  25

1919-21 Rise 10  6  4  9

Fall 16  18  22  16

1921-23 Rise 24  26  22  22

Maximum  Rise 42  36  39  29  34

Fall 45  41  44  45  25

Minimum Rise 9  12  6  4  9

Fall 9  7  8  7  10

Average Rise 24  25  23  20  23

Fall 19  18  21  23  18


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  339

Snyder's  deposits  index  gives  a  different  result.  As  it  almost
always  leads  the  other  indexes  in  attaining  the  crest  of  a  business
wave,  and  less  uniformly  leads  them  in  reaching  the  trough,  so  it
makes  the  periods  of  increasing  activity  relatively  brief,  and  the
periods  of  declining  activity  relatively  long.  Combined  with  what  we
know  of  its  composition  and  its  month-to-month  changes,  this  sug-
gests (though  it  does  not  prove)  that  the  cycles  in  financial  activity
differ  from  those  characteristic  of  general  business  in  being  made  up
of  a  shorter  section  of  relatively  rapid  advance,  and  a  longer  section  of
decline.

All  that  has  just  been  said  applies  strictly  to  the  five  indexes  under
consideration,  for  one  country,  in  the  years  1878-1923.  Whether  the
generalizations  are  applicable  to  other  indexes,  other  countries,  and
other  periods  remains  an  open  question.  In  view  of  the  diversity  of
the  items  which  enter  into  the  averages,  we  cannot  judge  the  repre-
sentative value  of  the  averages  themselves  until  a  wider  array  of  data
is  available.  In  the  meanwhile,  we  may  note  that  in  respect  to
variability,  our  measures  of  the  durations  of  business  cycles  compare
not  unfavorably  with  the  measures  made  of  many  other  social  phe-
nomena. The  period  of  decline  in  business  cycles  is  decidedly  more
variable  in  duration  than  the  period  of  advance ;  the  latter  period  in
turn  is  appreciably  more  variable  in  duration  than  are  whole  cycles.
For  the  latter  measurements  our  materials  show  a  coefficient  of  varia-
tion of  29.4  per  cent.^

(6)  The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles.

In  Table  16  the  lengths  of  the  American  cycles  of  1878-1925  are
measured  by  adding  together  first  each  period  of  advance  and  its
subsequent  period  of  decline,  secondly  each  period  of  decline  and  its
subsequent  period  of  advance.  From  what  we  have  already  seen
about  the  variability  of  these  periods,  it  is  clear  that  the  two  ways
of  measuring  seldom  give  identical  results.  No  reason  appears  for
regarding  one  set  of  measurements  as  more  significant  than  the  other.

*  Using  all  of  the  observations  given  in  Table  15,  we  get  the  following  coefficients  of
variation  (that  is,  standard  deviations  as  percentages  of  the  corresponding  arithmetic
means) :

Number  of  Mean  Standard  Coefficient

observations  duration  deviation  of  variation

Period  of  advance 55  22.75  mo.  8.34  mo.  36.7%

Period  of  decline 51  19.82 "  10.10 "  51.0%

Whole  cycles 101  42.02 "  12.37 "  29.4%


340


BUSINESS  CYCLES


Further,  our  five  indexes  often  given  five  different  measurements  for
a  given  cycle  counted  in  the  same  way. The  differences  range  from

TABLE 16

Duration  of  Business  Cycles  in  the  United  States,  1878-1925,  According  to  Five
Indexes  of  Business  Activity

Based  upon  Table  15


A.  T.  and  T.

business

index

Months

T-T C-C

Frickey's

clearings

index

Months

T-T C-C

Snyder's

clearings

index

Months

T-T C-C

Snyder's

deposits

index

Months

T-T C-C

Persons'

trade

index
Months
T-T  C-C

Trough-trough  1878-85
Crest-crest 1881-87

74

68

71

72

83

70

74

70

Trough-trough  1885-88
Crest-crest 1887-90

35

41

40

37

35

37

39

42

Trough-trough  1888-91
Crest-crest 1890-92

38

18

36

27

36

30

36

32

Trough-trough  1891-94
Crest-crest 1892-95

37

44

29

36

31

35

44

28

Trough-trough  1894-97
Crest-crest 1895-99

28

51

45

41

41

42

30

44

Trough-trough  1897-00
Crest-crest 1899-02

50

32

40

40

42

24

41

27

Trough-trough  1900-O4
Crest-crest 1902-07

36

57

44

58

46

56

44

56

Trough-trough  1904-08
Crest-crest 1907-10

54

32

43

34

42

50

43

49

44

34

Trough-trough  1908-11
Crest-crest 1910-12

34

35

46

31

47

34

33

26

37

31

Trough-trough  1911-14
Crest-crest 1912-17

44

47

37

36

47

49

55

43

55

Trough-trough  1914-19
Crest-crest 1917-20

51

37

51

32

53

32

55

34

Trough-trough  1919-21
Crest-crest 1920-23

26

40

24

44

26

44

25

38

Trough-trough  Maximum  74

Crest-crest "

68

71

72

83

70

74

70

55

55

Trough-trough  Minimum
Crest-crest ''

I  26

18

29

27

24

24

26

26

25

31

Trough-trough  Average

42

43

43

43

41

Crest-crest


42


42


42


42


38


2  to  18  months,  and  average  nearly  10  months. Yet  even  a  period
of  about  45  years  is  long  enough  to  make  the  average  length  of  busi-


I
I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  341

ness  cycles  come  out  nearly  the  same  whatever  index  is  used,  and
whether  the  measurements  are  taken  from  crest  to  crest  or  from
trough  to  trough.  The  eight  averages  covering  this  period  all  come
out  42  or  43  months.  Even  Persons'  index,  which  overs  only  20  years,
gives  averages  of  38  months  from  crest  to  crest  and  41  months  from
trough  to  trough.

Once  more  we  must  note  the  limited  scope  of  the  data  under
analysis  and  question  the  representative  value  of  the  averages.  But
these  are  the  most  precise  measurements  of  the  duration  of  business
cycles  we  can  get  for  the  present;  they  refer  to  the  country  and  the
period  which  interests  us  most,  and  they  come  from  five  different
sources.  We  may  therefore  consider  the  distribution  of  the  measure-
ments in  some  detail.  We  shall  treat  each  measurement  given  by
each  series  for  each  cycle,  whether  taken  from  crest  to  crest  or  from
trough  to  trough,  as  one  observation  upon  the  duration  of  business
cycles.

The  101  observations  which  this  procedure  lets  us  count  are  scat-
tered over  a  range  which  runs  from  18  to  83  months.^ Half  of  the

*  The  full  arrays,  tabulated  from  Table  16,  may  be  given.

Observations  upon  the  Duration  of  Business  Cycles  T^f  the  United  States,  1878-
1923,  Made  from  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity


Number  of  Cases

Number  of  Cases

Duration

Trough

Crest

Duration

Trough

Crest

in

to

to

in

to

to

Months

Trough

Crest

Total

Months

Trough

Crest

Tots

18

1

1

45

1

1

24

1

1

2

46

2

2

25

1

1

47

1

2

3

26

2

1

3

49

1

1

2

27

2

2

56

1

1

2

28

1

1

2

51

2

1

3

29

1

1

53

1

1

30

1

1

2

54

1

1

31

1

2

3

55

1

2

3

32

5

5

56

2

2

33

1

1

57

1

1

34

1

4

5

58

1

1

35

2

2

4

68

1

1

36

5

1

6

70

2

2

37

3

3

6

71

1

1

38

1

1

2

72

1

1

39

1

1

74

2

2

40

2

2

4

83

1

1

41

2

2

4

—

—

42

2

2

4

51

50

loT

43

3

3

44

5

4

9

(Note  continued  on  p.  342.)


342  BUSINESS  CYCLES

observations,  however,  are  concentrated  between  34  and  47  months,
an  interval  of  little  more  than  a  year.

As  often  happens  in  dealing  with  a  frequency  table,  we  get  more
significant  results  by  grouping  the  intervals.  Here  we  may  combine
months  into  quarters.  This  we  can  do  in  three  ways,  treating  each
month  as  the  end,  the  middle,  or  the  beginning  of  a  quarter.  Thus
our  time  scales  might  be  based  upon  any  of  these  groupings:

1st  grouping  2d  grouping  3d  grouping

22-24  mo.  23-25  mo.  24-26  mo.

25-27 "  26-28 "  27-29 "

28-30 "  29-31 "  30-32 "

etc.  etc.  etc.

These  three  groupings  give  appreciably  different  distributions,  as  the
following  figures  show:

Crude  Crude

Primary  Mode  Secondary  Mode

1st  grouping  (22-24  mo.,  etc.)  15  observations  at  34-36  mo.  13  observations  at  43-45  mo.
2d  "  (23-25  "  "  )  16  observations  at  35-37  mo.  12  observations  at  44-46  mo.
3d " (24-26 " "  )  16  observations  at  42-44  mo. 14  observations  at  36-38  mo.

Such  shifting  in  the  positions  of  the  crude  mode  as  the  grouping  of
the  months  is  altered  from  one  arbitrary  scheme  to  another,  makes
us  wish  for  an  average  of  the  three  groupings.  In  averaging,  we
can  once  more  arrange  the  items  in  three  ways,  putting  (say)  the
26-28  month  interval  first  in  a  combination  with  27-29,  and  28-30
months;  second  in  a  combination  with  25-27  and  27-29  months;  or
last  in  a  combination  with  24-26  months  and  25-27  months.  As  be-
fore, we  have  no  reason  for  preferring  any  of  these  arrangements  to
the  others.  We  may  therefore  use  an  average  of  all  three.  That  plan
will  give  as  our  final  distribution  of  the  101  observations  a  distribution
in  which  the  class-frequencies  are  weighted  averages  of  the  frequencies
secured  in  nine  different  groupings  of  the  observations. The  central

Two  measures  of  the  central  tendencies  of  the  arrays  may  be  added.

Observations  taken
From  trough  From  crest  In  both

to  trough  to  crest  ways

Arithmetic  means 42.5  months  41.5  months  42.0  months

Quartile 36  32  34

Median 41  39  40

Quartile 46  49  47


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  343

points  of  the  intervals  used  are  16  months,  19  months,  22  months,
etc.2

Chart  20,  in  which  the  results  appear,  shows  that  all  our  averaging
of  different  arrangements  does  not  completely  smooth  out  the  irregu-
larities. The  two  modes  persist  in  the  intervals  centering  on  37  and
43  months.  They  are  separated  by  a  lower  point  at  40  months,  which
happens  to  be  the  median  of  the  series.

The  conclusion  is  clear  that  within  the  period  and  country  repre-
sented by  our  indexes,  business  cycles,  while  varying  in  length  from
a  year  and  a  half  to  nearly  seven  years,  have  a  modal  length  in  the
neighborhood  of  three  to  three  and  one  half  years.  They  are  far
from  uniform  in  duration,  but  their  durations  are  distributed  about
a  well  marked  central  tendency  in  a  tolerably  regular  fashion.  This
distribution  differs  from  the  type  described  by  the  "normal  curve'*
in  being  prolonged  toward  the  upper  end  of  the  time  scale  somewhat
farther  than  toward  the  lower  end.

There  we  may  leave  the  topic  for  the  present,  planning  to  return
to  it  in  the  next  chapter,  when  we  shall  have  for  analysis  observations
upon  a  larger  number  of  business  cycles,  over  a  longer  period,  and  from
seventeen  countries  instead  of  one.

(7)  The  Amplitude  of  Business  Cycles.

All  our  indexes  measure  the  amplitude  of  business  fluctuations
in  percentage  deviations  from  base  lines,  which  represent  the  loci  of
the  ordinates  of  secular  trend  corrected  for  seasonal  variation.^  We
have  noted  certain  technical  differences  in  methods  of  construction,
but  have  found  that  the  average  magnitudes  of  the  published  figures
are  of  the  same  order  in  all  the  indexes.  The  greatest  differences,
indeed,  are  between  two  indexes  which  are  alike  in  method  of  con-
struction— Snyder's  series  for  clearings  and  for  deposits.

Table  17  assembles  all  the  measurements  of  extreme  deviations
from  the  base  line  at  the  troughs  and  crests  of  successive  business

'Under  this  plan,  the  average  for  the  interval  centering  on  19  months,  for  example,
is  made  from  the  observations  for  16-18  months  weighted  1,  the  observations  for  17-19
months  weighted  2,  the  observations  for  18-20  months  weighted  3,  the  observations  for
19-21  months  weighted  2,  and  the  observations  for  20-22  months  weighted  1.  By
months,  this  arrangement  weights  the  observation  at  16  months  1,  at  17  months  3,  at  18
months  6,  at  19  months  7,  at  20  months  6,  at  21  months  3,  and  at  22  months  1.

^For  the  present  purpose,  Snyder's  practice  of  eliminating  the  seasonal  variations
ajter  the  deviations  from  secular  trends  have  been  computed  is  not  an  important  de-
parture from  the  methods  followed  by  Persons,  Frickey,  and  the  statisticians  of  the
American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company.


BUSINESS  CYCLES


I


344

cycles,  and  Table  18  shows  the  magnitude  of  the  successive  swings
from  trough  to  crest  and  from  crest  to  trough.

CHART  20.

Frequency  Distribution  of  101  Observations  Upon  the  Duration  of  Business  Cycles  :

United  States,  1878-1923.

Based  upon  Table  16.  M

Averages  obtained  by  combining  several  different  groupings  of  the  observations.  See  text *


34 40 46 52 58 64
CENTRAL  MONTHS  OF  THE  INTERVALS


70


Numerical  Values


Central  Months

Average  Number

Central  months

Average  Number

of  the  intervals

of  observations

of  the  intervals

of  observations

16

.3

52

4.2

19

.7

55

5.1

22

.8

58

2.4

25

5.0

61

.1

28

5.7

64

.9

31

8.4

67

2.9

34

11.9

70

2.5

37

12.7

73

.7

49

9.4

76

43

13.3

79

.7

46

7.8

82

.3

49

5.1

100.9


The  highest  pitch  of  prosperity  in  the  whole  period  covered  was
attained  in  1881  according  to  Frickey's  and  Snyder's  clearings  in-
dexes, in  1901  according  to  Snyder's  deposits  index,  in  1907  according


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  345

to  the  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company^s  index,  and  in
1917  according  to  Persons'  index  (which  does  not  go  back  of  1903).
These  differences  are  not  to  be  regarded  as  discrepancies,  but  rather
as  probably  reliable  indications  that  the  processes  to  which  the  in-
dexes specifically  relate  really  attained  their  highest  levels  above  their
base  lines  in  different  cycles.

The  most  interesting  case  is  the  maximum  shown  by  Snyder's
deposits  index  in  1901, — a  moderate  crest  according  to  the  two  clear-
ings indexes,  and  the  lowest  crest  in  the  list  according  to  the  Ameri-
can Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  series.  That  year  saw  the
great  "Northern  Pacific  corner"  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange.
Financial  activity  in  New  York  did  perhaps  rise  higher  above  its  trend
then  than  at  any  other  time  between  1878  and  1923.  The  series
which  is  much  influenced  by  New  York  City  clearings  reflects  this
feverish  activity.  Outside  clearings  were  stimulated  in  moderate
degree.  But  ''general  business,"  as  shown  by  the  telephone  com-
pany's series,  expanded  only  a  little.

The  deepest  depressions  occurred  in  1878  and  1896  according  to
Frickey's  index,  in  1894  and  1896  according  to  Snyder's  clearings
index,  in  1914  according  to  Snyder's  deposits  index,  and  in  1921  ac-
cording to  the  telephone  company's  and  Persons'  indexes.  All  these
were  unquestionably  periods  of  extreme  hardship,  and  the  differences
among  the  several  indexes  concerning  their  relative  severity  need
give  us  no  concern.

The  periods  of  maximum  and  minimum  advance  and  decline  in
business  activity  according  to  the  five  indexes  are  best  presented  in
tabular  form.  The  greatest  ''boom"  in  the  whole  period  was  that
which  followed  the  prolonged  period  of  depression  in  the  1870's  if  we
consider  outside  clearings,  that  which  culminated  in  the  Northern
Pacific  corner  of  1901  if  we  give  metropolitan  clearings  their  share
in  the  national  total,  and  that  which  accompanied  or  followed  the
World  War  if  we  take  the  trade  indexes.  Similarly  the  most  catas-
trophic declines  were  those  which  followed  on  the  greatest  booms;  for
even  Snyder's  deposits  index  makes  the  drop  of  1881-1884  slightly
larger  than  that  following  the  Northern  Pacific  corner.  The  mildest
periods  of  expansion,  on  the  other  hand,  were  those  which  culminated
in  1895,  1902,  and  1912-13,  while  the  mildest  depressions  came  in
1886-88,  1900,  and  1910-11.  The  decline  in  1895-97  was  also  slight;
but  that  was  because  the  preceding  period  of  activity  was  mild,  not
because  the  depression  lacked  severity. AH  this  is  quite  consistent


346  BUSINESS  CYCLES

with  what  is  known  from  other  sources  concerning  the  major  and
minor  business  cycles  of  the  period.

TABLE  17

Percentage  Deviations  from  Their  Base  Lines  of  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Ac-
tivity AT  the  Crests  and  Troughs  of  Successive  Business  Cycles,  United
States:  1878-1923.

A.  T.  and  T. Frickey's Snyder's  Snyder's  Persons'

business  clearings clearings  deposits  trade

index  index  index  index  index

Trough  Crest  Trough  Crest  Trough  Crest  Trough  Crest  Trough  Crest

78  Trough -13  -29  -14  -14

'81  Crest +13  +27  +26  +30

'84-'85  Trough -19  -20  -19  -23

'86-'87  Crest +9  +19  +11  +  7

'88  Trough -7  -3  -4  -7

'90  Crest +17  +22  +21  +14

'91  Trough -  7  +4  +3  -  1

'92-'93  Crest +14  +20  +18  +13

'93-'94  Trough -20  -17  -20  -18

'95  Crest +6  -2  -3  +3

'96-'97  Trough -17  -29  -20  -11

'99  Crest +11  +10  +7  +21

'00  Trough -  4  -11  -  5  -15

'01-'02  „  Crest +6  +8  +15  +34

'03-'04  Trough -14  -11  -  2  -17  -  9  i

'06-'07  Crest +18  +15  +16  +19  +13 "

'07-'08  Trough -17  -22  -12  -20  -19

'10  Crest +12  +8  +6  +11  +8

'lO-'ll  Trough -3-8  -2  -7  -4

'12-'13  Crest +10  +8  +3  +5  +9

'14  Trough -18  -17  -17  -28  -18

'16-'17  Crest +17  +10  +13  +25

'19  Trough -8  -2  -6  -3

'19-'20  Crest +13  +9  +11  +15

'21  Trough -25  -10  -  7  -22

'23  Crest +10  +11  +6  +17

Minimum -3 +6 +4 -2 +3 -3 -1 +3 -3 +8

Maximum -25 +18 -29 +27 -20 +26 -28 +34 -22 +25

Average -13.2  +12.0  -14.8  +13.5  -  9.5  +11.5  -13.4  +14.4  -12.5+14.5

I

By  far  the  most  important  difference  among  the  indexes  is  that
Snyder's  clearings  series,  and  less  clearly  Frickey's  companion  piece,


1


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  347

suggest  that  business  cycles  have  been  growing  progressively  milder
decade  by  decade,  whereas  the  other  indexes  show  no  such  cheering


TABLE 18

•.\3iPLiTUDE  OP  THE  Rise  from  Trough  to  Crest  and  op  the  Decline  from  Crest
TO  Trough  in  the  American  Business  Cycles  of  1878-1923  as  Shown  by  Five
Indexes  of  Business  Activity.

A.  T.  and  T.  Frickey's Snyder's Snyder's  Persons'

business  clearings clearings deposits  trade

index  index index index  index

Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall  Rise Fall

Rise  1878-81 26  56  40  44

Fall  1881-'84,  '85 32  47  45  53

Rise  1884,  '85-86,  '87. . 28  39  30  30

Fall  1886,  '87-'88 16  22  15  14

Risel888-'90 24  25  25  21

FaU  189(>-'91 24  18  18  15

Rise  1891-'92,  '93 21  16  15  14

Fall  1892, '93-'93, '94..  34  37  38  31

Rise  1893,  '94-'95 26  15  17  21

Fall  1895-'96,  '97 23  27  17  14

Rise  1896,  '97-'99 28  39  27  32

Fall  1899-'00 15  21  12  36

Rise  1900-'01,  '02 10  19  20  49

Fall  1901, '02-'03, '04..  20  19  17  51

Rise  1903, '04-'06, '07.. 32  26  18  36  22

Fall  1906, '07-'07, '08..  35  37  28  39  32

Rise  1907, '08-' 10 29  30  18  31  27

Fall 1910-'ll 15  16  8  18  12

Rise  1911-'12, '13 13  16  5  12  13

Fall  1912, '13-' 14 28  25  20  33  27

Rise  1914-'16,  '17 35  27  41  43

Fall  1916,  '17-'19 25  12  19  28

Rise  1919-'19,  '20 21  11  17  18

Fall  1919,  '20-'21 38  19  18  37

Rise  1921-'23 35  21  13  39

Minima 10  15  15  16  5  8  12  14  13  12

Maxima 35  38  56  47  40  45  49  53  43  37

Average  rise 25  28  21  28  27

Average  fall 25  27  21  28  27

drift. If  we  confine  attention  to  the  most  violent  cycles  of  1878-1923
(including  the  cycle  of  1900-04  in  Snyder's  deposits  index),  and  com-


348


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  19

Dates  of  the  Most  and  the  Least  Violent  Cyclical  Fluctuations  in  American
Business,  1878-1923,  According  to  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity


Greatest  rise .  .

Greatest  fall .  .
Smallest  rise .  .
Smallest  fall . . .


A.  T.  and  T.

business
index

1914-17
1921-23
1920-21
1900-02
1899-00
1910-11


Frickey's

clearings

index

1878-81


1881-84
1893-95
1910-11


Snyder's

clearings

index

1878-81


1881-85
1911-13
1910-11


Snyder's

deposits

index

1900-01


1881-84
1910-12
1886-88
1895-97


Persons'
trade
index

1914-17


1920-21
1911-12
1910-11


bine  the  points  of  rise  and  fall  shown  in  Table  18,  we  get  the  following
results :

TABLE  20

Amplitude  of  Combined  Rise  and  Fall  in  Violent  Business  Cycles,  According
TO  Five  Indexes  of  Business  Activity

Based  upon  Table  18


usiness  Cycles  of

A.  T.  and  T.

business
index

Frickey's

clearings

index

Snyder's

clearings

index

Snyder's

deposits

index

Persons
trade
index

1878-85

58

103

85

97

1891-94

55

53

53

45

1900-04

. .

. ,

100

1904-08

67

63

46

75

54

1914-19

60

39

60

71

1919-21

59

30

35

55

On  the  face  of  the  returns  we  must  conclude  that,  since  the  early
1880's,  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  outside  clearings  have  been  greatly
reduced;  but  that  the  lessened  fluctuations  of  outside  clearings  have
not  led  to  greater  stability  in  other  types  of  business.^  It  does  not
necessarily  follow,  however,  that  business  processes  of  any  one  of  the
many  types  which  affect  outside  clearings  have  become  more  stable.
In  the  periods  covered  by  Snyder's  and  Frickey's  indexes,  checks  have
come  into  wider  use  in  retail  trade,  and  in  paying  rents,  salaries,  and
even  wages.  Transactions  of  this  type  have  cyclical-irregular  fluctua-
tions of  notably  smaller  amplitude  than  the  wholesale  transactions
which  have  long  been  settled  with  checks.  Further,  Mr.  Snyder's
series,  which  includes  all  outside  clearings,  tends  to  become  stabler

'  It  may  be  remarked  that  the  evidence  of  the  A.  T.  and  T.  index  on  this  point  can-
not be  thrown  out  because  of  the  many  changes  in  the  series  used  in  making  it.  For
these  changes  have  been  mainly  of  a  sort  which  tend  to  render  the  averages  less  variable.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


349


from  the  addition  of  new  clearing  houses  to  the  list.  In  view  of  these
considerations  and  of  the  contrary  evidence  borne  by  other  business
indexes,  it  is  rash  to  say  that  business  cycles  are  growing  milder  be-
cause the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  outside  clearings  are  less  now  than
they  were  some  40  years  ago.  The  severity  of  the  crisis  of  1920  and
the  depression  of  1921  is  attested  by  abundant  evidence.

By  way  of  summary  we  may  assemble  our  111  observations  upon
the  extreme  amplitudes  of  the  crests  and  troughs  of  business  cycles
in  another  frequency  table. ^  Again  the  question  arises  how  the  ob-
servations made  at  successive  points  shall  be  grouped  to  bring  out
their  significance.  Taking  a  span  of  5  points  in  the  scale  of  deviations,
I  have  made  groups  centered  around  deviations  of  0,  5,  10  .  .  .
points;  1,  6,  11  .  .  .  points;  2,  7,  12  .  .  .  points;  3,  8,  13  .  .  .
points;  and  4,  9,  14  .  .  .  points.  In  all  of  these  groupings,  the  dis-
tributions of  the  maximum  deviations  at  the  troughs  of  cycles  show
two  crude  modes.  One  or  both  of  these  modes  shift  their  locations
and  their  relative  prominence  on  every  change  in  the  groupings  of
the  observations.  On  the  other  hand,  all  5  of  the  distributions  of
the  maximum  deviations  at  the  crests  of  cycles  rise  step  by  step  to  a


•The  full  array  is  as  follows:


Scale  of  deviations

Scale  of  deviations

from  base  lines  in

Number  of

I'rom  base  lines  in

Number  of

Points

Observations

Points

i

Observations

Troughs

Crests

Troughs

Crests

Troughs

Crests

Troughs

Crests

-f  4

-  4

1

-16

+16

1

+  3

-  3

1

1

-17

+17

6

3

+  2

-  2

1

-18

+18

3

2

+  1

-  1

-19

+19

3

2

0

0

-20

+20

5

1

-  1

+  1

1

-21

+21

2

-  2

+  2

3

-22

+22

2

1

-  3

+  3

3

2

-23

+23

1

-  4

+  4

3

-24

+24

-  6

+  5

1

1

-25

+25

1

1

-  6

+  6

1

4

-26

+26

1

-  7

+  7

5

2

-27

+27

1

-  8

+  8

2

4

-28

+28

1

-  9

+  9

1

3

-29

+29

2

-10

+10

1

4

-30

+30

1

-11

+11

3

5

-31

+31

-12

+12

1

1

-32

+32

-13

+13

1

5

-33

+33

-14

+14

3

2

-34

+34

1

-15

+15

1

3

Totals


56


55


350  BUSINESS  CYCLES

single  mode  and  decline  again  step  by  step.  Only  once  is  this  mode
shifted  to  a  new  position  by  altering  the  groupings.  If  the  observa-
tions analyzed  are  representative,  the  crests  of  business  cycles  are
more  regularly  distributed  about  their  central  tendency  than  are  the
troughs.

On  adding  together  the  groupings  for  troughs  and  crests,  we  get
five  total  distributions  which  are  not  quite  so  regular  as  the  distribu-
tions of  the  crests,  but  decidedly  more  regular  than  the  distributions
of  the  troughs.  In  two  cases  there  are  two  crude  modes  separated  by
a  lower  interval;  in  one  case  two  adjacent  intervals  show  the  same
maximum  figure;  in  the  other  two  cases  there  is  a  single  mode  coin-
ciding in  position  with  the  mode  of  the  distribution  of  crests.

Perhaps  the  best  way  to  establish  the  broad  characteristics  of  these
distributions  is  to  strike  averages  of  all  five  groupings.  Table  21  shows
the  results  of  that  operation.  The  number  of  observations  recorded
at  each  point  in  the  scale  of  deviations  from  the  trend  lines  of  the
series  appear  five  times  in  as  many  different  combinations.  In  divid-
ing these  interlocking  combinations  for 'averaging  I  have  used  a  scale
which  centers  the  successive  groups  around  deviations  from  the  trends
of  2  points,  7  points,  12  points,  etc.  Since  two  troughs  are  found
slightly  above  and  two  crests  slightly  below  the  trend  lines,  the  first
group  in  the  scale  centers  around  +  8  for  the  troughs  and  —  3  for  the
crests.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  double  mode  persists  in  the  averaged  dis-
tribution of  the  troughs.  The  primary  mode  is  in  the  group  centering
about  17  per  cent  below  the  trend  lines,  the  secondary  mode  in  the
group  centering  about  minus  7  per  cent.  The  intermediate  interval,
12  per  cent,  is  the  point  of  greatest  concentration  of  the  crests.  The
distribution  which  combines  crests  and  troughs  has  almost  equal
values  at  7,  12  and  17  per  cent  deviations  from  trend  values.

On  the  whole,  there  is  no  clear  evidence  of  the  existence  of  two
distinct  types  of  business  cycles — major  and  minor,  or  violent  and
mild — in  these  observations  concerning  extreme  deviations  from  the
trends.  Of  course  there  are  major  business  cycles  and  minor  ones,
just  as  there  are  tall  men  and  short  men  in  every  race ;  but  when  all
the  deviations  at  the  crests  and  troughs  of  business  cycles  are  put
together  they  suggest  a  homogeneous  group  of  phenomena  rather
than  a  mixture  of  two  species.  Yet  the  volume  of  data  is  not  sufl&cient
to  close  the  question.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


351


TABLE  21

Frequency  Distributions  op  111  Observations  upon  the  Amplitude  op  the  Per-
centage Deviations  op  Five  Business  Indexes  prom  Their  Respective  Trends
AT  THE  Troughs  and  Crests  op  American  Business  Cycles:  1878-1923.

Data  from  Table  17
Averages  of  five  groupings  of  the  observations. See  text
Scales  of  Percentage

Deviations  Number  of  Observations
Central  points  of  the

groups  averaged  Actual  Numbers  Percentages  of  Totals

Troughs Crests  Troughs Crests Both  Troughs  Crests  Both

+  8 -  8  0.2 ... 0.2  0.4  ...  0.2

+  3 -  3  2.0 1.8 3.8  3.6  3.3  3.4

-  2 4-2  8.6 3.0 11.6  15.4  5.5  10.5

-  7  +7  11.4  13.8  25.2  20.4  25.1  22.7
-12  +12  7.8  16.0  23.8  13.9  29.1  21.4
-17  +17  14.2  11.0  25.2  25.4  20.0  22.7
-22  +22  8.0  5.0  13.0  14.3  9.1  11.7
-27  +27  2.8  2.8  5.6  5.0  5.1  5.0
-32  +32  1.0  1.2  2.2  1.8  2.2  2.0
-37 +37  ... 0.4 0.4  ...  0.7  0.4

Totals  56.0  55.0 111.0  100.2 100.1 100.0

Arithmetic  Standard  Coefficients  of

Means  Medians  deviations  variation

Troughs 12.6  13.5  7.88  63%

Crests 13.0  12.0  7.54  58%

Both i2.8  12.7  7.92  52%

FREQUENCY DIAGRAMS
PERCENTAGE  BASIS


TROUGHS


CRESTS


BOTH


25


20


15


10


:?g


1


25


20


15


:x :Kry:.. :k


8 3 2 7 12  17  22  27  32  37

SCALE OF OCVIATIONS
FROM  TRCNO


3 2 7 12  17  22  27  32  37

SCALE OF DEVIATIONS
rROM  TRLND


7  ^

rn — I I I — r-\ — I I I I

8 3 2 7 12 17  22  27  32  37

SCALE or DEVIATIONS
FROM  TREND


10


352  BUSINESS  CYCLES

Additional  evidence  upon  this  important  point  can  be  obtained  by
analyzing  in  similar  fashion  the  figures  given  in  Table  18  concerning
the  percentage  amplitude  of  the  swings  from  crest  to  trough,  and
from  trough  to  crest  of  successive  cycles.  Of  course,  the  same  mate-
rials under  he  this  table  and  the  one  we  have  just  been  using;  but
the  deviations,  instead  of  being  taken  always  with  reference  to  the
base  lines,  are  combined  in  two  new  ways :  first  a  deviation  in  a  trough
is  added  (without  regard  to  signs)  to  the  next  deviation  at  a  crest;
then  the  latter  deviation  is  added  to  that  at  the  following  trough,  and
so  on.  Such  re-groupings  of  data  are  most  useful  in  trying  to  deter-
mine whether  multiple  modes  reveal  features  which  are  accidental
or  characteristic  of  the  series  in  which  they  occur.

Again  I  have  used  a  span  of  5  points;  centered  my  groups  suc-
cessively around  movements  of  2,  7,  12  .  .  .,  3,  8,  13  .  .  .,  4,  9,  14
.  .  .,  5,  10,  15  .  .  .,  and  6,  11,  16  .  .  .  per  cent  of  trend  values,  and
finally  averaged  all  the  groupings  together.  Double  modes  appear
in  most  of  the  groupings;  but  they  shift  location  as  the  groupings
change,  and  they  dwindle  when  the  five  groupings  are  combined  in
a  general  average.

Thus  Table  22,  which  presents  the  final  outcome  of  these  opera-
tions, confirms  the  impression  made  by  Table  21.  The  diagram  for
the  declines  from  crest  to  trough  shows  a  slight  secondary  mode  at
34  per  cent  separated  from  the  primary  mode  by  a  wider  interval
than  appeared  in  Table  21,  while  the  diagram  for  the  advances  from
trough  to  crest  shows  almost  equal  frequencies  at  19  and  29  per  cent,
and  a  slight  increase  from  34  to  39  per  cent.  But  the  diagram  which
includes  both  declines  and  advances  rises  rapidly  to  a  single  mode
and  then  falls  gradually  step  by  step  with  one  slight  arrest  in  the
descent.  On  the  whole  our  frequency  distributions  of  the  amplitudes
of  cyclical  fluctuations  are  somewhat  more  regular  than  our  distribu-
tions of  their  durations,  and  afford  even  less  basis  for  supposing  that
there  are  two  or  more  distinct  species  of  business  cycles.

That  business  cycles  bring  enormous  economic  losses  upon  a  coun-
try is  clear  from  this  study  of  their  amplitudes.  Reckoned  in  per-
centages of  ordinates  of  secular  trend,  the  declines  from  the  crests  to
the  troughs  of  business  cycles  in  the  United  States  from  1878  to  1923
averaged  more  than  a  fifth  in  Snyder's  clearings  index,  and  more  than
a  quarter  in  all  the  other  series.  The  grand  average  of  all  the  ob-
servations is  25.5  per  cent. In  extreme  cases,  these  declines  exceeded


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS


353


I


TABLE  22

Frequency  Distributions  of  106  Observations,  Made  from  Five  Indexes  of  Busi-
ness Conditions,  upon  the  Amplitude  of  the  Rise  from  Trough  to  Crest  and
THE  Decline  prom  Crest  to  Trough  in  American  Business  Cycles,  1878-1923,
'Reckoned  in  Percentages  of  Trend  Values.

Data  from  Table  18
Averages  of  five  groupings  of  the  observations. See  text
Scale  of  percentage  Number  of  Observations

rise  or  decline

Actual  Numbers  Percentages  of  Totals


Central  points

of  the  groups

averaged

Decline

Rise

Both

Decline

Rise

Both

4

0.2

0.8

1.0

0.4

1.5

0.9

9

2.0

2.6

4.6

3.9

4.7

4.3

14

9.8

8.8

18.6

19.2

16.0

17.5

19

11.8

10.0

21.8

23.1

18.2

20.6

24

6.2

8.8

15.0

12.2

16.0

14.1

29

5.6

9.8

15.4

11.0

17.8

14.5

34

6.4

4.4

10.8

12.5

8.0

10.2

39

5.0

5.4

10.4

9.8

9.8

9.8

44

1.2

2.4

3.6

2.4

4.4

3.4

49

1.6

1.0

2.6

3.1

1.8

2.5

54

1.2

0.6

1.8

2.4

1.1

1.7

59

51.0

0.4
55.0

0.4

106.0

...

0.7

100.0

0.4

Totals

100.0

99.9

Arithmetic
means

Medians

Standard
deviations

Coefficients  of
variation

Decline

. . . . 25.5

23

10.99

43%

Rise

. . . . 25.6

25

10.97

43%

Both

. . . . 25.5

24.2

10.89

43%

FREQUENCY DIAGRAMS
PERCENTAGE  BASIS


DECLINES


ADVANCES


BOTH


20-

15-

10-

5-

Oi


AMPLITUDE OF  OE.CLINE:
IN  PERCENTAGES  OF  TREND


JTJI


_ "-u-i  I


AMPLITUDE OF  ADVANCE
IN  PERCENTAGES  OF  TREND


-20
■15

10

5

10


AMPLITUDE OF  ADVANCE AND  DECLINE
IN  PERCENTAGES  OF  TREND


354  BUSINESS  CYCLES

35,  45,  and  even  50  per  cent  of  the  levels  indicated  by  the  trends.
Perhaps  the  data  from  which  these  indexes  are  made  overweight  the
activities  which  are  particularly  susceptible  to  the  business-cyclf.
hazard ;  that  is  another  question  which  requires  the  study  of  elaborate
evidence  which  would  be  confusing  here.  But  one  might  make  large
reductions  on  this  score  and  still  leave  a  huge  charge  against  depres-
sions, without  counting  the  lasting  impairment  of  efficiency  pro-
duced by  business  demoralization  and  unemployment.

(8)  The  Distinctive  Character  of  Each  Business  Cycle.

As  one  analyzes  successive  business  cycles  in  various  ways,  one
finds  evidence,  even  in  the  bleak  statistical  records  here  used,  that
each  cycle  has  special  characteristics  of  its  own,  or  rather  a  special
combination  of  characteristics.  More  intensive  study  carried  over  a
wider  range  in  time  and  space  would  strengthen  this  impression.
Strictly  speaking,  every  business  cycle  is  a  unique  historical  episode,
differing  in  significant  ways  from  all  its  predecessors,  and  never  to
be  repeated  in  the  future.  Of  course,  the  theory  of  business  cycles
aims  primarily  to  find  generalizations  which  can  be  applied  to  all
cases.  But  it  is  wise  for  those  on  theory  bent  to  realize  clearly  the
multi-faceted  variability  of  their  cases.  Such  knowledge  may  even
help  them  in  the  process  of  establishing  generalizations.  For  one
who  is  familiar  with  the  idiosyncrasies  of  particular  cycles  will  some-
times see  that  a  given  rule  does  apply  to  cases  which  at  first  sight
seem  to  form  exceptions.  Both  as  a  contribution  to  our  general  under-
standing of  business  cycles  and  as  an  aid  to  our  later  inquiries,  we
may  note  briefly  some  of  the  salient  characteristics  of  the  American
cycles  of  1878  to  1923.

(1)  The  cycle  of  1878-85  followed  an  exceptionally  long  and  ex-
ceptionally severe  period  of  depression.  When  it  finally  started,
revival  was  rapid;  prosperity  was  sustained  at  a  high  level  for  an
unusually  long  time;  the  recession  was  gentle,  and  the  decline  long
drawn  out.  The  only  season  of  acute  financial  strain  in  this  cycle
came,  not  at  the  downward  turning  point,  but  late  in  the  decline —
the  so-called  "crisis  of  1884."

(2)  While  the  period  of  expansion  was  decidedly  shorter  than
the  period  of  contraction  in  the  cycle  of  1878-85,  the  reverse  was  true
in  the  cycle  of  1885-88.  Again  the  recession  was  mild,  there  was  no
period  of  acute  financial  stress,  and  the  depression  was  not  severe.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  355

(3)  In  the  cycle  of  1888-91  prosperity  attained  a  higher  pitch
than  in  its  predecessor,  though  not  so  high  as  in  1881.  The  recession
of  1890  was  accompanied  by  more  financial  strain  than  occurred  in
1882  or  1887;  but  the  difficulties  seem  to  have  been  due  largely  to
foreign  influences  connected  with  the  collapse  of  Baring  Brothers  in
London.  The  period  of  decline  was  even  briefer  and  milder  than  in
the  preceding  cycle,  being  cut  short  by  an  unusual  harvest  situation.
The  world  crop  of  wheat  was  poor  in  1891,  the  American  crop  abun-
dant. Hence  our  farmers  sold  a  large  amount  of  grain  at  prices  high
for  that  period.  Their  prosperity,  shared  by  the  '^granger"  railroads
and  distributors  in  the  agricultural  districts,  contributed  powerfully
to  an  early  resumption  of  activity.

(4)  The  next  period  of  expansion,  1891-93,  was  briefer  than  any
of  its  predecessors  shown  by  our  indexes.  It  was  terminated  by  the
great  panic  of  1893,  one  of  the  longest  and  severest  crises  in  American
business  history.  While  this  business  wave  had  not  risen  to  a  high
crest,  its  trough  was  very  low.

(5)  We  may  call  the  fluctuations  of  1894-97  a  submerged  cycle.
Although  the  amplitudes  of  the  rise  and  the  decline  were  not  far  from
the  average  amplitudes  shown  by  Table  18,  the  preceding  and  the
following  troughs  were  so  low  that  the  crest  of  the  wave  did  not  quite
reach  the  base  line  in  two  of  our  indexes,  and  barely  rose  above  the
base  line  in  two  others.

(6)  Rising  slowly  from  the  low  point  of  1897,  business  had
not  attained  a  very  high  level  when  it  was  interrupted  by  the  mild
reaction  of  1900.  As  in  1890,  foreign  difficulties  seem  to  have  been
largely  responsible  for  the  recession.  The  period  of  contraction  was
both  brief  and  mild.

(7)  The  cycle  of  1900-04  contained  the  Northern  Pacific  corner
of  1901,  and  the  peculiar  ^'rich-man's  panic"  of  1903.  In  financial
circles  the  fluctuations  were  of  great  amplitude,  as  Snyder's  deposits
index  shows.  But  business  of  other  sorts  was  affected  relatively  little.
The  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company's  index  makes  this
cycle  the  mildest  in  our  list,  while  Snyder's  deposits  index  makes  it
the  most  intense.

(8)  Perhaps  better  than  any  other  case  in  our  period,  the  fluctua-
tions of  1904-08  answer  to  the  generalized  conception  of  a  business
cycle  presented  in  the  theoretical  treatises.  From  the  depression  of
1904,  business  made  a  fine  recovery  in  1905,  maintained  a  high  pitch
of  prosperity  for  some  two  years,  passed  through  a  severe  crisis  in  the


356  BUSINESS  CYCLES

autumn  of  1907,  and  plunged  into  a  new  depression  in  1908.  All  the
familiar  phenomena  appeared  in  standard  succession  and  sharply-
defined.

(9)  and  (10)  The  next  two  cycles  (1908-11  and  1911-14),  on  the
other  hand,  were  mild  affairs.  While  the  revival  from  the  depression
of  1908  was  vigorous,  it  did  not  lead  to  a  boom;  the  recession  in  1910
was  not  sharp,  the  depression  of  1911  was  not  severe,  and  the  succeed-
ing period  of  expansion  of  1912-13  was  terminated  early  by  another
mild  recession.  But  the  depression  which  closed  the  second  of  these
cycles  gained  dramatic  intensity  when  it  was  accentuated  by  the
outbreak  of  war  at  the  end  of  July,  1914*.

(11)  Of  course  the  war-time  cycle  of  1914-18  was  distinguished
by  unusual  features^ — extraordinary  price  fluctuations,  a  not  less
extraordinary  shift  in  the  character  of  production,  extreme  scarcity
of  labor,  abundance  of  loan  funds,  and,  toward  the  end,  by  government
intervention  in  business  on  an  unprecedented  scale.

(12)  Hardly  less  exceptional  was  the  first  post-war  cycle  of  1918-
21.  After  the  brief  and  mild  depression  ushered  in  by  the  Armistice
of  November,  1918,  business  started  on  a  boom  so  sudden  that  the
period  which  can  be  labeled  ^'revival"  was  very  brief.  Again  the
price  fluctuations  were  extremely  violent.  The  crisis  was  of  excep-
tional severity  so  far  as  industry  was  concerned,  and,  while  the  Fed-
eral Reserve  System  bore  the  financial  strain  with  marked  success,
the  subsequent  depression  was  one  of  the  worst  in  American  experi-
ence. Yet  one  who  realizes  how  profoundly  economic  activities  in
the  United  States  were  affected  by  the  great  war,  from  the  time
when  its  sudden  onset  shattered  confidence  to  the  time  when  industry
won  back  to  a  peace  basis,  must  wonder  that  it  altered  the  usual  round
of  business  cycles  so  little.  A  person  who  did  not  know  when  the
great  war  occurred,  could  not  date  it  from  inspection  of  our  five  busi-
ness indexes,  though  it  would  stand  out  clearly  in  indexes  made  largely
from  price  series.

(13)  During  the  cycle  of  1921-24,  American  business  gradually
returned  to  more  settled  conditions.  While  price  fluctuations  con-
tinued greater  than  they  had  been  from  1878  to  1914,  the  price  sys-
tem attained  a  new  equilibrium.  After  a  rather  slow  recovery  from
the  depression  of  1921,  business  had  a  short  period  of  almost  feverish
activity  early  in  1923,  suffered  a  check,  recovered  in  the  opening
months  of  1924,  and  then  entered  upon  a  sharper  decline.

(14)  From  this  trough  in  the  middle  of  1924  we  may  date  the


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  357

beginning  of  the  cycle  in  the  later  stages  of  which  this  account  is
written.

VII. The  Need  of  Combining  Theory,  Statistics,  and  History.

From  the  outset  of  this  inquiry  into  business  cycles,  the  need  of
statistical  work  has  been  clear.  The  first  demonstration  came  from
a  quarter  which  few  might  expect — a  review  of  theories  made  on
non-statistical  lines.  By  showing  how  many  processes  are  involved
in  business  cycles,  these  theories  raised  a  series  of  essentially  quanti-
tative problems.  Which  of  the  causes  of  cyclical  fluctuations  stressed
by  different  theorists  are  the  most  important?  How  considerable  are
the  effects  produced  by  these  causes,  directly  and  indirectly?  What
changes  occur  simultaneously?  In  what  sequence,  and  after  what
intervals  do  other  changes  follow?  How  regular  are  cyclical  fluctua-
tions? All  these  are  obviously  questions  which  call  for  measured
observations — very  many  measured  observations  upon  diverse  proc-
esses, systematically  made  in  numerous  markets  over  long  series  of
years — in  short,  the  type  of  observations  which  constitute  statistics.
Indeed,  the  idea  suggested  itself  at  the  close  of  Chapter  I,  that  the
whole  inquiry  might  shift  from  a  search  for  causes  conducted  in  the
light  of  common  reason  to  a  quasi-mathematical  study  of  the  inter-
relations among  a  number  of  complex  variables.

Again  in  Chapter  II,  when  discussing  the  economic  organization
within  which  business  cycles  run  their  course,  we  found  ourselves
facing  quantitative  issues  at  every  turn.  From  the  section  which
dealt  with  the  proportions  of  ''reaF'  income  which  families  produce
for  themselves  and  the  proportions  which  they  buy  with  money,  to  the
section  on  international  differences  of  organization,  we  had  to  answer
as  best  we  could  questions  of  how  much  and  how  often.

But  now  that  in  the  present  chapter  we  have  surveyed  the  statis-
tical materials  and  methods  of  particular  concern  to  students  of  busi-
ness cycles,  we  see  that  there  are  grave  limitations  upon  the  help  we
can  expect  from  this  source.  Rapid  progress  has  been  made  by  the
last  generation  in  gathering  and  in  utilizing  statistical  data;  yet  we
are  far  from  the  goal  of  establishing  the  study  of  business  cycles  upon
a  strictly  statistical  basis.

On  the  technical  side,  our  methods  of  determining  both  the  secular
trends  and  the  seasonal  variations  of  time  series  are  rough.  So  far,
no  one  has  segregated  irregular  from  cyclical  fluctuations. While  a


358  BUSINESS  CYCLES

method  of  approximating  that  result  was  suggested  above  and  will
be  elaborated  in  Chapter  V,  it  yields  only  averages,  and  is  applicable
only  to  series  which  cover  a  considerable  number  of  cycles.  Neither
the  visual  study  of  charts  nor  the  coefficient  of  correlation  are  wholly
satisfactory  methods  of  determining  the  relationships  among  fluctua-
tions. In  precisely  what  forms  series  should  be  expressed  to  bring
out  their  most  significant  relationships  is  a  problem  which  statisticians
have  posed  rather  than  solved.  Little  systematic  work  has  been  done
toward  measuring  the  amplitude  of  the  cyclical-irregular  fluctuations
characteristic  of  different  processes.  More  attention  has  been  given
to  the  problems  of  time  sequence,  but  the  results  are  neither  compre-
hensive nor  secure.  Finally,  we  have  no  index  numbers  of  business
cycles,  nor  any  definite  program  for  making  them.  As  substitutes  we
must  use  a  somewhat  haphazard  collection  of  indexes  relating  to  such
processes  as  happen  to  have  been  recorded  in  statistical  form  for
considerable  periods.

Yet  graver  limitations  are  imposed  by  the  paucity  of  statistical
materials.  Of  the  various  processes  which  the  theories  reviewed  in
Chapter  I  represent  as  of  crucial  importance,  we  have  satisfactory
data  concerning  not  one.  Wholesale  prices,  foreign  trade,  banking,
railway  transportation,  the  metropolitan  money  and  securities  mar-
kets are  the  fields  best  covered  in  the  United  States ;  but  the  investi-
gator who  works  on  any  of  these  subjects  develops  many  problems  for
which  he  cannot  get  solutions  from  his  data.  About  profits,  savings,
advance  orders  and  other  future  commitments,  the  production  of
consumers'  goods  and  industrial  equipment,  the  amount  of  income
disbursed  to  consumers  and  their  spending,  our  information  is
fragmentary.  In  certain  respects  other  countries  offer  better  data
than  the  United  States — the  British  unemployment  returns,  and  the
German  receipts  from  the  tax  on  domestic  bills  of  exchange  are  ex-
amples; but  broadly  speaking  the  foreign  records  are  more  deficient
than  our  own.

To  overcome  this  handicap  so  far  as  possible,  the  National  Bureau
of  Economic  Research  has  made  a  systematic  collection  of  economic
and  social  statistics  for  the  United  States,  Great  Britain,  France  and
Germany,  which  it  hopes  to  publish  in  the  near  future  for  the  benefit
of  all  workers  in  the  social  sciences.  Each  series  is  described,  anno-
tated, and  presented  by  months  or  quarters,  if  possible,  for  the  full
period  since  its  start.  The  collection  covers  in  considerable  detail  all
types  of  economic  activity,  and  the  leading  indicia  of  social  changes.


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  STATISTICS  359

By  enlisting  the  cooperation  of  foreign  experts,  the  compilers,  Dr.
Willard  L.  Thorp  and  Mr.  Harold  Villard,  hope  to  keep  errors  of
omission  and  commission  to  a  minimum.  In  addition,  the  National
Bureau  is  compiling  various  new  series  of  data  which  throw  light  upon
salient  aspects  of  business  cycles.  Dr.  Frederick  R.  Macaulay's  studies
of  bond  yields  and  interest  rates  since  1857,  Dr.  Harry  Jerome's
monograph  upon  Migration  and  Business  Cycles,  Dr.  Leo  Wolman's
critical  investigations  of  the  labor  market.  Dr.  Frederick  C.  Mills'
intensive  work  upon  the  interrelations  among  price  fluctuations,  and
Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets'  study  of  secular  trends  all  promise  contribu-
tions of  importance.  Incidental  use  can  be  made  also  of  our  earlier
studies  of  unemployment,  and  of  Dr.  Willford  I.  King's  continuing
estimates  of  income.  By  utilizing  the  general  collection  of  statistics,
together  with  the  special  studies  made  by  the  National  Bureau  and
other  agencies,  we  shall  be  doing  what  we  can  to  give  our  inquiry  a
secure  foundation  of  measurements.

One  other  source  we  have,  intermediate  between  statistics  and
casual  observation.  This  is  the  collection  of  Business  Annals,  re-
cently published  by  the  National  Bureau.  Diligent  ransacking  and
critical  comparison  of  many  reports,  periodicals,  and  pamphlets  en-
abled Dr.  Thorp  to  trace  the  course  of  business  cycles  over  a  longer
period  and  a  wider  area  than  is  covered  by  any  but  the  most  meager
statistics.  From  his  systematic  records  we  can  learn  certain  broad
facts  about  the  characteristics  of  recent  cycles  in  countries  of  varying
culture,  and  of  early  cycles  in  the  countries  which  concern  us  most.
These  annals  give  the  best  opportunity  for  studying  the  international
relationships  of  business  fluctuations.  They  enable  us  even  to  make
crude  measurements  of  the  duration  of  business  cycles,  which  by
covering  many  more  cases  supplement  and  broaden  the  conclusions
drawn  above  from  the  business  indexes.  Exploiting  this  fresh  source
is  our  next  task.

Just  as  a  review  of  theories  of  business  cycles  made  us  see  the
need  of  statistics,  so  our  review  of  statistics  makes  us  see  the  need
of  economic  history.  Of  course  our  historical  survey  must  be  con-
densed, like  our  summary  of  theories.  When  that  survey  has  been
completed,  we  shall  not  dwell  upon  the  limitations  of  business  annals
— they  will  be  obvious.

It  is  wise  to  face  the  shortcomings  of  each  of  these  approaches  to
one  problem — the  theoretical,  the  statistical,  and  the  historical.  But
critical  though  we  must  be  of  all  our  materials  and  methods,  we  can


360  BUSINESS  CYCLES

put  the  criticisms  to  constructive  uses.  What  has  just  been  said  con-
cerning the  limitations  of  statistics  should  not  check,  but  guide  our
dealings  with  tables  and  charts.  The  diversity  of  theories  sketched
in  Chapter  I,  all  plausible  and  each  claiming  to  reveal  the  cause  of
most  importance,  seemed  rather  disconcerting.  But  from  each  ex-
planation we  may  get  some  suggestion  of  value,  and  certainly  neither
our  statistics  nor  our  condensed  business  histories  will  enable  us  to
do  without  much  reasoning  of  the  sort  relied  upon  by  economic
theorists.  To  win  as  much  knowledge  as  we  can  of  business  cycles,
we  must  combine  all  that  we  can  learn  from  theory,  statistics,  and
history.


CHAPTER  IV.

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS.

I. The  National  Bureau's  Collection  of  Business  Annals.

Several  of  the  theorists  whose  writings  were  laid  under  contribu-
tion in  Chapter  I — notably  Tugan-Baranovski,  Bouniatian  and
Lescure — have  devoted  much  attention  to  the  history  of  crises  and
depressions.  Similarly,  some  of  the  statisticians  referred  to  in  Chap-
ter III — for  example,  Warren  M.  Persons  and  his  colleagues — have
supplemented  their  time  series  on  occasion  by  preparing  annual  sum-
maries of  business  conditions.  But  the  histories  have  dealt  largely
with  what  was  common  in  the  episodes  treated,  and  the  summaries
have  been  confined  to  rather  brief  periods  in  a  few  countries.  For
theoretical  uses,  there  is  needed  a  systematic  record  of  cyclical  alterna-
tions of  prosperity  and  depression,  covering  all  countries  in  which
the  phenomena  have  appeared,  and  designed  to  make  clear  the  re-
current features  of  the  alternations.  If  the  view  taken  in  Chapter
II  of  the  circumstances  under  which  business  cycles  occur  is  valid,
it  may  not  be  impracticable  to  make  a  modest  descriptive  record  of
this  sort  which  approximates  completeness.

While  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  has  not  been
able  to  perform  this  whole  task,  it  has  sought  to  form  a  larger  collec-
tion of  what  we  may  call  "business  annals"  than  has  been  available
hitherto.  Dr.  Willard  L.  Thorp,  who  directed  the  work  of  compilation,
ransacked  the  rich  resources  of  the  New  York  Public  Library  for
official  documents,  reports,  pamphlets,  periodicals,  and  books  dealing
systematically  or  incidentally  with  business  conditions  in  various
countries.  The  generous  cooperation  of  several  foreign  scholars
brought  additional  materials  and  special  knowledge  to  the  work.^
For  every  year  and  every  country  covered,  the  plan  required  a  digest

^  Professor  Albert  Aftalion  of  Paris  reviewed  the  French  annals,  Dr.  Robert  R.
Kuczynski  of  Berlin  the  German  annals,  Dr.  F.  A.  von  Hayek  of  Vienna  the  Austrian
annals,  Dr.  Robert  F.  Foerster  the  Italian  annals,  Dr.  E.  H.  D.  Arndt  of  Transvaal
University  the  South  African  annals,  and  Drs.  N.  D.  Kondratieff,  A.  L.  Vainstein  and
M.  B.  Ignatieff  of  the  Conjuncture  Institute,  Moscow,  the  Russian  annals.

361


'362  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  contemporary  opinions  concerning  (1)  industrial,  commercial  and
labor  conditions,  (2)  conditions  in  the  markets  for  loans,  securities,
and  foreign  exchange,  (3)  agricultural  production  and  prices,  and
(4)  non-economic  occurrences,  such  as  pohtical  events,  epidemics,
floods  or  earthquakes,  which  seem  to  have  influenced  business  ap-
preciably. From  such  information  as  he  could  gather  upon  these
four  heads.  Dr.  Thorp  formed  his  own  opinion  concerning  the  phase
of  the  business  cycle  through  which  the  country  in  question  was  pass-
ing each  year,  and  expressed  his  opinion  in  a  brief  caption.

Annals  of  this  sort  for  the  United  States  have  been  carried  back
to  1790,  the  first  year  after  the  adoption  of  the  Constitution.  To
make  possible  international  comparisons  from  the  beginning  of  the
American  record,  English  annals  have  been  compiled  for  the  same  136
years.  Lack  of  accessible  sources,  or  lack  of  economic  unity,  made  it
difficult  to  go  back  of  1840  in  France,  1853  in  Germany,  and  1867
in  Austria.  To  show  the  geographical  spread  of  business  fluctuations
in  recent  times,  several  other  countries  were  added  to  the  five  covered
in  the  long-period  studies.  With  1890  as  the  starting-point  in  all
eases,  Italy,  the  Netherlands,  Sweden,  and  Russia  were  chosen  yto
show  diversified  conditions  in  Europe.  Next,  three  great  English-
speaking  colonies  on  three  continents  were  taken — Canada,  Australia,
and  South  Africa.  To  represent  South  America,  Argentina  and  Brazil
seemed  fittest.  Finally  the  foremost  Oriental  civilizations  were  in-
cluded— British  India,  Japan  and  China.  Needless  to  say,  the  sample
might  well  have  been  enlarged,  both  by  carrying  the  annals  back  to
earlier  dates  in  several  of  the  nations  covered,  and  by  including  at-
least  a  dozen  other  countries.  The  National  Bureau  hopes  that  what
it  lacked  means  to  accomplish  may  be  done  by  men  who  have  access
to  the  fullest  records  available  for  the  periods  and  the  countries  it
has  omitted.

Limited  as  it  is  in  scope,  our  collection  of  annals  attained  propor-
tions and  a  promise  of  usefulness  which  called  for  independerft  pub-
lication. In  the  present  book,  we  can  use  the  volume  of  Business
Annals  much  as  we  use  the  coordinate  statistical  series.^ '^  '

>

"  See  Business  Annals,  by  Willard  Long  Thorp,  Publications  of  the  National  Bureau
of  Economic  Research,  No.  8,  New  York,  1926.

The  present  chapter  consists  mainly  of  the  "Introduction"  which  I  contributed  to
Dr.  Thorp's  book,  with  such  omissions,  emendations,  and  additions  as  are  suggested  by
its  relation  to  earlier  chapters,  or  by  sober  second  thoughts.  Once  more  I  may  thank
the  National  Bureau's  staff,  especially  Dr.  Frederick  C.  Mills  and  Dr.  Thorp,  for  much
help  in  analyzing  the  material  contained  in  the  annals.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 363

II. The  Trustworthiness  of  Business  Annals*

1. Sources  and  Methods  of  Compilation.

The  materials  with  which  compilers  of  business  annals  work  lack
the  objectivity,  as  well  as  the  formal  precision,  of  statistics.  A  man's
opinion  concerning  the  fortunes  of  business  in  a  given  year  is  affected
by  his  personal  interests,  his  training,  his  opportunities  for  making
observations  himself  and  collecting  the  observations  of  others,  his
aptitude  for  generalizing,  and  the  care  with  which  he  studies  his
evidence.

;  One  who  begins  sampling  contemporary  opinions  concerning  busi-
ness conditions  in  any  country  with  this  reflection  in  mind,  will  be
impressed  less  by  the  differences  among  the  conclusions  reached  by
various  observers  than  by  their  consensus.  In  the  majority  of  years,
^business  developments  are  dominated  by  a  trend  so  clear  that  it  im-
presses every  thoughtful  observer,  whatever  his  personal  equation
may  be.  Of  course,  there  are  years  in  the  record  of  every  country
when  such  is  not  the  case.  When  the  investigator  finds  serious  dis-
crepancies among  his  sources,  he  must  sometimes  ascribe  them  to  bias
or  incompetence  on  the  part  of  one  or  more  writers;  but  more  often
he  di^overs  that  the  writers  who  seem  to  disagree  referred  to  different
industries  or  different  sections  of  a  country — industries  or  sections
which  had  divergent  fortunes.  ,

^  As  the  activities  of  a  people  get  more  definitely  organized  on  the
h^sis  of  business  economy,  the  sources  of  information  concerning
%(siness  become  more  numerous,  more  reliable,  and  more  alike  in
tenor.  On  the  one  hand,  different  industries  and  different  sections
of  the  country  are  tied  more  closely  together,  so  that  prosperity  or
depression  in  one  affects  more,  and  is  more  affected  by,  prosperity  or
depression  in  others.  We  shall  have  occasion  to  observe,  for  example,
that  the  American  annals  reveal  greater  similarity  of  fortunes  in  the
opening  years  of  the  20th  century  than  in  the  closing  years  of  the
l§th  century.  On  the  other  hand,  business  reporting  becomes  a
profession,  and  undergoes  a  development  comparable  in  character  to
the  contemporary  development  in  gathering  statistics.  Indeed,  these
^wo  developments  foster  one  another.  Since  about  the  middle  of
tne  19th  century  in  England  and  the  United  States,  and  since  later
dates  in  other  countries,  there  have  been  established  an  increasing


364  BUSINESS  CYCLES

number  of  periodicals  which  report  business  developments  weekly  or
monthly  to  critical  circles  of  subscribers.  Government  agencies,  espe-
cially the  consular  offices,  render  similar  services  to  the  whole  business
public.  In  recent  years,  it  is  possible  to  find  for  all  the  countries  in-
cluded in  our  annals  several  sources  of  information,  domestic  or  for-
eign, which  can  be  checked  against  each  other.  In  default  of  local
periodicals,  British,  French  and  American  consular  reports  can  be
drawn  upon  for  information  concerning  trade  in  every  quarter  of  the
world.  And  besides  the  reports  made  at  regular  intervals  for  every
country,  there  is  a  much  longer  list  of  pamphlets  and  books  which
throw  light  upon  business  affairs  at  different  times.  The  bibliography
Appended  to  Dr.  Thorp's  report  shows  how  numerous  and  how  varied
are  the  sources  upon  which  a  diligent  compiler  of  business  annals  can
draw.

In  proportion  as  his  sources  multiply,  an  alert  compiler,  like  an
alert  historian,  realizes  that  his  own  work  has  its  subjective  side.
The  few  sentences  he  writes  to  summarize  the  mass  of  material  are
colored  by  his  personal  equation,  compounded  of  his  preconceptions,
his  knowledge  and  his  ignorance,  his  technical  training,  and  all  the
other  characteristics  which  enter  subtly  into  his  appreciation  of  vari-
ous bits  of  evidence.  From  the  same  set  of  sources,  no  two  compilers
will  make  quite  the  same  summaries.  In  most  years,  the  differences
will  be  slight  in  comparison  with  the  similarities;  but  in  the  years
when  business  conditions  as  seen  by  contemporaries  are  confused,  two
compilers  may  get  appreciably  different  impressions  concerning  the
situation  as  a  whole.

Perhaps  the  gravest  danger  lurking  in  the  statistical  treatment
of  social  problems  is  that,  once  data  have  been  compiled  into  neatly
published  tables,  the  figures  gain  a  pontifical  authority  over  many
minds.  Field  statisticians  who  provide  the  original  data  usually  re-
tain a  prudent  skepticism  concerning  the  representative  value  of  the
precise-seeming  results  toward  which  they  have  contributed.  But
'^arm-chair  statisticians,'^  who  have  never  filled  in  a  questionnaire
from  interviews,  deciphered  a  factory  payroll,  audited  the  accounts
of  a  business  enterprise,  or  assessed  the  value  of  a  stock  of  merchan-
dise, are  prone  to  put  unmerited  confidence  in  tables  they  wish  to
analyze.  Business  annals  have  not  yet  won  undeserved  credit.  But
it  is  not  premature  to  point  out  that  the  crisp  phrases,  in  which  a
compiler  of  annals  sets  down  his  conclusions  for  country  after  country
and  year  after  year,  are  as  much  subject  to  a  margin  of  error  as  are


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 365

statistical  summaries.  The  compiler,  like  the  statistical  field  worker,
is  sure  that  the  width  of  this  margin  varies  from  entry  to  entry;  but,
again  like  the  field  statistician,  he  cannot  feel  much  confidence  in  his
own  estimate  of  his  probable  error.

2. A  Comparison  of  Business  Annals  and  Business  Indexes.

Fortunately,  there  is  a  way  of  testing  two  samples  of  the  National
Bureau's  annals  objectively.  As  seen  in  the  preceding  chapter,  we
have  statistical  indexes  of  business  conditions  in  the  United  States  and
England  which  cover  considerable  periods.  If  these  series  deserve
their  name,  the  fluctuations  which  they  show  in  economic  activity  and
the  business  changes  which  our  annals  describe  may  be  expected  to
run  similar  courses.

While  Dr.  Thorp  and  his  assistants  have  made  some  use  of
statistical  tables  in  compiling  their  annals,  and  while  the  writers
whose  observations  constitute  their  sources  have  done  likewise,  it
is  by  no  means  a  foregone  conclusion  that  the  annals  and  the  indexes
of  business  activity  will  agree  closely.  For  the  data  used  in  making
the  indexes  cover  a  much  narrower  range  of  economic  activities  than
are  represented  in  the  annual  business  reviews  of  such  sources  as
consular  reports,  the  London  Economist,  Raffalovich's  Marche
Financier,  or  the  Financial  Review,  Moreover,  in  so  far  as  consuls,
or  editors,  or  our  own  compilers  have  used  statistics  in  drawing  their
conclusions,  they  have  used  the  data  in  unadjusted,  or  but  slightly
altered  form.  The  statisticians  who  make  business  indexes,  on  the
other  hand,  subject  their  data  to  the  elaborate  series  of  transforma-
tions described  in  Chapter  III.  They  compute  and  eliminate  secular
trends;  often  they  eliminate  also  seasonal  variations;  in  some  cases
they  seek  to  eliminate  the  effects  of  price  fluctuations.  When  they
are  combining  several  series,  they  may  reduce  the  fluctuations  of  each
to  units  of  its  standard  deviation,  and  ''weight"  their  averages  as
best  they  can.  As  a  final  step  they  often  "smooth"  their  curves.
All  these  operations  are  quite  different  from  those  which  a  financial
editor  performs  when  he  passes  through  his  mind  reports  from  many
cities  and  many  industries,  and  sets  down  his  broad  conclusion  con-
cerning the  course  of  business  as  a  whole.  The  statistical  operations
are  more  objective  and  more  precise;  but  they  deal  with  more  limited
data,  and  deal  with  them  in  a  more  circumscribed  and  mechanical
fashion.


366  BUSINESS  CYCLES

To  all  acquainted  with  the  making  of  the  two  types  of  summaries,
it  will  be  clear  that  a  comparison  between  the  annals  of  business
and  the  statistical  indexes  of  business  activity  is  quite  as  much  a
test  of  the  latter  as  of  the  former.  The  makers  of  the  statistical
indexes  are  usually  careful  to  point  out  the  limitations  of
their  results,  and  eager  to  compare  them  with  the  results  of  other
investigations.  They  recognize  (1)  that  the  original  data  are  subject
to  varying  margins  of  error;  (2)  that  the  technical  methods  of
eliminating  secular  trends,  seasonal  fluctuations,  and  the  effects  of
price  variations  are  far  from  perfect;  (3)  that  the  residuals  left  in
time  series  by  these  eliminations  contain  not  merely  the  cyclical
fluctuations,  but  also  the  effects  of  random  factors  peculiar  to  the
series  used.  Even  if  a  statistician  had  relatively  abundant  raw  mate-
rials to  work  up,  he  would  not  claim  that  his  results  formed  a
strictly  accurate  record  of  changes  in  business  conditions.  In  his
eyes  the  best  results  he  can  get  remain  approximations,  limited  by
the  errors  of  the  underlying  data  and  the  uncertainties  of  his  technical
methods.

But  the  most  serious  limitation  is  that  the  statistician  who  seeks
to  cover  a  considerable  period  can  find  but  few  time  series  fit  for
his  purpose.  The  indexes  of  general  business  or  volume  of  trade
which  run  back  of  the  great  war  must  be  made  on  one  of  two  plans.
Either  they  must  be  records  of  a  single  type  of  activity — like  Mr.
Carl  Snyder's  "clearings  index  of  business" — or  they  must  be  made
by  averaging  the  fluctuations  of  groups  of  series  which  themselves
change  from  time  to  time — like  the  American  Telephone  and  Tele-
graph Company's  "index  of  general  business  conditions,"  or  Professor
Warren  M.  Persons'  "index  of  trade."

Now,  no  single  type  of  transactions — ^not  even  such  an  inclusive
type  as  the  volume  of  checks  cleared  in  all  reporting  towns  outside
of  New  York — can  be  taken  to  represent  all  the  important  phases  of
business  activity.  The  payments  made  by  check  in  the  towns  which
have  no  clearing  houses,  and  the  payments  made  in  coin  and  paper
money  may  undergo  fluctuations  which  differ  in  amplitude  and  timing
from  the  fluctuations  of  clearings.  That  is  merely  a  doubt  concerning
the  faithfulness  with  which  clearings  represent  changes  in  total  pay-
ments. Far  more  important  is  the  certainty  that  the  volume  of
payments  made  by  check  within  a  given  period  undergoes  fluctuations
materially  different  from  the  fluctuations  which  are  taking  place  in
the  volume  of  goods  produced,  shipped,  or  consumed,  and  different


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 367

from  the  fluctuations  in  employment,  the  disbursing  of  income,  and
the  purchasing  of  consumers^  goods.  Yet  the  latter  processes  are
quite  as  much  a  part  of  business  as  is  paying  bills  by  check.

The  indexes  made  by  averaging  the  fluctuations  of  several  series
represent  a  wider  range  of  activities.  But  the  activities  which  can  be
included  are  those  for  which  a  statistical  record  happens  to  have  been
made  for  a  relatively  long  period — not  the  activities  which  a  statis-
tician would  choose  were  he  planning  an  index.  Moreover,  the
changes  in  the  lists  of  series  which  are  available  for  successive  decades
raise  grave  questions  about  the  comparability  of  the  results  for  the
earlier  and  the  later  years  covered.  Finally,  there  are  puzzling  ques-
tions about  the  interpretation  of  a  composite  made  by  averaging
the  fluctuations  of  series  so  different  as  (say)  price  indexes,  values  of
goods  imported,  and  tons  of  pig  iron  produced.

What  we  have  in  our  business  annals  and  our  indexes  of  general
business  conditions,  then,  are  different  approaches  to  the  problem  of
recording  the  fluctuations  of  economic  activities — approaches  each  of
which  has  its  uncertainties  as  well  as  its  merits.  We  cannot  expect
them  to  agree  perfectly.  When  they  disagree  we  cannot  say  that
the  discrepancy  necessarily  means  error  in  one  or  all;  it  may  mean
merely  that  the  different  activities  reflected  by  the  various  approaches
really  did  not  change  in  quite  the  same  way.  But  if  we  find  a  general
consilience  among  the  results  we  shall  feel  increased  confidence  in
the  reliability  of  both  approaches,  and  may  regard  the  occasional
discrepancies  as  presenting  genuine  problems  from  the  study  of  which
fresh  knowledge  may  be  gained.

The  charts  which  follow  offer  as  graphic  a  comparison  as  can  well
be  made  between  our  annals  and  the  leading  American  and  British
indexes  of  general  trade  which  cover  considerable  periods.  In  the
column  for  each  year  is  entered  a  brief  characterization  of  business
conditions  drawn  from  the  annals,  and  above  are  plotted  the  index
curves.^  The  curves  show  cyclical  fluctuations  above  and  below  the
moving  base  traced  by  the  monthly  ordinates  of  the  secular  trends  of

*For  the  methods  followed  in  making  the  two  American  indexes  used  in  Chart  21,
see  M.  C.  Rorty,  "The  Statistical  Control  of  Business  Activities,"  Harvard  Business
Review,  January,  1923,  vol.  1,  pp.  154-166,  and  Carl  Snyder,  "A  New  Clearings  Index
of  Business  for  Fifty  Years,"  Journal  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  Septem-
ber, 1924,  vol.  xix,  pp.  329-335.

For  the  recent  items  in  the  two  series,  we  are  indebted  respectively  to  Mr.  Seymour
L.  Andrew,  Chief  Statistician  of  the  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Company,
and  to  Mr.  Snyder  of  the  federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York.


u^


O


I

I


m

"1,

o

c

^

CT)

H

"u

^

<g

-^3

fl

cS

00

03

e

c

^

<u

^

-^

^.^

>.t3

^

XJ  1

1

^.S

^•^

o  e

2j«

^  o

^

^o

CL

r^

^

S

-ft

^

CQ

s*

"d

^

^

•g

a

<0

t5

%

0)

b

,a

-^

•^

oT

a

^

OQ

c

a

rl

o

•V

e<3

^

p

^T

u

3

P=H

w

QJ

d

to

p

W

^•

c^

8

g

<

369


370  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  time  series  used  (corrected  when  necessary  for  seasonal  varia-
tions). Since  these  ordinates  are  assigned  the  value  of  zero  or  100  in
the  computations,  they  fall  in  the  chart  upon  a  horizontal  line,  which
may  be  called  the  base.

In  studying  the  charts,  we  must  bear  in  mind  that  they  do  not  do
full  justice  either  to  the  statistical  method  of  presenting  changes  in
business  or  to  the  annals.  It  is  a  commonplace  that  no  statistical
average  represents  adequately  the  array  of  data  from  which  it  is
computed.  Just  so,  the  catchwords  used  to  summarize  the  annals
do  not  represent  adequately  Dr.  Thorp's  records.  Much  more  than
the  charts  show  can  be  learned  by  examining  the  series  combined  to
make  the  indexes  of  business  conditions,  and  by  reading  the  fuller
form  of  the  annals.  In  confining  our  comparison  to  the  most  abstract
and  symbolic  summaries  of  the  two  sets  of  materials,  we  are  imposing
a  severe  test  of  conformity.

On  the  American  chart  the  correspondence  between  the  annals
and  the  two  statistical  indexes  is  very  close.  Indeed,  there  are  no
serious  discrepancies.  To  be  more  specific,  the  annals  show  13  busi-
ness recessions,  mild  or  severe,  between  1875  and  1924.  Every  one
of  these  recessions  is  marked  in  both  of  the  statistical  indexes  by  a
decline  in  the  curve.  These  declines  are  slight  in  the  recessions  which
the  annals  describe  as  mild,  and  abrupt  in  the  recessions  which  the
annals  (in  their  fuller  form)  describe  as  crises  or  panics.^  Further,
the  two  curves  give  joint  evidence  of  no  recessions  other  than  those
mentioned  by  the  annals.  Similarly  with  other  phases  of  the  suc-
cessive cycles.  When  the  annals  report  revivals  the  curves  ascend;
when  the  annals  report  prosperity  the  curves  fluctuate  on  levels
decidedly  higher  than  in  the  preceding  or  following  depressions;
when  the  annals  report  depressions  the  curves  are  relatively  low.

The  chief  difference  between  the  two  records  is  that  the  annals
show  but  vaguely  and  irregularly  the  degrees  of  prosperity  and  de-
pression attained  in  successive  cycles,  whereas  the  curves  necessarily
deviate  from  the  horizontal  base  by  definite  distances.  Finally,  there
are  indications  in  the  American  chart  that  business  conamentators
are  influenced  in  their  use  of  the  terms  prosperity  and  depression  by
recent  experience.  From  such  subjective  waverings,  the  statistical
indexes  are  exempt.  But  this  point  comes  out  more  clearly  in  the
British  chart,  and  will  be  discussed  in  that  connection.

^On  the  use  of  these  three  terras  in  the  annals  to  suggest  the  varying  character  of
the  transitions  from  prosperity  to  depression,  see  below,  section  iii,  4,  "Crises"  and
"Recessions."


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 371

For  opportunity  to  compare  the  British  annals  with  a  British
index,  the  National  Bureau  is  indebted  to  Dr.  Dorothy  Swaine
Thomas,  who  generously  put  at  our  disposal  before  publication  a
series  showing  changes  in  business  conditions  from  1855  to  1913  by
quarters.^  This  index,  like  the  American  Telephone  and  Telegraph
Company^s  index  for  the  United  States,  is  a  composite  made  from  a
list  of  series  which  reflect  various  types  of  economic  activity.  Since
these  materials  have  grown  more  abundant  with  the  years,  Dr.
Thomas'  index  represents  British  business  as  a  whole  more  faithfully
in  the  later  decades  than  in  the  earlier  ones.  But  of  course  the  intro-
duction of  a  new  series  with  a  numerical  value  different  from  the  aver-
age of  the  other  components  of  the  index  produces  changes  which
may  not  correspond  with  the  changes  in  business  conditions.

On  the  whole,  the  correspondence  between  the  British  annals  and
the  British  index  is  close,  though  not  so  close  as  in  the  American  com-
parison. Dr.  Thomas'  curve  usually  rises  when  the  annals  report
revival,  stands  high  when  the  annals  report  prosperity,  sinks  when
the  annals  report  recession,  and  runs  on  a  low  level  when  the  annals
report  depression.  But  there  are  exceptions  to  the  rule  which  require
comment.

(1)  Judging  from  the  curve,  one  would  expect  the  annals  to
report  a  recession  of  British  business  in  1860-61.  These  years  present
an  unusually  mixed  state  of  affairs.  As  a  result  of  the  American  Civil
War,  the  cotton  textile  industry  suffered  severely  from  scarcity  of
raw  material.  But  reports  from  other  trades  do  not  indicate  that
there  was  a  general  recession  of  activity.  On  the  contrary,  most
industries  seem  to  have  been  very  active.  In  the  fuller  form  of  the
annals  these  facts  are  succinctly  stated.  For  his  two-word  summary
Dr.  Thorp  could  find  no  phrase  which  seemed  more  accurate  than
"uneven  prosperity,"  a  phrase  which  he  uses  in  all  cases  when  most
industries  are  thriving,  but  one  or  more  important  trades  are  de-
pressed by  special  circumstances.  The  statistics  available  to  Dr.
Thomas  for  the  1860's  are  data  in  which  the  cotton  industry  counts
heavily.  Hence  her  curve  drops  abruptly.  Most  of  the  other  Eng-
lish series  covering  these  years  which  the  National  Bureau  has  col-
lected confirm  the  index  rather  than  the  business  commentators.  In
our  later  statistical  work  we  shall  have  to  recognize  the  cycles  which
the  consensus  of  statistical  evidence  shows. But  it  would  be  conceal-

'  See  "An  Index  of  British  Business  Cycles,"  by  Dorothy  S.  Thomas,  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  March,  1926,  vol.  xxi,  pp.  60-63.


(VJ


pq


08

B
o

M

H

03

.X3


O

o

"^ I

<1S


^r


T3

a
a


^

BM  MJIA1  suadaep  uojssajdap  pjii^  ^|  6 1

^^^^

uo!es8oajtX)!J9clsoJd  CI 61

^

*^

A;!J8dsojd  2(61

4

:>*

y^usdeoJd |  |6l

7

A;!jadsojcj  0161

""^-— *" |eA!A8y.606l

^

^■^-'^ ucNSsajdaQ  9061

<:

uoissaosji  Ajuadsojy  /06l

\_^

/jijadeojd  9061

^^^

[^v

Ajuadsojd  :  (BAiAa^  go6 1

>

IBAiAaa ;  uoissaadaQ  -^061

^

suadaap  uoissajdaQ  £^061

<

f

uoissBJdap  pauasss"!  506 1

^

►

uo!SGajdappj!i/\| |06l

uojssaoaj  jAjuadGOJcl  0O6I

^v,^^^^

Ajuadsojd  6691

■^^

/ijjadsojd  9691

#^

^

Xjjjadsojd  ^691

\

/juadsojd  ;  ipajab^  969 1

^ — -

....^^ leAjAaj  1  uojssajdaQ  g69l

c-

— ^^"^ uoissajdaQ  f69l

^J

uojssajdap  daaQ  {^691

r

uoissajdaQ  2691

>

^^^'"^

UOIIBJJSCX

d  lepuBui^  ruoissaoaj  |Bu;snpu| |69I

f

uoissaoaj  \  omed  '.X^uadsoJcj  069 1

^^ — ,

7^

X^uadsoJd  6991

^^"^^

>

Xi.uadsoJd  a;Euapo|/\j  999 1

^

I^AiAay  ^99  1

, leAfAaj  \K\Q\  |s  \  uoissajdao  999 1

./

uoissajdaQ  999 1

I


<VJ


373


374  BUSINESS  CYCLES

ing,  rather  than  overcoming,  a  difficulty  to  make  our  interpretation
of  contemporary  opinions  fit  the  surviving  figures.

(2)  In  1874-75  the  annals  report  depression  while  Dr.  Thomas'
curve,  though  declining,  is  still  above  the  base  line.  In  1881,  1897-98
and  1910-11  the  annals  report  "mild  prosperity'^  or  "prosperity,"
while  Dr.  Thomas'  curve  is  slightly  below  or  but  slightly  above  the
base  line.  Perhaps  these  differences  between  the  statistical  record
and  the  annals  are  due  in  part  to  defects  in  the  data  at  Dr.  Thomas'
disposal,  or  to  the  technical  difficulties  of  eliminating  secular  trends.
But  it  is  probable  that  they  indicate  one  of  the  defects  characteristic
of  business  annals.  In  judging  current  business  conditions,  everyone
is  influenced  by  comparisons  with  recent  experience.  When  business
has  been  notably  good  for  several  years,  as  it  had  been  in  England
during  the  early  1870's,  and  then  grows  slack,  a  commentator  will
say  that  business  is  depressed,  though  the  volume  of  trade  still
remains  large.  Similarly,  after  business  has  passed  through  a  period
of  hard  times,  commentators  are  likely  to  hail  as  prosperity  any
substantial  increase  of  activity.  In  short,  men's  judgments  upon
business  conditions  belong  among  the  social  phenomena  which  are
influenced  by  business  cycles.  As  a  summary  of  current  opinion  about
the  state  of  trade,  our  annals  reflect  these  subjective  changes  in  the
use  of  terms.

The  preceding  comparisons  cover  periods  and  countries  in  which
business  reporting  is  well  developed.  Presumably  the  annals  for
earlier  years  in  the  United  States  and  England,  and  the  annals  for
countries  with  a  less  integrated  organization,  contain  a  wider  margin
of  error.  But  usually  there  is  such  a  consensus  of  judgment  among
the  sources  as  to  leave  little  doubt  about  the  general  tenor  of  affairs.
In  years  when  differences  of  opinion  appear  among  contemporary
writers.  Dr.  Thorp  has  consulted  every  source  available  to  him  and
has  weighed  the  evidence  with  care.  He  has  endeavored  also  to
use  the  technical  terms  employed  in  characterizing  different  states
of  business  as  consistently  as  possible.  Yet  the  results  are  subject  to
emendation,  and  readers  who  discover  errors  of  any  sort  are  urged  to
let  the  National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research  benefit  by  their
acumen.

Despite  the  difficulties  dwelt  upon  in  the  preceding  chapter,  the
most  satisfactory  materials  for  studying  business  cycles  are  statistical
data — not  mere  business  indexes,  like  those  shown  in  the  preceding


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 375

charts,  but  series  showing  month  by  month  the  fluctuations  of  many
types  of  economic  activity.  But  we  have  found  that  the  periods  and
the  places  for  which  such  data  can  be  had  in  abundance  are  few.
Hence  we  have  been  forced  to  recognize  that  narrow  limits  of  time
and  of  space  are  drawn  around  the  quantitative  study  of  business
fluctuations.  We  cannot  trace  back  business  cycles  to  their  begin-
nings in  any  country  of  Europe  by  the  aid  of  figures.  Nor  can  we
trace  in  figures  the  spread  of  business  cycles  to  countries  which  are
just  beginning  to  standardize  their  economic  life  on  the  European
pattern.  For  the  compilation  of  abundant  statistics  of  business  activi-
ties does  not  begin  in  any  country  until  the  business  activities  them-
selves have  become  highly  organized.  That  comes  later  than  business
cycles.

According  to  the  logic  of  the  statistical  method,  this  limitation
of  the  number  of  cycles  for  which  data  have  been  preserved  is  most
serious.  The  statistician's  art,  as  practiced  in  the  social  sciences,
consists  in  establishing  generahzations  about  variable  phenomena
by  the  analysis  of  an  array  of  cases.  When  his  cases  are  few,  no
elaboration  of  technique  can  enable  the  statistician  to  generalize
with  security.  Business  cycles  are  both  highly  complex  and  highly
variable  phenomena,  and  statistical  inferences  concerning  them  must
be  taken  as  tentative  until  the  number  of  cases  available  for  analysis
has  grown  decidedly  larger  than  at  present.

Under  these  circumstances  it  is  well  to  learn  all  that  we  can  from
the  annals  of  business.  In  countries  like  the  United  States  and
England  these  annals  cover  at  least  twice  as  many  cycles  as  are
covered  by  more  than  a  few  statistical  series.  In  countries  where
statistics  are  in  their  infancy,  the  annals  give  us  some  insight  into
the  course  of  developments.  Precision,  of  course,  cannot  be  had  from
descriptive  accounts;  but  the  annals  speak  in  terms  of  more  and
less,  they  mark  off  turning  points  in  business  trends,  they  com-
pare in  general  terms  the  contemporary  fortunes  of  different  coun-
tries. Taken,  not  as  a  rival,  but  as  a  supplement  of  statistical
analysis,  an  attempt  to  find  the  characteristics  of  business  cycles  as
shown  by  the  longer  and  wider  record  of  the  annals  has  its  value.
Indeed,  as  was  said  near  the  close  of  the  preceding  chapter,  there  are
certain  fundamental  problems  concerning  business  cycles  which  can
be  answered  more  certainly  by  studying  the  annals  than  by  analyzing
the  statistics  now  available.


376  BUSINESS  CYCLES

III. The  Cyclical  Character  of  Business  Fluctuations.
1. The  ^  ^Normal  State  of  Trade"  a  Figment.

The  broadest  conclusion  established  by  the  long  and  wide  experi-
ence covered  by  the  annals  is  that  there  is  no  "normal  state  of
trade."  The  phrase  is  common  both  in  treatises  upon  economic  theory
and  in  the  talk  of  business  men.  Yet  the  historical  record  shows  no
reality  corresponding  to  this  figment  of  the  imagination.

If  "normal"  is  interpreted  to  mean  usual,  prevailing,  that  which
exists  in  the  absence  of  grave  "disturbing  causes,"  the  annals  show
that  the  only  normal  condition  is  a  state  of  change — ^which  is  not
what  the  phrase  means  to  those  who  use  it.  From  England  in  1790
to  China  in  1925,  from  Sweden  to  Australia,  the  tables  reveal  inces-
sant fluctuations.  Frequently  the  word  "prosperity"  is  used  in  the
annals  of  some  country  for  several  years  in  succession.  But  "de-
pression" occurs  in  series  perhaps  as  often.  And  in  a  less  condensed
summary  both  of  these  catchwords  would  be  qualified  always,  as  they
often  are  qualified  even  in  these  tables,  by  adjectives  indicating  that
the  prosperity  or  depression  is  waxing  or  waning.

If  "normal"  means,  not  that  which  usually  does  prevail,  but  that
which  we  think  should  prevail,  it  is  equally  a  figment — though  one
of  a  useful  kind.  There  are  good  reasons  for  trying  to  decide  what
phase  of  business  cycles  is  most  conducive  to  social  welfare;  for
seeking  ways  to  make  that  phase  last  longer  and  to  mitigate  de-
partures from  it.  But  when  such  is  the  meaning  in  mind,  a  less
ambiguous  word  than  "normal"  should  be  used.

Of  course,  the  economic  theorist's  "normal  state,"  that  which
corresponds  to  the  conditions  assumed  for  purposes  of  analysis,  is
not  to  be  looked  for  in  an  historical  record.  Nor  can  we  take  for
granted  the  existence  of  a  moving  "normal  state  of  trade,"  of  such  a
nature  that  departures  from  it  tend  to  correct  themselves.  That  idea,
if  needed,  can  be  less  ambiguously  expressed  in  terms  of  economic
equilibria.

An  additional  source  of  confusion  and  therefore  an  additional
reason  for  avoiding  the  word  is  supplied  by  the  slipshod  practice
of  business-cycle  statisticians,  who  sometimes  write  "normal"  when
they  mean  a  long-period  average,  and  sometimes  write  "normal"
when  they  mean  the  course  marked  by  the  ordinates  of  a  secular
trend.


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 377


2. Use  of  the  Term  ^'Cycles."

While  the  annals  show  that  business  is  subject  to  continual  fluc-
tuations, they  also  show  that  in  no  country  are  the  alternations  of
expansion  and  contraction  highly  regular.  Is  it  justifiable,  then,  to
speak  of  these  fluctuations  as  business  "cycles"?

That  of  course  is  a  question  regarding  the  proper  use  of  a  tech-
nical term.  In  1922,  President  John  C.  Merriam  of  the  Carnegie
Institution  called  "A  Conference  on  Cycles/'  in  which  representatives
of  several  sciences  discussed  the  cyclical  phenomena  with  which  they
deal.  To  prevent  misunderstandings  the  conferees  needed  a  defini-
tion of  cycles  applicable  alike  in  meteorology,  botany,  geology,  paleon-
tology, astronomy,  geography  and  economics.  Subsequent  discussion
showed  that  the  definition  given  by  the  first  speaker,  Dr.  F.  E.
Clements,  commended  itself  to  the  others.

In  general  scientific  use  (said  Dr.  Clements)  the  word  (cycle)
denotes  a  recurrence  of  different  phases  of  plus  and  minus
departures,  which  are  often  susceptible  of  exact  measurement.
It  has  no  necessary  relation  to  a  definite  time  interval,  though
this  is  frequently  a  characteristic  of  astronomical  cycles.  Apart
from  the  familiar  cycles  of  the  day,  the  lunar  month,  and  the
year,  the  one  best  known  is  the  sun-spot  recurrence,  to  which
the  term  cycle  is  almost  universally  applied.  This  furnishes
convincing  evidence  that  the  significance  of  the  term  resides  in
the  fact  of  recurrence  rather  than  in  that  of  the  time  interval,
since  the  sun-spot  cycle  has  varied  in  length  from  7  to  17  years
since  1788,  while  the  minimum-maximum  phase  has  ranged
from  3  to  5  years  and  the  maximum-minimum  phase  from  6  to
8  years  since  1833.  In  consequence,  it  seems  desirable  to  use
cycle  as  the  inclusive  term  for  all  recurrences  that  lend  them-
selves to  measurement,  and  period  or  periodicity  for  those  with
a  definite  time  interval,  recognizing,  however,  that  there  is  no
fixed  line  between  the  two.^

Now  our  annals  show  beyond  doubt  "a  recurrence  of  different
phases"  in  business  activity,  and  these  recurrences  "lend  themselves
to  measurement."  Hence  we  have  ample  warrant  in  the  usages  of
other  sciences  than  economics  for  applying  the  term  "cycles"  to

*  "Report  of  a  Conference  on  Cycles,"  The  Geographical  Review,  Special  Supple-
ment, October,  1923,  vol.  xiii,  pp.  657,  658.


378  BUSINESS  CYCLES

business  fluctuations.  But  the  term  "periodicity"  we  should  not  use
with  reference  to  business  cycles,  or  with  reference  to  crises.  For
the  time  intervals  between  crises  are  far  from  regular.  They  vary,
as  will  appear  presently,  even  more  than  the  length  of  sun-spot  cycles.

3. The  Phases  of  Business  Cycles.

The  different  phases  which  recur  in  business  activity  are  some-
times treated  as  only  two — depression  and  prosperity.  More  often
there  are  said  to  be  three  phases  which  recur  in  the  order  prosperity,
crisis,  depression.^  But  if  the  transition  from  prosperity  to  depres-
sion is  recognized  as  a  separate  phase,  it.  seems  logical  to  give  similar
recognition  to  the  transition  from  depression  to  prosperity.  Then  we
have  a  four-phase  cycle  of  prosperity,  crisis,  depression,  and  revival.^
Professor  Warren  M.  Persons  goes  further  still.  By  dividing  the
transition  from  prosperity  to  depression  into  "financial  strain"  and
"industrial  crisis,"  he  gets  five  phases.^

This  process  of  subdivision  can  be  carried  further  indefinitely
as  statistics  with  brief  time  intervals  become  more  abundant.  And  as
knowledge  of  the  subject  grows  and  its  practical  applications  become
more  important,  there  may  be  call  for  such  refinements.  As  matters
stand,  however,  four  phases  satisfy  the  needs  of  systematic  inquiry.
The  separation  of  the  phase  of  "financial  strain"  from  that  of  "indus-
trial crisis"  rests  on  logical  quite  as  much  as  upon  chronological
grounds,  and  is  somewhat  confusing  in  a  cycle  of  recurrence  in  time.
Cases  will  be  cited  presently  of  financial  strain  occurring  at  other
stages  of  the  cycle  than  the  transition  from  prosperity  to  depression,
and  industrial  reactions  frequently  occur  when  it  is  difficult  to  find  any
trace  of  preceding  financial  strain,  for  example,  in  the  United  States
in  1923.  But  we  are  trenching  upon  a  topic  which  requires  separate
treatment.

4. "Crises"  and  "Recessions."

Two  quite  distinct  conceptions  of  business  crises  are  current
in  recent  books. Professor  Aftalion,  for  example,  defines  the  crisis  as

*  Compare  for  example,  Dr.  E.  H.  Vogel's  description  of  a  cycle,  Die  Theorie  des
volkswirtschajtlichen  Entvdckelungsprozesses  und  das  Krisenproblem,  Vienna,  1917,  pp.
31,  32.

^  These  four  phases  were  recognized  and  separately  described  as  long  ago  as  1867  by
John  Mills,  "On  Credit  Cycles,  and  the  Origin  of  Commercial  Panics,"  Transactions  of
the  Manchester  Statistical  Society,  1867-68,  pp.  5-40.

'See  Professor  Persons'  numerous  articles  in  the  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,
and  his  Measuring  and  Forecasting  General  Bitsiness  Conditions,  New  York,  1920,  p.  34.


1


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 379

"the  point  of  intersection  ...  at  which  prosperity  passes  over  into
depression.'^  ^  Professor  Bouniatian,  to  give  a  corresponding  example
of  the  second  usage,  applies  the  term  ^^to  an  organic  disturbance  of
economic  life,  bringing  upon  a  large  number  of  enterprisers  loss  of
fortune  and  income  or  complete  economic  ruin/'  -

From  this  difference  of  definition  there  follow  differences  in  the
lists  of  crises  recognized  in  various  books,  and  hence  differences  in  the
average  intervals  asserted  to  lie  between  crises.  Professor  Lescure,
who  antedated  Aftalion  in  defining  crisis  as  the  point  of  intersection
between  prosperity  and  depression,  includes  the  crisis  of  1913  in  his
historical  section.  But  Bouniatian  admits  no  crisis  between  1907
and  1920,  and  quite  consistently;  for,  as  Lescure  himself  explains,
there  was  no  epidemic  of  bankruptcies  in  1913.^  Tugan-Baranovski
goes  even  further  than  Bouniatian  in  stressing  the  violence  of  crises,
and  consequently  in  shortening  his  list  of  crisis  dates.  A  crisis
"breaks  out  like  a  tempest"  in  the  midst  of  prosperity,  "bringing
bankruptcies,  unemployment,  misery,  etc."  With  this  conception  in
mind,  he  quite  rightly  says  that  England  escaped  a  crisis  in  1873,
in  1882,  in  1890,  in  1900  and  in  1907— though  the  "industrial  cycle"
shows  itself  in  the  evolution  of  English  business  in  these  later  times
"with  the  same  neatness  and  clarity  as  before."  ^

Which  of  these  two  conceptions  of  the  crisis  fits  better  in  a  discus-
sion of  business  cycles  is  easy  to  decide.  What  concerns  such  a
discussion  is  the  recurrence  of  certain  phases  of  business  activity.
The  transition  from  prosperity  to  depression  is  one  of  the  regularly
recurring  phases,  whether  it  is  marked  by  "an  organic  disturbance  of
economic  life,"  in  Bouniatian's  phrase,  or  whether  financial  strain  is
conspicuous  by  its  absence.

But  while  there  is  no  doubt  about  the  reality  of  these  transitions,
there  is  grave  doubt  whether  the  word  crisis  should  be  retained  to
describe  them.  For  with  that  word  there  is  associated  in  the  public
mind,  as  in  the  minds  of  writers  like  Bouniatian  and  Tugan-Baran-
ovski, the  idea  of  financial  strain.  When  such  strain  is  scarcely  per-
ceptible, it  is  confusing  to  call  the  transition  a  crisis.  Close  study  of
the  annals  shows  that  transitions  free  from  strain  are  frequent —

*  Albert Aftalion, Les Crises Periodiques de Surproduction, Paris, 1913, vol. i,
Preface,  p.  vi.

^Mentor  Bouniatian,  Les  Crises  Economiques,  Paris,  1922,  p.  31.
^Lescure, Des  Crises  Generates  et  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  3rd ed., Paris,
1923,  pp.  2  and  238-253;  Bouniatian,  as  cited  above,  pp.  43,  44.

*  Michel  Tugan-Baranovski,  Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Angleterre,  Paris,  1913,  pp.  34,
150.  152,  166,  167,  174.


380  BUSINESS  CYCLES

perhaps  more  frequent  than  violent  transitions.  And  there  are  cheer-
ing indications  that  the  preponderance  of  mild  transitions  is  growing
greater.

To  make  the  confusion  worse,  the  annals  report  numerous  cases
of  financial  strain,  not  at  the  moment  when  prosperity  is  passing
into  depression,  but  in  other  phases  of  the  cycle.  ^'Financial  strin-
gency" and  ^^bourse  panics"  are  common  phenomena  in  ^'booms/'  often
occurring  a  year  or  two  before  the  phase  of  expansion  in  general
business  ends  Less  remembered,  but  not  less  important,  are  the
cases  of  financial  strain  coming  in  periods  of  depression.  To  cite
a  dozen  examples,  the  annals  make  such  reports  for  France  in  1861,
Germany  in  1877,  England  in  1878,  Argentina  in  1891,  Australia  and
Russia  in  1892,  Italy  and  the  Netherlands  in  1893,  the  United  States
in  1896  (as  well  as  in  1819  and  1884),  South  Africa  in  1898,  Japan
in  1901,  and  China  in  1912.  Often  the  sources  from  which  the  annals
are  drawn  use  the  words  "crisis"  or  "panic"  in  describing  these  epi-
sodes of  depression,  and  sometimes  they  use  "crisis"  as  equivalent  to
depression  itself.

"Crisis,"  then,  is  a  poor  term  to  use  in  describing  one  of  the  four
phases  of  business  cycles.  If  it  is  to  be  retained,  it  must  be  defined
in  the  colorless  fashion  of  Lescure  and  Aftalion — as  the  mere  point
of  intersection  between  prosperity  and  depression.  But  sad  experi-
ence shows  how  much  misunderstanding  comes  from  the  effort  to  use
familiar  words  in  new  technical  senses.  Scientific  writers  can  hardly
expect  that  readers  will  purge  their  minds  of  old  associations  and
form  new  ones  at  a  terminologist's  bidding.

One  remedy  for  the  ambiguity  of  "crisis"  is  to  apply  a  qualifying
adjective  whenever  the  word  is  used.  Thus  Mr.  Joseph  Kitchin  dis-
tinguishes between  major  and  minor  crises.  But  his  major  crises
are  in  some  cases  such  mild  transitions  that  many  writers  refuse  to
call  them  crises  at  all.  Such  is  the  case  with  the  American  crises  of
1882  and  1899  (1900  is  a  better  date),  and  the  English  crisis  of
1913,  all  of  which  Mr.  Kitchin  labels  "major."  ^  Thus  his  con-
ception of  a  major  crisis  is  even  more  confusing  to  non-technical
readers  than  the  use  of  the  unqualified  term.  If  the  ambiguity  is
to  be  remedied  by  applying  adjectives,  it  seems  best  to  use  a  pair  that
bear  directly  upon  the  ambiguous  point.  Thus  the  common  expres-
sions "mild  crisis"  and  "severe  crisis"  are  clear  in  intent  and  safe

"See  the  "Dates  of  Major  Crises"  in  Mr.  Kitchin 's  paper,  "Cycles  and  Trends  in
Economic  Factors,"  Review  of  Economic  Statistics,  January,  1923,  Prel.  vol.  v,  pp.  10-16.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 381

to  use  in  descriptive  work,  such  as  business  annals,  provided  there
are  not  too  many  cases  on  the  borderhne  between  mildness  and
severity.

But  no  set  of  adjectives  can  make  "crisis^'  a  suitable  name  for
the  fourth  phase  of  business  cycles.  Hardly  can  one  say  "depression,
revival,  prosperity,  mild  or  severe  crisis.'^  The  choice  lies  between
retaining  "crisis"  defined  in  an  unfamiliar  way,  or  replacing  it  by  some
word  corresponding  to  "revival,"  which  is  used  to  designate  the  up-
ward turn  of  the  cycle.  This  second  alternative  seems  the  lesser  evil,
especially  in  view  of  the  fact  that  our  theoretical  and  practical  in-
terests lie  increasingly  in  those  mild  transitions  from  prosperity  to
depression  which  have  been  little  attended  to  by  theorists.

In  this  discussion,  accordingly,  business  cycles  are  treated  as
having  four  phases — depression,  revival,  prosperity  and  recession.
The  word  "crisis"  is  not  dropped,  but  is  used  like  the  words  "panic"
or  "boom"  to  indicate  degrees  of  intensity.  Every  business  cycle
includes  a  phase  of  recession;  this  recession  may  or  may  not  be
marked  by  a  crisis;  the  crisis,  if  there  is  one,  may  or  may  not  de-
generate into  a  panic.  All  the  old  and  most  of  the  recent  books
on  the  subject  deal  chiefly  with  crises,  panics  and  severe  depressions;
these  annals  endeavor  to  show  also  the  mild  recessions  and  the  periods
of  dull  business.

We  have,  indeed,  gone  far — we  hope  not  too  far — in  calling  atten-
tion to  the  mild  recessions.  Our  aim  has  been  to  include  all  cases
in  which  the  evidence  indicates  a  general  slackening  of  activity,  even
though  the  slackening  lasted  but  a  few  months,  and  did  not  reach
grave  proportions.  Cases  in  point  may  be  found  in  the  American
annals  for  1888,  1900  and  1923.  Other  illustrations  are  Italy  in  1900,
England  in  1803  and  1854,  and  the  brief  reaction  in  the  majority  of
our  17  countries  after  the  Armistice  of  1918.  On  the  other  hand,
we  have  tried  not  to  include  cases  in  which  only  a  few  branches  of
business  suffered  a  setback — such  as  the  English  case  of  1860-61  al-
ready referred  to,  or  the  financial  difiiculties  caused  in  London  by  the
outbreak  of  war  between  France  and  Prussia  in  1870.

5. "Prosperity"  and  "Depression."

A  somewhat  different  criticism  may  be  made  of  the  terms  used
for  two  other  phases  of  business  cycles.  In  comparing  the  annals
with  business  indexes,  we  had  occasion  to  note  that  the  words  "pros-


382  BUSINESS  CYCLES

perity"  and  "depression'^  are  themselves  subject  to  cyclical  fluctua-
tions in  meaning.  Their  significance  is  relative  rather  than  fixed.
The  more  active  phase  of  a  given  cycle  is  called  prosperous,  and  the
less  active  phase  is  called  depressed,  though  both  phases  may  be
very  mild.  We  must  not  suppose  that  business  conditions  are  almost
identical  in  the  prosperous  phases  of  successive  cycles,  even  in  the
same  country — or  in  the  depressed  phases.

This  relativity  of  meaning  appeared  in  the  review  of  business  in-
dexes in  Chapter  III,  though  little  was  said  about  it  at  the  time.  The
crests  of  business  cycles  sometimes  reach  but  a  little  way  above  the
base  lines  of  the  index  charts.  On  rare  occasions  they  remain  below
these  lines.  The  like  is  true,  mutatis  mutandis,  of  the  troughs.  Sta-
tistically, prosperity  and  depression  are  variables,  distributed  in  a
fairly  regular  fashion  over  a  considerable  range. ^

Perhaps  we  might  develop  quantitative  definitions  for  prosperity
and  depression  by  saying,  for  example,  that  business  is  prosperous
when  certain  indexes  have  attained  a  given  percentage  height  above
their  corrected  trends.  The  time  may  come  when  that  shift  in  prac-
tice will  appear  both  feasible  and  desirable.  Or  we  might  substitute
for  the  words  in  question  other  terms  whose  relativity  of  meaning  is
patent.  For  example,  we  might  speak  of  the  phase  of  business  expan-
sion and  the  phase  of  business  contraction,  or  of  the  phase  of  rising
and  declining  activity.  Of  course  these  two  proposals  are  quite  com-
patible with  each  other.  But  our  business  indexes  are  not  yet  suffi-
ciently perfect,  and  they  do  not  yet  cover  a  sufficient  range  of  times
and  places,  to  afford  satisfactory  measurements  of  degree  of  pros-
perity and  depression.  The  second  proposal  presents  no  such  diffi-
culties, and  is  often  followed  in  this  discussion.  Yet  the  misunder-
standings to  which  the  words  in  question  may  give  rise  seem  scarcely
grave  enough  to  justify  discarding  them  entirely.  Few  people  are
likely  to  think  of  prosperity  and  depression  as  definite  states.  When
their  application  to  business  cycles  involves  a  serious  stretching  of
the  vague  popular  usage,  a  reminder  of  their  technical  meaning  may
be  sufficient  safeguard.

6. The  Uniformity  and  the  Variability  of  Business  Cycles.

Recurrence  of  depression,  revival,  prosperity  and  recession,  time
after  time  in  land  after  land,  may  be  the  chief  conclusion  drawn  from

*See  Chapter  HI,  section  vi,  3  (3) "On  Identifying  Business  Cycles  by  the  Use
of  the  Business  Indexes,"  and  (7)  "The  Amplitudes  of  Business  Cycles."


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 383

the  experience  packed  into  our  annals;  but  a  second  conclusion  is
that  no  two  recurrences  in  all  the  array  seem  precisely  alike.  Business
cycles  differ  in  their  duration  as  wholes  and  in  the  relative  duration
of  their  component  phases ;  they  differ  in  industrial  and  geographical
scope;  they  differ  in  intensity;  they  differ  in  the  features  which
attain  prominence;  they  differ  in  the  quickness  and  the  uniformity
with  which  they  sweep  from  one  country  to  another.

This  mixture  of  uniformity  and  variability  in  business  cycles  may
seem  disconcerting  when  stated  so  baldly.  But  we  confront  a  similar
mixture  of  fundamental  similarity  and  detailed  differences  when  we
visualize  men^s  faces,  or  consider  their  characters,  or  study  any  social
phenomena.  In  all  such  cases,  variability  presents  conceptual  diffi-
culties not  to  be  glossed  over,  and  difficulties  of  explanation  not  sur-
mounted as  yet.  But  uncounted  ages  ago  men  found  that  they  could
think  of  pines  despite  difference  in  the  size,  shape,  location,  color,
roughness,  and  hardness  of  particular  specimens;  they  could  think
of  trees  despite  the  differences  among  pines,  maples  and  palms,  and
the  difficulty  of  delimiting  trees  from  shrubs.  And  within  the  past
hundred  years  men  have  developed  a  technique  for  studying  varia-
tions about  a  central  tendency,  a  technique  which  reveals  the  existence
of  formerly  unsuspected  uniformities  among  variations  themselves.

Differences  among  business  cycles,  then,  afford  no  reason  for
doubting  that  these  cycles  constitute  a  valid  species  of  phenomena.
But  the  existence  of  such  differences  should  put  us  on  our  guard
against  using  concepts  and  methods  of  analysis  appropriate  only  in
work  where  differences  among  individuals  of  a  given  species  either  do
not  exist  or  can  be  precisely  defined  (as  in  geometry),  or  are  not  signifi-
cant for  the  problems  under  consideration  (as  in  certain  branches  of
physics  and  chemistry).  The  student  of  business  cycles  should
picture  their  characteristic  differences  as  clearly  as  may  be,  measure
them  with  what  precision  he  can,  and  find  how  these  differences  are
distributed  around  their  central  tendencies.  While  the  annals  are  not
quantitative  in  form,  they  can  be  used  to  some  extent  in  treating  this
statistical  problem.

IV. The  Duration  of  Business  Cycles.
1. Current  Estimates  of  Average  Length.

The  differences  among  business  cycles  which  have  attracted  most
attention  are  differences  in  duration. Quite  naturally,  the  discoverers


384  BUSINESS  CYCLES

of  the  recurrence  overstressed  its  uniformity  in  this  respect  as  in
others.  Influenced  by  the  dominant  type  of  economic  theory,  these
discoverers  thought  of  a  "normal"  cycle  and  so  simplified  their  prob-
lem— a  practice  still  common.  To  cite  an  extreme  example:  in  1867
John  Mills  described  the  "credit  cycle"  as  lasting  ten  years — three
years  of  declining  trade,  three  years  of  increasing  trade,  three  years
of  over-excited  trade,  and  one  year  of  crisis.^  Even  the  early  statis-
tical workers  yielded  to  the  lure  of  "normality."  They  were  eager  to
establish  the  "periodicity  of  crises,"  which  was  suggested  by  such
crisis  dates  as  1815,  1825,  1836,  1847,  1857  and  1866.  This  desire
warped  their  selection  and  treatment  of  data.  Jevons  had  an  admir-
ably candid  mind;  yet  in  1875,  when  the  sun-spot  cycle  was  supposed
to  last  11.1  years,  he  was  able  to  get  from  Thorold  Rogers'  History  of
Agriculture  and  Prices  in  England  a  period  of  1 1  years  in  price  fluctua-
tions, and  when  the  sun-spot  cycle  was  revised  to  10.45  years  he
was  able  to  make  the  average  interval  between  English  crises  10.466
years."  To  get  this  later  result,  Jevons  purposely  left  out  from  his
list  of  crises  "a  great  commercial  collapse  in  1810-11  (which  will  not
fit  into  the  decennial  series)";  he  also  omitted  the  crisis  of  1873,  and
inserted  a  crisis  in  1878,  which  other  writers  do  not  find.^

Jevons'  way  of  reckoning  the  length  of  cycles  by  the  intervals
between  crises,  and  of  counting  as  crises  periods  of  financial  strain
coming  after  booms,  or  recessions  followed  by  long  depressions,  is
still  common  among  theoretical  writers.  The  results  they  get  are  not
in  close  agreement.  Tugan-Baranovski  takes  7  to  11  years  as  the
limits  of  variation  in  the  length  of  cycles  and  10  years  as  the  average
duration.  Bouniatian  says  that  "under  normal  conditions"  cycles  last
from  9  to  11  years,  but  adds  that  there  is  "a  tendency  toward  a  nor-
mal period  of  about  10  years."  Cassel  takes  1873,  1882,  1890,  1900,
and  1907  as  crisis  years  in  Europe,  and  1873,  1882,  1893,  1903,  and
1907  as  crisis  years  in  the  United  States.  Cassel  himself  strikes  no
average,  but  his  dates  give  limits  of  4  to  11  years  and  an  average  of
8%  years. Lavington  accepts  8  years  as  the  average  duration.

*"0n  Credit  Cycles  and  the  Origin  of  Commercial  Panics,"  Transactions  of  the
Manchester  Statistical  Society,  1867-^8,  pp.  5-40.  Compare  the  diagram  of  a  cycle
which  Jevons  gives  in  his  Primer  of  Political  Economy,  New  York,  1882,  p.  121.

^Jevons  withdrew  his  first  paper  from  publication  when  he  discovered  "that  periods
of  3,  5,  7,  9,  or  even  13  years  would  agree  with  Professor  Rogers'  data  just  as  well  as  a
period  of  11  years."  See  his  Investigations  in  Currency  and  Finance,  London,  1884.,
pp.  207,  225.

'  See  the  three  papers  on  crises  reprinted  in  Jevons'  Investigations  in  Currency  and
Finance,  especially  pp.  200-203,  225,  233.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 385

Slightly  different  is  the  method  of  reckoning  cycles  by  the  inter-
vals between  depressions.  Otto  C.  Lightner  records  18  depressions
in  American  business  from  1808  to  1921,  not  counting  "minor''  cases,
with  intervals  ranging  from  3  to  12  years  and  averaging  6%  years.
George  H.  Hull,  denying  that  depressions  are  periodic,  counts  17
"industrial  crises"  in  the  United  States  from  1814  to  1907.  His  dates
differ  somewhat  from  Lightner's,  having  intervals  ranging  from  1  to
11  years,  and  averaging  a  little  less  than  6  years  apart.

With  these  results  may  be  given  two  others  of  the  same  order  of
magnitude,  but  reached  by  quite  different  methods.  Pigou,  using
British  unemployment  returns  and  measuring  intervals  between  both
the  crests  and  the  troughs  of  the  industrial  waves,  gets  a  trifle  less
than  8  years  as  his  average  length.  Henry  L.  Moore  also  gets  8  years
as  the  standard  length  both  of  "generating"  and  of  "derived  economic
cycles/'  but  gets  it  from  periodogram  analysis  of  time-series.^

Other  statistical  workers  have  recently  reached  quite  different
conclusions.  Thus  Professor  W.  L.  Crum  made  a  periodogram  analysis
of  monthly  interest  rates  upon  commercial  paper  in  New  York  from
1866  to  1922  and  found  (somewhat  doubtful)  evidence  of  a  period  of
39-40  months  in  their  fluctuations.  At  the  same  time  Mr.  Joseph
Kitchin,  after  analyzing  bank  clearings,  interest  rates,  and  wholesale
prices  in  Great  Britain  and  the  United  States  from  1890  to  1922,
suggested  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  trade  are  composed  of  minor
cycles  averaging  40  months  in  length,  and  major  cycles,  which  are
aggregates  of  two  or  less  often,  of  three  minor  cycles.^  Since  the
publication  of  these  two  papers  in  January,  1923,  "the  40-month
cycle"  has  enjoyed  a  considerable  vogue  among  statisticians.  Forty
months  is  also  the  median  value  of  the  observations  upon  the  duration
of  American  cycles  in  1878-1923,  derived  in  Chapter  III  from  five
indexes  of  business  conditions,  while  the  mean  value  is  42  months.

*See  M.  Tugan-Baranovski,  Les  Crises  Industrielles  en  Angleterre,  1913,  pp.  247,  248;
M.  Bouniatian,  Les  Crises  Economiques, -1922,  p.  42;  G.  Cassel,  The  Theory/  of  Social
Economy,  1924,  p.  508;  A.  Aftalion,  Les  Crises  Periodiques  de  Surproduction,  1913,  vol.  i,
pp.  8-14;  F.  Lavington,  The  Trade  Cycle,  1922,  p.  14;  O.  C.  Lightner,  History  oj  Busi-
ness Depressions,  1922,  table  of  contents;  G.  H.  Hull,  Industrial  Depressions,  1911,
pp.  54-57,  and  the  chronological  table,  pp.  50,  51 ;  A.  C.  Pigou,  The  Economics  oj  Wel-
jare,  1920,  p.  804;  Henry  L.  Moore,  Generating  Economic  Cycles,  1923,  pp.  15,  64.

^See  W.  L.  Crum,  "Cycles  of  Rates  on  Commercial  Paper,"  Review  of  Economic
Statistics,  January,  1923,  preliminary  vol.  v,  pp.  17-28;  Joseph  Kitchin,  ''Cycles  and
Trends  in  Economic  Factors,"  the  same,  pp.  10-16.


386  BUSINESS  CYCLES


2. Measurements  Based  upon  the  Annals.

It  is  not  necessary  to  examine  narrowly  the  discrepancies  among
the  results  obtained  by  measuring  the  intervals  between  years  of
crisis  or  years  of  depression.  They  run  back  partly  to  differences  in
the  countries  and  the  periods  covered,  and  partly  to  differences  of
opinion  concerning  the  severity  which  entitles  a  particular  disturb-
ance to  be  called  a  true  crisis  or  depression.  Granted  each  author
his  own  conception  of  what  constitutes  a  cycle,  his  measurements
are  presumably  correct  for  the  land  and  period  covered.  By  using
the  present  annals,  anyone  so  disposed  might  validate,  and  anyone
so  disposed  might  question  any  of  the  averages  and  limits  of  varia-
tions which  have  been  derived  in  this  way.

But  anyone  who  reads  the  annals  closely,  whatever  the  definition
of  crisis  in  his  mind,  will  see  that  there  is  grave  question  regarding
the  unity  of  many  of  the  6-,  or  8-,  or  10-year  cycles.  Take  as  the
simplest  example  Professor  Cassel's  list  of  crisis  years  in  the  United
States:  1873,  1882,  1893,  1903  and  1907.  Perhaps  one  may  argue  that
the  annals  justify  these  dates  from  Cassel's  viewpoint,  though  it  is
not  clear  why  he  should  omit  1888  if  he  includes  1903.  But  the  im-
portant point  is  that  the  cycle  from  1882  to  1893  was  punctuated  by
the  recessions  of  1888  and  1890,  and  that  the  cycle  from  1893  to  1903
was  punctuated  by  recessions  both  in  1896  and  in  1900.

Now,  the  differences  of  opinion  concerning  the  length  of  Ameri-
can cycles  in  this  period  turn  less  on  the  facts  of  business  expansion
and  contraction  than  on  what  movements  of  expansion  and  contrac-
tion should  be  selected  for  treatment  as  business  cycles.  The  older
writers  fastened  upon  the  salient  phenomena — severe  crises  and  the
rather  long  intervals  between  them — as  requiring  explanation.  This
tradition  still  rules  in  theoretical  treatises.  But  as  knowledge  of
business  cycles  grows,  and  as  men  seek  to  use  this  knowledge  more
effectively  in  interpreting  current  developments  month  by  month,  a
more  intensive  treatment  becomes  both  feasible  and  useful.  Without
denying  the  graver  importance  of  the  wider  swings,  we  find  ourselves
involved  much  of  the  time  in  dealing  with  fluctuations  of  less  ampli-
tude, fluctuations  which  the  theorists  have  passed  over  lightly.  The
same  developments  which  make  it  wise  to  substitute  the  concept  of
recession  for  the  concept  of  crisis  make  it  wise  to  recognize  the
shorter  segments  into  which  the  long  swings  are  frequently  divisible.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 387


This  change  reduces  the  typical  duration  of  American  cycles  to
roughly  one-half  of  the  estimate  commonest  among  theoretical
writers.

By  way  of  illustration,  we  may  compile  from  the  American  annals
a  list  of  recessions  in  the  United  States  since  1790.  In  this  list  the
recessions  are  characterized  by  phrases  which  indicate  their  severity,
and  leading  features.  Financial  troubles  occurring  in  the  middle  of
depressions  are  not  counted  as  recessions,  but  cases  of  this  sort  which
have  commonly  been  listed  as  crises  are  noted  in  the  table.  In  the
early  years  the  business  fortunes  of  the  northern  states  alone  are
followed;  sometimes  conditions  were  quite  different  in  the  agricul-
tural south  and  west.  Since  the  annals  seldom  permit  a  precise  dating
of  recessions,  the  duration  of  successive  cycles  is  reckoned  to  the
nearest  whole  year.

TABLE  23
Business  Rbcessions  in  the  United  States  and  Approximate  Duration  of  Business

Cycles,  1790-1925


Duration
of  Cycles
in  Years

Financial  crisis,  spring 1865

Recession  early  in  year. ...  6

Recession  late  in  year 6  1870

Brief  recession,  June,  War  1873*

with  England 5  1882

Crisis, March, following

peace 3  1888

Mild  recession.  May 7

Panic,  autumn 3  1890

Recession,  summer 3  1893  *

Recession,  panic,  autumn..  5  1896

Panic,  spring 4

Panic,  October 3  1900

Brief  recession.  May 6

Mild  recession  early  in  year,  1903  *

War  with  Mexico  1  1907JL

Recession, financial panic,  1910

November 2  1913*

Recession,  last  quarter. ...  6  1918

Recession,  late  spring,  panic

in  August  4  1920  *

Recession  late  in  year,  pros-  1923

pect  of  Civil  War 3

*The  dates  thus  marked  show  the  commonly
frequently  listed  are  1819,  a  case  of  financial  strain
The  "rich  man's  panic"  of  1903  is  omitted  in  some


1796*
1802
1807*
1812

1815*

1822

1825*

1828

1833

1837*

1839*

1845

1846

1847*

1853
1857*

1860


Duration
of  Cycles
in  Years
Recession, second quarter,

close  of  Civil  War 5

Recession,  January  5

Violent  panic,  September..  4
Recession late  in  year,  fi-
nancial panic  in  1884*....  9
Slight recession, early in

year 5

Financial  crisis,  autumn 3

Severe  panic.  May 2

Recession  early  in  year,  fi-
nancial stringency 3

Brief  and  slight recession,

spring  4

Financial  strain,  spring 3

Severe  crisis,  autumn 4

Mild  recession,  January 2

Recession,  summer 3

Recession after Armistice,

November 5

Severe  crisis.  May  2

Mild  recession,  summer. ...  3


accepted  crisis  years. Other  dates
in  a  business  depression,  and  1890.
lists.


388  BUSINESS  CYCLES

To  show  the  usual  way  of  reckoning  the  length  of  cycles,  the  com-
monly accepted  dates  of  crises  in  the  United  States  are  marked  with
asterisks.  Anyone  who  checks  these  dates  against  those  given  in
other  books  will  find  different  ways  of  counting;  for  example,  1837-
1839  is  sometimes  put  down  as  a  single  crisis.  But,  taking  the  dates
as  marked,  we  have  14  cycles  between  1796  and  1920,  ranging  from
about  2  years  (1837-39)  to  about  16  years  (1857-1873)  in  length,  and
averaging  8%  years.  We  can  raise  this  average  by  omitting  or  com-
bining some  of  the  crises  counted  here,  or  reduce  it  by  counting  some
of  the  other  recessions  as  crises.  At  best  there  is  a  considerable  margin
for  admissible  difference  of  opinion.

When  we  drop  the  effort  to  discriminate  the  degrees  of  severity
among  crises  and  count  all  recessions,  this  margin  of  uncertainty
becomes  narrower,  though  it  does  not  vanish.  It  is  easier  to  recognize
a  change  of  direction  in  business  movements  than  it  is  to  determine
how  serious  a  change  for  the  worse  has  been.  Yet,  another  compiler
drawing  off  a  list  of  recessions  from  the  most  detailed  form  of  our
annals  might  give  a  slightly  different  set  of  dates,  and  one  who  made
a  fresh  set  of  annals  from  the  original  sources  might  increase  these
differences  somewhat. The  broad  results,  however,  seem  well  assured.

Counting  business  cycles  now  as  the  intervals  between  recessions,
noting  the  quarters  in  which  the  turns  came,  and  reckoning  to  the
nearest  whole  year,  we  get  the  following  results:


1  cycle

about  1

year

long  (1845-46)

4  cycles

2

years

0 "

3

5 "

4

6 "

5

4 "

6

1 "

7

(1815-1822)

0 "

8

1 "

9

(1873-1882)

In  all  we  have  32  cycles  in  127  years,  which  yields  an  average  length
of  not  quite  4  years.  The  commonest  length  is  about  three  years;  and
two-thirds  of  the  cases  fall  within  the  limits  of  three  to  five  years.
These  results  may  be  compared  with  similar  summaries  from  the
other  country  for  which  we  have  annals  covering  136  years.  The
dates  given in  Bouniatian's  list of  English crises  are  starred to


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 389

show  the  conventional  view  of  cycle  chronology.  His  16  dates  mark
off  15  cycles  in  the  127  years  from  1793  to  1920 — an  average  length
of  almost  8%  years.  If  1913  be  added  to  the  list  of  crises  and  it  seems
to  belong  there  quite  as  much  as  certain  dates  which  Bouniatian
admits  as  turning  points  unaccompanied  by  severe  financial  strain,
there  are  16  cycles,  ranging  in  length  from  about  4  to  about  13  years,
and  averaging  not  quite  8  years.

Of  the  cycles  marked  off  by  recessions,  22  are  shown.  Perhaps  we
should  add  recessions  in  1814  after  the  first  abdication  of  Napoleon,
in  1861  when  the  American  Civil  War  upset  the  cotton  trade,  in  1864
when  financial  strain  was  marked,  in  1870  when  the  Franco-Prussian
War  brought  confusion  to  the  financial  markets,  in  1897  and  1911
when  the  rising  tides  of  activity  were  checked.  But  in  none  of  these
cases  does  the  evidence  of  contemporary  business  reports  indicate
a  general  slackening  of  trade.  Even  if  these  cases  were  counted,  it
would  still  appear  that  English  business  has  experienced  fewer
recessions  than  American  business  during  the  same  period  of  four
generations.  Hence  English  cycles  have  been  longer  on  the  average
than  American  cycles.  Taking  the  dates  entered  in  the  table  we  get
an  average  duration  of  5%  years  in  England  against  4  years  in  the
United  States.

But  these  averages  are  even  less  a  guide  to  business  forecasting  in
England  than  in  America.  It  is  difficult  to  find  any  regular  order
in  the  lengths  of  the  successive  cycles  in  either  Table  23  or  Table  24.
When  we  tabulate  the  frequency  of  English  cycles  according  to  dura-
tion we  find  less  concentration  at  the  mode  than  in  the  corresponding
American  table. From  1793-1920  there  were

2  cycles  about  2  years  long  (1829-31,  and  1918-20)


1

3

(1807-10)

5

4

2 '

5

4

6

2 '

7

3

8

1

9

(1873-83)

2

10

(1837-47,  and  1890-1900)

Four-year  cycles  are  most  common  in  England,  three-year  cycles  in
the  United  States. One-half  of  the  English  cases  are  4-6  years  in


390


BUSINESS  CYCLES


length,  while  two-thirds  of  the  American  cases  are  grouped  at  3-5
years.

TABLE  24

Business  Recessions  in  England  and  Approximate  Duration  op
Business  Cycles,  1790-1925


Duration

Duration

of  Cycles

of  Cycles

IE

L  years

m  years

1793

Recession, February, fol-
lowing financial  pressure  in

1854

Recession, January, Cri-
mean War  7

1792  *

4

1857*

1866*

Financial  panic,  November 4

1797*

Panic,  February

Severe  financial  crisis,  first

1803

Recession,  May,  renewal  of

quarter, Overend-Gurney

war

6

failure 8

1807

Mild  recession

4

1873*

Recession  late  in  year 8

1810*

Severe  crisis,  July

3

1883

Slow recession, early in

1815*

Crisis, autumn, following

year,  perhaps  beginning  in

end  of  war

Recession,  early  spring

6

4

1890*

1882* 9

1819*

Recession  following  financial

1825*

Recession,  spring, followed

crisis  in  November 8

by  financial  panic

6

1900*

Recession,  summer 10

1829

Recession,  first  quarter

4

1907*

Recession, autumn, finan-

1831

Recession

2

cial  stringency 7

1837

Recession  early  in  year,  fol-

1913

Recession,  last  quarter 6

lowing financial panic in

1918

Recession  on  Armistice,  No-

1836*

6

vember 6

1847*

Financial panic, April, re-
cession, summer

10

1920*

Severe  crisis,  second  quarter 2

*The  dates  thus  marked  show  the  crises  recognized  by  Mentor  Bouniatian,  Let
Crises  Economiques,  Paris,  1922,  p.  43.  Most  authorities  would  include  1913,  also,  on
the  same  grounds  that  lead  Bouniatian  to  list  crises  in  1882  and  1900,  although  these
years  were  not  marked  by  severe  financial  strain.

On  applying  the  same  methods  of  analysis  to  the  three  other  coun-
tries for  which  we  have  annals  running  back  to  the  1860's,  1850's,  and
1840's,  we  find  that  in  average  duration  their  cycles  are  intermediate
between  the  English  and  the  American  patterns.  The  average  length
works  out  as  follows :


1838-1920—82  years

France,  15  cycles,  average  length  5%  years.

England,  (1837-1920),  12  cycles,  average  length  nearly  7

years.
United  States,  (1837-1920),  22  cycles,  average  length  3^/4

years.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNAU


391


1848-1925—77  years

Germany,  15  cycles,  average  length  5  years.

England  (1847-1920),  11  cycles,  average  length  6%  years.

United  States (1847-1923), 19  cycles,  average  length  4
years.
1866-1922—56  years

Austria,  10  cycles,  average  length  5.6  years.

England  (1866-1920),  8  cycles,  average  length  6%  years.

United  States  (1865-1923),  15  cycles,  average  length  not
quite  4  years.


3. Frequency  Distributions  of  the  Measurements  Based  upon

THE  Annals.

A  systematic  summary  of  our  evidence  concerning  the  duration  of
business  cycles  is  provided  by  the  following  exhibits.  Table  25  is  a
companion  piece  to  Tables  23  and  24.  It  shows  the  dates  of  recessions
in  fifteen  countries  as  accurately  as  Dr.  Thorp  can  determine  them
from  the  annals,  and  shows  also  the  approximate  duration  of  suc-
cessive cycles  reckoned  to  the  nearest  whole  year.  Chart  23  is  a
graphic  version  of  Tables  23,  24,  and  25.  It  uses  lines  of  varying  length
to  show  the  duration  of  business  cycles  in  each  of  our  countries,  in
chronological  order.


TABLE  25
Dates  of  Business  Recessions  in  Fifteen  Countries  : Various  Years  to  1925


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
in  years
France
1838

1847 early 9

1854 March 7

1857 autumn 3

1860 autumn 3

1867 early 6

1870 July 3

1873 early 3

1876 early 3

1882 early 6

1890 early 8


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
in  years
1900 late  summer  .  11

1908 early 7

1913  early  summer.  5
1918  November  ...  5
1920 summer 2


Germany
1848

1857 autumn 9

1866 June 9

1870 July 4


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
inyeari

1873 autumn 3

1878 early 4

1880 early 2

1882 summer 3

1890 early 8

1900 August 10

1904 summer 4

1907 summer 3

1913 summer 6

1918 November  ... 5

1922 summer 4

1925 summer 3


392


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE 25— (Continued)


Dates  of  Business  Recessions  in  Fifteen  Countries


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
in  years

Austria
1866

1869 late 3

1873 summer 4

1884 early 11

1892 early 8

1894 early 2

1900 early 6

1908 early 8

1912 autumn 5

1918 October 6

1922 autumn 4


Russia

1891  early

1899  third quarter.  8

1904  February 5

1908  early 4

1914  early 6

1917  March 3

1923  October 7

1925  late 2


Sweden

1892  early

1901  early  9

1907  late  autumn..  7

1913  autumn 6

1917  4

1920  summer 3


Netherlands

1891  early

1901  early 10

1907  autumn 7

1913  late 6

1917  early 3

1920  autumn 4


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
in  years

Italy

1888  early

190O spring 12

1907  last  quarter  . .  8
1913 second  half. . .  6

1918 October 5

1920 early 1

Argentina
1890 first  quarter

1892  autunm 3

1900 early 7

1908  early 8

1911  early 3

1913 early 2

1920 December ...  8

Brazil

1889  November

1896 early 6

1900 autunm 5

1907 autumn 7

1912  late 5

1918 November  ...  6

1920 autumn 2

1924 second  half  ...  4

Canada

1888

1893  early 5

1900 autumn 7

1907 autumn 7

1913  second  half  . .  6
1918 November ...  5

1920 autumn  2

1924 spring 4

South  Africa

1890  September

1895 autumn 5

1899 October 4

1903 early 3


Dura-
tion of
Cycles
in  yearf

1913 10

1918 late 5

1920 autumn 2

Australia
1890 January

1901 January 11

1908 January 7

1913  January  5

1914  autumn 2

1920 November ...  6

1924 January 3

India
1889

1896  summer 7

1900 summer 4

1907 autumn 7

1914 August 7

1918 November  ...  4

1920 May 2

Japan
1890 January

1894 August 5

1897  autumn 3

1905 September  ...  8

1907 spring 2

1914 spring 7

1918 November  ...  5

1920 March 1


China
1888

1897  9

1900  May 3

1906  6

1910  4

1920  midyear 10


Chart 23. Approximate Duration of Business Cycles, arranged in Chronological

Sequence.
White  inset  figures  indicate  approximate  duration  in  years.


UNITED  STATES


1796-
1802-
1807-
1812-
1815-
1822-
1825-
1828-
1833-
1837-
r839-
1845-
1846-
1847-
1853-
1857-
1860-
1865-
1870-
1873-
1882-
1888-
1890-
1893-
1896-
1900-
1903-
1907-
1910-
1913-
1918-
1920-


1802
1807
1812
1815
1822
1825
1828
1833
1837
1839
1845
1846
1847
1853
1857
I860
1865
1870
1873
1882
1888
1890
1893
1896
1900
1903
1907
1910
1913
1918
1920
1923


■n


FRANCE


1838-
1847-
1854-
1857-
1860-
1867-
1870-
1873-
1876-
1882-
1890-
1900-
1908-
1913-
J9I8-


1847
1854
1857
I860
1867
1870
1873
1 876
1882
1890
1900
1908
1913
1918
1920


ENGLAND


1793-  1797

1797-1803

1803-1807

1807-1810

I8I0-I8I5

I8I5-I8I9

1819- 1825

1825-1829

1829-1831

1831-1837

1837-1847

1847-1854

1854-1857

1857-18661

1866-18731

1873-18831

1883-1890

1890-1900

1900-1907

1907-1913

I9I3-I9I8

19)8-1920


GERMANY


1848-
1857-
1866-
1870-
1873-
1878-
1880-
1882-
1890-
1900-
1904-
1907-
1913-
1918-
1922-


1857
1866
1870
1873
1878
1880
1882
1690
1900
1904
1907
1913
1918
1922
1925


AUSTRIA


,866-1869
1869-1873
1873-1884
1884-1892
1892-1894
1894-1900
1900-1908
1908-1912
I9I2-I9I8
19)8-1922


Chart  23. Approximate  Duration  of  Business  Cycles,  arranged  in  Chronological

Sequence — Continued.
White  inset  figures  indicate  approximate  duration  in  years.


RUSSIA


1891-1899
1899-1904
1904-1908
1908-1914
1914-1917
1 9 117-1923
1923-1925


CANADA


1888-1893
1893-1900
1900-1907
I907-J9I3
I9I3-I9I8
1918-1920
1920-1924


SWEDEN


1892-1901
1901-1907
1907-1913
1913-19)7
1917-1920


NETHERLANDS

1891-1901  ■■■■■■■■

1901-19071

1907-19131

I9I3-I9J7I

I9I7-I920I


1888-19001

1900-19071

1907-1913

!9r3-l9l8

I9I8-I920I


ITALY


1888-18971
1897-19001
1900-19061
I906-I9I0I
i9^0-^92PI


CHINA


ARGENTINA

1890-18921

1892-19001

1900-19081

1908-191  I

I9II-I9I3I

J9I3-I920I


SOUTH  AFRICA

1890-18951

1895-1899

1899-19031

I903-I9I3I

I9I3-I9I8

1918-19201


AUSTRALIA

1890-1901  ■■■■■■

1 90 1  - 1 908  ■■■■■■■

1908-19131

I9I3-I9I4

I9I4-I920I

1930-1924


INDIA


1889-1896
1896-1900
1900-1907
1907-1914
I9I4-I9I8
1918-1920


BRAZIL


JAPAN


1889-1895
1896-1900
1900-1907
1907-1912
i9)2-l9l8
1918-1920
i920-l924


1890-1894
1894-1897
1897-1905
1905-1907
1907-1914
1914-1918
1918-1920


394


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 395

We  can  treat  the  observations  upon  the  duration  of  business  cycles
assembled  in  this  table  and  chart  as  the  data  of  an  historical  inquiry,
or  as  the  data  of  a  theoretical  problem.  In  the  first  case  we  ask:
What  has  been  the  duration  of  business  cycles  in  the  countries  and
during  the  periods  for  which  we  have  annals?  In  the  second  case
we  ask:  What  expectations  regarding  the  duration  of  business  cycles
are  justified  by  the  sample  observations  in  hand?

As  historical  data,  our  observations  probably  contain  inaccuracies.
Conceiving  a  business  recession  as  a  decline  in  economic  activity
which  follows  a  period  of  expansion  and  spreads  over  most  of  a  coun-
try's industries,  we  have  sought  to  find  and  date  every  recession  which
occurred  in  certain  countries  during  certain  periods.  On  the  basis  of
these  recession  dates,  we  have  measured  the  duration  of  successive
cycles  to  the  nearest  whole  year.  Finally,  we  have  struck  averages
from  these  measurements.  Mistakes  may  have  occurred  in  any  of
these  steps.  We  may  have  omitted  some  recessions;  we  may  have
included  some  cases  which  do  not  fit  our  definition  of  recessions;  we
may  have  blundered  in  measuring  or  averaging.  But  so  long  as  we
are  trying  merely  to  report  what  has  taken  place  in  the  past,  these
doubts  concerning  the  accuracy  of  our  work  are  all  that  need  concern
us.  The  historical  record  is  fixed ;  it  has  its  unique  features  and  in-
terest ;  in  studying  it  we  can  indulge  in  no  speculations.

A  subtler  problem  and  doubts  of  another  order  are  presented
when  we  treat  our  observations  as  data  for  drawing  theoretical  con-
clusions regarding  the  duration  of  business  cycles  at  large.  For  this
purpose,  we  must  ask,  not  merely  whether  our  observations  are  his-
torically dependable,  but  also  whether  they  constitute  a  representative
sample  of  the  phenomena  measured.  Are  the  observations  suffi-
ciently numerous?  Are  they  sufficiently  independent  of  each  other?
Ought  we  to  discard  the  observations  upon  cycles  which  we  think  have
been  cut  short  or  prolonged  by  factors  which  have  no  organic  relation
to  business  activity?

In  the  sense  in  which  the  term  is  used  here — ^recurrences  of  pros-
perity, recession,  depression  and  revival  in  the  business  activities  of
countries  taken  as  units — the  total  number  of  past  business  cycles
may  well  be  less  than  a  thousand.  For  business  cycles  are  phenomena
peculiar  to  a  certain  form  of  economic  organization  which  has  been
dominant  even  in  Western  Europe  for  less  than  two  centuries,  and
for  briefer  periods  in  other  regions. And  the  average  cycle  has  lasted


396  BUSINESS  CYCLES

five  years,  if  we  may  trust  our  data.  Of  the  whole  number  of  cases
to  date,  the  166  cycles  we  have  measured  form  a  significant  fraction.
By  compiling  business  annals  for  Norway,  Belgium,  Switzerland,
Denmark,  Spain,  New  Zealand  and  Chile  we  could  probably  get  addi-
tional observations  as  satisfactory  as  some  of  those  already  included.
Perhaps  we  could  trace  business  cycles  in  Greece,  Egypt,  Turkey,
some  of  the  Balkan  States,  possibly  Mexico,  and  additional  countries
in  Spanish  America.  Doubtless  we  might  carry  our  observations
further  back  in  most  of  the  seventeen  countries  which  we  have
studied.  But  after  we  had  pushed  our  investigations  everywhere  into
the  twilight  zone  where  business  cycles  are  doubtfully  recognizable,
we  should  still  be  dealing  with  relatively  small  numbers.  A  strict
standard  would  bar  out  not  only  most  of  the  extensions  suggested,
but  also  some  of  the  cases  we  now  include.  It  is  not  certain  that  the
Chinese  fluctuations  should  be  treated  as  business  cycles  proper.
At  best,  they  represent  conditions  only  in  the  coast  cities  having  a
large  foreign  trade.  Also,  our  early  American  observations  are  open
to  question,  even  on  the  understanding  that  they  refer  only  to  the
most  highly  organized  of  the  thirteen  original  states.

The  observations  are  not  all  independent  of  each  other.  We  shall
see  presently  that  the  duration  of  business  cycles  in  every  country
influences,  and  is  influenced  by,  the  duration  of  business  cycles  in
other  countries.  Moreover,  the  non-business  factors  which  affect  the
duration  of  business  cycles  often  produce  uniform  results  in  several
countries.  To  cite  one  example:  7  of  our  17  countries  had  a  two-year
cycle  at  the  end  of  the  World  War.  One  hundred  and  sixty-six  obser-
vations, many  of  which  come  in  clusters,  are  likely  to  show  a  less
regular  distribution  around  their  central  tendency  than  would  166
observations  strictly  independent  of  each  other.

If  we  wish  to  find  out  what  we  can  about  the  probable  duration
of  future  business  cycles,  we  should  discard  observations  upon  cycles
whose  duration  has  been  determined  by  factors  of  a  kind  not  likely
to  be  influential  in  the  future.  If  the  data  for  any  country  show
unequivocal  evidence  of  a  change  in  the  length  of  cycles,  the  later
data  are  likely  to  be  a  safer  guide  to  expectations  than  the  earlier
data,  or  the  full  array.  But  we  have  no  warrant  for  discarding  cases
in  which  cycles  seem  to  have  been  cut  short  or  prolonged  by  wars,
civil  disorders,  exceptional  harvest  conditions,  or  any  other  factor,
unless  we  believe  that  such  ^'disturbing  circumstances"  will  not  recur


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 397

in  the  future  as  in  the  past.  Even  the  man  who  has  supposed  that
business  cycles  "tend''  to  have  some  standard  period  will  probably
conclude  upon  studying  the  present  charts  that  he  had  better  take
the  data  as  they  come.

In  fine,  our  observations  form  a  fairly  satisfactory  basis  for
studying  the  duration  of  business  cycles.  Like  all  observations,
their  accuracy  is  open  to  question;  but  they  have  been  made  with
care  and  their  number  is  sufficient  to  allow  errors  to  offset  each
other  in  some  measure.  We  should  be  glad  to  have  a  larger  sample;
but  the  present  one  constitutes  an  appreciable  fraction  of  its  "uni-
verse." We  need  not  reject  any  of  the  observations  on  the  ground
that  the  duration  of  certain  cycles  has  been  affected  by  "disturbing
circumstances'';  for  we  are  interested  in  actual  cycles  in  the  actual
world  where  "disturbing  circumstances"  are  always  present.  We
might  expect  a  more  regular  distribution  if  all  our  observations
were  strictly  independent  of  each  other.  But  once  again,  as  the
world  is  constituted,  interdependence  in  duration  is  characteristic
of  business  cycles  in  different  countries.  A  complete  array  of  meas-
urements for  all  past  cycles  would  resemble  our  sample  in  this
respect,  and  future  cycles  seem  likely  to  show  increasing  inter-
dependence in  duration.  Perhaps  we  should  conceive  of  our  dis-
tributions as  made  from  a  number  of  independent  measurements
smaller  than  the  nominal  count,  but  with  the  use  of  "weights"  which
total  166.  Many  cycles  are  weighted  by  one,  while  other  cycles,
which  began  and  ended  on  the  same  dates  in  countries  with  close
business  relations,  or  dominated  by  the  same  non-business  factors,
are  weighted  by  numbers  running  as  high  as  seven.

To  put  our  data  in  shape  for  analysis,  we  must  disregard  the
chronological  sequence  of  cycles  of  varying  length,  shown  in  Chart
23,  and  rearrange  all  the  cases  in  frequency  tables  of  the  sort  already
given  for  American  and  English  cycles — tables  which  show  the  num-
ber of  cycles  of  each  recorded  duration.  That  step  is  taken  in  Table
26.  But  the  tabulations  by  separate  countries  have  slight  significance
except  for  England  and  the  United  States,  because  the  number  of
cases  is  small  (5-15  cycles).  Hence  Table  27  is  made  from  Table  26,
by  combining  the  observations  from  single  countries  into  various
groups.  To  facilitate  comparisons  among  the  two  dozen  distribu-
tions here  shown,  all  the  samples  are  put  in  percentages.  Qiart  24
is  a  graphic  form  of  these  percentage  distributions.


398


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  26.

Frequency  Distribution  of  Business  Cycles  According  to  Duration  in  Years

Data  from  Seventeen  Countries. Various  Dates  to  1925.
Based  upon  Tables  23,  24  and  25.


Duration

in

Years


1  year  ,

2  years

3  "

4  "

5  "

6  "

7  "

8  "

9  "

10  "

11  "

12  "


England France Ger-  Austria  Italy Nether-  Sweden  Russia
many lands

1793- 183&- 1848-  1866-  1888- 1891- 1892-  1891-

1920 1920 1925  1922 1920 1920 1920 1925


Total number .... 22  15  15  10  5  5  5  7

Average  duration  in

years 5.8  5.5  5.1  5.6  6.4  5.8  5.6  4.9


Duration United Canada Aus-  South Argen- Brazil India

in States tralia  Africa tina

years 1796- 1888- 1890-  1890- 1890- 1889- 1889-

1923 1924 1924  1920 1920 1924 1920

1  year  1

2  years 4 1 1  1 1 1 1

3  " 10 .. 1  1 2

4  " 5 1 ..  1 .. 1 2

5" 6 2 1  2 .. 2

6  " 4 1 1  .... 2 ..

7  " 1 2 1  .. 1 1 3

8  " 2

9  " 1

10  " 1

11  " 1

Total number 32 7 6  6 6 7 6
Average dura-
tion in  years  4.0 5.1 5.7  5.0 5.0 5.0 5.2


Japan China

1890- 1888s.
1920 1920 i


7
4.3


5
6.4


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 399


TABLE  27. .

Frequency  Distribution  op  Business  Cycles  According  to  Approximate  Duration  in
Years:  by  Countries,  Groups  op  Countries  and  Periods

(Based  upon  Table  26)


United

States and

England

United  States,  England,  France,

Dura-
tion in

Duration
in  Years

United
States

England

Germany  and  Austria

Before  1873

After  1873

Full  Period

Years

Num-

• Per

Num-

• Per

Num-  Per

Num-

- Per

Num-  Per

Num-

Per

ber

Cent

ber

Cent

ber Cent

ber

Cent

ber Cent

ber

Cent

1

1

3.1

1 1.9

1

2.1

1

1.1

1

2

4

12.5

2

9.1

6 11.1

2

4.3

7 1*4.9

9

9.6

2

3

10

31.2

1

4.5

11 20.4

12

25.5

9 19.1

21

22.4

3

4

5

15.6

5

22.7

10 18.5

10

21.3

6 12.8

16

17.0

4

5

6

18.8

2

9.1

8 14.8

5

10.6

7 14.9

12

12.8

5

6

4

12.5

4

18.2

8 14.8

8

17.0

5 10.6

13

13.8

6

7

1

3.1

2

9.1

3 5.6

3

6.4

2 4.3

5

5.3

7

8

, ,

. . .

3

13.6

3 5.6

2

4.3

5 10.6

7

7.4

8

9

1

3.1

1

4.5

2 3.7

3

6.4

2 4.3

5

5.3

9

10

2

9.1

2 3.7

1

2.1

2 4.3

3

3.2

10

11

..

...

..

...


..

...

2 4.3

2

2.1

11

Totals ....

32

100.0

22

100.0

54 100.0

47

100.0

47 100.0

94

100.0

Totals

Duration
in  Years


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Totals ....


Countries

with  close

business

relations  *

Num

-Per

ber

Cent

4

10.3

7

18.0

6

15.4

4

10.3

5

12.8

2

5.1

6

15.4

1

2.6

2

5.1

2

5.1

39

100.0

Countries
relatively
indepen-
dent of
each  other'


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2.6

13.2

13.2

21.0

15.8

15.8

7.9

5.3

2.6

2.6


38 100.0


Countries
with  aver-
age dura-
tion of  5.5

years  or
more*


Num-  Per
ber Cent


1
5

11
10
7
13
7
7
4
4
3
1


1.4

6.9

15.4

13.7

9.6

17.8

9.6

9.6

5.5

6.5

4.1

1.4


73 100.0


Countries  with  average

duration  of  5.2  years

or  less*


Excluding
United
States


Num-  Per
ber Cent


1
8
9
10
10
5
9
5
2
2


1.6

13.1

14.8

16.4

16.4

8.2

14.8

8.2

3.3

3.3


Including
United
States


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2

12

19

15

16

9

10

5

3

2


2.2

12.9

20.4

16.1

17.2

9.7

10.8

5.4

3.2

2.2


61 100.0 93 100.0


Countries
with  aver-
age  dura-
tion of  5.0
to  5.7*
years


Num-  Per
ber Cent


11

16

17

13

14

13

9

5

4

3


10.5

15.2

16.2

12.4

13.3

12.4

8.6

4.8

3.8

2.9


105 100.0


Dura-
tion in
Years


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9
10
11
12

Totals


400


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  27— Contirmed

Frequency  Distribution  of  Business  Cycles  According  to  Approximate  Duration  in
Yel\rs:  by  Countries,  Groups  of  Countries  and  Periods — (Continued)


Five

English-
Speaking
Countries  *

Twelve

All

Duration
in  Years

Eight
European
Countries

Nine  Non-
European
Countries

Non-
English-
Speaking
Countries

Countries
except
United
States

All
Countries

Dura-
tion in
Years

Num-  Per

Num-  Per

Num-  Per

Num-  Per

Num-  Per

Num-

• Per

ber Cfent

ber Cfent

ber Cent

ber Cent

ber Cent

ber

Cent

1

1 1.2

2 2.4

1 1.4

2 2.2

2 1.5

3

1.8

1

2

6 7.1

11 13.4

9 12.5

8 8.6

13 9.7

17

10.2

2

3

14 16.7

16 19.5

13 17.8

17 18.3

20 14.9

30

18.1

3

4

14 16.7

11 13.4

12 16.4

13 14.0

20 14.9

25

15.1

4

5

8 9.5

15 18.3

13 17.8

10 10.8

17 12.7

23

13.9

5

6

13 15.5

9 11.0

10 13.7

12 12.9

18 13.4

22

13.3

6

7

7 8.3

10 12.2

6 8.2

11 11.8

16 11.9

17

10.2

7

8

9 10.7

3 3.7

3 4.1

9 9.7

12 9.0

12

7.2

8

9 ...

5 6.0

2 2.4

2 2.7

5 6.4

6 4.5

7

4.2

9

10

4 4.8

2 2.4

3 4.1

3 3.2

6 4.5

6

3.6

10

11

2 2.4

1 1.2

1 1.4

2 2.2

3 2.2

3

1.8

11

12

1 1.2


1 1.1

1 0.7

1

0.6

12

Totals ....

84 100.0

82 100.0

73 100.0

93 100.0

134 100.0

166

100.0

Totals

Recent  Cycles  Only: About  1890  to  1925


Duration
in  Years


1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

Totals ..


European  and  Non-
European  Countries


Eight

European

Countries

Num-

• Per

ber

Cent

1

2.2

3

6.7

6

13.3

7

15.6

6

13.3

8

17.8

5

11.1

3

6.7

1

2.2

3

6.7

1

2.2

1

2.2

45

100.0

Eight

Non-
European
Countries'


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2.0

14.0

12.0

12.0

18.0

10.0

18.0

6.0

2.0

4.0

2.0


50 100.0


Industrial  and  Non-
Industrial  Countries


Seven
Industrial
Countries^


Num-  Per
ber Cent


11.6

20.9

18.6

11.6

14.0

9.3

2.3

2.3

7.0

2.3


43 100.0


Ten  Non-
Industrial
Countries'


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2

8
7
7

11
7

10
5
1
2
1
1


3.2

12.9

11.3

11.3

17.7

11.3

16.1

8.1

1.6

3.2

1.6

1.6


62 100.0


Totals  excluding  and

including  United

States


Excluding
United
States


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2

10

12

13

15

13

14

6

2

5

2

1


2.1

10.5

12.6

13.7

15.8

13.7

14.7

6.3

2.1

5.3

2.1

1.1


95 100.0


Including
United
States


Num-  Per
ber Cent


2

13

16

15

16

13

14

6

2

5

2

1


1.9

12.4

15.2

14.3

15.2

12.4

13.3

57

1.9

4.8

1.9

1.0


105 100.0


Dura-
tion in
Years


1
2
3

4
5

6

7

8

9
10
11
12

Totals


*  England,  United  States,  Canada,  Australia,  South  Africa.
'  Not  including  United  States.

'England,  France,  Germany,  Austria,  Netherlands,  Sweden,  United  States.

*  All  other  countries  included  in  Annals.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 401

The  first  six  figures  in  the  chart  deal  with  the  five  countries  for
which  we  have  annals  covering  relatively  long  periods.  The  peculi-
arities of  the  American  distribution  stand  out  clearly — the  pro-
nounced mode,  almost  a  "spike,"  at  three  years,  and  the  relatively
slight  dispersion,  indicated  by  a  standard  deviation  and  a  coefficient
of  variation  which  are  respectively  the  lowest  and  next  the  lowest
in  the  hst.  In  the  English  distribution,  there  is  a  curious  pre-
dominance of  cycles  lasting  2,  4,  6,  8  and  10  years  over  cycles  lasting
3,  5,  7  and  9  years.  In  view  of  the  small  number  of  observations
(only  22),  it  is  uncertain  whether  this  feature  is  significant.  However
that  may  be,  the  irregularities  in  the  American  and  Enghsh  distribu-
tions compensate  each  other  for  the  most  part,  so  that  Figure  C  is
more  regular  than  either  of  the  arrays  from  which  it  is  made.

Next,  the  French,  German  and  Austrian  observations  are  com-
bined with  the  English  and  American.  Advantage  is  taken  of  the
larger  number  of  cases  to  compare  earlier  with  later  cycles.  By
using  1873  as  the  dividing  point,  we  get  two  groups  each  of  which
contains  47  observations.  From  1873  to  the  end  of  the  late  war,
the  business  fortunes  of  these  countries,  particularly  of  the  European
countries,  ran  more  similar  courses  than  in  earlier  years.  That  is,
the  observations  in  the  later  period  are  less  independent  of  each
other  than  the  earlier  observations — a  fact  which  may  explain  the
lesser  regularity  of  Figure  E  as  compared  with  Figure  D.  As  a
test  of  this  suggestion  we  have  made  a  distribution  of  the  cycles  in
the  four  countries  in  our  list  which  seem  to  have  the  closest  business
ties  with  each  other  for  the  period  in  which  we  have  annals  for  all
four.  The  results,  shown  in  Figure  G,  constitute  one  of  the  least  regu-
lar distributions  in  the  whole  twenty-four.  As  a  companion  piece  we
have  made  up  a  random  group  of  similar  size  from  observations
which  must  be  nearly  independent  of  each  other,  taking  English
cycles  in  1793-1825,  American  cycles  in  1825-57,  German  cycles  in
1857-90,  Canadian  cycles  in  1888-1924,  and  Russian  cycles  in  1891-
1925.  In  this  comparison  the  38  independent  observations  (Figure
H)  yield  a  much  more  regular  distribution  than  the  39  observations
which  are  inter-correlated  with  each  other.  Indeed,  the  contrast  in
regularity  is  more  striking  than  we  would  expect  from  other  com-
parisons of  the  sort.

There  follow  ten  figures  in  which  all  of  the  observations  are
broken  into  parts  on  the  basis  of  four  criteria.  First,  the  countries
are  grouped  according  to  the  average  duration  of  their  business


Chart 24. Percentage Distribution of  Business Cycles in Various Countries and
Various  Periods  According  to  their  Approximate  Duration  in  Years.


Figure  A
United  States:  179G-1923


FiavBE  B
England:  1793-1920.


22  cycles

Average  duration— 5.8  yeaw  i^  r^  »
Standard  deviation— 2.3  yean  f*""  ^ent
OoefiScient  of  variation— 39  per  eeni, pr\


I 2  3  4  5  6  7


23456789  10


FiouRB  C  "RotJUE  D

(Tnited  States  and  England:  1793-96  to  1920-23; United  States,  England,  France,  Germany,  Austria:

Various  dates  to  1873.


47  cycles

Average  duration— 4.9  yean

Standard  deviation— 2.1  years

~ ifficient  of  variation— 43  per  centi PQ


I 23456789  10


I 23456789  10


Fioimi  E
United  States,  England,  France,  Gennanyv
1 Austria:  1873 -to  1920-25


20-


47  cycles

Average  duration — 5.2  yekra
Standard  deviation — 2.6  years
-CoeflBcient  of  variation— 48  per  cent


FlOURE  F

United  States,  England,  France,  Germany,
Austria:  full  period  _______


94  cycles

Average  duration — 5.0  years
Standard  deviation — ^2.4  years
cient  of  variation — 47  per  <


2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II

Dordhon  in  Years


I 23456789  10

Duration  in  Yearj


402


Chartt  24. Percentage Distribution of Business Cycles in  Various Countries and
Various  Periods  According  to  their  Approximate  Duration  in  Years. — (Continued)


FiccBE  G  Figure  H

Countries  with  Close  Business  Relations — England, Observations Relatively Indciicndent of  \  "Each
France,  Germany^  Austria:  1866-1920.  Otker— England, 179S-1825; United States,

1825-1857;  Germany,  1857-18'.)0;  Russia,  1891-
1825;  Canada,  1888-1924-


Ver'^Sxa

20


20-


39  cycles

Avenigc  duration — 6.5  yean
Standard  deviation— 2.6  years
Xoefficient  of  variation — 47  per  cent


38  cycles

Average  duration— 4.7  years  Ca„r'Q.>0

Standard  deviation— 2.1  years  tSCV-Snii

Coefficient  of  variation— 43  per  cen\____p/^.


2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II


I 2  3  4..5  6_7,  8  9  10


FiaoRB  1  FiousE  J

Countries  Having  Cycles  with  Average  Duration Countries  Having  Cycles  with  Average  Duration

•of  5.5  Years  or  More — France,  Austria,  Sweden, of  5.2  Years  or  Less,  excluding  United  States —

England,  Australia,  Netherlands,  Italy,  China: Japan,  Russia,  South  Africa,  Argentina,  Brazil,

various  dates  to  1920-24.  Canada, Germany, India: various dates to

J920-25.


TSeydet

Average  duration — 5.9  yean
Standard  deviation— 2-5  years
jCoefficient  of  variation— 43  per  oeat.


61  cycles

Average  duration — 5.0  years
Standard  deviation — 2.2  years
.Coefficient  of  variation— 44  per  wnf . O/N


20


I 23456789  10  II  12


123456789  10


FiotJM  K  Ftamx  h

Countries  Having  Cycles  with  Average  Duration 'Countries  Having  Cycles  with  Average  Duration

of  6.2  Years  of  Less — Countries  hsted  in  Figure of 5.0-5.7 Years — South Africa, Argentina,

J,  United  States  added:  various  dates  to  1920- Brazil,  Canada,  Germany,.  India,  France,  Aus-

25«  tria,  Sweden,  England,  AustraUa :  various  dates

to  1920-25.


OSeycIea

Average  duration— 4.7  yean

Standard  deviation— 2.1  years

Bcient  of  variation— 45  per-oen\


106  cycles

Average  duration — 5.4  years

Standard  deviation — 2.4  years

Coefficient  of  variation— 44  per  f^nt  OQ


23456789

Ourajjon  io  Y<sa/'9


\0


2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9


10  II


403


Chart 24. Percentage Distribution of Business Cycles in Various Countries and
Various  Periods  According  to  their  Approximate  Duration  in  Years. — {Continued)


Ftotme  M Ftuviic  N
IJight  European  Countries:  various  dates  to Nine  Non-European  Countries: various  dates  to
1920-25 : ,  1920-24.


l%r*Cenf
2


84  cycles

Average  duration — 5.6  yeara

Standard  deviation — 2.6  years

nt  of  vamtion — H  per  eeat


82  cycles

Average  duration— 4.7  years
8tuid&rd  deviation — ^2.2  yean
Coefficient  of  X


Percent
-20


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II  12


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  11


FionRE  O  FlOtTM  P

Five  English-Speaking  Countries— England,  Can- Twelve  Non-English-Speaking  Countries:  various

ada,  Australia,  South  Africa,  United States: dates  to  1920-25.
__jvariou8  dates  to  1920-24


73  cycles

Avenge  Juration— 4.9  years

Standa:  J  detiation— 2.2  years  •

Bt  of  variation— 4«  per  cent.


93  cycles

Average  duration — 5.4  years
Standard  deviation — 2.5  years
XToefficient  of  ▼ariation— 47  per  ee^


I 23456789  10  li


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  6  9  ION  12


ao


FlOl'RE  Q

All  Countries  except  United  States: various
tlttAa  to  1920-25


134  cycles

Average  duration — 5.4  years
Standard  deviation — 2.5  years
-Coefficient  of  variation— 45  per  cent


Fiocub  R
All  Countries:  various  dates  to  1920-25.


ICC  cycles

Average  duration— 5.2  years
Standard  deviation — 2.4  years
Coefficient  of  variation— 47  per  oeDt_


■20


I 2  3  4 5  6  7  8  9  10  1112

Duration  in  Ycar«


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  IM2

Duration  in  Year»


404


Chart  24. Percentage Distribution of Business Cycles in Various Countries and
Various  Periods  According  to  their  Approximate  Duration  in  Years. — (Continued)

fionmS  PioOToiT

Eight  European  Countries:  1888-92  to  1920^05. Eight  Non-European  Clountries,  excluding  Uoited

States:  1888-1890  to  1920-24


45  cycles

Averace  duration — 5.6  yi

Steodaid  deviation— 2.5


SOcy'aea

Average  duration— S.2  year*
Standoni  deviation— 2.4  year»
Coefficient  vt  variatioa— M  per  qeoC.


-Percent

-20 •


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II  12


I 23456789  10  II


FlOCKB  U

8»veo Industrial Countfies — England, France.
Germany,  Austria,  Netherlands,  Sweden,  Unttea
i890-92  to  1920-2S:


ftovtz  V
Ten  Non-Industrial  Countries— Russia,  Italy,  Aiw
gentina,  Brazil,  Canada,  South  Africa,  India,
.^Australia,  Japan,  China: 1888-91  to  1920-25,_


43  cycles

Avora^  duration — 6.0  cycles

QtADdiLrd  deviation — Z4  cycles

"MSnepXcf


03  cycles

Average  duration — 6.3  years
Standard  deviat:«ri— 2.5  years
jQpefficieot  of  vanation— 47  per  oeol.


23456789  10  II


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II  12


FibuHB  W ,  ,  .
All  Oountries  except  United  States: 1888-02  i»;
J920-25


20-


95  cycles


Standard  derviation — 2.6  years
.Coefficient  ot  vftriatioit— 44  per  c«ot


Ttavnt  X
All  Countries:  1888-92  to  1920-25.


106  cycles

Average  duration— 5.2  years
Standard  deviation — 2.4  years
jOoefficieot  of  variation— 47  per  cegt-


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II  12

Duration  in  Years


I 2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10  II  12

Dwrdti,6n  in  Years


405


406  BUSINESS  CYCLES

cycles  as  given  in  our  annals.  Figure  I  shows  the  observations  from
countries  with  relatively  long  cycles,  Figures  J  and  K  the  observa-
tions from  countries  with  relatively  short  cycles  (excluding  and
including  the  United  States),  and  Figure  L  the  observations  from
countries  with  cycles  of  medium  length.  The  latter  group  contains
part  of  the  observations  used  in  Figure  I  and  part  of  those  used  in
Figure  J.  Second,  the  European  and  non-European  observations
are  presented  separately  in  Figures  M  and  N.  Third,  the  observa-
tions from  five  English-speaking  and  twelve  non-English-speaking
countries  are  shown.  Fourth,  Figure  Q  gives  all  the  non-American
observations  for  comparison  with  the  American  distribution  of
Figure  A. Figure  R  sums  up  the  whole  body  of  data.

The  final  section  of  the  chart  is  confined  to  recent  cycles — those
occurring  since  about  1890.  Again  the  data  are  divided  into  groups:
observations  from  European  and  non-European  countries,  from  in-
dustrial and  non-industrial  countries;  from  all  countries  except  and
all  including  the  United  States.

When  we  review  the  whole  array  of  distributions,  we  see  that  the
diagrams  and  the  differences  among  the  diagrams  are  of  a  sort  com-
mon in  studies  of  social  phenomena.  As  usually  happens  in  such
work,  the  small  samples,  especially  when  they  contain  inter-correlated
observations,  are  rather  irregular.  But  with  increase  in  the  size  of
the  samples  and  in  the  independence  of  the  observations,  the  distri-
butions grow  fairly  regular,  though  not  symmetrical.

The  materials  appear  to  be  fairly  homogeneous,  with  the  impor-
tant exception  already  noted — the  distribution  of  American  business
cycles  in  respect  to  length  differs  from  the  distribution  of  cycles  in
other  countries.  This  difference  stands  out  most  sharply  in  the  con-
trast between  Figures  A  and  Q.  It  is  responsible  for  the  double  modes,
separated  by  a  lower  point,  in  Figures  0  and  X,  and  for  the  rela-
tively high  coefficients  of  variation  in  most  of  the  groups  combining
American  and  foreign  observations.  In  the  samples  drawn  solely
from  foreign  countries^  the  diagrams  usually  have  a  rounded  top
quite  unlike  the  spike  of  Figure  A.  Combining  the  American  with
foreign  observations  generally  produces  an  unambiguous  mode  at
three  years,  but  twice  (Figures  0  and  X)  it  produces  the  double
mode  already  spoken  of.

Barring  out  the  twelve  distributions  into  which  American  observa-
tions enter  does  not  reduce  the  variety  in  the  position  of  the  crude


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 407

modes.  Two  of  the  remaining  dozen  figures  have  modes  at  three
years  (G  and  P) ;  two  at  three  and  four  years  (M  and  Q) ;  and  eight
at  4,  5,  or  6  years,  if  we  may  include  here  one  double  mode  at  5  and
7  years  (Figure  T).  By  way  of  generalization  we  can  hardly  be  more
specific  than  to  say  that  two-thirds  of  the  foreign  cycles  are  concen-
trated in  the  interval  three  to  seven  years.

All  of  the  distributions  have  rather  high  coefiicients  of  variation.
In  other  words,  the  observations  do  not  cluster  closely  around  their
averages.  These  coefficients  are  least  in  the  two  distributions  con-
fined to  single  countries  (Figures  A  and  B),  and  greatest  in  the  dis-
tributions made  from  American,  British,  French,  German  and  Aus-
trian observations  since  1873  (Figure  E).  But  the  difference  between
the  lowest  and  highest  coefficients  (39  and  48  per  cent)  is  not  great,
and  14  of  the  24  round  off  at  45,  46  or  47  per  cent.

All  the  distributions  are  skewed  positively.  The  range  runs
farther  above  the  arithmetic  mean  than  below  it  in  every  case,  and
in  every  case  but  Figure  T  the  range  also  runs  farther  above  the  crude
mode  than  below  it.  Moreover,  the  crude  mode  is  less  than  the  arith-
metic mean  in  16  cases,  about  equal  to  it  in  7  cases,  and  clearly  higher
than  the  mean  only  in  Figure  T.  One  of  the  most  significant  distri-
butions, Figure  W,  which  includes  all  cycles  since  about  1890  in
countries  other  than  the  United  States,  approaches  symmetry;  but
the  very  broadest  groups.  Figures  X  (all  recent  cycles),  Q  (all  foreign
cycles),  and  R  (all  cycles)  are  decidedly,  though  not  extremely,
skewed.

Before  attempting  to  interpret  these  frequency  distributions,  it
is  advisable  to  consider  the  relative  duration  of  periods  of  prosperity
and  depression,  the  bearing  of  long-period  trends  of  wholesale  prices
and  secular  changes  in  cycle  lengths.

4. The  Relative  Duration  of  Prosperity  and  Depression.

Dr.  Thorp  has  made  a  special  study  of  the  annals  to  determine  as
accurately  as  possible  how  many  months  of  the  record  for  each  coun-
try can  be  classed  as  prosperous  and  how  many  as  depressed.  Need-
less to  say,  this  task  involved  the  continuous  exercise  of  personal
judgment.

As  pointed  out  in  the  comparison  between  the  annals  and  certain
statistical  indexes  of  business  activity,  contemporary  observers  are
always  influenced  by  recent  experience  in  their  use  of  the  terms  de-


408  BUSINESS  CYCLES

pression  and  prosperity.  Hence,  no  rigid  criterion  of  what  constitutes
business  prosperity  and  depression  can  be  evolved  from,  or  read  into,
our  sources.  But  that  fact  does  not  obstruct,  it  really  facilitates,
the  task  in  hand.  For  we  seek  to  compare  the  duration  of  the  pros-
perous phase  with  that  of  the  depressed  phase  within  each  cycle
treated  as  a  unit.  That  the  prosperous  phases  of  successive  cycles
in  the  same  country  and  of  synchronous  cycles  in  different  countries
attain  different  degrees  of  intensity  is  a  matter  of  deep  interest,  both
practically  and  theoretically;  but  it  is  beside  the  present  point.

Dr.  Thorp's  chief  difficulty  was  that  his  sources  seldom  date  the
transitions  from  one  phase  of  a  cycle  to  the  next  phase.  In  trying
to  supply  that  omission  in  every  case,  he  had  to  rely  upon  indicationa
which  are  often  faint.  In  detail  his  decisions  must  be  subject  to  a
wider  margin  of  error  than  his  measurements  of  the  durations  of
whole  cycles,  since  the  recessions  on  which  the  latter  measurements
are  based,  are  the  phases  which  have  attracted  most  attention.  Hence
it  will  be  advisable  to  confine  ourselves  to  his  averages  covering
several  or  many  cycles,  and  to  draw  only  broad  conclusions.

Table  28  shows  the  form  and  drift  of  Dr.  Thorp's  tabulations. It .

TABLE  28

Relattve  Duration  of  Different  Phases  of  Business  Ctcles  in  Seventeen

Countries,  1890^1925

Months  Percentages

Months  of  prosperity 2,888  39.3

Months  of  recession  and  revival 1,756  23.9

Months  of  depression 2,700  36.8

Total 7,344  100.0

Years  of  prosperity  per  year  of  depression:  1.07.

appears  that  the  phases  of  recession  and  revival  put  together  make  up
rather  less  than  one-quarter  of  the  duration  of  recent  cycles.  But
in  view  of  the  difficulty  of  saying  just  when  revival  has  blossomed
into  prosperity,  and  just  when  recession  has  merged  into  depression,
this  conclusion  should  not  be  stressed  heavily.  However,  if  these
decisions  can  be  made  on  a  substantially  consistent  basis,  the  com-
parison between  the  relative  duration  of  the  prosperous  and  de-
pressed phases  of  the  cycles  will  not  be  compromised.^  What  the
table  indicates  is  that  in  this  period  of  36  years  the  prosperous

'  Chart  27,  below,  shows  for  every  cycle  the  quarters  and  years  which  Dr.  Thorp  has
taken  as  marking  off  revival  and  recession.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 409

phases  averaged  somewhat  longer  than  the  depressed  phases.  A  simi-
lar conclusion  was  drawn  from  American  business  indexes  in  Chap-
ter III.  Business  contraction  was  found  to  be  "a  briefer  and  more
violent  process  than  business  expansion."  A  crude  average  of  over
50  measurements  of  the  duration  of  the  ascending  phase  of  the  cycles
since  1878  gives  23  months.  The  corresponding  average  for  the  de-
scending phase  is  about  19  months.^

Similar  averages  showing  the  relative  duration  of  prosperity  and
depression  for  particular  countries  and  periods  are  given  in  Table  29.
To  get  comparable  results  it  has  been  necessary  both  to  take  periods
which  comprise  whole  cycles,  and  to  make  these  periods  as  nearly
synchronous  as  may  be.  For  the  results  in  any  one  country  vary
considerably  from  one  period  to  another.  For  example,  the  English
and  American  averages  come  out  in  three  different  periods  as  follows :


Years  of  Pros-
perity per  Year
of  Depression

Years  of  Pros-
perity per  Year
of  Depression

England  1790-1925....

1.11

United  States  1790-1925.,

1.50

1890-1913....

1.24

1890-1913..

1.57

1890-1920....

1.71

1890-1923..

,.. 1.79

As  a  guide  to  future  expectations,  the  averages  which  include  the
years  of  the  great  war  seem  less  significant  than  the  averages  which
we  have  for  longer  periods  of  time  in  five  countries,  or  than  the  aver-
ages for  17  countries  in  the  period  from  about  1890  to  1913.

The  wide  differences  between  the  averages  for  the  countries  at  the
the  bottom  and  the  top  of  the  list  in  Table  29  show  how  much  business
conditions  are  affected  by  political  turmoil  and  stability.  Brazil,
China,  Russia  and  South  Africa  had  grave  troubles  in  the  period  for
which  we  have  compiled  their  annals,  and  Austria  suffered  from  her
proximity  to  the  Balkan  volcanoes.  The  other  figures  speak  for  them-
selves. But  we  should  remember  that  the  figures  for  each  country
speak  that  country's  language.  Swedish  prosperity  may  differ  from
Canadian  prosperity — the  comparison  made  is  between  the  prosperous
and  the  depressed  phases  of  Swedish  cycles  in  one  case,  and  between
the  prosperous  and  the  depressed  phases  of  Canadian  cycles  in  the
other  case.  It  is  risky  to  say  that  one  of  these  countries  has  been  more
prosperous  than  the  other,  even  in  the  period  here  covered. And  it

*  See  Chapter  III,  section  vi,  (2)  "Month-to-Month  Changes,"  and  (5)  "Duration  of
Periods  of  Expansion  and  Contraction."


410


BUSINESS  CYCLES


is  easy  to  conceive  that  any  country  might  change  its  ranking  in  such
a  list  radically  within  a  decade  or  two.


TABLE  29.

Kelative  Duration  of  the  Prosperous  and  Depressed  Phases  in  the  Business  Cycles
OP  Seventeen  Countries  during  Various  Periods

Years  of  Pros-
perity per  Year
Period  of  Depression

United  States 1790-1925  1.50

England  1790-1925  1.11

France 1840-1925  1.18

Germany  185^-1925  1.18

Austria  1860-1925  0.70

Years  of  Pros-  Years  of  Pros-

perity per  Year  perity  per  Year

Period  of  Depression  Period  of  Depression

Canada 1888-1924  1.86  1888-1913  2.08

United  States....  1890-1923  1.79  1890-1913  1.57

England 1890-1920  1.71  1890-1913  1.24

France 1890-1920  1.70  1890-1913  1.47

Australia 1890-1920  1.69  1890-1913  1.37

Sweden 1892-1920  1.67  1892-1913  1.89

Netherlands 1891-1920  1.61  1891-1913  1.59

India 1889-1920  1.43  1889-1914  1.26

Argentina  1890-1920  1.07  1890-1913  1.06

Japan 1890-1920  1.05  1890-1914  .75

Germany 1890-1925  1.03  1890-1913  1.14

Italy 1888-1920  .98  1888-1913  .90

South  Africa  ....  1890-1920  .89  1890-1913  .66

Russia  1891-1925  .81  1891-1914  1.09

China 188&-1920  .65  1888-1910  .67

Austria 1892-1922  .63  1892-1912  .73

BrazU 1889-1924  .45  1889-1912  .29

Seventeen  Countries  1.14  1.08

One  of  the  main  reasons  why  these  ratios  of  years  of  prosperity
to  years  of  depression  are  unstable  is  revealed  by  a  further  analysis
of  the  long  records  for  England  and  the  United  States.  From  various
index  numbers  of  prices,  it  is  known  that  the  long-period  trend  of
the  wholesale  price  level  changed  direction  four  times  in  the  130
years,  1790  to  1920.  The  turning  points  came  at  nearly  the  same
dates  in  this  country  and  England,  save  that  our  greenback  prices
reached  their  highest  point  just  before  the  end  of  the  Civil  War  in


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 411

1865,  whereas  in  gold-standard  nations  prices  continued  to  rise  until
1873.  Thus  we  have  in  both  countries  five  periods  of  alternately
declining  and  advancing  price  trends.  From  1790  to  1814  wholesale
prices  rose  unsteadily;  from  1814  to  1849  they  declined  unsteadily;
from  1849  to  1865  in  the  United  States  and  to  1873  in  England  they
rose  unsteadily;  from  1865  in  the  United  States  and  1873  in  England
they  declined  unsteadily  until  1896;  from  1896  to  1920  they  rose  un-
steadily. For  the  periods  thus  marked  off,  Dr.  Thorp  has  obtained
the  following  ratios  of  years  of  prosperity  to  years  of  depression :


TABLE  30.

Rblativb  Duration  of  the  Prosperous  and  the  Depressed  Phases  of  Business  Cycles
[  IN  Periods  of  Rising  and  Declining  Trends  of  Wholesale  Prices:

England  and  the  United  States,  1790-1925


England

Years  of
Prosperity
per  Year  of
Depression

United  States

Years  of
Prosperity
per  Year  of
Depression

1790-1815  Prices  rising . .

1.0

1790-1815  Prices  rising . .

2.6

1815-1849  Prices  falling  . .

.9

1815-1849  Prices  falling  . .

.8

1849-1873  Prices  rising . .

3.3

1849-1865  Prices  rising . .

2.9

1873-1896  Prices  falling  . .

.4

1865-1896  Prices  falling  . .

.9

1896-1920  Prices  rising . .

2.7

1896-1920  Prices  rising . .

3.1

These  results  are  so  uniform  and  so  striking  as  to  leave  little  doubt
that  the  secular  trend  of  the  wholesale  price  level  is  a  factor  of  great
moment  in  determining  the  characteristics  of  business  cycles.  That
is  no  novel  conclusion;  but  Dr.  Thorp's  data  lend  it  new  force  and
precision.

A  final  point  established  by  study  of  the  relative  duration  of  the
prosperous  and  the  depressed  phases  of  business  cycles  is  that  the
very  long  cycles  usually  owe  their  length  primarily  to  prolongation
of  depression.  Among  the  166  cycles  we  have  measured  there  are  17
which  lasted  9  years  or  more.  The  average  of  all  our  observations,
it  will  be  remembered,  is  5.2  years.  Dr.  Thorp  has  made  a  special
examination  of  these  long  cycles  to  determine  when  the  revivals
occurred,  and  how  long  were  the  periods  of  declining  and  of  increasing
activity. His  results  appear  in  Table  31.

Whereas  the  most  inclusive  average  in  Table  29  gives  a  ratio  of
1.14  years  of  prosperity  per  year  of  depression,  the  present  table
gives  a  ratio  of  0.79. In  11  of  the  17  cycles  the  phase  of  depression


412


BUSINESS  CYCLES


is  longer  than  the  phase  of  prosperity.  The  longest  period  of  pros-
perity found  is  72  months;  the  longest  periods  of  depression  run  72,
76  and  100  months.  Finally,  the  average  phase  of  depression  in
these  long  cycles  is  nearly  a  year  longer  than  the  average  phase  of
prosperity.

TABLE  31.


Length Country

in
Years


12

11

11

11

10

10

10

10

10

10

9

9

9

9

9

9

9


Italy

France

Austria

Australia . . .

England

England  ....
Germany  . . .
Netherlands  .
South  Africa.

China

United  States
England  ....

France

Germany  . . .
Germany . . .

Sweden

China


5.


Years  of  prosperity  per  year  of  depression:  0.79.

Secular  Changes  in  the  Average  Duration  of  Business

Cycles.


Another  matter  which  demands  attention  is  the  differences  be-
tween the  average  duration  of  business  cycles  in  various  countries
revealed  by  Table  26.  In  particular,  why  do  American  cycles  average
only  4  years  in  length,  while  English  cycles  during  the  same  period
average  nearly  5  years  and  10  months?

A  possible  clew  to  this  puzzle  is  suggested  by  the  hypothesis,  de-
veloped in  Chapter  II,  that  business  cycles  are  associated  with  a  par-
ticular form  of  economic  organization,  here  called  ^'business  economy."


Phases  of  Depression  and  Phases  of

Prosperity

IN  Business

Cycles  Lasting  Nine  Yeaes  or  More

Periods  Covered  by  the

Year

Months

Months

Cycles

of

of

of

Revival

Depression

Prosperity

1888,  early-1900,  early . . .

. 1897

100

30

1890,  early-1900,  late

. 1895

60

42

1873-1884

. 1880

72

36

1890-1901

. 1896

62

48

1837,  early-1847,  April  . . .

. 1843

68

44

1890,  Nov .-1900

. 1895

42

48

1890,  early-1900,  summer.

. 1894,  late

44

51

1891-1901

. 1896

48

48

1903-1913

. 1909

60

36

1910-1920

. 1916

60

48

1873-1882

. 1878

57

42

1873,  late-1883,  early  ....

. 1880

69

24

1838-1847

. 1840

24

72

184&-1857

. 1853

54

42 1

1857-1866

. 1860

18

66

1892-1901

. 1895
. 1895

30
76

60

12 ;

1888-1897

Total

944

749 \

A

Lverage

55

44

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 413

If  that  hypothesis  be  valid,  the  characteristics  of  business  cycles  may
be  expected  to  change  as  economic  organization  develops.  We  have
historical  evidence  to  support  this  supposition  in  respect  to  at  least
one  characteristic:  violent  panics  are  giving  way  to  recessions.  May
not  the  average  intervals  between  recessions  also  vary  from  genera-
tion to  generation?

In  the  introduction  to  Business  Annals  I  noted  that  secular  changes
in  duration  have  occurred  in  certain  countries  for  which  Dr.  Thorp
has  compiled  annals  covering  an  extended  period.  But  I  failed  to
develop  the  full  significance  of  the  data.  Dr.  Frederick  C.  Mills  of
the  National  Bureau's  staff  has  made  a  more  extended  study  of  the
problem,  and  suggested  a  tentative  explanation,  not  only  of  the  secu-
lar changes  which  he  finds  in  the  average  duration  of  business  cycles
in  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and  Germany,  but  also  of  the
differences  in  the  average  length  of  business  cycles  in  our  17  countries.^

Dr.  Mills  formulates  his  hypothesis  as  follows:
.  .  .  the  duration  of  business  cycles  in  a  given  country  is  a
function  of  the  stage  of  industrial  development  which  that
country  has  attained.  More  specifically:  When  the  modern
type  of  economic  organization  is  in  the  initial  stage  of  develop-
ment, the  average  duration  of  business  cycles  is  relatively  long.
During  the  stage  of  rapid  growth,  when  modern  types  of  busi-
ness enterprise  and  modern  forms  of  industrial  organization
are  being  applied  extensively,  business  cycles  are  of  relatively
short  average  duration.  With  the  decline  in  the  rate  of  eco-
nomic change  and  the  attainment  of  comparative  stability,
business  cycles  increase  again  in  length.

To  test  this  hypothesis  adequately  Dr.  Mills  recognizes  that  he
needs,  not  only  a  larger  body  of  observations,  but  also  an  "objective
criterion  for  distinguishing  the  stages  in  a  country's  industrial  de-
velopment, or  for  classifying  countries  according  to  their  present  state
of  development."  On  the  view  developed  in  this  book,  the  factor  in
economic  organization  critically  important  for  the  understanding  of
business  cycles  is  not  the  "stage  of  industrial  development"  as  such,
but  the  proportion  of  the  people  who  are  depending  mainly  upon
making  and  spending  money  incomes,  and  the  proportion  of  total
business  that  is  done  by  large-scale  enterprises. Needless  to  say,  we

2  "An Hypothesis  concerning the Duration of  Business Cycles,"  Journal of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  December,  1926,  vol.  xxi,  pp.  447-457.


414  BUSINESS  CYCLES

have  neither  an  "index  of  industrialization,"  nor  an  index  of  business
economy.  Under  these  circumstances,  Dr.  Mills  is  forced  to  make  a
somewhat  arbitrary  division  of  Dr.  Thorp's  materials  into  the  periods
suggested  by  his  hypothesis — a  division  based  partly  on  the  evidence
of  the  annals  themselves  and  partly  on  other  information.  Thus  he
takes  the  early  stage  of  industrialization  in  the  United  States  to  last
from  the  beginning  of  the  annals  to  1822,  since  which  time  the  coun-
try has  been  in  the  stage  of  rapid  economic  transition.  In  England
he  supposes  that  the  first  stage  had  been  passed  before  our  annals
begin,  that  the  second  stage  extended  from  1793  to  1831,  and  the
third  from  1831  to  date.  The  countries  which  he  assigns  to  this
third  stage  of  decreasing  rate  of  progress  are  England  since  1831,
France  since  1876,  Austria  since  1873,  the  Netherlands  and  Sweden
since  the  beginning  of  their  annals  in  1890.  Germany  he  puts  into
the  first  stage  until  1866,  and  into  the  second  stage  since  then.^

2  Mills'  full  classification  of  the  materials  is  as  follows:

A.  Countries  in  the  early  stages  of  industrialization:

United  States  to  1822

Germany  to  1866

Italy  to  1907

Canada  to  1913

Australia  to  1913

South  Africa  to  1913

China  to  date

India  to  date

Russia  to  date

Argentina  to  date

Brazil  to  date

B.  Countries  in  the  stage  of  rapid  economic  transition:

England  to  1831

United  States  1822  to  date

France  to  1876  " " 1838

Germany  1866  to  date

Austria  to  1873  " " 1866

Italy  1907  to  date

Canada  1913  to  date

Australia  1913  to  date

South  Africa  1913  to  date

Japan  to  date  " " 1890

C.  Countries  in  which  the  transition  is  going  forward  at  a  decreasing  rate:

England  1831  to  date

France  1876  to  date

Austria  1873  to  date

Netherlands  to  date  (Annals  begin  1891)

Sweden  to  date  " " 1892

*  The  dates  given  as  marking  the  beginning  of  the  Annals  are  the  dates  of  the  first
recorded  recessions.  In  cases  where  the  beginning  of  a  stage  is  not  defined  in  the  above
table,  that  stage  is  assumed  to  date  from  a  period  prior  to  the  beginning  of  the  Annals.


(Annals  begin

1796)

i(

1848

<(

1888

<<

1888

<<

1890

((

1890

<<

1888

«

1889

((

1891

((

1890

((

1889

(Annals  begin

1793)

THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS
On  this  basis,  Dr.  Mills  gets  the  following  results :


415


Early  stages  of
industrialization


Number  of  observations 51  cycles

Mean  duration 5.86  years

Standard  deviation 2.41 "


Stage  of  rapid
economic
transition

77  cycles
4.09  years

1.88 "


Stage  of  relative
economic
stability

38  cycles
6.39  years
2.42 "


He  computes  that  differences  as  great  as  those  between  the  averages
of  the  first  and  second  periods  and  between  the  averages  of  the  second
and  third  periods  would  arise  as  the  result  of  sampling  fluctuations
about  one  time  out  of  50,000  and  1,000,000  trials  respectively.  The
explanation  for  the  relatively  short  duration  of  American  cycles  sug-
gested by  these  results  is  "an  exceptional  prolongation  of  the  period
of  industrial  transition  in  this  country."

There  can  be  little  doubt  that  the  average  duration  of  business
cycles  has  undergone  secular  changes  in  the  countries  for  which  Thorp
has  compiled  the  longest  records.  If  our  annals  are  valid,  this  con-
clusion is  definitely  established  for  England,  and  made  highly  prob-
able for  France  and  the  United  States.  Mills  gives  the  following
averages  for  periods  which  differ  in  the  case  of  one  country  from
those  used  in  his  systematic  classification  of  all  the  materials :


England

1793-1831

9  cycles

Average

duration  4.22  years

<<

1831-1920

13 "

6.85 "

France

1854-1876

6 "

3.67 "

((

1876-1920

7 "

6.32 "

United  States

1796-1822

5 "

5.20 "

((

It

1822-1860

11 "

3.50 "

it

11

1860-1888

5 "

5.50 "

ft

11

1888-1923

11 "

3.20 "

Thus  English  and  French  cycles  have  grown  longer,  while  American
cycles  have  gone  through  a  curious  double  swing,  first  decreasing  in
length,  then  increasing,  then  decreasing  again.

But,  granting  the  statistical  significance  of  these  averages,  and
their  value  as  a  summary  of  past  experience,  what  theoretical  impor-
tance can  we  attach  to  them?  From  the  empirical  viewpoint  they
show  the  existence  of  secular  trends  in  the  duration  of  business  cycles.
We  have  seen  that  purely  empirical  trends  can  be  used  only  in  the
most  tentative  fashion  as  a  basis  for  forming  future  expectations,  or  as


416  BUSINESS  CYCLES

a  basis  for  giving  explanations.  But  if  trends  can  be  developed  from
rational  hypotheses,  they  become  far  more  useful.  Thus  we  come
back  to  a  critical  consideration  of  the  evidence  for  Mills'  hypothesis
concerning  the  connection  between  the  average  duration  of  business
cycles  and  the  state  of  industrialization.

It  is  doubtful  if  any  half-dozen  economic  historians,  given  Mills'
necessarily  vague  definitions  of  three  stages  of  industrialization,  and
asked  to  date  the  close  of  each  stage  in  the  17  countries  for  which
we  have  business  annals,  would  undertake  the  task,  or  find  themselves
in  substantial  agreement  if  they  did.  It  is  easy  to  question  many  of
the  dates  assigned  by  Mills,  and  hard  either  to  establish  or  to  dis-
prove their  validity.  To  canvass  the  pertinent  evidence  in  detail
would  be  an  enormous  task,  and  would  lead  to  no  conclusive  result
unless  prefaced,  first  by  a  more  precise  statement  of  the  hypothesis
than  Mills  has  given,  and  second  by  the  development  of  objective
standards  by  which  to  rate  the  significance  of  what  facts  might  be
established.

Our  best  hope  for  further  light  upon  the  hypothesis  which  Mills
makes  so  interesting  lies  in  further  analytic  work  upon  secular  trends
in  economic  history.  Few  problems  are  more  fascinating,  more  im-
portant, or  more  neglected  than  the  rates  at  which  economic  develop-
ment proceeds  in  successive  generations  and  in  different  countries.
It  is  conceivable  that  men  who  combine  the  requisite  statistical  tech-
nique with  the  requisite  historical  knowledge  can  develop  effective
methods  of  utilizing  the  scattered  figures  which  survive  in  little
known  sources,  and  the  abundant  descriptive  materials,  in  such  fash-
ion as  to  show  at  least  the  broad  stages  in  the  recent  economic  develop-
ment of  the  leading  commercial  nations.  If  they  do,  sidelights  upon
changes  in  various  characteristics  of  business  cycles  will  be  a  not
unimportant  gain  from  their  labors.

6.  Conclusions.

1.  Our  measurements  of  the  intervals  between  recessions  do  not
bear  precisely  upon  the  obsolescent  debate  concerning  the  periodicity
of  crises.  But  measurements  made  from  the  annals  upon  the  old  plan
would  be  as  fatal  to  the  hypothesis  of  periodicity  as  the  measurements
which  I  prefer.  Indeed,  counting  from  crisis  to  crisis  would  make
the  limits  within  which  cycles  vary  even  wider  than  does  counting
from  recession  to  recession. The  longest  cycle  shown  by  the  annals


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 417

— the  Italian  case  of  1888-1900 — ^would  be  extended  from  12  to  19
years  if  we  skipped  the  mild  recession  of  1900  and  passed  on  to  the
crisis  of  1907.  Perhaps  still  longer  cycles  might  be  found,  were  this
method  of  counting  systematically  applied  to  all  countries.  Nor
could  the  extension  of  the  range  in  one  direction  be  compensated  by
reduction  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale.  The  shortest  cycle  could  not
be  prolonged  beyond  two  or  three  years,  except  by  such  violent  proce-
dures as  telescoping  the  American  panics  of  1837  and  1839  into  a
single  crisis.

Nor  can  I  confirm  the  ingenious  suggestion  made  by  Professor
H.  S.  Jevons  and  Mr.  Joseph  Kitchin,  that  long  cycles  are  multiples
of  two  or  three  short  ones.^  Were  such  the  case,  and  were  the  short
cycles  SVs  or  3%  years  long  as  these  writers  suppose,  one  would  expect
\)ur  frequency  diagrams  to  show  modes,  primary  or  secondary,  at  3,  7,
and  10,  or  11  years.  None  of  them  do  so.  There  are  diagrams  with
modes,  pronounced  or  faint,  at  3  and  7  years,  and  4  and  8  years.  But
there  are  also  diagrams  with  modes,  pronounced  or  faint,  at  3  and  4
years;  3  and  5  years;  3  and  6  years;  3  and  8  years;  3,  4,  6,  and  8  years;
3,  5,  and  7  years;  3,  5,  and  10  years;  3,  6,  and  10  years;  4  and  5  years;
4  and  6  years;  5  and  7  years,  etc.  More  significant  is  the  fact  that  as
the  size  of  the  samples  increases  the  minor  modes  tend  to  disappear,
instead  of  tending  to  grow  clearer.  In  the  most  inclusive  sample  of
all  (Figure  R  of  Chart  24),  there  are  no  secondary  modes.

While  few  if  any  recent  writers  maintain  the  hypothesis  of  peri-
odicity in  any  form,  many  of  them  do  give  some  average  figure  to
represent  the  duration  typical  of  business  cycles.  Such  averages  are
adequate  for  certain  purposes.  But  the  present  results  show  that
no  average  can  suggest  the  facts  about  the  duration  of  cycles  which
are  most  significant  for  theory  and  practice.

2.  If  there  is  any  regularity  in  the  sequence  of  cycles  of  different
lengths,  I  have  failed  to  find  it.  Chart  23,  which  represents  the
duration  of  cycles  taken  in  chronological  order,  shows  the  hazard  of
attempting  to  forecast  how  long  the  next  cycle  will  last  in  any  of  our
countries.  Neither  modal  length,  nor  the  duration  of  the  preceding
cycle  is  a  safe  guide.

3.  A  semblance  of  regularity  does  appear,  however,  when  we
disregard  chronological  sequence  and  group  our  observations  in  fre-

*See  Herbert  Stanley  Jevons,  The  &an's  Heat  and  Solar  Activity,  London,  1910,
and  Joseph  Kitchin,  ''Cycles  and  Trends  in  Economic  Factors,"  Review  of  Economic
Statistics,  January,  1923,  Preliminary  vol.  v,  pp.  10-16.


418  BUSINESS  CYCLES

quency  tables.  And  the  regularity  becomes  more  marked  as  the  size
of  the  sample  increases,  that  is,  as  the  number  of  independent  obser-
vations upon  the  duration  of  business  cycles  becomes  greater.

The  regularity  which  emerges,  consists,  not  in  the  preponderance
of  cycles  of  any  given  duration,  but  in  the  way  in  which  cycles  of
different  durations  group  themselves  about  their  central  tendency.
The  distribution  is  of  a  type  found  in  many  studies  of  biological  and
social  phenomena.  It  is  not  symmetrical,  but  skewed  positively.
In  all  the  groups  into  which  we  have  divided  the  observations  for
analysis,  the  range  runs  farther  above  than  below  the  arithmetic
mean,  and  in  two-thirds  of  the  groups  the  crude  mode  is  less  than  the
arithmetic  mean.

4.  American  cycles  have  a  shorter  average  duration  than  those
of  any  other  country  studied.  The  averages  of  32  American  and  of
134  foreign  measurements  are  4.0  and  5.4  years  respectively.  The
shortest  average  duration  found  in  any  foreign  country  is  4.3  years
in  Japan,  where  7  cycles  occurred  in  approximately  the  period  covered
by  10  American  cycles.  The  American  distribution  shows  a  pro-
nounced mode  at  3  years;  the  most  inclusive  of  the  foreign  distribu-
tions shows  a  rounded  top  with  equal  numbers  of  cases  at  3  and  4
years,  and  no  marked  decline  in  numbers  before  8  years.

5.  Secular  changes  in  the  average  duration  of  business  cycles
can  be  traced  in  countries  for  which  business  annals  have  been  com-
piled for  long  periods.  In  England  and  France  the  duration  has  in-
creased; in  the  United  States  the  duration  averaged  5.2  years  in
1796-1822,  3.5  years  in  1822-60,  5.5  years  in  1860-88,  and  3.2  years
in  1888-1923.  This  fact  makes  it  difficult  to  adapt  the  physical-cause
theories  of  economic  fluctuations  to  business  cycles.

The  most  interesting  hypothesis  concerning  these  changes  in  sec-
ular length,  and  concerning  the  differences  in  the  average  duration  of
cycles  in  different  countries  at  a  given  period,  is  that  offered  by  Dr.
Frederick  C.  Mills,  who  suggests  tentatively  that  business  cycles  tend
to  be  relatively  long  in  a  country  during  the  early  stages  of  indus-
trialization, relatively  short  during  the  stage  of  rapid  economic  transi-
tion, and  relatively  long  again  when  the  rate  of  transition  decreases.

6.  While  our  frequency  distributions  lack  the  symmetry  of  the
Gaussian  normal  curve,  their  form  suggests  fitting  "a  logarithmic
normal  curve;  that  is  a  Gaussian  curve  in  which  the  successive  units
[standard  deviations]  of  the  horizontal  scale  are  readjusted  to  dis-


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 419

tances  having  a  constant  ratio  rather  than  a  constant  difference/^  -
This  experiment  has  been  tried  upon  Figure  R  of  Chart  24 — the  dis-
tribution which  includes  all  of  our  166  observations.  Chart  25  shows
that  the  fit  of  the  logarithmic  normal  curve  to  the  data  is  on  the
whole  rather  close.^


Chartt  25. Logarithmic  Normal  Curve  Fitted  by  Davies'  Method  to  the  Frequency
Distribution  of  16C  Observations  upon  the  Duration  of  Business  Cycles.

Frequency


3a

^»^

/

\

V

28

/

1

f

\

24

/

\

\

20

V

/

\

16

12

8

/

\

N

\

/

xj

f

^

4

J

/

.

y

n

5 6 7 8

Duration  in  Yeairs


10 II J2


From  this  fact  we  infer  that,  like  other  biological  and  social  phe-
nomena whose  distributions  are  well  described  by  some  form  of  the
normal  curve,  the  durations  of  business  cycles  may  be  regarded  as
the  net  resultants  of  a  multitude  of  factors  which  are  largely  inde-

'See  George  R.  Davies,  "The  Logarithmic  Curve  of  Distribution,"  Journal  of  the
American  Statistical  Association,  December,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  467-480.  Dr.  Thorp  has
adopted  Professor  Davies'  method  in  making  the  chart  on  this  page.

■^When  the  cycles  now  running  in  our  17  countries  are  ended,  the  new  batch  of
observations  promises  to  modify  the  distribution  of  Chart  25  somewhat.  Five  years
have  already  elapsed  since  the  latest  recession  in  three  of  our  countries,  and  six  years
in  seven  countries.


420  BUSINESS  CYCLES

pendent  of  each  other.  If  there  is  any  dominant  factor  or  set  of  fac-
tors, which  tends  to  produce  cycles  of  uniform  duration,  its  influence
is  greatly  modified  by  a  host  of  other  factors  combined  in  ways  which
vary  endlessly.  This  conclusion  has  an  important  bearing  upon  the
theory  of  business  cycles  and  the  methods  by  which  that  theory  may
be  improved.^

7.  Regarding  the  relative  duration  of  the  several  phases  which
make  up  business  cycles,  the  annals  yield  certain  fragmentary,  but
significant,  results.

As  we  interpret  them  on  the  basis  of  current  business  reports,  the
phases  of  recession  and  revival  are  relatively  brief.^  Put  together,
they  account  for  only  one-quarter  of  the  duration  of  business  cycles
on  the  average.  Of  the  remaining  three-quarters,  the  prosperous
phase  occupies  a  somewhat  longer  time  than  the  phase  of  depression.
But  the  ratio  of  months  of  prosperity  to  months  of  depression  varies
widely  from  country  to  country,  and  within  any  country  it  varies
widely  from  cycle  to  cycle. Consequently,  the  average  ratios  ap-

*Dr.  Oskar  Morgenstem  has  kindly  allowed  me  to  read  the  manuscript  of  a  paper
on  ''Internationale  vergieichende  Konjunkturforschung"  (soon  to  appear  in  the  Zeit-
fichrift  fur  die  gesammte  Staatsuissenschaft) ,  in  which  he  questions  the  propriety  of  my
averaging  together  measurements  of  the  duration  of  business  cycles  which  have  oc-
curred in  communities  of  widely  different  economic  organization.  As  Dr.  Morgenstern
points  out,  the  hypothesis  that  there  is  an  intimate  connection  between  the  form  of
economic  organization  and  business  cycles  implies  that  radical  differences  in  economic
organization  are  associated  with  corresponding  differences  in  cyclical  fluctuations.  Since
I  work  with  the  hypothesis  in  question,  am  I  justified  in  assembling  in  a  single  array
measurements  of  cycles  in  communities  so  unlike  in  organization  as  contemporary
England  and  China,  or  the  United  States  of  the  20th  and  of  the  18th  centuries?

As  said  in  the  text,  I  take  the  Chinese  reports  to  represent  conditions  in  the  coast
cities  only.  Similarly,  in  dealing  with  the  earlier  American  annals,  I  use  only  the
reports  from  the  northern  and  eastern  states,  paying  no  attention  to  the  reports  from
the  southern  states  and  western  settlements,  which  are  frequently  quite  different  in
tenor.  There  is  evidence  that  business  economy,  as  defined  in  Chapter  II,  had  become
established  (though  not  highly  developed)  by  1790  from  Pennsylvania  to  Massachusetts,
and  by  1890  in  the  coast  cities  of  China.  If  that  opinion  is  valid,  I  seem  justified  in
treating  the  fluctuations  of  economic  fortune  experienced  by  these  two  communities
as  business  cycles.

Granted  so  much,  is  not  something  to  be  learned  by  studying  the  available  meas-
urements of  these  highly  variable  phenomena  as  a  whole,  as  well  as  in  a  variety
of  small  groups?  Of  course,  it  would  be  easy  to  over-stress  the  significance  of  my  grand
average  of  the  duration  of  business  cycles.  I  do  not  attach  much  importance  to  the
arithmetic  mean  of  the  total  array;  but  I  do  think  the  distribution  of  the  observations
around  their  central  tendency  is  a  matter  of  much  theoretical  interest.

Finally,  I  agree  with  Dr.  Morgenstern  that  the  relation  between  the  duration  of
business  cycles  and  changes  in  the  form  of  economic  organization  was  not  adequately
treated  in  my  introduction  to  Thorp's  Business  Annals.  Since  that  book  was  published,
Mills'  hypothesis  has  put  the  problem  in  a  clearer  form,  and  indicated  how  much  work
may  be  required  to  reach  a  satisfactory  solution.

"When  it  is  necessary  to  define  revivals  and  recessions  as  the  periods  within  which
all  of  the  statistical  series  in  a  large  collection  turn  up  or  turn  down,  these  two  phases
become  relatively  long. But  more  of  that  matter  in  the  volume  to  follow.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 421

proach  stability  only  when  long  periods  of  time  and  many  countries
are  included.  Perhaps  the  most  significant  figures  are  those  for  the
United  States  and  England  in  1790-1925,  and  for  all  our  17  countries
in  1890-1913.  These  three  results  come  out  respectively  1.50,  1.11
and  1.08  years  of  prosperity  per  year  of  depression.

Both  the  English  and  the  American  records  indicate  that  the
relative  duration  of  the  prosperous  and  depressed  phases  of  business
cycles  is  dominated  by  the  secular  trend  of  wholesale  prices.  In  the
three  periods  of  rising  price  trends  since  1790,  the  prosperous  phases
of  the  cycles  have  been  prolonged  and  the  depressed  phases  have  been
relatively  brief.  In  the  three  periods  of  declining  price  trends,  the
prosperous  phases  of  the  cycles  have  been  relatively  brief  and  the
depressed  phases  prolonged.  While  the  observations  upon  which
these  conclusions  rest  are  subject  to  a  margin  of  uncertainty  in  every
cycle  considered,  random  errors  could  hardly  produce  such  uniform
results  as  we  find.

Finally,  it  appears  that  the  depressed  phases  of  business  cycles
are  susceptible  of  greater  prolongation  than  the  prosperous  phases.
Whereas  our  averages  including  many  cycles  all  show  a  slight  pre-
ponderance of  years  of  prosperity  over  years  of  depression,  our  long
cycles  as  a  group  show  a  marked  preponderance  of  years  of  depression
over  years  of  prosperity.


In  weighing  the  conclusions  drawn  in  this  section,  one  should  bear
in  mind  certain  features  of  the  data  and  methods  used.

No  selection  or  "adjustment''  has  been  practiced  upon  the  obser-
vations. The  "abnormal  cases" — if  that  phrase  has  an  intelligible
meaning — are  included  with  the  "normal."  Every  reader  of  the
annals  will  note  how  frequently  foreign  wars  and  domestic  turmoil,
harvest  fluctuations,  epidemics,  floods  and  earthquakes  have  checked
or  reenforced  the  tides  of  business  activity.  A  tendency  toward
alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression  must  have  considerable  con-
stancy and  energy  to  stamp  its  pattern  upon  economic  history  in  a
world  where  other  factors  of  most  unequal  power  are  constantly
present,  and  where  one  or  other  of  these  factors,  singly  or  in  combina-
tion, rises  to  dominance  at  irregular  intervals.

Our  measurements  are  based  solely  upon  the  intervals  between
recessions.  It  would  be  desirable  to  check  the  results  by  a  second
set,  based  on  the  intervals  between  revivals. We  have  not  attempted


422  BUSINESS  CYCLES

such  a  check,  because  business  commentators  have  paid  less  attention
to  the  upward  than  to  the  downward  turning  points  of  business  cycles.
The  materials  for  making  the  second  set  of  measurements  are  less
full  and  reliable  than  the  materials  we  have  exploited.  If  a  second
set  as  satisfactory  as  the  first  could  be  made,  the  frequency  distribu-
tions it  yielded  would  doubtless  differ  in  numberless  details  from  the
frequency  distributions  here  presented.  But  we  have  no  reason  to
believe  that  the  broad  conclusions  suggested  by  the  new  frequency
distributions  would  run  counter  to  the  conclusions  we  have  drawn.

The  year  is  too  large  a  unit  for  measuring  business  cycles.  Our
results  have  the  crudity  of  an  effort  to  ascertain  the  stature  distribu-
tion of  men,  women  and  children  from  measurements  made  in  feet.
In  statistical  work  with  time  series,  it  is  often  possible  to  substitute
the  more  appropriate  unit  of  a  month.  But  such  investigations  of
business  fluctuations  are  confined  to  those  narrow  limits  of  time,  place,
and  type  of  business  for  which  elaborate  numerical  data  have  been
collected.

The  best  we  could  do  when  we  were  seeking  to  determine  the
duration  of  business  cycles  by  using  monthly  statistics  was  to  make
numerous  measurements  of  a  dozen  cases  in  one  country.  Five  busi-
ness indexes,  covering  by  months  part  or  all  of  the  last  half  century
in  the  United  States,  together  with  the  plan  of  counting  durations
both  from  crest  to  crest  and  from  trough  to  trough,  enabled  us  to  ac-
cumulate 101  observations  upon  the  lengths  of  what  the  annals  rep-
resent as  12  cycles  (or  12%  if  we  start  with  the  trough  of  1878).
That  the  results  obtained  in  this  way  agree  with  the  results  obtained
from  the  same  period  of  the  annals  appears  from  Chart  21.  For  that
chart  shows  that  the  most  significant  of  the  statistical  indexes  which
run  back  to  1875  give  the  same  recession  dates  as  do  the  annals.

It  may  be  worth  while,  however,  to  compare  the  101  statistical
measurements  of  the  12%  cycles  of  1878  to  1923  with  the  32  measure-
ments of  32  cycles  made  from  the  annals  of  1796  to  1923.  To  that
end,  we  may  condense  the  quarterly  figures  made  from  the  statistical
observations  which  ran  originally  by  months,  into  yearly  figures,  as-
signing each  quarter  to  that  year  into  which  it  presumably  would
fall  were  the  reckoning  made  from  annals.  For  example,  we  count
the  cycles  lasting  approximately  two  years  as  those  included  in  the
four  quarters  centering  on  19,  22,  25  and  28  months — that  is,  the
quarters  which  run  from  1%  years  to  2  years  and  five  months.  Chart
26  gives  the  results.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 423


.CHART  26

Percentage  Distribution  of  Measurements  of  the  Duration  of  Business  Cycles
IN  THE  United  .States  Based  upon  Business  Indexes,  1875-1925,  and  Business

Annals,  1790-1925.

By  using  5  business  indexes,  and  counting  intervals  both  from  trough  to  trough  and
crest  to  crest  of  the  cycles,  101  measurements  were  made  of  the  duration  of  12^/2  cycles.
The  measurements,  originally  expressed  in  months,  were  grouped  first  by  quarters,  and
later  by  years. See  Table  16,  Chart  20,  and  context  in  Chapter  III.

The  Annals  yield  a  single  set  of  measurements  of  the  duration  of  32  cycles.
See  Table  27.


Measurements  made  from
Business  Indexes

Measurements  made  from
Business  Annals


RCtNT
40

30

1

2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9

year

years

Percentage  Distribution
of  the  Measurements

made  from
Business Business
Indexes Annals

1875-1925 1790-1925

.3 3.1
12.1 12.5
42.0 31.2

30.1

15.6

8.4

18.8

10

6.0

12.5

0

1.0

3.1

3.1

100.0


100.0


The  similarity  of  the  two  figures  on  this  chart  is  patent.  If  the
measurements  based  on  statistics  show  an  even  greater  concentration
at  three  years  than  do  the  measurements  made  from  the  annals  (42
per  cent  of  the  observations  as  compared  with  31  per  cent),  it  is
because  of  the  difference  in  the  years  covered  by  the  two  sets  of  data.
If  we  take  only  that  part  of  the  annals  covered  by  the  business  indexes,
we  find  5  of  the  12  cycles  lasting  3  years,  and  5  is  42  per  cent  of  12.
Similar  explanations  apply  to  the  other  differences  between  the  two
figures: — for  example,  the  lack  of  very  short  and  very  long  cycles  in
1875-1925  as  compared  with  1790-1925,  accounts  for  the  margins
between  the  lines  at  1  and  9  years.

In  view  of  the  agreement  between  the  two  sets  of  measurements,
it  seems  safe  to  say  (1)  that  if  our  business  indexes  extended  back
to  1790,  they  would  show  less  concentration  of  cycles  at  3  years,  and
a  wider  spread  in  the  measurements;  (2)  that  if  we  could  elaborate
the  measurements  made  from  the  annals,  by  counting  in  months,  and
reckoning  duration  not  merely  from  recession  to  recession,  but  also


424  BUSINESS  CYCLES

from  revival  to  revival,  we  should  find  the  modal  length  to  be  more
than  36  months,  as  Chart  20  indicates,  though  less  than  three  and  a
half  years.


V.  International  Relationships  Among  Business  Cycles.

1.  A  Conspectus  of  Business  Conditions  in  Different

Countries.

Opinions  differ  widely  concerning  the  relations  between  the
economic  fortunes  of  different  countries.  One  prevalent  view,  often
implied  in  discussions  of  pubhc  policy  though  seldom  avowed  openly,
is  that  competition  for  foreign  markets  and  foreign  investments  makes
dne  nation's  gain  another  nation's  loss.  A  second  view  is  that  small
countries  with  a  vast  commerce — England,  the  Netherlands,  Belgium,
Sweden  and  Norway — experience  prosperity  or  depression  as  world
business  quickens  or  slackens;  but  that  nations  with  a  continental
spread  need  feel  slight  concern  about  foreign  factors — to  them  in-
ternal development  is  of  overshadowing  importance.  There  is  still
a  third  view,  that  business  enterprise  has  been  silently  establishing
a  'Vorld  economy,"  a  "commercial  league  of  nations,"  in  which  all
the  members  prosper  or  suffer  together.

Needless  to  say,  the  annals  do  not  give  clear  proof  or  disproof  of
any  of  these  contentions.  But  they  do  indicate  a  trend  in  the  direc-
tion of  'Vorld  economy."

To  facilitate  international  comparisons  of  economic  fortunes,  the
annals  of  all  the  countries  studied  have  been  compressed  into  a  single
table.  This  conspectus  begins  with  the  United  States  and  England
in  1790,  adds  France  in  1840,  Germany  in  1853,  Austria  in  1867,  and
12  other  countries  in  1890.  For  the  last  generation  it  affords  a  fair
view  of  world  experience.  The  entries  have  the  bleakness  of  statis-
tical averages;  they  do  not  indicate  the  complexity  of  conditions
prevaihng  every  year  within  each  country.  For  most  purposes  the
fuller  form  of  the  annals  given  in  Dr.  Thorp's  book  should  be  used
rather  than  the  conspectus.  But  it  is  only  as  we  concentrate  in  each
country  upon  the  net  resultant  of  its  diverse  conditions  that  we  can
gain  a  clear  view  of  the  international  similarities  and  diversities.  Even
the  conspectus  is  not  simple  enough  to  tell  its  own  story;  it  needs  to  be
analyzed  and  summarized,  as  the  reader  who  looks  it  over  will  agree.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 425


TABLE  32

CoNSPEc?ru8  OP  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countwbs

1790 1791 1792  1793

United  States Revival; pros-  Prosperity Prosperity; fi-  Prosperity

perity  nancial  distress

England Moderate pros-  Prosperity Prosperity; fi-  Recession;  psuiic;

perity nancial  strain  depression

1794 1795 1796  1797

United  States Uneven prosper-  Prosperity Recession; de-  Depression ;  panic
ity pression

England Depression Revival Uneven prosper-  Recession ;  panic ;

ity  depression

1798 1799 1800  1801

United  States Depression Revival Prosperity  Mild  prosperity

England Depression Depression Depression  Depression; re-
vival

1802 1803 1804  1805

United  States Recession Mild  depression Revival  Prosperity

England Prosperity Prosperity; re-  Mild  depression  Revival

cession

1806 1807 1808  1809

United  States Prosperity Prosperity; re-  Depression  Depression

cession

England Prosperity Recession Mild  depression  Revival; pros-
perity

1810 1811 1812  1813

United  States Revival Moderate pros-  Brief recession;  Prosperity

perity  uneven pros-

perity

England Prosperity; re-  Deep  depression Revival  Prosperity

cession

1814 1815 1816  1817

United  States  Prosperity ; fi-  Prosperity; Depression  Mild  depression
nancial  distress panic; reces-
sion

England Uneven prosper-  Boom ;  recession Deep  depression  Depression ; re-

ity  vival

1818 1819 1820  1821

United  States Mild  depression Severe depres-  Depression  Depression; re-

sion ; financial  vival

panic

England Prosperity Recession ; de-  Depression  ;  Slow  revival

pression  slight  revival


426


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  32— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1822  1823  1824  1825

United  States Mild  recession Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity  ;

panic ; reces-
sion

England Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

perity  cession;  panic

1826  1827  1828  1829

United  States Depression; re-  Moderate pros-  Prosperity; re-  Depression; re-
vival perity  cession  vival
England Depression Revival Prosperity Recession; de-
pression

1830  1831  1832  1833

United  States Moderate pros-  Prosperity  Moderate pros-  Prosperity;

perity  perity  panic; reces-

sion

England Slow  revival  Recession; de-  Depression  Revival

pression

1834  1835  1836  1837

United  States Mild  depression Revival ; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity  ;

perity  panic; reces-

sion ; depres-
sion

England Prosperity  Prosperity;  stock  Prosperity; fi-  Recession ;  panic ;

exchange  panic nancial  panic  depression

1838  1839  1840  1841

United  States Depression;  Revival; panic;  Depression  Depression
slight  revival recession

England Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression

France Revival  Prosperity

1842  1843  1844  1845

United  States Depression  Depression; re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity; brief

vival  perity  recession

England Depression  Revival  Mild  prosperity Prosperity

France Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  ;

bourse  panic

1846 1847  1848 1849
United  States Recession; mild  Revival; pros-  Mild  depression;  Prosperity
depression perity; panic;  revival
recession
England Prosperity Prosperity  ;  Depression Depression ; re-
panic;  recession  vival

France Prosperity Recession ;  panic  Depression  ;  Depression

panic

1850  1851  1852  1853

United  States Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

cession

England Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity

France Depression  Depression  Revival  Prosperity

Germany Revival


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 427


TABLE  32— (Continued)
Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries


1854

United  States Recession ;

pression

England Recession


1855
de-  Depression;
vival


1856
re-  Prosperity


Mild  depression


France Prosperity ; brief  Prosperity

recession


Germany.... Prosperity


Prosperity


Revival ;
perity

Brief  recession


Prosperity
bourse  panic


1857

Prosperity  ;
panic ;  reces-
sion; depres-
sion
pros-  Prosperity  ;
panic ;  reces-
sion

Moderate  pros-
perity; panic;
recession

Prosperity  ;
panic ;  reces-
sion


1858
United  States Depression

England Depression

France Depression


Germany.


Recession ;
pression


1859
Revival

Revival

Revival

de-  Depression


1860
Prosperity ;

cession
Prosperity

Prosperity;

cession
Revival


1861
re-  Mild  depression;
revival
Uneven prosper-

re-  Recession

Mild  prosperity


1862 1863  1864 1865

United  States War  activity War  activity  War  activity Boom ;  recession

England Uneven prosper-  Uneven prosper-  Uneven prosper-  Prosperity

ity ity  ity; financial

strain

France Mild  depression Uneven depres-  Depression; fi-  Depression

sion  nancial  panic

Germany.... Uneven prosper-  Moderate pros-  Moderate pros-  Prosperity

ity perity  perity


1866  1867  1868  1869

United  States Mild  depression Depression  Revival  Prosperity;  mon-

etary difficul-
ties

England Recession ;  panic ;  Depression  Depression  Revival

depression

France Revival  Recession ; mild  Depression ;  revi- Prosperity;

depression; val

bourse  panic  Prosperity

Germany Prosperity; re-  Depression;  revi-  Revival  bourse  panic

cession ; de- val
pression

Austria Revival  Moderate pros-  Prosperity;

perity  panic; reces-

sion


428


BUSINESS  CYCLES


TABLE  32~{Continued)
Coi^sPECTus  OF  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1870  1871  1872  1873

United  States Recession ; mild  Revival ; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity  ;

depression  perity  panic; reces-

sion
England Prosperity;  panic  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

cession

France Prosperity ;  reces-  Depression  ;  Revival  Recession ; de-

sion; depres- panic  pression

si  on

Germany Prosperity ; brief  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity;

recession  panic ; reces-

sion ; depres-
sion

Austria Slow  recession Mild  depression Revival ; pros-  Prosperity  ;

perity  panic ; reces-

sion

1874  1875  1876  1877

United  States Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression

England Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression

France Mild  depression  Revival  Gradual  recession  Mild  depression

Germany.... Depression  Depression  Depression  Slow  revival

Austria Deep  depression  Depression  Depression  Depression

1878  1879  1880  1881

United  States Depression;  re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity

vival  perity

England Deepening  de-  Depression; re-  Slow  revival  Mild  prosperity

pression  vival

France Depression  Revival; bourse  Prosperity  Moderate pros-

panic  perity

Germany.... Recession;  de-  Depression; re-  Recession; mild  Renewed  revival

pression  vival  depression

Austria Depression  Depression  Revival  Mild  prosperity

1882  1883  1884  1885

United  States  Prosperity;  slight  Recession  Depression  Depression; re-

recession  vival

England Mild  prosperity Slow  recession  Depression  Depression

France Recession; panic  Depression  Depression  Depression

Germany.... Prosperity; re-  Mild  depression  Depression  Depression

cession

Austria Moderate pros-  Prosperity  Recession  Mild  depression

perity; bourse
panic

1886  1887  1888  1889

United  States Revival  Prosperity  Brief  recession Prosperity

England Depression;  Revival  Moderate pros-  Prosperity

slight  revival  perity

France Depression  Revival  Moderate pros-  Moderate pros-

perity perity; finan-

cial strain
Germany.... Depression; re-  Revival  Moderate pros-  Prosperity

vival  perity

Austria Depression; re-  Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity

vival


I


I


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 429

TABLE  32— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1890  1891  1892  1893

United  States Prosperity; re-  Depression; re-  Prosperity  Recession;  panic;

cession  vival  depression

England Prosperity; Industrial reces-  Depression  Deep  depression

panic; reces- sion; financial
sion  prostration

France Recession; mild  Mild  depression Depression  Depression

depression

Germany Recession  Depression  Depression  Depression

Austria Uneven prosper-  Prosperity  Recession  Revival

ity

Russia Mild  prosperity Recession, de-  Depression  Revival

pression

Sweden Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession, mild  Depression

depression

Netherlands. .  Mild  prosperity Recession  Depression  Depression

Italy Depression  Depression ;  panic  Depression  Depression ;  panic

Argentina Recession; de-  Depression; panic  Revival, reces-  Mild  depression

pression  sion

Brazil Depression  Depression  Uneven depres-  Depression

sion

Canada Mild  depression Depression; re-  Mild  prosperity Recession; de-

vival  pression

South  Africa. Prosperity ;  reces-  Depression  Rapid  revival Prosperity

sion; depres-
sion

Australia Recession; de-  Depression  Depression  Depression ;  panic

pression

India Mild  depression Depression  Uneven depres-  Depression

sion

Japan Recession; de-  Depression  Depression  Mild  depression

pression

China Mild  depression Mild  depression Depression  deep-  Depression

ens


430  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE  Z2— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1894  1895  1896  1897

United  States  Deep  depression Depression; re-  Recession; de-  Depression; re-
vival pression  vival

England Depression  Depression; re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity

vival  last  half- perity
year

France Depression  Depression; re-  Revival  Moderate pro»-

vival  perity

Germany Depression; re-  Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity

vival

Austria Recession ; mild  Mild  depression Mild  depression Mild  depression

depression

Russia Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity

Sweden Mild  depression Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity

Netherlands..  Depression  Depression  Revival  Mild  prosperity

Italy Depression  Depression  Depression  ;  Revival

slight  revival

Argentina Depression  Lessening  depres-  Revival  Revival  retarded

sion

Brazil Revival  Mild  prosperity Recession ;  panic ;  Depression ;  panic

depression

Canada Acute  depression  Depression  Lessening  depres-  Revival

sion

South  Africa. Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression  Depression

cession

Australia.... Depression  Depression;  Strong  revival Mild  prosperity;

slight  revival  agricultural  de-

pression

India Uneven  revival Mild  prosperity Recession  Depression

Japan Revival; reces-  Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

sion  cession

China Depression  Revival  Prosperity  Gradual  recession


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 431

TABLE  32— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1898  1899  1900  1901

United  States  Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity, brief  Prosperity

perity  recession

England Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Mild  depression

cession, sum-
mer

France Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression

cession

Germany.... Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression

cession; de-
pression

Austria Mild  depression;  Mild  prosperity Recession; de-  Depression

revival  pression

Russia Prosperity  Prosperity; Recession ; de-  Depression

panic ; reces- pression
sion

Sweden Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession; de-

pression

Netherlands..  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession; mild

depression

Italy Uneven prosper-  Mild  prosperity Prosperity; brief  Prosperity

ity  recession

Argentina....  Mild  prosperity Prosperity  Recession; de-  Depression

pression

Brazil Depression  deep-  Depression; re-  Revival; panic;  Mild  depression

ens  vival  recession

Canada Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity;  slight  Revival; pros-

recession  perity

South  Africa. Depression  Revival; reces-  Depression  Revival

sion

Australia Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession

India Slow  revival  Moderate pros-  Recession  Depression

perity

Japan Depression  Depression  Deeper" depres-  Depression; fi-

sion  nancial panic,

spring

China Mild  depression Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-  Depression; re-

perity  cession; de- vival

pression


432  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE  32— (Continued)
Conspectus  op  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries


1902  1903  1904  1905

United  States Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Mild  depression;  Prosperity

cession  revival


England Lessened  depres-  Depression  deep-  Revival  Revival; pros-

sion ens  perity

France Depression Revival Moderate pros-  Prosperity

perity

Germany.... Depression Revival Mild  prosperity;  Revival; pros-
recession  perity

Austria Depression Depression; re-  Revival  Mild  prosperity

vival

Russia Depression Depression; re-  Recession; de-  Depression

vival  pression

Sweden Depression Revival Mild  prosperity  Prosperity

Netherlands..  Depression Depression Revival; pros-  Prosperity

perity

Italy Moderate pros-  Prosperity Prosperity  Prosperity

perity

Argentina....  Depression; re-  Prosperity Prosperity  Prosperity
vival

Brazil Mild  depression Depression  deep-  Depression  Depression

ens

Canada Prosperity; fi-  Prosperity Uneven prosper-  Full  prosperity

nancial  distress  ity

South  Africa. Prosperity Recession Depression  Depression

Australia.... Mild  depression Deepening de-  Revival  Mild  prosperity

pression

India Revival Prosperity Prosperity  Prosperity

Japan Slow  revival  Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity;  re-
cession ;  de-
pression

China Mild  prosperity Mild  prosperity Mild  prosperity  Mild  prosperity


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 433

TABLE  Z2— (Continued)

Conspectus  op  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1906  1907  1908  1909

United  States Prosperity  Prosperity  ;  Depression  Revival ; mild

panic; reces-  prosperity

sion ; depres-
sion

England Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression  Revival

cession

France Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession; mild  Revival

depression

Germany.... Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression  Depression; re-

cession ; de-  vival

pression

Austria Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession; de-  Depression

pression

Russia Depression; Revival  Recession ; de-  Depression ; re-

slight  revival  pression  vival

Sweden Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression  Depression

cession;  panic

Netherlands..  Prosperity  Prosperity  Depression; re-  Revival; pros-

vival  perity

Italy Prosperity  Prosperity ; re-  Depression  Depression

cession

Argentina Prosperity  Prosperity  Mild  recession Revival ; pros-

perity

Brazil Slow  revival  Revival ; reces-  Depression  Revival

sion,  autumn

Canada Prosperity  peak Prosperity; Depression ; re-  Revival

panic ; reces- vival
sion

South  Africa. Depression  Depression  deep-  Depression les-  Revival

ens  sens

Australia.... Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession; mild  Rapid revival;

depression  prosperity

India Prosperity  Prosperity ; re-  Depression  Depression  ;

cession  slight  revival

Japan Revival ; pros-  Prosperity  ; Depression  Depression ; re-

perity  panic; reces-  vival

sion

China Recession  Depression  Depression  Revival


434  BUSINESS  CYCLES

TABLE  S2— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1910  1911  1912  1913

United  States Recession  Mild  depression Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-

peri  ty  cession

England Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

cession, last
quarter

France Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

cession

Germany Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

perity  cession

Austria Depression  Revival  Prosperity; re-  Depression ; panic

cession; de-
pression

Russia Prosperity  Pro^erity  Prosperity  Prosperity  except

on  bourse

Sweden Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity;  slight

recession

Netherlands..  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Recession

Italy Mild  depression Revival halted,  Uneven prosper-  Mild  prosperity ;

autumn  ity  recession

Argentina ....  Prosperity  Recession ; mild  Depression ; re-  Recession

depression  vival,  autumn

Brazil Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Uneven pros-

perity

Canada Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-

cession

South  Africa. Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Uneven  recession

Australia. . . . Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity  Mild  recession

India Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity  Uneven prosper-

ity

Japan Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity

perity

China Recession  Depression  Depression  Depression


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 435

TABLE  32— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1914  1915  1916  1917

United  States Depression  Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity; war

perity  activity

England Mild depression  War  activity  War  activity  War  activity

deepens with
war

France Depression  War  activity  War  activity  War  activity

Germany Mild  depression;  War  activity  War  activity  War  activity

revival

Austria Depression  War  activity  War  activity  War  activity

Russia Recession;  panic;  Uneven depres-  War  activity  Recession; de-

depression  sion  pression

Sweden Recession; de- Revival, pros-  Prosperity  Recession

pression  perity

Netherlands..  Recession;  panic;  Revival; uneven  Moderate pros-  Recession
depression  prosperity  perity

Italy Recession;  panic;  Uneven depres-  War  activity  War  activity

depression  sion

Argentina....  Depression; panic  Uneven depres-  Depression;  slow  Revival

sion  revival

Brazil Depression  deep-  Depression; re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity

ens  vival  perity

Canada Depression  deep-  Depression; re-  War  activity  War  activity

ening  with  war vival

South  Africa. Recession; de-  Slow  revival  Rapid  revival Prosperity

pression

Australia Revival; reces-  Mild  depression;  War  activity  War  activity

sion  revival

India Prosperity :  reces-  Depression  Revival  Prosperity

sion

Japan Recession; de-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity  Uneven prosper-

pression  perity  ity

China ,  Depression  deep-  Depression  Revival; pros-  Uneven prosper-

ens  perity  ity


436  BUSINESS  CYCLES ,

TABLE  32— (Continued)

Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1918  1919  1920  1921

United  States ^^^  activity ;  re-  Revival ; pros-  Prosperity ; re-  Depression
cession  perity  cession;  depres-

sion

England War  activity;  re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-  Deep  depression

cession  perity  cession;  depres-

sion

France ^^^ activity;  Depression; re-  Prosperity; re-  Depression; re-
stagnation  vival ; boom  cession ;  depres- vival

sion

Germany.... War activity;  Depression  Depression  Revival,  spring

disorganization,
November

Austria ^^^ activity;  Depression  Slow  revival  Revival

chaos

Russia Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression

Sweden Depression  Depression; re-  Boom;  recession; Depression

vival  depression

Netherlands..  Depression  Revival; pros-  Prosperity;  reces-  Depression

perity  sion; depres-

sion

Italy War activity; Mild  depression;  Recession; de-  Depression ; panic

slight  recession revival  pression

Argentina Moderate pros-  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression

perity  cession

Brazil Prosperity ; brief  Prosperity  Prosperity ; re-  Severe  depression

recession  cession; de-

pression

Canada War  activity;  re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-  Depression

cession  perity  cession

South  Africa . Prosperity ; re-  Revival ; pros-  Prosperity ; re-  Deep  depression
cession  perity  cession; de-

pression

Australia War  activity  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression

cession

India Prosperity; re-  Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-  Depression

cession  perity  cession; de-

pression

Japan Uneven prosper-  Depression; re-  Prosperity; re-  Depression

ity;  recession  vival;  prosper- cession; de-

ity pression

China Uneven prosper-  Prosperity  Prosperity; re-  Depression

ity  cession ; de-

pression


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 437

TABLE  32— (Continued)
Conspectus  of  Business  Fluctuations  in  Various  Countries

1922  1923  1924  1925

United  States Revival; pros-  Prosperity; re-  Mild  depression; Prosperity
perity  cession  revival

England Depression  Depression  Lessening  depres-  Depression

sion

France Revival  Prosperity  Prosperity  Prosperity

Germany Revival  checked,  Depression  Revival; tempo-  Halting revival;

summer;  disor-  rary  check, recession

ganization  summer

Austria Uneven  recession  Depression  Depression; fi-  Depression

nancial  strain

Russia Depression; slight  Revival; reces-  Mild  depression;  Uneven prosper-

revival  sion,  October revival  ity;  recession

Sweden Depression; re-  Revival  Mild  prosperity Mild  prosperity

vival

Netherlands. .  Depression  Depression  Revival  Mild  prosperity

Italy Depression  Depression; re-  Moderate pros-  Prosperity

vival  perity

Argentina....  Depression  Lessening  depres-  Revival  Prosperity

sion

Brazil Lessening  depres-  Revival  Mild  prosperity;  Depression

sion  recession

Canada Depression; re-  Moderate pros-  Recession; mild  Revival; pros-

vival  perity  depression  perity

South  Africa. Depression  Revival  Mild  prosperity Prosperity

Australia SI ov;  revival  Revival; mild  Mild  recession Revival; pros-

prosperity  perity

India Depression  Slow  revival  Revival; mild  Mild  prosperity

prosperity

Japan Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression; re-

vival

China Depression  Depression  Depression  Depression


438  BUSINESS  CYCLES


2. How  Closely  the  Cycles  in  Different  Countries  Agree.

Concerning  the  fact  of  fundamental  interest  in  this  inquiry,  the
conspectus  of  business  conditions  gives  an  exaggerated  impression  of
century-long  and  world-wide  similarity.  Periods  of  prosperity,  re-
cession, depression  and  revival  are  here  pictured  as  recurring  in  much
the  same  way  in  every  country  and  during  every  decade.  The  fuller
form  of  the  annals  makes  it  clear,  not  only  that  this  recurrence  is
nowhere  the  whole  story  of  economic  fluctuations,  but  also  that  it  is
farther  from  being  the  whole  story  in  some  countries  than  in  others.
The  importance  of  business  cycles  as  a  factor  in  national  life  was  less
during  the  closing  decades  of  the  18th  century  than  during  the  open-
ing decades  of  the  20th  century  in  England  and  the  United  States.
There  is  a  similar  difference  between  these  two  countries  and  China,
Russia  or  Brazil  at  present.  The  more  highly  organized  a  country's
business,  the  larger  the  proportion  of  its  people  who  live  by  making
and  spending  money  incomes,  the  more  important  become  the  recur-
rent cycles  of  activity.  Let  us,  however,  take  cyclical  oscillations
for  granted,  disregard  their  relative  amplitudes,  and  inquire  what
influence  the  cycles  in  one  country  exercise  upon  cycles  in  other
countries.

It  has  long  been  recognized  that  the  great  financial  crises  have
an  international  sweep.  Thus  the  conspectus  shows  that  England
and  the  United  States  shared  in  the  crises  of  1815,  1825  and  1837;
that  England,  the  United  States  and  France  (which  now  is  repre-
sented in  the  annals)  shared  in  the  crisis  of  1847;  that  these  three
countries,  and  Germany  also,  shared  in  the  panic  of  1857;  that  Eng-
land, the  United  States,  France,  Germany  and  Austria  shared  in
varying  degrees  the  crisis  of  1873.  To  these  familiar  facts  our  annals
add  that  all  five  countries  had  mild  recessions  in  1882-84.  Of  the
17  countries  included  in  the  annals  after  1890,  10  had  recessions  in
1890-91,  15  had  recessions  in  1900-01,  15  in  1907-08,  12  in  1912-13,
11  in  1918,  and  14  in  1920.  Further,  the  countries  which  escaped  a
share  in  these  world  reactions  usually  owed  their  exemption  to  an
earlier  turn  for  the  worse.  Thus  South  Africa  and  Japan  had  no
recession  in  1900-01  because  they  were  already  suffering  from  depres-


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 439

sion. The  three  countries  of  our  17  which  escaped  in  1920  were
Germany,  Austria  and  Russia.

Of  course  the  experiences  of  the  several  countries  were  not  iden-
tical in  the  years  of  crises  and  recessions.  In  the  whole  record  there
is  no  crisis  which  was  equally  severe  everywhere.  In  1873,  for
example,  the  United  States,  Germany  and  Austria  suffered  far  more
severely  than  England  and  France.  In  1890,  on  the  contrary,  the
financial  strain  was  more  severe  in  London  than  in  New  York  or
Berlin,  while  Vienna  deferred  its  recession  until  1892.  The  center  of
disturbance  in  1900  seems  to  have  been  Germany;  countries  like  the
United  States  and  Italy  felt  but  repercussions  of  a  foreign  shock.  In
1907  the  gravest  difficulties  appeared  in  the  United  States.  Probably
the  nearest  approach  to  a  severe  world-wide  crisis  was  made  in  1920,
and  that  case  was  obviously  dominated  by  post-war  readjustments.
It  is  clear,  however,  that  a  financial  crisis  breaking  out  in  any  country
of  commercial  importance  produces  financial  strains  in  other  coun-
tries, and  that  even  mild  recessions  like  those  of  1882-83  and  1913
spread  widely.

It  has  been  less  noticed  that  other  phases  of  business  cycles  also
propagate  themselves.  The  long  depressions  of  the  1870's,  the
checkered  fortunes  of  the  1880's,  the  revival  of  the  middle  1890's,
the  boom  of  1906-7,  the  calmer  prosperity  of  1912,  the  hectic  activity
of  the  war  years,  and  the  severe  depression  after  1920  had  much  the
same  international  character  as  the  crises  to  which  attention  is  often
restricted.

Yet  business  cycles  do  not  run  a  strictly  parallel  ceKirse  in  any\
two  countries.  Perhaps  the  best  way  to  bring  out  the  degree  of  like-
ness and  difference  in  contemporary  f orJimSs  is'  to  note  the  proportion
of  years  in  which  conditions  in  different  countries  are  described  by
the  same  terms  in  the  conspectus^  ^and  the  proportion  of  years  in
which  conditions  are  described  inUinlike  terms.  An  effort  to  carry
out  this  plan  shows  that  many  years  do  not  fall  into  either  category.
Business  may  be  reviving  in  one  country  and  already  prosperous  in
another,  depressed  in  one  and  entering  depression  in  another;  or
conditions  may  be  similar  during  the  early  part  of  a  year  and
divergent  in  the  closing  months,  or  different  at  the  start  and  con-
vergent at  the  close.  In  such  cases  one  cannot  call  the  conditions
quite  similar  or  decidedly  unlike.  Thus  it  is  necessary  to  recognize
at  least  three  types  of  relations  between  the  synchronous  phases  of
business  cycles  in  different  countries — agreement,  partial  agreement


440  BUSINESS  CYCLES

and  opposition.  Arbitrary  definitions  may  be  adopted,  and  a  statisti-
cal tabulation  made  of  these  relationships.^

Such  a  comparison  of  business  conditions  in  the  five  countries  for
which  we  have  annals  running  back  of  1890  is  provided  by  Table  33.
Most  of  the  comparisons  here  made  show  a  preponderance  of  years
in  which  the  business  cycles  of  the  countries  paired  were  passing
through  the  same  phases  over  years  in  which  they  were  passing
through  opposite  phases.  The  intimacy  of  relations  is  probably
understated  by  the  table;  for  it  takes  no  account  of  the  shifting  rela-
tions of  lead  and  lag  in  the  influence  exercised  by  business  conditions
in  one  country  upon  business  conditions  in  the  other  country  with
which  it  is  compared.  As  one  would  expect  from  England's  position
in  international  trade  and  finance,  English  cycles  are  more  highly
correlated  with  the  cycles  of  other  countries,  than  the  cycles  of  other
countries  are  correlated  with  each  other.  The  closest  agreements
are  found  between  English  and  French  or  English  and  German  cycles;
the  loosest  agreements  are  between  Austrian  and  American  cycles.

From  the  third  section  of  the  table,  it  appears  that  the  inter-
national similarity  of  phase  in  business  cycles  increased  on  the  whole
with  the  passage  of  time.  The  breaking  of  economic  bonds  by  the
war,  and  the  tardiness  of  their  restoration  after  the  Armistice,  inter-
fered with  this  process  of  synchronizing  cycles.  But  the  non-economic
factors,  which  played  so  large  a  role  after  1914,  had  much  the  same
character  and  influenced  business  among  all  the  belligerents  in  much
the  same  way,  so  long  as  hostilities  lasted. Since  1918,  economic

*The  rules  followed  by  Dr.  Thorp  in  preparing  the  data  for  the  following  table  are
as  follows:

Agreement  includes

1.  Years  in  which  two  countries  pass  through  the  same  phase  or  phases  of  a  cycle.

2.  Years  in  which  two  countries  pass  through  at  least  two  corresponding  phases,

though  one  may  enter  a  third  phase. Example: "Prosperity; recession"  in
one  country,  and  "Prosperity;  recession;  depression"  in  another.

Partial  agreement  includes

Years  in  which  two  countries  pass  through  phases  of  the  cycle  which  succeed
one  another.  Example:  "Revival"  in  one  country,  and  "Prosperity"  in  another;
or  "Recession"  in  one  country,  and  "Recession;  depression"  in  another.

Opposition  of  phases  includes

Years  in  which  opposite  phases  of  cycles  occur,  whatever  intermediate  phases  are
noted.  Example:  "Prosperity;  recession;  depression"  in  one  country,  and
"Depression;  revival"  in  a  second.

War  activity  is  interpreted  in  this  tabulation  as  corresponding  to  prosperity.
The  relative  severity  of  recessions  in  different  countries  is  not  taken  into  account.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 441


TABLE  33.

Agreement  and  Difference  of  Phase  in  English,  French,  German,  Austrian  and

American  Business  Cycles

Various  Periods


Period  Covered

Number  of  Years  of

Percentage  of  Years
of

Dates

Num-
ber of
Years

Agree-
ment

in
Phase

Par-
tial
agree-
ment

Oppo-
sition

in
Phase

Agree-
ment

in
Phase

Par-
tial
agree-
ment

Oppo-
sition

in
Phase

I

English  and  French  cycles.
English  and  German  cycles
English  and  Austrian  cycles
English  and  American  cycles

1867-1925

« «
« «

59
59
59
59

32
33
27

28

20
22
21
18

7

4

11

13

54
56
46
47

34
37
36
31

12

7

19

22

French  and  German  cycles.
French  and  Austrian  cycles
French  and  American  cycles

i€ 11
U U
11 «

59
59
59

27
19
23

25

21
23

7
19
13

46
32
39

42
36
39

12
32
22

German  and  Austrian  cycles
German  and  American  cy-
cles

u u

1867-1925

u u

U U

rt u

it u

59
59

59

236
236
236
236
236

23
21

18

120

104

101

90

87

24
20

23

81
91
89
84
89

12
18

18

35
41
46
62
60

39
36

31

51
44
43
38
37

41
34

39

34
39
38
36
38

20
31

Austrian  and  American  cy-
cles

31

II

England and four other
countries

15

Germany and four other
countries

17

France  and  four  other  coun-
tries

19

United  States  and  four  other
countries

26

Austria and four other
countries

25

Ill

English  and  American  cycles

1790-1857
1857-1925

68
68

21
33

28
21

19
14

31
49

41
31

28
21

English  and  French  cycles. .

1840-1882
188a-1925

43
43

12
28

17
11

14
4

28
65

40
26

33
9

Enghsh  and  German  cycles.

1853-1888
1889^1925

36
37

19
21

15
13

2
3

53
57

42
35

6

8

English  and  Austrian  cycles.

1867-1895
189^1925

29
30

14
13

12
9

3
8

48
43

41
30

10
27

442  BUSINESS  CYCLES ^

fortunes  have  diverged  widely. Presumably  the  business  forces  tend-
ing toward  convergence  are  gradually  resuming  their  wonted  sway.

In  treating  the  period  when  the  annals  include  17  countries,  a
more  significant  method  of  presenting  the  relations  among  their  busi-
ness cycles  is  feasible.  For  the  cycles  since  1890  have  an  international
pattern  simple  enough  to  be  carried  in  mind,  and  appHed  to  the
experience  of  one  country  after  another.  This  pattern  may  be
sketched  as  follows:

1st  cycle,  1890-91  to  1900-01

Recession  in  1890-91;  depression  in  1891-95;  revival  in  1895-
96;  prosperity  in  1896-00;  recession  in  1900-01.

2nd  cycle,  1900-01  to  1907-08

Recession  in  1900-01;  depression  in  1901-03;  revival  in
1903-04;  prosperity  in  1905-07;  recession  in  1907-08.

3rd  cycle,  1907-08  to  1913-14

Recession  in  1907-08;  depression  in  1908-09;  revival  in
1909-10;  prosperity  in  1910-13;  recession  in  1913-14.

4th  cycle,  1913-14  to  1918

Recession  in  1913-14;  depression  in  1914-15;  revival  in
1915;  prosperity  in  1915-18;  recession  in  1918.

5th  cycle,  1918  to  1920

Recession  in  1918;  very  brief  and  mild  depression  early  in
1919;  quick  revival  in  1919;  prosperity  in  1919-20;  recession
in  1920.

6th  cycle,  1920  to (unfinished)

Recession  in  1920;  severe  depression  in  1921-22;  revival  in
1922-23;  mild  prosperity  in  1924-25.

During  this  period,  of  our  17  countries
Six  have  had  5  cycles  and  are  now  in  a  6th: England,  France,  the

Netherlands,  Sweden,  Italy  and  China.
Five  have  had  6  cycles  and  are  now  in  a  7th: Austria,  South  Africa,

Australia,  Argentina  and  India.
Five  have  had  7  cycles  and  are  now  in  an  8th: Germany,  Russia,

Canada,  Brazil,  and  Japan.
One  has  had  10  cycles  and  is  now  in  an  11th:  the  United  States.

Thus  no  country  in  our  list  has  had  fewer  business  cycles  since
1890  than  the  international  pattern  calls  for;  but  the  majority  of


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 443

countries  have  had  one  or  two  more  than  that  number.  These  addi-
tional cycles  seldom  result  from  failure  to  participate  in  the  inter-
national movements  of  activity  and  depression,  but  rather  from  the
intercalation  of  what  we  may  call  domestic  recessions  between  the
dates  of  international  recessions.  To  take  the  most  striking  case:
the  United  States  had  its  share  in  all  the  recessions  of  the  inter-
national pattern;  but  it  also  had  domestic  recessions  in  1893,  1896,
1903,  1910,  and  1923.  When  a  country  skips  an  international  reces-
sion, it  is  usually  because  that  country  has  recently  suffered  a  domestic
recession.  Thus  business  was  already  depressed  in  Japan  and  South
Africa  when  the  international  recession  of  1900  began;  South  Africa
and  China  escaped  the  international  recession  of  1907  for  similar
reasons;  so  too  the  European  neutrals  had  recessions  in  1917  and
not  in  1918.

The  countries  whose  business  cycles  diverge  most  from  the  inter-
national pattern  are  Italy  before  say  1907,  Russia,  South  Africa,
Brazil  and  China — all  countries  rather  backward  in  economic  organ-
ization and  predominantly  agricultural.  The  countries  whose  cycles
have  followed  the  international  pattern  most  closely,  on  the  other
hand,  are  countries  of  highly  developed  industry,  trade,  and  finance —
England,  France,  Germany  (until  1919),  Sweden,  and  the  Nether-
lands. Australia  and  Canada  lag  but  a  little  behind  these  European
powers  in  conformity.  Austrian  cycles  were  being  assimilated  closely
to  those  of  her  western  and  northern  neighbors  in  the  decade  before
the  war.  Even  British  India  and  Japan  have  followed  the  European
pattern  of  cycles  without  very  striking  divergencies.

Another  way  of  summing  up  the  international  relationships  of
business  cycles  since  1890  is  to  run  down  the  columns  of  entries  in
Table  32  for  each  year.  There  is  no  year  of  the  36  covered  in  which
the  same  phase  of  the  cycle  prevailed  in  all  of  the  17  countries.  Uni-
formity is  approached,  however,  in  1893,  1899,  1906,  1908,  1912,  1916,
1920,  and  1921 ;  and  in  most  years  there  is  a  marked  preponderance
of  entries  of  similar  tenor.

A  graphic  presentation  of  these  facts  is  given  by  Chart  27.  The
irregular  bands  of  white  and  of  black  which  run  vertically  across  the
chart  are  not  quite  continuous  in  any  year  from  1890  to  1925.  But
the  existence  of  a  general  trend  toward  uniformity  of  business  for-
tunes is  plain.


s


G


$$


s;


i^


CO


&  :


53


'<

te

o

tlJ

^

^

<

o

z

§

CO

rt?

z

2r

rp

liJ

3

u

III

(i)

II  1.1


I  I  I  I


0


s


III


444


I  5


I


2  2

g  O

>  13

•a  g


1-1

I


o 2

m to

^ H


D


^

<

^

^

£^

<

UJ

2

\-

CO

liJ

u

§

O

<

cc

(0

445


446  BUSINESS  CYCLES

3.  Domestic  and  Foreign  Factors  in  Business  Cycles.

Possibly  this  tendency  to  synchronize  their  phases,  found  in  the
business  cycles  of  different  countries,  arises  from  some  cosmic  cause
which  affects  all  quarters  of  the  globe  in  much  the  same  way  each
year.  Upon  that  daring  hypothesis,  our  annals  throw  no  light.  But
the  annals  do  suggest  certain  tamer  explanations,  which  account  not
only  for  the  general  resemblance  among  cycles  in  different  countries,
but  also  for  their  differences.  These  tamer  explanations  are  not  in-
consistent with  the  cosmic  hypothesis,  but  they  do  not  depend  upon  it.

Whatever  the  causes  of  the  recurrent  fluctuations  in  economic
activity  may  be,  the  annals  suggest  that  these  causes  become  active
in  all  communities  where  there  has  developed  an  economic  organiza-
tion approximating  that  of  western  Europe.  There  appears  to  be  a
rough  parallelism  between  the  stage  attained  in  the  evolution  of
this  organization  by  different  countries,  and  the  prominence  of  busi-
ness cycles  as  a  factor  in  their  fortunes.

One  characteristic  of  the  type  of  organization  in  question  is  the
wide  area  over  which  it  integrates  and  coordinates  economic  activi-
ties. Bare  as  they  are  and  short  their  span,  the  annals  reveal  a
secular  trend  toward  territorial  expansion  of  business  relations  and
a  concomitant  trend  toward  economic  unity.  For  example,  the
American  annals  show  how  often  the  fortunes  of  the  North,  the  South
and  the  West  diverged  from  one  another  in  the  earlier  decades  after
the  adoption  of  the  Constitution,  and  how  these  divergencies  have
diminished  in  later  decades.  Not  that  business  is  ever  equally  pros-
perous or  equally  depressed  in  all  states  of  the  Union  even  now:
always  there  are  perceptible  differences,  and  at  times  the  differences
are  wide,  particularly  among  the  great  farming  ^^belts."  Yet  the
annals  picture  the  vastly  greater  population  of  to-day,  spread  over  a
vastly  greater  territory,  as  having  more  unity  of  fortune  than  had
the  people  of  the  thirteen  original  states  and  the  frontier  settlements
in  1790-1820.

Broadly  speaking,  the  annals  support  a  similar  conclusion  concern-
ing the  world  at  large.  \The  network  of  business  relations  has  been
growing  closer  and  firmer  at  the  same  time  that  it  has  been  stretching
over  wider  areas.  The  annals  allow  us  to  catch  some  glimpses  of  this
double  trend  within  the  borders  of  a  few  countries  besides  the  United
States,  and  they  show  it  clearly  in  the  relations  among  different
countries. As  American  business  is  coming  to  have  one  story,  diversi-


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 447

fied  by  agricultural  episodes,  so,  before  the  war  shattered  international
bonds  for  a  time,  world  business  seemed  to  be  approaching  the  time
when  it  too  would  have  one  story,  diversified  by  political  and  social
as  well  as  agricultural  episodes  in  different  countries.

The  basis  of  this  trend  toward  unity  of  economic  fortunes  among
communities  organized  on  the  European  model  is  that  each  phase  in
a  business  cycle,  as  it  develops  in  any  area,  tends  to  produce  the  same
phase  in  all  the  areas  with  which  the  first  has  dealings.

^  Prosperity  in  one  country  stimulates  demand  for  the  products  of
other  countries,  and  so  quickens  activities  in  the  latter  regions.  Pros-
perity also  lessens  the  energy  with  which  merchants,  financiers,  and
contractors  seek  competitive  business  in  neutral  markets,  and  so
gives  a  better  chance  to  the  corresponding  classes  in  countries  where
the  domestic  demand  is  less  active.  Further,  prosperity,  with  its
sanguine  temper  and  its  liberal  profits,  encourages  investments  abroad
as  well  as  at  home,  and  the  export  of  capital  to  other  countries  gives
an  impetus  to  their  trade.  A  recession  checks  all  these  stimuli.  A
severe  crisis  in  any  important  center  produces  quicker  and  graver
results.  7  Demands  for  financial  assistance  raise  interest  rates  and
reduce  domestic  lending  power  in  other  centers;  apprehensions  re-
garding the  solvency  of  international  houses  may  start  demands  for
liquidation  in  many  places;  the  losses  which  bankruptcies  bring  are
likely  to  be  felt  by  business  enterprises  the  world  over.  So,  too,  with
depressions  and  revival;  wherever  they  prevail,  they  exert  influences
upon  business  elsewhere  which  tend  to  produce  depressions  or  revivals
in  all  regions  with  which  the  center  of  disturbance  trades.

Nor  are  these  relations  one-sided.  The  condition  of  business  in
every  country  not  only  influences,  but  is  influenced  by  conditions  in
other  countries.  The  trend  toward  international  similarity  of  busi-
ness cycles  is  enforced  by  an  endless  series  of  actions  and  reactions
among  the  influences  exerted  and  experienced  by  all  the  nations  which
deal  with  each  other.

Of  course,  the  degree  of  influence  exerted  by  business  conditions
in  a  given  area  upon  business  elsewhere  depends  upon  the  importance
of  that  area  in  international  commerce  and  finance.  Similarly,  the
sensitiveness  of  business  in  a  given  area  to  the  influence  of  business
conditions  elsewhere  is  least  in  communities  like  interior  China,  whose
economic  activities  are  mainly  self-contained,  and  greatest  in  com-
munities which  depend  largely  upon  foreign  markets,  foreign  invest-


448  BUSINESS  CYCLES

ments,  and  foreign  sources  of  supply,  like  England.  It  is  also  clear
that  a  country  of  the  latter  type  will  reflect  world  conditions  more
faithfully,  the  more  widely  its  foreign  interests  are  distributed.

While  this  line  of  analysis  explains  the  tendency  of  business  cycles
in  different  countries  to  synchronize  their  phases,  it  does  not  hide
the  obstructions  which  this  tendency  meets.

In  so  far  as  the  people  in  any  country  buy  and  sell,  lend  and
/borrow  only  among  themselves,  they  are  likely  to  have  economic
vicissitudes  all  their  own.  Agricultural  communities  which  live
largely  on  what  they  produce  suffer  more  from  acts  of  nature  than
farming  populations  which  trade  extensively;  but  they  have  little
share  in  the  world  dislocations  of  business.  Even  in  countries  where
farmers  are  more  business-like,  we  have  noted  that  agriculture  has
a  story  of  its  own,  dictated  by  the  weather  at  home  and  abroad — a
story  which  often  differs  from  the  story  of  mining,  manufactures,
transportation,  wholesale  trade,  and  finance.^  Of  course  the  agri-
cultural story  modifies  the  general  tale.  Fluctuations  in  the  cost  of
raw  materials  and  of  foods,  as  well  as  fluctuations  in  the  buying  power
of  farm  families,  react  upon  the  prosperity  of  other  industries  in
proportion  to  the  relative  weight  of  agriculture  in  the  country's  total
business.  Hence,  the  larger  the  agricultural  element  in  a  given
nation,  the  less  likely  are  that  nation's  business  cycles  to  fit  neatly
into  the  international  pattern  over  a  long  series  of  years.  For  two
nations  with  large  farming  interests  are  not  likely  to  have  closely
similar  harvest  fluctuations  year  after  year.  The  one  development
touching  agriculture  which  most  clearly  tends  toward  unifying  busi-
ness fortunes  is  the  decline  in  the  proportion  of  families  which  depend
on  farming,  and  the  concomitant  increase  in  the  proportion  following
industrial  pursuits.  Dr.  Thorp's  prefaces  to  the  chapters  of  Business
Annals  show  that  this  decline  is  world-wide.

While  the  rise  of  large-scale  industry  within  a  nation  of  culti-
vators, craftsmen  and  petty  traders  links  its  economic  life  to  that
of  other  nations,  there  may  be  a  stage  in  this  development  when
international  influences  seem  to  recede  and  domestic  influences  to
grow  more  important.  The  first  modem  mines,  factories,  railways,
and  banks  in  such  a  country  are  likely  to  be  foreign  enterprises,

*  In  one  way,  the  development  of  a  "world  market"  for  the  great  agricultural  staples
even  increases  the  hazards  of  farming.  A  scanty  yield  of  wheatSin  Canada,  for  example,
does  not  always  cause  a  compensatory  rise  of  prices.


THE  CONTRIBUTION  OF  BUSINESS  ANNALS 449

dependent  upon  foreign  investors  for  their  capital  and  perhaps  upon
foreign  customers  for  their  markets.  During  that  stage,  such  business
as  the  outside  world  recognizes  in  the  new-old  country  will  be
peculiarly  sensitive  to  foreign  fluctuations  in  finance  and  commerce.
Meanwhile,  if  the  new  ventures  prosper,  natives  of  the  country  will
learn  to  practice  modern  methods  and  to  consume  modern  products.
Alongside  the  foreign-owned  enterprises,  domestic  enterprises  will
multiply,  drawing  their  capital  from  home  sources  and  selling  largely
in  the  home  market.  After  a  time  perhaps  most  of  the  early  enter-
prises will  be  sold  by  their  foreign  owners  to  native  business  men.
During  this  stage  the  country's  business  will  seem  to  be  emancipating
itself  from  the  domination  of  outside  influences,  and  its  business
cycles  will  diverge  more  widely  from  the  international  pattern.  But
if  the  process  of  modernizing  economic  life  continues  until  a  con-
siderable fraction  of  the  population  is  affected,  then  a  gradual  re-
approach  toward  world  conditions  will  begin.  Some  such  series  of
changes  probably  explains  in  part,  but  in  part  only,  a  curious  feature
of  our  Russian  annals.  In  the  earUer  years  covered  by  this  record,
Russian  cycles  followed  the  international  pattern  more  closely  than
in  the  later  years  of  the  Tsarist  regime.^  Perhaps  Chinese  business
will  pass  through  similar  stages  in  the  not-distant  future.

Besides  differences  in  economic  organization,  in  the  proportion
of  people  engaged  in  farming,  and  in  harvest  conditions,  there  is  a
host  of  more  obvious  causes  of  divergencies  among  business  cycles,
whether  we  consider  successive  cycles  in  the  same  country  or  syn-
chronous cycles  in  different  countries.  Wars  and  civil  disturbances
play  a  prominent  role  in  business  annals,  and  that  role  is  most  erratic.
Many  of  the  differences  of  business  fortune  which  the  annals  show
seem  ascribable  to  such  factors;  but  we  have  had  occasion  to  note
that  during  its  earlier  stages,  at  least,  the  World  War  had  a  unifying
effect  upon  conditions  among  both  belligerents  and  neutrals.  The
after-effects  of  this  war,  however,  were  far  from  uniform  in  different
nations.  In  the  cycles  of  every  country  we  can  trace  also  the  influence
of  changes  in  monetary  conditions,  banking  organization  and  tariff
acts  domestic  or  foreign,  if  not  the  influence  of  changes  in  taxation,
internal  improvement  plans  and  public  regulation  of  business  enter-
prises. Besides  these  governmental  matters,  it  seems  probable  that

'For  a  fuller  discussion  of  the  relations  between  business  cycles  in  Russia  and  in
Western  Europe,  see  S.  A.  Pervushin,  The  Business  Conjuncture,  Moscow,  1925,  pp.
209-213.  I  am  indebted  to  Dr.  Simon  S.  Kuznets  for  a  synopsis  of  Professor  Pervushin's
analysis.


450  BUSINESS  CYCLES

differences  of  national  habit  in  respect  to  enterprise  and  thrift  affect
the  frequency  and  violence  of  business  oscillations.  Still  other
matters  which  may  count  are  changes  in  the  methods  of  managing
investments,  the  integration  of  industry,  the  organization  of  labor,
the  development  of  social  insurance.  But  there  is  little  point  in
extending  a  list  of  factors  whose  relative  importance  we  cannot  weigh.

This  much  seems  clear :  business  activity  is  influenced  by  countless
developments  in  the  realms  of  nature,  politics  and  science,  as  well  /
as  by  developments  within  the  realm  of  business  itself;  few  of  these
developments  occur  at  the  same  time,  in  the  same  form  and  on  the
same  scale  in  all  countries.  Thus  there  is  no  difficulty  in  understand-
ing why  business  cycles  vary  in  many  ways  from  nation  to  nation,
though  it  is  quite  impossible  as  yet  to  assign  its  relative  importance
to  each  (perhaps  to  any)  cause  of  divergence.  One's  final  reflection
may  be  that  the  quiet  business  forces  working  toward  uniformity  of
fortunes  must  be  powerful  indeed  to  impress  a  common  pattern  upon
the  course  of  business  cycles  in  many  countries.  And  the  increasing
conformity  to  an  international  pattern  which  the  annals  reveal  in
recent  years  shows  that  the  international  influences  are  gaining  in
relative  importance.


CHAPTER  V.

RESULTS  AND  PLANS.

I.  The  Concept  of  Business  Cycles.

1.  Evolution"  of  the  Concept.

To  the  early  workers  in  our  field  the  pressing  problem  was  to
account  for  the  dramatic  events  which  they  called  ''commercial  crises/'
Not  only  did  they  confine  themselves  mainly  to  this  single  phase  of
business  fluctuations;  also  they  confined  themselves  mainly  to  ex-
cogitating explanations.  The  occurrence  of  crises  was  known  to
everyone.  What  need  was  there  of  elaborate  factual  investigations?
And  why  need  one  explain  prosperity?

This  approach  led  to  a  discussion  which  centered  in  the  validity
of  rival  doctrines,  rather  than  in  the  characteristics  of  business  fluctua-
tions. The  participants  debated  with  each  other  on  the  basis  of
common  knowledge,  reenforced  by  occasional  citations  of  evidence.
Even  in  using  evidence,  their  aims  were  oftener  dialectical  than
positive.  A  second  consequence  was  that  the  discussion  tended  to
drift  away  from  the  main  body  of  economic  theory  and  to  become  a
"specialty.'^  For  when  crises  are  taken  out  of  their  setting  in  a  con-
tinuous process  of  change,  they  appear  to  be  "abnormal'^  phenomena.
As  such  they  lie  on  the  edge,  rather  than  in  the  center,  of  the  theo-
retician's domain.  In  discussions  of  what  were  taken  to  be  the  lead-
ing problems  of  economics,  changes  in  business  activity  were  among
the  matters  hidden  from  sight  under  the  blanket  assumption,  ''other
things  remaining  the  same.''  While  chapters  on  the  cause  of  crises
appeared  in  some  of  the  standard  treatises  which  applied  economic
principles  to  practical  issues,  the  topic  had  no  place  in  "pure  theory."
Most  of  the  contributions  were  monographs,  and  many  of  the  writers
had  but  slender  knowledge  of  economics.  As  late  as  1898,  Bohm-
Bawerk  thought  it  necessary  to  argue  that  a  theory  of  crises  "should
always  form  the  last,  or  next-to-the-last,  chapter  in  a  system  of  eco-

451


452  BUSINESS  CYCLES

nomic  theory,  written  or  unwritten."  ^  The  converse  view,  that  ideas
developed  in  the  study  of  business  fluctuations  may  lead  to  reformu-
lations of  economic  theory,  still  strikes  most  economists  as  strange.^
A  broader  conception  of  the  problem  was  implied  by  John  Wade's
casual  observation,  made  in  1833,  that  ^'the  commercial  cycle,"  with
its  "alternate  periods  of  prosperity  and  depression,"  had  been  running
its  course  in  England  ''during  the  last  seventy  years."  ^  Probably
the  notion  that  trade  fluctuations  are  cyclical  occurred  independently
to  other  men;  certainly  it  spread  rapidly.  Clement  Juglar  made
this  conception  his  own,  and  in  1860  sought  to  show  the  relations
between  the  ''three  periods  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  liquidation,"
which  "always  follow  one  another  in  the  same  order."  More  than
that,  Juglar  threw  himself  energetically  into  factual  investigations,
basing  his  conclusions  largely  upon  analyses  of  changes  in  commodity
prices,  interest  rates,  and  bank  balances,  supplemented  by  a  history  of
crises  since  1696.*  His  work  marks  a  critical  'turning  point  in  the
study.  But,  though  Juglar  grasped  the  need  of  dealing  with  business
cycles,  he  called  his  book  Des  Crises  Commer dales.  If  to  this  day
many  writers  (especially  Europeans)  follow  his  precedent  in  choosing
titles  for  their  books,  they  also  follow  his  other  precedent  by  making
their  theories  of  crises  include  a  discussion  of  prosperity  and  depres-
sions, if  not  also  of  revivals.^

Most  of  the  changes  made  since  Juglar's  time  in  the  conception
of  the  problem  have  resulted  from  doing  the  kind  of  work  he  did  on
a  larger  scale  and  more  intensively.  Ideas  implicit  in  his  notions
have  become  clear;  matters  which  he  passed  over  lightly  have  been
emphasized;  better  methods  of  analyzing  time  series  have  been  in-
vented ;  terms  have  come  into  use  which  Juglar  would  not  have  under-

2  See  Bohm-Bawerk's  review  of  Eugen  von  Bergmann's  Geschichte  der  NationalO'
konomischen  Krisentheorien,  in  Zeitschrift  fiir  Volksmrtschaft,  Sozialpolitik  und  Ver-
waltung,  vol.  vii,  p.  112.

'  Compare  Dr.  Adolf  Lowe's  elaborate  argument  that  the  problem  of  cyclical  fluctua-
tions cannot  be  treated  by  the  "variation  methods"  of  pure  economics,  and  that  it,
among  other  problems,  calls  for  the  development  of  a  dynamic  theory,  in  which  the
concept  of  equilibrium  will  be  replaced  by  the  concept  of  cyclical  oscillations.  "Wie  ist
Konjunkturtheorie  Uberhaupt  moglich?"  Weltmrtschaftliches  Archiv,  October,  1926,  vol.
xxiv,  pp.  165-197.

®See  Chapter  I,  section  iii.

*To  appreciate  the  scope  of  Juglar's  long-continued  labors,  one  must  examine  the
eecond  edition  of  his  book,  Des  Crises  Commer  dales,  Paris,  1889.  The  phrases  quoted
in  the  text  are  from  p.  21.

'  For  example,  see  Mentor  Bouniatian's  remarks  concerning  the  ground  which  should
be  covered  by  a  theory  of  crises:  Les  Crises  Economiques,  Paris,  1922,  p.  28.


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  453

stood.  Both  in  seeming  and  in  truth,  the  whole  discussion  is  on  a
different  plane ;  yet  one  can  read  many  of  the  ideas  which  seem  to  us
fresh  between  the  lines  of  Juglar's  book,  if  not  in  the  text  itself.

Juglar  did  not  realize  clearly  that  the  intervals  between  crises
frequently  contain  two,  and  sometimes  contain  three,  alternations  of
prosperity  and  depression.  Nor  is  this  important  fact  firmly  grasped
by  contemporary  writers  upon  crises.  It  stands  out  sharply  only
when  one  analyzes  appropriate  time  series,  or  reads  business  reviews
with  care.  Of  course,  the  reason  why  these  brief  cycles  are  over-
looked by  writers  upon  crises  is  that  the  cycles  in  question  include
no  crises,  in  the  traditional  meaning  of  the  term.  A  man  who  com-
poses a  treatise  upon  "Commercial  Crises"  may  entertain  the  idea
of  "commercial  cycles,"  plan  to  treat  them,  and  yet  not  recognize
a  goodly  part  of  the  cycles  revealed  by  his  own  materials.  To  mini-
mize the  danger  of  being  thus  misled,  statistical  investigators,  who
plume  themselves  upon  following  faithfully  the  indications  of  their
data,  have  discarded  what  seemed  to  be  the  most  firmly  established
term  in  the  whole  discussion.  They  call  the  transition  from  pros-
perity to  depression  a  recession.  It  follows  that  the  cycles  which
they  recognize  are  briefer  on  the  average  than  the  cycles  of  the  books
on  crises.  Instead  of  thinking  about  periods  seven  or  eight  years
long,  they  think  of  three-  or  four-year  cycles  as  typical.  But  they
•are  also  concerned  to  find  how  the  longer  and  shorter  cycles  are  dis-
tributed about  this  mode,  and  how  the  average  duration  of  cycles
varies  from  period  to  period  and  from  one  country  to  another.

In  word,  at  least,  Juglar  held  that  crises  are  "periodic":  his  full
title  runs  Des  Crises  Commercial es  et  de  leur  Retour  Periodique  en
France,  en  Angleterre  et  aux  jStats-Unis,  But  his  own  history  of  crises
in  these  three  countries  shows  that  in  no  one  of  them  have  the  inter-
vals between  crises  been  regular.  Theoretical  writers  frequently  fol-
low this  inexact  precedent,  calling  crises  periodic  in  their  titles  and
showing  in  their  texts  that  the  period  varies  widely.^ Statistical

'Compare  the  titles  of  the  following  books  with  the  passages  cited  in  each:  A.
Aftalion,  Les  Crises  Periodiques  de  Surproduciion,  Paris,  1913,  vol.  i,  pp.  8-14;  M.
Bouniatian,  Les  Crises  Economiques — Essai  de  Morphologic  et  theorie  des  crises  eco-
nomiques  periodiques,  Paris,  1922,  pp.  42-45;  J.  Lescure,  Des  Crises  Generales  et
Periodiques  de  Surproduciion,  3d  ed.,  Paris,  1913,  pp.  1-288  (note  the  intervals  between
the  dates  of  the  crises  described) ;  Ludwig  Pohlej  Bevolkerungshewegung,  KapitaU
hildung,  und  periodische  Wirtschaftskrisen,  Gottingen,  1902,  statistics  in  the  appendix,
especially  pp.  89-90.

This  may  be  one  more  case  in  which  we  should  explain  what  seems  to  be  a  verbal
contradiction  by  observing  that  what  a  theorist  takes  to  be  "normally"  true  he  does  not
expect  to  find  historically  true.


454  BUSINESS  CYCLES

workers  have  avoided  this  loose  use  of  a  term  which  in  other  sciences
implies  strict  regularity  of  timing.  What  they  find  to  be  regular  is
the  recurrence  of  prosperity,  recession,  depression  and  revival,  in  that
sequence.  One  of  their  leading  aims,  as  said  above,  is  to  find  out
just  how  business  cycles,  and  their  constituent  phases,  vary  in  dura-
tion. Yet  to  this  day  an  occasional  critic  treats  the  word  "cyclicar*
as  synonymous  with  ''periodic/'  and  imputes  belief  in  the  periodicity
of  fluctuations  to  writers  upon  business  cycles.

John  Wade  spoke  confidently  of  "the''  commercial  cycle;  on  oc-
casion Juglar  used  the  corresponding  French  phrase ;  '^  there  are  recent
books  upon  "the"  business  cycle  and  "the"  trade  cycle.^  Possibly  the
misleading  implications  which  can  be  read  into  these  phrases  would
have  been  accepted  by  their  early  users.  John  Wade  may  have  con-
ceived the  commercial  cycle  as  a  single  movement,  or  as  a  succession
of  grand,  unitary  swings  from  prosperity  to  depression  and  back
again.  Maybe  a  ghost  of  this  dim  notion  still  haunts  the  minds  of
some  who  trace  business  cycles  to  a  single  cause.  But  most  of  those
who  now  speak  of  "the"  business  cycle,  mean  by  it,  not  one  phe-
nomenon, but  a  congeries  of  interrelated  phenomena.  Increasing
emphasis  upon  the  diversities  in  respect  to  amplitude  and  timing
found  among  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  different  processes  is  highly
characteristic  of  recent  work.  Statistics  provide  no  direct  evidence
of  the  existence  of  "the"  business  cycle ;  what  they  provide  is  evidence
of  cyclical  fluctuations  in  hundreds  of  time  series.  Indeed,  it  is  dif-
ficult to  construct  from  the  data,  or  even  to  conceive  of  constructing,
any  single  index  of  "the  general  trend"  in  business  activity.^  But  the
more  thoroughly  investigators  anatomize  the  business  cycle,  the  more
they  need  a  general  term  to  designate  the  whole.

Yet  the  words  we  use  set  traps  for  us.  Starting  with  a  vague  con-
ception of  a  group  of  seemingly  related  phenomena  which  we  wish
to  study,  we  name  it.  That  step  is  necessary,  but  dangerous.  The
definiteness  of  the  name  may  conceal  from  us  the  indefiniteness  of
our  knowledge.  If  the  name  is  a  compound  of  words  familiar  in  other
uses,  we  may  take  their  implications  for  facts. Assuming  tacitly  that

'  For  example,  "Le  cycle  est  parcouru  dans  le  monde  entier  sur  toutes  les  places  de
commerce;"  Des  Crises  Commerciales,  2d  ed.,  p.  17.

'For  example,  Miss  Dorothy  S.  Thomas  calls  her  valuable  study  Social  Aspects  of
the  Business  Cycle,  and  Mr.  F.  Lavington  uses  The  Trade  Cycle  as  a  title.

•Compare  Chapter  III,  section  vi,  2  "A  Critique  of  the  Indexes  of  Business  Con-
ditions."


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  455

we  know  what  we  have  named,  we  may  begin  contriving  explanations,
when  we  should  be  trying  to  find  out  what  our  words  mean.^^

All  this  was  said  at  the  beginning  of  the  book.  It  explains  why
no  definition  of  business  cycles  was  given  there.  It  explains  why
even  the  review  of  theories  was  made  to  emphasize  a  fundamental
feature  of  business  cycles,  to  indicate  what  detailed  facts  should  be
looked  for,  and  how  those  facts  should  be  studied.  It  explains  the
long  chapters  on  economic  organization,  statistical  methods,  and
business  annals.  It  explains  the  present  section  on  the  evolution  of
the  concept  of  business  cycles.  Even  now,  we  can  do  no  more  than
frame  a  working  definition  to  use  in  trying  to  learn  more — a  defini-
tion which  presumably  will  require  modification  as  knowledge  grows.

2.  A  Working  Concept  of  Business  Cycles.

To  find  out  what  business  cycles  are,  we  have  looked  at  them
through  the  eyes  of  economic  theorists,  through  the  eyes  of  economic
statisticians,  and  through  the  eyes  of  business  reporters.  Each  group
of  workers  helps  us  to  appreciate  features  of  the  common  object  which
the  other  groups  take  for  granted,  or  fail  to  see.  It  is  by  combining
the  three  sets  of  observations  that  we  can  form  the  mental  picture
of  business  cycles  most  useful  in  the  constructive  work  which  lies
before  us.

(1)  Elements  derived  from  Business  Reports.

Treated  in  one  way,  business  reports  give  a  most  confusing  view
of  business  fluctuations;  but  treated  in  another  way,  they  give  the
simplest  view.  When  we  wade  through  the  commercial  histories
printed  in  financial  papers  or  consular  documents,  we  may  get  no
general  impression  except  that  of  infinite  detail.  But  by  careful
planning  and  hard  work,  we  can  put  these  records  in  such  form  that
they  afford  a  view  over  wide  areas  and  through  decades.  Then  the
details  fade,  and  the  broad  features  of  commercial  history  become
clear.  Among  these  broad  features,  one  of  the  most  prominent  is  a
pattern  in  the  changes  taking  place  in  time — a  pattern  common  to  all
countries  which  can  be  said  to  have  a  business  history. Again  and

^'It  seems  to  me  that  as  a  name  for  our  subject  "the  business  cycle"  exposes  us  to
these  dangers  rather  more  than  does  "business  cycles."  On  that  ground,  I  prefer  the
latter  term  in  most  contexts.  Surely  it  is  safer  usage  to  speak  of  "commercial  crises"
than  to  speak  of  "the  commercial  crisis."


456  BUSINESS  CYCLES

again  in  many  lands,  a  period  of  active  trade  ends  in  a  relapse;  then
dull  times  prevail;  afterwards  comes  a  quickening,  and  presently-
trade  is  active  once  more.  This  frequently  recurring  sequence,  of
which  there  are  so  many  examples  in  the  record  slowly  built  up  by  the
cooperation  of  numberless  business  reporters,  is  what  men  have  in
mind  when  they  speak  of  the  business  cycle.

But  business  annals  give  us  much  more  than  this  bare  skeleton
of  a  concept.

(1)  Current  commercial  histories  usually  take  nations  as  their
units,  but  they  make  it  clear  that  a  given  wave  of  prosperity  or  de-
pression does  not  always  sweep  over  all  parts  of  a  country,  and  that
such  a  wave  sometimes  sweeps  over  the  commercial  world.  So  un-
equal are  the  areas  affected  by  different  waves  that  we  cannot  asso-
ciate business  cycles  with  any  given  geographical  or  political  unit.
For  convenient  discussion  it  seems  wise  to  abide  by  the  convention  of
our  sources,  and  think  of  (say)  Japanese  cycles,  Swedish  cycles  and
Brazilian  cycles.  There  is  the  more  reason  for  this  practice  in  that
the  record  of  business  cycles  in  every  country  has  its  own  peculiari-
ties. But  we  must  conceive  of  the  phenomena  as  international,  not
only  in  the  sense  that  they  occur  in  many  countries,  but  also  in  the
sense  that  the  state  of  trade  prevailing  in  any  country  at  any  time
actively  promotes  the  development  of  a  similar  condition  in  all  other
countries  with  which  the  first  has  important  business  relations.  On
the  other  hand,  we  must  recognize  that  in  a  large  country  whose  eco-
nomic organization  is  not  highly  integrated  different  sections  some-
times have  cyclical  fluctuations  more  divergent  than  those  of  neigh-
boring nations.

(2)  The  conception  of  prosperity  or  depression  within  a  given
country  has  the  character  of  an  average.  Seldom  does  a  detailed  sur-
vey show  that  all  branches  of  business  are  active,  or  all  dull,  at  the
same  time.  As  a  rule,  the  reporters  are  clear  and  unanimous  con-
cerning the  "prevaihng  tone" ;  but  sometimes  they  picture  conditions
as  so  mixed  that  it  is  hard  to  discover  the  trend.  And  sometimes
when  reporters  agree  concerning  the  prevailing  tone,  they  agree  also
that  certain  industries  present  striking  exceptions.  In  other  words,  a
reader  of  commercial  histories  conceives  of  business  cycles  as  a  se-
quence of  phases  each  of  which  is  a  highly  complex  aggregate  of
conditions  in  different  industries — conditions  which  are  never  strictly
uniform,  and  which  are  at  times  markedly  divergent.

(3)  Another  characteristic  of  business  cycles  as  pictured  by  com-


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  457

mercial  histories  is  that  they  vary  in  intensity.  The  writers  tell  of
wild  panics  and  of  quiet  recessions,  of  sensational  booms  and  of  mild
prosperity,  of  complete  prostration  and  of  mere  dullness,  of  dramatic
revivals  and  of  long-drawn-out  recuperations!.  These  descriptive
terms  and  their  hundred  variants  cannot  be  interpreted  with  pre-
cision. We  cannot  even  rank  successive  or  contemporary  cycles  in
the  order  of  their  intensities, — to  say  nothing  of  measuring  degrees  of
intensity.  But  neither  can  we  doubt  the  fact  that  cycles  run  the
gamut  from  violent  fluctuations  to  moderate  swings.  And  if  we
follow  these  sources  faithfully,  we  must  drop  'crises  from  our  con-
ception of  business  cycles,  for  in  the  moderate  swings  no  phase  occurs
which  is  fitly  designated  by  that  word.

(4)  Concerning  the  wave-length  of  business  cycles,  commercial
histories  give  us  more  definite  impressions.  We  can  measure  approxi-
mately the  intervals  between  successive  recessions.  There  are  doubt-
ful cases,  because  the  industrial  complexity  just  referred  to  some-
times makes  it  hard  to  say  whether  a  given  set  of  difiiculties  was
general  enough  to  be  called  a  recession;  but  these  cases  are  not  suf-
ficiently numerous  to  cut  much  figure  in  the  results.

Some  cycles  are  found  in  the  record  which  appear  to  have  been
nearer  one  year  than  two  years  in  length.  At  the  other  extreme,  we
find  a  few  cycles  lasting  11  or  12  years.  But  the  bulk  of  the  cases  fall
within  the  three-  to  six-year  range.  And  when  a  goodly  number  of
observations  are  put  together  the  measurements  distribute  them-
selves about  their  central  tendency  in  a  fairly  regular,  though  not
symmetrical,  fashion.

Further,  it  appears  that  the  phases  of  revival  and  recession,  as
reported  in  the  sources  from  which  business  annals  are  compiled,  are
brief  in  comparison  with  the  phases  of  prosperity  and  depression;
that  on  the  average  prosperity  lasts  a  little  longer  than  depres-
sion ;  that  this  relation  of  prosperity  to  depression  is  accentuated  when
wholesale  prices  have  a  rising  secular  trend,  and  reversed  when  that
trend  declines;  that  the  very  long  cycles  are  due  more  to  the  pro-
longation of  depression  than  to  the  prolongation  of  prosperity.

(5)  On  reading  the  business  records  of  any  country  year  after
year,  one  is  impressed  by  the  continuity  of  cyclical  changes.  In  the
sequence  of  prosperity,  recession,  depression  and  revival,  any  stage
can  be  treated  as  the  end  of  one  cycle  and  the  beginning  of  another.
Yet  it  seems  wiser  to  say  that  there  is  no  beginning  and  no  end;  or
better  still,  that  there  is  a  continuous  movement  which  passes  through


458  BUSINESS  CYCLES

certain  phases  in  an  established  order,  but  at  a  pace  which  varies  from
time  to  time  and  country  to  country.

(6)  Current  business  commentators  say  many  hasty  things  about
the  causes  of  changes  in  conditions  which  we  cannot  incorporate  into
a  working  conception  of  business  cycles.  But  for  one  generahzation
along  this  line  we  have  use :  business  cycles  are  highly  sensitive  phe-
nomena, influenced  by  a  host  of  factors  not  of  business  origin.  Among
such  factors,  wars,  civil  disturbances,  inequalities  in  harvests,  and
epidemics  play  prominent  roles.

(7)  Finally,  a  survey  of  business  annals  of  countries  at  dif-
ferent stages  of  development,  and  of  the  business  annals  of  the  same
country  through  successive  stages,  suggests  that  business  cycles  are
associated  with  a  certain  form  of  economic  organization.  This  sug-
gestion is  confirmed  by  a  longer-range  study  of  economic  history.^
While  commercial  and  financial  crises  can  be  traced  back  a  long  time
in  England,  the  Netherlands,  France,  Southern  Germany,  and  north-
ern Italy,  these  early  modern  and  late  medieval  crises  appear  to
have  been  due  far  more  largely  to  non-business  factors  than  are
modern  recessions,  and  to  have  been  less  general  in  their  incidence.
Business  cycles  which  affect  the  fortunes  of  the  mass  of  people  in  a
country,  which  succeed  each  other  continuously,  and  which  attain  a
semblance  of  regularity,  do  not  become  prominent  in  the  economic
history  of  a  country  until  a  large  proportion  of  its  people  are  living
mainly  by  making  and  spending  money  incomes.  Also,  there  is  evi-
dence that  business  cycles  keep  changing  character  as  economic  or-
ganization develops.  The  most  violent  manifestations  are  brought
under  control.  Panics  subside  into  crises,  and  crises  into  recessions.
It  seems  probable  that  the  average  length  of  cycles  grows  shorter  at
one  stage  of  institutional  development,  and  at  a  later  stage  grows
longer  again.  In  fine,  we  must  think  of  the  recurrence  of  prosperity,
recession,  depression  and  revival  as  characteristic  of  economic  activity
only  when  economic  activity  is  organized  on  the  basis  of  what  is  here
called  ^^business  economy."

Thus  the  conception  of  business  cycles  obtained  from  a  survey  of
contemporary  reports  starts  with  the  fundamental  fact  of  rhythmical
fluctuations  in  activity,  and  adds  that  these  fluctuations  are  peculiar
to  countries  organized  on  a  business  basis,  that  they  appear  in  all

^See  Chapter  II,  section  i,  "The  Historical  Connection  between  Business  Cyclea
and  the  Use  of  Money."


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  459

such  countries,  that  they  tend  to  develop  the  same  phase  at  nearly
the  same  time  in  different  countries,  that  they  follow  each  other
without  intermissions,  that  they  are  affected  by  all  sorts  of  non-
business factors,  that  they  represent  predominant  rather  than  uni-
versal changes  in  trend,  and  that,  while  they  vary  in  intensity  and
duration,  the  variations  are  not  so  wide  as  to  prevent  our  identifying
different  cases  as  belonging  to  a  single  class  of  phenomena.

(2)  Elements  Derived  from  Theories  of  Business  Cycles.

What  alterations  in  this  concept  are  suggested  by  studying  the
theories  of  business  cycles?

Read  one  after  another  in  full  detail,  these  theories  are  scarcely
less  confusing  than  are  commercial  reviews.  It  is  feasible,  however,
to  deal  with  the  theories  in  much  the  same  way  as  we  have  dealt  with
the  business  reports.  Chapter  I  presents  a  collection  of  theoretical
accounts,  which  can  be  set  against  the  historical  accounts  summarized
in  Chapter  IV.  Treating  one  collection  as  we  did  the  other,  we  can
ask.  What  do  the  theories  as  a  whole  tell  us  about  the  phenomena?

First,  the  theories  put  fresh  emphasis  upon  the  exceeding  com-
plexity of  cyclical  fluctuations.  But  the  complexity  revealed  by  the
theories  is  complexity  of  an  order  different  from  that  revealed  by
commercial  reports.  While  the  latter  deal  with  business  conditions
in  different  areas  and  different  industries,  the  theories  deal  with  dif-
ferent processes — processes  which  are  supposed  to  run  their  course  in,
or  to  affect,  all  industries  and  all  communities  organized  upon  a
business  basis.

Among  the  processes  so  intimately  involved  in  cyclical  fluctuations
that  they  have  been  made  to  yield  explanations  of  business  cycles,  we
noted  the  following:

Banking  operations — particularly  the  processes  of  expanding  or
contracting  bank  loans,  with  their  effects  in  enlarging  or  reducing  the
volume  of  credit  currency;  fluctuations  in  discount  rates,  and  the
fluctuations  of  bank  reserves  which  result  from  changes  in  the  public^s
use  of  coin  and  paper  money,  and  from  the  banks'  efforts  to  maintain
solvency.

Saving  and  investing  in  their  relation  to  the  amount  of  construc-
tion work  undertaken,  the  supply  of  consumers'  goods  sent  to  market,
and  the  volume  of  retail  buying.

The  process  of  adjusting  the  current  supply  of  goods  of  all  sorts


460  BUSINESS  CYCLES -

to  the  demand  for  them,  as  that  process  affects  business  commitments,
or  is  affected  by  (1)  the  uncertainties  incident  to  all  business  plan-
ning, (2)  changes  in  the  marginal  utilities  of  consumers'  goods  and
the  marginal  utility  of  money,  on  the  one  hand,  and,  on  the  other
hand,  by  changes  in  the  demand  for  and  in  the  operation  of  industrial
equipment.

Disbursing  money  incomes  to  consumers  and  spending  money  by
consumers,  in  relation  to  the  processes  of  making  and  selling  goods —
relations  which  may  be  treated  with  reference  to  the  influence  of  price
fluctuations  upon  the  incomes  and  purchasing  power  of  different
classes,  with  reference  to  the  effect  of  saving  by  corporations  and  in-
dividuals upon  the  demand  for  consumers'  goods,  or  with  reference
to  the  difficulty  of  providing  liquid  capital  for  business  enterprises
without  reducing  the  demand  for  goods  in  general  below  the  volume
sent  to  market.

Making  profits  out  of  industrial  operations — a  process  which  is
held  to  breed  illusions  concerning  the  volume  of  demand,  to  magnify
the  moderate  fluctuations  of  retail  buying  into  violent  oscillations  in
production,  or  to  cause  the  alternate  marking  up  and  writing  down
of  the  capital  values  at  which  business  enterprises  are  rated  and  upon
which  loan  credits  are  based.

Promoting  new  business  ventures,  or  making  revolutionary
changes  in  business  methods.

^Trogress"  at  large,  a  characteristic  of  the  age  which  makes  it
impossible  to  keep  the  rates  at  which  different  factors  grow  properly
adjusted  to  each  other.

In  addition  to  these  economic  processes  our  attention  has  been
called  to :

Waves  of  optimism  and  pessimism,  which  are  held  by  one  writer
to  ^^give  birth  to  one  another  in  an  endless  chain,"  and  by  another
writer  to  result  from  fluctuations  in  birth-,  death-,  and  morbidity-
rates.

Cyclical  changes  in  weather,  which  affect  business  on  one  line  of
analysis  because  they  affect  crop  yields,  on  a  second  line  of  analysis
because  they  affect  health  and  mental  attitudes,  and  on  a  third  line
because  they  give  the  industries  using  organic  materials  a  rhythm
different  from  that  of  the  industries  using  inorganic  materials.

Of  course  not  all  of  these  theories  of  business  cycles  can  be  valid
in  the  sense  of  their  authors. Indeed,  if  any  one  theory  really  shows


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  461

the  chief  cause  of  cyclical  fluctuations,  none  of  the  rival  theories
shows  the  chief  cause.  But  we  can  take  all  of  the  theories  into  our
working  conception  of  business  cycles  in  the  sense  that  we  can  con-
ceive of  the  recurrent  sequences  of  prosperity,  recession,  depression
and  revival  as  involving  cyclical  fluctuations  in  each  of  the  economic
processes  listed,  and  as  affected  by  emotional  and  climatic  conditions.
Nor  can  we  limit  our  view  to  the  processes  and  conditions  on  which
theories  of  business  cycles  have  been  erected.  In  working,  we  must
be  prepared  to  study  any  feature  of  modern  life  which  appears  to  be
intimately  related  to  business  fluctuations.  But  with  every  factor  in
the  complex,  whether  suggested  by  others  or  discovered  in  our  inquiry,
we  must  deal  critically.  Among  other  things,  this  means  that  our
conception  of  a  multiplicity  of  processes  involved  in  business  cycles
does  not  commit  us  in  advance  to  any  conclusion  about  the  number
of  causes  at  work.  If  the  evidence  we  find  points  in  that  direction,
we  can  conclude  that  some  single  cause  produces,  directly  and  indi-
rectly, the  cyclical  fluctuations  in  an  uncounted  list  of  processes.

While  adding  a  signiflcant  feature  to  our  conception  of  business
cycles,  the  survey  of  theories  sheds  little  light  upon  the  suggestions
derived  from  the  survey  of  business  annals.  For  the  cycles  explained
by  economic  theorists  are  not  the  cycles  recorded  by  business  his-
torians. Interested  in  establishing  generalizations,  a  theorist  passes
lightly  over  the  differences  among  successive  cycles  in  the  same  coun-
try and  synchronous  cycles  in  different  countries.  He  contemplates  an
ideal,  or  a  typical,  case,  supposedly  modeled  on  real  cases  and  sum-
ming up  all  their  really  essential  features.  Nor  is  that  procedure  open
to  criticism,  provided  the  theorist  takes  care  to  test  his  ideal  construc-
tion for  conformity  to  fact.  Some  modern  theorists  do  so  explicitly
and  at  length ;  doubtless  others  believe  that  they  have  made  adequate
tests  privately,  though  they  spare  their  readers  the  heavy  task  of  as-
sessing their  evidence.  In  any  case,  concentration  upon  an  ideal
case  by  a  theorist  does  not  mean  that  he  denies  the  variability  of  the
phenomena,  but  that  he  sets  the  variations  aside  in  order  to  get  a
clearer  view  of  what  seem  to  him  fundamentals.

On  two  points,  however,  most  of  the  theories  of  business  cycles
are  at  variance  with  the  concept  derived  from  commercial  reviews.
These  points  were  discussed  in  Chapter  IV,  and  noted  in  the  preceding
section;  but  they  must  be  mentioned  in  the  present  connection.
(1)  Most  theorists  take  crises  to  be  one  of  the  phases  of  all  business


462  BUSINESS  CYCLES

cycles,  though  a  few  writers  define  "crisis''  in  a  way  which  makes  it
equivalent  to  ''recession."  (2)  By  taking  cycles  as  the  intervals  be-
tween crises,  and  not  counting  mild  recessions  as  crises,  most  theorists
make  the  duration  typical  of  business  cycles  roughly  twice  the  length
we  deduce  as  typical.  On  both  these  points,  the  conception  suggested
by  business  annals,  confirmed  as  it  is  by  statistical  analysis,  is  more
useful  in  constructive  work  than  its  rival.

Nor  can  the  idea  presented  in  many  theories  that  business  cycles
represent  an  alternate  rupture  and  restoration  of  economic  equilibrium
be  included  in  our  working  conception.  Men  who  take  as  their  point
of  departure  the  theorem  that  economic  forces  tend  to  establish  a
stable  equilibrium  may  conceive  the  main  problem  to  be,  how  this
fundamental  tendency  is  overcome  at  times  and  how  it  presently
reasserts  itself.  I  have  not  chosen  that  point  of  departure.  Hence  it
is  no  part  of  my  task  to  determine  how  the  fact  of  cyclical  oscilla-
tions in  economic  activity  can  be  reconciled  with  the  general  theory
of  equilibrium,  or  how  that  theory  can  be  reconciled  with  facts.

Yet  this  does  not  dispose  of  the  matter.  Whatever  his  methodo-
logical assumptions,  anyone  who  deals  with  crises  is  likely  to  think
of  a  balance  of  forces,  particularly  if  his  explanation  centers  in  some
single  process.  "Over-saving,"  "over-production,"  "under-consump-
tion,"  "a  rate  of  interest  higher  than  that  economically  justified,"
"optimistic  error,"  "excess  capacity," — all  such  phrases  imply  the
idea  of  an  equilibrium  which  has  been  disturbed.  They  may  or  may
not  be  conscious  applications  of  a  general  economic  theorem.  But
when  we  enlarge  our  problem  to  include  numerous  processes  and  all
phases  of  the  cycle,  the  idea  of  equilibrium  becomes  less  helpful  in
conceiving  the  whole  movement  than  in  dealing  with  details.  Pro-
vided we  interpret  equilibrium,  not  in  the  mechanical,  but  in  the
bookkeeping  sense,  as  suggested  in  the  closing  section  of  Chapter  II,
we  may  compare  one  set  of  factors  or  forces  with  an  opposing  set,  note
which  set  exceeds  the  other  for  the  time  being,  and  inquire  what  con-^
sequences  that  excess  produces.  But  in  what  useful  way  can  we
conceive  of  the  equilibrium  of  the  whole  system  we  must  contem-
plate, when  that  system  includes  factors  which  cannot  be  combined
into  two  opposing  totals — quantities  of  goods  in  physical  terms,  prices,
pecuniary  aggregates?  If  we  could  reduce  every  factor  to  its  money
value,  the  feat  might  be  accomplished;  but  in  the  process  we  should
bury  qualitative  distinctions  of  great  moment.  While  we  can  relate
all  the  qualitatively  unlike  factors  in  the  problem  to  each  other


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  463

through  their  bearing  upon  prospective  profits,  we  cannot  add  them
all  together  and  get  results  which  are  illuminating.

/N (3)  Elements  Derived  from  Statistical  Analysis.

Our  collection  of  statistics  is  like  our  collection  of  business  annals,
and  unlike  our  collection  of  theories,  in  that  it  deals  with  the  cycles  of
history — fluctuations  which  have  occurred  in  certain  countries  be-
tween certain  dates.  Hence  the  statistics  can  be  used  to  test  elements
in  our  concept  which  are  derived  from  commercial  reviews.  The  tests
confirm,  with  a  welcome  increase  of  definiteness,  the  view  that  busi-
ness cycles  run  a  continuous  round;  that  they  vary,  but  vary  after
the  fashion  characteristic  of  most  social  phenomena,  in  intensity,  in
duration  and  in  the  intensity  and  duration  of  their  constituent  phases;
that  the  synchronous  fluctuations  in  countries  having  business  rela-
tions with  one  another  tend  to  have  a  common  pattern,  and  that  the
course  of  business  changes  is  frequently  altered  by  factors  not  of
business  origin.

On  the  other  hand,  our  collection  of  statistics  resembles  our  col-
lection of  theories,  and  differs  from  our  collection  of  business  annals,
in  that  it  deals  with  economic  processes  rather  than  with  the  fortunes
of  different  industries.  Hence,  the  impression  derived  from  the
theories,  that  a  business  cycle  is  a  highly  complex  congeries  of  fluctua-
tions in  different  processes,  can  be  made  clearer  by  appeal  to  statistics.
And  though  statistics  deal  with  historical  cycles,  to  a  limited  extent
we  can  combine  the  different  cases  they  present  in  such  a  way  as  to
test  theoretical  conceptions  of  what  features  of  the  historical  cycles
are  typical,  and  what  are  exceptional.

Besides  confirming  certain  elements  in  the  concept  derived  from
our  other  sources,  the  collection  of  statistics  brings  forcibly  to  our
attention  two  elements  which  are  traceable,  rather  than  prominent,  in
business  annals  and  in  certain  theories.

Time  series  show  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  characteristic  of
various  economic  processes  differ  in  amplitude  and  timing;  they  show
approximately  how  much  these  fluctuations  differ  in  amplitude,  and
what  order  they  follow  in  time.

Time  series  also  show  that  the  cyclical  fluctuations  of  most  (not
all)  economic  processes  occur  in  combination  with  fluctuations  of
several  other  sorts: — secular  trends,  primary  and  secondary,  seasonal
variations,  and  irregular  fluctuations.


464  BUSINESS  CYCLES

By  developing  special  methods  for  segregating  secular  trends  and
seasonal  variations,  statisticians  have  enabled  us  to  get  a  clearer  view
of  cyclical  fluctuations,  though  they  have  accomplished  little  toward
isolating  the  irregular  changes  in  their  series.  Thus  we  are  forced
to  deal  with  materials,  which,  at  best,  show  cyclical-irregular  fluctua-
tions in  combination.  Even  so,  we  can  sort  the  series  into  groups,
based  upon  the  regularity  and  the  measure  of  agreement  among  their
movements.  There  are  some  time  series  whose  fluctuations,  mild  or
violent,  show  slight  traces  of  any  rhythm.  But  there  are  enough
series  which  show  tolerably  regular  cyclical  fluctuations,  agreeing  with
one  another  and  with  our  business  annals  in  tenor,  to  give  us  confi-
dence in  the  basic  element  of  our  conception — the  recurrence  of  the
prosperity-recession-depression-revival  sequence.

3.  Two  Criticisms  Considered.

One  element  in  our  working  concept  has  been  rejected  by  Dean
Arthur  B.  Adams,  who  holds:

It  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  cyclical  movements  are  contin-
uous. .  .  .  Each  business  cycle  is,  in  a  large  measure,  separate
and  distinct  from  the  one  preceding  it  and  the  other  succeed-
ing it.  Considerable  time  may  elapse  between  the  ending  of
one  cycle  and  the  beginning  of  another.

Adams  illustrates  this  contention  by  reference  to  American  experi-
ence:

No  period  of  prosperity  developed  from  1893  until  the  indus-
trial expansion  of  1905-07.  Again,  following  the  Panic  of  1907
no  period  of  prosperity  developed  until  the  World  War  expan-
sion of  1915-20.

Our  annals,  on  the  contrary,  and  the  business  indexes  with  which  we
have  compared  them,  show  between  1893  and  1907  a  ^^submerged
cycle"  terminated  by  a  recession  early  in  1896,  a  second  period  of
somewhat  greater  activity  terminated  by  a  very  mild  reaction  in  1900,
and  a  third  movement  of  expansion  ending  in  the  ''rich  man's  panic''
of  1903.  Between  1907  and  1920,  also,  our  annals  and  indexes  show
three  cycles,  marked  off  by  recessions  in  1910,  1913  and  1918.

Yet  the  difference  between  Dean  Adams'  view  and  the  one  taken
here  is  more  a  difference  in  the  use  of  terms  than  a  difference  con-


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  465

cerning  facts.  For  Adams  recognizes  that  between  1893  and  1905,
and  again  between  1907  and  1915,  there  was  '^some  oscillation  of
prices,  credit  and  profits." He  thinks,  however,  that

these  slight  movements  occurring  within  a  few  months  were
far  too  inconsequential  to  be  designated  as  cyclical  fluctuations.

What  are  here  called  business  cycles  of  small  amplitude.  Dean  Adams
calls  ^^periods  of  time  covered  by  oscillating  business  equilibria.'^  ^  In
his  terminology,  no  fluctuation  is  a  business  cycle  unless  the  pros-
perous phase  develops  into  a  ''boom."

Perhaps  it  does  not  matter  greatly  which  of  these  contrasting
usages  is  adopted,  so  long  as  the  facts  are  kept  in  mind.  On  either
view,  one  must  face  the  problem  why  some  revivals  grow  into  intense
and  prolonged  prosperity,  and  why  in  other  cases  prosperity  is  mild
and  brief.  But  one  who  takes  the  trouble  to  measure  the  amplitudes
of  successive  fluctuations  in  many  time  series  throughout  consider-
able periods,  finds  his  observations  so  distributed  about  their  central
tendency  that  he  has  no  basis  for  contrasting  business  cycles  and
what  Dean  Adams  calls  ''oscillating  business  equilibria."  ^  Our
inquiry  will  be  more  orderly  if  we  treat  all  cyclical  oscillations  as  be-
longing to  one  species  of  phenomena,  and  inquire  into  the  variations
characteristic  of  the  species  in  respect  to  amplitudes,  duration,  and
other  measurable  features.

Professor  Irving  Fisher  doubts  the  validity  of  the  whole  concep-
tion with  which  we  are  concerned,  and  asks  whether  "the"  business
cycle  is  not  a  myth. His  chief  argument  runs  as  follows:

if  by  the  business  cycle  is  meant  merely  the  statistical  fact  that
business  does  fluctuate  above  and  below  its  average  trend,
there  is  no  denying  the  existence  of  a  cycle — and  not  only  in
business  but  in  any  statistical  series  whatsoever!  If  we  draw
any  smooth  curve  to  represent  the  general  trend  of  popula-
tion, the  actual  population  figures  must  necessarily  rise  some-
times above  and  sometimes  below  this  mean  trend  line.  .  .  .
In  the  same  way  weather  conditions  necessarily  fluctuate  about
their  own  means;  so  does  the  luck  at  Monte  Carlo.  Must  we
then  speak  of  "the  population  cycle,"  "the  weather  cycle"
and  "the  Monte  Carlo  cycle"?

*  Arthur  B.  Adams,  Economics  of  Business  Cycles,  New  York,  1925,  pp.  195-197,
and  213.

'See  "The  Amphtude  of  Business  Cycles"  in  Chapter  III,  sections  vi,  3  (7).


466  BUSINESS  CYCLES

I  see  no  more  reason  to  believe  in  ^^the''  business  cycle.  It
is  simply  the  fluctuation  about  its  own  mean.  And  yet  the
cycle  idea  is  supposed  to  have  more  content  than  mere  varia-
bility. It  implies  a  regular  succession  of  similar  fluctuations,
constituting  some  sort  of  recurrence,  so  that,  as  in  the  case  of
the  phases  of  the  moon,  the  tides  of  the  sea,  wave  motion,  or
pendulum  swing,  we  can  forecast  the  future  on  the  basis  of  a
pattern  worked  out  from  past  experience,  and  which  we  have
reason  to  think  will  be  copied  in  the  future.  We  certainly
cannot  do  that  in  predicting  the  weather,  or  Monte  Carlo  luck.
Can  we  do  so  as  to  business?  Not  so  long  as  business  is  domi-
nated by  changes  in  the  price  level !  ^

Professor  Fisher  has  rendered  a  wholesome  service  to  students  of
business  cycles  by  challenging  their  basic  concept  in  this  vigorous
fashion.  To  discuss  the  issue  in  full  would  involve  repeating  once
again  many  of  the  facts  set  forth  in  the  preceding  chapters  and
summarized  in  the  preceding  sections.  That  is  not  feasible;  but  it  is
well  to  recall  what  groups  of  facts  the  challenge  must  face.

Even  when  economic  time  series  are  reduced  to  percentage  devia-
tions from  their  secular  trends  adjusted  for  seasonal  variations,  the
fluctuations  in  some  cases  still  seem  as  irregular  as  the  fluctuations
of  the  weather,  or  of  ''Monte  Carlo  luck."  But  there  are  many  series
of  which  this  cannot  be  said.  When  charted,  the  fluctuations  of  pig-
iron  production,  unemployment  percentages,  bank  clearings,  and
building  permits,  to  cite  but  a  few  examples,  prove  to  be  decidedly
less  irregular  than  the  fluctuations  of  a  weather  chart,  a  chart  of  net
gold  shipments,  or  of  potato  crops.  In  no  case  are  the  fluctuations
highly  regular;  but  in  many  cases  they  are  far  from  haphazard,  de-
spite the  inability  of  statisticians  to  free  what  they  call  "cyclical"
changes  from  what  they  call  "irregular"  perturbations.  Further,  the
cyclical-irregular  fluctuations  of  the  series  which  individually  show
semblance  of  regularity  are  found  to  have  tolerably  regular  relations
with  one  another  in  respect  to  time,  duration,  and  amplitude  of  move-
ment^— ^relations  many  of  which  have  been  suggested  by  economic
theory.  Finally,  in  timing  and  direction  these  inter-correlated  fluctua-
tions agree  closely  with  the  evidence  given  by  business  annals  con-
cerning a  long-continued  and  wide-spread  recurrence  of  prosperity,
recession,  depression  and  revival.

'Irving  Fisher,  "Our  Unstable  Dollar  and  the  So-called  Business  Cycle,"  Journal
oj  the  American  Statistical  Association,  June,  1925,  vol.  xx,  pp.  191,  192.


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  467

To  ascertain  how  regularly  this  sequence  recurs,  to  learn  all  they
can  about  its  characteristics,  causes,  and  consequences,  is  the  problem
upon  which  students  of  business  cycles  are  working.  They  speak  of
cychcal  fluctuations,  instead  of  periodic  fluctuations,  just  because
the  first  term  does  not  imply  strict  regularity  of  recurrence.  To  them
"the  cycle  idea"  does  ''have  more  content  than  mere  variability'';
but  it  does  not  have  the  content  of  periodicity.  Anyone  who  makes
business  forecasts  on  the  basis  of  a  fixed  time  schedule  is  not  applying
their  concept,  but  violating  it.  What  they  know  about  the  recurrence
does  not  yet  enable  them  to  make  consistently  successful  business
forecasts.  But  in  that  fact  they  see  reason,  not  for  giving  up  their
work,  but  for  pressing  it  further.

No  competent  judge  questions  the  desirability  of  studying  eco-
nomic fluctuations  in  an  objective  fashion.  Professor  Fisher  himself
is  one  of  the  distinguished  workers  in  the  field.  But  he  thinks  that
the  subdivision  of  this  broad  problem  which  is  called  "business  cycles"
in  America  and  "trade  cycles"  in  England  would  flourish  better  under
some  other  name.  Perhaps  a  new  name  can  be  found  which  is  equally
apt  and  less  subject  to  misconstruction.  If  so,  it  should  be  adopted.
But  no  such  blanket  term  as  "economic  undulations,"  "industrial
fluctuations,"  "business  oscillations,"  or  "theory  of  conjunctures"
will  meet  the  needs  of  current  research.  For  we  have  seen  that
various  investigators  believe  they  have  discovered  several  different
types  of  fluctuations  in  time  series — secular  trends,  "long  waves,"  sec-
ondary trends,  generating  cycles,  commercial  cycles  (the  commonest
name  for  inter-crisis  changes),  business  cycles,  seasonal  variations,  ir-
regular perturbations.  Probably  each  of  these  types  which  with-
stands critical  examination  will  become  the  object  of  intensive  study
by  economic  statisticians  and  by  economic  theorists,  or  better  by  men
who  unite  these  too-often  separated  interests.  As  knowledge  grows,
there  will  be  increasing  need  of  specific  names  to  characterize  each
type  of  fluctuations  and  to  differentiate  each  from  the  other  types.
To  drop  the  name  now  widely  used  for  one  of  the  best  established  of
these  types,  before  a  better  substitute  has  been  supplied,  might  cause
more  confusion  than  is  now  caused  by  misunderstanding  of  the  word
"cycles."  Meanwhile,  the  general  adoption  of  this  word  in  other
sciences  to  designate  recurrent,  but  non-periodic,  phenomena  is
familiarizing  the  intelligent  public  with  its  meaning.^ Perhaps  the

*  See  above,  Chapter  IV,  section  iii,  2 ;  "Use  of  the  Term  'Cycles.' "


468  BUSINESS  CYCLES

course  which  will  make  the  least  trouble  is  for  critics  to  observe  what
those  who  treat  of  business  cycles  mean  by  that  term.


4.  A  Definition  of  Business  Cycles.

In  a  systematic  investigation  of  business  cycles,  all  of  the  char-
acteristics developed  in  the  preceding  pages  by  analyzing  business
annals,  theoretical  hypotheses  and  statistical  data  should  be  con-
sidered. But  it  is  useful  to  have  a  brief  definition  summarizing  those
characteristics  which  show  the  generic  type  of  the  phenomena  in
question,  and  those  characteristics  which  mark  off  business  cycles
from  the  other  phenomena  just  mentioned  with  which  they  may  be
confused.

Business  cycles  are  a  species  of  fluctuations  in  the  economic  activi-
ties of  organized  communities.  The  adjective  ^^business"  restricts  the
concept  to  fluctuations  in  activities  which  are  systematically  con-
ducted on  a  commercial  basis.  The  noun  "cycles"  bars  out  fluctua-
tions which  do  not  recur  with  a  measure  of  regularity.

The  phenomena  with  which  business  cycles  may  be  confused  are
(1)  changes  in  business  conditions  which  occur  between  the  dates
of  "crises,"  (2)  fluctuations  which  affect  a  minor  portion  of  the  eco-
nomic activities  of  a  business  community,  (3)  fluctuations  which  recur
every  year,  and  (4)  the  less  definitely  established  secondary  trends
and  "long  waves."  From  the  first  of  these  related  species,  business
cycles  are  distinguished  by  the  fact  that  each  cycle  includes  one  wave
of  rising  and  falling,  or  falling  and  rising  activity,  whereas  the  inter-
vals between  "crises"  often  include  two  and  some  times  include  three
such  waves.  From  the  second  species,  business  cycles  are  distin-
guished by  their  wider  inclusiveness.  From  the  third  species  they  are
distinguished  by  not  recurring  annually.  From  the  fourth  species
they  are  distinguished  by  their  briefer  time-span.

Following  the  lines  of  this  analysis,  we  indicate  both  the  generic
features  and  the  distinguishing  characteristics  of  business  cycles  by
saying  that  they  are  recurrences  of  rise  and  decline  in  activity,,  affect-
ing most  of  the  economic  processes  of  communities  with  well-devel-
oped business  organization,  not  divisible  into  waves  of  amplitudes
nearly  equal  to  their  own,  and  averaging  in  communities  at  different
stages  of  economic  development  from  about  three  to  about  six  or
seven  years  in  duration.

Seldom  can  the  interrelated  species  of  social  (or  natural)  phe-


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  469

nomena  be  marked  off  from  one  another  with  such  precision  as  to
leave  no  doubtful  cases.  Certainly  our  business  annals  and  statistical
indexes  show  some  fluctuations  which  are  difficult  to  classify  on  any
scheme.  If  the  definition  suggested  makes  clear  what  is  typical  of
the  phenomena  in  question,  it  will  serve  its  purpose.

II. Tentative  Working  Plans.

To  give  an  intelligible  account  of  business  cycles,  as  we  have  come
to  conceive  them,  is  the  task  of  the  second  volume.  The  cycles  with
which  the  discussion  will  deal  are  neither  the  cycles  of  history,  nor
the  cycles  of  some  speculative  construction,  but  cycles  of  an  inter-
mediate order.  We  shall  seek  to  find  what  features  have  been  char-
acteristic of  all  or  of  most  cycles,  and  to  concentrate  attention  upon
them,  paying  less  attention  to  features  which  have  been  peculiar  to
one  or  a  few  cases.  In  this  respect,  our  aim  will  be  like  that  of  eco-
nomic theorists,  and  different  from  that  of  economic  historians,  com-
mercial journalists,  and  business  forecasters,  who  are  concerned  with
particular  cycles.  But  our  way  of  finding  what  is  typical  and  what
is  exceptional  will  be  the  way  of  the  statistician  and  the  historian  who
ventures  to  generalize.  Of  course,  concentrating  upon  what  is  typical
involves  considering  the  way  in  which  the  various  phenomena  treated
are  distributed  around  their  central  tendencies.  What  this  procedure
shows  to  be  typical  may  at  times  be  equivalent  to  what  an  economic
theorist  would  call  ''normal'^  features  of  business  cycles ;  but  there  is
no  assurance  that  such  correspondence  will  be  common.

Materials  for  the  discussion  are  supplied  by  the  three  collections
from  which  our  working  conception  of  business  cycles  has  been  de-
rived— the  collection  of  business  annals,  the  collection  of  statistical
series,  and  the  collection  of  theories.  These  are  formal,  objective
sources  which  any  student  can  exploit.  In  addition,  like  every  other
student  of  economic  behavior,  I  shall  draw  upon  my  own  store  of
experiences  and  observations — a  queer  mixture  of  generic  and  indi-
vidual elements,  the  latter  determined  largely  by  chance  and  by  per-
sonal equation.

The  methods  employed  must  be  methods  which  make  it  possible
to  weave  these  diverse  materials  into  a  single  fabric.  We  must  be
ready  to  consider  concrete  events  such  as  historians  treat;  but  we
must  array  them  in  groups  after  the  fashion  of  statisticians,  and  inter-
pret them  in  the  light  of  what  we  know  about  economic  behavior,  after


470  BUSINESS  CYCLES

the  fashion  of  economic  theorists.  Similarly,  we  must  be  ready  to
apply  the  mathematical  technique  of  statisticians ;  but  we  must  guide
our  statistical  investigations  by  rational  hypotheses,  and  eke  out  our
statistical  observations  by  recourse  to  historical  records.  So,  too,
while  we  must  be  ready  on  occasion  to  analyze  imaginary  cases  with
the  theorists,  these  cases  should  be  arranged  whenever  possible  with
an  eye  upon  the  historical  and  statistical  data  by  which  speculative
conclusions  may  be  tested.  Of  course,  it  is  an  error  to  think  that  free
use  of  factual  materials  reduces  the  need  for  careful  reasoning.  In
our  effort  to  give  an  intelligible  account  of  business  cycles,  reasoning
must  be  our  chief  concern;  but  it  should  be  reasoning  which  deals,
and  squares,  with  observations,  and  the  observations  should  have  as
wide  a  sweep  as  we  can  get  from  history,  as  much  precision  as  we
can  get  from  statistics,  and  as  much  subtlety  as  we  can  get  from
personal  experience.

The  concept  of  business  cycles  developed  in  this  volume  suggests
that  the  leading  question  of  the  second  volume  be  put  in  the  form
"How  do  business  cycles  run  their  course?"  rather  than  in  the  form
"What  causes  business  cycles?"  What  we  are  seeking  to  understand
is  a  complex  of  recurrent  fluctuations  in  numerous  interrelated  proc-
esses. To  learn  what  we  can  about  the  workings  of  these  processes
in  their  relations  to  one  another  and  as  a  whole  is  the  next  step.
When  we  have  taken  that  step,  it  will  be  time  to  see  what  the  ques-
tion about  the  cause  of  business  cycles  means,  and  in  what  sense  it
can  be  answered.

Meanwhile,  we  need  not  hesitate  to  speak  about  causal  relation-
ships among  the  numerous  factors  in  the  processes  whose  fluctuations
we  are  tracing,  whenever  such  language  seems  appropriate.  Men
phrase  their  statements  concerning  economic  relations  in  various
ways.  One  may  say  that  under  certain  circumstances  an  increase  of
orders  for  goods  is  followed  by  a  rise  of  prices,  or  that  it  permits  sellers
to  raise  prices,  or  that  it  tends  to  produce  a  rise  of  prices,  or  that  it
occasions  a  rise,  or  that  it  causes  prices  to  rise.  Each  of  these  phrases
has  implications  somewhat  different  from  the  others — implications  of
which  we  seldom  stop  to  think  in  the  midst  of  our  constructive  work.
The  only  statement  in  the  list  which  we  can  test  adequately  is  the
colorless  statement  that  one  event  is  followed  by  another.  We  should
be  on  the  safest  ground  if  we  confined  ourselves  strictly  to  tested  alle-
gations concerning  past  sequences. Yet  in  our  searches  for  sequences


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  471

to  test,  and  in  our  thinking  about  probable  future  developments,  it
would  be  foolish  to  contend  against  the  settled  habit  of  thinking  in
terms  of  cause  and  effect.  Many  of  our  keenest  guesses  at  new  truth
come  to  mind  in  this  dubious  form,  just  as  many  stimulating  insights
are  suggested  by  analogies.  We  avail  ourselves  of  analogies  both  in
making  investigations  and  in  stating  their  results,  though  we  all
know  that  analogy  is  not  proof.  So  we  think  and  write  in  causal
terms,  though  we  admit  the  impossibility  of  establishing  a  necessary
connection  between  antecedent  and  consequent.

Whatever  causal  connections  we  may  work  into  our  account  of
business  cycles,  that  account  will  remain  an  analytic  description  of
interrelated  processes.  Of  necessity,  the  causal  relationships  will
appear  most  complicated.  A  phenomenon  which  crops  up  first  as  an
effect  turns  presently  into  a  cause,  and  since  we  shall  be  following  a
continuous  process  we  must  treat  it  first  as  the  one  and  then  as  the
other.  Even  that  is  a  simplified  version  of  the  facts:  in  truth  every
factor  in  the  situation  at  every  moment  is  being  influenced  by,  and
is  influencing,  other  factors — it  is  not  first  cause  and  then  effect,  but
both  cause  and  effect  all  the  time.  Further,  we  cannot  follow  single
chains  of  causal  influence.  The  interactions  among  economic
processes  are  so  important  that  we  cannot  set  them  aside.  Almost
every  effect  with  which  we  deal  will  appear  to  be  the  joint  product  of
numerous  causes,  and  to  be  one  among  several  causes  of  numerous
effects.  In  view  of  these  complications,  it  will  prove  more  helpful  to
treat  our  problem  at  large  in  terms  of  the  relations  among  a  number
of  complex  variables,  rather  than  in  terms  of  cause  and  effect.

A  cardinal  illustration  of  our  difficulties,  and  of  the  way  out,  is
provided  by  Chapter  IL  To  avoid  getting  lost  in  the  maze  of  proc-
esses which  Chapter  I  showed  we  must  follow,  we  sought  to  find  some
general  scheme  for  viewing  these  processes  in  systematic  relation  to
one  another.  The  scheme  suggested  was  to  relate  every  factor  to  the
current  and  prospective  profits  of  business  enterprises.  Profits  are
net  mathematical  resultants  of  many  plus  and  minus  items  in  a
computation.  We  do  not  analyze  profit  and  loss  statements  in  terms
of  cause  and  effect,  though  we  often  give  causal  explanations  of
changes  in  certain  items.  So,  when  we  put  the  scheme  of  Chapter
II  to  use  in  the  second  volume,  we  shall  concentrate  attention  upon
the  net  resultants  of  interrelated  changes  in  many  variables  and
relegate  causal  analysis  to  incidental  uses.


472  BUSINESS  CYCLES

The  best  framework  for  a  discussion  of  how  business  cycles  run
their  course  is  that  provided  by  the  phases  of  these  cycles — prosperity,
recession,  depression,  and  revival.  Our  collections  of  business  annals
and  of  theories  lend  themselves  readily  to  this  plan;  for  the  annals
mark  changes  in  the  tides  of  activity,  and  most  current  theories  ex-
plain crises  by  what  happens  in  prosperity  and  revivals  by  what  hap-
pens in  depression.  But  statistical  time  series  are  continuous.  How
shall  we  break  them  into  parts  for  use  in  a  discussion  which  treats
first  all  periods  of  prosperity  as  a  unit,  then  all  periods  of  recession,
and  so  on?

Most  of  the  statistics  which  the  National  Bureau  is  collecting
come  from  the  United  States,  England,  France  and  Germany — coun-
tries included  in  our  volume  of  Business  Annals.  For  each  of  these
countries  Dr.  Thorp  has  drawn  up  a  table  which  marks  off,  not  only
successive  cycles,  but  also  the  successive  phases  of  each  cycle.  As
they  stand,  or  with  such  modifications  as  prove  advisable  when  we
enter  into  full  detail,  his  divisions  will  be  used  as  a  basis  for  breaking
up  the  time  covered  by  each  series  used,  first  into  cycles,  second  into
periods  of  prosperity,  recession,  depression  and  revival.  That  is,  we
plan  to  analyze  all  the  time  series  for  a  given  country  on  the  basis  of
a  standard  pattern  derived  from  the  business  annals  of  that  country,
not  on  the  basis  of  the  various  patterns  which  might  be  derived  from
study  of  the  several  series  themselves.  In  most  cases  we  anticipate
that  the  cycles  and  phases  of  the  individual  series  will  correspond
fairly  well  with  the  standard  patterns  of  the  countries  from  which
they  come.  But  there  will  be  cases  of  notable  divergence  in  timing —
cases  which  our  plan  will  throw  into  high  relief,  and  from  which  we
shall  learn  much  of  interest.

The  cycles  with  which  we  are  working  run  from  trough  to  trough ;
that  is,  they  show  a  business  cycle  as  a  wave  which  rises,  breaks  and
subsides.  We  might  equally  well  have  taken  the  cycles  from  peak  to
peak,  representing  each  as  a  decline,  followed  by  a  rise.  Our  chief
reason  for  preferring  the  former  plan  is  that  it  may  enable  us  to  in-
clude a  few  more  recent  cases  than  would  its  rival.

When  a  series  has  been  divided  into  cycles  on  this  basis,  we  plan
to  ascertain  its  mean  value  in  each  cycle,  and  to  turn  the  original
figures  for  every  month  or  quarter  of  each  cycle  into  relatives  on  the  i
basis  of  this  mean  value  as  100. This  step  will  put  all  the  series  i
into  comparable  form,  and  give  us  numerical  results  which  can  be
used  in  many  ways. Then  each  cycle  in  each  series  will  be  repre-


RESULTS  AND  PLANS  473

sented  by  four  charts,  one  showing  its  relative  fluctuations  during  the
prosperous  phase,  one  during  the  phase  of  recession,  a  third  during
depression,  and  a  fourth  during  revival.  These  charts  will  be  drawn
with  overlaps  at  either  end;  for  example,  the  charts  for  revivals  of
activity  will  include  the  latter  part  of  the  preceding  depression  and
the  earlier  part  of  the  succeeding  prosperity.

Charts  drawn  in  this  manner,  with  logarithmic  vertical  scales,  can
be  used  in  many  combinations.  We  can  compare  the  fluctuations  of
a  given  series  in  a  given  country  in  successive  periods  of  given  phase,
and  contrast  its  fluctuations  in  opposite  phases.  We  can  study  the
movements  of  similar  series  from  different  countries  in  the  same
phases  of  the  same  cycles.  We  can  take  different  series  from  the  same
country  in  the  same  phase  of  the  same  cycle. And  so  on.

By  using  the  average  value  of  each  series  during  each  cycle  as  the
base  for  computing  relatives,  we  eliminate  most  of  the  secular  trend.
Otherwise,  the  plan  involves  a  minimum  of  "adjustments''  in  present-
ing data.  But  though  simple,  it  can  be  elaborated  at  will.  At  need,
the  seasonal  variations  of  series  can  be  ascertained  by  any  of  the
standard  methods,  and  eliminated.  Or  a  series  can  be  turned  into
percentage  deviations  from  its  secular  trend  before  it  is  broken  up
into  cycles.  Our  percentage  fluctuations  about  the  mean  values  of
a  series  in  a  given  cycle  can  be  reduced  to  multiples  of  their  own
standard  deviations.  Indeed,  we  can  utilize  almost  any  technical  de-
vice which  the  work  of  other  investigators,  or  our  own  experience,
shows  to  be  helpful.

A  special  advantage  of  the  plan  is  that  it  helps  us  to  deal  with
the  most  baffling  problem  encountered  in  analyzing  time  series^ — the
problem  of  segregating  cyclical  from  irregular  fluctuations.  In  no
single  case  will  our  procedure  effect  such  a  segregation ;  but  when  we
assemble  charts  showing  the  movements  of  some  variable  during  (say)
the  prosperous  phase  of  numerous  cycles  in  several  countries,  we
should  be  able  to  make  out  with  some  confidence  what  changes  are
characteristic  and  what  are  exceptional.  In  some  cases  we  may  be
able  to  go  further,  and  connect  deviations  from  the  common  course
with  disturbing  factors  of  which  we  read  in  non -statistical  sources.

Of  course,  our  fundamental  problem  in  using  statistics  will  be  to
find  out  what  relations  subsist  between  the  cyclical  fluctuations  char-
acteristic of  different  economic  processes.  As  pointed  out  in  Chapter
III,  the  possible  relationships  are  of  many  types.  We  are  accustomed
to  asking  whether  it  is  the  total  magnitude  of  one  variable  which


[


474  BUSINESS  CYCLES

affects  a  second,  a  change  in  the  direction  of  its  movement,  or  the
amount  of  change  from  one  date  to  the  next,  or  the  percentage
rate  of  change.  We  are  learning  to  ask  whether  it  is  the  changes
accumulated  over  a  period  of  time  that  should  be  looked  into,  or  the
amount  of  the  variable  in  excess  of  a  critical  range,  or  its  ratio  to
some  other  variable.  These  are  but  a  few  of  the  possibilities  which
statisticians  may  soon  be  considering.  Moreover,  the  effects  upon  the
second  variable  may  be  changes  in  total  amount,  in  direction  of  move-
ment, in  amount  of  movement,  in  percentage  rise  or  fall,  or  in  any
of  the  other  indefinitely  numerous  possibilities.  Again,  a  given  var-
iable may  affect  a  second  variable  in  one  way  while  it  affects  a  third
and  fourth  in  other  ways.  So,  too,  a  given  variable  may  be  affected
in  unlike  ways  by  two  or  more  processes  which  bear  upon  it.  All  these
problems  are  further  complicated  by  the  need  of  finding  how  promptly
an  effect  is  exercised,  how  that  effect  is  distributed  through  time,  and
whether  the  effect  is  constant  in  character  through  all  phases  of
business  cycles,  or  whether  it  changes  from  phase  to  phase.

There  are  important  problems  relating  to  business  cycles  which
cannot  be  treated  within  the  framework  which  has  been  sketched.
Hence  the  analysis  of  what  happens  in  periods  of  prosperity,  reces-
sion, depression  and  revival  must  be  supplemented  by  discussions  in
which  certain  hypotheses  are  tested  with  reference  to  long  periods  of
time,  in  which  business  annals  are  considered  in  their  wider  sweep,
and  in  which  statistical  series  are  taken  as  wholes  instead  of  in  seg-
ments. But  these  problems  will  stand  out  far  more  clearly  after  the
successive  phases  of  business  cycles  have  been  analyzed  in  detail  than
they  do  at  present.

No  group  of  workers  in  the  present  generation  can  hope  to  coven
the  field  marked  out  by  these  suggestions.  The  task  of  finding,  case]
by  case,  the  best  form  of  stating  the  relations  among  different  eco-
nomic processes  is  a  task  on  which  an  increasing  number  of  increas-
ingly skillful  investigators  will  be  working  for  a  long  time  to  come
— how  long  no  one  can  guess.  But  what  our  successors  can  accom-
plish will  depend  upon  the  stage  at  which  we  pass  on  the  problem.
Our  task  is  to  use  as  best  we  can  the  means  at  our  disposal — the  in-
sights given  by  economic  theory  as  it  now  stands,  the  statistical  and
historical  data  now  available,  and  all  the  suggestions  we  can  get.


ADDENDA

Work  upon  business  cycles  is  progressing  so  rapidly  in  so  many
quarters  that  a  manuscript  falls  somewhat  behind  date  while  it  is
passing  through  the  press.  As  partial  remedy,  I  add  notes  on  a  few
developments  of  which  I  have  learned  too  late  for  mention  in  the
proper  place.  Before  the  volume  reaches  its  first  readers,  doubtless
I  shall  be  wishing  that  I  might  supplement  these  addenda.  Not  all
the  omissions  are  items  of  recent  date.  Probably  the  most  serious
are  matters  of  which  I  should  have  known  long  ago,  but  of  which  I
am  still  ignorant.

A  Russian  paper  by  Albert  Wainstein  on  Harvests,  Meteorological
and  Economic  Cycles,  and  the  Problem  of  Economic  Forecasting,
Moscow,  1926,  reviews  the  recent  literature  upon  weather  theories
of  business  cycles.  Among  the  contributions  noticed  is  a  series  of
articles,  otherwise  unknown  to  me,  published  by  Axel  F.  Enstrom
in  the  Teknisk  Tidskrift  (Veckoupplagen),  1916.  From  the  French
synopsis  of  Wainstein's  paper,  supplemented  by  notes  which  Dr.
Kuznets  has  made,  I  judge  Enstrom's  investigations  to  merit  more
attention  than  they  have  received.  By  repeated  smoothing  and
differentiation  of  numerous  time  series,  most  of  which  run  back  to
1830,  Enstrom  finds  non-synchronous  cycles  of  8  to  9  years  in
wholesale  prices,  crops,  production,  temperature  and  sunspots.  Be-
tween sunspot  and  temperature  cycles  he  gets  a  correlation  coefficient
of — .94.  He  attributes  the  lagging  cycles  in  economic  activities  to
the  cycles  in  temperature,  and  believes  that  the  sequences  are  suffi-
ciently regular  to  afford  a  basis  for  forecasting  economic  cycles  from
solar  observations.

In  the  new  volume  of  Der  moderne  Kapitalismus,  "Das  Wirt-
•schaftsleben  im  Zeitalter  des  Hochkapitalismus"  (Munich  and  Leip-
zig, 1927),  Professor  Werner  Sombart  gives  a  fresh  exposition  of  his
theory  of  business  cycles,  showing  the  relation  between  the  factor
which  he  stresses  (the  different  conditions  under  which  organic  and
inorganic  goods  are  produced)  and  other  processes.

475


476  ADDENDA

This  discussion,  Chapter  xxv,  also  throws  light  upon  the  historical
connection  between  business  cycles  and  the  form  of  economic  organ-
ization. In  treating  that  theme,  I  ought  to  have  referred  to  Chap-
ters xvi  and  xvii  in  the  second  volume  of  Der  moderne  Kapitalismus,
3rd  ed.,  Munich  and  Leipzig,  1919.  Sombart  there  points  out  the
characteristics  which  differentiate  the  economic  perturbations  of  the
16th,  17th  and  18th  centuries  from  the  business  cycles  of  the  19th.
and  20th  centuries.

Professor  A.  C.  Pigou's  treatise  on  Industrial  Fluctuations,  men-
tioned in  Chapter  I  as  forthcoming,  has  been  published  in  London.
A  hasty  examination  of  the  copy  I  have  just  received  suffices  to  show
that  the  book  fulfills  the  high  expectations  with  which  it  has  been
awaited.

Mr.  R.  G.  Hawtrey's  article  in  the  May,  1927,  issue  of  the  Quar-
terly Journal  of  Economics  on  ^The  Monetary  Theory  of  the  Trade
Cycle  and  Its  Statistical  Test"  contains  not  only  a  concise  statement
of  his  own  views,  but  also  a  criticism  of  Pigou's  "psychological  the-
ory," which  Hawtrey  seems  to  regard  as  the  only  serious  "rival"  of
the  "monetary  theory."

An  interesting  variant  of  the  "profits  theory"  has  been  suggested
by  Professor  F.  Schmidt  of  the  University  of  Frankfurt  in  Die  In-
dustriekonjunktur — ein  Rechenfehler.  (Zeitschrift  fiir  Betriebswirt-
schaft,  2.  Sonderheft,  Berlin  and  Vienna,  1927.)

The  gist  of  Schmidt's  contention  is  that  illusions  concerning  cur-
rent profits  arise  from  a  technical  defect  in  bookkeeping.  When  the
price  level  rises,  profits  are  overstated,  because  no  allowance  is  made
for  the  increasing  unit  costs  of  replacing  the  raw  materials,  current
supplies,  and  other  goods  which  enterprises  are  continually  using  up.
The  whole  difference  between  aggregate  buying  prices  and  aggregate
selling  prices  is  set  down  as  profits,  although  the  replacement  of  the
necessary  working  supplies  will  absorb  a  larger  part  of  the  receipts
than  in  the  preceding  turnover  period.  When  the  price  level  is  fall-
ing, profits  are  minimized,  or  losses  magnified,  because  no  account  is
taken  of  the  diminished  unit  costs  of  replacing  the  goods  used  up.
This  illusory  element  in  profits  leads  to  over-borrowing,  over-confi-
dence, and  over-extension  of  industrial  equipment  in  the  one  case,
and  to  their  opposites  in  the  other  case.


ADDENDA  477

Dr.  Matsuyo  Takizawa's  Penetration  of  Money  Economy  in
Japan  and  its  Effects  upon  Social  and  Political  Institutions  has  now
been  published  by  the  Columbia  University  Press.

The  American  estimate,  cited  in  Chapter  II,  that  savings  have
averaged  about  one-seventh  of  national  income,  may  be  compared
with  the  new  British  estimate  by  Professor  Bowley  and  Sir  Josiah
Stamp.  "Total  savings  expressed  as  a  proportion  of  total  social
income  was  ...  16  per  cent  in  1911,  and  12  or  13  per  cent  in  1924.
If  the  unemployed  are  absorbed  in  industry,  and  we  reach  a  year
of  good  trade,  the  pre-war  proportion  of  saving  may  well  be  again
attained.^^  The  National  Income,  1924,  by  Arthur  L.  Bowley  and
Sir  Josiah  Stamp,  Oxford,  1927,  p.  57.

A  study  of  secondary  trends,  by  Dr.  Charles  A.  R.  Wardwell  of
the  University  of  Pennsylvania,  will  soon  be  published  in  Philadel-
phia under  the  title.  An  Investigation  of  Economic  Data  for  Major
Cycles.  I  have  seen  only  the  first  draft  of  the  manuscript.  Dr.
Wardwell  uses  methods  different  from  those  of  de  Wolff,  Kondratieff,
or  Kuznets,  and  gets  from  his  American  data,  which  run  by  quarters
from  1866  or  later  to  the  present,  "major  cycles"  averaging  about  15
years  in  duration.  Smaller  samples  of  English  and  German  series
also  give  "major  cycles,"  but  somewhat  briefer  ones.

My  remark  in  Chapter  I,  that  "no  one  has  yet  devised  a  satis-
factory method  of  measuring  .  .  .  cyclical  fluctuations  directly,"  has
been  made  questionable  by  Dr.  Martin  Allen  Brumbaugh.  His  doc-
toral dissertation,  published  at  the  University  of  Pennsylvania  and  in
New  York  in  1926,  is  entitled  Direct  Method  of  Determining  Cyclical
Fluctuations  of  Economic  Data.

"The  method  developed  arrives  at  the  relatives  of  cyclical  differ-
ences in  two  major  operations,  first,  the  division  of  each  item  of  data
by  the  item  of  the  same  season  of  the  preceding  year,  and  secondly,
the  correction  for  trend  residue.  The  first  step  removes  the  seasonal
variations,  reduces  the  data  to  relative  form  and,  since  it  is  a  chain
index,  removes  the  normal  growth.  The  second  step  removes  the
small  residual  trend  element  which  represents  the  increase  of  one
year.  .  .  .

"In  the  final  result  we  have  not  measured  cycles  but  cyclical
differences.  .  .  .  We  have  demonstrated  that  the  relative  cyclical


478  ADDENDA

differences  lead  to  a  wave  curve  whose  periodic  changes  conform  to
those  of  a  curve  of  relative  cycles.  Further,  that  the  amplitudes  of
the  curve  of  cyclical  differences  express  rapidity  of  change  whereas
the  amplitudes  of  the  curve  of  relative  cycles  express  amounts  which
are  the  results  of  such  change." (Pp.  71,  72.)

Dr.  Brumbaugh  recognizes  that  the  final  test  of  his  method  "must
come  from  an  appeal  to  business  conditions.''  In  his  judgment,  the
method  "has  satisfactorily  fulfilled  every  reasonable  requirement  for
the  cases  to  which  it  has  been  applied." (P.  73.)

Mr.  A.  W.  Flux  publishes  a  valuable  paper  upon  "Indices  of
Industrial  Productive  Activity"  in  the  latest  issue  of  the  Journal  of
the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  vol.  xc,  part  ii,  pp.  225-271.

Mr.  Carl  Snyder  has  brought  together  in  one  volume  his  numerous
studies  of  cyclical  fluctuations  (of  which  such  free  use  is  made  in
Chapters  III  and  IV),  and  added  valuable  new  results  to  the  papers
already  published.  Business  Cycles  and  Business  Measurements:
Studies  in  Quantitative  Economics,  by  Carl  Snyder,  New  York,  1927.

In  "The  Summation  of  Random  Causes  as  the  Source  of  Cyclic
Processes"  (Problems  of  Economic  Conditions,  vol.  iii,  part  i,  pub-
lished by  the  Conjuncture  Institute  in  Russian  with  an  English  sum-
mary, Moscow,  1927),  E.  E.  Slutsky  presents  two  theses:

(a)  that  cyclic  .  .  .  processes  may  originate  owing  to  a  sum-
mation of  mutually  independent  chance  causes,  and  (b)  that
these  chance  waves  may  show  a  certain  regularity,  being  an
imitation  in  lesser  or  greater  degree,  of  strictly  periodical
fluctuations.

The  first  thesis,  which  is  supported  by  a  most  interesting  analysis
of  a  random  series  from  numbers  drawn  in  a  lottery,  has  a  bearing
upon  my  inference  from  the  distribution  of  cycle  durations  (see
above  pp.  419,  420).  But  Mr.  Slutsky  thinks  that  I  am  not  justified
in  treating  the  variability  of  cycle  durations

as  a  reason  for  denying  the  regular  periodicity  of  cycles  .  .  .
for  a  similar  result  could  be  obtained  also  for  many  curves
composed  from  regular  sine  curves.


1


ADDENDA  479

The  preliminary  annals  for  1926,  prepared  by  Dr.  Willard  L.
Thorp  and  published  in  the  National  Bureau's  News-Bulletin  for
May  20,  1927,  indicate  that  recessions  occurred  last  year  in  France,
Italy,  and  Argentina.  These  reports  add  three  new  observations
upon  the  duration  of  business  cycles  to  the  collection  analyzed  in
Chapter  IV.  All  three  of  the  cycles  just  terminated  lasted  about
6  years.


INDEX


Adams,  A.  B.,  41,  42n,  51,  90n,  255n,  464,
465n.

Addenda,  475-478.

Advertising,  as  means  of  controlling  de-
mand, 155,  165

Aftalion,  Albert,  7n,  29n,  52,  55,  90n,
361n..  379n.,  380,  385n.,  453n.

Aggregative  Indexes  of  Trade,  316,  317

Agriculture
Business-cycle,  hazard  in,  87-89
Capitalization  of,  97
Relative  importance  in  different  coun-
tries, 175-177
Savings  in,  153

Altschul,  Eugen,  196n.

American  Bureau  of  Metal  Statistics,
95,  96n.

American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Com-
pany's Index  of  "General  Business,"
284,  287,  288,  294-296,  321,  328,  329-
348,  366,  368,  369.

Amplitudes  of  Cyclical  Fluctuations,  45,
46,  87-89,  95,  100,  123,  124,  141-146,  150,
153,  174,  261,  270-280,  343-354,  457,  463.

Andrew,  S.  L.,  367n.

Angell,  J.  W.,  139n.

Annals  of  Business,  82,  358-360,  361-450,
455-459.

Analytic  description,  2,  54,  55.

Argentina,  176,  177,  362,  380,  392,  394,  398,
410,  414n,  429,  437,  Addenda.

Arkwright,  Richard,  159.

Arndt,  E.  H.  D.,  361n

"Arts  of  Production,"  92-94.

Artman,  C.  E.,  109n

Australia,  99n,  176,  177,  179,  362,  380,  392,
393,  394,  398,  410,  412,  414n,  429-437.

Austria,  176,  202,  362,  391,  392,  393,  398,
410,  412,  414n,  427-437,  438-445.

Automobile  Production,  235.

Axe,  E.  W,  278,  302n,  303.

Axe  and  Flinn's  Business  Index  for  Ger-
many, 302,  303.

Babbagb,  Charles,  236n.
Bacon,  N.  T.,  194n.
Baines,  Sir  Athelstane,  195n.
Bank  Clearings,  210,  211,  247,  264,  279,  280,
304-306,  313,  314,  327,  329-348,  385.


Bank  Currency,  117-139.

Bank Reserves, 31-34, 133-135, 247, 288.

Banking and Business  Cycles, 31-34,  51,

52, 102, 133-135,  280,  288.
Bankruptcies,  247,  258.
Bean,  L.  M.,  64n.
Belgium,  5,  396.
Bellerby,  J.  R.,  44n,  53.
Bergmann,  Eugen  von,  7  n.,  452n.
Berridge,  W.  A.,  277,  302.
Bbveridge,  Sir  William,  13n.,  14,  15n.,  51,

206n.,  259n,  260n.,  291n.,  292.
Beveridge's  Chart  of  "The  Pulse  of  the

Nation,"  293,  294.
BiLGR-AM,  Hugo,  47n.
Birth  Rates  and  Business  Cycles,  20,  50.
Bohm-Bawerk,  Eugen  von,  450,  451n.
Bond  yields,  210,  211,  219,  222.
Bouniatian, Mentor,  3n., 29n., 52,  57n.,

81n.,  90n,  361,  379n.,  384,  385n.,  390n.,

452n 453n
BowLEY,  A.  L.,  239n.,  240n.,  242n.,  243n.,

245,  Addenda.
Bradley,  Harriett,  70n.
Brazil,  82,  176,  362,  392,  394,  398,  410,  414n.,

429-437,  442-445.
Brewster,  Sir  David,  4,  5.
Brumbaugh,  M.  A.,  Addenda.
Buckle,  H.  T.,  193.
Building  Permits,  218,  247,  258,  279.
Bureau  of  Internal  Revenue  (Tax  Divi-
sion), 141,  142,  145.
Bureau of Laror Statistics, 94n., 146,

147n.,  207n.,  282,  286,  293n.,  315,  317,

324n.
Burgess, W. R., 123n., 124n., 126, 275,

307.
Business  Annals,  82,  358-360;  361-450,  455-

459.
Business  Cycles,  Concept  of,  455-469.
Business  Cycles,  Definition  of,  468,  469.
Business Cycles, Development of, 75-82,

182,  395,  396,  412-416,  418,  420n.,  440-

450,  458.
Business  Cycles,  Early  Recognition  of,  10,

11,  452.
Business Cycles and Economic Theory,

3,  4,  451,  452.
Business-cycle  Hazard,  87-89,  157,  173.


481


482


INDEX


Business-cycle  Theories,  Summaries  of,  11,

12,  459-461.
Business Economy, 63-74, 116, 154-157,

171-173,  174-180,  182,  185,  396,  412-416,

418,  420n.,  446-450,  458.
Business Enterprises, 71, 72, 86-90, 100-

105,  111,  112,  149-151.
Business  Failures,  247,  258.
Business Forecasting, 201, 251,  252, 324-

326,  466,  467.
Business  Indexes,  200,  202,  284,  287,  288,

290-354,  365-375.
Business Management, 157-159, 169-173,

185.
Business  Reporting,  363,  455,  456.
Business  Statistics,  155,  160.

Calendar  and  Seasonal  Variations,  237.
Canada,  176,  362,  392,  394,  398,  410,  414n.,

429-437,  442-445,  448n.
Capitalism  and  Business  Cycles,  8,  9,  24,

55-57,  61,  62, 169-173. (See  Business

Economy).
Capitalization and Business Cycles, 43,

44,  51.
Cassel, Gustav, 44n., 48n., 53,  90n.,  93,

115n., 154n.,  384,  385n.,  386
Catchings,  Waddill,  37,  39,  40n.,  51,  90,

117n.
Causal  Theories  of  Business  Cycles,  1,  2,

49n.,  54-57,  460,  461,  470,  471.
Causation and Correlation, 267-269, 285-

289.
Cement  Production,  234,  246.
Chalmers,  George,  191.
Changuig Seasonal Variations, 241, 243-

245,  248,  252.
Charts  of  Time  Series,  Development  of,

191.
Checks, as Means of  Payment, 117-128,

149,  184.
China,  66,  82,  176,  177,  178,  362,  380,  392,

394, 396, 398, 410, 412, 414n., 420n.,

429-437,  442-445,  447,  449.
Cigar  consumption,  234.
Cigarette  Production,  246.
Circulating  Medium,  117-139.
Circulation,  Velocity  of,  122-128.
Clare,  George,  199.
Clark,  Hyde,  10.
Clark, J. M., 44, 45n., 48n., 53, 90n.,

170.
Clearings,  210,  211,  247,  264,  279,  280,  304-

306,  313,  314,  327,  329-348,  385.
Clements,  F.  E.,  377.
Climatic  Seasonal  Variations,  236-239.
Classification  of  Business-Cycle  Theories,

11,  12,  49-53,  459-461.
Coal  Production,  227,  246.


Coefficient of Correlation, 262-270, 282,

283,  284,  326.
Coefficient of Variation, 79, 339n., 351,

353,  407.
Coin  and  Paper  Money,  117-128,  149.
Coinage,  Invention  of,  66.
"Commercial  Crises,"  1-11,  451-455.
Commercial Relations among Business

Enterprises, 102.
Commitments and Business Cycles, 28,

52.
Commons,  J.  R.,  71,  232n.,  238n.
Commutation,  69.

Competition  and  Business  Cycles,  17n.,  52.
Competition  and  Prices,  114.
Complexity  of  Business  Cycles,  1-3,  47-49,

58,  59,  180,  181,  204,  205,  291,  309-311,

455-462.
Construction Work  and  Business  Cycles,

26-28,  52,  90,  100.
Consumers'  Demand  and  Business  Cycles,

6,  8,  24,  25,  30,  35-42,  45,  51,  52,  139,

150,  151,  155,  163-167,  185.
Consumers'  Goods,  108,  109,  164,  165.
Consumers'  Goods,  Stock  of,  94,  95.
Continuity of  Business  Cycles,  457,  45^,

463-465.
Conventional  Seasons,  236-239.
Co-operation in the Business Economy,

171,  172.
Copper,  95,  96,  210,  211.
Correlation,  Theory  of,  197,  262-270.
Cost  of  Business  Cycles,  353,  354.
Cotton  Statistics,  246.

COURNOT,  AUGUSTIN, 194.

Credit  and  Business  Cycles,  9,  32-34,  51,

52.
Credit  men,  162.
Crests  and  Troughs  of  American  Cycles,

334-337,  343-354.
Crises, Relation  to Business  Cycles,  75-

82 378-381
"Crises"  and  "Recessions,"  378-381.
Crises  in  Periods  of  Depression,  78,  380.
Crisis  Years,  384,  387,  390-392,  438,  439.
Crum, W. L., 213n., 214n., 240n., 244n.,

245n,.  259n.,  293n.,  326n.,  385n.
"Cycles,"  Scientific  Meaning  of,  377,  378,

466,  467.
Cyclical  Fluctuations  in  Time  Series,  123-

125,  199,  255-261,  290-354,  Addenda.

Dates  of  American  Cycles,  334-337,  387.

Dates  of  Crises,  384,  387,  390-392,  438,  439.

Davenport,  H.  J.,  115n.

Davies,  G.  R.,  419n.

Day,  E.  E.,  213n.,  249n.,  318n.

Death  rates  and  Business  Cycles,  20,  50.

Declining Industries, 225.


I


INDEX


483


I>wduction and Statistical Method, 192,

193.
Definition  of  Business  Cycles,  468,  469.
Dennison,  H.  S.,  51,  95.
Department  of  Commerce,  83n.,  200n.
Deposit  Currency,  117-139.
Depressions
Amplitude  of,  343-354,  457.
Duration  of,  337-343,  407-412,  420,  421,

457.
Interpretation  of,  381,  382,  456.
DiBBLEE,  G.  B.,  166n.
Distinctive  Character  of  Each  Cycle,  354-

357.
Distributed  lags,  266,  267,  285-287.
Dividends,  Income  from,  142-146,  247,  258.
"Domestic  Recessions,"  443.
DoREN,  Alfred,  80n.
Douglas,  C.  H.,  41n.
Draper,  E.  G.,  238n.
Duration  of  Business  Cycles,  79,  339-343,

384-424,  453,  457,  Addenda.


Early  Crises,  75-82.

Early  Theories  of  Business  Cycles,  4-11.

Easter  and  Seasonal  Variations,  237,  239,
245.

Economic  Cost  of  Business  Cycles,  353,
354.

Economic  Equilibrium  and  Business  Cy-
cles, 9,  186-188,  462.

Economic  Organization  and  Business  Cy-
cles, 5,  6,  8,  16,  17,  22-25,  42-46,  51,
52,  55-57,  61-188,  363,  364,  412-416,
418,  420n.,  446-450,  458.

Economic  Resources,  90-100.

Economic  Theory  and  Business  Cycles,
3,  4,  451,  452.

Economic  Welfare,  65,  66.

Eden,  Sir  F.  M.,  191.

Edgeworth,  F.  Y.,  10,  195n.,  196n.,  197n.,
204n.,  250,  262.

Edwards,  Alba  M.,  84n.,  85n.

Education,  Expenditure  upon,  92-94.

Ehrenberg,  Richard,  80n.

Elasticity  of  Circulating  Medium,  119-
122.

Emotional  Factor  in  Business  Cycles,  9,
17-20,  44,  50.

Employees,  87-89,  141-146,  153.

Employment,  87-89,  198,  210-212,  238,  239,
240n.,  241,  385.

Employment,  Statistics  of,  198,  210,  211,
238,  239,  240n.

Engineering  Professions,  Development  of,
159-162.

Engineers  and  Industrial  Management,
159-162,  185.

England,  Minnie  T.,  22,  50,  93.


England
Agriculture,  176.

Business  annals,  4,  5,  362,  363,  371-374,
376,  379,  380,  385,  390,  393,  398,  402,
409-415, 421,  425-437,  438-445.
Business  reporting,  201,  202.
Crises  of  16th-18  Centuries,  3-5,  10,  12,

13,  75-81.
Crises  of  19th  and  20th  Centuries,  388-

390.
Employment statistics, 210, 211, 238,

239,  240n.,  241,  291,  292.
Enterprise  and  thrift,  177.
Evolution of  business  economy,  68-73,

185.
Government  regulation  of  business,  179.
Index  of  business  cycles,  299,  301,  371-

374.
Wealth  and  income,  99n.
Wholesale  prices,  210,  211,  219,  222.
Enstrom,  Axel  F.,  Addenda.
Enterprisers,  89,  90,  153,  157-159,  183.
Equation  of  Exchange,  128-139.
Equilibrium  and  Business  Cycles,  9,  186-

188,  462.
Expenditures,  Family, 146-149, 163-167.


"Fact"  and  "Theory,"  59n.,  357-360,  469,
470.

Faulkner,  Roland  P.,  195,  196n.

Family  budgets,  94,  147.

Family  expenditures,  94, 147,  163-167.

Farmers,  87-89,  97, 153, 175-177.

Faulkner,  Helen  D.,  242n.

Fedder,  J.  (J.  VAN  Gelderen),  227n.,  228.

Federal  Reserve  Bank  of  New  York,
123,  124,  307.

Federal  Reserve System, 136n., 178, 179.

Federal  Trade  Commission,  91n.,  92n.,
97n.,  98n.,  99n.,  148n.,  150n.

Feldman,  H.,  238n.

Fetter,  Frank  A.,  90n.

Field,  J.  A.,  209n.

Financial  Relations  among  Business  En-
terprises, 101-103.

Fisher,  Irving,  22,  35n.,  117n.,  118n.,  123n.,
126n.,  127,  128,  129n.,  130,  134,  138,
209n.,  266n.,  267n.,  268n.,  286n.,  287n.,
316n.,  465n.,  466n.,  467.

Fleetwood,  Bishop,  191.

Flinn,  Harold  M.,  244n.,  278,  302n.,  303.

Flux,  A.  W.,  202,  Addenda.

Fobrster,  R.  F.,  361n.

Forecasting  of  Business  Conditions,  201,
251,  252,  324-326,  466.  467.

Forecasting  Sequences,  324-326.

"Forty-month  Cycle,"  343,  385.

Foster,  W.  T.,  37,  39,  40n.,  51,  90,  117n.

Fourier,  Joseph,  191.


484


INDEX


France,  14,  80,  99n,  176,  177,  178,  179,  185,
202,  227,  228,  362,  380,  390,  391,  393,
398,  410,  412,  414n.,  415,  426-437,  438-
44^ AoHpTirifi,

Frank/ L.  K.,  45,  46n.,  51,  56,  95,  233ii.,
272n.

Frequency  Distributions,  205n.,  332,  344,
351-353,  399-407,  418,  419.

Frickby,  Edwin,  244n,  273,  305,  306,  307,
313n.,  314,  326n.,  327,  328,  329n.,  330n.,
331,  332,  333n.,  334n,  335,  337,  338,
340,  343n.,  344,  345,  346,  347,  348.

Frickey's  "Index  of  Outside  Clearings,"
305,  306,  313,  314,  327,  329-348.

Friday,  David,  153.

Funk,  W.  C,  64.

Gainful  Workers,  83-85.

Galton,  Sir  Francis,  197n.,  262.

Gauss,  K.  F.,  193,  254n.

Gay,  E.  F.,  74n.

Gelderen,  J.  VAN,  227n.,  228,  229.

"General  Business"  Indexes,  284,  287,  288,

290,  293,  294,  320-324.
Germany,  5,  80,  99n.,  176,  177,  179,  185,  202,

227,  278,  302,  303,  362,  380,  391,  393,

398,  410,  412,  414n.,  426-437,  438-445.
Gilbert,  J.  W.,  236n.
GiNi,  Corrado,  202.
Gold,  Monetary  Stock  of,  119-121.
Gold,  Supply  of  and  Demand  for,  119-121,

135,  136,  138,  228,  410,  411.
Gompertz  Curves  and  Trends,  224-226.
Goods  in  process,  95,  96.
Government  and  Production,  167-169,  179,

180, 185.
Graphic Methods, Development of, 191,

209.
Great  Numbers,  Law  of,  194.
Grbssbns,  O.,  244n.,  245n.
Growth  Factor  in  Time  Series,  93,  195,  200,

212-236.
Guidance of Production, 154-173, 184,

185.

Hale,  R.  L.,  65n.

Hall,  L.  W.,  214n.,  242n.

Hansen,  A.  H.,  31,  32n.,  33n.,  53,  283,  284,
288.

Harap,  Henry,  166n.

Hardy,  C.  0.,  16,  17n.,  18,  52,  156.

Harmonic  Analysis,  191,  200,  259-261  (See
Periodogram Analysis).

Hart,  W.  L.,  242n.

Harvard  Committee  on  Economic  Rej-
search,  200,  201,  324n.,  326.  ,

Hastings,  Hudson  B.,  37,  40n.,  51.

Hawtrey,  R.  G.,  33,  34n.,  53,  139n.,  Ad-
denda.

Hayek,  F.  A.  von,  202,  361n.


Hayes,  H.  G.,  164n.

Health  and  Business  Cycles,  15,  50.

Hbrschel,  Sir  William,  12.

Hexter,  M.  B.,  19,  20n.,  50,  236n.

Hildebrand^  Bruno,  63n.

History  and  Business  Cycles,  55-57,  232,

354-360, 361, 412-416, 420n., 446-450.

(See  Business  Annals),
HoBSON,  J.  A.,  24,  25n.,  52,  90,  151.
Hooker,  R.  H.,  200n.
Hookstadt,  Carl,  90n.
Hoover,  Herbert,  94n.
Housewives,  64,  83-85,  165,  166.
Hull,  C.  H.,  190n.
Hull,  G.  H.,  27,  28n.,  29,  52,  90,  385n.
Huntington,  Ellsworth,  15n.,  20,  50.
HuRLiN,  R.  G.,  85n.

Ignatieff,  M.  B.,  361n.
Illusion  and  Business  Cycles,  46,  47,  51.
Imports  of  Merchandise,  227,  235,  247.
Improvements  upon  Land,  97.
Incomes
Aggregate  of  prices,  116.
Expenditure  of,  146-149.
Received  in  money,  140,  141,
Incomes  and  Business  Cycles,  35-42,  51.
Individualism in  the  Business  Economy,

170.
Industrial  Equipment  and  Business  Cycles,

8,  27,  29-31,  44,  51,  52,  90,  96,  97,  182.
Industrial  Relations  among  Business  En-
terprises, 101.
Industrial  Technique,  92-94,  159-162.
Industry  and  Business,  105-107,
Index  Numbers  of  Prices,  191,  193n.,  195,

196, 204,  206-208,  210,  211,  218,  220,

222,  235,  266,  267,  279.
Indexes  of  Business  Conditions,  200,  202,

284,  287,  288,  290-354,  365-375.
India,  66,  82,  176,  177,  362,  392,  394,  398,

410,  414n.,  429-437,  442-  445,
Ingalls,  W,  R.,  91n.,  92n.,  96n,,  153,  154n,
Ingraham,  Olin,  214n.,  216n.
Inter-crisis  Cycles,  78,  79,  229,  384-390,  416,

417,  453,  461,  462,  468,  469.
Interdependence of  Business  Enterprises,

100-105.
International Aspect  of  Business  Cycles,

438-450,  456.
International  Differences  in  Economic  Or-
ganization, 174-180.
Interrelations  among  Prices,  113-115.
Induction  in  Economic  Theory,  192,  193.
"Industrialization" and Business Cycles,

412-416,  418,  420n.
Inflation Theory of Business Cycles, 9,

44,  52,  53.
Innovations and Business Cycles, 20-22,

51,  156.


INDEX


485


Investing  and  Business  Cycles,  23-25,  52.

Investors,  162,  163,  185.

Interest  Rates  and  Business  Cycles,  31-34,

35n, 44, 52, 210, 211, 219, 241, 247,

248,  265,  279.
Irregular Fluctuations, 212, 249-255, 257,

463,  473.
Iron  Production,  210,  211,  217,  222,  227,

235,  248.
Isolation  Methods,  212,  255-261,  473.
Italy,  68,  80,  176,  202,  362,  380,  392,  394,

398,  410,  412,  414n.,  417,  429-437,  442-

445,  Addenda.

Japan, 75n.,  176, 177, 185,  362,  380,  392,

394,  398,  410,  414n.,  429-427,  438,  442-

445.
Jerome,  Harry,  303n.,  359.
Jerome's "Industrial Composites,"  303.
Jevons,  Herbert  Stanley,  13,  50,  90n.
Jevons,  W.  Stanley,  9, 10, 12, 13n.,  53,

81n.,  194,  195n.,  199,  209n.,  236n.,  310,

384n.,  417n.
Johannsen,  N.,  25n.
Joint-stock Companies, 72, 102-104, 157,

158.
Jones,  E.  D.,  7n.
JuGLAB,  Clement,  10,  11,  452n.,  453,  454.

Karsten,  Karl  G.,  265,  266n.,  267n.,  270n.,

289n.,  290n.
Kelley,  T.  L.,  268n.,  316n.,  317n.
Kemmbrer,  E.  W.,  123n.
King,  W.  I.,  64,  88n.,  89,  90n.,  92n.,  94n.,

97, 140, 141n., 147, 152, 153n., 154,

168n.,  214n.,  244n.,  245n.,  256n.,  286n.,

359
Kinley',  David,  117,  118n.,  123,  127,  150n.
Kitchin,  Joseph,  380n.,  385n.,  417n.
Knight,  F.  H.,  156n.
Knowledge  and  Income,  92-94.
KoNDRATiEFF,  N.  D.,  201,  227n.,  228,  229,

230,  361n.,  Addenda.
KoREN,  John,  195n.,  199n.
KuczYNSKi,  R.  R.,  361n.
KuzNETS, S.  S.,  46n.,  48n.,  51,  95  200n.,

213n., 221, 225, 226,  229, 235n., 276,

359,  Addenda.
Kirk,  Hazel,  166n.

"Lacking"  and  Business  Cycles,  25n.,  26n.

"Lags,"  264-269,  280-289,  324-326,  336,  337.

Land,  Value  of,  97,  99n.

Langton,  William,  10.

Laplace,  P.  S.,  191,  192,  193,  194,  197,  254n.

Lavington,  F.,  44n.,  53,  384,  385n.,  464n.

Least-squares  Method,  193.

Lbderer,  Emil,  36,  37n.,  51.

Leichter,  Otto,  9n.

Lenders,  162,  163,  185.


Length of Business  Cycles, 79, 339-343,

384-424,  453,  457.
Lescohier,  D.  238n.
Lescure, Jean, 7n., 42n., 44n., 51, 57n.,

361,  379n.,  380,  453n.
Leven,  Maurice,  90n.,  168n.
Levy,  L.  E.,  47n.
Lewisohn,  Sam  A.,  238n.
Lexis,  Wilhelm,  196n.
Lightner,  O.  C,  385n.
"Link-relative"  Method,  240.
Live-stock,  97,  99n.,  246.
Logarithmic  Scale  in  Charts,  209.
Logistic  Curves  as  Trends,  225,  226.
"Long  Waves,"  226-230,  468,  469,  Addenda.
Losses caused by Business Cycles, 353,

354.
Lowe,  Adolf,  7n.,  59n.,  452n.
LoYD,  S.  J.,  (Lord  Overstone),  10,  lln.

Macaulay,  F.  R.,  242,  246,  359.

Making  Money  and  Business  Cycles,  42-
47,  51,  105-107,  142-146,  162,  172,  173.

Major  Cycles, See  "Long  Waves."

Malthus,  T.  R.,  8n.,  166n.,  191.

Mann,  L.  B.,  147,  148n.

Manorial  Economy,  67,  69.

Mansfield,  Chief  Justice,  71.

Manufacturing
Business-cycle  hazard,  87,  89.
Capitalization compared with agricul-
ture, 97.

Marshall,  Alfred,  3,  4n.

Marshall,  John,  191.

Marx,  Karl,  8,  9n.,  232.

Martin,  P.  W.,  40,  41n.,  51,  139.

May,  R.  E.,  35,  36n.,  51.

McCracken,  H.  L.,  232n.

McCulloch,  J.  R.,  193n.

Merchandise  Inventories,  95,  96.

Merriam,  John  C,  377.

Meteorological  Theory  of  Business  Cycles,
9, 12-16,  50,  Addenda.

Method,  Problems  of,  1-3,  47-49,  53-59,
59n.,  61,  62,  66,  106,  107,  129n.,  138,
139,  180,  181,  186-188,  192,  193,  205,
229,  230-233,  357-360,  395-397,  451,  452,
454,  455,  460-463,  469-474.

Mill,  John  Stuart,  3,  4n.,  8n.,  106n.,  192n.

Miller,  H.  E.,  7n.,  lln.

Mills,  F.  C,  108n.,  189n.,  213n.,  263n.,
284,  285,  288n.,  324n.,  359,  362n.,  413,
414,  415, 416,  418,  420n.

Mills'  Hypothesis  concerning  Duration  of
Business  Cycles,  412-416,  418.

Mills,  John,  9,  11,  378n.,  384.

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  46,  51,  95,  157,  272.

Mombert,  Paul,  48n.

Monetary  Mechanism,  117-139.

Monetary  Stock,  U.  S.,  98.


486


INDEX


Money,  Definitions  of,  117.

Money  and  Business  Cycles,  33,  34,  38,  40,

41,  51,  52,  128,  133-139,  182.

Money  Economy  and  Business  Cycles,  31,

44,  51,  61-63,  66-74,  182,  185.
Money  Economy,  Evolution  of,  66-74,  171.
Money  Incomes  and  Business  Cycles,  35-

42,  51,  64-66,  140-151,  146-149.
Month-to-month  Changes  in  Business  In-
dexes,  330-333.

"Monthly-means"  Method,  242.
MooRE,  Henry  L.,  13, 14n.,  50,  189,  200,
259n.,  385n.

MORGBNSTERN, OSKAR,  420n.

Multiple-cycle  Hypothesis,  417.

National  Bureau  of  Economic  Research,
64n.,  75,  87,  89n.,  92,  97n.,  108n.,  140,
141n.,  142,  147n.,  148n.,  153n.,  168n.,
199n.,  210n.,  238n.,  302,  303n.,  358,
359,  361,  362n.,  365,  371,  374,  413,  472.

National  Income,  64,  65,  92,  140,  141.

National  Industrial  Conference  Board,
160, 161n.

National  Monetary  Commission,  117,
118n.,  123.

National  Wealth,  90,  91.

Netherlands,  80,  81,  176,  362,  380,  392,
394,  398,  410,  412,  414n.,  429-437,  442-
445.

Newcomer,  Mabel,  93n.

Newton,  Sir  Isaac,  190.

Neymarch, a., 178n.

"Normal,"  Uses  of  the  Term,  129n.,  254n.,
376.

"Normal"  State  of  Trade,  376.

Norton,  J.  P., 200,  262.

Nystrom,  p.  H., 147,  148n.

Occupations  of  the  American  Population,
82-85,  88,  89,  161n.

Ogburn,  W.  F.,  303n.

Ogburn  and  Thomas'  Annual  Index  of
Business,  303.

Organic  and  Inorganic  Industries,  15,  16,
50,  Addenda.

"Outside"  Clearings,  264,  280,  305,  306,
313,  314,  327,  329-348.

Overproduction  Theory  of  Business  Cy-
cles, 7,  8,  29-31,  38,  52,  139.

Over-saving  and  Business  Cycles,  6,  24,  25,
52,  90.

Overstone,  Lord,  10,  lln.

Owen,  Robert,  8,  159.

Paper  Money,  117,  121,  184.
Patterson,  E.  M.,  49n.
Patton,  a.  C,  213n.

Parallelism  of  Cycles  in  Different  Coun-
tries, 438-450,  456.


Payments

Among  business  enterprises,  149-151,
Estimated  total  volume  in  U.  S.,  149.
How  made,  117-128,  184.
Timing  of  sales  and  payments,  131,  132.
Volume of payments and production,
140.

(See  Bank  Clearings,  Indexes  of  Busi-
ness Conditions,  Pecuniary  Volume  of
Business) .

Pearson,  Karl,  197,  254n.,  262.

Peculiarities  of  Successive  Cycles,  354-357.

Pecuniary  Volume  of  Business,  312-314,
327.

"Period  of  Gestation,"  30.

Periodicity,  Scientific  Use  of  the  Term,
377,  378,  466,  467.

Periodicity  of  Commercial  Crises,  10,  11,
13-15,  384,  416,  417,  453,  454,  466,  467.

Periodogram Analysis, 251, 259-261, 385.

Personal  Effects,  Wealth  in,  94.

Persons,  W.  M.,  49n.,  58n.,  197n.,  200,  201,
213n.,  240n.,  242n.,  243,  247,  252n.,
253n.,  254n.,  263n.,  264n.,  266,  273,
274,  277,  282,  284,  288n.,  293n.,  294n.,
297,  299n.,  300,  302n.,  315,  321,  324n.,
325,  326n.,  327,  329n.,  330n.,  331,  332,
333n.,  334n.,  335,  337,  338,  340,  341,
343n.,  345,  346,  347,  348,  361,  366,  378n.

Persons'  "Index  of  General  Business,"  293,
294, 324-326.

Persons'  "Index  of  Trade,"  297,  300,  315,
327,  329-348,  366.

Pervushin,  S.  a.,  255n.

Petty,  Sir  William,  190.

Phases  of  Business  Cycles,  58,  78-80,  378.
(See  Crises,  Depression,  Prosperity,
Revival).

Pig-iron  Production,  210,  211,  217,  222,
227 235 248

PiGOU,  A.  C.,  17,*  18,  19n.,  20,  30n.,  31n.,
44n.,  50,  157,  385n.,  Addenda.

Playfair,  William,  191,  209n.

PoHLE,  LuDwiG,  47n.,  453n.

Poisson,  S.  D.,  193.

"Political  Arithmetic"  190,  191.

PoLLAK  Foundation  for  Economic  Re-
search, 37,  40n.,  139.

Port  of  New  York  Authority,  109n.

POYNTING, J. H., 200n.

Prescott,  R.  B.,  224.

Price,  Richard,  190.

Price  fluctuations  and  Business  Cycles,
29,  30,  32-34,  36-42,  107.

Price  Indexes,  191,  193n.,  195,  196,  204,
206-208,  210,  211,  218-220,  222,  235,
266, 267, 279.

Price  Trends  and  Business  Cycles,  135,
136,  138,  228,  230,  233,  263,  264,  407-
412.


INDEX


487


Prices,  System  of,  108-115.

Prices  and  the  "Quantity  of  Money,"  128-
139

Probabilities,  Theory  of,  191,  192,  195,  196,
250,  251,  419,  420.

Producers'  Goods,  110,  111.  (See  Indus-
trial Equipment.)

Production,  Indexes  of,  315-320,  Addenda.

Profits  and  Business  Cycles,  41-47,  51,  105-
107,  142-146,  162,  172,  173,  182,  183,
471.

Progress  and  Business  Cycles,  22,  23,  50,
93.

"Progressive  Link-relative"  Method,  244,
245,  248.

Prolongation  of  Depressions,  411,  412,  421.

Promotion  and  Business  Cycles,  22,  50,
159.

Property,  Income from, 142-146.

Prosperity
Amplitude of, 343-354, 457.
Duration  of,  337-343,  407-412,  420,  421,

457.
Interpretation  of,  381,  382,  456.

"Psychological  Theory"  of  Business  Cy-
cles, 9,  17-20,  50,  Addenda.

Publicity  and  Statistics,  198,  199.

Purchasing  Power  and  Business  Cycles,
31,  32,  35-42,  51,  90,  139,  140.

Quantitative  Analysis,  10,  53,  54,  189-360.

(See  Statistical  Method  and  Business

Cycles).
Quantity  Theory  of  Money,  128-139.
QuETELET,  Adolphe,  193,  195.

Raguet,  Condy,  11.

Railway  Statistics,  210,  211,  218-220,  222,

234,  247,  265.
Random  Fluctuations,  212,  249-255,  258.
Ratio  Charts,  209.
^ "Ratio-to-ordinate"  Method,  242,
Real Income, 64-66.
Recessions,  378-371.
Relationships, Measures  of,  261-270,  473,

474.
Rents,  Income  from, 142-146.
Resources,  90-100.
Retail trade, 45, 46, 71, 74, 87-89, 108,

109,  147-149,  198,  234,  279.
RicARDO,  David,  3,  4n.,  157,  167,  189,  193n.
RiETz,  H.  L.,  240n.,  263n.
Robertson,  D. H.,  26n.,  27n.,  30n.,  31n.,

48n.,  53,  90n.
rodbertus,  k.  j.,  8.
Rogers,  Thorold,  384.
RopKE,  WiLHBLM,  35n.,  47n.
RoRTY, M. C,  28,  29n.,  52,  261n.,  295n.,

367n.


ROSCHBR, WiLHELM, 9.

Russia,  82,  176,  177,  201,  362,  392,  394,  398,
410,  414n.,  429-437,  439,  442-445,  449.

Salaries, 142-146.

Sanford,  H.  W.,  48n.

Sauerbeck,  Augustus,  195,  196n.,  219,  302.

Savings and Business Cycles, 23-25, 52,

90,  151-154,  184,  Addenda.
Scale  of  Operations,  86-90,  172.
Schaffle,  a.  E.  F.,  8.
Schmidt,  F.,  Addenda.
School  Attendance,  83-85,  93,  94.

SCHUCKBURG-EVELYN, SiR GeORGB, 191.

Schumpeter,  Joseph,  20,  21,  22n.,  93,  156.

SCHWABE, HeINRICH, 12.

Science  and  Wealth,  92-94.

Scott,  W.  R.,  75,  76,  77,  78n.,  79n.,  80n.,

81n.,  82.
Seasonal Variations, 123, 124, 195, 199,

212,  234-249,  463,  468,  469.
"Secondary Trends," 226-230, 463, 468,

469,  Addenda.
Secular  Changes  in  Duration  of  Business

Cycles,  412-416,  418,  420n.,  458.
Secular  Trends,  93,  195,  200,  212-236,  252,

410-412,  463,  468n.,  469.
Securities,  Prices  of.  111,  112.
Services,  Income  from,  142-146.
SiLBERLiNG,  N.  J.,  276,  277,  302.
Sim  MEL, (jEorg, 75n.
SiSMONDI,  J.  C.  L.  SiMONDE  DE,  4,  5,  6,  7n.,

8n.,  16,  53,  155,  157,-166n.,  189.
Size  of  Enterprises,  86-90,  172.
Slutsky,  E.  E., Addenda.
Smith,  Adam,  3,  4n.,  72,  168,  190.
Smith,  K.  C,  239n.,  240n.,  242n.,  243n.,  245.
Snyder,  Carl,  124,  125n.,  127,  149n.,  279n,

286, 296, 297n., 298, 304, 305n., 306,

307,  308,  309,  310,  311,  315,  319,  327,

328,  329n.,  330n.,  331,  332,  333n.,  334n.,

335,  337,  338,  339,  340,  343n.,  344,  345,

346,  347,  348,  352,  355,  366,  367n.,  368,

369,  Addenda.
Snyder's "Clearings Index of Business,"

304-306,  319,  327,  329-348,  366,  368,  369.
Snyder's "Index of Deposits Activity,"

307,  308,  328,  329-348.
Snyder's "Index of Volume of Trade,"

295,  296,  298,  309-311,  315,  319.
Soetbeier,  Adolf,  195,  196n.
Sombart,  Werner,  15,  16n.,  50,  86n.,  Ad-
denda.
South  Africa,  82,  176,  362,  380,  392,  394,

398,  410,  412,  414n.,  429-437,  438,  442-

445.
Speculation  and  Business  Cycles,  8,  17.
Spending  Money,  94,  147,  163-167.
Spietthoff,  Arthur,  27n.,  29,  48n.,  52,  90n.,

151,


488


INDEX


Spurious  Correlation,  263,  264.
Stamp,  Sir  Josiah,  99n.,  Addenda.
Standard Deviation, 271-280, 318, 324n.,

339n.,  351,  353,  402-405.
Standardization  and  Production, 155.
Standardization and  Statistics, 198, 199.
Statistical  Data,  Growth  of,  54,  190,  191,

197-199,  203-205.
Statistical Method and Business  Cycles,

10,  53,  54,  189-360,  364,  453,  454,  463,

464.
Stine,  0.  C,  64n.
Stock-Exchange  Statistics,  218,  279.
Stone,  N.  I.,  238n.
Stucken,  Rudolf,  25n.,  26n.
Sugar  Meltings,  246.
Sun-spot  Theory  of  Business  Cycles,  12,

13,  50,  384,  Addenda.
Sweden,  154n.,  176,  362,  392,  394,  398,  410,

412,  414n.,  429-437,  442-445.
Switzerland,  5, 176,  396.
Synchronism  of  Cycles  in  Different  Coun-
tries, 438-450.


Takizawa,  Matsuyo,  75n.,  Addenda.
Technical  Experts,  159-162,  185.
Theories of Business Cycles, 3-53,

189.
Theories of Business Cycles, Summaries

of,  11,  12,  49-53,  459-461.
"Theory"  and  "Fact,"  59n.,  357-360,  469,

470.
Thomas,  Dorothy  S.,  277,  278,  299,  301,

302n., 303, 321, 371n., 372, 373, 374,

454n.
Thomas'  Index  of  "British  Business  Cy-
cles," 299, 301, 321,  371-374.
Thorp,  W.  L.,  5n.,  75,  77,  78,  79,  81,  82,

103n.,  176n.,  359,  361,  362n.,  364,  365,

370,  371,  374,  391,  407,  408n.,  411,  414,

420n.,  424,  440n.,  448,  Addenda.
Time  Sequence of  Cyclical  Fluctuations,

264-269,  280-289,  324-326.
Time  Series,  Analysis  of,  199-354.
TooKE,  Thomas,  191.
Trade  Associations  and  Statistics,  155.
"Trade  Cycles" (See  Business  Cycles).
Trade,  Volume  of, 128-139,  266,  267,  286,

287,  295-300,  312-320,  327,  329-348.
Transformations  of  Time  Series,  265-269,

473, 474.
Troughs  and  Crests  of  American  Cycles,

334-337,  343-354.
TscHUPROW,  A.  A.,  263n.
Tugan-Baranovski,  Michel,  10,  23,  24n.,

26,  29,  52,  53,  55,  57n.,  90,  151,  361,

379n., 384,  385n.
TuGWELL,  R.  G.,  65n.,  170n.
Tuttle,  p.  M.,  273.


Unemployment, 87-89, 198, 210-212, 238,

239,  240n.,  241,  385.
Uncertainty  and  Business  Cycles,  5,  6,  16,

17,  52,  87-89,  156,  157.
"Under-consumption  Theory"  of  Business

Cycles,  6,  7,  8,  51,  52.
"Under-saving"  and  Business  Cycles,  23,

24,  52.
United States
Amplitudes  of  business  cycles,  343-353.
Business annals, 362-370, 386-389, 393,

398, 399, 402, 409-411, 414, 415,  418,

422-424,  425-437,  438,  441-446.
Business  forecasting,  200,  201.
Business  indexes,  293-308,  326-354.
Character of business cycles of 1878-

1924, 354-357.
Crises  and  recessions,  334,  355,  354-357,

387.
Development of statistical data, 197,

198.
Duration  of  bsuiness  cycles,  337-344,  383-

424.
Estimated  savings,  151-154.
Estimated  volume  of  payments,  149-151
Evolution  of  economic  organization,  73,

74,  363,  414,  415,  446.
Expenditures  in  retail  trade,  146-149.
Government  regulation  of  business,  168,

179.
Monetary  mechanism,  116-128.
National  income,  64,  65,  140,  141.
Occupations,  82-85, 161n., 176.
Standard  deviations  of  cyclical  fluctua-
tions, 273-276.
Taxable incomes, 141-146.
Time  sequences  of  cyclical  fluctuations,

282,  283.
Time  series,  210,  211,  216-220,  222,  223,

234,  235,  241,  246-248,  258.
Wealth  and  income,  90-100.
Wholesale  prices,  204n.,  205n.,  210,  211.

Vainstein,  a.  L.,  361n.

Variability of Business Cycles, 354-357,

382,  383,  465-467.
Veblen,  Thorstein,  42,  43,  44,  49n.,  51,

90n., lOln.,  255n.
Velocity of Circulation, 122-128.
Vialles,  Pierre,  47n.
ViLLARD,  Harold,  359.
VoGEL,  E.  H.,  22,  23n.,  50,  93,  378n.
Volume  of  Payments,  U.  S.,  149.
Volume  of  Trade,  128-139,  266,  267,  286,

287, 295-300, 312-320, 327, 329-348.

Wade,  John,  lOn.,  452,  454.
Wagbmann,  Ernst,  202.
Wages  and  Business  Cycles,  6,  7,  8,  9,  24,
35,  51, 141-146.


INDEX


489


Wainstein,  Albert,  Addenda,

Walker,  Amasa,  11.

Walr^\s,  Leon,  115n.

War  Industries  Board,  204ii.,  208n.

Wardwbll,  C.  a.  R.,  Addenda.

Wealth  and  Income,  90-100,  182.

Weather, Theory of Business  Cycles,  9,

12-16,  50,  Addenda,
Wheat,  210,  211,  246.
Wiedenfeld,  K.,  177n.
WiRTH,  Max,  10.
Wolff,  S.,  db,  227n.,  228n.,  229,  Addenda.


Wolman,  Leo,  89n.,  90n.,  359.
Working,  Holbrook,  214n.
World  Economy  and  Business  Cycles,  446-
450,  456.

Yields  of  Bonds,  210,  211.

Young,  A.  A.,  189n.,  216n.,  264n.,  275.

Young,  Arthur,  190.

Yule,  G,  U.,  197,  200,  262.

Zeuch,  W.  B.,  232n.


This  book  may  be  kept

FOUKTKHIN  DAYS

A  fine  of  two  cents  a  day

will  be  charged  for  each  day

the  book  is  kept  ovortime

m

Due Duo Due Due

AP3 50
HO  >  0^50 _

m

\

JAN  2  2  -S*

JAN  2  9  -57

i

MAY  1  8  '57

Mitchell,  Wes»e>| C
Business  cycles


M652b
