Business  cycles.


3  1924  003  462  680


UBRARY

AUG 9 1944


DEPT.  OF
AGRIC.  ECON.


\^\


/}  JM


^^


Cornell  University
Library


The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.

There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.


http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924003462680


MEMOIRS

OF  THE

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Volume  3


BUSINESS CYCLES

BY

WESLEY  CLAIR  MITCHELL


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  PRESS
BERKELEY

SEPTEMBER,  1913


COPYRIGHT 1913, BY  WESLEY CLAIR MITCHELL
Published  Septembek  27,  1913


^ ( ^) >t-  b ^


BUSINESS  CYCLES


MAY  25  1821


^^f-^f^i


^7:;^


BUSINESS CYCLES


BY


WESLEY  CLAIR  MITCHELL


UNIVERSITY OF CALIFORNIA PRESS

BERKELEY

1913


MS*


COPYRIGHT,  1913,

BY

WESLEY  CLAIR  MITCHELL


-a\^GQS


L.  S.  M.


PREFACE

This  book  offers  an  analytic  description  of  the  complicated  processes  by  which  seasons  of
business  prosperity,  crisis,  depression,  and  revival  come  about  in  the  modern  world.  The
materials  used  consist  chiefly  of  market  reports  and  statistics  concerning  the  business  cycles
which  have  run  their  course  since  1890  in  the  United  States,  England,  Germany,  and  Prance.

I  am  the  sorrier  for  the  bulkiness  of  the  volume  because  I  have  written  for  the  man  of
business  as  well  as  for  the  professional  economist.  Doubtless  a  skillful  expositor  might  have
presented  the  same  results  in  fewer  pages ;  but  most  of  the  bulk  is  due  to  my  conviction  that  the
quickest  way  to  attain  reliable  results  is  to  take  great  care  in  measuring  the  phenomena  exhibited
by  business  cycles.  Readers  who  look  over  the  first  chapter  will  find  that  many  diverse  theories
about  the  causes  of  crises  seem  plausible  when  considered  in  the  light  of  common  knowledge.
To  determine  which  of  these  explanations  are  really  valid,  it  is  necessary  to  find  out  the  regularity
with  which  each  alleged  stress  recurs,  the  scope  which  each  attains,  the  elements  which  enter  into
each,  and  the  consequences  with  which  each  is  associated.  To  make  progress  toward  the  solution
of  these  problems  requires  the  collection  and  analysis  of  elaborate  records  of  business  experience
in  quantitative  form.  Men  seriously  interested  in  the  workings  of  the  money  economy  will  share
my  regret  that  the  statistical  materials  are  not  more  complete,  rather  than  complain  that  too
many  tables  are  offered.  And  if  any  who  lack  time  or  patience  for  study  take  up  the  book,  the
."Suggestions  to  Readers"  will  show  them  where  to  find  the  gist  of  the  conclusions.

One  of  the  chief  difficulties  in  the  investigation  has  been  to  get  quantitative  data  for  the  four
countries  dealt  with  which  can  fairly  be  compared.  Official  documents  and  business  journals
present  many  tables  with  such  scanty  explanations  that  one  cannot  make  out  precisely  what
the  statistics  include.  I  have  ventured  rather  boldly  in  setting  such  figures  side  by  side,  and  have
doubtless  made  some  blunders  which  those  \^dth. better  opportunities  of  knowing  the  work  of
statistical  bureaus  may  point  out.  In  almost  all  cases,  however,  the  comparisons  are  made,  not
between  actual  amounts  in  different  countries,  but  between  the  relative  fluctuations  which  actual
amounts  undergo  in  the  course  of  business  cycles.  For  such  comparisons  it  is  indeed  desirable,
but  it  is  not  indispensable,  to  have  statistics  of  precisely  the  same  scope.

Pains  have  been  taken  to  put  the  data  derived  from  different  countries  and  different  branches
of  business  into  comparable  form  by  reduction  to  common  units  and  by  computing  relative  figures
upon  a  common  basis — averages  for  the  decade  1890-99.  In  order  to  facilitate  comparison  still
further  numbers  of  not  more  than  three  or  four  digits  have  been  used  in  most  of  the  tables.
Many  small  discrepancies  occur  between  totals  and  the  items  which  enter  into  them,  because  I
have  not  indulged  in  the  common  statistical  practice  of  forcing  figures  in  order  to  secure  formal
consistency  even  at  the  cost  of  accuracy.

The  quarto  format  was  chosen  in  order  that  the  charts  might  be  printed  directly  on  the  page
without  the  use  of  folding  "inserts." All  charts  showing  relative  quantities  were  originally

[yii]-


drawn  to  the  same  scale.  But  in  reproducing  the  drawings  for  publication  it  was  found  necessary
to  reduce  the  size  of  some  much  more  than  of  others.  Of  course  the  constant  relation  between  the
horizontal  units  of  time  and  the  vertical  units  of  relative  quantity  was  not  disturbed  by  this
process.  Inequalities  of  outside  measurement  matter  little,  because  the  slope  of  the  curves  is
the  important  thing,  and  the  eye  notes  similarities  or  differences  of  slope  about  equally  well  in
charts  of  the  same  and  of  different  sizes.

Several  friends  have  assisted  me  by  reading  and  criticizing  parts  of  the  manuscript — Mrs.
Warren  Gregory,  Mr.  John  Gralaam  Brooks,  Professor  Walter  Morris  Hart,  Professor  Jessica
B.  Peixotto,  and  Professor  Henry  Rand  Hatfield.  The  editors  of  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy
have  courteously  permitted  the  use  of  certain  statistical  materials  first  published  in  their  columns.
My  thanks  are  also  due  to  Mr.  J.  C.  Rowell  of  the  University  of  California  Library,  to  Dr.  C  C.
Williamson  of  the  New  York  Public  Library,  and  to  the  authorities  of  the  Royal  Statistical
Society's  Library,  London. But,  more  than  all  others,  my  wife  has  shared  in  making  this  book.

Wesley  Claik  Mitchell.
37  West  Tenth  Street,
New  York  City.


[  viii  ]


■ SUGGESTIONS TO EBADERS

Those  who  desire  to  get  quickly  the  gist  of  the  conclusions  reached  concerning  the  causes  of
business  cycles  are  advised  to  begin  with  the  last  chapter.  Points  which  they  find  obscure  in
the  summary  there  presented,  or  points  in  which  they  have  especial  interest,  may  be  looked  up
in  Chapters  X-XIII  by  aid  of  the  table  of  contents.

Economic  theorists  will  find  the  viewpoint  from  which  the  investigation  has  been  made  set
forth  in  Chapter  II,  in  the  "Framework"  of  Parts  II  and  III,  and  in  the  final  section  of
Chapter  XIV

Readers  concerned  with  recent  business  history,  maj'  find  whatever  materials  the  book  presents
for  their  purposes  by  using  the  table  of  contents  under  Chapters  III-IX,  and  XII.

Those  looking  for  statistical  materials  and  those  interested  in  statistical  methods  should  consult
the  table  of  contents  under  Part  II.

Discussions  of  monetary  and  banking  problems  occur  not  only  in  Chapters  VI  and  VII.  but
also  in  Chapters  XI,  iii ;  XII,  ii  and  v ;  XIII,  i,  2,  D,  and  XIV,  iii,  3.


[^]


PLAN OF THE BOOK

PART  I

The  Problem  and  Its  Setting

Chapter  I.  A  Preliminary  Eeview  of  Current  Theories  concerning  Business  Cycles.

Chapter  II.  The  Economic  Organization  of  Today.

Chapter  III. The  Annals  of  Business,  1890-1911.


PART  II

Statistical  Data  Concerning  the  Business  Cycles  op  1890-1911  in  the  United  States.

England,  France,  and  Germany

The  Framework  of  Part  II.

Chapter  IV.  The  Fluctuations  of  Prices  since  1890.

Chapter  V.  The  Volume  of  Business.

Chapter  VI.  The  Currency.

Chapter  VII.  The  Condition  of  the  Banks.

Chapter  VIII.  Saving,  Investment,  Enterprise,  and  Speculation.

Chapter  IX.  Profits  and  Bankruptcies.


PART  III
The  Rhythm  of  Business  Activity
The  Framework  of  Part  III.
Chapter  X.  The  Cumulation  of  Prosperity.

Chapter  XI. How  Prosperity  Breeds  a  Crisis.
Chapter  XII. Crises.
Chapter  XIII. Business  Depression.
Chapter  XIV. The  Wider  Aspects  of  Business  Cycles.


;xi]


CONTENTS

PART  I
THE  PROBLEM  AND  ITS  SETTING

PAGE

Chapter  I. A  Preliminary  Review  op  Current  Theories  Concerning  Business  Cycles.

I.  Types  of  the  Early  Theories  of  Crises 3

II.  Current  Theories  of  Business  Cycles.

1.  Two  points  of  agreement 5

2.  Beveridge's  "competition  theory" - 6

3.  May's  theory  of  the  discrepancy  between  wages  and  productivity 7

4.  Hobson's  theory  of  over-saving  7

5.'  Aftalion's  theory  of  diminishing  utilities 8

6.  Bouniatian's  theory  of  over-capitalization  9

7.  Spiethoff's  theory  of  the  ill-balanced  production  of  industrial  equipment  and

complementary  goods 10

8.  Hull's  theory  of  the  changing  costs  of  construction 11

9.  Lescure's  theory  of  variations  in  prospective  profits  13

10.  Veblen's theory of  the discrepancy between prospective profits and current

capitalization 14

11.  Sombart's  theory  of  the  uneven  expansion  in  the  production  of  organic  and

inorganic  goods 16

12.  Carver's  theory  of  the  dissimilar  price  fluctuations  of  producers'  and  consumers'

goods 16

13.  Fisher's  theory  of  the  lagging  adjustment  of  interest  17

14.  Johannsen's  theory  of  "impair  savings" 18

III.  The  Method  of  Investigation 19

Chapter  II. The  Economic  Organization  op  Today.
I.  Money  Economy 21

II.  The  Business  Enterprise.

1.  Uneven  development  of  business  enterprises  in  various  fields 22

2.  The  interdependence  of  business  enterprises  23

3.  Pecuniary  versus  industrial  factors  in  business  prosperity 24

4.  Factors  affecting  pecuniary  profits  26

III. The  System  of  Prices.

1.  The  prices  of  consumers'  commodities  27

2.  The  prices  of  producers' goods  in relation  to  the  prices of  consumers' com-

modities , 27

[xii]


3.  The  prices  of  producers'  goods  in  relation  to  antecedent  prices  28

4.  The  prices  of  business  enterprises  29

5.  The  prices  of  services  to  persons  29

6.  The  interrelations  between  prices  30

7.  The  role  of  prices  in  economic  life 31

IV.  The  Guidance  of  Economic  Activity.

1.  The  role  played  by  technical  experts  32

2.  The  role  played  by  enterprisers  32

3.  The  role  played  by  lenders  34

4.  The  role  played  by  government  36

5.  The  alleged  "  planlessness "  of  production 37

V.  International  Differences  in  Economic  Organization.

1.  The  fundamental  similarity  of  organization  40

2.  The  relative  importance  of  different  industries  ■. 40

3.  Thrift  and  enterprise 41

4.  Banking  systems  and  monetary  habits  42

5.  The  government's  share  in  directing  economic  activity 43

Chapter  III. The  Annals  op  Business,  1890-1911.

I.  The  Business  Cycles  of  1873  to  1889.

1.  The  Crisis  of  1873 44

2.  The  later  seventies  and  early  eighties 45

3.  Business  expansion  in  the  later  eighties  and  the  French  crisis  of  1889 46

II.  The  Crisis  of  1890  and  the  European  Depression  of  1891-94.

1.  The  crisis  of  1890 48

2.  The  depression  of  1891-94  in  Europe 49

III.  The  Panic  of  1893  and  the  Depression  of  1894^96  in  the  United  States.

1.  The  business  years  1891  and  1892  51

2.  Contemporary  explanations  of  the  panic  of  1893  51

3.  The  influence  of  the  Sherman  silver-purchase  act  52

4.  The  decline  of  the  gold  reserve  53

5.  Business  conditions  and  the  panic 54

6.  The  events  of  the  panic 56

7.  The  struggle  to  maintain  the  gold  reserve  after  the  panic  56

8.  Business  depression  in  1894  58

9.  The  brief  revival  of  1895  59

10.  The  stringency  of  1896  59

11.  The  return  of  depression 59

IV.  Business  Prosperity  of  1895-99  and  the  Crisis  of  1900  in  Europe.

1.  England  60

2.  Germany • 61

3.  France • 62

[  xiii  ]


V.  Business  Prosperity  of  1897-1902  and  the  Crisis  of  1903-04  in  the  United  States.

1.  The  prosperous  years  1897-99 63

2.  The  pause  of  activity  in  1900  64

3.  The  stock-market  mania  of  1901  and  the  Northern  Pacific  "Corner"  65

4.  The  prosperity  of  general  business  in  1901-02  65

5.  "The  Rich  Man's  Panic"  of  1903-04 67

6.  "The  American  invasion  of  Europe"  68

VT.  Business  Depression  in  Europe,  1901-04.

1.  England  70

2.  Germany ; 71

3.  Prance 72

VII.  The  Prosperous  Times  of  1905-06  in  Europe  and  America.

1.  England 73

2.  Germany 73

3.  France 74

4.  The  United  States 74

VIII.  The  Crisis  of  1907.

1.  England 75

2.  Germany 76

3.  France 76

4.  The  United  States 77

IX.  The  Depression  of  1908-09  and  the  Revival  of  1909-11  in  England  and  Germany.

1.  England 78

2.  Germany 80

X.  The  Depression  of  1908,  the  Revival  of  1909,  and  the  Reaction  of  1910-11  in  France
and  the  United  States.

1.  France 81

2.  The  United  States 82

XI.  Summary 86

PAET  II
Statistical  Data  Concerning  the  Business  Cycles  op  1890-1911  in  the  United  States,

England,  Prance,  and  Germany

The  Framework  of  Part  II 91

Chapter  IV. The  Fluctuations  of  Prices  Since  1890.

1.  The  Prices  of  Commodities.

1.  The  available  data  and  the  methods  of  analysis 93

2.  The  prices  of  consumers'  goods  at  retail 94

3.  The  prices  of  consumers'  goods  at  wholesale  96

4.  The  prices  of  producers'  goods 98

5.  The  prices  of  manufactured  goods  and  of  raw  materials 99

6.  The  prices  of  organic  and  inorganic  goods  104

7.  The  dispersion  of  price  fluctuations 109

8.  The  representative  character  of  index  numbers 112

9.  The  fluctuations  of  prices  in  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and  Germany....  118

[xiv]


II.  The  Prices  of  Labor — Wage?.

1.  The  American  data  130

2.  The  prices  of  labor  in  American  manufacturing  industries  132

3.  The  prices  of  labor  in  England 136

III.  The  Prices  of  Loans — Interest.

1.  The  tables  of  interest  rates  140

2.  Rates  of  interest  yielded  by  investments  in  bonds  156

3.  Rates  of  interest  upon  short-time  loans  160

4.  International  comparisons 163

IV.  The  Prices  of  Shares  in  Business  Enterprises.

2.  Tables  of  the  relative  prices  of  American  common  stocks 172

3.  The  course  of  the  New  York  stock  market  in  1890-1911 189

3.  The  course  of  the  New  York  stock  market  in  1890-1911 189

4.  The  diversity  of  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  common  stocks 191

5.  The  prices  of  preferred  stocks  194

6.  The  prices  of  stocks,  bonds,  and  commodities  201

7.  International  comparisons : 219

Chapter  V. The  Volume  of  Business.

I.  The  Physical  and  the  Pecuniary  Volume  of  Business  223

II.  The  Movement  of  the  Population  224

IIL  The  Volume  of  Goods  Produced 230

IV.  The  Volume  of  Domestic  Trade  242

V.  The  Volume  of  Foreign  Commerce  252

VI.  The  Volume  of  Goods  Consumed  264

VII.  Unemplojonent 268

VIII.  Per  Capita  Indices  of  the  Volume  of  Business 271

Chapi'ee  VI. The  Cuebency.

L  The  Production  of  Gold  278

II.  The  Quantity  of  Gold  Currency  279

IIL  The  Quantity  of  Silver  and  of  Paper  Money 288

IV.  The  Distribution  of  the  Monetary  Stock  among  the  Banks,  the  Public,  and  the  Treasury  295

V.  The  Volume  of  Deposit  Currency 300

VI.  The  Velocity  of  Circulation  306

Notes :

A  Revised  Estimate  of  the  Amount  of  Money  held  by  the  Banks  of  the  United  States

in  1890-1911 311

The  Volume  of  Deposit  Currency  in  the  United  States,  1890-1911  318

Chapter  VII. The  Condition  of  the  Banks.

I.  The  Clearing-House  Banks  of  New  York 323

II.  The  National  Banks 333

III.  The  National  Banks  in  Reserve  Cities  and  in  Rural  Districts 356

IV.  The  Joint-Stock  Banks  of  England  and  Wales ..-,- 373

V.  The  Central  Banks  of  England,  France,  and  Germany  377

['"'J


Chapter  VIII.  Saving,  Investment,  Bnterpeise,  and  Speculation.

I.  Saving ..'.. 387

II.  Investment,  Enterprise,  and  Speculation.

1.  Savings-bank  deposits  —- 390

2.  Purchases  of  bonds  and  of  stocks 393

3.  Applications  for  investment  loans 398

4.  The  establishment  of  joint-stock  companies 410

5 The  savings  and  investments  made  by  business  enterprises  out  of  current  income.—  414
6.  Investments  in  railway  construction  and  in  the  erection  of  buildings 418

Chapter  IX.  Profits  and  Bankruptcies.
I.  Profits.

1.  American  railways  422

2.  The  national  banks  427

3.  German  corporations  431

II.  Bankruptcies.

1.  The  United  States 438

2.  England,  France,  and  Germany 444


PART  III

The  Rhythm  op  Business  Activity

The  Framework  of  Part  III  449

Chapter  X.  The  Cumulation  of  Prosperity.

I.  The  Beginnings  of  Revivals  in  Business  Activity 452

II.  The  Diffusion  of  Business  Activity.

1.  The  increase  in  the  demand  for  commodities 453

2.  The  development  of  business  optimism 455

3.  The  laggards  in  business  revivals 456

4.  The  statistical  signs  of  business  revivals 456

III.  The  Rise  of  Prices.

1.  The  prices  of  commodities.

A.  Why  prices  rise  457

B.  How  the  rise  of  prices  reacts  upon  the  demand  for  commodities 459

C.  How  the  rise  of  prices  spreads  and  cumulates  460

D.  Why  different  groups  of  commodity  prices  rise  in  dissimilar  degrees 461

2.  The  prices  of  labor ,  464

3.  The  prices  of  loans  466

IV The  Increase  of  Profits.

1.  Why  profits  increase  468

2.  The  rise  in  the  prices  of  stocks 469

V.  The  Volume  of  Investments 471

VI.  The  Business  Equilibrium 472

[XVI]


Chapter  XI.  How  Prosperity  Breeds  a  Crisis.

I.  The  Increasing  Costs  of  Doing  Business.

1.  Supplementary  costs 475

2.  The  prime  costs  of  weak  enterprises 476

3.  The  cost  of  lahor 476

4.  The  cost  of  materials 481

5.  The  cost  of  bank  loans  ^ 482

6.  The  declining  economy  of  business  management  483

II.  Industrial  Equipment  and  the  Investment  Market.

1.  The  consequences  of  increasing  the  industrial  equipment  483

2.  The  development  of  stringency  in  the  investment  markets 485

3.  The  decline  of  investment  borrowing 486

4.  The  check  upon  orders  for  new  construction  487

III.  The  Tension  in  the  Money  Market.

1.  The  demand  for  short-term  loans  489

2.  The  supply  of  short-term  loans 490

3.  The  development  of  stringency 491

4.  The  inter-relations  between  prosperity  and  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation....  492

IV.  The  Decline  of  Prospective  Profits.

1.  The  problem  of  defending  profits  against  the  encroachments  of  costs 494

2.  Hindrances  to  the  continued  advance  of  selling  prices.

A.  Public  regulation,  contracts,  and  custom ."... 496

B.  The  increase  of  capacity  for  producing  goods  497

C.  The  advance  in  interest  rates 499

D.  Under-consumption 499

3.  The  critical  point  - 502

V.  The  Undermining  of  Business  Credit.

1.  The  relations  between  credit  and  profits 503

2.  The  effect  of  prosperity  upon  the  volume  of  credits 505

3.  The  effect  upon  outstanding  credits  of  the  decline  in  prospective  profits 506


Chapter  XII.  Crises.

I.  The  Beginning  of  Liquidation  512

II.  A  Typical  Panic— The  United  States,  1907.

1.  The  beginning  of  the  panic  of  1907 515

2.  The  scramble  for  money 516

3.  The  demoralization  of  the  markets  for  loans  and  investments 522

4.  The  reaction  of  monetary  stringency  upon  general  business 530

III.  A  Typical  Crisis— England,  1907.

1.  The  beginning  of  reaction  538

2.  The  effect  of  foreign  crises 539

3.  The  crisis  in  industry  and  commerce  543

IV.  The  Close  of  Crises  - - 548

V.  The  Prevention  of  Panics  550

[  xvn]


Chapter  XIII.  Business  Depression.

I.  How  Crises  Breed  Depressions.

1.  Abortive  revivals  of  activity  - 554

2.  The  cumulation  of  depression.

A.  The  volume  of  business  556

B.  The  fall  of  prices - 558

C.  Savings  and  investments  559

D.  The  currency  and  the  banks 560

II.  How  Depression  Breeds  Prosperity.

1.  The  re-adjustment  of  prime  costs  562

2.  The  re-adjustment  of  supplementary  costs 564

3.  The  increase  in  the  physical  volume  of  business  565

4.  The  end  of  liquidation  568

Chapter  XIV.  The  Wider  Aspects  op  Business  Cycles.

I.  Summary  of  the  Preceding  Theory  of  Business  Cycles.

1.  The  cumulation  of  prosperity 571

2.  How  prosperity  breeds  a  crisis 573

3.  Crises 576

4.  Depression 577

Note. — The  relation  of  the  preceding  theory  of  business  cycles  to  the  theories
reviewed  in  Chapter  I 579

II.  Diversities  Among  Business  Cycles  and  their  Causes.

1.  The  diversities 581

2.  Their  causes 582

III.  Business  Cycles  in  Economic  History.

1.  The  genesis  of  business  cycles  583

2.  Man's  mastery  over  the  workings  of  the  money  economy 585

3.  Proposals  for  controlling  business  cycles  586

IV.  The  Forecasting  of  Business  Conditions.

1.  The  exceptional  opportunities  of  certain  financiers  588

2.  The  business  barometers  available  to  the  public 591

3.  Suggestions  for  bettering  business  barometers.

A.  New  barometers  needed  593

B.  The  improvement  of  old  barometers 594

C.  Difficulties  in  the  way  595

V.  The  "Money  Surface  of  Things"  and  What  Goes  on  Beneath  596

[  XVIII  ]


PART  I

THE  PROBLEM  AND  ITS  SETTING


CHAPTER  I

A  PRELIMINARY  REVIEW  OF  CURRENT  THEORIES  CONCERNING

BUSINESS  CYCLES

I.  Types  op  the  Early  Theories  of  Crises

Serious  efforts  to  frame  a  theory  of  business  cycles  began  with  the  contem-
porary discussions  of  the  economic  crisis  of  1825/  Differences  of  opinion
promptly  appeared  regarding  the  cause  of  this  widespread  dislocation  of  trade
— differences  which  multiplied  as  the  crises  of  later  years  brought  new  mater-
ials and  new  men  into  the  discussion.  Presently  crises  became  one  of  the
accredited  topics  of  economic  theory,  and  systematic  writers  began  to  develop
explanations  based  upon  their  doctrines  of  production,  distribution,  and
exchange.  Before  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  there  had  accumulated  a
body  of  observations  and  speculations  sufficient  to  justify  the  compilation  of
histories  of  the  theories  of  crises.^

Inevitably,  the  early  efforts  to  a:ccount  for  the  exceedingly  complex  phe-
nomena of  crises  were  crude  and  superficial.  But  the  problem  commanded
so  much  attention  that  the  character  of  the  treatment  rapidly  improved.  Each
recurring  crisis,  indeed,  produced  a  fresh  crop  of  ill-considered  explanations;
but  meanwhile  other  writers  were  steadilj^  using  and  bettering  the  work  of
their  predecessors.  In  this  process  of  elaboration,  however,  the  early  differ-
ences of  opinion  did  not  disappear.  Instead,  they  became  standardized  into
several  distinct  types  of  theory,  each  represented  in  the  growing  literature  by
a  number  of  variants.

First  may  be  put  the  view  that  crises  are  ' '  abnormal ' '  phenomena,  produced
by  some  disturbing  event  such  as  the  introduction  of  revolutionary  inventions,
the  development  of  new  means  of  transportation  which  alter  old  trade-routes,
wars,  the  revision  of  tariffs,  fluctuating  monetary  standards,  crop  failures,  the
unexpected  bankruptcy  of  some  conspicuous  business  enterprise,  changes  in
fashion,  and  the  like. Such  explanations  proceed  upon  the  assumption  that


1  E.  von  Bergmann,  Geschichte  der  nationaldkonomischen  Krisentheorien  (Stuttgart,  1895).  As  usual,  research
has  discovered  a  number  of  fragmentary  discussions  by  earlier  writers.  See  the  opening  pages  of  von  Berg-
mann's  successive  chapters.

2  Von  Bergmann 's  book,  cited  in  the  preceding  note,  is  the  most  elaborate.  The  best  histories  in  English
and  French  are  E.  D.  Jones's  Economic  Crises  (New  York,  1900),  and  J.  Lescure's  Des  crises  generales  et  peri-
odiques  de  surproduction  (Paris,  1907),  pp.  433-522.

[3]


4  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

the  equilibrium  of  economic  activities  lias  become  so  delicate  that  it  may  be
disturbed  by  untoward  conjunctures  of  the  most  dissimilar  kinds,  and  point
to  the  conclusion  that  each  crisis  has  its  own  special  cause  which  must  be  sought
among  the  events  of  the  immediately  preceding  years.'

Next  in  formal  simplicity  is  the  type  of  theory  which  ascribes  crises  to
"inflation."  An  increase  in  coin,  in  irredeemable  paper  money  issued  by  the
government,  in  bank-notes,  or  in  deposit  currency  produces  an  advance  of
prices.  The  latter  stimulates  business  to  great  activity,  which  runs  to  extremes
in  reckless  investments  and  feverish  speculation,  and  ends  in  a  crash  of  credit
and  widespread  bankruptcy.

The  "over-production"  and  "under-consumption"  theories  contend  that,
owing  to  the  efficiency  of  modern  machinery,  the  power  of  society  to  produce
has  outstripped  its  power  to  consmne.  Hence  the  periodical  occurrence  of
"general  gluts" — paradoxical  situations  in  which  superabundance  causes  want.
Unable  to  sell  their  increasing  output  of  goods  at  remunerative  prices,
employers  are  forced  to  close  their  factories  and  turn  away  their  hands — a
remedy  which  aggravates  the  disease  by  reducing  yet  more  the  community's
power  to  purchase  for  consumption.

To  the  classical  economists  the  theory  of  general  over-production  was  a
heresy,  which  they  perseveringly  sought  to  extirpate  by  demonstrating  that
the  supply  of  goods  of  one  sort  necessarily  constitutes  demand  for  goods  of
other  sorts.  But  maladjusted  production  they  allowed  to  be  possible,  and
their  theories  of  crises  usually  sought  to  show  how  maladjustment  comes  about
through  the  sinking  of  capital  in  unremunerative  investments.  Such  locking-
up  of  capital  was  often  held  to  be  one  result  of  "the  tendency  of  profits  to  a
minimum. ' '  When  this  tendency  has  reduced  the  current  rate  of  profits  to  an
unaccustomed  level,  the  less  sagacious  capitalists  become  dissatisfied  and  embark
in  ill-considered  schemes.  There  results  the  production  of  goods  for  which
no  market  can  be  found,  business  failures,  and  the  loss  of  confidence — in  short,
a  crisis  which  extends  over  all  lines  of  trade.

Another  group  of  economists,  among  whom  Schaffle  Avas  prominent,  accepted
ill-adjusted  production  as  the  cause  of  crises ;  but  accounted  for  it  by  the  com-
plexity of  modern  economic  organization.  Not  only  are  manufacturers  com-
pelled to  produce  goods  months  in  advance  for  a  market  whose  changes  they
cannot  forecast,  but  investors  are  compelled  years  in  advance  to  put  their  funds
into  enterprises  the  need  of  which  is  uncertain.  A  close  coordination  between
supply  and  demand  is  not  possible.  The  mistakes  which  are  made  should  be
ascribed  less  to  avoidable  errors  of  judgment  than  to  the  planlessness  of  capi-
talistic production.

3  Jones  gives  a  good  analysis  of  this  type  of  theories  in  his  second  chapter. Eoscher  is  perhaps  the  best
known  representative.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  5

But  the  most  vigorous  attempt  to  prove  that  crises  are  a  chronic  disease  of
capitalism  is  that  made  by  Rodbertus,  Marx,  and  their  followers.  The  gist  of
the  socialist  contention  is  usually  that  the  laborer  receives  as  wages  much  less
than  the  real  value  of  his  product.  Hence  the  demand  for  consumers'  goods,
which  must  depend  largely  upon  the  great  mass  of  wage-earners,  fails  to  keep
pace  with  the  increase  of  the  output.  Meanwhile,  the  capitalist-employers  are
investing  their  current  savings  in  new  productive  enterprises,  which  presently
begin  to  add  their  quotas  to  the  market  supply.  This  process  runs  cumula-
tively until  the  time  comes  when  the  patent  impossibility  of  selling  goods  at
a  profit  brings  on  a  crisis.

So  bald  a  statement  as  the  preceding  falls  far  short  of  doing  justice  to
the  nineteenth  century  writers  upon  crises;  but  it  suffices  to  indicate  the
foundations  upon  which  our  contemporaries  have  built  their  more  elaborate
explanations.  The  latter  conserve  all  of  permanent  value  which  the  earlier
economists  achieved,  and  contain  in  addition  certain  fresh  contributions  to  the
subject.  Accordingly,  a  review  of  the  leading  discussions  which  have  been  pub-
lished since  1900  will  afford  an  adequate  introduction  to  the  problem  as  it  stands
today.

II. CUERENT  ThEOEIES  OP  BUSINESS  CyCLES

1.  Two  Points  of  Agreement

Wide  divergences  of  opinion  continue  to  exist  among  competent  writers
upon  crises ;  but  in  recent  years  substantial  agreement  has  been  reached  upon
two  points  of  fundamental  importance.

Crises  are  no  longer  treated  as  sudden  catastrophes  which  interrupt  the
''normal"  course  of  business,  as  episodes  which  can  be  understood  without
investigation  of  the  intervening  years.  On  the  contrary,  the  crisis  is  regarded
as  but  the  most  dramatic  and  the  briefest  of  the  three  phases  of  a  business  cycle
■ — prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.'  Modern  discussions  endeavor  to  show
why  a  crisis  is  followed  by  depression,  and  depression  by  prosperity,  quite  as
much  as  to  show  why  prosperity  is  followed  by  a  crisis.  In  a  word,  the  theory
of  crises  has  grown  into  the  theory  of  business  cycles.'

This  wider  grasp  of  the  problem  has  discredited  the  view  that  crises  are
due  to  abnormal  conditions  which  tempt  industry  and  trade  to  forsake  their
beaten  paths  and  temporarily  befog  the  judgment  of  business  men  and  investors.


4  The  not  infrequent  statement  that  prosperity  sometimes  merges  into  depression  without  the  intervention
of  a  crisis  means  simply  that  the  writers  understand  by  crisis  a  violent  disturbance  of  business  conditions.
It  is  in  closer  accord  with  every-day  usage  to  call  such  occurrences  ' '  panics, ' '  and  to  apply  the  term  ' '  crisis ' '
to  the  transition  from  prosperity  to  depression  even  when  accomplished  quietly.  On  closer  inspection,  a  busi-
ness cycle  is  often  found  to  be  complicated  by  minor  changes,  such  as  the  interruption  of  depression  by
a  premature  resumption  of  activity,  the  occurrence  of  a  pause  or  even  a  slight  crisis  in  the  midst  of  pros-
perity, and  the  like. But  for  the  present  it  is  wise  to  confine  attention  to  the  broadest  features  of  the  cycle.

5  Compare  W.  Sombart,  "Versuch  einer  Systematik  der  Wirtschaftskrisen,"  ^rcWi)  fiir  5o2iahume?isc;iaft,
1904,  pp.  1-21.


6  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

or  to  misguided  legislation,  unsound  business  practices,  imperfect  banking
organization,  and  the  like."  As  business  cycles  have  continued  to  run  their
round  decade  after  decade  in  all  nations  of  highly  developed  business  organ-
ization, the  idea  that  each  crisis  may  be  accounted  for  by  some  special  cause
has  become  less  tenable.  On  the  contrary,  the  explanations  in  favor  today
ascribe  the  recurrence  of  crises  after  periods  of  prosperity  to  some  inherent
characteristic  of  economic  organization  or  activity.  The  complex  processes
which  make  up  business  life  are  analyzed  to  discover  why  they  inevitably  work
out  a  change  from  good  times  to  bad  and  from  bad  times  to  good.  The
influence  of  special  conditions  is  admitted,  of  course,  but  rather  as  a  factor
which  complicates  the  process  than  as  the  leading  cause  of  crises.

2.  Beveridge's  "Competition  Theory"

Among  these  theories  which  seek  to  account  not  for  crises  but  for  the
cyclical  fluctuations  of  economic  activity,  the  ''competition  theory"  tentatively
advanced  by  Beveridge  is  one  of  the  simplest.

In  most  instances,  he  begins,  production  is  carried  on  by  several  or  many
establishments,  each  acting  independently,  and  each  seeking  to  do  as  large  a
share  of  the  business  as  possible.  Whenever  the  demand  for  their  wares
increases,  each  competitor  tries  to  engross  a  larger  portion  of  the  market.
' '  Inevitably,  therefore,  all  the  producers  together  tend  to  overshoot  the  demand
and  to  glut  the  market  for  a  time.  This  is  a  result  not  of  wild  speculation
nor  of  miscalculation  of  the  total  demand ;  it  must  be  a  normal  incident  wher-
ever competition  has  a  place  at  all."  Such  activity  among  producers  consti-
tutes the  period  of  prosperity.  But  sooner  or  later  the  glutting  of  the  market
becomes  apparent,  and  then  the  crisis  comes,  because  the  goods  cannot  all  be
sold  at  a  profit.  Prices  fall,  production  is  checked,  and  a  period  of  depression
ensues.  Gradually,  however,  the  slackened  rate  of  production  allows  the  accum-
ulated stocks  to  be  cleared,  perhaps  below  cost  price,  perhaps  by  waiting  until
demand  grows  up  to  supply.  When  this  excess  of  demand  over  supply  has
once  again  become  patent  business  recovers.  Depression  yields  to  prosperity,
competitors  again  vie  with  each  other  to  increase  their  shares  in  the  output,
after  a  few  years  the  market  is  glutted  again,  and  a  new  crisis  comes,  to  be
followed  once  more  by  depression.  Thus  business  cycles  are  due  in  the  last
resort  to  "the  simple  and  well  nigh  universal  fact  of  industrial  competition."'

0  The  first  type  of  theories  mentioned  in  the  preceding  section.
'  W.  H.  Beveridge,  Unemployment,  ed.  3  (London,  1912),  chapter  iv.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  7

3.  May's  Theory  of  the  Discrepancy  between  Wages  and  Productivity

Like  Beveridge,  May  conceives  crises  to  result  immediately  from  the  glut-
ting of  markets  for  industrial  products.  But  May  offers  a  quite  different
analysis  of  the  cause  of  gluts.  The  continually  growing  productivity  of
industry  makes  necessary  a  corresponding  growth  of  the  market,  if  disaster
is  to  be  avoided.  But  to  enable  producers  to  sell  their  growing  output  promptly
prices  must  be  reduced  and  wages  must  be  raised  in  proportion  as  the  supply
of  goods  increases.  For  it  is  only  by  combining  an  increase  in  the  money
income  of  the  mass  of  the  population  with  a  decrease  in  the  cost  of  commodities
that  a  country's  home  markets  can  be  kept  expanding  with  the  progress  of
industrial  methods.  Periods  of  prosperity  attended  by  rising  prices  necessarily
violate  this  condition  of  business  hygiene  and  inevitably  end  by  glutting  mar-
kets. Then  come  crises,  which  restore  the  body  politic  to  health  by  forcing
down  prices  to  the  point  where  consumers  can  purchase  the  supplies  which  are
offered.  The  germ  of  the  trouble,  then,  is  the  tendency  of  prices  to  rise  during
periods  of  increasing  productivity.  Accordingly,  May  urges  as  remedy  a  legal
limitation  of  the  rate  of  profits,  in  order  that  producers  may  be  forced  to  reduce
prices  as  they  increase  output."


4.  Hobson's  Theory  of  Over-saving

A  third  explanation  of  how  markets  come  to  be  glutted  periodically  is  offered
by  Hobson's  theory  of  over-saving.  Hobson  holds  that  at  any  given  time
"there  is  an  exact  proportion  of  the  current  income  which,  in  accordance  with
existing  arts  of  production  and  existing  foresight,  is  required  to  set  up  new
capital  so  as  to  make  provision  for  the  maximum  consumption  throughout  the
near  future. "  Now,  if  in  a  period  of  prosperity  the  rate  of  consumption  should
rise  pari  passu  with  the  rate  of  production,  there  is  no  inherent  reason  why
the  prosperity  might  not  continue  indefinitely.  But  in  modern  societies,  a
considerable  portion  of  the  wealth  produced  belongs  to  a  small  class.  In  active
times  their  incomes  rise  more  rapidly  than  their  consumption  and  the  surplus
income  is  perforce  saved.  There  results  for  the  community  as  a  whole  a  slight
deficiency  of  spending  and  a  corresponding  excess  of  saving.  The  wealthy
class  seeks  to  invest  its  new  savings  in  productive  enterprises — thereby  increas-
ing the  supply  of  goods  and  also  increasing  the  incomes  from  which  further
savings  will  be  made.  This  process  runs  cumulatively  during  the  years  of
prosperity  until  finally  the  markets  become  congested  with  goods  which  cannot
be  sold  at  a  profit.  Then  prices  fall,  liquidation  ensues,  capital  is  written  down,
and  the  incomes  of  the  wealthy  class  are  so  reduced  that  savings  fall  below  the
proper  proportion  to  spending. During  this  period  of  depression  the  glut  of

8  R.  E.  May,  Das  Grundgesetz  der  Wirtsehaftslcrisen  (Berlin,  1902).


8  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

goods  weighing  upon  the  market  is  gradually  worked  off,  and  the  prospect  of
profitable  investment  slowly  returns.  Saving  rises  again  to  the  right  pro-
portion to  spending  and  good  times  prevail  for  a  season.  But  after  a  while
the  chronic  impulse  towards  over-saving  becomes  fully  operative  once  more,
and  soon  or  late  begets  another  congestion  of  the  markets  and  this  congestion
begets  another  depression.  Proximately,  then,  the  cause  of  alternating  pros-
perity and  depression  is  the  tendency  toAvard  over-saving;  ultimately  it  is  the
existence  of  the  surplus  incomes  which  lead  to  over-saving.''


5.  Aftalion's  Theory  of  Diminishing  Utilities

The  possibility  of  a  general  over-production  of  goods  has  often  been  denied
on  the  ground  that  human  desire  is  insatiable.  Recently  Aftalion  has  sought
to  show  that  this  objection  may  be  set  aside  by  the  laws  of  marginal  utility.
He  ascribes  the  fall  of  prices  which  characterizes  a  crisis  to  the  effect  of  general
over-production  in  diminishing  the  social  use-values  of  the  whole  mass  of  com-
modities offered  for  sale.  While  admitting  that  there  can  be  no  general  fall
of  values  in  exchange,  he  contends  that  there  can  be  such  a  fall  of  values  in
use.  Human  wants  are  not  all  met;  but  the  wants  for  the  concrete  goods  in
the  market  are  gratified  to  such  a  degree  that  their  marginal  utilities  decline.
There  follows  a  general  fall  of  prices — often  to  points  below  the  costs  of  pro-
duction. Similarly,  the  rise  of  prices  in  prosperity  results  from  a  rise  of
marginal  utilities  caused  by  a  relative  scarcity  of  goods  in  proportion  to  the
community's  needs — that  is,  from  under-production.

But  whence  come  these  alternations  of  over-production  and  under-produc-
tion? Aftalion  sees  them  as  consequences  of  the  "round  about"  method  of
production  characteristic  of  capitalism.  When  there  is  a  promising  market
for  consumers'  goods  we  set  about  building  new  factories  and  ordering  new
machines.  A  considerable  time  is  required  to  provide  such  new  equipment.
During  this  interval  prices  rise  because  goods  are  scarce,  and  prosperity  reigns.
But  when  at  last  the  new  factories  are  completed  and  the  new  machines
installed,  they  begin  to  turn  out  consumers'  goods  in  great  masses.  Presently
the  market  is  overstocked,  values  in  use  decline,  prices  fall,  and  a  crisis  comes.
After  the  crisis,  depression  rules  for  a  season  because  the  excessive  equipment
provided  during  the  period  of  prosperity  is  itself  durable,  and  goes  on  flooding
the  market  with  its  products.  Therefore  values  in  use  and  prices  continue  to
fall,  despite  the  redundant  supply  of  money.  Under  such  discouraging  cir-
cumstances, producers  do  not  increase  the  size  of  their  plants;  they  do  not
even  replace  all  the  equipment  which  is  worn  out.  Consequently,  productive
capacity  slowly  diminishes. Since  wants  do  not  shrink,  but  rather  expand,

»I  have  followed  Mr.  Hobson's  latest  exposition,  The  Industrial  System (London,  1909),  chapters  iii  and
xviii.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  9

the  day  finally  dawns  when  the  current  supply  of  consumers'  goods  and  the
stocks  of  materials  are  found  to  be  inadequate.  Then  the  social  value  of  goods
of  all  kinds  rises,  prices  advance,  prosperity  returns,  and  the  whole  cycle
begins  anew."

6.  Bouniatian's  Theory  of  Over-capitalization

Bouniatian's  theory  of  over-capitalization  is  much  like  Hobson's  theory  of
over-saving.  Any  one  among  many  causes  may  so  affect  supply  and  demand
as  to  cause  the  prices  of  some  important  group  of  commodities  to  rise.  This
advance  tends  to  propagate  itself  by  raising  the  prices  of  all  related  commod-
ities. At  the  same  time  it  concentrates  purchasing  power  in  the  hands  of  those
who  own  the  goods  which  have  advanced  in  price.  This  concentration  of  pur-
chasing power  enhances  the  accumulation  of  capital;  for  (1)  the  desire  for
increased  consumption  does  not  expand  so  quickly  as  income  has  risen,  and
(2)  the  spirit  of  enterprise  is  excited  by  increased  profits  received.  The  larger
supply  of  capital  leads  to  a  greater  demand  for  the  means  of  production,  and
raises  their  price — now  concentrating  purchasing  power  in  the  hands  of  those
who  own  or  produce  the  means  of  production.  This  new  concentration  enhances
once  more  the  accumulation  of  capital.  Thus  the  process,  initiated  by  a  casual
rise  of  prices  in  any  part  of  the  industrial  field,  soon  reaches  the  industries
which  turn  out  industrial  equipment  and  runs  cumulatively  for  a  time.

But  ultimately  the  process  works  its  own  reversal.  For  the  centralization
of  purchasing  power  in  the  hands  of  a  small  class  is  at  the  expense  of  the
purchasing  power  of  the  masses.  Absolutely  consumption  grows,  but  its
growth  is  slower  than  that  of  the  supply  of  goods  turned  out  by  the  increasing
industrial  equipment.  In  the  last  resort  the  prices  of  these  means  of  pro-
duction are  dependent  on  the  prices  of  the  consumers'  goods  which  they  help
directly  or  indirectly  to  produce.  In  the  end,  therefore,  the  failure  of  con-
sumption to  expand  at  the  same  pace  as  the  accumulation  of  capital  and  the
means  of  production  in  which  the  capital  is  invested  inevitably  causes  con-
sumers' and  producers'  goods  to  fall  in  price.

Then  the  process  is  reversed.  Purchasing  power,  instead  of  being  concen-
trated in  the  hands  of  the  owners  of  goods,  is  dispersed.  The  fall  of  prices
propagates  itself  and  goes  on  cumulatively  as  the  rise  had  done.  Much  of
the  industrial  equipment  stands  idle  and  deteriorates,  not  only  from  lack  of
repair  but  also  from  the  invention  of  improved  processes  and  machinery.  Thus
an  approximate  equality  between  the  community's  power  of  consumption  and
its  equipment  for  production  is  brought  about.  Meanwhile  the  large  supply
of  idle  capital  in  the  form  of  loanable  funds  drives  down  the  rate  of  interest.
Ultimately  the  time  comes  when  the  supply  of  goods  is  no  longer  superabund-

!  10  A.  Aftalion,  Essai  d'une  theorie  des  crises  gHerales  et  periodiques  (Paris,  1909).  See  also  his  replies  to
criticisms  by  Gide  and  Lescure  in  Bevue  d'economie  politique,  April,  1910.


10  MEMOIRS  OF  TPIE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

ant,  and  fresh  ventures  may  be  undertaken  at  a  low  rate  of  interest  with  good
hope  of  success.  Then  in  some  line  prices  receive  a  fillip,  and  the  whole  process
begins  once  more  with  concentration  of  purchasing  power,  increased  savings
and  lively  demand  for  goods.

Thus  prosperity  and  depression  are  two  unlike  results  of  the  same  cause —
over-capitalization.  That  is,  the  ceaseless  striving  of  productive  energy  to
keep  profitably  employed  causes  production  to  expand  more  rapidly  than
consumption,  and  infallibly  produces  a  maladjustment  with  alternating  periods  ,
of  expansion  and  contraction.  The  roots  of  the  difficulty  lie  deep  in  the  capi-
talistic organization  of  society,  which  separates  the  individual's  activit}'  in
production  from  his  activity  in  consumption,  and  so  favors  inequality  in  the
distribution  of  wealth — a  condition  which  is  both  cause  and  consequence  of
over-capitalization."


7.  Spietlioff's  Theory  of  the  Ill-balanced  Production  of  Ivdustrial  Equipment

and  Complementary  Goods

While  Hobson  ascribes  crises  to  over-saving  and  Bouniatian  to  over-
capitalization, Spiethoff  ascribes  them  primarily  to  ill-balanced  production  of
industrial  equipment  and  complementary  goods.  A  revival  of  prosperity  leads
first  to  the  full  utilization  of  the  existing  industrial  equipment,  and  then  to
a  rush  to  produce  new  equipment.  The  latter  movement  results  from  a  heavy
investment  of  capital  by  men  who  hope  to  share  in  the  high  profits  which  pros-
perity promises.  After  a  time  the  new  equipment  begins  turning  out  goods
which  seek  a  market — partly  goods  to  satisfy  personal  wants,  partly  goods  to
be  used  in  producing  other  goods.  Over-production  inevitably  results  after
a  time  in  those  industries  which  make  industrial  equipment.  For  the  demand
for  this  type  of  goods  is  capable  of  being  substantially  satisfied  by  a  few  years
of  activity.  That  is,  the  community  finds  itself  provided  with  enough  indus-
trial equipment  to  produce  all  the  goods  which  can  find  a  profitable  market
and  then  the  demand  for  further  machinery,  etc.,  drops  off,  leaving  short  of
orders  the  foundries,  machine  shops,  etc.,  which  have  been  rapidly  extended.
Meantime  the  capital  which  had  accumulated  in  superabundant  volume  during
the  preceding  depression  has  been  absorbed,  and  further  business  expansion
is  checked  by  the  inadequacy  of  current  savings  to  supply  the  needs  of  business
borrowei's.  This  slackening  demand  for  new  industrial  equipment,  combined
with  the  scantiness  of  loan-capital,  brings  the  period  of  prosperity  to  a  close.
Unemployment  among  workmen  and  losses  among  capitalists,  beginning  in  the
industries  which  make  industrial  equipment,  cause  a  decline  in  consumers'
demand  and  react  upon  all  industries  which  make  goods  for  personal  needs.

11  M.  Bouniatian,  Studien  sur  Theorie  und  GescMchte  der  Wirtschaftslcrisen  (Municli,  1908) vol.  I.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  11

Then  an  over-production  of  consumers'  goods  becomes  apparent  and  the  circle
of  the  unemployed  and  of  the  losing  capitalists  widens.  So  matters  go  from
bad  to  worse  in  a  vicious  circle  and  the  depression  deepens  for  a  time.

But,  like  prosperity,  depression  works  its  own  end.  The  weakest  producers
are  forced  out  of  business,  new  needs  develop,  the  fall  of  prices,  wages,  and
interest  cuts  down  the  cost  of  production,  and  the  capital  value  of  plants  is
reduced  by  foreclosure  sales,  agreements  with  bondholders  and  the  like.  At
last  the  time  comes  when  production  at  a  profit  seems  possible  again.  For  a
while  business  conditions  are  relatively  stable;  but  presently  activity  becomes
more  marked,  demand  for  industrial  equipment  grows  animated,  and  the  cycle
of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  is  repeated.

Over-production  of  goods  for  producing  other  goods  and  the  increasing
scarcity  of  loan-capital,  then,  are  the  results  of  prosperity  which  cause  crises
and  depressions.  But,  Spiethoff  asks,  exactly  what  do  these  phrases  mean?
Over-production  means  that  there  are  more  machines,  etc.,  than  can  be  sold
at  a  profitable  price,  for  the  reason  that  possible  purchasers  cannot  get  enough
capital  to  pay  for  and  to  operate  them.  This  scarcity  of  capital  means  proxi-
mately that  the  loan  funds  in  the  investment  markets  have  been  depleted  by
the  heavy  borrowings  •  of  prosperous  years.  But  this  lack  of  capital  in  the
shape  of  money  for  lending  conceals  the  real  difficulty — a  lack  of  the  capital
goods  which  the  would-be  borrowers  need  for  carrying  on  the  process  of  extend-
ing their  enterprises.  To  increase  the  supply  of  money  would  work  no  real
cure;  for  the  money  transferred  from  lender  to  borrower  is  useless  unless  it
can  be  converted  by  purchase  into  those  goods  which  are  required  for  oper-
ating the  industrial  equipment  that  threatens  to  fall  idle.  These  goods  are
primarily  labor  and  the  goods  which  laborers  consume.  The  root  of  the  evil
is,  therefore,  ill-proportioned  production — over-production  of  industrial  equip-
ment and  such  durable  consumption  goods  as  dwellings,  and  a  concomitant
under-production  of  the  goods  necessary  to  employ  the  equipment."

8.  Hull's  Theory  of  the  Changing  Costs  of  Construction

An  American  business  man,  George  H.  Hull,  has  recently  drawn  from  his
experience  of  practical  affairs  conclusions  which  resemble  those  drawn  by
Professor  Spiethoff  from  his  theoretical  analysis  of  economic  records.  High
prices  of  construction,  runs  his  thesis,  is  the  hitherto  "unknown  cause  of  the
mysterious  depressions"  from  which  the  industrial  nations  suffer.

In  demonstrating  this  thesis,  Hull  contends  that  agriculture,  commerce,  and
finance  fluctuate  within  relatively  narrow  limits.  Agriculture  provides  the
necessities  of  life,  commerce  distributes  them,  and  finance  adjusts  the  bills.

12  Spiethoff  has  published  his  analysis  in  a  series  of  articles  in Schmoller's  Jahrbuch  fiir  Gesetsgehung,
1902,  pp.  721-759;  1903,  pp.  679-708;  1909,  pp.  445-467 927-951,  1417-1437.


12  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  volume  of  all  this  business  is  fairly  constant,  because  the  demand  for
necessities  is  incapable  of  sudden  expansion  or  contraction.  Industry,  on  the
contrary,  may  expand  or  contract  indefinitely — especially  that  part  of  industry
devoted  to  construction  work.  For  the  sources  of  "booms"  and  depressions,
therefore,  we  must  look  to  the  enterprises  which  build  and  equip  houses,  stores,
factories,  railways,  docks,  and  the  like.

Of  the  huge  total  of  construction,  which  Hull  believes  to  make  over  three-
quarters  of  all  industrial  operations,  at  least  two-thirds,  even  in  the  busiest  of
years,  consists  of  repairs,  replacements,  and  such  extensions  as  are  required
by  the  growth  of  population.  This  portion  of  construction  is  necessary  and
must  be  executed  every  year.  But  the  remaining  portion  is  "optional  con-
struction," and  is  undertaken  or  not  according  as  investors  see  a  liberal  or  a
meager  profit  in  providing  new  equipment.

Now,  when  the  costs  of  construction  fall  low  enough  to  arouse  "the  bargain-
counter  instinct,"  many  of  "the  far-seeing  ones  who  hold  the  purse-strings  of
the  country"  let  heavy  contracts,  and  their  example  is  followed  by  the  less
shrewd.  The  addition  of  the  resulting  new  business  to  the  regular  volume  of
"necessity  construction"  plus  the  provision  of  ordinary  consumers'  goods
creates  a  "boom."  But,  after  a  year  or  two,  contractors  discover  that  their
order  books  call  for  more  work  than  they  can  get  labor  and  materials  to  finish
on  contract  time.  When  this  oversold  condition  of  the  contracting  trades  is
realized,  the  prices  of  labor  and  of  raw  materials  rise  rapidly.  The  estimated
cost  of  construction  on  new  contracts  then  becomes  excessive.  Shrewd  investors
therefore  begin  to  defer  the  execution  of  their  plans  for  extending  permanent
equipment,  and  the  letting  of  fresh  contracts  declines  apace.  As  they  grad-
ually complete  work  on  their  old  contracts,  all  the  enterprises  making  iron,
steel,  lumber,  cement,  brick,  stone,  etc.,  then  face  a  serious  shrinkage  of  busi-
ness. Just  as  the  execution  of  the  large  contracts  for  ' '  optional  construction, ' '
let  in  the  low-price  period,  brought  on  prosperity,  so  the  smallness  of  such
contracts,  let  in  the  high-price  period,  now  brings  on  depression.  Then  the
prices  of  construction  fall  until  they  arouse  "the  bargain-counter  instinct"  of
investors  once  more,  and  the  cycle  begins  afresh.

While  Hull  grants  that  panics  are  often  caused  by  strictly  financial  dis-
orders, he  holds  that  all  industrial  depressions  are  caused  by  high  prices  of
construction,  and  foreshadowed  by  high  prices  of  iron.  Consequently  he
believes  that  depressions  could  be  prevented  from  occurring  if  the  government
would  collect  and  publish  monthly  "all  pertinent  information  in  relation  to
the  existing  volume  of  construction  under  contract  for  future  months,  and  all
pertinent  information  in  relation  to  the  capacity  of  the  country  to  produce
construction  materials  to  meet  the  demand  thus  indicated. '  "'^

13  George  H.  Hull,  Industrial  Depressions (New  York,  1911),  p.  218.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  13

9.  Lescure's  Theory  of  Variations  in  Prospective  Pro-fits

Lescure  agrees  with  Spiethoff  that  business  cycles  arise  from  irregular
activity  in  producing  producers'  goods,  and  that  the  latter  in  turn  is  connected
with  the  alternating  ebb  and  flow  of  the  capital  invested  in  industry  and  trade.
But  he  explains  the  periodical  expansion  and  contraction  of  these  investments
in  a  fashion  different  from  Spiethoff.  To  him  changes  in  the  prospective  rate
of  profits  are  the  important  factor.  By  profits  he  means  the  margin  between
selling  prices  and  cost  of  production.

A  period  of  prosperity  inevitably  comes  to  an  end  because  cost  ultimately
creeps  up  on  selling  prices  so  far  as  to  reduce  the  margin  of  profits  and  hence
to  discourage  further  investments.  This  increase  in  cost  is  due  to  high  prices
for  raw  material,  high  rates  of  interest,  high  wages,  and  heavy  expenses  in
establishing  new  enterprises  and  extending  old  ones.  Selling  prices  cannot
be  indefinitely  raised  to  preserve  the  margin  of  profit  from  these  encroachments
b}'  costs,  because  there  comes  a  time  when  the  ever-increasing  supplies  offered
on  the  market  have  satisfied  the  more  pressing  wants,  and  people  will  not  buy
the  yet  larger  quantities  of  goods  at  yet  higher  prices.  When  the  prospective
profits  of  fresh  enterprises  have  been  thus  rendered  doubtful,  investors  hesitate
to  make  business  loans  on  the  grand  scale  which  is  necessary  to  sustain  the
movement  of  expansion.  Instead  they  begin  to  prefer  the  lesser  risks  of  gov-
ernment bonds  and  similar  conservative  securities.  The  inability  of  business
enterprises  to  borrow  freely  checks  the  execution  of  their  plans  for  extensions,
and  hence  reduces  the  demand  for  producers'  goods.  Then  the  enterprises
turning  out  these  goods  find  themselves  in  difficulties,  and  the  weakest  are
presently  forced  to  the  wall.  One  disaster  leads  to  another,  owing  to  the  close
interrelationship  which  exists  between  different  establishments  and  different
trades.  A  wave  of  depression  sweeps  over  the  business  world,  and  for  a  time
the  prospects  of  profits  become  darker  and  darker.

But  depression,  like  prosperity,  has  its  own  limits.  Demand  cannot  shrink
indefinitely,  for  consumers  must  be  fed,  clothed,  and  housed.  All  the  elements
in  cost  decline — raw  materials,  M^ages,  interest,  expenses  of  getting  established.
Further,  the  depression  stimulates  efforts  to  improve  methods  of  production.
Thus  ultimately  costs  are  readjusted  on  a  lower  level,  the  prospective  margin
of  profit  first  ceases  to  shrink,  and  later  begins  to  expand.  The  spirit  of  busi-
ness enterprise  is  once  more  aroused,  investors  turn  back  to  business  loans,
and  prosperity  returns  for  its  brief  day."

14  Jean  Lescure,  Des  crises  genirales  et  periodiques  de  surprodmction  (Paris,  1907),  pp.  496-522.


14  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

10.  Veblen's  Theory  of  the  Discrepancy  between  Prospective  Profits  and

Current  Capitalization

The  chief  merit  of  Lescure's  discussion  is  its  realistic  air,  its  effort  to  look
at  business  cycles  from  the  standpoint  of  the  man  of  business.  In  this  effort,
however,  the  French  economist  has  been  anticipated  by  an  American.  Veblen
■begins  his  discussion  of  "the  theory  of  modern  welfare"  by  pointing  out  that
prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  ' '  are  primarily  phenomena  of  business ;  they
are,  in  their  origin  and  primary  incidence,  phenomena  of  price  disturbance,

either  of  decline  or  of  advance They  affect  industry  [only]  because

industry  is  managed  on  a  business  footing,  in  terms  of  price  and  for  the  sake
of  profits. ' '

A  period  of  prosperity  is  ushered  in  by  a  rise  of  prices,  caused,  for  example,
by  an  increased  supply  of  gold,  or  by  heavy  government  purchases.  This  rise
affects  first  some  one  industry  or  line  of  industries,  which  responds  with  a
burst  of  activity  and  increased  investments  by  business  men  anxious  to  exploit
the  profitable  field.  Partly  by  actual  increase  of  demand,  partly  by  lively
anticipation  of  future  increases,  aggressive  business  enterprise  extends  its
ventures  and  pushes  up  prices  in  remoter  branches  of  trade.  Thus  the  rise
of  prices  is  carried  over  into  one  branch  of  business  after  another.

Now  the  growing  demand  and  enhanced  prices  increase  the  prospective
profits  of  the  business  enterprises  in  each  trade  as  they  reach  it.  Larger  pros-
pective profits  lead  to  higher  market  capitalization  of  the  business  enterprises,
and,  of  course,  higher  market  capitalization  means  an  increased  value  of  the
properties  as  collateral  security.  Thus  the  way  is  paved  for  the  marked
extension  of  credit  on  which  the  active  trade  is  largely  dependent.

This  sequence  of  growing  demand,  rising  prices,  increasing  expectations
of  profit,  swelling  capitalization  of  business  enterprises,  and  expanding  credit
runs  on  cumulatively  so  long  as  its  basis  continues — an  anticipated  increase
in  demand  or  selling  prices  greater  than  the  anticipated  increase  in  costs.
But  eventually  the  process  undermines  its  own  basis.  For  costs  rise  with
the  increasing  cost  of  labor,  and  with  the  gradual  extension  of  the  advance
in  prices  to  all  the  commodities  which  business  enterprises  buy.  In  the  end
these  costs  gain  so  much  upon  prospective  selling  prices  as  to  cut  down  the
anticipated  margin  of  profit.  Then  the  enhanced  market  capitalization  of  the
business  enterprises  begins  to  seem  excessive.  Consequently,  the  collateral
security  for  loans  shrinks  in  the  estimation  of  the  business  community  and
ceases  to  be  regarded  as  an  adequate  guarantee  of  the  credits  which  have  been
granted.  The  confident  tone  of  business  expectations  which  characterized  the
period  of  prosperity  yields  to  nervousness.  To  bring  on  a  general  crisis  it
needs  but  that  some  considerable  creditor  should  conclude  that  the  present
earning  capacity  of  his  debtor  no  longer  warrants  the  capitalization  upon  which


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  15

Ms  collateral  is  appraised.  When  this  happens  liquidation  begins,  extending
from  one  industry  to  another  and  converting  prosperity  into  depression.

Yeblen  differs  from  most  •writers  in  holding  that,  once  begun,  business
depression  tends  to  maintain  and  perpetuate  itself,  instead  of  tending  to  produce
a  resumption  of  activity.  Business  men  commonly  ascribe  their  troubles  to
over-production ;  but  what  they  mean  is  that  not  enough  of  their  products  can
be  sold  for  satisfactory  prices  to  warrant  the  running  of  mills  at  full  capacity,
or  near  enough  capacity  to  yield  a  fair  profit.  "Fair"  profit  means  to  the
business  men  a  satisfactory  return  on  what  they  regard  as  the  capital  value
of  their  enterprises.  Reductions  in  this  capital  value  are  assented  to  with
extreme  reluctance,  and  usually  lag  behind  the  decline  which  has  taken  place  in
earning  capacity.  But  such  reductions  are  gradually  forced  during  depression
by  the  bankruptcy  of  the  weakest  enterprises  and  their  reorganization  with
reduced  fixed  charges.  This  process  of  reorganization  turns  the  weakest  com-
petitors into  the  most  dangerous.  Yet  more  important  is  the  unceasing  advance
in  technical  perfection  which  characterizes  modern  machine  industry,  and
which  enables  the  new  plants  which  are  built  from  time  to  time  to  start  with
a  marked  initial  advantage  in  equipment  over  their  partially  antiquated  pre-
decessors. The  difficulty  of  earning  a  fair  profit  without  submitting  to  a
reduction  of  capitalization  is  made  chronic  by  these  conditions.  "Hence
depression  is  normal  to  the  industrial  situation  under  the  consummate  regime
of  the  machine,  so  long  as  competition  is  imchecked  and  no  deus  ex  macMna
interposes."  The  only  abiding  refuge  from  such  chronic  depression  is  thor-
oughgoing coalition  in  all  those  lines  of  business  in  which  coalition  is  feasible.
It  is,'  to  be  sure,  only  in  the  last  generation  that  the  march  of  technical  progress
has  become  steady  and  rapid  enough  to  establish  this  condition  of  chronic
depression ;  but  it  promises  to  become  more  and  more  pronounced  in  the  future.
Periods  of  prosperity  are  taking  on  the  character  of  episodes,  initiated  by  some
extraordinary  increase  in  the  demand  for  goods,  and  running  out  presently
into  the  normal  state  of  depression  through  the  sequence  of  events  which  has
been  recited.

To  Veblen,  then,  the  important  factor  in  determining  the  character  of  a
business  period  is  the  discrepancy  between  current  capitalization  and  antici-
pated earning  capacity.  When  the  latter  rises,  business  has  a  season  of  pros-
perity, during  which  capitalization  expands  rapidly.  But  rising  costs  always
undermine  the  basis  for  anticipating  high  profits  and  then  capitalization  is
left  higher  than  anticipated  profits  warrant.  The  latter  situation  characterizes
depression."

15  T.  B.  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise  (New  York,  1904),  ch.  vii.  Professor  E.  E.  A.  Seligman
has  worked  out  a  theory  of  crises  which  resembles  Veblen 's  in  the  run  of  ideas  and  in  phraseology.  See  Ms
introduction  to  The  Currency  Frohlem  and  the  Present  Financial  Situation.  A  series  of  addresses  delivered  at
Columbia  University,  1907-08.


16  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

11.  Sombart's  Theory  of  the  Uneven  Expansion  in  the  Production  of  Organic

and  Inorganic  Goods

Sombart,  like  many  of  the  i^ecent  German  writers,  finds  ill-proportioned
production  the  chief  cause  of  crises ;  but  he  thinks  it  inaccurate  to  say  that  the
over-production  is  in  industrial  equipment.  For  during  the  German  "boom"
which  collapsed  in  1900-01,  over-production  was  quite  as  marked  in  industries
making  equipment  for  electric  lighting  systems,  telephone  plants,  street  rail-
ways, dwellings,  bicycles,  etc.,  as  in  industries  making  machines.  The  real
lack  of  proportion  he  sees  in  the  unlike  degree  of  expansion  in  industries  using
organic  and  inorganic  materials.  The  inorganic  industries,  typified  by  steel,
can  expand  to  an  enormous  extent  within  a  brief  period  without  being  seriously
hampered  by  scarcity  of  raw^  materials.  The  organic  industries,  typified  by
cotton-spinning,  on  the  contrary,  are  always  in  precarious  dependence  upon
the  year's  harvests.  In  the  organic  industries,  one  may  say,  the  condition  of
business  is  determined  by  the  harvests;  in  the  inorganic  industries  the  con-
dition of  business  determines  the  production  of  raw  materials.  The  modern
crisis,  then,  following  upon  a  period  of  prosperity,  is  substantially  the  result
of  the  different  rhythm  of  production  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  realms.
The  organic  industries  dependent  upon  harvests  cannot  keep  pace  with  the
inorganic  when  the  latter  are  being  rapidly  extended  by  heavy  investments
of  capital."

12.  Carver's  Theory  of  the  Dissimilar  Price  Fluctuations  of  Producers'  and

Consumers'  Goods

Carver  has  suggested  a  way  of  accounting  for  business  cycles  by  applying
the  laws  of  value  which  govern  producers'  goods.  He  points  out  that  a  com-
paratively small  change  in  a  factory's  selling  prices  will  cause  a  much  greater
change  in  its  profits,  if  volume  of  output  and  expenses  remain  the  same.
Since  the  value  of  the  factory  as  a  going  concern  is  the  capitalized  value  of
its  prospective  profits,  a  large  increase  of  profits  will  cause  a  large  increase
of  the  factory's  value,  provided  the  high  profits  are  expected  to  continue  long.
Hence  the  law  that  "the  value  of  producers'  goods  tends  to  fluctuate  more
violently  than  the  value  of  consumers'  goods." It  follows  that:

"A  slight  rise  in  the  price  of  consumers'  goods  will  so  increase  the  value  of  the  producers'
goods  which  enter  into  their  production  as  to  lead  to  larger  investments  in  producers'  goods.
The  resulting  larger  market  for  producers'  goods  again  stimulates  the  production  of  such  goods,
and  withdraws  productive  energy  from  the  creation  of  consumers'  goods. This  for  the  time  tends

16  W.  Sombart,  ' '  Die  Storungen  im  deutschen  Wirtschaf tsleben, ' ' Schriften  des Vereins fur  Sooialpolitik
vol.  113,  pp.  130-133.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  17

to  raise  the  price  of  consumers'  goods  still  higher,  and  this  again  to  stimulate  still  further  the
creation  of  producers'  goods.  There  is  no  check  to  this  tendency  until  the  new  stock  of  producers'
goods  begin  to  pour  upon  the  market  an  increased  flow  of  consumers '  goods.  This  tends  to  produce
a  fall  in  their  value,  which  in  turn  produces  a  still  greater  fall  in  the  value  of  producers '  goods,
and  so  the  process  goes. ' '

Thus,  once  more,  prosperity  breeds  crisis  and  depression ;  but  this  time  the
reason  is  found  in  the  dissimilar  fluctuations  which  the  laws  of  value  establish
for  the  goods  which  people  use  and  the  equipment  with  which  they  are  made."


13.  Fisher's  Theory  of  the  Lagging  Adjustment  of  Interest

Another  interesting  suggestion  comes  from  Irving  Fisher.  By  statistics
he  has  shown  that  when  for  any  reason  prices  begin  to  rise,  interest  rates
advance,  but  not  fast  enough  to  offset  the  decline  in  the  purchasing  power  of
the  principal  caused  by  the  rise  of  prices.  During  such  periods,  accordingly,
borrowers  on  the  whole  get  the  better  of  lenders  and  make  high  profits.  Since
the  borrowers  consist  largely  of  active  business  men,  precisely  the  class  of
greatest  foresight,  they  grasp  the  situation  more  quickly  than  lenders.  As  a
result  of  their  desire  to  profit  by  their  opportunity,  loans  are  rapidly  extended.
This  extension  is  effected  largely  by  the  lending  of  bank  credits,  that  is,  by
the  increasing  of  deposit  currency.  The  greater  volume  of  the  currency  com-
bines with  more  rapid  circulation  of  money  and  checks  to  increase  prices  again,
and  so  to  start  the  whole  process  anew  on  a  higher  level.  "There  is  thus  set
up  a  vicious  circle,  which  will  continue  just  as  long  as  the  rate  of  interest  fails
to  make  a  proper  adjustment  to  put  on  the  brakes  and  prevent  over-borrowing."

"But  the  rise  in  interest,  though  belated,  is  progressive,  and,  as  soon  as  it
overtakes  the  rate  of  rise  in  prices,  the  whole  situation  is  changed."  Bor-
rowers can  no  longer  hope  to  make  great  profits,  and  the  demand  for  loans
ceases  to  expand.  Further,  the  higher  rate  of  interest  reduces  the  price  of
many  of  the  securities  used  as  collateral  for  loans.  Business  men  "who  have
counted  on  renewing  their  loans  at  the  former  rates  and  for  the  former  amounts
are  unable  to  do  so.  It  follows  that  some  of  them  are  destined  to  fail."  There
follow  suspicions  regarding  the  solvency  of  the  banks,  runs  for  cash,  forced
curtailment  of  loans,  and  exceedingly  high  rates  of  interest — in  short,  the
phenomena  of  crisis.

The  contraction  of  loans  is  accompanied  by  a  reduction  of  deposit  currency
and  a  slower  circulation  both  of  money  and  of  cheeks.  Hence  prices  decline.
Again  the  rate  of  interest  follows ;  but  just  as  it  was  slow  to  rise  so  now  it  is
slow  to  fall. Then  the  business  men  who  borrow  find  that  the  sluggish  adjust-


17  T.  N.  Carver "A  Suggestion  for  a  Theory  of  Industrial  Depressions,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,
May,  1903,'  pp.  497-500.


18  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

ment  of  interest  reduces  their  profits.  Therefore  loans,  and  the  deposits  based
on  loans,  contract  again.  But  the  shrinking  volume  of  deposit  currency  causes
a  further  fall  of  prices,  and  once  more  interest  lags  behind  and  renews  the
process.  Thus  the  phase  of  depressions  runs  cumulatively  until  at  last  the
progressive  reduction  of  interest  has  overtaken  the  fall  of  prices.  At  this
point  business  men  find  their  profits  rising  to  the  normal  level.  Borrowing
becomes  freer,  the  volume  of  deposit  currency  swells,  prices  start  upward,  and
the  cycle  begins  afresh."


14.  Johannsen's  Theory  of  "Impair  Savings"

The  Neglected  Point  in  Connection  with  Crises^''  which  N.  Johannsen  has
developed  is  really  a  point  in  connection  with  depressions.  Saving,  he  reminds
us,  always  threatens  to  produce  "a  minus  of  demand."  In  periods  of  pros-
perity this  minus  is  cancelled  by  a  plus,  because  the  savings  are  promptly
invested  in  new  construction.  But,  when  a  crisis  comes,  the  volume  of  con-
struction work  shrinks.  The  business  men  engaged  in  all  branches  of  "con-
tracting" begin  to  run  behind,  and  their  employees  are  thrown  out  of  work.
The  industries  which  supply  brick,  lumber,  structural  steel,  rails,  cement,  etc.,
promptly  suffer  a  decline  in  the  demand  for  their  products  and  so  also  do  the
industries  which  cater  to  the  personal  needs  of  the  men  dependent  upon  the
stagnant  industries.

What,  then,  becomes  of  the  ciurrent  savings  which,  if  times  were  good,  would
be  invested  in  construction?  Johannsen  answers  that  they  are  spent  largely
in  lending  upon  or  in  buying  property  which  the  men  in  the  stagnant  industries
are  compelled  to  mortgage  or  to  sell.  Now,  when  savings  are  invested  in  this
fashion,  they  do  not  give  rise  to  any  plus  of  demand  for  fresh  products  to
cancel  the  minus  of  demand  which  the  act  of  saving  creates.  In  other  words,
the  savings  made  in  times  of  depression  are  largely  "impair  savings."  They
increase  the  wealth  of  the  savers,  but  diminish  the  wealth  of  the  community.
For  the  act  of  saving,  when  unaccompanied  by  investments  which  create
demand  for  goods  currently  produced,  disturbs  the  equilibrium  of  production
and  consumption  and  throws  the  whole  business  system  out  of  gear.  ".  .  .  .
if  people  could  be  compelled  to  expend  for  luxuries  such  part  of  their  surplus
income  as  could  not  find  investment  [of  the  demand-producing  kind],  the

18  Irving  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  chapter  iv,  and  chapter  xi,  §§  15  16
17.  Compare  the  same  writer's  summary  statement  of  his  theory  in  Moody's  Magazine,  February  1909'  pp!
110-114,  and  H.  G.  Brown's  paper  "Typical  Commercial  Crises  versus  A  Money  Panic,"  Yale  Bevie'w  Au'eust'
1910.  ' ^ '

19  New  York,  1908.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  19

depression  would  at  once  be  b«'^u|fi^(i^^^^Kl  There  would  not  then  be  an
excess  of  working  forces,  sjpce  ttiey  would  be\bsorbed  in  the  production  of
luxuries,  so  far  as  not  em(Dloyf|AVii^ie3§2Jonsl):uctions,  or  for  purposes  of
replacement.'""

III.  The  MeThuu  uFInvestigation

Beveridge  ascribes  crises  to  industrial  competition.  May  to  the  dispropor-
tion between  the  increase  in  wages  and  in  productivity,  Hobson  to  over-saving,
Aftalion  to  the  diminishing  marginal  utility  of  an  increasing  supply  of  com-
modities, Bouniatian  to  over-capitalization,  SpiethofE  to  over-production  of
industrial  equipment  and  under-production  of  complementary  goods,  Hull  to
high  costs  of  construction,  Lescure  to  declining  prospects  of  profits,  Yeblen  to
a  discrepancy  between  anticipated  profits  and  current  capitalization,  Sombart
to  the  unlike  rhythm  of  production  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  realms,  Carver
to  the  dissimilar  price  fluctuations  of  producers'  and  consumers'  goods,  Fisher
to  the  slowness  with  which  interest  rates  are  adjusted  to  changes  in  the  price
level.

One  seeking  to  understand  the  recurrent  ebb  and  flow  of  economic  activity
characteristic  of  the  present  day  finds  these  numerous  explanations  both  sug-
gestive and  perplexing.  All  are  plausible,  but  which  is  valid?  None  neces-
sarily excludes  all  the  others,  but  which  is  the  most  important?  Each  may
account  for  certain  phenomena ;  does  any  one  account  for  all  the  phenomena  ?
Or  can  these  rival  explanations  be  combined  in  such  a  fashion  as  to  make  a
consistent  theory  which  is  wholly  adequate?

There  is  slight  hope  of  getting  answers  to  these  questions  by  a  logical  process
of  proving  and  criticizing  the  theories.  For  whatever  merits  of  ingenuity  and
consistency  they  may  possess,  these  theories  have  slight  value  except  as  they
give  keener  insight  into  the  phenomena  of  business  cycles.  It  is  by  study  of
the  facts  which  they  purport  to  interpret  that  the  theories  must  be  tested.

20  P.  82.

jSfoTE. In  order  to  bring  out  the  salient  points  which  difEerentiate  the  several  theories  reviewed  above,  I

have  been  obliged  to  omit  much  effective  detail  and  all  corroborating  evidence.  In  particular  most  writers
show  how  the  operation  of  the  factors  upon  which  they  lay  stress  is  reinforced  and  quickened  by  speculation.
Two  contributions  to  this  important  aspect  of  the  subject  deserve  especial  mention — Petrazycki's  book  on
speculation  and  joint-stock  companies,  and  Edward  D.  Jones's  chapter  upon  the  psychology  of  crises.  L.  von
Petrazycki, Aktienwesen  und  Spekulation,  Berlin, 1906;  E.  D.  Jones,  Economic  Crises  (New  York,  1900),  ch.  ix.

I  have  omitted  Pohle's  interesting  attempt  to  base  a  theory  of  crises  upon  the  steady  growth  of  popu-
lation on  the  one  hand,  and  the  unsteady  growth  of  investment  on  the  other  hand,  because  he  has  recently
shifted  his  emphasis.  In  1902  he  held  that  in  order  to  have  proper  equipment  ready  for  the  regular  number
of  new  recruits  who  are  ever  joining  the  industrial  army,  it  is  necessary  to  produce  machines,  raw  material,
etc..  in  larger  quantities  than  the  force  of  old  soldiers  can  use.  But  the  irregularity  with  which  savings  are
invested  prevents  this  desideratum  from  being  realized  every  year.  In  1910  he  agrees  substantially  with
Spiethoff,  holding  that  the  chief  cause  of  crises  is  the  inequality  in  the  formation  of  fixed  and  circulating
capital  adding  simply  that  the  economic  and  social  consequences  of  crises  are  aggravated  by  the  regularity
with  which  population  increases  even  in  times  of  depression.  Ludwig  Pohle,  Bevblherungs'bewegung,  Kapitalhil-
dung,  und  periodische  WirtsehaftsTcrisen  (Gottingen,  1902);  "  Konjunkturschwankungen  und  Konjunkturbericht-
erstattung,"  Zeitschrift  filr  Socialtoissenschaft,  Jan.,  1910.  Neither  have  I  thought  it  necessary  to  include
the  superficial  form  of  the  under- consumption  theory  elaborated  by  Pierre  Vialles  in  La  consommation  et  les
crises  Sconomiques  (Paris,  1903).  Finally,  Mr.  H.  S.  Jevons's  ingenious  attempt  to  revivify  his  father's  "sun-
spot  theory"  scarcely  affords  a  convincing  explanation  of  the  business  cycles  with  which  this  book  is  chiefly
concerned. ("Trade  Muctuations  and  Solar  Activity,"  Contemporary  Beview,  August,  1909.)


20  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

But  the  perspective  of  the  invesigation  would  be  distorted  if  we  set  out  to
test  each  theory  in  turn  by  collecting  evidence  to  confirm  or  to  refute  it.  For
the  point  of  interest  is  not  the  validity  of  any  writer's  views,  but  clear  com-
prehension of  the  facts.  To  observe,  analyze,  and  systematize  the  phenomena
of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  is  the  chief  task.  And  there  is  better
prospect  of  rendering  service  if  we  attack  this  task  directly,  than  if  we  take
the  roimd  about  way  of  considering  the  phenomena  with  reference  to  the
theories.

This  plan  of  attacking  the  facts  directly  by  no  means  precludes  free  use
of  the  results  achieved  by  others.  On  the  contrary,  their  conclusions  suggest
certain  facts  to  be  looked  for,  certain  analyses  to  be  made,  certain  arrange-
ments to  be  tried.  Indeed,  the  whole  investigation  would  be  crude  and  super-
ficial if  we  did  not  seek  help  from  all  quarters.  But  the  help  wanted  is  help
in  making  a  fresh  examination  into  the  facts.

It  is  not  feasible  to  make  a  study  of  all  the  crises  listed  in  the  monographs.
Not  only  is  the  field  too  extensive  to  cover  thoroughly,  but  the  recorded  infor-
mation is  also  too  vague,  too  much  confined  to  the  dramatic  events  of  the  crises,
and  too  scanty  concerning  the  intervening  phases  of  depression  and  prosperity.
Whatever  chance  there  may  be  of  bettering  the  work  already  done  lies  in
securing  data  more  full  and  more  precise  than  the  data  heretofore  employed.
The  minute  examination  of  a  few  business  cycles  therefore  promises  better
results  than  a  general  survey  of  many.  Hence  attention  will  be  concentrated
upon  those  cycles  concerning  which  the  fullest  and  most  exact  knowledge  is
available — the  cycles  of  the  last  two  decades.  By  including  England,  Germany,
and  France,  as  well  as  the  United  States,  a  sufficient  number  of  cases  can  be
had  to  warrant  generalizations.

The  materials  most  important  for  such  an  investigation  are  the  current
reports  of  business  periodicals  and  the  statistical  records  of  business  activities.
Most  stress  must  be  laid  upon  the  latter ;  for  the  problems  to  be  dealt  with  are
largely  problems  of  the  relative  importance  of  different  factors,  or  of  the
general  trend  of  diverse  fluctuations.  Quantitative  analysis  of  the  phenomena
is  needed  quite  as  much  as  qualitative  analysis.  Since  in  his  efforts  to  make
accurate  measurements  the  economic  investigator  cannot  devise  experiments,
he  must  do  the  best  he  can  with  the  cruder  gauges  afforded  by  statistics.

At  best,  the  study  of  statistical  tables  is  a  tedious  task.  In  the  present  case
the  task  is  also  long,  because  there  are  so  many  phases  of  economic  activity
to  be  looked  into.  But  the  figures  may  possess  some  measure  of  interest  and
meaning  from  the  outset,  if  they  appear  as  details  of  a  larger  system.  Accord-
ingly, the  statistical  chapters  are  prefaced  by  a  sketch  of  the  modern  form  of
economic  organization  and  of  the  rhythmical  alternations  of  expansion  and
contraction  which  have  run  their  course  in  the,  world  of  business  since  1890.


CHAPTER  II


THE  ECONOMIC  ORGANIZATION  OP  TODAY


I.  Money  Economy

Money  economy  is  one  of  the  ancient  institutions  which  after  a  checkered
history  has  attained  its  fullest  development  in  our  own  day  under  the  influence
of  machine  production  and  railway  transportation.  The  essential  feature  of
this  institution  is  not  the  use  of  money  as  a  medium  of  exchange ;  but  the  fact
that  economic  activity  takes  the  form  of  making  and  spending  money  incomes.
Instead  of  producing  the  goods  their  families  require,  men  "make  money,"
and  with  their  money  incomes  buy  for  their  own  use  goods  made  by  unknown
hands.  The  exceptions  to  this  rule  presented  by  the  domestic  labors  of  house-
wives, by  the  raising  of  vegetables  in  kitchen  gardens,  by  agricultural  leases
for  shares  in  the  crops,  etc.,  are  the  last  survivals  of  an  earlier  economic  order
in  which  villagers  relied  chiefly  upon  goods  produced  by  their  own  efforts,  and
themselves  consumed  most  of  what  they  made.

The  economic  comfort  or  misery  of  a  modern  family,  accordingly,  depends
not  upon  its  efficiency  in  making  useful  goods  and  its  skill  in  husbanding  sup-
plies, but  upon  its  ability  to  command  an  adequate  money  income  and  upon
its  pecuniary  thrift.  Even  in  years  when  crops  are  short  and  mills  are  idle,
the  family  with  money  need  not  go  cold  or  hungry.  But  the  family  without
money  leads  a  wretched  life  even  in  years  of  abundance.  To  the  single  family,
then,  prosperity  and  depression  appear  not  as  problems  of  the  adequacy  of  the
goods  produced,  but  as  problems  of  the  adequacy  of  money  income.

To  the  nation  the  making  of  money  is  important  in  a  fashion  quite  different.
Comfort  and  misery  do  not  depend  upon  the  aggregate  of  money  incomes
received  by  its  citizens;  they  do  depend  upon  the  abundance  of  useful  goods.
Efficiency  in  producing  useful  goods  is  important  to  an  individual  chiefly
because  it  enhances  his  ability  to  make  money ;  money-making  is  important  to
a  nation  chiefly  because  it  enhances  the  efficiency  of  production.  Natural
resources,  mechanical  equipment,  and  industrial  skill  are  factors  of  funda-
mental importance  under  any  form  of  economic  organization.  But  where
money  economy  dominates,  natural  resources  are  not  developed,  mechanical
equipment  is  not  provided,  industrial  skill  is  not  exercised,  unless  conditions

[21]


22  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

are  such  as  to  promise  a  money  profit  to  those  who  direct  production.  The
elaborate  cooperative  process  by  which  a  nation's  myriad  workers  provide  for
the  meeting  of  each  other's  needs  is  thus  brought  into  precarious  dependence
upon  factors  which  have  but  a  remote  connection  with  the  material  conditions
of  well-being — factors  which  determine  the  prospects  of  making  money.

II.  The  Business  Enterpetse

For  purposes  of  making  money  men  have  gradually  developed  the  modern
business  enterprise — an  organization  which  seeks  to  realize  pecuniary  profits
upon  an  investment  of  capital,  by  a  series  of  contracts  for  the  purchase  and
sale  of  goods  in  terms  of  money.'  These  goods  usually  belong  to  one  of  three
classes :  commodities ;  services,  such  as  labor  and  transportation ;  or  rights,  such
as  bank  credits,  securities,  and  insurance.

1.  Uneven  Development  of  Business  Enterprise  in  Various  Fields

Business  enterprises  of  the  full-fledged  type  have  come  to  occupy  almost
the  whole  field  in  finance,  wholesale  trade,  railway  and  marine  transportation.
They  dominate  mining,  lumbering  and  manufacturing.  In  retail  trade  they
play  an  important  role,  and  in  agriculture  they  have  secured  a  foothold — for
example,  in  sugar,  coffee,  and  rubber  plantations,  in  market  gardens,  nurseries,
dairies,  and  the  like.  One  may  even  regard  the  independent  craftsman  in  his
repair  shop,  the  small  retailer,  and  the  farmer  as  conducting  business  enter-
prises; for  all  these  classes  are  learning  to  apply  business  methods,  and  to
think  of  themselves  as  making  a  profit  rather  than  as  earning  a  livelihood.
The  professions  also  are  being  invaded  by  the  spirit  of  business  enterprise.
Many  newspapers  seem  to  be  managed  with  an  eye  single  to  profit;  not  a  few
legal,  dental,  and  medical  offices  rest  under  a  like  suspicion.  But,  despite  this
wide  extension  of  business  aims  and  methods,  there  still  remain  broad  differ-
ences of  degree  between  the  enterprises  typical  of  the  several  fields  of  effort.
In  size,  in  complexity  of  organization,  in  dependence  on  the  money  market,  in
singleness  of  business  aim,  the  typical  farm,  small  retail  store,  handicraft  shop,
and  professional  (jffice  are  not  equal  to  the  typical  corporate  enterprises  of
wholesale  trade,  transportation,  manufacturing,  lumbering,  mining,  and  finance.
The  highly  organized  enterprises  of  the  latter  fields  constitute  the  world  of
business  par  excellence.

In  the  study  of  business  cycles  this  uneven  development  of  business  organ-
ization in  different  fields  is  highly  important.  For  it  is  within  the  circles  of
full-fledged  business  enterprise  that  the  alternations  of  prosperity  and  depres-
sion appear  most  clearly,  and  produce  their  most  striking  effects. Practically

1  Compare  W.  Sombart,  Der  moderne  Kapitalismus,  vol.  I,  p.  195.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  23

all  of  the  writers  whose  theories  of  crises  have  been  reviewed  agree  tacitly
or  explicitly  upon  this  point.  They  deal  primarily  with  what  goes  on  in  the
centers  of  commerce,  industry,  and  finance.  Branches  of  production  and  trade
which  are  not  organized  in  elaborate  business  enterprises  are  much  less
susceptible  both  to  the  stimulus  of  prosperity  and  the  inhibition  of  de  pression.
In  country  districts,  for  example,  the  pace  of  activity  is  subject  to  seasonal
but  not  to  cyclical  changes  such  as  occur  in  factory  towns.  The  farmers  are
never  thrown  out  of  work,  except  by  bad  weather,  and  they  are  never  over-
rushed  except  by  seed-time  and  harvest.  In  other  words,  the  scope  and  the
intensity  of  prosperity  and  depression  appear  to  depend  upon  the  extent  and
the  perfection  of  business  organization.  The  condition  of  the  inner  world  of
business,  indeed,  affects  powerfully,  and  is  powerfully  affected  by,  what  goes
on  among  the  outside  masses  of  producers  and  distributors ;  but  the  inner  world
always  remains  the  focus  of  interest.

2.  The  Interdependence  of  Business  Enterprises

Not  less  important  for  the  study  of  business  cycles  is  the  thoroughgoing
interdependence  of  business  enterprises.  For  the  accountant's  purpose  each
enterprise  may  be  treated  as  a  separate  unit;  but  for  the  economist's  purpose
all  enterprises  are  so  bound  to  each  other  by  industrial,  commercial,  and  finan-
cial ties  that  none  can  prosper  and  none  can  suffer  without  affecting  others.

As  a  plant  concerned  with  the  handling  of  commodities,  the  typical  enter-
prise is  one  cog  in  a  great  machine.  Our  industries  are  carried  on  by  sets  of
nominally  independent  plants  which  pass  on  goods  to  each  other  in  serial
succession.  For  example,  one  series  embraces  wheat-growers,  grain-carrying
railways,  elevators,  flour  mills,  wholesale  dealers  in  provisions,  bakeries,  and
retail  distributing  agencies.  Each  set  of  members  in  such  a  series  is  depend-
ent upon  the  preceding  set  for  its  chief  supplies  and  upon  the  succeeding
set  for  its  chief  vent.  The  wheat,  the  flour,  and  the  loaves  flow  through  the
successive  sets  of  enterprises  in  a  ceaseless  river,  though  the  volume  of  the  flow
is  not  steady.  Further,  no  industrial  series  is  self-sufficing,  even  as  a  whole.
Each  set  of  enterprises  in  our  example,  from  the  farms  to  the  retail  agencies,
is  industrially  dependent  on  other  industrial  series  which  equip  it  with
buildings,  machines,  fuel,  office  supplies,  etc.  A  peculiar  degree  of  mutual
dependence  exists  between  the  whole  mass  of  industries  on  the  one  hand,  and
the  railways  on  the  other  hand.  Coal  mining  and  the  steel  trade  also  touch
practically  every  industrial  establishment  in  one  way  or  another.  So  far  has
the  process  of  industrial  differentiation  and  integration  been  carried  that  "the
whole  concert  of  industrial  operations  is  to  be  taken  as  a.  machine  process,
made  up  of  interlocking  detailed  processes,  rather  than  as  a  multiplicity  of
mechanical  appliances  each  doing  its  particular  work  in  severalty,'"

2  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  p.  7.


24  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Since  the  continuous  flow  of  goods  through  the  successive  sets  of  enterprises
which  form  interlocking  series,  and  the  transfers  of  goods  between  enterprises
belonging  to  different  industries,  are  maintained  by  contracts  of  purchase  and
sale,  there  is  no  need  to  enlarge  upon  the  commercial  aspect  of  the  inter-
relations. Each  enterprise  is  affected  by  the  fortunes  of  its  customers,  its
competitors,  and  the  purveyors  of  its  supplies.

Financial  interdependence  is  also  in  part  but  another  aspect  of  the  indus-
trial and  commercial  bonds.  Complicated  relationships  of  debtor  and  creditor
arise  from  the  purchase  and  sale  of  goods  upon  credit,  and  make  the  disaster
of  one  enterprise  a  menace  to  many.  On  this  financial  side  the  banks  bear  a
relation  to  all  other  enterprises  like  that  which  the  railways  bear  on  tlie  indus-
trial side ;  for  all  enterprises  buy  bank  credit  much  as  they  buy  transportation.
As  a  serious  congestion  of  traffic  applies  the  brake  to  industrial  operations,
so  the  inability  of  banks  to  lend  applies  the  brake  to  business  dealings.  But
there  is  a  less  obvious  type  of  financial  relationship  which  is  rapidly  assuming
importance.  The  corporate  form  of  organization  makes  easy  the  acquisition
of  a  common  ownership  in  enterprises  nominally  independent  of  each  other.
The  same  capitalist  or  coterie  of  capitalists  often  owns  a  large  or  even  a  con-
trolling interest  in  companies  doing  different  kinds  of  business,  or  the  same
kind  in  different  places.  Thus  the  selling  agent  may  acquire  an  interest  in
the  factory  whose  output  he  handles;  the  manufacturer  may  manage  his  own
retail  stores  or  check  competition  by  buying  stock  in  a  rival  company,  or  secure
his  own  raw  materials  by  taking  over  a  mine ;  the  great  capitalist  may  invest
in  steel  and  real  estate,  in  railways  and  banks,  in  newspapers  and  hotels.  Thus
also  we  have  our  "chain"  shops,  "chain"  banks,  "chain"  newspapers,  "chain"
theatres,  "chain"  lumber-yards,  and  the  like.  Often  the  alliance  is  made  closer
yet  by  one  corporation  buying  stock  in  rival  or  tributary  companies.  The
scale  which  such  relations  have  assumed  is  shown  by  the  Interstate  Commerce
Commission's  report  upon  the  intercorporate  relationships  of  American  rail-
ways. On  June  30,  1906,  the  par  value  of  railway  stocks  outstanding  was
8,884  million  dollars,  of  which  the  railways  themselves  held  4,115  millions.  In
addition,  they  held  323  millions  of  stock  in  other  than  railway  enterprises.^

3.  Pecuniary  versus  Industrial  Factors  in  Business  Prosperity

A  business  enterprise  may  participate  directly  or  indirectly  in  the  work
of  providing  the  nation  with  useful  goods,  or  it  may  not.  For  there  are  divers
ways  of  making  money  which  contribute  nothing  toward  the  nation's  welfare,
and  divers  ways  which  are  positively  detrimental  to  future  welfare.  But,
for  the  understanding  of  prosperity  and  depression,  it  is  more  important  to
observe  that  even  the  enterprises  which  are  most  indubitably  making  useful

3  Intercorporate  BelationsUps  of  Bailways  in  the  United  States  as  of  June  SO,  1906. Special  Eeport  no 1  dp
9  and  48.  f  ■ j  pp-


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  25

goods  do  SO  only  so  far  as  the  operation  is  expected  to  serve  the  primary  busi-
ness end  of  making  profits.  Any  other  attitude,  indeed,  is  impracticable  under
the  system  of  money  economy.  Only  government  and  philanthropy  can  afford
to  make  public  welfare  their  first  consideration.  For  the  man  who  allowed
his  himianitarian  interests  to  control  his  business  policy  would  soon  be  forced
out  of  business.  From  the  business  standpoint  the  useful  goods  produced  or
helpful  services  rendered  are  merely  by-products  of  the  process  of  earning
dividends.  It  follows  that  a  theory  of  modern  prosperity  must  deal  primarily
with  business  conditions — with  the  pecuniary  aspect  of  economic  activity.

The  practice  has  long  prevailed  among  economists  of  neglecting  this  aspect
on  the  ground  that  money  is  merely  a  symbol,  the  use  of  which  makes  no
difference,  save  one  of  convenience,  so  long  as  the  monetary  system  is  not  out
of  order.  The  economists  have  looked  beneath  "the  money  surface  of  things"
to  the  labor  and  goods,  or  the  sacrifices  and  utilities,  which  they  assumed  to
be  the  matters  of  real  concern.*  When  applied  to  the  theory  of  crises,  this
practice  has  diverted  attention  from  the  difficulties  of  business  to  the  difficulties
of  industry,  as  if  the  latter  were  the  fundamental  source  of  economic  ills.  Thus
"over-production"  has  sometimes  been  represented  as  if  it  were  a  chronic  dis-
order of  the  factory  system  as  such,  which  periodically  infects  the  business
world  and  causes  an  epidemic  of  bankruptcies.

Such  a  view  confuses  the  investigation  of  crises  because  it  obscures  the
relations  between  industry,  commerce,  and  business.  The  industrial  process  of
providing  and  transporting  goods,  the  commercial  process  of  collecting  and
redistributing  them,  and  the  business  process  of  making  money  are  measurably
distinct,  although  they  run  side  by  side  and  are  largely  concerned  with  the  same
commodities.  For  the  well-being  of  the  conmiunity,  efficient  industry  and
commerce  are  vastly  more  important  than  successful  money-making.  A  busi-
ness panic  which  did  not  interrupt  the  making  and  distributing  of  wares  desired
by  the  community  would  be  no  great  disaster.  But  the  whip-hand  among  these
three  processes  belongs  none  the  less  to  business,  since  the  very  men  who  as
manufacturers  and  merchants  provide  for  the  common  welfare  base  their
operations  on  the  prospect  of  money  profits.  In  practice,  industry  and  com-
merce are  thoroughly  subordinated  to  business.

To  be  sure,  business  prospects  are  constantly  infiuenced  by  changes  in
industry  and  commerce.  A  new  invention  may  have  important  economic  con-
sequences ;  but  not  unless  it  reduces  costs,  alters  selling  prices,  or  in  some  other
way  affects  the  pecuniary  calculations  of  business  men.  Likewise  a  change
of  commercial  centers  or  methods  may  stimulate  or  depress  business  in  a  given
district.  Such  technical  changes,  indeed,  are  among  the  important  factors
which  business  men  take  into  consideration  in  laying  plans.  In  so  far  forth
they  become  important  factors  for  the  student  of  crises. It  is  not  the  disturb-

4  Compare  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  "The  Rationality  of Economic  Activity,"  Journal  of  Political  Economy,
March,  1910,  pp.  205-215.


26  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

ances  which  they  produce  directly  in  the  production  and  distribution  of  goods,
however,  which  gives  them  weight  as  causes  of  prosperity  or  depression,  but
the  indirect  influence  which  they  exercise  upon  business.

In  fine,  business  cycles  get  their  economic  interest  from  the  changes  which
they  produce  in  the  material  well-being  of  the  community.  This  well-being
depends  upon  the  production  and  distribution  of  useful  goods.  But  the  indus-
trial and  commercial  processes  by  which  goods  are  furnished  are  conducted
by  business  men  in  quest  of  profits.  Thus  the  changes  which  affect  the  com-
munity's well-being  come,  not  from  the  processes  which  directly  minister  to  it,
but  from  the  process  of  making  money.  So  thoroughly  is  this  the  case  that
changes  in  the  technique  of  industry  and  commerce  affect  the  community  pri-
marily by  stimulating  or  retarding  business  activity  and  then  working  back
to  alter  the  volume  of  goods  provided  for  social  consumption.  Accordingly,
the  conclusion  holds  that  an  investigation  into  the  ebb  and  flow  of  contemporary
economic  activity  must  concern  itself  primarily  with  the  phenomena  of  business
traffic — that  is,  of  money-making.^

4.  Factors  Affecting  Pecuniary  Profits

Business  prosperity,  in  its  turn,  depends  upon  the  factors  which  control
present  and  prospective  profits,  together  with  present  and  prospective  ability
to  meet  financial  obligations.  Profits  are  made  by  connected  series  of  pur-
chases and  sales — whether  in  commerce  or  manufacture,  farming  or  mining.
Accordingly  the  margins  between  the  prices  at  which  goods  can  be  bought  and
sold  are  the  fundamental  condition  of  business  prosperity.  Closely  connected
with,  and  in  large  measure  dependent  upon,  price-margins  is  the  other  great
factor — the  volume  of  transactions  effected.

Just  as  the  ever  recurring  changes  within  the  system  of  prices  affect  busi-
ness prosperity  and  through  it  national  welfare,  so  do  changes  in  national
welfare  and  business  prosperity  react  upon  prices.  A  period  of  business
expansion  causes  an  interminable  series  of  readjustments  in  the  prices  of
various  goods.  These  readjustments  in  their  turn  alter  the  pecuniary  prospects
of  the  business  enterprises  which  buy  or  sell  the  commodities  affected,  and
thereby  start  new  changes  in  business  prosperity.  With  the  latter  changes  the
process  begins  anew.  Prices  once  more  undergo  an  uneven  readjustment,  pros-
pects of  profit  become  brighter  or  darker,  business  prosperity  waxes  or  wanes,
prices  feel  the  reflex  influence  of  the  new  business  situation, — and  so  on  with-
out end.


5  Practically  all  the  recent  theories  rest  tacitly  upon  this  basis. Veblen  is  explicit  upon  the  point: Theory
of  Business  Enterprise,  pp.  177-182.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  27


III.  The  System  op  Prices

The  prices  ruling  at  any  given  time  for  the  infinite  variety  of  commodities,
services,  and  rights  which  are  being  bought  and  sold  constitute  a  system.  That
is,  these  prices  are  so  related  to  each  other  as  to  make  a  regular  and  connected
whole.


1.  The  Prices  of  Consum.ers'  Commodities

The  prices  which  retail  merchants  charge  for  consumers'  commodities
afford  the  best  starting-point  for  a  survey  of  this  system.  These  prices  are
loosely  connected  with  each  other;  for  an  advance  in  the  price  of  any  com-
modity usually  creates  an  increased  demand  for  other  commodities  which  can
be  bought  as  substitutes  in  certain  if  not  all  of  its  uses,  and  thus  creates  business
conditions  which  favor  an  advance  in  the  prices  of  these  substitutes.

But  retail  prices  are  more  closely  related  to  the  prices  for  the  same  goods
which  shop-keepers  pay  to  wholesale  merchants,  and  the  latter  to  manufac-
turers. Of  course,  this  series  of  prices  for  consumers'  commodities  often  has
more  or  less  than  three  members,  because  of  the  intervention  of  more  than  one
wholesale  or  jobbing  house  or  of  an  importer  in  the  regular  traffic,  or  because
of  direct  selling  by  manufacturers  to  retail  merchants  or  even  to  consumers.
There  is  wide  diversity  also  in  the  margins  between  the  successive  prices  in
the  series.  These  margins  are  usually  wider  in  retail  than  in  wholesale  trade ;
wider  on  goods  limited  in  sale,  perishable,  requiring  a  large  assortment  for
selection,  subject  to  changes  in  fashion  or  in  season,  than  on  durable  staples;
wider  when  the  manufacturer  sells  directly  to  the  consumer  than  when  whole-
sale and  retail  merchants  intervene;  wider  when  a  monopolist  can  fix  prices
in  his  own  favor  than  under  conditions  of  keen  competition,  etc.  But  these
diversities  are  themselves  measurably  regular,  so  that  the  margins  between  the
successive  prices  in  the  series  for  each  kind  of  commodities  forms  a  tolerable
business  basis  for  making  profits  out  of  the  process  of  supplying  the  com-
munity with  the  goods  it  habitually  uses.


2.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods  in  Relation  to  the  Prices  of  Consumers'

Commodities

The  business  men  engaged  in  squeezing  money  profits  out  of  these  price-
margins  are  seldom  able  to  keep  the  whole  difference  between  selling  and  buying
prices.  From  retailers  back  to  manufacturers  they  require  various  commod-
ities, services,  and  rights  for  the  efficient  conduct  of  their  operations.  For
such  producers'  goods  they  have  to  pay  out  prices  which  eat  into  the  profit-


28  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

margins  on  the  consumers'  goods  in  which  they  deal.  The  most  important
classes  of  these  producers'  goods  are  commodities  such  as  raw  materials  and
current  supplies,  buildings  with  proper  machinery  or  other  equipment,  manual
and  mental  labor,  loans,  leases,  transportation,  insurance,  and  advertising.

To  merchants,  the  prices  paid  for  all  these  producers'  goods  are  important
factors  in  fixing  the  margins  between  the  buying  and  selling  prices  of  the  con-
sumers'  goods  in  which  they  deal.  But,  save  in  the  case  of  transportation  and
certain  kinds  of  labor,  it  is  difficult  to  connect  directly  the  prices  which  figure
as  costs  with  the  margins  upon  which  particular  commodities  change  hands.
For  the  cost  prices  of  the  other  producers'  goods  are  usually  paid  for  the
pecuniary  advantage  of  the  enterprise  as  a  whole,  and  the  accruing  benefits
extend  to  many  transactions  and  often  cover  a  long  time.  The  like  is  true  of
manufacturers,  with  this  modification,  that  they  often  regard  the  margins
between  the  prices  of  their  chief  raw  materials  and  their  leading  products
much  as  merchants  regard  the  margins  between  the  bujdng  and  selling  prices
of  their  staple  wares.  That  is,  manufacturers  often  think  of  the  difference
between  these  particular  prices  as  the  margin  on  which  they  deal,  and  from
which  the  costs  of  their  other  producers'  goods  must  be  deducted  in  figuring
net  profits.


3.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods  in  Relation  to  Antecedent  Prices

With  the  exception  of  labor,  producers'  goods  are  provided,  like  consumers'
goods,  chiefly  by  business  enterprises  operating  on  the  basis  of  margins  between
buying  and  selling  prices.  Hence  the  price  for  any  given  producers'  good  is
related  not  only  to  the  prices  of  the  consumers'  goods  in  the  manufacture  or
distribution  of  which  it  is  used,  but  also  to  the  prices  of  the  various  other
producers'  goods  employed  in  its  own  manufacture  and  distribution.  Thus
the  prices  of  producers'  goods  do  not  form  the  ends  of  the  series  of  price
relationships,  but  the  beginnings  of  new  series  of  relationships  which  run  back-
ward with  countless  ramifications  and  never  reach  definite  stopping  points.
Even  the  prices  of  raw  materials  in  the  hands  of  the  ultimate  producers  are
related  intimately  to  the  prices  of  the  labor,  current  supplies,  machinery,
buildings,  land,  loans,  leases,  etc.,  which  the  farmers,  miners,  lumbermen,  etc.,
employ.

Concerning  the  prices  of  such  producers'  goods  as  consist  of  material  com-
modities no  more  need  be  said.  And  most  of  the  less  tangible  services — loans,
transportation,  insurance — require  but  a  word.  They  are  the  subjects  of  an
organized  business  traffic  in  which  price  margins  are  computed  on  the  same
general  principles  as  prevail  in  the  buying  and  selling  of  commodities.  There-
fore, the  prices  charged  by  the  bank,  the  railway,  and  the  insurance  company


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  29

are  systematically  related  both  to  the  prices  which  these  enterprises  must  pay
for  their  own  producers'  goods  and  to  the  prices  of  the  wares  dealt  in  by  the
enterprises  which  borrow  money,  ship  goods,  and  carry  insurance.

The  price  of  labor  may  seem  to  bring  the  series  to  a  definite  stop  at  least  at
one  point.  For,  in  most  cases,  the  laborer  or  his  union  deals  directly  with
the  employer  or  his  association,  and  the  laborer  does  not  have  a  business  atti-
tude toward  the  production  of  his  own  energy.  But  the  price  which  the  laborer
can  command  is  indubitably  connected  with  the  prices  of  the  consmners'  goods
which  established  habit  has  made  into  a  standard  of  living.  At  this  point,
therefore,  analysis  of  the  interrelations  between  prices  brings  us  not  to  a  full
stop,  but  back  to  our  starting-point, — the  prices  of  consumers'  commodities.


4.  The  Prices  of  Business  Enterprises

Besides  the  prices  of  consumers'  commodities,  of  raw  materials,  and  of
other  producers'  goods,  we  must  take  account  of  the  prices  of  business  enter-
prises themselves.  Occasionally  established  business  enterprises  are  sold  out-
right as  running  concerns.  Promoters  are  also  constantly  offering  new  busi-
ness schemes,  or  reorganizations  of  old  enterprises  for  sale.  But  the  most
important  transactions  of  this  class  are  stock-exchange  dealings  in  the  shares
of  joint-stock  companies.  That  the  prices  of  whole  business  enterprises  or  of
shares  in  them  are  intimately  related  to  the  prices  which  have  been  discussed
is  clear ;  for  these  prices  depend  primarily  upon  present  and  prospective  profits,
and  profits  depend  primarily  upon  price-margins  and  the  volume  of  business
transacted.


5.  The  Prices  of  Services  to  Persons

There  remains  one  other  division  of  the  system  of  prices — a  division  which
has  much  in  common  with  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods  on  the  one  hand  and
with  the  prices  of  labor  as  a  business  adjunct  on  the  other  hand.  It  consists
of  the  prices  of.  the  heterogeneous  services  rendered  to  persons  as  such— not
to  business  enterprises.  Here  belong  the  prices  of  domestic  service,  medical
attendance,  much  instruction,  many  forms  of  amusement,  etc.  The  furnishing
of  such  services  presents  a  certain  contrast  to  the  business  traffic  in  consumers'
goods,  materials,  machinery,  loans,  transportation,  etc.  For  systematic  organ-
ization hag  not  been  developed  to  so  high  a  point,  business  motives  do  not  have
such  unrestricted  scope,  and  the  wares  are  not  standardized  in  equal  measure.


30  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Moreover,  the  prices  wMcli  people  are  willing  to  pay  for  such  services  are
based  on  personal  needs  and  personal  income,  rather  than  on  closely  calculated
chances  of  profit.  The  prices  of  these  services  therefore  form  the  most  loosely
organized  and  irregular  division  of  the  system  of  prices/

/

6.  The  Interrelations  hettveen  Prices

The  value  of  this  classification  of  prices  is  that  it  assists  in  seeing  the
relations  which  bind  all  prices  together  and  make  of  them  a  system.  The  close
relations  between  the  prices  of  consumers'  commodities,  materials,  business
adjuncts  of  all  kinds,  and  of  business  enterprises  are  sufficiently  clear,  and
enough  has  been  said  about  the  looser  bonds  which  unite  the  prices  of  services
to  persons  with  the  larger  field  of  business  traffic.  But  several  other  lines  of
relationship  should  be  indicated  more  definitely.

(1)  On  the  side  of  demand  almost  every  producers'  or  consumers'  good  has
its  possible  substitutes  in  certain  or  in  all  uses.  Through  the  continual  shifting
of  demand,  changes  in  the  price  of  one  commodity  are  often  communicated  to
the  prices  of  its  substitutes,  from  the  latter  to  the  prices  of  their  substitutes,
and  so  on.  An  initial  change,  however,  usually  becomes  smaller  as  it  spreads
out  in  these  widening  circles.

(2)  Similarly,  on  the  side  of  supply,  almost  every  good  has  genetic  rela-
tionships with  other  goods,  made  of  the  same  materials,  or  supplied  by  the
same  set  of  enterprises.  Along  these  lines  also  price-changes  may  spread  over
a  wide  field.  Particularly  important  because  particularly  wide  are  the  genetic
relationships  based  upon  the  use  of  the  same  producers'  goods  in  many  lines
of  trade.  Floating  capital  most  of  all,  in  somewhat  less  degree  transportation
and  certain  general  forms  of  labor,  current  supplies,  machinery  and  plant,  not
to  mention  the  less  important  insurance  and  advertising,  enter  into  the  cost  of

8  A  tabular  survey  may  assist  in  getting  a  general  view  of  the  system  of  prices:
Jr'riees  of  consumers'  commodities  charged  by: Eetail  dealers

Wholesale  dealers
Manufacturers
Prices  of  producers'  goods: Kaw  materials

Current  supplies

Machinery
Buildings,  etc.
Leases
Labor

Bank  loans
Investment  loans

Transportation

Insurance

Advertising
Prices  of  business  enterprises.
Prices  of  services  to  persons.

Behind  the  prices  of  each  group  entered  in  this  classification  stands  an  equally  complex  array  of  antecedent
prices,  and  between  the  several  groups  exist  interrelations  too  intricate  to  be  set  forth  in  tabular  form.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  31

most  commodities.  Accordingly,  a  changed  price  established  for  one  of  these
common  producers'  goods  in  any  important  use  may  extend  to  a  great  diversity
of  other  uses,  and  produce  further  price  disturbances  without  assignable  limits.

(3)  Closely  connected  with  this  genetic  relationship  through  common  pro-
ducers' goods  is  the  relationship  through  business  competition,  both  actual  and
potential.  Insofar  as  effective  competition  exists,  a  state  of  price-margins
which  makes  any  one  trade  decidedly  more  or  less  profitable  than  other  trades
in  the  same  market  area  cannot  long  maintain  itself.  For  sooner  or  later  the
infliix  or  efflux  of  capital  so  changes  the  supply  of  the  commodities  concerned
as  to  restore  a  balance  on  the  basis  of  cost  prices.

(4)  Present  prices  are  affected  by  prices  of  the  recent  past  and  the  antici-
pated prices  of  the  near  future.  Indeed,  present  prices  are  largely  determined
by  past  bargains,  which  established  time  contracts.  Thus  the  price  system  has
no  definable  limits  in  time.  No  analysis  can  get  back  to  the  ultimate  term  in
the  endless  series  of  bargains  which  helped  to  make  the  prices  of  the  present.

(5)  Nor  has  the  system  of  prices  any  logical  beginning  or  end.  At  what-
ever point  analysis  may  start  to  follow  the  interlocking  links,  to  that  point  will
analysis  come  again  if  it  proceeds  far  enough.  The  above  analysis,  for  example,
began  with  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods  at  retail.  These  prices  are  paid
out  of  personal  incomes.  But  these  incomes  are  themselves  aggregates  of  prices
received  for  labor,  for  the  use  of  loan  funds,  or  for  the  use  of  rented  property ;
or  they  are  aggregates  of  the  net  price-margins  which  yield  profits.  Thus  the
system  of  prices  is  an  endless  chain.


7.  The  Role  of  Prices  in  Economic  Life

Prices,  then,  form  a  system — a  highly  complex  system  of  many  parts  con-
nected with  each  other  in  diverse  ways,  a  system  infinitely  flexible  in  detail
yet  stable  in  the  essential  balance  of  its  interrelations,  a  system  like  a  living
organism  in  its  ability  to  -recover  from  the  serious  disorders  into  which  it
periodically  falls.

The  most  significant  fact  about  the  system  of  prices,  however,  is  the  function
it  performs  in  the  economic  life  of  nations.  It  serves  as  a  social  mechanism
for  carrying  on  the  process  of  providing  goods.  For  prices  are  the  means
which  make  possible  the  elaborate  exchanges,  and  the  consequent  specialization,
which  characterize  the  modern  world.  They  are  the  source  from  which  family
income  is  derived,  and  the  means  by  which  goods  are  obtained  for  family  con-
sumption; for  both  income  and  cost  of  living— the  two  jaws  of  the  vice  in
which  the  modiern  family  is  squeezed— are  aggregates  of  prices.  Prices  also
render  possible  the  rational  direction  of  economic  activity  by  accounting,  for
accounting  is  based  upon  the  principle  of  representing  all  the  heterogeneous


32  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

commodities,  services,  and  rights  with  which  a  business  enterprise  is  concerned
in  terms  of  money  price.  Most  important  of  all,  the  margins  between  different
prices  within  the  system  hold  out  that  hope  of  pecuniary  profit,  which  is  the
motive  power  that  drives  our  business  world.

IV.  The  Guidance  of  Economic  Activity

1.  The  Role  Played  h-y  Technical  Experts

The  making  and  distributing  of  goods  by  the  elaborate  modern  methods
requires  highly  skilled  direction.  On  the  technical  side  the  work  is  planned
by  and  executed  under  the  supervision  of  civil,  mechanical,  mining,  and  elec-
trical engineers,  designers,  industrial  chemists,  "efl&ciency  experts,"  etc.  These
are  the  men  who  know  how  to  extract  raw  materials,  refine  and  manufacture
them,  devise  and  operate  machinery,  organize  working  forces, — in  short,  the
men  who  know  how  to  secure  the  physical  efficiency  of  economic  effort.  By
applying  the  results  and  the  methods  of  science  to  the  every  day  work  of  the
world,  they  have  led  the  rapid  advance  in  the  technique  of  production  of  which
we  feel  so  proud.

2.  The  Role  Played  by  Enterprisers'

But  in  no  country  in  the  world  are  these  technical  experts  allowed  free
scope  in  directing  the  work  of  providing  material  goods.  Higher  authority
is  assigned  by  the  money  economy  to  another  class  of  experts,  business  men
who  are  skilled  not  in  making  goods,  but  in  making  money.  As  an  employee
of  the  business  man,  the  engineer  must  subordinate  his  interest  in  mechanical
efficiency  to  his  superior's  interest  in  profitable  investment.  The  chief  role  in
directing  what  use  shall  be  made  of  the  country's  natural  resources,  machinery,
and  labor  is  therefore  played  by  its  enterprisers.

But  who  and  what  are  these  enterprisers  ?  The  classical  economists  assumed
that  there  stood  at  the  head  of  the  typical  business  enterprise  a  capitalist-
employer,  who  provided  a  large  part  of  the  capital  invested,  assumed  the
pecuniary  risk,  performed  the  "work  of  superintendence,"  and  pocketed  the
profits.  Many  enterprisers  of  this  versatile  type  remain  today ;  but  the  extra-
ordinary growth  in  size  and  influence  of  the  joint-stock  company  has  given
greater  prominence  to  another  form  of  business  management.

The  large  corporation,  dominant  in  the  business  of  today,  is  owned  by  a
miscellaneous  and  shifting  body  of  stockholders. The  funds  required  for  fixed

investment  are  usually  provided  in  some  measure  by  these  owners,  but  in  larger

•

9  Among  the  various  aliases  under  which  the  old  "capitalist-employer"  and  his  successors  pass  today,
"enterpriser"  seems  the  least  objectionable.  It  is  an  old  English  word,  recently  brought  back  into  use  at
almost  the  same  time  by  P.  A.  Fetter,  Principles  of  Economics  (New  York,  1904),  and  by  H.  Stanley  Jevons,
Essays  on  Economics  (London,  1905).


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  33

part  by  bondholders,  who  may  or  may  not  own  shares  as  well  as  bonds.  The
chief  pecuniary  risks  are  borne  by  the  shareholders,  but  ordinarily  under  pro-
visions which  limit  their  liability  to  the  sums  which  they  have  put  into  their
shares.  The  work  of  management  is  largely  dissociated  from  ownership  and
risk.  The  stockholders  delegate  the  supervision  of  the  corporation's  affairs
to  a  committee — the  directors — and  the  directors  turn  over  the  task  of  admin-
istration to  a  set  of  general  officers.  The  latter  are  commonly  paid  fixed
salaries,  though  they  may  receive  in  addition  a  percentage  of  the  profits,  or
hold  stock  in  their  own  right.

In  such  an  organization  it  is  difficult  to  find  anyone  who  corresponds  closely
to  the  capitalist-employer.  Certainly  the  typical  stockholder,  who  takes  no
part  in  managing  the  corporation  beyond  sending  in  his  proxies  to  be  voted  at
the  annual  meeting,  does  not  fill  the  bill.  ISTeither  does  the  typical  director,
who  confines  such  attention  as  he  may  give  the  corporation's  affairs  to  pass-
ing on  questions  of  general  policy,  selecting  officers,  criticizing  or  approving
their  reports,  and  the  like.  Finally,  the  general  officers,  dependent  on  the
directors,  remunerated  largely  if  not  wholly  by  salaries,  and  practicing  among
themselves  an  elaborate  division  of  labor,  have  no  such  discretion  and  carry
no  such  risk  as  the  capitalist-employer.  The  latter,  in  fine,  has  been  replaced
by  a  "management,"  which  includes  several  active  directors  and  high  officials,
and  often  certain  financial  advisers,  legal  counsel,  and  large  stockholders  who
are  neither  directors  nor  officials.  It  is  this  group  which  decides  what  shall
be  done  with  the  corporation's  property.

In  other  cases,  however,  a  single  enterpriser  dominates  the  corporation,  and
wields  full  authority.  The  stockholders  elect  his  candidates  to  office,  the
directors  defer  to  his  judgment,  the  officials  act  as  his  agents.  His  position
may  be  firmly  entrenched  by  outright  ownership  of  a  majority  of  the  voting
shares,  or  may  rest  upon  personal  influence  over  the  owners  of  voting  shares
sufficient  to  carry  elections.  In  these  "one-man"  corporations  the  theoretical
division  of  authority  and  function  becomes  a  legal  fiction.  Practically,  the
dominating  head  of  affairs,  who  may  not  be  an  officer  or  even  a  director,  cor-
responds to  the  old  capitalist-employer,  except  for  the  fact  that  he  furnishes
a  far  smaller  proportion  of  the  capital,  carries  a  far  smaller  proportion  of  the
pecuniary  risk,  and  performs  a  far  smaller  proportion  of  the  detailed  labor
of  superintendence.  These  limitations  do  not  restrict,  but  on  the  contrary
enhance  his  power,  because  they  mean  that  the  individual  who  "owns  the
control,"  or  dominates  those  who  own  it,  can  determine  the  use  of  a  mass  of
property  and  labor  vastly  greater  than  his  own  means  would  permit.

Thus,  while  the  corporate  form  of  organization  has  made  a  theoretical
division  of  the  leadership  of  business  enterprises  among  several  parties  at
interest,  it  has  also  made  possible  in  practice  a  centralization  of  power.  The
great  captains  of  finance  and  industry  wield  an  authority  swollen  by  the  capital


34  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

which  their  prestige  attracts  from  thousands  of  investors,  and  often  augmented
still  further  by  working  alliances  among  themselves.  Among  the  enterprisers
of  the  whole  country,  this  small  coterie  exercises  an  influence  out  of  proportion
not  only  to  their  numbers  but  also  to  their  wealth.  The  men  at  the  head  of
smaller  enterprises,  while  legally  free  to  do  as  they  will  with  their  own,  find
their  field  of  initiative  limited  by  the  operations  of  these  magnates.

Another  result  of  the  rise  of  large  corporations  controlled  by  one  or  by  a
few  individuals  is  that  the  latter  have  an  opportunity  to  make  money  for  them-
selves at  the  expense  of  the  enterprise  itself,  or  at  the  expense  of  the  other
parties  at  interest.  By  giving  lucrative  contracts  to  construction  or  repair
companies  in  which  they  are  interested,  by  utilizing  their  advance  information
of  the  corporation's  affairs  for  speculation  in  the  prices  of  its  shares,  by  rigging
its  accounts  for  the  same  purpose,  by  making  loans  or  granting  secret  rebates
to  other  enterprises  in  which  the}^  are  interested,  and  by  other  shifts,  it  is  often
possible  for  an  inner  ring  to  make  profits  out  of  wrecking  the  corporation  or
defrauding  the  outside  holders  of  stock  and  bonds.  Of  course  such  temptations
are  resisted  in  the  great  majority  of  cases,  but  scandals  of  this  kind  occur
with  sufficient  frequency  to  invalidate  the  easy  assumption  that  every  business
enterprise  is  managed  to  make  money  for  the  whole  body  of  its  owners.

Within  the  class  of  enterprisers  there  has  gradually  been  differentiated  a
special  set,  which  plays  an  exceptionally  active  role  in  guiding  economic  activity
— promoters.  The  promoter's  special  province  is  to  find  and  bring  to  the  atten-
tion of  investors  new  opportunities  for  making  money:  new  natural  resoTirces
to  be  exploited,  new  processes  to  be  developed,  new  products  to  be  manufac-
tured, new  organizations  of  existing  business  enterprises  to  be  arranged,  etc.
But  the  promoter  is  seldom  more  than  an  explorer  who  points  out  the  way  for
fresh  advances  of  the  army  of  industry.  When  an  enterprise  of  his  imagi-
nation has  been  organized  and  begun  operations,  the  promoter  does  not  often
retain  the  leadership  for  long.  As  permanent  officers  men  of  more  cautious
temper  and  more  systematic  habits  commonly  take  command.

3.  The  Role  Played  hy  Lenders

The  enterprisers,  indeed,  do  not  have  unlimited  discretion  in  deciding  what
use  shall  be  made  of  the  available  resources,  equipment,  and  labor.  In  matters
of  importance  their  decisions  are  subject  to  review  by  a  higher  court.  For
most  business  projects  require  the  use  of  funds  borrowed  from  banks,  large
capitalists,  or  from  the  investing  public,  and  this  fact  gives  the  lenders  an
effective  veto  power  over  proposals  which  do  not  meet  their  approbation.

Whenever  an  enterpriser  applies  to  an  individual  capitalist  to  take  an
interest  in  some  project,  to  a  bank  to  discount  his  notes,  or  to  the  investing
public  to  buy  bonds,  he  must  satisfy  the  lenders  of  his  ability  to  keep  up  the


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  35

interest  and  to  repay  the  principal.  Even  when  the  applicant  can  provide
collateral  security  for  the  loan,  and  obviously  when  he  cannot,  the  lender's
decision  depends  largely  upon  his  own  judgment  regarding  the  business  pros-
pects of  the  intended  venture.  To  aid  their  officers  in  forming  intelligent
decisions,  banks  are  coming  to  require  applicants  for  loans  to  make  on  stand-
ard forms  systematic  statements  of  their  financial  standing  and  projects.  In
addition,  the  banks  and  the  houses  which  grant  mercantile  credits  subscribe
to  commercial  agencies  and  maintain  credit  departments  of  their  own  for  the
purpose  of  collecting  and  classifying  information  about  the  business  standing
and  prospects  of  their  customers.  Similarly,  corporations  which  offer  bonds
or  stocks  for  sale  find  it  advisable  to  publish  advertisements  and  circulars
setting  forth  their  financial  condition,  the  purposes  for  which  money  is  being
raised,  and  the  anticipated  profitableness  of  the  extensions  in  view.  Affidavits
from  certified  public  accountants,  legal  counsel,  and  consulting  engineers  are
often  appended  to  lend  these  statements  greater  force.

The  review  of  the  projects  of  enterprisers  by  lenders,  then,  is  no  perfunctory
affair.  Nor  is  its  practical  influence  upon  the  guidance  of  economic  activity
negligible..  There  are  always  being  launched  more  schemes  than  can  be  financed
with  the  available  funds.  In  rejecting  some  and  accepting  others  of  these
schemes,  the  men  of  money  are  taking  a  very  influential  though  not  a  very
conspicuous  part  in  determining  how  labor  shall  be  employed,  what  products
shall  be  made,  and  what  localities  built  up.

Not  all  lenders,  however,  are  able  to  make  intelligent  decisions.  The  great
mass  of  small  investors  and  not  a  few  of  the  large  lack  the  experience  or  the
ability  to  discriminate  wisely  between  profitable  and  unprofitable  schemes.
Many  such  folk  put  their  money  into  savings  banks,  rely  upon  the  advice  of
friends  who  are  better  equipped,  consult  with  their  bankers,  take  counsel  from
the  financial  press,  or  follow  what  they  suppose  to  be  the  lead  of  some  con-
spicuous figure  in  high  finance.  Not  being  able  to  obtain  from  impartial  sources
or  personal  examination  the  data  necessary  for  forming  an  independent  judg-
ment, they  cannot  work  out  their  problems  along  strictly  rational  lines.  Hence
they  are  peculiarly  subject  to  the  influence  of  feeling  in  matters  where  feeling
is  a  dangerous  guide.  The  alternating  waves  of  overconfidence  and  unreas-
oning timidity  which  sweep  over  the  investment  market  are  among  the  most
characteristic  phenomena  of  business  cycles.  Even  those  who  are  looked  to
for  advice  are  not  wholly  immune  from  the  contagion  of  emotional  aberration.
It  follows  that  the  guidance  of  economic  activity  by  the  investing  class  is  not
strictly  comparable  with  the  intelligent  review  of  plans  by  competent  experts.

A  more  vigorous  and  more  intelligent  leadership  is  exercised  by  the  larger
capitalists.  They  excel  the  investing  public  not  only  in  means  of  securing
information  and  in  business  sagacity,  but  also  in  ability  to  control  conditions.
The  greatest  lenders  become  perforce  much  more  than  lenders. Over  the


36  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

enterprises  in  which  they  embark  large  sums  they  must  keep  watchful  eyes,
They  support  the  prices  of  their  securities  on  the  stock  market,  seek  to  maintain
profitable  connections  with  customers  and  financial  institutions,  keep  informed
concerning  the  business  of  competitors,  arrange  consolidations,  plan  dividend
disbursements,  and  the  like — in  short,  care  for  all  the  varied  financial  interests
of  the  enterprises  in  which  their  fortunes  and  their  prestige  are  at  stake.  On
the  highest  levels  of  business  success,  indeed,  the  functions  of  the  investor  and
the  enterpriser  merge  into  each  other.  The  great  capitalist  becomes  a  great
promoter.  He  not  only  vetoes  schemes,  but  forms  them  and  sees  that  they  are
carried  out.


4.  The  Role  Played  Tyy  Government

A  fundamental  difference  of  principle  sets  off  the  role  played  by  govern-
ment in  guiding  economic  activity  from  that  played  by  business  enterprises.
While  business  enterprises  aim  at  making  money,  government  aims  at  securing
public  welfare.

Notoriously,  this  broad  difference  of  principle  is  sadly  blurred  in  practice.
Even  in  the  most  democratic  countries,  public  welfare  is  not  always  the  ruling
passion  of  the  men  elected  to  office.  Besides,  public  welfare  remains  so  vague
a  concept  as  to  leave  wide  room  for  differences  of  opinion  about  the  relative
value  of  rival  policies  proposed  for  its  promotion.  Moreover,  among  the
citizens  of  a  money  economy  the  habit  of  applying  pecuniary  tests  and  accepting
pecuniary  standards  gives  a  strong  commercial  flavor  to  their  very  statesman-
ship. Finally,  government  is  forced  to  pursue  its  social  ends  largely  by  busi-
ness methods.  It  must  count  the  cost  even  when  it  cannot  count  the  gains  of
what  it  does  in  dollars,  and  by  some  shift  it  must  raise  a  money  revenue  to
defray  its  money  outgo.  But,  after  all  the  necessary  qualifications  have  been
made,  it  still  holds  true  that  in  dealing  with  economic  problems  government
keeps  closer  to  fundamental  issues  than  is  feasible  for  business  men.  Grovern-
ment  can  consider  what  needs  it  is  important  to  satisfy,  while  business  men
must  consider  what  market  demand  it  is  profitable  to  supply  or  profitable  to
create.

Were  this  difference  of  aim  the  sole  difference  between  the  public  and
private  guiding  of  economic  activity,  society  would  probably  be  organized  on
the  basis  of  state  socialism  instead  of  on  the  basis  of  money  economy.  But
there  is  this  further  difference,  that  government  is  far  less  efficient  in  pursuing
its  aim  of  social  welfare  than  business  enterprise  in  pursuing  its  aim  of  making
money.  The  scope  actually  accorded  to  government  in  managing  industry  has
been  affected  no  less  by  apprehension  of  this  shortcoming  than  by  appreciation
of  government's  function  as  the  guardian  of  common  interests.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  37

The  few  services  which  are  almost  everywhere  performed  by  govermnent
are  services  in  which  management  for  profit  is  deemed  quite  incompatible  with
public  welfare.  Schools  run  for  profit  would  not  teach  the  children  of  the  very
poor ;  sanitary  bureaus  run  for  profit  could  not  force  their  services  upon  com-
munities which  need  attention,  etc.  The  longer  list  of  services  which  in  some
places  are  assumed  by  government  and  in  others  left  to  business  enterprise  fall
mainly  into  four  classes :  undertakings  like  water  supply,  street  cars,  and  rail-
ways which  are  most  economically  managed  as  monopolies  and  therefore  open
to  the  suspicion  of  practicing  extortion ;  undertakings  like  the  management  of
forests  in  which  the  community  is  interested  in  conserving  sources  of  supply
over  a  longer  period  than  competing  business  enterprises  think  it  profitable  to
regard;  undertakings  like  the  improvements  of  rivers  and  harbors,  the  recla-
mation of  waste  lands,  and  the  building  of  canals  in  which  the  prospects  of
profit  are  not  sufficiently  bright  to  attract  the  requisite  amount  of  private
capital ;  and  undertakings  like  the  salt,  tobacco,  mining,  and  lottery  monopolies
of  Europe  which  are  frankly  exploited  by  government  for  the  sake  of  raising
revenue.

Over  a  far  wider  field,  government  affects  the  guidance  of  economic  activity
by  trying  to  prevent  the  pursuit  of  private  profit  from  clashing  with  public
welfare.  Factories  are  required  to  adopt  expensive  safeguards  for  the  benefit
of  their  employees  or  patrons;  they  are  forbidden  to  employ  the  cheap  labor
of  yomig  children,  to  keep  women  at  work  more  than  eight  hours  a  day,  etc.
Most  of  these  regulations  are  negative  in  character;  but  government  also
attempts  to  direct  business  enterprise  into  undertakings  which  are  claimed  to
be  socially  advantageous  though  unprofitable  without  assistance  from  the  state.
Protective  tariffs  upon  imports,  bounties  upon  the  production  of  sugar,  and
ship  subsidies  are  examples  in  point.

Still  more  in  general,  the  whole  plan  of  raising  public  revenues  and  deciding
public  expenditures,  the  methods  of  providing  for  the  public  defense  and  main-
taining domestic  order,  the  monetary  system  and  even  the  form  of  political
institutions,  in  short,  everything  government  is  and  does,  influences  the  direction
of  economic  activity.  For  the  money  economy  is  so  flexible  a  form  of  organ-
ization that  the  prospects  of  profits  and  therefore  the  direction  of  economic
activity  by  private  initiative  are  affected  by  a  thusand  acts  of  government  done
for  other  than  economic  ends.

5.  The  Alleged  " PlanUsmess"  of  Production

With  technical  experts  to  guide  the  making  of  goods,  business  experts  to
guide  the  making  of  money,  lenders  to  review  all  plans  requiring  large  invest-
ments, and  government  to  care  for  the  public  welfare,  it  may  seem  as  if  the
money  economy  provides  a  staff  and  a  procedure  adequate  to  the  task  of
directing  economic  activity,  vast  and  difficult  as  that  task  may  be. This


38  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

impression  is  strengthened  by  observing  that  each  class  of  business  leaders  is
spurred  to  efficiency  and  deterred  from  recklessness  by  danger  of  pecuniary
loss.  The  engineer  who  blunders  is  discharged,  the  enterpriser  who  blunders
goes  into  bankruptcy,  the  lender  who  blunders  loses  his  money.  Thus  the
guides  who  misdirect  the  industrial  army  are  always  being  eliminated  from
the  number  of  those  who  lead.  On  the  other  hand,  those  who  succeed  are  always
being  promoted  to  posts  of  wider  power.  The  successful  engineer  is  trusted
with  larger  commissions,  the  successful  enterpriser  uses  his  profits  to  extend
his  business,  the  successful  investor  has  more  money  to  lend.

With  this  powerful  stimulation  of  individual  efficiency,  the  money  economy
unites  an  opportunity  for  cooperation  on  a  grand  scale.  By  paying  money
prices,  the  leaders  can  enlist  the  aid  of  laborers  who  contribute  work  of  all
kinds,  of  expert  advisers  who  contribute  special  knowledge,  of  landlords  who
contribute  the  uses  of  their  property,  and  of  investors  who  contribute  the  uses
of  their  funds.  And  all  these  classes  can  be  made  to  work  in  disciplined  order
toward  the  execution  of  a  single  plan.

This  union  between  encouragement  of  individual  efficiency  and  opportunity
for  wide  cooperation  is  the  great  merit  of  the  money  economy.  It  provides  a
basis  for  what  is  unquestionably  the  best  system  of  directing  economic  activity
which  men  have  yet  practiced. Nevertheless,  the  system  has  serious  limitations.

1.  The  money  economy  provides  for  effective  coordination  of  effort  within
each  business  enterprise,  but  not  for  effective  coordination  of  effort  among
independent  enterprises.

The  two  schemes  of  coordination  differ  in  almost  all  respects.  Coordi-
nation within  an  enterprise  is  the  result  of  careful  planning  by  experts ;  coordi-
nation among  independent  enterprises  cannot  be  said  to  be  planned  at  all;
rather  is  it  the  unplanned  result  of  natural  selection  in  a  struggle  for  business
survival.  Coordination  within  an  enterprise  has  a  definite  aim — the  making
of  profits;  coordination  among  independent  enterprises  has  no  definite  aim,
aside  from  the  conflicting  aims  of  the  several  units.  Coordination  within  an
enterprise  is  maintained  by  a  single  authority  possessed  of  power  to  carry  its
plans  into  effect ;  coordination  among  independent  enterprises  depends  on  many
different  authorities  contending  with  each  other,  and  without  power  to  enforce
a  common  programme  except  so  far  as  one  can  persuade  or  coerce  others.  As
a  result  of  these  conditions,  coordination  within  an  enterprise  is  characterized
by  economy  of  effort ;  coordination  among  independent  enterprises  by  waste.

In  detail,  then,  economic  activity  is  planned  and  directed  with  skill;  but
in  the  large  there  is  neither  general  plan  nor  central  direction.  The  charge
that  "capitalistic  production  is  planless"  therefore  contains  both  an  important
element  of  truth  and  a  large  element  of  error.  Civilized  nations  have  not  yet
developed  sufficient  intelligence  to  make  systematic  plans  for  the  sustenance
of  their  populations ;  they  continue  to  rely  on  the  badly  coordinated  efforts  of


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  39

private  initiative.  Marked  progress  has  been  made,  however,  in  the  skill  with
which  the  latter  efforts  are  directed,  and  also  in  the  scale  on  which  they  are
organized.  The  growth  in  the  size  of  business  enterprises  controlled  by  a  single
management  is  a  gain,  because  it  increases  the  portion  of  the  field  in  which
close  coordination  of  effort  is  feasible.

2.  But,  as  pointed  out  above,  the  managerial  skill  of  business  enterprises
is  devoted  to  making  money.  If  the  test  of  efficiency  in  the  direction  of
economic  activity  be  that  of  determining  what  needs  are  most  important  for
the  common  welfare  and  then  satisfying  them  in  the  most  economical  manner,
the  present  system  is  subject  to  a  further  criticism.  For,  in  nations  where  a
few  have  incomes  sufficient  to  gratify  trifling  whims  and  where  many  cannot
buy  things  required  to  maintain  their  own  efficiency  or  to  give  proper  training
to  their  children,  it  can  hardly  be  argued  that  the  goods  which  pay  best  are
the  goods  most  needed.  It  is  no  fault  of  the  individual  business  leaders  that
they  take  prospective  profits  as  their  own  guide.  On  the  contrary,  they  are
compelled  to  do  so ;  for  the  men  who  mix  too  much  philanthropy  with  business
soon  cease  to  be  leaders.  But  a  system  of  economic  organization  which  forces
men  to  accept  so  artificial  an  aim  as  pecuniary  profit  cannot  guide  their  efforts
with  certainty  toward  their  own  ideals  of  public  welfare.  The  business  man-
agement of  single  enterprises  may  be  admirably  systematic  in  detail ;  but  it  is
controlled  by  no  large  hinnan  purpose.

3.  Even  from  the  point  of  view  of  business,  prospective  profit  is  an  uncer-
tain, flickering  light.  For  it  has  already  been  shown  that  profits  depend  upon
two  variables — on  margins  between  selling  and  buying  prices  and  on  the  volume
of  trade, — related  to  each  other  in  unstable  fashion,  and  each  subject  to  per-
turbations from  a  multitude  of  unpredictable  causes.  That  the  system  of  prices
has  its  own  order  is  clear ;  but  it  is  not  less  clear  that  this  order  fails  to  afford
certainty  of  business  success.  Men  of  long  experience  and  proved  sagacity
often  find  their  calculations  of  profit  upset  by  conjunctures  which  they  could
not  anticipate.  Thus  the  money  economy  confuses  the  guidance  of  economic
activity  by  interjecting  a  large  element  of  chance  into  every  business  venture.

4.  The  hazards  to  be  assumed  grow  greater  with  the  extent  of  the  market
and  with  the  time  which  elapses  between  the  initiation  and  the  fruition  of  an
enterprise.  But  the  progress  of  industrial  technic  is  steadily  widening  markets,
and  requiring  heavier  investments  of  capital  for  future  production.  Hence
the  share  in  economic  leadership  which  falls  to  lenders,  that  of  reviewing  the
various  chances  offered  them  for  investment,  presents  increasing  difficulties.
And,  as  has  been  shown,  a  large  proportion  of  these  lenders,  particularly  of
the  lenders  on  long  time,  lack  the  capacity  and  the  training  for  the  succesful
performance  of  such  work.

These  defects  in  the  system  of  guiding  economic  activity  and  the  bewildering
complexity  of  the  task  itself  allow  the  processes  of  economic  life  to  fall  into


40  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

those  recurrent  disorders  which,  constitute  crises  and  depressions.  Much
patient  analysis,  however,  is  required  to  discover  just  how  these  disorders  arise,
and  why,  instead  of  becoming  chronic,  they  lead  after  a  time  to  the  return  of
prosperity.


V.  International  Diffeeenges  in  Economic  Organization

1.  The  Fundamental  Similarity  of  Organisation

In  its  broader  features,  the  economic  organization  of  the  United  States,
England,  France,  and  Germany  is  substantially  the  same.  Money  economy
prevails  in  all  four  countries.  In  each  the  business  enterprise  is  the  dominant
form  of  organization  for  making  money,  and  in  each  the  business  enterprises
engaged  in  wholesale  trade,  manufactures,  mining,  lumbering,  transportation,
and  finance  show  a  higher  degree  of  development  than  the  business  enterprises
engaged  in  handicraft,  petty  trade,  farming,  and  the  professions.  Everywhere
the  business  enterprises,  though  nominally  independent,  are  so  bound  together
by  industrial,  commercial,  and  financial  bonds  that  "the  injury  of  one  is  the
'concern  of  all."  Everywhere  the  making  of  goods  is  subordinated  to  the
making  of  money,  so  that  economic  welfare  depends  on  the  prosperity  of  busi-
ness. Everywhere  economic  activity  is  directed  by  technical  experts,  enter-
prisers, investors,  and  governments,  and  everywhere  there  exists  the  same
combination  of  careful  planning  within  each  business  enterprise  and  lack  of  a
general  plan  for  the  guidance  of  all  enterprises.  Finally,  the  organization  of
the  system  of  prices  and  its  role  in  the  business  world,  the  influence  on  profits
exercised  by  the  volume  of  trade  and  the  factors  which  condition  it,  the
character  of  the  means  of  payment  in  use,  and  the  dependence  of  business  upon
savings  and  investment  are  much  the  same  in  Western  Europe  as  in  North
America.  The  framework  of  economic  culture,  in  short,  belongs  to  no  one
country.

But  this  substantial  uniformity  of  general  scheme  does  not  preclude  a
myriad  of  differences,  in  detail.  Those  of  chief  moment  for  the  theory  of
business  cycles  appear  to  be  the  following.


2.  The  Relative  Importance  of  Different  Industries

A  larger  proportion  of  the  English  population  is  engaged  in  manufacturing
industries  than  in  any  of  the  other  countries,  and  conversely  a  smaller  pro-
portion is  engaged  in  agriculture.  Hence  the  business  prosperity  of  England
depends  less  on  the  prosperity  of  her  farmers  than  is  the  case  in  France,


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  41

Germany,  or  the  United  States.'"  On  the  other  hand,  foreign  commerce  is
greater  both  relatively  and  absolutely  in  England  than  in  our  other  countries,
and  consequently  English  business  cycles  are  affected  in  exceptional  degree  by
the  state  of  foreign  markets.

3.  Thrift  and  Enterprise

The  French  have  decidely  less  of  the  spirit  of  business  enterprise  than  the
Americans,  English,  or  Germans.  Their  railways  could  not  be  built  without
a  state  guarantee  of  dividends ;  their  merchant  marine  relies  on  bounties ;  their
great  credit  companies,  founded  largely  for  the  establishment  of  new  enter-
prises, have  gone  over  to  the  less  hazardous  business  of  accepting  deposits  and
handling  investments  for  customers ;  their  private  banks  are  concerned  mainly
with  transactions  in  foreign  exchange  and  short-time  credits.  The  Frenchman
has  less  liking  than  the  men  of  the  other  countries  for  the  game  of  business.
He  aims  to  secure  a  competency  by  thrifty  conduct  of  business  along  familiar
lines,  and  then  to  retire  and  invest  his  accumulations  in  rentes.  Hence  French
business  does  not  exhibit  striking  alternations  of  prosperity  and  depression,
and  French  crises  are  not  severe."

On  the  other  hand,  the  French  surpass  the  people  of  the  three  other  nations
in  thrift.  In  recent  years  France  has  displaced  England  as  the  world's  great
lender.  For  the  relative  lack  of  business  enterprise,  combined  with  the  enor-
mous aggregate  of  small  savings,  provides  each  year  hundreds  of  millions  of
francs  which  seek  investment  in  foreign  securities.  And  the  French  exhibit
their  characteristic  business  conservatism  in  the  selection  of  investments.
Occasionally  they  may  buy  freely  of  speculative  stocks,  like  "Kaffirs";  but
the  bulk  of  their  savings  goes  into  public  securities,  high  grade  railway  and
industrial  bonds,  or  into  the  stocks  which  are  most  firmly  established  as  divi-
dend payers.'^

10  The  Statistisches  Jahrbueh  fiir  das  Deutsche  Seich,  1909,  p.  14,*  gives  a  classification  of  breadwinners
in  different  countries  from  which  the  following  figures  are  taken:

United  England  German

States  and  Wales  France  Empire

Date  of  census 1900  1901  1901  1907

Agriculture,  forestry  and  fishing  35.9%  8.8%  41.8%  35.2%

Manufactures  and  mining  24.1  48.0  35.5  40.0

Trade  and  transportation 16.3  23.0  9.5  12.4

other  occupations  23.7  20.2  13.2  12.4

100.0  100.0  100.0  100.0

Differences  in  tlie  methods  of  classifying  occupations  adopted  in  the  several  censuses  make  this  compar-
ison trustworthy  only  for  the  most  general  conclusions. The  American  figures  for  "other  occupations,"  for
example are  unduly  large  because  of  the  great  number  of  "laborers,  not  specified";  the  Preach  figures  for
•Manufactures  and  mining"  are  swollen  and  the  figures  for  "Trade  and  transportation"  diminished  by  put-
ting persons  engaged  in  transportation  under  the  former  caption,  etc.

11  Compare  K.  Wiedenf eld,  ' '  Das  Persiinliche  im  modernen  Unternehmertum, ' ' SchmoUer  's  Jahrbuch fiir
Gesetzgelung,  1910,  pp.  229-233.

12  Compare,  for  example,  A.  Neymarck,  "French  Savings  and  their  Influence,"  Publications  of  the  Na-
tional Monetary  Commission  (Senate  Document,  no.  494  61st  Congress,  2d  Session),  pp.  163-181.


42  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

4.  Banking  Si/stems  and  Monetary  Habits

Again,  the  United  States  has  a  banking  system  unlike  that  of  the  other
countries.  England,  Prance,  and  Germany  each  has  a  great  central  bank,
sustaining  peculiar  relations  to  the  public  treasury  on  the  one  hand  and  to
the  money  market  on  the  other  hand.  Among  the  other  banks  a  network  of
branches  has  been  rapidly  developed,  partly  by  amalgamation  of  independent
institutions,  partly  by  the  establishment  of  new  offices.  The  branches  as  a  rule
depend  for  their  reserves  upon  the  head  offices — which  are  mainly  in  London,
Paris,  and  Berlin — and  the  head  offices  in  their  turn  carry  a  large  part  of  their
reserves  in  the  central  bank.  The  latter  institution,  therefore,  bears  a  heavy
load  of  responsibility  and  exercises  a  corresponding  influence  upon  the  policy
of  the  other  banks  with  reference  to  discount  rates,  extension  or  contraction
of  loans,  and  the  like.  In  this  country,  on  the  contrary,  there  are  about  29,000
banks,  legally  independent  of  each  other,  of  small  average  size,  and  carrying
a  much  larger  percentage  of  reserves  in  ready  money  in  their  own  vaults  than
is  customary  elsewhere.  The  banks  in  a  country  district  redeposit  a  part  of
their  reserve  funds  with  the  larger  institutions  of  their  local  metropolis,  and
the  banks  of  the  latter  towns  in  turn  make  similar  redeposits  in  Chicago,  St.
Louis,  and  particularly  in  New  York.  But  the  business  bonds  thus  established
between  the  country  banks  and  those  of  our  foremost  financial  centers  still
leave  the  organization  of  the  banking  sj^stem  as  a  whole  far  looser  than  that
of  the  three  other  countries.  Moreover,  there  is  no  central  bank  in  New  York
or  elsewhere  to  play  the  role  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Prance,  or
the  Reichsbank.

With  respect  to  the  issue  of  notes,  also,  our  banking  system  is  peculiar.
The  central  bank  has  a  monopoly  of  issue  in  Prance,  and  a  position  of  unques-
tioned primacy  among  all  the  banks  of  issue  in  England  and  Germany.  Here
the  national  banks  are  secured  monopoly  by  a  prohibitive  federal  tax  on  the
notes  of  other  banks.  But  there  are  several  thousands  of  these  national  banks,
each  deciding  its  own  policy  with  reference  to  issue.

The  legal  requirement  of  depositing  United  States  bonds  as  security  with
the  federal  treasurer  interposes  a  most  effective  check  upon  elasticity  of  circu-
lation. It  is  still  uncertain  whether  the  attempt  to  provide  "emergency  circu-
lation" by  means  of  the  Aldrich-Vreeland  act  would  afford  adequate  relief  in
a  crisis,  but  that  act  certainly  gives  no  help  in  ordinary  times.  Prance  and
Germany,  on  the  contrary,  have  bank-note  systems  which  make  it  easy  to
increase  or  diminish  the  issues  in  accordance  with  the  changing  activity  of
business.  The  Bank  of  England,  however,  is  confined  within  limits  even  more
rigid  than  those  imposed  upon  the  national  banks  of  America.  Save  in  the
case  of  the  most  severe  panics,  increase  of  circulation  in  England  requires  an
increase  in  the  gold  holdings  of  the  bank.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  43

But  both  in  England  and  the  United  States,  the  relative  inelasticity  of  the
bank-note  circulation  makes  less  trouble  than  it  would  make  in  France  or
Germany.  For  the  people  of  the  two  Anglo-Saxon  nations  are  accustomed
to  make  much  freer  use  of  bank  checks  in  their  business  dealings.  In  corre-
sponding measure,  they  make  less  use  of  bank-notes  than  do  the  French  and
Germans.

5,  The  Government's  Share  in  Directing  Economic  Activity

Finally,  there  are  considerable  differences  among  our  four  countries  in  the
extent  to  which  both  central  and  local  governments  participate  in  the  direction
of  economic  activity.

Partly  because  of  the  limitations  placed  by  constitutional  law  upon  the
powers  of  government,  partly  because  of  a  temperamental  restiveness  under
control,  Americans  have  not  made  such  bold  or  successful  experiments  in  munic-
ipal ownership  of  public  utilities  or  in  state  ownership  of  railways,  telegraphs,
telephones,  mines,  and  the  like  as  have  the  Germans,  French,  or  British.  At
the  present  moment,  however,  this  difference  promises  to  grow  narrower,
because  of  the  efforts  to  regulate  business  enterprise  by  public  commission,
and  even  to  extend  public  undertakings  into  fields  hitherto  sacred  to  private
enterprise.

While  the  sequel  shows  that  these  differences  of  economic  organization  and
habit  possess  some  significance,  still  they  are  far  less  important  than  the  more
fundamental  points  of  agreement.  For  present  purposes  the  chief  result  of
this  similarity  of  organization  is  that  business  cycles  run  a  similar  course  in  all
four  countries. The  next  task  is  to  sketch  these  cycles  in  the  period  since  1890.


CHAPTER  III


THE  ANNALS  OF  BUSINESS,  1890-1911

Annals  are  of  necessity  dull;  for  in  a  year  by  year  record  of  events  it  is
impossible  to  develop  clearly  the  interrelations  which  by  binding  events  into
coherent  clusters  make  them  significant  and  interesting.  Nevertheless,  in  order
to  interpret  the  elaborate  tables  of  statistics  which  follow,  it  is  necessary  to
know  the  business  conditions  prevailing  in  each  of  our  four  countries  in  each
year  since  1890.  Readers  willing  to  accept  conclusions  without  a  scrutiny  of
the  evidence,  however,  may  content  themselves  with  the  chronological  summary
of  events  given  in  the  final  section  of  this  chapter.  And  readers  familiar  with
recent  business  history  may  skip  the  whole  chapter ;  for  it  offers  little  more  than
a  digest  of  what  leading  financial  journals  have  reported  every  year  concerning
the  state  of  trade  in  America,  England,  Prance,  and  Germany.

I.  The  Business  Cycles  op  1873  to  1889

The  crisis  of  1890,  the  first  event  of  the  period  selected  for  detailed  exami-
nation, is  best  explained  by  a  brief  preface  concerning  the  business  cycles  of
the  two  preceding  decades.

1.  The  Crisis  of  1873

The  crisis  of  1873  began  in  May  with  a  panic  in  Vienna,  where  the  great
Austrian  "boom"  had  been  increasing  its  headway  since  the  later  sixties.
Germany  had  entered  enthusiastically  upon  a  similar  course  of  business  expan-
sion almost  before  its  victorious  war  with  France  was  over.  Accordingly,  the
crash  in  Vienna  caused  a  serious  strain  in  Leipzig,  Frankfurt,  Hamburg,  and
Berlin.  But  the  summer  passed  without  disaster  and  confidence  was  returning
when  news  came  in  September  that  panic  had  broken  out  in  New  York.  In
America  rapid  railway  building  had  been  the  chief  feature  of  the  preceding
years  of  activity,  and  the  receiverships  of  railways  and  embarrassments  of  their
financial  backers  were  conspicuous  features  of  the  panic.  The  business  fabric
of  Germany,  weakened  by  domestic  speculation,  and  strained  by  losses  in
Austria,  was  unable  to  withstand .  this  new  shock,  A  crisis  followed,  though
it  was  less  severe  than  the  panics  in  Austria  and  America.

[44]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  45

England,  like  Germany,  was  involved  in  the  disasters  of  American  railways,
and  London  suffered  a  severe  strain  in  the  autumn.  But  the  domestic  business
of  England  was  in  more  solid  condition  than  that  of  Grermany — largely  because
the  acute  crisis  of  1866,  when  the  great  banking  house  of  Overend-Gurney
failed,  had  prevented  the  English  from  joining  heartily  in  the  "boom"  of
1870-72.  But  though  England  had  no  panic  in  1873,  her  best  customers  were
crippled,  and  in  1875  a  severe  depression  began.

Of  all  the  great  nations,  Prance  was  least  affected  by  the  crisis  of  1873.
She  bought  her  immunity  from  business  disaster,  however,  at  a  great  price —
the  military  reverses  and  civil  disorders  of  1870-71,  which  prevented  her  people
from  cultivating  a  "boom"  of  their  own,  and  from  participating  heavily  in
foreign  speculation.^

2.  The  Later  Seventies  and  Early  Eighties

The  period  of  business  depression  which  followed  the  crisis  lasted  in  the
United  States  until  the  summer  of  1879.  Then  harvest  failures  in  Europe  and
a  favorable  season  at  home  enabled  our  farmers  to  export  unprecedented  quan-
tities of  breadstuffs  at  high  prices.  Prosperity  among  the  farmers  and  the
grain-carrying  railways  promptly  increased  the  demand  for  commodities  of
many  kinds,  and  made  business  brisk  for  merchants,  manufacturers,  and  pro-
ducers of  raw  materials.  This  tide  of  prosperity  rose  through  1880  and  1881
to  its  culmination  in  1882,  when  a  recession  in  business  activity  began.  1883
was  a  year  of  declining  volmne  of  business ;  but  it  was  not  until  May,  1884,  that
the  cj'isis  became  acute.  While  severe  in  the  financial  circles  of  New  York,  and
accompanied  by  heavy  bankruptcies,  this  crisis  was  less  general  in  its  scope  and
less  disastrous  in  its  after  effects  than  that  of  1873.^

The  harvests  of  1879,  which  brought  back  prosperity  to  the  United  States,
intensified  the  business  depression  in  Europe.  But  presently  American  pros-
perity increased  the  demand  for  many  European  exports.  England  seems  to
have  felt  the  effects  of  this  stimulating  factor  most  sensibly;  but  even  there
the  expansion  of  business  was  confined  chiefly  to  the  iron,  steel,  and  shipping
trades.  Before  activity  had  become  general,  the  turn  of  the  tide  in  the  United
States  checked  the  movement,  and  business  relapsed  again  into  dullness.''

In  Germany,  the  depression  which  followed  1873  continued  in  a  mild  form
until  the  end  of  the  eighties.*  But  France,  where  the  check  had  come  in  1870,
began  to  show  signs  of  business  activity  as  early  as  1876.  The  recovery  was
attended  by  active  company  promotion  and  widespreading  speculation  on  the

1  Max  Wirth,  GesohicMe  der  BandelsTcrisen  (ed.  3,  1883),  pp.  450-614.

2  A.  D.  Noyes,  Forty  Years  of  American  Finance,  pp 53-61,  96-101.

3  Final  Eeport  of  the  Eoyal  Commission  to  inquire  into  the  Depression  of  Trade  and  Industry. Decem-
ber, 1886.

*Sombart,  Die  deutsche  VolTcswirtschaft  im  Neunzehnten  Jahrhundert  (ed.  2,  1909),  p.  91.


46  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

stock  exchanges,  and  ended  in  the  crisis  of  January,  1882.  Paris,  Lyons,  and
Vienna  were  the  centers  most  affected;  but  the  reaction  in  Prance  doubtless
helped  to  check  the  forward  movement  in  England  and  the  United  States."

3.  Business  Expansion  in  the  Later  Eighties  and  the  French  Crisis  of  1889

The  period  of  depression  in  America  after  the  crisis  of  1884  was  remark-
ably brief,  probably  because  the  crisis  had  been  preceded  by  more  than  a  year
of  moderate  liquidation.  Statistical  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  make
1885  the  dullest  year  of  the  decade;  but  the  recovery  was  so  prompt  that  the
Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle  declared  1886  to  be  the  best  business  year
since  1880.  Rapid  railway  building  was  the  chief  feature  of  the  revival.
According  to  Poor,  the  annual  increase  in  railway  mileage  rose  from  2,975
miles  in  1885  to  12,876  in  1887.  Thereafter  it  declined  to  an  average  of  5,830
miles  in  1888-90.  But  business  continued  to  prosper  during  these  closing  years
of  the  decade,  despite  troubles  in  the  speculative  markets,  rate  wars  among
the  railways,  and  extensive  strikes.

General  prosperity  and  the  negotiation  of  large  blocks  of  railway  securities
abroad  produced  enormous  importations  of  merchandise.  In  their  turn,  the
large  imports  yielded  the  federal  government  a  surplus  revenue  exceeding  100
millions  in  each  of  the  fiscal  years  1887  to  1890.  The  independent-treasury
system  made  an  artificial  problem  out  of  this  excess  of  receipts  over  expend-
itures ;  for,  in  spite  of  purchases  of  government  bonds  at  high  premiums,  pre-
payment of  interest  on  the  public  debt,  and  large  deposits  in  national  banks,
the  money  market  suffered  from  the  locking-up  of  funds  in  the  government
vaults.  As  a  solution,  the  Democrats  proposed  a  reduction  of  the  tariff,  the
Republicans  a  further  substitution  of  protectionist  for  revenue  principles,  and
an  increase  of  pensions.  In  the  presidential  election  of  1888  Harrison  defeated
Cleveland,  and  the  victorious  Republicans  in  1890  passed  the  McKinley  tariff
and  the  Sherman  silver-purchase  act.  The  first  measure  raised  the  average
rates  of  duty  to  the  highest  pitch  yet  attained,  put  sugar  on  the  free  list,  and
provided  a  bounty  to  American  sugar  interests.  The  second  measure  was
expected  nearly  to  double  the  quantity  of  silver  bought  by  the  treasury.
Combined  with  lavish  expenditures  upon  pensions,  etc.,  these  two  laws  made  a
great  reduction  in  the  surplus  revenue."  They  also  produced  effects  upon
business  which  their  authors  did  not  foresee.

Meanwhile  the  long  depression  in  England  had  ended  in  1886  or  1887.
Again,  American  prosperity  gave  a  strong  impetus  to  revival,  particularly  in
the  coal,  iron,  and  shipping  trades  which  were  stimulated  by  the  enormous
railway  building  of  1886  and  1887. But  this  time  prosperity  spread  to  other

5  Juglar,  Des  crises  commerciales  (ed.  2,  1889),  pp.  435-443.
8  Noyes,  op.  cit.,  chs.  v  and  vi.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  47

trades  and  England  entered  upon  a  period  of  active  business  expansion.
Accumulations  of  capital,  which  according  to  the  Royal  Commission  upon  the
Depression  of  Trade  and  Industry  had  continued  to  be  made  even  during  the
hard  times,  came  forward  freely  for  investment.  Promoters  took  advantage
of  the  increasing  confidence  and  the  moderate  rates  of  interest  to  launch  a  long
series  of  new  companies.  Beginning  with  the  conversion  of  private  British
enterprises — particularly  breweries — into  joint-stock  companies,  they  presently
undertook  similar  operations  in  Germany,  Austria,  and  the  United  States.
Mines  of  all  sorts  in  all  quarters  of  the  world,  Chilean  nitrate  deposits,  and
railways  in  North  and  South  America  came  into  favor.  Presently  "trust  and
investment  companies"  were  floated  to  promote,  underwrite,  and  speculate  in
the  stocks  of  other  companies.  But  most  important  of  all  were  the  speculative
investments  in  Argentina,  where  a  land  "boom"  and  a  mania  for  internal
improvements,  financed  by  foreign  capital,  Avere  in  full  swing.

German  business  experienced  a  similar  but  more  moderate  uplift  at  the
close  of  the  eighties.  For  a  while  the  Germans  bought  "Argentines"  freely,
but  presently  they  became  uneasy,  resold  most  of  their  holdings,  and  turned
to  speculation  in  the  shares  of  domestic  enterprises.  As  a  consequence  of  the
eager  demand  for  such  securities,  the  capital  of  the  joint-stock  companies
organized  in  Germany  rose  from  $13,000,000  in  1885  to  $101,000,000  in  1889.

After  her  crisis  in  1882,  Prance  did  not  enter  upon  a  new  period  of  business
expansion  until  about  1887.  The  most  spectacular  episode  of  the  next  three
years  was  the  rise  and  fall  of  the  "copper  ring."  The  Societe  des  Metaux  made
contracts  with  the  chief  copper  producers  in  various  countries  to  take  their
output  for  three  years  at  £70  per  ton,  planning  to  hold  the  selling  price  at  £80.
It  estimated  the  annual  output  at  about  150,000  tons  per  annum,  so  that  the
cost  price  would  reach  about  £10,500,000.  One  of  the  great  French  banks,  the
Comptoir  d'Escompte,  undertook  to  make  the  necessary  advances  upon  the
security  of  the  metal  bought.  But  experience  showed  that  the  selling  price  of
£80  caused  a  large  decline  in  the  consumption  of  copper.  Meanwhile,  the  high
buying  price  stimulated  production.  In  order  to  retain  control  of  the  market,
the  ring  was  compelled  to  buy  the  output  of  mines  which  had  not  entered  into
contracts  with  it,  and  was  further  embarrassed  by  the  unexpectedly  large
quantity  of  scrap  copper  which  was  offered.  By  March,  1889,  the  Societe  des
Metaux  found  itself  with  an  unsold  stock  of  160,000  tons  of  copper,  which  at
£70  per  ton  had  cost  £11,200,000.  The  Comptoir  d'Escompte  was  involved  by
its  enormous  advances  in  the  ill  fate  of  the  Societe.  The  end  came  when  the
Russian  government  in  March,  1889,  tried  to  withdraw  its, deposits  from  the
Comptoir.  To  prevent  a  disastrous  panic,  the  Bank  of  France  undertook  the
liquidation  of  the  Comptoir,  and  the  Societe  des  Metaux  went  into  bankruptcy.
Meanwhile  the  Panama  Canal  Company,  which  had  absorbed  many  millions


48  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

of  French  capital,  suspended  operations.  These  two  disasters  checked  French
speculation  early  in  1889.  Business  returned  to  a  highly  conservative  basis,  and
the  Bank  of  France  began  the  accumulation  of  the  immense  reserves  which
enabled  it  to  assist  the  Bank  of  England  so  effectually  in  1890.'

II.  The  Crisis  of  1890  and  the  European  Depression  of  1891-94^

1.  The  Crisis  of  1890

The  financial  crisis  of  1890  brought  this  period  of  business  expansion  to  a
close  in  England,  Germany,  and  the  United  States.  Indeed,  before  1889  was
out  the  English  and  Glerman  money  markets  had  become  stringent.  In  both
countries  the  central  banks  raised  their  discount  rates  to  5  per  cent  in  the
autumn,  and  on  December  30th  the  Bank  of  England  made  a  further  advance
to  6  per  cent.  These  high  rates  were  recognized  as  danger  signals ;  men  began
to  wonder  whether  a  crisis  was  at  hand,  and  in  a  measure  checked  speculation.
But  the  winter  and  spring  passed  without  disaster;  the  bank  rates  fell  again
to  4  per  cent  in  Berlin  and  3  per  cent  in  London,  and  the  speculative  spirit  was
reviving,  when  news  came  of  political  unrest  in  Argentina.  British  investors
became  uneasy  about  their  "Argentines,"  and  the  financial  houses  which  had
unsold  issues  on  their  hands,  or  had  committed  themselves  to  new  flotations,
found  increasing  difficulty  in  marketing  their  holdings.  These  complications
led  to  fresh  advances  in  the  discount  rates,  to  the  unloading  of  high  class  secur-
ities by  houses  which  lacked  funds,  to  sharp  declines  in  stock  prices,  and  to
growing  distrust.  The  climax  came  in  England  when  on  the  15th  of  November
the  failure  was  announced  of  Baring  Brothers  and  Company,  one  of  the
greatest  private  banking  houses  of  London,  which  had  become  involved  through
over-heavy  commitments  in  Argentina.  A  serious  panic  might  have  followed
had  not  the  announcement  of  the  failure  been  coupled  with  the  announcement
that  the  Bank  of  England,  supported  by  a  huge  fund  subscribed  by  other
financial  enterprises,  would  guarantee  the  payment  of  Baring's  liabilities.  As
a  further  precaution,  the  bank  borrowed  £3,000,000  from  the  Bank  of  France
and  £1,500,000  from  the  Russian  treasury.  These  preparations  proved  ample
to  control  the  situation :  a  panic  was  averted,  but  business  liquidation  began.

The  collapse  in  Argentina  had  little  direct  importance  for  Germany;  but
the  German  money  and  stock  markets  sympathized  with  the  summer  troubles
of  the  English.  When  the  Barings  failed  the  situation  became  more  tense.
In  Berlin  as  in  London  a  panic  was  averted ;  but  the  incipient  business  depres-
sion spread  and  became  deeper.

7  One  of  the  best  accounts  of  these  developments  in  England,  France,  and  Germany  is  that  published  by
Max  Wirth  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  March,  1893.

8  This  and  the  following  sections  are  based  mainly  upon  the  Financial  Beview  (New  York),  the  Economist
(London),  and  Eaffalovich 's  annual  Le  Marche  Financier  (Paris).  When  other  sources  are  drawn  upon  ref-
erences are  given.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  49

Much  the  same  was  true  of  New  York.  Americans  were  not  heavy  investors
in  Argentina,  but  they  were  heavy  borrowers  of  European  funds.  It  is  prob-
able that  some  hint  of  the  embarrassment  of  the  Barings  was  received  by  certain
New  York  houses  as  early  as  August,"  and  that  foreign  investors  sold  large
blocks  of  American  stocks  to  protect  their  other  holdings.  It  is  certain  that
gold  exports  were  heavy,  that  the  New  York  banks  held  less  than  the  legal
25  per  cent  reserves  in  eleven  out  of  the  twenty  weeks  from  the  middle  of
August  to  the  end  of  the  year,  that  call  loan  rates  rose  frequently  to  6  per  cent
per  annum  plus  one-half  per  cent  a  day,  that  commercial  loans  became  exceed-
ingly difficult  to  negotiate,  and  that  clearing-house  loan  certificates  were  issued.
But  New  York  succeeded,  like  London  and  Berlin,  in  avoiding  a  panic.

France  came  off  better  from  the  financial  troubles  of  1890  than  the  other
three  countries.  The  great  Parisian  failures  of  March,  1889,  had  effectually
checked  speculation,  and  business  had  been  conducted  upon  a  basis  so  conserv-
ative that  it  could  withstand  even  the  strain  of  the  Baring  failure.

Despite  the  financial  crisis,  general  business  prospered  in  1890.  The
Financial  Revietv  said  concerning  the  United  States:  "The  year  ....  was
one  of  great  activity  in  the  various  departments  of  trade  and  transportation,
with  a  volume  of  transactions  never  before  equalled. ' '"

The  London  Economist  was  a  little  less  emphatic  about  English  business:
' '  A  year  of  great  financial  disturbance,  but  nevertheless,  so  far  as  this  country
is  concerned,  of  moderate  commercial  prosperity — such,  in  brief,  is  the  record
of  1890.""

Study  of  the  various  statistical  indices  of  volume  of  business  shows  that
the  situation  in  Germany  and  France  was  like  that  in  England.

2.  The  Depression  of  1891-94  in  Europe

But  in  the  years  which  followed  business  of  all  kinds  was  overtaken  by
depression.  The  year  1891  was  a  year  of  financial  prostration  in  England.  In
Germany  there  was  much  complaint  at  the  small  demand  for  goods  of  all  kinds.
Though  France  was  less  affected  by  the  crisis,  she  suffered  with  the  others
from  the  wretched  harvests,  which  intensified  the  depression  in  Europe.

In  1892  both  foreign  and  domestic  trade  fell  off  in  England,  the  farmers
had  poor  crops  and  low  prices,  and  wage-earners  suffered  from  reductions  in
pay  and  from  unemployment.  Germany  was  perhaps  worse  off  than  England,
and  while  France  continued  to  be  least  affected,  even  her  commerce  and
industry  were  reported  as  stagnant  and  the  year  as  ending  in  gloom  and
lassitude.


8  "The  Crisis  of  1890,"  Economic  Journal,  March,  1891,  pp.  192-196.

10  P.  1.

11  "Commercial  History  and  Review,"  February  21,  1891.


50  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  Economist  pronounced  1893  to  be  a  bad  year  all  around.  Great  strikes
in  the  cotton  and  coal  trades,  heavy  losses  in  the  Australian  and  American
panics,  the  financial  embarrassments  of  several  governments  whose  securities
were  widely  held  in  Britain,  another  season  of  short  crops  and  low  prices  for
the  farmers,  severe  suffering  among  wage-earners,  and  a  marked  increase  in
pauperism  made  a  black  record.  Germany  fared  better  than  England  this
year  because  her  crops  were  larger;  but,  save  for  the  first  quarter  when  false
hopes  were  built  upon  monetary  reforms  in  Austria,  the  business  public  was
in  a  mood  of  deep  discouragement.  The  French,  too,  complained  of  mediocre
business  and  languid  security  markets;  but  their  harvests  were  fair,  and
French  investors  were  less  involved  than  British  and  German  in  the  extra-
European  panics.

The  year  1894  opened  in  hope,  but  closed  in  fresh  disappointment.  The
poor  English  farmers  had  another  wretched  season ;  yields  were  abundant,  but
a  rainy  harvest  left  the  cereals  in  bad  condition,  and  prices  were  almost
unprecedently  low.  The  physical  volume  of  trade  increased,  but  prices  con-
tinued to  fall,  and  business  was  done  on  such  a  narrow  margin  of  profit  that
the  feeling  of  depression  was  not  relieved.  Fuller  employment,  however,  less-
ened the  distress  among  wage-earners  in  a  measure.  The  one  hopeful  spot  in
the  business  world  was  the  stock  market,  where  a  "boom"  in  South  African
gold  mines  developed  in  the  closing  months,  and  a  general  increase  of  invest-
ment demand  began  to  appear.  German  reports  upon  1894  show  less  hesitation
in  recognizing  improvement  over  1893.  Large  subscriptions  to  government
loans  were  followed  by  a  demand  for  industrial  stocks,  particularly  shares  in
electrical  and  chemical  enterprises.  But  commerce  and  manufactures  could
be  called  better  only  in  comjoarison  with  1893;  they  were  not  good.  France
presents  a  similar  picture.  The  capital  which  found  no  employment  in
ordinary  business  channels  because  of  the  depression  flowed  toward  the  bourse.
Meanwhile  the  refunding  of  billions  of  public  securities  at  lower  rates  of
interest  tempted  investors  to  dally  with  more  lucrati^^e  stocks.  The  African
gold  mines  became  the  mania  of  the  day ;  though  Spanish,  Italian,  and  Portu-
guese securities  also  enjoyed  high  favor.  But  while  the  bourse  was  highly
prosperous,  commerce  recuperated  slowly.  The  volume  of  trade  was  held  to
be  greater  than  in  1893,  but  smaller  than  in  1892.

This  period  of  liquidation,  which  began  in  France  in  March,  1889,  in  Ger-
many and  England  toward  the  end  of  that  year  and  more  definitely  in  1890,
came  to  a  close  in  1895.  The  lowest  point  seems  to  have  been  touched  in  1893.
The  incipient  and  partial  improvement  of  1894,  decided  only  in  the  investment
markets,  developed  next  year  into  a  general  business  revival,  strong  enough
to  resist  several  serious  shocks.  But  before  dealing  with  the  new  period  of
business  prosperity  which  began  in  1895,  it  is  necessary  to  describe  the  business
events  of  1891-97  in  the  United  States.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  51


III.  The  Panic  or  1893  and  the  Depression  of  1894-96  in  the  United  States

1.  The  Business  Years  1891  and  1892

The  first  seven  months  of  1891  in  America  was  a  period  of  liquidation  after
tlie  crisis  of  1890,  similar  in  character  to  the  same  period  in  England.  But
midsummer  brought  a  dramatic  change  in  the  business  situation.  As  in  1879,
the  country  was  suddenly  lifted  from  depression  to  prosperity  by  the  concur-
rence of  bad  harvests  in  Europe  and  abundant  harvests  in  America.  The  first
beneficiaries  of  this  stroke  of  fortune,  the  farmers  and  railways,  bought  goods
with  freedom,  stimulating  trade,  manufacturing,  mining,  etc.,  in  almost  all
lines.  The  impetus  thus  given  to  business  activity  by  the  harvest  situation  of
1891  distorted  the  parallelism  of  business  history  in  this  country  and  in  Europe.
While  liquidation  was  proceeding  unchecked  in  England,  France,  and  Germany,
the  Financial  Beview  reported  that  in  the  United  States  the  volume  of  business
transactions  in  1892  was  greater  than  ever  before."

But  this  contrast  did  not  last  long.  The  crops  were  smaller  and  agricul-
tural prices  were  lower  in  1892,  and  much  concern  was  caused  by  the  enormous
outflow  of  gold  in  the  second  half-year.  Uneasiness  increased  in  the  early
months  of  1893.  The  net  gold  exports  were  11  millions  in  December,  12  in
January,  13  in  February,  2  in  March,  18  in  April,  and  15  in  May — a  total  of
71  million  dollars  in  six  months.  Meanwhile  heavy  failures  occurred,  partic-
ularly the  Philadelphia  and  Reading  Railway  on  February  20,  and  the
National  Cordage  Company  on  May  4.  The  collapse  of  practically  all  the  banks
in  Australia  intensified  distrust  and  increased  the  difficulty  of  securing  financial
help  from  London.  In  May  one  of  the  most  violent  panics  in  the  country's
history  broke  out.

2.  Contemporary  Explanations  of  the  Panic  of  1893

Several  explanations  of  this  panic  were  given  by  contemporaries.  Repub-
licans, like  Speaker  Reed,  assigned  as  cause  the  fear  of  tariff  reductions  aroused
by  the  sweeping  Democratic  victories  in  the  autumn  of  1892.''  Democrats,
like  Grovernor  Russell  of  Massachusetts,  retorted  that  Republican  legislation
and  extravagance  were  responsible."  Others  classified  the  panic  of  1893  as  an
economic  crisis  of  the  common  sort  produced  by  speculation,  over-production,
or  under-consumption.''  But  the  prevalent  view  was  that  the  panic  had  been
brought  about  by  doubt  concerning  the  maintenance  of  the  gold  standard."

12  1893,  p.  1.

13  North  American  Review,  September,  1893.
1*  Ihid.,  December,  1893.

15  For  example:  Gibson,  Forum,  June,  1893;  unsigned  article  in  Forum,  November,  1894;  Irwell,  Chautauquan,

^°i^6"Taussis  Economic  Journal,  December,  1893;  Carnegie,  North  American  Review,  September,  1893;  Smith,
Wilson  and  Bloss,  ibid.,  October,  1893.  On  the  contrary,  free-silver  advocates  often  charged  the  panic  to  a  con-
sDiraev  on  the  part  of  the  "gold  ring":  Stewart,  North  American  Beview,  November,  1893;  Knapp,  American
Journal  of  Politics,  June,  1894;  Schuckers,  The  New  Torle  National  Bank  Presidents'  Conspiracy.


52  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


3.  The  Influence  of  the  Sherman  Silver-purchase  Act

The  Sherman  Act  of  July  12,  1890,  required  the  secretary  of  the  treasury
to  purchase  4,500,000  ounces  of  silver  each  month,  and  to  issue  legal-tender
treasury  notes  in  payment.  This  act  produced  fresh  issues  of  paper  money,
amounting  to  24  millions  in  1890,  53  in  1891,  47  in  1892,  and  24  in  the  first  half
of  1893.

Prom  the  beginning  the  London  Economist  declared  that  the  whole  tendency
of  this  measure  was  towards  constituting  silver  the  basis  of  our  currency,  and
that  the  monthly  additions  of  paper  money  to  the  circulation,  irrespective  of
the  changing  business  requirements,  would  result  in  the  expulsion  of  gold
whenever  times  should  become  dull."  Foreign  capitalists,  made  timid  by  their
recent  losses  in  Argentina,  were  in  a  mood  to  listen  to  such  warnings.  Con-
tinued agitation  of  the  silver  question  in  Congress,  where  the  Senate  passed  a
free-coinage  measure  in  July,  1892,  intensified  their  fear  of  a  relapse  from
the  gold  to  a  silver  basis.  Hence  foreigners  not  only  stopped  buying  American
securities,  but  also  endeavored  to  unload  their  old  holdings  upon  the  New  York
market.  This  process  accelerated  the  expulsion  of  gold  which  the  Economist
had  prophesied.

From  February  to  July,  1891,  the  exports  of  gold  exceeded  imports  by
nearly  74  millions.  The  crop  situation  of  the  autumn,  however,  gave  the
United  States  so  huge  a  balance  on  merchandise  account  as  to  reverse  the  flow
of  gold,  and  by  January,  1892,  the  country  had  regained  some  39  millions.  But,
once  the  extraordinary  European  purchases  of  breadstuffs  declined,  the  out-
flow began  again,  and  from  February  to  September  the  net  losses  of  gold  were
52  millions.  This  year  the  autumnal  exports  of  agricultural  produce  were  less
than  usual,  and  sufficed  to  give  the  country  an  excess  of  gold  imports  for  but
two  months,  October  and  November,  when  the  gain  was  only  4  millions.
Meanwhile  the  unports  of  foreign  merchandise  had  increased.  In  December,
1892,  the  outflow  of  gold  began  again,  and  by  the  end  of  June  73  millions  more
had  been  lost.  Putting  these  figures  together,  we  have  net  exports  of  gold  from
February,  1891,  to  Jime,  1893,  aggregating  about  155  million  dollars.  Mean-
while, however,  American  gold  mines  had  been  adding  to  the  supply,  so  that
the  net  decline  in  the  monetary  stock  of  gold  was  from  648  millions  on  January
1,  1891,  to  532  millions  on  June  30,  1893 — a  loss  of  about  116  millions — over
one-sixth  of  the  whole."


17  December  20,  1890,  p.  1596;  December  26,  1891,  p.  1648;  July  9,  1892,  p.  881.

18  The  figures  embody  the  corrections  in  the  estimates  of  the  gold  stock  made  by  the  Director  of  the  Mint
in  his  report  for  1907,  pp.  66-87. See  the  tables  of  the  monetary  stock  of  gold  in  chapter  vi,  below.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  53

4.  The  Decline  of  the  Gold  Beserve

This  loss  of  gold  was  the  more  serious  because  it  threatened  a  suspension
of  gold  redemptions  by  the  treasury,  and  hence  a  depreciation  in  the  gold  value
of  the  dollar.  Before  the  passage  of  the  Gold  Standard  Act  of  1900,  the  gold
reserve  consisted  simply  of  the  unexpended  balance  of  gold  in  the  treasury.
No  law  had  fixed  the  amount  to  be  held,  or  provided  specifically  for  obtaining
more  gold  when  the  reserve  ran  low.  But  public  sentiment,  based  upon
treasury  practice  and  certain  incidental  clauses  of  monetary  statutes,  had  fixed
upon  the  round  sum  of  100  millions  as  the  minimum  balance  consistent  with
safety.

At  the  end  of  February,  1891,  the  treasury  held  almost  150  millions.
Certain  domestic  conditions  combined  with  the  export  of  gold  to  reduce  this
fund.  A  decline  in  public  revenues  and  a  heavy  increase  in  public  expenditures
cut  down  the  surplus  revenue  from  94  millions  in  1890  to  a  deficit  of  39  millions
in  1893.^°  Of  course  this  change  reduced  the  treasury's  ability  to  carry  a  large
balance  of  unexpended  money.  More  serious  was  the  spread  of  distrust  in
financial  circles  at  home  regarding  the  government's  ability  to  maintain
redemptions  of  the  paper  money.  As  early  as  January,  1891,  the  Bankers'
Magazine  noted  that  fear  of  free  coinage  of  silver  made  people  in  possession
of  gold  slow  to  part  with  it.  In  the  following  months  banks  and  other  lenders
began  inserting  in  notes  and  mortgages  clauses  requiring  payment  in  gold  coin
or  its  equivalent.^"  Another  result  of  the  same  distrust  was  that  the  banks
began  to  supply  depositors  who  withdrew  funds  for  the  payment  of  customs
duties  with  paper  money  instead  of  with  gold.  This  procedure  cut  off  the  most
important  source  from  which  the  treasury  received  gold  for  its  reserve.  In
self-defense  the  treasury  began  to  substitute  legal-tender  notes  for  gold  in  the
payment  of  its  debit  balances  at  the  New  York  clearing  house.  Then  inter-
national bankers,  able  to  obtain  nothing  but  legal  tenders  through  clearing-
house settlements,  began  to  get  gold  for  export  directly  from  the  treasury  by
presenting  notes  for  redemption.

The  cumulative  effect  of  these  interrelated  processes  was  to  diminish  the
government's  gold  reserve.  From  the  150  millions  of  February  28,  1891,  it
sank  to  118  millions  on  June  30.  Then  a  respite  was  given  by  the  great  exports
of  wheat  and  the  imports  of  gold.  Moreover,  the  activity  of  internal  business
caused  a  lively  demand  for  the  small  legal-tender  notes  and  prevented  them
from  accumulating  in  the  banks,  whence  they  could  be  sent  back  to  the  treasury
through  the  customs  houses.  Hence  the  gold  reserve  rose  to  nearly  133  millions,
and  still  stood  at  131  millions  on  the  last  day  of  1891.  During  1892  the  treasury
had  to  face  an  increasing  demand  for  redemptions. By  the  end  of  July  it  held

19  "Calendar  Year  Statements," Summary  of  Commerce  and  Finance,  December,  1898,  p.  1458.

20  Bankers '  Magazine,  N.  Y.,  vol.  25,  pp.  497,  636,  675,  798.


54  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

only  110  millions  of  gold.  But  the  demand  for  money  to  move  the  crops  in  the
autumn  again  carried  the  legal  tenders  westward  into  general  circulation  and
relieved  the  strain,  so  that  the  treasury  was  able  to  report  a  reserve  of  121
millions  on  December  31.  The  relief  was  but  temporary.  With  the  beginning
of  1893  the  demand  for  redemptions  assumed  the  proportions  of  a  "run"  for
gold.  In  five  months  the  treasury  paid  out  67  millions.  Nothing  but  the  volun-
tary exchange  of  gold  for  notes  by  the  New  York  banks  in  February,  March,
and  April  kept  the  reserve  above  the  100  million  mark  during  the  winter  and
spring.  But  such  aid  effected  no  more  than  a  postponement  of  the  result.  On
the  15th  of  April  the  secretary  of  the  treasury  gave  public  notice  that  the
reserve  had  been  reduced  to  what  public  opinion  regarded  as  the  danger-point,
by  announcing  that  the  issue  of  gold  certificates  was  suspended  in  accordance
with  the  law  which  required  such  action  whenever  the  gold  in  the  treasury
"reserved  for  the  redemption  of  United  States  notes  falls  below  $100,000,000.""
By  this  act  the  distrust  long  felt  by  foreign  investors  and  American
financiers  was  converted  into  a  general  alarm  among  all  classes.  The  grave
doubt  about  the  treasury's  ability  to  maintain  the  parity  between  different
kinds  of  money  combined  with  distrust  engendered  by  such  business  events  as
the  failure  of  the  Philadelphia  and  Reading  and  National  Cordage  to  destroy
business  confidence."

5.  Business  Conditions  and  the  Panic

The  panic  of  1893,  however,  cannot  be  accounted  for  solely  by  the  monetary
situation. Certain  unsound  elements  in  business  contributed  to  the  smash.

The  crisis  of  1890  was  primarily  financial  in  its  origin  and  effects.  On  this
side  of  the  Atlantic,  it  was  most  severe  in  New  York,  and  the  liquidation  of
the  first  half  of  1891  was  most  pronounced  there.  The  interior  sections  of  the
country  were  drawn  into  the  movement ;  but  before  liquidation  had  progressed
far  it  was  checked  by  the  sudden  return  of  prosperity  among  the  farmers.  As
a  result,  many  weak  enterprises,  which  must  soon  have  retrenched  radically
or  gone  out  of  business,  were  tided  over  and  allowed  to  continue  their  expansion.
In  short,  the  check  given  to  the  rising  tide  of  prosperity  was  too  brief  to  enforce .
a  thorough  revision  of  credits.

Superficially,  the  business  situation  in  1892  bore  the  impress  of  prosperity.
The  volume  of  business  was  greater  than  in  1891,  or  even  in  1890.  Such  is
the  testimony  of  coal  production,  gross  receipts  of  the  railways,  value  of  mer-

21  So  serious  was  the  alarm  that  the  administration  issued  an  announcement  on  April  24  that  ' '  the  Presi-
dent and  his  cabinet  are  absolutely  harmonious  in  the  determination  to  exercise  every  power  conferred  upon
them  ....  to  preserve  the  parity  between  gold  and  silver  and  between  all  financial  obligations  of  the  Gov-
ernment."

22  The  various  factors  which  cooperated  to  reduce  the  gold  reserve  can  be  followed  month  by  month  in  the
figures  published  by  the  Treasury.  See,  for  example,  Finance  Report,  1902,  pp.  241,  239,  247,  245,  185,  237,
99,  100,  235.  For  interpretations  see  Taussig,  Economic  Journal,  June,  1892,  pp.  362-369;  Noyes,  Forty  Tears
of  American  Finance,  chapters  vii  and  viii;  Lauck,  Causes  of  the  Panic  of  1893,  chapters  vi-viii.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  55

chandise  imported,  and  volume  of  clearings  outside  of  New  York.  Bank  loans
were  expanded,  but  without  a  serious  reduction  in  the  ratio  of  reserves  to
deposits.  In  New  York  the  money  market  was  "easy,"  with  average  rates
less  than  in  the  two  preceding  years.  The  prices  of  bonds  and  stocks  recovered
from  the  decline  they  had  suffered  during  the  crisis  of  .1890,  and  the  volume  of
sales  was  large.

All  this  indicated  an  active  but  not  a  feverish  state  of  trade.  On  the  other
hand,  commodity  prices  were  steadily  declining — a  most  unusual  accompani-
ment for  business  prosperity ;  and  one  which  tended  to  restrain  rather  than  to
excite  rash  investment  and  wild  speculation.  Nevertheless,  reports  of  specu-
lation in  farm  lands  and  town  lots  came  from  many  sections  of  the  interior.
New  York's  share  in  the  movement  was  a  lively  interest  in  the  stocks  of  new
"industrials."  The  combination  of  independent  manufacturing  enterprises
into  enormous  "trusts"  had  begun  in  the  later  eighties  and  continued  on  an
increasing  scale  through  1892.  Several  of  the  most  conspicuous  among  these
combinations  proved  in  the  sequel  to  have  been  financed  in  a  highly  reckless
manner.  A  few  railway  deals  of  like  character  were  made.  But  the  most
dangerous  element  in  the  situation  was  probably  the  doubtful  character  of  many
bank  loans.  Had  the  liquidation  begun  late  in  1890  been  carried  through,  the
banks  would  doubtless  have  written  down  or  written  off  a  considerable  portion
of  the  sums  due  them  from  embarrassed  houses.  The  quick  return  of  prosperity
saved  them  from  having  to  acknowledge  these  losses,  but  did  not  enable  all  the
weak  debtors  to  recuperate  their  strength.  On  the  contrary,  the  banks  seem
to  have  thrown  not  a  little  good  money  after  the  bad.  When  the  hour  of  need
came  they  found  it  impossible  to  realize  upon  a  considerable  proportion  of  their
nominal  loans.  On  paper  they  were  reasonably  strong ;  in  reality  many  banks
were  very  weak.

The  business  situation  was  further  undermined  by  the  harvests  of  1892.
Except  for  cotton,  the  yields  of  the  most  important  crops  were  fairly  large —
not  so  great  as  the  "bumper"  yields  of  1891,  but  equal  to  or  greater  than  the
average.  Low  prices  for  agricultural  products,  however,  made  the  year  rather
unprofitable  for  the  farmers.  Thus  the  stimulus  which  had  turned  depression
into  prosperity  a  year  before  was  lacking  in  the  autumn  of  1892.  The  demand
for  goods  from  the  agricultural  sections  began  to  decline ;  railways,  merchants,
and  manufacturers  bought  with  less  freedom,  and  all  the  disquieting  elements
in  the  situation  from  the  decline  of  the  gold  reserve  to  the  financial  difficulties
of  the  new  industrial  combinations  and  the  doubtful  character  of  bank  loans
had  an  unobstructed  chance  to  work  out  their  results.''


23  The  comparisons  in  this  section  which  imply  the  use  of  statistics  are  all  based  upon  tables  in  the  fol-
lowing chapters  On  the  condition  of  the  banks  in  1890-93  see  O.  M.  W.  Sprague,  Bistory  of  Crises  under
the  National  BanMng  System,  pp.  153-162.  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission.  Senate
Document  no.  538,  61st  Congress,  2d  session.)


56  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


6.  The  Events  of  the  Panic

The  panic  broke  out  early  in  May,  1893.  The  appointment  of  receivers  for
the  IS'ational  Cordage  Company  on  the  fourth  may  be  called  the  beginning.
There  speedily  followed  a  crash  of  prices  on  the  stock  exchange,  the  failure  of
several  large  brokerage  houses,  extremely  high  rates  for  loans,  bank  failures  in
the  west,  further  exports  of  gold  accompanied  by  a  further  decline  of  the
treasury's  reserve,  and  two  railway  receiverships.

President  Cleveland  was  among  the  men  who  held  the  business  panic  to  be
an  indirect  result  of  the  Silver-purchase  Act  of  1890.  Even  before  his  inaug-
uration he  had  sounded  the  congressional  leaders  among  the  Democrats  as  to
the  possibility  of  securing  a  repeal.  At  the  time  he  concluded  that  the  majority
of  his  own  party  stood  against  him.  But  sentiment  changed  after  the  panic
began,  and  on  June  30  he  summoned  Congress  to  meet  in  extra  session  on  the
seventh  of  August.  The  House  of  Representatives  promptly  acquiesced  with
Cleveland's  wishes;  but  men  from  the  silver-mining  states  obstructed  action
in  the  Senate  for  nearly  three  months,  so  that  it  was  the  first  of  November
before  the  repealing  act  was  signed.

Meanwhile  the  panic  had  been  running  its  course.  The  banks,  despite  an
unprecedentedly  general  issue  of  clearing-house  loan  certificates,  generally  lim-
ited or  suspended  payments.  Money  commanded  a  premium  for  many  weeks,
and  illegal  substitutes  for  cash  were  freely  put  into  circulation."  Business
failures  were  more  numerous  and  liabilities  larger  even  than  in  1873.  Over
three  hundred  banks  closed  their  doors,  and  29,340  miles  of  railway  went  into
the  hands  of  receivers."'^  Stocks  fell  heavily  in  price;  interest  rates  on  com-
mercial paper  were  quoted  as  high  as  12  to  18  per  cent,  and  for  a  time  in  June
loans  could  hardly  be  procured  at  all.  The  lack  of  money  for  pay-rolls,  diffi-
culty of  collections,  and  fear  lest  customers  would  be  unable  to  meet  their
contracts  caused  widespread  limitation  or  cessation  of  production.  Unemploy-
ment assumed  vast  proportions,  and  reacted  in  a  most  depressing  fashion  upon
the  demand  for  goods  at  retail  and  wholesale.^"

7.  The  Struggle  to  Maintain  the  Gold  Reserve  after  the  Panic

The  business  depression  which  followed  upon  the  panic  of  1893  was  compli-
cated by  the  continuing  uncertainty  about  the-  monetary  standard.

Though  Congress  had  yielded  to  the  intense  pressure  of  public  opinion  while
the  panic  was  still  on  and  repealed  the  silver-purchase  law,  it  stubbornly  refused
to  enact  the  measures  which  President  Cleveland  recommended  to  entrench  the


2-4  See  Warner,  "The  Currency  Famine  of  1893,"  Sound  Currency,  1896,  A  Compendium,  pp.  337-356.

25  Table  from  the  Sailway  Age,  reprinted  in  Statistical  Abstract,  1904,  p.  406.

26  See  A.  C.  Stevens,  ' '  Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of the  Panic  .  .  .  . "  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,
January,  1894; C.  C.  Closson,  "The  Unemployed  in  American  Cities,"  ibid.,  January  and  July,  1894.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  57

gold  reserve  after  the  panic  was  over.  Consequently  the  treasury's  stock  of
gold  remained  subject  to  the  influences  which  had  depleted  it  between  1890  and

1893,  save  that  the  automatic  injection  of  legal-tender  notes  into  the  currency
each  month  by  buying  silver  was  stopped.  On  the  other  hand,  the  deficit  in
the  government's  revenues  became  chronic — 39  millions  in  1893,  59  in  1894,  30
in  1895,  and  49  in  1896 — and  of  course  a  deficit  made  it  impossible  to  maintain
a  working  balance  in  any  kind  of  funds  without  borrowing.  Moreover,  the
depression  of  business  which  prevailed  most  of  the  time  prevented  the  legal-
tender  notes  already  outstanding  from  being  absorbed  into  active  circulation.
Meanwhile,  the  losses  of  gold  by  excess  of  exports  continued — 81  millions  in

1894,  71  in  1895,  and  28  in  the  first  seven  months  of  1896.  The  sums  of  legal-
tender  notes  which  the  treasury  was  forced  to  redeem  in  gold  were  even  larger
—142  millions  in  1894,  131  in  1895,  and  100  in  the  first  seven  months  of  1896."
In  all  this  time  practically  no  gold  was  received  through  the  customs  house,
and  practically  none  was  paid  out  through  the  clearing  house.  Against  these
adverse  conditions  the  administration  had  to  contend  in  its  efforts  to  prevent
the  gold  reserve  from  complete  exhaustion.

December  31,  1893,  the  reserve  was  but  81  millions.  Unable  to  secure  new
legislation  from  Congress,  the  administration  resorted  to  the  issue  of  bonds
redeemable  in  coin,  not  necessarily  gold,  under  a  provision  of  the  law  passed
in  1875  to  provide  for  the  resumption  of  specie  payments.  In  January,  1894,
Secretary  Carlisle  sold  $50,000,000  of  5  per  cent  ten-year  bonds  for  $58,700,000.
Despite  the  fact  that  much  of  the  gold  paid  for  these  bonds  was  obtained  from
the  treasury  itself,  through  the  presentation  of  legal-tender  notes  for  redemp-
tion, the  proceeds  temporarily  raised  the  reserve  above  100  millions.

But  the  processes  of  depletion  ran  on  unchecked,  and  by  July  31  the  reserve
was  lower  than  ever — 55  millions.  The  usual  autumnal  importations  of  gold
allowed  the  reserve  to  gain  6  millions  net  between  July  and  the  end  of  October ;
but  in  November  a  second  50-million  bond  issue  became  necessary.  Again  the
proceeds — $58,500,000 — carried  the  reserve  above  100  millions  for  a  little  time ;
but  again  the  outflow  rapidly  exhausted  the  new  supplies,  so  that  by  January
31,  1895,  the  balance  stood  at  45  millions.

In  February  President  Cleveland  contracted  with  a  syndicate  of  bankers
to  take  about  $62,400,000  of  4  per  cent  thirty-year  bonds  in  return  for
$65,100,000  of  gold.  The  syndicate  undertook  to  obtain  at  least  half  of  the
gold  in  Europe,  and  to  protect  the  treasury  so  far  as  possible  from  withdrawals
of  gold  for  export.  Monthly  deliveries  upon  this  contract  brought  the  reserve
up  to  108  millions  by  the  end  of  June.  But  at  this  point  the  efforts  of  the
sjradicate  to  check  the  outflow  of  gold  by  satisfying  the  export  demand  with
drafts  upon  London  broke  down,  and  once  more  the  treasury  began  to  lose
ground. In  December  President  Cleveland's  belligerent  message  regarding

2T  All  of  these  figures  are  for  calendar  years.


58  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

British  intervention  in  Venezuela  intensified  the  difficulty  by  causing  an  extra-
ordinary return  of  American  securities  from  London.  By  the  end  of  January,
1896,  the  reserve  was  reduced  to  50  millions  once  more.

But  President  Cleveland  had  already  acted,  by  calling  early  in  the  month
for  popular  subscriptions  to  a  loan  of  $100,000,000  on  4  per  cent  bonds.  The
proceeds  were  111  millions  of  gold.  While  about  40  millions  of  this  sum  had
been  obtained  by  subscribers  from  the  treasury  itself,  the  reserve  was  raised
to  the  highest  point  since  December,  1891 — 129  millions  on  March  31.  More-
over, the  large  subscriptions  to  this  loan  did  much  to  restore  confidence  and
the  possession  of  the  enormous  sum  which  the  proceeds  brought  in  enabled  the
treasury  to  impound  over  100  millions  of  legal-tender  notes.

For  a  time  all  was  well;  but  Mr.  Bryan's  success  in  persuading  the
Democratic  convention  to  adopt  a  free-silver  plank,  combined  with  the  vigorous
campaign  which  he  conducted,  caused  fresh  uneasiness.  On  July  23  the  reserve
was  below  90  millions.  This  time  the  banks  came  promptly  to  the  aid  of  the
treasury,  agreeing  to  turn  over  some  $25,000,000  of  gold  in  return  for  legal-
tenders,  and  cooperating  to  supply  the  export  demand  with  bills.^*  By  the  end
of  July  the  reserve  had  been  restored  to  111  millions.  Again  at  the  end  of
August  it  was  perilously  close  to  the  100-million  mark,  but  that  was  the  last
moment  of  anxiety.  In  the  end,  Mr.  Bryan  contributed  more  than  any  Demo-
crat save  Mr.  Cleveland  to  the  restoration  of  full  confidence  in  the  country's
monetary  standard.  For  by  forcing  the  free-coinage  issue  and  getting  himself
decisively  beaten,  he  brought  out  the  people's  verdict  in  favor  of  the  gold
standard.  With  the  harassing  doubt  about  this  question  set  at  rest,  all  difficulty
in  maintaining  the  reserve  vanished.  By  the  end  of  1896  the  treasury  held  137
millions  of  gold,  and  the  sum  moimted  steadily  to  more  than  250  millions  in  the
autumn  of  1899.

8.  Business  Depression  in  1894

The  importance  of  this  struggle  to  maintain  the  gold  reserve  appears  when
we  follow  the  varying  fortunes  of  business  from  1894  to  1896.

Depression  in  the  year  following  the  panic  was  extreme ;  for  other  factors
cooperated  with  business  liquidation  and  the  doubtful  outlook  regarding  the
standard  to  nip  in  the  bud  every  incipient  revival  of  activity.  The  so-called
Wilson  tariff  act  was  pending  in  Congress  and  kept  business  men  in  uncer-
tainty until  August,  when  President  Cleveland  in  disgust  allowed  it  to  become
law  without  his  signature.  Coxey's  "army"  made  its  march  to  Washington
in  April  and  May,  a  sign  of  hard  times  both  ludicrous  and  pathetic.  Prom
April  to  June  over  150,000  bituminous  coal  miners  were  on  strike,  causing  a
serious  shortage  of  fuel. Another  strike  tied  up  the  Great  Northern  railway

28  The  Financial  Review,  1897,  p.  8.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  59

for  nearly  three  weeks  in  April  and  May.  Finally  the  American  Railway
Union  strike  in  July  caused  such  disorder  that  federal  troops  were  ordered
to  Chicago.  Worst  of  all  in  its  effect  upon  business  was  the  failure  of  the  corn
crop,  particularly  in  Nebraska,  Iowa,  and  Kansas.  The  wheat  crop  was  fair,
but  brought  low  prices,  and  the  cotton  crop,  while  very  large,  sold  at  even
lower  rates.

9.  The  Brief  Revival  of  1895

The  February  contract  with  the  Morgan-Belmont  syndicate  was  followed
by  a  lively  revival  of  business  in  the  spring  of  1895.  Confidence  in  the  state
of  the  gold  reserve  enabled  financial  houses  to  place  several  large  security  issues
abroad,  and  foreigners  bought  stocks  and  bonds  freely  in  Wall  Street.  For
a  time  the  stock  market  was  buoyant,  commodity  prices  rose,  the  iron  and  steel
trade  had  a  surprising  "boom,"  and  imports  became  heavy.  But  the  revival  did
not  last  through  November;  for  the  syndicate's  plan  of  preventing  the  export-
ation of  gold  broke  down,  the  gold  reserve  -grew  gradually  less,  and  European
anxiety  over  the  Ottoman  problem  and  over  the  collapse  of  the  speculation  in
South  African  gold  mines  caused  foreign  selling  of  American  securities.  In
December  President  Cleveland's  message  about  the  boundary  dispute  between
England  and  Venezuela  brought  on  an  extraordinarily  violent  stock-market
panic  attended  by  heavy  failures.

10.  The  Stringency  of  1896

The  English  war  cloud  vanished  early  in  1896,  but  congressional  resolutions
threatened  hostilities  with  Spain  over  Cuba.  Such  dangers  were  presently
overshadowed  by  the  success  of  the  free-silver  party  in  capturing  Democratic
state  conventions,  followed  in  July  by  Mr.  Bryan's  spectacular  triumph  in
the  national  convention.  Until  after  election  day  the  presidential  campaign
kept  the  financial  centers  in  a  condition  of  intense  strain.  Interest  rates  were
high,  loans  were  hard  to  negotiate,  stocks  declined,  money  was  locked  up  in
safe-deposit  boxes,  and  failures  for  the  year  were  almost  as  numerous  as  in
1893. But  critical  as  the  situation  was,  no  panic  occurred.

11.  The  Rehirn  of  Depression

The  day  after  election  this  strain  suddenly  relaxed.  But  the  great  indus-
trial and  business  revival  which  the  Republicans  had  promised  and  which  their
newspapers  advertised  failed  to  materialize.  The  situation  improved  greatly
in  contrast  with  that  of  July  to  October,  but  prosperity  deferred  its  return  in
a  most  tantalizing  fashion.


60  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

Uncertainty  about  the  new  tariff  promised  by  the  Republicans,  now  restored
to  power,  contributed  to  the  dullness  of  the  first  half  of  1897.  It  was  not  until
July  24  that  the  Dingley  Bill  became  law.  Meanwhile  the  South  suffered  first
from  floods  in  the  Mississippi  Valley,  then  from  an  epidemic  of  yellow  fever,
and  finally  from  the  low  price  of  cotton.  In  March  the  decision  of  the  Supreme
/Court  that  the  Trans-Missouri  Freight  Association  was  illegal  threatened  to
plunge  the  railways  into  rate  wars.  Next  month  the  war  between  Grreece  and
Turkey  caused  another  fall  of  stocks.  It  was  not,  in  fact,  until  July  that
business  received  a  strong  impetus.  By  that  time  it  had  become  certain  that
the  wheat  supply  from  France,  the  Danubian  provinces,  Australia,  India,  and
Argentina  would  run  far  below  normal.  Meanwhile  the  outlook  for  the  Amer-
ican crops  improved  rapidly.  In  short,  such  another  year  as  1879  or  1891
was  promised.  Then  the  long  deferred  revival  of  business  prosperity  began
in  earnest.

IV.  Business  Prosperity  of  1895-99  and  the  Crisis  or  1900  in  Europe

How  European  business  passed  through  a  crisis  in  1890  and  suffered  depres-
sion in  1891-94  has  been  told.  How  it  revived  in  1895,  prospered  exceedingly
in  1898-99,  and  developed  another  crisis  in  1900  must  now  be  sketched.

1.  England

It  was  in  the  second  half  of  1895  that  the  Economist  marked  the  first  strong
revival  of  activity  in  English  business  after  the  crisis  of  1890.  This  movement
possessed  sufi&eient  vitality  to  withstand  the  depressing  effects  of  bad  harvests
combined  with  low  prices  in  the  autmnn,  and  of  President  Cleveland's  message
applying  the  Monroe  Doctrine  to  the  British  in  Venezuela.  In  1896  progress
continued,  still  in  the  face  of  discouraging  events.  Exports  to  the  United
States  fell  off,  the  Rand  gold-mining  industry  was  in  a  state  of  stagnation
following  the  Jameson  raid,  and  Europe  was  unsettled  by  prospects  of  entan-
glement over  the  eastern  question.  1897  brought  a  more  decided  improvement
in  English  industry  and  domestic  trade ;  but  exports  declined,  primarily  because
of  diminished  purchasing  power  among  important  customers.  India  suffered
from  famine  and  plague,  Australia  from  drought.  South  Africa  from  rinder-
pest and  depression  in  the  mining  districts,  Central  and  South  America  from
poor  harvests  and  political  unrest.

It  was  not  until  1898  that  the  improvement  in  business  which  had  been
under  way  since  1895  gained  sufficient  impetus  to  constitute  full  prosperity.
Next  year  the  war  with  the  Transvaal  began;  but  the  Economist  was  able  to
say  in  summary:  "Seldom  has  this  country  enjoyed  a  year  of  such  all-round
industrial  activity  and  prosperity  as  it  did  in  1899. ' '  The  war  was  a  depressing
factor  on  the  whole,  but  it  stimulated  powerfully  certain  trades,  particularly


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  61

iron,  coal,  and  shipping.  Foreign  trade  increased,  larger  clearings  and  railway
receipts  testified  to  the  activity  of  domestic  business,  unemployment  diminished
and  wages  rose,  consumption  of  staple  supplies  was  larger,  and  concentration
of  industrial  enterprises  was  conspicuous.

Business  activity  and  government  war  loans,  however,  carried  rates  of
interest  to  so  high  a  point  in  the  autumn  that  even  British  municipalities  had
difficulty  in  securing  loans  save  on  onerous  terms.  This  tide  of  prosperity
reached  its  highest  point  in  the  earlier  months  of  1900  and  then  began  quietly
to  recede.  High  taxation  and  dear  coal — both  due  to  the  war — were  held
largely  responsible.  Exports  declined  heavily  after  June,  unemployment
increased  again,  the  money  market  was  unsettled,  borrowings  save  by  the  gov-
ernment were  small,  the  public  stayed  out  of  the  stock  market.  But  the  crisis
was  accompanied  by  no  spectacular  failures  and  no  breakdown  of  credit;  it
was  no  more  than  the  fading  of  the  bright  prospects  of  1899  into  the  dull  out-
look of  1901.

2.  Germany

While  English  business  improved  slowly  from  1895  to  1897,  reached  full
prosperity  in  1898,  had  a  single  year  of  marked  buoyancy  in  1899,  and  then
gradually  relapsed  into  dullness,  German  business  enjoyed  a  far  more  intense
phase  of  prosperity  and  met  with  a  more  dramatic  check.  N^ot  since  the  first
years  of  the  empire,  when  Germans,  intoxicated  by  their  military  triumph  over
Prance,  plunged  enthusiastically  into  a  campaign  for  industrial  supremacy,
had  their  business  hopes  been  so  high  and  their  business  pace  so  fast.

The  improvement  in  1895  was  decidedly  greater  in  Germany  than  in  Eng-
land. By  1896  almost  all  branches  of  industry  were  reported  to  be  very  active,
and  the  investing  public  was  showing  a  marked  predilection  for  shares  in
industrial  enterprises  and  credit  companies.  The  reports  for  1897  speak  of
a  ''boom"  of  increasing  intensity;  1898  was  declared  one  of  the  most  brilliant
years  Germany  had  ever  known,  and  1899  became  known  as  the  annus  miraMUs.
Perhaps  the  electro-technical  industries  made  the  greatest  advances  as  a
whole,  but  remarkable  gains  were  scored  also  in  mining  and  metallurgy,  and
in  the  chemical  trades.  Emigration  fell  to  a  low  point,  and  immigration  from
bordering  nations  became  large.  The  cities  increased  in  population  at  a  rate
which  would  have  been  rapid  even  in  America,  and  the  Germans  showed  a
marked  aptitude  in  devising  new  methods  of  business  organization  as  well  as
new  industrial  processes.^"

But  the  second  half  of  1900  brought  a  check.  High  rates  of  interest  and
high  prices  for  coal  handicapped  industrial  enterprises.  Threatened  American
competition  in  iron  and  steel  became  a  formidable  bogey,  and  prices  fell. The

29  The  fullest  account  of  this  period  of  German  prosperity  is  given  in  Vie  Storungen  im  deutschen  Wirts-
chaftsleben  wdhrend  der  Jahre  1900  If.,  published  by  the  Verein  fur  Socialpolitik,  Leipzig,  1903,  8  volumes.


62  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

public  began  to  grow  suspicious  of  industrial  stocks  and  turned  again  to  the
less  lucrative  but  more  conservative  government  securities,  imperial,  provincial,
and  municipal.  The  punitive  expedition  to  Kiau-chow,  a  great  coal  strike,  a
check  to  building  because  of  difficulties  in  borrowing,  a  sharp  fall  in  stocks
which  became  extreme  in  June  and  July,  were  all  unfavorable.

Presently,  the  failure  of  four  large  mortgage  banks,  followed  by  the  arrest
and  criminal  prosecution  of  certain  of  their  directors,  in  the  closing  months
of  1900  caused  great  alarm.  Banks  of  this  class  had  placed  over  $1,500,000,000
of  securities  among  German  investors,  and  the  fear  that  criminal  mismanage-
ment like  that  revealed  in  the  notorious  cases  overtaken  by  catastrophe  had
been  common,  precipitated  a  rush  to  unload.  The  liquidation  was  presently
intensified  by  the  collapse  of  two  great  credit  banks  in  Saxony,  the  Dresdener
Kreditanstalt  (capital  $5,000,000)  and  the  Leipziger  Bank  (capital  $32,000,-
000).  The  latter  institution,  which  suspended  payments  July  25,  1901,  had
lent  $21,000,000  to  a  single  corporation,  which  turned  out  to  be  a  barefaced
swindle.  These  disasters  made  the  crisis  in  Germany  far  more  acute  in  1901
than  in  the  preceding  year.


3.  France

French  reports  indicate  that  the  business  expansion  from  1895  to  1899  was
more  moderate  than  even  the  English.  The  revival  of  activity  in  1895  was
marred  by  a  speculative  mania  for  gold-mine  shares  which  ended  in  heavy
losses,  even  before  Dr.  Jameson  made  his  raid.  But  commerce  and  industry
were  not  deeply  affected  by  the  troubles  of  the  Paris  bourse,  and  in  1896  con-
tinued to  gain  ground.  Even  the  bad  harvests  of  1897  did  not  prevent  the
volume  of  business  from  expanding  further,  as  shown  by  banking  transactions,
railway  receipts,  and  foreign  commerce.  Public  interest  in  industrial  secur-
ities became  marked  in  1898,  but  business  was  disturbed  by  the  Dreyfus  affair,
by  anxiety  over  investments  in  Spain,  then  at  war  with  the  United  States,  by
alternate  aljundance  and  scarcity  of  capital,  and  by  a  decline  of  exports.  But
1899  was  a  year  of  relatively  great  activity  in  trade  and  industry,  and  of  buoy-
ancy in  the  security  markets.  Much  importance  was  attached  to  the  stimu-
lating effect  upon  business  of  the  preparations  for  the  world's  exposition  to
be  opened  the  next  year  in  Paris.  And  next  year  the  losses  of  many  of  the
joint-stock  companies  created  to  exploit  the  concessions  connected  with  the
exposition  was  one  of  the  leading  features  in  the  reaction.  But  as  the  pre-
ceding expansion  had  been  mild,  so  also  was  the  crisis.  France,  like  England,
and  unlike  Germany,  passed  from  business  activity  to  business  liquidation  with
no  great  wrench.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  63

V.  Business  Prosperity  of  1897-1902  and  the  Crisis  of  1903-04  in  the

United  States

We  have  seen  that  American  business  was  subjected  to  changes  of  fortune
both  remarkably  quick  and  remarkably  sharp  in  1890-97 ;— crisis  in  1890,
depression  in  the  first  half  of  1891,  sudden  revival  in  the  autumn  followed  by
prosperity  in  1892 ;  violent  panic  in  1893,  deep  depression  in  1894,  short-lived
buoyancy  in  1895,  return  of  severe  strain  in  1896,  another  relapse  into  depres-
sion after  the  presidential  election,  and  finally  a  vigorous  revival  in  midsummer,
1897.  To  all  this  the  years  we  have  now  to  review  present  a  marked  contrast.
For  the  period  of  prosperity  which  began  in  1897  ran  a  long  and  even  course,
resisting  both  the  pressure  of  the  European  crisis  in  1900-01  and  the  excesses
of  domestic  speculation.  Indeed,  it  Avas  not  until  after  some  six  years  of
abounding  prosperity  that  general  business,  as  opposed  to  financial  operations,
received  a  serious  setback.

1.  The  Prosperous  Years  1897-99

The  revival  of  business  ushered  in  by  the  profitable  harvests  of  1897  made
rapid  progress  in  1898.  There  were  two  brief  pauses,  one  in  the  spring  just
before  war  broke  out  with  Spain,  and  one  in  the  autumn,  just  before  the  con-
gressional elections.  But  the  quick  victory  in  war  and  the  gains  by  the  sound-
money  party  at  the  polls  promptly  restored  confidence.  The  last  month  of
the  year  was  also  the  best ;  even  the  cotton,  woolen,  and  leather  industries,  which
had  been  in  unsatisfactory  condition,  showed  decided  improvement.

In  1899  there  appeared  a  marked  contrast  between  conditions  in  the  financial
markets  proper  and  in  general  business,  mercantile,  industrial,  railway,  agri-
cultural, etc.  Increasing  prosperity  marked  the  latter  in  almost  every  branch ;
indeed  general  business  had  not  been  so  buoyant  since  the  great  revival  of
1879-81.  But  a  reaction  developed  upon  the  stock  exchange.  One  of  the  most
conspicuous  features  of  1898  had  been  the  resumption  of  that  movement  toward
consolidation  of  industrial  enterprises  which  the  panic  of  1893  had  interrupted.
The  investing  public  showed  a  keen  appetite  for  new  securities,  an  appetite
which  promoters  proceeded  to  gratify  by  taking  options  on  independent  mills
and  factories  at  the  fancy  prices  asked  by  proprietors  in  flush  times,  combining
them  into  single  corporations  capitalized  at  rates  to  cover  buying  prices  plus
large  margins  for  promoters'  profits,  and  offering  the  new  crop  of  securities
for  sale.  In  1898  twenty  such  consolidations  were  effected  with  a  nominal
capital  of  nearly  709  millions.^"  So  profitable  did  these  ventures  prove  to
promoters  and  underwriters  that  a  much  larger  number  were  under  way  or
under  consideration  at  the  beginning  of  1899. But  in  May  the  industrial  shares

30  L. Conant,  Jr., ' '  Industrial  Consolidations  in  the  United  States, ' '  Publications  of  the  American  Statis-
tical Association,  March,  1901.


64  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

already  listed  on  the  stock  exchange  broke  heavily  on  the  sudden  death  of
ex-Governor  Flower,  who  had  been  a  leading  figure  in  the  market.  Prices
recovered  slowly  from  this  shock  until  in  September  the  whole  loss  had  been
regained.  Thereafter  the  market  was  fairly  steady  for  three  months,  but  in
December  another  crash  came  in  "industrials,"  and  on  the  eighteenth  prices
dropped  far  below  the  lowest  point  of  May.  A  trust  company  failed  in  New
York  and  several  financial  concerns  collapsed  in  Boston  because  of  the  shrink-
age in  copper  stocks.  To  relieve  the  panicky  condition  a  money  pool  was
formed  to  lend  10  millions  on  the  stock  exchange.  Meanwhile  stringency  in
the  money  market  had  become  pronounced  at  several  times,  the  outbreak  of
the  Boer  war  had  caused  some  uneasiness,  and  railway  stocks  had  sympathized
in  a  measure  with  the  fluctuations  of  industrials.  Under  these  circumstances,
many  intended  consolidations  were  abandoned  at  the  last  moment;  but  never-
theless the  record  for  the  year  went  far  beyond  the  high  mark  of  1898.  Not
less  than  87  such  companies  were  launched,  with  a  capital  of  2,244  millions.^^
The  most  striking  feature  of  the  year,  however,  was  that  the  troubles  of  the
stock  market  created  hardly  a  ripple  of  disturbance  in  general  trade.

2.  The  Pause  of  Activity  in  1900

In  Europe  we  have  seen  tliat  1900  brought  a  crisis — moderate  in  England
and  Prance,  severe  in  Germany.  In  the  United  States  this  crisis  was  repre-
sented by  nothing  more  than  a  brief  pause  in  a  period  of  exceptional  prosperity.
Industrial  consolidations,  to  be  sure,  were  far  less  numerous  than  in  1899 — ■
42  companies  with  a  capitalization  of  831  millions.  Sales  on  the  stock  exchange,
also,  were  a  third  less  for  the  first  nine  months.  Even  commodity  prices
declined,  new  orders  fell  off,  the  iron  and  steel  trade  gave  signs  of  over-
production, and  from  July  to  October  clearings  outside  New  York  were  less
than  the  year  before.  But  the  volume  of  general  business  still  remained
immense ;  for  the  first  time  our  bankers  fioated  large  loans  for  the  central  gov-
ernments of  England,  Germany,  Sweden,  and  for  many  foreign  cities ;  and  our
foreign  commerce  established  new  high  records.

This  pause  in  business  expansion  during  the  summer  was  followed  by  a
remarkable  outburst  of  activity  after  the  presidential  election  in  November.
Mr.  McKinley  defeated  Mr.  Bryan,  who  ran  for  a  second  time  on  a  free-silver
platform.  So  slight  had  been  the  reaction  and  so  vigorous  was  the  revival  that
most  statistical  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  make  1900  as  a  whole  even  a
better  year  than  1899.

31  Conant,  as  above.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  65

3.  The  Stock-Market  Mania  of  1901  and  the  Northern  Pacific  "Corner"

The  most  notable  feature  of  the  post-election  period  was  the  outburst  of
stock  speculation.  Supported  by  the  prosperity  of  trade,  the  large  popular
majority  for  sound  money,  and  the  establishment  of  "community  of  interests"
between  competing  railways,  the  promoters  and  underwriters  ventured  even
more  daringly  than  in  1898  and  the  early  part  of  1899.  After  Mr.  Morgan  had
dazzled  the  public  by  launching  the  "billion-dollar  steel  trust"  in  February
and  March,  1901,  there  seemed  for  a  time  no  limit  to  what  the  public  would
buy  or  the  prices  they  would  pay.  But  this  frenzy  of  speculation  came  to  a
sudden  end  on  the  ninth  of  May,  as  the  result  of  a  corner  in  Northern  Pacific
stock.  Two  groups  of  great  capitalists,  one  led  by  Morgan  and  Hill,  the  other
by  Harriman  and  the  Standard  Oil  magnates,  had  been  trying  to  buy  a  con-
trolling interest  in  the  stock  of  this  railway  for  some  time.  Their  bidding
ran  up  the  price  to  so  high  a  point  that  brokers  "sold  short,"  expecting  to  profit
when  the  price  dropped.  But  on  May  9  it  was  discovered  that  more  shares
had  been  sold  than  were  in  existence,  so  that  the  purchasers  were  in  a  position
to  extort  any  price  they  chose  in  settlement  of  the  contracts.  This  discovery
was  followed  both  by  wild  bidding  for  Northern  Pacific — bidding  so  wild  that
its  cash  price  reached  $1000  per  share — and  by  sacrifice  sales  of  other  secur-
ities. The  collapse  in  prices  which  resulted  from  the  latter  was  declared  by  the
Financial  Review  to  have  been  the  worst  ever  known.^^  To  save  the  situation,
a  syndicate  of  bankers  was  formed  for  making  loans  on  the  stock  exchange,
and  the  two  groups  of  contestants  for  the  control  of  Northern  Pacific  agreed
to  settle  all  contracts  for  the  stock  at  $150  per  share.  Despite  the  violence  of
the  panic,  no  stock-exchange  house  failed.  The  market  was  irregular  for  some
time,  but  toward  the  end  of  May  a  sustained  advance  began.  For  the  rest  of
the  year  prices  were  fairly  well  maintained  at  a  level  between  the  high  and  the
low  points  of  the  panic  month.  The  important  result  was  that  the  public  had
been  badly  scared,  though  not  seriously  hurt,  and  remained  out  of  the  market.

4.  The  Prosperity  of  General  Business  in  1901-02

This  stock-market  panic  was  by  no  means  the  only  unfavorable  feature  of
the  year.  Severe  droughts  cut  down  the  yield  of  oats  and  made  the  corn  crop
smaller  than  in  any  year  since  the  disastrous  season  of  1894.  But  the  wheat
crop  was  harvested  too  early  to  be  seriously  affected  and  proved  exceptionally
abundant.  The  steel  trade  suffered  from  a  great  strike  by  the  Amalgamated
Steel,  Iron  and  Tin  Workers  against  the  new  United  States  Steel  Corporation.
President  McKinley  was  shot  September  6  and  died  on  the  fourteenth.  Stocks
suffered  a  sharp  break  on  the  day  following  his  assassination  and  again  on  the

32  1902,  p.  13. I  have  followed  the  account  of  the  "corner"  given  by  A.  D.  Noyes,  Forty  Years  of  Ameri-
can Finance,  chapter  xii.


66  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

day  before  his  death.  The  attempt  of  the  Amalgamated  Copper  Company  to
keep  their  basic  price  at  17  cents  per  pound  broke  down  in  December,  and  was
followed  by  a  fall  to  13  cents.  The  cotton-goods  trade  was  not  satisfactory
and  production  was  curtailed  by  agreement  in  the  spring.  Corn  exports  were
reduced  by  the  short  crop,  iron  and  steel  exports  by  the  depression  in  Europe,
and  copper  exports  by  the  depression  and  by  high  prices.

So  strong  was  the  business  situation,  however,  that  none  of  these  depressing
influences  had  more  than  momentary  effect.  Clearings  outside  of  New  York
ran  ahead  of  the  record  of  1900  every  month  in  the  year.  The  railroads  proved
unable  to  handle  promptly  the  enormous  traffic  tendered  them,  so  that  an
unparalleled  car  shortage  developed  in  the  autumn.

This  contrast  between  abounding  prosperity  in  general  business  and  trou-
bled financial  markets  continued  through  1902.  Again  the  volume  of  trade  was
declared  to  be  greater  than  ever  before,  and  again  the  railways  were  offered
more  freight  than  they  could  move  in  the  autumn.  Such  lines  as  the  Penn-
sylvania, New  York  Central,  Baltimore  and  Ohio,  and  Illinois  Central  sold
enormous  security  issues  to  provide  larger  traffic  facilities.  In  June  the  Steel
Corporation  and  in  November  the  Pennsylvania  Railroad  made  voluntary
increases  of  10  per  cent  in  wages — an  example  which  was  Avidely  copied  before
the  close  of  1902  or  early  in  1903.  The  farmers  had  most  brilliant  harvests.
Even  the  high  price  of  meat  which  followed  from  the  deficient  stock  of  corn
and  the  great  anthracite  coal  strike  of  May  to  October  did  not  stem  the  rising
tide.  But  financial  reports  betrayed,  signs  of  increasing  strain.  The  public
continued  to  stay  out  of  the  stock  market,  and  the  number  of  shares  sold  in
New  York  was  nearly  a  third  less  than  in  1901,  though  greater  than  in  1900
or  1899.  Heavy  traffic,  indeed,  helped  the  prices  of  railway  shares  to  rise  in
the  summer  and  autumn  when  the  large  harvests  became  assured.  But  the
more  speculative  industrials  did  not  recover  much  of  the  ground  lost  in  1901,
despite  one  or  two  periods  of  apparent  activity  under  clever  manipulation  by
pools.  Meanwhile  the  money  market  in  the  autumn,  when  the  demand  for
funds  to  move  the  crops  was  at  its  height,  became  more  stringent  than  at  any
time  since  1896.  Mr.  Shaw,  the  secretary  of  the  treasurj^,  adopted  extraor-
dinary measures  of  relief — increasing  government  deposits  in  the  national
banks,  stimulating  larger  issues  of  banknotes  by  giving  the  deposits  to  insti-
tutions which  agreed  to  increase  their  circulation,  and  finally  by  accepting  other
than  federal  bonds  as  security  for  deposits  on  condition  that  the  bonds  released
be  made  the  basis  of  new  note  issues.  But  these  efforts  did  not  prevent  a  return
of  stringency  in  November  and  December,  a  return  accompanied  by  heavy
liquidation  in  the  stock  market.  Railway  and  industrial  shares  alike  fell  in
price.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  67

5.  "The  Rich  Man's  Panic"  of  1903-04

The  liquidation  in  stocks  which  began  in  November  and  December,  1902,
continued  with  hardly  a  check  until  November  and  December,  1903.  So  pro-
nounced and  so  long  a  decline  of  security  prices  had  scarcely  occurred  before.
The  explanations  offered  made  this  liquidation  in  1903  the  aftermath  of  the
speculation  of  November,  1900,  to  May,  1901.  When  the  investing  public  was
suddenly  scared  out  of  the  market  on  the  ninth  of  May  by  the  gyrations  of
Northern  Pacific  and  the  crash  of  other  shares,  the  great  banks  and  capitalists
interested  in  underwriting  syndicates  had  to  take  over  large  blocks  of  industrial
securities  which  they  had  hoped  to  unload  promptly  at  a  profit.  The  men
concerned  were  strong  enough  to  defend  their  holdings  in  the  panic  month,
and  to  keep  prices  fairly  level  through  1901  and  most  of  1902.  In  this  effort
they  were  greatly  aided  by  the  prevalence  of  prosperity.  But  they  could  not
work  off  the  bulk  of  their  holdings,  for  the  investing  public  resolutely  kept
out  of  the  market  for  industrials.  This  strained  situation  might  have  continued
even  longer  had  it  not  been  for  European  intervention.  The  post-election
speculation  of  1900,  with  which  the  trouble  began,  had  been  financed  largely
with  funds  borrowed  from  foreign  banks.  Favored  by  the  business  dullness
abroad,  the  borrowers  were  able  to  retain  a  large  part  of  these  loans  until
towards  the  end  of  1902.  Then  the  Europeans  began  to  recall  their  funds.  To
meet  such  demands  American  banks  had  to  insist  upon  repayment  of  loans  by
their  own  borrowers.  There  remained  nothing  for  the  latter  but  to  dispose
of  their  investments.  Hence  the  great  outpouring  of  securities  which  began
in  November,  1902,  and  ran  for  at  least  a  year.

The  public  felicitously  dubbed  this  liquidation  "the  rich  man's  panic."
But  no  panic  in  our  technical  sense  occurred.  A  few  of  the  new  industrial
corporations  failed  outright,  the  United  States  Shipbuilding  Company  was
stillborn,  and  a  number  of  financial  houses  became  bankrupt.  Even  the  best
railways  and  municipalities  found  it  difficult  to  borrow  on  their  accustomed
terms,  and  had  to  raise  the  rate  of  interest  on  their  bonds,  or  resort  to  the  issue
of  short-time  notes.  Still,  the  niunber  of  disasters  was  small  in  view  of  the
severity  of  the  decline  on  the  stock  exchange,  apparently  because  the  losses  fell
largely  upon  men  of  great  wealth.

In  1903  the  reaction  in  the  financial  markets  at  last  began  to  be  felt  outside.
Difficulties  in  borrowing  on  the  part  of  the  railways  reacted  upon  the  demand
for  goods,  particularly  for  iron  and  steel.  In  this  industry  the  second  half
of  1903  accordingly  brought  a  period  of  depression  and  restricted  production.
Manufacturers  in  many  other  branches  complained  of  smaller  orders,  of
increased  expenses,  of  extortionate  demands  by  trade-unions,  etc.  The  rail-
ways very  generally  reported  gains  in  net  earnings  which  were  small  in  com-
parison with  the  gains  in  gross  earnings,  and  accounted  for  the  difference  by


68  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

pointing  to  the  higher  cost  of  everything  they  bought.  The  cotton  trade
suffered  especially  from  the  high  price  of  the  raw  material,  in  which  a  gigantic
speculation  was  carried  on  under  the  leadership  of  Daniel  J.  Sully.  But  the
farmers  had  a  satisfactory  year;  for,  while  crops  were  smaller  than  in  1902,
they  brought  higher  prices.  And  clearings  outside  of  New  York  showed  mod-
erate gains  in  every  month  save  May  and  July.

The  slight  and  doubtful  gains  of  general  business  in  1903  turned  into  mod-
erate losses  in  the  first  seven  or  eight  months  of  1904.  Clearings  both  in  New
York  and  outside  ran  behind  the  corresponding  records  of  the  year  before  from
January  to  July — with  negligable  exceptions — and  the  gain  of  August  was
trifling.  Substantially  the  same  testimony  is  borne  by  railway  receipts,  by  the
accumulation  of  idle  money  in  the  banks,  by  very  low  rates  of  interest,  by  the
arrest  of  the  advance  in  wages,  and  the  defeat  of  the  men  in  most  of  the  labor
contests.  Extremely  severe  weather  from  January  to  May,  hampering  trafl&c
and  threatening  the  early  crops,  the  conflagration  in  Baltimore  resulting  in
losses  put  at  100  millions,  and  the  fears  excited  by  the  war  in  the  Orient,  were
secondary  factors,  reinforcing  the  brake  upon  business  activity.  On  the  other
hand,  the  investing  public  developed  an  insatiable  appetite  for  high-class  bonds,
so  that  both  corporations  and  municipalities  were  able  to  satisfy  their  capital
requirements,  and  provide  funds  for  new  developments.  In  the  stock  market
the  lowest  points  were  touched  in  March.  Contrary  to  expectations,  the  success
of  the  government  in  the  Northern  Securities  case  in  that  month  was  followed
by  a  rise  in  prices,  which  ran  on  slowly  until  July  and  then  quickened  its
pace.  Judge  Parker's  action  as  candidate  for  the  presidency  in  committing
the  Democratic  party  to  an  explicit  acceptance  of  the  gold  standard  prevented
the  autumn  campaign  from  exercising  the  disturbing  influence  noted  in  1896
and  1900.  Finally,  towards  autumn  the  assurance  of  abundant  harvests,  save
of  wheat,  encouraged  the  business  public.  Amid  these  favoring  circumstances,
the  reaction  was  terminated  in  a  remarkably  brief  time.  The  rate  of  progress
in  general  business  had  not  slackened  notably  until  1903,  the  actual  losses  were
confined  mainly  to  the  months  of  Januarj^  to  July  or  August,  1904,  and  a
vigorous  revival  began  in  September.

6.  "The  American  Invasion  of  Europe"

The  points  of  similarity  and  contrast  between  the  course  of  business  condi-
tions in  America  and  Europe  during  the  years  1897  to  1904  may  be  brought
out  in  developing  a  topic  concerning  which  little  has  been  said — the  growth  of
foreign  commerce.

The  official  record,  which  made  a  deep  impression  on  men's  minds  both  here
and  abroad,  is  summarized  in  the  following  figures.  Fiscal  years  are  taken,
because  they  happen  to  correspond  more  closely  than  calendar  years  with  the
changes  in  business  conditions.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  69

Merchandise  Exports  and  Imports  of  the  United  States  in  Millions  op  Dollars

Excess  of

Exports  Imports  exports

July  1,  1896,  to  June  30,  1897  1,051  765  286

July  1,  1897,  to  June  30,  1898  1,231  616  615

July  1,  1898,  to  June  30,  1899  1,227  697  530

July  1,  1899,  to  June  30,  1900  1,394  850  544

July  1,  1900,  to  June  30,  1901  1,488  823  665

July  1,  1901,  to  June  30,  1902  1,382  903  478

July  1,  1902,  to  June  30,  1903  1,420  1,026  394

July  1,  1903,  to  June  30,  1904  1,461  991  470

To  understand  the  pride  which  these  figures  aroused  in  America  and  the
alarm  they  excited  in  Europe  it  is  but  necessary  to  note  how  far  they  surpassed
all  previous  records.  Never  but  once  before  had  American  exports  exceeded
a  billion  dollars,  and  that  record  (1,030  millions)  had  been  made  by  the  extra-
ordinary harvest  conditions  of  1891.  The  previous  high  record  for  excess  of
exports  over  imports— 265  millions — had  been  made  as  long  ago  as  1878-79.
The  average  excess  of  exports  for  the  decade  July  1, 1886,  to  June  30,  1896,  had
been  70  millions.

Current  opinion  in  the  United  States  hailed  the  extraordinary  gain  of
exports  and  the  still  more  extraordinary  balance  in  our  favor  as  a  sign  that
this  country  was  conquering  the  markets  of  the  world.  It  was  prophesied  that
after  paying  off  all  its  own  debts  the  United  States  would  presently  become
the  leading  "creditor  nation"  of  the  world,  and  that  New  York  would  displace
London  as  the  foremost  center  of  finance.  Abroad,  Mr.  Chamberlain's  pro-
tectionist propaganda  was  supported  by  pointing  to  Britain's  danger  from
American  competition  in  neutral  markets,  and  an  Austrian  minister  of  finance
suggested  a  European  tariff  alliance  against  the  United  States.  So  lively  was
popular  interest  in  the  subject  that  the  illustrated  magazines  took  up  the
"romance"  of  commercial  expansion.  In  1900  McClure's  published  a  series
of  articles  by  Mr.  R.  S.  Baker  entitled  "Our  New  Prosperity,"  and  in  1902
S  crib  tier's  brought  out  Mr.  P.  A.  Vanderlint's  "American  Invasion  of  Europe."

But  in  1901  it  began  to  appear  that  the  patriotic  boasts  had  been  premature.
Competent  critics  demonstrated  that  the  treasury's  figures  for  the  balance  of
trade  did  not  show  the  balance  of  payments.  Not  only  was  there  reason  to
believe  that  the  customs-house  values  of  many  imports  were  too  low,  and  of
certain  exports  too  high;  but  it  was  also  necessary  to  take  account  of  other
items  than  the  commerce  in  merchandise, — such  as  the  expenditures  of  Amer-
icans traveling  abroad,  the  freight  paid  to  foreign  shipping  companies,  the
foreign  remittances  of  immigrants,  the  interest  and  dividends  on  investments
by  foreigners,  the  foreign  profits  made  by  buying  our  securities  in  times  of
depression  and  selling  them  back  at  higher  levels,  etc.'' Again,  as  prosperity

33  See  N  T  Bacon  "American  International  Indebtedness,"  Yale  Review,  November,  1900;  Final  Report
of  the  Industrial  Commission,  1902,  pp.  34-41;  H.  Dietzel,  "Die  'enorme  Ueberbilanz'  der  Vereinigten  Staaten,"
Jahrbiicher  fiir  Nationalohonomie,  August  and  November,  1905.


70  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

■grew  in  the  United  States  imports  rose  rapidly,  and  thus  cut  down  the  credit
balance.  On  the  other  hand,  when  the  European  "boom"  of  1897  to  1899  passed
through  the  crisis  of  1900  into  the  depression  of  1901  to  1904,  our  exports  fell
off.  For  the  relaxation  of  domestic  demands  for  their  products  allowed  foreign
producers  to  compete  more  vigorously  for  the  trade  of  neutral  markets.  Not
only  could  they  quote  lower  prices  than  at  the  height  of  their  own  "boom,"  but
they  could  also  promise  quicker  deliveries.  In  the  world  of  finance,  American
subscriptions  to  European  loans,  of  which  so  much  was  made  in  1900,  fell  to
much  lower  figures  in  later  years,  and  the  credit  balance  in  favor  of  our  bankers,
put  at  $200,000,000  at  the  close  of  1900,  was  presently  exhausted  and  replaced
by  a  debit  balance  of  similar  dimensions.  To  finance  the  great  industrial  con-
solidations of  1901  and  the  heavy  trade  of  1902,  American  bankers  had  been
obliged  to  negotiate  finance  bills  on  an  enormous  scale  in  London,  Paris,  and
Berlin.  Finally,  the  stock  liquidation  of  November,  1902,  to  November,  1903,
forced  by  the  demand  for  repayment  of  foreign  loans,  proved  that  the  American
money  market  had  not  yet  emancipated  itself  from  European  domination.

VI.  Business  Depression  in  Europe,  1901-04

The  annals  of  European  business  were  dropped  on  the  outbreak  of  the  crisis
in  1900  in  order  to  sketch  the  long  period  of  American  prosperity  which  led
up  to  the  "rich  man's  panic"  of  1903-04.  What  is  next  to  be  recounted  is  the
gradual  ebbing  of  the  business  tide  in  England,  G-ermany,  and  France  after  the
crisis  of  1900  had  passed.

1.  England

The  ebb  in  English  business  which  began  after  the  middle  of  1900  continued
through  1901.  Wholesale  prices,  wages,  and  stocks  all  fell;  unemployment
increased;  railway  earnings  and  provincial  clearings  both  indicated  a  decline
in  trade ;  foreign  commerce  was  slightly  smaller  in  money  value,  though  slightl}^
greater  in  physical  volume.  The  depression,  however,  was  moderate,  and  the
Economist  thought  the  volume  of  business  above  the  average,  though  less  than
in  1899.

The  Boer  War  ended  in  1902,  but  the  hoped-for  revival  of  business  did  not
come.  Foreign  trade  was  a  trifle  larger  both  in  volume  and  in  value,  stimii-
lated  by  American  prosperity  and  retarded  by  German  depression.  Domestic
trade  made  some  progress,  but  less  than  foreign  trade.  Prices  and  wages
sagged  a  little  further,  and  unemployment  increased.  The  public  was  apathetic
with  reference  to  stock  speculation  and  even  investment;  nevertheless  stock
prices  advanced  a  trifle.  The  farmers  fared  better  than  in  1901.  On  the  whole,
the  year  was  characterized  as  neither  good  nor  bad.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  71

Again  in  1903  disappointment  was  felt.  The  year,  though  "not  downright
bad,"  was  poorer  than  1902.  Disturbances  in  Macedonia  and  the  prospect  of
war  between  Russia  and  Japan  interfered  with  foreign  commerce,  which  never-
theless registered  slight  gains.  The  great  cotton  industry  was  disturbed  by
the  wild  fluctuations  in  the  price  of  the  raw  material— fluctuations  for  which
American  speculators  were  blamed.  The  farmers  fared  miserably  from  a  wet
harvest.  Wage-earners  suffered  from  less  pay  and  less  employment.  Domestic
trade  also  fell  off,  particularly  in  the  last  six  months.  The  Economist  believed
Mr.  Chamberlain's  protectionist  propaganda  to  be  a  disturbing  factor.  In
financial  centers  there  appeared  to  be  very  little  capital  for  investment;  the
stock  exchange  was  dull  and  prices  fell.

This  financial  and  industrial  depression  still  weighed  upon  the  country
throughout  the  greater  part  of  1904.  Foreign  trade  continued  to  gain  slowly,
and  proved  the  mainstay  of  the  manufacturing  industries.  Domestic  trade,
on  the  contrary,  was  further  restricted.  Wage-earners  once  more  found  their
condition  grow  worse  from  a  slight  decline  in  wages  and  a  larger  decrease  in
employment.  The  farmers,  however,  had  an  average  year — decidedly  better
than  1903.  And  the  stock  exchange,  perhaps  the  most  sensitive  barometer  of
the  business  world,  gave  signs  of  revival,  though  in  a  hesitajiog^fashion.  By
the  close  of  the  year  there  came  no  marked  activity,  bu^^^Go^  B^^JSl  feeling,
which  1905  abundantly  justified.


2.  Germany

During  these  years  Grerman  business  pursued  a  sui^Iffl^  JAJSH^^a ve  that
the  depression  was  more  severe,  and  that  the  revival  began  somewhat  sooner.
With  its  bank  failures,  disclosures  of  fraud,  low  wages,  short  hours,  unem-
ployment, mediocre  harvests,  internal  dissentions  within  syndicates,  struggles
between  producers  of  raw  materials  and  manufacturers  over  prices,  pessimism
among  investors,  and  crisis  on  the  bourse,  1901  was  a  bad  year  indeed.

Although  1902  brought  no  fresh  disasters,  it  brought  little  alleviation  from
hard  times.  The  harvests  were  far  from  good.  But  the  distrust  caused  by
the  great  bank  failures  gradually  lessened  as  the  months  passed,  and  investors
began  to  buy  government  securities  with  freedom.

Next  year  the  strain  was  held  to  have  ended  and  a  slight  improvement  to
have  begun.  The  coal,  iron,  electrical,  and  shipbuilding  industries  fared  better ;
farmers  had  satisfactory  crops,  both  imports  and  exports  increased,  unemploy-
ment diminished,  and  in  general  there  seemed  ground  to  hope  for  genuine
prosperity  in  1904.

How  far  this  hope  had  been  realized  was  a  matter  on  which  opinion  still
differed  at  the  end  of  the  next  year.  The  bourse  had  a  bad  panic  on  February
8  and  9  when  news  of  the  war  between  Japan  and  Russia  surprised  the  German


72  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

market.  Semi-official  reports  had  established  the  expectation  in  Berlin  that
no  rupture  would  occur  and  the  "bulls"  were  caught  in  the  midst  of  a  campaign
for  the  rise.  However,  aid  was  lent  by  the  great  banks,  and  despite  heavy
failures  general  business  was  not  seriously  shaken.  The  year  was  marked  by
numerous  combinations  of  capital,  comparable  in  extent  with  those  of  1898-
1901  in  America.  In  industry,  electrical  and  textile  establishments  did  better
than  in  1903;  coal,  iron  and  steel  enterprises  not  so  well.  The  farmers  had
excellent  crops  of  cereals,  but  poor  crops  of  fodder  and  potatoes.  All  in  all,
the  statistical  record  indicated  a  gain  over  1903,  but  one  limited  in  extent.

3,  France

As  often  before,  so  in  1900,  Prance  felt  the  depressing  effects  of  the  crisis
less  than  her  neighbors.  The  liquidation  continued  through  1901,  which  was
marked  by  slack  business  and  a  fall  in  industrial  shares.  Moreover,  the  staple
crops,  excepting  rye,  were  less  than  the  year  before.  The  one  sign  of  lively
business  was  a  "boom"  in  gold  mining  shares  in  December,  based  upon  reports
that  operations  would  be  resumed  shortly  in  South  Africa.

No  resumption  of  activity  came  in  1902;  on  the  contrary,  industrial  and
commercial  operations  were  further  restricted  in  many  lines.  The  speculation
in  gold  mines  came  to  grief  because  everyone  tried  to  sell  at  a  profit  when  peace
was  signed.  But  the  farmers,  except  those  producing  wine  grapes  and  sugar
beets,  had  a  better  season.

A  slight  improvement  in  conditions  led  the  commentators  to  say  that  the
depression  had  come  to  an  end  in  1903.  And  in  1904  they  declared  that  the
upward  trend  had  continued,  though  buoyancy  was  far  from  being  attained.
The  most  striking  feature  of  this  year  was  the  calmness  with  which  the  French
investors,  who  held  many  millions  of  Russian  bonds,  viewed  the  Japanese  vic-
tories. On  February  8  news  that  war  had  begun  caused  a  sharp  break  on  the
bourse,  and  on  the  twentieth  there  was  a  serious  decline,  in  which  other  stocks
suffered  more  than  the  "Russians."  But  the  great  banks  in  conference  with
the  minister  of  finance  came  to  the  aid  of  the  market,  and  a  prompt  recovery  was
effected.  In  later  months  there  were  several  periods  of  advancing  prices,  and
in  the  intervals  between  them  what  gains  had  been  made  were  firmly  held.
Thus,  as  in  England,  the  stock  market  of  1904  heralded  the  better  times  of  1905.

VII.  The  Prosperous  Times  or  1905-06  in  Europe  and  America

The  forward  movement,  which  began  upon  the  great  stock  exchanges  in  the
latter  part  of  1904,  developed  into  a  world-wide  march  of  prosperity  in  1905
and  1906,  and  ended  in  the  world-wide  crisis  of  1907.  Between  the  four  coun-
tries whose  business  history  we  have  been  following  the  differences  to  be  noted
in  these  years  are  differences  only  of  degree.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  73

1.  England

In  England  the  impetus  to  business  prosperity  seemed  to  come  from  abroad.
In  1905  the  export  demand  for  British  goods  was  nearly  10  per  cent  larger
than  in  1904,  and  the  consequent  activity  of  the  export  trades  reacted  upon
domestic  business.  By  the  end  of  the  year  industrial  prosperity  had  become
general.

Similar  conditions  prevailed  in  1906.  Exports  gained  nearly  14  per  cent
over  the  large  totals  of  1905,  and  all  departments  of  foreign  trade  made  new
high  records.  For  the  first  time  the  trade  totals  ran  beyond  a  billion  pounds
sterling.  Good  crops  among  the  most  important  customers  for  British  goods,
and  the  heavy  domestic  demands  upon  American  and  German  manufacturers
which  lessened  their  competition  in  neutral  markets,  were  among  the  most
important  causes  of  the  immense  exports.  Domestic  trade  expanded  under
these  conditions,  though  in  less  measure.

On  the  stock  exchange  alone  1906  was  disappointing.  The  aggregate  prices
of  325  representative  securities  actually  fell  in  this  year — "one  of  the  most
active  and  prosperous"  that  England  "ever  experienced.""  In  explanation
of  this  anomaly,  the  Economist  pointed  out  that  the  interest  rates  allowed  by
bankers  on  deposits  had  risen  above  the  rates  on  the  best  securities,  and  that
business  men  would  continue  to  put  their  large  profits  back  into  their  own
enterprises  so  long  as  the  "boom"  lasted.  The  high  interest  rates  became  more
marked  as  the  year  progressed,  until  finally  in  October  the  Bank  of  England
raised  its  discount  charge  to  6  per  cent,  a  rate  seldom  attained  except  when  a
crisis  is  feared.  Such  an  extraordinary  charge  for  discounts,  in  the  midst  of
prosperity,  was  taken  to  be  a  measure  of  defense  against  the  enormous  with-
drawals of  gold  by  Americans.  To  support  a  great  stock-market  campaign
in  Wall  Street  during  the  season  when  the  demand  for  money  to  move  the  crops
was  at  its  highest  point,  American  capitalists  had  negotiated  immense  sums  of
finance  bills  in  London  and  employed  the  proceeds  for  importing  gold.  Suc-
cessive advances  of  the  bank  rate  from  3l^  to  5  per  cent  having  failed  to  check
this  process,  the  Bank  adopted  the  decisive  measure  of  a  6  per  cent  rate.
Within  a  week  the  withdrawals  of  gold  for  New  York  ceased ;  but  the  money
market  continued  so  stringent  to  the  close  of  the  year  that  a  7  per  cent  rate
was  feared.  To  prevent  such  a  disturbing  measure  the  Bank  of  France  went
to  the  aid  of  London,  by  discounting  a  large  amount  of  English  bills.

2.  Germany

German  business  differed  from  English  in  1905  and  1906  chiefly  in  that  the
impetus  to  prosperity  came  from  domestic  sources,  and  that  the  "boom"  was
more  intense. The  trade  revival  made  such  rapid  progress  in  1905  that  the

34  This  index  number  of  stocks  is  kept  by  the  BanK:ers'  Magazine  of  London The  aggregate  values  are
given  for  December  is'  1905  and  1906,  as  fsfoTS.OOO.OOO  and  £3,021,000,000-a  fall  of  1.95  per  cent.


74  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

second  semester  suggested  comparison  with  the  wonderful  times  of  1898  and
1899.  The  enormous  demands  for  capital  caused  a  rapid  rise  of  interest  rates,
so  that  the  year  ended  with  6  per  cent  as  the  official  minimum  of  the  Reichsbank.
In  1906  the  volume  of  business  increased  still  further ;  prices  rose ;  employers
complained  of  a  scarcity  of  labor,  of  coal,  of  raw  materials,  and  of  capital.
But  amidst  this  intense  activity  of  trade  and  industry,  the  stock  exchange  was
dull  in  Germany  as  in  England.  The  highest  level  of  security  prices  had  been
touched  in  1905.  The  public  deserted  such  conservative  issues  as  the  govern-
ment 3  per  cents,  in  favor  of  industrial  stocks.  But  even  in  the  case  of  the
latter,  prices  sagged.  "Dear  money"  was  the  current  explanation.  The  volume
of  business  had  outgrown  the  capital  resources  of  the  country,  so  that  loans,
whether  on  short  or  long  time,  were  difficult  to  secure  at  all,  and  impossible  to
secure  except  on  onerous  terms.'  High  as  the  Bank  of  England  rates  were  in
1906,  the  ReichslDank  rates  were  higher  still — 6  per  cent  on  January  1,  presently
reduced  to  5  per  cent,  and  in  May  to  4iA,  but  advanced  again  to  5  per  cent  in
September,  6  per  cent  in  October,  and  7  per  cent  in  December.

3.  France

In  France,  also,  1905  and  1906  were  years  of  expanding  trade  at  home  and
abroad,  and  of  widely  diffused  prosperity.  But  with  their  customary  prudence
in  business  matters,  the  French  advanced  less  rapidly  than  the  Grermans  or  the
English.  Moreover,  the  internal  difficulties  which  the  Russian  government  had
to  face  after  its  military  defeat,  and  the  Morocco  affair,  were  more  serious
dangers  to  French  than  to  other  investors.

This  prudence  had  its  reward  even  in  1906.  While  London  was  facing  a
6  per  cent  and  Berlin  a  7  per  cent  bank  rate,  Paris  kept  3  per  cent  throughout
the  year,  and  the  Bank  of  France  was  able  to  help  the  British  market  as  well
as  to  serve  its  own.  Even  the  open-market  rates  in  Paris  advanced  but  slightly
over  the  average  for  1905,  and  remained  far  lower  than  the  corresponding
rates  in  London  and  Berlin.  Hence  the  Paris  bourse  did  not  have  to  carry  the
incubus  of  "dear  money."  The  reports  speak  of  great  activity  even  in  the
usually  dull  season  of  summer.  A  large  number  of  new  industrial  securities,
many  foreign,  were  offered  to  French  investors  and  bought  with  enthusiasm.
Securities  with  fixed  yield,  however,  declined  in  price.

4.  The  United  States

Finally,  the  business  history  of  America  in  1905  and  1906  is  much  like  that
of  Germany.  The  volume  of  both  domestic  and  foreign  trade  and  of  industrial
production  expanded  month  after  month,  prices  and  wages  rose  rapidly,  the
railways  were  taxed  beyond  their  capacity  by  the  freight  tendered,  and  the
farmers  were  favored  with  abundant  crops. On  the  whole,  business  prosperity


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  75

seemed  even  more  general  and  more  intense  than  in  1899  or  1901.  Not  even
such  a  disaster  as  the  San  Francisco  fire  caused  more  than  a  momentary  pause
in  the  activity.

But,  as  in  England  and  Germany,  this  expansion  of  business  overtaxed  the
resources  of  the  money  market.  Periods  of  increasingly  severe  stringency
recurred  at  ever  briefer  intervals,  particularly  in  the  autumn  when  the  crops
were  being  harvested  and  sent  to  market.  Resort  was  had  to  foreign  borrow-
ings upon  finance  bills  on  a  grand  scale ;  but,  even  so,  interest  rates  kept  rising,
and  both  commercial  paper  and  bonds  grew  harder  and  harder  to  sell.

For  a  time  it  seemed  as  if  "dear  money"  could  not  repress  the  buoyancy
of  the  stock  market.  The  upward  rush  of  stocks  which  began  in  1904  went  on
unchecked  until  March,  1905.  A  slight  decline  in  April  was  followed  in  May
by  a  decided  break  in  prices.  But  next  month  a  new  speculation  for  the  rise
began,  which  was  carried  on  with  few  checks  to  a  culmination  in  January,
1906 — and  that  in  the  face  of  call-loan  rates  which  averaged  over  9  per  cent
from  October  to  January.

The  stock-exchange  record  of  1906  was  far  less  brilliant — again  as-  in  Eng-
land and  Grermany.  The  general  course  was  downward  from  the  culmination
in  January  to  a  much  lower  level  in  May.  In  June  and  July  the  market  seemed
to  hesitate;  but  in  August  announcements  of  increased  dividends  on  the  Har-
riman  railways,  and  the  resumption  of  dividends  on  the  common  stock  of  the
United  States  Steel  Corporation  led  to  another  great  outburst  of  speculation
and  an  upward  rush  of  prices.  For  the  rest  of  the  year  the  market  wavered
around  the  high  level  established  in  August,  never  getting  quite  back  to  the
January  climax  and  gradually  weakening  toward  the  end  of  the  year.

VIII.  The  Crisis  of  1907

The  international  crisis  which  terminated  this  period  of  business  expansion
came  in  1907.  The  American  panic  of  October  and  November  was  but  its  most
violent  manifestation.

1.  England

English  statistical  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  in  1907  almost  all  show
increases  above  the  high  records  of  1906.  But  in  the  former  year  the  tide  was
rising;  in  1907  it  was  receding.  The  upward  movement  of  prices  culminated
as  early  as  May,  and  after  midsummer  trade  activity  began  to  slacken.  How-
ever, the  large  amount  of  orders  already  on  hand  kept  production  on  a  high
level  until  the  close  of  the  year.  The  high  rates  of  interest,  which  continued
from  1906  both  in  England  and  elsewhere,  handicapped  business  by  discour-
aging the  attempt  to  raise  new  capital.  On  the  stock  exchange  both  speculators
and  professional  dealers  suffered  heavy  losses. During  the  first  semester  the


76  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

activity  of  general  business  left  but  a  small  surplus  of  funds  for  investment
and  speculation ;  during  the  second  semester  discouragement  was  felt  over  the
curtailed  business  expansion.  The  English  crisis,  however,  bade  fair  to  be  as
quiet  and  uneventful  as  the  crisis  of  1900.  But  the  collapse  of  credit  in
America  in  October  and  November  led  to  an  enormous  outflow  of  gold,  threat-
ened British  investors  with  heavy  losses,  and  compelled  the  Bank  of  England
to  advance  its  rate  to  7  per  cent.  Elastic  as  the  financial  organization  of  Eng-
land is,  the  strain  of  this  foreign  panic  was  severely  felt,  and  business  fell  off
at  a  more  rapid  rate.^*

2.  Germany

Germany,  also,  had  clearly  passed  the  climax  of  her  "boom"  some  months
before  the  American  panic  occurred.  Prices  had  turned  downward,  the  pecu-
liarly sensitive  iron  and  steel  markets  had  begun  to  weaken,  industries  which
depended  upon  current  borrowings — like  the  building  trades,  and  shipbuilding
— were  less  active,  the  labor  market  showed  an  increase  in  the  number  of  men
seeking  jobs  as  early  as  July,  investors  were  apparently  losing  confidence  in
industrial  shares,  interest  rates  continued  to  rise,  the  course  of  quotations  on
the  bourse  was  downward,  and  complaints  multiplied  about  the  high  cost  of
living,  the  heavy  expenses  of  doing  business,  and  the  decline  of  net  profits.
But  the  recession  of  activity  which  had  l)egun  was  very  gradual  until  October.
Then  the  bad  news  from  New  York  greatly  intensified  the  stringency  of  money,
and  led  the  Reichsbank  to  raise  its  rate  to  1^2  psr  cent.  At  once  the  slow
decline  of  activity  became  rapid.  One  bank  failed,  two  conspicuous  specu-
lators went  bankrupt,  and  credit  received  a  severe  shock.  But  cooperation
among  the  great  financial  institutions  tided  over  the  difiicult  months,  and  Ger-
many had  no  panic.

3.  France

France  once  again  came  off  with  little  loss.  The  Bank  did  not  raise  its
discount  rate  above  4  per  cent,  and  was  able  to  render  liberal  assistance  to  the
money  market  of  London  and  hence  indirectly  to  all  money  markets.  Even
on  the  bourse  the  American  panic  was  but  slightly  felt;  only  a  few  of  the
securities  fell  in  price,  and  these  few  were  mainly  American  railways.  Gen-
eral business  was  not  seriously  hampered  by  dear  money,  manufactures  main-
tained the  course  of  moderate  prosperity  which  had  characterized  1905  and
1906,  and  railways  had  a  considerable  increase  of  trafiic.  Never,  in  short,  was
the  strong  side  of  French  conservatism  more  conspicuous  by  contrast  with  the
weak  side  of  American  and  German  enterprise  than  in  1907.

S't  A  fuller  account  of  this  crisis  is  given  below  in  chapter  xii.


MITCPIELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  77


4.  The  United  States

The  course  of  events  in  the  United  States  was  in  general  like  that  in  Eng-
land and  Germany,  save  that  our  credit  and  banking  system  broke  down  under
the  strain.  The  crisis— that  is,  the  recession  of  business  activity — antedated
the  panic  by  several  months.  It  is  true  that  the  volume  of  general  business
and  the  rate  of  industrial  production  gave  few  signs  of  waning  before  the  bank
failures  of  November.  But  prices  of  raw  materials  had  begun  to  recede  in
the  spring  or  early  summer,  new  orders  were  lighter  in  the  iron  and  steel  trades,
the  copper  market  was  oppressed  by  the  accumulation  of  unsold  stocks,  and
three  large  industrial  enterprises — Milliken  Brothers,  a  steel  firm,  the  Pope
Manufacturing  Company,  makers  of  automobiles,  etc.,  and  several  of  the  West-
inghouse  companies,  manufacturers  of  electrical  equipment — were  forced  into
the  hands  of  receivers  in  June,  August  and  October.  Meanwhile  the  investment
market  for  loans  was  becoming  more  and  more  stringent.  Even  the  strongest
railways  were  giving  up  the  effort  to  sell  long-time  bonds,  and  substituting
two-  or  three-year  notes  to  meet  their  most  pressing  capital  requirements.  New
York  City,  after  three  unsuccessful  attempts  to  float  4  per  cent  bonds,  finally
yielded  to  necessity  and  on  August  26th  offered  $40,000,000  at  4i/^  per  cent.

On  the  stock  exchange  the  difficulty  of  maintaining  the  level  of  quotations
which  characterized  the  later  months  of  1906  became  an  impossibility  in  1907.
A  rapid  fall  in  January  and  February  developed  in  March  into  a  crash  of
prices,  in  which  all  the  gains  of  the  post-election  "boom"  of  1904  and  the  "bull"
campaigns  of  1905  and  1906  were  lost.  April  brought  a  partial  recovery ;  but  in
May  and  June  prices  sagged  again.  Another  upward  turn  in  July  was  fol-
lowed by  a  second  crash  in  August,  when  the  low  prices  of  March  were  eclipsed.
Early  in  September  the  market  showed  a  little  strength,  but  presently  prices
began  to  decline  once  more,  and  the  bank  embarrassments  which  started  the
panic  in  October  came  on  a  falling  market.

Acute  trouble  began  with  the  suspicion  which  fell  upon  certain  New  York
banks,  controlled  by  a  group  of  financiers  who  were  believed  to  have  suffered
heavy  losses  through  the  decline  in  the  prices  of  copper  stocks.  To  forestall
a  general  loss  of  confidence,  the  clearing  house  examined  the  affairs  of  those
among  the  threatened  institutions  which  belonged  to  the  association,  and  agreed
to  give  them  such  assistance  as  they  might  need.  The  publication  of  this  news
in  the  morning  papers  of  October  21  did  much  to  allay  distrust.  A  panic  might
have  been  averted  had  not  the  clearing  agent  of  one  of  the  largest  trust  com-
panies in  the  city  announced  late  on  the  same  day  that  after  October  22  it  would
refuse  to  be  responsible  for  checks  against  this  client.  Next  morning  the  trust
company  opened  its  doors  to  a  run  and  after  paying  out  $8,000,000  to  clamorous
depositors  suspended  payments.


78  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

The  panic  which  followed  exhibited  all  the  usual  phenomena:  runs  upon
banks  and  trust  companies,  hoarding  of  money,  a  premium  upon  currency,
restriction  of  payments  by  the  banks,  call-loan  rates  above  100  per  cent,  unsal-
ability  of  commercial  paper,  a  severe  decline  of  prices  on  the  stock  exchange,
heavy  bankruptcies,  the  interruption  of  general  business  from  inability  to  get
money  for  pay-rolls,  difficulty  in  making  collections,  and  demoralization  of
the  domestic  exchanges.  Prom  New  York  as  a  center  these  conditions  spread
rapidly  over  the  whole  country.  By  way  of  remedy,  money  pools  for  lending
on  the  stock  exchange  were  formed ;  clearing-house  loan  certificates  were  issued
both  for  settlement  of  bank  balances  and  for  general  circulation ;  legal  holidays
were  declared  by  the  governors  of  Nevada,  Oregon,  and  California;  national
banks  increased  their  note  issues  as  rapidly  as  possible;  the  secretary  of  the
treasury  enlarged  the  government  deposits  in  banks  by  some  $35,000,000  and
offered  new  government  securities  for  sale ;  and  over  $100,000,000  of  gold  was
imported  from  Europe  in  November  and  December.  By  the  end  of  the  year
the  panic  was  under  control  and  business  passed  into  the  phase  of  depression.^^

IX.  The  Depeession  of  1908-09  and  the  Revival  of  1909-11  in  England  and

Germany

The  crises  of  1890  and  1900  had  both  been  f oUoAved  by  about  four,  years  of
depression  in  all  three  of  our  European  countries.  But  not  more  than  a  year
or  a  year  and  a  half  of  dullness  followed  the  cassis  of  1907.  In  reviving  again
business  was  repeating  its  history;  in  reviving  so  quickly  it  was  repeating  its
history  with  a  difference.  A  further  difference  presently  appeared.  In  1910,
for  the  first  time  in  twenty  years,  business  cycles  took  opposite  directions  in
different  European  countries.  Conservative  France  went  oif  with  enterprising
America  upon  the  path  of  decline,  leaving  England  and  Germany  together  upon
the  highAvay  of  prosperity.  The  closing  years  of  our  period  are  therefore  not
without  points  of  novelty.

1.  England

We  have  seen  that  signs  of  an  approaching  crisis  appeared  in  England
early  in  the  summer  of  1907.  The  outbreak  of  panic  in  America  aggravated
the  difficulties  arising  from  local  conditions  by  causing  an  extreme  advance  in
discount  rates.  Although  no  panic  occurred  in  England,  business  received  a
severe  check.  As  the  orders  already  booked  by  merchants  and  manufacturers
were  filled,  the  activity  of  trade  began  to  slacken.

Soon  after  the  beginning  of  1908  this  decline  in  the  volume  of  business
became  rapid.  Export  trade  suffered  not  only  from  depression  in  America,
but  also  from  a  falling  off  of  oriental  demand. Heavy  bankruptcies  which

35  A  fuller  account  of  this  panic  is  given  in  chapter  xii,  below.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  79

had  occurred  among  Chinese  and  Japanese  merchants  affected  the  market  for
cotton  goods.  Harvest  failure  and  commercial  depression  in  India  crippled
England's  most  important  customer.  Under  these  unfavorable  conditions  the
aggregate  value  of  exports  fell  over  11  per  cent  behind  the  record  of  1907.
That  domestic  business  likewise  suffered  was  shown  by  a  decline  in  railway
receipts  and  in  the  profits  of  joint-stock  companies,  by  a  decrease  in  employ-
ment, reductions  of  wages,  and  numerous  bankruptcies.  Probably  the  farmers
fared  best.  While  the  crops  did  not  quite  equal  those  of  1907,  still  they  were
well  above  the  ten-year  averages.

As  usual  in  times  of  depression,  money  became  cheap  and  abundant.  Prom
the  crisis  figure  of  7  per  cent,  the  bank  rate  was  gradually  reduced  to  2y2  per
cent  by  the  twenty-eighth  of  May,  at  which  figure  it  remained  for  the  rest  of
the  year.  Corporations,  both  domestic  and  foreign,  hastened  to  avail  them-
selves of  these  low  rates.  Many  loan  applications  which  had  been  deferred
because  of  the  unfavorable  market  for  bonds  in  1906-07  were  now  brought  for-
ward, and  other  companies  which  had  sold  one-  or  two-year  notes  to  meet  their
most  pressing  requirements  now  sought  to  fund  these  floating  debts.  Conse-
quently, while  general  business  was  declining  in  volume,  the  volume  of  invest-
ment business  broke  all  records.

Just  how  long  this  depression  lasted  it  is  difficult  to  say.  Unemployment
was  greatest  in  October,  1908 ;  wholesale  prices  were  lowest  in  Pebruary,  1909  f^
the  import  trade  did  not  begin  to  recover  until  April  and  the  export  trade  not
until  June,  1909 ;  wages  did  not  show  an  increase  until  the  last  quarter  of  the
year.  But  it  is  certain  that  a  turn  for  the  better  occurred  late  in  1908  or  early
in  1909.  While  the  first  months  of  the  latter  year  found  industry  still  inactive,
the  later  months  brought  a  vigorous  revival.  In  few  departments  of  business
were  the  high  records  of  1907  equalled,  the  Lancashire  cotton  trade  was  slow
in  recovering  from  the  slump  in  Indian  purchases,  and  the  high  cost  of  living
caused  bitter  complaint ;  but  by  the  close  of  the  year  prosperity  was  fairly
re-established.  Railway  receipts,  corporation  profits,  security  prices,  clearings,
and  interest  rates  were  all  higher.  The  farmers  were  troubled  by  wet  weather
in  harvest,  but  had  a  fairly  successful  year.  The  number  of  business  failures
was  the  lowest  for  a  decade.  But,  owing  both  to  the  higher  rates  of  interest
and  to  the  satisfaction  of  deferred  demands  for  capital,  the  volume  of  recorded
investments  was  somewhat  smaller  than  in  1908.

The  revival  of  1909  made  rapid  progress  in  1910.  Indeed,  England  was
distinctly  the  most  prosperous  among  the  great  nations  of  the  world  in  this
year.  Her  imports,  exports,  re-exports,  bank  clearings,  and  capital  invest-
ments all  surpassed  the  previous  high  records.  Business  failures  were  even
fewer  than  in  1909,  unemployment  shrank  again,  wages  increased,  and  wholesale
prices  continued  to  rise. The  farmers  did  not  share  fully  in  the  general  pros-

36  Sauerbeck.


80  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

perity;  but  despite  another  wet  season  did  fairly  well.  A  ''boom"  in  rubber
and  oil  stocks  attested  the  buoyant  optimism  of  investors.  Even  the  occurrence
of  two  general  elections  in  a  single  year  could  not  check  the  rising  tide.  And
the  year  closed  with  bright  prospects  of  a  further  increase  in  the  volume  of
trade  during  1911.

This  promise  was  measurably  fulfilled.  The  woolen,  shipbuilding,  iron,
steel,  shoe,  and  cotton  trades  were  highly  prosperous;  exports  increased  5.6
per  cent ;  railway  receipts  were  larger ;  the  percentage  of  unemployed  members
among  trade-unions  was  less  than  in  any  year  since  1900 ;  wages  were  materially
increased ;  the  farmers  had  a  profitable  season,  for  though  yields  were  reduced
by  drought  the  quality  of  the  crops  was  excellent  and  prices  were  high.  But
several  untoward  developments  marred  the  record.  Building  was  not  active;
the  tin-plate  trade  suffered  a  decline  of  orders  from  America;  all  the  trades
using  sugar  as  an  important  raw  material  were  injured  by  its  high  cost;  the
coal  trade  was  kept  in  uncertainty  by  the  prospect  of  labor  troubles ;  the  rail-
ways had  a  great  strike  to  contend  with ;  the  high  cost  of  living  augmented  the
unrest  among  wage-earners  in  many  other  trades;  and  financial  affairs  were
disturbed  by  a  fear  of  war  with  Germany.  One  savings  institution  assigned,
and  a  second  had  to  be  taken  over  by  a  group  of  banks.  The  applications  for
fresh  capital,  while  large,  were  less  than  in  1910.  The  stock  exchange  was
dull  in  the  second  half-year,  and  the  prices  of  securities  sagged.  As  a  conse-
quence town  clearings  fell  off,  while  country  clearings,  both  in  London  and  in
the  provinces,  increased.  The  Economist's  table  of  the  profits  of  upwards  of
two  hundred  industrial  companies  showed  an  average  gain  of  8.6  per  cent  over
1909-10 ;  but  the  gains  were  slight  in  the  last  three  months,  suggesting  that  the
boom  was  passing.

2.  Germany

The  course  of  business  in  Germany  from  1907  to  1911  differed  only  in  degree
from  that  in  England.

A  panic  was  avoided  in  1907,  but  1908  brought  a  severe  depression.  The
cartels,  which  have  recently  come  to  play  so  large  a  role  in  Germany,  endeav-
ored to  meet  the  situation  by  preventing  the  cutting  of  prices.  In  this  policy
they  achieved  measurable  success,  but  at  the  expense  of  a  severe  restriction  in
production,  and  much  friction  with  their  customers.  A  few  of  the  weaker
cartels  broke  up  under  the  strain,  and  the  process  of  forming  new  organizations
of  this  type  was  temporarily  checked.  Meanwhile  foreign  commerce  fell  off,
unemployment  increased,  and  the  urban  demand  for  consumers'  goods  shrank.
The  farmers,  however,  had  good  harvests,  and  their  enlarged  purchases  made
up  in  a  measure  for  the  slack  demand  from  other  quarters.

A  revival  of  activity  came  in  1909,  but  it  seems  to  have  begun  a  few  months
later  than  in  England. The  stock  market  developed  animation  in  the  second


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  81

third  of  the  year,  but  it  was  not  until  after  midsummer  that  a  change  for  the
better  was  distinctly  marked.  Excellent  harvests,  combined  with  high  prices
for  farm  products,  supported  the  movement.  Heavy  applications  for  long-
time loans  showed  that  the  industrial  companies  anticipated  an  increase  of
orders  and  wished  to  extend  their  facilities.  That  the  investing  public  had
confidence  was  shown  by  the  readiness  with  which  it  turned  from  investments
in  bonds  bearing  a  fixed  interest  to  investments  in  stocks  bearing  variable
dividends.

The  good  promises  of  1909  were  amply  fulfilled  by  1910.  Prosperity
extended  steadily  in  almost  all  branches  of  trade.  Both  the  foreign  and  the
domestic  demand  for  German  products  increased,  and  unemployment  dimin-
ished. Interest  rates  rose  again,  and  the  volume  of  new  security  issues  declined
somewhat.  But,  satisfactory  as  the  year  was  for  Glerman  business,  it  did  not
attain  the  pitch  of  activity  prevailing  in  England.

Poor  harvests  caused  by  drought  diminished  the  further  expansion  of
trade  in  1911.  The  prices  of  food  rose  to  an  extraordinary  level,  while  the
prices  of  raw  mineral  products  were  moderate.  Nevertheless,  the  coal,  iron
and  steel  trades  were  extremely  active.  Railroad  receipts,  unemployment
returns,  and  statistics  of  exports  and  imports  all  testified  that  the  volume  of
business  was  greater  than  in  1910.  As  in  England,  however,  the  financial
markets  had  a  different  story  to  tell.  The  threat  of  war  with  England  and
Prance  caused  the  recall  of  French  funds  invested  in  German  bills,  also  the
withdrawal  of  large  smns  from  the  banks  by  local  depositors.  Prices  fell
heavily  on  the  stock  exchange,  new  security  issues  were  checked,  interest  rates
were  uncertain  and  high.  The  banks  were  able  to  borrow  heavUy  from  N'ew
York,  however,  and  the  tension  relaxed  when  the  warcloud  blew  over.  On
the  whole  the  year  was  one  of  marked  prosperity ;  but  not  prosperity  of  such
intensity  as  that  of  1899  or  1906."

X.  The  Depeession  of  1908,  the  Revival  op  1909,  and  the  Reaction  of
1910-11  IN  Feanoe  and  the  United  States

1.  France

France  did  not  remain  immune  from  the  depression  of  1908,  but  she  was
affected  less  than  England  or  Germany.  Industrial  activity  declined  some-
what in  comparison  with  1907,  but  was  not  much  below  what  the  French  com-
mentators considered  normal.  Business  men  set  their  affairs  in  order  with
little  difiaculty,  and  by  the  end  of  the  year  were  ready  for  a  revival  of  activity
when  the  first  favorable  impetus  should  come.

37  For  business  conditions  in  Germany  in 1910 and  1911  I  have  reUed  upon  L.  Pohle's  reviews  published

in  the  February  numbers  of  the  Zeitsohrift  fur  Sooialwissensehaft,  1911  and  1912.


82  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

As  in  the  case  of  lier  neighbors,  so  in  that  of  France,  a  distinct  revival  began
in  1909.  Both  in  domestic  industry  and  trade  and  in  foreign  commerce  there
was  greater  activity.  The  shares  of  industrial  companies  and  of  banks,  as  well
as  government  securities,  rose  in  price.  Aside  from  wine-growers,  the  farmers
fared  well.  The  great  coal,  iron,  and  steel  producers  had  a  busy  season,  and
the  year  ended  with  prospects  of  greater  prosperity  in  1910.

Unfortunately,  these  promises  were  not  fulfilled  in  France,  as  they  were
in  England  and  in  Germany.  Extraordinary  floods  interfered  with  spring
planting  and  heavy  rains  interfered  with  harvests.  Both  the  wine  and  the
grain  growers  had  a  wretched  season.  In  a  country  where  agriculture  is  so
important  in  comparison  with  manufacturing,  serious  loss  to  the  farmers  means
a  poor  year  for  general  business.  Extensive  strikes  added  to  the  trouble.
Increase  in  foreign  commerce  and  activity  in  financial  circles  were  slight
compensations  for  agricultural  depression.  Hence  the  parallelism  between  the
course  of  business  in  England,  Germany,  and  France  was  notably  broken  in
1910.  While  the  former  countries  enjoyed  heightened  prosperity,  France
relapsed  into  depression.

In  1911  the  harvests  once  more  suffered,  this  time  from  drought;  but  the
shortage  was  not  so  great  as  in  1910.  Industry  and  commerce  appear  to  have
rallied  from  depression,  but  they  did  not  attain  high  prosperity.  The  strained
relations  with  Germany  arising  from  the  Moroccan  situation  caused  heavy
withdrawals  from  the  banks,  and  compelled  the  latter  to  restrict  their  advances
to  merchants,  manufacturers,  and  dealers  in  securities.  At  one  time  the  strange
spectacle  was  presented  of  New  York  lending  money  to  Paris  on  a  large  scale.
Importations  were  increased  beyond  all  precedent ;  but  the  huge  total  resulted
less  from  prosperity  than  from  the  short  crops  harvested  in  1910.  Riots
ascribed  to  the  high  cost  of  living  caused  much  sensation.  On  the  whole,  the
year  was  one  of  unrest  and  uncertainty,  but  not  one  of  serious  depression.

2.  The  United  States

In  America  the  panic  of  1907  was  followed  by  what  the  Financial  Review
declared  to  be  the  worst  industrial  paralysis  in  the  country's  history.^^  During
the  first  half  of  1908  the  production  of  pig-iron  was  barely  more  than  50  per
cent  of  the  production  in  the  first  half  of  1907.  Other  trades  making  pro-
ducers' goods  suffered  almost  as  severely.  Of  course,  the  total  volume  of  trade
did  not  shrink  in  so  extreme  a  degree,  because  purchases  of  food,  clothing,  and
the  like  cannot  be  stopped  or  postponed  like  the  purchase  of  pig-iron.  But
from  January  to  August  railway  gross  earnings  showed  losses  of  from  12  to
20  per  cent  each  month,  and  clearings  outside  New  York  losses  of  from  12  to
17  per  cent  in  comparison  with  the  corresponding  months  of  the  preceding  year.

38  The  Financial  'Review,  1909,  p.  11.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  83

Unemployment  assumed  extraordinary  proportions  in  the  industrial  centers,
and  emigration  ran  far  beyond  immigration.

In  sharp  contrast  with  this  industrial  and  commercial  depression  was  the
buoyancy  which  presently  developed  in  the  financial  markets.  After  February
the  prices  of  stocks  began  to  rise  and  this  movement  continued  without  a  serious
check  to  the  end  of  the  year.  By  January,  1909,  the  railway  shares  had
regained  all  the  losses  of  the  panic  year,  standing  substantially  where  they  had
stood  in  January,  1907.  No  doubt  this  movement  was  greatly  facilitated  by
the  exceedingly  low  rates  for  money  which  came  within  two  or  three  months
after  the  close  of  the  panic.  With  call  loans  to  be  had  for  less  than  2  per  cent,
it  was  profitable  to  borrow  money  and  buy  securities  which  yielded  interest  or
dividends  of  4  per  cent  or  over.'*''  But  the  heavy  purchases  of  stocks  and  bonds
were  also  proof  of  reviving  confidence ;  for  men  will  not  risk  the  purchase  of
securities  with  borrowed  funds  for  the  sake  of  a  small  margin  of  gain  in  interest,
unless  they  think  that  the  securities  are  more  likely  to  rise  than  to  fall  on  their
hands.

In  the  autumn  the  hopeful  tone  began  to  extend  from  financial  to  commercial
and  industrial  circles.  Despite  the  slow  rate  of  consumption,  stocks  of  goods
on  the  shelves  of  merchants  and  in  the  yards  and  warehouses  of  manufacturers
had  run  so  low  that  increased  purchases  became  necessary.  The  second  half
of  the  year,  accordingly,  and  still  more  the  last  quarter,  brought  a  distinct
increase  in  the  volume  of  production  and  of  general  business.  Good  crops
and  high  prices  for  agricultural  products  provided  a  firm  foundation  for  the
incipient  revival.

During  the  winter  and  spring  months  of  1909  business  was  conducted  in  a
rather  cautious  manner.  The  steel  trade  was  disturbed  in  February  by  wild
cutting  of  prices.  Throughout  1908  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation  had
held  stubbornly  to  the  policy  of  maintaining  the  selling  prices  of  its  products.
But,  concluding  that  its  competitors  were  secretly  selling  at  reduced  rates,  the
corporation  finally  changed  its  policy  and  announced  that  it  would  "protect
its  customers."  The  active  canvass  for  orders  which  followed  soon  bore  fruit
and  in  the  second  half  of  1909  the  output  of  pig-iron  broke  all  records.  Mean-
while such  indices  of  the  volume  of  general  business  as  railway  gross  receipts
and  clearings  outside  of  New  York  showed  steady  gains  and  in  the  latter  part
of  the  year  ran  ahead  not  only  of  the  figures  for  1908  but  also  of  the  higher
figures  for  1907.  Seemingly  the  improvement  in  business  conditions  began  at
least  as  early  in  America  as  in  Europe  and  proceeded  at  a  more  rapid  pace.
It  is  certain  at  least  that  wholesale  prices  rose  more  rapidly  during  1909  in
the  United  States  than  in  England,  France,  or  Germany.'" And  once  again

30  See  the  monthly  statistics  of  security  prices  and  interest  rates  in  chapter  iv,  section  iv,  below.
«  See  the  table  of  relative  prices  of  identical  commodities  in  the  United  States  and  England,  the  United
States  and  France,  and  the  United  States  and  Germany,  in  chapter  iv,  section  i.


84  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

good  crops  (except  of  cotton),  selling  at  high  prices,  added  their  powerful
influence  to  the  factors  which  made  for  prosperity.

We  have  seen  that  the  revival  of  1909  made  rapid  progress  in  both  England
and  Germany  during  1910,  and  that  it  was  checked  in  Prance  by  an  extremely
bad  season  for  the  farmers.  For  once  the  course  of  affairs  in  the  United  States
resembled  that  in  France  more  closely  than  that  in  the  other  two  countries.
But  the  recession  of  activity  in  America  was  not  due  to  agricultural  disasters.
On  the  contrary,  the  American  crops  were  bounteous,  with  the  exceptions  of
spring  wheat  and  cotton,  and,  though  prices  were  lower  than  in  1909,  the
farmers  as  a  whole  had  a  profitable  season.

As  is  often  the  ease,  the  first  signs  of  the  coming  reaction  were  given  by  the
stock  exchange.  The  rise  of  transportation  shares  which  had  begun  in  March,
1908,  ran  on  through  1909  with  no  serious  check,  and  by  December  eclipsed
even  the  highest  record  of  1906.  Early  in  1910  a  reverse  movement  set  in,
which  soon  developed  into  a  severe  fall  of  prices.  June  brought  the  lowest
quotations  for  a  majority  of  the  stocks,  but  there  was  no  marked  advance  in
the  later  months  of  the  year.  A  decline  of  net  earnings,  caused  by  the  necessity
of  paying  higher  wages,  and  the  opposition  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Com-
mission to  an  advance  of  freight  rates,  were  the  explanations  commonly  given
of  the  pessimistic  feeling  of  the  market.  Other  matters  of  complaint  were  fed-
eral prosecutions  of  corporations,  the  prospect  of  further  extension  of  federal
control  over  railway  charges,  and  the  growing  popularity  of  radical  policies  in
politics — all  tending,  it  was  alleged,  to  shake  the  confidence  of  business  men
and  investors.  The  money  market  gave  no  evidences  of  serious  strain ;  but  the
railways  and  other  large  corporations  had  increasing  difficulty  in  selling  bonds.
And  since  they  could  not  raise  money  on  favorable  terms  these  enterprises
reduced  their  purchases  of  rolling  stock,  rails,  etc.,  thus  passing  on  the  depres-
sion to  other  industries.

As  in  1908  the  rise  of  railway  stocks  foreshadowed  an  expansion  of  business,
so  in  1910  the  fall  of  railway  stocks  foreshadowed  a  contraction.  The  dimin-
ishing purchases  of  stocks  and  bonds,  and  the  smaller  issues  of  new  securities
brought  with  them  in  April  a  decline  in  the  bank  clearings  of  New  York,  The
same  month  saw  the  beginning  of  a  long  decline  in  pig-iron  production.  From
the  centers  of  finance  and  industry  the  reaction  spread  slowly  to  other  parts
of  the  country.  Outside  of  New  York,  clearings  continued  month  by  month
to  exceed  those  of  the  year  before,  but  by  ever  narrower  margins.  Finally,
in  December  the  figures  for  1910  fell  below  those  for  1909.  For  the  year  as  a
whole,  the  volume  of  production  in  most  lines  was  a  trifle  greater  than  that
of  the  preceding  year.  But  there  was  this  significant  difference — in  1909  the
tide  was  rising ;  it  was  ebbing  in  1910.  Toward  the  end  of  the  year,  however,
it  was  currently  believed  that  the  liquidation  had  nearly  spent  its  force,  and
that  another  expansion  of  business  might  be  expected  in  1911.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  85

The  first  month  or  two  of  the  new  year  seemed  to  justify  this  belief ;  but
the  later  months  rudely  dispelled  it.  On  February  23,  the  Interstate  Com-
merce Commission  announced  its  refusal  to  sanction  the  increases  in  rates  which
both  eastern  and  western  railways  declared  were  necessary.  In  consequence,
the  railways  adopted  a  policy  of  retrenchment,  reduced  their  orders  for  new
equipment,  and  postponed  when  possible  their  plans  for  extensions.  In  many
other  industries  the  leading  enterprises  adopted  a  similar  policy  because  of
numerous  "trust  prosecutions."  Apprehension  was  allayed  in  a  measure  by
the  decisions  of  the  Supreme  Court  in  the  Standard  Oil  and  American  Tobacco
cases.  While  the  court  ordered  both  combinations  to  be  dissolved,  it  applied
the  "rule  of  reason"  in  construing  the  "Sherman  anti-trust  act,"  and  approved
plans  by  which  the  companies  might  be  reorganized  without  heavy  loss  to  the
shareholders.  Fresh  alarm,  however,  was  caused  in  October  by  the  bringing
of  a  federal  suit  against  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation.  Throughout
the  year,  in  fact,  enterprise  on  the  part  of  large  capitalists  was  materially
checked  by  uncertainty  regarding  the  legal  position  of  business  combinations.
Hence  all  the  trades  that  depend  upon  the  volume  of  new  construction  put
under  contract  found  1911  a  dull  year.

Finance,  of  course,  reflected  this  dullness  in  exaggerated  fashion.  Stock
prices  sagged  downward  to  a  low  point  in  September,  and  the  volume  of  trans-
actions was  smaller  than  in  any  year  since  1898.  Money  was  such  a  drug
upon  the  market  that  New  York  banks  found  better  rates  for  loans  in  Berlin
and  Paris  than  at  home.  New  York  clearings,  affected  by  these  conditions,
fell  5  per  cent  below  the  moderate  totals  of  1910.  Outside  of  New  York,  com-
merce and  industry  were  depressed,  indeed,  but  moderately.  Clearings  indi-
cated a  gain,  but  one  less  than  the  average — 1.2  per  cent.  Poor  crops  probably
had  as  large  a  share  in  this  result  as  financial  uncertainty.  An  unprecedented
period  of  hot  weather  cut  short  the  yields  of  grains.  The  hay  crop  was  esti-
mated to  be  the  smallest  since  1895,  and  the  yield  of  potatoes  was  deficient.
Alone  among  the  great  staples,  cotton  did  well — indeed,  better  than  well,  for
the  crop  was  by  far  the  largest  on  record.  As  a  result  of  the  short  yield  of
breadstuffs  here  and  abroad  the  cost  of  food  advanced;  but  other  prices  were
not  well  maintained.

Towards  the  end  of  the  year  depression  relaxed  somewhat.  But  in  view
of  the  coming  presidential  election,  the  business  prophets  generally  refused  to
make  optimistic  forecasts  for  1912.


8G  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


XI.  Summary

One  who  turns  from  reading  economic  theory  to  reading  business  history
is  forcibly  impressed  by  the  artificiality  of  all  assumptions  of  a  "static"  or
even  a  "normal"  condition  in  economic  affairs.  For,  despite  all  efforts  to
give  technical  meanings  to  these  ambiguous  terms,  they  suggest  the  idea  of  an
unchanging  order,  or  of  an  order  which  economic  principles  are  always  tending
to  re-establish  after  every  aberration.  But  a  review  of  business  annals  never
discloses  the  existence  of  a  "static"  or  a  "normal"  state  in  either  of  these
senses.  On  the  contrary,  in  the  real  world  of  business,  affairs  are  always  under-
going a  cumulative  change,  always  passing  through  some  phase  of  a  business
cycle  into  some  other  phase.  Prosperity  is  relapsing  into  depression,  or  becom-
ing more,  intense,  or  breeding  a  crisis ;  a  crisis  is  degenerating  into  a  panic,  or
subsiding  into  depression;  depression  is  becoming  deeper,  or  merging  into  a
revival  of  prosperity.  In  fact,  if  not  in  theory,  a  state  of  change  in  business
conditions  is  the  only  "normal"  state.

In  recent  years  these  changes  have  run  a  broadly  similar  course  in  different
countries.  But  the  similarity  is  less  close  and  less  regular  than  is  often  implied
by  writers  who  are  celebrating  the  Wcltwirtschaft.  The  business  cycles  of
1889-1911  synchronise  better  for  England,  France,  and  Germany  than  for  any
of  these  European  countries  and  America.  France  had  a  crisis  in  1889,  some
eighteen  months  before  the  Baring  crisis  occurred  in  England.  German  busi-
ness revived  in  1894,  some  time  earlier  than  did  French  or  English  business.
Again,  in  1904  depression  continued  for  several  months  in  England  after  dis-
tinct signs  of  revival  had  appeared  in  Germany  and  France.  Finally,  in  1910,
France  suffered  a  recession  of  activity  while  England  and  Germany  were
enjoying  an  increase  in  prosperity.  But,  save  the  last,  these  are  all  minor
differences,  and  there  is  no  grave  inaccuracy  in  assigning  similar  dates  for  the
beginning  and  end  of  each  phase  of  the  successive  business  cycles:  crisis  in
1889-90,  depression  until  1894,  revival  in  1894-95  running  up  to  a  flood  tide
of  prosperity  in  1899,  crisis  in  1900,  depression  until  1903-04,  revival  followed
by  great  prosperity  culminating  in  1906,  crisis  in  1907,  depression  in  1908,  and
revival  once  more  in  1909.

These  periods  do  not  fit  the  United  States.  First  the  crop  situation  of  3891
destroyed  the  parallelism  of  events,  making  1892  a  good  j^ear  in  America  while
it  was  a  bad  year  abroad.  Then  the  panic  of  1893  was  not  accompanied  by  a
crisis  in  Europe.  Again,  revival  after  this  panic  was  delayed  in  the  United
States  until  the  summer  of  1897,  while  European  business  had  begun  to  improve
at  least  as  early  as  1895.  The  European  crisis  of  1900  was  scarcely  felt  in
America  and  general  business  continued  to  expand  in  the  face  of  European


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  87

depression  until  1903-04.  The  latter  years  were  years  of  crisis  here  and  years
of  depression  abroad.  On  the  contrary,  the  revival  in  the  autumn  of  1904,  the
prosperity  of  1905-06,  the  crisis  of  1907,  the  depression  of  1908,  and  the  revival
of  1909  were  nearly  contemporaneous  with  similar  developments  in  European
business.  At  the  very  end  of  the  period,  however,  another  discrepancy
appeared.  In  1910  business  activity  declined  in  America,  while  it  rose  in  Eng-
land and  Germany.

With  these  differences  in  dates  are  joined  differences  in  the  intensity  of
prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.  French  business  pursues  by  far  the  most
even  course.  At  the  opposite  extreme  stands  the  United  States,  followed  in
order  by  Germany  and  England.  The  most  striking  evidence  of  the  extremes
to  which  American  business  runs  is  afforded  by  the  peculiar  violence  of  its
transitions  from  prosperity  to  depression.  Since  1889,  England,  Germany,
and  France  have  each  had  three  crises ;  the  United  States  alone  has  had  panics.

The  next  step  in  the  investigation  is  to  examine  in  detail  the  various  business
phenomena  which  have  characterized  the  periods  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and
depression  sketched  in  the  present  chapter.  To  appreciate  the  full  significance
of  the  statistical  tables  which  form  our  chief  reliance  it  is  necessary  to  keep  in
mind  the  business  character  of  each  year  in  each  of  the  four  countries.  Since
this  task  imposes  a  considerable  burden  on  the  memory,  a  tabular  summary  of
the  business  annals  of  1889-1911  is  appended  in  convenient  form  for  reference.


88


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  1
Summary  of  Business  Conditions  in  the  United  States,  England,  Germany  and  France,  from  1889  to  1911


Years  United  States

1889  High  tide  of  prosperity

1890  Money  market  stringent  in

summer;  mild  crisis  in
autumn

1891  Liquidation 1st half-year;

revival  2d  half-year  on
crop  situation

1892  General business prosper-

ous; heavy  gold  exports

1893  Panic; acute in May to

October

1894  Deep  depression

1895  Revival in summer, fol-

lowed by  relapse

1896  Eeturn  of  depression;  pan-

icky conditions  in  finan-
cial markets

1897  1st  half  dull;  2d  half  great

improvement  on  crop  sit-
uation

1898  Prosperity  rising  rapidly

1899  High  tide  of  prosperity  in

general  business;  difficul-
ties on  stock  exchange

1900  Slight pause in activity,

followed  by  outburst  of
speculation  in  autumn

1901  Prosperity  in  general  busi-

ness; panic  on  stock  ex-
change May  9

1902  Prosperity  continued

1903  Financial  liquidation ;  ' '  rich

man 's  panic ' ' ;  general
business  still  active

1904  Mild  industrial  depression;

financial  liquidation  end-
ed ;  great  stock-market
speculation  in  autumn

1905  Rapid  gain  in  prosperity

1906  High tide of prosperity;

money  market  stringent

1907  Crisis,  and  severe  panic  in

October  to  December

1908  Deep depression in trade

and  industry;  revival  in
finance

1909  Recuperation,  marked  in  2d

half-year

1910  Eeturn  of  depression  in  2d

half-year


England

High tide of prosperity;

stringent  money  market  in

autumn
Severe crisis in autumn —

failure  of  Barings

Financial  prostration;  no  re-
duction of  trade;  poor
harvests

Shrinkage  of  trade;  poor
crops  and  low  prices

Deep  depression

Depression  continued;  price

of  consols  rose
Strong  revival  2d  half-year


Trade  revival  maintained


Domestic  business  expanded;
foreign  trade  stationary

Improvement  more  rapid;
real  prosperity

High  tide  of  prosperity;
money  market  stringent  in
autumn

Crisis;  mild  recession  of  ac-
tivity

Ebbing  of  activity  continued

Slight  improvement

Disappointing  year;  business
recovery  very  slow

Depression  continued  till
near  end  of  year;  more
sanguine  tone  at  close

Revival  made  rapid  progress

High  tide  of  prosperity;
money  market  stringent

Crisis,  intensified  by  Ameri-
can panic

Depression,  especially  in  for-
eign trade;  enormous  of-
ferings of  new  securities

Revival  of  activity

High  tide  of  prosperity


Germany  France

Prosperity;  stringent  money Crisis  in  March; moderate
market  in  autumn  liquidation


Crisis  in  autumn

Liquidation;  bad  harvests

Depression  deeper
Deep  depression
Improvement  toward  close
Revival  continued


Industrial  prosperity  in-
creased

Prosperity  of  increased  in-
tensity

Brilliant  year

' '  Annus  mirabilis ' ' ;  money
market  stringent  in  au-
tumn

Crisis;  bank  failures  in  au-
tumn

Crisis  more  acute


Depression

Slight  improvement  in  latter
part  of  year

Improvement  continued,  but
conditions  uneven


Revival  made  rapid  progress

High  tide  of  prosperity;
money  market  stringent

Crisis,  intensified  by  Ameri-
can panic

Marked  depression,  deeper  in
2d  half  of  year

Revival  of  activity

Prosperity  increasing


Mild  depression


Mild  depression;  bad  har-
vests

Diminishing  activity

Business  languishing  or  stag-
nant

Revival  on  bourse;  inertia
elsewhere

Revival  of  commerce  and  in-
dustry; minor  crisis  on
bourse

Moderate  activity


Greater activity; bad har-
vests

Mediocre  year

Marked  activity  of  trade  and
industry

Crisis;  activity  checked


Further  slackening  of  busi-
ness

Little  change; mild depres-
sion

Distinct  improvement


Revival  continued


Further  progress
Full  prosperity

Prosperity  continued;  crisis

liglrtly  felt
Check  to  activity


Revival  of  activity

Reaction; disastrous year
for  farmers


1911 Mild  depression


Continued  prosperity


Continued  prosperity


Partial  recovery


PART  II

STATISTICAL  DATA  CONCERNING  THE

BUSINESS  CYCLES  OF  1890-1911  IN  THE

UNITED  STATES,  ENGLAND,

FRANCE  AND  GERMANY


THE  FRAMEWORK  OP  PART  II

In  their  several  ways  the  three  chapters  of  Part  I  state  the  problem  to  be
dealt  with,  and  mark  out  the  line  of  attack  to  be  followed  in  Parts  II  and  III.
Chapter  I  shows  how  many  different  processes  of  current  life  are  capable  of
being  made  into  plausible  explanations  of  business  cycles.  By  tracing  the
broad  outlines  of  the  economic  organization  which  has  developed  on  the  basis
of  money  economy,  Chapter  II  shows  which  among  these  processes  is  of  con-
trolling importance,  and  how  the  subordinate  processes  find  their  unity  in  it.
Finally,  Chapter  III,  looking  at  the  problem  from  the  historical  viewpoint,
sketches  the  rhythmical  expansions  and  contractions  which  business  activity  has
undergone  in  recent  years.  Thus  the  actual  courses  followed  by  business  cycles,
the  controlling  factors  in  business  activity,  and  the  latest  theories  about  the
causes  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  are  all  before  us.

But  to  understand  business  cycles  we  need  more  definite  and  more  systematic
knowledge  of  the  phenomena  than  has  yet  been  provided.  So  much  Chapter  I
makes  clear.  Are  crises  due  to  under-consumption  ? — or  to  high  costs  of  con-
struction?— or  to  the  dissimilar  price  fluctuations  of  organic  and  inorganic
materials? — or  to  the  lagging  adjustment  of  interest  rates  to  changes  in  the
price  level?  To  test  such  theories  adequately  we  must  know  the  facts.  Does
the  demand  for  consumers'  goods  actually  grow  more  slowly  than  the  supply  in
the  years  preceding  a  crisis  ? — do  the  costs  of  constructing  new  industrial  equip-
ment actually  rise  so  fast  as  to  discourage  investment? — do  the  prices  of  farm
products  actually  fluctuate  in  a  different  fashion  from  the  prices  of  coal,  iron,
and  copper? — do  interest  rates  actually  lag  behind  prices  on  the  rise  and  fall?
One  and  all,  these  crucial  questions  emphasize  the  need  of  comprehensive
statistics..  We  are  not,  indeed,  planning  to  center  the  investigation  about  the
testing  of  the  theories  reviewed  in  Chapter  I;  but  for  an  investigation  upon
any  lines  we  must  provide  such  statistical  data  as  these  theories  show  to  be

required.

To  meet  this  requirement  as  well  as  may  be  is  the  task  of  Part  II.  Business
statistics,  however,  are  exceedingly  voluminous,  and  some  clear  principle  is
needed  as  a  guide  no  less  in  rejecting  what  is  irrelevant  than  in  selecting  what
is  illuminating.  Chapter  I  suggests  the  general  rule  that  all  data  are  pertinent
which  bear  upon  any  of  the  causes  assigned  for  business  cycles  by  our  numerous
theorists.  Chapter  III  shows  what  kinds  of  data  are  regarded  as  important
by  the  empirical  editors  of  business  periodicals. Chapter  II  provides  a  definite

[91]


92  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

framework  within  which  all  the  ideas  suggested  by  Chapters  I  and  III  may
find  their  proper  places.  For  this  chapter  shows  that  the  money  economy
subordinates  the  industrial  process  of  making  goods  and  the  commercial  process
of  distributing  them  to  the  business  process  of  making  money.  Accordingly,
the  ebb  and  flow  of  economic  activity  is  brought  into  dependence  upon  the
profits  of  business  enterprises.  Upon  this  basic  fact  the  whole  investigation
rests.  Profits,  in  their  turn,  depend  upon  the  margins  between  buying  and
selling  prices,  and  upon  the  volume  of  transactions.  First,  then,  we  must  seek
for  data  to  measure  variations  in  prices  and  variations  in  the  volume  of  trade.
And  Chapter  II  makes  it  clear  that  the  prices  of  importance  in  gauging  profits
are  not  merely  the  prices  of  commodities,  but  also  the  prices  of  labor,  of  loans,
and  of  business  enterprises  themselves.

But  these  statistics  of  prices  and  the  vohime  of  trade,  presented  in  Chapters
lY  and  V,  are  far  from  covering  the  field.  Business  cannot  be  carried  on
without  the  use  of  currency  and  of  bank  accommodation.  Accordingly  Chapters
VI  and  VII  are  devoted  to  the  mechanism  of  exchange  and  to  those  changes
in  the  condition  of  the  banks  which  relate  especially  to  their  powers  of  lending.
Chapter  II  also  shows  that  the  business  men  in  control  of  enterprises  are  not
the  ultimate  authorities  in  guiding  economic  activity;  for  their  larger  plans  at
any  rate  require  the  support  of  investors.  Henice  an  attempt  must  be  made
to  measure  the  fiuctuations  in  the  sums  saved  and  put  into  business  enterprises
— whether  as  stable  investments  or  as  speculative  ventures.  Chapter  VIII
has  this  aim.  Finally,  Chapter  IX  assembles  the  best  of  the  materials  which
purport  to  show  directly  the  changes  in  profits,  and  presents  also  the  cognate
statistics  of  bankruptcies.

While  each  of  the  chapters  which  follow  begins  abruptly,  ends  abruptly,
and  stands  in  a  measure  alone,  still  the  reader  will  appreciate  that  this  collection
of  statistical  data  has  been  made  on  a  definite  plan.  Every  chapter  bears  upon
the  crucial  problem  of  business  profits,  either  by  dealing  with  factors  which
determine  profits,  like  prices  and  the  volume  of  trade ;  or  by  dealing  with  neces-
sary conditions  for  the  successful  quest  of  profits,  like  the  currency,  banking,
and  investment;  or  by  offering  direct  gauges  of  business  success  and  failure,
like  the  statistics  of  profits  themselves  and  of  bankruptcies.


CHAPTER  IV

THE  FLUCTUATIONS  OF  PRICES  SINCE  1890
I.  The  Peicbs  of  Commodities

1.  The  Available  Data  and  the  Methods  of  Analysis

For  his  original  data  concerning  the  prices  of  commodities  a  private  inves-
tigator must  depend  upon  the  materials  published  by  governmental  bureaus
and  by  business  periodicals.  The  books  of  business  enterprises  are  not  open
to  his  inspection,  and  if  they  were  his  resources  would  be  unequal  to  the  heavy
task  of  sifting  out  from  the  masses  of  useless  entries  the  data  fitted  for  statis-
tical elaboration.

Despite  the  growing  interest  felt  in  price  movements,  the  published  data
still  leave  much  to  be  desired.  Out  of  the  thousands  of  commodities  bought
and  sold,  the  most  extensive  tables  quote  less  than  three  hundred.^  The  selec-
tion depends  less  on  the  information  which  is  desired  than  on  the  information
which  happens  to  be  available.  Goods  which  change  substantially  in  quality
from  year  to  year  must  be  rejected,  and  for  goods  which  are  usually  the  subject
of  private  bargains  it  is  difficult  to  secure  quotations.  For  the  most  part,  only
those  commodities  are  included  which  are  dealt  in  on  public  exchanges  and
those  for  which  dealers  post  their  buying  or  selling  prices.  Hence  it  happens
that  the  various  parts  of  the  system  of  prices  are  most  unevenly  covered.
Relatively  abundant  quotations  can  be  had  for  the  staple  raw  materials,  while
the  data  concerning  manufactured  goods,  whether  used  by  producers  or  con-
sumers, are  relatively  scanty.  Moreover,  the  market  reports  and  list  prices
given  to  the  public  cannot  always  be  trusted,  because  many  transactions  are
made  on  the  basis  of  concessions  from  or  additions  to  the  standard  rates.
Particularly  in  times  of  crisis,  when  the  markets  become  "demoralized,"
and  in  times  of  intense  activity,  when  premiums  are  paid  for  quick  deliveries,
the  published  tables  probably  understate  the  real  fall  and  rise  of  prices.
Finally,  a  considerable  part  of  the  business  transacted  at  any  given  time  is
done  on  the  basis  of  prices  fixed  by  earlier  contracts,  and  these  contract  prices
often  differ  notably  from  the  current  quotations.

1  The  compilers  of  Dun's  index  number  professed  to  include  some  350  commodities;  but  they  did  not  pub-
lish the  actual  prices.

[93]


94  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

With  all  its  defects,  however,  the  available  material  can  be  made  to  yield
much  information  under  systematic  examination.  If  some  conclusions  go  awry
because  of  errors  or  omissions  in  the  data,  the  blunders  may  prove  the  most
effective  stimulus  toward  securing  better  data  for  the  future.  For  the  impor-
tance of  full  records  of  prices  to  communities  where  making  and  spending
money  is  the  road  to  welfare  can  be  made  most  clear  by  boldly  developing  the
full  significance  of  the  scanty  present  records.

On  examination,  the  recorded  prices  of  different  commodities  at  successive
dates  show  a  bewildering  diversity  of  fluctuations.  Some  remain  unchanged,
some  rise,  some  fall;  the  rates  of  advance  and  decline  vary  widely.  Under
these  circumstances  the  primary  aim  of  analysis  is  to  ascertain  merely  the
general  trend  of  the  movements — the  average  variations.  The  first  step  in  the
method  employed  for  this  purpose  is  to  turn  the  actual  prices  of  each  com-
modity into  a  series  of  relative  prices,  computed  as  percentages  of  the  actual
prices  at  some  stated  period.  Wherever  possible  in  the  following  tables,  the
average  actual  prices  of  the  decade  1890-99  are  taken  as  the  basis ;  that  is,  they
represent  100  in  the  scale  of  relative  prices.  The  second  step  is  to  add  together
the  relative  prices  of  the  different  commodities  in  each  year,  and  divide  the
total  by  the  number  of  commodities.  The  resulting  arithmetic  means  of  the
relative  prices  may  not  be  the  most  perfect  measurements  of  average  variation
in  prices;  but  they  are  sufficiently  accurate  for  present  purposes,  and  in  addi-
tion are  easy  to  compute  and  easy  to  understand.  To  expend  much  labor  in
refined  elaboration  of  data  subject  to  a  broad  margin  of  error  is  pedantic.

Occasion  will  presently  arise  to  discuss  the  representative  character  of  these
index  numbers,  and  to  show  how  wide  a  field  is  covered  by  deviations  from
the  average.'  Meanwhile  the  method  just  described  is  applied  to  measure  the
average  fiuctuations  characteristic  of  different  parts  of  the  system  of  prices.
The  presentation  corresponds  as  closely  as  may  be  to  the  analysis  of  that  system
made  in  Chapter  II.

■  2.  The  Prices  of  Consumers'  Goods  at  Retail

The  only  systematic  collection  of  American  prices  at  retail  since  1890  is  a
table  compiled  by  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  showing  the  prices  of
thirty  staple  foods.  The  data  are  collected  by  agents  of  the  bureau  from
upwards  of  a  thousand  retail  dealers  in  toAvns  dotted  all  over  the  country.^  The
results  of  this  investigation  in  their  most  general  form  are  given  in  Table  2.*

2  See  subdivisions  7  and  8  of  the  present  section.

3  For  a  full  description  of  the  character  and  scope  of  the  data  see  Eighteenth  Annual  Eeport  of  the  Com-
missioner of  Labor,  pp.  635-661,  and  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  July,  1908,  pp.  181-214.

i  Here,  and  in  most  of  the  subsequent  tables,  I  have  dropped  the  decimal  places.  Decimals  make  com-
parisons between  difEerent  figures  somewhat  less  easy,  and  the  appearance  of  greater  accuracy  which  they  give
to  index  numbers  is  delusive.  The  margin  of  error  in  the  original  data  makes  vain  the  pretension  to  accur-
acy within  one-tenth  of  one  per  cent. For  the  original  figures  see  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  July,  1908

p.  loO.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


95


TABLE  2

Relative  Retail  Prices  op  Thirty  Staple  Foods  in  the  United  States. By  Yeaks,  1890-1907
Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


1890..
1891..
1892..
1893..
1894..
1895..
1896..
1897..
1898..


102

103

102

104

100

98

96

96

98


1899-

100

1900

102

1901

105

1902

Ill

1903

Ill

1904

112

1905

118

1906

116

1907

121

These  figures  indicate  a  certain  correspondence  between  retail  prices  and
business  conditions.  In  1893,  indeed,  the  thirty  foods  rose  slightly  instead  of
falling ;  but  they  declined  during  the  dull  years  Avhich  followed  the  panic,  and
rose  again  when  prosperity  returned.  This  rise  was  slow  until  1900-02;  it
became  slow  again  in  1902-04;  but  rapid  in  1905-07.  The  panic  of  1907  came
too  late  in  the  autumn  to  exercise  much  influence  upon  the  average  retail  price
level  of  that  year.  On  the  whole,  this  series  reflects  the  course  of  business
cycles  more  faithfully  than  might  have  been  expected.  For  the  supply  of
vegetable  and  animal  foods  varies  in  an  arbitrary  fashion  determined  by  the
weather,  and  the  demand  for  staple  foods  is  less  affected  by  prosperity  and
depression  than  that  for  more  dispensible  commodities.^

=  Since  this  chapter  was  written  the  Bureau  of  Labor  has  begun  to  publish  a  new  index  number  of  food
prices  at  retail.  Unfortunately,  this  new  series  is  not  fairly  comparable  with  the  old  one,  because  (1)  the
number  of  commodities  has  been  reduced  from  30  to  15,  (2)  the  description  and  presumably  the  quality  of
several  of  the  commodities  included  by  both  series  has  been  changed,  and  (3)  the  data  for  the  new  series  are
collected  from  a  new  and  smaller  list  of  towns.

The  results  of  the  two  series  agree  closely  in  1890-1900,  but  in  1901-07  the  new  series  shows  a  distinctly
higher  level  of  fluctuations.  As  between  the  two,  the  older  and  more  comprehensive  series  appears  to  be
the  more  trustworthy.  The  soje  advantage  of  the  new  series  is  that  it  covers  the  years  since  the  last  great
crisis.  In  the  bad  year  1908  food  prices  rose;  they  lose  further  during  the  business  revival  of  1909,  and
further  still  during  the  reaction  of  1910,  but  finally  subsided  a  little  in  the  dull  times  of  1911.  The  simple
averages  of  the  two  series  are  as  follows:  "


Old  series

New  series

30  commodities

15  commodities

1890

102.1

102.0

1891

103.4

103.6

1892

101.8

101.7

1893

104.1

104.6

1894

100.3

99.5

1895

98.2

97.2

1896

95.8

94.9

1897

96.3

96.4

1898

98.5

99.4

1899

99.6

100.6

1900_

101.5

102.9

Old  series  New  series
30  commodities 15  commodities

1901 105.5  109.5

1902 110.9  116.8

1903 110.9  116.9

1904 111.6  118.3

1905 112.5  118.3

1906 116.2  122.4

1907 120.7  128.0

1908 132.5

1909 140.3

1910 148.5

1911 146.9


See  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  no.  105,  Part  I,  "Retail  Prices  and  Cost  of  Living  Series." August
23,  1912.


96  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

3.  The  Prices  of  Consumers'  Goods  at  Wholesale

Three  index  numbers  of  wholesale  prices  in  the  United  States  are  currently
published,  one  by  the  federal  Bureau  of  Labor,  one  by  Bradstreets' ,  and  one
by  Thomas  Gibson  in  continuation  of  the  Dun  series  which  was  suspended  in
May,  1907."  None  of  these  index  numbers  in  its  published  form  suffices  for
the  purposes  of  the  present  investigation,  because  in  none  of  them  are  prices
grouped  in  such  fashion  as  to  correspond  to  the  divisions  of  the  system  of  prices
outlined  in  Chapter  II,  or  in  such  fashion  as  to  admit  of  testing  certain  theories
of  business  cycles  summarized  in  Chapter  I.  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  work
out  new  results  from  the  published  materials.  For  this  purpose,  the  Bureau
of  Labor  tables  afford  the  best  source.  The  prices  of  single  commodities
included  in  Dun's  series  have  never  been  published,  while  Bradstreets'  data
in  their  present  form  do  not  begin  before  1892  and  cover  only  106  articles.  The
following  tables  have  been  made,  accordingly,  by  regrouping  and  averaging
the  series  of  relative  prices  found  in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Bureaii  of  Labor.''

Of  the  145  series  of  relative  prices  derived  from  this  source,  55  are  for
commodities  bought  almost  exclusively  for  family  consumption.'  To  gauge
the  correspondence  between  the  fluctuations  of  consumers'  goods  at  wholesale
and  retail,  however,  it  is  best  to  use  data  for  substantially  similar  commodities.
Twenty-five  of  the  thirty  foods  included  in  Table  2  are  also  included  in  the
wholesale  price  data.  Accordingly  it  is  possible  to  present  a  comparison
between  prices  at  wholesale  and  retail  which  is  not  vitiated  by  the  presence  of
dissimilar  commodities  in  the  two  lists."


li  See  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  March  issue  of  each  year  since  1902;  Bradstreets' ,  passim;  J.  P.  Nor-
ton, Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,  1910,  pp.  750-759.

7  A  convenient  summary  of  the  American  and  foreign  index  numbers  for  varying  periods  of  years  is  given
in  the  Seport  of  the  Massachusetts  Commission  on  the  Cost  of  Living,  Boston,  1910.  See  also  subdivisions  8  and
9  of  the  present  section.

8  The  bureau's  tables  include  about  250-260  commodities;  but  many  are  nearly  identical  articles;  for  ex-
ample, 10  varieties  of  cotton  sheetings.  In  dealing  with  such  groups  I  have  preferred  to  use  only  the  average
relative  prices  of  all  the  series  included  within  them.  The  bureau's  method  obviously  allows  the  commod-
ities represented  by  several  varieties  to  exercise  undue  weight  upon  the  results.  It  is  this  process  of  group-
ing which  reduces  the  number  of  series  from  over  250  to  145.  The  new  results,  however,  differ  little  from
the  old — a  fresh  confirmation  of  the  often  noted  fact  that  systems  of  weighting  make  comparatively  slight
differences  in  a  large  index  number. See  Table  9,  below.

0  Such  is  the  case  with  the  Bureau  of  Labor 's  comparison  between  the  relative  prices  of  30  foods  at  retail
and  54  foods  at  wholesale  (Bulletin,  July,  1908,  pp.  195,  196).  In  order  to  make  the  comparison  still  closer
I  have  not  used  relative  retail  prices  for  the  whole  country,  as  in  Table  2,  but  for  the  North  Atlantic  states
when  the  wholesale  prices  are  from  New  York,  and  for  the  North  Central  states  when  the  wholesale  prices
are  from  Chicago.  The  list  of  foods  included  is  as  follows:  Apples  (evaporated),  beans,  beef  (fresh),  beef  (salt^
bread,  butter,  cheese,  coffee,  cornmeal,  eggs,  fish  (salt),  flour  (wheat),  lard,  milk,  molasses,  mutton,  bacon'
pickled  pork,  hams,  potatoes,  prunes,  rice,  sugar,  tea,  vinegar.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


97


TABLE  3

Relative  Prices  of  Twenty-five  Staple  Foods  at  Retail  and  Wholesale  in  the  United  States

By  Years,  1890-1907

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Year
1890

At
retail

102

Alt

wholesale

109

Year
1899

At

retail

99

At
wholesale

96

1891

104

113

1900

101

101

1892

102

105

1901

105

104

1893

105

115

1902

110

113

1894

100

103

1903

110

107

1895

98

96

1904

110

106

1896

95

84

1905

111

107

1897

96

86

1906

114

113

1898

98

93

1907

119

117

120
110
100
90

eo

Relative.

Chart I.

Prices  of  Twenty-  Five Staple
AT  Wholesale and Retail.
1890  -  1907.

Foods

120
110
100
90
80

AT WHOLESALE.

/

\

1
1

\
\
\

/

\

^

r"^

\

s

1
1

\

\
\

^-^

^

/

\

\

■■■^^

^^^

/

^
\

\

/
/

.-"

/
f

\
\

/
/

1890 91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900 '01 "02 '03 '04 'os 'OG '07

98


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


While  these  two  series  agree  closely  in  the  general  trend  of  fluctuations,
the  retail  prices  are  much  more  stable.  They  lag  behind  wholesale  prices  both
on  the  rise  and  on  the  fall,  but  more  on  the  fall  than  on  the  rise.  It  is  primarily
because  retail  prices  yielded  scarcely  at  all  to  the  depression  of  1903-04,  while
wholesale  prices  fell  several  points,  that  the  retail  level  stood  higher  in  1907."*

4.  The  Prices  of  Producers'  Goods

As  consumers'  goods  at  retail  are  more  stable  in  price  than  the  same  goods
at  wholesale,  so  consumers'  goods,  even  at  wholesale,  are  more  stable  in  price
than  producers'  goods.  The  next  table  establishes  this  fact  by  comparing  the
relative  prices  of  55  commodities  bought  almost  wholly  for  family  use  and
of  73  commodities  bought  almost  wholly  for  business  use.  The  availability  of
data  by  months  for  recent  years  makes  it  possible  to  carry  out  this  comparison
in  detail  for  the  period  including  the  latest  crisis,  depression,  and  revival  of
business  activity.


TABLE  4

Eelative  Prices  or  C'onsumeks  '  and  Producers  '  Goods  at  Wholesale  in  the  United  States

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

By  Years,  1890-1910


Year
1890

Consumers'
goods

115

Producers'
goods

115

Year
1902

Consumers'
goods

.  107

Producers'
goods

119

1891

111

113

1903

106

120

1893

105

106

1904

107

120

1893

108

102

1905

107

124

1894

99

92

1906

112

132

1895

94

92

1907

119

140

1896

89

89

1908

115

125

1897

90

88

1909

118

131

1898

94

94

1910

123

140

1899
1900

97
107

109
117

Averages
1890-99

100

100

1901

107

113

1900-

09

111

124

sa  The  new  retail-price  index  number  mentioned  in  note  5  makes  it  possible  to  extend  this  comparison
through  1911,  albeit  with  only  11  instead  of  25  commodities,  namely,  bacon,  beef,  butter,  corn  meal,  eggs,
granulated  sugar,  hams,  lard,  milk,  potatoes,  and  wheat  flour.

ki  At

retail  wholesale

1907 127  124

1908 132  130

1909 139  144

1910 .'....  147  146

1911 145  133

The  lagging  adjustment  of  retail  to  wholesale  price  fluctuations  is  strongly  marked  in  these  figures.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


99


TABLE  i— (Concluded)
By  Months,  1907-1910


Tear

Consumers'

Producers'

Consumers'

Producers

goods

goods

Year

goods

goods

1907  January

116

140

1909

January

116

127

February

117

142

February

116

127

March

117

143

March

116

127

April

115

143

,0

<S\

April

117

128

May

116

144

r*'

May

117

130

June
July

116
117

144
142

It

S

111  — i

June
July

116
117

130
129

August

120

141

Hi

It

August

116

130

September

122

141

\

«  <

September

118

132

October

125

138

1

/5/

October

120

135

November

125

134

^^910

November

123

137

December

123

130

December

124

139

1908  January

120

128

January

125

141

February

118

128

February

124

141

March

118

127

March

124

142

April

117

127

April

122

141

May

115

123

May

121

140

June

114

123

June

120

138

July

115

124

July

120

139

August

114

124

August

122

140

September

113

123

September

124

139

October

113

124

October

124

138

November

113

125

November

124

138

December

115

126

December

125

138

The  comparison  by  months  shows  that  producers '  goods  reached  their  highest
point  earlier  in  1907  than  consumers'  goods,  and  were  on  the  down  grade  several
■  months  before  the  panic  broke  out.  Their  decline  in  1908  was  also  greater  in
degree,  their  recovery  began  sooner,  and  proceeded  at  a  faster  pace.  In  brief,
within  short  periods  as  within  long,  the  prices  of  producers'  goods  appear  to
be  decidedly  more  sensitive  than  the  prices  of  consumers'  goods  to  alterations
in:  business  conditions.

5.  The  Prices  of  Mamifactured  Goods  and  of  Raw  Materials

It  is  next  in  order  to  examine  the  relation  between  the  prices  of  finished
products  and  the  raw  materials  from  which  they  are  made,  whether  the  pro-
ducts are  bought  chiefly  by  families  or  by  business  enterprises.  The  available
material  offers  twenty  pairs  of  materials  and  their  products,  and  five  triplets
of  materials,  partially  manufactured,  and  finished  goods.  Table  5  gives  the
averages  of  both  sets  of  data  by  years  for  1890-1910,  and  by  months  since  1907."

10  The  twenty  pairs  are  barley  and  malt,  corn  and  cornmeal,  flaxseed  and  linseed  oil,  rye  and  rye  flour,
wheat  and  wheat  flour,  cotton  and  cotton  textiles,  wool  and  woolen  textiles,  cattle  and  beef,  hogs  and  pork,
sheep  and  mutton,  hides  and  leather,  milk  and  cheese,  coke  and  pig-iron,  copper  ingots  and  copper  wire,  lead
pig  and  lead  pipe,  petroleum  (crude  and  refined),  spelter  and  zinc,  steel  billets  and  tools,  pine  boards  and
pine  doors,  window  glass  and  glassware.

The  five  triplets  are  steel  billets,  steel  rails,  and  tools;  wheat,  wheat  flour,  and  bread;  cotton,  cotton  yarns,
and  cotton  textiles;  wool,  worsted  yarns,  and  woolen  textiles;  hides,  leather,  and  shoes.

The  Bureau  of  Labor's  comparison  between  the  relative  prices  of  raw  materials  and  manufactured  goods
includes  many  more  commodities  than  the  present  one;  but  many  of  the  materials  in  one  list  are  not  repre-
sented by  products  in  the  other  list,  and  vice  versa.  The  method  employed  here  seems  more  reliable.  Compare
Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  March,  1910,  pp.  392-394  and  398-399.


100


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


CHAR-f 2.

Relative:  Prices  of  Twenty  Raw  Materials

150

AND THEIR Manufactured Products.

/

1890-1310.

/

\

/

/

14-0

150
120

no

100
90

^W  MATERIALS
lANUFACTOREO PRODUCTS.

/

/

1

\

\

/

/

130
120
110
100
90


/

X

/

1
1
1

1

\

f

•
^

\

1

/

r

N

'-^.

1
/
/
/

\

.,

/

\

\  \
\  \

'/

\

l\

\

k1

80

80

1890 '91 "92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900 'Ol 'o2 'o

5 '04 '05 'OG "07 '08 "03 1910.

IJO
120
110
100
90
80

chart

3

150
140
130
120

no

100
90
80

rvtLATIve. I-K1CE.5 OF^ T  IVE COMMODITIES IN THEIR RAW.

BvRTiALLY Manufactured,  and Finished State.
1890-1310.

/

Raw MATERIAl.9

PARTIAULY rnANUrWCTURED PRODUCTS

FlMlSHED ARTICLES  .

/

\

/

\

^

y

t

1

— _

\

1

1

\

/

/
/

/

~~y

i^"  **

>

1

,.•'

■■■■\

A v

h

1

1

!/

\

■•••\

/

\

\

■••...

/

J-

^^^

*^'^Z

\

/

^

^

I

1890 91 92 93 '94 '95 '96 97 '98 '39 1900 01 '02 03 '04 "05 '06 07 '08 '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


101


TABLE  5

Relative  Wholesale  Prices  of  Eaw  Materials  and  Their  Products  in  the  United  States
Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

By  Years,  1890-1910

Twenty  pairs  Five  triplets


Year
1890

t
Baw

113

Mfd.'
Ill

Raw
127

Partly  mfd.
115

Finishec
108

1891

114

114

117

115

107

1892

104

106

104

110

106

1893

99

104

95

103

105

1894

90

94

78

89

98

1895

94

95

88

90

95

1896

86

89

86

92

94

1897

89

90

93

90

94

1898

99

93

99

94

95

1899

113

104

113

100

98

1900

119

112

116

112

105

1901

120

112

109

101

102

1902

127

120

120

103

103

1903

124

115

123

109

106

1904

123

113

127

115

109

1905

128

119

130

114

114

1906

135

123

132

115

121

1907

145

133

137

120

121

1908

133

124

130

114

116

1909

142

128

146

124

117

1910

148

133

148

123

120

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

130

120

127

113

111

Twenty  Pairs  by  Months,  1907-1910


1907


Month

Raw

Mfd.

Raw

Mfd.'

Raw

Mfd.'

Raw

Mfd.'

January

144

130

136

129

138

122

155

136

February

147

131

131

128

137

123

156

137

March

147

133

134

127

138

125

157

140

April

146

134

133

127

139

126

153

136

May

149

135

132

125

144

129

148

135

June

148

136

129

123

143

129

146

133

July

146

135

131

122

142

129

144

132

August

144

132

135

121

138

129

147

132

September

148

134

135

122

142

128

145

131

October

148

134

133

121

145

129

143

129

November

139

133

134

121

149

131

143

127

December

135

129

136

123

152

133

144

127

102


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  5— (Concluded)


Five  Triplets  by  Months,

1907-

•1910

1907

1908

• 1909

1910

Month
January

Raw
134

Partly
mfd.
117

Finished
119

Raw
130

Partly
mfd.
120

Finished
119

Raw

135

Partly
mfd.
116

Finished
116

Raw

159

Partly
mfd.
129

Finished
120

February

136

.117

119

126

117

118

137

118

115

156

128

120

March

133

117

120

123

117

117

135

120

115

151

126

120

April

133

117

120

123

113

116

139

122

115

150

125

121

May

139

120

120

130

113

116

147

125

118

151

123

120

June

143

122

121

131

111

114

150

129

117

148

121

120

.Tuly

143

123

122

132

111

114

150

128

118

147

122

120

August

141

123

122

133

113

114

146

126

119

150

122

119

September

142

123

122

131

113

114

147

124

119

142

120

119

October

139

124

122

131

115

115

154

127

119

143

120

119

November

133

121

121

133

114

116

158

129

119

140

119

119

December

132

121

121

134

116

116

160

128

120

139

120

119

The  table  shows  that,  whether  the  comparison  be  by  months  or  years,  the
prices  of  raw  materials  respond  more  promptly  and  in  larger  measure  to
changes  in  business  conditions  than  do  the  prices  of  their  products.  Since  the
five  partly  manufactured  products  pursue  a  course  intermediate  between  their
raw  materials  and  finished  goods,  it  seems  that  the  more  manufacturing  costs
have  been  bestowed  upon  materials  the  steadier  do  their  prices  become.

This  result  suggests  that  the  greater  stability  in  the  prices  of  consumers'
goods  in  comparison  with  producers '  goods  noted  above  may  result  simply  from
the  fact  that  the  consumers'  goods  are  chiefly  finished  products,  while  the  pro-
ducers' goods  are  largely  raw  materials.  This  suggestion  may  be  tested  by
excluding  the  raw  materials  from  both  classes  and  confining  the  comparison
to  manufactured  articles  bought  for  family  and  for  business  use.  These  exclu-
sions reduce  the  numbers  of  commodities  in  the  two  lists  to  47  and  28  respec-
tively. A  similar  comparison  between  the  relative  prices  of  raw  materials
bought  by  families  and  business  enterprises  is  hardly  feasible ;  for  there  are  few
consumers'  goods  in  the  list  which,  like  onions,  can  fairly  be  regarded  as  raw.
But  it  is  permissible  to  introduce  the  45  raw  producers'  goods  for  the  additional
evidence  they  bear  to  the  greater  stability  of  manufactured  articles.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


103


TABLE  6

Relative  Wholesale  Prices  of  Manufactured  Consumers'  Goods  and  op  Raw  and  Manufactured
Producers'  Goods  in  the  United  States. By  Years,  1890-1910

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Manufact

ared  articles

Raw  materials

Number  of
commodi

Year
1902

Manufactured  articles

Raw  materials

commodities 47

Consumers'
Tear goods

1890 112

28

Producers'

goods

115

45

Producers'

goods

115

ies 47
Consumers'
goods

108

28

Producers'

goods

114

' 45
Producers'
goods

123

1891 109

111

114

1903

108

114

123

1892 105

107

106

1904

108

114

123

1893 107

102

101

1905

109

117

128

1894 99

92

92

1906

113

124

138

1895 94

91

92

1907

122

132

145

1896 92

93

87

1908

115

118

130

1897 90

89

88

1909

119

117

139

1898 94

93

94

1910

121

125

149

1899  98

1900  109

107
117

110
117

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

1901 107

113

114

1900-

09

112

118

128

130
120
110
100

90

Reuative  Pr
Used by

Chart  4

ICES OF  Manufactured Commodities
Producers and bv  Consumers.
1890-1910

140
130
.120
110
100

90

WDUCERS' COMMODITIES
JIMSUMERS' COMMODITIES

/

Cc

/

J.

^.

/

\

y

/

/
/

/

r

\

•

/

N

\^'

\

l\

1
1
1

'*'"N..

-  "^  "

•

\

>

-^

s

/'

1

1890 '91 '92 '93 "94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  '01 '02 '03 '04 'OS 'OG '07 "08 '09 1910

104  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

On  the  whole,  the  manufactured  goods  used  by  producers  show  the  wider
oscillations.  They  stood  higher  in  1890,  fell  slightly  lower  in  the  depression
following  1893,  rose  more  rapidly  from  1897  to  1900,  and  again  from  1904  to
1907,  and  finally  fell  further  from  1907  to  1908.  The  raw  producers'  goods,
to  be  sure,  exhibited  still  wider  oscillations;  but  the  evidence,  so  far  as  it
extends,  supports  the  contention  that  the  relative  demand  for  and  supply  of
producers '  goods  is  more  sensitive  to  alterations  of  business  conditions  than  the
relative  demand  for  and  supply  of  consumers'  goods.  This  table  may  there-
fore be  regarded  as  affording  a  statistical  foundation  for  the  theory  of  business
cycles  which  Carver  has  suggested."

6.  The  Prices  of  Organic  and  Inorganic  Goods

Sombart's  theory  that  business  cycles  are  caused  by  the  different  rhythms
of  production  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  realms  suggests  another  arrange-
ment of  the  price  data.  The  inorganic  goods  in  the  list  comprise  41  mineral
products.  The  much  larger  number  of  organic  goods  may  advantageously  be
subdivided  into  19  forest,  41  animal,  and  58  farm  products.  Both  mineral  and
forest  products  are  turned  out  in  the  United  States  under  conditions  which
permit  a  quick  adjustment  of  the  supply  to  alterations  in  demand.  Animal
products,  on  the  other  hand,  require  a  year  or  two  for  growth,  while  the  supply
of  vegetable  products  raised  on  the  farm  depends  quite  as  much  on  the  weather
as  on  the  efforts  of  farmers  to  adapt  their  production  to  market  conditions.
Table  7  gives  the  relative  prices  of  these  four  groups  of  commodities  in  three
arrangements :  manufactured  goods  and  raw  materials  together,  and  then  each
separately.  The  basis  of  comparison  in  the  separate  tables  is  rather  slender;
but  without  such  a  division  it  might  be  suspected  that  the  differences  between
the  several  groups  are  caused  primarily  by  the  unlike  proportions  of  raw
materials  and  manufactured  goods  constituting  them.'^

11  See  Chapter  I,  ii,  12.

12  There  is  a  slight  discrepancy  between  the  monthly  and  the  annual  figures  for  farm  products,  both  raw
and  manufactured,  in  1908.  It  is  due  to  the  omission  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  of  quotations  for  five  months
in  making  up  the  average  of  prices  of  onions  and  buckwheat  flour  for  the  year.  See  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau
of  Labor,  March,  1909,  pp.  303,  306.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


105


-n

7

180

Chart  5.

/

/
1

140

Relative  Priceis  of  Raw  Mineral.

1
1

170
leo

150
140

Forest  ,  Animal  and  Farm Products.

1890-1910.

/

/

f

\

X

V

/

1
1

MINERAL  Products
Forest Products
^Vnimal Products
'ARV^ Products

/
/
/
/
/

I
\
\
\

1

/
/

/

1
/

/

—

/

/
1

,

y

/

/

130
120
110

100

/
90

80

70

1

1
1

1  /

/

/
/ .

v«":

//

130
120

no

100
90

.•'

/

■H'

h

V

y

/•'

\  \

\

s

/

\

//
//

f

^-

,•

/

i
f

-^

><

\

\

¥

/
/

\

\

\

/■

7

80

\

70

1890 '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1300 01 '02 '03 '04 05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910

106


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Belative  Wholesale  Prices  of  Mineral,
Arithmetic  means.

Both  raw  and  manufactured  goods


TABLE  7
,  Forest,  Animal,  and
Average  actual  prices
By  Years,  1890-1910
Raw  materials


Farm  Products  in  the  United  States
in  1890-99  =  100

Manufactured  goods


Number  of
commodities

Year
1890

41 19
Mineral Forest
products  products

117 111

27
Animal
products

106

58

Farm

products

117

' 18 10 9
Mineral Forest Animal
products  products  products

119 107 104

18

Farm

products

119

23 9 18
Mineral Forest Animal
products  products  products

116 116 107

40

Farm

products

116

1891

112

107

109

117

111

105

109

125

112

109

109

113

1892

105

103

108

107

105

99

109

108

105

107

108

106

1893

101

101

112

106

98

98

116

104

103

104

110

107

1894

91

95

97

98

86

95

95

98

94

96

98

98

1895

91

96

93

93

90

96

95

92

91

96

92

94

1896

93

95

87

85

92

94

82

76

94

96

89

89

1897

88

92

91

87

88

95

88

85

88

89

92

88

1898

92

94

96

93

92

99

97

96

92

89

95

92

1899

111

105

100

97

119

112

105

97

105

98

98

97

1900

116

117

110

107

119

121

111

111

114

111

109

105

1901

112

111

109

108

113

113

115

121

111

109

106

102

1902

113

117

119

111

120

123

131

122

108

110

112

106

1903

116

125

115

108

126

138

118

118

108

111

113

104

1904

110

129

112

113

115

142

115

124

106

115

111

108

1905

114

135

119

109

124

149

124

116

107

120

117

106

1906

122

145

125

114

137

163

131

119

110

125

122

112

1907

125

152

128

126

139

169

136

133

115

134

124

123

1908

111

137

124

121

119

151

129

131

105

121

121

116

1909

112

143

135

122

121

164

149

138

105

120

129

114

1910

114

159

142

128

121

182

158

145

109

134

133

120

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

115

131

120

114

123

143

126

123

109

118

116

110

By  Months,  1907-1910


Number  of
commodities

Both  raw  and  manufactured  goods

41 19 27 58
Mineral Forest Animal Farm
products  products  products  products

Raw  n

laterials

»

[anufact

ured  goods

18 10 9 18
Mineral Forest Animal Farm
products  products  products  products

23 9 18
Mineral Forest Animal
products  products  products  ]

40

Farm

products

1907  January

128

151

131

117

146

170

145

124

115

130

125

114

February

129

153

132

119

148

171

145

127

115

134

125

115

March

129

156

129

121

146

174

136

131

115

136

125

116

April

128

158

128

120

143

177

133

127

116

137

126

117

May

128

157

126

123

144

174

131

134

116

139

124

118

June

128

155

124

127

143

171

130

138

116

138

122

122

July

127

154

125

127

141

170

131

134

116

136

122

125

August

124

155

126

129

137

170

135

131

114

137

122

127

September

123

153

128

131

134

168

137

135

115

136

124

129

October

120

150

131

134

131

164

142

141

112

135

126

181

November

119

148

128

130

128

162

136

135

112

131

124

128

December

117

139

126

128

122

153

130

135

112

124

124

126

MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


107


TABLE  7—

\Conclud,ed')

Number  of /—

Both  raw  and  manufactured  goods

41 19 27 58  '
ilineral  Forest  Animal  Farm
roducts  products  products  products

113 139 124 127

Raw  materials

Manufactured  goods

commodities

1
Month p

1908  January

18 10 9 18
Mineral  Forest  Animal  Farm
products  products  products  products

120 151 125 136

23 9 18 40
Mineral  Forest  Animal  I'arm
products  products  products  products

108 125 124 123

February

112

143

122

125

119

153

120

134

107

131

123

121

March

112

139

123

125

120

151

120

136

106

126

124

119

April

111

141

123

123

119

154

122

134

106

126

124

118

May

110

139

121

123

118

153

119

136

103

123

122

117

June

109

134

120

121

116

148

121

136

103

118

120

115

July

109

134

122

122

116

148

128

137

103

119

119

116

August

110

133

123

121

118

146

131

135

104

117

119

115

September

110

132

125

119

117

146

136

129

105

116

119

114

October

111

134

127

118

118

151

140

130

105

116

120

116

November

112

135

128

117

120

153

144

128

105

115

120

112

December

113

139

130

117

121

157

147

129

106

119

122

112

1909  January

113

139

130

117

122

156

145

129

106

120

122

111

February

112

138

129

119

120

155

144

134

106

119

122

112

March

110

137

131

120

117

155

139

139

105

117

127

111

April

110

138

131

122

108

156

137

143

103

118

128

112

May

109

138

132

124

119

157

141

149

102

118

128

113

June

109

139

132

124

118

159

141

148

103

118

128

114

July

110

140

134

123

117

162

144

144

104

116

129

113

August

110

145

135

119

118

169

146

131

104

119

130

114

September

112

149

138

119

121

174

153

131

106

121

131

114

October

114

152

141

122

126

175

158

134

106

125

132

116

November

116

151

144

125

127

173

167

138

106

126

133

119

~^ December

116

150

146

127

129

173

168

142

107

126

135

121

1910  January

117

151

147

130

129

173

168

147

108

127

136

122

February

117

154

146

129

127

176

165

147

109

129

136

121

March

116

156

150

128

126

179

169

144

109

131

140

121

April

115

160

349

124

123

187

165

137

110

130

141

119

May

114

160

143

126

120

188

156

141

109

128

136

119

June

113

159

140

123

119

186

152

137

109

128

135

116

July

113

162

136

127

118

188

147

144

109

134

131

119

August

114

164

:37

129

117

187

150

149

108

139

130

120

September

113

164

139

129

118

185

158

148

109

139

130

121

October

113

162

139

130

118

181

159

145

109

141

129

123

November

113

160

137

128

119

180

156

146

109

138

128

120

December

114

160

136

129

119

181

154

146

110

138

127

121

The  first  section  of  Table  7,  in  which  raw  materials  and  finished  products
are  lumped  together,  seems  rather  inconclusive.  All  the  groups  rise  and  fall
in  general  conformity  with  business  conditions,  and  all  exMbit  certain  contrary
movements.  More  significant  results  appear,  however,  as  soon  as  the  materials
and  finished  goods  are  segregated.  In  each  of  the  four  groups  of  products  the
greater  stability  in  price  of  manufactured  goods,  brought  out  by  Table  5,  is


108  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

shown  once  more.  So  far,  indeed,  have  manufactured  goods  lagged  behind
raw  materials  on  the  rise  that  their  prices  in  1909  stood  lower  than  in  1890  in
the  case  of  mineral  and  farm  products,  and  but  slightly  higher  in  the  case  of
forest  products,  despite  an  increase  in  the  cost  of  materials.  If  the  figures
are  representative,  there  has  been  a  reduction  in  manufacturing  costs  which
nearly  offsets  or  more  than  offsets  the  increased  cost  of  materials,  save  in  the
case  of  animal  products.  These  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  finished  goods,
however,  are  but  a  pale  reflection  of  the  changes  in  the  markets  for  raw  produce.
It  is,  then,  in  the  sensitive  prices  of  the  latter  that  we  must  seek  a  statistical
basis  for  Sombart's  theory.

The  prices  of  raw  mineral  and  raw  farm  products  present  the  most  effective
contrast.  While  both  accord  broadly  with  the  course  of  business  cycles,  the
farm  products  show  more  frequent  and  more  striking  movements  of  a  contrary
sort.  In  the  dull  year  1891  farm  products  rose  in  price  while  mineral  products
fell ;  farm  products  did  not  rise  in  price  during  the  temporary  revival  of  activity
in  1895,  as  mineral  products  did;  farm  products  rose  in  1901  while  mineral
products  fell;  farm  products  rose  in  the  face  of  business  depression  in  1904
while  mineral  products  fell;  finally,  farm  products  declined  but  two  points
while  mineral  products  declined  twenty  points  in  the  depression  of  1908.  Such
evidence  goes  to  support  Sombart's  contention  of  a  dissonance  between  the
movements  of  prices  in  the  organic  and  inorganic  realms.

But  a  dissonance  hardly  less  striking  appears  between  the  movements  of
prices  in  the  two  remaining  groups — forest  and  animal  products — both  belong-
ing to  the  organic  realm.  Animal  products  rose  in  the  dull  year  1891  and
the  crisis  year  1893,  while  forest  products  fell;  animal  products  did  not  rise
when  business  revived  in  1895,  while  forest  products  did,  though  slightly;
animal  products  alternately  rose  and  fell  from  1901  to  1907,  while  forest  pro-
ducts advanced  each  year.  In  brief,  the  prices  of  animal  products  corresponded
less  accurately  than  the  prices  of  forest  products  to  changing  business  condi-
tions from  1890-99  and  more  accurately  from  1900-09.  In  both  decades  the
dissonance  is  marked.

Of  the  four  series,  the  inorganic  mineral  products  reflect  the  business  cycles
with  least  distortion  for  the  whole  period;  but  their  superiority  as  a  "trade
barometer"  over  the  organic  forest  products  is  due  chiefly  to  the  steady  rise
of  the  latter  from  1901-07.  This  rise,  unbroken  even  in  1904,  is  doubtless  due
to  a  gradual  reduction  in  the  supplies  of  lumber  within  easy  reach  of  the  great
eastern  markets  from  which  the  quotations  come  and  to  a  closer  organization
among  the  lumber  interests.  In  every  year  since  1902  the  forest  products  have
cost  relatively  more  in  comparison  with  their  average  prices  in  1890-99  than
any  of  the  other  groups.  That  is,  a  depletion  of  natural  resources  more  rapid
in  the  case  of  the  forests  than  of  the  mines  seems  to  have  occurred  in  the  last
decade. But  the  opposite  may  well  happen  in  some  future  decade,  and  prevent


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  109

the  supply  of  mineral  products  from  being  adjusted  to  demand  with  greater
facility  than  in  the  case  of  forest  products.  In  the  case  of  animal  and  farm
products,  however,  where  dependence  is  not  upon  natural  deposits  of  minerals
and  forests  which  have  grown  through  decades,  but  upon  the  fruits  of  human
labor  during  one  or  two  seasons,  frequent  contradictions  between  the  move-
ments of  prices  on  the  one  hand  and  changes  in  business  conditions  on  the  other
hand,  seem  likely  to  continue  for  an  indefinite  time  to  come.  Sombart's
theory,  in  other  words,  might  be  more  accurately  formulated  in  terms  of  con-
trast between  goods  the  supply  of  which  within  short  periods  depends  largely
upon  the  weather,  and  goods  the  supply  of  which  within  short  periods  depends
almost  entirely  upon  the  activity  of  enterprise.  While  at  present  the  inorganic
mineral  products  seem  to  excel  the  forest  products  as  well  as  animal  and  farm
products  in  this  respect,  it  is  but  recently  that  they  have  come  to  do  so  in  the
United  States,  and  the  time  may  come  again  when  they  will  lose  this  position.
The  monthly  figures  for  1907  and  1910  confirm  the  conclusions  suggested  by
the  yearly  figures.  In  each  of  the  four  groups  the  crisis  of  1907,  the  depression
of  1908,  and  the  revival  of  1909,  affected  the  prices  of  raw  materials  earlier
and  more  seriously  than  they  affected  the  prices  of  manufactured  goods.  And
as  between  the  various  classes  of  raw  materials,  mineral  products  record  the
changes  in  business  conditions  more  faithfully  than  any  of  the  other  groups.

7.  The  Dispersion  of  Price  Fluctuations

While  the  arithmetic  means  so  far  presented  show  that  different  parts  of
the  system  of  prices  have  distinct  types  of  variation,  they  fall  far  short  of
doing  justice  to  the  wide  diversity  of  price  fluctuations.  This  diversity  deserves
more  attention  than  it  has  commonly  received;  for  it  is  not  only  one  of  the
most  constant  and  most  characteristic  features  of  contemporary  economic  life,
but  it  also  has  an  important  bearing  upon  business  cycles.

For  exhibiting  the  range  covered  by  price  fluctuations  the  best  contrivance
is  the  table  of  decils.  Decils  are  points  which  divide  a  series  of  numbers,  like
the  relative  prices  of  different  commodities  on  the  same  date,  into  ten  equal
groups.  They  correspond  in  character  to  the  more  familiar  medians  and
quartils — indeed,  the  fifth  decil  is  the  median.

All  of  the  145  series  of  relative  prices  derived  from  the  Bureau  of  Labor
are  included  in  Table  8.  In  1909,  for  example,  one  commodity  had  a  relative
price  as  low  as  48,  and  another  had  a  relative  price  as  high  as  243.  Thus  the
arithmetic  mean  for  that  year,  121  represents  relative  prices  which  are  scat-
tered over  a  range  of  almost  200  points.  But  three-fifths  of  the  145  commod-
ities had  relative  prices  falling  within  a  much  narrower  range — 44  points,  the
difference  between  the  second  and  eighth  decils — and  one-fifth  fell  within  limits
of  ten  points — the  difference  between  the  fourth  and  sixth  decils.


110  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

This  range  of  dispersion  differs  greatly  from  year  to  year,  shrinking  when
prices  fall  and  expanding  when  they  rise.  For  the  whole  period  covered  by
the  table  it  averages  142  points ;  but  it  drops  to  72  points  in  1897,  and  rises  to
315  points  in  1910.  Conversely,  concentration  around  the  median  becomes
denser  when  prices  fall  and  less  dense  when  they  rise.  The  average  margins
between  the  decils  run  as  follows  for  the  twenty  years  1890-1909 :


O  "  ai

to

ri  w
CO  ."3

5.S

g.:

"5  w

oors

2'S^

fii'o

®*5

"S

<o-*-»

(oja

»J3

O  u

"S

5S,|

^•a

5'2
fl HI

5S

5i?

S-d

is

fl  a  fl
S.2.2

1^  s
S5

S5

1^

ti

S5«

fc'd

^■2

S-d

fc-s'S

^■d

^■d

^■2

^•s

«g5

i§

n

l»

32.5

7.6

5.2

4.2

3.6

3.9

4.4

5.8

12.2

5 "^ M

Cj  ffi  <u

54.7


Every  year  exhibits  this  tendency  toward  concentration,  but  in  ever  varying
degree.  For  example,  the  margin  between  the  fourth  and  sixth  decils,  which
enclose  the  central  fifth  of  the  145  relative  prices,  starts  at  eight  points  in  1890,
drops  to  four  points  during  the  years  of  depression,  and  rises  again  to  eleven
points  during  the  later  years  of  prosperity.  Relative  prices  are  squeezed
together  by  the  pressure  of  business  depression,  and  spring  apart  when  the
pressure  is  relaxed  by  returning  activity.

Every  one  of  the  decils,  from  the  first  to  the  ninth,  reflects  the  connection
between  prices  and  business  conditions,  falling  when  times  are  hard,  rising
when  times  are  good.  There  is  much  the  same  regularity  and  order  in  the
seemingly  erratic  fluctuations  of  those  decils  which  are  far  from  the  average
as  in  the  movements  of  the  arithmetic  mean  itself.  The  very  divergences  in
the  ups  and  downs  of  the  decils  are  significant.  The  seventh,  eighth,  and
ninth  in  1909  stand  high  above  their  levels  in  1890,  while  the  first,  second,
and  third  show  losses  or  trifling  gains.  This  result  is  precisely  what  should
come  about  within  twenty  years  from  reduction  in  the  cost  of  manufacturing
processes,  from  the  growing  scarcity  of  certain  materials,  and  from  the  vary-
ing measure  in  which  these  two  factors  affect  the  prices  of  different  finished
products.

Tables  of  decils  are  clearly  more  adequate  representatives  of  price  fluctu-
ations than  tables  of  arithmetic  means ;  for  they  show  more  of  the  facts  than
can  any  single  series  of  averages,  however  constructed.  But  it  is  equally  clear
that  tables  of  decils  are  too  cumbersome  for  comparing  the  price  fluctuations
of  different  groups  of  commodities,  or  of  different  countries.  A  concentrated
extract  of  all  the  figures  is  needed.  Accordingly,  for  the  international  compar-
isons about  to  be  made,  we  return  to  the  use  of  arithmetic  means,  which  give
such  an  extract.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


111


i

1

300

CHART 6.

!\

RANGE  COVERED BY  THE  FLUCTUATIONS

1  1
/  1

IN  THE  RELATIVE WHOLESALE PRICES

' 1

280

OF  145  COMMODITIES.

1

1890-1910.

1

260

A HIGHEST RELATIVE PRICE.

t

B 9* DECIL.

f

1

240

/

D 7* DECIL.

/

EG*  DECIL.

(1

I  /

F MEDIAN

/

G 4* DECIL

/

220

I 2-'  DECIL

/

J 1" DECIL.

(

180

leo

K LOWEST  RELATIVE PRICE.

/
/

200
180
ISO

1

-.

/

/^

si

/

"^

\l

140
ISO
100

ao

\
\
\

\
\
\

/
/
/
/
/
f

1

1

\
1
1
\

1
1

\
\

1
1
1

\'

1

^

/

/

/^

/
\  /

y
/

/

140
120
100
80

C

's

\

\
\

\

1

1
f

\
\
\

1
1

1

/

/  /

J,

1
1
1

\

--

/

/

/

•

/
y

E
F
G
H

I

>s

'"n.

^

\
1

\

\

/

k

■--

/

y

y\

\y
\y

J
K

\

\

^x.

s

T

y

%

\

y

/^

^

\

\

~

\,

"^

/

60
40

\

/
/

I

\

s

/

SO
40

\

\
\
\

/

/
/

\
\
\

t

1

1
1

\
\

i
1
1

\

\

s

/
/
/
/

\
\
\
\

\
\

y
f

—

1890  '31 32  '95  '34  '35 '36  '37  '98 93  1300  01 '02 '03  '04  '05  '06  '07 '08  '09 1910

112  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  8
Decils  of  Eelative  Prices  at  Wholesale  in  the  United  States

By  Years,  1890-1910


Year
1890

Lowest

relative

price

86

1st
decil

97

3d
decil

101

3d

decil

105

4tll
decil

108

Median
112

6th
decil

116

Tth
decil

119

8th
decil

126

9th
decil

133

Highest

relative

price

160

1891

74

99

101

105

109

111

113

116

122

132

158

1892

61

92

99

101

104

107

108

111

114

118

141

1893

70

90

96

100

102

104

106

109

111

119

158

1894

46

79

85

91

94

96

99

101

103

111

129

1895

53

79

86

88

91

94

95

98

100

105

149

1896

39

71

79

85

88

90

92

95

98

100

142

1897

56

71

78

85

88

91

93

95

98

102

128

1898

48

77

84

87

91

94

96

99

101

108

155

1899

46

86

89

94

97

100

103

108

112

129

149

1900

59

90

98

102

106

109

113

118

123

136

192

1901

49

90

97

101

104

107

111

115

120

133

222

1902

45

91

98

102

107

110

114

119

134

145

194

1903

43

90

98

104

108

111

114

121

129

143

192

1904

60

91

98

103

106

112

117

120

130

143

197

1905

59

85

97

104

110

114

120

126

131

149

238

1906

62

89

100

108

114

119

124

131

137

159

279

1907

42

95

104

112

121

129

132

139

147

171

304

1908

45

89

102

107

113

119

124

130

139

156

228

1909

48

89

102

111

117

121

127

135

146

172

243

1910

48

86

103

112

118

124

132

144

154

187

363

Averages
1890-99

58

84

90

94

97

100

102

105

109

116

147

1900-09

51

90

99

105

111

115

120

125

134

151

229

8.  Tlie  Representative  Character  of  Index  Numbers

Before  launching  upon  international  comparisons,  we  must  face  the  problem
whether  the  available  index  numbers  are  trustworthy  representatives  of  the
average  price  variations  in  the  several  countries.

The  best  known  American,  English,  French,  and  German  series  differ  widely
in  the  number  and  character  of  the  commodities  included  and  in  the  basis  of
computation.  That  unlike  lists  of  commodities  may  be  expected  to  yield  unlike
results  follows  from  the  preceding  demonstration  that  there  are  specific  differ-
ences of  variations  between  the  prices  of  consumers'  and  producers'  goods,  of
raw  materials  and  manufactured  articles,  and  of  mineral,  forest,  animal,  and
farm  products.  May  not  the  divergences  found  between  series  for  the  several
countries  be  due  chiefly  to  the  varying  proportions  in  which  these  categories
of  commodities  are  represented?  Other  doubts  are  suggested  by  the  table  of
decils.  If  relative  prices  are  dispersed  over  a  range  averaging  more  than  100
points,  what  warrant  have  we  for  trusting  the  foreign  index  numbers  computed
from  data  for  less  than  fifty  commodities?


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  113

The  best  method  of  answering  these  questions  is  to  compare  different  index
numbers  which  purport  to  show  the  trend  of  wholesale  prices  in  the  same
country.  If  they  agree  substantially,  despite  dissimilarities  in  lists  of  com-
modities and  methods  of  computation,  then  the  results  of  comparisons  between
index  nxmibers  for  different  countries  may  be  accepted  as  showing  real  agree-
ments or  disagreements  in  the  movements  of  the  price  levels.

There  are  five  American  index  nmnbers  which  may  be  submitted  to  this
test.  All  are  made  from  quotations  from  the  great  wholesale  markets  of  the
northeastern  and  north  central  states,  but  they  are  strikingly  unlike  in  other
respects.

Dun's  index  number  is  not  an  average  of  relative  prices,  but  a  sum  of  actual
prices  in  dollars  and  cents.  It  purports  to  give  "the  cost  of  a  year's  supplies
of  all  the  necessaries  of  life"  for  a  single  individual.  Three  hundred  and  fifty
articles  are  said  to  be  included,  and  the  price  of  each  is  said  to  be  multiplied
"by  the  quantity  annually  consumed  by  each  inhabitant,  as  nearly  as  may  be
ascertained  by  statistical  records."  How  far  the  results  may  be  trusted  is
uncertain,  because  the  compilers  never  disclosed  their  list  of  commodities,  their
sources  for  quotations,  or  their  methods  of  estimating  per  capita  consumption.
After  May,  1907,  Dim's  Revieio  ceased  to  publish  this  index  number;  but  the
Gibson  Publishing  Company  have  undertaken  a  continuation.  The  Gibson
index  differs  from  Dun's  in  reducing  the  number  of  commodities  from  350  to
50,  and  in  substituting  averages  of  relative  prices  for  sums  of  actual  prices.
It  resembles  Dun's  index  in  allowing  foods  a  weight  of  50  per  cent,  textiles
18  per  cent,  and  minerals  and  miscellaneous  goods  16  per  cent  each.  Compu-
tation of  the  Gibson  index  for  1890  to  1906  shows  that  it  agrees  less  well  with
the  Dun  figures  for  these  years  than  with  the  figures  of  the  other  series  pres-
ently to  be  described.  On  the  whole,  the  Dun-Gibson  index  commands  less
confidence  than  its  rivals."

Bradstreet's  index  is  also  a  sum  of  actual  prices.  It  shows  "the  totals  of
the  prices  per  pound  of  96  articles,"  on  the  first  day  of  each  quarter  from  1892
to  1898,  and  on  the  first  day  of  each  month  from  1899  to  date.  The  figures
listed  in  the  table  are  averages  for  the  years."

Neither  Dun's  nor  Bradstreet's  series  in  its  original  form  can  be  compared
properly  with  the  series  compiled  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor.  For  sums  of  actual
prices  are  not  comparable  with  averages  of  relative  prices.  It  is  therefore
necessary  to  convert  these  two  series  into  relative  figures  on  the  basis  used  by
the  Bureau — average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  equal  100.  This  conversion  may
be  effected  approximately  by  dividing  the  original  figures  by  numbers  which

13  For  a  description  of  Dun's  index  see  the  Bulletin  of  the  Department  of  Labor,  March,  1902,  pp.  211,  212;
for  the  results  see  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  U.  S.,  1907,  p.  569;  for  the  method  of  continuation  by  the  Gibson
index  see  J.  P.  Norton,  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,  1910,  pp.  750-758 ;  for  a  criticism  of  the  whole
series  see  W.  C.  Mitchell,  ibid.,  November,  1910,  pp.  161-170.

11  The  full  table  for  1892  to  date  is  currently  published  by  Bradstreet's  in  the  second  weekly  issue  for  each
month.


114  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

show  the  ratio  of  their  sums  for  1890-99  and  1892-99  respectively  to  the  corre-
sponding sums  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor's  figures — namely,  1,000  for  1890-99  and
775.4  for  1892-99/=^

These  two  revised  series  are  followed  by  three  made  from  materials  pub-
lished in  the  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor.  One  gives  the  arithmetic  means
of  the  relative  prices  of  the  fifty  commodities  included  in  Gibson's  index;  a
second  the  Bureau's  own  average  for  "all  commodities,"  about  250  in  number;
a  third  gives  the  arithmetic  means  of  the  145  series  of  relative  prices  which
have  been  used  in  the  preceding  tables."

When  these  five  series  are  put  side  by  side,  as  in  Table  9,  they  are  found  to
agree  substantially  regarding  the  broader  movements  of  the  price  level.  All
show  a  heavy  decline  from  1890  to  1896  or  1897,  a  rise  from  these  dates  to  1900,
a  hesitating  course  from  1900  to  1904,  an  extremely  rapid  rise  from  1904  to
1907,  a  sharp  drop  in  1908,  and  a  recovery  in  1909.  But  in  detail  there  are
numerous  differences.  One  indicates  that  prices  rose  in  1890-91,  two  that  prices
fell  slightly,  one  that  they  remained  constant.  One  makes  1897  and  two  make
1896  the  year  of  lowest  prices,  while  two  make  both  years  the  same.  The  fall
from  1893  to  1896  varies  between  16  and  23  points,  and  the  rise  from  1896  to
1900  varies  between  20  and  28  points.  While  all  agree  that  the  net  changes
between  1900  and  1904  were  small,  they  disagree  concerning  the  course  from
year  to  year.  The  extent  of  the  rise  from  1904  to  1907  is  nearly  the  same  in  all
series — 14  points  in  one,  15  in  a  second,  and  16  in  three ;  but  the  extent  of  the
fall  in  1908  varies  between  5  and  12  points,  and  the  extent  of  the  reaction  in
1909  between  3  and  8  points.

A  more  systematic  comparison  can  be  made  by  computing  for  each  year  the
differences  between  some  one  series  and  the  other  four.  The  results  of  this
operation,  with  the  revised  Bureau  of  Labor  series  as  the  standard  of  compar-
ison, are  shown  in  the  second  part  of  Table  9.  The  original  series  of  the  bureau
is  found  to  differ  from  the  standard  series  by  a  trifle  less  than  one  point  on  the
average,  and  in  no  year  by  more  than  three  points.  Next  in  closeness  of  agree-
ment comes  the  improved  Gibson  series,  then  Bradstreet's,  and  last  Dun's.

In  judging  the  importance  of  these  differences,  it  is  helpful  to  examine  the
corresponding  differences  between  the  various  groups  of  relative  prices  which
have  been  contrasted  in  the  preceding  tables.  A  list  of  the  maximum  differ-
ences in  any  one  year  and  the  average  differences  for  the  whole  period  covered
will  suffice  for  the  purpose  (see  Table  10).


15  Dun's  sum  for  3  890-99  is  842.9,  which  divided  by  1,000  gives  .843.  Bradstreet's  sum  for  1892-99  is
54.23,  which  divided  by  775.4  gives  .06994.  These  quotients  are  the  divisors  used  in  the  next  table.  To
secure  greater  accuracy,  the  computations  have  been  based  on  Dun's  and  Bradstreet's  figures  expressed  in  three
digits,  instead  of  in  two  as  shown  in  the  table.

i«  For  Gibson's  list  of  commodities  see  Norton's  note  cited  above;  for  the  Bureau  of  Labor's  figures  see
Bulletin  for  March,  1910,  p.  385;  for  the  method  of  reducing  the  bureau's  list  of  250  commodities  to  145  see
footnote  8,  above.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


115


120
110
100
90
80

Chart 7
Comparison of  Varioos  American Index
OF  Prices at Wholesale..

Numbers

|40
130
120
110
100
90
80

1890-  1910

;

>

'"  /


Bureau  of  Labor  -original.
OuN-  Gibson.
Bradstreets.
Gibson improved

t

"V

^7

/ \  T  /

/

V

X

/■

N«

1

1  :

V

i:

■^y

• /

y

\,

■■V

i

/

f

>^

Y

*1

^

*'

^

A

V'
'/

1890 '91 '92 "93 '94 '95 '9G "97 '98 '99 1900 'Ol 'o2 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910

TABLE  9

SON  OP  Vabious  American  Index  Numbers  of  Wholesale  Prices.

Bt  Years

Number  of
commodities

350-50
Dun-
Gibson
Original

96
Brad-
street's
Original

350-50
Dun-
Gibson
-H  .843

96
Brad-
street's
-=-  .06994

50

Gibson
Improved

250 145
Bureau  of  Labor

Year

Original

Revised

1890

92

109

114

113

114

1891

96

114

114

112

113

1892

90

7.8

107

111

105

106

106

1893

91

7.5

107

108

105

106

105

1894

83

6.7

99

96

94

96

96

1895

■82

6.4

97

92

94

94

93

1896

74

5.9

88

85

87

90

89

1897

73

6.1

86

88

89

90

89

1898

78

6.6

92

94

95

93

93

1899

85

7.2

101

103

103

102

103

1900

91

7.9

108

113

112

110

111

1901

92

7.6

109

108

109

108

110

1902

102

7.9

121

113

116

113

114

1903

100

7.9

118

114

115

114

114

1904

97

7.9

115

113

116

113

114

1905

98

8.1

117

116

118

116

116

1906

105

8.4

125

120

123

123

122

1907

110

8.9

130

127

132

129

130

1908

106

8.0

125

115

125

123

121

1909

112

8.5

133

122

132

127

124

1910

115

9.0

137

129

135

132

131

1911

109

8.7

130

125

129

Averages
1890-99

84

7.0*

100

97*

100

100

100

1900-09

101

8.1

120

116

120

118

118

■■  Average  of  1892-99,


116


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  9— (Concluded)
Differences  Between  the  Eevised  Bureau  of  Labor  Series  and  Other  Index  Numbers


Number
commodities

Year

350-50
Dun-
Gibson
-^  .843

96
Brad-
street's
■^  .06994

50

Gibson
Improved

250
Bureau
of  Labor,
Original

1890

—5

0

—1

1891

+  1

+  1

—1

1892

+  1

+  5

—1

0

1893

+2

+3

0

+1

1894

+3

0

—2

0

1895

+4

—1

+1

+1

1896

—1

—4

—2

+1

1897

—3

—1

0

+1

1898

—1

+  1

+2

0

1899

—2

0

0

—1

1900

—3

+2

+1

—1

1901

—1

—2

—1

—2

1902

—7

—1

+2

—1

1903

+4

0

+  1

0

1904

+1

—1

+2

—1

1905

+  1

0

+  2

0

1906

+3

—2

+  1

+1

1907

0

—3

+2

—1

1908

+4

—6

+4

+2

1909

+9

2

+8

+3

1910

+6

—2

+4

+1

Sums*

56

34

33

19

Maxima*

9

6

8

3

Averages*

2.8

1.9

1.7

1.0

TABLE  10
Maximum  and  Average  Annual  Differences  Between  the  Series  of  Eelative  Prices  Shown  in  Tables  3-7

Maximum  Average

Character  of  relative  prices  compared differences  differences

Table  3. Foods  at  Eetail  and  Wholesale  11  4.5

Table  4. Consumers'  and  Producers'  Goods 21  8.4

Table  5. Twenty  Baw  Materials  and  their  Products  14  6.0

Table  6. Manufactured  Consumers'  and  Producers'  Goods  — . 11  5.0

Table  7. Eaw  Mineral  and  Forest  Products  43  13.1

Table  7. Eaw  Mineral  and  Animal  Products  28  7.9

Table  7. Eaw  Mineral  and  Farm  Products  22  8.9

Table  7. Eaw  Forest  and  Animal  Products  35  12.9

Table  7. Eaw  Forest  and  Farm  Products  44  15.8

Table  7. Eaw  Animal  and  Farm  Products  16  6.4


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  117

The  differences  shown  by  this  schedule  are  all  larger,  many  much  larger,
than  any  of  those  shown  by  Table  9.  In  other  words,  while  general  index
numbers,  when  compiled  from  widely  varying  lists  of  commodities  and  made
by  unlike  methods,  differ  somewhat  from  each  other,  their  differences  are  much
less  than  those  which  mark  off  the  various  parts  of  the  system  of  prices.

Further,  the  differences  between  the  several  index  numbers  are  not  arbi-
trary. Most  of  them  may  be  accounted  for  when  the  constitution  of  the  series
is  known.  For  example,  the  differences  between  Dun's  index  for  1890-1906
and  the  standard  series  are  partly  due  to  the  fact  that  the  former  gives  prices
on  July  1  while  the  latter  gives  averages  for  the  twelve  months  of  the  year.
Accordingly,  the  extent  of  these  differences  is  no  ground  for  misgiving.  Again,
the  larger  proportion  of  raw  materials  and  the  smaller  proportion  of  finished
products  explains  the  slightly  greater  sensitiveness  of  the  revised  in  compar-
ison with  the  original  Bureau  of  Labor  series.  Similarly,  the  still  greater
sensitiveness  of  the  improved  Gibson  series  is  due  to  its  still  greater  proportion
of  raw  materials.  If  we  knew  precisely  what  commodities  entered  into  Brad-
street's  index,  we  could  probably  account  for  its  idiosyncrasies  in  some  similar
fashion."

The  net  result  of  this  examination  into  the  representative  character  of  index
numbers  is  reassuring.  The  table  of  decils  shows  that  in  every  year  the  relative
prices  of  cormnodities  are  dispersed  over  a  wide  range ;  but  it  also  shows  that
this  dispersion  is  itself  orderly  and  regular  even  in  its  changes.  The  compar-
ison of  five  American  index  numbers  shows  that  no  two  run  exactly  parallel;
but  it  also  shows  that  all  agree  regarding  the  general  trend  of  fluctuations.
Further,  the  differences  of  detail  from  year  to  year  are  found  to  be  decidedly
smaller  than  those  between  the  various  species  into  which  prices  have  been
divided  in  earlier  sections.  Finally,  these  relatively  small  differences  are
capable  of  explanation  by  differences  in  the  material  entering  into  the  several
index  numbers,  so  far  as  that  material  is  known.

In  comparing  the  index  numbers  for  the  United  States,  England,  France,
and  Germany,  then,  average  differences  which  exceed  two  or  three  points  may
be  considered  a  safe  indication  of  real  divergencies  in  the  course  of  prices.
But  in  any  single  year  wider  deviations  may  be  caused  by  technical  differences
in  the  method  of  making  the  several  series.  It  is  therefore  desirable  to  sup-
plement the  comparisons  between  the  standard  series,  by  other  comparisons
between  new  index  numbers  made  from  the  American,  English,  French,  and
German  prices  of  identical  lists  of  commodities.''

n  Bradstreet's  publishes  regularly  the  prices  of  106  commodities,  but  includes  only  96  in  its  index  number,
without  stating  which  10  are  omitted.  Nor  does  it  explain  the  system  by  which  quotations  by  the  yard,
quart,  gallon,  square  foot,  thousand  of  brick,  etc.,  are  reduced  to  prices  per  pound.

"Since  this  chapter  was  written,  Mr.  E.  H.  Hooker  has  published  a  paper  comparing  English,  French,
German,  and  American  index  numbers.  "The  Course  of  Prices  at  Home  and  Abroad,  1890-1910,"  Journal  of
the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  December,  1911.


118  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

9.  The  Fluctuations  of  Prices  in  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and

Germany

Two  excellent  index  numbers  are  currently  published  in  England.  The  best
known  is  that  compiled  by  Mr.  Augustus  Sauerbeck,  and  for  many  years  pub-
lished in  the  March  issue  of  the  Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society.  It
includes  45  commodities,  mostly  raw  materials  and  slightly  manufactured  pro-
ducts. The  averages  are  arithmetic  means  of  relative  prices  computed  on  the
basis  of  average  actual  prices  in  1867-77.  No  attempt  is  made  to  weight  the
several  commodities  in  accordance  with  their  importance  beyond  including  two
varieties  for  such  articles  as  wheat,  iron,  and  coal.  For  purposes  of  compar-
ison with  the  American  index  numbers,  Sauerbeck's  figures  have  been  recom-
puted on  the  basis  average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100."

The  second  English  series  was  begun  by  the  Board  of  Trade  in  1903,  and
has  been  continued  in  the  Board  of  Trade  Lahour  Gazette:"'  Like  Sauerbeck,
the  Board  of  Trade  includes  45  articles,  but  it  selects  an  even  larger  proportion
of  raw  materials  in  comparison  with  manufactured  goods.  Most  of  its  actual
prices  are  based  on  "import  and  export  average  values."  The  relative  prices
are  computed  on  the  basis  of  actual  piices  in  1900,  and  in  making  up  the  arith-
metic means  the  relative  prices  of  each  commodity  are  weighted  in  accordance
with  its  estimated  consumption."  In  shifting  this  series  to  the  American  basis
(average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100)  I  have  contented  myself  with  the  rough
and  easy  method  of  dividing  the  original  results  for  each  year  by  their  average
for  1890-99.='

For  France,  also,  we  have  two  valuable  series.  The  first,  designed  by  M.
Lucien  March,  Chef  de  la  Statistique  Generale  de  la  France,  is  based  upon  the
prices  set  on  43  staple  imports  by  the  Commission  des  valeurs  en  douane.  This
list  of  commodities  corresponds  closely  to  Sauerbeck's  list  of  45.  Originally
the  relative  prices  were  computed  on  the  basis  of  average  actual  prices  in
1867-77;'"  but  as  now  published  in  the  Anituaire  statistique  de  France  the  series
has  been  shifted  to  the  basis  of  prices  in  1891-1900."

18  In  order  to  maintain  strict  continuity  in  the  figures,  I  have  not  used  the  series  which  Sauerbeck  drops
or  begins  within  this  period,  namely,  the  Cleveland  quotations  for  pig-iron,  English  tough-cake  copper  aver-
age import  prices  of  hides  and  leather,  and  St.  Petersburg  tallow.  In  other  respects  the  present  figures  are
computed  precisely  like  Sauerbeck's,  save  for  the  change  of  base.  The  disuse  of  these  series  does  not  alter
the  number  of  commodities  included;  for  pig-iron,  copper,  hides,  leather,  and  tallow  are  all  represented  by
other  continuous  quotations  in  Sauerbeck's  table.

20  See  Report  on  Wholesale  and  Betail  Prices  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  190S,  with  Comparative  Statistical
Tables  for  a  Series  of  Years  (London,  1903).

21  See,  for  example.  Twelfth  Abstract  of  Labour  Statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom,  pp.  80-89.

22  No  use  is  made  of  the  London  Economist's  index  number,  because  this  pioneer  effort  to  maintain  a  run-
ning measure  of  price  variations  is  distinctly  inferior  to  its  later  rivals.  Only  22  commodities  are  included
and  of  these  an  unduly  large  proportion  show  the  fluctuations  of  cotton,  in  raw  or  manufactured  form.  Rec-
ognition of  these  long-standing  defects  has  at  last  induced  the  Economist  to  revise  its  list.  See  the  issue
for  February  4,  1911,  p.  206.

23  Compare  Bulletin  de  statistique  et  de  legislation  comparee,  March,  1908,  p.  340.

2-1  Annuaire  statistique,  1908,  p.  201*. For  the  list  of  articles  included  see  ibid.,  pp.  84*-87*-


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  119

M.  Jules  Domergue  is  credited  with  planning  the  second  French  series,
maintained  by  La  reforme  economique.  The  quotations  are  taken  from  interior
markets,  and  include  48  commodities,  of  which  34  correspond  to  commodities
in  the  lists  of  March  and  Sauerbeck.  The  relative  prices  are  based  upon  actual
prices  in  the  single  year  1890.

In  preparing  these  French  series  for  comparison  with  the  American  series,
I  have  applied  the  summary  method  of  division  to  March's  results;  but  recom-
puted Domergue 's  table  in  full  on  the  basis  of  average  actual  prices  in  1890-99.
This  discrimination  in  favor  of  Domergue 's  series  is  justified  by  its  superior
claims  as  a  representative  of  the  French  price  level.  The  prices  of  foreign
articles  imported  into  a  country  are  less  significant  for  purposes  of  interna-
tional comparison  than  the  prices  of  both  foreign  and  domestic  articles  obtained
from  interior  markets.'^

The  German  material  is  less  satisfactory  than  the  English  and  French.
Soetbeer's  celebrated  series  has  been  allowed  to  lapse.  The  series  based  on  the
import  values  of  42  commodities  at  Hamburg,  published  in  the  Annuaire  statis-
tique  de  France,^"  is  open  not  only  to  the  general  objection  against  tables  which
quote  none  but  imported  articles,  but  also  to  a  special  suspicion.  It  represents
prices  as  rising  between  1900  and  1901,  in  the  face  of  a  serious  business  crisis,
and  at  a  time  when  the  two  series  next  described  show  a  fall.  Much  superior
is  the  index  number  computed  by  Otto  Schmitz  from  the  data  for  29  commod-
ities published  by  the  Imperial  Statistical  Office.  Schmitz 's  book,  Bewegung
der  Waarenpreise  in  BeutscUand,  closes  with  1902,  but  his  series  is  now  con-
tinued in  the  statistical  Beilage  zur  Zeitschrift  filr  Socialivissenschaft.  Since
the  actual  prices  which  Schmitz  uses  are  not  available  for  recent  years,  how-
ever, the  best  way  to  secure  an  index  number  for  Germany  is  to  start  afresh
with  the  price  data  given  by  the  Statistische  JnhrMcher  filr  das  Beiitsche  Reich.
Thirty  commodities  are  regularly  quoted  here  for  the  years  1890-1909,  and  the
index  numbers  made  from  their  prices  bear  a  close  relation  to  Schmitz 's  series
for  29  commodities."  Of  course,  the  new  computations  have  been  based  upon
average  actual  prices  in  1890-99.

The  various  foreign  index  numbers  which  have  been  described  are  assembled
in  Table  11,  together  with  the  best  two  American  series.  It  will  be  seen  from
the  second  part  of  the  table  that  the  two  French  series  agree  almost  as  closely

25  By  using  all  the  commodities  for  which  La  reforme  economique  publishes  complete  series  of  actual  prices
since  1890  I  have  raised  the  number  of  articles  in  Domergue 's  index  number  from  48  to  64.  The  chief  ob-
ject of  this  change  is  to  include  all  the  articles  for  which  we  have  prices  both  m  America  and  France.  The
enlarging  of  the  list  makes  little  difference  in  the  results  ■ ^t, i  ^  v, 4.v. n

M  A  de  Foville  has  prepared  a  third  index  number  for  Prance  by  comparing  the  value  set  b;^  the  Douane
francaise  on  imports  and  exports,  first  at  the  prices  of  the  preceding,  and  later  at  the  prices  of  the  current
year  Valuable  as  his  results  are,  they  serve  the  present  purpose  less  well  than  the  other  French  series,  which
are  made  by  methods  more  nearly  like  those  employed  in  computing  the  American  and  English  mdex  num-
bers. For  de  Foville 's  results  see  the  Bulletin  de  statistique  et  de  legislation  compare,  March,  1908,  pp.  340,  341.

26 1908,  p.  201*.  .  .  .^, ^,

27  The  commodities  in  the  new  index  number  include  tue  28  articles  listed  below  in  connection  with  the
table  comparing  the  relative  prices  of  identical  commodities  in  the  United  States  and  Germany,  and  m  addi-
tion rape-seed  oil  (Danzig  quotations)  and  hemp  (Liibeck  quotations).


120  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

as  the  American  pair.  But  the  Board  of  Trade's  figures  for  English  prices
show  a  decidedly  smaller  rise  in  the  second  decade  than  do  Sauerbeck's  figures.
Manipulation  of  the  material  entering  into  the  averages  shows  that  a  small
part  of  the  difference  can  be  accounted  for  by  dissimilarity  in  the  lists  of  com-
modities and  in  methods  of  weighting.^^  But  most  of  the  difference  is  due  to
a  dissimilar  run  of  quotations  for  what  purport  to  be  the  same  commodities.
Superficially,  discrepancies  traceable  to  the  original  data  look  suspicious.  It
must  be  remembered,  however,  that  the  Board  of  Trade  takes  most  of  its  data
from  "import  and  export  average  values,"  while  Sauerbeck  takes  most  of  his
from  market  reports.  Now,  even  with  such  staples  as  cotton  and  pig-iron,  the
imports  and  exports  consist  of  several  or  many  different  grades,  and  the  relative
proportion  of  the  high-priced  and  low-priced  grades  are  subject  to  variation
from  year  to  year.  Hence,  while  the  average  import  and  export  prices  may
show  accurately  what  prices  England  has  paid  for  cotton  per  pound  and
received  for  pig-iron  per  ton,  they  do  not  show  the  prices  of  strictly  uniform
commodities.  For  some  purposes  the  information  concerning  price  fluctua-
tions conveyed  by  the  Board  of  Trade's  figures  is  doubtless  more  useful  than
that  conveyed  by  Sauerbeck's  figures.  But  for  comparison  with  index  numbers
for  other  countries  made  from  market  quotations,  Sauerbeck's  figures  are
certainly  preferable.  Consequently,  the  latter  series  is  used  in  the  following
discussion.'"

As  between  the  two  French  and  the  two  American  series,  it  makes  little
difference  which  is  used.  But  reasons  have  already  been  suggested  for  pre-
ferring Domergue's  to  March's  figures,  and,  since  the  improved  Gibson  series
resembles  the  foreign  index  numbers  rather  closely,  it  may  be  preferred  to  the
revised  Bureau  of  Labor  series  for  purposes  of  international  comparison.

In  view  of  the  demonstration  that  American  index  numbers  compiled  by
different  agencies  from  dissimilar  materials  yield  substantially  similar  results,
international  comparisons  based  upon  Gibson's,  Sauerbeck's,  Domergue's,  and
the  new  German  series  command  no  little  confidence.  Even  the  disagreement
between  the  Sauerbeck  and  Board  of  Trade  series  is  not  seriously  disconcert-
ing, when  its  cause  is  known. But  part  of  the  differences  shown  in  the  second

28  For  example,  the  Board  of  Trade  makes  the  price  level  higher  in  1890  than  in  1900,  while  Sauerbeck
makes  it  lower.  (1)  To  determine  what  part  of  the  difference  is  due  to  dissimilarity  in  the  lists  of  commod-
ities, I  have  computed  several  averages  for  the  30  commodities  included  in  both  lists,  for  the  15  included
by  the  Board  of  Trade  and  not  by  Sauerbeck,  and  for  the  15  included  by  Sauerbeck  and  not  by  the  Board
of  Trade.  The  results  show  that  neither  series  would  be  altered  more  than  one  point  by  omitting  the  com-
modities not  included  in  the  other.  Such  an  omission  would  raise  Sauerbeck's  results  a  trifle  and  reduce
the  Board  of  Trade's,  thus  bringing  the  two  averages  for  1890  a  little  closer  together.  (2)  To  determine  the
effects  of  weighting  on  the  Board  of  Trade's  averages,  I  have  computed  a  simple  arithmetic  mean  of  its  45
relative  prices  for  1890,  and  obtained  102.3  in  place  of  104.0.  But  after  both  of  these  changes  have  been
made  the  Board  of  Trade's  figures  still  show  a  higher  range  of  prices  in  1890  than  in  1900,  and  Sauerbeck's
figures  still  show  a  lower  range.

29  There  may  be  other  reasons  for  the  peculiarities  of  the  British  Board  of  Trade  series  which  one  familiar
with  the  precise  method  of  computing  "import  and  export  average  values"  could  point  out.  The  close  agreement
between  the  French  import  figures  and  Domergue's  market  prices  shows  that  in  some  cases  the  two  sources
of  data  give  substantially  similar  results.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


121


1830 '31 "32 '93 "94 '35 '36 '97 '38 "99 1900 "01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1310


TABLE  11

CoMrARisoN  OP  American,  Engmsh,  French,  and  German  Index  Numbers  of  Prices  at  Wholesale.

By  Yeaes,  1890-1910

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

American  English  French  .German

Number  of , "^ ^  r -^ \  i * \  r * ^

commodities 145 50  45 45  43  64  30

Bureau  of Gibson,  Board  Domergue,  New

Year  Labor,  revised  improved  Sauerbeck  of  Trade  March  revised  series

1890  114 114  109 108  111  109  113

1891  113 114  109 112  109  108  111

1892  106 105  103 106  106  102  102

1893  105 105  103 104  104  105  99

1894  96 94  95 98  96  97  91

1895  93 94  94 94  94  94  92

1896  89 87  92 92  91  91  92

1897  89 89  93 94  92  91  94

1898  93 95  97 97  95  97  100

1899  103 103  104 96  103  106  106

1900  111 112  115 104  110  114  113

1901  110 109  107 101  105  107  108

1902  114 116  106 100  103  106  106

1903  114 115  106 101  104  107  106

1904  114 116  108 102  103  106  105

1905  116 118  111 101  109  107  113

1906  122 123  119 104  116  117  121

1907  130 132  123 110  119  126  129

1908  121 125  112 107  114  112  121

1909  124 132  114 108 113  119

1910  131 135  120 113* 122  122

Averages

1890-99 100 100  100 100  100  100  100

1900-09 118 120  112 104 112  114

*  Provisional,  subject  to  revision.  •


122


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  11 — {Cojicuded)


DiFrERENCES  AMONG  THE  SEVERAL  SERIES


Differences  between


Differences  between  the

Differences  between  Gibson's
improved  series  for  America  and

Sauerbeck's  series  for
England  and

Differences

between
Domergue's

Fear

Two

American

series

Two

English

series

'Two
French
series

Sauerbeck's

English

series

Domergue's
French
series

New

German

series

Domergue's New
French German
series series

French  series

and  New
German  series

1890

0

+ 1

—

2

+

5

+  5

+

1

0 —4

—4

1891

—  1

—  3

—

1

+

5

+  6

+

3

+  1 -2

—3

1892

+  1

—  3

—

4

+

2

+  3

+

3

+1 +1

0

1893

0

—  1

+

1

+

2

0

+

6

—2 +4

+6

1894

+  2

—  3

+

1

—

1

—  3

+

3

—2 +4

+6

1895

—  1

0

0

0

0

+

2

0 +2

+2

1896

+ 2

0

0

—

5

—  4

—

5

+  1 o"

—1

1897

0

—  1

—

1

—

4

—  2

—

5

+2 -1

—3

1898

—  2

0

+

2

—

2

—  2

—

5

0 —3

—3

1899

0

+  8

+

3

—

1

—  3

—

3

—2 —2

0

1900

—  1

+  11

+

4

—

3

—  2

—

1

+  1 +2

+  1

1901

+ 1

+  6

+

2

+

2

+  2

+

1

0 —1

—1

1902

—  2

+  6

+

3

+  10

+  10

+  10

0 0

0

1903

—  1

+  5

+

3

+

9

+  8

+

9

—1 0

+1

1904

—  2

+  6

+

3

+

8

+10

+  11

+2 +3

+1

1905

—  2

+  10

—

O

+

7

+11

+

5

+4 —2

—6

1906

—  1

+15

+

1

+

4

+  6

+

2

+2 —2

—4

1907

—  2

+  13

+

7

+

9

+  6

+

3

—3 —6

—3

1908

—  4

+  5

—

2

+  13

+  13

+

4

0 —9

—9

1909

—  8

+ 6

+  18

+19

+  13

+1 —5

—6

1910

—  4

+  7

+15

+  13

+13

—2 —2

0

Sums*

33

103

42

110

115

]

95

25 53

60

Maxima*

8

15

7

18

19

13

4 9

9

Averages

1.7

5.2

2.2

5.5

5.8

4.8

1.3 2.7

3.0

*  1890-1909.

part  of  Table  11  between  the  figures  chosen  to  represent  the  United  States,
England,  France,  and  Germanj^  must  be  ascribed  to  dissimilarity  in  the  several
lists  of  commodities.  The  comparisons  will  therefore  be  still  more  satisfactory
if  this  source  of  disagreement  can  be  reduced  to  negligible  proportions.  For-
tunately, Sauerbeck  gives  the  actual  prices  of  34  commodities  which  are  also
quoted  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor.  Similarly,  La  reforme  economique  reports  the
prices  of  43,  and  the  Statistische  Jahrhilcher  fiir  das  Deutsche  Reich  report  the
prices  of  28  articles  for  which  the  Bureau  of  Labor  provides  American  data.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


123


From  this  material  Table  12  has  been  made,  to  show  the  average  relative  prices
of  substantially  identical  commodities  in  the  United  States,  on  the  one  hand,
and  on  the  other  hand,  in  the  three  European  countries.^"

In  all  four  countries,  the  movements  of  prices  at  wholesale  have  been  the
same  in  their  larger  phases.  The  decline  from  1890  to  1894-96,  the  rise  from
the  latter  years  to  1900,  the  reaction  in  1901,  the  comparative  stability  in  1902-
04,  the  renewed  advance  in  1904-07,  and  the  sharp  fall  in  1908,  are  found  alike
in  the  United  States  and  England,  in  Prance  and  in  Germany.

30  The  commodities  included  in  the  three  lists  are  as  follows. The  descriptions  are  intended  only  to  enable
anyone  who  so  desires  to  identify  the  precise  materials  selected  from  each  source.

1.  The  United  States  and  England


English  Commodities

1.  Wheat:  American.

2.  Flour:  Town-made  white.

3.  Barley:  English  Gazette.

4.  Oats:  English  Gazette.

5.  Maize:  American  mixed.

6.  Potatoes:  Good  English.

7.  Eice:  Rangoon  cargoes  to  arrive.

8.  Beef:  Prime,  by  the  carcass.

9.  Beef:  Middling  by  the  carcass.

10.  Mutton:  Prime  by  the  carcass.

11.  Mutton:  Middling  by  the  carcass.

12.  Pork:  Large  and  small,  average,  by  the  carcass.

13.  Bacon:  Waterford.

14.  Butter:  Priesland,  fine  to  finest.

15.  Sugar:  British  West  Indian  refinery.

16.  Coffee:  Eio,  Good  Channel.

17.  Tea:  Congon,  Common.

18.  Iron:  Scotch  pig.

19.  Iron:  Bars,  common.

20.  Copper:  Chile,  bars.

21.  Tin:  Straits.

22.  Lead:  English  pig.

23.  Coal:  Average  export  price.

24.  Cotton:  Middling  American.

25.  Jute:  Good  medium.

26.  Wool:  English,  Lincoln  Half  Hogs.

27.  Silk:  Tratlee.

28.  Hides:  Eiver  Plate,  Salted.

29.  Leather:  Crop  hides.

30.  Tallow:  Town.

31.  Oil:  Linseed.

32.  Seeds:  Linseeds.

33.  Petroleum:  Eefined.

34.  Soda:  Crystals.


American  Commodities
"Contract:  contract  grades,  cash."
Av.  ' '  spring  patents ' '  and  ' '  winter  straights. ' '
"By  sample."
"Oats:  cash."
"Corn:  No.  2,  cash."
"Burbank."
"Domestic,  choice."
Cattle  steers,  choice  to  extra.
' '  Fresh  native  sides. ' '
Sheep  wethers,  plain  to  choice.
' '  Mutton,  dressed. ' '
Hogs:  average.

Av.  of  ' '  short  clear  sides ' '  and  ' '  short  rib  sides. ' '
' '  Creamery,  extra,  N.  Y.  market. ' '
"89°  fair  refining."
"Eio,  no.  7."
"Formosa,  fine."
"Pig-iron." "Foundry,  no.  1."
"Bar  iron:  best  refined." Av.  "From  Mill"  and

"From  Store."
"Ingot,  lake."
"Tin:  pig."
"Lead:  pig."

' '  Bituminous. ' ' Av.  of  3  series.
"Upland,  middling."
"Eaw."

"Ohio,  medium  fieece. "
"Eaw:  Japan  filatures."
"Hides:  green  salted;  heavy  native  steers."
' '  Harness,  oak. ' '
"Tallow."
"Linseed  oil,  raw."
"Flaxseed,  no.  1."
"Eefined  for  export."
"Bicarbonate  of,  American."


2.  The  United  States  and  Fkance


10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.


French  Commodities
Wheat:  Ble  cote  ofiieiell.
Flour:  Parine  fleur.
Bread:  Pain,  Taxe  official  a  Paris.
Barley:  Orge,  marche  libre.
Oats:  Avoine,  cote  officiell.
Corn:  Mais,  mixed  d'Amerique.
Eye:  Seigle,  cote  officiell.
Eice:  Eiz,  rangoon.
Starch:  Fecules.
Hay:  Foin.

Beef:  Boeuf,  Halles  central.
Mutton:  Mouton,  Halles  central.
Pork:  Pore,  Halles  central.
Lard:  Saindoux,  Americain.
Butter:  Beurre,  moyen.


American  Commodities
Wheat,  cash.
Flour,  wheat,  average.
Bread,  loaf,  average.
Barley,  by  sample.
Oats,  cash.
Corn,  cash.
Eye,  no.  2  cash.
Eice,  domestic  choice.
Starch,  pure  ciorn.
Hay,  timothy  no.  1.
Beef,  fresh  native  sides  N.  Y.
Mutton  dressed.
Hogs,  average.
Lard,  prime  contract.
Butter,  average.


124


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


But  in  degree  and  occasionally  in  direction  of  movement  numerous  differ-
ences appear.  The  closest  agreement  is  that  between  England  and  Prance.
Indeed,  both  Sauerbeck's  and  Domergue's  series  in  Table  11  and  the  English
and  French  series  in  Table  12  accord  more  perfectly  than  do  the  two  American,
two  English,  or  two  French  series.  The  wider  discrepancy  between  the  English
and  French  series  which  appeared  in  1910  was  probably  caused  by  the  bad
French  harvests  in  that  year.


16.

17,
18,
19,
20,
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.

-29.
30.
31.
32.

33.

34.
35.
36.
37.
38.
39.
40.
41.
42.
43.


9.

10.
11.
12,
13.
14.
15.
16,
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.


Sugar:  toucre,  buit,  Eoux.

Sugar:  Sucre  raffiuS,  Ire  qualite.

Coflfee:  Gates  sautos.

Iron:  Pars  marcliands.

Copper:  Cuivre  (ling)  et  plaques  de  laminage.

Copper:  Cuivre  (Barres)  ordinaire.

Tin:  Etain  banka.

Lead:  Plomb  (m.  ord.)  livrable  a  Paris.

Zinc:  Zinc  de  Selesie.

Steel:  Acier,  rails.

Coal:  Charbou  du  nord,  TV  20  a  25%  sur  bateau.

Cotton:  Coton  tres  ord.  au  Havre.

Cotton:  Av.  of  "Coton  chaine  28  ord."  and  "Coton

trame  37  ord."
Cotton:  Coton,  tissu  90  cm.  68  port.  20  fils.
Jute:  Jute.

Wool:  Laine  peignee,  typel,  Eoub.  Tour.
Wool:  Av.  of  "Mis  de  laine  peignee  chaine  40-56

mm.  and  ' ' Ills  de  laine,  trame  60  c.  50/84  mm. ' '
Linen:  Fil  de  lin  no.  20.
Silk:  Soie  greges,  Italic  2e  ord  10/12.
Hides:  Boeuf,  cuirs  bruts.
Rubber:  Caoutchouc,  march^  d'Anvers.
Tallow:  Suifs,  Paris.
Oil:  Huile,  lin.
Alcohol:  Alcool,  3/6  nord.
Glycerin:  Glycerine  brut,  28°.

Chemicals:  Produits  ehemiques:  sulfurique  aeide  66°.
Petroleum:  Petrole  amerieain.
Lime:  Produits  ehemiques:  chlorure  de  chaux

105/110.


Sugar,  89°  fair  refining.

Sugar,  granulated.

Coffee,  Eio  no.  7.

Bar  iron,  from  store,  Philadelphia  market.

Copper  sheet,  hot-rolled  (base  sizes).

Copper,  ingot.

Tin  pig.

Lead  pig.

Spelter  western.

Steel  rails.

Coal,  bituminous  Pittsburg.

Cotton,  upland  middling.

Cotton  yarns,  average.
Sheetings,  average.
Jute,  raw.
Wool,  average.
Worsted  yarns,  average.

Linen  shoe  thread  105,  Barbour.

Silk,  raw  Italian  classical.

Hides,  green  salted,  packers'  heavy  native  steers.

Rubber,  Para  Island.

Tallow.

Linseed  oil,  raw.

Alcohol,  grain.

Glycerin,  refined.

Sulphuric  acid,  66°.

Petroleum  refined  for  export.

Lime,  common.


3.  The  United  States  and  Germany


German  Commodities
Weizen,  Miinchen.
Weizenmehl,  Danzig.
Roggen,  Miinchen.
Roggenmehl,  Danzig.
Gerste,  Miinchen.
Hafer,  Miinchen.
Reis,  Bremen.
Rohzucker,  Magdeburg.
RaflSnade,  Magdeburg.
Kaffee,  Bremen.
Kartoffelspiritus,  Hamburg.
Rohtabak  (Kentucky),  Bremen.
Rindvieh,  Berlin.
Hammel,  Berlin.
Schweine,  Berlin.
Sehmalz,  Bremen.
Heringe  (Norweg.),  Stettin.
Roheisen  (Giesserei-),  Breslau.
Kupfer,  Frankfurt  a.  M.
Blei,  Berlin.
Zinn,  Hamburg.
Zink,  Breslau.

Steinkohlen (niederschles.),  Breslau.
Steinkohlen  (Puddel-),  Dortmund.
Petroleum,  Hamburg.
Baumwolle,  Hamburg.
Wolle,  Berlin.
Rohseide  (Organs.)  Krefeld.


American  Commodities
Wheat,  cash.
Flour,  wheat,  average.
Eye,  no.  2,  cash.
Flour,  rye.
Barley.
Oats,  cash.
Rice.

Sugar,  89°  fair  refining.
Sugar,  granulated.
Coffee.

Proof  spirits.
Tobacco,  plug.
Cattle,  average.
Sheep,  average.
Hogs,  average.
Lard,  prime  contract.
Fish,  herring.
Pig-iron,  foundry,  no.  2.
Copper,  ingot.
Lead,  pig.
Tin,  pig.
Zinc,  sheet.

Coal,  bituminous,  Georges  Creek,  f .  o.  b.,  N.  Y.
Coal,  bituminous,  Pittsburg.
Petroleum,  refined,  for  export.
Cotton.

Wool,  average.
Silk,  raw,  Italian  classical.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


125


CHART 9 .

Relative  Prices at  Wholesale of  34  Commodities
IN  THE  United  States  and England.

140

1890-1910.

/

130

/

IZO

110

100

90

ENGLAND

/

V-

/

120
110
100
^0

-

\

/

\

/

t

\
\

\

/
/
/

/

w

k  \

/

1/

\

■-<-,

—

—

/

^~^.

\  \

^:^s»

\

/

(^

y

80


\

/

m

1890 '91 '92 '33 '94 '95 '96 '97 "98 '99 1900 'oi '02 to '04 'o5 '06 '07 'Og '09 1910

CHART 10.

Relative Prices at  wholesale  of  43 Commodities

140

in  the  United States  and France

1890-  1910.

■- 1 A 1

/

150

/.

\

/

1

120
1.0
100

France

y

/ —

/

1

-I —

120

no

100

so

\

/

V

y

^

y

y  1

'  1

1

1
1
1

,'''

'•»^.

\
>

\

**•*'

V

/

,7

^■».,

.^''

—

y

N

:::>^

S^-

.'''

'7

■1

yo

80

\

—

/

80

1890 61 '92

'93 '94 '95 '96 '91 '98 '99 1900 'Ol '02 '03 '04 '05 Ot 'OT 08 09 1910

126


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


CHART II

Relative Prices at  Wholesale of as  Commodities

140

IN  THE United  States  and Germany

I89O-I9I0

/

V-

— y

^

no

UNITED STATES

GERMANY

y

^''\^

/

120

/:

\

."'

lao

X

1
/

'■■-

v^ —

110

roo

90

^

\  \

/

^

/

/

no

100
90
BO

\\
\\

V

I

J

/

\

—

/

\  \
\\
\\
\\
\\

V

\--

_^*»'

A

/


eo

N

^

/

1

1890  '9

92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 "99 1900 "01 "OE" '03 '04 '05 '06 07 '08 'OS 1910

TABLE  12

Index  Numbers  tor  Identical  Lists  of  Commodities  at  Wholesale  in  the  United  States  and  England,  the
United  States  and  Prance,  and  the  United  States  and  Germany. By  Years,  1890-1910

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  ^  100


No  of

United  States

and

England

United  States

and

France

United  States

and

Germany

commodit

Year
1890

es  34
United
States

115

34

England
109

43
United
States

114

43

France
110

28

United

States

114

28  '

Germany
113

1891

116

110

114

108

117

112

1892

106

104

107

102

105

103

1893

106

102

104

104

104

99

1894

96

94

94

96

92

91

1895

94

94

93

93

92

91

1896

83

92

87

91

86

91

1897

87

93

88

93

88

93

1898

94

97

94

97

95

99

1899

103

105

105

106

106

106

1900

111

117

111

113

112

112

1901

111

108

110

106

110

107

1902

119

106

113

104

116

106

1903

113

106

113

107

117

106

1904

112

107

114

106

117

,105

1905

114

111

117

109

120

113

1906

121

119

122

119

124

122

1907

128

124

130

126

134

128

1908

122

113

122

113

126

120

1909

129

114

129

116

131

119

1910

135

121

136

127

133

122

Averages
1900-09

118

113

118

100

100

100

1890-99

100

100

100

112

121

114

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


127


TABLE  12— (Concluded)
Differences  Among  the  Several  Series


Differences  between  the'

1st
and  2d
American
Year series

1890 +  1

1st

and  3d

American

series

+ 1

2d

and  3d

American

series

0

English

and
French
series

—  1

English
and

German
series
—  4

French

and

German

series

—  3

American
and

English
series

+  6

American

and

French

series

+  4

American

and

German

series

+ 1

1891

+  2

—  1

—  3

+

2

—  2

—

4

+

6

+

6

+  5

1892

—  1

+ 1

+  2

+

2

+ 1

—

1

+

2

+

5

+  2

1893

+  2

+  2

0

—

2

+  3

+

5

+

4

0

+  5

1894

+  2

+  4

+  2

—

2

+ 3

+

5

+

2

—

2

+  1

1895

+  1

+  2

+  1

+

1

+  3

+

2

0

0

+  1

1896

—  4

—  3

+  1

+

1

+  1

0

—

9

—

4

—  5

1897

—  1

—  1

0

0

0

0

—

6

—

5

—  5

1898

0

—  1

—  1

0

—  2

—

2

—

3

—

3

—  4

1899

—  2

—  3

—  1

—

1

—  1

0

—

2

—

1

0

1900

0

—  1

—  1

+

4

+  5

+

1

—

6

—

2

0

1901

+  1

+  1

0

+

2

+  1

—

1

+

3

+

4

+  3

1902

+  6

+  3

—  3

+

2

0

—

2

■ +13

+

9

+10

1903

0

—  4

—  4

—

1

0

+

1

+

7

+

6

+11

1904

—  2

—  5

—  3

+

1

+ 2

+

1

+

5

+

8

+  12

1905

—  3

—  6

—  3

+

2

2

—

4

+

3

+

8

+  7

1906

—  1

—  3

—  2

0

—  3

—

3

+

2

+

3

+  2

1907

—  2

—  6

—  4

—

2

—  4

—

2

+

4

+

4

+  6

1908

0

—  4

—  4

0

—  7

—

7

+

9

+

9

+  6

1909

0

—  2

—  2

—

2

—  5

—

3

+15

+13

+12

1910

—  1

+ 2

+  3

—

6

—  1

+

5

+14

+

9

+11

Sums*

31

54

37

28

49

47

107

96

98

Maxima*

6

6

4

4

7

7

15

13

12

Averages* 1.6

2.7

1.9

1.4

2.5

2.4

5.4

4.8

4.9

*  1890-1909.

Between  Germany  on  the  one  hand  and  England  and  France  on  the  other
hand,  somewhat  wider  differences  appear  in  both  tables.  (1)  Prices  fell  faster
in  Germany  from  1890  to  1894  than  in  its  neighbors,  but  arrested  their  decline
somewhat  earlier.  (2)  Prom  3894  to  1896  the  German  price  level  was  substan-
tially stable,  while  the  English  and  French  levels  continued  to  sag.  (3)  The
advance  in  1904-07  was  distinctly  greater  in  Germany,  and  (4)  the  fall  in  1907-
08  was  distinctly  less,  but  (5)  it  continued  in  1908-09  when  both  French  and
English  prices  turned  upward.  On  the  Avhole,  during  this  period  of  twenty
years,  the  German  price  level  has  fluctuated  through  a  slightly  wider  range  than
the  English  or  French.

Much  more  marked  are  the  differences  between  price  fluctuations  in  the
three  European  countries  and  in  the  United  States.  The  improved  Gibson
series  differs  from  Sauerbeck's,  Domergue's  and  the  new  German  series  by
nearly  twice  the  margins  found  between  any  of  the  last  three. Even  more


128  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

striking  is  the  evidence  afforded  by  Table  12.  Here  the  three  American  index
numbers,  of  dissimilar  constitution,  show  almost  exactly  the  same  total,  maxi-
mum, and  average  differences  among  themselves  as  do  the  three  European
index  numbers,  also  of  dissimilar  constitution.  But  when  comparison  is  made
between  the  three  pairs  of  similarly  constituted  index  numbers  for  the  United
States  and  the  European  countries,  the  total,  maximum,  and  average  differences
are  found  to  be  more  than  twice  as  great  as  in  the  former  cases.

These  results  concerning  the  fluctuations  of  prices  at  wholesale  accord
perfectly  with  the  results  reached  in  the  chapter  upon  the  annals  of  business.
There  it  was  found  that  while  business  cycles  have  pursued  broadly  similar
courses  in  America  and  Europe,  the  differences  between  their  courses  in  the
United  States  and  in  the  three  European  countries  have  been  much  wider  than
the  corresponding  differences  among  their  coiirses  in  England,  France,  and
Germany.  Now  it  appears  that  the  l3road  agreement  and  the  differences  in
detail  between  the  courses  of  business  cycles  have  been  accompanied  by  strik-
ingly similar  agreements  and  differences  in  the  movements  of  wholesale  prices.
The  United  States  again  is  found  to  be  less  closely  tied  by  economic  bonds  to
Europe  than  the  three  European  countries  are  tied  to  each  other.

In  1890  the  wholesale  price  level  stood  relatively  higher  in  America  than
in  Europe,  and  this  position  it  maintained  until  1893.  But  the  severe  crisis
of  that  year  in  America  was  felt  only  as  an  aggravation  of  the  depression  ruling
in  Europe.  Accordingly,  American  prices  fell  far  more  rapidly  than  European
prices  in  1893-96,  and  reached  a  relatively  lower  level.  The  tardiness  with
which  America  recuperated  from  depression  prevented  American  prices  from
catching  up  with  the  European  level  until  after  1900.  But  since  the  crisis  of
that  year  was  much  less  severe  on  this  than  on  the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic,
the  fall  of  American  prices  in  1900-01  lagged  behind  the  European  fall.  More-
over, the  prompt  return  of  prosperity  in  America,  while  Europe  continued  to
suffer  business  depression,  brought  with  it  a  rise  of  prices  in  America  while
prices  continued  to  sag  in  Europe.  Thus  the  American  price  level  became
relatively  higher  than  the  European — a  position  which  it  has  held  ever  since.
America's  lead  was  cut  down  by  the  more  rapid  rise  of  European  prices  in
1904-06,  and  increased  again  hj  the  more  rapid  rise  of  American  prices  in
1906-07.  Finally,  the  fall  of  prices  after  the  crisis  of  1907  was  slighter  in
America  and  the  rise  in  1909  was  much  more  marked.  At  the  end  of  the  period,
therefore,  the  difference  between  the  American  and  European  price  levels  was
greater  than  at  any  previous  time  covered  by  the  tables.  The  fact  that  the
United  States  had  become  relatively  the  worst  country  in  which  to  buy  and
relatively  the  best  country  in  which  to  sell  may  have  had  something  to  do  with
making  1910  a  year  of  contraction  in  American  business,  while  it  was  a  year
of  rapid  expansion  in  the  business  of  England  and  Germany.  But  consider-
ation of  such  questions  belongs  to  a  later  stage  of  the  investigation.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


129


The  materials  for  an  international  comparison  of  retail  price  movements
are  less  satisfactory.  The  British  Board  of  Trade  publishes  a  weighted  index
number  of  the  retail  prices  of  23  foods  in  London  which  now  covers  the  years
1895-1910.^'  This  service  can  be  pieced  back  to  1890  by  the  aid  of  an  experi-
mental series  compiled  by  Mr.  George  H.  Wood.''  With  this  rather  dubious
retail  index  number  may  be  compared  Sauerbeck's  figures  for  the  relative  prices
of  19  foods  at  wholesale.  For  Prance,  M.  Lucien  March  has  recently  published
a  table  showing  the  retail  prices  charged  by  a  railway  economat  in  Paris.
Among  the  52  commodities  in  his  list  there  are  36  articles  of  food  for  which
actual  prices  are  given  in  every  year  from  1890  to  1910.'"  A  wholesale  series
for  food  prices  in  France  can  be  made  from  data  for  the  23  articles  of  food


TABLE  13
Relative  Peices  of  Foods  at  Retail  and  Wholesale  in  the  United  States,  England,  and  Prance.

By  Years,  1890-1910


A-i

r'erage

actual  prices  in  1890

1-99  =

:100

XT.._ivn_  ^e

At  retail

A

United  States

A

England

France

A

JNumDer  oi  r

commodities  30
United
Year States

23
England

36
France

30

At

retail

54

At

wholesale

23

At

retail

19

At
wholesale

36

At

retail

23

At

wholesale

1890 102

104

103

102

112

104

107

103

106

1891 103

105

105

103

116

105

112

105

112

1892 102

105

104

102

104

105

107

104

105

1893 104

101

107

104

110

101

105

107

107

1894 100

99

102

100

100

99

96

102

101

1895 98

95

99

98

95

95

93

99

94

1896 96

93

97

96

84

93

91

97

87

1897 96

98

91

96

88

98

95

91

91

1898 98

102

95

98

94

102

99

95

100

1899 100

98

96

100

98

98

95

96

97

1900 102

101

95

102

104

101

101

95

98

1901 105

103

96

105

106

103

98

96

96

1902 111

103

95

111

111

103

98

95

97

1903 111

105

95

111

107

105

96

95

99

1904 112

106

96

112

107

106

99

96

97

1905 113

105

97

113

109

105

101

97

97

1906 116

105

101

116

113

105

101

101

99

1907 121

107

103

121

118

107

105

103

109

1908

110

105

121

110

105

105

101

1909

110

100

125

110

107

100

101

1910

112

102

129

112

111

102

107

Averages
1890-99 100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

106

98

112

106

101

98

99

31  Board  of  Trade  Labour  Gazette,  January,  1911,  p.  4.

32  "Real  Waees  and  the  Standard  of  Comfort  since  1850,"  Journal  of  the  Boyal  Statistical  Society  March,
1909  especially  pp.  94,  95,  and  103.  Wood's  figures  for  1890-94  have  been  shifted  from  the  basis  of  prices
in  1850  to  the  Board  of  Trade's  basis  of  prices  in  1900;  and  then  the  combined  series  has  been  shifted  to
the  basis  of  average  prices  in  1890-99.  . ,, ^  7 j t

33  "Influence  des  variations  des  prix  sur  le  mouvement  des  depenses  menageres  ^  Pans,  Journal  de  la
Societe  de  Statistique  de  Paris,  April,  1910,  pp.  162-163.  In  computing  the  index  number  m  Table  13,  the
average  of  the  relative  prices  of  three  kinds  of  sugar  was  used.


130  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

quoted  by  La  reforms  economique.^*  No  systematic  German  material  of  suffi-
cient extent  to  justify  the  computation  of  an  index  number  is  available/'  Since
the  commodities  included  in  the  above  retail  and  wholesale  lists  for  England
and  Prance  differ,  the  American  series  selected  for  comparison  are  the  Bureau
of  Labor's  simple  averages  for  30  foods  at  retail  and  54  foods  at  wholesale/"
A  minute  comparison  of  series  so  lacking  in  uniformity  as  the  foregoing
would  be  out  of  place.  But  certain  broad  conclusions  suggested  by  the  table
may  be  trusted.  (1)  Retail  prices  in  all  three  countries  have  held  a  more  even
course  than  wholesale  prices,  rising  less  during  prosperity,  and  falling  still  less
during  depression.  But  even  the  wholesale  prices  of  foods  do  not  reflect  the
course  of  business  cycles  with  accuracy,  because  they  consist  almost  wholly  of
organic  goods."  (2)  In  the  United  States  and  England  relative  prices  at  retail
were  lower  than  relative  prices  at  wholesale  in  1890,  and  higher  in  1907-10.
This  change  has  come  about  gradually  because  the  lagging  of  retail  prices
behind  wholesale  is  more  pronounced  upon  the  fall  than  upon  the  rise.  (3)  The
advance  of  food  prices  during  the  second  decade  was  distinctly  greater  in  the
United  States  than  in  England  or  Prance.

II.  The  Peices  of  Labor — Wages

1.  The  American  Data

Por  measuring  changes  from  year  to  year  in  the  prices  paid  for  labor,  the
largest  collection  of  data  is  that  published  by  the  United  States  Bureau  of
Labor  in  its  Bulletins  of  July,  1904-08.'^  The  returns  for  1907,  for  example,
show  the  wages  per  hour  received  by  351 ,000  persons,  following  333  occupations
in  4,169  establishments.  But  extensive  as  this  material  is,  it  still  falls  far  short
of  representing  the  prices  of  all  important  kinds  of  labor.  Practically  all  the
establishments  from  which  pay-rolls  are  obtained  are  engaged  in  some  line  of
manufacturing.  But  such  great  branches  of  employment  as  farming,  railroad-
ing, mining,  lumbering,  general  contracting,  salesmanship,  and  clerical  work
are  not  covered.  Thus  the  information  concerning  the  prices  of  labor,  like  that
concerning  the  prices  of  conunodities,  consists  of  samples,  drawn  from  a  limited
field,  and  offered  as  representatives  of  a  vastly  larger  munber  of  prices.  Por
present  purposes,  however,  it  is  fortunate  that  manufacturing  is  the  field  best
covered ;  for,  as  has  been  pointed  out,  industrial  centers  exhibit  the  phenomena
of  business  cycles  in  pronounced  degree.^"

34  Starch,  butter,  coflfee,  coooa,  soda,  pork,  beef,  mutton,  veal,  oats,  barley,  rye,  rice,  corn,  wheat,  flour,  bread,
lard,  tallow,  sugar  (raw  and  refined),  syrup,  wine.

35  The  Statistisches  JaJirhucJi  fur  das  Deutsche  Reich  gives  the  ' '  market  prices ' '  for  five  or  six  staples.

36  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  July,  1908,  p.  195.

37  Compare  section  6,  above.

38  See  also  the  Bureau 's  Nineteenth  Annual  Report.
30  See  Chapter  II,  ii,  1.


MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES  131

But,  even  as  a  representative  of  wages  in  manufacturing  industries,  the
Bureau  of  Labor's  results  have  been  questioned.  For  they  have  seemed  to
disagree  with  the  results  of  an  investigation  into  wages  in  1890  and  1900  made
by  the  Census  Office.  While  the  Bureau  of  Labor  found  that  relative  wages
per  hour  advanced  from  100.3  in  1890  to  105.5  in  1900,  Professor  Davis  R.
Dewey's  census  report  on  Employees  and  Wages  indicated  that  the  cases  in
which  wages  had  been  reduced  between  these  two  years  were  not  less  numerous
than  the  cases  in  which  wages  had  been  raised.  The  rather  vague  impression
of  a  discrepancy  left  by  Professor  Dewey's  textual  summaries  was  rendered
definite  in  1907  by  Professor  Henry  L.  Moore's  paper  on  "The  Variability  of
Wages."*"  Basing  his  work  on  Dewey's  data,  Moore  computed  the  average
rate  of  wages  in  thirty  selected  industries  in  1890  and  1900,  and  found  that
relative  wages  had  declined  from  100.0  to  99.6.  While  neither  of  these  careful
investigators  called  attention  to  the  variance  of  their  results  from  those  of  the
Bureau  of  Labor,  or  sought  to  criticize  the  latter,  others  were  less  cautious.
For  three  or  four  years  it  was  generally  thought  that  the  bureau's  figures
exaggerate  the  rise  of  wages  by  several  points.

Close  comparison  between  Professor  Moore's  and  the  bureau's  tables,  how-
ever, shows  that  the  apparent  discrepancy  is  due  almost  wholly  to  differences
in  scope  and  method  of  construction.*^  When  these  differences  are  eliminated
and  the  bureau's  data  are  worked  up  by  Moore's  methods,  they  yield  relative
wages  of  100.0  in  1890,  and  100.3  in  1900 — figures  which  are  almost  the  same
as  Moore's  relative  wages  of  100.0  and  99.6.  Clearly,  therefore,  there  is  no
ground  for  distrusting  the  bureau's  original  data.  Their  trustworthiness  is
confirmed,  not  discredited,  by  proper  comparison  with  the  data  gathered  by
Professor  Dewey  for  the  Census  Office.

But  the  question  remains  whether  the  bureau's  methods  of  computing  index
numbers — ^methods  which  show  a  considerable  advance  in  wages  between  1890
and  1900, — or  Moore's  methods,  which  reduce  this  advance  almost  to  zero,  are
to  be  preferred.  Professor  Moore's  primary  object  was  to  measure  the  varia-
bility of  wages  at  two  different  dates,  and  he  adapted  his  methods  to  this  end.
The  bureau,  on  the  contrary,  aimed  to  measure  the  average  change  of  wages
from  one  year  to  the  next,  and  chose  its  means  accordingly.  Each  set  of
methods,  therefore,  has  its  justification.  But  the  bureau's  set  is  preferable
for  the  present  purpose,  because  this  purpose  is  substantially  that  which  the

io  Political  Science  Quarterly,  March,  1907,  pp.  61-73.

41  In  detail  these  differences  are  as  follows:  Moore  took  wages  per  week,  the  bureau  wages  per  hour;
Moore  excluded  females  the  bureau  included  them;  Moore  covered  30  industries,  the  bureau  (m  its  Nineteenth
Annual  Report)  covered  56;  Moore  weighted  his  figures  by  actual  numbers  employed,  the  bureau  did  not
weight  its  figures  for  different  occupations  in  striking  averages  for  each  industry,  but  did  weight  its  figures
for  different  industries  in  striking  grand  averages;  finally,  Moore  computed  averages  m  one  way,  the  bureau
in  another.  Moore  began  by  tabulating  the  number  of  men  receiving  $2-3  a  week,  $3-4,  $4-5,  and  so  on.
Then  he  multiplied  the  mean  wage  in  each  of  these  groups  ($2.50,  $3.50,  $4.50)  by  the  corresponding  num-
ber of  employees  To  find  the  average  actual  wages,  he  divided  the  sums  of  these  products  by  the  total  number
of  men  represented,  and  then  turned  the  average  actual  wages  into  percentages.  The  bureau,  on  the  other
hand  turned  its  actual  wages  per  hour  into  percentages  at  the  outset  and  then  made  arithmetic  means  from
these  percentages  by  the  curious  combination  of  simple  and  weighted  averaging  which  has  been  stated.


132  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

bureau  had  in  view.  That  is,  we  need  a  measure  of  the  average  change  in  the
prices  of  labor  comparable  with  the  preceding  measures  of  average  change  in
the  prices  of  commodities.

In  one  respect,  however,  the  bureau 's  methods  of  analysis  may  be  improved.
Each  occupation  should  be  weighted  by  the  number  of  persons  engaged  in  fol-
lowing it,  instead  of  being  treated  as  having  the  same  importance  as  other
occupations  followed  by  many  less  or  many  more  people.*'  In  practice  this
change  proves  to  make  little  difference  in  the  results ;  but  it  has  been  adopted
in  constructing  such  of  the  following  tables  as  are  new.  The  numbers  used  in
weighting  each  series  are  obtained  by  first  giving  every  industry  a  weight
proportionate  to  the  number  of  wage-earners  engaged  in  it  according  to  the
manufacturing  census  of  1900,  and,  second,  dividing  the  weight  for  every
industry  among  its  several  occupations  in  accordance  with  the  average  number
of  persons  reported  by  the  Bureau  of  Labor  as  employed  in  the  decade  1890-99.*'


2.  The  Prices  of  Labor  in  American  Manufacturing  Industries

The  bureau's  grand  average  and  its  results  for  eleven  industries  employing
over  100,000  persons  according  to  the  census  of  1900  are  reproduced  in  the  next
table.**  The  figures  indicate  that  the  prices  of  labor  are  influenced  by  changes
in  business  conditions,  but  in  less  measure  than  the  prices  of  commodities,  even
at  retail.  The  general  average  declines  after  the  panic  of  1893,  recovers  in
1896,  advances  in  1898-1903,  makes  very  little  gain  in  the  dull  year  1904,  and
then  rises  rapidly  again  in  1904-07.  But  the  degree  of  rise  and  fall  is  consid-
erably less  than  that  of  commodities  at  wholesale,  and  just  about  the  same  as
that  of  foods  at  retail  (see  Chart  13).

On  examining  the  figures  for  separate  industries,  one  finds  that  there  is
less  variety  of  fiuctuation  than  in  commodity  markets.  But  still  considerable
differences  appear  between,  say,  cotton  mills  and  foundries,  or  building  trades
and  shoe  factories.  However,  no  industry  escaped  a  reduction  of  wages  after
1893,  and  none  failed  to  register  a  large  advance  between  1894  and  1907.

In  making  Table  15,  the  series  have  been  classified,  not  by  industries,  but
by  sex  and  rates  of  pay  in  1890-99.  The  new  system  of  weighting,  spoken
of  above,  has  been  introduced  into  this  compilation;  but  the  final  results  do
not  differ  from  those  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor  by  more  than  one  point  in  any
year.  Female  wage-earners  are  shown  to  have  received  a  greater  relative
increase  of  pay  than  any  group  of  men  represented  by  the  table.  This  result
may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  nearly  a  quarter  of  the  women  represented  by  the
data  were  employed  in  the  cotton  industry,  where,  according  to  Table  14,  the

■»=  For  the  bureau's  method  of  weighting  its  series  see  the  preceding  footnote.

is  The  topic  of  this  section  is  discussed  at  greater  length  in  "The  Trustworthiness  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor's
Index  Number  oi  Wages,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  May,  1911,  pp.  613-620.
*i  Compiled  from  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  July,  1808,  Table  III,  pp.  126-132.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


133


ThouB.  of
employees  3813


TABLE  14
Eelative  Wages  per  Hoint  in  Selected  Manufacturing  Industries  of  the

By  Years,  1890-1907
Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  wages  per  hour  in  1890-99  =


143


374


Year
1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907


Average

of  41  Boots Building

industries  and  shoes trades


100
100
101
101
98
98
100
100
100
102
106
108
112
116
117
119
124
129


98
96
98
101
100
101
101
103
102
102
105
105
109
116
117
118
120
124


218  191

Car

building,  Clothing,

steam  factory

railroad  product


97
98
100
100
98
98
100
101
103
105
110
115
121
127
130
132
140
145


103

102

102

104

98

98

98

98

98

100

101

102

106

112

116

115

119

124


100
100
100
100
97
99
100
100
102
103
103
107
103
106
110
111
115
116


308

Cotton
goods

103

99

100

104

97

97

105

101

97

97

109

110

116

123

120

126

140

158


350  100  222

Foundry

and
machine  Iron

shop Furniture and  steel*


United  States.
100

283 103


99

100

103

102

99

99

101

100

99

99

102

105

108

112

114

114

118

121


99

102

103

101

99

97

98

100

99

103

103

110

117

118

120

122

126

127


109

109

106

102

93

95

97

93

93

103

111

114

122

128

117

121

128

131


Lumber
103
102
102
102

98

97

97

97

99
102
104
107
110
113
114
118
124
128


Tobacco,
cigars

100

101

100

100

99

97

99
102
101
101
101
113
110
117
119
121
131
132


126
Woolen

and

worsted

goods

98

99
100
102

97

97
101
100
103
104
110
111
114
115
116
118
124
132


*"  Mean  of  Bar  iron,  Bessemer  converting,  and  Blast  furnaces.


advance  of  wages  has  been  especially  rapid ;  or  the  rapid  advance  of  wages  in
the  cotton  industry  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  higher  rates  have  been  demanded
by  women  and  girls.  Among  men,  the  highest  priced  workers  have  secured  the
most  rapid  increase  in  pay,  and  the  lowest  priced  the  least  rapid.  Perhaps
these  differences  are  connected  with  differences  in  the  scope  and  efficiency  of
trade-union  organization  among  wage-earners  on  the  higher  and  lower  planes.
Finally,  the  scope  and  distribution  of  divergences  from  the  general  trend
of  wage  changes  are  set  forth  in  Table  16.  That  the  range  covered  hj  the
relative  prices  of  labor  is  narrower  and  the  degree  of  concentration  around  the
median  is  greater  than  with  wholesale  commodity  prices,  appears  on  comparing
these  decils  with  those  of  Table  8.  The  average  margins  between  the  deeils  run
as  follows  in  number  of  points:


Wages

Wholesale  prices  ....


"3 '2


23.1
32.5


2.3
7.6


1.4
5.2


4.2


CO

00

05

1.1

1.1

1.4

1.8

3.0

41.4

3.6

3.9

4.4

5.8

12.2

54.7

134  MEMOIES  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

This  table  shows  also  that  the  very  deviations  from  the  general  trend  of
fluctuations  are  regular  and  orderlj^  in  the  case  of  prices  of  labor  as  in  the  case
of  prices  of  commodities.  For  each  one  of  the  decils  undergoes  changes  strik-
ingly similar  in  character  to  the  changes  undergone  by  the  median,  or  by  the
arithmetic  mean  of  Table  15.  Finally,  the  decreased  margins  between  the  decils
in  1894-96  and  the  increased  margins  in  later  years  show  that  relative  wages,
like  relative  prices,  are  squeezed  together  by  the  pressure  of  business  depression
and  spring  apart  when  this  pressure  is  relaxed  by  the  return  of  prosperity. ■''

TABLE  15

Relative  Wages  per  Hour  of  Employees  in  Forty-one  Manufacturing  Industries,  Classified  According  to

Sex  and  Average  Actual  Wages  per  Hour  in  1890-99. By  Years,  1890-1907

Arithmetic  means,  weighted  by  numbers  employed  in  each  occupation  and  each  industry. Average  actual


wages

per  hour  in

1890-99 :

=  100

Females

A

Males

Both

sexes

A

Proportionate
numbers 1895

Nearly  all
less  than  20c
Year per  hour

3305

Less

than  20c

per  hour

3902

20-34. 99c
per  hour

898

35c
per  hour
upward

8105

All

rates  of

pay

10,000

New
results

Bureau  of
Labor

1890

99

102

100

100

101

101

100

1891

100

102

100

101

101

101

100

1892

100

102

101

101

101

101

101

]893

102

102

101

101

101

101

101

1894

99

97

98

98

98

98

98

1895

98

98

99

97

98

98

98

1896

102

99

99

99

99

100

100

1897

100

98

100

100

99

99

100

1898

101

99

100

100

100

100

100

1899

100

102

102

104

102

102

102

1900

104

105

105

106

105

105

106

1901

107

107

107

110

108

108

108

1902

111

111

111

114

111

111

112

1903

114

114

116

118

115

115

116

1904

115

113

117

120

116

116

117

1905

119

115

.118

122

117

118

119

1906

127

120

123

126

122

123

124

1907

136

126

127

130

127

129

129

4s  Of  course,  these  figures  for  relative  rates  of  pay  per  hour  cannot  safely  be  accepted  as  indices  of  changes
in  cost  of  labor  to  employers,  or  in  money  incomes  to  wage-earners.  The  latter  topics  receive  attention  in
Chapter  XI,  i,  3,  and  Chapter  XIII,  ii,  1.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


135


120

no

100
90

Chart \z.
Relative  wages per  hour of Male
IN  41 Manufacturing
1890  - 1907.

AND Female
Industries.

Employees

140
130
120
110
100
90

Males

t

/
f

—  — —

— FEmalcs
- — Both  Sexes

1

^

/'

1^-

^

*j?

y

•--.

^^

^^

^

^'

•f^

X;

d^

A*^

1890 "91 '92 '93 '94 '35 '96 '97 "98 '99 1900 '01 "OZ '03 '04 '05 'OG '07

120

110

100

90

CHART

Relative  Prices  of  Labor

15.

AND

OF

Commodities

140
130
IZO

no

100
90

AT RETAIL  AND WHOLESALE IN THE UNITED STATES.

1890-1907.

labor-  relative  prices  per  hr.  in  4.1  mfg.  indostrl
Commodities  at  retail  -  30  staple foods

-

/

V


•

••..

•.

#
*

2

^

f

^

\

.„„.

1

^

k

/

•

^^

<

*


,-"

•


•<

,.••

1890 '91 '92 '93 "94 '95 'ge '91 '98 '93 1900 *0i "oz M '04 'o5 '06 '07

136  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  16

Decils  of  Relative  Wages  per  Hour  in  Forty-one  Manufacturing  Industries  of  the  United  States.
Weighted  by  Number  of  Employees  in  Each  Occupation  and  Industry. By  Years,  1890-1907

Average  actual  wages  per  hour  in  1890-99  =  100


Year

Lowest

relative

wage

1st
decil

2a
decil

3d

decil

4th
decil

Median

6th
decil

7th
decil

8th
decil

9th
decil

Highest
relative
wage

1890

82

97

98

99

99

100

101

102

103

105

126

1891

84

97

98

99

99

100

101

102

103

105

123

1892

84

98

99

99

100

101

101

102

103

105

120

1893

79

98

99

100

100

101

102

102

104

106

117

1894

85

94

96

97

98

98

99

99

100

101

114

1895

74

95

97

97

98

98

99

99

100

101

128

1896

80

97

98

99

99

100

100

100

101

103

127

1897

78

95

97

99

99

100

100

101

101

102

121

1898

80

96

98

98

99

100

101

101

102

105

116

1899

75

97

99

100

101

102

103

104

105

106

127

1900

72

99

101

103

103

105

106

107

110

110

134

1901

77

102

103

104

106

107

108

110

112

114

138

1902

74

103

106

109

110

111

112

114

115

120

165

1903

73

107

110

112

113

113

115

117

120

125

186

1904

75

108

110

113

113

114

116

119

121

127

171

1905

75

108

112

114

115

117

118

121

125

130

200

1906

76

111

115

118

120

122

124

127

131

137

276

1907

76

113

120

122

125

127

129

134

137

145

304

3.  The  Prices  of  Labor  in  England

England  alone  among  our  foreign  countries  possesses  comprehensive
statistics  of  wages  for  the  period  since  1890.'"'  Table  17  reproduces  the  index
number  of  wages  compiled  by  the  Board  of  Trade,  and  indicates  sufficiently
the  scope  of  the  data.  While  agriculture  and  coal  mining  are  included,  the
manufacturing  industries  are  by  no  means  so  well  represented  as  in  the
American  material.

English  wages  pursue  a  course  far  more  even  than  do  prices  at  wholesale.
But  when  compared  with  the  Board  of  Trade's  series  for  the  retail  prices  of
food  the  difference  is  less  marked.  Wages  fell  less  than  the  cost  of  food  in
1890-95,  but  rose  more  rapidly  in  1896-1900.  On  the  other  hand,  wages  fell  in
1900-03  while  the  retail  prices  of  food  were  rising  slowly.  In  1905-07  working-
men  regained  part  of  this  lost  ground;  for  wages  went  up  much  faster  than
food  prices.  But  after  the  crisis  they  suffered  doubly — wages  fell  slightly  and
the  prices  of  food  advanced  (see  Chart  15).


40  The  best  German  material  is  that  compiled  by  Dr.  R.  Kuczynski,  Die  Entwieklung  der  gewerhlichen  Lohne
seit  der  Begrundung  des  Deutschen  Beiches,  Berlin,  1909.  But  Kuczynski  does  not  consider  his  data  full  enough
to  justify  the  compilation  of  averages  for  large  groups  of  industries.  A  few  French  aeries  are  published  in
the  Annuaire  statistique  de  France.


MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


137


CHART 14.

RANGE  CXMRED  BY  THE  FUUCTUATIONS

IN  THE  RELATIVE  PRICES OF  LABOR

PER  HOUR  IN  41  MANLFACTURING  INDUSTRIES

1890-1907


HIGHE5T RELATIVE WAGE

9"' DECIL.

8* DECIL.

7* DECIL.

6"' DECIL

MEDIAN.

4" DECIL.

3" DECIL

2"^ DECIL.

I  •' DECIL

LOWEST RELATIVE WAGE


2B0


Z60


240


1890 sr 'S2 33 34 35 3C 51 38 '93 1300 01 02 03 04 '05 OS 07 OS 03 1910


138


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  17

General  Course  of  Wages  in  the  United  Kingdom
By  Years,  1890-1910

Average  rates  in  1890-99  =  100


Building  trades ;  bricl
layers,  carpenters,
joiners,  and  masons.
Mean  of  74  rates

Coal  mining :  hewers.
Weighted  percentage
changes  in  principal
districts

Engineering:  fitters,
turners,  iron  founde
and  pattern  makers.
Mean  of  36  rates

11

..  0)  p,

to  ^  o

ti .  CO

Unweighted  means

of  preceding  groups

of  trades

A

u

Oi
V

\

t-i

11
1^

1890

94

109

97

100

97

99

100

1891

95

110

98

102

100

101

101

1892

97

100

98

100

100

99

99

1893

98

102

97

99

99

99

99

1894

99

97

97

99

99

98

98

1895

100

92

98

99

99

98

98

1896

IOj.

91

102

99

99

99

99

1897

103

92

103

99

100

100

100

1898

106

100

104

99

102

102

102

1899

107

106

105

103

103

105

105

.jOO

109

127

105

105

107

110

111

1901

109

119

105

105

108

109

109

1902

109

111

105

105

108

107

107

1903

109

108

105

105

108

107

106

1904

109

105

105

105

108

106

106

1905

109

103

105

107

109

107

106

1906

109

106

106

111

108

108

108

1907

109

122

107

114

108

112

113

1908

109

119

107

114

109

111

112

1909

109

113

106

112

109

110

110

1910

109

114

107

112

109

110

110

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

109

113

106

108

108

109

108

Computed  from  the  Twelfth  Abstract  of  Labour  Statistics  of  the United  Kingdom,  p. 54,  by  shifting  the  base  from  rates  in
1900  zz  100  to  average  rates  in  1890-99  =  100.


MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


139


Finally,  when  the  English  and  American  index  numbers  of  wages  are  com-
pared, they  are  found  to  reflect  the  differences  in  the  course  of  business  cycles
which  have  twice  been  emphasized.  In  the  depression  of  1901-04  the  English
wage-earners  lost  much  of  the  gains  they  had  scored  in  the  prosperous  years
1896-1900.  American  wages,  on  the  contrary,  received  no  setback  in  the  short-
lived depression  of  1903-04.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  in  1907  the  American
table  shows  much  heavier  gains  than  the  English  table  over  the  level  of  1890.
But  when  only  the  first  decade  is  examined,  the  comparison  comes  out  the  other
way.  Depression  was  more  severe  on  this  side  of  the  Atlantic,  and  the  relative
prices  of  labor  in  1900  were  materially  lower  here  than  in  England.


130
120

no

100

So

Chart 15

Relative.  Prices  of  labor and  of  Commodities
AND Wholesale in England
1890-1910

AT

RETAIL

130
120
110
100
90

COMMODITIES AT RETAIL

_..••'

/

/

\
\

/

-—

-X

^.

.^■^

<^-

/

^  ***'

^

^,»

••■


,''

,.*•''

"^

■K
X

/


/ "^N

,"

1830 '9; '92 '93 '94 '35 '9S '97 '98 '99 1900 'Oi '02 '03 '04 "05 '06 '01 '08 '09 1910

140  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


III.  The  Prices  of  Loans — Interest

1.  The  Tables  of  Interest  Rates

The  iLmerican  statistics  of  interest,  available  for  the  years  1890-1911,  come
from  a  single  money  market.  But  this  one  market — New  York — is  by  far  the
most  important  in  the  country.  Moreover,  it  has  such  close  connections  with
all  the  lesser  financial  centers  that  its  rates  both  affect  and  are  affected  by
changes  occurring  elsewhere.  Loan  funds  are  so  fluid  a  commodity  that  out-
side banks  and  capitalists  can  lend,  and  outside  business  enterprises  of  large
size  can  borrow  in  New  York.  The  objections  to  relying  upon  statistics  from
this  one  market  as  indicative  of  fluctuations  in  the  rates  of  interest  are  there-
fore less  serious  than  would  be  the  objections  to  a  similar  procedure  with
reference  to  retail  prices  or  wages.  It  is  true  that  the  farmers  and  most  busi-
ness men  of  the  interior  have  practically  no  access  to  the  metropolitan  market.
Such  borrowers  must  pay  the  rates  of  interest  charged  by  local  banks  and
capitalists,  and  these  rates  are  usually  higher  than  those  current  in  New  York.
But  these  interior  rates,  particularly  in  the  larger  towns  of  the  northeastern
and  north  central  states,  probaljly  rise  and  fall  in  rough  conformity  with  rates
in  New  York,  and  our  interest  is  in  the  fluctuations  rather  than  in  the  actual
magnitude  of  the  rates.  Moreover,  the  reminder  is  again  pertinent  that  busi-
ness cj^cles  develop  their  most  distinctive  phenomena  among  the  larger  business
enterprises  in  the  centers  of  industry,  commerce,  and  finance.

In  modern  business  the  distinction  between  loans  on  long  time  and  short
time  is  clearly  drawn  and  highly  important.  Short  loans,  negotiated  to  meet
temporary  capital  requirements  such  as  the  purchase  of  supplies,  the  payment
of  labor,  etc.,  are  made  chiefly  by  commercial  banks,  and  by  business  enterprises
which  sell  their  goods  on  credit.  Long  loans,  negotiated  to  meet  permanent
capital  requirements  such  as  the  purchasing  of  land,  buildings,  machinery,  fran-
chises, etc.,  are  made  chiefly  by  individual  investors,  savings  banlis,  insurance
companies,  and  endowed  institutions.*^

For  long-time  loans  no  market  rates  of  interest  are  regularly  quoted.  A
good  substitute  for  such  quotations,  however,  is  afforded  by  the  net  rates  of
interest  realized  by  investors  who  lend  money  to  governments  or  business
enterprises  by  purchasing  bonds.

The  number  of  bonds  for  which  net  yields  can  be  computed  by  months  since
1890  is  small.  The  whole  class  of  state  and  municipal  bonds  is  barred  out  by
lack  of  satisfactory  quotations.  National  bonds,  while  quoted  every  month,  are
prevented  from  reflecting  accurately  general  market  conditions  by  the  require-

47  The  remainder  of  this  section  consists  chiefly  of  a  revised  version  of  the  article  on  "Bates  of  Interest
and  the  Prices  of  Investment  Securities,  1890-1909,"  published  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  April,
1911.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  141

ments  of  the  National  Banking  Act.  Moreover,  there  is  no  single  type  of
United  States  bonds  which  has  been  upon  the  market  during  the  whole  period
since  1890.  It  is  only  by  treating  the  "4  per  cents  of  1925"  as  a  continuation
of  the  "4  per  cents  of  1907"  that  a  continuous  series  can  be  approximated.
Some  arbitrary  assumption  is  involved  in  grafting  one  of  these  series  upon  the
other.  The  device  used  is  to  multiply  the  net  yields  of  the  4s  of  1907  in  1890-95
by  1.026— the  ratio  between  the  yields  of  the  two  issues  of  4s  in  1896,  which
is  the  first  full  year  that  both  were  upon  the  market.  This  shift  is  more  simple
than  accurate,  and  the  composite  series  which  it  gives  cannot  be  highly  com-
mended.*' Fortunately,  there  remains  one  class  of  bonds  for  which  better
quotations  are  available.

The  railway  bonds  now  listed  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  number
over  600 ;  but  of  these  few  date  back  to  1890  and  have  substantially  complete
quotations  for  every  month  since  then.  To  be  available,  bonds  must  also  have
several  years  to  run  after  1911;  for  otherwise  they  are  not  now  trustworthy
indices  of  the  interest  rates  which  investors  require  on  long  loans.  Indeed,
only  the  ten  securities  described  in  Table  18  meet  all  requirements  passably,
and  of  these  not  all  have  been  above  suspicion  as  conservative  investments
during  the  whole  period  covered.

The  lowest  and  highest  prices  of  these  bonds  in  each  month  of  1890-1911
were  obtained  from  the  Financial  Revietv.  The  means  between  these  extreme
quotations  were  struck,  after  accrued  interest,  as  of  the  middle  of  the  month,
had  been  deducted.  Then  net  yields  were  computed  for  each  month  from  these
mean  quotations  by  the  aid  of  bond  tables.*"  Finally,  net  yields  by  quarters
and  by  years  were  computed  by  averaging  the  monthly  figures.'"'  To  show  the
variations  in  interest  rates  more  clearly,  columns  of  relative  rates,  computed
on  the  basis  average  actual  net  yields  in  1890-99  =  100,  were  added  to  the
tables."  Table  19  presents  the  results  by  years.  The  bonds  are  arranged  in
the  order  of  their  average  net  yields  in  1890-99.  The  figures  for  quarters  and
months  are  given  in  Tables  21  and  22.  Since  the  latter  tables  would  be  made
unduly  bulky  by  printing  the  full  figures  for  all  the  securities  only  two  bond
series  are  included,  namely,  the  general  average  and  the  series  for  one  issue
which  merits  especial  attention. (See  p.  157.)

48  See  Table  20.  The  net  yields  for  different  issues  of  United  States  bonds  from  1878  to  1909  are  given
in  A.  Piatt  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States  (National  Monetary  Commission.  Senate  Document,  no.
570,  61st  Congress,  2d  session),  p.  281.

49  The  computing  was  done  by  Donald  English,  sometime  Assistant  in  Economics  in  the  University  of
California.  When  a  bond  lacked  a  quotation  for  some  month,  its  net  yield  was  interpolated  by  supposing
that  this  yield  varied  from  the  net  yield  of  the  preceding  or  following  month  in  the  same  proportion  that  the
average  net  yields  of  the  remaining  bonds  varied.  Interpolations  were  necessary,  however,  in  less  than  2  per
cent  of  the  oases.

50  Frequent  discrepancies  of  one  point  may  be  found  between  the  average  net  yields  by  quarters  and  by
years.  They  are  due  to  the  carrying  of  fractions  of  .5  or  more  and  the  dropping  of  smaller  fractions.  Sta-
tistical offices  often  arbitrarily  change  averages  so  as  to  be  formally  consistent  with  the  figures  from  which
they  are  struck;  but  this  practice  is  less  accurate  in  substance,  though  more  accurate  m  form,  than  the  one
followed  here.

61  The  average  relative  yields  are  computed  on  the  index  number  plan  from  the  relative  figures  for  each
of  the  ten  bonds — not  from  the  average  actual  yields  of  all  the  bonds.


142


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


Name  of  railway
Chicago  and  Eastern

Illinois
Missouri,  Kansas  and

Texas
Wabash
Chesapeake  and  Ohio

Chicago,  St.  Paul,  Min-
neapolis and  Omaha

Chicago,  Burlington
and  Quincy


TABLE  18
Description  of  the  Eailway  Bonds  Included  in  the  Following  Tables

Amount  of  issue
in  millions  of  dollars


Name  of  bonds
General  Consolidated
and  first  mortgage
First  mortgage

First  mortgage
First  consolidated

mortgage
Consolidated  mortgage

Nebraska  Extension
bonds,  secured  by
deposit  of  first
mortgage  bonds  of


Medium
of  payment

Dates  of

Outstanding
Authorized  1890 1909

Bate

of  interest

%

Moody's

rating  in

1909*

Issue Maturity

1887 1937

30

4

20

5

A  a

Gold

1890 1990

40

39

40

4

A  a

Gold

1889 1939

34

23

34

5

A  a  a

Gold

1889 1939

30

22

28

5

A a

1880 1930

30

13

16

6

A  a  a

Nebraska  branch  roads

1887

1927

t

25

23

4

A  a  a,

Central  Eailroad  of
New  Jersey

General  mortgage

Gold

1887

1987

50

35

45

5

A  a  a

Chicago,  Milwaukee
and  St.  Paul

General  mortgage,
"Series  A"

Gold

1889

1989

150

9

49

4

A  a  a

New  York,  Chicago
and  St.  Louis

First  mortgage

Gold

1887

1937

20

20

19

4

A  a  a

West  Shore  Eailroad

First  mortgage,
guaranteed  by  the
New  York  Central

1885

2361

50

50

50

4

A  a  a

*  Prom  Moody's  Anai

'ysis  of  Railroad/  Investments (New  York,  1909).

Moody  1

•ecognizes

14  classes

of  securities,  of  which  A

u  u  and  A

are  the  highest.

t  $20,000  per  mile.


TABLE  19
Actual  and  Eelative  Eates  of  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Ten  American  Eailway  Bonds  by

^EABS,  1890-1911:  Actual  Eates

CM


6

%

5.24

%
5.20

%

4.99

d

d

%

5.09

fM

a©
d=^
%

4.96

d

d

%

4.53

O

%
4.55

OS

d

%

4.39

%
4.38

«■
aj

%
3.88

Averages

1890

>
(a

%
5.10

>
%

4.35

<

%

4.72

1891

5.28

5.25

5.06

5.11

5.06

4.92

4.61

4.79

4.42

3.96

5.15

4.54

4.85

1892

5.03

5.04

4.81

4.85

4.84

4.73

4.53-

4.49

4.18

3.90

4.91

4.37

4.64

1893

5.16

5.17

4.95

5.00

4.97

4.94

4.60

4.42

4.30

4.02

5.05

4.46

4.75

1894

5.14

5.04

4.83

4.75

4.63

4.72

4.40

4.46

4.04

3.87

4.88

4.30

4.59

1895

5.07

4.76

4.72

4.59

4.56

4.64

4.36

4.38

3.87

3.82

4.74

4.21

4.48

1896

5.12

4.92

4.80

4.72

4.65

4.80

4.34

4.28

3.89

3.85

4.84

4.23

4.54

1897

5.02

4.78

4.76

4.48

4.28

4.51

4.47

3.96

3.78

3.72

4.66

4.09

4.38

1898

4.71

4.57

4.54

4.29

4.12

4.07

4.46

3.83

3.80

3.69

4.45

3.97

4.21

1899

4.32

4.34

4.26

4.12

3.97

3.47

4.23

3.59

3.71

3.56

4.20

3.71

3.96

1900

4.27

4.40

4.20

4.12

4.09

3.42

4.07

3.61

3.71

3.57

4.22

3.68

3.95

1901

3.90

4.11

4.08

4.00

3.83

3.40

3.81

3.59

3.66

3.54

3.98

3.60

3.79

1902

3.84

4.05

4.07

4.01

3.81

3.50

3.63

3.51

3.73

3.55

3.96

3.58

3.77

1903

4.15

4.13

4.24

4.19

4.09

3.69

3.84

3.70

3.89

3.70

4.16

3.76

3.96

1904

4.10

4.06

4.15

4.12

4.03

3.72

3.78

3.68

3.83

3.72

4.09

3.75

3.92

1905

3.95

3.97  '

4.08

4.04

3.79

3.61

3.69

3.59

3.79

3.70

3.97

3.68

3.82

MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


143


TABLE  19— (Concluded)
Actual  and  Eelative  Bates  of  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Ten  American  Railway  Bonds  by

Years,  1890-1911:  Actual  Rates


D

1

6

d-^

m
d

■s

d

to

Averages

r

>

"S

>
•a

^

5

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

%

1906

4.0(

i 4.03

4.24

4.10

3.97

3.78

3.89

3.71

3.82

3.80

4.08

3.80

3.94

1907

4.44

[ 4.24

4.60

4.45

4.27

4.08

4.11

3.95

4.07

3.97

4.40

4.04

4.22

1908

4.32

;  4.15

4.63

4.32

4.18

4.04

4.04

3.93

4.04

3.95

4.32

4.00

4.16

1909

4.14 4.01

4.24

4.13

3.95

3.94

3.89

3.87

3.94

3.89

4.09

3.91

4.00

1910

4.33 4.08

4.42

4.25

4.14

4.08

4.02

4.03

4.04

3.96

4.24

4.03

4.14

1911

4.35 '

1.12

4.50

4.26

4.13

4.11

4.06

4.05

4.03

3.97

4.27

4.04

4.16

Averages

1890-99

5.01 •

1.91

4.77

.4.70

4.60

4.53

4.46

4.26

4.04

3.83

4.80

4.22

4.51

1900-09

4.12 '

1.12

4.25

4.15

4.00

3.72

3.88

3.71

3,85

3.74

4.13

3.78

3.95

Relative  Rates

.

Average  actual  yieldi

s  in  1890-99 :

=  100

actual ^

O

j3
1

d

d

SO

d"*

d

d

»8

Averages

Av.

1

yields,  1890-99

5.01

4.91

4.77

4.70

4.60

4.53

4.46

4.26

4.04

3.83

2

cq

<

1890

105

106

105

108

108

100

102

103

108

101

106

103

105

1891

105

107

106

109

110

109*

103

112

109

103

107

107

107

1892

100

103

101

103

105

104

102

105

104

102

103

103

103

1893

103

105

104

106

108

109

103

104

107

105

105

106

105

1894

103

103

101

101

101

104

99

105

100

101

102

102

102

1895

101

97

99

98

99

102

98

103

96

100

99

100

99

1896

102

100

101

100

101

106

97

100

96

101

101

100

100

1897

100

97

100

95

93

99

100

93

94

97

97

97

97

1898

94

93

95

91

89

90

100

90

94

96

92

94

93

1899

86

88

89

88

86

77

95

84

92

93

87

88

88

1900

85

90

88

88

89

75

91

85

92

93

88

87

88

1901

78

84

86

85

83

75

86

84

91

93

83

86

85

1902

77

83

85

85

83

77

81

82

92

93

83

85

84

1903

83

84

89

89

89

81

86

87

96

97

87

89

88  .

1904

82

83

87

88

88

82

85

86

95

97

86

89

87

1905

79

81

86

86

82

80

83

84

94

97

83

88

85

1906

81

82

89

87

86

83

87

87

95

99

85

90

88

1907

89

86

96

95

93

90

92

93

101

104

92

96

94

1908

86

85

97

92

91

89

91

92

100

103

90

95

93

1909

83

82

89

88

86

87

87

91

98

102

86

93

89

1910

86

83

93

90

90

90

90

95

100

103

88

96

92

1911

87

84

94

91

90

91

91

95

100

104

89

96

93

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-

-09

82

84

89

88

87

82

87

87

95

98

86

90

88

144


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


The  best  records  of  short-time  interest  rates  in  New  York  are  likewise
published  in  the  Financial  Revieiv.  These  tables  show  by  weeks  the  rates  (1)
for  call  loans  at  the  stock  exchange  and  at  the  banks  and  trust  companies,
(2)  for  seven  kinds  of  time  loans,  ranging  from  30  days  to  7  months,  and  (3)
for  three  descriptions  of  commercial  paper.  Of  call  rates,  those  quoted  at  the
stock  exchange  are  both  the  most  important  and  the  most  regularly  recorded.
The  record  for  commercial  paper  is  not  quite  complete ;  for  during  the  height
of  crises  there  are  sometimes  weeks  in  which  no  rate  is  quoted,  or  in  which  the
quoted  rates  are  said  to  be  merely  nominal.  But  the  figures  for  time  loans
present  even  more  gaps.  Accordingly,  the  data  selected  are  (1)  the  average
rates  for  call  loans  at  the  stock  exchange,  (2)  the  rates  for  choice  double-name
commercial  paper  running  60  to  90  days,  and  (3)  the  rates  for  good  single-
name  commercial  paper  running  4  to  6  months.


120
110
100
90
80
70

Chart \6

Relative Rates of  Interest Yielded
American Railwat  Bonds  and in  United

1890-1910

BY  Investments
States  4's of  l9oi

N  Ten
and  1925.

no

100
90
80
70

',

WEST  Shore. Railway

average.  of  ten railway bonos

United  States 4's  of I90i  and 1325.

^^"'

S

^

^

^

■.

/

,

X

^^ —

X

/

^

^

/
/

-— ,

's

*

\1

\

■V

/

""*"■  •

"-.

•
,j^

/■'

/  -

.'

\

.-

•-..

.-•'''

■""

1890 91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '91 '98 '99 1900 01 "02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 08 09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


145


CHART 17.

220

RELATIVE  RATES OF  INTEREST  ON BONDS.

/

COMMERCIAL  PAPER,  AND  CALL  LOANS  IN  NEW  YORK

/

1830-1910.

/

200

AVERAGE OF  TEN RAILWAY BONDS.

COMMERCIAL PAPER 60-30  DAYS

180

CALL  LOANS AT  STOCK EXCHANGE

i j
i i

160

160

!

1

/
/■

\

^ i

160

140

1

1
1

I!

/

140

1

1

1
1

/

(

1'

.1

ll

/■

1

1  1

120

i

11

n

1

i

_

/

/ 1

r I

1 1

^ \

leo

1

}

ll

\

\

\

1

\l

1'

i

1

\

\
\

;  1

1

•  1

ll

i

I

1
1

\

100

^

>Y

1-
1

f

■n

J

ll

I  /

ii

1
1

100

1

!i

-*r
1:

1

N

"K.  *

/
1

1

^y

r

i!

1
1

!l

i'l

1/

-\

y

r

1

y

1  \^
1  \

1  /
/

80

1',

ii

*

/

i

i i

80

i!

/

ll
:i

/
/

1

1

i .'

l|

/

1

1

!  /

1

i

/

/

i
i

1

1

/■
/

60

1

1

1

60

1

1

1

1
i

1

\^'^

)E/

V.

^

K

1
i

mi

J5

11

m

]

40

i

\,<>

X

V

1890  '91 '92  '93  '94  'S5  '9G  '97  '98 '39  1900  '01 02  '03 04  '05  '06  W  08 09  m  'II

146  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  20

Actual  and  Relative  Rates  of  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by

Years,  1890-1911

Relative  rates  of  interest
Actual  rates  of  interest  Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100


r

Bonds

Commercial  paper

^/

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

Bonds

Commercial  paper

r
Year j

U.  S.  4s
of  1907
md  1925

West
Shore
R.  R.

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

4-6
months

60-90
days

U.  S.  4s
of  1907
and  1925

West
Shore
R.  R.

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

4-6
months

60-90
days

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

1890

2.43%

3.88%

4.72%

6.89%

5.64%

5.81%

88

101

105

115

123

176

1891

2.65

3.96

4.85

6.50

5.41

3.42

96

103

107

109

118

104

1892

2.80

3.90

4.64

5.38

4.04

3.03

101

102

103

90

88

92

1893

3.04

4.02

4.75

7.62

6.86

4.58

110

105

105

127

150

139

1894

2.79

3.87

4.59

5.22

3.04

1.06

101

101

102

87

66

32

1895

2.89

3.82

•  4.48

5.73

3.64

1.85

105

100

99

96

79

56

1896

3.14

3.85

4.54

7.02

5.76

4.21

114

101

100

117

126

128

1897

2.73

3.72

4.38

4.72

3.57

1.77

99

97

97

79

78

54

1898

2.69

3.69

4.21

5.31

3.82

2.16

97

96

93

89

83

66

1899

2.47

3.56

3.96

5.48

4.05

5.04

89

93

88

92

88

153

1900

2.18

3.57

3.95

5.71

4.38

2.93

79

93

88

95

96

89

]901

1.97

3.54

3.79

5.41

4.24

3.98

71

93

85

90

93

121

1902

1.98

3.55

3.77

5.75

4.88

5.22

72

93

84

96

106

159

1903

1.99

3.70

3.96

6.21

5.43

3.79

72

97

88

104

118

115

1904

2.09

3.72

3.92

5.13

4.24

1.78

76

97

87

86

93

54

1905

2.00

3.70

3.82

5.17

4.35

4.39

72

97

85

86

95

133

1906

2.04

3.80

3.94

6.24

5.68

6.44

74

99

88

104

124

196

1907

2.18

3.97

4.22

6.55

6.27

7.27

79

104

94

109

137

221

1908

2.44

3.95

4.16

4.95

4.42

1.97

88

103

93

83

96

60

1909

2.52

3.89

4.00

4.67

3.86

2.70

91

102

89

78

84

82

1910

2.74*

3.96

4.14

5.72

5.01

2.97

99*

103

92

96

109

90

1911

2.68*

3.97

4.16

4.71

4.02

2.57

97*

104

93

79

88

78

Averages

1890-99

2.76

3.83

4.51

5.99

4.58

■  3.29

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

2.14

3.74

3.95

5.61

4.78

4.05

77

98

88

93

104

123

*  Average  yields  of  January,  April,  July,  and  October. Report  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1911,  p.  823.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


147


TABLE  21
Rates  op  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Qqartebs,  1890-1911

Relative  rates  of  interest
Actual  rates  of  interest  Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100


-1st  quarter

Bor

ids

Commercial  paper

Call  loans

at  Stock

Exchange

5.58%

Bonds

Commercial  paper

1890-

West
Siiore
R.  R.

3.83%

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

4.65%

4-6
months
6.44%

60-90
days
5.30%

West
Shore
R.  R.

100

Av.  of

lOR.  R.

bonds

103

4-6
months

108

60-90
days

116

Call  loans

at  Stock

Exchange

169

2d  quarter

3.84

.4.64

6.45

5.07

4.62

100

103

108

111

140

3d  quarter

3.87

4.72

6.48

5.47

7.42

101

105

108

119

225

4th  quarter

3.98

4.87

8.17

6.98

5.62

104

108

136

152

171

1891-

-1st  quarter

3.93

4.83

6.76

5.41

3.27

103

107

113

118

99

2d  quarter

3.96

4.88

6.40

5.26

3.62

103

108

107

115

110

3d  quarter

3.99

4.89

6.64

5.72

3.00

104

108

111

125

91

4th  quarter

3.97

4.78

6.14

5.18

3.85

104

106

103

113

117

1892-

-1st  quarter

3.90

4.65

5.27

3.97

2.14

102

103

88

87

65

2d  quarter

3.88

4.60

4.58

3.14

1.62

101

102

77

69

49

3d  quarter

3.90

4.64

5.45

3.99

2.63

102

103

91

87

80

4th  quarter

3.92

4.67

6.26

5.19

5.81

102

103

105

113

176

1893-

-1st  quarter

3.95

4.62

6.33

5.84

5.31

103

103

106

127

161

2d  quarter

4.03

4.71

8.10

7.02

5.62

105

105

135

153

171

3d  quarter

4.15

4.97

9.84

9.33

5.65

108

110

164

204

172

4th  quarter

3.96

4.71

6.29

4.68

1.74

103

104

105

102

53

1894-

-1st  quarter

3.91

4.64

5.17

3.30

1.04

102

103

86^

72

32

2d  quarter

3.87

4.57

4.83

2.96

1.08

101

101

81

65

33

3d  quarter

3.87

4.59

5.13

3.15

1.00

101

102

86

69

30

4th  quarter

3.83

4.55

5.75

2.80

1.14

100

101

96

61

35

1895-

-1st  quarter

3.84

4.62

6.35

3.41

1.67

100

102

106

74

51

2d  quarter

3.83

4.49

5.12

3.03

1.56

100

100

86

66

47

3d  quarter

3.79

4.37

5.37

3.56

1.34

99

97

90

78

41

4th  quarter

3.81

4.43

6.33

4.51

2.85

100

98

106

98

87

1896-

—1st  quarter

3.81

4.48

7.69

5.57

4.17

100

99

128

122

127

2d  quarter

3.82

4.45

5.94

4.72

2.54

100

99

99

103

77

3d  quarter

3.92

4.67

7.89

7.05

4.02

102

103

132

154

122

4th  quarter

3.85

4.54

6.50

5.79

6.10

101

100

109

126

185

1897-

—1st  quarter
2d  quarter

3.77
3.72

4.43
4.43

4.56
4.54

3.26
3.39

1.67
1.36

99
97

98
98

76
76

71

74

51
41

3d  quarter
4th  quarter

3.70
3.68

4.34
4.31

4.83
4.96

3.79
3.74

1.61

2.45

97
96

96
95

81
83

83
82

49

74

1898-

-1st  quarter
2d  quarter

3.68
3.78

4.23
4.30

5.17
6.11

3.93
4.29

2.15
2.05

96
99

94
95

86
102

86
94

65
62

3d  quarter
4th  quarter

3.68
3.64

4.18
4.13

5.23
4.79

3.81
3.27

2.20
2.24

96
95

93
92

87
80

83
71

67
68

148


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  21— (Continued)
Rates  of  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Ql'aeters,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest


Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  —  100


—1st  quarter

Boi

ids

Commercial  paper

Call  loans

at  Stock

Exchange

3.17%

B,

3nds

A

Commercial  paper

1899-

West
Shore
B.  R.

3.58%

Av.  of

10  B,  B.

bonds

4.00%

4-6
months

4.77%

60-90
days

3.25%

West
Shore
R.  B.

94

Av.  of

10  B.  R.

bonds

89

4-6
months

80

60-90

days

71

Call  loans

at  Stock

Exchange

96

2d  quarter

3.53

3.92

4.85

3.53

3.74

92

87

81

77

114

3d  quarter

3.53

3.91

5.66

4.24

4.60

92

87

95

93

140

4th  quarter

3.59

4.00

6.86

5.41

8.65

94

89

115

118

263

1900-

—1st  quarter

3.56

3.97

6.27

4.71

3.50

93

88

105

103

106

2d  quarter

3.56

3.94

5.31

3.83

2.23

93

87

89

84

68

3d  quarter

3.59

3.97

5.48

4.20

1.47

94

88

92

92

45

4th  quarter

3.56

3.91

5.77

4.75

4.51

93

87

96

104

137

1901-

—1st  quarter

3.49

3.79

5.14

3.88

2.52

91

84

86

85

77

2d  quarter

3.54

3.78

5.40

3.95

5.10

93

84

90

86

155

3d  quarter

3.56

3.81

5.62

4.52

3.74

93

85

94

99

114

4th  quarter

3.57

3.79

5.44

4.73

4.58

93

84

91

103

139

3  902-

—1st  quarter

3.56

3.75

5.44

4.38

3.70

93

84

91

96

112

2d  quarter

3.54

3.73

5.37

4.50

4.55

93

83

90

98

138

3d  quarter

3.52

3.77

5.81

4.96

6.19

92

84

97

108

188

4th  quarter

3.58

3.83

6.58

5.84

6.44

94

85

110

127

196

1903-

—1st  quarter

3.63

3.87

5.81

5.25

5.02

95

86

97

115

152

2d  quarter

3.69

3.95

5.79

5.00

3.21

96

88

97

109

97

3d  quarter

3.72

4.05

6.54

5.73

2.29

97

90

109

125

70

4th  quarter

3.76

3.99

6.54

5.83

4.54

98

89

109

127

138

1904-

—1st  quarter

3.72

3.97

5.61

4.77

1.95

97

88

94

104

59

2d  quarter

3.74

3.96

4.71

3.90

1.37

98

88

79

85

42

3d  quarter

3.72

3.89

4.90

3.93

1.13

97

87

82

86

34

4th  quarter

3.71

3.86

5.31

4.27

2.66

97

86

89

93

81

1905-

-1st  quarter

3.69

3.82

4.73

3.91

2.60

96

85

79

85

79

2d  quarter

3.71

3.82

4.75

3.91

2.70

97

85

79

85

82

3d  quarter

3.69

3.81

5.06

4.34

2.60

96

85

85

95

79

4th  quarter

3.72

3.84

6.17

5.44

9.67

97

85

103

119

294

1906-

-1st  quarter

3.74

3.87

5.81

5.13

6.25

98

86

97

112

190

2d  quarter

3.79

3.93

5.82

5.34

5.52

99

88

97

117

168

3d  quarter

3.82

3.97

6.52

5.97

5.39

100

88"

109

130

164

4th  quarter

3.84

3.99

6.77

6.27

8.59

100

89

113

137

261

1907-

-1st  quarter

3.88

4.05

6.70

6.10

5.67

101

90

112

133

172

2d  quarter

3.91

4.15

6.14

5.67

2.58

102

92

103

124

78

3d  quarter

3.98

4.22

6.70

6.24

3.92

104

94

112

136

119

4th  quarter

4.13

4.45

7.33

7.46

16.20

108

99

122

163

492

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


149


TABLE  21— (Concluded)
Rates  op  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Quarters,  1890-1911

Relative  rates  of  interest
Actual  rates  of  interest  Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100


—1st  quarter

Bonds

'  West Av.  of  '
Shore 10  B.  E.
B.  E. bonds

3.99% 4.26%

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

2.87%

Bonds

A

-Commercial  paper

1908-

4-6
months

6.25%

60-90
days

5.75%

West
Shore
B.  B.

104

Av.  of

10  B,  E.

bonds

95

4-6
months

104

60-90
days

125

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

87

2d  quarter

3.98

4.20

4.70

4.00

1.62

104

93

79

87

49

3d  quarter

3.92

4.14

4.58

3.75

1.22

102

92

77

82

37

4th  quarter

3.92

4.06

4.69

3.97

2.10

102

90

78

87

64

1909-

—1st  quarter

3.86

3.97

4.28

3.56

1.96

101

89

71

78

60

2d  quarter

3.89

3.98

4.25

3.38

1.88

102

89

71

74

57

3d  quarter

3.91

4.00

4.41

3.86

2.30

102

89

74

84

70

4th  quarter

3.90

4.05

5.81

5.07

4.66

102

90

97

111

141

1910-

-1st  quarter

3.95

4.08

5.22

4.56

3.41

103

90

87

99

104

2d  quarter

3.97

4.16

5.51

4.77

3.25

104

92

92

104

99

3d  quarter

3.96

4.18

6.26

5.44

1.95

103

93

105

119

59

4th  quarter

3.96

4.14

5.89

5.26

3.24

103

92

98

115

98

1911-

—1st  quarter

3.96

4.14

4.64

3.98

2.62

103

92

78

87

80

2d  quarter

3.97

4.15

4.40

3.66

2.33

104

92

74

80

71

3d  quarter

3.98

4.16

4.96

4.15

2.32

104

93

83

91

71

4th  quarter

3.98

4.19

4.93

4.30

2.98

104

93

83

94

91

In  reducing  the  weekly  rates  given  in  the  source  to  monthly  averages,  each
week  was  placed  in  that  month  in  which  fell  the  majority  of  its  days.  Both
the  high  and  the  low  figures  were  included  in  making  the  averages."  Relative
rates  were  computed  on  the  same  plan  as  the  relative  rates  for  bonds — that  is,
on  the  basis  of  average  actual  rates  in  1890-99  =  100.  For  convenience  of
comparison,  the  results  are  presented  in  Tables  20,  21,  and  22,  side  by  side  with
the  net  yields  of  bonds.''^

62  The  averages  by  quarters  and  by  years  were  not  computed  from  the  monthly  figures,  but  directly  from
the  original  figures  by  weeks.  Of  course  this  is  the  more  accurate  method,  although  it  permits  many  slight
discrepancies  to  appear  between  the  quarterly  or  annual  figures  as  entered  in  the  tables,  and  the  correspond-
ing figures  which  may  be  computed  from  the  rates  by  months.

B3  In  his  Bate  of  Interest,  Professor  Irving  Fisher  gives  the  yearly  average  rate  of  interest  in  New  York
upon  "prime  two-name  60-day"  paper,  computed  from  the  Financial  Beview  "by  averaging  the  highest  and
lowest  weekly  rates"  (pp.  419,  420).  There  are  numerous  small  discrepancies  between  his  results  and  those
of  this  investigation,  for  which  it  is  difficult  to  account.  The  present  figures  have  been  checked  by  three
computers  and  should  be  arithmetically  correct.


150


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  22


Rates  of  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Months,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest


Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =


Bonds

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

Bonds

A

Commercial  paper

'  West
Shore
R.  B.

Av.  of '

10  R.  R.

bonds

1 '*^

4-6
months

60-90
days

West
Shore
R.  R.

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

4-6
months

60-90
days

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

1890  January

3.83%

4.62%

6.45%

5.39%

7.70%.

100

102

108

118

234

February

3.82

4.65

6.13

5.04

4.25

100

103

102

110

129

March

3.83

4.67

6.75

5.50

4.25

100

104

113

120

129

April

3.84

4.64

6.65

5.14

4.30

100

103

111

112

131

May

3.84

4.63

6.38

5.06

4.88

100

103

107

110

148

June

3.83

4.65

6.28

5.00

4.75

100

103

105

109

144

July

3.85

4.68

6.25

5.08

4.60

101

104

104

111

140

August

3.88

4.73

6.50

5.61

11.63

101

105

109

122

353

September

3.88

4.76

6.75

5.71

6.75

101

106

113

125

205

October

3.91

4.76

7.25

5.89

5.00

102

106

121

129

152

November

3.99

4.88

8.88

8.20

7.00

104

108

148

179

213

December

4.04

4.96

8.63

7.38

5.00

106

110

144

161

152

1891  January

3.94

4.83

7.28

5.83

3.90

103

107

122

127

118

February

3.92

4.81

6.38

5.00

2.88

102

106

107

109

87

March

3.94

4.86

6.50

5.25

2.88

103

108

109

115

87

April

3.94

4.84

6.25

5.09

3.30

103

107

104

111

100

May

3.96

4.87

6.50

5.33

4.38

103

108

109

116

133

June

3.99

4.93

6.50

5.50

3.25

104

109

109

120

99

July

4.01

4.93

6.60

5.63

2.20

105

109

110

123

67

August

4.00

4.89

6.75

5.75

2.13

105

109

113

125

65

September

3.95

4.84

6.60

5.79

4.50

103

107

110

126

137

October

3.99

4.82

6.41

5.60

4.25

104

107

107

122

129

November

3.98

4.80

6.25

5.10

4.38

104

106

104

111

133

December

3.95

4.73

5.75

4.85

2.94

103

105

96

106

89

1892  January

3.90

4.66

5.45

4.17

2.40

102

103

91

91

73

February

3.89

4.64

4.94

3.69

2.00

102

103

83

80

61

March

3.90

4.65

5.35

3.96

2.00

102

103

89

86

61

April

3.90

4.63

4.81

3.45

2.00

102

103

80

75

61

May

3.87

4.59

4.56

3.18

1.50

101

102

76

69

46

June

3.86

4.59

4.40

2.94

1.40

101

102

74

64

43

July

3.89

4.62

5.13

3.43

1.88

102

102

86

75

57

August

3.89

4.63

5.28

4.00

2.05

102

103

88

87

62

September

3.92

4.67

6.07

4.75

4.13

102

103

101

304

123

October

3.93

4.65

6.44

5.11

5.63

103

103

108

111

171

November

3.90

4.66

6.00

5.11

5.15

102

104

100

111

156

December

3.92

4.69

6.38

5.50

6.81

102

104

107

120

207

1893  January

3.94

4.64

6.06

5.18

4.00

103

3  03

101

113

121

February

3.93

4.60

6.00

4.85

3.00

103

102

100

3  06

91

March

3.97

4.64

6.80

6.80

8.20

104

103

114

148

249

April

4.02

4.64

6.13

5.75

4.88

105

103

102

125

148

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


151


TABLE  22— (Continued)
Bates  op  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Months,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest

Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =

:  100

Bonds

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

3.60%

Bonds

Commercial  paper

1893  May

'  West
Shore
R.  K.

4.03%

Av.  of

10  E.  R.

bonds

4.71%

4-6
months

8.35%

60-90
days

6.65%

West
Shore
E.  R.

105

Av.  of'

10  R.  R.

bonds

105

r

4-6

months

139

60-90
days
145

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

109

June

4.05

4.78

9.75

8.75

8.88

106

106

163

190

270

July

4.14

4.93

9.75

9.75

7.75

108

109

163

213

235

August

4.21

5.07

9.70

9.70

5.50

110

112

162

212

167

September

4.11

4.89

10.14

8.32

3.75

107

108

169

182

114

October

4.02

4.80

7.69

5.96

2.38

105

106

128

130

72

November

3.93

4.67

5.80

4.47

1.70

103

104

97

98

52

December

3.92

4.65

5.50

3.67

1.16

102

103

92

80

35

1894  January

3.94

4.68

5.35

3.50

1.02

103

104

89

76

31

February

3.90

4.64

5.19

3.25

1.00

102

103

87

71

30

March

3.88

4.59

4.94

3.00

1.09

101

102

83

65

33

April

3.84

4.55

4.81

3.15

1.13

100

101

80

69

34

May

3.88

4.56

4.75

2.91

1.10

101

101

79

63

33

June

3.88

4.59

4.94

2.89

1.00

101

102

83

63

30

July

3.88

4.62

4.94

3.00

1.00

101

103

83

65

30

August

3.87

4.60

4.98

3.09

1.00

101

102

83

67

30

September

3.86

4.57

5.50

3.28

1.00

101

101

92

72

30

October

3.84

4.55

5.75

2.72

1.00

100

101

96

59

30

November

3.82

4.53

5.75

2.81

1.03

100

100

96

61

31

December

3.83

4.56

5.75

2.88

1.44

100

101

96

63

44

1895  January

3.83

4.58

5.89

3.00

1.35

100

101

98

65

41

I'ebruary

3.86

4.64

6.79

3.65

1.50

101

103

113

80

46

March

3.83

4.63

6.50

3.90

2.25

100

103

109

85

68

April

3.84

4.58

6.25

3.96

2.25

100

102

104

86

68

May

3.84

4.49

4.85

2.75

1.32

100

99

81

60

40

June

3.82

4.41

4.31

2.63

1.16

100

98

72

57

35

July

3.81

4.39

4.55

2.95

1.40

100

98

76

64

43

August

3.78

4.36

5.50

3.53

1.03

99

97

92

77

31

September

3.77

4.35

6.25

4.04

1.56

99

96

104

88

47

October

3.80

4.38

6.44

4.81

2.17

99

97

108

105

66

November

3.79

4.42

5.50

4.07

1.97

99

98

92

89

60

December

3.84

4.49

6.80

4.58

4.56

100

100

114

100

138

1896  January
February

3.83
3.80

4.53
4.46

8.90
7.31

6.00
5.70

4.90
3.94

100
99

100
99

149
122

131

124

149

120

March

3.81

4.46

6.56

5.18

3.50

100

99

110

113

106

April

3.81

4.46

6.31

5.31

3.02

100

99

105

116

92

May

3.83

4.44

5.75

4.53

2.53

100

98

96

99

77

June

3.82

4.45

5.75

4.25

1.94

100

99

96

93

59

July

3.89

4.59

6.40

5.13

2.07

102

102

107

112

63

152


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  22— (Continued)
Rates  of  Interest  on  Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Months,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest


Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  rr:  100


Bonds

A

Commercial  paper

Call  loans

at  Stock

Exchange

4.69%

Bonds

A

Commercial  paper

1896  August

West
Shore
E.  R.

3.97%

Av.  of  '
10  R.  R,
bonds
4.75%

4-6
months

8.33%

60-90
days

7.75%

West
Shore
R.  R.

104

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

105

4-6

months

139

60-90
days

169

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

142

September

3.91

4.67

9.10

8.44

5.45

102

104

152

184

166

October

3.90

4.65

8.56

8.56

11.13

102

103

143

187

338

November

3.86

4.50

6.19

5.25

6.25

101

100

103

115

190

December

3.80

4.46

5.10

3.75

1.95

99

99

85

82

59

1897  January

3.78

4.44

4.69

3.36

1.78

99

98

78

73

54

February

3.75

4.42

4.50

3.00

1.63

98

98

75

65

50

March

3.78

4.43

4.50

3.33

1.62

99

98

75

73

49

April

3.73

4.45

4.63

3.55

1.50

97

98

77

77

46

May

3.73

4.44

4.75

3.54

1.41

97

98

79

77

43

June

3.71

4.39

4.30

3.16

1.20

97

97

72

69

36

July

3.66

4.34

4.38

3.43

1.19

96

96

73

75

36

August

3.71

4.34

4.81

3.75

1.25

97

96

80

82

38

September

3.73

4.34

5.20

4.11

2.22

97

96

87

90

67

October

3.73

4.35

5.25

4.19

2.50

97

96

88

91

76

November

3.67

4.31

4.63

3.45

1.81

96

96

77

75

55

December

3.65

4.26

5.00

3.47

2.92

95

95

84

76

89

1898  January

3.67

4.20

4.63

3.35

2.50

96

93

77

73

76

February

3.66

4.18

4.56

3.13

1.78

96

93

76

68

54

March

3.71

4.30

6.10

4.69

2.17

97

95

102

102

66

April

3.84

4.40

7.58

5.75

2.97

100

98

127

125

90

May

3.78

4.29

6.10

4.63

1.95

99

95

102

101

59

June

3.72

4.21

5.00

3.22

1.25

97

93

84

70

38

July

3.69

4.18

5.00

3.63

1.25

96

93

84

79

38

August

3.67

4.16

5.20

3.64

1.70

96

92

87

79

52

September

3.68

4.18

5.50

4.14

3.78

96

93

92

90

115

October

3.67

4.17

4.94

3.39

2.25

96

92

83

74

68

November

3.64

4.13

4.75

3.31

2.10

95

92

79

72

64

December

3.61

4.09

4.69

3.05

2.41

94

91

78

67

73

1899  January

3.59

4.02

4.50

2.88

2.72

94

89

75

63

83

February

3.58

3.99

4.50

2.95

2.47

94

89

75

64

75

March

3.56

3.99

5.20

3.79

4.10

93

89

87

83

125

April

3.54

3.95

5.25

3.71

5.13

92

88

88

81

156

May

3.54

3.92

4.80

3.59

3.52

92

87

80

78

107

June

3.50

3.89

4.50

3.31

2.63

91

86

75

72

80

July

3.49

3.90

5.06

3.66

4.47

91

87

85

80

136

August

3.51

3.90

5.70

4.35

3.27

92

87

95

95

99

September

3.58

3.94

6.29

4.83

6.38

94

88

105

105

194

October

3.58

3.98

6.00

5.10

7.50

94

88

100

111

228

November

3.57

3.98

6.80

5.36

7.60

93

88

114

117

231

December

3.63

4.03

7.38

5.88

11.13

95

90

123

128

338

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


153


Bates  of  Interest  on


TABLE  22— (Continued)
Bonds,  Commercial  Paper,  akd  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Months,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest


Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =


Bonds

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

Bonds

A

Commercial  paper

^

'  West
Shore
E.  B.

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

4-6
months

60-90
days

West
Shore
R.  R.

At.  a

10  R.  R.

bonds

4-6
months

60-90
days

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

1900  January

3.58%

4.01%

6.60%

4.81%

4.15%

94

89

110

105

126

February

3.53

3.95

6.00

4.43

2.25

92

88

100

97

68

March

3.56

3.94

6.13

4.86

3.94

93

88

102

106

120

April

3.54

3.91

5.69

4.30

3.06

93

87

95

94

93

May

3.59

3.94

5.25

3.69

2.00

94

88

88

81

61

June

3.56

3.97

5.00

3.69

1.69

93

88

84

81

51

July

3.58

3.97

5.25

4.00

1.53

94

88

88

87

46

August

3.60

3.97

5.60

4.22

1.30

94

88

94

92

39

September

3.58

3.96

5.56

4.45

1.61

94

88

93

97

49

October

3.58

3.96

6.08

5.06

3.57

94

88

102

110

108

November

3.57

3.91

5.50

4.39

5.06

93

87

92

96

154

December

3.53

3.86

5.81

4.75

5.13

92

86

97

104

156

1901  January

3.51

3.83

5.44

4.08

3.07

92

85

91

89

93

February

3.49

3.79

5.00

3.70

2.00

91

84

84

81

61

March

3.48

3.75

4.83

3.75

2.34

91

83

81

82

71

April

3.51

3.77

5.44

3.97

4.30

92

84

91

87

131

May

3.55

3.79

5.50

3.95

6.88

93

84

92

86

209

June

3.55

3.78

5.25

3.94

4.31

93

84

88

86

131

July

3.57

3.80

5.40

4.25

4.30

93

85

90

93

131

August

3.55

3.81

5.75

4.50

2.44

93

85

96

98

74

September

3.56

3.82

5.79

4.94

4.34

93

85

97

108

132

October

3.58

3.81

5.35

4.64

3.55

94

85

89

101

108

November

3.58

3.79

5.38

4.72

4.19

94

84

90

103

127

December

3.56

3.78

5.63

4.90

6.25

93

84

94

107

190

1902  January

3.56

3.76

5.55

4.56

4.57

93

84

93

99

139

February

3.57

3.75

5.25

4.00

2.38

93

84

88

87

72

March

3.56

3.74

5.50

4.37

3.94

93

83

92

95

120

April

3.56

3.72

5.28

4.53

5.10

93

83

88

99

155

May

3.54

3.72

5.50

4.54

5.56

93

83

92

99

169

June

3.53

3.74

5.33

4.42

2.84

92

83

89

96

86

July

3.51

3.75

5.65

4.64

3.52

92

83

94

101

107

August

3.52

3.78

5.75

4.82

3.78

92

84

96

105

115

September

3.53

3.80

6.17*

5.58*

10.80

92

85

103*

122*

328

October

3.56

3.82

6.93*

5.90*

7.63

93

85

116*

129*

232

November

3.58

3.82

6.29

5.71

4.88

94

85

105

125

148

December

3.61

3.85

6.50*

6.00*

6.81

94

86

109*

131*

207

1903  January

3.63

3.84

5.71

5.22

5.75

95

86

95

114

175

February

3.62

3.85

5.60

4.90

2.88

95

86

94

107

87

March

3.64

3.91

6.08*

5.54*

6.00

95

87

102*

121*

182

April

3.69

3.95

5.91

5.19

4.19

96

88

99

113

127

*  Nominal  part  of  the  month.


154


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  22— (Continued)


Rates  or  Interest  on  Eonds,  Commercial  Paper,  and  Call  Loans  in  New  York  by  Months,  1890-1911


Actual  rates  of  interest


Eelative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100


Bonds

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange
2.44%

Bonds

Commercial  paper

1903  May

West
Shore
R.  K.

3.69%

Av.  of

10  R,  R.

bonds

3.93%

4-6
months

5.66%

60-90
days

4.75%

West
Shore
E.  E.

96

Av,  of

10  E.  E.

bonds

87

4-6
months

95

60-90
days
104

Call  loans

at  Stock
Exchange

74

June

3.69

3.98

5.81

5.16

3.05

96

. 89

97

113

93

July

3.72

4.01

6.00

5.43

2.50

97

89

100

118

76

August

3.72

4.07

6.75

5.94

2.03

97

90

113

130

62

September

3.72

4.06

6.75

6.00

2.32

97

90

113

131

70

October

3.77

4.00

6.50

5.79

2.69

99

89

109

126

82

November

3.77

3.98

6.57

5.95

5.19

99

89

110

130

158

December

3.74

3.98

6.55

5.79

5.50

98

89

109

126

167

1904  January

3.72

3.96

5.53

4.89

2.34

97

88

92

107

71

February

3.70

3.97

5.75

4.79

1.81

97

88

96

105

55

Maroh

3.73

3.99

5.55

4.68

1.75

97

89

93

102

53

April

3.75

3.96

4.75

4.13

1.38

98

88

79

90

42

May

3.74

3.95

4.75

3.93

1.55

98

88

79

86

47

June

3.74

3.95

4.63

3.60

1.13

98

88

77

79

34

July

3.72

3.90

4.63

3.55

1.03

97

87

77

77

31

August

3.72

3.89

4.75

3.84

.90

97

87

79

84

27

September

3.72

3.89

5.38

4.29

1.53

97

87

90

94

46

October

3.71

3.87

5.75

4.41

2.03

97

86

96

96

62

November

3.71

3.85

5.15

4.14

2.80

97

86

86

90

85

December

3.70

3.85

5.06

4.28

3.13

97

86

85

93

95

1905  January

3.69

3.83

4.71

4.00

2.25

96

85

79

87

68

February

3.68

3.81

4.71

3.81

2.19

96

85

79

83

67

March

3.70

3.82

4.75

3.93

3.20

97

85

79

86

97

April

3.70

3.82

4.75

4.00

3.25

97

85

79

87

99

May

3.72

3.82

4.75

3.98

2.42

97

85

79

87

73

June

3.71

3.82

4.75

3.75

2.50

97

85

79

82

76

July

3.69

3.81

4.75

4.13

2.31

96

85

79

90

70

August

3.68

3.80

4.85

4.19

2.05

96

85

81

91

62

September

3.69

3.82

5.63

4.72

3.56

96

85

94

103

108

October

3.69

3.83

5.75

4.92

5.31

96

85

96

107

161

November

3.72

3.83

6.00

5.53

7.70

97

85

100

121

234

December

3.74

3.86

6.75

5.79

16.50

98

86

113

126

501

1906  January

3.71

3.85

5.75

5.06

8.65

97

86

96

110

263

February

3.74

3.86

5.79

5.04

4.63

98

86

97

110

141

March

3.76

3.90

6.00

5.28

4.88

98

87

100

115

148

April

3.78

3.92

5.92

5.44

9.50

99

87

99

119

289

May

3.80

3.93

5.81

5.33

4.15

99

88

97

116

126

June

3.79

3.94

5.75

5.25

3.25

99

88

96

115

99

July

3.80

3.95

5.93

5.48

2.97

99

88

99

120

90

August

3.83

3.98

6.50

6.00

4.44

100

88

109

131

135

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


155


TABLE  22— {Continued)


1906  September
October
November
December

1907  January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

1908  January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December

1909  January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December


Actual  rates  of  interest

^. — 1a

Bonds  Commercial  paper

r ' V  , ' -^

West  Av.  of  4-6  60-90 Call  loans

Shore 10  E.  E.  months  days  at  Stock

E.  E.  honds  Exchange

3.84% 3.99%  7.21%  6.56% 9.38%

3.83  3.98  6.85  6.30 5.15

3.84  3.98  6.69  6.25 7.50

3.84  4.00  6.75  6.25  14.00

3.85  4.01  6.69  6.15  6.15
3.85  4.03  6.50  5.94 4.38

3.98  4.12  6.81  6.19  6.38
3.91  4.13  6.47  5.92 2.35

3.91  4.13  5.71  5.40 2,31

3.90  4.18  6.25  5.50  3.13
3.94  4.18  6.36  5.75 4.55

3.99  4>23  6.60  6.25  3.06
4.01  4.27  7.17  6.79  4.00
4.05  4.37  7.33*  7.10*  21.00

4.21  4.53  t  7.40*  12.25

4.12  4.44  t  8-00*  J  4.60

3.99  4.26  6.70  6.59 4.75

3.97  4.24  5.80  5.06 1.81

4.01  4.27  t  5.63 1.85

4.01  4.22  5.25  4.38 1.72

4.00  4.18  4.25  3.94 1.66

3.93  4.19  4.64  3.69 1.52

3.92  4.19  4.58  3.75  1.22
3.92  4.13  4.43  3.61 1.06

3.92  4.11  4.75  3.89  1.35

3.93  4.09  t  4.10  1.44

3.93  4.05  t  4.04  1.75

3.91  4.02  4.69  3.85  2.90
3.87  3.99  4.40  3.68  1.81
3.85  3.97  4.22  3.54  2.25
3.87  3.97  4.28  3.50  1.85

3.87  3.97  4.25  3.50  1.94

3.88  3.97  4.29  3.44  1.84

3.91  4.00  4.21  3.25  1.87
3.90  3:99  4.15  3.38  2.06
3.90  4.00  4.56  4.04  2.17
3.93  4.02  4.75  4.25  2.69

3.90  4.03  t  5.03  4.31

3.88  4.06  5.98  5.09  4.65

3.92  4.05  5.59  5.09  5.03


Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100

Bonds  Commercial  paper

West  Av.  of  4-6  60-90 Call  loans

Shore  10  R.  R.  months  days at  Stock

R.  E.  bonds Exchange

100  89  120  143  285

100  89  114  137  156

100  89  112  136  228

100  89  113  136  425

101  90  112  134  187

101  90  109  130  133
103  92  114  135  194

102  91  108  129 71
102  92 95  118 70

102  93  104  120 95

103  93  106  125  138

104  94  110  136 93

105  95  120  148  121

106  97  122*  155*  638

110  101  t  161*  372

108  99  t  175*  443

104  95  112  144  144

104  94 97  no 55

105  95  t  123 56

105  94 88  96 52

105  93 71  86 50

103  93 78  81 46

102  93 77  82 37

102  92 74  79 32

102  92 79  85 41

103  91  t  89 44

103  90  t  88 53

102  90 78  84 88

101  89 74  80 55

101  88 70  77 68

101  89 71  76 56

101  88 71  76 59

101  88 72  75 56

102  89 70  71 57
102  89 69  74 63

102  89 76  88 66

103  90 79  93 82
102  90  t  330  131

101  90  100  111  141

102  90 93  111  153


*  Nominal

t  No  business.


156


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  22— (Concluded)


Actual  rates  of  interest

Relative  rates  of  interest
Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =

=  100

Bonds

Commercial  paper

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange
4.72%

B.

onds

A

Commercial  paper

1910  January

'west
Shore
R.  R.
3.94%

At.  of  '

10  R.  R.

bonds

4.06%

4-6
months

5.28%

60-90
days

4.75%

West
Shore
B.  R.

103

Av.  of

10  R.  R.

bonds

90

4-6
months

88

60-90
days

104

Call  loans
at  Stock
Exchange

143

February

3.94

4.07

5.16

4.44

2.78

103

90

86

97

84

March

3.97

4.10

5.23

4.50

2.88

104

91

87

98

87

April

3.98

4.13

5.59

4.75

3.28

104

92

93

104

100

May

3.99

4.16

5.45

4.75

3.63

104

92

91

104

110

June

3.95

4.18

5.50

4.81

2.77

103

93

92

105

84

July

3.98

4.20

6.16

5.38

2.41

104

93

103

117

73

August

3.96

4.19

6.30

5.43

1.55

103

93

105

118

47

September

3.95

4.13

6.31

5.53

2.00

103

92

105

121

61

October

3.95

4.12

6.21

5.56

3.13

103

91

104

121

95

November

3.96

4.14

6.15

5.50

3.23

103

92

103

120

98

December

3.96

4.15

5.28

4.66

3.38

103

92

88

102

103

1911  January

3.95

4.13

4.61

3.98

3.18

103

92

77

87

97

February

3.97

4.14

4.72

4.09

2.28

104

92

79

89

69

March

3.97

4.16

4.59

3.88

2.28

104

93

77

85

69

April

3.98

4.15

4.28

3.66

2.30

104

93

72

80

70

May

3.96

4.14

4.33

3.63

2.31

103

92

72

79

70

June

3.96

4.14

4.63

3.69

2.40

103

92

77

81

73

July

3.96

4.15

4.79

3.78

2.36

103

92

80

83

72

August

3.99

4.15

4.86

4.19

2.31

104

92

81

92

70

September

4.00

4.17

5.33

4.54

2.28

105

93

89

99

69

October

3.99

4.20

4.93

4.35

2.33

104

93

83

95

71

November

3.98

4.18

4.72

3.91

2.72

104

93

79

85

83

December

3.96

4.19

5.25

4.63

4.03

103

93

88

101

123

*  Nominal.
t  No  business.

2.  Rates  of  Interest  Yielded  hy  Investments  in  Bonds

The  differences  shown  by  Table  19  among  the  net  yields  of  the  ten  bonds
may  readily  be  accounted  for  by  differences  in  the  proportionate  value  of  the
underlying  properties,  by  the  existence  or  non-existence .  of  prior  liens,  by  the
relative  financial  strength  of  the  issuing  or  guaranteeing  corporations,  etc.
Similarly,  the  frequent  changes  in  rank  among  the  bonds  may  be  ascribed  to
alterations  in  these  particular  conditions,  which  a  well-advised  investor  con-
siders in  estimating  the  risks  he  runs  in  buying  securities.

But  there  is  one  fact  of  more  general  interest  about  these  differences  in
yield.  The  margins  between  the  higher  and  lower  yields  have  grown  narrower
in  the  course  of  twenty  years. In  1890  the  maximum  difference  was  5.24-3.88


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  157

per  cent  =  1.36 ;  in  1900  it  was  4.40-3.42  per  cent  =  0.98 ;  in  1909,  4.24-3.87  per
cent  =  0.37.  The  chief  cause  of  this  narrowing  of  the  margins  has  been  an
improvement  since  the  middle  nineties  in  the  credit  of  the  lower  grade  issues
among  investors.  The  risks  imputed  to  the  holding  of  bonds  of  such  railways
as,  for  example,  the  Chicago  and  Eastern  Illinois  have  diminished.  With  one
exception — the  bonds  of  the  West  Shore  Railroad— all  the  bonds  gave  lower
yields  in  1911  than  in  1890.  The  West  Shore  bonds,  guaranteed  principal  and
interest  by  the  New  York  Central  and  having  over  400  years  to  run,  were  rated
decidedly  higher  by  investors  in  1890  than  any  other  security  in  the  present  list.
But,  since  then,  the  improvement  in  the  financial  condition  and  prospects  of
other  railways  has  gradually  brought  their  obligations  closer  to  the  high
standard  of  securities  guaranteed  by  the  New  York  Central.  Indeed,  in  recent
years  the  bonds  of  the  Burlington,  the  Milwaukee,  and  the  Central  of  New
Jersey  have  frequently  outranked  the  bonds  of  the  West  Shore.

Another  factor  in  reducing  the  risk  and  therefore  the  net  yields  upon
investments  in  bonds  was  the  adoption  of  the  gold  standard  in  1900.  But  it
is  clear  that  doubts  about  the  dollar  in  which  interest  and  principal  would  be
paid  troubled  the  minds  of  investors  in  railway  bonds  less  than  doubts  about
the  financial  condition  of  the  issuing  companies.  For  the  bonds  in  highest
credit  during  the  nineties  were  not  expressly  payable  in  gold,  and  certain,  of
the  bonds  in  poorest  credit  were— for  example,  the  securities  of  the  Missouri,
Kansas  and  Texas.  The  danger  of  payment  in  a  silver  dollar  had  most  influence
diiring  Mr.  Bryan's  first  campaign.  In  1896  the  average  yield  of  the  six  gold
bonds  rose  0.25  per  cent  between  June  and  August,  and  declined  0.24  per  cent
between  August  and  December.  Meanwhile  the  average  yield  of  the  four
currency  bonds  rose  0.37  and  declined  0.36  per  cent.

The  average  yield  of  all  ten  bonds  is  the  best  available  gauge  of  the  changes
in  the  rates  which  large  American  corporations  have  paid  for  new  loans  on
long  time  since  1890,  and  also  the  best  gauge  of  the  net  returns  which  permanent
investors  have  received  upon  current  purchases  of  bonds.  But  it  is  distinctly
not  the  best  gauge  of  changing  rates  upon  long  loans  of  substantially  uniform
security.  For  the  latter  purpose  the  yield  of  the  West  Shore  bonds  is  prefer-
able, since  the  financial  credit  of  the  guarantor  was  so  firmly  established  in
1890  as  to  be  little  shaken  by  the  years  of  depression  and  little  strengthened
by  the  years  of  prosperity.  In  other  words,  the  yields  of  this  issue  refiect  the
changes  in  the  supply  of,  and  the  demand  for,  loan  capital  for  fixed  investment
with  less  distortion  by  the  factor  of  risk  than  do  the  yields  of  the  nine  other
bonds.  But,  since  the  yields  of  the  other  bonds  are  more  typical  of  American
experience  since  1890,  the  detailed  tables  have  been  arranged  to  show  both  the
net  yields  of  the  West  Shore  bonds,  and  the  average  net  yields  of  all  ten.


158  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  general  course  of  the  average  yields  has  been  as  follows :  Starting  at
4.62  per  cent  in  January,  1890,  the  rate  rose  with  the  business  difficulties  of
the  siunmer  and  autumn  to  4.96  per  cent  in  December.  During  the  reaction
which  followed  the  figure  fell  to  4.81  in  February,  but  rose  again  to  4.93  in
July.  The  extraordinarj^  shortage  in  the  European  wheat  harvest  of  1891
combined  with  the  abundant  American  crop  to  change  the  bond  market,  as  it
did  so  many  other  features  of  the  business  situation.  Yields  declined  with
scarcely  a  break  to  4.59  per  cent  in  June,  1892.  Then,  as  financial  difficulties
began  to  accumulate  again,  the  rate  went  up  to  4.69  per  cent  in  December.  A
brief  relaxation  of  the  strain  caused  a  decline  to  4.60  per  cent  in  February,
1893 :  but  when  the  panic  broke  out  bonds  fell  in  price  like  all  other  securities
and  the  average  yield  mounted  to  5.07  per  cent  in  August,  the  highest  point
in  the  twenty-two  years.

A  prompt  reduction  in  interest  rates  was  one  of  the  salient  features  of  the
intense  depression  which  followed.  By  April,  1894,  the  average  yield  upon
bonds  was  4.55  per  cent — decidedly  less  than  before  the  panic  began.  With
some  interruptions,  the  fall  continued  to  4.35  per  cent  in  September,  1895.
Next  year  the  free-silver  campaign  caused  a  vigorous  advance  from  4.45  per
cent  in  June  to  4.75  per  cent  in  August;  but  rates  fell  again  as  Mr.  Bryan's
prospects  of  victory  waned  and  by  July,  3897,  the  average  rate  was  4.34  per
cent — lower  than  in  1895.

During  the  years  of  business  revival  which  followed  the  summer  of  1897
bond  yields  continued  to  decline  slowly,  as  they  had  done  during  the  years  of
business  depression.  The  only  notable  interruptions  of  this  fall  occurred  in
March  and  April,  1898,  when  the  Spanish  War  began ;  in  September-December,
1899,  when  the  Boer  War  broke  out  and  the  "boom"  in  industrial  stocks  threat-
ened to  collapse;  in  May  and  June,  1900,  when  a  business  reaction  began  in
Europe  and  seemed  imminent  in  America;  and  in  the  months  following  the
Northern  Pacific  corner  of  May,  1901.  The  lowest  point  was  reached  in  April
and  May,  1902—3.72  per  cent.

The  period  of  "undigested  securities"  or  the  "rich  man's  panic"  turned
the  tide,  and  bond  yields  rose  rapidly  to  a  maximum  of  4.07  per  cent  in  August,
1903.  The  gradual  return  of  financial  ease  brought  on  a  new  decline  which
ran  through  1904  to  its  culmination  in  August,  1905.  But  the  record  of  this
month — 3.80  per  cent — did  not  equal  the  low  record  of  1902.

A  new  phase  of  development  began  in  September,  1905 — business  prosperity
accompanied  by  steadily  rising  rates  of  interest  on  bonds,  whereas  the  pros-
perous years  1898-1902  had  been  accompanied  by  falling  rates.  With  scarcely
a  break,  bond  yields  mounted  month  by  month  to  a  climax  in  November,  1907.
As  early  as  March,  1907,  the  highest  record  of  the  "rich  man's  panic"  had
been  surpassed,  and  to  find  an  equal  to  the  record  of  the  panic  of  November —
4.53  per  cent — it  is  necessary  to  go  back  eleven  years  to  the  excited  summer


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  159

of  1896.  But  not  all  the  ground  gained  in  1894-1902  was  lost;  for  the  panic
of  1907  did  not  drive  bond  yields  very  close  to  the  5.07  per  cent  attained  in
1893.

In  this  respect  the  yield  upon  the  West  Shore  bonds  presents  a  marked
contrast  to  the  average  yield.  This  most  stable  of  our  securities  had  shared
in  most  of  the  short-period  oscillations  of  the  average;  but  its  long-period
oscillations  were  different,  because,  as  has  been  said,  its  credit  was  less  improved
by  the  good  times  after  1897  than  that  of  the  other  bonds.  A  year  before  the
breaking  out  of  the  crisis  of  1893  the  yield  of  the  West  Shore  stood  at  3.87
per  cent;  a  year  before  the  breaking  out  of  the  crisis  of  1907  it  stood  at  3.83.
The  corresponding  figures  for  the  average  yields  were  4.59  and  3.98  per  cent.
The  West  Shore's  maximum  during  the  two  crises  was  the  same — 4.21  per  cent;
the  maxima  of  the  average  were  5.07  per  cent  and  4.53  per  cent.  In  both  cases,
however,  the  increase  in  yields  within  the  twelvemonth  preceding  the  climax
of  the  crisis  was  greater  in  1907  than  in  1893.

The  conclusion  suggested  by  these  facts — that  the  demand  for  loan  capital
for  fixed  investment  was  greater  in  proportion  to  the  supply  in  the  later  than
in  the  earlier  crisis — is  supported  by  the  contrast  between  the  yields  during
the  dull  years  which  followed  the  two  crises.  In  both  cases  yields  declined
after  the  panic,  but  the  decline  was  notably  less  in  the  later  case.  On  the  basis
of  yields  for  the  whole  year,  tbe  ten  bonds  fell  0.16  per  cent  in  1893-94,  and
0.06  per  cent  in  1907-08,  while  the  West  Shore  bonds  fell  0.15  per  cent  in  the
first  case  and  0.02  per  cent  in  the  second.  In  1909,  however,  bond  yields
declined  more  in  comparison  with  1908  than  they  did  in  1895  in  comparison
with  1894.

The  rather  unsatisfactory  series  for  United  States  bonds  (Table  20)  pursues
a  course  somewhat  different  from  that  of  the  railway  issues.  The  4  per  cents
both  of  1907  and  of  1925  are  "currency"  bonds,  like  the  bonds  of  the  West
Shore;  but  they  appear  to  have  been  influenced  much  more  by  the  difficulties
of  the  treasury  in  1893-95  and  by  the  free-silver  campaign  of  1896  than  were
any  of  the  railway  securities.  The  chief  anomaly  which  they  present  is  in
giving  higher  yields  in  1896  than  in  1893.  Thereafter  for  a  time  their  course
paralleled  that  of  the  West  Shore  bonds.  That  is,  their  yields  declined  from
1896  to  1901,  advanced  until  1904,  declined  in  1905,  and  then  rose  until  1907.
But,  instead  of  declining  like  the  yields  of  railway  bonds  in  1908-09,  they  rose
in  both  years,  and  stood  at  the  close  of  the  period  well  above  their  level  of
twenty  years  before.  These  peculiar  movements  of  1908-09  were  influenced
by  the  act  of  March  4,  1907,  which  legalized  the  practice  begun  by  Secretary
Shaw  of  accepting  other  than  United  States  bonds  as  security  for  government
deposits  with  the  national  banks,  and  also  by  the  sale  of  Panama  Canal  bonds.

During  all  this  time,  of  course,  the  actual  yield  upon  "governments"
remained  much  smaller  than  the  yield  upon  any  of  the  railway  issues ;  but  the


160  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

columns  for  relative  rates  show  that  the  yield  of  no  railway  bond  in  the  list
has  undergone  such  violent  changes.  Instead  of  proving  the  stablest  of
American  securities  from  the  investor's  point  of  view,  government  bonds  have
proved  the  least  stable  among  the  bonds  for  which  yields  have  been  computed.

3.  Rates  of  Interest  upon  Short-time  Loans

How  average  short-time  rates  of  interest  compare  with  average  yields  of
bonds  is  summarily  shown  by  the  little  table  which  follows:"

TABLE  23

Average  Eates  of  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Bonds  and  by  Shokt-Time  Loans

Actual  rates  Relative  rates

, ' N  , * <

1890-1909 1890-99 1900-09  1890-99 1900-09

United  States  4s  2.45% 2.76% 2.14%  100  78

West  Shore  bonds  3.78  3.83  3.74  100  98

Average  of  10  railway  bonds  4.23  4.51  3.95  100  88

Commercial  paper,  4-6  months  5.78  5.99  5.58  100  93

Commercial  paper,  60-90  days  4.68  4.58  4.78  100  104

Call  loans 3.67  3.29  4.05  100  123


The  twenty-year  averages  of  the  investment  rates  are  all  lower  than  the  like
averages  for  commercial  paper.  But  the  call-loan  rate  averages  less  than  the
yields  of  any  investments  except  those  in  government  bonds.

In  comparing  the  two  decades,  it  appears  that  the  short-time  rates  have
either  advanced  to  higher  levels  in  1900-09,  or  receded  but  little  f^  while  all  the
investment  rates,  except  that  on  West  Shore  bonds,  declined  considerably.
The  diminution  of  risks  seems  to  have  been  a  less  important  factor  in  the
market  for  short-time  loans  than  in  the  market  for  investment  securities,

ISTot  less  important  than  these  differences  in  the  long-period  averages  of
investment  and  short-time  rates  are  the  differences  in  stability.  How  much
wider  is  the  range  through  which  the  short-time  rates  fluctuate  appears  from
a  glance  at  the  extreme  variations.


54  The  comparisons  in  this  section  are  slightly  inaccurate,  because  it  is  necessary  to  set  discount  rates  on
commercial  paper  against  interest  rates  on  investments  in  bonds  and  on  call  loans.

55  If  the  quotations  for  commercial  paper,  4-6  months,  during  the  crisis  of  1907  were  more  complete  that
class  of  short-time  loans  would  probably  show  scarcely  any  decline  in  the  second  decade.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


161


TABLE  24

Extreme  Variations  in  the  Monthly  Rates  op  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Bonds  and  by  Short-
Time  Loans,  1890-1911

Actual  rates

'  117"; ~  ~ ^ ^  Relative  rates

Highest  Lowest  , «^

' — p> , * , Differ-  Diffier-

■^-'^te  Kate  Date  Rate  ence Highest  Lowest ence

West  Shore  bonds  j^ug.,  1893J ^  ^^^^ ^^^^^  ^^^^ ^^^^^ ^^^^ ^^^ ^^  ^^

Average  of  10  railway  bonds  Aug.,  1893  5.07  |^P^^ ]:^°^|  3.72  1.35  112  83  29

Commercial  paper,  4-6  months  Sept.,  1893  10.14  July, 1909  4.15  5.99  169  69  100

Commercial  paper,  60-90  days  July, 1893  9.75  June,  1895  2.63  7.12  213  57  156

Call  loans  Oct., 1907  21.00  Aug.,  1904  .90  20.10  638  27  611

What  holds  of  these  extreme  variations  holds  also  of  the  variations  from
one  season  of  the  year  to  the  next.  There  is  but  a  slight  difference  between
the  summer  and  autumn  yields  of  bonds,  while  the  rates  for  commercial  paper
and  call  loans  undergo  marked  changes.  Twenty-year  averages  for  each  month
show  the  general  trend  of  the  market.  Starting  from  the  lowest  point  of  the
year  in  June,  rates  for  commercial  paper  rise  to  their  highest  point  in  Sep-
tember or  October,  and  then  decline  until  February,  when  they  stand  little
above  the  lowest  level  of  the  summer.  The  opening  of  spring  business  causes
a  temporary  advance  in  March;  but  the  tide  quickly  turns  and  rates  decline
through  April  and  May  to  the  low  starting-point  of  June.  Call-loan  rates
pursue  a  somewhat  similar  but  more  erratic  course ;  for  their  monthly  averages,
even  over  a  period  of  twenty  years,  are  disturbed  by  the  extremely  high  rates
which  occur  during  panics  and  periods  of  feverish  speculation  in  stocks.°°


TABLE  25
Average  Seasonal  Variations  in  the  Eates  of  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Bonds  and  by  Short-
Time  Loans  During  Twenty  Years


West  Shore

Railroad

bonds

Average  of

10  railway

bonds

Commercial  paper

4-6  months

60-90  days

Call  loans

January

3.77%

4.23%

5.81%

4.59%

3.79%

February

3.76

4.21

5.55

4.27

2.55

March

3.77

4.23

5.74

4.66

3.41

April

3.78

4.23

5.62

4.51

3.36

May

3.79

4.21

5.41

4.26

2.85

June

3.77

4.22

5.37

4.20

2.64

July

3.78

4.24

5.54

4.50

2.69

August

3.80

4.25

5.91

4.93

2.87

September

3.79

4.25

6.33

5.24

4.06

October

3.80

4.24

6.40

5.23

5.02

November

3.80

4.23

6.01

5.02

4.75

December

3.79

4.23

6.02

4.99 '

6.01

56  The  frequent  deviations  from  the  general  seasonal  trend  may  be  followed  in  the  monthly  figures  of
Table  22.

The  twenty-year  averages  by  years  which  may  be  computed  from  Table  25  do  not  agree  precisely  in  all  cases
with  the  corresponding  figures  of  Table  23.  For  an  explanation  see  the  statement  in  footnote  52  of  this  chapter
concerning  the  methods  by  which  the  monthly,  quarterly,  and  yearly  averages  for  short-time  rates  were  made.
The  figures  by  years  are  more  accurate  than  the  figures  by  months.

Professor  E.  W.  Kemmerer  's  Seasonal  Variations  in  the  Relative  Demand  for  Money  and  Capital  in  the  United
States  (Senate  Document,  no.  588,  61st  Congress,  2d  session)  provides  detailed  statistics  of  the  changes  in
interest  rates  from  one  season  of  the  year  to  the  next.  The  results  of  the  two  investigations  are  in  close
agreement.


162  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

Table  26  shows  tlie  average  rates  of  interest  yielded  by  investments  in  bonds
and  by  short-time  loans  for  the  successive  phases  of  each  business  cycle  since
1890.  Here  the  differences  which  have  been  commented  upon  reappear  in
another  form.  The  lower  range  of  average  bond  yields  in  the  second  decade
is  contrasted  with  the  relative  stability  of  the  ten-year  levels  for  commercial
paper.  On  the  other  hand,  in  short  periods  bond  yields  are  stable  and  short-
time  loan  rates  are  variable.  But  all  the  rates  show  the  powerful  influence  of
changing  business  conditions.


TABLE  26

Bates  of  Interest  Yielded  by  Investments  in  Bonds  and  by  Short- Time  Loans  in  Seasons  of  Business  Prosperity,

Crisis,  and  Depression,  1890-1911

Relative  rates  of  interest

Actual  rates  of  interest  Average  actual  rates  1890-99  =  100

^ « ^ ^ I K.

Bonds Commercial  paper  Bonds  Commercial  paper

West Av.  of Call  loans  West  Av.  of  Call  loans

Shore 10  B.  R. 4-6 60-90 at  Stock  Shore  10  R.  R. 4-6  60-90  at  Stock

R.  R, bonds months days Exchange  R.  R.  bonds  months  days  Exchange

Jan.,  1890-July,  1890— Prosperity  3.83% 4.65% 6.41% 5.17% 4.96%  100  103  107  113  151

Aug.,  1890-Dec.,  1890— Minor  crisis  3.94 4.82 7.60 6.56 7.08  103  107  127  143  215

Jan.,  1891-July,  1891— Depression  3.96 4.S7 6.57 5.38 3.26  103  108  110  117  99

Aug.,  1891-Aug.,  1892— Prosperity  3.92 4.70 5.51 4.30 2.57  102  104  92  94  78

Sept.,  1892-Apr.,  1893— Approach  of  crisis  .... 3.94 4.65 6.24 5.38 5.23  103  103  104  ]17  159

May,  1893-Oct.,  1893— Major  crisis  4.09 4.86 9.23 8.19 5.31  107  108  154  179  161

Nov.,  1893-Mar.,  1895— Severe  depression  .... 3.87 4.60 5.48 3.25 1.22  101  102  92  71  37

Apr.,  1895-Sept.,  1895— Eevival  3.81 4.43 5.29 3.31 1.45  100  98  88  72  44

Oct.,  1895-June,  1896— Renewed  depression .. 3.81 4.45 6.59 4.94 3.17  100  99  110  108  96

July,  1896-Oct.,  1896 — Free-silver  campaign.. 3.92 4.67 8.10 7.47 5.84  102  104  135  163  177

Nov.,  1896-June,  1897— Depression  3.77 4.44 4.83 3.62 2.17  99  98  81  79  66

July,  1897-Feb.,  1898— Revival  3.69 4.29 4.81 3.61 2.02  96  95  80  79  61

Mar.,  1898-Apr.,  1898— Spanish  war  impending 3.78 4.35 6.84 5.22 2.57  99  96  114  114  78

May,  1898-Sept.,  1899— Prosperity  3.61 4.05 5.12 3.65 3.02  94  90  86  80  92

Oct.,  1899-Dec.,  1899— Minor  crisis  3.59 4.00 6.73 5.45 8.74  94  89  112  119  265

Jan.,  1900-Sept.,  1900 — Slight  depression  3.57 3.96 5.68 4.27 2.39  93  88  95  93  73

Oct.,  1900-Oct.,  1902— Prosperity  3.54 3.79 5.56 4.52 4.47  93  84  93  99  136

Nov.,  1902-July,  1904— "Rich  man's  panic" 3.70 3.95 5.82 5.09 3.20  97  88  97  111  97

Aug.,  1904-Aug.,  1905— Revival  3.70 3.84 4.93 4.06 2.35  97  85  82  89  71

Sept.,  1905-Sept.,  1906— Prosperity  3.76 3.90 6.06 5.42 6.53  98  86  101  118  198

Oct.,  1906-Sept.,  1907— Approach  of  crisis  .... 3.90 4.10 6.57 6.06 5.25  102  91  110  132  159

Oct.,  1907-Dec.,  1907— Major  crisis  4.13 4.45 *7.33 7.50 15.95  108  99  *122  164  484

Jan.,  1908-Sept.,  1908 — Severe  depression  .... 3.96 4.20 5.05 4.50 1.88  103  93  84  98  57

Oct.,  1908-Dec.,  1909— Eevival  3.90 4.01 4.61 3.99 2.57  102  89  77  87  78

Jan.,  1910-Dec.,  1911— Reaction  3.97 4.15 5.22 4.52 2.77  104  92  87  99  84

*  Nominal.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  163

In  the  periods  of  business  depression  which  follow  on  crises  rates  of  interest
on  well-secured  loans  of  all  kinds  fall."  Call  rates  and  discounts  on  60-90  day
commercial  paper  reach  their  lowest  points  in  such  seasons  (see  Tables  24  and
22)  ;  but  the  rates  on  4-6  months  paper  and  on  bonds  usually  continue  their

w?.  1  .""^^  ^*  ^^^'*  *^^  ^'"'"^'^^  '*^^^'  ^^  *^e  succeeding  revival  of  activity
When  the  tide  of  prosperity  rises,  however,  all  the  short-time  rates  run  up
Even  the  current  yields  upon  bonds  rise  if  the  prosperity  is  long  continued  and
the  demand  for  investment  loans  grows  great,  as  in  1905-07.  On  the  other
^^onr^?"^  ^^^^^  "^^^  continue  to  decline  throughout  a  prosperous  season  as
m  1897-1902,  if  the  dwindling  of  imputed  risks  is  notable.  Finally,  when  the
crisis  comes  rates  on  all  kinds  of  loans  reach  their  highest  points.  The
available  market  quotations  fail  to  show  the  full  increase  in  the  discount  upon
commercial  paper  during  panics,  because  many  loans  of  this  character  can
scarcely  be  negotiated  on  any  terms,  and  because  the  rates  for  such  business
as  IS  done  are  often  above  the  nominal  quotations.  But  when  the  pressure  of
the  panic  relaxes  rates  to  solvent  borrowers  fall  off  rapidly  to  the  low  points
characteristic  of  depression.

4.  International  Comparisons

For  comparison  with  the  American  tables  of  net  yields  upon  investments
in  bonds  no  foreign  material  is  readily  available  save  with  reference  to  gov-
ernment securities.  Of  course,  British  consols,  French  rentes,  and  imperial
German  bonds  are  ultra-conservative  investments,  and  yield  exceptionally  low
rates  of  interest.  Moreover,  both  the  supply  of  and  the  demand  for  these
securities  are  subject  in  a  special  degree  to  certain  conditions  not  arising  from
the  business  situation — such  as  prospects  of  war  and  peace,  increase  of  govern-
ment expenditures,  purchases  for  government  savings  banks  or  sinking  funds,
changes  in  the  list  of  securities  legally  open  to  investment  by  trustees,  actual
or  prospective  alterations  in  tax  laws,  and  the  like.  These  peculiar  conditions
may  cause  changes  in  the  yields  upon  government  bonds  which  are  not  repre-
sentative of  the  general  trend  of  the  investment  market.  But  until  some
student,  with  the  full  European  material  at  his  command,  shall  have  provided
adequate  tables  of  the  net  yields  upon  investments  in  the  bonds  of  business
enterprises,  changes  in  the  yields  of  government  securities  will  remain  the
safest  guide  to  alterations  in  the  long-time  rates  of  interest.^' They  are  cer-

57  Borrowers  in  doubtful  credit,  whether  merchants  selling  commercial  paper  or  corporations  selling  bonds,
may  find  it  difficult  to  secure  loans  at  any  price  in  such  seasons,  or  may  be  forced  to  pay  very  high  rates  as
an  offset  to  the  risks  incurred  by  lenders.

58  Upon  foreign  rates  of  interest  see  A.  H.  Gibson,  The  Fall  in  Consols  and  Other  Investments  since  1897
(London,  1908);  P.  L.  Newman,  "A  Eeview  of  the  Investments  of  Offices  in  Recent  Years,"  Journal  of  the
Institute  of  Actuaries,  XLII,  294-320;  F.  Hawkar,  "Note  sur  les  variations  du  taux  de  I'int^ret  en  Belgique,"
Proceedings  of  the  Fourth  International  Congress  of  Actuaries  (New  York,  1904),  I,  345-350;  G.  Eobert,  Bes
variations  du  taux  de  I'interet  (Lyon,  1902);  E.  Voye,  "Ueber  die  Hohe  der  verschiedenen  Zinsarten, "  Samm-
lung  nationalohonomischer  und  statistischer  Aihandlungen  des  staatswissenschaftlichen  Seminars  zu  Salle  (Jena,
1902) ;  N.  E.  Weill,  Vie  Solidaritat  der  GeldmdrMe  (Frankfurt  a.  M.,  1903) ;  II.  Albert,  Die  geschichtliche  Fnt-
wiclcelung  des  Zinsfusses  in  Deutschland  von  1895  his  1908  (Leipzig,  1910).  These  books  contain  much  statis-
tical information,  but  none  in  such  form  as  to  be  strictly  comparable  with  the  American  tables  of  the  present
chapter.


164


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


tainly  a  safer  guide  than  the  corresponding  American  figures  would  be  f"  for
during  the  period  considered  there  has  been  no  such  doubt  regarding  the
medium  in  which  the  obligations  of  Grreat  Britain,  France,  and  Germany  would
be  discharged  as  was  raised  by  the  free-silver  agitation  of  the  nineties,  and
removed  by  the  Gold  Standard  Act  of  1900.  Moreover,  the  European  markets
for  government  bonds  are  not  dominated  by  any  one  erratic  factor  to  the  same
degree  that  the  American  market  is  dominated  by  the  purchases  and  sales  by
national  banks.  Indeed,  so  exceptional  has  been  the  course  of  government
bonds  in  this  country  that  it  is  wiser  to  base  the  international  comparisons  upon
the  net  yields  of  the  West  Shore  Railroad's  securities  than  upon  the  net  yields
of  United  States  4s.

The  actual  yields  of  European  securities  are  taken  from  a  table  showing  the
"real  interest  earned  upon  European  ....  government  bonds  at  their  average
market  price,"  published  in  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States.''"  But


120


Chart 18

Relative  Rates  of  Interest  Yielded by  iNVESTMErvrrs  in  Bonds of  the  v/est  Shore

Railway and  of  the: American  ,  British  ,  Trench  ,  and German Governments.

1890-1909.


IjNiTED States 4*3 of I9oi  and 1925

West Shore Railway.

English Consols 2  %  and 2  '/z  per  cent.

French Rentes 3  per cent.

German Imperial 3  per cent.


120


1890 '91 '92 '93 94 '95 '96 '91 '98 '93 I9D0 'Ol 02 '03 04 '05 '06 "oi '08 '09 I9l0


69  Albert,  op.  cit.,  42-52,  shows  that  in  Germany  the  fluctuations  of  interest  upon  mortgage  loans  follow
closely  the  fluctuations  of  net  yields  upon  government  bonds  during  the  years  1895-1908.

60  One  of  the  reports  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission  (Senate  Document,  no.  570,  61st  Congress,
2d  session,  p.  281).  In  turn,  Andrew  took  his  foreign  data  from  the  Materialien  zur  Beurteilung  der  Zusam-
menhdnge  zwischen  dem  offentliohen  Schuldenwesen  und  dem  Kapitalmarlcte  (Berlin,  1908).


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  165

the  net  jdeld  of  British  consols  in  1903,  the  year  in  which  the  rate  of  interest
was  reduced  from  2%  to  21^  per  cent,  is  from  A.  H.  Gibson's  The  Fall  in
Consols."^  The  relative  rates  of  interest  have  been  computed  by  the  methods
explained  above.  The  average  actual  yields  in  1890-99  are  2.763  per  cent  upon
United  States  4s,  3.827  per  cent  upon  West  Shore  bonds,  2.673  per  cent  upon
consols,  3.042  per  cent  upon  rentes,  and  3.281  per  cent  upon  German  3s.  These
are  the  rates  which  equal  100  in  the  columns  for  relative  yields  in  Table  27.


TABLE  27

Actual  and  Relative  Bates  op  Interest  Yieldeb  by  Investments  in  Bonds  of  the  West  Shore  Railroad,  and
OP  THE  American,  British,  French,  and  German  Governments

By  years,  1890-1909


Actual  rates

Average  ac

Relative  rates
:tual  rates  1890-

A

-99  =  100

Tear

U.  S.  4s
of  1907
and  1925

West

Shore

R.B.

English
consols

2%  and
2^  %

French

rentes
3%

German
3s

U.  S.  4s
of  1907
and  1925

West
Shore
E.  E.

English
consols

2%  and
2%  %

French

rentes

3%

German
3s

1890

2.43%

3.88%

2.86%

3.32%

3.45%

88

101

107

109

105

1891

2.65

3.96

2.88

3.19

3.52

96

103

108

105

107

1892

2.80

3.90

2.85

3.09

3.48

101

102

107

102

106

1893

3.04

4.02

2.81

3.10

3.48

110

105

105

102

106

1894

2.79

3.87

2.73

3.01

3.31

101

101

102

99

101

1895

2.89

3.82

2.60

2.95

3.03

105

100

97

97

92

1896

3.14

3.85

2.49

2.95

3.02

114

101

93

97

92

1897

2.73

3.72

2.45

2.91

3.07

99

97

92

96

94

1898

2.69

3.69

2.49

2.93

3.14

97

96

93

96

96

1899

2.47

3.56

2.57

2.97

3.31

89

93

96

98

101

1900

2.18

3.57

2.77

2.99

3.46

79

93

104

98

105

1901

1.97

3;54

2.93

2.98

3.36

71

93

110

98

102

1902

1.98

3.55

2.92

2.99

3.25

72

93

109

98

99

1903

1.99

3.70

2.82

3.07

3.28

72

97

105

101

100

1904

2.09

3.72

2.84

3.09

3.33

76

97

106

102

101

1905

2.00

3.70

2.79

3.04

3.33

72

97

104

100

101

1906

2.04

3.80

2.84

3.08

3.42

74

99

106

101

104

1907

2.18

3.97

2.98

3.18

3.57

79

104

111

105

109

1908

2.44

3.95

2.91

3.13

3.62

88

103

109

103

110

1909

2.52

3.89

2.98

3.09

3.54

91

102

111

102

108

Averages
1890-99

2.76

3.83

2.67

3.04

3.28

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

2.14

3.74

2.88

3.06

3.42

77

98

108

101

104

61  London,  1908;  p.  54.


1G6


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


If  the  whole  period  of  twenty  years  be  taken,  the  United  States  bonds
give  the  lowest  average  yields.  Then  in  order  come  the  securities  of  Great
Britain,  Prance,  Germany,  and  the  West  Shore  Railroad.  The  margin  between
the  government  bonds  which  give  the  lowest  and  highest  yields  is  the  same  in
1909  as  in  1890.  Between  these  two  years  the  American,  British,  and  German
bonds  have  lost  ground,  while  French  rentes  have  gained.

European  statistics  of  discount  rates  are  distinctly  more  complete  and  more
authoritative  than  the  corresponding  American  figures.  It  is  sufficient  to  say
that  the  material  used  consists  of  the  bank  rates  and  market  rates  in  London,
Paris,  and  Berlin.  The  bank  rates  are  obtained  from  Palgrave's  tables,  as
published  in  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,
Germany,  and  France."'  The  market  rates  for  London  and  Paris  are  annual
averages  of  the  weekly  rates  given  in  the  same  document."^  The  Berlin  market
rates  are  compiled  from  the  StaUsticlie  Jahrhilcher  filr  das  Deutsche  Reich.
The  closest  American  counterpart  to  the  foreign  rates  is  afforded  by  the  series
for  double-name  commercial  paper,  running  60-90  days.

TABLE  28
Actual  and  Relative  Discount  Bates  on  Short-time  Loans  in  New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin

By  years,  1890-1!)11


Actual  Rates

Year
1890

New  York
60-90
days
5.64%

London
bank
rate
4.52%

Paris
bank
rate

3.00%

Berlin
bank
rate
4.52%

New  York
60-90
days

5.64%

London

market

rate

- 3.98%*

Paris

market

rate

2.62%

Berlin

market

rate

3.78%-

1891

5.41

3.26

3.00

3.79

5.41

2.44

2.53

3.02

1892

4.04

2.53

2.70

3.21

4.04

1.47

1.79

1.80

1893

6.86

3.05

2.50

4.07

6.86

2.13

2.22

3.17

1894

3.04

2.n

2.50

3.13

3.04

.97

1.78

1.74

1895

3.64

2.00

2.10

3.14

3.64

.80

1.63

2.01

1896

5.76

2.48

2.00

3.67

5.76

1.47

1.72

3.04

1897

3.57

2.63

2.00

3.81

3.57

1.81-

1.81

3.09

1898

3.82

3.24

2.20

4.27

3.82

2.58

1.99

3.55

1899

4.05

3.75

3.06

5.04

4.05

3.24

2.83

4.45

1900

4.38

3.98

3.24

5.33

4.38

3.64

3.03

4.41

1901

4.24

3.72

3.00

4.10

4.24

3.19

2.41

3.06

1902

4.88

3.33

3.00

3.33

4.88

2,97

2.40

2.19

1903

5.43

3.75

3.00

3.84

5.43

3.38

2.70

3.01

1904

4.24

3.30

3.00

4.23

4.24

2.67

2.14

3.14

*  May  16  to  end  of

the  year — 33

weeks.

02  Senate  Document,  no.  578,  Olst  Congress,  2d  session,  pp.  134,  137,  140.

03  Pp.  44-62,  315,  316.  Among  the  several  London  rates  I  have  chosen  that  for  60-day  bills.  The  London
rates  for  1910  are  computed  from  the  weekly  reports  of  the  Economist;  the  French  and  German  rates  for
the  same  year  are  from  the  Statistisches  JaJirbuch  fiir  das  deutsche  Reich,  1911,  p.  64.*  These  German  tables
make  the  market  rate  in  Paris  a  trifle  higher  than  the  tables  published  by  the  Monetary  Commission  for
1890-1908.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


167


TABLE  2S— {Concluded)
Actual  and  Relative  Discount  Eates  on  Short-time  Loans  in  New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin

By  years,  1890-1911


Actual  Mates

New  York

London

Paris Berlin

New  York

London

Paris

Berlin

■  60-90

bank

bank bank

60-90

market

market

market

Year

days

rate

rate rate

days

rate

rate

rate

1905

4.35%

3.00%

3.00% 3.81%

4.35%

2.64%

2.11%

2.85%

1906

5.68

4.26

3.00 5.15

5.68

4.06

2.69

4.04

1907

6.27

4.92

3.46 6.03

6.27

4.47

3.36

5.12

1908

4.42

3.02

3.05 4.78

4.42

2.24

2.13

3.52

1909

3.86

3.10

3.00 3.93

3.86

2.29

1.79

2.87

1910

5.01

3.72

3.00 4.35

5.01

3.16

2.44

3.54

1911

4.02

3.47

3.14 4.40

4.02

2.92

2.61

3.54

Averages

1890-99

4.58

2.96

2.51 3.87

4.58

2.09

2.09

2.97

1900-09

4.78

3.64

3.08 4.45

4.78

3.16

2.48

3.42

Belative  Sates

Average  actual  rates  in

1890-99  =

100

New  York

London

Paris Berlin

New  York

London

Paris

Berlin

60-90

bank

bank bank

60-90

market

market

market

Year

days

rate

rate rate

days

rate

rate

rate

1890

123

153

120 117

123

191*

125

127

1891

118

110

120 98

118

117

121

102

1892

88

86

108 83

88

70

86

61

1893

150

103

100 105

150

102

106

107

1894

66

71

100 81

66

46

85

59

1895

79

68

84 81

79

38

78

68

1896

126

84

80 95

126

70

82

103

1897

78

89

80 99

78

87

87

104

1898

83

110

88 110

83

124

95

120

1899

88

127

122 130

88

155

135

150

1900

96

135

129 138

96

174

145

149

1901

93

126

120 106

93

153

115

103

1902

106

113

120 86

106

142

115

74

1903

118

127

120 99

118

162

129

102

1904

93

112

120 109

93

128

102

106

1905

95

101

120 99

95

126

101

96

1906

124

144

120 133

124

194

129

136

1907

137

166

138 156

137

214

161

173

1908

96

102

122 124

96

107

102

119

1909

84

105

120 102

84

110

86

97

1910

109

126

120 112

109

151

117

119

1911

88

117

125 114

88

140

125

119

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100 100

100

100

100

100

1 900-09

104

123

123 121

104

151

118

116

*  May  16  to  end  of  the  year — 33  weeks.


168


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA


Chart  I9.

Relative  Bank  Discount Ratcs on Short  TTme Loans in

New York  , London  , Paris, and Berlin.

no

1830-1910.

no

160

London Bank Rate.

Paris Bank Rate.

BERLIN Bank  Rate.

1
1

leo

1
1

1

1  !

1
•1

150

1 !

150

1  '■

1  !

\

140

1

:

\

140

;

I .

1;

1

//

V

/

i  1

\'^

130

.'/

i\

'.

y

\\|-

130

i

/ /

•.'•\

1:

/

\v.

S  1

ii

il

/
/

\'

\

/

/

\
\

\\\

^,^

I
1

IZO

Jvl

1

■'/

;  \

\

^

1' i

/

I 1

120

->

\
\
\

//

\
\

/ i
/ /
i /

\

\  \
\ \

f

\l

\

— ^

/

/
/

110

•

1

/

1

/

\

V

11

',

no

\\

^'

1

1

,/

\  ..

•A

ll

',

/

100

\
— 1

'i

1

/

1

//
//

\/

,A

•A
•A

1

\

A
^

/

100

I

\

1

"l

/

/

\

/

\\\

\l

\

/ ;

1

/

/

\

1  \

/

\

/

Bo

— vtt

4^-

\

/ "

I

/

/

\

/

\

/

90

If

\

\

//

/\

/

/

/

'.

!

A^

/

•,

1

I

[■■

/ \

/

/

\

f

80

\

r

V

'A

80

/

/
/

/

/

/

10

7

/

70

/"•

f

1890 91 92 93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900 'Ol '02 'OJ "04 '05 'oS 'oi "08 "09 is'lo ' '

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


169


CHART 20.
RELATIVE  MARKET  DISCOUNT  RATES  ON  SHORT  TIME  LOANS

1

IN  NEW  YORK  .  LONDON  ,  PARIS ,  AND BERLIN

1
1

1
1

200

1890-1910.

1

1

1

200

1

1

1
1

UDNDON MARKET RATE.

1
1

- — BERLIN MARKET RATE

1

r

1

180

1

160

\
\

1
1
1
1
r

1
'  1

/

\

1

;l

/

\
\

1
1

;  1
■  1

\

1

•  1

1
1
I
i:

/

■■•••
>

i

\
\
\
>

/

/
/

/

/
/

J

1

I

1
1

il
■i

.■/■

//

■••1

i
1

140

i;

/

1

r

1  •

h

140

1:
i:

1'

/

\

1

1
1 .

/
/■/

^

^  '

1.  .
■■  1

\

i

^**,

1 :
;/

'  /

1

120

^^

■•\

1

\

i'j

\\*

ISO

•  V,

1

(

\

ti

^ I

1

/

/■

■;

i  1

\\

i\

V'

1

1

.•(

\\

j

\l

•, 1

ion

l\
l\

1 ;

s

T

./

:';

/
1

/

/■
1

7

1

•\..

11

i

;*•'

/

100

•  1 1

^m

1

1
1

/

/

S^

/

\

\

j

1

1

•  1

If

1

',/

/

s

\  /

•.1 1
*  1

If

r.

1

/

/

\/

■.1
-.1

{
(

\

A

/

/'

\f

80

80

•1

(■"

'.

)

/

1

/

-.1

/•

i;

/

1

■.1

■

i:
I;

/,

\

1
1

•

r.

1

60

1

1

1
1
1

\

1

1
1
1

1
1

Art

\
\

1

40

\

1830 '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  '01 'OZ '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910 j

170  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Comparisons  between  the  actual  rates  are  unsatisfactory  because  of  the
uncertainty  regarding  the  technical  character  of  the  paper  discounted  in  the
several  markets.  But  it  may  be  pointed  out  (1)  that  the  annual  averages  of
foreign  bank  rates  are  always  higher  than  the  corresponding  market  rates,
(2)  that  for  the  whole  period  both  bank  rates  and  market  rates  are  lower  in
Paris  than  in  London,  and  lower  in  London  than  in  Berlin,  (3)  that  the  advan-
tage of  Paris  over  London  has  become  greater  since  1898,  (4)  that  the  New
York  rates  are  higher  than  even  the  bank  rates  in  Europe,  except  in  1897-1900
and  1908-09,  when  they  are  exceeded  by  the  rates  in  Berlin.

A  comparison  between  the  foreign  rates  on  short-time  loans  and  on  govern-
ment bonds  shows  that  the  latter  average  less  than  the  bank  rates  and  more
than  the  market  rates,  except  in  Prance,  where  the  yields  upon  rentes  are
higher  even  than  the  bank  rates  for  the  whole  period,  though  not  for  the  second
decade.  Biit  the  difference  in  stability  is  more  striking  and  more  important
than  the  difference  in  average  rates.  The  relative  figures  of  Tables  27  and  28
show  that  market  rates  fluctuate  much  more  than  bank  rates,  and  bank  rates
much  more  than  bond  rates.

On  the  whole,  however,  the  general  trend  of  the  fluctuations  has  been  similar
in  the  money  and  the  investment  markets.  The  most  important  differences
are  that  short-time  rates  relaxed  in  1891,  while  bond  rates  stiffened ;  that  short-
time  rates  rose  in  1893,  while  bond  rates  changed  but  little ;  and  that  short-time
rates  rose  more  promptly  after  the  years  of  depression  and  reached  their  highest
points  earlier  in  the  years  of  prosperity.  All  the  European  rates  show  a  higher
level  of  fluctuation  in  1900-09  than  1890-99 — though  the  difference  in  the  case
of  French  rentes  is  small.


IV.  The  Prices  of  Shares  in  Business  Enterprises

1.  The  Significance  of  the  Prices  of  Stocks

Business  enterprises  are  not  the  subject  of  an  organized  business  traffic,
and  we  have  no  systematic  data  showing  fluctuations  in  their  prices  as  going
concerns  frorii  year  to  year.  As  a  substitute,  however,  we  have  abundant  data
concerning  the  prices  of  shares  in  joint-stock  companies.

The  stock  quotations  used  here,  like  the  interest  quotations,  all  come  from
a  single  market.  But  in  the  case  of  stocks  this  fact  is  not  a  serious  objection.
For,  compared  with  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  other  American  markets
are  insigniflcant  in  the  number  and  importance  of  the  securities  dealt  in,  and
in  the  magnitude  of  their  transactions.

More  serious  is  the  limitation  of  the  available  quotations  to  the  prices  of
shares  in  transportation  companies — chiefly  railways.  The  number  of  indus-
trial stocks  regularly  bought  and  sold  on  the  market  in  every  year  since  1890


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  171

is  too  small  to  make  significant  averages.  Further,  none  but  large  business
enterprises  list  their  stocks  in  New  York.  As  in  all  other  cases  of  price  data,
therefore,  we  are  forced  to  use  a  comparatively  small  number  of  quotations  as
representative  of  the  general  trend  of  the  market.  But  once  again  the  available
material  comes  from  that  part  of  the  business  field  most  affected  by  business
cycles.

Whether  the  market  prices  of  stocks  in  100-share  lots  may  be  interpreted  as
showing  accurately  changes  in  the  prices  of  the  business  enterprises  concerned
is  highly  questionable.  If  1,000  shares  in  a  railway  which  has  100,000  shares
outstanding  be  sold  at  $80  per  share  on  a  given  day,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow
that  the  whole  proprietary  interest  could  be  sold  (or  bought)  for  $8,000,000.
Indeed,  it  is  seldom  safe  to  infer  the  price  for  the  total  supply  of  any  kind  of
goods  from  the  current  market  price  per  unit.  This  fact  is  not  troublesome
in  the  case  of  commodities,  labor,  or  loans  because  we  are  not  interested  in  the
prices  of  the  total  supply.  But  in  the  case  of  stocks  we  should  like  to  know
the  changes  in  the  prices  at  which  enterprises  as  wholes  could  be  bought  outright.
And  that  cannot  be  known  except  in  the  rare  cases  when  such  sales  are  actually
made  and  the  terms  published.  Hence  we  must  content  ourselves  with  taking
the  figures  for  what  they  are — prices  of  shares  in  business  enterprises.

The  attitude  of  the  stockholder  toward  the  concern  whose  shares  he  has
purchased  is  generally  different  from  the  attitude  of  the  typical  merchant
or  manufacturer  toward  the  enterprise  which  he  controls.  Often  the  stock-
holder's attitude  is  hardly  distinguishable  from  that  of  the  bondholder.  He
buys  dividend-paying  stocks  as  an  income-producing  investment,  and  knows
little  or  nothing  about  the  management  of  the  business.  Often  the  stockholder
is  a  speculator  pure  and  simple,  who  buys  on  margin  with  the  intention  of  soon
selling  again,  and  who  thinks  little  of  dividends  in  comparison  with  the  antici-
pated change  in  the  price  of  his  shares.  Often  the  stockholder  combines  these
two  attitudes.  He  buys  outright  stoclss  which  pay  little  or  no  income,  and
holds  them  perhaps  for  years  in  the  anticipation  that  the  increase  in  their  price
will  ultimately  make  his  speculative  investment  profitable.  Sometimes  the.
stockholder,  by  himself  or  as  a  member  of  some  coterie  of  capitalists,  owns  or
seeks  the  control  of  the  enterprise.  In  that  case  he  may  have  the  attitude  of
the  entrepreneur  of  economic  theory;  that  is,  he  may  identify  his  business
interests  with  those  of  the  enterprise,  and  manage  the  latter  for  the  profit  upon
operation.  But  his  attitude  may  also  be  that  of  the  promoter  trying  to  sell  out
on  advantageous  terms,  or  that  of  the  business  buccaneer  seeking  a  profit  for
himself  at  the  expense  of  other  parties  at  interest  through  stock-market  manip-
ulation, through  contracts  which  are  injurious  to  the  enterprise  but  profitable
to  himself,  etc.  Finally,  the  stockholder  is  sometimes  a  man  primarily  inter-
ested in  some  related  or  competing  line  of  business,  who  desires  representation
upon  the  directorate  in  order  to  obtain  early  information  of  changes  in  policy
or  special  favors  for  his  other  enterprises.


172  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

But,  despite  this  diversity  of  interests  among  the  buyers  and  sellers  of
stocks,  the  present  and  anticipated  future  profits  of  corporations  are  by  far
the  most  important  single  factor  in  determining  the  prices  of  their  shares.
Directly  or  indirectly,  calculations  dealing  with  these  profits  influence  investors
and  speculators,  controlling  magnates  and  promoters,  even  business  buccaneers
and  stockholders  primarily  interested  in  other  lines  of  enterprise.  Hence  the
course  of  the  stock  market  is  significant  of  the  business  community's  hopes
and  fears  for  the  future,  as  well  as  of  its  good  or  ill  fortune  in  the  present.
Even  though  the  figures  do  not  represent  accurately  the  prices  of  business
enterprises  as  units,  they  are  therefore  of  great  value  in  the  study  of  business
cycles.

2.  Tables  of  the  Relative  Prices  of  American  Common  Stocks"^

The  prices  of  stocks  published  by  the  Wall  Street  Journal  and  Dun's
Review,  while  convenient  records  of  daily  and  monthly  fluctuations,  are  not
well  adapted  for  comparison  with  our  tables  of  prices  of  labor  and  of  com-
modities at  wholesale  and  retail.  For  these  stock  tables  give  average  actual
prices,  and  the  preceding  tables  give  average  relative  prices.  Moreover,  since
some  stocks  have  prices  many  times  as  high  as  other  stocks,  the  objections
which  have  led  to  the  disuse  of  average  actual  prices  of  commodities  sold  in
high-priced  and  low-priced  units  apply,  though  in  less  degree,  to  average  actual
prices  of  stocks.  On  the  other  hand,  the  one  true  index  number  of  American
stocks — computed  by  John  R.  Commons  and  N.  I.  Stone"^ — is  based  upon
average  actual  prices  in  1879-89,  gives  results  by  fiscal  years,  and  ends  with
1900-01,  while  the  preceding  tables  are  based  upon  average  actual  prices  in
1890-99,  give  results  by  calendar  years,  and  extend  at  least  to  1907.  To  deter-
mine the  relations  between  the  fluctuations  in  prices  of  different  orders,  it  is
accordingly  necessary  to  make  a  table  showing  the  relative  prices  of  stocks  on
the  basis  of  average  actual  prices  in  1890-99.

The  data  for  this  table  were  obtained  from  "Prices  of  Stocks  at  the  New
York  Stock  Exchange"  published  annually  in  the  Financial  Review.  These
tables  give  the  highest  and  lowest  prices  of  each  stock  quoted  each  month — a
sufficient  body  of  quotations  to  be  representative.  All  the  railroads  were
included  which  had  approximately  complete  and  regular  records  for  the  twenty
years  1890  to  1909.  Several  important  lines,  such  as  the  Burlington,  Lake
Shore,  Michigan  Central,  and  Northern  Pacific,  were  omitted  because  quota-
tions were  scanty  or  altogether  lacking  for  several  years. The  Alton  and  the

0*  Most  of  the  material  wMeh  follows  was  first  published  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  May  and  July,
1910,  under  the  captions,  "The  Prices  of  American  Stocks,  1890-1909,"  and  "The  Prices  of  Preferred  and
Common  Stocks,  1890-1909."

»6  Quarterly  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Economic  Sesearch,  July  and  October,  1900.  Eeprinted  in  summary
in  Final  Beport  oj  the  Industrial  Commission,  XIX,  29,  1101-1103.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  173

Rock  Island  have  undergone  changes  in  organization  which  break  the  continuity
of  their  quotations.  In  the  eases  of  the  Pullman  Company  and  the  Adams
Express  Company  a  similar  break  has  resulted  from  stock  dividends.  Stock
dividends  which  did  not  force  quotations  suddenly  to  a  lower  level,  and  the
payment  of  assessments  which  did  not  raise  quotations  suddenly  to  a  higher
level,  have  been  disregarded.  If  all  stocks  affected  by  such  changes  since  1890
were  excluded,  the  remaining  list  would  be  short  indeed.  In  railways  under-
going reorganization  the  prices  of  voting-trust  certificates  have  been  taken  in
lieu  of  the  prices  of  shares.  Thirty-five  railways  stocks  were  found  which  met
requirements,  and  five  express,  steamship,  and  telegraph  stocks  were  added  to
bring  the  number  of  series  up  to  forty.°°

TABLE  29
List  of  Stocks  Included  in  the  Following  Tables,  and  Their  Average  Actual  Prices  in  1890-99

Average
price  per  share
in  1890-99
North  Atlantic  railways — •

New  York,  New  Haven  and  Hartford  $207.90

New  York,  Ontario  and  Western  17.50

New  York  Central  107.40

Pennsylvania*  109.30

Erie 17.50

Anthracite  Coal  railways —

Central  of  New  Jersey  108.30

Delaware  and  Hudson  126.70

Delaware,  Lackawanna  and  Western  154.40

Beading 26.50

Middle  Western  railways —

Cleveland,  Cincinnati,  Chicago  and  St.  Louis  47.90

Wheeling  and  Lake  Erie  16.50

New  York,  Chicago  and  St.  Louis  14.80

Wabash  8.70

Pittsburg,  Cincinnati,  Chicago  and  St.  Louis  24.90

Canada  Southern  52.70

Lake  Erie  and  Western  18.30

Hlinois Central  100.80

Northwestern  railways —

Chicago,  Milwaukee  and  St.  Paul  79.20

Chicago  and  Northwestern  114.60

Chicago,  St.  Paul,  Minneapolis  and  Omaha  51.40

Duluth,  South  Shore  and  Atlantic  5.80

Iowa  Central  ''•^O

Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis  19.60

Wisconsin  Central  10.10

*  The  Pennsylvania  Railroad  is  not  quoted  with  regularity  on  the  New  York  market  until  September,  1897. Figures  for  earlier
years  were  accordingly  made  by  taking  double  the  price  of  $50  shares  as  quoted  on  the  Philadelphia  exchange.

66  The  work  of  transcribing  the  quotations,  casting  the  average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  and  computing
and  averaging  the  relative  prices  was  done  mainly  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Otto  Tinnemann,  of  Berkeley.


174  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  29— (Concluded)
List  of  Stocks  Included  in  the  Following  Tables,  and  Their  Average  Actual  Prices  in  1890-99

Average
price  per  share
in  1890-99
Southern  railways —

Chesapeake  and  Ohio  $20.80

Norfolk  and  Western  12.10

Louisville  and  Nashville  62.80

Missouri  Pacific  41.40

Missouri,  Kansas  and  Texas  13.10

Texas  and  Pacific  12.30

Pacific  railways —

Atchison,  Topeka  and  Santa  Pe  21.60

Denver  and  Rio  Grande  14.90

Southern  Pacific  26.20

Union,  Pacific 29.30

Canadian Pacific 74.40

Express,  steamship,  and  telegraph  companies —

American  Express  Company  119.20

United  States  Express  Company  51.60

Wells-Fargo  Express  Company  124.20

Pacific  Mail  Steamship  Company  30.40

Western  Union  Telegraph  Company  86.90

Table  29  shows  what  stocks  were  used,  and  gives  the  prices  which  stand  for
KJO.  Tlie  list  is  a  representative  one,  including  railways  in  all  parts  of  the
country ;  railways  which  underwent  reorganization  in  the  nineties  and  railways
which  have  suffered  no  financial  disasters;  raihvays  whose  stocks  have  long
been  upon  an  investment  basis,  and  railways  whose  stocks  have  been  a  football
of  speculation ;  railways  whose  shares  command  high,  medium,  and  low  prices ;
railwa}^s  which  belong  to  almost  all  the  great  systems  of  the  day.

Tables  30,  31,  and  32  present  the  arithmetic  means  of  the  relative  prices  of
this  list  of  stocks  by  years,  quarters,  and  months,  respectively."^  In  order  to
make  the  record  more  useful,  the  monthly  table  has  been  supplied  with  certain
data  which  aid  in  accounting  for  the  fluctuations.  In  marking  the  "turning
points"  I  have  neglected  minor  movements,  and  paid  attention  to  the  mean
between  the  highest  and  lowest  prices,  rather  than  to  either  extreme.  The
number  of  shares  sold  on  the  stock  exchange  is  given  as  an  indication  of  the
waxing  and  waning  volume  of speculation. The  average  interest  upon  call

«'  Many  discrepancies  of  one  point  appear  between  the  relative  prices  by  years  and  the  averages  of  the
relative  prices  by  quarters;  or  between  the  relative  prices  by  quarters  and  averages  computed  from  the  figures
for  the  months  included.  They  result  from  dropping  fractions  less  than  one-half,  or  carrying  fratcions  of  one-
half  or  more.  The  two  or  three  cases  of  wider  discrepancy — for  example,  in  1890 — are  caused  by  the  lack  of
quotations  for  some  one  stock  for  several  months.  The  averages  for  quarters  and  years,  in  other  words,  have
been  computed  directly  from  average  actual  prices — not  from  the  relative  prices  by  months.

The  figures  for  ' '  low ' '  and  ' '  high ' '  in  the  table  by  months  are  not  the  extreme  relative  prices  of  the
single  stocks  which  showed  the  widest  fluctuations;  but  arithmetic  means  of  these  extremes  for  forty  stocks.
In  the  tables  by  quarters  and  years  the  "low"  and  "high"  figures  are  similar  arithmetic  means  based  not
on  the  highest  or  lowest  quotations  for  any  single  month,  but  on  averages  of  the  highest  and  lowest  quota-
tions for  all  three,  or  all  twelve,  of  the  months  included.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  175

loans  is  computed  from  the  average  stock-exchange  rates  by  weeks."'  The  net
imports  or  exports  of  gold  are  taken  from  the  Reports  of  the  Treasurer  of  the
United  States.^"  Finally,  the  list  of  current  events  affecting  the  stock  market
has  been  compiled  from  the  monthly  digest  of  business  history  published  in  the
Financial  Review.  Of  course  this  list  is  necessarily  incomplete,  and  the  events
mentioned  are  stated  with  such  brevity  as  to  mean  little  in  some  cases  to  readers
who  have  not  fresh  in  mind  the  business  and  political  developments  of  the  last
twenty  years.  The  purpose  is  merely  to  suggest  the  causes  of  the  many  short-
period  oscillations,  which  are  so  striking  a  feature  of  the  stock  market.


TABLE  30

Eelative  Prices  op  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Years,  1890-1911

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100. Arithmetic  means


Year
1890

Low
115

High
127

Spread
12

Averag
121

1891

107

119

12

113

1892

117

128

11

123

1893

87

100

13

93

1894

77

86

9

82

1895

80

91

11

85

1896

73

82

9

77

1897

79

88

9

84

1898

89

99

10

94

1899

121

136

15

128

1900

126

141

15

134

1901

196

225

29

211

1902

239

261

22

250

1903

189

212

23

201

1904

183

201

18

192

1905

239

260

21

250

1906

256

279

23

267

1907

192

216

24

204

1908

191

212

21

201

1909

266

288

22

277

1910

243

265

22

254

1911

241

256

15

248

Averages
1890-99

95

106

11

100

1900-09

208

230

22

219

•58  In  making  this  computation,  each  week  was  assigned  to  that  month  in  which  the  majority  of  its  days
fell. The  source  of  both  sets  of  data  is  the  Financial  Review.

68  Save  for  September,  1905,  when  the  Treasurer's  Beport  gives  a  wrong  figure,  and  for  October  to  Decem-
ber 1909.  Data  for  these  months  are  from  the  Monthly  Summary  of  Commerce  and  Finance.  The  figures  ex-
clude gold  in  the  ore.


176  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  31

Relative  Pbicbs  or  40  Tbansportation  Stocks. By  Quarters,  1890-1911

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  ^  100. Arithmetic  means


First

quarter

Second  quarter

Low High
126 138

Third

quarter

Fourt

Low
96

h  quarter
— ^ .

Year
1890

Low
121

High
131

Low
123

High
133

High
113

1891

102

112

103

114

104

121

117

130

1892

121

133

118

127

117

126

114

124

1893

108

120

90

103

70

85

79

92

1894

80

88

79

87

75

84

76

83

1895

70

77

81

92

90

100

79

92

1896

76

85

76

83

65

74

75

85

1897

74

81

71

77

85

98

88

97

1898

87

98

87

94

93

101

94

106

1899

115

131

117

131

126

140

124

141

1900

125

138

126

140

121

130

133

156

1901

167

193

194

237

204

234

219

238

1902

228

244

240

259

255

280

233

261

1903

235

254

197

221

162

192

163

179

1904

170

187

164

174

182

200

213

239

1905

235

257

225

249

244

262

253

273

1906

260

284

244

273

257

279

261

282

1907

224

256

199

219

193

212

153

179

1908

158

180

181

202

200

218

223

248

1909

245

268

267

287

274

292

278

301

1910

261

287

246

270

225

244

244

260

1911

245

261

250

263

237

256

235

248

Averages
1890-99

95

106

95

105

95

106

94

106

1900-09

205

226

204

226

209

230

213

236

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


177


L/DRARY


TABLE  32
Relative  Prices  of  40  Transportation  Stocks.


1890  January


Relative  prices  of  stocks •

Turning
Low High  Spread points

125 134 9


By  Months,  1890-1911
Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

Net  imports
Average ( + )  or  exports
Millions call-loan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars


AUG 9 1944


DEFT.  OF
AGRIC.  ECON.


February 121 131


10


6.4


5.2


March


101 108


3.6


7.70


4.25


2.88


+ .6


+


March

119

128

9

4.5

4.25

+ .2

April

121

133

12

5.1

4.30

— .6

May

133

145

12

Max.

11.1

4.88

June

131

141

10

5.4

4.75

—  3.3

July

129

136

7

3.0

4.60

—10.7

August

125

135

10

4.1

11.63

— .4

September

118

131

13

5.1

6.75

+ 1.1

October

109

123

14

7.2

5.00

+  2.2

November

92

116

24

9.1

7.00

+  1.4

December

92

106

14

Min.

5.1

5.00

+  5.4

January

101

114

13

5.6

3.90

+ •■?

February

105

113

8

3.3

2.88

—  3.4

4.5


April

104

117

13

Max.

7.2

3.30

—13.9

May

105

116

11

6.3

4.38

—30.4

June

100

111

11

4.0

3.25

—15.5

July

98

107

9

Min.

3.2

2.20

—  5.6

August

99

121

22

5.8

2.13

+  1.2

September

114

134

20

11.2

4.50

+  7.1

October

119

131

12

6.7

4.25

+16.1

November

113

125

12

5.3

4.38

+  8.5

December

118

132

14

6.8

2.94

+  5.8

1892  January

121

135

14

Max.

10.0

2.40

+ .3

February

120

133

13

11.4

2.00

—  3.7

March

120

131

11

8.9

2.00

—  3.2

April

120

129

9

6.8

2.00

—  7.0

May

118

127

9

6.2

1.50

—  3.3

June

116

125

9

Min.

5.4

1.40

—16.6

July

117

128

11

3.6

1.88

—10.2

Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Reading  announced  inability  to  pay  interest  on
preferred  income  bonds;  difficulties  of  Sixth
National  Bank

Eeduction  of  surplus  reserve  of  banks;  rate-cut-
ting by  railways

Irregular  market;  small  corner  in  Beading

Silver-purchase  law  in  prospect;  large  railway
earnings

Speculative  interest  keen;  extra  dividends  by
Pennsylvania  and  Big  Four

Foreign  buying  declined ;  money  in  London  firmer ;
fear  of  gold  exports;  speculative  spirit  damp-
ened

Silver-purchase  law  approved;  London  selling
American  rails

Gold  exports;  tight  money;  London  selling  Amer-
ican rails

Treasury  relief  in  money  market,  by  purchase  of
bonds

Continuation  of  selling  on  London  account

Baring  crisis  in  London;  financial  failures  in  N.
T. ;  issue  of  clearing-house  loan  certificates

Improvement  toward  end;  Morgan's  "harmony
meeting"  of  railway  presidents;  strong  report
of  Vanderbilt  roads;  bank  surplus  restored

Recovery  aided  by  relaxation  of  strain  in  money

market
Market dull, waiting till doubts about financial

legislation  should  be  set  at  rest  by  adjournment

of  Congress
Foreign situation unfavorable; state legislation

hampering  railways  feared
Favorable  crop  prospects

Gold  exports  discouraging;  no  foreign  buying
Market  very  dull  on  continued  exports  of  gold
End  of  gold  exports  on  the  25th
Large  harvests  at  home  assured;  serious  shortage

abroad;  sharp  advance
Buoyancy  continued  until  24th; then  market  de-
clined on  profit-taking  sales  and  reports  that  the

Goulds  opposed  further  rise
Financial  troubles  reported  in  Paris  and  Berlin;

failure of Maverick National Bank; railway

earnings  heavy
Decided  improvement  after  middle  of  month;  large

earnings  continued
Market  awaiting  developments

Large  earnings  and  bright  prospects;  money
abundant;  selling  on  foreign  account

Eeading  lease  of  Lehigh  Valley  and  Jersey  Central
railways

Market  dull;  rumors  of  combinations;  merchandise
imports  exceeding  exports;  House  rejected  free-
silver  bill

Dullness  continued;  no  important  change,  save  the
increase  in  gold  exports

Business  largely  in  specialties;  heavy  floods  in
West  and  South

Eeceivers  appointed  for  Eichmond  Terminal

Free-coinage  bill  passed  by  Senate,  defeased  is
Bouse


178


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  32— (Continued)

Eelative  Prices  of  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Eelative  prices  of  stocks

Millions

of  shares

sold

5.4

6.9

7.0

Average
call-loan

rates
%

2.05

4.13

5.63

Net  imports

( +  )  or  exports

( — )  of  gold

f

1892  August

September
October

Low
120
114
119

High
130
123
127

Spread

10

9

8

Turning
points

Max.

in  millions
of  dollars

—  5.7

—  2.3
+ 2.6

November
December

114
111

125
120

11
9

5.8
8,4

5.15
6.81

+ 1.4
—11.3

1893  January
February
March
April

113

107
102
103

125
122
113
115

12
15
11

12

10.6

10.7

7.4

6.3

4.00
3.00
8.20
4.88

—12.2
—13.0
—  1.5
—18.3

May

87

103

16

9.0

3.60

—15.2

June

81

94

13

4.8

8.88

—  1.7

July
August

66
68

87
81

21
13

Min

5.9
4.9

7.75
5.50

+  5.8
+  40.6

September

76

88

12

4.7

3.75

+  5.2

October

78

93

15

6.3

2.38

+  1.1

November

83

91

8

Max.

5.5

1.70

+  4.1

December

76

91

15

4.9

1.16

—  1.9

1894  January
February

77
81

87
86

10
5

Min.

4.5
3.2

1.02
1.00

—  .6

—  1.1

March

83

91

8

4.8

1.09

—  2.9

April

85

93

8

Max.

4.0

1.13

—  9.4

May

78

86

8

4.8

1.10

—23.1

June

74

81

7

3.4

1.00

—22.4

July

72

78

6

Min.

2.8

1.00

—12.8

August

74

88

14

5.0

1.00

—  1.9

September

80

88

8

Max.

4.1

1.00

+ .4

October

76

85

9

3.9

1.00

+ .5

November

76

85

9

4.5

1.03

+  1.5

December

75

81

6

4.1

1.44

—  9.4

Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Beading  lease  annulled ;.  industrials  buoyant

Cholera  ' '  scare ' '  in  New  Tork

Beading  acquired  interest  in  Boston  and  Maine  and

control  of  New  York  and  New  England
Cleveland  elected  president
Death  of  Jay  Gould;  stringent  money  maTket

Activity  in  industrials

Beading  receivership

Money  market  stringent. Industrials  suffered

Gold  reserve  fell  below  $100,000,000 ;  bank  failures

in  Australia
National Cordage receivership; bank failures in

western states and in Australia; stock ex-
change panic  May  4  and  5
Panic  spread; extra  session  of  Congress  called;

four  minor  railway  receiverships
Bank  failures  in  West;  Erie  receivership
Premium  on  currency;  House  passed  bill  repealing

silver-purchase  act; three  railway  receiverships,

including  Northern  Pacific
Premium disappeared; money market easier;

four  railway  receiverships,  including  Wisconsin

Central
Senate  passed  silver-purchase  repeal  law  October

30; six railway  receiverships, including Union

Pacific
Money  redundant  in  New  York;  heavy  demand  for

high-grade  bonds;  two  railway  receiverships
Four  railway  receiverships,  including  Santa  Fe  and

New  York  and  New  England

Erie  reorganization  plan

House  passed  tariff  bill ;  Treasury  sold  $50,000,000
bonds  to  protect  reserve;  one  railway  receiver-
ship

Cleveland  vetoed  seigniorage  coinage  bill;  two  rail-
way reorganization  plans;  gold  reserve  above
$100,000,000

Coxey's  army;  coal  strike;  Great  Northern  strike;
one  railway  receivership;  New  York  and  New
England  reorganization  plan

Gold  reserve  fell  below  $100,000,000;  railway  rate
wars;  floods;  Pullman  strike

Coal  strike  settled ;  American  Eailway  Union  strike
began;  Santa  Pe  reorganization  plan;  Southern
Bailway  organized

Railway  strike  riots  in  Chicago;  Senate  passed
tariff  bill;  deadlock  between  the  two  houses;
gold  reserve  $55,000,000

Tariff  bill  became  law;  shortage  of  corn  crop  an-
ticipated; Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis  reorgani-
zation plan

Reading  reorganization  plan;  corn  reports  still
worse;  moderate  revival  of  general  business

Low  price  of  coal  reacted  on  anthracite  railways;
Duluth  and  Winnipeg  receivership

Treasury  sold  $50,000,000  bonds  to  recruit  gold
reserve;  one  railway  receivership;  Populist
losses  in  Congressional  elections

Cleveland's  message  declared  for  maintenance  of
gold  payments;  large  exports  of  gold  caused
uneasiness


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


179


TABLE  32— (Continued)

Relative  Prices  or  40  Teanspoktation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Relative  prices  of  stocks

Millions

of  shares

sold

Average

call-loan

rates

%

Net  imports

( + )  or  exports

(— )  of  gold

in  millions

of  dollars

r

Low

High

Spread

Turning
points

1895  January

70

78

8

3.2

1.35

—24.7

February

70

76

6

Min.

3.0

1.50

+ 4.1

March

69

78

9

5.1

2.25

+ 4.1

April

75

85

10

5.0

2.25

+ 2.0

May

80

95

15

8.9

1.32

+  3.3

June

86

96

10

6.0

1.16

+  2.0

July

89

97

8

5.8

1.40

—  3.3

August

90

100

10

5.3

1.03

—15.1

September

91

102

11

Max.

6.8

1.56

—16.7

October

88

98

10

5.3

2.17

— .1

November

82

90

8

5.0

1.97

—13.5

December

66

89

23

Min.

6.9

4.56

—14.2

1896  January

71

83

12

4.5

4.90

— .2

JPebruary

79

87

8

5.2

3.94

+  9.4

March

77

84

7

4.6

3.50

+ .3

April

78

90

12

Max.

4.1

3.02

—  2.7

May

77

82

5

2.8

2..53

—18.5

June

75

84

9

4.4

1.94

—  6.1

July

66

76

10

■  5.6

2.07

—10.4

August

61

70

9

Min.

4.3

4.69

+  2.1

September

68

77

9

4.6

5.45

+34.1

October

70

80

10

4.9

11.13

+  27.6

November

79

90

11

Max.

5.9

6.25

+  6.9

December

75

84

9

3.9

1.95

+  2.2

Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Congress  defeated  administration  measures  to  de-
fend gold  reserve,  which  fell  to  $45,000,000

Treasury  contract  with  Morgan-Belmont  gold  synd-
icate; Norfolk  and  Western  receivership;  an-
thracite coal  trade  demoralized

Syndicate  loan  restoring  confidence;  presidents  of
anthracite  roads  met,  seeking  to  control  demor-
alization of  coal  trade

Business  revival;  Santa  Pe  reorganization  plan;
buying  on  European  account

Extensive  European  buying;  conflicting  crop  re-
ports; speculation  in  wheat

Less  foreign  buying;  business  revival  extended;
' '  boom ' '  in  iron  trade ;  better  crop  prospects ;
syndicate  loan  completed

Gold  exports  resumed;  favorable  business  and
crop  conditions;  attempts  to  effect  agreement
for  maintenance  of  railway  rates

Bright  crop  prospects  affect  gold  exports;  Erie
reorganization  plans;  marked  rise  in  commodity
prices

Fall  on  the  13th,  caused  by  heavy  gold  export,  fol-
lowed by  recovery  on  reassuring  announcements
by  the  gold  syndicate

Cotton  crop  short;  speculation  for  rise  checked
exports ;  break  in  ' '  Kaffirs ' '  in  London  and
Paris;  Eastern  Question  caused  selling  on  Euro-
pean account

European  bourse  panic  on  the  9th;  heavy  gold
exports;  reaction  in  business;  decline  in  com-
modity prices

Cleveland's  Venezuela  message  on  the  17th  caused
panic  on  the  stock  exchange;  new  bond  issue  for
gold  reserve  impending

Popular  loan  for  $100,000,000  announced  on  6th;
Venezuela  "war  scare"  died  out;  anthracite
railway  agreement

Loan  subscriptions  $527,000,000 ;  Baltimore  and
Ohio  receivership ;  Senate  resolutions  recogniz-
ing Cubans  as  belligerents

House  accepted  these  resolutions;  heavy  mercantile
failures ;  severe  storms

Buying  for  European  account;  president  took  no
action  upon  Cuban  resolutions

Silver  men  captured  many  Democratic  state  con-
ventions; business  depressed;  St.  Louis  tornado
on  27th

Silver  men  defeated  in  Republican  convention ;  con-
tinued gains  in  Democratic  state  conventions

Bryan's  nomination;  gold  reserve  reduced  to  less
than  90  millions;  banks  aided  Treasury  by  ex-
changing gold  for  legal  tenders

Lowest  points  reached  between  7th  and  11th;  ad-
vance after  Bryan's  Madison  Square  meeting;
gold  imports  began  late  in  August

Gold  Democratic  convention;  large  Republican
pluralities  in  Vermont  and  Maine;  rise  in  price
of  wheat

Increasing  confidence  in  Bryan's  defeat;  stringent
money  market  caused  by  hoarding  gold ;  Western
Freight  Association  formed

McKinley  elected  on  3rd;  sharp  advance  followed
by  reaction  on  profit-taking  sales,  small  earnings
of  spring-wheat  roads,  etc.

Senate  discussing  resolution  recognizing  independ-
ence of  Cuba;  heavy  bank  failures  in  the  West


ISO


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  32— {Continued)
Relative  Prices  or  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


1897  January
rebruary
March


Relative  prices  of  stocks

* \

Turning
Low High  Spread points

76 83 7


74 79


Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  ^  100

Net  imports
Average ( -j- )  or  exports
Millions call-loan { — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars

3.4  1.78  + .2


72 81


2.8


5.0


1.63


1.62


+ .3


April

69

75

6

Min.

3,6

1.50

—  6.0

May

70

74

4

3.3

1.41

—  8.9

June

73

81

8

6.4

1.20

—  7.0

July

78

88

10

6.9

1.19

—  4.9

August

85

101

16

11.4

1.25

+ 2.4

September

92

107

15

Max.

13.1

2.22

+ 4.1

October

90

101

11

8.0

2.50

+  11.0

November

85

95

10

Min.

5.8

1.81

+  1.8

December

90

97

7

7.5

2.92

+  1.5

1898  January

91

101

10

Max.

9.3

2.50

+  3.1

February

88

101

13

9.0

1.78

+  4.3

March

82

93

11

10.1

2.17

+29.6

April

83

89

6

Min.

6.0

2.97

+  31.0

May

87

97

10

9.2

1.95

+  13.0

June

94

101

7

Max.

9.2

1.25

+ 2.8

July

92

98

6

Min.

4.8

1.25

+ 1.0

August

93

104

11

Max.

12.1

1.70

+13.1

September

94

101

7

9.4

3.78

+  13.4

October

93

100

7

Min.

7.5

2.25

+  15.0

November

92

103

11

11.0

2.10

+  3.8

December

100

118

18

15.3

2.41

+  6.9

Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market


Eaihvay  earnings  low; anthracite  and  bituminous

coal  carriers  affected  by  demoralization  of  coal

trade
Steel-rail  pool  collapsed; large  purchase  of  print

cloths; renewed  discussion  of  Cuban  affairs  in

Senate
Trans-Missouri Freight Association held illegal;

Lake  Shore  refuniied  7  per  cent  bonds  at  3%

per  cent; extra session of Congress for  tariff

legislation
Graeco-Turkish  war;  floods  in  Mississippi  Valley;

N.  Y.  Central  refunded  bonds
Senate  resolution  recognizing  Cuba  as  a  belliger-
ent;  Supreme  Court  denied  right  of  Interstate

Commerce  Commission  to  fix  rates
Marked  improvement  in  crop  situation,  followed  by

rise  of  Granger  stocks;  Chicago  and  Northwest-
ern refunded  bonds
Dingley tariff passed; bituminous coal strike;

crops  excellent  at  home,  seriously  short  abroad;

Klondike  gold  rush
' '  Boom ' '  on  stock  exchange,  due  to  crop  situation

and  revival  of  business
Reaction  in  latter  part  of  month  on  profit-taking

sales ;  rumors  of  war  with  Spain ;  yellow  fever  in

the  South;  coal  strike  ended
Recession of speculation; renewed fears of war

with  Spain
Break  on  5th  caused  by  fears  of  war  with  Spain;

recovery  on  good  railway  earnings,  and  end  of

yellow  fever
Meeting  of  Congress  caused  little  disturbance

Merger  of  Lake  Shore  and  Michigan  Southern  with
N.  Y.  Central  reported

The  ' '  Maine ' '  sunk  by  explosion  in  harbor  of
Havana;  industrial  consolidations

Market  fluctuating  on  conflicting  rumors  of  war
with  Spain;  industrial  consolidations

War  began  on  21st ;  investment  buying  almost
ceased;  more  industrial  consolidations

Battle  of  Manila  Bay  on  1st;  crop  prospects  ex-
cellent

Leiter  wheat  corner  collapsed;  Baltimore  and  Ohio
reorganization  plan;  several  increases  of  railway
dividends

Battle  of  Santiago  Bay  on  3rd;  peace  overtures  on
26th;  low  price  of  wheat;  grain  movement  light

Peace  protocol  signed  on  12th;  granger  stocks  rose
on  wheat  prospects;  coal  shares  fell  on  condition
of  trade

Fears  of  monetary  stringency;  break  in  prices  of
industrials;  Federal  Steel  Company  formed  with
capital  of  200  milUons

Pashoda  incident  threatened  rupture  between  Eng-
land and  France;  coal,  cotton,  woolen,  and
leather  trades  unsatisfactory

Republican  gains  in  elections;  Fashoda  incident
settled;  Spain  agreed  to  cede  Philippines;  mone-
tary stringency  in  Berlin

Peace  treaty  signed  on  10th;  coal  and  cotton
trades  improved;  railway  dividends  increased


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


181


TABLE  32— (Continued)
Relative  Prices  op  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


1899  January

February
March


April
May

June


Relative  prices  of  stocks

Turning
Low High  Spread points

110 132 22


118  133  15 Max.

118  129  11

118  133  15

117  131  U

115  129  14 Min.


July

124

134

10

August

128

144

16

September

129

142

13

October

127

140

13

November

132

143

11

December

114

139

25

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

Net  imports
Average ( + )  or  exports
Millions call-loan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars

24.3  2.72  +  4.1


16.1  2.47  + 4.3

17.7  4.10  + 1.7


17.0

5.13

+  1.0

15.0

3.52

+ .6

10.9

2.63

—18.2

8.4

4.47

— .2

13.0

3.27

+ .6

12..5

6.38

+ 1.5

10.9

7.50

+ 5.5

13.7


17.1  11.13


+ .9


7.0


Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market


Great ' '  boom ' ' on stock exchange ; enormous

industrial  consolidations;  railvcay  rate  situation

improved; dividend  increases
Speculation subsided; unfavorable news from

Philippines;  severe  storms
Industrial  consolidations  continued; great  rise  in

iron  and  steel  prices;  speculation  in  industrials;

disquieting  news  from  Samoa
Break  in  industrials,  followed  by  rally

Panic in industrials after death of Flower on

12th;  $20,000,000  indemnity  paid  to  Spain
Industrials  in disfavor; railways gained  after  a

weak  opening  on  improved  crop  prospects  and

larger  earnings
Gain  continued  on  favorable  reports  of  earnings

and  crops;  numerous  strikes
Easier  money,  declining  foreign  exchange, active

trade,  expanding  earnings,  increasing  dividends,

assurance  of  large  corn  crop
Tight  money  and  prospect  of  war  between  England

and  the  Transvaal  affected  the  market
Boer  war began; Bank of England rate raised

from  3% to 5  per  cent; tight  money  in  New

York;  advances  in  railway  rates
Early weakness because of tight money; later

strength  on  Treasury  purchases  of  bonds;  Bank

of  England  rate  6  per  cent
Stock  exchange  panic on 18th; London markets

disturbed  by  military  reverses ; financial  diffi-
culties in  Boston  from  decline  in  copper  stocks;

failure Produce Exchange Trust Co. in New

York;  recovery  after  the  22d


1900  January 122 134 12


February 125 137 12


9.8


10.2


4.15


2.25


4.2


+ .1


March

127

144

17

14.4

3.94

+ .5

April

132

148

16

Max.

14.8

3.06

+  1.0

May

126

138

12

9.5

2.00

—  9.1

June

119

134

15

7.3

1.69

—  6.8

July

123

133

10

6.2

1.53

+ 2.2

August

124

131

7

4.0

1.30

—15.6

September

117

127

10

Min.

5.2

1.61

+  2.7

October

123

140

17

10.9

3.57

-f  8.8

November

133

154

21

22.6

5.06

-f  9.5

December

144

175

31

23.4

5.13

+  2.5

Activity  of  business;  large  railway  earnings;  ad-
vances in  freight  rates  by  changes  in  classifi-
cation; larger  dividends

Early  advance  on  increased  dividends;  later  reac-
tion on  decline  of  street  railway  and  industrial
stocks

Gold-standard  act,  followed  by  foreign  buying;
street  railway  troubles  ended

American  Steel  and  Wire  Co.  on  16th  closed  several
mills,  because  of  failing  demand;  confidence
undermined

Uncertainty  about  course  of  industry;  reaction  in
trade  more  marked

Unfavorable  crop  reports;  continued  reaction  in
trade;  Boxer  troubles  in  China

Better  weather  for  the  crops;  Bryan  nominated
for  presidency  by  Democrats

Extreme  dullness,  because  of  presidential  campaign

Galveston  disaster;  anthracite  coal  strike;  uneasi-
ness about  campaign

Settlement  of  coal  strike;  more  confidence  in
Bryan's  defeat;  gold  imports

McKinley's  election  followed  by  a  great  outburst
of  speculation;  increased  dividends

"Boom"  extended  on  Morgan's  purchase  of  Penn-
sylvania Coal  Co.  for  Erie,  and  rumors  of  "com-
munity of  interest ' '  plans


182


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  32 — (Continued)
Kelative  Prices  or  40  Teanspoetation  Stocks.


Average  actual  prices  in  1890-


1901  January


Relative  prices  of  stocks

^

Turning
Low High  Spread points

157 181 24


Millions

of  shares

sold

30.3


February 167 188 21  21.9

March  175 210 35  27.1

April  196 229 33  41.7

Max.  and

May  169 239 70 Min.  35.3


June


July


215 242 27 Max.


197 234 37 Min.


August  205  231  26

September  209  238  29

October  212  232  20

November  224  242  18 Max.

December  219  238  19 Min.


19.8


16.0


16.8


Net  imports

Average ( + )  or  exports

call-loan ( — )  of  gold

rates  in  millions

%  of  dollars

3.07  —  4.7


2.00
2.34
4.30
6.88
4.31


6.25


+  1.0

+  1-2

—  3.4

—  9.2

—  2.6


4.30  —  1.5


10.8  2.44  +  2.4

14.0  4.34  + 6.5

14.0  3.55  +  1.0

18.3  4.19  —11.3


—  3.1


By  Months,  1890-1911
=  100


Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Speculation  culminated  on  Morgan's  purchase  of
Central  of  New  Jersey  for  the  Beading;  mod-
erate reaction  after  the  9th

U.  S.  Steel  Corporation  launched;  Union  Pacific
bought  control  of  Southern  Pacific

Marked  success  of  steel  ' '  flotation ' ' ;  rumors  of
further  combinations

High  tide  of  speculation;  many  rumors  of  further
combinations; Texas  oil  fever

Northern  Pacific  panic  on  the  9th;  no  failures;
recovery  late  in  month

Early  strength  lost  on  suspension  Seventh  National
Bank;  failure  H.  Marquand  &  Co.;  bank  fail-
ures in  Germany

Poor  bank  statement;  steel  workers'  strike;  dam-
age to  crops  by  drought;  threatened  rate  reduc-
tion by  Santa  Fe,  etc.

Crop  prospects  somewhat  improved;  steel  strike
thought  to  be  failing

McKinley's  assassination  and  death  caused  sharp
declines;  recovery  prompt  on  settlement  of  steel
strike,  rumors  of  mergers,  etc.

Industrials  fell,  railways  rose  on  rumors  of  merg-
ers, or  communities  of  interest,  and  increased
dividends

Effect  of  formation  of  Northern  Securities  Co.  off-
set by  break  in  copper  stocks  and  fears  of  tight
money

Amalgamated  Copper  Co.  gave  over  attempt  to
hold  copper  at  17  cents;  tight  money;  market
stronger  late  in  month


1902  January

223

241

18

February

229

246

17

March

232

245

13

April

236

261

25

May

239

258

19

June

246

260

14

July

249

268

19

August

259

284

25

September  258  289  31 Max.

October  245  273  28

November  232  261  29

December  222  252  30 Min.


14.8

4.57

—  1.2

13.0

2.38

—  7.7

12.0

3.94

—  2.8

26.6

5.10

—  1.9

13.5

5.56

—  1.2

7.8

2.84

+  .4

16.4

3.52

—  7.0

14.3

3.78

—  1.4

21.0

10.80

-1-  2.0

16.4

17.1
15.7


7.63

4.88
6.81


+ 7.2

+  2.3
—  1.5


Several  industrial  combinations  in  difficulty;  large

new  stock  and  bond  issues
Severe  snowstorms;  government  began  proceedings

against  Northern  Securities  Co.
Market continued to hold its own despite  labor

troubles  and  bad  weather
Eampant speculation and clique manipulation;

public  not  prominent  in  the  market; Morgan's

steamship  combination  announced
Collapse  of  "Webb-Meyer  Securities";  anthracite

coal  strike;  three  stock  exchange  firms  failed
Eailway dividend increases; industrial dividend

reductions;  peace  in  South  Africa
Crop  indications  favorable;  Eock  Island  Co.  plan

ill  received; gold  exports  depressing  at  end  of

month
Excellent  crop  prospects  outweighed  coal  strike  and

increasing  firmness  of  money  market
Severe  break  in  prices  at  end  of  month ;  liquidation

induced  by  high  money  rates  and  calling  of  loans

by  banks
Appointment  of  coal  strike  commission  and  easing

of  money  market  caused  rise;  later  fall  on  new

labor  troubles  and  fears  of  gold  exports
Forced  liquidation  by  pools;  bank  accommodation

difficult  to  secure
Eenewed  liquidation  due  to  monetary  tension;  later

buoyancy on formation of $50,000,000 money

pool


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


183


Eelative  Prices


Relative  prices  of  stocks


1903  January

Low
243

High
260

Spread
17

Turning
points
Max.

February

241

258

17

March

222

245

23

April

210

230

20

May

199

227

28

June

180

207

27

July

168

201

33

August

159

191

32

September

159

184

25

October

158

175

17

Min.

November

161

175

14

December

171

187

16

1904  January

176

192

16

Max.

February

166

184

18

March

163

179

16

April

168

177

9

May

161

170

9

Min.

June

163

172

9

July

170

185

15

August

179

202

23

September

195

211

16

October

205

230

25

November

216

243

27

December

217

244

27

TABLE  32— (Continued)

OF  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911

Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =:  100

Net  imports
Average {  -j- )  or  exports
Millions calMoan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars


Current  events  aifecting  the  stock  market


16.0

10.9

15.1

12.3
12.5

15.4

14.9
14.4

10.8

12.9

10.7

15.2

12.3

8.8

11.4

8.2
5.3
5.0

12.5

12.5

18.8

32.6
32.0
28.1


5.75  + .8  Buoyancy  for  ten or  twelve days, followed  by

reaction;  marked  irregularity  in  movements  of
different  stocks

2.88  — .5  "Anti-trust"  legislation — Bureau  of  Corporations

established;  Elkins  law,  law  expediting  hearings
under  Sherman  anti-trust  law,  etc.

6.00  -(-  2.7  Liquidation — labor troubles, increased operating

expenses,  failure  of  Aldrich  financial  bill,  dis-
sensions in  large  corporations

4.19  — .9  Prices  broke  on  13th  on  Northern  Securities  decis-

ion; later  rallied  on  winter  wheat  prospects,  etc.

2.44  — 13.7  Liquidation renewed; many strikes; iron trade

depressed,  cotton  speculation;  stock  panic  in
Montreal

3.05  — 10.5  U.  S.  Shipbuilding  Co.  receivership;  large  gold  ex-

ports; failures  in  Canada;  floods  in  Southwest;
drought  in  North

2.50  —  6.7  Stock  exchange  failures;  cotton  corner

2.03  -f-  3.2  Two  more  failures  on  stock  exchange;  rally  after

10th  on  shifting  of  holdings  to  stronger  hands;
corn  and  cotton  crops  late

2.32  +  1.6  Further  liquidation;  reports  of  crop  damage;  cuts

in  iron  and  steel  prices;  labor  troubles;  industry
depressed

2.69  +  1.9  Low  prices  tempted  buyers,  despite  bank  troubles

in  Baltimore,  Pittsburg,  and  St.  Louis;  depres-
sion in  iron  trade,  etc.

5.19  +  7.7  Advance  latter  part  of  month;  large  cotton  ship-

ments and  engagements  of  gold  for  import;
bond  market  improved

5.50  +14.6  Further large bond  issues; tone distinctly  more

hopeful

2.34  +  6.7  Strong  bond  market;  severe  storms  hampered  rail-

ways ;  wild  speculation  in  cotton  and  coffee

1.81  +  3.2  Eusso- Japanese war; Baltimore fire; break in

cotton  market;  speculation  in  wheat

1.75  +  5.0  Northern Securities decision by Supreme Court

followed  by  rise;  disagreement  of  Hill  and  Har-
riman  interests;  Sully  failed

1.38  —  9.9  Hill-Harriman litigation; backward spring, gold

exports,  poor  railway  earnings

1.55  — 33.2  United  States  paid  for  Panama  Canal;  uncertainty

regarding  wheat  crop

1.13  +  2.7  Else  latter  part  of  month  on  better  crop  prospects ;

settlement  of  strike  on  Great  Lakes;  end  of
gold  exports

1.03  -f-  7.5  Parker nominated for president by Democrats;

better  crop  prospects;  strikes  in  packing  indus-
try, building  trades,  etc.
.90  —  3.8  Market  stronger,  despite  cutting  of  iron  and  steel

prices,  reports  of  damage  to  wheat  crop,  rise  of
cotton,  etc.

1.53  +  1.1  Iron  demand  revived  on  further  price  reductions;

several  strikes  ended;  crop  prospects  uncertain;
industry  reviving

2.03  +  3.7  Industrial  revival  extended; good  crops  assured;

marked  buoyancy  on  stock  exchange

2.80  — 16.7  "Boom"  in  stocks  followed  Roosevelt's  election;

industrial  revival  continued  to  gain  ground

3.13  — 10.9  Market  broke  on  6th  and  13th  under  attacks  by

Lawson  and  president's  message;  prompt  re-
action


184


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  32— (Continued)


Relative  Prices  of  40  Tbanspoetation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


Relative  prices  of  stoclcs

, * \

Turning
Low Higli  Spread points
1905  January 225 248 23

February 238 257 19
March  243 264 21 Max.

April  229  261  32

May  220  241  21 Min.

June  223  242  19

July  237  250  13

August  244  268  24


September 252 266 14

October  253 270 17

November 251 272 21


December 255 278 23

1906  January 265 294 29 Max.
February 260 283 23


March

255

274

19

April

246

276

30

May

239

270

31

June

247

271

24

July

243

263

20

August

258

286

28

September  270  287  17 Max.

October  264  285  21

November  261  280  19

December  259  281  22


Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

Net  imports
Average { 4- )  or  exports
Millions call-loan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars

11.8  2.25  —15.7


Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market


Eumors  of  agreement  between  Hill-Harriman  in-
terests, and  of  combination  of  Union  Pacific,
Standard  Oil,  and  Vanderbilt  interests

10.6  2.19  — 13.4  Further rumors of impending combinations, ac-

companied by  heavy  buying
12.9  3.20  -f 1.8  Eeaction on failure  of rumored  combina,tions to

materialize,  and  on  disappointment  of  hopes  for
peace  between  Eussia  and  Japan

12.7  3.25  + .4  Symptoms  of  friction  among  railways; break  in

wheat  market;  bank  defalcations  in  Milwaukee;
insurance  scandals
12.1  2.42  -f-  1.3  Eeaction  in  iron  trade; renewed  attacks  by  Law-

son;  further  insurance  scandals;  Pennsylvania
bond  subscriptions  small

10.8  2.50  —  2.7  Improvement  latter  part  of  month  on  prospects  of

peace  between  Eussia  and  Japan;  Eyan's  pur-
chase of  Equitable  stock;  good  crop  reports

10.9  2.31  -f  2.9  Market  rose  on  dividend  disbursements  and  then

fluctuated  on  crop  reports;  cotton  statistics
scandal

10.9  2.05  -j-  2.1  Peace  between  Eussia  and  Japan;  iron  trade  buoy-

ant; market  broke  on  30th  and  31st  under  real-
izing sales  and  attack  by  Lawson

10.9  3.56  +  3.0  Market  recovered  and  advanced  until  checked  by

high  rates  for  money  toward  close  of  month

12.6  5.31  +  9.7  Course  of  market  irregular  and  uncertain

13.1  7.70  +  3.0  Market  declined  until  13th  on  dear  money;  Eussiau

mutinies ;  large  Hearst  vote  in  N.  Y. ;  later  mar-
ket rose  on  increased  dividends

14.4  16.50  Buoyancy  despite  extreme  tension  in  money  mar-

ket ;  passing  of  dividend  on  preferred  stock  by
Bock  Island  Co. ;  failure  of  Walsh  banks  in
Chicago

As  monetary  stringency  relaxed,  market  rose;  later
decline  on  profit-taking  sales,  and  proposed  in-
quiry into  restraint  of  trade

House  passed  Hepburn  rate  bill;  fear  of  coal
strike;  report  of  Armstrong  Insurance  Com-
mittee, etc.

Fear  of  monetary  stringency;  fear  of  coal  strike;
court  decisions  unfavorable  to  corporations

San  Francisco  earthquake  and  fire;  dear  money;
coal  strike;  sales  of  securities  by  fire  insurance
companies

Coal  strike  ended;  Garfield's  report  on  Standard
Oil;  money  easier

Hepburn  rate  bill  became  law;  Eeynolds-Neill  re-
port on  Chicago  stockyards;  bond  market  dull

Crop  outlook  highly  favorable; money  market  re-
turned to  ease;  U.  S.  Steel  announced  dividend
on  common  stock  July  31
31.8  4.44  +  6.2  Union Pacific and Southern Pacific dividends

increased  sensationally  on  17th;  "boom"  fol-
lowed; checked  late  in  month

Market  weak  and  strong  by  turns;  monetary
stringency  returning

Irregularity  continued;  break  on  news  of  advance
of  Bank  of  England  rate  to  6  per  cent  on  19th

Increase  of  Pennsylvania  Eailroad  dividend
strengthened  market  early  in  month;  later  un-
certainty on  dear  money

20.5  14.00  +  4.6  Tight  money  and  announcement  of  large  security

issues  offset  effect  of  increased  dividends


38.5

8.65

—  4.4

21.7

4.63

—  7.7

19.5

4.88

—  1.6

24.3

9.50

+  11.2

24.0

4.15

+27.9

20.3

3.25

—  1.8

16.3

2.97

+  7.0

26.0

9.38

+27.9

21.9

5.15

+  18.6

19.4

7.50

+  5.8

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


185


Relative  Pbices


Relative  prices  of  stocks

' ^; — r^

Turning
Low High  Spread points


1907  January

243

270

27

February

234

'252

18

March

193

243

50

Min.

April

208

225

17

Max.

May

194

219

25

Min.

June

197

213

16

July

208

222

14

Max.

August

183

211

28

Min.

September

190

204

14

Max.

October

151

192

41

November

149

169

20

Min.

December

158

176

18

1908  January

163

186

23

Max.

February

150

169

19

Min.

March

158

182

24

April

171

191

20

May

184

213

29

June

192

207

15

July

196

216

20

August

204

219

15

September

202

223

21

October

208

226

18

November

222

254

32

December

240

264

24

TABLE  32— (Continued)
or  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911
Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100

Net  imports
Average ( + )  or  exports
Millions call-loan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars

22.7  6.15  — .2


16.5
32.2

19.2

15.8

9.7

12.8

15.6

12.2

17.3

9.7
12.6

16.6

9.8

15.9

11.6

21.0

9.7

13.9

18.9


3.06  —  2.4


23.0


Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Further  issues  of  securities;  substitution  of  short-
term  notes  for  bonds;  increased  operating  ex-
penses; congestion  of  traffic

4.38  +  1.3  Further  borrowing  on  short-term  notes;  Interstate

Commerce Commission's investigation of the
Harriman  lines

6.38  +  2.0  Severe  liquidation  on  the  14th  and  25th;  failure  of

Morgan 's  attempt  to  arrange  conference  between
Roosevelt  and  railway  presidents

2.35  +  1.5  Money  market  relaxed;  stock  market  recovered  in

a  measure;  unfavorable  crop  reports

2.31  —  2.9  Unseasonable cold made crops backward; diffi-

culty in  financing  capital  requirements  continued

3.13  — 22.8  Bond syndicates expiring with  large portion of

bonds  unsold;  crop  prospects  somewhat  brighter

4.55  —  5.1  Federal  policy  of  asking  for  receivers  in  prosecu-

tion of  trusts  announced ;  intimations  of  dividend
increases
Standard  Oil  fine;  numerous  prosecutions  of  cor-
porations; signs of industrial reaction; Pope
receivership

4.00  + .2  Copper  fell  22-15% cents  per  pound; extra  divi-

dend by  Burlington;  success  of  N.  Y.  City  bond
sale  after  interest  had  been  raised  from  4  to  4%
per  cent
21.00  — .1  Embarrassment of Heinze, Morse, and Thomas

banks ; failure of Knickerbocker Trust Co. ;
panic
12.25  +61.7  Panic  continued ;  limitation  of  payments  by  banks ;

bargain  buying  of  stocks  in  small  lots
14.60  +42.5  Strain  relaxed;  decided  gain  on  stock  exchange  in

closing  days  of  the  mouth

4.75  +  9.4  Return  of  ease  in  money  market;  revival  of  con-

fidence;  Seaboard  Air  Line  and  Chicago  Great
Western  receiverships

1.81  — .1  President's  message  and  letter  to  Interstate  Com-

merce  Commission judged unfavorable to cor-
porate interests;  more  railway  receiverships

1.85  +  1.1  President's  message  of  March  25th  judged  more

favorable; suspended  banks  reopening; copper
prospects  brighter

1.72  — 13.0  Successful financing of Erie's capital require-

ments; railway  expenses  reduced

1.66  — 24.4  Congress  adjourned  without  passing  laws  adverse

to  corporate  interests;  Gould  stocks  weak

1.52  —  6.2  Inactivity;  cut  in  steel  prices;  dividend  reductions

and  suspensions;  Taft  nominated

1.22  —  2.7  Bryan nominated; Court of Appeals reversed

Standard Oil  fine  decision; efforts  to  increase
freight  rates

1.06  —  3.1  Advance  of  stocks  opposed  by  "shorts";  flagrant

manipulation  followed  by  suspension  of  a  large
brokerage  firm
Uneasiness  over  presidential  campaign;  suspension

of  dividends  by  American  Locomotive  Co.
Revival  in  iron  and  copper  trades; net  earnings

increasing  through  saving  of  expenses
Buoyancy  followed  Taft's  election;  moderate  reac-
tion on  profit-taking  sales,  suit  against  ' '  Sugar
Trust,"  etc.

2.90  —  3.3  Market irregular; advances in freight rates  an-

nounced;  tariff  hearings  begun  by  Committee
of  Ways  and  Means


17.6

1.35

14.3

1.44

+  .8

25.0

1.75

—  1.0

186


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  32— (Continued)
Relative  Prices  of  40  Transportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Relative  prices  of  stocks


January

Low
247

High
271

Spread
24

Turning
points

Max.

Millions

of  shares

sold

17.3

February

240

266

26

Min.

12.3

March

248

267

19

13.7

April

260

284

24

19.1

May

270

286

16

16.5

June


273 294 21 Max.


20.3


J'uly


219 246 27 Min.


14.3


Net  imports
Average (  -j- )  or  exports
call-loan of  dollars
rates  ( — )  of  gold

%  in  millions


1.81

2.25

1.85
1.94

1.84

1.87


2.41


-  5.5

-  6.4

-16.7

-  4.1
-10.1

-  7.2


July

274

288

14

Min.

12.8

2.06

—14.6

August

274

296

22

24.6

2.17

—  5.0

September

272

292

20

20.0

2.69

—  6.0

October

278

301

23

21.7

4.31

—  3.6

November

279

298

19

18.8

4.65

—13.1

December

284

307

23

Max.

17.6

5.03

—  9.4

January

262

298

36

24.5

4.72

—  4.0

February

252

275

23

Min.

16.0

2.78

+ .1

March

268

289

21

Max.

15.0

2.88

+ 2.6

April

254

277

23

14.1

3.28

—34.2

May

252

272

20

11.9

3.63

+ 2.4

June

233

265

32

16.3

2.77

+  3.0

+  9.5


August

228

250

22

10.4

1.55

+  9.7

September

232

245

13

7.7

2.00

+  1.4

October

247

266

19

Max.

13.5

3.13

+  3.5

November

246

263

17

10.7

3.23

+  2.9

Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market


Consolidated  Gas  decision,  maintaining  legality  of
80-cent  rate,  caused  decUne;  Harriman  entered
N.  Y.  Central  board

Steel  Corporation  announced  new  policy  of  "pro-
tecting their  customers ' '  on  19th ;  heavy  liqui-
dation followed

Congress  in  extra  session  on  the  tariff;  iron,  coal,
and  copper  trades  in  difficulties

Improved  industrial  conditions;  larger  purchases
of  bonds;  increasing  railway  earnings

Supreme  Court  decision  on  Commodities  Clause  of
Hepburn  act  on  3d  caused  rise;  expanding  busi-
ness activity

Eeaction  followed  Taft's  recommendation  of  tax
on  corporations;  hitch  in  plan  for  listing  Steel
shares  in  Paris;  poor  state  of  copper  trade

Tariff  nearing  completion;  increasing  business
activity;  higher  dividend  on  Steel  common

Tariff  act  signed  on  5th;  market  fluctuated  on
conflicting  rumors  of  Harriman 's  health;  crop
prospects  impaired  by  heat

Harriman  died  on  9th;  Taft's  speeches  caused
decline  in  third  week

Early  decline  on  dearer  money  in  New  York  and
London;  foreign  selling;  later  extensive  rise

Circuit  Court  found  Standard  Oil  contravening
Sherman  Anti-trust  Law  on  20th;  new  stock
issues  depressing

No  disturbing  features  in  Taft's  message;  specu-
lation encouraged  by  rise  of  certain  special
stocks;  general  list  buoyant  after  Christmas

Taf t  's  message  recommending  increase  in  powers
of  Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  etc.;  Hock-
ing Coal  and  Iron  Co.  in  hands  of  receivers;
fall  of  cotton  and  grain  prices;  slackening  activ-
ity in  steel  trade

Signs  of  declining  activity  in  several  industries;
failure  of  Pisk  &  Robinson

N.  Y.  Central  dividend  rate  increased;  numerous
strikes  and  wage  advances

Bad  crop  reports;  gold  exports,  dear  money,  inti-
mations of  further  prosecutions  of  corporations

Large  foreign  sales  of  railway  securities;  crop
prospects  better

Injunction  against  advance  of  railway  rates;  In-
terstate Commerce  Commission  reduces  rates
west  of  Missouri

Injury  to  spring  wheat;  Interstate  Commerce  Com-
mission secured  postponement  of  advances  in
freight  rates;  further  restriction  of  trade;
Parquhar-Pearson  securities  taken  over  by  Kiihn,
Loeb  &  Co.

Gains  by  ' '  Insurgents ' '  in  state  conventions ;
furtner  restriction  of  trade

Minnesota  rate  decision  favorable  to  railways;
Democrats  carried  Maine;  revival  of  demand  for
bonds

Crops  better  than  expected;  Democratic  success  at
elections  forecasted;  Bank  of  England  raised
rate  to  5  per  cent

Democrats  captured  House  of  Representatives;
federal  suit  against  ' '  Sugar  Trust ' ' ;  pessimistic
trade  forecasts


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


187


TABLE  32— (Concluded)
Relative  Prices  of  40  Teansportation  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


Relative  prices  of  stocl£s
A

Turning
Low High  Spread points

1910  December 243 255 12 Min.


1911  January 246 262 16


February 250 267 17 Max.


Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99 :

Net  imports
Average ( + )  or  exports
Millions call-loan ( — )  of  gold
of  shares  rates  in  millions

sold  %  of  dollars

9.8  3.38  +  3.6


10.4


10.2


3.18


2.28


March  251  265  14

April  249  260  11 Min.

May  249  263  14

June  259  271  12 Max.

July  255  265  10

August  232  262  30

September  224  242  18 Min.

October  232  246  14

November  238  253  15


5.5


15.0


17.4


10.9


2.36


2.31


2.28


2.33


+  8.6


+  5.4


6.8  2.28  +  3.6

5.6  2.30  +  3.0

11.1  2.31  —  1.8

10.5  2.40  +  1.7


+ .4


+  3.6


+ 2.4


+ .1


December 240 252 12 Max.


14.9  2.72  —10.5


9.1  4.03  +  3.7


:100


Current  events  affecting  the  stock  market

Encouragement  received  from  Taft's  message  to
Congress  and  decision  in  Anthracite  Coal  cases ;
further  federal  suits  against  corporations;  addi-
tional increases  of  wages  by  railways;  continued
restrictions  of  trade

Carnegie  Trust  Co.  closed;  restriction  of  produotiop
in  leather  and  cotton  trades;  large  loan  flota
tions  by  New  York  City  and  by  railways;  pros
pects  of  steel  trade  better;  net  earnings  of  rail
ways  larger;  money  market  easy

Decline  in  commodity  prices;  several  new  railway
loans;  further  improvement  in  steel  trade;  plan
for  double  tracking  Union  and  Southern  Pacific
announced;  market  broke  on  24th  after  an-
nouncement that  Interstate  Commerce  Commis-
sion refused  to  permit  advance  of  railway  freight
rates

N.  Y.  Central  Railroad  reduced  dividend;  railway
net  earnings  lower;  troops  sent  to  Mexican  bor-
der; new  orders  in  steel  trade  smaller;  copper
stocks  larger;  money  market  dull

Congress  met  in  extra  session;  further  signs  of
reaction  in  general  business;  increasing  demand
for  bonds ;  rates  for  money  very  low

Supreme  Court  decision  in  Standard  Oil  case  fol-
lowed by  temporary  revival  of  speculation;  gen-
eral cut  in  steel  prices ;  House  of  Representatives
began  investigation  of  U.  S.  Steel  Corporation

Sale  of  Panama  Canal  bonds  highly  successful;
Government  defeated  in  suit  to  separate  South-
ern Pacific  from  Union  Pacific,  but  won  suit
against  "Powder  Trust"  and  began  several  new
prosecutions  under  Sherman  law;  crops  injured
by  dry  weather

Further  damage  to  grain  crops,  and  wild  specula-
tion for  advance  of  prices;  Interstate  Commerce
Commission's  decision  regarding  Pacific  Coast
rates  deemed  unfavorable  to  railways;  new  trust
prosecutions;  anxiety  over  Moroccan  crisis

Supporting  of  prices  apparently  ceased  on  Stock
Exchange;  liquidation  on  European  account;
threatened  labor  difficulties  for  railways;  prices
of  steel  products  weaker;  new  trust  prosecutions

Speeches  by  Taft  and  Wickersham  threaten  exten-
sive prosecutions  of  trusts;  uneasiness  in  Euro-
pean markets;  loans  by  New  York  to  Paris  and
Berlin;  Tripolitan  war;  price  cutting  in  steel;
Western  railway  strikes

Federal  suit  against  U.  S.  Steel  Corporation;
Wickersham  approved  plan  of  ' '  Tobacco  Trust ' '
for  reorganization;  steel  earnings  larger;  revo-
lution in  China;  monetary  tension  in  Europe
relaxed;  New  York  bought  $13,000,000  Prussian
treasury  notes;  money  a  drug

Circuit  Court  approved  plan  for  disintegration  of
"Tobacco  Trust";  Commerce  Court  enjoined
order  of  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  in
Pacific  Coast  rate  cases;  increased  railway  orders
for  steel  products;  financial  conditions  abroad
easier;  over  $10,000,000  gold  sent  to  Canada;
New  York  reserves  below  25  per  cent

Hadley  Commission's  report  on  railway  securities
well  received;  increasing  orders  for  iron  and
steel;  further  trust  prosecutions;  receivers  ap-
pointed tor  Wabash;  rates  for  money  somewhat
firmer


188


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  189

3.  The  Course  of  the  New  York  Stock  Market  in  1890-1911

A  sketch  of  the  general  trend  of  the  market  is  useful  in  studying  these
tables.  From  133-145'"  in  May  of  1890  prices  declined  to  92-106  in  ^December
under  European  liquidation,  stringent  money,  and  the  reflex  influence  of  the
Baring  crisis  in  London.  The  first  seven  months  of  1891  was  a  period  of
liquidation  in  the  United  States  and  stocks  did  not  recover  much  of  their  lost
ground ;  but  after  the  scantiness  of  foreign  wheat  crops  and  the  abundance  of
the  American  crop  had  become  assured,  prices  advaced,  reaching  121-135  in
January,  1892.  For  the  rest  of  the  year  and  the  first  four  months  of  1893  the
market  sagged  under  the  influence  of  gold  exports,  the  decline  of  the  treasury's
gold  reserve,  foreign  selling,  and  the  financial  embarrassment  of  certain  rail-
ways and  industrial  corporations.  In  the  stock  market  the  crisis  of  1893  began
with  a  sharp  panic  on  May  4  and  5.  The  lowest  level  touched  in  that  disastrous
summer  was  68-81  in  August.  No  material  recovery  occurred  during  the  dull
year  1894;  but  after  President  Cleveland  made  his  contract  with  the  Morgan-
Belmont  gold  syndicate  in  February,  1895,  stocks  began  to  advance  and  reached
91-102  in  September.  The  resumption  of  gold  exports  and  the  concurrent
decline  of  the  treasury's  reserve  again  turned  the  tide  and  prices  were  falling
when  the  president's  Venezuelan  message  was  published,  December  17.  The
war  scare  which  followed  reduced  stocks  to  as  low  a  point  as  during  the  worst
of  the  panic  of  1893.  The  recovery  of  the  next  spring  was  checked  by  the  gains
of  the  free-silver  party  and  Mr.  Bryan's  nomination.  In  August,  1896,  while
the  issue  of  the  presidential  campaign  seemed  uncertain,  stocks  fell  to  their
lowest  point  in  the  whole  period  of  twenty-two  years,  61-70.

The  defeat  of  the  free-silver  policy  paved  the  Avay  for  a  return  of  business
prosperity.  But  this  immediate  advance  did  not  outlast  November,  and  for
the  next  eight  months  stocks  were  lower  than  in  the  week  of  election.  Finally,
in  midsummer,  1897,  the  development  of  a  crop  situation  like  that  of  1891
caused  a  sudden  advance  to  92-107  in  September.  But  fear  of  war  with  Spain
brought  on  a  relapse,  and  when  fighting  began  in  the  next  April  the  market
stood  at  83-89 — substantially  the  level  of  November,  1896.  During  the  war  the
general  trend  of  stock  prices  was  upward,  and  peace  was  followed  by  a  "boom"
which  carried  prices  to  118-133  in  February,  1899.  The  next  year  and  a  half
was  a  time  of  many  vicissitudes  upon  the  stock  market  in  which  industrial
shares  played  the  leading  roles.  But  even  the  railway  shares  underwent  a  fall
after  ex-Governor  Flower's  death  in  May,  1899;  scored  a  marked  advance  in
midsummer ;  suffered  a  heavy  drop  in  the  panic  of  December  18 ;  made  a  new
high  record  in  April,  and  finished  in  September,  1900,  lower  than  in  February,
1899.

70  These  figures  show  the  arithmetic  means  of  the  lowest  and  highest  relative  prices  for  the  month.


190  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

It  is  notable  that  in  these  years  of  business  revival  after  the  depression  of
1893-96  stock  prices  did  not  equal  the  high  record  of  May,  1890,  until  April,
1900.  But  the  great  outburst  of  speculation  which  followed  President  Mc-
Kinley's  second  election  turned  the  moderate  rate  of  advance  into  a  furious
rush,  and  established  what  for  twelve  years  has  appeared  to  be  a  permanently
higher  level  of  fluctuations.  From  117-127  in  September,  1900,  stocks  rose
with  hardly  a  check  to  239  in  May.  But  May  9  brought  the  Northern  Pacific
corner  and  the  market  dropped  to  169.  The  difference  between  these  figures
is  70  points — the  widest  spread  exhibited  by  any  month  in  the  tAvo  decades.
This  extraordinar)^  fall  had  but  a  transient  effect  upon  the  general  level  of
prices.  In  June  the  high  level  of  May  was  actually  surpassed,  and  the  general
trend  continued  upward  until  September,  1902,  when  the  figures  stood  258-289.

The  period  of  severe  liquidation,  known  as  "the  rich  man's  panic,"  began
in  October  or  November,  1902.  Under  heavy  but  steady  selling  the  market
receded  month  by  month  until  most  of  the  great  gains  of  1901  had  been  lost.
The  lowest  points  were  158-175  in  October,  1903,  and  161-170  in  May,  1904.

Another  forward  movement  began  while  the  presidential  campaign  was  in
progress,  and,  as  in  1900,  the  election  was  followed  by  an  outburst  of  specu-
lation. This  campaign  culminated  in  March,  1905,  with  prices  of  243-264.  A
decline  was  followed  by  a  second  great  "bull"  movement  which  established  a
record  of  265-294  in  January,  1906.  Once  more  the  spring  brought  a  reaction,
and  once  more  the  autumn  saw  an  advance.  On  July  31  the  Steel  Corporation
announced  the  resumption  of  dividends  upon  its  common  stock,  and  on  August
17  the  Union  Pacific  raised  its  dividend  from  6  to  10  per  cent,  and  the  Southern
Pacific  began  paying  dividends  on  its  common  stock  at  the  rate  of  5  per  cent.
The  market  responded  with  an  upward  rush  to  270-287  in  September.  There-
after for  many  months  a  contest  seems  to  have  been  waged  between  two
powerful  cliques.  The  efforts  to  carry  prices  higher  were  unavailing.  Instead,
the  level  of  fluctuations  gradually  declined  until  March,  1907,  when  the  market
broke  disastrously  on  the  14th  and  25th.  The  range  for  that  month  was  193-243.
Summer  brought  no  great  recovery,  and  in  August  another  relapse  resulted
in  prices  lower  than  those  for  March.  Recuperation  in  September  was  followed
by  the  outbreak  of  panic  in  October.  Next  month  the  market  fell  to  149-169 —
lower  than  during  the  troubles  of  1903-04,  and  lower  than  at  any  time  since
1900;  but  still  above  the  highest  record  of  1890-99.

After  the  crisis  of  1893,  recovery  Avas  slow,  and  a  fresh  decline  in  1896
reduced  prices  to  a  still  lower  level.  After  the  crisis  of  1907,  on  the  contrary,
recovery  was  rather  prompt.  By  January,  1909,  the  level  was  higher  than  in
January,  1907.  During  the  rest  of  the  year  the  trend  was  upward,  and  by
December  the  highest  previous  record — that  for  January,  1906 — had  been
eclipsed.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  191

In  January,  1910,  the  tide  turned  once  more,  and  stock  prices  entered  upon
another  serious  decline.  Except  for  a  temporary  revival  in  March,  the  fall
continued  until  July,  by  which  time  all  the  gains  scored  since  October-
November,  1908,  had  been  wiped  out.  The  autumn  months  brought  a  partial
recovery;  but  the  year  ended  with  prices  not  far  from  the  lowest  quotations  of
1909.  The  downward  trend  was  interrupted  in  1911  by  upward  movements  in
January-February  and  again  in  May- June ;  but  the  gains  were  less  than  the
subsequent  losses,  which  culminated  in  September  with  prices  at  about  the
same  level  as  in  July,  1910,  but  higher  than  in  the  spring  and  summer  of  1907.

The  general  level  of  prices  during  these  successive  periods  has  been  as
follows :

Average
price
January,  1890-April,  1893— Before  the  crisis  of  1893  119

May,  1893-June,  1897— Crisis  and  depression  81

July,  1897-September,  1900— Eevival  of  business  activity  113

October,  1900-October,  1902 — Flood  tide  of  prosperity  219

November,  1902-July,  1904— The  "rich  man's  panic"  195

August,  1904-February,  1907 — Flood  tide  of  prosperity  251

March,  1907-September,  1908 — Liquidation,  crisis  and  depression  193

October,  1908-December,  1909 — Eevival  of  business  activity  268

January,  1910-December,  1911 — Eeaction  251


4.  The  Diversity  of  Fluctuations  in  the  Prices  of  Common  Stocks

Stock  prices  have  a  much  wider  range  of  fluctuations  than  commodity  prices.
Table  33,  which  presents  the  decils  for  our  40  common  stocks,  shows  margins
between  the  lowest  and  highest  relative  prices  which  average  more  than  twice
as  great  as  the  corresponding  margins  in  Table  8,  which  gives  the  decils  for
145  commodities  at  wholesale.

But  though  this  dispersion  of  stock  prices  is  wide,  it  is  fairly  regular.
Greater  density  toward  the  middle  of  the  field,  narroAving  of  the  margins
between  the  decils  under  depression  and  spreading  under  prosperity,  and
general  agreement  between  the  movements  of  all  the  decils,  prevail  in  the  case
of  stocks  as  in  the  case  of  commodities,  and  show  that  the  very  divergencies
among  the  fluctuations  are  orderly  in  character.  Hence  arithmetic  means  may
be  accepted  as  a  convenient  summary  of  the  whole  set  of  variations.

The  stocks  which  have  the  highest  relative  prices  in  the  second  decade  are
in  general  those  which  had  the  lowest  actual  prices  in  the  first  decade.  Table
34  gives  the  evidence  in  the  form  of  the  average  relative  prices  of  the  seventeen
stocks  which  averaged  less  than  $25  per  share  in  1890-99,  the  thirteen  stocks
which  averaged  $25-99,  and  the  ten  stocks  which  averaged  over  $100. The


192  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  33

Decils  of  the  Relative  Prices  of  Common  Stocks'i

40  Stocks. By  years,  1890-1911. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =^  100


Tear

Lowest

1st  decil

2d  decil

3d  decil

4th  decil

Median

6th  decil

7th  decil

8th  decil

9th  decil

Highest

1890

30

60

92

97

105

109

120

134

146

171

266

1891

30

82

93

98

102

106

114

120

132

149

210

1892

70

96

101

105

111

115

119

125

142

167

210

1893

61

66

85

89

93

95

96

99

102

106

147

1894

40

52

65

73

79

87

91

92

96

100

106

1895

30

53

71

81

87

89

92

94

98

103

121

1896

26

53

64

75

77

81

85

88

92

96

102

1897

12

59

66

80

85

88

90

96

98

101

127

1898

17

61

79

85

89

91

98

105

107

121

178

1899

65

84

97

104

107

116

121

138

147

165

303

1900

60

85

91

102

118

124

129

138

150

195

306

1901

102

125

136

144

160

183

203

231

282

328

488

1902

104

139

149

173

204

218

241

285

342

372

564

1903

94

119

131

155

168

182

196

204

248

285

535

1904

92

104

130

157

165

168

187

208

223

284

522

1905

97

129

159

194

208

240

253

265

306

369

689

1906

94

126

170

199

223

236

271

289

327

444

748

1907

63

88

116

139

166

179

192

223

256

311

610

1908

49

92

117

131

156

169

189

219

257

348

586

1909

58

113

132

160

193

241

284

318

372

512

761

1910

32

97

125

135

165

218

233

256

386

488

817

1911

25

89

113

127

155

184

215

259

378

498

878

Averages
1890-99

38.1

66.6

81.3

88.7

93.5

97.7

102.6

109.1

116.0

127.9

177.0

1900-09

81.3

112.0

133.1

155.4

176.1

194.0

214.5

238.0

276.3

344.8

580.9

high-priced  shares  have  been  most  stable  in  price ;  but  even  they  have  advanced
much  more  than  commodities  at  wholesale.

A  geographical  arrangement  according  to  the  section  of  the  country  served
by  the  railways  (Table  35)  shows  differences  even  greater  than  those  between
low-priced  and  high-priced  stocks.  All  the  groiips  participate  in  the  larger
movements  of  the  market.  That  is,  all  fall  heavily  between  1892  and  1896 ;  all
regain  much  more  than  the  lost  ground  in  1897-02;  all  fall  in  1903;  all  rise
vigorously  again  in  1904-06 ;  all  go  down  once  more  in  1907 ;  all  move  upward
sharply  in  1909,  and  finally  all  decline  in  1910-11. But  the  differences  in  degree

71  This  table  is  compiled,  not  from  the  extreme,  but  from  the  average  prices  of  the  several  stocks  in  each
year.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  193

TABLE  34

Eelative  Prices  of  Stocks  Classified  According  to  Average  Actual  Prices  in  1890-99

Arithmetic  means. By  years,  1890-1911. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Year
1890

Less  than  $26
per  share

125

$25  to  $99
per  share

127

Over  $100
per  share

106

1891

118

115

101

1892

128

126

107

1893

92

92

99

1894

76

77

95

1895

85

79

95

1896

73

72

91

1897

78

84

93

1898

89

98

100

1899

136

129

114

1900

147

130

116

1901

271

186

140

1902

325

221

161

1903

246

187

141

1904

221

192

142

1905

297

248

173

1906

319

265

183

1907

225

214

155

1908

218

214

157

1909

332

271

193

1910

301

260

166

1911

296

253

160

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

1900-09

260

213

156

of  rise  and  fall  are  as  striking  as  the  uniformity  in  direction  of  movement.
The  southern,  western,  and  Pacific  stocks  suffer  more  severely  than  the  others
in  1893-96,  and  score  greater  gains  in  1897-1902.  Between  the  earlier  high
record  of  1902  and  the  later  of  1909,  the  coal-carrying  and  Pacific  railway
stocks  make  large  gains,  the  southern  moderate  gains,  and  the  middle  western
and  northwestern  moderate  losses,  while  the  Atlantic  railway  and  the  express,
steamship,  and  telegraph  stocks  change  but  little.  On  the  whole,  the  last  men-
tioned groups  have  been  the  stablest  in  price,  and  the  Pacific  railway  stocks
the  most  variable.  But,  once  more,  even  the  stablest  group  of  stocks  has  risen
more  in  price  than  have  commodities  at  wholesale."

72  That  these  differences  in  the  fluctuations  of  stocks  from  different  sections  of  the  country  are  not  wholly
due  to  the  greater  advance  in  the  prices  of  stocks  which  were  cheap  in  1890-99  appears  from  the  following
figures:


194  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  35

Relative  Prices  or  Seven  Groups  of  Transportation  Stocks. By  Years,  1890-1911

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


Year

5  North
Atlantic
railways

4  coal-
carrying
railways

6  Southern
railways

8  Middle
Western
railways

7  North-
western
railways

5  Pacific
railways

5  express,

steamship,

and  telegraph

companies

1890

113

117

132

120

105

144

117

1891

108

106

123

118

94

134

108

1892

119

135

114

128

119

139

108

1893

97

97

84

93

92

99

96

1894

89

95

78

83

76

65

89

1895

89

89

82

93

85

68

91

1896

86

88

67

77

78

64

85

1897

90

89

89

76

88

67

91

1898

95

84

98

93

■100

87

99

1899

115

99

134

120

164

132

117

1900

110

99

151

123

180

145

108

1901

158

144

259

206

267

259

137

1902

162

181

297

256

332

292

171

1903

133

161

259

188

245

236

151

1904

130

170

250

174

214

240

153

1905

186

255

325

214

281

306

176

1906

177

305

341

227

289

363

178

1907

127

245

269

153

190

320

152

1908

125

270

246

150

192

326

142

1909

159

340

358

201

296

445

177

1910

141

331

349

197

243

406

148

1911

140

328

345

178

244

405

137

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

147

217

276

189

249

293

155

5.  The  Prices  of  Preferred  Stocks

Preferred  stocks  are  hybrids — a  cross  between  common  stocks  and  bonds.
Their  owners  have  a  legal  claim  to  dividends  at  a  certain  rate  before  the
common  shareholders  are  allowed  any  return.  Often  this  prior  right  is  cumu-
lative— any  deficiency  in  the  preferred  dividend  for  earlier  years  must  be  made
good  from  later  profits  before  dividends  can  be  declared  on  the  common  stock.

Average  Gain  in

actual  prices, relative  prices,

1890-99  1890-09

Coal-carrying  railways $103.98  223  points

North  Atlantic  railways  91.92  46  points

Express,  steamship,  and  telegraph  companies  82.46  60  points

Northwestern  railways  41.41  191  points

Middle  western  railways  35.58  81  points

Pacific  railways  33.28  301  points

Southern  railways  27.08  226  points

A  table  showing  the  relative  prices  of  these  various  groups  of  stocks  by  quarters  in  1890-1909  may  be
found  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  May,  1910,  pp.  377-379.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  195

On  the  other  hand,  all  of  the  dividends  which  remain  after  the  preferred  share-
holders have  received  their  allotted  rate  usually  go  to  the  common  shareholders,
so  that  the  latter  may  receive  a  larger  dividend  than  the  former.  Further,
the  right  of  voting  for  directors,  and  hence  the  control  of  the  corporation,  is
frequently  vested  in  the  common  shareholders  alone.  These  differences  between
the  two  kinds  of  stock  give  rise  to  differences  in  their  price  fluctuations.  It  is,
therefore,  desirable  to  keep  the  two  kinds  separate  in  an  index  number  of  stocks.
But  it  is  also  desirable  to  determine  the  differentiating  characteristics  of  the
two  sets  of  fluctuations,  and  to  measure  as  nearly  as  may  be  the  varying  margin
between  them.

Such  an  investigation  is  best  based  upon  the  prices  of  preferred  and  common
shares  in  the  same  corporations;  for  if  preferred  shares  are  taken  in  one  set
of  companies  and  common  shares  in  another  set  the  results  reflect  differences
in  the  financial  fortunes  of  the  two  sets  of  companies,  as  well  as  differences  in
the  business  factors  affecting  the  two  types  of  stock.  Accordingly,  the  following
tables  are  made  from  data  concerning  the  preferred  and  common  stocks  of  the
ten  railways  for  which  the  most  regular  series  of  quotations  could  be  obtained.
The  titles  of  these  securities  are  given  in  Table  36,  and  their  average  relative
prices  in  Table  37.''''

The  general  trend  of  fluctuation  in  the  relative  prices  of  the  two  types  of
stocks  has  been  similar.  There  are  but  two  instances  in  which  the  changes
from  one  year  to  the  next  have  not  been  in  the  same  direction  for  preferred
and  for  common  stock.  Between  1890  and  1891  the  preferred  stocks  fell
slightly,  while  the  common  stocks  showed  no  change;  between  1905  and  1906
the  preferred  stocks  fell  one  point,  while  the  common  rose  thirteen  points.  In
every  other  case  the  types  rose  or  fell  together.

There  are,  however,  notable  differences  of  degree  between  the  two  sets  of
fluctuations.  For  the  flrst  eleven  years,  indeed,  the  relative  prices  keep  rather
close  together.  The  maximum  difference  occurs  in  1900  and  is  eleven  points.
But  even  during  these  years  of  close  agreement  preferred  shares  exhibit  their
characteristic  greater  stability  in  price.  Common  stocks  start  higher,  fall
lower,  and  again  rise  higher  than  preferred.  Further,  the  "spread"  between
the  annual  averages  of  the  lowest  and  highest  monthly  prices  is  always  greater
for  common  stocks.

These  differences  in  degree  of  rise  and  fall  became  much  wider  with  the
great  stock  market  "boom"  which  began  in  October,  1900.  Since  1901  the
average  relative  prices  of  the  common  stocks  have  exceeded  the  figures  for
preferred  by  margins  never  less  than  59  points  and  in  three  years  running
beyond  100  points.  That  is,  the  preferred  stocks  were  much  less  affected  by
the  "boom"  than  common  stocks. They  rose,  indeed,  and  rose  at  a  rate  rapid.

73  Corresponding  tables  by  quarters  for  1890-1909  may  be  found  in  the  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  July,

1910,  vol.  18,  pp.  516-519. Monthly  figures  are  given  in  Table  44,  below.


196


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


in  comparison,  for  example,  with  the  advance  in  wholesale  commodity  prices;
but  common  stocks  rose  more  rapidly  still.  The  greater  stability  of  preferred
stocks,  therefore,  stands  out  more  clearly  in  the  last  eleven  years  of  the  table
than  in  the  first  eleven  years.


TABLE  36

List  of  Preferred  and  Common  Stocks  Included  in  the  Following  Tables,  and  Their  Average

Actual  Prices,  1890-99


Average  prices,  1890-99

Preferred Common
stock stock

Value  of
Preferred  com-
pared with
Common
%

Chicago,  Milwaukee  and  St.

Paul  .

$130.00

$79.20

164

Chicago  and

Northwestern  .

152.50

114.60

133

Cleveland,  Cincinnati,  Chicago  and  St.  Louis

89.10

47.90

186

Denvi

3r  and  P

tio  Grande

48.80
41.80

14.90
17.50

327
239

Erie

Iowa
Lake

Central
Erie  an
uri,  Ka]

d  Western

32.30
69.50
28.14

9.20
18.30
13.10

351
380
215

Misso

isas  and  Texas

Norf(

)lk  and
,sh

Western

38.30
20.10

12.10
8.70

317
231

Waba

TABLE  37

jAtivb  Prices  or

Preferred  and

1  Common  Stocks

;  IN  Ten  Railways. :

By  Years,  1890-lS

Average  actual  prices  ir

L  1890-99  -

=  100. Arithmetic  means

Low

High

Spread

Average

Year Preferred

Commoii Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

Preferred Common

1890

104

106

113

120

9

14

108

113

1891

99

105

109

120

10

15

104

113

1892

111

118

119

129

8

11

115

124

1893

81

82

92

96

11

14

87

89

1894

79

77

85

87

6

10

82

82

1895

83

80

92

94

9

14

87

87

1896

81

76

89

86

8

10

85

81

1897

90

84

98

95

8

11

94

90

1898

103

91

112

102

9

11

107

97

1899

125

118

135

134

10

16

130

126

1900

128

134

138

154

10

20

133

144

1901

169

242

186

283

17

41

178

262

1902

186

290

196

320

10

30

191

305

1903

157

223

169

253

12

30

163

238

1904

152

203

161

226

9

23

156

215

1905

177

266

185

291

8

25

181

278

1906

175

277

185

306

10

29

180

291

1907

133

192

143

220

10

28

138

206

1908

125

182

136

208

11

26

130

195

1909

164

267

174

293

10

26

169

280

1910

143

234

153

262

10

28

148

248

1911

134

224

141

242

7

18

138

233

Averages

1890-99

96

94

104

106

9

13

100

100

1900-09

157

228

167

255

11

28

162

241

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


197


CHART 22

\\

300
280

AVERAGE  RELATIVE PRICES
OF

PREFERRED  AND  COMMON  STOC

IN ILN  RAILWAYS.

•KS

II
/I

(1

t

1
1
1  1

1
1

i

240

1830 -1911.

1

1
1

1
\

\

2  GO
240

1

1

1

1

1
1

\
1

\


COMMON STOCKS. I

1
1

\ 1
( 1

V  1

V  ,

\

200

i

\

200

i  /

\

\

140

1

\

'1

h

160

w

]

\\

l\

\

1

\l

\

IZO
100
80

i

/(

120
100
80

—

1  \

1

l\

//
/»
11

U

1
1

I

/

\

1

1830  '91 '92  '95  '94 '95 '36  '97 '98  '93  1900 '01 '02  '03  '04  '05  '06  '07 '08  '09  1910  '11

198  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  reasons  for  this  greater  stability  are  found  in  the  differences  already
pointed  out  between  the  rights  of  preferred  and  common  shareholders.  Prom
the  investor's  standpoint,  the  prior  right"  to  dividends,  often  coupled  with  a
limitation  upon  the  maximum  dividend,  promises  a  more  regular  return  upon
piirchases  of  preferred  than  upon  purchases  of  common  stock.  On  the  other
hand,  conunon  stock  is  the  speculator's  favorite,  precisely  because  it  promises
wider  oscillations  in  price,  so  that  speculative  operations  doubtless  enhance  the
differences  in  variableness  which  investment  dealing  would  establish.  Finally,
contests  for  control  usually  center  upon  common  stock,  either  because  it  alone
carries  voting  privileges,  or  because  it  is  cheaper.

Table  38,  which  gives  the  dividend  record  of  our  ten  stocks,  shows  that  the
returns  upon  preferred  shares  have,  in  fact,  been  more  regular  than  the  returns
upon  common  shares — except,  of  course,  when  no  dividends  at  all  have  been
paid  upon  the  latter.^*

It  is  less  easy  to  explain  why  common  stocks  advanced  so  much  more  than
preferred  stocks  between  1900  and  1901,  and  why  they  have  since  retained
most  of  the  lead  thus  gained.  But  Table  38  shows  that  the  roads  already
paying  the  fixed  rate  of  dividends  on  their  preferred  stocks  in  1900  soon  there-
after became  able  to  begin  or  to  increase  the  dividends  on  their  common  stocks.
And  Table  39,  compiled  from  the  statistical  reports  of  the  Interstate  Com-
merce Commission,  indicates  that  this  course  was  the  rule.  Until  the  year
ending  June  30,  1901,  the  increase  in  dividends  on  preferred  stocks  had  been
relatively  more  rapid;  thereafter  the  dividends  on  preferred  stocks  were
approximately  stable,  while  dividends  on  common  stocks  were  more  than
doubled  between  1901  and  1907.  The  more  rapid  rise  of  common  stocks  was
favored  also  by  the  improvement  in  the  physical  condition  of  the  properties,
the  higher  earnings,  the  livelier  speculative  interest,  and  the  establishment  of
communities  of  interest  and  purchases  for  control.  These  latter  factors,  not
susceptible  of  statistical  measurement,  seem  to  have  been  more  potent  than
investment  considerations.  For,  purely  on  an  investment  basis.  Table  38  would
hardly  justify  Northwestern  common,  for  example,  in  rising  between  1900  and
1902  from  $162  to  $234,  while  Northwestern  preferred  was  rising  from  $201
to  $254.

74  The  data  have  been  taken  from  the  "Investor's  Supplement"  appended  to  the  annual  issues  of  the
Financial  Beview,  and  checked  by  Moody's  Manual.  The  few  discrepancies  between  these  two  sources  have  been
settled  by  reference  to  the  railway  reports  published  in  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  199

TABLE  38

Dividends  Upon  Prepereed  and  Common  Stock  Declared  by  the  Ten  Railways  Listed  in  Table  36

By  Years,  1890-1909


C.  M.  &  St.  P.

C.  &N

.  w.

C.  C.  0.  &  St.  L.

D.  &E

i.  G.

Erie

A

*

A

A

Tear

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

f

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

1890

7

0

7

6

5

4

2.75

0

0

0

1891

7

0

7

6

5

3

2.50

0

0

0

1892

7

2

7

6

5

3

0

0

3

0

1893

7

4

7

6

5

3

2

0

0

0

1894

7

4

7

5.5

5

0

0

0

0

0

1895

7

2

7

4

5

0

0

0

0

0

1896

7

4

- 7

5

5

0

2

0

0

0

1897

7

5

7

5

2.50

0

2

0

0

0

1898

7

5

7

5

5

0

2.50

0

0

0

1899

7

5

7

5

5

0

4

0

0

0

1900

7

5

7

6

5

3

4

0

0

0

1901

7

6

7

6

5

3.50

5

0

1.50

0

1902

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

3

0

1903

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

3.50

0

1904

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

4

0

1905

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

4

0

1906

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

4

0

1907

7

7

8

7

5

4

5

0

2

0

1908

7

7

8

7

5

1

5

0

0

0

1909

7

7

8

7

5

0

5

0

0

0

Iowa  Central

L.  E.  ,

few.

M.  K.

A

&T.

N.  &W.

A

Wabash

A

Year

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

Preferred

Common

1890

0

0

4

0

0

0

3

0'

0

0

1891

0

0

4

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

1892

1

0

4.75

0

0

0

1.50*

0

0

0

1893

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1894

0

0

5  •

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1895

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1896

0

0

5

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

1897

0

0

5

0

0

0

1

0

0

0

1898

0

0

3.75

0

0

0

3

0

0

0

1899

3

0

0

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

1900

1.50

0

2

0

0

0

4

0

0

0

1901

0

0

4

0

0

0

4

2

0

0

1902

0

0

4

0

0

0

4

2.50

0

0

1903

0

0

4

0

0

0

4

3

0

0

1904

0

0

3

0

0

0

4

3

0

0

1905

0

0

3

0

0

0

4

3.50

0

0

1906

0

0

3

0

4

0

4

4.50

0

0

1907

0

0

3

0

4

0

4

5

0

0

1908

0

0

1

0

4

0

4

4

0

0

1909

0

0

0

0

4

0

4

4.50

0

0

*  Plus  1  per  cent  in  scrip.


200


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  39

Dividends  Upon  Preferred  and  Common  Stocks  Paid  by  Interstate  Railways
By  Tears  Ending  June  30,  1891-1907

Actual  dividends  Relative  dividends*

, ' ,  , ' ,

Years  Preferred  Common

ending  stoclj:  stoclt  Preferred  Common

June  30  Millions  Millions  stock  stock

1891  $16.4  $74.8  82  94

1892  17.9  79.7  90  101

1893  17.3  83.7  87  106

1894  14.0  81.5  70  103

1895  13.9  71.4  70  90

1896  16.2  71.4  81  90

1897  15.8  71.3  79  90

1898  21.5  74.7  108  94

1899  31.1  79.9  156  101

1900  35.2  104.4  177  132

1901  41.7  115.0  209  145

1902  44.0  141.4 '  221  178

1903  44.5  152.2  223  192

1904  46.2  175.7  232  222

1905  49.1  188.9  246  238

1906  51.6  221.2  259  279

1907  49.7  258.4  249  326

*  Average  actual  dividends, 1891-1900  =  100. Since  1907  the  Commission's  reports  have  not  segregated  the  dividends  upon
preferred  and  common  stocks. The  aggregate  sums  paid  have  been  as  follows:

Tear  ending  June  30,  1908  $390.7  millions

Year  ending  June  30,  1909  321.1  millions

Year  ending  June  30,  1910  405.8  millions

These  figures,  unlike  those  for  1890-1907,  do  not  include  the  returns  of  switching  and  terminal  companies.


In  conclusion,  it  may  not  be  amiss  to  show  what  effect  is  produced  by
putting  preferred  and  common  shares  together  in  the  same  index  number.
Table  40  gives  first  the  index  number  of  forty  coimnon  stocks  from  Table  30 ;
second  the  index  number  of  ten  preferred  stocks  from  Table  37 ;  and  third  an
index  number  of  the  two  sets  in  combination.  The  composite  series  shows  a
slightly  smaller  fall  from  1890  to  1896,  and  a  decidedly  smaller  rise  after  1900
than  is  shown  by  the  series  for  common  stocks  alone.  Despite  the  larger  number
of  securities  entering  into  the  composite  series,  it  is  less  significant  than  the
index  number  for  forty  common  stocks,  not  only  because  of  the  mixing  of  the
two  types  which  the  preceding  tables  show  to  be  different  in  important  respects,
but  also  because  of  the  double  weighting  of  the  ten  railways  for  which  both
kinds  of  stocks  are  included.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  201

TABLE  40

Relative  Pkiobs  of  Forty  Common  Stocks  and  op  Ten  PRBrEERED  Stocks  in  Transportation  Companies.

By  Years,  1890-1911
Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100. Arithmetic  means


Tear

40  common
stocks

10  preferred
stocks

50  common

and  preferred

stocks

1890

121

108

118

1891

113

104

111

1892

123

115

121

1893

93

87

92

1894

82

82

82

1895

85

87

86

1896

77

85

79

1897

84

94

86

1898

94

107

97

1899

128

130

129

1900

134

133

134

1901

211

178

204

1902

250

191

238

1903

201

163

193

1904

192

156

185

1905

250

181

236

1906

267

180

250

1907

204

138

191

1908

201

130

187

1909

277

169

255

1911

248

138

226

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

1900-09

219

162

207

6.  The  Prices  of  Stocks,  Bonds,  and  Commodities

The  usual  method  of  constructing  index  numbers  by  turning  actual  prices
into  percentages  and  averaging  the  latter  cannot  be  applied  to  bonds.  For,
unlike  staple  commodities  and  standard  stocks,  all  bonds  which  terminate  in
a  given  year  are  constantly  changing  their  net  values  through  mere  lapse  of
time.  The  thing  valued  in  the  bond  is  the  expectation  of  a  specified  annual
payment  for  a  specified  number  of  years,  coupled  with  repayment  of  the  prin-
cipal sum  at  the  date  of  maturity.  As  this  number  of  years  grows  less  with
each  passing  season,  the  thing  valued  changes.  Bond  market  quotations,  there-
fore, represent  changing  prices  of  goods  which  themselves  are  changing.  Of
course,  the  relative  prices  of  such  changing  goods  cannot  fairly  be  compared
with  the  relative  prices  of  shares  in  continuous  business  enterprises  or  of
substantially  uniform  commodities.


202  MEMOIES  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

But  an  approximately  accurate  series  of  relative  bond  prices  can  be  con-
structed by  an  indirect  method.  The  preceding  tables  of  bond  yields  show
for  each  year  the  annual  payments  for  which  investors  have  been  willing  to
lend  $100  to  certain  borrowers  under  specific  agreements  as  to  security,  etc.
The  principal  is  fixed,  the  interest  variable.  But  the  conditions  may  be
reversed  and  the  principal  treated  as  variable,  the  interest  as  fixed.  That  is,
the  problem  may  be  stated  in  the  form :  How  large  a  loan  have  investors  been
willing  to  make  in  each  successive  year  in  return  for  annual  payments  of  some
given  amount,  such  as  the  average  net  yields  for  1890-99?  The  problem  is
solved  by  dividing  the  average  net  jdelds  for  the  decade  by  the  average  net
yields  for  each  month  or  year.

For  example :  In  1890-99  men  who  bought  the  bonds  of  the  Chesapeake  and
Ohio  Railway,  secured  by  a  first  consolidated  mortgage,  required  net  annual
interest  payments  averaging  $4.70  for  each  $100  invested.  But  in  1890  they
required  $5.09  per  annum  for  each  $100  put  into  these  bonds.  Had  the  railway
offered  them  interest  at  the  rate  of  $4.70  in  this  year  they  would  have  lent  it
a  principal  sum  represented  by  the  equation  100  ($4.70  -^  $5.09)  =  $92.34.  In
this  fashion  one  may  compute  for  each  month  and  year  the  sums  which
investors  showed  themselves  ready  to  lend  to  each  of  the  railways  in  return
for  fixed  interest  payments.  And  these  sums  may  be  regarded  as  the  relative
prices  of  bonds  bearing  a  uniform  rate  of  interest,  and  having  no  fixed  period
of  termination.  Further,  these  relative  prices  of  bonds  are  fairly  comparable
with  the  relative  prices  of  stocks  and  commodities  computed  on  the  basis  of
average  actual  prices  in  1890-99."

Table  41  has  been  made  in  this  manner  to  show  the  relative  prices  of  each
of  the  ten  bonds  described  in  Table  18.  While  no  two  of  the  bonds  have  agreed
perfectly  in  their  price  fluctuations,  the  notable  feature  of  the  table  is  the
narrowness  of  the  range  between  the  highest  and  lowest  relative  prices.  It
would  be  difficult  to  find  ten  staple  commodities  which  have  kept  so  close
together  in  the  last  twenty  years.  The  ten  common  and  ten  preferred  stocks
included  in  the  preceding  section  of  this  chapter  have  differed  far  more  in
relative  prices  than  have  the  ten  bonds.

Among  the  latter,  those  which  have  fluctuated  through  the  widest  range  are,
of  course,  the  bonds  which  improved  most  in  credit  between  1893  and  1902.
The  poorest  bonds  have  made  the  best  investments  and  the  best  bonds  the
poorest.  Not  only  have  the  poorer  securities  yielded  higher  net  returns  on
their  cost  prices  year  by  year  (Table  19),  but  they  have  also  been  salable  on
more  advantageous  terms — bringing  decidedly  higher  profits  until  1902,  and
somewhat  smaller  losses  since  then.  These  higher  returns,  however,  have  been
obtained  by  running  greater  risks.

76  The  tables  of  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  were  computed  by  Mrs.  John  Spasoff  (Miss  Mansfield  Everett).


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  203

A  comparison  between  index  numbers  for  bonds,  stocks,  and  commodities  is
made  in  Table  42.  The  series  for  United  States  bonds  is  made  in  the  manner
described  from  the  net  yields  shown  in  Table  20.  The  first  series  for  stocks
shows  the  average  relative  prices  of  ten  stocks  which  have  paid  dividends  in
each  year  since  1890."  The  next  three  series  for  stocks  are  adapted  from  tables
30  and  37,  and  that  for  commodities  from  Table  9.  Table  44  carries  out  the
comparison  between  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  and  stocks  by  months."  It  is
preceded  by  a  summary.  Table  43,  in  which  the  monthly  figures  are  averaged,
as  in  Table  26,  according  to  the  successive  phases  of  the  business  cycles  which
have  run  their  course  in  America  since  1890.

The  following  are  the  chief  differences  shown  by  these  tables  between  the
fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  bonds,  stocks,  and  commodities:  (1)  With  the
exception  of  the  erratic  series  for  United  States  4s,  bonds  are  steadier  in  price
than  stocks  or  commodities — showing  higher  minima  in  1890-99  and  lower
maxima  in  1900-09.  (2)  Bonds  rise,  while  stocks  and  commodities  fall,  in  the
periods  of  depression  following  the  crises  of  1893  and  1907.  (3)  Bonds  reach
their  highest  levels  in  1901-02,  while  common  stocks  and  commodities  mount
still  higher  in  1906,  1907,  or  1909.  (4)  While  the  level  upon  which  bonds
fluctuate  is  somewhat  higher  in  the  second  decade  than  in  the  first,  there  is  no
such  marked  contrast  as  in  the  case  of  stocks.  (5)  At  the  end  of  the  period,
bond  prices  show  trifling  losses  or  moderate  gains  in  comparison  with  1890,
while  all  the  series  for  stocks  show  large  gains.  Even  the  index  number  for
commodities  marks  a  greater  advance  than  the  average  for  bonds.

The  greater  steadiness  of  bond  prices  requires  little  comment.  Divi-
dends vary,  interest  is  fixed.  The  ten  bonds  of  these  tables  have  paid  the  same
average  return  of  4.06  per  cent  upon. their  par  value  every  year  since  1890,
while  the  average  dividends  upon  the  ten  dividend-paying  stocks  included  in
Table  42  have  varied  as  follows:

Per  cent Per  cent Per  cent Per  cent
1890 6.45  1895 5.88  1900 5.95  1905 7.00

1891 6.40  1896 5.90  1901 6.30  1906 7.10

1892 6.53  1897 5.38  1902 6.90  1907 7.70

1893 6.50  1898 5.60  1903 6.90  1908 7.63

1894 6.35  1899 5.60  1904 6.90  1909 7.60


76  The  common  stocks  of  the  Central  Railroad  of  New  Jersey,  Chicago  and  Northwestern,  Delaware  and
Hudson,  Illinois  Central,  New  York  Central,  New  York,  New  Haven  and  Hartford,  and  the  American  Express
Company,  together  with  the  preferred  stocks  of  the  Chicago,  Milwaukee  and  St.  Paul,  Chicago  and  North-
western, and  Cleveland,  Cincinnati,  Chicago  and  St.  Louis.  Unfortunately  the  number  of  stocks  with  clear
dividend  records  is  not  large  enough  to  permit  the  computation  of  significant  averages  for  common  and  pre-
ferred stocks  separately.

'7  The  average  relative  prices  of  ten  railway  bonds  in  Table  41  are  arithmetic  means  of  the  corresponding
figures  for  each  of  the  ten  bonds.  A  trial  showed  that  substantially  the  same  results  are  obtained  by  divid-
ing the  average  yields  of  all  the  bonds  in  1890-99  by  their  average  yield  for  each  year.  Since  the  latter  method
of  computation  is  far  less  laborious,  I  have  adopted  it  in  working  out  the  monthly  figures  of  Table  44.  The
discrepancies,  produced  by  this  difference  in  method,  between  the  figures  of  Table  41  and  the  annual  averages
which  may  be  struck  from  the  figures  of  Table  44  are  negligible.


204  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  41

Relative  Prices  of  Ten  American  Railway  Bonds. By  Years,  1890-1911

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  =  100


1

d

d

so

d-«

d

O

d

•8

AVtsiagets

1

ID

>

■s

IN

3

1890 ■

95.6

94.4

95.6

92.3

92.8

100.1

97.9

97.0

92.2

98.6

94.1

97.2

95.7

1891

94.9

93.5

94.3

92.0

91.0

92.1

96.6

88.9

91.3

96.6

93.1

93.1

93.1

1892

99.6

97.4

99.2

96.9

95.1

95.8

98.3

94.9

96.6

98.1

97.6

96.7

97.2

1893

97.1

94.9

96.4

94.0

92.6

91.8

96.9

96.4

93.9

95.2

95.0

94.8

94.9

1894

97.4

97.4

98.8

98.9

99.4

96.0

101.3

95.5

99.9

98.9

98.4

98.3

98.4

1895

98.8

103.1

101.1

102.4

101.0

97.7

102.2

97.2

104.3

100.2

101.3

100.3

100.8

1896

97.8

99.7

99.4

99.6

99.0

94.4

102.6

99.5

103.8

99.4

99.1

99.9

99.5

1897

99.8

102.6

100.2

104.9

107.6

100.5

99.7

107.5

106.8

102.9

103.0

103.5

103.3

1898

106.3

107.4

105.1

109.6

111.8

111.4

99.9

111.2

106.2

103.7

108.0

106.5

107.3

1899

115.9

113.0

112.0

114.1

115.9

130.6

105.3

118.6

108.8

107.5

114.2

114.2

114.2

1900

117.3

111.5

113.6

114.1

112.6

132.5

109.5

118.0

108.8

107.2

113.8

115.2

114.5

1901

128.4

119.4

117.0

117.5

120.2

133.3

116.9

118.6

110.3

108.1

120.5

117.4

119.0

1902

130.4

121.2

117.2

117.2

120.8

129.5

122.7

121.3

108.2

107.8

121.3

117.9

119.6

1903

120.7

118.8

112.5

112.2

112.6

122.8

116.0

115.1

103.8

103.4

115.4

112.2

113.8

1904

122.2

120.9

115.0

114.1

114.2

121.8

117.9

115.7

105.4

102.9

117.3

112.7

115.0

1905

126.8

123.6

117.0

116.3

121.5

125.6

120.7

118.6

106.5

103.4

121.0

115.0

118.0

1906

123.4

121.8

112.5

114.6

116.0

119.9

114.5

114.8

105.7

100.7

117.6

111.1

114.4

1907

112.8

115.7

103.7

105.6

107.8

111.1

108.4

107.8

99.2

96.4

109.1

104.6

106.9

1908

115.7

118.2

103.1

108.8

110.1

112.2

110.3

108.4

99.9

96.9

111.2

105.5

108.4

1909

121.0

122.4

112.5

113.8

116.6

115.1

114.5

110.0

102.5

98.4

117.3

108.1

112.7

1910

115.7

120.3

107.9

110.6

111.2

111.1

110.8

105.7

99.9

96.6

1]3.1

104.8

109.0

1911

115.1

119.1

106.0

110.3

111.5

110.3

109.7

105.2

100.2

96.4

112.4

104.4

108.4

Averages

1890-99

100.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

101.0

101.0

100.0

101.0

100.0

100.0

100.0

101.0

100.0

1900-09

122.0

119.0

112.0

113.0

115.0

122.0

115.0

115.0

105.0

103.0

116.0

112.0

114.0

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  205


TABLE  42

Relative  Prices  of  Bonds,  Stocks,  and  Commodities. By  Years,  1890-1911

Arithmetic  means. Average  actual  prices  in  1890-99  ::=  100


Bonds

A

Stocks

Commodities

r ' —

United  States
4s  of  1907
Tear and  1925

West
Shore
B.  R.

Average  of

10  railway

bonds

10  dividend
paying
stocks

Preferred

stocks  in  10

railways

Common

stocks  in  10

railways

Common

stocks  in  40

transportation

companies

145  staples

1890

114

99

96

104

108

113

121

114

1891

104

97

93

100

104

113

113

113

1892

99

98

97

105

115

124

123

106

1893

91

95

95

96

87

89

93

105

1894

99

99

98

94

82

82

82

96

1895

96

100

101

95

87

87

85

93

1896

88

99

100

92

85

81

,77

89

1897

101

103

103

94

94

90

84

89

1898

103

104

107

102

107

97

94

93

1899

112

107

114

118

130

126

128

103

1900

127

107

115

121

133

144

134

111

1901

140

108

119

142

178

262

211

110

1902

140

108

120

157

191

305

250

114

1903

139

103

114

136

163

238

201

114

1904

132

103

115

136

156

215

192

114

1905

138

103

118

158

181

278

250

116

1906

135

101

114

159

180

291

267

122

1907

127

96

107

129

138

206

204

130

1908

113

97

108

126

130

195

201

121

1909

110

98

113

150

169

280

277

124

1910

101*

97

109

142

148

248

254

131

1911

103*

96

108

137

138

233

248

128t

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

130

102

114

141

162

241

219

118

*  Computed  from  average  yields  of  January,  April,  July,  and  October,  as  given  by  the  Report  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Cur-
rency, 1911,  p.  823.
t  Estimated.


206


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


130
120

no

100
90

Relative

Chart 23.
Prices  of  Average  of  Ten American Railway Bonds
AND  OF  THE West Shore Railway Bonds  .
1890-1910.

130
120
110
100
30

. WEST SHORE Railway bonds

/

\

-

y

\

\

/

\

>

y

/-

/

^


\

\
\

\

—

—

^

\

t

/

,.'

"/

'-^

^

y

>

—-

--"

'^■•™

,

1890 '91 '92 '93 '94 95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900 '01 '02 '03 '04 "05 '06 '07 '08 09 1910 'll

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


207


CHART 24.

\

RELATIVE PRICES OF  BOND?,

i\

W

5TQCK5 AND COMMODITIES.

\  \

2G0

1890  -1910.

1

. \

/

\

TEN DIVIDEND PAYING STOCKS.

'  I

COMMON  STOCKS  IN  40  TRANSPORTTATION  COS

1

1

240

___|45 STAPLE COMMODITIES.

1

1

1

240

1

i

1

1
i
i

1
1

220

i

1
i

! i

220

i

1
i

i

! i
! i

200

1

1

1

1

200

V

\

1

180

160

i

160

160

1

1

/
/
/
/

/
/

>

/
/

t

j \

140

140

/

I

1

—

, (

,

1

1 (

120
100
80

,/

/

/

1
1

1

1

/
/

t

/
/

120
100
80

\

/
/

\

\
\

\
ri-

i

\

/

/

/

/

/
1

/

/'

:^

^

\

'^

\

/

\
\

/

/

/

/
/

/

'/

•

\

/

1890  '91 'SZ  "33  '94  '95  '9G  '97  '98  '99 1900  'Ol 'OZ  '05  '04  '05  'OG  '07  '08  '09 1910

208


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  43

Bblative  Prices  op  Bonds  and  Stocks  in  Seasons  of  Business  Prospeeity,

Bonds
]k

Av.  of  10
railroad
W.  S.  E.  R. bonds

January,  1890-July,  1890— Prosperity  100  97

August,  1890-Deeember,  1890 — Minor  crisis  97  94

January,  1891-July,  1891 — Depression  97  93

August,  1891-August,  1892— Prosperity  98  96

September,  1892-October,  1893— Approach  of  crisis..  97  97

May,  1893-October,  1893— Major  crisis  94  93

November,  1893-March,  1895 — Severe  depression  99  98

April,  1895-September,  1895— Eevival  100  102

October,  1895-June,  1896 — Renewed  depression  100  101

July,  1896-October,  1896— Free  silver  campaign  98  97

November,  1896-June,  1897 — Depression  102  102

July,  1897-Pebruary,  1898— Eevival  104  105

March,  1898-April,  1898 — Spanish  war  impending  ....  101  104

May,  1898-September,  1899— Prosperity  106  111

October,  1899-December,  1899— Minor  crisis  107  113

January,  1900-September,  1900 — Slight  depression  ..  107  114

October,  1900-October,  1902— Prosperity  108  119

November,  1902-July,  1904— "Rich  man's  panic"....  103  114

August,  1904-August,  1905— Revival  103  118

September,  1905-September,  1906— Prosperity  102  116

October,  1906-September,  1907 — Approach  of  crisis..  98  110

October,  1907-December,  1907 — Major  crisis  93  101

January,  1908-September,  1908 — Severe  depression  ..  97  107

October,  1908-Deoember,  1909— Revival  98  112

January,  1910-December,  1911 — Reaction  97  109


Crisis,  and

Depression,  1890-1911

Stocks

'Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

Av.  of  40'

common

stocks

113

123

131

103

108

115

100

103

107

115

127

123

106

112

116

78

80

84

81

82

81

93

94

91

88

84

82

79

74

71

86

83

77

103

98

93

98

85

87

121

113

113

132

127

133

131

138

130

180

269

219

162

228

195

177

263

232

182

290

265

157

242

231

122

161

166

124

184

190

166

272

269

143

241

251

TABLE  44


Eelative  Prices  of  Bonds  and  Stocks. By  Months,  1890-1911


Bonds


Stocks


1890  January

W.  S.  K.  R.
99.9

Av.  of  10

railroad

bonds

97.7

Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

113.5

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

122.5

Av.  of  40

common

stocks

129.5

February

100.2

97.0

■ 112.0

115.0

126.0

March

99.9

96.6

107.5

112.5

123.5

April

99.7

97.3

111.5

115.5

127.0

May

99.7

97.3

119.0

136.5

139.0

June

99.9

97.1

111.5

133.0

136.0

July

99.4

96.4

114.0

127.5

132.5

August

98.6

95.4

112.0

121.0

130.0

September

98.6

94.7

111.0

119.5

124.5

October

97.9

94.7

104.0

109.5

116.0

November

95.9

92.3

93.5

97.0

104.0

December

94.7

90.9

92.0

93.5

99.0

MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


209


TABLE  i4r— (Continued)

Bonds


Stocks


W.  S.  E.  E.
1891  January 97.1

Av.  of  lo'

railroad

bonds

93.5

Av.  of  10
preferred

stocks

99.0

Av.  of  10
common

stocks

103.5

Av.  of  40

common

stocks

107.5

February

97.6

93.8

101.0

104.0

109.0

March

97.1

. 92.8

96.5

96.0

104.5

April

97.1

93.2

103.0

106.0

110.5

May

96.6

92.6

103.5

108.5

110.5

June

95.9

91.6

98.5

102.5

105.5

July

95.4

91.5

95.5

98.5

102.5

August

95.7

92.2

101.0

109.5

110.0

September

96.9

93.1

114.0

129.5

124.0

October

95.9

93.6

113.0

134.0

125.0

November

96.2

94.0

107.5

123.0

119.0

December

96.9

95.3

115.5

134.5

125.0

1892  January

98.1

96.7

123.0

138.5

128.0

February

98.4

97.3

124.0

134.5

126.5

March

98.1

97.0

123.5

133.0

12.5.5

April

98.1

97.4

119.0

130.5

124.5

May

98.9

98.3

115.5

124.0

122.5

June

99.1

98.4

113.5

118.5

120.5

July

98.4

97.7

113.5

119.5

122.0

August

98.4

97.3

114.5

123.0

125.0

September

97.6

96.7

108.5

113.5

118.5

October

97.4

97.0

110.5

118.5

123.0

November

98.1

96.7

108.5  ■

117.5

119.5

December

97.6

96.3

105.0

111.0

115.5

1893  January

97.1

97.1

108.0

115.0

119.0

February

97.4

98.1

105.0

111.0

114.5

March

96.4

97.3

99.5

103.5

107.5

April

95.2

97.3

101.0

104.0

109.0

May

95.0

95.7

89.0

92.0

95.0

June

94.5

94.4

82.5

84.0

87.5

July

92.4

91.4

69.5

71.0

76.5

August

90.9

88.9

69.5

71.5

74.5

September

93.1

92.3

77.0

78.0

82.0

October

95.2

93.9

78.0

83.5

85.5

November

97.4

96.5

81.5

85.5

87.0

December

97.6

97.0

81.5

83.0

83.5

1894  January

97.1

96.3

79.0

80.5

82.0

February

98.1

97.2

80.5

82.5

83.5

March

98.6

98.2

85.5

85.5

87.0

April

99.7

99.1

89.0

90.5

89.0

May

98.6

98.9

84.0

84.0

82.0

June

98.6

98.3

78.5

79.5

77.5

July

98.6

97.6

82.0

76.0

75.0

210


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  44—

-{Continued)

Bonds

Stocks

A

1894  August

1

W.  S.  E.  R.
98.9

Av.  of  10

railroad

bonds

98.1

Av.  of  10

preferred

Btocks

83.5

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

84.5

Av.  of  40

common

stocks

81.0

September

99.1

98.8

86.0

88.5

84.0

October

99.7

99.1

79.5

81.0

80.5

November

100.2

99.5

81.5

82.0

80.5

December

99.9

99.0

78.5

77.0

78.0

1895  January

99.9

98.5

76.5

72.5

74.0

February

99.1

97.2

74.5

71.5

73.0

March

99.9

97.4

75.0

73.0

73.5

April

99.7

98.4

83.0

82.0

80.0

May

99.7

100.5

90.0

93.0

87.5

June

100.2

102.2

93.5

93.5

91.0

July

100.4

102.7

95.5

96.0

93.0

August

101.2

103.4

97.5

98.5

95.0

September

101.5

103.7

98.0

100.0

96.5

October

100.7

102.9

96.5

96.0

93.0

Noyember

101.0

102.1

90.0

89.0

86.0

December

99.7

100.4

82.5

76.5

77.5

1896  January

99.9

99.6

81.0

78.5

77.0

February

100.7

101.1

89.0

87.0

83.0

March

100.4

101.1

90.0

82.0

80.5

April

100.4

101.0

91.0

82.5

84.0

May

99^

101.6

88.5

80.0

79.5

June

100.2

101.3

87.5

82.5

79.5

July

98.4

98.3

79.0

72.5

71.0

August

96.4

95.0

73.0

68.0

65.5

September

97.9

96.5

80.0

76.5

72.5

October

98.1

97.1

82.0

80.5

75.0

November

99.1

100.1

91.0

92.0

84.5

December

100.7

101.1

86.0

85.5

79.5

1897  January

101.2

101.5

87.0

86.0

79.5

February

102.0

102.1

87.5

82.0

76.5

March

101.2

101.9

86.0

84.0

76.5

April

102.6

101.3

80.5

75.5

72.0

May

102.6

101.6

84.5

75.5

72.0

June

103.1

102.6

88.0

82.0

77.0

July

104.6

103.8

92.5

86.5

83.0

August

103.1

104.0

103.5

102.0

93.0

September

102.6

103.8

111.0

109.0

99.5

October

102.6

103.7

104.5

101.0

95.5

November

104.3

104.6

98.0

92.5

90.0

December

104.8

105.8

103.0

97.5

93.5

MITCHELL :  BUSINESS  CYCLES


211


TABLE  4:4— (Continued)
Bonds


Stocks


1898  January

W.  S.  B.  R.
104.3

Av.  of  10^

railroad

bonds

107.3

Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

106.0

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

97.5

Av.  of  40

common

stocks

96.0

February

104.6

107.9

107.5

96.5

94.5

March

103.1

104.9

99.5

87.0

87.5

April

99.7

102.5

96.0

83.0

86.0

May

101.2

105.2

103.0

92.5

92.0

June

102.9

107.0

108.0

97.0

97.5

July

103.7

107.8

107.5

95.5

95.0

August

104.3

108.5

113.0

104.5

98.5

September

104.0

107.8

113.5

102.0

97.5

October

104.3

108.1

106.5

94.0

96.5

November

105.1

109.1

111.5

100.0

97.5

December

106.0

110.2

120.0

111.5

109.0

1899  January

106.6

112.3

127.0

120.5

121.0

February

106.9

112.9

129.0

126.0

125.5

March

107.5

113.0

127.0

123.0

123.5

April

108.1

114.1

129.5

126.0

125.5

May

108.1

115.0

124.5

121.5

124.0

June

109.3

116.0

125.5

120.5

•122.0

July

109.6

115.7

131.0

126.5

129.0

August

109.0

115.5

136.5

133.0

136.0

September

106.9

114.5

136.5

132.0

135.5

October

106.9

113.5

134.0

128.5

133.5

November"

107.2

113.4

136.5

132.5

137.5

December

105.4

lll.S

126.5

121.0

126.5

1900  January

106.9

112.5

128.0

123.5

128.0

February

108.4

114.1

131.5

128.5

131.0

March

107.5

114.3

135^0

141.0

135.5

April

108.1

115.3

139.0

150.5

140.0

May

106.6

114.4

133.5

143.0

132.0

June

107.5

113.7

128.5

139.0

126.5

July

106.9

113.6

128.0

137.5

128.0

August

106.3

113.6

127.5

138.5

127.5

September

106.9

114.0

125.5

137.0

122.0

October

106.9

113.8

129.0

145.5

131.5

November

107.2

115.3

137.0

160.5

143.5

December

108.4

116.9

150.0

188.0

159.5

1901  January

109.0

117.7

159.5

202.5

169.0

February

109.6

119.1

165.5

217.0

177.5

March

110.0

120.2

173.0

243.0

192.5

April

109.0

119.6

182.0

269.0

212.5

May

107.8

119.1

172.0

257.5

204.0

June

107.8

119.2

188.0

286.5

228.5

July

107.2

118.6

181.5

267.0

215.5

August

107.8

118.3

180.0

371.0

218.0

212


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  i4^ (Continued)
Bonds


1901  September

W.  S.  E.  R.
107.5

At.  of  10

railroad

bonds

118.0

Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

182.0

At.  of  10

common

stocks

282.5

Av.  of  40

common

stocks

223.5

October

106.9

118.3

180.5

280.0

222.0

November

106.9

119.1

185.5

293.0

233.0

December

107.5

119.2

183.5

280.0

228.5

1902  January

107.5

119.9

184.5

285.5

232.0

February

107.2

120.2

188.5

293.0

237.5

March

107.5

120.5

188.5

296.0

238.5

April

107.5

121.2

192.5

304.5

248.5

May

108.1

121.2

197.0

299.0

248.5

June

108.4

120.7

200.5

303.5

253.0

July

109.0

120.4

197.5

313.0

258.5

August

108.7

119.4

203.5

331.0

271.5

September

108.4

118.8

199.0

334.0

273.5

October

107.5

118.2

191.5

317.5

259.0

November

106.9

118.1

188.0

298.0

246.5

December

106.0

117.1

184.5

281.0

237.0

1903  January

105.4

117.3

187.5

307.5

251.5

February

105.7

117.2

188.5

303.5

249.5

March

105.1

115.5

186.5

282.0

233.5

April

103.7

114.3

179.0

265.0

220.0

May

103.7

114.9

173.0

260.0

213.0

June

103.7

113.5

168.5

228.5

193.5

July

102.9

112.4

154.5

218.0

184.5

August

102.9,

110.9

152.0

204.0

175.0

September

102.9

111.1

148.5

198.0

171.5

October

101.5

112.7

141.5

191.5

166.5

November

101.5

113.4

146.5

191.5

168.0

December

102.3

113.4

152.0

205.0

179.0

1904  January

102.9

113.9

156.0

205.5

184.0

February

103.4

113.6

147.0

194.0

175.0

March

102.6

113.1

148.5

192.5

171.0

April

102.0

113.8

152.0

196.5

172.5

May

102.3

114.1

147.5

187.0

165.5

June

102.3

114.3

143.5

183.5

167.5

July

102.9

115.7

155.5

195.0

177.5

August

102.9

115.9

156.5

210.5

190.5

September

102.9

116.0

162.0

230.0

203.0

October

103.1

116.6

169.0

250.0

217.5

November

103.1

117.0

176.5

267.5

229.5

December.

103.4

117.2

178.0

266.0

230.5

1905  January

103.7

117.8

181.0

274.5

236.5

February

104.0

118.3

185.0

284.0

247.5

March

103.4

118.2

186.0

290.0

253.5

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


213


TABLE  i^r— {Continued)


Bonds


Stocks


W.  S.  E,  E.

Av.  of  lo'

railroad

bonds

Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

Av.  of  40

comm6n

stocks

1905  April

103.4

118.2

181.0

277.0

245.0

May

102.9

118.0

174.0

256.5

230.5

June

103.1

118.0

177.5

258.0

232.5

July

103.7

118.3

182.0

270.0

243.5

August

104.0

118.6

188.5

283.5

256.0

September

103.7

118.1

184.0

286.5

259.0

October

103.7

117.9

187.5

285.5

261.5

November

102.9

117.8

180.5

284.0

261.5

December

102.3

117.0

188.0

290.5

266.5

1906  January

103.1

117.2

187.0

311.5

279.5

February

102.3 •

116.7

186.0

304.5

271.5

March

101.8

115.7

185.5

295.0

264.5

April

101.2

115.1

180.5

288.0

261.0

May

100.7

114.7

176.5

278.0

254.5

June

101.0

114.3

184.0

282.0

259.0

July

100.7

114.1

179.0

274.0

253.0

August

99.9

113.5

173.5

295.0

272.0

September

99.7

113.1

177.0

295.5

278.5

October

99.9

113.4

184.0

291.0

274.5

November

99.7

113.3

184.0

291.5

270.5

December

99.7

112.6

173.5

290.5

270.0

1907  January

99.4

112.5

171.5

270.0

256.5

February

99.4

111.9

164.0

256.5

243.0

March

97.4

109.5

147.5

225.5

218.0

April

97.9

109.1

144.5

220.5

216.5

May

97.9

109.2

142.5

209.5

206.5

June

98.1

107.9

153.0

213.5

205.0

July

97.1

107.9

149.5

224.5

215.0

August

95.9

106.7

147.5

208.0

197.0

September

95.4

105.6

123.0

205.0

197.0

October

94.5

103.3

126.0

169.5

171.5

November

90.9

99.5

117.5

152.5

159.0

December

92.9

101.6

123.5

161.5

167.0

1908  January

95.9

105.8

124.5

166.5

174.5

February

96.4

106.4

102.5

152.0

159.5

March

95.4

105.6

120.5

158.0

170.0

April

95.4

106.8

119.5

171.0

181.0

May

95.7

108.0

119.0

191.5

198.5

June

97.4

107.6

125.5

200.5

199.5

July

97.6

107.7

133.5

208.0

206.0

August

97.6

109.2

135.0

204.5

211.5

September

97.6

109.7

134.0

203.0

212.5

October

97.4

110.3

138.5

211.5

217.0

November

97.4

111.3

149.0

238.0

238.0

December

97.9

112.1

160.5

259.5

252.0

214


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  44 — (Concluded)


Bonds


Stocks


1909  January

W.  S.  E.  R.
98.9

Av.  of  10^

railroad

bonds

113.2

Av.  of  10

preferred

stocks

164.5

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

269.0

Av.  of  10

common

stocks

259.0

February

99.4

113.7

156.0

262.5

353.0

March

98.9

113.6

161.5

262.0

257.5

April

98.9

113.5

172.5

279.0

272.0

May

98.6

113.6

168.5

282.0

278.0

June

97.9

112.9

173.0

284.5

283.5

July

98.1

113.0

173.0

285.0

281.0

August

98.1

112.9

181.0

289.5

285.0

September

97.4

112.2

169.5

281.5

282.0

October

98.1

111.9

174.5

301.5

289.5

November

98.6

111.2

178.5

283.5

288.5

December

97.6

111.2

172.0

295.5

295.5

1910  January

97.1

111.1

167.7

284.3

280.0

February

97.1

110.8

156.2

262.8

263.5

March

96.4

110.0

160.8

278.2

278.5

April

96.2

109.2

156.6

266.5

265.5

May

95.9

108.4

154.0

260.0

262.0

June

96.9

107.9

146.0

237.8

249.0

July

96.2

107.4

136.8

217.4

232.5

August

96.6

107.6

138.9

227,4

239.0

September  '

96.9

109.2

150.5

229.7

238.5

October

96.9

109.5

145.5

242.9

256.5

November

96.6

108.9

120.4

238.5

254.5

December

96.6

108.7

140.7

242.6

249.0

1911  January

96.9

109.1

141.2

254.3

254.0

February

96.4

109.0

156.5

243.6

258.5

March

96.4

108.5

153.2

. 255.9

258.0

April

96.2

108.6

158.3

234.7

254.5

May

96.6

108.9

145.8

238.7

256.0

June

96.6

108.9

144.9

248.0

265.0

July

96.6

108.8

142.0

244.5

260.0

August

95.9

108.7

136.6

227.4

247.0

September

95.7

108.2

132.3

215.8

233.0

October

95.9

107.5

134.5

222.4

239.0

November

96.2

108.0

120.7

229.2

245.5

December

96.6

110.1

126.0

233.1

246.0

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  215

Moreover,  the  owners  of  many  Mgh-priced  stocks  have  derived  a  consider-
able irregular  gain  in  addition  to  dividends  from  the  privileges  accorded  them
from  time  to  time  of  subscribing  for  new  issues  of  stock  on  highly  profitable
terms."  Upon  the  other  stocks  included  in  the  table  dividends,  when  paid  at
all,  have  been  much  more  variable.  Even  among  the  ten  preferred  stocks  only
three  have  yielded  dividends  every  year.™  The  general  situation  is  best  shown
by  Table  45,  which  compares  the  amounts  per  mile  of  line  paid  by  the  interstate
railways  as  interest  upon  funded  debt,  and  as  dividends.'"  The  broad  differ-
ences between  the  relatively  stable  interest  payments  and  the  highly  variable
dividend  disbursements  go  far  toward  accounting  for  the  differences  between
the  courses  pursued  by  the  prices  of  bonds  and  stocks.

On  a  purely  investment  basis,  therefore,  stocks  should  fluctuate  more
violently  than  bonds.  In  addition,  considerations  other  than  those  of  an
investor  intent  upon  income  and  safety  are  a  more  potent  factor  in  the  stock
than  in  the  bond  market.  Speculation,  manipulation,  contests  for  control,  etc.
— all  the  transactions  which  produce  fluctuations  not  warranted  by  changes
in  the  incomes  yielded  by  securities — are  primarily  phenomena  of  the  stock
exchange,  and  touch  the  bond  market  but  indirectly.  In  proportion  as  stocks
become  flrmly  established  as  "dividend-payers,"  however,  their  prices  come
increasingly  under  the  control  of  investment  considerations  and  approximate
more  closely  the  steadiness  of  bond  prices.  It  is  partly  for  this  reason  that
preferred  stocks  fluctuate  less  than  common  stocks,  and  mainly  for  this  reason
that  the  ten  dividend-paying  stocks  in  Table  42  fluctuate  less  than  the  ten
preferred.

The  failure  of  bonds  to  match  stocks  in  attaining  a  much  higher  level  of
prices  in  the  second  decade  is  a  particular  aspect  of  the  general  difference  in
stability,  which  merits  especial  attention.  The  salient  facts  upon  which  an
explanation  must  proceed  are  brought  out  by  Table  45.

The  fiscal  years  1893-97  were  disastrous  to  American  railways.  The  table
shows  the  loss  of  nearly  half  the  net  income  of  1892,  the  cutting  of  dividends,
and  the  slow  reduction  of  interest  charges.  Common  stocks  bore  the  brunt  of
these  bad  years  and  fell  heavily  in  price.  Preferred  stocks,  though  less
affected  than  common,  fell  more  than  commodities  at  wholesale.  Even  the
strongest  dividend-paying  stocks  dropped  from  105  in  1892  to  92  in  1896.''
But  bonds,  while  falling  during  the  crisis,  promptly  rose  during  the  years  of
depression  to  prices  higher  than  had  prevailed  in  the  prosperous  months  of

78  Compare  T.  W.  Mitchell,  "Stockholders'  Profits  from  Privileged  Subscriptions,"  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics  (February,  1905).

79  See  Table  38.

80  Compiled  from  the  statistical  reports  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission.  Certain  changes  m  the
plan  of  accounting  impair  somewhat  comparisons  between  the  data  for  income  in  1908-09  and  m  earlier  years
But  the  commission's  report  for  1908  states  that  the  "main  figures"  of  the  income  account  are  comparab  e
(p.  86).  I  have  rearranged  the  figures  for  the  last  two  years  to  make  them  correspond  as  nearly  as  possible
with  those  for  1890-1907.

81  Annual  averages  of  relative  prices. See  Table  42.


216


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  45

Actual  and  Relative  Net  Income,  Dividends,  and  Interest  on  Funded  Debt  op  the  Interstate  Eailwats,
Per  Mile  op  Line. By  Years  Ending  June  30,  1890-1909


Actual  Amounts


Relative  amounts
Av.  actual  amounts  1890—99  :


100


Years  ending Interest  on

June  30 funded  debt Dividends Net  income


1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
■1901
1902
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909

Averages
1890-99

1900-09


$1,416
1,361
1,478
1,474
1,439
1,420
1,371
1,352
1,333
1,339
1,313
1,340
1,371
1,383
1,403
1,431
1,451
1,513
1,616
1,639

1,398
1,446


$574

598

628

606

578

484

484

477

521

592

725

802

926

960

1,046

1,097

1,227

1,355

1,718

1,377

554
1,123


$651

682

714

654

317

316

492

444

760

875

1,180

1,235

1,400

1,443

1,313

1,507

1,732

1,976

1,729

1,696

591
1,521


Interest  on

funded  debt  Dividends  Net  income

104


101

97

106

105

103

102

98

97

95

96

94

96

98

99

100

102

104

108

116

117

100
103


108

113

109

105

87

87

86

94

107

131

145

167

173

189

198

221

245

310

248

100
203


110

115

121

111

54

54

83

75

129

148

200

209

237

244

-222

255

293

335

293

287

100
258


1891-92.  For  investors,  frightened  by  the  panic  and  discouraged  by  hard  times,
were  in  a  mood  to  value  more  highly  than  before  the  relative  security  of
bonds.  And  this  willingness  to  pay  higher  prices  for  relative  security  more
than  offset  the  increased  risk  which  attached  to  the  bonds  themselves,  owing  to
the  weakened  position  of  railway  finances.

With  the  return  of  prosperity  in  the  summer  of  1897  the  whole  situation
changed.  The  net  income  of  railways  was  more  than  trebled  between  the  years
ending  June  30,  1897  and  1902.  Dividends  were  raised  on  the  stocks  which
had  paid  them  regularly  in  the  worst  of  years;  dividends  were  renewed  on
other  stocks,  and  dividends  were  gradually  begun  on  many  issues  which  had
never  paid  a  dollar.  But  the  railway  directors  did  not  distribute  all  of  their
increased  profits  among  stockholders.  They  carried  liberal  sums  over  to  restore
surpluses  impaired  by  the  period  of  hard  times,  and  devoted  part  of  their
earnings  to  bettering  the  physical  condition  of  their  properties  which  had  run
down. At  the  same  time  they  took  advantage  of  the  improvement  in  their


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


217


CHART  25.

i\

Relative  Prices  cf  40  Common  Stocks
AND  Relative  Net  Income  of  the

',\

320

1

Interstate  Railways  per  mile  of  line.

Years  ending  June  30,1890-1909.

300

Relative  net  iwcoME  per  mile  of  line.

I

280
£60

/

280
260

/
/
/
(
/

1

1

\

240

4

1
1

240

</

1
1

aao

/

/
/

\

1

j

220

/

200

200

ISO

\

180

1

ItO

/

ISO

i

140

/

140

1

1

1

/

120

1

/

ISO

>

/

\

1

;

100

i

/

1

100

11

1

1

80

\.

/

\

'

80

/

\

f

eo

EO

1

-

IB30 31 K 'X M 35  '3G 37 M  '33  'm 01 '02 ffi  '04  '05 06  m  '08 03

218  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

credit  and  of  the  favorable  rates  of  interest  to  sell  new  issues  of  bonds,  and
spent  the  proceeds  largel}^  in  increasing  their  equipment.  The  result  of  this
policy  was  to  enhance  the  capacity  of  the  railways  for  handling  traffic  and  to
reduce  the  cost  per  unit.  Increased  profits  abundantly  rewarded  these  efforts.
Even  after  reduction  to  a  mileage  basis,  the  net  incomes  of  the  railways  from
1901-09  were  never  less  than  double  the  average  net  incomes  of  1890-99.

Just  as  common  stocks  were  most  affected  by  the  years  of  depression,  so
they  were  most  affected  by  the  years  of  prosperity.  The  profits  of  the  railways
doubled,  and  so  did  the  prices  of  common  stocks — though  the  increase  of  divi-
dends was  less  rapid  than  the  increase  of  net  income.  But  preferred  stocks,
most  of  which  confer  but  a  limited  right  to  participate  in  increased  dividends,
rose  considerably  less  than  common  stocks.  Yet  more  moderate  was  the  rise
of  the  few  stocks  which  had  paid  dividends  even  in  the  middle  nineties.  Most
moderate  of  all  was  the  rise  of  bonds.  The  increased  financial  strength  of  the
railways  gave  the  holders  of  bonds  secured  by  prior  liens  a  wider  margin  of
safety,  and  therefore  advanced  the  price  of  l)onds  to  a  somewhat  higher  level.
But  the  bondholders  made  no  other  gains.  On  the  contrary,  the  alluring  pros-
pects of  profits  in  the  rising  stock  market  tempted  bondholders  to  convert  their
bonds  into  stocks.  Further,  the  keen  competition  among  borrowing  corpor-
ations gave  investors  an  opportunity  to  exact  better  terms,  and  the  increasing
cost  of  living  spurred  them  to  make  the  most  of  their  opportunity.  Hence
the  marked  contrast  between  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  and  of  stocks  in
1900-09.

Another  difference  between  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  and  stocks  which
requires  comment  is  their  course  in  pei-iods  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.
Table  43  shows  the  facts  succinctly.

Prom  the  standpoint  of  profit  and  loss  upon  resale,  bonds  have  been  the
bettei-  investments  in  periods  of  crisis  and  depression,  and  stocks  in  periods
of  revival  and  prosperit5\  Barring  the  peculiar  series  for  United  States  4s,
the  tables  show  no  exception  to  the  statements  that  bonds  fall  less  than  stocks
during  crises,  and  rise  less  during  jDrosperity.*"  But  the  common  statement
that  during  periods  of  depression  bonds  rise  while  stocks  fall  requires  quali-
fication. Bonds  did  not  rise  during  the  dull  months  January-July,  1891,  and
stocks  did  rise  during  the  dull  months  January-September,  1908.  The  truth
is  that  stocks,  like  all  goods  for  which  we  have  detailed  data,  react  from  the
extremely  low  points  touched  during  a  severe  crisis.  But,  if  the  crisis  is
succeeded  by  a  long  period  of  depression,  stock  prices  sag  again,  and  may,  as
in  1895,  1896,  and  1897,  touch  lower  figures  than  those  of  the  crisis  itself.
Bonds,  on  the  contrary,  rise  during  a  long  period  of  depression,  unless  circmn-

82  An  apparent  anomaly  in  Table  43  is  that  the  average  prices  of  all  classes  of  securities  stand  higher  in
the  minor  crisis  of  October  to  December,  1899,  than  in  the  preceding  period  of  prosperity.  But  the  monthly
figures  of  Table  44  show  that  there  was  a  decline  during  the  period  of  stress  from  the  level  attained  toward
the  close  of  the  prosperous  months.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  219

stances  are  such  as  to  cast  doubt  upon  the  ability  of  corporations  to  pay  their
interest  coupons.  Low  grade  bonds  affected  by  such  doubts  fall  at  the  same
time  that  high  grade  bonds  are  rising.  But  Table  41  shows  that  in  3894  and
again  in  1908  only  one  bond  in  the  present  list  fell  below  its  average  price
during  the  preceding  year  of  crisis— the  bond  of  the  Chicago,  Milwaukee  and
St.  Paul  in  the  first  case  and  of  the  Wabash  in  the  second.  Further,  a  com-
parison between  tables  41  and  19  shows  that  the  bonds  in  highest  credit  rose
less  in  price  during  these  years  of  depression  than  several  of  the  other  secur-
ities. Investors  who  had  been  frightened  out  of  the  stock  market  did  not
insist  upon  having  the  very  best  of  bonds ;  but  sought  rather  for  issues  which
appeared  safe,  and  at  the  same  time  yielded  i^-i/o  per  cent  more  upon  the
investment  than  did  the  bonds  guaranteed  by  the  New  York  Central.

In  brief,  bonds  are  more  stable  in  price  than  commodities,  commodities
more  stable  than  dividend-paying  stocks,  the  latter  more  stable  than  preferred
stocks,  Avhile  common  stocks  are  most  variable  of  all.  Further,  bond  prices
differ  strikingly  from  stock  and  commodity  prices  in  rising  during  periods  of
business  depression,  and  sometimes  falling  in  periods  of  business  prosperity.

7.  International  Comparisons

Unfortunately,  no  statistics  of  the  prices  of  securities  in  other  countries
have  been  published  which  are  comparable  in  form  with  the  preceding  tables.
The  usual  practice  in  treating  the  course  of  the  stock  market  is  to  quote  the
prices  of  securities  selected  at  random  for  certain  dates,  or  to  give  the  total
prices  of  a  long  list  of  bonds  and  stocks  lumped  together.  Such  material  may
serve  other  purposes  passably;  but  it  is  obviously  of  little  value  for  deter-
mining the  relations  between  the  price  fluctuations  of  securities  and  commod-
ities. True  index  numbers  of  stocks  and  bonds  are  needed,  but  they  have  not
been  provided.^^

Our  international  comparisons  must  therefore  be  confined  to  the  relative
prices  of  the  few  foreign  bonds  for  which  interest  yields  have  already  been
presented.'*  The  relative  prices  of  these  securities  and  of  their  best  American
counterparts  are  shown  in  Table  46.

In  respect  to  the  price  fluctuations  which  the  bonds  have  undergone  from
year  to  year,  the  three  European  series  are  rather  like  each  other  and  decidedly
different  from  the  American  series.  The  year  1891  was  one  of  "undigested
securities"  in  Europe,  not  unlike  1903-04  in  the  United  States. A  vast  mass

83  The  best  known  of  the  foreign  series  is  that  published  by  the  Bankers '  Magazine  of  London,  giving  the
total  market  value  of  over  300  securities  at  the  quotations  of  the  end  of  each  month  (with  occasional  omis-
sionsl  These  figures  are  conveniently  summarized  for  the  years  1887-1907  by  P.  L.  Newman,  "A  Review
of  the  Investments  of  Offices  in  Eecent  Years,  with  notes  on  Stock  Exchange  Fluctuations  and  the  Future
Rate  of  Interest,"  Journal  of  the  Institute  of  Actuaries,  vol.  42,  pp.  294-320.  The  list  of  securities  included
has  been  changed  several  times  during  this  period.  A  somewhat  similar  tabulation  for  France  is  published
nearly  every  year  by  RafEalovich  in  Le  marche  financier,  see,  for  example,  1909-10,  p.  251.

84  See  Chapter  IV,  iii,  4,  above.


220


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


150
120
110
100
90

Chart aS.
Relative Prices of Bonds of  the West Shore Railwav  and
OF  THE American  , British ,  French,  and German Governments.

1890-1909.

150
140
130
120
110
100
90

NiTEO  states  4s  of 1907  AND I9E5.
(/esT  Shore Railway.

V

English CBnmls zyi  and 2fe  per  cent.

French Rentes  3  per cent.

o o  German Imperial  3  per cent.

/

\

/

\

\

/

/

\

\

\

/

\

X

\

\

{

--■..•

%

X*"^

.-*•'*

'/

"V,,


•..,

c

><

1

\

;

^

^

.-'

■x>

V

^

)

r

\

1

1890 '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '91 '98 99 1900 'oi 'OZ '03 '04 'oS 'o6 "01 '08 "09 1910

TABLE  46


Eelativb  Prices  or  Bonds  of  the  West  Shore  Railroad  and  op  the  American,  British,  French,  and  German

Governments. Bt  Years,  1890-1909


United  States

A

Great  Britain,

Consols

2%  and  2^4

per  cent

93

France,

Rentes

3  per  cent

92

Germany,
Imperial
3  per  cent

95

'u.  S.  4sof
Year 1907  and  1925

1890 114

West  Shore'
R.  R.

99

1891

104

97

93

95

93

1892

99

98

94

98

94

1893

91

95

95

98

94

1894

99

99

98

101

99

1895

96

100

103

103

108

1896

88

99

107

103

109

1897

101

103

109

105

107

1898

103

1^4

107

104

104

1899

112

107

104

102

99

1900

127

107

97

102

95

1901

140

108

91

102

98

1902

140

108

92

102

101

1903

139

103

95

99

100

1904

132

103

94

98

99

1905

138

103

96

100

99

1906

135

101

94

99

96

1907

127

96

90

96

92

1908

113

97

92

97

91

1909

110

98

90

98

93

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

130

102

93

99

96

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  221

of  stocks  and  bonds,  which  European  investors  had  bought  during  the  hopeful
years  1888-90  from  promoters  and  underwriters  at  home  and  abroad,  weighed
heavily  upon  the  market  after  the  disaster  of  Barings  in  November,  1890.  To
protect  these  doubtful  holdings  many  overloaded  firms  and  individuals  were
forced  to  sell  their  gilt-edged  securities,  not  only  in  London  and  Berlin,  but
also  in  New  York.  Hence  the  decline  in  the  price  of  bonds  shown  by  Table  46
in  1891.  Rentes  escaped  the  decline,  because  French  investors,  sobered  by  the
collapse  of  the  copper  ring,  the  Gomptoir  d'Escompte,  and  the  Panama  Canal
Company  early  in  1889,  had  taken  less  share  in  speculative  ventures.

During  the  dull  years  which  followed  European  investors  became  as  timid
as  they  had  been  bold,  and  sought  secuiity  alcove  all  things.  The  result  was  a
fairly  steady  rise  of  high  grade  bonds  in  England,  France,  and  Germany  until
1896  or  1897.  In  America  the  course  of  affairs  was  very  different,  because
of  the  panic  of  1893  and  the  agitation  for  free  coinage  of  silver — disturbing
factors  of  which  Europe  felt  but  a  moderate  reflex  influence.

After  the  depression  business  activity  began  to  revive  somewhat  earlier  on
the  other  side  of  the  Atlantic — in  1896  or  even  in  1895,  instead  of  in  the  summer
of  1897.  Confidence  returned  with  prosperity  and  investors  began  to  show
preference  for  securities  which  promised  higher  returns  than  government
bonds.  Hence  tlie  latter  declined  in  price  and  their  net  yields  rose  gradually
until  1900-01.  But  American  investors,  Avith  the  panic  of  1893  and  the  setback
of  1896  still  fresh  in  mind,  kejjt  on  buying  high  grade  bonds  freely  until
1901-02.

The  crisis  of  1900  was  more  serious  in  Europe  than  here.  It  again  dis-
posed investors  to  seek  safety,  and  bond  prices  turned  upward — vigorously  in
Germany,  where  the  crisis  was  most  severe,  mildly  in  France  and  England.
The  highest  points  reached,  however,  were  much  below  the  records  of  1896-97.
The  movements  of  1903-05  were  irregular  and  slight — save  that  United  States
4s  declined  heavily  in  1904.  But  after  1905  the  renewed  prosperity  brought
renewed  neglect  of  bonds,  and  prices  fell  rapidly  until  1907.  This  time  the
American  trend  harmonized  with  the  European.  The  difficulties  experienced
in  financing  large  enterprises  in  New  York  had  their  counterparts  in  London,
Paris,  and  Berlin.  After  the  crisis,  bond  prices  rose  again;  but  the  yearly
averages  for  United  States  and  German  Iwnds  were  less  in  1908  than  in  1907.
In  the  last  year  the  French,  German,  and  West  Shore  bonds  rose  slightly,  while
consols  and  United  States  4s  fell.

The  chief  differences  between  the  trend  of  the  bond  market  in  this  country
and  abroad,  then,  are  the  interruption  of  the  rise  of  prices  in  America  by  the
panic  of  1893  and  by  the  free-silver  campaign  of  1896,  and  the  rise  of  American
bonds  in  1897-1901,  while  the  European  bonds  were  falling.  This  rise  of
American  bonds  under  conditions  of  marked  prosperity,  such  as  usually
dispose  investors  to  seek  investments  of  a  more  lucrative  character,  is  the  most


222  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

surprising  result  of  the  wliole  investigation.  So  far  as  United  States  4s  are
concerned,  the  settlement  of  all  doubts  about  the  medium  in  which  the  obliga-
tions would  be  paid,  and  the  increasing  demand  for  bonds  as  a  basis  of  national-
bank  circulation,  provide  an  adequate  explanation.  The  Gold  Standard  Act
may  also  have  improved  the  rating  of  the  West  Shore  bonds,  which  are  not
expressly  payable  in  gold;  but  it  will  be  recalled  that  these  bonds  were  not
greatly  affected  by  the  free-silver  agitation,  save  in  the  summer  of  1896.  More
influence  was  exercised  by  the  notable  increase  in  the  financial  strength  of
American  railways,  to  which  attention  has  been  called.  Directly,  the  West
Shore  bonds  were  less  affected  by  this  factor  than  the  issues  of  roads  which
had  been  in  straits  during  the  years  of  depression.  But  an  increase  in  the
prices  of  so  large  a  group  of  securities  as  the  bonds  of  other  railways  must
have  reacted  upon  the  price  of  any  single  issue ;  for  the  prices  of  all  high  grade
bonds  are  intimately  related  to  each  other  through  the  tie  of  substitution  goods.


CHAPTER  V


THE  VOLUME  OE  BUSINESS

I.  The  Physical  and  the  Pecuniary  Volume  of  Business

Erom  the  viewpoint  of  economic  welfare,  changes  in  the  volume  of  goods
provided  for  a  people's  use  are  the  most  important  features  of  business  cycles.
Depression  is  misfortune  because  it  increases  the  number  of  families  which
cannot  get  sufficient  food,  clothing,  and  shelter,  and  because  it  prevents  many
families  above  the  poverty  line  from  getting  certain  of  the  good  things  in  life
to  which  they  have  been  accustomed.  The  fluctuations  of  prices  are  relatively
artificial  matters,  which  acquire  significance  only  because  they  react  upon  the
process  of  providing  goods  for  gratifying  wants.

But  Chapter  II  shows  that  in  attempting  to  account  for  business  cycles  we
cannot  keep  steadily  to  the  consideration  of  economic  welfare.  Eor  where
money  economy  prevails  there  economic  activity  is  animated  and  guided  by
the  prospects  of  winning  pecuniary  profits.  To  understand  the  rhythmical
alternations  of  expansion  and  contraction  to  which  this  activity  is  subject,  we
must  therefore  look  at  affairs  from  the  business  viewpoint.  And  from  this
viewpoint,  changes  in  the  volume  of  goods  made  available  for  use  are  by  no
means  the  most  important  phenomena  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.
On  the  contrary,  they  count  merely  as  one  of  the  factors  affecting  present  and
prospective  profits,  and  stand  on  the  same  level  as  the  fluctuations  in  prices
which  were  treated  in  the  preceding  chapter.

In  analyzing  the  factors  on  which  prosperity  depends,  prices  and  volume
of  business  can  be  segregated  only  by  making  volume  of  business  mean  tons
of  pig-iron,  bales  of  cotton,  ])ushels  of  wheat,  gallons  of  petroleum,  and  the  like.
To  the  man  on  the  street,  however,  volume  of  business  means  pecuniary  quite
as  often  as  physical  volume.  A  department  store  reckons  the  increase  in  the
size  of  its  trade  not  by  the  yards  of  cloth,  pairs  of  shoes,  and  number  of  frying-
pans  it  sells  in  successive  years,  but  by  its  aggregate  sales  in  dollars  and  cents.
Thus,  like  most  of  the  terms  which  economics  borrows  from  work-a-day  life,
volimie  of  business  is  ambiguous.

In  theoretical  discussions,  the  aim  is  usually  to  select  some  one  among  the
several  current  meanings  of  such  a  term,  erect  it  into  an  "economic  concept,"

[223]


224  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

and  use  the  word  only  in  this  technical  sense.  But  in  the  present  case  we  face
a  special  difficulty.  Among  the  chief  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  are
several  which  have  no  other  than  a  pecuniary  meaning — for  example,  bank
clearings,  gross  receipts  of  railways,  and  domestic  bills  of  exchange.  We  can-
not dispense  with  these  measures,  because  those  expressed  in  physical  terms
are  too  scanty.  And  if  we  could  dispense  with  them,  we  should  miss  the
interesting  facts  which  may  be  learned  by  comparing  changes  in  the  physical
with  changes  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  trade.

Accordingly,  the  phrase  must  be  allowed  to  keep  both  of  its  current  mean-
ings, and  both  sets  of  facts  which  it  covers  must  be  investigated.  Misunder-
standings may  be  prevented  by  using  one  of  the  two  explanatory  adjectives
wherever  the  context  does  not  show  whether  pecuniary  or  physical  quantities
are  meant.

II.  The  Movement  of  the  Population

Changes  in  the  physical  volume  of  business  from  one  phase  to  the  next
within  a  business  cj^cle  are  but  slightl.y  affected  by  changes  in  the  number  of
hands  capable  of  work  or  in  the  number  of  mouths  needing  to  be  filled.  The
best  official  estimates  of  the  numbers  of  Americans,  English,  French,  and
Germans  indicate  that  the  rate  of  increase  is  not  much  faster  in  periods  of
prosperity  than  in  periods  of  depression.

Table  47  shows  that  in  1890-1909  the  United  States  grew  faster  in  population
than  did  Germany,  and  Germany  faster  than  England,  while  France  grew  but
little.  These  differences  help  to  account  for  the  fact,  brought  out  by  subsequent
tables,  that  during  these  twenty  years  the  physical  volmne  of  business  increased
faster  in  America  than  in  Germany,  faster  in  Germany  than  England,  and
faster  in  England  than  in  France.  But  it  is  only  in  periods  which  can  be
reckoned  by  decades  that  the  population  factor  assumes  great  prominence.

Even  when  we  turn  to  birth-rates  and  death-rates,  we  find  it  difficult  to
establish  a  close  correlation  between  them  and  the  condition  of  business.  There
are  no  comprehensive  American  data  on  the  subject,  but  the  excellent  foreign
figures  point  to  a  similarity  of  conditions  among  nations  of  western  culture.
Germany  has  both  a  higher  birth-rate  and  a  higher  death-rate  than  her  neigh-
bors; but  in  all  three  countries  both  the  birth-  and  death-rates  have  declined
during  the  twenty  years.  This  decline  is  the  notable  feature  of  Table  48.
Refined  methods  of  analysis  covering  a  longer  period  might  establish  a  connec-
tion between  the  varying  pace  of  the  decline  and  business  cycles ;  but  certainly
the  present  figures  have  no  such  connection  plainly  stamped  upon  their  face,  as
have  the  figures  for  prices  with  which  we  have  been  dealing.^ The  marriage

1  Tugan-Baranowsky,  Eandelskrisen  in  England,  pp.  292-3,  shows  tliat  the  influence  of  crises  upon  the  vital
statistics  of  England  was  greater  in  the  second  than  in  the  fourth  quarter  of  the  nineteenth  century.  He
ascribes  the  change  to  an  improvement  in  the  economic  condition  of  the  wage-earners.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


225


rate,  on  the  contrary,  does  vary  with  the  condition  of  business.  It  declines  in
the  middle  nineties  when  times  were  bad,  rises  with  the  return  of  prosperity
in  the  later  nineties,  dips  again  in  the  dull  years  1902-04,  and  rises  once  more
between  1904  and  1906  or  1907.  Further,  there  is  slight  change  in  the  decennial
averages  from  1890-99  to  1900-09."  But  since  these  variations  in  the  marriage
rate  are  not  followed  by  corresponding  variations  in  the  birth-rate,  they  possess
little  significance  for  the  growth  of  population.

The  one  factor  of  change  in  population  which  is  clearly  and  closely  con-
nected with  changes  in  business  conditions  is  immigration  and  emigration.
Immigration  into  the  United  States  has  shown  a  marked  increase  from  one
decade  to  the  next;  but  this  growth  is  exceedingly  unsteady. In  prosperous


TABLE  47

Population  of  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1910


In

Actual  figures
millions  and  tenths  of  millions

A

Average

Relative  figures
actual  population  1890-99  =  100

Tear

United
States

England
and  Wales

France

Germany

United
States

England
and  Wales

France

Germany

1890

62.9

28.8

38.4

49.2

92

95

99

95

1891

63.8

29.1

38.4

49.8

93

96

99

96

1892

65.1

29.4

38.4

50.3

95

97

100

97

1893

66.3

29.8

38.4

50.8

97

98

100

98

1894

67.6

30.1

38.4

51.3

99

99

100

99

1895

68.9

30.5

38.5

52.0

101

101

100

100

1896

70.3

30.8

38.5

52.8

103

102

100

102

1897

71.6

31.2

38.6

53.6

105

103

100

103

1898

72.9

31.5

38.8

54.4

107

104

100

105

1899

74.3

31.9

38.9

55.2

109

105

101

106

1900

76.3

32.2

38.9

56.0

112

106

101

108

1901

77.6

32.6

39.0

56.9

114

108

101

110

1902

79.2

33.0

39.1

57.8

116

109

101

111

1903

80.8

33.3

39.1

58.6

118

110

101

113

1904

82.5

33.6

39.2

59.5

121

111

102

115

1905

84.1

34.0

39.2

60.3

123

112

102

116

1906

85.7

34.3

39.3

61.2

125

113

102

118

1907

87.3

34.7

39.3*

62.0

128

114

102

119

1908

88.9

35.1

39.4*

62.9

130

116

102

121

1909

90.6

35.4

39.4*

63.7

133

117

102

123

1910

92.2

35.8

39.5*

64.6

135

118

103

124

1911

93.8

36.2

39.5*

65.4

137

119

103

126

Averages
1890-99

68.34

30.31

38.53

51.94

100

100

100

100

1900-09

83.30

33.82

39.19

59.89

122

112

102

115

*  Provisional  figures.

Compiled  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries.

2  The  marriage  rate  tends  to  rise,  where  the  decline  in  both  birth-  and  death-rates  is  raising  the  average
age  of  the  population.


226


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


150
120
110
100

90

Relative

Population

OF  THE

Chart  27.

United  States  ,
1890  -  1910

England

,  France:

,AND  Germany.

140
130
120
110
100
90

^ 1

.. .,,  (

JNITED STATtS.

:ngland.  ■

"RANCE  .
jERMANY

^

^

-  >

^

/

^

»*

—

/

^

--

^

y

^^*
^''

^,

,-'

,.-^

--

*»

^

..*•'

[T^

^^

_..

^^0'

r^^

?^

1890  '91 '92 '92) '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '03 '04 "05 '06 '07 "08 '09 1910

years  the  increase  is  very  rapid ;  in  bad  years  there  comes  not  a  slackening  of
the  increase,  but  a  heavy  decrease.  A  year  or  two  is  required,  however,  for  a
change  in  business  conditions  to  develop  its  full  influence  upon  immigration.
Emigration  from  the  United  Kingdom  follows  in  general  the  same  course  as
immigration  into  the  United  States.  It  seems  to  depend  less  on  business
conditions  at  home  than  on  business  conditions  abroad.  Hard  times  and
unemployment  in  Britain  do  not  drive  people  abroad  so  much  as  good  times
and  full  employment  elsewhere  attract  them,  or  enable  their  friends  who  have
gone  before  to  send  back  passage  money.  In  Germany,  on  the  contrary,  condi-
tions at  home  appear  to  be  the  factor  of  greatest  weight.  The  dull  times  after
1890  led  to  an  increase  in  emigration;  and  the  return  of  prosperity  led  to  a
decrease.  The  dull  times  following  the  crisis  of  1901-02  were  followed  by
another  increase,  and  the  return  of  prosperity  by  a  further  decrease.  But
the  most  striking  fact  about  the  German  figures  is  the  decline  in  the  level  of
fluctuations  since  the  early  nineties.  The  rapid  development  of  the  country's
industries  which  began  in  1895  has  provided  work  at  home  for  every  one  who
sought  it  in  the  years  of  prosperit)^  and  the  years  of  depression  have  been
neither  very  severe  nor  numerous.  Finally,  the  French  figures  for  emigration
possess  little  significance  beyond  showing  that  the  French  prefer  to  stay  at


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


227


TABLE  48
BiKTH  Rates,  Death  Rates,  and  Marriage  Rates  of  England,  Prance,  and  Germany

By  Teaks,  1890-1909


Number  of  births  per  hundred
of  the  population

Number  of  deaths  per  hundred
of  the  population

Number  of  persons  married  per
hundred  of  the  population

Year
1890

England
and  Wales

3.02

France
2.18

Germany
3.57

England
and  Wales

1.95

France
2.28

Germany
2.44

England
and  Wales

1.55

Prance
1.40

Germany
1.60

1891

3.14

2.26

3.70

2.02

2.29

2.34

1.56

1.49

1.60

1892

3.04

2.23

3.57

1.90

2.28

2.41

1.54

1.51

1.58

1893

3.07

2.28

3.67

1.92

2.25

2.46

1.47

1.49

1..58

1894

2.96

2.23

3.59

1.66

2.12

2.23

1.50

1.49

1.58

1895

3.03

2.17

3.61

1.87

2.22

2.21

1.50

1.47

1.60

"1896

2.96

2.25

3.63

1.71

2.00

2.08

1.57

1.51

1.64

1897

2.96

2.23

3.60

1.74

1.95

2.13

1.60

1.51

1.68

1898

2.93

2.18

3.61

1.75

2.09

2.05

1.62

1.48

1.68

1899

2.91

2.19

3.58

1.82

2.11

2.15

1.65

1.53

1.70

1900

2.87

2.14

3.56

1.82

2.19

2.21

1.60

1.55

1.70

1901

2.85

2.20

3.57

1.69

2.01

2.06

1.59

1.56

1.64

1902

2.85

2.16

3.50

1.63

1.95

1.94

1.59

1.51

1.58

1903

2.85

2.11

3.38

1.55

1.93

2.00

1.57

1.51

1.58

1904

2.80

2.09

3.41

1.63

1.94

1.96

1.53

1.52

1.60

1905

2.73

2.06

3.29

1.53

1.96

1.98

1.53

1.54

1.62

1906

2.72

2.05

3.31

1.55

1.99

1.82

1.57

1.56

1.64

1907

2.65

1.97*

3.23

1.51

2.02*

1.80

1.59

1.60*

1.62

1908

2.67

2.02*

3.21

1.48

1.89*

1.81

1.51

1.60*

1.60

1909

2.58

1.95*

3.11

1.46

1.92*

1.72

1.47

1.56*

1.56

1910

2.51

1.96*

2.98

1.35

1.78*

1.62

1.50

1.56*

1.54

Averages

1890-99

3.00

2.22

3.61

1.83

2.16

2.25

1.56

1.49

1.62

1900-09

2.76

2.08

3.36

1.59

1.98

1.93

1.56

1.55

1.61

*  Provisional  figures.

t  Twice  the  rate  for  number  of  marriages  per  hundred.
Compiled  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries,
born.


The  German  rates  have  been  recomputed  to  exclude  the  still-


home  whether  times  are  good  or  bad.  They  are  as  conservative  in  choosing
their  homes  as  in  choosing  their  investments.

But  though  emigration  and  immigration  are  clearly  connected  with  business
conditions,  except  in  France,  they  are  not  sufficiently  important  factors  in  the
total  population  of  any  great  nation  to  accelerate  or  retard  the  growth  of
numbers  in  a  notable  degree.  If  the  official  estimates  of  population  given  in
Table  47  may  be  trusted,  even  the  United  States  increases  in  numbers  at  a
fairly  steady  rate  whether  times  be  good  or  bad.

To  provide  steady  employment  for  the  ever  growing  army  of  workers,  then,
it  is  not  sufficient  to  maintain  unimpaired  the  supply  of  raw  materials  and  of
industrial  equipment." And  to  provide  steady  sustenance  for  the  growing  army

3  This  is  the  fact  upon  which  Pohle  has  laid  such  stress. See  note,  on  p.  19,  above.


228  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  49

Immigration  Into  the  United  States  and  Emigration  From  the  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-19]  0


Actual  numbers
Thousands  of  immiCTants  or  (

3migrants

Average

Relative  numbers
actual  numbers  in  1890-99  =  100

A .

Year

United
States

United
KinKdom

(2)

France

(3)

Germany

(41

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

1890

455

218

21

97

123

122

313

161

1891

560

219

6

120

152

122

90

199

1892

580

210

6

116

157

117

90

192

1893

440

209

6

88

119

117

90

146

1894

286

156

4

41

77

87

60

68

1895

259

185

5

37

70

103

75

61

1896

343

162

5

34

93

90

75

56

1897

231

146

5

25

63

81

75

41

1898

229

141

4

22

62

79

60

36

1899

312

146

5

24

84

81

75

40

1900

449

169

5

22

122

94

75

36

1901

488

172

4

22

132

96

60

36

1902

649

206

4

32

176

115

60

53

1903

857

260

6

36

232

145

90

60

1904

813

271

5

28

220

151

75

46

1905

1,026

262

5

28

278

146

75

46

1906

1,101

325

6

31

298

181

90

51

1907

1,285

396

8

32

348

221

119

53

1908

783

263

5

20

212

147

75

33

1909

752

289

5

25

204

161

75

41

1910

1,042

398

26

282

222

43

1911

879

455

23

238

254

38

Averages

1890-99

369.5

179.2

6.7

60.4

100

100

100

100

1900-09

820.3

261.3

5.3

27.6

222

146

79

46

^  By  years  ending  June  30.  Revised  figures  from  the  Immigration  Commission's  Abstract  of  the  Statistical  Review  of  Immi-
gration to  the  United  States,  p.  8.  The  data  show  thousands  of  "immigrants  arriving"  in  1890-1903,  of  "aliens  admitted"  in
1904-05,  and  of  "immigrant  aliens  admitted"  in  1906-10.

^  Thousands  of  British  and  Irish  passengers  leaving  the  United  Kingdom  for  countries  outside  of  Europe.  From  the  Statis-
tical Abstract  of  the  United  Kingdom.

3  Thousands  of  emigrants  to  countries  outside  of  Europe. Prom  the  Annuaire  Statistique  de  France.

*  Thousands  of  Germans  leaving  for  countries  oversea  by  both  German  and  foreign  ports.  From  the  Statistische  Jahrbiicher
fiir  das  Deutsche  Reich.


of  consumers  it  is  not  sufficient  to  maintain  a  constant  supply  of  food,  clothing,
and  shelter.  In  both  cases  the  provision  must  be  made  on  a  larger  scale  in  each
successive  year.  A  period  of  unchanging  physical  volume  of  business,  there-
fore, means  actual  deterioration  in  the  economic  wellbeing  of  the  community —
deterioration  which  is  more  serious  in  the  United  States,  where  population
increases  fast,  than  in  Prance,  where  population  increases  slowly.  Similarly,
a  decline  in  this  volume  means  a  more  serious  setback  than  the  face  of  the
figures  suggests,  and  a  rise  means  a  less  considerable  gain.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


229


3E0

Chart  28.

Relatwe  Number  of  immigrants  into  the  Un(ted  States

AND  OF  Emigrants  from  txe  United  Mngdom,

France  and  Cermant.

1690  -  1910.

1

340

1

300
280

300
280

...

E

E

mm

J1I0W

(T5  Tf
NTSfT

on
on

Ger
Fw

INCE

r^

P

|—

—

260
£40

\

—

—

—

1

~

j

260
240

zao

200

—

—

-

-

1

\

_

~1-

\

220
200

1  V

( i

'

160
140
120
100
80

1

i

. 1

1

/
/

I

1

1

1
1
1
1 ,

160
140
120
100
80

n

/

1

1

\i

1

1.

■

/

(

/

/
/
/

/

t ^>—

\

/
1
1

/

t

]

\

s  .

1

-■'

r

•

*

:

\}\

/•■^

j

„

;

>•-

....

60
40

f-

1

\

1

60
40

\

'\

/

/

\

L..,

4
/

\

/

•^.


f

\.'

1830  '31  '32  '93  '34  '35  '%  '37  '38  -33  1300 '01  '02  03  04  05  06  OT  08  03  1910 |

230  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


III.  The  Volume  or  Gtoods  Produced

Coal  is  typical  of  Sombart's  ''inorganic  goods,"  tlie  supply  of  which  ordi-
narily follows  the  fluctuations  of  market  demand/  Strikes,  railway  blocliades,
or  the  like,  may  interfere  for  a  time  with  filling  orders,  and  in  dull  times  the
operators  may  prefer  to  accumulate  stocks  rather  than  to  reduce  their  output ;
but,  in  general,  the  rate  of  production  is  adjusted  to  the  volume  of  orders.
The  latter,  however,  is  far  steadier  in  the  case  of  coal  than  in  that  of  most
commodities.  A  large  proportion  of  the  demand  is  for  domestic  uses,  and  times
must  be  hard  indeed  to  cause  a  considerable  decline  in  the  amount  of  fuel  used
for  heating  and  cooking.  The  business  demand  is  more  variable,  but  never-
theless steadier  than  the  business  demand  for  almost  any  other  staple.  For
coal  is  largely  consumed  by  every  great  industry  in  the  country,  so  that  it  is
not  dependent  for  its  market  upon  the  j^rosperity  of  any  one.

For  these  reasons  the  production  of  coal  pursues  a  remarkably  even  course.
Table  50  shows  that  the  output  in  all  four  of  our  countries  has  increased  rapidly
since  1890 — much  more  rapidly  than  population.  The  development  has  been
fastest  in  the  United  States,  then  in  order  come  Germany,  Great  Britain,  and
France.  So  strong  is  this  factor  of  growth  that  a  mild  depression  of  business
serves  only  to  lessen  the  rate  at  which  production  increases,  and  even  a  severe
depression  causes  a  relatively  slight  and  brief  falling  off.  Thus  the  lowest
points  touched  during  depression  in  one  business  cycle  are  higher  than  the
highest  points  reached  during  prosperity  in  the  preceding  cycle.

Pig-iron  resembles  coal  in  that  its  production  can  ordinarily  be  adjusted
promptly  to  changes  of  demand ;  but  it  differs  from  coal  in  that  the  demand  is
wholly  for  business  uses.  Moreover,  the  business  demand  itself  is  more  fluctu-
ating for  pig-iron  than  for  coal,  because  it  is  distributed  less  evenly  among
different  lines  of  business  and  is  less  continuous  in  any  one  line.  Coal  is  burned
every  day  a  factory  runs,  but  pig-iron  and  its  products  are  bought  in  much
greater  amounts  when  factories  and  railways  are  striving  to  increase  their
equipment  than  in  duller  seasons.

Consequently  the  production  of  pig-iron  undergoes  wider  oscillations  than
the  production  of  coal.  The  factor  of  growth  is  as  prominent  in  Table  51  as
in  Table  50,  and  the  average  rate  of  gain  is  not  notably  different.^  Again,  the
United  States  has  gained  most,  and  Germany  next.  France,  however,  shows  a
more  rapid  increase  than  Great  Britain ;  but  that  is  mainly  because  the  smaller
scale  of  production  in  France  in  1890-99  makes  comparatively  moderate  actual
increases  in  1900-09  appear  as  large  percentages  of  the  basic  figures."  This
growth,  however,  has  been  broken  by  more  numerous  and  more  serious  setbacks

4  See  Chapter  I,  ii,  11.

s  The  increase  in  the  output  of  pig-iron  has  been  rather  more  rapid  than  the  gain  in  the  coal  output  in
the  United  States,  Germany,  and  France. The  opposite  is  true  of  Great  Britain.

e  In  coal  production  also  the  French  scale  of  production  was  much  smaller  than  the  British  in  1890-99.
Nevertheless  the  British  increase  was  greater  not  only  absolutely  but  also  relatively.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


231


200
190

lao

170
160
ISO
140
130
120
110
100
90
80

chart 29.

250

Relative  Production  of  Coal  in  the
UNITED  States  .  United  Kingdom  ,  France  ,  and  Germany.

1890  -  1909.

\

\

1

230
220
210
200
190
ISO

no

160
150
140
150
120
110
100

90

80

\

1

I

NiTED  States.
NiTEo  Kingdom.

QAKirr

1

'

u

F

Germany.

/

1

*

.-**''

/

/

/

\

/

/

/

i

''

/

/

f

,•'

/

I

/

/

w

/
/

/

r

^4

/

i

.*

/
/

V

/

1

"j

/
— /

^"'

••5::

'/
/
/

J-

¥

/-

/

/

\

^■''

"7

K

i.

7

•

/

>

1

1890  '91 '92 "93 '94 95 '96 '91 '98 99 1900  '01 '02 '03 '04 '05 'OG '01 '08 '09 1910

232


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  50

Production  op  Coal  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1909


Actual  amounts
Millions  of  long  tons

Average

Relative  amounts
actual  amounts  1890-99

>

=  100

Year
1890

United
States

141

United
Kingdom

182

Prance
26

Germany
88

United
States

82

United
Kingdom

95

France

93

Germany
83

1891

151

185

26

93

88

97

93

88

1892

160

182

26

91

93

95

93

86

1893

163

164

25

94

95

86

89

89

1894

152

188

27

97

89

98

96

.92

1895

172

190

28

102

100

99

100  ■

97

1896

171

195

29

111

100

102

103

105

1897

179

202

30

119

105

106

107

113

1898

196

202

32

126

114

106

114

119

1899

227

220

32

134

133

115

114

127

1900

241

225

33

147

141

118

117

139

1901

262

219

32

151

153

115

114

143

1902

269

227

30

148

157

119

107

140

1903

319

230

34

160

186

120

121

152

1904

314

232

34

167

183

121

121

158

1905

351

236

35

171

205

124

125

162

1906

370

251

34

190

216

131

121

180

1907

429

268

36

203

251

140

128

192

1908

371

262

37

212

217

137

132

201

1909

411

264

37

214

240

138

132

203

1910

448

264

38*

219

262

138

135*

208

Averages
1890-99

171.2

191.0

28.1

105.5

100

100

100

100

1900-09

333.7

241.4

34.2

176.3

195

126

122

167

*  Provisional  figures.

Compiled  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries. The  German  figures  include  both  "Braunkohlen"  and  "Stein-
kohlen." The  metric  tons  of  France  and  Germany  are  reduced  to  long  tons  by  dividing  by  1.0156.


than  in  the  case  of  coal,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  gain  in  periods  of  prosperity
has  been  correspondingly  more  rapid.  Indeed,  the  statistics  of  pig-iron  output
form  one  of  the  most  sensitive  barometers  of  business  conditions.

But,  marked  as  is  the  effect  of  depression  and  prosperity  upon  the  physical
volume  of  pig-iron  produced,  the  effect  upon  the  pecuniary  value  of  the  output
is  greater  still.  Depression  brings  not  only  a  reduction  of  output,  but  also  a
reduction  of  price,  which  accentuates  the  change  in  volume  when  the  data  are
converted  from  tons  into  dollars.  The  price  often  continues  to  decline  for  a
time  after  the  lowest  ebb  of  production  has  been  passed,  so  that,  as  Table  52


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


233


Production


TABLE  51

OP  Pig-Ikon  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  Psance,  and  Germany
By  Years,  1890-1910


Actual  amounts
Hundreds  of  thousands  of  long  tons


Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  1890-99  =  100


Year

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

United
States

, — ^.

Kingdom
United

Prance

Germar

1890

92

79

19.

46

98

99  /

88  .

79

1891

83

74

19

46

89

93

88

79

1892

92

67

20

49

98

84

93

84

1893

71

70

20

49

76

88

93

84

1894

67

74

20

53

72

93

93

91

1895

94

77

20

54

100

97

93

93

1896

86

87

23

63

92

109

107

109

1897

97

88

24

68

104

111

112

117

1898

118

86

25

72

126

108

116

124

1899

136

94

25

80

145

118

116

138

1900

138

90

27

84

147

113

126

145

1901

159

79

24

78

170

99

112

134

1902

178

87

24

84

190

109

112

145

1903

180

89

28

99

192

112

130

171

1904

165

87

29

99

176

109

135

171

1905

230

96

30

107

246

121

140

185

1906

253

101

33

121

270

127

153

209

1907

258

101

35

127

276

127

163

219

1908

159

91

34

116

170

114

158

200

1909

258

95

35*

124

276

119

163*

214

1910

273

100

40*

146

292

126

186*

252

Averages

1890-99

93.6

79.6

21.5

58.0

100

100

100

100

1900-09

197.8

91.6

29.9

103.9

211

115

139

179

V


*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.

Compiled  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries. The  metric  tons  of  Prance  and  Germanv  are  reduced  to  lone
tons  by  dividing  by  1.0156.


shows,  the  season  of  lowest  vahie  is  frequently  one  or  more  years  later  than
the  season  of  smallest  output.  Even  after  the  price  has  turned  upward,  its
advance  is  slow  for  a  while,  so  that  new  high  records  of  value  are  much  later
in  being  made  than  new  high  records  of  production.  For  example,  the  output
record  of  1890  was  surpassed  in  1895  in  America,  in  1896  in  England,  and  as
early  as  1892  in  both  France  and  Germany ;  but  the  value  records  of  1890  were
not  surpassed  until  1899  in  America  and  England,  1897  in  France,  and  1896
in  Germany.  Finally,  at  the  culmination  of  prosperity  the  advance  of  prices
becomes  very  rapid,  so  that  the  extreme  fluctuations  of  value  are  much  greater
than  the  extreme  fluctuations  of  output.  In  other  words,  the  pig-iron  industry
is  steadier  than  the  pig-iron  business.


234


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 30.
Relative  Production  of  Rg  Iron  in  the  United  States,

280

/

United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany.

/

1830  -  1909.

/

/

United  Kingdom

France.

240

220

220

,'._

/  •

/

t

J

;

200

I

— 1~

'i-

200

180


—

--


-  —

/


n

•

--

160

ISO

/

;■

f^

4

160

/

;

i

Y

/

•

1

r

'

1

f^.

•

1

140
120
100

/

«

1

140
120
100

1

\

/

/

/
f

\

\

i

*

r

Tn,

1

K

\
\
\

1

/
/
f

/
/

^>

/
/
/

\  /

s

i

J

/

SO

:^

<" —

^■JL

7

•

K

/

80

1890 9

■9;

'9i '94  '95

'w

;  '9-

'a

5  '9!

i 19

M'O

1 '0

2  '0'

i  '(y

» 'Oi

5  'Of

3  'Cf7

'08  ■O'

3 19

10

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  235


TABLE  52

Value  of  Pig-Iron  Produced  in  the  United  States,  "United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany,  and  Eelative
Value  in  Comparison  "With  Relative  Amount  of  Product

By  Years,  1890-1909


Actual  values
In  millions  of  dollars

Average

Relative  figures
actual  figures  1890-99  =  100

United

United

^

United  States

A

United  Kingdom

France

Gei-many

Year

States

Kingdom

France  Gennany

'Tons Value^

Tons

Value

Tons

Value

Tons

Value'

1890

151

117

27

64

98 125

99

115

88

103

79

93

1891

128

95

24

55

89 106

93

93

88

91

79

80

1892

131

84

24

55

98 108

84

82

93

91

84

80

1893

85

77

23

51

76 70

88

76

93

87

84

74

1894

65

83

23

55

72 54

93

81

93

87

91

80

1895

105

90

21

56

100 87

97

88

93

80

93

81

1896

90

101

26

71

92 74

109

99

107

99

109

103

1897

95

103

28

83

104 78

111

101

112

106

117

121

1898

117

llO

31

90

126 97

108

108

116

118

124

131

1S99

245

159

36

108

145 202

118

156

116

137

138

157

1900

260

183

43

131

147 215

113

180

126

163

145

190

1901

242

121

33

117

170 200

99

119

112

125

134

170

1902

373

137

31

108

190 308

109

134

112

118

145

157

1903

344

137

35

125

192 284

112

1S4

130

133

171

182

1904

233

124

37

124

176 192

109

122

135

141

171

180

1905

382

147

41

138

246 315

121

144

140

156

185

201

1906

506

172

51

170

270 417

127

169

153

194

209

247

1907

530

182

41

196

276 437

127

179

163

156

219

285

1908

254

140

54*

170

170 210

114

137

158

205*

200

247

1909

419

150

57*

165

276 346

121

147

163

217*

214

240

1910

425

167

191

292 351

126

164

186

252

278

Averages
1890-99

121.2

101.9

26.3

68.8

100 100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

354.3

149.3

42.3

144.4

211 292

115

147

139

161

179

210

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.

Values  compiled  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries. American  figures  prepared  by  the  U. S.  Geological
Survey. Values  at  Philadelphia  1890-94: at  point  of  production  1895-1909.


236


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  237

As  representatives  of  the  production  of  organic  goods,  where  man's  control
over  the  factors  determining  supply  is  far  less  complete  than  in  the  cases  of
coal  and  pig-iron,  we  may  take  the  wheat  crops  of  our  four  countries.

A  comparison  between  Table  53  and  Tables  51  and  50  shows  that  the  factor
of  growth  has  been  far  less  notable  in  the  production  of  wheat  than  in  the
production  of  pig-iron  and  coal.  The  British  yield  has  actually  fallen  off  in
recent  years,  the  French  yield  has  gained  but  a  trifle.  While  the  G-erman  and
American  yields  show  distinctly  higher  averages  in  the  second  than  in  the  first
decade,  the  gains  are  small  in  comparison  with  those  scored  in  the  coal  and  iron
trades,  and  not  much  greater  than  the  increase  of  population.


TABLE  53

Wheat  Crops  op  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  figures
Millions  of  bushels

A

Relative  figures
Average  actual  crops  1890-99

United United
States Kingdom France

=  100

Tear

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

Germany

1890

399

78

309

104

79

123

99

89

1891

612

77

219

86

122

121

70

74

1892

516

63

311

116

103

99

100

100

1893

396

52

278

110

79

82

89

95

1894

460

63

348

111

91

99

112

95

1895

467

39

340

117

93

61

109

101

1896

428

60

340

126

85

94

109

108

1897

530

58

247

120

105

91

79

103

1898

675

77

363

133

134

121

116

114

1899

547

69

364

141

109

108

117

121

1900

522

56

326

141

104

88

105

121

1901

748

56

311

92

149

88

100

79

1902

670

60

328

143

133

94

105

123

1903

638

50

364

131

127

79

117

113

1904

552

39

299

140

110

61

96

120

1905

693

62

335

136

138

97

107

117

1906

735

62

325

145

146

97

104

125

1907

634

58

377

128

126

91

121

110

1908

665

56

318

138

132

88

102

119

1909

737

65

356

138

147

102

114

119

1910

635

58

258

142

126

91

83

122

1911

621

66

315

149

123

104

101

128

Averages
1890-99

503.0

63.6

311.9

116.4

100

100

100

100

1900-09

659.4

56.4

339.9

133.2

131

89

107

115

Compiled  from  the  Yearbooks  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture. Data  for  1890  from  Report  of  the  Sccreta,y  of  Agriculture.
1891,  p.  305.


23S


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 32.
Relative:  Wheat  Crops  of  the  United  5tate5  .  United  Kingdom  ,  France  ,  and  Germany.

1890 1910.


150


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  239

As  for  the  changes  from  one  phase  of  the  business  cycle  to  the  next,  there
are  many  cases  in  which  increased  yields  accompanied  increased  prosperity  or
in  which  poor  crops  and  depression  went  together.  But  the  correlation  between
volume  of  production  and  business  conditions  is  far  less  perfect  for  wheat  than
for  minerals.  For  example,  note  the  decline  in  the  American  harvest  of  1899,
the  British  harvest  of  1895,  the  French  harvest  of  1897,  and  the  German  harvest
of  1907,  and  the  increase  of  the  American  harvest  in  1908,  the  British  harvest
in  1902,  the  French  harvest  in  1903,  and  the  German  harvest  in  1902.  In  all
these  cases  short  crops  occurred  in  a  year  of  improving  business  or  large  crops
in  a  year  of  retrogression.  The  figures  indicate  that  as  a  business  factor  the
wheat  crop  is  less  an  effect  than  a  cause  of  change  in  conditions,  particularly
in  countries  where  agriculture  emplo3rs  more  hands  than  manufactures.  Good
crops  tend  to  bring  prosperity  and  poor  crops  depression  in  the  seasons  which
follow.  But  the  numerous  exceptions  to  this  rule  show  that  other  factors  often
overbalance  the  effect  of  the  harvests.

To  show  the  relation  between  the  physical  volume  and  pecuniary  value  of
farm  products  it  is  siifficient  to  take  data  for  corn,  wheat,  and  cotton  in  America
(Table  54).  With  pig-iron  it  is  the  rule  that  reduced  prices  and,  with  the
exceptions  noted  above,  increased  production  and  high  prices  go  together.
In  general,  the  opposite  holds  of  crops — reduced  yields  cause  high  prices  and
increased  yields  cause  low  prices.  Indeed,  a  deficiency  in  the  yields  sometimes
causes  such  a  rise  of  prices  as  to  make  the  pecuniary  value  of  the  short  crop
greater  than  that  of  a  large  one,  and  superabundant  yields  sometimes  cause
such  a  drop  in  prices  as  to  reduce  their  pecuniary  value.  Instances  of  the  first
kind  occurred,  for  example,  with  corn  in  1901,  wheat  in  1904,  and  cotton  in
1909 ;  instances  of  the  second  kind  in  1894  with  cotton,  1895  with  corn,  and  1898
with  wheat.  But,  in  the  case  of  staples  having  several  important  sources  of
supply,  this  relation  between  light  yields  and  high  prices  and  heavy  yields  and
low  prices  is  far  from  regular.  An  increased  yield  of  wheat  in  America  was
accompanied  by  a  rise  in  price  in  1891,  1895,  1897,  1901,  1908,  and  1909,  while
a  decreased  yield  was  accompanied  by  a  fall  in  price  in  1892  and  1893.  Such
cases  are  rather  less  numerous  with  corn  and  cotton,  of  which  the  United  States
produces  a  much  larger  proportion  of  the  world's  supply.  But,  with  corn,
reduced  productioh  and  reduced  prices  went  together  in  1892  and  1893,  and
increased  production  and  increased  prices  in  1890  and  1900.'  Thus  the  relations
between  physical  production  and  pecuniary  value  are  decidedly  irregular  with
agricultural  products.  Neither  yields  nor  prices  are  controlled  to  the  same
extent  by  business  conditions  as  are  the  output  and  prices  of  minerals.

7  Year  Book  of  the  Department  of  Agriculture,  1908,  pp.  598,  608,  and  674-5. The  prices  of  cotton  in  1900
and  1901  are  computed  from  Table  54.


240


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  54


Yields  and  Farm  Values  of  the  Coen,  Wheat,  and  Cotton  Crops

By  Years,  1890-1910


Corn


Wheat


OF  the  United  States


Cotton


Actual  figures

Million Million
bushels dollars

Relative  figures

Av.  actual  figures

1890-99  =  100

A

Actual  figures

Million Million
bushels dollars

Relative  figures

Av.  actual  figures

1890-99  =  100

Actual  figures

10,000 Million
bales dollars

Relative  figures

Av.  actual  figures

1890-99  =:  100

Year

Yields

Values

Yields

Values

Yields

Values

1890

1,490

754

81

124

399

335

79

102

865

352

96

120

1891

2,060

836

112

137

612

513

122

155

904

312

101

106

1892

1,628

642

89

105

516

322

103

98

670

267

75

91

1893

1,619

592

88

97

396

213

79

65

755

251

84

86

1894

1,213

555

66

91

460

226

91

69

990

220

no

75

1895

2,151

545

117

89

467

238

93

72

716

259

80

88

1896

2,284

491

124

81

428

311

85

94

876

276

98

94

1897

1,903

501

104

82

530

429

105

130

1,120

356

125

121

1898

1,924

552

105

91

675

393

134

119

1,127

3H

126

107

1899

2,078

629

113

103

547

320

109

97

951

324

106

111

1900

2,105

751

115

123

522

324

104

98

1,025

470

114

160

1901

1,523

922

83

151

748

467

149

141

948

387

106

132

1902

2,524

1,017

138

167

670

422

133

128

1,078

422

120

144

1903

2,244

953

122

156

638

443

127

134

1,002

576

112

197

1904

2,467

1,087

134

178

552

510

110

155

1,370

561

153

191

1905

2,708

1,117

148

183

693

518

138

157

1,073

557

120

190

1906

2,927

1,167

159

190

735

490

146

148

1,331

640

148

218

1907

2,592

1,337

141

219

634

554

126

168

1,133

553

126

189

1908

2,669

1,616

145

265

665

617

132

187

1,343

551

150

188

1909

2,772

1,653

151

271

737

730

147

221

1,039

688

116

235

1910

2,886

1,385

157

227

635

561

126

170

1,197

820

133

280

1911

2,531

1,565

138

257

621

543

123

165

Averages

1890-99

1,835.0

609.7

100

100

503.0

330.0

100

100

897.4

293.1

100

100

1900-09

2,453.1

1,162.0

134

191

659.4

507.5

131

154

1,134.2

540.5

126

184

Compiled  from  A.  P.  Andrew,  Statistics  for  the
Document  no.  570,  61st  Congress,  2d  session;  pp.
States.


United  States. (Publications  of  tlie  National  Monetary  Commission),  Senate
14, 15. The  data  for  1910-11  are  from  the  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


241


CHART 53.

Relative  Yields  and  Farm  values  of  the  wheat  crops

OF  THE  UNITED STATES  .

220

'V

1890  -  1910.

/

/

/
/
1
1

\
\

\

\

\
\
\

200

VALUES.

1

1
1

\

\
\

1

<

\

i

/

180

/

180

/

/

/

t

.

/

160

/

1

1  ^r%

»

160

i

, 1 /

j f

'  '

<"

^ /

!

i

i 1 i

/

^ /

'

5

/

v

1

/

\ A

,

/

A  ' /\

140

/

i  \

/  i

/  \

1 / \

140

1

,

/  1

/

\

ii

\\

/

/

'

\

/

li

\\

f

/

\

/

A

1

\

\'

/

\

>

r

^  /

\

/'

\

\

/

\

/

i\l

\

//

>

L

/

V  1

1

\

'

\

/

1

120

100

1

/\

\

11

\

/

,

120
100

1

\

1

1

\
\
\

\

1

\

/

/

/  /

1

\

/

\

^^  ■*

/

\\

V /

/

/

\\

/

v

/

/

\\

/

x

/

f

\\

/

I

do

\  \

/

1

80

\

r

•

1

1
1

\

y

x-

•

1890 91 92 '9i '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol 'OZ '03 '04 'O.

3 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910

242


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA


IV.  The  Yolitme  of  Domestic  Trade

Since  every  business  enterprise  of  any  size  directly  or  indirectly  makes  use
of  the  railways  on  the  one  hand  and  on  the  other  hand  of  the  banks,  the  records
of  railway  traffic  and  bank  transactions  afford  perhaps  the  best  single  gauges
of  the  amount  of  business  going  on  within  the  limits  of  a  country.

Gross  receipts  from  operations  are  the  most  readily  comparable  among  the
various  records  of  railway  traffic.  These  figures,  assembled  in  Table  55,  show
the  United  States  in  the  lead,  with  respect  to  absolute  amounts,  rate  of  growth,
and  violence  of  fluctuations.  Germany  ranks  second,  the  United  Kingdom
third,  and  France  last,  though  there  is  little  difference  between  the  rate  of
growth  in  the  two  latter  countries.  Except  in  the  United  States,  periods  of
business  depression  do  little  more  than  to  interrupt  the  expansion  of  railway
traffic  for  a  single  year. Germany  shows  a  decline  of  3  per  cent  in  1901  and


TABLE  55

;s  Eaenings  of  the

Bail  WATS

OF  THE

United  States,  United  Kingdom,

France,

AND  Germany

Actual  amounts
Millions  of  dollars

A

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  1890-99

United United

States Kingdom France

-  100

Year

United

States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

Germany

1890

1,052

373

223

310

91

92

91

85

1891

1,097

381

229

320

94

94

94

88

1892

1,171

382

228

321

101

94

93

88

1893

1,221

374

233

335

105

92

95

92

1894

1,073

389

238

336

92

96

97

92

1895

1,075

396

244

357

92

98

100

98

1896

1,150

415

250

378

99

102

102

103

1897

1,222

430

258

399

105

106

106

109

1898

1,247

443

267

438

107

109

109

120

1899

1,314

466

275

463

113

115

112

127

1900

1,487

481

293

483

128

119

120

132

1901

1,589

485

281

470

137

120

115

129

1902

1,726

497

285

482

149

123

117

132

1903

1,901

502

290

515

164

124

119

141

1904

l,97o

505

292

540

170

125

119

148

1905

2,082

512

304

580

179

126

124

159

1906

2,326

527

318

626

200

130

130

171

1907

2,589

546

328

653

223

135

134

179

1908

2,394

538

335

642

206

133

137

176

1909

2,419

539

340*

677

208

133

139*

185

1910

2,751

556

723

237

137

198

Averages

1890-99

1,162.2

404.9

244.5

365.7

100

100

100

100

1900-09

2,048.8

513.2

306.6

566.8

176

127

125

155

*  Provisional  figures.

Compiled  from  the  Statistical  Reports  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  and  from  the  statistical
Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany.  With  the  possible  exception  of  France,  the  figures  show  gross  receipts
American  figures  are  for  years  ending  June  30.


abstracts  of  the  United
from  operations. The


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


243


CHART 54.

<

j

Relative  Gross  earnings  of  the  railways  of  the

UNITED  STATES.  UNITED  KINGDOM ,  FRANCE  ,  AND GERMANY.

/

\

1

ppn

1890-1910.

/

\

/

UNITED  STATES.

/

\

-^

UNITED  Kingdom.

-i

zoo

FRANCE.

/

GERMANY.

/

ISO

/

I-

f
/
/
/

t

"•n

t

»

1

ISO

160

/

/

/

9
9
1

9

t

i

t

9
9
#

160
140
120
100
SO

I2Q
lOO
SO

*
•

*

I

1

»

,.

/

/

/

<

^''

t

/

-•*^

^

*

/

u

\

.^■"

^'^

/^

.'-'

L

*•>

,: 1

y

1

1890  '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 "05 '04 '05 '06 '07 '02 '09 1910

244  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

1908 ;  France  of  1  per  cent  in  1892  (perhaps  because  of  the  reduction  in  railway
rates  brought  about  by  a  change  in  the  tax  laws) ,  and  one  of  5  per  cent  in  1901,
the  year  following  a  great  international  exposition ;  the  United  Kingdom  shows
a  decline  of  2  per  cent  in  both  1893  and  1908.^  The  wider  fluctuations  of
American  business  are  shown  by  decreases  of  13  per  cent  in  1894  and  17  per
cent  in  1908.  But  while  the  volume  of  traffic  shrinks  little  in  Europe  even  in
periods  of  severe  depression,  it  grows  at  a  pace  considerably  faster  than  the
average  when  prosperity  reigns.  The  maximum  increases  from  one  year  to  the
next  are  12  per  cent  in  Grermany  (1906),  8  per  cent  in  France  (1900),  and  6
per  cent  in  England  (1899).  Again  the  United  States  with  an  increase  of
23  per  cent  (1907)  far  surpasses  the  other  countries.  Judged  by  this  standard,
then,  the  volume  of  domestic  trade  is  subject  to  so  large  a  factor  of  growth  that
it  contracts  but  a  trifle  when  business  is  dull,  and  shows  the  effects  of  business
cycles  mainly  by  expanding  faster  than  usual  when  business  is  brisk.  Amer-
ican business,  however,  is  subject  to  more  violent  oscillations  than  European.

It  is  only  in  England  and  the  United  States  that  bank  clearings  are  a  trust-
worthy gauge  of  volume  of  trade.  In  France  and  Grermany  bank  notes,  bank
transfers,  domestic  bills  of  exchange,  etc.,  are  used  for  many  of  the  transactions
effected  in  the  Anglo-Saxon  countries  by  checks,  and  bank  clearings  accord-
ingly are  comparatively  small.  For  the  sake  of  completeness,  the  Parisian  and
German  clearings  are  shown  in  Table  56;  but  these  figures  have  little  value
aside  from  indicating  that  the  use  of  checks  has  made  relatively  rapid  progress
since  1890.

As  indices  of  the  volume  of  domestic  trade,  the  American  and  English
clearings  show  wider  variations  than  do  railway  receipts.  The  factor  of  growth
is  larger  in  clearings ;  but  nevertheless  the  decreases  in  times  of  depression  are
greater  and  last  longer.  But  the  discrepancies  between  the  testimony  borne  by
the  two  sets  of  data  are  more  apparent  than  real.  Clearings  are  more  affected
than  railway  receipts  by  changes  in  prices,  which  Chapter  IV  showed  to  be
large  in  the  period  covered  by  the  tables.  Even  when  subject  to  no  govern-
mental regulation,  it  is  notoriously  difficult  for  railways  to  readjust  their
complicated  schedules  promptly  as  the  level  of  prices  rises  and  falls.  Hence
clearings  vary  more  than  railway  receipts  for  much  the  same  reason  that  the
value  of  pig-iron  varies  more  than  the  output.  Second,  speculation  in  stocks
and  commodities  exerts  a  powerful  infiuence  upon  the  volume  of  clearings,  while
it  does  not  perceptibly  affect  the  earnings  of  railways.  And  such  speculation
is  a  branch  of  trade  peculiarly  susceptible  to  wide  and  sudden  fluctuations.

How  important  is  this  second  factor  may  be  judged  from  the  difference
between  the  course  followed  by  clearings  in  New  York  and  by  clearings  in  the
rest  of  the  countr}^  The  latter  clearings  decline  somewhat  more  than  railway
receipts  in  times  of  depression  when  prices  are  falling  and  speculation  is  stag-

s  These  percentages  are  based  on  the  average  annual  receipts  of  1890-99.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  245


TABLE  56

Bank  Clearings  in  the  IFnited  States,  England,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  hundreds  of  millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  1890-99  =

100

Onited  States

London

Paris

Germany

United  States

A

London

Paris

New
York

Outside  New  York

Year

No.  of
clearing
houses

Amount

of
clearings

No.  of
clearing
houses

Amount

of
clearings

Outside
New New
York York

Germany

1890

375

55

231

380

12

9

43

105 94

106

88

84  •

1891

337

55

229

333

9

9

42

94 93

93

66

82

1892

367

66

253

315

9

9

40

102 103

88

66

78

1893

313

73

229

315

10

9

43

87 93

88

74

84

1894

244

78

211

308

12

9

43

68 86

86

88

84

1895

298

78

233

370

14

9

50

83 95

103

103

98

1896

289

82

224

369

15

9

54

81 91

103

no

106

1897

334

82

238

365

16

9

57

93 97

102

118

112

1898

420

82

269

394

18

10

67

117 110

110

132

131

1899

608

82

333

445

21

10

72

170 136

124

154

141

1900

526

86

334

436

21

10

70

147 136

121

154

137

1901

794

90

390

465

19

10

69

221 159

129

140

135

1902

763

93

417

488

21

11

71

213 170

136

154

139

1903

660

97

432

492

23

11

74

184 176

137

169

145

1904

686

97

439

514

27

11

78

191 179

143

199

153

1905

938

107

500

598

34

12

89

262 204

166

250

174

1906

1,047

113

552

619

48

13

100

292 225

172

353

196

1907

872

113

578

620

50

14

108

243 236

173

368

211

1908

793

113

531

590

52

17

109

221 217

164

382

213

1909

1,036

111

622

658

61

289 254

183

375

1910

973

668

713

66

271 273

198

485

1911

924

676

711

58

258 276

198

426

Averages

1890-99

358.5

245.0

359.4

13.6

51.1

100 100

100

100

100

1900-09

811.5

479.3

548.0

34.6

226 196

152

254

A • „ «„„^a.  t^nTT,  tho  Fiyinnrial  Review  (calendar  years)  ;  English  and  German  figures  from  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,

American  figures  from  the  |.na«emi^«me^  Oommisfion),  Senate  Document  no.  578,  61st  Congress,  2d  Session

pp'.™rLd  152rFrench  figurlsZ  de  France, 1908,  p. 65*, and  La  riforr^e  iconomique. The  French

figures  are  for  years  heginning  April  1.


246


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


ChART 35.

RELATIVE  Bank  Clearings  in  New  York,
Outside  New  York, and  in  London.

\

zao

/

1

\

1890  -  1911.

/

\

/
/

\

260

/

Outside  New  York

1

London

'

\

1  f
If

240

\

1

\

1

1

,\

1

1

A

220

/

1

i

\

1

r

220

\

\

/
1

1

1

\

?nn

,

\

i

200

1

\

.

/
;

/

\

/

/
/
/

/
/

ISO

(

180

1

1

^

/

1

/
/

/

'■•

\

/

/

/

\

/

leo

\

/
/

/

■'

Ifin

I

\

/
/

/

1

\

/

/

1

\

/

/

1

/

i

i4n

140

1

—

1

/

-■•

f

1  i

/

/

''r

V

/

120

120

i

t

100

\

i

^

—

-~

f

\

f

\

/

-^

(

N

\

\

1

/

i

so

\

y

f

80

\

/

1890  '91 '92 93  '94  '95 '96 '37 '98  '99 1900  'Ol '02  '03  '04 '05 'OS 07 08  '09 1910  'l  1

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  247

nant,  and  advance  somewhat  more  in  times  of  prosperity  when  prices  are  rising
and  speculation  is  rampant.  But  the  margins  between  the  relative  figures  for
these  country  clearings  and  for  railway  receipts  are  narrower  than  the  margins
between  country  clearings  and  New  York  clearings.  More  than  almost  any
other  branch  of  business,  stock  speculation  is  concentrated  in  New  York.  The
establishment  of  the  Stock  Exchange  Clearing  House  in  May,  1892,  relieved
the  banks  from  much  of  the  work  they  formerly  did  in  connection  with  stock
dealings,  and  was  partly  responsible  for  the  decline  in  the  volume  of  New  York
clearings  in  the  years  which  f  ollowed."  But  the  purchase  of  stocks  still  requires
a  heavy  use  of  bank  checks,  so  that  an  increase  of  activity  upon  the  stock
exchange  is  always  reflected  at  the  bank  clearing  house.  Hence  the  rough
concomitance,  shown  by  Table  57,  between  the  changes  in  the  number  of  shares
sold  and  in  the  volume  of  clearings.  On  the  whole,  the  clearings  are  steadier
than  the  stock  sales,  because  the  other  branches  of  trade  which  require  the
use  of  checks  fluctuate  less  wildly  than  does  speculation  in  stocks.  But  the
contribution  made  by  the  stock  exchange  to  bank  clearings  is  so  huge  as  to
invalidate  the  use  of  the  New  York  figures  as  a  gauge  of  the  activity  of  general
business.  The  country  clearings  are  a  far  more  trustworthy  witness,  and,  as
has  been  pointed  out,  their  testimony  agrees  well  with  that  borne  by  railway
receipts,  after  allowance  has  been  made  for  changes  in  prices,  and  for  the
measure  of  speculation  which  enters  into  every  branch  of  trade.

London  clearings  agree  with  British  railway  receipts  in  much  the  same
manner  that  country  clearings  in  the  United  States  agree  with  American  rail-
way receipts.  Of  course,  under  the  influence  of  changes  in  prices  and  specu-
lation they  fall  off  more  than  railway  receipts  in  the  middle  nineties,  and  rise
more  in  the  second  decade.  Stock  exchange  transactions,  however,  cut  a  less
figure  at  the  London  than  at  the  New  York  clearing  house,  largely  because  the
London  exchange  makes  fortnightly  instead  of  daily  settlements.  Hence  the
London  figures  are  a  less  accurate  gauge  of  volume  of  speculation  and  a  more
accurate  gauge  of  volume  of  general  trade  than  the  New  York  figures.  Like
the  indices  previously  examined,  bank  clearings  show  a  smaller  factor  of  growth
in  English  than  in  American  business.  But  this  difference  does  not  prevent
the  series  for  London  and  for  the  United  States  outside  of  New  York  from
reflecting  the  agreements  and  disagreements  pointed  out  in  Chapter  III  between
the  course  of  business  cycles  in  the  two  countries.

Since  bank  clearings  are  so  small  in  France  and  Germany,  it  is  advisable
to  seek  some  other  gauge  of  the  domestic  volume  of  trade.  The  wide  use  of
the  domestic  bill  of  exchange  by  business  enterprises  of  every  kind  in  Europe
gives  this  instrument  of  credit  a  significance  as  an  index  of  volume  of  business
transacted  not  unlike  that  of  the  bank  check  in  Anglo-Saxon  countries. More-

9  Financial  Review,  1893,  p.  12.


248


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  57

Number  or  Shares  Sold  on  the  New  York  Exchange  and  Bank  Clearings  in  New  York  City

Bt  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts

Relative  amounts

Average  actual  amounts

in  1890-99  =  100

A

Shares

sold.

Millions

of  shares

Bank
clearings.
Hundreds
of  millions
of  dollars

Year

Shares
sold

Bank
clearings

1890

71

375

84

105

1891

69

337

82

94

1892

86

367

102

102

1893

81

313

96

87

1894

49

244

58

68

1895

67

298

79

83

1896

S5

289

65

81

1897

77

334

91

93

1898

113

420

134

117

1899

176

608

209

170

1900

138

526

164

147

1901

266

794

315

221

1902

189

763

224

213

1903

161

660

191

184

1904

187

686

222

191

1905

263

938

312

262

1906

284

1,047

336

292

1907

196

872

232

243

1908

197

793

233

221

1909

215

1,036

255

289

1910

164

973

194

271

1911

127

924

150

258

Averages
1890-99

84.4

358.5

100

100

1900-09

209.6

811.5

248

226

Data  from  the  Financial  Review.


over,  the  imposition  of  stamp  taxes  upon  such  bills  supplies  data  from  which
the  amount  in  circulation  from  year  to  year  may  be  estimated  with  approximate
accuracy."

10  On  the  value  of  these  data  as  a  gauge  of  business  activity  see  K.  Helfferieh,  Der  deutsche  GeldmarTct  1895
iis  190S  (Sohriften  des  Vereins  fiir  Socialpolitik,  vol.  110),  p.  27.  The  German  figures  are  computed  from
the  receijpts  of  the  Wechselstempelsteuer  by  a  formula  used  by  the  Eeischsbank  in  compiling  its  anniversary
volume  for  the  years  1876-1900.  The  tax  receipts  (at  the  rate  of  one-half  per  mille)  are  capitalized,  and
from  the  sum  10  per  cent  is  deducted  as  an  allowance  for  the  lower  rate  of  taxation  upon  large  bills.  The
amounts  of  bills  on  which  the  French  tax  is  collected  are  given  in  the  Annuaire  statistique,  1908,  p.  90.*  Two
errors  of  the  press  have  been  corrected  in  changing  these  figures  into  American  money.  That  the  original  data
are  not  in  thousands  but  in  millions  of  francs  appears  from  p.  3*  and  from  a  comparison  between  the  amount
of  the  tax  and  the  amount  of  the  bills. The  first  digit  in  the  amount  for  1898  should  be  3  instead  of  2.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


249


Chart  36.

340

Relative  Number  of  Shares  sao  oi  the

NEW  York  Stxk  Exchange  and

i

Relative  Bank  Clearings  in  NewYork  City j

'

1890-1911.

LI/

320

1

BANK  CLEARINGS.

300

280

1

1

1

\

280

1

r

1

j  \

260

1

1  1

260

1

'

240

.  i

f

240

1  i

\  f

1

V!

T|

1

220

1

220

1

1

\

l\
\\
ll

ll

/

1

L

ISO

1 1
\  1

160

160

1

1 1
\i

\

■

1

140

140
120

1

120

/
//

If

100

I
\

100

A

1

/j

80

*

/

^^'

/


80
fiO

\l

\l

1

60


1


1890 '91  '92 33 '94 '35 '96 '97  '9

8'£

9  190

O'OI I

2  bS  04  05  Oe  '07  08  '09  1910 'll

250  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

These  figures,  presented  in  Table  58,  agree  more  closely  with,  railway  receipts
in  their  respective  countries  than  do  bank  clearings  in  America  and  England.
They  fall  more  than  railway  receipts  during  years  of  depression  and  rise  more
during  years  of  prosperity;  for,  of  course,  the  amount  of  bills  of  exchange  in
circulation  is  affected  by  changes  in  the  price  level.  The  reason  why  these
divergencies  are  smaller  than  the  corresponding  divergencies  between  clearings
and  railway  receipts  in  America  and  England  appears  to  be  that  bills  of
exchange,  based  mainly  upon  the  sale  of  actual  commodities,  are  less  affected
by  speculation  than  are  bank  clearings.  Finally,  the  differences  between  the
increase  from  the  first  to  the  second  decade  in  the  volume  of  bills  outstanding
in  Prance  and  Germany  confirm  the  conclusion  drawn  from  earlier  tables  that
German  business  has  been  expanding  at  a  considerably  faster  pace  than  French
business  in  the  last  twenty  years.


TABLE  58

[LLS  OF  Exchange

IN  Circulation

IN  France

AND

German

By  Tears,  1890-

-1910

Actual  amounts

In  tens  of  millions  of

dollars

Relative  amounts

Average  actual  amounts

in  1890-99  =  100

Year

France

Germany

France

Germany

1890

542

335

99

86

1891

551

350

101

90

1892

524

339

96

87

1893

525

350

96

90

1894

509

349

93

89

1895

514

374

94

96

1896

539

394

99

101

1897

556

426

102

109

1898

586

471

107

121

1899

611

516

112

132

1900

621

558

114

143

1901

596

532

109

136

1902

594

517

109

132

1903

625

536

115

137

1904

647

561

119

144

1905

668

629

122

161

1906

733

676

134

173

1907

769

743

141

190

1908

751

703

138

180

1909

778

794

143

203

1910

844

803

155

206

1911

838

215

Averages

1890-99

545.7

390.4

100

100

1900-09

678.2

629.9

124

160

Data  obtained  from  the  statistical  abstracts  of  Prance  and  Germany. For  method  of  computing  the  amount  of  bills  from  the
stamp-tax  receipts  in  Germany  see  preceding  note. The  German  figures  are  for  the  fiscal  years  beginning  April  1.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


251


\

y

200

CHART 37.

1
1

1
1
1

Relative  Amounts  of  Bii-if.  of  Exchange
IN  Circulation  in  France:  and  Germany.
1890  -  1910.

190
ISO

\
I

1
1
I

1
1

1
1

1
1
t

/

\1C\

Germany".

/

leo

J

1

160

/
/

/

150
140
ISO
120

no

100

/

150

t

\

/
/

J

V

/

140

/

1

1

t

\

\

•

•

/

1

/

N

/

/

/
1

^/

1

120
no

100

/
/

/

/

\

/

/

r

\.

/

/
/
/

/

/

N

\

-

s.

i

'/

**

90

■v

f

90

^v

y

1890 91 '92 93 94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol 'OE '03 '04 '05 'OG '07 "OS '09 1910.

252


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


V.  The  Volume  op  Foreign  Commerce

Table  59,  which  brings  together  the  grand  totals  of  foreign  commerce  for
our  four  countries  as  nearly  as  may  be  in  comparable  shape,  shows  that  in  this
branch  of  business  the  United  States  is  far  surpassed  by  the  United  Kingdom,
and  surpassed  also  by  Germany  in  volume  of  imports,  though  not  in  volume  of
exports.  Prance,  as  usual,  ranks  last.  Even  in  rate  of  increase  the  United
States  takes  second  place,  Germany  ranking  first,  England  third,  and  Prance
fourth. It  is  worthv  of  remark  that  in  each  of  the  countries  the  increase  of


TABLE  59
Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports  of  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  Prance,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-19]  1

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


United  States

A

United  Kingdom

France
Special  trade

Germ

Special

any
1  trade

TlATYIOCtl..

Year

Imports

exports

imports

exports

Imports

Exports

Imports

Exports

1890

823

858

1,732

1,282

856

724

990

792

1891

828

971

1,818

1,203

920

689

988

756

1892

841

938

1,749

1,106

808

668

956

703

1893

776

876

1,683

1,062

744

625

943

736

1894

676

825

1,706

1,051

743

594

937

705

1895

802

825

1,737

1,100

718

651

981

790

1896

682

1,006

1,876

1,169

733

656

1,025

839

1897

743

1,100

1,903

1,140

764

694

1,114

865

1898

635

1,256

1,995

1,136

863

678

1,209

894

1899

799

1,275

2,044

1,287

872

801

1,305

1,001

1900

829

1,478

2,238

1,417

907

793

1,372

1,098

1901

880

1,465

2,210

1,363

843

774

1,290

1,055

1902

969

1,361

2,251

1,379

848

821

1,340

1,113

1903

995

1,485

2,302

1,415

927

821

1,429

1,193

1904

1,036

1,451

2,340

1,463

869

859

1,512

i;243

1905

1,179

1,627

2,372

1,605

922

939

1,697

1,364

1906

1,321

1,798

2,545

1,828

1,086

1,016

1,909

1,513

1907

1,423

1,923

2,696

2,073

1,201

1,080

2,082

1,629

1908

1,116

1,753

2,498

1,835

1,089

975

1,824

1,523

1909

1,476

1,701

2,595

1,840

1,205

1,104

2,028

1,569

1910

1,563

1,829

2,796

2,094

1,384

1,203

2,126

1,779

1911

1,533

2,058

2,812

2,211

1,575*

1,191*

2,310

1,929

Averages

1890-99

760.5

993.0

1,824.3

1,153.6

802.1

678.0

1,044.8

808.1

1900-09

1,122.4

1,604.2

2,404.7

1,621.8

989.7

918.2

1,648.3

1,330.0

*  Provisional  figures

Figures  for  United  States  (calendar  years)  from  A.  P.  Andrew,  Statistics  for  the  United  States  (Publications  of  the  National
Monetary  Commission),  Senate  Document  no.  570,  61st  Congress,  3d  Session,  p.  10.  Figures  for  foreign  countries  compiled  from
the  (American)  Statistical  Abstract  for  Foreign  Uotintries,  1909,  pp.  21,  22,  and  42.  The  foreign  figures  for  1906-11  are  com-
puted from  tables  in  the  British,  IVench,  and  German  statistical  abstracts,  or  from  preliminary  reports  in  the  business  journals.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


253


Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports


TABLE  !y9— (Concluded)

OP  THE  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Yeabs,  1890-1911

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  1890-99  =  100


United  States

United  Kingdom

Net Domestic
imports exports

France
Special  trade

Gern
Specia

aany

Imports

Bomestic
exports

1  trade

Imports

Exports

Imports

Exports

1890

108

86

95

111

107

107

95

98

1891

109

98

100

104

115

102

95

94

1892

111

94

96

96

101

99

92

87

1893

102

88

92

92

93

92

90

91

1894

89

83

94

91

93

88

90

87

1895

105

83

95

95

90

96

94

98

1896

90

101

103

101

91

97

98

104

1897

98

111

104

99

95

102

107

107

1898

88

126

109

98

108

100

116

111

1899

105

128

112

112

109

118

125

124

1900

109

149

123

123

113

117

131

136

1901

116

148

121

118

105

114

123

131

1902

127

137

123

120

106

121

128

138

1903

131

150

126

123

116

121

137

148

1904

136

146

128

127

108

127

145

154

1905

155

164

130

139

115

138

162

169

1906

174

181

140

158

135

150

183

187

1907

187

194

148

180

150

159

199

202

1908

147

177

137

159

136

144

175

188

1909

194

171

142

160

150

163

194

194

1910

206

184

153

182

173

177

203

220

1911

202

207

154

192

196*

176*

221

239

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

148

162

132

141

123

135

158

165

*  Provisional  figures.

exports  has  exceeded  that  of  hnports.  Every  year  the  United  States  has  so-
called  favorable  balances  of  trade,  while  the  European  countries,  except  Prance
in  1905,  have  unfavorable  balances.

The  close' dependence  of  the  pecuniary  volume  of  foreign  trade  upon  business
cycles  is  stamped  upon  this  table.  Both  imports  and  exports  rise  in  years  of
prosperity,  and  both  decline  in  years  of  depression.  A  few  exceptions  to  this
rule  are  brought  about  by  causes  not  originating  in  the  world  of  business.  For
example,  1891  was  a  dull  year,  yet  imports  increased  in  Europe  and  exports
in  the  United  States,  because  of  the  short  European  and  abundant  American
harvests;  1897  and  the  first  half  of  1898  was  a  period  of  business  revival  in
England,  yet  British  exports  declined  a  little  because  of  famine  in  India,


254


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


1890 91 '92 '93 '94 95 'SG '97 '38 '99 1900  'o I '02 '03 '04 "05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910 'll


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


255


CHART 39.

•

Relative  Exports  of  Merchandise  from  the

•

210

•
•

United  5tates.  United  Kingdom  ,  France  ,  and  Germany.

1
•

•
•
•

1

1890  -  1911.

•

•
•

■

fl
• /

I •

190

United  States.

•

1 #

.'

/

170
160
130
140

United  Kingdom.

•
•

\

>

t

180
170
160
150
140

•  — '^'-^

France.
Germany.

• /

1
1

f
f

; \

\
\
\

\

//
//
f  1

•
•

•
• i

'

f
/

/

f
/

\
\
\

\

/

1

t

/

1 /

1

1
1
1

/

•

/

♦

\

•

\

'7
/

1

\

/

^

it

!/

r."

•
1

130
120
no

100

so

•

•
•

i

i

I

f

130
120
110
100
90

/

•

•
•

•

*

\

^-

J

•
f

f

/

/

•

r

>

/

\
A.

I

a
i!

•••/

^

S-

'''4

•

1

*

.A

^

»

1

IB90 "91 92 '93 '94 '95 '9G '97 '98 '99 1900*01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910 'h

256  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

drought  in  South  Africa,  poor  crops  and  political  unrest  in  South  America,  the
Dingley  tariff  in  the  United  States,  the  Spanish-American  War,  and  the
Fashoda  incident;"  two  of  these  same  factors — the  Dingley  tariff  and  the
Spanish  War — were  chiefly  responsible  for  the  decline  of  imports  into  the
United  States  in  the  prosperous  year  1898,  etc.  Apparent  exceptions  to  the
rule  may  also  be  brought  about  by  a  difference  in  the  coiirse  of  business  in
different  countries.  Thus  in  1901,  when  Europe  was  visited  by  depression,
both  imports  and  exports  declined;  while  the  United  States,  still  prosperous,
increased  its  imports,  but  suffered  a  decline  of  exports,  because  its  leading
customers  bought  less  freely.

This  case  suggests  a  difference  in  the  character  of  the  relation  borne  by
business  conditions  toward  imports  and  toAvard  exports.  Prosperity  at  home
tends  directly  to  increase  imports,  but  to  decrease  exports.  For  the  large
domestic  demand  and  the  rising  prices  which  accompany  prosperity  make  pro-
ducers less  dependent  upon  foreign  markets.  On  the  contrary,  while  depression
clearly  decreases  imports,  there  is  reason  to  expect  that  it  should  increase
exports.  For  the  lower  level  of  prices  at  home  and  the  reduced  domestic
demand  make  producers  more  eager  to  sell  goods  abroad.  Since  the  movement
of  exports  usually  contradicts  these  expectations,  the  reason  must  be  not  only
that  business  cycles  run  a  substantially  similar  course  in  countries  having
important  commercial  relations,  but  also  that  business  conditions  among  the
customer  nations  have  more  influence  upon  the  volume  of  exports  than  business
conditions  among  the  producers.

It  is  occasionally  said  that  prosperity  works  its  own  undoing  through  the
effects  it  produces  upon  foreign  commerce.  The  argmnent  is  that,  by  encour-
aging imports  and  discouraging  exports,  prosperity  reduces  a  favorable  and
augments  an  unfavorable  balance  of  trade  upon  merchandise  account,  and
therefore  tends  to  produce  an  outflow  of  gold.  In  turn,  the  latter  reduces  bank
reserves,  causes  a  restriction  of  credit,  and  so  brings  the  movement  of  expansion
to  a  close.

With  the  international  movements  of  gold  and  their  effects  upon  business
cycles,  we  are  not  yet  ready  to  deal.  But  it  is  pertinent  to  examine  the  relation
between  business  conditions  and  the  balance  of  trade  in  merchandise.  For
this  purpose,  the  excesses  of  exports  over  imports  or  of  imports  over  exports
have  been  computed  from  Table  59  and  set  down  in  Table  60.  The  figures  do
not  give  unequivocal  support  to  the  above  stated  theory.  For  example,  Eng-
land's excess  of  imports  was  greater  in  the  dull  years  1901-04  than  in  the  brisk
years  1905-07;  America's  excess  of  exports  rose  with  the  rise  of  prosperity
from  1904  to  1907;  France's  greatest  excess  of  imports  came  in  the  dull  years
1891  and  1911,  and  Germany's  excess  of  imports  declined  in  1899 — the  annus
ynirabilis.  But  the  cases  which  support  the  theory  are  more  numerous.  As  a
rule  the  excess  of  exports  in  America  has  fallen  at  the  culmination  of  a  period

11  See  the  Economist's  Commercial  History  and  Review  of  1897  and  1898.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


257


of  prosperity  and  risen  in  the  subsequent  period  of  depression.  Mutatis
mutandis,  the  rule  holds  good  also  for  France  and  Germany.  The  truth  seems
to  be  that  prosperity  in  a  given  country  does  stimulate  imports  and  check
exports ;  but  that  this  effect  is  often  offset  by  counter-influences,  such  as  fluctu-
ations in  the  harvest  and  business  conditions  among  customer  or  competitor
nations.

The  elaborate  form  in  which  statistics  of  foreign  trade  are  published  makes
it  possible  to  examine  the  influence  exercised  by  business  cycles  upon  exports


TABLE  60

Excess  of  Merchandise  Imports  Over  Exports  ( — )  or  or  Exports  Over  Imports  (-|-)  in  the  United  States,

United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany
By  Years,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Year
1890

United

States

+ 35

United
Kingdom

—450

France
—132

Germany
—198

1891

+143

—615

—231

—232

1892

+  97

—643

—140

—253

1893

+  100

—621

—119

—207

1894

+149

—655

—149

—232

1895

+ 23

—637

—  67

—191

1896

+324

—707

—  77

—186

1897

+357

—763

—  70

—249

1898

+  621

—859

—185

—315

1899

+476

—757

—  71

—304

1900

+  649

—821

—114

—274

1901

+585

—847

—  69

—235

1902

+392

•—872

—  27

—227

1903

+490

—887

—106

—236

1904

+415

—877

—  10

—269

1905

+448

—767

+  17

—333

1906

+477

—717

—  70

—396

1907

+500

—623

—121

—453

1908

+637

—663

—114

—301

1909

+225

—755

—101

—459

1910

+266

—702

—181

—347

1911

+525

—601

—384*

—381

Averages
1890-90

+232.5

—670.7

—124.1

—263.7

1900-09

+481.8

—782.9

—  71.5

—318.3

*  Provisional  figures.
Compiled  from  Table  59.

258


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


and  imports  in  great  detail.  It  will  suffice  for  present  purposes  to  take  the
three  grand  divisions  under  which  exports  and  imports  of  merchandise  are
classified:  foodstuffs,  raw  materials,  and  manufactured  goods/^

Tables  61  and  62  show  that  the  correlation  between  business  conditions  and
imports  and  exports  of  foodstuffs  is  far  from  close. Whether  the  changes  from


TABLE  61

Relative  Imports  op  Foodstuffs,  Raw  Materials,  and  Manufactured  Products  Into  the  United  States,

France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911

Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Average

actual

amounts

Foodstuffs

Raw  materials

Mar

lufactured  i

:oods

United
States

France

Germany

United
States

France

Germany

United
States

France

Germany

1890-99

261.6

237.1

361.8

185.5

446.0

457.3

303.8

119.1

225.4

1900-09

266.6

171.4

511.0

357.3

637.4

843.9

456.1

181.2

293.5

Tear

1890

100

118

92

92

103

92

115

100

104

1891

114

135

100

99

106

90

117

108

95

1892

120

114

99

101

94

86

104

100

90

1893

109

86

87

113

96

91

120

91

95

1894

110

98

95

70

91

87

76

89

88

1895

95

84

91

98

91

94

97

95

98

1896

95

82

97

107

94

98

108

100

99

1897

99

84

106

106

100

109

101

99

102

1898

73

123

120

102

102

117

76-

100

107

1899

85

77

114

113

123

136

86

118

121

1900

88

67

116

149

131

146

111

137

127

1901

90

64

125

134

122

128

110

125

112

1902

83

67

130

163

121

133

125

126

116

1903

90

78

128

178

131

148

149

133

128

1904

96

66

129

173

123

165

136

135

129

1905

111

67

154

210

13^

180

142

141

140

1906

105

77

153

224

160

229

174

162

137

1907

118

84

161

257

174

256

210

190

147

1908

112

76

149

196

155

216

174

181

131

1909

126

77

168

243

178

244

171

191

135

1910

125

115

163

305

188

265

215

229

144

1911

135

162*

197

276

201*

274

214

248*

152

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

102

72

141

193

143'

185

150

152

130

*  Provisional  figures.

Compiled  from  data  in  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries. The  American  figures  are  for  years  ending  June  30.


12  Great  Britain  is  excluded  from  the  following  comparisons,  because  I  have  not  found  the  threefold
classification  carried  back  to  1890  in  the  available  documents.  To  make  the  fivefold  American  classification
correspond  as  closely  as  may  be  with  the  less  detailed  French  and  German  tables,  I  have  combined  crude
with  manufactured  foodstuffs,  and  "manufactures  for  further  use  in  manufacturing"  with  "manufactures
ready  for  consumption. ' '  Since  these  American  figures  are  for  fiscal  years,  they  do  not  tally  with  the  Amer-
ican figures  for  calendar  years  in  Table  59.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


259


year  to  year  or  from  decade  to  decade  be  examined,  it  appears  that  international
trade  in  food  is  controlled  quite  as  much  by  the  harvests  as  by  the  alternations
of  business  activity  and  stagnation.  But  these  figures  do  throw  light  upon  the
general  trend  of  economic  development  in  the  three  countries.  Prance  has
become  distinctly  less  and  Germany  distinctly  more  dependent  upon  foreign
supplies  of  food  since  1890,  while  American  imports  of  this  character  have
increased  but  a  trifle,  despite  the  rapid  growth  of  population.


TABLE  62

Relative  Exports  or  Eoodstuffs,  Baw  Materials,  and  Manufactured  Products  Prom  the  United  States,

France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911

Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Average

actual

amounts

Foodstuffs

A

Raw  materials

A

Manufactured  goods

United
States

France

Germany

United
States

France

Germany

United
States

France

Germany

1890-99

419.6

137.1

106.8

286.7

171.5

179.6

241.1

369.5

521.3

1900-09

499.4

142.6

127.9

461.4

251.6

325.3

585.5

524.7

876.8

Year

1890

85

120

105

106

101

94

74

105

98

1891

79

114

98

121

94

91

78

101

93

1892

122

107

82

110

93

84

76

98

89

1893

95

100

95

86

88

89

74

91

91

1894

91

94

92

96

85

89

84

87

86

1895

76

83

93

92

98

96

85

100

99

1896

83

92

101

88

94

102

107

100

105

1897

99

102

115

104

106

108

129

101

105

1898

141

93

112

100

105

113

135

100

109

1899

128

95

107

97

136

135

158

118

124

1900

130

108

115

114

122

147

201

118

136

1901

139

105

101

139

115

144

193

117

132

1902

122

100

95

130

132

154

188

124

141

1903

121

93

114

143

132

162

194

126

150

1904

106

98

117

161

137

167

217

133

157

1905

96

110

113

165

151

186

253

144

174

1906

125

100

128

175

166

198

285

161

196

1907

122

105

123

207

170

219

307

175

212

1908

124

105

142

194

151

209

311

155

191

1909

104

116

150

182

191

226

278

167

192

1910

88

121

170

197

217

254

318

180

219

1911

92

102*

178

249

216*

269

376

184*

241

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

119

104

120

161

147

181

243

142

168

*  Provisional  figures.

Compiled  from  data  in  the  statistical  abstracts  of  tbe  several  countries. The  American  figures  are  for  years  ending  June  30,


260


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


261


Chart

41.

210

Relative:  Imports  of  Manufactured  Goods  into  the

^

/J

United  States  ,  France  ,  and  Germany
1890  -1910.

/

\

11

ll

200

\

ll

1 1

/

\

t

f  /

190
180

/

/
/
/

France.

1

\

Germany.

ii

^

170

1
1

160

1

1

1

160

/  f

ll
ll
ll

150

1  "in

140

\

A

•

i

•

/40

130
120

■

/  /

\

•

••••..

•
•
•

•

■

•

•

•

•

130
420

/

/..
/.♦

•
•
•

7

•


^

V

/

•

'

•

••

/■'

110
100
90
80

\

/

1

r

no

100
90
80

/
.  /
V

\

/

1

/

)>

■/

/
/

•
■
•

\

•

1
•  1

yj

/

/

ic!

re

eT

^

^

\

\

/

/

(

wl

to'

36

m

1

)

'

\

/

\

^

0

^

/

1890  '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'oi '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 'OS

1910

262


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


The  fairly  close  correspondence  established  by  Table  59  between  the  volume
of  foreign  commerce  and  business  cycles  is  confined  almost  wholly  to  imports
and  exports  of  raw  materials  and  manufactured  goods.  Occasional  breaks  in
the  parallelism  are  caused  by  changes  in  tariffs,  by  wars,  by  the  influence  of
crops  on  purchasing  power,  and  other  factors  not  directly  connected  with  busi-
ness activity ;  but,  as  a  rule,  imports  rise  when  times  are  good  at  home,  exports
rise  when  times  are  good  abroad,  and  vice  versa.

The  chief  purpose  of  the  next  table  is  to  show  that  these  classes  of  com-
modities which  do  fluctuate  in  harmony  with  business  cycles  make  a  smaller
proportion  of  American  than  of  foreign  trade.  Particularly  as  an  exporter,
America  deals  more  largely  in  foodstuffs  than  France  or  Germany.  On  the
other  hand,  more  than  half  of  the  French  and  German  exports  consist  of  manu-
factured goods."  Conversely,  among  imports,  manufactured  goods  take  the
lead  in  America,  raw  materials  in  France  and  Germanj^"

An  exaggerated  idea  of  the  relative  magnitude  of  foreign  as  compared  with
domestic  trade  is  made  by  the  fullness  of  the  statistics  for  the  former  and  the
scantiness  of  the  statistics  for  the  latter.  Lacking  records  for  the  value  of
goods  bought  and  sold  in  interior  markets,  we  are  unduly  impressed  by  the
imposing  totals  of  imports  and  exports  furnished  by  the  customs  houses. But


TABLE  63

Analysis  of  the  Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports  of  the  United  States,  France,  and  Germany,  by

Decades,  1890-1909

Imports

Average  actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars
K

United  States France Germany
^ K ^  ^ A A

1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09

Foodstuffs  261.6  266.6  237.1  171.4  361.8  511.0

Baw  materials  185.5  357.3  446.0  637.4  457.3  843.9

Manufactured  goods 303.8  456.1  119.1  181.2  225.4  293.5

Total 750.9  1,080.0  802.2  990.0  1,044.5  1,648.4

Relative  amounts

Total  actual  amounts  =  100

^ A ___^

United  States  Prance  Germany

' ' < , * , , ' ,

1890-99 1900-09 1890-99 1900-09 1890-99 1900-09

Foodstuffs  34.8%  24.7%  29.6%  17.3%  34.6%  31.0%

Eaw  materials 24.7  33.1  55.6  64.4  43.8  51.2

Manufactured  goods  40.5  42.2  14.8  18.3  21.6  17.8

Total  100.0  100.0  100.0  100.0 . 100.0  lOO.O

13  The  United  States,  however,  has  been  making  rapid  progress  in  the  exports  of  manufactured  goods so
that  in  the  second  decade  this  class-  of  merchandise  exceeded  foodstuffs  in  value.

14  Certain  slight  discrepancies — less  than  $1,000,000  in  all  cases — may  be  noted  between  the  decennial  aver-
ages for  France  and  for  Germany  in  tables  59  and  63.

The  large  American  imports  of  foodstuffs  consist  chiefly  of  such  articles  as  sugar,  coffee,  tea,  tobacco,  fruits
and  nuts,  etc.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


263


TABLE  6S— (Concluded)

Analysis  op  the  Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports  of  the  United  States,  Prance,  and  Germany,  by

Decades,  1890-1909

Exports

Average  actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars

, A .

r  ^

United  States Prance Germany
A > _A

1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09

Foodstufes  419.6  499.4  137.1  142.6  106.8  127.9

Eaw  materials  286.7  461.4  171.5  251.6  179.6  325.3

Manufactured  goods  241.1  585.5  369.5  524.7  521.3  876.8

Total  947.4  1,546.3  678.1  918.9  807.7  1,330.0

Relative  amounts
Total  actual  amounts  =  100

A

United  States ' Prance Germany
^\_ > A

1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09  1890-99  1900-09

Foodstuflfs  44.3%  32.3%  20.2%  15.5%  13.2%  9.6%

Eaw  materials  30.3  29.8  25.3  27.4  22.2  24.5

Manufactured  goods  25.4  37.9  54.5  57.1  64.6  65.9

Total  100.0  100.0  100.0  100.0  100.0  100.0

Compiled  from  data  in  the  statistical  abstracts  of  the  several  countries. The  American  figures  are  for  years  ending  June  30.
An  error  in  the  Prench  figures  for  imports  of  raw  materials  in  1897  has  been  corrected.  "


an  effort  to  cast  up  corresponding  totals  for  domestic  trade  shows  that  it  must
be  vastly  greater  in  volume.  Professor  Irving  Fisher's  computations  for  1909
make  the  aggregate  imports  and  exports  of  the  United  States  "a  paltry  3
billions  as  compared  with  a  total  national  trade  of  387  billions.'"'  Rough  as
are  certain  elements  in  this  estimate,  no  plausible  changes  in  the  figures  could
make  the  foreign  trade  equal  2  per  cent  of  the  domestic  trade.  For  the  other
three  countries  we  have  no  corresponding  data;  but  the  relative  proportion  of
foreign  to  total  trade  is  certainly  considerably  larger  in  Great  Britain  and
Germany  than  in  the  United  States,  and  probably  somewhat  larger  in  France.
In  none  of  these  countries,  however,  can  the  foreign  trade  make  5  per  cent  of
the  domestic  trade.  For  example,  if  British  imports  and  exports  were  fully
double,  and  if  British  domestic  trade  were  only  half  the  American,  still,  on  the
basis  of  Fischer's  estimate,  the  foreign  commerce  of  Great  Britain  would  not
equal  4  per  cent  of  her  total  business.

Accordingly,  the  statistics  of  foreign  trade  which  have  been  presented  are
imBortant  for  present  purposes,  less  because  of  the  magnitude  of  foreign  trade
itself  than  because  changes  in  the  volume  of  imports  and  exports  reflect  changes
in  the  volume  of  domestic  business  at  home  and  abroad.  The  figures  of  chief
value  in  this  respect  have  been  shown  to  be,  not  the  grand  totals,  but  the  data
concerning  the  imports  and  exports  of  raw  materials  and  manufactured  goods.

15  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  p.  306.


264


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


VI.  The  Volume  of  G-oods  Consumed

The  many  efforts  made  to  account  for  crises  as  a  result  of  under-consumption
lend  interest  to  the  estimates  of  per  capita  consumption  of  staple  commodities.
But  unfortunately  the  statistics  concerning  this  subject  provided  by  official
bureaus  are  not  very  useful.

The  chief  difficulty  is  that  the  figures  do  not  really  show  the  quantity  of
goods  consumed,  but  the  supply  made  available  for  consumption.  The  tacit
assumption  that  a  nation  does  use  up  within  each  year  substantially  the  quantity
of  wheat  and  corn,  tea  and  coffee,  provided  by  its  farmers  and  merchants  is  of
exceedingly  doubtful  validity.  For  example,  "if  the  American  statistics  may
be  trusted,  there  was  a  notable  decline  in  consumption  between  the  fiscal  years
1897  and  1898.  Table  64  shows  that  in  the  latter  year  the  average  inhabitant
economized  to  the  extent  of  31  pounds  of  sugar,  10  ounces  of  tea,  and  3  pounds
of  wool. The  fact  is  that  extraordinarily  large  quantities  of  these  commodities


TABLE

64

Pee  Capita

UONSUMPTION OF  NiNE COMMODITIES IN THE

United  States

By  Years,  1890-1909

Actual

amounts

Years
ending
June  30

Wlieat  and

wheat  flour

Bushels

Corn  and
corn  meal
Bushels

Sugar
Pounds

Coffee
Pounds

Tea
Pounds

Distilled

spirits

Pf.  gallons

Malt
liquors
Gallons

Wines
Gallons

Raw

wool

Pounds

1890

6.09

32.09

51.00

7.83

1.33

1.40

13.67

.46

6.03

1891

4.59

22.84

60.70

8.00

1.29

1.43

14.84

.46

6.44

1892

5.94

30.48

60.22

9.67

1.38

1.49

15.24

.43

6.75

1893

4.89

23.83

64.24

8.31

1.32

1.52

16.19

.48

7.10

1894

3.44

22.96

72.99

8.30

1.36

1.34

15.32

.32

5.13

1895

4.59

17.18

62.69

9.33

1.40

1.14

15.13

.30

7.39

1896

4.85

29.18

63.98

8.11

1.33

1.01

15.85

.27

6.98

1897

3.95

29.40

78.20

10.12

1.58

1.02

14.94

.53

8.40

1898

4.29

23.19

47.55

11.68

.93

1.12

15.96

.28

5.44

1899

6.09

23.51

61.98

10.79

.98

1.18

15.30

.35

4.51

1900

4.74

24.44

58.68

9.81

1.09

1.28

16.02

.39

5.72

1901

3.95

24.77

71.92

10.48

1.14

1.33

16.22

.37

5.18

1902

6.50

18.92

63.53

13.42

.94

1.36

17.50

.63

6.07

1903

5.81

30.45

79.38

10.91

1.30

1.46

18.04

.48

5.74

1904

6.33

26.74

69.26

11.79

1.34

1.48

18.34

.53

5.66

1905

6.15

28.59

72.47

12.17

1.23

1.45

18.50

.42

6.52

1906

7.07

30.73

77.07

9.94

1.10

1.52

20.19

.55

5.88

1907

6.86

33.11

82.61

11.40

.99

1.63

21.24

.67

5.81

1908

5.41

29.11

75.61

10.07

1.07

1.44

20.98

.60

4.95

1909

6.22

29.71

82.24

11.74

1.29

1.37

19.79

.70

6.67

Averages

1890-99

4.872

25.466

62.355

9.214

1.29

1.265

15.244

.388

6.417

1900-09

5.904

27.657

73.277

11.173

1.149

1.432

18.682

.534

5.820

Compiled  from  the  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United  States,  1909.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


265


TABLE  6^— (Concluded)

Per  Capita  Consumption  op  Nine  Commodities  in  the  United  States

By  Yeaes,  1890-1909


•

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  1890-99  =  100

ending Wheat  and
June  80 wheat  flour

Corn  and
corn  meal

Sugar

Coffee

Tea

Distilled
spirits

Malt
liquors

Wines

Eaw
wool

1890

125

126

82

85

103

111

90

119

94

1891

94

90

97

87

100

113

97

119

100

1892

122

120

97

105

107

118

100

111

105

1893

100

94

103

90

102

120

106

124

111

1894

71

90

117

90

105

106

100

82

80

1895

94

67

101

101

109

90

99

77

115

1896

100

115

103

88

103

80

104

70

109

1897

81

115

125

110

122

81

98

137

131

1898

88

91

76

127

72

89

105

72

85

1899

125

92

99

117

76

93

100

90

70

1900

97

96

94

106

85

101

105

101

89

1901

81

97

115

114

88

105

106

95

81

1902

133

74

102

146

73

108

115

162

95

1903

119

120

127

118

101

115

118

124

89

1904

130

105

111

128

104

117

120

137

88

1905

126

112

116

132

95

115

121

108

102

1906

145

121

124

108

85

120

132

142

92

1907

141

130

132

124

77

129

139

173

91

1908

111

114

121

109

83

114

138

155

77

1909

128

117

132

127

100

108

130

180

104

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

121

109

117

121

89

113

122

138

91

were  rushed  to  American  ports  in  the  fiscal  year  1897  and  early  in  1898,  in
order  to  avoid  the  increased  duties  about  to  be  levied  under  the  Dingley  tariff.
Later,  these  large  stocks,  piled  up  in  warehouses,  made  it  possible  to  supply
the  market  for  many  months  without  new  importations.  There  is  no  ground
for  thinking  that  consumption  was  so  large  as  the  fresh  supplies  provided  in
1897,  or  so  small  as  the  fresh  supplies  provided  in  1898.

The  American  figures  for  wheat  and  corn  are  made  by  deducting  the  net
exports  from  the  standard  crop,  and  dividing  the  remainder  by  the  number  of
the  population."  No  account  is  taken  of  the  stock  on  hand  at  the  beginning
of  the  year,  or  of  the  stock  carried  over  for  use  in  the  year  following.  Thus,
the  infiuence  of  commerce  in  moderating  the  irregularity  of  current  production,
by  collecting  stocks  in  seasons  of  abundance  and  distributing  the  store  in  seasons

16  See  the  Statistical  Abstract,  1909,  pp.  585,  586.


266


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  65

Peb  Capita  Consumption  or  Six  Commodities  in  the  United  Kingdom


Actual  amounts

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =

100

Coffiee
Pounds

Tea
Pounds

Wine
Gallons

Spirits  prf.
Gallons

Beer
Gallons

Tobacco
Pounds

Year :

Coffee

Tea

Wine

Spirits

Beer

Tobacco

1890

0.75

5.17

0.40

1.02

30.00

1.55

106

93

103

100

98

92

1891

0.76

5.35

0.39

1.04

30.16

1.61

107

96

101

102

99

95

1892

0.74

5.43

0.38

1.03

29.75

1.64

105

97

98

101

98

97

1893

0.69

5.40

0.37

0.98

29.55

1.62

97

97

96

96

97

96

1894

0.68

5.51

0.35

0.97

29.41

1.66

96

99

90

95

96

98

1895

0.70

5.65

0.37

1.00

29.58

1.66

99

101

96

98

97

98

1896

0.69

5.75

0.40

1.01

30.79

1.72

97

103

103

99

101

102

1897

0.68

5.79

0.39

1.02

31.29

1.75

96

104

101

100

103

103

1898

0.68

5.83

0.41

1.03

31.76

1.82

96

104

106

101

104

108

1899

0.71

5.95

0.41

1.09

32.53

1.88

100

107

106

107

107

111

1900

0.71

6.07

0.38

1.12

31.56

1.95

100

io9

98

110

104

115

1901

0.76

6.16

0.37

1.09

30.77

1.89

107

110

96

107

101

112

1902

0.68

6.06

0.36

1.05

30.24

1.92

96

109

93

103

99

114

1903

0.71

6.03

0.33

0.99

29.69

1.93

100

108

85

97

97

114

1904

0.67

5.99

0.28

0.95

28.79

1.95

95

107

72

93

94

115

1905

0.67

5.99

0.28

0.91

27.70

1.96

95

107

72

89

91

116

1906

0.66

6.17

0.28

0.90

27.97

1.97

93

111

72

88

92

116

1907

0.66

6.21

0.28

0.91

27.58

2.03

93

111

72

89

90

120

1908

0.66

6.18

0.25

0.85

26.62

2.02

93

111

65

83

87

119

1909

0.66

6.30

0.25

0.69

25.83

1.95

93

113

65

68

85

115

Average!

i

1890-99

0.708

5.583

0.387

1.019

30.482

1.691

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

0.684

6.116

0.306

.946

28.675

1.957

97

110

79

93

94

116

ata  from

the  Statistical  Abstract  of

the  United  Kingdom.

of  scarcity,  is  neglected.  Similarly,  the  figures  for  wine  have  little  value  except
as  showing  the  fluctuating  yields  from  season  to  season,  and  as  indicating  a
growing  taste  for  this  beverage.^^

Indeed,  the  only  American  estimates  of  consumption  of  value  to  the  student
of  business  cycles  are  the  figures  for  spirituous  liquors  and  beer.  The  impo-
sition of  stamp  taxes  enables  the  Commissioner  of  Internal  Revenue  to  deter-
mine with  substantial  accuracy  the  quantity  sold  each  season.'*  Even  these
figures  are  made  rather  irregular  by  changes  in  the  rates  of  taxation  and  in  the
prohibition  laws.  Further,  the  considerable  factor  of  growth  blurs  the  effect
of  business  cycles.  Nevertheless  both  series,  as  given  in  Table  64,  show  a  rough
correlation  with  business  conditions,  falling  or  rising  slowly  in  hard  times,
rising  more  rapidly  in  good  times.


597.


IT  The  domestic  production  of  wine,  minus  exports,  is  nowadays  six  times  the  volume  of  imports. Hid.,  p.


18  Hid.,  p.  597,  note  2.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


267


TABLE  66

Per  Capita  Consumption  op  Six

Commodities  in

France

Actual  amounts

Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =
Relative  amounts

100

Sugar
Pounds

26.24

Coffee
Pounds

3.90

Cocoa
Pounds

0.81

Wine
Gallons
24.82

Spirits
Gallons

1.15

Beer^
Gallons

5.81

Year
1890

Sugar
104

Coffee
93

Cocoa
92

Wine
85

Spirits
100

Beer
93

1891

26.02

4.03

0.83

27.98

1.15

5.81

103

96

94

96

100

93

1892

27.12

4.13

0.84

25.61

1.20

6.34

108

98

95

88

105

102

1893

24.26

3.96

0.82

37.75

1.14

6.34

96

94

93

130

99

102

1894

26.02

4.01

0.85

29.04

1.07

5.81

103

95

96

100

93

93

1895

26.68

4.15

0.87

21.91

1.07

6.07

106

99

99

75

93

97

1896

23.59

4.30

0.90

35.11

1.11

6.34

94

102

102

120

99

102

1897

22.93

4.42

0.92

25.87

1.13

6.34

91

105

104

89

99

102

1898

24.26

4.52

0.99

26.40

1.24

6.60

96

107

112

91

108

106

1899

24.92

4.64

1.00

36.96

1.21

6.86

99

110

113

127

105

110

1900

25.80

4.67

0.99

47.52

1.23

7.13

102

111

112

163

107

114

1901

24.03

4.89

1.04

40.39

0.93

9.77

95

116

118

139

81

157

1902

26.02

4.99

1.10

28.51

0.86

9.77

103

119

125

98

75

157

1903

29.77

6.31

1.17

26.40

0.93

9.24

118

150

133

91

81

148

1904

33.30

4.30

1.22

48.05

1.03

9.77

132

102

138

165

90

157

1905

29.99

5.12

1.22

40.13

0.94

8.98

119

122

138

138

82

144

1906

32.63

5.49

1.31

37.49

0.94

9.77

129

131

148

129

82

157

1907

32.85

5.71

1.30

46.46

0.87

9.50

130

136

147

159

76

152

1908

33.52

5.77

1.14

43.82

0.91

10.03

133

137

129

150

79

161

1909

34.62

6.02

1.30

39.34

0.91

10.03

137

143

147

135

79

161

Averages
1890-99

25.204

4.206

0.8'83

29.145

1.147

6.232

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

30.253

5.327

1.179

39.811

0.955

9.399

120

127

134

137

83

151

Data  from  the  Annuaire  statistigue  de  France.


The  British  statistics  in  Table  65  are  more  regular  and  more  significant  than
the  American.  But  again,  changing  habits  of  consumption  mask  part  of  the
influence  of  business  conditions.  Since  1890  the  British  have  been  using  more
tea  and  less  coffee,  while  the  opposite  is  true  of  Americans.  Further,  the
British  consumption  of  wine,  spirits,  and  beer  has  declined,  while  the  American
consumption  has  risen.  There  are  indications,  however,  that  business  pros-
perity tends  to  check  a  decline  and  to  stimulate  a  growth  in  consumption,  while
business  depression  has  the  opposite  tendencies.

Finally,  the  French  figures  (Table  66)  are  almost  as  irregular  as  the  Amer-
ican. Sugar  and  wine  refiect  the  fortunes  of  French  agriculture ;  coffee  shows
an  extraordinary  jump  in  1903  and  decline  in  1904 ;  beer  appears  to  be  affected
by  the  abundance  or  scarcity  of  wine  and  has  a  very  high  factor  of  growth
which  may  well  result  from  the  diminishing  use  of  spirits ;  filially,  cocoa,  like
beer,  seems  to  be  used  partly  as  a  substitute  for  wine,  but  nevertheless  shows
a  rough  correlation  with  business  cycles.


268  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


VII.  Unemployment

Another  aspect  of  the  volume  of  business  is  shown  by  the  statistics  of
unemployment.  Unfortunately,  systematic  information  upon  this  subject  is
exceedingly  meagre  in  the  United  States.  The  Geological  Survey  reports
annually  the  average  number  of  days  in  which  the  bituminous  and  anthracite
coal  mines  are  operated;  but  we  have  data  covering  no  other  industry  in  each
year  since  1890.'''  Of  these  two  series,  that  for  bituminous  mines  is  the  more
significant,  because  less  affected  by  serious  strikes.  The  figures  reflect  the
decline  of  business  activity  after  the  panic  of  1893,  the  brief  revival  of  1895,
the  sustained  revival  after  1896,  the  depression  of  1903-04,  the  fresh  revival  of
1905-07,  and  the  depression  of  1908.


TABLE  67

Average  Number  op  Days  in  Which  the  Coal  Mines  of  the  United  States  Were  Operated

By  Years,  1890-1908

Relative  number  of  days
Actual  number  of  Average  actual  number  in

days  1890-99  =  100


Anthracite Bituminous Anthracite  Bituminous

Year  mines  mines  mines  mines

1890  200  226  109  109

1891  203  223  111  108

1892  198  219  108  106

1893  197  204  107  99

1894  190  171  104  83

1895  196  194  107  94

1896  174  192  95  93

1897  150  196  82  95

1898  152  211  83  102

1899  173  234  94  113

1900  166  234  91  113

1901  196  225  107  109

1902  116  230  63  111

1903  206  225  112  109

1904  200  202  109  98

1905  215  211  117  102

1906  195  213  106  103

1907  220  234  120  113

1908  200  193  109  93

Averages

1890-99  183.3  207.0  100  100

Compiled  from  the  reports  of  the  U.  S.  Geological  Survey  on  Mineral  Resources  of  the  United  States,  1908,  Part  II,  p.  41.

18  See  Scott  Nearing,  "The  Extent  of  Unemployment  in  the  United  States,"  Quarterly  PuTjlications  of  the

American Statistical Association, September, 1909; vol.  xi, pp. 525-542; "Statistics of Unemployment  "

Bulletin  of  the  United  States  Bureau  of  Labor,  No.  109,  October  15,  1912. '


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


269


CHART 4-2

Relative  Number  of  Days  in  Which  the  Coal  Mines  of  the:  United  States  were  OFtRATED.

IS90  -1908.

120
110
100
90

—  —  —  —  — Bituminous  Mines.

120
110
100
90

.^

V

/
/

—  —

\

X

l"'

'  ^

N

/

\

\

<z^

-^i;

\
\
\

\

\

y

\

/

/
/
/

/

\

\
\

\
\

•

\

1/

1

\ \

\
1
\

\

>

\
X

/
/

\

\"

/

1

\

/

\

•

\

\
\

\

\
I

/

/
/

\

1

80
70

\

/

no

70

185

0 '9

'95

! '9

> '3

^  '9.

f '9

;  '9-

'91

i '9'

3 I9t

)0  'o

'02 "O

i '0^

1- 'Of

> 'ot

; '07 '08 '0£

) 1910

In  England  the  trade-unions  which  pay  unemployed  benefits  report  to  the
Labor  Department  the  percentage  of  their  members  receiving  such  aid  on  the
last  day  of  each  month.'"  These  reports  have  made  possible  the  admirable
British  statistics  of  unemployment.  While  the  returns  are  far  from  covering
the  whole  field  of  industry,  they  are  sufficiently  inclusive  in  their  scope  "to
make  the  movements  of  the  general  unemployed  percentage  over  a  period  of
years  fairly  representative  of  labour  conditions  as  a  whole.'"'  Table  68  shows
this  general  percentage,  the  percentages  for  several  trades  separately,  and  the
official  index  numbers  of  employment.  For  convenience  of  comparison,  the
corresponding  series  showing  the  percentage  of  members  out  of  work  among
the  reporting  French  unions  is  inserted  in  the  same  table.

The  British  series  indicates  that  work  was  plentiful  in  1890.  Thereafter
times  grew  steadily  worse  for  wage-earners  until  1893-94,  then  better  until
1899,  worse  again  until  1904,  better  once  more  until  1906,  worse  until  1908,  and
finally  better  again  in  1910-11.  That  is,  the  fluctuations  of  unemployment
accord  almost  perfectly  with  reports  of  business  conditions  published  by  the


20  "Persons  on  strike  or  locked  out,  siek  or  superannuated,  are  excluded  from  the  figures."
Btract  of  Labour  Statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom,  1906-07,  p.  3,  note.

21  W.  H.  Beveridge,  Unemployment  (London,  1909),  pp.  22,  23.


Twelfth  Ab-


270  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Economist.  The  maximum  swing  from  tlie  best  to  the  worst  years  is  5.5  per
cent  of  the  membership  of  the  reporting  unions  in  1890-99  and  5.3  per  cent  of
the  membership  in  1900-09.

The  French  figures  run  upon  a  higher  level  than  the  British ;  but  that  fact
possesses  little  significance  because  of  differences  in  the  trades  represented.
The  series  does  not  begin  until  recovery  from  the  depression  of  the  early  nineties
was  under  way.  A  fairly  stable  level  of  employment  is  indicated  until  1900.
But  the  crisis  of  that  year  was  followed  by  hard  times  and  involuntary  idleness
increased  among  workingmen  until  1904.  The  tide  turned  in  1905;  1906  and
1907  were  busy  years,  and  even  the  depression  of  1908  was  less  severe  than  that
of  1902-04  if  this  gauge  may  be  trusted.^^

TABLE  68

Statistics  of  Unemployment  in  the  United  Bjngdom  and  France

United  Kingdom  France

Index  Percentages  unemployed  in  certain  industries  r ^ -^

number  of  ^ -^ ^ Percentage

employment  All  unions  All  other  unemployed

Average  included Engineering, Woodworking Printing  trades among

of  1890-  in  the shipbuilding, and and  included  in members  of

Year 99  =  100  returns and  metal Building furnishing bookbinding  the  returns  trade  unions

1890  102  2.1 2.2 2.2 2.5 2.2  1.6

1891  101  3.5  4.1  1.9  2.1  4.0  1.7

1892  98  6.3  7.7  3.1  3.8  4.3  5.6

1893  97  7.5  11.4  3.1  4.1  4.1  2.6

1894  97  6.9  11.2  4.3  4.4  5.7  1.9

1895  98  5.8  8.2  4.4  3.6  4.9  3.3 7.0

1896  101  3.3  4.2  1.3  2.0  4.3  2.3  6.7

1897  101  3.3  4.8  1.2  2.2  3.9  1.8  6.9

1898  102  2.8  4.0  0.9  2.3  3.7  1.5  7.3

1899  102  2.0  2.4  1.2  2.1  3.9  1.2  6.6

1900  102  2.5  2.6  2.6  2.8  4.2  1.6  6.8

1901  101  3.3  3.8  3.9  3.7  4.5  2.1  7.8

1902  100  4.0  5.5  4.0  4.1  ' 4.6  1.9  9.9

1903  99  4.7  6.6  4.4  4.7  4.4  2.5  9.4

1904  98  6.0  8.4  7.3  6.8  4.7  3.0  10.2

1905  99  5.0  6.6  8.0  5.8  5.1  2.3  9.0

1906  101  3.6  4.1  6.9  4.8  4.5  1.9  7.6

1907  101  3.7  4.9  7.3  4.6  4.3  1.6  7.0

1908  96  7.8  12.5  11.6  8.3  5.5  2.9  8.6

1909  96  7.7  13.0  11.7  7.6  5.6  2.6  7.3

1910  99  4.7  6.8  8.3  5.4  4.9  2.2  5.8

1911  101  3.0  3.4  4.2  3.3  5.1  2.1  4.7

Averages

1890-99  100  4.35  6.02  2.36  2.91  4.10  2.35

1900-09  99  4.83  6.80  6.77  5.32  4.74  2.24  8.36

Data  from  the  Fourteenth  Abstract  of  Labor  Statistics  of  the United  Kingdom,  1908-09,  pp.  2  and  6- Annwaire  statistioue
de  France,  1908,  p.  178*.  -  •  i

22  The  German  figures  showing  the  percentage  of  unemployment  cover  too  short  a  time  to  possess  much
significance  as  yet.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


271


no

100

1

90

CHART  45.
Index  Numbers  of  Employment  in  the  United  Kingdom,
average  of  i&90-i899 100.

110

100

90

[^

.,**•

\.

■^

■^

'~~

-if^'^

\

y

1890  '91 *92 '93 '94 '95 '9S '97 '98 '99 1900 'Ol '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '01 '08 '09 1910

Among  the  American  figures  patterned  after  the  British  statistics  of  unem-
ployment, the  following  series  published  by  the  New  York  State  Department  of
Labor  Statistics  is  perhaps  the  best.  It  shows  the  average  percentage  of
members  reported  out  of  work  by  upwards  of  200  trade  unions.


1902 14.8%

1903 17.5

1904 16.9

1905 11.2

1906 9.3


1907 .-  16.2%

1908 29.7

1909 18.5

1910 19.1

1911 21.1


The  exceedingly  high  level  upon  which  these  figures  fluctuate  concerns  us
less  than  the  violence  of  the  changes  from  good  years  to  poor.  The  depression
of  1903-04,  the  prosperous  times  of  1905-06,  the  panic  of  1907,  the  depression
of  1908,  the  brief  revival  of  1909,  and  the  return  of  depression  in  1910-11  are
all  reflected  in  this  series.  But  the  most  striking  fact  is  that  the  maximum
percentage  of  unemployment  is  more  than  three  times  the  minimum.


VIll.  Pee  Capita  Indices  of  the  Volume  of  Business

The  volume  of  business  important  for  the  study  of  business  cycles  is  usually
the  total  volume  as  measured  in  physical  or  pecuniary  units.  But  sometimes
it  is  desirable  to  know  the  changes  in  this  volume  as  compared  with  the  changes
in  population.  To  serve  such  purposes,  several  of  the  most  significant  indices
shown  in  the  preceding  tables  have  been  reduced  to  a  per  capita  basis.


272


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


The  results,  presented  in  the  next  table,  throw  the  effects  of  prosperity  and
depression  into  higher  relief,  because  they  reduce,  though  without  wholly
eliminating,  the  obscuring  factor  of  growth.  Per  capita  figures  also  make
possible  fairer  comparisons  between  the  provision  made  in  different  countries
for  the  material  welfare  of  each  citizen.  Especial  interest  attaches  to  the
relative  figures.  They  show  that  the  rate  of  progress  has  been  fastest  in  the
United  States  and  next  fastest  in  Germany,  except  in  reference  to  foreign
commerce,  where  the  rank  of  these  two  leaders  is  reversed.  More  surprising
is  the  conclusion  that  in  most  of  the  lines  investigated  France  has  progressed
more  rapidly  than  the  United  Kingdom.


TABLE  69

Indices  or  the  Volume  of  Business  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany,

Reduced  to  a  Per  Capita  Basis
By  Years,  1890-1910


Tons  of  coal  produced
per  capita

Tons  of  pig-iron  produced
per  capita

Value  of

pig-iron  produced  in  dollars
per  capita

Year

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

1890

2.24

4.85

.677

1.79

.46

.211

.049

.093

2.40

3.12

.703

1.30

1891

2.37

4.89

.677

1.87

.130

.196

.049

.092

2.01

2.51

.625

1.10

1892

2.46

4.78

.677

1.81

.141

.176

.052

.097

2.01  '

2.20

.625

1.09

1893

2.46

4.26

.651

1.85

.107

.182

.052

.096

1.28

2.00

.599

1.00

1894

2.25

4.83

.703

1.89

.099

.190

.052

.103

0.96

2.13

.599

1.07

1895

2.50

4.85

.727

1.96

.136

.196

.052

.104

1.52

2.30

.545

1.08

1896

2.43

4.92

.753

2.10

.122

.220

.060

.119

1.28

2.55

.675

1.34

1897

2.50

5.05

.777

2.22

.135

.220

.062

.127

1.33

2.58

.725

1.55

1898

2.69

5.00

.825

2.32

.162

.213

.064

.132

1.61

2.72

.799

1.65

1899

3.06

5.39

.823

2.43

.183

.230

.064

.145

3.30

3.90

.925

1.96

1900

3.16

5.46

.848

2.63

.181

.218

.069

.150

3.41

4.44

1.105

2.34

1901

3.38

5.26

.821

2.65

.205

.190

.062

.137

3.12

2.91

.846

2.06

1902

3.40

5.40

.767

2.56

.225

.207

.061

.145

4.71

3.26

.793

1.87

1903

3.95

5.45

.870

2.73

.223

.211

.072

.169

4.26

3.25

.895

2.13

1904

3.81

5.45

.867

2.81

.200

.204

.074

.166

2.82

2.91

.944

2.08

1905

4.17

5.49

.893

2.84

.273

.223

.077

.177

4.54

3.42

1.046

2.29

1906

4.32

5.78

.865

3.10

.295

.233

.084

.198

5.90

3.96

1.298

2.78

1907

4.91

6.13

.916

3.27

.296

.231

.089

.205

6.07

4.17

1.043

3.16

1908

4.17

5.94

.939*

3.37

.179

.206

.086*

.184

2.86

3.17

1.370*

2.70

1909

4.54

5.93

.939*

3.36

.285

.213

.089*

.195

4.62

3.37

1.446*

2.59

1910

4.86

5.88

.962*

3.39

.296

.223

.101*

.226

4.61

3.72

2.96

Averages

1890-99  2.496

4.882

.7290

2.024

.1361

.2034

.0556

.1108

1.770

2.601

.682

1.314

1900-09

3.981

5.629

.8725

2.932

.2362

.2136

.0763

.1726

4.231

3.486

1.0786

2.400

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.

Computed  from  data  in  the  preceding  tables  of  this  chapter,  except  that  the  population  of  the  United  Kingdom  (instead  of  the
figures  for  England  and  Wales  given  in  Table  47)  is  used  as  the  divisor  of  amounts  which  relate  to  that  area.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


273


TABLE  69— {Continued)


Ind

ICES OF

THE  Volume  of

Business

IN THE

United  I

States,

United

Kingdom,

France,

and  Germany,

Eeduced  to  a  Feb  Capita  Basis

Bushels  of  wheat  produced
per  capita

Railway  gross  earnings  in
per  capita

A

dollars

Bank  clearings  in
dollars  per  capita

U.S. outside  England
New  York  London

Bills  of  exchange
in  dollars
per  capita

France Germany

Year

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

1890

6.34

2.08

8.05

2.11

16.7

9.9

5.81

6.30

367

1,319

141

68.1

1891

9.59

2.04

5.70

1.73

17.2

10.1

5.96

6.43

359

1,144

143

70.3

1892

7.93

1.65

8.10

2.31

18.0

10.0

5.94

6.38

389

1,071

136

67.4

1893

5.97

1.35

7.24

2.17

18.4

9.7

6.07

6.59

345

1,057

137

68.9

1894

6.81

1.62

9.06

2.16

15.9

10.0

6.20

6.55

312

1,023

133

68.0

1895

6.78

.99

8.83

2.25

15.6

10.1

6.34

6.87

338

1,213

134

71.9

1896

6.09

1.52

8.83

2.39

16.4

10.5

6.49

7.16

319

1,198

140

74.6

1897

7.40

1.45

6.40

2.24

17.1

10.7

6.68

7.44

332

1,170

144

79.5

1898

9.26

1.91

9.36

2.45

17.1

11.0

6.88

8.05

369

1,251

151

86.6

1899

7.36

1.69

9.36

2.55

17.7

11.4

7.07

8.39

448

1,395

157

93.5

1900

6.84

1.36

8.38

2.52

19.5

11.7

7.53

8.62

438

1,354

160

99.6

1901

9.64

1.35

7.98

1.62

20.5

11.7

7.21

8.26

503

1,426

153

93.5

1902

8.46

1.43

8.39

2.47

21.8

11.8

7.29

8.34

527

1,479

152

89.4

1903

7.90

1.18

9.31

2.24

23.5

11.9

7.42

8.79

535

1,477

160

91.5

1904

6.69

.92

7.63

2.35

23.9

11.9

7.45

9.08

532

1,530

165

94.3

1905

8.24

1.44

8.55

2.26

24.8

11.9

7.76

9.62

595

1,759

170

104.3

1906

8.58

1.43

8.27

2.37

27.1

12.1

8.09

10.23

644

1,804

187

110.4

1907

7.26

1.33

9.59

2.06

29.7

12.5

8.35

10.53

662

1,787

196

119.8

1908

7.48

1.27

8.07*

2.19

26.9

12.2

8.50*

10.21

597

1,681

191*

111.8

1909

8.14

1.46

9.04*

2.17

26.7

12.1

8.63*

10.63

687

1,859

197*

124.6

1910

6.89

1.29

6.53*

2.20

29.8

12.4

11.19

724

1,991

214*

124.3

1911

6.62

1.46

7.97*

2.28

721

1,964

128.1

Averages
1890-99  7.353

1.630

8.093

2.236

17.01

10.34

6.344

7.016

357.8

1,184.1

141.6

74.88

1900-

09  7.923

1.317

8.521

2.225

24.44

11.98

7,823

9.431

572.0

1,615.6

173.1

103.92

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.


274


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  69— (Continued)

Indices  of  the  Volume  of  Business  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany,

Eeduoed  to  a  Per  Capita  Basis


Imports  of  merchandise  in
millions  of  dollars


Exports  of  merchandise  in
millions  of  dollars


Year
1890

United
States

13.1

United
Kingdom

46.2

France
22.3

Germany
20.1

United
States
13.6

United
Kingdom

34.2

France
18.9

Germany
16.1

1891

13.0

48.1

24.0

19.8

15.2

31.8

17.9

15.2

1892

12.9

45.9

21.0

19.0

14.4

29.0

17.4

14.0

1893

11.7

43.7

19.4

18.6

13.2

27.6

16.3

14.5

1894

10.0

43.9

19.3

18.3

12.2

27.0

15.5

13.7

1895

11.6

44.3

18.6

18.9

12.0

28.1

16.9

15.2

1896

9.7

47.4

19.0

19.4

14.3

29.5

17.0

15.9

1897

10.4

47.6

19.8

20.8

15.4

28.5

18.0

16.1

1898

8.7

49.4

22.2

22.2

17.2

28.1

17.5

16.4

1899

10.8

50.1

22.4

23.6

17.2

31.5

20.6

18.1

1900

10.9

54.3

23.3

24.5

19.4

34.4

20.4

19.6

1901

11.3

53.1

21.6

22.7

18.9

32.8

19.8

18.5

1902

12.2

53.6

21.7

23.2

17.2

32.8

21.0

19.3

1903

12.3

54.6

23.7

24.4

18.4

33.5

21.0

20.4

1904

12.6

54.9

22.2

25.4

17.6

34.3

21.9

20.9

1905

14.0

55.2

23.5

28.1

19.3 •

37.3

24.0

22.6

1906

15.4

58.6

27.6

31.2

21.0

42.1

25.9

24.7

1907

16.3

61.7

30.6

33.6

22.0

47.4

27.5

26.3

1908

12.6

56.6

27.6*

29.0-

19.7

41.6

24.7*

24.2

1909

16.3

58.3

30.6*

31.8

18.8

41.4

28.0*

24.6

1910

17.0

62.3

35.0*

32.9

19.8

46.6

30.5*

27.5

1911

16.3

62.1

39.9*

3,5.3

21.9

48.8

30.2*

29.5

Averages
1890-99

11.19

46.66

20.80

20.07

14.47

29.53

17.60

15.52

1900-09

13.39

56.09

25.24

27.39

19.23

37.76

23.42

22.11

Provisional  figures,  subject  to

revision.

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


275


TABLE  69— (Continued)
Indices  of  the  Volume  of  Business  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany,

Reduced  to  a  Pek  Capita  Basis
Eelative  figures. Average  actual  figures  1890-99  =  100


Year
1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1895

1896

1897

1898

1899

1900

1901

1902

1903

1904

1905

1906

1907

1908

1909

1910


Tons  of  coal  produced
per  capita

United United

States  Kingdom  France  Germany

90 99 93 98


95

99

99

90

100

97

100

108

123

127

135

136

158

153

167

173

197

167

182

195


100
98
87
99
99
101
103
102
110
112
108
111
112
112
112
118
126
122
121
120


93

93

89

96
100
103
107
113
113
116
113
105
119
119
122
119
126
129*
129*
132*


92

89

91

93

97

104

110

115

120

130

131

126

135

139

140

153

162

166

166

167


Tons  of  pig-iron  produced
per  capita

United United

States Kingdom  France  Germany

107 104  88  84


Value  of  pig-iron  produced
per  capita


96

104

79

73

100

90

99

119

134

133

151

165

164

147

201

217

217

132

209

217


96

87

89

93

96

108

108

105

113

107

93

102

104

100

110

115

114

101

105

110


94

94

94

94
108
112
115
115
124
112
110
129
133
138
151
160
155*
160*
182*


83

88

87

93

94

107

115

119

131

135

124

131

153

150

160

179

185

166

176

204


United
States

136

114

114

72

54

86

72

75

91

186

193

176

266

241

159

256

333

343

162

261

260


United
Kingdom

120
97
85
77
82


98
99
105
150
171
112
125
125
112
131
152
160
122
130
143


France  Germany
130 99


92

92

88

88

80

99
106
117
136
162
124
116
131
138
153
190
153
201*
212*


84

83

76

81

82

102

118

126

149

178

157

142

162

158

174

212

240

205

197

225


Averages

1890-99  100 100 100 100

1900-09  159 115 120 145

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.


100

174


100
105


100
137


100
156


100
239


100
134


100
158


100
183


276  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  69— (Continued)

Indices  of  the  Volume  or  Business  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany,

Reduced  to  a  Per  Capita  Basis
Relative  figures. Average  actual  figures  1890-99  =  100


Bushels  of  wheat  produced
per  capita

Railway  gross  earnings
per  capita

Bank
per

clearings
capita

Bills  of  exchange
per  capita

Year

United

States

United
Kingdom

France  Germany

United
States

United
Kingdom

France  Germany

U.  S.  out-  England

side  N.  Y.  London  France

Germany

1890

86

138

99

94

98

96

92

90

103

111

100

91

1891

130

125

70

77

101

98

94

92

100

97

101

94

1892

108

101

100

103

106

97

94

91

109

90

96

90

1893

81

83

89

97

108

94

96

94

96

89

97

92

1894

93

99

112

97

93

97

98

93

87

86

94

91

1895

92

61

109

101

92

98

100

98

94

102

95

96

1896

83

93

109

107

96

102

102

102

89

101

99

100

1897

101

89

79

100

101

103

105

106

93

99

102

106

1898

126

117

116

110

101

106

108

115

103

106

107

116

1899

100

104

116

114

104

110

111

120

125

118

111

125

1900

93

83

104

113

115

113

119

123

122

114

113

133

1901

131

83

99

72

121

113

114

118

141

120

108

125

1902

115

88

104

110

128

114

115

119

147

125

107

119

1903

107

72

115

100

138

115

117

125

150

125

113

122

1904

91

56

94

105

141

115

117

129

149

129

117

126

1905

112

88

106

101

146

115

122

137

166

149

120

139

1906

117

88

102

106

159

117

128

146

180

152

132

147

1907

99

82

118

92

175

121

132

150

185

151

138

160

1908

102

78

100*

98

158

118

134*

146

167

142

135*

149

1909

111

90

112*

97

157

117

136*

152

192

157

139*

166

1910

94

79

81*

98

175

120

159

202

168

151*

166

1911

90

90

98*

102

201

166

171

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

108

81

105

99

144

116

123

134

160

136

122

139

'  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  277


TABLE  69— (Concluded)

Indices  of  the  Volume  op  Business  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  Prance,  and  Germany,

Eeduced  to  a  Per  Capita  Basis
Relative  figures. Average  actual  figures  1890-99  =  100
Imports  of  merchandise  per  capita  Exports  of  merchandise  per  capita


Tear

United
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

'united
States

United
Kingdom

France

Germany

1890

117

99

107

100

94

116

107

104

1891

116

103

115

99

105

108

102

98

1892

115

98

101

95

100

98

99

90

1893

105

94

93

93

91

93

93

93

1894

89

94

93

91

84

91

88

88

1895

104

95

89

94

83

95

96

98

1896

87

102

91

97

99

100

97

102

1897

93

102

95

104

106

97

102

104

1898

78

106

107

111

119

95

99

106

1899

97

107

108

118

119

107

117

117

1900

97

116

112

122

134

116

116

126

1901

101

114

104

113

131

111

112

119

1902

109

115

104

116

119

111

119

124

1903

110

117

114

122

127

113

119

131

1904

113

118

107

127

122

116

124

135

1905

125

118

113

140

133

126

136

146

1906

138

126

133

155

145

143

147

159

1907

146

132

147

167

152

161

156

169

1908

113

121

133*

144

136

141

140*

156

1909

146

125

147*

158

130

140

159*

158

1910

152

134

168*

164

137

158

173*

177

1911

146

133

192*

176

151

165

172*

190

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

120

120

121

136

133

128

133

143

*  Provisional  figures,  subject  to  revision.


CHAPTER  VI


THE  CURRENCY

I.  The  Production  of  Gold

Grold  mining  is  one  of  the  branches  of  production  in  which  the  output  is
but  slightly  affected  by  business  cycles.  It  has  often  been  pointed  out  that
prosperity  tends  to  check  the  production  of  gold  by  increasing  the  operating
expenses  of  mines.  Of  course  the  gold  miner  has  not  the  recourse  open  to  most
business  men  of  raising  the  price  of  his  product.  Hence  mines  which  pay  but
a  small  profit  in  years  of  depression  may  be  closed  in  years  of  prosperity.
What  is  more  important,  the  low-grade  ore  in  profitable  mines  may  be  extracted
or  not  according  as  operating  expenses  fall  or  rise.  But  it  is  not  often  noted
that  capit5,l  for  exploiting  gold  mines,  improving  transportation  in  mining
districts,  and  the  like,  can  be  raised  more  readily  when  investors  are  in  an
optimistic  frame  of  mind  than  when  they  are  rendered  conservative  by  hard
times.  Which  of  these  factors  is  the  more  weighty  is  neither  easy  nor  important
to  determine.  For  the  factors  of  decisive  weight  in  changing  the  annual  pro-
duction in  the  period  under  discussion  belong  to  a  different  order — the  discovery
of  new  deposits  of  gold,  improvements  in  the  arts  of  mining  and  metallurgy,
and  the  maintenance  of  peace  in  the  chief  producing  districts.

How  large  a  part  the  latter  factors  have  had  in  causing  the  marked  increase
in  gold  production  since  1890  may  be  inferred  from  the  following  table.  The
development  of  the  South  African  mines,  discovered  in  the  eighties,  has  con-
tributed the  lion's  share  of  the  increase.  But  the  low-grade  African  ores  could
not  have  been  worked  at  a  profit  by  the  methods  in  use  a  generation  before.
A  similar  combination  of  discoveries  and  advance  in  technique  made  in  other
quarters  of  the  globe  accounts  for  the  remaining  increase.  On  the  other  hand,
the  marked  decline  of  production  in  1900  was  due  to  the  Boer  War.

Rapid  as  the  increase  has  been,  the  rate  of  increase  has  fallen  off  in  a  notable
degree  since  the  later  nineties.  This  fact  is  brought  out  by  the  last  column
of  the  table,  which  shows  the  annual  gain  or  loss  in  the  form  of  a  percentage
of  the  preceding  year's  output.  The  average  of  these  percentages  in  the  second
decade  is  less  than  half  the  average  of  the  first  decade.


[278]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  279

TABLE  70
The  Production  op  Gold  by  Years,  1890-1911

Annual  production  of  gold


Actual  amounts
Millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts

Average  actual  amounts

in  1890-99  =  100

A

Per  cent  of
increase  (  +  )  or
decrease  ( — )  in
comparison  with
preceding  year

—  3.8%

Year
1890

World
119

Africa
11

'  World Africa^
61 26

1891

131

16

67 38

+

9.9

1892

147

24

75 57

+12.2

1893

157

29

80 69

+

7.4

1894

181

40

92 95

+15.0

1895

199

45

101 107

+

9.7

1896

202 "

45

103 107

+

1.8

1897

236

59

120 140

+16.7

1898

287

80

146 190

+21.5

1899

307

73

156 173

+

6.9

1900

255

9

130 21

—17.0

1901

261

9

133 21

+

2.5

1902

297

39

151 92

+13.7

1903

328

68

167 161

+10.4

1904

347

86

176 204

+

6.0

1905

380

113

193 268

+

9.5

1906

403

135

205 320

+

5.8

1907

413

152

, 210 360

+

2.5

1908

443

167

225 396

+

7.3

1909

454

171

231 405

+

2.5

1910

455

175

231 415

+

.2

1911

462

194

235 460

+

1.5

Averages
1890-99

196.6

42.2

100 100

+

9.7

1900-09

358.1

94.9

182 225

+

4.3

Data  compiled  from  the  Reports  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint  upon  the  Production  of  the  Precious  Metals.


II.  The  Quantity  of  Gtold  Currency

How  much  of  this  new  gold  has  gone  into  monetary  use,  and  remained  there,
is  not  definitely  known.  Scrupulously  accurate  records  are  kept  of  the  quantity
of  gold  coined,  but  they  do  not  solve  the  problem,  (1)  because  large  sums  of
uncoined  gold  serve  monetary  uses  in  the  reserves  of  governments  and  banks,
(2)  because  considerable  sums  of  gold  coin  are  annually  melted  down  by  gold-
smiths, etc.,  and  (3)  because  few  mint  reports  distinguish  between  the  new


280


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart  44.

/

400

RELATIVE  Production

OF  Gold j

IN  THE  World  and  in  fi

tf'RICA. '

1890  -  1909.

I
0 /

In  Africa.

1
1

320

280

1

1

1

240

,

240

200

1

L

1
1  y

200

160

;/

] ,r

7

160

/

/ 1
/  1

'  1

1

ISO

L 4_

_,L

120

// i

1

r  i

1
1

80

-j-~—i

1

80

/' 1

-\

40

/ 1

/ 1

— f— J

1
1
1

1
1
1

L

40

/

1

f

189031  '9J  '33  '34  '35 'X  '91  Si  "99  Wb'

)rO2'o3'O4'05'M'0T(18'l)SI3l0

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


281


bullion  and  the  old  coin,  old  plate,  etc.,  which  they  turn  into  money.  Indeed,
the  tables  compiled  by  the  American  mint  make  out  that  more  gold  has  been
coined  in  the  world  since  1890  than  has  been  mined.'

Another  method  of  attacking  the  problem  is  to  estimate  the  quantity  of
new  gold  which  is  consumed  in  the  arts  and  drained  away  to  the  Orient.  Since
1893  the  Director  of  the  United  States  Mint  has  undertaken  to  make  annual
estimates  of  "the  world's  industrial  consumption  of  gold."  His  figures  indi-
cate that  in  1893-1909  about  one-quarter  of  the  annual  output  of  the  mines  has
been  used  in  the  arts.  If  the  absorption  of  gold  by  British  India  is  added  to
the  industrial  consumption,  the  proportion  of  the  output  withdrawn  from
monetary  use  in  the  Occident  is  raised  from  one-quarter  to  rather  more  than
one-third.^  These  estimates,  however,  are  admittedly  based  on  inadequate
returns,  and  are  therefore  subject  to  a  wide  margin  of  error.  Another  com-
petent authority.  Professor  L.  de  Launay  of  the  Ecole  Superieure  des  Mines,
has  recently  estimated  the  industrial  consumption  at  40  per  cent  of  the  output,
oriental  absorption  at  16  per  cent,  and  coinage  at  44  per  cent.'  Whether  the
actual  proportion  of  the  new  gold  which  has  gone  into  monetary  use  in  the
west  is  nearer  the  mint's  ratio  of  two-thirds  or  Launay 's  ratio  of  two-fifths,

1  For  1890-1909  the  figures  are:  aggregate  production  $5,547  millions,  aggregate  coinage  $5,811.  Beport  on
the  Production  of  the  Precious  Metals  in  1909,  p.  36;  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint,  1910,  p.  61.  Of  course,
the  discrepancy  may  be  due  in  part  to  an  underestimate  of  the  gold  production.  For  the  grounds  for  sus-
pecting such  an  error  in  the  figures,  see  L.  de  Launay,  The  World's  Gold,  translated  by  O.  C.  Williams  (London,
1908),  pp.  161-168.

2  The  Industrial  Consumption  and  Indian  Absorption  of  Gold

Industrial  consumption


United

—A ^

Other

Ind

lian

Total
Columns

World's
production

Per  cent  of
column  4  to

Year

States

countries

absorption

1,  2,  and  3

of  gold

colnmn  5

1893

13

39

+

6

58

157

37%

1894

10

44

11

43

181

24

1895

12

48

-h

14

74

199

37

1896

11

50

+

14

75

202

37

1897

11

50

+

24

85

236

36

1898

13

54

-h

29

96

287

33

1899

17

58

+

39

114

307

37

1900

19

58

+

12

89

255

35

1901

20

62

+

16

98

261

38

1902

23

55

+

38

116

297

39

1903

24

55

+

43

123

328

38

1904

23

57

-t-

43

123

347

35

1905

28

57

+

13

98

380

26

1906

33

61

+

59

153

403

38

1907

34

66

+

69

168

413

41

1908

15

63

-1-

27

106

443

24

1909

30

82

+

90

202

454

44

1910

34

78

+

75

187

455

41

Sums  370

1,037

-1-600

2,008

5,705

of  prod

uction Q.5%

18.2%

10.5%

35.2%

100%

Column  1  shows  the  amount  of  new  bullion  and  gold  coin  consumed  in  the  arts  in  the  United  States.  In
accordance  with  the  Director  of  the  Mint's  revision  of  the  gold-stock  estimate,  $2,000,000  a  year  has  been
added  to  the  consumption  in  1893-1902  to  correct  the  original  understatement  of  the  gold  coin  melted  by  jew-
elers. (See  the  Director's  report  for  1907,  p.  86.)  Column  2  has  been  compiled  from  the  annual  Beports  on
the  Production  of  the  Precious  Metals.  Column  3  shows  the  production  of  gold  in  British  India,  plus  the  net
imports,  or  minus  the  net  exports.  The  figures  are  for  the  fiscal  years,  beginning  April  1.  They  are  taken
from  an  article  by  F.  J.  Atkinson,  Acoountant-General  of  the  United  Provinces  of  India  (Journal  of  the  Royal
Statistical  Society,  vol.  72,  p.  563).  The  data  for  1909  and  1910  have  been  computed  from  the  Beport  on  the
Production  of  the  Precious  Metals.

3  The  World's  Gold,  p.  178. Launay  does  not  publish  the  data  upon  which  his  estimate  rests.


282  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

we  do  not  know.  We  cannot  even  aver  with  certainty  that  the  average  ratio
falls  within  these  limits.  The  one  fact  of  present  interest  which  the  mint's
investigation  does  establish  is  that  the  industrial  consumption  of  gold,  like  that
of  other  luxuries,  varies  widel)^  between  periods  of  prosperity  and  of  depression.
So  far  as  this  factor  counts,  it  restricts  the  increase  in  the  quantity  of  money
when  business  is  active  and  expands  the  increase  when  business  is  dull.

The  United  States  is  the  only  one  of  our  four  countries  in  which  the  statistics
of  coinage  and  industrial  consumption  are  used  in  framing  an  annual  estimate
of  the  quantity  of  gold  money.  Starting  with  his  estimate  for  the  close  of
the  preceding  year,  the  Director  of  the  Mint  adds  the  net  increase  in  gold  coined
during  the  current  year  and  the  imports  of  Ajnerican  coin.  On  the  other  hand,
he  deducts  the  estimated  industrial  consumption  and  the  exports  of  coin.  Of
these  items,  none  but  the  coinage  can  be  accurately  determined.  Even  the
exports  and  imports  must  be  guessed  at  in  part ;  for  no  one  knows  what  sums
of  gold  coin  are  taken  out  of  and  brought  into  the  country  by  immigrants,
emigrants,  and  travelers.  Moreover,  if  the  error  in  the  estimates  runs  the  same
way  year  after  year  a  mistake  of  a  million  will  presently  mount  to  tens  of
millions.  Convinced  by  the  criticisms  of  Muhleman  and  others  that  the  official
estimate  was  too  high,  the  Director  of  the  Mint  made  a  thorough  revision  of
the  figures  in  1907,  and  deducted  a  round  $135,000,000  from  the  monetary  stock
of  gold  to  correct  errors  which  had  been  accumulating  since  1873.*  There  is
no  satisfactory  way  of  determining  the  margin  of  error  to  which  even  these
revised  figures  are  subject ;  but  they  probably  do  show  with  approximate  accu-
racy the  facts  of  most  importance  for  this  inquiry,  namely,  the  change  from
one  year  to  the  next  since  1890.

According  to  the  figures  (Table  71),  the  monetary  stock  of  gold  declined
$145  millions  between  the  end  of  1890  and  1895 — a  period  when  business  was
depressed,  the  treasury  in  straits,  and,  most  important  of  all,  when  the  main-
tenance of  the  gold  standard  seemed  doubtful.  After  Mr.  Bryan  had  been
defeated,  the  treasury  deficit  had  been  wiped  out,  and  business  had  improved,
the  gold  losses  were  promptly  made  up — made  up  more  than  twice  over  by
1900.  Thereafter  the  increase  was  steady  but  moderate  until  1906  and  1907,
when  more  than  $300  millions  were  added  to  the  stock.  The  dull  year  1908
brought  a  small  additional  gain,  and  the  more  active  year  1909  a  still  smaller
loss.  Thus  the  largest  relative  gains  were  scored  by  the  gold  stock  in  1896-98
and  again  in  1906-07 — the  first  a  season  of  increasing  trade  and  reviving  confi-
dence in  the  monetary  situation,  the  second  a  season  when  a  great  business
boom  culminated  and  ended  in  a  panic.

The  chief  sources  from  which  arise  the  gains  or  losses  of  gold  shown  by
Table  71  are  set  forth  in  the  next  table. According  to  these  official  estimates,

*  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint,  1907,  pp.  66-94.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


283


in  the  long  run  the  United  States— though  one  of  the  leading  gold  producers
of  the  world— absorbs  a  part  of  the  metal  produced  elsewhere,  in  addition  to
the  output  of  its  own  mines.  But  in  short  periods  monetary  legislation  and
business  conditions  frequently  reverse  this  situation,  not  merely  stopping  the
American  absorption  of  foreign  gold  but  even  expelling  a  part  of  the  current
American  product  to  foreign  lands.'


TABLE  71
Official  Estimate  of  the  Monetary  Stock  of  Gold  in  the  United  States  on  December  31  of  Each  Year,


1890-1911

Monetary  stock

Increase  (  +  )
during

or  decrease  ( — )
the  year

Year

Actual
amounts  in
millions  of

dollars

Relative  amts.

Av.  actual

amounts  in

1890-99  =  100

Actual
amounts  in
millions  of

dollars

In  percentages

of  stock  at

end  of

preceding  year

1890

648

101

+ 15

+.  2.2%

1891

626

97

—  22

—  3.4

1892

582

90

—  44

—  7.0

1893

591

92

+ 9

+  1.5

1894

539

84

—  52

—  8.8

1895

503

78

—  36

—  6.7

1896

589

91

+  86

+17.1

1897

638

99

+  49

+  8.3

1898

832

129

+194

+30.4

1899

897

139

+  65

+  7.8

1900

989

153

+  92

+10.3

1901

1,050

163

+  61

+  6.2

1902

1,121

174

+  71

+  6.8

1903

1,192

185

+  71

+  6.3

1904

1,217

189

+  25

+  2.1

1905

1,288

200

+  71

+  5.8

1906

1,458

226

+170

+13.2

1907

1,605

249

+147

+10.1

1908

1,654

257

+  49

+  3.1

1909

1,638

254

—  16

—  1.0

1910

1,709

265

+  71

+  4.3

1911

1,797

279

+  88

+  5.1

Averages

1890-99

644.5

100

+  26.4

+  4.1

1900-09

1,321.2

205

+  74.1

+  6.3

"corrected"  f

igures  for 1890-1906 in  the  Report

of  the  Director  of

the  Mint,  1907,  p.  87,  and  continued

from  the  Report  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States,  1910,  pp.  61-62.


5  The  discrepancies  shown  by  Table  72  between  the  net  gain  or  loss  of  gold  by  mining,  foreign  trade,  and
industrial  consumption,  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  hand  the  net  increase  or  decrease  in  the  estimated
monetary  stock,  are  due  chiefly  to  the  carrying  of  coin  out  of  or  into  the  country  by  travelers,  soldiers  going
to  the  Philippines,  emigrants,  and  immigrants.  Such  exports  and  imports  of  gold  escape  record  by  the  customs
houses.  A  minor  source  of  discrepancy  is  that  each  year  over  $1,000,000  of  old  jewelry,  etc.,  passes  over  from
industrial  to  monetary  use. See  Seport  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint,  1907,  pp.  87-92.


284


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA


Chart  45.

♦

280

Rfi  ativf  Amoi  ikits  nf  thf  MfiMFTARY  55tt"k

/

260
240
2  20
200
180
160
140

OF  Gold  in  the  United  5tate5
ON  December  31st  of  each  year

/

/

s

/

I&90  -  1910.

i

/

1

/

200
180
160
140
120

/

y^

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

120

100

\

*^

100

N

s.

i

/

'

80

\

V

/

80

>

r

1890  91  32  93 '94  V  k  91  98  99 1900 0|  02  03  '04 '05  '06'07  08  '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


285


TABLE  72
Chiep  Sources  or  Gain  or  Loss  to  the  Monetary  Stock  of  Gold  in  the  United  States

By  Years,  1890-1910


In  millions  of

dollars

Year

Production

of  gold  in

the  United

States

Excess  of

gold

imports  (  +  )

or  exports  ( — )

Industrial
consumption

of  coin  and
new  bullion

Net  gain  (  +  )

or  loss  ( — )

from  preceding

sources

Increase  ( -t- )

or  decrease  ( — )

in  estimated

stock  of  gold

1890

33

— 4

15

+  14

+  15

1891

33

—  34

15

—  16

—  22

1892

33

—  59

15

—  41

—  44

1893

•36

— 7

13

+  16

+ 9

1894

40

—  81

10

—  51

—  52

1895

47

—  71

12

—  36

—  36

1896

53

+  46

11

-f  88

+  86

1897

57

11

+  46

+  49

1898

64

4-142

13

+193

+194

1899

71

+ 6

17

+  60

+  65

1900

79

+  13

19

+  73

+  92

1901

79

— 3

20

+  56

+  61

1902

80

+ 8

23

+  65

+ 71

1903

74

4-  21

24

+  71

+ 71

1904

80

—  36

23

+  21

+ 25

1905

88

+ 3

28

+  63

+  71

1906

94

+109

33

+170

+170

1907

90

+  88

34

+144

+147

1908

95

—  31

15

+  49

+  49

1909

100

—  89

30

—  19

—  16

1910

96

34

+  62

+  71

Averages

1890-

99

46.7

— 6.2

13.2

+  27.3

+  26.4

1900-

-09

85.9

+ 8.3

24.9

+  69.3

+  74.1

d  3  are  from

the  Report  on  the  Production

of  the

Precious

Metals  in  1909,  pp.

13, 14, and  28.

The  original

data  in  column  3  have  been  raised  $2,000,000  for  the  years  1893-1902,  to  correct  the  original  underestimate  of  the  consumption

of  gold  coin  in  the  arts (see  Report  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint,  1907,  p.  86). Column  2  is  from  A.  P.  Andrew,  Statistics  for

the United  States (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),  p.  11. Column  4  is  computed  from  columns  1,  2,  and  3.
Column  5  is  from  Table  71, above.


For  comparison  with  these  American  figures,  there  are  a  few  official
estimates  of  the  gold  circulation  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  France,  made  at
irregular  intervals.  The  data  are  assembled  in  Table  73.  Both  of  the  European
countries,  like  the  United  States,  lost  gold  between  the  later  eighties  and  the
early  nineties."  From  the  early,  to  the  middle  nineties,  on  the  contrary,  the
European  countries  gained  gold  and  the  United  States  lost.  Finally,  since
the  middle  nineties  all  the  countries  have  gained,  but  at  very  different  rates —
the  United  States  five  or  six  times  as  fast  as  the  European  countries,  and  Great
Britain  about  two  times  as  fast  as  France.  The  per  capita  circulation  of  gold,
however,  remains  much  larger  in  France  than  in  any  other  country.

6  The  figures  for  America  in  1885  and  1891  indicate  a  gain,  but  merely  because  the  loss  from  1888-91  was
smaller  than  the  gain  in  1885-88.


286


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


These  European  data  are  so  scanty  that  they  may  be  supplemented  by  the
record  of  net  imports  or  exports  of  gold.  In  England,  Prance,  and  Germany
the  domestic  production  of  gold  is  so  slight  that  the  customs-house  returns  are
the  best  available  index  of  the  yearly  changes  in  the  total  stock  of  gold,  though
not  in  the  monetary  stock/  Of  course,  part  of  the  net  imports  are  absorbed
into  industrial  use;  part  of  the  net  exports  consist  of  gold  that  was  not  used
as  money;  the  existing  monetary  stock  is  decreased  by  melting  coins, or


TABLE  73

Estimated  Monetaby  Stock  op  Gold  at  Inteevals  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  France,  With  Estimates

foe  cokresponding  dates  in  the  united  states

Increase  (  +  )  or  decrease  ( — )  in  the  estimated  stock


Estimated  stock
in  millions  of  dollars

In  millions  of  dollars

In  percentages  of  the  stock
at  preceding  estimate

Year

United
Kingdom

United
States

United
Kingdom

United
States

'  United
Kingdom

United '

States

1888

499

650

1892

438

582

—  61

—  68

—12.2%

—  10.5%

1895

450

503

+  12

—  79

+  2.7

—  13.7

1903

567

1,192

+117

+689

+26.0

+137.0

France

United  States

France

United  States

France

United  States

1885

965

558

1891

772

626

—193

+ 68

—20.0%

+ 12.2%

1897

811

638

+  39

+ 12

+  5.0

+ 1.9

1903

926

1,192

+115

+554

+14.2

+  86.8

Compiled  from  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,  France,  and  Germany  (Senate  document,  no.
578,  61st  Congress,  2d  session),  pp.  75  and  345.  The  British  estimates  were  made  by  the  Royal  Mint,  except  that  for  1892,
which  was  made  by  the  Chancellor  of  the  Exchequer.  The  French  estimates  were  all  made  by  M.  de  Foville  on  the  basis  of  official
monetary  investigations.  The  British  estimate  of  1888  is  now  held  to  have  been  too  high.  The  American  figures  are  from  the
Report  of  the  Director  of  the  Mint,  1907,  p.  87.


increased  by  coining  plate,  etc.  But  the  statistics  of  Table  74  show  that  in  all
three  of  our  foreign  countries  there  has  been  a  rapid  increase  in  the  annual
supply  of  fresh  gold  available  for  monetary  use,  and  it  is  safe  to  suppose  that
there  has  been  a  roughly  proportionate  increase  in  the  annual  additions  to  the
monetary  stock.

Within  this  period  of  twenty  years  France  has  absorbed  a  decidedly  larger
part  of  the  new  gold  than  Germany,  and  Germany  a  slightly  larger  part  than
England.  But  whether  the  relative  increase  in  the  French  monetary  stock  of
gold  has  been  larger  than  the  German,  or  the  German  larger  than  the  English,
remains  uncertain.  In  all  three  countries  the  net  movements  are  steadier  than
in  the  United  States  and  more  uniformly  on  the  side  of  an  excess  of  imports
over  exports. Nevertheless,  the  European  oscillations  are  violent  in  compar-

7  These  are  the  reasons  for  suspecting  that  the  statistics  of  both  imports  and  exports  are  incomplete,  be-
cause not  all  the  shipments  and  receipts  are  recorded.  (Launay,  The  World's  Gold,  pp.  165-167.)  For  this
reason  no  attempt  is  made  to  base  refined  comparisons  upon  Table  74.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


287


TABLE  74
Net  Imports  (  +  )  or  Net  Exports  (— )  op  Gold  foe  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and


Germany

By  Years,

1890-1911

Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

Average

Relative  amounts
actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100

A

Year
1890

United
States

— 4

United
Kingdom

+45

France
—  26

Germany
+14

United
States

— 65

United
Kingdom

+139

France
—133

^
Germany
+ 74

1891

—  34

+30

+

25

+24

— 548

+  93

+128

+127

1892

—  59

+33

+

53

+  7

— 952

+102

+272

+  37

1893

— 7

+  26

+

36

+  9

— 113

+  80

+  185

+  48

1894

—  81

+58

+

68

+  60

—1,306

+  179

+349

+317

1895

—  71

+  71

+

2

+  4

—1,145

+219

+  10

+  21

1896

+  46

—28

—

2

+  5

+ 742

—  86

—  10

+  26

1897

+

31

+  9

+159

+  48

1898

+  142

+35

—

22

+25

+2,291

+108

—113

+132

1899

+ 6

+54

+

30

+32

+ 97

+167

+154

+169

1900

+  13

+38

+

64

+30

+ 210

+117

+328

+  159

1901

— 3

+33

+

55

+49

— 48

+102

+282

+259

1902

+ 8

+  30

+

61

+  8

+ 129

+  93

+313

+  42

1903

+  21

+  4

+

36

+45

+ 339

+ 12

+185

+238

1904

—  36

+  4

+103

+93

— 581

+ 12

+528

+492

1905

+ 3

+38

+  125

+43

+ 48

+  117

+641

+228

1906

+109

+17

+

52

+69

+  1,758

+  52

+267

+365

1907

+  88

+30

+

56

—  5

+1,419

+  93

+287

—  26

1908

—  31

—19

+192

+74

— 500

—  59

+985

+392

1909

—  89

+36

+

35

+  7

—1,435

+111

+179

+  37

1910

+31

+

11

+42

+  96

+  56

+222

1911

+  20

+42

+35

+ 323

+130

+185

Averages

1890-99

— 6.2

+32.4

+

19.5

+18.9

100

100

100

100

1900-09

+ 8.3

+21.1

+

77.9

+41.3

134

65

399

218

Compiled  from  the  (American)  Statistical  Abstract  of  Foreign  Countries,  Part  i,  for  the  years  1890-1907,  aJld  completed  from
the  statistical  abstracts  of  England,  France,  and  Germany.  The  data  for  the  United  States  are  from  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the
United  States  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),  p.  11.


ison  with  most  of  the  data  exhibited  in  preceding  chapters,  as  the  columns  of
relative  figures  show.  To  account  for  these  changes  in  detail  year  by  year
would  be  an  exceedingly  difficult  task,  because  of  the  multiplicity  of  the  factors
affecting  the  balance  of  payments  in  international  trade.  For  present  purposes
it  suffices  to  note  that  no  simple  rule  holds  for  all  the  countries  concerning  the
relations  between  the  course  of  business  cycles  and  the  net  imports  or  exports
of  gold.


288  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

III.  The  Quantity  of  Silver  and  of  Paper  Money

The  quantity  of  other  forms  of  money  in  the  United  States  can  be  estimated
more  accurately  than  the  quantity  of  gold  coin.  There  is  no  industrial  con-
sumption of  greenbacks  and  bank  notes,  and  but  a  trifling  industrial  consump-
tion of  silver  coin,  since  silver  bullion  costs  less  than  half  as  much  as  silver
dollars.  Moreover,  neither  paper  nor  silver  money  is  acceptable  to  foreigners,
so  that  the  small  sums  carried  out  of  the  country  are  promptly  sent  back  again.
Only  one  source  of  error  in  the  statements  need  be  feared — accidental  loss  or
burning.  On  this  account  the  treasury  has  already  written  off  $1,000,000  from
the  amount  of  United  States  notes  outstanding,  and  might  safely  v^rite  off
several  millions  more  from  that  item  and  from  the  amount  of  silver  coins  and
bank  notes. But  these  unrecorded  losses  cannot  make  more  than  a  small  per-

TABLE  75
Monetary  Stock  of  the  "United  States  on  July  1  of  the  Years  1890-1911


Actual  amounts

in  millions  of  dollars

Year

Gold

Silver
dollars

Subsidiary
silver

United
States
notes

Treasury

notes
of  1890

National
bank
notes

Total

Per

cent  of
gold

1890

639

380

77

347

186

1,629

39

1891

591

389

78

347

50

168

1,623

36

1892

600

389

78

347

102

173

1,689

36

1893

532

391

77

347

147

179

1,673

32

1894

548

395

76

347

153

207

1,726

32

1895

542

402

77

347

146

212

1,726

31

1896

507

422

76

347

130

226

1,708

30

1897

594

442

76

347

115

231

1,805

33

1898

747

460

76

347

101

228

1,959

38

1899

849

470

75

347

94

241

2,076

41

1900

917

490

83

347

76

310

2,223

41

1901

1,003

520

90

347

48

354

2,362

42

1902

1,068

540

97

347

30

357

2,439

44

1903

1,124

554

102

347

19

414

2,560

44

1904

1,198

560

107

347

13

449

2,674

45

1905

1,228

559

115

347

9

496

2,754

45

1906

1,343

561

118

347

7

561

2,937

46

1907

1,466

562

130

347

6

604

3,115

47

1908

1,618

563

147

347

5

698

3,378

48

1909

1,642

564

159

347

4

690

3,406

48

1910

1,636

565

155

347

4

713

3,420

48

1911

1,753

565

160

347

3

728

3,556

49

Averages

1890-99

614.9

414.0

76.6

347.0

115.3

205.1

1,761.4

34.8

1900-09

1,260.7

547.3

114.8

347.0

21.7

493.3

2,784.8

45.0

The  data  for  1890-1909  are  from  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commis-
sion), p.  156.  The  data  for  1910  and  1911  are  from  the  Report  of  the  Treasurer  of  the  United  States.  The  figures  for  gold  in
1890-1900  are  revised  on  the  basis  of  the  new  estimates  made  by  the  Director  of  the  Mint  in  1907.  See  page  282,  and  note  8,
page  289.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  289


TABLE  15— {Concluded)
MoNETAET  Stock  op  the  United  States  on  July  1  of  the  Years  1890-1911


Year
1890

Kelativ

Gold
104

e  amounts.

Silver

dollars

92

Average  actual  amountE

United

Subsidiary States

silver notes

101 100

;  in  1890-99
Treasury
notes
of  1890

=  100

National

bank

notes

91

Total
92

1891

96

94

102

100

43

82

92

1892

98

94

102

100

88

84

96

1893

87

94

101

100

127

87

95

1894

89

95

99

100

133

101

98

1895

88

97

101

100

127

103

98

1896

82

102

99

100

113

110

97

1897

97

107

99

100

100

113

102

1898

121

111

99

100

88

111

111

1899

138

114

98

100

82

118

118

1900

149

118

108

100

66

151

126

1901

163

126

117

100

42

173

134

1902

174

130

127

100

26

174

138

1903

183

134

133

100

16

202

145

1904

195

135

140

100

11

219

152

1905

200

135

150

100

8

242

156

1906

218

136

154

100

6

274

167

1907

238

136

170

100

5

294

177

1908

263

136

192

100

4

340

192

1909

267

136

208

100

3

336

193

1910

266

133

202

100

3

348

194

1911

285

136

209

100

3

355

202

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

205

132

150

100

19

241

158

centage  of  the  total.  Thus  the  official  figures,  reproduced  in  Table  75,  may  be
trusted  to  show  with  approximate  accuracy  the  variations  in  the  monetary  stock
since  1890.^

So  long  as  the  mints  were  working  up  the  silver  bullion  purchased  under
the  Sherman  Act  of  July  14,  1890,  the  stock  of  silver  dollars  increased  steadily,
in  dull  times  as  in  brisk  times,  when  the  currency  was  redundant  as  w^hen  it
was  scanty.  But  the  last  silver  dollar  was  struck  in  1904,  and  since  then  the
stock  has  remained  substantially  constant  at  about  $560  millions.  The  treasury
notes  of  1890,  issued  in  payment  for  silver  bullion,  also  increased  rapidly  until
the  Sherman  Act  was  repealed  on  the  first  of  November,  1893.  Thereafter
the  stock  of  these  notes  began  to  decline  as  rapidly  as  they  were  presented  to

s  The  gold  and  silver  certificates  need  not  be  included  in  the  table,  because  they  are  fully  covered  by
corresponding  amounts  of  gold  and  silver  coins  in  the  treasury.  The  Director  of  the  Mint  has  not  published
his  revised  estimates  for  the  gold  stock  on  July  1,  1890-1906.  I  have  therefore  been  compelled  to  assume  that  the
revised  figures  for  this  day  would  bear  a  ratio- to  the  old  figures  midway  between  the  ratios  born  by  the  revised
to  the  old  figures  for  the  December  preceding  and  following.


290


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


-

CHART  46

Relative:  Monetary  Stock  of  Gold  ,  Silver.

i—  -!A 340

AND  Bank  Motes  in  the  United  States

■■l

1830  -1911. /

520

ER :

SILV

3ANK NOTES ;

500

MU

i

/

280

260

■

/

/

2  SO

/ /

' 1 ' 1

■ \

240

220

M ;

--

\ /

-

220
200

1

\ 1

//

1 i :" "

/

1

ISO

7

/

160

/

/

160

140
120
100

/f

140

/

S^

/

^*

_..•

/-

/

+■-

--

--

—

-

\

^

'J

/

\

/

\
"l

/
/
f

\

i^

—

\

/

80

- 80

f

/

1

-

1890  '91 92  '95  '34  '95  '96  '97  '96  '99  1900 '01 '02 03  '04  '05  '06 07

'08  '09  I9I0'|I

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  291

thf  treasury  for  redemption  in  silver  dollars;  for  the  law  had  provided  that
"no  greater  or  less  amount  of  such  notes  shall  be  outstanding  at  any  time  than
the  cost  of  the  silver  bullion  and  the  standard  silver  dollars  coined  therefrom
then  held  in  the  treasury.""  In  1900  the  process  of  reduction  v^as  hastened
by  the  Gold  Standard  Act,  Avhich  required  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to
replace  the  treasury  notes  which  came  into  his  hands  by  silver  certificates,  as
fast  as  the  remaining  bullion  was  made  into  dollars  or  subsidiary  coin.  In
consequence  of  this  measure,  the  treasury  notes  have  all  but  disappeared  from
circulation.  Their  gradual  reduction  since  1894  has  been  roughly  concomitant
Avith  the  gradual  increase  of  silver  dollars,  so  that  the  volume  of  the  two  forms
of  money  when  taken  together  has  varied  within  limits  of  $26  millions — about
1  per  cent  of  the  average  monetary  stock."

The  estimated  stock  of  the  United  States  notes  has  not  changed  at  all  since
the  Act  of  May  31,  1878,  stopped  the  reduction  provided  for  by  the  Resumption
Act  of  1875,  and  directed  that  these  notes  when  received  by  the  treasury  should
be  ' '  reissued  and  paid  out  again  and  kept  in  circulation. ' '

The  subsidiary  coins  require  little  attention,  because  the  volume  of  "change"
in  use  exercises  no  perceptible  influence  upon  business  conditions,  beyond
facilitating  retail  trade.  The  stock  remained  nearly  stationary  from  1890  to
1899,  and  then  began  to  rise  steadily  at  such  a  pace  as  to  double  in  volume  by
1909.

Since  the  subsidiary  coins  may  be  set  aside,  since  the  stock  of  the  United
States  notes  has  remained  constant,  and  since  the  combined  stock  of  silver
dollars  and  treasury  notes  has  changed  but  little  since  1894,  it  follows  that  for
sixteen  years  the  only  variable  elements  in  the  American  monetary  system  have
been  the  gold  coin  and  the  national  bank  notes.^^

The  bank  notes  increased  at  a  moderate  pace  from  1891  to  1899,  without
much  reference  to  the  changing  needs  of  business. But  in  1900  the  Gold

!)  See  F.  W.  Taussig,  "The  Conversion  of  the  Treasury  Notes  of  1890  into  Silver  Certificates,"  Quarterly
Journal  of  Economics,  vol.  X,  pp.  350,  351.

1"  When  the  columns  for  silver  dollars  and  treasury  notes  of  ±890  are  combined  the  following  figures  result:


Actual

Relative

Year

amounts

amounts

1890

380

73

1891

439

85

1892

491

95

1893

538

104

1894

548

106

1895

548

106

1896

552

107

1897

557

108

1898

561

108

1899

564

109

1900

566

109

1901

568

110

1902

570

110

Actual

Relative

Year

amounts

amounts

1903

573

111

1904

573

111

1905

568

110

1906

568

110

1907

568

110

1908

568

110

1909

568

110

1910

568

110

1911

568

110

Averages

1890-

99

517.8

100

1900-

■11

569.0

110

11  E.  W.  Kemmerer,  Seasonal  Variation  in  the  Relative  Demand  for  Money  and  Capital  in  the  United  States
(Senate  Document,  no.  588,  61st  Congress,  2d  session),  chapter  VI,  shows  that  the  seasonal  elasticity  of  all
kinds  of  money  in  circulation  outside  of  the  treasury  is  limited  to  the  fact  that  the  year's  normal  increase
tends  to  take  place  in  the  fall  and  early  winter  when  currency  is  most  needed.  No  kind  of  money  exhibits
much  capacity  for  contracting  in  the  slack  months  of  the  year.


292  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

Standard  Act  caused  an  increase  of  more  than  25  per  cent  in  a  single  year.
By  raising  the  limit  of  note  issue  from  90  to  100  per  cent  of  the  par  value  of
the  government  bonds  held  as  security,  and  by  reducing  the  rate  of  taxation
upon  notes  secured  by  the  new  consols  of  1930,  the  law  enhanced  the  profit
which  national  banks  already  established  might  derive  from  exercising  their
rights  of  issue.  Further,  by  permitting  the  organization  of  national  banks  with
capital  of  less  than  $50,000  the  law  brought  a  large  number  of  new  institutions
into  the  system.  The  rapid  expansion  of  note  circulation  started  by  this  statute
was  afterwards  promoted  by  the  efforts  of  a  secretary  of  the  treasury  who
employed  his  power  of  distributing  the  much  desired  government  deposits  to
induce  the  banks  to  keep  outstanding  their  full  quotas  of  notes."  Still  later
the  decline  in  the  market  price  of  the  2  per  cent  consols  to  the  neighborhood
of  par  tended  to  raise  the  profit  upon  circulation.  Finally,  the  activity  of
business  stimulated  the  organization  of  new  banks  and  brought  home  to  new
and  old  an  insistent  demand  for  more  currency.  Favored  by  all  of  these
circumstances,  the  volume  of  bank  notes  rose  after  1899  even  faster  than  the
rapidly  rising  volume  of  gold  coin.

Concerning  gold,  the  present  table  brings  out  the  same  facts  as  Table  71,
with  a  few  minor  differences  arising  from  the  use  of  data  for  July  1  in  one  case,
and  for  December  31  in  the  other.  But  the  present  table  also  shows  the  pro-
portion borne  by  the  volume  of  gold  money  to  the  total  monetary  stock.  This
proportion  fell  rapidly  from  39  per  cent  in  1890  to  32  per  cent  in  1893,  in  conse-
quence not  only  of  the  direct  loss  of  gold  but  also  of  the  joint  increase  of  silver
dollars  and  treasury  notes  of  1890.  From  1893  to  1896  the  proportion  changed
but  little.  But  after  the  free-silver  party  had  been  defeated  at  the  polls  and
business  began  to  revive  the  incoming  flood  of  gold  speedily  raised  the  pro-
portion again  to  38  per  cent  in  1898.  Since  that  time  there  has  been  a  slow  but
steady  advance  to  49  per  cent  in  1911.

When  all  these  different  kinds  of  money  are  added  together  it  appears  that
the  total  stock  has  but  a  rudunentary  power  of  adjusting  its  volume  to  the
changing  demands  of  trade.  On  the  whole,  the  increase  in  volume  has  been
more  rapid  during  good  times  than  during  bad ;  but  the  increase  from  1893  to
1894,  from  1902  to  1904,  and  from  1907  to  1908  shows  an  absence  of  the  power
to  contract  when  trade  falls  off.

No  paper  money  is  issued  by  the  governments  of  Great  Britain  and  France,
and  none  by  the  German  government  aside  from  120,000,000  marks  in  treasury
notes,  which  offset  an  equal  sum  of  gold  coin  held  in  the  war  chest.  Of  course
silver  coin  is  widely  used  in  these  countries,  but  no  estimates  of  its  volume  are
regularly  published. The  European  data  available  for  comparison  with  the

12  For  details  see  A.  P.  Andrew,  "The  Treasury  and  the  Banks  under  Secretary  Shaw,"  Quarterly  Journal
of  Economics,  August,  1907,  vol.  21,  pp.  519-568.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  293

preceding  figures  are  therefore  limited  to  the  statistics  of  bank  notes  in  circu-
lation. The  most  significant  of  these  statistics  are  brought  together  in  Table  76.
In  none  of  the  three  foreign  countries  has  the  increase  in  the  stock  of  bank
notes  been  comparable  with  the  extraordinary  increase  in  America.  In  Great
Britain  the  quantity  has  even  declined  since  1900,  probably  because  the  public
has  acquired  the  habit  of  paying  a  larger  portion  of  small  bills  by  check.  In
France,  on  the  other  hand,  the  figures  reflect  an  increasing  preference  among
the  people  for  bank  notes  in  place  of  gold  coin — a  change  in  monetary  habits
which  causes  the  "unproductive  circulation"  of  the  Bank  of  Prance  to  grow


TABLE  76

Average  Annual  Circulation  of  Bank  Notes  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890

'  United United
States Kingdom France

■99  -  100

Year

United
States

United
Kingdom

Prance

Germany

Germany

1890

128

195

591

285

73

97

89

97

1891

130

197

595

281

74

98

89

96

1892

145

198

608

284

83

99

91

97

1893

165

198

665

276

94

99

100

94

1894

181

195

671

279

103

97

101

95

1895

184

199

681

303

105

99

102

103

1896

205

202

696

300

117

101

104

102

1897

208

205

712

301

119

102

107

103

1898

198

207

713

311

113

103

107 ■

■ 106

1899

209

211

737

315

119

105

110

107

1900

260

221

779

313

148

110

117

107

1901

323

220

794

320

184

110

119

109

1902

322

219

803

327

184

109

120

111

1903

362

218

832

332

206

109

125

113

1904

407

210

827

341

232

105

124

116

1905

462

211

851

353

264

105

128

120

1906

519

211

899

365

296

105

135

124

1907

558

212

926

386

318

106

139

132

1908

628

210

937

396

358

105

140

135

1909

655

212

980

410

374

106

147

140

1910

685

209

1,003

417

391

104

150

142

1911

699

213

1,012

431

399

106

152

147

Averages
1890-99

175.3

200.7

666.9

293.5

100

100

100

100

1900-09

449.6

214.4

862.8

354.3

256

107

129

121

The  American  figures  show  the  average  amounts  of  national  bank  notes  secured  by  bonds  outstanding  on  the  first  day  of  each
month.  Computed  from  the  Reports  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Oarrency.  The  British  figures  show  the  average  aniounts  of  notes
issued  by  all  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish  banks  in  the  hands  of  the  public.  Prom  Palgrave  s  tables  m  the  National  Monetary  Com-
mission's SJoMsKcs  fir  Great  Britain,  Germany,  and  Prance,  p.  125.  The  Prench  figures  show  the  average  note  issues  of  the  Bank
of  Prance.  Prom  the  Annuaire  Statistique,  1910,  p.  68*.  The  German  figures  include  the  notes  of  all  banks  of  issue,  as  given  by
the  StatistiM  Jahrtiicher  fur  das  Deutsche  Reich.  The  British  figures  for  1910  and  1911  are  based  on  returns  for  March,
June,  September,  and  December  as  given  in  the  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United  Kingdom,  adjusted  to  fit  as  nearly  as  may  be
the  Palgrave  series.


294


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


1"

CHART 47.

1

Relative  Amount  of  Bank  notes  in  Circulation

/

IN  the  United  States  ,  United  Kingc

1'

FRANCE  ,  AND GERMANY.

■1890 1909.

/

/

320
300

— United Kingdom

. FRANCE

Germany

\

320

300

1

i

/

1

1

1

/

1

(

P80
260

/

[

_]_._
1

£30

i

/

220
200

lao


-

—

'

-

/

/

1

220


-

-

—

i

h-

/

—


180

ISO

—

—

—

--

—

—


160

/
/

/

rfC

/

>

140
20
00

,c

\

/

—  •

_...■'■  1
\

.--..—

90  -

-

/ ....

M-"^

-

lL

ao

1890

il '92 95  '94 95  96 37  '98  '99  1900  01 '02  '05  '04 '05  '08

07 08  09  1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  295

steadily  larger.  In  Germany  the  bank-note  currency  remained  substantially
constant  in  1890-94  at  a  level  of  about  $280  millions,  in  1895-97  at  a  level  of
about  $300  millions,  and  in  1898-1900  at  a  level  of  about  $313  millions.  But
after  1900  the  volume  began  to  grow  steadily,  a  little  faster  in  good  times  than
in  bad.

In  general  there  is  but  a  slight  degree  of  correspondence  between  the  fluctu-
ations of  bank  notes  and  the  fluctuations  of  business  activity  from  one  year  to
the  next.  Even  the  European  countries  which  have  the  most  elastic  systems  of
issue  do  not  regularly  retire  large  sums  of  notes  when  business  is  depressed.
The  controlling  factors  seem  to  be  changes  in  monetary  habits  and  perhaps  the
slow  but  steady  growth  in  population.  A  very  different  conclusion  would  be
drawn,  however,  if  the  figures  of  monthl}'  circulation  were  used  in  place  of
annual  averages.  Then  it  would  appear  that  there  are  notable  changes  between
the  different  seasons  of  the  same  year  in  the  amount  of  notes  used.  In  other
words,  bank  notes  in  Great  Britain,  France,  and  Germany  are  a  much  more
elastic  form  of  currency  within  short  periods  than  they  are  within  the  longer
periods  covered  by  business  cycles.


IV.  The  Distribution  op  the  Monetaey  Stock  Among  the  Banks,  the

PiTBLIO,  AND  the  TREASURY

Since  1892  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  has  utilized  his  bank  reports
to  compile  an  annual  estimate  of  the  proportions  in  which  the  monetary  stock
is  held  by  the  banks,  the  public,  and  the  federal  Treasury.  Dr.  A.  P.  Andrew
has  carried  the  figures  back  to  1867."  The  next  table  presents  these  data  for
1890-1911  in  a  revised  form.  The  change  in  the  official  estimates  of  the  gold
stock  in  1890-1906,  the  amount  of  money  in  banks  which  do  not  report  to  the
comptroller,  the  former  confusion  of  "cash"  and  "cash  items"  in  bank  reserves,
etc.,  have  all  been  allowed  for  as  accurately  as  may  be."

The  figures  indicate  that  on  the  average  the  treasury  holds  a  little  more  than
a  tenth  of  the  country's  money,  the  banks  a  little  more  than  a  third,  and  the
public  a  little  more  than  one-half.  The  banks  seem  to  be  slowly  increasing
their  proportion  at  the  expense  both  of  the  treasury  and  of  the  public.  But
this  average  distribution  undergoes  marked  changes,  which  correspond  with  the
successive  phases  of  business  cycles.''  At  the  height  of  a  panic  the  public  with-
draws large  sums  from  the  banks,  reducing  the  quota  of  the  latter  to  its  mini-


is  statistics  for  the  United  States,  Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission,  p.  155.

li'Por  tlie  details  see  the  note  appended  to  the  present  chapter,  "A  Eevised  Estimate  of  the  Amount  of
Money  Held  by  the  Banks  of  the  United  States  in  1890-1911."

15  Compare  0.  M.  W.  Sprague,  "The  Distribution  of  Money  between  the  Banks  and  the  People  since  1893,"
Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,  1904,  vol.  18,  pp.  513-5^8.


296


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  77

Distribution  of  the  Monetary  Stock  op  the  United  States  Among  the  Public,  the  Banks,  and  the  Federal

Treasury  on  or  About  July  1,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts


lu

millions  oi  dollars

Proportions  of  the  total  stock
held  by  the

ProportioJ
stock  outsi
treasury  hf

Banks

Qs  of  the

dp  of  fhp

Total
stock

In  the
treasury
as  assets

Outside

of  the

treasury

Held

by
banks

Held  '
by  the
public

;ld  by  the

Year

Treasury

Banks

Public

Public

1890

$1,629

$256

$1,373

$492

$881

15.7%

30.2%

54.1%

35.8%

64.2%

1891

1,623

180

1,443

504

939

11.1

31.0

57.9

34.9

65.1

1892

1,689

151

1,538

585

953

9.0

34.6

56.4

38.0

62.0

1893

1,673

142

1,531

517

1,014

8.5

30.9

60.6

33.8

66.2

1894

1,726

144

1,582

680

902

8.3

39.4

52.3

43.0

57.0

1895

1,726

217

1,509

620

889

12.6

35.9

51.5

41.1

58.9

1896

1,708

294

1,414

556

858

17.2

32.6

50.2

39.3

60.7

1897

1,805

266

1,539

649

890

14.7

36.0

49.3

42.2

57.8

1898

1,959

236

1,723

713

1,010

12.0

36.4

51.6

41.4

58.6

1899

2,076

286

1,790

748

1,042

13.8

36.0

50.2

41.8

58.2

1900

2,223

285

1,938

787

1,151

12.8

35.4

51.8

40.6

59.4

1901

2,362

308

2,054

828

1,226

13.0

35.1

51.9

40.3

59.7

1902

2,439

314

2,125

875

1,250

12.9

35.9

51.2

41.2

58.8

1903

2,560

317

2,243

881

1,362

12.4

34.4

53.2

39.3

60.7

1904

2,674

284

2,390

1,016

1,374

10.6

38.0

51.4

42.5

57.5

1905

2,754

295

2,459

1,024

1,435

10.7

37.2

52.1

41.6

58.4

1906

2,937

333

2,604

1,043

1,561

11.3

35.5

53.2

40.1

59.9

1907

3,115

343

2,772

1,139

1,633

11.0

36.6

52.4

41.1

58.9

1908

3,378

341

3,037

1,394

1,643

10.1

41.3

48.6

45.9

54.1

1909*

3,406

309

3,097

1,466

1,631

9.1

43.0

47.9

47.3

52.7

1910

3,420

317

3,103

1,445

1,658

9.3

42.2

48.5

46.6

53.4

1911

3,556

342

3,214

1,573

1,641

9.6

44.2

46.1

48.9

51.1

Averages

1890-99

1,761.4

217.2

1,544.2

606.4

937.8

12.3

34.3

53.4

39.1

60.9

1900-09

2,784.8

312.9

2,471.9

1,045.3

1,426.6

11.4

37.2

51.4

42.0

58.0

*  Figures  for  April  30th,  instead  of  July  1st.

For  the  construction  of  this  table  see  the  note  appended  to  the  present  chapter,  "A  Revised  Estimate  of  the  Amount  of  Monev
Held  by  the  Banks  of  the  United  States."


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  -  297


TABLE  77— (Concluded)

Distribution  op  the  Monetary  Stock  or  the  United  States  Among  the  Public,  the  Banks,  and  the  Federal

Treasury  on  or  About  July  1,  1890-1911

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Year

Total
stock

In  the
treasury
as  assets

Outside
of  the

treasury

Held

by

banks

Held'
by  the
public

1890

92

118

89

81

94

1891

92

83

93

83

100

1892

96

70

100

96

102

1893

95

65

99

85

108

1894

98

66

102

112

96

1895

98

100

98

102

95

1896

97

135

92

92

91

1897

102

122

100

107

95

1898

111

109

112

118

108

1899

118

132

116

123

111

1900

126

131

125

130

123

1901

134

142

133

137

131

1902

138

145

138

144

133

1903

145.

146

145

145

145

1904

152

131

155

168

147

1905

156  ,

136

159

169

153

1906

167

153

169

172

166

1907

177

158

179

188

174

1908

192

157

197

230

175

1909

193

142

201

242

174

1910

194

146

201

238

177

1911

202

157

208

259

175

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

158

144

160

172

152

298


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


CHART  48.

Proportions  of  the  Mo^4EY  in  Circulation  in  the  United  States

Held  by  the  Banks  and  by  the  Public.

ia90 - 1911.


I  I HELD  BY  THE  BANK5.

1^^ Held  by  the  Public.


100


90


80


100


90


80


10


GO


-50


40


30


20


10


no


60


50


40


30


20


10


wJ^/^mM//m^.


mMM


T^.


j


1890 91 92 93 94 35 96 97 98 '99 1300  01 02 '05 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 I9i0


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


299


CHART  49.

260

1

RaAnvE  Amounts  of  Money  was  bt  the  banks  and

/

BY  THE  Public  in  the  united  states.

/

1690  -  1911.

1

N

/

240

HELD BY THE PUBLIC.

1

1

230

220

210
200
190

j

220
2iO
200
ISO
ISO

/

no

150

,,y

1.

t

,-"

•fc,,^

.^-

''•^

1

t
1
1

/

160
150

/

/

1

1

/

^

/

■ /

140
130

/

/

140
150

/

/
/

1

/

/,

/
/

/

120

no

100
30

/

/

120
110
100
90

\

/

/
/

/

r

,"

/

■\

\

\

/

1

1
1
1

/

A

\

I

--

\

/'

1
1

80

^

(

80

1890  '91 '92 '» '9* '93 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '05 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 "09 1910  'll

300  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

mum.  As  soon  as  the  crisis  yields  to  depression,  the  current  sets  strongly  in
the  opposite  direction.  Idle  money  accumulates  in  the  banks  and  raises  their
quota  to  its  maximum.  When  business  revives  and  emplojonent  becomes  more
regular  a  larger  proportion  of  the  monetary  stock  is  required  for  hand-to-hand
use,  the  quota  of  the  banks  declines  slowly  until  the  climax  of  prosperity  is
reached.  When  the  crisis  which  follows  comes  on  slowly  or  is  mild  in  character,
the  banks  begin  to  gain  again.  But  when  the  crisis  degenerates  into  a  panic,
the  gradual  decline  of  the  banks'  quota  which  occurred  during  the  prosperous
phase  of  the  cycle  suddenly  becomes  the  rapid  decline  with  which  we  started.

These  generalizations  seem  to  be  justified  by  the  figures  of  Table  77.  But
if  these  figures  were  annual  averages  instead  of  figures  for  a  single  day,  they
would  probably  show  a  closer  correlation  between  changes  in  the  distribution
of  money  and  changes  in  business  conditions.  As  matters  stand,  there  seems
to  be  a  contradiction  between  the  results  for  the  two  great  panic  years.  But
in  1893  the  panic  was  at  its  height  on  the  first  of  July,  while  in  1907  on  the  first
of  July  general  business  was  but  just  beginning  to  feel  the  reaction  which
developed  into  the  panic  of  October  and  November.  The  exceptionally  large
holdings  by  the  banks  in  1909  may  arise  from  the  fact  that  the  data  for  this
year  refer  to  April  30  instead  of  to  July  1,  though  we  do  not  know  enough  about
seasonal  variations  of  this  character  to  be  certain  that  the  banks  usually  hold
a  larger  proportion  of  the  country's  money  in  midspring  than  in  midsummer.

No  foreign  data  upon  this  subject  are  available,  both  because  of  the  scanty
materials  for  estimating  the  total  monetary  stock  and  because  of  the  lack  of
detail  in  the  bank  reports  concerning  the  amounts  of  money  in  hand.


V.  The  Volume  of  Deposit  Currency

That  the  currency  used  in  America  includes  a  far  larger  volume  of  checks
drawn  against  bank  deposits  than  of  money  is  a  matter  of  common  knowledge.
The  two  official  efforts  to  measure  these  tAvo  elements  in  the  currency  with
precision  have  been  directed,  not  toward  a  direct  comparison  between  the  quan-
tity of  money  and  the  quantity  of  deposits  subject  to  check,  but  toward  a  com-
parison between  the  volume  of  business  transactions  settled  in  money  and  the
volume  settled  in  credit  instruments.  In  1896,  Professor  David  Kinley,  who
superintended  both  investigations,  concluded  that  about  80  per  cent  of  all  busi-
ness payments  were  made  in  checks,  drafts,  etc.,  and  about  20  per  cent  in  money.
In  1909  he  adopted  80  to  85  per  cent  as  the  probable  proportion  of  business  done
by  check.  Both  of  these  conclusions  were  based  upon  a  critical  study  of  reports
from  the  banks  concerning  the  character  of  funds  deposited  with  them  upon
specified  days. By  applying  more  refined  methods  of  attack.  Professor  Irving


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  301

Fisher  has  reached  somewhat  different  results.  His  ratios  for  the  use  of  checks
are  86  per  cent  in  1896  and  91  per  cent  in  1909/"

Important  as  these  results  are,  they  do  not  answer  the  present  purpose.
We  need  an  estimate  of  the  volume' of  deposit  currency,  covering  every  year
since  1890,  and  comparable  with  the  revised  data  concerning  the  monetary  stock
which  have  been  presented.  For  such  comparisons  it  has  been  customary  to
rely  upon  the  statistics  of  the  individual  deposits  of  the  banks.  But  an  investi-
gation by  the  National  Monetary  Commission  has  shown  that  a  large  proportion
of  these  deposits  are  subject  to  conditions  Avhich  prevent  their  free  use  in  making
payments.  Accordingly,  it  is  necessary  to  ascertain  as  nearly  as  may  be  what
part  of  the  individual  deposits  are  actually  subject  to  check  in  all  the  classes
of  banks.  The  next  table  shows  the  results  of  such  an  effort,  and  a  note  at  the
end  of  this  chapter  explains  how  these  results  were  obtained.

The  relative  importance  of  bank  checks  and  of  money  as  constituent  elements
in  this  country's  currency  appears  from  the  figures  which  show  that  since  1890
deposit  currency  has  averaged  rather  more  than  two-thirds  and  money  outside
the  treasury  rather  less  than  one-third  of  the  total  circulating  medium.  The
deposit  currency,  moreover,  has  grown  at  a  faster  pace  than  the  money  in  circu-
lation. Between  1890  and  1911  the  former  increased  about  three  and  one-half
times  in  volume,  the  latter  about  two  and  one-quarter  times.  Consequently  the
proportion  of  deposit  currency  to  the  total  circulating  medium  has  risen  from
62  per  cent  to  72  per  cent,  and  that  of  money  has  fallen  from  38  to  28  per  cent.
That  business  habits  have  changed  during  these  two  decades  in  the  direction
of  a  freer  use  of  banking  facilities  by  the  business  public  there  can  be  no  doubt.

Though  this  change  obscures,  it  does  not  hide  the  fact  of  greatest  present
interest — namely,  that  the  ratio  of  checks  to  the  total  volume  of  currency  varies
with  the  course  of  business  cycles.  For  this  ratio  has  risen  fastest  in  periods
of  marked  prosperity,  such  as  1897-1902  and  1904-06.  On  the  other  hand,  the
gradual  growth  of  the  ratio  has  ceased  and  even  given  place  to  a  shrinkage  in
periods  of  business  reaction  such  as  1892-93,  1902-03,  and  1906-08.

Closely  related  to  but  not  identical  with  these  changes  in  the  ratio  of  the
deposit  currency  to  the  total  circulatinsr  medium  are  the  changes  in  the  ratio
of  the  monev  in  the  banks  to  the  deposit  currency.  In  the  last  section  it  was
shown  that  the  monev  in  the  banks  has  increased  faster  than  the  money  outside
of  the  treasury. Nevertheless  its  increase  has  not  kept  pace  with  that  of  the

16  David  Kinley,  The  Use  of  Credit  Instruments  in  Payments  in  the  United  States,  Publications  of  the  National
Monetary  Commission,  pp.  117  and  198-201.  The  results  of  the  investigation  of  1896  are  summarized  in  this
volume  (pp.  28-30'),  and  references  to  Kinley's  earlier  publications  on  the  subject  are  given  in  the  bibliog-
raphy Cp.  223).  For  Msher's  results,  see  his  Purchannq  Power  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  pp.  317,  318,  491,
492.  An  interesting  English  parallel  is  afforded  by  the  data  concerning  the  proportion  of  cash  and  credit
instruments  in  the  receipts  of  Parr's  Bank.  (See  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great
Britain,  Germa-n'y.  and  Prance,  p.  144').  On  a  "normal"  day  the  checks  made  97.45  per  cent  of  the  total  receipts
at  the  metropolitan  offices  and  85.70  per  cent  at  the  provincial  offices.  On  a  Saturday  these  percentages  rose
to  97.93  and  88.90,  and  on  a  stock-exchange  settling  day  to  98.89  and  88.98  per  cent  respectively.  All  of  the
data  refer  to  days  in  August,  1908.


302


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  78

The  Volume  of  Money  and  of  Deposit  Cukrency  in  the  United  States  on  the  30th  op  June  in  the  Years

1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

A

Aver

Relative  amounts
age  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =

:  100

Year

Total

monetary

stock

Money  out-
side of  the
treasury

Money
in  the
banks

Money

held  by  the

public

Deposit
currency

Total Money  out-
monetary  side  of  the
stock treasury

Money
in  the
banks

Money

held  by  the

public

Deposit
currency

1890

1,629

1,373

492

881

2,264

92

89

81

94

82

1891

1,623

1,443

504

939

2,325

92

93

83

100

85

1892

1,689

1,538

585

953

2,615

96

100

96

102

95

1893

1,673

1,531

517

1,014

2,510

95

99

85

108

91

1894

1,726

1,582

680

902

2,578

98

102

112

96

94

1895

1,726

1,509

620

889

2,731

98

98

102

95

99

1896

1,708

1,414

556

858

2,688

97

92

92

91

98

1897

1,805

1,539

649

890

2,747

102

100

107

95

100

1898

1,959

1,723

713

1,010

3,198

111

112

118

108

116

1899

2,076

1,790

748

1,042

3,865

118

116

123

111

140

1900

2,223

1,938

787

1,151

4,205

126

125

130

123

153

1901

2,362

2,054

828

1,226

4,955.

134

133

137

131

180

1902

2,439

2,125

875

1,250

5,367

138

138

144

133

195

1903

2,560

2,243

881

1,362

5,540

145

145

145

145

201

1904

2,674

2,390

1,016

1,374

5,853

152

155

168

147

213

1905

2,754

2,459

1,024

1,435

6,559

156

159

169

153

238

1906

2,937

2,604

1,043

1,561

6,863

'l67

169

172

166

249

1907

3,115

2,772

1,139

1,633

7,109

177

179

188

174

258

1908

3,378

3,037

1,394

1,643

6,522

192

197

230

175

237

1909

3,406

3,097

1,466

1,631

6,808

193

201

242

174

247

1910

3,420

3,103

1,445

1,658

7,713

194

201

238

177

280

1911

3,556

3,214

1,573

1,641

8,242

202

208

259

175

300

Averages

1890-99

1,761.4

1,544.2

606.4

937.8

2,752.1

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

2,784.8

2,471.9

1,045.3

1,426.6

5,978.1

158

160

172

152

217

The  data  concerning  money  are  from  Table  77,  preceding.  The  data  concerning  deposit  currencv  give  the  results  of  a  revised
estimate  of  the  bank  deposits  subject  to  check.  See  the  note  appended  to  the  present  chapter,  "The  Volume  of  Deposit  Cnrrencj
in  the  United  States."


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  303


TABLE  78— (Concluded)-

The  Volume  of  Money  and  op  Deposit  Currency  in  the  United  States  on  the  30th  of  June  in  the  Years

1890-1911


Ratios  borne  to  the  volume  of  deposit
currency  by  the

Amount  of  money

outside  of  the

treasury  plus  the

volume  of  deposit

currency

Millions  of

dollars

Ratios  borne  to  the  money  outside  of  the

treasury  plus  the  volume  of  deposit  currency

by  the

Year

Total

monetary

stock

Money  out-
side of  the
treasury

Money
in  the
banks

Money

held  by  the

public

Volume
of  deposit
currency

Money  out-
side of  the
treasury

Money
in  the
banks

Money

held  by  the

public

1890

72%

61%

22%

39%

3,637

62%

38%

14%

24%

1891

70

62

22

40

3,768

62

38

13

25

1892

65

59

22

36

4,153

63

37

14

23

1893

67

61

21

40

4,041

62

38

13

25

1894

67

61

26

35

4,160

62

38

16

22

1895

63

55

23

33

4,240

64

36

15

21

1896

64

53

21

32

4,102

66

34

14

21

1897

66

56

24

32

4,286

64

36

15

21

1898

61

54

22

32

4,921

65

35

14

21

1899

54

46

19

27

5,655

68

32

13

18

1900

53

46

19

27

6,143

68

32

13

19

1901

48

41

17

25

7,009

71

29

12

17

1902

45

40

16

23

7,492

72

28

12

17

1903

46

41

16

25

7,783

71

29

11

18

1904

46

41

17

23

8,243

71

29

12

17

1905

42

37

16

22

9,018

73

27

11

16

1906

43

38

15

23

9,467

73

2.8

11

16

1907

44

39

16

23

9,881

72

28

12

17

1908

52

47

21

25

9,559

68

32

15

17

1909

50

46

22

24

9,905

69

31

15

16

1910

44

40

19

22

10,816

71

29

13

15

1911

43

39

19

20

11,456

72

28

14

14

Averages

1890-09

65

57

22

35

4,296.3

64

36

14

22

1900-09

47

42

18

24

8,450.0

71

29

12

17

304


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


-

Chart  50.

300

]

Relative  Amounts of  Money  in  Circulation and  of  Dcposits

1
1

Subject  to  Check  in  the  United  States.

1
1

1690  -  1911.

1

280

/
1
/
/

—  _-»^ DEPOSITS Subject  TO  Check.

280

SGO

/

I

/

/

\

/

/

\

J

i

\

/

\

S40

1

\

/

240

/

\

/

/

\

1

1

220

1

220

1

1

i

1

1

/

200

1

1

>

/

ZOO

/

~^

1

/

r

1
1

i

,

/

/

/

/

/

/

180

/

1

/

ISO

1
1
1
1

/

r

J

/

1

/

ISO

1

/

1

y

160

1

<^

1

/

1

/

1

/

140

1

/

140

1

r^

1

/

1

t

^

1

/

lEO

1

1
1

/

/

1

/

120

/

/

f

J

/

^

z

V

^

5^

\

5i

T\

100

^

^

f

r

JL

\  AA.

\

100

/

\"

■7

1 "
\

Tf

t^

J

^

11

^

'  /

N

y

\

f

\

1

80

r

\

4f

>

\

^
^

%

h
«£

Hi

lA

it

09

0<

Si

^

/

80

1890*91 '92 "95  '9^  '35 *9B  "97 '96  "99 1900 'Ot '02 'Ob '04 "05 '06  '07 "08  '09 1910  "ll

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


305


CHART 51.

Proportions  of  the:  Circulating  Medium  of  the  United  States  Consisting  of  deposits
Subject  to  check,  Money  Held  by  the  banks  ,  and  Money  Held  by  the  Public.

IS90  -  191!  .


100


^m PROPORTION  OF  MONEY HELD BY THE PUBLIC.

^M Proportion  of  Money  held  by  the  banks -
I I Proportion  of  Deposits  subject  to  Check  .


100


90


90


80


70


60


80


70


60


50


30


40


■40


30


20


10


1890  '91 92 93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '96 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '05 '04 '05 '06 '07 '06 '09 1910  '11


30


20


10


306  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

deposits  against  which  it  is  held  as  a  reserve.  Hence  the  proportion  of  money
held  by  the  banks  to  deposits  subject  to  check  has  fallen  from  22  per  cent  in
1890-99  to  18  per  cent  in  1900-09.  But,  once  more,  the  change  has  not  been
steady.  On  the  contrary,  it  has  been  dominated  by  the  ever-recurring  alter-
nations of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.  The  highest  ratio  of  money  to
checking  deposits — 26  per  cent — came  in  1894,  the  lowest — 15  per  cent — in  1906.
The  juxtaposition  of  these  extreme  vaiiations  shows  how  inaccurate  is  the
assumption  that  the  deposit  currenc}'  ma}'  be  treated  as  a  substantially  constant
multiple  of  the  quantity  of  money  in  the  banks.

In  Section  iii  of  this  chapter  it  has  heen  shown  that  the  American  monetary
stock  has  slight  capacity  for  adjusting  its  volume  to  the  changing  condition  of
business.  On  the  whole,  it  does  increase  more  rapidly  in  good  times  than  in
bad ;  but  it  frequently  fails  to  contract  Avlien  prosperity  passes  over  into  depres-
sion. The  present  table  shows  that  deposit  currency  is  distinctly  superior  to
money  in  this  quality  of  elasticity.  In  prosperous  times  it  expands  more  rapidly
than  money,  and  in  dull  times  it  is  more  likely  to  contract.  For  example,
deposit  currency  shrank  21  per  cent  between  ]  907  and  1908,  while  the  monetary
stock  increased  15  per  cent."  Nevertheless,  deposit  currency  does  not  have  that
"perfect  elasticity"  with  which  it  is  sometimes  credited."  For  among  the
various  indices  of  business  conditions  presented  in  Chapter  V  there  are  several
which  reflect  changes  in  the  activity  of  trade  more  faithfully  than  does  the
column  of  relative  figures  for  deposit  currency  in  Table  78.


VI.  The  Velocity  of  Circulation

The  only  serious  attempt  to  estimate  the  velocity  with  which  both  money
and  checks  circulate  has  been  made  by  Professor  Irving  Fisher  for  the  United
States.^°  It  is  based  primarily  upon  the  data  collected  by  the  Comptroller  of
the  Currency  concerning  the  sums  of  money  and  credit  instruments  deposited
in  banks  on  the  settling  day  nearest  July  1,  1896,  and  on  March  16,  1909.
Figures  for  the  intervening  years  are  interpolated.

From  these  two  inquiries  Fisher  estimates  that  the  total  check  transactions
of  the  country  made  97  billion  dollars  in  1896  and  364  billions  in  1909.  Since
he  puts  the  deposits  subject  to  check  at  2.68  billions  in  the  first  3^ear  and  at  6.75
in  the  second,  he  finds  by  division  that  the  average  turnover  of  deposit  currency
in  1896  and  1909  respectively  was  26.2  and  53.9  times.


If  These  percentages  are  from  the  columns  of  "relative  amounts"  in  Table  78,  and  therefore  represent  ratios
to  the  average  actual  amounts  of  both  kinds  of  currency  in  1890-99.

IS  By  Professor  J.  Laurence  Laughlin,  for  example. See  his  Frinciples  of  Money  (New  York,  1903),  p.  120.
1^0  Purchasing  Power  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  Appendix  to  chapter  XII,  §§  4-8.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  307

To  calculate  the  velocities  for  the  years  1897-1908,  Fisher  uses  the  clearings
in  New  York  and  "outside  New  York"  as  a  barometer  of  business  transactions
performed  by  check,  allowing  the  latter  clearings  five  times  the  weight  of  the
former.  But  when  total  check  transactions  are  computed  in  this  fashion  for
1896  and  1909  he  finds  that  they  exceed  the  same  transactions  as  estimated  from
the  comptroller's  bank  inquiries  of  those  years.  The  two  estimates  can  be  made
to  agree,  however,  by  multiplying  the  barometer  made  from  clearings  by  .69
in  1896  and  by  .88  in  1909.  The  ratios  of  correction  to  be  applied  to  the  barom-
eter for  intermediate  years  he  assumes  to  rise  at  a  regular  rate  from  .69  to  .88.
After  estimating  check  transactions  in  this  fashion  for  each  year,  he  computes
the  velocity  of  circulation  by  dividing  these  totals  by  the  corresponding  estimates
of  deposits  subject  to  check.

A  more  elaborate  method  is  required  in  dealing  with  the  velocity  at  which
money  circulates.  The  comptroller's  inquiries  of  1896  and  1909  allow  the  total
sums  of  actual  money  deposited  in  or  withdrawn  from  the  banks  to  be  estimated
at  9.6  billions  in  the  course  of  the  first  year  and  at  20.7  billions  in  the  course  of
the  second.  So  far  as  these  withdrawals  are  used  in  payments  to  enterprises
or  individuals  having  bank  accounts,  Fisher  assumes  that  the  money  taken  out
of  the  bank  is  exchanged  on  the  average  just  once  before  it  is  redeposited.  But
when  money  is  drawn  from  the  banks  to  pay  people  who  keep  no  bank  accounts,
Fisher  assumes  that  it  changes  hands  twice  on  the  average  before  it  is  returned
to  the  banks  by  some  depositor.  The  first  time  it  is  paid  for  labor  in  the  typical
case ;  the  second  time  it  is  paid  by  the  laborer  for  groceries,  etc.,  and  then  it  is
deposited  once  more  by  the  retail  merchant.  Hence  the  sum  of  wages  paid  iu
money,  plus  allowances  for  money  payments  to  other  non-depositors,  must  be
added  to  the  sums  of  money  deposited  in  banks  in  estimating  the  total  circu-
lation of  money  against  goods.  These  items  are  put  at  5.7  and  13.1  billions  in
1896  and  1909.  Finally,  five  small  items,  the  largest  half  a  billion,  are  added
to  cover  cases  in  which  money  received  by  depositors  is  paid  out  again  in  cash
instead  of  being  put  into  the  banks,  etc.  The  grand  total  of  transactions  settled
by  the  use  of  money  is  thus  raised  to  16.2  billions  in  1896  and  to  35.1  billions
in  1909.  Dividing  these  totals  by  the  estimated  amount  of  money  in  circulation,
Fisher  finds  that  the  average  rate  of  turnover  was  18.6  times  in  the  first  year
and  21.5  times  in  the  second.

It  remains  to  interpolate  figures  for  the  intervening  years.  This  task  Fisher
performs  by  splitting  the  difference  between  two  hypotheses — one  that  the
velocity  increased  at  an  unvarying  pace  each  year  from  18.6  in  ]896  to  21.5  in
1909,  the  other  that  the  changes  corresponded  to  those  already  estimated  for  the
velocity  of  check  circulation.

The  final  results  are  as  follows :


308  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  79
Fisher's  Estimates  of  the  Velocity  of  Cieculation  of  Checks  and  Money  in  the  United  States,  1896-1911


Year

Checks

Money

Year

Checks

Money

1896

36.2

18.6

1904

40.2

20.7

1897

37.9

19.1

1905

43.1

21.8

1898

39.8

19.8

1906

46.8

21.7

1899

42.6

21.9

1907

44.9

21.1

1900

39.3

20.0

1908

45.7

20.0

1901

40.6

21,8

1909

53.9

21.5

1902

40.9

21.8

1910

52.8

21.0

1903

39.1

20.6

1911

49.9

20.9

Professor  Fisher  believes  that  his  figures  for  checks  are  subject  to  a  probable
error  of  between  5  and  10  per  cent,  and  that  his  figures  for  money  are  probably
correct  in  most  cases  for  the  first  two  digits.  But  our  interest  lies  rather  in
the  variations  between  years  of  depression  and  years  of  prosperity  than  in  the
absolute  accuracy  of  the  figures  for  any  one  year.  These  variations  have  two
sources.  First,  the  original  data  derived  from  the  comptroller's  inquiries^ of
1896  and  1909  show  a  marked  increase  in  velocities,  particularly  in  the  velocity
of  checks.  Second,  the  distribution  of  this  increase  over  the  intervening  years
is  rendered  somewhat  irregular  by  the  use  of  clearings  as  a  barometer  of  check
transactions.  The  results  indicate  that  both  money  and  checks,  but  checks  more
than  money,  are  gaining  in  velocity  of  circulation ;  but  that  this  gain  is  unsteady,
being  rapid  in  years  of  high  prosperity  and  being  broken  by  a  decline  in  years
of  business  reaction.

The  part  of  this  conclusion  of  chief  interest  here  may  be  tested  by  methods
which  possess  slight  value  for  estimating  the  actual  velocity  of  circulation  in
any  one  year.  The  activity  of  the  check  circulation  must  be  reflected,  though
not  without  distortion,  b)^  the  ratio  between  the  bank  clearings  of  a  town  and
its  average  deposits.  The  next  table,  which  presents  data  of  this  character  for
New  York,  Boston,  and  Philadelphia,  amply  confirms  Fisher's  conclusion  that
the  velocity  of  check  circulation  rises  in  prosperity  and  sinks  in  depression.
In  Now  York  the  ratio  stood  at  93  in  1890,  fell  to  43  in  1894,  rose  to  83  in  1901,
fell  again  to  61  in  1904,  rose  once  more  to  102  in  1906,  and  then  ran  down  to  61
in  1908.  The  Boston  figures  for  these  years  are  39,  25,  33,  31,  40,  31 ;  and  the
Philadelphia  figures  are  39,  27,  27,  24,  31,  22.  The  violence  of  the  changes  in
these  ratios  suggests  .that  Professor  Fisher's  results  under-  rather  than  over-
rate the  variations  in  the  velocity  of  circulation  from  one  year  to  the  next.
But  it  is  difficult  to  test  this  suggestion,  because  certain  of  his  data  have  to  be
interpolated  for  all  years  except  1896  and  1909  on  the  basis  of  hypotheses  which
themselves  cannot  be  verified  or  disproved.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


309


TABLE  80
Eatio  of  the  Yearly  Clearings  to  the  Average  Bank  Deposits  in  New  York,  Boston,


New  York


Boston


AND  Philadelphia
Philadelphia


Year

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1895

1896

1897

1898

1899

1900

1901

1902

1903

1904

1905

1906

1907

1908

1909

1910

1911

Averages
1890-99

1900-09


Clearings

Millions  of

dollars

(1)
37,458

33,749

36,662

31,261

24,387

29,841

28,870

33,427

41,971

60,761

52,634

79,420_

76,328

65,970

68,649

93,822

104,675
87,182
79,275

103,588
97,275
92,373

35,838.7
81,154.3


Av.  deposits

Millions  of

dollars

(2)
404.4

409.4

504.4

433.7

568.9

543.3

482.5

602.7

729.8

844.7

852.8

957.4

934.9

898.6

1,118.1

1,120.4

1,025.0

1,065.2

1,302.5

1,347.6

1,216.9

1,372.8

552.38
1,062.25


Ratio

(3)

92.6

82.4

72.7

72.1

42.9

54.9

59.8

55.5

a7.5

71.9

61.7

83.0

81.6

73.4

61.4

83.7

102.1

81.8

60.9

76.9

79.9

67.3

66.23
76.65


Clearings Av.  deposits
Millions  of Millions  of


dollars
(4)

5,130
4,753
5,005
4,577
4,148
4,757
4,498
5,095
5,425
7,086
6,180
7,191
6,930
6,717
6,631
7,655
8,335
8,135
7,338
8,440
8,299
8,340


dollars

(5)
130.2

129.2

147.2

135.9

166.9

160.0

140.1

173.8-

192.8

228.8

200.4

216.5

211.2

204.2

212.2

223.2

211.2

215.0

235.0

262.1

245.9

270.7


Ratio
(6)
39.4

36.8

34.0

33.7

24.9

29.7

32.1

29.3

28.1

31.0

30.8

33.2

32.8

32.9

31.2

34.3

39.5

37.8

31.2

32.2

33.8

30.8


Clearings

Millions  of

dollars

(7)

3,710
3,296
3,810
3,403
3,060
3,556
3,161
3,222
3,671
4,811
4,677
5,475
5,875
5,841
5,776
6,928
7,686
7,161
5,937
7,021'
7,690
7,692


Av.  deposits

Millions  of

dollars

(8)

94.2

95.9
112.1

98.6
113.4
108.3
100.1
119.9
131.4
164.8
178.9
204.9
210.8
210.7
237.8
256.9
249.6
250.4
272.5
314.9
201.9
328.4


Ratio
(9)
39.4

34.4

34.0

34.5

27.0

32.8

31.6

26.9

27.9

29.2

26.1

26.7

27.9

27.7

24.3

27.0

30.8

28.6

21.8

22.3

25.5

23.4


5,047.4 160.49


7,355.2 219.15

SouBOES  OF  Data

Columns  (1),  (4),  and  (7),  A.  P.  Andrew,  iStatistica  for  the  United  States
sion),  p.  8.

Column (2),  computed  from  data  in  ibid.,  pp.  98-118.

Columns (3), (6),  and (9),  computed  from  data  in  the  preceding  columns.

Columns  (5)  and  (8),  compiled  from  weekly  reports  in  the  Commercial  and
the  New  York  banks  in  1910  and  1911  are  also  from  this  source.

The  clearings  for  1910  and  1911  are  taken  from  the  Financial  Review.


31.9  3,570.0  113.87  31.77

33.59  6,237.7  238.74  26.32

(Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commis-

Financial Chronicle. The average deposits of


Pierre  des  Essars  has  utilized  the  reports  of  the  Bank  of  Prance  concerning
the  receipts,  payments,  and  average  balances  of  its  current  accounts  to  show
that  the  average  turnover  reaches  its  maximum  in  years  of  crises  and  then
declines  sharply.^"  A  continuation  of  his  table  to  1911  shows  that  his  conclu-
sions hold  good  of  recent  years,  though  the  changes  after  the  crisis  of  1900  are
veiled  somewhat  by  the  rapid  rate  at  which  the  turnover  has  been  increasing
in  the  past  decade.

20  Journal  de  la  Societe  de  Statistique  de  Paris,  April,  1895.


310


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  81

Velocity  of  Circulation  of  Private  Deposits  in  the  Bank  op  Trance,  Computed  According  to  the  Formula

of  p.  des  essars,  for  1890-1911


Year

Sum  of  the

"versements"

and  "payeraents"

In  millions

of  francs

"Soldemoyen"
multiplied

by  2
In  millions
of  francs

Velocity  of

circulation  —

amounts  in  1st

column  H-  amounts

in  2d  column

1890

108,636

804

135

1891

120,388

866

139

1892

97,430

839

116

1893

97,415

811

120

1894

113,734

890

128

1895

126,889

1,055

120

1896

107,823

1,056

102

1897

109,420

904

121

1898

118,458

896

132

1899

128,151

863

148

1900

130,263

874

149

1901

136,678

932

147

1902

142,023

887

160

1903

148,601

760

196

1904

169,327

989

171

1905

196,701

1,023

192

1906

216,443

1,014

213

1907

208,104

920

226

1908

197,102

932

211

1909

240,692

1,232

195

1910

269,507

1,096

246

1911

293,880

1,071

274

Averages

1890-99

112,834.4

898.4

126.1

1900-09

178,593.4

956.3

186.0

Data  from  the  Annuaire  statistique  de  France,  1909,  p.  68*


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  311


NOTES

A  REVISED  ESTIMATE  OP  THE  AMOUNT  OF  MONET  HELD  BY  THE  BANKS  OF

THE  UNITED  STATES  IN  1890-1911

Beginning  in  1892,  the  Comptroller  of  the'  Currency  has  included  in  his  annual  reports  an
estimate  of  the  amount  of  the  total  monetary  stock  held  by  the  federal  treasury,  by  the  banks,
and  by  the  general  public.  In  Dr.  A.  Piatt  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States  (Publica-
tions of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),  p.  155,  this  table  is  carried  back  from  1892  to  1867.
While  these  figures  afford  a  satisfactory  working  basis  for  estimating  the  character  of  the  changes
in  the  distribution  of  money  from  year  to  year,  they  require  several  corrections.

1.  The  amount  of  money  held  by  the  banks  is  computed  from  the  bank  reports  secured  by  the
Comptroller  of  the  Currency.  These  reports  include  all  of  the  national  banks,  but  not  all  of  the
state  and  private  banl?s  and  trust  companies.  Although  the  omitted  institutions  are  doubtless
small  banks  for  the  most  part,  their  number  is  sufficient  to  make  a  considerable  deficiency  in  the
published  figures  for  money  in  the  banks.

In  1900  and  1902-1911  the  comptroller  estimated  the  number  and  the  individual  deposits  of
these  institutions  from  which  reports  were  not  received. His  figures  were  as  follows :


1900

Number  of
banks

3,595

Individual
deposits

$450,000,000

1902

3,732

478,600,000

1903

4,546

502,500,000

1904

3,994

448,000,000

1905

3,500

435,600,000

1906

3,491

413,200,000

1907

4,191

554,900,000

1908

3,654

486,000,000

1909

3,021

389,700,000

1910

4,168

521,600,000

1911

4,159

560,000,000

Another  estimate  of  the  number  of  banks  operating  under  state  laws  has  been  made  by
Professor  George  E.  Barnett  in  his  State  Banks  and  Trust  Companies  Since  the  Passage  of  the
National  Bank  Act  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission).  Barnett's  figures  are
based  upon  official  state  reports,  where  the  latter  are  available,  and  elsewhere  upon  the  various
almanacs  giving  the  names  and  addresses  of  banking  institutions.  The  following  table  compares
Barnett's  figures  for  1890-1908  with  the  number  of  banks  reporting  to  the  comptroller:


312


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Number  of  banks  not  reporting


Number
of  State  banks

A

Number
of  trust  companies

Number
of  private  banks

to  the  comptroller

State
banks
433

Trust
companies

47*

Private
banks
2,961

Year
1890

Comptroller
2,101

Barnett^
2,534

Comptroller
149

Barnett
102.

Comptroller
1,344

Barnett
4,305

Total
3,347

1891

2,572

3,102

171

125

1,235

4,230

530

46*

2,995

3,479

1892

3,191

3,484

168

124

1,161

4,004

293

44*

2,843

3,092

1893

3,579

3,700

228

214

848

4,031

121

14*

3,183

3,290

1894

3,586

3,705

224

228

904

3,844

119

4

2,940

3,063

1895

3,774

3,818

242

241

1,070

3,924

44

1*

2,854

2,897

1896  .

3,708

3,917

260

257

824

3,810

209

3*

2,986

3,192

1897

3,857

3,978

251

264

759

3,806

121

13

3,047

3,181

1898

3,965

4,062

246

268

758

3,853

97

22

3,095

3,214

1899

4,191

4,253

260

276

756

4,168

62

16

3,412

3,490

1900

4,369

4,405

290

492

989

5,287

36

202

4,298

4,536

1901

4,983

4,906

334

561

917

5,060

_  477

227

4,143

4,293

1902

5,397

5,433

417

636

1,039

4,976

36

219

3,937

4,192

1903

5,962

6,111

531

827

1,174

5,417

149

296

4,243

4,688

1904

6,923

6,984

585

924

854

5,484

61

339

4,630

5,030

1905

7,794

7,920

683

1,041

1,028

5,291

126

358

4,263

4,747

1906

8,862

9,334

742

1,337

929

4,823

472

595

3,894

4,961

1907

9,967

10,352

794

1,485

1,141

4,947

385

695

3,806

4,882

1908

11,220

11,295

842

1,496

1,007

4,576

75

654

3,569

4,298

*  Com

iptroller's  figu]

res  in  excess

of  Barnett's

i.

Barnett  points  out  that  his  figures  for  1900-08  are  swollen  by  a  partial  double  counting  of  trust
companies  as  both  trust  companies  and  state  banks.  To  indicate  the  extent  of  this  duplication,
he  publishes  a  table  (p.  249)  showing  the  numbers  of  trust  companies  given  by  official  state  reports
and  the  numbers  derived  from  both  official  and  unofficial  sources.  In  answer  to  an  inquiry  he
Idndly  informs  me  that  in  1906-08  the  whole  number  of  trust  companies  officially  reported  is
counted  twice  in  his  tables,  while  in  1900-05  the  double  counting  is  probably  not  over  150  in  any
year  and  probably  not  over  half  the  difference  between  the  numbers  reported  officially  and  the
numbers  ascertained  from  both  official  and  unofficial  sources.  On  this  basis  I  have  framed  a
rough  estimate  of  the  deductions  which  should  be  applied  to  Barnett 's  figures.  The  following
columns  show  the  changes  which  result  in  the  total  number  of  omitted  banks,  and  also  compare
the  corrected  figures  with  the  comptroller's  estimate  of  the  non-reporting  banks.


Barnett's  estimate
of  the  non-reporting  banks

Comptroller's

estimate  of  the

non-reporting

banks

Year

Original

Corrected

1900

4,536

4,446

3,595

1901

4,293

4,193

1902

4,192

4,097

3,732

1903

4,688

4,558

4,546

1904

5,030

4,890

3,994

1905

4,747

4,597

3,500

1906

4,961

4,383

3,491

1907

4,882

4,204

4,191

1908

4,298

3,664

3,654

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  313

It  will  be  noticed  that  Barnett's  figures  remain  higher  than  the  comptroller's,  even  after  the
estimated  duplications  in  his  lists  have  been  deducted.  The  cause  of  the  discrepancy  is  not  clear
for  until  1908  the  comptroller  did  not  state  upon  what  source  he  based  his  estimates.  Barnett,
on  the  other  hand,  explains  that,  where  official  reports  are  unavailable,  his  lists  are  made  from
Homans'  Bankers'  Almanac  and  its  continuations — ^standard  technical  publications.  Further,
Barnett  uses  the  July  edition  of  the  almanac,  which  makes  his  results  conform  in  date  to  the  bank
reports  used.  I  am  therefore  inclined  to  accept  Barnett's  results  as  more  trustworthy  for  the
present  than  the  comptroller's.  For  1909-11,  however,  I  use  the  comptroller's  figures,  partly
because  Barnett  accepts  them  for  1909,  and  partly  because  the  preceding  table  shows  that  the
differences  between  the  two  estimates  had  nearly  disappeared  by  1907  and  1908.

2.  But,  granted  that  Barnett's  corrected  figures  show  the  approximate  number  of  banks  for
which  the  comptroller  obtains  no  reports,  it  remains  to  determine  how  much  money  these  insti-
tutions probably  hold.

Ji'rom  the  preceding  figures  published  by  the  comptroller  for  the  number  and  aggregate
deposits  of  the  non-reporting  banks  it  is  easy  to  compute  the  average  amount  of  deposits  held  by
each.  These  figures  agree  with  the  average  deposits  of  the  private  banks  for  which  reports  are
obtained,  as  the  following  comparison  shows :


Tear

Estimated  average

individual  deposits

of  non-reporting

banks

Average  individual

deposits  of  the

reporting  private

banks

1900

$125,000

$97,000

1901

129,000

1902

128,000

127,000

1903

111,000

113,000

1904

112,000

112,000

1905

124,000

124,000

1906

118,000

118,000

1907

132,000

132,000

1908

133,000

126,000

1909

129,000

129,000

1910

125,000

133,000

1911

135,000

127,500

The  practice  of  estimating  the  aggregate  deposits  of  non-reporting  banks  from  the  average
deposits  of  the  private  banks  is  justified  (1)  by  the  fact  that  the  great  mass  of  the  non-reporting
institutions  are  themselves  private  banks,  and  (2)  by  the  probability  that  while  the  non-reporting
state  banks  and  trust  companies  have  average  deposits  larger  than  those  of  private  banks,  the
non-reporting  private  banks  have  somewhat  smaller  average  deposits  than  the  private  banks  for
which  reports  are  obtained.  Indeed,  the  presumption  in  favor  of  the  comptroller's  later  practice
is  so  strong  as  to  discredit  his  estimate  for  1900,  in  which  he  puts  the  deposits  of  non-reporting
banks  at  a  round  $450,000,000,  without  noticing  that  this  figure  gives  average  deposits  more  than
a  quarter  greater  than  those  of  the  private  banks  for  which  he  had  returns.

3.  The  money  holdings  of  the  non-reporting  banks  may  be  estimated  by  assuming  that  these
institutions  keep  cash  reserves,  corresponding  to  those  of  the  reporting  private  banks.

One  minor  difficulty  obstructs  this  procedure.  From  1887  to  1895,  the  comptroller's  tables
for  private  banks  do  not  separate  ' '  cash ' '  from  ' '  cash  items. "  It  is  therefore  necessary  to  estimate
the  amount  of  the  latter  from  the  figures  for  later  years  in  which  "cash"  is  given  under  one  rubric
and  "cheeks  and  other  cash  items"  under  another. In  the  five  years  1896-1900  the  "cheeks  and


314


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


other  cash  items"  made  on  the  average  9  per  cent,  and  "cash  on  hand"  made  91  per  cent  of  the
sum  of  the  two  items.  By  applying  these  two  percentages,  the  ratio  of  cash  to  individual  deposits
may  be  computed  for  1890-95. The  amounts  are  stated  in  millions  of  dollars.


Private  Banks  for  Which  the  Comptroller  Publishes  Reports


Year

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

Cash

Individual
deposits

Per  cent  of  cash

to  individual

deposits

1890

14.5

1.3

13.2

99.7

13.2%

1891

12.0

1.1

10.9

95.0

11.5

1892

12.2

1.1

11.1

93.1

11.9

1893

9.4

.8

8.6

68.6

12.5

1894

8.0

.7

7.3

66.1

11.0

1895

9.3

.8

8.5

81.8

10.4

4.  We  are  now  ready  to  estimate  the  amount  of  money  held  by  banks  from  which  the  comp-
troller has  not  secured  reports.


Year

Number  of

non-reporting

banks

Average

individual  deposits

of  reporting

private  banks

In  thousands

of  dollars

Aggregate

individual  deposits

of  non-reporting

banks

In  millions

of  dollars

Ratio  of  cash

on  hand  to

individual  deposits

in  reporting

private  banks

Per  cent

Aggregate
money  holdings
of  non-reporting

In  millions
of  dollars

1890

3,347

74

248

13.2

33

1891

3,479

77

268

11.5

31

1892

3,092

80

247

11.9

29

1893

3,290

81

266

12.5

33

1894

3,063

73

224

11.0

25

1895

2,897

76

220

10.4

23

1896

3,192

72

230

10.5

24

1897

3,181

66

210

10.1

21

1898

3,214

82

264

9.3

25

1899

3,490

86

300

8.4

25

1900

4,446

97

431

8.6

37

1901

4,193

129

541

6.1

33

1902

4,097

127

520

7.1

37

1903

4,558

113

515

6.5

33

1904

4,890

112

548

6.1

33

1905

4,597

124

570

6.3

36

1906

4,383

118

517

6.1

32

1907

4,204

132

555

5.V

32

1908

3,664

126

462

6.7

31

1909

3,021

129

390

5.7

22

1910

4,168

133

554

5.4

30

1911

4,159

128

560

5.0

28

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES"  315

The  first  column  shows  the  number  of  non-reporting  banks  as  deduced  from  a  comparison
between  Barnett's  tables  (corrected  for  the  double  counting  of  trust  companies  in  1900-08)  and
the  number  of  banks  other  than  national  for  which  the  comptroller  publishes  reports.  The  average
individual  deposits  of  reporting  private  banks  are  computed  from  the  comptroller's  data."  The
third  column  is  made  by  multiplying  the  figures  in  the  first  column  by  the  corresponding  figures
in  the  second.  The  fourth  column,  like  the  second,  is  computed  from  the  comptroller's  data  for
private  banks,  but  after  excluding  the  "cash  items"  from  the  figures  for  "cash  and  cash  items"
in  1890-95.  The  fifth  column  is  made  by  applying  the  percentages  of  column  four  to  the  aggregate
deposits  of  column  three.

5.  A  final  correction  remains  to  be  made  in  the  comptroller's  figure  for  money  in  the  banks.
As  has  been  said,  the  published  reports  for  private  banks  in  1890-95  include  "cash  .items"  and
"cash"  under  the  single  heading.  The  same  is  true  of  the  comptroller's  figures  for  state  and
savings  banks  and  trust  companies.  To  find  the  amount  of  money  held  by  these  institutions  it  is
therefore  necessary  to  segregate  the  "cash  items."

The  method  adopted  toward  this  end  is  the  one  already  applied  to  the  private  banks.  The
separately  stated  amounts  of  "checks  and  other  cash  items"  and  of  "cash  on  hand"  in  1896-1900
were  added  together,  the  ratio  of  each  item  to  the  sum  of  the  two  was  computed,  and  the  average
of  these  ratios  was  struck  for  the  five-year  period.  It  turned  out  that  ' '  cash  items ' '  made  on  the
average  21  per  cent  of  the  "cash  and  cash  items"  among  the  state  banks,  5  per  cent  among  the
trust  companies,  9  per  cent  among  the  private  banks,  and  3  per  cent  among  the  savings  banks.
When  these  ratios  are  applied  to  the  original  returns  for  1890-95  the  following  results  expressed
in  millions  of  dollars  are  obtained.


State  banks

Trust

companies

Private  banks

A

Savings  banks

All  banks  other  than
national

A

Tear

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

Cash

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

Cash

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

Cash

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

Cash

Cash

and  cash

items

Cash
items

1
Cash

1890

120.8

25.4

95.4

19.9

1.0

18.9

14.5

1.3

13.2

30.1

.9

29.2

185.3

28.6

156.7

1891

107.5

22.6

84.9

16.5

.8

15.7

12.0

1.1

10.9

29.7

.9

28.8

165.7

25.4

140.3

1892

129.7

27.2

102.5

22.6

1.1

21.5

12.2

1.1

11.1

33.2

1.0

32.2

197.7

30.4

167.3

1893

137.0

28.8

108.2

22.2

1,1

21.1

9.4

.8

8.6

37.0

1.1

35.9

205.6

31.8

173.8

1894

144.5

30.3

114.2

34.4

1.7

32.7

8.0

.7

7.3

42.4

1.3

41.1

229.3

34.0

195.3

1895

143.1

30.1

113.0

35.9

1.8

34.1

9.3

.8

8.5

39.6

1.2

38.4

227.9

33.9

194.0

6.  The  preceding  results  may  now  be  applied  to  the  comptroller's  figures  for  "money  in  the
banks. "  The  original  data  for  1890  and  1891  are  from  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States,
p.  155,  and  for  1892-1910  from  the  Report  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  for  1910,  p.  58.^^
The  changes  consist  in  adding  the  estimated  amount  of  money  held  by  the  non-reporting  banks
in  1890-1911,  and  subtracting  the  estimated  amount  of  "cash  items"  included  with  cash  in  the
reports  of  banks  other  than  national  in  1890-95.  Money  in  banks  of  the  island  possessions  is  not
included. The  figures  are  in  millions  of  dollars.

The  first  effort  to  revise  the  comptroller's  figures  for  money  in  the  banks  was  made  by
Professor  Irving  Fisher  in  his  Purchasing  Power  of  Money,  appendix  to  Chapter  XII,  §§2  and  3.
His  results,  which  cover  the  years  1896-1909,  run  somewhat  higher  than  mine,  by  amounts  which


21  In  1911  the  comptroller 's  estimate  of  these  deposits  is  accepted.

22  P.  61  of  the  report  for  1911.


316  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Year

Money

in  the

reporting

banks

Money

in  the

non-reporting

banks

Cash  items

included  with  cash

by  the  reporting

banks

Eeviaed

estimate  of

money  in  the

banks

1890

488

33

29

492

1891

498

31

25

504

1892

586

29

30

585

1893

516

33

32

517

1894

689

25

34

680

1895

631

23

34

620

1896

532

24

556

1897

628

21

649

1898

688

25

713

1899

723

25

748

1900

750

37

787

1901

795

33

828

1902

838

37

875

1903

848

33

881

1904

983

33

1,016

1905

988

36

1,024

1906

1,011

32

1,043

1907

1,107

32

1,139

1908

1,363

31

1,394

1909

1,444

22

1,466

1910

1,415

30

1,445

1911

1,545

28

1,573

vary  from  about  ten  to -upwards  of  thirty  millions.  The  chief  cause  of  these  differences  is  that
Professor  Fisher  assumes  that  the  money  held  by  non-reporting  banks  bears  the  same  ratio  to  the
money  held  by  the  reporting  banks  as  the  unreported  deposits  bear  to  the  reported  deposits.  But
this  assumption  overlooks  the  facts  that  the  great  majority  of  the  non-reporting  institutions  are
private  banks,  and  that  the  reporting  private  banks  keep  smaller  reserves  in  proportion  to  their
deposits  than  do  the  whole  number  of  reporting  banks.  The  differences  are  shown  by  the  following
figures  from  Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States,  p.  34.


Proportion  of  cash  to
individual  deposits

Year

' In  all
reporting
banks

In  reporting
private
banks

1900

10.0%

8.6%

1901

9.2

6.1

1902

9.0

7.1

1903

8.8

6,5

1904

9.6

6.1

1905

8.5

6.3

1906

8.0

6.1

1907

8.3

5.7

1908

10.4

6.7

1909

9.9

5.7

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  317

Further,  Professor  Barnett's  tables  of  the  number  of  banks  other  than  national  in  the  United
States  had  not  been  published  at  the  time  Professor  Fisher  made  his  estimate,  and  he  was  there-
fore compelled  to  rely  upon  the  comptroller's  estimates  of  the  deposits  in  non-reporting  banks  in
1900  and  1902-09,  and  to  supply  figures  for  1896-99  and  for  1901  by  interpolation.  It  is  in  these
years  when  Professor  Fisher  had  to  interpolate  that  the  greatest  discrepancies  occur  between  the
two  estimates.  Even  then  the  differences  never  reach  5  per  cent  of  the  smaller  sum,  and  after
1899  they  are  always  less  than  1.5  per  cent.  The  following  figures  compare  the  two  estimates  as
closely  as  may  be.


Year

Fisher's

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

Present

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

DiflEerences

in  per  cent  of

the  smaller

estimate

1896

58

56

3.6%

1897

68

65

4.6

1898

74

71

4.2

1899

77

75

2.7

1900

80

79

1.3

1901

84

83

1.2

1902

88

88

0.0

1903

89

88

1.1

1904

103

102

1.0

1905

103

102

1.0

1906

105

104

1.0

1907

115

114

.9

1908

141

139

1.4

1909

148

147

.7

The  results  presented  here  are  composed  for  the  years  1896-1910  of  materials  in  which  the
actually  reported  elements  make  never  less  than  95  per  cent  of  the  total,  and  the  estimated
elements  never  more  than  5  per  cent.  A  considerable  error  in  the  latter  elements  would  there-
fore disturb  the  results  but  a  trifle.  In  1890-95  the  estimated  elements  are  relatively  larger ;  but
since  one  set  of  corrections  is  added  and  the  other  set  subtracted  the  net  corrections  applied  to
the  original  data  are  slight.  Even  an  error  of  300  per  cent  in  the  net  corrections  would  not  disturb
the  final  results  more  than  5  per  cent.  Further,  in  the  table  made  from  these  figures  for  use  in
the  text  the  money  in  the  banks  is  compared  with  a  much  larger  total— namely,  the  monetary
stock  of  the  country — and  of  course  the  relative  importance  of  any  error  contained  in  the  figures
is  reduced  still  more.  Finally,  the  conclusions  based  upon  this  table  in  the  text  are  concerned
with  the  changes  in  the  distribution  of  the  money  in  circulation  from  one  year  to  another.  Of
course  such  conclusions  are  not  appreciably  affected  by  errors  which  run  steadily  in  the  same
direction.  Despite  the  considerable  number  of  assumptions  involved  in  the  revision  of  the  comp-
troller's incomplete  figures,  the  results  are  therefore  sufficiently  accurate  for  the  purpose  in  hand.


318


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


THE  VOLUME  OF  DEPOSIT  CURRENCY  IN  THE  UNITED  STATES,  1890-1911

Until  recently  it  has  been  customary  to  assume  that  the  volume  of  deposit  currency  available
for  business  use  is  best  represented  by  the  individual  deposits  of  the  commercial  banks.  But  the
Special  Report  from  the  Banks  of  the  United  States,  April  28,  1909,  obtained  by  the  National
Monetary  Commission,  showed  that  a  large  proportion  of  these  individual  deposits  is  not  subject
to  check.  At  the  suggestion  of  Professor  Irving  Fisher,  Dr.  A.  P.  Andrew,  then  assistant  secretary
of  the  treasury,  caused  similar  investigations  into  the  character  of  bank  deposits  to  be  made  for
the  years  1896,  1899,  and  1906.  The  results  confirmed  the  conclusion  based  upon  the  Special
Report  of  1909 — nearly  half  of  the  total  individual  deposits  of  commercial  and  savings  banks
together  were  found  to  be  made  on  conditions  which  precluded  their  free  use  as  deposit  currency.
(Andrew,  Statistics  for  the  United  States,  pp.  151,  152.)  In  turn,  the  Comptroller  of  the  Cur-
rency included  the  topic  in  his  annual  report  and  compiled  a  table  classifying  the  individual
deposits  of  the  banks  in  1910.  At  present,  therefore,  definite  statements  of  the  amount  of  indi-
vidual deposits  subject  to  check  for  all  banks  from  which  the  Comptroller's  OfSce  secures  reports
are  available  for  the  years  1896,  1899,  1906,  1910,  and  1911.


Proportion  of  Individual  Deposits  Subject  to  Check  in  Banks  of  Different  Classes,  in  1896,  1899,  1906,

1909,  1910,  and  1911


National  Banks

Staxe  Banks

Individual
deposits

1,668

Individual  deposits
subject  to  check

Year
1896

Individual
deposits

716

Individual  deposits
subject  to  check

Year
1896

Actual
amount

1,421

Ratio
Per  cent

85.2

Actual
amount

563

Ratio
Per  cent

78.6

1899

2,522

2,151

85.3

1899

1,099

858

78.1

1906

4,056

3,202

78.9

1906

2,528

1,835

72.6

1909

4,826

3,515

72.8

1909

2,467

1,423

57.7

1910

5,287

4,236

80.1

1910

2,728

1,533

56.2

1911

5,478

4,470

81.6

1911

2,778

1,586

57.1

Mutual  Savings  Banks

Stock  Savings  Banks

1896

1,740

1896

175

1

.9

1899

2,025

1899

201

3

1.5

1906

2,999

1906

354

45

12.7

1909

3,145

3

.1

1909

569

101

17.7

1910

3,361

1910

710

146

20.6

1911

3,461

2

.1

1911

752

105

14.0

Loan  and  Trust  Companies

Private  Banks

1896

606

541

89.3

1896

66

60

90.9

1899

1,149

1,013

88.2

1899

74

65

87.8

1906

2,333

1,732

74.2

1906

103

86

83.5

1909

2,836

1,834

64.7

1909

193

105

54.4

1910

3,073

1,977

64.3

1910

125

66

52.8

1911

3,296

2,069

62.8

1911

142

75

52.8

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  319

These  data  are  assembled  in  the  table  on  the  preceding  page.  In  preparing  this  table  it  has
seemed  desirable  to  readjust  the  original  figures  to  remove  two  defects.  (1)  In  1896,  1899,  and
1906  "time  deposits"  estimated  at  $20,000,000  or  more  were  included  with  the  deposits  subject  to
check.  These  sums  have  been  distributed  among  the  banks  other  than  national  in  proportion  to
their  quotas  of  deposits  subject  to  check,  and  then  deducted  from  the  latter  figures.  (2)  In  1909
and  1910  considerable  amounts  were  reported  under  the  caption  "deposits  not  classified."  These
sums  have  been  divided  proportionately  between  the  deposits  which  are  and  the  deposits  which
are  not  subject  to  check.  The  resulting  figures  show  as  accurately  as  the  material  permits  what
proportion  of  the  aggregate  individual  deposits  may  be  treated  as  deposit  currency.

The  table  indicates  that,  perhaps  because  of  keen  competition  for  customers,  the  national,
state,  and  private  banks  and  the  trust  companies  have  been  forced  since  1899  to  pay  interest  on
an  increasing  proportion  of  their  deposits.  The  stock  savings  banks,  on  the  contrary,  have  rapidly
increased  their  business  with  non-savings  depositors.  Finally,  the  checking  deposits  of  the  mutual
savings  banks  are  so  small  as  to  be  negligible.

To  estimate  the  deposit  currency  of  the  country  since  1890  it  is  necessary  to  make  some
assumption  regarding  the  proportion  of  deposits  which  were  subject  to  check  in  the  years  inter-
vening between  the  dates  for  which  definite  statements  have  been  published.  The  least  objec-
tionable assumption  is  that  the  changes  shown  by  the  figures  have  been  proceeding  at  a  uniform
pace.  But  since  the  figures  for  1896  and  1899  indicate  that  the  movement  toward  paying  interest
on  a  larger  portion  of  deposits  scarcely  began  until  after  the  latter  year,  the  most  plausible
assumption  regarding  the  years  1890-95  is  that  they  showed  the  same  ratio  of  checking  deposits
as  1896.

The  estimate  of  the  indi\ddual  deposits  subject  to  check  is  framed  by  applying  the  ratios,  thus
adjusted,  to  the  aggregate  individual  deposits  of  the  various  classes  of  banks.  For  the  national,
state,  and  private  banks  and  the  trust  companies  Andrew  gives  the  individual  deposits  in  his
Statistics  for  the  United  States,  p.  31.^^  It  has  been  necessary  to  compile  the  figures  for  the  de-
posits of  stock  savings  banks  from  the  annual  Reports  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency.  The
individual  deposits  of  the  non-reporting  banks  are  borrowed  from  the  preceding  note  "A  Revised
Estimate  of  the  Amount  of  Money  held  by  the  Banks  in  the  United  States."  For  the  reasons
there  explained,  the  ratios  applied  to  the  latter  figures  are  the  ratios  used  for  the  private  banks.

The  sums  of  these  estimates  of  deposits  subject  to  check  in  the  various  classes  of  banks,  how-
ever, overstate  the  volume  of  deposit  currency  in  at  least  one  respect.  Fisher  has  pointed  out
that  the  exchanges  for  the  clearing  house  reported  by  the  banks  on  any  given  day  are  counted  as
deposits  both  in  the  banks  in  which  they  have  been  placed  for  collection  and  in  the  banks  against
which  they  have  been  drawn,  but  to  which  they  will  not  be  presented  until  the  following  day.^*
The  amount  of  these  exchanges  is  regularly  reported  for  the  national  banks ;  but  not  for  the  banks
operating  under  state  laws.  Satisfactory  data  for  the  latter  class  of  banks  are  available  only  in
the  aforesaid  Special  Report  from  the  Banks  of  the  United  States,  April  28,  1909.  The  Comp-
troller of  the  Currency  did,  indeed,  endeavor  to  secure  returns  upon  this  point  for  his  report  of
1910 ;  but  his  figures  for  the  state  banks,  particularly  in  New  York,  are  so  obviously  misleading
as  to  deprive  the  results  of  significance  for  present  purposes.  The  figures  for  1909  are  given
below.  An  estimate  of  the  clearing-house  exchanges  held  by  the  non-reporting  banks  is  added  to
the  returns.  It  is  made  by  assuming  that  these  institutions  have  the  same  proportion  of  exchanges
to  deposits  as  the  private  banks.

23  Certain  discrepancies  appear  between  the  individual  deposits  of  banks  other  than  national  in  1896,  1899,
and  1906  as  given  in  the  preceding  and  in  the  following  table.  These  discrepancies  are  found  in  the  source-
Andrew's  Statistics  for  the  United  States,  pp.  31  and  151.  The  figures  on  the  latter  page  appear  to  include
returns  from  a  larger  number  of  institutions  than  the  flures  on  p.  31.

24  Irving  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Power  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  pp.  436,  437.


320


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Estimate  of  the  Amount  op  Individual  Deposits  Subject  to  Check  in  Banks  of  Difpeeent  Classes  on  Date

OP  Kepoets  Neaeest  to  June  30,  1890-1911


National  banks

gtate  banks

Stock

savings  banks

Year

Individual

deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

Individual
deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

Individual
deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

1890

1,522

85.2

1,297

553

78.6

435

25*

1891

1,535

85.2

1,308

557

78.6

438

32*

1892

1,753

85.2

1,494

649

78.6

510

46*

1893

1,557

85.2

1.327

707

78.6

556

24*

1894

1,678

85.2

1,430

658

78.6

517

30*

1895

1,736

85.2

1,479

712

78.6

560

33*

1896

1,668

85.2

1,421

696

78.6

547

28*

1897

1,771

85.2

1,509

724

78.5

568

43*

1898

2,023

85.2

1,724

912

78.3

714

1*

1899

2,522

85.3

2,151

1,164

78.1

909

3*

1900

2,458

84.4

2,075

1,267

77.3

979

5*

1901

2,942

83.5

2,457

1,611

76.5

1,232

2*

1902

3,099

82.6

2,560

1,698

75.7

1,285

270

6.3

17

1903

3,201

81.7

2,615

1,815

74.9

1,359

303

7.9

24

1904

3,312

80.8

2,676

2,073

74.1

1,536

317

9.5

30

1905

3,784

79.9

3,023

2,365

73.3

1,734

357

11.1

40

1906

4,056

78.9

3,200

2,742

72.6

1,991

391

12.7

50

1907

4,323

76.9

3,324

3,069

67.7

2,078

440

14.3

63

1908

4,375

74.9

3,277

2,937

62.7

1,841

414

16.0

66

1909

4,826

72.8

3,513

2,467

57.7

1,423

569

17.7

101

1910

5,287

80.1

4,236

2,728

56.2

1,533

710

20.6

146

1911

5,478

81.6

4,470

2,778

57.1

1,586

752

14.0

105

*Separately
separate  reports

stated as
;  of  savings

"deposits subject to check," etc., in  Reports  of  the  Comptroller
deposits  and  deposits  subject  to  check  are  dropped  until  1910.

of  the Carre

ncy. After

1901  these

Estimate  op

THE  Amount  op  Individual  Deposits  Subjec

;t  to  Checi

[;  in  Banks

OF  DiPFBEBl

NT  ClASSE

s  ON  Date

OF  Reports  Nearest  to  June  30,  1890-1911


Loan

and  trust  companies

Private  banks

Non-reporting  banks

Tear

Individual
deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

Individual
deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

Individual
deposits

Per  cent
subject
to  check

Amount
subject
to  check

1890

337

89.3

301

100

90.9

91

248

90.9

225

1891

355

89.3

317

95

90.9

86

268

90.9

244

1892

412

89.3

368

93

90.9

85

247

90.9

225

1893

486

89.3

434

69

90.9

63

266

90.9

242

1894

471

89.3

421

66

90.9

60

224

90.9

204

1895

547

89.3

488

82

90.9

75

220

90.9

200

1896

587

89.3

524

59

90.9

54

230

90.9

209

1897

567

89.0

505

50

89.9

45

210

89.9

189

1898

662

88.6

587

62

88.9

55

264

88.9

235

1899

836

88.2

737

65

87.8

57

300

87.8

263

1900

1,028

86.2

886

96

87.2

84

431

87.2

376

1901

1,271

84.2

1,070

119

86.6

103

541

86.6

469

1902

1,526

82.2

1,254

132

86.0

114

520

86.0

447

1903

1,589

80.2

1,274

133

85.4

114

515

85.4

440

1904

1,600

78.2

1,251

96

84.8

81

548

84.8

465

1905

1,981

76.2

1.510

128

84.2

108

570

84.2

480

1906

2,009

74.2

1,491

110

83.5

92

517

83.5

432

1907

2,062

71.1

1,466

151

73.8

111

555

73.8

410

1908

1,867

67.9

1,268

127

64.1

81

462

64.1

296

1909

2,836

64.7

1,835

193

54.4

105

390

54.4

212

1910

3,073

64.3

1,977

125

52.8

66

554

52.8

293

1911

3,296

62.8

2,069

142

52.8

75

560

52.8

296

MITCHELL:  BUSLNfESS  CYCLES


321


Exchanges  tor  the  Clearing  House  Held  by  Banks  op  Different  Classes  on  April  28,  1909

Amount  Proportion

in  millions  of  of

dollars  the  total

National  banks 303.6  79.7%

State  banks  62.3  16.3

Mutual  savings  banks

Stock  savings  banks  1.4  .4

Loan  and  trust  companies  12.2  3.2

Private banks .5  .1

Non-reporting  banks  1.0  .3

All  banks  381.0  100.0

These  figures  indicate  thai  the  clearing-house  exchanges  of  the  national  banks  make  so  large
a  proportion  of  the  total  that  they  may  be  accepted  as  a  fairly  satisfactory  gauge  of  the  changes
in  the  latter.  Accordingly,  the  deductions  to  be  made  from  the  total  deposits  subject  to  check  are
esimated  by  dividing  the  exchanges  of  the  national  banks  given  by  the  report  nearest  June  30  of
each  year  by  .797.

The  final  results  of  these  operations  are  as  follows :


Estimate  of  the  Deposit  Currency  in  All  the  Banks  of  the  United  States,  on  or  About  June  30,  of  the

Years  1890-1911


Year

Estimated

individual  deposits

subject  to

check

Clearing-
house exchanges
of  national
banks

Estimated

clearing-house

exchanges  of

all  banks

Estimated

deposit

currency  of

all  banks

1890

2,374

88

110

2,264

1891

2,425

80

100

2,325

1892

2,728

90

113

2,615

1893

2,646

108

136

2,510

1894

2,662

67

84

2,578

1895

2,835

83

104

2,731

1896

2,783

76

95

2,688

1897

2,859

89

112

2,747

1898

3,316

94

118

3,198

1899

4,120

203

255

3,865

1900

4,405

159

200

4,205

1901

5,333

301

378

4,955

1902

5,677

247

310

5,367

1903

5,826

228

286

5,540

1904

6,039

148

186

5,853

1905

6,895

268

336

6,559

1906

7,256

313

393

6,863

1907

7,452

273

343

7,109

1908

6,829

245

307

6,522

1909

7,189

304

381

6,808

1910

8,251

429

538

7,713

1911

8,601

286

359

8,242

The  methods  just  explained  differ  in  several  respects  from  those  applied  by  Professor  Irving
Fisher  in  making  his  pioneer  estimate  of  deposit  currency.  (1)  Before  April  26,  1900,  the
national  banks  were  instructed  to  report  sums  due  to  savings  banks  under  the  caption  "Due  to
state  banks. ' '  But  the  Comptroller  discovered  that  certain  institutions  were  including  savings-
bank  deposits  with  individual  deposits.  To  check  this  practice  the  Comptroller  required  a  separate
report  of  sums  due  to  savings  banks,  and  later  of  sums  due  to  savings  banks  and  trust  companies,


322


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


Professor  Fisher  endeavored  to  correct  this  misclassification  of  deposits  in  the  years  1896-1900
by  deducting  from  individual  deposits  sums  ranging  from  160  to  330  millions.  He  has  kindly
written  me  that  no  deduction  whatever  should  have  been  made  on  this  score  in  1900,  since  the
new  rule  went  into  effect  in  that  year.  Further,  he  now  thinks  that  he  over-corrected  for  this
error  in  1896-99,  and  that  his  figures  probably  would  be  more  accurate  had  he  attempted  no  cor-
rection upon  this  score.  Inspection  of  the  changes  resulting  in  the  items  "Due  to  state  banks"
and  "Individual  deposits"  from  the  insertion  of  the  new  item  "Due  to  savings  banks"  makes
me  share  Professor  Fisher's  later  view.  (Compare  the  reports  for  February  13  and  June  29,
1900.)  Accordingly,  I  have  not  made  any  deduction  for  misclassification  of  bank  with  individual
deposits.  (2)  Professor  Fisher's  figures  for  deposits  in  non-reporting  banks  are  based  upon  the
Comptroller's  estimates  in  1900  and  1902-09,  and  upon  interpolations  in  the  remaining  years
which  he  covers.  As  explained  in  the  preceding  note,  my  figures  are  based  on  Barnett  's  count  of
the  number  of  banks  other  than  national.  (3)  Instead  of  working  with  the  individual  deposits
of  each  class  of  banks  separately,  as  I  have  done.  Professor  Fisher  works  with  the  total  deposits
of  all  classes  together.  This  difference  of  procedure  gives  different  results  because  the  percentage
of  deposits  subject  to  check  is  far  from  uniform  among  the  several  classes  of  banks,  and  because
the  amounts  of  deposits  in  the  several  classes  have  not  changed  at  the  same  rate.  (4)  From  the
deposits  of  all  banks,  Professor  Fisher's  computer  deducted  the  deposits  in  savings  banks  fis
reported  in  the  text  of  the  Comptroller's  report — for  example,  1909,  p.  44.  These  figures  are
considerably  larger  than  the  deposits  in  savings  banks  reported  in  the  appendices  of  the  same
documents — for  example,  1909,  p.  888.  And  it  is  these  latter  figures  which  were  used  by  the
Comptroller  in  making  up  his  estimate  of  total  bank  deposits.  The  discrepancies  between  the  two
sets  of  returns  average  nearly  150  millions  in  1901-08,  and  reach  a  maximum  of  195  millions  in
1907.  Accordingly,  Professor  Fisher's  figures  for  individual  deposits  in  the  reporting  commercial
banks  are  too  small.  (5)  On  the  other  hand.  Professor  Fisher  has  not  included  the  checking
deposits  in  stock-savings  banks.  The  preceding  tables  show  that  these  sums,  actually  reported  or
estimated,  vary  from  1  to  146  millions.  (6)  Professor  Fisher's  method  of  estimating  exchanges
for  the  clearing  house  as  explained  in  his  text  is  practically  the  same  as  mine.  But  for  some
reason,  which  is  not  clear,  his  computer  has  obtained  results  which  differ  from  mine  by  margins
of  5  to  50  millions.  Finally,  Professor  Fisher  deducts  these  exchanges  from  individual  deposits
before  he  applies  his  percentages  of  deposits  subject  to  check,  while  I  make  the  deduction  after-
ward, on  the  ground  that  these  exchanges  consist  chiefly  of  checks  drawn  against  checking  deposits.
This  difference  in  method,  however,  makes  little  difference  in  the  results  because  Professor  Fisher
allows  for  exchanges  in  fixing  his  percentages  of  deposits  subject  to  check.

Despite  all  these  differences  in  detail,  the  final  results  of  the  two  computations  harmonize
rather  closely.  As  the  following  comparison  shows,  the  differences  vary  within  limits  of  .3  and
4.5  per  cent  of  my  figures.  Minor  corrections  which  Professor  Fisher  has  made  in  his  figures  for
1900  and  1908  since  the  Purchasing  Power  of  Money  was  published  are  embodied  in  the
comparison.


Year
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902


Fisher's

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

268
280
319
390
440
513
543


Present

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

269
275
320
387
421
496
537


Differences

in  percentages

of  the  present

estimate

-fO.4%

—1.8

+0.3

—0.8

—4.5

—3.4

—1.1


Year
1903
1904
1905
1906
1907
1908
1909


Fisher's

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

570
580
654
684
713


675


Present

estimate  in

tens  of  millions

of  dollars

554
585
656
686
711
652
681


Differences

in  percentages

of  the  present

estimate

—2.9
-1-0.9
+0.3
+0.3
—0.3
—1.2
+0.9


CHAPTER  VII


THE  CONDITION  OF  THE  BANKS

The  primary  sources  of  information  concerning  the  relations  between  busi-
ness cycles  and  banking  are  the  statements  which  show  the  condition  of  the
banks  at  regular  intervals.

Material  of  this  character  is  far  more  abundant  for  the  United  States  than
for  England,  Prance,  or  Germany.  The  central  banks  of  these  three  countries,
indeed,  publish  weekly  balance  sheets  which  enable  one  to  follow  their  opera-
tions in  periods  of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  in  some  detail.  But  the
reports  of  the  Bank  of  England,  the  Bank  of  Prance,  and  the  Reichsbank  do
not  give  an  adequate  picture  of  the  effects  of  business  cycles  upon  banking  or
of  banking  upon  business  cycles.  Por  the  operations  of  these  institutions  are
vastly  exceeded,  both  in  vokime  and  variety,  by  the  operations  of  joint-stock
and  private  banks  in  the  several  countries.  Concerning  the  latter  classes  of
banks  the  National  Monetary  Commission  has  recently  brought  together  much
information  hitherto  unavailable.^  Nevertheless,  the  reports  remain  too  incom-
plete, too  infrequent,  and  too  lacking  in  detail  to  match  the  American  material
as  a  basis  for  investigation.

Por  this  country,  we  have  (1)  the  condensed  weekly  statements  of  the
clearing-house  banks  in  certain  great  cities,  (2)  five  detailed  statements  each
year  for  the  national  banks,  and  (3)  one  statement  each  year  for  most  of  the
banks  operating  under  state  laws.  By  analyzing  these  statements  we  may  find
what  changes  in  the  condition  of  the  banks  usually  accompany  the  progress  of
a  business  cycle  from  the  moment  of  incipient  revival  of  activity  to  the  ultimate
return  of  depression.  With  these  results  in  hand  we  can  then  make  the  best
of  the  scantier  European  material.

I.  The  Clearing-House  Banks  of  New  York

It  is  well  to  begin  with  the  clearing-house  banks  of  New  York,  both  because
their  reports  are  more  frequent  than  those  of  the  national  banks  and  because
the  phenomena  of  business  cycles  are  more  pronounced  in  financial  centers  than
in  the  country  as  a  whole.

1  statistics  for  Great  Britain,  Germany,  and  France  (Senate  Document,  no.  578,  61st  Congress,  2d  session),
Washington,  1910.

[323]


324  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  New  York  material  is  presented  in  two  tables,  one  of  which  averages
the  weekly  reports  by  years,  the  other  by  phases  of  business  cycles.  Either
set  of  averages,  however,  may  prove  misleading.  For  example,  if  cirulation
averages  larger  during  a  period  of  business  depression  than  during  the  pre-
ceding period  of  crisis,  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  banks  increased
their  note  issue  after  the  pressure  relaxed.  On  the  contrary,  they  may  have
withdrawn  a  part  of  the  issues  made  during  the  crisis  and  still  have  left  the
average  circulation  for  the  whole  period  of  depression  higher  than  before.
Accordingly,  it  is  necessary  to  suxjplement  the  use  of  the  tables  in  the  text  by
continual  references  to  the  weekly  returns  from  which  they  were  made.  When
the  following  statements  do  not  agree  precisely  with  the  indications  of  the
tables,  it  is  because  they  are  based  on  the  weekly  reports.

Among  all  the  items  included  in  the  statements  of  the  Associated  Banks,
circulation  is  by  far  the  smallest  in  actual  amoimt,  but  shows  by  far  the  most
rapid  rate  of  growth  from  1890  to  1910.  The  latter  fact  obscures  somewhat  the
effect  of  business  cycles.  None  the  less,  certain  regularly  recurring  relations
can  be  made  out  between  the  volume  of  note  issue  and  the  condition  of  business.
(1)  During  minor  crises  the  circulation  increases  little;  but  when  the  demand
for  cu.rrency  becomes  intense,  as  in  1893,  1896,  and  1907,  the  banks  take  out
additional  notes  as  fast  as  they  can  buy  bonds  and  make  the  necessary  arrange-
ments with  the  treasury.  But  the  increase  is  tardy  and  the  maximum  circu-
lation is  not  reached  until  several  weeks  after  the  strain  upon  the  banks  has
begun  to  relax.  (2)  When  crisis  yields  to  depression  the  banks  begin  to  contract
their  circulation ;  but  the  reduction  in  volume  is  even  slower  than  the  preceding
increase.  (3)  A  revival  of  business  activity  is  accompanied  by  a  slight  increase
of  note  issues,  which  sometimes  has  and  sometimes  has  not  continued  as  full
prosperity  is  attained.  (4)  Finall}^  when  prosperity  has  run  its  course  and  a
major  crisis  approaches,  circulation  expands  but  a  trifle,  as  in  1893,  or  declines,
as  in  1907.

The  circulation  of  the  New  York  banks,  then,  possesses  a  certain  degree  of
elasticity  in  the  sense  that  the  volume  rises  when  business  revives  after  a  period
of  depression,  attains  its  highest  points  immediately  after  panics,  and  contracts
slowly  when  depression  returns.  But  the  amount  issued  in  New  York  is  so
small  in  comparison  with  that  of  deposit  cui-rency  as  to  count  for  little  in
meeting  the  changing  needs  of  business.  And  the  degree  of  elasticitj^  exhibited
is  less  than  that  found  under  most  foreign  systems  of  note  issue.^

Since  about  1902,  the  behavior  of  bank  loans  in  New  York  during  the  typical
phases  of  business  cycles  has  been  distinctly  different  from  what  it  was  formerly.
Prom  1890  to  1902  the  banks  were  able  to  contract  their  loans  slightly  on  the

2  See  chapter  VI,  iii.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


325


TABLE  82
Annual  Averages  of  the  Weekly  Statements  of  the  Clearing-Hodse  Banks  op  New  York  City,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

K

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99

=  100

Capital  and
Year surplus

1890 120.8

Circulation
3.6

Net
I deposits
404.4

Loans
399.8

Lawful
money

104.5

Per  cent  of
reserve

25.88

Capital  and
surplus

92

Cir-
culation
34

Net
deposits

73

Loans
79

Lawful
money

64

1891

124.2

4.3

409.4

400.9

114.6

27.98

95

40

74

80

70

1892

127.5

5.5

504.4

472.9

141.7

28.00

97

51

91

94

86

1893

131.3

8.5

433.7

419.5

130.2

29.70

100

80

79

83

79

1894

132.3

10.9

568.9

471.0

213.6

37.59

101

102

103

93

130

1895

134.1

13.1

543.3

497.7

164.2

30.17

103

123

98

99

100

1896

134.3

16.2

482.5

463.9

142.1

29.38

103

152

87

92

87

1897

133.9

15.4

602.7

538.2

189.2

31.45

102

144

109

107

115

1898

133.9

14.7

729.8

637.0

213.4

29.32

102

138

132

126

130

1899

136.0

14.6

844.7

739.9

228.1

26.94

104

137

153

147

139

1900

158.7

24.3

852.8

779.5

228.8

26.82

121

228

154

155

139

1901

173.6

31.1

957.4

880.1

253.2

26.45

133

291

173

175

154

1902

201.9

34.5

934.9

894.5

244.1

26.11

154

323

169

177

149

1903

237.4

44.5

898.6

909.2

236.6

26.32

181

417

163

180

144

1904

249.7

39.8

1,118.1

1,061.2

307.0

27.43

191

373

202

211

187

1905

254.5

48.5

1,120.5

1,090.5

290.1

25.87

195

454

203

216

177

1906

267.7

49.6

1,025.0

1,044.8

263.3

25.68

205

464

186

207

160

1907

288.9

53.0

1,065.2

1,111.4

265.3

24.89

221

496

193

220

162

1908

288.0

57.5

1,302.5

1,240.4

365.4

28.04

220

538

236

246

223

1909

299.7

50.3

1,347.6

1,305.1

352.5

26.14

229

471

244

259

215

1910

319.1

48.4

1,216.9

1,223.5

322.8

26.70

244

453

220

243

197

1911

331.1

47.9

1,372.8

1,340.7

369.2

26.91

253

448

249

266

225

Averages
1890-99

130.83

10.68

552.38

504.08

164.16

29.648

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

242.0]

43.31

1,062.26

1,031.67

280.62

26.375

185

406

192

205

171

Data  for  1890-1909  compiled  from  A.  P.  Andrew,  Statistics  for  the  United  States  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Com-
mission), pp.  98-118;  data  for  1910  and  1911  compiled  from  the  Financial  Review;  data  for  capital,  surplus,  and  circulation  in
1910  and  1911  compiled  from  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle.


326


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 52

/

\

Relative  Amounts  of  the  Loans  ,  Deposits  .  and Reserves

/

\

250

/

\

220
210
200
130

OF  THE  CLEARING  House Banks  of  New  York.
1890 1910.

\/

\

240

250
220
210
200 -
190

/

k

\


Loans.
Deposits  .
Reserves  .

/

1
1

.'•••

\

\
\

1

/

\

/,

'i  '''-■

.

-

I

r-

\

/ 1

\

V
V

\

i

I

y  i

IflO

';

\

180

y

1 :

no

IGO
150

S

1 ',
/ .

\

160
ISO

1

\
\

1 :

\

_..-'

/

-/;

\

//

^

/

\

140

11

•

140


130

ISO

n

\

120

'I

110
100
90

SO

5

■'/  i

110
100
90
80

:

s  '

;

'

/

\

:/

/

V

7

//

A.

\\

•••A

••V

f

j

\

^^

I:

f.'

70

70

.•'

60

60

1890 91 92 '95 'Sl\- '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 'OJ '04 'OS '06 '07 '08 '03 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


327


3B

CHART 53.

36

1

\

RATIO  OF  THE  RESERVES  TO  THE  NET  DEP05IT5
OF  THE  aEARlNG-HOUSE BANKS  OF  NEW  YORK.

\

34

\

ANNUAL  AVERAGES Id90  -  1910.

32

\

/

V

32

30
28

/

L

N

/

\

\

30
28
26
24

26

/

\

/

\

i

\

^

24

\

/

1890 91 '92 "95 '94 "95 'SS '97 '98 '99 1900  '01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 'OS '09 1910

TABLE  83

Condition  of  the  Cleaeing-House  Banks  op  New  Yoek  City  in  Seasons  op

Depression,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars

Circulation Loans

January,  1890-July,  1890— Prosperity  3.6  402.9

August,  1890-Deeember,  1890 — Minor  crisis  3.5  395.3

January,  1891-July,  1891 — Depression 3.5  396.8

August,  1891-August,  1892— Prosperity  5.5  454.0

September,  1892-April,  1893 — Approach  of  crisis  5.6  449.9

May,  1893-October,  1893 — Major  crisis  8.6  406.6

November,  1893-March,  1895 — Severe  depression  11.4  466.3

April,  1895-September,  1895— Eevival  13.2  503.8

October,  1895-June,  1896 — Eenewed  depression  14.1  475.3

July,  1896-October,  1896 — Free  silver  campaign  17.4  460.8

November,  1896-June,  1897 — Depression  16.8  510.8

July,  1897-February,  1898— Eevival  14.7  587.0

March,  1898-April,  1898— Spanish  War  impending  13.9  595.5

May,  1898-September,  1899— Prosperity  14.6  706.3

October,  1899-December,  1899 — Minor  crisis  16.0  687.7

January,  1900-September,  1900— Slight  depression  22.2  773.7

October,  1900-October,  1902— Prosperity  31.3  877.6

November,  1902-July,  1904— "Eich  man's  panic"  42.4  942.0

August,  1904r-August,  1905— Eevival  44.0  1,113.7

September,  1905-September,  1906— Prosperity  50.7  1,042.6

October,  1906-September,  1907— Approach  of  crisis  50.9  1,086.4

October,  1907-December,  1907— Major  crisis  58.7  1,148.1

January,  1908-September,  1908— Severe  depression  59.8  1,214.0

October,  1908-December,  1909— Eevival  50.1  1,309.3

January,  1910-December,  1911— Keaction  48.2  1,282.1


Business  Pbospeeitt,  Ceisis,  and


Net
deposits

413.1

Lawful
money

107.9

Batio
of  reserve

26.19

391.6

99.3

25.41

404.7

113.6

28.11

484.0

138.8

28.57

462.3

124.0

26.81

400.6

111.1

27.47

552.3

202.1

36.65

556.3

171.7

30.82

502.7

147.6

29.38

466.1

130.9

28.07

553.8

182.7

32.89

676.2

191.6

30.08

678.9

203.2

29.95

814.0

229.3

28.27

751.8

192.0

25.54

853.7

231.9

27.15

942.9

247.3

26.22

952.5

255.6

26.76

1,169.1

309.6

26.46

1,031.7

265.3

25.70

1,052.3

270.2

25.66

1,058.1

235.8

22.33

1,270.2

362.1

28.44

1,359.3

357.0

26.24

1,294.9

346.0

26.81

328


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  8S— (Concluded)

Condition  of  the  Clearing-House  Banks  of  New  York  City  in  Seasons  of  Business  Prosperity,

Depression,  1890-1911

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-1899  =  100

Net

Circulation Loans  deposits

January,  1890-July,  1890— Prosperity  34  80  75

August,  1890-Deeember,  1890— Minor  crisis  33  78  71

January,  1891-July,  1891— Depression  33  79  73

August,  1891-August,  1892— Prosperity  51  90  88

September,  1892-April,  1893— Approach  of  crisis  52  89  84

May,  1893-October,  1893— Major  crisis  81  81  73

November,  1893-Mareh,  1895— Severe  depression  107  93  100

April,  1895-September,  1895— Revival  124  100  101

October,  1895-Jiine,  1896— Eenewed  depression  132  94  91

July,  1896-Oetober,  1896— Free  silver  campaign  163  91  84

November,  1896-June,  1897— Depression  157  101  100

July,  1897-February,  1898— Revival  138  116  122

March,  1898-April,  1898— Spanish  War  impending  130  118  123

May,  1898-September,  1899— Prosperity  137  140  147

October,  1899-December,  1899— Minor  crisis  150  136  136

January,  1900-September,  1900— Slight  depression  208  153  155

October,  1900-Oetober,  1902— Prosperity  293  174  171

November,  1902-July,  1904— "Rich  man's  panic"  397  187  172

August,  1904-August,  1905— Revival  412  221  212

September,  1905-September,  1906— Prosperity  475  207  187

October,  1906-September,  1907— Approach  of  crisis  477  216  191

October,  1907-December,  1907— Major  crisis  550  228  192

January,  1908-September,  1908— Severe  depression  560  241  230

October,  1908-December,  1909— Revival  469  260  246

January,  1910-December,  1911- Reaction  451  254  234


Crisis,  and


Lawful

money


61

69

85

76

68

123

105

90

80

111

117

124

140

117

141

151

156

189

162

165

144

221

217

211


approach  of  crises  and  to  contract  tlieni  much  more  radically  during  crises.
In  the  succeeding  periods  of  depression  they  expanded  loans,  despite  the  inac-
tivity of  trade — a  result  due  in  large  part  to  the  accumulation  of  idle  funds
sent  by  the  country  banks  to  New  York  and  to  the  inclusion  of  security  holdings
with  discounts  under  the  caption  of  loans  in  the  weekly  statements.  Finally,
when  business  revived,  the  banks  increased  their  loans  much  faster  than  during
depression,  and  continued  in  this  course  as  long  as  prosperity  reigned.^

In  the  "rich  man's  panic"  of  1903-04,  on  the  contrary,  the  New  York  banks
not  only  failed  to  contract  but  even  expanded  their  loans.  During  the  pros-
perous years  1905  and  1906,  when  a  further  rapid  expansion  might  have  been
expected,  the  banks  were  able  to  carry  their  loans  only  a  little  above  the  level
attained  at  the  end  of  1904. When  the  panic  of  1907  came  on,  they  were  again


'  Save,  of  course,  for  the  seasonal  changes  which  recurred  with  considerable  regularity  from  year  to  year.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  329

forced  to  increase  their  loans  under  circumstances  when  they  would  fain  have
enforced  a  drastic  contraction.  To  complete  the  anomaly,  they  made  heavy
extensions  of  loans  in  the  face  of  the  severe  business  depression  of  1908.  The
changes  of  1909-10,  however,  were  more  regular.  The  banks  expanded  loans
during  the  short-lived  revival  of  activity  and  contracted  them  again  when
business  relapsed  into  dullness.

Save  perhaps  for  the  moderate  increase  of  loans  during  periods  of  depres-
sion, the  fluctuations  of  loans  in  1890-1902  are  what  writers  upon  crises  regard
as  "normal."'  But  certain  of  the  fluctuations  in  1903-07,  particularly  the
expansion  of  loans  during  crises  and  the  slight  expansion  during  periods  of
abounding  prosperity,  are  highly  curious.  The  most  plausible  explanation
given  is  that  based  upon  the  relation  of  the  "out-of-town"  banks  and  the  New
York  trust  companies  to  the  money  market.  When  interest  rates  become  very
high,  particularly  rates  upon  call  loans,  both  sets  of  institutions  and  also  certain
railway,  insurance,  and  industrial  corporations  which  control  large  funds,  with-
draw their  balances  from  the  clearing-house  banks  and  lend  the  money  upon
their  own  account  to  stock  brokers,  etc.  On  the  contrary,  when  the  call-loan
rate  falls  to  the  neighborhood  of  2  per  cent  these  enterprises  find  it  advanta-
geous to  redeposit  their  funds  in  the  banks,  content  with  the  low  rate  of  interest
paid  upon  balances.  Such  movements  help  to  explain  both  the  slight  expansion
of  loans  in  1905-06  and  the  rapid  expansion  in  1908.  For  the  withdrawal  of
balances  reduced  the  ability  of  the  clearing-house  banks  to  lend  in  the  years  of
prosperity,  and  the  return  of  these  balances  increased  their  ability  to  lend  in
the  years  of  depression.  The  increase  of  bank  loans  during  the  crisis  of  1903-04
is  probably  due  to  the  fact  that  the  clearing-house  institutions  were  forced  to
"carry"  many  important  customers  who  had  overloaded  themselves  with
"indigestible  securities."  In  the  crisis  of  1907  the  primary  source  of  difficulty
was  that  both  the  out-of-town  banks  and  the  trust  companies  suddenly  with-
drew from  the  New  York  loan  market.  Together  they  exhausted  the  possi-
bility of  loan  contraction,  and  to  avoid  widespread  disaster  the  clearing-house
banks  were  forced  to  take  over  some  of  the  loans  which  these  competitors  had
been  carrying."

With  few  exceptions.  New  York  deposits  fluctuate  in  the  same  direction  as
loans.  But  the  degree  of  rise  or  fall  in  these  two  items  is  often  far  from  equal.
Certain  of  the  differences  appear  to  be  characteristic  of  specific  phases  of  the
business  cycle.  (1)  During  crises  deposits  decline  more  than  loans,  or,  as  in
1903-04  and  in  1907,  rise  less. (2)  During  periods  of depression  following

4  However  "  normal ' '  it  may  be  for  banks  to  contract  loans  during  a  crisis,  ability  to  expand  them  is  much
to  be  preferred.

5  Compare  O M W.  Sprague,  History  of  Crises  under  the  National  Banking System (Publications of  the
National  Monetary' Commission),  p.  300. See  also  chapter  XII,  iii,  3,  below.


330  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

upon  crises,  deposits  rise  more  than  loans.  (3)  When  business  revives  after
depression  deposits  usually  expand  somewhat  less  rapidly  than  loans,  though
this  rule,  unlike  the  others,  has  been  subject  to  exceptions  within  the  period
covered.  (4)  The  same  rule  applies  when  a  business  revival  develops  into  full
prosperity — both  items  expand,  but  loans  faster  than  deposits.

These  relations  stand  out  more  clearly  if  the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  be
computed.  The  next  table  shows  that  this  ratio  rises  on  the  approach  of  a
crisis,  attains  its  maximum  during  the  crisis,  and  then  falls  off.  If  the  suc-
ceeding period  of  depression  be  severe,  the  ratio  reaches  its  lowest  point ;  but
in  such  brief  seasons  of  business  contraction  as  that  of  1891  the  readjustment
is  not  worked  out  until  after  a  revival  of  activity  has  come.  In  either  case,
the  return  of  prosperity  is  accompanied  by  a  rise  of  the  ratio,  which  continues
imtil  the  next  crisis.  This  ratio,  indeed,  forms  one  of  the  best  barometers  of
business  conditions,  though  it  is  less  reliable  as  an  indication  of  fair  weather
than  as  a  warning  of  approaching  storm.


TABLE  84

Ratio  of  Loans  to  Net  Deposits  in  the  Cleaeing-House  Banks  of  New  York

By  years  By  phases  of  business  cycles

1890-1911  1890-1911

1890  98.9  January,  1890-July,  1890 — Prosperity  97.5

1891  97.9  August,  1890-Deeember,  1890— Minor  crisis  100.9

1892  93.8  January,  1891-July,  1891— Depression  98.1

1893  96.7  August,  1891-August,  1892— Prosperity  93.8

1894  82.8  September,  1892-April,  1893— Approach  of  crisis  97.3

1895  91.6  May,  1893-Oetober,  1893— Major  crisis  101.5

1896  96.2  November,  1893-March,  1895— Severe  depression  84.4

1897  89.3  April,  1895-September,  1895— Revival  90.6

1898  87.3  October,  1895-June,  1896 — Renewed  depression  94.6

1899  87.6  July,  1896-October,  1896— Free  silver  campaign  98.9

1900  91.4  November,  1896-June,  1897 — Depression  92.2

1901  91.9  July,  1897-Pebruary,  1898— Revival  86.8

1902  95.7  March,  1898-April,  1898— Spanish  War  impending  87.7

1903  101.2  May,  1898-September,  1899— Prosperity  86.8

1904  94.9  October,  1899-December,  1899— Minor  crisis  91.5

1905  97.3  January,  1900-September,  1900— Slight  depression  90.6

1906  101.9  October,  1900-October,  1902— Prosperity  93.1

1907  104.3  November,  1902-July,  1904— "Rich  man's  panic"  98.9

1908  95.2  August,  1904-August,  1905— Revival  95.3

1909  96.9  September,  1905-September,  1906— Prosperity  101.1

1910  100.5  October,  1906-September,  1907— Approach  of  crisis  103.2

1911  97.6  October,  1907-December,  1907— Major  crisis  108.5

Averages  January,  1908-8eptember,  1908— Severe  depression  95.6

1890-99  92.21  October,  1908~December,  1909— Revival  96.3

1900-09 97.07  January,  1910-December,  1911— Reaction  99.0


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


331


Chart 54.

Ratio  of  the Loans  to  the  Net  Deposits of  the  Clearing House

Banks-  of  New  York.

106

1890  -  1910.

i

104
102

102

/

jl

1

100

/

1

100

/

/

98
96

\,

/

/

98
36

\

/

/

/

/

1

\

/

/

\

/

'

/

1

/

94

92

\

/

1

/

/

94
92

\

/

/

1

1

/

^

90
8fi

/

90

8a

1

\

\

/

\

r

&6

36

84
82

84

82

1890 'S

'92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 'o

3 1910

332  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

The  ' '  specie  and  legal  tenders ' '  held  by  the  New  York  banks,  that  is,  their
cash  reserves,  have  declined  in  every  crisis  since  1890,  and  at  a  pace  roughly
proportionate  to  the  severity  of  the  disturbance.  Almost  before  the  crises  were
over,  however,  reverse  movements  have  set  in  on  such  a  scale  as  within  a  few
weeks  to  make  the  banks  stronger  in  cash  than  before  the  troubles  began.  This
immense  accumulation  of  money  in  the  bank 'vaults  has  more  than  once  begun
to  decline  again  before  business  revived.  In  other  cases  the  resumj^tion  of
activity  has  been  accompanied  by  an  outflow  of  cash  from  New  York.  But
business  revivals  have  usually  come  in  the  autumn  when  currency  would  have
been  shipped  west  to  move  the  crops,  even  though  depression  had  continued
unbroken.  Finally,  the  periods  of  full-fledged  prosperity  have  been  accom-
panied by  a  moderate  gain,  or  by  a  small  loss  of  cash.  In  1902,  for  example,
the  average  reserves  were  less  than  in  1901 ;  in  1906  they  were  less  than  in  1905,
and  in  the  latter  year  less  than  in  1904.

Not  less  significant  than  the  actual  amount  of  the  reserves  is  the  ratio  borne
by  reserves  to  deposits.  In  good  times  the  New  York  clearing-house  banks  as
a  group  have  been  content  to  carry  reserves  but  slightly  above  the  minimum  set
for  national  banks  in  central-reserve  cities — 25  per  cent  of  their  net  deposits.
When  crises  have  occurred,  reserves  have  usually  fallen  for  a  time  below  this
lunit.  The  minimum  ratios  reached  in  the  successive  crises  of  the  last  two
decades  have  been  as  follows:  24.13  per  cent  in  1890,  20.55  per  cent  in  1893,
26.84  per  cent  in  1896,  24.62  per  cent  in  1899,  25.06  per  cent  in  1903,  and  19.98
per  cent  in  1907.  During  the  succeeding  periods  of  depression,  reserves  have
risen  well  above  25  per  cent,  as  the  following  list  of  maxima  shows :  30.94  per
cent  in  1891,  45.20  per  cent  in  1894,  35.51  per  cent  in  1897,  28.87  per  cent  in  1900,
29.84  per  cent  in  1904,  and  30.06  per  cent  in  1908.  These  maximimi  ratios  have
all  been  reached  before  business  began  to  revive  again.  In  the  course  of  the
revival  the  decline  of  the  ratio  has  continued,  and  when  no  reaction  has  inter-
rupted the  movement  of  business  expansion  the  figure  has  presently  returned
to  the  neighborhood  of  26  per  cent.  The  seasonal  outflow  and  inflow  of  cash,
combined  with  the  seasonal  expansion  and  contraction  of  loans,  has  maintained
continual  oscillations  of  the  ratio ;  but  when  prosperity  has  been  long  continued
the  level  of  these  oscillations  has  slowly  declined,  and  toward  the  end  of  the
prosperous  phase  of  the  cycle  the  reserves  usually  have  dipped  from  time  to
time  below  the  level  of  25  per  cent.

To  summarize  the  results  of  the  preceding  analysis:  In  times  of  crisis  the
New  York  banks  have  increased  their  circidation,  though  tardily;  they  have
contracted  their  loans  in  the  earlier  crises,  but  have  been  forced  to  expand  them
in  1903  and  1907 ;  their  deposits  have  fallen  more  or  risen  less  than  their  loans,
so  that  the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  has  invariably  increased;  and  they  have
lost  cash  at  such  a  pace  as  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  their  reserves  to  deposits.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  333

In  times  of  depression  the  banlcs  ha^-e  slowly  reduced  their  circulation,  and
increased  their  loans.  But  their  deposits  have  risen  faster  than  loans,  so  that
the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  has  fallen.  Money  has  flowed  into  their  vaults
in  large  amounts  and  raised  the  percentage  of  reserve  to  the  highest  points
attained  at  any  stage  of  the  business  cycle.

When  business  has  revived  after  depression,  the  banks  have  usually  increased
their  note  issues  somewhat,  and  expanded  their  loans  rapidly.  The  rise  of
deposits  has  not  long  kept  pace  with  the  increase  of  loans,  so  that  the  ratio  of
loans  to  deposits  has  risen  presently,  if  not  at  the  outset  of  the  revival.  Reserves
have  usually  exhibited  an  uncertain  sagging  tendency;  at  least  they  have  not
grown  as  fast  as  deposits.  In  consequence,  the  ratio  of  reserves  to  deposits  has
described  a  descending  saAv-toothed  curve,  tlie  decline  often  beginning  before
depression  has  been  relieved.

As  revival  has  developed  into  prosperity,  the  banks  have  seldom  done  more
than  to  maintain  their  circulation  unimpaired.  On  the  contrary,  they  have
continued  to  expand  loans  at  a  faster  rate  than  their  deposits  have  grown.
Hence  the  i-atio  of  loans  to  deposits  has  risen  gradually.  In  some  cases  the
actual  amount  of  cash  has  increased,  in  others  decreased;  but  the  ratio  of
reserA^es  to  deposits  has  continued  the  checkered  decline  which  marked  the
period  of  revival.


II.  The  National  Banks

The  next  qviestion  is  whether  the  changes  shown  by  the  clearing-house  banks
of  New  York  during  the  successive  phases  of  business  cycles  are  peculiar  to
that  center  or  are  characteristic  of  the  Avhole  country.  Since  the  reports  for
all  commercial  banks  are  available  for  onl}^  one  date  in  each  year,  it  is  better
to  base  the  analysis  upon  the  fuller  data  for  the  national  banks.  A  condensed
abstract  of  the  resources  and  liabilities  of  these  institutions,  made  from  the
Reports  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currencij,  is  presented  in  the  following  table."

6  In  this  table  "loans"  include  "loans  and  discounts"  and  "overdrafts";  "United  States  bonds"  include
"U.  S.  bonds  to  secure  circulation,"  "U.  S.  bonds  to  secure  II.  S.  deposits,"  "U.  S.  bonds  on  hand,"  and
"premiums";  "other  bonds,  securities,  etc.,"  include  "other  bonds  to  secure  U.  S.  deposits,"  and  "bonds,
securities  etc. "  •  "  due  from  banks ' '  includes  ' '  due  from  approved  reserve  agents, "  "  due  from  national  banks
not  reserve  agents,"  and  "due  from  state  banks,  bankers,  trust  companies,  etc.";  "checks  and  exchanges"
include  "checks  and  other  cash  items,"  "exchanges  for  the  clearing  house,"  and  "bills  of  other  national
banks";  "cash"  includes  "fractional  currency,  nickels,  cents,"  "specie,"  "legal  tender  notes,"  and  "U.  S.
certificates  of  deposit";  "miscellaneous  resources"  include  "banking  house,  furniture,  and  fixtures,"  "other
real  estate  owned,"  "five  per  cent  redemption  fund,"  "clearing-house  loan  certificates,  net  balance,"  and
"due  from  the  IT.  S.  Treasurer,  other  than  the  5  per  cent  fund";  "capital,  etc.,"  includes  "capital  stock
paid  in,"  "surplus  fund,"  and  "undivided  profits  less  expenses  and  taxes";  "circulation"  includes  "national
bank  notes  outstanding"; "individual  deposits"  include "individual deposits"  and  "dividends  unpaid";


house  loan  certificates,"  "state  bank  notes  outstanding,"  "bonds  borrowed,"  "notes  and  bills  rediscounted,
"bills  payable,"  "reserved  for  taxes,"  and  "liabilities  other  than  those  above  stated."


334  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  85

Condensed  Abstract  of  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  of  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Reports

TO  THE  Comptroller  of  the  Currenct

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Date
1890  Feb.  28

Loans,
etc.

1,845

U.  S.
bonds

195

Other  bonds,
securities,  etc.

117

Due  from
banks

331

Checks  and
exchanges

149

Cash
278

Miscellaneous
89

May  17

1,904

194

117

325

104

275

91

July  18

1,934

194

116

325

123

282

87

Oct. 2

1,986

185

116

336

142

283

93

Dec.  19

1,932

184

117

300

123

279

112

1891  Feb.  26

1,928

186

121

321

110

303

95

May  4

1,970

187

122

321

164

304

99

July  9

1,964

187

122

318

118

311

94

Sept.  25

2,005

190

125

339

155

298

101

Dec. 2

2,001

192

128

354

146

311

105

1892  Mar.  1

2,059

195

138

420

167

355

103

May  17

2,108

197

144

412

137

374

106

July  12

2,128

196

151

423

129

367

100

Sept.  30

2,171

197

155

410

143

328

106

Dec. 9

2,167

199

154

382

148

320

111

1893  Mar.  6

2,160

203

153

357

162

315

109

May  4

2,161

204

151

329

153

324

111

July  12

2,020

207

150

299

145

290

103

Oct. 3

1,844

238

149

277

144

347

110

Dec.  19

1,872

236

160

350

107

415

103

1894  Feb. 28

1,872

248

174

387

103

435

105

May  4

1,927

245

185

407

109

453

107

July  18

1,944

244

191

397

98

440

108

Oct. 2

2,007

240

193

399

123

404

108

Dec.  19

1,992

248

197

390

112

376

108

1895  Mar.  5

1,965

264

197

366

108

367

111

May  7

1,989

267

194

367

116

365

112

July  11

2,017

253

194

394

116

384

113

Sept.  28

2,059

251

195

377

86

341

114

Dec.  13

2,042

251

193

367

117

338

115

1896  Feb.  28

1,966

283

192

333

119

338

116

May 7

1,983

282

191

338

117

350

116

July  14

1,972

274

190

349

107

345

117

Oct. 6

1,893

280

189

331

109

344

117

Dec.  17

1,901

281

190

377

117

382

118

1897  Mar.  9

1,898

280

198

425

105

421

118

May  14

1,934

279

203

429

116

411

120

July  23

1,978

279

205

446

122

414

119

Oct. 5

2,067

277

209

494

148

390

120

Dec.  15

2,100

301

218

526

152

411

120

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


335


TABLE  85— (Continued)

Condensed  Abstract  of  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  of  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Reports

TO  THE  Comptroller  of  the  Currency

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Loans,

U.S.

Other  bonds,

Due  from

Checks  and

Date

etc.

bonds

securities,  etc.

banks

exchanges

Cash

Miscellaneous

1898  Feb.  18

2,152

278

230

579

145

442

120

May 5

2,110

279

236

499

164

461

120

July  14

2,164

304

251

524

132

472

130

Sept.  20

2,173

358

255

525

147

422

124

Dee. 1

2,237

383

259

609

236

465

123

1899  Feb. 4

2,318

368

277

695

114

509

122

Apr. 5

2,421

364

300

684

252

495

122

June  30

2,508

346

305

687

248

493

121

Sept.  7

2,516

348

320

686

192

468

121

Beo.  2

2,514

351

325

604

129

431

121

1900  Feb.  13

2,505

383

331

630

228

478

120

Apr.  26

2,585

410

337

664

188

505

123

June  29

2,644

418

357

691

205

504

125

Sept.  5

2,710

419

367

736

170

522

125

Dec.  13

2,748

427

373

736

228

503

127

1901  Feb. 5

2,851

439

391

791

282

554

127

Apr.  24

2,940

445

421

808

338

551

129

July  15

2,981

451

435

788

351

542

128

Sept.  30

3,052

454

449

785

287

541

128

Dec.  10

3,081

453

452

784

301

538

113

1902  Feb.  25

3,161

456

459

835

241

563

129

Apr.  30

3,200

456

467

807

342

560

131

July  16

3,247

460

485

819

296

571

132

Sept.  15

3,314

469

493

820

375

509

133

Nov.  25

3,347

492

512

801

281

535

136

1903  Feb. 6

3,387

500

529

844

262

572

141

Apr. 9

3,433

503

535

813

249

538

143

June  9

3,442

527

539

802

277

554

146

Sept.  9

3,508

537

541

820

198

556

150

Nov.  17

3,476

543

545

834

229

522

152

1904  Jan.  22

3,511

555

558

893

286

616

157

Mar.  28

3,576

554

581

888

231

619

157

June  9

3,622

554

577

■880

201

660

162

Sept.  6

3,758

556

601

962

271

663

164

Nov.  10

3,828

565

602

993

399

644

167

1905  Jan.  11

3,772

567

611

922

332

672

172

Mar.  14

3,888

569

647

1,047

340

643

174

May  29

3,929

562

677

1,007

325

651

176

Aug.  25

4,028

566

673

1,040

317

667

180

Nov.  9

4,071

575

666

1,043

400

624

185

336


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  85— (Continued)

Condensed  Abstract  or  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  op  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Reports

TO  THE  Comptroller  or  the  Currency


Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Date
1906  Jan. 29

Loans,

etc.
4,118

U.S.
bonds

586

Other  bonds,

securities,  etc.

660

Due  from
banks
1,065

Checks  and
exchanges

482

Cash
670

Miscellaneous
189

Apr. 6

4,176

593

676

1,036

377

623

189

June  18

4,237

605

679

1,046

373

653

192

Sept. 4

4,331

642

688

1,074

460

628

193

Nov.  12

4,420

654

724

1,140

443

637

197

1907  Jan. 26

4,505

660

736

1,166

186

698

204

Mar. 22

4,573

666

745

1,121

319

658

206

May 20

4,664

671

774

1,130

334

694

209

Aug. 22

4,709

675

769

1,072

249

704

213

Dec. 3

4,623

713

890

925

311

663

282

1908  Feb. 14

4,452

743

887

1,035

259

791

230

May 14

4,551

734

855

1,062

295

864

233

July 15

4,640

733

840

1,104

309

852

236

Sept.  23

4,782

733

858

1,203

340

871

240

Nov.  27

4,879

719

855

1,251

401

847

244

1909  Feb. 5

4,870

737

879

1,282

342

863

248

Apr. 28

4,988

740

889

1,233

384

881

254

June  23

5,061

744

904

1,243

373

889

257

Sept. 1

5,158

746

916

1,227

408

857

261

Nov.  16

5,191

746

886

1,285

411

808

265

1910  Jan. 31

5,264

747

857

1,264

492

836

271

Mar.  29

5,464

748

856

1,285

378

838

273

June  30

5,456

749

863

1,202

525

824

279

Sept. 1

5,497

751

865

1,215

366

855

278

Nov.  10

5,498

751

867

1,317

420

819

284

1911  Jan. 7

5,443

752

894

1,351

250

839

291

Mar. 7

5,588

752

937

1,439

325

911

289

June 7

5,634

755

1,008

1,377

366

949

294

Sept. 1

5,690

775

1,034

1,306

376

899

299

Dec. 5

5,695

781

1,052

1,405

345

866

299

Date
1890  Feb. 28

Capital,
etc.

916

Circulation
124

Individual
deposits
1,482

U.S.
deposits

32

Bank
deposits Miscellaneous
434 14

Total

3,003

May 17

936

126

1,482

31

414

21

3,010

July 18

934

126

1,525

31

424

22

3,062

Oct. 2

961

123

1,568

29

426

34

3,141

Dec. 19

985

123

1,486

29

375

49

3,047

1891  Feb. 26

979

123

1,484

29

423

26

3,065

May 4

992

123

1,578

29

420

25

3,167

July 9

987

124

1,540

26

408

28

3,113

Sept.  25

1,009

131

1,589

20

431

33

3,213

Dec. 2

1,013

135

1,604

18

442

26

3,238

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


337


TABLE.  85— (Continued)
Condensed  Abstract  of  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  of  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Reports

TO  THE  Comptroller  op  the  Currency


Date
1892  Mar.

1

Capital,
etc.

1,011

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars

Individual U.  S.
Circulation deposits deposits

138 1,703 17

Bank

deposits

555

Miscellaneous
13

Total
3,437

May-

17

1,020

140

1,746

16

543

14

3,479

July

12

1,011

141

1,757

14

556

14

3,494

Sept.

30

1,027

143

1,769

14

531

26

3,510

Dee.

29

1,045

146

1,765

14

484

27

3,480

1893  Mar.

6

1,038

149

1,752

14

472

35

3,460

May

4

1,041

152

1,753

14

429

44

3,432

July

12

1,039

155

1,561

14

365

90

3,213

Oct.

3

1,029

183

1,454

14

349

80

3,110

Dec.

19

1,029

180

1,540

14

450

29

3,242

1894  Feb.

28

1,012

174

1,589

14

517

19

3,325

May

4

1,012

173

1,673

14

542

20

3,433

July

18

1,001

172

1,681

14

534

21

3,422

Oct.

2

1,003

172

1,731

14

527

27

3,474

Dee.

19

1,007

169

1,696

14

515

21

3,423

1895  Mar.

5

992

170

1,669

28

495

24

3,379

May

7

993

176

1,693

27

494

28

3,410

July

11

987

179

1,739

13

527

26

3,471

Sept.

28

994

182

1,704

14

495

35

3,424

Dee.

13

998

185

1,722

14

470

35

3,424

1896  Feb.

28

988

187

1,649

34

448

41

3,348

May

7

989

197

1,690

24

443

34

3,378

July

14

983

199

1,671

15

454

31

3,354

Oct.

6

985

210

1,600

15

415

39

3,264

Dee.

17

990

211

1,641

15

486

24

3,367

1897  Mar.

9

976

203

1,670

15

563

18

3,446

May

14

972

198

1,729

16

558

19

3,492

July

23

962

196

1,772

16

597

19

3,563

Oct.

5

966

199

1,855

16

646

23

3,705

Dec.

15

971

194

1,918

44

678

25

3,829

1898  Feb.

18

964

184

1,984

31

765

19

3,947

May

5

962

188

2,001

27

670

21

3,870

July

14

955

190

2,026

53

720

34

3,978

Sept.

20

962

195

2,032

75

698

41

4,004

Dec.

1

962

207

2,226

94

795

29

4,313

1899  Feb.

4

943

204

2,233

87

913

25

4,404

Apr.

5

947

204

2,439

87

932

30

4,639

June

30

947

199

2,530

76

932

24

4,709

Sept.

7

956

200

2,452

79

929

34

4,650

Dee.

3

971

305

2,382

80

796

41

4,475

338


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  85— {Continued)

Condensed  Abstract  of  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  op  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Eeports

TO  the  Comptroller  or  the  Currency

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Date
1900  Feb.  13

Capital,
etc.

977

Circulation
205

Individual
deposits

2,483

U.S.

deposits

109

Bank

deposits

856

Miscellaneous
45

Total
4,675

Apr.  26

1,001

236

2,450

109

975

40

4,812

June  29

1,013

265

2,460

99

1,063

44

4,944

Sept.  5

1,020

284

2,509

94

1,097

45

5,048

Dec.  13

1,036

299

2,625

94

1,045

43

5,142

1901  Feb. 5

1,035

309

2,755

95

1,205-

37

5,436

Apr.  24

1,057

317

2,895

96

1,227

39

5,631

July 5

1,062

819

2,945

99

1,207

44

5,676

Sept.  30

1,086

324

2,942

107

1,185

52

5,695

Dec.  10

1,114

319

2,965

110

1,169

45

5,723

1902  Feb.  25

1,117

314

2,983

112

1,279

37

5,843

Apr.  30

1,132

310

3,114

120

1,249

38

5,962

July  16

1,185

309

3,101

124

1,243

47

6,009

Sept.  15

1,201

318

3,210

124

1,200

60

6,114

Nov.  25

1,232

337

3,154

147

1,155

80

6,104

1903  Feb. 6

1,249

335

3,161

148

1,272

70

6,235

Apr. 9

1,266

335

3,169

148

1,218

76

6,213

June  9

1,285

359

3,203

147

1,212

80

6,287

Sept.  9

1,310

375

3,157

150

1,226

92

6,310

Nov.  17

1,324

376

3,177

163

1,164

99

6,302

1904  Jan.  22

1,329

381

3,303

163

1,323

78

6,577

Mar.  28

1,341

386

3,255

160

1,383

81

6,606

June  .9

1,349

400

3,313

110

1,412

71

6,656

Sept.  6

1,354

411

3,459

111

1,561

79

6,975

Nov.  10

1,372

419

3,709

110

1,513

74

7,197

1905  Jan.  11

1,368

424

3,615

106

1,535

69

7,118

Mar.  14

1,386

431

3,778

93

1,556

64

7,308

May  29

1,407

445

3,785

75

1,547

68

7,328

Aug.  25

1,420

469

3,822

62

1,625

75

7,472

Nov.  9

1,441

486

3,992

61

1,504

80

7,563

1906  Jan.  29

1,451

498

4,090

62

1,596

72

7,770

Apr. 6

1,470

506

3,980

74

1,557

83

7,671

June  18

1,491

511

4,058

90

1,545

89

7,784

Sept.  4

1,506

518

4,201

108

1,589

94

8,016

Nov.  12

1,536

536

4,291

140

1,600

111

8,214

1907  Jan.  26

1,552

545

4,118

157

1,677

105

8,155

Mar.  22

1,579

543

4,271

153

1,637

104

8,288

May  20

1,604

548

4,324

181

1,686

134

8,477

Aug.  22

1,631

552

4,320

161

1,595

130

8,390

Dec. 3

1,652

602

4,178

235

1,388

353

8,408

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  339


TABLE  85— (Concluded)
Condensed  Abstract  of  the  Eesources  and  Liabilities  op  All  National  Banks  as  Shown  by  Their  Reports

TO  THE  Comptroller  op  the  Currency


Date
1908  Feb.

14

Capital,
etc.

1,649

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars

Individual U.  S.
Circulation deposits deposits

628  ■ 4,107 233

Bank
deposits

1,584

Miscellaneous
197

Total
8,397

May

14

1,671

614

4,314

182

1,692

122

8,595

July

15

1,668

614

4,378

130

1,823

102

8,714

Sept.

23

1,689

614

4,549

126

1,942

107

9,027

Nov.

27

l,7t)0

599

4,721

124

1,959

93

9,197

1909  Feb.

5

1,70(

615

4,701

100

2,035

69

9,221

Apr.

28

1,729

636

4,827

70

2,037

69

9,369

June

23

1,744

641

4,900

74

2,035

77

9,472

Sept.

1

1,746

658

5,012

49

2,019

90

9,574

Nov.

16

1,780

668

5,122

49

1,886

86

9,591

1910  Jan.

31

1,779

668

5,194

48

1,967

75

9,731

Mar.

29

1,825

669

5,229

48

1,988

82

9,842

June

30

1,851

676

5,302

55

1,900

113

9,897

Sept.

1

1,877

675

5,147

50

1,944

134

9,826

Nov.

10

1,900

680

5,306

48

1,906

115

9,956

1911  Jan.

7

1,892

684

5,119

47

1,991

87

9,820

Mar.

7

1,910

681

5,306

46

2,224

74

10,241

June

7

1,933

682

5,480 '

49

2,147

92

10,383

Sept.

1

1,930

697

5,492

48

2,088

124

10,379

Bee.

5

1,958

703

5,537

53

2,085

107

10,443

The  circulation  of  the  national  banks  as  a  whole  has  adapted  itself  to
changing  conditions  of  business  scarcely  better  than  has  the  circulation  of  the
New  York  banks.  The  volume  has  expanded  tardily  during  crises,  contracted
slowly  during  depressions,  expanded  again  when  business  revived,  and  con-
tinued to  expand  through  periods  of  marked  prosperity.  In  the  latter  respect,
alone,  has  the  total  note  issue  of  all  national  banks  proved  itself  more  elastic
than  that  of  the  metropolitan  group.  But  these  movements  have  all  been  slug-
gish and  generally  of  small  amplitude.  Occasionally,  the  circulation  has  even
expanded  when  the  volume  of  business  Avas  shrinking,  as  in  1895  and  1910,  when
premature  revivals  of  activity  were  checked.  Moreover,  the  movements  which
harmonize  with  the  changing  phases  of  business  cycles  appear  as  minor  varia-
tions of  long-period  shiftings  controlled  by  factors  which  do  not  grow  out  of
the  business  situation.  For  example,  as  a  whole  1890-96  was  a  time  of  business
stress,  and  yet  the  general  level  of  the  circulation  rose ;  as  a  whole  1896-98  was
a  time  of  business  improvement,  and  yet  the  general  level  of  the  circulation
fell ;  finally,  the  marked  rise  of  the  circulation  after  1900  was  due  more  to  the


340  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

provisions  of  the  Gold  Standard  Act,  the  policy  of  Secretary  Shaw,  and  the
fall  in  the  prices  of  government  bonds,  than  to  the  expansion  of  American
business/

National-bank  loans  behave  in  a  more  regular  fashion  than  New  York  loans.
They  invariably  fall  during  crises,  and  rise  "promptly  in  the  following  depres-
sions, though  a  year  or  more  sometunes  elaj^ses  before  they  reach  the  ante-
crisis  level.  When  business  revives,  the  rise  continues  at  an  accelerated  pace,
and,  save  for  seasonal  variations,  this  rise  runs  on  through  the  years  of  pros-
perity until  another  crisis  comes.

In  the  New  York  bank  statements  securit}^  holdings  are  included  with  loans ;
in  the  national-bank  reports  the  two  items  are  segregated.  One  might  expect
that  in  the  stress  of  a  crisis  the  banks  ^^'ould  sell  part  of  their  miscellaneous
stocks  and  bonds  in  order  to  reduce  deposit  liabilities,  to  obtain  cash,  or  to  buy

TABLE  86
Annual  Averages  or  the  Chiee  Items  in  the  Eeports  or  the  National  Banks,  1890-1911


Year
1890

Loans,
etc.

1,920

Actual  amounts  in  ;
U.  S. Other  bonds,
bonds securities,  etc.

190 117

millions  of  dollars
Due  from Checks  and
banks exchanges

323 128

Cash
279

Miscellaneous
resources

94

1891

1,974

188

124

331

139

305

99

1892

2,127

197

148

409

145

349

105

1893

2,011

218

153

322

142

338

107

1894

1,948

245

188

396

109

422

107

1895

2,014

257

195

374

109

359

113

1896

1,943

280

190

346

114

352

117

1897

1,995

283

207

464

129

409

119

1898

2,167

320

246

547

165

452

123

1899

2,455

355

305

671

187

479

121

1900

2,638

411

353

691

204

502

124

1901

2,981

448

430

791

312

545

125

1902

3,254

467

483

816

307

548

132

1903

3,449

522

538

823

243

548

146

1904

3,659

557

584

923

278

640

161

1905

3,940

568

655

1,026

343

651

177

1906

4,256

616

685

1,072

427

642

192

1907

4,615

677

783

1,083

280

683

223

1908

4,661

732

859

1,131

321

845

237

1909

5,054

743

895

1,254

384

860

257

1910

5,436

749

862

1,257

436

834

277

1911

5,610

763

985

1,376

332

893

294

Averages
1890-99

2,055.4

253.3

187.3

418.3

136.7

374.4

110.5

1900-09

3,850.7

574.1

626.5

961.0

309.9

646.4

177.4

'  Compare  Chapter  VI,  iii.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


341


TABLE  86~{ConUnued)
Annual  Averages  of  the  Chief  Items  in  the  Reports  op  the  National  Banks,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts  in

millions  of  dollars

Total

Tear

Capital,
etc.

Circulation

Individual
deposits

U.S.
deposits

Bank
deposits

Miscellaneous
liabilities

resources

and
liabilities

1890

946

124

1,509

30

415

28

3,053

1891

996

127

1,559

24

425

28

3,159

1892

1,023

142

1,748

15

534

19

3,480

1893

1,033

164

1,612

14

413

56

3,291

1894

1,007'

172

1,674

14

527

22

3,415

1895

993

178

1,705

19

496

30

3,422

1896

987

201

1,650

21

449

34

3,342

1897

969

198

1,789

21

608

21

3,607

1898

961

193

2,054

56

730

29

4,022

1899

953

202

2,407

82

900

31

4,575

1900

1,009

258

2,505

101

1,007

43

4,924

1901

1,071

318

2,900

101

1,199

43

5,632

1902

1,173

318

3,112

125

1,225

52

6,006

1903

1,287

356

3,173

151

1,218

83

6,269

1904

1,349

399

3,408

131

1,438

77

6,802

1905

1,404

451

3,799

79

1,553

71

7,358

1906

1,491

514

4,124

95

1,577

90

7,891

1907

1,604

558

4,242

177

1,597

165

8,344

1908

1,675

614

4,414

159

1,800

124

8,786

1909

1,740

644

4,912

68

2,002

78

9,445

1910

1,846

674

5,236

50

1,941

104

9,850

1911

1,925

689

5,387

49

2,107

97

10,253

Averages
1890-99

986.8

170.1

1,770.7

29.6

549.7

29.8

3,536.6

1900-09

1,380.3

443.0

3,658.9

118.7

1,461.6

82.6

7,145.7

342


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  86— (Continued)
Annual  Averages  of  the  Chief  Items  in  the  Eepoets  of  the  National  Banks,  1890-1911

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Year
1890

Loans,
etc.

93

U.S.
bonds

75

Other  bonds,
securities,  etc.

62

Due  from
banks

77

Checks  and
exchanges

94

Cash
75

Miscellaneous
resources

85

1891

96

74

66

79

102

81

90

1892

103

78

79

98

106

93

95

1893

98

86

82

77

104

90

97

1894

95

97

100

95

80

113

97

1895

98

101

104

89

80

96

102

1896

95

111

101

83

83

94

106

1897

97

112

111

111

94

109

108

1898

105

126

131

131

121

121

111

1899

119

140

163

160

137

128

109

1900

128

162

188

165

149

134

112

1901

145

177

230

189

228

146

113

1902

158

184

258

195

225

146

119

1903

168

206

287

197

178

146

132

1904

178

220

312

221

203

171

146

1905

192

224

350

245

251

i74

160

1906

207

243

366

256

312

171

174

1907

225

267

418

259

205

182

202

1908

227

289

459

270

235

226

214

1909

246

293

478

300

281

230

233

1910

264

296

460

301

319

223

251

1911

273

301

526

329

243

238

266

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

187

227

334

230

227

173

161

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  343


TABLE  86~{Concluded)

Annual  Averages  of  the  Chief  Items  in  the  Eeports  of  the  National  Banks,  1890-1911
"Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  :


Total

Year

Capital,
etc.

Circulation

Individual
deposits

U.S.
deposits

Bank
deposits

Miscellaneous
liabilities

resources

and
liabilities

1890

96

73

85

101

75

94

.86

1891

101

75

88

81

77

94

89

1892

104

83

99

51

97

64

98

1893

105

96

91

47

75

188

93

1894

102

101

95

._47

96

74

97

1895

101

105

96

64

90

101

97

1896

100

118

93

71

82

114

95

1897

98

116

101

71

111

70

102

1898

97

113

116

189

133

97

114

1899

97

119

136

277

164

104

129

1900

102

152

141

341

183

144

139

1901

109

187

164

341

218

144

159

1902

119

187

176

422

223

174

170

1903

130

209

179

510

222

279

177

1904

137

235

192

443

262

258

192

1905

142

265

215

267

283

238

208

1906

151

302

233

321

287

302

223

1907

163

328

240

598

291

554

236

1908

170

361

249

537

327

416

248

1909

176

279

277

230

364

262

267

1910

187

396

296

169

353

349

279

1911

195

405

304

166

383

325

290

Averages
] 890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

140

260

207

401

266

277

202

344


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


/

Chart  55.

/
/

Relative  Amounts  of  the  Loans  ,  Individual  Deposits  ,

/
1

280

AND  Cash  Reserves  of  the  National  Banks- —

1890  - 1910.

1
/
/
/
/

260

/

;

1

—  —  —  —  Individual  Deposits.

•  ..•••.•••• r^E^M Rp«rB\/r  4

1

■  >>••••■■•* \jf  ion i^^o^r^  V  ^  a

/

1

>

' 1

/

/

240

240

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

/

Jy'

\

/

^

".

/

/

:

220

220

/

/

I

/

!

/

/

1

/

'

1

200

/
/

/

200

1
1

/

'

1

/

J

1

/

•

1

/

180

1

1

i

180

X

f

f

^

/

»

/

/

.-•

/

/

/

,••

'■"v

/

i

f  •

!

/

/

*

i

' /

;

160

1 j

f  1 '/

leo

! I

' /

' /

.*

' /

*

1

' /

.'

;  /

/  /••■
'  .'/I

140

1 1 J*

140

^

>

/

•7

1

/

1

'*  J

1

I-

y

J

/

120

*i

/

120

r

//  1

\

I

'hi

!

\

.

'

1

•.

/

1  J

/

V

r

\

;

f  /

100

/

x

*.

,'  /

100

^

$

^

=^

//

N

y

■  /

^

80

,'

80

1890  31 92 '9S '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 'SB 1900  'oi 02 Oi 04 '05 '06 07 '08 '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  345

United  States  bonds  as  a  basis  for  additional  circulation.  In  fact,  however,
they  have  made  but  little  use  of  their  "other  securities"  for  such  purposes.
In  the  crises  of  1893  and  1896  this  item  did  fall  a  trifle ;  but  in  the  crises  of
1890,  1899,  1903,  and  1907  it  rose,  slightly  on  the  first  three  occasions,  heavily
on  the  last.  Apparently  the  banks  are  unwilling  to  sacrifice  securities  at  the
low  prices  which  prevail  on  the  stock  market  in  times  of  crisis,  and  are  often
compelled  to  take  over  additional  stocks  or  bonds  from  embarrassed  debtors.
Such  holdings,  in  America  at  least,  cannot  be  regarded  as  an  efficient  "second
reserve"  for  meeting  seasons  of  stress.  What  service  they  render  in  this  regard
seems  to  be  limited  to  their  use  as  a  basis  for  clearing-house  loan  certificates.

As  soon  as  a  crisis  is  over  and  the  inflow  of  cash  begins,  the  banks  buy
additional  securities  at  the  same  time  that  they  are  expanding  loans.  The  one
exception  to  this  rule  occurred  during  the  depression  of  1908.  But  this  exception
is  more  apparent  than  real.  Between  August  and  December,  1907,  the  banks
had  been  forced  to  take  over  some  $121,000,000  of  additional  securities  other
than  government  bonds.  When  the  crisis  was  passed,  they  gradually  disposed
of  part  of  these  extraordinarily  large  holdings;  but  continued  to  carry  some
$50,000,000  more  than  before  the  crisis.

Periods  of  business  revival  and  of  prosperity  have  usually  been  accompanied
by  further  increases  of  security  holdings,  particularly  when  the  banks  have
been  participating  actively  in  syndicates  for  underwriting  new  issues.  Thus,
in  the  period  of  company  promotion  between  1898  and  1902,  "other  securities"
was  the  only  item  among  national-bank  resources  to  double  its  amount — and
more.

It  is,  indeed,  one  of  the  salient  features  of  the  national-banking  business
since  1890  that  the  banks  have  put  a  gradually  decreasing  proportion  of  their
funds  available  for  productive  investment  into  commercial  loans,  and  an
increasing  proportion  into  stocks  and  bonds.  The  next  table  traces  this  change
in  detail.  Whereas  loans  used  to  make  about  86  per  cent  of  the  combined  loans.
United  States  bonds,  and  other  securities,  they  made  in  1910  but  77  per  cent.
Other  securities  meanwhile  have  risen  from  about  5  to  about  12  per  cent  of  the
total,  and  United  States  bonds  from  9  to  10.5  per  cent.  The  proportion  of  other
securities  reached  its  maximmn  of  14.6  per  cent  and  that  of  loans  its  minimum
of  73.2  per  cent  immediately  after  the  crisis  of  1907.

Individual  deposits  in  the  national  banks  fall  during  crises,  rise  during
depressions,  and  continue  their  upward  course  during  periods  of  revival  and
prosperity.  In  all  this  they  resemble  loans ;  but,  as  in  ISTew  York,  the  amplitude
of  the  two  sets  of  variations  differs  from  phase  to  phase  of  the  cycle.  The  fall
of  deposits  exceeds  that  of  loans  in  crises,  and  their  rise  exceeds  that  of  loans
during  depressions.  On  the  other  hand,  during  periods  of  revival  and  prosperity
the  increase  of  deposits  usually  lags  behind  that  of  loans.


346


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  87

Loans  and  Security  Holdings  op  the  National  Banks  at  the  Date  of  Each  Report  to  the  "Comptroller  of

THE  Currency,  1890-1911


1890


1891


1892


1893


1894


1895


1896


1897


1898


Loans  and
security

holdings  in
millions

of  dollars

Proportion

of

i

ts

Date

Loans  and
security

holdings  in
millions
of  dollars

Proportion

LOf

Date

Loans
Per  cent

U.S.
bonds
Per  cent

Other  bondi

and  securitie

Per  cent

Loans
Per  cent

U.  S.
bonds
Per  cent

Other  bonds

and  securities

Per  cent

Feb. 28

2,157

85.6

9.0

5.4

1898

July

14

2,719

79.6

11.2

9.2

May 17

2,215

86.0

8.7

5.3

Sept.

20

2,786

78.0

12.8

9.2

July 18

2,244

86.2

8.6

5.2

Dee.

1

2,879

77.7

13.3

9.0

Oct. 2

2,287

86.8

8.1

5.1

1899

Feb.

4

2,963

78.2

12.4

9.4

Dec. 19

2,233

86.5

8.3

5.2

Apr.

5

3,085

78.5

11.8

9.7

Feb. 26

2,235

86.3

8.3

5.4

June

30

3,159

79.4

10.9

9.7

May 4

2,279

86.4

8.2

5.4

Sept.

7

3,184

79.0

10.9

10.1

July 9

2,273

86.4

8.2

5.4

Dec.

2

3,190

78.8

11.0

10.2

Sept.  25

2,320

86.4

8.2

5.4

1900

Feb.

13

3,219

77.8

11.9

10.3

Dec. 2

2,321

86.2

8.3

5.5

Apr.

26

3,332

77.6

12.3

10.1

Mar. 1

2,392

86.1

8.1

5.8

June

29

3,419

77.4

12.2

10.4

May 17

2,449

86.1

8.0

5.9

Sept.

5

3.496

77.5

12.0

10.5

July 12

2,475

86.0

7.9

6.1

Dee.

13

3,548

77.5

12.0

10.5

Sept.  30

2,523

86.1

7.8

6.1

1901

Feb.

5

3,681

77.5

11.9

10.6

Dee. 9

2,520

86.0

7.9

6.1

Apr.

24

3,806

77.2

11.7

11.1

Mar. 6

2,516

85.8

8.1

6.1

July

15

3,867

77.1

11.7

11.2

May 4

2,516

85.9

8.1

6.0

Sept.

30

3,955

77.1

11.5

11.4

July 12

2,377

85.0

8.7

6.3

Dec.

10

3,986

77.3

11.4

11.3

Oct. 3

2,231

82.6

10.7

6.7

1902

Feb.

25

4,076

77.5

11.2

11.3

Dee. 19

2,268

82.5

10.4

7.1

Apr.

30

4.123

77.6

11.1

11.3

Feb. 28

2,294

81.6

10.8

7.6

July

16

4,192

77.4

11.0

11.6

May 4

2,357

81.8

10.4

7.8

Sept.

15

4,276

77.5

11.0

11.5

July 18

2,379

81.7

10.3

8.0

Nov.

25

4,351

76.9

11.3

11.8

Oct. 2

2,440

82.3

9.8

7.9

1903

Feb.

6

4,416

76.7

11.3

12.0

Dec. 19

2,437

81.7

10.2

8.1

Apr.

9

4,471

76.8

11.2

12.0

Mar. 5

2,426

81.0

10.9

8.1

June

9

4,508

76.4

11.7

11.9

May 7

2,450

81.2

10.9

7.9

Sept.

9

4,586

76.5

11.7

11.8

July 11

2,464

81. S

10.3

7.9

Nov.

17

4,564

76.2

11.9

11.9

Sept.  28

2,505

82.2

10.0

7.8

1904

Jan.

22

4,624

75.9

12.0

12.1

Dee. 13

2,486

82.1

10.1

7.8

Mar.

28

4,711

75.9

11.8

12.3

Feb. 28

2,441

80.5

11.6

7.9

June

9

4,753

76.2

11.7

12.1

May 7

2,456

80.7

11.5

7.8

Sept.

6

4,915

76.5

11.3

12.2

July 14

2,436

81.0

11.2

7.8

Nov.

10

4,995

76.6

11.3

12.1

Oct. 6

2,362

80.1

11.9

8.0

1905

Jan.

11

4,950

76.2

11.5

12.3

Dee. 17

2,372

80.2

11.8

8.0

Mar.

14

5,104

76.2

11.1

12.7

Mar. 9

2,376

79.9

11.8

8.3

May

29

5,168

76.0

10.9

13.1

May 14

2,416

80.1

11.5

8.4

Aug.

25

5,267

76.5

10.7

12.8

July 23

2,462

80.4

11.3

8.3

Nov.

9

5,312

76.6

10.8

12.6

Oct. 5

2,553

81.0

10.8

8.2

1906

Jan.

29

5,364

76.8

10.9

12.3

Dec. 15

2,619

80.2

11.5

8.3

Apr.

6

5,445

76.7

10.9

12.4

Feb. 18

2,660

80.9

10.5

8.6

June

18

5,521

76.7

11.0

12.3

May 5

2,625

80.4

10.6

9.0

Sept.

4

5,661

76.5

11.3

12.2

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


347


Loans  and  Security  Holdings  of


TABLE  87— (Concluded)
THE  National  Banks  at  the  Date  of  Each  Report  to  the  Comptroller  of


the  Currency,  1890-1911

Se
12

Loans  and
security

holdings  in
millions

of  dollars

5,798

Eroportion  of

s
1909

Date
June  23

Loans  and
security

holdings  in
millions

of  dollars
6,709

Proportion  of

1906  Nov.

Loans
Per  cent

76.2

U.S.
bonds
Per  cent

11.3

Other  bonds

and  securities

Per  cent

12.5

Loans
Per  cent

75.4

U.S.
bonds
Per  cent

11.1

Other  bonds

and  securities

Per  cent

13.5

1907  Jan.

26

5,901

76.3

11.2

12.5

Sept.

1

6,820

75.6

11.0

13.4

Mar.

22

5,984

76.4

11.1

12.5

Nov.

16

6,823

76.1

10.9

13.0

May

20

6,109

76.3

11.0

12.7

1910

Jan.

31

6,868

76.6

10.9

12.5

Aug.

22

6,153

76.5

11.0

12.5

Mar.

29

7,068

77.3

10.6

12.1

Dec.

3

6,226

74.3

11.4

14.3

June

30

7,068

77.2

10.6

12.2

1908  Feb.

14

6,082

73.2

12.2

14.6

Sept.

1

7,113

77.3

10.5

12.2

May-

14

6,140

74.1

12.0

13.9

Nov.

10

7,116

77.3

10.5

12.2

July

15

6,213

74.7

11.8

13.5

1911

Jan.

7

7,089

76.8

10.6

12.6

Sept.

23

6,373

75.0

11.5

13.5

Mar.

7

7,277

76.8

10.3

12.9

Nov.

27

6,453

75.6

11.1

13.3

June

7

7,397

76.2

10.2

13.6

1909  Eeb.

5

6,486

75.1

11.4

13.5

Sept.

1

7,499

75.9

10.3

13.8

Apr.

28

6,617

75.4

11.2

13.4

Dec.

5

7,528

75.6

10.4

14.0

Consequently,  the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  always  rises  during  crises,  and
always  sinks  during  depression.  (See  Table  88.)  With  less  regularity  the
ratio  I'ises  again  on  the  revival  of  activity,  or  at  least  when  the  revival,  develops
into  prosperity.  The  latter  movement,  however,  is  sometimes  obscured,  as  in
1897-99,  by  the  change  pointed  out  below  in  the  relation  between  capital  and
total  liabilities.  The  national  bank  reports  are  not  made  at  sufficiently  brief
intervals  to  establish  the  priority  of  the  changes  in  deposits  and  loans ;  but  when
a  difference  does  appear,  deposits  are  the  first  to  fall  in  crises  and  the  first  to
rise  in  depressions.

Deposits  made  by  banks  follow  in  general  the  same  course  as  individual
deposits.  Their  changes  are  almost  always  greater  in  proportion  and  sometimes
greater  in  actual  amount  than  those  of  individual  deposits — for  example,  in
the  crisis  of  1907  and  the  depression  of  1908.  The  bank  deposits  have  also  made
much  the  more  rapid  growth  over  the  whole  period  covered  by  the  tables.

Cash,  like  deposits,  invariably  declines  in  crises  and  rises  early  in  depressions.
During  periods  of  revival  and  prosperity  its  fluctuations  are  less  regular.  The
reviving  activity  of  trade  leads  to  considerable  withdrawals  of  cash,  particularly
when  this  revival  coincides,  as  frequently  happens,  with  the  regular  autumnal
demand  for  money  to  move  the  crops.  But  sometimes  an  inflowing  current  of
gold  enables  the  banks  to  maintain  their  reserves  unimpaired,  or  even  to  increase
them,  despite  a  rapid  expansion  in  the  amount  of  money  carried  in  the  pockets
of  individuals  and  the  tills  of  business  enterprises.


348


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


136
134
152

Chart

,Sfi

Ratio  of  the  Loans  to  the  Net  Deposits
IN  THE  National  Banks.

1

1890 - 1910  .

130

128

i

IJ6
124

1

126

/

122

u

(

ll

1

1

,

1

1 14

1 12

y

1 12

\

110
108
106
104
102
100
98
9«
94

'

106
104

ll

/

»

A

/I

^

A

r

too

f

J

/I

I

t

7'

1

/

38

J

7'

/

'Jl

i

,

/

36

I

/

/

94

J

1890  '9l '92 "95 '94 '95 '96 'S\ '9a '99 1900 Ol "02 '03 '04- '05 '06 '07 '06 "09 I9I0  'll

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


349


TABLE  88

Ratio  to  the  Net  Deposits  or  National  Banks  op  Their  Loans  and  of  Their  Loans  Plus  Security  Holdings
AT  the  Date  or  Each  Report  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1890-1911


Katio  to  net  deposits  of

Date

Loans

Loans  and
securities

1890  Feb. 28

128.5

150.2

May 17

129.8

151.0

July 18

128.8

149.5

Oct. 2

131.0

150.8

Dec 19

134.3

155.3

1891  Feb. 26

130.6

151.4

May 4

130.2

150.6

July 9

129.9

150.3

Sept.  25

131.4

152.0

Dec. 2

129.4

150.1

1892  Mar. 1

123.2

143.1

May 17

121.1

140.7

July 12

120.8

140.5

Sept.  30

124.3

144.4

Deo. 9

126.1

146.6

1893  Mar. 6

126.7

147.5

May 4

127.1

148.0

July 12

136.3

160.4

Oct. 3

133.4

161.4

Dec. 19

122.1

147.9

1894  Feb. 28

115.8

141.9

May 4

113.4

138.7

July 18

113.0

138.3

Oct. 2

115.6

140.5

Dec. 19

116.6

142.6

1895  Mar. 5

116.3

143.5

May 7

116.7

143.8

July 11

114.9

140.3

Sept.  28

118.6

144.3

Dec. 13

119.5

145.5

1896  Feb. 28

119.5

148.4

May 7

118.2

146.4

July 14

118.1

145.9

Oct. 6

120.2

150.0

Dec. 17

116.4

145.2

1897  Mar. 9

111.4

139.5

May 14

111.0

138.7

July 23

109.8

136.7

Oct. 5

11L2

137.3

Dee. 15

109.5

136.5

1898  Feb. 18

106.3

131.4

May 5

105.1

130.7

Ratio  to  net  deposits  of

Date

Loans

Loans  and
securities

1898  July 14

103.5

130.1

Sept.  20

105.6

135.3

Dec. 1

102.8

132.3

1899  Feb. 4

99.2

126.8

Apr. 5

99.4

126.7

June  30

99.3

125.0

Sept. 7

100.5

127.2

Dec. 2

102.8

130.5

1900  Feb. 13

101,0

129.7

Apr. 26

100.5

129.5

June  29

100.6

130.1

Sept. 5

100.4

129.5

Dec. 13

101.5

131.1

1901  Feb. 5

98.8

127.5

Apr. 24

98.8

127.9

July 15

98.9

128.3

Sept.  30

99.9

129.5

Dec. 10

101.0

130.7

1902  Feb. 25

99.2

127.9

Apr. 30

99.6

128.3

July 16

100.6

129.8

Sept.  15

103.1

133.0

Nov.  25

103.7

134.8

1903  Feb. 6

101.8

132.7

Apr. 9

103.2

134.5

June 9

103.2

135.1

Sept. 9

104.2

136.3

Nov.  17

106.0

139.2

1904  Jan. 22

101.9

134.2

Mar.  28

101.6

133.9

June 9

99.4

130.4

Sept. 6

99.2

129.8

Nov.  10

100.0

130.4

1905  Jan. 11

98.6

129.4

Mar.  14

98.5

129.3

May 29

98.2

129.2

Aug.  25

98.5

128.8

Nov. 9

100.4

131.1

1906  Jan. 29

99.5

129.6

Apr. 6

101.3

132.0

June  18

101.3

131.9

Sept. 4

101.8

133.0

350


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  88— (Concluded)

Ratio  to  the  Net  Deposits  of  National  Banks  of  Their  Loans  and  of  Their  Loans  Plus  Security  Holdings
AT  the  Date  of  Each  Report  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1890-1911


Ratio  to  net  deposits  of

Ratio  to  net  deposits  of

Date
1906 Nov.

12

Loans  and
Loans securities

102.6 134.6

1909

Date
June

23

Loans
95.1

1
Loans  and
securities
126.1

1907  Jan.

26

101.4 132.8

Sept.

1

95.6

126.4

Mar.

22

102.3 133.9

Nov.

16

97.7

128.4

May

20

102.6 134.4

1910

Jan.

31

97.4

127.1

Aug.

22

102.5 133.9

Mar.

29

98.4

127.2

Dee.

3

106.8 143.8

June

30

99.7

129.1

1908  Feb.

14

101.2 138.3

Sept.

1

99.8

129.1

May

14

97.9 132.1

Nov.

10

100.4

129.9

July

15

96.9 129.8

1911

Jan.

7

98.8

128.7

Sept.

23

96.7 128.8

Mar.

7

96.9

126.2

Nov.

27

97.0 128.3

June

7

95.7

125.7

1909  Feb.

5

95.3 126.9

Sept.

1

96.5

127.1

Apr.

28

95.1 126.1

Dec.

5

97.0

128.2

Note. — Net  deposits  =  individual  deposits  plus  dividends
for  the  clearing  house,  cash  items,  and  bills  of  other  banks
all  U.  S.  bonds  held,  plus  premiums,  "other  bonds  to  secure


unpaid  and  sums  due  to  banks,  minus  sums  due  from  banks,  exchanges
.  Loans  =  loans  and  discounts  plus  overdrafts.  Security  holdings  ~
U.  S.  deposits,"  and  "bonds,  securities,  etc."


Unlike  the  New  York  banks,  the  national  banks  as  a  whole  have  usually
kept  their  ratio  of  reserves  to  net  deposits  unimpaired  during  crises,  and  some-
times they  have  even  increased  the  ratio  a  trifle  (see  Table  89).  But  the  data
from  the  regular  reports  do  not  necessarily  show  the  situation  at  the  time  of
most  intense  strain,  and  perhaps  weekly  statements  covering  the  whole  period
of  crises  would  give  different  results.  It  is  clear,  however,  that  the  national
banks  have  been  even  more  timid  than  the  clearing-house  institutions  of  New
York  in  using  their  reserves  to  restore  confidence  in  times  of  panic.  The  prompt
increase  in  the  ratio  as  soon  as  the  crisis  begins  to  merge  into  depression  is
unmistakable.  So  also  is  the  declining  tendency  of  the  ratio  in  times  of  business
revival  and  business  prosperitj^  Indeed,  the  ratio  has  usually  been  lower  at
the  culmination  of  the  "boom"  times  than  during  the  crisis  itself,  if  the  avail-
able data  may  be  trusted.  But  the  dAvindling  of  the  ratio  during  prosperous
times  is  somewhat  exaggerated  by  the  decline  of  the  general  level  about  which
it  has  fluctuated.  This  change  occurred  chiefly  between  the  beginning  of  1899
and  the  end  of  1902.


Liabilities  to  stockholders,  including  capital,  surplus,  and  undivided  profits,
have  shown  no  close  connection  with  business  cycles.  These  items  were  expand-
ing from  1890  until  1893.  Bank  failures  during  the  panic  of  that  year  caused
a  decline,  which  continued  not  only  through  the  period  of  depression  but  also


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


351


2a

26
24

22
20
IS
16
14

24
22
20
18
16
14

1

\

CHART 57.

Ratio  of  the Cash  Reserves to  the  Net  Deposits
OF  THE  National  Banks.
1890 -  1910  .

1

\

f\

/

V

\

\

1

[1

V

\

\

J

V

[

/

V

\

\

V

A

V

V

1/

^

A/

L

\

■\

V

\l

\J

V

W\

1890 '91 '92 '93 'BI- '95 96 '97 '98 '99 1900 '01 '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 '08 '09 1910 'II

TABLE  89


Ratio  op  the  Cash  Reserve  of  the  National  Banks  to

THE  Comptroller  of  the


Their  Net  Deposits  at  the  Date  or  Each  Report  to
Currency,  1890-1911


2

19

26

4

9


Date

1890  Feb. 28

May  17
July  18
Oct.
Dec.

1891  Feb.
May
July
Sept.  25
Dec. 2

-  1892  Mar.  1
May  17
July  12
Sept.  30
Deo.  9
1893  Mar.  6
May


4


July 12


Cash

reserve

Millions  of

dollars

278
275
282
283
279
303
304
'311
298
311
355
374
367
328
320
315
324
290


Net

deposits

Millions  of

dollars

1,436
1,467
1,501
1,516
1,438
1,476
1,513
1,512
1,526
1,546
1,671
1,740
1,761
1,747
1,719
1,705
1,700
1,482


Ratio
Per  cent

19.4

18.7
18.8
18.7
19.4
20.5
20.1
20.6
19.5
20.1
21.2
21.5
20.8
18.8
18.6
18.5
19.1
19.6


Date
1893  Oct.

3

Cash

reserve

Millions  of

dollars

347

Net

deposits

Millions  of

dollars

1,382

Ratio
Per  cent

25.1

Dec.

19

415

1,533

27.1

1894  Feb.

28

435

1,616

26.9

May

4

453

1,699

26.7

July

18

440

1,720

25.6

Oct.

2

404

1,736

23.3

Dec.

19

376

1,709

22.0

1-895  Mar.

5

367

1,690

21.7

May

7

365

1,704

21.4

July

11

384

1,756

21.9

Sept.

28

341

1,736

19.6

Dec.

13

338

1,708

19.8

1896  Feb.

28

338

1,645

20.5

May

7

350

1,678

20.9

July

14

345

1,669

20.7

Oct.

6

344

1,575

21.8

Dec.

17

382

1,633

23.4

1897  Mar.

9

421

1,703

24.7

352


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  89— (Concluded)

Ratio  of  the  Cash  Reserve  of  the  National  Banks  to  Theie  Net  Deposits  at  the  Date  of  Each  Report  to

the  (jomptroller  op  the  currency,  1890-1911


Date
1897  May

14

Cash

reserve

Millions  of

dollars

411

Net

deposits

Millions  of

dollars

1,742

Ratio
Per  cent

23.6

July

23

414

1,801

23.0

Oct.

5

390

1,859

21.0

Dee.

15

411

1,918

21.4

1898  Feb.

18

442

2,025

21.8

May

5

461

2,008

23.0

July

14

472

2,090

22.6

Sept.

20

422

2,058

20.5

Dee.

1

465

2,176

21.4

1899  Feb.

4

509

2,337

21.8

Apr.

5

495

2,435

20.3

June

30

493

2,527

19.5

Sept.

7

468

2,503

18.7

Dee.

2

431

2,445

17.6

1900  Feb.

13

478

2,481

19.3

Apr.-

26

505

2,573

19.6

June

29

504

2,627

19.2

Sept.

5

522

2,700

19.3

Dee.

13

503

2,706

18.6

1901  Feb.

5

554

2,887

19.2

Apr.

24

551

2,976

18.5

July

15

542

3,014

18.0

Sept.

30

541

3,055

17.7

Dec.

10

538

3,049

17.6

1902  Feb.

25

563

3,186

17.7

Apr.

30

560

3,214

17.4

July

16

571

3,229

17.7

Sept.

15

509

3,215

15.8

Nov.

25

535

3,227

16.6

1903  Feb.

6

572

3,327

17.2

Apr.

9

538

3,325

16.2

June

9

554

3,336

16.6

Sept.

9

556

3,365

16.5

Nov.

17

522

3,278

15.9

1904  Jan.

22

616

3,447

17.9

Mar.

28

619

3,519

17.6

June

9

660

3,644

18.1

Note. — Net  deposits  =  individual  deposits  plus  dividends  unpa
changes  in  the  clearing  house,  cash  items,  and  bills  of  other  banks.


Date
1904  Sept.

6

Cash

reserve

Millions  of

dollars

663

Net

deposits

Millions  of

dollars

3,787

Ratio
Per  cent

17.5

Nov.

10

644

3,830

16.8

1905  Jan.

11

672

3,826

17.6

Mar.

14

643

3,947

16.3

May

29

651

4,000

16.3

Aug.

25

667

4,090

16.3

Nov.

9

624

4,053

15.4

1906  Jan.

29

670

4,139

16.2

Apr.

6

623

4,124

15.1

June

18

653

4,184

15.6

Sept.

4

628

4,256

14.8

Nov.

12

637

4,308

14.8

1907  Jan.

26

698

4,443

15.7

Mar.

22

658

4,468

14.7

May

20

694

4,546

15.3

Aug.

22

704

4,594

15.3

Dec.

3

663

4,330

15.3

1908  Feb.

14

791

4,397

18.0

May

14

864

4,649

18.6

July

15

852

4,788

17.8

Sept.

23

871

4,948

17.6

Nov.

27

847

5,028

16.8

1909  Feb.

5

863

5,112

16.9

Apr.

28

881

5,247

16.8

June

23

889

5,319

16.7

Sept.

1

857

5,396

15.9

Nov.

16

808

5,312

15.2

1910  Jan.

31

836

5,405

15.5

Mar.

29

838

5,554

15.1

June

30

824

5,475

15.1

Sept.

1

855

5,510

15.5

Nov.

10

819

5,476

15.0

1911  Jan.

7

839

5,509

15.2

Mar.

7

911

5,766

15.8

June

7

949

5,884

16.1

Sept.

1

899

5,898

15.2

Dec.

5

866

5,872

14.7

and  sums  due  to

banks,  minus

sums  due

from  banks,  ex-

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  353

through  the  revival  of  activity  and  into  the  good  times.  Then  the  tide  turned,
and  since  February,  1899,  capital  liabilities  have  risen  with  scarcely  a  setback
through  crises,  bad  times  and  good.

There  is,  however,  one  little-known  fact  concerning  the  ratio  between  capital
liabilities  and  total  liabilities,  of  considerable  moment  for  the  theory  of  business
cycles.  This  ratio  remains  remarkably  stable  during  periods  of  established
prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression ;  but  it  declines  to  a  permanently  lower  level
when  business  is  recovering  from  a  prolonged  period  of  contraction.  The  next
table  shows  that  the  maximmn  variation  in  this  ratio  was  from  32.3  to  28.4
per  cent  in  1890-96,  and  from  21.0  to  18.2  per  cent  in  1900-]0.  But  during  the
interval  between  these  two  periods,  when  business  was  recovering  from  the
troubles  of  1893-96,  the  ratio  dropped  from  about  30  to  about  20  per  cent.  The
extreme  range  of  the  fluctuations  about  the  30  per  cent  level  in  1890-96  was
only  3.9  per  cent,  and  the  extreme  range  of  the  fluctuations  about  the  20  per  cent
level  in  1900  to  1910  was  only  2.8  per  cent,  much  less  in  both  cases  than  the  10
per  cent  drop  from  the  earlier  to  the  later  level.  Moreover,  the  lowest  ratio  in
1890-96 — 28.4  per  cent — was  much  higher  than  the  highest  ratio  in  1900-10 —
21.0  per  cent.

The  cause  of  this  striking  change  in  the  condition  of  the  national  banks
can  be  found  by  analyzing  the  statements  for,  saj,  October,  1896,  and  June,
1899.  Between  these  dates  the  resources  of  the  banks  increased  by  more  than
a  billion  dollars.  Whence  did  the  banks  get  these  additional  funds  f  Not  from
the  stockholders,  for  capital,  surplus,  and  imdivided  profits  fell  38  millions.
Not  from  the  issue  of  notes,  for  circulation  declined  11  millions.  Not  from
the  sale  of  bonds  and  stocks,  for  the  banks  bought  more  than  they  sold.  Not
from  miscellaneous  sources,  for  these  items  fell  15  millions.  Solely  from
depositors.  Individual  deposits  increased  930  millions,  net  bank  deposits  161
millions,  and  United  States  deposits  61  millions — a  total  of  1152  millions.  Of
course,  a  large  part  of  the  increase  in  individual  deposits  was  caused  by  an
increase  of  loans;  but  the  more  ample  reserves  which  enabled  the  banks  to
extend  their  loans  and  security  holdings  were  provided  by  customers  and  not
by  stockholders.  What  happened  was  that,  as  business  began  to  improve  the
public  deposited  enormous  sums  with  the  banks.  The  latter  made  profitable
use  of  these  funds  to  increase  their  commercial  discounts  (thus  augmenting
deposits  still  further),  to  buy  more  interest-bearing  securities,  and  even  to
return  part  of  the  former  capital,  surplus,  and  profits  to  stockholders.  This
reduction  of  capital  liabilities  is  explained  by  the  relatively  low  profits  mad<5
by  the  national  banks  from  1893  to  1899.'  When  the  public  had  provided  the
funds  which  made  an  extension  of  business  possible,  despite  a  lower  capital-
ization, profits  increased  again,  and  then  investors  began  putting  more  capital

s  Compare  Chapter  IX,  i,  below.


354


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  90

Ratio  of  the  Capital  Liabilities  to  the  Total  Liabilities  of  the  National  Banks  at  the  Date  or  Each
Report  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1890-1910


Date

1890  Feb.

28

Katio

at  date  of

report

30.5

Average

for  the

year

May

17

31.1

July

18

30.5

31.0

Oct.

2

30.6

Deo.

19

32.3

1891  Feb.

26

31.9

May

4

31.3

July

9

31.7

31.5

Sept.

25

31.4

Dee.

2

31.3

1892  Mar.

1

29.4

May

17

29.3

July

12

28.9

29.4

Sept.

30

29.3

Dec.

9

30.0

1893  Mar.

6

30.0

May

4

30.4

July

12

32.0

31.4

Oct.

3

33.1

Dee.

19

31.7

1894  Feb.

28

30.4

May

4

29.4

July

18

29.2

29.5

Oct.

2

28.9

Dec.

19

29.4

1895  Mar.

5

29.4

May

7

29.1

July

11

28.4

29.0

Sept.

28

29.0

Dec.

13

29.1

1896  Feb.

28

29.5

May

7

29.3

July

14

29.3

29.5

Oct.

6

30.2

Dec.

17

29.4

1897  Mar.

9

28.3

May

14

27.8

July

23

27.0

26.9

Oct.

5

26.1

Dec.

15

25.4

1898  Feb.

18

24.4

May

5

24.9

Date
1898  July

14

Batio

at  date  of  "

report

24.0

Average

for  the

year

23.9

Sept.

20

24.0

Dec.

1

22.3

1899  Feb.

4

21.4

Apr.

5

20.4

June

30

20.1

20.8

Sept.

7

20.6

Dec.

2

21.7

1900  Feb.

13

20.9

Apr.

26

20.8

June

29

20.5

20.5

Sept.

5

20.2

Dec.

13

20.1

1901  Feb.

5

19.0

Apr.

24

18.8

July

15

18.7

19.0

Sept.

30

19.1

Dec.

10

19.5

1902  Feb.

25

19.1

Apr.

30

19.0

July

16

19.7

19.5

Sept.

15

19.6

Nov.

25

20.2

1903  Feb.

6

20.0

Apr.

9

20.4

June

9

20.5

20.5

Sept.

9

20.8

Nov.

17

21.0

1904  Jan.

22

20.2

Mar.

28

20.3

June

9

20.3

19.9

Sept.

6

19.4

Nov.

10

19.1

1905  Jan.

11

19.2

Mar.

14

19.0

May

29

19.2

19.1

Aug.

25

19.0

Nov.

9

19.1

1906  Jan.

29

18.7

Apr.

6

19.2

June

18

19.2

18.9

Sept.

4

18.8

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


355


TABLE  90~{Concluded)

Ratio  of  the  Capital  Liabilities  to  the  Total  Liabilities  oe  the  National  Banks  at  the  Date  of  Each
Ebpokt  to  the  Comptkollbr  op  the  Currency,  1890-1910


Date
1906  Nov.

12

Ratio

at  date  of

report

18.7

Average

for  the

year

1907  Jan.

26

19.0

Mar.

22

19.1

May

20

18.9

19.2

Aug.

22

19.4

Dec.

3

19.6

1908  Feb.

14

19.6

May

14

19.4

July

15

19.1

19.1

Sept.

23

18.7

Nov.

27

18.5

1909  Feb.

5

18.4

Apr.

28

18.5

Date
1909  June

23

Ratio

at  date  of

report

18.4

Average
for  tlie
year

18.4

Sept.

1

18.2

Nov.

16

18.6

1910  Jan.

31'

18.3

Mar.

29

18.5

June

30

18.7

18.7

Sept.

1

19.1

Nov.

10

19.1

1911  Jan.

7

19.3

Mar.

7

18.6

June

7

18.6

18.8

Sept.

1

18.6

Dee.

5

18.8

Note. — Capital  liabilities  includes  capital,  surplus,  and  undivided  profits.


34

32

30

28

26

24

22

20

IS

30
28
26
24
22
20
18

^

A

Chart 55.

Ratio  of  the  Capital  Liabilities  lO  the  Total  Liabilities
OF  THE National Banks>
1890  -  1910.

J

w

l\

I

A

\l

h

V

A

I

\

\

<-rr

T^

i~^  r.

•  It

/

/'^

HA

f ?

-'V

lOOl

5s

\

\

1/

\

h

A

'\

\

%

UflrJ

p

)

^

v/

/

\

^

r\j

J

\

w

/

H

1890 '91 "92 '93 '94- '95 '96 '97 "98 '99 1900 '01 'Oa '03 '04 '05 'OG '07 '08 '09 1910

356  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

into  bank  stocks.  But,  as  the  preceding  ratios  show,  the  increase  of  capital
was  only  fast  enough  in  1900-10  to  maintain  the  lower  level  of  capital  to  total
liabilities  which  had  been  reached  by  1899."

The  differences  brought  out  by  the  preceding  analysis  between  the  effect  of
business  cycles  upon  the  condition  of  the  national  and  the  New  York  banks
are  few.  (1)  The  national  banks  alwaj's  contract  loans  during  crises,  while
the  clearing-house  banks  of  New  York  expanded  loans  in  1903  and  still  more
in  1907.  (2)  The  national  banks  seem  to  hoard  their  cash  during  crises  more
than  the  metropolitan  institutions.  (3)  During  periods  of  prosperity,  the
national  banks  expand  their  circulation,  and  (4)  also  their  loans  and  deposits
with  greater  regularity.  The  reason  for  the  last-mentioned  difference  is  that
the  national  banks  as  a  whole  have  no  such  intermittent  competition  to  meet
in  the  loan  market  as  the  New  York  clearing-house  banks  face  from  the  out-
of-town  institutions,  the  trust  companies,  and  the  great  insurance,  railway,  and
industrial  corporations.

Besides  these  differences,  the  present  section  brings  out  additional  infor-
mation about  items  not  adequately  reported  in  the  NeAv  York  bank  statements.
(1)  Securities  other  than  United  States  bonds  contract  less  than  loans  in  crises
and  someimes  rise — on  occasion  rise  with  extreme  rapidity.  This  advance
usually  continues  through  periods  of  depression,  revival,  and  prosperity.  (2)
Bank  deposits  follow  the  same  general  course  as  individual  deposits,  but
undergo  fluctuations  of  greater  relative  amplitude.  (3)  The  ratio  of  capital
liabilities  to  total  liabilities  remains  nearly  constant  during  periods  of  pros-
perity, crisis,  and  depression;  but  drops  to  a  permanently  lower  level  when
business  is  recovering  from  a  prolonged  and  serious  period  of  contraction.
(4)  Finally,  the  decline  in  this  ratio  diminishes  the  sums  banks  can  lend  out
of  resources  of  given  amount,"  and  therefore  reduces  the  level  about  which  the
ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  fluctuates.

III.  The  National  Banks  in  Reserve  Cities  and  in  Rural  Districts

Of  the  five  sets  of  reports  received  annually  from  the  national  banks,  the
Comptroller  of  the  Currency  publishes  the  fourth  set  in  a  form  which  shows
the  condition  of  the  banks  in  central-reserve  cities,  reserve  cities,  and  country
towns. Statements  for  but  one  day  in  each  year  are,  of  course,  too  meagre  a

8  See  Wesley  C.  Mitchell,  ' '  The  Decline  in  the  Ratio  of  Banking  Capital  to  Liabilities, ' '  Quarterly  Journal
of  Economics,  August,  1909,  vol.  23,  pp.  697-713.  This  paper  shows  that  recovery  from  a  prolonged  depression
is  usually,  if  not  invariably,  accompanied  by  a  fall  in  the  otherwise  stable  level  about  which  the  ratio  of  capital
liabilities  to  total  liabilities  fluctuates.  Such  changes  occurred  among  the  national  banks  in  1878-80,  as  well
as  in  1896-99;  among  the  state  banks  at  the  same  dates;  among  the  Canadian  banks  in  1868-70,  1878-81  1887-
93,  and  in  1896-1900;  among  the  English  joint-stock  banks  in  1887-88,  1894-96,  and  1905-06.  Concerning  the
recent  experiences  of  the  last  group  see  the  end  of  section  iv,  below.

10  A  bank  with  a  reserve  of  $100,000  provided  wholly  by  stockholders  can  clearly  lend  larger  sums  than
one  with  an  equal  reserve  provided  half  by  depositors,  other  conditions  being  the  same.  Tor  the  latter  insti-
tution must  keep  larger  sums  of  cash  on  hand  against  the  extra  $50,000  of  deposits.


MITCHELL:  BUSLNESS  CYCLES


357


basis  for  investigating  the  influence  of  each  phase  of  business  cycles  upon  these
three  groups  of  institutions.  For  example,  the  relation  of  the  national  banks
in  urban  and  rural  districts  to  the  panic  of  1907  cannot  be  made  out  by  com-
paring the  reports  for  September  4,  1906,  August  22,  1907,  and  September
23,  1908.  But  these  reports  do  throw  additional  light  upon  a  few  matters  of
significance  for  the  history  of  American  business  since  1890.

Loans  in  the  central-reserve  cities — New  York,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis —
exhibit  the  influence  of  business  cycles  in  a  more  striking  degree  than  do  loans
in  country  districts.  Table  91  brings  out  this  fact  by  means  of  relative  figures.
For  example,  the  rural  banks  contracted  their  loans  less  than  the  city  banks
in  1893,  expanded  them  less  in  1894,  and  again  contracted  them  less  between

TABLE  91

Relative  Fluctuations  in  the  Loans  or  National  Banks  in  New  York,  the  Central  Eeserve  Cities,  the

Reserve  Cities,  and  in  Other  Places,  According  to  the  Fourth  Report  Made  to  the

Comptroller  op  the  Currency  in  the  Years  1890-1911


Average  actual  amounts

in  1890-99 :

=  100

New
, , , York
Average  actual  amounts r,oK  a
in  1890-99 ao5-"

Central

reserve

cities

490.8

Reserve
cities
531.0

Country
districts

1,050.2

All

national

banks

2,072.1

1890  Oct. 2

81

83

96

102

96

1891  Sept.  25

83

85

94

104

97

1892  Sept.  30

94

98

101

110

105

1893  Oct. 3

77

77

87

95

89

1894  Oct. 2

99

98

97

96

97

1895  Sept.  28

100

99

99

100

99

1896  Oct. 6

86

86

91

94

91

1897  Oct. 5

112

108

101

95

100

1898  Sept.  20

121

119

105

98

105

1899  Sept. 7

148

148

128

106

121

1900  Sept. 5

.56

156

137

116

131

1901  Sept.  30

167

174

151

133

147

1902  Sept.  15

166

179

164

149

160

1903  Sept. 9

173

184

170

162

169

1904  Sept. 6

221

222

174

166

181

1905  Aug. 25

220

228

195

178

194

1906  Sept. 4

192

207

220

204

209

1907  Aug. 22

195

216

235

229

227

1908  Sept.  23

248

253

233

219

231

1909  Sept. 1

253

266

259

236

249

1910  Sept. 1

239

260

275

263

265

1911  Sept. 1

242

269

288

271

275

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

199

209

194

179

190

358


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


Chart

59.

i

210
260
250
240
230

RaATlVE  Amounts  of  the  Loans  of  the  National  Banks  in

1
1
t ■

New  York,  the  Reserve  CrriES.  and  in  Country  Districts.
1690  -  1911.

i

\!

1
1

\

New  Vork  City.
Reserve  Cities.

M.I


1

.  1 '  •*

1 1

J  ■'

220
2J0

^^^

1  •

/*.  ;

220

210

I I
\  1
\l

1

W

200

A

200

ISO

i

y

190

I

/

/

;

180

no

160
ISO
140

I

/

180

no

160
150
140
130
120
110
100
90

/

[)

/
f  /

/

/

//

1/

/

/
/

/

/

f

/
/

/

•

/

/

1
1

t

:"'

120
110
100
90
80

;

!

J

/

/
/
/

/

1

■'"'

»'

\

/

■

■«H

/

I

//

r>

\

r

-*'*

/

//

\

\

1890 91 '92 95 ^34 '95 '96 "97 '9B '99 1900  "Ol '02 '05 "04 '05 '06 "01 '08 "09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


359


1895  and  1896.  The  revival  of  the  autumn  of  1904  was  far  less  pronounced  in
the  country  than  in  the  large  cities,  and  so  also  was  the  business  reaction  of  1910.
Again,  the  country  banks  were  slower  than  the  city  institutions  in  recovering
from  the  effects  of  the  panic  of  1907.

The  policy  of  investing  a  decreasing  proportion  of  funds  in  commercial
loans  and  discounts  and  an  increasing  proportion  in  stocks  and  bonds  has  been
hardly  less  marked  among  the  country  than  among  the  city  banks.  Table
92,  which  justifies  this  conclusion,  also  indicates  that  business  depression  accel-
erates and  business  prosperity  retards  this  change  in  the  case  of  banks  in  reserve
cities  and  country  districts.  The  same  can  hardly  be  said  for  the  institutions
in  New  York.  And  even  outside  of  New  York  the  rule  was  broken  in  1898-1901,
when  the  national  banks  joined  in  the  movement  towards  company  promotion
on  a  grand  scale.


TABLE  92


s  AND  Securities

OP  THE  National  Banks  in  New  York  City

,  the  Central  Eesebve  Cities,

the  Reserve

:ties,  and  Country  Districts

AT  THE  Date  of  the

Eeport  Nearest  October  1,  in  Each  Year,

1890-1911

New  York  City

Central  reserve  cities

Date

Loans  and

securities  in

millions  of

dollars

Loans
Per  cent

U.  S.

bonds

Per  cent

Other
bonds  and

securities
Per  cent

Loans  and

securities  in

millions  of

dollars

Loans
Per  cent

U.S.

bonds

Per  cent

Other
bonds  and
securities
Per  cent

1890  Get.

2

329

90.3

2.7

7.0

445

91.0

2.7

6.3

1891  Sept.

25

337

89.6

3.0

7.4

461

90.5

2.8

6.7

1892  Sept.

30

384

89.9

2.3

7.8

532

90.4

2.4

7.2

1893  Oct.

3

329

85.4

6.1

8.5

436

86.7

5.3

8.0

1894  Oct.

2

421

85.7

5.0-

9.3

554

86.8

4.5

8.7

1895  Sept.

28

424

85.9

5.4

8.7

559

87.3

4.8

7.9

1896  Oct.

6

379

82.8

7.7

9.5

498

85.0

6.6

8.4

1897  Oct.

5

476

85.7

5.7

8.6

609

86.7

5.3

8.0

1898  Sept.

20

568

77.8

12.2

10.0

727

80.2

10.4

9.4

1899  Sept.

7

649

83.5

7.4

9.1

856

84.6

6.3

9.1

1900  Sept.

5

715

79.7

9.5

10.8

943

81.0

9.1

9.9

1901  Sept.

30

769

79.5

9.2

11.3

1,052

81.1

9.0

9.9

1902  Sept.

15

778

78.0

10.2

11.8

1,091

80.5

9.1

10.4

1903  Sept.

9

829

76.2

9.9

13.9

1,139

79.3

8.9

11.8

1904  Sept.

6

1,016

79.5

7.1

13.4

1,344

81.2

7.0

11.8

1905  Aug.

25

1,021

78.9

6.8

14.3

1,378

81.2

6.5

12.3

1906  Sept.

4

897

78.2

6.6

15.2

1,266

80.3

6.9

12.8

1907  Aug.

22

934

76.3

6.2

17.5

1,338

79.4

6.3

14.3

1908  Sept.

23

1,144

79.2

5,6

15.2

1,551

80.2

6.3

13.5

1909  Sept.

1

1,164

79.6

5.2

15.2

1,618

80.8

6.0

13.2

1910  Sept.

1

1,082

80.8

5.1

14.1

1,561

81.8

6.0

12.2

1911  Sept.

1

1,153

76.8

5.2

18.0

1,661

79.5

5.6

14.9

Averages
1890-99

429.6

85.66

5.75

8.59

567.7

86.92

5.11

7.97

1900-09

926.7

78.51

7.63

13.86

1,272.0

80.50

7.51

11.99

360


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  92— (Concluded)


S  AND  SeCUEITIES

OF  THE  National  Banks  in  New  York  Ci.tt,

,  THE  Central  Reserve  Cities,

THE  RESBB

TIES,  AND  Country  Districts

at  the  Date  or  the

Report  Nearest  October  1,  in  Each  Year,

1890-1911

Reserve  cities

A

Country

districts

Date

Loans  and

securities  in

millions  of

dollars

Loans
Per  cent

U.S.

bonds

Per  cent

Other

bonds  and

securities

Per  cent

Loans  and

securities  in

millions  of

dollars

Loans
Per  cent

U.S.

bonds

Per  cent

Other

bonds  and

securities

Per  cent

1890  Oct.

2

556

91.4

4.8

3.8

1,286

83.4

11.4

5.2

1891  Sept.

25

549

90.9

5.1

4.0

1,310

83.1

11.4

5.5

1892  Sept.

30

599

89.8

5.2

5.0

1,392

82.7

11.1

6.2

1893  Oct.

3

536

86.6

8.4

5.0

1,258

79.7

13.5

6.8

1894  Oct.

2

593

86.5

7.3

6.2

1,293

78.3

13.3

8.4

1895  Sept.

28

610

86.4

7.7

5.9

1,338

78.1

13.3

8.6

1896  Oct.

6

576

84.2

9.4

6.4

1,288

76.5

15.0

8.5

1897  Oct.

5

631

85.3

8.4

6.3

1,312

76.3

14.6

9.1

1898  Sept.

20

682

82.1

10.0

7.9

1,377

74.8

15.5

9.7

1899  Sept.

7

828

81.9

8.9

9.2

1,500

74.3

14.7

11.0

1900  Sept.

5

905

80.1

9,8

10.1

1,647

74.1

14.8

11.1

1901  Sept.

30

1,020

78.8

9.7

11.5

1,882

74.1

13.8

12.1

1902  Sept.

15

1,095

79.4

9.5

11.1

2,091

74.9

12.7

12.4

1903  Sept.

9

1,163

77.7

10.8

11.5

2,286

74.4

13.6

12.0

1904  Sept.

6

1,194

77.3

11.0

11.7

2,378

73.3

14.0

12.7

1905  Aug.

25

1,324

78.2

9.8

12.0

2,566

73.0

13.5

13.5

1906  Sept.

4

1,486

78.5

10.4

11.1

2,909

73.8

13.8

12.4

1907  Aug.

22

1,590

78.4

10.2

11.4

3,225

74.4

13.3

12.3

1908  Sept.

23

1,607

76.9

10.8

12.3

3,214

71.6

14.4

14.0

1909  Sept.

1

1,764

78.1

10.1

11.8

3,437

72.0

13.6

14.4

1910  Sept.

1

1,829

79.8

9.9

10.3

3,725

74.1

12.8

13.1

1911  Sept.

1

1,945

78.6

9.7

11.7

3,893

73.0

12.6

14.4

Averages

1890-99

616.0

86.51

7.52

5.97

1,335.4

78.72

13.38

7.90

1900-09

1,314.8

78.34

10.21

11.45

2,563.5

73.56

13.75

12.69

The  differences  between  the  fluctuations  of  deposits  in  rural  and  urban
districts  are  similar  to  those  between  the  fluctuations  of  loans  in  the  same
districts  (see  Table  93).  But  when  the  figures  are  averaged  by  decades,  it
appears  that  the  net  growth  of  deposits  has  been  faster  in  the  country,  w^hile
that  of  loans  has  been  faster  in  the  cities.  Coupled  with  the  peculiarly  rapid
growth  of  the  item  "due  to  banks,"  in  the  accounts  of  institutions  in  reserve
and  central- reserve  cities,  these  figures  suggest  the  conclusion  that  in  an  increas-


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


361


TABLE  93


Eelative  Fluctuations  in  the  Individual  Deposits  op  the  National  Banks  in  New  Yoek,  the  Central

Reserve  Cities,  the  Reserve  Cities,  and  in  Other  Places,  According  to  the  Fourth  Report

Made  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  in  Each  Year,  1890-1911

Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Average  actual  amounts
in  1890-99

New
York

313.0

Central
reserve
cities
406.6

Reserve
cities

443.0

Country
districts

925.5

AU

national

banks

1,775.4

1,890  Oct.

2

81

82

88

91

88

1891  Sept.

25

88

88

87

92

90

1892  Sept.

30

88

92

97

104

100

1893  Oct.

3

80

81

80

83

.  82

1894  Oct.

2

109

106

97

94

98

1895  Sept.

28

96

95

96

96

96

1896  Oct.

6

88

87

91

91

90

1897  Oct.

5

109

107

107

102

104

1898  Sept.

20

118

117

117

112

114

1899  Sept.

7

144

145

141

133

138

1900  Sept.

5

135

136

145

142

141

1901  Sept.

30

181

179

161

162

166

1902  Sept.

15

193

192

170

181

181

1903  Sept.

9

144

153

169

193

178

1904  Sept.

6

186

190

182

203

195

1905  Aug.

25

210

212

199

224

215

1906  Sept.

4

211 '

213

223

254

237

1907  Aug.

22

170

182

229

277

243

1908  Sept.

23

238

237

241

272

256

1909  Sept.

1

249

256

275

298

282

1910  Sept.

1

223

236

280

318

290

1911  Sept.

1

245

257

299

.337

309

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

192

195

199

221

209

362  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

ing  degree  the  great  central  money  markets  are  supplied  with  funds  drawn
from  the  country  districts.  The  national  banks  in  agricultural  sections  seem
unable  to  find  enough  local  borrowers  to  use  the  funds  which  local  depositors
provide — a  situation  for  which  the  clause  prohibiting  national  banks  from
lending  upon  real  estate  security  is  doubtless  responsible  in  part."  They  there-
fore find  it  advantageous  to  send  sums  far  in  excess  of  what  is  needed  for
operations  in  exchange,  plus  what  can  be  counted  as  part  of  their  lawful
reserves,  to  banks  in  the  great  business  centers.  The  latter  have  long  encour-
aged this  practice  by  paying  interest,  generally  at  the  rate  of  2  per  cent,  on
(iountry-bank  balances.  In  recent  years  out-of-town  institutions  have  often
realized  a  substantially  higher  return  by  lending  money  in  the  cities  on  their
own  account.  Hence  it  happens  that  the  items  due  to  country  banks  from  other
banks  increased  209  per  cent  between  the  autumns  of  1890  and  1910,  while  their
loans  increased  only  157  per  cent.  And  doubtless  this  moderate  increase  of
loans  would  be  reduced  still  further  if  we  could  exclude  the  investments  in  the
commercial  paper  of  city  firms,  which  country  banks  have  come  to  buy  in  large
amounts  through  brokers.^^

Despite  the  infrequency  of  the  statements,  the  next  table  indicates  that  the
ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  behaves  in  much  the  same  fashion  in  the  country  as
in  the  cities — that  is,  the  ratio  rises  before  and  during  crises,  falls  during
depressions,  and  recovers  again  in  prosperity,  if  not  early  in  the  course  of
business  revival.  The  chief  differences  among  the  fluctuations  shown  by  the
three  groups  of  banks  are  that  the  movement  in  country  districts  lags  somewhat
behind  that  in  the  cities,  and  that  the  decline  in  the  level  of  fluctuations  has
been  greater  among  the  country  than  among  the  reserve-city  banks,  and  greater
among  the  latter  than  among  the  banks  of  the  central- reserve  cities.

This  second  difference  is  accounted  for,  not  only  by  the  above-mentioned
difficulties  met  by  country  banks  in  finding  satisfactory  local  borrowers,  but
also  by  the  unequal  decline  in  the  ratio  of  capital  to  total  liabilities.  It  has
already  been  pointed  out  that  in  proportion  as  a  bank  depends  less  on  its  stock-
holders and  more  on  its  depositors  for  funds,  the  ratio  of  its  loans  to  deposits
must  decline.  Now  Table  95  shows  that  the  drop  in  the  proportion  of  the
capital,  surplus,  and  undivided  profits  to  total  liabilities  has  been  most  rapid
among  the  country  banks.  Then  in  order  come  the  banks  of  reserve  cities,
central-reserve  cities  and  New  York.  The  table  also  shows  that  the  stability
of  the  ratio  from  1890-96  and  from  1900-10  has  been  less  remarkable  among
the  several  groups  of  banks  taken  singly  than  it  was  found  to  be  among  the
national  banks  taken  as  a  whole.


11  Compare  0.  M.  W.  Sprague,  Banking  Beform  in  the  United  States  (Cambridge,  1911),  chapter  ii. See  also
what  is  said  in  section  i  of  the  present  chapter  about  the  loans  of  out-of-town  banks  in  New  York.

12  Perhaps  the  desire  of  country  banks  to  maintain  their  relatively  high  rates  of  interest  upon  local  loans
is  a  more  potent  factor  than  the  unwillingness  of  their  customers  to  borrow.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


363


Chart  60.

i

Relative  Amounts  of  the  Individual  Deposits  of  the  National  Banks

/

IN  New  York  ,  in  the  Reserve  Cities and  in  Country  Districts
1630 1310.

;

300
280

Reseiwe Cities.

,

\

1

■

260

/

/
/

260

•

/

I

/

240

!

''/

240

I

/
/

\

220

1

220

/

1
1

i

; 1

f

\

200

1

\

200

,"

\

180

1

/

'"

1
II
1
1

>

,

ISO

*

J

1

It

!/

/

\

//

160

160

V

/

140

C

\

'

1

K

/•

\

I

1

/

\

f

.*

\

/•

7

■'  /
1

1

h

'.■>

\

/

80

f

1

1830  '31 '32 '95 '34 '95 '96 '91 '98 '99 1900 'Ol '02 'OJ '04  '05 'OS 07 '08  '09 1910

364


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  94

Ratio  to  the  Net  Deposits  of  the  Loans  and  op  the  Loans  Plus  Securities  Held  by  the  National  Banks

OF  New  York  City,  the  Central  Eeserve  Cities,  the  Eeserve  Cities  and  the  Country  Districts,

at  the  Date  of  the  Report  Nearest  October  1,  in  Each  Year,  1890-1911


New  York  City
Ratio  to  deposits  of

Central  reserve  cities
Ratio  to  deposits  of

Reserve  cities
Ratio  to  deposits  of

Country  districts
Ratio  to  deposits  of

Date

Loans
Per  cent

Loans  and
securities
Per  cent

Loans
Per  cent

Loans  and
securities
Per  cent

Loans
Per  cent

Loans  and
securities
Per  cent

r

Loans
Per  cent

Loans  and
securities
Per  cent

1890  Oct.

2

91.1

100.9

93.5

102.8

131.9

144.4

154.2

184.8

1891  Sept.

25

93.2

104.0

94.6

104.5

130.3

143.3

154.9

186.4

1892  Sept.

30

89.1

99.2

92.0

101.7

122.8

136.8

146.4

177.1

1893  Oct.

3

91.8

107.5

92.4

106.6

139.8

161.4

156.8

196.9

1894  Oct.

2

74.1

86.5

78.5

90.4

119.0

137.6

146.7

186.3

1895  Sept.

28

82.9

96.6

86.8

99.5

122.0

141.2

140.8

180.3

1896  Oct.

6

84.9

102.4

88.9

104.6

123.7

146.9

139.3

182.2

1897  Oct.

5

81.1

94.6

82.5

95.2

114.0

133.7

134.4

176.1

1898  Sept.

20

79.9

102.7

81.4

101.5

106.5

129.6

126.1

168.6

1899  Sept.

7

79.9

95.7

81.7

96.6

100.6

122.8

118.1

159.1

1900  Sept.

5

77.8

97.6

79.8

98.5

100.4

125.3

119.5

161.2

1901  Sept.

30

79.4

99.9

81.8

100.9

99.5

126.2

115.8

156.3

1902  Sept.

15

85.5

109.6

88.6

110.1

101.9

128.2

114.3

152.6

1903  Sept.

9

85.5

112.2

88.6

111.8

104.9

134.9

114.6

153.9

1904  Sept.

6

78.5

98.7

81.7

100.6

100.8

130.4

113.6

154.9

1905  Aug.

25

81.2

102.9

83.6

102.9

99.2

126.9

109.8

150.4

1906  Sept.

4

85.7

109.5

87.3

108.7

101.8

129.7

110.4

149.6

1907  Aug.

22

87.4

114.5

88.8

111.9

102.4

130.6

110.0

147.8

1908  Sept.

23

76.6

96.8

79.3

98.9

97.4

126.7

109.0

152.2

1909  Sept.

1

79.2

99.6

80.9

100.2

95.7

122.6

105.6

146.7

1910  Sept.

1

82.3

101.9

84.7

103.5

101.0

126.6

108.1

145.8

1911  Sept.

1

77.4

100.8

80.8

101.6

97.3

123.9

105.5

144.6

Averages

1890-99

84.80

99.01

87.23

100.34

121.06

139.77

141.77

179.78

1900-09

81.68

104.13

84.04

104.45

100.40

128.15

112.26

152.56

Note. — Net  deposits  =  individual  deposits  plus  dividends  unpaid  and  sums  due  to  banks,  minus  sums  due  from  banks,  exchanges
for  the  clearing  house,  cash  items,  and  bills  of  other  banks.  Loans  =  loans  and  discounts  plus  overdrafts.  Securities  =  all  U  S
bonds  held,  plus  premiums,  "other  bonds  to  secure  U.  S.  deposits,"  and  "bonds,  securities etc  "


MITCHELL:  BUSLNESS  CYCLES


365


Chart  ei.

RATIO  OF  THE UAN3  to  THE  Net  DEKWTa

OF  THE  National  Banks  in

New  York, in  the  Reserve  Cities,

AND IN  Country  Districts  .

1890  -  1910.


New  York City.


— Reserve Cities.

Country  Districts.


3C6  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  95

Ratio  or  Capital  Liabilities  to  Total  Liabilities  of  the  National  Banks  in  New  York,  the  Central  Eeservb

Cities,  Other  Eesebve  Cities,  and  in  Country  Towns,  According  to  the  Eeports  Made

Nearest  the  1st  op  October  in  Bach  Year,  1890-1911


Date
1890  Oct.

2

New  York

City
Per  cent

18.9

Central

reserve  cities

Per  cent

19.5

Reserve

cities
Per  cent

29.3

Country

towns

Per  cent

36.0

All  national

banks

Per  cent

30.6

1891 Sept.

25

19.0

20.1

30.4

36.9

31.4

1892  Sept.

30

17.8

19.1

27.6

34.8

29.3

1893  Oct.

3

20.6

22.0

31.3

38.8

33.1

1894  Oct.

2

15.8

17.2

27.1

36.0

28.9

1895  Sept.

28

17.5

18.7

27.7

34.7

29.0

1896  Oct.

6

19.0

20.5

28.6

35.4

30.2

1897  Oct.

5

14.9

15.5

24.3

32.8

26.1

1898  Sept.

20

13.0

13.8

22.8

30.7

24.0

1899  Sept.

7

11.4

12.1

18.3

27.2

20.6

1900  Sept.

5

12.8

13.0

18.1

26.1

20.2

1901  Sept.

30

12.6

12.6

17.3

24.4

19.1

1902  Sept.

15

14.8

14.7

17.8

23.9

19.6

1903  Sept.

9

17.8

17.4

19.2

23.6

20.8

1904  Sept.

6

14.5

14.6

17.7

23.5

19.4

1905  Aug.

25

14.7

14.4

17.4

22.8

19.0

1906  Sept.

4

16.1

15.4

17.1

21.6

18.8

1907  Aug.

22

18.7

17.5

17.7

21.3

19.4

1908  Sept.

23

14.2

14.2

17.0

22.3

18.7

1909  Sept.

1

14.8

14.4

16.1

21.7

18.2

1910  Sept.

1

17.2

.  16.6

17.3

21.4

19.1

1911  Sept.

1

16.3

15.7

16.7

21.1

18.6

Averages
1890-99

16.79

17.85

26.74

34.33

28.32

1900-09

15.10

14.82

17.54

23.12

19.32

The  next  two  tables  deal  with  cash  reserves,  one  giving  relative  fluctuations
in  the  amounts  of  cash  held,  the  other  giving  percentages  of  cash  to  net  deposits.
Despite  the  fact  that  deposits  have  increased  faster,  reserves  have  increased
less  fast  in  the  countrj^  than  in  the  cities.  Hence  the  second  table  shows  that
the  decline  in  the  percentage  of  reserves,  which  all  the  groups  have  permitted
to  occur,  has  been  least  marked  in  IS'ew  York,  and  most  marked  in  the  small
towns,  while  the  reserve  cities  rank  between  these  two  extremes.  So  decided
is  this  decline  that  no  group  of  banks  has  a  reserve  ratio  in  any  years  since
1900  equal  to  its  average  ratio  in  1890-99.  Years  of  prosperity  show  the  heaviest
declines,  while  years  of  depression  show  moderate  upward  reactions.  These
divergencies  from  the  average  trend  of  the  fluctuations  are  less  wide  among
the  country  than  among  the  city  banks.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


367


Finally,  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  the  growth  of  the  banking  business
as  conducted  under  federal  charters  has  been  fairly  uniform  in  city  and  country.
Perhaps  the  best  gauge  of  this  growth  is  the  increase  in  the  aggregate  resources
of  the  national  banks.  Prom  1890  until  1901  the  country  banks  lost  ground
relatively  to  the  banks  of  New  York,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis,  while  those  of
the  reserve  cities  a  little  more  than  held  their  own.  But  since  that  time  the
rate  of  expansion  has  been  faster  in  the  country  districts  than  in  the  central-
reserve  cities,  while  the  reserve-city  banks  have  scored  another  slight  gain.  In
1910,  however,  the  country  banks  had  not  wholh^  made  up  for  their  earlier
loss  in  relative  importance,  New  York  stood  almost  exactly  in  the  same  position
as  in  1890,  while  the  other  central-reserve  cities,  and  the  reserve  cities  had


TABLE  96


Relative  Fluctuations  in  the  Cash  Reserves  op  National  Banks  in

THE  Reserve  Cities,  and  in  Other  Places,  According  to

THE  Comptroller  or  the  Currency  in  Bach


New  York,  the  Central  Reserve  Cities,
the  Fourth  Report  Made  to
Tear,  1890-1911


Ave:

rage  actual  amounts  in

1890-99 :

=  100

Average  actual

amounts  in  1890-99

New  York
City

126.2

Central
reserve  cities

166.5

Reserve
cities
86.2

Country
towns
109.7

All  national
banks
362.4

1890  Oct.

2

73

74

79

84

78

1891  Sept.

25

68

74

89

89

82

1892  Sept.

30

82

84

95

97

91

1893  Oct.

3

86

92

89

108

96

1894  Oct.

2

136

127

97

98

111

1895  Sept.

28

99

96

90

94

94

1896  Oct.

6

86

85

96

109

95

1897  Oct.

5

109

110

110

102

108

1898  Sept.

20

121

121

121

107

116

1899  Sept.

7

141

138

132

113

129

1900  Sept.

5

170

165

144

112

144

1901  Sept.

30

171

170

147

119

149

1902  Sept.

15

146

149

145

124

140

1903  Sept.

9

161

161

158

139

153

1904  Sept.

6

228

218

172

139

183

1905  Aug.

25

200

204

187

151

184

1906  Sept.

4

158

169

194

163

173

1907  Aug.

22

174

187

222

183

194

1908  Sept.

23

267

260

255

199

240

1909  Sept.

1

239

246

262

202

236

1910  Sept.

1

231

240

258

211

236

1911  Sept.

1

240

254

277

216

248

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

191

193

189

153

180

368


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


36

UHART btL

Ratio  of  the  Cash  Reserves to  the  Net  Deposits

34

1

OF  THE  National  Banks  in  New  York  ,
IN  THE Reserve Cities  and in  Country Districts

32

1390  -  1910

^^^^^^^■^■a Mr\A/  YnnK fiTV

(

I

—  — Reserve: Cities

\

Country Districts

30

■30

\

y

\

/

\

/

\

2a

\

1

\

^

\

/

\

/

^

\

/

/

\

/

26

\

\

/

24

22

1
1

\
\

22

1 1

1

\

20
18

] 1

: i

1
1

\

\

1
1

\

20
i8

/

/

i/

\

1

1

\
\
\

1
1

I

\
\

f

i

\

16

«

1
1

«
«

•^

>

^^  0^

\
\

/

\

\

16

•

«

/

*•».

V

\

/

/

^

s

s.

/

f

\

--.

14

»

;

»

14

■*•..

1  2

s

1 2

1  0

*

(  o

*  ■  "

•  ^

/

*»,

•••..

■

8

8

1890  '91 '92 '9

3 "94 '9

3 '96 '91 '98 '99 1900  'oi '02 "03 "04 '05 '06 '07 '06 '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  369


TABLE  97

Ratio  of  the  Cash  Eesbrves  to  the  Net  Deposits  Held  by  the  National  Banks  in  New  York,  the  Central

Eeserve  Cities,  the  Reserve  Cities,  and  in  Country  Districts  at  the  Date  op  the  Fourth

Eepout  to  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  in  the  Years  1890-1911


Date
1890  Oct.

2

New  York

City
Per  cent

28.2

New  York,

Chicago,  and

St.  Louis

Per  cent

28.4

Reserve

cities
Per  cent

17.7

Country
districts
Per  cent

13.2

All

national

banks'

Per  cent

18.7

1891  Sept.

25

26.5

27.9

20.1

13.9

19.5

1892  Sept.

30

26.6

26.8

18.7

13.5

18.8

1893  Oct.

3

35.3

37.4

23.2

18.5

25.1

1894  Oct.

2

35.3

34.6

19.5

15.4

23.3

1895  Sept.

28

28.5

28.5

18.1

13.9

19.7

1896  Oct.

6

29.2

29.6

21.2

17.0

21.9

1897  Oct.

5

27.2

28.6

20.1

15.0

21.0

1898  Sept.

20

27.7

28.1

19.8

14.3

20.5

1899  Sept.

7

26.3

25.8

16.9

13.1

18.7

1900  Sept.

5

29.2

28.6

17.2

12.0

19.3

1901  Sept.

30

28.1

27.1

15.7

10.9

17.7

1902  Sept.

15

25.9

25.0

14.6

9.9

15.8

1903  Sept.

9

27.5

26.3

15.8

10.2

16.5

1904  Sept.

6

28.0

27.2

16.2

9.9

17.5

1905  Aug.

25

25.5

25.4

15.4 ■

9.7

16.3

1906  Sept.

4

24.3

24.2

14.6

9.2

14.8

1907  Aug.

22

26.8

26.1

15.7

9.2

15.3

1908  Sept.

23

28.5

27.6

17.3

10.3

17.6

1909  Sept.

1

25.8

25.3

15.7

9.5

15.9

1910  Sept.

1

27.5

26.5

15.4

9.1

15.5

1911  Sept.

1

26.6

25.9

15.2

8.8

15.2

Averages

1890-99

29.08

29.57

19.53

14.78

20.72

1900-09

26.96

26.28

15.82

10.08

16.67

Note. — Net  deposits  ::=  individual  deposits  plus  dividends  unpaid  and  sums  due  to  banks,  minus  sums  due  from  banks,  exchanges
for  the  clearing  house,  cash  items,  and  bills  of  other  banks.


absorbed  what  the  small  towns  had  lost.  On  the  average  the  country  banks,
though  vastly  greater  in  number,  have  but  about  half  of  the  total  resources,
the  New  York  banks  about  one-sixth,  and  the  other  reserve-city  banks,  including
Chicago  and  St.  Louis,  a  little  more  than  one-third.

The  conclusion  which  stands  out  most  clearly  from  the  tables  of  this  section
as  a  whole  is  that  the  development  of  banking  has  been  strikingly  similar  in
the  cities  and  in  the  country.  Differences  are  numerous,  but  they  are  differences
of  degree,  and  mostly  of  small  degree.  Moreover,  most  of  these  differences
appear  in  the  shifting  of  the  level  of  fluctuations  from  one  decade  to  the  next
rather  than  in  sudden  changes  from  year  to  year  under  the  iuflueuce  of  business


370


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  98

Relative  Growth  op  the  National  Banks  in  New  York  City,  the  Central  Eeserve  Cities,  the  Eeserve

Cities,  and  Country  Districts,  as  Measured  by  Their  Respective  Shares  in  the  Aggregate

Resources  of  All  National  Banks,  According  to  the  Reports Made

Nearest  the  1st  of  October  in  Each  Year,  1890-1911


Aggregate
resources  of
all  national
banks  in
millions  of
dollars

P:

roportions  of  the  aggregate  resources  he
the  national  hanks  in

Id  hy

Date

New  York

City
Per  cent

Chicago

and  St.  Louis

Per  cent

Reserve

cities
Per  cent

Country
districts
Per  cent

All  national

hanks

Per  cent

1890  Oct.

2

3,141

17.0

5.6

25.0

52.4

100.0

1891  Sept.

25

3,213

17.4

6.0

24.4

52.2

100.0

1892  Sept.

30

3,510

17.2

6.3

24.6

51.9

100.0

1893  Oct.

3

3,110

17.5

5.8

24.8

51.9

100.0

1894  Oct.

2

3,474

19.9

6.2

24.9

49.0

100.0

1895  Sept.

28

3,424

18.5

5.9

25.0

50.6

100.0

1896  Oct.

6

3,264

17.7

5.7

25.3

51.3

100.0

1897  Oct.

5

3,705

19.8

6.3

25.9

48.0

100.0

1898  Sept.

20

4,004

21.1

6.6

25.5

46.8

100.0

1899  Sept.

7

4,650

21.2

7.2

26.7

44.9

100.0

1900  Sept.

5

5,048

21.1

7.4

27.1

44.4

100.0

1901  Sept.

30

5,695

21.5

7.7

26.7

44.1

100.0

1902  Sept.

15

6,114

21.2

7.6

26.3

44.9

100.0

1903  Sept.

9

6,310

19.1

7.5

26.6

46.8

100.0

1904  Sept.

6

6,975

21.9

7.4

26.1

44.6

100.0

1905  Aug.

25

7,472

20.8

7.4

26.6

45.2

100.0

1906  Sept.

4

8,016

18.4

7.1

27.3

47.2

100.0

1907  Aug.

22

8,390

16.3

7.0

27.4

49.3

100.0

1908  Sept.

23

9,327

19.7

7.0

27.0

46.3

100.0

1909  Sept.

1

9,574

18.7

7.3

27.7

46.3

100.0

1910  Sept.

1

9,826

16.9

7.3

27.7

48.1

100.0

1911  Sept.

1

10,379

17.0

7.4

27.8

47.8

100.0

Averages
1890-99

3,549.5

18.73

6.16

25.21

49.90

100.0

1900-09

7,262.1

19.87

7.34

26.88

45.91

100.0

cycles.  Such  is  the  case,  for  example,  with  the  dissimilar  rates  at  which  loans
and  deposits  have  grown  in  city  and  in  country,  and  also  "svith  the  more  rapid
decline  in  the  country  districts  of  the  ratio  of  loans  to  individual  deposits,  of
capital  liabilities  to  total  liabilities,  and  of  reserves  to  net  deposits.  The
remaining  differences  which  bear  directly  upon  the  subject  of  business  cycles
may  be  summed  up  in  a  sentence :  the  changes  experienced  or  initiated  by  banks
a]'e  less  prompt  and  less  considerable  in  the  country  than  in  the  urban  centers.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  371


IV.  The  Joint-Stock  Banks  of  England  and  Wales

The  reports  of  the  great  deposit  banks  of  France  and  Germany  have  not
been  compiled  in  such  form  for  the  whole  period  since  1890  as  to  be  available
for  analysis  here.  But  the  Economist's  half-yearly  smnmaries  for  the  joint-
stock  banks  of  England  and  Wales  make  possible  a  brief  comparison  between
the  effect  of  business  cycles  upon  American  and  upon  foreign  banks.

The  most  striking  difference  between  the  preceding  tables  for  the  national
banks  and  the  following  tables  for  the  English  banks  is  the  relative  stability
of  conditions  shown  by  the  latter.  Not  only  is  the  expansion  of  business  from
one  decade  to  the  next  smaller  in  England,  but  so  also  are  the  changes  from
year  to  year  caused  by  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression.  Indeed,  the  fluctu-
ations of  the  leading  items  during  successive  phases  of  the  business  cycles  since
1890  are  often  confined  to  slight  differences  in  the  rate  of  growth.

Whereas  the  national  banks  contracted  their  loans  during  the  crises  of  1890,
1893, 1903-04,  and  1907,  the  English  joint-stock  banks  were  able  to  expand  their
loans  slightly  during  the  crises  of  1890, 1900,  and  1907.  In  periods  of  depression
the  changes  in  English  loans  have  been  slight;  but  steady  growth  has  marked
the  periods  of  prosperity.

The  fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  investments  in  consols,  bonds,  stocks,  etc.,
consist  of  a  moderate  expansion  from  year  to  year,  interrupted  by  a  slight
contraction  in  periods  of  tension — 1893,  1900,  1904,  and  1907-08.  The  ratio
of  these  securities  to  commercial  loans  also  pursues  an  even  course,  exhibiting
a  slight  decline  toward  the  climax  of  prosperity,  and  a  compensating  increase
after  the  crisis.  The  general  level  of  these  fluctuations  declined  a  trifle  between
the  flrst  and  the  second  decade  in  England,  whereas  it  rose  decidedly  in
America.  By  the  close  of  the  period  the  national  banks  still  held  fewer  securities
in  proportion  to  their  loans  than  the  English  banks  had  held  for  twenty  years.

Deposits  rise  a  trifle  during  crises  in  England  and  change  little  during
depression,  whereas  they  fall  sharply  during  crises  in  America  and  rise  again
during  depressions.  During  prosperity  they  increase,  of  course,  in  both  coun-
tries. This  increase  in  England  seems  to  precede  the  increase  in  loans.

The  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  has  gradually  declined  in  England  from  74
per  cent  in  1890  to  64  per  cent  in  1910,  and  in  America  from  about  130  per  cent
in  the  flrst  to  about  100  per  cent  in  the  last  year.  Interruptions  of  this  decline
occur  in  England  as  in  America  at  the  climax  of  prosperity  or  during  the  crisis ;
but  the  ratio  does  not  have  the  same  value  as  a  barometer  of  business  in  London
that  it  has  in  New  York.

The  "reserves"  credited  to  the  national  banks  in  the  preceding  tables  consist
wholly  of  lawful  money  actually  in  the  vaults ;  in  England  the  reserves  consist
of  "cash  in  hand,  and  money  at  call,  and  short  notice."  What  proportion  is
cash,  what  deposits  in  the  Bank  of  England,  and  what  loans  on  call  or  short


372


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  99


Summary  of  the  Statements  of  the  Joint-Stock  Banks  op  England  and  Wales,  as  Compiled  Semi-annually

BY  the  London  Economist,  1890-1911
Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Date

Capital  paid

up,  reserve

funds,  and

undivided

profits

Acceptance

liabilities

where

stated

Deposit

and  current

accounts

Miscellaneous
liabilities

Discounts,

advances,

loans,  bills,

etc.

Investments

in  consols,

bonds,  stocks,

etc.

Buildings

and
sundries

Cash  in

hand  and

money  at  call

and  short

notice

Total
assets  and
liabilities

1890  May

311

93

1,716

13

1,272

366

113

387

4,275

Nov.

312

93

1,735

12

1,289

368

117

383

4,315

1891  May

330

111

1,794

17

1,312

400

137

409

4,515

Nov.

339

77

1,853

21

1,349

422

105

420

4,592

1892  May

345

76

1,907

30

1,370

439

111

443

4,727

Nov.

345

68

1,927

20

1,357

457

102

450

4,731

1893  May

350

99

1,930

26

1,375

466

121

455

4,823

Nov.

349

87

1,913

19

1,361

464

113

435

4,746

1894  May

352

93

1,916

21

1,380

460

119

428

4,773

Nov.

348

74

1,956

16

1,376

467

99

456

4,797

1895  May

350

98

2,039

23

1,397

477

123

518

5,031

Nov.

348

89

2,136

18

1,470

499

110

517

5,193

1896  May

352

115

2,217

30

1,517

523

138

541

5,438

Nov.

362

106

2,429

22

1,617

574

126

607

5,848

1897  May

366

106

2,410

31

1,645

572

137

564

5,835

Nov.

361

78

2,474

27

1,659

576

105

603

5,888

1898  May

373

107

2,566

24

1,719

604

139

613

6,149

Nov.

374

88

2,634

18

1,750

603

125

640

6,235

1899  May

385

102

2,670

23

1,769

607

144

665

6,369

Nov.

384

98

2,779

14

1,847

616

135

682

6,559

1900  May

391

107

2,754

24

1,857

619

146

659

6,561

Nov.

392

91

2,782

17

1,882

612

128

662

6,569

1901  May

403

105

2,855

34

1,924

622

152

703

6,801

Nov.

403

93

2,830

17

1,868

623

134

723

6,695

1902  May

408

116

2,846

23

1,857

633

159

749

6,795

Nov.

404

78

2,842

20

1,863

624

123

738

6,696

1903  May

418

122

2,921

29

1,885

637

170

801

6,986

Nov.

417

101

2,887

23

1,910

636

142

743

6,862

1904  May

417

133

2,864

29

1,929

612

179

726

6,891

Nov.

411

99

2,837

17

1,892

611

143

720

6,732

1905  May

415

142

2,932

27

1,906

625

180

807

7,036

Nov.

413

129

2,984

16

1,915

640

162

828

7,087

1906  May

418

191

3,054

28

1,954

641

223

874

7,384

Nov.

415

152

3,055

14

2,004

641

179

816

7,277

1907  May

420

203

3,153

29

2,071

637

229

870

7,615

Nov.

416

141

3,190

21

2,140

629

171

828

7,537

1908  May

417

216

3,156

19

2,098

612

251

849

7,619

Nov.

415

157

3,192

17

2,077

628

183

895

7,567

1909  May

420

205

3,283

16

2,081

666

230

948

7,852

Nov.

413

180

3,303

18

2,069

682

197

970

7,836

1910  May

415

201

3,334

20

2,110

668

220

972

7,940

Nov.

411

185

3,440

17

2,206

675

197

976

8,107

1911  May

413

254

3,507

20

2,277

670

276

972

8,389

Nov.

405

191

3,571

26

2,318

663

207

1,005

8,386

Averages

1890-99

351.7

92.9

2,150.0

21.3

1,491.5

498.0

121.0

510.7

5,241.9

1900-09

411.2

138.0

2,986.1

21.8

1,959.1

631.5

174.0

795.4

7,119.8

Compiled  from  tlie  "Banking  Supplements'

'  of  the  Economist. The  dat

a  do  not  include  the  Bank  of

England.

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


373


TABLE  99— (^Concluded)

Summary  of  the  Statements  op  the  Joint-Stock  Banks  of  England  and  Wales,  as  Compiled  Semi-annually

BY  THE  London  Economist,  1890-1911

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =:  100

Cash  in
hand  and

Total
assets  and
liabilities

82

82


90

90

92

91

91

92

96

99

104

112

111

112

117
119
122
125
125
125
130
128
130
128

133
131
132
128
134
135
141
139
145
144
145
144

150
149
151
155
160
160

100
136


Date

Capital  paid

up,  reserve

funds,  and

undivided

profits

Acceptance

liabilities

where

stated

Deposit

and  current

accounts

Miscellaneous
liabilities

Discounts,

advances,

loans,  bills,

etc.

Investments

in  consols,

bonds,  stocks,

etc.

Buildings

and
sundries

Cash  in

hand  and

money  at  call

and  short

notice

1890  May

88

100

80

60

85

73

93

76

Nov.

89

101

81

57

86

74

97

75

1891  May

94

119

83

80

88

80

113

80

Nov.

96

83

86

98

90

85

87

82

1892  May

98

82

89

142

92

88

92

87

Nov.

98

73

90

96

91

92

84

88

1893  May

100

107

90

121

92

94

100

89

Nov.

99

93

89

89

91

93

93

85

1894  May

100

100

89

100

93

92

98

84

Nov.

99

80

91

76

92

94

82

89

1895  May

99

105

95

110

94

96

102

101

Nov.

99

96

99

82

99

100

91

101

1896  May

100

124

103

142

102

105

114

106

Nov.

103

114

113

103

108

115

104

119

1897  May

104

114

112

146

110

115

113

110

Nov.

103

84

115

126

111

116

87

118

1898  May

106

115

119

114

115

121

115

120

Nov.

106

94

123

82

117

121

103

125

1899  May

109

110

124

110

119

122

119

130

Nov.

109

106

129

66

124

124

111

133

1900  May

111

115

128

112

124

124

121

129

Nov.

111

97

129

77

126

123

105

130

1901  May

114

113

133

]60

129

125

126

138

Nov.

115

100

132

77

125

125

111

142

1902  May

116

125

132

110

124

127

131

147

Nov.

115

84

132

96

125

125

102

144

1903  May

119

131

136

137

126

128

141

157

Nov.

118

109

134

108

128

128

117

145

1904  May

119

143

133

135

129

123

148

142

Nov.

117

107

132

77

127

123

118

141

1905  May

118

153

136

126

128

126

148

158

Nov.

117

138

139

76

128

128

134

162

1906  May

119

205

142

130

131

129

185

171

Nov.

118

164

142

66

134

129

148

160

1907  May

119

218

147

137

139

128

189

170

Nov.

118

151

148

100

144

126

142

162

1908  May

118

233

147

89

141

123

207

166

Nov.

118

169

148

80

139

126

151

175

1909  May
Nov.

119
117

221
193

153
154

76

82

140
139

134
137

190
163

186
190

1910  May
Nov.

118
117

216
199

155
160

94
80

141
148

134
136

182
163

190
191

1911  May
Nov.

117
115

273
206

163
166

94

122

153
155

135
133

228
171

190
197

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

117

149

139

102

131

127

144

156

Compiled  from  the  "Banking  Supplements"  of  the  Economist. The  data  do  not  include  the  Bank  of  England.


374


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


160
150
140
130
120
1  10
100
90

ao

70

200
190
ISO

no

160
150
140
130
120

no

100
90
80
70

Chart 63.

Relative. Amounts of  the Loans  ,  Deposits  ,
AND  Reserves of  the  Joint  Stock  Banks

OF  England  and Wales.
1690 1910.

-^

;

/

/

/
/

LOANS  .

Reserves
Deposits.

1
1
1

/

V

\

V

1

/
/

•

1

\
\

y

/

/
•

/

\
\

\
>

1

.■

9
»

.''••.

A

J>

/

A

f

•-...

1

*
•

i

A

"^^

"»^'^

/
/

/.•
//•

L*

"r

^

Vj

^

^

\^

^

A

/

f

1
t.

v

y

^

1

V

/

•:.-

f

>

1890 '91 '92 '95 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '93 1900  'O! '02 '03 "04 "05 '06 "07 '08 '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSLNESS  CYCLES


375


TABLE  100

Various  Ratios  Between  Items  in  the  Statements  of  the  Joint-Stock  Banks  op  England  and  Wales,

Other  Than  the  Bank  of  England


Bate
1890  May

Loans

to
deposits
Per  cent

74%

Reserves

to
deposits
Per  cent

23%

Securities

to

loans

Per  cent

29%

Capital  to

total
liabilities
Per  cent

15%

1902

Date
May

Loans

to
deposits
Per  cent

65%

Reserves

to
deposits
Per  cent

26%

Securities

to

loans

Per  cent

34%

Capital  to

total
liabilities
Per  cent

12%

Nov.

74

22

29

14

Nov.

66

26

33

12

1891  May

73

23

30

15

1903

May

65

27

34

12

Nov.

73

23

31

15

Nov.

66

26

33

12

1892  May

72

23

32

15

1904

May

67

25

32

12

Nov.

70

23

34

15

Nov.

67

25

32

12

1893  May

71

24

34

15

1905

May

65

28

33

12

Nov.

71

23

34

15

Nov.

64

28

33

12

1894  May

72

22

33

15

1906

May

64

29

33

11

Nov.

70

23

34

15

Nov.

66

27

32

11

1895  May

69

25

34

14

1907

May

66

28

31

11

Nov.

69

24

34

13

Nov.

67

26

29

11

1896  May

68

24

34

13

1908

May

66

27

29

11

Nov.

67

25

35

12

Nov.

65

28

30

11

1897  May

68

23

35

13

1909

May

63

29

32

11

Nov.

67

24

35

12

Nov.

63

29

33

11

1898  May

67

24

35

12

1910

May

63

29

32

10

Nov.

66

24

34

12

Nov.

64

28

31

10

1899  May

66

25

34

12

1911

May

65

28

29

10

Nov.

66

25

33

12

Nov.

65

28

29

10

1900  May

67

24

33

12

Nov.

68

24

33

12

Averages

1901  May

67

25

32

12

1890-

-99

69.7

23.6

33.2

13.7

Nov.

66

26

33

12

1900-

-09

65.7

26.7

32.2

11.6

Computed  from  the  data  in  Table  99.  Loans  include  "Discounts,  advances,  loans,  bills,  etc."  Deposits  include  "Deposit  and
current  accounts."  Securities  include  "Investments  in  consols,  bonds,  stocks,  etc."  Capital  includes  "Capital  paid  up,  reserve
funds,  and  undivided  profits." Reserve  includes  "Cash  on  hand,  and  money  at  call  and  short  notice."


notice,  is  not  definitely  known,  but  British  bankers  admit  that  they  carry  rela-
tively small  sums  of  "till  money."  On  the  other  hand,  it  must  be  remembered
that,  during  the  period  under  review,  the  English  banks  have  never  been  driven
to  limit  their  payments  of  cash,  while  American  banks  have  resorted  to  that
expedient  twice.

In  actual  amount  the  English  reserves  have  risen  year  by  year  with  few
checks.  A  slight  falling  off  occurred  in  the  crises  of  1890,  1900,  and  1907.  The
remaining  cases  of  decline  are  distributed  among  periods  of  depression  (1893-


376


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


30
28
26
24-
22

Chart  G4

Ratio of  the  Reserve  to  the  Deposits of  the  Joint Stock  Banks
OF  England  and  Wales.
1890  -1910.

30
28
26
24
22

A

r

A

^

/

\

\

/

A

/

\,

i

r

\

/

V.

f

\

A

\J

f

V

/

1890  '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 "97 '98 '99 1900  'oi "02 "03 '04 *05 '06 '07 'OS '09 1910

94  and  1903-04),  periods  of  revival  (1896-97),  and  periods  of  Mgh  prosperity
(1906).  More  significant  is  the  ratio  of  reserve  to  deposits.  The  crises  have
brought  a  slight  decline;  depression  and  revival  a  somewhat  greater  gain;  the
climaxes  of  prosperity  stability  or  a  trifling  loss.  All  these  changes  are  mod-
erate in  degree  compared  with  the  corresponding  American  movements.  But
the  most  noteworthy  contrast  between  English  and  American  developments  is
that  the  national  banks  have  allowed  their  average  reserves  to  decline  from
about  20  per  cent  in  the  early  nineties  to  about  15  per  cent  in  1910,  while  the
English  banks  have  increased  their  ratios  from  about  23  to  about  28  per  cent.
However,  the  difference  in  the  character  of  the  funds  held  as  reserves  must  be
remembered.

Finally,  the  decline  in  the  ratio  of  capital  liabilities  to  total  liabilities  appears
in  England  as  well  as  in  America.  During  the  revival  of  business  activity  in
the  later  nineties,  this  ratio  sank  from  a  level  of  15  to  one  of  12  per  cent.  Again
in  the  revival  of  1905-06  it  sank  from  the  12  per  cent  level  to  that  of  11  per  cent ;
and  when  business  revived  from  the  depression  of  1908  it  sank  once  more  to  a
level  of  10  per  cent.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  377

V.  The  Central  Banks  of  England,  France,  and  Germany

The  data  presented  in  the  following  tables  concerning  the  central  banks  of
England,  France,  and  Uermany  consist  of  annual  averages  of  weekly  statements.
They  are  limited  to  a  few  of  the  most  important  items  in  the  accounts  of  the
banks.

In  none  of  these  institutions  do  the  fluctuations  of  circulation  betray  a  close
connection  with  the  course  of  business  cycles.  As  pointed  out  in  the  chapter
on  the  currency,  the  elasticity  of  the  foreign  systems  of  note  issue  is  confined
to  providing  for  the  changing  requirements  of  business  at  different  seasons  of
a  given  year."

Loans  contract  in  times  of  depression  and  expand  in  times  of  prosperity.
Their  behavior  during  crises  is  veiled  in  these  tables  by  the  use  of  annual
averages.  But  in  sharp  contrast  to  the  American  banks,  it  is  known  from
other  sources  that  all  three  of  the  central  banks  under  discussion  have  proved
their  ability  to  expand  their  accommodations  to  the  business  public  whenever
need  arises.

Deposits  in  these  banks  vary  in  a  rather  irregular  fashion,  for  they  consist
largely  of  government  funds  and  deposits  made  by  other  banks.  Except  in
the  Bank  of  England,  the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  is  extremely  high  judged
by  American  standards,  because  a  large  proportion  of  the  borrowers  prefer  to
take  the  proceeds  of  their  loans  in  notes.  But  in  all  three  banks  the  fluctu-
ations of  this  ratio  follow  the  same  course  as  in  New  York — that  is,  the  ratio
falls  during  depression  and  rises  during  prosperity.

In  central  banks  reserves  run  very  high  in  proportion  to  demand  liabilities.
Both  the  English  and  the  German  bank,  however,  have  contented  themselves
in  the  second  decade  with  somewhat  lower  ratios  than  those  held  in  1890-99.
On  the  contrary,  the  Bank  of  France  has  raised  its  extremely  high  ratio  higher
still.  In  all  three  institutions  the  ratios  have  risen  in  periods  of  depression
and  fallen  in  periods  of  prosperity.  The  maximum  variations  are  41  and  64
per  cent  in  England,  67  and  77  per  cent  in  France,  and  46  and  66  per  cent  in
Germany.  The  lowest  ratios  all  occur  in  years  of  crisis  and  the  highest  ratios
in  years  of  deep  depression  or  of  business  revival.


13  Chapter  VI,  iii.


378  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  101

Pkincipal  Items  Among  the  Eesoubces  and  Liabilities  op  the  Bank  of  England

Annual  averages  of  the  weekly  statements,  1890-1911
In  millions  of  dollars


Year

Capital
and
Eest

Government
securities

of  the
banking

department

Other
securities

of  the

banking

department

Reserve :
notes  and

specie  of  the
banking

department

Notes  of

the  issue

department

Deposits:

public

and  other

deposits  plus

7-day  bills

Per  cent  of

reserve :

reserve

H-by

deposits

1890

87

70

114

67

181

163

41%

1891

87

53

144

76

194

186

41

1892

87

58

128

78

198

177

44

1893

87

56

124

83

200

176

47

1894

87

56

104

126

237

198

64

1895

87

69

108

145

259

235

62

1896

87

72

138

169

286

292

58

1897

87

67

140

122

243

243

50

1898

87

63

155

112

234

243

46

1899

87

66

160

103

229

242

43

1900

87

83

143

104

240

243

43

1901

87

77

140

117

251

246

48

1902

87

79

144

118

250

254

46

1903

87

80

136

116

246

244

48

1904

87

83

128

120

248

243

49

1905

87

81

146

123

255

264

47

1906

87

77

159

114

248

263

43

1907

88

74

156

119

253

262

45

1908

87

72

144

130

263

260

50

1909

87

75

146

130

265

264

49

1910

87

75

147

132

264

267

49

1911

87

72

148

136

270

270

51

Averages
1890-99

87.0

63.0

131.5

108.1

226.1

215.5

49.6

1900-09

87.1

78.1

144.2

119.1

251.9

254.3

46.8

Compiled  from  Palgrave's  tables  in  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,  Germany,  and  France,  pp.
80  and  83. Data  for  1910  and  1911  compiled  from  the  Bankers'  Magazine (London).


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  379


TABLE  101— (Concluded)

Principal  Items  Among  the  Resoueces  and  Liabilities  of  the  Bank  op  England

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100

Government  Other  Reserve:  Deposits;

securities  securities  notes  and  public

of  the  of  the  specie  of  the  Notes  of  and  other

banking  banking  banking  the  issue deposits  plus

department  department  department  department 7-day  bills

111  87  62  80  76

84  110  70  86  86

92  97  72  88  82

89  94  77  88  82

89  79  117  105  92

110  82  134  115  109

114  105  156  126  135

106  106  113  107  113

100  118  104  103  113

105  122  95  101  112

132  109  96  106  113

122  106  108  111  114

125  110  109  111  118

127  103  107  109  113

132  97  111  110  113

129  111  114  113  123

122  121  105  110  122

117  119  110  112  122

114  110  120  116  121

119  111  120  117  123

119  112  122  117  124

114  113  126  119  125

100  100  100  100  100

124  110  110  112  118


Capital

and

Year

Rest

1890

100

1891

100

1892

100

1893

100

1894

100

1895

100

1896

100

1897

100

1898

100

1899

100

1900

100

1901

100

1902

100

1903

100

1904

100

1905

100

1906

100

1907

101

1908

100

1909

100

1910

100

1911

100

Averages

1890-99

100

1900-09

100

380  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  102
Principal  Items  Among  the  Eesources  and  Liabilities  of  the  Bank  op  France


Annual  averages  of  the  weekly  statements,  1890-1911
In  millions  of  dollars


Per  cent  of  reserve


Discounts

and  loans  on

securities

177

Reserve

gold  and

silver

485

Circulation
591

Accounts  current

A

to
circulation

82%

to  circulation

and  accounts

current

69%

Year
1890

Treasury
34

Private
78

1891

204

493

595

47

84

83

68

1892

164

546

608

56

81

90

73

1893

]70

571

665

• 25

78

86

74

1894

165

595

671

31

86

89

76

1895

165

635

681

39

102

93

77

1896

204

622

696

46

102

89

74

1897

210

615

712

43

87

86

73

1898

229

598

713

49

86

84

71

1899

246

591

737

40

83

80

69

1900

264

625

779

49

84

80

69

1901

209

679

794

26

90

86

75

1902

193

706

803

30

86

88

77

1903

221

695

832

32

73

84

74

1904

232

710

827

39

95

86

74

]905

217

764

851

48

99

90

77

1906

273

7.'59

899

50

98

84

73

1907

329

709

926

41

89

77

67

1908

275

764

937

33

90

82

72

1909

246

873

980

35

119

89

77

1910

295

823

1,003

26

106

82

73

1911

356

779

1,012

39

103

77

68

Averages
1890-99

193.4

575.1

666.9

41.0

86.7

86.2

72.4

1900-09

245.9

728.4

862.8

38.3

92.3

84.6

73.5

Compiled  from  the  Annuaire  Statistique  de'  France.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  381


TABLE  102— {Concluded)
Principal  Items  Among  the  Eesousces  and  Liabilities  of  the  Bank  of  Prance


Discounts

and  loans  on

securities

Reserve

gold  and

silver

Circulation

Accounts  current

Year

Treasury

Private

1890

92

84

89

83

90

1891

105

86

89

115

97

1892

85

95

91

137

93

1893

88

99

100

61

90

1894

85

103

101

76

99

1895

85

110

102

95

118

1896

105

108

104

112

118

1897

109

107

107

105

100

1898

118

104

107

120

99

1899

127

103

111

98

96

1900

137

109

117

120

97

1901

108

118

119

63

104

1902

100

123

120

73

99

1903

114

121

125

78

84

1904

120

123

• 124

95

110

1905

112

133

128

117

114

1906

141

132

135

122

113

1907 •

170

123

139

100

103

1908

142

133

141

80

104

1909

127

152

147

85

137

1910

153

143

150

63

122

1911

184

135

152

95

119

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

127

127

129

93

107

382  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  103
Principal  Items  Among  the  Resources  and  Liabilities  op  the  Keichsbank  of  Germany

Annual  averages  of  the  weekly  statements, 1890-1911
In  millions  of  dollars

Per  cent  of  reserves


Year

Capital

and
surplus

Securities

Discounts

and  loans  on

collateral

Reserve

Circulation

Deposits :
all  demand
liabilities  ex-
cept notes

, ^

to
circulation

to  total
demand
liabilities

1890

35

3

148

198

234

86

85%

62%

1891

35

3

149

220

231

110

95

65

1892

36

1

152

232

234

122

99

65

1893

36

2

161

208

234

108

89

61

1894

36

1

150

231

238

117

97

65

1895

36

2

156

249

261

119

95

66

1896

36

2

179

220

258

115

85

59

1897

36

2

179

215

258

112

83

58

1898

36

3

193

211

268

113

79

55

1899

36

3

214

205

272

125

75

52

1900

36

5

209

203

271

122

75

52

1901

45

13

219

225

283

142

80

53

1902

46

17

202

242

293

137

83

56

1903

47

19

219

224

297

132

75

52

1904

48

22

214

231

307

127

75

53

1905

58

25

233

243

318

139

76

53

1906

58

28

256

226

330

137

68

48

1907

58

24

286

226

352

138

64

46

1908

58

36

252

264

363

155

73

51

1909

58

66

240

270

375

172

72

49

1910

58

28

260

272

382

154

71

51

1911

58

11

275

288

396

155

73

52

Averages

1890-99

35.8

2.2

168.1

218.9

248.8

112.7

88.2

60.8

1900-09

51.2

25.5

233.0

235.4

318.9

140.1

74.1

51.3

Compiled  from  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great  Britain, Germany, and  France,  p. 173. Completed
from  the  bank's  annual  report  of  1911,  as  published  in  the  Bankers'  Magazine (London),  August, 1912,  pp.  277,  278.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  383


TABLE  103— (Concluded)
Principal  Items  Among  the  Eesotjrces  and  Liabilities  op  the  Reichsbank  op  Germany

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Year

Capital
and

surplus

Securities

Discounts

and  loans  on

collateral

Reserve

Circulation

Deposits :
all  demand
liabilities  ex-
cept notes

1890

98

136

88

90

94

76

1891

98

136

89

101

93

98

1892

101

45

90

106

94

108

1893

101

91

96

95

94

96

1894

101

45

89

106

96

104

1895

101

91

93

114

105

106

1896

101

91

106

101

104

102

1897

101

91

106

98

104

99

1898

101

136

115

96

108

100

1899

101

136

127

94

109

111

1900

101

227

124

93

109

108

1901

126

591

130

103

114

126

1902

128

773

120

111

118

122

1903

131

864

130

102

119

117

1904

134

1,000

127

106

123

113

1905

162

1,136

139

111

128

123

1906

162

1,273

152

103

133

122

1907

162

1,091

170

103

141

122

1908

162

1,636

150

121

146

138

1909

162

3,000

143

123

151

153

1910

162

1,273

155

124

154

137

1911

162

500

164

132

159

138

Averages
1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

143

1,159

139

108

128

124

384


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 65 .
Ratio  of  the  Cash Reserves  to  the  Demand  Liabilities  of  the
Bank  of  England  .  Bank  of  France  ,  and  Reichsbank  of  Germany.
1830  -  1909.

Bank  of  England  . Bank  of  France, Reichsbank.

78

ID
76
74
72
70

e&

/'

\

/

\

/

\ —

i

— 1

76
74
72
70
66

1

/

\

\

\

/

/

\
\

/
/
r

\
\

/
/

/

/
/

\

/

/

\

\ —

1

1

/

/
/

\

\

\
\
1

/
/

\

/
/

\

\

—

\

I

— \

/

/
/

V

66

66

/

i

.....

'

1

•

1
1

1
t

1

/

\

62

1
t
1

1

%

SO
56

W

60

\,

56

\

»

\

56

\

/

\

54
52

\

/

\

\

1

*

/

—

i

32

'

50

\

t

50

\

/

\

t

1

\

48

\

/

\

//

48

/

/

\

/

\

\

i

/

/

\

1

\

/

44

/

\

/

/

'14

4e
40

/

\

'

1

/

42.

—

/

1890 91 '92 9i '94 '95 '9G '°n '98 '99 1900  'Ot '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 "07 '05 '09

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


385


94
92
90
88
86
84
82
80
78
76
74
72
70
63
66
S4
62
GO
58
56
J4

86
84
82
80
78
76
74
72
70
68
66
64
62
SO
5h
S6
54

Chart  66.

Ratio of  the. Loans to  the Deposits
OF  THE Bank  of  E.ngland.
1890  -  1909.

\

/

/

1

1

1

'  1

\

'

/

\

\

/

\

j

1

\

\

\

/

\

\

/

\

\

i

/

/

1890 '91 '92 '93 '94 '95 '96 '97 '98 '99 1900  'o/ '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '07 'OB '03

386  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  104

Ratios  or  Cash  Reserves  to  Demand  Liabilities  and  op  Loans  to  Deposits  in  the  Bank  op  England,  Bank

or  Prance,  and  Eeichsbank  op  Germany

Ratio  of  cash  to  demand  liabilities  Ratio  of  loans  to  deposits


Bank
of  England

banking
department

Per  cent

Bank
of  France
Per  cent

Reichs-
bank  of
Germany
Per  cent

' Bank
of  England

banking,
department

Per  cent

Bank
of  Prance
Per  cent

Reichs-
bank  of
Germany
Per  cent

1890

41%

69%

62%

84%

167%

1487c,

1891

41

68

65

94

176

113

1892

44

73

65

86

131

106

1893

47

74

61

84

143

129

1894

64

76

65

63

127

111

1895

62

77

66

54

103

115

1896

58

74

59

57

131

133

1897

50

73

58

72

162

137

1898

46

71

55

81

178

150

1899

43

69

52

83

192

156

1900

43

69

52

72

200

156

1901

48

75

53

71

127

142

1902

46

77

56

72

123

135

1903

48

74

52

68

181

153

1904

49

74

53

63

141

154

1905

47

77

53

71

125

155

1906

43

73

48

75

177

172

1907

45

67

46

72

245

191

1908

50

72

51

67

193

149

1909

49

77

49

69

124

127

1910

49

73

51

72

178

154

1911

51

68

52

72

225

165

Averages

1890-99

49.6

72.4

60.8

75.8

151.0

129.8

1900-09

46.8

73.5

51.3

70.0

163.6

153.4

s  ratios  of  cash  to  demand  liabilities  are  from  the  preceding  tables. The  ratios  of  loans  to  deposits  are  computed  for  the
of  England  by  dividing  "other  securities" by "other  deposits plus seven-day  bills"; for the Bank  of  France  by  dividing


The
Bank  of _  .  ^

"discounts"  by  "accounts  current  of  individuals";  and  for  the  Reichsbank  of  Germany  by  dividing  "bills  of  exchange"  by  "other
demand  liabilities.'*


CHAPTER  VIII


SAVING,  INVESTMENT,  ENTERPRISE,  AND  SPECULATION


I.  Saving

A  quantitative  analysis  of  saving  cannot  be  made  at  present,  because  the
sums  saved  do  not  come  under  observation  until  they  are  deposited  in  savings
banks,  put  into  life  insurance,  invested  in  income-bearing  securities,  etc.  Our
knowledge  of  how  much  money  the  people  of  any  country  put  by  in  any  year
is  therefore  most  indefinite.  Even  the  simple  question  whether  the  volume
of  savings  declines  with  business  depression  and  rises  with  business  prosperity
cannot  be  answered  with  complete  assurance.  SchmoUer  conjectures  that  in
Germany  the  increase  of  capital  by  savings  averages  about  II/2  per  cent  per
annum,  but  that  in  good  years  the  ratio  probably  rises  above  2  per  cent,  and
falls  proportionately  in  bad  3^ears.'  On  the  other  hand,  certain  writers  upon
the  theory  of  crises  assume  that  depression  does  not  check  saving  in  an  apprec-
iable degree,  though  it  does  make  people  timid  about  investing  their  new
accumulations.  On  this  view,  the  phase  of  depression  in  a  business  cycle  is
characterized  by  the  piling  up  of  enormous  sums  of  idle  funds,  and  the  phase
of  prosperity  by  their  rapid  investment.^  To  determine  which  of  these  opinions
is  correct,  we  have  no  recourse  other  than  the  drawing  of  inferences  from
certain  opposing  tendencies,  the  relative  magnitude  of  which  is  not  accurately
knovm.

Business  depression  favors  saving  in  that  it  discourages  extravagance  and
usually  reduces  the  cost  of  living.  The  classes  whose  money  incomes  are  not
diminished — salaried  people  who  keep  their  postions  and  their  old  rates  of  pay,
landlords  who  keep  their  tenants  on  the  old  leases,  bondholders  whose  securities
prove  sound,  etc. — these  classes  have  a  better  opportunity  to  save  when  times
are  dull  than  when  times  are  brisk.  But  there  are  larger  classes  whose  money
incomes  decline  more  rapidly  than  living  expenses,  whose  curtailment  of
extravagance  is  compulsory.  Workingmen  are  exposed  to  reductions  of  wages
when  times  are  bad,  and  suffer  still  more  from  irregularity  of  employment.
Professional  men  working  on  their  own  account  find  less  demand  for  their

1  Grundriss  der  Allgemeinen  VolTcswirtscnaftslehre,  Erste  bis  sechste  Auflage,  p.  642.

2  Such  seems  to  be  Spiethoff  's  view,  though  he  does  not  state  it  explicitly. See  ' '  Die  Krisentheorien  von
M.  V.  Tugan-Baranowski  und  L.  Pohle,"  JahriucTi  fiir  Gesetzgebung,  1903,  pp.  679-708,  especially  pp.  699-701.

[387]


388  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

services,  if  like  lawyers  and  engineers  they  cater  to  business  needs,  or  difficulty
in  collecting  their  bills,  if  like  physicians  they  cater  to  imperious  personal
needs.  Business  men  bear  even  heavier  losses,  for  profit  is  the  type  of  income
which  is  most  sensitive  to  changes  in  business  conditions.  Capitalists  whose
property  consists  in  stocks  usually  suffer  loss  of  income  through  reduction  of
dividends.  And  business  enterprises,  which  often  save  up  large  surplus  funds
in  periods  of  good  trade,  are  more  likely  to  encroach  upon  their  old  savings
than  to  accumulate  new  when  trade  is  bad.

Thus,  while  depression  may  inculcate  the  virtue  of  thrift,  it  narrows  the
margin  of  income  available  for  saving  in  the  case  of  the  great  majority  of
families  and  business  enterprises.  The  net  effect  is  probably  to  reduce  the
volume  of  saving,  particularly  in  countries  where  the  distribution  of  wealth  is
most  unequal.  SchmoUer  hazards  the  guess  that  three-fifths  of  German  savings
are  made  by  the  rich  and  the  large  business  men.^  The  bulk  of  French  savings,
on  the  contrary,  is  represented  by  those  conversant  with  the  situation  as  coming
from  the  agglomeration  of  millions  of  small  sums  put  aside  by  people  in  himible
or  modest  circumstances.*  Since  the  incomes  of  great  business  men  and  of
large  capitalists  (aside  from  bondholders)  are  peculiarly  susceptible  to  the
influence  of  depression  and  prosperity,  it  follows  that  German  savings  probably
fluctuate  more  violently  than  French  savings  from  one  phase  of  a  business
cycle  to  the  next.  And  since  both  the  distribution  of  wealth  and  the  diffusion
of  thrift  in  America  and  England  are  more  like  the  German  than  the  French
model,  it  follows  that  savings  in  these  two  countries  probably  vary  widely
from  prosperity  to  depression.

Moreover,  the  tacit  assumption  that  enormous  sums  saved  in  periods  of
depression  are  kept  idle  until  the  next  wave  of  prosperity  sweeps  their  ovoiers
back  to  the  investments  markets  runs  counter  to  much  that  we  know  about  the
financial  habits  of  Anglo-Saxon  communities  at  least.  The  hoarding  of  money
through  a  period  of  .years  is  certainly  less  common  among  thrifty  Americans
and  English  now  than  it  was  before  the  advantages  of  investment  in  savings
banks,  life  insurance,  and  securities  had  become  well  known.  While  much
hoarding  of  this  kind  may  go  on  in  France  and  Germany,  it  is  probably
declining  even  among  the  peasantry  of  those  countries.  What  does  happen
demonstrably  is  that  the  character  of  investment  changes  from  prosperous  to
dxiU  times.  After  a  crisis  risky  investments  fall  into  disfavor,  and  the  highest
grade  of  bonds  are  bought  more  freely."  But  of  course  this  change  does  not
mean  that  the  volume  of  savings  has  increased.

3  Op.  cit.,  p.  635.

*  For  example,  see  A.  Neymarek,  ' '  French  Savings  and  .Their  Influence, ' '  in  the  Publications  of  the  National
Monetary  Commission (Senate  Document,  no.  494,  61st  Congress,  2d  session),  pp.  165-181.
5  See  the  next  section.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  389

Finally,  the  flood  of  money  which  is  often  poured  into  the  investment  market
in  the  early  years  of  a  period  of  prosperity  need  not  be  likened  to  the  outflow
from  a  reservoir  in  which  the  exceptionally  large  savings  of  several  years  of
depression  have  been  impounded.  Part  of  the  funds  are  merely  transferred
from  the  bond  market  to  the  stock  exchange.  On  the  latter  market  a  given
sum  becomes  the  basis  of  transactions  which  are  nominally  much  greater  in
volume  than  the  same  sum  employed  on  the  former  market.  For  a  much  larger
proportion  of  bonds  are  bought  outright,  paid  for  in  full,  and  held  for  months
or  years  than  in  the  case  of  stocks,  where  the  bulk  of  the  purchases  are  made
on  margins  Avith  the  intention  of  selling  again  at  the  flrst  favorable  turn.
Moreover,  if  the  preceding  conclusions  be  sound,  the  increase  of  funds  pouring
into  the  investment  markets  results  partly  from  an  increase  in  the  actual  volume
of  current  savings.  When  depression  yields  to  prosperity,  money  incomes —
especially  profits — rise  faster  than  the  cost  of  living,  and  the  thrift  inculcated
by  hard  times  yields  but  slowly  to  the  extravagance  encouraged  by  flush  times.
Finally,  a  considerable  portion  of  the  savings  made  during  a  period  of  depres-
sion goes  to  meet  obligations  incurred  before  the  preceding  crisis."  When
these  old  debts  have  been  paid  off,  and  the  debit  accounts  run  up  during  the
dull  times  themselves  have  been  squared,  savers  are  free  to  invest  their  fresh
accumulations  as  they  see  flt.

In  short,  there  is  small  room  for  doubt  that  saving,  like  most  of  the  activities
of  economic  life,  is  subject  to  the  rhythm  of  business  cycles,  slowing  down  in
depression,  speeding  up  in  prosperity.  But,  after  all,  the  volume  of  saving
is  important  chiefly  for  its  influence  upon  the  volume  of  investment.  Fortu-
natelj^  on  this  subject  we  have  relatively  full  and  reliable  information  in
quantitative  form.

II.  Investment,  Enterprise,  and  Speculation

As  types  of  economic  activity,  investment,  enterprise,  and  speculation  may
ibe  clearly  distinguished.  In  many  cases  the  three  tyjies  are  even  represented
by  three  sets  of  men — for  example,  the  trustee  seeking  to  "place"  funds  safely
for  the  sake  of  interest,  the  merchant  actively  managing  a  business  enterprise
for  profit,  and  the  operator  in  the  wheat-pit  dealing  in  "futures."  But  in  a
larger  number  of  cases  the  distinction  is  blurred ;  for  not  only  is  the  same  man
often  investor,  enterpriser,  and  speculator  in  one,  but  one  type  of  his  activity
also  merges  into  the  others.  Thus  when  the  investor  buys  stocks  the  act  assim-
ilates him  to  the  enterpriser,  and  when  he  buys  real  estate  trusting  to  a  rise
of  prices  the  act  assimilates  him  to  the  speculator.  Similarly  the  business
man  is  an  investor  in  so  far  as  he  puts  his  own  capital  into  his  enterprise,  and

6  Compare  N.  Johannsen,  A  Neglected  Foint  in  Connection  with  Crises  (New  York,  1908).


390  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

a  speculator  in  so  far  as  every  venture  involves  the  assumption  of  risk.  So,
also,  the' speculator  invests  some  fmids  of  his  own,  at  least  a  narrow  "margin"
upon  the  purchase  price  of  his  stocks,  and  he  may  take  an  active  part  in  the
management  of  a  business  enterprise  in  order  to  promote  his  campaign  upon
the  stock  market.

The  intimacy  of  these  connections  among  the  three  types  of  activity  makes
it  difficult  to  find  statistical  records  which  show  the  volume  of  investment  apart
from  the  voliune  of  speculation,  or  the  activity  of  business  enterprise  apart
from  both  speculation  and  investment.  Stock-exchange  transactions,  for
example,  are  predominantly  speculative  in  character ;  but  the  investment  factor
is  not  unimportant,  though  it  cannot  be  separated  from  the  speculative  factor
in  the  records.  Bond  purchases,  on  the  other  hand,  are  made  chiefly  by
investors;  but  speculation  in  the  price  of  bonds  is  by  no  means  unknown.
Similarly  with  the  tables  of  "capital  applications,"  "flotations,"  "listings"
on  the  stock  exchange,  etc.  The  figures  may  be  intended  to  show  the  fluctu-
ations in  the  sums  invested  in  business  ventures ;  but  they  also  show  the  varying
activity  of  business  enterprise  in  seeking  loans  for  new  undertakings  or  for
the  extension  of  old,  and  often  they  reflect  the  intensity  of  interest  in  speculative
ventures.

For  this  reason  it  is  inexpedient  to  attempt  to  separate  the  statistical
investigations  into  investment,  enterprise,  and  speculation.  Certain  indices  are
available  which  apply  almost  wholly  to  one  tj^e  of  activity  to  the  exclusion
of  the  other  types;  but  most  of  the  recorded  transactions  are  those  in  which
two  or  even  all  three  of  the  types  are  joined  together.


1.  Savings-bank  Deposits

The  deposit  of  funds  in  savings  banks  approximates  closely  to  an  act  of  pure
investment.  Fortunately,  the  obvious  propriety  of  exercising  close  supervision
over  the  conduct  of  fiduciary  enterprises  entrusted  with  the  savings  of  people
unskilled  in  business  has  led  to  the  compilation  and  publication  of  relatively
full  statistics  on  the  subject.  The  figures  of  most  significance  for  the  present
purpose  are  brought  together  in  the  next  table.

In  the  United  States,  the  increase  or  decrease  of  savings-bank  deposits  is
clearly  correlated  with  the  prosperity  or  depression  of  business.  In  the  years
immediately  following  the  major  crises  of  1893  and  1907  depositors  drew  out
more  money  than  they  paid  in.  Every  other  year  since  1890  shows  a  net
gain  in  deposits.  However,  the  maximum  ratios  of  gain  occur  in  years  of
-widely  diffused  prosperity,  or  in  years  when  a  mild  reaction  interrupts  a  period
of  business  expansion,  as  in  1900  and  1910.  Under  the  latter  circumstances
people  seem  to  put  into  the  savings  banks  funds  which  they  would  have  kept


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


391


TABLE  105

Deposits  in  the  Savings  Banks  op  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars


Relative  amounts

Average  actual  amounts  in

1890-99  =  100


Kates  of  increase  (  +  )  or  decrease  ( — )
during  the  year


Year
1890

'united
States

1,525

United
Kingdom

542

France
642

Germany
1,223

United
States

83

United
Kingdom

79

Trance
84

Germany

77

United
States

+  7.0%

United
Kingdom

+2.9%

F'rance
+  10.2%

Germany
+5.5%

1891

1,623

557

687

1,272

88

81

90

80

+  6.4

+2.8

+ 7.0

+4.1

1892

1,713

575

742

1,331

93

83

97

84

+5.5

+3.2

+ 8.0

+4.6

1893

1,785

598

724

1,404

97

87

95

88

+4.2

+4.0

—  2.4

+5.5

1894

1,748

646

768

1,492

95

94

100

94

—2.1

+8.0

+  6.1

+  6.3

1895

1,811

697

801

1,617

99

101

105

102

+3.6

+7.9

+  4.3

+8.4

1896

1,907

753

804

1,726

104

109

105

109

+5.3

+8.0

+ .4

+6.7

1897

1,939

800

824

1,830

106

116

108

116

+1.7

+6.2

+  2.5

+6.3

1898

2,066

843

825

1,944

113

122

108

122

+  6.5

+5.4

+ .1

+5.9

1899

2,230

883

837

2,040

122

128

109

128

+  7.9

+4.7

+  1.5

+4.9

1900

2,450

910

825

2,102

134

132

108

132

+9.8

+3.1

—  1.4

+3.0

1901

2,597

936

855

2,276

142

136

112

143

+6.0

+2.9

+  3.6

+8.3

1902

2,750

959

847

2,458

150

139

111

155

+5.9

+2.4

— .9

+8.0

1903

2,935

967

831

2,644

160

140

109

166

+6.7

+0.8

—  1.9

+7.5

1904

3,060

976

856

2,836

167

142

112

179

+4.2

+0.9

+  3.0

+8.3

1905

3,261

997

898

3,023

178

145

117

190

+6.5

+2.1

+  4.9

+  6.6

1906

3,482

1,017

921

3,187

190

147

120

201

+6.8

+2.0

+  2.6

+5.5

1907

3,690

1,020

960

3,306

201

148

125

208

+6.0

+  0.3

+  4.2

+3.7

1908

3,661

1,033

1,009

3,464

200

150

132

218

—0.8

+1.3

+  5.1

+4.8

1909

3,713

1,055

1,056

3,731

202

153

138

235

+1.4

+2.1

+  4.7

+7.7

1910

4,070

1,076

3,994

222

156

251

+9.6

+2.0

+  7.0

1911

4,213

1,117

230

162

+3.5

+3.8

Averages
1890-99

1,834.7

689.4

765.4

1,588.5

100

100

100

100

+4.6

+5.3

+  3.8

+5.8

1900-09

3,159.9

987.0

905.8

2,902.7

172

143

118

'l83

+5.3

+1.8

+  2.4

+  6.3

n»ta  from  the  RevoTt  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  the  National  Monetary  Commission's  Statistics  for  Great  Britain Germany,
Data  iromthe^iiepore  o;  me^uompiro^^^  ^^^^  ^^^  statistical  abstracts  of  the  respective  countries. All  kinds  of  savings  hanks  mak-


and  France,  pp.  42,  229,

ing  returns  are  included  in  all  of  the  countries.


392


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA-


Chart 67.

/

05^n

Relative  Amount  of  Savings  Deposits  in  the
United  States,  United  Kingdom  ,  France, and  Germany.

«

i

/

220

/

1890  -  1911.

/

/

^  ^  —  — United Kingdom.

•
•

■*

^

/

200

•

/

•  ^•^•—  Framce.

/

/

— • Germany.

•

/

190
180

no

IGO
150
lAn

180

no
leo

150
140
130
120

no

100

t

»
»

1

/

.'

Jf

1

y

/

^^

y^

y^

,^«>

^^

J

I

y

t

130
120

no

100

y

>

/I

/

/

/

/'

■■"•i.

y

/

y'

i.

.^

/-

y

/

y-

>

'/

90
80

//

/

90
80

/

/

/

f

>'

70

70

1890 '91 V '93 '94 '95 '96 '91, "98 '99 1900 'oi "02 '05 '04 '05 '06 '01 '08 '09 1910 'll

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  393

in  hand  or  in  checking  deposits  if  trade  had  remained  active.  In  Great  Britain
no  year  shows  a  decline;  but  the  rate  of  gain  is  slight  when  times  are  dull.
Returning  prosperity  at  first  stimulates  deposits ;  but  at  the  height  of  a  business
"boom"  the  British  saver  turns  to  investments  which  promise  a  higher  rate
of  interest  than  the  savings  banks  pay.  It  is  also  noticeable  that  the  decennial
average  of  growth  in  savings  deposits  was  much  lower  in  1900-09  than  in
1890-99.  For  once  the  French  figures  are  less  regular  than  the  American  and
British.  The  main  conclusion  which  they  suggest  is  that  some  factor  other
than  the  shifting  of  business  conditions  must  exercise  a  strong  influence  over
the  clients  of  the  savings  banks.  In  Germany,  as  in  Great  Britain,  every  year
shows  a  gain  upon  its  predecessor,  but  the  ratio  of  gain  varies,  declining  when
times  are  hard,  rising  when  times  improve,  and  then  shading  off  again  when
prosperity  reaches  its  apex.  The  one  exception  to  this  rule — the  rapid  gain  of
deposits  during  the  dull  years  1901  and  1902 — probably  results  from  a  trans-
ference of  funds  from  commercial  and  mortgage  to  savings  banks  after  confi-
dence in  the  solvency  of  the  former  had  been  shaken  by  the  fall  of  the  Leipziger
Bank,  the  Dresdener  Kreditanstalt,  and  four  mortgage  banks.


2.  Purchases  of  Bonds  and  of  Stocks

As  has  been  said,  there  is  certainly  more  or  less  speculation  in  bonds,  and
much  investment  in  stocks.''  Nevertheless,  the  sales  of  bonds  and  of  stocks
upon  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  may  be  taken  as  rough  gauges  respectively
of  the  fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  investment  and  of  speculation.  Since  the
figures  are  published  monthly,  it  is  feasible  to  present  them  not  only  by  years
but  also  by  periods  which  correspond  to  the  successive  phases  of  business
cycles.  The  use  of  par  values  makes  the  tables  reflect  changes  in  the  number
of  securities  sold,  rather  than  changes  in  the  pecuniary  volume  of  transactions.
Were  similar  figures  based  upon  market  values  available,  the  differences  shown
by  the  present  tables  between  the  fiuctuations  in  bond  and  stocks  sales  would
be  still  more  strongly  accentuated.  For  the  differences  between  the  fiuctuations
in  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  and  stocks  brought  out  in  Chapter  IV  run
roughly  parallel  with  the  differences  between  the  fluctuations  of  sales.

In  periods  of  severe  depression  investment  in  bonds  increases,  while  specu-
lation in  stocks  declines  or  rises  but  little  in  comparison  with  bond  sales.  When
business  begins  to  revive,  both  bond  and  stock  sales  increase,  but  bond  sales
at  a  much  faster  pace..  Before  prosperity  has  reached  its  culmination  bond
sales  decline,  while  stock  sales  containue  to  follow  an  ascending  saw-tooth  curve.
As  a  crisis  approaches  bond  sales  decline  rapidly,  while  stock  sales  decline

7  Speculation  in  bonds  has  been  increased  in  late  years  by  the  large  issues  of  income,  debenture,  and  con-
vertible bonds.  Compare  W.  Z.  Eipley,  "Kailway  Speculation,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February,
3911,  pp.  191,  192.


394


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  106

Par  Values  op  the  Eailway  and  Miscellaneous  Bonds  and  Stocks  Sold  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange

Bt  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars


Year
1890

Bonds
402

Stocks
6,612

1891

384

6,676

1892

486

7,670

1893

352

7,550

1894

340

4,822

1895

500

6,313

1896

363

5,111

1897

530

7,426

1898

889

10,833

1899

828

17,094

1900

569

13,372

1901

994

25,850

1902

880

17,789

1903

684

15,028

1904

1,015

17,394

1905

816

24,400

1906

606

24,843

1907

456

17,006

1908

999

17,694

1909

1,279

19,634

1910

592

14,730

1911

795

11,489

Averages
1890-99

507.4

8,010.7

1900-09

829.8

19,301.0

Relative  amounts

Av.  actual  amounts  in

1890-99  =  100

A

Bonds

Stocks

79

83

76

83

96

96

69

94

67

60

99

79

72

64

104

93

175

135

163

213

112

167

196

323

173

222

135

188

200

217

161

305

119

310

90

212

197

221

252

245

117

184

157

143

100

100

164

241

Ratio  of

bond  Bales

to  stock

sales
1:16.4

1:17.4

1:15.8

1:21.4

1:14.2

1:12.6

1:14.1

1:14.0

1:12.2

1:20.6

1:23.5

1:26.0

1:20.2

1:22.0

1:17.1

1:29.9

1:41.0

1:37.3

1:17.7

1:15.4

1:24.9

1:14.5

1:15.9
1:25.0


Data  compiled  from  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle  and  from  its  "Quotation  Supplement.'


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


395


396


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  107

AvEKAGE  Monthly  Par  Value  or  Railway  and  Miscellaneous  Bonds  and

Stock  Exchange  in  Seasons  op  Business  Prosperity,  Crisis,  and

Av.  actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

, A .

f  ^

Bonds  Stocks

January,  1890-July,  1890— Prosperity  39  531

August,  1890-December,  1890 — Minor  crisis  25  579

January,  1891-July,  1891 — Depression  25  460

August,  1891-August,  1892 — Prosperity  45  659

September,  1892-April,  1893 — Approach  of  crisis  34  708

May,  1893-October,  1893— Major  crisis  24  572

November,  1893-Marcli,  1895 — Severe  depression  28  409

April,  1895-September,  1895— Revival  52  600

October,  1895-June,  1896 — Renewed  depression  34  438

July,  1896-October,  1896 — Free-silver  campaign  23  458

November,  1896-June,  1897 — Depression  36  411

July,  1897-February,  1898— Revival  64  858

March,  1898-April,  1898 — Spanish  war  impending  39  775

May,  1898-September,  1899— Prosperity  77  1,209

October,  1899-Deeeniber,  1899— Minor  crisis  47  1,347

•January,  1900-September,  1900 — Slight  depression 38  874

October,  1900-Oetober,  1902— Prosperity  79  1,843

November,  1902-July,  1904 — "Rich  man's  panic"  .56  1,142

August,  1904-August,  1905— Revival  95  2,104

September,  1905-September,  1906 — Prosperity  53  2,166

October,  1906-September,  1907 — Approach  of  crisis  35  1,564

October,  1907-December,  1907 — Major  crisis  58  1,157

January,  1908-September,  1908 — Severe  depression  69  1,318

October,  1908-December,  1909— Revival  Ill  1,698

January,  1910-December,  1911 — Reaction  58  1,092


Stocks  Sold  on  the  New  York
Depression,  1890-1911


Av.  relative  amounts
Av.  actual  amounts
in  1890-99  =  100

Ratio  of

bond  sales

to  stock

sales

Bonds

Stocks

92

80

1:13.6

59

87

1:23.2

59

69

1:18.4

106

99

1:14.6

80

106

1:20.8

57

86

1:23.8

66

61

1:14.6

123

90

1:11.5

80

.66

1:12.9

54

69

1:19.9

85

62

1:11.4

151

129

1:13.4

92

116

1:19.9

182

181

1:15.7

111

202

1:28.7

90

131

1:23.0

187

276

1:23.3

132

171

1:20.4

225

315

1:22.1

125

324

1:40.9

83

234

1:44.7

137

173

1:19.9

163

197

1:19.1

262

254

1:15.3

137

164

1:18.8

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


397


42

LHART bS

Ratio of  Bond  Sales to Stock Sales
IN  New York.

1

\

40

\

1890  -  1911.

\

38

3G

1

36

34

ll

34

32

1

32

1

30

I

30

28

28

1

2G
24
22
20
18
16
14
12

1

26

/

24
22
20

/

f

\

1

1

j

/

\

/

\

1

\

1

Id

/

\

1

\

\

16
14

\

k

\

\

/

1

/

12

1890  '91 "92 '95 '94 '95 '9G '97 "98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '03 '04 '05 'OG '07 '08 '09 1910 'II

398  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

more  slowly  or  even  increase.  During  the  crisis  bond  sales  usually  shrink  to
a  small  volume;  but  in  1907  they  increased.  In  other  words,  investment  in
bonds  increases  under  depression  and  reaches  its  climax  early  in  the  following
period  of  returning  prosperity,  while  speculation  in  stocks  continues  to  expand
until  the  season  of  prosperity  has  reached  or  even  passed  its  culmination.
Hence  the  volume  of  investment  is  largest  in  comparison  -with  the  volume  of
speculation  when  a  prosperous  period  is  just  beginning,  and  smallest  when  a
crisis  is  approaching  or  is  even  at  hand.  Probably  the  present  data  minimize
rather  than  exaggerate  this  difference,  because  the  proportion  of  bonds  bought
by  investors  as  opposed  to  speculators  swells  in  periods  of  depression  and
shrinks  in  periods  of  prosperity.'


3.  Applications  for  Investment  Loans

Since  1871  the  Moniteur  des  interets  matSriels  of  Brussels  has  compiled  a
table  showing  the  "public  emissions"  of  each  year.  M.  de  Laveleye,  for  many
years  the  editor,  explained  in  1892  that  the  aim  of  his  efforts  was  to  ascertain
as  nearly  as  might  be  the  sum  of  money  really  invested  in  long-time  loans.
Stillborn  projects  were  rejected  and  loans  listed  on  more  than  one  market
were  counted  but  once.  All  the  available  sources  of  information  were  used;
but  of  course  the  bulk  of  small  privately  negotiated  loans  did  not  come  to  the
knowledge  of  the  compiler."  While  the  figures  cannot  be  regarded  as  complete,
they  are  made  on  a  uniform  plan,  and  provide  the  best  available  gauge  of  the
changes  from  one  year  to  the  next  in  the  volume  of  investment  loans  negotiated
in  Europe.  The  geographical  classification  is  based  on  the  country  applying
for  the  loan.  Hence,  while  the  totals  for  all  countries  show  fluctuations  in  the
sums  presumably  invested  by  Europeans,  the  figures  for  G-reat  Britain,  Prance,
and  Germany  show  fluctuations  in  the  amount  of  loans  which  their  governments
and  business  enterprises  sought  to  secure — not  the  sums  which  their  investors


8  Thp  volume  of  real-estate  transactions  is  currently  believed  to  be  an  excellent  gauge  of  speculative  activity.
But  I  know  of  no  systematic  record  of  this  character  except  that  compiled  since  1867  by  Messrs.  Thomas  Magee
&  Sons  of  San  Francisco,  and  published  in  their  San  Francisco  Meal  Estate  Circular.  The  fluctuations  are  large
in  volume  and  for  the  most  part  run  parallel  with  the  course  of  American  business  cycles.

Annual  Sales  op  Eeal  Estate  in  San  Francisco

1890 $36.5  millions 1901 $29.1  millions

1891 27.5  millions 1902 47.4  millions

1892 20.6  millions 1903 47.7  millions

1893 13.6  millions 1904 45.8  millions

1894 14.2  millions 1905 74.9  millions

1895 15.9  millions 1906 67.5  millions

1896 11.5  millions 1907 31.8  millions

1897 12.9  millions 1908 31.1  millions

1898 10.7  millions 1909 33.9  millions

1899 14.6  millions 1910 31.3  millions

1900 18.5  millions 1911 35.3  millions

My  attention  was  called  to  these  figures  by  Mr.  Edwin  A.  Fisher.

0  Compare  the  Bulletin  de  statistique  et  de  legislation  comparee,  vol.  46,  p.  84,  and  vol.  47,  p.  170.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


399


TABLE  108

Aggregate  Public  Applications  for  Investment  Loans,  According  to  the  Moniteur  des  interets  materiels

By  Years,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =

100

Governments,
states,  and
Year cities

1890 340

Credit
establish-
ments
118

Railways

and  industrial

companies

764

Conver-
sions

351

Total
1,572

Governments,

states,  and

cities

.75

Credit Railways
establish-  and  industrial  Conver-
ments companies sions

75 110 63

Total
84

1891

632

254

463

109

1,459

140

161

66

19

78

1892

177

13

277

17

484

39

8

40

3

26

1893

403

111

252

394

1,160

89

70

36

70

62

1894

566

65

368

2,440

3,439

125

41

53

436

184

1895

383

137

490

251

1,260

85

87

70

45

68

1896

725

149

888

1,465

3,227

160

94

127

262

173

1897

418

171

1,131

132

1,852

93

108

162

24

99

1898

394

272

1,051

317

2,035

87

172

151

57

109

1899

481

291

1,283

121

2,176

106

184

184

22

117

1900

926

271

1,092

2,290

205

171

157

123

1901

1,001

135

782

1,918

222

85

112

103

1902

1,146

153

659

1,640

3,598

254

97

95

293

193

1903

567

257

1,023

1,688

3,534

125

163

147

302

189

1904

1,113

259

1,060

353

2,785

246

164

152

63

149

1905

1,392

358

1,615

323

3,688

308

226

232

58

198

1906

1,185

445

1,504

1,992

5,126

262

281

216

356

275

1907

1,061

294

1,562

44

2,961

235

186

224

8

159

1908

1,398

265

2,365

64

4,092

309

168

339

11

219

1909

1,643

441

2,185

474

4,743

364

279

314

85

254

1910

1,746

523

2,152 •

688

5,109

386

331

309

123

274

1911

1,114

646

1,915

143

3,818

247

409

275

26

205

Averages
1890-99

451.9

158.1

696.7

359.7

1,866.4

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

1,143.2

287.8

1,384.7

657.8

3,473.5

253

182

199

118

186

Compiled  from  the  Bulletin  de  statistique  et  ie  legislation  comparee.


400


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 70

Relative:  Amounts  of  the  Publlc
Applications  for  Investment Loans.
1690 -  1910.
From,  the  tables of  the

MONITEUR DES Inte'reTS MaTERIELS


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  401


TABLE  109

British  Public  Applications  for  Investment  Loans,  According  to  the  Moniteur  des  interets  materiels

By  Years,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts  Relative  amounts

In  millions  of  dollars  Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100


Year
1890

Governments

states,  and

cities

69

Credit Railways
establish-  and  industrial  Conver-
ments companies sions

19 283

Total
372

Governments,

states,  and

cities

84

Credit
establish-
ments

128

Railways
and  industrial  Conver-
companies sions

94

Total
92

1891

69

14

196

279

84

95

65

69

1892

57

8

136

1

201

70

54

45

14

50

1893

99

81

2

183

121

27

29

45

1894

119

24

153

56

351

145

162

51

800

86

1895

89

14

214

9

326

109

95

71

129

80

1896

55

15

534

2

607

67

101

177

29

150

1897

105

6

552

664

128

41

183

164

1898

91

8

436

536

111

54

144

132

1899

66

40

434

540

81

270

144

133

1900

317

27

419

763

387

182

139

188

1901

476

9

240

725

581

61

79

179

1902

332

19

251

603

405

128

83

149

1903

230

35

198

464

281

236

66

114

1904

202

23

191

416

247

155

63

102

1905

208

37

298

543

254

250

99

134

1906

77

59

240

30

406

94

399

79

429

100

1907

150

57

277

484

183

385

92

119

1908

177

32

482

2

692

216

216

160

29

170

1909

250

36

323

609

305

243

107

150

1910

229

31

483

743

280

209

160

183

1911

91

64

271

426

111

432

90

105

Averag
1890-

;es

99 81.9

14.8

301.9

7.0

405.9

100

100

100

100

100

1900-'

09 241.9

33.4

291.9

3.2

570.5

295

226

97

46

141

402  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  110

French  Public  Applications  por  Investment  Loans,  According  to  the  Moniteur  des  interets  materiels

By  Years,  1890-1911


Act!
In  mil]

lal  amounts
lions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  —

100

Year
1890

Grovernments,

states,  and

cities

23

Credit Railways
establish-  and  industrial  Conver-
ments companies sions

4 40

Total
67

Governments, Credit
states,  and establish-
cities ments

62 18

Railways
and  industrial  Conver-
companies sions

59

Total
22

1891

168

77

59

305

455 352

86

99

1892

3

43

13

59

8

63

7

19

1893

8

41

3

52

22

60

2

17

1894

47

50

1,456

1,553

127

73

812

507

1895

1

54

78

46

179

3 247

114

26

58

1896

64

15

71

36

186

173 69

104

20

61

1897

3

4

70

83

159

8 18

102

46

52

1898

2

59

157

219

5

86

88

71

1899

50

65

172

287

136 297

252

94

1900

1

62

230

294

3 283

337

96

1901

53

8

189

251

144 37

277

82

1902

106

4

93

1,313

1,515

287 18

136

732

494

1903

16

63

58

138

43 288

85

45

1904

41

4

68

1

114

111 18

100

*

37

1905

34

20

109

163

92 91

160

53

1906

6

82

83

79

250

16 374

122

44

82

1907

47

16

154

217

127 73

225

71

1908

75

21

178

274

203 96

261

89

1909

33

122

178

333

89 557

261

109

1910

75

37

226

338

203 169

331

110

1911

17

41

199

257

46 187

291

84

Averages
1890-99

36.9

21.9

68.3

179.4

306.6

100 100

100

100

100

1900-09

41.2

40.2

134.0

139.3

354.9

112 184

196

78

116

*  Less  than  ^  per  cent.

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


403


TABLE  111


German  Public  Applications  foe  Investment  Loans,  Accoeding  to  the  Moniteur  des  interets  matiriels

By  Yeaes,  1890-1911


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars


Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-S


I  =  100


Governments,
states,  and
Year cities

Credit
establish-
ments

Railways
and  industrial  Conver-
companies sions

Total

Governments, Credit
states,  and establish-
cities ments

Railways
and  industrial  Oonver-
companies sions

1
Total

1890 98

74

51

10

233

113 111

45

8

59

1891 133

17

47

197

153 26

42

50

1892 103

3

10

116

118 5

9

29

1893 99

23

22

144

114 35

19

36

1894 66

24

25

75

190

76 36

22

58

48

1895 11

28

38

76

13 42

34

19

1896 44

76

163

1,208

1,491

51 114

144

932

377

1897 88

83

284

3

458

101 125

251

2

116

1898 83

216

266

565

96 325

235

143

1899 144

120

226

489

166 181

200

124

1900 101

93

188

382

116 140

166

96

1901 207

95

138

440

238 143

122

111

1902 229

105

79

413

264 158

70

104

1903 165

110

113

388

190 166

100

98

1904 121

159

129

409

139 239

114

103

1905 211

167

201

11

590

243 252

178

8

149

1906 265

150

223

638

305 226

197

161

1907 251

79

101

430

289 119

89

109

1908 407

137

183

726

468 206

162

183

1909 386

176

162

723

444 265

143

183

1910 243

167

168

578

280 252

148

146

1911 160

195

180

535

184 294

159

135

Averages

1890-99 86.9

66.4

113.2

129.6

395.9

100 100

100

100

100

1900-09 234.3

127.1

151.7

1.1

513.9

270 191

134

1

130

404


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart 7I.

Relative  Amounts of  the  Investment  Loans

Applied  for  by British  ,  French  ,  and  German

Railways  and Industrial  Companies.

1830  1910.


British Companies.

.— French Companies.

German  Companies.


320


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  405

provided.  The  data  for  the  United  States  are  too  incomplete  to  possess  much
significance,  particularly  in  the  earlier  years.  Indeed,  the  gradual  inclusion
of  an  increasing  proportion  of  the  loans  negotiated  in  America  is  probably
the  most  serious  defect  in  the  table  for  purposes  of  comparing  one  year  with
another.  But  this  defect  appears  only  in  the  figures  for  all  countries,  not  in .
the  figures  for  Great  Britain,  France,  and  Germany.  The  latter  figures,  how-
ever, as  well  as  the  totals,  are  affected  by  any  changes  which  take  place  in  the
proportions  of  investment  loans  which  are  publicly  advertised  and  privately
negotiated.  The  use  to  which  the  tables  may  be  safely  put  is  therefore  limited.
Nothing  beyond  rough  conclusions  as  to  the  general  trend  in  the  amount  and
in  the  character  of  the  successful  applications  for  investment  loans  can  be
drawn  with  confidence.

As  might  be  expected,  the  loans  applied  for  by  governments  show  but  a
slight  degree  of  coordination  with  business  cycles.  Municipalities  and  states
often  take  the  condition  of  the  money  market  into  account  when  determining
upon  the  feasibility  of  making  improvements  to  be  paid  for  by  the  sale  of
bonds,  and  so  also  may  national  governments  in  borrowing  to  finance  public
works.  But  even  local  governments  are  less  concerned  with  the  rate  of  interest
they  must  pay  than  are  business  enterprises,  and  national  goverimients  in
raising  money  for  wars  or  armaments  are  often  compelled  to  accept  whatever
terms  are  offered  at  the  moment  they  need  the  money.  Thus  the  exigencies
of  public  finance  are  often  a  "disturbing  factor"  in  the  business  situation,  not
only  in  the  countries  which  are  borrowing  but  also  in  the  countries  which  are
lending.  In  some  years  these  goverimaent  loans  are  greater  than  the  public
applications  for  long-time  business  loans;  for  example,  in  the  dull  years  1901
and  1902,  when  Great  Britain  was  adding  the  Boer  War  debt  to  heavy  bor-
rowings by  other  powers.  But  in  the  long  run,  the  sums  borrowed  by  govern-
ments are  much  less  than  the  sums  borrowed  by  business  enterprises.  The
real  disparity  is  probably  greater  than  the  present  table  indicates,  because  a
largei"  proportion  of  the  public  than  of  the  private  loans  is  publicly  advertised.

Investment  loans  to  business  enterprises,  on  the  other  hand,  show  a  close
coordination  with  business  cycles.  The  amount  falls  off  heavily  in  a  long  period
of  depression,  and  increases  rapidly  when  prosperity  returns.  But  the  figures
indicate  that  this  increase  does  not  continue  unabated  until  the  culmination  of
prosperity  is  attained.  If  the  actual  amount  of  the  business  loans  does  not
decline,  at  least  the  rate  of  increase  shrinks  from  large  to  small  proportions.
Difficulty  in  securing  the  ever-growing  amount  of  loan  capital  for  fixed  invest-
ment required  by  the  ever-growing  volume  of  business  characterizes  the  high
tide  of  prosperity.  The  first  year  or  two  of  depression,  on  the  contrary,  may
be  marked  by  very  heavy  loans  to  business  enterprises.  But  most  of  these
loans  represent  the  funding  of  floating  debts  incurred  in  the  later  stages  of
prosperity,  rather  than  the  extension  of  business  enterprises.


406  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

Roughly  speaking,  conversions  vary  inversely  as  loans  to  business  enter-
prises. They  are  undertaken  for  the  sake  of  reducing  interest  charges,  and
are  therefore  made  only  when  the  investment  market  is  ready  to  absorb  large
blocks  of  glit-edged  securities  bringing  in  a  low  return.  It  has  been  shown  in
Section  iii  of  Chapter  IV  that  interest  rates  are  low  when  business  is  depressed,
or  just  beginning  to  recover  from  depression.  Hence  the  great  bulk  of  the
conversions  entered  in  the  table  occur  in  1894-96  and  1902-03.  The  one  apparent
exception  occurs  in  1906.  Four-fifths  of  the  conversions  of  that  year,  however,
were  due  to  a  single  operation — the  refunding  of  a  large  Italian  loan,  which,
after  having  been  deferred  more  than  once  for  a  better  opportunity,  had  finally
to  be  carried  out  under  unfavorable  conditions.

Comment  on  the  figures  for  Great  Britain,  Prance,  and  Germany  is  unnec-
essary, because  what  has  been  said  of  the  general  table  applies  substantially
to  the  special  tables.  The  large  role  played  by  credit  companies  in  continental
as  compared  with  British  finance  may  be  pointed  out,  however.  The  fact  that
the  British  are  represented  as  borrowing  so  much  more  capital  than  the
Germans  or  the  French  is  due  largely  to  the  greater  extent  and  higher  devel-
opment of  British  colonies.  The  French,  it  may  be  added,  appear  to  be  less
embarrassed  than  the  other  nations  hj  scarcity  of  capital  at  the  height  of  a
prosperous  period.  This  conclusion,  suggested  by  the  figures,  is  fortified  by
our  knowledge  of  the  comparative  moderation  of  French  "booms,"  and  the
extraordinary  development  of  thrift  in  comparison  with  business  enterprise
as  economic  characteristics  of  the  people.

The  Economist's  estimates  of  the  annual  applications  for  capital  in  London,
summarized  in  the  next  table,  regularly  exceed  the  British  figures  taken  from
the  Moniteur  des  interets  materiels  by  many  millions.  But  these  differences
arise  chiefiy  from  the  fact  that  the  Economist  records  every  public  application
for  British  capital  from  whatever  land  it  comes,  while  the  Moniteur  classifies
as  British  only  the  applications  from  British  sources.

For  our  purposes  the  chief  value  of  these  figures  is  that  they  confirm
the  conclusions  based  upon  the  former  compilation.  Again,  government  loans
are  found  to  have  the  irregularity  which  results  from  the  exigencies  of  public
finance.  But  this  irregularity  does  not  altogether  hide  the  effort  of  local  and
perhaps  even  of  national  governments  to  place  their  loans  when  the  money
market  is  most  favorable  to  borrowers — that  is,  when  business  is  depressed,
or  just  beginning  to  revive.  Business  loans,  on  the  contrary,  rise  and  fall  with
the  expansion  and  contraction  of  activity.  The  high  rates  for  money  at  a  time
of  abounding  prosperity,  however,  cause  would-be  borrowers  to  defer  their
least  imperative  demands  for  fresh  capital  to  the  more  favorable  opportunities
afforded  by  the  first  year  of  the  succeeding  depression. It  is  interesting  to


MITCHELL;  BUSINESS  CYCLES


407


TABLE

112

1

Capital

Applications  in

London,

Accoeding

to  the

'Economist

By  Years,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100

Year
1890

Loans  to
central

and  local
govern-
ments

117

Loans

to

railv?ays

151

Loans
Loans to  other
to business
mining enter-
companies prises

33 393

Total
loans  to
business
enter-
prises

577

Grand

total

694

r
Loans  to

central
and  local

govern-
ments

69

Loans
Loans to
to mining
railways  companies

154 85

Loans
to  other
business
enter-
prises

151

Total
loans  to
business
enter-
prises
145

Grand
total

122

1891

219

78

16

196

290

509

128

79

41

75

73

90

1892

187

102

9

97

208

395

110

104

23

37

52

70

1893

119

59

6

55

120

239

70

60

16

21

30

42

1894

227

77

24

119

220

447

133

78

62

46

55

79

1895

180

83

72

174

329

509

106

84

186

67

83

90

1896

168

86

74

416

576

744

99

87

191

160

145

131

1897

158

85

62

461

608

766

93

86

160

177

153

135

1898

214

127

35

355

517

731

126

129

90

136

130

129

1899

116

135

56

341

532

648

68

137

145

131

134

114

1900

334

86

36

349

471

805

196

87

93

134

118

142

1901

492

90

22

172

284

776

289

92

57

66

71

137

1902

407

105

50

187

342

749

239

107

129

72

86

132

1903

281

70

13

164

247

528

165

71

34

63

62

93

1904

359

86

16

138

240

599

211

87

41

53

60

105

1905

376

205

46

187

438

814

221

209

119

72

110

143

1906

196

144

36

210

390

585

115

146

93

81

98

103

1907

218

145

14

224

383

601

128

148

36

86

96

106

1908

318

363

25

229

617

935

187

369

65

88

155

165

1909

376

206

39

266

511

887

221

210

101

102

128

156

1910

446

310

36

509

855

1,301

262

315

93

195

215

229

1911

217

337

41

338

716

933

127

343

106

130

180

164

Averages
1890-99

170.5

98.3

38.7

260.7

397.7

568.2

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

335.7

150.0

29.7

212.6

392.3

727.9

197

153

77

82

99

128

Compiled  from

the  London  Economist's  annual  "Commercial  History  and  Review."

408  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

notice  that  the  Economist  and  the  Moniteur  agree  in  making  the  British  loans
to  business  enterprises  slightly  smaller  in  the  second  than  in  the  first  decade
covered  by  the  tables.

The  best  American  substitute  for  the  European  statistics  which  have  just
been  discussed  is  afforded  by  the  amount  of  bonds  and  stocks  listed  each  year
on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange.  These  figures  afford  a  rough  gauge  of  the
new  opportunities  offered  for  investment  in  large  corporate  enterprises.

Most  significance  attaches  to  the  listings  of  new  securities.  The  new  stocks
put  on  the  market  respond  with  considerable  regularity  to  changes  in  business
conditions,  falling  when  business  is  depressed  and  rising  when  business  recovers,
but  not  attaining  large  proportions  until  prosperity  is  fully  established.  The
bond  listings,  on  the  contrary,  show  a  tendency  to  fall  comparatively  little  or
even  to  increase  heavily  when  business  is  dull,  and  to  decline  in  the  later  stages
of  prosperity.  This  contrast  between  the  amount  of  stocks  and  bonds  listed
agrees  with  the  contrast  brought  out  above  between  the  amount  of  the  stocks
and  bonds  sold  upon  the  same  market.

TABLE  113

Listings  of  Stocks  and  Bonds  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange

By  Yeaks,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars
Stocks  Bonds


Year

New
issues

Old  issues
newly
listed

Eeplaoing

old
securities

Total

New
issues

Old  issues
newly
listed

Replacing

old
securities

Total

1890

161

10

263

435

198

105

382

685

1891

97

2

91

189

191

16

80

288

1892

100

48

89

237

175

12

130

318

1893

94

49

56

198

139

42

107

289

1894

37

5

210

251

185

32

93

310

1895

77

35

31

143

167

16

75

257

1896

77

514

591

147

8

427

582

1897

53

24

425

503

88

16

254

357

1898

70

53

406

528

245

26

429

•700

1899

311

393

704

156

23

346

525

1900

297

130

194

621

148

6

290

444

1901

430

76

1,136

1,642

220

21

682

923

1902

251

11

522

784

198

3

333

534

1903

173

39

215

427

192

13

377

581

1904

121

55

176

430

105

535

1905

125

100

308

533

569

20

391

980

1906

237

16

409

663

303

12

256

572

1907

159

321

96

576

247

72

102

421

1908

124

249

141

514

649

96

128

873

1909

297

364

665

1,326

713

8

378

1,099

1910

305

467

468

1,240

572

52

185

808

1911

256

38

350

644

398

35

148

581

Avei'ages

1890-99

107.7

28.25

247.8

377.9

169.1

29.6

232.3

431.1

1900-09

221.4

145.1

374.1

726.2

366.9

27.9

304.2

696.2

Compiled  from  the  Financial  Review.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


409


CHART  72

f?ELATIVE AMOUNTS OF"

OF  STOCKS AND BON

UPON THE NEW YORK

IS9Q-19II r-

NEW ISSUES 1

33 LISTED ;|

EXCHANGE.  ,' ;

A  00

STOCKS

360

BONDS

1

360

320

320

1 ! i i

280

\_

1  I p 1

'  ' '' 1
>  ' ' 1

1  1 1 '

1-4- i Jl

280

^

'  1  '  1  '■

240

i  i

240

200
160

1 1

[ J

20O

1 t

( r

■ \

120

', 111

/■

SO

1 J

80
40

r

t

]9a'9r'9Z'«3'94'9S'96'97'9ll'93(iaiHte'O]94'0S'0S'07'06'O9'IO'll

410  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

TABLE  US— (Concluded)

Listings  op  Stocks  and  Bonds  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange
By  Years,  1890-1911
Eelative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100

Stocks  Bonds


Year

New
issues

Old  issues
newly
listed

Replacing

old
securities

Total

New
issues

Old  issues
newly-
listed

Replacing

old
securities

^
Total

1890

150

35

106

115

117

355

164

159

1891

90

1

37

50

113

54

34

67

1892

93

170

36

63

103

41

56

74

1893

87

173

23

52

82

142

46

67

1894

34

18

85

66

109

108

40

72

1895

71

124

13

38

99

54

32

60

1896

71

207

156

87

27

184

135

1897

49

85

172

133

52

54

109

83

1898

65

188

164

140

145

88

185

162

]899

289

159

186

92

78

149

122

1900

276

459

78

164

88

20

125

103

1901

399

269

458

435

130

71

294

214

1902

233

39

211

207

117

10

143

124

1903

161

138

87

113

114

44

162

135

1904

112

22

47

254

45

124

1905

116

353

124

141

336

68

168

227

1906

220

57

165

175

179

41

110

133

1907

148

1,134

39

152

146

243

44

98

1908

115

880

57

136

384

324

55

203

1909

276

1,288

268

351

422

27

163

255

3910

283

1,653

189

328

338

176

80

187

1911

238

135

141

170

235

118

64

135

Averages

] 890-99

]00

100

100

100

100

TOO

100

100

: 900-09

206

513

151

192

217

94

131

161

4.  The  Establishment  of  Joint-Stock  Companies

Another  piece  of  evidence  relating  to  investment,  enterprise,  and  specu-
lation— all  three  in  one — is  supplied  by  the  British,  French,  and  German
statistics  of  the  number  and  nominal  capital  of  the  joint-stock  companies
established.  These  data  obviously  include  enterprises  of  different  size  and
character  in  the  three  countries,  so  that  the  actual  figures  for  any  given  year
cannot  properly  be  compared  with  each  other."  But  in  each  country  the  changes
from  year  to  year  have  much  the  same  significance.

10  The  British  figures,  taken  from  the  Statistical  Abstract  of  the  United  Kingdom,  refer  to  companies  regis-
tered under  the  companies  act  of  1862.  Railways  and  municipal  tramways  are  excluded.  The  bulk  of  the
joint-stock  banks  and  the  majority  of  private  tramway  companies,  but  not  all  of  either  class,  are  included.
The  French  figures,  taken  from  the  Annuaire  Statistique,  include,  besides  joint-stock  companies  proper,  com-
panies "en  nom  coUectif  ou  en  commandite  simple."  The  German  figures  for  1890-1907  are  from  the  Deutsche
OeTconomist,  and  for  1908-11  from  the  Statistisches  JalirbucTc  fiir  das  Deutsche  Seirh.  They  include  " ATctienge-
sellschaften"  and  " Kommanditgesellschaften  auf  ATctien."


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


411


The  correlation  between  the  number  and  capital  of  the  new  "flotations"
on  the  one  hand  and  the  course  of  business  cycles  on  the  other  hand  is  most
marked  and  most  regular  in  Germany.  The  French  figures  plainly  show  the
influence  exercised  by  the  exposition  held  at  Paris  in  1900.  An  unusual  number
of  companies  with  extraordinarily  large  capitals  were  formed  both  to  prepare
for  the  fair  and  to  operate  concessions  connected  with  it.  Except  for  the  years
1898-1901  the  French  figures  follow  a  relatively  even  course.  The  British
figures  are  more  like  the  German,  the  chief  difference  being  that  the  scale  of
capitalization  in  the  second  decade  was  much  smaller  than  in  the  first.  More
stringent  legislation  respecting  the  obligations  of  promoters  and  underwriters


TABLE  114

[JMBEK  AND NOMINAL CAPITAL OF THE JOINT-StOCK COMPANIES  ESTABLISHED

IN  THE

United  Kingdom

:,  Fran

AND

Germany

E

!r  Years,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =:

100

'

Number

Nominal  capital^

'

Number

A

Nominal  capital

Year

United
Kingdom

France

•  United
Germany  Kingdom

France

Germany

'  United
Kingdom

France

United
Germany  Kingdom

France  <

Germany

1890

2,789

4,470

236

1,162

83

64

74

90

118

117

54

107

1891

2,686

4,713

160

654

103

21

71

95

80

66

68

35

1892

2,607

4,699

127

503

117

19

69

94

64

51

77

32

1893

2,617

4,586

95

470

63

18

69

92

48

47

41

30

1894

2,970

4,834

92

576

89

21

79

97

46

58

58

35

1895

3,892

4,800

161

1,126

96

60

103

96

81

113

63

100

1896

4,735

4,953

182

1,506

76

64

126

100

91

152

50

107

1897

5,229

5,206

254

1,417

104

91

139

105

127

143

68

152

1898

5,182

5,602

329

1,325

276

110

138

113

164

133

181

184

1899

4,975

5,912

364

1,197

516

130

132

119

182

120

339

217

1900

4,966

5,605

261

1,079

192

81

132

113

130

109

126

135

1901

3,433

5,485

158

705

244

38

91

110

79

71

160

64

1902

3,933

5,491

87

763

108

28

104

110

44

77

71

47

1903

4,075

5,689

84

614

68

71

108

114

42

62

45

119

1904

3,831

5,814

104

450

88

33

102

117

52

45

58

55

1905

4,358

6,034

192

580

125

92

116

121

96

58

82

154

1906

4,840

6,028

212

665

122

113

128

121

106

67

80

189

1907

5,265

6,842

212

671

209

60

140

138

106

68

137

100

1908

5,024

151

508

39

133

76

51

65

1909

6,373

179

689

55

169

90

69

92

1910

7,184

186

1,037

57

191

93

104

95

1911

6,444

169

766

56

171

85

77

94

Averages
1890-99

3,768.2

4,977.5

200.0

993.6

1.52.3

59.8

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

4,609.8

164.0

672.4

61.0

122

82

68

102

^  In  millions  of  dollars.

For  sources  and  limitations  of

data  see

note  on  preceding

page.

412


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


may  be  largely  responsible  for  this  falling  off  in  the  volume  of  nominal  capital.
At  all  events,  the  present  figures  agree  with  the  indications  afforded  by  the
tables  of  capital  applications  in  London  compiled  by  the  Economist  and  of
British  borrowings  compiled  by  the  Moniteur  des  interets  materiels.

The  next  table  derives  its  chief  interest  from  the  emphasis  laid  by  certain
German  writers  upon  the  peculiar  position  with  reference  to  business  cycles
held  by  industries  making  industrial  equipment.  Among  these  industries,  those
manufacturing  machinery  hold  perha]3s  the  first  place.  Accordingly,  if  the
activity  of  a  period  of  prosperity  is  really  most  marked  among  the  Betriebs-
mittelindustrien,  a  table  showing  the  number  and  capital  of  machine-building
companies  should  exhibit  the  influence  of  business  cycles  even  more  clearly
than  the  preceding  table  for  companies  of  all  kinds.  Werner 's  admirable  study
of  "Die  finanzielle  Brgebnisse  der  deutsehen  Masehinenbau-aktiengesellschaf-
ten'"'  provides  material  for  such  a  comparison.


TABLE  115

ITAL  OF  THE  JoINT-StOCK  COMPANIES  ESTABLISHED

IN  Germ

OP  Machinery

By  Yeaks,  1890-1907

Actual  amounts

Relative  ai
Av.  actual  a
in  1890-99

nounts

Number

Original
capital  in
thousands
of  dollars

iIUOUIllJS

=  100

Number

Original
capital

1890

8

2,694

79

■83

1891

6

1,919

59

59

1892

4

750

40

23

1893

2

309

20

9

1894

3

983

30

30

1895

8

2,404

79

74

1896

8

2,375

79

73

1897

16

4,297

158

132

1898

22

7,629

218

234

1899

24

9,288

238

284

1900

16

4,527

158

139

1901

5

1,195

50

37

1902

2

512

20

16

1903

7

5,310

69

163

1904

6

1,585

59

49

1905

5

1,457

50

45

1906

16

4,548

158

139

1907

5

1,571

50

48

Averages

1890-99

10.1

3,264.8

100

100

Ernst  Werner, "Die  finanzielle  Ergebnisse  der  deutsehen  Maschinenbau-Aktiengesellschaften,"  Thiinen-Archiv,  vol.  2,  p.  666.


11  Thunen-ArcMv,  vol.  2,  p.  666.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  413

The  number  of  the  companies  established  in  this  single  industry  within  any
one  year  is  too  small  to  possess  much  importance ;  but  significance  does  attach
to  the  data  for  the  capital.  A  comparison  between  the  relative  amounts  of  this
capital,  as  shown  in  Table  115,  and  the  relative  amounts  of  capital  for  all
the  German  joint-stock  companies,  as  shown  in  the  preceding  table,  indicates
that  the  machine-building  trades  really  are  more  subject  to  alternations  of
depression  and  prosperity  than  the  other  trades  exploited  by  joint-stock
companies.  This  evidence  may  fairly  be  quoted  in  favor  of  such  a  theory  of
business  cycles  as  that  propounded  by  Spiethoff.^'

No  American  records  corresponding  accura,tely  to  the  foregoing  statistics
of  joint-stock  companies  are  available.  But  Mr.  Luther  Conant,  Jr.,  has  pro-
vided a  cognate  table  covering  the  years  1887-1900  in  his  article  upon  ''Indus-
trial Consolidations  in  the  United  States.""  His  figures  exclude  companies
having  less  than  $1,000,000  of  capital,  and  all  companies  concerned  with  rail-
ways, street-car  systems,  gas,  electric  lighting,  etc.  The  capital  represented
is  the  amount  of  bonds  and  stocks  authorized  in  the  charters,  not  the  amount

TABLE  116

Number  and  Average  Capitalization  or  Industrial  Oombinations  Formed  in  the  United  States,  Together

With  the  Increase  in  the  Authorized  Capitalization  op  Such  Combinations

By  Years,  1887-1900


Actual  amounts

Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100

Year

Numter  of

combinations

formed

Increase  in Av.  capitalization
authorized of  newly  formed
capitalization combinations
Millions  of Millions  of
dollars dollars

Number  of

combinations

formed

Increase  in

authorized

capitalization

Average
capitalization

of  newly

formed

combinations

1887

8

216 27.0

47

54

137

1888

3

24 7.9

18

6

40

1889

12

152 12.7

71

38

65

1890

13

155 11.9

76

39

61

1891

17

166 9.1

100

42

46

1892

10

193 16.8

59

49

85

1893

6

239 39.6

35

60

202

1894

2

30 13.7

12

8

70

1895

6

107 17.5

35

27

89

1896

5

50 9.0

29

13

46

1897

4

81 20.3

24

20

103

1898

20

709 34.7

118

178

177

1899

87

2,244 23.9

512

565

122

1900

42

831 19.5

247

209

99

Averages
1890-99

17.0

397.4 19.65

100

100

100

Prom  Luther  Conant,  Jr.,  "Industrial  Consolidations  in  the  United  States,"  Quarterly  Publications  of  the  American  Statistical
Association,  vol.  7,  pp.  207-236,  March, 1901.

12  Compare  chapter  I,  ii,  7.

13  Quarterly  Publicatiom  of  the  American  Statistical  Association,  vol.  7,  pp.  207-236,  March,  1901.


414  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

issued.  Further,  increases  in  the  capital  of  the  combinations  previously  estab-
lished are  entered  in  each  year,  as  well  as  the  original  capital  of  the  newly
organized  companies.

Prior  to  1887,  Mr.  Conant  finds  only  six  industrial  consolidations  in  the
United  States,  with  an  aggregate  capitalization  of  $170,500,000.  Of  these  the
first  was  formed  in  1860,  the  next  two  in  1872,  and  one  each  in  1882,  1884,  and
1885.  The  large  scale  of  the  combinations  among  manufacturing  establishments
in  the  later  eighties  and  early  nineties  was  therefore  without  precedent.  The
temporary  check  in  1888  Mr.  Conant  ascribes  to  the  presidential  election  of
that  year.  The  crisis  of  1890  was  not  severe  enough  and  the  depression  of  1891
not  long  enough  to  administer  another  check.  But  the  crisis  of  1893  brought
the  movement  almost  to  a  standstill.  The  combinations  of  that  year  were
almost  almost  all  effected  before  the  panic  broke  out;  but  one  or  two  arrange-
ments which  had  reached  an  advanced  stage  were  carried  through  in  the  latter
part  of  1893  or  in  1894.  In  1895  six  good  sized  companies  were  launched  upon
the  wave  of  business  confidence  which  swept  over  the  country  after  President
Cleveland  had  made  his  bargain  for  the  protection  of  the  gold  reserve  with
the  Morgan-Belmont  syndicate.  But  when  business  slid  from  the  crest  of  this
wave  into  the  trough  of  depression  which  accompanied  the  Venezuela  episode
and  the  free-silver  campaign  the  movement  halted  once  more.  The  revival  of
1897  did  not  have  so  dramatic  an  influence  as  the  revival  of  1895 ;  but  the  move-
ment rapidly  increased  its  momentum  in  1898,  and  in  1899  "developed  into  a
craze  on  the  part  of  greedy  promoters  and  vendors  to  unload  properties  on
the  public  at  enormous  prices.  The  figures  for  1899  ..."  Mr.  Conant  con-
tinues, "do  not  fully  measure  the  proportions  of  industrial  consolidations  in
that  year.  In  addition  to  the  companies  shown,  other  projects  amounting
roughly  in  proposed  capitalization  to  over  one  billion  dollars  were  undertaken
and  carried  to  advanced  stages,  later,  however,  to  be  abandoned.  .  .  .  The
stock  market  was  so  overloaded  with  new  industrial  securities  in  1899  that
promoters  found  great  difficulty  in  the  latter  part  of  that  year  and  in  1900  in
inducing  either  bankers  or  the  public  to  take  up  new  flotations.  The  recurrence
of  another  presidential  election  may  also  be  .  .  .  cited  as  a  factor,  but  the  chief
influence  was  the  difficulty  in  securing  financial  assistance  for  such  schemes."

5.  The  Savings  and  Investments  Made  hy  Business  Enterprises  Out  of  Current

Income

Ordinarly,  discussions  of  savings  and  investment  deal  solely  with  the  saving
of  money  out  of  individual  incomes  and  the  investment  of  funds  by  natural
persons.  But  it  is  a  grave  mistake  to  overlook  the  large  sums  which  are  saved
out  of  current  profits  and  put  back  into  the  business  by  business  enterprises.
A  portion  of  the  gross  receipts  of  a  prosperous  firm  or  corporation  is  often


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


415


spent  upon  "betterments"  of  its  plant  or  equipment,  before  the  net  profits  are
computed.  And  out  of  these  net  profits  a  part  is  frequently  carried  to  surplus
account  and  invested  in  securities,  used  as  working  capital,  or  otherwise  dis-
posed of  for  the  benefit  of  the  enterprise.  In  so  far  as  an  enterprise  improves
its  physical  property  by  the  expenditure  "of  income,  or  accumulates  a  surplus,
the  amount  of  capital  it  needs  to  raise  by  borrowing  or  by  selling  new  issues
of  securities  is  proportionately  reduced.  Saving  and  investment  have  been
performed  directly  by  the  business  enterprise  itself.

The  statistics  available  upon  this  subject  are  so  meager  that  they  must  be
regarded  as  illustrations  of  the  practice  rather  than  as  measures  of  the  amounts
involved.  The  data  for  the  national  banks,  derived  from  the  Reports  of  the
Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  are  limited  to  an  exhibit  of  the  excess  of  net
earnings  over  dividends. There  is  such  an  excess  in  every  year  except  1894;


TABLE  117

Savings  Made  by  the  National  Banks  Out  of  Current  Income
By  Years  Beginning  March  1,  1890-1906,  and  by  Years  Ending  June  30,  1907-11


Years

beginning

March  1,

1890-1906,

and  ending

June  30,

1907-11

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1895

1896

1897

1898

1899

1900

1901

1902

1903

1904

1905
fl906
1 1907

1908

1909

1910

1911

Averages

1890-99

1900-09


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars


Relative  amounts
Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  :


:  100


Dividends
50.7

50.6

51.3

46.4

46.3

45.6

43.2

43.8

44.9

47.4

50.2

64.8

60.1

73.6

71.0

80.8
J120.1
|122.1

98.1

93.0
105.9
114.7

47.0
82.0


Net
earnings

77.0

70.0

68.4

52.4

45.6

48.6

48.6

45.6

49.3

70.0

87.7

99.1

102.7

116.5

105.2

113.7

^180.8

|185.7

132.3

131.2

154.2

157.0

57.6
122.8


Excess  of

net  earnings

(  +  )  or  of

dividends  ( — )

+26.3
+  19.4
+17.1
+  6.0


+  3.0
+  5.4
+  1.8
+  4.4
+22.6
+37.5
+34.3
+42.6
+42.9
+34.2
+32.9
+60.7
+63.6
+34.2
+38.2
+48.3
+42.3

+10.5
+40.9


Dividends
108

108

109

99

99

97

92

93

96
101
107
138
128
157
151
172
256
260
209
198
225
244

100
174


Excess  of
net  earnings
Net  (-l-)orof

earnings dividends  ( — )
+250


134

122

119

91

79

84

84

79

86

122

152

172

178

202

183

197

^314

1 322

230

228

268

273

100
213


+185
+163
+  57
—  7
+  29
+  51
+  17
+  42
+215
+357
+327
+406
+409
+326
+313
(+578
1+606
+326
+364
+460
+403

100
+390


Compiled  from  the  Report  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1911,  p.  324.
1906,  to  March  1, 1907,  and  June  30,  1906,  to  June  30, 1907.


The  figures  for  1906  and  1907  include  March


416  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

but  it  is  trifling  during  the  wliole  period  of  depression  in  the  middle  nineties,
rises  rapidly  after  1898  to  a  maximum  of  nearly  $43,000,000  in  1903,  then  falls
off  in  1904-05  by  about  25  per  cent,  rises  again  in  the  succeeding  period  of
prosperity  to  about  $64,000,000  in  1906-07,  declines  upwards  of  50  per  cent  in
1908,  and  finally  begins  to  recover  olice  more  in  1909-10.  For  the  banks,  at
least,  these  figures  are  representative.  They  indicate  that  the  savings  and
investments  of  this  class  of  business  enterprises  are  peculiarly  sensitive  to
changing  business  conditions.

The  railway  figures,  taken  from  the  Reports  on  the  Statistics  of  Railways
in  the  United  States  prepared  by  the  statistician  of  the  Interstate  Commerce
Commission,  are  more  complete,  in  that  they  show  not  only  the  surplus  or
deficit  of  annual  income  after  the  deduction  of  dividends  from  net  income,  but
also  the  sums  spent  upon  permanent  improvements  and  charged  to  the  income
account  before  the  net  income  is  computed."

The  latter  savings  and  investments  remained  small,  $5,000,000  or  less  each
year,  until  the  period  of  business  prosperity  in  the  later  nineties  was  well  under
way.  Then  they  increased  rapidly  to  thirty  or  forty  millions,  declined  some-
what in  the  "rich  man's  panic,"  and  rose  again  to  nearly  $50,000,000  in  1906.
The  difficulties  of  securing  adequate  funds  to  finance  growing  traffic  then
caused  the  railways  to  reduce  such  expenditures  in  1907,  a  reduction  which  the
dull  times  of  1908-09  carried  still  further.

The  annual  surpluses  or  deficits  of  the  railways  have  undergone  much
greater  changes,  both  absolutely  and  relatively,  than  the  corresponding  sums
in  the  accounts  of  the  national  banks.  In  the  fiscal  years  1894  and  1895  huge
deficits  resulted  from  the  bad  state  of  trade  and  the  effort  to  buoy  up  the  price
of  stocks  by  maintaining  dividends  whether  they  were  earned  or  not.  In  the
next  two  years,  1896  and  1897,  accounts  came  out  nearly  even.  But  when  the
return  of  prosperity  increased  earnings,  the  railways  pursued  a  rather  con-
servative dividend  policy  and  saved  large  sums  which  they  might  have  distrib-
uted among  stockholders.  For  more  than  a  decade  after  1898  these  savings
were  never  less  than  $44,000,000  a  year,  and  rose  with  fluctuations  which  reflect
closely  the  varying  fortunes  of  trade  to  a  maximum  of  $141,000,000  in  1907.
The  panic  of  that  year,  combined  with  heavy  dividend  disbursements,  reduced
the  surplus  to  a  trifling  sum  in  1907-08,  but  in  the  very  next  year  the  railways
resmned  their  former  policy  on  a  liberal  scale.


14  "Net  income"  in  the  following  table  is  net  income  from  operation  and  from  other  sources  as  computed
by  the  commission  up  to  1907  inclusive.  "Permanent  improvements  charged  to  income  account"  were  among
the  items  deducted  before  striking  net  income.  Hence  the  sums  saved  and  kept  in  the  business  each  year
include  both  these  improvements  and  the  surplus,  if  any.  Indeed,  in  1908-10  the  savings  were  larger  than  the
table  shows,  since  the  railways  made  "appropriations  to  reserves  and  miscellaneous  items"  out  of  net  cor-
porate income  amounting  respectively  to  22,  21,  and  5  million  dollars.  How  such  items  were  accounted  for
before  1908  is  not  clear.  The  "surplus  or  deficit"  in  the  table  is  found  by  subtracting  "total  dividends"  from
"net  income."

Since  the  commission  adopted  an  improved  form  of  income  account  in  1908,  it  has  been  necessary  to  rear-
range the  items  so  as  to  correspond  as  nearly  as  may  be  with  the  figures  for  1890-1907.  Both  operating  and
leased  roads  are  included.  In  computing  the  "surplus  or  deficit,"  dividends  declared  from  surplus,  as  well
as  dividends  declared  from  income,  are  deducted  from  the  net  corporate  income  of  the  current  year.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


417


TABLE  118

Investments  and  Savings  Made  by  the  Interstate  Eailways  Out  or  Cubbent  Income
By  Years  Ending  June  30,  1890-1910


Actual  amounts
In  millions  of  dollars

Relative  amounts

Average  actual  amounts  in

1890-99  —  100

Years
ending
June  30

Net
income

Permanent

improvements

charged

to  income

account

Surplus

(  +  )or

deficit  (— )

Permanent

improvements

charged

to  income

account

Surplus

(  +  )or

deficit  (— )

1890

102

5

+

12

91

+

185

1891

110

5

+

14

91

+

215

1892

116

4

+

14

73

+

215

1893

111

3

+

8

55

+

123

1894

56

4

—

46

73

—

708

1895

56

4

—

30

73

—

462

1896

90

5

+

2

91

+

31

1897

81

5

—

6

91

—

92

1898

140

7

+

44

127

+

677

1899

164

13

+

53

236

+

816

1900

227

26

+

88

473

+1,354

1901

242

32

+

85

582

+1,308

1902

280

35

+

95

636

+1,461

1903

296

42

+

99

764

+1,523

1904

279

39

+

57

709

+

877

1905

327

38

+

89

691

+1,369

1906

385

49

+112

891

+1,723

1907

449

39

+141

709

+2,169

1908

393

29

+

3

527

+

54

1909

395

25

+

74

455

+1,138

1910

523

58

+117

1,054

+1,295

Averages

1890-99

102.6

5.5

+

6.5

100

+

100

1900-09
Compiled  from  the  statistical


327.3  35.4  +  84.3  644  +1,295

reports  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission. See  note  on  preceding  page.


418  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Probably  the  sums  saved  and  invested  by  business  enterprises  in  the  United
States  vary  from  a  maximum  of  several  hundreds  of  millions  to  a  minus  quan-
tity during  the  periods  of  deepest  depression.  Thus  the  sums  involved  are
considerable,  even  when  compared  with  the  enormous  aggregates  of  individual
savings.  And  for  a  theory  of  business  cycles  they  derive  added  importance
from  their  peculiar  degree  of  dependence  upon  the  alternations  of  prosperity
and  depression.


6.  Investments  in  Railway  Construction  and  in  the  Erection  of  Buildings

The  subject  of  investment  may  be  approached  from  still  another  side — that
of  the  amount  of  work  done  or  sums  spent  in  extending  the  nation's  physical
equipment  for  industrial  or  personal  use.

Best  known  among  statistics  of  this  character  are  the  figures  for  railway
building.  Although  the  general  lines  of  the  American  system  had  been  laid
down  before  1890,  and  although  the  relative  importance  of  this  branch  of
construction  is  much  less  now  than  it  was  in  earlier  decades,  still  the  figures
possess  significance,  both  for  the  actual  amount  of  investment  which  they
represent  directly  and  indirectly  and  as  a  symptom  of  the  activity  in  other
fields.  The  most  trustworthy  data  for  the  present  purpose  are  the  Interstate
Commerce  Commission's  statements  of  the  total  length  of  line  operated  by  the
companies,  including  second,  third,  and  fourth  tracks,  as  well  as  yard  tracks
and  sidings.  The  differences  between  the  figures  for  successive  years  represent
roughly  the  new  construction  finished,  and  while  the  lines  formerly  built  which
pass  out  of  operation  within  any  given  time  reduce  the  amount  of  new  con-
struction indicated  by  the  figures  somewhat  below  the  truth,  this  item  is  not
large  enough  to  affect  the  conclusions  materially.  Another  objection  is  that
in  1908  the  mileage  of  switching  and  terminal  companies  was  segregated  and
excluded  for  the  first  time.  But  the  commission  has  stated  the  mileage  for
these  companies  separately  in  that  year,  and  constructed  its  data  for  1909  on
the  same  plan  as  the  revised  data  for  1908.  The  figures  for  the  increase  of
mileage  in  1909  are  therefore  comparable  with  the  figures  for  earlier  years,
save  that  the  small  amount  of  new  construction  by  switching  and  terminal
companies  is  not  included.

The  results,  given  in  Table  119,  show  that  construction  has  been  more
extensive  in  good  than  in  bad  times.  But  it  also  appears  that  a  year  or  two
is  required  for  a  change  in  the  business  situation  to  exercise  its  full  influence
upon  railway  building.  When  plans  for  an  extension  of  tracks  have  been
matured,  the  work  is  likely  to  be  carried  out,  even  though  a  crisis  intervenes.
On  the  other  hand,  a  railway  may  plan  extensions  when  the  first  signs  of
returning  prosperity  appear  upon  the  business  horizon;  but  time  is  required
to  execute  the  work  so  that  the  new  tracks  can  be  operated. Further,  the  table


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


419


TABLE  119

Increase  in  the  Total  Length  of  Line  Opekatbd  by  the  Interstate  Railways  of  the  United  States,

Including  Single  Track,  Second,  Third,  and  Fourth  Tracks  and  Yard  Tracks  and  Sidings

By  Years  Ending  June  30,  1890-1910

Annual  increase  in  mileage


Years
ending
June  30

1890

1891

1892

1893

1894

1895

1896

1897

1898

1899

1900

1901

1902

1903

1904

1905

1906

1907

1908

1908

1909

1910

Averages

1890-99


Hundreds

of  miles

of  line

operated

1,999

2,074
2,111
2,219
2,298
2,333
2,391
2,420
2,453
2,501
2,588
2,654
2,742
2,838
2,971
3,068
3,171
3,280
3,378'
3,336"
3,424^
3,518"


Actual Relative  amts.
amounts  in Av.  actual
hundreds  of amounts  in
miles 1891-99  =  100


75
37

108
79
35
58
29
33
48
87
66
88
96

133
97

103

109


94


134

66

194

142

63

104

52

59

86

156

118

158

172

238

174

185

195

176


158
168


2,279.9 55.8 100

1900-09 3,011.4 96.5 173

From  the  Reports  of  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission  on  the  Statistics  of  Railways  in  the  United  States.
^  Mileage  of  switching  and  terminal  companies  included.
2  Mileage  of  switching  and  terminal  companies  excluded.


shows  that  the  extension  of  the  railway  network  has  not  stopped  altogeher
even  in  he  midst  of  the  most  serious  depression.  The  smallest  net  gain  in  any
year  of  the  whole  period  was  nearly  3,000  miles  of  track.

Another  bit  of  evidence  is  afforded  by  the  figures  showing  the  cost  of  the
buildings  erected  in  forty-five  American  cities,  as  reported  by  the  United  States
Geological  Survey  for  the  years  1902-11.^''

15  The  forty-five  American  cities  included  in  the  report  of  building  operations  are  as  follows :  Allegheny
(united  with  Pittsburgh,  Pa.,  February  1,  1908);  Atlanta,  Ga.;  Boston,  Mass.;  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.;  Buffalo,  N.  Y.;
Cambridge,  Mass. ;  Chicago,  HI. ;  Cincinnati,  O. ;  Cleveland,  0. ;  Columbus,  O. ;  Dayton,  O. ;  Denver,  Colo. ;  Detroit,
Mich.;  Fall  Eiver,  Mass.;  Grand  Rapids,  Mich.;  Hartford,  Conn.;  Indianapolis,  Ind.;  Jersey  City,  N.  J.;
Kansas  City,  Mo.;  Los  Angeles,  Cal. ;  Louisville,  Ky.;  Memphis,  Tenn. ;  Milwaukee,  Wis.;  Minneapolis,  Minn.;
Nashville,  Tenn.;  Newark,  N.  J.;  New  Haven,  Conn.;  New  Orleans,  La.;  New  York,  N.  Y.  (data  for  the
boroughs  of  Manhattan  and  Bronx  only);  Omaha,  Neb.;  Philadelphia,  Pa.;  Pittsburgh,  Pa.;  Providence,  R.  I.;
Reading,  Pa.;  Richmond,  Va.;  Rochester,  N.  Y.;  St.  Joseph,  Mo.;  St.  Louis,  Mo.;  St.  Paul,  Minn.;  San  Fran-
cisco, Cal.;  Scranton,  Pa,;  Seattle,  Wash.;  Syracuse,  N,  Y,;  Washington,  D,  C;  WoTcesterj  Mass,


420


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


Chart  73-

240

Relative  Amounts  of  New  Railway  Mileage:

Operated in the United States  .

1891 - 1910.

220

1

'

220

200
180
160

200
\&0
f60

1

/

/

\

1

/

\

/

j

f

140

1

\

140

120

1

\

I

120

100

\j

h

100

80
60

1

/

80

/

1

/

GO

1891 '92 '93 '94  'SS '9G ^^^ '98 '99 1900  'oi '02 '03 '04 '05 '06 '01 '08 '09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  421


TABLE  120

Cost  op  Buildings  tor  "Which  Permits  Were  Granted  in  45  American  Cities

By  Years,  1902-1911

1902 $368,000,000

1903 397,000,000

1904 460,000,000

1905 623,000,000

1906 657,000,000

1907 612,000,000

1908 535,000,000

1909 733,000,000

19]  0 675,000,000

1911 658,000,000


Like  the  data  for  railw.ay  mileage,  these  figures  indicate  that  new  construc-
tion never  ceases,  but  that  it  is  decisively  stimulated  by  prosperity  and  retarded
by  depression.  This  retardation  is  felt,  indeed,  before  the  depression  conies,
if  the  later  stages  of  prosperity  are  marked  by  difficulty  in  raising  capital.


CHAPTER  IX


PROFITS  AND  BANKRUPTCIES


I.  Profits

Statistics  both  trustworthy  and  significant  concerning  profits  are  scarce.
Most  business  enterprises  not  oi'ganized  as  joint-stock  companies,  and  many
which  are  so  organized,  seek  to  keep  their  profits  from  becoming  public.  Such
accounts  as  are  published  are  difficult  to  use  because  of  the  many  different
methods  of  reckoning  profits.  It  is  only  after  expert  scrutiny  that  the  pub-
lished statements  can  be  accepted,  and  the  chief  result  of  such  scrutiny  is  often
the  discovery  that  information  of  crucial  importance  for  determining  the  actual
rate  of  profits  has  been  skilfully  withheld.  When  the  details  are  furnished,
it  is  difficult  to  find  a  workable  definition  of  profits  uniformly  applicable  to  all
industries.  Further,  it  is  only  by  collecting  figures  made  by  uniform  methods
for  a  considerable  number  of  enterprises  that  representative  results  can  be
attained.  The  profits  of  a  single  enterprise  can  no  more  be  accepted  as  an
index  of  prevailing  conditions  than  the  price  of  pig-iron  can  be  accepted  as
an  index  of  fluctuations  in  the  general  level  of  prices.

For  the  United  States  at  least,  these  considerations  practically  restrict  the
available  material  covering  the  years  1890-1911  to  industries  in  which  the
different  enterprises  are  legally  compelled  to  keep  their  accounts  in  a  standard
form,  and  to  report  the  results  to  some  official  who  publishes  a  digest  of  the
whole.  Much  of  the  most  important  body  of  such  data  is  that  contained  in
the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission's  Annual  Reports  on  the  Statistics  of
Raihvays  in  the  United  States.


1.  American  Railways

The  leading  items  in  the  income  accounts  of  all  the  interstate  railways,
considered  as  a  single  system,  are  presented  in  the  following  table.'^  The  gross
earnings  from  operation  have  been  affected  by  every  passing  phase  of the


I  In  compiling  the  figures  from  the  annual  reports  it  has  been  necessary  to  follow  the  form  of  income  account
used  until  1907,  inclusive,  although  the  new  form,  introduced  in  1908,  is  more  logical  in  certain  respects.  The
meaning  of  the  most  important  headings  is  sufficiently  indicated  by  the  following  schedule  of  items  included
under  each.  As  a  rough  gauge  of  the  relative  importance  of  each  item,  its  aggregate  amount  in  the  year
ending  June  30,  1907,  is  given  in  millions  of  dollars.

[422]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  423

business  cycles  which  have  occurred  since  1890.  The  activity  of  general  busi-
ness from  the  middle  of  1889  to  the  middle  of  1893,  barring  the  first  seven
months  of  1891,  caused  a  moderate  increase  in  traffic  receipts.  Then  the  indus-
trial depression  brought  an  abrupt  loss  of  about  12  per  cent  of  the  total;  the
year  1894-95  made  but  a  slight  improvement;  and  the  short-lived  revival  of
trade  in  1895,  vs^hich  swelled  the  earnings  of  1895-96,  was  succeeded  by  renewed
depression,  which  caused  another  decline  in  railway  earnings.  The  definite
turn  of  the  tide  came  for  the  railways,  as  for  other  lines  of  business,  in  the
summer  of  1897 — that  is,  at  the  beginning  of  the  fiscal  year  1898.  Thereafter
gross  earnings  increased  each  year  until  the  next  major  crisis  came  in  1907;
for  the  depression  of  1903-04  did  no  more  than  to  reduce  the  rate  of  gain.  But
the  depression  which  followed  the  panic  of  1907  caused  a  decline  of  revenue
reaching  $149,000,000 — absolutely  more,  but  relatively  much  less  than  the
decline  in  1893-94.  Thus  the  dependence  of  railway  earnings  upon  the  pros-
perity of  business  enterprises  in  other  industries  is  patent.

Operating  expenses,  which  include  the  upkeep  of  the  right  of  way-  and
rolling  stock  as  well  as  the  cost  of  moving  trains,  follow  the  fiuctuations  of
gi'oss  earnings  very  closely.  The  slight  divergencies  indicate  that  railway
managers  find  difficulty  in  curtailing  expenses  immediately  when  traffic  falls
off.  But  once  their  new  plans  are  laid  they  may  be  able  to  prune  expenses
even  in  the  face  of  slightly  increasing  traffic,  or  at  least  to  prevent  expenses
from  growing  at  the  same  pace  as  traffic.  There  are  also  indications  that
toward  the  culmination  of  a  period  of  high  prosperity  the  increasing  prices  of
labor  and  supplies  may  make  their  expenses  grow  a  trifie  faster  than  their

Amount  in
1907

Gross  earnings  from  operation  $2,589  millions

Passenger  revenue  565

Mail 50

Express 57

Freight 1,824

Miscellaneous 93

Operating  expenses  1,749

Maintenance  of  way  344

Maintenance  of  equipment  368

Conducting  transportation  971

General  expenses  65

Income  from  other  sources  287

Lease  of  road  125

Stocks  89

Bonds  24

Miscellaneous ^^

Fixed  charges 678

Interest  on  funded  debt  344

Rents  paid  for  lease  of  road  129

Taxes  ^JJ

Investments  charged  to  income  39

Miscellaneous ^6


424


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


receipts.  But  over  a  considerable  period  of  time  it  seems  feasible  to  keep  the
cost  of  operating  railways  in  close  adjustment  to  the  earnings  of  operation.

Owing  to  this  close  adjustment,  net  earnings  from  operations  agree  rather
closelj'  with  gross  earnings.  Net  earnings  fall  a  trifle  more  than  gross  earnings
in  periods  of  depression,  rise  a  trifle  faster  in  the  earlier  stages  of  prosperity,
and  a  trifle  slower  than  gross  earnings  when  prosperity  approaches  its  climax.
These  deviations  result,  of  course,  from  the  slight  deviations  which  have  been
pointed  out  between  the  fluctuations  of  gross  earnings  and  operating  expenses.

To  ascertain  the  total  income  of  the  railways,  the  income  from  other  sources
must  be  added  to  the  net  income  from  operation.  This  additional  income  shows
exactly  the  same  gain  in  decennial  averages  as  the  items  which  have  been  dis-
cussed. But  from  one  year  to  the  next  it  pursues  a  decidedly  diiferent  course,
responding  to  changed  business  conditions  much  more  slowly  than  does  net
income  from  operations.  The  cause  of  this  tardy  response  becomes  clear  when
it  is  noted  that  the  chief  items  of  "income  from  other  sources"  are  rents  for


TABLE 121

Condensed  Income  Account  toe  the  Intee-State  Bailways  of  the  United  States

By  Yeaks  Ending  June  30,  1890-1910

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars


Years

ending

June

30

1890

Gross
earnings

from
operation

1,052

Operating

expenses

692

Net

income

from

operation

360

Income
from
other

sources

127

Total
income

487

Fixed
charges

385

Net

income

102

Dividends
90

Surplus

(  +  )or

deficit

(— )

+ 12

1891

1,097

732

365

134

499

389

110

96

+ 14

1892

1,171

781

390

142

532

416

116

102

+ 14

1893

1,221

828

393

150

542

431

111

103

+ 8

1894

1,073

731

342

143

485

429

56

102

—  46

1895

1,075

726

350

132

482

426

56

86

—  30

1896

1,150

773

377

129

506

417

90

88

+ 2

1897

1,122

753

370

125

495

413

81

87

— 6

1898

1,247

818

429

138

568

427

140

96

+  44

1899

1,314

857

457

149

605

441

164

111

+  53

1900

1,487

961

526

163

689

461

227

140

+  88

1901

1,589

1,030

558

180

738

496

242

157

+  85

1902

1,726

1,116

610

196

806

526

280

185

+  95

1903

1,901

1,258

643

206

849

553

296

197

+  99

1904

1,975

1,339

636

213

849

570

279

222

+  57

1905

2,082

1,391

692

232

924

597

327

238

+  89

1906

2,326

1,537

789

257

1,046

660

385

273

+112

1907

2,589

1,749

841

287

1,127

678

449

308

+141

1908

2,440

1,710

730

391

1,121

728

393

391

+ 3

1909

2,473

1,650

823

319

1,142

747

395

321

+  74

1910

2,812

1,882

930

387

1,317

794

523

406

+117

Per ages :
1890-99

1,152.2

769.1

383.3

136.9

520.1

417.4

102.6

96.1

+ 6.5

1900-09

2,058.8

1,374.1

684.8

244.4

929.1

601.6

327.3

243.2

+  84.3

Compiled  froin  the  Interstate  Commerce  Commission's  Reports  on  the  Statistics  of  Railways  in  the  United  States.  In  1908
the  Commission  adopted  a  new  form  of  income  accounts.  The  above  figures  for  1908  to  1910  were  obtained  by  rearranging  the
various  items  for  both  operating  and  leased  roads  so  as  to  conform  as  nearly  as  possible  to  the  tables  for  1890-1907


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


425


TABLE  121— (Concluded)

Condensed  Income  Account  for  the  Inter-State  Railways  of  the  United  States

Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99=100


Tears

ending

June

30

1890

Gross
earnings

from

operation

91

Operating

expenses

90

Net

income

from

operation

94

Income
from
other

sources

93.

Total

income

94

Fixed

charges

92

Net

income

99

Dividends
94

Surplus

(  +  )  or

deficit

(— )

+ 185

1891

95

95

95

98

96

93

107

100

+ 215

1892

102

102

102

104

102

100

113

106

+ 215

1893

106

108

103

110

104

103

108

107

+ 123

1894

93

95

89

104

93

103

55

106

— 708

1895

93

94

91

96

93

102

55

89

— 462

1896

100

101

98

94

97

100

88

92

+ 31

1897

97

98

97

91

95

99

79

91

— 92

1898

108

106

112

101

109

102

136

100

+ 677

1899

114

111

119

109

116

106

160

115

+ 816

1900

129

125

137

119

132

110

221

146

+1,354

1901

138

134

146

131

142

119

236

163

+1,308

1902

150

145

159

143

155

126

273

193

+1,461

1903

165

164

168

150

163

132

289

205

+1,523

1904

171

174

166

156

163

137

272

231

+ 877

1905

181

181

181

169

178

143

319

248

+1,369

1906

202

200

206

188

201

158

375

284

+1,723

1907

225

227

219

210

217

162

438

320

+2,169

1908

212

222

190

286

216

174

383

407

+ 54

1909

215

215

215

233

220

179

385

334

+1,138

1910

244

245

243

283

253

190

510

422

+1,800

Averages :

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

+ 100

1900-09

179

179

179

179

179

144

319

253

+1,295

the  use  of  leased  lines,  interest  upon  bonds  and  dividends  upon  stocks  owned
by  the  railway  corporations.  The  amount  of  the  first  and  second  items  is
usually  determined  by  contracts  running  for  several  or  for  many  years,  so
that  the  receipts  are  not  diminished  promptly  by  business  depression,  unless
the  debtor  companies  are  forced  to  compromise  with  their  creditors,  or  become
bankrupt.  Even  dividends,  as  a  later  column  shows,  are  not  promptly  reduced
to  the  same  extent  as  traffic  earnings  when  business  becomes  dull,  or  increased
so  rapidly  when  business  revives.

Because  of  the  steadiness  of  this  "income  from  other  sources,"  the  total
income  of  railways  follows  the  course  of  business  cycles  less  closely  than  does
net  income  from  operation.  Since  the  former  income  averages  rather  more
than  one-third  of  the  latter,  the  influence  of  this  factor  in  steadying  total  income
is  considerable.  Indeed,  the  large  increase  in  income  from  other  sources,  due
almost  wholly  to  bigger  dividends  upon  stocks,  almost  offsets  the  loss  of  earnings
from  operation  in  1907-08.


426


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart  74.

Income  ,  Fixed  Charges  , Dividends  .  and Surplus

i

1300

OR DEFICIT OF THE INTERSTATE RAILWAYS

/

OF  THE  United  5tate3.

/

(200

1890 -  1910.

/

Total  Income..

/

—

^^

1100

/

Fl  XEID CHABGE.9  •

J

/

Net IhJcoME.

/

1000

DlV\OENDS.

/

/

900

soo

/

/

900

/

/

600

/

/

100

/

/

/

,^

r

700

/

r

/

/

'

/

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

/

f

600
500
400
300
200
100
0

y

\

/

/

y^

yy

-'

1

^

\

. ^_

^'

.--

-■

X

^

1

/
/

\
\

1

i

/

A  /

s
\

/

/
/

/

,^-

y'  1

1 1

/

*

/

^^^

.-'

'"

......

.•

\

*^'*.

•••••"

.■-

.—- •

••^

1

#

'•..

.--••

••''

100

1

100

1890 '91 '31 '93 94 '95 '9e 'Sl '98 '99 1900  'Ol '02 '03 '04 '05 'OS 'O? '08 "09 1910

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  427

From  the  total  income  it  is  next  necessary  to  deduct  the  fixed  charges,
among  which  payments  for  interest  on  funded  and  floating  debt  and  for  the
use  of  leased  lines  make  up  between  two-thirds  and  three-fourths  of  the  total.
Of  course  such  items  are  far  more  constant  in  amount  than  are  the  operating
expenses.  How  difficult  it  is  to  retrench  fixed  charges  was  shown  after  the
panic  of  1893,  Despite  their  desperate  straits  and  their  numerous  bankrupt-
cies, the  interstate  railways  were  able  to  reduced  fixed  charges  less  than  one-
half  per  cent  between  1892-93  and  1893-94.  After  the  panic  of  1907,  these
charges  even  increased  in  the  face  of  declining  traffic.  On  the  other  hand,
fixed  charges  grow  less  rapidly  than  receipts  when  business  is  brisk,  and  may
even  be  reduced  by  careful  management  in  the  face  of  slowly  recuperating
business  as  in  1894-97.

The  deduction  of  these  relatively  stable  amoimts  from  the  total  income  has
the  effect  of  making  net  income  far  more  variable  than  any  of  its  component
elements.  That  is,  prosperity  and  depression  raise  and  reduce  profits  propor-
tionately far  more  than  they  raise  and  reduce  gross  earnings  or  operating
expenses.

The  income  of  stockholders  from  railway  shares,  however,  has  been  kept
more  stable  than  the  profits  of  the  railways.  So  anxious  have  been  the  financial
managers  of  the  companies  to  keep  up  dividends,  that  they  have  been  ready
to  incur  heavy  deficits  in  current  income  by  paying  out  more  in  dividends  than
they  have  received  in  profits.  When  prosperity  has  returned,  they  have  pur-
sued the  opposite  policy  of  paying  dividends  substantially  less  than  the  current
profits,  thereby  accumulating  handsome  surpluses  to  increase  the  future  earning
capacity  of  the  properties.


2.  The  National  Banks

The  data  published  by  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency  concerning  the
profits  made  by  the  national  banks  are  much  less  detailed  than  the  Interstate
Commerce  Commission's  data  concerning  railway  profits.  But  the  former
possess  one  advantage.  Unlike  the  railway  figures,  they  can  be  computed  with
confidence  in  the  form  of  percentages  of  the  capital  and  surplus  employed.
These  percentages  are  not  averages  obtained  by  adding  the  percentages  for  the
separate  banks,  and  dividing  by  their  numbers ;  but  the  quotients  obtained  by
dividing  the  total  earnings  and  dividends  by  the  total  capital  and  surplus  of
all  the  national  banks.

While  railway  profits  were  rather  more  than  holding  their  own  in  1890-93,
bank  profits  were  distinctly  declining,  at  a  slow  pace.  The  panic  did  not  at
once  cause  a  heavy  loss  of  earnings ;  but  its  sequel  was  more  serious.  In  the
half-year  September  1,  1893,  to  March  1,  1894,  the  losses  on  account  of  bad


428


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE 122


Abstract  of  Eeports  op  Earnings  and  Dividends  of  the  National  Banks

By  Half  Years,  1890-1911

Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars

Charged  off


Capital

Losses

Expenses

and

Gross

and

and

Net

surplus

earnings

premiums

taxes

earnings

Dividends

Sep.  1, 1889-Mar.  1, 1890

820

70.4

9.8

25.4

35.2

26.2

Mar.  1, 1890-Sep.  1,1890

847

74.2

11.5

25.8

36.8

24.9

Sep.  1, 1890-Mar.  1, 1891

872

76.1

8.8

27.2

40.1

25.8

Mar.  1, 1891-Sep.  1, 1891

894

75.2

11.8

27.9

35.6

25.0

Sep.  1, 1891-Mar.  1, 1892

910

75.1

11.8

29.0

34.4

25.5

Mar.  1, 1892-Sep.  1,1892

917

73.4

11.4

29.7

32.3

24.9

Sep.  1, 1892-Mar.  1, 1893

933

76.9

10.3

30.4

36.1

26.5

Mar.  1, 1893-Sep.  1, 1893

930

74.8

11.7

30.5

32.7

23.2

Sep.  1, 1893-Mar.  1, 1894

928

71.5

21.5

30.2

19.8

23.2

Mar.  1, 1894^Sep.  1, 1894

910

68.2

16.5

29.5

22.2

22.1

Sep.  1, 1894-Mar.  1, 1895

911

68.0

14.4

30.2

23.4

24.2

Mar.  1, 1895-Sep.  1,1895

905

67.5

14.2

29.8

23.5

21.8

Sep.  1, 1895-Mar.  1, 1896

903

70.9

15.4

30.4

25.1

23.7

Mar.  1, 1896-Sep.  1,1896

899

71.6

16.3

30.6

24.7

21.8

Sep.  1, 1896-Mar.  1, 1897

895

69.3

14.5

30.9

23.9

21.4

Mar.  1, 1897-Sep.  1,1897

880

68.4

17.8

30.3

20.3

21.0

Sep.  1, 1897-Mar.  1, 1898

874

71.7

15.3

31.2

25.2

22.8

Mar.  1, 1898-Sep.  1,1898

846

71.7

15.9

31.0

24.8

21.4

Sep.  1, 1898-Mar.  1, 1899

864

75.3

16.5

34.4

24.5

23.5

Mar.  1, 1899-Sep.  1,1899

850

81.2

17.2

34.1

29.8

23.2

Sep.  1, 1899-Mar.  1, 1900

858

89.6

13.3

36.1

40.2

24.2

Mar.  1, 1900-Sep.  1,1900

863

104.1

20.3

36.6

47.1

23.8

Sep.  1, 1900-Mar.  1, 1901

897

93.8

14.5

38.8

40.5

26.4

Mar.  1, 1901-Sep.  1, 1901

910

94.4

14.2

38.9

41.3

25.3

Sep.  1, 1901-Mar.  1, 1902

980

115.4

15.1

42.5

57.8

39.5

Mar.  1, 1902-Sep.  1,1902

973

105.9

14.4

42.7

48.8

28.7

Sep.  1, 1902-Mar.  1, 1903

1,054

114.8

15.7

45.1

54.0

31.4

Mar.  1, 1903-Sep.  1,1903

1,098

119.8

15.8

48.0

55.9

32.1

Sep.  1,1903-Mar.  1,1904

1,140

128.1

17.1

50.4

60.6

41.5

Mar.  1, 1904^Sep.  1,1904

1,164

121.3

16.3

52.6

52.4

34.1

Sep.  1, 1904^Mar.  1, 1905

1,177

122.5

14.4

55.3

.52.8

36.9

Mar.  1, 1905-Sep.  1, 1905

1,191

126.1

16.0

56.9

53.1

36.2

Sep.  1, 1905-Mar.  1, 1906

1,198

133.7

15.2

57.9

60.6

44.6

Mar.  1, 1906-Sep.  1, 1906

1,286

145.6

16.1

62.6

67.0

44.6

Sep.  1, 1906-Jan.  1,1907

1,323

152.1

15.0

61.7

75.4

51.3

Jan.  ],1907-July  ],1907

1,407

162.6

15.9

69.9

76.9

48.4

July  1, 1907-Jan.  1, 1908

1,425

163.7

25.3

73.3

65.1

43.9

Jan.  1, 1908-July  1, 1908

1,460

168.7

25.3

77.2

66.2

53.5

July  1, 1908-Jan.  1,1909

1,499

169.2

21.1

82.9

65.1

47.1

Jan.  1, 1909-July  1, 1909

1,510

179.5

19.3

94.1

66.1

45.9

July  1, 1909-Jan.  1, 1910

1,566

194.7

20.5

100.5

73.7

53.7

Jan.  1,1910-July  1,1910

1,621

207.9

18.2

109.3

80.5

52.2

July  1, 1910-Jan.  1, 1911

1,668

215.2

18.8

111.9

84.5

62.4

Jan.  1, 1911-July  1, 1911

1,688

213.8

21.2

120.1

72.5

52.3

Averages

1890-99

889

72.6

14.1

29.9

28.5

23.6

1900-09

1,189

133.6

17.2

58.3

58.1

38.7

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


429


TABLE  122— {Concluded)

Abstract  of  Reports  op  Earnings  and  Dividends  op  the  National  Banks
By  Half  Ybabs,  1890-1911


Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1;
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Mar.  1
Sep.  1
Jan.  1
July  1
Jan.  1
July  1
Jan.  1
July  1
Jan.  1
July  1
Jan.  1


1889-Mar.  1
1890-8ep.  1
1890-Mar.  1
1891-Sep.  1
1891-Mar.  1
1892-Sep.  1
1892-Mar.  1
1893-Sep.  1
1893-Mar.  1
1894-Sep.  1
1894-Mar.  1
1895-Sep.  1
1895-MaT.  1
1896-Sep.  1
1896-Mar.  1
1897-Sep.  1
1897-Mar.  1
1898-Sep.  1
1898-Mar.  1
1899-Sep.  1
1899-Mar.  1
1900-Sep.  1
1900-Mar.  1
1901-Sep.  1
1901-Mar.  1
1902-Sep.  1
1902-Mar.  1
1903-Sep.  1
1903-Mar.  1
1904-Sep.  1
1904-Mar.  1
1905-Sep.  1
1905-Mar.
1906-Sep.
1906-Jan.
1907-July
1907-Jan.
1908-July
1908-Jan.
1909-July
1909-Jan.
1910-July
1910-Jan.
1911-July


,1890
,1890
,1891
,1891
,1892
,1892
,1893
,1893
,1894
,1894
,1895
,  1895
,1896
,1896
,1897
,  1897
,1898
,1898
,1899
,1899
,1900
,1900
,1901
,1901
,1902
,1902
,1903
,1903
,1904
,1904
,1905
,1905
,1906
,1906
,1907
,1907
,1908
,1908
,1909
,1909
,1910
,1910
,1911
,1911


Eatios

Gross

earnings

to

capital

and
surplus

8.59%

8.76

8.73

8.41

8.25

8.00

8.24

8.04

7.70

7.49

7.46

7.46

7.85

7.96

7.74

7.77

8.20

8.48

8.72

9.55
10.44
12.06
10.46
10.37
11.78
10.88
10.89
10.91
11.24
10.42
10.41
10.59
11.16
11.32
11.50
11.56
11.49
11.55
11.29
11.89
12.43
12.82
12.90
12.67


Net

earnings

to

capital

and
surplus

4.30%

4.35

4.61

3.99

8.78

3.52

3.87

3.51

2.13

2.44

2.57

2.60

2.78

2.75

2.68

2.31

2.89

2.93

2.84

3.51

4.68

5.46

4.52

4.54

5.90

5.02

5.12

5.09

5.31

4.50

4.49

4.46

5.06

5.21

5.70

5.46

4.57

4.54

4.34

4.38

4.71

4.96

5.07

4.29


Averages

1890-99  8.17

1900-09  11.17

Compiled  from  the  annual  Reports  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency.


3.22
4.91


Bividends

to

capital

and
surplus

3.20%

2.94

2.96

2.80

2.81

2.71

2.84

2.49

2.50

2.43

2.65

2.41

2.63

2.43

2.39

2.38

2.61

2.54

2.72

2.73

2.82

2.76

2.94

2.73

4.03

2.95

2.98

2.93

3.64

2.93

3.14

3.04

3.73

3.47

3.88

3.44

3.08

3.66

3.14

3.04

3.43

3.21

3.74

3.10


2.66
3.23


Dividends

to

capital

4.27%

3.92

3.95

3.75

3.78

3.66

3.85

3.40

3.41

3.32

3.64

3.32

3.62

3.35

3.32

3.32

3.65

3.54

3.82

3.85

4.01

3.88

4.18

3.96

5.81

4.30

4.43

4.37

5.48

4.45

4.79

4.63

5.74

5.41

6.28

5.58

4.95

5.93

5.12

4.99

5.65

5.35

6.20

5.18

3.64
4.95


430


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Chart  75.

Ratio of  the  Gross Earnings  ,  Net Earnings  , and  Dividend3

OF  THE  National Banks to their Capital  and Surplus.

1890  -  1911.

Divide:no5

12

14-

y

/-

-

12

A

A

/

10
8
6
4

2

/

\J

K

'V

^

^

r

10
8
6
4-

2

^

^

^

)

"^

i

'\.

. —

\

— >

.-'

^

,

X'

•-..

"••■«.

"— ...

\

••■..

V-

"^.r.

^C

.T.»^

/~

1

.•.,..*

'  \

.—..?■

\

.-•J

Y'

— y'

1890 '91 '32 "93 '94 '93 '96 'Sl '96 "99 1900  "Ol "02 'OS "04 '05 "06 '01 '08 "09 1910 "ll

debts  were  $10,000,000  above  the  average  prevailing  theretofore.  And  during
the  dull  years  which  followed  the  banks  were  unable  to  maintain  their  gross
earnings  at  the  accustomed  ratio.  On  the  contrary,  their  losses  continued  heavy
during  the  whole  period  of  depression,  and  they  could  not  reduce  expenses  and
taxes  below  the  level  of  the  years  before  the  panic.  Hence  net  earnings  suffered
a  loss  much  more  severe  than  did  gross  earnings.  This  reduction  in  net  profits,
indeed,  was  so  severe  as  not  only  to  stop  the  investment  of  fresh  capital  in
national  banks,  but  also  to  cause  a  withdrawal  of  many  millions  of  capital
formerly  invested.  Nevertheless,  the  losses  suffered  by  the  banks  in  the  period
of  depression  were  by  no  means  equal  to  the  losses  suffered  by  the  railways.

This  greater  stability  of  banking  as  compared  with  railway  profits  showed
itself  again  when  prosperity  returned;  but  this  time  to  the  disadvantage  of
the  banks.  After  1897  both  gross  and  net  earnings  began  to  increase,  but  it
was  not  until  the  half-year  September  1,  1899,  to  March  1,  1900,  that  the  ratio
of  net  earnings  to  capital  and  surplus  equalled  the  record  set  in  1890-91.  From
this  time  forward,  however,  the  level  of  fluctuation  in  banking  profits  was
decidedly  higher  than  it  had  been  in  the  preceding  decade. The  "rich  man's


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  431

panic"  gave  the  banks  a  period  of  keen  anxiety  and  reduced  their  earnings
for  a  time,  and  the  crisis  of  1907  increased  their  losses  through  bad  debts.
But  the  lowest  level  of  profits  touched  in  these  lean  years  was  well  above  the
figures  of  1893-97,  and  the  large  profits  made  in  the  fat  years  1901-03  and
1905-07  set  records  much  above  the  figures  of  1890-91.  And  these  larger  profits
attracted  a  rapidly  increasing  volume  of  capital  into  the  business  of  banking
under  the  national  law.^

3.  German  Corporations

Although  close  comparisons  between  the  foregoing  figures  for  the  railways
and  the  national  banks  are  precluded  by  the  dissimilarity  between  the  two  sets
of  data,  it  seems  certain  that  bank  profits  and  railway  profits  feel  the  effect  of
changes  from  prosperity  to  depression  in  unequal  measure.  To  decide  which
set  of  figures  gives  the  truer  index  of  the  relationship  between  profits  and
business  cycles  for  the  purposes  of  a  general  discussion,  or  to  determine  whether
the  situation  in  different  industries  can  safely  be  represented  by  any  average
or  type,  would  be  impossible  if  we  were  confined  to  the  scanty  American  data.
It  is  therefore  fortunate  that  the  efforts  of  certain  German  students  to  con-
struct uniform  statistics  of  profits  for  many  industries  afford  a  wider  basis
for  conclusions.^

Among  these  contributions,  Wagon's  book  on  the  financial  development  of
German  corporations  in  1870-1900  is  most  serviceable  for  the  present  purpose.^
It  is  based  primarily  upon  the  annual  reports  of  the  joint-stock  companies
listed  on  the  Berlin  exchange,  and  covers  nearly  forty  industries.  The  tables
for  most  of  these  industries  show  (1)  the  number  of  companies  for  which
reports  are  used,  (2)  their  share-capital,  (3)  loans,  (4)  reserves,  (5)  net  profits,
(6)  losses,  and  (7)  dividends.  Of  these  data,  only  the  rate  of  net  profits  left
after  the  deduction  of  losses,  and  the  rate  of  dividends  are  reproduced  in  the
next  table  for  the  years  1890-1900.  As  a  rough  gauge  of  the  scope  of  the  data
for  each  industry,  the  average  number  of  companies  and  the  average  capital

2  Another  interesting  bit  of  evidence  has  been  supplied  by  Professor  E.  S.  Meade.  He  has  computed  the
net  earnings  from  operations  of  twenty-nine  industrial  "trusts"  in  the  United  States,  and  reduced  the  data
to  an  index  number  on  the  basis,  profits  of  1902  =  100. The  results  are  as  follows:

1902 100.0  1907 134.8

1903 103.5  1908 111.8

1904  92.2  1909 122.7

1905 104.6  1910 137.7

1906 124.1

He  adds  that  the  figures  for  1911  are  not  yet  available,  but  that  they  will  undoubtedly  show  a  considerable
decline. "The  Economies  of  Combination,"  Journal  of  Political  Economy,  April,  1912.

3  The  German  literature  upon  the  subject  is  reviewed  by  Professor  W.  J.  Ashley,  in  ' '  The  Statistical  Meas-
urement of  Profit,"  Economic  Journal,  December,  1910.  J.  von  Koriisi's  statistical  investigations  into  the  profits
of  joint-stock  companies  domiciled  in  Buda-Pesth  gave  the  impetus  to  and  set  the  model  for  the  subsequent
workers.

*  Eduard  Wagon,  Die  pnanzielle  EntwicMung  deutcher  Aktiengesellschaften  von  1870-1900.  (Sammlung  na-
tionaliikonomischer  und  statistischer  Abhandlungen  des  Staatswissenschaftlichen  Seminars  zu  Halle.)  Jena,
1903.


432


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE 123


Ratios  op  Net  Profits  and  of  Dividends  to  Share  Capital  in  Thirty-Seven  German  Industries,  According  to

Wagon

By  Yeabs, 1890-1900

nSt  peofits


Iron

Coal
mining

mining

and
smelting

Metal
industries

Machinery

Building
materials

Salt
works

Glass

Porcelain

Chemicals

Electricity

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

Average
number  of

. 34

51

30

46

21

6

3

4

19

10

enterprises .

Average

aggregate

. 64.4

98.0

18.2

28.6

12.8

8.1

4.3

1.3

27.5

33.6

capital'

1890

17.85

9.10

10.52

12.40

11.04

10.41

12.53

14.82

17.49

10.51

1891

16.38

7.74

8.05

12.06

7.93

5.92

9.53

15.28

16.17

9.82

1892

8.55

5.06

7.89

10.04

5.90

3.93

9.74

13.07

16.93

8.88

1893

5.66

4.84

7.24

7.95

6.10

10.64

9.94

14.24

17.71

8.51

1894

4.99

3.57

12.62

8.91

8.43

11.18

9.60

12.85

16.49

9.29

1895

7.00

4.99

14.99

10.97

10.12

9.85

11.18

13.07

14.58

12.29

1896

9.07

7.45

12.66

12.75

11.78

10.56

12.77

20.41

14.60

12.45

1897

11.28

11.24

15.56

14.73

12.73

11.34

12.56

18.93

12.56

13.09

1898

11.66

12.17

15.56

13.94

12.39

12.29

12.95

19.77

14.92

10.50

1899

12.40

15.14

13.72

15.42

17.47

12.43

14.79

14.26

15.33

11.85

1900

17.74

13.62

9.86

12.91

14.13
DIVIDENDS

13.26

17.91

15.44

14.44

11.25

1890

13.82

7.17

8.48

9.06

8.70

8.60

10.50

14.00

13.04

8.09

1891

13.40

6.76

7.32

9.48

6.51

5.17

8.26

12.50

11.91

7.78

1892

7.29

4.75

7.25

8.28

4.83

5.38

8.35

11.00

12.59

7.41

1893

4.52

4.04

6.51

7.47

4.77

7.03

8.26

10.90

12.21

8.42

1894

4.36

4.19

9.15

6.67

6.66

8.53

8.38

10.34

11.99

9.08

1895

6.27

4.31

10.55

8.48

7.88

5.73

9.37

12.71

1.48

9.16

1896

7.93

6.13

12.70

9.33

9.63

7.33

10.71

13.98

10.77

8.38

1897

9.94

9.03

11.64

10.29

10.21

8.49

10.74

13.10

10.76

9.87

1898

10.22

9.95'

11.88

10.25

8.35

9.04

11.12

13.36

11.33

7.70

1899

10.79

11.97

10.58

11.48

13.17

9.16

12.05

10.50

12.27

9.06

1900

1462

10.97

7.30

10.96

9.21

10.19

14.08

10.55

11.14

8.64

^  In  millions  of  dollars.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


433


Ratios  of  Net  Profits


TABLE  123— (Continued)

AND  OF  Dividends  to  Share  Capital  in  Thirtt-Seven  German  Industries,  According  to

Wagon

By  Tears, 1890-1900

NET  PROFITS


Paper

Rubber

Lumber

Milling

Building

Printing

Miscellaneous

Gas

Water

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

Average
number  of
enterprises .
Average
aggregate
capital'

10
4.4

8
3.3

2
1.7

8
4.2

30
25.1

2
0.6

9
5.5

4
6.3

3
3.3

1890

22.83

20.44

7.72

7.85

5.16

7.86

10.40

11.34

9.30

1891

10.88

14.38

7.95

15.92

7.54

3.55

8.36

10.16

8.94

1892

13.37

17.18

4.83

5.98

5.74

5.28

2.87

9.80

9.35

1893

15.88

17.45 ;,

,  f-  4.91

5.88

4:.22

1.56

5.86

10.81

7.34

1894

16.01

14.04

6.67

4.29

3.92

6.66

8.68

11.79

9.78

1895

14.24

14.95

7.72

6.48

4.36

8.23

11.65

13.00

11.38

1896

19.30

19.50

8.34

8.25

3.60

3.36

43.94

13.48

12.25

1897

18.49

18.37

8.33

7.89

4.18

4.51

39.00

15.02

12.81

1898

15.80

12.58

8.32

7.50

4.62

8.34

20.81

13.11

14.10

1899

19.69

7.28

6.51

3.86

5.38

7.60

19.25

14.17

12.19

1900

13.65

14.52

5.43

5.06

4.45

9.38

13.77

14.45

12.67

DIVIDENDS

1890

10.36

17.04

6.50

6.61

2.95

6.67

7.42

8.25

8.50

1891

7.45

11.70

6.50

11.75

4.76

4.74

6.27

8.19

7.50

1892

7.32

13.93

4.00

6.08

3.93

4.44

4.55

8.15

8.20

1893

10.07

14.64

4.00

4.17

3.58

2.44

4.62

8.18

5.94

1894

9.31

11.57

5.50

4.16

3.34

4.99

6.02

8.18

8.61

1895

8.87

12.24

6.00

5.63

3.35

6.64

8.35

8.27

10.04

1896

11.90

14.98

6.43

6.85

2.97

2.57

17.87

9.05

11.08

1897

12.68

14.17

6.52

6.32

3.43

5.50

12.92

8.88

11.55

1898

11.26

11.37

6.39

5.67

3.49

6.34

16.05

8.55

11.33

1899

10.67

7.37

5.35

5.46

4.49

6.21

14.36

9.41

11.10

1900

10.16

11.77

4.45

4.30

4.22

8.50

13.46

9.65

11.02

•In  millions  of  dollars.


434


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  123— (Continued)

Ratios  or  Net  Profits  and  of  Dividends  to  Share  Capital  in  Thirty-Seven  German  Industries,  According

TO  Wagon


By  Years,

1890-1900

Cloth
20

Spinning

and
weaving

21

Sugar
22

NET PROFITS

Brewing Distilling
23 24

Poods
25

Baths
26

Railways
27

Land

transport

without

rails

28

Average

number  of

enterprises

Average

aggregate

capital*

1890

11
5.2
4.14

22
14.0
8.00

7

4.7

7.00

49
25.3
8.42

2
1.3

4.67

4

1.9

8.86

2

0.1

4.57

24
66.7
6.80

5

2.0
10.08

1891

3.07

5.20

8.39

6.87

4.67

5.48

4.88

6.33

9.89

1892

4.31

4.60

8.29

7.71

4.73

3.00

5.58

6.07

11.27

1893

8.58

8.53

8.63

9.49

6.44

3.41

5.61

11.25

13.31

1894

5.80

5.38

7.45

9.35

11.87

3.80

6.45

6.10

13.82

1895

10.23

10.55

5.14

11.54

16.39

9.97

5.85

5.99

13.36

1896

10.82

11.86

12.06

12.38

16.46

14.24

5.62

7.79

12.03

1897

6.35

8.52

14.35

12.96

17.38

12.84

3.97

7.42

6.59

1898

7.39

8.68

11.57

10.90

16.20

14.76

5.03

7.15

11.59

1899

21.45

9.04

16.11

11.12

8.97

15.56

4.16

6.48

12.09

1900

—15.63

7.29

17.05

11.21

16.41

12.42

6.41

6.68

5.15

DIVIDENDS

1890

5.04

6.54

5.65

6.95

4.00

5.02

3.90

3.77

7.80

1891

1.40

4.98

6.99

6.17

4.00

4.49

4.22

3.46

7.89

1892

3.33

5.10

5.58

6.41

4.00

2.67

4.49

3.23

9.35

1893

5.87

6.72

5.78

7.95

5.00

2.67

4.92

4.48

10.81

1894

4.63

4.98

4.91

7.43

7.00

3.26

3.14

4.20

11.07

1895

7.41

8.09

5.34

8.62

10.93

6.99

4.81

4.98

11.09

1896

7.97

8.04

8.55

9.75

10.90

9.14

4.41

4.52

9.98

1897

4.97

6.20

8.51

9.67

11.36

8.81

3.39

4.76

8.49

1898

6.61

6.42

8.87

9.42

9.41

12.10

3.67

4.60

7.46

1899

11.04

6.73

11.45

9.11

4.64

10.19

3.67

4.80

9.83

1900

2.65

6.34

13.12

9.76

13.64

8.52

5.00

4.58

6.22

'In  mill

ions  of  dollars.

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


435


TABLE  12S— (Concluded)

Eatios  of  Net  Profits  and  of  Dividends  to  Share  Capital  in  Thirty-Seven  German  Industries,  According

TO  Wagon

By  Years,  1890-1900

NET  PROFITS


Land

transport

on  rails

29

Inland
navigation

30

Marine
navigation

31

Insurance

Life
32

Fire
33

Hail
34

Re-insurance
35

Trans-  ^
portation

36

Banking
37

Average
number  of
enterprises

19

3

5

23

29

5

33

46

145

Average 1
aggregate r
capital' 1

23.8

2.4

25.3

6.5

9.6

1.6

4.5

4.4

478.6

1890

9.09

5.42

8.39

45.36

32.89

10.80

19.37

21.88

11.06

1891

9.67

1.75

2.28

50.26

30.29

—44.43

21.89

15.78

8.82

1892

8.72

0.96

0.94

55.26

20.75

47.76

8.62

25.41

8.24

1893

7.66

2.30

1.98

59.20

16.46

70.57

9.21

22.03

8.48

1894

9.49

4.68

—2.36

71.26

33.31

41.96

26.13

23.74

8.28

1895

11.50

6.48

5.26

78.35

22.89

32.21

16.14

15.54

10.32

1896

13.14

3.12

11.99

73.75

36.84

—17.83

29.27

12.94

10.27

1897

10.22

4.71

16.23

87.34

34.17

23.79

29.56

19:43

9.90

1898

7.95

5.58

10.01

86.29

33.56

—  4.62

22.70

18.48

10.54

1899

7.62

7.88

10.35

94.54

15.24

2.45

4.06

11.92

11.27

1900

6.58

5.69

13.81

104.60

23.91

10.10

6.44

18.18

9.14

DIVIDENDS

1890

7.96

4.30

7.16

15.69

21.26

6.64

13.25

16.22

7.60

1891

7.08

2.39

2.20

14.02

20.48

1.18

13.45

15.24

6.50

1892

6.40

0.78

0.94

13.02

18.13

12.69

11.45

16.52

6.20

1893

6.58

1.75

1.83

12.93

15.92

20.56

8.00

16.50

6.25

1894

6.65-

3.38

0.18

13.68

21.65

18.67

13.03

16.09

6.74

1895

8.12

4.97

2.47

12.81

17.48

15.23

12.24

13.96

7.38

1896

9.28

2.64

4.05

12.81

22.32

4.31

14.58

13.44

7.63

1897

8.49

3.86

5.58

13.02

21.97

12.70

14.34

13.69

7.66

1898

6.73

4.51

7.47

12.79

22.48

8.67

14.19

12.64

7.89

1899

6.08

6.07

7.92

12.79

17.42

6.77

12.39

12.89

8.21

1900

6.21

4.71

9.43

12.96

19.32

8.70

10.46

13.09

7.49

'  In  millions

i  of  dollars.

436  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

for  this  eleven-year  period  are  shown  in  the  headings.  The  percentages  of  net
profits  and  of  dividends  are  computed  by  dividing  the  sums  of  the  actual  profits
and  dividends  for  all  the  companies  included  by  the  sums  of  their  share  capitals.
But  in  the  case  of  the  insurance  companies  the  divisor  is  the  sums  of  the  paid-up
capitals.  The  practice  prevalent  in  Germany  of  issuing  shares  at  a  premium
makes  the  capital  actually  invested  somewhat  larger  as  a  rule  than  the  nominal
share-capital  on  the  basis  of  which  profits  and  dividends  are  computed.  Hence
the  figures  overstate  the  profitableness  of  the  actual  investments.  But  this
fact  invalidates  the  following  comparisons  between  the  profits  made  in  years
of  depression  and  in  years  of  prosperity  in  relatively  slight  degree.  On  the
other  hand,  the  dividend  rates  understate  the  gains  derived  by  shareholders,
because  they  omit  the  gains  from  the  privilege  of  subscribing  to  new  issues  of
stock  on  terms  more  advantageous  than  those  open  to  the  general  public.
Finally,  Wagon  can  offer  no  assurance  of  substantial  uniformity  in  the  methods
of  accounting  followed  by  his  different  companies.  Hence  it  is  unsafe  to  base
upon  the  figures  any  but  broad  and  general  conclusions  concerning  the  trend
of  profits  from  one  phase  of  the  business  cycle  to  the  next.

To  compute  the  average  rate  of  profits  for  the  thirty-seven  industries  which
are  represented  in  Table  123  would  be  easy ;  but  the  value  of  the  results  would
be  highly  problematical.  The  general  trend  and  the  numerous  divergencies
are  both  indicated  by  the  following  statement  of  the  number  of  industries  which
showed  their  highest  and  lowest  rates  of  profits  during  each  year  of  the  business
cycle  which  began  with  depression  in  1891  and  culminated  in  the  crisis  of  1900.

Number  of  industries  showing  their


lowest  rate  of
profits  in  the
corresponding

highest  rate  of
profits  in  the
corresponding

years

years

1891

6

2

1892

9

1

1893

5

3

1894

i

1

1895

2

1

1896

1

7

1897

2

7

1898

0

1

1899

5

8

1900

3

6

37  37


Except  1898,  every  year  of  the  whole  cycle  was  both  the  year  of  the  lowest
profits  for  one  or  more  industries  and  also  the  year  of  the  highest  profits  of
one  or  more  other  industries. The  variety  of  the  fortunes  enjoyed  by  different


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


437


industries  could  hardly  be  shown  more  strikingly  than  by  this  fact.  It  is
therefore  clear  that  no  single  industry  could  safely  be  taken  as  typical  of  all.
And  yet  the  same  figures  unmistakably  show  a  general  trend.  The  early  years
of  the  decade  were  much  less  profitable  for  most  industries  than  the  years
beginning  in  1896.  They  also  show  that  the  early  stages  of  business  revival
mark  the  highest  level  of  profits  for  quite  as  many  industries  as  the  years
when  the  movement  culminates,  and  that  as  the  crisis  approaches  an  increasing
number  of  industries  find  their  profits  falling  to  a  low  ebb.

Concerning  Wagon's  data  for  dividends,  it  is  sufficient  to  remark  that  they
follow  the  rate  of  profits,  but  at  a  distance.  Like  the  American  railways  and
banks,  the  German  industries  of  all  kinds  keep  their  dividends  much  more
stable  than  their  net  profits — reducing  the  rates  less  than  profits  fall  in  unfav-
orable seasons  and  raising  them  less  than  profits  rise  when  times  are  good.
Incidentally  these  figures  show  that  in  Germany  as  in  America  the  business
enterprises  save  large  sums  out  of  their  current  incomes  and  reinvest  the
money  in  their  undertakings.

One  other  piece  of  German  evidence  may  be  added — a  table  compiled  by
Dermietzel  to  show  the  general  trend  of  dividends  declared  by  joint-stock  com-
panies engaged  in  a  number  of  industries.  Here  the  capital  of  the  companies
is  classified  according  to  the  rate  of  dividends  paid,  and  close  attention  is
necessary  to  understand  the  figures. During  the  depression  of  1891-94  the


TABLE 124


Nominal  Capital  of  German  Joint-Stock  Companies  Classified  According  to  the  Bate  of  Dividends

Declared
By  Yeabs, 1890-1902


1890
1891
1892
1893
1894
1895
1896
1897
1898
1899
1900
1901
1902


0%

1.6
4.4
3.5
4.1
7.5
5.2
3.2


1.4

10.1

9.4


Kate  of  dividends  declared
0-5%  5-10%  10-15%  15-20%  20-25%

Percent  of  aggregate  capital  paying  each  rate  of dividend

5.4


10.9

19.5

25.1

13.3

9.8

5.0

2.3

2.0

.4

8.0

21.8

16.9


54.8
69.1
66.2
62.4
65.9
62.9
66.9
65.3
61.1
59.8
62.1
47.8
54.9


31.4
10.3
8.5
7.7
12.6
20.3
21.2
25.9
29.8
31.5
22.4
17.4
15.1


4.9
3.5
1.6


1.9
1.1


1.1
3.1
5.2
5.7
6.1
3.3
.8
2.0


2.3

1.3

.9


25-30% 30-35%


.7
.7
.7
.7
.7


2.2

.5
.5


.5
.3
.3


rnmnilpd  from  Otto  Dermietzel  Statistische  Vntersuchwngen  iiber  die  Eapitalrente  der  griisseren  deutschen  AUiengesellschaften
(mU  Ausschltiss  der  Eisenbahnen)  von  1876-1902  (Gottingen,  1906)  pp.  61-3.  Includes  no  companies  with  nominal  capitals
of  less  than  ten  million  marks. Banks  are  more  fully  represented  than  any  other  class  of  enterprises.


438  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

proportion  of  capital  paying  no  dividends  or  low  dividends  is  high.  But  when
prosperity  returned  the  proportion  paying  10  per  cent  or  more  increased  rapidly
until  1899.  The  recession  of  prosperity  in  1900  appears  in  a  moderate  falling
off  of  the  percentages  of  capital  in  the  columns  for  the  higher  rates ;  but  it  is
not  until  1901  that  a  severe  depression  is  again  indicated.


II.  Bankruptcies

1.  The  TJtiited  States

Two  great  commercial  agencies,  Bradstreet's  and  Dun's,  regularly  report
the  number  and  the  liabilities  of  commercial  enterprises  which  fail  in  the
United  States.  That  there  are  considerable  discrepancies  between  their  figures
appears  from  the  following  table,  in  which  the  data  compiled  by  the  two  agencies
are  arranged  in  parallel  columns.  As  a  rule,  the  number  of  failures  reported
by  Dun  is  greater  than  the  number  reported  by  Bradstreet;  but  the  contrary
is  true  in  1891,  1893,  and  1899.  The  liabilities  differ  more  widely  than  the
number  of  failures,  and  Bradstreet's  figures  are  greater  than  Dun's  about  half
the  time.  The  cause  of  these  discrepancies — apart  from  the  difficulty  of  secur-
ing, accurate  information — is  not  altogether  clear.  Bradstreet's  explains  that
its  figures  do  not  include  failures  of  banks,  professional  men,  farmers,  stock-
brokers, or  real  estate  dealers,  and  that  they  do  not  include  cases  of  "failure
to  succeed"  which  involve  no  less  to  creditors.  Whether  Dun's  figures  do
include  these  classes  is  not  known,  because  the  figures  are  published  without
explanation  of  their  scope.

For  the  present  purpose,  however,  these  discrepancies  are  of  little  moment ;
for  the  general  conclusions  suggested  by  the  two  sets  of  data  are  the  same.

(1)  The  number  of  failures  declines  in  the  earlier  stages  of  prosperity,  rises
slowly  as  a  crisis  approaches,  reaches  its  maximum  during  the  months  of  the
crisis,  and,  though  declining,  remains  large  during  the  period  of  depression.

(2)  The  aggregate  and  the  average  liabilities  of  bankrupt  firms  show  similar
but  more  violent  fluctuations.  During  years  of  prosperity,  mismanagement  and
lack  of  capital  account  for  the  great  bulk  of  business  failures,  and  these  diffi-
culties are  far  commoner  among  small  than  among  large  firms.  On  the  other
hand,  catastrophes  resulting  from  business  conditions  beyond  the  control  of
the  firms  affected  are  relatively  much  commoner  at  times  of  crisis,  and  these
difficulties  affect  both  large  and  small  enterprises  without  distinction.  Hence
the  average  liabilities  of  the  firms  which  go  to  the  wall  always  increase  during
a  crisis.  (3)  Despite  the  larger  number  of  firms  in  business  during  the  second
decade,  both  the  number  and  the  liabilities  of  the  firms  which  failed  were
smaller  than  in  1890-99. The  "business  mortality  rate"  has  dropped,  unless


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


439


TABLE 125

Statistics  op  Commercial  Failures  in  the  United States, Compiled by Bradstreet 's and by Dun's

Commercial  Agencies


""

By

Years  1890

-1911

Number  of  failures

Liabilities  of

firms  which

failed. In

millions  of

dollars

A

Actual  amounts

Average  liabilities
of  firms  which
failed

Number  of  firms

in  business. In

thousands

%  of  firms  in

business  which

failed

r

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

r

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

1890

10,700

10,900

$175

$190

$16,400

$17,400

989

1,111

1.07

.98

1891

12,400

12,300

193

190

15,600

15,500

1,018

1,143

1.21

1.07

1892

10,300

10,300

109

114

10,600

11,000

1,036

1,173

.99

.88

1893

15,500

15,200

382

347

24,600

22,800

1,059

1,193

1.46

1.28

1894

12,700

13,900

152

173

11,900

12,500

1,048

1,114

1.21

1.25

1895

13,000

13,200

159

173

12,200

13,100

1,054

1,209

1.23

1.09

1896

15,100

15,100

247

226

16,400

15,000

1,079

1,152

1.40

1.31

1897

13,100

13,400

159

154

12,100

11,600

1,086

1,059

1.20

1.26

1898

11,600

12,200

142

131

12,200

10,700

1,093

1,106

1.06

1.10

1899

9,600

9,300

120

91

12,400

9,700

1,126

1,148

.85

.81

1900

9,900

10,800

127

138

12,800

12,900

1,162

1,174

.85

.92

1901

10,600

11,000

130

113

12,200

10,300

1,202

1,219

.88

.90

1902

10,000

11,600

106

117

10,600

10,100

1,239

1,253

.80

.93

1903

9,800

12,100

154

155

15,800

12,900

1,273

1,281

.76

1.12

1904

10,400

12,200

144

144

13,800

11,800

1,308

1,320

.79

.92

1905

10,000

11,500

122

103

12,200

8,900

1,353

1,357

.73

.85

1906

9,400

10,700

127

119

13,600

11,200

1,401

1,393

.66

.77

1907

10,300

11,700

384

197

37,400

16,800

1,448

1,418

.70

.82

1908

14,000

15,700

296

222

21,100

14,200

1,488

1,448

.94

1.08

1909

11,800

12,900

141

155

11,900

12,000

1,543

1,486

.76

.80

1910

11,600

12,700

189

202

16,300

16,000

1,593

1,515

.72

.80

1911

12,600

13,400

188

191

14,900

14,200

1,638

1,525

.77

.81

Averages
1890-99

12,400

12,580

183.8

178.9

14,440

13,930

1,058.8

1,140.8

1.168

1.103

1900-09

10,640

12,020

173.1

146.3

16,140

12,110

1,341.7

1,334.9

.787

.911

440  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


TABLE  125— (Concluded)

Statistics  of  Commekcial  Failures  in  the  United States, Compiled by Bradsteeet's and by Dun's

Commercial  Agencies

By  Tears  1890-1911
Relative  amounts. Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99=  100


Number
of  failures

A

Liabilities  of  firms
which  failed

A

Average  liabilities
of  firms  which  failed

A

Number  of  firms
in  business

A

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

Bradstreet

Dun

1890

86

87

95

106

114

125

93

97

1891

100

98

105

106

108

111

96

100

1892

83

82

59

64

73

79

98

103

1893

125

121

208

194

170

164

100

105

1894

102

110

83

97

82

90

99

98

1895

105

105

87

97

84

94

100

106

1896

122

120

134

"  126

114

108

102

101

1897

106

107

87

86

84

83

103

93

1898

94

97

77

73

84

77

103

97

1899

77

74

65

51

86

70

106

101

1900

80

86

69

77

89

93

110

103

1901

85

87

71

63

84

74

114

107

1902

81

92

58

65

73

72

117

110

1903

79

96

84

87

109

93

120

112

1904

84

97

78

80

96

85

124

116

1905

81

91

66

58

84

64

128

119

1906

76

85

69

67

95

80

132

122

1907

83

93

209

110

259

121

137

124

1908

113

125

161

124

146

102

141

127

1909

95

103

77

87

82

86

146

130

1910

94

101

103

113

113

115

150

133

1911

102

107

102

107

103

102

155

134

Averages :

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

86

96

94

82

112

87

127

117

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


441


Chart 76.

Relative.  Number  ,  Total  Liabiuties  ,  and  Average  Liabilities
OF  Commercial  Firms  wmicH  Failed  in  the  United  States.
Based Upon Bradstreet's Data
1890  -  1911.


Number.

Total Uabiuties

Average  Liabilities.


zoo


190


180


no


160


150


140


•tso


I  20


MO


100


2  50


240


230


220


190


180


no


160


150


140


130


120


110


100


90


80


70


60


1690  '9! '92 '93 '94 '95 '36 '91 "98 '99 1900  "01 'OZ '03 '04 'OS '06 '01 '08 '09 1910  '11


442


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


the  figures  are  in  error  by  a  large  margin.  Even  the  rates  for  1908,  which  show
most  clearly  the  influence  of  the  crisis  which  came  late  in  1907,  are  less  than
the  average  for  the  first  decade.

To  supplement  the  above  statistics  of  commercial  failures,  there  are  available
figures  which  show  the  disasters  met  by  banks  and  by  railwaj^s.  The  national-
bank  data,  compiled  by  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  may  be  accepted
without  reservation;  but  the  data  for  other  banks  are  supplied  by  Bradstreet's


TABLE 126

Bank  Failures  in  the  United  States,  Compiled  by  the  Comptbollee  of  the  Curbency  and  by  Bradstreet's

Commercial  Agency

By years ending October 31 for the National Banks, 1890-1911
By  years  ending  June  30  for  other  than  National  Banks, 1892—1911


Actual  figures

Relative  figures
Average  actual  figures  in  1890-99  or

1892-99  =  100

Number  of  failures

Capital  of
insolvent
National
banks
in  thousands
of  dollars

Liabilities  of

insolvent

banks  other

than  National

in  thousands

of  dollars

Number  of  failures

Liabilities  of
insolvent

banks  other

than

National

National
banks

Other  than

National

banks

National
banks

Other  than insolvent

National National

banks banks

1890

9

No  data

$ 750

No  data

35

No  data 20

No  data

1891

25

No  data

3,622

No  data

97

No  data 97

No  data

1892

17

69

2,450

$11,025

66

73 65

50

1893

65

414

10,935

97,193

253

439 292

442

1894

21

65

2,770

44,901

82

69 74

204

1895

36

85

5,235

15,912

140

90 140

72

1896

27

110

3,805

9,174

105

117 102

42

1897

38

122

5,852

24,091

148

129 156

110

1898

7

53

1,200

7,080

27

56 32

32

1899

12

26

850

10,447

47

28 23

48

1900

6

32

1,800

11,421

23

34 48

52

1901

11

56

1,760

13,335

43

59 47

61

1902

2

43

450

10,333

8

46 12

47

1903

12

26

3,480

4,006

47

28 93

18

1904

20

102

1,535

31,775

78

108 41

145

1905

22

57

2,035

10,273

86

60 54

47

1906

8

37

680

7,188

31

39 18

33

1907

7

34

775

22,165

27

36 21

101

1908

24

132

5,560

209,836

93

140 148

955

1909

9

60

769

25,190

35

64 21

115

1910

6

28

875

18,182

23

30 23

83

1911

3

56

275

18,547

12

59 7

84

Averages ;

1890  or  92-

-99 25.7

94.4

3,746.9

21,982.3

100

100 100

100

1900-1909

12.1

57.9

1,884.4

84,552.2

47

61 50

157

From  the  Reports  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


443


Commercial  Agency,  and  are  subject  to  an  uncertain  margin  of  error,  partic-
ularly with  reference  to  the  liabilities.  In  all  essential  respects,  this  table  for
the  banks  supports  the  conclusions  based  upon  the  table  for  commercial  failures.
One  exception  may  be  noted — the  liabilities  of  the  banks  other  than  national
which  failed  in  the  second  decade  exceed  the  corresponding  liabilities  for
1890-99.  But  this  exception  results  almost  wholly  from  the  catastrophe  of
one  great  institution  which  collapsed  in  the  panic  of  1907 — the  Knickerbocker
Trust  Company.  The  number  of  bank  failures  in  1893  was  much  greater  than
the  number  in  the  later  panics ;  but  in  1893  the  failures  were  mainly  among  the
small  banks  of  the  South  and  West,  while  in  1907  several  large  banks  in  New
York  City  went  to  the  wall.


TABLE 127

Eailway Eeceiverships and Fokeclosures

According  to  the  Sailway  Age

By  Years,  1890-1911


Relative  figures


Actual  fi
Placed  under  receivership

Stocks
Number and
of  roads Miles bonds^

gures

Sold  under  foreclosure

A

Average  actual  figu
Placed  under  receivership

Stocks
Number and
of  roads Miles bonds

resin  1890-99  =  100

Sold  under  foreclosure

Number
of  roads

Miles

Stocks

and

bonds*

Number
of  roads

Miles

Stocks
and
bonds

1890

26

2,963

105

29

3,825

182

84

45

29

77

64

48

1891

26

2,159

84

21

3,223

169

84

33

23

56

54

45

1892

36

10,508

358

28

1,922

96

116

159

98

74

32

25

1893

74

29,340

1,781

25

1,613

80

238

444

488

66

27

21

1894

38

7,025

396

42

5,643

319

122

106

108

112

94

84

1895

31

4,089

369

52

12,831

762

100

62

101

138

215

201

1896

34

5,441

276

58

13,730

1,150

109

82

76

154

230

303

1897

18

1,537

93

42

6,675

518

58

23

26

112

112

136

1898

18

2,069

139

47

6,054

253

58

31

38

125

101

67

1899

10

1,019

52

32

4,294

268

32

15

14

85

72

71

1900

16

1,165

78

24

3,477

190

51

18

21

64

58

50

1901

4

73

2

17

1,139

86

13

1

1

45

19

23

1902

5

278

6

20

693

40

16

4

2

53

12

11

1903

9

229

19

13

555

16

29

3

5

35

9

4

1904

8

744

36

13

524

28

26

11

10

35

9

7

1905

10

3,593

176

6

679

20

32

54

48

16

11

5

1906

6

204

55

8

262

10

19

3

15

21

4

3

1907

7

317

14

6

114

14

23

5

4

16

2

4

1908

24

8,009

596

3

138

3

77

121

163

8

2

1

1909

5

859

78

12

2,629

250

16

13

21

32

44

66

1910

7

735

51

17

1,100

94

23

11

14

45

18

25

1911

5

2,606

211

13

1,386

41

16

39

58

35

23

11

Averages
1890-99 31.1

6,615.0

365.3

37.6

5,981.0

379.7

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-1

D9 9.4

1,547.1

106.0

12.2

1,021.0

65.7

30

23

29

32

17

17

^  In  millions  of  dollars.


444


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


Railway  receiversMps  follow  the  same  rules  as  commercial  and  bank
failures,  except  that  they  lag  a  little  further  behind  the  change  in  business
conditions.  A  railway  is  not  taken  out  of  the  hands  of  its  owners  quite  so
promptly  as  a  commercial  firm  or  a  bank  when  its  inability  to  meet  its  creditors
is  made  apparent.  The  months  following  a  crisis  accordingly  show  the  largest
numbers  of  railway  failures,  while  proportionately  more  banks  are  closed  and
commercial  firms  declared  bankrupt  during  the  crisis  itself.  Foreclosure  sales
of  railways,  which  do  not  occur  until  the  inability  of  the  stockholders  to  reor-
ganize a  railway  already  in  the  hands  of  a  receiver  has  been  demonstrated,  of
course  lag  still  further  behind  crises.

2.  England,  France,  and  Germany

The  European  statistics  of  failures  are  meager  in  comparison  with  the
American.  For  England  and  Wales  there  is  shown  the  number  of  debtors
adjudicated  bankrupt,  of  schemes  of  arrangement  and  of  compositions  with
creditors  under  the  acts  of  1883  and  1890,  and  of  orders  for  the  administration
of  deceased  debtors'  estates.  Since  the  statistics  thus  refer  to  cases  of  which
the  courts  have  taken  cognizance,  their  accuracy  is  open  to  little  doubt  so  far


Chart  77

Relative:  Number  of  Failures  in  England ,  France  ,  and  Germany.

1890  -  1909

160

i

»

1

\

150

(

%

•
•

,

-—  — France.

•

»
•

140

Germany.

•
•

••.

/

•
•

130

>
•
•

•••

._

130

I

*•

r

120

«
•

ISO

1

110

100

90

y

•

110
100

"''/

/

*

/

I

>

/

/

f

*

>

•

\^

/
/

>

k

7

'—

•

f:

\

^

^

\

/

\

s

7

\

1890 91 '92 '93 "94 '95 '9G '97 '96 '99 1900  'oi "02 '05 '04 '05 '0€ "01 'Ofl '09

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


445


as  they  go,  but  there  may  be  many  more  cases  of  failures  settled  out  of  court.
The  French  data  used  include  both  the  "judicial  liquidations"  and  the
"failures"  so  called.  Finally,  the  German  figures  are  described  simply  as
showing  the  number  of  "new  bankruptcies  occurring  each  year."  In  England
only  are  the  liabilities  shown.  The  actual  numbers  of  failures  occurring  during
any  given  time  in  the  three  countries  cannot  properly  be  compared  with  each
other,  because  of  differences  in  the  bankruptcy  laws ;  but  there  seems  to  be  no
reason  why  general  comparisons  should  not  be  made  between  the  fluctuations
in  the  numbers  from  one  vear  to  the  next.


TABLE 128


Statistics  of  Commercial  Failuki:s

IN  England,  France

,  AND  GeR

MANY

By  Years,

1890-1911

Number  of  failures

A

Liabilities

which  fa

England  a:

Actual
amounts^

Actual  numbers

Relative  numbers
Average  actual  numbers
1890-99=100

lin

of  firms
iled  in
nd  Wales

Relative
amounts'

England
■  and
Wales

France

Germany

England

and

Wales

France

Germany^

1890

4,040

8,570

No  data

92

97

No  data

30.1

89

1891

4,240

8,580

7,620

97

97

105-

41.9

124

1892

4,660

8,590

7,680

107

97

106

43.3

128

1893

4,900

8,420

6,730

112

95

93

36.7

109

1894

4,790

9,170

7,410

110

104

102

34.2

101

1895

4,415

8,550

7,110

101 .

97

98

31.9

95

1896

4,170

8,620

6,760

95

"  98

93

28.8

85

1897

4,098

8,970

7,000

94

102

96

28.1

83

1898

4,310

9,580

7,360

99

-109

101

33.2

99

1899

4;111

9,180

7,740

94

104

106

28.8

85

1900

4,410

9,290

8,560

101

105

118

31.5

93

1901

4,244

8,930

10,570

97

101

145

33.1

98

1902

4,202

8,990

9,830

96

102

135

27.1

80

1903

4,286

8,710

9,630

98

99

132

25.9

77

1904

4,546

9,760

9,510

104

111

131

33.9

101

1905

4,764

9,500

9,360

109

108

129

28.8

85

1906

4,436

8,930

9,400

101

101

129

28.0

83

1907

4,111

8,106

9,860

94

92

136

27.6

82

1908

4,306

11,570

98


159

26.8

80

1909

4,070


11,005

93

151

28.2

84

1910

3,880

10,783

89

148

40.0

119

1911

3,742

86

33.3

99

Averages
1890-99

4,373

8,823

7,268

100

100

100

33.7

100

1900-09

4,338

9,930

99

137

29.1

86

^  Average  actual  amounts  in  1891-99  =  100.

"  In  millions of dollars.

'Average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99  =  100.

Compiled  from  the Statistical  Abstracts  of  the several  countries.


446  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

These  fluctuations  are  much  more  marked  in  Germany  than  in  England  or
France.  As  several  of  the  previous  tables  have  indicated,  German  business
shows  most  of  the  phenomena  of  business  cycles  in  more  accentuated  form
than  French  and  English  business.  In  the  present  case  Germany  equals,  if
she  does  not  surpass,  the  United  States  in  instability.  The  chief  differences
between  these  two  countries  with  respect  to  the  fluctuations  in  number  of  fail-
ures grow  out  of  the  dissimilarity  in  the  chronology  of  their  business  cycles.
1893  did  not  bring  a  severe  crisis  in  Germany,  1900  did  not  bring  one  in  the
United  States.  Even  the  higher  level  of  the  German  fluctuations  in  the  second
decade  and  of  the  American  fluctuations  in  the  flrst  decade  may  be  traced  to
this  difference  in  business  history.

The  English  figures  are  peculiar  in  that  they  make  the  largest  number  of
failures  occur  toward  the  end  of  a  period  of  depression,  instead  of  during  a
crisis  like  the  American  and  German  figures.  It  may  be  that  the  judicial  source
of  the  English  data  has  some  bearing  upon  this  difference;  but  the  known
promptness  of  the  British  courts  disposes  one  to  regard  this  suggestion  as  of
slight  moment.  A  more  important  cause  of  difference  is  the  relative  conserv-
atism of  British  business  and  the  ability  of  British  banks  to  provide  adequate
accommodation  for  their  borrowers  in  seasons  of  stress.  But  no  banker  can
ward  off  business  failure  which  results  from  inability  to  secure  sufficient  trade
to  make  profits.  Of  course  failures  from  this  latter  course  are  most  numerous
at  the  end  of  several  years  of  depression,  when  a  firm's  powers  of  resistance  to
bankruptcy  have  been  gradually  exhausted.

Finally,  the  French  statistics  for  failures,  like  most  of  the  other  gauges  of
economic  activity  which  have  been  examined  hertofore,  are  less  influenced  by
business  cycles  than  the  American,  German,  or  British  statistics.  Indeed,  one
who  studied  the  present  table  only  would  go  quite  astray  in  dating  the  crises
which  have  occurred  in  Prance  since  1890.  For  some  reason,  which  a  fuller
knowledge  of  the  scope  of  the  data  might  disclose,  the  largest  number  of  failures
occurred  in  1898,  a  highly  prosperous  year,  and  in  1904,  when  business  was  on
the  eve  of  a  revival  of  activity.  But  the  most  remarkable  and  most  character-
istic feature  of  the  French  figures  is  their  evenness.  If  business  "booms"  are
less  intense  in  France  than  elsewhere,  epidemics  of  bankruptcy  are  less  severe.


PART  III

THE  RHYTHM  OF  BUSINESS  ACTIVITY


THE  FRAMEWORK  OF  PART  III

The  review  of  recent  theories  concerning  business  cycles  in  Part  I  of  this
book  and  the  statistical  study  of  the  phenomena  of  recent  cycles  in  Part  II
have  a  common  purpose — to  provide  suggestions  and  materials  for  attacking
the  problem  of  Part  III.  This  problem  is  to  account  for  the  rhythmical  alter-
nations of  prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression  which  occur  in  the  modern  business
world.

Now  the  recurrent  phases-  presented  by  economic  activity,  wherever  it  is
dominated  by  the  quest  of  profits,  grow  out  of  and  grow  into  each  other.  An
incipient  revival  of  activity,  for  example,  develops  into  full  prosperity,  pros-
perity gradually  breeds  a  crisis,  the  crisis  merges  into  depression,  depression
becomes  deeper  for  a  while,  but  ultimately  engenders  a  fresh  revival  of  activity,
which  is  the  beginning  of  another  cycle.  A  theory  of  business  cycles  must
therefore  be  a  descriptive  analysis  of  the  cumulative  changes  by  which  one
set  of  business  conditions  transforms  itself  into  another  set.

The  deepest-seated  difficulty  in  the  way  of  framing  such  a  theory  arises
from  the  fact  that  while  business  cycles  recur  decade  after  decade  each  new
cycle  presents  points  of  novelty.  Business  history  repeats  itself,  but  always
with  a  difference.  This  is  precisely  what  is  implied  by  saying  that  the  process
of  economic  activity  within  which  business  cycles  occur  is  a  process  of  cumu-
lative change.

It  follows  that  a  thoroughly  adequate  theory  of  business  cycles,  applicable
to  all  cases,  is  unattainable.  Even  if  some  one  cycle  could  be  fully  accounted
for,  the  account  would  necessarily  be  inaccurate  with  reference  to  cycles  which
were  the  outgrowth  of  earlier  or  of  later  conditions.  Nor  are  all  the  differences
between  the  successive  cycles  of  one  country  and  between  the  contemporary
cycles  of  several  countries  differences  in  minor  detail.  Even  such  an  elemen-
tary matter  as  the  order  in  which  the  phases  of  a  business  cycle  succeed  one
another  is  not  invariable.  A  revival  of  business  activity  does  not  always
develop  into  prosperity — sometimes  it  relapses  into  depression.  Such  devia-
tions from  the  usual  course  of  events  occurred  in  the  United  States  in  1892,
1895,  and  1910.  A  situation  of  intense  strain,  presenting  the  phenomena  of
crises,  sometimes  follows  a  period  of  depression,  instead  of  following  a  period
of  prosperity ;  for  example,  the  American  stringency  of  1896.  It  is  needless  to
labor  the  point,  however,  for  random  references  to  the  preceding  chapters  will

[449]


450  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

show  that  the  points  of  difference  between  any  two  periods  of  prosperity,  of
crisis,  or  of  depression  are  scarcely  less  numerous  than  the  points  of  similarity.
Every  business  cycle,  strictly  speaking,  is  a  unique  series  of  events  and  has  a
unique  explanation,  because  it  is  the  outgrowth  of  a  preceding  series  of  events,
likewise  unique/

The  theory  of  business  cycles,  however,  need  not  be  given  up  in  despair
because  it  cannot  satisfy  ideal  requirements.  The  purposes  which  scientific
theory  serves  are  met  by  explanations  which  stop  far  short  of  radical  thor-
oughness. Much  would  be  gained  for  the  conduct  of  individual  affairs  and
the  guidance  of  legislation  could  we  single  out  from  the  maze  of  sequences
among  business  phenomena  a  few  which  are  substantially  uniform.  For  these
sequences  could  be  used  with  a  degree  of  confidence  depending  upon  the  regu-
laritj"  with  which  they  recur  as  guides  in  forecasting  the  immediate  business
future.  They  could  also  serve  as  centers  for  organizing  our  knowledge  con-
cerning the  variable  sequences,  and  as  points  of  departure  in  search  for  new
uniformities.  Such  regular  sequences  would  help  us  to  break  up  the  tangled
mass  of  facts  presented  by  direct  observation  into  coherent  clusters.  The  latter
would  stimulate  the  imagination  to  unravel  various  lines  of  ca/§(i^al  connection
which  are  jumbled  together  in  the  annals  of  business  and  in  the  tables  of
statistics.  Then  it  might  be  found  that  the  irregularity  of  other  sequences
arises  from  varying  combinations  among  sequences  themselves  regular.

The  first  aim  of  the  descriptive  analysis  of  business  cycles,  then,  must  be
to  look  for  the  sequences  which  occur  in  every  period  of  revival,  of  prosperity,
of  crisis,  or  of  depression.  But  the  search  need  not  be  confined  to  the  phe-
nomena revealed  by  the  preceding  chapters.  The  various  lines  of  thought
suggested  by  what  lies  on  the  surface  may  be  followed  boldly  in  the  hope  of
discovering  further  uniformities  which  are  obscured  by  being  tangled  together.
These  speculations,  however,  must  be  submitted  to  the  pragmatic  test.  That
is,  they  must  be  used  in  attempting  to  interpret  the  known  phenomena  of
business  cycles,  and  judged  by  the  aid  which  they  render  the  mind  in  its  effort
to  create  order  amidst  the  confused  facts  of  observation.

As  Chapter  II  provided  the  framework  into  which  the  statistical  chapters
of  Part  II  were  fitted,  so  it  provides  also  the  framework  for  the  descriptive
analysis  of  Part  III.

Since  the  quest  of  money  profits  by  business  enterprises  is  the  controlling
factor  among  the  economic  activities  of  men  who  live  in  a  money  economy,
the  whole  discussion  must  center  about  the  prospects  of  profits. On  occasion,

1  If  theory  is  to  be  taken  seriously  as  seeking  to  give  really  adequate  understanding,  it  must  be  admitted
that  even  this  unique  explanation  of  any  single  cycle  cannot  be  completely  worked  out.  For,  obviously,  analysis
can  never  be  carried  back  to  the  beginning  of  the  chain  of  events  which  eventuated  in  any  cycle,  and  con-
cerning even  the  proximate  events  it  is  obviously  impossible  to  collect  all  the  relevant  information.  Further
the  intellectual  instruments  of  analysis  are  unequal  to  the  complex  problem  of  handling  simultaneous  varia-
tions among  a  large  number  of  inter-related  functions.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  451

indeed,  this  central  interest  is  eclipsed  by  a  yet  more  vital  issue — the  avoidance
of  bankruptcy.  But  to  make  profits  and  to  avoid  bankruptcy  are  merely  two
sides  of  a  single  issue — one  side  concerns  the  well-being  of  business  enterprises
under  ordinary  circumstances,  the  other  side  concerns  the  life  or  death  of  the
same  enterprises  under  circumstances  of  acute  strain.

Whatever  affects  profits  and  solvency,  then,  comes  within  the  sweep  of  the
analysis.  And  we  already  know  the  factors  of  chief  significance:  the  prices
which  constitute  business  receipts  and  the  prices  which  constitute  business
expenses,  the  volume  of  sales  effected  at  the  prevailing  margins  of  profit,  the
need  of  having  currency  to  make  payments,  and  the  need  of  securing  loans  in
adequate  amount  from  banks  and  investors.  But  to  know  what  these  factors
are,  and  even  to  know  what  fluctuations  they  undergo  in  severalty,  is  but  half
of  the  battle.  The  other  and  the  harder  half  is  to  follow  the  interactions  of
these  factors  through  all  the  permutations  which  brighten  or  darken  the  pros-
pects of  profits  and  make  easy  or  difficult  the  maintenance  of  solvency.

Since  the  processes  of  a  nation's  business  life  never  cease  or  begin  afresh,
there  exists  no  natural  starting-point  for  the  descriptive  analysis  to  which  we
are  committed.  It  is  necessary  to  plunge  in  medias  res  by  breaking  into  the
unceasing  processes  at  some  arbitrarily  chosen  point.  The  grave  disadvantage
of  this  procedure  is  that  the  whole  situation  from  which  we  start  must  be  taken
for  granted.  But,  by  following  the  interlacing  processes  forward  through
their  successive  phases  we  can  work  round  again  to  our  point  of  departure,
and  account  for  our  original  assumptions  in  the  only  way  in  which  we  can
account  for  any  of  the  intermediate  phenomena — that  is,  by  tracing  the  pro-
cesses of  cumulative  change  by  which  one  set  of  business  conditions  gradually
evolves  into  quite  a  different  set.

The  starting-point  chosen  is  that  stage  of  the  business  cycle  in  which  activity
begins  to  quicken  after  a  period  of  depression.  How  the  characteristic  features
of  this  stage  are  evolved  by  the  depression  itself  is  the  topic  which  will  be
treated  last  of  all.


CHAPTER  X


THE  CUMULATION  OF  PROSPERITY

I.  The  Beginnings  of  Revivals  in  Business  Activity

Since  1890  the  United  States  has  had  five  seasons  of  business  revival  fol-
lowing upon  periods  of  business  depression :  the  midsummer  of  1891,  the  spring
of  1895,  the  midsummer  of  1897,  the  autumn  of  1904,  and  the  winter  of  1908-09.'
In  England,  Prance,  and  Germany  similar  revivals  occurred  in  1895,  1904-05,
and  1909.'

v/  The  conspicTjXLUs  agent  in  rousing  business  from  its  partial  lethargy  has
often  been  some  propitious  event.  For  example,  highly  profitable  crops  of
grain  served  as  occasions  for  the  American  revivals  of  1891  and  1897 ;  President
Cleveland's  contract  with  the  Morgan-Belmont  syndicate  for  the  defense  of
the  gold  reserve  started  the  revival  of  1895 ;  an  increase  in  the  export  demand
for  British  commodities  stimulated  English  trade  in  1905  and  .1909 ;  and  the
extraordinary  development  of  the  electro-technical  and  chemical  industries  led
the  way  in  the  Oerman  revival  of  1895.^
v/  But,  with  one  striking  exception,  these  propitious  events  did  no  more
than  to  hasten  a  process  of  business  recuperation  already  under  way.  To
show  how  the  very  conditions  of  business  depression  beget  a  revival  of  activity
is  a  task  reserved  for  Chapter  XIII;  but  certain  results  of  this  later  investi-
gation may  be  anticipated. Among  the  ultimate  effects  of  a  period  of  hard

\/ times,  then,  are  the  following:  a  lessening  in  the  prime  and  supplementary
costs  of  manufacturing  commodities,  a  reduction  in  the  stocks  of  goods  held
by  wholesale  and  retail  merchants,  a  liquidation  of  business  debts,  low  rates  of
interest,  a  banking  position  which  favors  an  increase  of  loans,  and  an  increasing
demand  among  investors  for  corporate  securities.  Xow  all  of  these  conditions
are  conducive  to  a  resumption  of  business  activity,  either  because  (like  the
settling  of  old  accounts)  they  remove  obstacles,  or  because  (like  the  reduction
of  mercantile  stocks)  they  promise  a  larger  demand  for  wares,  or  because  (like
low  interest  and  Ioav  manufacturing  costs)  they  widen  the  margin  of  profit,

1  The  quickening  of  activity  in  the  autumn  of  1900  hardly  deserves  to  be  included -in  this  list,  because  the
preceding  slackening  of  activity  had  been  so  mild,  so  restricted,  and  so  brief.
-  See  the  sections  of  Chapter  III  relating  to  these  years.
3  Again  see  the  relevant  sections  of  Chapter  III.

[452] ,


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  453

or  because  (like  the  position  of  the  banks  and  the  attitude  of  investors)  they
facilitate  the  borrowing  of  capital.  Fundamentally,  the  revivals  of  business
must  be  ascribed  to  the  processes  which  beget  these  favorable  conditions.

The  one  exception  to  this  rule  which  has  occurred  in  the  history  of  our
four  countries  within  a  period  of  more  than  twenty  years  is  afforded  by  the
harvest  episode  of  1891.  Exceptionally  large  American  crops  of  grain,  sold
at  exceptionally  high  prices,  cut  short  what  promised  to  be  an  extended  period
of  liquidation  after  the  crisis  of  1890  and  suddenly  set  the  tide  of  business
rising.  But  in  this  single  case  the  revival  proved  both  partial  in  its  scope  and
brief  in  its  duration,  partly  at  least  because  the  stresses  which  had  led  to  the
crisis  were  not  relaxed  in  the  period  of  depression."  Over  against  this  single
instance  are  set  several  instances  in  which  revival  began  quietly  without  the
occurrence  of  any  propitious  event  sufficiently  striking  to  impress  itself  upon
the  attention  of  contemporary  chroniclers.  Such  was  the  case,  for  example,
with  the  German  revival  in  1904-05,  and  with  all  the  French  revivals  since
1890,  The  attempt  to  account  for  business  revivals  as  the  results  of  happy
accidents  therefore  deserves  no  more  credence  than  the  abandoned  theory  that
crises  are  "pathological"  phenomena  due  to  some  "abnormal"  cause.  The
quiet  processes  of  business  recuperation  during  dull  times  are  quite  competent
to  develop  into  revival  without  the  adventitious  help  of  any  "disturbing  cir-
cumstance."

II.  The  Diffusion  of  Bushstess  Activity

1.  The  Increase  in  the  Demand  for  Commodities

Once  started,  a  revival  of  activity  spreads  rapidly  over  a  large  part,  if  not
over  the  whole,  of  the  field  of  business.  For,  even  when  the  first  impulse
toward  expansion  is  sharply  confined  to  a  single  industry  or  a  single  locality,
its  effects  in  the  restricted  field  stimulate  activity  elsewhere.

In  part  this  diffusion  of  activity  proceeds  along  the  lines  of  interconnection
among  business  enterprises  which  were  traced  in  Chapter  II.  One  line  leads
back  from  the  industries  first  stimulated  to  the  industries  which  provide  raw
materials  and  supplementary  supplies.  Another  line  leads  forward  to  the  chain
of  enterprises  which  handle  the  increased  output  of  commodities.  Still  other
lines,  of  less  importance  for  the  transmission  of  the  stimulus,  radiate  to  the
industries  which  deal  in  complementary  or  substitution  goods.  Of  course  the
particular  trades  which  receive  an  early  share  in  the  revival  are  those  which
stand  in  the  most  intimate  relations  with  the  trade  which  happens  to  be  the
first  center  of  business  expansion.  But,  since  every  important  industry  requires
transportation  and  bank  accommodation,  the  railways  and  the  banks  which

*  See  Chapter  III,  iii,  1  and  5.


V


454  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

serve  the  locality  affected  are  always  among  the  early  beneficiaries. Among
other  trades  coal  mining  has  the  best  chance  of  profiting  promptly.

As  the  industries  which  cater  to  the  business  needs  of  the  enterprises  from
which  activity  radiates  receive  a  stimulus,  so  also  do  the  industries  which  cater
to  the  personal  needs  of  the  families  interested  in  the  flourishing  enterprises.
Larger  earnings  for  the  employes  and  higher  profits  for  the  proprietors  enable
both  classes  to  pay  such  debit  accounts  as  they  may  have  run  up  during  the
period  of  depression  and  to  enlarge  their  current  purchases.  The  statistics
of  consumption  are  too  fragmentary  to  give  much  aid  in  following  this  process;^
but  current  trade  reports  justify  the  belief  that  even  the  staple  articles  of  food
find  a  somewhat  larger  sale  when  business  improves,  and  that  better  qualities
are  freely  substituted  for  the  poorer  which  were  bought  so  long  as  severe
economy  was  compulsory.  The  demands  for  clothing,  furniture,  amusements,
and  luxuries  of  all  kinds  are  doubtless  affected  in  larger  degree  than  the  demand
for  food,  because  purchases  of  such  goods  can  be  given  up,  diminished,  or
deferred  in  seasons  of  depression  with  less  discomfort.

While  retail  shopkeepers  are  the  first  beneficiaries  of  the  increasing  con-
sumers' demand,  they  are  compelled  to  place  fresh  orders  promptly  with  whole-
sale merchants,  because  they  have  let  their  stocks  run  low  during  the  dull  times.
Since  the  wholesale  merchants  have  pursued  the  same  policy,  they  are  like-
wise prompt  in  placing  fresh  orders  with  the  manufacturers.  Thus  the  whole
chain  of  trades  engaged  in  furnishing  consumers'  goods  soon  feels  the  stimu-
lating effect  of  a  revival  of  business,  no  matter  in  what  locality  or  industry  it
starts.  And  each  enterprise  which  finds  its  own  trade  increasing  becomes  an
agency  in  extending  activity  to  still  other  enterprises — those  from  which  it
buys  producers'  goods,  and  those  which  supply  consumers'  goods  to  its  own
personnel.

At  first  the  impetus  toward  business  expansion  grows  weaker  as  it  spreads
out  from  its  original  center  to  the  branches  of  business  which  furnish  it  with
producers'  and  consumers'  goods.  For  the  latter  classes  of  enterprises  have
customers  engaged  in  several  or  in  many  industries,  or  customers  living  in
many  sections  of  the  country,  so  that  an  increase  of  say  5  per  cent  in  the  sales
to  one  set  of  customers  means  an  increase  of  much  less  than  5  per  cent  in  the
total  volume  of  sales.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  impetus  is  cumulative.  If
the  steel  trade  makes  more  business  for  the  railway,  the  railway  presently
increases  its  orders  for  steel,  and  thus  sets  the  process  working  afresh  at  a
higher  pitch  of  intensity.  Thus  the  revival  gathers  momentum  as  the  industries
which  receive  a  mild  stimulus  one  after  the  other  begin  to  react  upon  those
in  which  the  movement  started.


5  Compare  Chapter  V,  section  vi.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  455

2.  The  Development  of  Business  Optimism

The  diffusion  of  activity  is  not  confined  to  these-  definite  lines  of  intercon-
nection among  business  enterprises.  It  also  proceeds  by  engendering  an  opti-
mistic bias  in  the  calculations  of  all  folk  who  are  concerned  with  the  active
direction  of  business  enterprises  and  with  the  providing  of  loans.

Practically  all  business  problems  involve  elements  which  are  not  precisely
known,  but  must  be  approximately  estimated  even  for  the  present,  and  forecast
still  more  roughly  for  the  future.  Probabilities  take  the  place  of  certainties,
both  among  the  data  upon  which  reasoning  proceeds  and  among  the  conclusions
at  which  it  arrives.  This  fact  gives  hopeful  or  despondent  moods  a  large  share
in  shaping  business  decisions.  A  mathematician's  mood  exercises  no  influence
upon  his  solution  of  an  algebraic  equation ;  but  it  does  affect  his  opinion  about
the  advisability  of  buying  the  bonds  which  are  offered  him.

While  these  emotional  states  are  largely  the  product  of  strictly  individual
conditions — such  as  the  state  of  digestion — they  are  also  in  part  the  product
of  suggestions  received  from  the  demeanor,  the  talk,  and  the  actions  of  asso-
ciates. Most  men  find  their  spirits  raised  by  being  in  optimistic  company.
Therefore,  when  the  first  beneficiaries  of  a  trade  revival  develop  a  cheerful
frame  of  mind  about  the  business  outlook,  they  become  centers  of  infection,
and  start  an  epidemic  of  optimism.  Perhaps  the  buoyancy  of  a  grocer  gives
a  lumber  dealer  no  adequate  reason  for  altering  his  conservative  attitude  toward
the  business  projects  upon  which  he  must  pass.  Yet,  in  despite  of  logic,  he
will  be  the  readier  to  buy  if  his  acquaintances  in  any  line  of  trade  have  become
aggressively  confident  of  the  future.  The  fundamental  conditions  affecting
his  own  business  may  remain  the  same ;  but  his  conduct  is  altered  because  he
sees  the  old  facts  in  a  new  emotional  perspective.

As  it  spreads,  the  epidemic  of  optimism  helps  to  breed  conditions  which
both  justify  and  intensify  it.  The  mere  fact  that  a  growing  number  of  business
men  are  gaining  confidence  in  the  outlook  becomes  a  valid  reason  why  each
member  of  the  group  and  outsiders  also  should  feel  confident.  For  the  hopeful
mood  means  greater  readiness  to  make  new  purchases,  enter  into  new  contracts,
etc. — in  fine,  means  that  the  incipient  revival  of  -activity  will  be  supported  and
extended.  There  is  the  stronger  reason  for  relying  upon  the  feeling  in  that
its  growth — like  the  growth  in  the  volume  of  goods  ordered — is  cumulative.
As  new  groups  of  business  men  become  infected  with  optimism,  their  demeanor,
talk,  and  actions  confirm  the  faith  of  those  who  converted  them.  Thus  the
feeling  of  confidence  becomes  stronger  as  it  spreads;  that  is,  it  becomes  an
increasingly  powerful  factor  in  supporting  the  movement  out  of  which  it  grew,
and  in  justifying  itself.


456  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


3.  The  Laggards  in  Business  Revivals

Just  as  there  are  often  certain  industries  or  localities  which  stand  out  as
conspicuous  leaders  in  a  revival  of  activity,  so  there  are  often  other  industries
or  localities  which  stand  out  as  conspicu.ous  laggards.  Bad  weather,  tariff
changes,  technical  inventions,  the  discovery  of  new  sources  of  supply,  the  devel-
opment of  new  trade  routes,  alterations  in  popular  taste,  etc.,  may  prevent
particular  enterprises  from  sharing  the  general  improvement.  Every  industry
or  locality  which  languishes  from  any  cause  retards  the  growth  of  activity  and
of  confidence  among  other  industries  or  localities.  But  such  cases  seem  more
and  more  exceptional,  and  count  for  less  and  less  as  the  revival  progresses.  For
the  cumulative  character  of  the  processes  which  we  have  been  tracing  results
in  making  the  general  movement  toward  prosperity  more  dominant  as  it
jjroceeds.

Quite  apart  from  the  victims  of  special  misfortunes,  however,  certain  trades
and  localities  have  a  late  or  a  minor  share  in  the  benefits  of  a  business  revival.
Such  is  the  case  on  the  whole  with  the  agricultural  and  grazing  sections  in
contrast  with  the  centers  of  industry,  commerce,  and  finance.*  Even  in  those
notable  cases  when  the  revival  has  begun  with  profitable  crops  for  the  farmers
in  certain  sections,  it  has  reached  the  other  farming  sections  and  the  world  of
handicraft,  small  trade,  and  the  professions,  not  by  direct  transmission,  but
indirectly  by  its  effect  upon  the  more  highly  organized  world  of  business.
Not  until  the  lumber  companies,  mines,  and  quarries  are  working  full  time,
the  factories  buying  materials  and  employing  men  freely,  the  railways  reporting
few  idle  cars,  and  the  mercantile  houses  busy — not  until  this  stage  has  been
reached  is  the  impetus  toward  activity  carried  out  from  the  centers  to  all  corners
of  the  land.  And  not  until  this  time  are  all  the  classes  which  form  the  fringe
of  modern  industry  in  cities  and  towns  alike  swept  into  the  movement.


4.  The  Statistical  Signs  of  Business  Revivals

A  business  revival  is  a  composite  made  up  of  many  elements.  It  is  not  to
be  defined  in  terms  of  any  single  change  for  the  better,  and  not  to  be  sharply
marked  off  from  the  state  of  depression  out  of  which  it  emerges.  Indeed,  the
only  safe  way  of  dating  a  revival  is  to  accept  the  concensus  of  opinion  among
men  intimately  familiar  with  business  conditions  at  the  time.

Among  all  the  "business  barometers"  there  is  not  one  which  always  rises
or  falls  when  these  skilled  observers  agree  that  revivals  occurred.  This  fact
merits  attention  because  of  its  bearing  on  the  pTactical  problem  of  forecasting
changes  in  the  business  weather.


i>  Compare  Chapter  II,  ii,  1.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  457

An  increase  in  the  physical  volume  of  business,  indeed,  seems  to  be  an
invariable  concomitant  of  revivals;  but  this  increase  usually  sets  in  months,
even  a  year  or  more,  before  depression  has  relaxed/  A  prophet  who  pinned
his  faith  to  this  sign  would  therefore  publish  cheerful  bulletins  prematurely.
The  course  of  wholesale  prices  is  an  even  less  reliable  guide.  For,  contrary
to  a  widely  accepted  opinion,  prices  do  not  always  rise  in  the  early  stages  of
revival,  and  they  do  sometimes  turn  upward  during  depression.'  As  for  the
money  market,  its  changes  during  periods  of  business  revival  are  irregular  in
part,  and  in  part  indistinguishable  continuations  of  changes  already  under
way  before  the  revival  began.  For  example,  discovmt  rates  sometimes  rise  and
sometimes  fall  when  the  change  for  the  better  occurs ;  bank  loans  expand,  but
the  expansion  antedates  the  revival ;  the  ratio  of  reserves  to  deposits  may  move
in  either  direction;  the  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  usually,  but  not  invariably,
rises ;  applications  for  investment  loans  may  increase  before  the  revival  or  not
until  it  has  come;  the  purchases  of  bonds  and  stocks  are  similarly  erratic  in
their  behavior,  etc.°  The  statistics  of  unemplojnnent,  monetary  circulation,
savings,  profits,  and  bankruptcies  are  no  safer  guides  than  those  which  have
been  mentioned.

Thus  there  is  no  certain  way  of  predicting  when  business  will  begin  to
recover  from  a  prevailing  depression.  Only  by  compiling  a  composite  record
of  numerous  factors,  and  endeavoring  to  establish  their  general  trend,  can  an
intelligent  guess  be  made.  The  whole  business  situation  is  so  full  of  cross-
currents and  imcertainties  at  this  stage  of  the  cycle  that  forecasts  are  subject
to  a  much  wider  margin  of  error  than  after  the  cumulation  of  prosperity  has
besnun.


-&^


III.  The  Rise  of  Pbices
1.  The  Prices  of  Commodities

A.  WHY  PRICES  EISE

While  the  level  of  wholesale  prices  often  remains  substantially  unchanged
or  even  recedes  a  trifle  in  the  early  stages  of  a  business  revival,  it  always
advances  in  the  later  stages.

This  advance  is  not  the  simple  matter  of  course  it  is  often  assumed  to  be.
True,  the  growing  activity  of  business  means  an  increasing  demand  for  com-

7  This  statement  is  based  upon  a  comparison  between  the  leading  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  pre-
sented in  Chapter  V  and  the  upward  turning-points  in  business  cycles  pointed  out  in  Chapter  III.  For  further
discussion  of  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  business  during  depression  see  Chapter  XIII,  ii,  3.

s  Though  the  recovery  of  business  from  the  depression  which  followed  the  crisis  of  1890  is  dated  from  the
year  1895  in  England  and  France,  the  English  and  French  index  numbers  presented  in  Table  11  indicate  not
only  that  prices  failed  to  rise  in  1895  but  that  they  continued  to  decline  in  1896,  and  advanced  but  a  little
in  1897.  On  the  contrary,  English  index  numbers  show  a  slight  rise  in  1904,  though  the  revival  of  business
can  scarcely  be  said  to  have  begun  before  1905.  Therefore  the  failure  of  index  numbers  to  rise  does  not  justify
the  inference  that  no  improvement  has  occurred  in  business,  and  the  occurrence  of  a  rise  does  not  justify  the
inference  that  depression  is  past.

8  bee  the  tables  in  Part  II  relating  to  these  various  subjects  and  note  the  fluctuations  in  the  years  of  revival
and  the  years  immediately  preceding.


458  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

modities;  but  it  also  means  an  increasing  supply.  On  this  basis  there  is  as
much  reason  for  expecting  prices  to  fall  as  for  expecting  them  to  rise.  The
fact  that  business  men  presently  become  ready  both  to  pay  progressively  higher
prices  for  goods  and  to  buy  progressively  larger  quantities  therefore  constitutes
a  problem.

This  problem  is  the  more  difficult  because  several  business  conditions  pre-
vailing when  a  revival  begins  are  distinctly  unfavorable  to  a  rise  of  prices.
The  effect  of  depression  in  reducing  the  costs  of  doing  business  has  already
been  pointed  out  as  among  the  factors  which  favor  resumption  of  activity."
But  it  does  not  favor  an  advance  in  the  price  level.  On  the  contrary,  it  means
that  profits  can  be  made  without  restoring  prices  to  the  level  which  prevailed
before  the  depression  set  in.  Second,  at  this  stage  of  the  business  cycle,  busi-
ness enterprises  are  anxiously  soliciting  orders.  The  advantage  in  strategic
position  as  bargainers  is  on  the  side  of  the  buyers — much  more  so  than  later,
when  factories,  railways,  and  shops  already  have  all  the  business  they  can
readily  handle.  Third,  a  prolonged  period  of  depression  often  wracks  to  pieces
certain  combinations  to  maintain  prices,  and  leaves  the  field  over  which  free
competition  rules  wider  at  its  close  than  at  its  beginning.  Fourth,  every
increase  in  the  volume  of  business  obtained  in  the  early  stages  of  revival  makes
a  more  than  proportionate  addition  to  profits,  even  though  it  be  taken  at
unchanged  prices.  For  until  the  existing  equipment  of  standard  efficiency
for  handling  business  is  already  busy,  new  orders  can  be  filled  without  an
increase  in  prime  costs,  and  at  a  reduction  of  supplementary  costs  per  unit
of  output.

These  conditions  explain  why  prices  often  fail  to  rise  promptly  at  the
beginning  of  a  trade  revival,  and  why  in  other  cases  the  initial  rise  is  slow.
But  presently  these  conditions  are  turned  into  their  opposites  and  become
incentives  for  raising  prices.

The  magic  which  works  this  transformation  is  the  further  expansion  in
the  physical  volume  of  business.  Beginning  sometimes  two  years  or  even  more
before  the  revival,  this  expansion  is  accompanied  for  months  by  falling  and
then  by  nearl}'  stationary  prices.  But  there  is  a  critical  point  beyond  which
the  expansion  cannot  go  without  producing  an  advance  of  prices,  even  in  keenly
competitive  trades.  This  critical  point  is  reached  in  the  affairs  of  any  enter-
prise when  it  has  already  secured  sufficient  orders  to  keep  busy  its  standard
equipment  and  its  regular  staff  of  employes.  To  execute  additional  orders
then  requires  overtime  work,  the  hiring  of  new  and  presumably  less  efficient
hands,  the  starting  of  old-fashioned  machines,  the  installation  of  new  equip-
ment, or  some  similar  change.  Such  measures  involve  higher  prime  costs,  and
often  new  supplementary  charges  as  well.  Hence  additional  orders  no  longer
make  a  more  than  proportionate  addition  to  profits,  and  may  well  make  a  less

10  See  section  I  above,  and  for  a  more  thorough  analysis  Chapter  XIII,  ii,  1  and  2.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  459

than  proportionate  addition — unless  higher  prices  are  asked.  Pear  of  checking
the  revival  of  trade  may  make  enterprises  slow  in  putting  up  their  prices;
but  every  delay  encourages  a  further  expansion  in  the  volume  of  business  and
strengthens  the  conditions  favoring  an  ultimate  advance  of  the  price  level.

At  the  same  time,  the  expansion  of  trade  facilitates  the  re-establishment  of
those  combinations  to  maintain  or  advance  prices  which  have  broken  down
during  the  preceding  period  of  depression  and  encourages  the  formation  of
new  combinations.  It  also  reduces  the  strategic  advantage  which  buyers
recently  enjoyed  over  sellers  in  bargaining.  As  sellers  become  less  eager  to
accept  orders  at  the  old  level  of  prices,  buyers  generally  become  more  eager  to
place  orders. But  this  statement  requires  further  analysis.


B.  HOW  THE  EISE  OF  PRICES  EEACTS  UPON  THE  DEMAND  FOE  COMMODITIES

There  is  always  danger  that  sellers  may  over-reach  themselves  by  advancing
prices  more  rapidly  than  the  market  conditions  will  support.  For  the  expansion
in  the  volume  of  business,  upon  which  rests  the  whole  movement  toward  pros-
perity, may  be  checked  by  an  ill-timed  or  excessive  advance.  Frequently  one
or  more  branches  of  trade  receive  a  setback  while  others  are  reviving,  because
mistakes  of  this  kind  are  made  by  leading  enterprises.  More  rarely,  the  whole
revival  is  retarded  or  even  stopped  by  an  over-rapid  rise  of  the  price  level.
There  is  evidence,  for  example,  that  this  cause  helped  to  blight  the  promising
American  revival  of  1909.^^

But  when  the  advance  of  prices  is  gradual  and  well  balanced  as  between
different  goods  it  promotes  rather  than  retards  the  growing  demand  for  com-
modities. For  nothing  stimulate^  the  volume  of  present  orders  more  power-
fully than  a  moderate  increase  of  quotations,  which  is  thought  to  be  the  earnest
of  further  increases  in  the  near  future.  Provided  they  are  not  charged  more
for  goods  than  their  competitors,  buyers  count  on  being  able  to  raise  their  own
selling  prices  at  least  enough  to  defend  their  margins  of  profit.  And  they
become  eager  to  lay  in  large  stocks  or  to  make  long  contracts  while  quotations
are  still  moderate  and  terms  are  still  easy. Thus  the  anticipation  of  future

11  Certainly  the  advance  of  prices  in  this  country  was  more  rapid  than  in  foreign  countries  where  the  revival
was  sustained.  See  the  index  numbers  for  identical  lists  of  commodities  in  the  IJnited  States  and  other  coun-
tries, Table  12,  and  the  confirmatory  evidence  borne  by  Table  11.

A.  D.  Noyes,  "Forty  Years  of  American  Finance,"  New  York,  1909,  pp.  245,  246,  expresses  the  opinion
that  an  over-rapid  advance  of  prices  contributed  also  to  checking  the  revival  of  1895.  While  the  above  mentioned
tables  do  not  show  a  marked  difference  between  the  course  of  prices  in  America,  where  the  revival  was  short
lived,  and  in  Europe,  where  it  developed  into  full-blown  prosperity,  the  following  detailed  comparisons  by
months  lends  a  rather  equivocal  support  to  Noyes 's  opinion.  '

Eelatwe  Prices  at  Wholesale  in  the  United  States,  England,  and  Germany,  by  Months,  1895-96

United  States  England  Germany

1895— April

July

October
1896 — January


Falkner

Bradstreet

Sauerbeck

Sehmitz

84.7

5.97

61.7

83.47

85.2

6.42

62.8

84.30

86.3

6.52

63.3

84.70

85.2

6.31

61.4

83.82

460  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

advances  in  prices  not  only  prevents  present  advances  from  reducing  demand,
but  actually  makes  demand  grow  in  the  face  of  a  rising  level  of  prices.

C.  HOW  THE  EISB  OP  PEICES  SPREADS  AND  CUMULATES

Once  set  going,  the  rise  of  prices  rapidly  spreads  over  the  whole  system  of
prices  in  much  the  same  manner  that  the  activity  of  trade  out  of  which  it  grew
spreads  over  the  whole  field  of  business.  When  the  price  of  a  commodity  has
been  advanced  at  any  stage  of  its  journey  from  original  producer  to  ultimate
consumer,  that  advance  represents  an  increase  of  cost  to  every  subsequent  pur-
chaser, and  becomes  a  reason  for  increasing  its  price  at  later  stages.  At  the
same  time,  those  who, first  put  up  the  price  have  a  stronger  business  incentive
for  securing  larger  supplies  to  sell  at  their  wider  margins  of  profit.  Their
eager  bidding  offers  the  persons  from  whom  they  buy  an  opportunity  to  exact
higher  prices.  Thus  the  advance  travels  backward  to  antecedent  prices,  as  well
as  forward  to  subsequent  prices.  In  less  measure,  the  impulse  toward  higher
prices  is  imparted  to  complementary  and  to  competing  goods.  From  the  latter
it  extends  to  their  materials,  products,  complements,  and  competitors,  and  so
on  from  one  class  of  commodities  to  the  next.  The  great  raw  staples  of  com-
merce, which  are  sure  to  be  touched  comparatively  early  in  this  process,  play
an  especially  prominent  role  in  spreading  the  rise ;  because  an  advance  in  their
prices,  caused  by  an  increasing  demand  from  any  quarter,  is  promptly  felt  in
all  the  hundreds  of  uses  to  which  they  are  put  and  becomes  a  reason  for  advanc-
ing the  prices  of  all  their  manifold  products.

The  rise  of  prices  reseml^les  the  increasing  activity  of  trade  also  in  that  it
is  cumulative.  If  the  advance  is  begun,  for  example,  in  the  textile  trades  and
spreads  thence  to  other  lines,  it  will  flow  back  again  in  the  form  of  higher  prices
for  all  the  things  which  textile  mills  buy.  Then  these  mills  must  raise  their
selling  prices  once  more  or  sulimit  to  a  reduced  margin  of  profit.  And  if  the
textile  mills,  as  is  likely,  do  raise  their  selling  prices  further,  that  step  starts  tho
whole  process  over  again  on  a  higher  level.

Since  the  successive  sets  of  business  men  who  handle  a  given  commodity
are  generally  successful  in  their  endeavor  to  pass  on  the  increase  of  prices  from
one  to  another,  the  onus  of  the  advance  finally  falls  upon  the  ultimate  consumers.
For  present  purposes,  these  people  belong  to  one  of  two  classes — individuals
who  buy  consumers'  goods  for  personal  use,  or  investors  who  buy  equipment  for
business  use.  Both  classes  pay  the  increased  prices,  not  only  without  diminish-
ing, but  while  actually  augmenting  the  volume  pf  their  purchases.  For  the
growing  activity  of  business,  which  leads  to  the  rise  of  prices,  also  provides
the  mass  of  families  with  larger  money  incomes  to  spend,  and  makes  investors,
whether  acting  singly  or  through  business  enterprises,  eager  to  get  the  equip-
ment necessary  for  participating  in  the  high  profits  which  prosperity  promises.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  461

D.  WHY  DIFFEEENT  GROUPS  OF  COMMODITY  PRICES  EISE  IN  DISSIMILAR  DEGREES

Of  course  the  advance  of  prices  is  far  from  uniform.  A  few  prices  fall,
a  few  remain  constant,  and  of  the  many  which  rise  some  advance  one  or  two,
some  one  hundred  or  more  per  cent.  Our  concern,  however,  is  not  with  the
idiosyncrasies  in  the  price-movements  of  single  commodities,  but  with  theii'
average  variations.  That  there  is  a  distinct  trend  in  the  fluctuations  even  of
those  relative  prices  which  lie  far  above  or  beloAV  the  median  is  showm  by  the
table  of  decils.'"  That  this  trend  has  been  measured  with  substantial  accuracy
is  shown  by  the  close  agreement  among  index  numbers  compiled  by  distinct
authorities  from  quotations  obtained  from  different  sources  and  including  dis-
similar lists  of  commodities."

But  it  has  also  been  shown  that  this  trend  is  not  the  same  in  all  parts  of  the
system  of  prices.  While  all  parts  of  the  system  feel  the  influence  of  a  business
revival,  they  respond  to  the  stimulus  with  varying  degrees  of  promptness  and
energj^.  The  genuineness  of  these  differences  as  phenomena  characterizing  a
shifting  of  the  price  level  is  attested  not  only  by  the  regularity  w4th  which  they
recur  whenever  business  improves;  but  also  by  the  fact  that  the  divergencies
among  the  average  fluctuations  of  the  groups  referred  to  are  much  wider  than
the  divergencies  among  general  index  numbers  made  hj  different  hands."

Of  such  dissimilarities  in  the  average  price  variations  of  groups  of  com-
modities, the  following  have  been  established:  (1)  retail  prices  rise  less
promptly  and  less  considerably  than  the  wholesale  prices  of  the  same  com-
modities ;  (2)  the  wholesale  prices  of  finished  products  lag  behind  the  wholesale
prices  of  the  same  commodities  in  a  partially  manufactured  state,  and  the  latter
prices  in  turn  lag  behind  the  prices  of  the  corresponding  raw  materials ;  (3)  the
wholesale  prices  of  manufactured  consumers'  goods  rise  perhaps  more  promptly,
but  certainly  less  considerably  than  the  wdiolesale  prices  of  manufactured  pro-
ducers' goods;  and  (4)  the  wholesale  prices  of  raw  mineral  products  respond
to  changes  in  business  conditions  wdth  greater  certainty  and  greater  accuracy
than  do  the  wholesale  prices  of  raw  farm,  animal,  or  forest  products.^^

The  differences  between  the  average  variations  in  the  retail  and  wholesale
prices  of  the  same  goods  are  due  chiefly  to  the  steadiness  of  certain  important
items  of  expense  in  conducting  a  retail  shop.  A  shop-keeper's  rent,  wages,
losses  on  bad  debts,  interest  on  fixed  investment,  depreciation  charges,  and  the
like  do  not  rise  promptly  with  the  wholesale  prices  of  his  wares.  Consequently
he  can  maintain  or  even  increase  his  profits  on  the  business  as  a  whole  while
raising  his  selling  prices  less  than  his  buying  prices  have  been  raised.  There-
fore the  more  rigorously  competition  constrains  shop-keepers  to  defend  their

12  See  Chapter  IV,  i,  7.

13  See  Chapter  IV,  i,  8.

1*  See  Tables  9  and  10,  and  the  discussion  appended  to  each — Chapter  IV,  i,  8.
15  See  Chapter  IV,  i,  3,  4,  5,  and  6.


462  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

reputations  for  reasonable  prices  and  fair  dealing,  the  more  certainly  will  retail
prices  lag  behind  wholesale  prices  on  the  rise/"

Similar  is  the  explanation  of  the  differences  between  the  average  variations
in  the  wholesale  prices  of  the  same  goods  at  successive  stages  of  their  progress
from  the  state  of  raw  materials  to  that  of  finished  products.  Manufacturing
expenses  like  retailing  expenses  include  important  items  which  do  not  rise
rapidly  on  the  return  of  prosperity.  Hence  the  more  accurately  selling  prices
are  adjusted  to  total  expenses  of  production,  the  more  certainly  will  finished  ^■'
products  lag  behind  partly-finished  products  and  the  latter  behind  raw  materials
when  the  price  level  is  advancing.

Even  the  manufacturing  enterprise  with  a  complete  monopoly  finds  its  inter-
est in  keeping  selling  prices  more  stable  than  the  prices  of  raw  materials.  For
if  the  monopoly  charged  the  maximum-net-revenue  price  before  the  price  level
advanced  it  runs  danger  of  losing  profits  by  putting  up  its  selling  prices  faster
than  is  necessary  to  meet  the  increase  of  expenses,  and  total  expenses  increase
much  less  rapidly  than  the  prices,  of  raw  materials.  In  fact,  the  large  and  ably
managed  combinations  which  control  a  considerable  proportion  of  their  indus-
tries have  generally  kept  their  selling  prices  more  stable  than  prices  had
formerly  been  under  competitive  conditions."

The  dissimilarities  between  the  average  price  variations  of  consumers'  and
producers '  goods  in  their  finished  state  have  a  different  source.  In  both  classes,
the  goods  for  which  we  have  data  are  mainly  important  staples.  ISTow  the
consumers'  demand  for  articles  which  enter  into  the  budget  of  the  great  mass
of  families  is  fairly  constant. Families  economize  or  expand  their  expend-


18  Of  course  rent,  wages,  and  interest  charges  are  themselves  aggregates  of  prices  paid  for  certain  business
adjuncts.  What  happens,  then,  is  that  certain  prices  which  enter  into  the  cost  of  retailing  rise  less  rapidly  than
the  wholesale  prices  of  wares.  Hence  the  lagging  of  retail  behind  wholesale  prices  may  be  described  as  an
adjustment  of  retail  prices  to  the  aggregate  of  the  prices  which  the  shopkeeper  must  pay.

17  Since  this  chapter  was  written,  Professor  B.  S.  Meade  has  published  an  index  number  of  the  prices  of  18
commodities  produced  by  trusts  and  of  18  commodities  produced  under  competitive  conditions.  His  data  were
obtained  from  the  Bureau  of  Labor  and  his  relative  prices  were  computed  on  the  basis  of  actual  prices  in
January,  1897. The  articles  selected  and  the  results  obtained  are  as  follows:

Non-Trust  Trust

Manila  rope  Anthracite  coal

Bituminous  coal  (Toughiogheny)  American  cement

New  Orleans  molasses  Eefined  petroleum

Pig-iron  (Bessemer,  Pittsburgh)  Cotton-seed  oil

Bleached  sheetings  Glucose

Corn  meal  Newspaper

Yellow  pine  Proof  spirits

Plain  white  oak  Leather

Print  cloth  Wire  nails

Glass  tumblers  Steel  rails

Vici  kid  shoes  Eaw  linseed  oil

Sheet  zinc  Pig  lead

Flour  (New  York)  American  fine  salt

Cotton  Plug  tobacco

Bare  copper  wire  Sulphuric  acid

Wilton  carpet  Granulated  sugar

Earthenware  plates  Cotton  thread

Bleached  shirtings  Domestic  parlor  matches


MITCHELL:  BUSLNBSS  CYCLES


463


itures  cliiefly  by  cutting  off  or  adding  luxuries,  amusements,  savings,  and  the
like. Moreover,  population  grows  at  a  steady  rate  which  is  little  affected  by


1897

A

1898

1899

Non-Trust

Trust

Non-Trust

Trust

Non-Trust

Trust

January-

100.0

100.0

98.7

104.9

102.7

105.9

February

99.8

98.3

98.7

104.9

104.5

108.1

March

99.8

100.2

94.6

105.4

108.3

110.5

April

99.4

99.9

100.2

104.1

110.8

113.7

May

99.2

99.9

102.2

106.5

112.2

113.9

June

98.2

100.8

104.4

107.1

114.4

114.6

July

98.2

100.9

104.3

107.1

113.6

116.1

August

99.3

105.7

103.8

107.2

115.5

116.8

September

100.9

108.3

103.5

104.5

119.9

119.0

October

99.9

107.2

101.9

103.2

121.3

122.0

November

98.5  ■

104.0

102.6

104.8

121.4

124.0

December

98.7

104.0

102.2

104.1

127.3

127.2

1900

1901

1903

A

A

January

131.6

130.1

119.2

126.5

123.7

126.2

February

132.1

133.3

119.1

128.7

124.3

129.1

March

134.0

133.4

118.7

128.6

125.2

130.2

April

134.1

133.6

119.5

128.8

125.2

129.8

May

131.9

130.5

117.3

127.5

128.0

128.8

June

128.3

131.3

117.5

126.9

128.0

128.3

July

136.9

131.0

117.0

131.3

128.0

130.4

August

123.5

128.8

118.2

131.1

127.3

129.6

September

121.2

128.9

120.1

126.8

127.3

127.7

October

121.2

128.8

121.3

128.3

128.6

125.2

November

119.7

131.0

123.3

127.4

129.5

123.1

December

119.1

1903

A

128.0

124.4

1904

125.9

128.3

1905

A

125.4

January

127.8

124.4

127.1

122.3

125.1

122.9

February

127.8

124.5

130.5

124.5

124.0

120.4

March

127.9

127.2

130.7

124.7

124.4

121.7

April

128.8

127.8

131.5

125.2

124.5

120.9

May

128.9

126.4

128.2

123.3

124.5

121.8

June

131.3

126.3

130.4

122.0

125.5

122.8

July

131.3

125.8

124.2

122.8

128.3

121.0

August

132.4

125.2

122.9

121.4

130.5

121.8

September

131.5

124.6

119.0

121.5

130.7

123.8

October

128.2

125.4

123.9

121.6

130.5

121.5

November

127.4

122.5

126.8

114.8

133.7

122.2

December

126.5

123.7

129.3

123.3

13.5.5

123.0

1906

1907

1908

A

A

A

January

135.9

124.5

142.1

130.2

142.7

130.1

February

135.2

126.3

143.8

130.2

142.2

130.0

March

133.7

122.7

147.2

131.7

138.5

131.8

April

136.5

126.1

147.5

131.4

136.0

130.1

May

136.7

124.4

147.7

131.8

135.9

129.8

June

136.8

124.2

153.8

135.3

132.0

131.2

July

136.8

123.9

154.5

132.9

131.8

129.8

August

136.6

125.7

152.3

133.1

131.5

131.0

September

136.6

125.3

146.5

133.3

130.1

131.4

October

137.6

126.3

148.3

133.1

131.7

132.0

November

141.1

126.8

146.9

130.4

132.1

130.3

December

142.8

130.0

1909

A

142.1

130.1

1910

133.3

131.5

Non-Trust

Trust

Non-Trust

Trust

January

133.3

129.2

144.4

136.7

February

133.2

130.8

143.9

135.2

March

133.1

130.8

143.8

137.2

April

133.0

128.0

142.9

135.6

464  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

business  cycles."  On  the  contrary,  the  producers'  demand  for  business  supplies
other  than  raw  materials — particularly  the  demand  for  commodities  which  con-
stitute part  of  the  equipment  for  production — becomes  much  more  brisk  as  the
prospects  of  profits  become  brighter.  At  the  same  time  the  establishing  of  new
business  enterprises  and  the  enlarging  of  old  enterprises  become  more  common.
This  superior  stability  of  consumers'  as  compared  with  producers'  demand  is
confined,  however,  to  demand  for  staples.  Had  we  price  data  for  consumers'
luxuries  we  should  probably  find  them  exhibiting  average  variations  equal  to
or  greater  than  those  of  staple  producers'  goods.

Finally,  the  difference  in  the  accuracy  with  which  the  prices  of  raw  minerals
and  of  other  raw  products  reflect  changes  in  business  conditions  arises  chiefly
from  technical  circumstances  affecting  the  volume  of  current  supply.  The  pro-
duction of  coal,  iron,  copper,  zinc,  etc.,  is  more  completely  under  man's  control
than  is  the  production  of  beef,  pork,  mutton,  and  wool,  or  of  wheat,  cotton,  sugar,
and  corn.  The  influence  of  increasing  demand  upon  the  prices  of  the  latter
groups  of  products  is  often  offset  by  favorable  seasons  for  the  farmers,  or
exaggerated  by  bad  seasons,  while  the  prices  of  mineral  products  respond  regu-
larly to  changes  of  market  conditions.  Forest  products  belong  with  minerals
rather  than  with  animal  and  farm  products,  so  far  as  concerns  their  conditions
of  production  in  very  brief  periods.  But,  in  the  United  States  at  least,  the
exhaustion  of  the  better  sources  of  supply — better  both  in  quality  of  timber  and
iu  location — has  recently  proceeded  faster  in  the  lumbering  than  in  the  mining
business.  Hence  the  prices  of  forest  products  have  been  moving  upward  rather
steadily,  and  the  influence  of  business  conditions  has  been  limited  to  retarding
this  advance  in  times  of  depression  and  accelerating  it  in  times  of  prosperity."

2.  The  Prices  of  Labor

Into  the  sweep  of  the  changes  which  follow  hard  upon  one  another  when
business  revives  from  depression  there  is  presently  draAvn  even  the  least  business-
like section  of  the  community — the  wage-workers  whom  we  habitually  think  of

1909  1910


Non-Trust

Trust

Non-Trust

Trust

May

134.0

128.2

139.2

133.8

June

135.4

128.5

138.6

134.0

July

137.3

129.0

138.6

132.4

August

138.9

128.5

138.6

138.4

September

138.9

130.4

137.4

141.4

October

138.9

130.8

137.4

133.7

November

142.2

135.4

135.1

133.3

December

142.4

133.7

135.2

138.3

From  these  figures  Meade  concludes  (1)  that  in  the  years  1897-1900,  while  the  trusts  were  in  process  of
formation,  the  two  series  of  relative  prices  ran  nearly  parallel;  (2)  that  since  1900  the  trust-made  products
have  had  lower  relative  prices  than  those  made  under  conditions  of  competition;  and  (3)  that  the  trust-made
products  have  been  decidedly  more  stable  in  pi'ice  than  the  others,  so  far  as  concerns  large  fluctuations. — "The
Economies  of  Combination, ' '  Journal  of  FoUtical  Economy,  April,  1912.  Professor  Meade  has  kindly  provided
me  with  a  revised  version  of  his  table,  in  which  an  error  or  two  lias  been  corrected.

18  See  Chapter  V,  i.

i»  Compare  Chapter  IV,  i,  6,


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  465

not  as  making  money  but  as  making  a  living.  For  reasons  of  peculiar  interest
the  changes  which  take  place  in  their  rates  of  pay  do  not  run  parallel  with  the
changes  in  the  prices  fixed  for  commodities  by  dealings  between  business  enter-
prises. The  results  which  flow  from  this  inaccurate  adjustment  in  their  turn
become  new  factors  of  great  weight  not  only  in  determining  the  material  well-
being  of  large  numbers  of  men — a  matter  with  which  business  as  such  is  not
concerned — but  also  in  determining  the  market  for  consumers'  goods  and  the
margins  of  profit  between  the  selling  prices  of  all  sorts  of  commodities  and
the  labor  costs  of  providing  them.

Both  the  American  and  the  British  statistics  presented  in  Chapter  IV  confirm
the  prevailing  opinion  that  in  times  of  business  revival  the  prices  of  labor  rise
less  than  the  prices  of  commodities  at  wholesale.  The  American  figures  are
confined  to  wages  in  manufacturing  industries,  but  the  British  figures  indicate
that  wages  in  agriculture  are  even  more  sluggish  in  their  movements.

Less  well  known  is  the  fact  that  the  advance  often  begins  sooner  in  the
labor  than  in  the  commodity  markets.  Yet  both  in  the  United  States  and  in
Great  Britain  wages  began  to  rise  after  the  depression  of  the  middle  nineties
before  wholesale  prices  had  touched  their  lowest  point.  The  evidence  for  the
second  decade  is  less  conclusive.  The  crisis  of  190.3"04  v/as  not  sufficientlj^  severe
in  America  to  cause  a  reduction  of  wages,  and  the  Bureau  of  Labor  has  not  yet
published  data  for  the  years  after  the  panic  of  1907.  In  England  the  crisis  of
1900  was  followed  by  wage-reductions,  and  in  the  later  revival  wholesale  prices
advanced  not  only  farther  but  also  earlier  than  the  prices  of  labor.

The  reason  why  wages  rise  less  than  wholesale  prices  is  found  principally
in  the  unlike  organization  of  the  labor  and  commodity  markets.  Where  trade
unions  are  non-existent  or  weak  the  individual  laborers  have  neither  the  prompt
knowledge  of  changes  in  business  conditions  necessary  to  determine  what
employers  can  afEord  to  pay  for  labor,  nor  the  power  to  enforce  such  demands
as  are  not  readily  conceded.  As  an  organization  for  collective  bargaining,  the
trade  union  improves  the  wage-earners'  position  in  these  respects.  But  many
unions  seek  to  make  wage-contracts  running  for  a  considerable  time  and  binding
the  men  not  to  ask  for  fresh  advances  until  the  contracts  have  expired.  Most
important  of  all,  the  individual  working-man,  the  trade  union,  and  the  employer
are  much  more  under  the  dominion  of  the  idea  of  a  just  price  than  are  the
business  men  dealing  in  commodities.  This  survival  from  the  relatively  stable
economic  life  of  the  middle  ages  has  almost  ceased  to  influence  the  prices  men
offer  or  accept  for  cotton,  wheat,  or  iron; — such  commodities  are  "worth  what
they  wall  bring."  But  there  still  persists  in  the  minds  of  all  the  parties  in  the
labor  market  certain  notions  of  what  is  a  proper  wage  for  a  day's  labor.  When
the  employer  offers  much  less  than  the  customary  price,  he  arouses  stubborn
resistance  which  is  reinforced  by  the  whole  community's  commonsense  that  the
work  is  worth  more,  or  that  a  man  cannot  support  his  family  decently  on  such


466  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

a  sum.  On  the  other  hand,  when  working-men  ask  much  more  than  the  cus-
tomary prices,  their  pretensions  strike  others  as  absurd.  Of  course,  such  feelings
impede  the  free  working  of  supply  and  demand  in  the  labor  market — or  rather
constitute  an  important  feature  of  both  supply-price  and  demand-price — and
tend  to  keep  wages  more  stable  than  are  prices  in  markets  where  pecuniary
motives  have  unrestricted  sway.

If  these  conditions  obstruct  the  rapid  rise  of  wages  when  business  revives,
they  also  facilitate  the  restoration  of  wages  to  the  customary  levels  when  a
depression  accompanied  by  wage-reductions  is  passing  away.  Such  is  the
explanation  of  the  celerity  with  which  wages  rose  after  the  hard  times  in  the
nineties.  Early  in  the  movement  toward  increase  of  activity,  in  the  United
States  before  a  revival  could  fairly  be  spoken  of,  employers  conceded  a  slight
increase  of  pay.  That  English  employers  did  not  follow  the  same  course  in  the
revival  of  1904-06  may  be  due  to  the  fact  that  the  unprecedentedly  high  rates
which  the  men  had  secured  before  the  crisis  of  1900  had  not  been  paid  long
enough  to  become  fairly  entrenched  in  the  minds  of  masters  and  men  as  the
fit  and  proper  prices  to  be  charged.  Hence  they  yielded  with  unaccustomed  ease
to  the  pressure  of  hard  times  after  the  crisis  and  were  restored  in  the  subsequent
period  of  prosperity  with  unaccustomed  difficulty.

It  must  also  be  said  that  the  economic  pressure  which  drives  the  great  mass
of  wage-earners  to  sustain  their  arduous  struggles  for  higher  wages  relaxes  just
at  the  time  when  rapid  increases  might  be  wrung  from  employers.  The  relatively
moderate  rate  at  which  retail  prices  rise  in  the  earlier  stages  of  revival  prevents
the  cost  of  living  from  going  up  fast.  On  the  other  hand,  the  economic  position
of  working-men  is  being  improved  by  the  greater  regularity  of  employment  and
the  abolition  of  "short  time."  Even  ^^ithout  any  increase  in  their  rates  of  pay
the  wage-earning  class  is  better  off.  They  hesitate  to  demand  an  increase  of
their  customary  wages  until  the  feeling  of  this  relative  prosperity  is  dulled  by
familiarity,  until  the  cost  of  living  has  advanced  seriously,  and  until  personal
savings  or  trade-union  accumulations  have  put  them  in  position  to  fight  with
vigor.

3.  The  Prices  of  Loans

Wage-earners  may  not  be  thorough  business-men;  but  bankers  most
emphatically  are.  Nevertheless,  discount  rates  usually  average  less  in  the  first
year  of  business  revival  than  in  the  last  year  of  business  depression.'"  Invari-
ably, however,  these  rates  rhove  upward  before  the  revival  has  been  long  in

20  Table  28  shows,  for  example,  that  in  London  and  Paris  both  the  market  and  the  bank  rates  were  lower
in  1895  than  in  1894,  and  that  in  these  markets  and  in  Berlin  also  the  rates  were  lower  in  1905  than  in  1904.
The  more  detailed  data  for  New  York,  when  averaged  by  phases  of  the  business  cycle,  give  similar  results
(Table  26).  Almost  every  time  that  business  conditions  have  improved  the  discount  rates  have  dropped.  If
the  examination  is  pushed  back  into  the  monthly  figures  of  Table  22,  the  situation  is  found  to  be  complicated
by  the  regularly  recurring  seasonal  fluctviations  in  rates.  But,  when  this  factor  has  been  allowed  for,  the  con-
clusion remains  that  in  their  earlier  stages  business  revivals  are  characterized  by  low  and  often  by  declining
rates  of  discount.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  467

progress.  Sometimes,  as  in  the  European  money  markets  in  the  middle  nineties,
the  advance  precedes  the  rise  of  wholesale  prices ;  sometimes  it  follows  the  latter,
as  in  the  same  markets  ten  years  later;  sometimes  the  two  movements  are
nearly  simultaneous,  as  in  New  York  in  1898  and  again  in  1905.

The  cause  of  this  advance  in  discount  rates  is  not  far  to  seek ;  what  requires
explanation  is  the  slowness  with  which  the  rise  starts.  As  has  been  said  more
than  once,  bank  loans,  like  transportation,  are  among  the  goods  required  by
nearly  every  business  enterprise.  The  volume  of  loans  demanded,  however,
increases,  not  with  the  physical,  but  with  the  pecuniary  volume  of  business,  and
the  latter  type  of  expansion  may  be  deferred  by  a  continued  fall  of  commodity
prices  for  some  time  after  conditions  have  bettered.  Moreover,  the  banks  have
such  liberal  reserves  at  this  stage  of  the  business  cycle  that  they  are  able  to
meet  an  increasing  demand  for  some  time  Avithout  weakening  their  position
unduly."  Still  further,  it  was  shown  in  Chapter  VII  that,  during  recovery
from  a  period  of  depression  which  has  been  both  long  and  severe,  the  ratio  of
capital  liabilities  to  total  liabilities  among  the  banks  is  reduced  by  funds  coming
from  depositors.^^  This  inflow  of  money  increases  the  lending  power  of  the
banks  without  increasing  the  investment  upon  which  profits  are  reckoned,  and
therefore  retards  the  advance  of  discount  rates.  But,  when  banks  have  secured
tolerably  full  employment  for  their  resoiirces  available  for  lending,  they  exact
higher  prices  for  additional  advances,  in  the  same  way  that  manufacturers  raise
their  selling  prices  when  they  have  obtained  substantial  "backbone"  orders.

Call-loan  rates  usually  advance  more  promptly  than  discount  rates.^^  The
reason  is  partly  that  the  demand,  which  comes  almost  wholly  from  the  stock
exchange,  expands  as  soon  as  speculative  interest  revives,  and  partly  that  the
supply  of  funds  for  lending  on  call  contracts  as  soon  as  favorable  opportunities
open  for  employing  money  in  other  ways.  For  ''the  call-loan  market  is  really
the  storage  place  for  the  nation's  surplus  credit,  and  consequently  has  to  take
up  all  the  stress  resulting  from  changes  of  stress  in  other  parts  of  the  credit
system. ' '"

On  the  contrary,  interest  upon  long  loans  as  represented  by  the  net  yields
of  investments  in  railway  and  government  bonds  at  current  prices,  lags  decid-
edly behind  discount  rates  upon  the  rise.''  One  cause  of  the  lagging  is  the
increase  of  confidence  among  investors,  with  its  consequent  reduction  in  the
premium  charged  for  the  assumption  of  risks.  Another  cause  may  be  an  increase
in  the  current  rate  of  savings,  with  its  consequent  growth  in  the  sums  coming

21  Compare  the  ratios  of  cash  on  hand  to  demand  liabilities  in  Tables  82,  83,  89,  97,  100,  and  104.

22  Compare  Table  90,  and  the  context.

23  See  the  tables  of  Chapter  IV,  iii.

24  T.  F.  Woodlock,  ' '  The  Stock  Exchange  and  the  Money  Market, ' '  in  The  Currency  Problem  and  the  Present
Financial  Situation,  a  Series  of  Lectures  delivered  at  Columbia  University,  1907-08,  New  York,  1908,  p.  37.  Com-
pare Chapter  VII,  i,  above.

25  See  Chapter  IV,  iii.


468  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

forward  for  investment.  But  our  knowledge  of  savings  is  too  indefinite  to  permit
of  confident  statements.'"  A  third  cause  will  be  revealed  presently  when  we
examine  into  the  demand  for  long  loans  on  the  part  of  business  enterprises."


IV.  The  Increase  of  Profits

1.  Why  Profits  Increase

Since  the  quest  of  profits  is  the  great  driving  force  of  the  money  economy,
the  significance  of  all  the  processes  which  have  been  sketched  culminates  in  their
bearing  upon  the  amount  of  money  business  enterprises  can  make.

The  net  resultant  of  these  processes  is  to  increase  profits.  Of  chief  import-
ance is  the  fact  that  supplementary  costs  rise  slowly  in  comparison  with  the
physical  volume  of  business.  So  long  as  this  marked  difference  in  the  rate  of
increase  is  maintained,  prime  costs  may  keep  up  with  or  even  outstrip  the
advance  of  selling  prices,  and  still  net  profits  will  grow  larger  with  each  suc-
cessive increment  added  to  the  turnover.  But  in  many  instances  prime  costs
also  lag  behind  selling  prices  on  the  rise.  Discount  rates  often  and  prices  of
raw  materials  regularly  rise  faster  than  do  the  prices  of  finished  products.
But  rates  of  wages  lag  behind.  While  the  number  of  well-trained  hands
remains  equal  to  requirements,  while  dawdling  can  be  prevented,  and  while
' '  overtime ' '  can  be  avoided,  the  cost  of  labor  to  the  employer  increases  no  faster
than  the  rates  of  money  wages.  Freight  charges  constitute  another  important
item  in  prime  costs  which  probably  lags  behind  wholesale  prices  on  the  rise.

It  follows  that  the  rise  in  the  profits  made  by  different  business  enterprises
must  vary  widely.  Obviously,  those  enterjjrises  are  favored  which  secure  an
early  share  in  the  increasing  volume  of  business,  and  in  the  subsequent  rise  in
selling  prices.  In  contrast,  enterprises  which  are  late  in  being  reached  by  the
growing  demand  for  goods,  and  early  in  being  reached  b}^  the  rise  in  the  prices
of  raw  materials,  etc.,  maj  find  the  revival  of  prosperity  a  doubtfxil  blessing  for
some  time.  Again,  it  is  an  advantage  at  such  seasons  to  have  relatively  heavy
supplementary  and  relative!}-  liglit  prime  costs.  Similarly,  it  is  an  advantage
to  have  prime  costs  consisting  largely  of  wages  and  freight  charges.  Now,  since
these  several  factors — promptness  in  being  reached  by  the  increase  in  the  volume
of  business  and  by  the  rise  in  prices,  the  proportion  of  supplementary  to  prime
costs,  and  the  share  of  prime  costs  which  is  cost  of  labor  and  transportation —
since  these  factors  are  found  in  all  their  possible  combinations,  the  diversity  in
the  fluctuations  of  profits  is  amply  accounted  for.


20  See  Chapter  VIII,  i.

-^  See.section  v  of  this  chapter.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  .469

Meager  as  are  the  statistics  concerning  profits,  they  suffice  to  confirm  the
above  conclusions.  That,  within  large  groups  of  enterprises  or  industries,  the
rate  rises  promptly  with  the  tide  of  prosperity  there  is  no  doubt.  Indeed  it  is
certain  in  particular  cases  and  probable  on  the  average  that  profits  begin  to
pick  up  before  the  period  of  depression  is  over.  Wagon's  statistics  of  the  ratio
borne  by  net  profits  to  the  share  capital  of  joint-stock  companies  in  37  German
industries  even  indicate  that  in  a  few  cases  the  years  of  deepest  depression  were
the  most  lucrative  of  the  whole  business  cycle  from  1891-1900.  But  these  cases
are  decided  exceptions,  and  the  years  which  brought  maximum  profits  to  the
largest  number  of  industries  were  the  two  years  following  the  revival  of  activity.
in  1895,  the  year  when  prosperity  culminated  (1899),  and  the  year  of  the  crisis
(1900).  Dermietzel's  figures,  which  show  the  general  drift  of  affairs  more
clearly  than  Wagon's,  indicate  that  profits  were  lowest  in  the  third  year  of  the
depression,  that  they  rose  a  trifle  in  the  last  year,  and  then  continued  their  rise
without  interruption  through  the  revival  of  activity  and  the  period  of  prosperity
to  a  climax  in  1899.''


2.  The  Rise  in  the  Prices  of  Stocks

Since  the  market  price  of  a  business  enterprise  rests  primarily  upon  the
capitalized  value  of  its  current  and  prospective  profits,  the  prices  of  stocks  vary
roughly  with  the  rate  of  profits.  The  degree  of  this  correspondence  can  be
determined  for  the  one  group  of  enterprises  for  which  we  possess  data  relating
both  to  profits  and  stock  prices — the  American  railways.  On  the  whole,  the
prices  of  stocks  do  follow  changes  in  net  income,  but  follow  at  some  distance,
sometimes  rising  less  than  profits  in  periods  of  revival,  for  example  in  1898, —
sometimes  rising  more,  for  example  in  1905  and  1909.''''  The  explanation  of
the  discrepancies  which  mar  the  parallelism  is  to  be  found  in  the  facts  that  rail-
way dividends  have  been  kept  more  stable  than  net  income,  that  the  stock
market  looks  forward  to  future  profits  in  coming  years  as  well  as  back  to  net
earnings  for  recent  months,  that  the  interest  rate  at  which  anticipated  future
profits  are  capitalized  is  itself  subject  to  variations,  and  that  considerations
other  than  those  of  an  investor  intent  upon  income  and  safety — such  as  specula-
tion, manipulation,  and  contests  for  control — are  frequently  potent  factors  in
the  market.'"

But  even  when  stock  prices  lag  furthest  behind  the  gains  in  net  income,  they
both  precede  and  exceed  the  rise  of  prices  at  wholesale."  Two  factors  contribute
toward  this  result. First,  it  has  just  been  shown  that  profits  recover  some  of

28  See  Chapter  IX,  i.

29  See  Chart  25,  Chapter  IV,  iv.

30  Compare  Chapter  IV,  iv,  6.

31  The  following  figures  compare  the  index  number  for  40  common  stocks  with  the  various  index  numbers  of
prices  at  wholesale  which  are  available  by  months  for  each  of  the  periods  of  revival  in  America  since  1890.


470


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


their  earlier  losses  before  the  revival  sets  in,  and  in  an  earlier  section  it  was
shown  that  commodity  prices  often  do  not  rise  until  the  movement  toward
recuperation  has  continued  for  several  months  or  even  a  year/^  Second,  the
stock  market  does  not  wait  for  an  increase  of  profits  to  take  place,  but  discounts
it  as  soon  as  its  occurrence  is  anticipated.

The  advance  in  prices  is  even  less  uniform  among  stocks  than  among  com-
modities.^^ In  part  these  differences  arise  from  dissimilar  changes  undergone
by  the  profits  and  financial  prospects  of  the  various  companies.  But  there  are
other  differences  which  regularly  recur  between  the  prices  of  different  types
of  stocks.  Low-priced  stocks  rise  more  rapidly  than  the  high-priced,  common
stacks  rise  more  rapidly  than  preferred,  and  stocks  which  pay  dividends  irregu-
larly rise  piore  rapidly  than  those  which  are  firmly  established  upon  an  income-
yielding  basis.  The  chief  reasons  for  these  differences  are  the  greater  attractive-
ness of  low-priced  stocks  ]to  speciilators,  the  greater  relative  weight  of  the  invest-
ment demand  in  the  ease  of  dividend-paying  stocks,  and  the  superiority  of  pre-
ferred to  common  stocks  in  steadiness'  of  yield.^*


1891-92

1895-96

Falkner's

Falkner's

index

Railway

index

Railway

number

stocks

number

stocks

July

97.7

102.5

January

S4.7

74.0

October

97.9

125.0

April

84.7

80.0

January

96.5

128.0

July

85.2

93.0

October

86.3

93.0

January

85.2

77.0

1897

1900-01

Falkner's

Bureau  of

index

Railway

Labor  index

Railway

number

stocks

number

.stocks

January

82.0

79.5

January

111.4

128.0

April

80.9

72.0

April

112.9

140.0

July

79.9

83.0

July

109.3

128.0

October

83.6

95.5

October

108.7

131.5

January

108.3

169.0

1904-05

1908-09

Bureau  of

Bureau  of

Labor  index

Railway

Labor  index

Railway

number

stocks

number

stocks

January

113.2

184.0

January

125.7

174.5

April

114.0

172.5

April

124.0

181.0

July

112.0

177.5

July

121.7

206.0

October

111.8

217.5

October

122.1

217.0

January

114.0

236.5

January

124.0

259.0

It  would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  from  these  figures  that  whenever  stock  prices  rise  commodity  prices  will
presently  follow.  Examination  of  Table  44  shows  several  instances  in  which  the  stock  market  turned  upward
and  then  relapsed  again  while  commodity  prices  were  falling.

32  See  sections  ii,  4,  and  iii,  1,  A,  of  the  present  chapter.

33  The  decils  for  the  relative  prices  of  40  common  stocks  cover  a  wider  range  than  the  decils  for  145  com-
modities. See  Tables  33  and  8.

34  See  Tables  34,  37,  and  42,  together  with  the  accompanying  text.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  471


V.  The  Volume  of  Investments

All  the  processes  of  a  business  revival  heretofore  described  might  run  their
course  vyithin  the  circle  of  business  enterprises  existing  at  the  close  of  depres-
sions. But  it  is  characteristic  of  the  money  economy  that  the  prospect  of  good
profits  leads  not  only  to  greater  activity  among  the  old  enterprises,  but  also
to  extensions  of  their  size  and  to  the  creation  of  new^  enterprises.  This  expansion
of  business  undertakings  is  the  more  important  because  for  a  time  at  least  it
imparts  new  energy  to  the  very  causes  which  produced  it.

While  the  investment  of  fresh  capital  in  business  enterprises  never  ceases
altogether,  it  sinks  during  depression  to  a  relatively  lower  ebb  than  does  the
rate  of  current  production  of  such  staples  as  agricultural  produce,  coal,  or  even
iron.  Recovery  usually  begins  before  depression  has  passed  away;  but  it  is
not  until  business  has  distinctly  entered  upon  the  phase  of  revival  that  new
investments  of  this  character  become  large  again.  Sometimes  the  first  year  of
recuperation  brings  the  maximum  investments  of  the  cycle,  more  often  the
second  or  third  year.  This  maximum  is  likely  to  be  several  times  as  great  as
the  preceding  minimum.  The  grovd;h  of  industrial  equipment  is  therefore  most
uneven.

These  statements,  based  upon  the  tables  given  in  Chapter  VIII  concerning
the  applications  for  business  loans,  the  capital  of  new  joint-stock  companies,
the  increase  of  railway  mileage,  the  cost  of  buildings  erected,  the  amount  of
income  re-invested  in  their  own.  business  by  banks  and  railways,  etc., — ^these
statements  accord  well  with  the  preceding  analysis.  Not  until  work  has  been
provided  for  the  existing  industrial  equipment  by  the  slow  expansion  in  the
volume  of  business  during  periods  of  depression,  supplemented  by  its  more
rapid  strides  after  revival  begins,  and  not  until  the  profits  of  existing  business
enterprises  have  been  raised  to  a  satisfactory  level,  are  there  many  tempting
opportunities  for  fresh  investments.  But  as  these  conditions  occur  often  at
an  early  stage  of  the  period  of  business  expansion,  so  with  corresponding  fre-
quency the  first  year  or  two  of  revival  brings  a  large  aggregate  of  corporate
borrowings  on  long  time.''^

While  our  information  with  respect  to  the  volume  of  savings  from  year  to
year  is  scanty,  we  have  no  reason  to  suppose  that  its  growth  is  so  uneven  as
that  of  investments.  Hence  it  should  follow  that  after  a  year  or  two  of  heavy
business  borrovnngs  the  current  supply  of  investment  funds  available  for  the
purchase  of  corporate  securities  will  show  signs  of  being  unequal  to  the  demand.
At  least  one  such  sign  has  already  been  found — the  rise  of  interest  rates  upon
long-time  loans,  which  usually  begins  somewhat  later  than  the  rise  of  discount

35  An  anomaly  in  the  tables  of  applications  for  loans  which  may  trouble  readers  at  this  point  is  explained
in  Chapter  XIII,  i,  1,  C.


472  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

rates  or  even  of  commodity  prices.  ^Vhile  the  return  of  confidence  among  inves-
tors helps  materially  to  keep  this  rate  from  rising  promptly  with  the  demand
for  such  loans,  it  presently  has  a  contrary  effect.  Let  confidence  reach  the  point
at  which  investors  become  ready  to  assume  considerable  risks  and  the  demand
for  bonds  at  a  fixed  rate  of  interest  will  begin  to  shift  into  a  demand  for  stocks
promising  a  higher,  but  less  certain,  rate  of  dividend.  Then  corporations  seek-
ing to  "place"  bonds  will  be  obliged  to  offer  greater  inducements  by  raising
the  nominal  rate  of  interest  or  selling  securities  bearing  the  old  rate  at  a  lower
price.  Combined  with  the  difference  of  pace  at  which  the  demand  for  long
loans  and  the  supply  of  current  savings  expand,  this  movement  accounts  for
the  rise  in  long-time  interest  rates  which  usually  occurs  when  prosperity  has
fairly  begun.'"

So  soon  as  the  volmne  of  investments  has  attained  large  proportions,  another
stimulus  is  imparted  to  the  activity  of  business.  For  the  establishment  of  new
and  the  enlargement  of  old  enterprises  involves  a  heavy  demand  for  new  indus-
trial equipment — buildings,  machinery,  furnishings,  etc.  Then  the  industries
concerned  with  the  supply  of  the  many  kinds  of  goods  included  in  these  broad
categories  come  in  for  their  share  of  prosperity,  and  add  their  quota  to  the
increasing  demand  for  materials,  equipment,  labor,  discounts,  and  long  loans.
The  whole  set  of  processes  characteristic  of  business  expansion  is  thereby  ren-
dered still  more  intense.


VI.  The  Business  Equilibeiltm

The  preceding  sections  show  how  the  endlessly  complicated  processes  started
by  an  increase  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  convert  depression  into  prosperity.
The  salient  feature  of  the  whole  development  is  that  each  successive  effect  reacts
to  strengthen  the  causes  which  produced  it,  so  that  the  movement  toward  pros-
perity gathers  momentum  as  it  proceeds.

Every  industry  wakened  to  activity  stimulates  other  industries,  and  when
the  latter  are  roused  their  activity  creates  a  larger  demand  for  the  products
of  the  industries  from  which  the  stimulus  came.  The  swelling  volume  of  trade
presently  sends  up  the  prices  of  certain  commodities;  every  such  advance
becomes  a  reason  for  raising  other  prices ;  the  latter  advances  presently  cause
the  first  prices  to  be  raised  anew,  thus  starting  the  whole  process  over  again
on  a  higher  level ;  and  the  rising  of  the  price  level  promotes  the  expansion  in  the
volume  of  business  out  of  which  it  grew.  In  combination,  the  expansion  of
trade  and  the  rise  of  prices  make  those  who  profit  b}^  them  optimists;  every
convert  to  optimism  makes  new  converts;  the  latter  confirm  the  faith  of  the
first ;  and  the  resulting  prevalence  of  business  confidence  favors  further  expan-

'■"  See  section  iii,  3,  above.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  473

sions  in  the  volume  of  trade  and  further  advances  of  prices.  These  developments
make  workingmen  insistent  to  demand,  and  employers  able  to  concede  higher
wages;  the  resulting  increase  of  family  incomes  widens  the  market  for  the
increasing  output  of  consumers '  goods  and  sustains  the  advances  made  in  their
prices;  meanwhile  the  higher  cost  of  labor  occasions  further  advances  in  the
prices  of  commodities  at  wholesale  and  retail.  Interest  rates  and  rents  rise  for
similar  reasons,  and  their  advances  have  similar  effects  upon  the  demand  for
consumers'  commodities,  the  costs  of  production,  and  the  level  of  prices.  Finally,
every  increase  of  profits  resulting  from  the  expanding  volume  of  business  and
the  rising  level  of  prices  encourages  new  investments  in  business  enterprises;
these  new  investments  swell  the  volume  of  business  still  more,  drive  prices  still
higher,  favor  new  advances  of  wages,  interest,  and  rents,  and  augment  afresh
the  profits  of  numerous  trades.

The  more  vividly  this  cmnulative  growth  of  prosperity  is  appreciated,  the
more  difficult  becomes  the  problem  why  prosperity  does  not  continue  indefinitely ;
instead  of  being  but  one  passing  phase  of  the  business  cycle.

Of  course  prosperity  confers  no  immunity  against  disasters  which  interfere
with  the  course  of  business ;  but  over  many  such  rocks  the  accimiulated  momen-
tum of  good  times  may  run  without  serious  mishap..  The  great  shortage  of
the  American  corn  crop  in  1901  did  not  stop  the  "boom"  then  in  progress,
though  it  came  soon  after  a  spectacular  corner  in  the  stock  market ;  the  failure
of  Mr.  Walsh's  banks  in  Chicago,  the  San  Francisco  fire,  and  the  great  coal
strike  did  not  stop  the  "boom"  of  1905-06,  though  they  followed  hard  one  on
the  other.  For  such  misfortunes  affecting  a  few  sections  of  the  business  com-
munity the  superabounding  prosperity  of  the  other  sections  is  more  than  a
match.  On  the  other  hand,  many  periods  of  intense  prosperity  have  ended  in
years  of  peace,  plenty,  and  good  fortune.  The  waning,  like  the  waxing  of  pros-
perity, therefore,  must  be  due,  not  to  the  influence  of  "disturbing  causes"  from
outside,  but  to  processes  which  run  regularly  within  the  world  of  business  itself.

The  world  of  business  is  a  system  comprising  numberless  independent  enter-
prises, bound  together  by  industrial,  commercial  and  financial  ties.  For  the
continuance  of  prosperity  it  is  indispensable  that  a  certain  balance  be  main-
tained between  the  fundamental  processes  which  constitute  the  activity  of  this
system.  The  demand  for  goods  of  every  kind  must  keep  pace  with  the  increas-
ing supply,  despite  the  steadily  rising  prices;  the  cost  of  raw  materials  must
not  increase  too  much  in  comparison  with  the  selling  prices  of  manufactured
goods ;  mercantile  collections  must  grow  with  mercantile  credits ;  bank  reserves
must  expand  with  demand  liabilities ;  the  cost  of  living  must  not  rise  much  faster
than  money  incomes;  banks  and  investors  must  continue  able  to  provide  the
ever-increasing  loan  funds  required  by  business  enterprises;  and  the  like.  If
there  occurs  a  serious  maladjustment  in  the  rate  at  which  any  of  these  factors


474  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

are  growing  in  relations  to  the  others,  some  business  enterprises  mil  suffer  loss
of  profits.  Then  the  bonds  which  unite  different  enterprises  will  become  chan-
nels through  which  the  injury  will  spread  to  other  enterprises,  just  as  they  were
recently  channels  for  the  spread  of  prosperity.  Unless  the  original  injury  is
promptly  healed,  there  is  grave  danger  that  the  cumulation  of  prosperity  will
be  converted  into  a  cumulation  of  depression.

It  is  some  such  maladjustment  among  the  various  factors  in  the  system  of
business  which  brings  all  seasons  of  expansion  to  a  close  and  turns  prosperity
into  crisis.  The  regularity  with  which  this  happens  suggests  that  prosperity
itself  has  other  effects  than  those  which  tend  to  sustain  and  intensify  business
activity.  During  the  earlier  stages  of  a  business  revival  these  effects  pass
unnoticed ;  but,  though  slow  in  developing,  their  later  growth  must  be  cumulative
at  a  higher  rate  than  the  growth  of  the  prosperity-producing  factors.  The  next
task  is  to  investigate  the  sources  and  character  of  these  stresses  which  accum-
ulate within  the  system  of  business  until  they  finally  disrupt  its  equilibrium.


CHAPTER  XI

HOW  PROSPERITY  BREEDS  A  CRISIS

I.  The  Increasing  Costs  of  Doing  Business

Among  the  threatening  stresses  which  gradually  accumulate  within  the
system  of  business  during  seasons  of  high  prosperity  is  the  slow  but  sure
increase  in  the  costs  of  doing  business.

1.  Supplementary  Costs

During  the  early  stages  of  a  business  revival,  that  portion  of  the  total  cost
of  carrying  on  an  enterprise  which  consists  of  supplementary  charges  declines,
because  the  sum  of  these  charges  remains  nearly  constant  while  the  number
of  sales  over  which  they  are  distributed  increases.^  This  decline  of  supple-
mentary costs  per  unit  gradually  ceases  as  the  revival  grows  into  full  prosperity.
For  when  the  current  volume  of  business  grows  large  enough  to  tax  the  full
capacity  of  existing  mines  and  factories,  railways  and  stores,  it  becomes  neces-
sary to  enlarge  the  old  or  to  found  new  enterprises  to  care  for  additional  orders.
Of  course  such  additions  to  the  existing  industrial  equipment  involve  the  enter-
prises which  undertake  them  in  new  supplementary  charges — interest  on  the
funds  invested,  rents  for  the  use  of  new  premises,  depreciation  on  buildings,
machinery,  etc.,  insurance,  salaries  for  general  officials,  and  the  like.

Often  these  charges  are  less  per  unit  of  product  which  the  new  equipment
turns  out  than  in  the  case  of  the  old  equipment,  because  improved  processes
or  machinery  are  available  for  adoption.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  the  initial
cost  of  construction  in  the  midst  of  a  period  of  prosperity  is  high — a  fact  which
saddles  the  new  plants  from  the  start  with  heavy  interest  charges.  Further,
when  a  new  plant  is  founded  by  a  new  company,  the  latter  must  usually  invest
considerable  sums  in  building  up  a  trade  connection.  In  this  process  it  is  fre-
quently compelled  for  a  time  to  take  customers  who  have  made  trouble  for  them-
selves in  dealing  with  the  old  established  firms  and  whose  business  is  likely  to
prove  equally  unsatisfactory  to  the  new.  These  high  interest  charges,  costs  of
getting  established,  and  losses  upon  bad  debts  often  overbalance  the  advantages
from  improved  technical  equipment.

1  See  Chapter  X,  iv,  1.

[475]


476  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Another  factor  of  some  moment  is  the  gradual  increase  in  the  supplementary
costs  of  the  old  enterprises  themselves — an  increase  quite  apart  from  that
involved  in  extending  plants.  When  leases  expire  or  bonds  fall  due  in  a  period
of  pi'osperity,  the  enterprises  concerned  must  expect  ordinarily  to  pay  higher
rents  and  higher  interest  to  secure  renewals.  Permanent  officers,  also,  are  more
likel}'  to  claim  and  to  secure  an  increase  in  the  scale  of  their  salaries  when
business  is  good  and  the  cost  of  living  is  advancing.

Often  more  important  than  this  cessation  of  the  decline  in  supplementary
costs  per  unit,  is  the  positive  increase  Avhich  prosperity  brings  in  prime  costs.

2.  The  Prime  Costs  of  Weak  Enterprises

When  a  revival  of  activity  begins,  the  business  enterprises  which  have  been
running  with  few  intermissions  during  the  period  of  depression  are  surrounded
by  a  fringe  of  other  enterprises  which  have  closed  down  altogether.  Disadvan-
tageous location,  antiquated  equipment,  poor  trade  connections,  weak  financial
backing,  timid  or  unskillful  management — any  of  these  circumstances  may  have
been  responsible  for  their  inability  to  keep  prime  costs  down  to  the  low  selling
prices  which  depression  brings.  Rather  than  to  make  goods  which  do  not  repay
even  the  cost  of  labor  and  materials,  they  have  shut  their  doors  and  pocketed
the  entire  loss  of  supplementary  charges.

When  prosperity  returns  and  prices  rise,  tliese  enterprises  begin  to  start  up
again,  one  after  one.  They  waste  more  material,  or  more  labor,  or  more  capital,
or  more  transportation  in  putting  a  given  output  upon  the  market  than  do  their
more  fortunate  rivals,  and  at  given  prices  their  profits  are  narrower.  But  their
resumption  of  business  has  this  effect  upon  all  the  well-equipped,  well-located,
and  well-managed  enterprises  in  the  field;  it  bids  up  the  prices  of  materials,
labor,  etc.,  and  its  addition  to  the  supply  of  goods  sent  to  market  increases  the
difficulty  of  advancing  selling  prices  sufficiently  to  offset  the  encroachments
of  costs  upon  profits.

Many  of  the  strongest  enterprises  have  among  their  machines  or  plants
some  which  fall  below  the  current  standard  of  efficiency.  Like  the  weak  enter-
prises, these  sections  of  the  industrial  equipment  are  allowed  to  stand  idle  when
business  is  dull,  but  started  again  when  business  becomes  brisk.  Of  course,  the
average  of  the  prime  costs  per  unit  of  the  goods  produced  by  such  an  enterprise
rises  Avith  every  old  machine  and  every  ill-located  plant  it  sets  at  work.

3.  The  Cost  of  Labor

The  average  rise  in  the  rate  of  wages  is  slow  in  the  first  year  or  two  of  a
trade  revival,  but  it  becomes  more  rapid  in  the  later  stages  when  employers
have  difficulty  in  finding  sufficient  hands  to  fill  their  orders.  Encroachments
w^ould  seldom  be  made  upon  profits,  however,  did  fluctuations  in  the  rate  of


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  477

wages  represent  the  sole  changes  in  cost  of  labor ;  for  wholesale  prices  usually
keep  rising  faster  than  wages  to  the  very  climax  of  prosperity.^  The  source
of  serious  trouble  is  that  labor  is  a  highly  changeable  commodity — its  quality
deteriorates  as  its  price  rises.

Where  humanitarian  motives  are  not  allowed  to  interfere  with  business
policy,  the  less  efficient  employes  are  the  first  to  be  discharged  after  a  crisis.
Hence  the  relatively  small  working  forces  of  depression  are  the  picked  troops
of  the  industrial  army.  When  a  revival  has  grown  into  full  prosperity,  on  the
contrary,  employers  are  constrained  to  accept  any  help  to  be  had.  They  must
take  on  men  who  are  too  old,  and  boys  who  are  too  young,  men  of  irregular
habits,  men  prone  to  malinger,  even  the  chronic  "trouble  makers."  Raw
recruits  of  all  sorts  must  be  enlisted  and  trained  in  a  hurry  at  the  employer's
expense.  A  deterioration  in  the  average  efficiency  of  the  working  forces  inevit-
ably follows.

The  genuineness  of  this  deterioration  admits  of  no  doubt ;  but  its  Aveight  in
increasing  costs  is  difficult  to  determine.  The  foreign  statistics  of  unemploy-
ment show  differences  of  not  more  than  5  or  6  per  cent  of  the  membership  of
reporting  trade  unions  between  the  best  and  the  worst  years  of  a  business
cycle.^  Among  the  masses  of  unskilled  laborers  belonging  to  no  trade  union  the
variations  in  employment  may  be  greater ;  but  that  is  a  matter  of  conjecture.*
In  New  York  State  the  reported  fluctuations  are  much  wider  than  in  France
or  England.  For  example,  there  is  a  difference  exceeding  20  per  cent  of  the
membership  of  the  reporting  unions  between  the  numbers  out  of  work  in  the
exceedingly  dull  year  1908  and  the  exceedingly  busy  year  1906.*''  Such
differences  leave  a  wide  margin  for  the  improvement  of  working  forces  during
depression,  and  for  a  corresponding  deterioration  during  prosperity.

While  the  relatively  inefficient  reserve  army  of  labor  is  thus  called  into
active  service,  both  the  standing  force  and  the  reserves  are  kept  at  work  long

2  The  following  figures  from  Tables  9,  11,  15,  and  17  compare  the  index  number  of  wages  in  manufacturing
enterprises  with  the  index  numbers  of  prices  at  wholesale  in  the  United  States  and  England  during  two  periods
of  business  expansion. A  minus  sign  indicates  that  wages  or  prices  fell,  instead  of  rising.


United

States

Bnj

fland

'

Advance  during

'

Advance  during

the

vear

the-

k-ear

Wages

Prices

A

Wages

Prices

A

Year

Wages

Prices

Wages

Prices

1897

99

89

—1

0

100

93

1

1

1898

100

93

1

4

102

97

2

4

1899

102

103

2

10

105

104

3

7

1900

105

111

3

8

111

115

6

9

1904

116

114

1

0

106

108

0

o

1905

118

116

2

2

106

111

0

3

1906

123

122

5

6

108

119

2

8

1907

129

130'

6

8

113

123

5

4

In  three  of  these  four  cases  the  rate  at  which  the  rise  of  prices  exceeds  the  rise  of  wages  declines  toward
the  end  of  the  prosperous  period;  but  in  only  one  out  of  the  four  does  the  rise  of  prices  in  the  culminating  year
fail  to  surpass  the  rise  of  wages.

3  See  Table  68,  above. Compare  A.  de  Lavergne  and  L.  Paul  Henry,  le  CJwmage  (Paris,  1910),  pp.  66-68.

4  Compare  W.  H.  Beveridge,  Unemployment  (London,  1909),  pp.  21,  22.
4"  See  p.  271  above.


478  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

hours.  Now  overtime  labor  is  especially  expensive  to  employers,  not  only  because
it  often  commands  extra  rates  of  wages,  but  also  because  it  is  tired  labor.  Few
manual  laborers  possess  sufficient  strength  and  vitality  to  stretch  out  their
working  day  from  8  or  9  to  10,  11  or  12  hours  for  weeks  or  even  months  at  a
time  without  suffering  a  decline  in  efficiency.  At  first,  the  closing  hours  of  the
long  day,  after  a  time,  all  the  hours  of  every  day  find  the  men  less  alert  and  less
energetic — unable  to  accomplish  as  much  work  per  hour  as  in  less  busy  seasons.
Moreover,  the  quality  of  the  output  declines  as  nerves  become  fatigued.
"Spoiled  work"  increases  often  at  an  alarming  pace,  and  the  resulting  loss  of
materials  and  time  threatens  serious  encroachments  upon  profits.*"

Quite  apart  from  this  difficulty  of  overtime,  men  cannot  be  induced  to  work
at  so  fast  a  pace  when  employment  is  abundant  as  when  it  is  scarce.  Employers
complain  that  in  good  times  their  men  "slow  down";  employes  complain  that
in  dull  times  they  are  "speeded  up."  Whatever  may  be  the  merits  of  this
chronic  dispute  about  the  fairness  of  the  day's  work  given  for  a  day's  pay  in
either  phase  of  the  business  cycle,  there  is  abundant  testimony  from  both  sides
as  to  the  existence  of  a  considerable  difference  in  the  energy  exerted.  Theoretical
writers  have  strangely  neglected  this  point,  but  the  trade  journals  make  much  of
it.  The  most  trustworthy  bod}^  of  evidence  on  the  subject,  however,  is  contained
in  the  special  report  made  by  the  federal  Cormnissioner  of  Labor  in  1904  upon
Regulation  and  Restriction,  of  Outpnt.  This  evidence  is  the  more  convincing
because  the  influence  of  business  conditions  upon  the  efficiency  of  labor  was  not
a  subject  of  inquiry.  Nevertheless,  manufacturers  and  foremen,  trade-union
officials,  and  manual  workers  both  within  and  without  the  ranks  of  organized
labor  called  attention  time  after  time  to  the  fact  that  the  pace  of  work  was
slower  in  the  flush  times  of  1900-02  than  it  had  been  in  the  dull  times  of  1894-96
In  different  phrases  they  all  gave  the  same  explanation — ^men  are  less  afraid
of  discharge  when  business  is  good.  A  sainple  bit  of  testimony  may  be  quoted.
The  superintendent  of  a  company  manufacturing  electrical  machinery  said :

"The  absorption  of  'driftwood' — that  is,  the  taking  on  of  men  who  would  not  be  given  a  job
in  ordinary  times,  the  temporary  employment  of  tramps,  to  make  it  perfectly  plain — is  the  cause
of  but  a  small  percentage  of  the  decreased  output  in  machine  shops.  Five  years  ago  men  did  not
restrict  their  output,  union  or  non-union  men,  because  they  wanted  to  hold  their  jobs,  and  a  man
would  do  anything  and  all  he  was  told  to  do.  Now  a  man  knows  that  all  he  has  to  do  is  to  walk
across  the  street  and  get  another  job  at  the  same  rate  of  pay.  During  the  hard  times  we  took
contracts  at  any  price  we  could  get,  and  in  some  places  and  cases  men  were  driven  at  high  speed
to  get  this  work  out,  so  as  to  lose  as  little  money  on  it  as  possible.  Men  will  not  keep  up  that  speed
rate  in  these  days.  "We  are  not  restricted  in  our  right  to  hire  and  'fire,'  but  we  are  mighty  careful
nowadays  not  to  discharge  a  man  unless  we  have  the  very  best  of  cause,  and  would  not  discharge
unless  we  had  a  case  that  would  preclude  a  visit  from  a  union  committee.  We  are  not  looking  for
visits,  nor  trouble  of  any  kind."°

■'ti  Compare  Josephine  Goldmark,  "Fatigue  and  EfSciency"  (New  York,  1912),  Chapter  VI.
s  P.  113. Similar  statements  from  many  sources  may  be  found  on  pp.  21,  22,  146,  148,  159,  160 164 165 168
222,  273,  285,  327,  380,  382,  442,  711,  712,  810,  832,  884,  and  910.


MITCHELL:  BUSLNESS  CYCLES  479

Among  these  various  factors  which  co-operate  to  increase  the  cost  of  labor
in  a  period  of  prosperity — the  rise  in  wages,  the  employment  of  undesirables,
the  payment  of  extra  rates  for  the  tired  labor  of  overtime,  and  the  lessening
energy  put  into  their  work  by  old  hands  and  new — we  can  approximate  a  quanti-
tative estimate  of  the  first  only.  Unless  employers  grievously  exaggerate,  how-
ever, the  last  is  the  most  important,  and  neither  of  the  other  two  factors  is
negligible.  That  this  combination  of  advancing  prices  for  labor  and  declining
efficiency  produces  a  serious  increase  in  the  cost  of  getting  work  done  is  beyond
question.

Of  course,  the  most  serious  inroads  are  made  upon  profits  in  those  industries
where  wages  constitute  a  large  proportion  of  the  total  outlay.  A  rough  index
of  the  variations  in  this  proportion  from  one  industry  to  another  is  afforded  by
the  following  table,  which  reproduces  the  census  classification  of  expenses  in
thirty  odd  branches  of  manufacturing  in  1900.  Depreciation  charges,  insurance
against  mercantile  and  trade  risks,  and  cost  of  selling  products  are  not  included
by  the  census,  so  that  the  total  expenses  are  somewhat  understated  and  the
proportion  of  wages  correspondingly  exaggerated.  But  since  pn  the  average
wages  make  over  a  fifth  of  the  recorded  expenses  of  manuacturing  goods,  an
increase  of  5  or  10  per  cent  in  labor  cost  must  cut  deeply  into  profits  unless
some  way  of  offsetting  it  can  be  found.

For  other  than  manufacturing  branches  we  have  few  data  regarding  the
relations  of  wages  to  total  expenses.  On  the  interstate  railways  the  proportion
mounts  nearly  to  40  per  cent.'  Among  mines,  quarries,  and  lumber  companies
the  average  proportion  of  labor  cost  must  be  nearer  that  of  the  railways  than
the  manufacturing  companies.  Among  mercantile  establishments,  both  retail
and  wholesale,  however,  it  is  probably  below  the  proportion  in  most  branches
of  manufacturing.  But  the  cases  must  be  few  in  any  line  of  business  where  the
increasing  price  and  declining  efficiency  of  labor  in  periods  of  prosperity  do
not  become  matters  of  grave  concern  to  employers.

"The  following  figures  relate  to  the  "operating  roads"  in  the  year  ending  June  30,  1909:

Actual

amounts  in  Propor-

millions  of  tions  of  the

dollars  total

Salaries 86  3.8%

Wages 902  39.5 «

other  operating  expenses  662  29.0

Taxes  85  3.7

Eents  for  leases  of  other  roads  ....  120  5.2

Interest  354  ]5.5

Miscellaneous  75 .  3.3

Total  2,284  100.0

Compiled  from  the  report  upon  the  Statistics  of  Railways  in  the  United  States  for  the  Tear  Ending  June  30,
1909.


480


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE 129

CLASSimCATION OP EXPENSES IN MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES HAVING PRODUCTS VALUED AT MORE THAN

$100,000,000  IN  1900
Actual  amounts  in  millions  of  dollars  Proportions  of  the  total


Salaries
$
All  industries 404

Wages

$
2,322

Misc.
Expenses
$
1,028

Cost  of
Materials
$
7,345

Total

$
11,099

Salaries
%
3.6

Wages

%

20.9

Misc.

Expenses

%

9.3

Cost  of

Materials

%

66.2

Agricultural  implements

8

22

11

44

85

9.4

25.9

12.9

51.8

Boots  and  shoes

8

59

11

170

248

3.2

23.8

4.4

68.6

Bakeries

6

28

10

95

139

4.3

20.1

7.2

68.4

Carpentering

2

71

49

142

264

.8

26.9

18.5

53.8

Carriages  and  wagons

4

30

6

57

97

4.1

30.9

6.2

58.8

Eailway  shops

6

96

6

110

218

2.8

44.0

2.8

50.4

Car  building

2

23

3

70

98

2.0

23.5

3.1

71.4

Cheese,  butter,  etc.

1

6

2

109

118

.8

5.1

1.7

92.4

Clothing,  men 's

14

79

.•52

198

343

4.1

23.0

15.2

57.7

Clothing,  women '?

7

33

12

85

137

5.1

24.1

8.8

62.0

Copper  smelting

1

9

2

122

134

.7

6.7

1.5

91.1

Cotton  goods

7

X7

22

177

293

2.4

29.7

7.5

60.4

Flour  mills

."i

IS

10

476

509

1.0

3.5

2.0

93.5

Foundries

32

182

41

286

541

5.9

33.6

7.6

52.9

Furniture

7

43

n

65

126

5.6

34.1

8.7

51.6

Iron  and  steel

12

121

32

522

687

1.7

17.6

4.7

76.0

Lead  smelting

1

5

1

144

151

.7

3.3

.7

95.3

Leather

3

23

7

155

188

1.6

12.2

3.7

82.5

Liquors,  malt

13

26

109

52

200

6.5

13.0

54.5

26.0

Lumber

11

105

18

318

452

2.4

23.2

4.0

70.4

Planing  mills

5

33

/

100

145

3.4

22.8

4.8

69.0

Masonry

2

53

31

87

173

1.2

30.6

17.9

50.3

Paper

5

21

10

71

107

4.7

19.6

9.3

66.4

Petroleum  refining

2

7

3

103

115

1.7

6.1

2.6

89.6

Plumbing

3

32

5

65

105

2.8

30.5

4.8

61.9

Printing

36

84

56

87

263

13.7

31.9

21.3

33.1

Silk

3

21

10

62

96

3.1

21.9

10.4

64.6

Slaughtering, etc.

10

34

24

687

755

1.3

4.5

3.2

91.0

Sugar  refining

2

7

7

223

239

.9

2.9

2.9

93.3

Tin  smithing

3

*22

5

50

80

3.7

27.5

6.3

62.5

Tobacco — chewing,  etc.

4

7

48

35

94

4.8

8.3

57.2

41.7

Tobacco — cigars

5

41

31

58

135

3.7

30.4

23.0

42.9

Woollen  goods

3

25

7

71

106

2.8

23.6

6.6

67.0

Worsted  goods

2

20

7

77

106

1.9

18.9

6.6

72.6

Twelfth  Census  of  the  U

.  S.,  Manufactures,  Vol.

1,  Table  1

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  481

4,  The  Cost  of  Materials

According  to  the  preceding  table,  the  cost  of  materials  exceeds  wages  in
every  one  of  the  leading  branches  of  manufacture,  and  in  a  majority  of  cases
is  over  twice  as  large.  Indeed,  on  the  average  it  makes  practically  two-thirds
of  the  total  outlay.  If  wares  for  re-sale  be  substituted  for  materials,  this  pro-
portion must  run  far  higher  in  wholesale  stores,  while  in  retail  shops  it  cannot
be  much  lower  than  in  factories  on  the  average  and  may  well  be  considerably
higher.  Even  the  transportation  companies  and  enterprises  in  the  extractive
industries  have  to  buy  vast  quantities  of  current  supplies.  Hence  an  increase
in  the  cost  of  materials,  wares,  or  supplies  is  often  an  increase  in  the  largest
single  item  of  expense,  and  always  an  increase  in  an  important  item.  The
relative  fluctuations  in  the  prices  of  those  commodities  which  are  bought  and
of  those  which  are  sold  are  therefore  of  great,  in  many  cases  of  decisive,  impor-
tance in  determining  profits.

Concerning  these  relative  fluctuations,  our  definite  information  consists  of
index  numbers  for  raw  materials,  partially  manufactured  products,  and  finished
goods;  also  for  the  same  commodities  at  wholesale  and  at  retail.'  Now  this
statistical  evidence  points  to  the  conclusion  that  what  must  be  taken  as  buying
prices  creep  up  on  selling  prices  during  a  period  of  prosperity.'  Of  course
this  movement,  like  the  others  which  have  just  been  traced,  threatens  a  reduction
of  profits.

'  Chapter  IV,  i,  3,  5,  6,  and  9.

8  The  evidence  may  be  summarized  as  follows. The  figures  are  based  on  Tables  3,  5,  6,  7,  and  ]3. Minus
signs  indicate  that  prices  fell  instead  of  rising.

Number  of  points
by  which  relative  prices  rose

1896-1900 1904-07 1908-09

25  foods  at  wholesale  in  the  United  States  17  9

25  foods  at  retail  in  the  United  States  6  11

23  foods  at  wholesale  in  England  10  6  2

19  foods  at  retail  in  England  8  10

23  foods  at  wholesale  in  France  11  12  0

36  foods  at  retail  in  France  — 2  7  — 5

20  raw  materials  33  22  9

20  manufactured  products  23  20  4

5  raw  materials  30  10  16

5  partly  manufactured  products  20  5  10

5  finished  commodities  11  12  1

45  raw  producers'  goods  30  22  9

28  manufactured  producers'  goods  24  18  — 1

18  raw  mineral  products  27  24  2

23  manufactured  mineral  products  20  9  0

10  raw  forest  products  17  27  13

9  manufactured  forest  products  15  19  — 1

9  raw  animal  products  29  21  20

18  manufactured  animal  products  20  13  8

18  raw  farm  products  35  9  7

40  manufactured  farm  products 16  15  — 3


482  MEMOIRS  OV  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

"V\^hile  a  difficulty  of  this  character  seems  to  be  encountered  in  most  branches
of  business  it  is  likely  to  become  peculiarly  acute  in  those  manufacturing  indus-
tries which  use  animal  and  farm  products  as  their  leading  raw  materials.  For,
following  up  a  suggestion  of  Sombart's,  we  have  found  that  these  classes  of
products  are  more  erratic  in  their  price  fluctuations  than  are  the  products  of
mines  and  forests."  Hence  an  uncommonly  large  speculative  risk  must  be
borne,  or  insured  against,  in  such  branches  of  trade  as  meat  packing,  flour
milling,  cotton  spinning,  woollen  weaving,  tanning,  etc.  Of  course  this  risk
exists  during  all  phases  of  the  business  cycle,  but  it  is  augmented  in  prosperity
by  the  necessity  of  carrying  larger  stocks  of  raw  materials.  The  census  indi-
cates that  more  than  three-fourths  of  all  the  "materials  purchased  in  the  raw
state"  by  American  factories  in  1900  belonged  to  this  class  which  is  peculiarly
unstable  in  price."

5.  The  Cost  of  Bank  Loans

Interest  upon  short-time  loans  is  a  minor  element  of  expense  in  manufac-
turing operations,  according  to  the  American  census;"  but  it  must  be  a  much
more  important  matter  to  the  mercantile  classes.  Certainly  it  is  among  the
costs  of  doing  business  which  trench  upon  profits  in  the  later  stages  of  pros-
perity ;  for  the  relative  rates  of  discount  rise  at  a  much  more  rapid  pace  than
the  index  numbers  of  wholesale  prices — to  say  nothing  of  retail  prices."  But
this  is  a  topic  of  many  aspects,  which  will  require  more  adequate  treatment  in
a  later  section."

9  See  Chapter  IV,  i,  6.

1"  The  sources  of  raw  materials  are  given  as  follows:

Prom  farms  $1,941,000,000

Prom  forests  119,000,000

Prom  mines  320,000,000

Prom  the  sea 10,000,000

Prom  all  sources  $2,490,000,000

Twelfth  Census  of  the  United  States,  Manufactures,  Part  I,  p.  exxxv.  The  ' '  farm ' '  products  of  this  class-
ification include  both  the  animal  and  farm  products  of  the  tables  in  Chapter  IV.

11 ' '  Rent  of  offices,  insurance,  interest,  etc., ' '  all  put  together  made  only  6.4  per  cent  of  the  total  manu-
facturing cost  in  1900. Op.  cit.,  compare  the  data  in  Tables  XLIX  and  I.

12  A  conspectus  of  the  evidence  obtained  by  comparing  figures  from  Tables  11  and  28  follows.  In  order
to  avoid  the  effect  of  crises  in  raising  interest  rates,  the  comparisons  are  made  between  the  levels  in  the  last
year  of  depression  and  the  last  year  before  the  crisis. A  minus  sign  indicates  a  fall  instead  of  a  rise.

Number  of  points  by  which
relative  prices  and  relative
discount  rates  have  risen

A.

1896-99  1904-06

Wholesale  prices  in  America  14  8

Discount  rates  in  New  York  — 38  31

Wholesale  prices  in  England  12  11

Market  discount  rates  in  London  85  66

Wholesale  prices  in  Prance  15  11

Market  discount  rates  in  Paris  53  27

Wholesale  prices  in  Germany  14  16

Market  discount  rates  in  Berlin  47  30

The  one  exception  to  the  rule  that  discount  rates  rise  faster  than  prices  cannot  be  wholly  explained  away
by  the  tension  in  the  New  York  money  market  caused  by  the  free-silver  campaign  of  1896.  '  If  comparison  be
made  between  1897  and  1899,  wholesale  prices  are  found  to  have  risen  14  points  and  discount  rates  only  10  points.

13  See  the  section  upon  "The  Tension  in  the  Money  Market."


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  483

6.  The  Declining  Economy  of  Business  Management

One  final  matter  may  be  mentioned:  prosperity  is  unfavorable  to  economy
in  business  management.  When  mills  are  running  overtime,  when  salesmen
are  sought  out  by  importunate  buyers,  when  premiums  are  being  offered  for
quick  deliveries,  when  the  railways  are  congested  with  traffic,  then  neither  the
over-rushed  managers  nor  their  subordinates  have  the  time  and  the  patience
to  keep  waste  down  to  the  possible  minimum.  The  pressure  which  depression
applies  to  secure  the  fullest  utilization  of  all  material  and  labor  is  relaxed,  and
in  a  hundred  little  ways  the  cost  of  doing  business  creeps  upward.  Still  less
can  attention  be  given  to  the  adoption  of  improved  methods  of  organization;
for  changes  in  habitual  routine  are  always  the  source  of  some  confusion  and
delay  when  they  are  being  introduced,  and  when  an  enterprise  has  all  the  busi-
ness it  can  handle  delay  is  the  one  thing  to  be  avoided.  Even  when  the  feasi-
bility of  making  an  important  improvement  is  demonstrated  to  the  managers
of  an  enterprise,  they  often  defer  its  introduction  to  a  less  busy  season.
Progress  in  industrial  technique  and  in  business  methods  would  be  slower  than
it  is  if  business  communities  were  always  prosperous.


II.  Industrial  Equipment  and  the  Investment  Market

1.  The  Consequences  of  Increasing  the  Indtostrial  Equipment

While  the  increasing  costs  of  doing  business  are  threatening  to  encroach
upon  profits  in  almost  every  branch  of  trade,  the  rapid  extension  of  industrial
equipment  is  breeding  other  stresses.

It  has  been  shown  that  the  repairing  of  old  and  the  building  of  new  equip-
ment for  the  handling  of  business  is  greatly  accelerated  by  the  return  of  pros-
perity after  a  period  of  depression."  This  movement  gains  momentum  as
prosperity  becomes  more  intense.  N'ow  the  laying  of  new^  railways,  the  erection
of  new  office  buildings,  factories,  and  power  plants,  the  opening  of  new  mines,
quarries,  lumber  camps,  and  the  like,  stimulates  all  the  branches  of  business
concerned  with  construction  work.  Not  only  contracting  firms,  but  also  cement
mills,  brickyards,  structural  steel  works,  machine  building  companies,  lumber-
yards, etc.,  etc.,  become  busy.  Direct  statistical  evidence  is  meager;  but  there
is  little  doubt  that  the  volume  of  business  done  by  such  enterprises  regularly
shows  a  higher  ratio  of  increase  in  prosperity  than  is  common  among  estab-
lishments which,  deal  either  in  staple  consumers'  goods,  or  in  the  current


1*  See  Chapter  X,  v,  and  the  tables  of  Chapter  VIII,  ii.


484  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

supplies  used  by  business  enterprises/"  Of  course,  the  constant  necessity  for
repairs  and  renewals  provides  a  good  deal  of  work  for  these  construction  trades
at  all  times,  and  there  is  never  a  year  when  considerable  extensions  of  old
and  construction  of  new  plants  are  not  undertaken.  But  when  to  this  regular
work  of  maintaining  the  efficiency  of  the  existing  equipment  and  to  these  odd
contracts  for  new  construction  there  is  added  the  rush  of  orders  from  the  many
enterprises  which  see  their  own  trade  outrunning  their  facilities  and  from  the
numerous  new  projects  launched  on  the  rising  tide  of  prosperity,  then  the
construction  trades  have  a  season  of  activity  which  few  of  the  industries  for
which  they  are  working  can  match.

It  follows  at  once  that  these  trades  add  a  sharpl^^  increasing  demand  to  the
market  forces  which  are  swelling  the  volume  of  business  and  lifting  the  level
of  prices.  For  a  while  their  demand  for  commodities  is  not  accompanied  by  a
corresponding  increase  in  the  market  supply.  What  they  are  making  in  the
way  of  equipment  has  been  sold  in  advance  to  business  enterprises  and  does  not
come  on  the  market  as  a  factor  opposing  the  advance  of  prices.  While  this
condition  lasts,  the  demand  of  construction  trades  has  an  especially  stimulating
efPect  upon  the  price  level.  But,  at  the  same  time,  the  bidding  of  these  trades
for  labor  and  materials  aids  in  driving  up  the  costs  of  doing  business  in  all
the  various  ways  described  in  the  preceding  section.

A  second  consequence  of  the  situation  is  that  the  movement  toward  pro-
viding new  industrial  equipment  is  likely  to  become  particularly  rapid  in  the

15  The  production  of  pig-iron,  for  example,  undergoes  much  wider  fluctuations  between  seasons  of  prosperity
and  depression  than  the  production  of  coal,  as  the  following  figures  from  Tables  50  and  51  show.

Relative  Production  of  Pig-Ieon  and  Coal  in  the  United  States,  United  Kingdom,  France,  and  Germany

By  Years,  1890-1910
Average  actual  production  in  1890-99^100


United

A

States

United  Ki

ingdom

France

Germany

A

Year

Pig-iron

Coal

Pig-iron

CoaT

Pig-iron

Coal^

Pig-iron

Coal

1890

98

82

99

95

88

93

79

83

1891

89

88

93

97

88

93

79

88

1892

98

93

84

95

93

93

84

86

1893

76

95

88

86

93

89

84

89

1894

72

89

93

98

93

96

91

92

1895

100

100

97

99

93

100

93

97

1896

92

100

109

102

107

103

109

105

1897

104

105

111

106

112

107

117

113

1898

126

114

108

106

116

114

124

119

1899

145

133

118

115

116

114

138

127

1900

147

141

113

118

126

117

145

139

1901

170

153

99

115

112

114

134

143

1902

190

157

109

119

112

107

145

140

1903

192

186

112

120

130

121

171

152

1904

176

183

109

121

135

121

171

158

1905

246

205

121

124

140

125

185

162

1906

270

216

127

131

153

121

209

180

1907

276

251

127

140

163

128

219

192

1908

170

217

114

137

158

132

200

201

1909

276

240

121

138

163

132

214

203

1910

292

262

126

138

186

135

252

208

Averages

1890-99

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

100

1900-09

211

195

115

126

139

122

179

167

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  485

very  trades  whose  business  it  is  to  furnish  such  equipment.  The  productive
capacity  of  the  existing  enterprises  which  at  the  time  of  business  revival  is
not  used  at  all  or  not  used  to  the  full  is  especially  large  in  these  lines.  But
when  orders  for  construction  work  do  begin  to  come  in,  they  come  so  fast  and
are  so  large  and  require  such  quick  execution  that  this  wide  margin  of  reserve
power  is  often  exhausted  in  a  year  or  less.  Then  the  foundries,  machine  shops,
cement  mills,  brickyards,  and  all  the  rest  become  the  most  anxious  of  all  enter-
prises to  install  new  equipment  in  the  shortest  possible  space  of  time ;  for  they
cannot  secure  contracts  unless  they  can  guarantee  prompt  deliveries,  and  the
season  when  contracts  are  to  be  had  may  be  brief.  Indeed,  the  ProduMivmittel-
industrien  may  well  show  a  more  rapid  expansion  of  equipment  than  any  of
the  trades  to  which  thej^  cater."

Further  consequences  appear  as  soon  as  sections  of  the  new  industrial
equipment  are  finished  and  put  into  active  service.  Then  the  enterprises  which
own  the  new  equipment  begin  on  the  one  hand  to  hire  operatives,  buy  raw
materials,  etc.,  etc.,  and  on  the  other  hand  to  pour  their  products  upon  the
market.  This  activity  serves  both  to  strengthen  the  forces  which  are  already
raising  the  costs  of  doing  business  and  to  obstruct  the  advance  of  selling  prices.
But,  since  new  construction  is  not  underta]?:en  on  a  grand  scale  until  a  business
revival  has  made  considerable  headway,  and  since  the  work  of  building  and
installing  the  elaborate  equipment  of  to-day  lasts  months  if  not  years,  pros-
perity has  neared  its  high  tide  before  the  new  equipment  begins  to  aggravate
seriously  the  encroachments  of  costs  upon  profits.


2.  The  Development  of  Stringency  in  the  Investment  Markets

The  extension  of  industrial  equipment  is  financed  in  part  by  funds  taken
out  of  the  current  income  of  business  enterprises  and  re-invested."  But  the
bulk  of  the  necessary  funds  is  obtained  by  borrowing,  by  inducing  those  already
interested  in  enterprises  to  advance  additional  capital,  or  by  bringing  in  new
stockholders.  As  indices  of  how  much  money  is  raised  for  such  purposes,  we
have  the  statistics  of  applications  for  loans,  sales  of  bonds  and  stocks,  and
fluctuations  in  the  interest  rate  upon  long-term  loans.''

After  a  year  or  two  of  the  heavy  borrowings  of  prosperity,  this  interest
rate  usually  rises  to  what  is  regarded  by  the  business  community  as  a  high

16  They  may;  but  they  are  far  from  doing  so  always.  In  the  interests  of  symmetry,  certain  writers  like
SpiethofC  have  tried  to  show  that  this  group  of  trades  is  regularly  the  chief  seat  of  over-investment  during
prosperity  and  the  chief  seat  of  weakness  in  the  subsequent  crises.  But  less  partial  examination  of  the  very
evidence  on  which  Spiethofl  mainly  relies  shows  that  the  lead  in  the  German  "boom"  of  1896-99  and  in  the
collapse  of  1900-01  was  not  held  by  industries  which  are  most  exclusively  devoted  to  the  production  of  means
of  production.  See,  for  example,  W.  Sombart,  Schriften  des  Verems  fur  SocialpoUUh,  vol.  CXIII,  p.  130;  .T.
Lescure,  Des  Crises  gen6rales  et  p6riodiques  de  surproductiort,  Paris,  1907,  p.  516.

17  See  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  5.

18  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  2  and  3;  Chapter  IV,  iii,  1,  2,  and  4.


486  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

level,"  and  complaint  begins  to  be  heard  of  a  "scarcity  of  capital."  This  is
one  of  the  most  regularly  recurring  phenomena  of  the  months  which  precede
the  outbreak  of  a  crisis.

The  popular  explanation  of  this  alleged  scarcity  is  that  too  much  capital
has  recently  been  locked  up  in  fixed  investments,  and  that  the  remainder  of
free  capital  is  insufficient  to  meet  the  current  needs  of  business.  But  all  that
the  available  data  establish  is  that  the  supply  of  funds  forthcoming  for  long
loans  is  no  longer  equal  to  the  demand  at  the  old  rate  of  interest.  It  does  not
necessarily  follow  that  saving  has  declined,  or  that  the  heavy  investments  of
the  preceding  year  or  two  were  made  out  of  past  accumulations  which  are  now
approaching  exhaustion.  The  stringency  may  quite  as  well  be  due  to  the
diversion  of  an  increasing  proportion  of  the  funds  seeking  investment  into
other  channels  than  those  provided  by  the  loan  market.  Active  business  men
are  likely  to  cease  looking  elsewhere  for  investments  for  their  savings  when
their  own  special  enterprises  have  in  sight  more  business  than  can  readily  be
carried  with  the  available  working  funds.  Others  may  be  deterred  from  lending
at  the  old  rate  because. the  advancing  price  level  is  reducing  the  purchasing
power  of  fixed  money  incomes,  or  because  they  think  it  may  reduce  the  pur-
chasing power  of  the  principal  when  it  comes  to  be  repaid.  Still  others  who
do  not  think  their  interests  out  so  clearly  may  be  impressed  by  the  patent  fact
that  bonds  have  been  falling  in  price.  The  statistics  and  market  reports  show
that  the  purchases  of  stock  increase  while  the  purchases  of  bonds  are  falling  off.^"

But,  whatever  the  cause  may  be — a  problem  which  cannot  be  settled  until
more  definite  knowledge  is  obtained  concerning  the  fluctuations  of  savings  and
the  promptness  with  which  savings  are  invested — the  effect  is  certain.  The
terms  exacted  for  long  loans  become  onerous.


3.  The  Decline  of  Investment  Borroiving

When  the  market  rate  of  interest  for  long-term  loans  has  risen  one-quarter,
one-half,  or,  on  some  classes  of  business,  1  per  cent  above  the  level  which  had
prevailed  during  the  preceding  period  of  depression,  the  financial  managers
of  large  business  corporations  begin  to  restrict  their  borrowings  to  the  nar-
rowest possible  limits.  Two  shifts,  indeed,  are  open  to  them :  they  may  endeavor
to  follow  the  change  in  the  appetite  of  investors  by  raising  more  capital  on
stocks  and  less  on  bonds,  and  they  may  take  up  money  on  one-,  two-,  or  three-
year  notes  at  a  high  rate  of  discount  instead  of  selling  long-term  bonds. That

1"  An  interesting  exception  is  aflforded  by  the  experience  of  the  United  States  in  1897  to  1902 See  Chapter
IV,  iv,  V.

20  Compare  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  2,  and  footnote  21,  below.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  487

they  adopt  both  of  these  courses  freely  is  proved  by  the  evidence."  But  it  is
also  clear  from  the  tables  of  Chapter  VIII  that  the  volume  of  public  appli-
cations for  capital  usually  suffers  a  heavy  decline  in  the  year  preceding  a  crisis.
Of  course  this  decline  means,  not  that  the  desire  on  the  part  of  business
enterprises  to  secure  funds  has  shrunk,  but  that  the  men  in  control  are  unwill-
ing to  saddle  their  companies  for  a  long  series  of  years  with  the  heavy  fixed
charges  which  would  result  from  borrowing  under  the  prevailing  conditions.
They  prefer  to  defer  the  execution  of  their  plans  until  funds  can  be  procured
on  better  terms.


4.  The  Check  upon  Orders  for  New  Construction

High  rates  of  interest,  however,  are  not  the  sole,  in  many  cases  they  are  not
even  the  most  important,  cause  for  deferring  the  execution  of  plans  calling  for
ncM^  construction.  The  high  prices  demanded  by  contractors  as  the  climax  of
prosperity  approaches  frequently  count  for  more.

Evidence  has  been  given  that  many  contracts  for  permanent  improvements
are  let  in  the  early  days  of  revival,  or  even  in  the  late  days  of  depression."
Much  of  the  work  then  undertaken  requires  a  year,  two  years,  three  years,  or
even  more  to  execute.  To  safeguard  themselves  against  an  advance  of  prices,
the  firms  which  are  contracting  to  construct  houses,  office  buildings,  factories,
machinery,  roadways,  sewers,  canals,  docks,  bridges,  and  the  like  enter  into
sub-contracts  with  enterprises  which  provide  the  necessary  iron,  steel,  copper,
lumber,  cement,  brick,  tile,  stone,  etc.  When  it  is  feasible,  the  latter  enterprises
in  their  turn  ofteil  enter  into  contracts  with  still  other  houses  from  which  they
buy  materials  or  supplies.  Now  most  of  these  enterprises  bind  themselves  with-
out, definitely  knowing  how  much  business  other  enterprises  in  the  same  branch
of  trade  are  booking. It  often  happens,  therefore,  that  contractors  and  their

21  The  following  figures,  compiled  from  Table  113,  show  the  total  amount  of  securities  newly  listed  each  year
on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  and  the  proportions  borne  to  the  total  by  bonds  and  by  stocks.

Amount  Per  cent  of

in  millions


Year  of  dollars Stocks  Bonds

1896  359  44.8%  55.2%

1891  288  33.7  66.3

1892  275  36.4  63.6

1893  233  40.3  59.7

1894  222  16.7  83.3

1895  244  31.6  68.4

1896  224  34.4  65.6

1897  141  37.6  62.4

1898  315  22.2  77.8

1899  467  66.6  33.4

1900  445  66.7  33.3

It  will  be  noticed  that  the  proportion  of  bonds  rises  in  the  years  of  depression  and  declines  rapidly  in  the

years  of  full  prosperity.  . , ,  ■ ^  ■ j_-, j_- i.^  t j. ^^

The  substitution  of  short-term  notes  for  bonds  was  particularly  prominent  in  the  tight  money  markets  ot

1903  and  1907. See  the  current  issues  of  the  financial  journals,  and  for  summaries  the  Financial  Review,  1904,

p.  27;  1908,  p.  32.

22  See  Chapter  X,  v.


Amount

Per  cent  of

in  millions
of  dollars

A

Year

Stocks  .

Bonds

1901

650

66.2%

33.8%

1902

449

55.9

44.1

1903

365

47.4

52.6

1904

551

22.0

78.0

1905

694

18.0

82.0

1906

540

43.9

56.1

1907

406

39.2

60.8

1908

773

16.0

84.0

1909

1,010

29.4

70.6

1910

877

34.8

65.2

488  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

sub-contractors  sell  to  investors  more  construction  than  can  readily  be  executed
within  the  contract  time.  This  condition  of  trade  is  discovered  when  the  con-
tractors look  about  for  labor  and  materials  to  perform  the  work  they  have
undertaken.  Then  prices  rise  rapidly  and  large  bonuses  are  often  offered  for
quick  deliveries.  One  result  is  that  many  building  contractors  and  manufac-
turers find  that  what  promised  to  be  lucrative  bargains  turn  out  to  be  losing
bargains.  More  important  is  the  further  result.  When  bids  are  invited  for
additional  construction,  contractors  are  forced  to  ask  much  higher  prices  than
those  which  they  would  have  asked  a  year  or  so  earlier.''^

Of  the  projects  for  permanent  improvements  some  are  so  pressing  that  the
contracts  are  let  despite  the  onerous  terms  demanded.  But  there  are  other
projects,  many  and  large,  which  can  be  and  are  postponed  to  a  season  when
the  initial  outlay  will  be  less.  Thus  the  high  costs  of  construction  which  char-
acterize a  period  of  prosperity  combine  with  the  high  interest  charges  upon
long  loans  to  reduce  the  number  and  the  size  of  fresh  contracts  let.

Activity  does  not  slacken  at  once  in  the  trades  which  do  contract  work  and
furnish  materials.  For  the  finishing  of  the  contracts  already  in  hand  may
keep  everyone  as  busy  as  ever  for  several  months  to  come.  Indeed,  the  mills
making  structural  steel,  etc.,  may  be  working  under  high  pressure  to  get  out
work  on  which  bonuses  for  quick  delivery  are  expected  at  the  very  time  their
order  books  for  the  coming  quarters  are  scantily  filled,  and  while  their  selling
agents  are. having  great  difficulty  in  drumming  up  custom."

This  change  in  the  situation  promises  to  relieve  one  of  the  stresses  which
is  becoming  acute.  The  provision  of  new  equipment  will  decline,  and  therewith
both  the  increase  of  competition  for  an  already  scant  supply  of  labor  and
materials  and  the  increase  of  the  new  products  seeking  sale.  But  at  best  this
relief  refers  only  to  the  pace  at  which  the  stress  is  accumulating.  Moreover,
the  relief  lies  in  the  future,  and  as  a  rule  it  is  not  felt  until  after  the  crisis  has
occurred.  And,  worst  of  all,  this  problematical  relief  to  the  enterprises  which
would  have  to  meet  the  competition  of  the  new  equipment  is  offset  by  the
sudden  apparition  of  acute  strain  approaching  in  the  industries  which  provide
equipment.  Particularly  when  they  have  extended  their  own  plants  to  handle
the  recent  fiood  of  contracts  do  they  suffer  when  this  tide  recedes.  How  serious
is  the  danger  which  their  threatened  embarrassment  entails  for  the  whole  com-
munity of  business  enterprises  will  appear  in  the  sequel.^''

23  Compare  Mr.  Hull 's  theory  of  industrial  depressions,  summarized  in  Chapter  I,  ii,  8.
-*  See,  for  example,  the  current  weekly  reports  of  the  Iron  Age  in  the  summer  of  1907. The  following  figures
showing  the  unfilled  orders  on  the  books  of  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation  at  the  end  of  the  month  are
significant  of  the  general  trend:

1906 — December  8,500,000  tons

1907— March  8,000,000  tons

June 7,600,000  tons

September 6,400,000  tons

December  4,600,000  tons

-^'  See  section  iv,  2,  B.,  and  section  v,  below.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  489

III.  The  Tension  in  the  Money  Market

1.  The  Demand  for  Short-Term  Loans

The  advance  of  interest  rates  in  a  period  of  high  prosperity  is  relatively
much  greater  in  the  money  than  in  the  investment  market.'"  For,  while  certain
of  the  factors  which  drive  up  interest  rates  operate  in  both  markets,  others  are
peculiar  to  the  market  for  discounts.

It  has  already  been  pointed  out  that  the  volume  of  bank  accommodation
needed,  by  the  business  community  grows  not  only  with  the  increase  in  the
physical  volmne  of  business  but  also  with  the  rise  of  prices."  Were  no  other
factor  to  be  considered,  it  would  therefore  be  cumulative  at  a  high  rate.  But
there  are  other  factors.

The  expectation  of  large  profits,  coupled  with  the  prevalence  of  an  opti-
mistic bias  in  judging  business  chances,  disposes  men  of  affairs  to  undertake
as  much  business  as  possible  upon  their  working  capitals.  Indeed,  not  a  few
venture  beyond  the  line  of  safety,  and  failures  ascribed  to  inadequacy  of  capital
become  numerous.^*  Of  course,  this  effort  to  make  one's  own  capital  support
as  much  business  as  possible  involves  borrowing  a  larger  proportion  of  the
funds  required  than  is  common  in  periods  of  depression  or  revival.  That  is
to  say,  the  demand  for  bank  loans  increases  even  more  rapidly  than  the  pecu-
niary volume  of  business.

Among  the  factors  which  differentiate  the  demand  for  short-term  loans  from
the  demand  for  long-term  loans  is  a  lesser  degree  of  elasticity.  The  volume  of
discounts  asked  for  does  not  contract  so  much  as  the  volume  of  investment
borrowings  when  interest  rates  rise.  Many  of  the  investment  projects  require
that  everything  to  be  used  shall  be  bought  new.  Then  the  whole  annual  cost
of  the  undertaking  may  be  treated  from  the  accountant's  viewpoint  as  the
interest  on  the  sums  invested.  But  in  the  majority  of  the  short-term  loans  the
practical  business  problem  relates  to  the  additional  service  which  may  be  got
by  the  use  of  additional  funds  from  equipment  and  labor  which  are  already
on  hand  and  for  which  the  cost  has  already  been  allowed.  Then  the  interest
on  the  projected  loan  cannot  be  treated  as  the  whole  expense.  On  the  contrary,
it  may  be  a  minor  item,  and  an  advance  of  the  rate  by  1  or  2  per  cent  may  make
so  small  a  fraction  of  the  whole  cost  as  not  to  deter  men  from  borrowing.

Again,  in  borrowing  for  long  periods,  the  business  man  must  consider
probable  selling  prices  in  the  years  to  come.  Experience  teaches  him  that  it
is  folly  to  expect  an  indefinite  continuance  of  the  active  demand  for  his  goods
and  the  high  prices  which  prevail  during  the  "boom." Hence  his  enterprise,

28  Compare  the  relative  rates  of  discount  in  Table  28  with  the  relative  rates  of  bond-yields  in  Table  27.

27  See  Chapter  X,  iii,  3.

2s  Compare  Chapter  XII,  ii,  4.


490  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

\vhicli  for  the  jDresent  might  support  heavy  fixed  charges  without  disaster,  will
face  more  serious  difficulties  in  the  next  period  of  depression.  But  in  bor-
rowing for  60  or  90  days,  or  even  for  a  year,  the  business  man  is  prone  to  count
upon  being  able  to  turn  over  his  goods  promptly  at  prices  equal  to  or  higher
than  those  prevailing  at  the  moment.  Hence  he  has  less  reason  to  hesitate
because  of  an  increased  cost  of  loans.

Finally,  the  temporary  shifting  of  a  part  of  the  investment  demand  for
loans  to  the  money  market  by  the  substitution  of  short-term  notes  for  bonds
increases  the  demand  for  bank  accommodation.^"  For  these  notes  are
"peddled"  not  only  among  individual  investors,  savings  banks,  insurance  com-
panies, and  others  who  might  have  bought  bonds,  but  they  are  offered  also  to
commercial  banks  and  there  added  to  the  applications  for  discounts  coming
from  the  regular  classes  of  local  customers.

2.  The  Supply  of  Short-Term  Loans

Directly  or  indirectly  the  supply  of  short-term  loans  comes  chiefly  from
the  banks. ^^  Since  the  commodity  loaned  by  a  bank  is  usually  some  form  of
bank  credit,  an  expansion  of  loans  causes  a  corresponding  expansion  in  the
volume  of  demand  liabilities.^^  And  since  these  liabilities  to  pay  on  demand
must  be  protected  by  an  adequate  stock  of  cash,  the  amount  which  the  banks
of  any  country  can  lend  is  ultimately  limited  by  the  amount  of  monej^  which
they  hold.'^

How,  then,  does  prosperity  affect  the  amount  of  money  held  by  the  banks  f
It  is  only  for  the  United  States  that  we  have  regular  statistics  concerning
the  stock  of  money  in  the  country  and  the  distribution  of  this  stock  between
the  banks  and  the  public.  The  influence  of  prosperity  upon  the  total  stock  of
money  available  for  use  will  be  discussed  presently.  For  immediate  purposes
the  pertinent  fact  is  that  even  when  the  total  stock  is  growing  most  rapidly,
the  American  banks  are  unable  to  prevent  their  quota  from  being  diminished
by  the  activity  of  business.  Of  the  money  withdrawn  from  the  banks  day
by  day  and  Aveek  by  week  for  paying  wages  and  the  like,  the  greater  part  flows
back  in  a  few  days  through  the  deposits  of  shopkeepers,  street-car  companies,
restaurants,  places  of  amusement,  etc.  But  not  all  of  it  flows  back.  For  when
employment  is  full  and  wages  are  rising,  millions  of  men  carry  each  a  little

-'■'  See  section  ii,  3,  of  this  chapter.

30  Discount  houses  and  bill  brokers  either  do  a  banking  business  themselves,  depend  largely  upon  banks  for
their  funds,  or  act  merely  as  middlemen  between  the  borrower  and  a  lending  bank.  Even  the  credits  extended
to  their  customers  by  American  mercantile  houses  scarcely  form  an  exception;  because  the  lenders  usually  have
recourse  to  banks  for  aid  in  carrying  such  accounts.

">i  Compare  the  tables  in  Chapter  VII  showing  the  concomitant  fluctuations  of  bank  loans  and  deposits,  or
bank  loans  and  total  demand  liabilities.

32  The  validity  of  this  statement  is  not  affected  by  such  long-standing  differences  of  banking  organization
and  practice  as  make  it  possible,  for  example,  to  sustain  a  far  greater  volume  of  demand  liabilities  with  a
given  sum  of  money  in  England  than  is  possible  in  America.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  491

more  money  than  when  times  are  dull.  And  when  trade  is  active  thousands
of  retail  shops  carry  each  a  little  more  "change"  than  when  daily  sales  were
smaller.  Hence  it  is  that  the  table  relating  to  the  distribution  of  the  money
in  circulation  between  the  banks  and  the  public  shows  that  the  banks'  proportion
of  the  total  declines  gradually  from  the  time  when  depression  begins  to  relax
to  the  time  when  prosperity  reaches  its  zenith.^^

This  loss  of  money  by  the  banks  to  the  public  is  sometimes  more  than  offset
by  an  increase  in  the  stock  divided  between  these  two  claimants.  For  example,
the  actual  amount  of  lawful  money  in  the  clearing-house  banks  of  New  York
and  in  the  national  banks  as  a  whole  increased  during  the  prosperous  years
1897-99.  At  other  times  the  decline  in  the  quota  exceeds  the  gain  from  the
total  to  be  divided.  Such  was  the  case  in  1905-06  when  both  of  these  groups
of  banks  found  the  actual  amount  of  their  cash  declining.^*  But,  whatever  is
the  net  change  in  the  actual  amount  of  money  in  the  banks,  prosperity  checks
the  possible  expansion  of  short-time  loans  in  so  far  as  it  increases  the  proportion
of  money  suspended  in  active  circulation  at  the  expense  of  the  proportion  held
by  the  banks  as  reserves.


3.  The  Development  of  Stringency

Since  the  demand  for  short-term  loans  expands  at  a  peculiarly  rapid  rate,
since  the  supply  of  these  loans  is  limited  by  the  amount  of  cash  in  the  banks,
and  since  the  banks  lose  cash  to  the  public,  prosperity  ultimately  produces  a
tense  money  market.

The  coming  of  this  result  is  deferred  by  the  elasticity  of  the  limit  set  by
cash  reserves  upon  the  expansion  of  bank  loans.  In  times  of  depression  bank
reserves  become  larger  in  proportion  to  demand  liabilities  than  bank  managers
tbink  needful,  so  that  periods  of  prosperity  open  with  a  considerable  excess  of
lending  power  above  current  demands.'"'  But,  owing  to  the  processes  just
traced,  the  excess  is  gradually  used  up,  and  after  a  time  bank  managers  are
facing  the  difficult  problem  of  precisely  how  much  farther  it  is  prudent  to  go
in  the  way  of  lending  additional  credit  on  the  basis  of  their  available  cash.
In  America  hard  and  fast  rules  regarding  the  minimum  ratios  of  reserve  to
be  held  are  imposed  by  law  upon  all  the  national  and  many  of  the  state  banks.
But,  on  the  one  hand,  these  rules  are  administered  with  much  circumspection,
and,  on  the  other  hand,  business  judgment  affirms  that  the  circiunstances  of
the  time,  the  character  of  a  bank's  clientele,  its  relations  with  other  banks,  and
the  liquidness  of  its  assets  other  than  cash  ought  always  to  be  taken  into  account

33  See  Chapter  VI,  iv.

34  See  Tables  82,  83,  85,  and  86.

35  See  Chapter  VI,  iv,  and  XHI,  i,  2,  D.


492  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

ill  determining  whether  it  is  really  overstepping  the  limits  of  prudence.  Hence
there  is  iii  practice  considerable  leeway  within  which  the  responsible  officials
exercise  their  own  judgment.

The  net  resultant  of  this  situation  as  shown  by  bank  reports  is  that  in
periods  of  prosperity  the  expansion  of  loans  regularly  proceeds  at  such  a  pace
as  to  reduce  the  ratio  of  reserves  to  demand  liabilities  by  a  considerable  though
variable  margin.  The  national  banks  of  America,  for  example,  have  allowed
their  i-eserve  ratios  to  fall  from  3  to  6  per  cent  below  the  high  records  of  the
years  preceding  the  revival  of  activity.  The  clearing-house  banks  of  New
York  have  let  their  ratios  drop  below  26  per  cent,  and  frequently  a  trifle  below
the  accepted  minimum  of  25  per  cent.^°  Just  where  bankers  will  draw  their
line  against  further  expansion  of  loans  it  is  therefore  impossible  to  say.  But
it  is  certain  that  they  will  draw  such  a  line  firmly  somewhere  withiu  fairly
definite  limits.  As  these  limits  are  approached  the  bankers  put  up  their  dis-
count rates  and  become  more  exacting  in  their  acceptances  of  new  applications
for  loans.  Business  men  then  find  that  short-term  loans  are  both  more  expensive
and  more  difficult  to  secure.

That  this  development  of  stringency  in  the  money  market  imposes  a  severe
strain  upon  business  prosperity  cannot  be  doubted;  but  its  precise  bearings
must  be  considered  in  connection  with  the  other  strains  arising  from  the  increas-
ing costs  of  doing  business,  the  tension  of  the  market  for  bonds,  and  the
difficulties  faced  by  the  enterprises  producing  industrial  equipment.  Before
attacking  this  central  problem  it  is  necessary  to  dispose  of  a  point  which  was
recently  mentioned  only  to  be  set  aside — the  inter-relations  between  prosperity
and  the  quantity  of  money  in  circulation.

4.  The  Inter-relations  Between  Prosperity  and  the  Quantity  of  Money  in

Circulation

With  the  quantity  of  gold  which  passes  into  monetary  use  prosperity  and
its  consequent  developments  have  a  highly  complex  set  of  inter-relations.  (1)
Tlie  advance  in  the  cost  of  supplies,  the  decline  in  the  efficiency  of  labor,  etc.,
cause  costs  to  encroach  upon  profits  in  gold  mining  more  seriously  than  in
most  other  lines  of  business.  For  the  gold-mining  company  cannot  increase
the  selling  price  of  its  product  one  jot.  Hence  the  increase  of  the  gold  output
is  somewhat  checked. Certain  of  the  poorer  mines  may  be  closed,  and  in  the

•-•6  Concerning  the  New  York  banks,  see  Chapter  VLt,  i. The  following  figures  from  Table  89  refer  to  the
national  banks:

Depression  Prosperity

Feb., ]894  26.9% 19.6% Sept.,  1895

Mar.,  1897 24.7 18.7 Sept.,  1899

June,  1904 18.1 14.8 Nov.,  1906

May,  1908 18.6 1.5.1 Mar.,  1910

The  tables  for  national  banks  in  country  and  city  districts  show  that  this  policy  is  followed  in  all  parts  of

the  United  States. The  foreign  statistics,  though  scanty,  yield  similar  results. See  the  various  sections  of

Chapter  VTT.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  493

better  mines  low-grade  bodies  of  ore  are  temporarily  passed  over."  (2)  Of
the  gold  which  is  extracted,  a  decidedly  larger  quota  is  diverted  from  coinage
to  industrial  uses  by  the  growing  demand  which  prosperity  begets  for  jewelry,
etc.^^  (3)  Of  the  gold  which  is  used  as  money  in  any  country,  a  larger  part  is
likely  to  be  exported  if  prices  have  risen  more  rapidly  there  than  in  other
commercial  nations,  because  such  a  state  of  the  markets  stimulates  imports
of  merchandise  and  checks  exports.'"  All  of  these  influences  act  in  the  direction
of  reducing  an  increase  or  augmenting  a  decrease  in  the  quantity  of  gold  money.
On  the  other  hand,  (4)  prosperity  stimulates  the  production  of  gold  by  spread-
ing a  taste  among  investors  for  speculative  securities  promising  a  high  rate
of  return,  thereby  making  it  easier  to  raise  capital  for  developing  new  mines."
(5)  Further,  the  adverse  influence  of  prosperity  upon  the  balance  of  payments
on  merchandise  account  may  be  more  than  offset  by  its  favorable  influence  upon
the  balance  on  investment  and  banking  account.  For  prosperity  encourages
the  sale  of  securities  to  foreign  capitalists,  and  by  establishing  high  discount
rates  in  the  local  money  market  encourages  the  international  banking  houses
to  keep  large  balances  in  the  financial  centers."  Thus  the  net  effect  of  pros-
perity upon  the  quantity  of  gold  coin  depends  upon  two  opposing  sets  of  factors
of  which  the  relative  strength  varies  from  time  to  time.  But,  whatever  this
net  effect  may  be,  in  recent  times  it  has  certainly  been  overshadowed  by  the
influence  of  other  factors  which  are  not  directly  dependent  upon  the  condition
of  business — the  progress  of  mining  and  metallurgical  technique,  the  discovery
of  new  gold  deposits,  and  the  maintenance  of  order  in  the  chief  producing
districts.*^

The  supply  of  paper  money  issued  by  the  government  is  usually  controlled
by  imperious  necessities  of  public  finance  or  by  large  issues  of  public  policy,
with  neither  of  v^hich  the  changing  phases  of  business  cycles  have  more  than
an  indirect  connection.  As  for  the  quantity  of  paper  money  issued  by  the
banks,  the  influence  of  prosperity  depends  largely  upon  the  provisions  of  law
regarding  issue,  security,  and  redemption.  These  provisions  are  too  elaborate
to  be  rehearsed  here.  The  present  purpose  may  be  met,  however,  by  recalling
the  conclusion  established  by  the  statistics  of  bank-note  circulation  presented
in  Table  76.  But  a  slight  degree  of  correspondence  appears  between  the  average
quantity  of  bank-notes  outstanding  in  each  year  and  the  fluctuations  of  busi-
ness activity — a  conclusion  which  holds  for  the  elastic  systems  of  France  and
Germany  as  well  as  for  the  inelastic  systems  of  America  and  England."

37  See  Chapter  VI,  i.

38  See  Chapter  VI,  ii.

39  See  Chapter  V,  v.

40  See  Chapter  VI,  i.

41  See  Chapter  VI,  ii.

42  See  Chapter  VI,  i.

43  See  Chapter  VI,  iii.


494  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIPORNIA

Not  until  we  come  to  deposit  currenc)^  do  we  find  tlie  influence  of  prosperity
upon  the  quantity  of  the  circulating  medium  to  be  both  clear  in  its  bearing
and  decisive  in  its  weight.  By  making  business  men  more  anxious  to  borrow
and  banks  more  willing  to  lend,  good  times  produce  a  rapid  expansion  of  credit
currency.  In  the  one  country  where  the  quantities  can  be  measured,  this
expansion  has  regularly  shown  a  higher  ratio  than  the  concomitant  expansion
of  bank  reserves  or  even  of  the  total  monetary  stock."  Prosperity  also  causes
the  credit  currency,  and  in  less  measure  money,  to  circulate  more  rapidly.*^
In  these  two  ways  business  activity  automatically  provides  means  by  which  the
vastly  increased  payments  required  by  the  expanding  pecuniary  volume  of  trade
are  readily  effected.

So  much  concerning  the  effect  of  prosperity  upon  the  quantity  of  the  cur-
rency. What  of  the  counter  effects  of  changes  in  the  quantity  of  the  currency
upon  prosperity!

Here  the  one  important  factor  to  deal  with  is  changes  in  the  supply  of  gold
money,  since  gold  is  nowadaj^s  the  vital  element  in  bank  reserves,  and  since  the
supply  of  gold  is  dominated  by  factors  not  intimately  related  to  business  cycles.

An  abundant  supply  of  gold  favors  a  revival  of  business  activity  by  giving
the  banks  liberal  reserves  and  thereby  increasing  their  ability  to  lend  credit
at  moderate  rates  of  intei'est.  This  feature  of  the  situation  grows  more
important  as  the  revival  ripens  into  full  prosperity.  For  the  banks  usually
have  a  considerable  reserve  of  lending  power  in  the  earlier  stages  of  revival,
even  though  the  gold  supply  has  been  contracting ;  while,  as  the  climax  of  pros-
perity approaches,  the  banks  are  usually  straining  every  resource  to  meet  the
heavy  demand  for  loans,  even  though  the  gold  supply  has  been  expanding.
That  is,  an  increasing  supply  of  gold  favors  the  continuance  of  prosperity  by
retarding  the  accumulation  of  one  of  the  stresses  which  prosperity  breeds —
namely,  tension  in  the  money  market.


IV.  The  Decline  of  Prospective  Profits

1.  The  Problem  of  Defending  Profits  against  the  Encroachments  of  Costs

The  gist  of  the  first  part  of  this  chapter  is  that  prosperity  breeds  an  increase
in  the  cost  of  doing  business — an  increase  which  threatens  to  diminish  profits.
The  decline  in  supplementary  costs  per  unit  ceases;  equipment  of  less  than
standard  efficiency  is  brought  back  into  use ;  the  price  of  labor  rises  while  the
efficiency  of  labor  falls;  the  cost  of  materials,  supplies,  and  wares  for  resale
advances  faster  than  selling  prices ;  discount  rates  go  up  at  an  especially  rapid

**  See  Chapter  VI,  v.
45  See  Chapter  VI,  vi.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  495

pace,  and  all  the  little  wastes  incidental  to  the  conduct  of  business  enterprises
grow  steadily  larger.

So  far  all  is  clear.  But  it  has  not  been  shown  that  this  rise  of  money  costs
necessarily  involves  a  fall  of  money  profits.  For  do  not  the  higher  cost  prices
paid  by  any  person  mean  higher  selling  prices  for  someone  else?  If  so,  does
not  an  increase  of  costs  promise  to  augment  the  net  incomes  of  sellers  just  as
much  as  it  threatens  to  reduce  the  net  income  of  buyers'?  Is  there,  then,  any
real  danger  that  the  average  rate  of  profits,  taking  all  business  enterprises
together,  will  be  encroached  upon?

(1)  With  reference  to  those  items  among  the  increasing  costs  which  consist
of  higher  prices  paid  by  one  set  of  business  enterprises  for  goods  bought  from
other  enterprises  it  is  indeed  true  that  the  increase  of  expenditures  is  just
balanced  by  the  increase  of  receipts.  But,  though  from  the  accountant's  view-
point the  gains  and  losses  are  equal,  equality  does  not  make  them  negligible.
For  the  additions  to  cost  and  the  additions  to  income  are  most  unevenely  dis-
tributed— a  condition  which  threatens  to  disturb  confidence  by  bringing  serious
loss  upon  certain  enterprises.

(2)  So  far  as  the  additional  costs  consist  of  higher  prices  paid  to  persons
not  belonging  to  the  business  community  proper,  such  as  wage-earners  and
farmers,  it  is  by  no  means  certain  that  other  enterprises  will  get  back  what  any
given  enterprise  pays  out.  For  the  additions  to  money  income  scattered  among
millions  of  men  are  not  all  spent  promptly  in  ways  which  add  to  the  profits  of
business  enterprises.

(3)  Against  the  remaining  items  of  increasing  cost — the  use  of  old-fashioned
equipment,  the  diminishing  efficiency  of  labor,  and  the  declining  economy  of
business  management — against  these  losses  no  compensating  gains  can  be  set.
They  represent  a  serious  addition  to  the  expense  of  accomplishing  given  results
in  most  if  not  in  all  establishments — an  addition  which  constitutes  an  imme-
diate encroachment  upon  profits  whenever  it  occurs  and  which  benefits  no  other
enterprise  in  anything  like  equivalent  measure.  Thus  there  is  no  escaping  the
conclusion  that  the  increase  of  costs  makes  grave  difficulties  for  the  Avhole  com-
munity of  business  as  well  as  for  particular  enterprises.

But,  granted  so  much,  there  still  remains  a  problem  to  be  faced.  Why
cannot  business  men  defend  their  margins  of  profits  against  the  threatened
encroachments  of  costs  by  marking  up  their  selling  prices  sufficiently?  That
simple  expedient  would  remove  the  difficulty  at  a  stroke.

Once  squarely  put,  this  question  is  not  easy  to  answer  squarely.  It  sounds
well  to  say  that  the  advance  of  selling  prices  cannot  be  continued  indefinitely.
But  this  plausible  statement  challenges  the  abrupt  question :  Why  not  ?  The
only  rejoinder  which  lies  upon  the  surface  is  that  the  advance  of  the  price  level
would  ultimately  be  checked  by  the  inadequacy  of  the  quantity  of  money.
Indefinitely  high  prices  necessitate  indefinitely  large  credits  for  merchants.


496  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

manufacturers,  etc.,  and  these  credits  must  be  sustained  by  indefinitely  large
bank  reserves.  Since  the  quantity  of  money  has  a  limited  ratio  of  increase,
the  time  must  come,  soon  or  late,  when  the  existing  reserves  would  seem  scanty
in  comparison  with  the  volume  of  demand  liabilities  reposing  upon  them.  Then
confidence  in  the  solvency  of  the  banks  would  become  impaired,  and  the  whole
movement  of  expansion  and  advancing  prices  would  end  in  a  grand  panic.
As  a  sketch  of  what  might  happen,  this  analysis  has  a  certain  academic  interest.
But  other  causes  check  the  rise  of  prices  before  the  banks  have  allowed  them-
selves to  be  jeopardized  in  this  fashion.  And,  what  is  more  to  the  point,  this
analysis  does  not  really  bear  upon  the  problem  in  hand.  For  the  problem  is
not,  What  prevents  the  general  level  of  prices  from  rising  indefinitely?  but.
What  prevents  business  enterprises  from  maintaining  a  profitable  adjustment
between  the  advance  of  two  sets  of  prices,  those  which  constitute  costs  and  those
which  constitute  returns  1  To  shoAV  wlw  a  rise  in  the  general  level  of  all  prices
must  come  to  an  end  is  not  to  explain  the  acciunulation  of  stresses  betweeia
these  two  parts  of  the  system  of  prices.

Thus  we  come  back  to  our  problem.  During  the  earlier  stages  of  prosperity
nci  insviperable  obstacle  is  encountered  in  defending  profits  hj  raising  selling
prices. What  processes  create  such  obstacles  in  the  later  stages?


2.  Flindraiices  to  the  Continued  Advance  of  Selling  Prices

A.  PUBLIC  EEGULATION,  CONTRACTS,  AND  CUSTOM

In  certain  important  and  many  unimportant  lines  of  business  the  encroach-
ments of  costs  upon  profits  cannot  be  prevented  because  governmental  regu-
lation, established  custom,  business  policy,  or  long-term  contracts  impede  the
advance  of  prices.

American  street  railways,  for  example,  are  usually  prohibited  by  the  condi-
tions of  their  charters  from  charging  more  than  a  five-cent  fare,  and  even  when
legally  free  to  do  as  they  like  they  seldom  find  it  good  policy  to  depart  from
the  customary  price.  Gas  and  electric-lighting  companies,  water  companies,
and  the  like  generally  have  their  basic  rates  fixed  by  agreements  with  the  public
authorities,  and  cannot  raise  their  tariffs  except  by  negotiation  at  considerable
intervals.  Enterprises  in  this  position  find  their  share  in  prosperity  limited
to  the  advantage  derived  from  an  increase  in  the  physical  volume  of  their
business.  Often  their  fixed  charges  make  so  large  a  proportion  of  their  total
expenses  that  an  increasing  volume  of  sales  suffices  to  keep  their  profits  rising
for  some  time  after  prime  costs  have  begun  to  advance.  But  there  is  a  limit
upon  the  number  of  patrons  they  can  serve  with  their  existing  plants,  and  as
this  limit  is  approached  a  further  advance  in  the  cost  of  materials,  labor,  etc.,
is  bound  to  reduce  their  profits.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  497

State  and  federal  legislation  has  recently  brought  most  of  the  American
railways  into  the  class  of  enterprises  whose  charges  are  subject  to  public  super-
vision. And  experience  has  shown  that  public  commissions  are  much  less  ready
to  permit  than  railway  managers  are  to  propose  advances  in  freight  and  pas-
senger rates.  For  a  public  commission  is  prone  to  consider,  not  whether  costs
are  encroaching  upon  profits,  but  whether  current  profits  constitute  a  fair  return
upon  the  capital  invested.  This  attitude  may  be  wholly  justifiable  upon  broad
grounds  of  public  policy ;  but  the  continuation  of  business  prosperity  may  be
imperilled  by  allowing  costs  to  encroach  upon  profits,  even  though  the  rate
which  remains  to  the  companies  would  have  seemed  amply  remunerative  in  the
earlier  days  of  revival.*"

As  examples  of  enterprises  which  hesitate  to  raise  prices  because  they  sell
to  a  wide  circle  of  individual  consumers  at  prices  stereotyped  by  business  policy
or  by  custom,  we  may  cite  the  newspapers,  the  weekly  and  monthly  periodicals,
and  the  manufacturers  of  trade-marked  goods  which  are  advertised  widely  at
fixed  prices.  The  first  group,  however,  may  raise  its  advertising  rates,  and
perhaps  the  second  may  reduce  the  quality  of  its  wares.

Early  in  every  period  of  prosperity  many  other  enterprises  sign  contracts
which  bind  them  to  deliver  at  fixed  prices  goods  which  conform  to  strict  speci-
fications. When  these  contracts  make  up  the  bulk  of  their  business,  and  require
many  months  to  execute,  the  selling  firms  are  nearly  helpless  if  their  profits
are  threatened  by  rising  costs.

All  enterprises  which  have  difficulty  in  protecting  profits  by  raising  prices
have  peculiarly  strong  motives  for  resisting  the  advance  in  the  cost  of  materials,
labor,  etc.  But,  in  so  far  as  they  are  buying  staples  or  supplies  made  from
staples  which  are  used  by  many  other  industries,  they  must  get  their  shares
in  competition  with  enterprises  which  are  free  to  raise  selling  prices.  The
gas  companj^  must  bid  for  coal  against  the  neighboring  foundry,  the  newspaper
must  pay  enough  for  paper  to  keep  a  portion  of  the  logs  cut  from  going  to  the
planing  mills,  etc.  And  neither  the  gas  company  nor  the  newspaper  can  prevent
its  employes  from  slackening  the  intensity  of  their  effort.  Inability  to  raise
selling  prices  certainly  does  not  confer  immunity  against  the  rise  of  buying
prices.

B.  THE  INCREASE  OF  CAPACITY  FOR  PRODUCING  GOODS

The  obvious  point  has  already  been  made  that  when  new  industrial  equip-
ment is  placed  in  active  service  both  the  demand  for  labor,  materials,  etc.,  and
the  current  supply  of  products  are  enlarged.  Hence  the  encroachments  of  costs
and  the  difficulty  of  advancing  selling  prices  are  both  aggravated." The

*s  How  a  decline  of  prospective_  profits  puts  a  close  to  prosperity  is  explained  in  the  closing  section  of  this
chapter.

*''  See  section  ii,  1,  of  the  present  chapter.


498  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

resulting  strain  grows  progressively  more  severe  so  long  as  prosperity  continues
to  stimulate  investment  in  new  equipment.  Must  not  the  day  come  when,  in
all  the  industries  affected,  selling  prices  can  no  longer  be  raised  ?

It  is  conceivable  that  under  a  supremely  systematic  and  far-sighted  direction
of  economic  activity  the  rate  at  which  new  industrial  equipment  was  provided
in  every  branch  of  industry  might  be  adjusted  to  the  rate  at  which  the  demand
for  its  products  increased  with  such  nicety  as  to  prevent  the  overstocking  of
any  market.  Needless  to  say,  such  system  and  such  foresight  are  not  attained
by  the  present  business  community.  The  provision  of  new  equipment  for  busi-
ness use  is  left  to  the  initiative  of  any  individual  who  will  risk  his  own  funds
or  who  can  persuade  investors  to  risk  theirs  in  the  venture.  Caution  is  enforced
by  the  penalty  of  pecuniary  loss  if  the  enterprise  does  not  find  a  profitable
market  for  its  wares.  But  a  year  or  more  is  usually  required  to  carry  such  a
project  from  the  stage  of  inception  to  the  stage  when  an  elaborate  plant  stands
ready  to  begin  operations.  With  the  crude  criteria  available  at  present,  no
one  can  make  accurate  forecasts  of  the  prices  at  which  given  quantities  of  a
commodity  can  be  sold  so  long  in  advance.  The  result  is  that  many  of  the
forecasts  which  are  made  go  wrong.  The  provision  of  industrial  equipment
proves  inadequate  to  meet  the  demand  which  exists  at  profitable  prices  in  some
branches  of  trade,  and  more  than  adequate  in  other  branches.  The  whole  tenor
of  prosperity,  however,  is  in  the  direction  of  augmenting  errors  of  the  latter
kind.  The  optimistic  temper  which  prevails  disposes  most  men  to  under-rate
the  risks  and  to  over-rate  the  probable  gains.  Even  the  active  and  experienced
men  of  affairs  do  not  escape  this  infection  of  over-confidence,  and  the  mass  of
investors  are  especially  subject  to  it.  Indeed,  the  credulity  of  the  latter  class
offers  a  tempting  opportunity  to  enterprising  promoters,  who  launch  plausible
schemes,  sell  them  out  to  the  general  public,  and  abandon  them  to  their  fate.**

The  twist  given  by  over-confidence  to  forecasts  of  future  demand,  always
difficult  to  make  with  accuracy,  thus  leads  in  every  period  of  prosperity  to  an
overstocking  of  certain  markets.  To  check  the  prosperity  out  of  which  the
movement  grows  it  is  not  necessary  that  investments  should  return  no  profits
or  involve  heavy  losses.  Difficulty  arises  whenever  the  increase  in  the  capacity
of  certain  kinds  of  mines  or  factories,  or  of  the  sa-\vmills,  railways,  etc.,  in
certain  districts,  proceeds  fast  enough  to  keep  selling  prices  from  rising  as
rapidly  as  costs.  For  a  decline  of  orders  from  the  industries  first  affected
spreads  trouble  among  other  branches  of  business  by  a  process  analagous  to
that  by  which  activity  is  propagated.*"  And,  what  is  more  serious  still,  an
actual  or  even  a  prospective  decline  of  profits  in  a  few  important  industries
suffices  to  create  financial  difficulties  of  grave  concern  to  all  industries.""

*8  See  Chapter  II,  iv,  2  and  3.
40  See  Chapter  X,  ii,  1  and  2.
50  See  section  v,  3,  below.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  499

C.  THE  ADVANCE  IN  INTEREST  BATES

Rising  rates  of  interest  of  course  count  among  the  increasing  costs  of  doing
business  which  threaten  to  reduce  profits.  But  they  also  have  other  effects
which  must  be  counted  among  the  obstacles  which  prevent  selling  prices  from
being  raised  sufficiently  to  cancel  increasing  costs.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  the  discouragement  of  long-term  borrowing,
caused  by  the  rise  of  interest  rates,  makes  it  difficult  for  the  trades  engaged
in  construction  work  of  all  kinds  to  secure  new  contracts.^^  Investors  will  not
pay  these  high  rates.  Neither  will  they  let  contracts  freely  at  the  high  prices
which  contracting  firms  are  forced  to  charge  in  order  to  meet  their  own  high
costs.  And  when  contractors  of  various  kinds  begin  to  restrict  their  orders
for  materials  and  supplies,  the  decline  of  demand  threatens  to  stop  the  rise  of
prices  in  other  industries,  if  not  to  cause  a  fall.

In  the  money  market  there  is  little  evidence  that  the  demand  for  short-time
loans  falls  off  when  interest  rates  mount  high ;  but  it  is  clear  that  banks  restrict
their  loans  when  the  ratio  of  reserves  falls  dangerously  low.^^  Of  course,
inability  to  borrow  means  inability  to  buy — a  check  upon  the  expansion  in  the
demand  for  a  vast  variety  of  goods  and  hence  an  added  obstacle  in  the  way  of
further  price  advances.

High  discount  rates  also  impede  the  efforts,  often  made  toward  the  end  of
a  prosperous  period,  to  maintain  selling  prices  by  keeping  goods  off  the  market
and  allowing  the  current  output  to  pile  up  in  huge  stocks,  which  are  held  for
sale  at  a  more  opportune  moment.  This  policy  interrupts  the  inflow  of  cash
from  sales,  and  makes  it  necessary  to  borrow  money  to  pay  running  expenses.
A  temporary  relief  from  a  threatened  fall  of  prices  may  be  obtained  in  this
way,  but  the  potential  danger  becomes  more  grave.  The  heavy  interest  cost  of
"carrying"  the  unsold  stocks  saps  the  financial  strength  of  even  the  largest
enterprises  and  makes  long  persistence  in  this  course  hazardous.  If  buyers
get  wind  of  the  situation,  they  hold  off'  for  the  drop  in  prices  which  they  expect
to  come  when  the  stocks  are  finally  ' '  sacrified. ' '  In  short,  there  can  be  but  one
end  to  such  a  policy  when  initiated  under  the  business  conditions  of  waning
prosperity,  and  that  disastrous  end  is  hastened  by  high  discount  rates.

D.  XJNDEE-CONSUMPTION

If  certain  of  the  theories  reviewed  in  the  first  chapter  are  sound,  the  greatest
obstacle  in  the  way  of  defending  profits  by  advancing  selling  prices  is  the
lagging  of  consumers'  demand  behind  the  supply  of  consumers'  goods.  May
goes  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  glutting  of  the  markets  can  be  prevented  only  by
combining  an  increase  in  wages  with  a  decrease  in  prices — only  by  such  double

51  See  section  ii,  4,  of  the  present  chapter.

52  See  section  iii,  3,  of  the  present  chapter,


500


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


stimulation  can  demand  be  kept  up  to  supply.  Af talion  holds  simply  that  the
increasing  supplies  of  consumers'  goods  cause  marginal  utilities  to  fall,  and
thus  bring  on  a  decline  in  the  price  level.°*

Such  theories  are  speculative  solutions  of  a  quantitative  problem,  which  is
commonly  formulated  in  the  question.  Does  the  increase  in  consumers'  demand
keep  pace  with  the  increase  in  consumers'  supply?  but  which  is  more  accurately
stated  by  asking,  Does  consumers'  demand  grow  fast  enough  to  absorb  the
forthcoming  supplies  at  the  continually  rising  prices  which  must  be  charged
to  prevent  costs  from  encroaching  upon  profits?

To  answer  this  question  categorically  would  require  more  refined  and  more
extensive  statistics  of  demand,  supply,  and  prices  than  are  to  be  had." One

53  See  Chapter  I,  ii,  3  and  5.

5i  Some  light  is  shed  upon  the  theory  of  underconsumption  by  figures  which  deal  with  the  purchasing
power  of  wage-earners '  incomes.

The  federal  Bureau  of  Labor  has  computed  the  average  changes  in  the  purchasing  power  of  factory  hands
by  combining  its  index  numbers  of  wages  per  hour,  hours  per  week,  and  retail  prices  of  food.  The  results,
reproduced  below,  indicate  a  slight  decline  between  the  early  and  the  late  stages  of  prosperity  in  the  amount
of  food  a  wage-earner  can  buy.  Thus  the  statistics  seem  to  bear  out  the  contention  that  consumers'  demand
does  not  expand  rapidly.  But  several  factors  of  moment  have  been  omitted  from  the  computation.  (1)  The
number  of  employes  in  the  establishments  investigated  by  the  bureau  increases  rapidly  during  prosperity.
To  show  the  effect  of  this  factor  upon  market  demand  for  food,  a  final  column  has  been  added  to  the  table
as  published  by  the  bureau.  It  is  made  by  multiplying  the  relative  purchasing  power  of  full-time  weekly
earnings  by  the  relative  number  of  employes.  A  rapid  expansion  of  purchasing  power  appears  in  the  results,
though  the  rate  of  growth  becomes  somewhat  slower  as  the  climax  of  prosperity  is  approached.  (2)  The  in-
crease of  money  incomes  arising  both  from  the  greater  steadiness  of  employment  and  the  greater  frequency
of  "overtime"  in  active  periods  is  unrepresented.  (3)  The  proportion  of  money  income  which  is  spent  upon
consumers'  goods  may  change.  If  extravagance  does  become  as  widespread  as  popular  moralists  assert,  the
rate  of  savings  may  shrink  somewhat  in  comparison  with  the  early  days  of  prosperity — shrink  to  the  detriment
of  would-be  borrowers,  but  to  the  advantage  of  purveyors  of  consumers'  goods.

Eblativb  Number  of  Employes, Hours  Per  Week, Wages  Per  Hour,  Pull  Time  Weekly  Earnings  Per

Employe,  Retail  Prices  of  Food,  and  Purchasing  Power  of  Hourly  Wages  and  of  Pull  Time  *

Weekly  Earnings  Per  Employe,  Measured  by  Retail  Prices  of  Food,  1890-1907

(Relative  Numbers  computed  on  basis  of  averages  for  1890-99  =  100)

Purchasing  power  measured  by
retail  prices  of  food  of


Year

Number

of
employes

Hours
per

week

Wages
per
hour

Full  time

weekly

earnings  per

employe

Retail  prices

of  food,

weighted

according

to  family

consumption

Hourly

wages

A

Full  time

weekly

earnings  per

employe

Weekly

earnings

multiplied  by

number  of

employes

1890

94.8

100.7

100.3

101.0

102.4

97.9

98.6

93.5

1891

97.3

100.5

100.3

100.8

103.8

96.6

97.1

94.5

1892

99.2

100.5

100.8

101.3

101.9

98.9

99.4

98.6

1893

99.4

100.3

100.9

101.2

104.4

96.6

96.9

96.3

1894

94.1

99.8

97.9

97.7

99.7

98.2

98.0

92.2

1895

96.4

100.1

98.3

98.4

97.8

100.5

100.6

97.0

1896

98.6

99.8

99.7

99.5

95.5

104.4

104.2

102.8

1897

100.9

99.6

99.6

99.2

96.3

103.4

103.0

103.9

1898

106.4

99.7

100.2

99.9

98.7

101.5

101.2

107.7

1899

112.1

99.2

102.0

101.2

99.5

102.5

101.7

114.0

1900

115.6

98.7

105.5

104.1

101.1

104.4

103.0

119.1

1901

119.1

98.1

108.0

105.9

105.2

102.7

100.7

119.9

1902

123.6

97.3

112.2

109.2

110.9

101.2

98.5

121.7

1903

126.5

96.6

116.3

112.3

110.3

105.4

101.8

128.8

1904

125.7

95.9

117.0

112.2

111.7

104.7

100.4

126.2

1905

133.6

95.9

118.9

114.0

112.4

105.8

101.4

135.5

1906

142.9

95.4

124.2

118.5

115.7

107.3

102.4

146.3

1907

144.4

95.0

128.8

122.4

120.6

106.8

101.5

146.6

Mr.  George  H.  Wood's  British  figures  ("Real  Wages  and  the  Standard  of  Comfort  Since  1850,"  Journal
of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  March,  1909,  vol.  72,  p.  103)  seek  to  cover  some  of  these  omitted  items.  His
series  for  retail  prices  include  other  articles  than  food.  He  has  estimated  the  variations  in  working-class
rents,  and  combined  the  data  for  unemployment  with  the  data  for  wages. Further,  Mr.  Wood  points  out  that


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  501

significant  fact,  however,  is  established  in  Chapter  IV.  The  monthly  figures
of  Table  4  show  that  producers'  goods  reached  their  highest  point  and  began
their  decline  earlier  in  1907  than  did  consumers'  goods. Likewise,  the  monthly

in  England  there  has  been  a  steady  shifting  away  from  the  ill-paid  toward  the  well-paid  occupations.  Hence
the  "average  workman"  has  improved  his  position  more  rapidly  than  the  "workman  of  unchanged  grade."
The  final  results  of  his  investigation,  converted  from  English  into  American  money  and  shifted  from  the  basis
actual  amounts  in  1850^=100  to  the  basis  average  actual  amounts  in  1890-99^100,  are  summed  up  in  the

The  Estimated  Changes  in  the  Real  Wages  op  English  Workmen
By  Years,  1890-1902


Relative  figures  for  workmen

o£

unchanged  grade

Money  cost  of

Money  wages

Relative

^

A

\

^

assuming

20s  in  1850

real

wages

Money  wages

Relative

Kelative

Percent-

Commod-

Rent

commod-

'

Allowing

Full  work

Allowing

'

Allowing

money

retail

age  unem-

ities 1850

1880  —

ities  1850

I'ull

for  unem-

1890-99

for  unem-

Full

for  unem-

Real

Year

wages

prices

ployed

=  16s

4s

=  20«

work

ployment

^  100

ployment

work

ployment

wages

1890

99

104

2.1%

$3.55

$1.22

$4.77

$7.91

$7.74

97

99

100

103

98

1891

99

105

3.5

3.58

1.24

4.82

7.91

7.64

96

97

100

101

97

1892

99

105

6.3

3.58

1.24

4.82

7.86

7.37

95

94

100

98

96

1893

99

101

7.5

3.46

1.24

4.70

8.10

7.28

98

95

99

96

98

1894

99

99

6.9

3.38

1.24

4.62

7.86

7.32

99

97

99

97

100

1895

99

96

5.8

3.26

1.27

4.53

7.86

7.40

102

100

98

96

100

1896

99

95-

3.4

3.24

1.27

4.50

7.91

7.64

103

104

99

100

102

1897

101

98

3.5

3.33

1.27

4.60

8.08

7.79

103

103

100

101

102

1898

102

99

3.0

3.41

1.27

4.67

8.13

7.88

102

103

102

103

102

1899

105

98

2.4

3.33

1.29

4.62

8.35

8.15

105

108

104

106

104

1900

109

101

2.9

3.46

1.29

4.75

8.69

8.42

107

108

108

109

106

1901

109

103

3.8

3.50

1.29

4.79

8.69

8.35

106

106

107

108

104

1902

107

104

4.4

3.55

1.29

4.84

8.57

8.18

104

103

105

106

102

accompanying  table.  They  show  a  definite  increase  in  the  purchasing  power  of  money  wages  up  to  the  very
end  of  the  prosperous  period  1896-1900.  If  these  figures  could  be  multiplied  by  the  relative  number  of  employees,
the  total  purchasing  power  represented  would  doubtless  increase  much  more  rapidly.

Mr.  Walter  T.  Layton  (Introduction  to  the  Study  of  Prices,  London,  1912,  p.  150)  has  extended  to  1910  Mr.
Wood's  relative  figures  for  money  wages,  retail  prices,  unemployment,  and  real  wages  of  men  in  full  work,
and  allowing  for  unemployment. The  last-mentioned  series,  shifted  to  the  basis  1890-99^100,  runs  as  follows:

Relative  Real  Wages  in  England,  Allowing  for  Unemployment


1890

99

1901

107

1891

97

1902

104

1892

94

1903

100

1893

95

1904

_ 98

1894

. .. 97

1905

1906

100

1895

100

103

1896

104

1907

104

1897

104

1908

97

1898

103

1909

96

1899

108

1910

98

1900

109

These  figures,  like  the  others,  indicate  a  gain  in  the  purchasing  power  of  wage-earners'  incomes  up  to  the
years  of  the  crises — even  without  counting  the  gain  in  the  number  of  persons  at  work.  The  rate  of  gain,
however,  slows  down  in  the  crisis  years.  It  is  noteworthy  that  real  wages  did  not  attain  as  high  a  level  in
1907  as  in  1899-1900.

Interesting  as  are  these  estimates,  they  leave  much  to  be  desired.  Even  if  the  figures  be  accepted  at  their
face  value,  they  show  merely  that,  despite  the  rise  of  retail  prices,  one  large  class  of  people  is  able  to  buy
an  increasing  volume  oi  consumers'  goods  in  periods  of  prosperity.  How  matters  stand  with  other  classes
remains  conjectural.  The  incomes  of  bondholders  must  increase  rather  slowly;  indeed,  they  do  not  increase
at  all  except  so  far  as  these  persons  have  fresh  savings  to  invest  at  the  high  rates  which  become  prevalent
in  prosperity,  or  venture  to  shift  their  funds  to  securities  which  yield  higher  returns.  If  the  tables  of  Chapter
IX  and  the  analysis  of  Chapter  X  may  be  trusted,  stockholders  and  other  recipients  of  profits  enjoy  a  more
rapid  increase  of  money  income  than  wage-earners.  It  may  also  be  said  with  some  assurance  that  the  incomes
of  the  landlord  and  salaried  classes  grow  more  slowly  on  the  average  than  do  wages.  But  concerning  the
non-salaried  professional  men,  concerning  farmers,  and  concerning  wage-earners  outside  of  manufacturing
industries,  there  is  no  substantial  basis  for  making  even  a  guess  at  the  average  increase  of  money  incomes.
And,  if  the  rates  of  increase  were  known,  there  would  be  no  satisfactory  data  to  confirm  or  disprove  Hob-
son's  assertion  that  the  proportion  of  income  saved  gains  upon  the  proportion  spent.  Finally,  if  we  did  know  at
what  average  rate  expenditure  upon  consumers'  goods  increases,  we  should  still  be  unable  to  complete  the
demonstration;  for  we  have  no  satisfactory  statistics  of  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  consumers'  goods  pro-
duced and  sent  to  market.


502  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

figures  of  Tables  5  and  6  show  that  raw  materials  began  to  fall  in  price  before
the  products  manufactured  from  them.  Now,  if  the  chief  stress  arose  from
the  lagging  of  consumers'  demand  behind  the  supply  of  consumers'  goods,  one
would  expect  the  opposite  result  to  be  registered  by  the  index  numbers.  Con-
sumers' goods  would  be  the  first  to  fall  in  price,  and  this  decline  would  extend
to  the  prices  of  producers'  goods  and  of  raw  materials.  This  extension  might
take  place  promptly;  but  certainly  these  other  classes  of  commodities  would
not  be  the  first  to  fall.  What  is  known  about  the  behavior  of  prices,  then,  favors
the  view  that  the  impossibility  of  defending  profits  against  the  encroachments
of  costs  is  experienced  earlier  by  enterprises  which  handle  raw  materials  and
producers'  goods.  This  conclusion  is  confirmed  by  a  comparison  between  the
current  reports  concerning  retail  trade,  jobbing,  and  manufacturing  at  times
when  crises  are  approaching.  The  technical  journals  usually  report  that  the
factories  and  wholesale  houses  are  restricting  their  orders  some  weeks,  if  not
months,  before  they  report  that  retail  sales  are  flagging.

Until  the  under-consumption  theories  have  been  shored  up  by  more  con-
vincing evidence  than  has  yet  been  adduced  in  their  favor,  therefore,  the  view
must  prevail  that  the  difficulty  of  warding  off  encroachments  upon  profits  by
advancing  costs  comes  to  a  head  earlier  in  other  lines  of  business  than  in
those  concerned  with  consumers'  goods.  The  latter  industries  may  well  have
troubles  of  their  own,  troubles  which  would  presently  become  acute  if  left  to
themselves.  But  these  gradually  accumulating  difficulties  usually  cut  but  a
small  figure,  because  before  they  have  reached  a  critical  stage  they  are  over-
shadowed by  graver  troubles  arising  in  other  quarters.

3.  Tfm  Critical  Point

To  sum  up :  The  very  conditions  which  make  business  profitable  gradually
evolve  conditions  which  threaten  a  reduction  of  profits.  When  the  increase  in
the  volume  of  business,  at  first  a  cause  and  later  both  a  cause  and  a  consequence
of  rising  profits,  taxes  the  productive  capacity  of  the  existing  industrial  equip-
ment, the  early  decline  of  supplementary  costs  per  unit  of  output  comes  gradually
to  a  standstill.  Meanwhile,  the  expectation  of  making  satisfactory  profits
induces  active  bidding  among  business  enterprises  for  materials,  labor,  and  loan
funds,  and  sends  up  their  prices.  At  the  same  time,  the  poorer  parts  of  the
industrial  equipment  are  brought  back  into  use,  the  efficiency  of  labor  declines,
and  the  incidental  wastes  of  management  rise.  Thus  the  prime  costs  of  doing
business  become  heavier.  After  these  processes  have  been  running  cumulatively
for  a  time,  it  becomes  difficult  to  advance  selling  prices  fast  enough  to  avoid  a
reduction  of  profits  by  the  encroachment  of  costs.  In  many  industries  the
increase  in  industrial  equipment  has  been  so  rapid  that  the  full  output  can
scarcely  be  marketed  at  the  high  prices  which  must  be  asked. In  the  trades


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  503

engaged  in  construction  work  the  volume  of  new  contracts  declines  when  the
rise  in  long-term  interest  discourages  borrowing,  and  when  the  cost  of  construc-
tion becomes  excessive  in  the  eyes  of  investors.  The  decline  in  bank  reserves
ultimately  makes  the  banks  disinclined  to  expand  loans  further — a  development
which  diminishes  the  ability  oi  many  enterprises  to  buy  as  freely  as  they  had
planned.  The  high  discount  rates  also  clog  the  effort  to  forestall  a  decline  of
prices  by  holding  stocks  of  commodities  off  the  market.  In  other  trades  prices
are  more  or  less  stereotyped  by  public  regulation,  custom,  contract,  or  business
policy.  It  may  also  be  that  the  purveyors  of  consumers'  goods  in  general  find
difficulty  in  selling  their  supplies  at  sufficiently  high  rates  to  maintain  profits
unimpaired,  though  index  numbers  and  market  reports  indicate  that  these
difficulties  come  to  a  head  earlier  in  other  branches  of  trade.

Since  these  various  stresses  become  more  severe  the  longer  prosperity  lasts
and  the  more  intense  it  becomes,  and  since  a  set-back  suffered  by  any  industry
necessarily  aggravates  the  stress  among  others  by  reducing  the  market  for  their
products,  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  profits  must  infallibly  occur.  But  both
the  analysis  and  the  statistics  of  profits  in  Chapter  IX  show  that  this  reduction
comes  much  later  in  some  branches  of  business  than  in  others,  and  varies  widely
in  its  severity.  Even  in  the  same  industry  different  enterprises  have  exceedingly
dissimilar  fortunes,  partly  because  of  unlike  advantages  of  location  and  business
connection,  partly  because  each  enterprise  encounters  its  own  peculiar  set  of
unforeseen  business  conjunctures,  partly  because  of  unequal  energy  and  skill
among  the  managers.  Indeed,  what  quantitative  information  we  possess  indi-
cates that  in  the  very  last  year  preceding  a  crisis  a  large  number,  perhaps  a
majority,  of  enterprises  are  still  making  profits  as  high  as  or  higher  than  in
any  preceding  year.  That  is,  if  an  average  rate  of  profits  could  be  computed
for  a  whole  country,  it  would  not  be  surprising  to  find  it  reaching  its  climax  just
before  the  crisis  breaks  out.  But  this  result  would  not  mean  that  there  had
been  no  serious  encroachment  upon  profits.  On  the  contrary,  it  would  mean
that  the  critical  point  is  reached  and  a  crisis  precipitated  as  soon  as  a  decline
of  present  or  prospective  profits  has  occurred  in  a  few  leading  branches  of
business  and  iefore  that  decline  has  become  general.  To  understand  this  devel-
opment, it  is  necessary  to  examine  the  bearings  of  the  rate  of  prospective  profits
upon  outstanding  credits.

V-  The  Undermining  of  Business  Credit

1.  The  Relations  bet-ween  Credit  and  Profits

Towards  the  end  of  a  period  of  expansion  practically  all  business  enterprises

have  become  enmeshed  in  the  network  of  credit. Customers  prefer  to  buy  "on

time,"  and  in  their  turn  sellers  insist  upon  receiving  similar  terms  from  those

from  whom  they  buy. There  are  outstanding  numberless  contracts  which  require


504  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

work  to  be  done  by  one  enterprise  for  another  in  advance  of  payment.  And
nearly  all  enterprises  above  the  smallest  size  borrow  from  the  banks.  This
seeking  for  credit,  indeed,  is  not  purely  voluntary.  Where  the  increase  in  the
volume  of  business  made  possible  by  the  use  of  borrowed  funds  adds  more  to
profits  than  the  interest  adds  to  costs,  borrowing  becomes  compulsory  in  sharply
competitive  trades.  For  a  man  who  uses  borrowed  funds  in  addition  to  his  own
capital  can  make  higher  profits  than  a  rival  who  refuses  to  ' '  run  into  debt, ' '  if
both  sell  at  the  same  price.  Then  the  borrowing  competitor,  if  he  be  aggressive,
can  undersell  his  less  daring  rival  and  still  make  a  fair  rate  of  profit  while
driving  the  latter  out  of  business.  Thus  even  the  reluctant  among  business  men
are  constrained  to  ask  as  well  as  to  grant  credit.^^

In  order  to  bring  out  the  relation  between  these  credits  and  profits  it  is
necessary  to  recite  a  few  familiar  facts  of  business  practice.  The  amount  of
credit  which  an  enterprise  can  secure  depends  primarily  upon  the  estimate
set  by  lenders  upon  its  value  as  a  going  concern.  Several  elements  are  commonly
taken  into  consideration  in  framing  such  estimates:  the  amount,  nature,  and
condition  of  the  physical  property  owned  by  the  enterprise,  including  stocks  of
materials  and  finished  goods  as  well  as  real  estate  and  equipment ;  the  number
and  character  of  the  contracts,  patent  rights,  franchises,  securities,  etc.,  w^ich
it  holds;  its  pecuniary  obligations  already  outstanding;  the  balance  between
its  bills  due  and  bills  receivable;  the  good- will  it  enjoys;  the  business  prospects
of  the  branch  of  trade  in  which  it  is  engaged,  etc.  Now  all  of  the  property  owned
by  a  business  enterprise,  both  tangible  and  intangible,  is  valued  primarily  upon
the  basis  of  the  amount  of  money  which  can  be  made  by  its  use.  Good-will,  also,
is  valued  according  to  its  estimated  contribution  toward  profits.  Pecuniary
obligations  of  all  sorts  have  to  be  considered  because  they  represent  deductions
which  must  be  made  from  gross  receipts  before  net  profits  can  be  computed.
And  business  prospects  mean  precisely  the  prospects  of  making  money.  That
is,  profits,  present  and  prospective,  are  by  far  the  most  important  single  element
in  deciding  how  much  a  business  enterprise  is  worth  and  how  large  a  line  of
credit  can  safely  be  granted  it.  Indeed,  if  the  available  data  concerning  present
and  prospective  profits  were. sufficiently  full  and  sufficiently  trustworthy  to  be
accepted  without  being  checked  by  any  other  methods  of  estimate,  a  business
euterpi'ise  might  be  rated  simply  by  capitalizing  these  profits  at  the  current  rate
of  interest.""


5^5  Compare  Thorstein  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  pp.  92-97.

•■•o  Additional  elements  are  taken  into  consideration  when  an  enterprise  oilers  the  lender  of  credit  some
guarantee  in  support  of  its  promise  to  pay.  If  the  security  consists  of  endorsements  by  other  business  enter-
prises, or  01  promissory  notes,  bills  of  exchange,  etc.,  owned  by  the  applicant,  then  the  lender  estimates  the
financial  standing  of  the  other  enterprises  on  the  basis  just  described.  If  the  security  is  stocks  offered  as
collateral,  their  pecuniary  value  is  estimated,  and  again  the  factor  of  chief  importance  is  the  present  and
prospective  profits  of  the  business  enterprise  concerned.  If  the  security  be  bonds,  it  is  still  necessary  to  know
what  profits  the  issuing  corporation  makes  in  order  to  determine  the  chances  that  the  interest  will  be  paid
promptly.  In  ease  the  security  consists  of  warehouse  receipts,  bills  of  lading,  bills  of  exchange,  or  similar
documents  which  carry  with  them  the  legal  title  to  certain  commodities,  the  prices  which  the  latter  will  com-
mand become  the  matter  of  prime  importance.  But  even  then  the  business  standing  of  the  applicant  for  credit
is  taken  into  account,  since  lenders  do  not  want  the  trouble,  delay,  and  uncertainty  involved  in  having  to  sell
the  commodities  to  secure  reimbursement.


AIITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  505

Whatever  form  credit  assumes,  in  fine,  whether  it  be  a  bank  loan,  mercantile
credit,  or  a  contract  requiring  the  performance  of  services  for  future  payment,
whether  it  be  supported  by  collateral  security  or  not,  the  present  and  prospective
profits  of  the  applicant  form  an  element,  usually  the  crucial  element,  in  deter-
mining how  much  may  be  granted.


2.  The  Effect  of  Prosperity  upon  the  Volume  of  Credits

In  its  earlier  stages,  prosperity  increases  the  volume  of  credits  which  prudent
judges  are  willing  to  concede  by  broadening  the  basis  upon  which  credits  are
granted.  All  who  deal  in  staple  commodities  by  methods  which  enable  them
to  pledge  their  stocks  to  lenders,  can  secure  increasing  advances  as  the  prices
of  their  goods  rise.  The  concomitant  advance  of  stock-exchange  securities  per-
forms a  like  service  for  those  with  shares  and  bonds  to.offer  as  collateral.  And
the  increasing  profits  of  business  enterpi'ises,  coupled  with  their  brighter  pros-
pects in  the  immedi-ate  future,  justifies  them  not  only  in  their  own  opinion,  but
also  in  the  opinion  of  lenders,  in  asking  for  more  liberal  lines  of  credit.  The
effect  of  these  definite  changes  in  the  business  situation  is  heightened  by  the
prevailing  spirit  of  confidence.  On  the  same  facts  submitted  by  an  applicant
for  discounts  bankers  will  pass  a  more  favorable  verdict;  the  credit  men  of
wholesale  houses  have  less  critical  eyes  for  the  orders  sent  in  by  retail  dealers ;
and  manufacturers  are  more  easily  induced  to  make  up  goods  to  be  paid  for
after  delivery.

As  prosperity  grows  more  intense,  a  pryamiding  of  credits  begins.  The
larger  advances  secured  in  one  form  or  another  by  most  business  houses  help
to  swell  their  profits.  In  turn,  the  higher  profits,  present  and  prospective,  give
these  enterprises  both  a  business  motive  and  a  business  justification  for  demand-
ing larger  credits.  If  their  applications  are  granted  and  followed  by  further
increases  of  profit,  the  enterprises  make  still  larger  demands,  and  so  on.  At
the  same  time,  the  high  rate  of  profits  disposes  business  men  to  use  their  own
funds  to  control  as  many  enterprises  as  possible ;  that  is,  to  finance  their  ventures
with  borrowed  money  to  the  extreme  limit  permitted  by  lenders.'"  Similarly  with
the  other  bases  of  credit.  Prosperity  leads  to  a  rapid  advance  in  the  prices  of
commodities ;  then  higher  prices  force  the  dealers  to  secure  more  funds  to  finance
their  purchases,  and,  on  the  other  hand,  enable  them  to  borrow  more  money  on
their  warehouse  receipts,  etc.  So,  too,  with  stock-exchange  securities,  when  used
as  collateral  for  loans.  Every  rise  of  the  quotations  entitles  holders  to  ask  for
larger  advances,  and  if  these  advances  are  invested  in  further  purchases  on  the
exchange  they  aid  in  screwing  up  quotations,  and  the  higher  quotations  increase
the  borrowing  power  of  the  owners  once  more.

uT  Compare  section  iii,  1,  above.


506  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

This  process  does  not  run  long  without  encountering  obstacles.  The  advance
in  interest  rates  is  one,  because  it  cuts  down  the  capitalized  value  of  given  pros-
pective profits.  The  fall  of  bond  prices,  which  usually  conies  after  a  year  or
two  of  prosperity  is  another,  because  it  reduces  the  borrowing  power  of  men
having  this  class  of  collateral.  Stock  prices  are  subject  to  frequent  relapses,
even  in  the  best  of  times.  The  like  is  true  of  commodity  prices,  particularly
in  the  case  of  the  great  agricultural  staples.  And  the  credit  based  on  the  business
rating  of  enterprises  has  its  ups  and  downs;  for  the  prospective  profits  of
different  enterprises  vary  endlessly,  bankruptcies  occur  in  every  year  to  incul-
cate caution  among  lenders,  and  every  year  has  its  seasons  of  relative  dullness
and  doubt.  But,  despite  these  minor  checks,  the  grand  total  of  credits  rises  year
by  year  until  the  climax  of  prosperity  has  been  reached.'*

Accordingly,  that  climax  finds  business  enterprises  trusting  each  other  liber-
ally for  the  payment  of  goods  sold  upon  time,  contracting  freely  to  make  goods
for  future  delivery,  and  also  borrowing  on  the  grand  scale  permitted  by  high
profits  and  easy  optimism.  At  this  stage  of  the  cycle  the  typical  business  enter-
prise has  outstanding  heavy  financial  obligations  to  creditors,  but  relies  con-
fidently on  the  still  larger  sums  which  will  fall  due  from  its  debtors,  plus  the
sums  represented  by  its  unsold  goods  and  unfilled  contracts,  to  bring  in  the
necessary  funds  in  good  season.


3.  The  Effect  Upon  Outstanding  Credits  of  the  Decline  in  Prospective  Profits

Upon  such  a  structure  of  inter-locking  credits,  the  encroachments  of  costs
upon  profits  combine  with  the  tension  in  the  money  and  investment  markets  to
impose  an  ever-increasing  strain.

The  course  of  development  can  be  followed  most  clearly  with  reference  to
credits  granted  upon  stock-exchange  collateral  in  New  York  during  the  period
which  bred  the  panic  of  1907.  The  following  figures  show  the  lowest  and  the
highest  points  touched  between  January,  1904,  and  September,  1907,  by  interest
rates,  and  commodity  and  security  prices,  together  with  the  level  at  which  all
these  factors  stood  in  the  last-named  month — just  before  the  panic  began."^"

Bond  prices  began  to  rise  before  the  depression  of  1903-04  was  over.  Two
or  three  months  later  stock  prices  moved  upward,  and,  after  another  two  or
three  months,  commodity  prices.  Discount  rates  did  not  advance  until  eight  or
nine  months  after  commodities,  and  two  months  more  passed  before  investment
rates  of  interest  turned  the  corner.  The  early  advance  of  securities,  the  slightly
later  advance  of  commodities,  and  the  continued  decline  of  interest  rates,  all
helped  to  broaden  the  basis  of  credit.

58  Compare  the  rapid  increase  of  bank  loans  shown  by  the  tables  of  Chapter  VII.

69  The  commodity  prices  are  from  the  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  March,  1910,  p.  398. The  other  data
are  all  compiled  from  the  monthly  tables  of  Chapter  IV,  iii  and  iv.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


507


Substantially  the  reverse  order  was  observed  on  the  fall.  Bonds  and  pre-
ferred stocks  touched  their  highest  points  in  August,  1905,  common  stocks  in
January,  1906,  and  raw  materials  in  June,  1907,  while  manufactured  goods  and


TABLE 130

The  Extreme  Fluctuations  op  Interest  Rates  and op  Commodity  and  Security

BETWEEN  January,  1904,  and  September,  1907

Interest  rates

Highest  point  in

Jan.  1904-Sept.  1907

4.27%,  Sept.,  1907

6.79%,  Sept.,  1907

Commodity  prices
136.9,  June, 1907

130.3  Sept., 1907

Security  prices
118.6,  Aug., 1905

188.5,  Aug., 1905

311.5,  Jan., 1906

279.5,  Jan., 1906


Lowest  point  in
Jan.  1904-Sept.  1907
Average  yields  upon  investments  in

ten railway bonds 3.80%,  Aug., 1905

Discount upon 60-90 day com-
mercial paper 3.75%,  June, 1905

Eaw  materials 117.3,  Oct., 1904

Manufactured  goods 110.3,  Sept.,  1904

Ten  railway  bonds 113.1,  Meh.,  1904

Ten  preferred  stocks 143.5,  June, 1904

Ten  common stocks 183.5,  June,  1904

Forty  common  stocks 165.5,  May, 1904


Prices  in  New  York,


Standing  just
before  the  panic


4.27%,  Sept.,  1907
6.79%,  Sept.,  1907

132.8,  Sept.,  1907
130.3,  Sept.,  1907

105.6,  Sept.,  1907
123.0,  Sept.,  1907
205.0,  Sept.,  1907
197.0,  Sept.,  1907


interest  rates  on  both  long  and  short  loans  continued  to  advance  until  the  panic
broke  out.  Of  course,  the  fall  in  security  prices  was  partly  a  consequence  of
the  rise  in  interest  rates;  for  a  bond  or  stock  expected  to  bring  in  interest  or
dividends  at  a  specified  rate  is  worth  less  on  an  investment  basis  when  "money"
brings  6  per  cent  than  when  it  can  be  had  for  4  per  cent.""  But,  whatever  the
cause  to  which  it  was  due,  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  securities  began  to  undermine
the  credit  of  borrowers  who  depended  upon  this  type  of  collateral  considerably
more  than  a  year  before  the  panic  occurred.  The  strain  began  earlier  in  the
case  of  bonds,  but  it  became  much  more  severe  in  the  case  of  stocks — especially
of  common  stocks.  Borrowers  whose  credit  depended  upon  the  prices  of  raw
materials  which  they  could  use  directly  or  indirectly  as  collateral,  did  not  suffer
in  the  same  way  until  the  summer  before  the  panic,  and  then  the  decline  in  the
prices  of  their  wares  was  much  more  moderate  than  the  decline  in  stock  prices.
Finally,  those  who  could  make  a  similar  use  of  manufactured  goods  had  a
nominally  increasing  security  to  offer  until  the  panic  actually  began.

Now,  the  money  value  of  an  enterprise  as  a  going  concern  and  the  price  of
shares  in  business  enterprises  are  matters  of  the  same  sort.  No  doubt,  the  list-
ing of  shares  on  a  stock-exchange  gives  opportunity  for  the  occurrence  of  many
fluctuations  in  prices  which  find  no  parallel  in  a  banker's  rating  of  the  business

60  Indeed,  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  can  be  computed  only  on  the  basis  of  their  net  yields. See  Chapter
IV,  iv,  6.


508  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

enterprises  which  apply  for  loans."  But,  if  the  enterprise  has  difficulty  in
financing  its  plans  for  permanent  improvements,  the  banker  is  less  disposed  to
take  its  paper.  A  mere  rise  in  interest  rates  will  tend  to  depress  its  capitalized
value  in  the  banker's  eyes,  in  the  same  way  that  a  tight  money  market  tends
to  depress  the  prices  of  stocks.  Most  of  all,  the  moment  that  prospective  profits
decline,  even  though  present  profits  continue  large,  the  banker  revises  his  estim-
ate of  how  much  credit  the  enterprise  may  reasonably  be  granted.  In  short,
the  business  factors  which  cause  stocks  to  fall  in  the  later  stages  of  prosperity
have  a  similar  effect  upon  the  credit  ratings  of  business  enterprises.  The  latter
fact  is  less  clear  solely  because  these  ratings  are  not  made  upon  an  open  market,
and  not  quoted  in  the  newspapers.

Accepting  the  prices  of  shares  in  business  enterprises,  then,  as  the  best
available  index  of  the  current  valuations  set  by  men  of  affairs  upon  going
concerns,  we  may  enquire  how  general  and  how  severe  was  the  decline  in  market
ratings  before  the  panic  of  1907.  The  Financial  Review  gives  stock  quotations
for  63  manufacturing,  mining,  gas,  electric,  street  railway,  and  miscellaneous
companies  on  January,  1906,  January,  1907,  and  September,  1907.  Adding
our  40  transportation  companies,  we  have  a  list  of  over  one  hundred  business
enterprises  for  which  the  changes  in  current  valuation  during  the  period  which
bred  the  crisis  are  recorded.  Between  January,  1906,  and  January,  1907 —
the  culminating  year  of  prosperity — shares  in  21  of  these  companies  rose  in
price,  while  in  82  companies  shares  fell.  That  is,  nine  months  before  the  panic
broke  out  a  reduction  of  market  valuation  had  occurred  in  the  case  of  four  out
of  five  of  these  enterprises.  But  the  average  decline  was  rather  moderate  as
stock-market  fiuctuations  go — 9  per  cent  of  the  prices  in  January,  1906.  As
the  stresses  bred  by  prosperity  became  more  intense  this  decline  grew  greater
in  degree  and  became  all  but  universal.  Only  one  enterprise — the  American
Cotton  Oil  Company — saw  its  shares  rise  between  January  and  September,
1907,  while  102  enterprises  saw  their  shares  fall.  The  average  drop  in  these
eight  months  was  28  per  cent."^

While  we  cannot  prove  by  direct  evidence  that  this  decline  in  the  values  set
by  the  stock  market  on  shares  in  large  corporations  fairly  represented  the

31  Compare  Chapter  IV,  iv,  1.

"2  Among  the  seven  industrial  groups  into  which  the  103  companies  fall,  two  show  a  slight  average  rise
between  January,  1906,  and  January,  1907 — the  mining  and  smelting  companies,  and  the  great  iron  and  steel
companies  which  mine  much  of  their  own  coal  and  ore.  On  the  other  hand,  these  two  groups' suffered  a  heavier
average  fall  in  market  valuation  between  January  and  September,  1907,  than  did  any  of  the  five  other  groups.
These  facts  accord,  well  with  the  preceding  analysis.  The  rapid  rise  in  the  prices  of  raw  mineral  products
during  a  period  of  prosperity  enables  the  mining  company  to  offset  the  encroachments  of  costs  upon  profits
until  the  falling  off  in  new  contracts  for  construction  work  begins.  But  when  the  cycle  has  reached  that  point
these  same  companies  experience  a  peculiarly  violent  constriction  in  demand,  and  their  prospective  profits  drop
suddenly.

Among  the  remaining  groups,  which  differ  widely  from  each  other  in  character  of  products,  the  fall  of  stock
prices  from  January,  1906,  to  .January,  1907,  and  again  from  the  latter  date  tb  September,  1907,  presents
surprisingly  uniform  averages.

The  data  upon  which  these  generalizations  rest  are  given  in  the  following  table.  The  actual  prices  are
means  between  the  highest  and  lowest  quotations  reported  by  the  Financial  Eevietr.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


509


change  in  the  values  set  by  credit  men  upon  smaller  business  enterprises,  still
we  can  scarcely  doubt  that  lenders  of  all  classes  were  growing  more  and  more
conservative  in  their  ratings  of  applicants  for  loans.  Of  course  this  change
in  mental  attitude  was  no  mere  whim  or  emotional  aberration,  but  the  mature


Prices  of  Common  Shares  in  103  Business  Enterprises  in  January,  1906,  January,  1907,  and  September,  1907-


Mean  actual  prices


Mean  relative  prices

Actual  prices  in  Jan.,

1906  =  100


Jan.,
1906

Milling  and  Smelting —

Amalgamated  Copper  Co $109.69

American  Smelting  and  Eefining  t'o 167.75

Columbus  and  Hocking  Coal  and  Iron  Co 22.06

Federal  Mining  and  Smelting  Co 168.50

Homestake  Mining  Co 81.50

National  Lead  Co 87.69

Ontario  Silver  Mining  Co 3.44

Pittsburg  Coal  Co.  of  New  Jersey 16.06

IT.  S.  Eeductio.n  and  Befining  Co 32.00

Average,  9  enterprises

Iron  and  Steel —

Colorado  Fuel  and  Iron  Co 69.38

Eepublio  Iron  and  Steel  Co 35.50

Sloss-Sheffield  Steel  and  Iron  Co 91.50

Tennessee  Coal  and  Iron  Co 147.00

U.  S.  Steel  Corporation  44.13

Virginia  Iron,  Coal,  and  Coke  Co 26.57

Average,  6  enterprises

Machinery  and  Sailway  Equipment —

Allis  Chalmers  Co - 24.69

American  Car  and  Foundry  Co 43.50

American  Locomotive  Co _ 74.62

American  Steel  Foundries  14.44

General  Electric  Co 176.63

International  Power  Co 76.50

International  Steam  Pump  Co 32.50

New  York  Air  Brake  Co 159.25

Pressed  Steel  Car  Co 59.06

Railway  Steel  Spring  Co 60.75

U.  8.  Cast  Iron  Pipe  and  Foundry  Co 49.56

Westinghouse  Electric  Manufacturing  Co 171.00

Average,  12  enterprises

Manufacturing,  various —

American  Agricultural  Chemical  Co 29.31

American  Beet  Sugar  Co 30.50

American  Cotton  Oil  Co 40.63

American  Grass  Twine  Co 10.75

American  Hide  and  Leather  Co 9.31

American  lee  Securities  Co 40.88

American  Linseed  Co 24.63

American  Sugar  Eefining  Co.  150.69

American  Woolen  Co 44.31

Butterick  Co 57.44

Centra]  Leather  Co 47.06

Distillers  Securities  Corporation  52.56

General  Chemical  Co 79.50

International  Paper  Co 24.18

Knickerbocker  lee  Co.  (Chicago)  64.88

National  Biscuit  Co 69.00

Jjational  Enameling  and  Stamping  Co 17.25

U.  S.  Rubber  Co 54.75

Union  Bag  and  Paper  Co 14.31

Virginia  Carolina  Chemical  Co 51.00

Average,  20  enterprises

*  February,  1907.
t  August,  1907.


Jan.,
1907

$116.13

148.31

26.06

161.50

85.00*

71.13

6.56

16.13

28.88


52.19
37.44
73.63
158.00
46.56
43.50


15.19

43.19

72.38

9.75

159.13
49.38
37.63

137.25
52.00
54.25
47.38

151.38


24.19
21.50
30.88
7.38
5.88
86.50
17.63
132.81
33.63
49.06
36.38
72.25
75.13
16.88
54.75
81.63
14.25
50.13
7.56
35.94


Sept.,
1907

$65.38
93.94
22.44
95.50
71.25
49.88
3.50
9.75
13.75


21.88
22.38
46.50
135.00t
29.75
26.25


Jan., Jan.,
1906 1907


7.56

39.06

52.38

6.63

126.50
40.88
22.50

109.00
28.13
36.13
30.13

138.00


16.88
12.50
32.50

4.63

3.94
42.88

8.50
112.38
22.44
31.25
17.88
54.38
63.00*
14.00
50.75
73.50
10.94
30.25

5.38
19.75


100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

100
100
100
100
100
100
100

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100


106

88
118

96
104

81
191
100

90
108

75
105

80
107
106
164
106

62
99
97
68
90
65
116
86
88
89
96
89
87

83
70
76
69
63

212
72
88
76
85
77

137
95
70
84

118
83
92
53
70


Sept.,
1907


60
56

102
57
87
57

102
61
43
69

32
63
51
92
67
99


31

90
70
46
72
53
69
68
48
59
61
81
62

58
41
80
43
42

105
35
75
51
54
38

103
79
58
78

107
63
55
38
39
62


Rise  (  +  )  or  fall  ( — )  in  relative

prices  between
Jan.,  '06 Jan.,  '06 Jan.,  '07
Jan.,  '07 Sept.,  '07 Sept.,  '07


+ 6

—  12
+  18

—  4
+  4

—  19
+  91


10


—  25
+  5

—  20
+  7
+  6
+  64
+  6

—  38

—  1

—  3

—  32

—  10

—  35
+  16

—  14

—  12

—  11

—  4

—  11

—  13

—  17

—  30

—  24

—  31

—  37
+112

—  28

—  12

—  24

—  15

—  23
+  37

—  5

—  80

—  16
+  18

—  17

—  8

—  47

—  30

—  11


—  40

—  44
+  2

—  43

—  13

—  43
+  3

—  39

—  57

—  31

—  68

—  37

—  49

—  S

—  33

—  ]

—  33

—  69

—  10

—  30

—  54

—  28

—  47

—  31

—  32

—  52

—  41

—  39

—  19

—  38

—  42

—  59

—  20

—  57

—  58
+  5

—  65

—  25

—  49

—  46

—  62
+  3

—  21

—  42

—  22
+  7

—  37

—  45

—  62

—  61

—  38


—  46

—  32

—  16

—  39

—  17

—  24

—  89

—  39

—  47

—  39

—  43

—  42

—  29

—  15

—  39

—  65

—  39

—  31

—  9

—  27

—  22

—  18

—  12

—  47

—  18

—  40

—  30

—  35

—  8

—  25

—  25

—  29
+  4

—  26

—  21
—107

—  37

—  13

—  25

—  31

—  39

—  34

—  16

—  12

—  6

—  11

—  20

—  37

—  15

—  31

—  27


510


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


conclusion  of  much  thinking  about  the  changes  in  business  prospects  which  pros-
perity itself  was  bringing  about.  When  this  growing  conservatism  in  judging
what  a  business  enterprise  was  worth  had  reached  a  certain  point  it  became
an  independent  force  reacting  powerfully  upon  the  situation  which  had  bred  it.
Let  the  estimated  money  values  set  upon  business  enterprises  decline  seri-
ously, then  creditors  become  apprehensive  lest  their  margins  of  security  shrink
to  nothing.  Certainly  the  overwhelming  majority  of  enterprises  are  still
solvent ;  probably  a  very  large  proportion  are  still  making  high  profits ;  perhaps
more  than  half  are  doing  better  than  at  any  previous  stage  of  the  business  cycle.


Prices  op  Common  Shares  in  103  Business  Enterprises  in  January,  1906,  January,  1907,  and  September,  1907 — (Continued)


Mean  actual  p

Jan.,  Jan.,

1906  1907

Public  Utilities —  $  $

American  Telephone  and  Telegraph  Co 141.44  130.50

Brooklyn  Eapid  Transit  Co 89.69  77.75

Brooklyn  Union  Gas  Co 171.50  110.50

Chicago  Union  Traction  Co 11.38  5.31

Consolidated  Gas  Co 174.88  136.00

Detroit  United  Railways  97.06  79.56

Metropolitan  Street  Railways 123.50  105.50

N.  Y.  and  N.  J.  Telephone  Co 154.75  113.00

North  American  Co.  (new  stock)  102.50  85.00

Peoples  Gas,  Light,  and  Coke  Co.  (Chicago)  ....  100.50  96.44

Third  Avenue  Railway  Co 137.25  120.25

Toledo  Railways  and  Light  Co 34.13  28.50

Twin  City  Eapid  Transit  Co 119.63  105.31

Average,  13  enterprises

Miscellaneous —

Brunswick  Dock  and  City  Improvement  Co 19.00  14.00

Pullman  Co 244.88  175.56

U.  S.  Realty  and  Improvement  Co 91.25  83.75

Average,  3  enterprises

Average,  63  "industrial"  enterprises

Transportation  Companies —

New  York,  New  Haven,  and  Hartford  200.94  186.63

ISew  York,  Ontario,  and  Western  54.25  45.44

New  York  Central  152.06  129.88

Pennsylvania  144.25  135.44

Erie  48.75  38.94

Central  of  New  Jersey  226.75  215.00

Delaware  and  Hudson  223.63  217.75

Delaware,  Lackawanna,  and  Western 465.75  495.00

Philadelphia  and  Reading  149.13  129.19

Cleveland,  Cincinnati,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis  ....  107.44  90.00

Wheeling  and  Lake  Erie  19.19  14.75

New  York,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis  69.50  60.75

Wabash 23.38  17.31

Pittsburg,  Cincinnati,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis  ....  85.25  75.69

Canada  Southern  69.94  64.63

Lake  Erie  and  Western  41.44  27.75

Hlinois  Central  178.00  165.00

Chicago,  Milwaukee,  and  St.  Paul  186.38  151.31

Chicago  and  Northwestern  230.00  192.38

Chicago,  St.  Paul,  Minneapolis,  and  Omaha  194.00  165.00

Duluth,  South  Shore,  and  Atlantic  21.00  18.00

Iowa  Central  1 32.19  26.44

Minneapolis  and  St.  Louis  82.13  57.88

Wisconsin  Central  30.50  24.19

Chesapeake  and  Ohio  58.56  52.50

Norfolk  and  Western  89.13  88.38

*  Interpolated.

tJuly,  1907.


Mean  relatiye  prices

Actual  prices  in  Jan.,

1906  =  100


Sept.,

1907

$

109.75t
45.81

102.31
3.00

101.63
63.00
40.81

lOd.OO
59.88
86.88
50.50
21.50
93.31


10.00

156.75

50.00


150.25

33.31

104.25

119.88

20.81

173.00

158.50

469.00

94.44

62.25

9.69

35.88

11.69

66.50

60.88

16.56*

138.00

120.19

145.50

127.00

9.50

15.94

39.63

15.13

33.69

70.88


Jan.,
1906

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100

100
100
100
100

100

100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100
100


Jan.,
1907

92

87
64
47
78
82
85
73
83
96
88
84
88
81

74
72
92
79

91

93

84
85
94
80
95
97
106
87
84
77
87
74
89
92
67
93
81
84
85
86
82
70
79
90
99


Sept.,
1907

78
51
60
26
58
65
33


58  —
86  —
37  —
63  —
78  —

59  —


53

64
55
57

63

75
61
69
83
43
76
71
101
63
58
50
52
50
78
87
40
78
64
63
65
45
50
48
50
58
80


Rise  (  +  )  or  fall  ( — )  in  relative
prices  between

, ' ^

Jan.,  '06  Jan.,  '06  Jan.,  07
Jan.,  '07 Sept.,  '07 Sept.,  '07


-I-


13
36

53
22
18
15
27
17
4
12
16
12
19

26

28

8

21


7
16
15

6
20

5

3

6
13
16
23
13
26
11

8
33

7
19
16
15
14
18
30
21
10

1


+


22
49
40
74
42
35
67
32
42
14
63
37
22
41

47
36
45
48

37

25
39
31
17
57
24
29
1
37
42
50
48
50
22
13
60
22
36
37
35
55
50
52
50
42
20


—  14

—  36

—  4

—  21

—  20

—  17

—  52

—  5

—  25

—  10

—  51

—  21

—  10

—  22

—  21

—  8

—  37

—  22

—  28

—  18

—  23

—  16

—  11

—  37

—  19

—  26

—  5

—  24

—  26

—  27

—  35

—  24

—  11

—  5

—  27

—  15

—  17

—  21

—  20

—  41

—  32

—  22

—  29

—  32

—  19


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  511

But  the  creditors  of  those  enterprises  which  have  suffered  most  severely  from
the  encroachments  of  costs,  from  the  decline  of  new  orders,  or  from  some  unfor-
tunate conjuncture ;  or  may  be  the  creditors  who  happen  to  be  most  nervous —
certainly  numerous  creditors  of  some  sort  become  sufficiently  alarmed  to  refuse
to  renew  maturing  loans. Then  their  debtors  must  pay  up.

When  prosperity  has  evolved  such  a  condition  of  business,  the  process  of
liquidation,  once  begun,  spreads  rapidly  and  promptly  brings  into  its  sweep
even  the  creditors  who  are  least  nervous  and  the  debtors  who  are  most  pros-
perous. For  the  efforts  to  raise  money  made  by  the  men  called  upon  for
settlement  presently  increase  the  uneasiness  of  other  creditors  and  create  new
difficulties  for  the  enterprises  whose  prospects  of  profits  have  not  been  dimmed
hitherto.  The  analysis  of  the  process  by  which  liquidation  spreads  over  the
whole  field  of  business,  however,  belongs  in  the  next  chapter;  for  when  the
demand  for  reduction  of  outstanding  credits  becomes  general  the  business  cycle
passes  over  from  the  phase  of  prosperity  into  the  phase  of  crisis.

Prices  of  Common  Shares  in  103  Business  Enterprises  in  Januabt,  1906,  January,  1907,  and  September,  1907 — (Concluded)

Mean  actual  prices

Jan.,  Jan.,  Sept.,

1906  1907  1907

Louisville  and  Nashville  152.50  139.50  107.81

Missouri  Pacific  103.13  89.38 69.44

Missouri,  Kansas,  and  Texas  38.31  38.63 35.00

Texas  and  Pacific  36.06  34.19 27.38

Atchison,  Topeka,  and  Santa  Fe  92.94  103.31 86.88

Denver  and  Rio  Grande  44.94  39.19 23.69

Southern  Pacific 69.25  93.25 85.44

Union  Pacific 154.25  175.94  129.69

Canadian  Pacific  173.38  187.50  164.00

American  Express  Co 235.75  241.00  202.00

United  States  Express  Co 131.25  113.50 89.47*

Wells-Pargo  Express  Co 244.00  285.00  280.00*

Pacific  Mail  Steamship  Co 48.75  37.75 24.38

Western  Union  Telegraph  Co 93.63  83.63 75.50

Average,  40  enterprises

Grand  average,  103  enterprises  100  91  66  — 9 —  34 —  25

*  Interpolated.


Mean  relative  prices

Actual  prices  in  Jan.,

1906  =  100

Eise  (  +  )  or  fall  (— )
prices  betwee

in  relative
n

Jan.,
1906

Jan.,
1907

Sept.,
1907

Jan.,  '06
Jan.,  '07

Jan.,  '06
Sept.,  '07

Jan.,  '07
Sept.,  '07

100

91

71

— 9

—  29

—  20

100

87

67

—  13

—  33

—  20

100

101

91

+ 1

— 9

—  10

100

95

76

— 5

—  24

—  19

100

111

93

+  11

— 7

—  18

100

87

53

—  13

—  47

—  34

100

135

123

+  35

-1-  23

—  12

100

114

84

+ 14

—  16

—  30

100

108

95

-1- 8

— 5

—  13

100

102

86

+ 2

—  14

—  16

100

86

68

—  14

—  32

—  18

100

117

115

+  17

+  15

— 2

100

77

50

—  23

—  50

—  27

100

89

81

—  11

—  19

— 8

100

91

70

— 9

—  30

—  21

CHAPTER  XII


CRISES


I.  The  Beginning  of  Liquidation

AVe  have  seen  that  the  very  conditions  of  business  prosperity  ultimately
beget  a  downward  revision  of  credits.  For  prosperity  produces  a  vast  expan-
sion of  credits  based  primarily  upon  the  capitalization  of  large  anticipated
profits.  When  profit  margins  are  threatened  by  the  encroachments  of  costs,
when  these  encroachments  cannot  be  offset  by  further  advances  of  selling  prices,
and  when  the  rate  at  which  profits  are  capitalized  is  reduced  by  the  rise  of
interest,  then  creditors  begin  to  take  alarm  and  press  for  the  settlement  of  their
claims.

The  beginning  of  this  process  of  liquidation  is  sometimes  prematurely
brought  on  by  the  collapse  of  some  conspicuous  enterprise  which  has  suffered
heavy  losses  in  speculative  ventures.  Such  failures,  however,  are  more  often
signs  that  liquidation  is  already  under  way  than  causes  of  its  beginning.  At
other  times  crop  failures,  political  disorders,  uncertainties  about  the  monetary
standard,  the  outbreak  of  war  or  a  drop  of  prices  following  upon  the  making
of  peace,  crises  in  foreign  countries,  or  other  developments  which  do  not  arise
from  the  domestic  business  situation  give  the  impetus  to  liquidation  before  the
period  of  prosperity  has  run  its  full  course.  But  the  preceding  description
of  the  processes  going  forward  in  a  period  of  business  activity  shows  that,  even
in  the  absence  of  any  disquieting  event  from  the  outside,  prosperity  itself  grad-
ually accumulates  stresses  which  impel  creditors  to  demand  repayment  of  a
part  of  their  advances.

There  is  no  general  rule  concerning  the  spot  in  the  business  system  at  which
this  process  of  forcing  debtors  to  pay  up  begins.  If  there  occur  violent  fluctu-
ations in  the  prices  of  certain  important  materials  which  threaten  losses  to
manufacturers  or  merchants,  the  trades  concerned  may  be  the  first  to  suffer
loss  of  credit.  Contractors  or  others  engaged  in  providing  industrial  equip-
ment are  especially  likely  to  be  early  victims,  because  their  orders  fall  off  as
soon  as  the  bond  market  becomes  stringent  and  the  cost  of  construction  becomes
heavy.  Or  there  may  be  some  district  of  the  country,  rather  than  some  line
of  business,  where  the  great  lenders  of  the  financial  centers  think  that  the
expansion  of  credits  has  proceeded  faster  than  the  expansion  of  security  for

[512]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  513

repayment.  Or  it  may  be  merely  that  certain  individual  creditors  take  the
conservative  tack  before  others,  and  put  the  screws  upon  whatever  enterprises
happen  to  have  borrowed  from  them.  The  spot  where  liquidation  begins,  how-
ever, is  less  important  than  the  manner  in  which  it  spreads  from  enterprise
to  enterprise,  from  trade  to  trade,  and  from  town  to  town.

Say,  then,  that  some  creditor  more  cautious  than  his  fellows,  or  the  creditor
of  some  enterprise  more  heavily  involved  than  most,  gives  notice  that  a  maturing
debt  will  not  be  renewed  or  extended.  The  debtor  has  various  ways  of  raising
funds.  He  may  apply  to  some  other  lender,  he  may  put  pressure  upon  those
who  owe  him  money,  he  may  offer  liberal  inducements  to  settle  accounts  not
yet  due,  he  may  persuade  other  creditors  to  allow  more  time  on  sums  due  them,
he  may  force  cash  sales  of  wares  on  hand,  he  may  "sacrifice"  his  securities  or
other  property.  If  any  of  these  shifts  prove  successful  in  securing  the  neces-
sary funds,  the  debtor  escapes  bankruptcy  himself.  But  his  efforts  increase
the  business  difficulties  of  others.  If  he  borrows  from  some  bank,  that  insti-i
tution  is  brought  nearer  the  point  where  it  must  restrict  its  loans  to  other  would-
be  borrowers.  If  he  applies  pressure  to  his  own  debtors  he  lands  them  in  the
same  predicament  he  is  facing.  If  he  persuades  other  debtors  to  pay  before
their  time  or  other  creditors  to  defer  their  claims,  he  at  least  diminishes  the
means  at  their  disposal.  Finally,  if  he  sells  commodities,  securities,  or  other
property  at  a  sacrifice  for  cash  he  injures  the  market  for  others.  Thus,  though
the  earlier  attempts  to  force  a  liquidation  of  outstanding  credits  may  cause
no  failures,  they  increase  the  likelihood  that  further  attempts  wUl  have  more
serious  results.

They  also  increase  the  likelihood  that  similar  attempts  will  be  made  by
other  creditors.  Both  creditor  and  debtor  have  an  interest  in  concealing  such
matters  as  the  refusal  to  extend  a  loan;  but  the  steps  which  the  debtor  takes
to  raise  money  give  an  inkling  of  his  plight  to  the  business  men  whom  he
approaches  on  the  subject.  A  suspicion  that  some  creditor  is  becoming  appre-
hensive and  that  some  debtor  is  having  trouble  in  meeting  his  obligations  is
all  that  is  needed  to  decide  other  hesitating  creditors  to  put  on  the  screws.
And  each  new  effort  to  reduce  outstanding  credits  spreads  wider  the  knowledge
of  what  is  going  on,  and  strengthens  the  movement  toward  liquidation.

The  more  general  such  a  movement  becomes,  the  more  difficult  it  is  to  carry
through  without  disaster.  For  the  money  and  investment  markets  promptly
become  more  tense  than  ever.  The  demand  for  loans  which  falls  upon  any
bank  is  swelled  not  only  by  the  men  who  are  being  pushed  to  settle  by  other
banks  and  by  mercantile  or  manufacturing  concerns,  but  also  by  the  men  who
seek  to  fortify  their  position  by  having  funds  in  readiness  to  meet  demands
which  may  be  made  upon  them.  For,  when  a  serious  crisis  is  thought  to  be
impending,  it  seems  wiser  to  pay  interest  on  money  which  may  not  be  needed
for  some  time  than  to  risk  inability  to  secure  it  later. In  addition,  enterprises


514  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

which  have  bonds  maturing,  or  which  must  raise  money  to  pay  for  contract
work  nearing  completion  fall  back  upon  the  banks  because  investors  will  not
take  their  long-time  obligations.  This  sudden  increase  in  the  demand  for  loans
to  meet  outstanding  obligations  much  more  than  makes  up  for  the  decrease  in
the  demand  for  loans  to  finance  fresh  business  ventures.  On  the  other  hand,
banks  are  particularly  loath  to  increase  loans  at  such  seasons  if  they  can  help
it.  Their  reserves  were  reduced  to  a  low  point  by  the  preceding  period  of
prosperity,  and  experience  teaches  that  if  the  situation  goes  from  bad  to  worse
they  may  be  subjected  to  heavy  demands  from  depositors  and  require  very
large  reserves  to  maintain  their  own  prestige.  Further,  the  risk  of  loss  on  bad
debts  increases  with  the  demand  for  loans.  Heavy  failures  are  likely  to  occur,
and  no  one  can  tell  what  enterprises  will  be  crippled  by  these  failures.  The
one  certainty  is  that  the  banks  holding  the  paper  of  bankrupt  firms  will  suffer
delay  and  perhaps  a  serious  loss  on  collection.  Hence  each  bank  is  disposed
to  limit  its  efforts  to  "taking  care  of  its  own  customers."^

Such  a  restriction  of  loans,  however  prudent  it  may  appear  from  the  view-
point of  a  single  bank,  aggravates  the  stress.  On  the  one  hand,  it  increases
the  likelihood  that  some  of  the  enterprises  already  trying  to  raise  money  will
fail  and  be  pushed  to  the  wall;  on  the  other  hand,  it  increases  the  general
uneasiness  and  makes  the  pressure  for  liquidation  more  general  and  more
intense.  Thus  matters  nm  along  for  some  days  or  weeks,  the  strain  becoming
more  severe  until  the  bankruptcy  of  one  or  more  conspicuous  enterprises  pub-
lishes abroad  the  gravity  of  the  situation.

"V\''hat  happens  then  depends  primarily  upon  the  leading  banks.  The  crisis
may  degenerate  into  a  panic,  or  its  severity  may  be  greatly  mitigated  by  effective
measures  of  relief.  The  best  way  of  presenting  these  alternatives  is  to  describe
two  concrete  instances  in  detail — a  typical  panic  and  a  typical  crisis.


II.  A  Typical  Panic — The  United  States,  1907

Since  1890  the  United  States  has  had  two  great  panics,  w^hile  England,
France,  and  Germany  have  had  none.  We  are  therefore  confined  to  the  study
of  Am_erican  experience  in  1893  and  1907.  The  phenomena  of  these  two  panics
are  sufficiently  alike  to  make  a  review  of  one  suffice  for  present  purposes.  The
later  is  preferable,  not  only  because  it  is  closer  to  contemporary  interests,  but
also  because  more  material  is  available  concerning  it,  and  because  it  is  not
complicated  by  a  monetary  problem."

1  Particularly  when  the  banking  system  has  such  a  rudimentary  organization  as  in  the  United  States  at  present.
Compare  section  v,  below.

2  Ou  the  panic  of  1893  see  Chapter  III,  iii,  6;  A.  C.  Stevens,  "Analysis  of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Panic  in
the  United  States  in  1893,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  January,  1894;  0.  M.  W.  Sprague,  History  of  Crises
Under  the  National  Banlcing  System  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),  Chapter  IV;  W.  J.
Lauek,  The  Causes  of  the  Panic  of  1893,  Boston  and  New  York,  1907.  A  very  brief  description  of  the  panic
of  1907  is  given  above  in  Chapter  III,  viii,  4.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  515

1.  The  Beginning  of  the  Panic  of  1907

It  was  a  series  of  bank  failures  in  New  York  which  turned  the  crisis  of  1907
into  a  panic.

Months  before  the  panic  broke  out,  tension  in  the  investment  market  had
caused  a  slackening  of  new  construction.  Copper  was  among  the  commodities
which  suffered  a  loss  of  demand.  Its  price  fell  from  26  cents  a  pound  early
in  the  year  to  20  cents  in  July,  151/2  cents  in  September,  and  12  cents  in  October.
Of  course,  the  prices  of  stocks  in  copper  mining  companies  also  fell  heavily.
In  turn  this  fall  embarrassed  the  capitalists  who  were  large  owners  of  copper
stocks  and  who  presumably  depended  on  these  securities  to  serve  as  collateral
for  heavy  loans.  Among  these  capitalists  was  one,  Mr.  P.  A.  Heinze,  who
organized  a  pool  to  bolster  up  the  prices  of  shares  in  the  United  Copper
Company.  On  October  14th  the  pool  succeeded  in  running  up  the  prices  of
this  stock  on  the  "curb"  from  371/4  to  60.  But  this  success  was  brief.  Next
day  the  price  declined  again,  and  on  the  16th  it  tumbled  to  10.  Gross  &  Klee-
berg  failed,  alleging  that  the  brokerage  firm  of  Heinze 's  brother  would  not  take
stock  bought  for  their  account.  Next  day  the  latter  firm — Otto  Heinze  &
Company — suspended.

This  episode  in  copper  stocks  made  trouble  because  Mr.  F.  A.  Heinze  was
president  of  the  Mercantile  National  Bank.  It  was  believed  that  he  "owned
the  control"  of  this  institution,  and  suspected  that  he  had  taken  advantage
of  that  fact  to  obtain  large  loans  upon  the  security  of  the  stocks  which  had
fallen  so  heavily  in  price.  Naturally,  the  bank's  depositors  became  alarmed
and  began  to  withdraw  their  accounts.  The  suspicion  spread  quickly  to  seven
other  banks  which  were  controlled  by  Messrs.  C.  W.  Morse,  E.  R.  and  0.  P.
Thomas — men  believed  to  have  close  business  affiliations  with  the  Heinzes.  The
names  and  sizes  of  these  banks  are  shown  by  the  following  table.^ The  insti-

Capital  and  Deposits  on

surplus  Oct.  12

Mercantile  National  Bank*  $8,043,600  $11,569,400

Consolidated  National  Bank  2,114,700  3,913,300

National  Bank  of  North  America*  4,407,600  13,320,000

Mechanics  and  Traders  Bank*  2,943,300  19,001,000

New  Amsterdam  National  Bank*  1,266,600  5,132,900

Fourteenth  Street  Bank*  1,416,200  7,392,300

Hamilton  Bank  488,700  7,210,000

Hudson  Trust  Company  1,106,000  3,828,000

$21,786,700  $71,366,900

tutions  starred  were  members  of  the  Clearing  House.

Distrusting  their  ability  to  meet  the  demands  of  depositors,  these  institutions
appealed  to  the  Clearing  House  for  help.  After  examination  to  determine  their
condition,  the  Clearing  House  pledged  its  aid  on  condition  that  the  Heinze,
Morse,  and  Thomas  interests  withdraw  from  control.  These  arrangements  were
completed  by  Sunday,  October  20th,  when  it  was  generally  believed  that  danger
of  a  panic  had  been  averted.

sBradstreet's,  Oct.  26,  1907,


516  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

But  next  day  confidence  received  a  yet  more  serious  shock.  The  president
of  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  was  credited  with  being  interested  in
certain  of  the  Morse  enterprises.  Distrust  resulted  in  a  succession  of  unfavor-
able clearing-house  balances,  and  on  Monday  the  National  Bank  of  Commerce
announced  that  it  would  no  longer  act  as  clearing  agent  for  the  trust  company.
Tuesday,  October  22,  the  Knickerbocker  opened  its  doors  to  a  run,  and
suspended  after  three  hours,  during  which  it  claimed  to  have  paid  out  some
$8,000,000.*

The  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  was  the  third  largest  institution  of  its
kind  in  ISTew  York,  and  had  deposits  of  about  $62,000,000.  Its  failure  caused
widespread  alarm,  and  precipitated  runs  on  the  Trust  Company  of  America
(deposits  $64,000,000)  and  the  Lincoln  Trust  Company  (deposits  $22,400,000).
To  add  to  the  distrust,  several  of  the  Westinghouse  companies  went  into  the
hands  of  a  receiver  on  October  23rd,  and  the  Pittsburgh  Stock  Exchange  was
closed.  Next  day  several  runs  began  on  banks  and  trust  companies  in  New
York,  and  the  Hamilton  and  Twelfth  Ward  Banks  suspended  payments  as  a
safety  measure.  The  day  following  several  other  suspensions  were  announced
by  banks  and  trust  companies — one  in  Manhattan,  four  in  Brooklyn,  and  one
in  Providence.

2.  The  Scramhle  for  Money

The  salient  feature  of  the  panic  precipitated  by  this  epidemic  of  bank
troubles  was  a  desperate  scramble  for  monej^  To  the  New  York  banks  which
were  actually  subjected  to  runs,  and  to  the  banks  which  feared  lest  they  might
be,  large  supplies  of  currency  were  a  matter  of  self-preservation.  Out-of-town
banks,  knowing  that  panic  in  New  York  would  spread  to  the  rest  of  the  country,
and  remembering  that  remittances  had  been  scaled  down  or  refused  in  1893,
ordered  the  return  of  their  balances  with  reserve  agents  and  "called"  the  loans
they  had  outstanding  with  stockbrokers.  Timid  depositors  sought  to  get  their
money  into  their  own  hands,  and  many  large  business  men  locked  up  such  sums
as  they  could  secure  in  order  to  be  fortified  against  emergencies  and  prepared
to  take  advantage  of  favorable  opportunities — such  as  stock  sales  at  bargain
prices  or  a  premimn  on  currency.

The  first  relief  measures  were  directed  toward  enabling  the  Trust  Company
of  America  and  the  Lincoln  Trust  Company  to  meet  the  run  by  their  depositors.
October  23rd  a  committee  of  trust-company  presidents  was  formed  to  aid  them

4  Compare  Sprague,  History  of  Crises  Under  the  National  Banking  System  (Publications  of  the  National  Mon-
etary Commission),  pp.  251,  252.  Mr.  Edmond  Kelly  says  that  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  had  become
"an  independent  financial  power"  of  which  the  "Wall  Street  Group"  was  jealous,  and  that  this  group  took
advantage  of  the  institution 's  temporary  financial  embarrassment  to  get  rid  of  its  eflicient  president  Mr.
Charles  J.  Barney.  Subsequent  events  proved  that  the  company  was  solvent,  and  might  have  been  saved
from  passing  into  the  hands  of  receivers.  Twentieth  Century  Socialism,  New  York,  pp.  182-184.  Interesting
personal  details  concerning  this  incident  and  its  consequences  are  given  by  Carl  Hovey,  The  Life  Story  of  J
Pierpont  Morgan,  N.  Y.,  1911,  eh.  XrV.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  517

by  advancing  cagh  and  securities  to  be  used  as  the  basis  of  loans.  The  Secre-
tary of  the  Treasury  deposited  $35,000,000  in  the  national  banks  within  four
days,  and  much  of  the  large  share  allotted  to  New  York  was  transferred  to
the  threatened  trust  companies.  Meanwhile,  to  prevent  the  further  collapse
of  prices  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  a  pool  was  formed  to  lend  $25,000,000  on  call
on  October  24th,  and  $10,000,000  on  the  25th.  But  it  was  not  until  October
26th — four  days  after  the  suspension  of  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company —
that  the  New  York  Clearing  House  began  to  issue  clearing-house  loan  certifi-
cates.^

While  this  measure  improved  the  situation  by  enabling  the  banks  to  lend
more  freely,  it  was  coupled  with  another  measure  which  intensified  the  scramble
for  money.  Although  the  New  York  bank  reserves  had  not  declined  seriously
by  October  26th — for  most  of  the  millions  absorbed  by  the  trust-company  runs
and  shipped  to  out-of-town  banks  had  been  provided  by  the  government  deposits
— the  banks  began  to  restrict  their  payments  of  cash  as  soon  as  the  issue  of
clearing-house  loan  certificates  was  authorized.  Then  out-of-town  banks,  think-
ing themselves  in  desperate  need  of  lawful  money  for  reserves,  and  employers
who  could  not  get  from  their  banks  enough  money  to  pay  wages,  were  compelled
to  buy  currency  at  a  premium  from  brokers.  A  premium  on  currency  was  first
reported  by  the  press  on  the  30th  of  October.  Early  in  November  it  rose  as
high  as  4  per  cent,  remained  above  1  per  cent  until  the  second  half  of  December,
and  did  not  disappear  until  the  last  two  or  three  days  of  the  year."

Of  course  the  existence  of  the  premium  gave  depositors  an  additional
incentive  for  drawing  money  out  of  the  banks,  and  gave  those  who  received
money  an  additional  incentive  for  refusing  to  deposit  it.  Moreover,  the  pre-
vailing distrust  of  the  banks  on  the  part  not  only  of  the  general  public  but
also  of  each  other  was  augmented  by  the  refusal  to  honor  in  full  checks  and
demands  for  remittances.  On  the  other  hand,  the  premimn  may  have  induced
some  men  who  had  locked  up  money  in  safety  deposit  boxes  to  sell  their  hoards.
But  the  scramble  for  money  was  certainly  rendered  more  rather  than  less  intense
by  the  restriction  of  payments  on  the  part  of  the  New  York  banks.

The  $35,000,000  transferred  from  the  federal  sub-treasuries  to  the  national,
banks  was  the  first  addition  made  to  the  supply  of  money  in  circulation.  But
much  more  was  needed,  and  the  banks  resorted  to  an  increase  of  their  notes
and  an  importation  of  gold.  Neither  measure,  however,  gave  prompt  relief.
It  was  not  until  after  the  first  of  November  that  the  bank  notes  began  to  increase
rapidly,  and  not  until  the  week  ending  November  9th  that  the  first  shipments
of  gold  were  received.^

5  Sprague  regards  this  delay  as  "the  most  serious  error  made"  in  managing  the  panic  of  1907. Op.  cit.,

^ 6A p Andrew,  "Hoarding  in  the  Panic  of  1907,"  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  February,  1908.

■r  For  the  importation  of  gold  see  Table  131,  below. The  volume  of  national-bank  notes  outstanding  was
as  follows:


518  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

In  the  meantime  the  panic  had  spread  rapidly  from  New  York  to  the  interior.
In  two-thirds  of  the  cities  having  more  than  25,000  inhabitants  the  banks  fol-
lowed the  example  of  the  metropolis  in  suspending  cash  payments  to  a  greater
or  less  degree/  Since  lawful  money  could  not  be  provided  quickly  enough
to  meet  the  insistent  demand,  a  variety  of  substitutes  for  cash  came  into  use.
An  attempt  made  by  Dr.  A.  P.  Andrew  to  ascertain  the  amount  of  this  illegal
and  inconvertible  paper  money  yielded  the  following  result:


Millions
of  dollars

Clearing-house  loan  certificates  (large) 238

Clearing-house  loan  certificates  (small)  23

Clearing-house  checks  12

Cashiers'  cheeks  14

Manufacturers'  pay  checks  47

Total 334

But  this  record  was  far  from  complete,  and  Dr.  Andrew  thought  it  safe  to
"place  an  estimate  of  the  total  substitutes  for  cash  above  500  millions.""

Developments  in  New  York  can  best  be  followed  by  aid  of  the  annexed  table,
which  shows  the  recorded  movements  of  money  into  and  out  of  the  clearing-
house banks.  Before  the  panic  began,  money  was  being  shipped  westward  from
New  York  for  crop-moving  purposes  at  about  the  usual  rate ;  but  the  time  was
close  at  hand  for  this  movement  to  decline." The  panic  quadrupled  the  outflow

October  1 $603,900,000  December  1 $656,200,000

October  15  607,100,000  December 15 676,900,000

November  1  611,800,000  December  31 690,100,000

November  15  631,300,000  January  18  695,900,000

Response  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  Senate  Resolution  no.  33  of  December  12,  1907  (60th  Con-
gress, 1st  session,  Senate  Document  208,  pp.  11,  126).

To  provide  lawful  security  for  this  increase  of  notes  and  for  further  government  deposits,  on  November
17th  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  offered  to  receive  subscriptions  for  $50,000,000  in  Panama  Canal  bonds  and
$100,000,000  in  3  per  cent  certificates  of  indebtedness,  and  to  permit  90  per  cent  of  the  proceeds  of  the  bonds
and  75  per  cent  of  the  proceeds  of  the  certificates  to  remain  in  the  national  banks  as  government  deposits.
But  only  $24,631,980  of  the  bonds  and  $15,436,500  of  the  certificates  were  actually  sold.  (Report  of  the  Sec-
retary of  the  Treasury,  1908,  pp.  21,  22.)

8  A.  P.  Andrew,  ' '  Substitutes  for  Cash  in  the  Panic  of  1907, ' '  Quarterly  Journal  of  Economics,  August,
-1908,  pp.  501,  502.

0  Ihid.,  p.  515.  As  an  additional  aid  to  the  banks  in  restricting  payments,  the  governors  of  Oklahoma,
Nevada,  Washington,  Oregon,  and  California  declared  a  succession  of  legal  holidays.  Sprague,  op.  cit.,  286,
287.

10  The  average  gain  (-f)  or  loss  ( — )  to  the  New  York  banks  by  interior  movements  of  cash  during  the
months  October  to  January  in  the  ten  years  1899-1908  was  as  follows.  The  amounts  are  stated  in  thousands
of  dollars.

October — 1st  week — 3,883  December — 2d  week — 836

October — 2d  week  — 2,543  December — 3d  week  + 515

October — 3d  week  — 3,014  December — 4th  week  -j- 60

October — 4th  week  — 3,685  December — 5th  week  -|-2,188

November — 1st  week  — 2,700  January — 1st  week  -|-6,684

November — 2d  week  — 2,666  January — 2d  week  -|-6,621

November — 3d  week  — 1,530  January — 3d  week  -|-7,773

November — 4th  week  — 563  January — 4th  week  -{-6,895

December — 1st  week  — 213

E.  W.  Kemmerer,  Seasonal  Variations  in  the  Demand  for  Money  and  Capital  in  the  United  States  (Publica-
tions of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),  p.  125.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


519


in  the  last  week  of  October  and  caiised  it  to  increase  still  further  throughout
the  first  half  of  November.  Thereafter  the  shipments  declined ;  but  the  current
did  not  set  in  favor  of  New  York  until  the  first  of  the  New  Year — three  weeks
later  than  usual. Of  course  these  figures  mean  that  the  restriction  of  payments


TABLE 131

Becorded  Movements  of  Monet  into  and  out  of  the  Clearing-house  Banks  of  New  York  City  during  the

Panic  of  1907

In  millions  and  tenths  of  millions  of  dollars

Net  gain  ( + )  or  loss  ( — )  by


Weeks  ending

Reserves
of  the
banks

Shipments

to  and  from

interior

Sub-treasury
operations

Imports  and
exports ,
of  gold

ToWls  of  the

three

preceding

columns

Net  gain  (  +  )

or  loss  ( — )

in  bank

reserves

October 5

261.8

—  3.9

—

1.0

+ .1

—

4.8

—  7.6

12

261.2

—  4.9

4-

1.0

+ .2

—

3.7

— .6

19

267.6

—  4.4

+

4.0

—

.4

+  6.4

26

254.7

—16.3

-u;

21.0

—  1.3

+

3.4

—12.9

November 2

224.1

—17.0

-r

9.5

— .5

—

8.0

—30.6

9

219.8

—17.4

+:

15.0

+  7.3

+

4.9

—  4.3

16

218.7

—22.6

—

6.1

+21.1

—

7.6

—  1.1

23

215.9

—17.3

-r

.6

+12.4

—

4.3

—  2.8

30

217.8

—10.6

—

.6

+16.5

+

5.3

+  1.9

December 7

222.5

—  9.0

+

3.5

+13'.8

+

8.3

+  4.7

14

226.6

—  6.8

—

2.8

+  9.5

—

.1

+  4.1

21

233.1

—  5.2

+

1.4

+  5.7

+

1.9

+  6.5

28

242.6

—  2.2

+

2.4

+  4.1

+

4.3

+  9.5

January 4

250.6

+  5.5

—

4.3

+  5.3

+

6.5

+  8.0

11

269.0

+13.4

—

4.6

+  3.6

+12.4

+18.4

18

295.2

+12.3

+

3.5

+ .5

+16.3

+26.2

25

318.9

+20.6

+

1.5

+ .4

+22.5

+  23.7

Compiled  from  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle.  The  interior  movements  and  sub-treasury  operations  are  for  weeks
ending  one  day  earlier  than  indicated  by  the  table.  For  the  weeks  ending  November  15  to  January  10,  the  Chronicle  gives  the
net  result  of  sub-treasury  operations  and  gold  imports  together;  but  as  it  also  gives  the  gold  imports  separately  it  is  easy  to
segregate  the  two  movements.


by  the  New  York  banks  was  far  from  total ;  on  the  contrary,  they  supplied  the
interior  banks  with  nearly  $125,000,000  between  the  outbreak  of  the  panic  and
the  end  of  the  year.  Only  a  small  part  of  these  funds,  however,  came  out  of
the  reserves  of  the  banks.  At  first  the  bulk  was  provided  by  the  treasury,  and
when  that  source  began  to  fail  the  gold  which  had  been  ordered  from  Europe
began  to  arrive.  Indeed,  these  receipts  of  money  from  the  government  and
from  abroad  exceeded  the  western  shipments  during  the  first  seven  weeks  of
the  panic.


520


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


If  the  data  be  trustworthy,  then,  the  decline  of  the  bank  reserves  in  New
York  was  caused  mainly  by  a  local  drain — the  runs  on  the  trust  companies  for
which  the  clearing-house  banks  found  money,  and  hoarding."  The  heavy  loss
of  cash,  however,  was  confined  to  the  first  two  weeks  of  the  panic,  and  after
the  fifth  week  the  reserves  began  to  rise  steadily.  At  the  lowest  ebb  the  bank
statement  showed  not  less  than  $215,851,100  of  specie  and  legal  tenders  on
hand,  equal  to  19.98  per  cent  of  the  deposits.  It  was  therefore  not  actual  lack
of  money,  but  timidity  in  using  bank  reserves  which  explained  the  restriction
of  payments  and  the  resulting  premimn  on  currency.^"

The  next  table  shows  how  the  money  in  circulation  was  increased.  Between
the  last  days  of  September  and  of  October  only  14  millions  were  added  to  the
monetary  stock;  but  the  treasury  transferred  57  millions  from  its  vaults  to


TABLE 132

Amount  op  Money  in  the  Teeasuey  as  Assets  and  the  Estimated  Amount  in  Cieculation  dueing  the  Panic

OF  1907


Gold  coin  and  bullion..

Gold  certificates

Silver  dollars

Silver  certificates

Subsidiary silver

TJ. S. notes

Treasury notes

National-bank notes....


In  millions  of dollars
Money in the Treasury as


September

30,  1907

.. 200

.. 81

4

.. 13


20


Total 329


October

31,  1907

167

71
2

7
7
3


Assets

November

30,  1907

174

72


15


272


261


December

31,  1907

189

60


11


January

31,  1908

177

41


11
11


30


270


286


Estimated Amount in Circulation

September  October  November

"  31,1907

574


30,  1907

Gold  coin 562

Gold  certificates 640  677

Silver dollars 85  89

Silver  certificates 461  464

Subsidiary silver 125  127

U.  S.  notes 343  343

Treasury notes 6  6

National-bank notes 584  595


30,  1907
640
676
91
469
133
345
6
649


December
31,  1907

649

707
91

468

135

345
5

679


January
31,  1908

641

770
90

453

131

339
5

665


Total 2806


2.S76


3008


3079


3094


Estimated  stock  of  money 3135  3149

Per  cent  in  the  Treasury  as  Assets 10.5%  8.6%

Per  cent  in  circulation 89.5  91.4

Compiled  from  the  Reports  of  the  Treasurer  of  the United  States.


3269
8.0%
92.0


3349

8.1%
91.9


3380
8.5%
91.5


11  The  Trust  Company  of  America  is  said  to  have  paid  out  some  $34,000,000  in  two  weeks. Sprague,  op.  cit.,

12  Compare  Sprague,  op.  cit.,  pp.  260-277.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  521

the  banks,  so  that  the  amount  in  circulation  increased  about  70  millions.  There-
after the  increase  came  chiefly  from  the  importation  of  gold  and  the  issue  of
new  bank  notes.  Between  the  end  of  October  and  the  end  of  December  the
circulation  of  gold  coin  and  certificates  rose  105  millions,  bank  notes  84,  silver
dollars  and  silver  certificates  6,  subsidiary  silver  8,  and  greenbacks  2  millions.
In  the  hurry  of  the  panic,  banks  did  not  stop  to  take  out  gold  certificates,  but
used  gold  coin  with  unaccustomed  freedom.  The  very  unpopularity  of  the
latter  medimn  rendered  it  more  acceptable  to  banks  which  were  endeavoring
to  restrict  withdrawals  of  deposits.  In  all  $273,000,000  were  added  to  the  money
in  circulation  between  September  30th  and  the  end  of  the  year.  But  even  this
huge  sum  was  far  from  adequate;  for,  if  Andrew's  estimate  is  not  exaggerated,
more  than  twice  as  much  unlawful  currency  was  provided  in  the  form  of  sub-
stitutes for  cash.  The  monetary  demands  created  by  a  panic  seem  to  be  insati-
able, because  a  comparatively  small  decrease  in  the  use  of  credit  instruments
makes  a  large  increase  in  the  need  of  money.

Still  more  striking  results  would  appear  if  we  had  for  these  months  data
concerning  the  distribution  of  the  money  in  circulation  between  the  banks  and
the  public.  But  Secretary  Cortelyou  has  prepared  an  interesting  substitute
for  such  figures  in  the  shape  of  an  estimate  of  the  money  absorbed  by  the  public
during  the  panic.  The  sums  are  given  in  millions  of  dollars."  These  figures
show  that  the  national  banks  of  the  whole  country  lost  less  cash  than  those  of


New  York  United

City  States

Keduction  in  cash  held  by  the  national  banks  between  August  22

and  December  3  42  41

Net  importations  of  gold,  November  1  to  December  31  94  106

Increase  in  government  deposits  in  the  national  banks,  August  22

to  December  3  48  80

Increase  in  bank-note  circulation,  August  22  to  December  3  16  50

Seduction  in  cash  held  by  the  state  banks  and  trust  companies  of

New  York  City,  August  22  to  December  19  19  19

Total  218  296


New  York  City.  In  other  words,  the  banks  outside  of  the  metropolis  partici-
pated in  the  scramble  for  money  and  locked  up  what  they  laid  hands  on.  This
fact  is  brought  out  more  clearly  by  Table  133.  In  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  and  the
reserve  cities  the  banks  used  their  reserves,  though  timidly,  to  meet  the  demands
for  money;  but  in  the  smaller  towns  the  very  banks  which  were  forcing  substi-
tutes for  cash  upon  depositors  increased  their  own  holdings  of  lawful  money.

13  Eesponse  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  to  Senate  Resolution  no.  33  of  December  12,  1907  (60th  Con-
gress, 1st  session,  Senate  Doe.  208),  pp.  14,  15.


522  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

TABLE 133

Cash  Eesebves  and  Net  Deposits  with  Eesebve  Agents  held  by  the  National  Banks  of  Different  Classes

ON  August  22  and  December  3,  1907


In

millions  of  dollars
Central  reserve  cities

Reserve
cities

Country
banks

New  York

Chicago

St.  Louis

Cash  reserves

$

$

$

$

$

August  22

218.8

66.1

26.8

190.3

199.6

December  3

177.1

54.0

21.0

162.6

246.0

Gain  (  +  )  or  loss  (-

-)

... —  41.7

—12.1

—  5.8

—  27.7

+  46.4

Percentage  of  reserves

%

%

%

%

%

August 22

26.5

25.2

23.0

13.4

7.6

December 3

20.5

23.1

19.6

12.9

9.9

Gain  (  +  )  or  loss  (-

-)

... — 6.0

—  2.1

—  3.4

— .5

+ 2.3

Net  deposits  with  reserve  agents

$

$

August 22

166.5

410.0

December  3

139.7  .

356.0

Gain  (  +  )  or  loss  (—

-)


—  26.8

—  54.0

From  O.  M.  W.  Sprague,  Crises  under  the  National  Banking  System,  (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission),
pp.  305,  308,  309,  310.  A  slight  mistake  in  Sprague's  figures  for  the  gain  in  cash  by  the  country  banks  has  been  corrected
by  reference  to  the  Report  of  the  Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  1908, p. 195.


3.  The  Demoralization  of  the  Markets  for  Loans  and  Investments

This  desperate  scramble  for  cash  threw  the  money  market  into  confusion.

Business  journals  testify  that  collections  were  seriously  intefered  with,  so
that  many  business  enterprises  were  temporarily  deprived  of  the  regular  remit-
tances of  funds  on  which  they  had  been  counting  to  meet  their  current  expenses
and  their  financial  obligations.

More  precise  information  concerning  the  confusion  which  reigned  in  all
matters  pertaining  to  pajrments  between  different  places  is  given  by  the  fol-
lowing table  of  domestic  rates  of  exchange.  In  ordinary  times  these  rates
fluctuate  within  limits  set  by  the  cost  of  shipping  currency,  including  insurance
and  the  loss  of  interest  during  transit.  Even  between  San  Francisco  and  New
York  40  cents  per  thousand  dollars  is  the  usual  shipping  point,  so  long  as  paper
money  is  available  for  remittance.^'  But  in  November,  1907,  rates  as  high  as
$2  prevailed  in  places  so  close  to  New  York  as  Boston  and  Philadelphia.  In
some  towns  the  extraordinary  •  rates  were  premiums  and  in  other  towns  dis-
counts. The  whole  machinery  for  making  payments  was  thrown  out  of  gear
for  a  month  or  two,  and  the  resulting  embarrassment  to  business  houses  and
banks  must  have  been  severe."


i-iKemmerer,  op.  cit.,  p.  118.

15  Compare  Sprague,  op.  cit.,  pp.  291-297.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


523


TABLE 134

Eates  op  Exchange  on  New  York  in  Various  Cities  During  the  Panic  of  1907


Week  ending
October 26

Boston
$  .25  discount

Philadelphia
Par

Cincinnati
$  .25  discount

$

Kansas  City
.25  premium

November 2

.25  discount

50  disponnt

.25  premium
1.00  premium

9

.30  premium

$2.50

premium

Par- .25  discount

16

1.50  premium

5.00

premium

Par- .60  discount

1.00  premium

23

2.00  premium

2.50-

-$4.00  premium

Par- .60  discount

1. 00  premium

30

Par

2.00-

-  3.00  premium

1.00  premium

1.00  premium

December 7

.25  discount

1.50

-  2.50  premium

.30- .50  discount

•

1.00  premium

14

.30  discount

2.50

premium

.50  discount

1.00  premium

Successive
weeks  of

Chicago

St.  Louis

New  Orleans

San  Francisco

October 1st

$  .25

discount

$  .75  discount

$  .75  discount

$ .20

premium

2iid

.20

discount

.45  discount

.35  discount

.60

discount

3rd

.20

discount

.60  discount

.35  discount

.70

discount

4th

.25

discount

2.00  discount

.75  discount

10.00

discount

November  1st

.25

discount

.30  discount

1.50  discount

7.50

discount

2nd

Par

2.50  premium

2.00  discount

Unsaleable

3rd

.25

premium

4.00  premium

1.50  discount

Unsaleable

4th

1.00

premium

6.00  premium

1.00  discount

Unsaleable

December  1st

1.00

premium

2.00  premium

.80  discount

5.00

discount

2nd

Par

2.00  premium

.40  discount

3.50

discount

3rd

Par

4.00  premium

.40  discount

4.00

discount

4th

.50

discount

3.00  premium

.75  discount

4.00

discount

5th

.50

diseoimt

2.00  premium

.85  discount

Data  for  the  first  four  cities  from  Sprague,  Bistory  of  Crises  under  the  National  Banking  System,  pp.  291,  292;  for  the  second
four  cities  from  Kemmercr,  Seasonal  Variations  in  the  Relative  Demand  for  Money  and  Capital  in  the  United  States,  p.  372.  In
all  cases  the  quotations  are  for  $1,000  of  New  York  exchange.


Other  anomalies  were  observed  in  the  market  for  foreign  exchange.  It  was
fortunate  for  the  country  that  few  finance  bills  were  outstanding  when  the
panic  broke  out.  In  October,  1906,  the  Bank  of  England  had  been  forced  to
advance  its  rate  of  discount  to  6  per  cent  in  order  to  check  an  outflow  of  gold
to  America.  It  took  advantage  of  the  occasion  to  warn  the  other  London  banks
that  the  accepting  of  more  finance  bills  for  New  York  account  would  menace
the  stability  of  the  local  market.  The  monetary  stringency  of  the  following
months  in  America  was  partly  caused  by  this  step.  New  York  financiers  were
forced  to  settle  for  their  old  bills  as  they  matured  and  could  get  no  further
advances  of  moment.  Moreover,  an  unusually  small  amount  of  anticipatory
bills  had  been  drawn  in  the  summer  of  1907  against  shipments  of  produce.


524  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Hence,  when  the  export  movement  of  wheat  and  cotton  began  in  the  autumn,
the  proceeds  of  the  bills  of  exchange  were  not  required  to  settle  old  debts,  but
supplied  credits  against  which  gold  could  be  demanded/"  The  panic  also  caused
a  rapid  decline  in  imports  of  commodities,  so  that  the  favorable  balance  of
payments  on  merchandise  account  reached  unprecedented  proportions."

All  this  was  highly  favorable  to  the  banks,  and,  as  we  have  seen,  enormous
amounts  of  gold  were  imj^orted — 63  millions  in  November,  43  in  December,
and  10  in  January.  The  curious  feature  of  the  situation  was  that  these  impor-
tations were  made  in  the  face  of  quotations  for  sterling  bills  high  above  the
import  point.  Under  ordinary  circumstances  the  import  point  for  sight
exchange,  with  discount  at  6  per  cent,  is  about  $4.8414  and  the  export  point
is  about  $4.88.'^  Just  before  the  panic,  the  actual  rates  for  bankers'  sight  bills
stood  in  the  neighborhood  of  4.86.  In  the  first  turmoil  they  dropped  as  low
as  4.8214  on  October  26th — considerably  below  the  import  point.  But  a  quick
rally  brought  them  up  to  4.86% — 88  on  November  2nd.  During  this  whole
month  the  lowest  quotation  was  4.85-851/4,  while  the  highest  quotation  was
4.88i4>-4.88%."  That  is,  tens  of  millions  of  gold  were  engaged  for  import  at
prices  for  bills  always  well  above  the  import  point  and  sometimes  exceeding
the  export  point.  Of  course,  the  explanation  is  that  the  importing  banks  could
sell  the  gold  "to  arrive"  at  a  premiiun  of  perhaps  1  to  3  per  cent.  It  does  not
follow  that  the  premium  on  currency  facilitated  imports ;  but  simply  that  this
premium  affected  the  nominal  prices  of  bills  of  exchange,  when  the  bills  were
paid  for  in  checks  upon  banks  which  were  restricting  withdrawals  of  cash.

On  the  Stock  Exchange  the  panic  wrought  havoc  with  prices.  Common
stocks  were  most  seriously  depressed,  but  preferred  stocks  also  fell  heavily
(Table  135).  Even  high-grade  railway  bonds  sold  off  several  points.  The
lowest  prices  in  all  classes  of  securities  were  touched  in  November.  December
brought  a  distinct  rally,  and  January,  the  first  month  after  the  panic,  showed
higher  prices  for  bonds  and  preferred  stocks  than  September,  the  last  month
before  the  panic. Common  stocks,  however,  were  slower  in  recovering.

The  one  encouraging  feature  of  the  market  was  that  sales  at  these  low  prices
were  not  made  on  a  large  scale.  During  the  severe  liquidation  of  March,  1907,
over  32  million  shares  of  stock  had  changed  hands  in  a  single  month.  In
October  the  sales  were  not  much  over  half  and  in  November  less  than  a  third

10  Sprague,  op.  rit.,  pp.  241  and  246.

1'  The  imports  and  exports  of  merchandise  were  as  follows:

Imports  Exports  Balance

September $103,400,000  $135,400,000  +$32,000,000

October 111,800,000  180,400,000  +  68,600,000

November  110,900,000  204,500,000  +  93,600,000

December  92,300,000  207,100,000  +114,800,000

January  85,000,000  206,200,000  +121,200,000

Compiled  from  the  MoiUMy  Summary  of  Commerce  and  Finance.

ISA.  Strauss,  "Gold  Movements  and  the  Foreign  Exchanges,"  in  The  Currency  Problem  and  the  Present
Financial  Situation,  a  series  of  addresses  delivered  at  Columbia  University  1907-08,  pp.  65-67.

19  Financial  Review,  1908,  p.  59.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


525


TABLE 135
Prices  and  Volume  of  Business  on  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange  During  the  Panic  of  1907

Relative Prices of Bonds and Stocks
Average  actual  prices  1890-99=100


Bonds  of  the Ten
West  Shore railway
K.  R. bonds
95.4 105.6

Ten

preferred

stocks

123.0

Ten

common

stocks

205.0

Forty  common  stocl

is

September

Grand
averages

197.0

Averages  of Averages  of

highest lowest

relative relative

prices prices

204 190

October

94.5

103.3

126.0

169.5

171.5

192

151

November

90.9

99.5

117.5

152.5

159.0

169

149

December

92.9

101.6

123.5

161.5

167.0

176

158

January

95.9

105.8

124.5

166.5

174.5

186

163

September
October
November
December

Volume  of  Business  Tr
Par  Value  of

ansacted

Actual

value  of

stocks  sold

a

902

1127

617

779

Number

of  shares

sold

b

12.2

17.3

9.7

12.6

0
>

.Hi

\0

\5\

U3

1

•^

Bonds Stocks

sold sold

a a

25 1088
50 1551
63 849
60 1072

a:  <

a=in  millions  of  dollars.
&=in  millions  of  shares.

January

86 1396

1016

16.6

1

jm

Data  concerning  prices  of  securities  from  the  Tables  in  Chapter  IV,

iii  and  iv  above. Data

concerning i

volume

1 of business

from  the  ''Quotation  Supplement"  of  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle,  and  the  Financial  Review.


of  this  volume.  Doubtless  the  drastic  decline  of  the  spring  and  summer  months
had  already  forced  most  of  the  weaker  holders  to  dispose  of  their  stocks.  In
addition,  the  banks  made  considerable  effort  to  sustain  the  market,  first  by
contributing  to  the  money-pools  of  October  24th  and  25th,  and,  after  clearing-
house loan  certificates  had  been  issued,  by  refraining  from  forcing  repayment
of  call  loans,  and  by  taking  over  loans  called  by  the  trust  companies  and  out-
of-town  banks.  Indeed,  this  policy  of  forbearance  was  compulsory.  Brokers
and  their  customers  could  not  have  found  the  money  to  settle  had  all  the  banks
stopped  lending  on  the  one  hand,  and  on  the  other  called  in  their  outstanding
loans.  And  if  the  banks  had  endeavored  to  get  back  their  money  by  selling
the  stocks  pledged  with  them  as  collateral,  the  resulting  fall  of  prices  in  a  market
where  no  one  could  borrow  would  have  wiped  out  their  margins  of  security
and  left  them  with  heavy  losses.

Judging  from  the  comments  of  the  press  on  the  sudden  increase  in  "odd-lot"
sales,  the  purchasers  at  this  season  were  largely  small  investors.  The  low  prices
offered  tempting  bargains  to  all  who  had  funds  available  for  payment.  The
bond  sales  were  much  heavier  relatively  than  the  sales  of  stocks,  both  because
purchasers  faced  smaller  risks  in  taking  bonds  under  panic  conditions,  and
because  the  slighter  decline  in  price  made  the  man  who  was  forced  to  raise
money  by  parting  with  his  securities  prefer  to  let  bonds  go  rather  than  stocks.


526


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA


The  most  violent  manifestations  of  the  panic  appeared  in  the  market  for
short-time  loans.  Unfortunately,  we  have  statistics  of  discount  rates  for  New
York  City  alone.^°  The  best  compilation  of  these  figures,  that  published  in  the
Financial  Review,  is  partially  reproduced  in  the  following  table  for  the  weeks
preceding,  during,  and  following  the  panic.

The  exceedingly  high  rates  for  call  loans  are  the  most  spectacular  feature
of  this  exhibit.^^  But  we  have  seen  that  these  rates  did  not  force  such  a  ruinous
liquidation  as  might  have  been  expected.  In  any  case,  the  eccentricities  of  the
call-loan  rate  possess  less  significance  for  general  business  than  the  demoral-
ization of  the  market  for  time  loans  and  commercial  paper.

TABLE 136


Rates  of  Interest  in  New  York  During  the  Panic  of  1907


Weeks
ending

1907
October


November


December


1908
January


4
11
18
25

1

8
15
22
29

6
13
20
27

3r

3=
10
17
24
31


Prem-
ium
on
cur-
rency

Range


1  -3

1  -4
2i-4
li-3i

i-2

l-U

ir-U


Call  Loans


At

Banks

At  Stocli

and

Exchange

Trust

-,  Go's.

Range
3-10

2i- 6

2J-  10

5  -125

3-75

4  -  25

5-15

3J-  15


Aver-  Mini-
age  mum


3
3

2
6
6
5

5  -
2  -
2i-
U-

n-


12
13
25
17
25
20

20
9


5

5

5
40
50
22
10
10

7

6
18
12
20
17

10
6
4
2
11


4
3

n
n


Commercial  paper


Time  Loans


Double

names


Single  names


60
days

Range
51-  6


90
days

Range
6  -  6J


4

mos.

Range

6  -6i


6

mos.


Choice
60-90
days
Range  Range

7


6J 6J-  7


12


-  7*
-16


12  -15
12  -15


6i-  T
12  -16
12  -15
12  -15
12  -15
12  -15


6J

6

6i-7*

No  business

No  business

No  business

No  business

No  business


7=

7  -7J'


Prime
4-6
mos.
Range

7

75

7
7


-7i»
-7¥


Good
4-6
mos.
Range


7  -7¥
7¥+


No  business
-7J» 7  -7J=
-7J= 7  -7i»

No  business
8


No regular rates: All business by special agreement


8  -10
12
12
10

10
6J
51
4
3  -  3J


8  -10
10
10
10


-12


5J


10
6

51

4i

3  -3J


5i


7
6

5i-5i
4i


4J


7  -8
6  -7
7J-8


5^-6
5


6i-7J
6J-7
5J
5i-6


6i-7J
Gl-7
6  -6J
5J-6


7J

6i-7
6  -6i


^  Covers  business  for  last  two  days  of  year.
^  Covers  business  for  iirst  three  days  of  year.
^  Banks  and  trust  companies  out  of  the  market.
^Nominal  rates;  no  offerings.
^  Quotations  entirely  nominal ;  no  business.
(From  the  Financial  Review^  1909,  pp.  40,  41.)


^»  Bradstreet's,  indeed,  publishes  the  nominal  rates  of  discount  in  a  number  of  cities;  but  Table  136  shows
that  nominal  rates  are  not  trustworthy  indices  of  money-market  conditions  during  a  panic.  For  that  reason
it  would  be  vain  to  compile  the  figures  for  other  towns.

21  The  statement  made  in  the  table  that  the  banks  and  trust  companies  were  out  of  the  call-loan  market
from  the  last  week  of  October  to  the  end  of  the  year  does  not  mean  that  they  lent  no  money  on  call.  They  did
lend  perforce  at  the  "money  post"  on  the  Stock  Exchange,  though  not  over  their  own  counters.  Compare
Mr.  T.  F.  Woodlook's  excellent  paper  on  "The  Stock  Exchange  and  the  Money  Market,"  in  The  Currency
Problem  and  the  Present  Financial  Situation,  a  series  of  addresses  delivered  at  Columbia  University,  1907-08.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  527

Rates  of  12  per  cent  and  over  are  bad  enough,  but  far  worse  are  the  entries
"no  business"  and  the  footnotes  which  explain  that  the  quotations  in  the  table
are  purely  nominal,  because  no  loans  were  being  made.''  At  a  pinch,  the
merchant  and  the  manufacturer  may  be  able  to  pay  10-15  per  cent  for  loans
during  a  month  or  two.  Not  to  be  able  to  get  loans  at  all  is  a  far  worse  plight.
And  many  enterprises  must  have  found  themselves  in  this  predicament  for
six  or  eight  weeks.  No  doubt  most  of  the  strong  banks  "took  care  of"  such
regular  customers  as  seemed  to  be  really  solvent.  But  the  enterprises  which
relied  largely  for  loans  upon  selling  their  commercial  paper  through  note
brokers  had  no  such  protection.

Further  light  is  thrown  on  the  extreme  stringency  of  the  money  market
during  the  panic  by  the  following  data  concerning  the  clearing-house  banks
in  New  York,  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,  St.  Louis,  Ncav  Orleans,  and  San
Francisco.  The  New  York  banks  increased  their  loans  more  than  10  per  cent
in  the  very  height  of  the  panic ;  in  Boston  and  Philadelphia  the  changes  were
slight ;  but  in  the  other  cities  the  banks  contracted  loans,  slightly  in  St.  Louis,
heavily  in  Chicago,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco.  The  exceptional  action
of  the  New  York  banks  is  accounted  for  by  the  facts  that  the  trust  companies
were  compelled  to  liquidate  loans  whenever  possible,  and  that  the  outside  banks
followed  the  same  course.  "These  two  groups  of  lenders  more  than  exhausted
the  possibilities  of  contraction  in  New  York,  and  a  part  of  their  loans  had  to
be  taken  over  by  the  clearing-house  banks  to  prevent  a  general  disaster. ' '"  Of
course,  the  extreme  reluctance  of  the  banks  to  make  new  or  even  to  extend  old
loans  aggravated  the  panic  among  business  men  who  needed  to  borrow.

Deposits  fell  off  faster  than  loans  were  contracted  in  Chicago,  St.  Louis,
and  San  Francisco.  It  might  be  expected  that  the  difference  would  be  accounted
for  by  a  reduction  of  reserves.  But  such  is  not  the  case.  Even  where  reserves
declined,  the  loss  of  cash  is  not  sufficient  to  sustain  the  theory  that  the  banks
were  paying  off  depositors  in  cash  taken  from  their  vaults.  If  such  with-
drawals were  permitted  on  a  considerable  scale,  despite  the  restriction  of  pay-
ments, they  were  more  than  offset  with  funds  imported  from  Europe,  obtained
from  New  York,  or  raised  by  selling  bonds.  In  New  Orleans  the  decline  of
deposits  was  very  slight,  and  in  New  York  deposits  increased  some  $63,000,000
in  the  first  four  weeks  of  the  panic.  This  increase  was  due  to  the  expansion
of  loans  by  $115,000,000.  The  difference  between  these  two  sums— $52,000,000
—is  nearly  equalled  by  the  concomitant  drop  of  $49,000,000  in  the  reserve.

Finally,  the  table  shows  again  how  tenaciously  the  banks  held  to  their  cash
in  the  face  of  the  most  urgent  demands  from  their  customers. Though  the

22  Probably  the  60-  and  90-da.y  loans  made  at  12  per  cent  and  over  in  November  went  largely  to  stock-
brokers who  usually  carry  half  or  more  of  their  loans  on  time,  and  depend  on  call  money  for  the  balance.
Some  of  these  time  loans  to  brokers  had  to  be  renewed  during  the  panic,  as  part  of  the  plan  to  forestall  worse
things  on  the  Stock  Exchange.

23  Sprague,  op.  cit.,  p.  300. Compare  Chapter  VII,  i,  above.


528


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE 137

Loans,  Deposits,  and  Eeserves  of  the  Clearing-house  Banks  op  New  Yoek,  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,

St.  Loms,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco,  During  the  Panic  op  1907

In  millions  of  dollars ,


New  York  City

C

Ihicago

Loans
1089

Deposits

$

1037

Reserves

A

Loans

$
279.7

Deposits
405.2

Reserves

Week  ending
October 5

Amount Eatio

$ %

262 25.3

Amount
$
62.7

Ratio
%
15.5

12

1083

1026

261 25.5

276.7

402.8

62.8

15.6

19

1077

1026

268 26.1

277.1

398.9

59.0

14.8

26

1088

1024

255 24.9

279.3

391.6

54.5

13.9

November 2

1148

1052

224 21.3

276.0

384.3

53.9

14.0

9

1187

1087

220 20.2

271.2

376.8

55.7

14.8

16

1192

1089

219 20.1

270.8

372.4

55.8

15.0

23

1188

1080

216 20.0

265.1

370.5

58.1

15.7

30

1198

1083

218 20.1

261.1

371.1

63.8

17.2

December 6

1186

1075

223 20.7

258.0

369.8

65.3

17.7

13

1175

1067

227 21.2

255.0

363.4

65.6

18.1

20

1165

1059

233 22.0

252.5

363.2

66.5

18.3

27

1148

1051

243 23.1

250.2

358.9

69.0

19.2

January 4

1133

1048

251 23.9

247.3

363.3

71.5

19.7

11

1117

1052

269 25.6

244.0

371.8

74.8

20.1

18

1127

1090

295 27.1

243.5

381.2

76.0

19.9

25

1136

1127

319 28.3

246.3

389.5

77.4

19.9

TABLE 137— (Continued)
Loans,  Deposits,  and  Reserves  op  the  Clearing-house  Banks  op  New  York,
St.  Louis,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco,  During  the
In  millions  of  dollars


Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,
Panic  op  1907


ing
5

Boston

Philadelphia

Loans

$
190.3

Deposits

$

214.8

Reserves

A

'

Loans

$
224.3

Deposits

$

252.9

Reserves

A

\

Week  end
October

Amount

$

21.6

Ratio

%
10.1

Amount

$

54.7

Ratio
%
21.6

12

190.8

213.3

21.6

10.1

223.0

251.3

53.6

21.3

19

191.7

224.2

22.4

10.0

222.0

254.8

55.6

21.8

26

191.2

222.1

22.8

10.3

219.8

246.3

52.7

21.4

November

2

192.5

222.2

20.8

9.4

219.6

236.2

47.4

20.1

9

191.5

214.7

19.9

9.3

221.2

233.8

45.9

19.6

16

190.9

217.7

19.2

8.8

222.2

233.3

44.8

19.2

23

190.4

213.7

18.6

8.7

223.0

230.7

44.8

19.4

30

190.7

212.1

17.1

8.1

224.2

231.2

44.5

19.2

December

6

191.9

214.7

17.4

8.1

224.4

230.2

44.8

19.5

13

190.6

211.3

18.2

8.6

224.8

230.5

43.0

18.7

20

189.5

209.4

19.3

9.2

224.8

229.5

43.1

18.8

27

190.1

210.0

20.5

9.8

225.1

231.1

43.3

18.7

January

4

191.1

218.9

21.9

10.0

224.6

235.3

45.7

19.4

11

188.9

216.3

23.8

11.0

223.1

233.9

46.5

19.9

18

188.6

216.0

25.1

11.6

222.9

235.5

48.1

20.4

25

188.1

210.3

25.8

12.3

221.4

234.1

50.0

21.4

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


529


TABLE 137— (Continued)
Loans,  Deposits,  and  Eeserves  of  the  Cleabing-housb  Banks  or  New  York,
St.  Louis,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco,  During  the

In  millions  of  dollars


Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,
Panic  op  1907


ing
5

St.

Louis

New  Orleans

Loans

$
171.7

Deposits

$

203.4

Eeserves

"

Loans
$
65.9

Deposits
54.8

Reserves

A

^

Week  end
October

Amount

$

24.9

Ratio

%
12.1

Amount
$
5.4

Ratio
%
9.9

12

168.2

200.6

23.9

11.9

66.2

54.3

4.8

8.8

19

168.4

198.4

22.0

11.0

66.5

52.7

4.4

8.3

26

167.8

194.5

22.4

15.2

66.0

53.3

5.1

9.6

November

2

167.3

189.0

21.3

11.3

65.8

52.8

4.6

8.7

9

167.4

188.8

21.7

11.5

64.9

52.9

5.0

9.5

16

168.1

188.6

23.9

11.5

64.8

52.9

5.5

10.4

23

167.1

186.9

24.8

13.2

62.5

53.1

5.6

10.5

30

166.4

187.0

25.6

13.6

62.3

52.9

5.9

11.2

December

6

166.7

186.7

25.7

13.8

62.0

52.1

5.8

11.0

13

166.1

186.5

26.0

13.9

61.3

52.0

5.6

10.8

20

165.3

185.1

26.2

14.2

60.3

51.5

6.1

11.8

21

163.1

184.3

26.8

14.5

59.1.

51.9

6.2

11.9

J  anuary

4

162.4

182.6

26.0

14.3

60.3

.51.5

6.1

11.8

11

160.3

181.0

26.4

14.4

59.1

51.9

6.2

11.9

18

157.5

180.4

26.7

14.2

58.2

51.6

6.3

12.2

25

154.1

176.6

27.2

15.3

57.3

51.5

6.0

11.7

TABLE m— (^Concluded)

Loans,  Deposits,  and  Reserves  of  the  Clearing-house  Banks  op  New  York,  Boston,  Philadelphia,  Chicago,
St.  Louis,  New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco,  During  the  Panic  op  1907


In  millions

of  dollars

San  Francisco

A

Loans

$
93.0

Deposits
108.2

Reserves

Weeks  ending
October 5

Amount

$

13.8

Ratio
%
12.8

12

93.3

108.3

13.1

12.1

19

94.6

111.0

13.7

12.3

26

93.4

108.3

12.0

11.1

November 2

90.1

99.5

12.0

12.1

9

88.8

96.1

11.3

11.8

16

89.1

94.3

12.5

13.2

23

88.0

92.7

14.0

15.1

30

87.1

91.4

15.3

16.7

December 6

86.3

90.3

15.7

17.4

13

85.5

90.5

16.7

18.5

20

85.0

90.1

17.9

19.9

27

84.1

89.7

17.8

19.8

January 4

83.5

91.7

17.7

17.7

11

82.6

92.0

18.6

20.2

18

82.2

92.5

19.5

21.1

25

81.1

92.7

19.5

21.0

Comniled  from  E  W.  Kemmerer,  Seasonal  Variations  in  the  Relative  Demand  ior  Money  and  Capital  in  the  Vnited  States.
(PubUcatiors  of  the  National  Monetary  Commission).  Pp.  258,  264,  269,  274,  275.  The  data  for  Boston  and  Philadelphia  are
compiled  from  the  Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle.


530  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

New  York  banks  displayed  great  nervousness  in  restricting  payments,  their
course  was  bolder  than  that  pursued  by  the  banks  in  these  other  cities,  with
the  exception  of  Boston  and  Philadelphia.  After  losing  a  relatively  small
sum  in  the  first  or  second  week  of  the  panic,  the  banks  of  Chicago,  St.  Louis,
New  Orleans,  and  San  Francisco  all  began  to  gain  once  more.  By  the  end
of  November  their  percentages  of  reserve  were  higher  than  in  the  weeks  pre-
ceding the  panic.  Had  the  New  York  banks  set  the  example  of  attempting
to  quiet  the  panic  by  meeting  all  demands  in  full,  it  is  probable  that  the  scramble
for  cash  would  never  have  assumed  great  dimensions  and  that  the  banks  in
other  towns  would  have  been  able  to  maintain  the  same  policy.  But  with
restriction  begun  in  New  York,  a  timid  policy  may  have  been  compulsory  upon
the  banks  in  smaller  places.

Concerning  the  policy  pursued  by  banks  in  other  towns,  our  information
is  slight.  The  last  report  of  the  national  banks  before  the  panic  was  made
August  22,  and  the  next  report  not  unt'il  December  3.  The  changes  between
these  two  dates  cannot  with  confidence  be  ascribed  to  the  effect  of  the  panic.
The  drift  of  this  evidence,  however,  indicates  that  a  moderate  contraction  of
loans  was  practiced  throughout  the  country,  while  deposits  everywhere  fell
much  more  rapidly  than  loans.  It  has  already  been  shown  that  reserves
decreased  a  little  in  most  of  the  reserve  cities  and  increased  in  the  country
districts."


4.  The  Reaction  of  Monetary  Stringency  upon  General  Business

On  the  one  side,  the  panic  intensified  the  process  of  liquidation — that  is,
the  process  of  forcing  the  settlement  of  outstanding  accounts.  On  the  other
side,  it  made  the  raising  of  money  extremely  difficult.  The  restriction  of
payments  by  the  banks,  the  slowness  of  collections,  the  confusion  of  domestic
exchanges,  the  fall  in  the  prices  of  securities,  the  demoralization  of  the  discount
market,  and  the  contraction  of  bank  loans,  one  and  all  added  to  the  troubles
of  debtors  who  were  being  pressed  for  payment.

An  increase  in  the  number  of  business  failures  resulted.  Table  138  shows,
however,  that  this  increase  was  not  very  great  during  the  weeks  when  the  panic
was  at  its  worst.  On  the  other  hand,  the  number  increased  as  the  panic  relaxed
after  the  first  of  the  year.  The  explanation  is  partly  that  banks  and  other
lenders  made  special  efforts  to  allay  distrust  so  long  as  the  danger  was  most
threatening,  and  partly  that  the  Januarj'^  1st  settlements  brought  affairs  to  a
head  Avith  many  weakened  firms.

It  has  already  been  shown  that  just  before  and  during  a  crisis  the  increase
in  the  liabilities  of  firms  which  fail  is  more  rapid  than  the  increase  in  their

^■i  See  Table  133,  and  compare  Sprague,  op.  cit.,  pp.  303-313.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


531


TABLE 138

Weekly  Number  op  Business  Failures  in  the  United  States  during  the  Panic  op  1907,  compared  with  the

NUMBERS in THE CORRESPONDING  WEEKS OP FOUR  PRECEDING YEARS

Corresponding  weeks  in


Weeljs  ending

1907

1906

1905

1904

1908

October

3

177

136

189

195

197

10

192

192

183

196

203

17

194

170

178

227

216

24

220

184

178

180

217

31

223

163

160

200

216

November 7

226

146

166

184

250

14

259

222

198

190

234

21

265

212

224

193

167

28

258

174

188

184

239

December

5

272

216

203

231

241

12

284

220

226

239

239

19

300

227

235

249

243

26

248

161

212

218

209

1908

1907

1906

1905

1904

January

2

345

185

220

278

262

9

435

283

286

295

315

16

431

234

279

304

266

23

408

252

276

228

242

30

359

211

228

239

216

Compiled  from.  Bradetreet's.


number/'  Dun's  figures  by  quarters  (Table  139)  bring  out  the  facts  clearly
with  reference  to  the  panic  of  1907.  Still  more  striking  would  be  the  showing
if  bank  suspensions  were  included  with  these  commercial  and  manufacturing
bankruptcies.  But,  as  they  stand,  the  figures  show  that  the  average  size  of  the
enterprises  dragged  down  by  a  panic  considerably  exceeds  the  size  of  those
which  fail  during  prosperity  or  those  which  succumb  after  the  panic  has  yielded
to  depression.

TABLE 139

The  Number  and  Average  Liabilities  oe  Business  Failures  in  the  United  States


1907

1st

By  quarters,
quarter

1907  and  1908

Number  of

failures

3,136

Average
liabilities
$10,228

2iid

quarter

2,471

15,173

3rd

quarter

2,483

18,714

4th

quarter

3,635

22,379

1908

1st

quarter

4,909

15,422

2nd

quarter

3,800

12,805

3rd

quarter

3,457

15,997

4th

quarter

3,524

12,099

Dun's  Eeview,  January  8,

1910,  p.  11.

25  See  Chapter  IX,  ii,  1,  above.


532  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

This  result  follows  from  a  change  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  causes
which  bring  about  failure.  For  years  Bradstreet's  has  endeavored  to  ascertain
the  leading  reason  for  every  failure  it  records.  Lack  of  capital  and  incom-
petence usually  account  for  more  than  half  the  cases,  while  fraud,  inexperience,
etc.,  bring  up  the  proportion  "due  to  the  faults  of  those  failing"  to  about
four-fifths.  In  a  panic,  however,  failures  which  are  "not  due  to  the  faults  of
those  failing,"  but  to  failure  of  others,  competition,  or  what  Bradstreet's  calls
"specific  conditions"  become,  if  not  more  numerous  relatively,  more  important
financially.  Thus  in  the  prosperous  years  1905  and  1906  about  a  quarter  of
the  defaulted  liabilities  were  ascribed  to  causes  beyond  the  control  of  the  failing
firms,  while  in  1907  this  proportion  increased  to  more  than  one-half,  and  in
1908  remained  above  one-third.^°  During  a  panic  a  considerable  number  of
large  concerns,  furnished  with  adequate  capital  and  well  managed,  are  among
the  victims  of  these  unfortunate  conjunctures,  and  it  is  primarily  their  fall
which  swells  the  average  liabilities.

On  commodity  prices  panic  has  a  sharply  depressing  influence.  It  was
brought  out  in  the  closing  section  of  Chapter  XI  that  several  groups  of  com-
modities had  passed  their  maximum  prices  several  months  before  the  panic  of
1907  began.  Raw  mineral  products  began  to  decline  after  February,  raw  forest
products  after  April,  20  miscellaneous  raw  materials  after  May,  and  goods
manufactured  from  them  after  June.  June  also  marked  the  turning  point  for
all  the  producers'  goods  for  which  we  have  data.  On  the  other  hand,  raw
animal  and  farm  products,  especially  subject  to  seasonal  influences,  rose  after
midsummer  to  maxima  in  October."  Consumers'  goods  also  rose  until  October
and  did  not  begin  to  decline  until  December,  while  the  retail  prices  of  foods
rose  slightly  during  the  panic  itself.

Thus,  upon  most  classes  of  wholesale  prices  the  influence  of  the  panic  was
limited  to  accelerating  a  fall  already  in  progress,  or  to  diminishing  the  effect
of  seasonal  conditions  which  tended  toward  an  advance. It  is  probable,  how-

26  Though  it  is  difficult  to  discover  and  classify  the  causes  of  all  bankruptcies,  Bradstreet's  figures  possess
great  interest  as  a  pioneering  effort  in  an  important  field  of  enquiry.  Eearranged  for  the  sake  of  greater
convenience,  the  data  for  1904-08  are  as  follows:

Percentage  of  Number  of  Failures
Faults  of  those  failing  1908  1907  1906  1905  1904

Lack  of  capital  34.2  37.1  35.9  33.4  32.2

Incompetence  21.6  22.6  22.3  24.4  23.1

Fraud  11.5  10.1  10.0  9.2  8.6

Inexperience  4.0  4.9  4.9  4.8  5.1

Unwise credits  2.0  2.3  2.6  3.5  3.4

Neglect  2.2  2.5  2.2  2.9  3.1

Extravagance  1.0  .9  1.0  1.1  .8

Speculation  1.0  .7  .8  .7  .8

Total  77.5 81.1 79.7 80.0 77.1

Not  faults  of  those  failing

Specific  conditions  18.9  16.3  17.3  16.3  19.1

Failure  of  others  1.8  1.4  2.0  2.2  2.5

Competition  1.8  1.2  1.0  1.5  1.3

Total  22.5 18.9 20.3 20.0 22.9  38.0 55.4 27.1 20.9 31.9

27  For  animal  products,  however,  this  maximum  was  less  than  that  of  the  preceding  February.


Percen

tage  of  Liabilities

1908

1907

1906

1905

1904

27.2

18.4

30.9

33.0

32.0

16.0

8.9

15.5

21.6

14.1

6.9

5.1

16.2

8.2

6.4

1.8

3.2

2.2

2.1

3.2

3.7

3.1

2.1

4.2

4.8

.8

.5

1.5

1.1

1.6

.9

.5

.9

1.2

.7

4.7

4.9

3.6

7.7

5.3

62.0

44.6

72.9

79.1

68.1

31.3

51.7

17.9

15.5

22.7

5.0

3.3

8.8

4.5

8.2

1.7

.4

.4

.9

1.0

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


533


TABLE 140
Eelativi;  Prices  op  Commodities  in  1907  and  1908. By  Months

Prices  at  Wholesale  in  the  United  States

' ■ * ,

_  . ., „ Eaw  materials  145  Brad-  Eng-

Betail Con- Pro- Eaw Manu- , K ^  Com-  street's  land

prices Burners' ducers' ma- factured Min-  modi-  index  Sauer-

of  foods goods goods terials articles eral Forest Animal Farm  ties  No.  heck

^gg^ (1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9)  (10)  (11)  (12)

January 120 116 140 144 130 146 170 145 124  127  8.9  80

February 120 117 142 147 131 148 171 145 127  129  9.0  81

March 119 117 143 147 133 146 174 136 131  129  9.1  80

April 119 115 143 146 134 143 177 133 127  129  9.0  81

May 119 116 144 149 135 144 174 131 134  130  8.9  8S

June 119 116 144 148 136 143 171 130 138  130  9.0  82

July 120 117 142 146 135 141 170 131 134  130  9.0  81

August 120 120 141 144 132 137 170 135 131  130  8.9  79

September  122 122 141 148 134 134 168 137 135  131  8.8  79

October 123 125 138 148 134 131 164 142 141  13S  8.9  79

November  123 1S5 134 139 133 128 162 136 135  129  8.7  77

December  1S4 123 130 135 129 122 153 130 135  126  8.5  76

1908

January 120 128 136 129 120 151 125 136  124  8.3  76

February 118 128 131 128 119 153 120 134  123  8.1  75

March 118 127 134 127 120 151 120 136  122  8.0  74

April 117 127 133 127 119 154 122 134  122  8.1  74

May 115 123 132 125 118 153 119 136  121  8.0  74

June 114 123 129 123 116 148 121 136  119  7.7  73

July 115 124 131 122 116 148 128 137  120  7.8  73

August 114 124 135 121 118 146 131 135  120  7.9  72

September  113 123 135 122 117 146 136 129  119  7.9  73

October 113 124 133 121 118 151 140 130  120  8.0  72

November  113 125 134 121 120 153 144 128  120  8.1  72

December  115 126 136 123 121 157 147 129  121  8.2  72

Column  (1)  is  from  the  Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Lahour,  Julv, 1908,  p.  187 — "simple  average";  columns  (2) and  (3) are

from  Table  4  above;  columns  (4)  and  (5)  are  from  Table  5  above;  columns  (6),  (7),  (8),  and  (9)  from  Table  7;  column
(10)  from  the  materials  used  in  making  Table  7 — "grand  totals"  of  all  commodities  raw  and  manufactured;  column  (11)
from  BradstreeVs,  and  column  (12)  from  the  Journcd  of  the  Boyai  statistical  Society.


ever,  that  the  recorded  quotations  from  which  the  index  numbers  are  computed
fail  to  show  the  full  severity  of  the  reaction  in  commodity  markets.  For  there
are  broad  hints  in  the  contemporary  issues  of  the  financial  periodicals  that
heavy  reductions  from  list  prices  were  quietly  made  in  private  negotiations  by
overstocked  houses,  as  one  means  of  raising  money.""

28  The  changes  in  the  general  index  numbers  which  include  many  commodities  of  different  classes  are  less
illuminating  than  these  detailed  figures.  For  the  points  of  time  which  such  series  as  those  published  by  the
Bureau  of  Labor,  Sradstreet's,  and  Sauerbeck  mark  as  the  beginning  of  recession  clearly  depend  upon  the
proportionate  representation  allowed  to  consumers'  and  producers'  goods,  to  manufactured  articles  and  raw
materials,  and  to  the  raw  products  of  the  mines,  forests,  and  farms.  Thus  the  Bureau  of  Labor's  index  number
puts  the  maximum  price  in  October,  1907,  and  Bradstreet's  index  number  in  March,  primarily  because  the  former
includes  relatively  more  manufactured  goods  than  the  latter.


534


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


The  total  volume  of  general  business  continued  to  increase  slowly  for  some
time  after  the  recession  of  wholesale  prices  had  begun.  Such  at  least  is  the
conclusion  suggested  by  the  statistics  of  bank  clearings  given  in  the  next  three
tables.  Owing  to  the  influence  of  seasonal  factors  upon  the  clearings,  the
comparisons  made  between  corresponding  periods  in  1907  and  1906  possess
more  significance  than  comparisons  between  successive  months  or  weeks  of
1907.

So  far  as  New  York  is  concerned,  clearings  in  1907  ran  steadily  behind  the
records  of  3  906  except  in  March  and  July.  But  most,  if  not  all,  of  the  decline
was  due  to  dullness  upon  the  Stock  Exchange.^"  It  is  impossible,  however,  to
segregate  the  clearings  which  originate  in  the  sales  of  stocks  and  bonds  from
those  which  originate  in  other  transactions,  so  that  we  cannot  be  certain  that
the  volume  of  general  business  in  New  York  was  less  before  the  panic  in  1907
than  it  was  in  the  preceding  year  of  high  prosperity.^"  Outside  of  New  York,
it  was  certainly  greater  in  every  month  of  the  year  until  November,  if  the
clearings  may  be  trusted  as  an  index.  But  after  midsummer  the  gains  were
considerably  smaller  than  they  had  been  in  April  to  July,  and  probably  would
have  turned  presently  into  moderate  losses,  even  had  the  crisis  not  become  a
panic.


TABLE 141

Bank  Cleakings  in

New  York

AND  Outside  or

'  New

In
New  York

By  months
millionB  of  dollars
Outside
New  York

A

1906

1907

1906

1907

January 11,239

9,638

5,095

5,383

February 8,324

7,332

4,153

4,461

March 8,377

9,562

4,630

5,063

April 8,543

7,668

4,359

4,969

May 8,793

7,335

4,444

5047

June 7,816

6,369

4,433

4,767

July 7,256

7,312

4,392

5,037

August 8,834

6,891

4,310

4,637

September 8,314

6,030

4,199

4,522

October 9,344

8,196

5,206

5,584

November 8,608

5,500

5,048

4,159

December 9,227

5,350

5,058

4,057

Compiled  from  the  Financial  Review.

1907  compared  with  1906


Gain  (  +  )
New  York

or  loss  ( — )
Outside
New  York

—1,601

+ 288

— 992

+ 308

+1,185

+ 433

— 875

+ 610

—1,458

+ 603

—1,447

+ 334

+ 56

+ 645

—1,943

+ 327

—2,284

+ 323

—1,148

+ 378

—3,108

— 889

—3,877

—1,001

=9  The  exceptional  gain  of  clearings  in  March  enforces  this  opinion;  for  this  was  the  only  month  in  the
year  when  the  number  of  shares  sold  in  1907  was  greater  than  in  1906.  See  the  table  in  the  Financial  Bevieir,
1908,  p.  35.

30  The  slight  excess  of  the  July  clearings  in  1907  occurred  in  the  face  of  a  decline  in  the  number  of  shares
sold  from  16.3  to  12.8  millions.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


535


TABLE  142
Bank  Cleaeings  in  Vabious  Cities  during  the  Panic  of  1907

In  millions  of  dollars


Weeks  ending
October 3

New  York

$

1724

Outside
New  York
$
1176

Chicago
$
259

Boston

$

159

Philadelphia
$
149

St.  Louis

$

64.5

Pittsburg

$

55.6

San
Francisco

45.0

Baltimore

$

31.2

10

1580

1141

249

144

130

67.7

50.0

44.3

32.8

17

1778

1257

271

172

152

76.2

52.3

47.3

29.6

24

1948

1247

265

171

151

73.2

55.3

43.7

32.8

31

1846

1176

244

178

152

61.5

52.7

40.6

31.7

November 7

1357

1029

208

138

122

55.9

46.9

26.4

14

1373

994

200

138

125

55.5

51.9

30.9

29.0

21

1316

970

198

137

118

57.8.

49.6

28.0

28.0

28

981

749

153

94

95

45.1

44.8

20.6

20.5

December 5

1455

1017

205

131

139

60.5

55.2

30.3

27.3

12

1320

952

191

125

110

58.8

47.6

29.2

26.3

19

1243

951

191

124

117

58.0

45.3

31.2

26.0

26

1031

792

166

100

95

50.2

42.0

24.5

20.0

January 2

1062

844

168

131

103

53.1

43.5

26.0

19.7

9

1545

1071

213

152

131

65.5

48.4

32.6

28.3

16

1674

1055

216

168

122

61.7

42.8

34.4

26.2

23

1664

1054

229

161

123

62.8

44.9

35.1

25.5

30

1345

942

214

132

104

57.1

44.8

33.3

24.3

October 3

Kansas
•  City

$
37.7

Cincinnati

$

26.4

New
Orleans

$
17.7

Minneapolis
29.9

Cleveland

$

19.8

Detroit

$

14.5

Louisville

$

14.1

Los

Angeles

$

10.4

Omaha

$

11.6

10

39.9

25.8

17.7

32.4

17.2

13.0

13.1

11.2

12.9

17

39.6

27.5

19.0

36.9

20.3

14.9

13.9

12.9

13.5

24

'40.9

27.5

20.4

36.0

17.7

14.8

13.4

11.2

12.7

31

39.5

24.6

19.6

29.2

17.4

14.3

14.4

9.0

13.7

November 7

34.5

23.5

18.4

24.8

15.9

14.0

11.5

9.7

10.2

14

31.1

21.3

18.7

22.5

16.7

13.2

10.2

9.2

10.4

21

29.2

21.7

19.5

23.2

15.9

14.2

9.1

8.7

10.5

28

23.6

16.8

15.5

19.4

12.2

10.7

7.1

6.1

8.3

December 5

26.7

22.6

22.9

26.5

15.4

12.7

10.7

7.3

10.3

12

29.2

20.7

21.6

25.3

15.0

13.9

8.9

9.9

10.7

19

31.1

21.9

23.2

24.2

15.3

13.6

9.0

7.2

10.5

26

25.7

17.9

19.8

19.6

13.0

10.7

7.6

5.8

. 9.4

January 2

25.5

19.9

20.7

19.5

12.7

11.1

8.1

6.4

8.5

9

33.1

29.8

20.9

23.4

18.6

14.1

11.6

8.9

11.3

16

34.9

27.0

22.2

22.9

16.1

13.2

11.8

9.6

12.9

23

34.9

25.2

22.7

20.9

17.4

13.9

11.7

9.4

11.7

30

32.7

24.1

18.1

18.6

14.7

11.3

11.0

7.6

11.0

Compiled  from

Bradstreet's.

536


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE 143


Per  Cent  op  Increase  (+)  or  Decrease  ( — )  of  Bank
1907  in  comparison  with  the  Clearings  or


Clearings  in  Various Cities during the Panic of
coreespokding  weeks  in  the  preceding  year


Weel^s  ending
October 3

New  York

%

—24.8

Outside

New  York

%

+  4.2

Chicago

%
+16.2

Boston

%
—  6.5

Philadelphia

%

—12.2

St.  Louis

%
+  14.3

Pittsburg

%

+ 1.3

San

Francisco

%

—  8.4

Baltimore

%

+ 8.2

10

—21.3

+  3.6

+14.7

—17.4

—  4.5

+14.2

+  6.6

+  1.4

+  13.5

17

—17.8

+  5.6

+20.2

—11.0

—  8.6

+21.9

+  8.8

+  3.3

—  2.5

24

—  7.7

+12.6

+20.1

—  3.0

+  1.9

+22.3

+  7.9

—  2.2

+21.2

31

+ .7

+  8.5

+13.8

+  9.7

+  1.0

+  6.0

+  2.2

—14.8

+ 8.2

November 7

—24.9

—  6.1

—  3.0

—13.3

—14.7

+ -1

+  1.7

14

—35.1

—19.0

—15.3

—21.2

—22.0

—18.0

—  1.8

—82.4

—  8.3

21

—42.3

—19.9

—18.6

—26.9

—25.8

—13.4

—  5.8

-^8.1

—10.2

28

—39.7

—20.6

—18.9

—30.6

—27.7

—16.6

— .8

—48.7

—15.7

December 5

—37.5

—21.3

—22.7

—29.5

—23.2

—10.6

—  4.6

— 46.6

—19.0

12

—38.9

—18.1

—14.4

—26.0

—27.7

—11.3

—12.0

—36.6

—14.7

19

—48.2

—20.0

—20.3

—30.9

—26.0

—  9.6

—11.2

—30.8

—19.8

26

—43.0

—20.2

—17.9

—28.3

—29.1

—  8.5

—14.7

—35.4

—24.8

January 2

—48.1

—25.0

—25.8

—33.2

—13.2

—16.9

—41.7

—34.6

9

—31.1

—13.4

—10.7

—23.7

—17.0

—  3.9

—12.7

—28.0

—10.6

16

—23.7

—15.6

—  9.2

—29.7

—17.7

—10.9

—19.0

—26.4

—15.8

23

—25.2

—  8.3

— .7

—17.7

—14.4

—  3.1

—18.1

—25.3

—11.4

30

—28.0

—13.1

—  6.2

—18.6

—28.5

—  1.3

—18.8

—26.4

—17.1

October 3

Kansas

City

%

+36.8

Cincinnati
'/«
+  1.7

New
Orleans

%
—13.7

Minneapolis

%

+12.4

Cleveland

%

+  9.6

Detroit

%
+10.1

Louisville
%
+  9.2

Los
Angeles
%
—12.0

Omaha

%
+10.9

10

+37.9

+  5.7

—28.5

+19.5

+  1.1

+  5.6

+  7.3

—  2.1

+13.0

17

+26.4

—  4.5

—17.6

+24.4

+  2.9

+  6.6

+  7.1

+10.1

+18.3

24

+36.7

+10.8

—16.6

+45.1

+14.6

+26.4

+  8.6

+ 1.0

+25.9

31

+36.8

—  2.1

—  6.0

+29.9

—  7.2

+20.9

+11.2

—  9.6

+39.5

November 7

+20.7

—15.9

—32.1

—  8.0

—  4.6

+15.6

—  9.7

—17.1

+  3.2

14

—  1.0

—16.7

—30.9

—19.9

—13.9

—34.1

—23.8

—35.6

+  3.8

21

+ .6

—22.1

—29.8

+ .6

—  9.2

—40.5

—25.3

—30.9

+ .1

28

+  2.0

—18.8

—31.4

—  2.0

—  7.5

—10.5

—25.0

—44.9

+  1.5

December 5

—14.8

—19.8

—24.0

—  4.8

—14.3

—14.9

—22.2

—45.8

—  6.0

12

—  5.7

—19.5

—22.1

+  2.9

—11.5

—  5.8

—33.9

—22.2

—  2.9

19

+ .4

—17.7

—16.8

+  7.5

—20.5

—  9.2

—34.0

—47.9

—12.0

26

—  5.1

—19.3

—10.7

—  4.6

—15.2

—11.5

—31.3

—40.0

+ .8

January 2

—  5.4

—20.2

—11.9

+  1.4

—32.9

—15.9

—36.5

—42.2

—10.0

9

—  1.1

—  6.9

—20.4

+11.9

—  7.2

—  4.9

—25.9

—32.9

+  6.1

16

+ 4.4

—21.0

—16.6

+27.4

—14.2

—10.2

—22.3

—35.1

+18.4

23

+  10.8

—  7.8

—  4.0

+24.4

+10.4

+  2.6

—  8.5

—25.1

+17.1

30

+15.0

—10.5

—20.6

+21.5

—10.7

—  5.3

—  7.2

—36.7

+10.9

Compiled  from  Bradstreet's.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  537

The  detailed  figures  by  weeks  show  that,  just  before  the  panic,  Boston,
Philadelphia,  and  New  Orleans  were  running  steadily  behind  their  records  of
a  year  before,  and  that  San  Francisco  and  Los  Angeles  were  barely  keeping
even.  But  the  middle-western  towns  were  still  making  gains  sufficient  to  keep
the  totals  for  the  country  outside  of  New  York  above  the  totals  of  1906.

The  first  efEect  of  the  panic  in  the  great  business  centers  of  the  East  was
to  increase  the  volume  of  financial  transactions,  such  as  the  sale  of  securities
by  embarrassed  banks  and  individuals,  the  shifting  of  loans,  etc.  These  trans-
actions availed  to  put  the  clearings  even  of  New  York,  Boston,  and  Phila-
delphia temporarily  above  the  records  of  1906.  But  business  of  more  ordinary
kinds  was  restricted  with  such  promptness  that  the  special  panic  operations
cut  little  figure  in  the  totals  after  the  end  of  October.  The  eastern  cities  which
had  been  running  behind  before  the  panic  now  showed  losses  of  a  quarter,  a
third,  or  even  a  half  in  comparison  with  the  corresponding  weeks  of  the  year
before.  Still  more  surprising  is  the  speed  with  which  the  trouble  spread  from
New  York  to  the  Gulf  and  to  the  Pacific.  The  very  first  week  of  the  panic
showed  lessened  gains  over  1906  or  actual  losses  in  a  majority  of  the  towns.
From  the  third  week  of  the  panic  to  the  end  of  the  year  the  restriction  of
business,  measured  from  the  level  of  1906,  averaged  about  20  per  cent  outside
of  New  York  and  about  40  per  cent  in  New  York.  Among  the  leading  towns,
Kansas  City,  Minneapolis,  and  Omaha  fared  least  badly — perhaps  because  their
industries  are  so  largely  concerned  with  foodstuffs.  In  general,  the  industrial
sections  of  the  east  lost  more  heavily  than  the  agricultural  sections  of  the
middle  west ;  for  the  harvests  were  on  the  whole  profitable  to  American  farmers.

Notes  in  the  business  periodicals  show  clear h^  how  this  restriction  in  the
volume  of  business  was  brought  about.  At  the  first  hint  of  trouble  from  the
banks,  merchants  began  to  limit  their  purchases.  "Hand-to-mouth"  buying
became  the  order  of  the  day.  Wholesale  dealers  and  manufacturers  received
telegrams  cancelling  orders  already  placed  or  asking  for  deferred  deliveries.
Other  concerns  found  that  they  could  not  secure  the  specifications  necessary
for  making  up  goods  ordered  on  contracts.  On  the  other  hand,  sellers  often
hesitated  to  ship  goods,  fearing  lest  the  consignees  should  prove  unable  to  pay.
Not  a  few  houses  withdrew  commercial  travelers  already  in  the  field,  and
stopped  soliciting  orders  for  a  time.  Here  and  there  inability  to  secure  money
for  payrolls  caused  a  temporary  stoppage  of  work.

Such  interruptions  of  the  usual  course  of  wholesale  trade  and  manufac-
turing, with  their  reactions  upon  transportation,  mining,  and  the  like,  became
epidemic  in  the  first  fortnight  of  the  panic.  But  retail  trade  continued  to  be
reported  ''fair"  for  several  weeks,  especially  in  the  middle  west.  No  doubt
the  approach  of  the  Christmas  shopping  season  and  of  cold  weather  was  largely
responsible  for  sustaining  the  business  of  shopkeepers  in  1907.  But  the  same
phenomenon  was  remarked  upon  in  1893,  when  the  panic  occurred  in  summer.


538  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

Eetail  trade,  in  fact,  seems  not  to  be  curtailed  seriously  outside  of  the  largest
cities  until  a  panic  has  closed  many  industrial  enterprises,  put  others  on  short
time,  and  led  to  the  widespread  discharge  of  wage-earners.  Then,  of  course,
the  shopkeeper  sees  his  sales  fall  off,  as  the  wholesale  merchant  and  manufac-
turer had  several  weeks  earlier.


III.  A  Ttpioai,  Crisis — England,  1907

Since  our  example  of  a  panic  is  taken  from  American  experience  in  1907,
our  example  of  a  crisis  had  best  be  taken  from  the  simultaneous  experience  of
England.

1.  The  Beginning  of  Reaction

Definite  signs  that  the  business  "boom"  had  passed  its  zenith  appeared  in
England  as  early  as  midsummer,  ]907,  several  months,  that  is,  before  the
American  panic  occurred.

Among  the  symptoms  of  reaction  which  called  forth  contemporary  comment
were  the  following.  British  railway  stocks  fell  in  the  first  half  of  1907  with-
out any  apparent  reason  save  that  investors  were  holding  aloof."  A  series  of
high-grade  loans  failed  to  find  subscribers.  The  Bristol  corporation,  the  Mid-
dlesex County  Council,  the  East  Indian  Railway,  and  finally  the  Manchurian
Railways,  supported  by  an  unconditional  guarantee  from  the  Japanese  govern-
ment, tried  one  after  another  to  raise  money  and  were  "more  or  less  cold-
shouldered  by  the  public.'"^  While  the  shipbuilding  yards  were  kept  busy
most  of  the  year  executing  orders  received  in  1906  or  even  in  1905,  their  out-
look for  the  future  was  dismal,  since  few  new  contracts  were  in  sight.'^  The
iron  and  steel  trades  were  in  a  similar  position.  Though  the  mills  were  working
at  high  tension  for  the  moment,  and  though  stocks  of  pig-iron  were  very  low,
the  price  of  "Cleveland  warrants"  began  falling  in  July,  since  both  domestic
and  foreign  demand  for  future  delivery  was  declining.^*  Indeed,  manufac-
turers were  not  anxious  to  take  new  business  at  the  ruling  quotations,  because
of  the  high  cost  of  production.  The  Economist  explained  that  the  price  of  coal
was  ' '  a  crushing  tax  on  present  and  prospective  industry, ' "'  and  that  producers
of  iron  were  practically  trading  at  a  loss  in  executing  orders  booked  at  a  time
when  materials  and  fuel  were  much  cheaper.^" The  building  trades  also  were

31  See  the  London  Mconomist,  vol.  65,  pp.  1144,  1192,  1328.

32  Ihid.,  p.  1284.  The  failure  of  the  Manchurian  railway  loan  attracted  especial  attention  because  of  the
attractiveness  of  the  terms  offered — interest  5  per  cent,  subscription  price  97,  amount  of  issue  £4,000,000.  The
underwriters  included  some  of  the  strongest  British  banks,  and  the  guarantee  of  principal  and  interest  by
the  Japanese  government  seemed  to  afford  good  security.

33  lUd.,  p.  1261.

Si  Ibid.,  pp.  1138-1139.
35  Ibid.,  p.  1583.
3S  Ibid.,  p.  1502.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  539

dull  in  almost  all  sections  of  the  country."  Among  the  railways,  gross  receipts
grew  steadily,  but  operating  expenses  grew  faster,  so  that  the  ratio  of  net  to
gross  receipts  declined.''  Sauerbeck's  index  number  of  prices  at  wholesale
reached  its  summit  in  May,  and  fell  in  every  subsequent  month.  After  July
town  clearings  in  London  ran  in  most  weeks  below  the  records  of  1906.  Imports
began  to  show  diminishing  gains  after  April.  Perhaps  most  significant  of  all
the  signs  of  reaction,  the  percentage  of  unemployment,  which  in  every  month
since  March,  1905,  had  been  less  than  in  the  corresponding  month  of  the  year
before,  began  in  July,  1907,  to  run  steadily  higher  than  in  1906."

By  midsummer  of  1907,  then,  the  tide  of  British  business  began  to  recede,
because  prosperity  had  bred  the  stresses  described  in  Chapter  XI.  But  it  was
only  in  the  markets  and  the  industries  most  sensitive  to  coming  events  that
the  change  was  noticed.  The  current  volume  of  business  outside  of  the  financial
markets  showed  no  slackening ;  for  railways  receipts  continued  to  grow,  country
clearings  in  London  and  clearings  in  most  of  the  provincial  towns  continued
to  exceed  the  high  records  of  1906,  and  exports  showed  no  falling  off  in  their
rate  of  gain".  Nevertheless,  the  difficulties  already  present  on  the  stock
exchange  and  in  the  bond  market,  and  definitely  foreshadowed  in  shipbuilding,
the  iron  trade,  and  the  labor  market  were  certain  to  extend  in  a  short  time  over
the  whole  field  of  business.  The  more  acute  difficulties  experienced  in  foreign
countries,  then,  did  not  cause  the  British  crisis  of  1907 — they  did  no  more  than
hasten  its  development  and  make  it  more  severe.


2.-  The  Effect  of  Foreign  Crises

London's  position  as  the  world's  free  market  for  gold  exposes  British  busi-
ness in  an  exceptional  degree  to  disturbance  from  financial  troubles  in  other
countries;  and  the  exceptionally  high  ratio  of  foreign  commerce  to  domestic
trade  in  Britain  makes  her  business  exceptionally  sensitive  to  depression  among
her  customers.  The  year  1907  brought  severe  stresses  from  the  first  source,
the  year  1908  from  the  second.

Egypt  had  a  serious  crisis  in  the  spring  of  1907,  South  Africa  in  the  late
summer  and  early  autumn,  Holland  in  the  first  half  of  October,  the  United
States  and  Hamburg  in  the  second  half,  Portugal  in  November,  and  Chile  in
December." Each  of  these  disasters  produced  some  effect  upon  the  delicate


3T  The  Economist's  "Commercial  History  and  Keview  of  1907,"  p.  1.

38  Economist,  vol.  65,  p.  1499.

39  Tables  relating  to  clearings,  imports,  and  unemployment  are  given  on  a  later  page.

40  In  England  as  in  America  the  metropolitan  clearings  are  a  less  faithful  guide  to  the  volume  of  business
than  country  clearings.  Even  the  town  clearings  in  London  show  no  decline  if  the  figures  for  stock-exchange
pay  days  and  consols  settling  days  be  excluded.  See.  the  £«onoms<."  Commercial  History  and  Review  of
1907  "  p 3:  for  statistics  of  clearings  and  exports  see  Tables  147,  148,  and  149.

41  Economist,  vol.  65,  pp.  1138,  1583,  1755-56,  1814-15,  1977,  2083-84,  and  2171.


540  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

mechanism  of  the  London  money  market  and  later  upon  the  demand  for  British
products.  Incomparably  greatest  among  these  effects,  however,  was  that
produced  by  the  panic  in  New  York.

The  first  consequence  of  the  crash  in  America  was  the  fall  of  "Yankee  rails"
on  the  London  stock  market.  No  large  failures  followed ;  indeed,  dealers  were
said  to  be  pleased  by  what  they  described  as  the  emancipation  of  the  home  and
foreign  markets  from  "American  bondage."*^  The  second  consequence,  with-
drawals of  gold  from  the  Bank  of  England  for  export  to  New  York,  had  more
serious  results.

On  October  16th  the  Bank  of  England  had  a  reserve  of  $116,000,000,  equal
to  49%  of  its  deposit  liabilities  to  the  banks  and  the  public.  Meanwhile  its
loans  made  63.6%  of  deposits.  In  both  respects  the  bank  was  stronger  than
usual;  for  the  averages  of  these  ratios  in  1900-09  were  46.8  and  70.0  per  cent
respectively."  The  bank  rate  had  stood  since  the  middle  of  August  at  the
moderately  high  level  of  4^  per  cent,  and  the  market  rate  for  60-day  bills  was
4.13  per  cent. In  all  respects  the  bank  had  the  situation  well  in  hand.

The  first  heavy  withdrawals  of  gold  were  made  in  the  week  ending  November
2— $33,436,000."  In  the  next  two  months  $97,700,000  in  gold  was  exported  from
England.*"^  Meanwhile,  since  the  holiday  shopping  season  was  approaching,  the
domestic  withdrawals  of  currency  from  the  bank  exceeded  the  deposits  in  most
weeks."  To  meet  this  enormous  drain,  the  Bank  of  England  advanced  its  dis-
count rate  from  41;^  to  5y2%  on  October  31st,  to  6%  on  November  4th,  and  to
7%  on  the  7th.  It  also  secured  some  $15,000,000  in  American  eagles  from  the
Bank  of  France  early  in  November,"  and  induced  the  India  Council  to  release
into  the  bank's  general  fund  about  $7,500,000  of  gold  that  had  been  "ear-
marked."" These  measures  proved  amply  sufficient.  Between  October  23rd
and  November  6th  the  reserve  fell  $31,000,000 ;  next  week  the  gold  from  France
was  largely  instrumental  in  raising  it  by  $17,000,000;  another  decline  of
$6,000,000  followed ;  but  thereafter  gold  began  to  flow  into  England  freely  and
by  December  11th  the  reserve  stood  again  at  $115,000,000,  equal  to  47  per  cent
of  the  deposits.  The  usual  end-of-the-year  settlements  caused  a  new  drop  of
the  reserve  after  the  middle  of  December,  so  that  the  ratio  stood  at  36  per  cent
on  January  1st ;  but  the  managers  knew  that  the  strain  was  passed  and  reduced
the  bank  rate  to  6  per  cent  on  the  2nd,  and  to  5  per  cent  on  the  16th.  Meanwhile
the  reserve  had  mounted  to  sums  larger  both  absolutely  and  in  proportion  to
deposits  than  before  the  American  panic  began.


■12  Ihid.,  pp.  1840,

43  See  the  tables  relating  to  the  Bank  of  England  in  Chapter  VII,  v.

**  See  the  money  article  of  the  Economist,  October  26th  and  November  2d.

•15  See  Table  146.

■to  See  the  weekly  money  article  of  the  lSco)iomist  in  November  and  December.

■'''  The  latter  institution-  received  in  return  long  dated  bills  at  4%  per  cent  discount,  charged  1-0/00  prem-
ium for  the  gold,  and  stipulated  that  the  reimbursement  should  be  in  sovereigns.  See  the  Prench  correspond-
ence of  the  Economist,  November  9th.

48  See  the  money  articles  of  the  Economist  for  November  30th,  and  December  14th  and  21st.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


541


TABLE 144

Weekly  Returns  op  the  Banking  Depaktment
August  7,  1907,  to  January

In  millions of dollars


OF  THE  Bank  of  England.
29,  1908


1907

Capital
and  rest

Public
deposits

Other
deposits

and

seven-day

bills

Govern-
ment
securities

Other
securities
in  banking
department

Reserve

notes  and

specie

Per  cent
of  reserve
to  deposits

Per  cent
of  loans
to  other
deposits

August 7

88

31

214

78

140

115

47%

65.4%

14

88

32

208

71

136

121

50

65.4

21

88

37

226

71

153

127

48

67.7

28

88

37

228

71

151

131

49

66.2

September 4

89

31

233

70

151

132

50

64.8

11

89

37

229

70

148

136

5i

64.6

18

89

42

229

70

150

140

52

65.5

25

89

45

221

70

149

136

51

67.4

October 2

89

42

213

70

150

125

49

70.4

9

86

32

220

77

144

117

47

65.5

16

86

26

209

72

133

116

49

63.6

23

86

34

213

72

145

117

47

68.1

■30

87

35

219

70

170

101

40

77.6

November 6

87

33

212

70  -

176

86

35

83.0

13

87

34

220

70

168

103

40

76.4

20

87

38

212

70

170

97

39

80.2

27

87

38

210

70

159

106

43

75.7

December 4

87

27

216

70

153

107

44

70.8

11

87

26

219

70

147

115

47

67.1

18

87

25

212

70

145

109

46

68.4

25

87

27

212

70

161

96

40

75.9

1908

January 1

87

37

256

77

199

104

36

77.7

8

87

26

220

79

135

118

48

61.4

15

88

22

217

70

131

126

53

60.4

22

88

33

211

70

128

134

55

60.7

29

88

43

205

70

126

141

57

61.5

Compiled  from  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,  Germany,  and,  France 1867-1909 (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Com-
aission.) Pp.  120, 121. The  ratio  of  loans  to  deposits  is  computed  from  the  3rd  and  5th  columns  of  the  table.


542


MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


.

TABLE 145

London

Rates  of  Discount,  by

Weeks,  August,

1907,  TO

January,  1908

Bank
rate
%

4.00

Discount  rates

Call
money
%
2.75

Deposit  allowances

1907

August 2

60-day
bills
%
3.56

6-months*

bills

%

4.19

Discount
Banks houses
% %
2.50 2.75

9

4.00

3.94

4.44

2.00

2.50 2.75

16

4.50

4.50

5.00

3.00

3.00 3.25

23

4.50

4.63

5.19

2.50

3.00 3.25

30

4.50

4.19

4.88

2.50

3.00 3.25

September 6

4.50

3.94

4.69

2.13

3.00 3.25

13

4.50

3.81

4.38

2.25

3.00 3.25

20

4.50

3.69

4.13

1.75

3.00 3.25

27

4.50

3.69

4.25

3.63

3.00 3.25

October 4

4.50

3.88

4.25

3.63

3.00 3.25

Ix

4.50

3.94

4.44

2.25

3.00 3.25

18

4.50

4.13

4.44

2.88

3.00 3.25

25

4.50

4.50

4.75

3.38

3.00 3.25

November 1

5.50

5.69

5.56

4.50

4.00 4.S5

8

7.00

6.75

6.44

5.00

4.00 5.25

15

7.00

7.00

6.13

5.00

4.00 5.25

22

7.00

6.94

6.13

6.50

4.00 5.25

29

7.00

6.38

5.13

5.25

4.00 5.25

December 6

7.00

5.88

4.75

3.50

4.00 5.25

13

7.00

6.06

5.13

4.00

4.00 4.75

20

7.00

6.06

4.94

4.50

4.00 4.75

27

7.00

6.38

5.13

6.50

4.00 4.75

1908

January 3

6.00

5.00

4.63

4.88

4.00 4.25

10

6.00

4.63

4.31

4.13

4.00 4.25

17

5.00

4.31

4.06

3.63

3.50 3.75

24

4.00

3.75

'3.50

3.25

2.50 3.00

31

4.00

3.63

3.31

3.75

2.50 3.00

Compiled  from  Statistics  for  Great  Britain,  Germany,  and  France,  1867-1909. (Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Com-
QJssion.) Pp. 61, 62.  •'


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


543


TABLE 146


Monthly  Imports  and  Exports

OP  Gold

INTO  AND  OUT  OF GkEAT BeITAIN

,  1906-1908

1906

1907

In  millions of dollars
190f

i

Net  imports  ( -f- )
or  exports  ( — )

January

Imports
11.6

Exports
16.1

Imports
22.3

Exports
18.2

Imports
15.7

Exports
14.3

1906
—  4.5

1907
+  4.1

1908
+ 1.4

Febuary

27.2

7.7

18.1

14.5

20.2

17.7

+19.5

+ 3.6

+  2.5

March

25.9

10.1

21.4

11.3

18.5

7.0

+15.8

+10.1

+  11.5

April

13.6

28.1

17.8

8.7

27.5

16.7

—14.5

+  9.1

+10.8

May

22.2

20.4

23.9

14.1

15.8

21.6

+  1.8

+  9.-8

—  5.8

June

11.6

3.1

10.6

18.6

15.5

23.6

+  8.5

—  8.0

—  8.1

July

13.4

7.5

18.1

10.7

22.1

24.7

+  5.9

+  7.4 •

—  2.6

August

21.4

4.4

19.4

8.5

14.0

18.9

+17.0

+10.9

—  4.9

September

14.3

40.6

12.7

17.0

24.1

24.7

—26.3

—  4.3

— .6

October

15.7

43.1

20.6

28.2

14.9

24.7

—27.4

—  7.6

—  9.8

November

26.7 •

10.8

55.1

74.0

13.8

25.9

+15.9

—18.9

—12.1

December

20.4
224.0

15.5
207.4

37.9

277.8

23.7
247.5

22.4
224.5

23.2
243.1

+  4.9

+14.2

— .8

Year

+16.6

+30.3

—18.6

Compiled
mission.) P.

from  Statietics
. 66.

for  Great

Britain,  Germany,  and

France,  1887-

-1909.

(Publications  of  the  National  Monetary  Com-

This  increase  of  the  reserve  after  the  first  fortnight  of  the  heavy  withdrawals,
while  due  partly  to  the  $22,500,000  of  gold  obtained  from  the  Bank  of  Prance
and  the  India  Council,  and  partly  to  the  inflow  of  funds  from  the  interior  after
the  holidays,  was  also  due  in  large  measure  to  imports  from  other  countries.
In  fact  the  imports  of  gold  in  November  and  December  amounted  to  $93,000,000
— only  $4,700,000  less  than  the  exports."  Never  was  the  efficacy  of  an  advance
in  the  bank  rate  as  a  means  of  attracting  gold  more  strikingly  demonstrated.


T'he  Crisis  in  Industry  and  Commerce


Though  the  Bank  of  England  succeeded  in  meeting  the  double  strain  imposed
by  the  approach  of  crisis  at  home  and  the  call  for  help  from  New  York,  it  was
obliged  to  maintain  the  extraordinarily  high  discount  rate  of  7  per  cent  for
nearly  two  months.  During  all  this  time  the  market  rate  for  60-day  bills
averaged  nearly  61/2  per  cent  and  for  6-months  bills  nearly  51/9  per  cent.'"
While  these  rates  were  much  lower  than  those  reported  in  New  York,"  they
were  much  higher  than  English  business  was  accustomed  to  paying.  The  tense
condition  of  the  money  market,  therefore,  had  a  powerful  effect  in  hastening
and  aggravating  the  crisis  which  had  been  developing  slowly  since  midsummer.

49  Doubtless  the  gold  received  from  the  Bank  of  IVance  is  counted  among  the  imports.

50  See  Table  145.

51  See  Table  136.


544  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

This  crisis,  however,  proved  mild  and  tame  in  comparison  with  the  American
panic.  There  was  no  hint  of  suspension  or  even  of  limitation  of  payments  by
the  banks,  and  therefore  no  scramble  for  money.  There  was  no  fear  that  solvent
borrowers  with  acceptable  security  to  give  would  be  refused  bank  accomodation,
and  therefore  no  needless  failures  and  no  wholesale  destruction  of  credit.  In
the  very  fortnight  when  the  Bank  of  England  lost  $31,000,000  of  cash  it  increased
its  loans  by  $31,000,000.  If  the  loans  declined  after  November  6th,  it  was  not
because  the  bank  was  refusing  to  lend,  but  because  business  men  were  refusing
to  borrow  at  7  per  cent.

On  the  Stock  Exchange  the  crisis  had  less  effect  than  might  have  been
expected,  largely  because  of  a  fortunate  coincidence.  In  September  the  Execu-
tive Council  of  the  Amalgamated  Society  of  Railway  Servants  had  decided  to
take  a  ballot  upon  the  advisability  of  calling  a  general  strike.  But  Mr.  Lloyd
George  intervened,  and  news  that  the  dispute  would  be  adjusted  without  a  con-
flict was  published  on  the  same  day  that  the  Bank  of  England  raised  its  rate
to  7  per  cent.^^  While  this  good  news  did  much  to  buoy  up  the  market,  never-
theless November  brought  the  lowest  stock  prices  of  the  year.  Recovery  was
prompt,  however,  and,  if  the  "index  niunber  of  stock-exchange  values"  compiled
by  the  London  Bankers'  Magazine  may  be  trusted,  the  general  level  of  prices
was  higher  in  January  than  it  had  been  in  September."'

Another  fortunate  circumstance  helped  to  mitigate  the  effects  of  the  crisis
upon  industry  and  commerce.  The  British  farmers  reaped  exceptionally  large
harvests  in  1907  and  sold  them  for  exceptionally  high  prices.^*  While  agriculture
employs  a  much  smaller  proportion  of  the  population  in  the  United  Kingdom
than  in  the  United  States,  still  the  ability  of  the  farming  classes  to  buy  freely
was  an  important  factor  in  counteracting  the  shrinkage  in  the  demand  for  com-
modities from  other  sources.  Nevertheless,  the  recession  of  activity,  already
under  way,  became  more  marked  in  the  last  three  months  of  the  year.

In  November,  the  Economist  sought  the  opinions  of  representative  firms  in
many  branches  of  trade  regarding  the  effect  of  "dear  money"  upon  their  busi-
ness. The  replies  indicated  that  there  had  not  as  yet  been  any  serious  interrup-
tion of  manufacturing;  but  the  passing  of  the  "boom"  was  generally  admitted.
Not  a  few  manufacturers  who  had  been  troubled  by  the  heavy  cost  of  production
seemed  to  welcome  the  change.  In  particular,  the  high  prices  of  raw  materials
had  become  a  serious  burden,  and  many  firms  had  been  "unable  to  recompense

52  Economist,  vol.  65,  pp.  1863,  1945.

53  This  so-called  index  number  shows  the  aggregate  ' '  values ' ' of 387  representative issues  of  securities,
including  both  stocks  and  bonds. The  results  for  1907-08  in  millions  of  dollars  are  as  follows:

1907— January 18,702 1907— August 17,023

February 18,571 September  17,188

March  17,962 October  17,062

April  17,972 November  16,823

May  17,792 December  17,033

June 17,461 1908— January 17,334

July  17,685 February  17,320

54  Economist,  vol.  65,  p.  2031,  and  ' '  Commercial  History  and  Eeview  of  1907, ' '  pp.  3,  4.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


545


themselves  by  charging  more  to  their  customers. ' '  The  most  pessimistic  opinions
came  from  trades  like  jute  and  linen  which  depended  largely  upon  the  American
market.  But  no  serious  disasters  were  anticipated,  because  manufacturers  had
received  such  a  long  warning  of  the  crisis  that  speculation  had  been  kept  within
narrow  limits."''


TABLE 147

Merchandise  Imports  and  Exports  op  Great  Britain  by  months,  January,  1907,  to  March,  1908,  together

with  the  percentage  op  gain  (  +  )  or  loss ( — )  in  comparison with

the  corresponding  months  op  the  preceding  year


1907

January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December

1908

January

February

March

1907
January

February

March

April

May

June

July

August

September

October

November

December


Food,  drink,  and

tobacco
j^

Per  cent
of  gain
Amount or  loss


96.1

79.5

95.7

95.5

99.1

100.3

105.0

106.0

98.6

119.0

108.9

101.0

97.1

91.1

107.3


7.3

6.8

6.9

7.2

7.8

8.4

11.2

11.4

11.3

11.6

11.8

9.1


+  0.2

—  1.4
+  0.6
+10.2
+  0.1

—  2.7
+  3.4
+18.4
+  1.7
+12.4
+11.1
+  7.9

+  1.0
+14.5
+12.0

—  1.0

+  5.8

—  3.9
+12.1
+  2.4
+12.7
+22.1
+19.3
+  8.7
+  0.3
+  4.1
+  7.8


In  millions  of dollars

Raw  materials  Articles

and  articles  wholly  or

mainly  mainly

unmanufactured  manufactured


Amount


130.

116.

115.

112.
91,
74.
82.
71,
78.
95.;

106.'

112.1


121.5

102.2

81.4


18.9
19.0
20.1
21.1
22.6
21.9
24.8
23.7
23.6
25.7
24.4
21.9


Per  cent
of  gain
or  loss


Amount
Imports


+31.6
+32.1
+  2.9
+39.8
+12.1
+  9.7
+  14.8
+  3.5
+  0.5
+  2.8
—  1.6
+  1-1


66.4
60.1
68.6
67.5
64.5
56.6
65.9
61.3
56.8
64.9
61.5
57.9


—  7.0  54.9
—12.4  60.7
—29.5 64.0

Exports

+18.9 141.8


+26.2
+13.7
+29.8
+25.0
+38.6
+30.6
+28.9
+33.3
+28.8
+35.2
+27.1


128.3
139.7
136.7
146.8
128.5
158.3
143.5
183.9
146.3
135.3
125.8


Per  cent
of  gain
or  loss


+  4.2

—  1.7

—  0.3
+10.7

—  5.8

—  7.1
+  5.5

—  4.8

—  1.3

—  1.3

—  3.4

—  3.6


1908

January  7.4 +  1.1 20.6  +  9.1 137.0 —  3.4

February  7.1 +  4.2 20.3  +  6.8 125.9 —  1.8

March  7.2 +  4.4 20.5  +  1.8 130.4 —  6.6

Compiled  from  the  monthly trade supplements  of  the (London)  Economist.


Miscellaneous

and

unclassified


Amount

1.2

1.1

.9

.9

.9

1.0

1.0

.9

1.0

.9

.9

.9


—17.5  .8

+  0.7 1.2
—  6.8  .9


+13.9
+  9.7
+10.1
+28.2
+  17.7
+  3.7
+19.9
+  8.9
+13.2
+14.3
+  5.5
+  1.0


2.7
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.6
3.2
2.3
2.9
3.0
2.6


Per  cent
of  gain
or  loss


—  0.9
+  5.9
—19.4

—  2.3
—12.3
+11.6

—  2.3
—18.5
+26.3
—18.4

—  4.9
+  0.6

—32.0
+  9.5

—  1.5


+35.5
+19.2
+  1.6
+  9.1
+  2.1
+18.6

—  3.7
+40.9
+  0.4
+27.5
+  2.6

—  7.5


Grand  total

, ' >

Per  cent
of  gain
Amount or  loss


294.6
257.6
281.0
276.3
256.0
232.6
254.1
239.9
220.6
280.6
278.1
272.5

274.3
255.1
253.6


170.6
156.1
169.0
167.5
179.7
161.1
196.8
181.8
171.1
186.5
174.5
159.3


2.5  —  6.8  167.4
2.2  +  9.2  155.5
1.9 —13,5 16Q.1


+13.2
+11.3
+  8.4
+20.5
+  2.1

—  0.2
+  7.4
+  0.8
+  0.6
+  5.5
+  2.5
+  2.4

—  6.8

—  0.9

—  9.7


+13.9
+11.5
+  9.7
+27.3
+  16.4
+  8.1
+20.9
+11.5
+15.1
+15.3
+  8.7
+  4.2

—  1.8

—  0.3
-=  5,3


55  Economist,  vol.  65,  pp.  2022,  2071-72.


546


MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


TABLE

148

Clearings  in

London

By  Weeks,

1907-08

iding

Town  clearings

Country  clearings

Weeks  ei

A

Amounts  in  millions
of  dollars

Gain  (  +  )

or  loss  ( — )

Per  cent

Amounts  in  millions
of  dollars

Gain  (  +  )

or  loss  ( — )

Per  cent

1907

1906

1907

1906

1907

1906

July 3

July

4

1,460

1,483

—  1.6%

105

98

+ 7.1%

10

11

1,134

995

+  14.0

123

113

+  8.8

17

18

1,198

1,146

+  4.5

112

104

+ 7.7

24

25

913

908

+ .6

95

88

+ 8.0

31

Aug,

. 1

1,151

1,237

—  V.O

95

88

+  8.0

Aug. 7

8

1,042

864

+20.6

96

86

+11.6

14

15

899

1,126

—20.2

101

98

+  3.1

21

22

1,111

931

+19.3

102

87

+17.2

28

29

880

907

—  3.0

84

75

+12.0

Sept. 4

Sept

. 5

1,102

1,321

—16.6

93

91

+  2.2

11

12.

878

836

+  5.0

102

86

+18.6

18

19

1,007

1,244

—19.1

96

90

+  6.7

25

26

905

864

+ 4.7

89

82

+  8.5

Oct. 2

Oct.

3

1,268

1,340

—  5.4

94

94

0.0

9

10

1,053

916

+15.0

124

112

+10.7

16

17

1,154

1,197

—  3.6

114

106

+  7.5

23

24

935

965

—  3.1

102

93

+  9.7

30

31

1,245

1,301

—  4.3

98

92

+  6.5

Nov. 6

Nov,

, 7

1,069

1,016

+  5.2

120

105

+14.3

13

14

975

1,128

—13.6

104

93

+11.8

20

21

1,138

997

+14.1

112

99

+13.1

27

28

940

924

+ 1.7

94

83

+13.2

Dec. 4

Dec.

5

1,151

1,362

—15.5

99

100

—  1.0

11

12

872

956

—  8.8

108

92

+17.4

18

19

1,1.51

1,252

—  8.1

106

99

+ 7.1

24

26

834

717

+16.3

79

57

+38.6

1908

1907

1908

1907

1908

1907

Jan. 1

Jan.

2

1,096

1,518

—27.8

79

94

—16.0

8

9

1,114

1,128

—  1.2

123

113

+  8.8

15

16

1,025

1,347

—23.9

108

102

+  5.9

22

23

1,105

1,070

+  3.3

107

97

+  10.3

29

30

976

967

+ .9

95

86

+10.5

Feb. 5

Feb.

6

1,287

1,430

—10.0

112

109

+  2.8

12

13

949

1,002

—  5.3

103

91

+13.2

19

20

1,127

1,265

—  6.4

90

90

0.0

26

27

915

978

—10.9

104

96

+  8.3

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES


547


TABLE  149


Provincial  Clearings

IN  England

By  Weeks,  1907-08

Manchester

A

Liverpool

Birmingham

Newcastle-on-Tyne

Bristol

Weelis

ending

1907

July 6

Amount
in  millions
of  dollars

37.1

Gain  (  +  )  or
loss  ( — )  in
comparison
with  1906

+ 6.5%

Amount

in  millions

of  dollars

24.3

Gain  (+)  or
loss  (— )  in
comparison
with  1906

+26.6  %

t

Amount
in  millions
of  dollars

9.3

Gain  (  +  )  or
loss  ( — )  in
comparison
with  1906

+  10.5%

Amount
in  millions
of  dollars

6.2

Gain  (  +  )  or
loss  (— )  in
comparison
with  1906

—  3.1%

Amount

in  millions

of  dollars

3.9

Gain  (  +  )  or
loss  (— )  in
comparison
with  1906

+  5.2%

13

30.4

+ 5.4

20.7

+19.4

5.5

+ 0.8

5.3

+22.3

2.9

+  0.4

20

30.9

+17.5

18.7

+41.1

5.1

+  11.0

4.6

—  1.7

2.7

+  6.5

27

27.7

+ 8.0

13.8

+ -2

4.8

—  2.4

5.2

—  6.4

2.8

—  3.7

Aug. 3

34.7

+14.1

19.8

+17.4

8.4

+  8.0

5.8

—11.6

3.5

+  3.6

10

28.2

+12.6

13.8

+15.1

3.6

+19.8

4.6

—  2.4

2.1

+  2.5

17

29.5

+  10.8

16.6

+  2.0

5.0

+  8.4

6.5

+  6.7

2.7

—  7.1

24

24.1

+13.8

14.5

+  3.7

3.8  .

—  5.0

6.0

+13.8

2.5

0.0

31

28.6

+12.9

16.3

+13.3

4.7

—11.1

5.1

+  5.2

2.5

—  4.4

Sept. 7

31.4

+12.1

16.9

+  8.8

7.7

+27.2

5.6

+  2.6

2.9

+12.0

14

26.6

+ 5.9

16.4

—0.01

4.4

+  5.1

5.1

—  4.7

2.6

+  5.8

21

26.8

+  12.1

20.2

+  56.6

4.1

—  4.3

5.4

+  2.9

2.4

—  0.1

28

27.4

—  0.5

17.2

—  5.7

4.2

—10.7

5.2

+  8.8

2,4

—  8.3

Oct. 5

38.3

+  13.1

20.4

—  3.3

8.2

+12.2

6.5

—  3.8

3.6

—  6.2

13

30.4

+  1.9

17.3

—15.2

4.8

—  1.7

4.8

—  3.6

2.8

+  0.3

]9

30.2

+10.4

17.4

—17.3

5.2

—  6.5

4.5

—12.0

3.1

+  8.7

26

27.2

+ 1.8

17.4

+  2.4

4.3

—  8.7

4.7

—  9.8

3.2

+11.6

Nov. 2

35.5

+12.1

22.4

+  8.7

7.7

—  2.8

6.1

+18.9

3.3

+  6.6

9

32.1

+19.7

16.5

+10.5

6.1

+29.2

4.9

+24.4

2.9

+  7.9

16

31.6

+  6.0

19.9

+  1.8

5.4

—  0.3

6.0

+ 5.5

3.1

—  4.9

23

27.8

+  8.8

16.8

—  1.5

4.5

—  9.7

6.1

+11.7

2.8

+  2.7

30

29.9

+ 2.6

20.3

+  7.1

4.7

—18.6

5.2

+  2.3

2.7

+  2.8

Dec. 7

35.8

+34.1

19.3

+13.1

7.9

+  1.9

5.9

—  6.8

3.2

—  7.6

14

30.1

+  0.7

19.9

+  2.0

4.9

—  7.9

5.7

+  3.9

2.6

—  0.9

21

29.2

+  6.7

18.8

+  5.5

5.3

—18.1

5.8

—  4.0

4.0

+  18.5

28

36.6

—14.3

16.2

—  0.6

5.3

—  1.8

6.7

+86.1

2.9

—20.8

1908
Jan. 4

23.0

—  3.6

14.2

—11.0

6.8

—  9.0

3.7

—43.0

2.8

—13.0

11

30.9

+  2.9

17.8

—  5.1

4.8

—  6.2

5.2

+12.8

3.0

0.0

18

31.9

+  2.0

21.1

—  4.7

5.1

—10.9

5.1

—  3.6

2.9

—  9.2

25

27.2

+  1.9

19.2

+12.2

4.4

—13.5

4.8

—15.3

2.8

—  3.8

Feb. 1

31.0

—  5.7

18.8

—14.1

5.8

—26.1

4.4

—14.0

3.0

—13.9

8

35.7

+17.1

19.2

+  8.2

7.1

+  9.2

4.5

—21.1

3.5

+  4.5

15

31.8

+  6.5

18.5

—11.1

5.3

—  9.6

4.2

—26.7

3.3

+  7.7

22

26.5

—  3.1

17.8

—  2.5

4,9

—12,2

4.2

—24.8

2.9

—  4.0

548  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

These  views  are  amply  confirmed  by  the  statistical  record.  The  dwindling
gains  of  imports  and  exports  over  the  figures  of  twelve  months  before  turned
after  the  first  of  the  year  into  positive  losses.  Country  clearings  in  London  held
out  longer,  but  town  clearings  and  clearings  in  the  provincial  centers  of  trade
showed  losses  or  diminished  gains.  Finally,  unemployment,  instead  of  declining
after  the  end  of  the  year  as  usual,  continued  to  rise  until  the  percentage  was
more  than  twice  that  of  the  year  before.

Thus  English  business,  like  American  business,  passed  from  a  state  of  high
prosperity  in  the  summer  of  1907  into  a  state  of  marked  depression  in  the
summer  of  1908 ;  but  the  transition  was  accomplished  without  a  serious  epidemic
of  bankruptcies  and  without  violent  interruption  of  the  usual  processes  of
producing  and  distributing  goods.


TABLE  150

Percentage  of  Trade  Union  Members  Unemployed  in  the  United  King-dom  at  the  End  of  Each  Month,

1904-08

1904

1905

1906

1907 1908

January

6.1

6.3

4.3

3.9 5.8

February

5.6

5.7

4.1

3.5 6.0

March

5.5

5.2

3.4

3.2 6.4

April

5.5

5.2

3.2

2.8 7.1

May

5.8

4.7

3.1

3.0 7.4

June

5.5

4.8

3.2

3.1 7.9

July

5.6

4.7

3.1

3.2 7.9

August

5.9

4.9

3.3

3.6 8.0

September

6.3

4.8

3.3

4.1 9.3

October

6.3

4.6

3.9

4.2 9.5

November

6.5

4.3

4.0

4.5 8.7

December

7.1

4.5

4.4

5.6 9.1

Average  6.0  5.0  3.6  3.7  7.8

From  the  Fourteenth  Abstract  of  Labor  Statistics  of  the  United  Kingdom,  1908-09,  p.  7.


IV.  The  Close  of  Crises


No  certain  dates  can  be  assigned  for  the  beginning  or  for  the  end  of  crises.
For  the  strains  which  result  in  forced  liquidation  of  credits  accumulate  slowly
and  the  demand  for  settlement  of  outstanding  credits  may  become  widespread
before  the  public  is  apprised  of  what  is  going  on  and  before  the  pace  of  activity
has  sensibly  abated.  Further,  in  a  large  country  this  process  of  liquidation  may
begin  at  some  business  center,  while  the  tide  of  prosperity  is  still  rising  elsewhere,
and  spread  rather  gradually  to  the  latter  places.  On  the  other  hand,  the  strains
relax  as  gradually  as  they  have  gathered,  and  the  crisis  merges  into  depression
in  the  same  unobtrusive  fashion  that  it  emerged  from  prosperity.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  549

For  example,  it  is  impossible  to  say  precisely  when  the  crisis  of  1907  began
in  the  United  States.  Stringency  in  the  money  and  investment  markets  became
severe  in  1906;  the  stock  market  was  in  difficulties  at  least  as  early  as
January,  1907,  and  a  crash  occurred  in  March;  the  prices  of  raw  mineral
products  began  to  decline  after  February ;  complaints  of  the  encroachment  of
operating  expenses  on  profits  became  common  in  the  spring ;  bond  issues  began
to  find  few  takers  about  the  same  time ;  several  large  industrial  plants  went  into
the  hands  of  receivers  in  the  summer  because  they  could  not  secure  loans,  and
restriction  of  construction  work  was  frequently  reported  after  July.  In  short,
a  crisis  was  brewing  toward  the  end  of  1906  and  in  the  earlier  part  of  1907.  But
none  the  less  the  volume  of  general  business  continued  to  rise  month  by  month.
To  say  precisely  when  the  crisis  began  is  therefore  to  select  some  arbitrary
criterion  and  apply  it  irrespective  of  other  conditions.

Panics,  on  the  other  hand,  may  be  dated  with  more  assurance.  The  suspen-
sion of  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  on  October  22nd  marks  the  beginning
of  the  panic  of  1907,  and  with  less  definiteness  the  crash  of  industrial  stocks
and  the  bank  failures  of  May  mark  the  beginning  of  the  panic  of  1893.

The  ending  of  a  crisis,  whether  accompanied  by  panic  or  not,  is  the  cessation
of  the  intense  demand  for  prompt  liquidation.  Where  the  banks  have  been  able
to  satisfy  the  needs  both  for  currency  and  for  deposit  credits,  solvent  debtors
gradually  meet  their  obligations  as  they  mature,  and  the  insolvent  debtors  fail
and  pass  from  the  management  of  business  enterprises.  There  are  losses  to  be
written  off,  but  confidence  in  the  safety  of  the  remaining  credits  is  restored.
Meanwhile  but  little  borrowing  is  done  to  finance  new  business  ventures,  and  that
little  is  done  upon  a  broad  margin  of  security  to  the  lender  and  on  exceedingly
conservative  estimates  of  profit  to  the  borrower.  Interest  rates  relax,  and  money
accmnulates  in  the  banks.  In  short,  the  crisis  ends  because  the  members  of
the  business  community  have  withstood,  on  the  whole  successfully,  the  test  of
ability  to  meet  their  financial  obligations.

When  a  panic  has  occurred,  with  a  restriction  of  payments,  a  scramble  for
money,  contraction  of  loans,  heavy  failures,  etc.,  the  process  of  recuperation  is
slower  but  possesses  the  same  general  character.  Despite  the  intense  stress  of
the  demand  for  money,  the  percentage  of  failures  to  the  whole  number  of  firms
in  business  is  very  small.  According  to  Bradstreet's  this  percentage  was  1.46
in  1893,  .70  in  1907,  and  .94  in  1908.  Bun's  Revietv  gives  1.28  per  cent  in  1893,
.82  per  cent  in  1907,  and  1.08  per  cent  in  1908.  The  great  majority  of  enterprises
reassure  their  sceptical  creditors  by  actually  paying,  or  proving  their  ability
presently  to  pay,  what  they  owe.  Meanwhile  the  importation  of  gold,  the
increase  in  bank-notes,  and  the  issue  of  substitutes  for  money  gradually  relieves
the  worst  of  the  monetary  stringency.  Just  so  soon  as  banks  become  able  and
willing  to  pay  in  cash,  hoarding  ceases,  and  money  locked  up  in  deposit  boxes
comes  back  into  circulation. Presently  the  banks  find  themselves  with  a  super-


550  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

fluity  of  cash  and  reduce  interest  rates.  The  restriction  in  the  volume  of  business
brings  with  it  a  meagre  demand  for  credit,  while  borrowing  to  meet  maturing
debts  declines.  There  may  remain  much  anxiety  concerning  the  collection  of  old
accounts,  the  number  of  failures  may  remain  large  or  even  increase;  but  the
inability  to  borrow  on  good  security  is  a  thing  of  the  past.  The  acute  stage  of
the  liquidation — the  crisis — is  over,  and  depression — the  dragging  stage  of  the
liq  nidation — begins.

V.  The  Prevention  of  Panics

Experience  supports  the  curi-ent  belief  that  occasional  crises  are  inevitable
in  communities  where  economic  organization  has  developed  into  the  full-blown
money  economy  and  where  knowledge  concerning  the  workings  of  the  money
economy  is  imperfect.  Just  as  definitely,  experience  supports  the  belief  that
crises  can  be  prevented  from  degenerating  into  panics.  The  distinction  between
these  two  states  of  business  is  a  matter  of  degree,  but  in  this  case  matters  of
degree  have  grave  importance.  To  save  solvent  firms  from  failing  for  lack  of
loans  they  can  repay,  to  save  capable  managers  from  being  forced  to  part  with
the  control  of  properties  they  are  developing  effectively,  to  save  employers  from
having  to  discharge  men  because  banks  will  not  furnish  money  for  payrolls, —
in  short  to  prevent  the  more  violent  manifestations  of  business  confusion  from
occurring — is  a  service  of  great  value  to  a  country.

The  American  panics  of  1893  and  1907  were  ushered  in  by  a  series  of  heavy
failures.  But  the  downfall  of  the  Comptoir  d'Escompte  in  1889  in  France,  of
Barings  in  1890  in  England,  and  of  the  Bank  of  Leipzig  in  1901  in  Germany
were  no  less  alarming  than  the  failure  of  the  Knickerbocker  Trust  Company  in
1907  in  America.  Had  the  former  failures  occurred  in  the  United  States,  panics
would  have  followed;  had  the  latter  failure  occurred  in  England,  France,  or
Grermany,  there  would  have  been  no  panic.

For  in  any  of  these  European  countries  the  shock  to  confidence  would  have
been  allayed  by  the  prompt  intervention  of  the  other  banks.  A  syndicate  of
the  strongest  financial  institutions  in  the  country  would  have  taken  charge  of
the  embarrassed  concern  and  guaranteed  payment  to  its  depositors.  More  impor-
tant still,  the  central  bank  would  have  taken  the  lead  in  a  policy  of  lending  freely
to  all  necessitous  business  men  who  could  provide  adequate  security  for  repay-
ment. Most  important  of  all,  a  restriction  of  payments  on  the  part  of  the  leading
banks  would  not  have  been  made — it  would  not  even  have  been  feared.  Failures
would  not  have  been  avoided,  for  enterprises  which  had  become  insolvent  through
mismanagement  or  misfortune  would  have  gone  into  the  hands  of  receivers;
but  the  bankruptcies  would  not  have  been  swelled  by  the  inability  of  solvent
concerns  to  secure  bank  accommodation. Interest  rates  would  have  risen,  but


Banks  of  New  York
reserves

Oct. 12

$261  millions

Nov.  23

216

Jan. 11

269

Oct. 12

100%

Nov.  23

83

Jan. 11

103

MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  551

not  to  10  and  12  per  cent,  and  commercial  paper  would  not  have  become  unsale-
able. The  process  of  liquidation  would  have  proceeded  with  its  concomitant
decline  in  prices  and  volume  of  trade;  but  the  transition  from  prosperity  to
depression  would  have  been  far  less  violent.

The  difference  in  efficiency  for  purposes  of  withstanding  strain  between  the
American  and  the  English  banking  organization  and  banking  practice,  stands
out  with  startling  clearness  from  the  following  figures  concerning  bank  reserves.

Bank  of  England
Actual  amounts:  reserve

Before  the  panic  Oct. 9 $117  millions

Lowest  point  Nov.  6 86

After  the  panic Jan. 8 118

Belative  amounts:

Before  the  panic  Oct. 9  100%

Lowest  point  Nov.  6 74

After  the  panic  Jan. 8  101

American  importations  of  .gold  from  London  actually  caused  a  greater  relative
fall  in  the  Bank  of  England  reserve  than  occurred  in  the  combined  reserves  of
the  New  York  clearing-house  banks.  Yet  no  one  feared  for  a  moment  that  the
great  British  bank  would  hesitate  to  honor  in  full  all  legitimate  demands  made
upon  it  from  home  or  abroad,  while  the  New  York,  banks  advertised  their  weak-
ness by  restricting  payments  almost  at  the  outset  of  the  strain.

The  crucial  importance  of  the  policy  followed  by  the  leading  banks  in  deter-
mining whether  a  crisis  shall  become  a  panic  arises  from  the  fact  that  the  banks
are  the  chief  source  of  short-time  loans  and  the  chief  organs  for  increasing  the
currency  on  short  notice.  Since  a  crisis  occasions  a  liquidation  of  outstanding
credits,  the  imperative  need  of  the  time  is  for  sufficient  bank  accommodation
to  enable  solvent  debtors  to  meet  the  demands  made  upon  them  for  payment.
If  the  banks  can  inspire  the  community  with  confidence  in  their  ability  to  satisfy
this  need,  the  process  of  liquidation  can  be  carried  through  with  a  minimum  of
loss  and  confusion.

Defects  both  of  banking  law  and  banking  practice,  therefore,  may  fairly  be
held  responsible  for  the  degeneration  of  American  crises  into  panics.  The  legis-
lation which  prevents  any  but  national  banks  from  issuing  notes  and  which
requires  the  latter  institutions  to  deposit  government  bonds  as  security  prevents
a  rapid  increase  of  the  currency  at  the  moment  when  it  would  be  most  effective
in  checking  an  incipient  panic."  But  the  need  would  not  be  fully  met  even  by
the  most  elastic  system  of  bank-note  issue.  For  the  majority  of  business  enter-
prises require  deposit  credits  rather  than  money  to  meet  their  accruing  obliga-

56  Whether  the  provisions  for  the  issue  of  emergency  currency  made  by  the  Aldrich-Vreeland  Act,  passed
after  the  panic  of  1907,  afford  an  adequate  remedy  for  this  long-standing  defect  in  the  American  currency
system  cannot  be  told  until  the  new  machinery  has  been  tested  in  practice.  And  this  law  seems  likely  to  expire  by
limitation  before  occasion  has  arisen  for  its  application.


552  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

tions.  Elasticity  of  lending  power  is  needed  more  than  elasticity  of  currency.
At  present  American  banks  in  the  country  districts,  and  still  more  American
banks  in  the  reserve  and  central-reserve  cities,  make  a  practice  in  good  times
of  keeping  reserves  but  little  above  the  minimum  required  by  lav^.  Indeed,  the
end  of  a  prosperous  period  commonly  finds  the  great  majority  of  city  banks  with
reserves  barely  above  or  just  under  the  limit."  These  reserves  are  not  small;
indeed,  they  are  larger  in  proportion  to  deposits  than  the  reserves,  carried  in  other
countries  which  avoid  panics."^  But  there  is  no  adequate  machinery  in  the
American  system  of  thousands  of  small,  independent  banks  for  putting  the
available  funds  where  they  are  most  needed.  Each  institution  in  country  dis-
tricts must  fend  for  itself,  and  many  banks  not  threatened  keep  idle  in  their
vaults  money  which  under  a  higher  type  of  organization  might  be  used  effec-
tively to  calm  uneasiness  and  avert  disaster  in  other  places.  In  the  towns,  the
issue  of  clearing-house  loan  certificates  does  something  toward  enabling  the
banks  to  co-operate  with  each  other.  But,  in  recent'  panics,  this  measiu-e  has
been  shorn  of  one  of  its  original  elements — the  equalization  of  reserves  among
the  banks  by  assessments  levied  upon  institutions  which  have  more  money  than
they  require  and  the  distribution  of  the  proceeds  among  the  institutions  whose
reserves  are  running  low.""  As  matters  stand  now,  the  clearing-house  loan  cer-
tificate does  enable  city  banks  to  keep  all  their  cash  for  the  use  of  their  depositors
and  correspondents,  instead  of  using  a  large  proportion  for  the  payment  of
clearing-house  balances.  But  it  does  not  enable  the  bank  which  has  heavy
demands  for  currency  from  country  banks  or  from  local  customers  to  obtain
funds  from  its  neighbors.  Thus,  even  in  the  reserve  and  central-reserve  cities,
the  available  money  is  prevented  from  flowing  to  the  places  where  it  is  most
needed.  Of  course  this  fact  renders  more  difficult  the  avoidance  of  restrictions
upon  payments.  The  banks  most  exposed  to  demands  for  money — that  is,  the
city  banks  which  make  a  specialty  of  soliciting  deposits  from  country  institu-
tions— are  tempted  to  restrict  their  remittances  early  in  any  season  of  strain,
because  they  cannot  count  definitely  upon  support  from  their  neighbors.""

Granting  that  much  of  the  difficulty  of  meeting  the  strains  imposed  upon
banks  by  crises  arises  from  the  lack  of  organic  inter-relations  among  the  institu-
tions, we  still  have  to  admit  that  the  American  banks  have  made  a  fetish  of
the  reserve  requirements  of  the  national-bank  act.  Just  at  the  moments  of
hesitation  when  timidity  on  the  part  of  the  banks  spreads  fear  among  business
men  and  when  boldness  inspires  confidence,  the  banks  have  been  timid. Instead

67  See  Chapter  VII,  i  and  ii.

ss  Compare  F.  S.  Mead,  "Bank  Reserves  in  the  United  States,  Canada,  and  England,"  Quarterly  Journal  of
Economics,  May,  1907.  '

59  Sprague,  "History  of  Crises  Under  the  National  Banking  System"  (Publications  of  the  National  Mon-
etary Commission),  especially  the  chapters  dealing  with  the  crises  of  1884,  1893,  and  1907.

«»Sprague's  suggestion  that  institutions  which  make  a  business  of  holding  bankers'  deposits  should  be
required  by  law  to  keep  larger  reserves  than  institutions  which  do  a  purely  local  business  merits  careful  con-
sideration. See  his  Banhing  Beform  in  the  United  States,  Cambridge,  Mass.,  1911,  pp.  94ff.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  553

of  using  their  reserves  promptly  and  liberally,  they  have  sought  to  keep  them
intact  or  even  to  increase  them  by  withdrawing  money  from  other  banks  in
which  they  have  placed  deposits.  Willingness  to  "go  below  the  legal  reserves"
on  occasions  when  alarm  is  spreading  would  probably  do  more  to  check  panics
in  the  United  States  than  the  practice  of  holding  larger  reserves  in  ordinary
times.  Certainly,  the  latter  measure  would  give  little  relief  unless  it  were
coupled  with  the  former  policy.


CHAPTER  XIIT ^

BUSINESS  DEPRESSION
I.  How  Crises  Breed  Depressions

1.  Abortive  Revivals  of  Activity

Both  in  1893  and  in  1907,  the  passing  of  the  panic  in  America  was  promptly
followed  by  an  increase  of  business  activity.  Newspapers  and  technical  journals
reported  the  re-opening  of  mills  and  factories  which  had  been  closed  during  the
panic,  the  return  to  the  road  of  commercial  travelers  who  had  been  recalled,  the
freer  buying  of  goods,  etc.  Optimists,  encouraged  by  such  reports,  began  to
predict  a  speedy  revival  of  prosperity.  The  crisis,  they  argued,  had  arisen  from
impaired  confidence.  If  confidence  could  be  restored,  no  real  reason  would
remain  why  business  should  not  be  resumed  on  the  scale  prevailing  before  the
panic.  The  supply  of  labor,  the  stock  of  raw  materials,  the  equipment  for  trans-
porting and  manufacturing  goods,  had  not  been  reduced  in  quantity  or  quality
by  runs  upon  the  banks  or  by  insolvencies.  Everyone  was  eager  to  be  at  work.
Let  business  men  "look  on  the  bright  side,"  combat  sceptics  by  talking  pros-
perity instead  of  hard  times,  prove  their  faith  by  their  works,  and  all  woulr"
be  well  once  more.^

In  both  cases  a  few  weeks  sufficed  to  prove  the  falsity  of  such  predictions
and  the  futility  of  such  a  policy.  The  little  burst  of  activity  which  followed  the
panic  subsided  again,  and  hope  gave  place  to  renewed  discouragement.  There
was  no  recurrence  of  the  acute  strain  which  had  marked  the  panics,  but  in  its
place  there  came  a  slow  liquidation  which  dragged  on  through  many  months.

The  failure  of  these  "sunshine  movements"  lends  point  to  the  problem.  Why
are  crises  followed  by  depression?  Why  do  so  many  mills  which  re-open  their
gates  after  the  season  of  severe  stress  is  over  presently  close  again?  Is  the
reason  solely  that  the  majority  of  business  men  will  not  or  cannot  shake  off
their  gloomy  forebodings?  Or  are  there  elements  in  the  business  situation  as
left  by  the  crises  which  make  a  period  of  depression  inevitable — elements  beyond
the  control  of  sentiment?


1  In  1908  a  number  of  business  men  in  St.  Louis,  inspired  by  sentiments  of  this  sort,  organized  a  "National
Prosperity  Association,"  whicli  sought  to  establish  branches  in  all  parts  of  the  country.  The  chief  effort  of
the  association  was  directed  toward  inducing  producers  and  manufacturers  to  agree  upon  a  general  resumption
of  operations  on  .Tune  1st. Financial  Beview,  1909,  p.  22.

[554]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  555

While  a  decline  in  the  current  volume  of  new  orders  and  contracts  for  future
performance  begins  some  months  before  the  crisis,"  yet  the  close  of  the  crisis
finds  many  factories,  mines,  contracting  firms,  and  the  like  with  a  considerable
amount  of  work  still  to  be  performed.  A  temporary  stoppage  of  operations
during  a  panic  may  be  caused  by  inability  to  obtain  money  for  pay-rolls,  or  by
doubts  concerning  the  ability  of  consignees  to  pay  for  goods  when  delivered.
But  when  the  banks  have  ceased  to  limit  payments,  and  when  indiscriminate
distrust  of  the  solvency  of  business  enterprises  has  disappeared,  then  work  is
promptly  resumed  upon  these  left-over  orders  and  contracts.  Other  concerns
find  themselves  caught  with  stocks  of  raw  materials  already  on  hand  or  con-
tracted for,  far  larger  than  are  required  by  current  consumption  in  a  period
when  orders  are  light.  Their  best  way  of  raising  money  to  meet  maturing  obliga-
tions is  often  to  work  up  and  sell  these  materials,  even  though  very  low  prices
have  to  be  quoted  in  order  to  force  a  market.  Such  conditions  account  for  the
re-opening  of  many  business  enterprises  in  the  weeks  immediately  following
a  panic.

But,  unless  large  new  orders  and  contracts  are  obtained  speedily,  these  busi-
ness enterprises  soon  reach  the  end  of  their  order-books  or  surplus  stocks.
Then  they  reduce  their  working  forces,  put  their  plants  on  part-time,  or  close
altogether.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  neither  in  1894  nor  in  1908  did  the  volume  of
new  business  prove  sufficient  to  support  the  mills  which  had  re-opened.  Hence
the  reports  of  the  second,  third,  and  fourth  months  after  the  panics  told  a
disappointing  tale  of  new  suspensions  of  industrial  operations.^

It  is  the  paucity  of  new  orders,  then,  which  blights  the  hope  of  a  quick  restora-
tion of  prosperity  after  a  severe  crisis.  Business  men  may  be  ready  to  talk
prosperity  in  the  hope  that  others  may  be  induced  to  buy;  but  in  their  own
purchases  they  practise  extreme  conservatism.  Confidence  may  be  restored  in
the  sense  that  no  one  longer  doubts  the  solvency  of  the  banks,  or  the  ability  of
any  one  fairly  entitled  to  credit  to  secure  loans.  But  confidence  in  the  sense  of
sanguine  expectations  of  profitable  prices  and  a  large  volume  of  business  is  not
restored,  and  cannot  be  restored  by  cheerful  conversation.  Past  experience
enforces  the  contrary  belief  that  prices  will  fall  and  the  volume  of  business
shrink  for  some  time  to  come.  The  processes  which  work  out  these  results  must
now  be  described.


"  Compare  Chapter  XI,  ii,  4.

3  These  reports  of  fresh  suspensions  are  seldom  given  as  much  prominence  as  the  more  cheerful  news  of
earlier  weeks.  Indeed,  the  newspapers  sometimes  report  the  opening  of  a  conspicuous  establishment  several,
times  within  a  few  months,  without  referring  to  its  intermittent  suspensions.  Such  cases  usually  mean  that
the  managers  let  their  small  current  orders  accumulate  for  a  few  weeks  until  enough  work  is  on  hand  to
justify  starting  the  machinery,  execute  the  work  rapidly,  and  then  close  once  more.  Compare  the  Iron  Age,
July  30,  1908,  vol.  82,  p.  324.'


556  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA


2.  The  Cumulation  of  Depression

A.  THE  VOLUME  OF  BUSINESS

The  wholesale  discharges  of  workingmen,  which  occur  during  a  crisis  and
again  when  the  left-over  contracts  and  accumulated  stocks  of  materials  have
been  worked  off,  cause  a  decline  in  consumers'  demand.  Many  business  and
professional  men  likewise  are  compelled  to  retrench  their  family  expenditures.
Few  people  may  starve ;  but  tens  and  hundreds  of  thousands  are  forced  to  put
up  with  a  less  varied  or  a  less  abundant  diet.  Other  lines  of  expenditure  are
reduced  more  sharply  than  the  purchases  of  food.  Clothing  and  furniture  are
used  longer  before  being  discarded  and  are  replaced  at  urgent  need  by  cheap
articles.  Fuel  and  light  are  economized  to  an  uncomfortable  degree;  amuse-
ments, travel,  and  all  the  dispensable  adjuncts  of  comfort  are  pared  down.
Accumulated  savings,  personal  credit  at  retail  shops,  and  personal  property
which  can  be  pawned  are  gradually  eaten  up  by  those  hardest  pressed.  As
these  resources  are  exhausted,  the  straits  of  many  families  become  worse  and
their  purchases  of  commodities  are  progressively  reduced.  Hence  the  calls
upon  private  and  public  charity  usually  increase  and  the  volume  of  consumers'
demand  usually  decreases  as  the  period  of  hard  times  drags  on.*

In  general,  the  current  business  demand  for  the  raw  materials  and  partially
finished  products  from  which  consumers'  goods  are  made  shrinks  with,  the
shrinkage  of  family  expenditure.  Indeed,  for  a  time  this  business  demand
shrinlis  even  faster  than  consumers'  demand;  for  either  merchants  or  manu-
facturers may  fill  their  orders  for  a  while  after  the  crisis  from  their  left-over
stocks,  which  are  likely  to  be  larger  than  they  care  to  carry  in  a  dull  market.
On  the  other  hand,  in  order  to  keep  at  least  a  skeleton  organization  together,
manufacturers  sometimes  make  goods  for  which  they  have  no  present  sale.  But
operations  of  this  last  kind  must  necessarily  be  limited  in  scale.

Information  concerning  the  current  demand  for  such  producers'  goods  as  are
used  in  repairs  and  renewals  of  existing  plants  is  scanty.  Every  period  of
intense  activity  brings  out  all  the  weak  points  of  the  active  establishments,  and
leaves  many  of  them  in  a  somewhat  run-down  condition.  The  first  lull  in  activity
affords  a  favorable  opportunity  for  overhauling  plants  and  bringing  their  equip-
ment up  to  the  highest  standard  of  efficiency.  But  what  has  been  proved  to  be
technically  desirable  may  not  be  financially  expedient. Many  alterations  are

4  This  restriction  of  demand  and  the  patent  misery  from  which  it  arises  are  ordinarily  more  severe  in
the  great  cities  and  the  industrial  towns  than  in  the  country  districts.  The  farmers  may  have  abundant  crops
and  remunerative  prices  at  the  very  time  when  the  mills  are  idle  and  their  hands  are  walking  the  streets.
Even  when,  as  in  1894-96,  the  agricultural  interest  also  suffers  from  bad  seasons  or  low  prices,  there  is  less
acute  privation  in  the  country  than  in  the  towns.  Agricultural  depression,  however,  renders  the  depression  in
the  industrial  centers  still  more  intense;  for  the  slackening  of  the  farmers'  demand  for  goods  ruins  the  market
for  many  manufacturing  and  mercantile  enterprises.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  557

planned  as  soon  as  the  reduction  in  orders  gives  the  managing  staffs  leisure ;  but
their  execution  is  often  deferred  until  a  resumption  of  active  demand  for
products  is  in  sight.  On  the  whole,  it  is  probable  that  a  leisurely  course  is  taken
by  the  majority  of  enterprises,  so  that  the  demand  for  repairs  and  renewals  is
light  during  at  least  the  first  quarter  or  two  of  depression.

Concerning  the  demand  for  all  the  variety  of  goods  which  enter  into  new
construction  work  it  is  possible  to  speak  with  more  confidence.  While  many  of
the  existing  factories  are  standing  idle,  while  many  buildings  lack  tenants,  while
the  railways  have  light  traffic,  etc.,  there  is  little  inducement  to  enter  upon  the
provision  of  new  equipment.  While  investors  have  the  recent  decline  in  the
price  of  securities  fresh  in  mind,  there  is  little  use  in  issuing  any  but  the  best
accredited  grade  of  bonds.  Finally,  while  a  further  fall  of  prices  is  in  prospect,
it  is  vain  to  expect  the  larger  capitalists  to  take  up  new  projects  which  can  prob-
ably be  executed  more  cheaply  after  the  lapse  of  a  year  or  two.  Engineers,  archi-
tects and  the  like  may  be  kept  busy  preparing  plans  for  future  use ;  but  in  the
early  stages  of  depression  few  contracts  for  new  construction  are  actually  put
under  way.  Hence  the  demand  for  this  kind  of  work  continues  the  decline  which
began  in  the  latter  days  of  prosperity.

The  processes  which  cause  this  shrinking  in  the  volume  of  trade,  like  the  pro-
cesses which  cause  an  increase  in  times  of  revival,  are  cumulative  in  their  effects.
The  more  workmen  are  discharged  the  smaller  becomes  consumers'  demand.
Everj^  reduction  in  consumers'  demand  causes  a  further  decline  in  the  business
demand  for  the  materials  from  which  consumers'  goods  are  made.  On  the  one
hand,  this  latter  decline  causes  more  workmen  to  be  discharged,  and  on  the  other
hand  it  discourages  managers  from  making  the  repairs  and  renewals  which  they
have  in  mind,  and  discourages  capitalists  from  putting  their  new  projects  under
contract.  The  longer  these  plans  for  improving  and  extending  the  industrial
equipment  are  deferred,  the  less  grows  emplojnnent  in  the  enterprises  which
provide  materials.  And  the  longer  men  remain  wholly  or  partly  idle,  the  more
are  their  families  forced  to  scrimp  expenditures,  so  that  consumers'  demand
shrinks  still  further,  and  this  shrinkage  further  intensifies  the  influences  which
are  constricting  the  volume  of  business.

Nevertheless,  the  lowest  ebb  in  the  physical  volume  of  industrial  production
usually  comes  in  either  the  first  or  second  year  after  a  severe  crisis.  The  statis-
tics presented  in  Chapter  V,  and  the  index  numbers  of  the  volume  of  trade  com-
piled by  Kemmerer  and  Irving  Fisher,  all  point  to  this  conclusion.'  Agricul-
tural production,  of  course,  is  more  erratic,  showing  an  increase  in  periods  of
depression  quite  as  often  as  it  ^hows  a  decrease. What  are  the  forces  which

5  See  Chapter  V iii-  E W.  Kemmerer,  Money  and  Credit  Instruments  in  Their  delation  to  General  Prices,
(ed.  2,  New  York,  1909),  p.'lSl;  Irving  Fisher,  The  Purchasing  Fewer  of  Money  (New  York,  1911),  pp.  478-486.


558  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

counteract  the  cumulative  shrinkage  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  Mdthin
two  or  three  years  after  a  crisis  is  a  problem  which  must  be  deferred  to  the
concluding  section  of  this  chapter."

B.  THE  FALL  OF  PEICES

As  a  crisis  subsides,  the  confusion  which  reigns  in  the  markets  for  com-
modities' gradually  disappears.  But,  while  the  extremely  low  prices  made  in  a
few  forced  sales  may  not  be  matched  again,  the  trend  of  fluctuations  continues
downward  for  a  considerable  period.  Thus  the  fall  in  wholesale  prices  after
the  crisis  of  1890  lasted  at  least  four  years  in  Grermany  and  at  least  six  years  in
England  and  France ;  that  after  the  crisis  of  1893  lasted  four  years  in  America  ;
that  after  the  crisis  of  3900  lasted  three  years  in  England  and  four  years
in  Germany  and  Prance;  that  after  the  crisis  of  1907  lasted  from  one  to  two
years  in  different  places.^  So  far  as  recorded  quotations  show,  then,  the  lowest
level  of  commodity  prices  is  reached,  not  during  the  crisis,  but  toward  the  close
of  the  subsequent  period  of  depression,  or  even  early  in  the  final  revival  of  busi-
ness activity.*

The  chief  cause  of  this  fall  is  the  shrinkage  in  the  demand  for  consumers'
goods,  raw  materials,  producers'  supplies,  and  construction  work  analyzed  in
the  preceding  section.  On  the  other  side  of  the  market  stands  a  reserve  army
of  capital  and  labor  capable  of  producing  the  much  larger  supplies  of  com-
modities for  which  there  was  call  in  the  recent  period  of  prosperity.  The  anxiety
of  these  enterprises  now  standing  idle  or  working  below  their  capacity  to  get
more  business  intensifies  competition  in  those  branches  of  trade  where  it  already
exists,  and  often  extends  competition  into  branches  of  trade  whence  it  had  been
banished  by  agreements  to  sustain  prices.  Pools,  working  agreements,  and
combinations  of  other  kinds  become  far  more  difficult  to  sustain  in  the  face  of
a  buyers'  market,  and  many  of  them  go  to  pieces  because  their  members  begin
to  suspect  each  other  of  secret  undercutting  of  rates.  Moreover,  enterprises
verging  on  bankruptcy  and  enterprises  in  the  hands  of  receivers  are  peculiarly
dangerous  competitors  for  solvent  firms  to  meet.  They  often  disregard  supple-
mentary charges  altogether  and  seek  to  defray  their  operating  costs  by  taking
work  at  prices  which  their  rivals  who  are  keeping  up  interest  on  their  bonds  find
it  hard  to  match.  Finally,  the  fall  in  prices  is  cumulative.  It  spreads  from
one  part  of  the  system  of  prices  to  other  parts  along  the  various  lines  of  inter-
connection traced  in  Chapter  II,  and  then  spreads  back  again  from  the  parts
which  are  slow  to  be  affected  to  the  parts  in  which  the  decline  began.

«  Section  ii,  3.

''  Chapter  XII,  ii,  4.

«  See  Tables  9,  11,  and  12.

f  Compare  Chapter  X,  ii,  4.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  559

As  on  the  rise,  so  on  the  fall,  there  are  marked  differences  in  the  promptness
with  which  different  classes  of  commodity  prices  begin  to  change  and  in  the
degree  to  which  the  change  extends.  Retail  prices  lag  behind  wholesale  prices
of  the  same  goods ;  consumers'  goods  lag  behind  producers'  goods ;  manufactured
commodities  lag  behind  the  raw  materials  from  which  they  are  made ;  farm  and
forest  products  are  less  regular  in  their  fluctuations  than  mineral  products.
These  differences  arise  partly  from  the  differences  in  the  shrinkage  of  demand
pointed  out  above,  partly  from  technical  circumstances  affecting  the  possibility
of  adjusting  current  production  to  current  consumption,  and  partly  from  the
effort  to  adjust  selling  prices  to  the  total  costs  incurred  by  business  enterprises
rather  than  to  the  buying  prices  of  particular  wares."

For  reasons  which  have  been  sufficiently  explained,  the  prices  of  labor  fall
less  rapidly  than  the  prices  of  commodities  at  wholesale."  Interest  rates  on  long-
time loans  behave  like  w^^gG  rates  in  that  they  decline  at  a  slow  pace,  but  unlike
wage  rates  in  that  they  fall  for  a  longer  time."  On  the  contrary,  short-time
interest  rates  fall  faster  and  further  than  commodity  prices."  There  is  less
hesitation  at  lending  funds  freely  at  low  rates  for  three  months  than  for  ten
years,  and  large  sums  which  the  owners  will  later  invest  in  more  permanent
ways  are  transferred  in  times  of  depression  from  the  bond  to  the  monej^  market,
checking  the  fall  of  rates  in  the  first  and  accelerating  the  fall  in  the  second.

As  for  the  prices  of  securities,  high-grade  bonds  rise  because  of  the  decline
in  long-time  interest  rates,  while,  at  the  other  end  of  the  scale,  common  stocks
fall  under  the  combined  influence  of  diminished  earnings  and  dull  prospects.
Securities  which  stand  between  these  extremes,  like  speculative  bonds,  stocks
with  a  good  dividend-paying  record,  and  preferred  stocks,  rise  or  fall  according
as  they  partake  more  of  the  character  of  gilt-edged  bonds  or  of  common  stocks.
In  most  cases,  the  latter  relations  are  more  potent  factors  and  prices  decline,
though  less  than  the  prices  of  ordinary  shares."

C.  SAVINGS  AND  INVESTMENTS

What  is  known  concerning  the  changes  which  occur  in  money  incomes  in
periods  of  depression  suggests  that  the  amount  of  money  saved  declines  heavily
— a  conclusion  which  receives  at  least  a  measure  of  statistical  support  from
data  showing  the  deposits  in  savings  banks." That  the  volume  of  funds  required

10  For  index  numbers  of  the  various  classes  of  prices  referred  to  see  Chapter  IV,  i,  2,  3,  4.  5,  6,  and  9;  for
a  fuller  analysis  of  the  causes  of  the  differences  in  range  of  fluctuation  see  Chapter  X,  iii,  1,  T>.

11  For  index  numbers  see  Chapter  TV,  ii;  for  analysis  see  Chapter  X,  iii,  2.

12  For  index  numbers  see  Chapter  IV,  iii,  2  and  4;  for  analysis  see  the  following  discussion  of  "Savings  and
Investment. ' '

13  For  index  numbers  see  Chapter  IV,  iii,  1,  3,  and  4.

1*  See  Chapter  IV,  iv.  As  the  tables  in  that  section  show,  there  is  usually  a  reaction  from  the  lowest  prices
touched  during  a  crisis,  particularly  if  the  crisis  has  degenerated  into  a  panic; -but  when  the  subsequent  de-
pression is  severe  and  prolonged  prices  begin  to  sag  again,  and  sometimes  reach  a  lower  point  than  that  recorded  m
the  time  of  most  intense  strain.

15  See  Chapter  VIII,  i,  and  ii,  1.


560  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

for  current  investments,  in  the  extension  of  old  or  the  construction  of  new  con-
cerns, also  shrinks  seriously  is  attested  by  abundant  evidence/"  Finally,  the
often-noted  change  in  the  preference  of  investors — their  neglect  of  the  specula-
tive shares  which  were  the  favorites  of  flush  days  and  their  taste  for  ultra-con-
servative bonds — is  also  proved  by  statistics."

All  this  answers  to  expectations.  But  the  investment  market  presents  one
peculiar  feature.  The  first  year  of  depression  often  brings  an  exceedingly  heavy
issue  of  securities  by  large  corporations."  The  apparent  anomaly,  however,  has
a  simple  explanation.  During  the  high  tide  of  prosperity  preceding  a  crisis,
many  great  enterprises  provide  for  their  most  pressing  financial  needs  by  selling
short-time  notes  or  by  borrowing  directly  from  the  banks.^°  After  the  crisis
when  interest  rates  have  begun  to  relax,  they  seek  the  first  opportunity  to  fund
these  floating  debts  into  long-time  bonds.  Of  course,  large  issues  of  securities
made  for  such  purposes  represent  neither  extensions  of  new  equipment  nor
investments  of  fresh  capital,  but  at  most  a  shifting  from  one  form  of  obligations
to  another  form,  and  from  one  set  of  lenders  to  another  set.

D.  THE  CUEEENCY  AND  THE  BANKS

Upon  the  production  of  gold,  the  proportion  of  the  output  applied  to  mone-
tary uses,  and  the  international  movements  of  the  existing  monetary  stock,
depression  exercises  a  complicated  set  of  influences  which  need  not  be  described
in  detail  because  they  are  the  precise  opposites  of  the  influence  exercised  by  pros-
perity.^" The  net  outcome  of  all  the  factors  involved  differs  from  one  period
of  depression  to  the  next.  In  the  United  States,  the  one  country  for  which  we
have  adequate  data,  the  stock  of  gold  currency  declined  in  the  dull  months
January  to  July  1891,  February  to  November  1894,  July  to  September  1895,
April  to  July  1896,  March  to  May  1908,  and  July  1909  to  April  1910 ;  but  it  rose
during  the  dull  months  January  to  May  1897,  May  to  November  1908,  April  1910
to  May  1911,  and  during  the  dull  years  1903-04.^^  There  is  therefore  no  warrant
for  the  belief  that  the  quantity  of  gold  currency  contracts  regularly  with  the
pecuniary  volume  of  business.

As  for  other  kinds  of  money,  bank  notes  alone  possess  pretensions  to  elas-
ticity which  merit  serious  consideration.  However,  a  survey  of  the  records  for
England,  France,  and  Germany,  as  well  as  for  the  United  States,  shows  that  in
these  countries  the  amount  outstanding  has  seldom  shrunk  in  years  of  business
depression.^^

16  See  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  3-6.

"  See  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  2.

18  See  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  3.

10  See  Chapter  XI,  ii,  3,  and  iii,  1.

20  See  Chapter  XI,  iii,  4.

21  See  the  monthly  figures  for  the  stock  of  gold  money  in  the  appendices  to  the  annual  Reports  of  the
Treasurer  of  the  United  States.

22  See  Chapter  VI,  iii.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  561

Much  more  decided  than  its  influence  upon  the  volume  of  the  currency,  is
the  influence  of  depression  upon  the  distribution  of  the  money  in  circulation
between  the  banks  and  the  public.  As  soon  as  the  strain  of  a  severe  crisis
relaxes,  current  deposits  of  cash  in  the  banks  begin  to  exceed  current  with-
drawals, so  that  presently  the  banks  hold  a  decidedly  larger  proportion  of  the
monetary  stock  than  in  seasons  of  active  trade.^^

Of  course,  this  process  increases  the  deposits  of  the  banks  so  far  as  deposits
represent  actual  cash.  In  addition,  the  large  reserves  increase  the  ability  of  the
banks  to  lend  their  own  credit,  and  therefore  to  extend  the  deposits  which  result
from  discounts.  Nevertheless,  deposit  currency  usually  shrinks  in  volume  when
a  period  of  prosperity  merges  into  a  period  of  depression.  The  elasticity  of  this
element  in  the  circulating  mediiun,  indeed,  is  decidedly  greater  than  that  of
money.  As  a  result,  the  ratio  between  deposits  subject  to  check  and  money
in  circulation  falls  in  dull  years.^*

One  other  fact  concerning  the  effect  of  depression  on  the  currency  is  brought
out  in  Chapter  VI.  The  velocity  of  the  circulation  of  money,  and  in  higher
degree  the  velocity  of  the  circulation  of  checks,  declines  with  the  activity  of
trade.^^

By  these  changes  in  the  quantity  of  money  and  of  deposit  currency  and  in
the  velocities  at  which  both  money  and  checks  circulate,  the  volume  of  payments
is  reduced  in  harmony  with  the  fall  of  prices  and  the  shrinkage  in  the  physical
volmne  of  trade.  In  this  complicated  series  of  readjustments  the  causative
influences,  however,  are  not  all  on  the  side  of  the  business  situation.  The
failure  of  the  quantity  of  money  to  contract  promptly  when  a  crisis  turns  into
depression  results  in  monetary  redundancy,  of  which  the  visible  sign  is  the
accumulation  of  idle  cash  in  the  banks.  This  accumulation,  we  have  seen,  does
not  produce  the  expansion  in  loans  and  deposits  which  would  occur  if  the
prospects  of  profits  were  bright.^"  But  it  does  increase  the  competition  among
banks  for  such  business  as  is  to  be  had,  and  aids  in  producing  that  fall  in  the
discount  rates  which  we  have  seen  to  be  more  rapid  than  the  fall  of  prices  at
wholesale."  In  so  far,  the  quantity  of  money  is  a  factor  in  accelerating  the
readjustment  of  costs  to  selling  prices  which  ultimately  restores  the  prospects
of  profits  and  ushers  in  a  period  of  expanding  trade  and  rising  prices.'' Hence

23  See  Chapter  VI,  iv.
z*  See  Chapter  VI,  v.

25  See  Chapter  VI,  vi.

26  New  York  often  presents  an  apparent  exception  to  this  rule.  In  1908,  for  example,  bank  loans  were  larger
in  this  city  than  in  1907,  chiefly  because  country  banks  were  sending  to  New  York  idle  funds  which  they
could  not  use  at  home,  and  were  depositing  in  the  banks  at  2  per  cent  interest  funds  which  they  had  formerly
lent  on  their  own  account  at  call  on  the  Stock  Exchange.  The  demand  which  absorbed  the  increased  supply
of  loans  arose  largely  from  the  fact  that  money  could  be  had  for  1  per  cent  or  even  less  at  call  and  invested  in
securities  which  yielded  interest  or  dividends  of  4  per  cent  or  more.  The  national  banks  as  a  whole,  and  the
great  foreign  banks  for  which  we  have  statistics,  usually  show  a  decline  in  loans  when  prosperity  is  succeeded
by  depression. See  the  various  tables  in  Chapter  VII.

27  See  the  paragraph  upon  the  prices  of  loans  in  section  B,  above,

28  See  the  next  section  of  this  chapter.


562  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

such  an  increase  in  the  world's  production  of  gold  as  has  been  going  on  in
recent  years  tends  to  cut  short  and  to  mitigate  periods  of  depression,  as  well
as  to  prolong  and  to  intensify  periods  of  prosperity.  By  thus  altering  some-
what both  the  intensity  and  the  relative  duration  of  these  two  phases  of  business
cycles,  it  tends  to  give  an  upward  direction  to  those  long-period  movements  of
the  price  curve  in  which  the  years  of  depression  and  years  of  prosperity  are
averaged  together.

II.  How  Depeession  Breeds  Peospeeity
1.  The  Re-adjustment  of  Prime  Costs

The  shrinkage  which  depression  brings  in  the  volume  of  orders,  and  the
accompanying  decline  of  selling  prices  put  severe  pressure  upon  the  managers
of  business  enterprises  to  reduce  their  expenses  within  the  narrowest  feasible
limits.  Certain  of  the  price-phenomena  which  have  been  pointed  out^'  show
that  the  resulting  efforts  are  successful  at  least  in  part.

That  wholesale  prices  fall  faster  than  retail  prices,  that  the  prices  of  pro-
ducers' goods  fall  faster  than  those  of  consumers'  goods,  and  that  the  prices
of  raw  materials  fall  faster  than  the  prices  of  manufactured  products  means,  of
course,  that  in  these  cases  buying  prices  are  reduced  more  than  the  correspond-
ing selling  prices.'" Further,  since  short-time  interest  rates  fall  much  faster

2»  See  section  i,  2,  B,  above.

30  The  statistical  evidence  given  by  the  tables  of  Chapter  IV,  i,  may  be  summarized  as  follows. Plus  signs
mean  that  prices  rose  instead  of  falling.

Number  of  points  by  which
relative  prices  fell

1893-96 1902-04

25  foods  at  wholesale  in  the  United  States  31  7

25  foods  at  retail  in  the  United  States  10  0

1891-96  1900-03 1907-08

23  foods  at  wholesale  in  England  21  5  0

19  foods  at  retail  in  England  12  -{-4 +3

1891-96 1900-04 1907-08

23  foods  at  wholesale  in  France  25  1  8

36  foods  at  retail  in  Prance 8 +1 +2

1890-96 1903-04 1907-08

20  raw  materials  m  the  United  States  27  4  12

20  manufactured  products  in  the  United  States  22  7  9

5  raw  materials  in  the  United  States  41 _|-  7  7

5  partly  manufactured  products  in  the  United  States  .... 23 +12  6

5  finished  commodities  in  the  United  States  14+6  5

45  raw  producers'  goods  in  the  United  States  28  0  15

28  manufactured  producers'  goods  in  the  United  States 22  0  14

18  raw  mineral  products  in  the  United  States  27  5  20

23  manufactured  mineral  products  in  the  United  States 22  2  10

10  raw  forest  products  in  the  United  States  13 +19  ig

9  manufactured  forest  products  in  the  United  States  20 +5  -13

9  raw  animal  products  in  the  United  States  22  16  7

18  manufactured  animal  products  in  the  United  States 18  1  3

18  raw  farm  products  in  the  United  States  43 -|.  2  2

40  manufactured  farm  products  in  the  United  States  27+2  7


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  563

than  wholesale  prices,  the  cost  of  loans  declines  in  proportion  to  the  prices  of
products.''  Wages  also  are  reduced  in  seasons  of  severe  depression,  but  in
this  case  the  reduction  is  less  than  that  in  commodity  prices.''  It  does  not  neces-
sarily follow,  however,  that  the  cost  of  labor  increases  in  proportion  to  the
selling  prices  of  what  labor  produces.  For  there  is  strong  evidence  that  the
efficiency  of  labor  becomes  much  greater  in  dull  years  than  it  had  been  in  the
preceding  brisk  years.  Overtime  ceases,  and  with  it  cease  not  only  the  payment
of  extra  rates  but  also  the  weariness  of  long  hours.  When  working  forces  are
reduced  in  size  they  are  raised  in  quality  by  weeding  out  the  less  desirable  hands.
Most  important  of  all,  the  fear  of  being  discharged  at  a  time  when  thousands
of  men  are  already  looking  in  vain  for  work  disposes  every  man  who  is  kept
to  do  his  best — to  keep  any  pace  which  may  be  set,  even  at  grave  danger  of  over-
taxing his  strength.''  The  heightening  of  the  physical  productivity  of  labor
which  results  from  these  changes  does  more  than  the  fall  of  wages  to  diminish
the  ratio  between  money  cost  of  labor 'and  money  value  of  products.

When  selling  prices  have  been  materially  reduced,  enterprises  which  are
poorly  equipped,  disadvantageously  located,  or  inefficiently  managed  are  often
compelled  to  close  altogether,  because  they  cannot  get  back  even  their  prime  costs
on  an  output  sold  at  current  rates.  Within  the  stronger  enterprises  the  poorer
portions  of  the  equipment  are  allowed  to  stand  idle  for  the  same  reason.  It
results  that  the  producers  who  remain  in  the  race  during  periods  of  depression
can  "figure"  on  the  basis  of  prime  costs  considerably  lower  than  the  average
which  prevails  in  seasons  of  prosperity.

Finally,  depression  checks  the  numerous  small  wastes  which  grow  up  within
most  business  enterprises  during  years  of  intense  activity.  There  is  not  only
a  strong  incentive  but  also  sufficient  leisure  to  economize  materials,  to  make  the

31  A  similar  summary  follows  of  the  evidence  from  Chaprter  IV,  i  and  iii,  relating  to  wholesale  prices  and

discount  rates  in  periods  of  depression.  Number  of  points  by  which

^  relative  prices  and  relative

rates  of  interest  fell

, ' V

1893-97 1903-04 1907-08

Wholesale  prices  in  America  16  0  9

Discount  rates  in  New  York,  60-90  days  '2  25  41

3  890-95 1900-04 1907-08

Wholesale  prices  in  England 1'5  J  11

Market  discount  rates  in  London  153  46  107

Wholesale  prices  in  France  15  8  14

Market  discount  rates  in  Paris  47  48  59

Wholesale  prices  in  Germany  21  8  8

Market  discount  rates  in  Berlin  59  4*5  54

32  The  evidence  of  the  tables  (Chapter  IV,  i  and  ii)  is  as  follows:  , .  , ^ ^.  ^

Number  of  points  by  which
relative  prices  and  relative
I  fell


1893-95 1903-04


Wholesale  prices  in  America  12  0

Eelative  wages  in  America  ^^^f^^  +^1^^  ^^-^-^-^^

Wholesale  prices  in  England  '^o  I  t

Eelative  wages  in  England  4  a  i


33  Compare  Chapter  XI,  i,  3,


564  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

most  of  by-products,  to  supervise  the  work  of  every  employe,  to  adjust  each
successive  step  of  each  process  accurately  to  the  other  steps,  and  to  make  what-
ever changes  in  .organization  promise  a  saving  of  cost  without  entailing  a  heavy
investment  of  fresh  capital.


2.  The  Re-adjustment  of  Supplementary  Costs

Reductions  in  prime  costs  begin  to  be  made  promptly  upon  the  passing  of
prosperity.  But,  for  a  while  at  least,  they  are  accompanied  by  an  increase  of
supplementary  costs  per  unit  of  product,  arising  from  the  distribution  of  the
existing  fixed  charges  over  a  declining  volume  of  sales.  To  determine  the  aver-
age net  effect  of  these  opposing  changes  upon  total  cost  per  unit  is  impossible  for
lack  of  information,  detailed  in  character  and  extensive  in  scope,  regarding  the
quantitative  importance  of  the  numerous  factors  involved.  But,  whatever  these
net  effects  may  be,  it  is  certain  that  the  policy  of  making  selling  prices  cover
total  costs,  is  perforce  abandoned  by  many  enterprises  when  business  enters
upon  the  phase  of  depression.  Competition  for  what  business  is  to  be  had  often
results  in  a  temporary  disregard  of  supplementary  costs  and  the  basing  of  quota-
tions upon  estimates  which  include  little  beyond  the  prices  of  materials,  freight,
andJabor,

Obviously  such  a  disregard  of  supplementary  costs  in  fixing  selling  prices
cannot  continue  long  without  threatening  insolvency.  Unless  the  coupons  of
bond-holders  and  the  rents  of  lessors  are  met,  the  creditors  will  secure  the
appointment  of  a  receiver  to  manage  the  property  in  their  interest.  But,  under
the  modern  form  of  business  organization,  insolvency  does  not  necessarily
involve  suspension  of  operations.  When  a  considerable  sum  has  been  invested
in  real  estate,  plant,  machinery,  or  good  will,  so  specialized  in  form  that  it  cannot
be  diverted  to  other  uses  without  serious  loss,  then  an  insolvent  concern  is
usually  kept  running  so  long  as  it  can  pay  even  a  slight  margin  above  the  indis-
pensable current  expenses.  The  financial  obligations  of  the  enterprise,  however,
are  so  re-organized  as  to  turn  the  temporary  disregard  of  supplementary  costs
into  a  permanent  reduction  of  fixed  charges.  The  bond-holders  may  be  forced
to  concede  a  reduction  in  the  rate  of  interest  or  in  the  nominal  value  of  their
principal,  lessors  may  be  compelled  to  scale  down  their  rents,  preferred  shares
may  be  turned  into  common,  outsiders  may  buy  the  whole  company  under  fore-
closure at  a  price  which  leaves  little  for  the  common  stockholders,  or  some  other
plan  of  re-organization  may  be  arranged  among  the  various  parties  at  interest
which  enables  the  enterprise  to  continue  its  business  with  some  prospect  of
meeting  all  of  its  obligations."

SI  Compare, for  example, Stuart  Daggett 's  detailed study  of  Railroad  Reorganization (Harvard Economic
Studies,  vol.  IV),  Boston,  1908,


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  565

Such  forced  reductions  of  supplementary  costs  are  a  common  feature  not
only  of  the  months  succeeding  a  crisis  but  also  of  the  years  of  depression  which
follow.  For  many  enterprises  which  weather  the  violent  storm  are  so  weakened
that  they  cannot  withstand  the  prolonged  strain  of  low  prices  and  meager  busi-
ness. And  both  the  weak  enterprises  still  struggling  desperately  to  avoid  receiv-
erships and  the  other  enterprises  which  have  been  re-organized  are  particularly
dangerous  competitors  for  solvent  concerns,  and  make  it  difficult  for  the  latter
to  avoid  a  similar  compromise  with  their  creditors.  But  just  so  fast  as  the
process  of  re-organization  is  carried  through,  the  prospects  of  profits  are
improved  by  the  scaling  down  of  costs.

A  somewhat  similar,  but  less  drastic,  reduction  of  supplementary  costs  is
gradually  effected  in  many  enterprises  which  never  pass  through  the  hands  of
receivers.  Reluctantly  managers  write  down  the  book  value  of  plants  and  equip-
ment that  are  not  paying  their  way.  New  men  buy  into  old  enterprises  and
estimate  the  selling  prices  they  must  charge  on  the  basis  of  the  moderate  sums
they  have  invested.  As  old  leases  run  out  they  may  well  be  renewed  at  lower
rents,  and  as  old  bonds  mature  they  may  well  be  replaced  at  lower  rates  of  inter-
.est.  More  in  general,  business  men  are  constrained  to  admit  to  themselves  and
to  their  bankers  that  the  capitalized  values  of  their  enterprises  have  suffered
somewhat  the  same  decline  that  the  stock  exchange  records  for  listed  securities.
While  these  reduced  capitalizations  arise  primarily  from  the  reduction  of  profits,
they  also  become  the  basis  for  reduced  expectations  of  return,  and  justify  a
smaller  capital  charge  in  fiixing  selling  prices.

Finally,  such  new  enterprises  as  may  be  set  on  foot  during  depression  have
the  advantage  not  only  of  low  prime  costs,  conferred  by  improved  processes  and
machinery,  but  also  of  low  supplementary  costs,  conferred  by  the  low  prices  for
construction  work  and  the  low  interest  on  bonds.

3.  The  Increase  in  the  Physical  Volume  of  Business

E^ddence  has  been  cited  to  show  that  the  physical  volume  of  business  reaches
its  lowest  ebb  within  the  first  or  second  year  after  a  crisis.'"  In  other  words,
the  second  or  third  year  of  depression  regularly  ushers  in  an  expansion  in  the
quantity  of  goods  turned  out  by  factories,  transported  by  railways,  and  handled
by  merchants.  What  are  the  processes  which  bring  about  this  result  in  the  face
of  the  many  discouraging  circumstances  of  dull  times?

First,  the  accumulated  stocks  of  goods  carried  over  from  the  preceding
period  of  prosperity  are  gradually  disposed  of.  Even  when  current  consump-
tion is  small,  manufactories  and  merchants  can  reduce  their  stocks  of  raw
materials  and  finished  wares  by  filling  orders  chiefly  from  what  is  on  hand  and
confining  purchases  to  the  small  quantities  needed  to  keep  full  assortments.

35  See  section  i,  2,  A,  of  the  present  chapter.


566  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

But,  when  these  stocks  have  once  been  reduced  to  the  smallest  dimensions
allowed  by  the  regular  filling  of  orders,  then  current  purchases  and  current
production  are  perforce  increased,  even  though  current  consumption  does  not
grow  larger.

In  somewhat  similar  fashion,  families  can  get  on  for  a  time  with  the  clothing
and  furnishings  purchased  in  the  later  days  of  prosperity,  and  business  enter-
prises can  get  on  for  a  time  with  their  old  equipment — not,  however,  for  an
indefinite  time.  As  these  articles  are  gradually  worn  out  and  discarded,  it
becomes  necessary  to  buy  new  ones,  if  money  can  be  found  for  the  purpose.
Then  the  demand  for  both  consumers'  and  producers'  goods  begins  to  pick  up.

Third,  the  aggregate  volume  of  consumers'  demand  depends  in  large  part
upon  the  number  of  the  population,  and  this  number  has  been  shown  to  increase
at  almost  the  same  rate  in  depression  as  in  good  times.^"  This  factor  counts
for  nothing  in  France,  but  for  much  in  Germany,  and  for  something  in  England.
Its  importance  in  the  United  States  is  uncertain,  because  we  have  no  adequate
statistics  comparing  the  excess  of  births  over  deaths  with  the  excess  of  emigrants
over  immigrants.

Once  more,  the  development  of  new  tastes  among  consumers,  the  appearance
of  new  materials,  and  the  introduction  of  new  processes  do  not  come  to  a  stand-
still even  in  times  of  depression.  While  the  changes  in  the  character  of  demand
which  result  may  restrict  the  market  for  commodities  which  are  being  super-
seded, the  losses  of  the  producers  of  the  latter  are  gradually  written  off,  and
there  remains  over  the  stimulating  effect  of  aetivit)^  among  producers  of  the
novelties.

Finally,  and  most  important  of  all,  the  later  stages  of  depression  see  a
marked  increase  in  the  demand  for  new  construction.  This  phase  of  the  devel-
opment requires  more  extended  notice.

While  the  amount  of  funds  saved  each  year  by  the  people  of  any  country
probably  declines  in  hard  times,  certainly  saving  never  ceases." For  a  time,
however,  the  fresh  accumulations  of  capital  are  not  accompanied  by  a  corre-
sponding volume  of  fresh  investments  in  business  ventures. Refunding  oper-
ations make  a  large  proportion  of  the  business  done  in  the  investment  market,
for  governments  and  business  enterprises  alike  are  keen  to  secure  the  advantage
of  the  low  rates  of  interest  which  prevail.^* Of  the  money  seeking  fresh  invest-
ments, whether  it  be  the  product  of  current  savings  or  of  refunding,  much  goes
ir)to  the  purchase  of  property  which  embarrassed  holders  are  forced  to  sell.
That  is,  certainly  a  considerable  and  probably  an  extremely  large  share  of  the
liquid  capital  provided  by  certain  individuals  in  seasons  of  depression  is  used
merely  to  cancel  part  of  the  losses  incurred  by  other  individuals. Such  invest-
so  See  Chapter  V,  i.
3T  See  Chapter  VIII,  i.
38  Compare  the  tables  in  Chapter  VIII,  ii,  3.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  567

ments  represent  a  redistribution  of  ownership,  but  no  new  creations  of  indus-
trial equipment.'"  Finally,  a  part  of  the  funds  which  in  the  prosperous  phase
of  the  business  cycle  seek  the  investment  market  are  left  during  the  earlier
stages  of  depression  on  deposit  in  the  banks,  and  used,  so  far  as  a  use  can  be
foimd,  in  making  short-time  loans.*"

The  changes  in  the  business  situation  which  in  the  later  stages  of  depression
direct  investment  funds  once  more  to  the  construction  of  new  equipment  are
numerous.  (1)  When  most  of  the  weaker  owners  of  business  enterprises  have
once  been  squeezed  out  and  forced  to  sell  their  holdings,  and  when  the  necessary
corporate  reorganizations  have  been  largely  completed,  the  opportunities  to
buy  into  old  enterprises  on  favorable  terms  become  less  mmierous.  Thereafter
more  of  the  men  seeking  business  openings  build  for  themselves.  (2)  The
timidity  inspired  among  investors  by  the  crisis  gradually  wears  off,  and  capi-
talists large  and  small  become  more  ready  to  risk  their  funds  in  business
ventures.  (3)  The  low  rate  of  interest  at  which  money  can  be  borrowed  on
long  time,  provided  good  security  be  offered,  means  that  the  more  enterprising
spirits  can  secure  whatever  funds  they  require  in  addition  to  their  own  means
on  teims  which  will  keep  the  fixed  charges  moderate  for  years  to  come.  (4)
Even  more  important  in  most  cases  in  its  bearing  on  fixed  charges  is  the  low
initial  cost  at  which  contracts  for  construction  can  be  let  when  labor  is  efficient
and  materials  are  cheap.  (5)  Under  the  influence  of  systematic  research,  in
recent  times  the  progress  of  industrial  technique  has  become  fairly  steady  and
continuous.  Hence,  the  longer  the  period  during  which  new  construction  is
checked  by  business  depression  the  greater  becomes  the  accumulation  of  tech-
nical improvements  of  which  new  plants  can  take  advantage,  and  therefore  the
greater  becomes  the  inducement  to  invest  in  new  equipment.  (6)  The  gradual
growt>h  of  the  current  demand  for  consumers'  and  producers'  goods,  brought
about  in  the  manner  already  explained,  stimulates  the  investment  demand  with
which  we  are  now  dealing.  When  current  orders  begin  to  increase,  the  man-
agers of  existing  enterprises  are  encouraged  to  begin  the  improvements  in  their
facilities  which  perhaps  have  been  planned  for  several  years,  and  the  organizers
of  new  ventures  are  encouraged  to  let  their  contracts.  Both  sets  of  investors
are  anxious  to  make  their  bargains  for  construction  before  the  cost  of  building
advances  and  to  have  their  new  plants  ready  for  operation  by  the  time  a  revival
of  activity  becomes  pronounced.

Under  the  combined  pressure  of  these  various  business  forces,  then,  a
marked  increase  in  the  demand  for  all  the  innumerable  kinds  of  commodities
and  labor  required  for  construction  occurs  in  the  later  stages  of  depression.
Of  course  this  increase  in  the  volume  of  demand  from  investors  causes  fuller
employment  of  labor  and  assures  more  orders  to  the  existing  producers  of  pro-

39  Compare  the  digest  of  Johannsen 's  theory  of  "impair  savings"  in  Chapter  I,  ii,  14.
■">  See  section  i,  2,  B,  above.


568  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVEESITT  OF  CALIFORNIA

ducers'  goods.  There  follows  a  new  expansion  in  consumers'  and  producers'
demand,  and  this  expansion  reacts  in  the  way  suggested  to  enhance  investment
demand.  Thus  the  increase  in  the  volume  of  business  is  cumulative  in  its
growth.  Unless  the  processes  which  we  have  traced  are  checked  by  some  unto-
ward event  such  as  a  serious  failure  of  crops,  within  a  year  or  two  they  carry
the  physical  volume  of  business  to  higher  levels  than  those  reached  at  the  close
of  the  preceding  period  of  prosperity.*^


4.  The  End  of  Liquidation

The  various  processes  just  described  combine  reductions  in  both  prime  costs
and  fixed  charges  with  an  expansion  in  the  physical  volume  of  business.  In
this  fashion  depression  ultimately  breeds  prosperity.  For  of  course  these
changes  increase  prospective  profits,  and  in  the  money  economy  prospective
profits  are  the  great  incentive  to  activity.

But  for  many  months  the  processes  by  which  depression  works  its  own
ending  are  kept  down  to  a  slow  pace  by  the  continued  fall  of  prices.  For  the
data  presented  in  Chapters  IV  and  V  indicate  that  the  price  level  and  even
the  pecuniary  volume  of  business  usually  continue  to  fall  for  some  time  after
the  physical  volume  of  business  has  begun  to  rise.  The  rate  at  which  prices
fall,  however,  is  slower  in  the  later  than  in  the  earlier  stages  of  depression.
And  the  effect  of  the  fall  in  reducing  profits  is  mitigated,  if  not  wholly  offset,
by  the  increasing  volume  of  sales.  For  to  the  various  factors  already  men-
tioned as  reducing  supplementary  costs  per  unit  another  factor  is  added  when
fixed  charges  begin  to  be  distributed  over  an  increasing  output.

The  business  situation  into  which  depression  evolves,  then,  differs  radically
from  the  situation  in  which  it  began.  Most  of  the  heavy  stocks  of  goods  which
hung  menacingly  over  the  market  at  the  close  of  the  crisis  have  been  disposed
of,  so  that  every  increase  of  consumption  leads  to  an  equivalent  increase  of
production.  The  fioating  debts  and  the  heavy  fixed  charges  which  threatened
widespread  insolvency  have  been  paid  off,  written  down,  or  otherwise  read-
justed, so  that  the  enterprises  can  once  more  live  within  their  incomes.  Even
the  great  mass  of  business  enterprises  which  did  not  change  hands  and  which
made  no  compromise  with  their  creditors  are  now  assigned  a  lower  capitalized
value  corresponding  to  their  moderate  expectaltions  of  profit.  The  volume  of
credits  outstanding  is  well  within  the  limits  which  mercantile  houses  and  banks
can  support.  Investors  have  ceased  to  be  foolishly  timid,  and  they  have  not
yet  become  recklessly  bold.  Prices  are  still  declining,  but  at  a  slackening  pace.
Costs  of  doing  business  have  been  so  reduced  as  to  leave  a  narrow  margin  of
profit  despite  the  low  scale  of  selling  prices. The  demand  for  goods  of  many

■11  Compare  the  various  indices  of  the  volume  of  business  presented  in  Chapter  V.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  569

kinds — though  not  such  as  to  tax  the  existing  equipment  to  its  utmost — ^is
already  large  and  growing  steadily  larger.*^

In  fine,  this  business  situation  is  that  described  at  the  beginning  of  Chapter
X — the  situation  out  of  which  a  revival  of  activity  presently  develops.  Having
thus  come  round  again  to  its  point  of  departure,  after  tracing  the  processes  of
cumulative  change  by  which  prosperity  breeds  crisis,  crisis  evolves  into  depres-
sion, and  depression  paves  the  way  for  a  return  of  prosperity,  the  present  theory
of  business  cycles  has  reached  its  appointed  end.

*2  Alone  among  the  writers  reviewed  in  Chapter  I,  Veblen  holds  that  the  business  conditions  of  depression
tend  to  become  chronic  rather  than  to  breed  prosperity.  (Section  ii,  10.)  The  basis  for  this  view  is  that  the
continual  improvements  in  industrial  technique  give  new  plants  such  an  advantage  in  cost  over  their  older
competitors  as  to  keep  the  majority  of  existing  enterprises  always  in  difficulties.  The  one  remedy  which  Veblen
sees  for  this  condition,  apart  from  the  favorable  accidents  which  occasionally  interrupt  the  downward  trend
of  prices,  is  an  ever  more  thorough  coalition  or  combination  among  business  men  to  restrain  competition.

The  reason  why  business  history  has  not  yet  answered  this  expectation  is  that  other  price-making  factors
have  proved  more  potent  than  technical  improvements  in  methods  of  production.  Among  these  other  fac-
tors, the  one  on  which  Veblen  lays  stress — extension  of  combinations  in  restraint  of  competition — certainly  re-
quires attention.  But  the  factors  mentioned  above — particularly  the  reduction  in  the  operating  and  supple-
mentary costs  of  the  old  enterprises  themselves,  and  the  increase  of  demand  for  construction  work — have  so
tar  exercised  a  powerful  influence  in  restoring  conditions  which  promise  a  fair  margin  of  profit.

To  forecast  the  future  relative  force  of  the  numerous  factors  involved  is  far  from  easy.  Of  course  de-
pressions bred  prosperity  in  the  days  before  competition  had  been  severely  shackled  by  combination;  but  in
those  days  the  progress  of  technique  was  seemingly  less  steady  than  it  is  now.  Should  the  further  progress
of  combination  be  checked,  however,  it  is  still  probable  that  the  changes  which  depression  brings  about  in  the
efficiency  of  labor,  in  the  policy  of  investors,  in  the  capitalization  of  corporations,  in  the  relative  prices  of
finished  products  and  raw  materials,  etc.,  would  continue  to  over-balance  the  depressing  influence  exercised  by
the  introduction  of  improved  processes  and  machinery.


1^

CHAPTER  XIV


THE  WIDER  ASPECTS  OP  BUSINESS  CYCLES
I.  Summary  of  the  Pbeoeding  Theoey  of  Bijsi^^ess  Cycles

The  theory  of  business  cycles  presented  in  Chapters  X-XIII  is  a  descriptive
analysis  of  the  processes  of  cumulative  change  by  which  a  revival  of  activity
/  develops  into  intense  prosperity,  by  which  this  prosperity  engenders  a  crisis,  by
which  crisis  turns  into  depression,  and  by  which  depression,  after  growing  more
severe  for  a  time,  finally  leads  to  such  a  revival  of  activity  as  that  with  which
the  cycle  began.

This  analysis  rests  primarily  upon  an  elaborate  statistical  enquiry  into  the
phenomena  of  recent  cycles  in  the  United  States,  England,  Prance,  and
Grermany.  The  statistical  line  of  attack  was  chosen  because  the  problem  is  essen-
tially quantitative  in  character,  involving  as  it  does  the  relative  importance  of
divers  forces  which  are  themselves  the  net  resultants  of  innumerable  business
decisions.  The  selection  of  statistical  data,  the  methods  of  presentation,  and
the  co-ordination  of  the  results  were  determined  in  large  part  by  ideas  borrowed
from  theoretical  writers  or  from  financial  journals.  But  all  the  tables  of  figures
and  all  the  borrowed  ideas  were  fitted  into  a  framework  provided  by  a  study
of  the  economic  organization  of  to-day,  which  showed  that  the  industrial  process
of  making  and  the  comctnercial  process  of  distributing  goods  are  thoroughly
subordinated  to  the  business  process  of  making  money.

The  theory  derived  from  these  materials  has  filled  so  many  pages  that  a
summary  may  prove  serviceable.  There  is  always  danger,  however,  that  a
plausible  summary  may  carry  too  much  weight.  Readers  who  have  looked  over
Chapter  I  -will  appreciate  how  easy  it  is  to  make  many  dissimilar  explanations
of  crises  sound  convincing  when  attention  is  confined  to  a  restricted  range  of
phenomena.  Only  by  putting  any  theory  to  the  practical  test  of  accounting  for
actual  business  experience  can  its  value  be  determined.  The  case  for  the  present
theory,  therefore,  and  also  the  case  against  it,  is  to  be  found  not  in  the  easy
summary  which  follows,  but  in  the  difficult  chapters  which  precede,  or  better
still  in  an  independent  effort  to  use  it  in  interpreting  the  ceaseless  ebb  and  flow
of  economic  activity.


[  570  ]


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  571

1.  The  Cumulation  of  Prosperity

With  whatever  phase  of  the  business  cycle  analysis  begins,  it  must  take  for
granted  the  conditions  brought  about  by  the  preceding  phase,  postponing
explanation  of  these  assumptions  until  it  has  worked  around  the  cycle  and
come  again  to  its  starting  point.

A  revival  of  activity,  then,  starts  with  this  legacy  from  depression :  a  level
of  prices  low  in  comparison  with  the  prices  of  prosperity,  drastic  reductions
in  the  costs  of  doing  business,  narrow  margins  of  profit,  liberal  bank  reserves,
a  conservative  policy  in  capitalising  business  enterprises  and  in  granting  credits,
moderate  stocks  of  goods,  and  cautious  buying.

For  reasons  which  will  appear  in  the  sequel,  such  conditions  are  accompanied
by  an  expansion  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade.  Though  slow  at  first,  this
expansion  is  cumulative.  Now  it  is  only  a  question  of  time  when  an  increase
in  the  amount  of  business  transacted  which  grows  more  rapid  as  it  proceeds
will  turn  dullness  into  activity.  Left  to  itself,  this  transformation  is  effected
by  slow  degrees ;  but  it  is  often  hastened  by  some  propitious  event  arising  from
other  than  domestic  business  sources,  such  as  exceptionally  profitable  harvests,
Tieavy  purchases  of  supplies  by  government,  or  a  marked  increase  in  the  export
demand  for  the  products  of  home  industry.

Even  when  a  revival  of  activity  is  confined  at  first  within  a  narrow  range  of
industries  or  within  some  single  section  of  the  country,  it  soon  spreads  to
other  parts  of  the  business  field.  For  the  active  enterprises  must  buy  more
materials,  wares,  and  current  supplies  from  other  enterprises,  the  latter  from
still  others,  and  so  on  without  assignable  limits.  Meanwhile  all  enterprises
which  become  busier  employ  more  labor,  use  more  borrowed  money,  and  make
higher  profits.  There  results  an  increase  in  family  incomes  and  an  expansion
of  consumers'  demand,  which  likewise  spreads  out  in  ever  widening  circles.
Shopkeepers  pass  on  larger  orders  for  consumers'  goods  to  wholesale  merchants,
manufacturers,  importers,  and  producers  of  raw  materials.  All  these  enterprises
require  more  supplies  of  various  kinds  for  handling  their  growing  trade,  and
increase  the  sums  which  they  pay  out  to  employes,  lenders,  and  proprietors —
thus  stimulating  afresh  the  demand  for  both  producers'  and  consumers'  goods.
Soon  or  late  this  expansion  of  orders  reaches  back  to  the  enterprises  from
which  the  impetus  to  greater  activity  was  first  received,  and  then  this  whole
complicated  series  of  reactions  begins  afresh  at  a  higher  pitch  of  intensity.
All  this  while,  the  revival  of  activity  is  instilling  a  feeling  of  optimism  among
business  men,  and  this  feeling  both  justifies  itself  and  heightens  the  forces  which
engendered  it  by  making  everyone  readier  to  buy  with  freedom.

"While  the  price  level  is  often  sagging  slowly  when  a  revival  begins,  the
cumulative  expansion  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  presently  stops  the  fall
and  starts  a  rise. For,  when  enterprises  have  in  sight  as  much  business  as  they


572  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

can  handle  with  their  existing  facilities  of  standard  efficiency,  they  stand  out
for  higher  prices  on  additional  orders.  This  policy  prevails  even  in  the  most
keenly  competitive  trades,  because  additional  orders  can  be  executed  only  by
bi'eaking  in  new  hands,  starting  old  machinery,  buying  new  equipment,  or
making  some  other  change  which  involves  increased  expense.  The  expectation
of  its  coming  hastens  the  advance.  Buyers  are  anxious  to  secure  or  to  contract
for  large  supplies  while  the  low  level  of  quotations  continues,  and  the  first
definite  signs  of  an  upward  trend  of  quotations  brings  out  a  sudden  rush  of
orders.

Like  the  increase  in  the  physical  volume  of  business,  the  rise  of  prices
spreads  rapidly ;  for  every  advance  of  quotations  puts  pressure  upon  someone
to  recoup  himself  by  making  a  compensatory  advance  in  the  prices  of  what  he
has  to  sell.  The  resulting  changes  in  prices  are  far  from  even,  not  only  as
between  different  commodities,  but  also  as  between  different  parts  of  the  system
of  prices.  Retail  prices  lag  behind  wholesale,  the  prices  of  staple  consumers'
behind  the  prices  of  staple  producers '  goods,  and  the  prices  of  finished  products
behind  the  prices  of  their  raw  materials.  Among  raw  materials,  the  prices
of  mineral  products  refiect  the  changed  business  conditions  more  regularly  than
do  the  prices  of  raw  animal,  farm,  or  forest  products.  Wages  rise  often  more
promptly,  but  always  in  less  degree  than  wholesale  prices;  discount  rates  rise
sometimes  more  slowly  than  commodities  and  sometimes  more  rapidly ;  interest
rates  on  long  loans  always  move  sluggishly  in  the  early  stages  of  revival,  while
the  prices  of  stocks — particularly  of  common  stocks — both  precede  and  exceed
commodity  prices  on  the  rise.  The  causes  of  these  differences  in  the  promptness
and  the  energy  .with  which  various  classes  of  prices  respond  to  the  stimulus  of
business  activity  are  found  partly  in  differences  of  organization  between  the
markets  for  commodities,  labor,  loans,  and  securities;  partly  in  the  technical
circumstances  affecting  the  relative  demand  for  and  supply  of  these  several
classes  of  goods ;  and  partly  in  the  adjusting  of  selling  prices  to  changes  in  the
aggregate  of  buying  prices  which  a  business  enterprise  pays,  rather  than  to
changes  in  the  prices  of  the  particular  goods  bought  for  resale.

In  the  great  majority  of  enterprises,  larger  profits  result  from  these  divergent
price  fluctuations  coupled  with  the  greater  physical  volume  of  sales.  For,  while
the  prices  of  raw  materials  and  of  wares  bought  for  resale  usually,  and  the  prices
of  bank  loans  often,  rise  faster  than  selling  prices,  the  prices  of  labor  lag  far
behind,  and  the  prices  which  make  up  supplementary  costs  are  mainly  sterotyped
for  a  time  by  old  agreements  regarding  salaries,  leases,  and  bonds.

This  increase  of  profits,  combined  with  the  prevalence  of  business  optimism,
leads  to  a  marked  expansion  of  investments.  Of  course  the  heavy  orders  for
machinery,  the  large  contracts  for  new  construction,  etc.,  which  result,  swell
still  further  the  physical  volume  of  business,  and  render  yet  stronger  the  forces
which  are  driving  prices  upward.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  573

Indeed,  the  salient  characteristic  of  this  phase  of  the  business  cycle  is  the
cumulative  working  of  the  various  processes  which  are  converting  a  revival
of  trade  into  intense  prosperity.  Not  only  does  every  increase  in  the  physical
volume  of  trade  cause  other  increases,  every  convert  to  optimism  makes  new
converts,  and  every  advance  of  prices  furnish  an  incentive  for  fresh  advances  ;
but  the  growth  of  trade  also  helps  to  spread  optimism  and  to  raise  prices,  while
optindsm  and  rising  prices  both  support  each  other  and  stimulate  the  growth
of  trade.  Finally,  as  has  just  been  said,  the  changes  going  forward  in  these
three  factors  swell  profits  and  encourage  investments,  while  high  profits  and
heavy  investments  react  by  augmenting  trade,  justifjdng  optimism,  and  raising
prices.

2.  Mow  Prosperity  Breeds  a  Crisis

While  the  processes  just  sketched  work  cumulatively  for  a  time  to  enhance
prosperity,  they  also  cause  a  slow  accumulation  of  stresses  Avithin  the  balanced
system  of  business — stresses  which  ultimately  undermine  the  conditions  upon
which  prosperity  rests.

Among  these  stresses  is  the  gradual  increase  in  the  costs  of  doing  business.
The  decline  in  supplementary  costs  per  unit  of  output  ceases  when  enterprises
have  once  secured  all  the  business  they  can  handle  with  their  standard  equipment,
and  a  slow  increase  of  these  costs  begins  when  the  expiration  of  old  contracts
makes  necessary  renewals  at  the  high  rates  of  interest,  rent,  and  salaries  which
prevail  in  prosperity.  Meanwhile  prime  costs  rise  at  a  relatively  rapid  rate.
Equipment  which  is  antiquated  and  plants  which  are  ill  located  or  otherwise
work  at  some  disadvantage  are  brought  again  into  operation.  The  price  of
labor  rises,  not  only  because  standard  rates  of  wages  go  up,  but  also  because
of  the  prevalence  of  higher  pay  for  overtime.  More  serious  still  is  the  fact  that
the  efficiency  of  labor  declines,  because  overtime  brings  weariness,  because  of
the  employment  of  "undesirables,"  and  because  crews  cannot  be  driven  at  top
speed  when  jobs  are  more  numerous  than  men  to  fill  them.  The  prices  of  raw
materials  continue  to  rise  faster  on  the  average  than  the  selling  prices  of
products.  Finally,  the  numerous  small  wastes,  incident  to  the  conduct  of
business  enterprises,  creep  up  when  managers  are  hurried  by  a  press  of  orders
demanding  prompt  delivery.

A  second  stress  is  the  accumulating  tension  of  the  investment  and  money
markets.  The  supply  of  funds  available  at  the  old  rates  of  interest  for  the
purchase  of  bonds,  for  lending  on  mortgages,  and  the  like,  fails  to  keep  pace
with  the  rapidly  swelling  demand.  It  becomes  difficult  to  negotiate  new  issues
of  securities  except  on  onerous  terms,  and  men  of  affairs  complain  of  the
"scarcity  of  capital."  Nor  does  the  supply  of  bank  loans  grow  fast  enough  to
keep  up  with  the  demand. For  the  supply  is  limited  by  the  reserves  which


574  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

bankers  hold  against  their  expanding  demand  liabilities.  Pull  employment  and
active  retail  trade  cause  such  a  large  amount  of  money  to  remain  suspended  in
active  circulation  that  the  cash  left  in  the  banks  increases  rather  slowly,  even
when  the  gold  output  is  rising  most  rapidly.  On  the  other  hand,  the  demand  for
bank  loans  grows  not  only  with  the  physical  volume  of  trade,  but  also  with
the  rise  of  prices,  and  with  the  desire  of  men  of  affairs  to  use  their  own  funds
for  controlling  as  many  business  ventures  as  possible.  Moreover,  this  demand
is  relatively  inelastic,  since  many  borrowers  think  they  can  pay  high  rates  of
discount  for  a  few  months  and  still  make  profits  on  their  turnover,  and  since
the  corporations  which  are  unwilling  to  sell  long-time  bonds  at  the  hard  terms
which  have  come  to  prevail  try  to  raise  part  of  the  funds  they  require  by
discounting  one-  or  two-year  notes.

Tension  in  the  bond  and  money  markets  is  unfavorable  to  the  continuance  of
prosperity,  not  only  because  high  rates  of  interest  reduce  the  prospective  margins
of  profit,  but  also  because  they  check  the  expansion  in  the  volume  of  trade  out
of  which  prosperity  developed.  Many  projected  ventures  are  relinquished  or
postponed,  either  because  borrowers  conclude  that  the  interest  would  absorb
too  much  of  their  profits,  or  because  lenders  refuse  to  extend  their  commitments
farther.

There  is  one  important  group  of  enterprises  which  suffers  an  especially  severe
check  from  this  cause  in  conjunction  with  high  prices — the  group  which  depends
primarily  upon  the  demand  for  industrial  equipment.  In  the  earlier  stages  of
prosperity,  this  group  usually  enjoys  a  season  of  exceptionally  intense  activity.
But  when  the  market  for  bonds  becomes  stringent,  and — what  is  often  more
important — when  the  cost  of  construction  has  become  high,  business  enterprises
and  individual  capitalists  alike  defer  the  execution  of  many  plans  for  extending
old  and  erecting  new  plants.  As  a  result,  contracts  for  this  kind  of  work  become
less  numerous  as  the  climax  of  prosperity  approaches.  Then  the  steel  mills,
foundries,  machine  factories,  copper  smelters,  quarries,  lumber  mills,  cement
plants,  construction  companies,  general  contractors,  and  the  like  find  their  orders
for  future  delivery  falling  off.  While  for  the  present  they  may  be  working  at
high  pressure  to  complete  old  contracts  within  the  stipulated  time,  they  face
a  serioLis  restriction  of  trade  in  the  near  f  utm'e.

The  imposing  fabric  of  prosperity  is  built  with  a  liberal  factor  of  safety ;  but
the  larger  grows  the  structure  the  more  severe  become  these  internal  stresses.
The  only  effective  means  of  preventing  disaster  while  continuing  to  build  is  to
raise  selling  prices  time  after  time  high  enough  to  offset  the  encroachments  of
costs  upon  profits,  to  cancel  the  advancing  rates  of  interest,  and  to  keep  investors
willing  to  contract  for  fresh  industrial  equipment.

But  it  is  impossible  to  keep  selling  prices  rising  for  an  indefinite  time.  In
default  of  other  checks,  the  inadequacy  of  cash  reserves  would  ultimately  compel
the  banks  to  refuse  a  further  expansion  of  loans  upon  any  terms. But  before  this


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  575

stage  has  been  reached,  the  rise  of  prices  is  stopped  by  the  consequences  of  its
own  inevitable  inequalities.  These  inequalities  become  more  glaring  the  higher
the  general  level  is  forced ;  after  a  time  they  threaten  serious  reduction  of  profits
to  certain  business  enterprises,  and  the  troubles  of  these  victims  dissolve  that
confidence  in  the  security  of  credits  with  which  the  whole  towering  structure  of
prosperity  has  been  cemented.

What,  then,  are  the  lines  of  business  in  which  selling  prices  cannot  be  raised
sufficiently  to  prevent  a  reduction  of  profits  ?  There  are  certain  lines  in  which
selling  prices  are  stereotyped  by  law,  by  public  commissions,  by  contracts  of  long
term,  by  custom,  or  by  business  policy,  and  in  which  no  advance,  or  but  meagre
advances  can  be  made.  There  are  other  lines  in  which  prices  are  always  subject
to  the  incalculable  chances  of  the  harvests,  and  in  which  the  market  value  of
all  accumulated  stocks  of  materials  and  finished  goods  wavers  with  the  crop
reports.  There  are  always  some  lines  in  which  the  recent  construction  of  new
equipment  has  increased  the  capacity  for  production  faster  than  the  demand
for  their  wares  has  expanded  under  the  repressing  influence  of  the  high  prices
which  must  be  charged  to  prevent  a  reduction  of  profits.  The  unwillingness  of
investors  to  let  fresh  contracts  threatens  loss  not  only  to  contracting  firms  of
all  sorts,  but  also  to  all  the  enterprises  from  whom  they  buy  materials  and
supplies.  The  high  rates  of  interest  not  only  check  the  current  demand  for  wares
of  various  kinds,  but  also  clog  the  effort  to  maintain  prices  by  keeping  large
stocks  of  goods  off  the  market  until  they  can  be  sold  to  better  advantage.  Finally,
the  very  success  of  other  enterprises  in  raising  selling  prices  fast  enough  to
defend  their  profits  aggravates  the  difficulties  of  the  men  who  are  in  trouble.
For  to  the  latter  every  further  rise  of  prices  for  products  which  they  buy  means
a  further  strain  upon  their  already  stretched  resources.

As  prosperity  approaches  its  height,  then,  a  sharp  contrast  develops  between
the  business  prospects  of  different  enterprises.  Many,  probably  the  majority,
are  making  more  money  than  at  any  previous  stage  of  the  business  cycle.  But
an  important  minority,  at  least,  face  the  prospect  of  declining  profits.  The  more
intense  prosperity  becomes,  the  larger  grows  this  threatened  group.  It  is  only
a  question  of  time  when  these  conditions,  bred  by  prosperity,  will  force  some
radical  readjustment.

Now  such  a  decline  of  profits  threatens  worse  consequences  than  the  failure
to  realise  expected  dividends.  For  it  arouses  doubt  concerning  the  security  of
outstanding  credits.  Business  credit  is  based  primarily  upon  the  capitalized
value  of  present  and  prospective  profits,  and  the  volume  of  credits  outstanding
at  the  zenith  of  prosperity  is  adjusted  to  the  great  expectations  which  prevail
when  the  volume  of  trade  is  enormous,  when  prices  are  high,  and  when  men  of
affairs  are  optimistic.  The  rise  of  interest  rates  has  already  narrowed  the
margins  of  security  behind  credits  by  reducing  the  capitalized  value  of  given
profits. When  profits  themselves  begin  to  waver  the  case  becomes  worse.


576  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Cautious  creditors  fear  lest  the  shrinkage  in  the  market  rating  of  the  business
enterprises  which  owe  them  money  will  leave  no  adequate  security  for  repayment.
Hence  they  begin  to  refuse  renewals  of  old  loans  to  the  enterprises  which  cannot
stave  off  a  decline  of  profits,  and  to  press  for  a  settlement  of  outstanding
accounts.

Thus  prosperity  ultimately  brings  on  conditions  which  start  a  liquidation
of  the  huge  credits  which  it  has  piled  up.  And  in  the  course  of  this  liquidation
prosperity  merges  into  crisis.

3,  Crises

Once  begun,  the  process  of  liquidation  extends  rapidly,  partly  because  most
enterprises  which  are  called  upon  to  settle  their  maturing  obligations  in  turn
put  similar  pressure  upon  their  own  debtors,  and  partly  because,  despite  all
efforts  to  keep  secret  what  is  going  forward,  news  presently  leaks  out  and  other
creditors  take  alarm.

While  this  financial  readjustment  is  under  way,  the  problem  of  making  profits
on  current  transactions,  is  subordinated  to  the  more  vital  problem  of  main-
taining solvency.  Business  managers  concentrate  their  energies  upon  providing
for  their  outstanding  liabilities  and  upon  nursing  their  financial  resources,
instead  of  upon  pushing  their  sales.  Tn  consequence,  the  volume  of  new  orders
falls  off  rapidly.  That  is,  the  factors  which  were  already  dimming  the  prospects
of  profits  in  certain  lines  of  business  are  reinforced  and  extended.  Even  when
the  overwhelming  majority  of  enterprises  meet  the  demand  for  payment
with  success,  the  tenor  of  business  developments  therefore  undergoes  a  change.
Expansion  gives  place  to  contraction,  though  Avithout  a  violent  wrench.  Discount
rates  rise  higher  than  usual,  securities  and  commodities  fall  in  price,  and  as
old  orders  are  completed  working  forces  are  reduced ;  but  there  is  no  epidemic
of  bankruptcies,  no  run  upon  banks,  and  no  spasmodic  interruption  of  the
ordinary  business  processes.

At  the  opposite  extreme  from  crises  of  this  mild  order  stand  the  crises  which
degenerate  into  panics.  When  the  process  of  liquidation  reaches  a  weak  link
in  the  chain  of  interlocking  credits  and  the  bankruptcy  of  some  conspicuous
enterprise  spreads  unreasoning  alarm  among  the  business  public,  then  the  banks
are  suddenly  forced  to  meet  a  double  strain — a  sharp  increase  in  the  demand
for  loans,  and  a  sharp  increase  in  the  demand  for  repayment  of  deposits.  If
the  banks  prove  able  to  honor  both  demands  without  flinching,  the  alarm  quickly
subsides.  But  if,  as  has  happened  twice  in  America  since  1890,  many  solvent
business  men  are  refused  accommodation  at  any  price,  and  if  depositors  are
refused  payment  in  full,  the  alarm  turns  into  panic.  A  restriction  of  payments
by  the  banks  gives  rise  to  a  premium  upon  currency,  to  hoarding  of  cash,  and
to  the  use  of  various  unlawful  substitutes  for  money. A  refusal  by  the  banks


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  577

to  expand  their  loans,  still  more  a  policy  of  contraction,  sends  interest  rates  up
to  three  or  four  times  their  usual  figures,  and  causes  forced  suspensions  and
bankruptcies.  There  follow  appeals  to  the  government  for  extraordinary  aid,
frantic  efforts  to  import  gold,  the  issue  of  clearing-house  loan  certificates,  and
an  mcrease  of  bank-note  circulation  as  rapid  as  the  existing  system  permits.
Collections  fall  into  arrears,  domestic-exchange  rates  are  dislocated,  workmen
are  discharged  because  employers  cannot  get  money  for  pay-rolls  or  fear  lest
they  cannot  get  pay  for  goods  when  delivered,  stocks  fall  to  extremely  low  levels,
even  the  best  bonds  decline  somewhat  in  price,  commodity  markets  are  disor-
ganized by  sacrifice  sales,  and  the  volume  of  business  is  violently  contracted.

That  crises  still  degenerate  on  occasion  into  panics  in  America,  but  not  in
England,  France,  or  Germany,  arises  prunarily  from  differences  in  banking
organization  and  practice.  In  each  of  the  three  European  countries,  the  banking
system  as  a  whole  is  so  organized  by  the  prevalence  of  branch  banking  and  the
existence  of  a  central  bank  that  reserves  which  bear  a  small  proportion  to  the
aggregate  demand  liabilities  of  all  the  ofBces  can  be  applied  when  and  where
they  are  most  needed.  The  central  bank  not  only  carries  a  reserve  which  is  far
in  excess  of  immediate  requirements  in  ordinary  times,  but  also  uses  this  reserve
boldly  in  times  of  stress,  presenting  in  both  these  respects  a  marked  contrast
to  the  policy  of  American  banks.  As  a  result,  European  business  men  need
not  fear  either  a  refusal  to  lend  or  a  restriction  of  payments  by  the  banks  on
which  they  depend.  And  panic  has  small  chance  to  develop  where  the  depositor
can  get  his  money  at  need  and  the  solvent  business  man  can  borrow.

4.  Depression

The  close  of  a  panic  is  usually  followed  by  the  re-opening  of  numerous  enter-
prises which  had  been  shut  during  the  weeks  of  severest  pressure.  But  this
prompt  revival  of  activit}^  is  partial  and  short-lived.  It  is  based  chiefly  upon
the  finishing  of  orders  received  but  not  completely  executed  in  the  preceding
period  of  prosperity,  or  upon  the  effort  to  work  up  and  market  large  stocks
of  materials  already  on  hand  or  contracted  for.  It  comes  to  an  end  as  this
work  is  gradually  finished,  because  new  orders  are  not  forthcoming  in  sufficient
volume  to  keep  the  mills  and  factories  busy.

There  follows  a  period  during  which  depression  spreads  over  the  whole  field
of  business  and  grows  more  severe.  Consumers '  demand  declines  in  consequence
of  wholesale  discharges  of  wage-earners,  the  gradual  exhaustion  of  past  savings,
and  the  reduction  of  other  classes  of  family  incomes.  With  consumers'  demand
falls  the  business  demand  for  raw  materials,  current  supplies,  and  equipment
used  in  making  consumers'  goods.  Still  more  severe  is  the  shrinkage  of
investors'  demand  for  construction  work  of  all  kinds,  since  few  individuals  or
enterprises  care  to  sink  money  in  new  business  ventures  so  long  as  trade  remains


578  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

depressed  and  the  price  level  is  declining.  The  contraction  in  the  physical
volume  of  business  which  results  from  these  several  shrinkages  in  demand  is
cumulative,  since  every  reduction  of  emplo}Tnent  causes  a  reduction  of  con-
sumers' demand,  and  every  decline  in  consumers'  demand  depresses  current
business  demand  and  discourages  investment,  thereby  causing  further  discharges
of  employes  and  reducing  consimiers '  demand  once  more.

With  the  contraction  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  goes  a  fall  of  prices.
For,  when  current  orders  are  insufficient  to  employ  the  existing  equipment  for
production,  competition  for  what  business  is  to  be  had  becomes  keener.  This
decline  spreads  through  the  regular  commercial  channels  which  connect  one
enterprise  with  another,  and  is  cumulative,  since  every  reduction  in  price
facilitates,  if  it  does  not  force,  reductions  in  other  prices,  and  the  latter
reductions  react  in  their  turn  to  cause  fresh  reductions  at  the  starting  point.

As  the  rise  of  prices  which  accompanied  revival,  so  the  fall  which  accom-
panies depression  is  characterized  by  certain  regularly  recurring  differences  in
degree.  Wholesale  prices  fall  faster  than  retail,  the  prices  of  producers '  goods
faster  than  those  of  consumers*  goods,  and  the  prices  of  raw  materials  faster
than  those  of  manufactured  products.  The  prices  of  raw  mineral  products
follow  a  more  regular  course  than  those  of  raAv  forest,  farm,  or  animal  products.
As  compared  with  general  index  numbers  of  commodity  prices  at  wholesale,
index  numbers  of  wages  and  interest  on  long-time  loans  decline  in  less  degree,
while  index  numbers  of  discount  rates  and  of  stocks  decline  in  greater  degree.
The  only  important  group  of  prices  to  rise  in  the  face  of  depression  is  that  of
high-grade  bonds.

Of  course  the  contraction  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  and  the  fall  of
prices  reduce  the  margin  of  present  and  prospective  profits,  spread  discoin-age-
ment  among  business  men,  and  check  enterprise.  But  they  also  set  in  motion
certain  processes  of  readjustment  by  which  depression  is  gradually  overcome.

The  prime  costs  of  doing  business  are  reduced  by  the  rapid  fall  in  the  prices
of  raw  materials  and  of  bank  loans,  by  the  marked  increase  in  the  efficiency  of
labor  which  comes  when  employment  is  scarce  and  men  are  anxious  to  hold
their  jobs,  and  by  closer  economy  on  the  part  of  managers.  Supplementary
costs  also  are  reduced  by  re-organizing  enterprises  which  have  actually  become
or  which  threaten  to  become  insolvent,  by  the  sale  of  other  enterprises  at  low
figures,  by  rediiction  of  rentals  and  refunding  of  loans,  by  charging  off  bad
debts  and  writing  down  depreciated  properties,  and  by  admitting  that  a  recapital-
ization of  business  enterprises — corresponding  to  the  lower  prices  of  stocks —
has  been  effected  on  the  basis  of  lower  profits.

While  these  reductions  in  costs  are  still  being  made,  the  demand  for  goods
ceases  to  shrink  and  then  begins  slowly  to  expand — a  change  which  usually
comes  in  the  second  or  third  year  of  depression.  Accumulated  stocks  left  over
from  prosperity  are  gradually  exhausted,  and  current  consumption  requires


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  579

current  production.  ClotMng,  furniture,  machinery  and  other  moderately
durable  articles  which  have  been  used  as  long  as  possible  are  finally  discarded
and  replaced.  Population  continues  to  increase  at  a  fairly  uniform  rate :  the
new  mouths  must  be  fed  and  the  new  backs  clothed.  New  tastes  appear  among
consumers  and  new  methods  among  producers,  giving  rise  to  demand  for  novel
products.  Most  important  of  all,  the  investment  demand  for  industrial  equip-
ment revives ;  for  though  saving  may  slacken  it  does  not  cease,  with  the  cessation
of  foreclosure  sales  and  corporate  re-organizations  the  opportunities  to  buy  into
old  enterprises  at  bargain  prices  become  fewer,  capitalists  become  less  timid
as  the  crisis  recedes  into  the  past,  the  low  rates  of  interest  on  long-term  bonds
encourage  borrowing,  the  accumulated  technical  improvements  of  several  years
may  be  utilized,  and  contracts  can  be  let  on  most  favorable  conditions  as  to
cost  and  prompt  execution.

Once  these  various  forces  have  set  the  physical  volume  of  trade  to  expanding
again,  the  increase  proves  ciunulative,  though  for  a  time  the  pace  of  growth  is
kept  slow  by  the  continued  sagging  of  prices.  But  while  the  latter  maintains
the  pressure  upon  business  men  and  prevents  the  increased  volume  of  orders
from  producing  a  rapid  rise  of  profits,  still  business  prospects  become  gradually
brighter.  Old  debts  have  been  paid,  accumulated  stocks  of  commodities  have
been  absorbed,  weak  enterprises  have  been  re-organized,  the  banks  are  strong —
all  the  clouds  upon  the  financial  horizon  have  disappeared.  Everything  is  ready
for  a  revival  of  activity,  which  will  begin  whenever  some  fortunate  circumstance
gives  a  sudden  fillip  to  demand,  or,  in  the  absence  of  such  an  event,  when  the
slow  growth  of  the  volume  of  business  has  filled  order  books  and  paved  the  way
for  a  new  rise  of  prices.  Such  is  the  stage  of  the  business  cycle  with  which  the
analysis  began,  and,  having  accounted  for  its  own  beginning,  the  analysis  ends.


Note

The  Relation  of  the  Preceding  Theory  of  Business  Cycles  to  the  Theories

Reviewed  in  Chapter  I

When  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  preceding  analysis,  none  of  the  theories  of  business  cycles
summarized  in  Chapter  I  seems  to  be  demonstrably  wrong,  but  neither  does  any  one  seem  to  be
wholly  adequate.  Perhaps  an  effort  to  suggest  the  limitations  of  each  theory  may  throw  addi-
tional light  upon  a  problem  which  is  dark  enough  at  best— certainly  such  an  effort  will  show  how
much  the  present  discussion  has  borrowed  from  its  predecessors.

Beveridge's  theory,  that  the  competitive  eifort  of  each  producer  to  engross  as  much  of  the
market  as  possible  for  his  own  wares  necessarily  leads  to  gluts,  puts  all  the  stress  upon  a  single
feature  in  a  set  of  processes  which  have  been  shown  to  be  exceedingly  complex.  To  do  Mr.  Bev-
eridge  justice,  he  is  far  from  professing  to  advance  an  adequate  theory  of  crises.  And  the  one
factor  which  he  does  emphasize  certainly  counts  in  the  sense  that  the  whole  course  of  business
cycles  would  be  profoundly  altered  if  competition  between  producers  were  completely  suppressed,


580  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

But  the  claims  freely  made  a  decade  since,  both  in  America  and  Germany,  that  the  development
of  trusts  and  cartels  would  put  an  end  to  crises,  have  not  been  sustained  by  business  history.  The
industries  in  which  combination  has  made  greatest  strides  toward  regulating  competition  still  feel
the  stress  caused  by  the  increasing  cost  of  labor  and  by  tension  in  the  investment  and  money
markets.  Nor  have  the  managers  of  these  great  combinations  been  able  to  avoid  a  reduction  of
profits  from  waning  demand  for  their  products  when  prosperity  has  passed  its  zenith.

The  various  forms  of  the  under-consumption  theory  have  already  been  criticized.  Their  value
lies  in  showing  one  of  the  possible  obstacles  in  the  way  of  preventing  the  encroachments  of  costs
upon  profits.  But  it  has  never  been  proven  that  consumers'  demand  falls  behind  supply  before
a  crisis  has  begun.  And  whatever  may  be  the  facts  of  this  case,  there  is  evidence  that  the  strains
which  have  actually  precipitated  the  crises  of  recent  years  have  appeared  earlier  in  other  branches
of  trade  than  those  which  cater  to  the  wants  of  consumers.^

Spiethoff 's  theory  of  the  ill-balanced  production  of  industrial  equipment  and  of  complementary
goods  supplies  two  elements  in  the  preceding  discussion.  But  here  these  elements  have  been
given  a  somewhat  different  setting.  The  under-production  of  complementary  goods  appears  in  the
guise  of  an  increase  in  the  costs  of  materials,  labor,  etc.,  so  rapid  that  it  threatens  to  reduce  pros-
pective profits.  The  over-production  of  industrial  equipment  appears  as  one  of  the  obstacles  in
the  way  of  advancing  selling  prices  sufficiently  to  offset  this  increase  in  costs.  If  this  setting  helps
to  make  the  bearing  of  Spiethoff 's  analysis  clearer,  it  also  serves  to  show  that  other  elements
besides  those  upon  which  he  enlarges  must  be  taken  into  account.

Hull's  theory  that  the  high  cost  of  construction  work  in  periods  of  intense  prosperity  causes
a  severe  decline  in  investment  demand  and  hence  a  crisis,  which  spreads  from  such  industries  as
the  steel  trade  to  all  branches  of  business,  has  been  incorporated  into  the  preceding  analysis.  But
there  it  is  combined  with  numerous  other  ideas  which  Mr.  Hull  has  neglected.

Lescure's  theory  of  variations  in  prospective  profits  combined  with  Veblen's  theory  of  the
discrepancy  between  prospective  profits  and  current  capitalization  affords  the  general  framework
of  Chapter  XI.  But  the  analysis  of  these  two  writers  has  been  developed  by  the  aid  of  sugges-
tions drawn  from  other  sources,  and  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  test  certain  of  their  assumptions
by  the  use  of  statisical  materials.

Among  the  suggestions  thus  utilized  are  those  made  by  Sombart,  Carver,  and  Irving  Fisher.
While  all  three  suggestions  belong  in  an  analysis  of  the  way  in  which  prosperity  engenders  a
decline  of  prospective  profits  and  thus  undermines  the  basis  of  credit,  no  one  of  them  can  properly
stand  alone.

Stresses  within  the  system  of  prices  may  well  arise,  as  Sombart  holds,  because  the  supply  of
organic  goods  does  not  keep  the  same  pace  as  the  supply  of  minerals  and  the  like;  but,  unless
the  preceding  analysis  is  sheer  imagination,  there  are  other  factors  at  work,  more  regular  in  their
operation  than  the  uncertainties  of  the  harvests,  and  not  less  potent  in  encroaching  upon  profits.

Carver's  theory  of  the  dissimilar  price  fluctuations  of  producers'  and  consumers'  goods  is
another  way  of  explaining  the  fact  that  prosperity  brings  on  a  rapid  increase  of  industrial  equip-
ment, and  that  a  crisis  occurs  when  the  increasing  supply  of  goods  cannot  be  sold  at  a  profit.
Of  course  this  feature  of  business  developments  has  been  taken  into  account;  but  it  is  far  from
standing  alone — a  conclusion  which  Mr.  Carver  would  be  prompt  to  recognize  were  he  dealing
with  the  problem  on  a  more  extended  scale.

Likewise,  the  lagging  adjustment  of  interest  rates  to  the  fluctuations  of  the  price  level,  utilized
bj^  Mr.  Fisher  to  explain  the  occurrence  of  crises,  is  only  one  among  several  factors  which  widen
the  margins  of  profit  in  the  early  stages  of  prosperity  and  narrow  them  at  a  later  stage.

Finally,  incidental  use  has  been  made  of  Mr.  Johannsen's  theory  of  "impair  savings."  That
is,  it  has  been  recognized  in  Chapter  XIII  that  investments  in  refunding  bonds,  in  the  securities

1  See  Chapter  XI,  iv,  2,  D.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  581

of  companies  which  are  undergoing  reorganization,  and  in  properties  sold  under  foreclosure,  have
no  such  stimulating  effect  upon  business  as  investments  in  new  industrial  equipment.  It  is  in
part — but  only  in  part — because  investments  of  the  former  type  predominate  in  the  months
succeeding  a  crisis  that  the  current  volume  of  production  falls  off.

While  the  proof  sheets  of  this  chapter  were  in  my  hands,  Mrs.  Minnie  Throop  England's
preliminary  sketch  of  her  projected  theory  of  crises  appeared  ("Economic  Crises,"  Journal  of
Political  Economy,  April,  1913).  Mrs.  England  seems  to  have  formulated  the  problem  in  much
the  same  way  that  I  have  done,  to  have  employed  like  methods,  and  to  have  reached  broadly  similar
conclusions.

II.  Diversities  Amokg  Business  Cycles  and  Their  Causes

Any  analysis  which  traces  the  general  course  of  the  processes  bringing  about
prosperity,  crisis,  and  depression,  inevitably  leaves  a  misleading  impression  of
uniformity  among  business  cycles.  As  a  matter  of  fact  these  cycles  differ
widely  in  duration,  in  intensity,  in  the  relative  prominence  of  their  various
phenomena,  and  in  the  sequence  of  their  phases.^

1.  The  Diversities

If  the  years  between  one  crisis  and  the  next  be  taken  as  the  length  of  a
business  cycle,  the  English,  French,  and  German  cycles  beginning  in  1890  lasted
ten  years,  and  those  beginning  in  1900  lasted  seven  years.  The  contemporaneous
American  cycles  have  shown  wider  variations:  three  years  from  1890  to  '93;
ten  years  from  1893  to  1903 ;  and  four  years  from  1903  to  '07.  In  view  of  these
diversities,  the  notion  that  crises  have  a  regular  period  of  recurrence  is  plainly
mistaken.

That  business  cycles  do  not  always  consist  of  a  period  of  unruffled  prosperity,
of  a  well-defined  crisis,  and  of  uninterrupted  depression  is  shown  by  American
experience  in  1893-1903.  Depression  was  broken  by  the  revival  in  1895,  and
then  aggravated  by  the  extreme  monetary  stringency  of  1896.  The  revival
which  began  in  1897  was  interfered  with  for  a  short  time  by  the  outbreak  of
war  with  Spain  in  the  spring  of  1898.  The  prosperous  phase  which  followed
was  marred  by  the  stock-exchange  troubles  of  1899  and  1901,  and  by  the  tem-
porary slackening  of  general  business  in  1900.

Of  examples  of  differences  in  intensity,  the  contrast  between  French  and
American  cycles  is  the  most  striking.  But  even  within  the  limits  of  one  country,
successive  cycles  bring  relatively  mild  crises  like  those  of  1890  and  1903  in
America  and  severe  panics  like  those  of  1893  and  1907;  relatively  brief  and
moderate  periods  of  depression  like  those  of  1891  and  1904,  and  relatively  long
and  drastic  ones  like  that  of  1894-96 ;  relatively  transient  periods  of  prosperity
like  those  of  1892  and  1909,  and  relatively  long  periods  of  intense  prosperity
like  those  of  1898-1902,  and  1905-07.


2  Compare  ' '  The  Framework  of  Part  III.


582  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Finally,  no  two  periods  of  prosperity,  crisis,  or  depression  show  just  the
same  combination  of  elements.  Speculation  is  sometimes  rampant  during  pros-
perity as  in  America  in  1901,  and  sometimes  held  firmly  in  check  as  in  England
in  1906-07.  A  contraction  of  credit  is  often  the  most  conspicuous  feature  of
crises,  as  in  the  American  panics  of  1893  and  1907 ;  while  at  other  times  it  plays
a  minor  role  in  comparison  with  the  declining  volume  of  new  business,  as  in  the
British  crisis  of  1907.  Different  branches  of  trade  and  different  sections  of
the  country  are  found  to  be  the  chief  seats  of  activity,  the  chief  sources  of  stress,
and  the  chief  sufferers  from  depression  in  successive  cycles.  Indeed,  dissimilari-
ties of  this  type  are  so  numerous  and  so  obvious  that  it  is  not  worth  while  to  cite
more  than  these  few  examples.

2.  Their  Causes

Many  of  these  divergences  among  business  cycles  are  due  to  events  which
arise  from  other  than  business  sources.  For  the  mechanism  of  the  money
economy  is  so  delicate  that  someone 's  prospects  of  profits  are  affected  by  every
day's  news.  Most  important  of  all  these  extraneous  factors  in  the  long  run  are
the  chances  of  the  weather  which  make  crops  good  or  bad,  and  so  affect  the
prices  of  farm  products,  the  purchasing  power  of  agricultural  communities,  the
earnings  of  "granger"  railways,  etc.,  etc.  The  making  of  war  or  of  peace,
disturbances  of  domestic  order,  earthquakes,  conflagrations,  epidemics,  changes
in  monetary  standards,  tariff  revisions,  governmental  policies  regarding  corpora-
tions, alterations  in  the  gold  output,  improvements  in  industrial  techniqtie,  the
opening  of  new  lands  to  settlement,  the  depletion  of  natural  resources,  the
shifting  of  trade  routes, — these  and  a  thousand  other  things  can  scarcely  fail
of  helping  or  hampering  some  business  venture.  If  the  circle  which  they  reach
be  large  and  their  effects  pronounced,  they  doubtless  give  a  peculiar  twist  to
the  business  cycle  within  which  they  fall.  Particularly  in  times  of  transition
from  one  phase  of  the  cycle  to  another,  when  the  set  of  the  current  is  uncertain,
the  influence  of  such  events  is  often  marked.  But  in  the  midst  of  prosperity,
of  crisis,  or  depression,  it  often  seems  as  if  the  business  community  pays  no
heed  to  news  which  does  not  accord  with  the  tenor  of  the  time.

Less  obvious  but  more  persisting  in  their  effect  upon  the  course  and  character
of  business  cycles  are  the  changes  continually  occurring  in  business  organization
and  practice,  and  in  the  relative  importance  of  different  industries.  For  example
both  the  extravagance  of  "booms"  and  the  violence  of  panics  have  been  tempered
by  closer  organization,  wider  knowledge,  and  firmer  policies  among  the  banks.
Again,  the  rapid  development  of  manufacturing  and  the  decline  of  railway
building  in  rank  among  American  industries  have  helped  to  make  the  business
cycles  of  1900-10  different  from  those  of  1880-90.  Once  more,  the  increasing
dominance  of  large  corporations  which  rely  upon  the  investing  public  for  their


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  583

funds  gives  greater  influence  to  the  markets  for  bonds  and  stocks  than  these
markets  exercised  in  the  days  of  family  enterprises.  The  broad  contrast  between
French  and  American  cycles  shows  how  powerfully  the  relative  development
of  thrift  or  of  enterprise  affects  the  intensity  of  both  prosperity  and  depression.
Other  changes  which  react  upon  business  cycles  are  the  extension  of  monopoly
control,  the  integration  of  industry,  the  organization  of  labor  with  its  standard-
ization of  wage  rates,  and  in  general  the  readjustment  of  business  to  meet
changes  in  the  material,  political,  or  social  environment.

The  reaction  of  such  contemporary  changes  in  economic  organization  upon
the  character  of  successive  business  cycles  may  be  difficult  to  trace.  But  each
new  change  accomplished  becomes  the  basis  upon  which  further  change  proceeds.
That  is,  the  broad  changes  of  economic  organization  are  cumulative,  like  the
lesser  changes  which  make  each  phase  of  every  business  cycle  evolve  into  its
successor.  And,  being  cumulative,  their  dominating  influence  upon  the
phenomena  of  business  cycles  stands  out  clearly  in  the  lapse  of  years.  Hence
it  is  probable  that  the  economists  of  each  generation  will  see  reason  to  recast
the  theory  of  business  cycles  which  they  learned  in  their  youth.


III.  Business  Cycles  in  Economic  Histoey

1.  The  Genesis  of  Business  Cycles

If  the  term  economic  crisis  be  made  to  cover  any  serious  disturbance  of
the  usual  processes  of  producing  and  distributing  goods,  then  such  crises  are
at  least  as  old  as  economic  records.  Destructive  "acts  of  Grod"  and  the  wasteful
wrath  of  man  often  brought  acute  distress  upon  communities  of  industrious
people  long  before  economic  organization  assumed  its  present  form  and  business
cycles  began  to  run  a  regular  course.

More  modern  in  their  character  were  the  disturbances  which  followed  the
organization  of  credit.  By  the  sixteenth  century,  for  example,  the  public  debts
of  Prance,  Spain,  Austria,  etc.,  had  attained  such  development  that  royal
repudiations  became  a  prolific  source  of  financial  crises  in  centers  like  Antwerp
and  Lyons."  The  rise  of  banking  exposed  mercantile  circles  to  still  other
dangers.  The  goldsmith  bankers  in  London,  to  cite  specific  instances,  were
subjected  to  runs  and  their  patrons  to  panics  when  the  Dutch  burnt  the  English
fleet  at  Chatham  on  the  Thames  in  1667,  and  again  in  1672  when  Charles  II
stopped  payments  from  the  Exchequer.  But,  though  such  episodes  may  fairly
be  called  financial  crises,  they  differ  from  their  recent  counterparts  both  in
the  limited  number  of  trades  which  they  affected  and  in  their  direct  dependence
upon  war  or  the  fiscal  embarrassments  of  government.

3  See  the  second  volume  of  E.  Bhrenberg's  Das  Zeitalter  der  Fugger,  Jena,  1896.


584  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Even  in  the  eighteenth  century  most  of  the  English  crises  arose  from  other
than  business  sources — though  by  this  time  England  had  definitely  assumed
the  leadership  in  economic  organization.  In  1708  the  goldsmith  bankers  took
advantage  of  reports  of  Jacobite  plots  and  of  preparations  in  Prance  for  a
descent  upon  Scotland  to  attack  the  credit  of  the  Bank  of  England.  In  1720
the  South  Sea  Bubble  burst,  ending  an  almost  incredible  mania  of  speculation
in  stocks.  The  next  crisis  occurred  in  1745,  when  the  Pretender  with  his  High-
landers penetrated  within  120  miles  of  London.  The  end  of  the  Seven  Years'
War  was  followed  in  1763  by  lively  speculation  and  collapse  upon  the  Stock
Exchange.  Again  in  1771-73  the  making  of  peace  led  to  speculation  and  a  crash.
Pive  or  six  years  later  losses  brought  on  by  the  war  with  the  American  Colonies
caused  serious  business  difficulties.  When  this  war  ended,  in  1783,  peace  once
more  gave  rise  to  a  sudden  expansion  of  business  and  the  expansion  ended  in
a  crisis.  Finally,  in  1793,  came  what  the  historian  of  these  events  calls  the
first  of  England's  great  industrial  crises,  followed  by  depression  in  general
business.*

This  brief  recital  indicates  that  business  cycles  are  much  later  in  appearing
than  economic,  or  even  strictly  financial  crises.  In  England  itself  they  seem  not
to  have  begun  before  the  close  of  the  eighteenth  century.  But  when  they  did
appear,  it  was  in  the  form  of  an  extension  over  all  branches  of  industry  of
difficulties  not  unlike  those  which  had  been  suffered  for  more  than  a  hundred
years  by  large  capitalists,  bankers,  and  speculators  in  stocks.  With  this  exten-
sion in  scope  came  a  shifting  in  the  relative  importance  of  the  causes.  In  the
past,  the  undermining  of  credit  had  usually  been  caused  by  war,  by  the  making
of  peace,  or  by  some  violation  of  financial  obligations  on  the  part  of  govern-
ment. In  the  future,  the  undermining  of  credit  was  to  be  caused  more  frequently
by  stresses  engendered  within  the  world  of  business  itself.

The  reason  for  both  of  these  changes  lay  in  the  gradual  extension  of  the
highly  organized  business  enterprise  from  its  earlier  centers  of  foreign  com-
merce, mining,  finance,  and  banking  over  the  wide  field  of  manufacturing  and
domestic  trade — an  extension  which  accompanied  the  Industrial  Revolution.  As
handicraft  gave  place  to  factories  managed  on  business  principles,  catering
to  a  wide  and  imcertain  market,  entering  freely  into  long-term  contracts,,
requii'ing  a  heavy  investment  of  fixed  capital,  and  using  borrowed  money  on  a
liberal  scale,  the  circle  of  enterprises  affected  by  financial  difficulties  grew
steadily  larger,  and  the  danger  that  financial  difficulties  would  arise  from  the
conduct  of  business  affairs  grew  steadily  greater.

Moreover,  as  manufacturing  and  domestic  trade  became  dependent  upon
the  money  and  investment  markets,  crises  began  regularly  to  be  followed  by
periods  of  liquidation  in  manufacturing  and  mercantile  circles.  But  since  the
financial  difficulties  now  arose  largely  from  the  embarrassment  of  manufacturers

4  Mentor  Bouniatian,  Studien  zur  Tlieorie  und  Geschichte  der  Wirtschaftslcrisen,  vol.  II;  Geschichte  der  Handels-
hrixen  in  England,  1640-1840,  Munich,  1908,  chapters  3-6.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  585

and  merchants,  a  thorougli-going  liquidation  on  the  part  of  the  latter  ended
the  conditions  which  had  caused  the  crisis  and  paved  the  way  for  a  resumption
of  business  activity.  And  since  both  the  accumulation  and  the  relaxing  of  these
stresses  came  about  regularly  as  a  by-product  of  business  processes,  the  irregular,
unpredictable  crises  of  the  past  turned  gradually  into  the  cycles  of  prosperity,
crisis,  and  depression  upon  which  men  have  come  to  count  and  which  they  are
beginning  to  forecast.

In  proportion  as  the  Industrial  Revolution  and  its  concomitant  changes  in
the  organization  of  commerce  and  transportation  spread  to  other  countries,  the
latter  began  to  develop  the  phenomena  of  business  cycles  already  familiar  in
England.  And  in  proportion  as  the  business  enterprise  completed  its  domina-
tion of  manufacturing,  wholesale  trade,  finance,  transportation,  mining,  and
lumbering,  and  began  to  invade  retail  trade,  the  professions,  and  agriculture,
the  cyclical  oscillations  of  expansion  and  contraction  brought  ever  larger
numbers  of  men  under  their  immediate  sway.

2.  Man's  Mastery  over  the  Workings  of  the  Money  Economy

Business  cycles,  then,  make  their  appearance  at  that  stage  of  economic  history
when  the  process  of  making  and  distributing  goods  is  organized  chiefly  in  the
form  of  business  enterprises  conducted  for  profit.

This  form  of  economic  organization  has  been  gradually  developed  out  of
earlier  forms  by  successive  generations  of  men  who  have  thought  to  gain  some
advantage  from  each  successive  step.  But  the  complicated  machinery  of  the
money  economy  has  never  been  wholly  under  the  control  of  its  inventors.  The
workings  of  the  system  are  not  fuUy  mastered  even  by  the  present  generation
of  business  men,  and  recurrently  the  financial  machinery  inflicts  grave  suffering
upon  us  who  use  it.  Because  we  have  not  learned  how  to  prevent  costs  from
encroaching  upon  profits  and  stringency  from  accumulating  in  the  money
markets,  how  to  keep  steady  the  construction  of  new  industrial  equipment,
how  to  control  the  market  capitalization  of  business  enterprises,  and  how  to
avoid  spasmodic  expansions  and  contractions  of  credits— because  our  theo-
retical knowledge  and  our  practical  skill  are  deficient  regarding  these  technical
matters,  we  cannot  maintain  prosperity  for  more  than  a  few  years  at  a  time.

Nevertheless,  within  the  past  century,  we  have  made  incontestable  progress
toward  mastery  over  the  processes  of  the  money  economy.  The  Tulip  Mania  in
HoUand,  the  South  Sea  Scheme  in  England,  and  the  Mississippi  Bubble  in
France  have  no  worthy  rivals  in  recent  decades.  Even  the  speculative  excitement
which  preceded  the  crisis  of  1873  in  the  German  states  and  in  America  has
scarcely  been  equalled  since  1890.  By  a  combination  of  various  agencies  such
as  public  regulation  of  the  prospectuses  of  new  companies,-legislation  supported
by  efficient  administration  against  fraudulent  promotion,  more  rigid  require-
ments on  the  part  of  stock  exchanges  regarding  the  securities  admitted  to  official
lists  more  efficient  agencies  for  giving  investors  information,  and  more  conserva-


586  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

tive  policy  on  the  part  of  the  banks  toward  speculative  booms,  we  have  learned
to  avoid  certain  of  the  rashest  errors  committed  by  earlier  generations.  Again,
from  hard  experience,  European  banks  at  least  have  learned  methods  of  con-
trolling a  crisis  and  preventing  it  from  degenerating  into  a  panic.  The  ' '  integra-
tion of  industry"  has  also  done  something,  though  less  than  is  often  claimed,
toward  steadying  the  course  of  business  both  by  concentrating  power  in  the
hands  of  experienced  officials,  and  by  moderating  the  extreme  fluctuations  of
prices.

3.  Proposals  for  Controlling  Business  Cycles

What  has  been  already  accomplished  in  these  directions  toward  controlling
our  business  machinery  may  well  be  the  earnest  of  greater  achievements  in  the
future.  Three  promising  lines  of  effort  are  presented  by  the  proposals  to
re-organize  the  American  banking  system,  to  use  governmental  and  railway
purchases  as  a  business  balance  wheel,  and  to  "stabilize  the  dollar."

The  first  proposal  aims  primarily  at  preventing  crises  from  degenerating
into  panics.  The  feasibility  of  accomplishing  this  aim  has  been  proven  by
European  and  Canadian  experience,  and  practical  plans  have  been  worked  out
in  detail  by  the  Monetary  Commission,  congressional  committees,  bankers'
associations,  and  private  investigators.  Indeed,  banking  reform  is  both  the
most  needed  and  the  easiest  to  accomplish  among  all  the  changes  w^hich  promise
to  increase  our  control  over  the  workings  of  the  money  economy.  But  the
literature  upon  this  subject  is  so  large  and  so  accessible  that  there  is  no  need
to  go  into  detail  in  this  book.

The  second  proposal,  to  use  govei'umental  and  railway  purchases  as  a
balance  wheel  to  steady  the  business  mechanism,  aims  primarily  at  mitigating
the  severity  of  depressions.  It  has  been  formulated  most  definitely  in  France
and  in  England.  In  1907  the  French  Minister  of  Public  Works  directed  that
inquiry  be  made  concerning  the  effect  of  crises  upon  railways.  The  report
argued  that  it  is  feasible  for  the  great  railway  systems  to  distribute  their  orders
for  rolling  stock,  etc.,  systematically  over  the  full  period  of  a  business  cycle
in  such  fashion  as  to  reduce  the  volume  of  orders  now  placed  in  busy  years  and
to  increase  the  volume  in  dull  years.  This  change  would  be  to  the  finnacial
advantage  of  the  railways  in  that  equipment  is  cheaper  to  build  in  years  of
depression,  to  the  advantage  of  shippers  in  that  a  more  timely  provision  of
rolling  stock  would  diminish  the  frequency  of  freight  blockades  and  car  famines,
and  to  the  advantage  of  the  public  in  that  the  plan  would  make  employment
steadier  in  an  important  industry.  By  way  of  applying  these  ideas  the  Minister
of  Public  Works  in  May,  1907,  invited  the  railways  to  submit  a  definite  pro-
gramme for  the  purchase  of  rolling  stock  covering  the  years  1907-1910.°

5  Notice  sur  la  periodicite  des  crises  economiques  e  ses  rapports  avee  Sexploitation  des  ehemins  de  fer
frangais.  Minitere  des  Travaux  Public.  Paris,  December,  1907.  Quite  independently,  Mr.  Carl  Snyder  has
suggested  the  financial  advisabilitj'  of  much  the  same  policy  for  the  American  railways.  New  York  Globe  and
Financial  Advertiser,  .January  3,  1913.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  587

More  ambitious  in  scope  and  different  in  emphasis  is  the  scheme  worked
out  by  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Sidney  Webb.  As  part  of  a  comprehensive  plan  for  the
prevention  of  destitution,  they  propose  that  a  portion  of  government  contracts
be  held  back  in  years  of  intense  activity  and  let  out  in  slack  years.  Dr.  A.  L.
Bowley's  figures,  on  which  they  rely,  indicate  that  if  only  3  or  4  per  cent  of
the  government's  orders  were  treated  in  this  fashion,  a  very  large  part  of  the
unemployment  now  caused  by  cyclical  depressions  might  be  counterbalanced.
Among  the  items  which  could.be  relegated  to  a  ten  years'  programme,  and
put  to  contract  only  when  trade  showed  signs  of  falling  off,  they  mention:
"...  one-half  of  the  yearly  appropriation  for  rebuilding  and  multiplying
.  .  .  government  buildings  .  .  .;  one-half  of  the  normal  annual  provision  for
such  stores  as  blankets,  canvas,  and  khaki  cloth,  of  which  there  is  always  a
large  stock ;  the  whole  (or  one-half)  of  the  sum  allocated  annually  to  the  gradual
placing  of  telegraph  wires  underground,  and  the  gradual  extension  of  the
telephone  into  every  little  village ;  the  whole  of  such  printing  as  the  reports  of
the  Historical  Manuscripts  Commission,  and  the  official  history  of  the  South
African  War;  at  least  one-half  of  the  annual  expenditure  on  developing  the
Government  forests  .  .  . ;  a  considerable  proportion  of  the  Board  of  Education
grants  for  the  building  of  new  training  colleges  and  secondary  schools;  some
part  of  the  year 's  normal  shipbuilding  .  .  . ;  at  least  one-half  of  the  annual
appropriation  for  new  rifle  ranges  and  drill  halls  for  the  Territorial  Force;
most  of  the  capital  expenditure  of  the  Congested  Districts  Board  in  Ireland,
and  so  on.  And  to  this  should  be  added,  the  whole  of  the  sums,  amounting  to
more  than  a  million  a  year,  already  placed  at  the  disposal  of  the  Development
Commissioners  and  the  Road  Board.  It  is  very  clear  [they  conclude]  that
there  is,  in  the  aggregate,  a  very  large  amount — out  of  which  the  total  of  four
millions  a  year  could  easily  be  selected — and  a  very  considerable  variety  of
expenditure  which  could,  without  any  appreciable  inconvenience,  be  rearranged
within  the  decade.  "^^

Finally,  if  Professor  Irving  Fisher's  ingenious  plan  of  "stabilizing  the
dollar"  were  adopted,  and  if  it  succeeded  in  keeping  fluctuations  of  the  price
level  within  narrow-limits,  the  course  of  business  cycles  would  doubtless  become
more  even  than  at  present.  For  if  every  rise  or  fall  in  commodity  prices  were
checked  promptly,  one  of  the  chief  factors  now  causing  changes  in  the  prospects
of  profits  would  be  practically  removed.  Of  course  there  might  still  occur
unequal  changes  in  the  relative  prices  of  raw  materials  and  finished  products,
of  consumers'  goods  at  wholesale  and  retail,  or  of  labor  and  loans,  which  would
affect  profit  margins  without  disturbing  in  equivalent  degree  the  general  index
number  used  as  a  basis  for  compensating  the  dollar.  Profits  would  also  be
subject  to  changes  arising  from  variations  in  the  volume  of  business,  in  the

saTfte  Prevention  of  Destitution  (London,  1912),  pp.  118,  119. Consult  also  the  references  given  on  p.  157.
Compare  B.  S.  Eowntree  and  B.  Lasker,  Unemployment  (London,  1911),  pp.  306-308.


588  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

efficiency  of  labor,  etc.  But  since  the  magnitude  of  the  effects  now  produced
by  these  factors  results  from  their  cimiulative  action  in  heightening  each  other's
intensity,  the  paralyzing  of  one  potent  factor  would  render  the  others  also  less
potent.

The  feasibility  of  carrying  out  these  proposals,  aside  from  banking  reform,
has  not  been  demonstrated  on  a  large  scale.  Certainly  all  three  plans  merit
careful  consideration.  They  are  brought  forward  in  this  place,  however,  merely
for  the  purpose  of  suggesting  concretely  possible  ways  in  which  man's  control
over  the  workings  of  the  money  economy  maj^  be  increased  in  the  future.

Apart  from  such  specific  reforms  in  economic  organization,  progress  lies  in
the  direction  of  bettering  our  forecasts  of  business  conditions.  For  when  coming
troubles  are  foreseen  they  may  be  mitigated  often,  and  sometimes  averted.


IV.  The  Foeecasting  of  Business  Conditions

The  uncertainty  attending  present  forecasts  of  business  conditions  arises
chiefly  from  the  imperfections  of  our  knowledge  concerning  these  conditions
in  the  immediate  past  and  in  the  present.  For,  since  business  cycles  result
from  processes  of  cumulative  change,  the  main  factors  in  shaping  tomorrow
are  the  factors  at  work  yesterdaj^  and  today.

Now  the  money  economy  affords  most  unequal  insight  into  its  own  workings
to  different  classes  of  business  men.  These  inequalities  open  a  rich  source  of
profit  to  the  favored  class,  and  their  efforts  to  make  the  most  of  their  chances
may  increase  the  violence  of  crises.  One  way  of  increasing  social  control  over
economic  activity  is  therefore  to  democratize  the  knowledge  of  current  business
conditions  already  possessed  by  a  few.  But  the  ways  and  means  to  this  end  can
be  discussed  better  after  the  present  inequalities  of  knowledge  and  their  conse-
quences have  been  set  forth.

1.  The  Exceptional  Opportunities  of  Certain  Financiers

Concerning  the  business  condition  of  crucial  importance — fluctuations  in
profits — it  is  especially  difficult  to  secure  prompt,  reliable,  and  wide  information.
There  are  certain  men  so  placed  in  the  business  world,  however,  that  they  have  a
wide  outlook  over  profits,  and  so  trained  that  they  can  draw  fairly  safe  conclu-
sions concerning  the  trend  of  the  changes  going  forward.  The  greater  capitalists
who  are  actively  participating  in  many  enterprises  and  who  have  intimate  per-
sonal relations  with  other  captains  of  industry  are  in  this  position  of  vantage,
and  so  also  are  the  managers  of  -the  largest  banks.  Doubtless  the  information
at  the  disposal  of  even  these  men  at  the  center  of  the  financial  system  leaves  much
to  be  desired  in  scope  and  accuracy. Doubtless  the  inferences  which  thev  draw


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  589

are  warped  by  their  personal  equations  and  the  forecasts  wMch  they  make  are
measurably  divergent.  But  could  these  gentlemen  be  induced  to  publish  frankly
what  they  know  concerning  the  present  and  what  they  really  expect  in  the  near
future,  it  is  probable  that  the  concensus  of  their  opinions  would  seldom  prove
far  wrong.

However,  this  superior  foresight  is  a  business  asset  of  too  much  value  to  be
given  away.  The  man  of  large  means  who  can  make  trustworthy  forecasts  of
the  coming  of  a  crisis  is  able  to  shift  his  holdings  in  such  fashion  as  to  avoid
losses  which  will  fall  upon  the  unwary  and  to  make  profits  by  having  funds  in
hand  for  buying  property  at  bargain  prices.  Not  until  his  own  affairs  have
been  thus  arranged  is  he  likely  to  take  the  public  into  his  confidence.  When
he  does  speak  it  may  well  be  with  a  view  toward  influencing  the  trend  of  senti-
ment among  lesser  business  men  and  investors  to  his  own  advantage.  The  public,
therefore,  has  good  reasons  for  reading  the  interviews  which  prominent  finan-
ciers occasionally  give  out  in  a  highly  critical  spirit.

The  advantage  enjoyed  by  this  small  group  of  major  financiers  is  not  limited
to  superior  opportunities  for  foreseeing  approaching  changes.  In  a  measure
they  can  control  the  events  they  forecast.  This  ability  arises  chiefiy  from  the
increasing  centralization  of  power  to  grant  or  withhold  credits.  On  the  one
hand,  the  rise  of  the  great  corporation  has  made  the  business  enterprises  of
strategic  importance  dependent  upon  the  metropolitan  markets  for  loans  and
securities,  rather  than  upon  local  banks  and  investors.  On  the  other  hand,
the  great  banks,  insurance  companies,  and  investment  houses  which  dominate
the  financial  markets  of  New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin  have  developed
intimate  relations  with  each  other,  and  can  be  controlled  by  a  few  small  coteries
of  financiers.  To  these  men  is  therefore  given  a  large  measure  of  power  over
the  granting  of  bank  loans,  the  floating  of  new  securities,  and  the  prices  of
outstanding  stocks  and  bonds.  This  power  they  can  use,  if  they  choose,  to
increase  the  stresses  which  prosperity  breeds.  If  they  lock  up  large  sums  of
money,  for  example,  they  reduce  the  reserves  of  banks  and  precipitate  the
downward  revision  of  credits  with  which  a  crisis  begins.  If  they  block  corpor-
ations from  raising  loans  needed  to  meet  maturing  obligations,  they  force  the
appointment  of  receivers,  beat  down  the  price  of  stocks,  and  create  a  sentiment
of  distrust  which  produces  further  consequences  of  its  own.

What  little  is  known  of  the  "inside  workings  of  high  finance"  indicates
that  this  power  has  not  yet  been  exercised  with  the  ruthless  efficiency  of  which
it  is  susceptible.  Doubtless  many  great  business  men  would  recoil  from  the  idea
of  deliberately  aggravating  a  crisis  for  their  own  gain.  Moreover,  the  financiers
who  have  most  power  over  credit  are  often  heavily  interested  in  industrial  enter-
prises, and  fear  to  lose  dividends  in  the  period  of  depression  which  would  follow
a  crisis.  A  third  deterrent  is  the  obsession  of  the  dollar  as  a  stable  measure  of
value. So  accustomed  do  business  men  become  to  treating  the  dollar  as  constant


590  MEMOIRS  OP  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

and  imputing  all  changes  in  prices  to  fluctuations  in  the  value  of  the  goods
quoted,  that  they  do  not  readily  grasp  the  money  profit  to  be  made  out  of
changes  in  the  general  level  of  prices.  Finally,  even  in  the  highest  circles  of
finance;  centralization  of  power  has  not  yet  gone  far  enough  to  guarantee
unanimity  of  action."

Among  these  deterrents  from  the  effort  to  aggravate  the  fluctuations  of
business  conditions,  two  at  least  seem  to  be  losing  their  force.  The  increasing
mobility  of  investments  is  making  it  easier  for  financiers  to  extricate  their
funds  from  industrial  entanglements  and  put  them  into  such  form  that  a  period
of  depression  can  bring  no  serious  loss.  And  the  continual  fluctuations  in  the
price  level  are  ever  demonstrating  that  dollars  are  shifting  units,  out  of  whose
fluctuations  profits  may  be  made.  It  is  therefore  quite  possible  that  financiers
may  exploit  their  opportunities  for  aggravating  crises  with  greater  energy  in
the  immediate  future  than  they  have  done  in  the  recent  past.''

If  their  efforts  in  this  direction  become  more  energetic,  it  may  be  expected
that  the  old-fashioned  capitalists  who  are  interested  primarily  in  the  uninter-
rupted conduct  of  industrial  operations  will  join  with  the  great  numbers  of
smaller  business  men  to  safeguard  themselves  from  raids  upon  credit.  Probably
the  demand  for  government  regulation,  which  is  directed  at  present  chiefly
toward  regulation  of  railway  and  industrial  corporations,  would  then  be
extended  to  regulation  of  all  the  financial  operations  concerned  with  the  granting
of  loans.  But  it  is  not  yet  clear  precisely  how  government  could  intervene  to
prevent  powerful  groups  of  financiers  from  locking  up  money  when  they  saw
fit,  from  refusing  banking  accommodation  when  they  chose,  or  from  declining
to  underwrite  new  issues  of  securities  for  corporations  out  of  favor.

Indeed,  the  increase  of  government  regulation  in  industry  may  make  the  most
aggressive  capitalists  more  eager  to  interest  themselves  primarily  in  finance
and  to  exploit  to  the  utmost  their  opportunities  of  manipulating  credit.  In
that  case  a  second  line  of  defence  may  be  followed  by  many  whose  business
interests  are  jeopardized.  If  reliable  information  concerning  profits  and  credits,
such  as  now  exists  in  partial  form  and  in  few  hands,  were  collected  and  published,
the  strategic  advantage  of  the  great  financiers  in  forecasting  crises  would  be
materially  reduced.  For  then  everyone  interested  could  take  such  measures  of
precaution  when  prosperity  was  seen  to  be  breeding  a  crisis  as  his  affairs
required  and  his  judgment  suggested.  Indeed,  everyone  within  the  measure
allowed  by  his  pecuniary  resources  might  endeavor  to  turn  the  coming  crisis  to

6  In  New  York,  for  example,  there  appear  to  be  several  groups  of  powerful  financiers,  each  group  more  or  less
firmly  cemented  together  by  family  ties  and  business  interests,  but  changing  from  time  to  time  in  personnel,
in  relative  prestige,  and  especially  in  their  relations  with  the  other  similar  groups.  Ordinarily  each  group  acts
more  or  less  independently,  and  frequently  one  group  engages  in  a  bitter  contest  with  some  rival.  Sometimes
such  contests  bring  about  grave  disturbances  in  the  business  world,  as  when  the  fight  between  the  Hill  and
Harriman  interests  for  the  control  of  the  Burlington  railroad  led  to  the  Northern  Pacific  corner  of  May,  1901.
But  at  other  times  the  lack  of  concerted  action  is  a  factor  of  safety  in  that  it  lessens  the  control  which  any
single  power  can  exercise  over  the  financial  markets.

■^Compare  Veblen,  Theory  of  Business  Enterprise,  pp.  206-209;  Edmond  Kelly,  Twe7itieth  Century  Socialism
(New  York,  1910),  Book  II,  Chapter  VI.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  591

his  own  profit — a  situation  which  would  result  in  few  being  caught  at  a  disad-
vantage. The  field  left  open  for  predatory  exploitation  by  financiers  would  be
reduced  to  the  production  of  sudden  contractions  of  credit  of  which  the  statistics
of  profits  and  credits  had  given  no  warning.  That  is  to  say,  these  campaigns
would  run  counter  to  the  general  trend  of  business  developments  and  would
therefore  be  far  less  destructive  than  campaigns  reinforced  by  the  stresses
accumulated  by  prosperity.

But  all  this  concerns  a  problematical  future. How  do  matters  stand  with
the  business  public  at  present  1


2.  The  Business  Barometers  Available  to  the  Public

The  American  man  of  affairs  who  seeks  to  keep  informed  about  the  trend
of  business  conditions  at  large  relies  upon  the  financial  colmnns  of  his  daily
paper,  supplemented  perhaps  by  one  or  two  of  the  financial  weeklies  and  a
special  trade  journal.  The  data  which  he  can  compile  from  these  sources  cover
a  considerable  range.

Commodity  prices  at  wholesale  are  represented  both  by  actual  quotations
for  the  great  staples  of  commerce  and  by  index  numbers  like  Bradstreet's.  The
prices  of  loans  on  call  and  on  time  for  thirt}^  days  to  six  months  are  reported
for  I^ew  York,  together  with  the  market  and  bank  rates  in  London,  Paris,  and
Berlin.  The  prices  of  securities  dealt  in  on  the  New  York  exchange  are  pub-
lished in  detail,  and  to  show  the  general  trend  of  the  market  there  are  convenient
records  such  as  the  Wall  Street  Journal's  average  actual  prices  of  twenty  rail-
way and  twelve  industrial  stocks.

Fluctuations  in  the  volume  of  business  must  be  estimated  from  various
sources:  bank  clearings,  railway  gross  earnings,  number  of  idle  cars,  imports
and  exports,  coal,  copper,  pig-iron,  and  steel  output,  shipments  of  grain,  cotton,
live  stock,  etc.  Government  crop  reports  help  to  forecast  the  probable  state
of  trade  in  various  agricultural  sections.  Less  systematic  but  often  helpful  are
the  numerous  reviews  of  business  conditions  in  different  trades  and  different
cities  published  at  regular  intervals  by  several  weekly  papers.

Information  about  the  currency  is  supplied  by  the  official  estimates  of  the
monetary  stock,  by  reports  of  gold  imports  and  exports,  by  the  recorded  move-
ments of  money  into  and  out  of  the  ISTew  York  banks,  and  by  the  figures  concern-
ing production  and  industrial  consumption  of  gold,  and  the  distribution  of
money  between  the  banks  and  the  public — though  these  last  three  statements
come  but  once  a  year.  Regarding  the  banks  there  are  telegraphic  statements
from  the  central  institutions  of  Europe,  weekly  reports  from  the  clearing-
houses of  New  York,  Boston,  and  Philadelphia,  five  reports  a  year  from  the
national  banks,  and  a  variety  of  official  and  private  reports  of  banks  organized
under  state  laws.


592  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

Some  idea  of  the  volume  of  investment  and  speculation  going  on  may  be
obtained  from  the  transactions  of  the  New  York  Stock  Exchange,  the  number
of  building  permits  granted,  the  mileage  of  railway  under  construction,  and
from  the  less  systematic  news  items  concerning  fresh  contracts  let,  security
issues  offered  to  the  public,  and  the  like.

Last  and  most  important,  the  prospects  of  profits  are  best  shown  for  the
railways,  whose  gross  and  net  earnings  are  published  and  commented  upon  with
unfailing  interest.  The  earnings  of  the  United  States  Steel  Corporation  prob-
aMy  stand  second  in  general  esteem.  Then  comes  a  miscellaneous  mass  of
information  supplied  b}^  such  reports  as  the  large  corporations  engaged  in
various  branches  of  mining,  manufacturing,  and  banking  choose  to  make  public.
The  other  side  of  the  shield  is  shown  by  the  statistics  of  bankruptcy  compiled
"\^'eekly  by  two  great  mercantile  agencies.

Though  far  from  complete,  this  list  of  materials  for  gauging  the  trend  of
business  conditions  is  long.  In  fact,  it  is  all  too  long  for  the  average  business
man.  To  compile  and  to  anatyze  the  available  data  requires  more  time,  more
effort,  more  statistical  skill,  or  more  analytic  ability  than  most  men  have  to
spend  on  the  task.  Hence  the  typical  man  of  affairs  skips  the  bewildering
evidence  and  reads  only  the  summary  conclusions  drawn  by  the  editor  of  his
financial  paper  or  by  the  forecasting  agency  to  which  he  subscribes.  That  the
studying  of  business  barometers  and  the  forecasting  of  business  weather  has
itself  become  a  profitable  business  affords  convincing  proof  at  once  of  the  need
aud  the  difficulty  of  using  effectively  materials  published  to  all.  It  is  from  such
specialists,  rather  than  from  the  average  merchant  and  manufacturer,  that  we
may  expect  the  improving  and  disseminating  of  the  information  required  as  a
basis  for  perfecting  social  control  over  the  workings  of  the  money  economy.

Now,  these  professional  forecasters  attached  to  the  staffs  of  financial  papers,
investment  houses,  and  the  like  do  not  find  the  data  already  at  hand  too  elaborate.
They  have  the  time  and  the  patience,  they  will  acquire  whatever  they  now  lack
of  statistical  technique  and  analytical  skill  to  extract  the  essence  from  large
masses  of  data.  What  they  most  need  to  improve  their  forecasts  is  more  exten-
sive and  more  reliable  materials  to  work  upon.  But  it  is  also  quite  possible
to  better  the  use  they  make  of  data  already  available.

In  the  next  section  certain  suggestions  are  offered  for  the  making  of  'new
and  the  bettering  of  old  business  barometers.  Since  they  have  grown  out  of  an
effort  to  understand  recent  C3^cles,  these  suggestions  may  be  of  service  to
professional  business  forecasters  if  not  to  the  business  public.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  593

3.  Suggestions  for  Bettering  Business  Barometers

A.  NEW  BAE0METER8  NEEDED

Among  the  most  needed  additions  to  the  list  of  American  business  barometers
are  the  following :

A  general  index  number  of  the  physical  volume  of  trade  could  be  made  from
data  showing  the  production  of  certain  staples,  the  shipments  or  receipts  of
others,  the  records  of  foreign  commerce,  and  similar  sources.  Professor  Irving
Fisher  has  shown  that  much  material  for  this  purpose' is  already  incidentally
provided  in  official  documents,^  and  doubtless  much  more  could  be  had  for  an
enquiry  which  did  not  go  back  of  1900  or  1905.  Separate  averages  should  be
struck  for  the  great  departments  of  industry,  since  the  differences  between  the
relative  activity  in  different  lines  would  often  be  not  less  significant  than  the
computed  changes  in  the  total.  So  far  as  feasible  these  sub-divisions  of  the
index  number  of  the  physical  volume  of  trade  should  be  made  to  correspond
with  those  of  the  wholesale-price  index.

Mr.  Hull's  plan  for  obtaining  reports  concerning  the  voliune  of  contracts
let  for  construction  work  and  the  percentage  of  w^ork  performed  upon  old
contracts  merits  careful  consideration."  Since  it  comes  from  a  man  intimately
acquainted  with  the  business,  the  feasibility  of  the  plan  cannot  be  lightly  denied.
Few  sets  of  figures  would  give  more  insight  into  business  conditions  when
prosperity  was  verging  toward  a  crisis  or  when  depression  was  engendering
prosperity.

An  index  number  of  the  relative  prices  of  bonds  and  corresponding  figures
showing  changes  in  interest  rates  upon  long-term  loans  would  not  be  difficult
to  prepare."  Even  if  standing  alone,  these  two  series  would  possess  great  value
as  reflecting  the  attitude  of  investors;  but  they  would  be  still  more  useful  if
accompanied  by  data  concerning  the  amount  of  bonds  and  short-term  notes  put
upon  the  market  by  business  enterprises  and  by  governments,  whether  central
or  local.

Certain  states — notably  New  York  and  Massachusetts — have  made  a  begin-
ning in  the  direction  of  providing  statistics  of  unemployment.  But  we  have
no  comprehensive  data  of  this  kind  comparable  with  those  provided  by  England,
France,  and  Germany.  Their  value,  not  only  as  an  index  of  welfare  among
wage-earners,  but  also  as  reflecting  changes  of  activity  within  important  indus-
tries and  changes  in  the  demand  for  consumers'  goods  is  such  as  to  make  the
present  lack  a  matter  of  general  concern.

s  See  the  Appendix  of  his  Purchasing  Power  of  Money.

9  George  N.  Hull,  Industrial  Depressions  (New  York,  1911).

10  Compare  Chapter  IV,  iii,  1,  and  iv,  6,  above. Since  this  chapter  was  written  the  New  YorTc  Times  Annalist
has  made  a  beginning  in  this  direction.


594  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OP  CALIFORNIA

Most  to  be  desired  of  all  are  statistics  which  would  show  the  relative  fluctua-
tions of  costs  and  profits.  Unhappily,  the  difficulties  both  theoretical  and  prac-
tical in  the  way  of  obtaining  such  figures  are  particularly  grave.  But  certainly
ever}^  extension  of  public  authority  over  corporate  activity  should  be  utilized
to  secure  such  uniform  methods  of  accounting  as  have  been  imposed  upon  the
interstate  railways,  and  the  reports  obtained  by  the  government  should  be  made
available  in  some  significant  form  for  the  information  of  the  business  public.

Finally,  the  information  practically  available  in  forecasting  business  con-
ditions could  be  materially  increased  by  prompter  publication  of  many  of  the
data  supplied  by  the  government.  In  numerous  eases  extremely  valuable  figures
are  not  given  to  the  press  until  they  have  become  matters  of  historical  interest
rather  than  current  news.


B.  THE  IMPROVEMENT  OP  OLD  BAEOMETERS

The  index  numbers  of  commodity  prices  at  wholesale  would  be  more  useful
if  separate  series  were  computed  for  raw  materials  and  for  the  articles  manu-
factured from  them,  and  if  the  raw  materials  were  sub-divided  into  farm,
animal,  forest,  and  mineral  products.  The  differences  between  the  fluctuations
of  these  several  groups  would  be  of  great  assistance  in  determining  the  causes,
and  therefore  the  significance,  of  changes  in  the  grand  total.  Further,  an  index
number  of  identical  commodities  in  the  United  States,  England,  France,  and
Germany  would  facilitate  the  effort  to  follow  the  concomitant  courses  of  business
cycles  in  different  countries  and  to  anticipate  the  reaction  of  foreign  upon
domestic  conditions.

Stock  prices  should  be  computed  upon  the  index-number  plan  instead  of  in
the  current  form  of  average  actual  prices  of  shares  in  a  selected  list  of  corpora-
tions or  the  aggregate  market  values  of  certain  issues  of  securities.  To  facilitate
comparisons  the  basis  chosen  for  the  index  number  of  stocks  should  agree  with
that  chosen  for  commodity  prices.  The  distinctively  investment  stocks  should
be  separated  from  the  speculative  favorites,  and  separate  averages  should  be
struck  for  railways,  public  utilities,  and  industrials.  By  proper  selection  of
data  fluctuations  in  the  average  relative  prices  of  the  industrial  stocks  might
be  made  to  reflect  the  fortunes  of  enterprises  especially  concerned  with  the
providing  of  industrial  equipment.  In  contrast,  the  public-utility  stocks  would
be  affected  by  a  relatively  steady  consumers'  demand,  and  railway  stocks  by
the  activity  of  general  business.

The  weekly  and  monthly  reports  of  clearings  also  would  be  more  useful  if
they  were  accompanied  by  index  numbers  which  showed  the  relative  magnitude
of  the  changes  in  actual  amounts.  Separate  averages  of  these  relative  figures
should  be  provided  for  the  centers  in  which  financial  operations,  industrial
activity,  and  agricultural  conditions  are  the  dominant  factors.


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  595

Banking  statistics  would  be  more  instructive  if  the  actual  amounts  of  the
leading  items  were  supplemented  by  ratios  not  only  of  reserves  to  deposits,  but
also  of  loans  to  deposits.  Another  set  of  relative  figures  should  be  made  to  show
the  amplitude  of  the  fluctuations  in  the  leading  items.  If  the  clearing-house
associations  would  require  from  their  members  and  make  public  accurate
returns  of  the  receipts  and  shipments  of  currency  the  activity  of  business  in
various  sections  could  be  followed  with  greater  certainty.  Finally,  one  of
the  darkest  points  of  current  business  conditions  in  America  could  be  cleared
up  if  the  rates  of  discount  upon  first-class  commercial  paper  in  these  various
centers  could  be  regularly  ascertained.  But  perhaps  no  thoroughly  comparable
statistics  of  discount  rates  can  be  compiled  until  the  varying  qualities  of  com-
mercial paper  now  in  circulation  have  been  standardized  by  permitting  the
national  banks  to  accept  drafts  after  the  European  fashion.

To  extend  this  list  of  suggestions  for  bettering  figures  of  the  sorts  already
published  would  be  easy ;  but  enough  has  been  said  to  make  clear  the  character
of  the  desirable  changes.  In  general,  the  need  is  for  more  careful  discrimina-
tion between  dissimilar  data  now  often  lumped  together  in  a  single  total,  the
collecting  from  new  centers  of  data  already  published  for  New  York,  more
uniform  methods  of  compilation  to  guarantee  the  comparability  of  what  purport
to  be  similar  figures,  and  the  computing  of  relative  fluctuations  upon  a  common
basis.  In  many  if  not  in  all  cases  a  double  set  of  relative  figures  is  highly
desirable — one  set  referring  to  average  actual  amounts  in  some  fixed  decade,
the  other  set  making  comparisons  with  the  corresponding  period  of  the  pre-
ceding year.

C.  DIFPICTJLTIES  IN  THE  WAT

When  the  discussion  of  how  to  improve  our  control  over  the  workings  of  the
money  economy  is  thus  brought  down  to  practical  details,  the  complexity  of
the  task  becomes  patent.  Scarcely  one  of  the  suggestions  made  for  bettering
or  extending  the  indices  of  business  conditions  but  calls  to  mind  various
obstacles  which  hinder  the  getting  of  trustworthy  data — the  reluctance  of  private
interests  to  divulge  information,  the  diversity  of  business  practices  in  various
trades  and  sections  of  the  country,  the  continual  changes  going  forward  iu
business  organization,  the  alterations  in  the  relative  importance  of  different
raw  materials  and  still  more  in  the  kinds  and  qualities  of  manufactured  prod-
ucts, the  technical  puzzles  of  statistical  classification  and  averaging,  etc.  In
view  of  these  difficulties,  the  prospect  of  rapid  improvement  in  the  data  for
business  forecasting  is  not  so  bright  as  might  be  desired.

The  vigor  of  the  efforts  made  to  overcome  the  difficulties  will  depend
largely  upon  the  demands  of  business  men  for  better  service  than  they  are
now  receiving. To-day  the  one  class  which  evinces  the  clearest  sense  of  the


596  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

usefulness  of  a  comprehensive  statistical  survey  of  the  business  present  as  a
basis  for  forecasting  the  business  future  is  the  class  of  speculators  in  stocks.
But  many  men  who  prefer  to  call  themselves  investors,  and  an  increasing
number  of  brokers,  bankers,  merchants,  manufacturers,  contractors,  and  the
like,  are  becoming  active  consumers  of  such  reports.  Since  these  classes  can
be  counted  upon  to  subscribe  to  those  papers  and  confidential  agencies  which
give  them  the  most  satisfactory  service,  business  forecasting  will  doubtless
become  a  more  extensive  profession,  and  make  such  progress  as  is  possible
under  private  initiative  spurred  on  by  competition.

There  are  many  lines  of  business,  however,  concerning  which  information
that  is  both  reliable  and  comprehensive  cannot  be  secured  by  private  enterprise.
Whether  the  government  will  extend  the  scope  of  its  present  activities  in  this
field  will  probably  be  determined  chiefly  by  large  issues  of  public  policy.  For
most  of  the  figures  compiled  by  the  government  are  by-products  of  measures
taken  with  other  ends  in  view  than  the  increase  of  knowledge  concerning  the
workings  of  the  money  economy.  As  the  railway  statistics  are  an  incidental
result  of  the  interstate  commerce  law,  the  banking  statistics  of  the  national
banking  act.,  etc.,  so  future  additions  to  the  government's  statistical  output  will
be  made  or  not  as  public  control  over  business  affairs  is  extended  or  restricted.

Certainly  the  community  as  a  whole  has  a  deep  interest  in  developing  this
branch  of  the  government's  work.  The  business  men  who  study  financial
journals  are  chiefly  concerned  to  make  profits  or  to  avoid  losses  arising  from
the  ups  and  downs  of  the  markets.  The  community,  on  the  contrary,  is  inter-
ested in  reducing  the  disturbances  which  these  market  ups  and  downs  cause
in  the  process  of  making  and  distributing  useful  goods.  But  so  long  as  this
process  of  making  and  distributing  useful  goods  is  subordinated  to  the  process
of  making  money,  the  community's  interest  in  steadying  the  pace  of  economic
activity  can  be  promoted  by  giving  all  business  men  alike  the  best  possible
opportunities  for  knowing  the  present  and  forecasting  the  future.  However,
a  vivid  realization  of  what  might  be  accomplished  along  this  line  for  the  general
welfare  is  not  common.  More  direct  efforts  to  apply  governmental  agencies
to  the  correction  of  what  are  deemed  to  be  ill  results  of  business  enterprise
make  a  stronger  appeal  to  the  majority  of  voters.  Hence  it  is  those  who  desire
to  see  the  present  form  of  economic  organization  perfected  rather  than  funda-
mentally changed  who  are  most  concerned  with  pressing  the  demand  for  better
governmental  reporting  of  business  conditions.

V.  The  "Money  Sueface  of  Things"  and  What  Goes  on  Beneath

The  present  theory  of  business  cycles  deals  almost  wholly  with  the  pecuniary
phases  of  economic  activity.  The  processes  described  are  concerned  with
changes  in  prices,  investments  of  funds,  margins  of  profit,  market  capitali-
zation of  business  enterprises,  credits,  the  maintenance  of  solvency,  and  the


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  597

like— all  relating  to  the  making  of  money,  rather  than  to  the  making  of  goods
or  to  the  satisfaction  of  wants.  Only  two  non-pecunidry  factors  command
much  attention— changes  in  the  physical  volume  of  trade  and  in  the  efiBciency
of  labor — and  even  these  two  are  treated  with  reference  to  their  bearing  upon
present  and  prospective  profits.

The  reason  for  thus  staying  upon  the  "money  surface  of  things"  in  analyz-
ing business  cycles,  rather  than  for  attempting  to  penetrate  beneath  to  the
motives  which  actuate  economic  conduct,  is  the  reason  set  forth  in  Chapter  II.
Modern  economic  activity  is  immediately  animated  and  guided,  not  by  the
quest  of  satisfactions,  but  by  the  quest  of  profits.  Therefore  business  cycles
are  distinctly  phenomena  of  a  pecuniary  as  opposed  to  an  industrial  character.
To  dip  beneath  the  business  considerations  relating  to  profit  and  loss,  to  deal
with  "psychic  income"  and  "psychic  cost,"  even  to  deal  with  physical  pro-
duction and  consumption  in  other  than  their  pecuniary  bearings,  is  to  distort  the
problem.  For  the  processes  actually  involved  in  bringing  about  prosperity,
crises,  and  depression  are  the  processes  performed  by  business  men  in  endeav-
oring to  make  money.  Business  men  refuse  to  complicate  their  problems  by
going  back  of  the  dollar  to  that  for  which  the  dollar  stands,  and  he  who  would
understand  what  they  are  doing  must  treat  their  action  as  it  is.

But  if  the  causes  of  business  cycles  which  it  is  important  to  trace  lie  almost
wholly  within  the  pecuniary  order,  the  consequences  of  moment  are  matters
of  human  well-being.  The  ways  in  which  business  prosperity,  crisis,  and
depression  react  upon  the  bodily  and  mental  welfare  of  the  community  are
so  numerous,  however,  that  it  is  feasible  to  mention  only  a  few  of  the  most
significant.

First,  it  has  been  shown  that  the  provision  made  for  satisfying  the  com-
munity's needs — the  physical  volume  of  current  production — grows  more
abundant  when  business  is  prosperous  and  more  scanty  in  the  earlier  stages
of  business  depression.  But  neither  the  expansion  nor  the  shrinkage  in  this
supply  of  useful  goods  is  so  great  as  the  expansion  and  the  shrinkage  in  the
corresponding  pecuniary  values.  And  the  alteration  which  does  occur  in  the
output  of  industry  is  distinctly  greater  with  reference  to  producers'  than  with
reference  to  staple  consumers'  goods.  That  is,  the  amount  of  food,  clothing,
and  the  like  produced  by  the  community  for  its  own  current  use  is  steadier
than  the  business  barometers  suggest.

Upon  the  distribution  of  this  current  supply  of  useful  goods  business  cycles
exert  a  strong  influence,  since  they  produce  widespread  changes  both  in  money
incomes  and  in  the  purchasing  power  of  dollars.  The  precarious  plight  of
the  wage-earner's  family  in  the  money  economy  consists  largely  in  the  shrinkage
of  employment  caused  by  business  depression.  The  physical  privations,  the
anxieties,  and  the  humiliations  forced  upon  this  class  by  inability  to  find  work
are  not  only  themselves  a  grievous  evil,  but  they  are  also  prolific  sources  of


598  MEMOIRS  OF  THE  UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA

further  evils — intemperance,  prostitution,  chronic  idleness,  the  desertion  of
families,  and  the  stunting  of  children.  Profits  doubtless  shrink  in  larger  pro-
portion than  wages,  and  many  families  who  draw  their  income  from  this  source
are  forced  to  adopt  painful  economies  and  to  endure  much  anxiety,  though
they  seldom  suffer  such  extreme  hardships  as  those  of  wage-earners  out  of
work.  On  the  other  hand,  the  relatively  small  class  of  persons  whose  incomes
really  do  remain  fixed  during  depression  profit  by  the  reduced  cost  of  living;
but  for  this  material  advantage  they  pay  a  heavy  price  in  uncertainty  and  in
sympathetic  participation  in  the  sufferings  of  others.

Business  cycles  also  affect  material  well-being  by  influencing  the  selection
of  business  leaders,  the  centralization  of  economic  power,  and  the  progress  of
industrial  technique.

Prosperity  stimulates  enterprise  and  encourages  business  men  to  set  up
for  themselves.  But  by  making  it  easier  for  the  unfit  managers  to  survive
for  a  time,  it  reduces  somewhat  the  community's  economic  efficiency.  Even
the  abler  business  men,  under  the  press  of  hurry,  relax  somewhat  their  precau-
tions against  waste.  Meanwhile  investors  become  more  inclined  toward  rash
ventures,  and  an  increasing  proportion  of  society's  energy  is  thrown  away  in
unprofitable  undertakings.  Crisis  and  depression,  on  the  contrary,  serve  at
least  to  weed  out  the  less  competent  managers,  to  enforce  vigilant  attention  to
detail  upon  all,  and  to  make  investors  cautious.

The  foreclosure  sales  and  reorganizations  to  which  depression  gives  rise
afford  the  best  opportunity  for  the  increase  of  fortunes  already  large,  and  for
the  rise  of  business  magnates  already  powerful."  In  this  way  depression
promotes  the  centralization  of  control  in  the  world  of  business.  But,  on  the
contrary,  it  often  weakens  or  destroys  loosely  cemented  alliances  or  pools  for
the  regulation  of  competition.  And  the  promotion  of  great  combinations
among  business  enterprises  formerly  independent  is  usually  undertaken  in  the
middle  stages  of  prosperity,  when  investors  are  optimistically  inclined  and
before  the  money  and  bond  markets  have  become  stringent.

For  the  progress  of  industrial  technique,  in  the  sense  of  the  practical
application  of  improvements  already  invented,  the  most  favorable  phase  of  the
business  cycle  is  the  period  of  revival  of  activity.  Depression  forces  men  to
cast  about  for  any  feasible  method  of  reducing  cost ;  but  it  offers  little  induce-
ment for  the  immediate  expenditure  of  large  sums  upon  improvements.  It
is  the  season  when  alterations  are  planned ;  that  of  revival  is  the  season  when
they  are  executed  on  the  largest  scale.  Prosperity  is  less  favorable,  not  for
lack  of  funds,  but  for  lack  of  time  and  attention.

In  general,  prosperity  is  a  season  of  strenuous  activity,  recompensed  by
materia]  comfort  and  enlivened  by  high  hopes.  Its  chief  social  drawbacks  are
the  waste  incidental  to  hurry,  the  extravagance  bred  by  affluence  and  optimism,
the  obsession  of  attention  by  business  interests,  and  the  anxieties  which  cloud

11  See  Anna  Youngman,  The  Economic  Causes  of  Great  Fortunes  (New  York,  1909).


MITCHELL:  BUSINESS  CYCLES  599

its  later  days.  A  crisis  intensifies  these  anxieties,  particularly  for  business  men
and  investors.  The  turmoil  subsides  in  depression;  but  the  subsidence  brings
despondency  upon  those  whose  fears  have  been  realized,  and  leaves  others  with
a  dull  outlook  at  best.  To  workingmen  it  is  the  season  of  most  suffering — of
over-driving  when  at  work  and  of  privation  when  on  the  street.  For  these
disadvantages  its  repression  of  waste,  stimulation  of  plans  for  technical
improvements,  and  enforcement  of  caution  regarding  investments  are  but
partial  compensation.

Brief  as  it  is,  this  statement  of  how  business  cycles  react  upon  social  well-
being  suffices  to  suggest  the  double  personality  acquired  by  citizens  of  the
money  economy.  Money  making  for  the  individual,  business  prosperity  for
the  nation,  are  artificial  ends  of  endeavor  imposed  by  pecuniary  institutions.
Beneath  one  lies  the  individual's  impulsive  activities — his  maze  of  instinctive
reactions  partially  systematized  into  conscious  wants,  definite  knowledge,  and
purposefiil  efforts.  Beneath  the  other  lie  the  vague  and  conflicting  ideals  of
social  welfare  which  members  of  each  generation  re-fashion  after  their  own
images.  In  this  dim  inner  world  lie  the  ultimate  motives  and  meanings  of
action,  and  from  it  emerge  the  wavering  standards  by  which  men  judge  what
is  for  them  worth  while.

The  money  economy  has  not  supplanted,  but  it  has  harnessed  these  forces.
Upon  human  activity  and  human  ideals  it  has  stamped  its  own  pattern.  How
it  has  facilitated  the  division  of  labor,  how  it  has  given  a  pecuniary  twist  to
the  desire  for  distinction,  how  it  has  shifted  the  basis  of  political  power  and
given  rise  to  new  social  classes — these  results  of  the  money  economy  are  widely
recognized.  How  it  has  taught  men  to  think  in  terms  of  its  own  formal  logic,
efficient  within  certain  limits  but  arid  when  pushed  to  extremes,  has  been  par-
tially worked  out  by  writers  like  Simmel,  Sombart,  and  Veblen.  How  its
technical  exigencies  subject  economic  activity  to  continual  alternations  of
expansion  and  contraction  this  book  has  aimed  to  show  in  detail.

Subject  as  men  are  to  the  sway  of  pecuniary  concepts  and  ideals  they  can
still  judge  the  workings  of  the  money  economy  by  more  intimate  and  more
vital  standards.  To  make  these  latter  standards  clear,  to  show  in  what  definite
ways  the  quest  of  profits  transgresses  them,  and  to  devise  feasible  methods
of  remedying  these  ill  results,  is  a  large  part  of  the  task  of  social  reform.
Economic  theory  will  not  prove  of  much  use  in  this  work  unless  it  grasps  the
relations  between  the  pecuniary  institutions  which  civilized  man  is  perfecting,
the  human  nature  which  he  inherits  from  savage  ancestors,  and  the  new  forces
which  science  lends  him.  To  treat  money  as  an  empty  symbol  which  "makes
no  difference  save  one  of  convenience"  is  a  habit  exceeded  in  superficiality  only
by  the  habit  against  which  it  protests— that  of  treating  money-making  as  the
ultimate  goal  of  effort.


INDEX


"Abnormal"  events  and  crises,  3,  5,  6,  582.

Abortive  revivals of  business,  554, 555.

Accounting,  31,  32.

Advertising,  cost  of,  and  the  system  of  prices,  28.

Aftalion,  A.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  8,  9,  19,  500.

Agriculture,  development  of  business  enterprise  in,
22,  23;  relative  importance  in  different  coun-
tries, 40,  41;  connection  with  business  cycles,
239,  456,  582.

Albert, H., 163n., 164n.

Aldrich-Vreeland  Act,  551n.

Amalgamated  Copper  Company,  66.

American  Railway  Union  Strike  of  1894,  59.

American  Tobacco Company, 85.

Andrew,  A.  P.,  141n.,  164,  240n.,  252n.,  285n.,  287n.,
288n.,  292n.,  295,  311,  315,  316,  318,  319,  325n.,
517n., 518,  521.

Animal  products,  relative  prices  of,  104-109.  Com-
pare, Food,  prices  of,  and  Farm  products,  relative
prices  of.

Annals  of  business,  1890-1911,  United  States,  Eng-
land, France,  and  Germany,  44-85;  tabular  sum-
mary, 88.

Anthracite-coal  railways,  194.

Applications  for  investment  loans,  398—410,  486,
487, 559,  560,  566, 567.

Argentina,  European  investments  in  the  securities  of,
47,  48.

Ashley,  W.  J.,  431n.

Associated  Banks  of  New  York,  323-333;  compare
New  York  Clearing  House.

Atkinson,  F.  J.,  281n.

Australia,  bank  failures  in  1893,  51.

Austria,  crisis  of  1873,  44.

Bacon,  N.  T.,  69n.

Baker,  E.  S.,  69.

Balance  of  trade,  68-70,  254-257; compare  Imports.

Baltimore  fire,  68.

Bank  checks,  use  in  different  countries,  244;  eea
Deposit  currency.

Bank,  circulation,  see  Bank  notes.  Deposit  currencj'.

Bank  clearings,  244-248,  273,  276,  307,  308,  309,
534-6,  546,  547.

Bank  deposits, see  Deposit  currency.

Bank  earnings,  expenses,  and  profits,  427-431.

Bank  failures,  442,  443,  515,  516.

Bank  notes,  288-295;  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-384;  in
panic  of  1907,  517-521;  in  depression,  560.


Bank  of  England,  action  in  the  crisis  of  1890,  48;

discount rates, 166-170; reports, 323, 377-386;

discounts  in  1906,  523;  action  in  crisis  of  1907,

540-543,  551;  run  on,  1708,  584.
Bank  of  France,  action  in  crisis  of  1889,  47;  action

in  the  crisis  of  1890,  48;  discount  rates,  166-170;

circulation,  293; rapidity  of  turnover,  309,  310;

reports,  323,  377-386;  loan  to  Bank  of  England

in 1907, 540, 543.
Bank  of  Germany,  see  Reichsbank.
Bank  rates,  see  Discount  rates.
Bank  reserves,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-386;  490-494,  519-

522,  527-530,  540,  541,  551-3;  560-562.
Bankers'  Magazine (London),  73n.,  544.
Bankers'  Magazine (New  York),  53.
Banking reform, 550-553, 586.
Banking,  relation to  business  enterprises,  24.
Banking systems — dissimilarity between American

and  European,  42.
Bankruptcies,  statistics,  438-446;  in  panic  of  1907,

530-532, 548, 549; in depression, 564, 565.
Banks— money  held  by,  295-300, 311-317,  490-494,

560, 561; deposits subject to cheek, 300-306,

318-322; condition  of  banks  of  various  classes,

323-386; savings  made  by,  415,  416; profits  of,

427-431; failures  among,  442,  443.
Baring  Brothers  and  Company,  failure  of,  48,  189,

550.
Barnett,  6.  E.,  311-317,  322.
Barney,  C.  J.,  51 6n.
Barometers of business conditions, 232, 242, 456,

457,  591-6.
Beer,  consumption  of,  264-267.
Beginnings  of  business  cycles,  583-5.
Bergmann,  E.  von,  3n.

Berlin,  crisis  of  1873,  44;  discount  rates,  166-170.
Beveridge,  W.  H.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  6,  19,

269n.,  477n., 579,  580.
Bills  of  exchange,  247-251,  273,  276;  see  Foreign  ex-
change. Domestic  exchange.
Birmingham,  clearings  in  1907,  547.
Birth  rates,  224,  225.
Board  of  Trade  (British),  wholesale  prices,  118-122;

retail  prices,  129;  wages,  136-9.
Board  of  Trade  Labour  Gazette,  118.
Boer  war,  60,  64,  70,  158,  278.
Bonds — rates  of  interest  yielded  by,  140-170;  prices

of,  201-222;  volume  of  sales,  393-7;  listings,  408-

410;  sales  of  in  periods  of  prosperity,  486,  487n.;


[  600  ]


INDEX


yields  and  prices  before  crisis  of  1907,  506,  507;
prices  during  the  panic,  524,  525;  prices  during
depression,  559.

Bonds  of  England,  France,  and  Germany,  163-6,  219-
221.

Bonds  of  "United  States,  issues  of  1894-96,  57,  58;
quotations,  140,  141;  yields,  144,  146,  159,  160,
163-6;  relative  prices  of,  204,  205,  219-222.

"Booms,"  see  Prosperity  of  business.

Boston,  banks,  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  528,  530.

Boston,  ratio  of  bank  clearings  to  deposits,  308,  309.

Bouniatian,  M.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  9,  10,  19,
584n.

Bowley,  A.  L.,  587.

Bradstreet's, index number, 96, 113-117, 533, 591.

Bradstreet's,  statistics  of  bankruptcies,  438-443,  531,
532,  549.

Breadstuffs,  imports  and  exports,  258-263.

Bristol,  loan  in  1907,  538;  clearings  in  1907,  547.

Brown,  H.  G.,  18n.

Bryan,  W.  J.,  58,  59,  64,  157,  158,  189,  282.

Buildings  erected,  420,  421.

Bulletin  of  the  Bureau  of  Labor,  96,  114,  130.

Bureau  of  Labor  (U.  S.),  retail  prices,  94,  95;  whole-
sale prices,  113-117,  533n. ;  wages,  130-136;  pur-
chasing power  of  wage-earners,  500n.

Business  activity,  revivals  of,  452,  453;  character-
istics of,  453^74;  compare  Prosperity  of  busi-
ness.

Business  annals,  1890-1911,  44-85;  tabular  summary,
88.

Business  barometers,  232,  242,  456,  457,  591-6.

Business  costs,  increase  in  periods  of  prosperity,
475-483;  encroachments  upon  profits,  494-503;
decrease  in  periods  of  depression,  562-5.

Business  crises,  see  Crises.

Business  depression,  see  Depression  of  business.

Business  enterprises,  22-26;  prices  of,  29;  contrasted
with  government  management,  36,  37;  efficiency
of,  37-40;  statistics  of  prices  of  shares,  170-219;
savings  made  by,  414-418;  bankruptcies  of,  438-
446; capitalization  of,  503-511,  564,  565.

Business  equilibrium,  472-4.

Business  liquidation, see Liquidation.

Business  panics, see Panics.

Business  prosperity,  see  Prosperity  of  business.

Business  revivals,  see  Eevival  of  business  activity.

Business,  volume  of,  223-277,  453-7,  534,  539,  548,
556-8,  &65-8.

Call-loan  rates,  144-156,  160-163,  177-187,  526,  542.

Canadian  banks,  356n.

Capacity  for  production,  see  Industrial  equipment.

Capital — bank,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-384;  public  ap-
plications  for, 398-410, 559, 560.

Capitalist,  see  Enterpriser,  Stockholders,  Lenders,
Investors.

Capitalization  of  business  enterprises,  in  relation  to
business  cycles,  9,  14,  15;  how  affected  by  pros-


perity, 503-511;  how  affected  by  depression,  564,

565.
Carver,  T.  N.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  16,  17,  19,

104,  580.
Cash reserves of banks, ch. vii, passim., 323-384,

490-494,  519-522,  527-530,  540,  541,  551-3;  560-

562.
Central Railroad of New  Jersey, bonds, 142, 143,

157,  204.
Central reserve-city  banks, 356-366, 522, 528, 529,

535,  536.
Chamberlain,  J.,  69,  71.
Checking  deposits,  see  Deposit  currency.
Checks,  see  Bank  checks.  Deposit  currency.
Chesapeake  and  Ohio  bonds,  142,  143,  202,  204.
Chicago  and  Eastern Illinois,  bonds,  142,  143,  157,

204.
Chicago  banks,  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  528,  530,  535,

536.
Chicago, Burlington, and Quincy, bonds, 142, 143,

157,  204.
Chicago,  Milwaukee,  and  St.  Paul,  bonds,  142,  143,

157,  204,  218.
Chicago,  St.  Paul,  Minneapolis,  and  Omaha,  bonds,

142,  143,  204.
Chile,  crisis,  1907,  539.
Circulation,  monetary,  see  Currency.
Circulation,  rapidity  of,  306-310,  491,  561.
Clearing-house  loan certificates,  issues  in  1890,  49;

in  1893,  56;  in  1907,  78,  517,  552.
Clearings,  see  Bank  clearings.
Cleveland,  6.,  46,  56,  57,  58,  59,  60,  179,  414.
Closson, C. C,  56n.
Goal  mines,  relation  to  other  enterprises,  23;  number

of  days  operated,  268.
Coal, statistics of production, 230-232, 272, 275,

484n.
Coal-carrying  railways,  stocks,  194.
Cocoa,  consumption  of, 267.
Coffee,  consumption  of,  264-267.
Coinage,  279-287.
Commerce, foreign, volume of, 252-263, 274, 277,

286,  287,  523,  524,  543,  545.
Commercial  and  Financial  Chronicle,  46.
Commercial  crises,  see  Crises.
Commercial  failures,  statistics  of,  438-446;  in  panic

of 1907, 530-532, 548, 549; in depression, 564,

565.
Commercial  paper,  discount  rates,  140,  144—156,  160-

163,  166-170,  466-8,  482,  485-492,  499,  506,  507,

508,  526,  527,  542,  550,  551,  559.
Commodity  prices statistics, 1890-1911,  93-130; in

periods  of  business  revival,  457-464;  in  periods

of  high  prosperity,  494-503;  in  months  preceding

a crisis, 507; during  a  panic,  532, 533; during

depression,  558,  559,  568.
Common  stocks,  tables  of  prices  of,  in  40  transpor-
tation companies,  172-188:  course  of  the  market.


[601]


INDEX


189-191;  diversity  of  fluctuations,  191-4;  com-
mon and  preferred  stocks  in  ten  railways,  194-
201;  comparison  of  the  prices  of  common  stocks,
preferred  stocks,  dividend-paying  stocks,  bonds,
and  commodities,  201-219;  prices  in  periods  of
revival,  469,  470;  fluctuations  preceding  a  crisis,
506-511;  prices  during  a  crisis,  524,  525,  540,
544;  prices  during  depression,  559.

Commons,  J.  E.,  172.

Compensated  dollar,  586-8.

Competition  and  prices,  31,  462n.,  463n.,  464n.

Competition  theory  of  business  cycles,  6,  579,  580.

Comptoir  d'  Escompte,  failure  of,  47,  221,  550.

Comptroller  of  the  Currency,  295,  311,  318,  319,
321,  356,  415,  427,  442.

Conant,  L.,  Jr.,  63n,  64n,  413,  414.

Condition  of  business,  1890-1911,  summary,  88;  see
Prosperity,  Crises,  Depression,  Revival  of  busi-
ness activity.

Confidence,  increase  of  in  business  revivals,  455;
decline  of  before  crises,  508-514;  in  periods  of
depression,  554,  555,  568.

Conjunctures,  unforeseen,  and  business  cycles,  3,  5,
6,  25,  582.

Consolidation  of  business  enterprises,  see  Industrial
consolidations.

Consols,  British,  163-166,  219-221.

Construction,  costs  of,  in  relation  to  business  cycles,
11,  12,  471,  472,  483-9,  497-9,  567.

Construction  of  industrial  equipment,  in  periods  of
revival,  471,  472;  in  periods  of  prosperity,  483-
9;  in  periods  of  depression,  557,  567.

Consumers'  demand,  and  growth  of  population,  227,
228;  increase  in  business  revivals,  454;  decrease
in  periods  of  depression,  556,  565,  566.

Consumers'  goods,  prices  of,  16,  17,  27;  statistics  for
United  States,  retail,  94,  95;  wholesale,  96-9,  102-
104,  461,  463,  464,  501,  502,  532,  533,  558;  pro-
duction of,  597.

Consumption,  volume  of,  264-267,  279-282,  499-
503,  556,  565,  566,  597-9.

Contract  prices,  496,  497.

Contraction of  business, see  Depression.

Control  over  business  cycles,  585-8.

Conversion  of  loans,  statistics,  399-403,  406.

Copper,  prices  of,  in  1907,  515.

"Copper  ring"  of  1889,  47,  221.

Corn,  production  of,  239-241;  consumption  of,  264,
265.

"Corners,"  see  Northern  Pacific  "corner";  Credits,
manipulation  of.  Panics.

Cortelyou,  G.  B.,  517,  521.

Cost  of  buildings,  420,  421.

Costs  of  construction  in  relation  to  business  cycles,
11, 12, 471, 472, 483-9, 497-9, 567.

Costs  of  doing  business,  increase  in  periods  of  pros-
perity, 475-483;  encroachments  upon  profits,  494-


503, 538, 539, 544; decrease in periods of de-
pression, 562-8.

Cotton,  production  of,  239-241.

Country  banks,  356-366,  522.

"Coxey's  Army,"  58.

Credit,  relations  with  profits,  503-  505;  how  affected
by  prosperity,  505,  506;  how  undermined,  506-
511;  manipulation  of  credit  and  crises,  588-591.

Chrises,  theory  of,  chs.  I,  xii,  xiv,  i,  3;  history  of
crises,  chs.  Ill,  xiv,  583-5;  effects  upon  economic
welfare,  596-9.

Crisis,  of  1825,  3;  of  1873,  44,  45;  of  1884  in  America,
45;  of  1882  in  Prance,  45,  46;  of  1889  in  Prance,
47;  of  1890  in  Europe  and  America,  48,  49;  of
1893  in  America,  51-6;  of  1900  in  Europe,  60,
61;  of  1903-04  in  America,  67,  68;  of  1907  in
Europe  and  America,  75-8;  events  preceding
crisis  of  1907  in  America,  506-511;  of  1907  in
America,  515-537,  in  England,  538-548.

Crops,  1890-1911,  ch.  ill,  passim;  connection  with
business  conditions,  239,  453,  582.

Cultural  discipline  of  the  money  economy,  599.

Cumulative  change  as  characteristic  of  business
cycles,  449,  451,  583.

Currency,  278-322;  in  periods  of  prosperity,  490-
494;  in  panic  of  1907,  516-522;  in  periods  of
depression,  560—562.

Customary  prices,  465,  466,  496,  497.

Daggett,  S.,  564n.

Death  rates,  224,  225.

Decils,  commodity  prices,  109-112;  labor  prices,  135-
7;  stock  prices,  191-3.

Demand — for  coal  and  iron,  230;  increase  of  demand
in  times  of  revival,  453-454;  effect  upon  price
level,  458-460;  decline  of  demand  in  periods  of
depression,  556,  557,  565-8;  for  capital,  see  Appli-
cations for  investment  loans.  Money-market.

Deposit  currency,  300-306,  318-322,  494,  560,  561.

Deposits,  banks,  eh.  vil,  passim,  323-386;  in  savings-
banks,  390-393;  see  Deposit  currency.

Deposits  subject  to  check,  see  Deposit  currency.

Depression  of  business,  after  crisis  of  1873,  44;  after
crisis  of  1884,  America,  46,  in  England,  1884-86,
46,  47;  after  crisis  of  1890,  England,  Germany,
and  Prance,  49,  50;  in  1904,  America,  68;  after
crisis  of  1900,  Europe,  70-2;  after  crisis  of  1907,
England,  78,  79,  Germany,  80,  81,  Prance,  81,  82,
America,  82,  83;  after  revival  of  1909  Prance,  82,
America,  84;  effect  on  iron  production  and  prices,
232,  233;  connection  with  crops,  239;  business
conditions  resulting  from,  452,  453;  periods  of  de-
pression, 554-569;  summary  of  theory,  577-9;
effect  upon  economic  welfare,  597-9.

Dermietzel,  O.,  437,  469.

Dewey,  D.  E.,  131.

Dietzel,  H.,  69n.

Diffusion  of  business  activity  in  periods  of  revival,
453-7.


[  602]


INDEX


Diminishing  utility  and  crises,  8,  499-502.

Dingley  tariff,  60,  256,  265.

Director  of  the  Mint,  281,  282.

Discount  rates.  New  York,  140,  144-156,  160-163;
New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin,  166-170;
in  periods  of  revival,  466-8;  in  periods  of  pros-
perity, 482,  485-492,  499,  506,  507,  508;  in  crisis,
526,  527,  542,  550,  551;  in  periods'  of  depression,

559,  560.

Discounts,  bank,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-384.
Distilled  spirits,  consumption  of,  264-7.
Distribution  of  income  and  properity,  how  affected

by  business  cycles,  596-9.
Distribution of money among banks, public, and

treasury,  295-300,  490,  491,  561.
' '  Disturbing  causes ' '  and  crises,  3,  5,  6,  582.
Diversities  among  business  cycles,  581-3.
Dividend-paying stocks, relative prices of, 203-5,

215,  218.
Dividends,  upon  preferred  and  common  stocks  in  ten

railways,  199;  paid  by  interstate  railways  upon

preferred and common stocks, 200; aggregate

dividends of interstate railways, 423-7; of

national  banks,  427-431;  of  German  corporations,

431-8.
Domergue,  J.,  index  number,  119,  120,  121,  122,  124,

127
Domestic  exchange  rates  in  panic  of  1907,  522,  523.
Dresdeuer  Kreditanstalt,  failure  of,  62.
Dreyfus  affair,  62.
Dull  times,  see  Depression.
Dun's  index  number,  93n.,  96,  113-117.
Dun's  Beview,  113,  172,  549.

Dun's  statistics  of  bankruptcies,  438-441,  531,  549.
Early  crises,  583-5.
Earnings — railways,  242^,  273,  276,  422-7;  national

banks,  427-431;  industrial  trusts,  431n.;  German

corporations, 431-8.
East  Indian  railway  loan  of  1907,  538.
Economic welfare and business cycles, 596-9; see

Money  economy.
Economist  index  number,  118n.
Economist  (London),  49,  50,  52,  60,  71,  80,  270,  371,

406,  407,  408,  538,  539,  544.
Efficiency  of  business  management,  483,  563,  564.
Efficiency  of  labor,  477-9,  562,  563.
Egypt,  crisis,  1907,  539.
Ehrenberg,  K.,  583n.
Elasticity  of  currency,  291-5,  306,  492-4,  520,  521,

560,  561.
Emigration,  225-229,  566.
Emissions  of  capital,  398^10.

Emotional  factor  in  business cycles,  19n.,  35,  455,

509,  510,  554,  555,  568.
Employment,  irregularity  of,  268-271,  477,  539,  548,

556,  597,  598;  means  of  reducing,  586,  587.
Encroachments  of  costs  upon  profits,  475-483,  494-

503.


England,  Mrs.  M.  T.,  581n.

England — relative  importance  of  manufacturing,  agri-
culture, and  foreign  commerce,  40,  41;  banking
system,  42,  43;  public  ownership,  43;  crisis  of
1873,  depression  of  1875-79,  45;  revival  of  1880,
45;  revival  of  1886-87,  46;  prosperity  of  1887-
89,  47;  crisis  of  1890,  48;  depression  of  1891-94,
49,  50;  revival  and  prosperity  of  1895-99,  60;  61;
crisis  of  1900,  61;  depression  of  1901-04,  70-1;
prosperity  of  1905-07,  73;  crisis  of  1907,  75,  76,
538-547;  depression  of  1908-09,  78,  79;  revival  of
1909-11,  79,  80;  summary  of  business  conditions,
1890-1911,  88;  early  crises,  583-5;  see  Population,
Volume  of  business,  etc.

England — statistics — prices  of  commodities,  118-
130;  prices  of  labor,  136-9;  prices  of  loans,  163-
170;  prices  of  bonds,  218-220;  birth  rate,  death
rate,  marriage  rate,  emigration,  224-229;  volume
of  business,  230-277;  banking,  371-381;  savings-
bank  deposits,  391-3;  applications  for  loans,  400,
406,  407;  joint-stock  companies  established,  410-
412;  bankruptcies,  444-6;  concerning  crisis  of
1907,  538-547.

English,  D.,  141n.

English  joint-stock  banks,  356n.,  371-6.

Enterprise,  statistics  relating  to,  389-421;  see  Busi-
ness  enterprises.

Enterpriser — role  in  guiding  economic  activity,'  32-
4;  see  Business  enterprises.

Equilibrium  of  business,  472-4.

Essars,  P.  des,  309,  310.

Exchange,  bills  of,  247-251,  273,  276;  see  Foreign
exchange,  Domestic  exchange.

Exchequer,  stoppage  of,  583.

Expansion  of  business,  452-474.

Expenses,  classification  of,  479n.,  480;  see  Costs.

Exports,  volume  of,  252-263,  274,  277,  286,  287;
during  crisis  of  1907,  523,  524,  543,  545.

Express,  steamship,  and  telegraph  company  stocks,
194.

Failures  of  business  enterprises,  438-446;  in  panic  of
1907,  530-532,  548,  549;  in  depression,  564,  565.

Famine,  Indian,  1898,  254.

Farm  products,  relative  prices  of,  104-109,  533,  559.

Fashoda  incident, 256.

Fetter,  F.  A.,  32n.

Financial  cliques,  and  crises,  588-591.

Financial  Meview,  49,  51,  65,  141,  144,  172,  175,  508,
526.

Financial  stringency,  co-existing  with  general  pros-
perity. United  States,  1899,  63;  1901-02,  65,  66;
see  Stringency.

Fisher,  E.  A.,  398n.

Fisher,  L,  17,  18;  19,  149n.,  263,  300,  301,  306,  307,
308,  315-317,  318,  319,  321,  322,  557,  580,  587,  593.

Fixed  charges  railways,  423-7.

Fixed  prices,  496,  497.


[603]


INDEX


Food,  prices  of,  United  States,  at  retail,  1890-07,
95;  1890-1911,  95n.;  at  retail  and  wholesale,
96,  97;  in  United  States,  England  and  France,
129,  130;  comparea  with  relative  wages,  135,
500n.,  501n.

Foodstuifs,  imports  and  exports,  258-263.

Forecasting  of  business  conditions,  456,  457,  588-596.

Foreclosure  sales  of  railways,  443,  444;  compare
564,  565.

Foreign  commerce,  volume  of,  252-263,  274,  277,  286,
287,  52?,  524,  543,  545.

Foreign  exchange  rates,  in  panic  of  1907,  523,  524.

Foresight  and  crises,  588-596.

Forest  products,  relative  prices  of,  104-109.

Foville,  A.  de.,  index  number,  119n.

France — statistics — prices  of  commodities,  118-130;
prices  of  loans,  163-170;  prices  of  bonds,  219-
221;  birth,  death,  and  marriage  rates,  224-227;
emigration,  227-229;  volume  of  business,  230-277;
banking,  377-386;  savings-bank  deposits,  391-3;
applications  for  loans,  402;  joint-stock  companies
established, 410-412; bankruptcies,  444-6.

France — thrift,  40;  banking  system,  42,  43;  public
ownership,  43;  crisis  of  1873,  45;  revival  of  busi-
ness in  1876,  45;  crisis  of  1882,  46;  revival  of
1887,  47;  crisis  of  1889,  47,  48;  crisis  of  1890,
49;  depression  of  1891-94,  49,  50;  revival  of
1895,  prosperity  of  1896-99,  and  crisis  of  1900,
62;  depression  of  1901-04,  72;  prosperity  of  1905-
07,  74;  crisis  of  1907,  76;  depression  of  1908,  81;
revival  of  1909,  82;  relapse  of  1910-11,  82;  sum-
mary of  business  conditions,  1890-1911,  88;  see
Population,  Volume  of  business,  Currency,  etc.

Free-coinage  of  silver.  Senate  resolution  of  1892,
52;  campaign  of  1896,  58,  59;  effect  of  campaign
upon  bond  market,  157,  158,  164;  effect  of  cam-
paign on  stock  market,  189,  221,  282,  292.

Genesis  of  business  cycles,  583-5.

Geological  Survey,  268.

George,  Lloyd,  544.

German  bonds,  163-6,  219-221.

Germany — enterprise,  41;  banking  system,  42,  43;
public  ownership,  43;  crisis  of  1873,  44;  depres-
sion of  1874-1886,  45;  revival  and  prosperity  of
1887-89,  47;  crisis  of  1890,  48;  depression  of
1891-94,  49,  50;  revival  of  1894,  prosperity  of
189.5-99,  and  crisis  of  1900-01,  61,  62;  depression
of  1901-04,  71,  72;  prosperity  of  1905-07,  73,  74;
crisis  of  1907,  76;  depression  of  1908-09,  80,  81;
revival  of  1910-11,  81;  summary  of  business  con-
ditions, 1890-1911,  88;  see  Population,  Volume  of
business.  Currency,  etc.

Germany — statistics — prices  of  commodities,  118-
128;  prices  of  loans,  163-170;  prices  of  bonds,
219-221;  birth,  death,  and  marriage  rates,  224-
227;  emigration,  227-229;  volume  of  business,
230-277;  banking,  377-386;  savings-bank  de-
posits, 391-3; applications  for  loans,  403;  joint-


stock  companies  established,  410-413;  corpora-
tion profits,  431-8;  bankruptcies,  444^6.

Gibson,  A.  H.,  163n.

Gibson  index  number,  96,  113-117.

Gluts,  general,  theories  concerning  the  cause  of,  6,
7;  see  Crises.

Gold,  currency, 279-287,  492-4,  560-562.

Gold,  imports  and  exports,  49,  51-4,  177-187,  286,
517,  519,  540  543,  550,  551;  see  Bank  reserves.
Currency.

Gold,  industrial  consumption  of,  279-282,  285.

Gold  production,  278, 279.

Gold  reserve,  U.  S.,  52-4,  56-8;  see  Bank  reserves.
Gold  currency.

Gold  standard,  52-4,  56-8,  59,  64,  68,  157,  164,  222,
291, 292,  340.

Goldmark,  Josephine,  478n.

Goldsmith  bankers,  583,  584.

Government  bonds,  yields  upon  investments  in  U.  S.,
146,  159,  160,  161;  yields  upon  English,  French,
and  German  bonds,  163-6;  relative  prices  of  U.  S.,
204,  205;  relative  prices  of  English,  French,  and
German bonds, 219-222.

Government  purchases,  as  means  of  steadying  em-
ployment, 586,  587.

Government — role  in  guiding  economic  activity,  36,
37,  43.

Greenbacks,  288-291.

Gross  and  Kleeberg,  515.

Hamburg,  crisis,  1907,  539.

Hamilton  Bank,  516.

Hard  times,  see  Depression  of  business.

Harriman,  E.  H.,  65,  75,  590n.

Harrison,  B.,  46.

Harvests,  1890-1911,  ch.  iii,  passim;  connection  with
business  cycles,  239,  453,  582.

Hawkar,  F.,  163n.

Heinze,  F.  A.,  515.

Heinze,  Otto,  &  Co.,  515.

Helflferich,  K., 248n.

Henry,  L.  P.,  477n.

Hill,  J.,  65,  590n.

History  of  business  cycles,  583-5;  see  Annals  of
business.

Hoarding  of  money,  in  panic  of  1907,  516,  517.

Hobson,  J.  A.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  7,  8,  19.

Holland,  crisis,  1907,  539.

Hooker,  B.  H.,  117n.

Hovey,  C,  516n.

Hull,  G.  H.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  11,  12,  19,
488n.,  580,  593.

Bl-balanced  production,  as  cause  of  crises,  4,  10,  11;
see  Spiethoff,  Hull,  Industrial  equipment.

Immigration, 225-229, 566.

"Impair"  savings,  see  Johanusen.

Imports,  volume  of,  252-263,  274,  277,  286,  287;
during  crisis  of  1907,  523,  524,  543,  545.


[604]


INDEX


Incomes,  as  aggregates  of  prices,  31 ;  see  Saving,  Dis-
tribution, Economic  welfare,  Under-consumption.

Index  numbers,  representative  character  of,  112-117;
statistics,  commodities,  94-130;  wages,  130-139;
interest  rates  and  bond  yields,  140-170;  stocks,
170-201;  bonds,  201-222;  prices  of  commodities
produced  by  trusts  and  under  competitive  con-
ditions, 462n.,  463n.,  464n.;  see  Volume  of  busi-
ness, Currency,  Banking,  Investment,  Profits,
Bankruptcies.

India  Council,  540,  543.

India,  famine  of  1898,  254;  absorption  of  gold  by,
279-282.

Industrial  consolidations  in  United  States,  1888-92,
55;  1898-99,  63,  64;  of  1900-01,  65;  the  after-
math of  1903-04,  67,  68;  statistics,  413,  414;
profits  of,  431n.;  price  policy  of,  462n.,  463n.,
464n.

Industrial  consumption  of  gold,  279-282,  285.

Industrial  equipment,  increase  of  in  revival,  471,
472;  in  periods  of  prosperity,  483-9,  497-9;  m
periods  of  depression,  557,  559,  560,  566,  567;  see
Spiethoff,  Hull.

Industrial  Eevolution  and  business  cycles,  584,  585.

Industrial  stocks,  fluctuations  preceding  crisis  of
1907,  508,  509n.,  510n.

Industry  and  money-making,  21-6.

Inflation  theory  of  crises,  4;  see  Currency.

Inorganic  goods,  relative  prices  of,  16,  104-109;  pro-
duction of,  230-241;  see  Sombart.

Insolvencies,  statistics  of,  438-446;  in  panic  of  1907,
530-532,  548,  549;  in  depression,  564,  565.

Insurance,  relation  to  the  system  of  prices,  28.

Integration  of  industry,  413,  414,  586;  see  Industrial
consolidations.

Intemperance,  597,  598.

Intercorporate  relationships,  24.

Interest  rates,  relation  to  business  cycles,  17;  as
part  of  the  system  of  prices,  28;  statistics,  1890-
1911,  140-170;  in  periods  of  revival,  466-8;  in
periods  of  prosperity,  482,  485-492,  499,  506,  507,
508;  in  crisis  of  1907,  526,  527,  542,  550,  551;  in
periods  of  depression  559,  560.

Interior  movements  of  currency  in  panic  of  1907,  519.

Interstate  Commerce  Commission,  24,  84,  198,  416,
422.

Inventions,  effect  of,  upon  business  cycles,  25,  569n.

Investment,  volume  of,  389-421;  in  periods  of  busi-
ness revival,  471,  472;  in  periods  of  prosperity,
483-488,  497-9;  in  periods  of  depression,  559,  560.

Investors,  share  in  guiding  economic  activity,  34-6.

Iron,  statistics  of  production,  230-236,  272,  275,
484n.

Issues,  of  capital,  398-410;  of  paper  money,  see
Bank  notes.

Jameson  raid,  60,  62.

Japan,  war  with  Russia,  71,  72,  74.

Jevons,  H.  S.,  19n.,  32n.


Johannsen,  N.,  theory  of  industrial  depressions,  18,
19,  389,  569n.,  580,  581.

Joint-stock  banks  of  England,  356n.,  371-376.

Jones,  E.  D.,  3n.,  4n.,  19n.

Journal  of  the  Royal  Statistical  Society,  118.

Juglar,  C,  46n.

Kelly,  E.,  516n.,  590n.

Kemmerer,  E.  W.,  161n.,  291n.,  518n.,  520n.,  523n.,
529n.,  557.

Kinley,  D.,  300,  301n.

Knickerbocker  Trust  Company,  suspension  of,  77,
443,  516,  517,  549,  550.

Korosi,  J.  von,  431n.

Kuczynski,  E.,  136n.

Labor  costs,  in  periods  of  revival,  464-6,  468;  in
periods  of  prosperity,  476-480;  in  periods  of
depression,  562,  563.

Labor,  prices  of,  28,  29;  statistics  for  United  States
and  England,  130-139;  in  periods  of  revival,  464-
6;  in  periods  of  prosperity,  476-9;  in  periods  of
depression,  562,  563 ;  purchasing  power  of  wages,
500n.,  501n.

Lasker,  B.,  587n.

Lauck,  W.  J.,  54n.,  514n.

Laughlin,  J.  L.,  306n.

Launay,  L.  de,  281,  286n.

Laveleye,  E.  de,  398.

Lavergne,  A.  de,  477u.

Layton, W. T., 501n.

Leipziger  Bank,  failure  of,  62,  550.

Lenders,  role  in  guiding  economic  activity,  34-6.

Lescure,  J.,  3n.,  13,  14,  19,  485n.,  580.

Liabilities  of  bankrupt  enterprises,  439-442,  445.

Lincoln  Trust  Compajiy,  516.

Liquidation,  conditions  which  cause,  510,  511;  char-
acter and  consequences,  512-514;  following  a
crisis,  554^562.

Liquors,  consumption  of,  264^267.

Liverpool,  clearings  in  1907,  547.

Loans,  bank,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-384;  see  Discount
rates.

Loans,  prices  of,  28;  statistics,  140-170;  volume  of,
398—410;  in  periods  of  revival,  466-8;  in  periods
of  prosperity,  482,  485-492;  in  periods  of  depres-
sion, 559,  560;  see  Discount  rates.  Call-loan  rates.
Credit, Bonds, Investment.

London,  discount  rates,  166-170,  .542;  bank  clear-
ings, 244-247,  546.

Losses  of  national  banks,  427-431.

Lumber,  see  Forest  products.

McKinley,-  W.,  64,  65,  190.

McKinley  tariff  act,  46.

"Machine  process,"  the,  23.

Machine-building  companies  established  in  Germany,
412,  413;  see  Industrial  equipment.  Costs  of  con-
struction, Spiethoff,  Hull.

Malt  liquors,  consumption  of,  264-267.

Manchester,  clearings  in  1907,  547.


[605]


INDEX


Manchurian  railway  loan  of  1907,  538.

Manufactured  goods,  relative  prices  of,  99-104;  im-
ports and  exports  of,  258-263.

Manufacturing,  relative  importance  of  in  different
countries,  40,  41.

March,  L.,  118-120,  121,  122,  129.

Marriage  rate,  224,  225.

Marx,  K.,  5.

Material  prosperity  and  business  cycles,  597-9;  see
Money  economy.

May,  E.  E.,  theory  of  business  cycles,  7,  19,  499;  see
TJnder-eonsumption.

Mead,  F.  S.,  552n.

Meade,  E.  S.,  431n.,  462n.,  463n.,  464n.

Mercantile  National  Bank,  515.

Merchandise  imports  and  exports,  252-263,  274,  277,
286,  287,  523,  524,  543,  545.

Middle-western  railway  stocks,  194.

Middlesex  County  Council,  loan  of  1907,  538.

Mileage  of  railways,  annual  increase  in,  418-420;
placed  under  receivers,  and  sold  under  foreclosure,
443,  444.

Milliken  Brothers,  failure  of,  77.

Mineral  products,  relative  prices  of,  104^109,  533,
559; see  Sombart.

Mining  stocks,  fluctuations  preceding  crisis  of  1907,
509n.

Mississippi  Bubble,  585.

Missouri,  Kansas,  and  Texas  bonds,  142,  143,  157,
204.

Mitchell,  T.  W.,  215n.

Monetary  stock,  of  gold,  279-287,  of  other  kinds  of
money,  288-295;  distribution  of,  295-300,  490,
491;  relations  with  prosperity,  492-4;  in  panic  of
1907,  516-522;  in  periods  of  depression,  560-562.

Money  economy,  21,  22;  efficiency  of,  37-40;  perfect-
ing, 585-8;  effects  upon"  welfare,  596-9.

Money,  statistics,  278-317;  in  periods  of  prosperity,
490-494;  in  crises,  516-522;  in  periods  of  de-
pression, 560-562.

Money-making  and  economic  welfare,  21-6,  597-9.

Money-market,  in  periods  of  revival,  466,  467;  in
periods  of  prosperity,  489-494,  503-511;  during
crises,  522-9,  539-542,  550-553;  in  periods  of  de-
pression, 559,  562,  568,  569;  see  Discount  rates.

Moniieur  des  interets  materiels, 398-404.

Monopolies,  price  policy  of,  462n.,  463n.,  464n.;  see
Industrial  consolidations.

Moore,  H.  L.,  131.

Morgan,  J.  P.,  65,  51 6n.

Morgan-Belmont  Syndicate,  57,  59,  179,  414.

Morse, C.  W.,  515.

Muhleman,  M.  L.,  282.

National Bank of Commerce, 516.

National  banks  (U.S.),  circulation,  288-295;  con-
dition, 333-356;  in  reserve  cities  and  country  dis-
tricts, 356-370; savings  by,  415,  416;  profits  of.


427-431;  failures  among,  412,  443;  defects  of
organization,  550,  551,  586.

National  Cordage  Company,  failure  of,  51,  54,  56.

National  Monetary  Commission,  166,  301,  323.

National  Prosperity  Association  of  1908,  554n.

National-bank  notes,  288-295,  333-370,  517,  520,
521,  550,  551.

Nearing,  S.,  268n.

Net  income,  interstate  railways,  423-7,  national
banks,  427^31;  see  Profits.

Netherlands,  crisis,  1907,  539.

New  Orleans  banks,  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  529,  530,
535,  536.

New  York,  Chicago,  and  St.  Louis,  bonds,  142,  143,
204.

New  York  City,  bond  issues  in  1907,  77;  bank  clear-
ings, 244-248;  ratio  of  clearings  to  deposits,  308,
309;  condition  of  the  banks,  323-333,  357-370,
515-530,  534-7,  561n.

New  York  Clearing  House,  in  panic  of  1907,  515-
528,  530,  534-7.

New  York  State,  unemployment,  271,  477.

New  York  Stock  Exchange,  see  Stock  Exchange,
New  York.

Newcastle-on-Tyne,  clearings  in  1907,  547.

Newman,  P. L.,  163n.

Neymarck,  A.,  41n.,  388u.

"Normal"  state,  85,  86.

North  Atlantic  railway  stocks,  194.

Northern  Pacific  "corner"  of  1901,  65,  67,  158,  190,
590n.

Northern  Securities  case,  68.

Northwestern  railway  stocks,  194.

Norton,  J.  P.,  113n.,  114n.

Noyes,  A.  D.,  45u.,  46n.,  54n.,  65n.,  459n.

Optimism,  growth  of  in  periods  of  business  revival,
455;  see  Confidence.

Organic  and  inorganic  goods,  prices  of  in  relation  to
business  cycles,  16,  104-109,  230-241;  see  Som-
bart.

Orient,  absorption  of  gold,  279-282.

Origin  of  business  cycles,  583-5.

Over-capitalization  as  cause  of  crises,  9,  14;  see  Veb-
len.

Over-confidence,  35;  see  Confidence.

Over-production,  theory  of  crises,  4,  25,  499-502,
580;  compare  Industrial  equipment,  Spiethoff,
Under-consumption.

Over-saving,  as  cause  of  crises,  7,  9;  as  cause  of  de-
pressions, 18;  see  Saving,  Under-consumption.

Overend-Guruey,  failure  of,  45.

Overhead  charges,  see  Supplementary  costs.

Pacific  railway  stocks, 194.

Palgrave,  E.  H.  I.,  166,  293n.,  378n.

Panama  Canal  Company,  failure  of,  47,  48;  bonds,
159.

Panic,  of  1873,  44,  45;  of  1893  in  America,  56,  189;
of  1907  in  America, 77,  78,  190,  328,  515-537;


[606]


course  of  prices  immediately  preceding,  506-511;
reaction  of  American  panic  on  English  crisis  of
1907,  540,  551;  beginning  and  end  of  panics,  549,
550;  prevention  of  panics,  550,  551,  585-8;  sum-
mary of  theory  of  panics,  576-577.

Paper  money,  288-295,  493;  see  Bank  notes.

Paris,  bank  clearings,  244,  245;  discount  rates,  166-
170.

Parr's  Bank,  301n.

Pecuniary  factors  in  economic  welfare,  21-6,  596-
9;  see  Money  economy.

Pecuniary  volume  of  business,  223,  224,  232-241,
453-7,  534,  539,  548,  556-8.

Fer  capita  indices  of  volume  of  business,  271-277.

Periodicity  of  business  crises,  581.

Petrazycki,  L.  von,  19n.

Philadelphia,  banks  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  528,  530,
535,  536.

Philadelphia,  ratio  of  bank  clearings  to  deposits,  308,
309.

Physical  volume  of  business,  223,  224,  597;  see  Vol-
ume of  business.

Pig  iron,  see  Iron.

Pittsburg  Stock  Exchange,  516.

" Planlessness of  production," 37-40.

Pohle,  L.,  19n.,  81n.,  227n.

Pope  Manufacturing  Company,  receivership  of,  77.

Population,  movement  of,  224-229,  566.

Portugal,  crisis,  1907,  539.

Predatory  financiers,  588-591.

Preferred  stocks,  prices  of  in  ten  railways,  194-201;
compared  with  prices  of  common  stocks,  dividend-
paying  stocks,  bonds,  and  commodities,  201-219;
see  Stocks.

Premium  on  currency,  in  panic  of  1907,  517,  526.

Prevention  of  panics,  550,  551,  585-8.

Price  level,  in  periods  of  business  prosperity,  456-
470;  why  the  rise  is  cheeked,  494-503;  in  months
preceding  a  crisis,  506,  507;  during  depression,
558,  559,  568;  see  Prices  of  bonds,  commodities,
labor,  etc.

Prices,  obstacles  to  advance  of  at  climax  of  pros-
perity, 494-503.

Prices,  public  regulation  of,  496,  497.

Prices — system  of,  27-30;  role  of,  31,  32;  of  con-
sumers' goods,  27;  of  producers'  goods,  27,  28;
of  business  enterprises,  29;  of  services  to  per-
sons, 29;  of  organic  and  inorganic  goods,  16;
inter-relations  between,  30,  31;  see  Prices  of  com-
modities, bonds,  labor,  etc.

Prices  of  bonds — statistics — American  railway  bonds,
201-218;  American,  English,  French,  and  German
government  bonds,  218-220;  method  of  computing
relative  prices,  201,  202;  fluctuations  preceding
panic  of  1907,  506,  507;  during  the  panic,  524,
525;  in  periods  of  depression,  559.

Prices  of  commodities — statistics:  character  of  data,
93,  94; consumers'  goods  at  retail,  94,  95; con-


sumers' goods  at  wholesale,  96,  97,  102,  103,  104;
producers'  goods,  98,  99;  manufactured  goods  and
raw  materials,  99-102;  organic  ana  inorganic
goods,  104-109;  dispersion  of  price  fluctuations,
109-112;  representative  character  of  index  num-
bers, 112-117;  comparison  of  relative  prices  in
the  United  States,  England,  France,  and  Ger-
many, 118-130;  prices  of  pig-iron  and  agricul-
tural products,  232-241;  see  Price  level.

Prices  of  labor — statistics — American  data,  130-132;
in  American  manufacturing  industries,  132-6;  in
England,  136-9;  in  periods  of  revival,  464-6,  in
periods  of  prosperity,  476-9;  in  periods  of  de-
pression, 559,  563.

Prices  of  loans — statistics — character  of  American
data,  140;  141,  144;  tables  of  bond  yields  and
discount  rates,  142-156;  course  of  the  bond  mar-
ket, 1890-1911,  156-160;  rates  of  interest  on
short-time  loans,  160-163;  rates  of  interest  in
New  York,  London,  Paris,  and  Berlin,  163-170;
in  periods  of  revival,  466-8;  in  periods  of  pros-
perity, 482,  485-492;  in  periods  of  depression,
559,  563;  see  Interest  rates.

Prices  of  stocks — statistics — significance  of  the  data,
170-172;  tables  of  American  stock  prices,  1890-
1911,  172-188;  course  of  the  market,  189-191;
diversity  of  fluctuations,  191-4;  prices  of  pre-
ferred stocks,  194-201;  comparison  of  the  prices
of  commodities,  stocks,  and  Donds,  201-219 ;
fluctuations  preceding  panic  of  1907,  506-511;
prices  during  crisis,  524,  525,  540,  544;  in  de-
pression, 559.

Prime  costs,  in  periods  ot  revival,  468;  in  prosperity,
476-483;  in  depression,  562-4.

Producers'  goods,  prices  of,  16,  17,  27,  28;  statistics
for  U.  S.,  1890-1910,  98,  99,  102-104;  461,  463,
464,  487,  488,  532,  533,  558,  559.

Production,  of  coal,  iron,  and  agricultural  staples,
. 230-241; of  gold,  278,  279;  see  Over-production.

Productive  capacity,  see  Industrial  equipment.

Professional  forecasters  of  business  conditions,  592.

Professions,  invaded  by  business  enterprise,  22.

Profits,  variations  in,  and  business  cycles,  4,  13,  14,
15,  26;  statistics  of,  422-438;  in  periods  of  busi-
ness revival,  468,  469;  encroachments  upon  in
periods  of  prosperity,  494-503;  relation  with
credits,  503-505;  effect  of  decline  in  prospective
profits,  506-511;  in  England  in  summer  of  1907,
538,  539,  544;  in  depression,  555,  568;  see  Money
economy.

Promoters,  29,  34;  see  Industrial  consolidations.

Prophecies  of  business  conditions,  456,  457,  588-596.

Prospective  profits  and  business  cycles,  13,  14,  15,
450,  451,  468,  469,  472,  473,  474,  494-502,  506-
511,  555,  568;  see  Money  economy.

Prosperity  of  business,  Europe,  1896-99,  60,  61,  62;
United  States,  1898-1902,  63-66;  Europe,  1905-
07,  72-4;  United  States,  1905-07,  74,  75;  1910-11


[607]


INDEX


in  England  and  Germany,  79-81;  effect  upon  pig-
iron  production  and  prices,  232,  233;  connection
with  crops,  239;  revivals  of,  452,  453;  cumulation
of,  453-474;  how  prosperity  breeds  a  crisis,  475-
511;  summary  of  theory  of  prosperity,  573-6;
effects  upon  economic  welfare,  597-9.

Prostitution,  597,  598.

"Psychic"  income,  597.

Psychological  factor  in  business  cycles,  19n,  35,  455,
509,  510,  554,  555,  568.

Public  regulation  of  prices,  496,  497.

Public  utility  stocks,  fluctuations  preceding  panic  of
1907,  510n.

Public  welfare,  industrial  and  pecuniary  factors  in,
21-6;  relationship  of  government  and  business
enterprise  toward,  36;  how  affected  by  business
cycles,  596-9.

Quantity-theory  of  money,  492-4,  560-562.

Eaffalovich, A.,  48n.

Sailway  Age,  statistics  of  railway  receiverships,  443.

Eailway  bonds,  rates  of  interest  yielded  by,  140-166;
relative  prices  of,  201-222,  506,  507,  524,  525,  559.

Eailway  building,  418-420.

Eailway  earnings,  242-244,  273,  276,  422-7.

Eailway  rates,  244,  496,  497.

Eailway  receiverships,  443,  444.

Eailway  savings,  416-418.

Eailway  stocks,  prices  of,  significance  of  the  data,
170-172;  tables  of  stock  prices,  1890-1911,  172-
188;  course  of  the  market,  189-191;  diversity  of
fluctuations,  191-4;  preferred  stocks,  194-201;
dividend-paying  stocks,  204,  206,  214,  217;  com-
parison with  the  prices  of  commodities,  and
bonds,  201-219;  fluctuations  of  stock  prices  pre-
ceding panic  of  1907,  510n.,  511n.;  during  the
crisis,  524,  525,  540,  544;  during  depression,  559.

Eailways,  relation  to  other  business  enterprises,  23;
intercorporate  relationships  of,  24.

Eapidity  of  circulation,  306-310,  494,  561.

Bates  of  interest,  see  Interest  rates.

Eatios,  bank  loans  to  deposits,  bank  reserves  to  de-
posits, bank  capital  to  total  liabilities,  ch.  vii,
passim,  323-384.

Eaw  materials,  organic  and  inorganic,  16;  prices  of,
28;  statistics  for  United  States,  1890-1910,  99-
102,  104-109;  imports  and  exports,  258-263;  prices
in  periods  of  revival,  461,  462;  in  periods  of  pros-
perity, 481,  482;  in  months  preceding  a  crisis,
506,  507;  in  a  crisis,  532,  533;  in  depression,  558,
559;  see  Sombart.

Eeading  Eailway,  failure  of,  51,  54.

Eeceiverships  of  railways,  443,  444.

Seforme  Sconomique,  119,  120,  122,  130.

Eefunding  of  loans,  statistics,  399-403,  406,  560,  564.

Eegnlation  of  prices  by  government,  496,  497.

Eeichsbank,  Germany,  166-170;  248n.,  323,  377-386.

Sentes,  French,  163-166,  219-222.


Rents,  relation  to  the  system  of  prices,  28;  see  Sup-
plementary costs.

Ee-organization  of  business  enterprises,  564,  565.

Eeserve-city  banks,  356-366,  522.

Eeserves,  bank,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-386;  490-494,
519-522,  527-530,  540,  541,  551-3,  560-562.

Eestriction  of  payments,  in  crisis  of  1907,  517,  550,
551.

Eetail  prices,  statistics  of.  United  States,  94,  95;
United  States,  England,  and  Prance,  129,  130;
retail  prices  and  wages,  132,  136,  500n.,  501n.,  in
periods  of  revival,  461,  462;  in  periods  of  pros-
perity and  crisis,  533;  in  periods  of  depression,
559.

Eevival  of  business  activity,  America,  1879,  45;
England,  1880,  45;  France,  1876,  45;  America,
1885-86,  46;  England,  1886-87,  46;  France,  1887,
47;  England,  France,  and  Germany,  1894^96,  60-
62;  America,  1897,  60,  62;  England,  France,  and
Germany,  1904,  72^;  America,  1904,  74,  75;  Eng-
land, France,  and  Germany,  1909,  79-82;  America,
1909,  83;  causes  of,  452,  453;  characteristics  of,
453-474;  blighting  of,  554,  555;  summary  of
theory  of,  571-3.

"Rich  Man's  Panic,"  67,  68,  158,  190,  328,  416.

Eipley,  W.  Z.,  393n.

Eisks  imputed  to  bonds,  156,  157,  163,  202.

Eobert,  G.,  163n.

Eodbertus,  K.,  5.

Eoscher,  W.,  4n.

Eowntree,  B.  S.,  587n.

Russo-Japanese  war,  71,  72,  74.

St.  Louis  banks,  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  529,  530,  535,
536.

San  Francisco,  banks,  in  panic  of  1907,  527,  529,
530,  535,  536;  fire,  75,  473;  real-estate  sales,  398n.

Sauerbeck,  A.,  79n.,  118-122,  124,  127,  129,  533,  539.

Savings,  over-saving,  and  crises,  7,  8;  "impair  sav-
ings," 18;  volume  of,  387-9,  414-418,  559,  560.

Savings-bank  deposits,  statistics  of,  390-393.

Schaffle,  A.,  4.

Schmitz,  0.,  index  number,  119.

Sehmoller,  G.,  387,  388.

Schuekers,  J.  W.,  51n.

Seasonal  variations  in  interest  rates,  161.

Securities,  prices  of,  see  Bonds,  and  Stocks.

Security  holdings  of  banks,  ch.  vii,  passim,  323-384.

Seligmau,  E.  E.  A.,  15n.

Shares  in  business  enterprises,  see  Stocks,  Business
enterprise.

Shaw,  Leslie  M.,  66,  159,  340.

Sherman  Anti-trust  act,  85.

Sherman  silver-purchase  act  of  1890,  46,  52,  56,  289.

Silver,  monetary  stock  of,  288-291;  see  Free  silver.

Simmel,  G.,  599.

Snyder,  C,  586n.

Socialist  theory  of  crises,  5.

SociSte  des  metaux,  47.


[608]


INDEX


Soetbeer,  A.,  index  number,  119.

Sombart,  W.,  5n.,  16,  19,  22n.,  45n.,  104-109,  230,
482,  485n.,  580,  599.

South  Africa,  256,  278,  279,  539.

South  America,  256.

South  Sea  Scheme,  585.

Southern  railway  stocks,  194.

Spanish-American  war,  62,  63,  158,  256.

Speculation,  relation  to  business  cycles,  4,  19n.,  35;
European  speculation  in  "Argentines,"  1889-
90,  47,  48;  French  speculation  in  copper,  1888-89,
47;  "Kaffir"  speculation  of  1894,  50;  American
speculation  in  land  and  "industrials,"  1888-92,
55;  American  stock-market  mania  of  1901,  65;
cotton  speculation  of  1903,  68;  effect  on  bank
clearings,  244-247;  volume  of,  389-421;  diminu-
tion of,  585,  586.

Spiethoff,  A.,  10,  11,  13,  19,  387n.,  413,  485n.,  580.

Spirits, consumption of, 264-267.

Sprague,  O.  M.  W.,  55n.,  295n.,  329n.,  362n.,  514n.,
516n.,  517n.,  518n.,  520n.,  522n.,  523n.,  524n.,
530n.,  552n.

Stabilized  dollar,  586-8.

Standard  Oil  Company,  65,  85.

State  of  trade,  1890-1911,  summary,  88.

State-bank  failures,  442,  443.

"Static  state,"  85,  86.

Steel  trade,  relation  to  business  enterprises,  23.

Stevens,  A.  C,  56n.,  514n.

Stock  Exchange,  New  York,  transactions,  177-187,
244-8,  393-7,  408-410.

Stock,  monetary,  279-295.

Stockholders,  economic  position  of,  33,  171,  172.

Stocks,  statistics  of  prices,  significance  of  the  data,
170-172;  tables  of  American  stock  prices,  1890-
1911,  172-188;  course  of  the  market,  189-191;
diversity  of  fluctuations,  191-4;  prices  of  pre-
ferred stocks,  194-201;  comparison  of  prices  of
commodities,  stocks,  and  bonds,  201-219;  prices
in  periods  of  revivals,  469,  470;  sales  of  in  periods
of  prosperity,  486,  487n.;  fluctuations  preceding
panic  of  1907,  506-511;  prices  and  sales  during
panic,  524,  525,  540,  544;  during  depression,  559.

Stone,  N.  I.,  172.

Stoppage  of  the  Exchequer,  583.

Strauss,  A.,  524n.

Stringency,  in  investment  market,  485,  486;  in
money  market,  489-492,  526,  527,  530-538,  543-
8,  550,  551.

Subsidiary  silver  coins,  monetary  stock  of,  288-291.

Substitutes  for  cash,  in  panic  of  1907,  518.

Sugar, consumption of, 264-267.

Sully,  D.  J.,  68.

Summary,  business  conditions,  1890-1911,  88;  theory
of  business  cycles,  570-579.

"Sunshine  movements,"  554,  555.


Supplementary  costs,  decrease  of  in  revivals,  458,
461,  468;  increase  of  in  prosperity,  475,  476;
re-adjustment  in  depression,  564,  565.

Surplus  or  deficit  of  interstate  railways,  423-7.

Surplus  revenue  of  1887-90,  46.

Suspension  of  payments,  see  Restriction  of  pay-
ments, Bankruptcies.

Taussig,  P.  W.,  51n.;  54n.,  291n.

Tea,  consumption  of,  264-267.

Tension,  in  investment  market,  485-7;  in  money  mar-
ket, 489-494,  526,  527,  530-538,  543-8,  550,  551.

Thomas,  E.  B.,  515.

Thomas,  0.  P.,  515.

Thrift-development  in  different  countries,  41;  see
Saving.

Tobacco,  consumption  of,  266.

Trade,  volume  of,  223-277,  453-7,  534,  539,  548,  556-
8,  565-8.

Transportation  companies,  prices  of  stocks,  tables  of
prices  of  40  common  stocks,  172-188;  course  of
the  market,  189-191;  diversity  of  fluctuations,
191—4;  preferred  and  common  stocks  in  ten  rail-
ways, 194-201;  comparison  of  the  prices  of
stocks,  bonds,  and  commodities,  201-219;  see
Stocks,  prices  of.

Transportation,  relation  to  the  system  of  prices,  28.

Treasury  notes  of  1890,  46,  52,  56,  288-291.

Treasury,  XJ.  S.,  money  held  by,  295-298,  see  Gold
reserve.

Trust  Company  of  America,  516,  520n.

Trusts,  see  Industrial  consolidations;  United  States
Steel  Corporation.

Tugan-Baranowsky, M., 224n.

Tulip  mania,  585.

Twelfth  Ward  Bank,  516.

Under-consumption  theory  of  crises,  4,  499,  502,  580.

Unemployment,  268-271,  477,  539,  548,  556,  597,  598;
proposal  for  reducing,  586,  587.

United  Copper  Company,  515.

United  Kingdom,  see  England.

United  States — relative  importance  of  agriculture
and  foreign  commerce,  40,  41;  banking  system
and  monetary  habits,  42,  43;  public  ownership,
43;  crisis  of  1873,  44;  depression  of  1874-79,  45;
revival  of  1879,  45;  crisis  of  1884,  45;  depression
of  1884,  46;  revival  of  1885-86,  46;  crisis  of  1890,
49,  54;  depression  of  Jan.-July,  1891,  51;  revival
of  1891,  51;  panic  of  1893,  51-6;  depression
of  1894,  58;  revival  of  1895,  59;  stringency  of
1896,  59;  revival  of  1897,  60,  62;  prosperity  in
1898-99,  63;  pause  of  activity  in  1900,  64;  Stock-
market  mania  of  1900-01,  65;  prosperity  in  1901-
02,  65,  66;  "rich  man's  panic"  in  1903-04,  67,
68;  "American  Invasion  of  Europe,"  68-70;
prosperity  of  1905-07,  74,  75;  panic  of  1907,  77,
78;  depression  of  1908,  82,  83;  revival  of  1909,
83;  relapse  of  1910-11,  84,  85;  summary  of  busi-
ness conditions,  1890-1911,  88;  monthly  record  of


[609]


INDEX


events  afEeoting  the  stock  market,  177-187;  re-
view of  bond  market,  1890-1911,  156-160;  review
of  stock  market,  1890-1911,  189-191;  population,
224-229;  volume  of  business,  230-277;  currency,
278-322;  banking,  323-370;  savings-bank  deposits,
390-393;  stocks  and  bonds  sold,  393-8;  stocks
and  bonds  listed,  408-410;  railways  built,  418-
420;  cost  of  buildings,  420,  421;  bankruptcies,
438-44;  panic  of  1907,  515-538;  need  of  re-organ-
izing banking  system,  550,  553,  586.

United  States  bonds,  quotations,  140,  141;  yields,
144,  146,  159,  160,  163-6;  relative  prices  of,  204,
205,  219-222;  as  basis  of  bank  circulation,  292;
amounts  held  by  national  banks,  333-364.

United  States  Notes,  288-291.

United  States  Shipbuilding  Company,  67.

United  States,  statistics,  prices  of  commodities,  93-
129;  prices  of  labor,  129-139;  prices  of  loans,
140-170;  prices  of  stocks,  170-201;  prices  of
stocks,  bonds,  and  commodities,  201-222;  popula-
tion, 224-227;  immigration,  227-229;  volume  of
trade,  230-277;  concerning  panic  of  1907,  518-
537;  see  Currency,  Banking,  Saving,  Investment,
Profits,  Bankrupticies.

United  States  Steel  Corporation,  65,  66,  75,  83,  190,
488n.,  592.

Vanderlint,  F.  A.,  69.

Variability  of  interest  rates,  160,  161.

Veblen,  T.  B.,  14,  15,  19,  23n.,  26n.,  504n.,  569n.,  580,
590n.,  599.

Velocity  of  circulation,  306-310,  494,  561.

Venezuela,  58,  59,  60,  414.


Vialles,  P.,  19n.

Vienna,  panic  of  1873,  44;  crisis  of  1882,  46.

Volume  of  business,  physical  vs.  pecuniary,  223,  224;

statistics  of,  224-277;  increase  of  in  periods  of

revival, 453-7; during crises, 534, 539,  548; in

periods  of  depression,  556-8,  565-8.
Wabash  railway  bonds,  142,  143,  204,  219.
Wages,  purchasing-power  of,  7;  as  part  of  system  of

prices,  28,  29;  for  statistics  see  Labor,  prices  of.
Wagon,  E.,  431-7,  469.
Wall  Street  Journal,  172,  591.
Walsh,  J.  E.,  473.
Webb,  Mr.  and  Mrs.  S.,  587.
Weill,  N.  B.,  163n.

Welfare  and  money-making,  21-6,  596-9.
Werner,  E.,  412.
Wheat,  production  of,  237-241 ;  consumption  of,  264,

265,  273,  276.
"Weltwirtschaft,"  86.
West  Shore  Bailroad  bonds,  142,  143,  144,  146-156,

157,  159-162,  164-6,  204-213,  219-222.
Westinghouse  receivership,  77,  516. ,  ' 'r-j  ("' V^  Ti^
Wiedenfeld,  K.,  41n.  ^dU^-

Wine,  consumption  of,  264-7.
Wirth,  M.,  45n.,  48n.
Women,  wages  of,  132-5.
Wood,  G.  H.,  129,  500n.,  501n.
Woodloek,  T.  P.,  467n.,  526n.
Wool, consumption of, 264, 265.
World's  production  of  gold,  278,  279.
Yields,  upon  investments  in  bonds,  140-166.
Youngman,  Anna,  598n.


[610]
