Project MKULTRA, the CIA’s Program of Research in Behavioral Modification: Joint Hearing Before the Select Committee on Intelligence and the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research (August 3, 1977)
U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence / Committee on Human Resources, 1977

US Government work — public domain. Complete hearing transcript on the CIA mind-control program, following the 1977 recovery of MKULTRA financial records.
Transcription source: Internet Archive (OCR of the GPO joint-hearing volume)

================================================================

PROJECT MKULTRA, THE CIA’S PROGRAM OF 
RESEARCH IN BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION 


JOINT HEARING 


BEFORE THE 


SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE 
‘SUBCOMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


OF THE 


COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES 
UNITED STATES SENATE 


NINETY-FIFTH CONGRESS 
FIRST SESSION 


AUGUST 3, 1977 


ae 


Printed for the use of the Select Committee on Intelligence 
and Committee on Human Resources 


PROJECT MKULTRA, THE CIA’S PROGRAM OF 
RESEARCH IN BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION 


JOINT HEARING 


BEFORE THE 


SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE 
SUBCOMMITTEE ON 
HEALTH AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 


OF THE 


COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES 
UNITED STATES SENATE 


NINETY-FIFTH CONGRESS 
FIRST SESSION 


AUGUST 8, 1977 


ee 


Printed for the use of the Select Committee on Intelligence 
and Committee on Human Resources 


U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
96-408 O WASHINGTON : 1977 
For sale by the Superintendent of Documents, . Government Printing Office 
Washington, D.C., pone 
Stock No - (052-070--04357-1 


SENATE SELECT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE 

(Established by S. Res. 400, 94th Cong., 2d sess.) 
DANIEL K. INOUYE, Hawaii, Chairman 

BARRY GOLDWATER, Arizona, Vice Chairman 


BIRCH BAYH, Indiana ‘CLIFFORD P. CASE, New Jersey 

ADLAI E. STEVENSON, Illinois JAKE GARN, Utah 

WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine CHARLES McC. MATHIAS, Jr., Maryland 
WALTER D. HUDDLESTON, Kentucky JAMES B. PEARSON, Kansas 

JOSEPH R. BIDEN, Jr., Delaware JOHN H. CHAFEE, Rhode Island 
ROBERT MORGAN, North Carolina RICHARD G. LUGAR, Indiana 

GARY HART, Colorado MALCOLM WALLOP, Wyoming 


DANIEL PATRICK MOYNIHAN, New York 


ROBERT C. BYRD, West Virginia, Ex Officio Member. 
HOWARD H. BAKER, Jr., Tennessee, Fa Officio Member 


WILLIAM G. Minter, Staff Director 
EaRL D,. EISENHOWER, Minority Staff Director 
s AupreEY H. Hatry, Chief Clerk 


COMMITTEE ON HUMAN RESOURCES 
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS Jr., New Jersey, Chairman 
JENNINGS RANDOLPH, West Virginia JACOB K. JAVITS, New York 


‘CLAIBORNE PELL, Rhode Island RICHARD S. SCHWEIKER, Pennsylvania 
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts ROBERT T. STAFFORD, Vermont 
GAYLORD NELSON, Wisconsin- ORRIN G. HATICH, Utah 

THOMAS F. EAGLETON, Missouri JOHN H. CHAFEE, Rhode Island 

ALAN CRANSTON, California S. I. HAYAKAWA, California 


WILLIAM D, HATHAWAY, Maine 
DONALD W. RIEGLE, Jr., Michigan 


STEPHEN J. PARADISE, General Counsel and Staff Director 
MARJORIE M. WHITTAKER, Chief Clerk 
Don A. ZIMMERMAN, Minority Counsel 


SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 
EDWARD M. KENNEDY, Massachusetts, Chairman 


, 


CLAIBORNE PELL, Rhode Island RICHARD S. SCHWETIKER, Pennsylvania 
GAYLORD NELSON, Wisconsin JACOB K. JAVITS, New York 
WILLIAM D. HATHAWAY, Maine JOHN H. iCHAFEE, Rhode Island 
HARRISON A. WILLIAMS, Jr., New Jersey 

(ex officio) 


LAWRENCE HorowlItz, Professional Staff Member 
DAVID WINSTON, Minority Counsel 


(m1) 


CONTENTS 


Statements of: 

Admiral Stansfield Turner, Director, Central Intelligence Agency ; ac- 
companied by; Frank Laubinger, Office of Technical Services, Cen- 
tral Intelligence Agency; Al Brody, Office of Inspector General, 
Centra} Intelligence Agency; Ernest Mayerfield, Office of General 
Counsel, Central Intelligence Agency, and George Cary, Legislative 
Counsel, Central Intelligence Ageney_____________-____-__------- 

Philip Goldman, former employee, Central Intelligence Agency_----- 

John Gittinger, former employee, Central Intelligence Agency__------ 


Appendix A.—XVII. Testing and Use of Chemical and Biological Agents 
by the Intelligence Community__________________-__-_-- eee 
Appendix B.—Documents Referring to Discovery of Additional MKULTRA 
Material *2-2225222% ose eee ea ee es 


Material Submitted for the Record: . 


Psychological Assessments___.____.-._.----__---- +--+ 
“Truth” Drugs in Interrogation______..___..._---___---_-.-__-__-__ 
Construction of Gorman Annex______.____--_- ee 
Subproject 54__---_-_---__---________ Wee GaSe 
Drug Testing in Foreign Countries___.___._______--_---_--- S Soawew 
MKSEARCH, OFTEN/CHICKWIT___________--------_------_____ 
Employees Terminated Because of Their Participation in MKULTRA 

Subproject 3_-.--_-_--_._.-2-__-_----- eee 
QKHILLTOP Definition__.._.--____-_-__________------- 


Page 


PROJECT MKULTRA, THE CIA’S PROGRAM OF 
RESEARCH IN BEHAVIORAL MODIFICATION 


WEDNESDAY, AUGUST 3, 1977 
U.S. SENATE, 


SeLecT COMMITTEE ON INTELLIGENCE, 
AND SUBCOMMITTEE ON HEALTH 
AND SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH 

OF THE COMMITTEE ON Human Resources, - 

Washington, D.C. 
The committees met, pursuant to notice, at 9:07 a.m. in room 1202, 
- Dirksen Senate Office Building, Senator Daniel K. Ineuye-(chairman 

of the Select Committee on Intelligence) presiding. 

Present: Senators Inouye (presiding), Kennedy, Goldwater, Bayh, 
Hathaway, Huddleston, Hart, Schweiker, Case, Garn, Chafee, Lugar 
and Wallop. 

Also present: William G. Miller, staff director, Select Committee on 
Intelligence; Dr. Lawrence Horowitz, staff director, Subcommittee 
on Health and Scientific Research; and professional staff members of 
both committees. 

Senator Inovyr. The Senate Select Committee on Intelligence is 
meeting today and is joined by the Subcommittee on Health and 
Scientific Research chaired by Senator Edward Kennedy of Mas- 
sachusetts and Senator Richard Schweiker of Pennsylvania. Senator 
Hathaway and Senator Chafee are members of both committees. We 
are to hear testimony from the Director of Central Intelligence, Adm. 
Stansfield Turner, and from other Agency witnesses on issues concern- 
ing new documents supplied to the committee in the last week on drug 
testing conducted by the Centra] Intelligence Agency. 

It should be made clear from the outset that in general, we are 
focusing on events that happened over 12 or as long as 25 years ago. 
It should be emphasized that the programs that are of greatest con- 
cern have stopped and that we are reviewing these past events in 
order to better understand what statutes and other guidelines might be 
necessary to prevent the recurrence of such abuses in the future. We 
also need to know and understand what is now being done by the CIA 
in the field of behavioral research to be certain that no current abuses 
are occurring. 

I want to commend Admiral Turner for his full cooperation with 
this committee and with the Subcommittee on Health in recognizing 
that this issue needed our attention. The CIA has assisted our com- 
mittees and staffs in their investigative efforts and in arriving at 
remedies which will serve the best interests of our country. 


(1) 


2 


The reappearance of reports of the abuses of the drug testing pro- 
gram and reports of other previously unknown drug programs and 
projects for behavioral control underline the necessity for effective 
oversight procedures both in the executive branch and in the Con- 
gress. The Select Committee on Intelligence has been working very 
closely with President Carter, the Vice President, and Admiral 
Turner and his associates in developing basic concepts for statutory 
guidelines which will govern all activities of the intelligence agencies 
of the United States. 

In fact, it is my expectation that the President will soon announce 
his decisions on how he has decided the intelligence agencies of the 
United States shall be organized. This committee will be working 
closely with the President and Admiral Turner in placing this new 
structure under the law and to develop effective oversight procedures. 

It is clear that effective oversight requires that information must 
be full and forthcoming. Full and timely information is obviously 
necessary if the committee and the public is to be confident that any 
transgressions can be dealt with quickly and forcefully. 

One purpose of this hearing is to give the committee and the public 
an understanding of what new information has been discovered that 
adds to the knowledge already available from previous Church and 
Kennedy inquiries, and to hear the reasons why these documents were 
not available to the Church and Kennedy. committees. It is also the 
purpose of this hearing to address the issues raised by any additional 
illegal or improper activities that have emerged from the files and to 
develop remedies to prevent such improper activities from occurring 
again. 

Finally, there is an obligation on the part of both this committee 
and the CIA to make every effort to help those individuals or institu- 
tions that may have been harmed by any of these improper or illegal 
activities. I am certain that Admiral Turner will work with this com- 
mittee to see that this will be done. 

I would now like to welcome the most distinguished Senator from 
Massachusetts, the chairman of the Health Subcommittee, Senator 
Kennedy. : 

Senator Krnnepy. Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. We are 
delighted to join together in this very important area of public in- 
quiry and public interest, 

‘Some 2 years ago, the Senate Health Subcommittee heard chilling 
testimony about the human experimentation activities of the Central 
Intelligence Agency. The Deputy Director of the CIA revealed that 
over 30 universities and institutions were involved in an “extensive 
testing and experimentation” program which included covert drug 
tests on unwitting citizens “at all social levels, high and low, native 
Americans and foreign.” Several of these tests involved the adminis- 
tration of LSD to “unwitting subjects in social situations.” 

At least one death, that of Dr. Olsen, resulted from these activities. 
The Agency itself acknowledged that these tests made little scientific 
sense. The agents doing the monitoring were not qualified scientific 
observers. The test. subjects were seldom accessible beyond the first 
hours of the test. In a number of instances, the test subject became ill 
for hours or days, and effective followup was impossible. 


3 


Other experiments were equally offensive. For example, heroin 
addicts were enticed into participating in LSD experiments in order 
to get a reward—heroin. 

Perhaps most disturbing of all was the fact that the extent of ex- 
perimentation on human subjects was unknown. The records of all 
these activities were destroyed in January 1973, at the instruction of 
then CIA Director Richard Helms. In spite of persistent inquiries by 
both the Health Subcommittee and the Intelligence Committee, no 
additional records or information were forthcoming. And no one— | 
no single individual—could be found who remembered the details, not 
the Director of the CIA, who ordered the documents destroyed, not 
the official responsible for the pregram, nor any of his associates. 

We believed that the record, incomplete as it was, was as complete 
as it was going to be.. Then one individual, through a Freedom of In- 
formation request, accomplished what two U.S. Senate committees 
could not. He spurred:the agency into finding additional records per- 
taining to the CIA’s program of experimentation with human subjects. 
These new records were discovered by the agency in March. Their 
existence was not made known to the Congress until July. 

The records reveal a far more extensive series of experiments than 
had previously been thought. Eighty-six universities or institutions 
were involved. Néw instances of unethical behavior were revealed. 

The intelligence community of this Nation, which requires a shroud 
of secrecy in order to operate, has a very sacred trust from the 
American people. The CIA’s program of human experimentation of 
the fifties and sixties violated that trust. It was violated again on the 
day the bulk of the agency’s records were destroyed in 1973. It is 
violated each time a responsible official refuses to recollect the details 
of the program. The best safeguard against abuses in the future is a 
complete public accounting of the abuses of the past. 

I think this is illustrated, as Chairman Inouye pointed out. These 
are issues, are questions that happened in the fifties and sixties, and 
go back some 15, 20 years ago, but they are front page news today, as 
we see in the major newspapers and on the television and in the media 
of this country; and the reason they are, I think, is because it just con- 
tinuously begins to trickle out. sort of, month after month, and the 
best way to put this period behind us, obviously, is to have the full 
information, and I think that is the desire of Admiral Turner and of 
the members of this committee. 

The Central Intelligence Agency drugged American citizens with- 
out their knowledge or consent. It used university facilities and per- 
sonnel without their knowledge. It funded leading researchers, often 
without their knowledge. 

These institutes, these individuals, have a right to know who they 
are and how and when they were used. As of today, the Agency itself 
refuses to declassify the names of those institutions and individuals, 
quite appropriately, I might say, with regard to the individuals under 
the Privacy Act. It seems to me to be a fundamental responsibility to 
notify those individuals or institutions, rather. I think many of them 
were caught up in an unwitting manner to do research for the 
Agency. Many researchers, distinguished researchers, some of our 
most outstanding members of our scientific community, involved in 


4 


this network, now really do not know whether they were involved or 
not, and it seems to me that the whole health and climate in terms of 
our university and our scientific and health facilities are entitled to 
that response. 

So, I intend to do all I can to persuade the Agency to, at the very 
least, officially inform those institutions and individuals involved. 

Two years ago, when these abuses were first revealed, I introduced 
legislation, with Senator Schweiker and Senator Javits, designed to 
minimize the potential for any similar abuses in the future. That 
legislation expanded the jurisdiction of the National Commission on 
Human Subjects of Biomedical and Behavioral Research to cover all 
federally funded research involving human subjects. The research 
initially was just directed toward HEW activities, but this legislation 
covered DOD as well asthe CIA. 

This Nation has a biomedical and behavioral research capability 
second to none. It has had for subjects of HEW funded research for 
the past 3 years a system for the protection of human subjects of bio- 
medical and behavioral research second to none, and the Human Ex- 
perimentation Commission has proven its value. Today’s hearings 
and the record already established underscore the need to expand its 
jurisdiction. 

The CIA supported that legislation in 1975, and it passed the Senate 
unanimously last year. I believe it. is needed in order to assure all 
our people that they will have the degree of protection in human ex- 
perimentation that they deserve and have every right to expect. 

Senator Inouye. Thank you very much. Now we will proceed with 
the hearings. Admiral Turner ? 

[The prepared statement of Admiral Turner follows:] 


PREPARED STATEMENT OF ADMIRAL STANSFIELD TURNER, DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL 
INTELLIGENCE 


Mr. Chairman: In my letter to you of July 15, 1977, I reported our recent dis- 
covery of seven boxes of documents related to Project MKULTRA, a closely held 
CIA project conducted from 1953-1964. As you may recall, MKULTRA was an 
“umbrella project”? under which certain sensitive subprojects were funded, in- 
volving among other things research on drugs and behavioral modification. Dur- 
ing the Rockefeller Commission and Church Committee investigations in 1975, 
the eryptonym became publicly known when details of the drug-related death of 
Dr. Frank Olson were publicized. In 1953 Dr. Olson, a civilian employee of the 
Army at Fort Detrick, leaped to his death from a hotel room window in New 
York City about a week after having unwittingly consumed LSD administered to 
him as an experiment at a meeting of LSD researchers called by CIA. ; 

Most of what was known about the Agency’s involvement with behavioral 
drugs during the investigations in 1975 was contained in a report on Project 
MKULTRA prepared by the Inspector General's office in 1963. As a result of 
that report’s recommendations, unwitting testing of drugs on U.S. citizens was 
subsequently discontinued. The MKULTRA-related report was made available to 
the Church Committee investigators and to the staff of Senator Kennedy’s Sub- 
committee on Health. Until the recent discovery, it was believed that all of the 
MKULTRA files dealing with behavioral modification had been destroyed in 
1973 on the orders of the then retiring Chief of the Office of Technical Service, 
with the authorization of the then DCI, as has been previously reported. Almost 
all of the people who had had any connection with the aspects of the project 
which interested Senate investigators in 1975 were no longer with the Agency 
at that time. Thus, there was little detailed knowledge of the MKULTRA sub- 
projects available to CIA during the Church Committee investigations. This 
lack of available details, moreover, was probably not wholly attributable to the 


5 


destruction of MKULTRA files in 1973; the 1963 report on MKULTRA by the 
Inspector General notes on page -14: “Present practice is to maintain no records 
of the planning and approval of test programs.” 

When I reported to you last on this matter, my staff had not yet had an 
opportunity to review the newly located mateérial in depth. This has now been 
accomplished, and I am in a position to give you a description of the contents of 
the recovered material. I believe you will be most interested in the following 
aspects of the recent discovery : 

How the material was discovered and why it was not previously found; 

The nature of this recently located material ; 

How much new information there is in the material which may not have 
been: previously known and reported to Senate investigators; and 

What we believe the most significant aspects of this find to be. 

To begin, as to how we discovered these materials. The material had been 
sent to our Retired Records Center outside of Washington and was discovered 
there as a result of the extensive search efforts of an employee charged with re- 
sponsibility for maintaining our holdings on behavioral drugs and for responding 
to Freedom of Information Act requests on this subject. During the Church 
Committee investigation in 1975, searches for MKULTR4A-related material were 
made by examining both the active and retired records of all branches of CIA 
considered at all likely to have had association with MKULTRA documents. The 
retired records of the Budget and Fiscal Section of the Branch responsible for 
such work were not searched, however. This was because financial papers as- 
sociated with sensitive projects such as MKULTRA were normally maintained 
by the Branch itself under the project file, not by the Budget and Fiscal Section. 
In the case at hand, however, the newly located material was sent to the Re- 
tired Records Center in 1970 by the Budget and Fiscal Section as part of its 
own retired holdings. The reason for this departure from normal procedure is not 
known. As a result of it, however, the material escaped retrieval and destruction 
in 1973 by the then-retiring Director of the Office as well as discovery in 1975 
by CIA officials responding to Senate investigators. 

The employee who located this material did so by leaving no stone unturned 
in his efforts to respond to FOIA requests. He reviewed all listings of material 
of this Branch stored at the Retired Records Center, including those of the 
Budget and Fiscal Section and, thus, discovered the MKULTRA-related docu- 
ments which had been missed in the previous searches. In sum, the Agency failed 
to uncover these particular documents in 1973 in the process of attempting to 
destroy them; it similarly failed to locate them in 1975 in response to the Church 
Committee hearings. I am convinced that there was no attempt to conceal this 
material during the earlier searches. 

Next, as to the nature of the recently located material, it is important to 
realize that the recovered folders are finance folders. The bulk of the material in 
them consists of approvals for advance of funds, vouchers, accountings, and the 
like—most of which are not very informative as to the nature of the activities 
that were undertaken. Occasional project proposals or memoranda comment- 
ing on some aspect of a subproject are scattered throughout this material. 
In general, however, the recovered material does not include status reports or 
other documents relating to operational considerations or progress in the various 
subprojects, though some elaboration of the activities contemplated does appear. 
The recovered documents fall roughly into three categories: 

First, there are 149 MKULTRA subprojects, many of which appear to have 
some connection with research into behavioral modification, drug acquisition 
‘and testing or administering drugs surreptitiously. 

Second, there are two boxes of miscellaneous MKULTRA papers, including 
audit reports and financial statements from “cut-out” (i.e., intermediary ) 
funding mechanisms used to conceal CIA’s sponsorship of various research 
projects. 

Finally, there are 33 additional subprojects concerning certain intelligence 
activities previously funded under MKULTRA which have nothing to do 
either with behavioral modification, drugs, and toxins or with any other re- 
lated matters. 

We have attempted to group the activities covered by the 149 subprojects into 
categories under descriptive headings. In broad outline, at least, this presents the 
contents of these files. The activities are placed in the following 15 categories: 


6 


1. Research into the effects of behavioral drugs and/or alcohol : 

17 subprojects probably not involving human testing ; 

14 subprojects definitely involving tests on human volunteers ; 

19 subprojects probably including tests on human volunteers. While not 
known, some of these subprojects may have included tests on unwitting sub- 
jects as well; 

6 subprojects involving tests on unwitting subjects. 

2. Research on hypnosis : 8 subprojects, including 2 involving hypnosis and drugs 
in combination. - 

8. Acquisition of chemicals or drugs: 7 subprojects. 

4. Aspects of magicians’ art useful in covert operations: e.g., surreptitious de- 
livery of drug-related materials : 4 subprojects. 

5. Studies of human behavior, sleep research, and behavioral changes during 
psychotherapy : 9 subprojects. 

6. Library searches and attendance at seminars and international conferences 
on behavioral modification : 6 subprojects. 

7. Motivational studies, studies of defectors, assessment, and training tech- 
niques: 23 subprojects. 

8. Polygraph research : 3 subprojects. 

9. Funding mechanisms for MKULTRA external research activities: 3 
subprojects. 

10. Research on drugs, toxins, and biologicals in human tissue; provision of 
exotic pathogens and the capability to incorporate them in effective delivery 
systems : 6 subprojects. 

11. Activities whose objectives cannot be determined from available documen- 
tation : 3 subprojects. 

12. Subprojects involving funding support for unspecified activities connected 
with the Army’s Special Operations Division at Ft. Detrick, Md. This activity is 
outline in Book I of the Church Committee Report, pp. 388-389. (See Appendix A, 
pp. 68-69. Under CIA’s Project MKNAOMI, the Army Assisted CIA in develop- 
ing, testing, and maintaining biological agents and delivery systems for use 
against humans as well as against animals and crops. The objectives of these 
subprojects cannot be identified from the recovered material beyond the fact 
that the money was to be used where normal funding channels would require 
more written or oral justification than appeared desirable for security reasons 
or where operational considerations dictated short lead times for purchases. About 
$11,000 was involved during this period 1953-1960 : 3 subprojects. 

18. Single subprojects in such areas as effects of electro-shock, harassment tech- 
niques for offensive use, analysis of extrasensory perception, gas propelled sprays 
and aerosols, and four subprojects involving crop and material sabotage. 

14. One or two subprojects on each of the following : 

“Blood Grouping” research, controlling the activity of animals, energy 
storage and transfer in organic systems; and 

stimulus and response in biological systems. 

15. Three subprojects cancelled before any work was done on them having to 
do with laboratory drug screening, research on brain concussion, and research 
on biologically active materials to be tested through the skin on human volunteers. 

Now, as to how much new the recovered material adds to what has previously 
been reported to the Church Committee and to Senator Kennedy’s Subcommittee 
on Health on these topics, the answer is additional detail, for the most part: e.g., 
the names of previously unidentified researchers and institutions associated on 
either a witting or unwitting basis with MKULTRA activities, and the names of 
CIA officials who approved or monitored the various subprojects. Some new sub- 
stantive material is also present: e.g., details concerning proposals for experi- 
mentation and clinical testing associated with various research projects, and @ 
possibly improper contribution by CIA to a private institution. However, the 
principal types of activities included have, for the most part, either been outlined 
to some extent or generally described in what was previously available to CIA 
in the way of documentation and was supplied by CIA to Senate investigators. 
For example: 

Financial disbursement records for the period 1960-1964 for 76 of the 149 
numbered MKULTRA subprojects had been recovered from the Office of Finance 
by CIA and were made available to the Church Committee investigators in August 
or September 1975. : 

The 1968 Inspector General report on MKULTRA made available to both the 
Church Committee and Senator Kennedy’s Subcommittee mentions electro-shock 


7 


and harassment substances (pp. 4, 16) ; covert testing on unwitting U.S. citizens 
(pp. 4% 10-12) a the search for new materials through arrangements with special- 
ists in universities, pharmaceutical houses, hospitals, state and federal institu- 
tions, and Drivate research organizations (pp. 7, 9) ; and the fact that the Tech- 
nical Service Division of CIA had initiated 144 subprojects related to the control 
of human behavior between 1953-1963 (p. 21). 

; The relevant section of a 1957 Inspector General report on the Technical Serv- 
ice Division was also made available to the Church Committee staff. That report 
discusses techniques for human assessment and unorthodox methods of com- 
munication (p. 201) ; discrediting and disabling materials which can be covertly 
administered (pp 201-202) ; studies on magicians’ arts as applied to covert oper- 
ations (p. 202) ; specific funding mechanisms for research performed outside of 
CIA (pp. 202-203, 205) ; research being done on “K” ( knockout) material, alcohol 
tolerance, and hypnotism (p. 203); research on LSD (p. 204) ; anti-personnel 
harassment and assassination delivery systems including aerosol generators and 
other spray devices (pp. 206-208) ; the role of Fort Detrick in support of CIA’s 
Biological/Chemical Warfare capability (p. 208) ; and material sabotage research 
(p. 209). Much of this material is reflected in the Church Committee Report, 
Book I, pp. 385-422. (See Appendix A, pp. 65-102). 

The most significant new data discovered are, first, the names of researchers 
and institutions who participated in the MKULTRA project and, secondly, a 
possibly improper contribution by CIA to a private institution. We are now in 
possession of the names of 185 non-government researchers and assistants who 
are identified in the recovered material dealing with the 149 subprojects, The 
names of 80 institutions where work was done or with which these people were 
affiliated are also mentioned. 

The institutions include 44 colleges or universities, 15 research foundations or 
chemical or pharmaceutical companies and the like, 12 hospitals or clinics (in ad- 
dition to those associated with universities), and 3 penal institutions. While the 
identities of some of these people and institutions were known previously, the 
discovery of the new identities adds to our knowledge of MKULTRA. 

The facts as they pertain to the possibly improper contribution are as follows: 
One project involves a contribution of $375,000 to a building fund of a private 
medical institution. The fact that a contribution was made was previously 
known; indeed it was mentioned in a 1957 Inspector General report on the 
Technical Service Division of CIA, pertinent portions of which had been re- 
viewed by the Church Committee staff. The newly discovered material, however, 
makes it clear that this contribution was made through an intermediary, which 
made it appear to be a private donation. As a private donation, the contribution 
was then matched by federal funds, The institution was not made aware of the 
true source of the gift. This project was approved by the then DCI, and concurred 
in by CIA’s top management at the time, including the then General Counsel who 
wrote an opinion supporting the legality of the contribution. 

The recently discovered documents give a greater insight into the scope of the 
unwitting drug testing but contribute little more than that. We now have col- 
laborating information that some of the unwitting drug testing was carried on 
in safehouses in San Francisco and New York City, and we have identified that 
three individuals were involved in this undertaking as opposed to the previously 
reported one person. We also know now that some unwitting testing took place 
on criminal sexual psychopaths confined at a State hospital and that, additional- 
ly, research was done on a knock-out or “K” drug in parallel with research to 
develop pain killers for cancer patients. . . 

These, then are the principal findings identified to date in our review of the 
recovered material. As noted earlier, we believe the detail on the identities of 
researchers and institutions involved in CIA’s sponsorship of drugs and be- 
havioral modification is a new element and one which poses a considerable prob- 
lem. Most of the people and institutions involved are not aware of Agency 
sponsorship. We should certainly assume that the researchers and institutions 
which cooperated with CIA on a witting basis acted in good faith and in the 
belief that they were aiding their government in a legitimate and proper purpose. 
I believe we all have a moral obligation to these researchers and institutions to 
protect them from any unjustified embarrassment or damage to their reputations 
which revelation of their identities might bring. In addition, I have a legal 
obligation under the Privacy Act not to publicly disclose the names of the in- 
dividual researchers without their consent. This is especially true, of course, for 


8 
those researchers and institutions which were unwitting participants in CIA- 
sponsored activities. 

Nevertheless, recognizing the right and the need of both the Senate Select 
Committee on Intelligence and the Senate Subcommittee on Health to investigate 
the circumstances of these activities in whatever detail they consider necessary, 
I am providing your Committee with all of the names on a classified basis. I 
hope that this will facilitate your investigation while protecting the individuals 
and institutions involved. Let me emphasize that the MKULTRA events are 12 
to 25 years in the past. I assure you that the CIA is in no way engaged in either 
witting or unwitting testing of drugs today. 

Finally, I am working closely with the Attorney General and with the Secre- 
tary of Health, Education and Welfare on. this matter. We are making available 
to the Attorney General whatever materials he may deem necessary to any 
investigation he may elect to undertake. We are working with both the Attorney 
General and the Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare to determine 
whether it is practicable from this new evidence to attempt to identify any of 
the persons to whom drugs may have been administered unwittingly. No such 
names are part of these records, but we are working to determine if there are 
adequate clues to lead to their identification ; and if so, how to go about fulfilling 
the Government’s responsibilities in the matter. 


TESTIMONY OF ADM. STANSFIELD TURNER, DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL 
INTELLIGENCE, ACCOMPANIED BY FRANK LAUBINGER, OFFICE 
OF TECHNICAL SERVICES; AL BRODY, OFFICE OF INSPECTOR 
GENERAL; ERNEST MAYERFIELD, OFFICE OF GENERAL COUNSEL; 
AND GEORGE L. CARY, LEGISLATIVE COUNSEL 


Admiral Turner. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I would like to begin 
by thanking you and Senator Kennedy for having a joint hearing this 
morning. I hope this will expedite and facilitate our getting all the 
information that both of your committees need into the record quickly. 

I would like also to thank you both for prefacing the remarks today 
by reminding us all that the events about which we are here to talk 
are 12- to 24-years old. They in no way represent the current activities 
or policies of the Central Intelligence Agency. 

What we are here to do is to give you all the information that we 
now have and which we did not previously have on a subject known 
as Project MKULTRA, a project which took place from 1953 to 1964. 
It was an umbrella project under which there were numerous sub- 
projects for research, among other things, on drugs and behavioral 
modification. What the new material that. we offer today is a sup- 
plement to the considerable material that was made available in 1975, 
during the Church committee hearings, and also to the Senate Sub- 
committee on Health and Scientific Research. 

At that time, the CIA offered up all of the information and docu- 
ments it believed it had available. The principal one available at that 
time that gave the greatest amount of information on this subject 
was a report of the CIA’s Inspector General written in 1963, and which 
led_ directly to the termination of this activity in 1964, 13 years ago. 

The information available in 1975 to the various investigating 
groups was indeed sparse, first because of the destruction of material 
that took place in 1973. as detailed by Senator Kennedy a minute ago, 
with the concurrence of the then Director of Central Intelligence and 
under the supervision of the Director of the Office of Technical 
Services that supervised Project MKULTRA. 


9 


The material in 1975 was also sparse because most of the CIA people 
who had been involved in 1953 to 1964 in this activity had retired from 
the Agency. I would further add that I think the material was sparse 
in part because it was the practice at that time not to keep detailed 
records in this category. 

For instance, the 1963 report of the Inspector General notes: = 

Present practice is to maintain no records of the planning and approval of 
test programs. 

In brief, there were few records to begin with and less after the 
destruction of 1973. : 

What I would like to do now, though, is to proceed and let you know 
what the new material adds to our knowledge of this topic, and I 
will start by describing how the material was discovered and why it __ 
was not previously discovered. The material in question, some seven 
boxes, had been sent to our Retired Records Center outside of the 
Washington area. It was discovered there as the result of an extensive 
search by an employee charged with the responsibility for maintain- 
ing our holdings on behavioral drugs and for responding to Freedom 
of Information Act requests on this subject. 

During the Church committee investigation of 1975, searches for 
MKULTRA-related material were made by examining both the active 
and the retired records of al] of the branches of CIA considered likely 
to have had an association with MKULTRA documents. The retired 
records of the Budget and Fiscal Section of the branch that was respon- 
sible for such work were not searched, however. This was because the 
financial paper associated with sensitive projects such as MKULTRA 
were normally maintained by the branch itself under the project title, 
MKULTRA, not by the Budget and Fiscal Section under a special 
budget file. 

In the case at hand, however, this newly located material had been 
sent to the Retired Records Center in 1970 by the Budget and Fiscal 
Section of this branch as part of its own retired holdings. In short, what 
should have been filed by the branch itself was filed by the Budget 
and Fiscal Section, and what should have been filed under the project 
title, MKULTRA, was filed under budget and fiscal matters. The rea- 
son for this departure from the normal procedure of that time is simply 
not known, and as a result of it, however, the material escaped retrieval 
and destruction in 1973, as well as discovery in 1975. 

The employee who located this material did so by Jeaving no stone 
unturned in his efforts to respond to a Freedom of Information Act 
request, or several of them, in fact. He reviewed all of the listings of 
material of this branch, stored at the Retired Records Center, including 
those of the Budget and Fiscal Section, and thus discovered the 
MKULTRA-related documents, which had been missed in the previous 
searches, 

In sum, the agency failed to uncover these particular documents in 
1973, in the process of attempting to destroy them. It similarly failed 
to locate them in 1975, in response to the Church committee hearings. 
Iam personally persuaded that there is no evidence of any attempt to 
conceal this material during the earlier searches. Moreover, as we will 
discuss as we proceed, I do not believe the material itself is such that 


10 


there would be a motive on the part of the CIA to withhold this, having 
disclosed what it did in 1975. 

Next, let me move to the nature of this recently located material. 
It is important to remember what I have just noted, that these folders 
that were discovered are finance folders. The bulk of the material in 
them consists of approvals for the advance of funds, vouchers, and 
accountings and such, most of which are not very informative as to 
the nature of the activities that they were supporting. Occasional proj- 
ect proposals or memoranda commenting on some aspect of a subproject 
are scattered throughout this material. In general, however, the re- 
covered material does not include overall status reports or other docu- 
ments relating to operational considerations, or to the progress on 

_Yarious subprojects, though some elaboration of the activities contem- 
plated does appear from time to time. 

There are roughly three categories of projects. First, there are 149 
MKULTRA subprojects, many of which appear to have some connec- 
tion with research into behavioral modification, drug acquisition and 
testing, or administering drugs surreptitiously. Second, there are two 
boxes of miscellaneous MKULTRA papers, including audit reports 
and financial statements from intermediary funding mechanisms used 
to conceal CIA sponsorship of various research projects. ; 

Finally, there are 33 additional subprojects concerning certain in- 
telligence activities previously funded under MKULTRA but which 
have nothing to do either with behavioral modifications, drugs and 
toxins, or any closely related matter. 

We have attempted to group the activities covered by the 149 sub- 
projects into categories under descriptive headings. In broad outline, 
at least, this presents the contents of these files. The following 15 
categories are the ones we have divided these into. 

First, research into the effects of behavioral drugs and/or alcohol. 
Within this, there are 17 projects probably not involving human test- 
ing. There are 14 subprojects definitely involving testing on human 
volunteers. There are 19 subprojects probably including tests on human 
‘volunteers and 6 subprojects involving tests on unwitting 
human beings. . 

Second, there is research on hypnosis, eight subprojects, including 
two involving hypnosis and drugs in combination. Fikes 

Third, there are seven projects on the acquisition of chemicals or 
drugs. 

Fourth, four subprojects on the aspects of the magician’s art, useful 
in covert operations, for instance, the surreptitious delivery of drug- 
related materials. : 

Fifth, there are nine projects on studies of human behavior, sleep 
research, and behavioral change during psychotherapy. ; 

Sixth, there are projects on library searches and attendants at semi- 
nars and international conferences on behavioral modifications. 

Seventh, there are 23 projects on motivational studies, studies of 
defectors, assessments of behavior and training techniques. 

Eighth, there are three subprojects on polygraph research. — 

Ninth, there are three subprojects on funding mechanisms for 
MKULTRA’s external research activities. 


11 


Tenth, there are six subprojects on research on drugs, toxins, and 
biologicals in human tissue, provision of exotic pathogens, and the 
capability to incorporate them in effective delivery systems. 

_Eleventh, there are three subprojects on activities whose nature 
simply cannot be determined. 

Twelfth, there are subprojects involving funding support for un- 
specified activities conducted with the Army Special Operations Divi- 
sion at Fort Detrich, Md. This activity is outlined in Book I of the 
aa committee report, pages 388 to 389. (See Appendix A, pp. 

Under CIA’s Project MKNAOMI, the Army assisted the CIA in 
developing, testing, and maintaining biological agents and delivery 
-systems-for use against humans as well as against animals and crops. 

Thirteenth, there are single subprojects in such areas as the effects 
of electroshock, harassment techniques for offensive use, analysis of 
extrasensory perception, gas propelled sprays and aerosols, and four 
subprojects involving crop and material sabotage. - 

Fourteenth, one or two subprojects on each of the following: blood 
grouping research; controlling the activities of animals; energy stor- 
age and transfer in organic systems; and stimulus and response in 
biological systems. 

Finally, 15th, there are three subprojects canceled before any work 
. was. done on them having to do with laboratory drug screening, re- 
search on brain concussion, and research on biologically active 
materials. 

Now, let me address how much this newly discovered material adds 
to what has previously been reported to the Church committee and 
to Senator Kennedy’s Subcommittee on Health. The answer is basi- 
cally additional detail. The principal types of activities included in 
these documents have for the most part been outlined or to some 
extent generally described in what was previously available in the 
way of documentation and which was supplied by the CIA to the 
Senate investigators. 

For example, financial disbursement records for the period of 1960 
to 1964 for 76 of these 149 subprojects had been recovered by the 
Office of Finance at CIA and were made available to the Church 
committee investigators. For example, the 1963 Inspector General 
report on MKULTRA made available to both the Church committee 
and the Subcommittee on Health mentions electroshock and harass- 
ment substances, covert testing on unwitting U.S. citizens, the search 
for new materials through arrangements with specialists in hospitals 
and universities, and the fact that the Technical Service Division of 
CIA had initiated 144 subprojects related to the control of human 
behavior. 

For instance also, the relevant section of a 1957 Inspector General 
report was also made available to the Church committee staff, and 
that report discusses the techniques for human assessment and un- 
orthodox methods of communication, discrediting and disabling ma- 
terials which can be covertly administered, studies on magicians’ arts 
as applied to covert operations, and other similar topics. 

The most significant new data that has been discovered are, first, 
the names of researchers and institutions who participated in 


12 


MKULTRA projects, and second, a possibly improper contribution 
by the CIA to a private institution. We are now in the posses- 
sion of the names of 185 nongovernment researchers and assistants 
who are identified in the recovered material dealing with these 149 
subprojects. 

There are also names of 80 institutions where work was done or 
with which these people were affiliated. The institutions include 44 
colleges or universities, 15 research foundation or chemical or pharma- 
ceutical companies or the like, 12 hospitals or clinics, in addition to 
those associated with the universities, and 3 penal institutions. 

While the identities of some of these people and institutions were 
known previously, the discovery of the new identities adds to our 
knowledge of MKULTRA. 

The facts as they pertain to the possibly improper contribution are 
as follows. One project involves a contribution of $375,000 to a build- 
’ ing fund of a private medical institution. The fact that that con- 
tribution was made was previously known. Indeed, it was mentioned 
in the 1957 report of the Inspector General on the Technical Service 
Division of CIA that supervised MKULTRA, and pertinent portions 
of this had been reviewed by the Church committee staff. 

The newly discovered material, however, makes it clear that. this 
contribution was made through an intermediary, which made it ap- 
pear to.be a private donation. As a private donation, the contribution 
was then matched by Federal funds. The institution was not made 
aware of the true source of the gift. This project was approved hv 
the then Director of Central Intelligence and concurred in by CIA’s 
top management including the then General Counsel, who wrote an 
opinion supporting the legality of the contribution. 

The recently discovered documents also give greater insight into 
the scope of the unwitting nature of the drug testing, but contribute 
little more than that. We now do have corroborating information that 
some of the unwitting drug testing was carried out in what is known 
in the intelligence trade as safe houses in San Francisco and in New 
York City, and we have identified that three individuals were in- 
volved in this undertaking, whereas we previously reported there was 
only one person. 

We also know now that some unwitting testing took place on crimi- 
nal sexual psychopaths confined at a State hospital, and that addi- 
tionally research was done on a knockout or K drug in parallel with 
research to develop painkillers for cancer patients. 

These, then, are the principal findings identified to date in our re- 
view of this recovered material. As noted earlier, we believe the de- 
tail on the identities of researchers and institutions involved in CIA 
sponsorship of drug and behavioral modification research is a new 
element and one which poses a considerable problem. Most of the peo- 
ple and institutions involved were not aware of CIA sponsorship. We 
should certainly assume that the researchers and institutions which 
cooperated with CIA on a witting basis acted in good faith and in 
the belief that they were aiding their Government in a legitimate and 
proper purpose. 

I believe that we all have a moral obligation to these researchers 
and institutions to protect them from any unjustified embarrassment 


13 


or damage to their reputations which revelation of their identities 
might bring. In addition, I have a legal obligation under the Privacy 
Act. not to publicly disclose the names of the individual researchers 
without their consent. 

This is especially true, of course, for those researchers and institu- 
tions which were unwitting participants in CLA sponsored activities. 

Nonetheless, Mr. Chairman, I certainly recognize the right and the 
need of both the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence and the 
Senate Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research to investigate 
the circumstances of these activities in whatever detail you consider 
necessary. I am providing your committee with all of the documenta- 
tion, including all of the names, on a classified basis. I hope that this 
will facilitate your investigation while still protecting the individuals 
and the institutions involved. 

Let me emphasize again that the MKULTRA events are 12-to 24 
years in the past, and I assure you that CIA is in no way engaged in 
either witting or unwitting testing of drugs today. 

Finally, I am working closely with the Attorney General on this 
matter. We are making available to the Attorney General whatever 
materials he may deem necessary to any investigations that he may 
elect to undertake. Beyond that, we are also working with the Attorney 
General to determine whether it is practicable from this new evidence 
to identify any of the persons to whom drugs may have been admin- 
istered unwittingly. No such names are part of these records. We have 
not identified the individuals to whom drugs were administered, but 
we are trying now to determine if there are adequate clues to lead to 
their identification, and if so how best to go about fulfilling the Gov- 
ernment’s responsibilities in this matter. 

Mr. Chairman, as we proceed with that process of attempting to 
identify the individuals and then determining what is our proper re- 
sponsibility to them, I will keep both of these committees fully ad- 
vised. I thank you, sir. 

Senator Inovyr. Thank you very much, Admiral Turner, Your 
spirit of cooperation is much appreciated. I would like to announce to 
the committee that in order to give every member an opportunity to 
participate in this hearing, that we would set a time limit of 10 minutes 
per Senator. 

Admiral Turner, please give this committee the genesis of MKUIL 
TRA. Who or what committee or commission or agency was responsi- 
ble for dreaming up this grandiose and sinister project, and why was 
it necessary? What is the rationale or justification for such a project 
and was the President of the United States aware of this? 

Admiral Turner. Mr. Chairman, I am going to ask Mr. Brody on 
my right, who is a long-time member of the CIA to address that in 
more detail. I believe everything that we know about the genesis was 
turned over to the Church committee and is contained in that ma- 
terial. Basically, it was a CYA-initiated project. It started out of a 
concern of our being taken advantage of by other powers who would 
use drugs against our personnel, and it. was approved in the Agencv. I 
have asked the question you just asked me, and have been assured that 
there is no evidence within the Agency of any involvement at higher 
echelons, the White House, for instance, or specific approval. That 
does not say there was not, but we have no such evidence. 


96-408 O- 77-2 


14 


Mr. Brody, would you amplify on my comments there, please? 

Mr. Bropy. Mr. Chairman, I really have very little to add to that. 
To my knowledge, there was no Presidential knowledge of this proj- 
ect at the time. It was a CIA project, and as the admiral said, it was 
a project designed to attempt to counteract what was then thought to 
be a serious threat by our enemies of using drugs against us. Most of 
what else we know about it is in the Senate Church committee report. 

Senator Lvouyr. Were the authorized members of the Congress 
made aware of this project through the budgetary process ? 

Mr. Bropy. We have no knowledge of that, sir. 

Senator Inovyr. Are you suggesting that it was intentionally kept 
away from the Congress and the President of the United States? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. We are only saying that we have no evi- 
dence one way or the other as to whether the Congress was informed 
of this particular project. There are no records to indicate. 

Senator Inouye. Admiral Turner, are you personally satisfied by 
actual investigation that this newly discovered information was not 
intentionally kept away from the Senate of the United States? 

Admiral Turner. I have no way to prove that, sir. That is my con- 
viction from everything I have seen of it. 

Senator Inouyr. Now, we have been advised that these documents 
were initially discovered in March of this year, and you were notified 
in July of this year, or June of this year, and the committee was noti- 
fied in July. Can you tell us why the Director of Central Intelligence 
was notified 3 months after its initial discovery, why the delay? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. All this started with several Freedom of 
Information Act requests, and Mr. Laubinger on my left was the in- 
dividual who took it upon himself to pursue these requests with great 
diligence, and got permission to go to the Retired Records Center, and 
then made the decision to look not only under what, would be the ex- 
pected subject files, but through every file with which the branch that 
conducted this type of activity had anv conceivable connection. 

Very late in March, he discovered these seven boxes. He arranged 
to have them shipped from the Retired Records Center to Washing- 
ton, to our headquarters. They arrived in early April. He advised his 
appropriate superiors, who asked him how long he thought it would 
take him to go through these and screen them appropriately, clear 
them for Freedom of Information Act release. 

There are, we originally estimated, 5,000 pages here. We now think 
that was an underestimation, and it may be closer to 8,000 pages. He 
estimated it would take about 45 days or into the middle of May to 
do that. He was told to proceed, and as he did so there was nothing 
uncovered in the beginning of these 149 cases that appeared particu- 
larly startling or particularly additive to the knowledge that had al- 
ready been given to the Church committee, some details, but no major 
revelations. 

He and his associates proceeded with deliberateness, but not a great 
sense of urgency. There were other interfering activities that came 
and demanded his time also. He was not able to put 100 percent of his 
time on it, and there did not appear to be cause for a great rush here. 
We were trying to be responsive to the Freedom of Information Act 
request within the limits of our manpower and our priorities. 


15 


In early June, however, he discovered two projects, the one related 
to K drugs and the one related to the funding at the institution, and 
realized immediately that he had substantial new information, and 
he immediately reported this to his superiors, 

Two actions were taken. One was to notify the lawyers of the prin- 
cipal Freedom of Information Act requestor that we would have sub- 
stantial new material and that it would be forthcoming as rapidly as 
possible, and the second was to start a memorandum up the chain 
that indicated his belief that we should notify the Senate Select Com- 
mittee on Intelligence of this discovery because of the character at least 
of these two documents. 

As that proceeded up from the 13th of June, at each echelon we had 
to go through the legal office, the legislative liaison office and at each 
echelon about the same question was asked of him: Have you gone 
through all of this, so that when we notify the Senate Select Com- 
mittee we do not notify half of the important relevations and not the 
other half? The last thing I want, Mr. Chairman. is in any way to 
be on any topic, give the appearance on any topic of being recalcitrant, 
reluctant, or having to have you drag things out of me, and my sub- 
ordinates, much to my pleasure, had each asked, have you really gone 
through these 8,000 pages enough to know that we are not going to 
uncover a bombshell down at the bottom 2 

By late June, about the 28th, this process reached my deputy. He 
notified me after his review of it on the 7th of J uly, which is the first 
I knew of it. I began reading into it. I asked the same probing ques- 
tion directly. I then notified my superiors, and on the 15th delivered 
to you my letter letting you know that we had this, and we have been 
working, many people, many hours since then, to be sure that what we 
are telling you today does include all the relevant material. 

Senator Inouye. I would like to commend Mr. Laubinger for his 
diligence and expertise, but was this diligence the result of the Free- 
dom of Information Act or could this diligence have been exercised 
during the Church hearings? Why was it not exercised ? 

Admiral Turner. There is no question that theoretically this dili- 
gence could have been exercised at any time, and it may well be that 
the Freedom of Information Act has made us more aware of this. 
Would you speak for yourself, please. . 

Mr. Launrincer. I really don’t attribute it, Senator, to diligence so 
much as thoroughness. If you can imagine the pressures under an 
organization trying to respond, which I think the CIA did at the time 
of the Church committee hearings, the hallways of the floor I am on 
were full of boxes from our records center. Every box that anyone 
thought could possibly contain anything was called up for search. It 
was one of a frantic effort to comply. 

When the pressure of that situation cools down, and you can start 
looking at things systematically, you are apt to find things that you 
wouldn’t under the heat of a crash program, and that is what happened 
here. 

Senator Inouye. Thank you very much. Senator Kennedy? _ 

Senator Kennepy. Admiral Turner, this is an enormously distress- 
ing report that you give to the American Congress and to the American 
people today. Granted, it happened many years ago, but what we are 


16 


basically talking about is an activity which took place in the country 
that involved the perversion and the corruption of many of our out- 
standing research centers in this country, with CIA funds, where some 
of our top researchers were unwittingly involved in research spon- 
sored by the Agency in which they had no knowledge of the back- 
ground or the support for. 

Much of it was done with American citizens who were completely 
unknowing in terms of taking various drugs, and there are perhaps 
any number of Americans who are walking around today on the east 
coast or west coast who were given drugs, with all the kinds of physical 
and psychological damage that can be caused. We have gone over that 
in very careful detail, and it is significant and severe indeed. 

I do not know what could be done in a less democratic country 
that would be more alien to our own traditions than was really done 
in this narrow area, and as you give this report to the committee, I 
would like to get some sense of your own concern about this type of 
activity, and how you react, having assumed this important responsibil- 
ity with the confidence of President Carter and the overwhelming 
support, obviously, of the, Congress, under this set of circumstances. 

T did not get much of a feeling in reviewing your statement here this 
morning of the kind of abhorrence to this type of past activity which 
I think the American people would certainly deplore and which I 
believe that you do, but could you comment upon that question, and also 
petiaps give us what ideas you have to insure that it cannot happen 
again ? 

anil Turner. Senator Kennedy, it is totally abhorrent to me to 
think of using a human being as a guinea pig and in any way jeopardiz- 
ing his life and his health, no matter how great the cause. TI am not 
here to pass judgment on my predecessors, but I can assure you that 
this is totally beyond the pale of my contemplation of activities that 
the CIA or any other of our intelligence agencies should undertake. 

I am taking’ and have taken what I believe are adequate steps to 
insure that such things are not continuing today. 

Senator Kennepy. Could you tell us a little bit about that? 

Admiral Turner. I have asked for a special report assuring me that 
there are no drug activities extant, that is, drug activities that involve 
experimentation. Obviously, we collect intelligence about drugs and 
drug use in other countries, but there are no experimentations being 
conducted by the Central Intelligence Agency, and Ihave had a special 
check made because of another incident that was uncovered some years 
ago about the unauthorized retention of some toxic materials at the 
CIA. I have had an actual inspection made of the storage places and 
the certification from the people in charge of those that there are no 
such chemical biological materials present in our keeping, and I have 
issued express orders that that shall not be the case. 

Beyond that, I have to rely in large measure on my sense of com- 
mand and direction of the people and their knowledge of the attitude 
J have just expressed to you in this regard. 

Senator Kennepy. I think that is very commendable. 

Admiral Turner. Thank you, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. I think it is important that the American people 
understand that. 


17 


You know, much of the research which is our area of interest that 
was being done by the Agency and the whole involved sequence of ac- 
tivities done by the Agency, I am convinced could have been done in a 
legitimate way through the research programs of the National Insti- 
tutes of Mental Health, other sponsored activities. I mean, that is some 
other question, but I think you went to an awful lot of trouble, where 
these things could have been. 

Let me ask you specifically, on the followup of MKULTRA, are 
there now—lI think you have answered, but I want to get a complete 
answer about any experimentations that are being done on human be- 
ings, whether it is drugs or behavioral alterations or patterns or any 
support, either directly or indirectly, being provided by the Agency 1n 
terms of any experimentation on human beings. 

Admiral Turxer. There is no experimentation with drugs on human 
beings, witting or unwitting, being conducted in any way. : 

Senator Kennepy. All right. Or being supported indirectly ? I mean, 
are you contracted out? 

Admiral Turner. Or being in any way supported. 

Senator Kennepy. All right. How about the nondrug experimenta- 
tion our Committee has seen—psychosurgery, for example, or psy- 
chological research ? 

Admiral Turxer. We are continually involved in what we call as- 
sessment of behavior. For instance, we are trying to continually im- 
prove our polygraph procedures to, you know, assess whether a person 
is lying or not. This does not involve any tampering with the individ- 
ual body. This involves studying records of people’s behavior under 
different circumstances, and so on, but it is not an experimental thing. 
Have I described that accurately, Al? 

Mr. Bropy. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, it is limited to those areas? 

Admiral Turner. Yes; it does not involve attempting to modify be- 
havior. It only involves studying behavior conditions, but not trying 
to actively modify it, as was one of the objectives of MKULTRA. 

Senator Kennrpy. Well, we are scarce on time, but T am interested 
in the other areas besides polygraph where you are doing it. Maybe 
you can either respond now or submit it for the record, if you would do 
that. Would you provide that for the record? . 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

[‘The material on psychological assessments follows :] 

Psychological assessments are performed as a service to officers in the opera- 
tions directorate who recruit and/or handle agents. Except. for people involved 
in training courses, the subjects of the assessments are foreign nationals. The 
assessments are generally done to determine the most successful tactic to persuade 
the subject to accept covert employment by the CIA, and to make an appraisal of 
his reliability and truthfulness. 

A majority of the work is done by a staff of trained psychologists, some of 
whom are stationed overseas. The assessments they do may be either direct or 
indirect. Direct assessments involve a personal interview of the subject by the 
psychologist. When possible the subject is asked to complete a formal “intelli- 
gence test” which is actually a disguised psychological test. Individuals being 
assessed are not given drugs, nor are they subjected to physical harassment or 
torture. When operating conditions are such that a face-to-face interview is not 
possible, the psychologist may do an indirect assessment, using as source ma- 
terials descriptions of the subject by others, interviews with people who know 
him, specimens of his writings, etc. 


18 


The other psychological assessments involve handwriting analysis or grapho- 
logical assessment. The work is done by a pair of trained graphologists, assisted 
by a small number of measurement technicians. ‘They generally require at least 
a page of handwritten script by the subject. Measurements are made of about 
80 different writing characteristics, and these are charted and furnished to the 
graphologist for assessments. 

The psychologists also give courses in psychological assessment to group of 
operations officers, to sharpen their own capabilities to size up people. As part of 
the training course, the instructor does a psychological assessment of each 
student. The students are witting participants, and results are discussed with 
them, 


It is important to reiterate that psychological assessments are only a service 
to the operations officers. In the final analysis, it is the responsibility of the 
operations officer to decide how a potential agent should be approached, or to 
make a judgement as to whether any agent is telling the truth. . 

Admiral Turner. The kind of thing we are interested in is, what 
will motivate a man to become an agent of the United States in a difti- 
cult situation. We have to be familiar with that kind of attitudinal 
response that we can expect from people we approach to for one reason 
or another become our spies, but I will be happy to submit a very 
specific listing of these. 

Senator Kennepy. Would you do that for the committee? 

In the followups, in the MKSEARCH, in the OFTEN, and the 
CHICKWIT, could you give us also a report on those particular 
programs? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Did they involve experimentation, human 
experimentation ? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. None of them? 

Admiral Turner. Let me say this, that CHICKWIT program is the 
code name for the CIA participation in what was basically a Depart- 
ment of Defense program. This program was summarized and re- 
ported to the Church committee, to the Congress, and I have since they 
have been rementioned in the press in the last 2 days here, I have not 
had time to go through and personally review them. I have ascertained 
that all of the files that we had and made available before are intact, 
and I have put a special order out that nobody will enter those files 
or in any way touch them without my permission at this point, but 
they are in the Retired Records Center outside of Washington, and 
they are available. ; 

I am not prepared to give you full details on it, because I simply 
haven’t read into that part of our history, but in addition I would sug- 
gest when we want to get into that we should get the Department of 
Defense in with us. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, you will supply that information to the 
Intelligence Committee, the relevant, I mean, the health aspects, obvi- 
ously, and the research we are interested in ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. ; 

Senator Kennepy. Will you let us know, Admiral Turner ? 

Admiral Turner. I will be happy to. 

[See p. 169 for the material referred to. ] : 

Senator Kennepy. Thank you. I am running out of time. Do you 
support the extension of the protection of human subjects legislation 
to include the CIA and the DOD? You commented favorably on that 


19 


before, and I am hopeful we can get. that on the calendar early in 
September, and that is our strong interest. 

Admiral Turner. The CIA certainly has no objection to that pro- 
posed legislation, sir. It is not my role in the administration to be the 
supporter of it or the endorser of it. 

Senator Kennepy. As a personal matter, since you have reviewed 
these subjects, would you comment? I know it is maybe unusual, but 
you can understand what we are attempting to do. 

Admiral Turner, Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. From your own experience in the agency, you 
can understand the value of it. 

Just finally, in your own testimony now with this additional infor- 
mation, it seems quite apparent to me that you can reconstruct in very 
careful detail this whole project in terms of the responsible CIA 
officials for the program. You have so indicated in your testimony. 
Now with the additional information, and the people, that have been 
revealed in the examination of the documents, it seems to be pretty 
clear that you can track that whole program in very careful detail, 
and I would hope, you know, that you would want to get to the bottom 
of it, as the Congress does as well. I will come back to that in my next 
* round, Thank you very much. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Goldwater? 

Senator Gotpwarter. I have no questions. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Schweiker ? 

Senator Scuwerker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Admiral Turner, I would like to go back to your testimony on page 
12, where you discuss the contribution to the building fund of a 
‘private medical institution. You state, “Indeed, it was mentioned in a 
1957 Inspector General report on the Technical Service Division of 
CIA, pertinent portions of which had been reviewed by the Church 
committee staff.” I would like to have you consider this question very 
carefully. I served as a member of the original Church committee. 
My staffer did a lot of the work that you are referring to here. He 
made notes on the IG’s report. My question to you is, are you saying 
that the section that specifically delineates an improper contribution 
was in fact given to the Church committee staff to see? 

Admiral Turner. The answer to your question is “Yes.” The infor- 
mation that a contribution had been made was made available, to the 
best of my knowledge. 

Senator Scuwerker. Only certain sections of the report were made 
available. The report had to be reviewed out at Langley; it was not 
reviewed here, and copies were not given to us here. I just want you to 
carefully consider what you are saying, because the only record we 
have are the notes that the staff took on anything that was of 
significance. 

Admiral Turner. My understanding was that Mr. Maxwell was 
shown the relevant portion of this report that disclosed that the con- 
tribution had been made. 

Senator Scuwerxker. To follow this up further, I’d like to say that 
I think there was a serious flaw in the way that the IG report was 
handled and the Church committee was limited. I am not making any 
accusations, but because of limited access to the report, we have a situ- 


20 


ation where it is not even clear whether we actually saw that material 
or not, simply because we could not keep a copy of the report under 
the procedures we had to follow. We were limited by notetaking, and 
so it is rather ambiguous as to just what was seen and what was not 
seen. I certainly hope that the new Intelligence Committee will not 
be bound by procedures that so restrict its ability to exercise effective 
oversight. ; 

I have a second question. Does it concern you, Admiral, that we used 
a subterfuge which resulted in the use of Federal construction grant 
funds to finance facilities for these sorts of experiments on our own 
people? Because as I understand what you are saying, while the CLA 
maybe only put up $375,000, this triggered a response on the part, of 
the Federal Government to provide on a good faith basis matching 
hospital funds at the same level. We put up more than $1 million of 
matching funds, some based on an allegedly private donation which 
was really CLA money. 

Isn’t there something basically wrong with that? 

Admiral Turner. I certainly believe there is. As I stated, the Gen- 
eral Counsel of the CIA at that time rendered a legal opinion that 
this was a legal undertaking, and again I am hesitant to go back and 
revisit the atmosphere, the Jaws, the attitudes at that time, so whether * 
the counsel was on good legal ground or not, I am not enough of a 
lawyer to be sure, but it certainly would occur to me if it happened 
today as a very questionable activity. 

Senator Scuwerker. Well, I think those of us who worked on and 
amended the Hill-Burton Act and other hospital construction as- 
sistance laws over the years, would have a rather different opinion on 
the legal intent or object of Congress in passing laws to provide hos- 
Pl construction project money. These funds weren’t intended for 
this. 

It reminds me a little bit of the shellfish toxin situation which turned 
up when I was on the Church committee. The Public Health Service 
was used to produce a deadly poison with Public Health money. Here 
we are using general hospital construction money to carry on a series of 
drug experiments. 

Admiral Turner. Excuse me, sir. If I could just be, I think, ac- 
curate, I don’t think any of this $375,000 or the matching funds were 
used to conduct drug experiments. They were used to build the hos- 
pital. Now, the CIA then put more money into a foundation that was 
conducting research on the CIA’s behalf supposedly in that hospital, so 
the intent was certainly there, but the money was not used for 
experimentation. 

Senator Scuwerker. Well, I understand it was used for bricks and 
mortar, but the bricks were used to build the facility where the experi- 
ments were carried on; were they not? 

Admiral Turner. We do not have positive evidence that they were. 
It certainly would seem that that was the intent, but I do not want to 
draw inferences here 

Senator Scnwerker. Well, why else would they give this money for 
the building fund if the building was not used for a purpose that 
benefited the CIA program? 

Admiral Turner. I certainly draw the inference that the CIA 
expected to benefit from it, and some of the wording says the General 


21 


Counsel’s opinion was that this was legal only if the CIA was going 
to derive adequate benefit from it, but, sir, there is no evidence of what 
benefit was derived. 

Senator Scuwerker. There must have been some pretty good benefits 
at stake. The Atomic Energy Commission was to bear a share of the 
cost, and when they backed out for some reason or another, the CIA 
picked up part of their tab. So, at two different points there were 
indications that CIA decisionmakers thought there was great benefit 
to be derived from whatever happened within the brick and mortar 
walls of that facility. . 

Admiral Turner. You are absolutely right. I am only taking the 
position that I cannot substantiate that there was benefit derived. 

Senator Scnwerker. The agreement documents say that the CIA 
would have access to one-sixth of the space involved in the construction 
of the wing, so how would you enter into an agreement that specifically 
says that you will have access to and use of one-sixth of the space and 
not perform something in that space? I cannot believe it was empty. 

Admiral Turner. Sir, I am not disputing you at all, but both of us 
are saying that the inference is that one-sixth of the space was ased, 
that experimentation was done, and so on, but there js no factual ev1- 
dence of what went on as a result of that payment or what went on in 
that hospital. It is just missing. It is not that it didn’t happen. 

Senator Scuwerxer. Admiral Turner, one other 

Senator Kennepy. Would the Senator yield on that point? 

Senator Scuwerxer. I understand that in the agency’s documents 
on the agreement it was explicitly stated that one-sixth of the facility 
would be designated for CIA use and made available for CIA re- 
search. Are you familiar 

_ Mr. Bropy. Senator, as I recall, you are right in that there is a men- 
tion of one-sixth, but any mention at all has to do with planning. There 
are no subsequent reports as to what happened after the construction 
took place. 

Senator Scnwerker. Admiral Turner, I read in the New York Times 
that part of this series of MKULTRA experiments involved an ar- 
rangement with the Federal Bureau of Narcotics to test LSD sur- 
reptitiously on unwitting patrons in bars in New York and San 
Francisco. Some of the subjects became violently ill and were hos- 
pitalized. I wonder if you would just briefly describe what we were 
doing there and how it was carried out? I assume it was through a safe 
house operation. I don’t believe your statement went into much detail. 

Admiral Turner. I did mention the safe house operation in my 
statement, sir, and that is how these were carried out. What we have 
learned from the new documentation is the location and the dates at 
which the safe houses were run by the CIA and the identification of 
three individuals who were associated with running those safe houses. 
We know something about the construction work that was done in 
them because there were contracts for this. Beyond that, we are pretty 
much drawing inferences as to the things that went on as to what you 
are saying here. 

_ Senator Scuwerker. Well, the subjects were unwitting. You can 
infer that much, right? 

Admiral Turner. Right. 


22 


Senator Scuwermer. If you happened to be at the wrong bar at the 
wrong place and time, you got it. 

Mr. Bropy. Senator, that would be—contacts were made, as we 
understand it, in bars, et cetera, and then the people may have been 
invited to these safe houses. There really isn’t any indication as to 
the fact that this took place in the bars. 

Admiral Turner. We are trying to be very precise with you, sir, and 
not draw an inference here. Vhere are 6 cases of these 149 where we 
have enough evidence in this new documentation to substantiate that 
there was unwitting testing and some of that involves these safe 
houses. There are other cases where it is ambiguous as to whether the 
testing was witting or voluntary. There are others where it was clearly 
voluntary. 

Senator Scuwerker. Of course, after a few drinks, it is questionable 
whether informed consent means anything to a person in a bar 
anyway. 

Admiral Turner. Well, we don’t have any indication that all these 
cases where it is ambiguous involved drinking of any kind. There are 
cases in penal institutions where it is not clear whether the prisoner 
was given a choice or not. I don’t know that he wasn’t given a choice, 
but I don’t positively know that he was, and I classify that as an 
ambiguous incident. 

Senator Inovyr. Your time is up, Senator. 

Senator Huddleston? - 

Senator Huppieston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Admiral Turner, you stated in your testimony that you are con- 
vinced there was no attempt to conceal this recently discovered docu- 
mentation during the earlier searches. Did you question the individ- 
uals connected with the earlier search before you made that judgment ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes; I haven’t, I don’t think, questioned every- 
body who looked in the files or is still on our payroll who looked in 
the files back in 1975, but Mr. Laubinger on my left is the best author- - 
ity on this, and I have gone over it with him in some detail. 

Senator Hupptesron. But you have inquired, you think, sufficiently 
to assure yourself that there was no intent on the part of any person 
to conceal these records from the previous committee ? 

Admiral Turner. I am persuaded of that both by my questioning 
of people and by the circumstances and the way in which these docu- 
ments were filed, by the fact. which I did not and should have men- 
tioned in my testimony, that these were not the official files. The ones 
that we have received or retrieved were copies of files that were work- 
ing files that somebody had used, and therefore were slipped into a 
different location, and again I say to you, sir, I can’t imagine their 
deliberately concealing these particular files and revealing the other 
things that they did reveal in 1975. I don’t see the motive for that, 
because these are not that damning compared with the overall material 
that was provided. 

Senator Hunpresron. Is this the kind of operation that if it were 
continuing now or if there were anything similar to it, that you would 
feel compelled to report to the Select Committee on Intelligence ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. You mean, if I discovered that some- 
thing like this were going on without my knowledge? Yes, I would 
feel absolutely the requirement to— 


23 


Senator Huppiesron. But if it were going on with your knowledge, 
would you report it to the committee? I assume you would. 

Admiral Turner. Yes. Well, it would not be going on with my 
knowledge, but theoretically the answer is yes, sir. 

Senator Huppiesron. Well, then, what suggestions would you have 
as we devise charters for the various intelligence agencies? What 
provision would you suggest to prohibit this kind of activity from 
taking place? Would you suggest that it ought to be specifically out- 
lined in a statutory charter setting out the parameters of the per- 
missible operation of the various agencies? 

Admiral Turner. I think that certainly is something we must con- 
sider as we look at the legislation for charters. I am not on the face 
of it opposed to it. I think we would have to look at the particular 
wording as we are going to have to deal with the whole charter issue 
as to exactly how precise you want to be in delineating restraints and 
curbs on the intelligence activities. 

Senator Huppreston. In the case of sensitive type operations, which 
this certainly was, which might be going on today, is the oversight 
activity of the agency more intensive now than it was at that time? 

Admiral Turner. Much more so. I mean, I have briefed you, sir, 
and the committee on our sensitive operations. We have the Intel- 
ligence Oversight Board. We have a procedure in the National Se- 
curity Council for approval of very sensitive operations. I think the 
amount of spotlight focused on these activities is many, manyfold 
what it was in these 12 to 24 years ago. 

Senator Huppiesron. How about the record keeping ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes; I can’t imagine anyone having the gall to 
- think that he can just blithely destroy records today with all of the 
attention that has come to this, and certainly we are emphasizing that 
that is not the case. : 

Senator Hupprxston. Admiral, I was particularly interested in the 
activity that took place at the U.S. Public Health Service Hospital at 
Lexington, Ky., in which a Dr. Harris Isbell conducted experiments 
on people who were presumably patients there. There was a narcotics 
institution, I take it, and Dr. Isbell was, according to the New York 
Times story, carrying on a secret series of correspondence with an 
individual at the agency by the name of Ray. Have you identified who 
that person is? 

Admiral Turner. Sir, I find myself in a difficult position here at 
a public hearing to confirm or deny these names in view of my legal 
responsibilities under the Privacy Act not to disclose the names of 
individuals here. : 

Senator Huppteston. I am just.asking you if you have identified 
the person referred to in that article as Ray. I am not asking you who 
he was. I just want to know if you know who he is. 

Admiral Turner. No. I am sorry, was this W-r-a-y or R-a-y? 

Senator Hupprzsron. It is listed in the news article as R-a-y, in 
quotations. 

Admiral Turner. No, sir, we have not identified him. 

Senator Huppixston. So you have no knowledge of whether or 
not he is still a member of vour staff or connected with the Agency in 
any way. Have you attempted to identify him? 


24, 


[ Pause. ] 


: ae Turner. Senator, we have a former employee whose first 
aus 1s Ray who may have had some connection with these activities, 
enator Huppieston. You suspect that but you have not verified 


that at this time, or at least you are not i iti indi ; 
ot 
you have verified it y' in a position to indicate that 


Admiral Turner. That is correct, 

Senator Hupprzston. Thank you. 

Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inouye.’ Senator Wallop? 

Senator Watior. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 
_ Admiral Turner, not all of the—and in no way trying to excuse 
you of the hideous nature of some of these projects, but not all of the 


projects under MKULTRA are of a sinister or even a moral nature. 
Is that a fair statement? 

Admiral Turner. That is correct. . 

Senator Watxor. Looking down through some of these 17 projects 

_not involving human testing, aspects of the magician’s art, it doesn’t 

seem as though there is anything very sinister about that. Studies of 
human behavior and sleep research, library searches. Now, those 
things in their way are still of interest, are they not, to the process 
of intelligence gathering? ; 

_Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. I have not tried to indicate that we 
either are not doing or would not do any of the things that were 
involved in MKULTRA, but when it comes to the witting or unwitting 
testing of people with drugs, that is certainly verboten, but there are 
other things. 

Senator Wattop. Even with volunteer patients? I mean, I am not 
trying to put you on the spot to say whether it is going on, but I mean, 
it is not an uncommon thing, is it, in the prisons of the United States 
for the Public Health Service to conduct various kinds of experiments 
with vaccines and, say, sunburn creams? I know in Arizona they have 
done so. 

Admiral Turner. My understanding is, lots of that is authorized. 
but I am not of the opinion that this is not the CIA’s business, and 
that if we need some information in that category, I would prefer 
to go to the other appropriate authorities of the Government and ask 
them to get. it for us rather than to in any way 

Senator Watvor. Well, you know, you have library searches and at- 
tendants at the national seminars. This is why I wanted to ask you if 
the bulk of these projects were in any way the kinds of things that the 
Agency might not do now. A President would not have been horrified 
by ue list of the legitimate types of things. Isn’t that probably the 
case 2 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. : 

Senator Watxor. And if it did in fact appear in the IG report, is’ 
there any reason to suppose that the President did not know of this 
project? You said there was no reason to suppose that he did, but let 
me reverse that. Is there any reason to suppose that they did not? 

Admiral Turner. No. : 

Senator Wartor. Well, you know, I just cannot imagine you or 
literally anybody undertaking projects of the magnitude of dollars 
here and just not knowing about it, not informing your superior that 


25 


these were going on, especially when certain items of it appear in the 
Inspector General’s report on budget matters. 

‘Admiral Turner. Well, I find it difficult when it is that far back to 
hypothesize what the procedures that the Director was using in terms 
of informing his superiors were. It is quite a different climate from 
today, and I think we do a lot more informing today than they did 
back then, but I find it very difficult to guess what the level of knowl- 
edge was. 7 

Senator Waxxor. I am really not asking you to second-guess it, but 
it just seems to me that, while the past is past, and thank goodness we 
are operating under different sets of circumstances, I think it is naive 
for us to suppose that these things were conducted entirely without the 
knowledge of the Presidents of the United States during those times. _ 
It is just the kinds of research information that was being sought was 
vital to the United States, not the means, but the information that they 
were trying to find. 

Admiral Turner. I am sorry. Your question is, was this vital ? Did 
we view it as vital ? 

Senator Watxor. Well, your implication at the beginning was that 
it was a response to the kinds of behavior that were seen in Cardinal 
Mindszenty’s trial and other things. I mean, somebody must have 
thought that this was an important defensive reaction, if nothing else, 
on the part of the United States. 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir, I am sure they did, but again I just don’t 
know how high that permeated the executive branch. 

Senator Watior. But the kinds of information are still important 
to you. I mean, I am not suggesting that anyone go back and do that 
kind of thing again, but I’m certain it would be of use to you to know 
what was going to happen to one of your agents assuming someone had 
put one of these things into his bloodstream, or tried to modify his 
behavior. 

Admiral Turner. Absolutely, and you know, we would be very con- 
cerned if we thought there were things like truth serums or other 
things that our agents or others could be subjected to by use or im- 
proper use of drugs by other powers against our people or agents. 

Senator Watxopr. Are there? I don’t ask you to name them, but are 
there such serums? 

Admiral Turner. I don’t know of them if there are. I would have to 
answer that for the record, sir. 

Senator Watxop. I would appreciate that. 

[The material referred to follows:] 


“TrRuTH” Drucs IN INTERROGATION 


The search for effective aids to interrogation is probably as old as man’s need 
to obtain information from an uncooperative source and as persistent as his 
impatience to shortcut any tortuous path. In the annals of police investigation, 
physical coercion has at times been substituted for painstaking and time-con- 
suming inquiry in the belief that direct methods produce quick results. Sir James 
Stephens, writing in 1888, rationalizes a grisly example of “third degree” prac- 
tices by the police of India: “It is far pleasanter to sit comfortably in the shade 
rubbing red pepper in a poor devil’s eyes than to go about in the sun hunting up 
evidence.” 

More recently, police officials in some countries have turned to drugs for assist- 
ance in extracting confessions from accused persons, drugs which are esumed 


26 


to relax the individual's defenses to the point that he unknowingly reveals truths 
however humanitarian 


he has been trying to conceal. This investigative technique, ; nanita 
as an alternative to physical torture, still raises serious questions of individual 
rights and liberties. In this country, where drugs have gained only marginal 
acceptance in police work, their use has provoked cries of “psychological third 
degree” and has precipitated medico-legal controversies that after a quarter of 
a century still occasionally flare into the open. 

The use of so-called “truth” drugs in police work is similar to the accepted 
psychiatric practice of narco-analysis; the difference.in the two procedures lies 
in their different objectives. The police investigator is concerned with empirical 
truth that may be used against the suspect, and therefore almost solely with 
probative truth: the usefulness of the suspect’s revelations depends ultimately on 
their acceptance in evidence by a court of law. The psychiatist, on the other hand, 
using the same “truth” drugs in diagnosis and treatment of the mentally ill, is 
primarily concerned with psychological truth or psychological reality rather than 
empirical fact. A patient’s aberrations are reality for him at the time they occur, 
and an accurate account of these fantasies and delusions, rather than reliable 
recollection of past events, can be the key to recovery. 

The notion of drugs capable of illuminating hidden recesses of the mind, help- 
ing to heal the mentally ill and preventing or reversing the miscarriage of justice, 
has provided an exceedingly durable theme for the press and popular literature. 
While acknowledging that “truth serum” is a misnomer twice over—the drugs 
are not sera and they do not necessarily bring forth probative truth—journalistic 
accounts continue to exploit the appeal of the term. The formula is to play up 
a few spectacular “truth” drug successess and to imply that the drugs are more 
maligned than need be and more widely employed in criminal investigation than 
can officially be admitted. 

Any technique that promises an increment of success in extracting information 
from an uncompliant source is ipso facto of interest in intelligence operations. 
If the ethical considerations which in Western countries inhibit the use of narco- 
interrogation in police work are felt also in intelligence, the Western services 
must at least be prepared against its possible employment by the adversary. An 
understanding of “truth” drugs, their characteristic actions, and their potentiali- 
ties, positive and negative, for eliciting useful information is fundamental to an 
adequate defense against them. ; 

This discussion, meant to help toward such an understanding, draws primarily 
upon openly published materials. It has the limitations of projecting from crimi- 
ae investigative practices and from the permissive atmosphere of drug psycho- 

erapy. 

SCOPCLAMINE AS “TRUTH SERUM” 


Early in this century physicians began to employ scopolamine, along with 
morphine and chloroform, to induce a state of “twilight sleep” during childbirth. 
A constituent of henbane, scopolamine was known to produce sedation and drowsi- 
ness, confusion and disorientation, incoordination, and amnesia for events ex- 
perienced during intoxication. Yet physicians noted that women in twilight sleep 
answered questions accurately and often volunteered exceedingly candid remarks. 

In 1922 it occurred to Robert House, a Dallas, Texas obstetrician, that a similar 
_ technique might be employed in the interrogation of suspected criminals, and he 
arranged to interview under scopolamine two. prisoners in the Dallas county 
jail whose guilt seemed clearly confirmed. Under the drug, both men denied the 
charges on which they were held; and both, upon trial, were found not guilty. 
Enthusiastic at this success, House concluded that a patient under the influence 
of scopolamine “cannot create a lie . . . and there is no power to think or rea- 
son.” [14] His experiment and this conclusion attracted wide attention, and the 
idea of a “truth” drug was thus launched upon the public consciousness. 

The phrase “truth serum” is believed to have appeared first in a news report 
of House’s experiment in the Los Angeles Record, sometime in 1922. House resisted 
the term for a while but eventually came to employ it regularly himself. He pub- 
lished some eleven articles on scopolamine in the years 1921-1929, with a notice- 
able increase in polemical zeal as time went on. What had begun as something 
of a scientific statement turned finally into a dedicated crusade by the “father of 
truth serum” on behalf of his offspring, wherein he was “grossly indulgent of its 
wayward behavior nd stubbornly proud of its minor achievements.”[11] 


27 


Only a handful of cases in which scopolamine was used for police interroga- 
tion came to public notice, though there is evidence suggesting that some police 
forces may have used it extensively. [2, 16] One police writer claims that the 
threat of scopolamine interrogation has been effective in extracting confessions 
from criminal suspects, who are told they will first be rendered unconscious by 
chloral hydrate placed covertly in their coffee or drinking water.[16] ; 

Because of a number of undesirable side effects, scopolamine was shortly dis- 
qualified as a “truth” drug. Among the most disabling of the side effects are 
hallucinations, disturbed perception, somnolence, and physiological phenomena 
such as headache, rapid heart, and blurred vision, which distract the subject from 
the central purpose of the interview. Furthermore, the physical action is long, far 
outlasting the psychological effects. Scopolamine continues, in some cases, to make 
anesthesia and surgery safer by drying the mouth and throat and reducing secre- 
tions that might obstruct the air passages. But the fantastically, almost painfully, 
dry “desert” mouth brought on by the drug is hardly conducive to free talking, 
even in a tractable subject. 

THE BARBITURATES 


The first suggestion that drugs might facilitate communication with emo- 
tionally disturbed patients came quite by accident in 1916. Arthur 8. Lovenhart 
and his associates at the University of Wisconsin, experimenting with respiratory 
stimulants, were surprised when, after an injection of sodium cyanide, a catatonic 
patient who had long been mute and rigid suddenly relaxed, opened his eyes, and 
even answered a few questions. By the early 1930’s a number of psychiatrists 
were experimenting with drugs as an adjunct to established methods of therapy. 

At about this time police officials, still attracted by the possibility that drugs 
migh help in the interrogation of suspects and witnesses, turned to a class of 
depressant drugs known as the barbiturates. By 1935 Clarence W. Muehilberger, 
head of the Michigan Crime Detection Laboratory at East Lansing, was using 
barbiturates on reluctant suspects, though police work continued to be hampered 
by the courts’ rejection of drug-induced confessions except in a few carefully 
circumscribed instances. : 

The barbiturates, first synthesized in 1903, are among the oldest of moder 
drugs and the most versatile of all depressants. In this half-century some 2,500 
have been prepared, and about two dozen of these have won an important place 
in medicine. An estimated three to four billion doses of barbiturates are pre- 
scribed by physicians in the United States each year, and they have come to be 
known by a variety of commercial names and colorful slang expressions: “goof- 
balls,” Luminal, Nembutal, “red devils,” “yellow jackets,” “pink ladies,” ete. 
Three of them which are used in narcoanalysis and have seen service as ’’truth” 
drugs are sodium amytal (amobarbital), pentothal sodium (thiopental), and to a 
lesser extent seconal (secobarbital). 

As one pharmacologist explains it, a subject coming under the influence of a 
barbiturate injected intravenously goes through all the stages of progressive 
drunkenness, but the time scale is on the order of minutes instead of hours. 
Outwardly the sedation effect is dramatic, especially if the subject is a psychiatric 
patient in tension. His features slacken, his body relaxes. Some people are 
momentarily excited; a few beocme silly and giggly. This usually passes, and 
most subjects fall asleep, emerging later in disoriented semi-wakefulness. . 

The descent into narcosis and beyond with progressively larger doses can be 
divided as follows: 

I. Sedative stage. 

II. Unconsciousness, with exaggerated reflexes (hyperactive stage) . 

III. Unconsciousness, without reflex even to painful stimuli. 

IV. Death. 
Whether all these stages can be distinguished in any given subject depends 
largely on the dose and the rapidity with which the drug is induced. In 
anesthesia, stages I and II may last only two or three seconds. 

The first or sedative stage can be further divided : 

Plane 1. No evident effect, or slight sedative effect. 

Plane 2. Cloudiness, calmness, amnesia. (Upon recovery, the subject will 
not remember what happened at this or “lower” planes or stages.) 

Plane 38. Slurred speech, old thought patterns disrupted, inability to inte- 
grate or learn new patterns. Poor coordination. Subject becomes unaware 
of paniful stimuli. 


‘28 


Plane 3 is the psychiatric “work” stage. It may last only a few minutes, but 
it can be extended by further slow injection of drug. The usual practice is to 
bring the subject quickly to Stage II and to conduct the interview as he passes 
back into the sedative stage on the way to full consciousness. 


CLINICAL AND EXPERIMENTAL STUDIES 


The general abhorrence in Western countries for the use of chemical agents 
“to make people do things against their will’ has precluded serious systematic 
study (at least as published openly) of the potentialities of drugs for interroga- 
tion. Louis A. Gottschalk, surveying their use in information-seeking inter- 
views,(13] cites 186 references; but only two touch upon the extraction of 
intelligence information, and one of these concludes merely that Russian tech- 
niques in interrogation and indoctrination are derived from age-old police 
methods and do not depend on the use of drugs. On the validity of confessions 
obtained with drugs, Gottschalk found only three published experimental studies 

. that he deemed worth reporting. 

One of these reported experiments by D. P. Morris in which intravenous sodium 
amytal. was helpful in detecting malingerers.[12] The subjects, soldiers, were 
at first sullen, .negativistic, and non-productive under amytal, but as the inter- 
view proceeded they revealed the fact of and causes for their malingering. Usually 
the interviews turned up a neurotic or psychotic basis for the deception. 

The other two confession studies, being more relevant to the highly special- 
ized, untouched area of drugs in intelligence interrogation, deserve more detailed 
review. 

Gerson and Victoroff[12] conducted amytal interviews with 17 neuropsychiatric 
patients, soldiers who had charges against them, at Tilton General Hospital, 
Fort Dix. First they were interviewed without amytal by a psychiatrist, who, 
neither ignoring nor stressing their situation as prisoners or suspects under 
scrutiny, urged each of them to discuss his social and family background, his 
army career, and his version of the charges pending against him: 

The patients were told only a few minutes in advance that narcoanalysis would 
be performed. The doctor was considerate, but positive and forthright. He indi- 
cated that they had no choice but to submit to the procedure. Their attitudes 
varied from unquestioning compliance to downright refusal. 

Each patient was brought to complete narcosis and permitted to sleep. As he 
became semiconscious and could be stimulated to speak, he was held in this stage 
with additional amytal while the questioning proceeded. He was questioned 
first about innocuous matters from his background that he had discussed before 
receiving the drug. Whenever possible, he was manipulated into bringing up 
himself the charges pending against him before being questioned about them. 
If he did this in a too fully conscious state, it proved more effective to ask him 
to “talk about that later’ and to interpose a topic that would diminish suspicion, 
delaying the interrogation on his criminal activity until] he was back in the 
proper stage of narcosis. 

The procedure differed from therapeutic narcoanalysis in several ways: the 
setting, the type of patients, and the kind of “truth” sought. Also, the subjects 
were kept in twilight consciousness longer than usual. This state proved richest 
in yield of admissions prejudicial to the subject. In it his speech was thick, 
mumbling, and disconnected, but his discretion was markedly reduced. This val- 
uable interrogation period, lasting only five to ten minutes at a time, could be 
reinduced by injecting more amytal and putting the patient back to sleep. 

The interrogation technique varied from case to case according to background 
information about the patient, the seriousness of the charges, the patient’s atti- 
tude under narcosis, and his rapport with the doctor. Sometimes it was useful to 
pretend, as the patient grew more fully conscious, that he had already confessed 
during the amnestic period of the interrogation, and to urge him, while his mem- 
ory and sense of self-protection were still limited, to continue to elaborate the 
details of what he had “already described.” When it was obvious that a subject 
was withholding the truth, his denials were quickly passed over and ignored, 
and the key questions would be reworded in a new approach. 

Several patients revealed fantasies, fears, and delusions approaching delirium, 
much of which could readily be distinguished from reality. But sometimes there 
was ho way for the examiner to distinguish truth from fantasy except by refer- 
ence to other sources. One subject claimed to have a child that did not exist, 


29 


another threatened to kill on sight a stepfather who had been dead a year, and 
yet another confessed to participating in a robbery when in fact he had only 
purchased goods from the participants. Testimony concerning dates and specific 
places was untrustworthy and often contradictory because of the patient's loss 
of time-sense. His veracity in citing names and events proved questionable. Be- 
cause of his confusion about actual events and what he thought or feared had 
happened, the patient at times managed to conceal the truth unintentionally. 

As the subject revived, he would become aware that he was being questioned 
about his secrets and, depending upon his personality, his fear of discovery, or 
the degree of his disillusionment with the doctor, grow negativistic, hostile, or 
physically aggressive. Occasionally patients had to be forcibly restrained during 
this period to prevent injury to themselves or others as the doctor continued to 
interrogate. Some patients, moved by fierce and diffuse anger, the assumption 
that they had already been tricked into confessing, and a still limited sense of 
discretion, defiantly acknowledged their guilt and challenged the observer to 
“do something about it.” As the excitement passed, some fell back on their orig- 
inal stories and others verified the confessed material. During the follow-up 
interview nine of the 17 admitted the validity of their confessions; eight re- 
pudiated their confessions and reaffirmed their earlier accounts. 

With respect to the reliability of the results of such interrogation, Gerson 

-and Victoroff conclude that persistent, careful questioning can reduce ambigui- 
ties in drug interrogation, but cannot eliminate them altogether. 

At least one experiment has shown that subjects are capable of maintaining a 
lie while under the influence of a barbiturate. Redlich and his associates at 
Yale[25] administered sodium amytal to nine volunteers, students and profes- 
sionals, who had previously, for purposes of the experiment, revealed shameful 
and guilt-producing episodes of their past and then invented false self-protective 
stories to cover them. In nearly every case the cover story retained some ele- 
ments of the guilt inherent in the true story. 

Under the influence of the drug, the subjects were crossexamined on their 
cover stories by a second investigator. The results, though not definitive, showed 
that normal individuals who had good defenses and no overt pathological traits 
could stick to their invented stories and refuse confession. Neurotic individuals 
with strong unconscious self-punitive tendencies, on the other hand, both con- 
fessed more easily and were inclined to substitute fantasy for the truth, con- 
fessing to offenses never actually committed. 

In recent years drug therapy has made some use of stimulants, most notably 
amphetamine (Benzedrine) and its relative methamphetamine (Methedrine). 
These drugs, used either alone or following intravenous barbiturates, produce 
an outpouring of ideas, emotions, and memories which has been of help in diag- 
nosing mental disorders. The potential of stimulants in interrogation has re- 
ceived little attention, unless in unpublished work. In one study of their psychi- 
atric use Brussel et al. [7] maintain that methedrine gives the liar no time to 
think or to organize his deceptions. Once the drug takes hold, they say, an in- 
surmountable urge to pour out speech traps the malingerer. Gottschalk, on 
the other hand, says that this claim is extravagant, asserting without elabora- 
tion that the study lacked proper controls.[13] It is evident that the combined 
use of barbiturates and stimulants, perhaps along with ataraxics (tranquilizers), 
should be further explored. 


OBSERVATIONS FROM PRACTICE 


J. M. MacDonald, who as a psychiatrist for the District Courts of Denver 
has had extensive experience with narcoanalysis, says that drug interrogation 
is of doubtful value in obtaining confessions to crimes. Criminal suspects under 
the influence of barbiturates may deliberately withhold information, persist in 
giving untruthful answers, or falsely confess to crimes they did not commit. 
The psychopathic personality, in particular, appears to resist successfully the 
influence of drugs. : 

MacDonald tells of a criminal psychopath who, having agreed to narco-inter- 
rogation, received 1.5 grams of sodium amytal over a period of five hours. This 
man feigned amnesia and gave a false account of a murder. “He displayed little 
or no remorse as he (falsely) described the crime, including burial of the body. 
Indeed he was very self-possessed and he appeared almost to enjoy the examina- 
tion. From time to time he would request that more amytal be injected.” [21] 

MacDonald concludes that a person who gives false information prior to re- 


86-408 O- 77-3 


30 


ceiving drugs is likely to give false information also under narcosis, that the 
drugs are of little value for revealing deceptions, and that they are more effective 
in releasing unconsciously repressed material than in evoking consciously sup- 
pressed information. 

Another psychiatrist known for his work with criminals, L. Z. Freedman, 
gave sodium amytal to men accused of various civil and military antisocial acts. 
The subjects were mentally unstable, their conditions ranging from character 
disorders to neuroses and psychoses. The drug interviews proved psychiatrically 
beneficial to the patients, but Freedman found that his view of objective reality 
was seldom improved by their revelations. He was unable to say on the basis of 
the narco-interrogation whether a given act had or had not occurred. Like Mac- 
Donald, he found that psychopathic individuals can deny to the point of uncon- 
sciousness crimes that every objective sign indicates they have committed.[10] 

F. G. Inbau, Professor of Law at Northwestern University, who has had con- 
siderable experience observing and participating in “truth” drug tests, claims 
that they are occasionally effective on persons who would have disclosed the 
truth anyway had they been properly interrogated, but that a person deter- 
mined to lie will usually be able to continue the deception under drugs. 

The two military psychiatrists who made the most extensive use of narcoanal- 
ysis during the war years, Roy R. Grinker and John C. Spiegel, concluded that 
in almost all cases they could obtain from their patients essentially the same 
material and give them the same emotional release by therapy without the use 
of drugs, provided they had sufficient time. 

The essence of these comments from professionals of long experience is that 
drugs provide rapid access to information that is psychiatrically useful but of 
doubtful validity as empirical truth. The same psychological information and a 
less adulterated empirical truth can be obtained from fully conscious subjects 
through non-drug psychotherapy and skillful police interrogation. 


APPLICATION TO CI INTERROGATION 


The almost, total absence of controlled experimental studies of “truth” drugs 
and the spotty and anecdotal nature of psychiatric and police evidence require 
that extrapolations to intelligence operations be made with care. Still, enough 
is known about the drugs’ action to suggest certain considerations affecting the 
possibilities for their use in interrogations. 

It should be clear from the foregoing that at best a drug can only serve as 
an aid to an interrogator who has a sure understanding of the psychology and 
techniques of normal interrogation. In some respects, indeed, the demands on his 
skill will be increased by the baffling mixture of truth and fantasy in drug-induced 
output. And the tendency against which he must guard in the interrogate to give 
the responses that seem to be wanted without regard for facts will be heightened 
by drugs: the literature abounds with warnings that a subject in narcosis is 
extremely suggestible. 

It seems possible that this suggestibility and the lowered guard of the narcotic 
state might be put to advantage in the case of a subject feigning ignorance of a 
language or some other skill that had become automatic with him. Lipton[20] 
found sodium amytal helpful in determining whether a foreign subject was merely 
pretending not to understand English. By extension, one can guess that a drugged 
interrogatee might have difficulty maintaining the pretense that he did not com- 
prehend the idiom of a profession he was trying to hide. 

There is the further problem of hostility in the interrogator’s relationship to 
a resistance source. The accumulated knowledege about “truth” drug reaction 
has come largely from patient-physician relationships of trust and confidence. 
The subject in narcoanalysis is usually motivated « priori to cooperate with the 
psychiatrist, either to obtain relief from mental suffering or to contribute to a 
scientific study. Even in police work, where an atmosphere of anxiety and threat 
may be dominant, a relationship of trust frequently asserts itself: the drug is 
administered by a medical man bound by a strict code of ethics; the suspect 
agreeing to undergo narcoanalysis in a desperate bid for corroboration of his 
testimony trusts both drug and psychiatrist, however apprehensively ; and finally, 
as Freedman and MacDonald have indicated, the police psychiatrist frequently 
deals with a “sick” criminal, and some order of patient-physician relationship 
necessarily evolves. 


31 


Rarely has a drug interrogation involved “normal” individuals in a hostile 
or genuinely threatening milieu. It was from a non-threatening experimental 
setting that Eric Lindemann could say that his “normal” subjects “reported a 
general sense of euphoria, ease and confidence, and they exhibited a marked in- 
crease in talkativeness and communicability.”[18] Gerson and Victoroff list poor 
doctor-patient rapport as one factor interfering with the completeness and au- 
thenticity of confessions by the Fort Dix soldiers, caught as they were in a 
command performance and told they had no choice but to submit to narco- 
interrogation. 

From all indications, subject-interrogator rapport is usually crucial to obtain- 
ing the psychological release which may lead to unguarded disclosures. Role-play- 
ing on the part of the interrogator might be a possible solution to the problem 
of establishing rapport with a drugged subject. In therapy, the British narco- 
analyst William Sargent recommends that the therapist deliberately distort the 
facts of the patient’s life-experience to achieve heightened emotional response 
and abreaction.[27] In the drunken state of narcoanalysis patients are prone to 
accept the therapist’s false constructions. There is reason to expect that a drugged 
subject would communicate freely with an interrogator playing the role of rela- 
tive, colleague, physician, immediate superior, or any other person to whom his 
background indicated he would be responsive. 

Even when rapport is poor, however, there remains one facet of drug action 
eminently exploitable in interrogation—the fact that subjects emerge from 
narcosis feeling they have revealed a great deal, even when they have not. As 
Gerson and Victoroff demonstrated at Fort Dix, this psychological set provides a 
major opening for obtaining genuine confessions. 


POSSIBLE VARIATIONS 


In studies by Beecher and his associates,[3-6] one-third to one-half the 
individuals tested proved to be placebo reactors, subjects who respond with 
symptomatic relief to the administration of any syringe, pill, or capsule, regard- 
less of what it contains, Although no studies are known to have been made of the 
placebo phenomenon as applied to narco-interrogation, it seems reasonable that 
when a subject’s sense of guilt interferes with productive interrogation, a placebo 
for pseudo-narcosis could have the effect of absolving him of the responsibility 
for his acts and thus clear the way for free communication. It is notable that 
placebos are most likely to be effective in situations of stress. The individuals 
most likely to react to placebos are the more anxious, more self-centered, more 
dependent on outside stimulation, those who express their needs more freely 
socially, talkers who drain off anxiety by conversing with others. The non- 
reactors are those clinically more rigid and with better than average emotional 
control. No sex or I.Q. differences between reactors and non-reactors have been 
found. 

Another possibility might be the combined use of drugs with hypnotic trance 
and post-hypnotic suggestion: hypnosis could presumably prevent any recollec- 
tion of the drug experience. Whether a subject can be brought to trance against 
his will or unaware, however, is a matter of some disagreement. Orne, in a survey 
of the potential uses of hypnosis in interrogation,[23] asserts ‘that it is doubt- 
ful, despite many apparent indications to the contrary, that trance can be induced 
in resistant subjects. It may be possible, he adds, to hypnotize a subject unaware, 
but this would require a positive relationship with the hypnotist not likely to 
be found in the interrogation setting. 

In medical hypnosis, pentothal sodium is sometimes employed when only light 
trance has been induced and deeper narcosis is desired. This procedure is a 
possibility for interrogation, but if a satisfactory level of narcosis could be 
achieved through hypnotic trance there would appear to be no need for drugs. 


DEFENSIVE MEASURES 


There is no known way of building tolerance for a “truth” drug without creat- 
ing a disabling addiction, or of arresting the action of a barbiturate once induced. 
The only full safeguard against narco-interrogation is to prevent the adminis- 
tration of the drug. Short of this, the best defense is to make use of the same 
knowledge that suggests drugs for offensive operations: if a subject knows that 
on emerging from narcosis he will have an exaggerated notion of how much he 
has revealed he can better resolve to deny he has said anything. 


32 


The disadvantages and shortcomings of drugs in- offensive operations become 
positive features of the defense posture. A subject in narco-interrogation is 
intoxicated, wavering between deep sleep and semi-wakefulness, His speech is 
garbled and irrational, the amount of output drastically diminished. Drugs 
disrupt established thought patterns, including the will to resist, but they do so 
indiscriminately and thus also interfere with the patterns of substantive infor- 
mation the interrogator seeks. Even under the conditions most favorable for 
the interrogator, output will be contaminated by fantasy, distortion, and untruth. 

Possibly the most effective way to arm oneself against narco-interrogation 
would be to undergo a “dry run.” A trial drug interrogation with output taped 
for playback would familiarize an individual with his own reactions to “truth” 
drugs, and this familiarity would help to reduce the effects of harassment by 
the interrogator before and after the drug has been administered. From the view- 
point of the intelligence service, the trial exposure of a particular operative to 
drugs might provide a rough benchmark for assessing the kind and amount of 
information he would divulge in narcosis. 

There may be concern over the possibility of drug addiction intentionally or 
accidentally induced by an adversary service. Most drugs will cause addiction 
with prolonged use, and the barbiturates are no exception. In recent studies at 
the U.S. Public Health Service Hospital for addicts in Lexington, Ky., subjects 
received large doses of barbiturates over a period of months. Upon removal of 
the drug, they experienced acute withdrawal symptoms and behaved in every 
respect like chronic alcoholics. 

Because their action is extremely short, however, and because there is little 
likelihood that they would be administered regularly over a prolonged period, 
barbiturate “truth” drugs present slight risk of operational addiction. If the 
adversary service were intent on creating addiction in order to exploit with- 
drawal, it would have other, more rapid means of producing states as unpleasant 
as withdrawal symptoms. 

The hallucinatory and psychotomimetic drugs such as mescaline, marihuana, 
LSD-25, and microtine are sometimes mistakenly associated with narcoanalytic 
interrogation. These drugs distort the perception and interpretation of the sen- 
sory input to the central nervous system and affect vision, audition, smell, the 
sensation of the size of body parts and their position in space, etc. Mescaline and 
LSD-25 have been used to create experimental “psychotic states,” and in a 
minor way as aids in psychotherapy. 

Since information obtained from a person in a psychotic drug state would be 
unrealistic, bizarre, and extremely difficult to assess, the self-administration of 
LSD-25, which is effective in minute dosages, might in special circumstances 
offer an operative temporary protection against interrogation. Conceivably, on 
the other hand, an adversary service could use such drugs to produce anxiety or 
terror in medically unsophisticated subjects unable to distinguish drug-induced 
psychosis from actual insanity. An enlightened operative could not be thus 
frightened, however, knowing that the effect of these hallucinogenic agents is 
transient in normal individuals. 

Most broadly, there is evidence that drugs have least effect on well-adjusted 
individuals with good defenses and good emotional control, and that anyone who 
can withstand the stress of competent interrogation in the waking state can do 
so in narcosis. The essential resources for resistance thus appear to lie within 
the individual. 

CONCLUSIONS 


The salient points that emerge from this discussion are the following. No such 
magic brew as the popular notion of truth serum exists. The barbiturates, by 
disrupting defensive patterns, may sometimes be helpful in interrogation, but 
even under the best conditions they will elicit an output contaminated by decep- 
tion, fantasy, garbled speech, etc. A major vulnerability they produce in the sub- 
ject is a tendency to believe he has revealed more than he has. It is possible, how- 
ever, for both normal individuals and psychopaths to resist drug interrogation; 
it seems likely that any individual who can withstand ordinary intensive inter- 
rogation can hold out in narcosis. The best aid to a defense against narco-inter- 
rogation is foreknowledge of the process and its limitations. There is an acute 
need for controlled experimental studies of drug reaction, not only to depressants 
but also to stimulants and to combinations of depressants, stimulants, and 
ataraxics. 


33 


REFERENCES 


1. Adams, E. Barbiturates. Sci. Am., Jan. 1958, 198 (1), 60-64. 

ae oem J. Truth Drugs: The new crime solver. Coronet, Jan. 1951, 29, 
72-76. 

3. Beecher, H. K. Anesthesia. Sci. Am., Jan. 1957, 198, p. 70. 


4, Appraisal of drugs intended to alter subjective responses, symptoms. 
J. Amer. Med. Assn., 1955, 158, 399-401. 


5 : Evidence for increased effectiveness of placebos with increased 


oO 
stress. Amer. J. Physiol., 1956. 187, 163-169. 

6. . Experimental pharmacology and measurement of the subjective 
response. Science, 1953, 116. 157-162. 

7. Brussel, J. A., Wilson, D. C., Jr., & Shankel, L. W. The use of methedrine in 
psychiatric practice. Psychiat. Quart., 1954, 28, 381-394. 

8. Delay, J. Pharmacologic explorations of the personality : narcoanalysis and 
“methedrine” shock. Proc. Roy. Soc. Med., 1949, 42, 492-496. 

9. deRopp, R. S. Drugs and the Mind. New York: Grove Press, Inc., 1960. 

10. Freedman. L. Z. “Truth” drugs. Sci. Am., March 1960. 145-154. 

11. Geis, G. In scopolamine veritas. The early history of drug-induced ‘state- 
ments. J. of Crim. Law, Criminal. € Pol. Sci., Nov.-Dec. 1959, 50(4), 347-358. 

12. Gerson, M. J., & Victoroff, V. Experimental investigation into the validity 
of confessions obtained under sodium amytal narcosis. J. Clin. and Exp. Psycho- 
path., 1948, 9, 349—375. 

13. Gottschalk, L. A. The use of drugs in information-seeking interviews. Tech- 
nical report #2, ARDC Study SR 177-D Contract AF 18 (600) 1797. Dec. 1958. 
Bureau of Social Science Research, Ine. 

14. House, R. E. The use of scopolamine in criminology. Texas St. J. of Med., 
1922, 18, 259. 

15. Houston, F. A preliminary investigation into abreaction comparing methe- 
drine and sodium amytal with other methods. J. Ment. Sci., 1952, 98. 707-710. 

16. Inbau, F. G. Self-incrimination. Springfield : C. C. Thomas, 1950. 

17. Kidd., W. R. Police interrogation. 1940. 

18. Legal dose of truth. Newsweek, Feb. 23, 1959, 28. 

19. Lindemann, E. Psychological changes in normal and abnormal individuals 
under the influence of sodium amytal. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1982, 11, 1083-1091. 

20. Lipton, E. L. The amytal interview. A review. Amer. Practit. Digest Treat., 
1950, 1, 148-163. 

21. MacDonald, J. M. Narcoanalysis and criminal law. Amer. J. Psychiat., 1954, 
111, 283-288. 

22. Morris, D. P. Intravenous barbiturates: an aid in the diagnosis and treat- 
ment of conversion hysteria and malingering. Afil. Surg., 1945, 96, 509-513. 

23. Orne, M. T. The potential uses of hypnosis in interrogation. An evaluation. 
ARDO Study SR 177-D Contract AF 18(600) 1797, Dec. 1958. Bureau of Social 
Science Research, Inc. 

24. Pelikan, E. W., & Kensler, C. J. Sedatives: Their pharmacology and uses. 
Reprint from The M ‘edical Clinics of North America. W. B. Saunders Company, 
Sept. 1958. 

25. Redlich, F. C., Ravitz, L. J., & Dession, G. H. Nareoanalysis and truth. 
Amer. J. Psychiat., 1951, 107, 586-593. 

26. Rolin, J. Police Drugs. Translated by L. J. Bendit. New York : Philosophical 
Library, 1956. 

27. Sargant, W., & Slater, E. Physical methods of treatment in psychiatry. (3rd. 
ed.) Baltimore : Williams and Wilkins, 1954. 

28. Snider, R. S. Cerebellum. Sci. Am., Aug. 1958, 84. 

29. Uhr, L., & Miller, L. G. (eds.). Drugs and Behavior. New York-London: 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 1960. 


Senator Watnop. If they are, I would assume that you would still 
try to find from either theirs or somebody else’s information how to 
protect our people from that kind of activity. 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

Senator Watxopr. Thank you very much. Thank you, , Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Chafee? 

Senator Cuaresr. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 


34 


Admiral Turner, I appreciate that these tawdry activities were tak- 
ing place long before your watch, and I think you have correctly 
labeled them as abhorrent, but not only were they abhorrent, it seems 
to me they were rather bungled, amateurish experiments that don’t 
seem to have been handled in a very scientific way, at least from the 
scanty evidence we have. 

It seems to me that there were the minimum of reports and the 
Agency didn’t have the ability to call it quits. It went on for some 12 
years, as you mentioned. What I would like to get to is, are you con- 
vinced now in your Agency that those scientific experiments, legiti- 
mate ones that you were conducting with polygraph and so forth, were 
being conducted in a scientific manner and that you are handling it in 
ae manner to get the best information that you are seeking in 
the end? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, I am, and I also have a sense of confidence 
that we are limiting ourselves to the areas where we need to be in- 
volved as opposed to areas where we can rely on others. 

Senator Carer. I am convinced of that from your report. I just do 
hope that you have people who are trained in not only handling this 
type of experiment, but in preparing the proper reports and drawing 
the proper data from the reports. You are convinced that you have 
this type of people? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Cuaresr. The second point I am interested in was the final 
lines in your testimony here, which I believe are very important, and 
that is that the Agency is doing all it can in cooperation with other 
branches of the Government to go about tracking down the identity of 
those who were in some way adverecly affected, and see what can be 
done to fulfill the government’s responsibilities in that respect. I might 
add that I commend you in that, and I hope you will pursue it 
vigorously. 

A hospital in my State was involved in these proceedings, and it is 
unclear exactly what did take place, so I have both a parochial interest 
in this and a national interest as well, and I do hope you will press on 
with it. It involves not only you, I appreciate, but also HEW and per- 
haps the Attorney General. 

Admiral Turner. Thank you, sir. We will. 

Senator Cuarer. Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inouys. Thank you very much. : 

Admiral Turner, MKULTRA subproject 3 was a project involving 
the surreptitious administration of LSD on unwitting persons,.was it 
not? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Inouye. In February 1954, and this was in the very early 
stages of MKULTRA, the Director of Central Intelligence wrote to 
the technical services staff officials criticizing their judgment because 
they had participated in an experiment involving the administration 
of LSD on an unwitting basis to Dr. Frank Olson, who later committed 
suicide. Now, the individuals criticized were the same individuals who 
were responsible for this subproject 3, involving exactly the same prac- 
tices. Even though these individuals were clearly aware of the dangers 
of surreptitious administration and had been criticized by the Director 


35 


of Central Intelligence, subproject 3 was not terminated immediately 
after Dr. Olson’s death. 

In fact, according to documents, it continued for a number of years. 
Can you provide this committee with any explanation of how such 
testing could have continued under these circumstances? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir, I really can’t. 

Senator Inouye. Are the individuals in the technical services who 
carried on subproject 3 still on the CIA payroll? 

Admiral Turner. I am sorry. Are you asking, are they today? 

Senator Inouye. Yes. 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

Senator InouyE. What would you do if you criticized officials of the 
technical services staff and they continued to carry on experimenta- 
tion for a number of years ? 

Admiral Turner. I would do two things, sir. One is, I would be sure 
at the beginning that I was explicit enough that they knew that I 
didn’t want that to be continued anywhere else, and two, if I found it 
being continued, I would roll some heads. 

_ Senator Inovyr. Could you provide this committee with informa- 
tion as to whether the individuals involved had their heads rolled ? 

Admiral Turner. I don’t believe there is any evidence they did, but 
I will double check that. 

[See p. 170 for material referred to. ] 

Senator Inovrr. As you know, Senator Huddleston and his subcom- 
mittee are deeply involved in the drafting of charters and guidelines 
for the intelligence community. We will be meeting with the President 
tomorrow. Our concern is, I think, a basic one. Can anything like this 
occur again ? 

Admiral Turner. I think it would be very, very unlikely, first, be- 
cause we are all much more conscious of these issues than we were back 
in the fifties, second, because we have such thorough oversight proce- 
dures. I cannot imagine that this kind of activity could take place 
today without some member of the CIA itself bypassing me, if I were 
authorizing this, and writing to the Intelligence Oversight Board, and 
blowing the whistle on this kind of activity. 

I am also doing my very best, sir, to encourage an openness with 
myself and a free communication in the Agency, so that I am the one 
who finds these things if they should happen. The fact is that we must 
keep you and your committee and now the new committee in the House 
informed of our sensitive activities. I think all of these add up to a 
degree of scrutiny such that this kind of extensive and flagrant activity 
could not happen today without it coming to the attention of the proper 
authorities to stop it. 

Senator Inouye. A sad aspect of the MKULTRA project was that 
it naturally involved the people who unwittingly or wittingly got in- 
volved in experimentation. I would appreciate it if you would report 
back to this committee in 3 months on what the Agency has done to 
notify these individuals and these institutions, and furthermore, to 
notify us as to what steps have been taken to identify victims, and if 
identified, what you have done to assist them, monetarily or otherwise. 

Admiral Turner. All right, sir. I will be happy to. 

Senator Gotpwater. Will the Senator yield ? 


36 


Senator Inouye. Yes, sir. 

Senator Gotpwarer. I wonder if he could include in that report for 
our information only a complete listing of the individuals and the 
experiments done on them, and whether they were witting or unwitting, 
volunteer or nonvolunteer, and what has been the result in each case. 
I think that would be interesting. 

Admiral Turner. Fine. Yes, sir. 

Senator Inouvyx. Senator Kennedy ? 

Senator Kennepy. Thank you. It is your intention to notify the in- 
dividuals who have been the subjects of the research, is that right, 
Admiral Turner? Do you intend to notify those individuals? 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

, Senator Kennepy. If you can identify them, you intend to notify 
them ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. And you intend to notify the universities or re- 
search centers as well? 

Admiral Turner. Senator, I am torn on that. I understand your 
opening statement. I put myself in the position of the president of one 
of those universities, let’s say. If he were witting—if his university 
had been witting of this activity with us, he has access to all that in- 
formation today. If he were not witting, I wonder if the process of 
informing him might put his institution’s reputation in more jeopardy 
than letting them go on the way they are today, not knowing. I really 
don’t know the equities here. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, the problem is, all you have to do is pick up 
the newspapers and you see these universities mentioned. In many in- 
stances, I think you are putting the university people at an extraordi- 
nary disadvantage, where there is a complete change of administra- 
tion, and they may for one reason or another not have information 
that they are under suspicion. There is innuendo; there is rumor. I 
cannot help but believe that it will just get smeared all over the news- 
papers in spite of all the security steps that have been taken. 

It seems to me that those universities should be entitled to that infor- 
mation, so that the ones with other administrations can adapt proce- 
dures to protect those universities. The importance of preserving the 
independence of our research areas and the communities seems to me to 
be a very fundamental kind of question about the protection of the 
integrity of our universities and our research centers. : ; 

Admiral-Turner. You are saying that you feel that if we identify 
them privately to themselves, we can benefit them in an adequate way to 
cover the risk that this will lead to a more public disclosure? There are 
lots of the 80 who have not been identified publicly at this point. _ 

Senator Kennepy. I think the universities themselves should be noti- 
fied. I think then the universities can take whatever steps in terms of 
their setting up the procedures to protect their own kinds of integrity 
in terms of the future. I would certainly hope that they would feel 
that they could make a public comment or a public statement on it. 
I think it is of general public interest, particularly for the people that 
are involved in those universities, to have some kind of awareness of 
whether they were used or were not used and how they were used. 

I think they are entitled to it, and quite frankly, if there is a public 
official or an official of the university that you notify and he wants 


37 


for his own particular reasons not to have it public, I don’t see why 
those in a lesser echelon or lower echelon who have been effectively used 
by it should not have the information as well. 

So, I would hope*that you would notify the universities and then 
also indicate to the public. I can’t conceive that this information will 
not be put out in the newspapers, and it puts the university people at 
an extraordinary disadvantage, and of course some of it is wrong, 
which is the fact of the matter, and I think some university official 
saying, well, it isn’t so, is a lot different than if they know it is con- 
firmed or it is not confirmed in terms of the Agency itself. I think that 
there is a responsibility there. 

Admiral Turner. I have great sympathy with what you are saying. 
I have already notified one institution because the involvement was so 
extensive that I thought they really needed to protect themselves, and 
I am most anxious to do this in whatever way will help all of the 
people who were perhaps unwitting participants in this, and the diffi- 
culty I will have is, I can’t quite do, I think, what you suggested, in 
that I may not be able to tell an institution of the extent and nature of 
its participation. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, you can tell them to the best of your in- 
formation, and it seems to me that just because the university or an 
individual is going to be embarrassed is not a reason for classifying 
the information. So, I would hope—I mean, I obviously speak as an 
individual Senator, but I feel that that is an incredible disservice to 
the innocent individuals and, I think, a disservice to the integrity of 
the universities unless they are notified, to be able to develop pro- 
cedures you are developing with regards to your own institution and 
we are trying to in terms of the Congress. Certainly the universities 
are entitled to the same. 

Admiral Turner. Yes. Not all of these, of course, were unwitting. 

Senator Kennepy. That’s right. 

Admiral Turner. Many of them were witting, and therefore they 
can take all those precautionary steps on their own, but I am perfectly 
open to doing this. I am only interested in doing it in a way that when 
identifying a university it will not lead to the public disclosure of the 
individuals, whom I am not allowed to disclose, and so on. 

Senator Kennepy. That could be done, it seems to me. 

Admiral Turner. So, we will see if we can devise a way of notifying 
these institutions on a private basis so that they can then make their 
own decision whether their equities are best served by their announc- 
ing it publicly or their attempting to maintain it 

Senator Kennepy. Or you. I wonder. What if they were to ask you 
to announce or indicate ? 

Admiral Turner. My personal conscience, sir, at this time, is that I 
would be doing a disserve to these universities if I notified the public. 

Senator Kennepy. Would you meet with some university officials 
and ask what their views are or whether they feel that the preserva- 
tion of the integrity of the universities would be better served or not? 
I think that would be useful to find out from small, large, private, and 
public universities’ officials how they view the integrity 

Admiral Turner. Fine. I will phone several university presidents 
today who are my friends and who are not involved in this, and ask 
them what they think the equities would be. 


38 


Senator Kennepy. All right. You let us know, too. 

Admiral Turner. But I am not sure that I see that there is any great 
benefit in my notifying the public as opposed to the university notify- 
ing them. Let him have his choice whether he wants—each institution 
wants to have it made public. 

Senator Krennepy. Yes. The fact would remain that the institution’s 
credibility would be better served if the institution’s president were to 
deny it and the university indicated that it did not participate in that 
program than if the university were to deny it and the Agency says 
nothing. It seems to me that that would be the strongest, and the only 
way that that is going to be credible. I would value it if you would get 
some input from universities as to what they believe is the fairest way 
in terms of the preservation of the integrity of the universities. 

Let me, if I could, ask on the question of the uses of these safe 
houses, as I understand from information that was provided to us in 
the course of our last committee, the testing of various drugs on in- 
dividuals happened at all social levels, high and low, it happened on 
native Americans and also on foreign nationals. That is what I under- 
stand was the nature of the project itself. 

Now, I am just wondering whether those tests were conducted at the 
two locations on the east coast and the west coast which were known 
as safe houses. To your knowledge, is that correct? 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. In terms of the research in this particular pro- 
gram, it did not go beyond the safe houses located on the east coast and 
the west coast ? I believe I am correct on that. 

Admiral Turner. That type of unwitting testing of sort of ran- 
domly selected individuals, yes. : 

Senator Kennepy. It was just located in those two places? 

Admiral Turner. To the best of our knowledge, there were only two 
locations, 

Senator Kennepy. Well, how do we interpret randomly selected ? 

Admiral Turner. Well, as opposed to prisoners in a prison who were 
somehow selected. 

Senator Krennepy. All right. Do you know from this information 
how many people were recruited during this period ? 

Admiral Turner. No idea. 

Senator Kennepy. Do you know approximately ? 

Admiral Turner. I asked that question the other day, and we just 
don’t have—apparently we are very—well, either there were no 
records kept of the actual numbers and types of people tested or they 
were destroyed. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Schweiker. 

Senator Scuwercer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Admiral Turner, I would like to come back to the experiments 
which may have been conducted at the hospital research facilities 
which the CIA helped to finance. It wasn’t clear to me from your pre- 
vious answers what kind of work was done there. I gather you are un- 
clear on that, too, from your remarks, yet I find in the CIA docu- 
mentation which you have supplied us, a list describing some of the 
advantages the Agency hoped to gain. It says: 


(a) One-sixth of the total space in the new hospital wing will be available to the 
Chemical Division of TSS * * * ; (b) Agency sponsorship of sensitive research 


39 


projects will be completely deniable; (c) Full professional cover will be provided 
for up to three biochemical employees of the Chemical Division; (@) Human 
patients and volunteers for experimental use will be available under controlled 
clinical conditions with the full supervision of 

and there is a blank, something has been deleted. 

_ It seems pretty clear to me what they intended to do in that par- 
ticular wing. Doesn’t it to you? Why would you go to such elaborate 
preparations, to buy part of the wing, bring three of your own per- 
sonnel there, give them a cover, and give them access to patients? 
Why would you go to such trouble and expense to arrange all that, if 
you weren’t planning to experiment on people in the hospital ? 

Admiral Turner. I agree with you 100 percent, sir. Those were 
clearly the intentions. I have no evidence that it was carried out in 
that way. I am not trying to be defensive, Senator. I am only trying 
to be absolutely precise here. 

Senator Scrwerker. Well, then, as to the nature of what was done 
there, the last paragraph on the same page of the document says, 
“The facilities of the hospital and the. ability to conduct controlled 
experimentations under safe clinical conditions using materials with 
which any agency connection must be completely deniable will aug- 
ment and complement other programs recently taken over by TSS, 
such as,” and then there’s another deletion. 

Now, the words following “such as” have been deleted. That is still 
classified, or at least it was removed when this document was sanitized 
and released. It seems to be that whatever was deleted right there would 
give you a pretty good clue as to what they were doing, since it says 
that the activities would “augment and complement other programs” 
undertaken by TSS. So, I have trouble understanding why you don’t 
know what was contemplated. Just the fact that similar programs are 
referred to in the document, though what they are is still deleted, 
should enable you to check it out. 

You could look at what went on in the similar programs mentioned 
following the “such as”-in the classified version of this document. 

Admiral Turner. Senator, I have not said that we don’t know what 
was contemplated being done there. We do not know what was done 
there. 

Senator Scuwrrker. Why did you delete that reference? Why 13 
that still classified, that particular project of whatever it is? 

Admiral Turner. I don’t know this particular case. We will get you 
the exact answer to that one and inform you about it, but it 1s quite 
probable that that other case is unrelated to this in the—well, not un- 
related, but that that was a project that still deserves to be classified. 

[The material referred to follows:] 

Construction of the Gorman Annex was begun in 1957 and the Annex was 
dedicated in March 1959. Of the several MKULTRA projects conducted at 
Georgetown only one involving human testing covered ‘a time span subsequent 
to March 1959. Subproject 45 ran from 1955 to 1963, thus it is possible that 
the final four years (1959-1963) of the subproject could have been spent in 
the Gorman Annex. However, there is no reference to the Gorman Annex or a 
“new Annex” in Subproject 45 papers, neither is there any mention of the sub- 
project moving to a new location in 1959 or later years. 

Authorization to contribute CIA funds toward construction of the Gorman 
Annex is contained in Subproject 35 of MKULTRA. Recently discovered material 
indicated that Dr. Geschickter continued his research for sleep- and amnesia- 
producing drugs under Project MKSEARCH through July 1967 at Georgetown 
University Hospital. But it is impossible to determine if the facilities of the 
Gorman Annex were involved. 


- 40 


Senator Scuwerer. I think that would give us a pretty good clue 
as to what was going to be done in the wing the CIA helped to finance. 

Was there any indication at all in the records you found that the 
project ultimately used cancer patients or terminally ill patients in 
connection with this facility ? ° 

Admiral Turner. I’m sorry. I missed your question because I was 
trying to get the data on the last one. I will read you the blank. 

Senator Scuwerker. Go ahead. . ; 

Admiral Turner. QKHILLTOP. It doesn’t help you, but—— 

Senator Scuwerker. Can you tell us what that is, or is it still 
classified ¢ 

Admiral Turner. I don’t know, and I assume from the fact that 
we deleted it, it is still classified, but I will get you that answer, sir. 

Senator Scuwerxer. Thank you. I’d like to see that information. 

[See p. 171 for material referred to.] °° 

Now my next question was: Is there any indication, Admiral, that 
projects in that particular center involved experimentation on ter- 
minally ill cancer patients? = 

Admiral Turner. I missed the first part of your question, sir. I am 
very sorry. 

Senator Scuwerker. Do you have any indication that some experi- 
ments in the facility used terminally ill cancer patients as subjects? 
You do acknowledge in your statement and it is clar from other docu- 
ments that these kinds of experiments were at some point being done 
somewhere. My question is, is there any indication that cancer patients 
or terminally ill patients were experimented with in this wing? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, it does appear there is a connection here, sir. 

Senator ScuwerKer. The other question I had relates to the de- 
velopment of something which has been called the perfect concussion. 
A series of experiments toward that end were described in the CIA 
documents, I wonder if you would just tell us what your understanding 
of perfect concussion is. 

Admiral Turner. Is that in my testimony, sir, or in some other 
document ? 

Senator Scuwerxer. Subproject 54, MKULTRA, which involved 
examination of techniques to cause brain concussions and amnesia by 
using weapons or sound waves to strike individuals without giving 
warning and without leaving any clear physical marks. Someone 
dubbed it “perfect concussion”—maybe that was poetic license on the 
part of our staff rather than your poets over there. I wonder if you 
could just tell us what brain concussion experiments were about? 

Admiral Turner. This project, No. 54, was canceled, and never 
carried out. 

Senator Scuwerker. Well, I do believe the first year of the project 
in 1955 was carried out by the Office of Naval Research, according to 
the information that you supplied us. The CIA seems to have been par- 
ticipating in some way at that point, because the records go on to say 
that the experimenter at ONR found out about CIA’s role, discovered 
that it was a cover, and then the project was transferred to 
MKULTRA in 1956. Again, this is all from the backup material you 
have given us. So, it was canceled at some time. I am not disagreeing 


41 


with that, but apparently for at least a year or two, somebody was 
investigating the production of brain concussions with special black- 
jacks, sound waves, and other methods as detailed in the backup 
material. 

Admiral Turner. The data available to me is that this project was 
never funded by the CIA, but I will double-check that and furnish the 
information for the record for you as to whether there was ever any 
connection here and if so, what the nature of the work was. 

(The material referred to follows :] 


Mr. Laubinger corrected his testimony regarding Subproject 54 during the 
September 21, 1977 hearings before the Subcommittee on Health and Scientific 
Research of the Human Resources Committee. The relevant portion is reproduced 
below: 

Mr. LAUBINGER. On project 54, it has got a rather sensational proposal in there, 
in terms of the.work that they propose to do, and you asked about the proposal 
and I said, in fact, it was never funded under MKULTRA. Now, I overlooked—-at 
least, my memory did not serve me correctly when I went through that file folder 
to see one memorandum dated January 10, 1956, which makes it quite clear, as a 
matter of fact, that that proposal was based on prior work that was funded by—— 
the Agency. : 

Senator ScHWEIKER. By what? 

Mr. LAUBINGER. By the CIA. So, that information was in their file folder. It 
did not happen to be in my head when I testified. 

Senator ScHWEIKER. I think I might have read you that, and that is why I 
argued at the time with you, because I think I had in front of me, as I recall, 
some indication that it was funded there. I did read that to you. So, you did 
supply it to us; there is no argument about that information. 

Mr. LausBrncer. Perhaps I am sort of headstrong, myself, and in my own view, 
I am reading under the ULTRA project, that if it had been funded under 
ULTRA, it would have had a project number and identified as such. The thing 
that threw me was that it was funded, apparently, outside of any MKULTRA 
activity and it was under the normal contracting process, so that it was not 
included in MKULTRA as ‘any work done under that funding umbrella. 

The file folder that you have and I have, right here, makes it quite clear, 
however, that a year’s work was done through navy funding—a navy funding 
mechanism—on which the proposal was based that ultimately came into the 
MKULTRA program. That second proposal was never funded. So, there was 
conftict and I, personally, I think, introduced a little bit of confusion in that in 
my testimony. 

Senator ScHWEIKER. Well, do you agree or not agree with DOD’s statement 
aaa even though the initial funding was navy, it was really a conduit for 

e CIA? ; 

Mr. Lausincer. I think that is correct. 


Senator Scuwetker. Yes; I would appreciate that. I would like to 
know how it went from ONR to CIA after a year. Somebody made a 
decision to make that transfer, and to make this an MKULTRA sub- 
ject. There had to be some sort of review that led to a decision to 
continue that kind of concussion—total blackout, maximum amnesia, 
and whatever else it was you were interested in—study and testing. 

Mr. Lavpincer. Senator, if I may try to say a few words on that, 
the files that were available to us for inspection, which are limited, 
indicated that there was a project being carried on by the Navy having 
to do with the effects of brain concussion. The CIA developed an inter- 
est in that, and considered funding it, but actually never did, and as 
the admiral testified, the MKULTRA is merely a funding mechanism, 
a place they go for money to do such things, but there is no evidence 
that I know of that that project was ever funded. 


42 


Senator Scuwerxer. Well, I am confused, because here again is an- 


other quote from a document that we have seen, which you have re- 
leased and supplied to us: 


Following is the technical progress made under the current [deleted] contract: 
(@) Specialized instrumentation and numerous testing techniques have been 
developed to obtain the desired dynamic data; (b) considerable data has now 
been obtained supporting the resonance-cavilation theory of brain concussion ; and 
(c) preliminary acceleration threshold data has been obtained for a fluid-filled 
glass simulated skull. : 

It goes on to talk about a blast range and a 2,500-square-foot labora- 
tory. The document notes that “Three blast test series have been run 
to date.” It describes a special blackjack device, “a pancake-type black- 
jack giving a high peak impact force with a low unit surface pressure.” 

I agree the records are inconclusive as to the results of this work, 
but it certainly seems that some testing was done. 

Mr. Lausincrr. Senator, you are putting us in the same position 
T think you were stating that you were in earlier in referring to docu- 

_ments not before us, but. I believe you are quoting_from a proposal_ 
that someone sent to the Agency to fund this work, and he is referring 
to past work. The past work would have encompassed a lot of things 
like that, but CIA was not involved with that. 

Senator ScuwerKer. What do you mean, Admiral, on page 6 of your 
testimony when you mention projects using magician’s art? How do 
magicians get into the spook business? 

Admiral Turner. I have interpreted this as to how to slip the mickey 
into the finn, but I would like to ask my advisers here to comment. 

Mr. Bropy. I think that is essentially it, Senator. It is surreptitious 
administration of material to someone, deceptive practices, how to 
distract. someone’s attention while you are doing something else, as 
I understand it. It was also some type of a covert communication 
project involved with the study of how magicians and their assistants 
perhaps communicate information to one another without having other 
people know it. This is the type of thing that was involved, sir. 

Senator Scuwerxer. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inourg. Senator Huddleston? 

Senator Huppieston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Admiral, in your checking these newly discovered documents and 
interviewing members of the CIA staff, did you find information that 
would confirm the contention described by the reporters for the New 
York Times that this type of experimentation was begun out of a 
fear at the Agency that foreign powers might have had drugs which 
would allow them to alter the behavior of American citizens or agents 
or members of the Armed Forces who were taken into custody, and 
which would have resulted in false confessions and the like? Is my 
question clear? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. I haven’t personally read the documen- 
tation on that. In my discussions with the people who are well in- 
formed in this area at the Agency, I am told that that is the case. 

Senator Huppreston. Was there any evidence or any indication that 
there were other motives that the Agency might also be looking for 
drugs that could be applied for other purposes, such as debilitating an 
individual or even killing another person? Was this part of this kind 
of experimentation ? 


43 


Admiral Turner. Yes; I think there is. I have not seen in this series 
of documentation evidence of desire to kill, but I think the project 
turned its character from a defensive to an offensive one as it went 
along, and there certainly was an intention here to develop drugs that 
could be of use. 

Senator Huppiesron. The project continued for some time after it 
was learned that, in fact, foreign powers did not have such a drug as 
was at first feared, didn’t it? 

Admiral Turner. That is my understanding. Yes, sir. 

Senator Huppieston. Is there any indication that knowledge gained 
as a result of these experiments has been useful or is being applied in 
any way to present operations ? 

Mr. Bropy. Senator, I am not sure if there is any body of knowledge. 
A great deal of what there was, I gather, was destroyed in 1973. I 
would like to defer to Frank here. Do you know of any ? 

Mr. Lausrncer. I know of no drugs or anything like that develope 
under this program that ever reached operational use or are in use 


teday. ie od 


Senator Huppiteston. So apparently any information that was 
gathered was apparently useless and not worth continuing, not worth 
further development on the part of the Agency. 

Mr. Lavusincer. I am having difficulty hearing your questions. 

Senator Huppieston. I can hardly hear myself. 

Admiral Turner. I think the answer to your question is that we have 
no evidence of great usefulness on this, and yet I think we should 
remember. 

Senator Huppieston. Well, is it accurate to say that this experimen- 
tation produced few useful results or had little application at all to the 
operations of the Agency or anybody else as far as we know? 

Admiral Turner. J think that is basically correct. At the same time, 
I would point out.that we had two CIA prisoners in China and one in 
the Soviet Union at this time, and we were concerned as to what kinds 
of things might be done to them, but I am not saying that—— 

Senator Huppiesron. Have you detected any sign that any other na- 
tion is continuing or has in the past conducted experiments similar to 
this or with a similar objective ? 

Admiral Turner. I am not prepared to answer that one off the top 
of my head, sir, but I will get it to you. 

[The material referred to follows :] 

We maintain no files of up-to-date information on. the testing of drugs in 
foreign countries. Some years ago we occasionally would review foreign research 
on antibiotics and pharmaceuticals in connection with public health and civil 
defense assesments. For a few years beginning in 1949 we assessed foreign 
research on LSD under Project ARTICHOKE because of concern that such 
drugs might be employed. gainst Agency and other U.S. personnel. Information 
relative to this work has already been provided to relevant Committees. In this 
early work we also occasionally looked at foreign human experimentation; we 
long ago eliminated our holdings on this subject and no collection requirements 
are any longer served. As consumer interest in this area has dropped off 
and higher priority areas need attention, we have virtually no present coverage 
with the possible exception of an occasional scanning of the literature for a 
specific program. To the best of our knowledge no other unit in the Intelligence 
Community is tracking this subject now. . 


44 


Senator Huppieston. You don’t know whether any of your agents 
anywhere in the world have been subjected to any kind of procedure 
like this? 

Admiral Turner. We certainly know of other powers conducting 
research in these areas, yes. 

Senator Hupptxston. Do you know how they go about that research ? 

Admiral Turner. It is pretty sketchy, the information we have. 

Senator Huppteston. Do you know of any other organization in this 
country or any institution that has conducted extensive research on 
unwitting individuals and through unwitting institutions? 

Admiral Turner. Well, I have read something in the newspapers 
about this, but I have not familiarized myself with it in specifics. 

Senator Huppresron. It is not a normal mode of operation for hu- 
man research, is it? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

Senator Hupprxston. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inouyr. Senator Wallop? 

Senator Watzop. Mr. Chairman, I only have one to follow up on 
Senator Huddleston’s questions and my earlier ones. You are not really 
saying, are you, Admiral Turner, that there are no mind-altering 
drugs or behavior modification procedures which have been used by 
foreign powers? 

Adiniral Turner. No, sir, I am not. 

Senator Watzop. I drew that inference partly in answer to my ques- 
tion that you knew of no truth serum. Maybe that is a misnomer, but 
surely there are relaxants that make tongues looser than they would 
otherwise be. Isn’t that true? 

Admiral Turner. Yes. 

Senator Waxxop. So I think it is fair to say, too, that the experience 
of many American prisoners of war in the Korean conflict would 
indicate that there are behavior modification procedures in use by 
foreign powers of a fairly advanced degree of sophistication. 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Wattor. Again, I will just go back and say I think this 
must have been part of the motivation. I don’t think you would have 
mentioned Cardinal Mindszenty had you thought his behavior was 
normal at the time or had anybody else. So, I would just again say 
I think it is a little bit scapegoating. I don’t think the object of this 
hearing is in any way to lay blame on those passed or those dead or 
otherwise, but I think it is a little bit scapegoating to say that it 
stopped with the directors of the CIA or the DCI’s of the time. Also 
I think it is a little bit scapegoating to say they didn’t even know it, 
but that it was some lower echelon acting alone. 

I think this was a behavior pattern that was prevalent in those 
years, and I think the object lesson is that we have discovered, we 
think and we hope, through your assurances and other activities of 
the Congress, means of avoiding future incidents of that kind. I thank 
you, Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Chafee? 

Senator Craree. No questions. 

Senator Inouye. Senator Kennedy, I think you have another 
question. 


45 


Senator Kennepy. Just talking about the two safe houses on the 
east and west coast as being the sources for the unwitting trials, now, 
the importance of this and the magnitude of it, I think, is of signifi- 
cance, because we have seen from your records that these were used 
over a period of 8 or 9 years, and the numbers could have been con- 
siderable. You are unable to determine, at least in your own research, 
what the numbers would be and what the drugs were, how many people 
ps involved, but it could have been considerable during this period 
of time. 

It would certainly appear to me in examining the documents and 
the flow charts of cash slips that, were expended in these areas that it 
was considerable, but that is a judgmental factor on it, but I think 
it is important to try and find out what the Agency is attempting to 
do to get to the bottom of it. 

Now, the principal agent that was involved as I understand it is 
deceased and has been deceased for 2 years. The overall agent, Mr. 
Gottlieb, has indicated a fuzzy memory about this whole area, He 
has testified before the Intelligence Committee. Yet he was respon- 
sible for the whole program. Then, the Director had indicated the 
destruction of the various materials and unfamiliarity with the 
project. 

Now, you have indicated in your testimony today that there are two 
additional agents on page 9 of your testimony, you indicated there 
are two additional agents which you have uncovered at the bottom of 
it, and you say, the names of CIA officials who approved or monitored 
the various projects. You talk about the two additional agents in your 
testimony. ; 

Now, I am just wondering if you intend to interview those agents 
to find out exactly what is being done. I suppose, first of all, shouldn’t 
the project manager know what was being done? 

Admiral Turner. Our first problem, Senator, is that we have been 
unable to associate an individual with those names at this point. We 
are still burrowing to find out who these people are. We haven’t identi- 
fied them as having been CIA employees, and we don’t know whether 
these were false names. 

Senator Kennepy. You are tracking that down, as I understand it? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. You are tracking that down, and you have every 
intention of interviewing those people to find out whatever you can 
about the program and project ? 

Admiral Turner. My only hesitation here is whether I will do this 
or the Justice Department. 

Senator Kennepy. It will be pursued, though, I understand? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Either through the Agency or through the Jus- 
tice Department ? 

Admiral Turner. [Nods in the affirmative. ] 

Senator Kennepy. Is it plausible that the director of the program 
would not understand or know about the details of the program? 
Is it plausible that Dr. Gottlieb would not understand the full range 
of activities in those particular safe houses? 


96-408 O- 77-4 


46 


‘ ooeural Turner. Let me say it is unlikely. I don’t know Mr. Gott- 
ieb. 

Senator Kennepy. Has anybody in the Agency talked with Mr. 
Gottlieb to find out about this? 

Admiral Turner. Not since this revelation has come out. 

Senator Kennepy. Not since this revelation? Well, why not? 

Armiral Turner. He has left our employ, Senator. 

Senator Kennepy. Does that mean that anybody who leaves is, you 
know, covered for lifetime ? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Why wouldn’t you talk with him and find out? 
You have new information about this program. It has been a matter 
of considerable interest both to our committee and to the Intelligence 
Committee. Why wouldn’t you talk to Mr. Gottlieb? 

Admiral Turner. Well, again, I think the issue is whether this 
should be done by the Justice Department or ourselves. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, are we wrestling around because you and 
Attorney General Bell can’t agree 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy [continuing]. On who ought to do it? 

Admiral Turner. We are proceeding together in complete agreement 
as to how to go. I have, in connection with trying to find all of these 
Americans or others who were unwittingly tested, I have some con- 
siderable concern about the CIA running around this country inter- 
viewing and interrogating people, because I don’t want to give any 
yes that we are doing domestic intelligence. 

enator Kmnnepy. I am just talking about one, in this case. That 
was the man who was responsible for the whole program, and to 
find out whether anyone within the Agency since you have had this 
new material has talked to Gottlieb since 1975, and if the answer is 
no, I want to know why not. 

Admiral Turner. The reason he was not interviewed in connection 
with the 1975 hearings was that he had left the employ of the CIA 
and there was a concern on the part of the Agency that it would appear 
to the investigators that the CIA was in some way trying to influence 
him and influence his testimony before the committee. If these 
committees have no objection, we would be happy to contact Dr. 
Gottlieb and see if he can augment anything here in this new infor- 
mation, though I don’t think there is much in this new information 

.that he can add to as opposed to what was available in 1975. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, you see, Admiral Turner, you come to the 
two committees this morning and indicate that now at last we have the 
information. We don’t have to be concerned about anything in the 
future on it. Now, I don’t know how you can give those assurances to 
the members of these committees as well as to the American people 
when you haven’t since 1975 even talked to the principal person that 
was in charge of the program, and the records were destroyed. He is 
the fellow that was running the program, and the Agency has not 
talked to him since the development of this new material. 

Admiral Turner. Our only concern here is the proprieties involved, 
and we will dig into this and work with the Justice Department on 


47 


who, if either of us, should get into discussions with Dr. Gottlieb so as 
not to prejudice any legal rights that, may be involved here, or to ap- 
pear in any way to be improper. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, do I understand you have not contacted the 
Justice Department about this particular case since the development 
of this new material about Gottlieb ? 

Admiral Turner. Not about Gottlieb specifically. We have contacted 
him. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, it is amazing to me. I mean, can you under- 
stand the difficulty that any of us might have in terms of comprehend- 
ing that when you develop a whole new series of materials that are on 
the front page of every newspaper in the country and are on every tele- 
vision, I mean, that means something, but it does not mean nearly as 
much as the interest that we have in the fact about the testing of un- 
witting Americans, and every single document that the staff reviews 
has Mr. Gottlieb’s name on it and you come up to tell us that we don’t 
have to worry any more, we have these other final facts, and Mr. Gott- 
lieb has not been talked to? 

Admiral Turner. Sir, I am not saying that these are in any way th 
final facts. I am saying these are all the facts we have available. 

Senator Kennepy. And you have not talked to the person who was 
in charge of the program, so what kind of value or what kind of weight 
can we give it? ; 

Admiral Turner. We are happy to talk to him. I think the issue 
here again is one of propriety and how to go about this. We have not, 
I believe, enough new information about Gottlieb’s participation here 
to signal that his interview would be that much more revealing than 
what was revealed in 1975. 

Senator Kennepy. The importance of it, I think, from our point 
of view, is, he would know the drugs that were administered, the vol- 
ume of drugs, how it was administered, and in terms of your ability 
to follow up to protect these people and their health, to the extent that 
it can be done, that opportunity is being lost. 

I want to get on to some others, but will you give us the assurance 
that you will get ahold of Gottlieb or that you will talk to Attorney 
General Bell and talk with Gottlieb ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. And let us know as to the extent of it. I don’t 
see how we can fufill our responsibility in this area on the drug test- 
ing without our hearing from Gottlieb as well, but I think it is im- 
portant that you do so, particularly since all of the materials have 
been destroyed. 

These other two agents, have they talked to them ? 

Admiral Turner. We don’t know who they are, sir. We are trying 
to track down and see whether these names can be releated to anybody. 

Senator Kennepy. That is under active investigation by the Agency ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. And you have the intention of talking to those 
people when you locate them. Is that correct ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir, under the same circumstances as Gottlieb. 

Senator Kennepy. And you have people working on it? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. 


48 


Senator Kennepy. With regards to the activities that took place in 
these safe houses, as I understand from the records, two-way mirrors 
were used. Is that your understanding ? 

Admiral Turner. Yes, sir. We have records that construction was 
done to put in two-way mirrors. 

Senator Krennepy. And they were placed in the bedroom, as I 
understand. 

[ Pause. ] 

Senator Kennepy. Well, we have documents—— 

Admiral Turner. I believe that was in the Church record, but IL 
don’t have the details. 

Senator Kennepy. And rather elaborate decorations were added, as 
I understand, at least, to the one in San Francisco, in the bedroom, 
which are French can-can dancers, floral pictures, drapery, including 
installation of bedroom mirrors, three framed Toulouse Lautrec post- 
ers with black silk mats, and a number of other—red bedroom cur- 
tains and recording equipment, and then a series of documents which 
were provided to the committee which indicate a wide proliferation 
of different cash for $100, generally in the $100 range over any period 
of time on the particular checks. Even the names are blocked out, as 
to the person who is receiving it. Cash for undercover agents, operat- 
ing expenses, drinks, entertainment while administering, and then it 
is dashed out, and then the other documents, that would suggest, at 
least with the signature of your principal agent out there, that— 
“called to the operation, midnight, and climax.” 

What can you tell us that it might suggest to you about what tech- 
nigues were being used by the Agency in terms of reaching that sort 
of broad-based group of Americans that were being evidently enticed 
for testing in terms of drugs and others? Do you draw any kind of 
conclusion about what might have been going on out there in these 
safe houses? 

Admiral Turner. No, sir. 

[General laughter. ] 

Senator Krennepy. There is a light side to it, but there is also an 
enormously serious side. And that is that at least the techniques which 
are used or were used in terms of testing, and trying to find out ex- 
actly the range of drugs used and the numbers of people involved and 
exactly what that operation was about, as well as the constant reitera- 
tion of the use of small sums of cash at irregular intervals. A variety 
of different techniques were employed but there is an awful lot of 
documentation putting these matters together. 

When you look at the fact that it is a broad range population that 
has been tested, tested in these two areas, with the kind of cash slips 
that were used in this, payment mechanisms and decorations and all 
of the rest, we are not able to put a bottom line on it but one thing is 
for sure, and that is, Gottlieb knows. That is one thing for sure, be- 
cause his name appears on just about every one of these documents, 
and it is, I think, very important to find out what his understanding 
is of the nature of that. So, we will hear more about that. 

Admiral Turner. I believe Gottlieb has been interviewed by the 
Congress. 

Senator Kennepy. That’s right, he has, and in reviewing the record, 
it is not very satisfactory, and it just seems with the new information 


49 


and the new documentation and the new memoranda—and he did not 
have the checks at that time—and with the wide variety of different 
memoranda with his name on it, his memory could be stimulated on 
that. 

Thank you. 

Senator Inovrer. I would like to thank the admiral and his staff for 
participating in this hearing. I believe the record should show that this 
hearing was held at the request of the Agency and the admiral. It was 
not held because we insisted upon it. It was a volunteer effort on the 
part of the Agency. I think the record should also indicate that Ad--. 
miral Turner has forwarded to this committee a classified file including 
all of the names of the institutions and the persons involved as the 
experimentors. . 

I should also indicate that this hearing is just one step involved in 
the committee’s investigation of drug abuse. Just as you have had much 
work in going over the 8,000 pages, the staff of this committee has had 
equal problems, but I would like the record to show that you have 
made these papers and documents available to the committee. I thank 
you for that. 

As part of the ongoing investigation, we had intended to call upon 
many dozens of others, experimentors, or those officials in charge, and 
one of those will be Dr. Gottlieb. 

In thanking you, I would like to say this to the American people, 
that what we have experienced this morning in this committee room 
is not being duplicated in any other committee room in any other part 
of the world. I doubt that very much. Our Agency and our intelligence 
community has been under much criticism and has been subjected to 
much abuse, in many cases justified, but this is the most open society 
that I can think of. For example, in Great Britain there are about six 
people who are aware of the identity of the man in charge of intelli- 
gence. In other countries, similar conditions exist. Here in the United 
States we not only know Admiral Turner, we have had open hearings 
with him, such as this. The confirmation hearings were all open. 

In a few weeks, the Senate of the United States will debate a resolu- 
tion to decide upon whether we should disclose the amounts and funds 
being used for counterintelligence and national intelligence. I would 
hope that in presenting this issue to the public, the media will take note 
that the Agency has cooperated and will continue to. The abuse that 
we have learned about this morning is one I hope will never happen 
again, but without constant oversight on the part of the Executive 
Office, on the part of the Congress, it could happen again. It is impor- 
tant therefore that we continue in this oversight activity. 

So, once again, Admiral, I thank you very much for helping us. We 
will continue to call upon you for your assistance. We would like to 
submit to you several questions that the members and staff have pre- 
pared. We hope you will look them over carefully and prepare re- 
sponses for the record, sir. : 

Senator Kennepy. Mr. Chairman ? 

Senator Inovye. Yes, sir? 

Senator Krennepy. I, too, want to thank Admiral Turner for his 
responsiveness. I have had meetings with him in the committees and 
also conversations, telephone conversations, and private meetings, and 


50 


I have found him personally to be extremely responsive, and it is a 
very difficult challenge which he has accepted in heading this Agency. 
TI want you to know, personally, I, too, would like to see this put behind 
us. I don’t think we are quite there yet in terms of this particular area 
that we are interested in. I think the Intelligence Committee has 
special responsibilities in this area of the testing, so we look forward 
to working with you in expediting the time that we can put it behind, 
but it does seem to me that we have to dig in and finish the chapter. 
So, I want to personally express my appreciation to you, Admiral 
Turner, and thank you for your cooperation and your help, and I look 
forward to working with you. 

Admiral Turner. Thank you. 

Senator Huppreston. Mr. Chairman, I am not sure you emphasized 
this enough, but I think the record ought to show that Admiral Turner 
informed the Select Committee on his own initiative when the new 
documentation was found. The documentation has been made avail- 
able to us voluntarily, in a spirit of cooperation. foes 

I think this shows a vast difference from the mode of operation that 
existed prior to the formation at least of the Church committee, and 
a difference that is very helpful. 

Senator Inovyr. Thank you very much. Thank you very much, 
Admiral. 
pris would now like to call upon Mr. Philip Goldman and Mr. John 

ittinger. 

Me "Gelatin and Mr. Gittinger, will you please rise and take the 
oath. 

Do you solemly swear that the testimony you are about to give is 
the truth, the whole truth and nothing but the truth, so help you, God? 

Mr. Gotpman. I do. 

Mr. Grrrincer. I do. 

Senator Inouye. Thank you, sir. 

Mr. Goldman, will you identify yourself, and after that, Mr. 
Gittinger. 

Senator Kennepy. Before we start in, we had a third witness, Mr. 
Chairman, Mr. Pasternac, who planned to testify, traveled to Wash- 
ington—he lives in Washington, and was contacted recently—with 
the intention of testifying this morning. And something—he called 
us late this morning and indicated that he wanted to get a counsel 
before he would wish to testify. 

Senator Inouye. Mr. Goldman. 

Mr. Goldman, will you identify yourself, sir. 


TESTIMONY OF PHILIP GOLDMAN, FORMER EMPLOYEE, CENTRAL 
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


Mr. Gotpman. I am Philip Goldman. 

Senator Inovyr. And you are a former employee of the.Central 
Tntelligence Agency ? 

Mr. Gotpman. Over 10 years ago. 

Senator Inouyr. And you were employed at the time when 
MKULTRA was in operation? - 

Mr. Gorpman. There were some MKULTRA’s in operation at the 
time I was there. 


51 ies 


Senator Inouye. And Mr. John Gittinger, are you a former em-- 
ployee of the Central Intelligence Agency ? 


TESTIMONY OF JOHN GITTINGER, FORMER EMPLOYEE, CENTRAL 
INTELLIGENCE AGENCY 


Mr. Grrrincer. I am. 

Senator Inouye. Are you still an employee? 

Mr. Grrrincer. No. 

Senator Inouye. Were you a member of the Agency at the time 
MKULTRA was in operation? 

Mr. Girrinecer. Yes. 

Senator Inouye. Thank you. Senator Kennedy. 

Senator Kennepy. I want to welcome both of you to the committee. 

If we could start with Mr. Goldman. Were you the project engineer 
for the safe houses in either San Francisco or New York? 

____Mr. Gotpman. IL_know of-no safe-house in San Francisco. ~~ 

Senator Kennepy. How about in New York? 7 

Mr. Gotpman. I knew of one facility that was established there, 
but I didn’t know anything of its operation. 

Senator Kennepy. Were you a monitor on any testing of drugs on 
unwitting persons in San Francisco? 

Mr. Gorpman. No. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, we have a classified document here that was 
provided by the Agency that lists your name as a monitor of the pro- 
gram and I would appreciate it if you would look—— 

Mr. Gorpman. I think the misunderstanding arises because I was 
project officer. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, would you take a look at that? 

[Mr. Goldman inspected the document. ] 

Mr. Gorpman. This document as it states is correct. However, 
my. 

Senator Kennepy. That document is correct ? 

Mr. Gorpman. As far as I see on the first page, the project. But 
my. 

Senator Krennepy. Well, could I get it back, please. 

That would indicate that you were a monitor of the program. 
oo Gotpman. I was in charge of disbursing the moneys to Morgan 

all. 

Senator Kennepy. To whom was that ? 

Mr. Gorpman. To the individual whose name was listed at the top 
of that document. 

Senator Krnnepy. And you knew that he was running the project 
in San Francisco? 

ra Gotpman. I knew he was the person who was in charge out 
there. 

Senator Kennepy. All right. 

Mr. Gotpman. But I had no knowledge nor did I seek knowledge of 
actually what he was doing, because there would be other things 
involved. 

I did receive 

Senator Kennepy. What were you doing? 


52 


Mr. Gotpman. I was collecting—I had to be sure that all the re- 
ceipts that ever were turned in balanced with the moneys that were 
paid out to see that everything was run all right. There was no illegal 
use of funds as far as we could determine by the receipts and cash. 

Senator Kennepy. So even though the Agency document indicates 
that you were a monitor for the program, one of the few monitors of 
that particular program which you mentioned for San Francisco and 
Mill Valley, Calif., you described your responsibility only as a carrier 
of money, is that correct ? 

Mr. Gotoman. I would say as a disburser or carrying out—seeing 
that the moneys were handled properly. There was within that—I 
don’t know what’s done or what he did do in conjunction with other 
people. 

Senator Kennepy. Were you responsible for the disbursement of 
all the funds? 

Mr. Gotpman. I was responsible for turning over the check to him. 

Senator Kennepy. And what did you know of the program itself? 

Mr. Gotpman. The only thing I knew of the program was what he 
furnished us in terms of receipts and that sort of thing. I didn’t in- 
dulge or concern myself in that. 

Senator Kennepy. You still wrote, and I'll let you examine it— 
it’s a classified document—but you wrote a rather substantive review 
of the program in May of 1963, talking about the experiments, the 
factual data that had been collected, covert and realistic field trials, 
about the necessity of those particular—and talked about the effec- 
tiveness of the various programs, the efficiency of various delivery 
systems. That doesn’t sound to me like someone who is only—— 

Mr. Gotpman. Well, if you would refresh my memory, if I could 
read this I would certainly agree with whatever is said there, if it was 
written. 

Senator Kennepy. I am trying to gather what your role was. You’ve 
indicated first of all that you didn’t know about—you knew about a 
safe house in New York; now we find out that you’re the carrier for 
the resources as well and the agent in San Francisco. We find out now 
that the CIA put you as a monitor. You're testifying that you only were 
the courier, and here we have just one document, and there are many, 
others that talk about the substance of that program with your name 
on it and I am just trying to find out exactly what role you were 
plaving. 

Mr. Gorpman. The only thing I can tell you about this and I am 
drawing completely on my memory is that this individual who was 
in charge out there conducted these things and reported them back to 
the Agency. I didn’t participate in any of them. All I know was that he 
furnished me with receipts for things that were done and told of the 
work that they had done. . 

Senator Krnnevy. Well, that document covers more than receipts. 

Mr. Gotpman, Yes, it tells of what—they had conducted work out 
there. 

Senator Krnnepy. It descrihes, does it not? Read the paragraph 2. 

Mr. Gorpman, “A number of covert” 

Senator Kennepy. Well, you can’t read it, it’s a classified document, 
and I don’t know why, quite frankly, but it relates to the substance 


53 


of those programs and your name is signed to the memorandums on 
it. I am not interested in you trying to review for us now what is in the 
document, but I think it would be unfortunate if we were left with the 
opinion that all you were was a courier of resources when we see a 
document with your name on it, signed, that talks about the substance 
of the program. And what we’re interested in is the substance of the 
program. We have the recent documents that were provided by the 
Agency, which do indicate that you were at least involved in the 
substance, and I’m just trying to find out whether you’re willing to 
tell us about that. 

Mr. Gotpman. I am perfectly willing to tell you everything that 
I can remember. 

Senator Kennepy. But you can’t remember anything. 

Mr. Gotpman. I can’t remember the substantive parts of these 
things, I really can’t. 

Senator Kennepy. Of the program that was taking place. 

Do you have any greater familiarity with what was happening in 
New York? 

Mr. Gotpman. No, no. 

Senator Kennepy. And you have the same function with regards 
to New York? 

Mr. Gotpman. The same function with regard to New York. 

Senator Kennepy. Did you ever go to San Francisco? 

Mr. Gotpman. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. Did you meet with the agent in charge? 

Mr. Gotpman. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. And why did you meet with him? 

Mr. Gotpman. To discuss some of the receipts and things that were 
there to find out if these were indeed true expenditures and to find out 
7 everything was going along all right for the work that was being 

one. 

Senator Kennepy. What work was being done? 

Mr. Gotpman. No, the reports of these things and whatever was 
being done. I don’t know who he reported to but he did report to 
somebody. 

Senator Kennepy. You travel out there to find out about the work 
that’s being done, and what does he tell you, that the work is being 
done well and. 

Mr. Gorpman. He told me that the work that they were doing was 
going along, progressing satisfactorily, but to be very frank with 
you 

Senator Kennepy. But he didn’t tell you what the work was? 

Mr. Gotpman. To be very frank with you, Senator, I cannot re- 
member the things that happened back in those days. I’ve been away 
from the company—from the Agency for over 10 years, and that is 
even farther back than that, and that was just about the time when I 
first engaged in this, so it was my first 

Senator Kennepy. Did they disburse a series of $100 checks, to 
your recollection ? 

Mr. Gotpman. I don’t recollect it, but if you have it there, then 
they did. 

Senator Kennepy. Did you know Dr. Gottlieb? 

Mr. Gotpman. Yes. 


54 


Senator Kennepy. How did you know Dr. Gottlieb? 

at OER He had been head of the division when I was re- 
cruited. ’ 

Senator Kennepy. Did you talk to him about these programs? Did 
you have anything to do with him during this period of time? 

Mr. Gotpman. I didn’t have anything to do with him until I would 
say probably in the sixties. 

Senator Kennepy. And can you tell us what you had to do with 
him then ? . 

Mr. Gotpman. Just what you see there on the papers. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, that is the request for the money and he 
approves it. 

Mr. Gotpman. That is the request for money and he approves it, 
and I am quite sure that I probably discussed with him whether the 
work was going along all right, whether his reports were being turned 
in, and whether he was satisfied with the way things were going 
and did he have any complaints about the way other people were 
requesting him, but I did not engage myself in anything he was ou: 

enator Kennepy. Well, did you get the impression that Gottlie 
knew what was going on? 

Mr. Gotpman. I didn’t ask. 

Senator Kennepy. But you told him that your impression that what 
was going on even though you didn’t know what was going on, was go- 
ing on well, I guess? [Laughter. ] 

Mr. Gotpman. I told Gottlieb what you saw in there was that the 
things appeared to be going along all right. I was repeating and par- 
roting back the words that were given to me while I was there. 

: Ca ae Kennepy. What was the money being spent for, do you 
now 

Mr. Gotpman. No; I can’t recall that, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Would you remember if we told you it was red 
curtains and can-can pictures—— 

Mr. Gotoman. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Floral pictures and the rest. 

Mr. Gorpman. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Recorders. 

Mr. Gotpman. No, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. Recorders and two-way mirrors. 

Mr. Gotpman. Wait, hold on. You're slipping a word in there now. 

Senator Kennepy. But you would have authorized those funds, 
would you not, since you were the — 

' Mr. Gotpman. Did you say two-way mirrors? 

Senator Kennepy. Yes. 

Mr. Gotpman. Where? 

Senator Kennepy. In the safe houses. 

Mr. Gotpman. Where? 

Senator Kennepy. San Francisco. 

Mr. Gotpmay. No. 

Senator Kennepy. How about New York? 

Mr. Gotpman. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. You remember now that you approved expendi- 
tures for New York? 


55 


Mr. Gotpman. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. What were those expenditures for ? 

Mr. GotpMan. That was a transfer of money over for the use in 
an apartment in New York by the Bureau of Narcotics. It was for 
their use. 

Senator Kennepy. Do you have any knowledge of what was going 
on in the apartment ? 

Mr. Gotpman. No, sir, other than I know that it had been used, ac- 
cording to the information that I have been given, it was used by the 
Bureau of Narcotics to make meetings with individuals who they were 
interested in with regard to pushing dope—not pushing dope, but sell- 
Ing narcotics and that sort of thing. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, Iam sure you had many responsibilities and 
it’s a long time ago, but the Agency does indicate that you were project 
monitor for that particular program. 

Mr. Gotpman. That’s correct. 

Senator Kennepy. Your own testimony indicates you went out to re- 
view the expenditures of funds to find out whether they were being 
wisely used, that you came back and talked to the project director, Mr. 
yee to give him a progress report about what was going on out 
there. : . 

Mr. Gotpman. Yes, sir, I did. 

Senator Krnnepy. All those things are true, and yet you draw a 
complete blank in terms of what was the project itself. That’s where 
the record is now. 

Mr. Gorpman. I did not go out there to review the projects nor did 
I come back and talk with Mr. Gottlieb and review what I had observed 
in terms of any projects that they—that is, other parts of the Agency 
might have in operation there. I simply reported back those things 
which were told to me by the individual out there who—and I carried 
them back and they are contained in the report that you have in front 
of you, word for word, just as it was given to me. 

Senator Kennepy. The report that you examined here is a substan- 
tive report on the particular program and project. And I don’t think 
anyone who wasn’t familiar with the project—this is a personal evalu- 
ation—could write a report on the substance of it without knowing 
about it. Now, that’s mine. Maybe you can’t remember and recollect, 
and that’s—— 

Mr. Gorpman. No; everything I put down in there is things that I 
was told while I was out there, and if there was any ancillary informa- 
tion involved in there I can tell you I just don’t remember that. I really 
don’t. 

At the time—that was some years ago. At the time—a lot of time has 
passed since then and I have made quite sure that if I could recollect it 
at all, I would do it. If you have some papers and you want me to cer- 
tify whether yes, this is so or that is so, I can do that, but I can’t recall 
it mentally. 

Senator Kennepy. You just certified the principal. There are others 
up here. 

I would like to go to Dr. Gittinger. 

Mr. Girrtnerr. It’s Mr. Gittinger. 

Senator Kennepy. How long did you serve with the Agency ? 


56 


Mr. Grrrincer. Twenty-six years. 

Senator Kennepy. Excuse me? 

Mr. Girrincer. Twenty-six years., 

Senator Knennepy. Twenty-six years. 

And at some point you moved into the operational support side, is 
that correct ? 

Mr. Girrincer. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. And did you know Sidney Gottlieb? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. And did he inform you about the research proj- 
ects involving LSD? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Krnnepy. It is my understanding that you were also aware 
of some of the drug testing projects conducted on unwitting subjects 
on the west coast using the Bureau of Narcotics people in the operation. 
Is that true? 

Mr. Grrrincer. I was. 

Senator [nouyr, Excuse me. Would you speak into the microphone? 
T cannot hear you. : , 

Mr. Girtincer. Sorry. 

Senator Kennepy. Do you know which drugs were involved in those 
tests? 

Mr. Grrrincer. LSD. And I can’t remember for sure much of the 
others. What is the substance of marihuana, cannabis, is that right, that 
can be delivered by other than smoking ? 

Senator Kennepy. Cannabis? 

Mr. Girrrncer. There had been some discussion of that; yes. 

Senator Kennepy. And was heroin also used ? 

Mr. Girrincer. Heroin used by CIA ? 

Senator Krennepy. No. In the west coast operation. 

Mr. Girrtncrr. Absolutely not. 

- Senator Kennepy. Now, to your knowledge, how were the drugs ad- 
ministered to the unwitting subjects ? 

Mr. Grrrineer. I have no direct knowledge. 

Senator Kennepy. Why did you go to the safe houses ? 

Mr. Grrrtncer. It’s a very complicated story. Just in justification of 
myself, this came up just day before yesterday. I have not really had 
enough time to get it all straightened in my mind, so I ramble. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, you take your time and tell us in your own 
words. We’ve got some time here. 

Mr. Grrrincer. My responsibilities which would involve any of the 
period of time that you were talking about really was not directly 
related to drugs at all. I was a psychologist charged with the responsi- 
bility of trying to develop as much information as I could on various 
cultures, overseas cultures, anthropological type data, if you follow 
what I mean. I was also engaged in trying to work out ways and means 
of assessing people and understanding people. 

I originally became involved in this through working on Chinese 
culture, and over a series of time I was introduced to the problem of 
brainwashing, which is the thing that really was the most compelling 
thing in relationship to this, and became charged with the responsi- 
bility of trying to find out a little bit about interrogation techniques. 


57 


And among other things, we decided or I decided that one of the best 
sources of interrogation techniques would be trying to locate and inter- 
view and become involved with experienced police interrogators in 
the country and experienced people who had real practical knowledge 
of interrogation. The reason for this is that we had become pretty well 
convinced after the experience of the brainwashing problems coming 
out of China, that it was the techniques of the interrogators that were 
causing the individuals to make confessions and so forth in relationship 
to this, rather than any kind of drugging and so forth. So we were 
very much interested in interrogation techniques, and this led to me 
being introduced to the agent in the west coast, and I began to talk to 
him in connection with these interrogation techniques. 

Senator Kennepy. OK. Now, that is the agent that ran the tests 
on the west coast on the unwitting people. That’s where you come in, 
correct ? : 

Mr. Grrrincer. If I understand—would you say that again ? 

Senator Kennepy. The name Morgan Hall has been—that is the 
name that has been used. 

Mr. Grrrinecer. Yes. 

Senator Kennepy. And that is the agent that you met with. 

Mr. Girrincer. That is right. 

Senator Kennepy. And you met at the safe house. 

Mr. Grrrincer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Krennepy. Whom did you meet with in the safe house? 

Mr. Grrtrnuzr. This is the part that is hard for me to say, and J am 
sorry that I have to. In connection with some work that we were 
doing, we needed to have some information on sexual habits. Morgan 
Hall provided informants for me to talk to in connection with the sex 
habits that I was interested in trying to find information. During one 
period of time the safe house, as far as I was concerned, was used for 
just these particular type of interviews. And I didn’t see the red 
curtains. 

Senator Kennepy. Those were prostitutes, were they ? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. How many different times were you there that 
you had similar. 

Mr. Grrrincer. I couldn’t possibly say with any certainty on that. 
Four or five times. 

Senator Kennepy. Four or five times. 

Mr. Grrrincer. Over—you remember now, the period that I’m tall- 
ing about when I would have any involvement in this is from about 
1956 to 1961. So it’s about a 4- or 5-year period which is the only time 
that I know anything about what you are talking about here today. 

Senator Krennepy. Did Morgan Hall make the arrangements for 
the prostitutes to meet with you? 

Mr. Grrrinorr. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kunnepy. Did the interviews that you had have anything to 
do with drugs? 

Mr. Grrrtncer. Well, as I tried to explain earlier when this was 
being discussed a little bit beforehand, again I think it is pretty hard 
for most people now to recognize how little there was known about 
drugs at the period of time that we are talking about, because the 


58 


drug age or the drug culture comes later on. Consequently, those of 
us who had any responsibility in this area were interested in trying to 
get as much information as we could on the subculture, the subculture 
drug groups, and obviously the Bureau of Narcotics represented a 
means of doing this. Consequently, other types of things that were 
involved in discussions at that time would have to do with the under- 
ground use of drugs. When I am talking about this I am talking about 
the folkways in terms of unwitting use of drugs. Did these people that 
I was talking to have any information about this and on rare instances 
they were able to tell me about their use, and in most cases this would” 
largely turn out to be a Mickey Finn or something of that sort rather 
than anything esoteric. 

I also was very much interested because we had relatively little 
information, believe it or not, at that time, in terms of the various 
reactions that people were having to drugs. Therefore, these people 
were very informative in terms of they knew a great deal of informa- 
tion about reactions. 

Senator Kennupy. At least you gathered—or am I correct in assum- 
ing that you gathered the impression that the prostitutes that you had 
talked to were able to slip the drugs to people as I understand it. Did 
you form any impression on that? 

‘Mr. Grrtincer. I certainly did not form the impression that they 
did this as a rule or 

Senator Kennepy. But they had the knowledge. 

Mr. Grrrincrr. They had the knowledge or some of them had had 
knowledge of this being done. But again, as it turned out, it was largely 
in this area of knockout drops. 

Senator Kennepy. Looking back now did you form any impression 
about how the Agency was actually testing the broad spectrum of social 
classes in these safe houses? With the large disbursal of cash in 
small quantities, $100 bills and the kinds of elaborate decorations and 
two-way mirrors in the bedrooms and all the rest, is there any question 
in your own mind what was going on in the safe houses, or the tech- 
niques that were being used to administer these drugs? : 

Mr. Grrrincer. I find it very difficult to answer that question, sir. I 
had absolutely no direct knowledge there was a large number of this. I 
had no knowledge that anyone other than—than Morgan Hall was in 
any way involved in the unwitting administration of drugs. 

Senator Kennepy. But Gottlieb would know, would he not? 

Mr. Girrrnerr. I believe so, yes, sir. 

Senator Kennxpy. Could we go into the Human Ecology Founda- 
tion and talk about that and how it was used as an instrument in terms 
of the support of research ? 

Mr. Girrineer. Yes, sir. ; 

Senator Kennepy. Could you describe it to us? Could you describe 
the Human Ecology Foundation, how it functioned and how it worked # 

Mr. Girrincrr. May I tell something about how it evolved, which I 
think is important? 

Senator Kennepy. Sure. 

Mr. Grrrincer. The Society for the Investigation of Human Ecol- 
ogy, so-called, was actually a—I am confused here now as to whether 
I should name you names. 


59 


Senator Kennepy. Well, we’re not interested in names or institu- 
tions, so we prefer that you do not. That has to be worked out in 
arrangements between Admiral Turner and the individuals and the 
institutions. 

But we’re interested in what the Foundation really was and how it 
functioned and what its purpose was. 

Mr. Grrrincer. Well, it was established to undertake research in the 
general area of the behavioral -sciences. It definitely had almost no 
focus or interest in, say, drug-related type of activities except in a very 
minor way, because it was largely set up to attempt to gain a certain 
amount of information and to fund projects which were psychological, 
sociological, anthropological in character. It was established in the 
sense of a period of time that a lot of us who are in it wish we could 
do it over again, but we were interested in trying to get together a panel 
of the most representative high-level behavioral scientists we could to 
oversee and help in terms of developing the Society for the Investiga- 
tion of Human Ecology type of program. 

The Agency in effect provided the money. They did not direct the 
projects. Now, the fact of the matter is, there are a lot of innocent peo- 
ple who received the Society for the Investigation of Human Ecology 
money which I know for a fact they were never asked to do anything 
for the CIA but they did get through this indirectly. They had no 
knowledge that they were getting CIA money. 

Senator Krennepy. Over what period of time did this take place? 

Mr. Grrrincer. As far as I was concerned, it was the period of time 
ending in 1961. I believe the Human Ecology fund finally phased out 
in 1965, but I was not involved in this phasing out. 

Senator Kennepy. Can you give the range of the different sort of 
individual projects of the universities in which it was active? 

Mr. Grrrineer. Well, it would have as many as—I am very fuzzy 
on my memory on the number of projects. It is over 10, 20, 30. 

Senator Kennepy. After it made the grants, what was the relation- 
ship of the Agency with the results of the studies? The Foundation 
acquired the money to make the grants from the Agency, and then it 
made the grants to these various research programs. 

Mr. Grrricer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. And that included eight universities as well as 
individual researchers? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Yes, sir. 

Senator Krnnepy. Then what follow-up was there to that, sir? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Well, in every sense of the word, the organization 
was run exactly like any other foundation, and it carried with it the 
same thing in terms of making certain that the people that they had 
given money to used it for the purpose for which it had been granted, 
that they had access to any of the reports that they had put out, but 
there were no strings attached to anybody. There wasn’t any reason 
thev couldn’t publish anvthing that thev put out. 

Senator Kennepy. What sort of budget are we talking about here? 

Mr. Grrrincer. I honestly do not remember. I would suess we are 
talking in the realm of about $150,000 a year, but don’t hold me to that, 
because I don’t know. 


60 


Senator Kennepy. What is your view about such funding as a pro- 
eens) person, in terms of compromising the integrity of a univer- 
sity, sir? . 

Mr. Grrrincer. Well, obviously, sir, insofar as today there is no 
question about it. I will have to say at the time that we were doing this 
there was quite an entirely different kind of an attitude, and I do 
know for a fact that we moved to start towards phasing out the So- 
ciety for the Investigation of Human Ecology and the Human Ecol- 
ogy Fund for the very reason that we were beginning to recognize that 
it was moving into an area but this would be compromised. 

Senator Kennepy. Well, that is commendable, both your attitude 
and the reasons for it, but during that period of time it still was in- 
volved in behavior research programs, as I understand it. __ 

Mr. Grrrtncer. Yes, sir. On its own, in connection with this, it 
participated again, and these again were not CIA-directed projects, 
but these were all things which would theoretically contribute to the 
general knowledge at the time where the things like the study of the 
Hungarian refugees—obviously, the study of the Hungarian refugees 
who came to this country after the Hungarian revolt was a very use- 
ful exercise to try to get information about the personality character- 
istics of the Communists and so forth. 

Senator Kennepy. Were there other foundations that were doing 
similar kinds of work? 

Mr. Girr«ncer. Not to my knowledge, sir. 

Senator Kennepy. You believe—— 

Mr. Girrincer. You mean, CIA, other CIA? 

Senator Kennepy. Right. an 

Mr. Grrrincer. Well, my answer is in the sense that I know of no 
other CIA foundations, no. There were, of course, other foundations 
doing similar kinds of work in the United States. 

Senator Kennepy. Have you heard of the Psychological Assess- 
ments Foundation ? 

Mr. Grrrtcer. I certainly have. 

Senator Kennepy. What was that? What function did that have? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Now, this was bringing us up to a different era. I 
believe the functions of that organization have nothing whatsoever 
to do with the things that are being talked about here while I was 
associated with it. 

Senator Kennepy. Rather than getting into the work, it was another 
foundation, was it not? It was another foundation supported by the 
Agency? 

Mr. Grrrtmeer. What, the Psychological Assessment ? 

Senator Kennepy. Yes. 

Mr. GrrttnceEr. No, sir, it was not. ; 

Senator Kennepy. It did not get any support at all from the 
Agency? 

Mr. Grrrtncer. Oh, yes, sir. It did get support, but it was a business 
rm. 

Senator Kennepy. It was a business but it got support from the 
Agency? 

Mr. Grrrincer. It got money from it, but it definitely was not in 
MKULTRA or in any way associated with this. 


61 


Senator Kennepy. All right. I want to thank you for your helpful 
testimony, Mr. Gittinger. It is not easy to go back into the past. I 
think you have been very fair in your characterizations, and I think 
it is quite appropriately indicated that there are different standards 
now from what they were 25 years ago, and I think you have responded 
very fairly and completely to the inquiries, and I think with a good 
deal of feeling about it. 

You are a person who is obviously attempting to serve the country’s 
interest, so I want to thank you very much for your statement and 
for your helpful timeliness. 

Mr. Grrrincer. Thank you, sir. 

Senator Inovyr. Senator Case? 

Senator Case. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I am sorry that I had 
another committee that IJ had to complete the hearing with this morn- 
ing before I got here. ; 

I shall read the testimony with very great. interest, and I appreci- 
ate your testimony as I have heard it. I would like to comment just on 
one point, and that is, it relates to a story in the press yesterday about 
part of this program involving the funding of a grant at a foreign 
university. I would like to elicit from you a comment as to the addi- 
tional sensitivity and difficulty that that practice involves from your 
standpoint asa scientist, as well as a citizen, if you will. 

Mr. Grrrincer. I will say it was after the fact thinking. It was utter 
stupidity the way things worked out to have used some of this money 
outside the United States when it was CIA money. I can categorically 
state to my knowledge and I don’t claim a complete knowledge all the 
way across of the human ecology functions, but to my knowledge, and 
this is unfortunate, those people did not know that they were getting 
money from CIA, and they were not asked to contribute anything to 
CIA as such. 

Senator Case. It would be interesting to try to examine this by turn- 
ing the thing around and thinking what we would think if this hap- 
pened from a foreign official agency to our own university. Thank you, 
Mr. Chairman. 

Senator Ivoure. Senator Schweiker. 

Senator Scuwerker. Thank you, Mr. Chairman. 

Dr. Goldman, I wonder if you would tell us what your training and 
educational background is? 

Dr. Gotpman, I have already given a biography for the record. 

Senator Scuwetker. I have not seen it. Who has it? Is it classified ? 
We may have it for the record, but may I ask you to briefly describe 
your training and background for us now? I hope it is no secret. 

Dr. GorpMan. Well, I was told if I was asked this to say that. I was 
told that by your staff people, but I have no objection to telling you. 
I am a resident from Pennsylvania, southwest Pennsylvania, Lan- 
caster County. I went to Penn State, and I am in nutrition. 

Senator ScuwerKer. In what? 

Dr. Gorpman. Nutrition. 

Senator Scuwerker. Were you in charge of a section or segment of 
the CIA in your past capacity ? 

Dr. GotpMan. During the time I was with that organization, I was 
in charge of one small section of it, one small segment of it; yes. 


96-408 O-77-5 


62 


Senator ScuwerKker. What was the function or purpose of that sec- 
tion that you headed ? . 

Dr. Gotpman. To provide support for the other parts of the division. 

Senator Scuwerker. Where in the chain of command would that put 
you in relation to Dr. Gottlieb? 

Dr. Gotpman. Pretty far down the line. 

Senator Scuwerker. Mr. Gittinger, I would just like to ask you a 
few questions. We appreciate your frankness and candor with the com- 
mittee, and we realize this is ‘a very difficult area to go into. I am not 
quite clear on two matters that were raised earlier. First, were the safe 
houses we were talking about here used on occasion by the prostitutes 
you referred to? 

Mr. Grrrincer. I really have not the slightest idea. 

Senator Scuwerker. Were the prostitutes used in any way to slip 
the customers drugs for observation purposes ? 

Mr. Grrrincer. Not to my direct knowledge. 

Senator Scuwerker. Would you have been in a position to know the 
answer to either of these questions? 

Mr. Grrrtncer. May I say, probably not, and may I make an aside 
to explain a little bit of this, please, sir? 

Senator Scuwerker. Mr. Gittinger, a moment ago you mentioned 
brainwashing techniques, as one area that you had, I guess, done some 
work in. How would you characterize the state of the art of brain- 
washing today? Who has the most expertise in this field, and who is 
or is not doing it in terms of other governments? 

During the Korean war there was a lot of serious discussion about 
brainwashing techniques being used by the North Koreans, and I am 
interested in finding out what the state of the art is today, as you see it. 

Mr. GirrtncEr. Well, of course, there has been a great deal of work 
on this, and there is still a great deal of controversy. I can tell you that 
as far as I knew, by 1961, 1962, it was at least proven to my satis- 
faction that brainwashing, so called, is some kind of an esoteric device 
where drugs or mind-altering kinds of conditions and so forth. were 
used, did not exist even though “The Manchurian Candidate” as a 
movie really set us back a long time, because it made something im- 
possible look plausible. Do you follow what I mean? But by 1962 and 
1963, the general idea that we were able to come up with is that brain- 
washing was largely a process of isolating a human being, keeping 
him out of contact, putting him under long stress in relationship to 
interviewing and interrogation, and that they could produce any 
change that way without having to resort to any kind of esoteric 
means. 

Senator Scuwerxer. Are there ways that we can ascertain this from 
a distance when we see a captive prisoner either go on television, in 
a photograph, or at a press conference? In other words, are there cer- 
tain signs that you have learned to recognize from your technical 
background, to tell when brainwashing has occurred? Or is that very 
difficult to do? 

Mr. Grrrrincer. It is difficult to do. I think it is posible now in terms 
of looking at a picture of somebody who has been in enemy hands for 
a long period of time. We can get some pretty good ideas of what kind 
of circumstances he has been under, if that is what you mean. 


63 


Senator Scuwerker. That is all I have, Mr. Chairman. Thank you. 

Senator Inouye. Thank you very much. 

Before adjourning the hearings, I would like to have the record 
show that Dr. Goldman and Mr. Gittinger have voluntarily cooperated 
with the committee in staff interviews, that they appear this morning 
voluntarily, and they are not under subpena. 

Gentlemen, I realize that this experience may have been an unhappy 
one and possibly a painful one. Therefore, we thank you very much 
for participating this morning. We also realize that the circumstances 
of that time differed very much from this day, and possibly the na- 
tional attitude, the national political attitude condoned this type of 
activity. So, we have not asked you to come here as persons who have 
committed crimes, but rather in hope that you can assist us in studying 
this problem so that it will not occur once again. In that spirit we 
thank you for your participation, and we look forward to working 
with you further in this case. 

Thank you very much. 

Senator Kennepy. Mr. Chairman, I would like also to thank the 
witnesses. These are difficult matters, and I think all of us are very 
grateful. 

Senator Scuwetner. I think the witnesses should know that though 
it may not always seem that way, what we are trying to do is to probe 
the past and look at the policies of the past to affect the future. I think 
our emphasis really is on the future, not the past, but it is important 
that we learn from the past as we formulate policies and legislation 
for the future, I hope that all of the witnesses who did come before us 
voluntarily this morning, including Admiral Turner respect the fact 
that we are questioning the past to learn about the future. I think it 
should be looked at in that light. 

Senator Kennepy: I think that is the spirit in which we have had 
these hearings. It seems to me that from both these witnesses and 
others, Gottlieb knows the information and can best respond, and we 
are going to make every effort in the Senate Health Committee to get 
Mr. Gottlieb to appear, and we obviously look forward to cooperating 
with Senator Inouye and the other members of the committee in get- 
ting the final chapter written on this, but we want to thank you very 
much for your appearance here. 

Senator Inouye. The hearing will stand in recess, subject to the call 
of the Chair. 

{ Whereupon, at 12:12 p.m., the hearing was recessed, subject to the 
call of the Chair. ] 


APPENDIX A 


XVII. TESTING AND USE OF CHEMICAL AND BIOLOGI- 
CAL AGENTS BY THE INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY 


Under its mandate ? the Select Committee has studied the testing and 
use of chemical and biological agents by intelligence agencies. Detailed 
descriptions of the programs conducted by intelligence agencies in- 
volving chemical and biological agents will be included in a separately 
published appendix to the Senate Select Committee's report. This sec- 
tion of the report will discuss the rationale for the programs, their 
monitoring and control, and what the Committee’s investigation has 
revealed aoout the relationships among the intelligence agencies and 
about their relations with other government agencies and private in- 
stitutions and individuals.” 

Fears that countries hostile to the United States would use chemi- 
cal and biological agents against Americans or America’s allies led 
to the development of a defensive program designed to discover tech- 
niques for American intelligence agencies to detect and counteract 
chemical and biological agents. The defensive orientation soon became 
secondary as the possible use of these agents to obtain information 
from, or gain control over, enemy agents became apparent. 

Research and development programs to find materials which could 
be used to alter human behavior were initiated in the late 1940s and 
early 1950s. These experimental programs originally included testing 
of drugs involving witting human subjects, and culminated in tests 
using unwitting, nonvolunteer human subjects. These tests were de- 
signed to determine the potential effects of chemical or biological 
agents when used operationally against individuals unaware that they 
had received a drug. 

The testing programs were considered highly sensitive by the in- 
telligence agencies administering them. Few people, even within the 
agencies, knew of the programs and there is no evidence that either 
the executive branch or Congress were ever informed of them. The 
highly compartmented nature of these programs may be explained in 
part by an observation made by the CIA Inspector General that, “the 
knowledge that the Agency is engaging in unethical and illicit activi- 


*Senate Resolution 21 directs the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence 
Activities to investigate a number of issues: 

“(a) Whether agencies within the intelligence community conducted illegal 
domestic activities (Section 2(1) and (2)); 

“(b) The extent to which agencies within the intelligence community cooper- 
ate (Section 2(4) and (8)); 

“(c) The adequacy of executive branch and congressional oversight of intel- 
ligence activities (Section 2(7) and (11)); 

“(d) The adequacy of existing laws to safeguard the rights of American citi- 
zens (Section 2(13)).” 

? The details of these programs may never be known. The programs were highly 
compartmented. Few records were kept. What little documentation existed for 
the CIA’s principal program was destroyed early in 1973. 


(385) 
(65) 


66 
386 


ties would have serious repercussions in political and diplomatic circles 
and would be detrimental to the accomplishment of its missions.” * 

The research and development program, and particularly the co- 
vert testing programs, resulted in massive abridgments of the rights 
of American citizens, sometimes with tra‘zic consequences. The deaths 
of two Americans * can be attributed to these programs; other partici- 
pants in the testing programs may still suffer from the residual ef-' - 
fects. While some controlled testing of these substances might be de- 
fended, the nature of the tests, their scale, and the fact that they were 
continued for years after the danger of surreptitious administration 
of LSD to unwitting individuals was known, demonstrate a funda- 
inental disregard for the value of human life. “ ‘ 

The Select Committee’s investigation of the testing and use of chem- 
ical and biological agents also raise serious questions about the ade- 
quacy of command and control procedures within the Central Intelli- 
gence Agency and military intelligence, and about the relationships 
among the intelligence agencies, other governmental agencies, and 
private institutions and individuals. The CIA’s normal administrative 
controls were waived for programs involving chemical and biological 
agents to protect. their security. According to the head of the Audit 
Branch of the CIA. these’ waivers produced “gross administrative 
failures.” They prevented the CIA’s internal review mechanisms (the 
Office of General Counsel, the Inspector General, and the Audit Staff) 
from adequately supervising the programs. In general, the waivers had 
the paradoxical effect of providing less restrictive administrative con- 
trols and less effective internal review for controversial and highly 
sensitive projects than those governing normal Agency activities. 

The security of the programs was protected not only by waivers 
of normal administrative controls, but also by a high degree of com- 
partmentation within the CIA. This compartmentation excluded the 
CIA’s Medical Staff from the principal research and testing program 
employing chemical and biological agents. 

It also may have led to agency policymakers receiving differing 
and inconsistent responses when they posed questions to the CIA 
component involved. 

Jurisdictional uncertainty within the CIA was matched by juris- 
dictional conflict among the various intelligence agencies. A spirit of 
cooperation and reciprocal exchanges of information which initially’ 
characterized the programs disappeared. Military testers withheld in- 
Formation from the CIA, ignoring suggestions for coordination from 
- their superiors. The CIA similarly failed to provide information to 
the military on the CIA’s testing program. This failure to cooperate 
was conspicuously manifested in an attempt by the Army to conceal’ 


3 CIA Inspector General’s Survey of TSD, 1957, p. 217. 

2 On January 8, 1953. Mr. Harold Blauer died of circulatory collapse and heart 
failure following an intravenous injection of a synthetic mescaline derivative 
while a subject of tests conducted by New York State Psychiatric Institute under 
a contract let by the U.S. Army Chemical Corps. The Committee’s investigation 
into drug testing by U.S. intelligence agencies focused on the testing of LSD, how- 
ever, the committee did receive a copy of the U.S. Army Inspector General’s 
Report, issued on October 1975, on the events and circumstances of Mr. Blauer’s 
death. His death was directly atributable to the administration of the synthetic 
mescaline derivative. : 


67 
387 


their overseas testing program, which included surreptitious admin- 
istration of LSD, from the CIA. Learning of the Army’s program, 
the Agency surreptitiously attempted to obtain details of it. 
The-decision to institute one of the Army’s LSD field testing projects 
had been based, at least in part, on the finding that no long-term resid- . 
ual effects had ever resulted from the drug’s administration. The 
CIA’s failure to inform the Army of a death which resulted from the 
surreptitious administration of LSD to unwitting Americans, may well 
have resulted in the institution of an unnecessary and potentially lethal 
rogram. ; , 
: e development, testing, and use of cheinical and biological agents 
by intelligence agencies raises serious questions about the relationship 
between the intelligence community and foreign governments, other — 
agencies of the Federal Government, and other institutions and in- 
dividuals. The questions raised range from the legitimacy of American 
complicity in actions abroad which violate American and foreign laws 
to the possible compromise of the integrity of public and private insti- 
tutions used as cover by intelligence agencies, 


A. THe ProcramMs INVESTIGATED 


1. Project CHATTER 


Project CHATTER was a Navy program that began in the fall of 
1947. Responding to reports of “amazing results” achieved by the 
Soviets in using “truth drugs,” the program focused on the identifica- 
tion and testing of. such drugs for use in interrogations and in the 
recruitment of agents. The research included laboratory experiments — 
.on animals and hum::, subjects involving Anabasis aphylla, scopola- 
mine, and mescaline in order to determine their speech-inducing quali- 
ties. Overseas experiments were conducted as part. of the project. 

The project expanded substantially during the Korean War, and 
ended shortly after the war, in 1953... _ 


2. Project BLUEBIRD/ARTICHOKE | 


The earliest of the CIA’s major programs involving the use of 
chemical and biological agents, Project BLUEBIRD, was approved by 
the Director in 1950. Its objectives were: 


(a) discovering means of conditioning personnel to prevent 
unauthorized extraction of information from them by known 
means, (b) investigating the possibility of control of an in- 
dividual by application of special interrogation techniques, 
(c) memory enhancement, and (d) establishing defensive 
means for preventing hostile control of Agency personnel.* 


As a result of interrogations conducted overseas during the project, 
another goal was added—the evaluation of offensive uses of unconven- 
tional interrogation techniques, including hypnosis and drugs. In . 
‘August 1951, the project was renamed ARTICHOKE. Project ARTI- 
CHOKE included in-house experiments on interrogation techniques, 
conducted “under medical and security controls which would ensure 


*CIA memorandum to the Select Committee, “Behavioral Drugs and Testing,” 
2/11/75. 


68 
388 


_ that no damage was done to individuals who volunteer for the experi- - 
ments.” * Overseas interrogations utilizing a combination of sodium 
pentothal and hypnosis after physical and psychiatric examinations of 
the subjects were also part of ARTICHOKE. oe: 

The Office of Scientific Intelligence (OSI), which studied scientific 
advances by hostile powers, initially led BLUEBIRD/ARTICHOKE 
efforts. In 1952, overall responsibility for ARTICHOKE was trans- 
ferred from OSI to’the Inspection and Security Office (I&SO), pre- 
decessor to the present Office of Security. The CIA’s Technical Serv- 
ices and Medical Staffs were to be called upon as needed; OSI would 
retain liaison function with other government agencies.* The change 
in leadership from an intelligence unit to an operating unit appar- 
ently reflected a change in emphasis; from the study of actions by 
hostile powers to the use, both for offensive and defensive purposes, 
of special interrogation techniques—primarily hypnosis and truth 
serums. : 

Representatives.from each Agency unit involved in ARTICHOKE 
met almost monthly to discuss their progress. These discussions in- 
cluded the planning of overseas interrogations® as well as further 
experimentation in the U.S. 

Information about project ARTICHOKE after the fall of 1953 
is scarce. The CIA maintains that the project ended in 1956, but evi- 
dence suggests that Office of Security and Office of Medical Services 
of oe interrogation” techniques continued for several years 
thereafter. 


3. MENAOMI 


MKNAOMI was another major CIA program in this area. In 1967, 
the CIA summarized the purposes of MKNAOMI: 


(a) To provide for a covert support base to meet clandes- 
tine operational requirements. 

(b) To stockpile severely incapacitating and lethal ma- 
ise for the specific use of TSD [Technical Services Di- 
vision]. 

(c) To maintain in operational readiness special and unique 
items for the dissemination of biological and chemical ma- 
terials. 

(d) To provide for the required surveillance, testing, up- 
grading, and evaluation of materials and items in order to 
assure absence of defects and complete predictability of re- 
sults to be expected under operational conditions.® 

Under an agreement reached with the Army in 1952, the Special 
Operations Division (SOD) at Fort Detrick was to assist CIA in 
developing, testing, and maintaining biological agents and delivery 


5 Memorandum from Robert Tavlor, O/DD/P tn the Assistant Deputy (In- 
spection and Security) and Chief of the Medical Staff, 3/22/52. 

® Memorandum from H. Marshall Chadwell, Assistant Director. Scientific Intel- 
ligence, to the Deputy Director/Plans (DDP) “Project ARTICHOKE,” 8/29/52. 

§ “Progress Report, Project ARTICHOKE.” 1/12/53. Z 

® Memorandum from Chief, TSD/Biological Branch to Chief. TSD “MKNAOMI: 
Funding. Obiectives, end Accomplichmente.” 10/18/87. p. 1. For a fuller descrip- 
tion of MKNAOMI and the relationship between CIA and SOD. see p. 360 ff. 


69 
389 © 


systems. By this agreement, CIA acquired the knowledge, skill, and 
facilities of the Army to develop biological weapons suited for CIA 


use. 

SOD developed darts coated with biological agents and pills con- 
taining several different biological agents which could remain potent 
for weeks or months. SOD also developed a special gun for firing 
darts coated with a chemical which could allow CIA agents to incapaci- 
tate a guard dog, enter an installation secretly, and return the dog to 
consciousness when leaving. SOD scientists were unable to develop 
a similar incapacitant for humans. SOD also physically transferred 
to CIA personnel biological agents in “bulk” form, and delivery 
devices, including some containing biological agents. 

In addition to the CIA’s interest in biological weapons for use 
against humans, it also asked SOD to study use of biological agents 
against crops and animals. In its 1967 memorandum, the CIA stated: 


Three methods and systems for carrying out a covert attack 
against crops and causing severe crop loss have been devel- 
oped and evaluated under field conditions. This was accom- 
plished in anticipation of a requirement which was later 
developed .but was subsequently scrubbed just prior to put- 
ting into action. 


- MKNAOMI was terminated in 1970. On November 25, 1969, Presi- 
dent Nixon renounced the use of any form of biological weapons that 
kill or incapacitate and ordered the disposal of existing stocks of bac- 
teriological weapons. On February 14, 1970, the President clarified the 
extent of his earlier order and indicated that toxins—chemicals that 
are not living organisms but are produced by living organisms—were 
considered biological weapons subject to his previous directive and 
were to be destroyed. Although instructed to relinquish control of 
material held for the CIA by SOD, a CIA scientist acquired approxi- 
mately 11 grams of shellfish toxin from SOD personnel at Fort De- 
trick which were stored in a little-used CIA laboratory where it went 
undetected for five years.’° 


4. MEULTRA 


MKULTRA was the principal CIA program involving the research 
and development of chemical and biological agents. It was “con- 
cerned with the research and development of chemical, biological, and 
radiological materials capable of employment in clandestine oper- 
ations to control human behavior.” " 

In January 1973, MKULTRA records were destroyed by Technical 
Services Division personnel acting on the verbal orders of Dr. Sidney 
Gottlieb, Chief of TSD. Dr. Gottlieb has testified, and former Direc- 
tor Helms has confirmed, that in ordering the records destroyed, Dr. 
Gottlieb was carrying out the verbal order of then DCI Helms. 

_ MKULTRA began with a proposal from the Assistant Deputy 
Director for Plans, Richard Helms, to the DCI, outlining a special 


© Tid. p. 2. 
»” Senate Select Committee, 9/16/75, Hearings, Vo. 1. 
4 Memorandum from the CIA Inspector General to the Director, 7/26/63. 


70 
390 


funding mechanism for highly sensitive CIA research and develop- 
ment projects that studied the use of biological and chemical materials 
in altering human behavior. The projects involved : 


Research to develop a capability in the covert use of bio- 
logical and chemical materials. This area involves the produc- 
tion of various physiological conditions which could support 
present or future clandestine operations. Aside from the of- 
fensive potential, the development of a comprehensive capa- 
bility in this field of covert chemical and biological warfare 
gives us a thorough knowledge of the enemy’s theoretical 
potential, thus enabling us to defend ourselves against a foe 
who might not be as restrained in the use of these tech- 
_ hiques as we are.” 


MKULTRA was approved by the DCI on April 13, 1953 along the 
lines proposed by ADDP Helms. 

Part of the rationale for the establishment of this special fund- 
ing mechanism was its extreme sensitivity. The Inspector General’s 
survey of MKULTRA in 1963 noted the following reasons for this 
sensitivity : ; wre 

a. Research in the manipulation of human behavior is con- 
sidered by man:. authorities in medicine and related fields 
to be professionuily unethical, therefore the reputation of 
professional participants in the MKULTRA_program are on 
occasion in jeopardy. . . 

b. Some MKULTRA activities raise questions of legality 
implicit in the original charter. ~ 

.c. A final phase of the testing of MKULTRA products 
places the rights and interests of U.S. citizens in jeopardy. 

d. Public disclosure of some aspects of MKULTRA activ- 
ity could induce serious adverse reaction in U.S. public 
opinion, as well as stimulate offensive and defensive action 
in this field on the part of foreign intelligence services.** 


Over the ten-year life of the program, many “additional avenues to 
the control of human behavior” were designated as appropriate for 
investigation under the MKULTRA charter. These include “radiation, 
electroshock, various fields of psychology, psychiatry, sociology. and 
anthropology, graphology, harassment substances, and paramilitary 
devices and materials.” ™ 

The research and development of materials to be used for altering . 

‘human behavior consisted of three phases: first, the search for ma- 
terials suitable for study; second. laboratory testing on voluntary 
human snhiects in various types of institutions; third, the application 
of MKULTRA materials in normal life settings. 

The search for suitable materials was conducted through standing 
arrangements with specialists in universities, pharmaceutical houses, 
hospitals, state and federal institutions, and private research organi- 


% Memorandum from ADDP Helms to DCI Dulles, 4/3/53, Tab A, pp. 1-2. 


* 1.G. Report on MKULTRA, 1963 = 
4 Tbid, p. 4. eer 


71 
391 


zations. The annual grants of funds to these specialists were made 
under ostensible research foundation auspices, thereby concealing the 
CIA’s interest from the specialist’s institution. 

The next phase of the MKULTRA program involved physicians, 
toxicologists, and other specialists in mental, narcotics, and general 
hospitals, and in prisons. Utilizing the products and findings of the 
basic research phase, they conducted intensive tests on human subjects. 

’ One of the first studies was conducted by the National Institute of 
Mental Health. This study was intended to test various drugs. inelud- 
ing hallucinogenics, at the NIMH Addiction Research Center in Lex- 
ington, Kentucky. The “Lexington Rehabilitation Center,” as it was 
then called, was a prison for drug addicts serving sentences for drug 
violations. 

The test subjects were volunteer prisoners who, after taking a brief 
physical examination and signing a general consent form, were admin- 
istered hallucinogenic drugs. As a reward for participation in the 
program, the addicts were provided with the drug of their addiction. 

LSD was one of the materials tested in the MKULTRA program. 
The final phase of LSD testing involved surreptitious administration 
to unwitting nonvolunteer subjects in normal life settings by under- 
cover officers of the Bureau of Narcotics acting for the CIA. 

The rationale for such testing was “that testing of materials under 
accepted scientific procedures fails to disclose the full pattern of reac- 
tions and attributions that may occur in operational situations.” 

According to the CIA, the advantage of the relationship with the 
Bureau was that 


test subjects could be sought and cultivated within the setting 
of narcotics control. Some subjects have been informers or 
members of suspect criminal elements from whom the [Bu- 
reau of Narcotics] has obtained results of onerational value 
through the tests. On the other hand, the effectiveness of the 
substances on individuals at all social levels, high and low, 
native American and foreign, is of great significance and 
testing has been performed ona variety of individuals within 
these categories. [Emphasis added. ] ** 


A special procedure, designated MIKDELTA, was established to 
govern the use of MKULTRA materials abroad. Such materials were 
used on a number of occasions. Because MKULTRA records were 
destroved, it is imnogssible to reconstruct the operational use of 
MKULTRA materials by the CIA overseas; it has been determined 
that the use of these materials abroad began in 1953, and possibly as 
early as 1950. 

Drugs were used primarily as an aid to interrogations. but 
MKULTRA/MKDELTA materials were also used for harassment, 
discrediting, or disabling purposes. According to an Inspector General 
Survey of the Technical Services Division of the CIA in 1957—an 
inspection which did not discover the MKULTRA project involving 
the surreptitious administration of LSD to unwitting, nonvolunteer 


% Toid, p. 21. 
* Tbid., pp. 11-12. 


72 
392 


subjects—the CIA had developed six drugs for operational use and 
they had been used in six different operations on a total of thirty-three 
subjects.17 By 1963 the number of operations and subjects had in- 
creased substantially. aot Sa 

In the spring of 1963, during a wide-ranging Inspector General 
survey of the Technical Services Division, a member of the Inspector 
General's staff, John Vance, learned about MKULTRA and about 
the project involving the surreptitious administration of LSD to un- 
witting, nonvoluntary human subjects. As a result of the discovery 
and the Inspector General’s subsequent report, this testing was halted 
and much tighter administrative controls were imposed on the pro- 
gram. According to the CIA, the project was decreased significantly 
each budget year until its complete termination in the late 1960s. 


& The Testing of LSD by the Army 


There were three major phases in the Army’s testing of LSD. In the | 
first, LSD was administered to more than 1,000 American soldiers who 
volunteered to be subjects in chemical warfare experiments. In the 
second phase, Material Testing Program EA 1729, 95 volunteers re- 
ceived LSD in clinical experiments designed to evaluate potential 
intelligence uses of the drug. In the third phase, Projects THIRD 
CHANCE and DERBY HAT, 16 unwitting nonvolunteer subjects 
were interrogated after receiving LSD as part of operational field 


tests. 
B. CIA Drue TEstine ProcRaMs 


1. The Rationale for the Testing Programs 


The late 1940s and early 1950s were marked by concern over 
the threat posed by the activities of the Soviet Union, the People’s 
Republic of China, and other Communist bloc countries. United States 
concern over the use of chemical and biological agents by these powers 
was acute. The belief that hostile powers had used chemical and bio- 
logical agents in interrogations, brainwashing, and in attacks designed 
to harass, disable, or kill Allied personnel created considerable pres- 
sure for a “defensive” program to investigate chemical and biological 
agents so that the intelligence community could understand the mech- 
anisms by which these substances worked and how their effects could 
be defeated.?® 

Of particular concern was the drug LSD. The CIA had received 
reports that the Soviet Union was engaged in intensive efforts to pro- 
duce LSD; and that the Soviet Union had attempted to purchase the 
world’s supply of the chemical. As one CIA officer who was deeply 
involved in work with this drug described the climate of the times: 
“(It] is awfully hard in this day and age to reproduce how frightening 
all of this was to us at the time, particularly after the drug scene has 
become as widespread and as knowledgeable in this country as it did. 
But we were literally terrified, because this was the one material that we 


¥ bid, 1957, p. 201. 

‘Thus an officer in the Office of Security of the OIA stressed the “urgency of 
the discovery of techniques and method that would permit our personnel, in the 
event of their capture by the enemy, to resist or defeat enemy interrogation.” 
(Minutes of the ARTICHOKE conference of 10/22/53.) 


73 
393 


had ever been able to locate that really had potential fantastic possi- 
bilities if used wrongly.” 1° 

But the defensive orientation soon became secondary. Chemical and 
biological agents were to be studied in order “to perfect techniques . . . 
for the abstraction of information from individuals whether willing or 
not” and in order to “develop means for the control of the activities and 
mental capacities of individuals whether willing or not.”?° One 
Agency official noted that drugs would be useful in order to “gain con- 
trol of bodies whether they were willing or not” in the process of re- 
moving personnel from Europe in the event of a Soviet attack.?* In 
other programs, the CIA began to develop, produce, stockpile, and 
maintain in operational readiness materials which could be used to 
harass, disable, or kill specific targets.” ; 

Reports of research and development in the Soviet Union, the Peo- 
ple’s Republic of China, and the Communist Bloc countries provided 
the basis for the transmutation of American programs from a defen- 
sive to an offensive orientation. As the Chief of the Medical Staff of 
the Central Intelligence Agency wrote in 1952: 


There is ample evidence in the reports of innumerable inter- 
rogations that the Communists were utilizing drugs, physical 
duress, electric shock, and possibly hypnosis against their ene- 
mies. With such evidence it is difficult not to keep from be- 
coming rabid about our apparent laxity. We are forced by this 
mounting evidence to assume a more aggressive role in the 
development of these techniques, but must be cautious to 
maintain strict inviolable control because of the havoc that 
could be wrought by such techniques in unscrupulous hands.” 


In order to meet the perceived threat to the national security, sub- 
stantial programs for the testing and use of chemical and biological 
agents—including projects involving the surreptitious administra- 
tion of LSD to unwitting nonvolunteer subjects “at all social levels, 
high and low, native American and foreign’”—were conceived, and 
implemented. These programs resulted in substantial violations of the 
rights of individuals within the United States. 


»” Testimony of CIA officer, 11/21/75, p. 33. 

Memorandum from the Director of Security to ARTICHOKE representa- 
tives, Subject : “ARTICHOKE Restatement of Program.” 

» ARTICHOKE memorandum, 7/30/53. 

™The Inspector General’s Report of 1957 on the Technical Services Division 
noted that “Six specific products have been developed and are available for oper- 
ational use. Three of them are discrediting and disabling materials which can be 
administered unwittingly and permit the exercise of a measure of control over the 
actions of the subject.” 

A memorandum for the Chief, TSD, Biological Branch to the Chief, TSD, 
10/18/67, described two of the objectives of the CIA’s Project MKNAOMI as: 
“to stockpile severely incapacitating and lethal materials for the specific use of 
TSD” and “to maintain in operational readiness special and unique items for 
the dissemination of biological and chemical materals.” 

*=Memorandum from the Chief of the Medical Staff, 1/25/52. 


74 
394 


Although the CIA recognized these effects of LSD to unwitting in- 
dividuals within the United States, the project continued.* As the 
Deputy Director for Plans, Richard Helms, wrote the Deputy Direc- 
tor of Central Intelligence during discussions which led to the cessa- 
tion of unwitting testing: 

While I share your uneasiness and distaste for any pro- 
gram which tends to intrude upon an individual’s private _ 
and legal prerogatives, I believe it is necessary that the 
Agency maintain a central role in this activity, keep current 
on enemy capabilities the manipulation of human behavior, 
and maintain an offensive capability.*® 


There were no attempts to secure approval for the most controversial 
aspects of these programs from the executive branch or Congress. 
The nature and extent of the programs were closely held secrets; even 
DCI McCone was not briefed on all the details of the program in- 
volving the surreptitious administration of LSD until 1963. It was 
deemed imperative that these programs be concealed from the Ameri- 
can people. As the CIA's Inspector General wrote in 1957: 


Precautions must be taken not only to protect operations 
from exposure to enemyeforces but also to conceal these ac- 
tivities from the American public in general. The knowledge 
that the Agency is engaging in unethical and illicit activities 
would have serious repercussions in political and diplomatic 
circles and would be detrimental to the accomplishment 
of its mission.” 


2. The Death of Dr. Frank Olson 

The most tragic result of the testing of LSD by the CIA was the 
death of Dr. Frank Olson, a civilian employee of the Army, who died 
on November 27, 1953. His death followed his participation in a CIA 
experiment with LSD. As part of this experiment, Olson unwittingly 
received approximately 70 micrograms of LSD in a glass of Cointreau 
he drank on November 19, 1953. The drug had been placed in the bottle 
by a CIA officer, Dr. Robert Lashbrook, as part of an experiment 
he and Dr. Sidney Gottlieb performed at a meeting of Army and 
CIA scientists. 

Shortly after this experiment, Olson exhibited symptoms of para- 
noia and schizophrenia. Accompanied by Dr. Lashbrook, Olson sought 
psychiatric assistance in New York City from a physician, Dr. Harold 
Abramson, whose research on LSD had been funded indirectly by 
the CIA. While in New York for treatment, Olson fell to his death 
from a tenth story window in the Statler Hotel. 


™ Even during the discussions which led to the termination of the unwitting 
testing, the DDP turned down the option of halting such tests within the U.S. 
and continuing them abroad despite the fact that the Technical Services Divi- 
sion had conducted numerous operations abroad making use of LSD. The DDP 
made this decision on the basis of security noting that the past efforts overseas 
had resulted in “making an inordinate number of foreign nationals witting of 
our role in the very sensitive activity.” (Memorandum for the Deputy Director 
of Central Intelligence from the Deputy Director for Plans, 12/17/63, p. 2.) 

% Toid., pp. 2-3. 

* 1.G. survey of TSD, 1957, p. 217. 


75 
395 - 


a. Background.—Olson, an expert in aerobiology who was assigned 
to the Special Operations Division (SOD) of the U.S. Army Biolog- 
ical Center at Camp Detrick, Maryland. This Division had three 
primary functions: . . -: 


(1) assessing the vulnerability of American installations 
to biological attack; 

(2) develope techniques for offensive use of biological 
weapons; an 

(3) biological research for the CIA.” 

Professionally, Olson was well respected by his colleagues in both 
the Army and the CIA. Colonel Vincent Ruwet, Olson’s immediate 
superior at the time of his death, was in almost daily contact with 
Olson. According to Colonel Ruwet: “As a professional man... his 
ability . . . was outstanding.” # Colonel Ruwet stated that “during 
the period prior to the experiment ... I noticed nothing which 
would lead me to believe that he was of unsound mind.” * Dr. Lash- 
brook, who had monthly contacts with Olson from early 1952 until 
the time of his death, stated publicly that before Olson received LSD, 
“as far as I know, he was perfectly normal.” * This assessment is in 
direct contradiction to certain statements evaluating Olson’s emo- 
tional stability made in CIA internal memoranda written after 
Olson’s death. 

b. The Experiment.—On November 18, 1953, a group of ten scien- 
tists ffom the CIA and Camp Detrick attended a semi-annual review 
and analysis conference at a cabin located at Deep Creek Lake, Mary- 
land. Three of the participants were from the CLA’s Technical Serv- 
ices Staff. The Detrick representatives were all from the Special 
Operations Division. 

According to one CIA official, the Special Operations Division 
participants “agreed that an unwitting experiment would be 
desirable.” *! This account directly contradicts Vincent Ruwet’s recol- 
lection. Ruwet recalls no such discussion, and has asserted that he 
would remember any such discussion because the SOD participants 
would have strenuously objected to testing on unwitting subjects.” 

In May, 1953, Richard Helms, Assistant DDP, held a staff meeting 
which the Chief of Technical Services Staff attended. At this meeting 
Helms “indicated that the drug [LSD] was dynamite and that he 
should be advised at all times when it was intended to use it.” ** In 
addition, the then DDP, Frank Wisner, sent a memorandum to TSS 
stating the requirement that the DDP personally approve the use of 
LSD. Gottlieb went ahead with the experiment, securing the ap- 


* Staff summary of Vincent Ruwet Interview, 8/13 /75, p. 3. 
ane of Col. Vincent Ruwet, To Whom It May Concern, no date, 


2 Ruwet Memorandum, p. 3. 

30 Joseph B. Treaster, New York Times, 7/19/75, p. 1.- 

4 Memorandum for the Record from Lyman Kirkpatrick, 12/1/58, p. 1. 

= Ruwet (staff summary), 8/13/75, p. 6. 

® Inspector General Diary, 12/2/53. : 

* Ibid. Dr. Gottleib has testified that he does not remember either the meeting 
with Helms nor ‘the Wisner memorandum. (Gottlieb, 10/18/75, p. 16.) 


4 


76 
396 


proval of his immediate supervisor. Neither the Chief of TSS nor 
the DDP specifically authorized the experiment in which Dr. Olson 
participated.*> 

According to Gottlieb.°* a “very small dose” of LSD was placed in 
a bottle of Cointreau which was served after dinner on Thursday, 
November 19. The drug was placed in the liqueur by Robert Lash- 
brook. All but two of the SOD participants received LSD. One did 
not drink; the other had a heart condition.*’? About twenty minutes 
after they finished their Cointreau, Gottlieb informed the other par- 
ticipants that they had received LSD. 

Dr. Gottlieb stated that “up to the time of the experiment,” he 
observed nothing unusual in Olson’s behavior.** Once the experiment 
was underway, Gottlieb recalled that “the drug had a definite effect on 
the group to the point that they were boisterous and laughing and they 
could not continue the meeting or engage in sensible conversation.” 
The meeting continued until about 1:00 a.m., when the participants 
retired for the evening. Gottlieb recalled that Olson, among others, 
complained of “wakefulness” during the night.** According to Gottlieb 
on Friday morning “aside from some evidence of fatigue, I observed 
nothing unusual in [Olson’s] actions, conversation, or general be- 
havior.” *° Ruwet recalls that Olson “appeared to be agitated” at 
breakfast, but that he “did not consider this to be abnormal under the 
circumstances.” 4° 

c. The Treatment.—The following Monday, November 23, Olson 
was waiting for Ruwet when he came in to work at 7:30 a.m. For the 
next two days Olson’s friends and family attempted to reassure him 
and help him “snap out” of what appeared to be a serious depression. 
On Tuesday, Olson again came to Ruwet and, after an hour long con- 


* Dr. Gottlieb testified that “given the information we knew up to this time, 
and based on a lot of our own self-administration, we thought it was a fairly 
benign substance in terms of potential harm.” This is in conflict not only with Mr. 
Helms’ statement but also with material which had been supplied to the Technical 
Services Staff. In one long memorandum on current research with LSD which 
was supplied to TSD, Henry Beecher described the dangers involved with such 
research in a prophetic manner. “The second reason to doubt Professor Rothland 
came when I raised the question as to any accidents which had arisen from 
the use of LSD-25. He said in a very positive way, ‘none.’ As it turned out 
this answer could be called overly positive, for later on in the evening I was 
discussing the matter with Dr. W. A. Stohl, Jr., a psychiatrist in Bleulera’s 
Clinic in Zurich where I had gone at Rothland’s insistence. Stohl, when asked 
the same question, replied, ‘yes,’ and added spontaneously, ‘there is a case 
Professor Rothland knows about. In Geneva a woman physician who had been 
subject to depression to some extent took LSD-25 in an experiment and became 
severely and suddenly depressed and committed suicide three weeks later. 
While the connection is not definite, common knowledge of this could hardly 
have allowed the positive statement Rothland permitted himself. This case is 
a warning to us to avoid engaging subjects who are depressed, or who have been 
subject to depression.’” Dr. Gottlieb testified that he had no recollection of 
either the report or that particular section of it. (Sidney Gottlieb testimony, 
10/19/75, p. 78.) 

* Memorandum of Sheffield Edwards for the record, 11/28/53, p. 2. 

* Lashbrook (staff summary), 7/19/75, p. 3. 

378 Gottlieb Memorandum, 12/7/53. p. 2. 

*® Edwards memorandum, 11/28/53, p. 3. 

*” Gottlieb memorandum, 12/7/38, p. 3. 

“© Ruwet memorandum, p. 8. 


77 
397 


versation, it was decided that medical assistance for Dr. Olson was 
desirable.* 

Ruwet then called Lashbrook and informed him that “Dr. Olson 
was in serious trouble and needed immediate professional attention.” *? 
Lashbrook agreed to make appropriate arrangements and told Ruwet 
to bring Olson to Washington, D.C. Ruwet and Olson proceeded to 
Washington to meet with Lashbrook, and the three left for New York 
at about 2:30 p.m. to meet with Dr. Harold Abramson. 

At that time Dr. Abramson was an allergist and immunologist 
practicing medicine in New York City. He held no degree in psychia- 
try, but was associated with research projects supported indirectly 
by the CIA. Gottlieb and Dr. Lashbrook both followed his work closely 
in the early 1950s.** Since Olson needed medical help, they turned to 
Dr. Abramson as the doctor closest to Washington who was experi- 
enced with LSD and cleared by the CIA. 

Ruwet, Lashbrook, and Olson remained in New York for two days of 
consultations with Abramson. On Thursday, November 26, 1953, the 
three flew back to Washington so that Olson could spend Thanksgiving 
with his family. En route from the airport Olson told Ruwet that he 
was afraid to face his family. After a lengthy discussion, it was de- 
cided that Olson and Lashbrook would return to New York, aud that 
Ruwet would go to Fréderick to explain these events to Mrs. Olson.** 

Lashbrook and Olson flew back to New York the same day, again 
for consultations with Abramson. They spent Thursday night in a - 
Long Island hotel and the next morning returned to the city with 
Abramson. In further discussions with Abramson, it was agreed 
that Olson should be placed under regular psychiatric care at an 
institution closer to his home.‘ 

d. The Death.—Because they could not obtain air transportation for 
a return trip on Friday night, Lashbrook and Olson made reservations 
for Saturday morning and checked into the Statler Hotel. Between 
the time they checked in and 10:00 p.m.; they watched television, 
visited the cocktail lounge, where each had two martinis, and dinner. 
According to Lashbrook, Olson “was cheerful and appeared to enjoy 
the entertainment.” He “appeared no longer particulary depressed, 
and almost the Dr. Olson I knew prior to the experiment.” *° 

After dinner Lashbrook and Olson watched television for about 
an hour, and at 11:00, Olson suggested that they go to bed, saying that 
“he felt more relaxed and contented than he had since [they] came 
to New York.” *7 Olson then left a call with the hotel operator to wake 
them in the morning. At approximately 2:30 a.m. Saturday, Novem- 
ber 28, Lashbrook was awakened by a loud “crash of glass.” In his 
report on the incident, he stated only that Olson “had crashed through 
the closed window blind and the closed window and he fell to his death 
from the window of our room on the 10th floor.” *8 


“ Toid., p. 4. , 

* Lashbrook memorandum, 12/7/58, p. 1. 

* Staff summary of Dr. Harold Abramson interview, 7/29/75, p. 2. 
“ Lashbrook memorandum, 12/7/53, p. 3. 

* Abramson memorandum, 12/4/53. 

“ Lashbrook memorandum, 12/7/53, p. 3. 

" Tdid., p. 4. 

* Toid. 


96-408 O- 77-6 


78 
398 


Immediately after finding that Olson had leapt to his death, Lash- 
brook telephoned Gottlieb at his home and informed him of the in- 
cident.*® Gottlieb called Ruwet and informed him of Olson’s death 
at approximately 2:45 a.m.°° Lashbrook then called the hotel desk 
and reported the incident to the operator there. Lashbrook called 
Abramson and informed him of the occurrence. Abramson told Lash- 
brook he “wanted to be kept out of the thing completely,” but later . 
changed his mind and agreed to assist Lashbrook.* 

Shortly thereafter, uniformed police officers and some hotel em- 
ployees came to Lashbrook’s room. Lashbrook told the police he didn’t 
know why Olson had committed suicide, but he did know that Olson 


_ “suffered from ulcers.” 5? 


e. The Aftermath—Following Dr. Olson’s death, the CLA made 
a substantial effort to ensure that his family received death benefits, 
but did not notify the Olsons of the circumstances surrounding his 
demise. The Agency also made considerable efforts to prevent the 
death being connected with the CIA, and supplied complete cover for 
Lashbrook so that his association with the CIA would remain a secret. 

After Dr. Olson’s death the CIA conducted an internal investiga- 
tion of the incident. As part of his responsibilities in this investiga- 
tion, the General Counsel wrote the Inspector General, stating: 


I’m not happy with what seems to be a very casual attitude 
on the part of TSS representatives to the way this experi- 
ment was conducted and the remarks that this is just one of 
the risks running with scientific experimentation. I do not 
eliminate the need for taking risks, but I do believe, espe- 
cially when human health or life is at stake, that at least the 
prudent, reasonable measures which can be taken to mini- 
mize the risk must be taken and failure.to do so was culpable 
_ negligence. The actions of the various individuals concerned 
_é after effects of the experiment on Dr. Olson became manifest 
also revealed the failure to observe normal and reasonable 
precautions.*? 


- 73 As a result of the investigation DCI Allen Dulles sent a personal 


letter to the Chief of Technical Onerations of the Technical Services 
‘Staff who had approved the experiment criticizing him for “poor 
judgment... in authorizing the use of this drug on such an unwitting 
-basis and without proximate medical safeguards.” ** Dulles also sent 


“fa letter to Dr. Gottlieb, Chief of the Chemical Division of the Tech- 


< fical Services Staff, criticizing him for recommending the “unwitting 


“application of the drug” in that the proposal “did not give sufficient 


emphasis for medical collaboration and for the proper consideration 


‘eof the rights of the individual to whom it was being administered.” * 


“CIA Field Office Report, 12/3/53, p. 3. 


"~- © Ruwet Memorandum, p. 11. 


teh CIA Field Office Report, 12/3/53, p. 8. 
hare Ibid. 


+ Memorandum from the General Counsel to the Inspector General, 1/4/54. 
-a.™ Memorandum from DCI to Chief, Technical Operations, TSS, 2/12/54. 


* -;™ Memorandum from DCI to Sidney Gottlieb, 2/12/54. : 


79 
399 


The letters were hand carried to the individuals to be read and 
returned. Although the letters were critical, a note from the Deputy 
Director of Central Intelligence to Mr. Helms instructed him to in- 

- form the individuals that : “These are not reprimands and no person- 
nel file notation are being made.” ** 

Thus, although the Rockefeller Commission has characterized them 
as such, these notes were explicitly not reprimands. Nor did participa- 
tion in the events which led to Dr. Olson’s death have any apparent 
effect on the advancement within the CIA of the individuals involved. 


3. The Surreptitious Administration of LSD to Unwitting Non- 
Volunteer Human Subjects by the CIA After the Death of Dr. 
Olson 

The death of Dr. Olson could be viewed, as some argued at the time, 
as a tragic accident, one of the risks inherent in the testing of new sub- 
stances. It might be argued that LSD was thought to be benign. 
After the death of Dr. Olson the dangers of the surreptitious admin- 
istration of LSD were clear, yet the CIA. continued or initiated *” a 
project involving the surreptitious administration of LSD to non- 
volunteer human subjects. This program exposed numerous individuals 
in the United States to the risk of death or serious injury without their 
informed consent, without medical supervision, and without necessary 
follow-up to determine any long-term effects. - 

Prior to the Olson experiment, the Director of Central Intelligence 
had approved MKULTRA, a research program designed to develop 
a “capability in the covert use of biological and chemical agent 
materials.” In the proposal describing MKULTRA Mr. Helms, then 
ADDP, wrote the Director that: 


we intend to investigate the development of a chemical mate- 
rial which causes a reversible non-toxic aberrant mental state, 
the specific nature of which can be reasonably well predicted 
for each individual. This material could potentially aid in 
discrediting individuals, eliciting information, and implant- 
ing suggestions and other forms of mental control.® 


On February 12, 1954, the Director of the Central Intelligence 
Agency wrote Tss officials criticizing them for “poor judgment” in 
administering LSD on “an unwitting basis and without proximate 
medical safeguards” to Dr. Olson and for the lack of “proper consid- 
eration of the rights of the individual to whom it was being admin- 
istered.” ®° On the same day, the Inspector General reviewed a report 
on Subproject Number 3 of MKULTRA, in which the same TSS 
officers who had just received letters from the Director were quoted 
as stating that one of the purposes of Subproject Number 3 was to 


* Note from DDCI to Richard Helms, 2/13/54. 

The 1963 IG Report, which described the project involving the surreptitious 
administration of LSD, placed the project beginning in 1955. Other CIA docu- 
ments reveal that it was in existence as early as February 1954. The CIA has 
told the Committee that the project began in 1953 and that the experiment which 
led to Dr. Olson’s death was part of the project. . 

3 Memorandum from ADDP items to DCI Dulles, 4/3/53, tab A, p. 2. 

® Memorandum from DCI to Sidney Gottlieb, 2/12/54; and memorandum from 
DCI to Chief of Operations, TSS, 2/12/54. ; 


80 
400 


“observe the behavior of unwitting persons being questioned after 
having been given a drug.” © There is no evidence that Subproject 
Number 3 was terminated even though these officers were unequivo- 
cally aware of the dangers of the surreptitious administration of LSD 
and the necessity of obtaining informed consent and providing medical 
safeguards. Subproject Number 3, in fact, used methods which showed 
even less concern than did the OLSON experiment for the safety and 
security of the participants. Yet the evidence indicates the project 
continued until 1963.5 

In the project, the individual conducting the test might make 
initial contact with a prospective subject selected at random in a bar. 
He would then invite the person to a “safehouse” where the test drug 
was administered to the subject through drink or in food. CIA per- 
sonnel might debrief the individual conducting the test, or observe 
the test by using a one-way mirror and tape recorder in an adjoining 
room. 

Prior consent was obviously not obtained from any of the subjects. 
There was also, obviously, no medical prescreening. In addition, the 
tests were conducted by individuals who were not qualified scientific 
observers. There were no medical personnel on hand either to admin- 
ister the drugs or to observe their effects, and no follow-up was con- 
ducted on the test subjects. 

As the Inspector General noted in 1963: : 


A significant limitation on the effectiveness of such testing is 
the infeasibility of performing scientific observation of re- 
sults. The [individuals conducting the test] are not qualified 
scientific observers. Their subjects are seldom accessible be- 
yond the first hours of the test. The testing may be useful in 
perfecting delivery techniques, and in identifying surface 
characteristics of onset, reaction, attribution, and side-effect.” 


This was particularly troublesome as in a 


number of instances, . . . the test subject has become ill for 
hours or days, including hospitalization in at least one case, 
and the agent could only follow up by guarded inquiry 
after the test subject’s return to normal life. Possible sickness 
and attendant economic loss are inherent contingent effects 
of the testing.® 
Paradoxically, greater care seems to have been taken for the safety 
of foreign nationals against whom LSD was used abroad. In several 
cases medical examinations were performed prior to the use of LSD.* 


© yfemorandum to Inspector General from Chief, Inspection and Review, on 
Subproject #3 of MKULTRA, 2/10/54. 

“1G Report on MKULTRA, 1968. 

* Tbid., p. 12. 

8 Tbid. According to the IG’s survey in 1963, physicians associated with 
MKULTRA could be made available in an emergency. 

“The Technical Services Division which was responsible for the operational 
use of LSD abroad took the position that “no physical examination of the subject 
is required prior to administration of [LSD] by TSS trained personnel. A physi- 


81 
401 


Moreover, the administration abroad was marked by constant obser- 
vation made possible because the material was being used against 
prisoners of foreign intelligence or security organizations. Finally, 
during certain of the LSD interrogations abroad, local physicrans 
were on call, though these physicians had had no experience with LSD 
and would not be told that hallucinogens had been administered.® 

The CIA’s project involving the surreptitious administration of 
LSD to unwitting human subjects in the United States was finally 
halted in 1963, as a result of its discovery during the course of an 
Inspector General survey of the Technical Services Division. When 
the Inspector General learned of the project, he spoke to the Deputy 
Director for Plans, who agreed that the Director should be briefed. 
The DDP made it clear that the DCI and his Deputy were generally 
familiar with MIKULTRA. He indicated, however, that he was not 
sure it was necessary to brief the DDCI at that point. 

On May 24, 1963, the DDP advised the Inspector General that he had 
briefed the Director on the MKULTRA program and in particular 
had covered the question of the surreptitious administration of LSD 
to unwitting human subjects. According to the Inspector General, the 
DDP said that “the Director indicated no disagreement and therefore 
the ‘testing’ will continue.” ; 

One copy of an “Eyes Only” draft report on MKULTRA was 
prepared by the Inspector General who recommended the termination 
of the surreptitious administration project. The project was suspended 
following the Inspector General’s report. 

On December 17, 1968, Deputy Director for Plans Helms wrote a 
memo to the DDCI, who with the Inspector General and the Executive 
Director-Comptroller had opposed the covert testing. He noted two 
aspects of the problem: (1) “for over a decade the Clandestine Serv- 
ices has had the mission of maintaining a capability for influencing 
human behavior;” and (2) “testing arrangements in furtherance of 
this mission should be as operationally realistic and yet as controllable 
as possible.” Helms argued that the individuals must be “unwitting” 
as this was “the only realistic method of maintaining the capability, 
considering the intended operational use of materials to influence 
human behavior as the operational targets will certainly be unwitting. 
Should the subjects of the testing not be unwitting, the program would 
only be “pro forma” resulting in a “false sense of accomplishment and 
readiness.” & Helms continued : 


cian need not be present. There is no danger medically in the use of this material 
as handled by TSS trained personnel.” The Office of Medical Services had taken 
the position that LSD was “medically dangerous.” Both the Office of Security 
and the Office of Medical Services argued that LSD “should not be administered 
unless preceded by a medical examination . .. and should be administered only 
by or in the presence of a physician who had studied it and its effect.” (Memo- 

randum from James Angleton, Chief, Counterintelligence Staff to Chief of Oper- 


. ations, 12/12/57, pp. 1-2. 


% Physicians might be called with the hope that they would make a diagnosis 
of mental breakdown which would be useful in discrediting the individual who 
was the subject of the CIA interest. 

* Memorandum for the Record prepared by the Inspector General, 5/15/68, p. 1. 

Ibdid., p. 2. 


82 
402 


If one grants the validity of the mission of maintaining this 
unusual capability and the necessity for unwitting testing, 
there is only then the question of how best to do it. Obviously, 
the testing should be conducted in such a manner as to permit 
the opportunity to observe the results of the administration 
on the target. It also goes without saying that whatever test- 
ing arrangement we adopt must afford maximum safeguards 
for the protection of the Agency’s role in this activity, as 
well as minimizing the possibility of physical or emotional 
damage to the individual tested.®* 


In another memo to the Director of Central Intelligence in June, 
1964, Helms again raised the issue of unwitting testing. At that time 
General Carter, then acting DCI, approved several changes in the 
MKULTRA program proposed by Mr. Helms as a result of negotia- 
tions between the Inspector General and the DDP. In a handwritten 
note, however, Director Carter added that “anwitting testing will be 
subject to a separate decision.” ° * 

No specific decision was made then or soon after. The testing had 
been halted and, according to Walter Elder, Executive Assistant to 
DCI McCone, the DCI was not inclined to take the positive step of 
authorizing a resumption.of the testing. At least through the summer, 
the DDP did not press the issue. On November 9, 1964, the DDP 
raised the issue again in a memo to the DCI, calling the Director’s 
attention to what he described as “several other indications during 
the past year of an apparent Soviet aggressiveness in the field of 
covertly administered chemicals which are, to say the least, inexplic- 
able and disturbing.” 7 

Helms noted that because of the suspension of covert testing, the - 
Agency’s “positive operational capability to use drugs is diminishing, 
owing to a lack of realistic testing. With increasing knowledge of the 
state of the art, we are less capable of staying up with Soviet advances 
in this field. This in turn results in a waning capability on our part 
to restrain others in the intelligence community (such as the Depart- 
ment of Defense) from pursuing operations in this area.” ™ 

Helms attributed the cessation of the unwitting testing to the high 
risk of embarrassment to the Agency as well as the “moral problem.” 
He noted that no better covert situation had been devised than that 
which had been used, and that “we have no answer to the moral 
issue.” 7 

Helms asked for either resumption of the testing project or its defini- 
tive cancellation. He argued that the status quo of a research and de- 
velopment program without a realistic testing program was causing 
the Agency to live “with the illusion of a capability which is becoming 
minimal and furthermore is expensive.” 73 Once again no formal action 
was taken in response to the Helms’ request. 


* Memorandum from DDP Helms to DDCI Carter, 12/17/63. 
* Memorandum from DDP Helms to DCI, 6/9/64, p. 3. 

” Ibid., 11/9/64, p. 1. 

™ Tdid., pp. 1-2. 

7 Thid., p. 2. 

7 Ibid. 


83 
403 


From its beginning in the early 1950’s until its termination in 1963, 
the program of surreptitious administration of LSD to unwitting non- 
volunteer human subjects demonstrates a failure of the CIA’s leader- 
ship to pay adequate attention to the rights of individuals and to pro- 
vide effective guidance to CIA employees. Though it was known that 
the testing was dangerous, the lives of subjects were placed in jeop- 
ardy and their rights were ignored during the ten years of testing 
which followed Dr. Olson’s death. Although it was clear that the laws 
of the United States were being violated, the testing continued. While 
the individuals involved in the Olson experiment were admonished 
by the Director, at the same time they were also told that they were 
not being reprimanded and that their “bad judgment” would not be 
made part of their personnel records. When the covert testing project 
was terminated in 1963, none of the individuals involved were subject 
to any disciplinary action. 


4. Monitoring and Control of the Testing and Use of Chemical and 
Biological Agents by the CIA 

The Select Committee found numerous failures in the monitoring 
and control of the testing and use of chemical and biological agents 
within the CIA." An analysis of the failures can be divided into four 
sections: (a) the waiver of normal regulations or requirements; (b) 
the problems in authorization procedures; (c) the failure of internal 
review mechanisms such as the Office of General Counsel, the Inspector 
General, and the Audit Staff; and (d) the effect of compartmentation 
and competition within the CIA. 

a. The Waiver of Administrative Controls——The internal controls 
within any agency rest on: (1) clear and coherent regulations; (2) 
clear lines of authority; and (3) clear rewards for those who conduct 
themselves in accord with agency regulations and understandable and 
immediate sanctions against those who do not. In the case of the test- 
ing and use of chemical and biological agents, normal CIA adminis- 
trative controls were waived. The destruction of the documents on the 
largest CIA program in this area constituted a prominent example of 
the waiver of normal Agency procedures by the Director. 

These documents were destroyed in early 1973 at the order of then 
DCI Richard Helms. According to Helms, Dr. Sidney Gottlieb, then 
Director of TSD: 


... came to me and said that he was retiring and that I was 
retiring and he thought it would be a good idea if these files 
were destroyed. And I also believe part of the reason for 
our thinking this was advisable was there had been relation- . 
ships with outsiders in government agencies and other orga- 
nizations and that these would be sensitive in this kind of a 
thing but that since the program was over and finished and 
done with, we thought we would just get rid of the files as 


™ Section 2(9) of S. Res. 21 instructs the Committee to examine: the ‘extent 
to which United States intelligence agencies are governed by Executive Orders, 
rules, or regulations either published or secret.” 


84 
404 


well, so that anybody who assisted us in the past would not 
be ee to follow-up or questions, embarrassment, if you 
will.?5 ‘ 


The destruction was based on a waiver of an internal CIA regula- 
tion, CSI 70-10, which regulated the “retirement of inactive records.” 
As Thomas Karamessines, then Deputy Director of Plans, wrote in 
regulation CSI-70-10: “Retirement is not a matter of convenience or 
of storage but of conscious judgment in the application of the rules 
modified by knowledge of individual component needs. The heart of 
this judgment is to ensure that the complete story can be reconstructed 
in later years and by people who may be unfamiliar with the events.” 76 

The destruction of the MKULTRA documents made it impossible 
for the Select Committee to determine the full range and extent of the 
largest CIA research program invoiving chemical and biological 
agents. The destruction also prevented the CIA from locating and pro- 
viding medical assistance to the individuals who were subjects in the 
program. Finally, it prevented the Committee from determining the 
' full extent of the operations which made use of materials developed in 
the MKULTRA program.” ; 

From the inception of MKULTRA normal Agency procedures were 
waived. In 1953, Mr. Helms, then Assistant Deputy Director for Plans, 
proposed the establishment of MKULTRA. Under the proposal six 
percent of the research and development budget of TSD would be 
expended “without the establishment of formal contractual relations” 
because contracts would reveal government interest. Helms also voted 
that qualified individuals in the field “are most reluctant to enter into 
signed agreements of any sort which connect them with this activity 
since such a connection would jeopardize their professional reputa- 


*S Richard Helms testimony, 9/11/75, p. 5. 

‘Many Agency documents recording confidential relationships with individuals 
and organizations are retained without public disclosure. Moreover, in the case of 
MKULTRA the CIA had spent millions of dollars developing both materials and 
delivery systems which could be used by the Clandestine Services ; the reconstruc- 
tion of the research and development program would be difficult if not impos- 
sible, without the documents, and at least one assistant to Dr. Gottlieb protested 
against the document destruction on those grounds. 

Clandestine Services Institution (CSI) 70-10. When asked by the Select 
Committee about the regularity of the procedure by which he authorized Dr. 
Gottlieb to destroy the MK ULTRA records, Helms responded : 

“Well, that’s hard to say whether it would be part of the regular procedure or 
not, because the record destruction program is conducted according to a certain 
pattern. There’s a regular record destruction pattern in the Agency monitored by 
certain people and done a certain way. So that anything outside of that, I suppose, 
would have been unusual. In other words, there were documents being destroyed 
because somebody had raised this specific issue rather than because they were 
encompassed in the regular records destruction program. So I think the answer 
to your question is probably yes.” (Helms testimony, 9/11/75, p. 6.) 

™ Even prior to the destruction of documents, the MKULTRA records were far 
from complete. As the Inspector General noted in 1963: 

“Files are notably incomplete, poorly organized, and lacking in evaluative state- 
ments that might give perspective to management policies over time. A substan- 
tial portion of the MKULTRA record appears to rest in the memories of the prin- 
cipal officers and is therefore almost certain to be lost with their departures.” 
(IG Report on MKULTRA, p. 23.) 


85 
405 . 


tions”. Other Agency procedures, i.e., the forwarding of documents 
in support of invoices and the provision for regular audit procedures, 
_ were also to be waived. On April 13, 1953, then DCI Allen Dulles 
approved MKULTRA, noting that security considerations precluded 
handling the project through usual contractual agreements. 

Ten years later investigations of MKULTRA by both the Inspector 
General and the Audit Staff noted substantial deficiencies which re- 
sulted from the waivers. Because TSD had not reserved the right to 
audit the books of contractors in MKULTRA, the CIA had been 
unable to verify the use of Agency grants by a contractor. Another 
firm had failed to establish controls and safeguards which would as- 
sure “proper accountability” in use of government funds with the 
result that “funds have been used for purposes not contemplated by 
grants or allowable under usual contract relationship.” ’ The entire 
MKULTRA arrangement was condemned for having administrative 
lines which were unclear, overly permissive controls, and irrespon- 
sible supervision. 


The head of the Audit Branch noted that inspections and audits: 
led us to see MKULTRA as frequently having provided a_ . 
device to escape normal administrative controls for research 
that is not especially sensitive, as having allowed practices 
that produce gross administrative failures, as having per- 
mitted the establishment of special relationships with unreli- 
‘able organizations on an unacceptable basis, and as having 
produced, on at. least one occasion, a.cavalier treatment of a 
bona fide contracting organization. 


While admitting that there may be a need for special mechanisms 
for handling sensitive projects, the Chief of the Audit Branch wrote 
that “both the terms of reference and the ground rules for handling 
such special projects should be spelled out in advance so that diver- 
sion from normal channels does not mean abandonment of controls. 

Special procedures may be necessary to ensure the security of highly 
sensitive operations. To prevent the erosion of normal internal con- 
trol mechanisms, such waivers should not be extended to less sensitive 
operations.. Moreover, only those regulations which would endanger 
security should be waived; to waive regulations generally would 
result in highly sensitive and controversial projects having looser 
rather than stricter administrative controls. MKNAOMI, the Fort 
Detrick CIA project for research and development of chemical and 
biological agents, provides another example where efforts to protect 
the security of agency activties overwhelmed administrative controls. 
No written records of the transfer of agents such as anthrax or shell- 
fish toxin were kept, “because of the sensitivity of the area and the 
desire to keep any possible use of materials like this recordless.” ** The 


™ Memorandum from ADDP Helms to DCI Dulles, 4/3/53, Tab. A, p. 2. 

™ Memorandum from IG to Chief, TSD, 11/8/63, as quoted in memorandum 
from Chief, Audit Branch. 

©The memorandum suggeSted that administrative exclusions, because of the 
importance of such decisions, should require the personal approval of the Deputy 
Director of Central Intelligence on an individual case basis. Present CIA policy 
is that only the DCI can authorize certain exemptions from regulations. 

" Sidney Gottlieb testimony, 10/18/75, Hearings, Vol. 1, p. 51. 


86 
406 


result was that the Agency had no way of determining what mate- 
rials were on hand, and could not be certain whether delivery systems 
such as dart guns, or deadly substances such as cobra venom had been 
issued to the field. : 

b. Authorization.—The destruction of the documents regarding 
MKULTRA made it difficult to determine at what level specific proj- 
ects in the program were authorized. This problem is not solely a re- 
sult of the document destruction, however. Even at the height of 
MKULTRA the IG noted that, at least with respect to the surrepti- 
tious administration of LSD, the “present practice is to maintain no 
records of the planning and approval of test programs.” * 

While it is clear that Allen Dulles authorized MKULTRA, the rec- 
ord is unclear as to who authorized specific projects such as that in- 
volving the surreptitious administration of LSD to unwitting non- 
volunteer human subjects. Even given the sensitive and controversial 
nature of the project, there is no evidence that when John McCone 
replaced Allen Dulles as the Director of the Central Intelligence 
Agency he was briefed on the details of this project and asked whether 
it should be continued.** Even during the 1963 discussions on the pro- 
priety of unwitting testing, the DDP questioned whether it was “neces- 
sary to brief General Carter,” the Deputy Director of Central Intelli- 
gence and the Director’s “alter ago,” because CIA officers felt it neces- 
sary to keep details of the project restricted to an absolute minimum 
number of people.™ : 

In May of 1963, DDP Helms told the Inspector General that the 
covert testing program was authorized because he had gone to the 
Director, briefed him on it and “the Director indicated no disagree- 
ment and therefore the testing will continue.” ® Such authorization 
even for noncontroversial matters is clearly less desirable than ex- 
plicit authorization ; in areas such as the surreptitious administration 
of drugs, it is particularly undesirable. Yet according to testimony 


= 1G Report on MKULTRA, 1963, p. 14. 

* According to an assistant to Dr. Gottlieb, there were annual briefings of the 
DCI and the DDP on MKULTRA by the Chief of TSD or his deputy. However, a 
May 15, 1963 Memorandum for the Record from the Inspector General noted that 
Mr. McCone had not been briefed in detail about the program. Mr. McCone’s Exec- 
utive Officer, Walter Elder, testified that it was “perfectly apparent to me” that 
neither Mr. McCone nor General Carter, then the DDCI, was aware of the sur- 
reptitious administration project “or if they had been briefed they had not under- 
stood it.” (Elder, 12/18/75, p. 18.) Mr. McCone testified that he “did not know” 
whether he talked to anyone about the project but that no one had told him about 
it in a way that “would have turned on all the lights.” (John McCone testimony, 
2/3/76, p. 10.) 

* According to Elder’s testimony, “no Deputy Director, to my knowledge, 
has ever been briefed or was it ever thought necessary to brief them to the extent 
to which you would brief the Director.” 

IG Memorandum for the Record. 5/15/63. 

On the question of authorization of the covert testing program, Elder testified 
as follows: 

“But my reasonable judgment is that this was considered to be in the area of 
continuing approval, having once been approved by the Director.” 

The theory of authorization carrying over from one administration to the next 
seems particularly inappropriate for less visible, highly sensitive operations 
which, unless brought to his attention by subordinates, would not come to the 
attention of the Director. 


87 
407 


before the Committee, authorization through lack of agreement ‘is 
even more prevalent in sensitive situations. 

* The unauthorized retention of shellfish toxin by Dr. Nathan Gordon 
and his subordinates, in violation of a Presidential Directive, may have 
resulted from the failure of the Director to issue written instructions to 
Agency officials. The retention was not authorized by senior officials in 
the Agency. The Director, Mr. Helms, haa instructed Mr. Karames- 
sines, the Deputy Director of Plans, and Dr. Gottlieb, the Chief of 
Technical Services Division, to relinquish control to the Army of any 
chemical or biological agents being retained for the CIA at Fort De- 
trick. Dr. Gottlieb passed this instruction on to Dr. Gordon. While 
orders may be disregarded in any organization, one of the reasons that 
Dr. Gordon used to defend the retention was the fact that he had not 
received written instructions forbidding it.®” 

In some situations the existence of written instructions did not pre- 
vent unauthorized actions. According to an investigation by the CIA’s 
Inspector General TSD officers had been informed orally that Mr. 
Helms was to be “advised at all times”. when LSD was to be used. In 
addition TSD had received a memo advising the staff that LSD was 
not to be used without the permission of the DDP, Frank Wisner. The 
experiment involving Dr. Olson went ahead without notification of 
either Mr. Wisner or Mr. Helms. The absence of clear and immediate 
punishment for that act must undercut the force of other internal in- 
structions and regulations. . 

One last issue must be raised about authorization procedures within 
the Agency. Chemical agents were used abroad until 1959 for dis- 
crediting or disabling operations, or for the purpose of interrogations 
with the approval of the Chief of Operations of the DDP. Later the . 
approval of the Deputy Director for Plans was required for such 
operations. Although the medical staff sought to be part of the ap- 
proval process for these operations, they were excluded because, as the 
Inspector General wrote in 1957: 


Operational determinations are the responsibility of the 
DD/P and it is he who should advise the DCI in these 
respects, just as it is he who is responsible for the results. It 
is completely unrealistic to consider assigning to the Chief, 
Medical Staff, (what, in effect, would be authority over clan- 
destine operations.) *° 


Given the expertise and training of physicians, participation of the 
Medical Staff might well have been useful. 

Questions about authorization also exist in regard to those agencies 
which assisted the CIA. For instance, the project involving the sur- 
reptitious administration of LSD to unwitting non-volunteer human 
subjects was conducted in coordination with the Bureau of Narcotics 
and Dangerous Drugs. There is some question as to the Commissioner 
of Narcotics’ knowledge about the project. 


*® Mfr, Elder was asked whether the process of bringing forward a description of 
actions by the Agency in getting approval through the absence of disagreement 
was a common one. He responded, “It was not uncommon. . .. The more sensitive 
the project the more likely it would lean toward being a common practice, based 
on the need to keep the written record toa minimum.” 

*? Nathan Gordan testimony, 9/16/75, Hearings, Vol. 1. 

* 1957 IG Report. 


88 
408° 


In 1963, the Inspector General noted that the head of the BNDD - 
had been briefed about the project, but the IG’s report did not indi- 
cate the level of detail provided to him. Dr. Gottlieb testified that “I 
remember meeting Mr. Anslinger and had the general feeling that he 
was aware.” ® Another CIA officer did not recall any discussion of 
testing on unwitting subjects when he and Dr. Gottlieb met with Com- 
missioner Anslinger. , 

In a memorandum for the record in 1967 Dr. Gottlieb stated that 
Harry Giordano, who replaced Mr. Anslinger, told Dr. Gottlieb that 
when he became Commissioner he was “only generally briefed on the 
arrangements, gave it his general blessing, and said he didn’t want to 
know the details.” The same memorandum states; however, that there 
were several comments which indicated to Dr. Gottlieb that Mr. Gior- 
dano was aware of the substance of the project. It is possible that 
the Commissioner provided a general aithorzation for the arrange- 
ment without understanding what it entailed or considering its pro- 
priety. A reluctance to seek detailed information from the CIA, and 
the CIA’s hesitancy to volunteer it, has been found in a number of 
instances during the Select Committee’s investigations. This problem 
is not confined to the executive branch but has also marked congres- 
sional relationships with the Agency. 

c. Internal Review.—The waiver of regulations and the absence of 
documentation make it difficult to determine now who authorized 
which activities. More importantly, they made internal Agency review 
mechanisms much less effective. Controversial and highly sensitive 
projects which should have been subject to the most rigorous inspection 
lacked effective internal review. 

Given the role of the General Counsel and his reaction to the sur- 
reptitious administration of LSD to Dr. Olson, it would have seemed 
likely that he would be asked about the legality or propriety of any 
subsequent projects involving such administration. This was not done. 
He did not learn about this testing until the 1970’s. Nor was the Gen- 
eral Counsel’s opinion sought on other MKULTRA projects, though 
these had been characterized by the Inspector General in the 1957 
Report on TSD as “unethical and illicit.” 

There is no mention in the report of the 1957 Inspector General’s 
survey of TSD of the project involving the surreptitious administra- 
tion of LSD. That project was apparently not brought to the attention 
of the survey team. The Inspector who discovered it during the IG’s 
1963 survey of TSD recalls coming upon evidence of it inadvertently, 


® Gottlieb, 10/18/75, p. 28. 

© The IG’s report on MKULTRA in 1968 stated: 

“The original charter documents specified that TSD maintain exacting con- 
trol of MKULTRA activities. In so doing, however, TSD has pursued a phi- 
losophy of minimum documentation in keeping with the high sensitivity of some 
of the projects. Some files were found to present a reasonably complete record, 
including most sensitive matters, while others with parallel objectives contained 
little or no data at all. The lack of consistent records precluded use of routine 
inspection procedures and raised a variety of questions concerning manage- 
ment and fiscal controls.” 

™ CIA, Inspector General’s report on TSD, 1957, p. 217. 


89 
409 


rather than its having been called to his attention as an especially 
sensitive project.” 

Thus both the General Counsel and the Inspector General, the prin- 
cipal internal mechanisms for the control of possibly improper actions, 
were excluded from regular reviews of the project. When the project 
was discovered the Executive Director-Comptroller voiced strong op- 
position to it; it is possible that the project would have been termi- 
nated in 1957 if it had been called to his attention when he then served 
as Inspector General. 

The Audit Staff, which also serves an internal review function 
through the examination of Agency expenditures, also encountered 
substantial difficulty with MKULTRA. When MKULTRA was first 
proposed the Audit Staff was to be excluded from any function. This 
was soon changed. However, the waiver of normal “contractual pro- 
cedures” in MIKULTRA increased the likelihood of “irregularities” 
as well as the difficulty in detecting them. The head of the Audit 
Branch characterized the MKULTRA procedures as “having allowed 
_ practices that produced gross administrative failures,” including a 
lack of controls within outside contractors which would “assure proper 
accountability in use of government funds.” It also diminished the 
CLA’s capacity to verify the accountings provided by outside firms. 

d. Compartmentation and Jurisdictional Conflict Within the 
- Agency—As has been noted, the testing and use of chemical and 
biological agents was treated as a highly sensitive activity within the 
CIA, This resulted in a high degree of compartmentation. At the same 
time substantial jurisdictional conflict existed within the Agency be- 
tween the Technical Services Division, and the Office of Medical Serv- 
ices and the Office of Security. 

This compartmentation and jurisdictional conflict may well have 
led to duplication of effort within the CIA and to Agency policy- 
makers being deprived of usefulinformation. - 

During the early 1950’s first the BLUEBIRD Committee and then 
the ARTICHOKE Committee were instituted to bring together rep- 
resentatives of the Agency components which had a legitimate inter- 
est in the arca of the alteration of human behavior. By 1957 both these 
committees had fallen into disuse. No information went to the Tech- 
nical Services Division (a component supposedly represented on the 
ARTICHOKE Committee) about ARTICHOKE operations being 
conducted by the Office of Security and the Office of Medical Services. 
The Technical Services Division which was providing support to the 
Clandestine Services in the use of chemical and biological agents, but 
provided little or no information to either the Office of Security or the 
Office of Medical Services. As one TSD officer involved in these pro- 
grams testified: “Although we were acquainted, we certainly didn’t 
share experiences.” ® 


* yen after the Inspector came upon it the IG did not perform a complete 
investigation of it. It was discovered at the end of an extensive survey of TSD 
and the Inspector was in the process of being transferred to another post within - 
the Agency. : : 

Testimony of CIA officer, 11/21/75, p. 14. 


90 
410 © 


QKHILLTOP, another group designed to coordinate research in 
this area also had little success. The group met infrequently—only 
twice a year—and little specific information was exchanged.* 

Concern over security obviously played some role in the failure to 
share information,® but this appears not to be the only reason. A TSD 
officer stated that the Office of Medical Services simply wasn’t “par- 
ticularly interested in what we were doing” and never sought such 
information.** On the other hand, a representative of the Office of 
Medical Services consistently sought to have medical personne) par- 
ticipate in the use of chemical and biological agents suggested that 
TSD did not inform the Office of Medical Services in order to pre- 
vent their involvement. 

Jurisdictional conflict was constant in this area. The Office of 
Security, which had been assigned responsibility for direction of 
ARTICHOKE, consistently sought to bring TSD operations in- 
volving psychochemicals under the ARTICHOKE umbrella. The 
Office of Medical Services sought to have OMS physicians advise and 
participate in the operational use of drugs. As the Inspector Gen- 
eral described it in 1957, “the basic issue is concerned with the extent 
of authority that should be exercised by the Chief, Medical Staff, over 
the activities of TSD which encroach upon or enter into the medical 
field,” and which are conducted by TSD “without seeking the prior 
approval of the Chief, Medical Staff, and often without informing 
him of their nature and extent.” 7 

As was noted previously, because the projects and programs of 
TSD stemmed directly from operational needs controlled by the 
DDP, the IG recommended no further supervision of these activi- 
ties by the Medical Staff : 


It is completely unrealistic to consider assigning to the 
Chief, Medical Staff, what, in effect, would be authority over 
clandestine operations. Furthermore, some of the activities 
of Chemical Division are not only unorthodox but unethical 
and sometimes illegal. The DDP is in a better position to 
evaluate the justification for such operations than the Chief, 
Medical Staff.°* [Kmphasis added. ]} 


Because the advice of the Director of Security was needed for 
“evaluating the risks involved” in the programs and because the 
knowledge that the CIA was “engaging in unethical and illicit activi- 
ties would have serious repercussions in political and diplomatic 
circles,” the IG recommended that the Director of Security be fully 
advised of TSD’s activities in these areas. 

Even after the Inspector General’s Report of 1957, the compartmen- 
tation and jurisdictional conflict continued. They may have had a sub- 


* The one set of minutes from a QKHILLTOP meeting indicated that individ- 
uals in the Office of Medical Services stressed the need for more contact. ; 

™ When asked why information on the surreptitious administration of LSD 
Was not presented to the ARTICHOKE committee, Dr. Gottlieb responded: “I 
imagine the only reason would have been a concern for broadening the aware- 
ness of its existence.” - 

CTA officer, 11/21/75, p. 14. 

“IG Survey of TSD, 1957, p. 217. 

* Toid. 


91 
411 


stantial negative impact on policymaking in the Agency. As the Dep- 
uty Chief of the Counterintelligence Staff noted in 1958, due to the 
different positions taken by TSS, the Office of Security, and the Office 
of Medical Services on the use of chemical or biological agents, it was 
possible that the individual who authorized the use of a chemical or 
biological agent could be presented with “incomplete facts upon which 
to make a decision relevant to its use.” Even a committee set up by the 
DDP in 1958 to attempt to rationalize Agency policy did not have ac- 
cess to records of testing and use. This was due, in part, to excessive 
compartmentation, and jurisdictional conflict. 


C. Covert Testinc on Human Sussecrs sy Miuitrary INTELLIGENCE 
Grours: MatertaL Testrinc Procram EA 1729, Proszect THIRD 
CHANGE, anp Prosecr DERBY HAT 


EA 1729 is the designator used in the Army drug testing program 
for lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD). Interest in LSD was originally 
aroused at the Army’s Chemical Warfare Laboratories by open litera- 
ture on the unusual effects of the compound.” The positive intelli- 
gence and counterintelligence potential envisioned for compounds like 
LSD, and suspected Soviet interest in such materials,’°° supported the 
development of an American military capability and resulted in ex- 
periments conducted jointly by the U.S. Army Intelligence Board and 
the Chemical Warfare Laboratories. 

These experiments, designed to evaluate potential intelligence uses 
of LSD, were known collectively as “Material Testing Program EA 
1729.” Two projects of particular interest conducted _as part of these 
experiments, “THIRD CHANCE” and “DERBY HAT”, involved 
the administration of LSD to unwitting subjects in Europe and the 
Far Fast. 

In many respects, the Army’s testing programs duplicated research 
which had already been conducted by the CIA. They certainly involved 
the risks inherent in the early phases of drug testing. In the Army’s 
tests, as with those of the CIA, individual rights were also subordi- 
nated to national security considerations ; informed consent and follow- 
up examinations of subjects were neglected in efforts to maintain the 
secrecy of the tests. Finally, the command and control problems which 
were apparent in the CIA’s programs are paralleled by a lack of clear 
authorization and supervision in the Army’s programs. 


® USAINTC staff study, “Material Testing Program, EA 1729,” 10/15/59, p. 4. 

This same USAINTC study cited “A 1952 (several years prior to initial U.S. 
interest in LSD-25) report that the Soviets purchased a large quantity of LSD-25 
from the Sandoz Company in 1951, reputed to be sufficient for 50 million doses.” 
(Ibdid., p.'16.) 

Generally accepted Soviet methods and counterintelligence concerns were also 
strong motivating factors in the initiation of this research: 

“A primary justification for field experimentation in intelligence with EA 1729 
is the counter-intelligence or defense implication. We know that the enemy phi- 
losophy cendones any kind of coercion or violence for intelligence purposes. There 
is proof that his intelligence service has used drugs in the past. There is strong 
evidence of keen interest in EA 1729 by him. If for no other purpose than to know 
what to expect from enemy intelligence use of the material and to, thus, be pre- 
pared to counter it, field experimentation is justified.” (bid, p. 34) 


92 
412 


1. Scope of Testing — ca ; ae 

Between 1955 and 1958 research was initiated by the Army Chemical 
Corps to evaluate the potential for LSD as a chemical warfare inca- 
pacitating agent. In the course of this research, LSD was administered 
to more than 1,000 American volunteers who then participated in a 
series of tests designed to ascertain the effects of the drug on their 
ability to function as soldiers. With the exception of one set of tests 
at Fort Bragg, these and subsequent laboratory experiments to evalu- 
ate chemical warfare potential were conducted at the Army Chemical 
Warfare Laboratories, Edgewood, Maryland. 

In 1958 a new series of laboratory tests were initiated at Edgewood. 
These experiments were conducted as the initial phase of Material 
Testing Program EA 1729 to evaluate the intelligence potential of 
LSD, and included LSD tests on 95 volunteers.’" As part of these 
tests, three structured experiments were conducted : 


1. LSD was administered surreptitiously at a simulated 
social reception to volunteer subjects who were unaware of 
the purpose or nature of the tests in which they were 
participating; 

2. LSD was administered to volunteers who were subse- 
quently polygraphed ; and , 

3. LSD was administered to volunteers who were then 
confined to “isolation chambers”. 


These structured experiments were designed to evaluate the validity 
of the traditional security training all subjects had undergone in the 
face of unconventional, drug enhanced, interrogations. 

At the conclusion of the laboratory test phase of Material Testing . 
Program EA 1729 in 1960, the Army Assistant Chief of Staff for 
Intelligence (ACSI) authorized operational field testing of LSD. The 
first field tests were conducted in Europe by an Army Special Pur- 
pose Team (SPT) during the period from May to August of 1961. 
These tests were known as Project THIRD CHANCE and involved 
eleven separate interrogations of ten subjects, None of the subjects 
were volunteers and none were aware that they were to receive 
LSD. All but one subject, a U.S. soldier implicated in the theft of 
classified documents, were alleged to be foreign intelligence sources 
or agents. While interrogations of these individuals were only moder- 
ately successful, at least one subject (the U.S. soldier) exhibited 
tt us of severe paranoia while under the influence of the drug. 

The second series of field tests, Project DERBY HAT, were con- 
ducted by an Army SPT in the Far East during the period 
from August to November of 1962. Seven subjects were interrogated 
under DERBY HAT, all of whom were foreign nationals either sus- 
pected of dealing in narcotics or implicated in foreign intelligence 
operations. The purpose of this second set of experiments was to col- 
lect additional data on the utility of LSD in field interrogations, and 
to evaluate any different effects the drug might have on “Orientals.” 


* Inspector General of the Army Report. “Use of Volunteers in Chemical Agent. 
Research,” 3/10/76, p. 138. 


93 
413 


2. Inadequate Coordination Among Intelligence Agencies 

On October 15, 1959, the U.S. Army Intelligence Center prepared 
lengthy staff study on Material Testing Program EA 1729. The stated 
purpose of the staff study was: “to determine the desirability of EA 
1729 on non-US subjects in selected actual operations under controlled 
conditions.1°? It was on the basis of this study that operational fiel 
tests were later conducted. 

After noting that the Chemical Warfare Laboratories began experi- 
ments with LSD on humans in 1955 and had administered the drug 
to over 1,000 volunteers, the “background” section of the study 
concluded : 


There has not been a single case of residual ill effect. Study 
of the prolific scientific literature on LSD-25 and personal 
communication between US Army Chemical Corps person- 
nel and other researchers in this field have failed to disclose 
an authenticated instance of irreversible change being pro- 
duced in normal humans by the drug.’ 


This conclusion was reached despite an awareness that there were 
inherent medical dangers in such experimentation. In the body of this 
same study it is noted that: 


The view has been expressed that EA 1729 is a potentially 
dangerous drug, whose pharmaceutical actions are not fully 
understood and there has been cited the possibility of the 
continuance of a chemically induced psychosis in chronic 
form, particularly if a latent schizophrenic were a subject, 
with consequent claim or representation against the U.S. 
Government.“ 


An attempt was made to minimize potential medical hazards by care- 
ful selection of subjects prior to field tests. Rejecting evidence that 
the drug might be hazardous, the study continued: 


The claim of possible permanent damage caused by EA 1729 
is an unproven hypothesis based on the characteristic effect 
of the material. While the added stress of a real situation 
may increase the probability of permanent adverse effect, 
the resulting risk is deemed to be slight by the medical re- 
search personnel of the Chemical Warfare Laboratories. To 
prevent even such a slight risk, the proposed plan for field 
experimentation calls for overt, if possible, or contrived- 
through-ruse, if necessary, physical and mental examination 
of any real situation subject prior to employment of the 
subject.2°5 


This conclusion was drawn six years after one death had occurred 
which could be attributed, at least in part, to the effects of the 
very drug the Army was proposing to field test. The VSAINTC staff, 
however, was apparently unaware of the circumstances surround- 
ing Dr. Olson’s death. This lack of knowledge is indicative of the 


se USAINTC staff study. “Material Testing Program EFA: 1729.” 10/15/59, p. 4. 
Thid., p. 4. 

* Thid.. p. 25. 

™ Toid. 


96-408 O- 77-7 


94 
~ 414 


general lack of interagency communication on drug related research. 
As the October 1959 study noted, “there has been no coordination 
with other intelligence agencies up to the present.” 7°° 


On December 7, 1959, the Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelli- 
gence (ACSI, apparently a General Willems) was briefed on the 
proposed operational use of LSD by USAINTC Project Officer Jacob- 
son, in preparation for Project THIRD CHANCE. General Willems 
expressed concern that the project had not been coordinated with the 
FBI and the CIA. He is quoted as saying “that if this project is going 
to be worth anything it [LSD] should be used on higher types of 
non-U.S, subjects” in other words “staffers.” He indicated this could 
be accomplished if the CIA were brought in. The summary of the. 
briefing prepared by a Major Mchovsky continues : “Of particular note 
is that ACSI did not. direct. coordination with CIA and the FBI but 
only mentioned it for consideration by the planners.” *% 

After the briefing, four colonels, two lieutenant colonels and Major 
Mehovsky met to discuss interagency cooperation with CTA and FBI. 
The group consensus was to postpone efforts toward coordination: 


It. Col. Jacobson commented that before we coordinate with 
GIA we should have more factual findings from field experi- 
mentation with counterintelligence cases that will strengthen 
our position and proposal for cooperation. This approach 
was agreed to by the conferees.’ 


Had such coordination been achieved, the safety of these experiments 
might have been viewed differently and the tests themselves might 
have been seen as unnecessary. 


3. Subordination of Individual Rights to National Security Consid- 
erations 

Just as many of these experiments may have been unnecessary, the 
nature of the operational tests (polygraph-assisted interrogations of 
drugged suspects) reflects a basic disregard for the fundamental 
human rights of the subjects. The interrogation of an American 
soldier as part of the THIRD CHANCE 1961 tests is an example of 
this disregard. 

The “trip report” for Project THIRD CHANCE, dated Septem- 
ber 6, 1961, recounts the circumstances surrounding and the results of 
the tests as follows: 


[The subject] was a U.S. soldier who had confessed to theft 
of classified documents. Conventional methods had failed to 
ascertain whether espionage intent was involved. A significant 
new admission by subject that he told a fellow soldier of the 
theft while he still had the documents in his possession was 
obtained during the EA 1729 interrogation along with other 
variations of Subject’s previous account. The interrogation 
results were deemed by the local operational authority satis- 
factory evidence of Subject’s claim of innocence in regard to 
espionage intent. 


“4 Thid.. p. 6. 

7 Nfehovsky Fact Sheet, 12/9/60, p. 1. 

18 Thid., p. 2. 

1° SPT Trip Report, Operation THIRD CHANCE, 9/6/61, p. 5. 


95 
415 


The subject apparently reacted very strongly to the drug, and the 
interrogation, while productive, was difficult. The trip report 
concluded : 


(1) This case demonstrated the ability to interrogate a 
subject profitably throughout a highly sustained and almost 
incapacitating reaction to EA 1729. 

(2) The apparent value of bringing a subject into the EA 
1729 situation in a highly stressed state was indicated. 

(3) The usefulness of employing as a duress factor the de- 
vice of inviting the subject’s attention to his EA 1729- 
influenced state and threatening to extend this state in- 
definitely even to a permanent condition of insanity, or to 
bring it to an end at the discretion of the interrogators was 
shown to be effective. 

(4) The need for preplanned precautions against extreme 
paranoiac reaction to EA 1729 was indicated. 

(5) It was brought to attention by this case that where sub- 
ject has undergone extended intensive interrogation prior to 
the EA 1729 episode and has persisted in a version repeatedly 
during conventional interrogation, adherence to the same ver- 
sion while under EA 1729 influence, however extreme the reac- 
tion, may not necessarily be evidence of truth but merely the ° 
ability to adhere to a well rehearsed story.?” 


This strong reaction to the drug and the accompanying discomfort 
this individual suffered were exploited by the use of traditional inter- 
-rogation techniques. While there is no evidence that physical violence 
or torture were employed in connection with this interrogation, physi- 
cal and psychological techniques were used in the THIRD CHANCE - 
experiments to exploit the subjects’ altered mental state, and to maxi- 
mize the stress situation. Jacobson described these methods in his trip 
report: 
Stressing’ techniques employed included silent treatment be- 
fore or after EA 1729 administration, sustained conventional 
interrogation prior to EA 1729 interrogation, deprivation of 
food, drink, sleep or bodily evacuation, sustained isolation 
prior to EA 1729 administration, hot-cold switches in ap- 
proach, duress “pitches”, verbal degradation and bodily dis- 
comfort, or dramatized threats to subject’s life or mental 
health. 


Another gross violation of an individual’s fundamental rights oc- 
curred in September 1962 as part of the Army’s DERBY HAT tests 
in the Far East. A suspected Asian espionage agent was given 6 
micrograms of LSD per kilogram of bodyweight. The administration 
of the drug was completed at 1035 that morning: 


At 1120, sweating became evident, his pulse became thready. 
He was placed in a supine position. He began groaning with 
expiration and became semicomatose.1!? : 


° Tdid., pp. 17-18. 

™ Tbid., p. 18. : 

™“ “DERBY HAT” Medical and Pharmacological Report: Case #1, 9/20/62, 
p. D10-2. : : 


96 
416 


For the next 28 minutes, the subject remained semicomatose. 


At 1148, responses to painful stimuli were slightly improved. 

At 1155, he was helped to a sitting position. 

At 1200, he became shocky again and was returned to supine 
position. 

At 1212, he was more alert and able to sit up with help. 

At 1220, Subject was assisted to the interrogation table. 

At 1230, he began moaning he wanted to die and usually 
ignored questions. Rarely he stated “he didn’t know.” 

At 1250, his phasic alertness persisted. He frequently re- . 
focused his eyes with eyelid assistance. He frequently threw 
his head back with eyes closed. 

At 1330, he was slightly more alert. He was forced-walked for 
5 minutes. He physically would cooperate until he became 
shocky again (sweating, thready pulse, pale). 


For the next three hours the subject remained in about the same con- 
dition. Continued attempts at interrogation yielded no relevant 
answers. Six hours after receiving the drug, the subject began giving 
relevant answers to questions. Eight and one-half hours after the 
initial dosage, the subject was polygraphed. The interrogation con- 
tinued for seventeen and one-half hours after the drug was ad- 
ministered. 

There was some psychological and medical screening of the in- 
dividuals tested within the United States, in Europe, and in 
Asia. The proposal for the field experimentation in fact called for 
such examinations. The fact of prescreening did not eliminate the 
risk of injury;.the availability of medical staff did, however, limit | 
injury and may well have prevented the death of one or more of the 
subjects. As the medical corps member of the team which surrepti- 
tiously administered the LSD noted, “one subject... did collapse after 
the interrogation and the presence of the medical officer was not only 
of value to the subject but to the interrogation team who were thus 
assured that an unnecessary untoward result would not occur.” 

In the October 15, 1959, USAINTC staff study, moral and legal 
ramifications of covert administration of LSD in field conditions were 
considered. 


It was always a tenet. of Army Intelligence that the basic 
American principle of the dignity and welfare of the in- 
dividual will not be violated. . . . A more meticulous regard 
for the prohibition against violence or duress is taken in 
practice when the suspect is a US citizen or ally as against 
an actual or potential enemy, in peace as against war, and in 
respect. to the nature of the crime. ... In intelligence, the 
stakes involved and the interests of national security may 
permit a more tolerant interpretation of moral-ethical values, 
but not legal limits, through necessity... . / Any claim 


*8 Toid., p. D10-3. : : 
8 SPT Trip Report, Operation THIRD CHANCE, 7/25/61, p. 1. 


97 
mete 417 


against the US Government for alleged injury due to EA 
1729 must be legally shown to have been due to the material. 
Proper security and appropriate operational techniques 
can protect the fact of employment of EA 1729.1 


On the basis of this evaluation, the stily concluded that in view of 
“the stakes involved and the interests of national security,” the pro- 
posed plan for field testing should be approved. “o 
The surreptitious administration of drugs to unwitting subjects by 
the Army raises serious constitutional and legal issues. The considera- 
tion given these issues by the Army was wholly insufficient, The char- 
acter of the Army’s volunteer testing program and the possibility that 
drugs were simply substituted for other forms of violence or duress in 
field interrogations raises serious doubts as to whether national se- 
curity imperatives were properly interpreted. The “consent” forms 
which each American volunteer signed prior to the administration of 
LSD are a case in point. These forms contained no mention of the 
medical and psychological risks inherent in such testing, nor do they 
mention the nature of the psychotrophic drug to be administered: 


The general nature of the experiments in which I have 
volunteered. have been explained to me from the standpoint 
of possible hazards to my health. /¢ is my understanding that 
the experime:is are so designed, based on the results of 
animals and previous human experimentation, that the antic- 
ipated results will justify the performance of the experi- 
ment. I understand further that experiments will be so con- 
ducted as to avoid all unnecessary physical and medical 
suffering and injury, and that J will be at liberty to request 

. that the experiments be terminated at any time if in my opin- 
ion T have reached the physical or mental state where con- 
tinuation of the experiments becomes undesirable. 

I recognize that in the pursuit of certain experiments 
transitory discomfort may occur. I recognize, also, that under 
these circumstances, J must rely upon the skill and wisdom 
of the physician supervising the experiment to institute what- 
ever medical or surgical measures are indicated. [Emphasis 


added.] 218 


The exclusion of any specific discussion of the nature of LSD in 
these forms raises serious doubts as to their validity. An “anderstand- 
ing... that the anticipated results will justify the performance of 
the experiment” without full knowledge of the nature of the experi- 
ment is an incomplete “understanding.” Similarly, the nature of the 
experiment limited the ability of both the subject to request its re- 
quest its termination and the experimenter to implement such a request. 
Finally, the euphemistic characterization of “transitory discomfort” 
and the agreement to “rely on the skill and wisdom of the physician” 
combine to conceal inherent risks in the experimentation and may be 
viewed as disolving the experimenter of personal responsibility for 
damaging aftereffects. In summary, a “volunteer” program in which 
subjects are not fully informed of potential hazards to their persons 
is “volunteer” in name only. 


us USAINTC staff study, “Material Testing Program EA 1729,” 10/15/59, p. 26. 
“8 Sample volunteer consent form. 


98 
418 


This problem was compounded by the security statements signed 
by each volunteer before he participated in the testing. As part of. 
this statement, potential subjects agreed that they would: 


. not divulge or make available any information related 
to U.S. Army Intelligence Center interest or participation in 
the Department of the Army Medical Research Volunteer 
Program to any individual, nation, organization, business, 
association, or other group or entity, not officially authorized 
to receive such information. 

I understand that any action contrary to the provisions of 
this statement will render me liable to punishment under the 
provisions of the Uniform Code of Military Justice." 


Under these provisions; a volunteer experiencing aftereffects of the test 
might have been unable to seek immediate medical assistance. 

This disregard for the well-being of subjects drug testing is in- 
excusable. Further, the absence of any comprehensive long-term 
medical assistance for the subjects of these experiments is not only 
unscientific; it is also unprofessional. 


4. Lack of Normal Authorization and Supervision 


It is apparent from documents supplied to the Committee that the 
Army’s testing programs often operated under informal and nonrou- 
tine authorization. Potentially dangerous operations such as these 
testing programs are the very projects which ought to be subject to 
the closest internal scrutiny at the highest levels of the military com- 
mand structure. There are numerous examples of inadequate review, 
partial consideration, and’ incomplete approval in the administration 
of these programs. 

When the first Army program to use LSD on Aimerican soldiers in 
“field stations” -was authorized in May 1955, the Army violated its 
own procedures in obtaining approval. Under Army Chief of Staff 
Memorandum 385, such proposals were to be personally approved by 
the Secretary of the Army. Although the plan was submitted to him 
on April 26, 1956, the Secretary issued no written authorization for 
the project, and there is no evidence that he either reviewed or ap- 
proved the plan. Less than a month later, the Army Chief of Staff 
issued a memorandum authorizing the tests.’ 

Subsequent testing of LSD under Material Testing Program EA 
1729 operated generally under this authorization. When the plans for 
this testing were originally discussed in early 1958 by officials of the 
Army Intelligence Center at Fort Holabird and representatives of 
the Chemical Warfare Center at Edgewood Arsenal, an‘informal pro- 
posal was formulated. This proposal was submitted to the Medical 
Research Directorate at Edgewood by the President of the Army In- 
telligence Board on June 3, 1958. There is no evidence that the plan 
was approved at any level higher than the President of the Intelli- 
gence Board or the Commanding General of Edgewood. The approval 
at Edgewood appears to have been issued by the Commander’s Adju- 
tant. The Medical Research Laboratories did not submit the plan to 
the Surgeon General for approval (a standard procedure) because 


° Sample Volunteer Security Statement. : , 
™ Inspector General of the Army Report, “Use of Volunteers in Chemical 
Agent Research,” 3/10/76, p. 109. 


99 
419 


the new program was ostensibly covered by the authorizations granted 
in May 1956.14 

The two projects involving the operational use of LSD (THIRD 
CHANCE and DERBY HAT) were apparently approved by the 
Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence (General Willems) on 
December 7, 1960. This verbal approval came in the course of a 
briefing on previous drug programs and on the planned field exper!- 
mentation. There is no record of written approval being issued by the 
ACSI to authorize these specific projects until January 1961, and 
there is no record of any specific knowledge or approval by the Secre- 
tary of the Army. 

On February 4, 1963, Major General C. F. Leonard, Army ACSI, 
forwarded a copy of the THIRD CHANCE Trip Report to Army 
Chief of Staff, General Earl Wheeler. *#° Wheeler had apparently 
requested a copy on February 2. The report was routed through a Gen- 
eral Hamlett. While this report included background on the origins 
of the LSD tests, it appears that General Wheeler may only have read 
the conclusion and recommendations.’ The office memorandu 
accompanying the Trip Report bears Wheeler’s initials.’ 


4. Termination of Testing 


On April 10, 1963, a briefing was held in the ACSI’s office on the 
results of Projects THIRD CHANCE and DERBY HAT. Both 
SPT’s concluded that more field testing was required before LSD 
could be utilized as an integral aid to counterintelligence interroga- 
tions. During the presentation of the DERBY HAT results, General 
Leonard (Deputy ACSI) directed that no further field testing be 
undertaken.!”° After this meeting the ACSI sent a letter to the Com- 
manding General of the Army Combat Developments Command 
(CDC) requesting that he review THIRD CHANCE and DERBY 
HAT and “make a net evaluation concerning the adoption of EA 1729 
for future use as an effective and profitable aid in counterintelligence 
interrogations.” 127 On the same day the ACSI requested that the CDC 
Commander revise regulation FM 30-17 to read in part: | 


. in no instance will drugs be used as an aid to interro- 
gations in counterintelligence or security operations without 
prior permission of the Department of the Army. Requests 
to use drugs as an investigative aid will be forwarded through 
intelligence channels to the OACSI, DA, for approval... . 

Medical research has established that information obtained 
through the use of these drugs is unreliable and invalid. . .. 
It is considered that DA [Army] approval must be a pre- 
requisite for use of such drugs because of the moral, legal, 
medical and political problems inherent in their use for intel- 
ligence purposes.’ 


* Tdid., pp. 135, 137, 138. 

122 Mlehovsky Fact Sheet, 12/9/60. 

i Memorandum from Leonard to Wheeler, 2/4/63. 

se SGS memorandum to Wheeler through Hamlett, 2/5/63. 
Ibid, 

»” Maj. F. Barnett, memorandum for the record, 8/12/63. 


= a memorandum for the record, 7/16/63. 
te. 


100 
420° ~—C : 


The subsequent adoption of this regulation marked the effective ter- 
mination of field testing of LSD by the Army. 

The official termination date of these testing programs is rather 
unclear, but a later ACSI memo indicates that it may have occurred 
in September of 1963. On the 19th of that month a meeting was held 
between Dr. Van Sims (Edgewood Arsenal), Major Clovis (Chemi- 
cal Research Laboratory), and ACSI representatives (General 
Deholm and Colonel Schmidt). “As a result of this conference a deter- 
mination was made to suspend the program and any further activity 
pending a more profitable and suitable use.” 12° 


D. Cooperation aNd CoMPETITION AMONG THE INTELLIGENCE Com- 
MUNITy AGENCIES AND Between TiiEsE AGENCIES AND OTHER 
INDIVIDUALS AND INSTITUTIONS 


1. Lelationships Among Agencies Within the Intelligence Community 

Relationships among intelligence community agencies in this area 
varied considerably over time, ranging from full cooperation to intense 
and wasteful competition. The early period was marked by a high 
degree of cooperation among the agencies of the intelligence commu- 
nity. Although the military dominated research involving chemical 
and biological agents, the information developed was shared with the 
FBI and the CIA. But the spirit of cooperation did not continue..The 
failure by the military to share information apparently breached the 
spirit, if not the letter, of commands from above. 

As noted above, the Army Assistant Chief of Staff for Intelligence 
was briefed on the proposed operational testing of LSD under Project 
THIRD CHANCE, and expressed concern that the project had not 
been coordinated with FBI and CIA. Despite this request, no coordi- 
nation was achieved between the Army and either of these agencies. 
Had such cooperation been forthcoming, this project may have been 
evaluated in a different light. 

The competition between the agencies in this area reached bizarre 
levels. A military officer told a CLA representative in confidence about 
the military’s field testing of LSD in Europe under Project THIRD 
CHANCE, and the CIA promptly attempted to learn surreptitiously 
the nature and extent of the program. At roughly the same time Mr. 
Helms argued to the DDCI that the unwitting testing program should 
be continued, as it contributed to the CIA’s capability in the area and 
thus allowed the CIA “to restrain others in the intelligence community 
(such as the Department of Defense) from pursuing operations.” '%° 

The MKNAOMI program was also marked by a failure to share 
information. The Army Special Forces (the principal customer of the 
Special Operations Division at Fort Dietrick) and the CIA rather 
than attempting to coordinate their efforts promulgated different re- 
quirements which varied only slightly. This apparently resulted in 
some duplication of effort. In order to insure the security of CIA 
operations, the Agency would request materials from SOD for opera- 
tional use without fully or accurately describing the operational 
One This resulted in limitations on SOD’s ability to assist 
the TA. , 


™ Undated ASCI memorandum, p. 2. 
*” Memorandum from the DDP to the DCI, 11/9/64, p. 2. 


101 
421 


2. Relationships Between the Intelligence Community Agencies and 
Foreign Liaison Services 

The subjects of the CLA’s operational testing of chemical and bio- 
logical agents abroad were generally being held for interrogation by 
foreign intelligence or security organizations. Although information 
about the use of drugs was generally withheld from these organiza- 
tions, cooperation with them necessarily jeopardized the security of 
CLA interest in these materials. Cooperation also placed the American 
Government in a position of complicity in actions which violated the 
rights of the subjects, and which may have violated the laws of the 
country in which the experiments took place. 

Cooperation between the intelligence agencies and organizations in 
foreign countries was not limited to relationships with the intelligence 
or internal security organizations. Some MKULTRA research was 
conducted abroad. While this is, in itself, not a questionable practice, 
it is important that such research abroad not be undertaken to evade 
American laws. That this was a possibility is suggested by an ARTI- 
CHOKE memorandum in which it is noted that working with the 
scientists of a foreign country “might be very advantageous” since 
that government “permitted certain activities which were not per- 
ey by the United States government (i.e., experiments on anthrax, 
ete,).” 25 


3. The Relationships Between the Intelligence Community Agencies 
and Other Agencies of the US. Government 

Certain U.S. government agencies actively assisted the efforts of 
intelligence agencies in this area. One form of assistance was to pro- 
vide “cover” for research contracts let by intelligence agencies, in 
order to disguise intelligence community interest in chemical and 
biological agents. 

Other forms of assistance raise more serious questions. Although 
the CI.\’s project involving the surreptitious administration of LSD 
was conducted by Bureau of Narcotics personnel, there was no open 
connection between the Bureau personnel and the Agency. The Bureau 
was serving as a “cut-out” in order to make it difficult to trace Agency 
participation. The cut-out arrangement, however, reduced the CIA’s 
ability to control the program. The Agency could not control the 
process by which subjects were selected and cultivated, and could not 
regulate follow-up after the testing. Moreover, as the CIA’s Inspector 
General noted: “the handling of test subjects in the last analysis rests 
with the [Bureau of Narcotics] agent working alone. Suppression of 
knowledge of critical results from the top CIA management is an 
inherent risk in these operations.” * The arrangement also made it 
impossible for the Agency to be certain that the decision to end the 
surreptitious administration of LSD would be honored by the Bureau 
personnel. 

The arrangement with the Bureau of Narcotics was described as 
“informal.” 433 The informality of the arrangement compounded the 
problem is aggravated by the fact that the 40 Committee has had vir- 


or 


1m ARTICHOKE Memorandum, 6/13/52. 

= TG Report on MKULTRA. 1968, p. 14. 
. 8 bid. This was taken by one Agency official to mean that there would be no 
written contract and no formal mechanism for payment. (Elder, 12/18/75, p. 31.) 


102 
422 


apparent unwillingness on the part of the Bureau’s leadership to ask 
for details, and the CIA’s hesitation in volunteering information. 
These problems raise serious questions of command and control within 


the Bureau. 


4. Relationships Between the Intelligence Community Agencies and 
Other Institutions and Individuals, Public and Private 


The Inspector General’s 1963.Survey of MKULTRA noted 
that “the research and development” phase was conducted through 
standing arrangements with “specialists in universities, pharmaceu- 
tical houses, hospitals, state and federal institutions, and private re- 
search organizations” in a manner which concealed “from the institu- 
tion the interests of the CIA.” Only a few “key individuals” in each 
institution were “made witting of Agency sponsorship.” The research 
and development phase was succeeded by a phase involving “phy- 
sicians, toxicologists, and other specialists in mental, narcotics, and 
general hospitals and prisons, who are provided the products and 
findings of the basic research projects and proceed with intensive, test- 
ing on human subjects.” 154 ; 

According to the Inspector General, the MKULTRA testing pro- 
grams were “conducted under accepted. scientific procedures... 
where health permits, test subjects are voluntary participants in the 
programs.” °° This was clearly not true in the project involving the 
surreptitious administration of LSD, which was marked by a com- 
plete lack of screening, medical supervision, opportunity to observe, or 
medical or psychological follow-up. 

The intelligence agencies allowed individual researchers to. design 
their project. Experiments sponsored by these researchers (which in- 
cluded one where narcotics addicts were sent to Lexington, Kentucky, 
who were rewarded with the drug of their addiction in return for 
participation in experiments with LSD) call into question the deci- 
sion by the agencies not to fix guidelines for the experiments. 

The MKULTRA research and development program raises other 
questions, as well. It is not clear whether individuals in prisons, mental, 
narcotics and general hospitals can provide “informed consent” to 
participation in experiments such as these. There is doubt as to whether 
institutions should be unwitting of the ultimate sponsor of research 
being done in their facilities. The nature of the arrangements also 
made it impossible for the individuals who were not aware of the 
sponsor of the research to exercise any choice about their participa- 
tion based on the sponsoring organization. 

Although greater precautions are now being taken in research con- 
ducted on behalf of the intelligence community agencies, the dilemma 
of classification remains. These agencies obviously wished to conceal 
their interest in certain forms of research in order to avoid stimulating 
interest. in the same areas by hostile governments. In some cases today 
contractors or researchers wish to conceal their, connection with these 
agencies. Yet the fact of classification prevents open discussion and 
debate upon which scholarly work depends. 


™ Thid. p. 9. 
35 Thid. p. 10. 


103 


APPENDIX B 


DOCUMENTS REFERRING TO DISCOVERY OF ADDI- 
TIONAL. MKULTRA MATERIAL 


(22 June 1977 


‘Deputy’ Director’ of Central Intelligence 


* for Science and Technology 
Request fox ‘Gui idance: on Handling ; 
' Recently Located MKULTRA Material 


= THROUGH 


SUBJECT 


“ 
4 


“1. (U/AIUO) This memorandum is to advise you that 
additional MKULTRA documents have been discovered and to 
obtain your approval for follow-on actions required. 
Paragraph 7 contains a _Teconnended course of action. 


» 2. (U/AIUO) As a result of John Marks FOIA re- 
quest (F- 76-374), all of the MKULTRA material in OTS oe 
possession was reviewed for possible release to hin. 
‘Following that review, the OTS material in the Retired 
Records Center was searched. It was during that latter 
search that .the subproject files were located among the. 
retired records of the OTS Budget and Fiscal Section. 
These files were not discovered earlier as the earlier 

._ searches were linited to the examination of the_active 

. and retired records of those branches considered most - 
likely to have generated or have had access to MKULTRA © 
documents. Those branches included: Chémistry,. : 
Biological, Behavioral Activities, and Contracts Manage- 
ment. Because Dr. Gottlieb retrieved and destroyed all 
the MKULTRA documents he was able to locate, it is not : 
surprising that the earlier search for MKULTRA documents, 
directed at areas where they were most likely to be found, 
was unsuccessful, The purpose of establishing the MKULTRA 
mechanism was’ to limit knowledge of the sensitive work 
being performed to those with an absolute need to know... 
If those precepts had been followed, the recently found | - 
B&F files should have ‘contained- only financial and 
administrative documents. (In retrospect, I realize ‘that 


ed Daclassified by AST? 
% 73 dato beer 
eg aL BE 


=: aan eee 


104 


"beg own on 
"Ob da ad at a 
BOM Ot 


49 Peg de bt 


12 & be ba rn 


thts 
Guat 
LO a 
ort! send 
edd Pa 


a 
i 
a 


U 
a 
io\4 
th 


We te "tt bs bet 
Or wy SB fy Aue 
OA rd bed be bee ad 


in 


dance on Handl 


elie 90 On 
Cte bs ESS ot 1 TD Yer bo! 
HS Wet he A, 34 ft M4 WI OW OT 
“AVOO° FA Wet i Ub sa wo 
~~ WU es uO. 49 05 5 Dy OE LS rt ot 
a an 1 44 of oe Peed Ce bd ved wet! 
is] BVH MAM DU -. te ert f5 42 Ue rt OF 
ont At mt be : set HAMA wee ty 
h YUU Nel hg 49 qaert Hee oO, at's 
a 7 O basemty [259 63 ra Un de Me CDAD UD ba Hdd Gee be 
thd Rao a 6 bee oY 
a en Po wy vonuU 
on Eu eb att wEeR 
wt 6760 Cl % SOK 
aa WIN Chu bh fea Gm & vu. 
acs. gun oOo3 ff. ou ch 
im oo] mt 077 O £O-s road re) fo Mae} 
ot VAD Rh SF oh po: 7) 
wr BW O.4'3 ww ay OnnvU 
OM" aAane nm oC Gu “Mor 
Qa: Mund ah oO aouU' tt ert os 
: at OU bh NN OF °o O Wert te 
wero to Ob FE h.Y Ot bn: en 8 BW ort Lid 
“vo ord OO FS 8 te c) ae ow 
Ga MUU EWE 0 ooh OMS ee MB od 
a9 OO a fin . m4 tdoet Thue dd be he IS 
ou ee ek es eth VW ONT Oo 
vo hee gy oe eds he Ne 8 . 
wt Geet Gd ord eS On. oer apie 
Gt i fede be OO Gey oe 
Wp 13 O tas. bh 
det ee ee ot 
O. obU4 Gate PS bs ot ont 


wU MN Oo HO 
OU Uae 

OQ) ih to 4 
C2) th 4 ut 


105 


* caddanes: on Handling Recently 
ULTRA Material . 


could be controversi2l in that it was 
chanism making it appear to be a private 
2e¢ | donations qualified for, ad EES 
ivee, an equal anount of Federal matchings 

rt irom the Office’ of General Counsel dated 
i attesting to the: legality of this funding 


. The centr 
made thre: 
donaticen. 


funds< a 


yet te 
n 


) ’ The iesisietive “Counsel hes. been as 
72 @xistence of these additicnal MKULT RA 
2 


mace averse 
documents Still under review and sanitization. 
itigation and we are committed to 


these files shortly; 


et? el 


ea 

2 1 te his attorneys 

= n and Privacy 
tt hem of the. 
er éination process 
2 . 


<xo actions that should 
ly sanitized material to 
ireé by FOIA litigation. 


the Senate Select Connictee of the 


t. Inforn 
existence ct the recently loceted records prior te 
infovzing Mr. Narks' attorneys. 
Tt is Tecoamended that you approve of both of these actions. 


8. (G/ATUC) If additional details on the contents — 
of this meteriai are desired, the OTS officers most familier 
t are prepared to brief you at your con venience. ; 


peers Ss. Nahduein 
+ a tos ies Director 
See ; ; Office of Technical Service 


106 


. e : 


The Director of Central Intelligence 
Washingjon D.C.20505 


The Honorable Daniel K. Inouye, Chairman 
Select Committee on Intelligence 

United States Senate : 
Washington, D.C. 20510 


Dear Mr. Chairman: 


During the course of 1975 when the Senate Committee, chaired 
by Senator Church, was investigating intelligence activities, the — 
_ CIA was asked to produce documentation on a program of experimentation 
with the effect of drugs. Under this project conducted from 1953 
to 1964 and known as "MK-ULTRA," tests were conducted on American 
citizens in some .caSes without their knowledge. The CIA, after’ 
searching for such documentation, reported that most of the documents 
on this matter have been destroyed. I find it my duty to report 
to you now that ‘our continuing search for drug related, as well as 
other documents, has uncovered certain papers which bear on this 
_ Matter. Let me hasten to add that I am persuaded that there was no 
previous attempt to conceal this material in the original 1975 
exploration=~ The material recently discovered was in the retired _ 
archives filed under financial accounts and only uncovered by using 
extraordinary and extensive search efforts. In this connection, 
incidentally, I have personally commended the employee whose diligence 
produced this find. ; . 


Because the new material now on hand is primarily of a financial 
nature, it does not present a complete picture of the field of drug 
experimentation activity but it does provide more detail than was 
previously available to us. For example, the following types of 
activities were undertaken: i 


a. Possible additional cases of drugs being tested on 
American citizens, without their knowledge. 


b. Research was undertaken on surreptitious methods of 
administering drugs. . 


c. Some of. the persons chosen for experimentation were 
drug addicts or alcoholics. ; 


d. Research into the development of a knockout or "K" 
drug was performed in conjunction with being done to 
develop pain killers for advanced caneer patients, and tests 
on such patients were carried out. 


107 


e. There is a possibility of an | improper paysent: to a 
private institution. . : 


The drug related activities described in this newly tocated material 
began almost 25 years ago. I assure you they were discontinued over 
10 years ago and do not take place today. 


In keeping with the President's commitment to disclose any errors 
of the Intelligence Community which are uncovered, I-would like to 
volunteer to testify before your Committee on the full details of this 
unfortunate series of events. I-am in the process of reading the 
fairly voluminous material involved and do want to be certain that 
I have a complete picture when I talk with the Committee. I will be 
in touch with you next week to discuss when hearings might be 
scheduled at the earliest opportunity. 


I regret having ‘to bring this issue to your attention, but I know 
' that it is essentid#] to your acreretan: procedures that you be kept fully 
informed in a timely manner. 

Yours sincere 


STANSFIELD TURNER 


109 


APPENDIX C 
DOCUMENTS REFERRING TO SUBPROJECTS 
_ DRAFT = 


gate ——_fi i yo77 "+ "1 May 1953 


SUBJECT: a ‘Project veo, subprogect 2 


1. ““gubproject 2 is being set up to provide a secure and ae 
efficient means to exploit? in regard 
to the ‘MEULTRA | Program. aS a, e ge wees Be ; 


ace 2: sa precticing sychiatrist in ae oe 
and a faculty member of the #% Ms His rast——_- 
positions have ineluded Chief Neuropsychiatrist at Egat ———— a. 
Chief of the Psychiatric Section at @nmynsingem —— /3 
me and OSS experience during World War. IT. He has been of 
value in the general MKULTRA field as an overall edvisor and - 
. vt consultant, he has been of value in contacting individuals in the 
C C_— a area and in setting up projects there, and he has 
done work himself which has contributed to the MKULTRA field. His 


connate, — 7 


7 3e. Subproject 2 would include: 


ae Miscellaneous research and testing services in the- 
general ‘Fie1s of MKULTRA. : . . 


b. ‘cacvicas asa contact and cut-out for rojects in the 


“MRULTRA field, primarily those ‘located in th —C. 

area, > 
“ee Monitoring of selected projects in the MKULTRA field, 

when located in the central SoRURSm area. . Cc. 


@. .Services as a general consultant and edvisor in the 
MKULTRA field. 5 


4. the total cost of this project is not to exceed $4,650.00" 
for a period of one year. te 


oS ens, Mes 1s cleared through TOP SECRET on a contact 


basis. 


= ewes premieres — A 


Chemical Division/TSs 


APPROVED: 9’ 


96-408 O- 77-8 


110 


. Research Director .. ; a 


ne a Saeed 


any, ame . 
Dates Sten = AiS?, i tet 
eee 


-| 

are i 

4 

: 

aaa . . - : 

: ’ . 
ye 
r 
oe 
‘ 


111 


Objective: To study the posstole synergistic action of drugs 


which may be appropriate for use in abolishing Sansotouanese’ 
Situation: There is reason to believe that two or more ‘drugs, 
used in combination, are more effective than sitgis drugs. . 
The cibinad effect of eae niga: suck as combiratiors of 
barbiturates,. are?imown, With other coubirations,.the degree 
of synergism is not known. If consideratle synergism is found 
to exist, two possibilities must be considered: (1) that a 
particularly useful combination may be found, and (2) that a 
particular cGibinatioe ‘my be hazardous because of its effect 
on respiration or some other vital function. To minimize 


hazards, animal experiments should precede human experiments. 


Provosal: Allocation of $1000 for animal experiments, to be. 


drewn on as needed. - That experiments be conducted inforrally 


Be without a specific grant, and with appropriate cover. 


. Objective: : To study methods for the administration of drugs 


_ without the knowledge of the patient. Preparation of a manual. 
Be eS ci : . a } 


Method: A survey of methods which have been used by criminals 
for surreptitious administration of drugs. _Analysis of the 


psychodynamics of situations of this nature, 


Proposal: That $1000 be allocated for this purpose, funds to 


be requested as needed. 


mrart, 
date ——__6UN Jv, = 1 August e 


MEMORANDUM FOR: THE RECORD 


"SUBJECT? : Project MLA, Subproject 8.2 
ne: iS gis ca seek aes alae dateiatall Ws Joa -- 
pecure and efficient means of exploi mS 


C— QAR 8 rowed Yo the METER propes" aa 


He has been of value in the 

"MKULTRA project, serving as an advisor and : 

. conmultent, oontacting init individoals in the gage —— << 
~ area, and carrying, out his own research program : 


‘3. “Subproject 2 would include the following: 


~ (a) Wiscellaneous ‘research and tegen services 


. (db) heciisé. asa ganitact and iactact for ae 


“4n the MKULTRA fie. those located in 
ee 
(o) Me Monitoring of selected projects in the 
field vies, ecated ta Seat eae 
al — 
(a) Services ag a general consultant and advise 
ae in the MEULTRA field, 
a mo He would act.as medical advisor and consultant 
5 Wand his QUEM ectablish~ - 
, é : 
c —— 4 will be reimbursed for his services 


and expenses upon receipt of an dinvoice at irregular 
intervals, When travel expenses sre incurred through 
use of a common carrier, they will be documented and 
reimbursed in the usual manner; that is, ponecereey vith 
standard Government allowances. 


% 


* ade? moniw ire, / ee 
enna 


. 16 at this time. 


114 


STL ST ee: 


. DRA quer 
2 Octoder 1953 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 
SUBJECT: Project MKULTRA, Subproject 16 


1.. Subproject 16 is a continuation of Subproject 3, which 
involved the establishment and maintenance of facilities for the™ 
realistic testing: of certain research and development items of 
interest to CD/TSS and APD/TSS. The facilities. were set up under 
Subproject 3, and Subproject 16 is intended to prods for the 
continued maintenance of the facilities. - 


2.. Subproject 3 was originally intended to provide funds for the 
maintenance of the facilities for one year; but it turns out that the 
. costs of alterations, equipment, and initial supplies were under- . 
estimated in Subproject 3; hence the peesensy. to establish Subproject , ;. 


6 . 


es Subproject 16 will be Sduaucted vy a : : 
Certain support sear will be provided by cD/tss . 
and APD/TSS. , aes 


he The estimated cost for a period of one year ‘fe #1,TH0. co. — 


WeY GOTTLIEB 
, ener 
Chemical Division, TSS 


PROGRAM APPROVED - 7 = APPROVED FOR OBLIGATION ~ 
AND RECOMMENDED: . OF FUNDS: aaa 


pate: / 3 ch 1003, : = 


Original Only, _ oo re 


22 


the’ 
enclosed. and return. then to nes 


. lered checks. printed with aqgQeeBRss aan 
Tessie ae “have also “ordered” stationery bearing rapa maze. 


116 


MEMORANDUM FOR TSE RECORD 


SUBJECT: Project MKULTRA, Subproject 23 
: oo : o 


1. The scope of this project is intended/to encompass oll 
those activities now engased in by the 1) 
s in its cwn facilities under the direction = cD/Ts3s. ie 
At the present time the varicus projects at this faeility ( 
7 ani QQMAMMP are being concluded and it is deexed desirable 
from the stanipoint of security end efficiency to replace these pro- 
jects with a single project more general in its haul ‘ 


2. The attacked provosal from Dr. icates the 
extent of the investigations that his facilities will allow him to 
carry out on the materials developed in the three proj tects’ referred 
to in paragraph 1, as well as certain other materials of interest to 
ca/tss. Dr. also serves as a general consultant to thi 
division end/provides cover and cut-out facilities to the Agency. 


3. “The total cost of this project for a period of one yeer will 
net exceed $42,700.00. On) 

4. Dr. Vane} neat granted a fop Secret Clearance by 
the Agency end is fully capable of protectins the security of tne 
‘Govermment's interest in such matters as this. 


APPROVED FCR OSLIZATICN 
OF FUDS: 


Seastimante Deactosnh i 


aouaeamenss Frege 


117 


3 The present invéstigation 1s concerned with chemical 
sre effective in modifying the behavior and fmction of the central uervous oystam. 


1 = It is proposed to study a variety of Imowm drugs in this pharmacological class 
that are in present day use and to synthesize new chemical agents or to modify 
existing ones as eceasien may demand. 


2 = The various chemical agents investigated or synthesized will be tested on 
animals to determine their acute and chronic toxicity. Their pharmacological 


study will be carried out on the affected organs vhen the animils are sacrificed. 
3 ~ Preliminary clinical investigation will be carried out on the more promising 
chemical agents, and appropriate laboratory procedures will be performed, such 
as blood counts, urinalysis, etc. to determine the effectiveness and the side 
reactions of the drugs under investigation. . 
A = Adequate reports will be submitted of the findings at quarterly intervals. 


5 = Proposed budget: 


Personnel 
Synthetic o zanic chemist $7,500.00 
Research medical associate 6, 500.00 
Pharmacological assistant 5,500.00 
Chemical assistant 4,000.00 
Histology tecinician 2,400.00 
Clinical teckmician 3,600.00 
Chemical consultant 1,200.00 
Total salaries for personel 4 $30, 700.00 
Other 3 ; 
Animals, animal maintenance & facilities 4,000.00 
Chemical & laboratory supplies , expendable 4,000.00 
Miscellancous permanent pment 2,000.00-~ 
Travel, medical meetings, etc. 2,000.00 
“Total other expenditures 12,000.00 


TOTAL ‘ $ 42,700.00 


118 


free 
DRAFT 2h, 
- 8 October 1954 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 
SUBJECT: + Inerease in the Scope of Subproject 23, Project MKULTRA 


(ev) 

1. Due to e/considerable increase in the scope of the work under- 
taken by QUOQMNAP st the direction of TsS/cD under Subproject 23, 
Project MKULTRA, the $42,700.00 sum originally obligated for this work 
is insufficient to cover the year's costs. It is therefore proposed to 
add $15,000.00 to that already obligated under this Subproject. 


2, The total cost of this Subproject for the period 28 January 1954 
to 28 January 1955 will thus amount to $57,700.00. : 


3. The increase in scope responsible for this proposal consists of 
the development and partial financing of two new sources of biologically 
active compounds of interest in the program tss/cD is carrying out. 


Chemical Division, TSS 
APPROVED: 


Chief, eeaTEE Division, TSS 


pate: Cit (+ /4re 


Original Only. 


SUBJECT: i : = hitnectaatacn: for Payment of Certain Bepenses Under 
oe ~ Project MKULTRA, Subproject 23 aa ; 


1. In order to carry on the work of the above Subproject,-it_ 
was necessary to test the effects of certain chemical substances 
when administered to human ceings. Certain of. the anticipated 
effects involved mental functions which precluded the use of mentels 
defectives for this particular aisy: 


2. In view ot these ed fcuna tances the project engineer, with 
versal approval from his chief, authorized the contractor to pay the 
hospitals expenses of certain persons suffering from incurable cancer 
for the privilege of studying the effects of these chemicals during 
their terminal illnesses. The total funds expended in cial fashion 
amounted to $658.05 and full value was received.. i). 

3. It ‘is requested that, the Chief, Tss tnatdate his Shawleds 
and approval of this particular expenditure for audit vurposes. 


Distribution: 
Orig. - shes 


120 


21 December 1954 


MEMORANDUM FOR: Director of Central Intélligence 


SUBJECT : Project MMULTRA, Subproject 35 


1. While the Director's statutory authority to expend funds 
for confidentiel purposes is not limited by law, we believe that 
a gift of Goverrment funds es such would exceed the intent of the 
Congress in granting that power. However, where a gift is made 
for the express ‘vurpose of producing something of velue to this 
Agency which cannot ctherwise be obtained and there is a reason- 
able exnectation that the velue may be received, the gift may in 
effect be an expenditure for proper official purposes. _ 


2, In Subproject 35, it is stated that. the donation in 
question would achieve certain ends desired by TSS. There seems 
to be no question that those ends would be edvantageous, so the 
main questions appear to be whether they could not be attained 
by more direct, normal methods, and, if not, whether the return. 
is necessary and reasonable in relation to the donation. 


3. We ere in no position to review the requirements of TSS 
or to eppraise the advantages that would result from this project. 
We do not coment, therefore, on the value received if ‘the 
project results in the benefits foreseen. We feel we should 
corment on factors affecting the probability of achieving those 
ends. In = legal sense, there is little or no control. Once 
the funds are donated, the individual, his foundation, or the 
hospital could conceivably refuse to work for ‘us or allow us the 
use of the facilities. = 

4, Practically, the control seens to be established es well 
as circumstances permit. Certainly, as long as the individual is 
alive and in his present vosition, we have every reason to expect 
his complete cooperation in the future as in the past, unless 
through some act or feult of our own he is alienated. Even in the 
event of his death or incapacity, there appears to be a reasonable 


Downgraded to: Pavermenns. : 
meaner) eesti, . : - 


Ve Led 
by authority of: 187475} 


Cate: Juno 1977 ica : Bhat as 
-y a 
2 AN? DET 7 Copy # 1 of 1 copy 


S2 GOST; cy yi 


probacilisies earscar 


ehence ef continutrgz the project. If these 
the expenditure, there 


susricfens t9 chtain an adeguate returm fer 
cen be no legal objection to this asrect of the project. 


5. + should be noted thet there are two éircumstances which 
require consideration in a final determination. As stated in 
Section V, our contribution, by appearing to be from a privete 
source, would increase the matching Government contribution by a 
sinilar amount which would not be the case if it were known that 
this was in fact a Govermient contributicn also. Secondly, it is 
the stated volicy of the hospital to charge the Government end 
commercial organizations 60 ser cent overheed on research contracts ) 
whereas nonprofit foundaticns pay only direct costs but no overhead. 
Because of the ostensible source, our projects will not be charged ; 
overhead. This could te construed as morally wrongful to the 3 
hospital, as normally we would pey the &0 ver cent overheed 
charge for projects performed directly for us, but I believe 
this can be offset, at least to the azount of our donation, end 
perhaps by the further anount by which the other added contri- 
butions are increased by our denation. In any case, if the 
project is ea proper one and must be porformed in aie nianner, 
security dictates these circumstances end they, therefore, do 
not present a legal obstacle as such. 


6. We raised the avesticn whether funds for the hospital 
construction could not be cbtained from otker normzl charitable 
sources. It appeared that there was a “strong possibility thet iad 
the individual concerned could raise adequate Punds fren private 
resources, but it was the position of TSS that if this were the 
cease we would not obtain the-commitment from the individual and 
the degree of control which this project is designed to echieve. 


: ca 


LAWRENCE R. HOUSTON 
General Counsel 


~ 


by authority cf 
Cate: Juno 1st7. 


E2 IMPDET; CL BY isTait 


Copy # 1 of 1 copy 


122 


a, nya” i? ha TTMDA 
SUBJECT :. Amendment to Subproject 25 of Project MOUUTAA 


ela 
Director requesting an inerease cf $250,000 for the TzS 


F2D budget for this Freject. This request does not affect 


= in any way the comments in my memersndim of 21 December 1954, 


awe 


2 Domngraded to: -jjgyalnakidh 
; by authority of: 187475 ow 


cate: June 1977 


EO LAPDET; CL BY 187475 


] Copy # 1 of 1 copy 


123 


; ee —, A 
5 May 1955 


A portion of the Rossarch and Developcent Pregren of 
TS3/Chenical Divicicn is dsvoted t6 the discovery cf the . 
following materiels ond mathods: © 


1, Sudstences which will promote illezical thinking 
end inpulziveness to the point where the recipient would be 
discredited in public, 


2. Substances which increase the sitictadey of menta= 
tion and psrcepticn, 


3. Materials which will prevent or counteract tha 
intexicat tins effect. of alconol, 


4 Materials which will pronote the intoxleating 
feot of alcohol. 


: . 5, Materials which will producs the signs end Sistene 
of recognized discases in a reversible way co that aed my 
be used for malingering, otc. . 


6, Materials which will render the Induction of & hyp pnosis 
easier or otherwise enhance ite uczefulness, ae 


7, Substances which will enhance the ability of indi- , 
viduals to withstand privaiioa, torture and coercion curing 
interrezation ond so-called “brain-washing", 


8, Materials and physical matiods which will produce» 
amnesia for ovents preceding and caring their use, 


9. Physical methods ef precucing shock and scneushoe 7 
over extended paricds of tins and c eayante of surreptitious 


" US8, 


10, Substances which produce physical “disablement such 
as eee” of the legs, acute anemia, etc, 


— 


124 


Z _ = 


oe « 


U1, Substences hich will produce “pure!” eupheria with no 
gabsequent let-dewn, 


12, Substances which alter porsonality structure in such 
& way that the tendoney of the recipient to become dependent 
upon another perscn is enbanced, . 


13. A material ¥bich will cause mental confusion of such 
& type that the individual uder its influenes will 2ind it 
difficult to maintain a febrication under questioning, : 7 ; 


14. Substances which will lever tho enbiticn and 
general worl efficiency of ren whan administered in 
undetectable arcunts, : - 

15. Substances which promote weelmess or distortion 
of ths oyssicht or hearing. Peculties, proferably withcut 
ferzansnt effects, = 


16, A knockcut pill which can curreptitiously be 


administered in drinks, focd, clgarettes, as on cercaol, 


etc,, which will be sare to use, provide a rarimm of 
amesia, ood be suitable for ues by agent tyres on en 
ad hoo basis, : . 


17, A material which can be curreptiticusly adminis=- 
tored by the atove routes end which in very szall amounts 
will make it impossible for a man to perform any physical 
activity vrataver, : ; 


. » s e e of 
The development of materials of this type follows the “YO hes 
atandsrd practices of such ethicel czvg houses as emehenaty ,~— Ke 
It is a relatively routine procedure to Gevaiop a arug : 
vo the point cf hwran testing, Crdinerily, tha drug heusss ecepend 
upon the services cf private physicians for the final clinical 
testing, Ths physicians aro willing to assuze the rarconslbility 
‘of guch testa in.crder to edvence the seionres of medicine, It 
is difficult and sometines irpossible for TSS/CD to offer such 
en incucezont with rospect to its preducts, In Fractica, it hes 
bsen possible to usa outsides cleared contractors for the preliminary 
phases of this werk, Howavor, that part which involves humn 
testing at effzotive dose levels presents eecurity problems which. 
cannot bs handlsd by the ordinary contractor, 


weet 


. : e 
The proposed facility @apaseeepemoffera e unique oppor=- 

tunity for the secure handling ci gucn olinical testing in sddi- 
tion to the many edrcntages cutlined in the project proposal, 

Tho security preblens menticned above era eliminated by ths fact 

that the recronsibility for the testing wll rest cespletely 

unon the paysicien and the hospital, 
: : : g Myill cllcew iso/W porssezs 
soporviss the work vary closely to:'mexe eure.that cali tosts aro 
conducted according to the reccgnized practices ond exbody ade- 
‘quete safeguards. 


96-408 O- 77-9 


126 


abd She 
10 May 1955 


SUBPROJECT 35 OF PROJECT MKULTRA 


le _ Subproject 35 as approved by the DCI on 15 January 1955 contemplated a 

. financial contribution of $125, 000 to the @i@# 
participate in the construction of a new. research wing to cost $2, 000, 000 
exclusive of furnishings and equipment “Agency funds will be transmitted F 
through the : aa cut-out which ~ - B 
will result in one-sixth of the space in the new researes wing being made ae 
available for Agency-sponsored research involving covert biological and i 
chemical techniques of warfare, 


2, At that time (15 January 1955) «ogee aes pra 
encouragement indicated a willingness to contribute $500, 000 to the construc- 
tion fund, The building fund was to have been raised as follows: 


$1, 000, 000 - Contributed by emer: 


B 
250, 000 - Donation from Gaga of which =~ 3} 
$125, 000 to be aerate by CIA : 
L 250, 000 - Matching funds under Public Law 221 equal 
to the amount of the two above contributions 
500, 000 - <eennnmRa  — p 


$3,000,000 - TOTAL | » 
. : “ae B.s 


3, Since it now appears that the expected contribution by am will not be 
forthcoming, permission is requested to increase the Agency's contribution 
by $250, 000 which will result in a financial situation as-follows:” 


oes -B 
including .~ 3 


$1,000,000 - Contributed by & 
500,000 - Donation from¢ oe 
3 $375, 000 supplied by CIA 
1,500,000 - Matching funds under Public Law 221 equal 
to the amount of the two above contributions 

$3,000, 000 - TOTAL 


4, The Agency's contribution would thus total $375, 000. This investment, 

together with the equal sum resulting from matched funds, is fully justified 

in the opinion of TSS for reasons which will be explaincd by ak ~ < 
Chief, TSS, and Dr, Sidney Gottlieb, Chief, TSS/Ciemical Division, 

The scope of subproject 35 has not changed since the Director originally 

approved a request by TSS for permission to spend $125, 000 of available 


127 


49 fn this purpose through the controls and procedures established 
ULTRA, At the time subproject 35 was set up within the scope of 
the ISS RUD proyram, security considerations and cover arrangements 
were carefally, reviewed and the Office of General Counsel assisted in legal 
With the exception of funding arranzements, no changes in 


We ey 


Ae, . 
5, Funds to cover #h< previously approved sum of $125, 000 are available 


within the TSS MB@BPbudget for FY 55 and have been set aside. The TSS ' 
‘udet, however, lacks funds with which to cover the supplemental sum of 


rterinzgnations. 
arogram have since been made. 


$250,000, and it is requested that the TSS @BMPoudzet be increased by this 


amount, Supplementary funds available for subproject 35 can definitely t be 
obligated by the end of FY 55, ; 


sngrndad tot 


ority of: 167475 


128 


See oe See ee ee ee. Sa 
AMENDMENT TO SUBPROJECT 35, PROJECT MKULTRA , 
AMENDMENT TO SUBPROJECT 35, PROJECT MKULTRA 


For the Purpose of Establishing a Cover Organization for Highly Sensitive 
Projects in the Field of Biological, Chemical and Radiological Warfare ~ 


I. Background of Subproject 35. 


In January 1955 approval was given by the DCI to Subproject 35 of Project 
MKULTRA. The documents which lead to this approval (including comments 
of the OGC) are attached herewith as Tabs 2, A and 3. 


Project MKULTRA is the framework of procedures and controls under which 
research projects in certain highly sensitive fields are carried out by TSS. 
A description of the background of Project MKULTRA may be found on 

page 1 of Tab A, : 


Subproject 35 establishes cover ‘under which the Chemical Division of 
DD/P/TESS would conduct certain sensitive projects in the fields of biological 
and chemical warfare and consists of a proposed arrangement whereby the 


Agency covertly contributes funds to assist the yt ‘ aD - Rg 
SERRE in the construction of a new research wing Contribution of these ” 
funds is ‘to be made through the (UQaEAMEIERaAG! B Sree ER -8 


a. ‘as cut-out so that the ¢ we cet cpcrgooemm®. would remain — rR 
unwitting of Agency participation in the building program, Projects would 
later be carried out by the Chemical Division using the facilities of the 
new research wing, and Agency employees would be able to participate 
in the work without the University or the Hospital authorities being aware 

. of Agency interest, Subproject 35 contemplated the contribution of Agency 
funds to assist in the construction of facilities, Future research work 
would be carried out through the. as cut-out and would be ~ 3 
separately funded under existing procedures and controls, iS 


wy Seem, and the background of ~ B 
gfsum are described on page 2 of Tab A, On the 
e found a further description of the Q2Qm@eSes — B 


Vee 


same page there will b 


sare 


Ul, Building Fund, 


The University will require $3,000, 000 for the six-story addition to the 
hospital exclusive of the cost of land, heating and power supply which are 
being provided by the University, Under Public Law 221, Subappropriation 


te 
‘ 
‘ 


129 


663, dated 26 August 1954, funds are available to match funds raised for 
this purpose by the University. : 


‘When Subproject 35 was first prepared, it was hoped and expected that the - 
funds required would be provided as follows: The University has allocated 
$1, 000, 000 to this project and will assume upkeep and staffing obligations, 

‘ Wik agreed that if the Agency would provide QUSRSRRAErie — B 
with a grant of $125,000, the Fund would match this amount and 
make a total donation of eee 000 to the University Building Fun 


mB would contribute $500, 000 
ogical research would be 


was of interest to that Agency. In summary, the financial situation was 
to have been as follows: 


$125,000 was supplied by CIA) 
1,250, 000 - Matched Funds under Public Law 221 


500, 000 - ea — 2 


$3, 000, 000 - TOTAL R 
It was recognized that the Federal contribution 1,250,000 under Public 


Law 221 would be seemingly inflated by reasoz of the inclusion of the CIA 
contribution in that of ai% pases It was felt that the value to 

the Agency was such that this inflation of the Federal contribution was more 
than justified by the importance of the over-all project and that furthermore, 
the inclusion of the CIA contribution in that of Gig 

best means of maintaining security, 


Il, Eee — 3 C 


arc a 
The original informal commitment bathe of BENG was first obtained 


through verbal discussions with armors cant ch were fcllowed 
up by an exchange of corresponden¢ebetween the.DCI and GRMKESEM — c 7 


Unfortunately at that time 
versy concerning the 4 
GREP subordinates resulted ina 
would not contribute to the Building 
an annual research program amounti 


was fully occupied with the contro- 

» and continued contact with BB - C 
decision that could not or 

und, but would be wNling to support — 

g to $50, 000 to $75, 0 It is not 


B 
Hoo. 


Copy # t of 1 copy 


130 
ee ee - 


known whether this change in policy was suggested tp Bees or -C 
whether it originated with him, Be that as it may, when the change in 


policy became apparent, it was evident that additional funds would be re- 
quired to complete the hospital construction, 


IV, Sugzested Funding, e "os pt 


It is now suggested that the $3, 000, 000 required for the hospital wing be 
provided as follows: 


$1,000, 000 -4& pair OS eee 
+». 500,000 - Donation (or EK: x 
$375, 000 supplied by CIA) 
1,500,000 - Matched Funds from Public Law 221 
$3,000,000 - TOTAL 
2B 


The donation from QgSRREESAOSERAREEStW ould thus consist of the original 
$125, 000 to be supplied by CIA plus the sum of $125, 000 to be provided by 
the Fund and a supplemental CIA contribution of $250,000. Originally 
Subproject 35 requested permission to make a contribution of $125, 000 to 
the building fund and approval was given, This approval is enclosed 
herewith as Tab 2, The purpose of this amendment to Subproject 35 is to 
request permission to contribute an additional $250, 000 to the building 
construction fund through 22g ReRSMERaR «It should be noted that ~ 3 

the total Government contribution to the hospital fund still remains 

unchanged at $1,875,000. The increase in the size of the contribution 

by the Fund is not out of keeping with other operations of eee and will — 2 
not arouse undue comment because of its magnitude, The originally approved 
contribution has not ‘as yet been transmitted toga} and neither the — @ 
original contribution nor the supplement would be paid to ES until ~8 
funds adequate to complete the project are made available, This condition 

was specified by the DCI in approving the original contribution, 


(including — 5 


V. Source of CIA Funds, 


Funds to cover the initially approved sum of $125, 000 are available and have 
been segregated for this purpose within the TSS FY 1955 Budget for Research 
and Development, Insufficient funds remain in the TSS budget to cover the 
supplementary sum of $250,000, and it is therefore requested that the TSS 
budyet be increased by this amount and that the increase be made available 

to Subproject 35 of Project MKULTRA. 


Copy # 1 of 1 copy 


-3- 


131 


VIL Comments by the Office of General Counsel, ¢ 


Tab 3.is a memorandum from the General Counsel to the DCI dated 21 
December 1954, Commenting on Subproject 35, and stating in part that 
there are -no fundamental legal objections if the probable benefits are ‘con- 
sidered a fair return for this expenditure, The amendment to the Subproject 
_ contemplates only an increase in funds and in no way changes any other 
aspect of the project. The project has ‘been referred back to the OGC even 
though no change in its structure is contemplated, and Tab 4 contains his ; 
comments, 


VIL. Justification, 

Se z 

The advantages and benefits accruing to the Agency outlined in 2 Tab A are 
felt by TSS to provide adequate and complete justification for the expenditure 
of the additional sum herein requested which brings the total CIA contribu- 
tion to $375,000, The most important of these advantages and benefits ; 
may be summarized as follows: (Fuller explanations may be found in Tab A). 


a. One-sixth of the total space in the new hospital wing will be 
_available to‘the.Chemical Division of TSS, thereby providing labora-~ 
tory-and office space, technical assistants; equipment and experi- 
mental animals, . 


b. Agency sponsorship of sensitive research projects will be 
completely deniable, 


-e, Full professional cover will be provided for up to three bio-_ 
chemical employees of the Chemical Division. 


d, Human patients and volunteers for experimental use will be 
available under‘ controlled clinical conditions within the full 
_ Supervision of Sum ~& 


Subproject 35.was originally conceived in October and November of 1954, 
and the énsuing six months have indicated that in¢reasing emphasis and 
importance are being placed on the Chemical Division's workin this field. 
The facilities of the hospital and the ability to conduct controlled experi- 
ments under safe clinical conditions using materials with which any Agency 
.connection must be completely deniable will augment and complement other 


programs pecenely taken over by TSS, such as SP —#H 
2 ee 2 


of: L8T4aTS oan 


Copy 4 1 of 1 copy 


-4- 


132 


It was originally thought that at least 18 months would elapse after the 
building funds had been raised before the facilities would be finished and 
could be pecspisd by TSS This lengthy delay has now been overcome, 


has raised the $500, 000 which his Fund will ostensibly contribute,- 
he will then be allowed to use existing space in the present hospital in 

order that he may build up the organization which will later occupy the new 
_wing, This means that TSS will be able to begin to take advantage of this 
cover situation within a matter of months instead of waiting for a year and. 

a half, . , ' 


VIII, Security. 
Security matters and details are being co-ordinated with the TSS Liaison 


and Security Officer. Security of transmittal of the funds and cover arrange- 
ments are described in Tab A and remain unchanged, 


IX, Agreement with Ge 


~~ : a © 
The agreement with @ is described in Tab A, and the extent 


of his co-operation and the control over his actions remain unchanged, 


X. Resultant Financial Saving. ‘ 


The total contribution of $375, 000 by CIA will, result in an additional 
$375, 000 in matching funds provided under Public Law 221. Itis felt that 
the expenditure of these total funds is justified by the importance of the 
programs which will be pursued at the new facility, Even though the CIA 
contribution is increased under this amended project, the total of Federal 
funds remains unchanged. The use of this facility will allow work to 
proceed under conditions of cover and security which would be impossible 
to obtain clsewhere without an expenditure of equivalent or greater funds. 
In addition, by funding individual projects for this facility through the 
SB no charge will be incurred for overhead expense. If 
resentch projects mm are openly sponsored by the — b 
U, S. Government, it is customary to pay an overhead rate equivalent 5 
to 80% of salaries, However, if a non-profit fund, such as - 3b 
Sponsors research, the. funds granted for the work are customarily 
used only to pay for salaries, equipment and supplies, but not overhead 
* The Agency thus buys considerably more research. through & 
han would be the case if no cut-out were used, 


wees eorery am outs by : . 
Ra LUN FCA: So aes 
: Weresith the file on pais lodeui dm Sube 


project 25, ve our cozments on the leral 
BSTECTS. while there is no lesjal control ond 

estas are certain incidental consideraticns, 
ere is no fundamental legal cojection if che 
tes benefits ar s : 
a i 


for tnis 


: : ., General Counsel 


7 22 TRNanewnav y0ck 34 
.  (DATE)- << 


L_FORM NO. 10.101 JAN 1952 : (47) 
. - Re Ses at-aollid a ae ate a eat ae ee Kee oe eee . ° = Cate 


134 


: eye - // 


Taba 


SUBPROJECT 35-- PROJECT MKULTRA ‘ 
For the purpose of establishing a cover organization for highly © 
sensitive projects in the field of covert Biological, Chemical 


; and Radiological Warfare 


I, Background of Project MKULTRA. 


In 1953 the DCI approved Project MKULTRA which established procedures po 
and controls under which research projects in certain highly sensitive 

fields could be carried out by TSS without the neeeeity of eeries the 

usual contracts, The approved procedures apply o om 
over-all Research and Development budget, and no paditional fund 3 
are required, Controls established in the Project Review Committee 
approval of the Research and Development program (other than the 
signing of a contract) remain unchanged, and special provisions for 

. audit are included, All files are retained by TSS, 


Thesé procedures and controls were approved since it is highly un- 
desirable from a policy and security point of view that contracts be 
signed indicating Agency or Government interest in this field of en- 
deavor, Ina great many instances the work must be conducted by in-. 
dividuals who are not and should not be aware of Agency interest, In 
other cases the individuals involved are unwilling to have their names 
on a contract which remains out of their control in our files, Experience 
has shown that qualified, competent individuals in the field of physio- 
logical, psychiatric and other biological sciences are very reluctant 
. to enter into signed agreements.of any sort which would connect them 
‘with this activity since such connection might seriously jeopardize 
their professional reputations. E 5 
When Project: MKULTRA was approved, it was not contemplated that 
it would-be used for the establishment of cover. Over forty individual 
research and development projects have been established under this 
framework and have been carried out extremely successfully, both 
from technical and administrative points of view. The experience 
gained in handling these projects has emphasized that establishment 
of better cover both for the projects and for associated Agency scientists 
is of utmost importance, Subproject 35 would establish such cover, - 
e 


Dozuzradea to: sepememmmen  ~: 
by cuthori : 


135 


Background of the & 


Ses : . was incorporated in - 8 

Eat es ype Sar ap. It has a Board of Directors of six 

members, one of whom is@QQARMSSERRMB who acts as Executive - C 
Director of the Fund. aggReeppin it has solicited funds from various - @ 
individuals to finance a program of basic research in the chemotherapy 

of cancer, asthma, hypertension, psychosomatic. disorders and other 7 
chronic diseases. Since 195) sa bas-co—operated. with. the, ie tn evens 
Chemical Division of TSS and acted smoothly and efficiently, both as 

a cut-out for dealing with contractors in the fields of covert chemical 

and biological warfare, and as a prime contractor for certain areas of om 
biological research. Projects presently being handled for the Agency 
by the Fund are administered under the contro!s and procedures 
previously approved for MKULTRA. 


“Background of & 


Il. 
-¢ 
Wp is internationally known as a gegen 


in the field Taam ceraech and is @ - 
In the past Ke has been associated in 


a@ research capacity with both the 


~8 
C 


WERRROMA During the war CARRE served as 2 GREEOND — 
in the Bureau of Medicine and Surgery in the Navy. Since then he-has 
maintained a consulting relationship to the Navy medical research pro- 
gram, SQRQegMeM is TOP SECRET cleared and witting of Agency — C 
sponsorship of.the programs carried out by the Fund as are two other 
members of the Fund's Board of Directors, 


4 ~ GAC 
% ee actively engaged in a campaign to raise funds ; 
or the purpose of est he a new clinical research wing on the existing 

4 ; meee ear ‘The research wing will cmsist of a — R 
Perera six stories phigh; 320 feet long and 50 feet wide. Two-thirds 

of the space will be research laboratories and offices while 100 

research beds will occupy the remainder, 5 partici- - © 
pation in the fund-raising campaign outlined below will result in his 

having control of one-sixth of the total space in addition to the base- 


Copy # /_ of 2 copies 


ment and general out-patient facilities, ‘In this effort, 
has secured the enthusiastic support of the medical faculty a 
officers of the University who have carried the preliminary arrangements 
forward to the maximum extent of their resources, 


Vv. Financial Situation. 


The University will, require about $3, 000, 000 for the 2B story addition, 
This sum is exclusive of the cost of land and the heating and power supply; 

. which are already available at the site At the present time under Public 

: Law 221, funds are available to match funds raised by the University, 
The University has allocated $1,000, ee to this project and will assume 
upkeep and staffing obligations, @&% WP has-agreed that if CIA -— C 
will provide gay ma ean of $125, 000, ‘SM wi ~2B 
match this amount and maxe a2 total donation of $250, 000 to the University - 
Building Fund. This Agency's contribution will be made under the con- \. 
dition that it will be refunded if construction does not take. place. 


~ 2B 
ce56. 000 to the erinters project on the ‘basis that =: SOR SGEE TS ~ & 
will be conducted in the new wing. @ggSRAuDetwths ehoneie aware of our +B 


interest in the building, is unwitting of our specific fields of research «. 
and individual projects, .In summary, the financial situation would be as 
follows: 


(12s, 000 or by CIA) . 
1, 250, 000 - Matched funds from Public Law 221 

500, 000 - ¢ hy F 
$3,000,000 - TOTAL . 


Although it is recognized that the Federal contribution of $1,250, 000 under 
P, L. 221 is seeming! inflated by reason of the inclusion of the CIA contri- 
bution in-that.of Gap 5 actually the value to the Cla is -&h . 
$250, 000 and not just $125,0Q0, the amount of CIA's contribution; further- 
more the inclusion of the CIA contribution in that of eipepancese 
WBE is the best method of maintaining security... 


Domcraded to: -SagMiRaNebiyoass ia 7 ‘ 
ter authority of: 287473" : : 
“.33 June 1977 


Ll LE2eT; cL BY 237275 


Copy # _/ of 2 copies 


~ ots 


ee saeenaeaa — 
Sa Nee, Be aise 
VI, Difficulties Faced by TSss, Py 


It has been generally recognized for some time that the external re- 
search activities of the Chemica! Division of TSS in the field of covert 
biological, chernical and radiological warfare are sorely in need of 
proper cover. Although Project MKULTRA provides excellent admini- 
strative and financial cover for projects, it does not afford cover for 
scientific or technical personnel. MKULTRA has been used for 
dealing through “fgppScMaecemkae as a cut-out and for working 
directly with individuals or-private companies, The use of 

in the future will be increasingly limmited-due to ~~~ 


(a)’ The increasing number of people who, albeit 
properly cleared, are aware of the Agency 
connection with zee — 


(b) The feeling by SGMMAMORSERIIAM that the Agency ~ -C 
employees contacting him (Drs. Gottlieb, 
; etc.) have no cover of any sort and ~ © 
consequently expose him to unnecessary and 
highly undesirable personal risk; and 


{c) The widespread intra-Agency awareness of 
the nature of the relaticnship between the 
Fund and the Agency. ’ 


Another serious problem faced by TSS/CD as a result of lack of suit- 
able cover is the difficulty in planning careers for technical and 
scientific personnel in the biological field, A long-range career 
concept of activities in this field inevitably includes proper cover for 
the individual concerned. The availability of research facilities 

at Soper : ers ili offer an excellent opportunity 
to solve many of the above problems, and : 
and able to make any reasonable arrangements to suit our needs. Up 
to three Chemical Division employees can be integrated into Me -¢ 
MRAM program for work in the new hospital wing on the 
Agency's research projects, Although career planning was not a 
consideration when planning the procedures and controls established 
by Project MKULTRA, nevertheless this particular subproject, in 
addition to its primary objective, will be of very great secondary help 


es . ‘ 


authority of: 187475 ™ Copy # J of 2 copies 


2 June i677 res 


* ENPDET; Ch BY 187475 243, 


R 


~R 


‘-B 


is willing —C 


138 


eae / SE — > 


in simplifying and eliminating many of the very awkward and dangerous 
~ conditions facing certain Chemical Division employees. 


VU. = Advantages and Benefits Accruing to TSS. 


The contemplated arrangements will-vesult in many advantages and 
benefits, including the following: 


-(a) One-sixth of the total space in the new research 
uwing is to be available to and ~ 
in turn, will be available to the Chemical 
Division of TSS. This will provide laboratory 
and office space, technical assistants, equip- 

‘ ment and experimental animals for use of Chemical 
Division personnel in connection with specific - 
future projects, 


c,/t 


+(b) The cost of Chemical Division projects which are 
to be carried out under this cover will be covered. 
by funds made available through Project MKULTRA, 
and projects will be subject to the procedures ~ 
and controls established for. MKULTRA. The 
funds will be passed through QRS 2 
- @MBRas has been done in the past. SQRRMEy 
in turn will either pay expenses directly or 
.transfer the ‘money.to the University for this 
purpose, Each project will be individually 
funded based on its particular budget, and there 
- will be no other continuing or recurring charges 
for items such as space, facilities, etc. 


(c) The Agency's sponsorship of sensitive research 
projects would be completely deniable since no 
connection would exist between the University 

_ and the Agency, 

{d) Excellent professional cover would be provided 
for up to three bio-chemical employees of the 
Chemical Division of TSS, This would allow open ~ 
attendance at scientific meetings,. the advancement 
of personal.standing in the scientific world, and . 
as such, would constitute a major efficiency and 


Copy #,/_ of 2 copies 
~-5- . 


_ 


139 


morale booster. 


(e) Human patients and volunteers for experimental 
use will be available under excellent clinical 
conditions with the full supervision of @aagemamme — R 


(i) There would be available the equivalent of a 
hospital safehouse, : 


(g) It is expected that the output of useful results 
of the Chemical Division in the bio-chemical 
field will be greatly improved through the more 
efficient use of technical personnel who would 
be able to spend more of their time on actual 
laboratory work, 


(h) 


(i) ' Excellent facilities would be provided for 
recruiting new scientific personnel since 
members of the Chemical Division working under 
this cover will be in daily contact with members 
of the Graduate School of the University. 


(j) _ The regular University library and reprint 
service will be available as a source of, 
technical information, 


VIII, Funding. : ‘ 


It is proposed that $125, 000 be granted to ss 
approval is granted, TSS will arrange for payment to be made under 
the procedures and controls of MKULTRA. These funds would come 
out of the presently approved TSS Research and Development budget 
for FY 1955 and no new funds are involved, The funds would be 
transferred as a grant toaG : In turn ; 

MY will match these funds with an equal amount and donate a total - 
of $250, 000 to the University as outlined in paragraph V, The sum.of 
$125, 000 would be entirely in the nature of a grant and would in due 


adod to: Sietaaeer . 


thor Ps ines hy * 
oy of: 187475 OA ‘ Copy # / of 2 copies 


ae 


140 


course be merged with the entire $3,000, 000 raised for the construc- 
tion of the wing. The Agency would retain no residual interest in the 
building or title to any equipment or facilities purchased with this 


money, 


This single grant will constitute the Agency's entire participation in 
“the new hospital: wing, and there will be no recurring obligations in 
the form of annual’support of the hospital or additional grants. Trans-~- 
mission of Agency funds to ESTaauaee will be made = B 
through previously gpcabliehes cover.channels set up by the 

for similar transmittals in the past. The donation on Gp ~ ~ft 


Samns books will be shown as having been received from rT ASAI — g 


ROSEN MOE P PET 


fie 


In the future when TSS sponsors ssusitive research projects which are 
-to be carried out in. Geass each project — /% 
will be individually financed anvough di : as:it has 

been in the past in accordance with previously established ‘procedures 

and controls using allotted portions of the annual Research and Develop- 
ment budget. The University will be totally unwitting.of Agency 
sponsorship, and the projects to every outward appearance wil be 
sponsored by J 


* 


In the event of 2 eS SOARES will continue in 
being and any activities under this project will be continued through me ~ 8 
nd will be unaffected by his death, 


IX. Memorandum of Agreement. 


A memorandum of ‘cobesment will be signed with. Bi 2 at) C 
outlining to the greatest extent possible the arrangements under which : : 


the hospital space under his control will be made available to Chemical 
-Division personnel and the manner in which cover will be provided and 

other benefits obtained. No contract will be signed since TEREEERAST — 
would be unable to reflect any of the Agency's contractual terms in his 
arrangements with the University when 3 si Aa # Bmakes the ~ Ps 
donation in question, The memorardum of ‘agreement will be retained 7 
in TSS. 


x. Security, : : oi 5 ; ? q ‘ 


All security matters and details are being cofordinated with the TSS/ 
ritv Office... - 8 


Copy #_7 of 2 copies 


141 


XI, Resultant Financial Saving. z 


The $125, 000 to be contributed by CIA plus the $125, 000 in matching funds 
provided under P, L. 221 to the Building Fund will be more than offset 

in a few years by the savings which will result from use of this non-profit 
fund, If a research project at or other educa- ~ ff 
tional non-profit institution is sponsored by the U._S. Government, it 

is customary for the Government to pay for salaries, equipmen' 
supplies, :etc. and for-overhead as well, In the case of -4 
‘ the overhead amounts to 80% of salaries, However, if a non-/_ 
profit foundation such as ponsors research ata - 
non-profit institution, the funds gr anted for the work are customarily 

used to pay for salaries, equipment and supplies but not for overhead, 

The Government dollar thus buys considerably more research through 
Hthan would be the case if no cut-out were used. ~2B 


XII. Legal Matters. 


Mrof the Office — 4 
etails surrounding this 


This matter has been discussed with 
of General Counsel, and he is fully aware of a 
grant, 


Copy # / of 2. copies 


~8- a~- 


96-408 O- 77 - 10 


142 


9 Apriligss 
SEMOCRANDUI FOR: THE RECORD 


SUDJECT :’ Trip Report, Visit to eae: 
. : : 7 April.1953 ‘ 


1. The purpose of this trivu was to maxe arrangements for 
closing out the ae project. M26 been givea ample previous 
notice that sucii waa likely to be the intent of the visit, end he pre- 
pared himself accordingly. 


2. it was explained t that it would not be 

posible to carry over funds beyond tho end of the current fiscal 
year. Therefors all work would have to be completed and all pay- 
ments made prior to 30 Juns. This dsadline appeared accepiadle to: - 
bim, and it waa agreed that I would inake my final visit thereto | 
receive reports and attend to final details on 16 junc. Qyggedid not 
have a current financial report, but he estimated that funds currently 
+ @n hand would be about sufficient for remaining expenditures, He 

agreed to send the Socicty within the next 10 days a more exact state- 

ment of curzent balance and estimated remaining expenditures. I 

tried to impress oa him ctrongly that transfer of additional funds and/ 
" oF return of uncxpended funds must be completed well before the end 
- of the fiscal year. é . : 
° 3, Of the 30 cases called for in the original desiyzn 13 have 
been completed (but only 4 have teen transcribed from the tapes). In 
addition there are 8 cases in proyreas (of which two are alreasy in 
interview and 6 are worked up to the point of having the lists of quostions 
prepared). It was agreed that to. meet tae deadline we would have to 
limit the design to these 26 cases. : 


4. It lo apparent that @MMB is co involved in the administrative 
problems of the project that he ie not paying aoy attention to the results.’ 
‘Since to date oaly 4 cases have been transcribed there is no way of tclling 
what ia coming out of it. I assume there wera no dramatic reactions, be- 
cause the iaterviewers would have lect him kaow about them had they emerged. 
It ia possible, however, thet our own analysis of the data may dredge up 
something of value, althougs lam dubious on this point. 


5. g@MMB cave me hio usual long involved talk on the difficulties 
he had encountered which account ior the delays. Hs also talked at some 


143 


length about hie “experimente" with bypnoals, some aspects of which ' 
are milcly haireraising, YSinally he msde quite a pitch tor continuing : 
eorne uuch project as this noxt year, “with rcaliscic, specific deadlines." 
IL told him we would discusa possibliitices alter the present project waa 
corapleted and we had a chaace to closely cxamine the take. 


Distribution: 
wr 


" July 18, 1958 


Dear Mr. (aaa : 2 ‘ 
: The experiment designed to test the effectiveness of 
_eertain medication in causing individuals to release guarded in- 
formation has been completed in accordance with the original ex- 
perimental design, with the exception that 25 instead of 30 cases 
were used. This matter was discussed in more detail in my letter 
of July 15. Abstracts on all 25 cases, transcriptions of the in- 
terviews, Wechsler-Bellevue Intelligence Tests given at the hos- 
pital and previously given at this clinic, post-experimental . 
rankings and evaluation sheets, and a schedule covering the drug 
administration have all been submitted to you under separate % 
cover. " : 


Enclosed is a financial statement which reprivsents the 
final accounting of the funds allocated by you for use in this 
project. If, for your purpose, you require a more detailed sum~- 
mary of what specific professional services were performed or 
more detail with reference to travel expenses or any other item, 
kindly let me know, : eg 


You will note, in this connection, that Dr. was 
compensated in an amount exceeding that’ paid to Dr. This 


was occasioned by the fact that Dr. gM spent much tine § ng 
the files and records at the and 
@@Mihe Prison selecting cases that mig e suitable for our pur- 


pose. It was from the cases selected by him that the subjects 
used in the experiment were finally chosen. ‘ 5 


. I have .been instructed to write a check to the Society 
for.the balance in the account as ox today. I would like to 


x is 


delay this matter for a few days. Several checks have been writ- 
ten during recent days, and I would like to be sure they cleared 
the bank inu@QQPRMER = before closing out the account. You will 
receive a check in the amount of $1356.26 early next week. 


. If there is any additional information required, I will 
be happy to cooperate. 


L BY 187475 


lecated 


Hospital has one th eusand, one hundred end thirty-five Ql, 135). beds. 
At the present tine thero aro one bundred and forty-two (142) rene 
poychotics inectiies a3 orindnal-se eae poychopati:s, Thero ara four 


t 


fe 


f full-t ire psychiatrists and verying nuxvers of mocic a1 interns; 


. psychologists; four secial ieeces nurces and attendants. Tho super- 


tendort ef the ilcspital is hoa witting monber 
of tha rescerch team. ‘Tho institution coms under the circotion of 


—thertxecitive Scerecbary of the State cepartment of Meatel Health and 


SL IL 


‘the research Project wilt te carried cut ab the Se =: RB 


Sot WEQRRGREEA weich io — 


8 


ey 2 


} 


~Cc 


- any research project is pireaaay eppreved by the Co-ordinator ef Research 


of the State Department of Nertal Health. CLGEEERP? i. secura 


this anproval. nake spaca evedlorie and 1% is 


possi: le for the research ean to sleep e% the Hospital while camrying 


out their investigation, 3 


SUEE TS 
Tha subjects wi2l be selected fron the ono err end Lerty-two 

(1:2) eriminal-so:mal psychopaths on whom there is an adequete previous 

investization tucluding police reports, physical, pyyeltiatric on 


poycholersic exerdnationsy snd social hiztorics, Tho azo renge of the 


fay 


147 


subjects varies fren tuaity’ vo ceventy years and there ts a wies eet. 


. 


aticn of intellisonee levels and social teckyreunds. 


R, 2 psychologist wao hag had extensive 
exverionen 4a examining erizinals; has written extensiv 
os 3 


cn poychopatinice sexual ceviationss is an authority on pely- 


greph and interrozation methods. 


GAEYEF Cor coms thirty years; a peychdatrist who has 

sent his iif in the treatment ef the criminal insano and 
reintains tho caly institution SRE cor the care  — CC 
and 


treatment for the cririnel-semel psychorath. 


P a psychiatrist who has a large private — Cc 


practice, At the present tins he is exclusively devoting 
his tine to prychcanclycis. Ho has had extensive americnce 


exenining crimiunids., 4s a Navy psychiatrist bo hes hed 


extensive experience in | 


in the ficld ef castern cultures, Oriental 


psychiatry, traimashing, otc. ile nao also done drug inter- 
rogation with crindnals and has envased in narcoanalysis 


and hypneanslycis. 


148 


poythiatrist who is en the—C 


ad end rofntains a private practice in the ficld 
of ps yenkatry. AREER 1:25 had vido experience in — C 


back sema iwonty-five years, 


* gnaling witb crininols gods 


4neluding dous in torreyeisone 


yoician for the pest twenty-five —- C 


phys: 


ses hed extensiva experd=- — © 
ence gealing with cll sorts of criminals and has ongaged 
an raz interresation. Lesides his eity positioa, he also 
‘maintains a private practice in tae ‘field of general 
», medicine. 
: sex Ah e 


Phos oisgestod ona of the pepeikrtae 8 fr 
the treat~ 


his staff who is interesiud and has used drugs in 
nant of pationts and has elso used hypnosis with mental 


pationts. Tho research assistants have not been selected 


cht well include poycholotste cr milics nov 
The ceerstary will — 


as yot but raj 


attached to 


2 present sceretery uno will do all the neces= — © 

ecry stenecrsphic work in aduiticn te her present duties. Bis 

. nf] oO. 

3 “ 

oT & 

uw Pra 

-) itd 

- c 

Three teams ef tio senior profossionsl] ia each will bo solected. Q] x 

3 

ts N 
on? tean workin: with the sclected yreup ef “pétdeats will uca straight % 
w 
o> 
intorrogation, hypnosis and hypnosis sind Lcd and mosis and a mn 
: we 
wo 


at 
: dsemeiiamiietie 


wor 
“Noo 
y 2 
Ea 
id 
2 
7 
a 
es 
Br 
° 
2 
é 
s 
¥ 


tetrehyirecompbinel acetata cosivative. Anott 


forking on cnother 
at Forp of cxdiccts will use streicht interrozation, LSD with interrogaticn 
7 oo aa? 
and a tetri.ydrccennsbinel acetate derivative and interrogation. Later..- 
the thie tean with encther croup ef gitjocta will usa strefcht interro- 


gaticn and a combination uf 152 and a tetralydrocannavinol acetate 


derivetive. .- ee fF 
A mecting of all the rembers of the research project wild be briefed 
on tha anaes to ve used and all of the phamscological and radical knee 
, ledge gained so far in the uso of these drugs. ; ; : 
Ingelecting groups cf subjects for cxperinentatien, the following 
objestivas will bo seught: 
-1) Subjects will be selested who have denied allesaticns 
: - of verious kinds that can Yo checked or strongly assuznd 


on the: basis of previcusly established records, 


2) -As far es possible, the ectual research man administering 


erucs will not be aware of the cruz he is sédinistering 


ond placchos will be intersrersed with drug adrinistration. 


3) Precautions will he taken to neutralico ayo, intelli- 
uence, physical. condition, soclal backgreund end any 
other controllable factor in selecting groups. Ad= 


ininistrotion of drugs will be done both openly and 


surreptitiously. 


4) Scund recordings will be made of the interresetion 


ek tor 
nerity of 


nenaLy. 
june 1977 


E2 INPSET; 


CL BY 137475 
5) 


of; lsvavo MO ee 


Euo cam Will ts cxerciced in cousting methods of 
t 


interr sation ag far as this can be Gone. ‘Tho results 
of interrovation with drugs aid other techniques wil) 
Wo -checied against extating records end qualitative and 


quantitative reports will be evaluated. Accurate end 


+ uniform reports twill be kent- ent reports will be sub-. 


Mitted cn the basis of interin progress and cerplete 


projects. 


151 


Bt = a - bx  DRAPT aR ot 


-. 30 January 1S61 oe 


MEMORANDUM FOR THE RECORD- : 


SUBJECT: Project MKULTRA, Subproject 42 


a Subproject 42 is to be continued ‘for the same- purposes as 


‘when originally established: to support & covert eas 


and realistic field trials of certain research and development items 5 


' of interest to TSD, and to maintain the physical facilities eeaatned for 
these trials. — 

2. In the past year a number of covert isa realistic field 
-trials have been successfully carried out. The results of these 
experiments have provided factual data essential to establishing 
protocols for a number of contemplated operations. A continuation , 
of covert and realistic field trials dre necessitated by the production 
of new materials in TSD programs + particularly in areas requiring 
detailed knowledge of the effectiveness gnd efficiency of delivery 


systems. ‘Additional trials are also necessitated by the need for 


better controlled "field-type" experiments.. - — 


3. The estimated cost of the project is $5,000.00 for a period 
of six months. Charges should be made against Allotment 11.25-1390-3902. 

4, Accounting for funds el equipment under this subproject has 
been eopoptisnes on @ detailed basis with the auditor and will continue 


as in the past. . . Pan 


& 5. 


152 


: . 4 
is approved for TOP SECRET by the Agency and 


operates under cover for purposes of this subproject. 
: “t 


APPROVED FOR OBLIGATION OF FUNDS: -_ 


or. 


Date: 


Distribution: 
Original only. 


153 


MEKORANDUM FOR THE RECORD 
SUBJECT: — Project MKULTRA, Subproject 42 


“1. Subproject 42 is bei 
continued support of thes 
is a continuation of Subvr 
is intended that th 


tabla shed to provide fcr the 

Me tacilities, and as such, 

Under Subpreject 42, it 
facilities be moved from FBne t 

pa These facilities, 

: in the new oration, will continue to provide a means for the 
realistic testing of certain R and D items of interest to 
cp/Tss and APD/TSS. . ‘ a 


ject 1 


2. Subproject 42 will be conducted by Mr. 4 : 
a@ seaman, Certain supsort activities will be provided by 
eD/iss and AFD/TSS.  - ; ; . 


3. The estimated os for a period of one year : is ; 
$8,300. me starting 1 March 1955. 7 ; a 4 


“woe oD. ee ne 2 Pere 3, 


ae 


155/Chentcal Division 


APPROVED FOR OBLIGATICN - - APPROVED FOR ADDITIONAL - 
OF FUNDS: « ° - 2! OBLIGATION OF FUNDS: (G2,089. 34) 


Research Director - 


Date: Z ; dene MOST 


Original Only. 


ue as ; 
a 
ie 


4 _ MEMORANDIM FOR: THE RECORD 


‘ SUBJECT. aoe ScaeD Subproject 4 45. 


Eye ee oe ams scope ‘of this Project is intended to encom 
Ox ait those satsrities now’ engeged in by the gogmet 


ite, in its own facilities under the 

air ction or Tes, Chemical. Division. These activities will 

” take the form of three lines of biochemical investigation; 

“. namely, the curare-like effect of certain. thiols, the prepara- 
tion of hydrogenated quinolines and indole alkaloids, and the 

_ continued study of diphenolic compounds, In addition to the - 
above investigations, the present biological testing and as- 
saying techniques will be elaborated and broadened to include P 


sulting from the above programs. 


= 2. The. ‘attached ‘proposal ‘from BENS ndicates 
the extent of the investigations that his facilities will allow . 
him to carry out on the materials developed in the three lines 
of research referred to in paragreph 1 
materials of interest to TSS/CD, 2x 
as a general consifltant to this Division and p Rreradee: cover and 
cut-out facilities to the Agency. © ~ : 


- 3.-. The total cost of this project fab a pete of one year 
* will not exceed $100,000.00, At the present time, the sum of 
$40,000.00 is being committed, the balance of the total to be 


roe at a later date, Pe aes 
CY x ” ; 


- sc has been granted a TOP SECRET ‘cleaxance 
by the Agency, ‘and is fully capable of protecting the Perera a 
hd the Government's interest a this matter, : - 


: 2 oe 


‘APPROVED FOR OBLIGATION 
OF FUNDS: ag APEROVED: 


rss, Chemical Division 


| ig rigs 3 
ie Research Director 
Date: 2Y Wan Sy” 


Attachments: 3 : 
Proposal ce. 


“Original Only. /* 


11 as certain other _ 
aay also serves ey ~ 


30° Jeruesy 1936 ee ene 
vr =e a OR i cans tere ane 7 - 
” MENCRANDUM FR: ‘THE RECORD ; 
SUBJECT: | Propeee MTA, “Subproject 45. * = 
: G ares © “The scope ‘of this sretie i intended to meompass all those * 
3) activities now engaged in by the-@& : 


under the direction of TSS/CD, These activities rare the forn 
of three lines of biochemical investigation, namely, the Curare-like 
‘effect of certain thiols, the preparation of hydrogenated quinolines 
and indole alkaloids and a program of investigation of toxic cerebral 
. states, _This last investigation will include bio-assay end chemical- 
analysis of various body fluids of animals in which cerebral toxemias 
have been produced, It is the aim of this program to endeavor to 
understand the mechanism of such states as toxic delirium, uremic 
coma, and cerebral toxicity from poifsoning.° In order to continue the 
6)- ‘established "cover" activities of themmegpand to make available a ~ 
pool of subjects for testing purposes, the & re 
) Ree effects of poe aa cae ata from the above program will - 


uated. ra we 


3 (@) . 2, The attached proposal from Spee BMHindicates the 
extent of the investigations that his facilities will allow him to 
‘carry out on the materials developed in the three lines of research 
* peferred to in paragraph one, ag.well as certain other materials of 
go serves as a general consultant 


‘2. " interest to TSS/CD."& 
Cr to this Division and provides Ove: F and cut-out facilities to the 
pe earners . 

"3, The head cost of this project for a period of one year will 

not exceed $100,000, Charges should be made against Allotment 

§-2502-10-001. : . : . . 
iY Z ta oz sf 

Yhas been requested to subait a summary account- 

annual eudit report be made available for 


Sx the sponsor's inspection, ~ Also, it has been requested that any unex- 
pene funds shall be returned to the Agency, : 


* other than its activities as a cut-out 


Page Le mera . 
com meg 
@: 6s Te was mreulsy eecel 4 that documeatation and eecore tae Sor 
‘travel expenses which are normally reimbursable by the 


Cy es shall conform with the noone Practices ac if theres 


a. 


APPROVED FOR OBLIGATIOW 
QF FUNDS: 


Research Director ; ls 
Bate: “2¢ Live, ; ae 


Attachnent: ~ : ‘: 
Proposal am : 


Distribution: - 
Original Only 


ee, The ‘research to be undertaxen during the ‘twelve month, ak 

‘ pertod for whtch financial eupport ts requested wtll be ‘devoted . 
“ta Die continued analysts of the neural and anager ens mechanism 
of stress and the. chemteal agents. that tac uenee tt. “The screening 
procedures are based largely upon a further analysts of phases of 
stress cnd the influences of this phystologte behavior complex © 


upon both body and skin temperatures as detatled in the accompany -. 


tag report. 
The olientce! synthesis oe new compounds will be continued 


B ot ine Gee er the superviston 1 a> 

c GRBB. on at the » under the supervtston J 

C ee ae chemtcal agents will be screened Sor 
thetr capectty to provoke stress or to suppress the stress reactton 


f @pee 
-tn tte acuse or chronte phases. Antmal testing will inelude pharma- 


cologte screening and proper toxtetty studtes. or these compounds as 


_— ~~ — 


heretofore. — * 
. Chemtcal agents that have been. yound active and within a 


suttable toxtetty range wtll be subjected to eltnteal “screening on 


appropriate pattents, the inttial screening being ecarrted out on 
advanced cancer pattents. The amount of money Gevoted to chemtcal 


synthesis, however, has been further reduced, Chemical compounds 


avatlable from btologtc sources cs well as those synthestaed tn th 


. project will be screened, particularly those that are cctive in 


etther ratstng or lowering body temperature. cans 


-_- 


As heretoyfore any agents which prove to be of interest : 


8 be aedhaw aw tuntian hath an transvlant 


96-408 O- 77 - 11 


‘antnal tumors and on Cancer patients, Thts cancer phase or tna ae 
* project wtil be cénstdgred-a byeproduct of the major objecttve, ~ 


which will be dtrected to the problem of stress, 
“ os - 


Pps 


‘WARNING NOTICE 
SS 
SERSVE INTELLIGENCE oe 
SOURCESAND METHODS INVOLVED ae 


xa mo Suan 2% 


n) 


gqysourne £4 


04 papesausod 


13% 


LLGT UNL 


suviet 23° 


ata + 


159 


MEMORANDUM FOR: THE RECORD ie: 
SUBJECT ° - " % Continuation of MKULTRA, Subproject No. 


1. The scope of this aie includes all those activities 
‘now engaged in by ARRSaER 


1533 
under the direction of PSS/ED with the exception of those cutout 


TNS ey EE 


functions specifically mentioned in connection with other MKULTRA 


subprojects. In gederal: the veaeases effort under this subproject - 
will continue along the lines. laid down in previous years. These 
involve the synthesis and pharmacological and clinical evaluation 
of compounds of those chemical feratites known to have dppitdation 
in the psychéchemical and "K" fields. During the past year importaat 
progress. has been made in the area related to stressor compounds 


and the relationship of these materials to the physiological pathways 


through which both stress and the reaction to it are magciates in 


human a 


[as is indicated in the attached Scopewat, the work 


of the past ye has progressed to the point where more definitive 


a on the stress reaction can be geanled eae Primarily 


this was brought about by the characterization of several new 


materials which produce-stress reaction in humans and the applica- 


tion of same new clinical methods of measuring the extent of the 


disturbance produced, During the next year proportionally more 


effort will be expended on the problem of the development of new 


cS 


Sed bute. 


Ic" “enock-out’ types of agents since progress has been slower than 


‘is ‘desirable in thie direction and because a new approach to the 
problem has been worked oxt./f 


Cre tet -— eon 


: also serves as a general consultant to 


the Agency, provides services of a sensitive nature on an ad hoc 


basis, and serves as a cut-out in procurement problems. 


3.. The total cost of this project for a period of one year 
$0,399 - 
will not exceed $71,500.00. Charges should be made against 


Allotment 0525-1009 -4902. 


> has been requested to submit a summary 


accounting oe a copy of the Fund's annual audit report for the 
sponsor's inspection, Also, it has been requested that aay. auexpeaded . 
funds shall be returned to the Agency. 

5. Title to any permanent equipment purchased by funds i 


shall be retained b§ 


. . 


> in lieu of ‘higher overhead rateg, _. __ 


+ 


6. It was mutually agreed that documentation and accounting 


for travel expenses which are normally reimbursable by iu» 


sball conform with the accepted practices of the 


Sune 1977 


date 
a 
E2 INMPDET; CL BY 187475 


161 


~~ under the: direction of 1SD/RB vith the exceptién.of those cutout-—— 

functions specifically mentioned in comection with other MKULTRA 
subprojects. In general, the research effort under this subproject ae 

‘ will continue along the lines laid down in previous years. These - 

involve the synthesis and pharmacological and clinical evaluation of 

compounds of those chemical families known to have application in the 

peychochemical and "K” fields. During the coming year it 1s planned 

to concentrate: more directly on the ae practical aspects of the 

"mockout" problem. Enough new potent substances have become available 

lately to make such a change in-emphasis sworthvbile. In connection 

vith this change it should be noted that certain findings mede in 

EMER project at $i vhich cannot be further exploited at 

that facility will be pursued at QMSERGEimp in the future. For this 

reason it may be necessary to supplement the tindings of this subproject | 


WO 


from time to time during the year due to increases of scope. 
aan 2. QRRBEINGNIM, also serves as a general consultant to the 
Agency, provides services of a sensitive nature on an ad hoc basis, 


and serves as @ cutout in procurement probleus. 


_—E2 EDEL; CL BY 187475 


162 


. 3- The total cost of this project fore period of one year will 
not exceed $40,000.00. Charges should be made against Allotment 


2125-1390-3902. ; j : 


Cc oe SREMREEIN has been requested to submit a summary - 
accounting nes copy of the Fund's annual sae report ‘for the 
sponsor's. inspection. Also, it has been requested that any unexpended 
funds shall be returned. to the Agency. A 


&. : it : 
: 5. “Pitle to any permanent equipment purchased by funds granted 


RM in lieu of higher overhead rates. : 
6. It was mutually agreed that documentation and accounting for 


ae travel expenses which are normally reimbursable by 3 


“abal, conforn.with the accepted practices of the Fund. 


TsD/Research Branch 


APPROVED FOR OBLIGATION Of FUNDS: 


~» -Research Director P" 

ea rae 7 ‘ 
Date a . 
Attachment: Proposal and Budget Ng 2 ° 


Distribution: Original only : 


163 


ee 
: as ey 

i ae DRAFT Blut fe 
, 24 January 1964 / ba ie 


MEMORANDUM FOR : THE RECORD 
SUBJECT | : MKULTRA, Subproject 149 


1, This subproject is being established for ie tee 
(aye 


of supporting realistic tests of certx#in development ene and 
- Li v 


delivery systems of interest. to TSD/BB. : Year), va 


2. During the course of development it is sometimes 


found that certain very necessary experiments or tests are pet 
suited to ordinary laboratory facilities. At the same er A : = 
it would be difficult if not impossible to conduct such tests 
as operatiqnal field tests. This project is designed to pro-~ 
vide a capability and facilities to fill this intermediate 
requirement. ; , se 
3. The activities under this subproject will be con- 

ducted by ur. Boga, an individual in the import and C ~ 
Mr, @QQ86" holds a TOP - 


SECRET Treasury Department clearance and a SECRET Agency 


export business, in 


st. 


approval. He is déupietaty witting of the aims and goals of _ 
his activities. ee. 

C. 4, Mr. feeae possesses unique facilities and personal = 
abilities which makes him’invaluable in this kind of testing 


operation, Mr, Pec because of his peculiar_talents. and — —_- 


c_: 


164 


we 


capabilities as well, as his excellent connections with all of — 
the local law enforcement agencies, will provide a unique and 


essential capability. Because Mr. a EE “no T PAGE reel 
sident of the 


| at 


area, it is necessary that a 


suitable replacement be provided in order that a capability 


for continuance of our activities be maintained. 


5, The estimated cost of the project is $10,000.00 for 
a period of one year. - Charges should be made against Allotment 


Number 4125-1390-3902. Reimbursement will: be made for services 


_ rendered, ce i eo 
6. Accounting for funds advanced and any equipment aieer 
this- subproject will be in accordance with account ng proce — 
poe Std | a 
ures established by thel7 issu s Inertottad Unv ru J . 


7. .A memorandum of agreement along lines estab shed" by 
previous audit recommendations in like situations will be 


executed. 


7E0/Biological Branch, 


Distribution: : 
Original only 


165 


SUBJECT: Request for Support of Research on the Mechanism of Brain Concussion 


1. This isa request for financial support for research on the mechanism of” 
brain concussion for the period 1 Feb 1956 to 1 Feb 1957. 


: 2. The resonance-cavitation theory upon which this research is to b based 
63 has been presented in the proposal ‘submitted to thes 
¥ dated 27 March 1954. ss 


3. The program as originally submitted estimated the duration of the program 
to be from three to five years requesting a total of $72,109 for the initial 
year. Deas 2 as - : : 


. At the request of the wee s ati a reduced budget was submitted. 


L amounting to $24,925, was then awarded to the 


Zs 


oa 


TES Rewer to support this program from 1 Feb 1955 
t Feb 1950." 3 * 2 
at - " ‘ ; aon ; 
6. The progress made to date under the above contract can be summarized’as 
-  LolYows: ; : ym fd ta Bem ; 
___ A, RESEARCH FACILITIES : 
C 7 i The following research facilities have been established for the 
: investigation of the very diverse aspects of the problems being 


_ Studied: : 


Atotal of ‘square feet of laboratory and office space 
equipped with much of the diversified machinery and apparatus 
necessary for research in this field. : 


b. Blast Range . if - 
A blast range has been established at Ye Fs 
approximately (aga meftiyof the main 
area is owned by the WF and is closed to the public. 


Three blast test-series have been run to date. 


made with ‘the 


‘3 Guarnieri t en 


Arrangzents have been 3 
SS for use of their 
assigned for this 


_ human cadavers. A test area has been 


WARNING Nope 
‘NS SaeATELLIGENCE 


ie “AND METHODS INVOLVED : oa : 


166 


B. PERSONNEL -. ~~ Ne Sts Seen ew egos 


i 


Both full-time technical personnel and part-time professional | 
research personnel have been acquired and indoctrinated relative 
to their specific function. Anse 4 


C. TECHNICAL PROGRESS z 3 E i 


z ‘Following is the technical progress made under the current 


contract: “a 
it 


a. Specialized sipecmasneaese and numerous Eewtanig hatinaiee 
have been developed to obtain the desired dynamic data. 


b. Considerable data has now- been obtained supporting the 
resonance-cavitation theory of brain concussion. 


c. Preliminary acceleration threshold data has been obtained 
for a fluid-filled glass simulated skull. 


a, Data pas been obtained on the nature and the magnitude of 
. pressure fluctuations within a glass simulated skull subject 
: to either impact Or sound waves propagated in air. 


e. Initial studies have been made on the simulated glass skull 
"attempting to establish the cavitation patterns for various 


“ _ types of Ampact: 


7. The proposed method and program plan remain the same as stated in the 
original proposal, except for the temporary- deletion of the immersion 
blast "study. . 


8. The current level of activity on this pfoject can be indicated by the 
B most recent billing to the RS 1 for the month of November, which amounted 
‘to $4,034.61. a 


9. In the interest of eit tehenay and economy it is requested:-that at least 
this level of activity be maintained for the coming year. 


WARNING NORBe 


cam or Tus reeaAncit” rinwiiwe © 
2 : ? whe le ae ae. 

Trottor, Ww. defines: brain concussion as: 

transient state due to head injury which is of instantanious 

onset, manifests widespread symptoms of purely paralytic 

kind, does not as such comprise any evidence of structural 


cerebral injury, and is always followed by amnesia for the 


actual moment of the accident." 


10,2 The implication of the underlined portion of the above statement 
is that if a technique were devised to induce brain concussion 
without giving either advance warning or causing external physical 
trauma, the person upon recovery would be unadie to recall what 
had happened to him. Under these conditions the same technique 
of producing the concussion could be re-used many times without 
disclosure of its nature. 


10.3 First, considering the poesibilities of direct impact to the 
head_or body, it should be.possible.from the findings of this 
research program to determine the following: 

- a. Optimum design of impacting devices. ‘ 
b. Optimun points of impact on skull or body 
for the specific effects desired. - 
ce. Intensity of the blow for the effect desired. 
: i . 

10.4 In regard to the potential impacting devices, there are certain 
design requsitessthat are apparent at this time: 

c a. The impact should be delivered’ without 
advance warning. 

b.. The area of impact and force distribution 

should be such that surface trauma does 
not occur. 

ce. The intensity of the agpacting force and 

its duration should be such as to obtain 
the desired effect. 

da. The device should be as small’ an as silent 

. as possible. 

ca 

10.5 The ‘specific impacting devices might take the form of any of 
the following: 

a. A pancake type black-jack giving a high peak 
impact force with a low unit surface pressure. 


b. Concealed or camouflaged spring-loaded impacting 
devices that trigger upon contact with the head. 


(Original and sole copy :agg) 


! 


10.6 


10.7 


* 10.8 


10.9 


11.0 


12.0 


168 


\S- A projectile type impecter auon as a aa oe 
-> using @ small Shot filled sack for a projectile. arate ae 


da. An explosive pad detonated in contact with the 

_ head or the body. . . 
ae : yo. : 
Let us now consider the possibilities of exciting the resonance 
cavitation directly without impact. There 1s considerable evidence 
that resonance cavitation can be induced directly in the following 
ways: pf of coe 
a. A blast wave propagated in air. (Blast: Concussion) ; 


b. Physical excitation with a mechanical driver 
er horn, tuned to the resonant frequency of 
the head. ti ; 


A single blast pressure wave propagated in air must have considerable 
intensity in order to produce brain concussion, however, there is 
considerable evidence (Carver & Dinsley) ‘that modification of the 
pressure wave can produce profound effects, : 


Excitation of the resonance cavitation by using a tuned driver 
at this time appears to be well within the relm of possibility. 
The neurotic-like manifestations normally associated with blast 
concussion could possibly be induced by this method. Use of 
this method,however, would require actual physical contact with 
the drivers. 2 5 iE . 


Excitation of the resonance cavitation by tuned sound waves also 
appears to be a reasonable possibility. Concentration of the sound- 
field at some remote point could be effected with accoustical lenses 


‘and reflectors. The blast duration would be in the order of a 


tenth of a second. .Masking of a noise of this duration should not 
be too dificult. ae . 


It would possibly.be advantageous to establish the effectivness 
of both:of. the above methods as a tool in brain-wash therapy. 

A full knowledge of the method and the rgsulting sequela should be 
of aid to any person forced to submit to such treatment. 


Possibly the most significant potential aspect of this study would 

be in the development of practical means of giving a person immunity, 
even though temporary, to brain concussion. One technique that appears 
to have potentialities involves the introduction of a small quantity 
of gas, approximately 1 cc, into the spinal cord. This gas bubble 
would then normally migrate to the ventricles located’ at the centrum 
of the-brain. The ability of this bubble to expand under dynamic 
loading would be most effective in preveriting resonance éavitation 


from occuring. eo 


(Original and sole copy “ rage) 


96-4C8 196, ; 


MATERIAL FOR THE RECORD 
MKSEARCH, OFTEN/CHICKWIT 


MKSEARCH was the name given to the continuation of the MKULTRA pro- 
gram. Funding commenced in FY 1966, and ended in FY 1972. Its purpose was to 
develop, test, and evaluate capabilities in the covert use of biological, chemical, 
and radioactive material systems and techniques for producing predictable human 
behavioral and/or physiological changes in support of highly sensitive operational 
requirements. : 

OFTEN/CHICKWIT 


In 1967 the Office of Research and Development (ORD) and the Edgewood 
Arsenal Research Laboratories undertook a program for doing research on the 
identification and characterization of drugs that could influence human behavior. 
Edgewood had the facilities for the full range of laboratory and clinical testing. 
A phased program was envisioned that would consist of acquisition of drugs and 
chemical compounds believed to have effects on the behavior of humans, and 
testing and evaluating these materials through laboratory procedures and toxi- 
ecological studies. Compounds believed promising as a result of tests on animals 
were then to be evaluated clinically with human subjects at Edgewood. Substances 
of potential use would then be analyzed structurally as a basis for identifying and 
synthesizing possible new derivatives of greater utility. 

The program was divided into two projects. Project OFTEN was to deal with 
testing the toxicological, transmisivity and behavioral effects of drugs in animals 
and, ultimately, humans. Project CHICKWIT was concerned-with acquiring infor- 
mation on new drug developments in Europe and the Orient, and with acquiring 
samples. 

There is a discrepancy between the testimony of DOD and CIA regarding the 
testing at Edgewood Arsenal in June 1973. While there is agreement that human 
testing occurred at that place and time, there is disagreement as to who was 
responsible for financing and sponsorship. (See hearings before the Subcommittee 
on Health and Scientific Research of the Senate Human Resources Committee, 
September 21, 1977.) 


(169) 


170 


THE. DIRECTOR OF CENTRAL :INTELLIGENCE 


WASHINGTON, D.C. 20505 


Office of Legislative Counsel 23 December 1977 


Honorable Daniel K. Inouye, Chairman 
Select Committee on Intelligence 
United States Senate 

Washington, D.C. 20510 


Dear Mr. Chairman: ‘ 


During Admiral Turner's 3 August 1977 testimony 
before your Committee and the Senate Human Resources 
Subcommittee on Health and Scientific Research, you asked 
whether any Agency employees had been terminated because of 
their participation in MKULTRA Subproject 3. Admiral 
Turner indicated he did not believe any employee had 
been terminated, but would have Agency records searched 
on this question. Our records have been searched and the 
results confirm the Director's testimony that no such 
actions were taken. 


ore 


Lng pee, 


brie isties Counsel 


171 
QKHILLTOP DEFINITION 


QKHILLTOP was a cryptonym assigned in 1954 to a project to study Chinese 
Communist brainwashing techniques and‘to develop interrogation techniques. 
Most of the early studies are believed to have been conducted by the Cornell 
University Medical School Human Ecology Study Programs. The effort was 
absorbed into the MKULTRA program and the QKHILLTOP cryptonym became 
obsolete. The Society for the investigation of Human Ecology, later the Human 
Ecology Fund, was an outgrowth of the QKHILLTOP. 


a 
=
