The Religious Ceremonies and Customs of the Parsees (J.J. Modi, 1922)
==========================================================
Modi's 1922 full account of Parsi ritual life — the authoritative insider's description of Zoroastrian ceremonies and customs. Public domain. Source: Internet Archive.

es 


HM UHUGL VE DALE TI 
00103753 


na SAAR HE 


NO) TO BE ISSUED our: 


waa? Be ah 2 Bei =. = Ee aS 
Siar ean 
1% 


Digitiz from 


THE RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES 


AND 


CUSTOMS .OF THE PARSEES. 


By 
JIVANJI JAMSHEDJI MODI, 
B.A., PH.D., \C.1.E., 

FELLOW OF THE UNIVERSITY,OF BOMBAY (1887), DIPL. LITTERIS EX 
ARTIBUS (SWEDEN, 1889), SHUMS-UL-ULAMA (INDIA, 1898), OFFICIER 
D’ACADEMIE (FRANCE, 1898), OFFICILR DE L'INSTRUCTION 
PUBLIQUE (FRANCE, 1902), CAMPBELL MEDALLIST, 

B. B. BR. ASIATIO SOCIETY (1918). 


103795, 
EE ny oe 


1922 


BRITISH INDIA PRESS, MAZAGON, BOMBAY. 


ORL 

245- 38 
Mod] Re| 
[03453 


TOL TL 
00103753 


To 
THE TRUSTEES—PAST AND PRESENT, 
OF 


Tur FuNDS AND PROPERTIES OF THE 
PARSEE PANCHAYET 


Whom-—and through them the Parsee Community— 
IT have tried to serve, to the best of my poor abilities, 
For a long period of nearly 30 years, 
Asa Souvenir 
Of my long connection with their Board as their Secretary, 
And as a Token of Gratitude 
For all. that they have been pleased to do 

_to help me in my Duties and to encourage me in my Studies. _ 


JIVANJI JAMSHEDJI MODI. 


PREFACE. 


This book has grown out of the work of study, undertaken 
for the Dictionary of Religion and Ethics published by 
Dr: Hastings. In his letter dated 26th December 1905, 
Dr. Hastings, invited me to be a contributor to his Dictionary 
on the subject of Parsee Religious Ceremonies and customs. A 
complete compendium of all the Religious Ceremonies and 
Customs of the Parsees was wanting. So, on receiving. the- 
above invitation, 1 proposed to go thoroughly into the study of 
the whole subject, and this book isthe result. Here and there, 
T have re-cast the subjects as originally written. 


My name was kindly submitted to Dr. Hastings by the late 
Revd. Dr. Mills, Professor of Iranian Languages at the University 
of Oxford. So, Dr. Hastings, at his suggestion, asked me 
to give “‘the closest possible description’ of the ceremonies 
and’customs. Dr. Mills also had written to me direct, to “ be 
absolutely exhaustive as to details.” Ere this, I hed found, 
that a detailed description of the ceremonies and customs was 
wanted by scholars,-especially foreign, as it would help them 
in their elucidation of some Avesta and Pahlavi texts. For 
example, I found that my paper on the Funeral Ceremonies of 
the Parsees, read-before the Anthropological Society of Bombay, 
had been_of some use to the late Prof. James Darmesteter 
in his translation of the Vendidad.! Prof. A. V. W. Jackson, 
when. he was in Bombay in 1901, had drawn my attention to 
the want of a detailed description of religious céremonies, 
especially the Purification Ceremonies of the Bareshnim. 
Then, in a letter dated 8th March, he wrote: “‘ May I not urge 
you to write a detailed monograph of the Bareshnum I spoke 

1 In his Appendix A, to the eighth chapter of the Vendidad, entitled 
 Cérémonies funtbres chez les Parses,” he thus refers to it: “Nous 


faison grand usage dans cet exposé d’une excellente étude de M. 
Jivanjj Modi’’ (Le Zend Avesta. Vol. IT, p. 146 n. 1.) 


vi PREFACE. 

to you on the subject that morning when I was atColaba? Such 
a, treatise giving all the Ceremonies would be important.” I 
know, that the want of such a book was felt, at times, in Courts 
of Justice, when there were cases in the matter of the Wills 
of Testators who directed certain religious ceremonies to be 
performed, and when there was the question of the proper 
significations of the ceremonies, I knew of a case, in which 
the learned Judge had to refer to Dr. Haug’s Essays on the 
Parsees for the explanation of certain Ceremonies. In another 
ease, the present Parsee Advocate General studied with some 
interest, for an explanation of some ceremonies, my rough 
copy of the manuscript sent to Dr. Hastings. So, bearing all 
the above suggestions and matters in mind, T have tried to be 
somewhat exhaustive, and hope, that the book will be of some 
use to students of Comparative Religion. I am glad to 
observe, from the preface of .““The Comparative Study of 
Religions! ” by Prof. Widgery of the University of Cambridge, 
that the advanced proof pages of this book, of which he speaks 
as ‘an exhaustive treatise) on Social and Religious Customs, of 
the Parsees,” have been of some use to the author. Students of 
Comparative Religion may, in the matter of the religious 
ceremonies and.customs of the Parsees, look to this book as a 
kind of a Dictionary of Parseeism. The exhaustive Index will 
help them to use it as such. I beg to tender my best 
thanks.to.my friend, Mr. Bomanji Nusserwanji Dhabhar 
M. A., for its preparation. 


I think that, irrespective of the question of the want of such 
a book by the students of Religion and Anthropology, it will 
be found of some use to my community in general. The times 
are rapidly changing. The ‘new’ has been springing rapidly 
upon the ‘old’. As often said, the heresy of to-day becomes 


‘1 “© The Comparative Study of Religions. A systematic Survey,” by 
Alban G. Widgery, Lecturer in the Philosophy of Religion in the Univer- 
sity of Cambridge; formerly Professor of Philosophy and the Compara- 
tive Study of Religions, the College, Baroda, Preface p. IX. 


PREFACE. - vii 


the orthodoxy of to-morrow ; the liberalism of this year, the 
conservatism of the next. The reader will find, that many a 
ceremony, ritual or custom has been spoken of, as having 
become obsolete or as being more honoured in the breach than 
in the observance. Many more will be obsolete in the course 
of a few years. Customs are often.as despotic as fashions, 
but they also change as fashions. So, this work will, it is hoped, 
serve, to a certain extent, as a record of what was once,-and 
what is now, prevalent. 


Some of the religious ceremonies and customs~are good in 
themselves from a sanitary or hygienic point of view. As 
Prof. Max Muller says: ‘There is a reason at the bottom 
of everything, however, it seems unreasonable to us, in the 
customs and laws of the ancient world.”1 What is said of 
the old symbolism stands good, to a-certain extent, for some 
old customs: ‘The Symbolism of to-day preserves the 
serious belief of yesterday and what, in an age more or less 
distant, was a vital motive, inspiring an appropriate course of 
conduct, survives in the.conduct it has inspired, long after it 
has itself ceased to be active and powerful.” But, we find that, 
at times, “too much of even a good thing ” spoils that thing. 
This is so in the case of some religious ceremonies and cus- 
toms. We find that, very particularly, in the case of some 
purificatory ceremonies, for example, the Bareshnim: The 
original good simple ideas of purity, viz., freedom from contact 
‘with the impure, and isolation, if infection or impurity is 
caught or is believed to have been caught, are, at times, 
carried to tiresome extremes. No wonder, if they were so 
carried to extremes in olden times, when we see, that cases of 
that kind happen even in modern times, under an alarm or 
panic of a sudden epidemic, as that of Plague in Bombay in 
1896-97. However, such extremes tend to obscure the original 
good object. 


} Max Muller’s Science of Mythology. 


viii PREFACE. 


In the rituals of purification, especially in that of the Baresh- 
num, as prescribed in the Vendidad, and as carried on later, 
we find such an éxtreme, ending in some tiresome intricacies. 
It seems that, at the end of the’ ninth century, there was, 
among the Zorpastrians of Persia itself, an attempt of a kind 
of revolt against the multiplicity or the intricacy of the cere- 
monies, and the standard of that revolt was raised by \a 
prelate, ZAdsparam, the high priest.of Sirkén. But the revolt 
was suppressed by the higher ecclesiastical authority at. Pars 
and Kerman. We find an account of this controversy in the 
Pahlavi Epistles of Manuscheher.! It seems, that long before 
this, even in the times of the Pahlavi commentators, there 
arose some controversies about the intricacies and the details 
of the ritual of the Bareshnim. 


Goethe, that great German Hafiz;-admires the view of the 
Purity of Elements (Fire, air, earth and water), as observed 
by the ancient Persians. He admires, what he calls, ‘‘ Wiirde 
der Simmtlichen Elemente” ¢.e., “‘ The Dignity of Elements.” 
He has attached to his Parsi-Nameh or Buch des Parsen, 
which forms the eleventh book of his West-Ostliche Divan, 
some “ Notes and’ Discussions (Noten und Abhandlungen). 
Therein, he says: “Their: religion is clearly based on the 
dignity of.all elements, as manifesting God’s existence and 
power. ‘Hence the sacred dread to pollute water, the air, 
earth. Such respect for all natural forces that surround man 
leads toevery civic virtue. Attention, cleanliness, application 
are stimulated and fostered.”? Notwithstanding this admiration 
of the DigAIy. of the Elements, he runs down the later, what 
he calls, ‘endless tedium” of consecration and purification. 


1 Vide the interesting Introduction of Mr. Bomanji N. Dhabbar in his 
Namakiha-i Manishchihar. Vide West’s Introduction S. B, E. Vol. 
XVIII. 

2 Vide my Paper on “ Goethe’s Parsi-nameh or Buch aa Parsen’’, in 
the Journal of the B. B. R. A. Society, Vol. XXIV, pp. 66-95. Vide my 
Asiatic Papers, Part II, pp. 119-148. 


PREPACR. ix - 


Some of the intricate tedium of purification carried to an 
extreme from the original reasonable thoughts of sanitation and 
purification, has now passed off and is passing away. But. 
as it often happens, in the rush or fashion of doing away with 
what wax tedious or unnecessary and what formed the ex- 
erescences, some other customs, which are good from sanitary 
and other points of view of public utility, also are done away 
with. Even M. Renan of France, who was taken to be-a.he- 
retic for his liberal thoughts and views, and who, therefore, 
cannot be suspected of any kind of undue conservatism, and 
who, though looking hopefully to the future, looked with res- 
pect to the past,} looked with distrust at the_attempt to 
throw off good with the bad. He said: “I fear that the work 
of the twentieth century will consist in taking out of the waste 
paper basket a multitude of the excellent ideas which the nine- 
teenth century has heedlessly thrown into it.”” The Parsees of the 
present day, are, I am afraid, doing something of that kind. 
This book, which records all the religious ceremonies and customs 
of the Parsees, will, at least; show to future generations, what 
was the good that was heedlessly thrown off, and what was 
the bad that was propérly thrown of. 


In connection, with this view of preserving what is good in 
the customs ofthe old, one may appropriately quote from 
Mr. Carpenter’s Pagan and Christian Creeds” (p. 266) the 
following passage : ‘‘ Numerous instances might of course be 
adduced of how a Church, aspiring to be a real Church of 
Humanity, might adopt and re-create the rituals of the past 
in the light of a modern inspiration. Indeed, the difficulty 
would be to limit the process ; for every ancient ritual, we can 
now see, has had a meaning and a message, and it would be 
areal joy to disentangle these and to expose the profound 
solidarity of human thought and aspiration from the very 
dawn of civilization down to the present day. Nor would it 
be necessary to imagine any Act of Uniformity or dead level 


1 He snid ; “ J’aime le passé, mais, je porte envie a 1’ avenir,” 


x ' -PREFACE. 


of ceremonial in the matter. Different groups might concen- 
trate on different phases..of religious thought. and practice. 
The only necessity would be that they should approach the 
subject with a real love of Humanity in their hearts and a 
real desire to come into touch with the deep inner life and 


mystic growing pains of the souls of men and women in all 
ages,” 


In describing some of my subjects I have tried to follow a sug- 
gestion of Dr. Hastings. He had asked the subjects to be 
treated, both from the Iranian or the ancient Zoroastrian and 
the Parsee or the modern Zoroastrian point of view. I have 
tried to show, here and there, how the modern practice and 
view differ from the ancient, referred to in the Avesta, Pah- 
lavi, Pazend and Persian books. I have generally tried to look 
at various subjects from a student’s._point of view and have 
merely described them as required. But in some places, 
where possible, I have tried..to explain old beliefs and customs 
and to trace their origin. 


Some of the subjects treated in the volume, have been 
treated by me in various. papers,! read before the Anthropolo- 
gical Society of Bombay and published, in some form or 
another, in the Journal of the Society. So, I have tried to treat 


1 These papers are the following.— 


1 Birth, Customs and Ceremonies (Journal of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, Vol. IX, pp. 568-82). 
2 Marriage Customs and Ceremonies (Vol. V, pp. 242-82). 
8 Funeral Ceremonies (Vol. II, pp. 405-44). , 
4 Purificatory Ceremonies. The Padyab and the Nan (Vol. XI, pp. 
162-185.) ; 
. § Purificatory Ceremonies. The Bareshnim and Riman (Vol. XI, 
pp. 224-289). 
6 Purificatory Ceremonies. Purificatory Processes in Daily life. 
' (Vol. XI, pp. 364-375). 
7. Initiation Ceremonies (Vol. XI, pp. 454-484). ° 
8 Consecration Ceremonies (Vol. XI, pp. 496-544). 
9 The Inner Liturgical Ceremonies. The Yacna (Vol. XI, pp. 996-1055), 
10 The Quter Liturgical Ceremonies (Vol, XI, pp, 39-91), 


PREFACE. xi 


them, here and there, from the point of view of Cultural an- 
thropology, and have given points of similarity with the beliefs 
and customs of other people. 


I have treated the whole subject under the following pan 
cipal heads :— ‘ 

T. The Socio-Religious Ceremonies, which have been 
treated under the heads of (A) Birth, (B) Marriage and_(C) 
Death Ceremonies. 

If. The Purification Ceremonies, which are treated under 
the sub-heads of (a) N&hn, (6) Riman, and (c) the Bareshnim, 
(d) with an additional chapter on the purification of articles 
supposed to have been contaminated. 


III. The Initiation Ceremonies, which have been treated 
under the sub-headings of (a) Naojote or the Initiation of a 
child into the fold and (6) Navar and Martab, which are the 
two grades of Initiation into priesthood. 


IV. The Consecration. Ceremonies, which treat of (a) the 
consecration of Fire-temples, (b) of the Towers of Silence, and 
(c) of Aldts or religious: requisites. 

V. The Liturgical ‘ceremonies, which are treated under two 
principal heads; (A) The first head speaks of the Inner Litur- 
gical services and treats of (a) the Yagna, (6) the Visparad, (c) 
the Vendidad, and (d) the Baj. (B) The second head speaks of ' 
the Outer Liturgical ceremonies of (a) the Afringan, (b) the 
Farokhshi, and (c) the Satum. An additional chapter treats 
of ‘several ceremonies which are groups of more than one 
ceremony. 

I beg to thank Rev. Hastings for the courtesy to let me use 
my articles in his Dictionary for the purpose of some of the 
subjects of this book. 


Farenma Lopese, 1 Woopsnouse Roap, 
CotaBa, Bombay, 5th November 1922, 


CONTENTS. 


1—SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES 


‘AND CUSTOMS. 


CHAPTER I. 
BIRTH CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS. 


Birth, and auspicious events - .. i sis a “ 
Pregnancy acs = st 

The fifth and other a iehe ‘of pregnancy 

Place of Delivery . 

Lamp lighted on the birth ‘of a child 

Period of confinement 

Isolation and Purification .. 


The first drink after birth oe > bee a a 
Naming the child .. a are . es ane a 
Birth-day. Childhood .. an se 2s a ais 


CHAPTER IT, 


MARRIAGE CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS. 


Marriage, a good institution preferred by God .. 

Helping Marriage, a meritorious act. Herodotus 

Mavrriageable age 

Betrothal. Divé (lamp) aad haaini 

Marriage day and time. Sacred bath a3 

Marriage Dress, marks, presents, dowry and procession 

Welcoming Ceremonies. Ceremonial fire. Witnesses. . 

Ceremonies. Tying the knot. Hand Coe Encircling. 

Throwing of rice 

Religious Ceremony. The Bansdiction: 

Fastening the skirts. Washing the feet. " Rating fees 

Playing together Entertainment, Menu oe we on 
_ Divorce a ae os oe oe oe we 


ws Oo eA GS o oH OO mm 


14 

15 

16 
17-19 
20-21 
22-23 
29-31 


31-34 
35-41 


44-46 


xiv CONTENTS, 


CHAPTER III. 
FUNERAL CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS. 


L—Ceremonies relating to the Disposal of the body. 


‘The object of observances, summed. up in two words . 

Washing the shroud. Akhianah. The last drink of Haoehe 
juice, Final Bath. Isolation of the Corpse oe 

The Shroud, Paiwand, Direction of the head .: eget ae 

The Kasha or Boundary line. The Sanitary isolation. . 

The Sag-did oes ae a ae 

The presence of Fire. Prayers, “Time of removal 

The corpse-bearers ; Their even number F 5a > 

The Geh sdrné recital. The Baj. Thelast look and _ the 


removal er Be ee ise = 
The Gaomez as a purifier .. at Ae o- 
The funeral Procession. The ia aoa -» 4S g's. ee 
The Tower of Silence ae a6 Woe . 
The Solicitude for the living. Begr egation and disinfection .. 
A few observances in the house .. - oe oe 
Ii.——Ceremonies athe a: ‘the Soul. 
‘The Picture of one’s Deeds. Number three .. oe “ 
The Sarosh Ceremonies. The Oothamnaé kite re ar 
Commemoration. Adoption He ares 


The Chinvat Bridge, and Mithra, the eae oe oe +e 
Ceremonies on the 4th, 10th, 30th, and Anniversary days... 


IL—PURIFICATION CEREMONIES. 


CHAPTER IV. 


The Padyab and the Nahn a oe. a 

Reason, why importance is attached to ‘Purificatory Coremonies 
A sort of Padyab, common among many nations 
Two objects of Purification, Physical and eyobels™ 
Four kinds of purification ceremonies .. 


1 Padyab, the first kind. Its four occasions 9.6. es 


2 Nahn, the second kind. The four parts of its Process 
(a) The Padyab-kusti ; (b) the symbolic eating of a pomegra-" * 
nate leaf and the drinking of Nirangdin ; (c) The Patet 
or the Prayer of repentance ; (2) The final bath .. ois 
he four occasions of Nahn (a)-Naojote 3 (b)- Marriage > (c 


77-80 


80-82 


83 
85 


“95.99 


Accouchément ; (d) The Farvardegan Holidays -- .. se 100-10] 


eannines A 
CHAPTER V. 


THE BARESHNOM AND THE RIMAN. 


XV 


.3.—Bareshnim, the third kind of purification, treated 


under four heads. 


1 Its meaning and object . 
How it differs from Silas kinds of Purification 
Original and modern objects. Darmesteter’s view 

2 Description, as given in the Vendidad.. a es f. 
A Karsha or Kasha. The Pavi. The Naogar. 

3 The Bareshnim gah or the place of Bareshnim 
To lay out the place, (a2) Digging magas or pits-(b) DiaWing 
Kashas or furrows ; (c) Covering it with sand.or earth 


A modern Bareshnim gah ; (a) Its Locality; (6) Its area ; (¢) - 
The form of itsmagasor pits; (d) The, distance between the. . 


magas. Sets of stones there ... 
Plan of the Bareshntim gdh Kf r 24 wn $3 
4 The Process of giving the Bareshnim. . 


(A) Preliminary Preparations ‘of (a) the Requisites, (b) the 
Purifier, (c) the Place and (d) the Candidate a 


(B) The Process proper we es vs ‘ 
The Dog in the Ceremony a ie oe a ate 
Application of{a) the Nirang or consecrated cow’s urine, (b) 

of Sand, (c) of consecrated water, (d) The final Bath —,. 
Table, showing the number applications 
Consecration of the clothes 


5 Retreat of 9 days after the Bareshnim 
(a) The navshu Baths during the Retreat; (b) the Khub. te) 


The season for the ceremony .. os eee 
Causes that vitiate the Bareshnim. (a) Eating ai fosd eooked - 
by non-Zoroastrians, (6) non-observance of the Baj, (c) Long : 


- Travels and Voyages. Tacitus on the subject. Reason 
for the Prohibition. (d) Taking of oaths, (e) Falling off of 


‘. the Turban, the turban and- the padan being the insignias - 


of Priesthood % eat 3 taste 


IV Riman, the fourth kind of Se arieayam: Its Process. “A Pin 
of its Place "es ee er oe oe ot oe 


102 
102 
1104-5 


‘107 
118-17 


118 


118-22 


oo. 


129.25 
"125 
126 


126-30 


130-35 
135-38 


136-141 
142 
143 

* 144 


148-53 


153-57 


xvi ' CONTENTS, 


Old Iranian Purification and Modern Plague Operations. (a) 
Disinfection of Infected houses, (b) The Contacts (the 
Hamrit and the Patrit), (c) The Evicts (the Patrits), (d) 
Baths and Fumigalions, (e) Conversation with the In- 
fected, (f) Destruction of suspected things, (g) Prohibition 
of Burial 6 ee oe % 157-161 


Tranian, Hebrew ee ‘ona Pusiavalions we ox a 161-66 


- CHAPTER VI. 


PURIFICATORY PROCESSES AND CUSTOMS IN 
DAILY LIFE. 


Purification of (a) a House, (b) and of Things defiled or infected 167-68 
Some Purificatory Processes in Daily Life. Uncleanliness of 

(a) Saliva, (6) Nail and Hair, (c) Issues a a 168-70 
Menses and Uncleanliness, (a) The Dastanist4n or the Place of 

Isolation. (6) The Period of Isolation. (c) Purification from: 


the monthly course oe oe Pe os + oe 170-173 
The Pahlavi books on Menses_.... >, we ae oe 173 
The Present Practice a ee ve ee 174 
Injunctions of the Leviticus, Pliny on Menses <2 se 175-77 


Ill. INITIATION CEREMONIES AND 
CUSTOMS. 


CHAPTER VII. 
The Naojote or initiation of the child into the Fold. 


Two kinds ofvInitiation: 1 Naojote, the initiation of a Child 
into the Fold, (2) Naévar and Martab, the Initiation into 
Priesthood 


178 

1 The Naojote (a) Beanie of the Word. (b) Aue for ‘the Ini- 
tiation Ps i te as ae ae é@ 178-80 
Sudreh, the sacred shirt. Its Structure and symbolism ar “181 

Kusti or the Sacred Thread. Its Structure and symbolism. Its 
knots ne AG is oe 183 
The Account in the "Pahlavi Dadistan-i-Dint Ss Ae ove 188 
The Ceremony. Sacred Bath, Ceremonial Requisites. . ® 190-92 


The Initiation Proper. (a) The Recital of the Confession Faith. 
(b) Nirang-i-kusti (ce) The Articles of Faith, (d) the final 
Benediction eet a oe oe 4 heed - 


comratres. xvii 
CHAPTER VIII. 


Il ‘THE NAVAR AND THE MARTAB, THE INITIA- 
TION INTO ZOROASTRIAN PRIESTHOOD. 


Priesthood hereditary oe ee ee oe oe oe 197 
1 The Navar, the first Initiation .. we xe ont ise 
The different stages of Initiation ; (a) The Bareshnam, (6) The ~. 
Gewra, (c) The Initiation proper “a ie “s oe = 200-4 
Gurz, the symbolic mace os «e a os es 204 
2 The Martab. 


IV. THE CONSECRATION CEREMONIES. 
CHAPTER IX. 


I, Consecration of the sacred Fire and Fire-temples. 


(A) Consecraton of the Atash Behram,. the sacred fire of os : 
first grade oe 210-11 
The Requisite 16 fires of different ifs ‘(a) the Collection, (6) 
Purification, (¢) Consecration’ and (d) Unition of the Fires 212-220 
The Consecration of the united fires. Consecration of the 


Chamber of fire, (g) The final Enthronement.. eo «+ —, 220-26 
The Spiritual rule of the.sacred fire aca Sie ae Mo. 3 226 
A National toast connected with the sacred fire se) ie 227 
Signification of the purifying and consecrating processes ws 228 

_ The sacred ash m oe oe ee * 230 


The Bui ceremony for feeding the i, (a) Variation for the 

different grades of the sacred Fire, (b) The five times for i. 

the ceremony... . a oe oe " 280-33 
The Bui Geremony in an Atesh- Behram os ; ; 234 
(B) Consecration of the sacred fire of the Atash Adaran. ‘(a) The ani” 

Collection, (6) Purification, (c) Consecration of fout fires. (a) ; 

The final Consecration of the united fire. (¢) Its Enthrone:- 

ment oe -230:242 
:. (0) Oansecration of the Sed Fire of ine: Redaly Dadgah ee 


CHAPTER X. 


II. CONSECRATION OF THE TOWER | 
OF SILENCE. 
The three stages. 1 Digging the ground (Kodali méarvi); 


2, Laying the foundation. The Tana. Its signification. -. .. 
3. The Consecration of the Tower... ae we oe. t. 248-52 


xvii CONTENTS, 
CHAPTER XI 


Ill. CONSECRATION OF THE ALAT 
OR RELIGIOUS REQUISITES. 


Rapp on the*Nirazig used in Gorisecration 


oe e. we 254 
An account’ 6f the Nirangdin Cerémony’ S.2 255 
The Soarerranon ” the Vereey2: or the sacred Ball ad his hair 256-5 


V. THE LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. ° 
CHAPTER XIT. 


I. The inner liturgical ceremonies. 
I. The Yacna, 


‘he Innet-and the Outer liturgical ceremonies , 260 
The Inner. I The Yacna, II the Visparad, III the Vendidad 

- * and IV the Baj ste Rs =, Sieh wad. She ae 261 

The Dar-i-Meher, the place of the Liturgical ceremonies ee 261 

The Yazashna-gah, or the Urvicgah, or the Hindhola ee 263 

The 15 characteristics of an officiating priest 265 
_The two parts of the Yacna- 1 the Paragnaé and IT ihe Youn 
proper... oe % ae oe as oe os 
I The Paragna consisting of the ceremonies of (a) Barsam, (b) 
Aniydonghan, (c) Urvaraézn, (d) Jivam, (e) Zaothra, and (f) 

Haoma .. es oe os oe ne i 266 
The Liturgical aa wtlas. The Ritual of making it pav or 

pure oe . ° .- o- oe oe 266 

_ (a) The different khwdns or stone slabs .. F or _ 270 

(6) The Havanim and the Lala. The Tashta, the Mahrai 275-77 
(c)\The Barsam. {ts use in the recital of Grace before meats. 

Its Preparation, Gathering and Tying 277-86 

(d) The Varac nf-viti, z.¢., the hair-ring .. me 286 

(e) The Astra or Miplo, i.¢e., the knife .. we me a 288 

(f) The Kunds and other water-vessele ... . . 288 

(g) The Aiwdyaonghana, made from the leaf of the Date- tree, 

a symbol among the ancient Iranians. Its preparation 

and signification ‘ee 8 ars on <6 ove 289-98 

(h) The Urvarim. Its Signification and Preparation ve 293 

(¢) The Jivam be ‘ai Seite ras Se : wae 295 


_v) The Darfin or Sacred Bread. Its Brcabata: 


eating 
(Chashni) we 


ee ee se 


ee - o. 296 


CONTENTS. 


(k) The Goshudé .. as 


e« 


The Yacna of the Parsis and the J yotishtoma of the Brah. 


mans ae se és a es Si ee we 
() The Haoma. Its Botanical name. Its purification 
The Antiquity of the Ceremony +3 
Description of its ceremony under 4 lien (1) Preliminary 


ae 


preparation, (2) Purifying and consecrating the twigs, (3). 


Preparing ‘and straining the cus (4) papking the 
Juice 


Dr. Haug on a indred ceremony oon ibe Hindns ' 


(m) Zaothra Water. Its Purification and Consecr ain; The 
object and symbolism of the ceremony 


The Ritual of mixing the Zaothra or Zor (Zor walivels 


(n) Fire and its Requisites, The metallic aati the 1@ lad 
the tongs and the fragrant fuel 


oa 


ae 


II. The Yacna Proper. 
Preparation and Consummation of the Haoma Juice™.. . 
Description of the 72 chapters with the ritual... ... + 


A View of the ama of the esas based on its Liturgical 
Apparatus . oo, a 


ee oe ee 


CHAPTER XIII. : 


II. THE VISPARAD CEREMONY. 


Visparad, A prayer for the Ratus. 
The texts treating of the-ratus. The Asha and the Ratu 
The eight priests referred to in the Visparad oe 


Their positions in the Yazashna gah as mecortieg in the 
Nirangastan oe o oe o° 


The best Typical prayers referred to by the Vieparad. The 
Staota Yacna, the Ahuanavar with the number of its 
recital on different occasions, the Ashem, the TenBne Hatam 


CHAPTER XIV. 
Ill. THE VENDIDAD CEREMONY. 


The order of the recital of its aoe with those of the: 
Yaona and Visparad. $y : cs 


CHAPTER XV. a 
-IV. THE BAJ CEREMONY. 


The various Significations of the word Baj a we a 
The Requisites for the Baj recited with religious ritual ee 
Different kinds of Bajs described 


‘ee 


299 
299 
299-305 
305 


306-14 


“BES 


316-18 
318 


318 
321 
322-328 
"329 


330-32 
335 


337 


340.49 


354-558 
359 
360 


xX CONTENTS. 


Baj of (a) Panch tai, (bySraosha, (¢) Fareshtas, (d) Pantha 
Yazata (e) Nairyosangh ip Agréras, (9) Vanant with the 
ritual of Vanot képvi, (2) Jashan days, (1) Ardafarvash, &o. --361: 371 


The Lesser Baj recited on smailer occasions. ; <3 oo “371 
Silence observed during meals alter the recital of the Bal. : 


(Prayer of Grace) on ae i oe 373 
Baj recited on occasions of nateral functions -..  * .. oO BTS 
Baj for the consecration of certain religious requisites. . = 378 


Technical phraseology and Object a ae ss ar ny ts) 


_ CHAPTER XVI. 
Il. THE OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES. 
I. The Afringan. 


The AfringAn of the Parsees and the Apri of the Brahmins .. 377 
“The Participants. ‘ ‘The Zeti and the Rathwi <. Je - BIT 
The three parts of an Afringan. The Dibacheh, the Atringan as 

proper and the Afrin ©... 3 “ee 378 


1 The Dib&cheh. The Khshhnuman, “The Yad, Parnagh- 

yashna o Sik. ed Gee > ees ie is 378-84 
2 The Afringan proper. Its variable and unvariable parte .. a84 
8 The Afrin, The eight Afrins, 1 Gihambar, 2 Rapithavin, 3 


Arda&farosh, 4 Buzorg, 5 Myazd, 6 Spitaman Zarthosht. 7 
Hamkar& or Dahman, 8 Gahambiar Pavi .. ee ae 387-90 


The Ritual of the Afringan. The Myazda. Ita requisites, 
Fruit, Flower (Language of Flowers) Wine, &c. es ar 390.98 


The Arrangement of Flowers. The Expression of Approval 398 
The Orientation ot Pointing of the 4 Directions and corners 401 
The Hamazor. “Its cecasions. The Kiss of peace .. se 401 
The Asha-dad ~ .. o . oe es 


oe eee 40ti 
CHAPTER XVII. 


THE FAROKHSHI. 

The Fravashis or Farohars. Their Relation to the y Hue 
Intelligences, Their work and classes «2 we 408-41) 
The Fravashis, the Transcendental Essences... ~. 2, 412 
The Fravashis and (a) the Ideas of Plato, (b) the Patsernss ofthe *” 
Bible or oe oe os aia avs ‘ A 414 
The Fravashis of men, living (born and unborn) and dead 


ae 415-16 
The Spiritual Constitution of man eee, oh 417 
The Fravashi of the living and the Genius of the Romans, the 
Demons of the Greeks ../ ae 1? 4)8-19 
The Fravashi of the Dead. The Destiny ‘of the soul . ss"  ” aag 
Relations between the Living and the Dead =..." 4. 0 TL * . 


vt "423 


‘ CONTENTS. 


CHAPTER XVIII. 


THE SATOM. 


Satim, a general ene of Praise for the dead . te Sas 
Satim, recited over the meals .. 6 <s 
The morsel of thedog.. oe ws 


CHAPTER XIX. 


GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 
1 The Ham&~yasht.. thee oe ae oe as 
2 Geti-kharid i Se ae we 
3 Sarosh. The Yazata. “Jorani Kriya. "iigetvele .§ }. 
The .Uthamné, the Sosh, the Lakh, the Ashodad. ~Gae 


bhanavvi. Dhup sarvi, Cheha@ram.. .. 3. 6, 
4 The Zindeh-ravan a © as. Gant Fig ae. 
5. The Nirangdin.. ©... 0 - yn *. we 1 ews 
6 The Gahambars. Their importance, (a) Agricultural or 
Seasonal and (b) Cosmogonical yt a ae $4 


The six .Gahambars as Season festivals .. as 
The Gahambars, as connected with Cosmogony ae an 
The two principal functions of the, Gahambars, (a) the liturgical 
service, (b) the feast . os are oe “ag 
(a) The service ; the Afringan, Baj, Visparad, Pavi -. 
The Pavi. The ritual and its name .. ee «. 
(b) The solemn Feast. How to celebrate a Gahambar 
‘The sacred feasts of the Iranians and of the Jews... 
“Phe Washing of hands inthe feast - ... ..-- «- 
The present. practice. The public gatherings .. : 
7 Jashan. Ttsthree kinds. Those connected with (a) ae 
season festivals, (b) the dead, and (c) past Historical. events. 
(‘The Jashan days during the 12 months of a Parsee year 
8 Fravardegan or muktad.. © .. ee os ee 
The Nam-grahen recited on the occasion oe oe 
. Its. Importanée and the principal observance .. ne 
_ Albiruni and Anquetil Du Perron on the Farvardegin holidays. 
The Hurak, Machi, and Takche and Behrun .. 
Flowers and the Memory of the dead... os aie 
Ideas symbolized by the ceremony. The prayer oe +e 
9 ¥arest&. The ‘Yazatas. Their two classes. Those 
referring to (a) the physical and (6) Spiritual World 
The Ameshé Spentas. The Hamkars .. ag oo 


ee. oe 


oe ae 


XX 


431-33 
734-38 


488-44 
445 
446 


446 
- 446-48 
448 


470 
471 
473 
473 
476 

AT8-79 


AL BMettReatt Ol’ yaad, 
BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 


The Religious System of tre Parsees, 

A Catechism of. the Zoroastrian Religion. 
The Nadjéte Ceremony of the Parsees, 
The Marriage Ceremony of the Paraees, 


Marriage Customs among the Parsees, their Comparison with 
similar Customs of other Nations, 

The Funeral Ceremonies of the Parsees, 

The Parsees at the Court of Akbar and Dastur Meherji Rana. 

Atyddgar-i Zarirén, Shatrétha-f-Atrén, va Afdya va Sahi- 
giya-I-Sistén, i.e,, The Memoir of Zarir, Cities of Iran, 
and the Wonders and Marvels of Scistin (Pahlavi Transla- 
tions, Part I. Texts in Gujarati character, with English 
and Gujarati translations and notes). 


Jémaspi (Pahlavi Translations, Part T1I. Pahlavi, Pazend 
and Persian texts with English and Gujarati translation 
and notes), 


Wine among the Ancient Persians. 


A Few Events in the Early History of the Parsees and their 
Dates, ; yee 


A Glimpse into the Work of the Bombay Branch Royal Asiatic 
Society during the last 100 years, from a Parsee point 
of view. 7 


Asiatic Papers. Part I. 
Asiatic Papers. Part IT. 
Asiatic Papers. Part TIT (In the Press). 


BY THE SAME AUTHOR. xxiij 


Anthropological Papers, Part I.. 
Anthropological Papers. Part IT. 
Anthropological Papers. . Part III (in the Press). 
Masonic Papers. 
Dante Papers. 
Memorial Papers, 
Anguetil Du Perron and Dastur Darab. 
Moral Extracts from Zoroastrian Books. 
Education among the Ancient Iranians. 
Impressions d’un Parsi sur la Ville de Paris. 
La Visite d’un Parsi & la Ville de Constantinople. 
La Ceremonie du Naojote parmi les Parsis. 


WORKS EDITED BY THE SAME AUTHOR. 
K. RB. Cama Memorial Volume. 
The Pahlavi Madigan-i'Hazar Dadistan. 
K. R. Cama Masonic Jubilee Volume. 
Spiegel Memorial Volume. 
Sir J. J: Madressa Jubilee Volume. 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR IN 
GUJARATI. aval, | 


"Ayre XUleal. Meteorology. nae 
oye, BIH AA MUA. Jamshea, Hom and Firé. 
MAL EMAL HAMA Ser, PU 41 Disardiy’ 
The Social Life, Geography and Articles of Faith of Avesta times. 

metild AA £2162. Andhita and Farohar. 

af ryofl g9'eoft mall led mL Immortality of 
the Soul. 

Ae. AA a Fexaud. Mithra and. a’ Feast of 
Mithras, . 

PAARL Aa autetl ge. A - Piotioniey of Avestic 
Proper Names. 

yaiel Fava, en Wr. Iranian Essays, Part I.- - 

vat (AYA, Gua “eA. Iranian Essays, Part IT. 

wrt CANA, ea AeA. Tranian Basays, Part’ III. 

Ata S42 gDjev. A Sermon on Death. - 

Wet AAAS ory Ye. Shah-nameh up to the 
Reign of Minocheher. 

uNedly ALA Wize Shah-nameh, and Fi cles. 

mid WARS CANAL, (oeL Yar). Lectures befure the 

Dnyan Prasarak Society, Part I. 

aed WHS Fava, ( er fsa). Lectures before the 
Dnyan Prasarak Society, Part IT. 

mit wales Cy, ( e1 a1eA) Lectures before the 
Dnyan Prasarak Society, Part IIT. 

mid wars F4y (ena BA). Lectures before the 
Dnyan Prasarak Society, Part IV. 

HAIN AH were ony WA aD, ei War. 
Lectures and Sermons on Zoroastrian Subjects, Part I. 

Ale HH AVA oy waAA giv, eur vflen. 
Lectures and Sermons on Zoroastrian Subjects, Part II. 

HA Wy Wrsl ey MA aM, or AeA. Lec- 
tures and Sermons on Zoroastrian Subjects, Part ITI. 


WORKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR % xxv 
2 


RF YH we eM ~WA ae, citar “BA. 
Lectures and Sermons on Zoroastrian Subjects, Pert IV: 

e2BIaN a wre ey ~WA aA, eur waa. 
Lectures and Sermons on Zoroastrian Subjects, Part V. _ 

” ” ” Part VI. 


“gei¢82l. Bundehesh (Pahlavi Translations, Part II.) 

$04 VU QUwWwU AA WAL yorrt, AMAA ~>A 
“flor war urcddicll wzuHel uy. ‘The Ancient Iranians, 
according to Herodotus and Strabo, compared with the Avesta 
and other Parsee Books. 

RUEdlAlei eieAIAL, Gia YA. Episodes from the Shah- 
nameh, Part I. 

gedit eaaart, er “Lier. Episodes from the Shah- 
nameh, Part II. 

auedlaiet Yel. Heroines.of the Shah-nameh. 

Valid Uieleria Ae maaa, Wael, wore, grr 
wedd Ww@. The Peshdadian Dynasty of Persie, according 
to the Avesta, Pahlavi.and Persian Books. 

WAdd Bmiullrd arty mac Wad, vieve, srl yatse 
wHiQ. The Kaeyanian. Dynasty of Persia according to the 
Avesta, Pahlavi and Persian Books. 

ysciett (ear Sear B24 uel Wad, wmev'e gral 
(4% yaasia nad ava An Inguiry from Pahlavi, Pazend, 
Persian and-other works on the subject of the Number of Days 
of the Fravardegin. 

yeaddi wel why~uciZi. Bombay Parsee Charities. 

e242 UA (AMQALML Series of six books on Zoroaa- 
trian Religion and Persian History. 

wads Vd. veda ah Ware Vira 

yrds “fey. evaded wel adm. 

Was WY. oaBiah waa shi wa Gary. 

was Wiay. CARA Gell Ad WA AMAL 

WAS BE. Ura yr Efe, en Wal. 


3 


Page Line 


12 Note, 1, 4 


Incorrect . 


Rerused 


23 Note, 1, 15 Whic wash 
30 Note, 1, 30 Temer 


99 3 
106 2? 
“412-28 
113 16 
162 28 
166 12 
185 12 
231 1 
233. Al 
238 12 
242 3 
242 7 
242 17 
244 13 
248 19 
248 24 
285 21 
336 6 
339 
347 Note, 1, 5 
349 2 
367 14 


CORRIGENDA. 


Correct 

.. Refused, 

». Which was. 
1 


«+ Temper. 


of naogir +» OF NLogar, 
Purificatary .. Purificatory. 
260 +. 100. 

Sakan +. Sirkan, 
Yaozddir .. Vaozddtar. 
doby .. body. 

14 . 24, 

Pl2ys .. Plays. 
Thoug es Though. 
Deedsh .» Deeds. 
Cosecrated .. Consecrated. 
Recited -» Recited. 
Metalic Lo ‘Metallic, 
Springs .. Sprigs. 
dovout - «devout, 
dovout +. devoat. 

Zo . Zor. 

Pos .. Position. 
Rathwiskhara. Rthwishkara, 
Accoutn .. Account. 

G yrloof .- Glory of. 
Dasabhoy .. Dadabhoy. 
Ahurs .. Ahura. 


Page 
415 


Line 
25 
10 
13 
13 
20 


Eneorrect Correct 
Milleniums .. Millenniums, 
Get Srna -- Geb Sarna, 
Ardafarost .. Ardafarosh, 
Bheharum_ .. Cheharum. 
Umyuzd, Sarun Myaazd, Darun. 
seated -. Seated and. 
Undersstands. Understands. 


To celebrate, .. Celebrate. 
Adrdafacosh .. Ardgfarosh. 


Through «» Though. 
Yazita .. Yazata. 
All «+ At. 
Antumnal .. Autumnal. 
Amian «+ Ancient. 
Fravart of  .. Fravart or? 
See my oe My, 
Pahiair Pertian PablaviPersian. 
Remined -.» Remind. 
Pahiani +» Pahlavi. 
Pahlani +» Pahlavi. 
Because is =... Because it. 
A of +» As. 

Angles +. Angels. 
Rozy -. Roz. 


The wanted ., They wanted. 


1—SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES 
AND CUSTOMS. 


CHAPTER I. 


Birth Ceremonies and Customs. 


The ceremonies and customs, that fall under the head of 
«Socio-Religious Ceremonies and Customs,”’ may be subdivided, 
according to the three principal events of man’s life,—birth, 
marriage and death—under the following heads :— 


{.—Birth Ceremonies and Customs. 
II.—Marriage Ceremonies and Customs. 
I11.—Funeral Ceremonies and Customs. 


I.—Birth Ceremonies and Customs. 


The birth of a child is a very auspicious event in a Parsee 

Wie Ba Ste house. It. was so also in ancient Persia, . 
child, an auspicious According tothe Vendidad,! Ahura Mazda 
prone says :—“‘I prefer a person with children 
(puthrdné) to one without children (aputhrdi).” Even the very 
ground, where lives a man with his children, is described as 
feeling happy.’ Cultivation and a good supply of food to 
people are recommended, because they make mankind healthy 
and able ‘to produce a healthy progeny.2 To be the father 
of good children was a blessing from the Yazatas, like Tish- 
trya,* Mithra,> Haoma,® and Atar,’ and from the Fravashis.® 
To be “childless, was a curse from the Yazatas.® Domestic 


1 IV, 47. 2 Vendidad, III, 2. 3 Vendidad, ITi, 33. 

4 Yasht, VILL, Tir, 15. 5 Yasht X, Meher, 65. 

6 Yacna XI, Hom Yasht, 4 7, 10, 13, 22. 

7 Yaena, LXII, Atash Nyaish, 10; Vendidad XVIII, 27. 

8 Yasht X, Meher, 3; Yaght XIII, 134. 

9 Hom Yasht, Yagna H4, XI, 3. Cf. The blessings and the curse of 
Cambyses (Herodotus ITE, 65), Cf. also those of Darius (Behistun Inserip- 
tions, IV, 10, 11). 


2 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


animals, when ill-fed’and ill-treated, cursed their masters, that 
they may be childless! Childlessness was something like a 
punishment from heaven.* Kingly splendour 3 was associated 
with those who were blessed with children.* According to the 
Shayast 14 Shayast, one of the advantages of having children 
was ‘that the duty and good works which a son performs 
are ag much the father’s as though they had been done by his 
own hand,” 5 , 


A Zoroastrian woman often prayed for a good, healthy 
child.6 A Zoroastrian man and woman prayed before their 
sacred fire for a good, virtuous child.7, A woman without a 
child fel as sorry as a fertile piece of land that is not 
cultivated. She prayed for a husband,who could make her a 
mother of children.® 


Among the Achemenides, a wife who gave birth to many 
children was a favourite with her husband, who did not like to 
displease her in any way.!° “Children being the choicest gift of 
God, their lives were, as it were, pledged by parents for the solemn 
performance of an act. /We read in Herodotus: 1? ‘“‘ Next to 
prowess in arms, it is regarded as the greatest proof of manly 
excellence to be the father of many sons. Every year, the king 
sends rich gifts to the-man, who can show the largest number: for 
they hold that number is strength.” Strabo also says a similar 
thing.13 “We learn from the writings of the Christian Martyrs 
of Persia, that the ancient Persians, did not, for the above reasons, 
like the-prohibition against marriage among the Christians in 
the case of holy young Christian girls. 


1 Yaona, XI, 1-2. ? Yaena, XI, 3; Yasht X, Meher, 38, 108, 110. 

3 Kavaém Kharéno. 4 Yasht XIX, Zamydd, 75. 5 Chap. X, 22; 
XI 15. §S.B. E. Vol. V, pp. 325, 345. 

8 Yacna, IX, 22. 7 Atash Nyaish, Yacna LXII, 5. 

® Vend. ILI, 24, 9 Yasht V (Aban), 87. 

0 Herodotus, IX, 111. #4 Herodotus, TX, 10. 

2 Ibid 1,136. Rawlinson’s Translation, Vol. I, p. 277. 

8 Bk. XV, IL. 


BIRTH ; 3 


. 
In the Avesta itself, we find no references to any ceremony or 
rite during the state of pregnancy. The only 
Eregnency: allusion we find is this :—Women on finding 
themselves enceinte prayed before Ardvicura for an easy deliv- . 
ery,’ and then for a copious supply of milk at their breast for 
their children.2 The allusion to these prayers suggests, that 
there may be some formal ceremonies accompanying those | 
prayers, but we do not know what they were. 


Coming to later Pahlavi and Persian books, we find, that the 
Shiayast 14 Shiyast directs, that, when it is known that a lady of 
the family has become pregnant, a fire may be maintained most 
carefully in the house. The Saddar also gives this direction.‘ 
We have the remnant of this injunction in the present, custom of 
some of the modern Parsees, who, on the occasion of the comple- 
tion of the fifth and seventh months of pregnancy, light a lamp 
of clarified butter in their houses. “The reason, assigned for this 
in the Pahlavi and Persian books, is, that the fire, so kindled in 
the house, keeps out daévas,7.e., evil influences from the house. 
Again, a fire or a lamp is.even now taken to be symbolical of 
the continuation of a line of-offspring. For example, it is not. 
rare to hear, even now, words like these “‘ Taméro cherég roshan 
rahé,” i.e., “May your lamp be always burning.” This benedic- 
tion is meant-to say: ‘‘ May your son live long, and may your 
line of descent continue.” The ancient Iranians believed, that 
there were many chances of the children to be born being 
males, if the males were stronger than the females at the time 
of conception. (Bundehesh, Chap, XVI).5 


According to the Avesta, in the state of pregnancy, a woman 
is to be looked after very carefully. It is wrong for the husband 
to have sexual intercourse with her in her advanced state of 


1 Yasht, V (Abin), 87. 
2 Ardvicura Nyaish, 3. 

5 Chap. X,4;XIL, 11. S. B. E. Vol. V, pp. 316, 343. 
§ Chap. XVI, 1. S. B. E. Vol. XXIV, p. 277. 

5 Vide may Anthropological Papers, Part II, p, 207. 


4 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


pregnancy, which, according to the Revayets, commences with 
the fifth month? She is to abstain from coming into contact 
with any dead or decomposing matter, even with a thing like 
one’s tooth-pick which may contain gerths of one’s disease.? 


During pregnancy, the modern Parsees have no religious 

The Gfthand the Ceremonies or. rites. On the completion of 
seventh months of the fifth month of pregnancy, one day \is 
a Cee ae ae celebrated and known as “ Panch mésitih,” 
rejoicing. i.e, the day of the fifth month.’ Similarly, 
a day is ‘observed on the completion of the seventh month, and 
is known as Agharni. These days are observed as auspicious 
days of rejoicing only in the case of the first pregnancy. They 
are observed not in accordance with any religious injunction or 
with religious ceremonies or rites. The’expectancy of a child 
being a joyful event as said above, these days—especially some 
day after the completion of the seventh month—are observed as 
joyous occasions, when the lady who is enceinte is presented with 
suits of clothes by her parents, relatives and friends and especially 
by the family of her husband. The husband, is in turn, presented 
with a suit of clothes _by the wife’s family. Sweets are sent 
out as presents by the husband’s family to the bride’s house and 
to near relations.and friends. In these sweets, one prepared in 
the form of a cocoanut,? has a prominent place. A cocoanut 
typifies a.man’s head‘ and so it is a symbol of fecundity. Some 


1 Four months ten days. Vide Anquetil Du Perron, Zend Avesta, 
Vol. II, p. 563. 

? Shayast 18 Shaéyast, Chap. X, 20; XIT, 13, (8. B. E., Vol. V; pp. 323, 
344); Saddar, XVII, 2 (S. B. E., Vol. XXIV, p. 278). 

3 Among the Rajputs of India, the acceptance of a cocoanut is 4 
symbol of the acceptance of a proposal for marriage (vide Tod’s Annals 
of Rajasthan, edited by C. H. Payne, p. 25). 

4 The following story connects the cocoanut with a» man’s head. An 
astrologer once said to a king that, whatever was sown or planted on such 
and such a coming auspicious day, would grow well. The king said : 

-“* Suppose somebody sows a man’s head on a stony ground, will that 
also grow up into a luxuriant tree?” ‘* Yes,’ said the astrologer. The 
king, thereupon; cut off the head of the astrologer and sowed it in a stony 
ground. The cocoanut palm grew out of. it. (Journal of the Ceylon 
Asiatic Society, J anuary 1891.) 


BIRTH 6 


of the customs observed on these occasions are more Indian in 
their origin and signification than originally Persian or Zoroas- 
trian. 


In the case of the first delivery, it generally takes place in the 

Place of delivery, house of the wife’s parents. A room or a 
and its temporery part of a room, generally on the down-floor. 
CORnAeCrariON, is prepared and set apart for the purpose. As 
the Vendidad 4 says, the place for delivery must be very clean, 
dry and least-frequented by others. It appears, that in former 
times, such places were specially provided in Parsee houses on 
the down-floors. Parsee houses in those times had ‘generally 
spacious down-floors that were used for all purposes.“ The upper 
floors were low, and were rather like lofts. So; the down-floors 
provided proper places for delivery, as enjoined in the Vendidad. 
But, as, with changed circumstances, Parsee houses of to-day 
are not what they were before, and as, at present, in storied 
houses in big towns, the .down-floors.are generally the worst part 
of the houses, places of delivery atthe down-floor are now-a-days 
properly condemned as unhealthy. In the case of a house or a 
place where no delivery’ has taken place before, religious- 
minded persons generally take care that a religious ceremony 
may be performed there before the delivery. In other words, 
they get the place consecrated. A priest or two say and perform 
the Afringin prayer and ceremony over the place. At times, 
even the Baj prayer is recited. It seems that one of the lost 
nasks (books), the Hispaéram, had special chapters on the 
subject of parturition.? 


On the birth of a child, a lamp is lighted and kept burning, 
for at least three days, in the room where 

snd lamplighted °2 the lady is confined. The Saddar says: 
“When the child becomes separate from 


1 Chap. V, 46. 

2 Dinkard, Bk. VIII, Ch. XXXI and XXXV. 9, &. B. E., Vol. XXXVII, 
PP. 100 and 109. Dastur Darab Peshotan’s Dinkard, Vol. XVI, pp. 20 
and 28, The second of the above two chapters, refers to various subjects 
of obstetrics. 


6 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


the mother it is necessary to burn a lamp for three nights and 
days—if they burn a fire it would be better—so that the demons 
and fiends may not be able to do any damage and harm; because 
when a child is born, it is exceedingly delicate for those three 
days.” 1 Some people keep the lamp burning for ten days and 
some for forty days, the latter number being generally observed 
as the period of confinement. 


On delivery, the mother is enjoined to remain apart. from 

Paid senha: others. She is not to come into contact with 
ment on delivery, fire, water, and other furniture of the house.? 
a aayes In the case of those that give birth to still- 
born children, it is enjoined in the Vendidad,’? that they must 
thus remain apart for"12 days. This period has been latterly 
extended, as described in the later Pahlavi and Persian books, 
to forty days in all cases of delivery. Now-a-days, a Parsee 
lady has generally forty days «of\confinement after delivery. 
The Saddar says: ‘‘ During forty days it is not proper that 
they should leave the child alone ; and it is also not proper that 
the mother of the infant should put her foot over a threshold in 
the dwelling (i.e., leave the house) or cast her eyes upon a hill, 
or it is bad for her menstruation.” 4 


Some families, following the Hindu custom, observe the fifth 
day after birth, known as pachory (i.e., the fifth day), and the 
tenth day;-known as dasori (i.e., the tenth day), as gala days, 
but these days have no religious signification. 


During the above forty days, the lady is in a state of isola- 
tion. She is not to come into contact with 
anybody and with any part of the ordinary 
furniture of the house, especially wooden 
furniture and linen articles. Her food is to be served to her on 


Perfect isolation 
and purification. 


1 Chap. XVI, 2; 8. B. E. Vol. XXIV, p. 277; vide also the Persian 
Farziat-nameh of Dastur Dérab P&ahlan; vide the Gujarat Farziat-nameh 
(1843), p. 5. 

2 Vendidad, V. 45-49. 3 Vendidad, V. 55-56, 

* Chap. XVI. 4, S, B, E., Vol, XXIV, p. 277, 


BIRTH 4 


her plate by others. Those who have to come into contact 
with her have to bathe before they mix with others. Even the 
medical attendants had to do so, but, now-a-days, this sanitary 
rule is more honoured in the breach than in its observance. 
The original injunction may, among some other reasons, have 
been intended to observe “ purity” in order to prevent the 
spread of the diseases to which women in this state are 
subject.! 


At the end of forty days, which is the period of confinement, 
the lady has to purify herself by a bath before. ordinarily 
mixing with others. At first she takes an ordinary bath and 
then goes through what is called ‘nan,’ a-contraction of the 
Sanskrit word “snan” which is a sacred bath.? A priest, 
generally the family priest, administers that bath with con- 
secrated: water. 


All the bedding and clothes of the woman, used ‘during the 
forty days of her confinement after delivery, are rejected from 
ordinary use. They are enjoined to be destroyed, lest they carry 
germs of disease among others. But, now-a-days, that injunc- 

’ tion is not strictly followed. They are given away to sweepers. 


1 Vide the chapter on “* Maternity and its Perils” in Mr. Havelock 
Ellis’s ‘“‘ The Nationalization of Health ’’ (1892), pp. 123-143. It says that 
in England and Wales, where 4,500 women die every year in child-births 
‘* about 70. per cent. of this mortality is due to puerperal fever’ and that 
‘* almost the whole of this mortality might be avoided.” It is the careless 
medical practitioners and midwives, that are responsible for this mortal- 
ity, because they do not take sanitary care, and therefore carry germs 
from one woman in confinement to another. The midwifery writers of 
old said to their disciples: ‘‘ Thine is « high and holy calling ; see that 
thou exercise it with purity.” In the enjoined isolation of the Parsee 
women during their confinement, the original intention seems to be that 
of observing purity. Some of thelater Pazand and Persian writers have 
not properly understood the original good object of the early writers, and 
80, have carried the rigour of isolation too far. But anyhow, the origina 
injunction of isolation is intended for the purity referred to by old mid- 
wifery writers. Vide Dastur Jamaspji’s Sad-dar'( yee% WRX dda), 
pp. 142-46, for some further medical opinion. 

? Vide below, Chap. IV, Purificatory Ceremonies. 


8 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Formerly, a mother in child-birth first drank a few drops of 
aver the sacred Haoma-juice, which was squeezed 
Pirie Voviag drink and consecrated in a fire-temple. The 
Persian Farzidt-nimeh of Dastur Darab 
Pahlan says, that a new-born child should be made to drink a 
few drops of this juice. If the consecrated Haoma-juice (para- 
” Haoma) may not be had, one may pound at home a few Haoma 
twigs and a few leaves of the pomegranate tree (urvardm)>in 
water with the recital of an Ahunavar and give the juice for 
the first drink. In the Hom Yasht,! Haoma is said to give 
fine healthy children to women. Haoma was emblematical of 
immortality. Anquetil Du Perron? refers to this religious 
custom as prevalent in his time. But, now-a-days, this custom 
is rarely observed, and in place of the-Haoma-juice, a sweet 
drink made of molasses or sugar is givento the child as a first 
auspicious drink. The Farziat-nameh asks the mother to feed 
the child with her own milk for.I8 months, if the child be 
male, and for 15, if it be a female. 


Herodotus? refers to the-custom of naming the child among 
the ancient Persians. We infer from what 
he says, that the parents waited for some 
time after birth,.and then, watching the physical and mental 
characteristics of the child, gave them such names as indicated 
their characteristics. In the case of modern Parsees, many name 
the child after an immediate deceased ancestor. A Parsee name 
ismade-up of three names. The first is his own personal name, 
The second is his father’s name and the third is his surname or 
family name. Now, it is the first of these three, that is the 
proper name of the child; and in the case of that name, many 
prefer to call a child by an immediate ancestor’s name. Suppose 


Naming the child. 


i Yacna IX, p. 22. Vide my paper on ‘“‘Haoma in the Avesta” for 
the health-giving properties attributed to the plant. Vide my Asiatic 
Papers, Part I, pp. 225-43. Journal of the Anthropological Society of 
Bombay, Vol. VII, pp. 203-21. 

2 Zend Avesta, I, p. 564. : 3 Bk I, 139. 


BIRTH 9 


@ person named Jivanji had his father named Jamshedji, and his 
mother named AwAnbai. Then, on the birth of a child, ifitisa 
male child and if his own father (Jamshedji) was dead, he would 
prefer to name it Jamshedji. If it were a female child, he would 
like to name it Awanbai after his deceased mother. Some resort 
to a so-called astrologer and name the child as advised by him. 


This process of naming the child has one particular reli- 
gious significance, and it is this: In all religious ceremonies, 
during life or after death, a person’s name is recited, as he 
or she is named atthe time of his or her birth. This name 
is called Janam-ndm or birth-name. In his or her Naéjote, i,e¢., 
sacred shirt and thread ceremony, marriage ceremony, or any 
other ceremony enjoined by him or her during life-time (Zindeh- 
ravin), the birth-name is recited together with the father’s 
name. In all the ceremonies after death (Anésheh-ravan), the 
name is similarly recited. In the case.of a female, her personal 
name is recited together with that of her father as long as she 
is not betrothed, But after betrothal, her name is recited 
together with that of her husband.! As a lady’s name is recited 
with her husband’s in all-ceremonies after betrothal,. the 
ceremony of betrothal»is known as ‘“‘ Ndmzad shudan” in 
Persian, meaning “‘to be named,” or ndm pddvun in Gujarati 
meaning “ to give'a name. ” 

Herodotus says of the old Achemenian times, that “their 
names, which are expressive of some bodily or mental excellence, 
all end with the same letter.”’2 Looking to the names as given 
in the Avesta, we find that they mostly end in‘a’. The same 
or similar names when given by Greekwriters end in ‘s’. 
This can be easily seen from a list of Iranian names given 
by Rawlinson? with their corresponding forms in Greek 
writings. 


1 Among the present Zoroastrians of Persia, and those of the Kadmi, 
sect in India, who follow them, her name is recited with that of her | 
father. . . 

2 Bk. I, 139. Rawlinson’s Herodotus, Vol. I, p. 279. 

3 Jbid, Vol. III, pp. 550-63. : 


10 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


‘We find from stray allusions here and there in the Pahlavi 
and Persian writings, that, at times, children were named after, 
orin memory of, some particular events at the time of their 
birth. For example, names like Rustam and Kobéd are 
associated with some particular events at the time of their birth. 
Herodotus! speaks of Persian names as expressive of their 
physical form. Thus, we read inthe Khushro Shirin of Nizami, 
that the father of Khusro Parviz named the child, Khusru, 
because he saw him ‘ kinglike’ (Khusravi) in appearance. 


Most of the modern Parsee names end in ji (99, Avesta ‘ ji’, 
Persian Zéstan ‘to live’). In the recital of prayers in honour of 
the dead, this suffix ‘ ji’ is generally dropped, especially among 
the priestly class. It is taken to be a suffix-appellation of only 
the living. Modern Parsee names can be traced to certain few 
sources. For the males, they are the following :—(1) Some of 
them are derived from the names of some of their Yazatas or 
angels. They are Hormusji\(from Avesta Ahura Mazda, 
Hormuzd, the first Yazata), Bahamanji (Avesta Vohumana, 
Persian Bahman, the 2nd Yazata), Adarji (Adar, the 9th), 
Khorshedji (Avesta Hvaré Khshaéta, the 11th), Meherji (Avesta 
Mithra, Persian Meher, the 16th), Behramji (Avesta 
Verethragna, Pahlavi Varahram, Persian Behram, the 19th), Din 
(Avesta Daéna;-the 24th), and Homji (Avesta Haoma the 32nd 
in the list of the Sirouz4). (2)Some names are derived from some 
precious-jewels ; for example, Dhanji, Hirji, Manockji, Ratanji.? 
(3) Some names are adopted from those of their Iranian 
ancestors, as mentioned in the Shah-nameh and in other Iranian 
writings ; for example, Ardeshir, Burjorji, Bezonji, Darashah, 
Darabji (Dorabji), Edalji (Adalji), Erachji, Fardunji (Fredun), 
Hirozji (Pirozeji), Framji (Framroz), Godrezji, Gustadji, Jalbhai, 
Jamshedji, Jamaspji Jehangirji, Kaikusru, Kekbadji 
(Kaikobad), Kerbadji, Kavasji, Khod&bux, Minochehrji 
(Mancherji), MeherwAnji (Meherban), Nadirshah, ° Nowrozji, 


* Bk. I. 139. 
2 Vide for their meaning, the similar names of women on the next 
page. : 


“BIRTH ; 11 


Noshirwanji, Pahlanji (Pahliim), Pestonji (Peshotan), Rustamji, 
_Shidvakshah, Shapurji, Shehriarji, Sohbrabji, Tehmulji (Avesta 
Takhma-Urupa, changed in Pahlavi into Tahamurasp, then 
contracted, by dropping the final asp, into Tahmur, then changed 
into Tahmul). (4) Some names have been taken bodily or with 
slight changes from the Hindus. For example, Bapujis 
Bbikhaji, Dadabhai, Dajibhai, Dosibhai, Fakirji, Ghandibhai, 
Jijibhai, Jivaji, Jivanji, Kuvarji, Lavji, Limji, Motabhai, 
Nanabhai, Pochaji, Santok, Suklaji, Ukarji. 

Coming to the names of the female sex, ‘ Bai’ the last part 
of their names corresponds to the last part ‘ji’ of the males. 
One can divide them under the following groups:—(1) Names 
derived from the names of the Zoroastrian“ Yazatas or angels. 
These are Bahmanbai, Adarbai, Avanbai (from Awan the 10th 
Yazata), Khorshedbai, Meherbai, Dinbai, Hamabai (from Homa 
or Haoma). (2) Names derived from wealth or precious metals 
or jewels. They are Dhanbai’ (wealth), Hirabai (diamond), 
Jarbai (Persian Zar gold), Manockbai (ruby), Motibai (pearl), 
Ratanbai (jewel), Rupabai (silver), Sundbai (gold). (3) Names 
derived from old Persian names: Banubai (Persian Banu lady), 

‘Freni, Gulbai (Persian, Gul flower), Navazbai (contracted from 
Persian Arnavaz, a sister of King Jamshed), Pirozbai, 
Pourouchisht,; Tehmina. (4) Names derived from expressions for 
sweets: Mithibai (sweet), Shakarbai (sugar), Shirinbai (Persian, 
Shirin..sweet, also an Iranian name). (5) Names taken from 
the Hindus: Aimaé, Alib&i, Bachubai, Bhikhibai, Ch&éndanbai, 
Dosibai, Jaibai (Jaiji), Kuwarbai, Nalibai, Sukhlibai, Virbai. 

We find from these above lists, that some names are common 
to males and females. It is only the suffix ‘ji’ or ‘bai’ that 
makes it a male ora female name. 

As for the names derived from the Zoroastrian Yazatas or. 
angels, children are, at times, named after some particular 
Yazatas, if they are born on the days of the month bearing 
the name of those Yazatas. For example, a male or female 
child, born on the day Meher, the 16th day of a Parsee month, 
may be named Meherji or Meherbai respectively. 


12 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND OUSTOMS 


The birth-day of a Parsee child—and especially the first birth. 
day—is an important day. No religious rites 
orceremonies are enjoined as necessary. 
But the parents generally like to celebrate the day in, what one 
may call, a religious way. After a bath and a new suit of 
clothes, the child is generally sent with some sandal-wood to 
an adjoining Fire-temple. There, the ash of the sacred fire is 
attached to its forehead. Some of those, who can afford;- get 
a religious ceremony, known as Fareshta,! performed. That is 
generally done on the first birth-day. This ceremony consists 
of the recital of prayers in honour of the 33 different Yazatas or 
angels, and indicates, that God’s blessings are invoked upon the 
child, and that it is wished that it may be blessed with all the 
physical characteristics and mental virtues over which God has 
directed these Yazatas to preside. According to Herodotus, 2 
‘* of all the days in the year, the one which the ancient Persians 

observed most was their birth-day.”’ 


Birth-day- 


From a strictly religious point of view, there is nothing special 
to be remarked in the case of the childhood 
of a,Parsee child. It is held to be innocent 
and not liable or subject to the performance of any religious 
duties or rites. If God forbid, the child dies before the Naojéte 
or the investiture of the sacred shirt and thread, its funeral 
ceremonies.are on a lower scale. In the recital of the funeral 
prayers, the child is spoken of as ‘ Khird, ’ 7.e., small or young. 
This. appellation signifies that the deceased person was too 
young and that it had no responsibility for duties or rites as a 
Zoroastrian. 


Childhood. 


At or about the age of six, the child has to learn by heart a 
few religious prayers—especially those falling under the head of, 


1 Pers, ,A& 3 7. €., angel. 

2 Bk. I. 133. Vide Ibdid., Bk. IX. 110—14, for the king’s birth-day 
feast‘ Tykta.’? The king soaped his head and gave gifts on this day. He 
rerused no demands of gifts on that day. For the meaning of the word 
‘ tykta’, vide my “ Agiatic Papers,” Part IT, p. 242. 


BIRTH . 18 


and attached to, the Nirang-i-Kusti, ! i.e., the recital for putting 
on the sacred thread. These must be learnt by heart for the 
coming occasion of its Naojéte, when it is to be invested with 
sacred shirt and thread. After this investiture, the child’s 
name ceases to be recited as Khard in the prayers accompanying 
religious ceremonies but is recited as Behedin or Osht& as the 
case may be, i.e., a3 it belongs to the layman or the priestly class. 


According to the Farzi&t-nameh, when the child first begins 
to speak, the first word to be taught to it is the name of God 
and the next that of Zoroaster. At the age of seven, it may be 
entrusted to a Mobad or priest for religious instruction. At 
first, the Sraosh Baj prayer, then the Nydishes, and then the 
Yashts may be taught to it. 


The Pahlavi Aérpatastén 2 has a chapter on the subject of 
the childhood of a Zoroastrian child of old and of the respon- 
sibilities of its Mobad preceptors.. The latter were to take 
no children under their charge without the permission of their 
parents or guardians.3 There:seemed to be a custom whereby 
some children lived with their preceptors, whose fee for the whole 
period of tuition is mentioned in one place as 500 drachms, or 
about 600 rupees, The preceptors had, as it were, a kind of 
lien on the children if the stipulated fee was not paid. If, at 
the end of the stipulated time, they found that the guardians 
were not the proper persons to whom the children could be 
safely restored, they withheld the restoration. The Pahlavi 
Andarz-i- kutakén, speaks of a few duties of children from a 
religious point of view (Dr. Freiman’s Text and Translation. 
Dr..Hoshang Memorial Volume, pp. 482-89 ). 


1 Spiegel, translated by Bleeck, Vol. ITI. p. 4, “‘ Le Zend Avesta,” par 
Darmesteter, Vol. IT., p. 685. 

2 Aerpatastén and Nirangastan, by Mr. Sorab Jamshedji Bulsara, M.A. 
Aerpatastan Bk. I., Chap. IV. 

3 Ibid., Chap. IV. 1. 

4 The following subjects are referred to in the Dinkard as the contents 
of a section of the lost Husparam nask on the subject of child-birth and 
children: “ Begetting a son; conception; tokens of a sex; formation of 
the limbs; Fravahars’ power of making the sexes; child-birth and care 
of a child; spiritual vision of the child; habits tending to beauty and 
other good qualities,” J (Dastur Darab Peshotan’s Dinkard, Vol. XVI, 
contents, p. V). 


CHAPTER II. 


Marriage Ceremonies and Customis. 


According to the Parsee books, marriage is an institution that 
d is favoured by the Almighty God Accord- 
Marriage, a good : 
institution, accord- ing to the Vendidad (IV. 47), Ahura Mazda 
ing toParsce books. ..¥5: “OQ Spitama Zarathushtra! Indeed, 
I thus recommend hereunto thee, a man with a wife above a 
Magava (i.e., an unmarried man) who grows: up (unmarried), a 
man with a family above one without any family, aman with 
children above one who is without children.” The very ground 
where a married man lives is represented-as feeling happy. 
Zarathushtra asks : ‘“‘ O Creator of the physical world! Which 
is ‘the second place on the earth that feels happy?” Ahura 
Mazda replies: “That (place is happy), over which a holy 
man builds a house with fire, cattle, wife, children and good 
followers.” (Vend. III, 1.)4 


The reason why marriage is recommended in Parsee books ig, 
that there is a greater likelihood for a married person than for 
an unmarried one to be able to withstand physical and mental 
afflictions and to lead a religious and virtuous life (Vend. IV, 
48, 49). We read.in the Gathas (Yagna, LIIT., 5): “ T say (these) 
words to_you, marrying brides and bridegrooms! Impress them 
in yoursmind. May you two enjoy the life of good mind by 
following the laws of religion. Let each one of you clothe the 
other \with righteousness. Then assuredly there will be a 
happy life for you.” 


1 Compare with this, the following lines, wherein also the poet 
describes the house of a married couple as feeling happy :— 
“* What a delicious breath marriage sends forth 
The violet’s bed not sweeter! Honest wedlock 
Is like a banqueting house built in a garden, 
On which the spring flowers take delight 
‘To east their modest odours.” 


MARRIAGE 15 


Marriage being thus considered a good institution and well- 

qanae sagas nigh a religious duty, recommended by 
is a meritorious Teligious scriptures, a Parsee considers it 
a a meritorious act to help his co-religionists to 
marry. The Vendidad (IV, 44) says: “If a co-religionist—hbe 
he brother or friend—comes to thee with a desire for a wife, 
get him married to a wife.”1 To bring about the marriage of 
a maiden, who has reached her puberty, with a good righteous 
man, is considered to be very meritorious and an act of atone- 
ment for a sin (Vend. XIV, 15). 


We learn also from Herodotus (Bk. I., 136), that in ancient 

The authority of Persia, the State encouraged married life. 
Herodotus. He says: “ Next to prowess in arms, it is 
regarded as the greatest proof of manly excellence to be the 
father of many sons. Every year the king sends such gifts to 
‘the man who car show the largest number, for they hold that 
number is strength.” ® Thus; from very ancient times, marriage 
is considered among the Parsees to be a most important event 
in one’s life. 


+ It is not_unusual for Parsees to enjoin by their last testament or 
by a Trust, that a certain amount of their wealth may be spent in charity 
in the way of\helping poor brides to marry. A similar provision has been 
made by the first Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy, Baronet, in his charitable 
Institution known as the Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy Parsee Benevolent 
Institution ; and even now, about 60 years after his death, poor brides 
are helped tobe'married. The Parsee Punchayet funds also have a similar 
provision. At present, about Rs. 75 are given to help the marriage of 
every bride. When parents lose by death a young son of marriageable 
age, they take consolation in this special kind of charity. This custom 
can be compared to that of the ‘“‘ funeral doles ” of the ancient Christians, 
wherein pious Christians provided for the marriage of poor unmarried 
girls. Among the ancient Greeks, the State thought it its duty to provide 
dowries for the marriage of the poor maidens of the country. 


Among the Romans, the State encouraged marriages. A tax 
known as uxorium was imposed upon the unmarried. Celebacy was an 
affliction among the ancient Jews (Judges XL, 37; 1 Samuel I, 1); 
Proverbs XVIL., 6). 


is SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


After the several vicissitudes of fortune that the community 
: a4 has passed through, it is difficult to determine 
ae ee how many and which of the present several 
ceremonies is marriage customs of the Parsees are originally 
originally Persian. 2 y 
Zoroastrian ot Persian. But this much can 
be said with well-nigh a certainty, that the strictly solemn or 
the religious part of the ceremony, wherein the priests take part, 
is more or less originally Persian. M. Harlez seems to be correct 
when he says on this point: ‘‘ Nous ne trouvous pas non plus, 
dans ce qui nous reste des livres avestiques, de cérémonies parti- 
culiéres pour le marriage ; il est probable cependant que Vori- 
gine de celles qu’observent encore les Parses modernes remonte 
aux temps les plus reculés.”’ ! 


In the very commencement of the Ashirvad or the marriage 
Blessing-prayer, known as the Paévand Nameh, and recited at the 
wedding ceremony, the officiating head priest says, that the 
ceremony is “according to the rules and customs of the Mazda- 
yacgnan religion (avar dad va 4in-i-Din-i-Mazdayacni).”’ We 
gather from stray references in Herodotus (Bk. IX. 108) that 
the Achemenides observed some ceremonies for marriage. _ 
Firdousi also refers tothe existence of some marriage customs 
(ain va kish. Mecan’s Calcutta edition, Vol. I, p. 320). 


According.to the Avesta, a person came to manhood in ancient 

The marriage. ‘Iran at the age of fifteen (Yt. VIIL., Tir, 
able age. 13-14; Yt. XIV, Behram, 17; Yagna IX., 5). 
The Pahlavi Bundehesh also gives the same age (Chap. III., 19, 
8. B. E. Vol. V., 16). So, fifteen was the marriageable age for 
males. For the females also, it was 15 (Vendidad XIV.,15). The 
very fact, that in the Avesta we find brides praying for suitable 
husbands, shows, that there were no early marriages (Yt. V, Aban 
87; Yt. XV, Ram, 40; Yaona IX, 23). The Paéwand-nameh, 
recited at present at the marriage ceremony, also shows that 
early marriages were never contemplated. The bride and 


i Parlez, Avesta. (Introduction) p. CLXXI. 


MARRIAGE : 17 


bridegroom are asked to express their consent after “ truthful 
consideration ” (T& and4zandi paéman pa rast manashni pasand 
kardehid). The book of Herodotus also points to a grown-up 
age for marriage. The marriageable age at present is gerterally 
after 21 for the males and after 16 for the females. The Parsee 
Marriage Act enjoins 21 for the males and 18 for the females. 
When they are not of that age, the marriage-certificate must be 
signed by the parents, 


The nuptial ceremonies of the marriage-day are preceded by 
several other ceremonies. When the match is 
arranged, an auspicious day is fixed for thd 
betrothal. ‘The new moon day, or, the first day (Hormazd) of the 
Parsee month, or, the twentieth day, over which Behram, the 
angel of Victory, is believed to preside, are generally considered 
to be auspicious days. Now-a-days, the parties generally fix such 
auspicious days or the days most convenient to them. But still 
it is not rare, especially in the Mofussil towns, for the parties to 
resort to Hindu astrologers to\name one or more auspicious 
days for the betrothal-or marriage or such other auspicious 
events; 


The betrothal. 


Matches are generally arranged by the parents with the con- 
sent of the children, though, now-a-days, there are many cases 
of marriages where marrying parties make their own choice. In 
the latter \case, they generally consult the parents. Mutual 
friends.of the two families generally carry messages and bring 
about the arrangement. The Pahlavi Pand-nameh of Aderbid 
Marespand recommends this process (§ 42). The marriages of 
the three sons of Faredun and the marriages of Rustam with 
Tehemina and of Kaus with Soudabeh, were, as we learn from 


-Firdousi, thus arranged. Upto late, and even now to a certain 
extent, professional match-makers were not unknown. 


On the betrothal day, at first, the ladies of the bridegroom’s 
family go to the house of the bride and make her a money 
present in silver coins, Then the ladies of the bride’s family 
go to the house of the bridegroom and make him a similar 

3 


18 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


present. These reciprocal presents of silver coins form the only 
important part of the ceremony. 


The ladies return to their houses, after a little refreshment, 
mostly consisting of fish, sweets, curd, plantains and sugar. The 
modern Parsee term for this ceremony is Adravviin, but the 
older! term is Nam pddvtiin, which is derived from the Persian 
term ‘Namzad kardan,’ 7.¢.,to name. Itis so called from the 
fact that after the betrothal, the brides took the names “of-the 
bridegrooms.? According to the Parsee custom, a girl’s name is 
always connected with her husband’s in religious ceremonies 
alter the betrothal, even if, by some chance or accident, marriage 
does not take place. This shows that betrothal * was considered 
to be a solemn ceremony for a marriage contract. Nuptial 
songs are generally sung on this occasion. 


1 An unbetrothed girl was said to be  unnamed,’’ (n&é kardeh 
nam). Cf. Firdousi’s statement about the daughters of the king of 
Yeman, mar dn har sé ré niiz n& kardeh.nam. (Mecan’s Text, Vol. I, 
p- 51). According to Anquetil du Perron (Tome II, p. 557), the 
marriage ceremonies of the Parsees in Surat, at the time of his 
residence there (A.D. 1760),-were of two kinds, (1) Némzad (betrothal) 
and Nekéh (marriage). Now-a-days, in Bombay, the priests do not take 
any active part in the first.ceremony, but it appears from Anquetil (II, 
p. 557) that they did so in former times. The intended bridegroom and 
the bride, and their families, met together, and the family priest of the 
bridegroom said. that “ That was the will of God.” He then recited the 
Tandaructi and the Profession of Faith prayer and gave the hand of one 
into that of the other. In some of the Mofussil towns like Naosari, the 
family priest or a friendly priest still takes an active part in the betrothal. 
On the day of betrothal, he carries a formal message from the family of 
the bridegroom to that of the bride and asks for the bride to be given in 
mazria ge to the bridegroom. The parents express their pleasure to do so, 
and stamp, as it were, their pleasure to do so, by presenting the priest 
with afew rupees. Afterwards, a priest from the bride’s family goes on 
a similar errand to the family of the bridegroom. 

* Vide above, p. 9, the section of ‘‘ Naming the child” in ‘* The 
Birth Ceremonies. *’ 

3 Betrothal isso called, because, in it, a ‘ troth ’ or a promise of truth- 
ful adherence to a marriage contract is given: cf, the promise of Mithro 
viré mazé (Vendidad, IV, 2), which is considered by the Revayets to bea 
marriage promise, to break which is considered to be @ great sin. 

‘4 For some marriage songs, vide my Marriage Customs of the Parsees. 
Vide Journal, Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. V of 1899. 


MARRIAGE 19 


The next ceremonial occasion is that of Divé, t.e., a light. It , 

is so called, because, early in the morning of a 

kindling Ws at day fixed for the occasion, an oil lamp is lit 
: jn the house of each party.! The ladies of 
each of the two families go in turn to the house of the other, 
and place a silver coin in the lamp there. This occasion is 
considered more important than that of the betrothal, because, on 
it, formal presents of clothes and rings are made. When» the 
matches are arranged, the betrothal is hastily determined upon, 
to give a formal stamp, as it were, to the arrangement. The 
parties then have no time to prepare mutual presents and gifts ; 
so, this second occasion, the day for which is fixed leisurely, is 
more important than the betrothal, for the-formal presents of 
gifts. The first wedding rings are generally presented by both 

the parties on that day. 


The next important occasion is that of Adarni. It is the 
oceasion, on which, the dowry given by the 
bride’s father, is presented to the bride- 
groom’s family. On several other occasions of holidays between — 
the betrothal day and the marriage day, several presents are 
sent to each other’s family, mostly from the family of the 
bride to that of the bridegroom. The marriage occasion is 
one, when.the mothers of the bride and the bridegroom, expect 
presents of clothes from their own parents. If the parents are 
dead, it is considered to be the duty of the brother or brothers 
to present asuit orsuits of clothes to the sister. A nuptial song 


The Adarni. 


is generally sung on such an occasion. 


a 


1 Cf. the custom among the ancient Greeks, according to which the 
bride’s mother carried in her hand the bridal torches kindled at the family 
hearth, and the bridegroom’s mother carried torches and awaited the 
procession from the bride’s house. (The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks, 
by Bliimner, pp. 139-140). 


20 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


An auspicious day is fixed for the marriage. In some fami-. 
lies, even now, it is the astrologer who 
determines which day is auspicious for the 
marriage.! The new moon day and the full 
moon day are auspicious.? Tuesdays are inauspicious.2. The 
marriage festivities generally last for four days. The first of 
these is°called mandav-saro, when a twig of a tree, generally 
a mango-tree, is planted near the door, symbolic of a wish» for 
fertility.2 The second and the third days are known as 


Varadh-patra days when religious ceremonies in honour of the 
dead are performed. 


The fixing of an 
auspicious day. 


1In some families an astrologer’s services are engaged before the 
marriage also. When matches are being arranged by the intercession of 
mutual friends, the horoscopes of the,intended bride and bridegroom are 
submitted to him to observe whether there was or not any rd¢ between 
the two, ¢.e., whether the stars predicted or not that there would 
be harmony between the two. If that harmony is declared not to exist, 
nothing further is done. 


2 According to Strabo, the vernal equinox was considered to be the 
best season for marriages among the ancient Persians, because it was, as 
it were, the birthday of Nature. Among the ancient Greeks, weddings 
took place in the winter. “ A favourite time was the month Gamelion (the 
‘end of January and beginning of February) which hence received its name, 
Certain days regarded as auspicious were generally chosen, and the waning 
moon was specially avoided.”” (The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks, by 
Bliimner, p. 136). “ The Athenians preferred the time of the new moon, 
while some of the Greeks considered the period of full moon as the most 
favourable ” (‘‘ The Knot Tied’'” by W. Tegg, p. 63). Among the ancient 
Jews, “‘ the fourth day of the week, 7.c., Wednesday, was an auspicious 
day for the marriage of virgins and Thursday for that of widows.” 
(W. Tegg, p. 53). Among the ancient Romans, “ certain days were reckon- 
ed unfortunate for the marriage as the Kalends, Nones, and Ides, and the 
days which followed them, particularly the whole month of May. But 
widows might marry on these days. The most fortunate time was the 
middle of the month of June” (Ibid, p. 174). 

* Cf. The custom referred to by Mrs. Philgot in her Sacred Trees, 
pp. 88-9 1, ae 


MARRIAGE 21 


Coming to the ceremonies of the day of marriage itself, the 
bride and the bridegroom take in the morn- 
ing or in the afternoon, a sacred bath with 
consecrated water.t1 This sacred bath is known as ndn,? 


The sacred bath. 


The Parsee marriages are generally performed in the evening, 
; just a little after sunset. The bridegroom 
The time of -the es 
performance of the generally sits in the compound of the house 
religious ceremony. 47 bungalow in a promiscuous place in the 
midst of a company of several male friends and relations... The 
bride and the lady guests are accommodated with seats within 
the building. 
Marriage is considered to be an event which must be celebrated, 
. not quietly, but with some.éclat. It must be 
Marriage per- - 
formed with éclat celebrated in the presence of an assembly 4 
sianene Aran, (Anjuman) who can bear witness to the event. 


1 We learn from Firdousi, that this seems to be an old custom. King 
Behram Gour took his Indian wife Sepinoud to the Fire-temple of Ader 
Goushasp for the purpose. Among the ancient Greeks, ‘* among the 
ceremonies bearing religious character which preceded the wedding, an 
important part was played. by the bath. Both bride and bridegroom 
took a bath either in the morning of the wedding day, or the day before, 
for which the water was brought from a river ot from some spring regarded 
as specially sacred, as at Athens the spring Callirhoe, (or Enneacrunoe) 
at Thebes theIsmenus.” (The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks, by 
Prof. Bliimner, translated by Alice Zimmern, p. 137). 

2 Vide.below Chapter IV. The Purificatory Ceremonies. 

§ Itis just the time when day and night unite together. So, perhaps 
that hour is chosen to indicate, that just as day and night, light and dark- 
ness, unite together and melt into each other, so the marrying couple may 
unite together in prosperity and adversity, in happiness and grief, in 
danger and safety. The ancient Romans also performed their marriages 
at night-fall, because they said it was the time when Venus, the goddess of 
beauty, which personified beauty in the marrying bride, shone. © 

4 In ancient Rome and Greece also, a similar view was held about 
marriage. But the assemblies began to be very large, and consequently 
extravagance in marriage expenses crept in. Hence, it was found necessary 
to limit the number of guests invited. Plato allowed 10 guests to each 
side, i.¢., in all 20 guests were allowed at the marriage gatherings, A 
law of the fourth century fixed that number to be 30. A cénsor had the 
right of going ito a house where the marriage took place and he 
femoved out of the house any number that exceeded 30, | 


22 SOCIO-KELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


According to the Dinkard, marriages were performed, in ancient 
Tran, with éclat. It says, that the drums and fifes which played 
at marriage gatherings announced the marriage to the people 
of the town or village. The assembly of males that gathers on 
marriage occasions is called Shahjan, (#.e., the assembly for the 
royal bride). 

The bridegroom puts on the usual ceremonial dress—Jama- 

The dress of the Pichhori—of the Parsees, which is a loose 
bridegroom. flowing dress, full of folds and curls.A This 
flowing dress is always white in colour.2 The bridegroom holds 
a shawl in his hand, a shawl being considered in India a symbol 
of respect and greatness. He has the mark of a Kunkun * (red 
pigment) on his forehead. 


2 A loose flowing dress is, in all ages, considered to be necessary for 
solemn and state occasions. In courts, churches, and universities, the 
gowns and robes, which were similar flowing dresses, played an important 
part. The folds of such dresses carried the idea of a kind of mystery, 
respect and rank. Women, therefore, generally put on such flowing 
dresses. 

2 White colour is generally the symbol of purity, innocence and faith. 
fulness. The Roman bride used-to wear a white gown on the occasion of 
her marriage. The ribbon-knots which the guests put on among the Romans 
on marriage occasions were also white in colour. 

3 Fifty years ago the chief leaders of the Parsee community used to 
carry shawls over their shoulders. The head-priests of the community 
still carry shawls, as the insignia of their office. Thepresentation of shawls 
to friends on important ceremonial! occasions, as mentees; is still com- 
mon to a.certain extent. 

4 Kunkun or the red pigment’ plays an important part on marriage, 
and such other gay occasions in India. Various explanations are given 
about its use. Some say, that this red pigment is the symbol or substitute 
of blood, and that its use is the remnant of the custom of using blood on 
such oecasions. They say that formerly they used to sacrifice animals on 
gay occasions like marriage, to avert evil from the married lifeof the couple. 
The blood of such gacrificed animals was applied to the forehead of the 
marrying couple. The application of the red pigment is considered to be 
a remnant and substitute of that custom. I haveheard a story of a Divan 
of a native State, that on the coronation of his Prince, he made a slight cut 
on his thumb, and with the blood oozing from the wound, made the 
usual mark (t#1@) on the Prince’s forehead. That was a prevalent custom 
among the Rajputs of Oodeypore (vide Tcd’s Rajasthan). In old 
Christian art also, an angel is shown stamping a mark on the forehead 


MABRIAGE 33 


The red pigment mark on the forehead of a bride ‘is always 

The _ significa- round and that on the forehead of a 
tion of the markof bridegroom always long and vertical. The 
ees cde pe we reason is this: the long vertical mark of the - 
flowers, male symbolizes a ray of the sun, and the 
round mark of the female symbolizes the moon. A handsome 
manis compared by Oriental writers with the sun, butthe beauty 
of a woman is always compared with that of the moon. The-sun 
is always represented in ancient pictures, as a round dise with 
shooting rays. Again, thesun, through his rays, is a fructifying 
agent, but the moon is represented as a conceiving agent. She 
absorbs the rays of the sun. Just as the sun is-a fructifying 
agent, and the moon a conceiving agent, so is man in his relation 
to woman. Hence it is that the mark on a man’s forehead is 
long and vertical like the rays of the sun, and that on a 
woman’s forehead round like the moon. 


The bridegroom has a garland! of flowers round his neck 
as a symbol of sweetness and geniality. The bridegroom is 
called var-ra ja, 1.e., husband-king. For this particular occasion 
of marriage his position-is taken to be elevated.* 


of the elect (vide The Life of Christ as represented in Art by 
Dr, Farrar). The legend explains the subject as the sign of the letter T 
which was originally a ~ (cross) and was a symbol of felicity, safety and 
salvation. 

1 Garlands play a prominent part in the marriage customs of many 
nations. They were common among the ancient Greeks, Romans and 
Jews. In old Anglo-Saxon churches, the priest blessed the pair. and put 
garlands of flowers round their necks. 

? They say, that in ancient times, among several nations, the marry. 
ing couple put on crowns. Among the ancient Greeks, the priest put 
crowns on the heads of bridegrooms. In Athens, the friends of the bride 
carried a crown for her. In Egypt also, the bride put on a crown. Among 
the Hebrews the marrying couple were made to walk under a canopy 
resembling a crown. In Norway, the bride put on a jewel resembling a 
crown. In ancient churches, they kept a metallic crown, whic wash lent 
to the marrying couple for the occasion. 


24 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS GEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Some of the assembled friends and relations then make their 
presents to the bridegroom and his father. 
Presents to the : 
pride and bride. ‘The presents mostly consist of shawls or 
ae to their ings, or money in cash. The bride and her 
parents receive similar presents from their 
friends. Up to a few years ago, these presents, especially 
those in cash, were very common, Small presents of cash up 
to Rs. 5 were not necessarily paid into the hands ‘ofthe 
parties, but were given into the hands of a friend or relation, 
who acted as a receiver or collector for the occasion. He put 
down in a book the names of the donors and the amount of 
their money-gifts. Such money-presents used to pay off a 
part of the marriage expenses.1 The memo kept by the 
receiver proved to be of use to the parties when, on similar 
occasions of marriages in the family of their friends, they had to 
make similar presents in return. 


1 This custom reminds one of. the ‘“ marriages of contributions ” 
of ancient Wale sand the ‘penny weddings’ of ancient Scotland. In 
Wales, a herald went round in the.town, announcing the marriage, and say- 
ing, that presents would be received very thankfully and returned on similar 
occasions. Individual givers of small cash presents did not feel the burden 
of the small payment, but to the marrying couple and their parents, the 
total amount of these individual small presents was most welcome, as it 
enabled them to pay off the wedding expenses, and to put up a new house. 
In the case of the penny-weddings of Scotland, at times, the people of the 
whole village paid in their small contributions, and took a part in the wed- 
ding festivals. In some cases, the neighbours collected among them- 
selves -and presented to the marrying couple, sufficient corn that would 
last during the whole of the first year of their married life. In old England, 
they say, the nobleman in possession of the adjoining estates presented 
meat, and the milk-men milk, cheese, eggs, &c., for the wedding feasts, 
The schoolmasters and the priests generally lent their cooking utensils. 
The parties receiving these presents kept a note of such presents, and were 
generally ready to give similar presents on the occasions of marriages in the 
families of those who had given them those presents. In Cumberland, 
they placed a plate in a prominent place at the place of marriage, and the 
assembled friends put into it their mite. In ancient Europe, on the mar- 
riage day, the bride used to sell ale to her friends and to her husband’s 
friends at fancy prices. The money so acquired helped them in putting 
up a new house. In ancient Egypt, the bride held in her hand a soft sub- 
stance called hend and the friends put in silver coins in that substance. 


MARRIAGE 25 


Tt appears from the Avesta, that in old Iran, it was more cus- 

Marriage gift ana tomary for the bridegroom to give marriage 
dowry. gifts to the bride than for him to take from 
her. The duty of the father of the bride, and in his absence 
_ or death, that of the brother, was confined to that of presenting 
an ear-ring (gaoshavaré) to the bride. The sum of 2,000 silver 
dinars and two gold dirhems, referred toin the Pahlavi Paéwand- 
nameh, recited at the marriage, seems to be the average 
standard which an ordinary bridegroom of moderate. means 
was expected to provide for his bride. 


An hour or two before the celebration of the marriage, the 

Marrige:Groos ladies of the bride’s family and the bride’s 
sions, friends, form themselves in a procession, and 
carry for the bridegroom, to his place, presents of clothes and 
some other valuables. The houses of the bridegroom and 
the bride have a kind of wedding ‘powder called chauk spread 
over their thresholds on such merry occasions.1 A nuptial 
song is again sung on such an occasion. They return to their 
place after this presentation. The assembly, then, forms itself 
into a procession, headed bythe officiating priests and the bride- 
groom and followed by. the ladies who carry with them what 
is called varni, i.e., a present from the var, -(i.e, the bride- 
groom) to the bride. The procession is sometimes preceded by 
a band of music. According to the Pahlavi Dinkard, one of 
the objects_of playing music on the occasion of a marriage is to 
inform the whole town, especially the neighbourhood, that a 
marriage has been celebrated.? The procession? goes to the 


1 Vide my paper on “The Wedding Sand in Knutsford (Cheshire, 
England) and the Wedding Sand (ils) in India” (Journal, Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, 1912, Vol. EX, pp. 471-80). Vide my Anthropological 
Papers, Part II, pp. 31-39. 

? Dastur Peshotan’s Dinkard, Vol. IT., p. 96. Vide ‘* Notice Sur lez 
Yexedis,” Journal Asiatique of January-February, 1896, p. 119. 

3 Such marriage processions played an important part in many 
nations. In the Isle of Man, the marriage processions entered the church 
after going round three times. In ancient Greece, marriage processions 
were generally accompanied with musical bands and torches, The whole 


4 


26 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


house of the bride, where the marriage generally takes place. 
A nuptial song is generally sung on this occasion. 


The procession goes to the place of the bride, and its members 
are accommodated with seats, the males in the compound and 
the females within the house. The door of the house of the 
bride is decorated with a hanging string of flowers, called toran 
(i.e., arch) and the sideposts which support the doors are 
marked with Haradh (turmeric) mixture.1 This kind of decora- 
tion is observed on the door of the bridegroom’s house also. A 
nuptial song is sung on this occasion. 


procession went on foot to the house of the bride, but the marrying ceuple 
were seated in a carriage. Upto about 70 years agoin Bombay, and about 
45 years ago in Naosari, and such other Moiussil.towns, it was common 
to see the husbands—generally boy-husbands—riding on horses. In 
Naosari, some marriage processions were accompanied by men carrying 
guns which were fired at intervals. It is said, that this is the case even now 
in some parts of Scotland. This seems to be a remnant of the ancient 
custom of marrying by capture when tribes attacked other tribes, and 
carried off marriageable girls. 

1 Among the ancient Romans, the door of the house of the bride - 
groom was similarly decorated with flowers when the bride first went to 
her husband’s house. She herself applied oil to the door-posts, oil being 
considered a symbol of prosperity. In Indian and other architectures, 
the toran (archway) played a ery prominent part (vide History of 
Indian Literature. by Harrowitz, p. 72). It is a symbol of marriage, 

suspended at the portal of the bride (Tod’s Rajasthan, p. 26). 

; The custom of applying Haradh(turmeric) to the door-posts is common 
in India. “The. word Haradh comes from the Sanskrit root har, which 
means ““to be yellow, to shine.” Its colour is like that of sun-light. 
So turmeric and other drugs of its colour are taken to be the symbols of 
sun’s light, and also of the prosperity and plenty brought about by his 
fertilizing power. Hence, the marks made with turmeric are considered 
auspicious. Instead of the red pigment (Kunkun), some use turmeric for 
the auspicious marks on their foreheads. It is for its being a symbol of 
plenty and prosperity that the new account books, commenced to be 
used on the Dewali New Year’s day by the Hindus, are marked with 
turmeric marks. 

According to Dr. Dymock, one of the different Indian words for tur- 
merie is Rajni, t.e., light. They say that in ancient times, young wives 
decorated their foreheads with auspicious marks of turmeric, a little before 
sunset, when they expected their husbands to return to their homes from 
out-door work. This was intended as an auspicious thing, signifying, that 
as the sun, whose symbol the turmeric was, fructified the creation, so they 


MARRIAGE 27 


After the assembly is seated, the bridegroom enters the bride’s 
Ww : house. He is welcomed at the door by the 
elcoming cere= 

monies beforecross- mother of the bride. He is made to stand 
ng the threshold. 3+ the threshold where several ceremonies 
are performed to welcome him and to wish him good luck. A 
fresh Kunkun mark is made upon his forehead, and a little rice 
is stuck upon the moist Kunkun mark and thrown over his head. 
Rice is considered to be the symbol of plenty and prosperity. 
Hence the sprinkling of rice plays a prominent part on many occa- 
sions of joy for wishing good luck. The officiating priests also, 
in performing the religious ceremony, and in invoking the 
blessings of God upon the couple, sprinkle rice over them.1 
Before the recital of the marriage blessings, the bride and the. 
bridegroom also throw upon one another a handful of rice. 
Some fond mothers make the bride andthe bridegroom eat a 
few grains of rice thus besprinkled over them in the marriage 
ceremony. 


An egg is then passed round his head three times, and then 
thrown upon the ground and broken. This seems to be the 


may be fructified and blessed with children at the hands of their husbands. 
This custom is said to prevail even now in some of the Indian villages. 
Even young ladies, when visiting lady friends in the evening, have their 
bodies marked with turmeric. These visitors are then allowed to return to 
their husband’s houses after sunset, which is considered to be the auspi- 
cious occasion for the coming of the goddess Laxmi, which presides over 
wealth and prosperity. According to the Iliad, Juno, in order to entice 
Jone, had her bed prepared of turmeric-coloured saffron. 

1 In Poland, the father of the bridegroom, after the nuptial benedic- 
tion, welcomes the married couple into his house by throwing over them 
grains of barley corn. The grains are picked up again and sown, and, if 
they grow well, that is considered} very auspicious. Among the Hebrews 
also, grains of barley were thrown in the front of the couple, and that was 
meant “ to denote their wishes for a numerous progeny.” In Notting- 
hamshire and Sussex, the sprinkling of rice on the couple was a prevalent 
custom. In ancient Spain, not only the parents of the couple, but 
other passers-by in the streets, also sprinkled corn. According to Dalton’s 
Ethnology (p. 148), among the Buniyas, the bride and the bridegroom 
threw over each other seven handfuls of rice, and moved seven times 
*ound a pole buried in the midst of a hut, : 


23 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


remnant of the old custom of animal sacrifice.1 It signifies 
that if there be any evil destined for the person it may pass off 
to the ege and be destroyed with it. 


A cocoanut is then similarly passed round the head three 
times and then broken.2 A little water is then poured in a 
tray, which is passed round the head three times, and then the 
water is thrown at the feet of the bridegroom. Once inthe 
evening, the ladies of the bride’s family present before the 
bridegroom a water-pot (called var-behendoo, i.e., a pot presented 
to the husband, (var), as a part of the dowry), and-make him dip 
his hand in it. While doing so, he drops a silver coin into it as 
a return gift, and as a mark of his appreciation of their gift.3 
At one time it was customary that the feet of the couple were 
washed with water just after the performance of the marriage 


1 Among the ancient Romans;,.on similar occasions, “ a hog was 
sacrificed. The gall of the victim was always taken out, and thrown away, 
to signify the removal of all bitterness from the marriage.” 

2 In Scotland, they used to break a cake over the head of the bride 
at the threshold of her husband’s house, when after marriage, she entered 
it for the first time. Among the Hebrews, after the marriage ceremony, 
they present before the bridegroom a wineglass which he breaks as a sign 
of good omen. All present then shout out ‘‘ mazzletown, mazzletown,” 
which means “‘ good luck, good luck.’? This ceremony among the Hebrews 
is vatiously explained. Some say, it is to remind the Hebrews that their 
people ‘are all-scattered in different countries, just as the pieces of the glass 
lie scattered over the ground. Others say, that it is to remind the marrying 
couple of the transitory state of this life, which may be as easily broken as 
the glass. 

3 Water is considered to be a symbol of prosperity and also of humil.- 
ity. According to Herodotus, the ancient Persians, when they went to 
conquer foreign countries, asked for dust and water from those countries 
as tokens of submission. The act of the Athenians and Spartans of throw- 
ing the Persian messengers into a pit and into a well respectively, to 
receive with their own hands therefrom the desired earth and water, was 
one of the immediate causes of the Persian invasion of Greece, which led 
to the famous battle of Marathon. In one of the tribes of Bengal, they 
give earthen pots full of water and rice to the marrying couple, and 
sprinkle water over them from those pots. A person going out on an 
important business, considets it @ good omen, if he meets one with a pot 
full of water, 


MARRIAGE . 29 


ceremony. When Parsees began to put on English-fashioned 
boots, it being a little troublesome to remove the boots, the 
custom was to wash the tip of the boots with a little water. 1 


After the welcoming ceremonies on the threshold, the bride- 
groom is made to crdss the threshold without placing his foot 
upon it. The bride also, when she goes to her husband’s, is 
made to cross the threshold.2 The threshold is crossed with 
the right foot, which is always considered auspicious.3 


When the bridegroom enters the house to be married he is 
further welcomed with a song.” Having 

Weaae - neg for entered the house, the bridegroom takes his 
seat first, and waits for the bride, who comes 

in, after a short time, to take her seat.4. The bridegroom sits 


penn et 


1 In Scotland, in the last century, the unmarried friends of the bride 
washed her feet on the evening preceding the marriage. The custom is 
still known in some parts of Scotland as that of “ feet-washing.” It was 
known among the ancient Hebrews and is known among the modern 
Hindus. Among the ancient Romans also they washed the feet of the 
couple. Among the Persian Zoroastrians, they still wash the feet of the 
couple, and make them dip their hands in earthen water-pots. 

2 According to Plutarch (Life of Romulus), among the ancient 
Romans, the bride, when she first went to her husband’s, was lifted up over 
the threshold. A similar custom is said to prevail in Lincolnshire. Thoy 
say, that in‘old England, when the couple first left the house after marriage, 
the house servant washed the threshold with hot, water “to keep the door- 
step warm,” This was to indicate a wish that another marriage may soon 
take place in the family. 

$3 In some countries of Europe, the bride, while entering the Church to 
be married, is asked to put her right foot first into the building and then to 
leave it also with the same foot. In former times, when some royal marti. 
ages took place by proxy, the nobleman representing the royal bridegroom 
placed his right foot on the bed of the.royal bride. The right hand side is 
always considered auspicious. Among the Dhankar tribe of Maha- 
bleshwar, to determine whether the time for marriage is auspicious or 
not, a calf in the hut is let loose to be fed by the cow which is kept out- 
side the hut. If the calf, while going to . the cow, passes by the right 
hand side of the marrying couple sitting in the compound, the time is 
auspicious. If it pasees by the left hand side it is inauspicious, and 
the marriage is postponed for some time, 

4 To make the bridegroom wait for the bride for some time, seems 
to be @ custom prevalentamong many people, Among the Zoroastrians of 


30 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


on the right hand of the bride. The right hand side is a place 
of honour, and so it is occupied by the husband who is 
considered to be the leader of the bride.1 


The bridegroom and the bride teke their seats facing the 
East.2 There are two stools on one side of each of the chairs. 
On these are placed two metallic trays full of rice, which is to 
be thrown by the officiating priests over the couple while recit- 
ing their marriage benedictions. On the stool by the side of 
the chair on which the bride is to take her seat, stands asmall 
metallic pot containing ghee (clarified butter) and molasses.* 


Persia, when, at the marriage time, the members of the bridegroom’s 
family go to ask her tobe present for the marriage, the bride does not go 
at once. Her relatives keep her away and say that “* She has gone to the 
garden for picking flowers,” or that ‘* She has gone to her brother’s.’? When 
the match is arranged, a few members of the bridegroo m’s family go to the 
bride’s house to have her final consent. When they ask her, ‘‘ Are you 
willing to marry such and such a person ?” she is not expected to reply at 
once. The question is repeated several times, and then finally she replies 
in the affirmative in a low voice. In some tribes, whenthe bridegroom’s 
party goes to the bride’s, the latter’s house is kept closed for some time and 
opened after some knocking. Such customs and evasive answers are 
intended to signify, that it is the husband who seeks the wife and is 
anxious to have her, and not the wife. 

1 In Christian marriages also, the bridegroom stands on the right 
hand of the bride. 


‘We modern Christians perpetuate this custom of Orientation 
in the position given to our churches and in turning to the East when 
we recite the creeds or general assent to the articles of the Christian 
Faith.” (Mrs. Ainsley’s Symbolism of the East and West, p. 33). This 
customs a relic of the anciént Sun-worship that was generally prevalent, 

’ Ghee being a soft, slippery substance made out of milk, isconsidered 
to be a symbol of gentility, courtesy and obedience. The ancient Roman 
bride, for similar reasons, applied oil on the threshold of her house 
when welcoming the bridegroom into her house. Even now, some fond 
Parsee mothers, while giving a bath to their children on their birthdays 
apply milk to their bodies, ‘“* Have a bath with milk, and be the parent 
of many sons,” is a common form of benediction among Parsee ladies on 
marriage occasions. Curd, which is a kind of milk production, alse plays 
a prominent part on joyous occasions like birthdays and marriages, 
Molasess being a sweet substance is a symbol of sweetness and good temer. 
So, these two substances are produced by the f amily of the bride‘as symbols 


MARRIAGE 31 


A servant stands there holding a censer with burning fire in 
one hand, and a little frankincense in the 
other.* On the two stands there are two 
burning candles, one, by the side of the bridegroom, and the 
other, by the side of the bride,? 

Then two persons are made to stand before them, one by the 

Marriage witnes- Side of the bridegroom and the other by 
se8, that of the bride. These are the marriage 
witnesses.? The nearest relations generally stand. as witnesses. 
It is usually married persons, not bachelors,-who. stand as 
marriage witnesses.* 


As to the ceremony itself, we find, both from the ancient 


Fire, 


writings and the modern customs, that 
The ceremony 7 Av 
proper. the following are requisite for a proper 


of good omen, wishing gentleness, peace and contentment to the couple. 
After the ceremony, the pot containing these substances and the remaining 
rice are presented to the family priest. 

1 Fire is held as a sacred “and most important symbol among the 
Parsees. So, it is present in most of the Parsee rituals. It isa symbol of 
purity and plenty. Among the ancient Greeks, fire and water were held 
as symbols of purification, and the bridegroom himself held them in his 
hand while welcoming his bride in his house. According to some, the 
Roman bridegroom held fire andwater before his bride as “ necessaries of 
life,” signifying thereby,that he would supply her with all necessaries of 
ife. Among the Romans, the marriage ceremony was performed before the 
altar of their Atrium where their sacred fire was burning. In some parts 
of Australasia, the brides carry fire to the houses of their bridegrooms. 


2 These burning-candles.remind us of the ‘ bridal torches ’’ of the 
pncient Greeks, among whom the mother of the bride carried these torches 
n marriage processions. They were kindled from their family hearths. 

8 Jt is the custom of many nations to have witnesses to testify to 
the event of marriage. The ancient Hebrews also had two witnesses. The 
Christians also have two. Among the Romans, the Pontifex Maximus 
performed the marriage ceremony before the witnesses. In ancient Persia, 
the nearest relations stood as witnesses. According to Firdousi, in the 
marriage of Sidvash with Firangiz, Afrasieb, the father of Firangiz, stood 
as a witness for his daughter. 

* In the Greek Church of Russia, it is only married priests that can 
perform the marriage ceremony. 


, 


$2 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND OUSTOMS 


marriage. :— 


(1) The marriage should be celebrated before a specially- 
called assembly (anjuman jasta-isted)1 which need not be very 
large. As the later tradition says, five persons may.for the 
purpose form an anjuman or assembly. The assembled guests 
served, as it were, as further witnesses to the marriage. 


(2) The officiating priest questioned the marrying couple 
whether they consented to be united in marriage. 


(3) He united them by joining their hands, a-process known 
as Hathevaré, 2.e., hand-fastening. A symbolic knot also played 
a@ prominent part in the ceremony. 


(4) The process uniting them was followed by a benediction 
which was accompanied with a sprinkling of rice or such other 
things. 

Before being seated by each other’s side, the bride and the 

Pruner oaks: bridegroom are first seated opposite each 
monies. Vyingthe other; separated by a piece of cloth held 
Biro: between them as a curtain. Now begins 
what we may call the religious ceremonies. Two priests present 
themselves for the performance of these ceremonies. The senior 
officiating priest \gives the right hand of one into the right 
hand of the other. Then a piece of cloth is passed round the 
chairs of both so as to enclose them in a circle. The ends of the 
cloth are tied together. This is, as it were, strictly speaking 
the tying of the marriage-knot. Thijs is done with the recital 
of the sacred formula of “‘ Yatha Aha Vairyé.” 2 


} Pahlavi Paewand-nameh. : 

2 A knot is a symbol of love, friendship and faithfulness. In old 
England, the bride carried, on her gown, a number of ribbon knots which 
the guests plucked off from her body and carried them with them as tokens 
of the event. That the custom of tying marriage knots among the Parsees 
is very ancient appears from Firdousi’s Shahn&meh where Zal’s marriage 
with Roudabeh is said to have been celebrated by tying masriage knots, 
(Bé bastand bandi ba din o kish.) 


MARRIAGE 33 


After tying the knot of the ends of the cloth, which, as it 
were, enclosos them into a circle of unity, 
the priest fastens with raw twist their right 
hands which are grasped by each other. 
This rite is called Hathévaré, i.e., hand-fastening.! The above 
sacred formula is recited during this rite also. It is the family 
priests who are entitled to the fee of hand- fastening, even if 
the ceremony is performed by other priests. 2. 


Hathévaro, i,e., 
hand-fastening. 


In the ceremony of hand-fastening, the raw twist is put rotnd 
the hands seven times. After fastening the hands, the raw 
twist is passed round the pair seven times, and then, finally, it 
is passed seven times round the knot of the-cloth which 
passes round their chairs. During all this-process, the sacred 
prayer of Yatha Ahi Vairyé is recited. 


1 Up to the eighteenth century, there was a, custom in England that 
the marrying couple went to the river adjoining the town, washed their 
hands, and each, grasping the other’s/hand, took the oath of marriage. This 
was known as hand-fastening. Among the Christians also, it is the priest 
who joins the handsof the couple. Among the ancient Greeks, the cera- 
mony of hand-fastening was considered as the ratifying agreement of 
marriage. Among the ancient Romans, the priest made the marrying couple 
sit on chairs which were put together, and on which wool was spread, 
‘and then fastened their hands. The modern Hindus also unite the hands 
of the couple. In Finland, it is the father of the bride who fastens the 
hands. Among some tribes, slight cuts are made on the hands before their 
being fastened, so that the blood of one may flow into that of another. It 
is the right hand of each that is fastened because the right hand jis consi- 
dered to be the witness of one’s faith. Among the Assyrians, it was the 
fatherof the bridegroom who fastened the hands of the ‘couple with a 
woollen thread. 


? This reminds us of the custom among ancient Christians, that the 
marriages genorally took place in the parishes in which the couple lived, 
But when they were performed in other parishes, it was the priest of the 
parish in which they lived, that took the marriage fee. 

3 The number 7 plays a prominent part in this ritual of hand-fasten- 
ing. Seven was a sacred number among the ancient Persians. There’ are 
seven Ameshaspentas, or archangels, seven heavens, and seven Keshvars., 
4.e., the zones or regions. Cf. the seven Brobangels of the Hebrews and 
the seven Spirits of the Christians. ‘ 


34 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


At the end of this ceremony, at a signal given by the senior 
priest, the servant who holds the fire-vase 
places frankincense on the fire. At this 
signal, the curtain of cloth, which is held between the couple, 
is dropped, and the couple throw on each other a few grains of 
rice which they hold in their left hands. This throwing of rice 
‘is accompanied by a clapping of hands by the friends <and 
relations who have assembled there. 


The union. . 


The above ceremony of holding the cloth-curtain between the 
bride and the bridegroom, and then dropping it after the fasten- 
ing of the hands, signifies that the separation that hitherto 
existed between them no longer exists now, and=that they are 
now united into the bond of matrimony.1 )As long as the 
curtain was held, they sat opposite each other, but on its remo- 
val, they are made to sit side by side, This also signifies that 
they, who were up to now separate, are now united together. 


The putting on of raw twist round the couple seven times 
also indicates union. The raw twist itself can be easily broken, 
but when several threads.are twined into one, they cannot 
easily be broken. So it.signifies that the tie of union into which 
the couple is now bound may not easily be broken. 


The throwing of the rice by the marrying couple upon each 

The throwing of Other is watched with great interest by their 
fice. friends, especially by the ladies, who urge their 
respective friends, the bridegroom or the bride, to look sharp 
and throw the rice first when the signal is given, The one that 
throws rice first over the other is said to win. This is, as it 
were, a race of love. ‘‘ Who won, the bridegroom or the bride?” 


2 Among the Hebrews, the bride at first put on a veil which was 
removed immediately after they were united in marriage. Among the 
ancient Christians, when the couple was kneeling in the sanctum, four of 
the.assistant clergy held over their hands a poll or care-cloth which was 
afterwards removed. Among the Russians of the Greek Church, “ a cur- 
tain of crimson tafetta supported by two young gentlemen, now parts the | 
lovers, and prevents them from stealing any anxious glances from each 
other’s eyes, (* The Knot Tied ” by W. Tegg, p. 106). 


MARRIAGE 35 


is a question often heard in the assembly.! This is to signify, 
that one who throws rice first, thereby indicates that he or she 
will be the foremost in loving and respecting the other. The 
clapping of hands expresses the approval and good-will of the 
‘assembly for theamion.? The priests also, during the recital 
of the benedictions, throw rice over the marrying couple. To 
throw rice or some such other thing over the marrying eouple 
as a symbol of good luck and prosperity seems to be an old 
custom. Firdousi refers to it-in the case of ZAl’s marriage (akik 
va zabarjad bar afshandand). 


Then follows the most important or the solemn part, or, what 

The strictiy reli. C8” be called, the strictly religious part of 
gious part of the the ceremony. ‘Two officiating priests stand 
Sore mony. before the couple. “The senior priest at. first 
blesses the couple in the following few words: “‘ May the 
Creator, the omniscient Lord, grant you a progeny of sons 
and grandsons, plenty of means to provide yourselves, heart- 
ravishing friendship, bodily strength, long life and an existence 
of 150 years!” 


Then, he puts the following question to the person, who stands 
by the side of the bridegroom as a witness to the marriage, on 
behalf of the bridegroom’s family :—“In the presence of this 


L In some parts of Wales, the friends of both parties went after 
marriage at the church to ay adjoining inn to par take of the marriage 
repast. A few members of both parties ran to aninn. There wasa kind of 
running race between them. The party who ran first and reached the inn 
first, guaranteed, as it were, that the bride or bridegroom, whom they re- 
presented, would be the first to show all love and respect to. the other. In 
some parts of the south of F rance, when the couple is Kneeling at the altar 
after the marriage, a lady goes before them, and pricks them with a pin. 
Both try to bear that as much as they can. The one that bawls out or 
expresses the feeling of pain first, is believed to be the one that would turn 
out less patient than the other in suffering the troubles, if any, of married 
life in particular, and of this world in genoral, 


? This corresponds to the custom of saying.“‘ Amen, Amen ” in some 


of the village churches of England, when, after the third reading of the 
banns, the clerk of the church says, ‘‘ God speed them all,” 7 


36 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


company ‘that has met together in the city of..........? 
on ..........” day of ..........2 month of the year 
veaceeeees? Of Emperor Yazdagird of the Sassanian dynasty 
of auspicious Iran, say, whether you have agreed to take this 
‘maiden..........3 by name, in marriage for this bridegroom, 
in accordance with the rites and rules of the Mazdayacnins, 
promising to pay her 2000 dirams of pure white silver and two 
dindrs of real gold of the Nishapur coinage. ¢ 


The witness replies: “ I have agreed.” 


Then the following question is put to the witness.on the side 
of the bride: “‘ Have you and your family, with righteous mind, 
‘and truthful thoughts, words and actions, and forthe increase 
of righteousness, agreed to give for ever this bride in marriage 
ra 

Reply : ‘“‘ We have agreed.” 

- Then the. priest asks the consent of the couple in the follow- 
ing words: “ Have you preferred to enter into this contract of 
‘marriage up to the end of your life with righteous mind ?” 

Both reply : “ We have, preferred.” 


To make the mattér doubly or trebly sure, the questions are 
repeated three times.§ 


1 Here, the name of the town where the marriage takes place is men- 
tioned. 

1 Here, the particular Parsee day, month and the year,'on= which 

“the marriage’is performed are mentioned. 
_ 03 Here, the name of the bride is mentioned. 

4 This sum seems to have been fixed in ancient Persia as the sun 
to be generally presented by the family of the bridegroom to the bride. 

& Here the name of the bridegroom is mentioned. 

6 Among the Christians, the banns are proclaimed three times, 
Among the modern Greeks, the priest, after putting on the blessed ring, 
declares the marriage three times. He repeats the benediction three times. 
In some of the tribes of Central Asia, e¢. g., in Dardistan, the priest asks 
the marrying couple and the assembled company three times, whether 
they all consented. In the Greek Church in Russia also, the priest puts a 
similar question to the couple three times. His question is ‘‘ Whether 
they sincerely consent to and approve their marriage, and whether they 
will love each other for the future as is thoir bounden duty so to do?” 

“The Knot Tied” by W. Tegg, p. 107). 


MARRIAGE 37 


Then follows the recital, by both the officiating priests, of the 
‘The Ashirwad, Paévandnameh or AshirwAd (1.c. benediction), 
i.¢., benediction. § which is an address made up of admonitions, 
benedictions and prayers. Here is a translation of the address. * 


The first part of the address, consisting of admonitions to the 
Admonitions. marrying couple, is as follows :— 


-“ By the helping name of Ahura Mazda may your happiness 
increase. May you be brilliant. Try to do good deeds. Be \in- 
creasing. Be victorious. Learn to do deeds of piety. Be 
worthy to do good deeds. Think of nothing but. the truth. 
Speak nothing but the truth. Do nothing but what is proper. 
Shun all bad thoughts. Shun all bad words. Shun all bad 
actions. Praise deeds of piety. Commit no acts opposed to picty. 
Praise the Mazdayagnan religion. Do nothing without mature 
consideration. Acquire wealth by good means. Suy what is 
true before your superiors, and act according to their orders. 
Be courteous, sweet-tongued, and kind towards your friends. Do 
not indulge in scandals. Avoid being angry. Do not commit 
sins for the sake of avoiding-shame. Do not be ambitious. Do 
not torment others. Do not entertain wicked jealousy. Do 
not be haughty. Avoid evil thoughts. Avoid evil passions. 
Deprive not others of their property. Keep yourselves away 
from the wives of others. Be industrious in following good pro- 
fessions. “Do»good to the pious and to the virtuous. Do not 
quarrel with the revengeful. Never be a partner with an ambi- 
tious man. Do not become a companion of a back-biter or a 
scandal-monger. Do not join the company of persons of ill- 
fame. Do not co-operate with the ill-informed. Fight with 
your enemies only by fair means. Treat your friends in a way. 
agreeable to them. Do not enter into any discussion with per- 


1 I had the pleasure and honour of contributing the translation of 
a large part of this address to Mr. Dossabhoy Framji Katraka’s very excel- 
lent book, ‘‘ The History of the Parsces”’ (Vol. I., p. 182). So, I quote 
it from that work. The rest, I had translated specially for my paper on 
“ Marriage Customs” before the Anthropological Society of Bombay. 


38 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


sons of ill-fame. Speak in an assembly after great considera- 
tion. Speak with moderation in the presence of kings. Be 
more giorious than your father. In no way annoy your mother, 
Keep yourselves pure by means of truth. Be immortal like 
Kaikhosru. Be well informed like Kaus. Be as brilliant as 
the Sun. Be as pure as the Moon. Beas illustrious as Zara- 
thushtra. Be as strong as Rustam. Be as fertile as the Earth. 
As soul is united with body, so may you be united and friendly 
with your friends, brothers, wife, and children. Always keep 
good faith, and preserve a good character. Recognise’ only 
Ahura Mazda, the Omniscient Lord, as your-CGod. Praise 
Zoroaster as “your spiritual leader. Treat Ahriman, the evil 
spirit, with contempt.” 


After the above adnonitions, follow. a few benedictions, in the 
Benedictions in. first part of which the priests pray to God 
voking the favour to confer upon. the couple, certain moral 
of virtues over A 7 P 5 
which the Yazatas and social virtues which are said to be the 
Dialers characteristics of the Yazatas (angel§ who 


give their names to the thirty days of the month. 


“* May Ahura Mazda bestow upon you good thoughts through 
Bahman, good words through Ardibehesht, good actions through 
Shehrivar, perfect thought through Spendérmad, sweetness 
through Khordad, fruitfulness through Amerdiéd. May God 
bestow upon you increasing lustre through Adar, purity through 
Aban, exalted position through Khurshed, increase through the 
cow-like Mohor, liberality through Tir, temperate habits through 
Gosh. May God bestow upon you pure justice through Meher, 
obedience through Srosh, truthfulness through Rashnu, increase 
of strength through Farvardin, victory through Behram, con- 
stant delight through Ram, strong power through Goad. May 
God bestow upon you knowledge through Din, collection of 
wealth through Arshisang, a number of good talents through 
Ashtad, great activity through Asmén, firmness of place through 
Jamyad, good sight through Marespand, and nourishment of 
body through Aneran.” 


MARRIAGE 39 


Then follow a few other benedictions: “Oh, you good men! 
May that come to you which is still better for you than good, 
since you find yourself worthy as a Zaota (a pious and virtuous 
man). May youreceive the reward which is earned by the Zaota 
as one who thinks, speaks, and does much good. May that come to 
you which is better than good. May that not come to you which 
is worse than evil. Oh good men! May that accrue to*you 
which is better than good. May your relations be worthy of 

: goodness. May you get that reward of which you have made 
yourself worthy. May good accrue to you as the result of per- 
fect good thought, perfect good words, and perfect good actions. 
May that piety come to you which is better than good. May 
not that sinful life, which is worse than evil, come to you. 
May it be so as I pray. May the much desired Airyaman come 
for joy to the good mind of Zoroastrian men and women. May 
he grant the desirable reward according to the law of all 
purities. I prefer that purity which is considered the best by 
Ahura Mazda. Righteousness is.the best gift and happiness. 
Happiness to him who is righteous for the sake of best 
righteousness. 


“ May they.(i.e.,the marrying couple) have light and glory, 
physical strength, physical health and physical victory, wealth 
that may. give a good deal of happiness, children blessed with 
innate wisdom, a very long life, and the brilliant happy 
paradise, which is due to the pious. May it be so as 
I wish it.” 


Then are recited a few benedictions in which certain departed 
_... worthies of ancient Iran are mentioned by 

the enadictions name, and it is wished, that the pair may 
gil Nias be blessed with the virtues and charac- 
sie teristics which had made them famous, 
Certain grand objects of Nature also are mentioned, and it is 
wished that the couple may be blessed with the physical qualities 


40 SOCIG-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


manifested by them. The following is a free translation of 
these benedictions :— 


“By the name of God, I bless you in the City of Bombay? 
as was the wont of our forefathers in Iran. May all your 
desires be fulfilled as were those of God in the creation of the 
world. May you be as great in dignity as king Kaikhosru:? 
May you be as friendly as angel Meher, as victorious over your 
enemies as Zarir, as handsome as Siavakhsh, as splendid~as 
Bejan, as pious as King Gushtasp, as strong as Sim Nariman, 
as powerful as Rastam, as good a lancer as Aspandiér, as good 
a helper of religion and far-seeing as Jamasp, as holy as the Holy 
Spirits, as generous as Tishtrya, as sweet as.rain-water, as bril 
liant as the Sun, as righteousas Zoroaster, endowed with a life as 
long as Time that rules over the world, ag fertile as the Earth, as 
united as a river united with a sea,.as full of joy as Winter, as 
gay as Spring, as fragrant as musk, as well-known as gold, as 
current (i.e. favourite) as a coin, as good a doer of virtuous 
deeds as God in his creation. May: these good wishes be fulfill- 
ed. May you. be as useful asthe Sun, the Moon, Water, Fire, 
Wine, Myrtle, Jassamine, Rose and the sweet Marjoram. May 
cece ee eee ANM... 05 3 with their children and their pro- 
geny live for a‘thousand years. Be fragrant and good as the 
basil and the amber. May you have such pious children as 
may be illustrious, and victorious over enemies, and as may add 
to the glory of the family. May it be so as I wish it.” 


A part of the address is, if so desired by the family, repeated 
Phe address in Sanskrit. They say, that when the Parsees 
Sanskrit. first emigrated to India, in order to make it 
intelligible to the Hindu Raja and his courtiers who had given 
them a home on the Indian soil, they repeated the address in 


1 Or, any other city, where the marriage is performed, may be men. 
tioned. : : 

? Kavi Husrava of the Avesta. For this and other proper names 
mentioned here, vide my Dictionary of Avesta Proper Names. 

8 Here are mentioned the names of the bride and the bridegroom, 


MARRIAGE 4} 


Sanskrit, which was then the language of the Court. That 
practice they have continued up to now, though there is no 
longer any necessity to do so at present. There is no written, 
authority about the above statement. one 


Then follow another set of benedictions in the Pazend language 
known as Tandaructi. The following is a free translation of 
these benedictions :— 


+ 


‘By the name of the bountiful, merciful and kind. God, 
_ who is a kind and just Lord, May’. 
x pga nes ite ........ 1 have health and Cae ‘life. 
He in vigour of May they be worthy of piety and splen- 
dour. O Omniscient Lord! let joy and- 
pleasure, ease and plenty reach them _and let Divine 
light and royal justice reach them. May they have courage and 
victory. May they be firm in théir.knowledge of the good 
Mazdayacnén religion by means of honest endeavour and good 
demeanour. May good relationship, the birth of children and 
long happy life be their lot.. May their body be, blessed with 
happiness and their soul with good government. O Omniscient 
Creator! May the religion of Zoroaster prosper.—Mmen. O 
Great God! May you grant long life, happiness and health to 
the ruler of our land, to the community and to .......... 1 
Grant them»all these for many years to enable them to help the 
worthy. Give» them a long life for many generations. May 
there be thousands of blessings upon them. May the year be 
happy, the month auspicious and the day propitious. Grant 
that. for several years, several days, and several months, they. 
may be found worthy and fit to perform religious rites and 
deeds of charity. Keep them pure for works of righteousness. 
May health, virtue and goodness be their share. May it 
be so. May it be more so, as is the wish of God and His 
prchanerls 


1 Here are mentioned the names of the marrying couple. 
. — 6 


42 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


The marriage ritual is repeated at midnight. Anquetil du 
F Perron says that it is a remnant of the 
The marriage : 
ritual repeated at old custom of Persia where, in the town of 
meee Kermfn, the marriage ceremony was per- 
formed at midnight. In many families, the practice of repeat- 
ing the ceremony at midnight and of the address in Sanskrit is 
not resorted to now. The performance of the above ceremonies 
and the recital of the address, complete, what we should call, 
the solemn part of the celebration of marriage. But there. are 
certain other customs and observances, which, though very rare 
in Bombay, are observed to a certain extent inthe Mofussil 
towns. Jt is the ladies who observe them. Moreover, they are 
now rather looked on more with an idea of.merriment than 
with that of any solemnity. 


The first observance of that kind is that of uniting Chheda 
pideiy: Siete chhedi, (&s1 BP). t.e., of fastening the skirt, 
i.e, fastening the of the garments of the couple.! The nearest 
pais of the gar- friend or relation of the couple ties the skirts 
of the jdmd (the flowing dress) of the 
bridegroom with that of the sdree of the bride. Thus united, 
the bride goes to the house of the bridegroom. The process of 
fastening the skirts is accompanied by a song. This custom also 
signifies the act.of uniting the two into the bond of marriage. 


1 Among the Hebrews, the bride and the bridegroom were made to walk. 
under a canopy or a sheet of cloth. This signified unity of protection. 
This custom seems to be another form of the custom of fastening the skirts 
ofeach other’s garments. The Hebrew spouse in the above custom said : 
** His banner over me was love.” (W. Tegg, p. 55). A Hebrew bride- 
groom at one part of the ceremony also spread the skirt of his garment 
over the head of his bride. That was meant to signify that the bride was 
now under his protection. The old Azlec priest used to ask the consent 
of the bride for the marriage. Having received it, he fastened the end of 
8 part of her long veil to the skirt of the bridegroom’s coat, and thus united, 
the bride went to the house of the bridegroom. This custom prevails also 

.in Nicaragua. In some tribes the officiating priest gently knocked the 
head of the bridegroom against that of the bride. This also had the same 
signification of unity. According to Dalton (Ethnography, p. 148), among 
the Buniyers, on the appearance of the starg at nightfall, the skirts of the 


MARRIAGE 43 


The next rite is that of “ washing the feet ” of the couple with 

“Washing the Water! That was more practicable about 
feet.” forty years ago, when almost all Parsees put 
on native shoes without stockings. But now, owing to the 
inconvenience of - taking off English shoes and stockings, 
only the front tip of the shoes is washed with a little water. 
The signification of the custom may be that of washing away 
all past mistakes and driving away all evils and misfortunes. 
More probably, it signifies a kind of welcome. In India, 
visitors, who come from some distance, are first given some 
water to wash their feet soiled by a long walk. At times, a 
lady hid the shoe thus removed and did not return it unless 
paid a rupee. ” 


The next rite was that of making the couple partake of food 
from the same dish? In doing so, each 
gives to the other, morsels of food of which 
dahi or curd form a part. This rite signifies, that now, being 


Dahi-Koomré. 


garments of the couple were joined together and théy passed the night— 
alone in this way. The next morning both were taken to an adjoining 
tank for a bath andthe knot was untied there. On their return home, 
they stood at the threshold of ‘their house with pots of water over their 
heads. A part of the water was then poured over their heads. 

ign Scotland in. the 18th Century, according to an old custom, the 
maids of the bride washed the feet of the bride on the eve preceding the 
marriage. Among the ancient Romans, ‘‘both she and her husband 
touched fire and water, because all things were supposed to be produced 
from these two elements; with the water they bathed their feet’ (W. 
Tegg, p. 75). The custom of washing the feet is prevalent among the 
Zoroastrians of Persia also. This custom of feet-washing prevailed among 
the ancient Hebrows also. It is now prevalent among the Hindus. 

2 « At Hindoo weddings, the brother or nearest relative of the bride 
hides the bridegroom’s shoes and will not restore them until the bride- 
groom pays him at least a rupee and a quarter. (The Shoe, a Moral Essay, 
by Mr. Tribhuvandas Mangaldas, p. 5). 

3 Among the ancient Romans, one of the forms of marriage was 
confarreatio which was “‘ a ceremony in which the bridegroom and bride 
tasted a cake made of flour with salt and water in the presence of the high 
priest and at least ten witnesses. This rite was said to symbolize the com. 
munity of life, of property, of family worship, that henceforth united them, ” 
Among the Roman Patricians, many generally resorted to this form of 


44 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


united in the bond of marriage, they have to board together 
and to share each other’s happiness and grief. This repast. is 
known as “‘ Dahi-Koomro” from the fact that dahi (curd), 
which is considered an auspicious substance of food on gay 
occasions, formed the essential part of the dish. 


” Another peculiar custom, now almost obsolete, is that of 

-Eki Beki, i. ¢., ™eking the couple play Eki Beki which is a 
odds and even. form of play. Both have several rupees 
in their hands.. One, without letting the other know, takes a 
certain number in the right hand, and asks the other whether 
the number is ekt (odds) or bekt (even). If the other guesses the 
number right, he or she is said to win.” Perhaps the significa- 
tion is the same as that in the rite of throwing the rice referred 
to above, wherein the one who won, guaranteed, as it were, his 
or her desire to loye the other more ardently than she or he 
would do. 


tarriage, and the couple.was niade to sit on one and the same piece of 
leather prepared from the skin of a sheep killed for the marriage sacrifice. 
The bridal cake of Christian marriages seems to be a relic of the ancient 
Roman custom... Colonel Daltonin his Hthnography, gives several jnstan- 
ces of tribes that have still prevalent among them this custom of making 
the couple eat together. As the Romans sat on one and the same piece of 
leather in-their “ corfarreatio,” so, some of the tribes sit together on one 
and the same piece of cloth. Among the ancient Hebrews, the couple were 
made to drink from one and the same cup of wine which was consecrated 
and blessed by the Rabi (W. Tegg, p. 54). In Russia and Scandinavia 
also, the couple are required to drink wine from the same cup. In Hessv, 
the couple eat from the same plate and drink from the same cup. Ae- 
cording toa writer of the Astatic Quarterly Review, in old Lombardy, tha 
only marriage rite was this, that the marriage couple drank from the aame 
cup and kissed each other. Latterly, whon the clergy protested against 
this simple rite without any religious element in it, the benedictions from 
the priest and a sermon were added to it. Among the Melanasians, the 
couple gave each other three morsels from a dish called ‘‘ sagomash."’ The 
bride then geve a little tobacco to the bridegroom who, in his turn, gave a 
betelnut to the bride. (Featherman, p. 32) 


MARRIAGE - 43 
A nuptial song is sung at the close of the wedding ceremony. 
After the celebration of the marriage, the 
The bride tak : : ats 
is bes Esa bride accompanies the husband to his house. 
BOURR A nuptial song is sung by the ladies, when 
the bride is taken to her husband’s house, and another is sung 
when the bride enters the house of her husband. : 


After the celebration of the solemn part of the marriage 

ieee ceremony, most of the guests were entertained 
of the assembled at a marriage feast. The following were the 
em toasts generally proposed at Parsee marriage 
feasts -— ; 


1. Yazddn-ni ydd, t.e., In remembrance of God. 
2. The married couple. 


3. The sacred fire temples. May their Sacred fires burn for 
‘ever. May they be the means of helping all. 

4. The guests. 

5. The host. 

6. His Majesty the King. 

All, or some of these, except the fifth, are proposed according 
to the directions of the host, and some one among the guests 
proposes that-of the host. At some marriage feasts, a piously 
inclined host adds to the above list that of the dear departed ones 
as “ Asho Farohar ni yad,” i.e., “ the remembrance of the pious 
departed ones.” In other communal feasts, while proposing 
this “toast, and the first on the list, viz., that in remembrance 
of the sacred name of God, fragrant frankincense is ordered to 
be placed on the family hearth. No speeches are made while 
proposing them. At large gatherings, there are professional 
health-proposers. Loud and clear voice is their only qualifica- 
tion for the work. They simply give out the toast with a loud 
voice, and at times, when the dining parties are very large, they 
go round the tables, repeating the words for giving the toasts 
several times, so that all may hear. These toasts. are drunk 
generally while dining, not at the end of the dinner, .... ... 


46 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


As to the menu, fish, which is considered a symbol of good 
omen and luck, is essential. No marriage feast 
can be complete without it. Again, a course 
of some kind of sweets is essential. Meat is not generally eaten 
in marriage feasts. It appearsfrom Anquetil that the reason 
why meat was prohibited in India, was, that formerly, at Surat, 
which was at first the head-quarters of the Parsees, a large 
number of Hindoo guests was invited. As Hindoos consider it 
irreligious to slaughter animals for food, to spare their feelings, 
meat was prohibited, But, from an account of the proceedings 
of a meeting of the community, held'in Bombay on the 18th of 
October 1823, and convened to consider some steps to regulate 
funeral and marriage expenses, it appears that meat was 
prohibited on marriage occasions from thepoint of view of 
economy.! Meat courses were thought to be expensive. 


The menu. 


In connection with this subject. of. marriage, we will say 

Baca a few words here-on the subject of divorce 
; and on that of adultery, which generally 
leads to it. 


It appears, that in ancient Iran, a husband was entitled to have 
a divorce from his wife in case of adultery. Besides adultery, 
aggravated perpetual quarrels also seemed to be a legitimate 
cause of seeking divorce. The parties had to go to court for 
a divorce.?\ There seemed to be a set form of speech for the 
husband “to give divorce? The Pahlavi word for divorce is 
zan-tajd.4 


‘Another cause of divorce on the part of the husband was the 
sterility of the wife. To be the father of children, being consi- 
dered a good, important and religious act, it is natural that this 
was thought to be a valid cause. It was eonsidered a valid 
reason, even in India upto so late as about 50 years ago. 
There was no clear divorce, until the wife wished to have one in 


1 Parsee Prakash, by Khan Bahadur Bomanji B. Patel, Vol. I., p, 172. 

2 Dastur Peshotan’s Dinkard, Vol. I, Chap. LXXX, 16 pp. 98-99. 
8. B. E, XVIII, pp. 406-47. 

88. B. E. XVILL p. 407. 4 4 Ibid, p. 419 


ADULTERY 47 


such & case, but there was a permission forthe husband to marry 
a second wife. Even upto 50 years ago, the Parsee Punchayet 
of Bombay permitted such husbands to have second wives dur- 
ing the life-time of tkeir first wives, but on one condition, that 
they were to maintain their first wives. At times, the first wife 
finding herself sterile, of her own accord asked her husband to 
have a second wife, and continuing to act as the mistress of the 
house, treated the second wife with affection and kindness: 


A passage in Herodotus also leads us to the same conclusion 
(Bk. IX, III). Xerxes asks his brother Masistes to divorce his 
wife. Masistes urges, as a reason not to do so, that she had 
borne him many children. 


The Parsees, now-a-days, are governed by the Parsi Marriage 
and Divorce Act (Act No. XV of 1865) passed on the 7th April . 
1865. According to that Act, the following serve as grounds for 
a divorce (sections 27-30) :— 


“1, Lunacy or mental unsoundness, at time of marriage, of 
which one of the contracting parties did not know. 


2. Impotency. 


3. Continualcabsence of one of the parties for seven years, 
without being heard of as alive. 


4, Adultery of the wife. 


5. Adultery, or bigamy with adultery, or adultery with cruel- 
ty, or.adultery with wilful desertion for two years or upwards, 
or rape or unnatural offence, of the husband,” t 


Adultery is the principal cause that leads to divorce. ‘‘ The 
Avesta raises its voice with great force 
against misconduct in every form and lays 
down very wise restrictions to assure lawful birth.” 2 It looks 
with dislike even at marriages between persons of unequal 


Adultery. 


1 Parsee Law, by Mr. F. A. Rana, p. 57. 
2 Avesta, par C. De Harlez, Introduction, p. CLX XI, 


48 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


positions, from moral and religious points of view. (Vendiddd 
XVIII, 62). The very fact that the ancient Iranians attached 
much importance to marriage, shows that they looked upon 
adultery with horror, In the case of a maiden who had lost her 
father, it was incumbent on the brother to give her in marriage 
at the proper time. That was accounted an act of righteousness 
on his part. It was considered inadvisable or almost sinful to 
allow a girl of martiageable age to remain unmarried. 


In the Gatha Vahishtéishti (Yacna LILI, 7), there isa carefully 
worded warning against, what Dr. Mills calls, ‘solicitations to 
vice.’ ! There, it is said: ‘“ But yours be the recompense, 
(O ye righteous women !) of this great cause. For while lustful 
desire heart-inflamed from the body there heyond goeth down 
where the spirit of evil reaches (to ruin, still) ye bring forth the 
champion to help on the cause, (and-thus conquer temptation), 
&o.”” 3 


The female Yazata Ashi (Yasht XVII, 47-60) complains -bit- 
terly against this vice. She-says that it “is the worst deed 
that men and tyrants.do,” ? when they seduce maidens from 
their path of virtue: In some parts of the Avesta and in 
the Pahlavi books, this vice is personified as ‘ Jahi.’ 


The Yazata Haoma is entreated to withstand the evil influ- 
ence of vicious women, whose lustful wavering soul is like a 
cloud which often changes the direction of its motion according 
to the direction of the wind (Yagna IX, 32). The Amesha- 
Spenta Asha Vahishia (Best Righteousness) js similarly entreated. 
(Yasht III, 9). An adulterer or adulteress is, as it were, an 
opponent of Gado, the good gpirit: of the Earth or of the animal 
creation, the idea being, that such a person comes in the way of 
the progress of the world (Vendiddd XXI, 1). The progress 
of the world in the different spheres of activity, physical and 
gt SP a a Ser Pa an Naas th Pa ee 


1 §, B. E. XXXI, p. 189. | 2 Ibid, p. 193, 
° §. B. E. XXII, p. 281," 


ADULTERY 49 


mental, acts against the influence of this class. (Vend, XXI, 17). 
Eredhat Fedhri is the name of a good pious maiden, who is 
considered as a prototype of maidenly virtue, and whose guar- 
dian spirit is invoked to withstand the evil machinations of 
Jahi, the personification of this vice (Yt XIII, 142). In the 
Pahlavi Bundahish (Chap. III), this Jahi is said to be an accom- 
plice of Ahriman himself. Her work is said to be “to cause 
conflict in the world,’’! wherefrom the distress and injury. of 
' Atharmazd and the archangels will arise. 


‘In the Pahlavi Dadistén-i-Dinik (71st question), 2. adultery 

is spoken of as one of the most heinous sins. “The mother of 
Zohik is eaid to be the first woman in the world, who committed 
this offence. It is said to be a sin which disturbs all lineage, 
‘which puts an-end to all control upon one’s desires and to the 
legitimate authority of a husband. It.is more heinous than 
theft or spoliation (77th question). * It is a crime which 
leads at times to murder, because the woman brings about abor- 
tion at times,4 There is another way in which adultery leads 
to murder. It is notedin our account of pregnancy, ® that 
‘sexual intercourse during pregnancy is prohibited, because it is 
thought that it leads to-an injury to the life of the child in the 
womb. Now,.a woman, who yields to lust and gives herself up 
to an adulterous life, -is likely to commit adultery, even in 
pregnancy. Such sexual intercourse may cause the loss of the 
life of the child in the womb.® 


Again, adultery is a canker in society in another way. When 
a man commits adultery with a woman, he, according to the 
injunction of the Vendidéd, is bound.to support the woman 
whom. he has seduced and the children that may be born of the 
illicit intercourse. Tt is his duty to hring up his illegitimate 


1 8. B. H. Vol. V, p. 15. 

2 §. B. HE. Vol. XVITI, Chap. LXXII, 5 

3 Ibid, Chap. LX XVIII, 3. 4 Ibid, p. 5. < 

5 Vide above, p. 3, “Birth Ceremonies.” 

8 Dadistin-t Dinik 77th Question, Chap.jUXXVIII, 6. 


50 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


children along with his legitimate children. In that case, the 
company of the illegitimate children is likely to spoil the good 
manners and morals of the legitimate children.1 But, if he 
does not bring up the illegitimate children properly, if he does 
not give them proper training, he is responsible for, and guilty 
of, al] the wrongful acts and sins that the children may commit 
in their childhood or in their grown-up age. 2 


The sin of adultery is very heinous in itself. But what_little 
atonement can be done for it can be done by 


| At nt for th : 
io vn the following good acts :— 


(a) The guilty person, especially the adulterer, must help 
by money or otherwise, in bringing about the marriage of four 
poor couples. (6) He must assist with money poor children 
who are not cared for by others and bring them up decently and 
educate them. (ce) If he sees others in society leading a vicious 
life, he must do his best to retrieve them. (d) He must per- 
’ form certain religious rites like those of the Dvazdeh-HomAst, 


In the Viraf-Ndmeh, the adulterer is represented as punished 
by being thrown in a steaming brazen cauldron (Chap. LX), and 
the adulteress as gashing’ her own bosom and breasts with an 
iron comb. (Chap. LXII).3 The adulteress who brings about 
abortion, meets with worse punishment, (Chap. LXTV). 


In all cases of adultery, the V endiddd (XV. 18) enjoined, that 
the person seducing a woman, whether married or unmarried, 
should maintain her, and the children that may be born of.her, 
until they come toage. Any attempt at desertion was considered 
a great sin (Vend. XV, 11-14). 


The Pahlavi Madig4n-i-Hazér Dadistén named the Social 
Code of the Parsees by Prof. Darmesteter, and proposed to be 
called a Law-bcok (Rechts buch) by Prof. Bartholomae 
is a book of a judicial type containing old Iranian Laws on 
marriage and cognate subjects. 


1 Ibid, 8-9, ? Ibid, 1-9. # Hoshang-Haug-West, Viraf Nameh, 
pp. 186-87. . 


CHAPTER III. 
Funeral Ceremonies and Customs, 


We will treat the subject of the Funeral Ceremonies and 
Division of the ObServances under two heads: 
subject. 


J. The Ceremonies that relate to the disposal of the body. 
II. Those that relate to the soul. 
I. Ceremonies that Relate to the disposal of the Body. 


The main principle, at the bottom of the Parsee custom of 
; : disposing of the dead=and at the+bottom 

The main prin. : e. ‘ 
ciple at the bottom of all the strictly religious ceremonies en- 
of the customs and joined therewith, is this, that the body, when 
disposal of the the immortal soul has left it, should, pre- 
boaye.” serving all possible respect for the dead, be 
disposed of in a way the least harmful and the least injurious 
to the living. For properly understanding the Parsee ceremonies 
that relate to the disposal of the body, one must look to the 
ancient Zoroastrian ideas of sanitation, segregation, purification 


and. cleanliness. as expressed in the Vendidéd, one of their 
Avesta Scriptures. 


As Prof..Darmesteter (Zend Avesta II) says, all the ceremonies 
Ne; of this order can be summed up in two words, 
hatetiben sem: which are the same as those which sum up 
so in too to-day all the prophylactic measures in the 
case of an epidemic, viz., (1) to break the 

contact of the living with the real or supposed centre of infec- 
tion ; (2) to destroy this centre itself. Though all do not die of 
an infectious disease, it is dangerous and difficult to leave it 
into the hands of all, to distinguish which case is infectious and 


which not. So, for the sake of precaution and safety, it seems to 


62 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


have been enjoined, that all cases of death should be supposed 
as infectious, and that people should come into as little contact 
as possible with dead bodies. yg 


Again, an idea of simplicity is observed in these ceremonies. 
The idea of sim- Adi, the Persian poet, says: 
plicity and equa- . 
lity. 
Chun ahang-i-raftan kunad jan-i-pak 
* Ché bar takht murdan ché bar rui-i-khak. 


_ te, when the pious soul thinks of departing, it is all the 
same, whether one dies on a throne or on bare.ground. The 
Parsee custom of the disposal of the dead illustrates, as it 
were, the above words of the poet. The method of carrying the 
body for disposal, from beginning to end, is the same for all. 


When a person’s case is given up, the relations begin to make 

Washing the preparations for the disposal of the body. 
shroud, and the At first, a partofthe house on the down-floor, 
ne hae where the body is to be placed before its 
placed. removal to the Towers, is washed clean with 
water. The shroud or the dress with which the body is to be 
covered is also washed-beforehand in the house.. The shroud 
or the dress with which the body is covered is white and made 
of cotton. It need not be new. Old clothes may be used 
for the purpose after being washed. Unnecessary wastage of 
clothes over the dead bodies is forbidden. (Vendiddd, V, 60). 


When a case is given up as hopeless, the relations send 
ss for two or more priests, whe assemble 
»Akhianah. : : 
round the sick bed of the dying person and 
say, for his benefit, the Patet, which ‘is a prayer for the 
repentance of one’s sins. The priests are paid in money and 
corn for their services. This is called the Akhidnah! ceremony 
because during this ceremony, priests are presented with grain. 


1 ‘The grain presented to priests, both on unhappy occasions like 
death, and happy occasions like Nadjote or Marriage, is called Akhianah, 
(perhaps corresponding to Av. akhehaéna, i.¢., that which prevents 
weakness). — 


DEATH : 53 


This part of the funeral ceremonies is not generally performed. 
The origin of this custom seems to lie in the fact that.a 
person must always say his repentance prayer, and repent of his 
sine. If he is conscious and able, he must do so at the approach- 

ing moment of death. His near relations and friends may 

join in the last prayers. If the recital of the whole Patet is not 

possible, the recital, a short time before death, of the Ashem- 
Vohi formula by the dying person himself, if he is able, or 

by some relation, if he is unable, is considered meritorious, The 

Hédokht Nask (1, 31-32) says, that the recital of the Ashem-- 
Voht formula! at the very end of life, praising good thoughts, 

good words and good actions and condemning evil thoughts, evil 
words and evil actions is, in point of greatness, goodness and 
excellence equal in value to the whole of the region of Khani- 

rath with its cattle and leading men. \The purport of all this 

is to say, that ifa man at his dying.moment could honestly say 
that he led a pious life and repented of all his sins, that life is 

worth more than the country.of Khanirath with all its riches. 


In the Vendidéd (XIL,-1-19), a shorter period of mourning is 
enjoined to the surviving relations of a righteous person (Dahma) 
than to those of a sinful person (Tanu-peretha). According to 
tradition, the Dahma or the righteous in this case is one who 
has said his repentance prayer or recited the Ashem Voha; and 
the Tanu-peretha or the sinful is one who has not said that 
prayer_or recited that formula. A longer period of mourning is 
enjoined for the sinful, because, in his case, the surviving dear 
ones have not only to mourn his loss, but have to mourn for the 
fact, that he has not led a good life, and as such has to meet 
with punishment.? 


1 It may be thus translated: ‘' Righteousness is the best gift and 
happiness. Happiness to him who is righteous for the sake of best 
righteousness.” 

* Cf. the words of Hamlet’s ghost :— 

“ Cut-off even in the blossoms of my sin, 
Unhousel’d, unanointed, unanel’d 
No reckoning made, but sent to my account 
With all my imperfections on my head. (Act I, Se. V). 


54 SOOIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Upto a few years ago, a short time before death, a few 

Communion drops of the consecrated Haoma juice were 
ae Oe Rei poured into the mouth of the dying person. 
Haoma juice. The Haoma! plant being an emblem of 
immortality, its juice is poured to impress an idea that, after 
all, the soul of a man is immortal. The Haoma plant reminds 
one of “ The Tree of Life’ of the Christian Scriptures (Genesis, 
TI, 9) in the garden of Eden and of the Sidra or Lotus ofthe 
Mahomedan Scriptures (The Quran, LITI, 14-20: S. B..E., IX, 
p. 252). As the Tree of Life is guarded by the Cherubim and 
the Sidra by 70,000 angels, so the Haoma-i-Saphid, or the White 
Haoma, is guarded by 99,999 Fravashis or the guardian spirits; 
Sometimes, instead of the juice of the Haoma plant, if it was 
not available at hand, the juice of a few grains of pomegranate, 
the leaves of which are considered essential/in some of the Parsee 
ceremonies, is dropped into the mouth of the dying person. 


A short time after death, the corpse ig washed throughout, 
first with a little application of gaomez and 
then with=water, generally with well-water. 
A clean suit of clothes, washed at home, is then put over the 
body. It is afterwards destroyed and. never used for any other 
purpose. The Kusti or the sacred thread is then put round the 
body by some near or dear one, with the recital of the Nirang-i- 
Kusti, or_ the Ahura Mazda Khudae prayer,2 The corpse is 


The final bath. 


Cf. “* Tears for the dead, who die in sin, 
And tears for living crime ; 
Tears for the lost—but Heaven’s own voice 
Says for the Christian dead—Rejoice.”” —Fewsbury. 
Cf. “ Come, come ; no time for lamentation now ; 
Not much more cause. .... 
Nothing is here for tears, Nothing to wail, | 
-. +» Nothing but well and fair. 
And what may quiet us for death go noble.” 
1 Vide below, the Haoma Ceremony, 
* In some cages, generally those of old men, when they were given 
up as hopeless, the final bath was, upto a few years ago, given during the 
last moments of life. 


DEATH 55 


then placed on a cot. Then two persons keeping themselves in 
touch with the body sit close by, and somebody recites the 
Ashem-Vohi prayer very close to the ear of the deceased. The 
relations then meet or embrace the deceased for the last time. 
In Persia, the person washing the corpse puts on woolen gloves. 


After this time, the dead body is supposed to fall under the 

Osnlast <stopoel influence of Druj-i-Nasush, ¢.e., the evil in- 
to prevent infec- fluence of Decomposition or Destruction. It 
ree is considered that to touch the body then is 
dangerous for the living, lest they should catch contagion and 
spread disease. Only the corpse-bearers are allowed to come 
into contact with the body. If somebody else touches the body, 
he has to go through a process of purification or a sacred bath 
taken under the directions of a priest. 


The body is now given in charge of two persons who are 
Putting on of generally trained to their work. They are 
the shroud. first required to take a bath and put on a 
clean suit of clothes. They perform the Kusti,! 7.¢., ungird the 
sacred thread and put it.on-again with a prayer, and then recite 
‘a part of the Srosh-baj prayer. Then holding a paiwand between 
them they enter the room where the corpse is placed. 


To hold a paiwand means to be in close contact or touch with 
each other. This is done when two persons 
hold a piece of cloth or cotton tape between 
them. ‘This is intended to show, that they are associated or 
united in doing a thing and are ready to co-operate and sympa- 
thise with each other. When these two persons enter into the 
room, holding the ‘ paiwand’ between them, the two relations 
who are sitting-by the side of the deceased leave their places 
and entrust the body to them. They place the body on the 
ground on a clean white sheet of cloth and put on the shroud 
over it. The whole of the body except the face is covered with 


The Paiwand. 


1 Vide below, the Naojote. 


56 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


cloth. In some parts of Gujarit even the face is covered with 
a padén (Avesta, paitiddna). 1 


The corpse is then lifted from its place by the abovementioned 
two persons and put on slabs of stones in a 
aie ing on the corner of the front room. The handg are 
arranged upon the chest crosswise. In some 
of the towns of Gujarat, the old Avestic method of placing the 
dead body on a plot of ground previously dug in the house, 
instead of on slabs of stone is still in practice. The ground is 
dug out a few inches deep and a layer of sand is spread over it, 
The corpse is placed on the ground thus prepared (Vendidad, 
V, 11; VIII, 8). The body is placed on the ground or on the 
slabs in a position which would avoid the head pointing towards 
the North. 


In all the ceremonies of the Parsees, the north side is as a 
rule generally avoided. The children while 

sige poke oe going through the Naojote ceremony for the 
purpose of putting on the sacred shirt and 

thread, the marrying couple going through the Ashirvid or 
marriage ceremony, andthe priests in all their religious rites 
and ceremonies never face the north. -This is due to the fact, 
that the ancient Iranians, the ancestors of the Parsees, had 
a natural hatred’ for the north, from which side proceeded 
all kinds*of dangers and evils whether climatic, physical or 
mental. The Vendidad (VII, 2, 5) says that the Druj-i-Nasush, 
ae, spirit of Destruction runs from the northern direction 
inthe form of a fly. Even the wind from the northern direc- 
tion was believed to be stinking (Yasht Fragment, XXII, 
Hadokht Nask, III, 18).2. The winds from the northern cold 


1 The padin is a piece of white cotton cloth put over the face. It is 
also put on by the Parsee priests when they say their prayers before the 
sacred fire or other sacred things of offerings. This is intended to 
prevent particles of saliva falling over the body or over the sacred things 
and thus to save them from defilement. 

* Haug’s Text and translation in the Book of Ardé Virdf, p. 315. 

e 


DEATH 57 


’ regions brought sickness and death in Persia. Again, the marau- 
ders from Mazenderan, Gilan and other adjoining regions in the 
north brought destruction and death in many Iranian families. 
These people of the north were depraved and wanting in many 
moral qualities. On the other hand, the south was considered a 
very auspicious side. The winds from the south were healthy 
and invigorating. Coming from the south, they brought rain and 
plenty. The wind blowing from the south purified the atmos- 
phere all round (Vendidad, ITT, 42).. The wind blowing towards 
the soul of a virtuous man, when it (the soul) passes on to Heaven 
on the dawn of the third night after death, was said, to be sweet- 
scented and fragrant and to have come from the.south (Yasht 
Fragment XXII, Hadokht Nask IT, 19). Owing to the belief 
based on these facts and considerations, the-north was always 
avoided. } 


After placing the corpse on slabs of stones, one of: the two 

: persons, draws round the body three Kashas ® 
Drawing the : ‘ : ; : 

Kasha, or, the or circles with a metallic bar or a nail. This 

Pemmeery tans is intended to show, that the ground within 

the circle is temporarily. set apart for the corpse, and that 
nobody is to go to that part of the ground, lest he should catch 

infection. 


In ancient Persia, almost all houses were provided with 

SenpaaPh apart. separate apartments for placing the corpse 
ments for the dead before its removal to the Towers of Silence. 
Bodie In the case of the poor who could not afford 
to have such separate apartments, there was a separate house for 
the purpose in every street. The poor carried their dead to 
such houses before removing them to the Towers. “Ahura 


1 Qf. the ancient Egyptians, while mummying the dead bodies, 
pointed the head towards the south (Maspero’s Egypt and Assyria). 
; * Vide my paper on “Iranian kashas and the Boundary lines of 
the Roman Lustrum” (Journal of the Anthropological Society of 
Bombay, Vol. VIII, pp, 520-30. My Anthropological Papers, Part I., 
pp. 331-39), 


08 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Mazda said : ‘ In every house, in every street, they should make 
three katas (separate parts of ground) for the dead’ ”’.” (Vend., 
V., p. 10). 

It is said, that even now, such separate houses are provided in 

the Parsee streets in Persia where the parties take their dead 
and perform the funeral ceremonies before removing them to 
the Towers of Silence. Such houses are known as “ margzad.”’ 
Up to late, some ofthe mofussil towns of Gujarat had™such 
.separate houses for the dead in Parsee streets. -They were 
known as Nasakh4nds i.e., the houses for the dead bodies. 
Every Parsee town has a Nass4-Khana, but now it is generally 
used as a depét for the biers, the slabs of stones above 
referred to, the shrouds and such other requisites for the 
removal of the dead. The Bahman Yasht (Chap. II, p. 38) 
speaks of it as Nas@i-kata! (corpse-chamber). 


It-is enjoined, that the place to bechosen for such apartments 

Their sanitary OF houses for the dead should be free from 
isolation. dampness, should be the least frequented 
by men and animals, and should be far away from the place 
where religious ceremonies are performed. The Vendidad (VIII, 
_p.5) says :“‘ Ahuramazda said that (they must choose) in the 
house of a Mazdayacna the cleanest and the driest place which 
is the least. frequented by cattle and beasts of burden, by the 
fire of Ahuramazda, by the Barsam spread through piety and 
by the holy man”. After having placed the body on one side of 
the ante-room, either on slabs or on a part of the ground dug and 
‘specially prepared, the two persons, who were upto now arranging 
all these things; now leave the house, still holding the paiwand 
between them. They then finish the Srosh Baj prayer, a part of 
which they had recited before commencing their work. 


One of the ceremonies is that of the Sagdid. The word ‘ Sag- 
The Sagdid. Its did’ is made up of sag, a dog, and did, 
object... ‘sight, and means‘ the sight of a dog.” A 


2 


1 Dastur Kaikobad Adarbad’s Text, p. 7. S. B, E., Vol. V., p: 205, 


‘DEATH 59 


dog, usually a four-eyed (Chathru-chashma) dog, i.e., a dog with 
two eye-like spots just above the eyes, is made to see the 
corpse.! , 


As regards the purpose why the sagdid is performed, varicus 
reasons are assigned: (a) Some say that the particular class 
of the spotted (chathru-chashma, or the four-eyed) dog had the 
characteristic of detecting whether life in the body of a man 
was extinct or not. It stared steadily at the body if life was 
extinct, and did not look at it at all if life was not altogether 
extinct. Thus the purpose for the sagdid among the ancient 
Iranians was to ascertain, before the disposal of the body, 
whether life was really extinct. (b) Others, as Dr. Haug says, 
attributed the sagdid to some supposed magnetic influence in 
the eyes of thedog. (c) There were others who connected the 
sagdid of the dog, which of all animals is the most faithful to 
his master, with the idea of loyalty and gratitude that must exist 
between the living and the dear departed ones. (d) M. Abel 
Hovelacque thinks, that the respect which the Mazdaygnans 
professed for the dog may be due either to a recollection of 
ancient belief of which the correct meaning may have been 


1 It appears from the customs of several ancient nations that the dog 
played a prominent part in the funeral ceremonies of these nations. 

(a) Compare tht Chathru-chashma of the Avesta with the “ four-eyed 
dogs” of the Rig-Veda (10th Mandala) which guarded the way to Yama’s 
abode; 

‘* Fear not to pass the guards— 
The four-eyed brindled dogs—that watch for the departed’, 
: (Mon. Willioms Indian Wisdom (1876), p. 22), 

(b) Among the ancient Romans, Lares of the departed virtuous, were 
represented in pictures with a dog tied to their legs. This was intended to 
show, that as the dogs watched faithfully at the door of their mastera, so 
the Lares watched the interests of the family to which they belonged, 

(c) The people of the West Indies have a notion among them of the 
dogs accompanying the departed dead. Cf. the following lines of Pore ; 
“* Bven the poor Indian whose untutored mind 
Sees God in clouds or hears him in the wind, 

Thinks admitted to yon equal sky 
His faithful dog shall bear him company.” 


60 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


lost or to a special motive. That motive may be the expression 
of the recognition of the dog’s valuable services in a society 
where the country life, agriculture and the breeding of the cattle 
played a rdle of great importance.! (e) Again, others considered 
the dog to be symbolical of the destruction of immoral passions. 
Death put an end to all passions; so, the presence of a dog 
near the dead body emphasized that idea. Cf. Dante’s following 
lines :— 


- “ For that fell beast whose spite thou wailest oer, 
Let no man onward pass along her way. 


. . . . . ~~ 


Many the creatures are that with her wed, 


And will be more until the greyhound come, 
Who with sharp agony shall.smite her dead.”’ 

(Divine Comedy, Hell, Ch. I, 11. 94-1€2 ; Dr. Plumptre’s Trans- 
lation.) 

In these lines, the greyhound is considered as the deliverer of 
Italy. He is the symbol of the destroyer of the passions of 
sensual enjoyment, pride and avarice which are ‘represented by 
the leopard, the lion and the wolf.’ 


1 Ce respect, que le Mazdéens professaicnt pour le chien avait-il un 
motif spécial > Gtait-il le souvenir d’anciens événements. d’anciennes 
eroyances dont on pouvait bien avoir perdu déja le véritable sens, c’est 
ce que nous ne pouvons assurer. Faut-il simplement en voir la cauge dans lu 
reconnaissance 4 laquelle le chien devait avuir un yi juste titre puur ses 
bona offices, dans une société oti Ja vie de campagne, la culture de la 
terre, Pélevage du bétail jouaient un réle si considérable ? Peut-étre 
les deux opinions ont~elles ici, comme bien souvent, une égale raison 
détre.” (L’ Avesta, Zoroastre et le Mazdéisme, par Abel Hovelacque,. 
(1880) p. 337). 5 : 

2 For the various beliefs about the dog, vide‘‘ The Dog in Myth and. 
Customs ” by E. T. Leith (Journal of the Anthropological. Society of 
Bombay, Vol. III, pp. 302-306 and pp. 360-362). Vide my paper on ‘“The 
Tibetan Mode of the Disposal of the Dead. Some side-light thrown by iton 
some of the details of the Iranian mode as described in the Vendidad. 
A study’ in the Sir Jd. J.Z. Madressa Jubilee Volume, cdited | me. 
pp. 347-35, 


DEATH 61 


(f) Some connect the idea of the sag-did with the symbolic 
idea of the two dogs—the Canis major and the Canis minor in 
the Orion at the Chinvad bridge, which is the Milky Way.! 


The Sagdid is performed twice during the process of putting 
on the shroud and is repeated in every Gah 3, as long as the 
corpse is in the house. It .is repeated just when the new Gah 
begins. It is enjoined that in case a dog is not procurable, the 
sagdid of flesh-devouring birds like the crows and vultures 
may be allowed ; that is to say, it will do, if a flesh-eating bird 
happens to pass and see the corpse from above. ° 


After the first sagdid, fire is brought into the room in a vase 

Fire kept buru- and is kept burning with-fragrant sandal- 
ing in tho room Wood and frankincense. This is done with a 
view to destroy the invisible germs of disease that may be float- 
ing in the air in the room where the corpse is placed before its 
removal to the Tower of Silence. We read the following in the 
Vendidad (VIII, 79, 80) about this sanitary use of fire: ‘“‘O holy 
Zarathushtra! If one carries with purity (for the fire) the 
aésma (t.e., the wood) of the plant Urvasna, or Vohugaéna 
ov Vohukéréti, or Hadhanaépata 4, or any other fragrant tree, 
the fire of Ahura-Mazda goes to fight a thousand times against 
the invisible evil daevas * in all the directions in which the wind 
spreads the fragrance of the fire.” 


Sir J. J. Z. Madressa Jubilee Volume, p. 317. 

?\The Géhs are the five different periods of the day. The first 
Géh, Havan, begins with the dawn of the day and ends at twelve noon or 
midday. The second, Rapithwin runs from twelve noon to three o’clock 
in the afternoon. The third, Uzairine begins at three and continues 
until it is dark. The fourth Aivisruthrem, commences from when it is 
dark, and lasts upto midnight. The fifth Gah Ushahin, commences’ 
from midnight and lasts upto the dawn of the day. 

3“* Or, the flesh-eating birds fly in the direction.” ( Vend. VII, 3,) 

4 All these are species of fragrant plants, the burning of the wood 
of which destroyed germs of disease. 

5 The word ‘ daéva’ is used in tho Avesta fur allevil intlucncos or 
things, whether physical, mental or moral. 


62 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Then a priest sits before the fire and recites the Zend-Avesta 

Prayers by a till the time of the removal.of the corpse to 
priest. the Tower, and keeps the fire burning. It 
is not absolutely necessary that a priest should recite prayers at 
this time. Any person in the house can recite prayers and 
keep the fire burning. The priest and all other persons are 
enjoined to sit at a distance of at least three paces from ‘the 
corpse, so that in case the deceased died of an infectious disease, 
there may be no danger or risk to the health and life of the 
living. We read the following about this enjoinment.: “ O Creator 
of the material world! At what distance from the.holy man 
(should the place of the corpse be)?’ Ahura. Mazda replied, 
** Three paces.” (Vendidad, VIII, 6, 7.) 


The corpse may be removed to the. Tower at any time during 

Pine ae She the day. As it.is enjoined that “ the Maz- 
removal of the dayagnans should expose the body to the 
body fo sner tower: Sun,” (Vend. V, 13), the removal of the body 
at night is strictly forbidden. If death takes place early at night, 
the body is removed the next morning ; but, if it takes place late 
at night or early in the morning, it is removed in the afternoon. 
In the case of an accidental death, a long interval is general- 
ly allowed. The Vendidad (VII, 4-5) says, that in a such a 
case, the decomposition does not commence as early as in the 
case of a body that was suffering from illness, but commences 
after one Gah, or one period of the day; and so, it is not 
detrimental to the health of the living to keep the body some 
time longer. 


About an hour before the time fixed for the removal of the 
body to the Tower, two—or, four if the body 
P Aas corpse-bear- i, heavier —Nassasalars, ! t.e., corpse-bearers, 
clothed in perfect white, enter the house, 
after having said and performed the Padyib Kusti. All the 


1 The Nagu-Kaghas of the Vendidad. In large towns or centres of 
Parsee population, there are generally two classes of corpse-bearers, 
(a) The Nassasalars, who go to the house and place the corpse on the bier, 


‘DEATH ‘ 63 


parts of the body except the face are covered up. “They put 
on dasténeh {i.e., covering for the hand) over their hands. 
The exposed parts of the body are covered up to ensure their 
safety. against catching infection through any uncovered part, 
should the deceased have died of an infectious disease. They 
enter the house holding a paiwand ! between them and carry 
an iron bier, called gehdn;? to remove the body. Wood being 
porous and therefore likely to carry and spread germs of disease 
and infection, its use is strictly prohibited in the funeral 
ceremonies, So, the bier is always made of iron. 


The corpse-bearers must be at least two, even if the deceased 
; were a mere infant that-could be carried by 
Siege Ragiasnicl Ake a single person. ‘ Nobody should carry the 
part in all funeral dead alone ” (Vendidad, III, 14). If the body 
ceremonies. 
is heavy, it must be carried by :four, six, 
eight, ten. or any such even number. A pair, or the number 
two, plays a prominent part.in all the ceremonies for the dis- 
posal of the dead body and that pair always holds a paiwand 
between them. After death, the body must never be left alone 
or in the company of.only one person. After washing it, there 
must be always two persons sitting by its side. Again the 
persons, who put on the shroud and place it on slabs of stone 
in a corner of the house before its removal to the Tower, must 
be two. We will see further on, that the priests who say the 
last funeral prayers at the house are also two. The persons 
who attend the funeral procession to the Tower also go in pairs 


and who afterwards enter the Tower and expose the corpse there. 
(vo) The Khandhas (i¢., those who carry the body on their Khandh, 
4. €., shoulders) whose business is to carry the bier of the corpse from the 
house to the Tower. In small towns where the Parsee population is scarce, 
one and the same persons perform both the works. In smaller towns 
where the Parsee population is more scarce, there are no paid professional 
carriers of this type and the corpses are disposed of by the relations and 
friends of the deceased. In Bombay, it being the head-quarters of the 
Parsees, there is a paid staff of about 50 professional corpse-bearers of both 
the classes. 1 Vide above, p. 54. 
* Perhaps from Pers. gdh bed, meaning the last bed. . 


64 - SOCTO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONTES AND CUSTOMS 


of two and two, holding a paiwand in the form of a handker- 
chief between them. .A. single individual should never attend 
the funeral. The injunction of having pairs in all these funeral 
ceremonies is intended to create a view of sympathy and mutual 
help. 


The corpse-beartrs, on entering the house, place the bier by. 

The recital of the the side of the corpse and then “ take. the 
Baj. Baj.”! They then recite a formula in) a 
suppressed tone which says: ‘“‘ (We do this) according \to the 
dictates of Ahura Mazda, according to the dictates of the 
Ameshaspentas, according to the dictates of the holy Sraosha, 
according to the dictates of ’ Adarbad Marespand,? and 
according to the dictates of the Dastur of-the age.” °: By the 
recital of this formula, known as the/Dasturi formula, they 
declare, that they undertake to perform all the ceremonies for 
the disposal of the dead as enjoined in the religious books and 
as directed by the Head-priest of the time. Then they sit 
silent by the side of the corpse. If they have at all any 
occasion to speak, they’ speak with a kind of suppressed tone, 
without opening the lips, which is said to be speaking in bdj. 


Then follows thé“ Géh-Sarna ” ceremony, t.e., the recital of 
The Ghé-sarna the Gatha. Its recital was intended as a ser- 
prayer. mon and exhortation to give moral courage 
to the survivors to bear up with fortitude the loss of the 
deceased and as a protection against the spread of disease, 


1“ To take the Béj” is to recite the Sraosh-b4j prayer up to the 
word ‘ Ashahé ”’ in the Kem-na-Mazda prayer which forms a part of the 
Sraosh-Baj (Darmesteter, Le Zend Avesta I1, pp. 686-88). When the 
particular work of a person in connection with the disposal of the dead 
body is finished, the baj is also then finished, ¢.e., the remaining part of 
the Sraosh-baj is recited. This b2@j is also taken by the priest at the 
time of bathing and in the Bareshnum ceremony. 

? He was a well-known Dastur or Head priest of¢he Sassanian times, 
and took an active part in the renaissance of the Zoroastrian religion after 
the long period of ignorance in the times of the Parthians. 

® Here they recite the name of the Head-priest. if there be one, of 
the time at the town, 


DEATH 65 


We read the following on this point in the Vendidad (X, 1, 2): 
“ Zarathushtra asked Ahura Mazda: ‘O Ahura Mazda! Most 
beneficent Spirit! Holy Creator of the material world! How 
~ are we to stand against the druj (evil influence) which runs from 
the dead to the living? How are we to stand against the nasu 
(evil influence) which carries infection. from the dead to the 
living ?? Then Ahura Mazda replied : ‘ Recite those words which 
are spoken twice in the Gathas.’” , The words referred to in this 
quotation occur in a passage in the beginning of the Ahunavaiti 
Gatha. 

In this Géh-Sarna ceremony, two priests perform the Pddyab 
Kusti, and, after reciting the prayers for the particular Gah, go 
to the chamber where the dead body is placed, and standing 
at the door or inside the door at some distance from the body, 
and holding a patwand! between them, put on the padén? over 
their face, take the bdj? and recite the Ahunavaiti Gatha 
(Yaena XXVIII-XXXIV) which ‘treats of Ahura Mazda, his 
Ameshispentas or immortal archangels, the future life, resurrec- 
tion and such other subjects. After reciting nearly half of the 
Ahunavaiti Gatha (up to XXXI, 4), they stop for about a 
minute. The corpsé-bearers now lift the corpse from the slabs 
of stone on which it islying and place it over the iron bier. 
The two priests now turn” towards the bier and recite the 
remaining half ofthe Ahunavaiti Gatha. * 

If the deceased person is a pregnant woman in the fifth month 

Geh Sarna cere. 01 her pregnancy when the child is supposed 
mony of pregnant to have some life, the geh-sdrnd ceremony is 
nw enjoined to be performed by two pairs of 
priests, The sag-did, above referred to, is also by two dogs, one for 


i Vide above, p. 54. 

* Vide above, p. 54 n. 

8 Vide above, p. 62. 

4 It seems, that at one time,’ in Persia, and even in India, the 
Gehsérné prayer at the house was finished at this part of the recital and 
the body was removed-to the Tower, the rest of the prayer being recited 
on the way to the Tower. (Vide my paper on “The Geh-sarn& Recital 
as enjoined and as recited about 150 yearsago,” in the Sir J. J. Z. 
Madressa Jubilee Volume, edited by me, pp 415-20.) 


9 


66 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


the woman and the other for the child. Again the body also is. 
to be carried out of the house by two pairs of Nass(salars 
Shayast 14 Shayast, X, 10 !; (Sad-dar LXX, 5. 2). 


When the recital of the Gatha is finished, the final sag-did* 
is performed, and then the relations and 
friends of the deceased who have by this 
time assembled at the house, have a last look of the deceased, 
Tn such an assembly, the females assemble in the house; and the 
males outside the house or in thestreet. The males,/one by one, 
pass before the corpse, have a last look, and out of respect make 
a how, which process is called sijda. 


The last look. 


When all have had their last look and paid-their respects, the 

Removal from Corpse-bearers cover up with a piece of cloth 
the house, the face of the deceased which was up to 
now open, and secure the body. to the bier, with a few straps 
of cloth so that it may not fall on being lifted up and carried. 
They then carry the bier out of the house and entrust it to the 
Khandhiaés who are, as/said-above,* another class of corpse- 
bearers whose only business is to carry the bier of the corpse on 
their shoulders from the house to the Tower. The number of 
these carriers varies according to the weight of the body to be 
carried. Before lifting up the body, these carriers also “‘ take 
the baj’’? and arrange themselves in pairs of two holding the 
paiwand, between them. 


Immediately after the removal of the body from the house, 
Neiaak chews Gaomez, 7.e., the urine of the cow, . is be- 
urine as a purifier sprinkled over the slabs of stone on which the 

or disinfectant. ‘ 
body was placed and over the way by which 


1§.B. E., Vol. V, p 319. It issaid that when the body of a pregnant 
woman has to be carried, in unavoidable circumstances, by two pergons, . 
these two persons must go through the Barshnum Purification (Shayast la 
Shayast, 116. S. B. E., Vol. V, p. 247). 

?§. B, E., Vol XXIV, p. 335. 

3 Vide above, p. 57. 

* Vide above, p. 61n. 


DEATH 67 


the corpse-bearers carried the body out of the house. The 
slabs of stone are now generally removed from the house imme- 
diately after the removal of the body.* 


The Gaomez or cow’s urine is spoken of as Nirang, because its 
application or use is generally accompanied by the recital of a 
nirang, i.¢., a prayer formula. Cow’s urine was believed by the 
ancient Zoroastrians to possess disinfecting properties. So) in 
order to destroy the germs of impurity and disease, if any, it 
was bésprinkled on the place where the dead body was placed.? 
For the same reason, cow’s urine played a prominent part in 
eleaning impurities attached to things that came into contact 
with the decomposing matters of men and animals. Such 
things are first asked to be purified or washed with cow’s 
urine and then with water (Vend. VII, 74-75). Utensils or 
articles of furniture made of wood, clay, or porcelain that come 
into contact with a decomposing body are condemned. altogether. 
Being porous, they are held.to have possibly caught the germs 
of disease from the dead body and are therefore considered to be 
unsafe for further domestic. purpose (Vend. VII, 75).* 


When the bier leaves the house, out of respect for the deceased, 
The Funeral Pro- all the male relations and friends of the fa- 
Ree \/mily that have assembled at the house of the 
deceased, or at times only the elders, follow the bier for some 


1 In some of the Mofussil towns, at least in the orthodox families of 
the towns, the slabs are kept in the house for 10 days or 30 days according 
as the season of the year be winter or summer. This injunction seems 
to have been based upon the Vendidad (chap. V. 42). 

2 Vendidad XIX, 21. 

3 According to Dr. Eugene Wilhelm, many other ancient nations 
besides the Persians used cow’s urine as a disinfectant. Vide Dr. Wil- 
helm’s paper ‘‘ On the use of Beef‘s Urine, according to the precepts of the 
Avesta and on similar customs with other nations.” According to Dr. 
Haug, the peasants of several parts of Europe, even now, use cow's urine 
for a similar purpose. (Haug’s Essays on the Parsees, 2nd Hdition, 
p. 286). “The use of gémdz has been lately found to be known in Basse. 
Bretague (Luzel, Le Nirang des Parsison Basse- Bretagne, Melusine, 493)” 

Darmesteter. §. B, E. IV, Ist ed. Introd. p. LX XXVIII a. 3, 


68 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


distance from the house or upto the end of the street. There, 
they make a last bow to the deceased and stand aside, 
giving way to those relations and friends who wish to 
accompany the funeral procession to the Tower of Silence. 
These follow the bier at a distance of, at least, thirty paces. The 
rest of the assembly now disperse. Before entering into their 
houses or places of business, they wash their face and other 
exposed parts of their body and perform the kusti. All-those 
who go with the funeral procession to the Tower are clothed 
in full white dress. They arrange themselves in pairs of two, 
hold a paiwand between them, take the baj and silently march 
to the Tower. The procession is headed by twopriests. On 
this point we read in the Vendidad (VIII, 14,19-21): ‘‘O Holy 
Creator of the material world! How does the road over which 
a dead man is cartied become passable for cattle, &c. ?”’. 
(Reply) “ First, the Athravan (i.e., the priest) should pass by 
the road, reciting the victorious words (of Yathé Aha Vairyé 
and Kem na Mazda).” 


When the bier reaches the Tower, at first it is put on the 

‘he Disposal in ground outside and the Nassasalars uncover 
eto the face of the body.’ Those who have accom- 
‘panied the funeral procession pay their respects and have a last 
look from a distance of atleast three paces. Then asagdid is once 
more performed and that for the last time. Inthemeantime, the 
gate of the Tower which is kept locked with a metallic lock is 
opened... The Nassasalars who had fetched the corpse out of the 
house and entrusted it to the carriers and who have accompanied 
the corpse, now resuine charge of the body. They lift up the 
bier and carry it into the Tower. They remove the body from 
the bier and place it on onc of the ‘ pavis’.! They then tear 
off the clothes from the body of the diseased and leave it 
(the body) on the floor of the Tower. We read on this point in 
the Vendidad ; (VIII, 10) “Two powerful persons may carry 


1 The platform of the Tower is, divided into separate sections named 
pdvis. Each corpse is placed ona separate pdvi. 


pidtit gg 


him and place him naked without any clothes on this. earth, 
on clay, bricks, stone and mortar.” The body must be exposed 
and left partly uncovered, so as to draw towards it the eye 
of the flesh-devouring birds and to fall an easy prey to them. 
The sooner it is devoured, the lesser the chance of further 
decomposition and the greater the sanitary good and safety. 
The clothes removed from the corpse are never used for any 
purpose whatever, but are thrown in a pit outside the Tower, 
where they are destroyed by the combined action of. heat, 
air and rain. In Bombay they are further destroyed with 
sulphuric acid. 

On the Nass4s4lars completing their work in the Tower and 
on their locking the Tower, notice is given, by a clapping of hands 
by a Servant, to all those who have accompanied the funeral 
procession and who have by this time taken their seats at 
some distance from the Tower, tosay that the body is placed 
in the Tower. They all get up from their seats and finish the 
bdj, i.e., recite the rest of the Sraésh-baj, of which, before 
joining the procession, they had recited only a part. They now 
leave off the paiwand and recite a short prayer which says : 
“We repent of all our sins. Our respects to you (the souls of 
the departed). .We remember here the souls of the dead who 
have the spirits ofthe holy.” They then apply cow’s urine to 
the exposed portions of their body and then wash them with 

_ water. They untie and regirdle the kusti with its usual formula 
of prayer. Then some, especially the priests, say the Patet or 
the Repentance prayer, mentioning the name of the deceased in 
the, last portion of the prayer and thus ask the forgiveness of 
God upon the deceased. As-said above, the Vendidid enjoins 
that only two priests must attend the funeral procession with 
a view to direct and advise the adoption of the necessary rites 
and ceremonies. But generally, the family invites more than two 
priests to accompany the procession and to say the prayers at 
the Towers. All of them are paid for ‘their services. This 
being done, all return home and generally take a bath before 
following their ordinary vocations. 


70 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND cUsTOMS 


A short description of the Tower of Silence? will not be out 
‘of place here. The Tower of Silence wherein 
the dead bodies are exposed tothe sun 
and to the flesh-eating birds, is generally built on the top of a 
hill or on an elevated ground. We read on this point in the 
Vendidid: “O Holy Creator of the material world! where 
are we to carry the bodies of the dead ? O Ahura Mazda! where 
are we to place them ?”’ Ahura Mazda replied: ‘“‘“O Spitama 
Zarathushtra | on the most elevated place”? (Vend. VI. 44-45), 
On such an elevated place, an isolated spot; away from human 
dwellings, is chosen for the Tower. Its construction all along is 
just in accord with the view held in the performance of the 
ceremonies for the disposal of the dead, viz.,the sanitary view, 
which enjoins, that, while disposing of the dead body with all 
respect due to the deceased, no injury or harm should be done to 
the living. The Tower is a round massive structure built 
throughout of solid stone. A few steps from the ground lead to 
an iron gate which opens on a circular platform of solid stone 
with a circular well in the centre. The following is a short 
description of a Bombay tower as given by Mr. Nusserwanjee 
Byramjee, the late energetic Secretary of the public charity 
funds and properties of the Parsee community. 


The Tower. 


“ The circular platform inside the Tower, about three hun- 
dred feet.in circumference, is entirely paved with large stone 
slabs well-cemented, and divided into three rows of shallow open 


1 The Parsee word for a Tower of Silence is ‘ dakhmA,’ which is used 
in the general sense of a receptacle for the dead. The English phrase - 
“ Tower of Silence ” seems, as pointed out by Sir George Birdwood, to 
have been first used by the late Mr. Robert Zavier Murphy, who was for 
some time the Oriental Translator to the Government of Bombay. The 
round tower-like construction of the building seems to have suggested 
to him the use of the word‘ Tower.’ Then, in Persian and also in Hindus- 
1ani, the word‘ Khamush,’ ¢. e., silent or‘ Khamushi,’ 7. ¢., silonce, is often 
used in connection with the dead. The dead are alluded to as being‘ Kha- 
nitish, ° d.¢., silent. Hence, this Persian word ‘ Khamush ’ goeems to have 
suygested to Mr. Murphy, who was versed in oriental learning, the word 
‘ silence ’ in connection with the word Tower. 


DEATH 71 


receptacles, corresponding with the three moral precepts of the 
Zoroastrian Religion—‘ good deeds,’ ‘good words,’ ‘ good 
thoughts,’ (The three rows are used as follows :) 


“ First row for corpses of males, 
** Second row for corpses of females. 


* Third row for corpses of children, 


‘The clothes wrapped round the corpses are removed and 
destroyed immediately after they are placed in the Tower— 
* Naked we come into this world and naked we ought to leave it.’ 


“There are footpaths for corpse-bearers to move about. A 
deep central well (bhanddr) in the Tower, about 150 feet in 
circumference (the sides and bottom of which are also paved 
with stone slabs) is used for depositing the dry bones. The 
corpse is completely stripped of its flesh by vultures within an 
hour or two, and the bones of the denuded skeleton, when 
perfectly dried up by atmospheric influences and the powerful 
heat of the tropical sun, are thrown into this well, where they 
gradually crumble to dust, chiefly consisting of lime and phos- 
phorus ;—thus the rich and the poor meet together on one level 
of equality after death. 


“There ate holes in the inner sides of the well through 
which the rain water is carried into four under-ground drains 
at thesbase of the Tower. These drains are connected with 
four under-ground wells, the bottoms of which are covered 
with a thick layer of sand. Pieces of charcoal and sandstone 
are also placed at the end of each drain, which are renewed 
from time to time. These double sets of filters are provided 
for purifying the rain water passing over the bones before it 
enters the ground—thus observing one of the tenets of the 
Zoroastrian religion that ‘The Earth shall not be defiled.’ 


“* The vultures (nature’s scavengers) do their work much more 
expeditiously than millions of insects would do, if dead bodies 
were buried in the ground. By this rapid process, putrefaction 


72 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


with all its concomitant evils, is most effectually prevented. 
According to the Zoroastrian religion, Earth, Fire and Water are 
sacred and very useful to mankind, and in order to avoid their 
pollution by contact with putrefying flesh, the Zoroastrian, reli- 
gion strictly enjoins that the dead bodies should not be buried 
in the ground, or burnt, or thrown into seas, rivers, &c. 


“In accordance with their religious injunctions the Parsees 
build their Towers of Silence on the tops of hills if availablé. No 
expense is spared in constructing them of the hardest and the 
best materials, with a view that they may last for centuries 
without the possibility of polluting the earth or contaminating 
any living beings dwelling thereon. 


“ However distant may be the home of_a deceased person, 
whether rich or poor, high or low in rank, he has always a walk- 
ing funeral—his body is carried to the Towers of Silence on an 
iron bier by official corpse-bearers. and is followed in procession 
by the mourners, relatives and friends, dressed in white flowing 
full-dress robes, walking behind in pairs and each couple joined 
hand in hand by holding a-white handkerchief between them in 
token of sympathetic grief.”’ 


In the compound of the Tower, at a short distance from it, 
there is a small building called sagri, where a sacred fire is kept 
burning day and night. In mofussil towns, where it is not con- 
* venient. to keep fire burning, at least, a light is kept burning. 


The-construction of a Tower is accompanied by religious cere- 
monies ! which are performed at different 
times during the progress of ‘the structure 
and are therefore divided into three classes:— 

(1) The ceremony of digging the ground. (2) The ‘‘ Tana” 
ceremony, or the ceremony of laying the foundation. (3) The 
consecration ceremony after which the Tower is laid open for 
public use. 


The Consecration 
of the Tower. 


1 Vide below, Consecration ceremonies. 


DEATH 83 


We have described at great length the funeral ceremonies upto 
> the time of the disposal of the body in the 
ie do lelngat ine Tower. It appears, that at the bottom of a 
bottom of all the good many of them lies a great solicitude, 
ceremonies, 
on the part of the lawgivers who framed the 
rules and dictated the ceremonies, to attend to the sanitary 
good of the survivors. At first sight, the details may appear 
irksome, but from the standpoint of sanitation and health, most 
of them, though enjoined about 3,000 years ago, appear. essen- 
tial. Every precaution is enjoined, so that, in disposing of the 
dead body, no contamination or injury may result-to the living. 
After a certain time after death, no man except the official 
corpse-bearers, is allowed to touch the dead body or to come into 
‘any contact with it. Hf somebody accidentally or unavoidably 
does touch the body, he is enjoined to keep himself aloof from 
others and not touch them before he bathes and undergoes a 
prescribed ceremonial of different washings. 


Not only should a man not come into contact with the dead 
body, but even utensils and other articles of 
ioe and. fyrmiture should be kept away from the 
isinfection. 
corpse. If wearing clothes have been defiled 
by the sweat, vomit, &c., of the dead, they should be 
altogether rejected and destroyed (Vend. VII. 13). If not 
defiled, they may be purified by the “Gaomez” and water. 
If the clothes are made of leather they must be washed thrice 
with “‘ Gaomez,” rubbed with dry earth thrice, washed with 
water thrice, and exposed for three months in the air before be- 
ing used again. If they are made of woven cloth, which is more 
porous than leather and therefore likely to carry more germs of 
disease and infection, the above process of cleaning and washing - 
must be repeated six times, and they must be exposed’ to the air . 
for a period of six months (Vend. VII, 14-15). Even the clothes 
thus purified cannot be used again for religious purposes or for 
ordinary domestic purposes, but they can be. nee for ouhen petty 
purposes, (Vend. VII, 18-19) ~ eS pete eae ae 
‘ Ie 


74 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Utensils for domestic purposes, if they have come into con- 
tact with a dead body, require to be washed several times accor- 
ding to the specific gravity of the metal of which they are mace. 
If the utensil is made of gold, it requires one washing with 
“ Gaomez ” and water and a rubbing with dry earth. An uten- 
sil of silver, which is more porous than gold and therefore likely 
to carry more contagion, requires two similar cleanings and wa- 
shings. An iron one requires three, a zinc one four, and.a_stone 
one six washings. An utensil of porcelain, wood or clay isto be 
condemned altogether (Vend. VII, 73-75). In the same way, 
if accidentally a dead body happens to come into.contact with 
stores of grain (Vend. VII, 32-35) or of drinking water (Vend. 
VI, 26-41), it is enjoined to reject and condemn.a certain quantity 
in the near vicinity of the body. 


Thus, at the bottom of all religious injunctions and restrictions 
in connection with the funeral ceremonies and the disposal of the 
dead body, lies the sanitary principle of segregation, prevention 
of contamination and infection, and the idea of observing sim- 
plicity and equality. 


We will now speak of some of the observances attended to in 
the house after the removal of the corpse. They also point to 
the same end, 


After the removal of the body to the Tower, all the members 
of the family are required to bathe. Fire is 
A few observ- : 
ancés attended to generally kept burning for three days at the 
in the house. Fire gpot where the body was placed before re- 
kept burning. : : 
moval. Fragrant sandal and incense are 
burnt over it. We have spoken above, about the good attri- 
buted to the fire in destroying the germs of disease lurking at 
the spot where the decomposing body was placed. 


Again the spot, where the body was placed before removal, is 
generally set apart and not used for some 
time. Nobody is allowed to go on the spot 
for a period of ten days if the season at the time be winter, or 


Spot set apart. 


DEATH 15 


For a period of thirty days, if the season be summer, when 
the decomposition and contamination are generally more rapid. 
(Vendidad V. 42). 


Near the spot where the body was placed, a lamp is kept 
burning for a period of ten days or thirty 
days, according as it is winter or summer. 
In a small pot full of water fresh flowers are kept and: changed 
every morning and evening. On the expiry of the above 
period, the chamber is washed throughout. 


Lamp and flowers. 


For three days after death, the family abstains from meat 

and takes food chiefly consisting of vegetable 

oe from and fish, which is called.“ parhizi,” i.e,, 

abstinence. Not only. do’ the family, but 

even nearest and dearest friends abstain from meat diet. The 

abstinence is observed as a sign of-mourning. Generally, no 

food is cooked in the house where death has taken place. The 

nearest relations of the family prepare the food for the bereaved 
family and send it over to. their place. 


On the custom of abstaining from meat diet during the first 
three days after the death of a member of the family, we find 
the following injunction in the Shayast 14 Shayast (Chap. 
XVII, 1-3). “Ina house where a person shall die, until three 
nights are completed, nothing whatever of meat is to be placed 
on a sacred cake (drén) therein and its vicinity ; but these, such 
as.milk, cheese, fruit, eggs and preserves, are to be placed ; and 
nothing whatever of meat is to be eaten by his relations.” ! 
The Sad-dar says “In every habitation where anyone departs 

: the relations should not eat meat for three days,” 
(Sad- -dar LXX VIII, 1-2). 2 


II, Ceremonies thai relate to the soul of the deceased, 


We will now speak of the funeral ceremonies performed for the 
soul after the disposal of the body. A short epitome of some of 


1 §. B. E. V. (1880) p. 382. 2 Ibid XXIV, pp. 341-42. | 


76 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


these is given in the 17th chapter of the Shayast 14 Shayast. 
(S. B. E. Vol. V, pp. 382-84). 


According to Parsee Scriptures, the soul of a dead person 
remains within the precincts of this world 
for three days.1 In this state, it sees before 
itself a picture of its past deeds. If itis 
the soul of a pious person, it sees a beautiful picture of, its 
deeds in the past life in the form of a handsome, well-formed, 
strong damsel and feels happy and joyful. If it is the soul of a 
wicked person, it sees a horrible picture of its past deeds in the 
form of an ugly, ill-formed, weak woman, shudders and feels 
unhappy at the sight and is at a loss where-to go.4 We read 
in the Hadokht Nask: ‘“‘ Zarathushtra asked Ahura-Mazda, 
‘O Ahura-Mazda, Beneficent, Spirit, Holy Creator of the material 
world! when a pious man dies, where dwells his soul for that 
night? . . . . Where for the.second night? . . .. 
Where for the third night ?’ ’ (Yasht Fragment XXII; Hadokht 
Nask, Chap. II, 1-18). Then Ahura-Mazda replied, “ It 
remains at the place of his body, singing the Ushtavaiti Gatha 
(song of congratulation), asking for blessedness thus: ‘ Blessed- 
ness ‘to him to whom Ahura-Mazda of his own will grants 


The soul sees a 
picture of its deeds. 


— 


3 Cf. The Christian idea of the Resurrection of Christ at the end 
of three days. : 

4 Drs Cheyne ealls this ‘‘ a very noble allegory.” He says, ‘‘ Heaven 
and hell are not primarily the localities appointed for souls after death ;.the 
one is‘ life,’ ‘ the best mental state ;’ the other is ‘ life’s absence,’ ‘the 
worst life,’ a high doctrine which is embodied in a very noble allegory in 
the Vendidad. .... Conscience, in fact, according to the fine allegory, 
appears to the soul of the deceased man and conducts it to its place.” (The 
Origin and Religious Contents of the Psalter by Rev. Dr. Cheyne (1891), 
pp. 398-99. The Bampton Lectures of 1889). Vide Rev. Dr. Cas- 
artelli’s paper entitled ‘‘ Outre-Tombe—-A Zoroastrian Idyll ” in the K. R. 
Cama Memorial Volume, pp. 74-78. Dr. Haug thought, that this allegory 
suggested to Prophet Mahomed ‘“ the idea of the celestial Huris.”’ 
Dr. Cheyne says, ‘“ At any rate this Zoroastrian allegory suggested 
the Talmudic story of the three bands of ministering angels who meet the 
soul of the pious man, and the threa bands of wounding angels who meet 
the bad man when he dies.”” (The Origin of the Psalter, p. 437). 


DEATH W7 


blessedness!’”’ (Yasht ‘Fragment, XXII; Hadokht Nask, 
Chap. II, 5. Vide Haug’s Text and Translation in the Book of 
Arda Viraf, pp. 309-10). 


If it is the soul of a wicked man itremains within the precincts 
of this world for three nights, remembering all the wickedness of 
its past life and feeling at a loss where to go. It clamours; 
“ Oh Ahura-Mazda ! To what land shall I turn ? Where shall 
go?” (Yasht Fragment, XXII; Hadokht Nask, Chap.-Hi. 
Vide Haug’s Book of Arda Viraf, p. 315). 


The soul of a man thus remains within the precinets of this 
world for three days. The number three is 
Number three 3 : 
symbolically sac. a sacred number, because it reminds one of 
real: the three principal precepts of the Mazda- 
yacnan religion upon which the moral philosophy of the 
Zoroastrian religion turns. Think-of nothing but the truth, 
speak nothing but the truth, and\do nothing but what is 
right, and you are saved. -Your good thoughts, good words, 
and good deeds will be your saviours in the next world. 
Therefore it is, that, three days after death, the soul of a 
good man directs itself_towards the paradise with three steps 
of Humata, Hikhta, and Hvarshta, 7.¢., good thoughts, good 
words and good deeds. On the other hand, the soul of a 
wicked man directs itself to hell with three steps of Dushmata, 
Duzikhta, and‘ Duzvarshta, i.e., evil thoughts, evil words, 
and evil actions. We read in the Hadokht Nask: “ The first 
step which the soul of the pious man advanced, he placed in Hu- 
mata (good thoughts), The second step which the soul of the 
pious man advanced, he placed in Hikhta (good words). The 
third step which the soul of the pious man advanced, he placed 
in Hvarshta (good deeds).” (Yasht Fragment, XXII, 15; 
Hadokht Nask IT; 34, Ibid. p. 314). 


Now for the three days and nights that a soul is believed to 
remain within the precinets of this world, it 

aise aang ao is under the special protection of Sraosha. 
The Yazata or the angel Sraosha is a guard- 


78 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND’ CUSTOMS 


ian angel guiding the souls of men. He is a guardian angel whom 
the Almighty has appointed to guide the souls of men while 
living and even when dead. The Yacna says: “O beautiful, 

‘holy Sraosha! protect us here in these two lives, in these two 
worlds, in this world which is material, in that which is 
spiritual.’? (Yacna LVII, 25). 


As Sraosha is the protector of the soul in this world, all the 
prayers. of a Zoroastrian begin with a Sraosh-baj, which-is) a 
prayer for the Khshniman of (lit., for the pleasure of, t.e., for 
thanking) Sraosha. It is for this reason, that Sraosh Yasht 
(Yagna LVII) is generally recited by a Parsee at night before 
going to bed, to pray that his soul be under the»protection of 
the angel when he is asleep. 


As the soul is under the protection of Sraosha for three 

ak peal pe days after death;-when it is still within the 
days’ ceremoniesat precincts of this world, the religious 
home. ceremonies for the soul of the dead during 
the first three days are performed in the name of, or with the 
Khshniman of, Sraosha. This angel is specially implored by the 
relations of the deceased to protect his soul. The Shayast 14 
Shayast says: ‘In all the three days, it is necessary to perform 
the ceremonial (Yazishn) of Sradsh, for this reason, because 
Sradésh wilh be,able to save his soul from the hands of the 
demons for=the three days ; and when one constantly performs 
a ceremonial atevery period (gdh) in the three days, it is as 
good.as-though they should celebrate the whole religious ritual 
atone time”.! We will now describe these ceremonies per- 
formed for the first three days in honour of Sraosha. 


At the commencement of every gdh, two or more priests and 
the relatives of the deceased say the Sraosh-b4j and the prayers 
of the particular Gah, and the Patet or the repentance prayer, 
with the Khshniman of Sraosha. At night, at the commence- 
ment of the Aiwisruthrem Gah, two priests perform the Afringan 


1 Chap, XVII, 3, 8. B. E. Vol. V. (1880) pp. 382-83. 


DEATH “<2 79 


ceremony in honour of Sraosha. They sit on a carpet face to 
face with a vase of fire and a metallic tray between them. 
The senior priest, who has the tray before him, is called ‘‘ Zaoti ” 
(from Zu, to perform a ceremony), or performer of ceremonies. 
The other, who has a vase of fire before him, is called the 
Atravakhshi, or the fire-priest. The metallic tray contains a 
pot of pure water and a few flowers, eight of which. are 
arranged in a particular order. Two of them point to the_fire 
and the remaining six are arranged in two rows of three each, 
Pointing to one another and in a line at right angles to the line 
in which the first two are arranged. 


The Zaoti begins the Afringin with what’is called a “ Dib&- 
chéh,” 7@e., introduction, which is a prayer in the Pazend 
language, wherein he invokes the protection of the angel Sraosha 
upon the soul of the deceased, whom he names in the prayer. 
When the ‘ Dibachéh’’! is finished, both the priests recite to- 
gether the seventh Kardé (Av. Kéréta) or section of the Sraosh 
Yasht, (LVII, 15-18), which sings the praise of the angel for the 
protection it affords. 


Besides these prayers and ceremonies, which are performed 

The first thr for three days and nights at the house 
days’ ceremoniesat_ of the deceased, the Yacna prayers, and 
the een sometimes the Vendidid with the Khshni- 
man.of Sraosha are recited at an adjoining Fire-temple for 
three successive mornings and nights. These Yagna prayers 
andthe Baj ceremonies with the Khshniman of Sraosha, can 
be performed only at the Fire-temples. . 


In the Uziran Gah of the third day, a ceremony is performed 
which is called the “Oothamna.” The 
friends and relatives of the deceased and a 
few priests meet together in an assembly. 
The particular prayers of the Gah, the Sraésh Hadokht (Yasht 


The Oothamna 
ceremony. 


1 Spiegal-Khordeh Avesta (Bleeck’s Translation). Vol. IIT, ‘p. 172, 


30 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


XI.) and the Patet are recited. A Pazend prayer with the 
Khshnfiiman of Sraosha is recited, wherein the name of the 
deceased is announced and the protection of Sraosha is implored 
forhim. This is an occasion for the announcement of charities. 
This ceremony and this assembly are very important, because, 
at the end of the ceremony, the relations and friends of the 
deceased generally announce donations to charity funds in the 
naiyat or memory of the deceased and to commemorate 
his name. The Parsee community of India has given many 
lacs of rupees in public charity. Of this sum, a/large part 
‘was announced at these funeral gatherings of the third day 
after death. 


The Parsees have another custom of/ commemorating the 

The custom of nameot a deceased person if he be a great 
commemorating public benefactor. At the conclusion of 
Hasee a _the above ‘‘ Qothamna&’”’ ceremony on the 
third day, the head priest generally, or in his absence an 
“ akabar,”’ 7. e., a leader of the community, proposes before the 
assembled Anjuman, ¢. e.,.the public assembly, that the name of 
the deceased public benefactor, whose benefaction or good deeds 
he enumerates, be commemorated by the community consenting 
to remember the name of the deceased in all the public religious 
ceremonies in the Dhup-nirang recital. This proposal is some- 
times seconded by somebody, or very often it is just placed 
before the=assembly without any formal seconding. When 
nobody opposes that proposal, silence is taken as consent, and 
thenceforth the name of the deceased is recited and his soul is 
remembered in all public religious ceremonies. If the deceased 
public benefactor has done benevolent acts for the good of the 
whole Parsee community, in whatever part of the world they 
be, his name is recited and remembered by the whole com- 
munity. If the deceased has done good and benevolent acts 
for the good of the community of his own particular town or 
district, the Anjuman of that town or district alone begins to 
invoke his name in the religious ceremonies. For example, the 
name of Sir Jamsetjee Jejeebhoy, the first Parsee Baronet, who 


DEATH 81 


rose from very poor circumstances to be a merchant prince of 
India, and who gave large sums of money in charity, not only 
for his own co-religionists but for all sections of the mixed 
community of India, is remembered in the religious ceremonies 
by the whole Parsee community of India. 

This custom ? is a very old one. It had its origin in the old 
Avesta times. The Fravardin Yasht contains a long list of the 
departed worthies of old Iran who had, before the time when the 
Yasht was written, done some benevolent acts for the good of 
the Mazdayagnan community. The Afrin-i-Rapithwin, written, 
later on, in the Pazend language, contains a few names of such 


‘ 


illustrious departed worthies. 


The formule used for this purpose have varied at different 

The different for- times. The formula/used in the Fravardin 
Sanit Yasht is: “ We invoke the Fravashi. . .” 
of the deceased. For example, “We-invoke the Fravashi of 
the holy Yima of Vivanghéna.’”’\The formula used in the 
Pazend Afrin-i-Rapithwin is,““ May the holy spiritof . . . . 
be one with us.” For example, “May the holy spirit of 
Emperor Kai-Vishtasp be’ one with us in ceremony.” The 
formula used now in the’ Pazend Dibachéh of the Afringan 
is,““May . . soandso . . of pious soul be remembered 
here.” For example, “ May Behedin * Jamshed Behedin Rus- 


1 T am told, that a somewhat similar custom prevails at the University 
of Oxford, where during the bidding prayer, they make “ a long statement 
recalling the gifts of benefactors to the University in times past. It is really 
a thanks giving to Almighty God for the gifts of the worthies of old who 
gave lands and money to endow the Colleges and University. The list of 
benefactors is read out in full on the high festivals in the University Church 
only.” (Dr. L. Mills in a letter). 

2 “ Behedin,” 2. ¢., “of good religion,” is aterm applied to the name of 
a Zoroastrian layman. If the deceased belongs to the priestly class, and 
has gone through the initiating ceremony of Navar, he is spoken of as 
“* Brvad,” which is another form of Herbad, which itself is the later 
form of Avesta ‘ Aethra-paiti.’ If the deceased belongs to the priestly 
class, but has not gone through the initiating ceremony of the Navar, he 
is spoken of as “ Osta,’’ which is the contracted form of Avesta “ Pa- 
vishta.” If he is a head priest, he is spoken of as Dastur. If the 
deceased is a female of the priestly class, she is spoken of as ‘‘Osti.” 


ll 


82 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


tam? of pious soul be remembered here. The honour of thus 
remembering the name of a deceased person in public religious 
ceremonies was considered to be the greatest honour that a 
grateful community could bestow upon a person after his death 
for the good that he had conferred upon his fellow-brethren. 


If the deceased is of the age of fifteen and has left no son, it is 

The adoption of necessary that a son should be given tohim 
S800: in adoption. The adopted son generally 
belongs to a nearly-related family. The name of the son 
thus adopted is declared publicly before the assembly. We 
find no reference to the system of adoption in the Avesta 
books. It is the Pahlavi works that refer to it. But the desire 
to have a son adopted if there is no son,of one’s own, naturally 
follows from the desire to have a son of one’s own, as alluded to 
in the Avesta, An Trinian was toaim at a married life and 
to have a son, and not only to have him but to educate him well. 
If he did his duty towards his children well, and if being well 
brought up morally, they performed good acts, he, as a conse- 
quence of, or as a recompense for, his carefulness to do his duty, 
was to participate in the righteousness which resulted from the 
good deeds of the children. The Shayast 14 Shiyast says, “‘ one 
is to persevere much in the begetting of offspring, since it is for 
the acquisition of many good works at once; because in the 
Spend and.Nihidim Nasks, the high priests have taught that 
the duty, and good works, a son performs, are as much the 
father’s as though they had been done by his own hand.” 
(Shayast 14 Shayast, Chap. XII, 15).2 Thus a son was 
considered a blessing from several points’ of view. His good 


1 The second name is the name of the father. If the deceased was 
adopted, his adoptive father’s name is mentioned instead of his own father’s. 
In the case of females, the name of her fathor is mentioned with hers, if 
she is unmarried, and that of the husband if she ismarried. In case of a 
second marriage, the name of the first husband is mentioned with hers. 
The Zoroastr ans of Persia, and following them the Parais of the Kadmi 
sect in India, mention the name of her father. 

? §. B. H., Vol. V., p. 345. 


DEATH 83 


actions were expected to shed lustre upon the good name 
of the father. Again, he would look after the family interests. 
He would perform the necessary religious rites of his parents. 
For all these reasons, an Iranian looked at a son as a great 
blessing. So, failing a son, he generally wished to adopt 
one. 


The dawn after the. third night after death is considered a 
iis ecuadesdat great and solemn, occasion. As we said 
the soul to the above, the soul of a man remains within the 
lend, onthe precincts of this world for three days. On 
the dawn after the third night, it goes to the 
other world. The soul passes over a bridge called Chinvat.! We 
read in the Vendidid: ‘‘The soul goes to the holy Chinvat 
Bridge created by Mazda, which is an old path of immemorial 
times and which is for the wicked_as well as for the holy. 
There, they ask the soul (to account) for its deeds done in this 
material world.” (Vend. XIX, 29). 


The bridge is guarded_by the angel Mithra. The Vendidad 

The Chinvat S@Y&; “(When) the third night ends and the 
Bridge and Mithra dawn shines, the well-armed Mithra appears 
Mesa at the sufficiently happy mountain” (Vend. 
XIX, 28). This.angel who is known in the later books as 
Meher Davar,7.e., Meher the Judge, is assisted by Rashné, the 
Angel of Justice, and Ashtad, the Angel of Truth. They judge 
a man’s actions done in the past life.2 If his good deeds 


' »The Chinvat Bridge reminds one of the “ Sirat ” of the Arabs, the 
““Wogho ” of the Chinese, the ‘ Givcll” and “‘ Bifrist ’ of the Scandi- 
navianys. Cf. the Belief of the Aucient Egyptians. Vide my paper, ‘The 
Belief about the Future of the Soul amung the Ancient Egyptians and 
Iranians’? (Journal, B. B. BR. AWS., XIX, pp. 365-374. Vide also my 
* Asiatic Papers,” pp. 137-146). 

* St. Michael is also represented as weighing a man’s actions in a 
scale. Videmy paper on “ St. Michael of the Christians and Mithra of 
the Zoroastrians. A Comparison.” (Journal of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, Vol. VI, pp. 237-54. My “ Anthropological Papers ” 
Part I, pp. 173-90). For a similar notion among the ancient Egyptians, 
Vide my paper on “‘ The Belief about tho Future of the Soul among tho 


84 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


overweigh even by a small particle his misdeeds, his soul is 
allowed to pass over the bridge to Paradise. If his good deeds 
are equal to his misdeeds the soul goes to a place called 
Haimeshta-gehan.! (Vend. XIX, 36). If his misdeeds outweigh 
his good deeds, even by a particle, he is cast down into hell. 


Thus, the dawn after the third night after death is the occasion 
Os ; when the soul of the man is judged by Meher 
remonies at : 

the dawn of the Davar, the Judge, assisted by Rashné Rast, 
fourth day. the Angel of Justice, and Astad, the Angel 
of Truth. Therefore it is considered a very important and 
solemn occasion for the performance of religious ceremonies for 
the soul of the deceased. The ceremonies“performed in the 
_ Uziran gah on the previous day are repeated, and the Afringan 
and Baj prayers and ceremonies are performed in addition. 
This being the time of the judgment of the man's deeds, his 
relations and friends pray for God’s. mercy on the soul of the. 
deceased. Man is liable to err, and therefore they implore the 
blessing and mercy of the Almighty on this particular occasion, 
when his deeds are judged by the angel Meher assisted by | 
Rashné and Astad. 


The Baj ceremonies on this occasion are recited in honour of 
the angels who have an important share in connection with the 
occasion. ‘The first Baj is in honour of the angels Rashné and 
Astad together, who help the angel Mcher. The second is in 
honour of Ram-Khvastra, who is the angel presiding on the rari- 
fied atmosphere or ether. This is because when a man dies, the 
soul of a good pious man pagses away to the higher regions 
through; or with the help of, rarified air, The third Baj is in 
honour of Ardafarosh, i.e., in honour of the spirits of all the 
departed souls, whose rank the particular deceascd, for whom 


Ancient Egyptians and Tranians.’?” (Journal, Bombay Branch. Royal 
Asiatic Society, Vol. XTX, pp. 365-374. My *« Asiatic Papers” Part I, 
pp. 137-146). 

! The Hameshta-gehan of the Parsces reminds one of the Purgatory 
of the Christians and the “ Aeraf ” of the Mahomedans. 


DEATH . 8S 


the ceremony is performed, has joined. The fourth Baj is in 
honour of Sraosh who has guided and guarded the soul of the 
deceased in its sojourn to the other world after death. When 
the Baj of Ardafarosh is recited, a suit of white clothes, together 
with the sacred bread and other sacrificial articles, is consecrated 
by the priest. This suit of clothes is called “Shiav.” It is 
the Vastra in the word Vastra-vata of the Fravardin Yasht:; 
“Who will praise us . . . . with clothes in hand?” 
(Frav. Yasht XIII, 50). This suit of clothes is generally given 
to the priest or to the poor. 


The other principal occasions, on which the Afrin’4n-Baj 
' ceremonies are enjoinedto be performed in 
Ceremonies on, ; : 
and after, the honour of the dead, are the ‘ Chehd4rum,” 
dourelt dey: “ Dehum,” “ Siroz,” and “ Salroz ”, é.¢., the 
fourth day, the tenth day, the thirtieth day and a year after 
death. The following passage of the Shayast 14 Shayast speaks 
of the above-said ceremonies.of the dawn after the third night 
and of subsequent ceremonies : 


“ And after the third night, at dawn, one is to consecrate 
three sacred cakes (drén),"one for Rashnu and Astad, the second 
for Vaé, the good, and the third for the righteous guardian 
spirit (arddi fravard); and clothing is to be placed upon the 
sacred cake of the righteous guardian spirit . . . . And 
the fourth day the ceremonial (Yazishn) of the righteous guar- 
dian spirit is to be performed; and afterwards are the tenth 
day, the monthly, and, then, the annual ceremonies.” (Shiyast 
la Shayast, Chap. XVII, 4-5. 8. B. E., Vol. V, (1880) p. 383). 


According to the Zoroastrian belief, the relation between a 
pious deceased and his surviving relations does not altogether 
cease after death. His holy spirit continues to take some in- 
terest in his living dear sons. If the surviving relations cherish 
his memory, remember him with gratefulness, try to please him 
with pious thoughts, pious words and pious deeds, it is likely, 
that these invisible departed spirits will take an interest in their 


86 SOCIO-RELIGIOUS CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


welfare, and assist them with an invisible helping hand. The 
most essential requisite, by which a surviving relative can please 
the holy spirits of his departed dear ones, is this, that he should 
be pious in thoughts, words and deeds, and that he should 
perform meritorious charitable deeds. We read in Yagna (Ha 
XVI, 7): “We praise the brilliant deeds of piety in \which 
the souls of the deceased delight.” For this reason, it is 
not unusual among the Parsees, that on the above-mentioned 
occasions of the third, fourth, tenth, and thirtieth day,. and on 
the anniversaries after death, they give food and clothing to 
_the poor of their community, and sometimes give various sums 
in charity. These occasions are further the occasions on which 
the surviving relatives remember, the deceased with feelings of 
gratitude, respect and love, and pray to God that his soul may 
rest in peace and tranquility. 


It appears from all the above description, that the funeral 
ceremonies are intended:to produce in the minds of the survivors 
a great solicitude for the health of the living, respect for the 
dead, feelings, of, gratitude and love towards the deceased, 
and ideas of morality and virtue, inculcated by the thought that 
death levels-everybody, and that one should always be prepared 
for death which may overtake him at any moment. 


II, PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES, RITES 
AND CUSTOMS 


CHAPTER IV 


The Padiyab and the Nahn. 


Rev, W. F, Blunt! in his article on the words ‘Clean ‘and . 
Unclean,”’ thus introduces the’ subject of 
Purification : ‘The words ‘clean’, ‘unclean’, 
‘purity’, ‘ purification’ have acquired in the process of religious 
development a spiritual annotation which observes their original 
meaning. Their primitive significance is wholly ceremonial; 
the conceptions they represent date back to a very early stage 
of religious practice, so carly indeed that it may he called 
pre-religious, in as far as any.useful delineation can be establish- 
ed between the epoch in which spell and magic predominated, 
and that at which germs-of.a rudimentary religious conscious- 
ness can be detected. In-a conspectus of primitive custom, 
one of the most widespread phenomena is the existence of 
‘taboo.’ Anthropology has yet to say the last word about it, 
and its general characteristics can be differently summarised.’ 
These introductory words of Rev. Blunt on the subject of 
‘* purification” suggest the question, whether in the matter 
of the progress of the world, there was at first, the revelation 
of truth and then degeneration, or whether there was at first. 
a low state of ideas and then with the advance of time, there 
was progress and elevation. That is a very large question, 
and in its consideration, one must remember, that the world 
has progressed in what may be called cycles of time. From 
@ broad consideration of the question on this special 
subject of ‘purification,’ we may say that the ancient Iranians 
had, from remote antiquity, the idea of mental or spiritual 


Introductory. 


1 Rev. Hastings’ Dictionary of the Bible, p. 144, 


88 PURIFICATORY CRREMONTES AND CUSTOMS 


purity connected with that of physical purity. The number 
of different intricate purificatory ceremonies, referred to in the 
Vendidad, may be the result of a later development, existing 
side by side with the first idea of mental purity. Goethe in 
his “‘ Notes and Discussions ’’ (Noten und Abhandlungen) con- 
nected with his Parsi-nameh or Buch des Parsen, seems to 
take that view.? 


As said by Dr. Rapp, ? “the Iranians had a cultivated.sense 
for purity and decency ; whatever has in the slightest degree 
anything impure, nauseous in itself, instils into them an 
unconquerable horror. This has a connection in part with the _ 
fact, that the impure is mostly even unhealthy and harmful, 
but in several cases the cause of the impurity-does not allow of 
being traced back to that fact. The Iranians had in a certain 
measure a distinct sixth sense for the pure.” All of that sort has, 
according to their view, their origin in darkness, in obscurity ; 
in such substances, according to their conceptions, the evil spirits 
dwell, and when they let su¢h sorts to approach near to them, 
they thereby offer to the-evil_spirits admission into, and domi- 
nation over, themselves.” “This view explains the origin of 
some purificatory rites~and ceremonies, which cannot easily, 
from their surface, be connected with physical purity, sanitation 
and health. 


Among the ancient Iranians, a good deal of importance was 
i attached, to what we may term, the Purifi- - 
pothetnn Jf atenh: cation of the body. The reason was, that it 
ed to Purificatory was believed—and it is a very reasonable 

Ceremonies. 2 . ‘ ‘ 
belief —that the physicai purity, or the purity 


1 Vide my Paper on ‘‘Goethe’s Parsi-nameh or Buch des Parsen ”’ 
Journal B. B. R. A. 8., Vol. XXIV, No. 1, (pp. 67-95) p. 938. Vide my 
* Asiatic Papers, Part IT” (pp. 119—48) p. 146. 

2 *¢Die Religion und sitte der Perser iind iibrigen Iranier nach den 
griechischen und rémischen Quellen.” (Religion and Customs of the 
Persians and other Iranians, according to the Greek and Roman authors). 
German Oriental Scciety’s Journal, Vol. XVII (Leipzic 1863) pp. 52-56. 
Translated from the German of Dr. Rapp by Mr K. R, Cama in hia 
* Zoroastrian Mode of Disposing of the Dead,” p. 19. 


PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 89 


of the body, is a step towards the purity of the mind, the purity 
of the soul. Purity is as essential for the good of the body as 
for the good of the soul. ‘‘ Yaozddo mashydi aipt Zanthem 
vahishié* i.e, ‘‘ Purity is best from the (very beginning of 
one’s) birth” is one of the most excellent sayings of the Avesta. 


Religion has a good deal, a great deal to do with the soul— 

Relation of Rel: with the soul of man, with the soul of. the 
gion to body and universe. And as soul has a-close relation- 
eye ship with the body, no religion, no religious 
system ignores the health of the body. Physical health comes as 
much into the domain of religion as spiritual health. It is for 
this reason, as well as for other reasons, that among all ancient 
nations, it was the priests who were Doctors.of Medicine as well 
as Doctors of Divinity. It was so in ancient Egypt, in ancient 
Greece, in ancient India, and it was\so in ancient Iran.? 
As Thomson says :— 


“ Even from the body’s purity, the mind 
Receives a secret. sympathetic aid,” 


The purity of body is.anemblem of the purity of mind. As 
a writer says: ‘‘So great is the effect of cleanliness upon man 
that it extends over to his moral character.” 


According to-the Parsee books, upon the harmony of the 
Health of-Mina >0dily elements depends the health of mind. 
dependent on § Diseases, which are introduced by Ahriman, 
Health of Body. the Evil Spirit, disturb the harmony. So, 
as it is the bounden duty of a Zoroastrian to oppose Ahriman, it 
is also his bounden duty to oppose that which introduces disease 
in the body, and to seek that which keeps up health. That is 
the original object at the bottom of all Zoroastrian Purificatory 
Ceremonies. Purification was intended to-keep the body strong 
and healthy, so that the strength of the body may act upon the 
mind and make it strong, healthy and pure. It is with this view 


2 Yaena (Gathe) XLVIII, 5; Vendidad, V, 21. ‘ 
2 Vide my paper on ‘‘Education among the Ancient Iranians,” p. 3, 
12 


90 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


that the Dinkard says: “‘ The removal of the sin pertaining to 
the soul and rendering it precious depends upon the strength of 
the body ; (for) it is owing to the existence of the body that there 
is cleansing of the sin of the soul.”! ‘Mens sana in corpore 
sano’ is an oft-quoted maxim; but, as Dr. Casartelli says, “ It 
has always been one of the most favourite maxims of Maz- 
deism.”2 Again as Prof. Darmesteter says, ‘“‘ The axiom that 
‘ cleanliness is next to godliness’ shall be altogether a Zoroas- 
trian axiom, with this difference, that in the Zoroastrian religion 
‘cleanliness is a form itself of godliness.’’ Such being the 
case, it is no wonder, that in the Avesta, and. among the 
followers of the Zoroastrian religion, a good deal of import- 
ance was attached to Health laws and to the purification 
of the body as a step towards the preservation of health. 
As religion powerfully impresses ‘upon’ the mind of the 
masses the necessity of preserving laws of health and purifi- 
cation, their observation has taken the form of religious 
ceremonies. An enormous multiplication of these has led 
and leads, at times, to the frustration of the original good 
object. A good deal has become mechanical. 


' A ceremonial Pddyéb orablutionis seen practised in almost all 

A sort of Pddyib ages and by almost all nations. It was 
coin pumiticoeag, deemed essential, both from the health point 
nations. of view and from a symbolic point of view. 
Mosesenjoined such ablutions. The ancient Greeks and Romans 
had them. The modern Mahomedans and Hindus‘ have them. 
The Christians have them symbolically in their baptismal rites. 
The sacred water placed at the doors of Christian churches, in 
which people dip their hands before entering, is a kind of 


1 Dastur Peshotan’s Dinkard, Vol. IV. p. 228. 

2“* Ta Philosophie Religieuse du Mazd¢isme sous les Sassanides ” 
par L. C. Casartelli, p. 128. 

® Le Zend Avesta, IL. Introduction, p. X. 

4 Vide the Manu Smriti and Nirnaya Sindhu. Vide Mr. Krishnalal 
Mohunlal Jhaveri’s Paper on “The Cult of the Bath” (Journal of the 
Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. LX. pp. 217—24). 


THE PADYAB 91 


“Aqua Lustralis”” or the water of purification of the ancient 
Romans. 


Purification is held essential among the Zoroastrians from 
two points of view: 1. Physically, from 

ee sa va a Health point of view and 2. 
ceremonies. Symbolically, from a Moral point of 


view. 


Firstly, from the point of view of Health. Men come into 
contact with impurities hovering in the air, water,and on 
the earth. When they know that they have so come into con- 
tact, they must purify themselves, and that, not.only for their 
own good, but for the good of others among-whom they are 
likely to spread the contagion. Not only should they purify 
themselves, but also purify their household things or utensils 
that may have come into contact with impurities. Again, there 
are times and cases, when they know, that they have not come 
into actual visible contact, but there are chances that they may 
have come into contactwith’ some impurities. So, from a 
‘protective’ point of view it is better that they wash or clean 
or purify themselves. 


Secondly, as mind, receives some sympathetic aid from. the 
purity of the body, and as the effect of cleanliness extends to 
one’s moral character, putification of the body seems to be an 
emblem of the purity of mind. 


There are four kinds of purificatory ceremonies among 

wNur kinds of the Parsees. They are the following :—I. 
Purification Cere- Padyéb. II. Nahn. UI. Bareshniim and 
ai IV. Riman. The first is very simple and 
is the work of a minute or two. It is performed by all. 
without the help of a priest. The second takes a long 
time. It takes from about twenty to thirty minutes and 
one requires the services of a priest in it. The third iz a 
longer affair. It is accompanied by a kind of Retreat, and lasts 
for ten days, and one has to go through three ceremonig] baths. 


92 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


It requires the services of two priests. The fourth requires the 
services of two persons, one of whom must be a priest. The 
other may be a priest or a layman. It lasts for about half an 
hour. Nowadays, it is strictly confined to those who have come 
nto contact with dead bodies. We will first describe the 
Padyab. 
I. P&dyab, the first form of purification. 

The Pady&b is the simplest form of purification or ablution 

What is the whicha Parsee has to go through several 
Padyab ? times during the day. The word Pidyab is 
the modern Persian form of Avesta paiti-ép whose Pahlavi 
rendering is pddydv. It means “ throwing water (4b) over (paiti) 
the exposed parts of the body.” The following is the process 
of the PadyAb: There are three parts of the process, which all 
together are known as padydb-kusti, The central or the second 
part is the Pady&b proper, which is preceded and followed by a 
prayer. (a) The first part of the process or the ceremony is to 
recite a short formula of a small prayer. The person perform- 
ing the Pady4b says at first Khshnadthra Ahurahé Mazddo, i.e., 
‘I do this for the pleasure of Ahura Mazda.”? Then he recites 
the short formula of Ashem Vohu.? (b) Having recited it, he 
washes his face. and the exposed portions of his body, such as 
the face, hands.and feet. This is the Pady&b proper. He then 
wipes off his face and the other parts of the body. (c) Then he 
finishes. the process by performing his kusti,3 i. e., he unties and 
re-ties the kusti with the recital of its formula. 


The, following are the occasions on which a Parsee has to 
Oveaiiones: “tos perform the Padyib:—(1) Early in the morn- 
performing the ing after rising from his bed. (2) On answer- 
Padyab. . . 3 
ing calls of nature. (3) Before taking his 

meals. (4) Before saying his prayers. 
1 This short invocatory formula is recited by a Parsee at the 
commencement of all his sets of prayers. It signifies that he undertakes 


to do all his actions for the pleasure of God, 7. ¢., so as to please Him, 
and for His Honour and Glory. 


2 It is a short prayer formula in praise of purity a da piety. 
Kusti is the sacred thread put after the initiation of the Naojote. 


THE PADYAB, 5 93 


The first thing that a Parsee has to do on rising from his bed, 

is to recite the short formula of Ashem 

ete pone Vohu. This recital is held to be very 

meritorious as it reminds him as to how to 

move during the whole of the day in the path of purity and 
piety. The Hadékht Nask says: 


Question.—‘‘ What is the one recital of the Ashem which. is 
worth a thousand of the other recitals of the Ashem in greatness 
and goodness and excellence” ? 


Reply.—‘* Ahura Mazda answered him: O holy Zarathushtra ! 
That, indeed, which a man recites, standing up from sleep 
ieee Srayahrte Setar praising good thoughts,good words and 
good deeds, renouncing evil thoughts,’ evil words and evil 
deeds.” 1 


Then he has to apply gadmez or cow’s urine to the exposed por- 
tions of his body reciting its nirang or short formula.2 Then 
he perfoms the Pady&b. - Until he does all this, he is not to eat 
or drink anything. In the case of a wet dream, &., the Padyab 
must take the form ofa bath and he is not to eat or drink 
anything before he bathes. 


Another occasion, on which the Pady&b purification is neces- 

2. Padyab-atter SFY; is the time after answering the calls of 
answering calls of nature. This is indispensably necessary 
nay from the point of view of cleanliness, It is an 
occasion when there is every likelihood of some germs of impu- 
rity sticking to the uncovered portions of the body. So, one 
must wash the exposed parts of the body before coming into 
‘contact with others. He cannot eat or drink without doing 
so. If a Parsee is in a place where he cannot obtain 
water, for example, while journeying, he may perform the 


1 The Book of Ard& Viraf, &., by Haug. p. 308g 
? Vide for this nirang, Spiegel translated by Bleeck. Khordeh Avesta, 


Pp. 3. 


94 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Pady&b with pure sand or dust,1 which is believed to have a 
cleaning effect next to water. What he has to do is to take a 
little of pure dry sand or dust and rub it over the exposed portions 
of his body, such as the hands and face. 


The third set of occasions during the day when one must 
perform the Padydb is that before taking 
meals. . To: wash one’s face and hands before 
meals is acknowledged by many as.a mode 
of cleanliness.? The priests, especially the officiating priests, 
who perform the religious ceremonies in the temples, and even 
laymen, on special solemn feasts, in addition to the Pady&b 
wash their right hands again before touching their food. At 
times, a servant, with a pot of water in one hand and a basin 
in the other, passes before all, pouring water over their hands.3 


3. Padyab before 
meals, 


We said above, that there were two points of view from 
which purification was enjoined among the 
Parsees. “The first point of view was that of 
Health and Cleanliness, and the second that 
of physical purity or cleanliness reflecting upon the mind as an 
emblem of mental purity.’ On the above three occasions, and 
especially on the first two occasions, the Padydb was performed 
from the first point’ of view, viz., Health or Cleanliness. On 
this last occasion, ¢.e., on the occasion of prayers, it-is 
gerierally performed with the second point of view, viz., that’ 


4. Padyab before 
Prayers. 


1‘The Mahomedans also use sand for thoir Wuzu when water is not 
available. Thisis whatis called “ tayammum (ress ) t.e., performing 
the Wuzu with sand instead of water, when the latter cannot be got.’’ 
(Steingass’ Dictionary, p. 344). In Marwar and Rajputana, where water 
is very scarce, they resort to whatis called “ the fiction of a bath” by 
dropping a stone in a well, saying Alsl8 VSL AIIs ust “ your bath is 
tantamount to mine” (Jahveri, Jour. Anthr. Soc. IX, p. 221). 

2 Dr. Turner, the Health Officer of Bombay, in a communique dated 
12th June 1912 to prevent the spread of cholera, advises the washing 
of hands with disinfectants before taking meals. 

3 This custom of washing the hands before eating was common 
among the ancient Jews and is common even now among several tribes 0 
the Mahomedans. The Hindus have generally a pre-dinner bath. 


‘ 


THE NAN . 95 


physical purity is a reflex or an emblem of mental purity, 
though the first point of view is not altogether absent. A man 
when he says his prayers, has the idea of the purity of mind 
before him. Prayer is a process to purify his mind. So, 
physical purification at the commencement reminds him of that 
mental purification.! 


II, N&hn, the second form of purification. 


Nahn is a higher form of purification. The Padydh isa daily 
form of purification. The Nahn is gone 
through on certain occasions, ‘and therein, 
the help of a priestis necessary. The word 
ndhn is a contraction of a word sndx which, though we do not 
find it in that form in the Avesta;.isfound in the Sanskrit as 
era (sndn). Snén means “ ablution, bathing.” The word 
comes from the Avesta root snd, Sans. eqy (snd), Latin Nare, 
Fr. Nager, meaning ‘ to. bathe.’ So, while the Pady4b is a 
purification of only the. exposed portions of the body, the ndhn, 
being a bath, is the purification of the whole body. The process 
of this second and higher form of purification consists of several 
parts. They-are the following: (1) The ordinary Padyab-kusti. 
(2) The symbolic eating of a pomegranate leaf and the drinking 
of the consecrated gadmez or cow’s urine. Tor the sake of 
convenience, we will call this process ‘“‘ symbolic communion.” 
(3) The recital of the Patet or Prayer of Repentance. (4) The 
final bath. Thus the Nahn or Snan, i. e., the bath proper, is 
preceded by three preliminary processes. We will speak of 
them in their order. 


The Nan : Mean- 
ing of the word. 


tng ee a 


1 Weseve this custom of purifying the body, at least ag a symbol, among 
many nations. A Mahomedan performs his wuzu, (39%5 ) .e., ablution 
before saying his nimaz or prayers. A Hindu has his snan or bath 
before his pujé. A Christian’s application of the sacred water on entering 
his church is a relic of the same custom. 


96 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


At first, the person who has to go through the Nahn ceremony 

1. The prolimi- performs the “ Padyab-kusti.”+ The priest, 
nary Padyéb-kusti. who officiates or makes the person pass 
through the ceremony, has also performed the PAdy&b- 
kusti. After the performance of this, the candidate for the 
ceremony is made to sit on a stool generally made of stone. 
Wood is generally avoided in these higher forms of purifica- 
tion, because, being more porous, it is supposed to be likely 
to contain some germs of impurity. ‘The priest who officiates 
at this ceremony must be a Bareshnumwila priest, 7.e., a ‘priest 
holding the Bareshnum,? and must be “ with the-Khub.”3 He 
takes with him, in a metallic tray or vessel, the following 

aha WIRE oe ne consecrated things known as dldé (Uit., 
requisite things for instruments or means) to the house of the 
the Tent: person undergoing the N&hn ceremony or to 
the place of the ceremony in the Fire-Temple, if the ceremony 
takes place there. (a) Nirangdin, %.e., the consecrated gadmez or 
cow’s urine. (b) Cow’s urine for application to the body. A small 
portion of both of these is poured in smalicups. (ce) Bhasam, 7. e., 
the consecrated ash of the Atash Beherim or the sacred Fire- 
Temple of the first grade.» (d) A little sand. (ec) A pomegranate 
" leaf. 


After the Pady&b, he makes the candidate “ take the Baj, 4 
@. Symbalio woh. te., recite the prayer of grace said before 
munion,.. (¢) The meals. After the recital of this prayer of 
pomesfanme reat grace, the candidate is made to eat or rather 
chew a leaf of the pomegranate tree. The candidate takes 
the leaf not directly in his hands but on a paiwand, which, 
in this case, is a handkerchief -or the skirt of his sacred shirt. 
The pomegranate tree leaf, which is technically known among 


The Pomegranate the Parsee priests as“ urvarim,” (Sanskrit 
as a Symbol. urvard, Lat. ‘ arbor.’ Fr. arbre, a tree) or “ the 


1 Vide above, p. 176. 2 We will speak of this later on. Vide below 
p. 148. 

8 A liturgical qualification. 

4 Vide Spiegel, translated by Bleeck. Khordeh Avesta, p. 185. 


THE NAHN 97 


tree ” is considered as the representative of the vegetable world 
which supplies sustenance to man. Among the ancients, the 
pomegranate symbolized the ‘ are,’ the allegorical story of which 
was compared with the various versions about Argus, Arguz, 
Aren, Arene, Arne, Theba, Baris, Laris, Boutus, Bosotus. and 
Cibotus of the ancients (Vide A New System or an Analysis of 
Ancient Mythology by Jacob Bryant, Vol. III, p. 73). The 
‘arc’ had something like its parallel in the “ Damater or 
Demater ” (i. e. the mother) of several ancient nations, which 
word typified ““The womb of Nature.’ The “are” gave 
forth a number of men and living creatures just\as mother 
earth or the womb of Nature gives them forth. The pomegran- 
ate contains, within the area of its small size, hundreds—nay, 
thousands—of grains, and so typifies or symbolizes the womb 
of Nature. It is a symbol of fecundity and fertility. Again, 
the pomegranate tree is almost.ever.green. It bears leaves 
during the whole of the year. So, it.is a symbol of an everlast- 
ing life. It was held to be sacred by the ancient Babylonians. 
From all these facts, we can understand why the leaves of a: 
pomegranate tree were given.to a child or to an adult at the nahn 
-or the sacred bath ceremony. When used in the Naojote cere- 
mony of a child, its signification reminds one of the words used 
by a Christian ‘child’s god-parents in the baptism ceremony, 
viz., ‘It (the child) may so pass the waves of this troublesome 
world, that» finally it may come to the land of everlasting 
life.”’ : a 
Then the candidate is asked to drink from a metallic cup.a 
few drops of the Nirangdin or the conse- 
crated urine of the bull. In that consecrated 
urine,’ the priest adds a pinch of the bha- 
sam * or the consecrated ash of the Fire-Temple. Before drink- 
ing it, he is made to declare, why he drinks that. He says in 
Baj, t.e., in a suppressed tone: “In khuram p3ki-i-tan, yaéz- 


(6) The Nirang- 


din. 


1 Vide Haug’s Essays, 2nd Ed., p. 400, nm 
2 Vide Ibid., pp. 570-71. 


13 


98 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


dathra-i-ravdn ra,” 4.e., ‘I drink this for the purification of my 
body, for the purification of my soul.’’ The words indicate that 
the few drops of the Nirang are drunk to signify symbolically, 
that the drinker undertakes to preserve during his life, not only 
physical purity but also mental purity, purity of life and 
action. He recites these words three times, and after each 
recital drinks a drop or two of the Nirangdin. This finishes 
what one may call, the symbolic communion. So, the person 
now completes or finishes the Baj, i.c., recites the prayers. which 
follow a meal. Having finished it, he performs the Kusét. 


Then the candidate says his Patet or the Repentance Prayer. 
As he has to go through a purifying or expiatory éeremony, he 

8. Th : has to confess before’ God his sins and to 

+ The recital of 
the Patet or the Re- repent for them.: He, purifies his body 
Benepe starer- symbolically ofits impurities. This puri- 
fication is emblematical of the purification of the mind. So, 
for that mental purification, he must repent for all his sins. 
The word Patet is the contracted form of Avesta “ paiti-ita,” 
literally meaning ‘going back” (from paiti, Sanskrit, 
prati, Lat., re, ‘back’» and ‘i,’ Lat.’ i-re, to go). So 
the word Patet means ‘going back’ or ‘receding from - 
the transgression of the Law.’ It corresponds to the Hebrew 
word ?shtibah which also’ means ‘returning’ or ‘ going 
back.’ ! <It.is a formula of confession, answering to the 
Buddhists’\P&timokkha which literally means “the disburse- 
ment.” 2 . 


After reciting the Patet, the person retires to the bath- 
room. After reciting the short prayer- 
formula of Khshnaéthra Ahurahé Mazdao 
Ashem Vohu, he undresses himself. Then placing his right 


4. The Bath. 


4 
4 


1 The Origin and Religious Contents of the Psalter, by Rev. Cheyne, 
p. 369. 


* Vide Buddhism by Rhys Davids (1882), pp. 162-63. 


THE NAHN . 99 


hand over his head he takes the Baj.! The priest then hands 
him from outside, with a spoon tied at the end of along stick 
having nine knots and called navgar or navgar or havgireh (i.¢., 
a stick with nine knots), the following articles believed to have 
purifying effects. At first, he hands him three times the con- 
secrated urine of the bull. It is rubbed over the body thrice. 
Then he giveshim thricealittle sand. That also is rubbed thrice 
over the body.2 Then lastly he gives him thrice a little conse 
crated «water called Av (i.e, the water). That also is rubbed 
. over the body thrice. A few drops of the consecrated water is 
generally sprinkled over the new suit of clothes which the candi- 
date has to put on after the bath. At times, forexample, in the 
case of female candidates, the priest leaves in the bath-room 
the above three things beforehand and gives instructions to 
the candidate howto apply them to the bedy before the bath. 


After the application of these consecrated purifying articles, 
the person bathes with water which itself is consecrated. A 
few drops of the water consecrated.in the Nirangdin ceremony, 
when added to a potful of.water, consecrate the whole water. 
Having finished his bath and having put on his trousers, the 
sacred shirt and the cap, placing his kust: on his shoulders, he 
finishes the B&j which he had commenced before the bath. Then 
he puts on his kusti with the recital of the necessary formule of 
prayers. This finishes the Nahn ceremony of the sacred bath 
of purification. 


14.¢., recites the Srosh Baj, beginning with three Ashem Vohu and 
fravardne prayers. A Parsee was enjoined not to speak when bare-headed _ 
Hence the necessity of covering the head with the hand, while reciting 
the formula. , 


2 It is believed that, at first, sand was used only as a substitute for 
water where water cannfot be found. The Mahommedans are permitted 
to use sand for their ‘‘ Wuzu.”” That sand is mown as khék (sta ). 
The Parsees also use the same word khak for the sand. Sale, in his 
Koran, says, that the early Christians also used sand in Baptism when 
water was not*proeurable, (Sale’s Koran (1891) Preliminary Diseourse, 
p. 75.) : : 


100 - PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 
The following are the occasions on which a Parsee goes 
The occasions on through this form of sacred bath. (1) The 
which the Nahn 
ceremony is gone Nacjote or the Investiture with the sacred 
through. Shirt and Thread. (2) The Marriage, 
(3) Women at the end of their period of accouchement, 


(4) The Farvardegin Holidays. 


. Of the above four occasions, the fourth was always volun- 
. tary. The third is the one with which women 
alone are concerned. The first two ocgasions, 
being the occasions of the two mostimportant 
events in the life of a Parsee, are very impurtant, and so all go 
through thisform of the sacred bath. The sacred bath at the 
Naojote of a child is indispensable. The only difference in its 
case is, that, as the child has no sacred shirt and thread over its 
body before this occasion, its preliminary Padyadb consists of 
simply reciting the introductory formula and washing the face 
and the other uncovered parts of the body. It does not 
perform the kust. 


1. Onthe occasion 
of Naojote. 


The second most important even in the life of a Parsee, 
when-he goes through this form of the sacred 
bath, is his or her marriage. Both the bride 
and the bridegroom go through this on the 
marriage-day, either in the morning or in the evening, before 
the celebration of the marriage itself. This Parsee custom of 
having a sacred bath on the occasion of the marriage reminds 
us of the sacred bath among the ancient Greeks. Among them, 
among the ceremonies bearing religious character which prece- 
ded the wedding, an important part was played by the bath. 
Both bride and bridegroom took a bath either in the morning 
ot the wedding day or the day before, for which the water was- 
brought from a river or from some spring regarded as specially 
sacred, as at Athens, the spring of Callirhoe (or Enneacrunos), 
at Thebes, the Ismenus.! The Hindus also have a ceremonial 


2, On the occasion 
of the Marriage. 


1“ The Home Life of the Anc’ent Greeks’’ by Prof. Bliimner, trans- 
lated by Alice Zimmern, 9. 137, 


THE NAHN 101 


bath before marriage! We learn from Firdousi that this 
custom of having the sacred bath at marriage is an old Iranian 
custom. King Behram Gour had taken his Indian wife Sepi- 
noud to the Fire-Temple of Ader Goushasp for the purpose. * 


The women at the end of the period of 40° days of their 

3. The occasion @¢couchement, go through this purification. 
of Accouchement. Before doing'so, they do not’ touch the 
domestic fire or go to the Fire-Temples or attend ceremonial 
gatherings. Not only do those who have been in child-birth, . 
but others who have come into contact with them, also go 
through.this purification. Women among the ancient Greeks ! 
and Hebrews, and the early Christians? had such »purifications.6 


The ten days of the Farvardegin Holidays fall at the end 
4, Oceagion of the Of the Zoroastrian ‘year. On any one of 
et os Holi- these days, and especially on any one of the 
last five days,.a Parsee went through this 
ceremony of purification, Up to.a few years ago, these:holidays 
were generally the occasions for this ceremony of purification ; 
but now-a-days it is a custom more honoured in the breach 
than in its observance. Very few practise itin Bombay, but in 
the Mofussil towns, there are still some who go through this 
form of purification’every year. These annual general occasions 
remind us.of the general occasion for lustration (Lat,. lustrare 
to purify) or purification among the ancient Romans. 


1 Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. IX, p. 219. © 
#6 Le Livre des Rois’? par M. Mohl, VI, p. 65. 


3 The Hindus also have a bath for women at the end of 40 days after 
delivery (Jour, Anthr. Sty. of Bombay, IX, p. 218). 

4 Vide, “The Home Life of the Ancient Greeks” by Prof.. Blimner, 
Among the Greeks, both,.the mother and those who had come into con- 
tact with her, went through a solemn sacred bath. 

5 St. Luke, II, 22. 

6 Vide, Dalton’s Ethnology of India (Bengal, ‘hie Meshmites) for a 
similareustom, Vide also A. Featherman’s “ Social History of the Races 
of.Mankind,” 2nd division, p. 87. 


CHAPTER VY. 


THE BARESHNUM AND THE 
RIMAN. 


Il. BARESHNOUM, THE THIRD FORM OF PURIFICATION. 


The subject of the Bareshniim is very large and intricate, 
Its description varies a little in the different parts of the 
Vendidad. 


I will treat the subject of the Bareshnam under the following 
heads:—l. What is the Bareshnim?-Its meaning. Its 
original and present objeet. 2. A Description of the Bareshnim, 
as given in the Vendidad. 3. Bareshnimgah, or the place of 
the Bareshnim. The ancient Bareshnimgéh and the modern 
Bareshnimgah. 4. The Process of giving the Bareshnim. 
We will treat this third part under two heads :—(a) The 
preliminary preparation, and (b) The process proper. 5. The 
Retreat of nine full days after the Bareshnim purification. 


1. The Bareshngm. Its meaning and object, 


Firstly we will speak of: What is Bareshnim ? How it 

Wie eee differs from the first two forms of purifica- 
‘nam. Meaning of tion? What is its meaning? What was 
the wond, the original object? What is its modern 
tendency ? : 


Bareshniim is the highest form of purification. It differs from 
the first twoforms in several respects :—(a) While the Pady&b 
is a work of one or two minutes, and the Nahn, of about half 
an hour, the Bareshnim, which originally had the object 
both of purification and segregation, lasted nine days. So, it 
is, at times, referred to in Parsee books as the Bareshniim-i- 
Noh Shab, ¢.e., the Bareshnim of nine nights. (b) While the 
Padyab requires no help of a priest, and while the N&ahn requires 
the help of one. priest, the Bareshniém requires the services of 


THE BARESHNOM ——-:108 


two priests. (c) While the first two can. 1 be performed in any, 
ordinary house or in a temple, the Bareshnim purification must 
- be gone through in a particular open-air place. Such a place 
is called Bareshnimgah, #.c., the place of the Bareshném. We 
will describe this place later on. 


This form of purification has taken its name from the word 
bareshnu which means, ‘top, head,’ from Av. barez, Sans. 
@@ ‘to be pre-eminent.’ In the description of the process of the 
particular form of sacred bath gone through in this ceremony, 
-as given in the Vendidéd (Chap. VIII, 40), it is enjoined, 
that the purification of the different parts of the body must 
begin from the head.or the top (bareshnim). The water is 
first required to be poured over the head from which the 
impurity passes down step by step. Hence the name. We will 
speak of these different parts of the body later on. 


The original object of the Bareshnim, as referred to in the 
: Vendidad, seems to be to purify those who 

The original and 
the modern objects had comeinto contact with a worse form 
imo ‘of. impurity—impurity which, from the 
sanitary point of view, may be deemed 
dangerous or infectious. For example, a man, who became 
unclean by coming into close contact. with the dead or, 
through, what Dr. -West calls “ any other serious defilement,””! 
was, im ancient Iran, required to go through this purification. 
Some. deaths occurred from infectious diseases, and so, the 
“ contacts,” «e¢., the persons who had come into long close 
contact with such dead, were likely to spread contagion. They 
were, therefore, required not only to go through purification, 
but through segregation for nine days. Thus, it was a 
joint form of purification and segregation. The original object 
seems to have been latterly widened, perhaps from a point of 
view of greater caution. At times, it is difficult for medica] 
men to determine, whether the disease of which a man dies. 


18. B, E, Vol, XVIII, p. 431. 


104 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSLOMS 


is infectious or not. If it is difficult for an expert pieAial 
man to determine that, it must be more so for the ordinary 
class of people. So, for the sike of caution or safety, it seems 
to have been enjoined that the living, a short time after death, 
must keep themselves at a distance from all the dead, whether 
they died of infectious or of non-infectious diseases. Those, 
who had, for same purpose or another, to remain in a very 
Jong contact with the dead, had to go through the long form 
of Bareshnim purification and segregation. : 


‘While considering the subject of ‘the Bareshnim or the’ 
" Darmesteter’s great purification, in order to have a clear 
view. "grasp of the purification as originally 
intended, we must bear in mind what Prof. Darmesteter says 
on the’subject of the ceremonies about the disposal of the dead 
among the Parsis:1 “The principle which governs the 
ceremonies, of the first order is the fear of contagion, or, ag 
the Avesta says, of the Druj Nasu; the Druj of Carrion. Death, 
that has once come, rests. ‘The visible proof of it is- given by 
the corruption which at once goes on in the body and spreads 
‘infection round about. It is represented in the form of a 
horrible fly, the fly’ which hovers over the corpses. All the 
ceremonies of this order can be summed up in two words, which 
are the same assum up to-day all the prophylactic measures 
in the case. of an epidemic :—(1) to cut off the communica- 
tions of the living with the centre of infection, real or supposed ; 
(2) to destroy the centre itself.”’ 


1“ Le principe qui domine les cérémonies du premier ordre est la 
crainte dela contagion ou, comme dit l’Avesta, de la Druj Nasu, la Druj- 
Charogne. La mort, une fois venue, reste: la preuve visible en est donnée 
par la corruption qui bien vite s’empare du cadavre et répand l’infection 
autour de lui : on se Ja représentait sous la forme d’une mouche horrible: 
,la mouche qui bourdonne sur les cadavres (Cf. Farg. VII 2). Toutes les 
cérémonies de cet ordre peuvent se réeumer en deux mots, ceux-la méme 
qui résument aujourd’hui toutes’ les mesures. prophylactiques en cas 
a@épidémie;1° interrompre les communications des vivants avec le 
centre d’infection, réel ow supposé : 2° détruire ce centre méme.”—Le 
Zend Avesta, Vol. II, pp: 146-~147;-side also Ibid. Introduction, page XII. 


THE BARESHNOM ~~ bog 105: 


On the subject of purification itself, Prof. Darmesteter says : 
‘ Purity is, after birth, the greatest good for man’ (Yaozdao- 
mashyai aipi zinthem vahishta) is the principle which dominates . 
the Vendidad. This word, ‘ purity’ .(Yaozdao), though it. 
associates with itself a moral idea or impression, has equally, 
before all, at least in the Vendidad, a conception purely physical ; 
and the word propreté (cleanliness) shall be the most exact, 
if it has taken the moral reflex which the Zend expression has,, 
and which, for example, the English word “ cleanliness,” has: 
The axiom ‘Cleanliness is next to godliness ’ shall altogether 
be Zoroastrian, with this: difference, that in Zonetirianism ; 
‘Cleanliness is a form itself of Godliness.” os 


ee 


* Lawful impurity has always physiological causes. Abate: 
all, the corpse is an impure object . . . But he who speaks of 
impurity speaks of contagion: because the corpse engenders: 
putridity and pestilence... .. The purification has for its 
object the expulsion of this contagion which passes from :thei 
dead to the living, and from one living person to another ; and: 
the theory of impurity and of purification reduces itself in fact’ 
to a theory of hygiene. ’1 

Further on, Prof. Darmesteter says: ‘‘ During the aes 
tion, the impure remains isolated from the faithful (7.e., from’ 
other Zoroastrians ), whom he would (otherwise) defile, in a: 
sort of lazaret... One sees, that they (i.e., the funeral 
ceremonies) are summed up in two words—two words’ of 
hygiene: (viz.,) to isolate the centre of infection, (and) to’ 
destroy that centre. What. distinguishes the Zoroastrian con~ 
ception from the European conception is this, that we busy: 
ourselves in isolating and destroying the dead element only 
in case of diseases said to be infectious ; (but) i in Zoroastrianism 
death is always infectious and contagious aa : 

Latterly, the original object of the Bareshnfim purification 

The present was still further widened. At times, it wag 
object. enjoined for the physical purification 

' Le Zend Avesta, Vol. II, Introduction, pp. X-XI. 

Ibid, p. XIL; vide also Ibid, p. 147. 
- 14 


106 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


originally intended, and, at times, it was intended to serve 
as a symbol for mental purification. It served as a kind 
of purification, both physical and mental, which qualified 
one for. some higher religious ceremonies. Now-a-days, the 
persons who go through this Bareshnfim ceremony are 
the professional corpse-bearers, who go through it, both 
before joining the profession and on leaving it. They come 
into contact daily with dead bodies of men, some of whom 
may have died of infectious diseases. Of course,. after the 
removal of every corpse to the Towers, they are required 
to bathe, but, when they leave for good, or at least for a long 
time, their daily line of business, it is thought tobe good and 
safe that they may go through this higher form of purification, 
before they mix freely with others. So, one can understand 
the object of a corpse-bearer going through the purification 
and segregation on retiring from his professional work. Look- 
ing to the original object of the purification as referred to in 
the Vendidad, it is not easy to understand why he has to go 
through this purification before he joins his profession. But, it 
may be taken, that he is made to go through this form, in 
order that he may be prepared for his business which requires 
extreme caution so as not to spread infection, or that he may be 
given an idea.of the form of purification necessary in case of 
those who come into direct contact with the dead. It may be 
with a ‘protective’ view. In the matter of the purificatory 
ceremonies of various nations anthropologists occasionally speak 
of ‘‘the purificatary ceremony ” as the protective theory. This 
may be an instance of the latter. © 


As to the priests, the Bareshnim is necessary, both, for a 
person who wishes to be initiated for the priestly profession, 
and for a full-fledged priest, when he wants to officiate in, 
what may “be called, the innercircle of higher ceremonies. In 
these cases, there is not the original idea of purification from 
impurities eaught by having come into contact with dead 
bodies, but the idea of a sentimental and symbolic point of 


THE BARESHNOM - 107 


view or a protective point of view. Another reason, which 
may have, at first, led to the oustom, may be this: It was 
one of the funetions of a priest to purify those who had come 
into contact with the impurities of a corpse. He was, therefore, 
also known as an Yaozdathragar, i.e., purifier. That being the 
case, it was held advisable that he himself should have at first 
gone through this purification. Thus, latterly, the original 
object of the Bareshnim as enjoined by the Vendidad,-viz., 
purification from the highest form of impurities like those 
arising from coming into long and close contact with the dead, 
especially the dead who died of infectious diseases, assumed 
also & symbolic signification. Thus, purification became a 
priestly function and was thought to be necessary for those 
priests who wanted to officiate within the inner circle of the 
Fire-temple and at some of the higher forms of ritual. The 
original object, latterly, in process of time, took another form. 
For example, a priest takes a Bareshném, and while doing 
so, declares that he does so for the “ian pak” (purification 
of the body) of A, B, or, who may be living or dead, i.e., he 
goes through the ceremony, so that the physical or the spiritual 
body of that person, who is named in the ritual, may have the 
efficacy of the purification.1 All this seems to be a later 
diversion from, or degeneration of, the original sanitary object 
of the Vendidad. 


"g. Deseription of the Bareshnom as given in the Vendidad. 


q We find references to the Bareshnim in three chapters of the 
Vendidéd :—(a) The first and principal 

__ Three references reference is in the 9th Chapter (§§ 1-57),2 
- where it is treated at some length. To 
have a clearer grasp, this chapter must be read with its 
Pahlavi rendering and commentary.? (b) The second reference 


*In the taurobolium purification of the Romans also, the priests went 
through the purification for “ the benefit of others ” (vide below, p. 163). 
? 8. B. B. IV (1880), pp. 119-130, S. B, E. XVIII, pp. 431-454. 


‘108 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


isin the 8th Chapter (§§ 35-72).1 (e) The third reference is: 
in the 19th Chapter (§§ 20-25).2 


“These three references seem to refer to three different forms 
“of pollution, i.e, to three different forms of greater or lesser 
‘eontact—direct or indirect—with corpses, which, when going 
‘through decomposition, are centres of disease and infection. Of 
‘course, all persons have to come into some contact with the 
Corpses of their dead relatives or friends for some time after 
‘death. But then, they must observe some rules or laws of health, 
‘so as not to endanger their own lives, and through themselves, 
‘the lives of others. If they do not observe these, there is a 
‘likelihood that they may, by some close. contact with the 
‘dead bodies, catch some germs of disease or infection and 
‘transfer them to others: In case they fail to observe those 
rules by accident or for some unavoidable purpose, in order 
to avoid any danger, they must.go through some purification 
-whichmay lessen the chance ‘of their infecting others and 
‘spreading the disease. 


The first reference (Vend. IX) seems to be an account of the 
purification of an extreme case of contact with a corpse—so 
extreme, that it requires to be carefully. purified and isolated 
for ten 3 days, so that the least chance for the spread of 
inféction may, be avoided. , 


The following is an outline of the account :—When a person 
The first refer. [88 become” polluted or defiled by coming 
ence», (IX, 1-57) in. into contact with a dead body, he must seek 
eg roid a purifier who must be (a) righteous, (b) 
speaker of truth, (c) versed in the mdnthras or holy scriptures, 


_2 8. B. B. IV, pp. 103-110. 2 §. B. E. IV, pp. 209-11. 

"3 1% may be remembered heré, that the period of 10 days is even now 
‘onsidered by medical men to be thé period of incubation for an infee- 
tious disease. We speak of 10 days’ quarantine (which originally. was 
‘of 40 days). If @ ‘contact,’ 7.e., a person who has come into contact 
with @ pergon suffering from an infectious disease, is isolated for 10 days 
and, if he, within that period does not develop that particular disease, 
he is considered to be safe to mix with others. ° 


THE BARESHNOM 109 


and (d) who has learnt from experienced persons how to purify 
others. The righteous man with these qualifications must find 
out a sanitary piece of ground. He must cut-off the trees, 
if there be any, on that ground. The ground chosen must 
be dry, clean, without vegetation and the least frequented by 
cattle and men. 


On the ground thus selected, nine magas or pits may be dug, 
Then these nine pits must be marked out by 13 karshas or 
furrows which have to be drawn by a sharp metallic instrument. 
Of these 13 karshas, the first must be drawn equidistant from 
the line of the pits. Then three karshas must be drawn round 
the first three pits. Then other three karshas round these first 
three and second three pits, 7.e., round the first six pits. 
Then, other three, round the nine pits together; lastly, the 
remaining three karshas round the central three pits. Then, 
the ground thus selected and marked out, or symbolically 
enclosed, must be covered over. with sand or some such kind of 
drying’ or disinfecting earth. 


_ Now follows an account~of the purification. The purifier is 
to stand out of the karshas drawn as above, and is to ask the 
infected person or the candidatefor purification to advance to 
the pits. When the candidate has advanced to the first pit, the 
purifying priest is to say the words “ Nemascha ya armaitish 
izaché”’*-and is to ask the candidate to repeat them. Each 
repetition of these words is said to weaken the influence of the 
infection. The purifying priest has to hold a nadégar or a 
nine-knotted stick in his hand and to fasten an iron or leaden 
receptacle or spoon at its end. He is then to get, at. first, the 
two hands of the candidate washed thrice by means of gadmez 
or the consecrated urine poured on his hands by means of the 
above spoon. If that is not done carefully, the purification that 
may follow will not be effective or complete. The hands with 
which the candidate is to clean his whole body must be at first 


1 i.e, Praise and commendation to Armaiti, i.e, to the Purity of 
thought, . 


110 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


thoroughly cleaned and purified. Then the whole body may 
be cleaned and purified in a particular way, beginning with the 
head and gradually coming down to the feet. By this purifica- 
tion from head to foot, the evil power of pollution or infection, 

- is said to run away from one part of the body to another, lower 
down, and, at last, it leaves the body through the lowest parts 
of the body, viz., the toes of the feet, in the form of a stinking 
fly. Then, when this is done, the purifying priest is to recite 
the Ahunavar and then the Kém n& Mazda prayers up to the 
‘words ‘‘ Astvaitish ashahé.’’ The recital of these’ formule of 
prayers is said to be very efficacious and is said to have its 
good effect on the health of the body. 


The above process of purification and the recital of prayers 
are to be repeated at each of the first six pits, to each of which 
the candidate is to advance step by step, and at each of which 
the evil power of pollution decreases step by step and the 
candidate gets purer. Having gone through this process of 
purification at each of the first six pits, the candidate is to 
advance towards the seventh pit, and is to sit at a distance of 
about 34 in. from it. The purification here is with sand or some 

- sand-like substance. He is to rub his body with it 15 times. 
He is to wait there till the moisture—if any—of the application 
of the consecrated urine dries off. The sand is supposed to 
be a purifying substance and it serves to dry the moisture as 
well. Then he is to goto the seventh pit where he has to 
purify his body once with water. Then heis to advance to the 
eighth pit and purifv his body twice with water. Then he is 
to advance to the ninth pit and there purify his body thrice 
with water. Then his body is to be fumigated with the smoke 
of the fuel of the wood Urvdsna, Vohit-gaona, Vohi-kérét, 
and Hadhdnaépata which were species of fragrant wood whose 
smoke was believed to have the quality of killing germs. 


This finishes the purification proper. The candidate is now 
to put on his clothes and to retire to a house where he is not to 
come into physical contact with other persons He is to remain 


THE BARBSHNOM. lli 


aloof and away from fire, water, cultivated land, trees, cattle, 
men and women, He is to pass three days and nights in 
such isolation. On the fourth day, he is to wash his body at 
first with urine and then with water. Then, he is to continue 
in the retreat, as said above, for three nights more. On the 
seventh day he goes through a bath again as on the fourth 
day. He then again remains aloof for three nights more, and 
then, on the tenth day, has again a bath. Thus, for nine-days 
and nine nights after the first Bareshnam: purification, he is to 
remain in a kind of isolation and retreat. After the final bath 
on the tenth day, he is deemed to be perfectly purified and 
can then mix with all men and women. 


The person who purifies must be properly paid by the person 
who goes through the purification. Hisfee depends upon the 
position of the candidate. The purifying person on his part 
is required to be proficient in his work. If he is not, he is guilty 
of doing harm to others and_is liable to great punishment. 


‘Lhe second reference to Bareshnim inthe 8th Chapter of the 
Pease pre ay Vendidad applies to cases, not so serious #8 
didad VII, 35-72, in the first reference. While in the 9th 

Chapter, the case is that of a person who 
is already supposed to have been defiled by a long contact 
with the dead (ham nacim paiti-iristem), here, in the 8th 
Chapter, the case refers only to one who has accidentally come 
into slight contact with (yi nagéum ava-bereta) a dead body. 
So, in this second case, the purification is not so ‘irksome as in 
the first case, both, in point of length of time and in the number 
of baths or purifications. The process enjoined in this case is 
as follows :—If the flesh of the dead body has been devoured 
off by a flesh-eating bird or animal before the person touches it, 
4.¢., if the body is a mere carcase of bones without the flesh on 
it, then, the most harmful parts of the body being done away 
with, there is less risk of catching any germs of disease from 
thecorpse. So, in this case, he is simply to wash his body with 
gadmez and water. A simple bath of this kind is sufficient to 


112 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


purify him. But, if the flesh of the corpse is not eaten off and 
the body is there with all its decomposing parts on it, then, the 
chances of risk being somewhat greater, the process of purifica- 
tion is as follows :—Three magas, i,e., pits must be dug, and the 
person is to purify his body with gadmez on each of them: Then 
a dog is to be taken near him. This process is to be repeated at 
a second set of three pits. He is then to wait for some time till 
the moisture of the urine, applied to his body and head; 
especially that on the head, dries up. Then, the person is to 
advance to a third set of three pits. He is to purify his body 
there, with water. The water must be poured .over the 
different parts of his body from head to foot.in/a particular 
way which is the same as that described in. the case of the 
great Bareshnim purification. Then, finally,he is to recite one 
Ahunavar and the Kémna Mazda prayer upto the words “ Ast- 
vaitish ashahé.” The person then “puts on his clothes and the 
Kusti or the sacred thread, reciting its allotted prayer. This 
finishes the purification. 


There is a third reference to’a higher form of purification, but 
it_cannot strictly be called Bareshnim, 
(Wong RIN 19 25) because, therein, it is not enjoined that the 
bath should begin from the ‘ bareshnu ’ 
(head) which word has given the purifieation its name. It says 
that if a person has come into contact with a dead body,} 
or if a~person has come into contact with a ‘contact’? he is 
to go through a process of purification. No pits aré mentioned 
in this purification. He is to wash his body four times with 
gadmez and twice with consecrated water. He is to recite 200 
Ashem Vohis and 200 Ahunavars. He is’ to pray for nine 
nights. 


1 In modern parlance, such es was used during plague operations io 
Bombay, such a person is called a ‘ contact.’ 


_? In the language of plague operations, a person who came into. contact 
with a ‘ contact’ was known as an ‘ evict,’ and he also was asked to leave 
his house and to go to camp. - 


fin BARESHNOM Be: 113. 


We find that there is a difference in the ritual, described in © 

Pho differnece in the three parts of the Vendidad. ‘The ten-, 
the ritual. Its dency is to reduce the rigour and intricacy 
ee ‘and to make the ritual simple. The 
difference may be due to various causes. It may be due (a) to 
the different views of different priestly writers (6) or to the 
changed times, when it was found permissible to reduce the 
rigour, (c) or to the change in places, the priests of one part 
of the country thinking it advisable to reduce the rigour. 
When we find that in a limited Parsee population of India, 
there are differences in ritual in places so close~as Bombay, 
Udvaré and Naosari, Surat and Broach, we must be prepared 
to find them in a large population like that of Iran. As a 
matter of fact, the Pahlavi Epistles of Mantshchiher do point 
to such differences in later times, in the matter of the Baresh- 
nim. Z&dsparam, the high priest of Sikan in the South of 
Kirman, was found fault with by his-brother Manishcheher, 
the high-priest of the western: country, for having made some . 
changes in the ritual of the Bareshnim. ! 

I have spoken above of a karsha ® or a furrow, of a paddn, and 
of a naédgar or nine-knotted stick, and shall have to speak of 
them frequently later on. So, I will describe them here. 


A karsha (Sanskrit 4 ¥ : karsha) from the root, ‘karesh’ (Per. 
A kazsha®. or ‘ashidan, to draw) means ‘a trench or a 
kasha. furrow.’ The word has a technical meaning 
in Zoroastrian rituals. At times, sacred or consecrated things 
or materials are to be kept, for the time being, within a limited 
space or enclosure, so that persons other than the officiating 
priests may not come into contact with them. The person in 
charge of the things, placing the things on the ground, draws 


2 Vide N&makihaé-i Manishcheher by Ervad Bamanji. N. Dhibhar 
Vide 8. B. E. Vol. XVIII, p. 279, ef seq. 
? Cf. The Boundary Lines of the Roman Lustrum. Vide my piper 
“ The Kashas of the Iranian Bareshniim and the Boundary Lines of the 
Roman Lustrum” (Journal of the Anthropological Society, Vol. VIII, 
pp. 520-35). _ 
15 


114 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


round it a temporary circle, trench, or furrow. Suppose, it is 
the consecrated urine or water that he carries, and, in travel- 
ling, he has to place these things aside for a time. Then, he 
places them on the ground and immediately draws, with a 
nail, a circle or furrow or trench round it. It need not be 
very deep. This process, viz, placing the things within the 
circle so formed, indicates, that it is free from the contact 
of other undesirable persons or things. If somebody: else 
steps within the circle—or touches it even from without. the 
circle, in which case also the line of isolation is broken—the 
thing is said to have lost its efficacy of consecration. This 
karsha (or kasha as itis ordinarily spoken now) or circle of limit, 
has a double efficacy. Just as, when you-shut a door of a 
room, you stop a person within from getting-out and a person 
without from getting in, so when you draw a ‘ karsha’ or the 
sacred circle, you not only stop—anyhow symbolically—the 
pollution from without affecting the purity of the consecrated 
substance within, but, in case the substance itself is undergoing 
decomposition and is impure, you stop the impurity from going 
out of the circle and spreading round about. For example, in the 
Bareshnimgih, kershas having these two different significations 
aredrawn. (a) The officiating priests take into the Bareshnimgih 
‘nirang,’ %.e.4.the consecrated urine, ‘dv,’ i.e., the eonsecrated 
water, and‘ bhasam,’ i.e., the consecrated ash of the Fire-temple. 
The priest who takes these there, first makes a circle on the 
ground with a nail or even at times with his forefinger, and then 
places the consecrated things within the ground thus enclosed. : 
Now, in this case, the circle is believed to protect the consecrated 
things from the pollution outside or to preserve the efficacy of 
the consecrated things from being lost. (5) Then take the case 
of the karshas round the pits or holes, where the person to be 
purified is to go through the different washings and the final 
bath. In this case, the karshas are meant to limit the circle of 
pollution. Here, a person who is considered to have been 
polluted or, to speak correctly, supposed to have been infected 
with an infectious disease, goes through his washings and baths, 


THE BARESHNOM 115 


and the circles were originally intended to keep the infection 
confined within the limit, so that it may not spread. The 
furrows are supposed to be trenches which would prevent the 
polluted water from his infected body to run beyond that 
certain limit. The karsha that a corpse-bearer draws round 
about the corpse in the house before removing the body to 
the Towers ! is of a similar kind. 

Most of these karshas are of a temporary kind, but inthe 
Fire-temples, they are of a permanent kind. In the Yazashna- 
gah, where the Yacna, Vendidid, and Baj ceremonies are per- 
formed, such karshas are necessary. So, there, they are of a 
permanent kind. There, the stone slabs, which form the pave- 
ment, have furrows, about two inches deep and two inches 
wide, cut in the stones. In the chamber of the Sacred Fire 
also, there are such permanent furrows cut in the stones of the 
pavement. These furrows are of the first kind, 7. e., they are 
intended to preserve the efficacy: of the consecrated fire or 
articles and of the sacred ceremonies within them. 

A karsha of this kind is generally known as a “ pdvi.” Pav? 
means sacred. Soa Pavi meansa furrow 
which preserves the sacredness of the con- 

secrated things or of the sacred ceremonies. When the efficacy 
of the consecrated things is encroached upon by somebody else 
going within the circle or within the limit pointed out, by the 
pdvi, then the thing is said to be avdv, (apAv) i.e., desecrated. 
In the phraseology of the ritual, the words “ pdvi karvi” 
. are at times used to signify the preparation of temporary furrows 
or the performance of religious:¢ ceremonies. 


Pavi. 


1 Vide above, p. 57, “ The he Funeral Catecnioniea: ” 

1 Lit. pavan Av, 7. e., (that which is washed) with. water. In the lan~ 
guage of the ritual, they often speak of ‘* making a thing pév,” 4. e., cere- 
monially clean. This is done by washing the thing from within and 
without three times. To make the water to be used in the ritual pd, 
they first wash thrice the vessel which is to contain the water, theu fill 
the vessel upto the brim with water, and then, lastly, pour thrice, with 
the recital of Khshnaothra Ahurahé Mazdao Ashem Vohd, further water 
and let it overflow. ; gy Be at be 


sad 


‘116 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


The word paddnis Avesta paiti-dana, lit. that which is kept over 


Paiti-dana or. (the mouth). It is padin foe in ‘Pahlavi, 
Padan. - - 
pandm or penimin Pazend, paddnin Persian. 


Iti is a piece of white cloth of cotton with two strings at the 
top to be fastened over the nose. It is a kind of mouth-veil 
put on at different times with different purposes. The priests 
put it on, when saying prayers before fire and the myazd_ or 
sacred things, so that their breath or saliva may not defile the 
sacred things before them. In this case, it resembles the cover- 
ing which the ancient Flamines, the Roman fire-priests, were 
required to put on. At other times, it is put on, as it were, 
for a contrary purpose, #.e., to prevent the outside defilement from 
coming to the person who puts it on.1, For example, the priest 
put it on, in the Bareshnimgiah, to prevent the defilement of 
the infected person, whom he purified, coming towards him. 
Some put it on even over the face of a corpse. Here also the 
object seems to be to prevent the defilement from the nose and 
‘mouth of the ‘corpse spreading out. The Pahlavi Vendidad 
(XVIII, 1) says that it may be prepared of any material (kold 
mandavami). It may be two fingers (angusht) broad and 
should be of two layers of cloth. 


Nadgar, or to.speak more correctly, Naé-gireh is the technical 
“‘Wadgar,thenine- name of a nine-knotted stick (graom nava- 
knotisengrigk. pikhem, Vendidid IX, 14). The use of 
such a_stick in the purifying ceremony as a symbol, seems to 
have’ been suggested by a passage of the Vendidad (XIX, 4). 
Zoroaster advances against Ahriman holding an instrument in 


1 This fact seems to be illustrated by what I saw in October 1918, 
The Medical authorities of the Parsee Fever Hospital directed, that 
nurses and other male and female. volunteers, who attended influenza 
patients at the Hospital during its epidemic,may put on a mask ora 
double-layered cloth-cover over their mouth and nose, so that they 
may not catch infeotion from the patients, 


THE BARESHNOM 117 


his hand (asdno ! zasta drajimné). In the portraits of Zoroaster, 
‘drawn from some sculptures on the rocks in Persia supposed 
to be those of Zoroaster, he is represented as. having a stick 
-in hishand. This is perhaps in reference to the above passage 
of the Vendidid. Some translators of the above passage of 
the Vendidad speak of this instrument as a nine-knotted stick, 
Another instrument, with which Zoroaster'is said to have 
advanced against Ahriman, is Ahunavar, i.e., the short prayer 
of Yath& Ahu Vairyé. That prayer is the spiritual weapon 
with which the prophet fights against the Evil Spirit, and the 
stick ig the material symbol of it. In all religions, priests or 
bishops are made to hold some weapons, mostly the sword. 
-These weapons ate symbols of religious authority. Now 
Zoroaster’s fight against the Evil Spirit is a kind of spiritual 
or mental purification. He fights to free or purify. the world 
from his evil influences. So, the:weapon also came to be used 
as a symbol in the Bareshn'’im ceremony of purification, wherein 
also the purifier fights against the pollution brought upon by 
the Evil Spirit. 


Now, as to the number nine, it was a sacred number among 
the ancients. It was supposed to be a symbol of a kind 
of perfection, \because when multiplied by any number, 
the addition ‘ofthe digits of the product always gives nine 
as- the product. So, it was held sacred even. amongst the 
ancient. Zoroastrians. In the Bareshnimgah, the pits are, 
as.we said, nine. The karshas or the furrows round the nine 
pits are nine. The isolation or the retreat after the Baresh- 
nim lasts for nine nights, So, the number nine also plays 
its part in the stick used in the purifying ceremony. The 
priest gives the consecrated articles to the candidate for 
purification by means of a spoon attached to such a nine- 
knotted stick. Perhaps, it was thought, that, in case the 

1 Harlez (Zend Avesta, p. 192) takes it to be an “ arrow.” Some take 


it to be “stones,” Aspandiarji (Edition of 1900, p. 269) takes it to he 
‘ALMZ ogar. Others take it fo be symbolical for ahunavar. (Ibid). 


118 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND OUSTOMS 


infection escaped from the infected person who is a candidate 


for purification, it might not reach the purifying priest and 


might be stopped at every knot of the stick. It might pass 
through the fibres of the stick but might be stopped at each 
of the knots. All this is symbolic, however we may try to 
understand it. 
8. Bareshnim-g4h or the place for the Bareshn(im. 
Having spoken ‘at some length on what is Bareshnam and 
The locality for 07 its description in the Vendidad, ‘I will 
the Bareshnimgéh now speak of the Bareshniim-gah. The 
ac enjdined in the Bareshnam being a form of putification for 
pre cae ae a person who came into close contact with 

a dead body—perhaps the dead body of a 
person who died of an infectious disease—it is natural that 
the place for this purification should be enjoined to be away 
from thickly populated parts ‘ofa town. It ought to be in 
a sequestered or the less frequented part of the town, The 
Vendidad (IX, 1-11) enjoins, that it ought to be at a place, less 
frequented by cattle, beasts of burden and men. Again, it must 
be at the distance of.at least 30 steps (gdya) from fire, 30 steps 


from the barsam ‘and 3 steps fromthe holy man. What is 


meant is, that it must be in a less frequented place and in a 
place away from religious places which are frequented by people. 


-Let us determine the distance mentioned here. It is required 
to be at the distance of at least 30 géya from a religious place 
where'liturgical services are performed. Now, according to the 
ancient Parsee books, each géya,7.e., step, is made up of 3 pédha, 
(Sans qr¢ Lat. ped-s or pés, Fr. pied, Germ. fuss, Pers. pdi, foot) 
i.e., feet. Now each padha or foot is equal to 14 érézu, i.e., 
fingers. Each érézu or finger is about 4 of an inch.2 So each 


1 Sacred metallic rods used in ritual. 

2 For a comparison of the Avesta ma ures with the Iranian 
measures mentioned by Herodotug and with modern measures, vide the 
tables given by me, in my 521y SAUNA, CUSeU WA BWA Yor 
(%e., The Ancient Iranians according to Herodotus and Strabo) pp. 
93-95. Vide Rawlinson’s Herodotus, I, p, 315. 


THE BARESHNOM. 149 


pidha (foot) comes to about 111 in., and each gaya (step) 
comes to about 2 ft. 92 in. Thus, when it is said that the 
Bareshnamgah must be at least 30 gaya from a place where 
religious services are performed, it means, in modern measures, 
that it must be at least (30 by 2 ft. 92 in.==) 84 feet. In other 
words, there must be no place of worship near the Bareshnim- 
gah for about 84 feet. Holy men are required to keep them- 
selves away from it by three steps, t.¢., by 8 ft. 4% in. 


The above figures from the Vendidad speak about the distance 
of the nearest frequented place. The Revayets followthe spirit 
of the Vendidad, but increase the distance, and say, that it, 
must be about 300 gayas (steps), (Bareshnaimgah dir az sheher 
si-sad gim shfyad)! ie, at the distance of about 280 yards 
from the city.” 

Again it is further enjoined, that, after having chosen a dis- 
tant or less frequented locality, one must select. there a piece of' 
ground “ where there is least water and where there are fewest 
trees, the part which is the cleanest and driest ”’ (Vendidid 
TX, 3).? In short, the driest~and the cleanest place is enjoined 
for the purification, so that the impurities or. germs of infection 
from the infected person may not increase and develop, and thus 
be a source of danger. In case, a place free of trees is not near 
at hand, the trees on the ground must be cut off to meet the 
requirement, The ground round about the Bareshnimgah must 
also be.cleared of its trees, for a distance of about nine wbdzu. 
As each vibdzu is spoken of as containing 8 vitashtis and as each 
viiashtt is about 10 in, 3, the ground so cleared off must be 
about 9 x8x 10=720 in., i.e., about 60 feet from all sides. 

Having chosén the locality at a safe distance from the city, 

Laying outof the 22d at the distance of at least about 84 
Bareshnimgah. feet from the nearest inhabited or frequented 
place, and having made the place dry and devoid of trees, 


1 Burjor Kamdin’s Revayet: Mr. Maneckji R. Unvala’s MS., dated 
1061 A. Y. (a.p. 1692). 

2 §. B. E. LV, (1880) p. 120. 

3 Vide my “ Kadim Iranians,” p. 94. 


i120 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


the next business is to lay out or arrange the Bareshnimgah. 
It should be laid out inthe centre of the above-mentioned area 
of 60 feet. The arrangement consists of 3 kinds of work:— 


(2) Digging magas or pits at fixed distances from one 
another, 


(6) Drawing out the karshas or the furrows round the 
‘pits, . 
(c) Covering the Bareshnimgah with sand or earth, 


(a) At first nine magas, ¢.e., pits or holes are to be dug in the 
centre of the ground beginning from the West and ending in 
the Hast. Each of these pits was to be two fingers (érézu), 
i.e, about 13 in. deep, if the time of the purification was 
summer, but 4 fingers, i.e., about 31 inches deep, if it was winter. 
At first, six such pits areto be dug atthe distance of onestep, i.e., 
about 2 ft. 9¢ in, from one another... Then, at the other end of 
this set of 6 pits, a space of 3 steps, 7.e., about 8 ft. 4% in. is to 
be left undug. Then follows another set of 3 pits of the same 
depth and at the same distance from each other as those of the 
first set of six. The»breadth of each of the nine pits is 
not given in the Vendidad; but the depth being, as said above, 
12in. in summer and 3} in. in winter, let us suppose that the 
width also is the same, viz. in summer IZin., and in winter 
3} in. ‘The reason, why different sizes were enjoined in the 
different seasons, seems to be, that in. summer, the heat being 
great, the ground, moistened by the water in the purification 
process, dries up earlier than in winter. ~ 


(b) The next important work in the preparation of the 
Bareshnimgah is that of drawing the karshas or furrows round 
the pits, to mark out the ground, beyond which the pollution or 
infection may not, pass.. The infected person is to have his 
baths in such a way that the water running from his infected 
body may not run further from the place and not pollute 
further ground. So, the ground must be marked out and proper 
channels or furrows for the water must be made. These 


{HE BARESHNOM ° 121 


ehannels may serve as limits for confining the pollution or 
infection in a particular place. : 


At first, one large karsha is to be drawn round the whole 
limit of the Bareshnimgah with a szarp metallic instrument. 
. (Vendidad TX, 10). It must be at. the distance of 3 steps 
(gaya), te, about 8 ft. 4¢ in. from the long row of pits.. 
Then, 12 karshas must be. drawn round the pits themselves 
in the following order: (a) Firstly, 3 karshas round the_first 
three pits; secondly, 3 karshas round the first six pits; thirdly, 
3 karshas round all the nine pits. Then, lastly, 3 karshas 
round the inner, 7.e., central three pits. 


(c) Having prepared the pits, on each of which the candi- 
date has to purify his body, and having enclosed the ground, 
the Bareshnimgah must be covered with some earth or sand. 
The candidate for purification has to go through the purifying 
process on each of the pits. Going through that, he has to 
cross that pit and go to the other or the purer side of the pit, 
leaving behind, in the pit just crossed, any pollution that had 
passed away from his body. So, he must have purer and 
cleaner ground to stand upon, after crossing the pit. This 
was secured by having the ground covered with sand or such 
other moisture-absorbing clay or earth.* 


Taking the distances as given in the Vendidad and as described 
above, the figures for the length and breadth of the Baresh- 
nfimgah and for the space occupied by the pits, the intervening 
spaces, and the furrows come to these :-— 


The breadth of each pit is 3} in. in winter ‘and 1} in, in 
summer. We take the largest breadth of winter months in our 
calculations. As there are altogether 9 pits, they occupy alto- 
gether (9X3 in.) 28¢ in.=2 ft.4¢in. Then, the distance 
between each pit being 93 in., as there are 7 intervals or 
distances between these 9 pits, they occupy in all (792 in.) 
673 in. ft. 74 in. Then, the distance between the first set of 


0 aig Nea ya Se 


1 Vendidad, IX, 11. 
16 


122 PURIFIOATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


6 pits and the second set of 3 pits: being 8 ft. 44 in., the length 
of the ground occupied by the whole set of pits. comes to (2 ft. 
4¢ in. +5 ft. 71 in. +8 ft. 4$ in.) 16 ft. 4 in. Then, the 
first and the most distant karsha or furrow being 8 ft. 4¢in. 
from all sides of the pits, allowing the space of 8 ft. 44 in. from 
the space (16 ft. 4 in.) between the first and the ninth or the 
last pit, ¢.e., on the “East and on the West, the whole length of 
the ground from East to West comes to (16 ft. 45 in.+8 ft. 
44 in. +8 ft. 4¢ in==) 33ft. 22 in. Coming to the breadth, 
(north and south), as the first and most distant karsha or 
furrow is to be 8 ft. 4¢ in. on both sides from any one of the 
pits, taking the pit to be a square and therefore its length to 
be the same as its breadth, ¢.¢., 33 in., we have the breadth 
Of (8 ft. 44 in. + 8 ft. 4¢ in. 32 in.=) 17 ft. gin. 


From all these calculations, we learn that the Bareshnamgah, 
as enjoined by the Vendidad, must have th& surrounding 
‘ground of the distance of about, 60.ft. from allits sides, cleared 
off of its trees, and that the space in it to be occupied for the 
purpose of the purification ceremony itself should be 33 ft. 
22 in: in length from East to West, and 17{t. 4 in. in breadth 
from North to South. The accompanying plan presents a plan 
of the Bareshnimgaéh, enjoined as above by the Vendidad. 


Now, as’the “modern Bareshniim putification has changed 
somewhat from the original one of the 
roan ad Vendidad times, in its object and in the 
} matter of the persons who should take the 
Bareshnim, so has the modern BareshnQmgah changed from the 
original Bareshnumgah of the Vendidad:times. Again, even at 
present, some of the rigid injunctions are more honoured in 
their breach than in their observance, We will here examine 
the changes, which are espeeially in the following points: (a) Its 
locality. (6) Its area. (c) The form of its mugas or ae 
The distance between the pits. 


(a) Firstly, as to locality, the present Bareshnimgahs are hot 
always away from the city. It is only.at Naésari, the old 


PLAN OF THE BARESHNUMGAH 
AS ENJOINED IN THE VENDIDAD 
(Vide at the back.) 


On the page 121 in line 31. 


do. 
do. 
do. 


32 
33 


ERRATA. 


Please read 2 ft. 92 in for 93 in. 


o 


29 


o 


” 


” 
235% in. 
19 ft. 7g in. 
19 ft. 74 in 
30 ft. 
30 ft. 
30 ft. 
47 ft. 


67g in. 

5 ft. 75 in. 
5 ft, 7g in. 
16 ft, 

16 ft. 

16 ft. 

33. ft. 


THE BARESHNOM =~ 123 


head-quarters of the Parsee priesthood, that the old injunction 
of the Vendidad is followed and the Bareshnimggh is situated 
at some distance from the closely inhabited part of the town. 
Even at Nadsari, the ground round about, of the distance of’ 
about 60 ft, is not cleared off of its trees. Now-a-days, the 
Bareshnaimgahs are attached to many Fire-temples, because 
the original purpose of the Bareshnim, viz., that of purifying 
only the infected, has lost much of its importance, andthe 
Bareshnim is looked at, as a form of purification necessary 
for the performance of liturgical services and ceremonies in 
the Fire-temple. It is mostly the priests that now-a-days 
take the Bareshnim. So, the original requirement of the 
infected person being kept apart from frequented quarters of 
the town no longer exists. Thus, the Bareshnim being a 
more frequent form of purification, and being the require- 
ment for a priest, the Bareshnimgdahs are now attached to the 
Fire-temples. : 


(b) The area of the modern Bareshnimg4h also is much. 
smaller than that described in the Vendidad. It varies in 
different towns. According to the Vendidad, the row of pits 
was in the centre of the area. In the modern one, it is nearer 
to the northern boundary. 

(c) As to the-form of the magas, we have no pits at all. 
They arereplaced by sets of small stones. Each set consists 
of 5 stones. The space between each set of pits as enjoined 
bythe. Vendidad was 92in. That space is now replaced by 
sets of 3 stones each. 


~(d) The magas or the pits having been done away, the 
distances, mentioned in the Vendidad, between each of the pits, 
viz., 98 in., and between the first set of six pits and the second 
set of three pits, viz., Sit. 44 in., are not observed. The omis. 
sion of the small distances between each of the pits or their 
modern substitutes, viz., the sets of stones, is not noticeable ; 
but the omission to observe the greater distance between 
the first six and the second three pits is easily marked. In 


124 PURIFICATORY OERBMONIBS AND CUSTeMS 


the modern Bareshnimgéh, all these sets of stones—both 
those representing the original pits, viz., sets of 5 stones, and 
those representing the original empty spaces between the pits, 
viz., sets of 3 stones—~are only about 6 in. apart. 


Taking the replacement of the Vendidid magas by sets of 

Sets of small stones at present, there must be nine seta 
sce ied nam, of stones, each of 6 stones, to represent 
gah. the 9 pits of the older Bareshnimegah, and 
nine sets of stones, each of 3 stones, to represent the inter- 
vening spaces between the pits—in all, 18 sets of stones. But 
instead of these 18, we have 2] sets in the modern, Bareshnim- 
gah. The extra three are made up of two sets, each of 3 stones, 
and one of 5. The first extra set of 3.stones is in the 
front of the long row of stones, #e., inthe west end of 
the row, and it ison this set, thatthe purifying priest 
places his nine-knotted stick, ‘and. commences the process 
of preparing the Bareshnimg&h or drawing the karshas. 
The second extra set of 5 stones is at the other end of the 
long row on the east, and itis on this set that the candidate 
takes his final bath. These-5 stonesare generally replaced by a 
broad large stone, so that the person can conveniently stand or 
sit on it and have his bath. The third or the final set of three 
stones forms.the furthest end of the row on the east. It is 
provided for the bather to stand upon, after his final bathon 
the large stone, to dry his feet before putting on his shoes. 


It seems, that, according to the Vendidad, in ancient times, 
at .each time that there was a case of a person who had 
become infected by coming into contact with a dead person in 
a prohibited way or in a way other than the proper or prescribed 
way, a Bareshnamgah was laid out. A piece of ground was 
selected, pits were dug, and the karshas or furrows were drawn. 
It appears, that the cases were rare, and so, the necessity of pre- 
paring the Bareshnimg&h arose rarely. But latterly, when the 
original object of the purification was changed, and its use and 
object were extended, a permanent thing was wanted. Now-e- 
days, the Bareshnim purification is a rare and uncommon thing 


THE BARESHNOM 125 


for the laymen, but common with the priests, who want to 
qualify themselves for performing religious ceremonies in the 
inner circle of the temples. So, in the modern Bareshnémgah, 
much of the arrangement enjoined in the Vendidad is given 
@ permanent form. As said above, they have done away with 
the digging of the nine magas or pits and replaced them by 
9 sets of stones; and the intervening spaces between the ‘pits 
are permanently replaced by sets of stones. It is only the 
karshas or the furrows that are newly made on each occasion 
of the Bareshnim, and that part of the process only is now- 
a-days technically known as “ preparing the Bareshnamgéh.” 
Again, in the modern ritual, there is no fumigation. 


Plans of the Bareshnémgah are given by Anquetil du 
Perron, ! . Harlez,? Spiegel,s Darmesteter,* 
Beccnadne sis ‘he and West.5 But-they all are faulty in one 
respect, They point the arrangement of the 
pits in the direction Northto South, thus indicating, that the 
candidate for purification comes in from the North and advances 
to the South. But asa matter of fact, the direction is from 
West to East. The candidate enters from the West and 
advances to the East.. Again, the plans of Prof. Darmesteter 
and Dr. West arefurther faulty, in this, that they point out the 
last 3 karshas to be round the last set of pits. But this is not so. 
These last three karshas are round the central set of the three pits. 
The plans given by all these scholars do not give clear 
separate ideas of (2) what a modern permanent Bareshnémgih 
is, and (b) what it appears to be when prepared at the time 
of giving a Bareshnim to a candidate. I give a plan which 
gives a view of both, and I will jllustrate the process of 
giving the Bareshnfim by references to it. , 


a a te 


_ 3 Zend Avesta, Tome IT, p. 546. 
? Avesta, Introduction, pn. CLX XVI. 
® Avesta, Erster Band, Vendidad, p. 295. 
* Le Zend Avesta : Deuxiéme volume, P. 162. 
5 §. B. B., Vol. XVIU, p. 435. 


126 PURIPICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


4. The process of giving the Bareshnim, 


Now we come to the subject of the process of giving the - 
Bareshném. I will at first speak (A) of some requisite pre- 
liminary preparations and then (B) of the process itself. 


The preliminary preparations consist of the following :-— 
(A) Preliminary _(@) Preparing or consecrating the requisites 
Preparations. for the purification. (6) Preparation on 
the part of the particular priests who gives the purification. 


(c) Preparation of the Bareshnimgah. (d) Preparation of the 
‘oandidate. 


At first, two Bareshnimw4ld ! priests who have previously 

(ey buenaeing performed the great Khub? ceremony, carry 
necessary requisites to the Bareshnimgah, the following conse- 
for the Bareshnim. crated articles required for the Bareshnim :— 
(a) The Nirangdin, #.e., the consecrated urine of the cow. 
(8) The Av, 7.2, the consecrated water. (c) The Bhasam,® i.c., 
the consecrated ash of the Sacred Fire of the Atash Beharam. 
Besides these consecrated things, the following utensils and 
articles are required in the Bareshnimgah :—(d) Two pots. 
ful of water. (e) Two metallic cups. (f) The leaf of a 
pomegranate tree. (g) Two Nadgars, 7.¢., sticks having nine 
knots. One of these two sticks has.a metallic spoon at one 
end tied with a»kusti or sacred thread. Another stick has a 
metallic nail, similarly tied at one end: The first three 
consecrated things are placed within a pdvi.4 This pdvz is 
on the.sowth side of the Bareshnamgah (place marked Z in the 
plan). 


1 F,¢., the priests who haye themselves gone through the areata 
paridesten and who observe all the required observances. 

? The khub ceremony requires the recital of the Yagna and the observ- 
ance of certain ceremonies. 

3 Wem TATA is said to be a special purification ceremony among the 
Hindus. 44 fF is one of the several names of Shiva, . because he 
sprinkled ashes over his body. Pane is their sacred ash (Calcutta 
Review of Jany. 1905). 

4 Vide above, p. 115. 


{HE BARESHNOM 27 


Having placed the above consecrated articles and other 

The purification ecessary things into the Bareshnamgah, 
of the utensilsand the two priests perform the kusti-pddyab, 
Oke weer: and put on the padén. Then one of them 
first makes pdv,! i.e., cleans ceremonially the two small metallic 
cups. In one of the cups, he pours the consecrated urine and 
throws: into it a pinch of the Bhasam or the consecrated, ash, 
Then he makes the two water-pots pdv and pouts into them a 
few drops of consecrated water. A few drops of consecrated 
water consecrate all the water in the pots. 

After preparing the requisite things as said above, the priest 

(b) Preparation himself takes a bath in the Bareshnimgah. 
os wince or ae He purifies himself with consecrated water 
who gives the puri- before purifying the candidate. One of the 
eeeten one: above two pots of water is for his use and 
the other for the subsequent use of the candidate. He goes to 
an adjoining place enclosed by. a pdvi (marked C on the plan), 
recites the formula of Khsnaothra Ahurahé Mazdéo Ashem 
Voha, and then unclothes himself. He places his clothes at a 
little distance from himself on a set of three stones. In doing 
so, he removes his turban with the paddn hanging over it. 
Then, sitting on a big stone, he bathes with the consecrated 
water contained in one of the two pots placed before him by 
the other priest on a set of three stones The other priest 
sprinkles a few drops of the dv or the consecrated water on the 
clothes of the priest. Thus, he symbolically purifies with the 
consecrated water his clothes also. On finishing his bath, he 
puts on his clothes and in so doing, he puts on his turban with © 
the paddn hanging over it. Then throwing his kusti on his 
shoulders, he recites the Kemna Mazda prayer and then puts 
on the kusti, reciting the Nirang-i-Kusti. 


Having bathed with the consecrated water, the priest now 
(c) The propara- Proceeds to “ prepare the Bareshnimgah.” 
tion of the Baresh- As said above, in the modern Baresh- 
migeh, nimgah, the place is all ready with the 


* 


Vide above, p. 115. 


128 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


9 pits, now-a-days replaced by 9 sets of 5 stones each and with 
the intervening sets of 8 stones each. What is left undone is 
the drawing of the karshas- or the furrows which is tech- 
nically known as “ preparing the Bareshnamgah.”’ He proceeds 
to draw the karshas as follows: He takes the two Naégars or 
the nine-knotted sticks, in his hands, the one with the metallic 
nail at the end in his right hand, and the other with the spoon 
in his left hand. Then, going to tne place where the,sets of 
stones commence, he places the nailed end of the first stick on 
the first set of 3 stones—the first extra set marked D in the 
plan—and stands facing the East. He then recites what is 
technically called the Dasturi, 7.e., he declares, that he performs 
the ceremony as enjoined by the Dasturs.’ In this recital, he 
_ first recites Khshnadthra Ahurahé Mazdao,one Ashem Vohu 
and five Yathé Ahu Vairyés, and then recites in Baj, ic, in a 
suppressed tone, the Dasturi formula.+ Then he recites loudly 
three Ashemvohus, and takes the Baj of Sradsh upto the words 
“ Vidhvaé mraéti.” Then saying, the word Ashem, once loudly, 
and for the second time in a suppressed tone, he goes to the 
north-west corner of the limit of the Bareshnimgah (marked E 
in the plan) and draws-one karsha with the nailed end of the | 
nine-knotted stick round the whole boundary, beginning with 
the northern side.. Some draw this karsha within the permanent 
pdvi which shows the inner boundary of the Bareshnimgah 
and others draw it out of the pdévi on the inside of the bcund- 
ary. He slowly proceeds from West to East (E to F in the 
plan), reciting four Yatha Aha Vairyés during the. process. 
Then he continues on the eastern side (F to G), then on the 
southern side (G to H), and las.ly, on the western side (H to E), 
reciting three Yathi Ahu Vairyés each time. Thus, com- 
pleting the quadrangle, he draws the first large karsha referred 
to, as said above, in the Vendidad. Then, he goes back to the 
row of stones and draws 12 karshas round about them. At first, 
he draws three karshas round the first set of the three pits 


a i a ee 
1 Herein, he says, that he performs the ritual as enjoined by tho 
Dasturs. Vide above, p 64, ‘The Funeral Ceremonios,” 


HE BARESHNOM & 2 129 


(IJ KL), each represented in the modern Bareshnimgah by 
three sets of 5 stones and shown in the plan by 5 dots. Then, he 
draws 3 karshas tound the first six pits, as marked MN. O Pin 
the plan; then, thirdly, round all the. nine pits as marked 
QRS Tin the plan. Lastly, he diaws three other “arsh1s round 
the middle set, as marked UV WX. Waen these 13 kursaas 
.are drawn, the Bareshnimgih is technically said to have become 
taiyir (543) ie, ready for the purification ceremony of the 
candidate. The priest, who thus prepares it, finishes the Baj 
of Siaosh, the first portion of which he had recited at the 
commencement of the work of preparing the Bareshnimgah. 
The candidate for purification first takes his ordinary bath in 
the morning with the necessary ritual, either 
at his house or at the Fire-temple. At Nao- 
sari, he takes this’ preliminary bath at his 
own house, and then goes to the Bareshnimgah. As it is a small 
town, and there are quarters which are strictly Parsee quarters, 
and the distances to the Bareshnimgah and the Fire-temples are 
not great, one can easily walk from his house to the Bareshnim- 
gah, and from there to the Temple} where he has to pass nine 
days in a kind of retreat. But Bombay being a large city, it 
is not quite possible to go from one’s house to the Bareshnim-~ 
gah in a- Temple without running the chance of coming 
into contact with non-Zoroastrians, from whom he is to keep 
aloof...So;,in Bombay and in other large centres of population, 
thecandidate—and when one speaks of a candidate, he is 
almost always a priest whv goes through the ceremony to 
qualify himself for the performance of certain religious cere- 
monies—takes the preliminary bath at the Temple. He puts 
on a newly washed set of clothes. Then, he goes to the Baresh- 
nimgah. If a long interval has passed since his preliminary 
bath, he performs the Kusti-Pddydb; if not, he need not 
perform that. : 

Then he takes his seat on a piece of clean ¢loth on the ground 
within an enclosed pavi (Ain the plan) outside the Bareshnam- 
gah proper. Then, he is made-to say the Baj, or prayer of grace, 

17 


(d) Preparation 
of the candidate. 


130 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 
{ 


and is given a pomegranate leaf to chew, and a little consecrated 
urine to drink in one of the two small metallic cups referred 
to above. He then finishes the Baj and recites the Patet. 
The process is the same as that in the Nan ceremony or in the 
second form of purification. So, I need not describe it in detail 
here.t He goes through this preliminary preparation before 
the technical “ preparation of the Bareshnimgah.” 


Now, we come to the subject proper of the process of the 

(B ahs: Besoaes Bareshnim ceremony. Two priests are 
proper of thé a. required for the purpose.? As said above, 
reabndm. one of the priests, the purifier, has himself 
‘gone through a purification with consecrated water. He has 
‘ prepared’ the Bareshnimgah for the purification. The candi- 
date himself is now ready. The second priest now goes in a 
pavi (Y) outside the Bareshnimgah.proper, and holds a dog by 
a chainin hishand. The candidate is now about to enter into 
the Bareshnimgah ; but before he does so, the priest’ who is 
to purify him retires into the pavi (Z) wherein the consecrated 
articles are kept. An infected person is supposed to step into 
the Bareshnimgah ; so, not only should the consecrated things, 
but also the priests who are to purify him and to give him a 
bath of purification are supposed to keep themselves out of 
the chances of infection and pollution. The pévi, which is 
prepared by drawing a karsha or a furrow round about, protects 
them. 

The-candidate now rises from his seat on the ground, 
leaves the pdvi wherein he ate and drank the consecrated 
things, and steps into another pavi (B). Coming in there, he 
takes the Baj. He recites Khshnadéthra Ahurahé Mazdao, 
Ashem Vohu.? Then he recites in bAj, i.e, in a suppressed or 


2 Vide above, pp. 96 et seg. 

2 Yabshdacragar d6 gan Avayad (Pahl. Vend. IX, 32); one of them 
hag performed the “had. 

5 Amat Yadshdacragar Yashi la kard Yekvimunet 14 Shayad (tbid.) 
Dastur Jamaspji takes the word “Yasht” herefor khdb, yo Wad 
vdleted yvadl am aa aegal, by Dastur Kaikhosru, p. 106. 


TEE BARESHNOM 18). 


muttering tone, ‘“Humata, hukhta, hvarshta, hu-manashné hu- 
gavashné, hu-kunashné........ 5 Aer tan pak,” ¢.e, ‘(I go 
through this ceremony) with good thoughts, with good words, 
and good deeds,? and I do this with the intention that the good 


of this may result to the body of (such and such a person)” 


This is a later change, development, or rather, degeneration, 

_ The original object of the purification, viz., purification from a 

kind of pollution or infection, was lost,and the ceremony became 
a kind of qualification forthe performance of some ceremonies, 
The priests go through this, and are paid for that and for the 
subsequent ceremonies, Yacna, &c. At first, they recited the 
name of the person who had asked them to perform the cere~ 
monies in certain formula, recited in the prayers. But, latterly, 
they began to recite his orher name inthe purification ceremony 
itself. 


The candidate then unclothes himself. He is not to speak 
anything now, If he has to say anything, he must speak in 
Baj, z.¢., in a suppressed'tone.. Having unclothed himself, he 
seats himself on the first set of 5 stones (a in the plan) which 
represent the first maga or pit of the original Bareshnimgah of 
the Vendidid, .While proceeding to the seat, he covers his 
head with his right-hand, because 2 Zoroastrian is enjoined not 
to walk bear-headed. With another hand, he tries for decency 
to cover his private part. 


The candidate for purification. having taken his seat in the 
pavi or enclosure formed by the karshas or furrows, the cause 
of infection is, as it were, confined within that space. As the 
infection is not expected to spread, the purifying priest now 
comes out of the pdvi, where he had taken his refuge for the 
sake of safety. He goes to the candidate to purify him, but 
always takes care to stand out of the pdv formed by the 


1 Here, he names the person, for whose naiyet or intention he takes the 
Bareshnim. If it is for himself, he saysso. Vide above p. 107,n, 1. - 
? The words are here repeated in their Pazend form, 


132 PURIFICATORY ‘CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


furrows in which the candidate is seated. He holds the nine- 
knotted stick with the spoon in his right hand, and the 
second stick with the metallic nail in his left hand. Then, the 
candidate places his right hand on his head. The reason 
why he now puts his right hand on his head is that a Zoroas- 
trian is asked not to speak with an uncovered head.! When 
he has to say anything with an uncovered head, for example, 
during the bath, he places his right hand over his head, and 
then savs what he has to say. Now, as the candidate, has 
to speak something, as we will see later on, he has to cover 
his head temporarily with his hand. 


The priest who has advanced to purify him now places the 
spoon-end of the nine-knotted stick on/his hand which covers 
the head. The candidate then places his left hand over the 
spoon. Care must be taken thatthe hands of the candidate 
only touch the spoon, #.e., the metallic part of the stick, and 
not the wooden part, which, being porous, is likely to catch 


1 We learn from Herodotus,.that the ancient Persians always kept 
their heads covered. He speaks (Bk. JII, 10-12). of the battle, which 
the Egyptians fought with the Persians at the Pelusiac mouth of the 
Nile, and in which Psammenitus, son of Amasis, was defeated, and of 
his visit of the battlefield. There he says, ‘‘ Here I saw a very sur- 
prising fact, which the people of the country informed me of ..... The 
skulls of the Persians were so weak, that if you should hit them only with 
a single.pebble, you would break a hole in them; whereas those of the 
E-vptians are so hard, that you could scarcely fracture them by strik- 
ing them with a stone, The cause of this, they told me, is as follows, 
and I readily assented; that the Egyptians begin from childhood and 
shave their heads. and the bone is thickened ty exposure to the sun. 
....s. And the reason why the Persians have weak skulls is this ; they 
shade them from the first, wearing tiaras for hats. Now, I myself saw 
that such was the case; and I also obs«rved the same thing at Papremis, 
with respret to those who were slain with Act amencs son, of Darius, by 
TInarus the Likyan.”? Ek. III, 12. H. Cory’s Translation, Bohn’s Series 
(1889), p. 174.) 

While saying prayers or performing religious ceremonies, a decent 
head-dress was unavoidably necessary. Herodotus says: “When any 
one wishes to offer sacrifice ...... he invokes the god, usually having 
his tiara decked with myrtle, ” (Bk, I, 182, Ibid, p. 60.) 


‘THE BARESHNOM 133 


germs of infection from him. The priest then recites three 
Ashem Vohis and the Baj of Sraosh up to “ Vidhvao 
Mraoté,” and with the word Ashem, (i.e. Purity), removes 
from the head the spooned stick. Then going to the 
pavi where the aldt or the consecrated things are placed, and 
taking, in one of the small metallic cups above referred to, 
a little of the Nirang, goes to the candidate again, pours.a 
little of it in the spoon,! and drops it in the hand of the-can- | 
didate who applies it to his whole body, He repeats this three 

times. 


The Vendidad (IX, 15-26) enjoins that the application must 
not be haphazard, but in a particular way beginning from the 
top of the head to the tip of the toe. It says, that, at first, 
both the hands must be cleaned or purified with the Nirang, 
so that, with those clean hands, he may’ clean all the other 
parts of the body. It says (IX, 15): “At first, both his 
hands must be washed. If both his hands are not washed at 
first, hé makes his whole body. unclean.” The Nirang after 
its application to the hand, must be applied to the other parts 
of the body in the following order: The head, the front part 
of the face between the brows, the back part of the head, 
the cheeks, the right ear, the left ear, the right shoulder, the 
left shoulder;the right arm-pit, the left arm-pit, the chest, the 
back, the right nipple, the left nipple, the right rib, the left 
rib, the right hip, the left hip, the sexual parts, (if the candi- 
date for purification is a male, the application must first be on 
the hind part and then onthe front part ; but if a female, it 
must begin on the front and then on the hind part), the right 
thigh, the left thigh, the right knee, the left knee, the right shin 
of the Jeg, the left shin of the leg, the right ankle, the left 
ankle, the right instep, the left instep, the right sole of the 
foot, the left sole of the foot, the right toe, the left toe. 


The Vendidad adds, that, with such an application, the 
Druj-i-Nasu, i.e, the Evil of infection or—to speak in modern 


nn 


2 Vendidad IX, 14, 


134 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


scientific language—the microbe of infection leaves the particular 
part of the body thus cleaned and runs down to the next 
named part, and, at last, leaves the infected person at the foot, 
making good his escape in the northern direction. 


Now-a-days, the application is not so systematic and not in 
the same successive order as enjoined in the Vendidad, It differs 
in several points :— : 


(a) Firstly, it is a hasty application or rubbing of the Nirang 
from head to foot. (6) Secondly, the Vendidad enjoins the priest 
who purifies the candidate to throw or sprinkle the Nirang gra- 
dually upon the different parts of the body, one after another. 
That process would require a very large quantity. But in 
practice now, the priest gives at once a little quantity, about 
a tea-spoonful the most, in the hollow of the hand of the 
candidate who applies that quantity over all the parts of 
the, body. (c) Thirdly, in modern practice, the priest drops 
the Nirang in the hands ofthe candidate three times at each 
pit. This triple process of dropping it is, perhaps, to replace, 
and to make up for, the abandonment of the very long and 
intricate process of the application a enjoined in the Vendidad. 
(d) Fourthly, it is enjoined, that the words “nemascha ya 
Armaitish izicha ” (i.e., praise and commendation to Armaiti, 
i.e, to the Purity of thought) are to be recited by the priest 
and repeated by the candidate before the first application or 
washing, but, in practice, they are recited after the first triple 
application. 

Then, to proceed in our description of the process of the Baresh- 
nim, the priest, after dropping the nirang into his hands, retires 
again into his pavi or enclosure where the dla or the consecrated 
articles are placed. The candidate is isolated within the karshas 
or the furrows. The isolation is shortly to be broken or 
dissolved by the other priest; who is to present a dog before the 
candidate. If that is done, the purifier himself, coming within 


1 The isolation of the pdvis is said to be broken or dissolved when a 
sontact is made between a person or persons or @ thing or things 


THE “BARESHNOM _ 135 


the circle of pollution or infection, is likely to catch infection. 
So, he retires within his enclosure (Z) of isolation for safety. 
The other priest ‘then advances with a dog held by a metallic 
chain, and keeping himself at a distance beyond the pavi,— 
in this case the first and distant karsha or furrow,—presents the 
dog before the candidate who then touches with his left hand 
the left ear of the dog. 


I will say a few words here on the use of the dog.in. this 

The Dog in:ths purification ceremony. In the 9th chapter 
Bareshnim cere. of the Vendidad, where a lengthy descrip- 
mee tion of the Bareshnim purification is given, 
we find no reference to the dog. But it is in its Pahlevi 
commentary. that we find it. There,,on the authority of 
the later commentators, it is said, that'“‘when they (the 
candidates for purification) pass-from one pit ‘to another, 
the dog may be held before them once.”! The 8th chapter of 
the Vendidad (§, 37-38) also_enjoins the presentation of a dog 
before the candidate. The description of the 8th chapter, 
though it refers to the Bareshniim purification, refers specially 
to the case of an inferior kind of pollution or infection. It is the 
case of a person who has merely “‘ touched the corpse of a dog 
or of a man.” But the case in the 9th chapter is rather a more 
serious case—the case of a person who has not simply touched 
the body but is actually “defiled by the dead.” In this latter 
case, he is. supposed to have come into greater contact with the 
corpse and to have disregarded the observances and restrictions 


within the pivi and between a person or persons, or a thing or things 
outside the pivi. For example, suppose the adjoining A , B 
figure represents a space enclosed in a pivi. The | 
lines AB, BC, CD, DA represent the four furrows of ease 
the pivi on the four sides. Now suppose a stick or EK 
a handkerchief falls on one of the pdvis in the way | 
shown at E. Then, the pdvi is said to be connected D™  ——SIC 
and so the isolation is said to be dissolved or broken. 

2 Amat min magh gan magh vazliind ayokbar kalba vakhduniyen” 
Pahlavi Vendidaéd IX, 32. Vide the Pahlavi Text of the Vendidad by 
Dastur Darab P. Sanjana, p. 186, 1. 6; 8.B.E. XVIII. p. 451. 


136 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 
7 x 


enjoined by the then sanitary authorities in the matter of isola- 
tion. So, when in the first case (Vendidad, VIII), viz., that of 
merely touching the body either accidentally of for some purpose 
under proper observances, he is to go through mere purifica- 
tions and baths, in the latter case (Vendidad IX) of an actual 
defilement, he is not only to go through the purification, 
but also through an isolation for 9 days and nights. 
He was to remain aloof, as we will see later on, for. a 
period of full 9 days and 9 nights, 7.e., about 10 days. 


Now, the question is: why was it enjoined that a dog should 
be presented before the candidate for purification ? One cannot 
speak with. authority or certainty, but can advance a probable 
reason by analogy or inference. The reason) seems to be the 
following :—Of the several means or ways to be adopted to 
do away with the spread of disease or infection, one was the 
speedy consumption of the body that was the centre of disease 
or infection. Consumption by. the flesh-devouring animals was 
one of such ancient prevalent ways. In the Vendidad, we find 
a reference to the old primitive way when corpses were exposed 
on tops of mountains, so that flesh-eating birds and animals, like 
vultures and dogs, who served as scavengers of Nature may 
devour the flesh. The dog was a domestic animal useful to the 
ancient Iranianin many ways. He served asa policeman to guard 
his house, to guard his fields, to guard his flock. Not only that, 
but it-served him, as said above, as a scavenger of Nature in 
eating away the flesh of the corpse of a deceased person which 
otherwise would have gone on decomposing, and then endan- 
gering the health of his town. So the dog was, in the eyes of 
an ancient Iranian, a very dear and useful animal. What is 
very dear and useful whether that be a man, an animal, or a 
thing is, as it were, in one sense, sacred. The dog therefore 
became a useful and sacred animal in the eyes of an Iranian. 
His great and important services were those of stopping 
decomposition and. of stopping the spread of disease and 
infection. Such being the case, one of the several objects, why 
on the death of a person, the dog was brought before the 


THE BARESHNOM 137 


corpse for sagdid, was, that the dog may see, that a person was 

dead and that a prey was ready for him. He may, by instinct, 

know, what was waiting for him. The second object, which 

arose from the first object and from all the above considera- 

tions, was rather more symbolic. The dog, being the scavenger 

of Nature, and as such, as said above, one of the means for the 

prevention of the spread of disease and infection, one of the 

means for keeping pure the earth, air, and ground of God,.. 
was the symbol and type of purification. Other thoughts.and 
ideas seem latterly to have been associated with the dog, on 

account of his other characteristics as a faithful domestic 

animal. So, from all these considerations, he was brought 

before a corpse and made to see the corpse.” His very eyesight 

was, as it were, a means of purification. So much for his 

presence before the corpse. 


From the view of his presence before a corpse which was a 
great centre of putrefaction,. infection and disease, the view 
of his presence before a person who was polluted and infected 
and who was therefore. another, though lesser, centre of 
infection and disease, \was’ only one step. The dog was a 
means, a channel, an instrument for purification, for keeping 
the air, earth and water of God pure. Heré, in the Bareshnim- 
gah, there is.a candidate, who coming into contact with a 
corpse, seeks purification, so that, being purified, he may not 
continue to be a source of danger to those round about him. 
So, the dog’s presence there was thought necessary to emphasize 
the\original object of purification. The dog was one of the 
instruments of Nature in keeping its products pure. Here isa 
person, who to avoid any chance of infection, lest his infected 
condition may be a source of danger, goes through a form of 
purification. Thus, the presence of the dog before the person, 
who very likely was as infectious as a corpse, was symbolic 
and significant.* 


1 It appears, that among some other nations also, the dog was used in 
the ceremony of purification, “The Bwotians had a custom to pass 
18 


138 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


_ Now there does not seem to be any particular significance in 
the candidate touehing the left ear of the dog with his lefé hand. 
As we said above, the candidate had now and then to keep his 
head covered with his right hand.. Again, the dog had: to be 
presented to him from beyond the furrows on his left. So itis 
only his left hand that was conveniently available. It is perhaps 
to preserve harmony or uniformity, that he touches the left 
ear of the dog. Perhaps, it is convenient also on account of 
the position of the dog. As we said above, the west is the 
side from which they enter the Bareshnumgah, and the candi- 
date proceeds to the east. The priest who fetches, the dog also 
comes in from the west. So, the dog, when it is made to 
stand on the left side of the candidate, with its face towards 
him, has,his left ear conveniently near. .There seems to be no 
other particular signification for this. As to the reason, why 
the candidate touches the ear, it. seems to be only to draw its 
attention to himself. In the East, they generally twist the ear 
of a person to make him look a little sharp if he is careless or 
indolent. The ear of a child is twisted by a parent or teacher 
to make it look a little sharp. 


The candidate is not to let his left hand touch his body. His 
hands were cleaned in the above process of the first purification 
by the nirang» Having come into contact with something else, 


between a dog cut in half, as a means of. purification. Liebrecht (Lie- 
brecht zur Volkskunde, p. 350) sees here a purifying new birth brought 
about by a sacrifice. He points out that dogs were often employed as 
Purification-Sacrifices among the Greeks and Romans” (Journal of the 
Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. III, p. 360: “The Dog in 
Myth and Custom Extract from Mr. E. Tyrrel Leith’s Notes.) 
Mr. W. W. Fowler, in the paper on the Roman Lustration (Purification) 
in his “ Anthropology and Classics,” describes, on the authority of Livi, 
a@ Macedonian method of the lustral, process for purifying an army. 
He says that the method was “ to march the whole host in spring before 
& campaign between the severed limbs of & dog’ (p. 108). Cf. The 
primitive way of making covenants in the Old Teste ment (Gemesis XV, 
10, 17, Jeremiah XXXV, 18 et seq.), wherein the contracting parties passed 
between the two parts of a sacrificed animal. Some attribute this to 
what they call a “purificatory theory” and others “‘ a protective theory”. 
Vide Sir James Frazer’s ‘‘ Folklore in the Old Testament,”’ 


’ 


THE BARESHNOM 139 


which, in its turn has not been washed, a part of the ‘purity of , 
the hand is said to have been lost by a touch to the dog. So, 
he must not apply it to his body before purifying it. This he 
does at the early stage of the next or second stage of purifica- 
tion at the second set of 5 stones which represent the next 
maga or pit. 

On the dog being removed from near the candidate, the isola- 

3. tion of the candidate within. the furrowsis 

Repetition of the ; 
application of mi- secured and the priest gets out of his pdvi or 
rang, &e. enclosure with the spooned nine-knotted stick 
in his hand, and recites the Kem n& Mazda prayer upto the 
word Ashahé. Then while reciting the next word ‘nemasché 
ya Armaitish izicha’ points with his above stick to the second 
set of 5 stones (marked b, in the plan) which represent the 
second maga or pit referred tointhe Vendidéd. That means an 
intimation that he should now advancefurther. The candidate 
thereupon repeats the words ‘ nemaschaé ya Armaitish izacha,’ 
and advances, towards that.set.. On his taking his seat there, 
the priest repeats thrice the above described process of handing 
some nirang for fresh application. The candidate applies it to the 
whole of his body as described above. The priest again retires 
to his pévi (Z). The second priest again advances towards the 
candidate with the dog. The candidate again touches the left 
ear of the dog. ~The priest with the dog retires and the first 
priest again gets outof his pdvi, advances towards the candidate, 
recites theabovesaid Kem na Mazda prayer as described above, 
asks the candidate to advance to the third set of 5 stones and 
gives him the nirang for application. Then the priest with the 
dog again advances. Thus thesame process, with the above de- 
tails and particulars, is gone through altogether for six times 
on the first six sets of pits which are represented in the 
modern Bareshnumgah by the first six sets of 5 stones 
(a, b, ¢, d, e, f in the plan). 

On coming to the seventh maga or pit (9) or the seventh 

Application of set of 5stones, the application to the body 
sand, is not that of the nirang, but that of mere 


- 140 PURIFICATORY OEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


sand (khak .$!4),1 The details of the process are the same 
as those described above in the case of handing the nirang. 
This is done 18 times, i.¢., the sand is given 18 times for appli- 
cation. The modern Bareshnumg4h is covered over with sand 
which is renewed occasionally. So, it is some of this sand 
that the priest gives to the candidate. Having given this 
18 times, the priest again retires to his pd (Z) and the other 
priest with his dog advances and the same process of touching 
the dog is gone through.. 


‘Then the first priest again gets out of his pdvi for the 8th 
time. Atthis time, before reciting the Kem 
na Mazda prayer as described above, he utters 
*‘Ahunem varirim ,tanim piAiti,” (¢.e., 
“ the prayer of Ahuna Vairya or Yathé Ahi, Vairy6 protects the 
body ”’) and then recites the Yatha.Ahé Vairyé formula once. 
He then asks the candidate, as before, to advance to the 8th 
pit or set of 5 stones (4). On the candidate taking his seat 
there, the application to the body is neither that of mirang nor 
of sand but of Av, i.e, consecrated water. This he does three 
times. The candidateapplies the consecrated water to his body 
as he had previously applied the nirang and the sand. The 
first priest retires into his pdvi (Z) and-the second priest with 
the dog advances, and the same process is gone through as 
before. Then, the first priest getting out of his pdui recites 
‘‘Ahunem Vairim tanim paiti, Yatha Ahi Vairyé and Kem 
ni Mazda ” as at the eighth stage of the process and asks the 
candidate to advance to the ninth pit or the 9th set of 5 stones 
(i). Here again he gives him thrice the consecrated water for 
application as at the 8th set of stones. The whole of the process 
is the same. But there is this difference, that at this 9th pit or 
set of stones, the whole process is repeated or gone through 
twice. : 


Application of 
consecrated water. 


1 Vide above p. 99, n. 2, for the use of sand as a purifier among the 
, Mahome dans also. 


THR BARESHNOM - 141 


Then again the first priest gets out of his pdvi, recites 
“Ahunem Vairim tanim paiti, Yatha Aha Vairyé and Kem 
ni Mazd&”’ prayers, as he did three times before (once at the 
8th stage and twice at the 9th stage), and asks the candidate 
to advance to the final stage, 7.e., the final or the tenth set ()) 
of 5 stones, which, in the modern Bareshnimgah, is generally 
replaced by a large broad stone on which one can conveniently 
sit and bathe, Here again, the priest gives thrice the consecrated 
water for application and the same process is gone through. 
But, the process of the recital of the prayers by the first priest 
and the application of the consecrated water by the candidate 
is repeated or gone through thrice. The process_of the pre- 
sentation of the dog before the candidate bythe second priest 
is gone through twice. 


The first priest, after giving the consecrated water for appli- 
cation for the,last time on the last stage, 
places the-small metallic cup on the ground 
out of his pdavi, and makes a.small pdvi 
tound'the cup. He then brings out of his pdvi the second pot 
of water which is consecrated by the addition of a few drops 
of dv or consecrated water and pours a little water out of it into 


The bath at the 
last stage, 


the abovenamed small metallic cup. Then, taking the pot 
before the candidate, he pours gradually the water out of the- 
pot upon his body. He must take care, that, in doing so, he 
himself is not besprinkled with water. He must stand beyond 
the karsha or the furrow. This is the final bath. He then once 
more retires to his pé@vi and the other priest presents the dog 
again before the candidate for the last time. He touches it, 
keeping his hand thus touched, apart. The dog being removed 
andthe contact broken, the first priest gets out of his pdui and 
recites once more “Ahunem Vairim tanim péiti and Yatha 
Ahi Vairyé and the Kem n4 Mazd&” prayer upto ‘ Nemascha 
ya Armaitish izacha.’ The candidate repeats these last words 
after the priest. | 


e 


142 


PURIFICATOBY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


The following table gives a list of the above details of the 
applications, &c., in the process of the 
Bareshnim purification, according to the 
modern practice :— 


A table showing 
the number of ap- 
plications. 


Kind of 
Re ciine meee | Ses | wo, ot | ahs fe 
or set of 5 © applica- Prayer recited. sentation 
stones "danhetecee tions, of the dog. 
: applied. . 
| 
Ist stage Nirang 3 Kem ni Mazda 1; Once 
2nd ,, Do. 3 Do. VW 
3rd_s,, Do. 3 Do, 1 5 
4th ,, Do. 3 Do. ly, 
5th ,, Do. 3 Do. | 
6th ,, Do. 3 Do, 1 is 
Inter vening space 
represented in 
the modern 
Bareshnumgah 
by 3 stones, 
7th stage  ..| sand 18 |Ahunem Vairim 
tanim paiti, Ya- 
thé Ahi Vairy6 
and Kem na 
Mazda. 1, 33 
8th, av (wa- 
ter) 3 3 Do, “le, 
Av 3 
Mth stage, Pro- on ‘ 
cess repeated.| . : Do. a Ewiee, 
av 3 Metered twice, | 
av 3 | 
w fadl claps | RY at 9 Do. | 3, Thrice, 
av 3 repeated thrice, | 
| 


This table. shows that there were altogether 18 applications 
of nirang or consecrated urine of the ox, 18 of khdk or sand and 


THE BARESHROM 143 


18 of dv or consecrated water. The first priest recited the’ Kem 
nd Mazda prayer only six times and recited that prayer with 
Ahunem Vairim Tanfim paiti and Yatha Aha Vairyé seven 
times. The dog was presented before the candidate 13 times. 
After the recital of the final Kem n& Mazda, as said above, 
the priest fetches the candidate’s new set 
sen ae the of clothes before him. It was placed 
aside in the Bareshniimgah beforehand. 
He pours over that suit a few drops of consecrated. water 
from the small metallic cup which he had filled up just a little 
while ago. Thus, he consecrates the candidate’s Clothes before 
he puts them on. He pours the rest of the water out of that 
cup upon the left hand of the candidate, which had remained 
uncleaned since he had touched the dog for-the last time with 
that hand. The priest then retires to his pdvi again. The 
candidate now puts on his suit of clothes and places his Kusti 
or sacred thread over his shoulders. He then puts on his Jama _ 
or a loose linen overcoat which forms the upper garment of 
a Parsee’s full dress. This-garment has always long sleeves. 
While putting it on in the Bareshnimgah after his bath of puti- 
fication, he is not to pull up these long sleeves, but is to keep them 
hanging. Then the priest comes out of his pdvi with his two 
nine-knotted sticks in his hands. The candidate then throws 
the loose low skirt of the right-hand side of his loose hanging 
gown (J4m&) on his left shoulder, placing his left hand under it 
over the shoulder. The priest places the spooned end of one 
of his knotted sticks over the abovesaid skirt of the gown. 
The candidate places his right hand covered with its hanging 
sleeves over the above spooned end of the priest’s knotted stick. 
Tn all this, care must be taken that the candidate’s sleeves and 
clothing touch only the metallic spoon but not the wooden 
part of the stick, Then the candidate finishes the Baj whith 
he had taken when he had just entered the Bareshnumgah for 
‘ purification and just before removing his clothes. 


1 Vide above, p. 129. 


144 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


When the candidate has individually finished the Baj, he 
and the priest jointly again finish the Baj. Having done so, 
the priest. makes the candidate recite the following formula :— 


« Zadeh nasash, sar o tan pik ashahé ravan (he repeats the 
words three times), sag asho harbad pak.” (These words also 
are repeated thrice). The words mean, ‘“‘The Nasu, t.e., the 
Evil Spirit of pollution is put down. The head and the body, 
(t.e., the whole body) have become purified. The soul has 
been purified. The dog is holy, the priest is holy,” 


When these words are repeated, the priest lifts up his knotted 
stick from the shoulder of the candidate who now puts on the 
sacred thread that was hanging over his shoulders, reciting the 
Nirang-i-Kusti. This finishes the ceremony~of the Bareshnim 
purification, 


5. Retreat after the Bareshnim. 


Though the purification,proper is finished, the candidate 
has still to wait for full nine days and nights 
before he goes to his usual avocation.* After 
the purification, he retires from the Bareshnimgih to the 
Dar-i-Meher or Fire-temple. Some temples, for example the 
temples at Naésari, have a separate place -for the purpose, 
which is called ndhnkhdneh ( 5'& wb i.e., the place for nhdn ). 
It is so called because the Bareshnim also is ordinarily known 
as nan, the name by which the second purification is known. 
There, he has still to remain aloof from others, He is not 
to come into contact with anything. His food and water are to 
be served to him in his plates and cups by other persons. He 
has to take his meals during the day-hours. He is to eat with 
a spoon in a gloved hand and not to use his fingers. He has a 
separate suit of clothes for the purpose of his meals. He 
has to say his prayers for the most part of his time, especially 
at the commencement of the 5 gdhs or periods of the day. The 


Retreat of 9 days. 


1 The Old Testament (Numbers XTX) seems to enjoin seven days, 


THE BARESHNOM 145 


first three nights must be, as it were, nights of ‘vigils,’ ¢.e., 
when he sleeps, he must sleep in a watchful or wakeful. mood, 
so as not to let his sleep be disturbed by worldly thoughts. 
If he is disturbed by a nocturnal pollution during the first three 
nights, he has to repeat the whole of the Bareshnim purification 
referred to above. 


. Ifthe Bareshniim is gone through for being qualified to 
perform the Nirangdin ceremony which is the ceremony 
for the consecration of the gadmez or cow’s urine, a 
nocturnal pollution during any of the nine days and nights 
of the Retreat vitiates the whole Bareshnim, which, in 
that case, is to be repeated. The priests in this ceremony are 
expected to pass their time in pure mental thoughts, in 
devotion and prayer. A wet dream isa proof that they have 
not done so. So, they are disqualified to perform a religious 
ceremony in which gadmez (urine) and av (water) are consecrated 
for the purification—both physical.and mental—of others. If 
those who consecrate a thing are not mentally pure, the things 
consecrated by them aremnot expected to have the influence of 
purifying the body and elevating the mind of others. He only, 
who is himself pure—both physically and mentally—-can make 
others pure, both physically and mentally. In the case of the 
initiates or candidates for priesthood (xdvar), asimilar state of 
mental purity is expected for a much longer time. 


Again, the candidates are not to sit, rest or sleep on wooden 
chairs or benches or beds, when in the Retreat. They spread 
their beds on the floor. Wooden things are all avoided. They 
are not to use water for any purpose except for drinking. 
They are to perform their pddydb also with the application 
of a little gadmez. They observe the dry system and use a 
kind of clay instead of sanitary paper. 


On the fourth day, after their great Bareshniim purification, 

they are to go through a bath which is known 

as the first navshu, i.e, the. first bath (or, _ 
: ia 


The navshu baths. 


146 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


wash ‘ shu’) out of the nine nights of the Isolation or Retreat. 
The process is as follows :— 


In the Bareshnimgah orin any other clean place covered 
over with dry sand, a pdvi or enclosure is made by drawing 
three karshas. A set of three stones is placed therein for the 
candidate to sit on to bathe. Then a priest with the Baresh- 
nfim, who has performed the Khib, makes pgv, a water-pot 
and a small metallic cup. The water-pot is then filled=with 
ordinary pure water. A few drops of the consecrated, water 
are putinto it. This consecrates all the water. In the metallic 
cup is poured a little of the consecrated gaémez.» The can- 
didate then goes to the place and undressing himself, puts 
his clothes in an adjoining pd. He_then takes his seat 
on the abovementioned set of three stones; facing the east, 
Then the priest who is to give him the supplementary 
sacred bath, brings the metallic cup containing gadmez 
before him, and places it out of. the pavi of the candidate 
drawing a pdvi or karsha round about thecup. The candidate 
then places his right hand over his head and takes the Baj of 
Sraosh, beginning with 3 Ashem Vohus. Reciting the Kem na 
Mazda upto the word Ashahé, he takes the metallic cup before 
him and applies the gadmez thrice over his whole bcdy. 
Having done so,/he removes the cup out of his own pdvi. 
The priest. then brings the pot of the consecrated water and 
places it before him, drawing a pdévi roundit. He pours a few 
drops of the consecrated water out of the pot: upon the newly 
washed set of clothes which the candidate is to put on after his 
bath. He thus consecrates the clothes also. The candidate 
then bathes himself. Then, putting on his clothes and placing 
his sacred thread over his shoulders, he finishes the Baj, facing 
the sun. He then puts on his sacred thread. This finishes the 
first navshu bath, If the candidate has gone through the first 
great Bareshnim purification in the Havangah, i.e, in the 
morning he must have his first navshu in the morning of the 
fourth day. If he has gone through it in the Uziran-gah, #.e., 
jn the afternoon, his navshu bath must be had in the afternoon, 


'WE BARESHNOM 147 


After the navshu bath, the candidate again returns to his 
place in the Fire-temple and observes the regulations in the 
same way as during the first three days. He then has a second 
navshu bath on the seventh day. The process is all the same, 
but with this difference, that at this second navshu he is given 
two pots of water. The second pot need not be as large as the 
first. A small one is generally given. Then again, three more 
days of retirement are observed. The above process is.gone 
. through on the tenth day, but with this difference, thatin this 
third navshu, three pots of water are given him to wash his 
body with. After this final bath, he is free,to. come into 
contact with all. 


We said above, that it is generally the priests now-a-days 
who go through the Bareshniim purification 
ceremony, and that, that ceremony is held to’ 
qualify them for the performance of several 
liturgical ceremonies. So, to qualify themselves for these, they 
perform, in the morning of the 11th day,! what is called the 
Khéb ceremony. It consists-in the recital of the whole of the 
Yacna, accompanied..by its ritual. A priest who has himself 
performed the Khib previously, makes him get through this 
Khib ceremony: This finishes the whole of the Bareshnéim. 


The Khdd after 
the Bareshnim. 


The Bareshnim purification, as well as the Nan purification, 
The timeofthe C22 be gone through the day-time only, 
Bareshnfim \. ceree and not at night.2 Again the Bareshnim 
mony. . . P . : P 
purification, in modern practice, is gone 

through, only during the dry season? and not during the rains, 
The Nadésari priests stop it from roz Behram, month Aban 
(the 20th day of the 8th month), up to roz Behram, month 
Farvardin (the 20th day of the lst month), of the next year. 
Among the priests of other towns, the days vary somewhat. 


1 In some towns, they do this in the morning of the 10th day itself 
after the third or final navshy and then an ordinary bath. v 
? Pahl. Vend. LX, 32 amat shap patas dayan yatunet la shdyad, Dastur 
Darabji’s Text, p. 187. 
3[bid. amat dayan mag-i pavan gomiz vardn vadunyen la shdyad, 


- 148 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


The reason seems to be this. As said above, it is enjoined 

that the place of the Bareshnimgih must be dry and free from 

moisture. But the rains prevent the ground from assuming 

this state of dryness. Even in the ordinary dry season, if it 

rains out of season, the purification ceremony cannot be gone | 
through. Not only that, but even if it rains continually for a 
day or two, during the nine days and nights of the Retreat, 
one is to abandon his course of Retreat and to repeat.the 
whole Bareshnim from the very commencement when» the 
weather gets dry and the Bareshnimgah gets free/of mois- 
ture. The reason for vitiation is, that, owing to the continuous 
rain, he is not likely to avoid rain water falling upon him 
while going out for purposes of nature to the proper places 
which are generally detached from the Temples, and while 
going to the Bareshnimgih for his first, second or third 
navshu. 


A priest, who has gone through the complete Bareshnim 

A Bareshnimw4- Purification jincluding the final Khib cere- — 
ot adam aor mony, is said to be & Bareshnamwala 
Bareshnim. priest,.7.e., a priest with the Bareshnim 
qualification. He is said “to hold” that qualification as 
long as he observes certain rules and observances enjoined 
by custom to beheld. A priest may hold that qualification 
for years-together, or his qualification may be vitiated or 
made defective in a short time. When holding the Baresh- 
niin, he is qualified to perform the religious ceremonies 
of Baj, Yacna, Visparad, and Vendidad, which are generally 
performed in a Fire-temple. If he does not hold the Bareshnim, 
he cannot perform these, but can perform ordinary ceremonies, 
such as the Nadjote, Marriage, and Afringan. 


‘The non-observance of the following regulations and observ- 
ances vitiate the Bareshnim: .1. Eating of food cooked by 
non-Zoroastrians. 2. Non-observance of the Baj. 3. Long 
travels and voyages. 4. Swearing or taking oaths. 5. Falling 
off of the turban from over the head. 


THE BARESHNCM 149 


BareshnimwaAla priests are required to abstain from food cook- 

1. Food cooked ed, and water fetched, by non-Zoroastrians. 
by non-Zoroas- Custom in India has gone even further and 
are has enjoined that they must be cooked 
’ and fetched by a member——male or female—of the priestly class. 
Even the holy bread (Darin) which they consecrate in the 
Baj, Yagna and Vendidad ceremonies must be prepared by 
members of the priestly class. Upto a few years ago,even 
the laymen abstained from food cooked by non-Parsees)} 


They must commence and finish several daily functions of 

2. Observance necessity, with the recital of the Baj. Some 
of the Baj. of these functions are the meals, baths and 
calls of nature, which all have their proper.bajs or. recitals to 
be made at the beginning and end. These recitals do not take 
a long time, but they generally begin and end with the Padydb- 
_ Kusti. The non-observance of these regulations vitiates the 
Bareshnim. : 


Long travels vitiate a Bareshnin. It is generally so, in the 
case.of-long railway travelling. The reason 
Pee Sia seems to be that while so travelling, it is 
not possible for the Bareshnimwala priest to 
observe the above rules and regulations about saying the Bajs 
on the necessary occasions or functions. For example, he must . 
perform the Padyab-Kusti before his meals. To do that, he 
must have pure clean water fetched by himself or by a Zoro- 
astrian. He must tie and untie his sacred thread. While 
doing so he must avoid contact with a non-Zoroastrian. 
All these cannot. be done in a long journey by railway 
train. 


1 Itis said, that about 50 years ago, when the late second Sir Jamsetjee 
Jejeebhoy, Bart., entertained H.R. H.the late Duke of Edinburgh, the 
uncle of His Majesty King George, at his bungalow at Khandala (there- 
after named as the Duke’s Retreat), he had separate tables for His 
Royal Highness and party and for himself, 


150 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND OUSTOMS 


Long voyages also vitiate a Bareshnim ; not only that, but 
they are held to disqualify a priest on his return to his town 
from performing the Yacna, Vendidad, Baj and such other 
higher liturgical ceremonies. 


This is an old Iranian custom referred to by Tacitus, in his 

The version of account of the Parthian King Valkhash 
Sai oes bie ( Vologeses ) and his brother Tiradata (Tiri- 
ages, dates), the King of Armenia, who lived: in 
the time of Emperor Nero and who belonged to .an ortho- 
dox priestly family. They were both kings as well. as priests. 
When called to Rome by Nero, to receive his crown as King 
of Armenia from his own hands, Tiridates refused'on account of 
his religious scruples to go by sea. Tacitus.says on this point: 
‘* Neither would his (Vologeses’) brother Tiridates refuse coming 
to Rome to receive the Armenian diadem, but that the obliga- 
tion of his priesthood withheld him : he would, however, go to 
the standards and images of Cesar, and there, in presence of the 
legions, solemnly receive the Kingdom.’’! Subsequently when 
Tiridates did go to Rome, he went by land instead of by sea. 
It is said that even Valkhash (Vologeses) refused to go to Rome 
by sea, when called by Nero. 


The reason seems to be this: The Zoroastrian books, and 

Reason for thig #mong them, the Vendidad especially, enjoin 
pore <8: that no impurities may be thrown into water. 
dididandsupport- If a Zoroastrian finds some rotten thing 
Oe ene taut’ thrown in water, it is his duty to get into 
Strabo. the water and remove it (Vendidad, VI, 
26-27), lest it may infect the water and endanger the health 
of the living. Herodotus refers to this old Iranian view 
when he says: “They (the Persians) neither make water, nor 
spit, nor wash their handsin a river, nor defile the stream 


with urine, nor do they allow anyone else to do so.”2 Strabo 


1 Works of Tacitus (The Oxford Translation), Vol. I, The Annals, 
Bk. XV, 24. Vide the translation of A. J. Church and W. J, 
Brodier (1891), p. 296. : 
? Bk. I, 138. Carey's translation (Bohn’s series 1889), p. 52. 


THE BARESHNOM 151 


also. refers to this custom and says: “‘ The Persians never 
pollute a river with urine, nor wash, nor bathe in it; they never 
throw a dead body nor anything unclean into it.”! In long 
voyages by sea, a Zoroastrian priest has to commit nuisance 
therein and throw impurities in the sea. So, he is prohibited 
to go on long voyages. If he doés, not only is his Bareshnim 
vitiated, but he is prohibited from going through it again. 
This prohibition seems to stick to the letter and not to the 
spirit of the original commandment. The prohibition to throw 
impurities in water was originally in the case of the fresh 
water of streams and rivers. Herodotus and Strabo refer to 
the fresh water of rivers. So far, it was good and sanitary. 
But as it generally happens in the matter of. many command- 
ments, the field of operation for the above’ wholesome regu- 
lation was widened and made unduly strict’ in later times, even 
as early as in the times of the Parthian dynasty. 


Tf a priest holding the Bareshnim has to go to a court of 
fs justicé, and there to swear or take an oath, 
ore his Bareshnim is vitiated, and he has to go 
through it again if he wishes to continue his 

profession. This custom also seems to be a very old Iranian 
custom. We find references to it in old Parsee books. Adarbid 
Marespand? asks his readers not to swear. The prohibition 
seems to-rest.on the oft-spoken characteristic of an ancient 
Iranian, ‘viz.,to speak the truth and nothing but the truth— 
a, characteristic referred to by Herodotus,? Xenophon,‘ Strabo, 
Piato,® and Nicholas Demoscenes.? To speak the truth was 
considered, as it were, the birth-characteristic of an ancient 
Iranian. His word must be taken as trie by the opposite 
party. If it was not, and if he had, in order to support it, to 
swear or to take an oath, that was, as it were, a slur upon his 


1 “The Geography of Strabo ’ (translated by Hamilton and Falconer, 
1857). Vol. III, p. 187; Bk. XV, chap. IV, 16. 

2 Pand-nameh, 42. ° Bk. I, 136, 137. 4 Cyropedia, I. 20. 

5 XV, ch. II, 18  § Alcibiades, I, 121. 7 Fragment, 67, 


152 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


character. If he yielded and swore, he, as it were, showed his 
want of self-respect. That being the view, an ancient Zoroas- 
trian was prohibited from taking an oath. The modern custom 
seems to be a relic of the old idea. So, if a priest has to go to 
court and unavoidably to take an oath, he is supposed to have 
gone against an old commandment, and therefore, his Bazesh- 
‘nim is vitiated. Hence, Parsee priests generally avoid going 
to courts, especially during the monsoon months, when,-owing 
to the rains, they cannot go through the Bareshnfim ceremony 
again to qualify themselves for the performance of the inner 
ceremonies of the Temple. They are very careful, to avoid 
any action that may vitiate their Bareshnfim during the rainy 
months, because the Farvardegan holidays, during which their 
services are in greater demand and better paid, occur at the 
end. of the season. 


The Parsee priests generally wear white turbans. If the 

5. Falling off of ‘urban ~ falls off from their head, even 
the turban. The agcidentally, that vitiates the Bareshnim 
turban and the eee 
padan, the insignia of the priest. The reason seems to be this : 
of priesthood. Firstly, all Zoroastrians are required to 
have their heads covered. It is improper to remain with head 
uncovered. So the falling off of the hat interrupts the observ- 
ance of the custom. But the most important thing is this, 
that the turban and the paddn are, as it were, the insignia of 
the office of priesthood. When that insignia falls off from the 
head, he is, as it were, deposed from his sacred office. So, his 
Bareshniim, which qualifies him for that office, is considered to 
be vitiated, and he has to repeat it, if he wishes to continue — 
to perform that sacred office. This custom seems to be an old 
custom common among some other ancient nations. “In the 
old religions, one so often finds that. the celebrant and assist- 
ants officiated with shrouded heads ...... The Flemins 
of Jupiter were forbidden to present themselves in publie or 
even to go out into the open air without their skull-caps, 
and that, too, by a law so stringent that Sulpicius, when the 


THE RIMAN 133 


tuft of his fell off accidentally, was deposed from his sacred 
office.””! 


The paddn or the piece of cloth, which a Parsee priest puts on 
over the face while performing religious ceremonies, is also held 
as an insignia of the qualification of the Bareshnim. Though it 
is put on by the priests in other ceremonies also wherein the 
Bareshnim qualification is not necessary, still, in the phraseology 
common among the priests, “ pad4n bandhvu,”’ 4.e., to put on 
the paddn, means to be qualified to officiate with the Bareshnim. 
When the head-priest permits the subordinate priests to go 
and officiate in the Yazashnagah of the Temple, he says, 
‘Put on the Padain.” When he wants to prohibit somebody 
from officiating there, he says, “Do not put on the Padan.” 
So when one pulls off the padén from over-the face of a priest, 
or when he takes off or throws off the turban from over his head, 
he deprives him of his qualification and is responsible for the 
action. The Bareshnam of the priest, so deprived, is vitiated. 


IV. Riman, The Fourth Form of Purification. 


As said above, the Bareshnim purification, though originally 
; : @ purification for those who had come into 
Gate oN contact with the dead, especially the dead 
who died of infectious diseases, has, now, 
with its accompanying retreat and Khab ceremony, come to be 
a form-of purification for the priests who wish to perform the 
religious ceremonies of the inner circle of the Temple. So, 
now-a-days, those who have come into contact with dead 
bodies, in ways that have been prohibited, have to go through 
a comparatively simpler form of purification. It is known as 
Riman purification. We will describe it here shortly :-— 


The word Riman } ) P. «2) comes from ‘rim,’ ( Pahl y 


P. at) or p. from Av. root ri B) Sans. <1 to ooze, to be foul, to 


+ “ Good Words,” June 1893, Pp. 389 : Article on “ Hats and Caps’ 
by Geoffrey and Winterwood. 


20 


154 PURIFICATORY GEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


desecrate) ¢.e., pus, filth. This word seems to be the same as 
English ‘rheum’ meaning “serous fluid secreted by mucous 
glands.” So ‘riman’ is one that has become polluted. by 
“coming into contact with filth from dead bodies. In this form 
of purification, the services of two persons are required, one 
of them must be a priest, the other may be a layman. «In 
order to be qualified to purify a riman (+.e., the person 
supposed to be polluted or infected) by this process of ‘puri- 
fication, the priest must perform the Khib ceremony. The 
efficacy of his Khib ends with the purification. If he has 
to perform other ceremonies which require.the Khib, he 
must repeat the Khib ceremony. Inthe rimun purifica- 
tion, the 4lét, ie, the consecrated things and the other 
requisites required, are the same as those in the Baresh- 
nam. 


The place of the purification must be one which is 
the least frequented by people. On such 


The place for 4 place, the priest has to prepare altogether 


ages PuLBoRoON: : 2 
nine pavis or enclosures. While preparing 


these, -he isto bear in mind the position of the sun and the 
direction of the wind. The pdvis must be so drawn ag not to 
let ‘the shadow of the riman’s body fall over the purifier, and 
thus deprive him of the heat and light of the luminary. Again, 
they must be so arranged that the direction of the wind may 
not be from the riman to the purifier, lest it may carry any 
germs of disease from the infected person to the priest. The 
pavis may be prepared either by digging in the ground, or 
‘by spreading sand on the ground in a way which may form a 
furrow. Generally it is done in the second way. Seven of 
the pdvis must be in one line and two others in a line by the 
side of this row adjoining. the central part of the row. A 
tenth circular pavi must be ‘drawn-at..a distance. with six 


THE RIMAN 155 


circular furrows. A set of threé stones are to he arranged 
outside this circular pévi. 


The above plan gives an‘idea.of the place. In the pdvi A; 
the priest. first places all the 4lat or the con- 

: cae of secrated™ requisites. He then performs the 
padydb and then fetches water from a well 

in two pots previously made pdv or purified by three washings, 
One of these two pots is large and the other small. Then he puts 
on tight trousers known as ijdar and also the paddén. Then, as 
in the case of the Bareshniim, he makes two small metallie cups 
pév, and, after having dried them, pours in one a little of the 
nirangdin, i.e, the consecrated urine and the bhasam, i.e., 
the sacred ash, and into another a little of the urine for external 
application. He then makes the two water-pots pdv and throws 
a little of the av or consecrated water into them. ‘The priest 
then retires to his pévi wherein the did are placed. Then the 
riman, t.e., the person who seeks purification, undresses himself 
at a distance and buries his clothing in the ground. He then 
comes and takes his stand in the pavi G allotted to him. The 
second person who has accompanied the priest and whose 
standing place is somewhere about L gives to the person who-is 


156 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


riman all the necessary instructions as to where to seat himself 
etc. He gives these instructions by a show of hands and signs. 
Heis not to speak anything.! He must not go so near the riman 
as to let his shadow fall upon himself or to let the wind blow from 
his direction towards himself. The priest then pours the con- 
secrated urine from the small metallic cup into an empty shell. . 
of an egg. This is done to avoid even a drinking cup coming 
into contact with the lips of the person supposed to be infected. 
He places the shell so filled and a leaf of the pomegranate in 
the pdvt (marked I). The second person lifts these up and 
places them in the pavi F. He, by signs, instructs the riman 
to chew the pomegranate leaf and then to drink the consecrated 
urine three times from the shell of the egg..-The riman must 
avoid touching his lips with the shell bubtry to pour the conse- 
crated urine into his mouth, so that even the shell of the 
egg may not catch any germs. Having drunk from it, he 
breaks the shell and buries it in.the ground near his place. Then 
the priest advances from his pavit.A to the third pavi C with 
the navgireh in his right hand and the small metallic cup con- 
taining the consecrated urine for application in his left hand. 
From there, by means ofthe long navgireh or the nine-knotted 
stick, he pours the gaomez in the hands of the riman. He must 
avoid touching the hands of the riman. He must throw 
it quickly ‘so that the falling liquid may not even form a 
current which can transfer the infection. The riman then 
applies the gaomez to his body 15 times. Having given the 
gaomez, the priest comes back to his first pdvt A, takes a little 
sand from there and goes to the third pdvi C again, and 
gives as above the sand to the riman 15 times. The riman 
rubs the sand over his whole body. The priest then coming 
back to-his pdvi, takes the small pot of consecrated water with 


t 

2 Compare what is said of the restrictions in the Plague of Florence 
in 1340: ‘f Nor was it (plague) given by conversation only with or 
coming near the sick, but even by touching their clothes or anything 
that they had before touched ’’ (Quoted in the Times of India of 27th 
Deeember 1898), 


OLD PURIFICATIONS AND MODERN PLAGUE OPERATIONS 157 


him and similarly pours that water to the riman 15 times for 
application as above. He then coming back to his pdvi takes 
the large pot of water and places it in the pdvt I. The second 
person takes it from there and instructs the riman by signs to 
leave his pévi G, and advance to the place of his final bath K. 
The riman does so, Then the second person, standing at some 
distancefrom him, pours from the pot gradually the water on 
his body. He is to take care that he is not besprinkled with 
any water from the body of the riman. He is to pour the water 
three times over his body. Thus washing his body, the riman 
puts on a new suit of clothes fetched near him by the other 
attendant. He then puts on the sacred thread reciting its 
usual nirang. This finishes the process and the person is now 
purified. 


Old Iranian Purification and Modern Plague Operations. 


All the Iranian injunctions ‘about purification as enjoined 
in the Vendidid, and to a certain extent, as observed now, 
appear to have at first the object of securing safety from 
disease. They seem ‘to have been framed in the times of a 
great epidemic. The plague operations of modern times in 
India, especially in the first two or three years of the plague, 
have shown, that-these injunctions had their use in those early 
times, and.have their use even now, if observed in the spirit 
and notin the letter. © We would compare here some of the 
above injunctions with modern regulations, enjoined in the. 
times of plague in its early stages in Bombay in 1897 and 
1898. Some of these were enforced so strictly that they even 
led to public riots. 


The houses where plague cases occurred were disinfected. 
1. Purificationor 22 case of tents, they were removed and 
disinfection of in- sterilized. A number of houses were fumi-~ 
aechee Lomeee gated with sulphur and other substances. 
There is a corresponding injunction in the Vendidad to 

fumigate the house or to remove the house if removable, ie, 


158° PURFPICATORY CEREMONIEFS AND CUSTOMS 


if itis a hut or a tent. The dwellers were to leave the 
houses for a time. 


‘Those who came in contact with plague cases, for example 
-. members of the family in which.a plague 
2. The Hamrit 

of the Parsee books case occurred, were called “contacts” by 
of modern ——s Plague officers, There were separate isolated 
“contact. camps” for them. The regu- 
lations for these people were at times so hard. that. they 
caused great heart-burning. In a Parsee camp.at Dadar, 
it was enjoined by a Plague Medical Officer in charge of the 
district, that the inmates of the camp must-not be allowed to 
move out of thecamp and to go to the bazar to fetch their daily 
things, but that a person—an outsider—may be appointed to 
take orders from. these people and fetch things for them. As 
the Secretary of the Institution that erected these camps, I 
had to protest to the Plague Committee against too hard an 
onforcement of this rule; and_relief was granted. But, I think 
that the European Medical Officer was a better follower of the 

Vendidad in this.matter than myself. 


Those, who.did. not come into contact with plague cases, but 
3. The Patrizs C2me into indirect contact with the “ con- 


of the Parsee books tacts,” were called “ evicts,” and they also 
and the ‘‘Hivicts”’ 


of _ the modern were asked to go out to camps. Both these 
, i. classes of people had to remain in camp 
for at least a period of 10 days known as the “ incubation 
period.” The “contacts ” were asked to hold little intercourse 
with others outside the camp. The “evicts” were allowed 
to go out, but were carefully watched. These “contacts”? of 
the modern plague phraseology were the “hamrits,” and the 
“ evicts’’ were the “ patrits’’ of the old Parsee books. Accord 
ing to’ the Vendidaéd also, the immediate “contacts’’ had 


to go through a purification-isolation for 10 days, 


ce 


* F 
OLD PURIFICATIONS AND MODERN PLAGUE OPERATIONS 7489 


In the first years of the plague, people leaving infected towns 
and districts were made to go through a 
4. The baths bath with disinfecting substances. -On rail- 
and  fumigations : 3 ae :. 
of the Vendid4d way stations like that of Anand, passengers 
Paull of modern had to get down and go through such baths 
before proceeding further. In some places; 
they had to go through fumigation. For example, the Baroda 
State had ordered at one time, that people going to Naosari, 
one of the towns under its jurisdiction, and the headquarters 
of the Parsee priesthood, were, before they , went to 
the town, to go through fumigation in a house adjoining the 
station. It is said, that even the Head Parsee-Priest of the 
town, on returning to Naosari from a visit to an adjoining 
town, was made to submit to this fumigation; and he took some 
offence at this compulsion, not remembering, perhaps at the 
time, that what he was then enjoined to do, was a form of 
the injunction of his own -Vendidad, where a person, after 
passing through the Bareshniun purification, was enjoined to 
go through a fumigation ~(Vendidad, IX, 32). The Yadzdd- 
tar, t.e., the priest or the officer who made the person pass 
through the purification, was required to be a person well 
versed in his work/of ensuring perfect purification. If he did 
not know his work well or if he failed in his duty, -he was 
condemned as a man who brought disaster upon his city 
(Vendidad IX, 51). 


It is said ' that in the 14th century, at the time of the plague 
in a.p. 1340 at Florence, it was believed 
that even conversation with an infected 
person transferred disease from one to 
another. In the rimen purification, it is a custom that the 
‘purifier and. the person going through the purification .must 
not speak, and the former must take his stand in.a position 
which would avoid even the current of wind from the latter. 


Teese as oe 


1 Vide above, po 156,,n. L 


5. Conversation 
with the infected. 


nen ee 


—_ 


160 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


As in the Vendidad, so now-a-days, things, that are supposed 

&. Bestitina of to have come into contact with the dead 
things suspected of body of an infected person, are enjoined to 
MonEnoty be rejected, or if used, to be used only 
after certain disinfection (Vendidad, VI, 42-43; WIII, 12-15; 
28-35; 73-75). 


Scientific opinion believes that plague’ germs remain buried 

in the ground together with the dead body 

and thrive again after a number of years on 

getting an opportunity. “ Even after the lapse of several! 

hundred years microzymes, or disease-producing organisms, 

were found to be alive and as active as ever and became the 

cause of death to hundreds of workmen engaged in digging up 

ground. which had been a burial place of some who had died of 

the plague of Modena, 300 years before. In fact, the plague was 

started anew and so killed thousands more.’’! It is with this 
idea that burial seems to have been prohibited in the books of 

the Parsees, Herodotus refers to this ancient prohibition 

(I, 140). Strabo also refers to it (Strabo’s Geography, Bk. 
XV, chap. III, 20). According to the Vendidad, the place 

where a corpse is buried is not considered to be pure and safe 

to live upon, fora period of at least 50 years from the time of 

the burial (VII, 48). 


7. Burial prohi- 
bited. 


As said by Prof. Darmesteter, with the Iranians, the ques- 
tion of a man’s death was not the question of his death alone. 
‘¢In the death of a man, there is more involved than the death 
of one man: the power of death, called forth from hell, threatens 
from the corpse, as from a stronghold, the whole world of 
the living, ready to seize whatever may fall within his reach, 
and ‘from the dead defiles the living, from the living rushes 
upon the living.” When a man dies in a house, there is danger 
for three days lest somebody else should die in that house.? 


1 “Scientific American,’’ 1888. ; 
* Sad.dar, Chap, LXXVIII. 58. B.E., Vol. XXIV, p. 341. 


IRANIAN, HEBREW AND ROMAN PURIMIcations . 161 


‘«The notion or feeling, out of which these ceremonies grew, 
was far from unknown to the other Indo-European peoples: 
what was peculiar to Mazdaism was that it carried to an 
extreme, and preserved a clearer sense of it, while elsewhere it 
grew dimmer and dimmer, and faded away. In fact, when 
the Greek, going out of a house where a dead man lay, 
sprinkled himself with water from the dpdaviou at the door, 
it was death that he drove away from himself. The Vedic 
Indian, too, although his rites were intended chiefly for the 
benefit of the dead, considered himself in danger and, while 
burning the corpse, cried aloud: ‘ Away, go away, O Death! 
injure not our sons and our men!’”’ (Rig-veda X, 18, 1),? 


I will close this subject with a short account of purification 
- among the ancient Hebrews and Romans, with a view, that the 
reader may see, at one glance, some points of. similarity, 
between the Iranian purification and the Hebrew and Roman 
purification. 


With reference to the similarity between the purificatory 

The Irenian puri- regulations of the Iranians and those of the 
oecas yatered ancient. Hebrews, we read in the Old Testa- 
tion. ment, of the unclean being removed out of 
thecamp. And the Lord spake unto Moses, saying, “Command 
the children of Israel, that they put out of the camp every 
leper, and everyone that hath an issue, and whosoever is defiled 
by the dead : Both male and female shall ye put out, without 
the camp shall ye put them; that they defile not their camps, . 
in the midst whereof I dwell.”2 We find some points of 
resemblance as follows :— 


1, In place of the consecrated gaomez, the Hebrews had 
what they called the “water of separation.” It was produced 
as follows: An unyoked spotless red heifer was slayed in the 
presence of the priest who sprinkled her blood before the 


1§. B. E., Vol. IV, Vendidad, Introduction V.3, Ist ed., pp. LXXXVI. 
* Numbers V, 1-3. 
21 


162 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES -AND CUSTOMS 


tabernacle seven times, and burnt her with all her skin, flesh, 
blood, and dung. Cedar wood, hyssop, and scarlet which, as it 
-were, here took tha place of the urvasna, vohit-gaona and vohii- 
-kerett of the Vendidid, were burnt with the heifer, 1 A man 
that was clean was to gather up the ashes of the heifer so 
-burnt, and was.to “flay them up. without the camp in a clean 
place .., » for a water of separation” which was ‘ 
_ tion for sin.” 2: 


‘a purifica- 


“9. ‘The Iranian Barcshnam, the purification of one who had 
come into eontact with the dead, lasted for full nine days. The 
Hebrew purification lasted seven days. ‘‘He that toucheth the 
dead body of any man, shall be unclean seven days.” Asin the 
Iranian Bareshniim, soin the Hebrew purification, there was one 
purification on the third day (the first navshu-of the Bareshnim) 
and. the second on the seventh day. As the unclean man 
‘in the Iranian Bareshnim is asked’to keep himself away from 
a place of worship, so among the Hebrews, he was to keep 
himself away from the holy tabernacle. Among the Hebrews, 
even one, who ‘‘toucheth a-bone of a man, or a grave, shall be 
unclean seven days." 4 


3. Ashes played an important part in the purification cere- 
monies in both». In place of the ashes of the burnt heifer, 
the Iranians had the bhasam or the ashes of the sacred fire 
of Atash Beharam. | 


4. Among both, ‘if a man died in a tent, the tent became 
unclean. Among the Hebrews the uncleanliness extended to 
“all the vessels, and upon the persons that were there.” 4 


5. Among the Iranians, the yaozddiar or the purifier 
-is required to take all possible care to secure himself from 
any contact with the unclean. Among the Hebrews also, the 


1 Numbers ALX, 2-6. * Sbid., Y, . 
3 Numbers XIX, 11 and 16. 4 Numbers XIX, 14-18} 


IRANIAN, HEBREW AND ROMAN PURIFICATIONS 163 


purifier, the person ‘‘that sprinkleth the water of separation ” 
is required to wash his clothes, He was taken as “unclean 
until evening.” 


6, Among both, any person, whom the unclean touched, . 
himself became unclean. 


The ceremony of the Bareshnim purification of the ancient 

Thelranian puri. Persians and the modern Parsis reminds ns 
feats pert es of two kinds of purification known to the 
tion. ancient Romans. , 

(1) One was that of the taurobolium or blood-bath in the 
worship cf the Mother, the goddess Cybele which worship the 
Romans are said to have admitted into Rome from Prygia, 
with all possible pomp and dignity, in order to have its protec- 
tion and help agairst Hannibal who was overrunning Italy. 
The novena or the fast of nine days, in this ceremony reminds 
us of the nine days (noh-shub) Retreat of the Bareshniim 
ceremony. In the ceremony of Cybele, “the votary was placed 
in a pit covered with a grating of planks pierced with holes, on 
which a bull and a ram’ were slaughtered, so that’the blood 
dropped through on to the recipient below.” ! Thus, we see, that 
pits or holes and bulls had their use in the Roman taurobolium, 
just as they had‘in the Iranian Bareshnim. The worship and 
ceremonyof)this goddess are connected by some with the 
worship of Mithras which had spread in the West. This Mithras 
of the West was the Mithra of the ancient [ranians, and it must 
beremembered, that, even now, thetemple, where the Bareshnim 
purification ceremony is gone through, is spoken of as the 
Dar-i-Meher, ¢.e., the Port or the Gate of Mithra, Meher being 
the later Persian form of Mithra. The ancient Iranian worship 
of Mithra, the Yazata or Angel of Light, while passing to 
the West had much degenerated. Here, we have an evidence 
of this. When the Iranians used and continued to use the 


1 Journal, R. A. S, of 1917, p. 704. Article on “The Most Ancient 
Goddess Cybele, ” by Mr. F. Legge. 


164 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


Gaomez, the urine (mez) of the cow or the bull (gao) after 
consecration, the borrowers of the mysteries or the rituals in the 
West resorted to blood sacrifices in which they slaughtered 
bulls. It is possible, that the degeneration in the West may have 
reacted to some extent here and there on Iran, but, on the 
whole, the original object of purification, the physical, mental 
and moral purification, was not lost sight of. but was alwaysin 
view, Of the Roman celebration of the goddess Cybele, -it is 
said, that (a) “it was thought to have a magical effect on the 
votary, who often records on votive tablets and altarsthat he or 
she has been by it ‘reborn unto eternity.’ (6) It also seems to 
have been ‘performed, like the Catholic Mass, for-the benefit of 
others, since we hear of its being celebrated for the health of 
the emperor, the success of the Roman arms, and other like 
purposes.”’ 

We may say that upto about 60-or 70 years ago, as in the . 
case of the Cybele celebration among the Romans, so among 
the Parsees, very young girls, of the age of about ten or under, 
went through the Bareshnéim puwrification., Even now, some 
priests go through the purification for, what Mr. Legge speaks 
of, as “the benefits of others.” 


- (2) The second Roman purification of which we are reminded 
is that known as the ‘‘lustratio.” A paper on “ Lustratio” 
by Mr. Fowler 2” suggests many thoughts of similarity : 


(a) As among the Parsees, so among the Romans, the original 
idea of purification or lustratio arose from the idea of remov- 
ing. impurities caught from ‘some mysterious miasmatic 
contamination,” ® eorresponding to the Druj-i-Nasush of the 
Tranians. 

(5) Water, bull’s blood, fire, sulphur, laurel, wool, and pine 
twigs formed some purificatory materials among the Romans. 
Water, bull’s urine, fire or rather its product, ashes, and 


1 Ibid., p. 704. : 
2 Anthropology and the Classics,” by W. W. Fowler, edited by 
Mr. R. R. Morett, * Ibid., p. 170. 


IRANIAN, HEBREW AND ROMAN PURIFICATIONS 165 


some fragrant plants for fumigation were the materials among 
the Iranians. The Romans also used “strips of the skin 
of a victim.” The Iranians had nothing of the kind of 
victims or animal sacrifices. They had the ‘consecrated 
urine of the bull. The Romans had a cake also as a 
holy ingredient. Among the Parsees, the candidate had to 
chew & pomegranate-leaf, but the purifying priest wanted 
daruns of sacrel breads for performing the khub which qualified 
him to do his work of purifying the candidate. 


(c) The Romans associated their lustratio with processions, 
or “slow-ordered movements in. procession, so characteristic 
of the old Roman character.” In the case of the Bareshnim 
among the Parsees, in an old Parsee centre of priesthood like 
Naogari, we find that, at times, some parents invite their near 
relatives and friends at the Bareshniimg&h to witness the 
purification of their son when he goes through the Bareshnim, 
which precedes his initiation-into priesthood. Those assembled 
then follow after purification, the candidate on foot, forming 
a small procession to the-temple where the candidate goes 
through his nine days’ retreat. . 


(d) In the case ‘of the Roman lustratio Mr. Fowler draws 
a line “between a magical period ard a religious period.’’! 
In the case\.of the Iranian Bareshnim I would distinguish 
the periods as physical and spiritual (tani va ravdni). At first, 
the. Bareshnim was meant as a purification from the contact 
with the dead or from physical impurities, and then a spiritual 
signification began to be added. Among the Romans the idea. 
of purification was extended from men to animals and even 
to armies and cities. With this extension of ideas, the periods 
of lustration, which came to be known as lustrums, came to 
be utilized in the case of armies, for reviews of troops, and in 
the case of cities, for taking the census. The ancient Hebrews 
also had, in their purificatory ceremonies, some connection 


 [bid., p. 171. 


166 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


with their system of census. The very name ‘Numbers’ for 
one of their Old Testament books signifies that. 


(e) Among the Romans, February was the month of purifica- 
tion. The month was so called from februare (to purify), 
Among the Parsees, the last ten, days of the year are generally 
the days for the second kind of purification, viz., the ndhn, 


(f) The Romans had, what are known as, their‘ boundary- 
lines ” in their wholesale purifications of cities. These boundary- 
lines correspond, to a certain extent, to the Iranian Kashas.! 


The ancient Egyptians also had some purificatory ceremonies 
for their priests. According to Maspero, 2 the officiating priest 
must carefully wash-nabu—his face; mouth, hands and doby ; 
and so necessary was this purification, that from it, the profes- 
sional priest derived his name nibu, i.e, the washed, the 
cleaned. Similarly, at times, Parsee priests were spoken of 
as néhnids from néhn. Water, in which natron &c. had been 
dissolved, was used asa purifying agent, both for application 
and drinking. Such ‘water was perfumed with  specialiy 
prepared incense. 


1 Vide my-paper on “The Kashas of the Iranian Bareshniim and 
the Boundary-lines of the Roman Lustrum,” Journal of the Anthropolo- 
gical Seciety, Vol, VIII, No. 7, pp. 520-30. 

7 Dawn of Civilization,” p. 123. 

3A short History of the Egyptian People by Dr. Budge (1910), p. 200. 


CHAPTER VI, 


DESTHICHIURY PROCESSES AND CUSTOMS 
IN DAILY LIFE. 


We will now speak about the purification of things in- 
fected, or supposed or suspected to be infected, and of the 
purificatory processes or customs observed in daily life. 


Not only is purification necessary for a man who has come 

Purification of a into contact with a dead body, but it is 
house. necessary in the case of the. house where 
such a death has taken place and in the case_of things that 
have come into contact with such a dead body. In the case 
of the house, it is enjoined, that, after the removal of the dead 
body, the house may be purified, or,.to speak in modern 
terms, may be disinfected or fumigated, by burning in it the 
wood of trees like urvdsana, vohugaona, véhu-kereti and hadhé 
naepata.! The smoke ofthe burning wood of these trees was 
believed to have possessed_a disinfecting result. In the case 
of removable houses, such as tents and huts, it was enjoined 
that they may be removed from the place where death took 
place and then disinfected as above.? 

Besides the house, there are other inanimate things, which 

Purigeadte) of also get defiled, and they, in their turn, are 
things. that have likely to be the medium of infection. So, 
peg degre: just as men require purification, these things 


also. require purification, though that purification is of a simple 


2 Vendidad, VIII, 1-2. These Iranian plants seem to have had the 
same properties as the hyssop of the Bible (Old Testament, Numbers 
MIX, 18). 

2 Vendidéd, VIII, 3. C,. the Old Testament, Numbers XIX, 14-18, 
‘* When a man dieth in a tent: all that come into the tent, and all thati: 
in the tent, shall be unclean seven days..... And aciean person 
shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water (¢.e. ‘the water of separation’ 
made of the ashes of a red heifer) and sprinkle it upon the tent,” 


168 PURLIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


nature. The following are the injunctions of the Vendidad for 
the purification of these things :—In the case of the bedding of 
the deceased, if it is spoilt by any excretions of the deceased, 
it must be rejected altogether. If it is not so spoilt, it may 
be disinfected with cow’s urine and used again.’ If the bedding 
consists of things made of leather, there must be three washings 
with cow’s urine, three rubbings with some disinfectant clay and 
finally three washings with water. It must then be exposed in 
the air for three months before being used again, If the bedding 
consists of linen things, all the above cleanings and _-washings 
must be made six times and the exposure in the air must last 
for six months.? If wooden things, fodder and grain have 
come into contact with dead bodies, a certain portion of these, 
that may have come into direct contact with the impurities, 
shall be rejected, and the rest must be purified and exposed 
in the air before being used.3 In the case of metallic utensils, 
the purification depended upon their specific gravity. Gold 
being the least porous, and so the least likely to hold infection, 
golden utensils required/onlyone purification ; silver ones, 
two ; iron three, and so on.# 


In the consideration of the principle of purification, one 

g if fact must be borne in mind, and that is, 

ome  purifica- 
tory processes in that, according to the old Iranian idea, 
Seen which to a great extent may be considered 
the modern hygienic idea, not only does death spread unclean- 
liness, but whatever goes out of the body also spreads unclean- 
liness. So, the following things are unclean and require a kind of 
purification :—(a) Breath or saliva from the mouth; (6) Nails 
of the fingers or toes, when separated from the body ; (c) hair 
when cut from the body; (d) issues both from males and 
females. , 


1 Vend. VII, 12-14. * [bid., 15. 

3 [bid., 28-35. a ‘ 

+ Ibid, 73-75. Cf, Old Testament, Numbers XIX, 15, where open 
_essels in the tent where a man died, were taken to be unclean, 


PURIFICATORY PROCESSES IN DAILY LIFE 169 


If a person drank from a cup or vessel, touching his lips. 

with the cup or vessel, no Zoroastrian must 

(a) Uncleanliness drink from that cup until it is washed with 
of breath or saliva. ; 

Pollution of drink- water. This is enjoined to avoid the risk 
ae the same of catching the germs of any disease, which 

the first drinker may be suffering from. 
These germs may have passed with his saliva to the sides of 
the cup.! 

Glass or metallic cups from which one person has, drunk, 
touching his lips with it, must be washed and purified. -It is 
after this washing that another person can safely drink from 
it. In the case of cups made of clay, the clay being porous and 
so likely to imbibe germs of disease, it is believed, that they are 
not likely to be sufficiently free from danger even after washing. 
Porcelain though glazed, has some risk: So, custom has 
enjoined that priests, observingthe Bareshniim, who are 
expected to observe all forms of purity, must not eat or drink 
from clay, wooden and porcelain vessels or cups. 

The breath or the saliva being unclean, it is a Parsee custom, 
that when a priest goes before the sacred fire or when he says 
his prayers with the myazd, or the sacred offerings like fruit, 
flowers, &c., before him, he is to put on a paiti-ddna or paddn 
over his face,? sothat the sacred fire or things may not be pollut- 


1 The following paragraph in a Medical Journal shows that the above 
injunction is-very useful from the point of health: “An educational 
“ journal contains a warning against the common drinking cup in school, 
“as a means of infective contact. The children should be instructed to 
“provide themselves with individual drinking-cups. Parents must be 
“ given to understand, that if the child does not havea drinking cup, it 
“will fot be possible to drink in school. The mouth of every consump- 
“tive contains the germs of the disease, and the transference of these 
“germs from the sick to the healthy child by means of the common 
« drinking-cup is the easiest accident possible. ”—Good Health, September . 
1905. 

2 This custom is alluded to in the Pahlavi commentary of the 
Vendidad (Padam-i vini ayén4k or ayoték) ¢.¢., the pada4m must properly 
be over the nose. (X VIII, 1). 

“ This principle appears not to have been peculiar to the Zoroastrian 

ryans, for the Slavonian priest in Arkona was enjoined to go out of 


22 


170 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


ed. Again for this reason, the Parsees are not to extinguish 
the fire or a lamp by their breath, i.e., by blowing over it.! 


When nails are pared or hair cut, they must not be thrown 

(b. ) Dhie pollu: at haphazard, but they must be buried 
tion of nail and carefully in the ground. The Vendidad 
ced (XVII) enjoins, that they must be buried 
in a dry place at some distance from the house in a well-dug 
hole. It further enjoins that they should be buried with-the 
recital of a certain formula of prayer. According to the modern 
practice, it is the priests only—and of those also very few— 
who bury the nails with the recital of the Baj. The hair are 
rarely buried but they are carefully cast aside. “When the head 
is shaved or.the hair cut, it is uaually, the practice, to bathe 
after the process, ? 


Issue makes the person, whether. male or female, unclean, 
. Not only the)person, but those who come 
into contact. with him or her, before he or 
she has purified himself or herself with a 
bath, gets unclean. In the.case of a male, wet dream or sexual 
intercourse makes him unclean and he must bathe before he 
mixes with others. This practice is still observed generally. 
In the case_of priests, wet dreams vitiate the efficacy of 
certain religious ceremonies in which they may be engaged. 
Sexual intercourse necessitates a bath for women also. The 
monthly issue or discharge requires greater restrictions on the 
part of women. 


(2) Pollution 
after issues. 


the temple, whenever he wanted to draw breath ‘lest the presence of 
the god should be defiled by contact with mortal breath.’” (Darmesteter, 
8. B. E. IV, Ist ed., p. 168, n. 7).” 

1 The Revayets; Strabo Bk. XV, chap. II, 14, The Taziks still 
observe this custom. 

2 It is likely, that some other ideas are latterly attributed to the 
custom of burying the nails and hair. Vide my paper on ‘‘ Two Iranian 
incantations for burying hair and nails” ( Journal of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, Vol. VIII, pp. 557-72. Vide my “ Anthropological 
Papers,” Part I, pp. 340-354), ~ 


\ 


+ 


PURIFICATORY PROCESSES IN DAILY LIFE 171 


As said above, according to the Iranian views of cleanliness 
aes Ve and uncleanliness, whatever emanates from - 
uncleanliness human body is dead, and so, likely to do 
coer ir harm to the living. So, like nails of hands 
placeforthewomen and feet, and hair, women’s menses fall 
eal monthly under the same category, and fall under 
the heading of things that are under the 
influence of Ahriman, or the Evil Spirit. They are harmful 
to the health of the living, and harmful even to. the 
women if not properly guarded and taken care of. So, 
the first care is to provide proper places for-women under 
this condition. 


Ié appears that in ancient Iran, just.asevery village or a 
streetinalarge town had a separate margzdd, t.e., mortuary, 
where people took their dead from. their houses, for the perfor- 
mance of the necessary funeral rites and ceremonies before 
their removal to the Towers of Silence, so every village or street 
had also a Dasténistin,! or, a house for the women in menses. 
It was not convenient in évery house to provide proper 
accommodation for them, so, a common house in the village or 
street was provided. It was enjoined that such a place should 
be about 15 kadams (about 13 yards) distant from household 
fire, water and»places of worship, and 3 kadams (about 24 
yards) distant from places frequented by men. (Vend. XVI, 2). 


They were not to touch anything. Anything that they 
touched became unclean. If they had their 

ea Tts children with them, and if these children 
° were to be taken out of their Dastanistin, 

their hands were first to be washed, and then their whole 
bodies to be washed with water. If a person touched a 
woman in her menses, he became unclean. [ff he did that by 
chance or unintentionally, he was to purify himself by a bath 


1 The word dastAn (menses) comes from Avy. dakhshta meaning a sign, 
Chithra (PA%), another Av. word for menses, also means a sign, a seed, 


172 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


with gaomez,i.e., urine and water. If he did that inten- 
tionally, he was to be punished and that punishment increased 
in proportion as his fault was for the first or the second time 
and so on (Vend. XVI, 14-26). If a person had sexual inter- 
course with a woman in menses, that was a heinous offence 
deserving great punishment. The 18th chapter of the Vendidad 
enjoins the performance of several good acts of righteousness 
in expiation of this most heinous of crimes. 


The ordinary period of menses was thought to be three 
days inthe least and nine days at the most. She was, under 
no circumstances, to stop the issue when in the ordinary course 
of menses. If she stopped the issue by any artificial means, 
for example, by the use of medicinal drugs, it was a sinful 
act, as it waslikely to affect her health. When she found that 
she was free from further issue, she. must wait one day more 
before she purified herself. If, after nine days, the woman 
did not find herself free, she must consider, that that was not 
her usual monthly course, but was some other illness. Such 
an extraordinary issue was supposed to be the work of Ahriman 
or the Evil Spirit (Vend.T, 18-19). 

Women in menses were to be given only a certain quantity 
of food, lest any vincrease of it may cause greater flow or 
stronger_issue. The Vendidad speaks of two ddnarés (1.e., 
about 1,400 grains) of corn and two ddnarés of animal food. 
The, persons giving them food are to do so from a distance 
and not to touch them. They were to take their meals in 
utensils made of metal and not of clay or wood, because the 
latter, being more porous than the former, are likely to secret 
the impurities and thus likely to de harm to the health of those 
who later on used these utensils again. Again, they are not 
to use their naked hands for eating, but they are to put on 
dastdnehs (gloves) or kissehs (i.e, glove-like bags) over their 
hands and then to eat by means of spoons. 


PURIFICATORY PROCESSES IN DAILY LIFE 173 


On the day after that on which the issue stops, she 
has to purify herself by a bath before 
coming into contact with other persons 
and things. The Vendidéd enjoined, that 
she was to bathe or wash herself with gadmez and water 
on three magas or pits like those mentioned in the puri- 
fication ceremonies of the Bareshnim. Her bedding and 
outer clothing also were to be washed and cleaned. Those 
who came into contact with her had also to wash them- 
selves. It seems, that in the times of the Vendidad, some 
expiatory ceremony was performed by the women in menses 
after their purification, e.g., that of destroying a particular 
number of little noxious creatures that, were. thought capable 
of doing harm to mankind. It seems, that at first, this expia- 
tory ceremony was enjoined in the case of extraordinary 
issues which were the result of the work of the Evil Spirit. 
The woman’s carelessness for her health or indifference for the 
ordinary laws of health was, as.it were, the work of the Evil 
Spirit. So, some punishment_or expiation was necessary for 
such carelessness. Then; latterly, by some unknown process 
or for some unknown reason, the expiation was extended even 
to the cases of ordinary menses. 


Among the-Pahlavi books, the Bundehesh (III, 7) speaks of 

_ menstruation as the work of Abhriman. 

boon onan’ ' The Shayast-la Shayast (Chap. II, 17, 96) 
considers the things used by a woman in 

menses as unclean. Things with which she is in contact 
just at the time when she knows that menstruation has begun, 
do not become unclean. For example, if she is on a carpet, 
and there feels or knows for the first time that she is in 
menses, the carpet does not become unclean (Chap. ITI, 2). 
Similarly, whatever objects that be on her body just at that 
time,—her necklace, earrings, garments, &c.,—are not unclean 
if immediately removed; (Chap. II, 4) but if they are not 
_ removed immediately, or if they are taken in, or put on after- 
atards, they become unclean. Her look vitiates the purification 


Purification from 
menses. 


174 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


of the padyab and consecrated things. When the issue stops, 
she must at least wait for one day before she bathes and 
purifies herself. Things that pass through her hand may be 
considered clean after being washed with gadémez and water. 

The Persian Sad-dar (Chaps. XLI and XLVIII) also speaks 
of the above and similar other injunctions. The injunction, 
of the later writings are more strict. Dastur Darab Pahlan, in 
his Persian Farziat-nameb, gives the following injunction, 
based on what he calls Pahlavi Zend and Pazend writings. (1) 
On finding the symptoms, the woman is to change at’ once 
her ordinary clothings. (2) She is to seek a sequestered 
place and keep herself away from, or not see, water, fire, holy 
man, the sun, moons sky, mountains, stars and trees. (3) 
Whatever she sees, suffers harm or diminution (jurm ese) (4) 
While eating, she must put on, on her hands, a piece of 
old cloth Craku 55.) and eat witha spoon; while drinking, 
she must not let a single drop, of water fall over her body. 
(5) She must thus keep herself alovf for from three to nine 
days, and ‘then wash herself with gaomez and water. (6) If 
she has unwittingly failed.to observe any of these regulations, 
she is to say' a patet or_repentance prayer. Dvazdah hamiast} 
is the proper atonement for her faults in this matter. She 
may recite that.or ask a priest to recite that on her behalf. 
On the subject of all these notions, Prof. Darmesteter says 
“The origin of all these notions is in certain physical 
instincts) in physiological psychology, which is the reason 
why. they are found among: peoples very far removed from one 
another by race or religion. But they took in Persia a new 
meaning as they were made a logical part of the whole religious 
system.’ 2 

At present also, most of the Parsee women generally observe 

The present prac- the above practices. There are no separate 
tice. Dastanistans or houses for menses in Parsee 


1 This ceremony, which nowadays consists of 12 times ( dvazdah 
895! 43) 12 recitals of the Yagna, is performed by priests. 
? §. B. E. IV (1880), Introduction, p. XCII. 


PURIFICATORY PROGESSES IN DAILY LIFE 175 


towns or streets, but generally a sequestered part of one’s own 
house is chosen for the purpose. The down-floor of the house 
was thought to be the proper place. But nowadays, ina crowded 
city like Bombay, the down-floor, instead of being a quiet and 
healthy place, such as that contemplated by the early injunctions 
of the Vendidad, is generally quite the contrary. So, most 
women in menses pass the period of menstruation on their 
upper floors, but in an isolated way. Every family has a separate 
iron cot for the occasion and a separate bedding, &c.. They 
are supplied their meals from a distance by others and they 
neither come into contact with others, nor do they touch other 
things or do household work. The very rigorous isolation 
enjoined by the later books is not observed, but anyhow, some 
kind of isolation and separation is maintained by the generality 
of women. In the matter of taking food, very few use spoons 
now, though upto about 25 years.ago, that was generally the 
case. In the matter of purification, they observe the bath 
enjoined by the early books, but the Vendidad injunction of 
bathing over the three. magas is not observed at all. A 
separate place of bathing and for purposes of nature for women 
in this condition is generally provided in Parsee houses. No 
expiation ceremonies as those hinted in the Vendidad are 
observed now, but, up to twentyfive or thirty years ago, 
women after their purification by a bath got a Patet, or an 
atonement prayer, recited by a priest, with a hope that if any 
injunctions enjoined to be observed in the matter of isola- 
tion may not have been observed, the fault may be pardoned. 

Issues or discharges caused ceremonial impurity among 

pg ae the ancient Hebrews and Christians also. 

Similar injunc- 
tions of the Levi- (Leviticus, XV). A difference was made 
ces between short issues, the result of sexual 
intercourse or wet dreams and “running issues.’’ In the former 
case, an ordinary bath brought about purification. In the latter 
case, a strict isolation was enjoined, and persons or things, that 
came into contact with the person, his bed, or his things, were 
held unclean. Earthenware that came into such contact was to 


176 PURIFICATORY CEREMONIES AND CUSTOMS 


be destroyed and wooden things to be “rinsed in water.” 
Even after the close of the running issue, the person was to 
remain isolated for 7 days, and, on the eighth day, he had 
to seek an atonement, ‘‘the atonement for her before the 
Lord,” at the hand of a priest and to make offerings. As . 
to the “contacts” or the persons who had come into con- 
tact. with the persons who had issues or discharges, they also © 
became unclean. Water was a purifier in their case, and in 
addition, time itself was a purifier. If such unclean persons or 
things were left to themselves “until the even”, they got 
purified, as if by the action of the moving purifying air. 
The children, who remained with the mother during the state 
of her above uncleanliness, had also tobe purified. The 
Deuteronomy (XXIII) also speaks of these issues and their 
uncleanliness. It appears that the laws of the Hebrews were to 
a certain extent more strict than those of the Persians. For 
example, persons who had polluta nocturna were asked to pass 
the succeeding day out of the. Hebrew camp and to return 
by evening. 


We find a reflex of the notion of the ancients on this point, 

Pliny on men- 28 given by Pliny in his Natural History 
struation. (Bk. VII, chap. XITI)1, in the later regula- 
tions as summed up in the abovementioned Farzidt-nameh 
(#% whos), Pliny says: ‘It would indeed be: a diffi- 
cult matter to find anything which is productive of more 
marvellous effects than the menstrual discharge. On the 
approach of a woman in this state, must (i. e., wine pressed 
from the grape) will become sour, seeds which are touched 
by her will become sterile, grafts wither away, garden plants 
are parched up, and the fruit will fall from the tree beneath 
which she sits. Her:very look, even, will dim the bright- 
ness of mirrors, blunt the edge of steel, and take away 
the polish from ivory. A swarm of bees, if looked upon 
by her, will die immediately; brass and iron will instantly 


2 Vide Bostock and Riley’s Translation (1858) Vol. II, pp. 150-52. 


PURIFICATORY PROCESSES IN DAILY LIFE 479 


become rusty and emit an offensive odour, while dogs 
which may have tasted of the matter discharged are seized 
with madness, and their bite is venomous and incurable. In 
addition to this, the bitumen ...... which is peculiarly 
tenacious and adheres to everything it touches, can-only be 
divided into separate pieces by means of a thread which has been 
dipped in this virulent matter. It is said that the ant, even 
an insect so extremely minute, is sensible of its presence, and 
rejects the grains which it has been carrying and will not. return 
to them again.” Pliny says in another chapter (Bk. XXVIII, 
ch. 23), “ Young wives... . . are injured immediately by the 
touch of a woman in this state ; and both rue and ivy, plants 
possessed of highly medicinal virtues, will-die instantly upon 
being touched by her. Much as I have already stated on the 
virulent effects of this discharge, I have to state in addition 
that bees, it is a well-known fact,.will forsake their, hives if 
touched hy a menstruate woman ;\that linen boiling in the 
cauldron will turn black, that. the edge of a razor will become 
blunted, and that copper vessels will contract a fetid smell and 
become covered with verdigris, on coming in contact with her. 
A mare big with foal;if touched by a woman in this state, will 
be sure to miscarry ; nay even more than this, at the very sight 
of a woman, though seen at a distance even, should she happen 
to be menstruating for the first time after the loss of her virginity 
or for the first time while in a state of virginity .... . Fire 
itself even, an element which triumphs over every other substance, 
is unable to conquer this. . . . Indeed, so pernicious are its 
properties, that women themselves, the source from which it 
is derived, are far from being proof against its effects ; a pregnant 
woman, for instance, if touched with it, or indeed if she so much 
as steps over it, will be liable to miscarry.” 


The later Parsee writings attribute many of the above-said 
noxious effects referred to by Pliny to the menses of women. , 
The injunctions of the Vendidad do not go to such. 
an extent, Much seems to have been borrowed latterly. 


23 


CHAPTER Vit. .- 


INITIATION CEREMONIES AND 
CUSTOMS 


I. THE NAOJOTE. THE INITIATION OF A ZOROAS- 
TRIAN CHILD INTO THE FOLD. 


By initiation, we mean an introduction into a certain religious 
organization, by the performance of certain 
rites and ceremonies. Of this kind of initia- 
tion, the Parsees have two: (i) The Nadjote, 
which is the initiation of a Parsee child into the fold of the 
Zoroastrian religion. (ii) The Ndvar and the) Martab, the two 
grades of initiation into Priesthood. We will at first speak 
of the Nadjote or the initiation of a child into the religion 
through investiture with a sacred shirt and thread. 


Two kinds of 
initiation. 


The ceremony of investing a child with sacred shirt and thread 
is called Nadjote.? A Zoroastrian may put 

Rr nate iat on any dress he likes. He may dress as 
an-Huropean, Hindu, Mahomedan or as a 

person of any nationality, but he must put on the sudreh 
and kusti, i.e., the sacred shirt and thread as visible symbols 
of Zoroastrianism. The word Nadjote is made up of two words, 
Pahlavi nad 9) (Avesta nava, »>_u} Sans. a4, P. 3, Lat. 


novus, Germ. neu, Fr. neuf) ‘new’ and z6t (soy Av. upb_y5 
nom, ) upb_yS sans. fa ) ¢.e.one who offers prayers, from eu 


»S (Sans. hu g) to offer prayers. The initiation is so named, 


' 4 The Journal of the Bihar and Orissa Research Society, Vol. 1., Part I. 
(for September 1915), pages 53-54, 
- 3 Op, ett, Vol. L., Part 1., page 53. 
3 The modern Zoroastrians of Persia call this ceremony Shiv-Kusti. 
e 


‘THE NAGJOTR 179 


because, it is after ‘its performance, that a Zoroastrian child ia 
said to be: responsible for the duty of offering prayers and 
observing religious customs and rules as a Zoroastrian. 1 The 
ceremony of Nadjote among the Parsees corresponds to that of 
Confirmation? among the Christians. 


Seven is the age at which it is enjoined to initiate a ehild. 
According to Herodotus (I, 136) and Strabo 

ae etre aga this (Bk. XV, chap. III, 18), the ancient Iranians 
commenved the education of their children 

at the age of five. It seems, that a part of that education was 
religious education which prepared them for this ceremony of 
investiture. Plato (First Alcibiades 37) gives the age of edu- 
cation as seven. This then must be the age of the regular 
commencement of secular education after the religious investi- 
ture with the sacred shirt and thread. The Vendidad 
(XV, 45) and the Dinkard (Vol. IV, chap. 170) 3 support 
Plato’s statement. In case_ a child is: not sufficiently intel- 
ligent to understand the ceremony and to know its responsi- 
bilities, it is permitted that the ceremony can be postponed 
to any age upto fifteen, at which age the investiture must 
take place. If the ceremony is not performed and if the 
child is not invested with the sacred shirt and thread at or 
before the age-of 15, the child is said to be claimed by the 


1 Some, take the word Naédjote to be another form of Nadzéd, i.e. a new 
birth, meaning thereby, a spiritual birth. After going through the cere~ 
mony, the child undertakes some moral or spiritual responsibility. Hence 
the word (West 8S. B. E, XXIV, chap. V, 7. 1, p. 262). The Shayast gy 


Shayast speaks of it as navid zadth ( KRY Q03)}. Dr. M.B. Davar’s 


ed., p. 72,1. 1, Chap. XIII, 2) ¢.e. new birth. 

2“ The word ‘ confirm’ ig found frequently in both the Old and the 
New Testaments in various shades of meaning, but with the general 
sense of strengthening and establishing” (Hasting’s Dictionary of the Bible). 


It is worth noting in connection with this meaning, that one meaning oD 


zu, the Avesta root of the word zaotar is “ to he strong ” (Sans, W, P, 2 95), 
3 Dastur Dr. Peshotan’s edition. ; 


180 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


Druj ast her own. The Vendidad (XVIII, 31, 54) represents 
the evil Druj as claiming four kinds of men as her own. 
Among thesé, the fourth kind is that of persons, who, 
having past the age of 15, go about without the sacred shirt and 
thread. The Druj says: “ He assuredly is the fourth of my 
those (i.e. above class of) men, he, an ill-behaved man, who, 
after (the age of ) fifteen years, moves about without the sacred 
thread and shirt.’ The Sad-dar (Chap. X, 1) says, that‘ itis 
incumbent on all Behedins, 3 (whether) males or females, who 
attain the age of 15 years, to bear the sacred thread, because the 
sacred thread is the waist-belt of humility and the symbol for 
preserving obedience to God, may He be honoured and 
respected.’’ 4 If one moves about without the sacred shirt 
and thread after the age of fifteen, he is said to commit the 
sin of vashdd dobdérishnih or kushdd davdrashni® ( 1.e. running 
about uncovered or naked.) 


With the age of the child, at which it is to be invested with the 
sacred shirt and thread, begins the responsibility of the parents 
to give a good religious and moral education to their children. 
It is enjoined, that good religious and moral education should be 
giventoachildatanearlyage. According to the Pahlavi Ganj-i 
Shayagén and the Shayast 14 Shayast, the parents are held 


1 Av, y) * ge one who does harm, deceives, speaks lies. 


This is personified as a female evil power. 
* Vend. XVIII, 54, ~ : 
3 4.e. Zoroastrians. “Lit. members of the good religion. 

Sad-dar Nagar (Chap. X, 1). Edition of Mr. B. N. Dhabhar, p. 9. Ac- 
cording to the 46th Chapter of this book, the period of 15 years includes: 
the nine months of the child being in the womb of the mother. Thus, the 
latest permissible age for the initiation is 14 years 3 months. Vide also 
the Shayast 14 Shayast, Chap. X, 13. It also gives the age as 14 years 
and 3 months (Dr. M. B. Davar’s ed., p. 51). S.B. E. Vol. V. (1880) 
p- 321. , 

5 Minokherad II, 35. Vide Ervad Tehmuras’s Edition with my Intro- 
duction, p..12,1,9 (8S, B, E, Vol, XXIV, p. 11); PReroenel XXYV, 
6; Patet 10. 


THE NAOJOTE 181 


responsible, if they fail in this duty and if the child in conse- 
quence commits a bad action. On the other hand, the parents 
are believed to take a share in the meritoriousness, if the child, 
by virtue of the religious and moral education given to it, does 
a religious act.! 


The ceremony of Nadjote consists of the investiture of the 
Sudreh, i6, the Child with sacred shirt and thread. Before 
Sacred Shirt. Mean- speaking of the investiture itself, Iwill 
ing of the word. - . 
Its Structure and first speak of this shirt and thread and of 


Symbolism. their symbolism. 


The shirt is called Sadreh or Sudreh. Anquetil Du Perron 
says, that the word “sadreh” comes from™Zend “ seehr 
paéschenghé, which means “useful clothing.”)? Dastur Edalji 
Darabji Sanjana also derives the word similarly 3, and says, that 
the word sud-reh means “an advantageous path.” Dr, West 4 
takes the word to be Persian “ sud-reh ” meaning an advanta- 
geous path. Some derive the word from Avesta “ vastra,” 
meaning ‘clothing’ and say that the word “ sadreh” is formed by 
dropping the first letter “‘v.> Mr. K. E. Kanga thinks that 
the word is Arabic 3,i~ suirah, i.e. anything which covers. or 
protects (the body).6 The Dadistan-i? Dini speaks of it as 


pirahan ( yore Pers. wlyy shirt). The Pahlavi Vendidad® 


* Ganj-i Shayagan, Dastur Peshotan’s edition, pp. 25-26; Shayagt 
14 Shayast, chaps. X, 22, XII, 15, Dr. M. B. Davar’s ed., pp. 53 and 65. 

2 “ Tapis (etoffe) utile,’ Zend Avesta, Tome IT, p. 529. 

5 gene 28 (Mojejati Zarthoshti, p. 10). 

4S. B, E. Vol. V, p. 286. 

5 The Zend Avesta par Darmesteter IT, p. 243 n. 13. As an instance of 
a similar dropping of “v” “we have ‘the case of Ry) Sans, (42 
Lat .vir, which has given us the Pers. yal Vy #.¢., hero. ” 

6 He wrote of this in a letter to me. 

7 Question XXXIX,1. Ervad Tehmuras’s Text, p. 125, J. 2. 

8 Chap. XVIII, 7. Dastur Hoshang’s Text, p. 566. Dastur Dr. .Hoshang 
says, that it isthe same as Pers. (\* a night shirt (ibid. Vol. II Gloasarial 
Index, p. 209.) Anquetil Du Perron (Tome II, p. 529) takes the Pahlavi 
word to be Chev. In that case, it is the same as Pers. a below, # t.€., the 
garment below the kusiz. 


182 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


speaks of it as shapik (98-9). It also speaks of it as 


tashkuk (919~Q ) 1. A Persian gloss of the word is given as 
sudreh.3 : 


The sacred shirt and thread are symbolic in their structure. 
Thesymbolism is explained not in the Avesta, but in later Pahlavi 
and Persian books. Some of the symbolism is explained.in the 
Dadistan-i Dini (Ques. 39, Chap. XL). The Persian Sar-nimeb-i- 
raz i Yazdani also refers to it. The shirt is made up of white 
cambric, the white colour being symbolic of innocence, and, as 
such, the symbol of the Méazdayacnén religion. The 
DAdistén i Dini enjoins that the shirt shoald be pure white ! 
and of only one fold 5, not double. The reason for the shirt 
to be of only one fold is said to be that’ Vohaman (Bahman) 
is “‘ one creation ’ which is the first (ayék dam ifartim).6 The 
word Vohi-mana being variously used, the signification is not 
olear, but what is meant seems to be this, that the whiteness of 
the shirt is supposed to influence for good one’s mind. Again, 
the shirt must not be made-up of one continuous piece of cloth 
but of two pieces sewn together on the sides, so that one piece 
may be on the right hand side, and the other on the left hand 
side, thus dividing the shirt into two parts, the front and the 
back part..These two parts—the front and the back—are said 
to be symbolic of the past and the future, both being related 
with,each other through the present. It has an opening for 
the head and reaches down to the knees. 


The most important part of the shirt is the gireh-bdn (lit. 
that which preserves the knot), which signifies loyalty to, or faith 


1 Pahl. Vend. XVII, 1. Dastur Dr, Hoshang’s Text, p. 561, 1. 12, 

* Ibid, note 17. 

3 « Spatta Daénay&o Mazdayagnoish upamanem” (Meher Yasht. Yt. 
X. 126). 

4 “Dardst sapit” (Ervad Tehmuras’s Text, p. 125, 1. 5-6). Ques. 39 
8. B. E. XVIII, Chap. XL, p. 133. 

5 Aydtak, aydkardeh. Ibid. 6 [béd, 


fHE WAdJOTE 183 


in, thereligion. The Girch-bdénis known asthe “ kisseh-i-kerfeh,” 
t.e., ‘the purse or the bag of righteousness.”’ It is made in the 
form of a bag or purse,which rests a little below the throat. It 
indicates symbolically that a man has to be industrious, and 
has nod only to fill his purse or bag with money, but also with 
kerfeh (righteousness), The Shayast la Shayast enjoins, that 
the sacred shirt should be put next to skin, ¢.e., there should 
be no other garment under it.2 Thus, the sudreh-is a symbol 
that reminds one of purity of life and righteousness. 


The Avesta word for the sacred thread is “ aiwy&onghana,” 
Rasti or the sa. lt. to gird round’ the body. Kasti is 
cred thread. Mean- its Pahlavi renderings The word Kisti 


ing of the word. is variously derived. (a) It may be 
Its structure and 


symbolism. derived from Pahlavi kust (RO1)9 P. was) 
meaning “direction or side.” Thus, the word kistt may mean 
“that which points out the proper direction or path.” Sudreh 
(the sacred shirt) indicates the advantageous path, and kistt 
(the sacred thread) indicates the proper direction to proceed 
on that path. Taking the same derivation, kisti may mean, 
“a badge distinguishing those who are on the side (kust) of 
(2.e., who believe in) Zoroastrianism.” (b) Some derive the 
word from kosht. (“45 ) waist, and say that it is so called 
because. it_is put on the waist.2 (c) Again kosht also means 
“limit or boundary, ” so, kisti may mean “that which keeps 
us,.or reminds us to keep ourselves, within*proper limits or 
bounds.” The Sudreh being, as said above, “the advan- 


{ 1Chap. IV. 7, 8 Amat sh&pik dé patmukht fkviminet va kustik 
madam zaki avpar yidruniyen adinash . . . vanac, (Dr. Davar’s ed., 
p. 30). 

2 Ci, Jeremiah XIII, 11, where the waist-cloth or the girdle of linen is 
enjoined always to “ cleave to the loins’, 7.e., to be ** worn next the skin,”’ 
which process of “wearing signified “righteousness and faithfulness.’ 
(Isaiah XI, 5). The sudreh, to a certain extent, corresponds to “the linen 
ephod”? of the priest (I, Samuel II, 18.) 

3 Haug and West, Glossary and Index of the Viraf-nameh, pp, 202-3, 


184 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


tageous path of righteousness,’ the kusti, which is put 
over it, is “that which confines us or keeps us within the 
limits of that path of righteousness.” The Avesta word for 
kasti, viz., aiwydonghana, which literally means “to sit round 
or to limit,’’ renders this derivation probable. (d) Again, 
some take this word késti to be kishti, i.e, a ship, and say, 
that it signifies, that, like a ship, it carries us to the safe haven 
of righteousness. Whatever derivation we take, the—kisti 
symbolizes and indicates a direction in the path of righteous- 
ness. 


The kustt is made up. of lamb’s wool. The wool is at first 
combed and then spun into fine thread on a-hand-spindle called 
chatri. Two such long threads are prepared on two spindles or 
chatris, and are then twisted into one. This thread is then 
woven into the usti on a hand-loom called jantar ( yi> 
sans. 4), the ends of which are movable, so that it can be 
adjusted to the length required. The twisted thread is passed 
round the loom 72 times; so, the kusti consists of 72 threads, 
divided into six strands, each of twelve threads. A continuous 
thread is made to pass, in the process of weaving, through 
each of the six strands. When the weaving is almost finished, 
and when about\a foot of the threads remain to be woven, the 
whole thread is removed from the loom and handed to a priest 
to be cut.and consecrated. It is the privilege of the women 
of the priestly class to weave and prepare a sacred thread, 
and. it_is the privilege of a priest to cut and consecrate it. 


To consecrate the thread, the priest first performs the 
padyab kasti. He then recites the Sradsh baj1 as far as the 
word, Ashahé. He next recites the nirang (the liturgical for- 
mula) for cutting and consecrating the thread, followed by 
the Ashem? VohG and Yath4 ahé vairyé.3 While reciting the 
latter, he cuts the késti into two parts as he utters the word 


i Vide Darmes‘eter. Le Zend Avesta II, pp. 686-88, 
2 Yacna XXVII, 14. 3 [bid, 13. 


THE NAOJOTE 185 


shydothnandm. On finishing the Yathd ahi vairyd, he utters in 
bAj (te. in a suppressed tone) the brief Pazend formula of sraosh 
ashé tag, tan farman,! and then finishes the baj. The women 
who prepare the kdsti, generally get it cut and consecrated 
by the male priest members of their own families. When 
they have no such members and have therefore to get it coil 
seorated by other priests, they have to pay a small fee for it: 
After this consecration, the késti is returned by the priest. to 
the owner, who now completes its weaving. First, by means of a 
needle, she turns the histi, which is hollow, inside out, and.then 
knits by hand the remaining part of the thread. Three tassels 
(lari),? each of 14 threads, are formed at each end of the 
woven thread. The Kisti is then finally washedbefore being 
used, 


The kisti, being prepared from the wool of a lamb, which is 
considered to be an emblem of innocence and purity, is held to 
remind Zoroastrian of the purity of life which he has always 
to observe. The 72 threads composing the kéisti, symbolize 
the 72 has or chapters of the Yagna. The 24 threads, which make 
up each of the three tassels at each end of the kisi, symbolize 
the 24 Kardahs or sections of the Visparad, a part of the 
liturgical prayer; the six strands, each of twelve threads, into 
which the 72threads of the kisti are divided at the time of 
weaving, are said to svmbolize the six religious duties 3 of a 


1 \Grosh yasht, Yt. XI, (Darmesteter. Le Zend Avesta II, p. 482. 
“Vienne Srésh .... Ormazd.’’) 


2 Pers. lar » thin. 

5 The enumeration of these duties differ in different Pahlavi and Pazend 
books, The Shayast 14 Shayasht (Chap. XII 31, Dr. Davar’s ed. p. 71, 
S. B. E. V, p. 351) gives the following list :—(1) the celebration of the 
Gasanbars (Gahambars) or the season festivals; (2) the celebration of 

‘the Rapitavin or the setting in of summer; (3) Sadésh (Sraosh) or 
the performance of the funeral ceremonies for the first three days after 
the death of one’s dear departed ones ; (4) Farvardegan, i.e., the religious 
observances during the last 10 days of a Parsee year in honour of the 
dear departed ones.; (5) the recital of the Kurshed Nidyish in honour of 


24 


186 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


Zoroastrian ; the twelve threads in each of the six strands 
symabolize the twelve months of the year; the six tassels symbo- 
lize the six season festivals (Gahambars) of a Zoroastrian 
year; the hollow of the thread symbolizes the space between 
athis world and the next; the doubling of the thread in the be- 
. ginning symbolizes the connection between the present cor- 
poreal world and the future spiritual world; the turning of 
the kasti, inside out, symbolizes the passage of the soul from the 
corporeal to the spiritual world; the final uniting of all the 
threads into one symbolizes universal brotherhood, or union. 
Though we have not the authority of Avesta books for an ex- 
planation of the symbolism of all the parts of the késti, there 
is no doubt, that its structure had some symbolic signification 
from very ancient times. It symbolizes some moral precepts or 
ideas, just as the Jandi or the sacred thread of the Brahmins and 
the cord worn by the Franciscan fathers round their waists 
do. The Sudreh and Kusti of the Parsees may remind one of 
the white garment and girdle of. the Essenes, a Jewish sect. 


Just as the cross is said to have existed as a symbol from 
times anterior to Christ, though Christ’s crucifixion added to 
its signification, so the kasti is said to have existed as a symbol 
before Zoroaster. It was Jamshed of the Peshdadian dynasty 
who is said to-have introduced it.2 Zoroaster is said to have 
confirmed this previous custom of putting on the kisti, 


the sun (thiee times a day); (6) the recital of the Mah-Niayish in 
honour of the moon (three times a month). 

The Sad-dar (Mr. B. N. Dhabhar’s ed. p. 6 , Chap. VI 2 ;'S. B. E. XXIV, 
p- 264), and the Minédkherad (Chap. IV, 8S. B. E. XXIV, p. 26, Ervad 
Tehmuras’s Text, p. 36 Ques. ITI) give a slightly different list. The 
Sarnimeh-i-raz-i Yazdani, a much later Persian book, gives a slightly 
different enumeration. (Vide the PersianeGujarati edition of 1255 
Yazdazardi, by Mr. Pallonji Jivanji L. HAtaria, Persian text, pp. 38-40). 

1 Josephus.—The Antiquity of the Jews, translated by W. Whiston 
(1811), Vol. IIT, p. 444. Bk. II, Ch. VIII, 7. * 

* Dadistan-i-Dini Chap. XXXIX, 19, Tehmuras’s edition, p. 120, Ques. 
XXXVI, 22; Sad-dar Ch. X,3. Mr, B. N. Dhabhar’sed., p. 9. A passage 
in the Pahlavi Vendidéd also seems to allude to the fact. In the second 


THE NAOQJOTE 187 


and also directed that it may be put on over a sacred shirt 
(vahumanich vasiarg) and with a recital of religious formule 
(dinik niranghd).' He held it to be a symbol of the necessity 
of (a) obedience to God, (6) closing up the door against sin and 
(c) breaking wp the power of destruction. . . 


Tt is enjoined, that, excepting the time of bathing, a Zoroas: 
trian must always bear the sacred shirt and thread. Thethread 
is to be untied and retied during the day on the following 
occasions :—(1) immediately after leaving bed in the morning ; ? 
(2) every time after- answering a call of nature ; (3)before saying 
prayers; (4) at the time of bathing; (5) before meals. A 
modern Parsee sometimes neglects to do so on the-first and fifth 
occasions, but he generally does so on the*second, third, and 
fourth occasions. The Dadistan-i Dini says,’ that, from times 
immemorial, men turn towards light at the time of performing 
the kaisti ceremony as it is connected with a form of prayer. 


The first thing that one has to.do on these occasions (except 
the first) is to perform whatis called padyab ‘ or ablution. It 
sonsists of washing the face and other uncovered parts of the 
body like hands and feet with pure water and after reciting « 
short prayer-formula.®> Then he has to face the sun. If he is 
within the house and if the sun is not visible, he has to stand 
facing the east'in the morning up to 12 o’clock noon, and facing 
the west from 12 o’clock to night-fall. At night, he has to face 
alamp or the moon, If there is no moon or lamp, he may ‘face 


chapter, while speaking of Jamshed, it says: W2 MUYROP 4-04 4oe 


10H1,44-9 1919 NE (Vend.II. 5, Spiegel’s Pahlavi Vend, p. 9, 1. 15) te, 
he had given (lit. done) a symbol to men on their body. 

+ Dadistan-i-Dinf Chap. XXXIX, 19, Tehmuras’s Text, p. 120, Ques 
XXXVIUL,.22. , 

2 Sad-dar, Chap. LXXXII. 3 Chap. XXXIX. 

* Vide Purificatory Ceremonies: Journal, Vol. XI, No. IT pp. 169-179, 

5 Khshnaéthra Ahurahé Mazd&o Ashem Vohu, #.¢, May God be 
pleased. Piety is the best good and happiness. Happiness to him who 
is pious for the best piety. 


138 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


the stars. We will, later on, while speaking of the investiture by 
the priest, desoribe in detail the process of putting on the kdsti. 


As to its symbolism the histi is a kind of belt. “ Kamar- 
bastan’’ ¢.e., “to tie the waist” or “to put on the belt”’ is a 
phrase which has come to mean “to be ready to serve, to be 
prepared for a work.” Sothe Dadistan says, that the putting 
on of the kisti on the waist,! symbolizes one’s readiness to 
serve God. 


While putting on the kisti, one has to fasten it with two 
knots, one in the front and another on the 
back. Knots, which signify firmness and 
resolution, symbolize here resolutions about 
certain religious and moral thoughts. While forming the first 
half of the first knot in the front on the second round of the 
thread, a Zoroastrian has to think that Ahura Mazda exists, 
that He is one, is holy and is matchless. While forming the 
second half of this first knot, he has to remember that the 
Mazdayacnian religion is the word of God and that he must 
have full faith in it. In the third round of the thread, while 
forming the first half-of the second knot at the back, one has 
to remember that Zoroaster is the, Prophet of God, and that he 
is our guide to show us the proper path of worship. While 
forming the second half of the second knot, he is to bear in 
mind that.he has always to attend to “good thoughts, good 
words and good deeds.’’ 2 


The-Dadistén-Dint (Chap. XXXIX, Pursishna XXXVIII) 

Symbolic signis- dwells at some length on the symbolie sig- 
cation of the kisti, nification of the kisti. The purport of what 
eyes al "oalist it says is this:—Firstly, God wishes that 
Dini. 


man should serve Him and should follow 


The knots of a 
kheté. 


1 The kasti of the Zoroastrian scriptures reminds one of the “ girdle ” of 
the Christian scriptures which varied from that of sack cloth (Isaiah 
TIT; 24) to that of gold (Revelation I, 13). The Avesta also sp2aks of the 
keasti or. belt being golden (zarany6é-aiwyadnghanem, Yt. XV, 57)- 
Among the Israelites and the early Christians ele: the operation of girding 
sighified- energetic action. poled 


* Sad-dar, Chap. X. 


THE NAOJOTE 188° 


His path. Now, there are certain conventional-ways iii which 
a man shows his service or obedience to God. For example,. 
he falls on his knees in his prayers; he lowers his head and 
bows; he raises his hands towards Heaven. All these ways or 
rites, which symbolize service or obedience or homage to God, 
are done occasionally. But the kisti is a standing symbol 
to signify permanently a man’s readiness to serve God. 
Asa kind of kamar-band or belt, put on in a solemn._way 
with religious meditation and prayer, it reminds a \person 
of his perpetual obligation to stand in the service of God. 
Whenever a Zoroastrian sees this kisti, this band ( os ) or belt 
“on his waist, he has to consider it as a badge of service and 
to say to himself “I am the servant (bandah %o4:) of God.” 
Secondly, a person puts on a badge or belt of service and 
stands before his superior to receive his orders. Thus, the 
sacred belt or kisti reminds a man of humiliation before God, 
and of his readiness to receive. His orders. Thirdly, the 
késtt isa kind of a band, 1.¢., a kind of a shutter. A shutter 
shuts up a thing, so that, neither outside influence may affect 
that thing nor that thing’s influence affect an outside thing. 
So, by putting the band of a késti, a Zoroastrian, while reciting 
the words manashni, gavashni, and kunashni, 1.e., thoughts,’ 
words and deeds; and putting on the knots on the thread, 
resolves ta let no outside evil influence enter into his mind and 
affect the purity of his thoughts, words and deeds, and not to 
let that purity of thoughts, words and deeds leave his mind. 
Fourthly, we learn from the Dadistan-i-Dini, that the kistt 
reminds one to have a high ideal of character before his mind. 
The waist over which the hist: is fastened, divides our physical 
body into three parts, the higher, the middle and the lower. 
The upper or the higher part of our body is the seat of heart 
and brain which typify higher characteristics. The lower part, 
which contains organs like the stomach which always require 
something to feed it, typifies lower characteristics of appetite, 
thirst, lust, etc. So, the kdsts being tied on the middle portion 
of the body, viz., the waist, and acting as a band or stopper, must, 


190 , INITIATION CEREMONIES 


remind us, not to let the lower passions rise above and suppress 
our higher characteristies.! 


Having described the preparation and the consecration of 
the shirt and thread, and having explained 
N “ee of their symbolism, we will now describe the 
: Nadjote ceremony itself, wherein a priest 

puts over the child the sacred shirt and thread. 


As a qualification of fitness to go through this ceremony, 

Discusion bee the child is expected to know a few short 
forethe Investiture prayers. Of these, the knowledge by heart 
a et Pesce of the Nirang-i-kusti (7.c., the prayer for 
requisites. the sacred thread) is indispensably neces- 
sary, because it is required to be recited whenever the sacred 
thread is to be untied and fastened again, on certain occasions 
during the day, of which we have spoken above. This Nireng- 
i-kusti is made up of the. following three prayers :—(1) 
Kem-na-Mazda ;? (2) Nirang-i-kusti or Ahura Mazda 
Khodae ;* (3) Jasa me vavanghé Mazda, Mazda-yacné ahmi.! 


1 This statement of the Dadistén reminds us of what Dr. Drummond, 
in his “Stones Rolled Away,” speaks a8 the three stories of our body, the 
upper, the middle and the lower. 

2 This short prayer is a part of what is canes as Khordeh Avesta, 4.¢,, 
the smaller Avesta :—It is made up of the following passages of the larger 
Avesta... (a) Yacua Chap. XLVI, 7; (6) Yacna Chap. XLIV, 16; (c) 
Vendidad VITI, 21; (d) Yaena Chap. XLIX, 10. The prayer consists of 
an invocation to God for help and an expression of desire to throw off 
physical and moral evils, , 

3 This is a prayer in the Pazend language. For the text of this prayer 
in the Avesta chatacter, vide “ Khurdeh Avesta in Zend Characters’’ by 
Ervad Tehmuras Dinshaw Anklesaria (1887), pp 23-26, and “ Khurdeh 
Avesta” by Mr. Framjee Minocherji Dastur (1881) pp. 5-7 For its 
translation, vide S.B.E., Vol. XVIII, p. 384; Le Zend Avesta, par 
Darmesteter ,Tome II, p, 685; and Spiegel, Bleeck’s Translation, Vol. of 
Khordeh Avesta, p. 4. 

* This short prayer, which forms, as it were, a short statement of the 
Zoroastrian Articles of Faith or Confession of Faith, is taken from Yagna 
XII, 9. The first four words meaning “ Oh God, come to my help ” are 
edded ss an invocation, from Ormaszd Yasht, Yt. 1, 27. 


THE NAOJOTE ; 191 


Besides this prayer of Nirang-i-kusti, the prayers known as 

- Nirang-f-4b-i Zar or Nirang-i Gaémez, Srosh-baj, and. Patet, 
were, at one time, expected from a Zoroastrian child, to be 
known by heart. for the Nadjote ceremony.. But now-a-days, 
they are not deemed absolutely necessary. 


On the day fixed for the investiture, a little before the time 
of the ceremony, the child is madeto go through a sacred bath 
or a kind of purification known as ndhn.! Upto a few years ago, 
it was customary, that the child should abstain from any kind 
of food in the morning until after the investiture. This was 
considered as a little sacrifice on the part of the child to testify 
its faith in the importance and value of the ceremony. 
Upto a few years ago, the ceremony was always performed 
‘in the morning, but now it is performed in the evening also 
according to the convenience of the parties. The very fact, that 
it was enjoined, that during the course of the ceremony the 
officiating priest must recite the dawn (Aush-b&m 2) prayer,? 
shows, that it was thought necessary that the ceremony should 
be performed in the morning. 


After the sacred bath, the child is taken to a room where the 
parents and their relations and friends, and the officiating priest 
with one or more other priests have assembled. The upper part . 
of its body, which is to be covered with the sacred shirt at the | 
hands of the officiating priest, is covered over with a sheet of 
white cloth that can be easily removed. The child is made to 
git on-a low wooden stool covered over with a sheet of white 
cloth, in front of the officiating priest, who sits on a carpet on the 
floor. The child is made to sit facing the East. The following 
requisite things are placed on the carpet :—(l) a tray 


1 Vide above, pp. 95-101, “ Purification Ceremonies.” 
? Pahl. yb “vo” Av, ‘vey Sans, TTA Lat. aurora, and Av. +g 


P. ¢ brilliant. 


* For the prayer vide Spiegel (Bleeck’s Translation), Khordeh Abeiias, 
p- 5; Darmesteter, Le Zend Avesta, Vol, II, p. 688. . 


1 92 ‘stration CEREMONIES 


containing a new set of alsties He the child, including a new 
sacred shirt and thread ; ; (2). a. tray of ricé known as akhiéna 
“which, at the énd of the t ceremony, is presented to the family 
priest ; it is a remnant, of the old system, when there. was a 
payment in kind a8‘well (3) a tray of flowers which are 
presented at the end to the assembled priests, friends and 
rélations ; (4) a lamp, generally a lamp fed with clarified butter ; 
there may be additional candle-sticks burning ; (5) fire;burn- 
ing on a censer with fragrant sandalwood and frankincense ; 
(6)"a tray containing a mixture of rice, pomegranate grains, 
.taisins, almonds, and a few slices of cocoanut, to be sprinkled, 
later on, by the priest over the child as a symbolof prosperity. 
the first tray, containing the suit of clothes,“also contains some 
betel leaves and areca nuts,’ afew pieces of sugarcandy, a few 
grains of rice, a cocoanut, a garland of flowers, a metallic cup. _ 
containing kiinkin (a kind of red powder) and a few rupees. 
All these things have nothing todo with the religious part of 
the ceremony, but they are considered in India as emblems of 
good luck. All these are presented by the priest, later on, to 
the child. The money is, at the end of the ceremony, taken 
by the family priest as a part of his fee, and is spoken of as 
the fee for the girydn or girehban.? 


Wher all the»priests have taken their respective seats, the 

head officiating priest, who is seated face 
Be il investiture to face with the child, gives in the hand of 
the child a new sacred shirt. They all 
then recite the Patet, or the atonement prayer. The child 
also recites the prayer or its special sections, if it knows 
these by heart ; but generally, it recites the Yatha Aha Vairyé 
prayers in its stead. In some families, recently, instead of 
the Patet, the Hormazd Yasht is recited. Having finished - 


. LThe betel-vine gives leaves ali the yearround. The vine gives no 
fruit or flower but simply leaves which are eaten with betel-nute. So 
the leaves are held as symbols of simplicity and prosperity. Journal 
of. the Anthropolozical Society of Bombay, Vol. XI, No. ae pp. 317-18. 

2 Vide above, p. 183, for the word. - 


“tte. “NAOSOTEN: AOE 


‘this, the ‘officiating priest g gots: ‘up ‘from, is seat’ and the: child 
stands before him. . Then follows the investiture proper which 
is made up of the following four parts’:—(1) the recital: of -thie 
Confession of Faith by the child, followed immediately by the 
putting on of ‘the sacred shirt by" the’ priést3 2) the retital 
at ‘the 2 Nivangi-i-kusti with a. preliminary inbroduction from 
the introductory part of the Hormazd Yasht (Yasht 1) upto 
the words vidhvao mraoti, accompanied with the’ girdling ‘of 
the hésti or sacred thread by the priest over the sacred: shirt ; 
(3) the tinal revital of the Mazdayagné Abmi (Yacna’ XI, "3 8-9) 
formula ofthe ‘Articles ‘of Faith ; (4) the recital of the, Tan~ 
darusti or the final benediction. 


‘The first part of the investiture consists in presenting: to it 
1. The recital of child the sacred shirt, after making it recite 
the Confession of the Confession of Faith. This prayer of the 
Faith, and the in-. ee ba 

vestiture with the Confession of Faith is made up of two parts: 
Sacred Shirt. ' (a) The Avesta khshnuman of the Yazata 
Din, who presides over Religion (Din Yasht. Yasht XVI).1 .(b) A 
Pazend formula of the Confession of Faith.2 The confession 
madé up of these two-part runs as follows :—“ Praised be the 
most righteous, the wisest, the most holy and the best Maz- 
dayagnian Law, which is the gift of Mazda. The good, true and 
perfect religion, which God has sent to this world, is that which 
Zoroaster has brought. That religion is the religion of Zoro- 
aster, ‘the religion of Ahura Mazda communicated to holy 
Zonesisr » Tt ends with the recital of an Ashem Vohé prayer. 


On the child-making this public didn ation of its faith in the 
Zoroastrian. Mazdayagnian religion; the priest clothes -it- with 


Sees 


‘84° Dies atieca-aut is symbolic of festivity and is, therefore, always used 

ag.an offering forthe gods {in India). ° It is. also an Sssen tial requisite for 
the ceremony of betrothal. (Ibid, p. 329.) 

-1 §.B.E., Vol. XXII (1883) “To the most right Chista, efc.,” p. 264. 
Spiegel, translated by. Bleeck. -Khordeh Avene: D 147. Deniers ‘Le 
Zend Avesta, Vol. II, p. 302. Z 

2 Spiegel, translated by Bleeck. Khordeh Asatte; - 191. 
25 


194 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


the sacred shirt. While putting it. on, he recites the. sacred 
formula of Yatha Aha Veiky® and the other priests join him in 
the recital. 


Then the officiating priest stands at the back of the child and 

2. The recital of oth face the east if it is morning, and 
as ra Bate Bk des the west if it is evening. He at first 
with the sacred recites the introductory part of the Ormazd 
thread. ’ “  Yasht (Yasht 1)! and then the Nirang-i- 
kusti2 The substance of this prayer of Nirang-i-kusti runs thus: 
‘The Omniscient God is the greatest Lord. Ahriman is the 
evil spirit, that keeps back the advancement of the world. May 
that Evil Spirit with all his accomplices~ remain fallen and 
dejected. O Omniscient Lord’ Lrepent ofall my sins; I repent 
of all the evil thoughts that I may have entertained in my 
mind, of all the evil words that I may have spoken, of all the 
evil deeds that I may have done. May Ahura Mazda be 
praised. May the Evil Spirit Ahriman be condemned. The 
will of the Righteous is the most praiseworthy. ” 


The process of putting on the kisti over the body is as follows:- 
The priest helds the kidst from its middle or central part in 
his left hand. Then he holds in his right hand a part of the two 
strings of the thread so formed. A part of the double strings 
is thus held horizontally between the two hands and the 
remainder hangs down vertically. This posture continues upto 
the recital of the words “manashni, gavashni, kunashni’” in the: 
Nirang-i-kusti. With the recital of these words a part of the 

_ strit.g is then formed into circular curves in both the hands. 
Then, on reciting the words Khshnadthra Ahurahé Mazdad, 
the ourves are let loose, and with the recital of Ashem Voha, 
the thread is passed round the child’s waist. With the recital 
of the first Yatha Aha Vairyé, the second round is completed, 


Te eemneneemaat 


4 Spiegel, translated by Bleeck. Khordeh Avesta, P- 21. From “ Ip 
the name of God. . . satisiaction, etc. ” 
* Ibid, p, 4. 


THE NaOJOTE 185 


the first knot in the front being tied with the recital of the word 
‘shyaothanandm. With the recital of the same word in the 
second recital of the Yatha ‘Aha Vairyé, the second knot in 
the - front is tied, and then, with the recital of another Ashem 
Vond, the thread is passed round the waist for the third 
time and the final two knots at the back are tied. This 
completes the investiture of the sacred thread. During this 
investiture, the child recites with the officiating priest.the 
Nirang-+-kisti. 


The child, after being thus invested with the sacred shirt and 

3. The Recital of thread, announces the last and the most 
the formula of the important part of the Articles of Faith, given 
mmrtisles of Fartit in the 12th chapter of the Yacna. It runs 
thus: “O Almighty! Come tomy help. Lam a worshipper of 
God. Iam a Zoroastrian worshipper of God. I agree te praise 
the Zoroastrian religion, and to believe in that religion. I praise 


good thoughts, good words and goed deeds. I praise the good” 


Mazdayacnian religion which curtails discussions ard quarrels, 
which brings a:out kinship or brotherhood, which is holy, and 
which, of all the religions that have yet flourished and are 
likely to flourish in the future, is the greatest, the best and 
the most excellent, and which is the religion given by Gud to 
Zoroaster. I believe, that all good things proceed from God. 
May the Mazdayagnian religion be thus praised.” 


The most important part of these short prayers is that, 
wherein the child is made to believe in the efficacy of .oné’s 
own good thoughts, words and actions. A Parsee has to 
believe that, for the salvation of his soul, he has to look to 
himself, For his .salvation, he bas to look to the purity of 
his thoughts, the purity of his words, and the purity of his 
deeds. The pivot on which the whole of the moral structure 
of Zoroastrianism turns, rests upon this triad of thought, 
word and deed. Think of nothing but the truth, speak nothing 
but the truth, do nothing but what is proper, and you are 
saved, 


f 


F96 INITIATION ‘CEREMONIES 


LP he: PASHUG IO of the sacred shirt anid thread and the ‘decks: 
el} i isc ~svation of the “Articles of -Faith:complete tho? 
iat; Rho final Be-. : “cebemiony.* “proper. ~The officiating priest: 


vo “sno ly now-make’ .a: red >ziuakun mark * on: thee 
ale’ 8 téiendad’sa torig ‘vertical mark if:the child is: male 
round mark if female—and ther gives inits hands, the coédamit,’ 
flowers, betel leaves, areca nuts, étc., referred: to above! :- There® 
obly retains. now thé recital of the Tandaructi or- penedivtions- 
by the officiating priest, my gene the blessings of God upon’ the’ 
new initiate. He says: “‘ May you enjoy health, long life 
and " splendour of piety. May the ‘good Angels and the Tin- 
mortal spirits (Ameshaspands) ° come‘to your help. May “the 
religion’ of Zoroaster flourish. O “Almighty God!’ May” ‘you. 
bestow long life, joy and health upon the ruler of our land, upon 
the. whole cominunity * and. upon this! .. .. May the child. 
live long to help the virtuous. May this day be auspiciows, 
this month be auspicious, this year be ‘atispicious. May you 
live for a gooi number of years to lead a holy; charitable and’ 
religious life.’ May you perform righteous deeds. ‘May health, 
virtue, and goodness ‘be your lot. May all your good wishes 
@ | lflled like those of the immortal angels. Amei | ! Ameh! e 


t 


While elite iis, ins priest showers: over. “the head of the 
child; the mixture of rice, pomegranate seed, almonds, raisins,ete., 
referred to above. In the end, all the assembled priests again’ 
recite together, the above tandarugti (benedictions)._ The priests 
are then ‘paid t ‘their fees. They and the assem bled friends and 
relations are presented with flowers. The’ priests’ then depart, and 
the child ‘arid ‘the parents: are’ presented with -sums of money 
by” friends’ “and - ‘relations: * ‘The: assembled guests generally 
disperse ‘aftera dinner, where ““Jarthoshti sikkant saldémati, 7? 7.6.4 
the prosperity- of “the: “Zoroastrian fold (Lit; the’ safety ‘or ‘prow 
perity of “Coroastrian coinage) is the toast of tie ‘occasion, : 


Here the same of the child is ‘niéntionod, 


197 


CHAPTER: “PEEL. 


soe aad so ive a3 aS + 


IE: THE: NAVAR- AND. THE: ARTE: 


THE: INITIATION INTO ZOROASTRIAN PRIESTHOOD, Ze 


“Tt is 3 the son of a ‘priest only who can ‘become a priest. “This 
seems to be a very old custom of ancient Tran. We find it 
alluded to in the institutions of Ardashir Babakin, the founder 
of the SassAnian dynasty, with whose reign commenced the Ira- 
nian Renaissance of the period. One of the innovations, said 
to have been introduced by him, or rather one of the old cus- 
toms,—more honoured in their breach than i in their observance 
at, his time,—re-introduced by him with.the aid of his Dastur— 
Tadsar or Tansar, was, that the members of different professions ' 
and trades, and their descendants, should, adhere to their old ' 
professions and trades and not change them for others, except ” 
with the special permission of the king or the Government 
authorities. The division of the people into different profes- 
sions and trades,.and the regulations to restrict them to their 
respective lines of business, were thought to he necessary for 
the. good of. society. + 


“ Cette répartition,” says -Tansar, “des hommes en quatre 
classes est pour le. monde. une. garantie durable de bon ordre. 
Le‘passage d’une caste a Iautre est interdit, sauf le cas of l'un , 
dé.nous montré un talent particulier. Alors on porte le cas. 
devant le roi. -Aprés uné: épreuve et une enquéte prolongée. 
faite par les Mobeds et les: Herbeds, s’ils reconnaissent Je mérite | 
da candidat ils se-transférent dans une autre caste.......... 

Jevscecsecss. Le Shahansh4h, par sa pure intelligence et la 
cotta de son génie, a reconstitué ces membres disjoints. I a 
remis chacun & sa place distincte; Va fait redescendre 3 son rang 
et a arrangé que personne n "exercerait un. autre métier que eelnj 


198 ; INITIATION CEREMONIES 


pour lequel Diet Vavait créé. Par ses mains la Providence 
divine a ouvert aux habitants de ce monde une porte incunnas 
méme aux age antiques.”! 


The division of the people into different professions and 
trades, referred te hy Tansar, as having been made by Ardashir, 
was not quite unknown to theancient Persians before his time. 
According to the Sh&h-nameh, it was made by King Jamshfd 
of the Peshdadian dynasty. ‘Il (Djemschid) assigna a chacun 
la place qui lui convenait, et Jeur indiqua leur voie, pour que 
tous comprissent leur position et reconnussent ce qui était au- 
dessus et au-dessous d’eux.”? Tabari says the same thing: 
‘** Djemschid partagea toutes les créatures du monde en quatre 


ClaSSeS... sce ceeceeeees sal daiers 3s Kalyc area weaee 6 il dit: Que 
chacun fasse son travail et ne s’occupe pas d’autre chose ..,. 
ere sesesesee SE Quelqu’un s’écartait des réglements 


qu'il avait établis, il le faisait mettre & mort.”3 We thus 
find that the rules introduced by Ardashir were rather 
old, and that he re-established them, and declareu that. 
people must, restrict themselves to their own hereaitary pro- 
fessions. The priesthood was especially such a profession. 
But, we find further from Tansar’s letter that Ardashir had 
intended to make certain exceptions. For example, a man, 
by special qualifications or examinations, can qualify hitnself 
for a profession, other than that of his forefathers. We find 
such an exception, in the case of priesthood, madé in Persia, 
even so late as the 17th century. One Dastur Ristam Gush- 
tasp Ardashir “is said to have sprung from the laity and not from 
® priestly family.”* It is said, that in the time of this Rastam 
Gushtasp, the then ruling Mahomedan King of Persia ordered 
a general massacre of the Persian Zoroastrians, unless they 
proved that they were monotheists and not idol-worshippers. 


Lettre de Tansar au Roi do Tabaristan (Journal Asiatique, Tome 
III, Neuvitme Serie, pp. 518-520) par Darmesteter. 

2 Le Livre des Rois, M. Mohl, Vol. 1, pp. 49-50. Smalled., p. 35, 

3 Tabari, par Zotenberg, Tome I, p. 10% 

& 8, B. E,, Vol. V, Introduction, p» XX XIII, West, 


THE NAVAR 199 


lt was this layman Ristam Gushtaésp who proved this to the 
satisfaction of the king, and he was made a Dastur. He. was a 
good scholar. The copy of the Dinkard in the Mulla Firoze 
Library, a copy of the Mino-Kherad in Mr. Tehmuras Din- 
shaw’s possession and a Persian Revayet in Mr. Manekji 
Unwala’s possession are by his pen. In India, no exception 
seems to have been made, and it is only the sons of priests 
ot of the members of the priestly families who can become 
priests. The right can be revived by any male member of the 
priestly family, though his immediate ancestors may not actually 
have been priests. For example, A may be a priest. His son 
'B, grand-son C, great-grand-sen D may not have entered into 
priesthood, but still E, the-son of D, can, if he chooses, become a 
priest. . The right can thus be revived by a descendant upto the 
fifth generation. It then dies and can no longer be exercised. 


In order to be a thoroughly qualified priest, one has to go 
through two grades of initiations and their ceremonies. They 
are: (1) the Navar and (2) the Martab. 


1., THE NAVAR.! 

The first initiatory ceremony for priesthood is that of 
Navar. The word is written and read in different ways. It 
is also written and read as Nabar, Naibar, or Nagbar.* 
Darmesteter says of this word: “ L’origine et le sens exact 
du mot ndbar 3% pehlvi napar et ndivar, sont obscurs.”3 
I think the word means “a new carrier of offerings or rites.” 


It can be derived from Avesta =W)U} new (Pahl. 9)! 
Sans. 77, P. 5, Lat. novus, Fr. neuf, Germ. neu, Eng. 


new, same as in Naéjéte ), and “) to carty (Pahi. ie) 


+ For “ Navar in Iran,” vide Prof. Khodayar’s article in the Sir J. J. Z. 
Medresea Jubilee Volume, pp. 435 et seq. 
* 8, B. E., Vol, XVIL, Pahl. Texts IT, Chep. LXXIX, 4n. 1—West. 


It is written Sin in an old manuscript of the Dadistan belonging to 


Mr, Tehmuras Dinshaw. 
3 Le Zend Avesta, Vol. I, Introduction, p. LIV, un. 2. 


200 INITiANION ceREMONTES 


«P. -wdy3;, Sans. 2, "Lat. Ferre; Eng. bear}. -in the Avesta 
-words, hi-bércti, ushta-bérét, vanta-bérétt: (Y. LX, °7)s/the 
word bérétt (like the Sanskrit af bhriti, nourishment, 
food, service, capital) which is derived from the above..:\/ 
bar, to carry, is used for presents, offerings. So.Navar, which 
is originally nat Pee (i. e., a new carrier of presents and. offer- 
ings), means “one who is newly initiated in the work of offer- 
ing prayers, rites and sacred things to the Deity.” ‘The fact, 
that it can be explained in the same way as the word Nadjote, 
the first important initiatory Zoroastrian ceremony, is a proof 
‘in support of this interpretation. 


To initiate a person into priesthood, several stages of cere: 

‘The different monies have to be goné through. They are 
ene seid aie the following :—(a) the Bareshnfim; (6). the 
@ priest, Gewra; (c) the initiation proper. .I give here 
an illustration which shows the initiate taking his‘ Bareshnim. 


(a) The candidate for. initiation into priesthood has first 
to go through two Bareshnim purifications.‘ The first 
Bareshnim is said tobe for his own tan-pak, i.e. for the 
purification of his own, body, the second is for the ntyat* 
of the person in ‘whose memory he becomes a Navar. 


+ Vide above; pp. 102-153, Purification Ceremonies,‘ In Persia, at 
* present, they go through 10 Bareshnims, four of which are said to be 
a for his soul” (* Navar in Iran,” by Prof. Khodayar Dastur Sheheryar, 
in the SitJ. Jd. Zarthoshti Madressa Jubilee voles, edited ty me, 
p. 435). ; 
8 Niyat literally means purpose, intention. Among iis oer many 
-charitable deeds are said to be peformed by a person in the niyat of ,a 
“deceased relative or friend. ..4 may build a Fire-Temple or a Tower of 
Silence or such other. religious edifice in the niyat of B, his father or rela- 
tive ox friend. It ‘is sométhing’like what we ¢all'“ in memory of” in 
erditiary language, incase of, ordinary charitable institutions, such as 
schools, dispensaries, asylums or hospitals. “In the case of religious 
iuildings, when they are consecrated, or even in the case of charitable 
buildings like schools or hospitals when they are opened with the réligious 
ceremony of a Jashan, the name.of the-particular-person, iv whésé ‘niga, 
fionour or ‘memory.the building or: institution is. founded, is: mentioned 
in the ) prayers. . (For the form i in which the name is mentioned. see, aboye, 
p. 83, chapter on “ Death.”)} These religious or ‘charitable buildings may 
be in the niyat of living persons aswell. In that case, the names of .the 


THE nAvaR ‘201 


Between the first Bareshnim and the second there may be 
an interval of a few days if it is so desired, or, otherwise the 
candidate may begin the second Bareshnim on the same day 
when he finishes the first. In that case, both the Bareshnims 
take 19 days in all. During these Bareshnfim days, the can- 
didate is to say his prayers five times during the day. He 
is expected to pass his time in a religious or pious mood. 
If, during any of the days of the Bareshniims, he has a 
pollutis nocturna, that vitiates his Bareshnfiim. In that‘case, he 
must begin the Bareshnam again, If the case happens in the 
second Bareshniim, he has to repeat only the second Bareshnim 
and not the first. To avoid this risk, nowadays, the candidate 
for priesthood goes through the initiation at a very early age, 
before 15 or 16, when he is likely to be free from such risk. 
The second Bareshniim is, as said above, forthe niyat of some- 
body. If that somebody is a lady; he must take care that he 
goes through the second Bareshnim and the subsequent cere- 
monies of gewrd and initiation at a time, when there is no 
chance of that lady’s passing through her monthly. course. 
If during these ceremonies,.the lady, in whose niyat he goes 
through the ceremony,-has her monthly course, that vitiates 
the ceremony which must be begun again when the lady has 
passed through hercourse and purified herself. If the person, 
male or female, dies during the period of these ceremonies, 
that event-also vitiates the whole thing. ! 


(6) On the candidate completing the Bareshniim, two quali- | 
fied priests (7.e., two priests who “hold the Bareshnim”), who 


living persons are recited in the prayers with a slight alteration. Instead 
of the words Aniisheh Ravin, 7.¢., ‘of the dead {li. immortal) soul’, the 
words Zindeh Ravn, 4.¢., ‘of the living soul,’ are affixed to the name of 
the person in whose honour the buildings or institutions are founded, 


The name of the donor also is recited as “3 Lo y3 “ farmaiyashna,” 74.¢., 
ono at whose direction the building or institution is founded. As in 
the case of the jashans for religious buildings or charitable institutions, 
so in the case of religious ceremonies, the name of the person in whose 
niyat, t.e,, purpose, honour or memory, they are performed, is mentioned 


in the recital of the prayer. 2 Vide above, p. 145. ae 


202 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


have to initiate the candidate, perform, what is known as, the 
gewrd ceremony, which lasts for six days. This gewrd ceremony, 
which qualified them to initiate the candidate, consists of 
reciting the Yacna with its ritual for six consecutive days. 
The word “gewrd ? comes from the Avesta root garew, Sanskrit 
grah, German engreifer, Pers, giraftan to acquire, to take hold of. 
Both the priests perform the Yagna ceremony, i.e., recite the 
whole of the Yacna with the necessary ritual. One ofthe 
two priests who recites the whole Yagna jg called Joti (Zaota), 
i.e., lit. the performer of ceremonies or the offerer of? offerings. 
The other priest who assists him in going through the ceremony 
is called Rathwi.!1 The priest, who performs the ceremony as 
the Joti, is technically said.to have “taken the Gewri,’ i.c., 
to have acquired the qualification of continuing the ceremony. 
The priest who takes the gewrd on the first’ day, is said to have 
taken the first gewrd. He is to pass a night of vigil and watch-— 
fulness. If he has nocturnal pollution, he is said to have lost 
the efficacy or the qualification of his gewrd. In that case, the 
gewra must be repeated the next day. If the efficacy continues, 
on the next day, in the morning, he “ gives the second gewrd”’ 
to his colleague. In, this case, the other priest recites the 
Yacna as Joti and the priest who gives the gewré acts as a 
Rathwi. He,-now, in his turn has to pass the night in vigil. 
Thus each of the two priests has to “take the gewrd.” on an 
alternate day. These gewra ceremonies are to be performed for 
six days. Toavoid the chance of the gewrds being vitiated by 
the failure of the vigil of the priest holding the gewré for the 
particular day or by some other cause, at times, three priests are 
made to take part in the gewrd ceremonies. Instead of one priest 
taking the gewrd, two perform the ceremony, so that, in case 
one fails to observe the required vigil and is disqualified 
for some cause, the other may serve, and the candidate may not 
be disappointed and the initiation not delayed. The candidate 


1 Rathwi or Raspi. Av, wlv4ay sas) lit., one who arranges the 


religious requisites at their proper (rathwya) places (Gah Uziran, 5), 


THE NAVAR 203 


‘has, during these six days, to pass his time in prayers during 
“the five Gahs and to observe all the observances of saying the 
grace at meals, &c. He is not to come in contact with any 
non-Zoroastrian. 


(c) On the sixth day of the gewraé ceremony, the priest who 
has taken the sixth gewra, i.e., has recited the Yacna with its 
ritual as the Joti on the sixth day, initiates the candidate, 
The candidate takes his bath in the morning with all its 
formalities and puts on a new set of white clothes. “He puts on 
a white turban which isa symbol or insignia of priesthood. 
The parents of the candidate invite a few friends, both male and 
female, to witness the ceremony. In mofussil towns like Nao- 
sari, a general invitation to males is passed round, through a 
crier, in the whole town. So, any Zoroastrian who chooses may 
attend. 


At the appointed hour at about nine o’clock in the morning, 
a procession is formed to take the candidate to the temple for 
initiation. At Naosari, the-headquarters of the priesthood, 
the assembly gathers at the house of the candidate. CGenitle- 
men gather outside the house and the ladies inside, and ‘they 
all then go to the temple in a procession. The candidate walks 
in the front with the head-priest of the town, or, in his absence, 
with his deputy, on his right: Other elders of the community 
follow. The ladies follow last. In Persia, the ladies throw 
dry fruits and silver coins over the candidate. In Bombay, 
the Parsees not having quite separate quarters, and the city 
being too thickly populated to arrange for the ceremonial 
procession, the candidate stays in the fire-temple itself, for the 
six days of the gewrdé. So, the gathering assembles at the temple 
itself and the procession also is formed there. It formally 
moves from one part of the temple to another. The candi- 
date is dressed in his full dress consisting of Jama (Pers. 
pala), which is a loose gown-like dress of white linen, and 
pichori, a kind of linen-belt, put round the waist. All the male 
members of the gathering are similarly dressed in their full 


204 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


dress. The candidate carries a shawl in his left hand, it being 
an insignia of an office or function which a person holds for the 
time being. 

The candidate carries in his right hand a gurz or a mace. 
Gurz is the Avesta vazra, Sans. 43H, @ 
mace or club. It symbolizes that the 
candidate is now going to be a member 
of the church militant and undertakes to fight against all 
evils, physical or moral. In the Khorshed Nydish,. Meher 
Yazad or the Angel Mithra, the God of Light, Justice and. 
Truthfulness is represented as carrying a vazra or mace to 
strike it over the heads of the Daévas or the evil powers 
(Yazii vazrem hunivikhtem kamérédhé paiti'daévanim).1 The 
Fire-temple where the candidate is going to be initiated is 
called Dar-i-Meher, 7z.e., the Port or the Gate of Meher (Mithra). 
So, he carries the gurz with him as the insignia of his coming 
office, in which he has to fight against the enemies of Light, 
Justice and Truthfulness and has to make his way for the 
church triumphant in Heaven.? 


The gurz or the 
mace, 


On the procession arriving at the Fire-temple, the candidate 
goes to the Yazashna-gih where he is 
to perform the Yacna ceremony. The 
assembled priests are generally seated on 
carpets.spread on the floor. The candidate removes his upper 
garments which form his full dress, performs the pddydb-kusti, 
and puts on the padén (mouth-veil).2 Thus prepared, he is 
bronght before the assembly by one of the two priests, who 


Preparation in the 
temple. 


1 Khorshed Nyaish, 15. 

2 For further particulars about the gurz, vide my paper, ‘“‘ The Gurz as 
a Symbol among the Zoroastrians”* (Journal of the Anthropological 
Society of Bombay, Vol. VIII, No. 7, pp. eS): My Anthropological 
Papers, Part I, pp. 313 ef. seq, 

3 In Persia, the Poddén hangs from a crown or a turban, decorated with 
gold and silver coins. The Sir J.J. Z. Madresa Jubilee Volume 
(pp. 435-38, Mr. Khoday4r’s article) gives an interesting account of, 
what is called, the “Vets’*’ and “ Verd” ceremonies in the Navar 
initiation there. 


“mm NAVAR 205 


asks for permission to initiate him. He asks: “Gentlemen 
of this gathering (Anjuman, Avesta Hanjamana), doth it please 
you that this candidate may be initiated ?” The Head-priest 
present, after the interval of a few seconds, takes the silence 
of the assembly for its assent and nods his head, or puts forward 
both his hands, to signify the acquiescence of the gathering. 

The candidate must be free from leprosy 1 or any wound from 
which blood oozes, otherwise he would be rejected and the neces- 
sary permission refused. It is to give the assembly an Opportu- 
nity to see or examine him well, that he is presented “before it 
after the removal of the upper garments.2. The/canclidate then 
returns to the Yazashna-géh to go through the ceremonies of his 
initiation and to recite the Yacna with its ritual, The visitors 
disperse after flowers and rose-water have been presented to 
thera. If the father or the guardian of the candidate is well 
off, he distributes money among the assembled priesthood. 
Relations and friends are, at times, feasted at noon and even at 
night, if parents can afford to do.so. 

On retiring to the Yazashna-géh, the candidate recites the 
Miné-Navar Yacna (Yacna without the Visparad)? with its 
ritual, he acting as the jot? and the priest who initiates him 
acting as the raspi. In the afternoon, he performs the 6a £ 
ceremony and.takes his meals, after which he performs the 
dfringdn ceremony. I give here an illustration which shows 
the Navar initiate performing the Yacna ceremony. 

On the second and the third day, the candidate is permitted to 
have.only one meal. The above three ceremonies are repeated 


7 On the Iranian horror of leprosy, cf. Vendidad Il, 29, 37; Avan 
Yasht, Yt, V, 92. Herodotus I, 138, “‘ Whoever of the citizens has the 
leprosy or scrofula is not permitted to stay within a town, nor to have 
communication with other Persians.” According to Ctesius, Megabyzus 
escaped from the hands of his captors, on pretending that he had 
leprosy. 

? It is said, that, in bas the candidate is taker to an adjoining room 
and there made stark naked and examined (vide Mr. Khoday4r’s article 
in the Sir J. J. Z. Madressa Jubilee Volume, p. 437). 

3 Vide Darmesteter, Le Zend-Avesta, Vol. I, p. LX VII. 

4 Ibid, Vol. IT, pp. 152-53, 


206 INITIATION CERRMONIES 


in honour of Sraosh on the second day, and the 6d) is per- 
formed-in the morning instead of in the afternoon as on the 
first day. On the third day, the above three ceremonies are 
again repeated in honour of Sirouza (the Yazatas presiding 
over the thirty (st) days (rouz) of the month). On the fourth 
day, the Yagna is recited with the Visparad, the bé7 and 
afringén in honour of Ahura Mazda. Thus -qualified,. the 
priest now called hérbad (Avesta, aéthrapaiti, teacher).can 
perform the dfringan, Nadjote, marriage and such other ceremo- 
nies, but not the Yagna, the Vendidid or the b4j ceremonies, 


_It appears, that the ndvar, has been from the first, a ceremony 
of trial, of self-abnegation, self-denial, and self-renunciation. 
The following facts point to that inference :— 


1. The candidate is expected to pass.his days during the 
continuation of the whole ceremony which lasts about a month, 
in akind of retreat, in order to be free from worldly thoughts 
and to be engaged in pious thoughts; he must sleep on the 
floor and not en a cot, and take his meals at stated hours after 
prayers. According to the» present custom, if the candidate 
has a pollutis nocturna~during the two Bareshniims, he is 
disqualified and has to go through the Bareshnim again, 
because the untoward occurrence is held to show, that he was 
not passing his time in pure divine meditation, which he was 
expected to-do, as a would-be priest, but that he thought of 
worldly matters! 2. During the last four days, when he is 
regularly being. initiated and performs the Yagna cerethony 
himself as jéf, he has to take only one meal on the second 
and third days, to prove that he has control over hunger and 
thirst and hence over other passions. 


A good deal of the original lofty ideal seems to be losing its 
ground now. In order to avoid the risk of failure in the test of 


1 this occurs during the last four days, the candidate is called 
nabad (§ o936 non-existent’) and is absolutely rejected as unfit for the 
priesthood, ; 


’ THE MARTAB 207 


pious meditation, self-abnegation, or control of passions, candi- 
dates are made to go through the initiatory ceremony in their 
early boyhood before the age of fifteen or sixteen, when accord- 
ing to the course of nature, they are expected to be free from 
pollutis nocturna. Again now-a-days, it is not only those boys, 
who are really intended to be priests in the future, that go 
through the initiation, but many others who are intended ‘by 
their parents for other walks of life. The latter are made to 
go through it with the idea, that it is a religious ceremony 
worthy to be gone through. There are many medical men, 

_ lawyers and merchants of the priestly class, who have been 
made to go through it by their parents in their boyhood. 
That being the case, the whole of the Yacna.is not learnt and 
not recited but only a part. One would not: object, and must 
not object, to this procedure, if even. in these cases, the 
original lofty ideal were kept in mind. The salutary effect 
would not be lost, if a boy were to be made to go through the 
discipline of the initiation in an intelligible manner. A doctor, 
a lawyer, or a merchant, if trained in early boyhood to a little 
discipline, pious meditation, self-control, and self-abnegation, 
would bea better man in-his profession by that kind of discipline, 
trial and training. What is wanted is, that the original high — 
ideal must always be kept in view. 


2. THE MARTAB. 


The second degree for priesthood is known as Martab.1 The 
degree-of navar does not entitle a priest to perform, what may 
be called, the ceremonies of the inner circle of the Fire-temple. 
He cannot perform the Yagna, the Vendiddd and the Bij cere- 
monies. He cannot officiate at the purification ceremonies 


1 The word is Arabic murattab <3_»* it, prepared, classified, It seems 
to be connected with the word martaba 743 5* a step, dignity.. It may 
thus mean, one who has risen to a higher step or grade or dignity, 
Some speak of this initiation as MarAtib. In that case, it is Arabic 
wed Ly maratib, i.e., grades and gradations of rank. The sense then 


would be “ one who has passed through more than one grade or rank,” 


208 INITIATION CEREMONIES 


of nén and bareshniim. In order to qualify himself to do so, 
he must go through the Martab ceremony: Besides the Yacna 
and the Visparad, which he had to read for his Navarhood he 
has now to read the Vendidad. 


For this ceremony, the candidate has to go through one 
bareshnim of 10 days. On the 11th day, he, in company witha 
qualified priest, performs the khib ceremony! and recites, for 
it the Mino Navar Yacna with its ritual. On the second day 
in the morning, he has to recite another Yacna in honour of 
Sraosh, and at midnight he recites the Vendidad.., This com- 
pletes the martab ceremony and he is now entitled to perform 
and recite any of the Zoroastrian rituals and prayers. 


The Zoroastrian Navarhood, in some of its features, reminds 
us of the Christian Knighthood of olden times, when Knighthood 
was a kind of religious order. The following passage presents 
many points of similarity between an Iranian Navar and 
an ancient Christian Knight: “The youug man, the squire, 
aspiring to knighthood, was first of all stripped of his garment 
and put into a bath, the symbol of purification. On his coming 
out of the bath, they clad him ina white tunic, the symbol of 
purity, a red robe, emblematic of the blood he was to shed in 
the cause of. the faith, and a black doublet, in token of the 
dissolution. which awaited him as well as all mankind. Thus 
purified and-clothed, the novice kept a rigorous fast for twenty- 
four hours. When evening came, he entered the church and 
passed=the night in prayer, sometimes alone, sometimes with 
a priest and with sponsors who prayed in company with him. 

When the sermon was over, the novice advanced 
towards the altar with the sword of knighthood, suspended 
from his neck ; the priest took it off, blessed it and attached 
it to his neck again. The novice then went and knelt before 
the lord, who was to knight him. ‘To what end,’ the lord 


1 The khub is of two grades ; for the major, the recital of the whole of 
the Yacna with the full ritual is requisite ; for the minor, the recital of 
a few his or sections (III to VII) are requisite. 


THE MARATB 209 


then asked him, ‘Do you desire to enter into this order? If 
it is that you may be rich, repose yourself, and be honoured 
without doing honour to knighthood, then you are unworthy 
of it.’” 


The points of similarity are the following :—(1) Both, the 
Iranian Navar,and the Christian Knight, had to go through 
purificatory baths. (2) Both had a white dress as a symbol 
.of purity. (3) The Knighthood had its fasts. The Navarhood 
had no fasts but a kind of abstention or temperance. (4) Both 
had some weapons to serve as symbols. The Knights had 
swords; the Navars had gurzs or maces. (5) Both the orders 
signified poverty and a desire to serve and work against evil. 


CHAPTER IX. 


CONSECRATION CEREMONIES. 


I—CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 
AND THE FIRE-TEMPLES. 


Consecration is ‘‘the act or ceremony of separating from a 
common to a sacred use, or of devoting 
and dedicating a person or thing to the 
service and worship of God’’ by certain rites or, solemnities. 
Consecration does not make a person or thing, sacred but 
declares him or it to be sacred, that is devoted_to God or to 
divine service; as the consecration of priests among the 
Israelites ; the consecration of the vessels used in the temple ; 
the consecration of a bishop.t The Parsees have no conse- 
eration of persons, in the sense in which the word is used among 
the Christians, e.g., the consecration of a bishop. If, by conse- 
cration is meant the conferring of a certain qualification upon a 
person to enable him or to entitle him to do a certain religious 
function or rite, they\have such a consecration. But the 
principal idea is, that the person seeks consecration by his own 
willing acts rather than any other person conferring the 
consecration.So;in the case of a person, the more proper 
word, from a Parsee point of view, is ‘“‘initiation” than 
‘‘gonsecration.’ I have already spoken of these initiation 
ceremonies under a separate head.? Among things, there is 
the consecration of the following -— 


I. The Sacred Fires and the Fire-Temples. 
II. The Towers of Silence. 


_ Consecration. 


UL The Alat (implements, apparatus), i.c., religious re- 
quisites. 


+ Webster. . 
* Vide above, Chapters VII and VIII. 


CONSECRATION OF THE FIRES 211 


1. There are three grades of the Sacred Fire—(A) The Sacred 

Fire of the Atash Behram, (B) that 

of He gare? orades of the Atash, Adaran and (C) that of the 

Atash Dadgah. These three have their 

different rituals of consecration and also different rituals 

for the daily prayers at the five times (gahs) of the day, when 

they are fed with fresh fuel. We will, at first, speak of . the 
process of consecrating these three grades of the sacred fire. 


(A) Consecration of the Sacred Fire of the First Grade. 
the Atash Behram. 


The st formulated for the consecration of the sacred: fire 
seems to have been developed from certain 
passages of the eighth chapter of the Vendi- 
dad (VIII. 73-96);.where, it is enjoined, that 
the fires used for different purposes and by different tradesmen 
may be carried from their places of use and business and 
enshrined in a Dad-gih (Av. Daityd-gatu), 7.e., in a proper 
place. The list of fires,there enumerated ‘is as follows :— 
Fires used (1) in burning a corpse, (2) in burning filth, (3) in 
burning dirt. (4) The fire used by a potter, (5) a glass-blower, 
(6) a coppersmith, (7) a goldsmith, (8) a silversmith, (9) an 
ironsmith,. (10) a steelsmith, (11) a baker, (12) a furnace- 
worker, (13)..a tinsmith, (14) a shepherd, (15) a military man 
or soldier, (16) a neighbour. 


The 16 fires which 
make up one. 


The process of. collecting the different fires and of purifying 
and, consecrating them is so long and intricate, that, naturally, 
authorities differ in the matter of the details, though they agree 
on, broad general principles. While , writing on the subject of 
this process, the late Dastur Minocheherji Jamaspji Jamaspasana! 


a 


1 I was indebted to the late Dastur Kaikhosru Jamaspji for kindly 
giving me a perusal of his late grandfather’s manuscript notes on the 
subject. 


212 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 

said, that in the case of all the six Atash-Behrams founded and 
consecrated in Bombay and elsewhere, there has not been any 
similarity in the matter of the process. The process has differed 
in, details. In the following account, I principally follow the 
description given by the late Dastur Erachji Sohrabji Meherji 
Rana.! The Ithéter Revayet also refers to this subject.” 


The list of the Vendidad given above has suggested to later 
ritualists the thought of collecting 16 kinds of different fires to 
produce, out of them, one fire for consecration. The different 
fires now collected in practice are the following :—(1) The fire 
used in burning a corpse, (2) the fire used by a dyer, (3) the fire 
from the house of a king or a ruling~ authority, (4) that 
from a potter, (5) a brick-maker, (6),a fakir or an ascetic, 
(7) a goldsmith, (8) a mint, (9) an ironsmith, (10) an armourer, 
(11) a baker, (12) a brewer or distiller or an idol-worshipper, 
(18) a soldier or a traveller, (14) a shepherd, (15) fire produced 
by atmospheric lightning, (16) household fire or fire from the 
house of any Zoroastrian. 


Each of the above fires-is at first collected, purified and 

te cues ; consecrated in a certain manner. All 

i Mt Stages 
the oodaes#atin, of these fires, thus collected, purified and 
ue era Bek consecrated, are united into one fire, which 
bee Bn eo of is then consecrated as one united fire. 

6 Fira ge. This consecrated fire is then enthroned in a 
Temple which itself is previously consecrated, I will describe 
these processes under the following heads :— 

1. Collection of the 16 fires. 

2. Purification of the 16 fires, 

3. Consecration of the 16 fires. 

4, Unition of the 16 consecrated fires. 


§. Consécration of the united Sacred Fire. 
a eT a a 
1 Vide his account in the “ Tam&am Avesta ni Ketab,” pablished by 
Mr, Dadabhoy Cowagji, Vol. IL, pp. 213-44, 
2 Published in 1846. 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 213 


6, Consecration of the Temple itself. 
7. Enthroning the united fire. 


The fires of the above-mentioned 16 tradesmen or function- 

ae ee aries are collected, purified and consecrated 
of the collection: of according to a fixed procedure. We will 
the. 10 ee: here deseribe in detail the process of 
collecting or fetching the first kind of fire, viz., that from a 
burning corpse :—A Zoroastrian is to go to a burning, ground 
and ask for a portion of the fire that burns a corpse! If 
the party gives it of his own accord, at the time when the 
burning process takes place, well and good. If not, the Zoro- 
astrian must wait there till the whole of the corpse has been 
burnt, and then, -when the relations and friends of the deceased 
go away, he is to take a portion of the fire left. He must ask 
a non-Zoroastrian to take out for him a certain portion of the. 
fire from the burning mass. Ifa non-Zoroastrian is not 
-available, or if he refuses to do that work for him, then two 
Zoroastrian laymen may perform the pédydéb kusti, hold the 
paiwand, recite the Sraosh_ Baj upto Ashahé,? and then hold 
over the fire, at the.distance of about a foot, a perforated 
ladle containing a little powdered sandalwood and frankincense 
and such other substance as may easily ignite. They must 
not let the ladle touch the fire. The heat of the fire from the 
burning ‘corpse easily ignites the fuel on the perforated ladle. 
The fire\so ignited must be taken by the laymen to an open 
place.They must then finish the Baj and have a bath of the 
riman purification. As the fire is that which has burnt an 
impure corpse, it is believed to have a part of the corpse’s 
defilement; so, the carriers of it are required to purify 
themselves. : 


1 Dastur Minocheherji’s above-mentioned notes say, that itis prefer~ 
able to have, if possible, the fite from a Brahman’s corpse, 

2 The Ithétar RevAyet (4.¢,, the 78 RevAyets, p. 9) is over-serupulous 
and enjoins that when one goes before the fire of the corpse all those 
precantions for pollution#as are required in the ease of the corpse itself, 
should be observed. 


214 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


‘The fire thus brought from a burning ground is then fed with 
fuel and is placed on a piece of ground open to wind. By its 
side and in a windward direction, they place a heap of powdered 
sandalwood, frankincense and such other easily combustible 
substances. The heat and the blaze of the fire, carried by the 
wind towards the heap, ignites it. When thus ignited, this 
fresh fire is fed with fuel. Then, again, by its side another 
heap of powdered sandalwood, frankincense and such other 
combustibles is placed in such a position, that the blaze arid ‘the 
heat of the fire produced as above may be carried by the wind 
towards it and that it may be easily ignited. This process is 
repeated 91 times. The distance between each—burning fire 
and the next heap to be ignited must be about half a gaz or 
about a foot. Each preceding fire is: allowed to extinguish 
itself. The fire ignited for the 91st time is then considered to 
be fit for use and it is kept burning by being regularly fed. 
This is the process of collecting the first fire in the above list 
of 16 fires, viz., the fire of a burning corpse.! 


All the other 15 fires are-similarly collected, but the process 
differs in the following points :—(a) The number of times, for 
which the above process is to be repeated, varies. For example, 
in the case of the second fire in the above list, viz., the fire 
of a dyer, the number of times for which the process is 
repeated is 80. I give below,? a table which shows at one sight, 
the number of times through which. the process of collection, 
the process of purification, and the process of consecration, 
passes. (b) In the case of the other fires, no defilement is sup- 
posed to be attached to them as that to the fire of the burning 


1 The Ithéter Revayet enjoins » more tedious process. It says, that 
the fire brought, as said above, from a corpse may be purified by passing 
through the process over nine pits. Over it, one Yacna of Sraosh, one 
Visparad and one Vendidéd of Sraosh must be recited. In this way, 
the whole procesa is to be recited 91 times, ¢,¢., 91 fires may be brought 
at different times from a burning corpse and purjfied and then collected , 


together.’ : 
2 Vide below, pp- 222-23. 


CONSECRATION OF THE’ SACRED FIRES 215 


corpse ; 80, the laymen, who fetched them from their respective 
places, need not personally go through any kind of riman purifi- 
cation as that required in the case of the fire that burnt a 
corpse. (c) Again, a portion of any one of the next 15 fires can be 
bodily lifted up from the mass and carried to the place of its use. 
It need not be produced by the ignition of powdered fuel on a 
perforated ladle, as in the case of the fire that burnt a corpse. 
The rest of the process is the same, 


‘In the case of the sixteenth fire, the household fire, it must 
be that of the house of a Mazdayaenian or « Zoroastrian. But 
in this class are included several fires: A Zoroastrian may be 
a priest or a layman. So, the fire must be made up of the 
fires from the houses of a priest and a layman. Among ,the 
priests, there are the Dasturs or the head-priests and Mobads 
or ordinary priests. So, the firefrom the house of the priests 
must be made up from two fires, fetched from the houses, both 
of a Dastur and of a Mobad. Again, to this last class of fire, 
viz., the household fire, must be added the fire produced by 
friction which was the earliest primitive way of producing 
fire for household purposes. There were two waysof producing 
fire by friction in early days, viz., (a) the friction of two pieces 
of flint and the friction of two pieces of wood. So fires produc- 
ed by both these two ways of friction must be added to 
the household fire fetched from the houses of priests and 
laymen. ‘ . 


At first, the household fire, made up from the fires of the 
houses of the priests and laymen, must be made to pass 40 
times through the above process of ignition, wherein a 
fire is produced by some combustibles being placed in the 
windward direction of a burning fire. To ‘the household 
fire, thus collected, may be added the fire’ produced by 
the above-said two methods of friction. The fire thus 
formed by ignition or combustion must again be passed 
144 times through the above-described process. , . 


216 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


The fire thus collected is considered fit to be handed over to 
priests for purification and consecration. 
Two priests take charge of it. They per- 
form the pédydb-kusti, hold the paiwand 
and recite the Sraosh Baj upto the word Ashahé. While 
reciting the Sraosh Baj, they recite in it the Dasturi also as in 
the case of the Bareshndm purification.! They then proceed to 
purify the fire. In this process of purification, they follow the 
precepts of the Vendidad (VIII, 73-78) which refers.to the 
practice of purifying a fire that is burning a corpse. It enjoins 
as follows:—(a) At first, the burning matter may be removed 
and its further hurning may be stopped. (6) Then a Zoroas- 
trian may take a perforated ladle, place some easily ignitible 
fuel upon it and then bold it above the burning fire so as 
not to touch it. The heat of the original fire, which was 
burning the corpse, passes up through the holes of the 
ladle and ignites the fuel.on it. The fire so produced 
must be put by the side of the fire that was burning the 
corpse at a distance ofa vitashti, i.e., about 10 inches from 
it. The original fire may then be allowed to extinguish itself. 
(c) The fire thus prepared by the first stage of purification may 
then be fed with further fuel. Then a second fire may he pre- 
pared from it-by the above process, 7.¢., by holding over it at 
some distance, a perforated ladle containing some easily ignit- 
iblefuel. \On the fuel being ignited, this second firethus prepar- 
ed may be placed by the side of the first fire at a distance of 
about 10 inches. The second fire must be fed with further 
fuel and the first fire allowed to extinguish itself in its turn. 
This is the second stage of purification, This process is 
repeated nine times. Justas a man, that has come into 
contact with a dead body, has to be purified at nine different 
magas or pits, each at the distance of a fixed measure, so the 
fire that was defiled by coming into contact with a dead body 
had to be purified ninetimes. After the ninth process, the fire 
produced thereby is considered to be pure. 


1 Vide above, Bareshnim Purification, p. 128, Vide also p. 64 


2. The process of 
purification. 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 217 


Now the modern practice of purifying the fire, fetched or 
rr collected as above, follows the above 
he modern prac- ay as 
tice in conformity process enjoined by the Vendidad but with 

with the Vendidad. : : : 

_ an increased number of times. Two priests 
take charge of the fire collected for them, as said above, by 
two laymen. They hold over the fire, at the height of about 
half a gaz or about 12 to 15 inches, a perforated ladle 
containing powdered sandalwood, frankincense and such-other 
easily combustible substances. When ignited, they place it 
on a clean place and feed it with fuel. 


The later Revayets say, that the priests are to prepare 
91 magas or pits, each with a little powdered fuel of the 
above kind. Then they are to place the fire kindled as 
above into the first of these pits. Then they are tohold a 
perforated ladle over the fire kindled as above and get the 
powdered fuel over it ignited... They are to place the 
fire so ignited in the second pit which is full of powdered 
fuel. This fuel further kindles the fire. They are to hold the 
perforated ladle over it and thus repeat the process over the 
91 pits for 91 times,~The fire thus produced at the 91st time 
is said to be purified and fit for consecration. Each of the 
pits is to be connected with the preceding adjoining pit by a 
paiwand formed of apiece of string or apiece of sandalwood. As 
the process goes on, the preceding fire or the fire of the pre- 
ceding pit\is allowed to extinguish itself. Now, it being not 
practicable in towns to have a large open place, where 91 
pits of the above kind can be provided, in present practice, 
the pits are replaced by fire-vases, and the process is repeated 
in vases. The number of censers need not be 91. A few ee 
would allow the process to be rejeated 91 times can do. 


This is the process of the purification of fire named first in 
out above list, viz., the fire of a burning corpse. Similar is the 
process for purifying the other 15 fires, But the number of times 
for which the process is repeated is different for ‘the different 
kinds of fire. The number of times for the purification process 


218 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


is in each case the same as the number of times for the 
collection process. The.table which I give below (pp. 222-23) 
will show this at one glance. 


The fire, collected and purified as above, is placed in a censer 

B The proces of and taken to the place where the re- 
consecrating the 16 ligious ceremonies for the consecration are 
o to be performed. Two priests, who ‘have 
gone or the Bareshném, take a portion of that fire, in 
a separate censer, and recite over itan Yacna anda Vendidad 
ceremony with the Khshnuman, or in honour of, Dadar Ahura 
Mazda, The fire, over which these recitals—one of the Yagna 
and one of the Vendidad—with their ritual are made, is kept 
separate in a separate censer and constantly fed.” In the 
meantime the fire collected and purified as above, and out 
of which only a portion was removed on the first day for 
consecration, is fed and kept burning. On the second day, 
another portion out of it is taken and the Yagna and Vendidad 
ceremonies are performed over it in honour of Ahura Mazda. The 
fire (which is a portion of the same first kind of fire, vzz., the fire of 
a burning corpse) thus consecrated on the second day ismixed up 
with the fire consecrated on the first day and which, as said above, 
is kept burning.in a separate censer. On the third dey again, 
another portion.of the above purified but unconsecrated fire of 
the first_kind, is taken and consecrated as on the first two days 
with a recital of the Yagna and the Vendidad in honour of 
Ahura Mazda. The fire (.e., the third portion of the first kind 
of fire) thus consecrated on the third day, is mixed up with 
the fire which was consecrated on the first two days and 
which was united or mixed up on the second day. 


Then, similarly, a portion‘of the purified but unconsecrated 
fire of the first kind may be taken each day from roz Hormazd 
(t.e,, the first of the month) to roz Aneran (i.e. the 30th day 
of the month), 7.¢., for 30 days and consecrated each day by the 
recital of one Yacnain the morning and one Vendidaéd after mid- 
night, both recited in honour of the Yazata or the angel presiding 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 219 


on the particular day on which the consecration takes place. 
For example, on roz (day) Hormazd, the recital of the Yacna 
and the Vendidad must be in honour of Ahura Mazda; on rez 
Bahman, in honour of Bahman, and soon. The fire consecrated 
each day isto be united with the united fire made up of the 
consecrated fires of all the preceding days including the first 
three days. P 


« 

On the completion of the first round of the ceremonies for the 
30 days of the month, commencing with Horm&zd (the first day) 
and ending with Aner&n (the 30th day), a second round of 30 days, 
in the same way as above, must be gone through. Then a third 
round must be similarly gone through, but not for the whole of 
the month, #.¢., for 30 days, but only upto the Zamyad roz, 
2.¢, the 28thday. Thus, as shown above, altogether 91 recitals 
of the Yacna and 91 of the Vendidéd are to be repeated for 
consecrating the fire of the first kind. The following table 


explains this :— . 
: Recitals. 

On the first three days inhonour of Ahura Mazda .. o. 3 

On 30 days from the Ist day (roz siaaieg to the 30th oe 
(voz Anerau) of the month .. as 30 
On 30 days as above for the secondtime 30 

On 28 days from the lst day to the 28th day (roz 3 srpte 
during the third month se ee oe +e 28 
a1 


Now, in the recital of the Yagna and the Vendidad, two priests 
are required. So, if there be one pair of priests, they would 
take 91 days to complete the consecration of the first kind of © 
fire, viz., the fire of the burning corpse. One pair can perform 
and recite more than one Yagna during the Havan gah or the 
morning hours, but they can perform only one Vendidad in the 
Hoshain gah or after midnight. So, one pair would take at 
least 91 days to complete the consecration of the first kind of 
fire. But morethan one paircan take part—and they generally 


220 CONSECRATION CEREMONTES 


do so—in the consecration of fires. In that case, the time would 
be shortened. Then the recital in honour of the Yazatas from 
Hormazd to Aneran need not be from day to day, #.e., on the 
respective days on which they presided. What is considered 
as essentially wanted is 91 recitals of the Yagna and 91 of the 
Vendidad, of which the first three are in honour of Ahura 
Mazda, the next 30 in honour of the 30 Yazatas in their 
order, the second 30 alse in honour of the 30 Yazatas,;*and 
the last 28 in honour of the 28 Yazatas from Hormazd to 
Jamyad. The fire of the first kind, thus united and consecrated 
after 91 recitals of the Yagna and the Vendidad, (the number 
of the recitals being the same as that of the processes of 
collection and of those of purification), is to.be kept apart ina 
censer marked with its name. A similarprocess is to be gone 
through over the other 15 fires. 


‘ 
In the case of the other 15 fires the details of the process 

* of consecration are well nigh the same. 
The points of difference are two: Firstly, 
the number of recitals of the Yagna and 
Vendidad over the portions of fire, i.e., the number of the 
processes of consecration varies in each. For example, in 
the case of the fires Nos. 2, 3, 4, etc., viz., that of the dyer, the 
king, potter, brick-maker, etc., the number of recitals is 80, 
70, 61, etc. which was also the number of its processes of 
collection and purification. Secondly, the order of the Yazatas 
with whose Khshnuman, i.e, in whose honour, the recital is 
mace, differs. For example, in‘ the case of the second kind 
of fire, viz., that of the dyer, the recitals of the Yaqnas and 
the Vendidads for the first three days are in honour of the 
second Yazata Bahman. Then the remaining 77 recitals begin 
from Bahman, the second Yazata, and taking two rounds of 30 
days end in the third round at Rashu, the eleventh Yazata. In 
the case of the third kind of fire, the Ist three recitals must 
be in honour of the third Yazata Ardibehesht. Then the 
remaining 67 begin with the third Yazata and end with Adar 


Consecration of 
the other 15 fires. 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 221 


in the third round.’ In the case of the fourth kind of fire, 

they are in honour of the fourth Yazata Sheherivar and so on, 
“so that the recitals for the 16th, kind of fire are in honour of 
‘the 16th Yazata Meher. 


I append here a table, giving the particulars, above referred 
to, about the different kinds of fires that are united to form the 
Sacred Fire of the Atash Beherim. (1) The first column gives 
a list of the names or the kinds of fires. (2) The second 
column gives the number of times the processes/of (a), col- 
lection, (6) purification, and (c) consecration . are’ repeated. 
The number for the repetition of each of all these three 
different kinds of processes is the same in the case of each of 
the fires (3) The third column gives“the names of the 
Yazatas with whose Khshnuman, or in whose honour, the 
consecration recitals of the Yagnas and the Vendidads for 
the first three days and nights are to be made. (4) The fourth 
column gives the names of the Yazatas in whose honour the 
rest of the consecration recitals of the Yaena and the 
Vendidéd are made and the number of the recitals. The 
number of recitals given.in this column and the three recitals 
in honour of each of the Yazatas mentioned in the third 
column, make\.up.the number of the second column. The 
second column-of the above list shows that there must 
be in all, 1,128 consecration recitals of the Yaena during the 
morning, hours of the day, and of the Vendidad after the mid- 
night. hours. One pair of priests can recite only one Vendidad. 
So, if only one pair of priests were to perform the ceremonies 
of consecrating the sixteen fires, they would take 1,128 days, 
2.€., about 37 to 38 months. But generally more than one 
jér or pair is employed in the consecration ceremonies. So. 
the whole ceremony is gone through in about a year or even 
less than a year. Again, several Jashan days, i.e., religious 
feast days and the Gahambar feast days occur during the 


1 £.g. in the case of the first fire, there are 91 repetitions for collec- 
tion, 91 for purification, and 91 for consecration. 


222 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


A Table giving the particulars about the different kinds 
Atash. Beherim and showing the number of the 


| No. of times for | Names of the Yazatas in 
‘a) the Collection, whose honour the three 


The Kind of Fire. @) Purificationand _ recitals of the Yagna 
(ec) Consecration and Vendidad are said 
processes. for the first three days. 
Y | 
1, Fire of a burning corpse. .| 91 | Ahura Mazda... 
; i 
i 3 
2. » oo Dyer... £, 80 Bahman & a 
3. 4 » King or ruling 10 | Ardibehesht .. ce 
authority. 
4, +» 2 Potter .. ee 61 ; Sheherivar .. es 
| . 
} 
5. » » Brick-maker .. 15 . | Spendarmad .. se 
6. » » Ascetic .. tes 50 | Khordaéd 3 ues 
7. 9s» Goldsmith (or Aly 60 | Amerd&ad 2 
chemist). 
8. » » Mint ee = 55 Depadar we “s 
| 
9. » 9» Tronsmith oe 61 " Adar .. or ae 
10. 9 x Armourer o 61 ’ Aban .. 
il, » » Baker .. se “61 ! Khorshed .. 
12, 45) Brewer, Distiller, 61 Mohor. . e ef 
or Idol-worship- 
s per. 
13. » , Soldier or Travel- 35 i Tir’ ., beg mt 
ler. 
14. » x» Shepherd a 33 Gosh (Dravasp) 
15. ae Atmospheric ‘Elec- ov Depmeher 
tricity. 
1G. Zoroastrian, 7.¢,, aj 4U-++- 144-1 gy Meher ine 


Dastur ( head-priest ), a 
Mobad (priest), or a lay- 
man and of friction by 
flint and pieces of wood, 


Total .. 1,128 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 223 


of Fires that are united to form the Sacred Fire of the 
processés of Collection, Purification und Consecration. 


Names of the Yazatas in whose honour the rest of the recitals of the 

i Yasna and Vendidad are said and the number of the recitals. 

By the word “first” is meant the first, beginning with the 
Yazata mentioned in the third column. 


3 recitals in honour of the first 28 Yazatas from Hormazd to 
Jamyad and 2 in honour of Marespend and Aneran. Thue 
(28 & Bae) 84-4 (2 x Dar) 4 88, 


3in honour of the first 17 Yazatas from Bahman to Rashna (te. 51) 
and 2in honour of the next 13 (é.¢, 26), In all 514-26==77. 


3 in honour of the first 7 Yazatas from Ardibehesht (i.e. 2ljand 2in 
honour of the remaining 23 (i.e. 46). So in all 21--46 = 67, 


2 in honour of the first 28 Yazatas from Sheherivar (¢.¢.56) and 1 in 
honour of the remaining 2 (7.e. 2). So in all 56-2 = 58. 


3in honour of tHe first 12 Yazatas from Roefdprnna (i.e. 36) and 2 in 
honour of the remaining 18 (7.e. 36). So all’ 36436 = 72. 


2 in honour of the first 17 Yazatas from Khordéd (4.e.34) and 1 in 
honourjof the remaining 13 (#.e. 13). So in all 344-13 == 47. 
2 in honour of the first 27 Yazatas from Amerdéd (7.e. 54) and 1 in 
honour of the remaining 3. So in all 544-3 == 57. : 


2 in honour of the first 22 Yazatas from Depddar (7.e. 44) and 1 in 
honour of the remaining 8, So in all 444-8 = 52. 


The same order as in the ease of the iourth kind of fire, but beginning 
with Adar, 

Do. do. do. but beginning 
with Abén. 

Do. do. do. but beginning 

with Khorshed. 

Do. do. do. but beginning 

with Mohor. 


2 for the first 2 Yazatas from Tir (tc. 4) and 1 for the remaining 
28, In all 4-28 == 32. 


| 1 for all the 30 Yazatas beginning from Gosh. So 30 in all. 


| 3 for the first 27 Yazatas, from Depmeher (¢.c. 81) and 2 for the 
remaining 3 (i.e. 6). Thusin all 814-6 = 87. 


6 for each of the 30 Yazatas beginning from Meher (i.e. 180) and 
Tmorein honour of Ahura Mazda. Thus 18) in all. 


224. CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


time that the whole process of consecration lasts. On such 
feast days, one Yagna and one Vendidad in honour of that 
particular Jashan must be recited. On the. occasion -of the 
Gahambar, i.e., the seasor festivals, the Visparad in honour 
of the Gahambar festival must be recited. The number of 
these additional recitals cannot be fixed as that depends 
upon the time of the year. 


What delays the pracess at times is the collection of the fire 
of atmospheric electricity, 7.e., the fire produced by the burning 
of a tree, grass or wood due to the fall of lightning. Months 
before the propesed time of the ceremony, messages are sent 
to different stations, requesting the Parsees there to be on a 
look-out to see if a falling lightning has produced a fire, and to 
take up a portion of the fire if so produced. The ceremony of 
consecrating the other fires need not-be delayed for this fire. It 
may goon. But,-if, by the time all the fires are consecrated, 
the fire produced by lightning does not come forth, the final 
unition and consecration of all the fires cannot take place. It 
must be indefinitely postponed. until: this. fire is produced and 
consecrated. —** . 


As said above, all the sixteen fires are, after the different 

4. The final Gams consecrations of its portions for the number 
tion of all-the 16 of times stated against their names in the 
re second column of the above table, col- 
leoted and fed in a separate censer. So, in all, there are 16 
different censers containing the 16 different fires. The final 
unition or collection must take place on the first Gatha 
Géhambar Festivat day, 7.e., on the first of the five intercalary 
days at the end of the year. A large censer is prepared for 
this process. Two Yaozd&thragar priests, i.c.. priests with 
Bareshnim and Khib, form a paiwand, and, at first, remove, 
by means of a ladle, the consecrated fire prepared froni the fire 
that burnt a corpse, from its éenser to this large censer.. Then, 
the other fires are carried there and united with the first in 
the consecutive order of their consecration. 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 225 


The censer, containing the fire thus united and formed 
5. The final con. from the 16 consecrated fires, is then 
secration of the carried to the ‘Yazashna-gih for final 
United Fire. 3 : 
consecration. At first, for three consecutive 
days, two priests recite, with their ritual, three Yagnas and 
three Vendidads, each on one day, with the Khshnuman of 
Sraosha, t.e.,in honour of the Yazata Sraosha. Then, from 
Hormazd, the Ist day of the next month to Aneran, the 30th 
of the month, 30 Yagnas and 30 Vendid&ds are recited, each’ 
on one day, in honour of the particular Yazata presiding on 
the particular day. Then, on the last day fixed-for the final 
consecration and enthronement of the Sacred. Fire, another 
Yacna in honour of Sraosha is recited with its ritual over it. 
This completes the cereniony of consecrating the Sacred Fire 
of Atash Behram, the Fire of the first degree. What remains 
to be done is to place it, or, as the»Parsee phraseology goes, 
to enthrone it, on its proper place (déityé-gatu). 
The Sacred Fire being consecrated, the chamber in the 
6. The Consecra- Fire-Temple where it is to be enthroned 
tion of the chamber must, also be. consecrated. That conse- 
of the Fire (the 5 
Sanctum Sanc Ctation ceremony lasts for three days. It 
forti): must be performed before the final day of 
consecration and enthronement. It consists of the performance 
there, for three consecutive days, of the Yacna and Vendidid 
ceremonies in honowr of Sraosha. 
On the day fixed, the final consecration-recital of the Yacna 
being said, the Sacred Fire is removed 
7. The final En- +5 the consecrated chamber with all dignity 
thronement. 
and solemnity. A procession is formed. 
The procession is headed by the head-priest and other priests 
who have officiated at the various ceremonies of the consecra- 
tion. Some bear swords and some Gurz or maces in their hands. 
The path, which leads from the Yazashna-gih where the final 
consecration of the Sacred Fire took place to the consecrated 
chamber where it is to be enthroned, is separated from the 
28 


226 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


adjoining place by pévis to keep it undefiled. Again, the path 
itself is divided into several -pavis, so that the two priests who 
carry the censer containing the Sacred Fire can remain, at each 
advance, in a separate pdvz. It must be remembered that, 
during the whole of the consecration processes also, the fire was 
kept within a separate pdvi where it was fed by the consecrating 
priests. The fire, after being carried thus to its chamber, is 
placed on alarge censer standing ona large slab of stone 
surrounded by a pévi. Then, it is fed with sandalwood, and 
frankincense, and an Atash Nydish 7.e., a prayerin, praise of 
fire, is recited. Then, in the front hall of the Temple, a 
Jashan ceremony is performed, wherein three. Afringans are 
generally recited. The first is with the. Khshnuman of 
Sraosha, the second with that of Dahman and the third 
again with that of Sraosha. Similarly, the Bajs are 
recited. This finishes the ceremony-of enthroning the Sacred 
Fire. 


The above ceremony of placing the Sacred Fire in its chamber 
ne is spoken of as the ceremony of takht- 
of eos ee nashini, t.e., enthronement or coronation. 
The Sacred Fire is metaphorically spoken of 
as a King, having aspiritual jurisdiction over the district round 
about. The stone slab or stand, on which its censer stands, is 
considered-and spoken of as its throne (takht). Its chamber is 
in the form of a dome, giving an idea of the dome of the 
heavens. Itis just under the centre of the dome that the 
censer stands on the slab. From that centre hangs, high above 
over the fire, a metallic tray which is spoken of as the crown 
(taj) of the Sacred Fire, which is looked at as the symbolic 
representation or emblem of a spiritual ruler. One or twa 
swords and one or two maces are hanging on the inner walls 
of its chamber. They serve as symbols of the Church militant, 
and signify, that thé faithful should fight against moral evils and 
vices, just as they would fight against their enemies, and thus 
make it, in the end, triumphant. 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES 227 


The Parsees have some general toasts, which may be called 

A national toast their “national toasts,” and which are 
cure® vith’ th, mow and then proposed at most of their 
Sacred Fire of the dinners. The first is “ Yazddn mi Yad, i.e., 
represented bea “In Honour and to the Glory of the Creator.” 

ing. Another, at times, is “4shé Farohar ni Yad,” 
i.e., “In honour of the dear departed holy ones.” One ofthe 
athers is “ Atash Beheram padshith nd pde-takht ni salamatt,” t:e., 
“For the safety of the foot of the Throne of the kingly Sacred 
Fire of the Atash Behram.’ In this toast, by the use of the 
word “throne,” the idea of the spiritual rule of the Fire is in- 
tended to be held. At times, even up to a few years ago, some 
laymen addressed the priests as pidshah, ¢.e., the king, because 
they attended to, and fed, the kingly fire., The visible fire of 
the Church is a symbol of the Invisible Church of God. 


In ancient Iran, the State and the Church were generally 

Tho State ana United. In bringing about by the hanian 
the Church in an- Renaissance after the Dark Ages of the 
ene aren: Parthian. rule, brought about the fall of 
the Achemenian Empire at tie hands of Alexander the 
Great, one of the ways adopted for the purpose by Ardeshir 
Babegin was that of the Unity of the Church and the State. 
His Vazir. and~Dastur (miniater and head-priest) Taosar 
alludes to-this, at some length, in his letter! to Jasnasfshah, 
the King of Tabaristan.? In Zoroastrianism, the Unity of the 


1 Journal Astatique, Tome III, March-April 1894. 


2During the last century, this question was discussed in another way 
and had even gone to the Court of Law. The Shahanshahi sect of 
the Parsees at Surat opposed the erection of an Atash Behram by the 
Kadmi sect, on the ground that there cannot be two Atash Behrams 
in one city. Both parties produced before the Court evidence from 
religious books, old and new, to support their case. The Court decided 
that there may be more than one Atash Behram in one city. The same 
question was discused in Bombay at the end of the last century. 
There existed Atash Behram of the Sh&ahansh&ahi sect. Its Dastur 
objected to the erection of another, saying, that, as there cannot be two 
kings in one and the same city, there cannot be two Atash Behram 
padshahs (kings) in one and the same city. Both sides published treatises. 
In the end, the second Atash Behram, known as the Anjuman Atash 
Behram, was founded. 


228 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


Church is represented, as it were, by the Unity of the Fire. 
Purity and Unity play the important part in the consecration 
of the great Sacred Fire. At present, thaugh the Zoroastrian 
Church is separated: from the State, it looks to the State— 
though now a non-Zoroastrian State—for its protection, for its 
sway. So, in their Afringdén prayers, they pray, even now, as 
they did in ancient Iran, for the long life, prosperity and 
just and happy rule of the king. What Herodotus said of-the 
ancient Iranians, that they, before praying for themselves, 
prayed for their sovereign and for their community, is true 
even now.! Not only in the Afringans, but also in the 
Tandarugti prayer, recited at the end of all the formal prayers, 
a Parsee prays for his king. In their big-dinners also, the 
“ Health of the King ” is one of their toasts. 


Now, what does a Sacred Fire, purified and consecrated as 

Signification of above, signify to.a Parsee? (a) A Parsee 
the purifying and has to think for himself : ‘When this fire 
consecrating pro- ; oe 
cesses of the Sacred 0n this vase before me, though pure in itself, 
Fire. though the noblest of the creations of God, 
and though the best-symbol of the Deity, had to undergo 
certain processes of purification, had to draw out, as it were 
its essence,—nay, its quintessence—of purity, to enable itself 
to be worthy of occupying the exalted position, how much 
-more necessary, more essential, and more important is it for 
me-—a poor mortal who is liable to commit sins and crimes 
and who is likely to come into contaet with hundreds of 
evils. both physical and moral—to undergo the process of purity 
and piety, by making my manashni, gavashni and kunashni 
(thoughts, words and deeds) pass, as it were, throught a sieve of 
piety and purity, virtue and morality, and to separate by that 
means my humata, hukhta and hvarshia (good thonghts 


1“ He that sacrifices is not permitted to pray for himself alone ; but 
he is obliged to offer prayers for the prospority of all the Persians and 
the king, for he is himself included in the Persians.” (Herodotus, 
Bk. I., 132.) 


CONSECRATION OF THE SACRED FIRES - 229 


good words and good deeds) from my dushmata, duzukhia, and 
duzvarshia (bad thoughts, bad words and bad deeds), so that 
I may, in my turn, be enabled to acquire an exalted position 
in the next world? (6) Again, the fires put together as 
above are collected from the houses and places of business of 
men of different grades of society. This reminds a Parsee; 
that, as all these fires from the houses of men of difierent 
grades have by the process of purification, equally acquired 
the exalted place in the vase, so, before Gcd, all men—no 
matter to what grades of society they: belong—are equal 
provided they pass through the process of purification, ic.,’ 
provided they preserve purity of thoughts, purity of words and 
purity of deeds. (c) Again, whend, a Parsee goes before the 
Sacred Fire, which is kept all day and night burning in the 
Fire-temple, the officiating priest. presents before him the 
ash of a part of the burning fire. The Parsee applies it to 
his forehead, just as a Christian applies the consecrated water 
in his Church, and thinks to himself: ‘Dust to dust. The 
Fire, all brilliant, shining and resplendent, has spread the 
fragrance of the sweet-smelling sandalwood and frankincense 
round about, but is at last reduced to dust. So, itis destined 
for me. After all, I am to be reduced to dust and have to 
depart from this-transient life. Let me do my best to spread, 
like this.fire, before my death, the fragrance of charity and 
good deeds.and lead the light of righteousness and knowledge 
before.others.’ In short, the Sacred Fire burning in a Fire- 
temple serves as a perpetual monitor to a Parsee standing 


before it, asking him to preserve piety, purity, humility and 
brotherhood.” 1 


1 Vide my “ Religious System of the Parsis,’? 2nd edition of 1903, 
pp- 27-28. Vide for this paper ‘‘The Report of the World’s Parliament 
of Religions,” Vol. II, p, 908. Vide the chapter on ‘“ Religion,” contri- 
buted by me, in Mr. Dosabhoy Framjee’s ‘‘ History of the Parsees,”’ 
Vol. IT, p. 214 : 


230' CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


While speaking of the purificatory ceremonies, we have said 

he veroinany uf that the sacred ash of the Sacred Fire of 
removing the ash the Atash Beherim is required to be mixed 
allen ster of with the consecrated urine. We will here 
Purification, describe the ceremony with which this ash 
is removed from the vase of the. fire :—Two priests with 
Bareshnim, who have performed the Khub ceremony, go before 
the Sacred Fire in the Ushain gah, 7.¢., after midnight. ‘They, 
at first, make pav ! i.e., religiously pure, a metallic tray, two 
metallic ladles and a piece of linen. Holding.a paiwand 
between them, they recite the Baj with the Khshnuman of 
Ahura. Mazda. Reciting it upto “* vidhvio mraotu,”’ they utter 
the word “ashem ” (i.¢., purity) and repeat.it in Baj, #.¢., in a 
suppressed tone. One of the priests then puts on gloves, 
and by means of the ladles, removes from the vase of the 
Sacred Fire as much of the ash as he requires, and places it in 
the metallic tray. Then, removing the gloves, both wash 
their hands and make them pdv, with pure water. They let the 
hands dry aud then pass the ash through the linen as through a 
sieve. The ash so collected is then put in a vessel previously 
made pdv. The vessel is then tied up with three turns of 
twisted yarn with two final knots and kept apart. Having done 
this, the priests.goout of the chamber of the Sacred Fire and 
finish the Baj. The ash is then supplied as required to the 


different Fire-temples of the lower grade under the jurisdiction 
of the great Temple for purificatory ceremonies.? 


We. will here describe the Bui ceremony, 7.e., the cere- 
mony of keeping the fire always burning, by feeding it with 
fragrant wood. The word “‘bui” is the Persian form of the 


Avesta word “baodha.’’ It is .“ bui”? 
Bui = : F F 
of feeding the Sac in Pahlavi. Ordinarily, the word means 
red Fire. Meaning “odour” or “smell.” In the Parsee 
of the word ‘“‘pui.”’ . : . 
ceremonial phraseology, it means perfume, 


1 The process of making a thing pav, or religiously pure, consists in 
reciting Khshnaéthra Ahurahé Mazdao and one Ashem Vohu and then 
washing it with pure water. This process is repeated three times. 

2 Vide above, pp. 96 and 114, 


THE BUI CEREMONY , 231 


or good odour. Fire pl2ys a prominent paré in all Zoroas- 
trian rituals. No ritual] can be complete without the presence 
of fire. So sandalwood, frankincense, and such other 
articles of fuel that emit good odour on burning are 
necessary requisites in all ceremonies. In the temples, 
where the Sacred Fire is kept perpetually burning, the feeding 
of the fire is an important ceremony. It is called “biidédan’’ 
in Persian, and “bui devi’’ (i.e. to give the perfume) \in 
Gujarati. 
The ceremony varies a little according to the different grades 
wae @keuets of the Fire-temples : As said above, there 
varying for the re three grades of Fire-temples:—(1) the 
eee fica efthe {tash Behram (in Pahlavi, Verehram or 
Vahram ; Avesta Véréthragna), 7.c., the fire 
of Victory (victory over evil influencesor powers); (2) the 
Atash Adaran, i.e., the fire of fires; (3) the Atash Dad-gah, 
t.e., the fire (ceremoniously established) in a, proper place. 
Did-gih is the Daitya-gata of the Vendidad (Chapter VII). 
In the first two grades .of fire temples, it is the priest 
alone who can go before the fire and feed it. In the case of 
the third grade of temples, in the absence of a priest, even 
a layman can feed it. In the case of the Atash Behram, 
the fire canbe\fed only by a priest who has become a 
Martab and who is observing all the ceremonies required 
to be observed by one with a Bareshniim. In the case of 
the Atash Adaran, it can be fed by any priest, even when he 
is not observing the Bareshnim. In the case of the Atash 
Behram, the officiating priest must also have performed the 
ceremony of Khib before going to the sacred fire to feed it. 
The Khab ceremony consists of the performence of the Yacna 
ceremony, Having once performed that ceremony, its quali- 
fying influence lasts for four days. After the fourth day, it 
must be performed again. A bath during the interval, or a 
wet dream, which necessitates a bath among the Parsees, or the 
partaking of food without the regular recital of the Baj, 1.e,, 
the prayer for grace, or the coming into contact with a non- 


232 COSECRATION CEREMONIES 


Zoroastrian, breaks the influence of the Khib, which, in such 
cases, must be performed again. 


The Bui ceremony is performed “five ‘times every day. Tt 
: is performed at the Commencement of each 
The five periods 

fortheperformance of the fivé Gahs or periods of the day which 
of the ceremony. correspond, to a certain .extent, with the 
canonical hours of the Christians! These periods are the 
following :—(1) Havan. It begins from early morning when the 
stars begin to cease to appear, and lasts upto 12 o’clock when 
the sun comes overhead. Literally, it means the time when 
' the ceremony of pounding the Haoma is performed, (2) Rapi- 
thavin. It runs from 12 0’clock noon to 3p. m.~ Literally, it 
‘means the pith (pithwa) or the middle part-of the day (ayaré) 
(3) Uziran, It runs from 3 p.m. tothe time when the stars 
begin to appear. Literally, it means the time of the advance- 
ment of the sun. (4) Aiwigruthrem. It runs from nightfall to 
midnight. (5) Ushahin. It runs from midnight to dawn when 

the stars begin to cease to appear. 


The ceremony of Buiin=the case of these three grades of 
: ; Firetemples varies. (a) In the case of the 

weer "fooding i second and third grades of Fire-temples, 
fire, according. 0. (the Atash Adarin and the Atash Dadgah), 

eae ei the fire can be fed with one piece of sandal- 
wood, but in the cas, of the Atash Behram, the fire must be 
fed with a Machi? of sandalwood, In this case, six pieces of 
sandalwood are placed on the Sacred Fire. "The Atash Behram 
is spoken of, as said above, as Atash Behram P&dsh4h, 7.e., 
the king. Being the highest Grade of Sacred Fire, it is com- 
a aN Pr ee 

1 The five géhs seer to correspond to Matin, Prime, Sext, Nones and 
Compline. In the Atash-Behram at Naosari certain priestly families had 
the right of the Bui ceremony for a certain number of days. This re- 
minds us of a similar practice in the Assyrian and Babylonian temples. 

2 M&chi comes from Sanskirt manch, meaning a throne, a seat of 
honour. 

3 Vide my contribution in the Zend Avesta of Darmestater I., 
Introduction LXI-II, 


THE BUI CERRMONY 233 


pared to a king. So the sandalwood, with which the Sacred 
Fire is fed, is placed on it in the form of a Machi or throne. 
The six pieces are. arranged on the’ fire in pairs of two pieces, 
placed one over the other. (6) The next point, in which the 
. ceremony ofthe Bui varies in the case of these different 
- grades of Fire temples, is this: In the case of the second and 
third, the Atash Nydish (the prayer in honour of the angel 
presiding over fire) is recited only once, but in the case of the 
‘Atash Behrém it is recited several times. In the first period 
of the day (the Havan), it is recited eleven times ; in the second 
(the Rapithvin), nine times ; in the third, seven ; in the fourth, 
seven; in the fifth, six times. (c). Again, in the case of the 
second and third grades of the Sacred Fire, the Bui ceremony 
isvery simple. The priest performs the, Kisti-pidyab («e., 
? erforms ablutions and unties and=puts on the Kisti again 
with the recital of a prayer), and then goes into the sacred 
chamber, places one or more pieces of sandalwood over the 
fire and recites the Atash Nyayish, but in the case of Atash 
Behram, the ritual is a little long in other respects. I will 
describe it here :-— 


A priest who has performed the Khfb ceremony, performs 
‘ the Kisti-padyab at the commencement of 

The Bui cere- _ - 
mony in an Atash . each new Gah, 7.¢., the period of the day, 
cae iid as described above, and then recites his 
Farziat, i.e., the necessary prayers, which are the Srdésh-baj, 
the Gah according to the time of the day, and the Khurshid and 
Meher Nydyishes during the day periods, 7.e, the abovenamed 
first three gihs. During the night-periods which form the 
last two gahs, the Khurshid and Meher Nyd&yishes are 
replaced by Sraosh Yasht (Yagna LVII) and Sraosh Hadokht. 
He then goes into the sacred chamber, puts on white gloves, 
places some frankincense over the Sacred Fire, and. then the 
Machi, i.c., the six pieces of sandalwood as said above. If 

89 


234 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


sandalwood is not obtainable, . six pieces of eny other kind. of 
elean good wood will do. The six pieces are pinced over the 
fire from three different positions, thus :-— 


1 


West 


South 


At first, the priest, standing before the censer, faces the cast 
and places two pieces (AA and BB in the above figure) of san- 
dalwood over the fire at\a short distance from each other. Then 
he turns to the south and places two more pieces (CC and DD) 
over the first two. Then he turns towards the west and places 
two more pieces HE and FF over the four.1 He then washes. 
with pure water? the stone-slab on which the censer of the 


4 In all the ceremonies of the Parsees, the north side is, as a 
rule, generally avoided. Vide above, p. 56. 


? For these purification ceremonies, the water itself is,as it were, 
purified, Two water-pots, full to the brim with well water, are taken into 
the chamber, The water from the oneis poured into the other, which 
itself is full to the brim until the water overflows, and while thus over- 
flowing cleans and purifies also the sides of the vessel. This is done 
three times with the recital of the words Khshnaéthra Ahtirahé Mazdio 
and of the Ashem-Vohj prayor. The water of the other pot is similarly 
purified. Then the water-pots with the water in them are said to be 
Toade pdv, ie., pure or clean with water (pa-Av = Persian, ba-ab), 


THE BUI CEREMONY 236 . 


Sacred Fire sfands.! This ceremony of washing the pedestal or | 
the stone-slab (Khan) on which the Sacred Fire stands, is alluded 
to in the 9th chapter of the Yacna.? The priest then places on 
the fire a little sandalwood and frankincense three times, - 
speaking the words Humata, Hukhta, Hvarshta, é.e., good 
thoughts, good words and good deeds. Then he goes round. the 
censer with a metallic ladle in his hand, and, standing “in 
eight 3 different positions (viz., the four sides and the four 
corners), and then going back to his original position on the 
west of the censer- and facing the east, recites, in’ these nine 
positions, different words of a short formula of prayer. This 
ceremonial of going round the censer is spoken of as ‘chak 
farvun,’ i.e, going round the circle-(Pers, chak, i.e., ‘one side 


of four; an eighth part of a thing”): 


The following chart points out the different positions in which 
A chart of the the priest stands whilst rediting the various- 
different positions. parts of the prayer-formula. The numbers 


1 The=stone-slab is ordinarily spoken -of by the priests as Khuén of 
Khan. Prof. Darmesteter, by some mistake (Le Zend Avesta I. Intro- 
duction LXI.) calls the nictallic tray, standing ona metallic stool on 
the left side of the cénser, the Khan, but in the ordinary ‘parlance of the 
priesthood, that tray is dalléd Khanché while the stone-slab is called 
Khan. 

* Yaona, H& IX, 1. 

3 in the performance of the Alringan cetemony also, thie Atravikhs 
shi, é.e., the person sitting before the fire, at the recital of the Ahunvar 
or Yatha Aha Vairyé and Ashem Vohf, points with his ladle in the tray, 
the eight different directions. From an.anthropological point of view; 
the custom has some similarity, with the sides and corners pointed by 
the Hindu Svastika and the pre-Christian Cross. 


236 | CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 
w 


point out the consecutive order in which he stands at the 
different positions before the censer on the altar :— 


oo e 
or 4, East % 
% ¥ 
eo 
e 
4] 3 
S Censer a 
: ob 
t 
% 

% £ 
3 & 
% 9. Back to the West, s 
wm facing the East. ee 

¥ 1. West 5 


. I give here an illustration of the performance of the Bui- 
ritual in the sanctum sanctorum of the Fire-temple.! 


tp A A 


1 The priests of the Shahanshahi sect put on white turbans, those of 
the Kadmi sect put on the fentd, which isa hat of an Irani type. In this 
illustration it is a Kadmi priest who officiates. 


237 


THE BUI CEREMONY 


The following table gives the different words of the text, 
recited in the different positions before the censer, the refer- 


ir meanings :— 


, and the 


ences to the Avesta text for the words 


*spaep (amo) 
yo JuoUTBETYSITUS O49 10g 


*spioa (ano) 
jo JuoTIUSEIYSTUS eYy IO 


*89y8noy} (mo) 
JO qUuomUOZYysYUS 943 IOg 


“#01908 POO Jo SZUE 
“TOTO of] YSno1y9 ostead oA 


‘T ‘ON 8B ouleg 


‘SPpIOM Pood Jo sur 
-~1eyZO 9Y4 YSnorryy osreid oA 


*[ “ON svoureg 


*sq48n044 poos jo s8ur 
-1ezo ey} Ysnoryy ested 0M 


‘org Aur ysnoryy 


2° 


peqr 
+s Ptqr 
'P ‘TITANT ‘eusdex 


“"s TIIAX'T vudex 
ee T ‘ON 88 oureg 


°°S TITAXY ‘eusex 
‘*  -[ “ON 88 oumeg 


**§ TITAXT 8udsex 
6 ‘IT vusex moy 


(pon O ‘eoyL,) estead J jsprom omg gery oN, 


‘SpIOM YY JO UOIVe[sUBLy, 


*sqX05, 
- OY} 09 eouArooy 


oe ee 


suysoedys 19_Ng 


eysusyova reANng 


eysueueul IeyNg 


‘ppysurezed gAqeryy 
-oez gysurygedyys ysngysue A 


= yureheryZ oruge BAILY 


‘gpyeurszed gq 
“PIygoez oySypyyN ysyeqsas, 


| Jugceres O1478 VATIV 
apyeurezed OAQ 
-71y9O8z QYdUBUBUT YsnoYysueA 


rurgheiys org? FAUTY 


“pogjoer 4Xeq, 
BISCAY OY} JO SPIO AA 


‘q8Eq OY} SUIOT 
PUB JOsUSd 6Y4 JO 480AA 
oy} uo ovgjd yeursrr0 
oyy 0% yoeq Surm0p 6 


ee oe 


** WQnog ‘8 
WMON ‘L 


ae ** FSOM-UMON °9 
50M -YINOG "Gg 


oe ae 


oe oe ee 


Ske I 
qSBT-YNOG *E 


oe. ae 


sts gee yMTON +g 


80M *T 


“‘suoTq00ITC 


‘panoos mynuuof ay fo aqng 


238 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


The meaning of the above formula on the whole is as fol- 
lows: —-“ O God! We praise Thee, through Thy fire. We praise 
Thee, by the offerings of good thoughts. We praise Thee 
through Thy fire. We praise Thee by the offerings of good 
words. We praise Thee through Thy fire. We praise Thee by 
the offerings of good deeds. (We do all this) for the enlighten- 
ment ofour thoughts, for the enlightenment of our words, and 
for the enlightenment of our deeds.’’ That is to say, the wor- 
shipper standing before the sacred fire, taking it as the symbol 
of God’s refulgence and purity, and placing over the fire sandal- 
wood and frankincense as visible offerings, offers the real, thoug 
invisible offerings of good thoughts, good words, and good deedsh, 
and thereby hopes and prays for the further-enlightenment of 
his thoughts, words and deeds. 


Having recited the above short-but pithy formula of prayer 
the priest places again over the fire a little sandalwood and 
frankincense, and then recites, as said above, the Atash 
Nyayish 1 several times, according to the Gah or period of the 
day. While reciting the first Nyayish for the first time, the 
priest goes on placing bits of sandalwood and frankincense 
(aésma biti) at the intervals of a few words. 


During the recital of the first Nyéyish, and during the recital 
oe of the first Pazend portion of it, whilst ut« 

the en mei? °F tering the words “dushmata,” “duzhukhta,” 
‘* duzvarshta,” 7.¢., evil thoughts, evil words, 

and evil deeds, he rings a bell thrice; some ring the bell thrice, 
whilst uttering each word, 7.e., in all give nine strokes of the 
bell. This is, as it were; to emphasise that portion of the 
prayer, wherein the worshipper expresses a desire to shun bad 
thoughts, bad words, and bad deeds. At the end of the first 
reéital of the principal portion of the Atash Nydyish, the priest 
draws by means of two ladles two circles in the ash in the 
censer at its ridge, and at the similar end of the second recital 


18. B. E. XXIIL, p. 357. Le end Avesta, par Darmesteter, IL, 
p. 705. 


CONSECRATION Of THE ADARAN FIRE 239 


he obliterates the circles again. While reciting the Nydyish 

during the first and the fifth Gah or period of the day (the 
Havan and the Ushahin), the priest stands on the West of 
the censer with his face towards the East, and during the 
other periods vice versd. 


(B) Consecration of the Saered Fire of the second grade, ~~ 
the Atash Adaran, 


The later Persian books say, that in a town or village where 
ten Zoroastrian families reside, the presence of a Fire-temple 
of the second grade, the Atash Adaran, is necessary. The 
process of collecting, purifying and consecrating the fires for this 
sacred Fire of the second grade is not very long. Four principal 
kinds of fire are required to constitute this’ fire. They are: 
Fire from the houses of (a) the Athornans, i.e., the priestly 
class, (b) the Rathaéshtar4n, 7.c., the military class, (c) the Vas- 
tryosan, t.¢., the agricultural class). (d) the Hutokhshén, 7.c., the 
artizans, tradesmen and manufacturers. We will speak of the 
consecration of the Sacred Fire of the second degree under 
the following heads: 1. Collection of the fires. 2. Purifying the 
fires. 3. Conseorating the fires. 4. The final consecration of 
the united fire. 5. The final enthronement, 


(a) The-first requisite fire-is that from the houses of the 
“1, Collection of Athornans, t.c., of the men of the priestly 
ee. ir Fecane ‘class. Forthis purpose, fires from the houses 
classes. of the following persons are generally 
collected and united :—(1) The Dastur, or the head-priest of 
the town. (2) An ordinary priest. (3) The leading or the head 
layman of the town. (4) The donor. In case the Fire-temple 
is founded by a private individual with a charitable or 
religious motive, the fire of his house is generally taken, if 
convenient. If he lives in a town different from that where 
he founds the Fire-temple, the fire of his house need not neces- 
sarily be had. The fires from the houses of these different 


persons are collected together. 


240 CONSECRATION CEREMONINS 


(6) For the preparation of the fire of the Rathaéshtars, i.c., 
the military or the governing class, fires from the houses of. 
the following grades of persons are collected :—l. Fire of the 
house of the Governor, or the ruling authority of the place. For 
example, if a Fire-temple is sought to be founded in Bombay, 
the fire from the cook-room of the Governor's house may 
be had. If it is to be founded in a mofussil town, that from 
the house of the Collector or the Assistant Collestor or the Deputy 
Collector, or any other officer who is the head ruling authority 
of the place may be had. 2. Fire of the house of a military 
officer or person residing in the town or in the neighbourhood 
may be had. If there are no houses of military officers or 
soldiers near at hand, the fire from the house-of a Police Officer 
may be had. 3. Fire from the house of the leading judicial 
authority. For example, if it is in Bombay that a Fire-temple 
is being founded, the fire from the house of the Chief Justice 
or of any one of the Judges of the High Court may be had. In 
the mofussil, it may be had from the house of any judge or 
magistrate or other judicial officer. All these fires are then 
mingled together to form a fire of the military or the ruling 
class, 


_(c) The fire of the house of an agriculturist may be had from 
the house of any tiller of the soil in the locality. If there is a 
Parsee cultivator at hand, the fire from his house may be had, 
and then from that of a Hindu cultivator. A fire from the 
house of an ordinary gardener may be had. Then all these fires 
are mingled together to form one fire of the agricultural class. 


 (@ The fire of the artizan class is prepared out of the fires of 

different tradesmen and workmen. They are generally fetched 
from the places of business of artizans and others, such as 
the goldsmiths, silversmiths, ironsmiths, tinsmiths, copper- 
smiths, dyers, distillers, bakers, potters, tillers, brick-makers, 
chunam-makers, shepherds, caravanbashis, sentinels, etc. The 
fires from their houses or places of business are all united to 
form one fire of the artizan class, 


CONSECRATION OF THE ADARAN FIRE 241 


The process of purification is well nigh the same as that des- 
cribed above in the case of the different 
ae grontestionof fires that were united to form the Sacred 
Fire of the first Grade. A ladle with holes 
containing powdered fuel, etc., is held over the fire at some dis- 
tance from the flame., The process differs in only one respect, 
viz., that in this case the process is repeated thrice only, while — 
in the case of the Sacred Fire of the first Degree the number of 
repetitions varied from 33 to 91 times. 


Each of the above-said four united fires, after being puri- 
fied as above, is consecrated separately. 
Fs oo of ach of the four fires is placed in a-separate 
vase and two priests take charge of each 
fire, é.e., in all, eight priests are required to consecrate them. 
A lesser number can do, but in that case it would take a larger 
number of days. On the first day, each of the four pairs of 
priests performs over the_fires, in the morning, the Yacna 
ceremony and, after midnight, the Vendidad with the Khshnu» 
man of Sraosh. On the second day, the same ceremonies are 
performed again, butwith the Khshnuman of Ahura Mazda. 
During these recitals the four fires are pisood before the 
officiating priests. 
Then, on the third day, the four fires are all united into one, 
4. The Anal ton- he Vase or censer conta ning the first, i.c., 
secration of the the fire of the Athornan or priestly class, 
nS receives in itself the fire of the next three 
classes. All the priests who officiate at the consecration unite 
themselves by a paiwand and then, reciting the Yatha Ahfi 
Vairyé formula, combine the fires together in the first censer. 
Having done so, they recite the nemashkar! of Atash or homage 
to the Sacred Fire three times, finishing it with the Ahmai- 
reshcha prayer, etc. It runs as follows: ‘Homage to thee, 
0 Fire of wise Ahura Mazda, the benefit giving great Yazata.”’ 


1 Vide Spiegel, translated by Bleeck, Khordeh Avesta, pp. 3-14. 
31 


242 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


Having thus combined: the fires and having thus paid an 
homage to the united Fire, two priests—generally the two 
priests who had at first cosecrated separately the fires of the 
priestly class—perform over it the Yagna ceremony in the 
morning and the Vendidid at midnight with the Khshnuman 
of Sraosh. Then, on the morning of the fourth day,a Yacna 
with the Khshnuman of Dadar Ahura Mazda is recited over 
the united Fire. This finishes the preparation and_ the-con- 
secration of the Sacred Fire of Atash Adaran. 


The Sacred Fire being thus prepared and consecrated, there 
-B. The enthrone. .2OW remains ths final ceremony of enthron- 
ment of the Sacred ing it. It is well-nigh the same as that for 
one the Sacred Fire of the-First Grade. The 
assembled priests and others form a procession and formally 
carry the Sacred Fire to the chamber which itself has been 
cleaned, purified and consecrated).as in the case of the Atash- 
Behram. There, it is enthroned on a large metalic censer 
which stands upon a raised.stone-platform or slab. A priest 
then feeds this Sacred. Fire reciting the Atash Nydaish. All 
others also recite this’ Nydish. Then, they assemble in the 
outer hall of the Temple and perform the Jashan ceremony. 
In this, either the three Afringdns referred to in the case of 
the Jashan of the Atash-Behram or the following Afringans 
are recited ;:—1l. Ardibehest Ameshaspand. 2. Ahura Mazda. 
8. Spendarmad. 4. Ard& Fravash. 5. Dahm4n, 6. Sraosh, 
Similarly, the B&j ceremony is performed at the same time. 


(C) Consecration of the Sacred Fire of the Third Grade : 
The Atash Dadgah. 


The ritual of the consecration of this fire is very simple. It 
is the ordinary fire of the household that is consecrated. So 
there is no special process of collection for it. Again, there is no 
special purification. The principal function is the consecration 
of the Temple where itis to be deposited. The fire, that is 


CONSECRATION OF THE DADGiH FIRE 243 


used in the consecration of the Temple itself while performing 
the Yacna and the Vendidad ceremony, forms the Sacred Fire 
of the Atash Dadg&h. The following is the process of con- 
sectating the Temple building :—The building intended or 
built for the temple is cleaned ‘and washed. Some later writings 
say, that all Temple buildings may, at first, be washed and 
purified thrice with gaomez or cow's urine, but the practice 
is not generally resorted to now. It may then be purified. by 
being washed thrice with water. After this purification and. 
cleaning, commences the consecration ceremony. It lasts for - 
four days. During the first three days, in the morning, an 
Yacna ceremony with the Khshnuman of Sraosh, and after 
midnight, a Vendidad with the same Khshnuman are recited. 
On the morning of the fourth day, a Yagna’ with the Khshnu- 
man of Ard& Farosh is recited-~Then finally, the Jashan 
ceremony is performed. In this \Jashan ceremony, five Afrin- 
gins are recited with the-Khshnuman of :—l. Ardibehe- 
sht. 2. Ahura Mazda. 3. Spendarmad (Spanta Armaitiy 
4. Ardafrdsh. 5. Dahman, 6. Sraosh. Similarly, six Bajs 
are recited.t 


1 At times, the numbers of Afrigansand Bajs vary. For a list of the 
Fire-temples of all grades vide Khan Bahfdur Bomanji Byramji Patel’s 
contribution in the Bombay Gazetteer, Vol.IX, Part II. Vide Zoroastrian 
Calendar of 1276 Yazdazardi (1906-07), by Mr. Mancherji Jagosh. 


$44 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


CHAPTER X. 
II.—-CONSECRATION OF THE TOWERS OF SILENCE. 


There are three ceremonies in connection with the con. 
secration of a Tower. They are the following :—-I. Kodari 
marvi (lit., to strike the first spade),1 i.e, the ceremony. for 
digging the ground to lay the foundation. II. The Tané-cere- 
mony, or the ceremony of laying the foundation. . IIf. “The 
Consecration ceremony proper. 


The first ceremony is that of digging the ground. It is 
1. The preliminary performed a few days before the formal 
eeremony of dig- laying of the foundation..In the centre of 
ging the gromnd, the spot chosen for a Tower, a Bareshnim- 
wal& priest encloses a certain place with a‘‘pavi”? and 
thereon performs, at first, the Khib ceremony with the five 
springs of the Barsam (pancht4i ni khab). Then he recites the 
“ Baj” in honour (1) of Sraosha, the guardian angel guiding 
the souls of the deceased,-(2) of Ahura Mazda, (3) of Spenta 
Armaiti, the Archangel presiding over ground, a portion of 
which is now being enclosed for the construction of the Tower, 
(4) of ‘‘ Ardafrosh,” i.e. all the departed souls, and (5) of 
“Haft Ameshaspands,” i.e, the seven Archangels. Having 
recited these prayers, the priest holdsa spade in his hand and 
recites the Srésh Baj upto Ashahé. He then digs with his 
own hand a part of the ground required for the Tower. While 
digging, he recites the Yatha Aha Vairyé prayer 21 times. 


1 The old Egyptian ritual for laying the foundation-stone of a temple, 
referred to below, also speaks of the use of the spade. 

2 « Pavi” (from “ pav,’’ i.e. , sacred) isa kind of trench a few inches 
deep in the ground. It is intended to separate a portion of a place from 
the adjoining ground in order to perform a sacred ceremony therein. 
No oytsider is allowed to enter within this enclosed place while the 
ceremony is being performed. The Yagna, Baj, and Vendidad cere- 
monies are performed only within such enclosed spaces. In Fire-Temples, 
the sacred fire burns on a censer within such an enclosed space. 


THE TINA CEREMONY 245 


A few days after, when the whole of the required plot of 

II. The Tana or ground is excavated by the labourers, two 
Hasan te priests perform in the morning the “Tan&” 
tion. _ ceremony for laying the foundation of the 
Tower. The ceremony is so-called from the fact of “tan” or 
a very fine thread being used to mark out the circumference of 
the Tower and its different parts for the laying of the founda- 
tion. One hundred and one! fine threads are woven into.one 
strong thread or string. The thread so prepared shouldbe as 
long as would suffice to go round the circumference and the 
inner parts three times.? Some time before its \use, this 
thread is made “pav,” 4. ¢., washed, purified and dried. 
To hold this thread, the priests have to fix in the ground 301 
nails of different sizes and weights. “The -following are the 
various numbers and weights :—(a) One.central nail (shown in 
the plan by the letter A) of one maund without any holes. 
(b) Four side nails? (7. e., for South-East, South-West, North- 
West and North-East sides) (B).E, D and C,), each of half a 
maund. Each of these four nails is to have three holes, one 
being straight and the other two crosswise. (c) Thirty-six nails 
(16 in the outer circle, each shown in the plan by the letter F, 
and twenty in the inner circle, each shown in the plan by the 
letter G,) weighing altogether about one maund. (d) Two 
hundred and fifty-six nails, altogether weighing one maund, 
32 on each of the eight rows marked HH inthe plan. (e) Four 
nails of the same size as the above 256 to be fixed at the places 
matked JJ. These five sets of nails give the total of 301. 


1)/One hundred and one is a sacred number, because, according to the 
Parsee books, the Almighty God has one hundred and one names which 
signify all his virtu~s. These one hundred and one names are recitd 
in several ceremonics, ¢.g., in preparing the sacred “ Zaothra ’’ or 
consecrated water for the Haéma ceremony. 

2 The number three is a sacred number, being symbolic of Humata, 
Hukhta and Hvarshta, ¢.¢., good thoughts, good words, and good deeds, 
the three precepts on which the moral structure of the Zoroastrian 
religion rests. 

3 These nails correspond to the pegs in the Egyptain ritual. For the 
four nails, cf. ‘the four supports of heaven ” (vide below, pp. 249-50), : 


246 _ CONSECRAFION CEREMONIES 


On the day of the Tana ceremony, in the morning, two Baresh- 
numwiAla priests get down into the excavation that has beendug. 
for the foundation. Having performed the pddydb, they per- 
form the Khub ceremony with the five twigs of the Barsam. 
They then put on their full sacerdotal dress (J4m4 pichhori) 
and hold the paiwand between them. They then recite the 
Sraosh Baj upto the word Ashahé, and begin to fix the nails in 
the ground. They recite one Ahunvar or Yathé-ahi-vatryé, 
_while striking each nail. The central large nail Ais struck first. 
The greater part of it is left above the ground. Then the nails 
on the South-East, South-West, North-West and North-East are 
struck. Then the above 36 nails are struck in the order marked 
in the plan beginning at Gon the S.-E..which is marked 
asGl. The orderis G1, F 2, G3, F 4, G 5; F 6, and so onin 
the first quarter. Then G10, F1l, and so on in the next 
quarter. Thus, the last or the 36th nail is at G 36 in the fourth 
quatter. Then the 256 nails are struck in eight different lines 
shown in the plan. The first 32 must be struck in the line 
between H and Gl. Thenext 32 on the similar row on the 
opposite side H-G 36. \The third 32 on the third similar row 
H-G 10 and then the fourth 32 on the opposite row, and so on, 
till all the 256 are struck in the 8 rowsat 32 perrow. Then the 
last four arestruck at the 4 points marked J. During the whole 
‘of the process of nailing, the priests recite Yatha-aht-vairyés. 


After finishing the nailing, the priests commence passing the 
tdn@ or the thread through the nails. They begin with the nail 
on the South-East quarter, B, one of the four large nails with 
three holes. The thread is passed through the lowest hole, and 
the end is fastened-with it with a double knot which is put 
over it with the recital of two Ahunvars. The long thread 
is then carried from:nail to nail in a metallic tray. One of the 
two priests carties the tray and the other passes the thread 
from nail to nail, always moving to the right, é.e., from South- 
East to the South, then to the South-West, then to the West, 
and so on. Beginning with the nail at B, he takes the 
thread to G1, then to F 2, then to G 3, then to F 4, and so on. 


THE TiNi CEREMONY 247 


Finishing the first quarter of the outer circle, i.e., passing the 
thread round the first 9 nails of the outer circle, he passes the 
thread through the lowest hole of E, the second of the four large’ 
nails with three holes. It is then passed round the 9 nails of 
the second quarter of the circle, then through the lowest hole of 
D; then round the 9 nails of the third quarter of the cirele ; 
then through C ; then round the 9 nails of last quarter of 
the circle. The nails in each quarter are fixed alternately; one 
at the side towards the inner well of the proposed Tower and 
the other at the furthest outer circle which isto form the 

foundation of the well of the round tower. , 


The above process finishes one round. The thread must be 
taken round for the second time in the same manner as in the 
first round, but with this difference, that in the case of the large- 
holed nails B, E, D and C, it is to be now passed through the 
second or the middle hole. Then the thread is to be taken round 
for the third time. The process.is the same, but differs in two 
points. Firstly, the thtead.is now to be pierced through the 
topmost hole of the four big-holed nails ; and secondly, in the 
third round, the thread is also to be taken round each of the 32 
nails which make each of the 8 rows. Going in one direction 
in the line of the 32 nails, in the first quarter of the circle, the 
thread is passed round one of the nails J. It is then passed | 
round each of the 32 nails of the opposite row. Thus, in the 
process of the third round, all the double rows, each of 32 nails, 
are passed through in each of the four quarters of the circle. 
The thread is then passed round the biggest central nail which 
was struck in the centre of the plot and which pointed the posi- 
tion of the central well, known as the bhandar. The whole‘of the 
remaining part of the thread is put round this central big nail. 
The two priests now finish the Sraosh Baj, with the recital of 
the fist part of which they had commenced the ceremony. This 
finishes the whole of the Tana ceremony. 


The place marked A in the plan forms the centre of the 
inner well of the circle where the bones gather after flesh js- 


248 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


devoured. The outer circle next to, or out of, A marks the place 
of the first set of pdvis, on which, when the tower is finished, 
bodies of children are placed. The next outer circle marks 
the middle circle of the tower when completed, on the pavis of 
which the bodies of females are placed. The third or the 
outermost circle marks the circle of the pavis on which bodies 
of males are placed. 
‘Thousand of Parsee visitors, men, women and ty, 
‘gather to witness the ceremony. On the 
The Assembly. 
} occasion of the Tan& ceremony of the 
Tower at Deolali, about 100 miles from Bombay, which took 
place a few years ago, six special trains from Bombay took 
devout Parsees there. It is said that about more than 5,000 
people collected there to witness the ceremony, The visitors 
were seated in a covered mandap round the excavations dug 
for the foundation of the Tower, Of course, all are not 
expected to witness the ceremony. Hardly a thousand can 
see it actually performed. But the other thousands go there 
with the dovout object of participating in the work. On 
the close of the ceremony, the remainder, who have not been 
able to see the whole ceremony, go to the place and see the 
nails and the thread as spread there. All the visitors throw 
into the excavation, gold, silver and copper coins and even 
currency notes as they can afford. Some more dovout even 
throw their rings. That is considered to be their contribution 
to the pious work of builiing a Tower. It is announced, that 
at the above-said Tower ceremony at Deolali, they collected 
in this excavated ground a sum of a little more than Rs. 2,000. © 
The head-priest of the district, in whose ecclesiastical jurisdic- 
tion the town lies, is believed to have the privilege of having 
the sum thus collected at these Towers of Silence ceremonies, 
but he generally gives it away to the subscription fund for 
the maintenance of the Tower, etc. It is believed, by many 
people, that it is meritorious to see the ceremonies of the 
consecration of at least seven Towers during one’s life-time. 
Hence such large gatherings. 


THE TANK CEREMONY 249 


For two or three weeks after the ceremony, the excavations 
with the nails or pegs and threads are left as they are, so that 
people, who had no opportunity to go and see it on the day of 
the ceremony, may go and see it at their convenience. Hun- 
dreds generally go there and throw their humble mite in the 
excavated foundations. The place assumes @ festive look for 
several days. Booths are put up by tradesmen for the sake 
of refreshments, etc. When the influx of people diminishes, the 
foundation work proceeds over the whole thing as it is. The 
nails and the thread remain underground and the foundation 
work proceeds over it. 

Now what is the signification of this Tana ceremony ? The 

. .. ,. Avesta and old Pahlavi books say nothing 

The signification . 3 3 
ofthe Tan& cere- of it. The signification seems to be this; 
muy: As it ig enjoined in the Vendidad that the 
ground must not be polluted with the corpses of dead bodies 
but must be exposed, this Tana cerenony seems to signify 
that the proposed Tower is ,expected to pollute the ground, 
only to the extent of its excavations, The thread all along 
limits, as it were, the extent of pollution. The pollution, if 
any, is within the four corners of the walls of the Tower. It 
does not extend even underneath. The position of the nails, 
and the threads:points out, as said above, the position of the 
different parts of the Tower when completed. We see from the 
description of the Tower, that it has four underground drains, 
through which the rain-water, etc., falling over the bodies in 
the Tower passes into the ground. The area of those under- 
ground drains which are likely to carry a little polluted water 
are also, a8 it were, limited by the four double rows, each of 
32 nails, and their thread. Again, the whole process of nailing 
begins with the central big nail and the whole process of the 
spreading of the thread ends at that central big nail. This 
seems to point to the idea of unity in the Beginning and unity 
in the End. We all come from One, from the One. We all go 
to that One. The whole creation is, as it were, united in its 

: 32 


250 | CONSECRATION CBREMONTES. 


birth. It is united in its end. There is. One. in All. There 
is All-in One, 
The Tan& ceremony of the Parsees reminds one of a some- 
2 what similar foundation-ceremony of the 
cinch dies ancient Egyptian temples. The well-known 
ceremony of the astronomer Norman Lockyer says :-—‘‘ We 
Egypt ans, learn from the works of Chabas, Brugsch, 
Diimichen, and others, that the foundation of an Egyptian 
temple was associated with @ series of ceremonies, which are 
repeatedly described with a minuteness, which, as. Nissen has 
pointed out, is painfully wanting in the case of Greece and 
Rome. Amongst these ceremonies, one especially refers to 
the fixing of the temple-axis; it is called, technically, ‘the 
stretching of the cord,’ .... Another part of the ceremony 
consisted in the king proceeding to the site where the temple 
was to be built, accompanied. mythically by the. goddess 
Sesheta, who ig styled ‘the “mistress of the laying of the 
foundation-stone.’ Each was armed with a stake. The two 
stakes were connected by a cord. Next the cord was aligned 
towards the sun or star as the case might be; when the align- 
ment was perfect, the two stakes were driven into the ground 
by means,of «a wooden mallet .... One boundary wall 
. . « Was built along the line marked out by this stretched 
cord.’’! | 


The old Egyptiari word for laying the foundation-stone was 
Put-ser,, wherein put means ‘to stretch,’ >47 ‘ ser’ means 
“eord,’ “ so that part of the ceremonial which consisted in 
stretching a cord in the direction of a star was considered of 
so great an importance, that it gave its name to the whole 
ecremonial.”2 Similarly in the Parsee ceremony, the taénd or 
the thread used in the ceremony has given its name to the 
whole ceremony. One Egyptian inscription says: “The 
Kherheb read the sacred text during the stretching of the 


4 “The Dawn of pea, » by Norman Lockyer, (1894), p. 178. 
2 Ibid, p. 178. 


THE CONSECRATION PROPER OF THE TOWER 261 


measuting-cord and the laying of the foundation-stone on the, 
piece of ground selected for the temple ..... . On account of 
the stretching of the measuring-cord, the Egyptian engineers 
were called by the Greeks, upreSoudrrat whose art Democritus 
boasts of having acquired.” 1 Another inscription says: “The 
lammer in my hand was of gold, as I struck the psg with 
_it,.....Thy hand held the ‘spade during the fixing of ‘its 
(the temple’s ) four corners with accuracy by the four supports 
of heaven” In one picture; the king and the goddess. are 
répresented with clubs in their hands, to hammer the pegs. 


On the lower being completed, a partioulur day is fixed for its 
edrisecration. It is generally consecrated in 

Pea eae the dry season, so that the ceremony, which 
Tower, is mostly to be performed in the open air with 
a temporary covering, may not beinterrupted by the rains. It 
lasts forfour days. The Tower is surrounded by a pdvi. In the 
central well of the Tower, called the ‘“Bhandar,’” two priests 
perform for three consecutive days the Yacna ceremonies 
during the day in the “Havan Gah,” and Vendidad cete- 
monies at night in the)“ Ushahin Gah.” These ceremonies are 
in honour of the angel Sraosha, who is protecting the souls of 
the dead for three days and nights after death. Onthe morn- 
ing of thefourth day, the opening day of the Tower, a Yacna 
ceremony is performed in honour of Ahura-Mazda. Then the 
Baj and Afringan ceremonies are performed in honour 
of \Ahur-Mazdsa, of Ardafarosh, i.¢c., the departed souls, of 
Spendarmad, 7.e., the Yazata presiding over mother-earth, 4 
portion of which is now occupied for laying the dead upon, 
and of Sraosha. In the Afringan ceremony, known as the 
Jashan? ceremony, which is performed in the presence of a 
large number of the community assembled to witness it, the 
name of the donor at whose expense the Tower is built is 
mentioned and the blessings of God invoked upon him. If 


1 Ibid, 
2 ‘Jashan’ is the contraction of ‘ Yazashna,’ 


252 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


the Tower is constructed by the donor in honour, of to 
commemorate the memory, of a deceased relative, the name 
of that relative is publicly mentioned. When the ceremony 
is over, the Parsees assembled go inte the Tower to see it and 
throw into the central well, gold, silver or copper coins as their 
mite in thé expenses of the construction of the Tower. Some 
throw even their rings and ornaments. These go to make\up 
the sum necessary for building the Tower, if itis built at the 
expense of the Anjuman or the whole community. If-it is 
built at the expense of a generous donor, the amount thus col- 
lected goes to the head priest of the district in whose ecclesias- 
tical jurisdiction the Tower lies. At times;he gives it for the 
use of some charitable funds of the town.! I give here a 
plan of the Tower itself. 


6 


1 For a list of the Parsee Towers of Silence, vide Bombay Gazetteer 
Vol. IX, Part II: Khan Bahadur Bomanji Byramji Patel’s contri 
bution. Vide ‘Zoroastrian Calendar of the Yazdazardi Year 1276 
(1906-7), by Mr. Muncherji Jagosh. 


CONSECRATION OF THE ALAT 253 


CHAPTER Xi. 


* IIL—CONSECRATION OF THE ALAT OR RELIGIOUS 
REQUISITES. 


A minor form of consecration is that for the Alat or the 

Consecration of 'oduisites. used in some religious services. : 
gaomez. Significa- One of such thing is gaomez or cow’s urine. 
fon ot sae wore: Among the ancient Iranians, water, urine 
and sand or a particular kind of earth or clay were considered 
to be the best means of purification. Water was the best puri-| 
fier, but before washing the body with it, the application of 
cow’s urine was considered necessary. Gaomaéza is the Avesta 
word for it. It comes from gao, a cow and miz, Sanskrit mith,. 
Latin ming-ere, to sprinkle. When the urine is consecrated by 
religious ceremonies, it is, in religious parlance, spoken of as 
Nirang or Nirang-din (i.e., the nirang prepared by religious 
ceremonies). It is so called, because a nirang, 7.c.,a religious 
incantation, is recited on its application. 


Urine bas been used by several nations from very old times — 
as a purificative. Its original use as a purificative has led to 
the notion of its being considered as a charm against evil spirits. 
Prof. Eugen Wilhelm says on the subject of its use:— 
“That the-practice of using cow’s urine as a preservative. 
against the influences of evil spirits is very old indeed, and likely 
to date-from the most ancient times, we may conclude from * 
the fact, that traces of this same custom existing with our Aryan 
brethren in the East in India and Eran may be found some- 
times even to-day in the West, in the Bretagne, that province of 


France which holds its name from the Celtic Britons who sought ~ - 
refuge there.” Dr. Wilhelm gives references from Roman — 


nd Hindu books for its use and then shows that “the urine 


1 “Qn the use of Beof’s Urine according to the precepts of the Avesta 
énd on similar customs with other Nations,” by Dr. Eugen Wilhelm, 
p. 31. 


254 ' “CONSECRATION CEREMONin£S 
ea itt 


was employed in medicine from the most ancient times.”! It 
was so used in Egypt, Greece, Rome, and Scandinavia. Pliny 
the Elder refers to its use as medicine in the 18th chapter of 
the 28th book of his Natural History.2 Galenus, ‘the most 
prominent physician, of antiquity’’3 next to Hippocrates, 
refers to this fact. It was an Indo-Germanic conception. Prof, 
Darmesteter, on the authority of Luzel (Le Nirang des Parsis 
en Basse-Bretagne, Mélusine, 493), says, that “the use of 
gaomez has been lately found to be known in Basse-Bretagne.”’ 
(S. B. E., Vol. IV, Ist ed., Introd. p. 88, n. 3). 


The urine used for ordinary purifications is the urine of 
adomesticated animal like the cow, the“bull, or even the 
goat. But the urine used for higher purificatory services is 
‘that of an uncastrated bull and it is consecrated with certain 
ceremonies. The Vendidad enjoins-its use for purification in 
several passages ; but the principal passage is the 21st section of 
the 19th chapter. Therein, there is a question to this effect: 
How can one purify a person who has become a hamrit (i.e., 
one who has come into direct contact with a dead body) or a. 
patrit (4.¢., one who has.come into indirect contact with a dead 
body by coming into contact with a hamrit)? The reply is, that - 
he can be purified by the urine of a bull that is (a) uncastrated 
(bikhedrem) and (b) that is properly prepared (ddityd-keretem, 
s.e., properly consecrated). ‘This passage requires, that the 
urine must be that of an un¢astrated bull, and that the bull 
must be one properly selected and qualified. 


In considering, what place gaomez or cow’s urine or, what 
is ceremoniously known as, “nirang’”’ 
occupies in Zoroastrian ritual, we must look 
to the times in‘ which its use was enjoined and also to the idea 
with which it was enjoined. Prof. Rapp says on this point :— 
“Tt would presume little acquaintance with the peculiari- 
ties of the ancient world, if we wished to bring to bear our 


Rapp on Nirang, 


1 Ibid, p. 29° 2 Ibid, p. 36 4 Ibid, p. 38: 


CONSHORATION OF THE ALA'T . 255 


present notions of decency and loathsomeness on the custome 
of old . . Can we. judge now of the ideas and customs 
in this. fashion from: the point of view of European modern 
notions? And before we determine to bring in accord all the 
customs of the ancient world that were employed for purifica- 
tions, to our modern rational notions, we might like to know 
to be sure what advantage has that blood. of an animal which 
Moses used, in respect of the purpose in view, over the urine 
of an ox ! It will not be possible for us altogether to comprehend 
the conceptions of the ancient notions of what is pure and what 
is not pure and of their ceremonies in religious purifications, 
if we do not ascend up’ to the very origin of allthese notions, 
-namely, to the ancient doctrine. of the double creation, that of 
the pure and of the impure world. That in the purifications so 
much value is set on the ox and all that,issues out of it, the 
sacred legends of the Zend people make it quite comprehensible. 

ect . We have seen that. the entire ceremonial law 
"i Zoroaster reat upon the conception of a pure and impure 
creation, and therefrom it follows that the corporeal impurity 
' was just as punishable ‘and just as abhorrent in the eyes of 
Ahuramazda, the pure; as the moral impurity of the soul, 
and that men should purify themselves from the first as 
. from the last_pollution by just the same means. 


“Now, we believe ourselves to be able to. prove that the 
entire ceremonial law of Moses reposes upon these very ideas 
and that no one can correctly comprehend nor understand 
the Mosaic law generally, if he does not start from these ideas 
when attempting his interpretations.” 1 . 


We willnow describe the Nirangdin ceremony, ?.e., the ceremony 

ie ase a for consecrating the urine. At first, two- 
the Nirangdin cere- priests go through the Bareshnim ceremony 
aia of ten days. There is one difference in the 
Bareshnim gone through by the priests on this occasion and 
that gone through by the priests on other ordinary occasions. 


2 “TK, R. Cama’s Translation of the Article on the Vendidéd from the 
German of Rapp, pp. 15-16, 19, 


‘\ 
256 CONSECRATION CEREMONIES 


In the latter case, it is the nocturnal pollution during the first 
three nights that vitiates the Bareshnim and necessitates a 
repetition. But, in the case of the priests who are to perform 
the Nirangdin ceremonies, they are to pass all the nine nights 
of the Bareshnim in vigil, watch and prayer. If they have the 
nocturnal pollution during any of the ten nights, they are to 
repeat the Bareshnim. 


As desoribed in the account of the Bareshnim ceremony). the 
complete Bareshnfim takes ten days. On the eleventh day, one 
of the two priests takes 4n early bath and puts on anew set of 
clothes. Then, performing his pédydb-kusti, says his morning 
prayers. Then he performs the Khub! ceremony. On the second 
day, z.c., on the twelfth day from the beginning, the second 
priest performs the Khub ceremony. His colleague, who has 
performed the Khub ceremony on the first day, gets him through 
that ceremony. Then, both the priests perform the Gewr4! cere- 
mony. During the six days of the Gewré, the priest whose turn 
it is to keep the Gewréhas.to pass the night in vigil, as said 
above. Again, he is to take his meals after reciting the. great 
baj and not the ordinary bdj, or prayer of grace. On the 
completion of the sixth Gewrd, both the priests perform the 
ba@j ceremony andeach partakes of the Darun consecrated by 
his colleague. This inter-communion, or partaking of the sacred 
bread consecrated by one another, is spoken of as “being ham- 
kalém,” t.e., “being one or united (ham) in their words (kalém) 
of prayer.’’ Then they purify the utensils to collect the urine 

_ of the bulls for consecration. They make pd, i.e., ceremonially 
pure, two large water-pots—one larger than the other—two 
small water-pots, and a cup that would cover the large water- 
pot. All these pots are metallic. 


By this time, a white bull known as the Varacyé is seca 
into the Temple where the ceremony is to 

Rei eg or be performed. We saw above that the Ven- 
didad refers to an uncastrated bull for the 


1 Vide above, p. 202. The Navar ceremony. 


CONSECRATION oF THE ALAT , 257 


use of the urine, but does not speak of its being a white one. 

.Later books have enjoined that it must be a white one. A 
single black hair on the body disqualifies it for being used 
as a sacred bull. The word ‘varagyé ’ comes from the Avesta 
word ‘varega’ meaning ‘hair,’ because the hair of this white 
bull is used symbolically in the Yagna ceremony. A metallic 
ting used in the ritual is known as “ varac ni viti,” te., ‘ the 
ring with the hair.’ The hair of this sacred bull is put round 
the ring. 


The two priests after being “ ham-kaldm’”’ as.said above, 
and after making the utensils pév or religiously pure, go with 
one of the small metallic pots before the sacred bull and collect 
his urine in the pot. Even a few drops of his urine are necessary 
to begin the collection. Having collected his-urine, they collect 
the urine from a number of other ordinary uncastrated bulls. 
The work of collecting the urine must be finished some time 
before sunset. When it is so.finished, one of the priests per- 
forms the paragnd ceremony in the Uziran-Gah, i.e., in the 
aftefnoon-period of the-day.. Then the Vendidad ceremony 
is performed at midnight, commencing at a little after 12 
o’clook. The vessel containing the urine of the sacred white 
bull and of other uncastrated bulls is placed between the Alat- 
gah, t.¢., theslab/of stone on which the sacred utensils for 
the performance of the ceremony are placed, and the censer of 
fire. Another vessel containing pure well-water is placed by 
the side of this vessel. The priests then recite the Vendidad, 
the recital of which together with the accompanying ritual 
lasts for about 7 hours. This final ceremony consecrates the 
urine which is then known as nirangdin, t.e., the consecrated 
urine> The water consecrated with it is known as dv, i.e., the 
consecrated water. 


In many eastern nations, the bull was held to be an em- 

Goneooration at blem of Life, of Vital Energy. The Egyp- 

the Sacred Bull and tians had their Apis. The Hindus have 

ae their Nandi. In Christian art, St. Luke 
33 


258 CONSECRATION. CEREMONIES. 
is symbolized by an ox, and it is said that this symboliza- 
tion has some connection with the reference to the ox in 
Ezekigl (I, 10) and Revelation (IV, 6). The white bull used 
by the ‘Parsees under the name Varacyé (7.e., the possessor ‘of 
Varag, or hair which is used in the ritual) reminds us a little 
of the Apis “of the Egyptians. Apis represented the moon. 
“He was supposed to have been born of a virgin cow rendered 
pregnant by a moon-beam.or a flash of lightning.” When he 
died he “‘reeeived a splendid burial........ As “universal 
joy pervaded on his discovery, so his death threw all Egypt 
into general mourning, and every one shaved off bis beard.” 
The Parsees have such white bulls in their principal towns. 
They’ are held useful for two purposes, One is, as described 
above, for their urine, which, together with that of other ordi- 
nary bulls, was consecrated. The second purpose is the use of 
their varéga, t.e., hair which iscused in the Yagna liturgy to 
Serve as a kind of hair-sieve. [his use is referred to in the 
Visparad (Karda X,2: varagat Haomé angharezéndi,i.e., the 
hair to pass, as through a sieve, the Haoma-juice). This bull 
is not used for any domestic purpose. On its death, all the 
liturgical services, wherein his varéea or hair is used, are stop- 
ped in the town or towns. Another white bull is immediately 
sought out.and consecrated. Until it is consecrated, all the 
necessary. Vendidad; Yaena and Visparad ceremonies in 
which its"hair is-used cease to be performed in the town, and 
are directed to be performed in other towns which have 
their “separate white bulls. This is something like the above- 
mentioned ‘‘ general mourning ” on the death of Apis in Egypt. 
The consecration of the Saered White Bull consists in having 
The Ritual of the 18 hair carefully cut with religious ritual 
consecfation: of a and then performing the Yagna ceremony 
bi ada with it. All big Parsee centres generally 
keep such a bull in reserve. On the death of the one in use, 
the second spare one is brought to an adjoining Fire-temple 
and washed and cleaned. He is kept within a ‘pdvi.’ Two 
Bareshnumwala priests who have bathed previously and put on 


CONSECRATION OF THE ALiT 259 


new suits of clothes, perform the pdédyab, say their morning 
prayers, perform the Khub ceremony of pdnch tdi (i.e, of the 
five twigs of the Barsam). They then take seven metallic cups, — 
a golden or silver ring, a pair of scissors and a pair of long 
metallic tongs, and carefully wash and purify them with pure, 
clean water. The two priests then go before the bull. One 
of them holds his tail aloft with the help of the tongs andthe 
other cleans and purifies it with pure water from a pot in~his 
hand, Herecites Khshnaéthra Ahurahé Mazdao and.one Ashem 
Vohu, while doing this. He repeats this process three times. 
Then, facing the south, he cuts off with the scissors, referred to 
above, two hairs from the tail of the bull and ties them on the 
metallic ring. He does this while reciting the Baj ceremony 
with three Ashem Vohds and Fravarané up to Vidhvao Mraotu, 
with the Khshnuman of Ahura Mazda. It is while uttering the 
word Ashem and two Ahunvars, that he ties the two hairs on 
the ring. Then he finishes the B&j. The priests then go to the 
place where the Yacna ceremony is performed, and with the 
recital of various short, prayers and with some ritual, consecrate 
the above ring with the hair, holding it before the fire, rubbing: 
it with the bhasam or the consecrated, ash of the Sacred Fire of 
the Atash Behram, and then washing it by dipping it, several 
times, in the above-referred to metallic cups which are full 
of pure, clean water. Then, with this newly obtained varega, 
or hair;they perform the Gewrd! ceremeny for six-‘days. 
On finishing the ceremony on the sixth day, the two priests 
go before the,bull again, and washing and purifying his tail as 
before, take a fresh and a larger quantity of hair. .This is 
distributed among the different temples within the jurisdiction _ 
of their temple for being used with the rings in their. Yagna 
and Vendidad ceremonies. This sompletes the ceremony of - 


. the consecration of the bull and of his hair. The liturgical 


ceremonies, the performance of which was suspended, are now. 
resumed with the symbolic use of the hair of the new bull. - « 


e 


1 Vide above, p. 202, the Navar ceremony, 


CHAPTER XII. 


THE LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 
I, THE INNER LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 
THE YACNA: ITS LITURGICAL APPARATUS. 


The liturgical ceremonies may be divided under two 
heads :— 


I.—The Inner Liturgical Services. 
II.—The Outer Liturgical Services. 


By the inner liturgical services, 1 Imean those religious ser- 

a, eee vices which can only be performed in a sepa- 
Outer Liturgical rate place specially allotted for the purpose. 
Darvon Such-a place is known as the Dar-i-Meher? 
and is generally connected with a fire-temple. Again, such. 
ceremonies can only be-performed by the priests who observe 
the Bareshnim.? These ceremonies are generally spoken of as 
the pdv mahal (Ay 54) ceremonies, 7.¢., the ceremonies of the 
holy or consecrated house. The priests capable of performing 
these ceremonies are spoken of as Yaozdathragar Mobads, ¢.e., 
priests who are purifiers. 


%In my account of the details of these ceremonies, besides my 
knowledge of what J have practised and observed, I have drawn informa- 
tion and particulars from other sources and especially from the Tamam 
Khordeh Avesta of Mr. Dadabhoy Akhb§ar-i-Saudagarwala and the 
Yaona b& Nirang of the late Ervad Tehmuras Dinshaw Anklesaria, 

* 7 Vive below, p. 261. 
3 Vide above, Bareshnim ChaP. V. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 261 


By the outer liturgical services, I mean those religious 
services which may be, but need not necessarily be, performed in 
& Dar-i-Meher or 2 place specially allotted for the purpose. They 
cen also be performed in any ordinary or private house or place. 
Again, they may be performed by any priest, even by one who 
does not observe the Bareshnim or by one who has only gone 

through the Navar and not the Martab initiation.! 


Under the heading of the inner or pa@v mahal liturgical ser- 
vices, fall the following ceremonies :—- 


I.—Yagna or Yazashna. 
Il.—The Visparad. 
IIl.—The Vendidad. 
IV.—The Baj. 


I will first describe here what a \Dar-i-Meher, where only the 
The Dar-i-Meher, inner liturgical ceremonies can be performed, 
or the place for is, A. five-temple is, as the word signi- 
performing the 
inner liturgical fies,.a temple or a sacred place for the 
anes preservation of the sacred fire. These 
temples have generally a place or a set of apartments attached 
to them where the above-said inner liturgical ceremonies 
are performed. These places are known as the Dar-i-Meher. 
Though, strictly speaking, these places or, portions attached 
to the temples for the performance of these ceremonies form 
the Dar-i-Meher proper, generally the whole religious build- 
ing, including the chamber of the sacred fire, is called the 
Dar-i-Meher. All the fire-temples need not necessarily have 
these Dar-i-Mehers or the apartments for the performance 
of the inner liturgical services attached to them. For example, 
the Atash Behr4m, or the Great Fire-temple at Naosari, has 
not the Dar-i-Meher attached to it. There, the Dar-i-Meher 
is in a separate building. But generally, almost always, the 


1 Vide above Initiation, Chap. VIII, p. 207. 


262 THE DAR-I-MEHER 


fire-temple and the Dar-i-Meher are in one and the same building 
and so, they are spoken of by both names. The building is 
spoken of generally as the Atash Behram or the Atash Adaran, 
according as it contains the fire of the first or the second grade. 
If it is a building containing the fire of the second grade, it is 
spoken of both as Atash Adaran or Dar-i-Meher. A Dar-i- 
Meher always contains the sacred fire of the third grade, viz., 
Atash-dadg&h, burning in it. A fire-temple ora Dar-i-Meher 
is, at times, also spoken of as an Agiary, 7.e., the place of 
Ag, Agni or fire. . 


The name Dar-i-Meher is made up of Dar (Avesta dvara, 
Sans, dvara, German Thiir or Thor, English door) and Meher 
which is the later form of Avesta Mithra. So it means “the 
door! or the porch of Mithra.’? Mithra or Meher occupies a 
prominent place in Zoroastrian angelology.2 He is the Yazata 
or the angel presiding over light and justice, and as lightis the 
symbol of truth and justice, and, as such, the symbol of divinity, 
the place where all the higher religious liturgical services in 
honour of God are performed, has come to be specially called 
Dar-i-Meher, ¢.¢., the house of Divine light and justice. 


1 The word “dar” or ‘‘ door’? is used here in more than its ordinary 
physical sense. , It is rather used in the allegorical sense in which it 
is used in. John X, 9, where we read: ‘I am the door: by me 
if any..man, enter in, he shall be saved, and shall go in and out, 
arid find pasture.” The word ‘‘dar” is used in later Persian, also for 
“Chapter.” For example, the religious book ‘‘ Sad-dar” derives its 
name from its having 100 (sad) chapters. Another equivalent of the 
word “ dar” is ‘‘ bab” (meaning both door and chapter). Hence, the 
word “bab” hag also received an allegorical religious signification. 
Hence it is, that Bab, the founder of the Babi religion in Persia, has 
derived his name. The word ‘‘ Chapter” which, as said above, is 
another signification of the word “dar’’ has received a religious signifi- 
cation among the Christians also. 

2 For an account of the attributes of Mithra and fora comparison of 
some of his attributes with those of St. Michael, Vide my papers on 
‘* Mithra of the Parsees and St. Michael of the Christians *’ in the Journal 
of the Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. VI, pp. 237-53. Vide 
my Anthropological Papers (Part I), pp. 173-190. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 263 


Just as a church, an abbey or a cathedral, at times, contains 
several chapels where different priests conduct their services, so 
a Dar-i-Meher has several divisions, where different sets of priests 
conduct their services. In the Yazashna, Vendidéd and 
Visparad ceremonies, it is always necessary to have two priests 
to officiate. These diferent parts or divisions of the Dar-i- 
Meher, where dilierent pairs of priests perform their ceremonies, 
are known as (a) Yazashna-gih, or (b) Urvig gah, or (c)-Hin- 
dhola. 


(2) By Yazashna-gih is meant the place (Pers. gdh) where 
the Yazashna ceremony is performed. 


(6) Urviggéh (the place of Urvig) is another synonym of 
Yazashna-gih. The, Dadistén-i-Dini (XLVIII, 13)! speaks of 
the Yazashna-gah as the Airvés. The meaning of the word 
urvig is not certain. Darmesteter, says: ‘‘ Urvaésa signifie pro- 
prement ‘tour’ 2 (urvaése vardashna: Dastur Hoshangji and 
Haug’s Old Zand-Pahlavi Glossary, p. 23, 1. 9).” According to 
Darmesteter, the word means place where they turn (le lieu 
ot on tourne). The word can be derived from “ vars’”’ hair, 
t.¢., the place where the ‘“‘vars’’ or the hair of the varagya 
or sacred bull.is used in the ceremonial, We know that in 
Persian, the wordyurvi¢g (vi)! or prvyy!) means a hair-rope. 
West thinks, that the word “is probably to be traced to the 


Avesta Survaesa’ +29%))2) goal.’’8 The word occurs in the. 


Farvardin yasht (yt. XIII, 58) in the sense of ‘limit.’ Dar- 
mesteter translates the word dura-urvaésa there, as “‘far- 
evolving circle.” In the Vishtasp yasht (yt. XXIV 29), the 
word is used in connection with the running of a horse in a 
cirele (“as an excellent horse turns back from the wrong way 
(hacha urvaésit) and goes along the right way (fratarem urvaé- 


1 8. B. E., XVII, p. 163. 
2 Le Zend-Avesta I, p. LXIT, n. 2. 
3 §. B, E., Vol. XVII, p. 163, n. 4. 


264 THE DAR-I-MEHER 


sem) (smiting the many Drujs.”” Darmesteter. S. B. E. XXIII 
p. 335). So, West seems to be right. Urvic is the circle or 
the limits within which the celebrants have to remain. At 
times, the stone slab on which the ceremonial utensils are 
arranged is also called Adrvés-(Dadistan-i-Dini, XLVITI, 14). 


(c) The word Hindhora or Hindhola is another name of the 
Yazashnea-gih. It seems to be a form of the Sanskrit 
Hindhola, i.e, a swing. The priests while reciting their 
prayers generally assume a swinging posture. So,-perhaps it 
has received its name from the swinging posture of the cele- 
brants. The stone platform on which all the ceremonial 
utensils and requisites are placed is also known as a hindhald: 
Perhaps the word hindhold may be a corruption of the Avesta 
word ardthrw which is used in the Niratigestan1 for the seat 
of the zoti, The Pahlavi rendering of that word there is 
udgéh. The word ardthru when written in Pahlavi may be 
read hanatrd from which the word may have been corrupted 
to hindhord. 


The different Yazashna-gihs are separated from each other 
by a pavi,? which serves both as the limit of each and also as 
the passage for the water used in the ceremonial. If somebody 
enters within the limit marked by the pavi while the service is 
going on, he vitiates the ceremony. If there are two Yazashna- 
gahs side-by side, they are separated by s narrow strip of space 
enclosed, between two pévis. The Yazashna-gahs are so con- 
structed as to permit the Zaoti or the principal officiating 
priest to face the south. 


A priest, who performs the inner liturgical ceremonies of the 
Yeena, the Visparad, and the Vendidad, is 

Characteristics of : Wa Ae JA . 
4 priest qualified to spokenof, at times,as Ya6z ddthragar, t.c., one 
perform the litur- ifi ive or’ ity. us 
Taalcereibiaes ual ed to give or RBEeG purity Honord 
ing to the later Pahlavi and Persian writings, 


— 


1 The photo-zinco text, folio 156-b, 1.11. Darmesteter’s Zend Avesta, 
IIT, p. 130. 


2 Vide Chapter on Purification Ceremonies, p. 115. 


LITORGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 265 


he must possess the following 15 characteristics ( Vide Darab 
Hormmazdyar’s Revayet. Yasna b& Nirang by Tehmuras 
D. Anklesaria, Introduction, p. 25) :— 


(1) Aiwiza him, .e., of pure nature or unblemished. 
-(2) Asnideh Kherad, ¢. ¢., possessed of innate wisdom. 
(3) Din-aspanargan, 7. e., firm in his beliefin religion. 


(4) Yazdan-minidar, 2. 2, one who often thinks of 
God. 


(5) Miné-vinashna, ¢. ¢., one who looks into. spiritual 
things. , 


(6) P4k-minashna, a. €., one of pure thoughts, - 
(7) Rast-gavashna, t. e., one who speaks the truth. 


(8) Kheradi-kunashna, 7.\¢.,.0ne who acts with wis- 
dom, ; 


(9) Yaozdathra tan, ée., one with a clean body. 
(10) Shiva-hizvan, 7. e:, sweet-tongued. 
(11) Narm-nask, ¢. ¢., a slow or careful reader of the 
sacred books. 
(12) Rast-avesta, z.e., one who recites the Avesta properly. 


(13) Padya&v sdzashna, 7. e., one who does all work with 
padyab, ¢.e., after observing the forms of puri- 
fication, 


(14) Khub-nirang, 7. e., one who knows well the religious 
formulas, , 


(15) Nabar-ziwan, 7. e., one who leads his life like a 
Navar, t.¢., observes during his life all the forms 
required to be observed during initiation into 
priesthood, 

34 


266 weg YACNA., THE: PARAGNA 


I will now proceed to describe the liturgical. service of the 
_-Yagna. 


The word Yagna, of which Yazashna is another and a later 

form, comes from the Avesta root yaz,. 
Sanskrit yaj, meaning ‘‘to invoke, to worship, 

to praise.’’ The word is the same as Sanskrit 

yajna or yagna meaning ‘‘a sacrifice.’ Thus, it is a prayer 

which includes the praise of God and his spiritual Intelligences 

and which invokes their aid. It is a long prayer -which is 

accompanied with certain ritual and in which certain things 
are presented as symbols. Its celebration requires the recital 

of the 72 chapters, known as the His! of the Yagna. Two 

priests are required for its celebration., They are, for the time 
being, spoken of as the Zaoti and the Raspi or Atravakhshi. 
They must, at first, have a bathand-put on a clean suit of 
clothes. They must clean their nails, so that there may be no 

impurities in them, They must.have a clean mouth, so that 

there lurk no particles of-any food between their teeth. 


Yacna or 
Yazashna. 


The Yacna is celebrated in two parts :— 
1.—The Paragna. 


II.—The Yagna proper. 


I. THE PARAGNA., 


The word paragnd comes from para (Avesta para) before or 
fore and Sanskrit yagna (Avesta Yagna), and means, “the recital 
or the ritual thet comes before or precedes the Yagna proper.”’ 
Some think, that the word is a corruption of paragra, which is 


1 The word Ha is the Avesta word hditi, meaning chapter or section, 
and comes from the root ha to cut. The 72 fine threads which go to 
make up the Kuséé or the sacred thread are said to symbolise the 72 
h&s or chapters of the Yacna. 


LITURGICAL sBRVICES OF THE PARSEES 267 


the corrupted form of prakriyd, i: e., (the kriyé or ceremony) — 
preceding (pra) the ceremony proper, 


This Paragn&é ceremony consists of the following cere- 
monies :— 


() The Barsam ceremony. 

(2) The Aiwiyaonghan ceremony. 
(3) The Urvaraém ceremony. 

(4) The Jivim ceremony. 

(5) The Zaothra or Jor ceremony: 
(6) The Haoma ceremony. 


We will describe these differentrituals of the Paragn& of 
the Yacna ceremony under the different heads of the religious 
requisites of the Yagna ceremony which bear their names. For 
the performance of the Yagna, the Visparad and the Vendidad™ 
ceremonies, certain requisites, both organic and inorganic, are 
necessary. We find a part of thelist of these in the third 
chapter of the»Yacna itself. Some of these requisites are 
mentioned in the recital of the paragné prayer which con- 
tains portions of the 24th and the 4th chapters of the Yacna. 
We give below a complete list of the apparatus required. 
We will describe these things, and, while doing so, describe 
the ceremonies bearing the names of, and connected with, these 
things. 


The following are required in a Yazashna-gah for the per- 

The liturgical formance of the Yagna, the Visparad and 
apparatus or the saa : 
requisites. in the the Vendidad eoremoning: Some of these 
Yazashna-gah. are required for the Baj ceremony also :— - 


(A) Khw4n or Stone slabs. 


268 THE PARAGNA 


(B) Metallic requisites, known as Astama or Alat, 7.¢., metallic 
utensils or instruments. They are generally of brass, 
and, at times, of silver. Among these are:— 


(a) and (6) Havanim and Lala, ¢. e., mortar and 
pestle. 


(c) Tashta, 7. e., chalice or plates and cups. 
(d) Mahrui, 7. e., crescent-shaped stands. 
(e) Barsam, vegetable twigs or metallic wires. 


(f) Varag ni viti, 7.e, a ring entwined with hair (of 
the sacred bull). 


(g) Kaplo, z. e., a knife. 

(h) The Kundi and other vessels for water. 
(C) Organic requisites. Among these are :— 

(a) Aiwy4onghana, the leaf of a date-palm. 


(6) Urvarém, the twig of 2 pomegranate tree. 
(c) Jivim, the fresh milk of a goat. 
(dZ) Dar&n, the sacred bread. 
(e). Goshfidé, the clarified butter. 
(f) Haoma, the twigs of the Heoma plent. 
(P) action or Zér, the consecrated water. 


(E) Fire and its requisites. Under this head come := 
(z) Fire. 


(6) Afargdniun, a vase to hold the fire, with its accom 
paniments, the laddle and the tongs. 


(¢) Aésma-bai, ¢, ¢., the fragrant fuel. 


LITURGICAL SERVIOES OF THE PARSEES. 269 


Of all these requisites the principal that aye often referred 
to as appertaining to a Zaotar! or sacrificer are the Aésma, 
Barsam, the Jivam, and the Havanim (Aesmézasté, Baresmé- 
zasto, Gaozast6, Havané-zasté6. Vendidad, III, 1; Yacna 
Yasht X Meher 91). A priest in the midst of the ritual is 
spoken of as one holding these in his hands (Zasta). 


In all inner liturgical services, it is enjoined, that the utensils 
ithe Begal stack: before being used, must be made pay, ie, 
ing the requisites ceremoniously purified. The following is 
i aaa the process adopted for this purification :— 


Pure clean water is fetched from a well in-utensils previously 
cleaned and washed. Well-water only is-used ; water drawn 
from pipes is not permitted. For this purpose, all temples are 
provided with a well. A priest obsefving the khib goes to a 
well with the utensils previously cleaned and washed and draws 
the water himself. Water drawn for the first and second time is 
rejected. It is the water that is drawn for the third time that is 
considered to be sufficiently pure for the ceremony. He 
carries this water to the chamber or place where the liturgical 
ceremonies are performed, and, with it, makes pdv, the utensils 
to be used in the liturgical service. The utensils are filled 
up to the brim-with water and then the priest utters the 
following formula and pours additional water so as_ to let it 
overflow the brim. He first says “ Khshnaothra Ahurahé Maz- 
dao, t.e. (I do this) for the pleasure of God,” and then recites 
one Ashem Vohu. He recites this formula three times, and, at 
each recital, pours further water so as to let it flow over the 
brim. In the interval of each formula, he recites in Baj, or mut- 
ters with a suppressed tone, the following words :—Yaozdathra 


1 For the function of the Zootar and eight other functionaries of his 
élass, tide the Nirangistan Bk. II, Ch. XXVII. For the Holy Ministers 
of the Church, their powers, qualifications, instruction, initiation, their 
triple quinary and octonary orders, &c., vide Nirangistan by Mr. 8. J. 
Bulsara. Introduction, pp. 29, et. seq. 


270 “LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAcNA 


Zareh Frakand, Yaozdathra Zareh Varkash, Yaozd4thra Zareh 

Paiti, i, e., with the purity of the seas, Frakand, Vouru Kasha and 
Paiti. The first two are the two names, Pahlavi and Avesta, 
of the Caspean Sea. The third is supposed to be the sea of 
Aral. With these three, the holy waters of the heavenly 
prototype of the river Ardvigura, supposed to be the Oxus, is also 
remembered (harvasp min6é Ardvicura 4w-i pak. Yaozdathra). 
What is meant by this recital and purification seems to~be 
this: The celebrant names the principal sources of water in 
ancient Iran and symbolizes by the ceremony the fact of the 
purifying process of water in the whole nature. All things 
required to be ceremoniously purified for_ritualistic purposes 
are made pure in this way. A priest makes his hands also clean 
or pure in this way.. Now, I will proceed to describe all the 
above requisites. 


The KhwAn is a stone slab used in the Yazashna-gah. Over 
it are spread all the utensils required in the 
(A) Khwén or’ liturgical.services of the Yazashna, the Vis- 
stone slabs, 
parad and the Vendidad. The word is the 
same as the modern Persian khwdn (w!,+), meaning a table. 
It is so called because it is a slab standing on four feet in the 
form ofa table. It is cut out of ordinary stone or marble. 
Altogether six stone slabs are used in the Yazashna-gih. Of 
these four are large and two small ones. Of the four large 
ones, three are square and one round, They are— 


(a) Alat no khwAn, 7.e., the table orslab for the instruments. 
an () Atash no khwAn, ¢. e., the slab for the fire. 


(c) Kundi no khw4n, é. e., the slab for the water vessel. 


{@) Zoti vo khwAn, 7. ¢., the slab for the Zaota priest to sit 
_ upon. 


'-(e) and (f) Aesam bui no Khwaz, i.e., the slab for the 
fuel. : 


_ LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 271 


The positions of the slabs in the Yazashna-gah are shown 
below :— 


South 
The Khwan jot 1 Two small . 
for the fire. pana |_| Khwans 
for pieces 
of sandal 
wood and 
a -.  frankine 
eense, 
East West 
The Khwan 
for the Alat, 
- 
The Zaote’s Khwan Kundi’s round Khwan. 
SNe 
North 


The Alat-khw&n is the Khwan proper, because it serves as a 
‘table (Khw4n) on which the priest spreads 
(a) _Alat-no all the sacrificial plates, cups end other 
Soo vend instruments, the Darun or sacred bread, the 
Jivim or the fresh milk, the urvardm or 
the pomegranate twig, Haoma, etc. It is also called Alat-gah, 
i.e., the place over which all the necessary sacred instruments 
(alat) are placed. It is also called Ald no takhté. The word 
takhié in Persian has the same meaning as Khwan, 7. e., & board 
or table. Hence, the word means “ the table for the (religious) 
instruments.” It is also known as Urvicg.! 


1 Vide, above, p. 263. 


272 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA_ 


980M 


edno euroeyy ety, 


“1978 IOTZ 10 


eaiyjoez ATOY oy} 
Zarureyuoo dno oyy, 


“rrey oy} 
UIA Bax oyy “a "4 
‘141A IU SBIBA 0173 
Bururequos dno eyy, 


*‘BSImg o9eueId 
-outod pus sur0eyT 
eud Zutureyu09 
oyejd oy “9 
‘a, Yyse2 UTUyIBAIQ, 
pue euovy ocuy, 


“BOTAN 
BuLOeyY 94, Fur 
-punod 103 opsed 
pues azeqzour eyy 
9° “BIRT wuTuBAyTT 


GHON 


saytor ysox} 0773.20] 
qoones oy, ‘9 *% 
‘oqyse; gu ugar 


= “gpnysob. 
pues pveiq poiovs 
oy} POY 07 1eones 
ouy «6° *¢ “eueBIC, 
toy = M4YSD} ~—_-CUT, 


qynog 


*reut 
uodn Surpueys 
wesive OU} YITA 
spueys podeys 


-JUe08eID OY} °9 %% 
‘smIyeyy O49 = ONT, 


ocd 


*OUITY @ JO} SBIANQ 
eu0eH proy oF dng 


aS 
JOAO EONeS B ITH 
eoml suosy oreds 
prey 02 dno eyy 


! MOjoq UMOYS SB QeIs OY} UO posuvIaE o1e soysInbor JayIO pu syUOUINIYSUT feOLsINgTT O44 [TY 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 273 


Before all the above plates, cups and other requisites are 
placed over it, the Khwdn requires to be made pdv, i. e., cleaned 
and purified. The officiating priest takes his seat upon his 

‘ stone-slab and then, making a water-pot and the Kundi, pdu, 
makes his. two hands pdv, and then taking some pdv water 
from the vessel (Kundi), recites the Khshnaothra formula six 
times and pours from a saucer the pdv water over the Khwin 
before him six times. During the first three recitals, he puurs 
the water, so as to let it fall from north to south, and then, 
during the second three recitals, from west to east. These 
six pourings of water over the Khwan makes it pdv. 

It seems that the use of stone-slabs as the aldé-gdh or the place 

for religious utensils, though old, is com- 

Staréta or car- paratively recent, because it does not seem to 
bri eae pes have been referred to in the Avesta. In the 
Avesta (Visparad XI, 2), we find the word 

staréta referred to, as one of the requisites for the performance 
of the liturgical ceremonies. -This word staréta (from star, Sans- 
crit star, Lat., stru-ere, to strew, spread) means a thing spread, 

i.e, a kind of matting: So,.it seems, that in very old times, all 
the sacrificial requisites. were spread on a matting or carpet. 
Herodotus (Bk. I, 132) seems to support this view, when he 
says about the sacrificial offering that the priest “strew under 
it a bed oftender grass, generally trefoil.”’ 


Thestone-slab for fire is placed opposite the first Khwan or 
the Alat gah at a distance of about five feet. 

(8) The Adosht or It is the slab upon which the Aferganiun 1 
the Khwan of Fire. 4» the censer containing the ceremonial fire 
stands. It is about 20 to 24 inches square 

and about 12 to 16 inches high. It is generally knownas Atash 
no Khwén, t.e., the slab for the fire. In the Dadistén-i-Dini 
(Chap. XLVITI, 15),? itis called Atashto, i.¢., the place for 


1 The censer is so called, because dfrins or benedictions, etc-, are 
generally recited before it when fireis burning on it, 
48. B. E., Vol. XVIII, p. 164, 


35 


274 LITURGICAL SERVICHS OF THE YAGNA 


the fire to stand upon [Alash, fire, and std, to stand]. This 
word Atashto has latterly become Adusht. It is also spoken of 
as Atash-gih, 7.e., the place of fire. When the Haoma Yasht 
(Yagna IX, 1) speaks of purifying the fire all round (atarem 
pairi-yaozdathentem), it refers to the washing or purifying of 
this stone slab as is done in the modern ritual. The Pahlavi of 
this chapter makes it clear (amatash atdsh gas kamisté 
khalélunastan. J. R. A.S. July 1900, p. 517. “ The first 
preparers of the Haoma ”’ by Dr. Mills. 


The third ‘stone-slab is a small and round one: It is about 

18 inches high and 15 inches in diameter. 

(c) The Khwan It stands on the right-of the first Khwén 

for the Kundi. or the Alat-gah. It is called Kundi no 

Khwén, i. e., the ‘slab for the Kundi, 

because the Kundi, or the vessel.containing pure water and 
all the utensils when they are not used, stands over it, 


This is a stone-slab, sufficiently large for the Zaota or the 

officiating priest who recites the whole of 

(d) Zoti’s Khwa . the Yagna, to sit upon. It is spread over 

with a carpet. It simply serves as a seat 

and has no sanctity attached to it. The Raspi, or the Atar- 

vakhshi, 7. ¢., the priest who looks after the fire opposite, has a 

carpet or a stool to sit upon. It is also spoken of as Zéd-gah, 
a. e., the place or seat of the Zoti (Zaotar). 


The fire in the Yazashna-gah, besides being fed ordinarily, 
(e) and (f). ‘The is fed with pieces of sandalwood and frank 
two please for incense at particular parts of the ritual, with 
a tas the recital of particular words in the. prayers. 
For this purpose, a few pieces of the fuel are set apart on two 


small slabs of stone during particular parts of the recital. 


I will now describe the metallic utensils, which are known as 


(B) The Metallic the Alat (plural of the Persian word Alat, 
requisites, the Alat : Basta, 
or Astéma. meaning utensil, instrument or apparatus) 


The technical word used by the priests for these utensils or 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 275 


apparatus is Asid@md. The word seems to be the corruption of 
stadmya, and means the apparatus used in singing the praise 
(stadmi) of God and His Divine Intelligences. Perhaps it is the 


Pahlavi gyP29— astimeh (Pahl. Vend. XIV, 7), which is the 


Pahl. rendering of Av. garémé skarana and is taken by some 
to represent the fire-vase (122 ley afergdnyun. Dastur 
Jamaspji’s Pahl. Vend. Translation, p. 133). According to Dastur 
Hoshangji (Pahl. Vend. p. 496, n.7) a Pers. gloss gives. for it 
w!so*3T. So, perhaps the astameh or fire-censer, being» the 
principal alat or instrument required in the ceremonial, all - 
others are mentioned under that name. Just as the first word 
of prayers gave their names to the whole prayers (e. g. Yatha 
ahd vairyS or Pater Noster),so the’ most important and 
essential instrument or requisite gave its. name to the whole set. 


As the principal ceremony in the Yagna liturgy is the prepa- 

ration and celebration of the Haoma, Hava- 

(a) The Havanim nim, the mortar in which the twigs of the 
(0) and the Lala. plant.are pounded, and the pestle, with 

which they are pounded, form an important 
part of the liturgical apparatus. Havanim is a kind of metallic 
mortar. Itis the Havana of the 14th chapter of the Vendidad 
(XIV, 8) which gives. list of the religious instruments of a priest. 
The word comes from the Avesta root Hu (Sanskrit su) to pound. 
Thus, it means an instrument in which the Haoma plant is 
pounded. It is spoken of as ddityd-kéréta, (Vend, XTV, 8) z.¢. 
properly prepared. This refers to its proper preparation, so 
that it may give a proper metallic ringing sound when struck 
by the 1414 or dasta, ¢. e., pestle. It appears from the Avesta, 
that it was made either of stone (asmana havana, Vend. XIV, 
10) or of iron (Yagna, XXII, 2: Visparad, X,2). It is the 
metallic Havanim that is now used in the ritual. 

The Lalé or the pestle is the instrument with which the 
Haoma twigs are pounded in the Havanim. It is also the 
instrument with which the Havanana, ¢.c. the priest performing the 
Haoma ceremony, strikes the Havanim and produces a ringing 


276 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA 


metallic sound. The word seems to be the Persian (W) lala, 
t.€., a tulip. It is so called from its resemblance to the stem of 
the tulip flower. It is also called dasta, i.e., a handle, from the 
fact of its being held in the hand to pound the Haoma in the 
Havanim. 

‘fhe word tashta is the Avesta (Vend., XIX, 8,) tashia (Fr: 
tasse, Germ. tasse, Eng. dish). It is va 
chalice, plate or cup used in the ceremonial. 
The fourteenth pargard of the Vendidad and its Pahlavi 
commentary refer to some of these tashtas. There are two 
kinds of tashia: One is that known as rakébi which is a Persian 
word (sf ) for « plate. The other is that known as fuliun and is 
probably so called from Sanskrit fal, 2. e.,flower, because it is 
hollower than the vakdbi or plate and looks like a full-blown 
flower. . 


(c) Tashta. 


The tashta or plates used in the ritual are five in number. One 
is known as Hom né tashté (tashta Haomya : Vendidad, XIV, 8), 
a.é., the plate for holding the Haoma.- The second is known as 
Jivdm né tasht6, i. e., the plate for holding the Jivam, i.¢., the 
fresh milk. It is the gaoidhya of the Vendidad (Chap. XIV,.8). 
It is spoken of in Pahlavi books as Gosh-dan, 7. ¢., the utensil 
containing kine-products. The third is known as surdkhdér 
tasht6, i. e., the plate with holes (Pers. surdkh, a hole). It is 
the plate-through which the Haoma juice is made to pass 
down into’a cup as through a sieve. It is the Raéthwish- 
bajina-(¢. e., purifier of the drugs) of the Avesta (Vend., XIX, 
8). The fourth is the plate that holds the Draéna or the 
sacred bread. The fifth is one for covering the cup holding 
some extra Haoma juice prepared by pounding the Haoma. 


The fulidns or the second kind of cups are also five in number, 
One of these is for holding the Haoma juice after pounding the 
Haoma plant with the urvardm. It is the Haomya of the Avesta 
(Visparad, XI, 2). The second is that for holding the zadthra or 
zor water. It is the Zashta zaothré-barana (2. e., the chalice 
which carries or holds the zaothra) of the Avesta (Visparad, X, 2). 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSHES $77 


The third is for holding the varas ring. The fourth is for 
holding some extra quantity of the Haoma juice. The fifth is 
‘ an extra one placed near the Mahrui for extra purposes. 


The Mahrui (lit. moon-faced) are two metallic stands about 
nine inches in height. They are so 
called because they have a moon-faced or 
crescent-shaped top. They are always used in pair, one 
‘placed in front of the other. They are alse called Barsam-dan, 
because the Barsam twigs are placed upon them. They are the 
ceremonial instruments referred to as Mah-ruy6 in the Dadistan- 
i-Dini (Chap. XLVII, 14)! There, the Adrvig, or the stone 
slab of the Yazashna-géh is spoken of as the proper place for 
the méhrii. They must always be metallic (shatvarin).? 


(d) Mahrui. 


The Barsam forms an important part of the liturgical appara- 
tus. In the modern ritual, the old vegeta- 

(e) The Barsam. ble Barsam has been replaced by metallic 
Barsam. As it is referred to by a classical 

writer like Strabo, and inthe Old Testament, and as its ceremony 
has been referred to by Firdousi and others, I will speak of it at 
some length. The word. Barsam is the Aveste word Baresman. 
It comes from the Avesta root barez, Sanskrit bark, to grow. 
The twigs of a particular tree used in liturgical ceremonies 
are spoken of asthe Barsam. - Later books say that the twigs 
may be of-the pomegranate tree or of the tree known as the 
chint. But the Avesta itself does not specialize any particular 
tree. It speaks generally, that the Barsam neust be of a tree. 
(Yagna, XXV, 3; urveram baresmanim). The Shayast 18 
Shiyast (XIV, 2), though it does not particularize the tree, 
says that only twigs of the proper tree must be used. But, 
now-a-days, instead of the twigs of any tree, metallic wires 
are used. They are generally of brass, but at times of silver. 
They are about nine inches long and one-eighth of an inch in 


1§. B. E., Vol. XVIII, p. 163. 
? Ibid, p. 165. Dadistan, Chap. XLVIIL, 17. 
3§.B.E., Vol. V, p. 370. 


278 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA 


diameter. Each of such wires is called a t&6 (Pers. tai, 7. ¢., a 
thin thread). The practice of using metallic wires seems to 
have come into force within these last 1,000 years, because the 
Dadistan refers to vegetable twigs 1 

The number of twigs required differ in different services. The 
Shayast 14 Shayast (XIV, 2)? enjoins, that neither more nor 
less than the requisite number should be used. The celebra- 
tion of the Yagna requires 23 twigs of which 21 form a bundle. 
One twig is placed on the foot of the Mdh-rui, 7. e.,,the moon- 
faced or the crescent-like stand which is otherwise known as 
the Barsamdan. This twig is called zor-né tde, 4. ¢., the twig of 
the saucer containing the zor or zaothra water. The other, i.e., 
the twenty-third twig is placed on the. saucer containing the 
jivdm, i.e., the mixture of water and millk. The celebration of 
the Vendiddd requires 35 twigs, of which 33 form a bundle 
and the other two are used as above. The celebration of the 
Visparad requires 35 twigs, that ofthe Yzeshné of Rapithavin 
15, and that of the Baj 5. In the case of the ceremony of 
Navar, 7. é., the initiation into priesthood, the recital of the 
Miné-Navar baj requires seven twigs. The Sraosh Yasht 
(Yagna, LVII, 5) speaks of the use of three, five, seven, and nine 
twigs by Sraosha. The greatest length of each of the twigs is 
spoken of here-as that of the height of a knee, 7. e., about two 
feet. According to the Nirangistin, the minimum number 
to be. used in the ritual is three, the minimum thickness 
of each twig to be equal to that of a hair, the maximum length 
to be one aesha and the maximum breadth one yava. The 
Vendidad (XIX, 19) also gives the length of one aesha and the 
breadth of one yava. Darmesteter3 takes ‘‘ aésha’’ to be the 
length of a ploughshare and the ‘‘yava’’ to be the breadth of 
a barley-corn. According to English measures, three barley- 
corns make one inch. 


1 Dadistan-i-Dinik, XLVIII, 17. Vide 8. B. E., Vol. XVILL, p. 165, n.3. 


2 §.B.E., Vol. V, p. 370. For some varying numbers, vide the 
Nirangestan Bk. III, Ch, VII, Appendix A. (Mr. Bulsara’s Translation, 
pp. 434. er seg). 


3 Le Zend Avesta IT, p. 265, 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 279 


In the ritual, the Barsam twigs or wires are placed on the 
above-mentioned two crescent-shaped metallic stands made 
generally of brass or at times of silver, of which the Shayast 14 
Shayast (III, 32; X, 35)! speaks as Barsamdan, i. e., the 
holder of the Barsam. We will see later on, that the Barsam 
is the symbol of God’s vegetable creation. As said above, the 
very etymology of the word suggests growth. The moon and 
its crescent (Lat. crescere, to grow, increase) give an idea-of 
growth. Again, the moon is believed to have some influence 
on the growth of vegetation. So, Barsam, the symbol of the 
vegetable world of God has, for its stand, moon-shaped metallic 
stands, 


The second. chapter of the Yagna shows that the Barsam was 
considered to be an essential requisite in the liturgical service 
of the Yagna. This chapter is called the Barsam Yasht. The 
Vendidad (XIV, 8) speaks of it as one of the requisites of 
an Athornan, 7.¢., a Fire-priest performing liturgical services. 
Being such an essential requisite, the very tree whose twigs 
serve as Barsam is an object of praise (Yacna, XXV, 3). All 
the religious rites of the inner liturgical service of the Zoro- 
astrians are celebrated with Barsam (Bahman Yasht, II, 57, 58).3 


According to the Nirangistan, the Barsam ceremony existed 
in the time of Zoroaster, whose contemporary, Jimasp, is 
said to have celebrated it in a particular way (Fragments, 6. 
Nirangistan, Fargard III, 89).¢ In many passages of the 


1§. B. E., Vol. V, pp. 284, 333. ; 

2 Vide my paper on “ The Ancient Iranian Belief and Folklore about 
the muon, etc”. (Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay, 
Vol. XI, pp. 14-39. Vide my Anthropological Papers, Part I, p. 802. 
et seq). 

3 §. B. E., Vol. V, p. 212. 

4 Darmesteter, Le Zod Avesta, ITI, p. 136. Vide the Nirangistan 
(B. II, Chap. V, Appendix A) by Mr. S.J. Bulsara. His Introduction 
may be read with advantage to have a brief view of what is said in the 
Nirangistan about the Barsam and about other articles of the alat, 
(Airpatastaén and Nirangistén by Sohrab Jamshedji Bulsara. Introd, 
pp. XLITI-VIL.) 


280 — LIT@RGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


Avesta, Nydishes and Yashts, it is always associated 
with the Haoma and Jivim ceremonies (Haémayé gava bares- 
mana). So, as the Haoma ceremony! is very ancient, it follows 
that the barsam ceremony also is as ancient as that. The 
Behman Yasht (ITI, 29, 37)2 speaks of it as celebrated by 
Peshotan, a contemporary of Zoroaster. 3 


The Parsees have three forms of prayers to be recited as 

grace before meals. One of these, which is 

,_ The Barsam used the longest and in which certain chapters of 
in the recital of 7 . 

grace before meals, the Yagna are recited, is used by priests 

on certain occasions when they officiate in 

continued inner liturgical services. In the-recital of this form 

of grace barsam is a necessary requisite. But, it seems, that in 


ancient times, barsam was a requisite ineven the simple forms 


1 Vide below p. 300. 

2 §. B. E, Vol. V, pp. 227, 229. 

3 It is this ceremony that Ezekiel refers to when he says: “Then 
he said unto me, ‘ Hast thou seen'this, O son of man ? Is it a light thing 
to the house of Judah that they commit the abominations which they 
commit here ? for they have filled the land with violence, and have re- 
turned to provoke me to anger and lo they put the branch to their nose.” 
(Ezekiel, VIII, 16-17). The Parsee priests even now hold the twigs up to 
their face. Hence it/is, that Ezekiel speaks of the branch as being held 
to the nose. 

Strabo also-refers to this ceremony. He says: “‘ They (the Persians) 
then lay the flesh in order upon myrtle or laurel branches; the Magi 
touch it with slender twigs and make incantations, pouring oil mixed with 
milk and honey, not into the fire, nor into the water, but upon the earth. 
They continue their incantations for a long time, holding in the hand a 
bundle of slender myrtle rods.”’ (Strabo, Bk. XV, chap. III, 14 
Hamilton and Falconer’s Translation (1857), III, pp. 136—137.) 

The Flamines or the Fire-priests of the ancient Romans also carried 
bunches of such twigs in their hands in their ritual. « Dino, a contem- 
porary of Philip, is said to have referred to the Barsam, though not as a 
sacrificial instrument but as an instrument of Divination (Darmesteter 
Le Zend Avesta, III, p. LXIX). The Dinkard (Bk. VIII, chap. XIX. 
83, chap. XX, 12) seems to refer to this use of the Barsam when it 
speaks of its being used as an ordéal (Baresmok- varih) i in judicial matters 
(s B.E., Vol, XXXVII, pp. 48, 55), 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 281 


of grace recited before meals. The reciter held barsam in his 
hand during these recitals. It was so in Sassanian times. 
We learn from Firdousi, that Yazdagard, the last Sassanian 
king, when he concealed himself during his flight in the house 
of a miller, asked. for the barsam to say his grace before the meals. 
This led to the discovery of the place of his hiding and he was 
treacherously killed by his general Mahui Suri. Again, we find, 
that in the reign of Khosro Parviz (Chosroes IT), this custonr 
of using the barsam in the recital of grace before meals was on 
the point of leading to a war between Persia and Romet. 


a3 


The Barsam is “identified with the Barhis or sacred grass 


(Kusha grass) of the-Brahmans, which 

Its similarity to they spread at their sacrifices as a seat for 
aHindu ceremony. the gods who are expected to come.’?2_ Dr. 
Haug differs from this identification, and 

says that it resembles “a peculiar rite at the great Soma 
sacrifices ...... At the time of the Soma libation (called 
Savana) which is to be performed three times on the same day, 
from 8 to 12a.m.(morning libation), 1to 5 p.m. (mid-day libation) 
and 6t011 p.m. (evening Jibation), the three Samaveda priests, 
the Udgata ,the Prastota, and the Pratiharta, require a certain 
number of wooden sticks to be placed in a certain order when 
chanting the sacred sdmans (verses of the Samaveda.) They 


rn 


i Rehatzek thus describes the incident: ‘‘On another occasion, 
the Persian monarch gave a banquet and had tables arranged for that 
purpose, in a rose garden. He had put on the royal diadem, and Nya- 
tus (the Roman ambassador) with the philosophers sat around the table 
nearer Bandvy, one of his (Khosru’s) favourite magnates with the 
Barsam (or little twigs held by Mobeds when praying) in his hand arrived 
and stood near his sovereign, who muttered the B&j (i.e., the prayer of 
grace). . . . When Ny&tus beheld this scene, he laid aside his bread, 
and was so annoyed that he left the table, saying that the Baj and the . 
Cross together were an insult to the Messiah.” (Journal of the B. B. 
R. A. Society, Vol. XIII, p. 88, note.) Firdousi refers to this subject 
at some length (vide Le Livre des Rois par M. Motl, Vol. VII, p. 183). 

2 Haug’s Essays, 2nd_ edition, p. 283. Vide Journal B. B. R.A 
Society, Vol. XIV, pp. 5-15. 36 


282 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


use for this purpose the wood of the Udumbara tree, and call 
them Kusha, which naine is generally given to the sacred grass, 
In the Agnishtoma, 15 such sticks are required at the morning 
libation, 17 at noon, and 21 in the evening ; in other sacrifices, 
such as the Aptoryama,evena much larger number of such 
sticks is required.”! The very fact, that the Barsam is not 
spread on the ground but is enjoined to be held up in the 
hand—left hand according to the Vendidid (XIX, 19)—as 
referred to in Ezekiel and by Straboand as practised at present, 
seems to show that its identification with the barhis of the Hindus 
is not correct and that Haug’s identification seems to be more 
probable. Again, as we have seen above, as_a symbol of 
vegetable creation, it is connected with the moon which helps 
the growth of vegetation. So, its identification with a rite of 
the Saoma sacrifice seems to be correct, because pacman has 
some connection with the moon. 


It appears from the Vendidéd (XIX, 18, 19), that the object of 
performing the Barsam ceremony seems 
to be the payment of homage to the 
‘vegetable creation of God. There, in reply 
to the question of Zoroaster, as to with what kind of praise 
or ritual (Yacna) he should worship or laud the creation 
of God, Ahura. Mazda replies, that he should go before a 
flourishing growing tree, utter the words, ‘‘ Praise be to thee, the 
good pure tree created by Ahura Mazda (nem6 urvairé vanghuhi, 
ete.,,),”’ | end then cut the Barsam out of the tree. This passage 
not only shows, that the Barsam represents the vegetable 
creation of God, but also, that the Barsam ritual is intended 
as a means of celebrating the praise of God for the creation 
of the world, especially the vegetable world. The Vishtasp 
Yasht (Yasht XXTV, 21+-23) also gives a similar interpre- 
tation. 

_ In the ritual, the holy water (the zaothra or jér water) is 
poured over the Barsam. Now, this zaothra or purified water 


' ‘The object of the 
Barsam ceremony. 


1 Haug, ibid, p. 282. 


‘LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 283 


represents, or is the symbol of; rain through which the world 
receives the gift of water from God. Thus, the ritual of pouring 
this sacred water, which is the symbol of the drops of rain, 
upon Barsam, which is the symbol of vegetable creation, 
signifies the celebration, or the worshipful commemoration, of. 
the process of the whole vegetable world being fertilized by rain, 
Prof, Darmesteter expresses this point very pithily and briefly 
in the following words: “ Le symbolisme de ces opérations ést_ 
transparent : Le Baresman représente la nature végétale, le 
z6hr (t. e. the sacred water) représente les eaux : on met le zohr 
en contact idéal avec le Baresman pour pénétrer toute la flore 
des vertus de ]’eau et féconder la terre.” 1 


The celebrant is enjoined to look continuously to the Barsam 
during the ceremony and. to concentrate his mind upon it (Vend. 
XIX, 19), because, by looking upon what represents, or is the 
symbol of, the vegetable creation, he conceives in his mind the 
whole of the creation. The object aimed at by the ritual is 
tiot gained if the celebrant or worshipper is immoral and vicious 
(Meher Yasht, Yt. X, 138). “In the case of a righteous person 
(ashavan), even. one single sincere performance of: the Barsam 
ceremony is sufficient’ to exalt him, and to put down the evil 
influences of the wicked (Fragments Tehmuras, XXIV, 40-41).2 
According to the Mino-Kherad (LVII, 28),? the celebration of 
this ceremony which symbolized the act of praising God for his 
creation; broke the power of the demons or of the evil influ- 
ences. The Dinkard (Bk. VIII, Chap. XXVI, 24)4 says, that 
the celebration of the praise of God with this ceremonial on a day 
of battle, helps the soldiers a good deal; it is something like 
throwing a well-aimed arrow. Firdousi refers to its use in the 
ritual in the Fire-temples in the time of Behramgour (Behram 
V).5 


1 Le Zend Avesta, I, p. 397. 

? Darmesteter, Le Zend Avesta, III, p. 61. 
3 §.B. E., Vol. XXIV, p. 103. 

£§. B. E., Vol. XXXVI, p. 89 

5 M. Mohl, Le Livre des Rois, Vol, VI, p. 65. 


284 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA 


The Dinkard (Bk. VITI, Chap. XXIX, 16),1 referring to the 

; Husparam Nask, says, that one of the 

oe ee sections of the Nirangistan refers to the 

is itand (b) tying “gathering and tying the sacred twigs 

(Barsam).’”? In modern practice, the cere- 

mony of the preparation ofthe Barsam for liturgical purposes 

consists of only one part. But, at one time, it consisted of two 

parts :—(a) The first part, viz., the gathering or the collection of 

the twigs now-a-days is different from the old method, because, 

instead of vegetable twigs, metallic twigs are’ used now. 

(0) The second part, viz., that of tying the twigs or, wires is 

performed even now. I will describe both the old ritual of 
gathering the twigs and the modern ritual of tying them. 


(a) According to the old practice, a priest who had performed 
the Khub ceremony—either the small or the large Khub—per- 
formed the ceremony of preparing the Barsam. He fetched 
pure water from a well and with it made a water-pot pdz, 7. e., 
pure. With this pure water, collected in a ceremoniously puri- 
fied utensil, he went before the tree whose twigs were to be used 
in the ritual as the symbolof the vegetable creation, and washed, 
with his right hand, the twig which he wanted to cut. Then, 
holding a knife (44p16) in the right hand and the utensil of pdv 
water in the left, he took the Baj with the Khshnuman for 
urvara or_trees, recited a formula of prayer, wherein the 
bountiful vegetable creation of God was praised (fracastayaécha 
urvaréo vanghuyéo mazdadhatay4o ashaonyao) and cut off the 
twig he required for the ritual. He cut off the twig with the 
recital of an Ashem Vohi. With the word “ Ashem,”’ he cut 
off and rejected the partly dried tip or the end. With the word 
Vohi, he touched the stem and with the word Vahishtem, he 
cut itoff. Atthe end of the recital, he thus paid his homage to 
the good vegetable creation of God, as enjoined in the Vendidad 
(Chapter XTX, 18): «‘Homageto thee, O good holy tree, created 


18. B. BE. Vol. XXXVI, p.96. Vide also Chapters. XIII—XVI, pp. 
469—77 of the Nirangistan translated by Mr. &. J. Bulsara. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 285 


by God! (Nemé6 urvairé vanguhi Mazdadhaté ashaoné). With 
the cutting of each twig the above ritual is repeated. He then 
retires to the Yazashna-gih. In the modern practice, a priest 
with the Khub makes the metallic wires pdv, ¢.e., pure, together 
with all the metallic utensils required for the Yazashné 

‘ceremony. The Shayast 14 Shayast (XIV, 2)1 enjoins that 
they all must be made pdv. He then holds the requisite 
number of wires, all but one, in his lefthand, Then, holding the 
remaining one in his right hand, with the usual recital of 
three Ashem Vohiis and Fravarane, takes the Baj -with the. 
Khshnuman of Khshathra-vairya or Shehrivar Ameshaspand who 
presides over metal. In the old practice, the Khshnuman was 
that for trees because the twigs used were those ofa tree. 
Then, during the recital of the Ashem Vohi of the B&j, 
touching both the ends of the bundle of wires in his left hand 
with the zaothra or zor wire (so called because itis to be placed 
on the zaothra water cup) in his right hand, he finishes the Baj. 
While finishing the B&j during the recital of the Yasnemcha 
formula, with the mention ‘of the name of Khshathra-vairya 
who presides over metals, he touches again both the ends of the 
bundle of the Barsam wires in his left hand with the zo 
wire in his right hand. 


(6) Having prepared the Barsam the next process is that of 
tying the-wiresintoa bundle. A strip of the leaf of a date-palm 
known as ‘aiwydonghana® is used for the purpose. The priest 
takes the Baj with the Khshnuman of Ahurahé Mazdao. During 
the recital of this Baj, while uttering the words Ahurahé Mazdéo 
(i.e. God), raevato (7.e., the Brilliant) and Kharenanghato (t.e., the 
Glorious), the priest, holding the Barsam on the aiwyaonghana 
which lies over the crescent of the Mah-rui, ties the Barsam 
with the strip of the leaf of the date-palm. He then dips four 
times the bundle of wires and the strip of the leaf in the water 


158. B. E, Vol. V., p. 370. 
2 Vide below, the ceremony of preparing the strip of leaf for the 
AiwyAonhana, p. 291. : 


286 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


of the Kundi or the vessel on his right hand side. While 
doing this, he recites four Ashem Vohus. He then recites two 
Ahunvars. During the recital of the first, he puts on two knots 
over the bundle of the wire. During the recital of the second, 
he cuts off and polishes with a knife the ends of the strip of the 
leaf of the date-palm. The knife used in the recital for the 
purpose (the ashtra of Vendidid XIV, 8), known at present as 
the Kaplé, is spoken of at times as the Barsam-chin.—The 
tying process being completed, the priest finishes the Baj. 


The hair (varc)! of a sacred white bull, entwined round a 
ring, is a necessary requisite. 'The number 
i? Ps Fe Rie of ae used, is ae five, or seven. The 
dead of thesacr- —varg or the hair of a‘sacred white bull parti- 
eularly kept for the purpose is used only 
as long as that bullis living. On thedeath of that bull, his vare 
or hair are rejected and that of anew bull, which in its turn is 
consecrated, are used. The ring with the hair is purified before 
being used in the ritual, This purification of the hair-ring 
takes place every time that-it is used, 7.e., at each performance 
of the Haoma ceremony. The ring with the varac or hair lies 
on the stone-slab before the priest in a small metallic cup. 
Before preparing the Zaothra water, the officiating priest 
makes the ring pdv or purifies it. He takes one wire of the 
-Barsam in-his right hand and places his left hand with the 
wire on two small metallic Zaothra cups which are placed in an 
nverted position on the stone-slab. Then holding the varag 
ring in his right hand he dips it in the Kundi on his right. He 
then utters in Baj or in a suppressed tone, the 101 names of 
God. This recital of the 101? names is repeated ten times. 
This dipping of the ring with the recital of God’s names 
purifies the ring for ritualistic purpose. 


1 Vide above p. 256 Varagyd in the Consecration Ceremonies. 

2 For these 101 names of God, vide Darab Hormzdyar’s Revayet; 
by Ervad M. R. Unvala. Yagna ba Nirang by Ervad Tehmuras D, 
Anklesaria, pp. 24-26, : 


5 7 e. 
LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 287 


When used in the Haoma ritual after the above purification, 
the ring is used with a Baj prayer, known as Varag ni Bdj, .e., 
the Baj for the use of Varag. The priest, who has to prepare 
the Haoma juice, holds in his left hand the Barsam wire, 
known as the Zér wire (Zor n6 tai) and in his right hand the 
hair-ring. Then holding both the hands together before his 
face, he takes the B&aj with the Khshnuman of the Fravashi 
or Farohar of Zarathushtra Spitama, and then finally reciting 
an Ashem Voha prayer dips it in the cup containing the Zér 
water. The ring thus consecrated is then used in, the subse- 
quent ceremony of straining the Haoma juice. 


In the ritual of preparing all the other requisites, the Baj 
with the Khshnuman referring to the particular requisite is 
recited. For example, (a) In the case of having the vegetable 
Barsam twigs, the Khshnuman referring to trees (urvaraydéo 
vanghuyéo mazdadhatayao ashaényao, z.c., the good holy trees 
created by Mazda) is enjoined to be recited. (b) In the case of 
tying the metallic twigs of the Barsam, the Khshnuman relating 
to metal (Khshathrahé vairyéhé ayékhshustahé, i.¢., the 
Ameshdspend Shebrivar presiding over the metals) is recited. 
(c) In the case of Jivam or the milk of the bovine creation, the 
Khshnuman referring to the cow (géush tashné géush uruné, 
i.¢., the bovine creation, the soul of the bovine creation) is recited. 
(4) In the case of the preparation of the Zaothra or Zér water, 
the Khshnuman relating to water (aiwyé vaughubyé vispanam- 
cha. apim mazdadhatanam, t.e., good waters, all the good 
waters created by Mazda) is recited. (e) In the case of the 
ritual of purifying the Haoma twigs, the Khshnuman referring to 
Haoma (Haomahé ashavazanghé, t.e., Haoma giving the strength 
of piety) is recited. But in the case of the varac, 7.¢., the hair, 
the Khshnuman recited refers to the holy spirit of Zoroaster 
(Zarathushtrahé Spitémahé ashaoné Fravashéé, i.e., the holy | 
Fravashi of Spitanta Zarathushtra). The reason does not seem 
to be clear, but it is traditionally said, that in the early days 
of the foundation of the ritual in Zoroaster’s times, the hair of 
the horse of Zoroaster were used as the varag (vide the Rivayatg). 


288 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


The haired ring, when placed in the perforated chalice (surakh- 
dar tashta) and used in the Haoma service, seems to serve, as 
it were, as a strainer for the Haoma juice. This varac or hair is 
spoken of in the Avesta (Visparad X 2) as Vareca Haoma ang. 
harezén, i.e., the Varag er hair for straining the Haoma juice. 


A knife with a metallic handle is another requisite. It is the 

‘ashtra’ of the Vendidad (XIV, 8). It is 

(9) Ashtra or now called Kaplé, because it is used-for 

Kapl6, i.e, knife. the purpose of cutting (kapvin) the 

aiwydonghana or the leaf of the date-tree, 

and the urvardm or the root or twigs of the pomegranate 

tree. It is also used in cutting and smoothening the ends 

of the aiwydonghana which fastens the twigs of the Barsam. 

It is also spoken of as the Barsam-chin, 7.e,, the instrument for 
picking and collecting the Barsam, twigs. 


As all the utensils and other requisites require purification, 
a quantity of water is always required in the 
(ht) The Kundi Yazashna-gih. The first important vessel 
and other water sn cae : 
vessels, for containing this is known as the Kundi 
(Sanskrit kund, a basin or bow]), 7.¢., the 
water basin. It is a large metallic basin about 15 inches in 
diameter and_12 inches in depth. All the sacred utensils are, 
before being spread on the Khwan or stone-slab, collected in 
this Kundi. Instead of making each and every one of the 
utensils severally pay or purified, they are all placed at first in 
the. Kundi, which is then made pév. The process of making 
the kundi pdv makes all the utensils contained in it also pdv, 


The other utensils used in the Yazashna-gah are two or three 
‘water-pots known 2s Karagyd or Kdhkrné. They do not form 
part of the dldt or the sacred utensils properly so called, but 
they form a part of the necessary requisites. The Karagyd isa 
small water-pot. The word seems to have come from Persian 
Karsdn ( y' 5), an, earthen or wooden vessel. Two of these 
are generally used in the Yazashna-gah. They hold the water 
used for making the several requisites pdv. The other water 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSHES. 289 


pot is known as Kéhdrnoo, It is a large water-pot. It seems 
to have been so called from the word Kéhrvun, i.e. to draw 
(water), because it is generally used for drawing water from 
the well. 


As a quantity of water is used in the Yazashna-gah for‘ purifi- 
cation purposes, an outlet for the water is provided by the pdvis.! 
The pdvis serve, both, as limits or marks within which certain 
ceremonies must be performed and which must not be encroach- 
ed upon by others, and as conduits for the waste-water to get 
out. 

We will now speak of the organic requisites. ‘Though Haoma 

is the most important of these requisites and 
pavadie. Organic though the ceremony of pounding and pre- 

paring its juice formsan important part of 
the Yagna liturgy, we will first describe the other organic requi- 
sites, because they are required for the Haoma ceremony and 
their preparation and purification precede that of the Haoma. 


Aiwydonghana is the strip of a leaf of the date-palm. The 
(a) The Aiwyaon- word comes from the Avesta aiwi (Sans. 
ghana,aleaf of the abhi, Gr. epi, round about) and yadngha, 
Rerecpelet (Sans. yd¢) to put on, and means putting 
round about, The’ word literally meansa bond or tie. The 
strip of a leafiof the date-palm used in the Yagna liturgy is 
called aiwyaénghana because it is put round the Barsam to 
tie it. 
According to Pliny,? the ancient Iranian kings had a special 
date-palm growing in their gardens. It was 
The date-t ree known as the “royal’’ date-palm. It was a 
ae perenne native of Babylonia. Syagri was a species 
the ancient of that date-palm. Pliny 3 says of this 
Iranians, , 5 : 
species, that no sooner did a tree die another 


1 Vide the word pdvi in the Purificatiory Ceremonies, p. 115. 
2 Bk. XIII, chap. 9. Bostock and Reiley’s ‘Translation, Vol. II, 
p. 174 3 Ibid, 
37 


290 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAcNA 


grew out of the old root. The story of the bird phoenix rising 
again from the ashes of its former self seems to have been taken 
from the story of this tree. The date-tree was for this reason 
held to be an emblem of immortality and of royalty among the 
ancient Iranians as among some other nations. ! 


1 Among the ancient Chaldwans, the date-tree signified the tree of 
life. Its roots go far down belowinto the earth, and its top with its 
branches points high above towards the sky. So, it was considered as 
a proper symbol of the tree of life, signifying, that man has come from 
a long unknown past and is advancing towards some unknown future. 
Its green branches symbolize the active element in our life and its trunk 
and root, the passive element. Among the ancient Assyrians, it was a 
symbol of fertility. Old Assyrian cylinders present pictures wherein a 
priest is represented as pointing to a.date-tree. (‘*Tho Sacred Tree,” by 
Mrs. Philpot, p. 88.) . 

The ancient Egyptians knew the date-palm by the name ‘‘Bai, ” and as 
it was an emblem of the immortality of the soul, the soul also was known 
as “Bai” or “ Ba.’ Again, as thé leafy part at the top pointed to the 
heavens, the date-palm symbolized the science of astronomy among 
the ancient Egyptians. The Egyptian Thoth, who was “ the Deity who 
superintended the life of man, ” held in his hands a palm, each branch 
of which represented a year. (“ Manners and Customs of the Ancient 
Egyptians,’ by Sir Gardiner Wilkinson, Vol. I, p. 256.) “* Mercury, the 
Hermes of Egypt, was represented with a palm branch in his hand: and 
his priests at Hermopolis used to have them stuck in their sandals on the 
outside. The Goddess Isis was thus represented.” * (Sryant’s ‘‘ New 
System, or Analysis of Ancient Mythology, ” (1807) Vol. II, pp. 3-4.) 

Owing to its straight and majestic appearance, it was held among 
the ancients as an emblem of honour. So, it was presented to triumphant 
persons as a symbol of a prize. ‘The ancients always speak of it as a 
stately.and noble tree. It was esteemed an emblem of honour; and 
made use of as a reward for victory. Plurimarum palmarum homo (i. ¢. 
@ man like many palms ) was a proverbial expression among the Romans 
for a soldier of merit. Pliny speaks of the various species of palms; 
and of the great repute in which they were held by the Babylonians. 
He says, that the noblest of them were styled the royal palms, and sup- 
poses that they were so called from their being set apart for the king's 
use. But they were very early an emblem of royalty” (Ibid. p. 3). 

The ancient Hebrews also held the palm as a symbot of triumph and 
victory. They carried boughs of the palm in their hands in some of 
their festivals. At the celebration of the nuptial ceremonies, it was used 
as a symbol of joy and good luck. “It was thought to have an influence 
at tae birth’’( Ibid p. 4.) According to Leviticus (Ch. XXIII, 40), 


va 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 291 


As the date-palm is essential in the liturgical services, every 
Fire-temple or Dar-i-Meher has one or more 

The ceremony of ee ee: 
preparing the Ai- date-trees growing in its compound. The 
ee : Its officiating priest who has observed the Khub 
: goes before the tree with a potful of water, 
made ceremoniously pdv or pure. He washes three times with 


among the ancient Hebrews, in the Feast of the Tabernacle, the Israe- 
lites were enjoined “to take the boughs of goodly trees, branches of 
palm-trees .... and rejoice before the Lord.’ According to Ezekiel 
(XLI, 18-20), the palm played a prominent part in the places of angels 
.and holy men. In the Temple, “‘a palm-tree was between.a cherub and 
acherub..... From the ground unto above the door were cheru- 
bims and palm-trees made, and on the wall of the temple.” In later 
Hebrew coins it is found as a symbol of Judea. The Blessed are repre- 
sented as standing before the throne of God,“ clothed with white robes 
and palms in their hands’ (Revelation, VII, 9). Being an. emblem 
of royalty, when Christ entered Jerusalem, the people welcomed him 
with branches of palm-trees in their hands. They “ took branches of 
palm-trees, and went forth to meethim, and cried Hosanna; Blessed - 
isthe King of Israel that cometh in the name of the Lord” (St. John 
XII, 13). On account of its straight growth, the Psalmist considered 
the palm to be a symbol of righteousness. He said: “ The righte- 
ous shall flourish like the palm-tree” (Psalm XCII, v. 12.) It rises 
and grows in spite of the great weight of its branches on its top or the 
head. Instead of being depressed by the weight of the branches, it 
thrives the more, the greater the number of branches. That fact sym- 
bolized the moral, that man must not be depressed under difficulties 
but try to rise to the occasion. (Bryaht’s Ancient Mythology, Vol. II, 
pp. 4-5.) . 

The palm was a classical symbol of Victory and Triumph. The Chris- 
tians then assumed it as the universal symbol of martyrdom. In many 
@ picture of the martyrs, an angel is represented 4s descending with the 

epalm. “‘ Hence it is figured in the tombs of the early martyrs and placed 
in the hands of those who suffered in the cause of truth, as expressing 
their final victory over the powers of sin and death.” (‘ Sacred and 
Legendary Art,’ by Mrs. Jameson, p. 31.) In the Greek Church it is 
held as the emblem of the Victory of Faith. 

The date being their and their cattle’a staple food and being a treo of 
which all the parts are utilized by them in one way or another, it is held 
by the Arabs in estimation and loved dearly, and they cultivate it and 
fructify it with religious fervour. Where Nature is not strong enough 
for the fructification of the palm, they at particular seasons cut off the 
male spathes and transfer the pollen to the female spathes. Bent thus 


292 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA 


that water the particular leaf which he wants, reciting the 
usual formula of Khshnaothra. Then, with a knife which is 
‘also previously washed clean, he cuts off, at first, the top or the 
end of the twig, and rejects it, lest it may be a little dried 
and damaged, and then, he cuts off the leaf. He then once 
more washes it with the pév water and then placing it in the 
water-pot, carries it to the Yazashna-géh. There, he divides 
the leaf into six thin strips, which being divided at first into two 
groups of three each, are then twisted into one string and knotted 
at both the ends. It is then placed in a clean pdv metallic cup 
and afterwards used for tying the Barsam. 


We said above, that the Barsam represents the creation of 
God. The separate twigs or wires of the Barsam represent that 
the creation ‘consists of various parts. The aiwydonghana 
which binds or ties together the Barsam signifies union or 
_ unity among these parts. It seems,to signify that the whole 
Nature is one. We are one withit. We learn from the Pahlavi 
commentary of the Yagna! (Chap. IX, 26) where aiwydonghana 
is referred to, that the idea-or the main object seems to be that 
of ayokardgih, t.e., of unification. The word aiwydonghana is 
also used in the Avesta for the Kusti or the sacred thread. One 
of the interpretations about the Kusti is, that it unites into a 


describes the process : “‘ It was just then the season at which the female 
spathe has to be fructified by the male pollen and we were interested in 
watching 4 man going round with an apron full of male spathes. With 
these he climbed the stem of the female palm and with a knife cut open 
the bark which encircles the female spathe, and as he shook the male 
pollen over it, he chanted in a low voice, ‘‘ May God make you grow and® 
be fruitful.”? (‘Southern Arabia,” by Mr. and Mrs. Theodore Bent, 
p. 117). In the sandy part of Arabia, it is held as dear as a mother. 
There they say on the authority of their prophet Mahomed : “ Honour the 
date tree, for she is your mother.” (“Ibid p.19). In the holy month of 
Ramzan, the day’s fast is first broken by eating & date. So, the idea 
of one’s duty is bound up with the date in their proverb, ‘* At the same 
time a date and a duty.” (Ibid, p. 20). 

1 Spiegel’s Pahlavi Yagna, p. 76, sec. 81. Vide Mills’ Pahlavi Text 
of Yasna IX, 49-103 (Journal of the American Oriental Society, Vol. 
XXIIE (1902), p. 3. 


. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 293 


circle of harmony all those who put it on. Similarly the 
aiwydonghana or the strips of the leaf of the date-palm, when 
put round the separate twigs or wires of the Barsam for the 
purpose of uniting them all into one bundle, signify the fact of 
theunity of the creation, the unity of Nature. On finishing 
the Yagna, while reciting the 72nd Chapter, the Zaéta puts on 
further knots over the Barsam with the strips of the aiwydon- 
ghana signifying that the liturgical ceremony has led ‘to~or 
signified further unification.} , 


The word comes from Avesta urvara, (Sanskrit-urvard, Latin 
Arbor, Fr. Arbre) tree. Originally, it means 

a ig gels a tree. Then it has been applied specially 
bolism and the to atwig of the pomegranate tree used in 
paring of Pre the liturgical service, The Dadistan-i-Dini 
(Ch. XLVIII, 16) specializes the pomegranate 

as the Urvarém or as “the tree. ” There, it is called Hadanapag 
(Avesta Hadhanaépata), 7. e;-evergreen, from hadhd—=Sanskrit 
sadd, i.e. “ever” and from nip or nap, to be green, “On a review 
of the whole evidence, botanical, literary and linguistic, Alphonse 
de Candolle (Origine des Plantes Cultivées)...... +...decides in 
favour of its source in Persia and the neighbouring countries.’’? 
The fruit is frequently represented on ancient. Assyrian 

and Egyptian’ sculptures, and had a religious significance 
in connexion with several oriental cults.” Déram, the 
Parsee name of the pomegranate fruit, comes from the 
Sanscrit name of the fruit Dalim, ( efata ) or Dadim ( arfea ). 
It is the Rimmon of the Bible The plant known as 
Hadhanaépata (or, as the word signifies, the evergreen) in 


1 Prof. Darmesteter, while translating this chapter has committed the — 
mistake to say that the priest here unties the knots (dénoue deux 
neuds), On the contrary, he goes on putting on five more knots. (Le 
Zend Avesta, I, p. 438). 

? Encyclopedia "Britannica, Vol. XIX, p. 442. 3 Ibid. 

4“ Rimmon” is the Hebrewnized form of Rammin, the Babylonian 
sir, weather and storm god assimilated by popular etymology to the 
word for pomegranate. (Dr. Hasting’s “ Dictionary of the Bible ”). 


294 SATURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


the Avesta and, at one time,’ considered to be a fragrant plant 
(Vend VIII, 2), is considered to be the pomegranate tree. The 
pomegranate being an evergreen plant is considered to be an 
emblem of the immortality of the soul.! It is also held as a 
symbol of plenty and prosperity, from the fact that it contains 
a number of grafs within itself. For this purpose, when 
benedictions are recited upon a child during its investiture 
with the sacred shirt and thread, grains of pomegranate mixed 
with grains of rice and raisins, ete., are besprinkled over it. 
In the Afringén ceremony, where fruits and flowers are used 
as offerings, the pomegranate is often used. If other kinds 
of fruits are not available, a few grains of the pomegranate are 
supposed to serve the purpose, I¢ is, as it-were, taken as the 
representative of all kinds of fruit.? .Fromeall these consider. 
ations, we see that the pomegranate \served variously as a 


1 It took the same place among the ancient Iranians as the Acacia plant 
in the mythology of some other nations. Again, the pomegranate 
symbolized the “ Ark”? which was,known as Damater or Demater (the 
aes among the ancients and.was looked as the ‘‘Mother of Mankind” 
or “‘ The Womb of Nature.” The Ark contained many seeds or rudiments 
= rnen and other living creatures. . he pomegranate also abounds with 
many seeds. So, “ it was thought no improper emblem of the Ark, which 
contained the rudiments of the future world. From hence the Deity of 
the Ark was named Rhoia, which signified a pomegranate and was the 
Rhea of the Greeks. The ancient Persians used to have a pomegranate 
carved upon their walking-sticks and sceptres ; undoubtedly on account 
of its being a sacred emblem.” (Bryant, ‘‘ Analysis of Ancient Mytho- 
logy,” YI, pp. 237-8). Here, Bryant attributes to the ancient Persians 
a desire-to have a device on their sticks, just as Herodotus (Bk. 1, 
Chap. 195) attributes a similar desire to the ancient Babylonians. 

The pomegranate was held sacred in Syria and Egypt. In an ancient 
temple at Pelusium, the statue of a goddess carried this “ mysterious 
fruit, in her hand’’ (Bryant IIL, p. 239). Pomegranates were “ the univer- 
sally accepted symbol of the female”? (“* Pagan and Christian creeds. 
Their Origin and Meaning,” by Edward Carpenter, p. 183). So, as such, 
they crowned the two pillars set up by Solomon in the front of his 
Temple—Jachin and Boaz-——which pillars symbolized the male (Ibid.) 

2 It is said that Hera was the goddess presiding over fruit among 
the Greeks. In her pictures at Argos, she is represented as holding the 
pomegranate in her hand, because that fruit was held to typify all kinds 
of fruit. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 295 


symbol: (1) It represented the vegetable creation.and especially 
the fruit-growing trees. (2) It symbolized the immortality of 
the soul. (3) It-symbolized the fecundity of nature. (4) It 
served as an emblem of plenty and prosperity. 


The ceremony of preparing the urvardm twig is similar to 
that of preparing the aiwydonghana. The priest who has 
observed the Khub goes with a pot of water made pdv and with 
a knife before the pomegranate tree, washes and purifies with 
the pdv water the particular twig which he wishes to have, and 
then, reciting three times the Khshnaothra formula,’ cuts it off. 
He then washes the twig so cut and returning to the Yazashna- 
gah places it in a metallic cup. Itis then used with the Haoma 
and Jivam in preparing the Haoma juice. 

Just as every Dar-i-Meher must have date-tree and a pome- 
granate tree, it_must have a she-goat for 
the use of its milk in the liturgical service. 
Jivam is. the abbreviated form of gdm jiv- 
yam (lit. the living product of the cow), ¢. ¢., the fresh milk 
of the cow. Though the word gdo or gao (Sanskrit g6, German 
kuh, English cow) suggests that the milk must be that of the cow, 
the word includes the flock of goats and sheep, and the milk 
used in the ceremony is always that of the goat and not that of 
the cow. A milk-giving goat is fetched into the Yazashna-gah 
and generally made to stand with its face turned towards the 
east. A priest with the Khub goes before it with a pot of pdv 
water.and, reciting the Khshnaothra formula thrice, .at first 
washes his own right hand and then the udder of the goat. He 
faces the south. He then takes the B&Aj with the Khshnuman 
of ‘‘géush tashné, géush uruné,” 7. e., of the 14th Yazata Gosh or 
Dravésp who presides over the bovine creation. Then, while 
reciting the Ashem Vohu, he begins to milk the goat. The first 
stream of milk is allowed to be dropped on the ground. Then 
reciting the word “asha sara manangha,” ¢.¢., “with the 
mind uppermost in purity,” lets 2 stream of milk pass into a 


(c) The Jivam. 
Its preparation. 


> ry Yagna, III, 3. 


296 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


pot. Then while reciting another Ashem, lets a second stream 
drop on the earth. Then reciting the words “asha sara 
vachangha,” é.¢., “with words uppermost in purity,” takes 
in a second stream in his pot. With the third Ashem, another 
stream is allowed to drop on the ground, and then, with the 
words “asha sara shkyothna,” ¢.¢., “‘ with deeds uppermost in 
purity,” takes in a third stream into the pot again. He then 
finishes the Bij. By the recital of the above words, he means 
to say, that the liturgical service he is going to perform is 
intended to be performed with a view to secure great purity of 
thought, word and deed. Then, patting the goat on its back, 
he recites twice the words “hazangrem baeshazanim, baévaré 
baeshazaniém,” ¢. ¢., “ thousand-fold health, ten thousand-fold 
health.’ These words are meant to signify that the milk of the 
bovine creation, drawn with all possible sanitary care when 
drunk by a person with purity of thought, word and action 
gives a thousand-fold health to him.» It is said, that formerly, 
at times, the milk of more than one she-goat or cow was 
drawn. The second person form of the recital, in which the 
she-goat or the cow was addressed varied, as tava, yavikem and 
ydishmakem ( AS Lt aspae St ons 9d y8t ons hy dawgS 9 3 58! 
o4 i.e, according as the cow or goat wag one or two or three or 
flock, i. e.,more than three). Vide Westerrgaard’s text, frag- 
ment VI, p. 383). 

Darun is the later form of the Avesta word Draonangha (lit. 
that which makes us strong from dru (7 ) 
to be strong). It is a flat unleavened 
round bread made of wheat flour and ghee or clarified butter, 
It is a necessary requisite for the celebration of the Yacna, 
the Visparad, the Vendidad and the Baj ceremonies. For the 
Yacna, Visparad and the Vendidad ceremonies one bread is 
required. For the Baj the number varies. For the Baj in 
honour of all the Yazatas, four breads are required. For the 
Baj of Sraosha six are required. Out of these four and six, 
half the number are what is technically named as ndm-pddeld, 
4. e., named and the other half are vagar-ndmnd, i. e., unnamed, 


(2). Darun. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 297 


The naming and the unnaming of the sacred breads is as 
follows: The sacred breads are required to be prepared by 
members—whether male or female—of the priestly class, While 
preparing them, the person mutters the words humata, hukhia 
and jwarshta (1. e., good thoughts, good words and good deeds). 
three times and while muttering them makes three marks at 
each recital. So during the three recitals he makes nine marks 
in the order as shown here : 


oO oO oO 
oO | ‘e) oO 
O O ce) 


The sacred breads thus prepared with the marks are said to 
be ‘‘named.”’ The others are said to be “without names.” 
Those named or marked with the symbolic signs of “ goed 
thoughts, good words and good deeds ” are known as the Darun 
proper. . The others that are without name or are unmarked, are 
spoken of as the “‘frasast,”’ from. the fact, that during the recital 
of one of the chapters of the Yagna in the Baj ceremony (H& 
VIII, 1), while uttering the word ‘‘ Fracasty,’’ 7.¢., praise, he lifts 
up the unnamed Darun. In the third chapter of the Yagna, 
where most of the sacred requisites are named, the sacred bread 
is not named specially as Draéna, but is referred to under the 
name of ‘‘ Kharathem myazdem,” #.e., the offered eatable food. 
The Nirangastan gives some detailed directions as to how the 
Darun should be prepared (Bk. I, Chapter VITI,; Appendix A, 
B.C.Mr.&. J. Bulsara’s Translation, pp. 86-104.) It is forbidden 
that the consecrated Daruns may be eaten by non-Zoroastrians. 


1 The Darun corresponds to the saered bread of the Christians. 
When consecrated (technically said to be injelo, i. e., sanctified or con- 
secrated), it corresponds te the consecrated bread of the Christians. 
(a) Like the «* Host” of the Christians, it is required to be “ round,” 
(6) Like the sacred bread of the Christians it must be prepared by one 
of the priestly class. (c) The naming” of the Daruns corresponds to 
the mystic signs of the Cross over the “sacred bread” of the Christians. 
(d) Like the sacred bread, it must not be eaten by people of other 


religions. 
38 


298 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


Of all the requisites placed on the stone slab or table, two are 
ae what we may cali edibles. They are the 

uel nwris ctthe Darun and the Haoma. The eating and 
iplena ay the drinking of these two is technically 
priest. spoken of as Chashni. The word comes 
from the root chash (Persian Chdshidan) to taste, to eat, and 
literally means eating or tasting. The word is confined, or 
limited to ceremonial eating or drinking, Again, it includes 
in itself the meaning not only of physical eating.or tasting 
but also mental or spiritual eating. For example, we have the 
word Din-chashidar, i.¢., the taster of religion, which is 
applied to one versed in religious learning. The Nirangastan 
refers to at some length to the subject of this chdshni.! 
(Bk. I. Chapter VIII, Appendix C. Mr. Balsara’s Trans. (p. 96.) 


Of the above two, the Darun and*the Haoma, the Chéshni or 
the ceremonial tastingof the Darun or sacred bread takes place 
first, As said above, the Dartn is prepared beforehand by a 
person of the priestly class, and is placed on the sacrificial 
table of the stone-slab. It.is after the recital of the first eight 
chapters of the Yagna that the priest eats the sacred bread. 
In the first two chapters of the Yagna, the priest invokes God 
and the Divine Intelligences. The next six chapters are the 
chapters whose recital consecrates the sacred Lread. They are 
known by the name of “ Sarosh Darun,”’ i.e., the chapters for the 
consecration of Darun or the sacred bread in honour of Sarosh. 
The 8th chapter is specially known by that name, because, it is 
while reciting this that the priest ceremoniously partakes of it. 
In the very commencement of the chapter the priest says : “I 
present with piety this appropriate food, water, vegetable, the 
product of the cow, Haoma, Para-haoma and the fruits.” The 
food referred to here (Kharethem myazdem) is the sacred bread. 
The other priest, the Raspi, then says to the assembled 
congregation : “ Ye persons! whohave been qualified by your 
righteousness and piety, partake of this consecrated food.’’ By 


1 Le Zend Avesta, Vol. I, p. 75. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES . 299. 


these words he means to say, that only the righteous have a 
right to partake in the religious feasts. The Zaota or the 
officiating priest then considering himself worthy of the 
privilege breaks a portion of the consecrated bread and partakes 
of it, Then the other celebrants may also partake of it if 
they like. i 
These chapters of the Yagna known as the chapters ofthe 
‘Sarosh Darun’ are also recited in the Baj ceremony. It is.at 
the end of this ceremony that the assembled congregation 
makes the chdshni, i.e., partakes of the consecrated bread. 
Prof. Darmesteter aptly calls this 8th (chapter’ the - 
“ Communion.” t 
The word Goshfdo is the Avesta geush hudhdo which literally 
means a product of the well-created cow. 
(ce) Goshido. So, it may mean flesh as well as milk, But 
in the liturgical service of the Yacna, while 
Jivam is the fresh milk, Goshudo isthe ghee or clarified butter 
which is a product of the milk of the cow. ' In the ritual, jt always 
accompanies the Darun or sacred bread. A small quantity of it 
is placed. over the Darun and is eaten as chdshni with the darun. 


Before proceeding to consider the other requisites of the 

The Yacne offting Yacna ceremony, I will quote here what 
Parsis and. the Dr. Haug says about some similarity bet- 
Jyotishtoma ofthe ween the Yagna of the Parsis and the 
Brahmans. : 

Jyotishtoma of the Brahmans, so that, 
what issaid above about some of the requisites and what will 
be said now about Haoma and the other requisites, may be 
properly understood. Dr. Haug says:—‘“ The Yajishn or 
Tjashne ceremony, as performed by the Parsi priests now-a-days, 
contains all the elements which constitute the different parts 
(four or seven) of the Jyotishtoma cycle of sacrifices, the 
prototype of all the Soma sacrifices. The Agnishtoma, (¢.e., 
praise of Agni, the fire), which is the opening sacrifice of 
this cycle and indispensable for every Agnihotri to gain the 


1 Le Zend-Avesta, Vol. I p. 75, 


300 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA . 


object wished for, viz., heaven, bears a particular resemblance 
to the performance of Ijashne. Of course, the whole cere. 
mony is much shortened, and the rites changed in accordance 
with the more enlightened and humane spirit of the Zoroastrian 
religion. Inthe Agnishtoma four goats must be killed and their 
flesh is partly offered to the gods by throwing it into Agni, 
the fire, who is the mediator between ‘gods and men, and partly 
eaten, by the sacrificer and the priests. During the Ijashne 
ceremony no animal is killed ; only some hair of an ox is placed 
in a small vessel and shown, together with other things, to the 
fire. This is now-a-days the only remnant of animal sacrifice on 
this occasion, but formerly they used a piece of meat besides. 
The Puroddsha of the Brahmans, or the sacrificial cakes, which 
must be offered to different deities in a certain order, during the 
recital of two mantras for each deity, is changed into a flat kind 
of bread (similar to a very small pancake), called Darin. The 
fresh milk required at the time of performing the Upasad cere- 
mony, is to be recognised -in the géush jivya. Ghi, butter, 
etc., required for less important ceremonies at the time of 
the Agnishtoma (when making the so-called’ Pray4jas for the 
six seasons) are represented by the gdush hudhdo. The Zaothra 
or consecrated water is required at the commencement of the 
Brahmanical sacrifices also, where it is called udaka shénta.” 1 


The last but not the least organic requisite of the liturgical 
apparatus of the Yagna ceremony is the 
Haoma. The ceremony of preparing, 
pounding and squeezing the Haoma juice, which, when so 
prepared is spoken of as para-Haoma, is an important func- ° 
tion in the ritual. So we will speak of it at some length. 


(8) “Haoma. - 


The word Haoma (Skr. soma, Pahl. and Pers. hom) comes 
from an old Aryan root hu—Skr. su, ‘to pound ’ ‘to squeeze.’ 
Hévana, the utensil in which the twigs of the Haoma plant 
are pounded, Advan, the gdh or the part of the day when 


1 Haug’s essayson the Parsees, 2nd ed,, p. 281, 


. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 301 


this plant is pounded, and hévandna, the priest who pounds 
it,—all these words come from the same root. 


In the Avesta we meet with four Haomas:—(1) Haoma, 
whom for convenience sake we may call Haoma the prophet. 
Chapters 9, 10 and 11 of the Yacna ‘speak of him as well as 
of the plant haoma discovered by him. Further allusions 
are found in Yacna LVII (19 and 20) and Yashts X, (Meher) 
88—90 and XVII, (Ashi) 5. (2) Haoma, the plant. Chapters 
9, 10 and 11 of the Yaena especially speak of this Haoma, 
(3) Haoma, who may be called Haoma the hero (Ys. XI, 7; Yt, 
IX, 17; XVII., 37, 38). (4) Haoma Khvarenangha (Yt. XUI, 
116). In the Fravardin Yasht we have a long list of the departed 
worthies of ancient Iran who had rendered some service to the 
community. The group in which Haoma Khvarenangha is 
mentioned seems to be a list of the: names of some of the imme- 
diate successors of Zoroaster. It appears, therefore, that this 
Haoma Khvarenangha, whose fravashi is invoked, was a great. 
man of Iran, who had done some good deeds that commemo- 
rated his name. 


These four different. Haomas have one or more special names 
in the Avesta. Haoma the prophet is called Haoma Déraosha. 
The plant haoma is spoken of as haoma zdiri (e.g. Ys. TX, 17, 30, 
32). Haoma the hero is known as Haoma Frdshmi in the 
Yashts. The fourth Haoma, as we have said above, is named 
Haoma Khvarenangha. 


Haoma the prophet is called frdshmi as well as Diraosha- 
The Haoma Frdshmi of the Gésh and Ashi Yashts is quite dif- 
ferent from the Haoma Frdéshmi of the Yacna and of Yashts X 
and XI. The reason, why these two Haomas, who lived at 
different times—one in the time of the Peshdadian dynasty, and 
the other in that of the Kaiaénian—are called Frashmi, seems 
to be that they both belonged to the same family stock. 


Just as Haoma the prophet had, besides his special designa- 
tion of Daraosha, that of Frashmi, so Haoma, the plant, had, be- 


302 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAcCNA 


sides the special appellation of zdivi, also that of déraosha and 
frashmi (Ys. X, 21; XLII. 5). It was called zdir?, on account of 
its yellow or gold-like colour. The other appellations were due 
to the fact of its being discovered by Haoma Daraosha, who 
was also known as Haoma Frashmi. 


It appears from the Avesta, that there lived in ancient Iran 
@ pious man named Haoma. He belong- 
Pr iia the r° ed to the early times of the Peshadadian 
' dynasty, before the time of /Vivanghant 
(Vivasvat of the Vedas), thefather of Yima (Yama of 
the Vedas). He was a very learned man (vaédhyd-paitt), 1 
versed, in the old religious literature. He had passed a good 
deal of his time in divine meditation on the Hukairya peak of 
the lonely mountains of the Elburz.? Before Zoroaster, he 
was the first man or prophet to proclaim to the world the 
Mazdayagnian religion.? As Zoréaster had his own religious 
compositions, so had Haoma.4. He had his Gathas® (imdosé 
té haoma gdthdo), and had as an opponent one Keres4ni®, 
It was this Haoma who gave his name to the plant, which he 
seems to have discovered, and to the Haoma ceremony, which 
he is said to have introduced, According.to Yasht X.,7 he was 
the first man who produced the juice in the mortar (hdvana) on 
the Elburz. mountain. It appears, that, while absorbed in deep | 
divine meditation in his retreat in the mountains, he discovered ' 
this plant growing on the heights, and found it to be nutritious, 
health-giving, and invigorating. He introduced it to the world 
assuch ; but, in order to make it doubly efficacious, he instituted 
a form of ritual, designed to absorb the mind of the people in 
holy and religious thoughts. A plant, in itself health-giving 
and vigorous, when partaken of under a partial inspiration 
of divine thoughts, was likely to be beneficial to the mind as 
well as to the body. 


i a hh 
1 Yagna, IX, 27. 2 Ibid., X. 10; Yt. X, 83; Yana LVII, 19, 
@ Ibid., TX. 26. ‘yt. XVII, 5. 5 Yaona, X, 18. 


6 Ibid., 1X, 24, 7 Yt. X, 90. . , 


LiTURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 303 


Haoma ‘is a medicinal plant which grows in Persia and 
Afghanistan. It is a species of Ephedra 
(Nat. Ord. Gnetacec?). Mountains and 
mountain-valleys are mentioned as places where the plant 
grows luxuriantly. In some passages, Mount Elburz (called 
in the Avesta Hara Berezaiti) is specially mentioned as its 
habitat. But it must be borne in mind that the name 
Elburz not only denoted the present Mount Elburz, a peak 
of the Caucasus, but was applied to the whole. range of 
mountains extending from the Hindu Kush in the East to 


The Haome plant. 


1 Dr. Aitchinson, who accompanied the English Afghan Boundary Com- 
mission of 1885 as a Naturalist, and to whom I had sent for identifiea- 
tion and inquiry in Afghanistan a few twigs of the Haoma plant used by 
the Indian Parsis in their ritual, with an account of the plant as given in 
the Avesta, said in his reply :— The specimens you sent me are the 
twigs of a species Ephedra (Nat. order. Gnetacew). A species grows all 
over this country—Beluchistan, Afghanistan, Kashmir and Western Thibet 
—which seems to be identical with the species received. This species is 
here, in all this country, called Hum (pronounced as the English word 
whom, also huma). In Beluchistan, it as well asa totally. distinct plant, 
Periploca aphyliais called\Hum. It grows equally on exposed hills and 
valleys consisting of ‘ branches and sprigs,’ one mass of upright twigs, 
each twig, if you notice, being made up of joints like the joints of the 
fingers. When covered with male flowers, the bush (from 1 to2 feet) is 
golden coloured, and the twigs are more or less so... . This plant has’ 
no leaves. It is.all twigs and jointed. Amongst the Pathans of the Khyber 
Pass and, all over that country the twigs are with water made into a 
decoction and employed very largely as a household remedy in sickness, 
and are’considered as possessing health-giving and healing properties. 
Owing toa general likeness between the stiff rod-like growth, upright and 
erect of the two plants, in Beluchistan, the natives equally give both the 
same name. No one would mistake the jointed and true Ham for 
the non-jointed false Ham, Periploca. The latter does not exist here at 
all. The Ephedra here is only employed to mix with snuff, being first 
of all burnt. The ashes cause the snuff to be more irritating, whether 
applied as a sternutatory or to the upper gum under the front part of the 
lip as ig the habithere ..... Before your letterand specimens came, I 
had made up my mind that the #phedra was the nearest to the ‘Soma’ 
plant that I had got to, but as it was stated that the Parsees employed 
the twigs of Periploca it rather put me out. Your specimens are all on 
my side.” : 


304 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAcNA 


the Caucasus in the West. The haoma is described as a plant 
with branches and sprigs,! as possessing medicinal propetece, 
and as golden-coloured.’? 


The religious or spiritual properties attributed to the haoma 
plant are described in a rich poetical style, and in a tone over- 
flowing with heartfelt admiration and praise. Hagma, prepared 
and drunk in a state of pious, spiritual inspiration, is believed 
to give wisdom, courage, success, health, increase, and great- 
ness.3 In such a state, the devotee becomes as powerful as 
an independent monarch, and is able to withstand many 
dangers coming from ill-disposed persons. Heaven, health, 
ong life, power to contend against evils, victory against 
enemies, and fore-warnings against coming dangers from 
thieves, murderers, and plunderers,.are the six gifts 
bestowed by haoma when adequately praised and prepared. 
Haoma is specially sought for by young maidens in 
search of good husbands, by married women desirous 
of being mothers, and\bystudents striving after know- 
ledge.6 It affords special protection against the jealous, 
the evil-minded, and the spiteful.7 It is a check upon the 
influence of women of loose character, who change their 
affections as-frequently as the wind changes the direction 
of the clouds.8 For all these reasons, haoma is called nmdna- 
paiti, vis-paiti, zantu-paiti, danghu-paiti, i.e., ‘Lord of the 
house, the village, the district, and the country.’® 

The qualifications which are required of the man who would 


drink haoma with advantage are good thoughts, good words, 
ee eee ee 


1 The Avesta word for this is  Srasperega, in which jra is a prefix, and 
sperega is the same as English ‘ sprig.” 


2 The Avesta word is zairi-gaona, which some Orientalists take to .- 
mean “ green-coloured.” But as green is the usual colour of vegetation, 
there was no apparent necessity to say so. The writer seems to mean 

* yellow’ or ‘ gold-coloured ’, in which sense the word is also used else- 
where. 


3 Yacna, IX, 17. 4 Ibid 18. 5 lbid. 19, 21. 6 Ibid. 22, 23. 
% Fbed. 28. 8 Ibid. 32. ® Ibid. 27. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 305 
good deeds, obedience to God, and righteousness.1 On the 
other hand, Haoma curses thus these who are sinful and evil- 
disposed: “I, Haoma, who am holy and keeper away of 
death, am not a protector of the sinful’”’?. “May thou be 
childless, and may evil be spoken of thee.’’$ 


It appears from the Avesta that the Haoma ceremony was 
in existence as early as the time of the 
Antiquity of the Peshd&dian dynasty. It is as old as the 
Haoma ceremony. . b 
time when the ancestors of the Parsis\and 
the Hindus, and even of the ancient Romans, dwelt together. 
It seems to have been always accompanied by the Barsom 
ceremony, as it is even at the present day. Now, it appears 
that the ancient flamines, who were Roman. fire-priests, and 
many of whose practices resembled those .of the dihravans, 
or Iranian fire-priests, used twigs of a particular tree, when- 
ever they went before the sacred fire. This practice resembles 
that of the Parsi priests, who also, as said above, used twigs 
of a particular tree when performing the Yagna ceremony 
before the fire. The twigs are now replaced by metallic wires. 


We said above that the twigs of the plant are brought 
from Persia. They are not used directly in 
fia pueciion the ceremony. On being taken to a temple, 
or Dar-t-meher, they are washed and purifi- 
ed, and then laid aside for a period of at least thirteen 
months. A qualified priest takes a quantity of these twigs, 
and washes and purifies them with water, reciting the 
formula Khshnaothra Ahurahé Mazdio, Ashem Vohi, etc., 
which means ‘Pleased be Ahura Mazda. Piety is the best 
good and happiness. Happiness to him who is pious for the 
best piety.’ After being thus purified with water, the twigs 
are kept in a metallic box, similarly washed and purified, for 
at least thirteen months and thirteen days before being used 
inthe ceremony. When so prepared and purified, they can 
be used several years afterwards. 


1 Ys. X, 16. 2 Ibid. XT, 3, ® Ibid. 1. 
39 


306 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


The Vendidad (VI, 42,.43) enjoins the purification of those 
haoma twigs which have come into actual contact with filth anc 
impurities ; but the present custom, which is designed to make 
assurance doubly sure, demands the purification of all haoma 
twigs intended for use in religious ceremonies. Again, the 
Vendidad requires the twigs to be laid aside for one year; but 
the present custom prescribes a period of thirteen months and 
thirteen days. 


This falls under four heads :—(1) the preliminary prepara- 
Description of the tions; (2) the ceremony of purifying or 
Haoma ceremony. consecrating the haoma twigs; (3) the cere- 
mony of preparing and straining the haoma juice; (4) the 
ceremony of drinking the haoma juice. 


Two priests take part at this stage, as/in the whole of the 
Yagna ceremony. One of them with the 
(1) Preliminary hub (i.e., ritual for qualification), either 
Preparations. 
small or great, duly observed, first prepares 
the atwyadnghana (strips of. date palm), the urvardm (twigs 
of pomegranate tree), and the jivdm (fresh goat’s milk). All. 
the dldt (the necessary sacred utensils) are emptied, washed, 
and put into the kundi (the large water vessel on the stone 
slab). The fire is kindled in the censer or vase, and the aésma 
(fragrant wood) and but (frankincense) are placed on the two 
adjoining small stones. Two water-pots—one small and the 
other large—are placed on the khwdn or stone slab for the 
dldt.. The cup containing the aiwyadénghana and the urvarém 
is placed on @ small stone by the side of the stone slab on 
which the priest sits. The haoma twigs are also ready by his 
sideinacup. The officiating priest (zaota) now takes his seat 
on the stone slab, which is covered with a carpet. He 
makes pdv (ceremonially pure) the smaller of the two 
waterpots, and with the water of that pot makes the kundi con- 
taining all the utensils pdv. He then prepares the zaothra water 
and ties the barsom wires. Having doneall this, he next proceeds 
to make the haoma twigs pdv. . 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 307 


The priest takes a few pieces of twigs of the haoma plant out 
(2) The ritual of of a cup, and, holding them between the 
puri fying the fingers of his right hand, washes them 
Haoma twigs. praer p ree ae : 
thrice with the pdv water. While doing 
80, he recites the Khshnaéthra formula three times. He 
then commences the baéj and the khshnuman of Haoma 
ashavazangha, wherein he says, that he does this _ for 
the homage, glory, pleasure, and praise of Haoma,.the 
giver of the strength of purity. Then, reciting the Ashem 
four times, he dips both his hands, together with the 
twigs, in the kundi on his right hand. He dips them four 
times into the water—thrice in the direction pointing from his 
position to the opposite side (7.e., from north to.south), and once 
in the opposite direction. Having thusmade-the twigs pdv, he 
finishes the bdj, and dips the purified twigs in the zaothra water. 
Then, drawing the hdvana before himy-he inverts it and places 
on it three pieces of the consecrated haoma twig; the rest 
are placed over the foot of the méh-rui (the two crescent-like 
stands). He next places piece of the urvardm by the side of 
the haoma twigs. 


(a) The priest begins by saying: “I invoke all the belong- 
(8) The coven NOP ings (t.e., the requisites for the performance 
of (a) preparing Of the ceremony) of the haoma, for the 
and (6) straning sake of Ahura Mazda.” Then he enumerates 
the Haoma juice. P ie : : 
some of the important requisites which lie 
before him on the stone slab. While reciting their names, 
he looks at them. The requisites which he enumer- 
ates are: haoma, myazda, (t.c., the darun, or sacred bread, 
which is spoken of as kharethem myazdem, ‘appropriate or 
sacred food’), the consecrated water (zaothra), the twigs 
(baresma), some product of the cow such as fresh milk 
(goshudé or géush hudhdo), a twig of the pomegranate tree 
(urvardm hadhéndépatdém), pure good water (aiwyd vanguhi- 
by6), mortar for pounding the haoma (hdvana), fragrant wood 
(aésma) and frankincense’ (bacidhi or but), and fire (dthra). 


308 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACGNA 


The prayer, in which he invokes or enumerates the requisites, 
and in which, while reciting their names, he looks at each of 
them as they lie beforehim onthe stone slab, forms a part 
of the 24th chapter of the Yagna. He recites the chapter 
from section 1 to section 12, omitting therefrom, in sections 
1 and 6, the words, imdmchd-gém jivydm ashaya uadatdm (‘this 
jiwdm, or fresh milk, held up with righteousness’), because, 
at the time when he recites this prayer, the jivdmis not yet 
placed on the stone slab. Sections 9to12 of this 24th chap- 
ter are the same as sections 4 to 7 of the fourth chapter. 


The Haoma ceremony may be performed either in the hdvan- 
gah or in the hushain-gah, i.e., during the morning or the mid- 
night hours. So, after reciting the first twelve sections of the 24th 
chapter, the priest recites the 13th section, if he prepares the 
haoma, juice in the hdvan-gdh, or the 17th section, if he prepares 
it in the hushain-géh. Having thus recited the khshnuman of 
the particular gdh during which the ceremony is performed, he 
recites the khshnuman formula of the particular day of the month 
and the particular month of the year on which he performs the 
ceremony. Then, he proceeds torecite the prayers contained in 
the fourth chapter of the Yacna from sections 17 to 25 up to the 
word vahishtat; omitting the portions which refer to rathwé 
berezato and sraoshahé ashyché (in sections 22 and 23). Next, he 
recites the prayers contained in the 25th chapter of the Yagna, 
from sections 1 to 3, omitting the reference to gdm jivydm (fresh 
milk) in, section 1. On reciting the words, Ameshd spentd 
(chapter XXV, section 1 of Spiegel), the priest holds between 
the thumb and the forefinger of his left hand the twigs 
of the haoma and pomegranate plants which were on the 
foot of the inverted hdvana and, lifting the latter with his 
right hand, knocks it thrice in its inverted position on 
the stone slab, and places it in its proper position. Then, 
reciting the words imem haomem, etc., (ibid., sec. 2, Spiegel), 
and taking the haoma twigs into the right hand from his left 
hand, he places them in the hdvana, or mortar. Next, reciting 
the words imdmché arvardm, etc., (ibid. sec. 4), he similarly 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 309 


places the -urvardm, or pomegranate twigs, in the mortar. 
Reciting the words aiwyovanguhibyo, etc., (ibid., sec. 5 to 11, 
Spiegel), he pours into the mortar, with his right hand, a few 
drops of the zaothra water which lies before him. He now 
invokes the Fravasht, or Guardian Spirit, of Zoroaster by reciting 
Yacna XXVI, 11 (Spiegel). Then, reciting the words iristanam 
urvdno (ibid., 35) and the yénghé hdidm prayers, he takes out of 
the kundi, the surékhddr tashta (i.¢., the plate with holes which 
serves as a strainer), and places it on the haoma cup at the foot 
of the mdh-rui. Reciting athéd ratush ashdichit hachd, etc., he 
removes the ldld, or pestle, from the kundi, passing it round in 
a circle within the vessel, and touching its rim from within, 
The circle begins from the north and passes in the direction of 
west, south and east. Then, reciting the words aétat dim, etc. 
(Ys. XXVITI, 1, Spiegel), he lets the lower.end of the pestle, and 
while reciting the words ratimcha yim, etc., (ibid., sec. 1), 
the upper end of the pestle, touch the stone slab. As he 
recites the words snathdi, etc., (tbid., sec. 2, Spiegel), which 
signify that the Daévas,or evil influences, may be beaten or 
struck, he strikes the metallic mortar with the pestle, which pro- 
duces sonorous sounds. “At first, he strikes from without, i.c., 
strikes the pestle on the outer rim of the mortar. The 
sonorous strokes are given in the order of east, south, west, 
and north... When striking on the north side, he gives three 
more strokes. Then both the priests say, Shekasté Gandminé, 
etc., in bdj, i.e, “May the Evil Spirit be broken? May 
100,000 curses be on Ahriman!” The priest then recites 
Fradathdi Ahurahé Mazdéo (Ys. XXVII, 3--7, Spiegel). Next 
he recitesfour Yathd ahi vairyés. While reciting the first three, 
he pounds the haoma and the urvardm twigs in the mortar; and 
while reciting the fourth, he strikes the hévana on the outside 
with the pestle. In like manner, he recites Mazdé at méi 
(abid., 8, Spiegel; or Ys, XXXIV, 15) four times, to the 
accompaniment of a similar pounding during the first three 
recitals and a striking of the hévanim during the fourth. This 
is followed by a recital of Airyemd ishyé (XXVIL. 9, Spiegel; 


310 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACGNA 


or LIV, 1) with like poundings and strokes. Next comes 
the recitals of three Ashem Vohus, during which the priest 
pours a little of the zaothra water into the mortar three 
times. Then, while reciting the words haoma puiri-hare- 
shyanté (Ys. XXVII, 10, Spiegel), he gives a little push to the 
pestle which is within the mortar, and causes it to turn a circle 
in the direction of north, west, south, east.t While reciting the 
words athd, ziné, humdyé-tara, which form the last part of the 
passage, he takes up the twigs of the haoma and the urvardm 
from the mortar between his thumb and fingers, and, holding 
the pestle also, he touches, or brings these in contact with, the 
barsam, the plate of jivdm, the haoma cup at the foot of the mdh- 
rut, and the stone slab. At the last-word anghen, he places the 
twigs and the pestle in the mortar again... He then recites four 
Yatha ahd vairyés, during the recital of the first three of which 
he pounds the twigs. He strikes the hdvana during the recital 
of the fourth. During each of the first three recitals and pound- 
ings, he pours a little of the zaothra water into the mortar with 
his left hand at the recitals of the words athd, ashdt, and hachd. 
At the end of each Yathd ahi vairyd, he pours the haoma juice 
so pounded over the pestle, which is held with the left hand 
over the strainer. From the strainer the juice passes into the 
_haoma cup below..*Therecital of thefourth Yathd ahd vairyd is 
accompanied by the striking of the mortar. Atthe end of this, 
the whole of the haoma juice is passed into the cup, as described 
above. If any particles of the twigs still remain unpounded, 
they are removed from the mortar and placed in the strainer, 
where they are rubbed with the hand to make all the extract 
pass into the cup below. During this process of rubbing, the 
priest recites thrice yé sevishté, etc. (XXVIII, 11, Spiegel, or 
XXXVIII, 11). The straineris then washed and placed over the 
mortar. The particles of the twigs still left unpounded or 


1 This part of the ritual is a relic of the old practice, when, after being 
pounded, the haoma twigs were regularly rubbed in the mortar with the 
Pestle to extract the juice further—a process now known as génivi. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 311 


undissolved are removed and placed in an adjoining clean 
corner. The pestle is washed and placed in the kundi, 


(6) The next ceremonial process is that of straining the haoma 
juice with the help of the varas ni vit?, 1.¢., the ring entwined with 
the hair of the sacred bull: The varas is put over the strainer 
(surakhdar tashta, ‘ perforated plate ’). The priest holds the cup 
containing the zaothra water in, his left hand, and places his right 
hand over the knotty part of the varas in the strainer...He 
recites us méi uzdreshud, Ahura, i.e.,O0 God purify me, etc. (Ys. 
XXXTII, 12—14), at the same time pouring the zaoihra water 
over the varas, and rubbing the knots of the varas. He 
recites two Ashem vohiis, the second of which is.recited-in bdj. 
He then holds the strainer with the varas.in his right hand, 
and the cup containing. the haoma juice in his left hand ; and 
repeating humata, hikhta hvarshta thrice, pours the haoma 
juice into the strainer, which is held in different positions over 
the khwdn, or stone slab, as the different words of the triad 
are repeated, While reciting the word humaia each time, he 
holds the strainer over the right hand of the stone slab, so that 
the haoma juice falls over it through the strainer. On each 
recital of the word hakhia, the haoma juice is similarly dropped 
into the cup ofthe zaothra water, which has just been emptied 
into the mortar through the strainer, and the varas with it. At 
each recital of the word hvarshia, the haoma water is allowed to 
drop into. the mottar. The haoma juice cup is now put back 
in its proper place on the stone slab, and the strainer with the 
varasis placed over it. Then all the juice in the mortar—a mix- 
ture of the zaothra water and the haoma juice, or, more properly 
speaking, the juice of the haoma and the urvardm twigs—is pour- 
ed into the strainer, through which it passes into the haoma 
‘ cup below. After its contents have been emptied, the mortar is 
once more put in its proper place. The milk-plate (jdm no 
tashtd) is placed at the foot of the mdh-rut. The priest also puts 
the other cups and saucers in their proper places. He deposits in 
their proper plate some of the spare twigs of the haoma and the 
urvardm which are at the foot of the mdh-rui. He places some 


312 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


of these in a spare oup and lets fall over them a few drops of the 
haoma juice prepared and collected in the cup, as described 
above. It is at this stage that the other priest who is to join 
him, in the recital of the Yagna, and who is now to act as the 
Zaota, enters the yazashnagéh. Reciting an Ashem vohi and a 
certain number of Yathd ahi vairyés, the number of which de- 
pends on the particular kind of Yagna to be performed, he goes 
before the khwdn of fire and purifies or consecrates the fire (Yaena 
TX,1). The priest who has performed the ceremony of straining 
the haoma now takes the zaothra wire ofthe barsom in his left 
hand, and the varas ring in his right hand, and finishes the bdj of 
the varas which he had commenced some time before. To do this, 
he recitestwo Yathd aht vairyésand theYasnemcha with the 
khshnuman of the Fravashi of Zoroaster. He next dips the varas 
ring in the zaothra water cup and places itin its own cup. He 
then rises from his seat, and, taking the haoma cup which 
contains the juice prepared and strained, as above, places it in 
a niche of the adjoining wall. He brings the jivdm and pours 
it into its saucer (jivdm no tashto). In a plate on the stone slab 
he now places the darun, or sacred, bread, which was up till now 
in another vessel in the yazashna-gah. Hethen recites an Ashem 
vohit and Ahmdi raéshcha, etc., finishes the 647, and performs 
the kisti. 

This closes the ceremony of preparing the haoma juice, more 
properly spoken of as the ceremony of straining the haoma (Hom 
galvé). With its completion terminates the paragnd, 1.e., 
the first of the preliminary preparatory ceremony of the Yagna. 
The second priest, who has now entered the yazashna-gdéh and ; 
who is to recite the whole of the Yagna, mounts the stone slab 
or platform which serves as a seat. As he does so, he recites 
two Yathé aht vairyés. While uttering the word shyaothana- 
ném of one yathdhe places the right foot over it, and, while 
reciting the same word of the second, his left foot. . 


The Dadistan-i-Dinik (XLVITI, 30—33) tries to explain 
Symbolism of the part ef the symbolism of the above 
eens ceremony of preparing and straining the 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 313 


haoma juice. For example, the four poundings of the haoma 
twigs during. the recital of four Ahunvars symbolize the 
coming .of Zoroaster and his three future apostles. “The 
pure Hém, which is squeezed out by four applications of 
holy water (zorih) with religious formulas, is noted even as a 
similitude of thé understanding and birth of the four apostles 
bringing the good religion, who are he who was the blessed 
Zaratisht and they who are to be Hashédar, Hishédar-mah 
and Séshans.”! The striking of the metallic hévana while 
pounding and straining the haoma reminds one of the triad of 
thought, word, and deed on which the ethics of Zoroastrianism 
rests. The Dddistdnsays on this point: ‘* The metal mortar 
(hdvan) which, is struck during the squeezing of the Hém, and 
its sound is evoked along with the words of the Avesta, which 
becomes a reminder of the thoughts, words, and deeds on the 
coming of those true apostles into_ the world.”2 The three 
ceremonial processes of pouring the zaothra water into the 
haoma mortar for the preparation of the juice are symbolical 
of the three processes of the formation of rain in Nature, viz., 
(1) evaporation, (2) formation of clouds, and (3) condensation 
as rain, 3 


The juice, prepared as above, by pounding the haoma twigs 
together with the urvardm in the zaothra water, is called para- 
haoma. 


The Jast ceremony in connexion with haoma is that of 

(4) The Cere- drinking it. We saw above that its pre- 
mony of drinking paration and straining formed a part of the 
eae: paragnd, i.e. the ceremony preparatory to 
the performance of the Yagna. The ceremony of drinking 
it forms a part of the Yacna itself. It begins with the 
recital of the ninth chapter, and finishes with the recital 
of the Ilth. In these three chapters, the priest sings the 
praises of Haoma. The Zaota describes in a highly poetical strain 


“28. B. E. Vol. XVII, p. 170. 2 Ibid. 3 Ibid., 170-171. 
40 


314 LITURGICAL SEBVIOES OF THE YAQNA 


the good qualities of the haoma juice which lies before him. 
On his finishing the description and the praises of haoma, 
at the eighth section of the 11th chapter, his colleague, the 
raspi or diravakhshi, makes his hand pdv, and, coming to the 
zaota, lifts the cup containing the haoma juice from the stone 
slab, and carries it round the sacred fire burning onthe censer 
on the slab opposite, at the same time taking the aésma but 
(sandalwood and frankincense) from their stone slabs_and 
placing them on the fire. He then comes back to the Zaota, 
and, holding the cup over the barsam-ddn, says to the Zaota: 
“May the haoma juice be of twofold, threefold, ninefold 
efficacy to you.’ Next, he hands the juice-cup to the Zaota, 
who, holding it in his hand, looks into it, again addresses a few 
words of praise, and prays, that the drinking of it may bring 
spiritual happiness to him. Finally, he holds up his paddn, 
or cloth veil, away from his mouth and drinks ‘the haoma. 
He does not drink the whole quantity at once,. but in three 
draughts. In the interval between each of the three draughts 
the rdthwi recites an Ashem vohit. 


During the recital of. the Yagna, the haoma juice is prepared 
and strained twice. As described above, at first it is prepared 
and strained by one priest in the preparatory pargand ceremony. 
It is drunk by another priest during the recital of the 11th chap- 
ter of the Yasna. Then, the priest who drank it prepares it a 
second time during the recital of the three chapters of the Yasna 
fromthe 25th to the 27th. The process of pounding the haoma 
twigs and striking the mortar continues during the recital of the 
82nd, 33rd and 34th chapters, with which the second prepara- 
tion terminates. Though the ceremony proper commences for 
the second time during the recital of the 25th chapter, it may 
be said to begin with the 22nd chapter, because all the requi- 
sites of the ceremony are enumerated and invoked at its 
commencement. These two preparations and poundings are 
spoken of in the Avesta (Yagna x. 2) as fratarem hdvanem and 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 316 


uparem hdvanem, i.e., the first and the second squeezing of the 
haoma.1 


Dr. Haug thus compares the Iranian haoma and the Brah- 

Dr. Haugon the manic soma ceremonies. “The most impor. 
preparation of the tant part of the offerings in both the Jyotish- 
Haoma juice ‘ 
among the Parsees. toma sacrifices and the Ijashne ceremony, is 
nea the Brak, the juice of the Soma plant. In both, the twig 
mans, of the plant itself(the Brahmans use thestalks 
of the Pétika, which is a substitute for the original Soma, and the 
Parsis use the branches of a particular shrub which grows in 
Persia) in their natural state are brought to the sacred spot, where 
the ceremony is to take place, and the juiceis there extracted 
during the recital of prayers. The contrivances used for obtain- 
ing the juice, as well as the vessels employed, are somewhat differ- 
ent, but, on closer inquiry, an originalidentity may be recognised. 
The Brahmans beat the stalks of the plant, which are placed ona 
large flat stone, with anothersmaller stone till they form a single 
mass; this is then put into a vessel and water is poured over 
it. After some time this water, which has extractéd the green: 
ish juice, is poured through a cloth, which servesas a strainer; 
into another vessel. The Parsi priests use, instead of stones, 
a metal mortar with a pestle, whereby the twigs of the Haoma 
plant, together with one of the pomegranate tree, are bruised, 
and they then pour water over them to obtain, the juice, which 
is strained through a metal saucer with nine holes. This juice 
(parahaoma) has a yellow colour and only very little of it is 
drunk by one of the two priests (the zaota) who must be present, 
whereas all the Brahmanical priests (sixteen in number), whose 
services are required at the Jyotishtoma, must drink the Soma 
juice, and some of the chief priests (such as the Adhvaryu and 
Hotd) must even take a very large quantity. The Parsi priests 


1 For an analysis of the three chapters of the Yagna on Haoma 
(Chapters 9 to 11), etc., vide my paper on Hadma in the Journal of the 
Bombay Anthropological Society, Vol. vii.; No. 3(1904), p..203 Vide 
my Anthropological Papers Part I, pp. 225-43. 


316 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


never throw any of the juice into the fire, but the Brahmans 
must first offer a certain quantity of the intoxicating juice to 
different deities, by throwing it from variously shaped wooden 
vessels into the fire, before they are allowed to taste ‘the sweet 
liquor.’ ‘The Parsi priests only show it to the fire and then drink 
it. Afterwards the juiceis prepared a second time by the chief 
priest Zaota and then thrown into a well. These two pre- 
parations of the Hama juice correspond to the morning libation 
(prdtah savana) and mid-day libation (madhyandina savana) of 
the Brahmans; for the third, or evening libation, there was no - 
‘opportunity in the Parsi ritual, because no sacrificial rites are 
‘allowed to be performed in the evening or night time.” 1 


With reference to what is said above by Dr. Haug, we must 
note, that it appears from the Avesta, that at one time, even 
the Parsis had stone mortars. Again, as to the last part of 
Dr. Haug’s statement, we must. note, that the Parsis also 
have an evening libation, and that in the rare exceptional case 
of the performance of the Nirangdin ceremony. In this case 
the Haoma juice is prepared-late in the afternoon preceding the 
night when the Vendidad is recited at midnight. 


Zaothra or zor is the water that is consecrated for the purpose 
of being used in the liturgical services of 
(D) Zaothra Water: , ee 

its purification or the Yacna, the Visparad and the Vendidad. 
consecration. Object The word comes from Avesta zu, Sanskrit hu, 

of the ceremony. ‘ aoe ae : 
meaning “ to perform religious ceremonies.”’ 
Literally, it means any sacrificial offering over which a religious 
ceremony is performed. Then it is restricted to the water 

which is consecrated for the ritual. 


The priest bas before him the two cups or chalices that are 
to hold the zaothra water. He then recites the Baj with the 
Khshnuman of “ aiwy6 vanghubyé vispanim apim Mazdadha- 
“tanam,” i.e. of all the good waters created by Mazda.” 


1 Haug’s Essays on the Parsis, 2nd ed., pp. 281-3. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSHES 317 


Then, uttering the word ‘“‘ashem,”’ é.e., righteousness,: he 
holds the empty zaothra cups over the surface of the water in 
the kundi or water-vessel, and then, reciting ‘the formula of 
“ Fra-té-staomaidé,”’ etc., and at the recital of the different 
parts of the prayer step by step, he gradually fills the cups 
with water from the kundi. The water thus consecrated is 
the zaothra water fit to be used in the haoma ceremony and in 
the Yagna. The priest then finishes the Baj. 


The Bundehesh indicates what the symbolic signification of 

Symbolism of the this ceremony was. We know from the 
ritual. Avesta and Pahlavi books and from the 
Classical writers like Herodotus (I., 138)-and~ Strabo (Bk. 
XV, 3), that the ancient Persians were very careful to 
preserve the purity of water. This.ceremony seems to 
have been intended to inculcate.that idea. This appears 
from the following passage of the Bundehesh (XXI, 3) which 
refers to the zaothra or zor ceremony.! “This, too, they say, 
that of these three rivers, that is the Arag river, the Marv 
river and the Veh river, the spirits were dissatisfied, so that 
they would not flow into the world owing to the defilement of 
stagnant water (armesht) which they beheld, so that they 
were in tribulation through it until Zaratusht was exhibited to 
them, whom [ (Atharmazd) will create, who will pour sixfold 
holy water.(zor) into it and make it again wholesome ; he will 
preach carefulness.”’ ; 


Thus; it seems that this ritual was intended to inculcate the 
lesson that man must try to keep the sources of drinking water 
‘pure. There must be no stagnation of water anywhere. The 
Bundehesh in connection with this matter refers to the process 
of evaporation and says that in the case of perfectly pure 
water, the water that evaporates from it returns to its source 
in three years. In the case of water which has pollution, or 
impurity and purity in equal proportions, it takes six years, and 
in the case of that wherein impurities predominate over purity, 


2.8. B. EL, Vol. V, p. 84 Vide also the Nirangastan on this subject, 


318 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAcNA 


it takes nine years. Then, in order to give a moral advice, it 
adds: ‘‘So, likewise, the blessings (dfrin) which the righteous 
utter, come back in this proportion to themselves.’”? What it 
means is this, that the purer a man is in his thoughts, the 
earlier he gets the return of these thoughts. The result of 
his thoughts and also the result of his words and actions re-act 
upon him. So, the greater the necessity of preserving purity 
in life. If a man prays even for some one else, that prayer 
re-acts upon him and does him good. The purer his thoughts, 
the purer his mind and head, the greater the return, the 
greater the re-action. 


At the completion of the Yagna ceremony, both the officiat- 
ing priests go to the well whence they had 
Zor-melavvi,i.e.. brought the water for the liturgical consecra- 
the ritual of mixing : 5 4 - 
the zor (zaothra). tion and carry with them in the hdvanim the 
consecrated water. There, standing before 
the well and saying short formule of prayers, the Zaota pours 
that water back into the well in three parts. He gives back 
to the well, a part of the water which he had taken from it, and 
that in a much more purified form. This ceremony is called zor- 
melavvi, i.e. to unite the zaothra or zor water with the original 
source of the water whence it was taken. The zor ceremony, 
then, is intended to impress, that it is one’s duty to keep the 
sources of water pure, and to learn from its ritual the lesson, 
that itis his duty to keep his mind, which is the source of all 
his actions, also pure. 


Under the heading of Fire and its requisites fall (a) fire 
(dtar), (b) the metallic censer (4farganiun) 
on which it burns, with its accompani- 
ments, the ladle (chamach) and the tongs 
(chipyé) with which the fuel is arranged over the fire and 
(c) the fuel (aésma bat). 


(¥) Fire and its 
requisites. 


(a) No Zoroastrian ritual or religious ceremony can be com- 
plete without the presence of fire. For the celebration of the 
Yagna, Visparad and the Vendid&d, any household fire may 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 319 


be used, but all temples or Dar-i-Mehers generally keep a 
fire for the purpose burning day and night in the Yazashna-gah. 
Like all the dldts or instruments used in the ritual, the fire used 
in the ritual is also purified for the time being. 


This ceremony of purification consists in cleaning and wash- 
ing with water the square stone slab (diash no khwdén) on which 
the afargadniun or the fire-vase stands. It isin the midst of 
the Haoma ceremony that it is made pdv or religiously pure. 
The ceremony of making this slab pdvis referred to inthe Havin 
Yasht (Yacna, IX, 1, atarem pairi yaozdathentem) and is per- 
formed as follows: The zaota or the chief officiating priest hold- 
ing a water-pot containing the pdv water in his right hand, makes 
his left hand pdv, reciting the Khshnaothra formula. Then 
putting the hand thus made pdv or purified into the pot so as 
to hold and lift it, makes his right-hand pdv. Then, he goes 
near the khwan on which the fire-vase stands and faces the east 
and looks towards the fire, “He then recites the nemdz, i.e, 
praise or homage to fire (nemagé té Atarsh Mazdao, i.e., 
Homage, to thee, O Fire of God). He then takes the Baj with 
the Khshnuman of Fire. Then, reciting at the end three 
Ashems, he washes with the pure water of the water-pot in 
his hand the khwaén or the slab on which the fire-vase 
stands. He turns round the slab proceeding at first to the 
south, then-to the west, then to the north and then back to 
the (east and washes it from all sides. In the Pahlavi 
Dadistan (Chap. XLVIII, 15),1 this stone slab for the 
fire-vase is called Atashto, (@dashto or Adosht) i. ¢., the place 
for the fire to stand upon. The Pahlavi Yacna speaks of it 
as Stashg&e, ¢.¢., seat of fire 2. 


(6) The dfargdniun is a metallic: censer or vase over which 
the fire is made to burn on ceremonial occasions. Itis so called, 
because its presence is necessary in the recital of Afrins, +.e., 


#18.BE,, Vol. XVIII, p. 164, 
2 Amatash atashga; kamist shustan (Spiegel’s Pahl. Yagna IX 2), 


320, LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THIS YACNA 


religious benedictions or,prayers. Its size varies. In the case 
of Izashna-gih, the size varies from about 15 inches to 18 inches 
in diameter and 18 to 30 inches in height. In the Fire-temples, 
its size is about three to four feet in diameter and about three 
to four feet in height. 


The fire censer or vase has always as its accompaniment a 
chamach (Persian chamcheh $+, % spoon or a ladle) 7.¢.). a 
ladle and a chipid (from Persian chapénidan wor las, to 
Squeeze, to compress) 1.¢., tongs. 


(c) The ceremonial fire requires to be fed during the liturgical 
services at stated parts of the recital of the Yagna,the Visparad 
and the Vendidad. The fuel required, for the purpose is 
known as aésma-bui. The pieces of sandalwood and frank- 
incense that are arranged on small stone’ slabs set apart for 
the purpose are especially known, by that name. 


The word aésma is the Avesta word aégma (Sanskrit, idhma 
(za), Persian, hizam ey) meaning fuel. In the Vendidad 
(VIII. 2), four kinds’of fuel are generally spoken of. They are 
Urvacna, Vohigaona;Vohi-Kéréti, and Hadhanaépata. The 
first, viz., Urvagna is generally taken to mean sandal-wood ; 
the second Vohégaona, to mean olibanum ; the third, Voha- 
Kéréti to mean agar,! ‘a kind of fragrant shrub; the fourth 
Hadhanaépata, to mean the wood of the pomegranate tree. 


The word Bui is the Avesta word Baodha, Persian bui 
qs? to smell. 


In modern practice, sukhad, t.e., sandal wood serves for aésma 
and lobén (Arab. loban, lebonah, olibanum) i.e., frankincense 
for but.’ Olibanum is a special product of Arabia, and we learn 
from Herodotus (Bk. III, 93) thet the Arabs used to give to the 
Persian king Darius, as tribute, frankincense worth about 
1,000 talents, 7.e., about £2,43,000. It was the trade of incense, 


vo 


1 Perhaps Arab. 7! white bright, noble, 7, ¢., the brightest or noblest 
of fuel, : i 


EITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 321 


that brought the ancient Arabs of Yemen into contact with the 
then civilized world.' Frankincense was one of ‘the three 
things which the three Magi from Persia are said to have 
presented to infant Jesus (St. Mathew II, 11). It was taken 
tobe the symbol of Divine power. 1 


Il. THE YACNA PROPER. 


"We have described, _at some length, the requisites necessary in 
the performance of the Yacna ceremony, and, while describing 
these requisites, described also at some length the preliminary 
paragné ceremony. We will now speak of the celebration of’ 
the Yagna proper. Most of the ritual is performed during the 
performance of the paragnd ceremony. The Yacna proper 
mostly consists in the recital of the 72 chapters of the Yagna 
with some ritual here and there. We will describe the main 
outlines of the ritual while describing the several component 
parts that make up the Yagna. : 


In the paragné ceremony,-we find, what we may call the lay- 
ing out or preparation of certain principal 

prepa bs Pol re or essential requisites, such as the Derun, the 
acne consum- Haoma, the Zaothra. In the Yacna proper, 
foe we find, what we callthe consummation. In 
the paragnd, we described the following six ceremonies :—(1) the 
Barsam, (2) the Aiwydonghan, (3) the Urvaram, (4) the Jivam, 
(5) the Zaothra, and (6) the Haoma. All these ceremonies, 
though ‘separate, may be said to be accessories to the Haoma 
ceremony. The Aiwydonghan, after its preparation and 
consecration, was associated with the Barsam. The urvardém or 
the pomegranate plant twig, after its preparation and consecra- 
tion, was pounded with Haoma twigs. The Jivém or the milk, 


+#— nant 
1 As in the Avesta, so in the Old Testament, four kinds of fragrant 
fuel are spoken of Stacte (nataph), onycha (sheheleth), galbanum 
(heelbenoh), and pure frankincense (lebonah zaccah). Frankincense 
is referred to in Exodus (XXX, 7 and 8) as being burnt in the Sanc- 
tum Sanstcrem. Leviticus (XVI, 12) refers to it when it speaks of 
‘« sweet incense beaten small.” The Parsis also use it after pounding 
it to a state of powder 


41 


322 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


after its preparation and consecration, was added to the juice 
of Haoma and Urvaram. The Zaothra water, after its prepa- 
ratfon and consecration, was used in preparing the Haoma 
juice. All these four, (1) the Haoma, (2) the Urvaram, (3) 
the Jivam, and (4) the Zaothra water went to form the Para- 
Haoma. So, the main function of the paragné may be said 
to be to prepare and consecrate the Haoma juice or the Para- 
Haoma.) Then, it is in the Yagna proper that it is consum- 
mated. So, what the Paragn& prepares, the Yagna ‘proper 
consummates. 


But it is not the consummation of the Haoma alone that we 

The Yacna (a) find in the Yacna proper, but we also find 
i ating ae are therein the consummation of the Darun. 
consummates, But the Darun (Draona) or the sacred bread 
ought to be consecrated before being consummated. This 
consecration takes place in the Yagna itself, in its early part. 
So, taking into consideration these questions of preparation, 
consecration and consummation, the Yagna proper can 
be divided into several parts: We will describe these divi- 
sions, and, while doing so, refer to the ritual observed therein, 


On the Zoti taking his stand on his stone-slab, as referred to. 
in the Paragna ceremony, both the priests 

ee ag cre Se in: recite in Baj the Pazend Dib&chéh (-elne 
Prefage, exordium ), reciting the name of 

the particular yazata with whose Khshnuman the Yagna is to 
be celebrated and the name of the person (living ordead Zindeh 
ravin or anousheh ravan) for whom the ceremony is to be per- 
formed. On, finishing the recital of the Dibachéh, each of the 
two priests joins together his two feet. This they do by placing 
the thumb of their right foot on that of their left foot. The 
idea is, that the first chapter, which is the chapter of invocation 
and which begins with the invocation of God, must be recited by 


ee 


1 «The whole of the grander ritual of the Mazdayasnas centres round 
that hely idea’ of “the Everlasting Life”....represented in Mazdean 
Theology by Haome “ (Vide §. J, Bulsara’s Nivanvisten: Introduction 
p. XL..) 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSHES 323 


them standing on one foot. The belief is that the prayer said 
standing on one foot or straight foot ( as wR or WR WA | isa good 
form ot prayer recited in all humility. So the two feet are in the 
above process united, as it were, into one. Again, another form 
for prayer often referred to in the Avesta is that of raising up 
the two hands (usténazasté guta gta ). So, both the priests 
join their two hands together and raise them up towards their 
face. In this position, they recite the prayer of Ferastuyé 
(Yagna XI 17-18), known asthe Patet (i.e. penitence) of the 
Avesta and the prayer of the particular gah with the proper 
Khshnuman. Then they commence the Yagna proper. 


In the very first chapter of the Yagna, the celebrant invokes 
in the very beginning “ Ahura Mazda, the Creator, the radiant 
and glorious, the greatest and the best, the most beautiful (to 
our conceptions), the most firm, the wisest, and the one of all 
whose (spiritual) body is the most perfect, who attains His ends 
the most infallibly, because.of His Righteous Order, He, who 
disposes our minds aright, who sends His joy-creating grace 
afar, who made us, and has fashioned us, and who has nourished 
and protected us,-who is the most bounteous Spirit”? 
(Yacgna I, 1). Then, he invokes the Amesha-spentas. He 
invokes them and submits his offerings to them. He tenders 
his homage to the grand divisions of time and space, which all 
go to make up the grand Nature, and even to the different 
‘grades of society. 


“Then, in the second chapter, he specially refers to the Zeothra 
and the Barsam, and repeats his former invocation and offer- 
ings. In the early part of this chapter, he makes several passes 
with the Barsam held in his hands through the crescent eurves 
of the Mdhrui, i. e. the crescent-shaped stands of the Barsam. 
The Zoti then takes his seat on his Khwdn. 


Most of the chapters uf the Yagna are recited by the Zoti, 
the Rathvi or the second priest joining him in the recital 


1 S. B. Ey XXXI, pp 195-96, 


324 LITURGICAL sERVIiCES OF THE YAgNA 


occasionally. The latter’s principal business -is to feed 
the fire by placing on it the aésma but (the sandal wood and 
frankincense) at the recital of particular portions of the 
Yagnz. He is therefore also spoken of as the Ataravakhshi, 
Atravakhshi or Athravakhshi, #.¢., one who increases the 
brilliance of the fire by feeding it (tar and vahsh qaq to. wax), 
Thus, the first two chapters are the preliminary chapters 
for invocation and offerings. . 


With the: recital of the third ahaptae begins. die. Shion: 

Chapters I1I— which is intended for the consecration of 
VIII. The Sarosh- the Darun,.?.e., the sacred bread. Chapters 
Danas clapvers: TII—VIII are known as the~chapters of 
Sarosh-Darun, ¢.e., (the consecration of) the sacred bread in. 
honour of Sarosh. At particular portions of the recital of 
these chapters and of other chapters, the Zoti occasionally 
takes a handful of water from the kundi, or the water-vessel | 
on his right hand, and drops it on the Barsam and on the 
aiwydonghan which ties the Barsam wires. This is a relic of” 
the old times, when, instead of metallic wires used now, twigs 
of trees were used as Barsam. It was to keep these vegetable’ 
twigs fresh and green that the water was sprinkled over 
them, formerly. Latterly, though the custom of using. 
vegetable twigs ceased, the ritual of keeping them green and 
wet continued, 


The consecration of the Darun finishes at the seventh 
chapter. Then, in the eighth chapter,1 each of the two 
celebrants says, “I offer these. things, this Darun, Water, 
Haoma,  etc., ‘through righteousness’? (ashaya dadh&mi- 
Yacna VIII, 1). The Atravakhshi places sandalwood and 
frankincense over the fire and says; “ O ye men! Ye who 
have deserved it by your righteousness and piety! eat of this . 
Myazda, the meat offering.” Thereupon, the Zoti, who thinks 
himself to have been, qualified to eat it, recites the formula. of 
Baj or the prayer of grace and. eats a bit of the sacred. 


1 Vide above p 1034. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES + $95 
e : ; 


bread (Darun) and then finishes the B&j. The Darun then 
can be passed out of the Yazashna-gah and may be eaten. 
by other members of the congregation if present. This is 
said to be the Darun-chashni or the ceremonial eating of 
the sacred bread. 


The ceremonial: eating of the consecrated bread being 

' finished, the drinking of the haoma juice 

in aoe begins. The juice bas been aireagh 

' pared and: consecrated in the paragnd cere, 

mony. So, it requires no consecration in the Yacna proper 

The priest continues his recital of the Yagna. The Haoma juice 

is there before him on the Alat-giéh. So,-looking to it, he 

recites the Haoma chapters (chaps, IX—-X1) which form the 

Haoma yasht ( the chapters in praise of ,Haoma) and then 

drinks it. We have described this.process above, under the 
head of Haoma. 


After the ceremony of eating. the consecrated bread ‘and 
Chaps. XII Grinking the consecrated haoma juice, the 
XVIII. The De- Zoti recites the 12th chapter which contains 
claration of Faith, 
Invocation anda _ the articles of the Zoroastrian faith. Then 
Dedication. follows the recital of Chapters XITI—X VIII 
which contain.prayers of invocation and dedication of the 


sacred things still standing on the Alat-gah. 
The next. three chapters contain praises of, and forma sort of - 
ondprar’ XIx— commentary on, the three most important 
XXI. Praise of tho. and old prayers of the Avesta, (1) the 
three hest prayers. Ahunavar or the Yatha Ahu Vairy6, (2) the: 
Ashem Voha, and (3) the Yenghhé Hatam. . 


From. Chapter XXII may be said to begin the recital for 

Chama eee the second preparation of haoma jlice. 
XXVIII. Second The celebrant refers to the Haoma, the 
Pevauen of Jivam, the Urvarém, the Zaothra, the Holy 

Water, the Havanim,the Barsam, etc.,before — 
him (imem Haomem .... gam jivyém, ete, .... Yagna 


326 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YACNA 


XXII 20-22), and says, that he desires to have them with the 
recital of their praise. They are again referred to in the 24th 
chapter. Then the recital of Chapters XXV—XXVII is 
accompanied by the preparation itself, 7.e., the haoma is pounded, 
squeezed and strained. The juice thus prepared for the second 
time is not drunk by the priest but set apart for the require- 
ments of the congregation.1 The 26th chapter of the above 
group is that which forms the kardeh (section) of Satum and is 
recited with the Dib&ché in the Satum ceremony. 


With the 28th chapter begin the Gathas, believed to be the 

Chapters XxvV- oldest writings in the Avesta and to be the 
an sara ee compositions of the Prophet himself. The 
LIII the Gatha following chapters make up each of the five 
chapters. Gath’s : Gath \Abunavaiti—Chapters 
SXVITI—XXXIV; G&tha Ushtavaiti—Chapters XLITI— 
XLVI ; Gath4 Spentomad—Chapters XLVII--L ; Gatha Vohu- 
khshathra—Chapter LI; and Gaéth& Vahishtoisht—Chapter 
Ll, 


The intervening eight chapters XXXV—XLII are known 

ChaptereXxxv- 98 the Yacna Haptanghaiti. These chapters 
XLIL The Yacna though they do not form the Gath4s proper, 
Cheer ae are written mostly in an older Gath4 dialect. 
Hosbam. Of these, the first seven chapters, XXXV— 
XLI form, as the name haptan (Greek hepta, Lat. septem, 
Fr, sept. German seiben) implies, the Yacgna Haptangh-haiti 
proper. The remaining eighth chapter, the 42nd, forms a 
supplement or appendix to the seven chapters. These chapters 
are also known as Haptan Yasht and are recited by the laity 
also as one of the Yashts. The 52nd chapter forms the 
Bosh beut or the prayer of Dawn. 


ee 


1 As said in my papers on the Birth and Funeral Ceremonies, 
there is a custom, though not generally observed now, to give a few’ 
drops of the haoma juice to a newly born child and to a dying man. 
These drops were given from the juice of the second preparation. 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 327 


The 54th chapter contains the prayer of Airyam4-ishyé which 

Chapter LIV ang f0F™S a part of the recital in the Ashirvad 
LY. Praises of cer> or the nuptial ceremony. The 55th chapter 
ise i a -is in praise of the Gathas and the Staota 
Yagna prayers. As to what chapters form the 33 Chapters 
of the Staota Yacna which literally means the Yagna of 
praise, there is a difference of opinion.* 


The 56th and the 57th chapters are in praise of Sraosha. 

Chapters Lvr~ OF these the The 56th chapter is called 
LVII, the Sraosha Sarosh Hadokht, because it is. believed to 
Chapters: have come down from Hadokht nask, the 
20th book of the original 21 books of theAvesta. The 57th 
chapter forms the Sraosh Yasht proper and is known as Sarosh 
Yasht vadi i.e., the larger Sarosh Yasht. It forms the principal 
night-prayer of the Parsees. 


The 58th chapter contains the prayer known as Fshusha 

Chapters LVITI- ménthra which is often referred to in other 
1 Praise and parts of the Yacna. A large part of the 
eepens 59th chapter (1—27) is a repetition of two 
former chapters (XXII, 1—17 and X XVI, 1-10) and consists 
of invocation and praise. That part which is new consists of 
some blessings: 


The 60th chapter contains the well-known prayer known as 

Chapter LX. the Kardeh or section of the Téo ahminmdné, 
Chapterfor blessing which is recited in the performance of the 
a Cie Afringan ceremony. It invokes beautiful 
blessings upon the house of the celebrant. It is an excellent 
prayer to be recited at the moorat or the house-warming 
ceremony of a new house. It is a kind of tan-darusts and man- 
darusti prayer in the Avesta language. 


1 Vide Dr. West (S. B. E. Vol. XXXVII. Dinkard Bk. VIII. 
Chap. XLVI, n. 1. Darmesteter (Le Zend Avesta, Vol. I Introduction 
Chap. IV, s. IV, Pp- 87-88) Bulsara (Aerpatastan and Nirangasten 
p. 47, n, 10.) et: 


328 LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE YAGNA 


The 6lst chapter is a prayer desiring ability to stand against 
evil-minded persons and evil influences with 
ime pee the help of as tenets preached by the above 
pect Lola oe referred to three celebrated prayers, viz., the 
praise of Ahunvar, the Ashem, and the Yenghé 
wee ‘hatém. The 62nd chapter forms the 
Atash-nyaish in praise of fire. The Zoti stands upon his 
khwdn, holds the Barsam in his hand, and looking to the-fire 
opposite, recites this prayer with the Atravakhshi. The seven 
chapters from 63 to 69 refer to water and its consecration. 
The 63rd praises the waters. The 64th is, to a large extent, a 
repetition of the 50th chapter (The Spentomad_Gaéth&) which 
praises Ahura Mazda who has created the health-giving waters. 
The 65th forms the Avan Ardvigura Ny&ish and refers to 
the waters of the river Ardvicura, supposed to be the modern 
Oxus.! The Zoti holds the cup of the zaothra water in his 
right hand, gets down from his seat or his khwdn, and looking 
to the water in the kundi by his side, recites this chapter. 
Chepters LXVI—LXIX. continue the ceremony of further 
consecrating the zaothra water. 


The last three chapters finish the Yacna ceremony by invok- 

Chapter LXX— ing the Amesha-spentas and praising the 
LXXII, The finish-~ good creation of Ahura Mazda. The recital 
ing chapigis. of the 72nd chapter finishes the Yacna 
proper. The Zoti gets down from his seat and exchanges a 
Hamazor, a kind of Zoroastrian kiss of peace,? with the Raspi 
ot Atravakhshi. Both then finish the Baj. They had begun 
the ceremony by taking up or holding the Baj and finish it 
by laying down or completing the Baj. They then perform 
the kustt. 


1 Vide my Paper in Gujarati on the Geography of the Avesta. 

2 Vide my Paper on The Kiss ef Peace among the Bene-Israels of 
Bombay and the Hamazer among the Parsees. Journal of the Anthro- 
‘pological Society of Bombay Vol. VIII, pp. 84-95. Vier wy Anthyeo- 
pological Papers Part I, pp. 283-94. , 


LITURGICAL SERVICES OF THE PARSEES 329 


Both then go before a well which is indispensably necessary 
. in a Fire-temple, the Zoti holding the 
The concluding ‘ = ; i 

coremony—Zor- Havanim containing the zaothra water in his 

Tales: hand. They face the sun and perform, as 

said above, what is called Zér-melavvi, i.e., to mix the zaothra 

consecrated water with the water of the well whence the water 

was first drawn. This they do by pouring the water from the 
HAavanim into the well. 


While speaking of the Barsam and the Haoma ceremonies 

The antiquity of which form the component parts of the Yagna 
the Yacna cere- ceremony, I have referred to their anti- 
sien ie quity. The antiquity of these ceremonies 
which form the component parts leads us to infer that the whole 
of the Yagna ceremony may be.very ancient. The materials 
of some of the requisites required in the ceremony also suggest 
its antiquity. For example, (1) the Hévanim or the mortar in 
which haoma is pounded in the paragnd of the Yagna ceremony 
is said to be either that of stone or iron (asmana ayanghaéna : 
Yagna XXII, 2; Visparad X,2). ‘Now-a-days, the metal 
generally used is bell-metal. Ironis never used. So, the words 
stone and iron suggest that possibly the ceremony must have 
first been introduced when the use of stone and iron was greatly 
prevalent and when other metals were rarely used. (2) Again, 
the use of the twigs of a tree for Barsam instead of metallic wires 
also suggest a remote antiquity. (3) The use of the varag¢ or the 
hair of the bull in the plate (tashia), which serves as a sieve for 
the haoma juice to be passed through for purification, leads us 
to infer that the times of the introduction of the ceremony 
were very old when other materials to serve as a sieve were 
Jess known. Now-a-days though a metallic plate with holes 
(surdkhddr tashta) serves as sieve, the Varac ring is still used 
with it as a relic of the old usage. 


330 “THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


CHAPTER XIII. 
II.—THE VISPARAD CEREMONY, 


The wore Visparad is formed from the Avesta words ‘ vispa 
sae hier ta ratavo’ which have two signfications, VIZ, 
the different (1) all seasons and (2) all lords or chiefs. So, 
pendatings of the Visparad is a form of prayer intended. to 
celebrate the season festivals, and, itis also a 

form of prayer, wherein all the ‘rads’ or chiefs or the best of 
the creations are invoked. The word ratu or rad.is too teehni- 
eal to be properly translated. Dr. Mills! says: “The word 
Visparad means ‘all the chiefs;’ referring to_the ‘ lords of the 
ritual ’...,.......... Lords, because ruling_as chief objects of 
attention during their mention in the course of the sacrifice, 
also, as in this case, genii guarding “over all of their class,” 
Anquetil? translates the words in. the text as ‘Destours’ or 
chief priests, and in a note, as ‘Chefs,’ 7.e., chiefs. He uses the 
word ‘chef’ in the senseof—“premier.’ So every species of 
creation has its ratu_or rad, 2. e., its best type or prototype. 
Burnouf? translates the word as ‘ grand ’ and ‘maitre’ or master. 
Dr. Haug‘ translates it as ‘chief or head.’ He says: “The 
name Visparad(Avesta vispé ratavd) means ‘all chiefs or 
heads ’.........The primary type of each class is its respective 
ratu or chief.”” Darmesteter follows Burnouf and translates 
itas ‘maitre’ or master. He says : 5 “ Ce mot de ratu, .est un 
des termes les plus importants de la langue religieuse. II 
signifie proprement maitre, au sens de maitre spirituel........ 
Ti désigne le chef qui est supposé placé & la téte de chaque 


1 §..B. E., Vol. XXXI, p. 335, ns, 1 and 3. 

2 Zend Avesta, Vol. I, partie II, p. 87. 

3 Commentaire sur le Yacna, pp. 4 and 17. 

4 Essays on the Parsees, 2nd edition, pp. 191-192. 
5 Le Zend Avesta, I, pp. 6-7. 


THE VISTARAD CEREMONY 301 


classed’étres.”’ Harlez! translates the word as ‘ chef ’ or chief. 
He says: “L’esprit de systématisation des mages avait fait 
diviser universe entier en catégories d’étres, et assigner 4 
chaque catégorie un chef présidant, & Vaction générale des 
étres de cette classe.” Spiegel? translates it as ‘ All lords.’ 
Geiger? and’ Kanga! translate it as ‘ master’ and as ‘leader’ or 
‘ chief.’ 


The word ‘rad’ is a form of the Avesta word ‘ ratu,’\which 
comes from Avesta areta== Sanskrit rita, which means, ‘te be 
straight, to say the truth.’ This word areta isthe same as 
English ‘ right.’ Now, in a species, that which is straight or 
perfect, that which is true, correct or well-formed, enjoys 
superiority over others. So the word ratu or rad has come to 
mean, ‘ a chief’. 


From the fact of the division of beings into two classes, the 
spiritual and physical, and from the fact of their having their 
own ratus or chiefs, and from an insight into the different 
writings on the subject,.we find, that, like the words 
fravashi and kharenangh, the word ratu has a broad special 
signification. Every member of the animal creation has its own 
fravashi, Creatures of both, the physical and spiritual, worlds 
have their fravashis or guiding spirits. Again all bodies have 
their kharenangh or glory or splendour. All bodies, both of the 
spiritual and the physical world, have their kharenangh. Simi- 
-larly, all bodies both of the spiritual and the physical world 
have their ratus. HEven substances of inanimate creation 
havetheir ratus. But, there is this difference, that while indivi- 
dual bodies have their fravashis and kharenanghs special to 
themselves, it is not the individual bodies that have each a ratu 


1 Le Zend Avesta, p. 2265, n. 5. 

2 Bleeck’s Translation, II, p. 2, Introduction. 

3 “ Civilization of the Hastern Iranians,” translated by Dastur Darab 
P. Sanjana, Vol. I, Introduction, p. XX XIX, |. 10. 

4 Avesta Dictionary p. 439. 


332 THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


for itself, but it is each class or species that has a ratu of its own. 
The priestly class has its own ratu. The military class has its 
own, ratu, andso on. So, each member of these classes also has. - 
a ratu but that is not a separate ratu for himself. Every 
member has a common ratu, to whom he or it can look as his 
or its chief, as his or its best type, as a high ideal worth 
imitating. For example, the Athornans or the priestly class 
must have a raéu or chief—both physically and mentally pure— 
to whom they can look for guidance, whom they may hold 
before themselves as a ‘High Ideal’ for imitation and 
guidance. 


Of the different parts of the Avesta that treat of the ratus, the 
iene at. principal are the following:—(1). The Gahs; 
treat of the” ratus (2) Yacna, Has Ito IV, VI, VII, and XII, 
or rads and the XTi; (3) Visparad, Kardeh I to III; 
classes of the ratus. 
(4) the Ahunavar or Yatha shu vairyé. 
The 24th chapter of the Bundehesh specially refers to the 
subject of rads. We can classify the beings—both spiritual and 
physical—of which the \raéus or primary types are referred tu 
in‘the Parsee books, as follows :— 


1. The spiritual beings. Ahuramazda and his Amesh&spen- 
tas and Yazatas, Ahuramazda stands at the head as ratum 
berezantem, t.e. the Exalted Chief. 


2. Mankind. ‘The different grades and professions of men 
have their own rads or chiefs. Zoroaster (Zarathushtrem asha- 
vanem ashahé ratiim) stands at the head of mankind as the best 
type of mankind. Then, the different professional grades of the 
priests, the warriors, the husbandmen, the artificers (Athornan 
rathaéshtaran, etc.), have their own rads or.chiefs. Then; the 
different constitutional divisions of the country—the house, the 
street, the village, the country (nm4na, viga, zantu, danghu)— 
have their own rads or chiefs. Then, the priests performing the 
different functions of the priesthood—the Havanan, Atarvaksh, 
Fraberetar, Aberetar, ete.—have rads of their own. 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 333 


3. Animal creation other than men. (a) Animals living in 
water, (6) living on land, and (¢) living in air have their rads or 
chiefs. 


4, Inanimate creation. Even objects of inanimate creation 
have their rads or chiefs. For example, Arus-i-Razur is the rad 
or principal type of all forests. The Hukairya mountainis the 
best principal type of all the mountains. 


5. Religious abstractions. Even religious abstractions have 
their ratus. For example, the prayers of Ahunavar and Yangahé 
Hatdm are the ratus or the best primary types of the prayers of 
Ahura Mazda (Ahuirim tkaéshem). 


There is one thing which must be remembered in the consi- 
deration of the meaning of the word raiu. 
Connection be- Jtis this: Wherever the word ratuis used, it 
tween asha and , : A . 
ratu. is used with the word asha, 1.¢., righteous- 
; ness, piety; purity. The ratu is always 
spoken of as “‘ashahératim,”’ z.e., the chief of righteousness. As 
the word Fravashi is always connected with the word ‘‘ ashau- 
nam,’’2.¢., of the righteous, so the word ‘“‘ratu” is always con- 
nected with “‘ashahé,” i.e., of righteousness. Again, the very 
roots of the words ‘‘ratu’”’ and ‘‘asha’’ are the same. Both the 
words come from.“‘aret”’ (right) to be straight, to be righteous. 
Thus, the word ratu carries with it the idea of straightness, per- 
fection, excellence, righteousness. Among men, one who is 
straight-forward, righteous, perfect, becomes the ratu or rad or 
chief of his class, to whom others look as a leader, worthy to be 
followed. Among things, that thing which is perfect, complete, 
pure, unblemished, beautiful, etc., is the ratu or rad or chief 
of the whole class, and is looked to as the best type. 


Thus, the meaning of the word rad or ratu enables us to under- 
sae stand, what the prayer known as the Vispa- 
The signification é i etna, 
ofthewordandthe Tad is. In the word Visparad, “ vispa 
object of the cere” means “‘all.”? So, the Visparad is a prayer or 
mony. . es cia ea 
collection of prayers or religious writings 


334 THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


which treat of, and praise, all the ratus, rads or chiefs of the 
different creations of God. I¢ signifies, that every person must 
have before him a high ideal (ratw) which he must do his best to 
reach. An agriculturist must have before him the ideal of a ratu 
of his class, ¢.¢e., of the best type of agriculturist. He must 
try to imitate and follow him. Not only that, but in the matter 
of his business-materials, he must use the ideal or the best type 
of materials. In the matter of the seeds that he uses, he must 
use the ratu or the chief or the best of the seeds. In the matter 
of his implements, he must use the best available. 


The 24th chapter of the Bundehesh speaks of the different 
ratus of the different classes of creation. Therein, at the end, we 
read the following sentence, which sums up, as it were, the 
object of the celebration of the Visparad. It says : ‘‘ Hangard 
denman, 4igh kolA min ké&r-iemas vadénét, adinash 
kasich veh,’’! 7.e., ‘‘ The conclusion is this: that he, who does a 
great work, has the best individuality or personality,” or, as 
Dr. West puts it “‘Theconelusion is this, that every one who 
performs a great duty has then much value.”’? In other words, 
the celebration. of the Visparad should suggest to the celebrant 
the idea of “ Excelsior.’’? How is that state of “‘ excelsior ” to 
be attained ? We find the reply in the 15th chapter (s. 1) 
of the Visparad-which says : 


“O Zoroastrian Mazdayagnans! Keep your feet, hands and 
understanding, steady for the purpose of doing proper, timely, 
charitable works and for the purpose of avoiding improper, 
untimely, uncharitable works. Practice good industry here. 
Help the needy and relieve them from their needs.”’ 


The Visparad is divided into 23 Kardds (Av. karéta) or sec- 
tions. It is never recited alone butis always 
recited with the Yagna. The Visparad 
is preceded by the paragné which is the 
same as that of the Yacna. In fact, the celebration of 


Recital of the 
Visparad. 


‘L Vide my Budehesh, p. 112. 2 8..B. E. V., p. 91, Ch. XXIV 30, 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY | 335 


the Visparad is the celebration of the Yagna with the addi- 
tional recital of the 23 chapters of the Visparad. Ordinarily, 
the Visparad is recited whenever the Vendidad is recited. 
But there are special periods of the year when the Visparad is 
specially recited. These periods are known as the Gahambirs 
(season festivals), and the Visparad then recited is known_. 
as Gédhambdr ni Visparad, i.e., the Visparad of the Gadhambars. 
It is specially celebrated on the occasion of the Gahambars, 
because the Gahambars are the ‘‘ratus ’’ of time. The further- 
ance, progress, development and improvement of everything in 
the world depends upon time, upon the due suceession of 
seasons at their proper times. It is the due observation of 
time (gah), that enables a man to do his best.in all his different 
walks of life, whether he be an agriculturist, trader or a pro- 
fessional man. Nature holds forth, before men, the GihambArs 
or the seasons as the best type, as the best ideal, for all work 
to bedone at the proper time. Such being the case, the 
Gahambars are specially considered to be the proper times for 
the celebration of the Visparad ceremony. 


Tt appears from the Visparad (ITI, 1), that, at one time, more 

The eight priests than two priests were required for the cele- 
referred to in-the» bration of the Yacna ritual. The Uziran 
aoe oe bor gah (Gah, III, 5) and the Vendidad (V, 57) 
tions and fune- alsorefer to them. The priests enumerated 
hens inthe Visparad, besides the Zaotar himself, 
are ‘the following:--(1) Havanan, (2) Ataré-vakhsh, (3) Frabe- 
retar, (4) Aberetar, (5) Asnatar, (6) Rathwishkara, (7) Sraosha- 
varez. In the modern ritual, the Zaotar or the senior 
officiating priest calls for their presence (astaya). He is, as. it 
were, calling out a roll-call. Instead of the above different 
priests answering to their names, it is only the Atravakhshi 
or Rathwi who replies and says ‘‘I am here” (azem vicdi). 
He shifts his position as the names are called out one after 
another and he takes his stand in the different corners and 
sides of the Yazashna gah before giving repliesto the calls. 


336 THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


The different positions occupied by him now in the ritual show 
the positions occupied at one time by the different priests 
when they all took a part in the ceremony. The positions are 
the following, the Zaotar himself sitting on his khwén in the 
north :— 


The designation of the Their pos tn the Yazashna-gah. 
priests. 
1. Zadétar se .. North, facing the fire-vase before him in 
the south. 


2. Havanan .. .. On the right side of the. Zotar or Zoti, 
in the north-west corner of the 
Yazashna-gah. 


3. Atravakhsha .. Onthe right side of the Zoti and facing 
the fire, z.e., on the south-west corner. 


4. Fraberetar .. .. On the left side of the Zoti, on the 
north-east corner. 


5. Aberetar .. .. On the left side of the Zoti and facing 
the fire, ¢.e., on the south-east corner. 


6. Asnatar —.. -. On the right side of the Zoti and 
between the Zodgah. (i.e, the seat of 
the Zoti) and the Atash-gah or the slab 
on which the fire-vase stands, 7.e., on 
the west in the middle of the 
Yazashna-gah. 


7. Rathwishkara .. On the left side of the Zoti and 
between the Zéd-géh and the Atash- 
gah, 7.e., on the east. 


8, Sraoshavareza .. Opposite to the Zoti and in front of the 
fire-vase, 7.¢., 0n the south of the 
Yazashna-gah, 


Hine yispARAD CHeREMONY 339 


I give below a diagram to show the positions of the eight 

Adiagram of the priests in the. Yazashna-gah as pointed ont 
positionsas observ. now, by the different positions occupied by 
aid the Atravakhshi in the Visparad ceremony, 
when responding to the call of the Zaotar for the presence of 
the different priests. 2 

South 
Sraoshavareza. 


A The slab , “QA 
Aberetar. A ee | for the Atravakhsh. 
fire-vase. ‘ : 


ed 


2 Rathwishkara. Asnatar. 


East 


780 MA 


Fraberetar. | Aldioath | Havanan. 
Abin japon 


Zabtar sitting on his Zodgah. 
North 


' The Nirangistén! seems to be the authority on which the 

The positions os pensions for the different priests are deter- 
determined by the mined. Themodern practice tallies with the 
Bicanglethat: description of the Nirangistén except in the 
case of the positions.of the Asnatar and the Rathwishkata. 
The Asnatar’s position in the modern ritual is on the right hand 
side of the Havanin who is represented as facing the 
Barsam. But the Nirangistén gives it on the left. 
The same is the case with the position of the Rathwishkara 
whose position now is on the left of the Fraberetar and not on 
the right as said by the Nirangistén. I think the words haoydt 
and dashindt (left and right) may have been interchanged by 
mistake by the original copyist. The Pahlavi Nirangistaén* 
also briefly refers to the functions (kairya (jy) of these 
eight priests. Their functions are as follows :— 


1. The Zuota. The word zactar means one who pettoema't the 
ceremony from zu, Sanskrit hu,to perform theceremony. He 


1 The Photo-zinco text, folio 155a to 157b ; Darmesteter, Le Zend 
Avesta, ITI, pp. 130-31. 

2Le,Zend Avesta par Darmesteter UII, pp. 128-30. My. Sohrab 
J. Bulsera’s Aerpatstan and Nirangstan, Chap XXVII. 


43 


338 THE VISPARBAD CEREMONY 


corresponds :.to the Haotar of the Brahmins.- He is the- 
principal officiator. He stands first: in the list, and in the Bun- 
dehesh (XXX, 30), Ahura Mazda himselfis allegorically spoken 
of as officiating aszaotar in: the Yagna ceremony with the Yazata 
Sraosha as the Raspi. The Dadistan-i-Dini (XLVIII, 13), 
which describes some parts of the ritual of the -Yacna, refers 
to the Urvig-gah as his proper place. According to the Niran- 
gistan, his principle function is to sing the Gathas (gAthaoscha 
fragravay4iti).1 This is a reference to the fact that it. is.the 
Zaotar who has torecite all thechapters of the Gathds in the 
performance of the Yacna ceremony. 


2. The Héwandn. It appears that in ancient’ times, there 
was a priest whose special function was topound the Haoma 
(haomemcha a-hunavat) in the Havanim’ (mortar) in the 
Havan-gah (the morning hours), to drink its juice cere- 
monially, and to do all the needful for the Haoma ceremony. 'a 


3. The Atravakhsha. As the word itself shows, his function 
was to feed (vakhsh, Englishwax, to grow, to increase) the fire 
(atra). The Nirangistan, further says that one of his functions 
was to putify the fire (Athrascha........ _. yaozdathat).2 This 
refers to the ritual in the Yagna ceremony, wherein, before the 
commencement of the Yagna proper, the stone-slab (khwAn) on 
which the fire-vase stands is washed by the priests. Dr. Haug? 
compares his: functions with those of the Agnidhra (who holds 
the fire) of the Brahmans. 


4, The Fraberetdy. Thefunction of this priest was to carry 
(bar, English ‘ bear) forward (fra, ‘English forth) all the 
requisites of the ceremony. Out of these requisites, the 
Nirangistan specializes the Barsam and the Fire (barésmancha 
frakem athraécha).4 


1 _Darmestetet’s Zend Avesta, III, p. 129. _Bulsara, p- 392 n, 1a; Ibid. 
2 Ibid. 

3 Essays on the Parsees,, 2nd edition, p. “281. 

4 Darmosteter’s Zend Avesta, III; p. 129 ; ; Bulgara, p. 393, 1. . 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 339 


5. The. Aberetér. The function of this priest is to -carry 
(bar) water , (&p).for the ceremony (Apem 4-barat). The 
Nirangistan points out this as_his- only function. 


6. ° The -Asnatér. - His function was to wash or clean (snd, 
Fr. nager) the ceremonial utensils -and requisites. The 
Nirangistan ‘specially refers to ‘the process of purifying the 
Haoma twigs and of straining the Haoma juice (haomemcha 
A- -snayat, haomiemcha paiti-harezat).1 


7. The Rathwiskhara, He was the priest whose proper 
function was to do (kar) the work of arranging all the 
requisites in their proper (rathwya) order. The Nirangistan 
specializes his work as that of properly ‘mixing the Jivam 
(gava, the milk) with Haoma juice,:and then of dividing the 
mixture (bakshayatcha). This seems'to refer to the present 
practice of the-Zaotar dividing . the Haoma juice:and . dropping 
it in different places.!a . Oe 


(8). Sraoshé Vareza. Sraosh& Vareza was a priest, who, to a 
certain extent, corresponded to a ‘confessor.’ He made the 
people act (varez) in obedience (sraésha) to certain rules of pen- 
ances, etc. Ifa person did a wrongful act, and if he wanted to 
do something to atone for that wrongful act, he (the sraosha- 
vareza) asked him to do certain good deeds, which could, to a 
certain extent, go to wipe off the effects of the previous wrongful 
deeds. Dr. Haug? thinksthatthe Zoroastrian Sraosh& vareza 
corresponds to the Brahmanical Pratiprasthata. Sraosha, whose 
functions, the Sraosha-vareza represents to a certain extent ‘in 
the-superintendence of the ritual, holds an uplifted.weapon 
(érédhwa snaithisha. Sarosh Yasht; Yacna LVII16) in his 
hand. The. Pratiprasthaté holds “a wooden sword”’ in his 
hand. The Nirangistén’ specializes his work atthe Yacna , 
ceremony as that of a general supervisor (aiwyakhshayat : aiwi, 
about, and akhsh, to watch). ; ; 

1 Derinenorets Zend Avesta, IT], p. 130; ubsers p. 393. 1a. Ibid. 


2 Essays on the Parsees, 2nd edition, p. 280. 
3 Darmesteter’s Zend Avesta, III, p. 130, Bulsara, p. 394, 


340 THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


The Visparad: (I, 3-9) gives us a list of the prayers which were 

The Visparad’s eld in great veneration atthe time when 
list of the best ty- . it was written. It enumerates the following 
pical (rad) prayers. prayers :-——(1) StaotaYaena, (2) Ahunavar, (3) 
Ashem Vohi, (4) Yenghé Hatam, (5) Gétha Ahunavad, (6) Yagna 
Haptanghaiti, (7) Gathé Ustavad, (8) Gatha Spentomad, (9) 
Gath& Vohukhshathra, (10) G&ath& Vahishtoyisht, (11) Daham 
Afriti, (12) Airyam4-ishyé, (13) Fshusho MAthra, (14) Hadhao- 
khta, (15) Ahuiri Frashna. I will here briefly refer to the first 
four which are held to be very important among the best (rad) 
prayers. 


Among the list of prayers enumerated by the Visparad, the 

}. The Stacta: Staota Yacna stands first ; but scholars differ 

ane: as to which chapters ef the Yacna form the 

Staota Yaona referred to by theVisparad. I think by this prayer 

the whole of the Yacna is referred to. I give below a 

list, showing which chapters-are referred to by various scholars 
as forming this prayer. 


Scholars. Chapters of the Yagna. 
Harlez (Le Zend Avesta, p. 226,n) .. .. The last chapters 
of the Yacna. 


Mills (S. BoE, XXXI, p. 294 
“Thatpart of the Yana which 
- begins with the Sraosh Yasht) .. . Chapter 57, ef esq. 


Darmesteter (Zend Avesta, I, 
Introduction, LXXXIII) .. ee . Chapters 14 to 59. 
K. R. Cama (Zarthosht Nameh, 
2nd saison: p. 232) Tis = ae . Chapters 55to 59 or 
57 to 71. 


Sheriarji D. Bharucha (Zarthoshti 
Abhyas, No. VIII, p..457) he . Chapters 58 to 60. 


Khurshedji E. Pavri (Zarthoshti, 
I, No.4, p.318) -- «+ «+ «Chapters 58and 59,, 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 341 


Among the prayers enumerated by the Visparad, three require 
a special mention. They are the Ahunavar, the Ashem, and the 
Yenghé Hatém. I will describe them at some length. 


The prayer is called Ahunavar (Ahuna vairya, Yagna, XTX, 3) 
from its second and third words, and because 
it speaks of the Lord (ahu) whose desire 
(vairya) is supreme, and who is independent. From its three 
first words, the prayer is more properly known as “ Yatha Aha 
Vairy6.”? This prayer corresponds somewhat to the ‘‘ Word ” 
of the Christians. It is spoken of as being uttered by God before 
the very creation (Yacna, XIX, 1-3, 8). The Yacna further 
says that if this prayer is recited by one perfectly and right 
sincerely, its meritoriousness is worth the recital of 100 Gathas. 
If one recites it, understands it, and praises it, 7.e., right 
sincerely acts up to its dictates, he goes to heaven (Ibid., 5 and 6). 
Of all the prayers of Ahura Mazda, it is the best (Ibid, 10; 
Sraosh Hadokht, Yasht, XI, 3). “He who recites it and properly 
understands it, acknowledges Ahura Mazda as his Lord and 
sets an example to others to. 80 acknowledge Him. Its recital 
helps a man in all difficulties and calamities (Yasht, XI, 4): 
Hence, it isa custom; even now, for an orthodox Parsee to 
recite one or more Ahunavars or Yatha Ahu Vairyés, when 
starting on a journey, or going out for business, or on leaving 
his house for ordinary daily business.! According to the Vendidad 
(XIX,..9), when Ahriman, the Evil Spirit, tried to tempt 
Zoroaster, it was with the recital of the Ahunavar that the 
Prophet, emboldened himself, rejected his (Ahriman’s) proposals, 
opposed him, and withstood the Temptation. There, Zoroaster 
speaks of this prayer as one taught by God himself (Mazda- 
fraokhta) and calls it an excellent weapon to defend himself. 


2 The Ahunavar. 


The Ahunavar is the very first prayer which a Zoroastrian 
child is taught to recite. There is hardly a prayer, small or 
great,which does not include in itself the recital of the Ahunavar 
once or more than once. On account of the importance and 
efficacy and sanctity attached to it, the Shayast 14 Shayast 


1 Vide Mr, M, R. Unwela’s Rivayat with my Introduction Vol, I, pp, 13-15, 


342 THE VISPABAD CEREMONY 


(Chap. XTX, 15) says, that religion is as much connected with it 
as the hair is connected with, and gives glory or beauty to, one’s 
facet The Ahunavar and the Ashem are, to - @ certain 
extent, to a Zoroastrian, what the Pater Noster is to a Chris- 
tian. Ifa person does not know his other daily prayers, or if 
he does not know to read them from the prayer book, he is 
required to recite a cerain number of Ahunavars in the place 
of each of these prayers. He holds a chaplet or string of beads 
in his hand and turns a bead at the recital of each Ahunavar.? 


List of (a) the re- The following list gives the number of 
cital of the Ahuna- . ya 
vars in place of Ahunavars which one can recite instead of 
certain prayers and . 3 
(b) on. particular different prayers. 
occasions. 
Prayers. Number of 
- Ahunavars, 
Khorshed Ny§ish, ¢.c., the prayer in praise 
’ of the Sun .. iis ai os he 103 


Meher NyAish, ¢.e.,..the.. prayer in praise 

of Mithra .. 4 sah Si He bea 65 
Mah Nydish, i.¢, the prayer in praise 

of the Moon ee ~ ace is. . 65 


Ardvigura, Nyaish, i.¢., the prayer in praise 

of Water .. ai ee AF ia 65 
Atash Nydish i.e, the prayer in praisee , 

of Fire ei ne ws as ie 65 


18. B.E., V, p. 393. 

2’ Vide my paper on Rosaries (Journal of the Anthropological Society 
of Bombay, Vol. of 1913). 
. 3 Vide Darab Hormuzdyar’s Rivayet by M. R. Unwala with my In- 
tréduction Vol. I, pp. 13-15. Vide Lars erqr ct eHorare, 
Rustamji Jamasji Dastur (1896). pp. 14-15. Vide K. E, Kanga’s 
Khordch Avesta, 8th ed. p. 149, 


tat VisPARAD. CEREMONY 343 


Prayers. No. of 
Ahunavars. 


The five Gahs, z.e., the prayers for the five 


periods of the day Ae me 2 ©65 

The Patet, t.e., the repentance prayer 121 with twelve 
Ashem vo- 
hi prayers, 

Ahura Mazda Yasht .. ma .. 103 with 12 

Ashem vo- 

his. 

Ardibehesht Yasht ae a .. 65 

Sarosh Hadokht ae RA » IPn4S 


Sarosh Yasht vadi (Yagna LVI) -«/ 103 
The Afringan ... So .. 121 with 12 
Ashem vo- 
:3 ct his. 
Hach of the five Gathas to be recited on 
each of the five intercalary days at the 
end of the year - et -. 1,200 


The Ahurnavars for these Gathas are recited with a parti- 
cular Baj, @.e., a small introductory prayer, and a prayer 
recited at the end. 


The Shayast 14 Shayast (Chap. XIX}! gives the following 
list. of theAhunavars to be recited by a Zoroastrian on particular 
oecasions to withstand difficulties, to have courage and 
help, and to win success :— 


Occasions of business. _No. of 
Ahunavars. 
1. When “one goes forth toan assembly or before 
grandees and chieftains, or on any business ; 
or when he goes to ask for what he wants, 
also when he quits any business” .. ‘ 1 


18. B. E, V, pp. 390-92. 


344 


2. 


10. 
ll. 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY. 


On the recital of some blessings upon somebody 
(It is for this reason that the recital of the 
Tandaructi prayer invoking blessings upon 
somebody and the recital of the Ashirvad 
blessings upon a marrying couple begin with 
two Ahunavars) .. & 


- On the recital of thanksgiving prayers at 
season-festivals. So,’ the Afringén of the. 


Gaihambars or the season-festivals begin 
‘with four Ahunavars) 


. On the occasion of atonement or repentance for © 


sins. (Thus, the Patet: or the Repentance 
prayer begins with the recital of five Ahuna- 
vars) 


When one “ goes to seek power’’ or to wina 
battle 


. When one recites:the praises of the Yazatas. 


(The recital of the Afringans with the Khshnu- 
mans of the Yazatas or angels begin with 
seven Ahunavars) oe ar a . 


. On the occasions of remembering and invoking 


the Fravashis of the dead. (It is for this 
reason that the Afringin of Ardafarosh, 
recited in honour of the dead, begins with 
eight Ahunavars) bis oe a a 


. When one goes to sow cornin his field (The ; 


corn was believed to take, in all, nine months 
from the time of its being sown, to be fit for 
use) 


. When one goes to seek a wife 


When one begins the work of breeding cattle .. 


When one climbs up @ mountain ig se 


10 
an 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY ‘ 345 


12. When one goes to low districts or valleys .. 12 


13. When one loses his way and wants to find his 
way back. (The Sarosh Hadokht specially 
refers to the recital of Ahunavar on such 
occasions (Patham vai paiti vicharanao : 
Vaaht 34) ne (es weg ye. war 18 


14, On crossing a bridge or a river. (The Sarosh 

Hadokht also refers to the recital of Ahuna- 

vars on crossing rivers and bridges (apam 

va navayanim paiti peretush) implying that 

the process involves some danger and 

difficulty on dark foggy nights (Khshapo va 

tanthry4o aipi-dvanaray4o) A. ‘ie 13 

The later Rivayets give a list, slightly 
upto me ioe. different from that of the Pahlavi Shayast 
14 Shayast.! \ We give the list below :— 


1. (a) When leaving the house for business ee) 

(6) When entering the house on return from 
business. 

(c) When beginning’a new work.. 2 

(d) On finishing @ work .. a af az 

(e) When beginning an important conversation 
with somebody. : + 1 

(f)..On going before @ ruler, or governor, or a | 
great man. 

(g) On entering a river, lake, or any such great 
reservoir of water. 

(kh) On lending money to somebody 

(‘) On borrowing money from somebody 


a 


2. On blessing somebody rf = ae om 2 
3. On removing nails from one’s fingers... as 3 


1 The Gujarati Rivayet of Darab Hormazdyér by Ervad Rustomji 
Jamasj Dastur, pp. 11-12. Vide M. BR. Unwala’s Text with my Intro- 
duction, pp. 13-15. 


44 


846 THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 
4. On the recital of the Gahamb4ar Afring4n “3 4 


5. On the recital of the Patet or Sradsh Bj or Afrin- 
gan .. = ey Mires - we 5 


‘6. When attending a marriage ih, Cit. “eH 6 
7. When going on a battle or to fight a cause a, 


8. On the recital of the Afringans of - Ardafarosh | 
and (6) Gathaé .. a : toe 8 


9. (a) On sowing seeds, (6) on planting fruit-trees, 
, ete. a a a sth, A Ae 9 


10. (a) On purchasing cattle, Y on ‘waite cattle 
home .. ne : AY ‘ oe 10 


11, On fixing a nail or peg into the ground to tie 
the cattle, (b) on cohabitation, (c) on carrying 
messages for betrothal, etc. .. vs vs nH 


12. On going over a mountain, a fortress, a bridge, or 
on climbing any lofty place and on going into a 
subterranean room, into & cave or into a step- 
ped reservoir or well of water .. as + 12 


13. (¢) On missing the road, (b) on entering a new 
village or city ae oe oe «» «13 


14, On entering into the heart of a great city .. 21 


This sacred prayer is made up of three metrical lines each con- 
taining seven words. So, the whole prayer 
The 21 words of © eet 
the Ahunavar and contains 21 words. The names of the 
the 21 books(nasks) 21 books (nasks) which formed the ancient 
of the Zorcastrians $ : 
Avesta literature are said to have corres. 
ponded to the 21 words of this sscred formula. The following 


iH ViSPARAD CEREMONY 347 


is the list of the words that make up this passage and of the 
names of the books that correspond to them ! :— 
Words of the Ahunavar. Names of books which 
correspond to these words. 
(1) Yatha.. <f . Sudkar or Satudgar. 


“"(2)) Aha 2 ee es .. Varshtmansar or Vahisht- 
Sako A ‘ mansar. 

(3) Vairyd. .. bs . Bago. 

(4) Atha ..Damdad or Dudzdeh Ha- 


ay mast. 
(5) Ratush .. fy . .Nadar or Nadur. 
(6) Ashat ss Ae .. Pajako .Pajeh, Pajam or 


‘ Mo Pazun. 
(7) Chit... Se . Ratoshtaiti or Ratoshtaid. 
(8) Hacha .. Barish. 


(9) Vanghetsh ee . Kashkisréb or Kashasr6b. 
' (10) Dazda... ..Vishtasp Yasht or oe 
taspéd. 

(11) Mananghé.. ae .. Vashtag (Dad or Dadok). 
(12) Shyaothnaném °.. .Chithradad or Chidrast. 
(13) Angheush .. os . Spend. 
(14) Mazdai. ».. ss ..Bagan Yasht. 
(15) Khshathremcha .. . .Nikédum. 
(16) Ahurdi.. Ae . Dubasrujd. 
(17) A... ae ..Husp&ram. 
(18) Yim ae rm . Sakadum. no 
(19) Dregubyé .. oie .. Videvdad or Vendiddd. ‘ 
(20) Dadat.. - . -Hadokht. 
(21) Vastarem .. dvs . Stud. Yasht. 


1' The namés of the books and’ even thé order vary alittle according 
to different authorities, The two great compilations of the Rivayets by 
DarAb Hormazdyaér and Barzo Kamdin give the names and contents. 
Vhe Dinkard (Bks. VIII and IX) and the: Dini Vajarkard give fuller 
contents (vide §, B. E. Vol. XXXVII). Fora brief accoutn of the 
contents prepared by me, vide Mr. Dosabhoy Framji’s History of the 
Parsees, Vol. II, pp. 157-64.. Vide M. R. Unwala’s Riv. with my 
Introduction pp. 3-4. 


. 


84g THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 


hase wabetanes Though it is a small prayer, scholars 
of the Ahunavar differ in their translation of it. The sub- 
prayer. stance of it runs thus :— 


As Ahu (Ahura Mazda or the spiritual Lord) is an indepen- 
dent ruler (because He rules} according to Order (ashdt, i.e., 
according to fixed laws), so, should a Ratu, (i.¢., the temporal 
Lord) (rule according to fixed laws). The gift of good mind is 
for the work of the world for (the sake of) Mazda. ‘He who 
gives (himself up) as the nourisher of the poor (or he who gives 
nourishment to the poor) gives kingdom to. Mazda (i.e., 
acknowledges him as king). 


The prayer of Ashem Voh@ is next to Ahunavar in importance 
and sanctity. It is the prayer in praise of 
Asha which can be saidto be the watchword 
of the Zoroastrian religion. According to the Hadokht Nask 
(Yasht Fragment XX1), if there is. any one prayer, which can 
be said to be the prayer of praise of all the good creation,—of all 
the good creation that has for its main principle, Asha or Order, 
— itis the prayer of Ashem Vohi, because it is the prayer which 
praises Asha, (t.e., Order, Harmony, System, Righteousness, 
Law). He who praises Asha from the inmost of his heart praises : 
God himself, Not only that, but he praises some of the best 
things of his creation, ¢g., water, earth, vegetation, animal 
creation, etc., in the evolution and growth of which we see 
Order and Law. The prayers of Ashem and Ahunavar give 
courage and victory to those who recite them and follow their 
teachings (Yasht XXI, 4). Such being the efficacy of this 
prayer which praises Order and Righteousness, its recital on 
certain particular occasions or periods of one’s daily work or 
life, have greater advantages than its recital at ordinary 
times. One Ashem Vohi recited at such particular occasions 
is worth several recited at other ordinary times. For example, 
it is said that one Ashem Vohé recited at meals is worth ten 
Ashem Vohis recited on other oecasions. An Ashem recited 
while going to bed is worth 1,000 Ashems recited at other 


The Ashem. 


THE VISPARAD CEREMONY 349 


times, An Ashem recited on getting up from bed is worth 
10,000 recited at other times. An Ashem recited by a person 
at the time of his death is worth the price of the whole 
continent of Khanirath: What is intended to be conveyed is 
this: If a man has led his whole life in a pious and righteous 
way, following the path of Asha, ¢.e., Order, Harmony, Righteou- 
ness, Law, and if he can conscientiously ‘recite at the end 
of his life one Ashem Vohu, é.e., if he can conscientiously 
say “‘I-have led a righteous (ash) life,’ then the spiritual 
wealth of that righteousness is worth the material wealth of 
Khanirath, which, of all the seven Keshnars or regions spoken 
of in the Avesta, was the best and the richest»On account 
of this reference to the Ashem Voht in connection with the 
end of the life of a man, it isa customamong the Parsees, that” 
when one hears the news of the death ofa friend or relation, 
le recites or mutters in a low voice the Ashem Voha prayer. 


Such being the importance attached to this prayer, it is the 
second prayer taught to a Zoroastrian child after the Ahunavar. 
The Ashem Vohi prayer, small though it is, is differently tran- 
slated by different translators. But the substance seems to be 
the same. It can be thus translated : Piety is the best good and 
happiness. Happiness to him who is pious for the best piety. 


This is the third of the three short but most important prayers 
or formule of the Zoroastrians. There is 
omaha 2 heel of hardly a prayer which, does not contain 
this formula. The Gahs, the Nydishes, the 
Yashts, the Yagna, the Visparad, the Vendidad all include its 
recital which in some cases is repeated more than once. Like 
the two prayers of Ahunavar and Ashem, it:is variously trans- 
lated. It can be translated thus: Ahura Mazda knows (iit., 
is the knower of), who among the living is the best in prayer 
through righteousness, (i.¢., says his prayer in the best way 
possible by observing asha, i.e., righteousness). We praise 
them (those recognized as above by Ahura Mazda) whether male 
or female, 


350 #HH VENDIDAD cuREMONY 


CHAPTER XIV. 
Ifl—THE VENDIDAD CEREMONY. ww 


The word Vendidéd comes from the Avesta word Vi-daéva- 
Meaning of the fa, i.e., the Law given against the Daévas 
word Vendidad. Its oy the evil spirits. The word is Javid-shedd- 
divisions. Its place . s. . . ‘ 
in the Avesta litera- ddd in the Pahlavi. It is Jud-div-ddd in 
bd Persian. It is so called, because a large part 
of it contains rules, regulations and instructions, as’ to how to 
withstand best, the evil influences of the Daévas, i.e., of all 
evil spirits or forces that lead to the impurity and decay both 
of body and mind. A part of it may be’called the sanitary 
code, and a part, the criminal code of the ancient Iranians, 
The divisions or chapters of the different parts of the Avesta 
are known by different names. _The chapters of the Yashts 
are known as Kardds (Av. Kareta) or sections. Those of the 
Yagna are known as Hés (Av. Aditi). But the chapters of 
the Vendidéd are known as pargards or fargards, (para- 
karéta, a greater section), a word which corresponds exactly, 
as Dr. Haug pointsout, to ‘ pericope,’! i.e., sections. The 
Vendidad has 22 chapters in all. The first chapter seems 
to be very old. 


According to the Dinkard (Book VIII ),? the Vendidad formed 
the 19th book of the 21 books (nasks) which contained the 
whole of the Avesta literature of ancient times. It correspond- 
ed with the word ‘Dregubyo’ in the Ahunavar prayer, the 21 
words of which are, as said above, believed to have cor- 
responded with the 21 books. Some of the Rivayets take it 
to be the 20th book in the list corresponding with the 
word ‘dadat.’ Of. the three groups in which the nasks are 
divided,—the gdsdnic, the dditk and the Hadhamanthrik,—the 
Vendidad belongs to the second group, viz., the dditk or the 


1 Essays, 2nd ed., p, 225. 
2S. B. E. Vol. xxxvii., p. 7. 3, Chap. i. 1] 812, 


THE VENDIDAD CEREMONY 351 


groups of books containing Zoroastrian jaws, rules and 
regulations on religious, sanitary, social and other matters, 


Two priests participate in the performance of the Vendidid 

The Vendidid ceremony. They must be those who have 
igo Ree ae observed the great Khub. Again, the Ven- 
vd pd aa darn ya didad proper is preceded, as in the case of 
ceremony, the Yacna, with the paragnd. The cere- 
mony is performed in the Ushahin Gah, i.e., at midnight. after 
12 o’clock. In the.case of the Vendidad performed. for the 
Nirangdin ceremony, a partof the paragnd ceremony is per- 
formed in the preceding afternoon in the Uziran gih. It is the 
Zaothra ceremony, 7.¢., the ceremony for preparing the conse- 
crated Zaothra or Zor water that is so peftgriast i in the preceding 


afternoon. 


The celebration of the ceremony consists of the ritual of its 22 

The celebration chapters, not successively but with addi- 
Cte eens tions of the different chapters of the Yagna 
tal. andthe ~Visparad. The Vendidad thus 
formed is known as the ‘ Vendiddd Sadah.’ As far as the 
ceremony or the recital itself goes, most of it is performed during 
the recital of the Yagna and the Visparad chapters. The 
following list-describes how the different chapters of the 
Vendidad are recited with those of the Yacna with some 
sections. here and there omitted and the Visparad during 
the ritual.1 


1. Yacna, Ha I, 1 to 8. 

2. Visparad, Kardeh I, complete. 
Yacna, Ha I, 10 to Ha II, 8. 
Visparad, Kardeh II, complete. 
Yagna, Ha IT, 10 to Ha XT, 8 


a ew 


1 Vide K. R. Cama’s Zarthusht Nameh, Ist Edition, p. 194. 
Vide Ervad Tehmuras’s Yazashna ba Nirang. Therein, in the Visparad 
portion, the portions of the Yagna as interspersed are given in brief, 


THE VENDIDAD CEREMONY 


Visparad, Kardeh ITI, 2—5. 
Yacna, Ha XI, 9 to 15, 
Visparad, Kardeh IJI, 6 to Kardeh IV. 
Yagna, Ha XJ, 16 to Ha XIV. 
Visparad, Kardeh, V. 

Yagna, Ha XV. 

Visparad, Kardeh VI. 

Yagna, Ha XVI to XVII. 
Visparad, Kardeh VII to VIII. 
Yaona, H& XVIII to XXI, 
Visparad, Kardeh IX. 

Yagna, Ha XXII. 

Visparad, Kardeh X to XI. 


-Yacna, H& XXII to XXVIII. 


Visparad, Kardeh XII. 
Vendidad, Pargards I to 1V. 
Yacna, Ha XXVIII to XXX. 
Visparad, Kardeh XIII. 
Vendidad, Pargards V to VI. 
Yagna, Ha XXXI to XXXIV. 
Visparad, Kardeh XIV. 
Vendidad, Pargards VII to VIII. 
Visparad, Karedh XV. ; 
Yaogna, H& XXXV to XLII. 
Visparad, Kardeh XVI to XVII. 
Vendidad, Pargards IX to X. 
Yaqna XLITI to XLVI. 
Visparad, Kardeh XVIII. 
Vendidad, Pargards XI to XII, 


45, 


"HE VENDIDAD CEREMONY 


Yagna, Ha XLVII to L. 

Visparad, Kardeh XIX. 

Vendidad, Pargards XTII to XIV. 
Yagna, Ha LI. 

Visparad, Kardeh XX. 

Vendidad, Pargards XV to XVI. 
Visparad, Kardeh XXI to XXII. 
Vendidad, Pargards XVII to XVIII. 
Yacna, Ha LIT to LITI. 

Visparad, Kardeh XXIII. 
Vendidad, Purgards XIX to XX. 
Yacna, Ha LIV. 

Visparad, Kardeh XXIV. 
Vendidad, Pargards XXI to XXII. 
Yagna, Ha LV to LXXII. 


353 


45 


CHAPTER XV. 
IV.—BAJ CEREMONY. 


The derivation of the word is doubtful. (a) Some derive it 

The derivation, from the Avesta word vach (Sans. vdch, 
literal meaning and Fat, vor) meaning word or speech. So, the 
different signifi- 7 : 
cations of the word word Baj means, certain words or prayers 

i. religiously recited in honour of particular 
beings, such as the yazatas or angels and the. Fravashis 
(Farohars) or the guarding spirits of the living or the dead. 
(6) Perhaps, it is the Persian 34 or $4 bdz or .bdz which 
means @ tribute. In the Baj ceremony and prayer, certain 
things which serve as representations or symbols of the different 
kinds of creation, such as animal creation, or vegetable 
creation, are submitted as offerings. So these offerings are, as 
it were, a tribute to the g yrloof the particular yazata or heavenly 
being, or to the memory of particular dear departed one, 
Ordinarily, the word Baj hag several significations in the 
religious phraseology of the Parsees. They are the following :— 


I. The anniversary of the death of a person, when the Baj 
ceremony is generally performed. 

IT. The offerings of sacred bread, fruits, ete., submitted 
during the recital and celebration of the Baj. 

III.-A ‘peculiar suppressed muttering tone in which some 
prayers are recited, or in which conversation is held on certain 
religious or solemn occasions when a kind of Baj is recited. 

IV. A certain class of prayers recited on particular occa- 
sions with certain formalities. 

We will now speak of these different significations. Baj is 
I Baj, tho anni- the name of one of the liturgical services 
versary of one’s which form the funeral services after one’s 
a: death. The first. three days after death are 
the principal days when these ceremonies are performed 


BiJ CEREMONY 355 


After this period of the first three days, the principal occasions 
during the first year after death are, as referred to in the 
Pazend Dibacheh of the Afringans, the following :—]. Cheha. 
rum, or the Fourth day. 2. Dehfim, or the Tenth day. 
8. Sirouz, or the Thirtieth day. 4. Sdalrouz, or the Anniver. 
sary, 

During the first year, the Baj ceremony is performed every 
month on the réz or the dey of the month of the death of the 
deceased and the day is known as pehld mahindni Baj, bijd 
mihindni Bdj, z.e., the first month’s Baj, the second month’s 
Baj, and so on. After the first year, the Baj ceremony is 
generally performed on every succeeding anniversary, which - 
anniversary is known as the Baj of the deceased. Just as an 
Englishman would say, “To-day is the fifth or sixth anniversary 
of the death of A or B,’’ a Parsee would say, “ To-day is the fifth 
or sixth Baj of A or B.” At times, he would speak a little more 
definitely and say, “To-day is the Baj of the fifth or sixth 
year of A or B.”’ It is considered to be the duty of the son 
or the nearest heir to perform the Baj ceremony in honour 
of the deceased person.. The name of the deceased person 
is recited in the Baj prayers.! The name of the person 
who gets the ceremony performed is also recited as Farmd- 
yashnt, i.e, as-that of the person giving the Farmdn or 
the order.to get it performed, At times, persons in their life 
time,or by their wills, set apart certain sums, out of the 
interest of which such ceremonies known as the Bdj-rozgér 
Ceremonies are performed. There are cases known of deceased 
persons whose Bajs have continued to be performed, #.e., whose 
death anniversaries have been religiously celebrated every year, 
for more than hundred years. In the case of some great 
worthies who have done yeoman’s service to their towns, their 
Bajs or death anniversaries are celebrated by public sub- 
scriptions. For exemple, the anniversaries of the deaths of 
Deastur Meherji Rana and of Desai Khorshedji of Neosari are 


1 Vide above, p. 81. ‘ Funeral Ceremonies’ for the form of the recital. 


356 BiJ CEREMONY 


observed with religious Baj ceremonies by their townspeople 
even now, about 300 years after the death of one and 150 years 
after the death of the other person, After the ceremonies, 
solemn dinners are held in which the subscribers participate, 


Yn the celebration of the Baj, certain offerings are necessary, 
These offerings, when placed in an utensil or 
UL. Baj, the of- 45 . 
feringsmadeforthe Vessel, are also called a Baj. The utensil 
colebrati d soe . e A 
re the Baj containing the offerings is called the Baj of 
the particular deceased whose funeral. cere- 
monies are performed, For example, suppose that a certain 
day is the anniversary of the death of more than one person. 
Then for. each such person, such vessels. with offerings are 
prepared. Then each of the vessels containing these offerings 
is said to be the Baj—or, to speak more correctly, the vessel 
containing the Baj—of A, B or C as the case may be. 


The most essential requisites of the Baj, 7.e., of the offerings 

The requisitesof are (a) the Darun, or the sacred bread, 
® Baj. (6) some kind of fruit, (c) some kind of 
enimal production. 


, (a) Of the Darun or the sacred bread, we have spoken at some 
length in the description of the Yagna ceremonies.! The 
Rivayets say that each of the named Daruns, 7.e., the sacred 
breads with the sacred marks, must be about 31 tdnks? in 
weight, and each of the un-named Deruns or Farshasts, ¢.e., the 
sacred breads without the sacred marks, must be about 33 tdnks, 


(5) As to fruit, it is generally the practice to place in the 

- Baj some fruits of the season. In India, where plantains or 
bananas are plentiful and are obtainable throughout the whole 
of the year, they form an essential requisite. One plantain or 
banana is placed in each Baj. Ordinarily, it is believed that for 
the poor or for those who cannot afford much, one or two dates 


1 Vide Darunin the Yagna ceremony. Vide above, p, 296. 
3 72 tanks make one seer, , 


‘ 


BiJ CEREMONY 357 


or a few grains of the pomegranate are sufficient as represen- 
tative of the offering of the vegetable creation of God. 

(e) As to some products of the animal creation, in India, an 
egg is considered to be an essehtial as easily obtainable. But for 
those who cannot afford, a very small quantity of ghee or clari- 
fied butter as representing an offering of the animal creation 
of God is sufficient. 


In the Parsee prayers there are several portions which are 
recited not in the ordinary tone but in a 
Ill, The recital ‘ 
or utterance in a ‘suppressed tone. The mouth is shut and 
suppressed tone the utterance is given expression to in a 
known as Bj. : : 
suppressed tone. The tone under these -cir- 
cumstances is generally nasal. This kind of expression is often 
referred to by Firdousi as ‘ Zarhzamé.’ 


(a) The Parsee prayers are mostly in the ancient Avesta 
language, but latterly some portions in the later Pazend 
language are added. These Pazend portions when they occur 
in the beginning or at the end_of an Avesta prayer are recited 
in the ordinary way, but‘when they occur in the midst of long 
Avesta prayers, they are recited in a suppressed tene and are 
then said to be recited in Baj. In the case of such Pazend por- 
tions, the prayer-books say in brackets “‘ Bdj ma bhanvun,” 1.¢., 
to recite in Baj, z.¢., in a suppressed tone. 


(by Again when a person is reciting a long prayer and if he has 
unavoidably to say something for business, he speaks in Baj or 
in a suppressed muttering tone.. For exemple, the celebration 
and recital of the Vendidad lasts from midnight to about 6 or 7 
in the morning. If, in the midst of this ceremony, the priest 
has to ask for something or say something, he has to dose in 
Baj. 

(c) Not only during prayers but on other occasions when 
one has recited a Baj (Vide below, the fourth signification of — 
the word) if he has to say something, he must say that in Baj, 
For example, if one has recited a B&j for meals, i.e, said 


358 BiJ CEREMONY 


grace before meals, he is not to. speak anything unless it be 
in Baj, i.e., in a suppressed tone. After taking his meals, he 
finishes the B&j. It is after this finishing prayer that he: can 
speak in the ordinary way. | 


The principal signification of the word Baj is a certain class of 

IV. The Baj, or Prayers known as Bajs and which are recited 
Baj prayersrecited “On different occasions with certain formali- 
on particular o¢ca- . . : 
sions with certain ties, great or small. Some of these Bajs are 
formalities, recited: only by the priests observing the 
Bareshnum and the Khub. The others ere those that can he 
recited even by the laymen. So we will divide these Bajs into 
two classes, 


(A) Bajs recited by the priests 1 with offerings as @ part of their 
Liturgical service. 
(B) Bajs recited on smaller oceasions without any offerings, 


. (A) Bajs recited The B&ajs of this class are the 
by priests observ- . ; 

ing the Baresh- principal Bajs. 

num, ete. ; ‘ 

The principal occasions—though not the only occasions—on 
which they are recited are the Baj days, i.e., the anniversaries of 
the deaths of persons. The necessary formalities or cunditions 
required for thisclass of Bajs are the following : 


(a) They must be recited by priests, holding the Bareshnam 
and qualified with a Khub. 

(6) They must be recited over @ Baj or a collection of certain 
offerings such es Daruns or séered breads, fruit, water, milk- 
product, such aS ghee or clarified butter. 


(c) Fire burning in a vase with sandal-wood and frankincense 
is essentially necessary during their recital. 

(d) They must be recited in a specially enclosed place ; for 
example, in the Yazashna-gih of the temples or when in a 
private residence, in a place specially cleaned, washed and 
enclosed in ‘ pavis,’ 


Big CEREMONY 359 


The following are the requisites which the priest must have 
Requisites of this before him within the pavis or an enclosed 


class of Bajs. space 


1. Atash or fire burning in a vase, with aesma and but, i.e., 
sandal-wood and frankincense. 


2. -Ap or water made pdv, or ceremoniously pure. 


3. Daruns or sacred breads. The number of these Daruns 
are four in tlie case of all Bajs but six in the case ofthe Baj of 
Sraésh. Half of this number are ndm pddeld, i.e... named or 
marked with nine marks in their preparation and half vagar 
néimnd, t.e., unnamed or unmarked. 


t 


4, Urvarim, or a few grains of the pomegranate. 


5. Goshudo, (gaush hudh4o), 7.e., ghee or clarified butter. 


6. Anegg. 

The following figure shows the respective places where the 
requisites are placed within the enclosed pavi : The requisites 
numbered 1 to 5 are placed-in a tray or vessel. 


Fire vase Small stone-slabs 
for 
e : Aesma bui, i.e., sandal-wood 
and frankincense, 
6 
No,-3.Darun egg. No. 4. Farshast (¢.¢., uns 
(named). named Darun with urvardém 
- over it), 
No. 2 Farshast No, 1 Darun Asmall vessel containing ap 
(ie, unnamed Dar- (named) with or water. 
un). goshudé over it. 


Place of the priest who recites the Bj either 
standing or sitting. — 


Chapters three to eight of the Yacna are known as Sarosh- 
Giiaicee gaetead Darun. They are so called because certain 
in the great selected portions of these are recited in the 
Baj. celebration of the Baj for the consecration of 
theDarun. Atfirst, anintroductory prayer in Pazend which is 


360 BiJ CEREMONY 


known as the Dibdcheh is recited. Therein, the name of 
the person—either living or dead—-for whose naiyat, i.e., for 
whose intention or purpose the ceremony is performed, is men- 
tioned. The name of the particular Yazata or angel in whose 
honour the Baj is recited is also mentioned in the Dibacheh. 
After the recital of the Dibacheh, the chapters of the Sarosh- 
Darun are recited. During the recital of the eighth chapter, the 
priest makes the Darun-chdshni, ¢. e., partakes of the sacred bread 
consecrated by him. He partakes of it five times in small 
bits. 
There are different kinds of the Baj, recited by the priest as a 
- ferent kings P&*t of the liturgical service. ~The chapters 
_ the liturgical of the Yagnha recited are mostly the same, but 
i, the difference arises from the difference in 
the Beings in whose honour the ceremony is performed. The 
following is the list of the different Bajs as given in Parsee 
books of ritual : 
1 Baj of panch tdi or five wires of Barsam. 
Baj of Sraosha. 
Baj of the Faresta or Firashta. 
Baj of Pantha Yazata. 
Baj of Neryosang Yazata, 
Baj of Haptorang. 
Baj of Agréras. 
Baj of Vanant. 
Baj of roz Aspandad and mah Farvardin. 
10. Baj of roz Khordid and mah Farvardin, or Khordad Sal. 
11. Baj of Jashan-i-Tiryan. Roz Tir m&h Tir. 
12. Baj of Jashan-i-Meherangan. ‘Roz Meher mah Meher. 
13. Baj of Jashan-i-Abangan. Roz Abin mah Aban. 
14, Baj of Jashan-i-Adargin. Roz Adar mah Adar. 
15. Baj of Farvardién. Roz Farvardin mah Adar. 


- © 


. 


SH wes 


29. 
30. 


Bid CEREMONY. 361 


Baj of the Disa, (7.e.,the anniversary of the death) of 
Zoroaster. Roz Khorshed mah Deh. 


. Bajof Jashan-i-Bahmanyén. Roz Bahman mah Bahman. 


Baj of Avardad Sal-gah. Roz Khordéd mah Aspandad. 

Baj of Din Beh Marespand. Roz Marespand mah Aspan- 
dad. 

Baj of Ard&farosh, é.e., of ali the Fravashis or Farohars, 

Baj for the performance of the Khub in the Gatha days. 


Baj of Gatha, (or the Intercalary) days. 


Baj of Cheharum ni Bamdad, «.e., the Baj to be recited 
at dawn on the fourth day after death. 


Baj of Mino Ram for the jindeh ravdn of the survivor of a 
married couple to be recited on the dawn of the fourth 
day after the death of any one of the two. 

Baj of the Gahambar. 7 

Baj of the Haft Ameshaspand or the seven See 

Baj of Sirouzeh, 

Baj of Nao Nabar, i.e., the Baj recited by the Navar or 

_ the new initiate into priesthood. 

Baj of Rapithavin. 

Baj_Shehan. 


We will shortly describe these different Bajs and their occa- 
sions.2 


This Baj is so called, because, in its recital, five idis or wires 
at Baj of Panch 0°! Barsam (vide Barsam ceremony) are used. 


It is recited by the priests for the perform- 


ance of the small Khub, the celebration of which is required 
for the ceremony and recital of all the Bajs and of the Yagna, 


etc, 


The Barsam tied for the performance of this Baj is not 


1 Vide my Paper on “« The Ketab-i-Darun Yashten “ in the Jour- 


nal of the K. R. Cama Oriental Institute No. 1, for somo other Bajs. 


46 


362 - . Bi: CEREMONY 


used for the performance of any other Baj for which the Barsam 
must be freshly tied. The Barsam tied by a priest, who has 
performed the small Khub with this Baj of five wires, can be used 
for the recital of three more Bajs. The Barsam tied by 2 priest 
with the great Khub of Mino-Navar can be used for the recital 
of nine Bajs.\ For the recital of more B&js than nine, the 
' Barsam must be freshly tied with its ceremonial. 

During the recital of this Baj, the Pazend Dibaché of Hu- 
mata, Hukhta, Hvarshta, wherein; the name of the. person— 
living or dead—for whom it is recited is mentioned, is repeated 
thrice. At the end, after the recital of H& V ITI, 4, the priest 
makes the ‘ chéshni’ of the Darun or the sacred bread, i.e., eats 
asmall part of it. The chdshni (4.c., the tasting of the bread by 
the priest) forms an important part of the Baj. In thecase of this 
Baj, the chdshni is made five times...1.. At first, a small bit of 
Darun No.1 { Vide: figure above) with a little goshudé or ghee, 
iseaten. 2. Secondly, a bit of the Farshast No. 2 with a little 
goshudé (from No. 1) is eaten. 3. Thirdly, a bit of the Darun 
No. 3 with a little goshudé and-with a little 4 ap, i.e., water, (i.¢,, 
being dipped a little.into the vessel of water) is eaten. 4. 
Fourthly, a bit of the Farshast No. 4 is similarly eaten. 5. 
Fifthly, a little of the goshudé, urvar and @p is eaten. 

Other members of the congregation, if any, afterwards par- 
take of the chdshni. The sacred bread and.other things -are 
passed “round. for all to take a bit for. chdshni. 


While in the recital of all other Bajs four Daruns or sacred breads 
.e used, in the recital of this, six are used, 
half of which are ‘ named, ’ i.¢., marked with 
nine marks made with the recital of the words Humata, Hukhta, 
Hvarshta, (i.e., good thoughts, good words and good deeds), and 
half‘ unnamed.’ The three ‘named’ ones are arranged on the left. 
hand side in a tray and the three Farshast or unnamed on the 
right-hand side. The first one, 7.e., the one nearest to the priest 
in the left-hand row carries over it the goshudé or the ghee, 7.¢., 
the clarified butter. The last one, i.e., the one furthest from the 


; (2) Bajofi Sraésha. 


BiJ CEREMONY 2363 


priest in. the right-hand row carries over it the urvadrdm.(s.e., 
‘some product of. the vegetable world) represented generally: by 
a few grains of the pomegranate or a date. The recital of the 
Baj of Sraosha generally concludes the recital.of all Bajs.. . It.is 
generally recited in all the Gahs or the five periods of the day 
during the first three days after death in. the name of the 
deceased. In its recital, the Pazend Dibaché is recited twice. 
In the case of the Sraosh B&j, as there are six “sacred bréads 
instead of four as in the Pdnch tdi and other Bajs, the officiating 
priest makes the chdshni, (i.e., partakes of the offered . sacred 
bread, etc.,) seven times instead of five as in the other Bajs. The 
two additional chdshnis are of the two additional Daruns, one of 
which is‘ named’ and the other ‘unnamed ’(Farshast). This 
Baj of Sraosha is also recited for the consecration of gehdns or 
the iron-biers. At times, on the death “ofa person, his rela- 
tions wish that a new bier may be provided. They get’ this biér 
consecrated before being used, That consecration is effected 
with this Baj. 


According to an old custom still prevalent, the contents of the 
Sraosha Baj, 7.e., the offerings of sacred bread, fruit, etc., , offered 
in this Baj, are taken by the priest as a part payment i in kind of 
his fees. 

This Baj is recited i in honour of the 33 Fireshtés ( AS, 

(3) Baj of the 1%. Yazata or angels). The recital of the Baj 
Fareshtas. for each of these 33 Yazaias is the same (a 
large part of the Yagna, Ha III to vii) except i in the following 
points : _ 

(a) The Pazend Dibaché of Humata, ‘Hukhta, Hvarshta. is 
recited twice (once in the very beginning and for the second time, 
after H& VII, 25) in the case of the Bajs of all the Yazatas, but 
in the, case of the Bajsof those Yazatas, (eg. Deépadar, Daép- 

Meher, Daépdin) in whose Khshnuman the formula of Vispae- 
shim Yazatandm occurs, it, asin the Bajs of Panch tai and Arda- 
farosh, is to be recited thrice (the third being recited with the 

Kardeh of staoms zbayemi just before the recital of Ha VII), 


364 BiJ CEREMONY 


{6) The Khshnuman for the Baj of each Yazata varies. The 
small Khshnumans recited in Has III, 1V, VI and VII are taken 
from their respective Khshnumans in the smaller Sirozeh. The 
larger Khshnumans recited once in Ha VI are taken from their 
respective Khshnumans in the larger Sirozeh. 


The word ‘ pantha’ is Av, ‘Pathan’ (Sanskrit panthan, German 

(4) Baj of Pantha pfad, English path). In the Khorshed 
Yazata. Nydish (s.8) a straightforward road or path 
is considered as an object of praise (patham khastéitim yaza- 
maidé). The word is figuratively used for a course.of life and 
for prescribed rules for that course of life as in the case of the 
English word ‘ path.’! 

Now a good spirit or a heavenly being was supposed to guide 
this path. From this idea, there was one step more, and itwas 
supposed, that some heavenly spiritor guide, guided all our move- 
ments even in our ordinary roads of travels, if one moved on 
straight and straightforwardly.? 

So, this Baj of Pantha Yazata or the angel presiding over 
paths and roads was recited.on an occasion when one went on 
a long journey, so that»God may guide his movements.. It is 
rarely recited now. 

Nairyosang.is the name of a Yazata. He is the messenger 

Baj of Nairyo. Of God. He presides over a particular fire 
sang Yazata. or a kind of vitality supposed to live in the 
navel of kings. He seems to resemble the Nardshans of the 
Vedas who also is a messenger of God and is also the name of 
a fire. As he presides over a kind of fire, he has some connection 
with the phenomenon of Light, and as such he is the collaborateur 
of Mithra, the angel of Light. The Baj under consideration is 
recited in honour of this Yazata. It is not recited now, but 
seems to have been recited in old times on rare occasions, 


1.Cf. ‘He marketh all my paths,” Job xxxiii, 11; ‘‘Hold up my 
goings in thy paths,” Psalm xvii, 5. 

2.Cf. <All the paths of the Lord are‘mercy and truth unto such ag 
keep his covenant and his testimonies,” Psalm xxv, 10 


BiJ CEREMONY 365 


~ 


Haptorang is the Avesta Haptéiring of the yashis (VITI, 12; 

Be XII, 28; XIII, 60). It is the name of a 
a ee iia heavenly body. Dr. West thinks it to be 
Ursa Major, It is associated with Tishtrya (Sirius), Vanant 
(Vega), and Satvas (Canopus!}. It has great influence 
on the waters of the northern seas (Bundehesh, Chap. 
XII, 12). Itis the Saptarashayahi of Panini. The yazaia 
presiding over it guards, with 99,999 Farohars or good guiding 
spirits, the gates of hell and prevents the 99,999 demons residing 
there from escaping into the world to do harm to the good 
creation. This Baj is not recited now. It seems to have been 
recited in former times when people had greater faith in 
astrology. , 


Agréras is the Agraératha of the Avesta (Yasht XIII, 131; 
IX, 22; XIX, 77). He is the Agraéréd of 
the Bundehesh and Agriras of Firdousi. 
He was the brother of the Turanian king Afrasiaéb and of Karse- 
vaj, the Machiavelli of ancient Iran. It appears from the Shah- 
nameh and from the Bundehesh, that when Afraésiéb shut up 
Minocheher, the kingof the Persians, in the mountains “of 
Padashkhvargar and reduced them to straitened circumstances, 
‘Agriras, though a brother of Afrasiéb, the enemy, like a 
kind, honest and straightforward man, prayed for the release of 
the Iranian king, and his army. He helped them to free them- 
selves from their confined position in the mountains. Afrasiab is 
said'to have killed his brother Agréras for thus helping his enemy. 
Firdousi places this event in the reign of Naodar. (Vide the 
word Agraératha in my Dictionary of Avesta Proper Names, 
pp. 7,10). For this exceptional service, Agréras was considered 
to be one of the saintly worthies of ancient times, and, though a 
non-Iranian, was canonized in the saints’ calendar. of the 
Farvardin, Yasht. Now, though the Parsee books of the 
Zoroastrian rubric give in the list. of the Bajs, a Baj 


Baj of Agreras. 


1 Vide Mr. M. P. Khareghat’s paper on ‘Tho Identity of some 
Havenly bodies ” in the Sir J, J. Z. Madrassa Jubilee Volume (pp. 116-58.) 


366 BiJ OBREMONY 


-in the name of this Turanian saint,” it cannot strictly 
be called a B&j, because there is no separate Khshnuman 
in his name. The Baj enjoined to be. recited as the Baj of 
Agréras is simply the ordinary Baj of . Ardafarosh, with. the 
instruction, that the name of Agréras may .be recited in ‘the 
place where the names of the departed ones are recited. 


The reason for a Baj connected with his name as given in the 
list of the book of rubrics seems to be, that in former times, on 
exceptional occasions, perhaps people celebrated the anniver- 
sary of his death or celebrated the Baj of Ardafarosh in his 
honour ‘in the fulfilment of a vow for a particular object. We 
have a recent instance of this kind. About 139-years ago, (in 
1783), a Parsee of Broach named HomA&jee Jamshedji was hang- 
ed by the British Government for the murder of a Parsee lady. 
The cause of the dispute which ended in the death of the lady 
arose from the controversy of the Kabiseh or the intercalary 
month which had produced a great schism among Broach, Surat 
and Bombay Parsees. Many a people considered Homajee to.be 
innocent and to be a saintly person. So, even now, there are 
several persons who,.on the anniversary of his death, celebrate 

his Baj, t.e., get the Baj of Ardafarosh recited in his honour with 

his name. Some take a vow, that if they would succeed in such 
and such an-object of their life, they would get his. Baj 
celebrated. 


Vanant, according to the Avesta, is the name of a star (Yasht 
(8) Bajof Vanant 4%, 1). It is supposed to be the star 
Yazata. Vega. According to the Bundehesh, (II, 7) at 
-the’ end of summer, it was a’ southern’ star. It is an 
associate of Tishtrya (Sirius). It has an Yazata of the same name 

' presiding over it. This Yazata observed a watch over the Elbourz 
mountains. It enabled the Sun, Moon, and other heavenly 
bodies to move undisturbed in their movements. With Tish- 
 trya who presided over rain, it had some influence over rain. It 
was supposed to have a special influence in withstanding the 
evil influences of the Devs or the evil spirits. To emphasize 


BiJ CEREMONY 367 


this belief, the priest, while reciting. its Ehshnuman (vanantd 
staro mazdadhatahé aédkht6é wamanéd yazatahé) in this 
Baj, strikes a' stick over a stone, thereby showing thatthe. 
evil influences may be struck and annihilated. In: the 
recital of this Baj, the priest makes five chdshnis as in 
the case of the Baj of the five wires (Panch tai) of Barsam, and 
of other Bajs (except that of Sraosh), but with this difference, 
that four of the chdshnis, instead of. being made from the four 
sacred breads, are made from only two of the. breads—ono 
named and the other unnamed (farshast). This Baj is recited 
only on roz Hormazd méh Farvardip, 7.¢., on the New 
Year’s Day. In the recital, the farshast is required to be lift- 
ed up and then lowered and then turned round in all direc. 
tions (Dasabhoy Kawasji’s Avesta Bk. If. p. 184).1 


There is a ceremony known as Vandt Kapvi, i.e, to cut the 
Vanét, which is connected with the name of 

Ear ceamany of this Vanant Yazata, whose Baj is under 
Venant with this - gonsideration.. The word Vandt. is the 
mocern “corrupted: form of .Vanant..- By: 

the name Vanét is meant a Darun or sacred bread prepared 
and consecrated in the name of the Yazata. A priest 
takes, t.e., recites the particular Baj known as Vanét ni Bdj. It 
consists in the recital of the ordinary Pazend prayer of “ Pa. 
nim-i-Yazdan ” with the Khshnuman of Vanant. After recit- 
ing the larger Khshnuman, the priest recites an Yathd 
Ahuw Vairyé and divides the bread with a knife into four. 
parts. For each bread that.. he has cut, he recites an 
Yatha Ahu Vairyé. Having done so. he finishes the Baj. 
This ceremony is also performed on the New Year’s Day. The 
Darun of Vanét differs from other Daruns in this that it 
is sweetened a little. “That. the prayers and ceremony con- 
nected with the Vanant Yazata were believed to have a 
charm-like effect in withstanding the influence of evil spirits. 


~ C& The Christian ritual, wherin also the sacred bread: is lifted, 
Mone and turned. 


368 Bid CEREMONY 


or mischief-making bodies, is shown by the fact that a part 
of the recital of theVanant Yasht, which can be recited even 
bya layman, is accompanied by a clapping of hands, once, 
twice, and thrice, to emphasize thereby that the evil influences 
are struck, beaten and annihilated. 


The other Bajs, from Baj No. 9 to Baj No. 22 require no.par- 
; ticular mention, except this, that they have 
Peal Pm vn their own particular Khshnumans. The Baj 
cea No. 9 to of the day known as Zarthosht no diso, i.c., 
° the anniversary of the death of Zoroaster 
(Roz 11th Khorshed of the 10th month Deh), though named as 
a separate Baj (No. 16) in the list of Bajs"given in the Parsee 
books of ritual and rubric, is not strictly speaking a separate Baj. 
The Baj recited on that day is the Baj of Ard& Farosh recited in 
honour of the dead. The name of the Prophet is mentioned 
therein as that of the person in whose honour it is recited. 


The Baj of Ard& Farosh in the above list requires a little 

The Baj of Arda €Xplanation. The word Arda in Ardé Farosh 
Farosh (No. 20.) is the later form of asha (cf. Asha-vahisht and 
Ardi-behest) and Farosh is the later form of Fravashi. So Ard& 
Farosh is the later form of “ashaondm Fravashiném,’’ i.e., the 
Farohars or the guiding spirits of the holy. Hence the Baj 
of Ard&Farosh is the Baj in honour of the Fravashis or the 
Farohars, %.e., the spirits of the departed ones. The liturgical 
services in honour of the dead, whether the Yacna, the Vendidad, 
the Afringan, or the Baj, are celebrated with the Khshnuman of 
Ard& Farosh which is the Khshnuman of Farvardin, the 19th 
Yazata. The chapters of the Yagna recited in this Baj are the 
same as in other Bajs, but the Pazend Dibéché of Humata 
Hukhté Hvarshta, wherein the name ofthe deceased person is 
mentioned is, instead of being recited twice as in the case of all 
the Bajs, is repeated thrice as in the case of the Baj of Pdnch tdi 
and of the Baj in whose Khshnuman the formula of Vispaeshdm 
occurs, The third Dibaché is repeated with the additional recitals 


BiJ CEREMONY 369 


“of the prayer of staomi zbayemi (Yacna, Ha XXVI), which is a 
‘special prayer in honour of the dead and which is known as 
Satum no kardé, i., the section or chapter of Satum or the 
eye for’ praising the dead. (Vide below for. the Sma) 


' ‘The dawn (Bamdad) of the fourth day (cheharam) after « one’s 
death is held to be the most important océa- 
.sion in connection with the funeral cere- 
~ monies of the dead. The soul of the deceas- 
ed is believed to hover for the first three days in the precincts 
‘of the world. It. is at the dawn of the fourth day, that it passes 
away, out of the precincts of this world, to the other world, While 
so passing away, the soul is judged by Meher Daver; #.é. Meher 
the Judge. So, this is considered to’be the most important 
. occasion. for the recital of the Baj. Four Bajs are’ recited on 
~ this occasion, .¢., in the Ushahin Gah or after midnight of, the 
third day. They are the followida’ Fe, pia xen BS yea 


1. The Baj of Rashné Astad, i.c., with the joint 2 Khshnuman 
of the Yazatas Rashnu and Astéd, who help Meher in his work 
of justicé. Rashnu presides over Truth and Justice. Accord- 
" ing to the Mino-Kherad, he holds the Dalpnse: of uae in his 
‘hand, Astad presides over Truth. 


2. The Bajof Rim. The Yazata Ram presides over air and 
‘over ethereal substance. ‘The soul now passes: to ‘the other 
- world through the ethereal sphere of space. The Yazata Ram 

also presides over Rémashni or joy. So, the occasion being that 

of the transition for the soul, and therefore mournful for the 

-survivors, the words Rémné Khdstrahé which refer to his func- 

. tion of spreading joy is omitted, when the Baj of Ram Yazata in 

honour of the dead is recited on this occasion, They are Tecited 
. on other occasions after the third day. 


Baj of Cheharam 
_niBamdad (No. 28). 


i 


3. The Baj of Sraosha or the angel who protects and guards 
the souls of all persons whether living or. dead, : 


4. The Baj of Ard& Farosh. 
47 


370 Bid CEREMONY 


These four Bajs are generally, though not always, repeated with 
the name of the partner of the deceased, #.c., with the name of 
‘the husband, if the deceased is a woman, or of the wife, if the 
deceased, is a man. The ceremonies of the first four days are 
generally performed for both members of the married couple, 
whether the other partner is living or dead. It is then spoken 
of as “Jodé ni Kriya,” i.e., the ceremonies of the (married) pair. 


Baj of Gahambar This Baj is recited only on the occasions of 
(No, 25). the six Gahamb4rs—or season festivals. 


Sirouza means thirty days. It isso called, because, therein all 

the thirty (st) Yazatas.which preside over 

each of the thirty days (roz) of the month 
are invoked in the words of their respective Khshnumans. This 
Baj is recited on the thirtieth day after one’s death, and on the 

‘ days preceding the day which finishes the periods of six months 
and a year after one’s death. It ‘is also recited by the new 
initiate into the priesthood, the Navar, on the third of the last 
four days when he officiates at the completing ceremony. 


Baj of Sirouza, 


This is recited by the Navar or the initiate into priesthood in 
the afternoon of the first of the last four days 


/when he officiates at the ceremony of the 
- eoncluding days.” 


Baj of Navar. 


This is so called, because it is recited on the Rapithavin 
.Baj of Repithe- day, i.¢., the third day, Ardibehesht, of the 
vin. ’ first month of the year. 


The word Shehan comes from Shéh or Shah, i.e., king. It 
means royal. It is rarely recited now. It 
was recited formerly on-very rare occasions 
when any great calamity or difficulty was believed to have 
overtaken the ‘king, the community or the country. Its 
recital is longer than all other Bajs because it is recited with 
two repetitions of the Khshnuman of Sirouza, two of that of 
Sraosha, and two of that of Ardafarosh. 


. B8j of Shehan. 


‘ 


BAS OBREMONY 371 


Now we come to the second class of the Bajs—the Bajs that 
a og are recited on smaller occasions. They are 
(B) Bajs recited ‘ . s a 
on amnaller ocea- recited without any offerings and some of 
oe them are recited even by the laity. While 
the recital of the Bajs of the first class (A) takes from about a 
quarter of an hour to half an hour, the recital of the Bajs of this 
second class (B) takesfrom half a minute to five minutes, 


The following is a list of some of the smaller Baja recited 
on different occasions :— 


(1) Baj or prayer of grace to be said before meals. 

(2) Baj to be recited when answering calls of nature. 

(3) Bajs for consecrating certain things used for ceremonial 
purposes. 


(4) Baj for bathing. 
We will speak of some of these smaller Bajs. 


(1) Baj or Pe There are three kinds of Jamvdni Baj 


f d , 
or Srace recited at 4. prayers of grace recited before meals. 


(2) The great Baj with the Barsam. 
(b) The great Baj without the Barsam. 
(c) The small Baj recited at ordinary meals. 


This Baj rather belongs to the Bajs of the first order A, but 
(a) * The great we speak of it under this head for the sake 


Baj withthe B 
sith, of conformity with the other Bajs of meals. 


The priests who observe the Khub for the performance of 
some great liturgical services, as the Yagna or the Vendidad, 
have to say this great liturgical Baj referred to above before 
taking their meals. It consists of the recital of a large part of 
chapters III to VIII of the Yagna with the Dibiche. The 
recital is the same as that of the first kind of Baj which is 
recited as a part of the liturgical service. It is recited with the 
Barsam. The priests whe observe the Khub cannot even drink 


B72 BiJ -CEREMONY 


-water without reciting this great Baj. When there are several ° 
priests who observe the Khub, each and all of them need not 
-recite the whole of this Baj.. One of them recites the whole and 
.the others join him at the end at the recital of the 8th chapter 

of the Yagna, wherein the officiating priest makes the ‘chdshni. 
They participate in the chdsh#ti and then take their meals. This 
Baj is-recited in a separate place enclosed in pévis. 


. This Baj-is recited by the priests with their-meals\ before 
@) ‘The great them. It is & short recital lasting fora few 
Baj without Bar- minutes. It is recited at solemn feasts, €. 9. 
ii at feasts on the anniversaries of deceased 
persons; at the celebration of Gahambars, Jashans, etc.’ The 
‘diners first perform the pddydb kusti and then wash their hands, 
and then, having their meals before them, recite 3 Ashem Vohus 
and Fravaréné, mentioning the particular gab or period of the 
day at which they take their meals... They then recite Yagna, 
Ha VIII, 3-4, Ha XXXVII,.1.. Then they recite in Baj the 
‘Pazend Dibaché of Humata Hukhta, etc., therein mentioning 
the name of the personin whose memory the solemn dinner is 
given. Having recited.this they take their dinner silently. . 


In such solemn dinners, it is generally the custom to set apart 
a morse) of bread for the dogs of the street. The morsel is called 
Kutré né book, 7.e., the morsel for the dog (vide below Satum). 
After finishing their meals they wash their hands and then finish 
the Baj: To finish this Baj (B4j mukvi), they at first say in Baj 
the Pazend ‘prayer of Tandarogti, naming the person who gave 
the dinner. and invoking benedictions upon him. hey then 
recite ‘Yagna' VAT, 5-8 and the Yagnemcha, etc. 


This Baji is to be recited at all ordinary meals, even by laymen. 
“The ° amail “Baj - It. takes about half a minute.to recite it.’ It 
recited at ordinary | -eonsists in the recital of @ part of the first 
meal: : , passage of the 37th chapter of the Yacna 
with a a few “introductory words in Pazend. It appears from 
Firidousi that even in the recital of _Bijs or prayers of grace 


BiJ CEREMONY 373 


at the table, it.was a religious custom in Sasanian times to use 
‘the Barsam. It was-a custom that led toa ‘dispute between 
Bendui, a courtier of King Chosroes II (Khosro Parviz) and 
Nydtush, a courtier of the Emperor of Rome. (Vide my 
oe into’ the work of the 'B. R. RB. A. ‘Society ” 


“Tei is enjoined. that after the recital of the Baj or grace Laas 
the meals, one must hold silence and. take 
his meals in silence and not to talk or speak 
during the meals. If one has. to speak for 
agent purposes, he may do so, not with his mouth open, and in 
the open ordinary tone, but in a suppressed tone, and that as 
little as possible. This utterance with a suppressed tone is 
technically said to be “ speaking in Baj’’ (bdjmd bolvun). 


Silence observed 
during the meals. 


‘Xenophon refers to this custom of holding silence during meals 
ee sighed and says, that it was enjoined with‘a view 
for holding silence that there might be no excitement . while 
during meals ogi partaking of meals. This explanation of the 
custom corresponds with what is said to be 
given by medical men at present that a meal when disturbed 
with some exciting conversation is not easily digested and that 
therefore there must be a perfect peace of mind during the meals. 
Macoucdi (Vol. II, p. 108) says, that it was Kayomars who 
enjoined ‘silence from a health point of view (Vide. my Asiatic 
Papers Vol. II, p. 283). The Indian Purans also refer to this 
Tranian custom. . 


“Albiruni, a Mahomedan author, says that this custom of hold: 
ing silence during meals was introduced in ancient Persia in the 
time of its Peshdadian king Faredun. When this monarch freed 
Persia from the tyrannous yoke of Zohak, the people resolved to 
observe this custom as an expression of gratitude to God for the 
boon of freeing them from the thraldom of Zohak (Albiruni’s 
Chronology, p..209). Ammian is said to refer to this custom. 
He says that the ancient Persians were prohibited from speaking 


374 BIJ CEREMONY 


while dining. The reason which he is said to have given, viz., 
“nothing might get polluted by the spittle”! does not seem 
to be correct, 


The recital of the Baj or grace before meals is technically 
Completion of the spoken of as Bdj dharvi, i.e, to hold the 
Baj.. Baj dharvi Baj. After the meals, a small prayer is 
mad 86) musket, again recited. That is technically spoken 
of as Baj melvi or Baj mukvi,i.e., to give up the Baj.. It is 
only after reciting this that the eaters are to break their 
silence. After this recital they generally perform the kusti, 
i.¢., untie and retie the kusti with the recital of its nirang 
or prayer, 


A person when going to answer the calls of nature has to take 
a Baj and after_performing the function, 
(2) Bajrecited at to finish it. It is generally known as 
natural functions, . 7 5 . . 
/* * pishdb ni Baj,” t.e., the Baj recited while 
passing water. When at about three steps from the ap- 
pointed place for the purpose, he recites “Guneh shekasté 
sad hazir bad” (é. e..May wrong actions be done away with 
hundred thousand times) anda Ahunavar. Thenafter perform- 
ing the natural function, and after retiring for about three steps, 
he finishes the Baj. To do this he has to recite Ashem Vohu 
thrice, Yagna Hé XXXV, 2, twice, HA XXXYV, 5, thrice and 
then Ha XVIII, 9, once. 


There are several B4js or prayers which are recited for the 
(3) Baj for the preparation and consecration of certain 
a oa re things required in the ritual. For example, 
quisites. the sacred thread, after being prepared by 
the women of the priestly class, is cut and consecrated by the 
priest with the recital of the smaller Sraosh Baj and a parti- 


cular nirang. (Vide above p. 184). 


1 The Religion and Customs of the Parsees, by Dr. Adolph Rapp, 
translated by K. R. Cama, p. 302. 


Bid CRREMONY 375 


Before bathing, one recites the Sraosh Baj up to the word 

(4) Baj for Ashahé in the “kem n& Mazd&” prayer and 
Bathing. then unclothes himself and bathes. Then 
having put on the clothes, he finishes the B4j commencing with 
the words “ nemasché y& Armaitish-iziché ’’ and then puts on 
the kustt. 


In the recital of all the Bajs there are three stages :—(1) The 
Technical phra- commencement of the recitalof the Baj. 
seology about the It is technically spoken..of as “ Baj 
Bal, dharvi,”’ or ‘‘ Baj levi, ” «e., “to hold the 
Baj’’ or “to take the Baj.”’ (2) Then-follows the function 
‘itself, whether it be that of taking the meals, bathing, conse- 
crating a thing or anything else. (3) Then follows the recital 
of the concluding portion of the Baj which is spoken of as 
“Baj mukvi.” 7. e., to lay down or finish the Baj. 


Some of these Bajs and Nirangs, which are lesser forms of 
’ Vom rayer formule, recited on small petty occa- 
Pog et baa wan are rarely recited now, and fat of thain 
of the Bajs and are recited by the priestly class. The object 
Nirangs. : ; iis : 
which led to their composition and compila- 
tion at first was. to indicate that a man must take a serious view 
of life, and. see, that even in the enjoyment of God’s blessings 
and in-all. kinds of work, there is always, what can be called a 
religious side of the question. When a thing has to be done, 
let it- be done with the ultimate view of doing good toall around 
us, It meant to indicate that as Ruskin said ‘“ There is religion 
* in everything around us.” 


A religious bent was thought to be given to every action, so 
that, in the end, it may lead to ennoble themind. As a writer! 
says: “ Every act and function of the body should be consecrated 
to the soul and mind; the traveller on this way should pray 
unceasingly, by devoting his every act unto his God, thinking 


P 1G. R. Mead. 


376 BiJ CEREMONY 


when eating : ‘‘ As this food nourishes the body, so may the-food 
of wisdom nourish the mind;’”? and when bathing :,‘‘As this 
water purifies . the body, so may the water of life vivify the 
mind ;” or when freeing the body of impurities: ** As these 
- impurities pass from: the body, so may the refuse of as 
pass from the mind.” 


CHAPTER XVI. 


THE OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES. 


I—THE AFRINGAN CEREMONY. 


As said above, by the Outer Liturgical Services, I mean, 
“those religious ‘services which may be, but need not neces- 
sarily be, performed in a Dar-i-Meher or a place specially 
allotted for the purpose. They can also be performed in any 
ordinary or private house or place. Again, they may be 
performed by any priest, eveti by one who does not observe 
the Bareshnim, or by one who has only gone through the 
Navar and not the Martab initiation.” These Outer Liturgical 
Services are:— I. The Afringan. II. The Farokhshi, and 
II, The Satam. 

The word Afringan comes from the root fri, Sanskrit prt, oe 

love to praise. So an Afringan is a prayer 

I—The Afringan 5 ° ‘ 
of the Parsees and ©Xpressive of love or praise. Perhaps, it has 
cane Api of the received this name from the fact, that that 

part of it which is common to all Afring&ns 
begins with the word Afrindmi. (Afrinami Khshathrayan 
danghu paiti, etc.) i.e., 1 pray for, etc. According to Dr. Haug, 
“in the Afringan ceremony of the Parsees there may be 
discovered a trace of the Brahmanical Apri ceremony....... oe 
The namevis the same: d-pri in Sanskrit, ¢@-fri in the Avesta, 
which literally means ‘to invite ;’ with which invitation the 
name of the being or beings, in whose honour the ceremony 
is being performed must always be mentioned.’’! 

The Afringén prayers may be recited by all priests, even by 

those not observing the Bareshnim and 

The Participants, even by those who have not gone through 
lets ee the see degree of bat. They a 
performed generally by two or more priests, 

At times—and that very rarely when a second priest is not 


1 Haug’s Essays, second edition, p. 284. 
48 


3878 OUTER LITURGICAD SERVICES 


available—they are recited even by one priest. The senior, who 
begins the ceremony with the recital of the Dibaché, is called 
Zoti or Joti which is the later form of Avesta Zaotar, lit., one who 
performs the ceremony. He is so called, because he is the prin- 
cipal performer of ceremonies. The other is called Atra-vakh- 
shi, i.e, one who keeps up or feeds (vakhsh) the fire ( Atar). 
He is. so called, because he sits near the fire vase and feeds 
the fire. He is also called Raspi, 7.e., assistant, from Avesta 
root rag to help. He is also spoken of as Rathwi, ¢e¢.,> an 
offerer from ré or rdd, to.give. The two priests who officiate - 
at the Yacna, the Visparad and the Vendidad ceremonies are 
also similarly called the Zaoti and the Atravakhshi or RAspi - 
or Rathwi. Any number of priests can take part in these 
ceremonies. Only one can act as Zoti, the rest who join the 
Atravakhshi act as Raspi. Even laymen can participate in the 
pra yeras Raspis. Again, the Afringans can be recited anywhere, 
even in private residences and need not have any special or 
enclosed space. Their recital must begin, as in the case of all 
prayers, with Padyab-Kusti.. Though any number of priests 
can take part in an Afringan ceremony, it is only two who 
perform the actual ceremony. 


Each Afring&n is divided into three parts. I. The Pazend 
Dibaché, II. The Afringan proper in the 
ea ae iran en Avesta language and ITII. The P&zend 
Afrin. 
Of these three parts, the Zoti recites all the three and the — 
Atravakhshi, Rathwi or Raspi recites with him only the 
second part. We will describe these three parts :— 


In the matter of all liturgical services, the DibAché is the 
principal part. One must clearly under- 
stand what the Dibaché is, so that he may 
have a clear grasp of the object of the Liturgical services.1 


1 The Dibaché. 


1 Vide for translation, Spiegel, translated by Bleeck, Khordeh Avesta, 
p. 172. Spiegel is wrong in speaking of it as “ Prayer after the Afergans,” 
It is a “ Prayer before the Afergans.”” 


pe AFRINGIN — ‘B99 


The. word Dib&ché (> ls) is Persian and means ‘preface.’ It 
‘is made up of diba (43s) brocade and the diminutive particle 
‘pe, So, literally, it means ‘“ the lesser brocade.” « As brocade, 
which is a kind of silk stuff, is superior to other stuffs, 80, the 
preface (dib&ché) which precedes a book is superior to other 
parts of the book, inasmuch as it is often written in a ‘good 
ornamental style and prepares the reader for what he expects 
to read in the book. In the Afring4n prayer also, the Dibaché 
is the principal part, wherein the reciter announces » the 
subject or the name of the particular Afringin which is to be 
recited, the name of tbe person, living or dead, in whose honour 
the prayer is recited, the name of the person-who directs 
(farmayashné Aa, le,3) the performance of the ceremony, etc. 
The more proper rendering of the word in the case of the 
Dibaché of the Liturgical services_of-the Parsees would be, I 
think, ‘ Exordium,’ meaning the introductory part of the service 
which prepares tne audience or the congregation for the main 
subject of the service. The Dibaché plays a prominent part in 
all liturgical services—in the-Yagna, Vendidad, Visparad, Baj» 
Afring4n, Farokhshi, Satum, Pavi, etc. All these services have 
a Dib&ché which is almost common, It is written in the Pazend 
language and, as its name implies, is to be recited in the beg. 
inning of prayers.” It is so recited, for example in the beginning 
of the Afring&ns. But in the case of long services which have 
long recitals of more than one prayer or of an aggregation of 
prayers, it has to be recited in the midst of these services. For 
example, though in the case of the Afring&n it precedes, as its 
name implies, every Afringan, yet the Afrifgan ceremony as a 
whole being an aggregate of several Afringéns, the Dibaché, 
besides being repeated in the very beginning, has to be repeated 
in the midst of the whole ceremony or recital before each 
separate kardeh or section of the Afringan. 


Now the general rule of the Zoroastrian rubric is this: All 
prayers written in the Pazend language or even in the later 
Persian language, when they precede or occur in the beginning 


380 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


of the Avesta prayers, or when they occur at the end, are 
recited in the ordinary open loud tone in which we ordinarily 
speak. But, when they occur in the midst of Avesta prayers or 
of an aggregate of prayers, they are recited ina suppressed 
low muttering tone which is then said to be uttered in 
Bdj.1_ So the Pazend Dibaché, when recited in the beginning 
of a prayer, is recited in the ordinary open loud tone, but when 
recited in the midst of a prayer, a ceremony or an aggregate 
of prayers, it is recited in Baj. 


The Dibaché of the Afring4n is like the Dibaché of all Liturgi- 
cal services, but it has one additional thing, viz., that in the 
very beginning it announces (a) the number of Yathd-ahu-vairyd 
prayers that are to be recited with the Afringans proper, and (0) 
the gah or period of the day. in which the. ceremony is per- 
formed. An Afring&n can, like the Bdj, be recited in any part of 
the day. : 

We said above that the Dibaché or the exordium announces 
to the audience or the congregation the main subjects of the 
service. Those main subjects are two: 


(A) It announces the name of the Yazata or the Heavenly 
being in whose honour, or for whose glorification or invocation, 
the service is celebrated or the ceremony performed. (B) It 
announces the name of the person—living or dead—in whose 
honour of memory the service is held and the name of the 
person.at. whose instruction or direction it is held. The 
technical phrases for these two kinds of announcements are— 

(A) Khshniman, and 
(B) Yad. e 


1 Pp, oe “ a silence observed by the Magi at meals and while per- 
forming their ablutions’’ (Steingass, Pers. Dictionary). The prayer mut- 
teredin a low tone is also said to be uttered in bdj. The ( ~oj0 3) 
Zamzama referred to by Firdousi and other Mahomedan writers, is this 
recital in 667. As Magoudi, says, the illiterate speak of the Avesta as 
Zamzama, “Il. ( Zeradecht, fils d’Espiman) fut le prophéte des Madjou 
(Guebres) at leur apporta le livre que le vulgaire appele Zemzemeh, mais 
dont le vrai nom, chez les Madjous, est Bestah (Avesta). (Magoudi 
traduit par Barbier de Meynard, Vol. II, p. 124). 


fe iFRINGIN 38) 


- We will speak of these two here at some length, so that these 
words which occur often may be clearly understood. 


The word ‘ Khshndman’ comes from the Avesta root Khshnu 
(Sanskrit Khshnu gz) to please, to rejoice, to 
gladden, to satisfy. So the word Khshna- 
man means ‘joy, satisfaction, pleasure.’ Now all the Parsee 
liturgical ceremonies are performed and the accompanying 
recitals are made for the Khshnéman of God, his Amesh4-spentas 
or the Archangels, his Yazatas or angels,—in short, for the 
Khshniman of God and His Heavenly Beings.” They are cele- 
brated in their Glory, to glorify them, to rejoice them, to satisfy 
them. All Parsee prayers, whether great or small, whether 
liturgical or non-liturgical, begin with the words “ Khshnaothra 
Ahurahé Mazd4o, Ashem Vohu...... .” tec (“ I say this or I do 
this) to please or glorify the Great Omniscient Lord.” So, the 
Dibaché announces the Khshniman of the particular Heavenly 
Being or Power in whose honour or for whose glorification 
the ceremony is performed, and the recital made. For example, 
if the service is for the Khshniman or glorification of Ahurs 
Mazda, the Dibaché announces itinthe words “ in Khshnaman’ 
i-Hormuzd Khudai beres4d, ’” i.¢., “‘ may this (service) be (lit. 
arrive) for the pleasure, joy or glorification of Ahura Mazda.” 
If it be for.the Yazata Bahman, then the words used are “in 
Khshniman-i-Bahman Ameshaspend beresid,” and so on, ac: 
cording as the Yazata or the Heavenly Being or the angel be 
one or another. If it be in the celebration of a Gaéhambé4r, 
i.e.5 &@ season, festival, then the particular Gahamb4r which is 
being celebrated or commemorated is mentioned. The general 
formula for the announcement of the Khshndman is ‘in Khshni- 
man-i-N. N..... 1! beresad.” 


(A) Khshnéman. 


When the Khshniman is thus announced in the Dibaché, thea, 
in the Afringén proper, the recital of which follows that of the 


1 Here the name of the Yazata oy the Gahambdar, ete., is men- 
tioned. 


$82 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


Dibaché, after’ the recital of the particular Gah or time of the day 
in which the service is held, the appropriate respective formula 
praising that particular Yazata and describing his attributes is 
recited. These formule are said to be the particular respective 
Khshnimans. of those particular Yazatas. These Khshnimans 
are two: one is said to be ndni art or the small Khshndman 
and the other vadi ag or greater Khshniman. They are taken 
from the Siroza prayer or the Siroza Yasht, which also is said to 
contain the ndnd or the small Sirozis and the vadd or greater 
Sirozas. The small Khshndman is recited after the word fra- 
sastayaécha in the recital of the Gah and the greater after 
“ Vidhvaé mraoti.’’ In the recital of the Kishniman of the 
Yazatas, the Khshniman of Ahura Mazda and the Amesha- 
spentas always precedes, i.e., the worshipper first declares, that 
the service is held for the Khshniman or glorification of Ahura 
Madza or God himself, and of His AmeshAspentas or the Archan- 
gels, and then for that of the particular Yazata named, The 
small Khshniiman is repeated in the Yasnemcha prayer which 
generally ends all prayers. 


The following words in the recital of the Dibicheh draw our 
special attention: Pa ganj-i-Dadir Ahura Mazda raydmand 
khorehmand Ameshaspand bérés&d, ¢.e, ‘May these (celebrations) 
arrive to the treasury of the Brilliant and Glorious Ahura Mazda 
and the Ameshaspentas.” What is meant is this: The worshipper 
has to pray with a view to ask for God’s blessings over all. 
His prayers are to go to the treasury (ganj) of God, from which 
there may be @ general distribution to all. The influence of 
even one individual worshipper is far-reaching. His prayers 
spread their influence round about, in his household, in his city, 
in his country. He is to pray, not for himself but for many 
round about him. The words of the Afringan point to what 
Herodotus ( Bk. I, 132) says of the ancient Persians, that they 
prayed not only for themselves but for the whole COmEnHnAty 
at the head of which stood the King. 


THE (FRINGAN 883 


The word Yad is Persian and means. ‘remembrance,’ 

(B) Tho Yad in All the liturgical services, besides being per- 
the Dibaché. The formed in honour of a particular Heavenly 
Zindeh ravan and F : : , 
the Anousheh. _ being or beings, are celebrated in the name or 
Taney in ‘the memory of somebody who is named 
in the recital. The words used are “aidar yad bad,” 4 sk yoy! 
i.e, “may be remembered here.” The services may be per- 
formed in the name or in the memory of the living or the dead. 
If it is performed for the living, it is said to be performed 
for the Zindeh-ravdn, i.e., for the living soul. If for the dead, 
for the Anoushéh-ravan, t.e., the immortal soul (of the dead). The 
word Anousheh-ravan is Anaosha-urvan of the Avesta, 7.e., im- 
mortal-souled. It is an epithet applied to the dead in religious 
phraseology. 

The following are the different forms of the nomenclature 
used for the Ydd in the Dibacheh:, Suppose that the ceremony 
or service is for one Jamshed whois the son of Rustam. 1. If 
Jamshed is living his name is recited thus : ‘‘ Namchisht{2 Zin- 
dehravan Behedin Jamshed.Behedin Rustam aidar yad bad,” 
ie., “ May the person with a living soul and bearing the name 
Behedin Jamshed (son-of) Behedin Rustom be remembered 
here.” 2. If the person is dead, his name is recited thus: 
“ Namchishti.Anousheh-ravin Behedin Jamshed Behedin Rus- 
tam aidar y4d bad Anousheh-ravan ravani,” ¢.e., May the im- 
mortal-souled person bearing the name Behedin Jamshed (son 
of) Behedin Rustam be remembered here. In the first case, 


1 It is this word Anousheh-ravan, which gave to Chosroes I, his Persian 
nate, Noshirvan. The modern Parsee name Nosherwanjeé or Nusser- 
Wanjee comes from it. : 

2 Namchishti, from Av, néman, name, and chishta from chish or chish 
to give, bestow, attribute, means “the personto whom such or such a 
name has been given or attributed.” The word may also mean famous, 
celebrated. Later translators translate the word by nam-ba-n4ém (K. E. 
Kanga’s Khordah Avesta, 8th ed. Afrin-i Ardafarosh s. 13) when it occurs 
in the Afringfn and Afrin, But that meaning doesnot seem to suit there, 
It may suit in the Pahlavi Vendidad (I, 21: III, 41; V, 34, &c.), where 
it occurs in the sense of details, (Namchishtik 1a goft ikvimunet, 4,0, the 
‘details are not given), 


384 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


viz., of the Zindeh-ravdn, if the father of the person be living, 
for the last words “aidar yad bid” the word “ beresad ” 
' ,dley? 7.e,, may good or help reach him) is used. 


The word Behedin inthe above formula means a layman, lit, 
one of the good religion. If the person belongs to a priestly class 
and has gone through the first degree of priesthood, the epithet 
‘Ervad’ (Pahl, herbad from Av. aethra-paiti i.e., a master of 

learning, a teacher) is used instead of ‘Behedin.’ If he belongs 
to the priestly class but has not gone through the degree of 
priesthood, he is spoken of as ‘osté’ (Av. havishta a disciple 
a learner). If the person is a lady of the priestly class, she is 
spoken of ag “ Osti,.’’ If the person is a high priest, he is spoken 
of as‘‘ Dastur.””? Similar appellations are added to the name of 
the father according as he is a priest or otherwise. 


The recital of the name of the person, whether dead or alive, 
Farmayashna, or for whom the ceremony is performed, is fol- 
the name of the lowed by a mention of the name of the person 
person directing : 
the performance Who directs that the ceremony may be per- 
of the ceremony. formed) ‘The formula adopted for this 
announcement is “Farmayashna Behedin. N.1 Mazdayasni 
beresdd, i.e, “This ceremony is performed at the direction 
of the Mazdayasnan Behedin N. N. May help or good come to 
him.” Thename.of the elder or the head of the family is gene- 
‘rally mentioned as the person directing the performance of the 
ceremony. 


Il\The Afringan The Afringan proper consists of two 
Beard i rae parts: (a) The Variable part, and (6) The 
able paris. Invariable part. 

(a) On the completion of the Dibaché, which is recited by only 
one of the priests, the other priest joins him in the recital of the 
Afring&n proper. At first, the number of the Yathd-Ahu-Vairyés, 
which varies according to the nature of the Afringdn as referred 
to above, are recited ; then follow the recital of the formula of 


1 Here the name of the person directing the performance is mentioned, 


385 


THE AFRINGAN 


‘read oxy Jo SABP UO} 48V] ON} OF ,, PESTA OBA ,, SUOTZS0ed ,.“pUYTAU IUTYe OY, ,, 091001 eul0g & 
‘yaprey ., PROTA OBA ,, OFO0I CUIOG ft 


SN A PS I, A TT 0 PE ERT TAT RTS TEI EL I OE FI I ID RD ET ET NET TEBE, BAY GESTALT, 


“pep oy} 1oF 
ugsaLyy yetods eyy sr4z ‘Aep Aue ug 


“qyeop Joqye Aressoaruue 481g oy 
Sutpeosoid Awp oy} uo pues yywep Joqye 


Sep ye oy% Ayperedss -Aep Aus uo}: 


‘Sep Aue uo’ 


-kep sue uo 


"poqder oq 0} TOY MM 


“LET “OST 


“SS-6) ‘IITX FUSe@A “Pesta OBA] 8 "* ysoreyepry jo UBsusy] F 
3 
es 011d lo ““syEzourg oy4 Jo UvsupTY] ¢ 
‘984878 X OY4 do (s[eZue) 
, “4 1 0991 L SeqySOILT OY} JO UBsuTyy, Z 
; “(13 pzeuloyy 
‘XT vudex)quywu yuye OFL) OT era = jy) 1 
*sQAITE A 
*poqytoed suorqoes nuy ‘ ~ 
iO Yyaplvy 9yy jo SOULS NT “BYIB AR sugsuryy ony Jo SOUre NT 
JO ON 


"Uayy us payoon syopany ay) pun supburify ayr fo 190,, 


(eT dT TOA ‘eeMUQ “YW 
peaig 4q jokyary Sayhpznuioy] qereq opra) surseq ugsuyy Youd yor YA sohsew 4 -nyp-vyq X 
Jo doquinu oy} pues 4I UT pozood st 4vyy Vysoay oY} JO UOIZdes JO Yapuny IvNosed oy} pure suysULTY oy 


oO 
> 


JO.SouvuU OY} SOATS OTGvI BUIMOTIOY OFT, “uURdUTIFY 94} Jo yopuwy re~oryszed o44 sMOTOJ Uy], “poyOor st 
YW Inoucy osoym ur Sureg ATuoavoH oY Jo unupuysyy OY} Jo 4eyy pue ‘Aep oyy Jo porsed oy} 10 ypb oy 


OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


386 


‘osye Z Yeu ‘6g 202 pu *] qyu ‘9 eos ard pengt JO SYOOG euros 4nq ‘ooovsd quosead O49 BI 9eYL, 7 


"UOT4817 UT 
sly jo shup 4se_ IMo}Z CYy Jo qsay 044 *(UMO 841 JO Yapaey feeds 
UO OFVYIT Jo WAN OYY Aq —poqytoor eq OL |e sey 9) ‘Wepzejy Bemyy| L ** deaen OUI Jo UYsULZY) TT 
“yyeop 10438 Aep yap o4y Jo 
uasp ey} uo ATjetsedse ynq ‘Avp Aue ug|:' oe _ gugumu yy ogE| L _ [8¢eze xX wWeYyed jo uesunyy ot 
‘aeak ayy Jo pus of3 48 shep Arepeo10qut 
eay eyy “ae ‘shep eure eAy ayy Suping |** Be ee “* pesta 08K} 8 ei “"eugeH Jo uBsuLTY] 6 


‘seq sf ‘(MO 891 Jo YoprVy etoods* svy 


“WEYED X18 OY Jo Yous jo sfep cay CYT UO HT) “eudvdepzew gree eyoRUd| F "* aequreyyD jo uysuryZy] 8 


T(aIprearey) qyuoUL 
981 eY3 Jo (24Seyeqrpry) Aep psg out ‘(Tao 891 JO YoprE yy 


“on ‘hep weysup uravyyidery oy} uo ATuO |[wjoods @ sey 4q) yovIM zeqIV) ZI ** ulaeygidey yo ugduarazy) L 
(8-1 ‘IIAT GH “eudex) aY8e K 
“UgaULy y JO SpUlY [[? 109ze poq1o0d Orv GSOVIg JO HuUuowyoos cody WIRE, ie eysovlg jo UYSUNTV)] 9 


Syopss SF ugsunyy esoy, -~Aep Aue ug 


Uy o- + guywu mys ogy, 


L>] 


oe ugmysg ugsuryy) ¢ 


“s94.-8. A 
“poqroer stiol;008 n 
“pezload oq OF WOU M $s eehion: a ie eared au sUpsULATY 049 Jo SOUTEN 
JO “ON 


d 


THE {FRINGAIN 387 


(6) After the recital of the particular Kardeh which forms the 
‘particular Afringan, the second priest, the Atravakhshi gets up 
from his place and standing before the fire and holding a flower, 
now given him by the first priest, the Joti, recites with him the 
Kardeh of “ Afrintmi Khshathrayan Danghu paiti.”?! This 
Kardeh is invariable and is repeated after the variable part 
of all Afringans. It contains an excellent prayer, invoking 
blessings upon the ruler of the land, on whose stable, just and 
kind rule depends the prosperity of the country and of the 
people. It is as it were an Avestan “God save the King.” 


The word Afrin literally means ‘ benedictions.’_This part of 
Wares. See, the Afringan prayers, which is, like the first 
lis differentkinds. part, written in the Pazend language, is so 
called because it is full of benedictions. 
These Afrins are generally recited, but they do not form a 
necessary part of the Afringén ceremony, One can, if he 
likes, finish the Afringin ceremony after the recital of the Afrin- 
gan proper, by reciting the finishing-Baj. For example, in the 
Afringén of Sraosha recited for the first three nights at the 
house where a man dies, no Afrin is recited. There are several 
kinds of Afrins. Some of these are such as must be recited 
on particular-occasions and after particular Afringéns. The 
recital of others is optional. They are the following :-— 


1. , Afrin of G&hambar. 
2. Afrin of Rapithavin. 
3. Afrin of Ardafarosh. 
4. Afrin of the names of Buzorgs, or the departed worthies, 
5, Afrin of Myazd. — 
6. Afrin of Spitaman Zarthosht. 
7. Afrin of the Hamkaras, or the Afrin of Dahman, 
8. Afrin-i G&hambar Pavi. 
I will describe these Afrins in brief. 


1 Westerguard, p. 321 Afrigan-i Gahambar 14-19, 


388 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


It is an Afrin which can only be recited after the Afringén of 

1. Atrinof Gah. the GahambArs on each of the five days of 
emnbar. ' the GahambArs or the six season festivals. 
This Afrin consists of three parts, the first and the last of which 
are Afrins proper.1 1. In the first part the worshipper prays 
that the spiritual strength of the ceremony and the ritual may: 
reach all. 2. It is the second part which renders this Afrin 
the Afrin of Gahambar, because, in it particular references.are 
made to the six Gahambars of the year, to the periods of the 
year when they occur and to the different grand objects? of 
God’s creation connected with those periods, /3.\\The third 
part again contains some benedictions. 


It is so called because it is the Afrin which is specially recited 
2, Afrin of Rapi. after the Afringan of Rapithavin, which 
thawin. is recited on the third day, (Ardibehesht) of 
Farvardin, the first month of the year. It may be recited after 
other Afring4ns on other occasions. This Afrin can be divided , 
into two parts:—1l. The first part contains the general form 
of benedictions found in other Afrins. 2. The second part 
contains a list of the names of the departed worthies of ancient 
Tran. Their Farohars or guarding spirits are remembered and 
commemorated. It. contains, as it were, two lists of canoniza- 
tion ; one, of the worthies of the time of the cycle of Zoroaster, 
and another that of the cycle of the Sassanian times. 


It is so called because it is gencrally recited after the Afringan 
3, Afrin of Arda- Of Ardafarohar or Ardafaroash or Ardafa- 
farosh. rosh,3 which is the Afringaén generally 


1 Vide Spiegel, translated by Bleeck. Khordah Avesta, p. 179, 


2 The order in which the grand objects were created is well-nigh the 
same as that in the Genesis, viz., the Heavens, Water, Land, Trees, 
Cattle, and Man. The Genesis speaks of the Creation on six consecu- 
tive days but this Afrin gives intervals of days between each of the six 
creations as follows; 45, 60, 75, 30, 80, 75, thus completing the 365 days 
of the year, the first creation, viz., the Heavens being ereated on the 
45th day of the year. 


"3 Ardd is Av. aréta, te. asha holy and farosh is Av. Fravashi. 
The word thus means “ the holy spirits.” 


‘THE {FRINGIN © -- 389 


recited: in honour of the dead. . The worshipper prays in. 
this Afrin that the - spiritual strength of the. ceremony 
performed, or of the recital made, may be a source- of 
pleasure and help to the Farohars or the spirits of all who have 
departed and all who may depart, from the time of Gayomard’ 
down to that of the coming Soshyos. 


It is an Afrin in the strict sense of the word. It is.so catled, 

4. Aerin of the because it contains a list of the names of 
names oof the some of the departed worthies (buzorgs) of 
Buzorgs. . ancient Iran, such as, Zarir, Sidvakhsh, Bejan, 
Gushtasp, Sim Nariman, Rustam, Asfandyar, and Jamasp. 
The particular traits of character in which they excelled are 
mentioned, and it is prayed that the living person, in whose 
honour or for whose benefit the ceremony is performed or the 
person at whose direction (Farmadyashné) the ceremony is 
performed, may possess those traits of character. In 
this Afrin, the name of the director is specially mentioned 
and good wishes expressed for him. This Afrin is generally 
recited after the Afrin of Ard4- farosh as an additional Afrin. 
Being a prayer of benedictions in the ordinary sense of the 
word. it forms a part of the marriage service also. ‘When so 
recited, the names of the marrying couples are mentioned 
therein and blessings invoked upon them. 


This Afrin has fallen rather into disuse. It is recited rarely. 

5. Afrin of It seems to have been so called because it 

Uy. was recited with the U. yard (the pies! of 
fruit, flowers, water, milk, &e.) before it. 


While all the Afrins above referred to are in the Pazend lan- 
' 6. Atrin-i-spit- guage, this is the only Afrin in the old Avesta 
tamin Zarthosht. language. Strictly speaking, it cannot be put 
into the class of Afrins, by which term is generally understood 
prayers recited after the Afring4ns as benedictions, because it is 
never recited during the Afringan ceremony. But in the strict 
and literal sense of the word Afrin, it is a real Afrin or a benedic- 
tion. It is addressed in the second person. . It is so called 


390 , OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


because it is said to have been composed by Zarthosht or Zoroas- 
ter and addressed to his royal. patron king Gusht4sp. Sueh 
being the case, its phraseology is to a great extent adopted, eyen 
now, by the Dasturs and other priests when they present 
laudatory addresses to personages of the Royal family. 


This Afrin is generally recited after the Afrins of Arda- 

7. - Rtrin of Ham- farosh and of the Buzorgs. It can be recited 

alone after any Afringan. It is known by 

ccit following names: (a) Afrin of Hamkara&. It is so 

called because the Hamkars (colaborateurs) of the. Ameshas- 
pands are mentioned therein.? 


(b) Afrin of Haft Ameshispand. It is so ¢alled because the 
seven (haft) Ameshaspands or archangels are one by one men- 
tioned therein, and the demons or Evil-spirits whom they combat 
are referred to,? 

(c) Afrin-i-Dahman. It is so called because the Dahm§n, #.e., 
the pious, the good, who had long since departed-—from 
Gayomard, the Peshdadian. King, to Asfandy&r of the Kianidn : 
dynasty——-are remembered therein. 

This Afrin is not strictly an Afrin, but it is spoken of as such. 

8 Afrini-Gaham- Only its first two sections form an Afrin, 


Fre een oF the rest being the Dib&ché referred to 
piv a above. It is recited over wine and milk 
a a ee 
1 For“ita\ translation vide Spiegel, translated by Bleeck, Khordeh 
Avesta XL, p. 140. 
2 The colaborateurs of the seven Amesh&spentas are the following :— 
1 Ahura Mazda—Daé-pa-Adar, Daé-pa-Meher, Daé-pa-Din. 
2 Bahman (V ohumana)—Méhér, Gosh (Dravasp), Ram. 
3 Ardibehesht (Asha-vahishta)—Adar, Sarosh, Beheram. 
4 Sheherivar (Khshathra Vairya)—Khur (Khurshed), Meher, Asman 
Aneran. 
5 Asfandarmad (Spenta Armaiti)—Avan (Ab4n), Din, Arad (Ashish 
or Ashisavangh), Marespand. 
6 Khordéd (Haurvatat)—Tir (Tishtrya), Ardafarvash or Ard&farosh 
(Farvardin), Goad (Vata). 
7 Amardad (Ameretat)—Rashné, Astad, Jamyad. 
® Spiegel translates it under this head, Vide Khordeh-Avesta, trans- 
lated by Bleeck, p. 176. 


THE AFRINGAN 391 


on the occasions of the Gahambdars or season festivals. It 
is so called because at one time, the celebrants sat within a 
placé enclosed by a pavi. 


r Having described at length the different 
ap rere he parts and kinds of the Afringgn, I will 
: now deseribe the ritual :--Two or more 
priests perform the Padyab-Kusti, as is usually the case, 
before commencing the prayers. They seat themselves on 
acarpet. Ona sheet of white cloth, the Zoti has before him 
in his front a tray which contains myazd, i.e. fruits and 
flowers of the season. At times, when there is a large quantity 
of the myazd, there are more than one tray. Besides fruit and 
flowers, there are milk, wine, water and sherbet (or syrup) in 
the tray in small vessels or glasses. Then, next to the tray con- 
taining fruit, flowers and the above things, there is a fire vase 
opposite to the Zoti. Near the vase, there is a tray containing 
sandal wood and frankincense. The following diagram shows 
the positions of the priests and the arrangement of the 
trays, ete. 


B 
EI} lle 

E 

A 


"A The seat of the Zoti. 
B The seat of the Raspi or Atravakhshi. 
C Vase of the Fire with a ladle and tongs. 
D Tray containing sandalwood and frankineense. 
E Tray containing the myazd, ¢.c., fruit, flowers, milk, wine, 
water, sherbet, etc. 


392 OUTER LIFURGICAL SERVICES 


- The word myazda comes from the Avesta root ‘ mid’ Sanskrit 
‘Mya Saar ana ste mid Ag to bestow. So, it means things reli- 
chdshné or cormmu- giously offered in ceremonies.1 The Darun 
ae or the sacred bread, fruit, flowers, wine, 
milk, etc., which are offered, and over which prayers are 
recited, are all jointly known as myazda. The Fravashis or the 
guarding spirits of the departed ones take delight in coming to 
‘the place where such myazd is offered. We read in the-Fra- 
vardin Yasht (Yasht XIII, 64): ‘‘ We worship the good, strong, 
beneficent Fravashis of the faithful......who run by tens of | 
thousands into the midst of the Myazdas.’’! : 


In the Gathas, myazd is offered to Ahura Mazda. “O Ahura! 
We offer Myazda to thee and to Asha with humility (or, 
with prayers nemanghd. Ha, XXXIV,, 3).”’ Among the 
different things offered, such as water, milk, wine, fruits, 
flowers, et¢., fruits are specially spoken of as the myazda. 
For example, in the above passage of the Gatha, the 
Pahlavi translator renders the word myazda by fruit (bar). 
He says: “I place the fruit within thy possession (bar 
pavan khvesh-i-lak yakhsenunam).? Neryosang also translates 
the word by ‘ phala,’ i.c., fruit. So, nowadays, the Parsees 
generally understand by the word myazd, which is corrupted 
into mej, ‘“fruit used in religious ceremonies.” 


Haug* derives the word otherwise. He says: “ Originally 
it meant ‘flesh,? as may be clearly seen from the cognate 
Armenian mis, ‘meat’ (comp. Sans. ménsa ara) being id- 
entical with ‘meat.’ Some derive the word ‘‘mass’’ of the 
Christian ritual from the same source. Others derive the word 
“mass” from missa in the Latin phrase “Ite missa est,’’ @¢., 
‘Go, it is dismissed,” but this derivation is supposed to be wrong 
and the initial conception is said to be of ‘flesh’ and of a flesh- 


\., 18. B. BR, XXII p. 196. ? Gathas, by Dr. Mills, p. 134. 
8 Essays on the Parsis, 2nd ed, p. 139. 


THE iFRINGiN —- 893 


offering in sacrifice! In old High German,:the word is 
maz, in Gothic maiz. In this sense, the word ‘massacre’ 
is taken to be masskhwar arawze te, flesh-eater. Lat. 
mensa, which, is a table or the food spread thereon, has 
a similar connection. Similarly in Persian miz 33” is “table” 
as wellas a guest. Mizbdn means a “host.’’ The word myazd in 
Persian also means a ‘banquet.’ In Latin “seconda mensa’’ 
similarly means ‘a second course.’ 


Originally the Darun, i.e,, the sacred bread was included in 
the word ‘myazda.’ For example, in the Yagna, in one of the 
chapters known as those of Sraosha Darun (H& III), the word 
myazda includes the Darun, But, latterly, the word Darun hag 
often been, mentioned separately ; for example, in the Afrin 
(Darun yashtahom, myazd hamirayenim), In a town like 
Naosari, in the ordinary parlance.of priests, the word myazd 
has come to mean the ceremony of, Afringan. 


All the things offered as myazda are eatables (Kharethem 
myazdem, Ha III, 1) and-the.worshippers partake of them in a 
eeremonious way. This partaking of the eatables presented as 
myazda is spoken of as“ chashni’’ (lit., tasting). It is only 
those who are deserving, who have deserved it by their righteous- 
ness (asha) and,good conduct (frérett) that are asked to participate 
in the chashni (Yagcna, Ha VITI, 2). As Prof. Darmesteter 
says, the public gatherings for offering the myazda and for 
eating them (chishni) were, as it were, gatherings for religious 
trials, He says: “ Cette communion est une sorte d’ épreuve 
religieuse. J] faut que le fidéle se sente en état de grace pour y tou- 
cher et il semble, d’aprés|’adjuration solennelle faite par le Zao- 
tar, que les effets du Myazda trahissent celui qui le consomme 
en état de.péché,”’ (Le Zend Avesta, Vol. I, p. 75). The ultimate 
Object of these offerings is, that they may suggest to the 


1 Vide Sir E. Cox’s articles in the Nineteenth century of March 1908’ 
wherein the Christian ritual is said to have existed Jong before 
Christianity, in the Eleusian and Mithraic Mysteries, 

50 


394 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


worshippers, that the best offering is that of righteous actions. 
Prayer, praise and righteousness are the best offerings acceptable 
to God. 


Wine is generally used in the Afringén and other religious 
ceremonies. There are some Parsees now, 
who, being total abstainers abstain from 
using wine in the ceremonies at their place. 
If we look to the time of the Avesta we find no prohibition. 
But, we find that the wine then used was the juice of the grapes. 
That it was a sweet, nourishing and health-giving drink 
appears from several facts :-— 


Wine in the 


anaes ceremony. 


1. Firstly, the very Avestaic word for wine shows, that it was 
a drink as sweet as honey. This Avestaic word is madhé which 
corresponds to the Sanskrit: madhd, Lat. mel, and French miei, 
4.€., honey. 

2. Secondly, the root of the word shows its medicinal] virtue. 
It comes from an old Aryan root. mad or madh, Sans. az Latin 
mad-éri, meaning to make a remedy, from which comesour English 
word medicine. “D&ru,” (5518 ), the later Persian word for wine 
which is now commonly used in Gujarati, also has the etymologi- 
cal meaning of medicine. Davd-ddru is a colloquial phrase for 
medical treatment., It comes from an qld Aryan root dru, 
Sanskrit dhru, meaning to be strong, to be healthy. 


8. Thirdly, it was prescribed as nourishment to ladies in 
their accouchement (Vendidad V, 52). 


4. Fourthly, being a nourishing drink, its use was per- 
mitted even among the priesthood (Vendidad XIV, 17). 


5. Fifthly, in one of the later writings, the Afrin-i-Gaham- 
bar, where they speak about the six Gahambars, it is said that 
the merit of celebrating the last season, festival of the year, 
the Hamaspathmaédem Gahamb4r, in honour of the creation of 
man, is just the same as that of feeding the poor and the 
pious. In the food referred to here, wine is spoken of as a 
part of the diet. At one time, it was generally thought, ana 


THE {FRINGAN 395 


even now it is thought by some, to be very meritorious to 
taste a little of the wine used in the religious ceremonies of 
the Gahambar festival. 


6. Sixthly, an allusion to wine in the recital of the blessings 
of the marriage ceremony of the Ashirvac, shows that the wine 
used in the old Parsee books was not the wine that intoxi- 
cated, The officiating priests, in the recital of a long list\of 
blessings that are invoked upon the marrying couple, wish the 
bride and bridegroom to be as sparkling and cheerful.as wine. 


Coming to the time of the Pahlavi literature ofthe Parsees, 
which flourished during the period of the Sassénian dynasty, 
we find Pahlavi writers permitting the use of wine and preach- 
ing moderation. Adarbad Marespand, in his Pand-nameh, or 
Book of Advice, thus admonishes his son: ‘‘ Make a moderate 
use of wine, because he who makes an immoderate use, commit- 
teth various sinful acts.”’ The Ddadisténi-dini (ch. L., LI.) 
allows the use of wine and admonishes every man to exert 
moral control over himself. To the robust and intelligent 
who can do without wine, it recoramends abstinence. To 
others it recommends moderation. Only that man is justi- 
fied to take wine, who can thereby do some good to himself, 
or at least can dono harm to himself. If his himata, hikhia, 
and hvarshta, t.e., his good thoughts, good words, and good 
deeds are in the least perverted by drink, he must abstain 
from it. The book advises a man to determine for himself 
once for’ all what moderate quantity he can take without 
doing any harm. Having once determined that quantity, he 
is never to exceed it. The most that aman should take is 
three glasses of diluted wine. If he exceeds that quantity 
there is a likelihood. of bis good thoughts, words, and deeds 
being perverted.1 The Dinkard (Vol. I, p. 4) considers excessive 
drinking to be a sin as it keeps away a person from prayers. 


1 On the subject of the trade of wine-sellers, the Dadist&n-i-dini says, 
that not only is a man who makes an improper and immoderate use of 
wine guilty, but also a wineseller who knowingly sells wine to those 


396 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


Flowers play a prominent part in the Afringin Ceremony. Hf 
Sia flowers are not available, leaves of any frag- 
Afringan Ceremo- Yant plant like the sabza (basil) are used. It 
ae appears, that, in former times special flowers 
were used for the Afringins of particular 
Yazatas or angels in whose honour or with whose Khshniiman 
the separate Afringins were recited. It appears that the 
ancient Persians had, as it were, a language of flowers of-their 
own. The Bundehesh (Chap. XXVII, 24) gives a list.of the 
different flowers which were said to be the special flowers of the 
different Yazatas. The association of the different flowers with 
the different angels depended upon the moral qualities or charac- 
teristics believed to have been associated with those angels. 
For example, the Ameshispenta Sheherivar (whose Avesta name 
is Khshathra Vairya) represents the Sovereign Will of God. 
Then he presides over the sovereign power of kings. He typified 
sovereignty, both physical and mental. The sovereignty of 
a king implies Order, Equity. or Justice. So Plutarch re- 
presents Sheherivar as the god of Order, Equity or Justice. 
Now, according to the Bundehesh, the flower known as “ Shah- 
Asparém ”’ or the Royal Asparem is the special flower of this 
Ameshaspenta.. This specialisation is very appropriate. The 
Shaih-asparem.of the Bundehesh is the flower ‘ basil.’ The word 
‘ Basil’ comes from Basilicus. This flower is the “ Konigskraut”’ 
of the Germans. It is the “plant royale ”’ of the French. We 
thus see, that the flower Shih-asparem or the Basil is very ap- 
propriately specialized as the flower of Sheherivar who presides 
over sovereignty—sovereignty of body and sovereignty of 
mind. It appears then, that, in former times, when one recited 


who make an improper use of it. It was deemed improper and unlaw- 
ful for a wine-seller to continue to sell wine, for the sake of his pocket, 
to a customer who was the worse for liquor. He is to mako it a point to 
sell wine to those only who can do some good to themselves by that 
drink, or, at least, no harm either to themselves or to others. For the 
use of wine among the Persians, as referred to by the Classical writers, 
&e. vide my Paper “ Wine among the ancient Persians ” (1888). 


THE {FRINGAN 397 


the Afringan with the Khshniman of Sheherivar, he used eight 
Shéh-asparem or Basil flowers which symbolized sovereign will. 
In the same manner, in the recital of the Afringans of different 
Yazatas, different flowers, which were special to them and 
which symbolized the special characteristics or qualities over 
which the Yazatas presided, were used. 


The following list shows the connection of different flowers 
with different Yazatas. 


Probable equivalent 
names in English. 


Pahlavi name of 
the flower. 


Name of the 
Yazata. 


a 


1 [Ahura Mazda ../Miaird Yasmin ../Jasamine with leaves like 


2 |[Bahman .. ..{(Saman-i-safid a8 trots iile. 

3 |Ardibehesht ..(Merezan gosh Sweet Marjoram, 

4 |Sheherivar . .|Shah-sparem asil-royal 

5 (Spendérmad —_..|Faranj-mashk ~jA sweet Basil, lit., the 


_ musk of the Firangis or 
Franks. 


6 |Khordid . .|Susan, Py, . {Lily. 
7 |Amerdad.. . |\Chambé . .[Itis the Sanskrit Champak. , 
8 |Daepa-adar ws vrs (vadrang) |Orange flower. 
ai. 
9 |Adar ae a Azergun .|The Anemone or the Mazri- . 
gold. 
10 |Aban «.. ..|Nilo-par —.. . .|Water-lily. 
ji |Khorshed . .|Marv-i-sped ae Cat-thyme (Gerrian, Kat- 
; zen-kraut. French, Le 
: Marum). . 
j2 |Mohor.. . .,{Ruges . {Rush or Leek. 
“13 Tir a ..|Vanadsh ../Flower of the Wan tree. 
14 Gosh... .jMeren ~.. , .|Vine-flower (French, Fleur 


de vigne. Germ, Wein- 
blithe). 


..|A flower of the species 
Pandanus odoratiasimus. 
. .|Violet. 


15 |Daepa-meher_ ..|KArad bie 
16 Meher... ../Vanush a 
17 jSraosh .. . .|Kheri Sorkh ae 


t 


Pepper grass. 


$98 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


Names of the Pahlavi name of Probable equivalent 
Yazata. the flower, names in English. 
pee 
18 [Rashna .. ..JNistarun  .. . .(Narcissus. 
19 |Farvardin . |Aoroz $s . .|Cock’s comb. 
20 |Behram .. ../Sisonbar =... ..{Water mint. 
21 [Rams . {Kheri zerd .. . .|Xellow Pepper grass: 
22 {Guid ../Vadrang-bui . ,|Mountatn-balm. 
23 |Despe.din . {Shambalit .. . .|Fenu-greek. 
24{Din .. ..\Guli-sadvarg  ..{Rosa centi-folia, 
2. | Ashisang os Beaks hamak Va- |Buphthalmus. 
26 |Astad ../Hamak Hom-i-Safid/White Haoma. 
27 |Aeman .. ..{Nané nanu sparam |Bread-vegetable. 
28 |Jamyaéd .. . {Kalkam 4...) ..)Saffron, Crocus. 
29 |Marespand . .JArtashiran).. ..|A bitter plant, 
80 |Anerén .. .-|Haoma.daté ai Hom|Haoma. 


The flowers are at first generally kept in a small tray on the 
The arrangement » left, and, on the commencement of the recital 
tnd the Exchange of each Kardé or section of the Afringan, 


of the Flowers. 


‘The Expression of , eight flowers are taken. into the principal tray 


Approval. 


containing the myazd, t.e., milk, water, wine: 


sherbet fruit, &c. The eight flowers are arranged in two rows. 
The first flowers lower down in both these rows point towards 
the fire vase opposite. The three next are arranged face to face. 
The following diagram shows the arrangement of the flowers : 


— p ann 
—, —— 
—>- <a 


—~ o> 
oon ly 


THE AFRINGAN- ~~ -- 399 


The flowers are arranged as above before the commencement 
of each Kardeh of the Afringans. At the end of the recital of 
the first or the variable part of the Afringan, the Raspi or the 
Atravakhshi gets up from his seat on the carpet and the Zoti 
gives him the lowest flower on the right hand side and himself 
holds the lowest on the left hand side. The former, while receiving 
the flower, utters the words “Ahurahé Mazd4o raévato Kharen- 
anghaté,”’ 7.e., “ of the Glorious and Brilliant God.”” Then both 
recite together the second or the invariable part of the Afrin- 
gans, the Kardé of Afrinami. As said before, this part of the 
Afringan invokes the blessings of God upon the ruler of the 
land. Both recite this portion holding the flowers in their 
hands. 


In Persia, the Zoroastrian priests hold up their finger instead 
of a fower. It seems that in ancient times, there was the prac- 
tice for people to hold up their fingers to show approval and 
consent. In Tibet, even now, when a person with whom you 
converse, wants to show his approval or agreement with what 
you say, he raises up his finger. Just as you nod your head a 
little to show, that you follow what another person with whom 
you converse says, the Tibetan, now and then raises his finger. 
We learn from, Firdousi that that is a very old custom. When 
Piran entrusted’ young Kaikhosru to some shepherds to be 
brought up under their care, in order to save him from the | 
grasp-of his maternal grandfather Afrasy4b, who, as the result 
of.a dream, thought of killing the boy-prince, the shepherds 
now and then raised up their fingers to show their approval 
and consent: 1 


1 wy 5 ac i st 985! ols, (Vuller’s Firdusii. Lieber Regum, 
Tomus secundus p. 6781, 2648. Mecan’s Calcutta ed. Vol. II p. 482 1. 
3. Mohl‘s Paris ed. Vol. II p. 420.) Vide my paper on “ A Tibetan form 
of Salutation, suggesting an explanation of a Parsee ritual,” in the 
Sir J.J. Z. Madres& Jubilee Volume, pp. 408-14. Vide also my paper 
on ‘Tibetan Salutations and a few thoughts suggested by them.” 
(Journal of the Anthropological Society of Bombay of 1914, Vide my 
Anthropological Papers, “Part II, pp. 120-21.) 


400 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


This part of the ritual seems to indicate, that, as there is 
one God above to rule over the world, there must be one King 
here as his representative to rule over the country. He must 
be powerful enough to over-rule all impiety, injustice, 
misrule, oppression and immorality. 

On, finishing this second part, both the priests exchange their 
flowers. This exchange symbolizes the exchange of lives. bet- 
ween this world and the next. Souls are born and souls pass 
away. How do they doso? That is indicated and symbolized 
by the next process in connection with the flowers. The priests 
recite twice the prayer of Humatanim, etc, (Yagna Haptan-. 
ghaiti, Yagna XXXV, 2), wherein the reciters say that they. 
praise those who practise good thoughts, good. words and good 
deeds, Now the Parsee books say that a pious righteous soul 
passes away to the other world, to the paradise, with three, steps 
reciting, at each stage, the words Humata, Hukhta and Hvarshta, 
i.e:, good thoughts, good words and good deeds,1 So, at this 
juncture, the Zoti, while reciting the above words Humatanam, 
etc,, lifts up the three flowers on the right hand side, one by one, 
beginning from above. ‘Then, reciting the same prayer of Huma- 
tandm for the second time, similarly lifts up the three flowers on 
the left hand side, but commencing from below. This process - 
and this recital symbolize the above view, that a pious righteous 
soul has to come down to and move about inthis world and 
then to pass away from this world to the other with the triad of 
good thoughts, good words and good. deeds. Having thus lifted 
up the two sets of three flowers with the above prayer praising 
goodness of thoughts, words and deeds, he gives them into” 
the hands.of the Raspi, who, in the end, returns them to him. 
He finally places them on one side in the tray. At the first 
recital of the Humatandm prayer and at the first lifting up of 
the flowers, the Raspi stands on one side of the Fire-vase, 1.z., 
on the right hand side of the Zoti, and, atthe second recital, on 
the other side. He, thus, changes his situation, to symbolize 
the change of situation on the part of the soul, after death. 


1 Vide also the Vispa himata prayer : “‘ All good thoughts, good 
words and good deeds lead ys to Heaven,” 


THE {FRINGIN: ; 401 


After the above recitals and after the abovesaid two processes 

tiie poliaina- ef of lifting the flowers from their two rows, the 
the directions with Raspi, who was all along standing before the 
melee fire-vase holding in his hand the ladle with 
which he placed sandal-wood on the fire-vase, presents the ladle 
to the Zoti. The Zoti holds it from the side of the broad blade 
and the Raspi, from the side of the end of the handle. Both 
recitean Yathd-Ahu-Vairyé and an Ashem Vohu. While reciting 
the Yathd, the Zoti moves the ladle in the tray before him 
pointing out the four sides or directions. While reciting 
the Ashem, he points to the four corners. In short, 
he points, as it were, to the different directions of the 
movements of the sun. In pointing out thefirst four directions 
he draws, as it were, a cross x . We know, that anth- 
ropologists say, that the Cross existed before Christ, that it 
symbolized to some extent the ancient sun-worship and pointed 
out the different directions in connection with the sun. In that 
respect, it resembled, to a certain extent, the savastikd of the 
Hindus which similarly symbolized the movement of the sun. 
Thus, the pointing of the different sides and corners with the 
ladle was something like describing a savastikd. 


After reciting the Yath& and the Ashem, two more Yatha- 
ahu-vairyés and_an ‘ Yasnemcha’ are recited, Then the two 
priests pass their hands into each other’s hands in a particular 
way. This process of passing hands is known as Hamdzor. Then 
a short recital of the Humatanim, etc., finishes the Afringén 
prayer. The Zoti then recites one or more Afrins, The 
priests are, at this last stage, paid their fees spoken of as asho- . 
ddd. Iwillheredescribe the terms (a) Hamdzor and (b) Ashéddd 
above referred to. 


The Hamazar plays ati important part in several ceremonies 

of the Parsees. It is a particular way in 

which, at the end of several ceremonies, one 

person passes his hands into the hands of another person. One 

person, say A, holds forth both his hands flattened out 
61 


(a) Hamazor. 


402 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


" and in the position of the thumbs being uppermost and the 
palm of one hand facing parallel to the palm of.the other. 
Another person B, with whom he makes the Hamazor, similarly 
holds forth his hands, placing his flattened right hand between 
A’s flattened hands. This process places the flattened right 
hand of A, in turn, between B’s flattened hands. Thus, each 
holds the right hand of another in the folds of his hands. Having 
thus placed them, they, with a graceful movement withdraw the 
right hands and similarly pass their left hands in the folds of the 
hands of another. After thus passing their hands into each other’s 
hands they lift their hands towards their heads just as if to 
touch them with the tips of their fingers, which is the usual 
way of saluting elders or superiors. This graceful movement of 
hands is spoken of as “‘ Hamazor karvi”’ or-“* Hamazor levi,” 
i.e., “ to make the Hamazor ”’ or ‘‘ to take the Hamazor.”’ 


The following are the ceremonies at the end of which the 

Hamazor is\generally performed. 1. The 

- pel Obey rere Yajashné. 2: The Vendidéd. 3. The 

which the Hama- Visperad. “4. The Afringan. 5. The recital 

pie alee Nyaishes jointly by a number of persons 
forming a congregation. 

During the first three ceremonies, it is generally the two 
priests who take part in the ceremonies that perform the Hama- 
vor, In the case of the' Vendidad when it is recited for the 
Nirangdin, . the second priest, i.¢, the Raspi, or the 
Atravakhshi, at the conclusion of the ceremony, performs 
the Hamazor with other priests and laymen assembled to super- 
intend and witness the ceremony. 


In the case of the Afringan ceremony, the two priests, the Zoti. 
and the Atravakhshi, perform the Hamazor at the end of each 
Afringan, i. e.,.at the end of each Kardé of the Afringan. If 
there is a large number of priests present and if there is a large 
congregation of laymen before which the ceremony is performed, 
at the end of the recital of the last Kardé of the Afring4n, the 
Atravakhshi goes round the assembly and performs Hamazor 


THE {FRING{N 408 . 


with the other priests and laymen. This custom of making 
HamAzor with others is getting a little out of practice in Bombay, 
but is still in practice in the Parsee towns of Gujarat. 


In the case of the recitals of the Nydishes jointly by a 
congregation, the Hamazor is performed by the persons assem- 
bled with several persons standing next to them. For example, 
the Oothamna ceremony on the third day after death ig 
such an occasion when there are joint recitals of the Khorshed 
and Meher Nydishes. There, after the recital of the Pazend 
Doi Nam-setayeshné, which always follows the recital of the 
Nyaishes, this performance of the Hemazor follows. Again, at 
some ceremonial gatherings, the Atash Nyaish is jointly recited. 
There also the Hamazor is performed after the recital of the Do& 
Nam-setayashné. , 


In such religious and ceremonial gatherings, people generally 
take their stand according to their seniority or superiority. 
The Dastur or the Head Priest or a senior has his place gene- 
rally in the middle and in the front. At the proper time, he 
performs the Hamazor with a few near him, beginning with the 
next juniors, standing next to him. The latter continues it 
with those next to him, and so on. Thus, the whole assembly 
makes the Hamazor, each person making it with the few round 
about him. 


I think, that the Hamazor of the Parsees resembles the 
The Hamazor of Kiss of Peace of some of the Bene-Israels of 
the Parsees and fy) qi a 
fie Kies of Peano India and the Kiss of Peace of some of the . 
of some of the Early Christians. Rev. J. H. Lord thus 
- Pone-Teracls ve unt describes the Kiss of Peace of the Bene 
Early Christians. Israels : 


“ Emanating from the chief minister, who bestows it on the 
elders nearest to him, it passes throughout the congregation, ' 
Each individual seeks it, as far as possible, from his senior or 
superior. Extending the arms with the hands flattened out, 
and in the position of the thumbs being uppermost, the person 


404- OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


approached takes the hand between both of his own, similarly 
held, and, the junior then probably places his remaining hand on 
the outside of one of those of the person already holding his 
other hand. The hands of each are then simultaneously released 
and each one immediately passes the tips of his fingers which 
have touched those of his neighbour to his mouth and kisses 
them. He then passes on to receive the same from, or to bestow 
the same on, another ; and so on, till all in the Synagogue have 
saluted one another. Two or three minutes may be occupied in 
the process. A movement is going on all through the Syna- 
gogue, and 4 distinctly audible sound of the lips is heard 
through the building, till all is finished.1’’ As tothe occasions 
when the Kiss of Peace is observed among the Bene- 
Israels, he says: “It is, of course, not difficult to believe 
in the possibility of the practice having been handed down 
amongst the Bene-Israels, and having been without break used 
by them on occasions of their meeting together at circum- 
cisions, and for such other communal meetings as they may 
_have kept up amongst themselves from the first.”’ 


The points of similarity between the Hamazor of the Parsees 
and the Kiss of Peace of the Bene-Israels, when observed in 
congregations, are the following: (a) The movements of 
hands is similay.. (6) In both, they emanate from the chief 
minister. (c) In both, each makes it with, or bestows it 
upon, the elders nearest to him. (d) In both, they pass 
throughout. the congregation. 


The only point of difference is this, that, while among the 
Bene-Israels the process ends with a kissing of the tips of the 
fingers of the hands, among the Parsees, it ends with the 
taking of the tips of the fingers to the forehead with a gentle 
bow. 


1 The Jews in India, and the Far East, by the Rev. J. H, Lord (1907) 
pp. 30-31. Vide my paper, “ The Kiss of Peace among the Bene-Israels 
of Bombay and the Hamazor among the Parsees ” (Journal of the An- 
thropological Society of Bombay, Vol. VIII, No. 2, pp. 84-95. Vide my 
Anthropological Papers, Part I, pp. 283-94). ; 


THE 4FRINGIN 405 


The word Hamd inthe word Hamazor is Avesta, hama, Sans- 
; krit sam, Latin simul, similis, English same. 
oe he meaning of The word Zor is Avesta Zaothra and comes 
from the root Zu, to perform a ceremony. 
So, the word Hamajor means “to be the same or to be one in 
ceremony.’’ One of the principal participants or performers of 
the ceremony, by passing his hands in the hands of others, 
symbolically makes them participate in the ceremony he had 
performed. Thé members of the congregation by performing 
the Hamazor with one of the principal celebrants make 
themselves participants in the ceremony. After the per- 
formance of the Hamazor and at the end of the ceremony, they 
subsequently make the chdshni, i.e., they eat a little of the 
consecrated things and thereby further show themselves as 
participants in the advantages or good’ resulting from the 
ceremony. 


While performing the Hamazor, they recite the words 

The formula re- ‘Hamézor ham& ashobéd,” ¢.e., “May you be 
sited while per- one(with us) in the ceremony and may yoube 
oe ie ashé_or righteous.’’ Therecital of the woras 
signify and emphasize the object and aim of the performance 
of the Hamazor ceremony. . The ultimate object of all cere- 
monies, rites and sacrifices is to elevate the mind of the performers 
or the worshippers. A ‘ sacrifice’ does not fulfil its object unless it 
makes the participant ‘ sacred,’ unlessit elevates his thoughts, 
and makes him a better man. So, after performing the 
sacrificial service, one of the principal celebrants passes 
his hands into those of the other members of the congregation 
and lets them pass theirs into his, and by this symbolic mixing 
of hands, makes them participants in the ceremony and wishes 
them or rather asks them to be ashé, 1.e., righteous. 


From the fact, that a Hamazor was performed in the Liturgical 
The Hamazor on Services with a view to signify participation 
8 New Year'sday. and unity and with a wish that the person 
with whom it was performed may berighteous, the Hamazor has 


406 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


come to signify a religious or solemn way of communicating one 
another’s good wishes on the Naoroz or the New Year’s 
day. To the laymen, it is best known in connection with this 
New Year’s day. Early in the morning of that day, after wash- 
ing and putting on new apparel, the male members of the 
family exchange this form of salutation and of expression of 
good wishes. Friends do.the same when they meet one another. 
‘* $l mubarak,”’ t.¢., “May the year be auspicious,’ and 
“* Dér zi va shad ui,” i.e., “ May you live long and may you 
live happy,’’ are other additional words, at times, uttered with 
this form of the exchange of salutations. Membersofia family, 
or friends, if at variance, are expected to forget.on the New 
Year’s day their differences and to unite and-be friendly with 
the performance of the Hamazer. A generation or two ago, it 
was a custom for the head of a family, i.¢.; the head, senior 
or elder member representing the block from which several 
chips had descended, to call .a mijlas or a gathering at his 
place in the morning of the New Year’s day for the purpose 
of the Hamazor. All the members of the family met together 
and exchanged Ham4zor. 

We see from what is said above, that behind the outward pass- 

Spiritual Hama- ing of hands in the Hamazor which signifies 
zor, unity, harmony, participation, there lies the 
inner idea, which demands that the participants must unite in 
the works of righteousness. So, behind, what we may call, the 
** physical Hamazor’’, there is what we may term the “ spiritual 
Hamazor.”” The participants in the ceremony, in the ritual, 
in the recital are asked to be one with the chief celebrant in 
some religious acts which may lead to an increase of righteous- 
ness in the world. From this view of the ritual there is not 
only the Hamazor —the physical Hamazor—between Man and_ 
Man, but there is also a kind of Hamazor—a kind of 
spiritual Hamazor between Man and Nature, between Man 
and Nature’s God. The Pazend Afrins recited in the above- 
described Afringén ceremonies are replete with expressions 
about this kind of Hamazor with God and his Nature. For 


tue AFRINGAN 407 


example, in the Afrin of Ardafarosh, there is a long list 
of Hamazorss-Hamazor with Ahura Mazda and Hamazor 
even with many abstract ideas, all leading to a conception 
of righteous moral life. The purport of this part of the 
Afrin is, that one must try to be one with the Harmony, 
Order, System established by God in Nature. The Hamazors 
with the divisions of Time and the divisions of Space~ in 
the Great Infinity of Time and Space—divisions brought 
about by the movements of Heavenly bodies—are all intended 
with a view to that Harmony, Order or System, Let man 
try to be one with that Harmony, Order or System. 


Ash6-dad literally means “ what is given (ddd) to the righteous 

to the holy (ashé).”” Hence the fees, or gifts 
given to the members of the Holy Order or 
the priesthood are generally spoken of as “ ashédad.”’ After- 
wards, now-a-days, the word is.sometimes employed even for 
the money-gift given at the temples to the Parsee poor, whether 
priests or laymen. 


(6) Ashd-dad. 


The ashéddd, or the fees to the priests, does not only consist 
of payment in money, but also payment in kind. At the Uth- 
amna ceremony;.on the third day after death, besides payment 
in money, payment in cloth is made. A sudreh or a sacred. shirt 
is given\to each priest invited for the ceremony. Again, the 
Daruns_or sacred breads and the myazd offered in the Sraosh 
Bij are taken by the family priest as a part payment, 
In some ceremonies, such as the Naojote and the Marriage, a 
part of the payment consists of grain. These grain payments 
are generally known as ‘ akhiana.’ 


-CHAPTER XVII. 


Il.—_THE FAROKHSHI. 


The word Farokhshi is another form of Fravashi, The prayer. 
recited under this name is so called, because 
Farokhshi. 
it is intended to remember, invoke \and 
praise the Fravashis of the dead. Like the Afringan, it is gen- 
erally recited over fruits, flowers, milk, wine, water, etc., and 
before fire. Its recital consists of the recital of the Satim and 
the Avesta portion of the Farvardin Yasht. At times, and that 
very rarely, the recital of the Farvardin Yasht~is proceeded 
with the recital of the Yagna chapters of the Baj recital, which, 
in that case is spoken of as Baj dharnu (lit. holding the Baj) 
of the Farokhshi. It is recited by one priest and has very 
little of ritual. As Farokhshi isthe recital of the prayers for 
the Fravashis, and as these Fravashis or Farohars play a very 
important part in the religion, of the Parsees, and as many 
ritualistic ceremonies refer to the Fravashis, a description of the 


Fravashis is essential. 


Fravashi is the original Avesta term and Farohar is its later 
‘The Fravashisor » 10rm. The word is too technical to be suffi- 
the Ferohars. ciently and properly rendered into English. 
Prof. Harlez says: It is difficult to determine their nature (leur 
nature parait assez difficile & déterminer.)! Rev. Dr. Casartelli 
says: “Il y a peu de sujets qui présentent plus de difficulté, 
tant dans lesystéme avestique que dans celui du mazdéisme plus 
récent, que celui des esprits appelés fravdhars, fardhars, fravash ou 
fréhars. L’embarras principal provient de ce que le nom est 
appliqué & une faculté de l’4me humaine unie au corps pendant 
la vie, et & cette faculté détachée du corps et menant la vie, 


1 Avesta, Livre sacré du Zoroastrisme : Introduction p. CXIX. 


THE FAROKHSHI 409. 


indépendante d’un esprit céleste.’’! The word Fravashi comes. 
from Avesta prefix fra, Sans.pra, Pers. far, Lat. pro. German vor, 
Eng. forth, meaning forward, and the Avesta root vakhsh, Sans. - 
qa per vakhshidan, Germ. waschen, Eng. wax, meaning to 
‘grow.’ So Fravashi is that power or spiritual essence in a 
substance which eriables it to grow. Neryésang in his Sanskrit 
translation, renders the word by vrudhdhi, 7.e., increase. The 
proper name Frawartish which we come across in the Cuneiform 
Inscriptions (Behistun IT, 5) and the name Phraortes which we 
find in Herodotus (Bk. I, 73, 102) are derived from the word’ 
Fravashi. We learn from the etymological meaning of the word 
and from all that is written about it in the Avesta books, that 
Fravashi is a spirit, a guardian spirit, inherent in everything, 
animate orinanimate which protects it from.decay and enables 
it to grow, flourish and prosper. Every good object in Nature 
has its Fravashi which protects it and helps its development. Dr. 
Haug’s definition gives some idea of what it is, though I would 
rather use the word ‘ spirit ’in place of ‘ angel.’ He says, “ these 
Frohars ‘or protectors, who are numberless, are believed to be 
angels, stationed everywhere by Ahuramazda for keeping the 
good creation in order, preserving it, and guarding it against the 
constant attacks of fiendish powers. Every being of the good 
creation, whether living, or deceased, or still unborn, has its own 
Fravashi or guardian, angel who has existed from the beginning. 
Hence they are a kind of prototypes and may be best compared 
to the ‘ideas’ of Plato who supposed everything to havea 
double existence, first in idea, secondly in reality.’’ 2 


All the Farohars were created by God before the creation of 
the Universe (Farvardin Yasht, XIII, 76). The Farvardin Yasht 
(Yasht XTII, 59-62) gives their number to be 99,999. But one 
must understand from that number, that, in the Avesta, it 
gives an idea of being innumerable. In this Yasht, 99,999 


1 Le Philospohie Religieuse du Masriciome sous les Sassanides,”’ par 
L. C. Casartelli, pp. 76-77. 3 
2 Haug’s Essays on the Parsees, 2nd edition, p, 206. 
52 


410 OUTER LITURGIOAL SERVICES 


-Fravashis or individual spiritual essences are spoken of as pro- 
tecting and looking after the sea Vourukasha (the Caspean). 
The same number looks after the constellation of Haptoirang 
(Ursa Major), the body of KeresAspa, and the seed of Zoroaster. 
So their rumber is innumerable. As the grand universe, the 
whole Nature is made up of innumerable objects, animate or 
inanimate, large or small, and as each object has its own Fravashi 
or some individual inherent spiritual essence which maintains 
and supports it, it is evident that there are innumerable such 
spiritual essences all emanating from that Great Divine Essence 
of God who has created them, and who has=made use of 
them. 


Ahura Mazda is the Great Architect of the Universe. He is 

The Fravashis the Creator ofthe Material as well as 
are Spiritual Eesen- the Spiritual world. The Fravashis form 
Siok Ebadd en the creation of the Spiritual world. In the 
Higher Intelligen- spiritual hierarchy, they stand, as it were, 
“ fourth inthe order of supremacy. There is 
believed to exist a beautiful relation between the different 


Higher Intelligences of the Hierarchy. 


1. Ahura Mazda (The Omniscient Self-existent Lord) is at the 
head of all. 


2. Next come his Ameshaspentas (The Bountiful Immortals) 
who. are his own creation (Ahura Mazda Yasht, Yasht I, 25). 
Ahura Mazda who is self-created (Khadhata, Khuda) is himself 
one of the Ameshaspands. (Yasht I, 3; Yasht ITI, 1). 


3. Then come the Yazatas (lit., those who are worthy of 
being worshipped). The Ameshdspentas who stand higher in 
the order and Ahura Mazda himself who stands at the top are 
also included in the list of the Yazatas. They stand first in the 
list of the Yazatas. In later books, Ahura Mazda is spoken 
of as Yazdan, 7.e., the Yazds in the plural, or the Yazata of the 
VYazatas. 


THE FAROKHSHI 411 


4. Then come the Fravashis (z.e., the guarding or protecting 
spirits). Now, each of the Yazatas, who precede the Fravashis 
in the above order of hierarchy, has his own Fravashi. The 
Ameshaspentas who stand higher have each their own Fravashis. 
Then Ahura Mazda who stands at the top has his own Fravashi 
(Yagna XXTII, 2; XXVI 2, 3). 


Ahura Mazda, the Omniscient Lord, has allotted to the-Fra- 

The Work ofthe Vashis the work of helping the creation, 
Fravashis in the (farvardin Yasht ; Yasht XTIT, 1,19). They 
creation of the Uni- 
verse, help in sustaining the sky (Ibid, 2, 22, 28, 29, 
Yagna XXIII, 1), in letting the great river Ardvigura flow (Yasht 
XIII, 4), in supporting the earth (Yasht XIII; 9, 22, 28; Yana 
XXIII, 1). They help mothers in maintaining the children in the 
womb and in the work of delivery (Yasht XIII, 11, 22, 28; 
Yagna, XXTIT,1,15). Itis these spiritual essences, these guiding 
and guarding spirits that help the waters to flow (Yasht XIII, 14, 
22, 28; Yacna XXIII, 1), the trees to grow, the winds to blow 
(Yasht, XITI, 14, 22, 28);the Sun, the Moon and the Stars to 
move in their orbits (Yasht XIII, 16). To them, the cattle 
owe their growth and» spread (Yagna XXIII, 1,12). The 
purport of all. this is, that there is the Divine hand of God in 
everything. .Through His Fravashis or the protecting, guiding 
and guarding Spirits, He maintains all and rules over 
all. 


~ We learn from the Farvardin Yash that all the objects of 
Nature have their Fravashis, but artificial 
objects have none, Ahura Mazda and the 
Ameshaspentas have their Fravashis (Yasht 
XU; Yaena XXII, 2-4; XXVI, 2-3). The Yazatas and 
mankind have their Fravashis (Yasht XIII, Yagna XXTIT, 2-4), 
The sky, waters, earth, fire, trees, cattle, all have their Frava- 
shis (Yasht XIII, 2). All the objects of Nature, as divided 
into three classes, 1. the Vegetable world, 2. the Mineral world, 
and 3, the Animal world, have their Fravashis. 


Two classes of 
Fravashis. 


- 412 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


From what is said above we may divide the Fravashis 
into two classes : 


(1) The Fravashis of Natural objects, 7.e., the transcendental 
-essences of the objects. (2) The Fravashis of men. 


According to the Avesta, allmatural objects have their Fra- 
(1) The Fravashis, vashis, but rot the objects that have been 
aang nean made from those natural objects. For_ex- 
objects. ample, the trees have their .Fravashis, 
but not the chair or the table that has been made fromthe wood 
of thetree. God has created the Fravashis of these natural ob- 
jects from the very beginning of creation. Before the creation 
of the object, there existed the Fravashi of that object, perfect, 
complete and correct. This conception of the Fravashi leads us 
‘to think that the Almighty had conceived the creation of every 
object in the Universe from the very beginning. In fact, he had 
conceived a complete, perfect and correct idea of the whole Uni- 
verse before its creation. He had, created or formed the trans- 
cendental spiritual essences of all o»jects before He created the 
objects themselves. Thespiritual essences existed at first, and 
then the objects resulted-from them. For example, the Avesta 
says that the earth itself hasa Fravashi. Now, asit also says that 
the Fravashi-existed before the creation of the object itself, it 
follows, that the Fravashi of the Earth existed or was created by 
God before He created, the Earth itself. What does that mean 
in common parlance ? It means that God had conceived befure- 
hand a-complete, perfedb, correct, harmonious, orderly system 
of the Earth, Frem that perfect conception, that correct idea, 
proceeded the creation of the earth. It existed in spirit before 
it existed in body. The earth, as we see'it now, is not a hap- 
hazard result of some kind of creation or formation, but it is the 
result of a correct order, a perfect system, which was conceived 
before the earth came into existence. Again, take the case of 
the Heaven which also has, according to the Avesta, its Frava- 
shi or a transcendental spiritual essence which existed before 
the creation of the Heaven. This also signifies that the 


THE FAROKHSHI 413 


‘Heaven also is not the result of some haphazard chance of — 
circumstances. No, the Almighty had created its Fravashi 
beforehand and had thus conceived a perfect system of its 
creation, evolution and development. The Heavens, as we 
see them now, are a result of such Omniscient Intelligence. 


The Zoroastrian belief about the Fravashis is connected with 
the idea of Eternity. Ahura Mazda is omniscient, omnipresent 
and omnipotent, and his omniscience, omnipresence and, omni- 
potence consist in, this, that he conceived, from thevery begin- 
ning of beginnings, if we may say so, from time unlimited 
(zravana akaréna), a most complete, a most correct, a most 
harmonious, a most orderly system of; the universe. The 
Fravashis or the Farohars played an important part in this 
conception, because the Fravashis of the Universe and its objects 
were the transcendental spirituel essences from which God 
evolved gradually the great universe. 


This view of the Fravashis as propounded in the Avesta 
shows beautifully the power and the wisdom of God. Take, for 
" example, a tree. It-has its Fravashi, 7.e., a transcendental 
Spiritual essence, pure and perfect, which existed somewhere 
before the tree came intu existence or assumed its present form 
and shape. With the birth, if we may so call it, of the tree, its 
Fravashi.continues with it. It is its guiding spirit. After a 
certain time, the tree dies. but not the Fravashi, It continues 
to exist somewhere in nature as a perfect. and pure transcenden- 
tal essence. This Avestaic view of the Fravashis teaches 
several facts. 


1. That there is something real, substantial, true, correct 
perfect, undying, behind the form and the figure of a thing 
which is always changing. That something real is always ex- 
isting, is eternal. : 


2. That God is omnipresent, omniscient, omnipotent and his 
omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence consist in this system 


414 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


— of the Universe which has come from eternity, which exists at 
present for eternity, and which will continue to exist for 
eternity. There is nothing spontaneous. Everything evolves 
from something, from transcendental essence which is something 
connected with the very essence of the Almighty. 


(a) The Fravashis of the Avesta remind us, as pointed out by 
The Fravashis of 8ug, of the ideas of Plato and of the pat- 
the Avesta, (a) the terns of the Bible. Ideas or the transcen- 
Ideas of Plato and 4 : ‘ 
(b) the Patterns of dental spiritual essences formed an important 
the Bible, part of the system of Plato’s ‘philosophy. 
According. to him, the material and phenomenal world is 
‘the result of some pre-conceived ideas. Matter existed 
from times eternal. That matter’ took form at some 
certain, time, but that form existed somewhere, long hefore . 
the matter took that form. These forms were Plato’s 
ideas. The ideas are eternal, invisible and imperishable, but the 
substances which take forms are subject to frequent changes. 
For example, just as, according to the Avesta, the Earth has its 
Fravashi, according to Plato it has its idea. The ‘idea’ of the 
Earth existed before the Earth itself. It was with that ‘idea’ 
before Him, with the help, as it were, of the ‘idea,’ that God 
created the world out of chaos. Milton uses the word ‘idea’ 
in that sense in the following lines : : 


“Thence to behold the new-created world 

The addition of his empire, how it showed 

In prospect from his throne, how good, how fair 

Answering his great idea.” (Paradise Lost, Book VII, Il. 

554-557.) 

: {b) Again, according to Dr. Haug, the Fravashis of the 
Avesta resemble the patterns of the Bible. That resemblance is 
not very great, but it does hold to a certain extent. God shows 
to Moses the pattern of the tabernacle which he wishes the 


Israelites to construct. He says: “According to all that I show 
thee, after the pattern of the tabernacle, and the pattern of all 


THE FAROKHSHI 418 


the instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it.’ (Exodus, 
XXV, 9). These patterns shown by God to Moses are the ideas 
or spiritual essences which led to the construction of the objects- 
The reference to the patterns in the New Testament more 
vividly suggests the ‘ideas.’ In the Epistle to the Hebrews by 
the apostle Paul, we read: “It was therefore necessary that the 
patterns of things in the heavens should he purified with 
these” (Hebrew IX, 23). 4 


Burnouf’s definition of the Fravashi, as understood by the 

(2) The Frava- Parsis, gives a correct idea of the Fravashi 
shis of man. of man. He says: ‘ By the Farohar, the 
Parsees understand the divine type of every being endowed 
with intelligence, his ‘idea’ in the thought of Ormuzd, the 
superior genius which inspires him /and which . watches 
over him.”? (Par Ferouer les Parses’ entendent le type 
divin de chacun des étres doués d’intelligence, son idée dans 
la pensée d’Ormuzd, le génie supérieur qui l’inspire et veille 
sur lui” (Burnouf : Commentaire sur le Yacna, p. 270). 


As every object of Nature-hasits Fravashi, so every man has 
his Fravashi, which God had created’ before the creation and 
which therefore existed somewhere before his birth. Thus, the 
birth of a child to-day is, in one respect, not a new phenomenon 
or event. It is an event which God had conceived at the very 
beginning of creation. The Fravashi of the child was created 
by God, milleniums before the date of the birth of the child. It 
existed from the very beginning, but it associated itself with the 
soul (urvan or ravdn) of the child at its birth in this world. It 
will continue to remain with the child or rather with the soul 
of the child as long as the child enjoys life (gaya, ahu, or ushidna). 
Onthedeath of the child, whether as a child or as a man, it will 
continue to exist as perfect, as pure, as sound and as innocent, 
as when it was first created. On death, it will separate itself 
from the body (fanu or asta, lit., bones) and from the soul 
(urvan) of the child and mix itself among all the holy 
Fravashis (hamdé ashé Farohar). 


416 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


- + Thus, in the matter of the Eternity of Existence,the Fravashi 
of a man may be said to have three periods of existence, 
though a continuous existence: (A) Before the birth of a 
man, his Fravashi had a “‘ pre-existence.”? (B) With his 
birth, it has “ co-existence’ or. what may be termed 
“earthly conscious -existence.’’ -(C) After his death, it has 
before it an eternal “future existence.’ Under these forms 
the Fravashis of men are spoken of as 


(A) Those of unborn persons (fravashayé a-Zétandm). 
.(B) Those of born persons (fravashay6 Zdiandm or Zavantdm). 
(C) Those of the dead (fravashayé irirathushdm). 


The work of: the Now what part doesthe Fravashi of a 
Bravashi of @ man man play in connection with man. What 
states. work has it to do ? 


As to what the Fravashi did in. what we have ternied its 
pre-existence, we know simply this, that, like 
the innumerable Fravashis, it did its work in 

“the field.of evolution. The world, or rather 

the universe as it is, is the result of development, of evolution, in 

which all the Fravashis take their part; so, with all the other 

Fravashis, the Fravashi of a particular man in its unborn 

{a-zdtanim) state had to do its work. : 


A. Thé Fravashi 
of an unborn man. 


Then, with the birth into this world of the man whose 
B. Thefravashi special Fravashi it is, its special work begins. 
of. a born m an. 
Difference betwéen ‘To understand that work, one must under- 
Urvana and Frava- . pay > 
SY (Sout. aad stand the relation betw een ® man’s urvan 
Spirit.) or Ravin and his Fravashi, or to speak in 
ordinary parlance, between his soul and guiding spirit. Ac- 
cording to the Avesta, a nian’s soul (urvan) is different from 
~ his guiding spirit (Fravashi), Several facts lead to show 


this. : 


(a) In the Khorshed and Meher NyAishes, a man invokes sepa- 
rately his soul and spirit (Haém urvanem yazamaidé. Haom 


4 


” Wits RARORHSHT 417 


Fravashim yazamaidé). (6) Urvan is masculine. Pravashé id : 
conceived as feminine. (¢) In the Fravardin Yasht, not only 
the Urvan and the Fravashi are considered to be separate 
spiritual parts of a man, but ‘other spiritual parts, such: as’ 
Daéna (Conscience), and Baodha (Intelligence) are spoken of 
as separate spiritual parts (Ahumcha Daénimtha, Baodhascha, 
Urvanemcha, Fravashimcha Vazamaidé. Yacna, Ha XXVI, ‘ 
4), (d) The Yacna (Ha XXIII, .4) speaks of each urvan 
(soul) having a separate Fravashi. There, ‘it is. said: “y 
invoke the Fravashi of my own soul’? (Ayasé yéshti havahé- 
uruno Fravashéé). (e) The Pahlavi books like the. Viraf némeh, 
the Mino-Kherad the Bundechesh, the Ganj-i-Shéyagan, all 
speak of them as two separate parts. 


Now the relation subsisting between the soul and its Fravashi 
will be better understood by comprehending what we may call 
the “ spiritual constitution of man.” 


A man‘is.made up of physicaland Spiritual parts, His urvan 

(soul) and Fravashi form his spiritual parts. 
-Ushtdna, i.e., the animaf life keeps up his 
body. \The animal life is kept up by the 
five senses. A moderate use of all the five senses is good for 
keeping up animal life. An immoderate use of the senses turns 
into a passion and is bad. The attachment of the soul to the 
body is atrial, an ordeal for the soul, As the enjoyment of 
the five senses is necessary and unavoidable to keep up animal 
life, the soul, while associating itself with the bodily life of a 
person, must look very sharp, lest an immoderate or undue 
use of the senses may contaminate it. It is good if the soul 
of a man separates itself in a pure, unalloyed uncontaminated 
state at the time when the animal life becomes extinct. If it 
does so, it is said to have passed the trial of this world well. 
One has to think, that the body is to be fed with the enjoyment 
of the senses in order to live and that it is not to be kept 
‘living in order to be fed. One must eat to live and not live 
to eat. 


* the episibdaleda: 
stitution of man, 


53 


418 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


-*Now it is the work of the Fravashi or the Farohar of a man 
to guide the wurvan or soul and not-let it be contaminated 
by an immoderate enjoyment of the senses. The Fravashi 
has, to guide the Urvan or the soul through the Baodha or 
the. Budhi or the spirit of intelligence. Just as a guide . leads 
# wayfarer, so the Farohar guides the soul of aman. A man 
or a soul who accepts that guidance is a wise man. Ifone were 
to ask from this point of view “‘ Whois the most fortunate man 
in this world ?”? We may reply in the spirit of the above quoted 
passage (ahumcha daenamcha: baodhascha urvanemcha frava- 
shimcha yazamaidé) that “A fortunate man is he;who accepts 
the guidance of his Fravashi, communicated to him through 
his intelligence (Baodha), and accepting the guidance, makes 
such an use of his five senses which lead. to support his life 
(ahu) as would keep his soul (urvam) pure and uncontaminated, 
so that when he has to pass on to the other world, he can - 
present himself before his God with a pure conscienc 
(daena).” 


The Fravashi of a living~man among the Zoroastrians 

ES Bale resembles, in good many points, the Genius 

FA ue ip her ad of the ancient Romans. The roots of both 
ao Ress aria the words signify well nigh the same thing. 
Fravashi comes from a root which signifies 

‘to increase’. Genius comes from a root gignere, to generate. 
‘Dr. William Smith says: ‘‘The genii of the Romans are the 
powers which produce life (diz genitales) and accompany man 
through it as his second or spiritual self. They were further 
not confined to man, but every living being, animal as well 
as man, and every place hadits genius. Every human being 
-at his birth obtained (sortitur) a genius, whom he worshipped 
as sanctus et sanctissimus deus, especially on his birth-day, with 
libations of wine, incense and garlands of flowers. The bridal 
bed was sacred to the genius, on account of his connection 
with generation, and the bed itself was called lectus genialis. 
On other merry occasions, also, sacrifices were offered to the 


THE FAROKHSHI 419 


genius........He (Genius) was worshipped on sad as. well 
as joyous occasions...... The genii are usually represented in 
works of art as winged beings.” (Classical Dictionary, word. 
Genius.) 


This passage shows that there are many points common to 
the Fravashis of the Zoroastrians and the genii of the Romans, 
(a2) As amofg the Romans, so among the Zoroastrians, the 
Fravashis were invoked on both, sad as well as joyous, occasions. 
(b) The Fravashis also, are, like the Roman genii, represented in 
old-Persian works of art as winged beings. In the Farvardin yasht 
(Yasht XIII, 70) they are represented as coming from the heaven 
like birds (Yatha n& mérégo hupéréno). (c) Among the Zoroas- 
trians, a3 among the Romans also, the Fravashis are invoked on 
bridal occasions. (d) They are represented as helping women in 
their labour of delivery (Yasht XTIT, 15). (e) Flowers, incense, | 
and. wine are used among the Zoroastrians as among the Romans 
in the ceremonies invoking the Fravashis, 


The Fravashis of the Avesta resemble the daimons of the 

‘The Fravashis of ‘Greeks .in several respects. The Greeks 
the Zoroastrians 
and the Daimons of took the Daimon to be a protecting spirit. 
the Greeks, Plato said that “ daimons aré assigned to 
men, at the moment of their birth, that they accompany men 
through life, and after death conduct their souls to Hades.” 
Pindar-spoke of the daimon as “the spirit watching over the 
fate of man from the hour of his birth.” The daimons are 
further described as “‘ the ministers and companions of the Gods 
who carry the prayers of men to the Gods, and the gifts of the 
Gods: to men.” Inthe Farvardin Yasht the Fravashis alsc 
are sepepionted as doing a similar errand (Yasht XIII, 01). 


Almost all nations, whether glats or new, of the East or the 
(C) The Fravashis West, the educated or the uneducated, have 
oe Re Fu- one form’ or another of venerating the 
Destiny of Soutafter dead. This veneration is connected with the 


death. belief in Future Life, Zoroastrianism 


420 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


believes in the immortality of the soul. The Avesta writings 
of the Hadokht Nask and the 19th chapter of the Vendidad 
and the Pahlavi books of the Minokherad and the Virat- 
nameh treat of the fate of the soul after death. The last men- 
tioned book contains an account of the journey of Ardai-Viraf 
through the heavenly regions. This account corresponds to 
that of the ascension of the prophet, Isaiah. Its notions about 
Heaven and Hell correspond to some extent to the Christian 
notions about them.! 


A plant called the Hom-i-saphid or white Homa, a name 
corresponding to the Indian Soma of the Hindus, is held to be 
the emblem of the immortality of the soul. According to Dr, 
Windischmann and Professor Max Miiller, this plant reminds 
us of the “Tree of Life’? in the garden of Eden.’ As in the 
Christian scriptures the way to the. Tree of Life is strictly 
guarded by the Cherubim, so in the Zoroastrian scriptures, 
the Hom-i-saphid, or the plant which is’ the emblem of 
immortality, is guarded by innumerable Fravashis or buar- 
dian spirits whose number, as given in various books, is 
99,999. A good dealof importance is attached in the 
Avesta and in the later Pahlavi writings to this question 
of the immortality of the soul, because a belief in this dogma 
is essential to the structure of moral principles. The whole 
edifice of -our moral nature rests upon its ground work. 
Dr. Geiger says on this point: ‘‘ Nowhere, 1 think, does the 
belief inthe future life after death stand out more prominently, 
nowhere are the ideas respecting it expressed more decidedly 
and carried out in all their details more fully, than among the 
Avesta people. Here the doctrine of immortality and of com- 
pensating justice in the next world forms a fundamental dogma 


1 Vide my papers before the Bombay Branch of the Royal Asiatic 
Society, Vol. XVIII pp. 192-205 and Vol, XXIII pp, 189-216, on ‘‘ The 
Divine Comedy of Dante and the Viraf-nameh of Ardai Viraf,” and 
on “ An Iranian Precursor of Dante and n Irish precursor (Adamnan) 
of Dante’’. Vide My ‘ Dante Papers,” 


THE FAROKHSHI 421 


of the whole system. Without it the Zoroastrian religion is 
in fact unintelligible ’’.! 


Again, Zoroastrianism believes in Heaven and Hell. Heaven 
is called Vahishta-chu in the Avesta books. It literally means 
the “best life.’ This word Vahishia has passed into Persian 
as “ Behesht,’’ which is the superlative form of ‘‘ veh,’”’ meaning 
" good,” and it corresponds exactly with our English word 
* best.”? Hell is known by the name of “ Achishta-ahu,’’ 4. €., 
“the worst life.” Heaven is represented as a place of radiance, 
splendour, and glory, and Hell as that of gloom;darkness, and 
stench. Between heaven and this world, there is supposed to 
be a bridge, named “ chinvat.’? This word—from the Aryan 
root ‘ chi,’? meaning to pick up, to collect,—means the place 
where a man’s soul has to present a collective account of the 
actions done in the past life.2 For.three days after:a man’s 
death, his soul remains within the limits of this world under the 
guidance of the angel Srosh. If the deceased be a pious man or a 
man who led a virtuous life, his soul utters the words “ Ushid- 
ahmdi yahmai ushid-kahmdi-chit.”’ i.e., ‘‘ Blessedness to him, by 
whom that which is his benefit becomes the benefit of any one 
else.”’ If he be a wicked man or one who led an evil life, 
his soul utters these plaintive words: “Kam nemoi Zdm? 
Kuthrd nemo ayeni?”? i.e., “To which land shall I turn ? 
Whither shall I go” @ 


On the dawn of the third night, the departed souls appear at 
the “Chinvat Bridge.’ This bridge is guarded by the angel 
Meher? Davar, ¢.e., Meher the Judge. He presides there asa 
judge assisted by the angels Rashna and Astad, the former 


1 Dastur Darab Peshotan’s Translation, Civilization of the Eastern 
Jranians in Ancient times, Vol. I, p. 98. 

2 The ‘ Chinvat”’ bridge of the Parsees reminds one of the “ oe a 
oi the Arabs, the ‘‘ Wogho” of the Chinese, and the ‘‘ Gioel] 0 oy 
** Bifrost” of the Scandinavians. 

8 Cf. my paper on“ Mithra, the Yazata of the Zorogstriansand Micha 
the saint of the Christians.” 


422 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


representing Justice and the latter Truth, At this bridge, and 
before this ange) Meher, the soul of every. man has to give an 
aceount of its doing in the past life. Meher Davar, the judge, 
weighs a man’s actions by a scale-pan. If a man’s good actions 
outweigh his evil ones, even by a small particle, he is allowed to 
pass from ‘the bridge to the other end and thence to heaven. 
Tf his evil actions outweigh his good ones, even by a small weight, 
he is not allowed to pass over the bridge, but is hurled down into 
the deep abyss of hell. If his meritorious and evil, deeds 
counterbalance each other, he is sent to a place known as 
Hamastgehan,’’ somewhat corresponding to the» Christian 
“* Purgatory ” and the Mahomedan“ Aeraf.”” His meritorious 
deeds done in, the past life would prevent him from going to hell 
and his evil actions would not let him go to heaven. 


Again ‘Zoroastrian books say that the meritoriousness of good 
deeds and the sin of evil ones, increase with the growth of time. 
As capital increases with interest, so good and bad actions done by 
a man, in his life increase, as it were, with interest in their effects. 
Thus a meritorious deed done in young age is more effective than, 
that very deed done in advanced age. For example, let that 
meritorious deed be valued in money. Let two friends, A and 
B, at the age of twenty-five, propose doing an, act of charity, 
viz., 2 donation of £1,000 to a charitable institution. A imme- 
diately gives the amount, and B postpones the act for some time 
and does it at the age of fifty. Calculating at the rate of four 
per cent., A’s gift of-£1,000 at the age of twenty-five is worth 
twice that of B at the age of fifty, z.e., twenty-five years later. 
Thus, the Dadistan-i-Dini, recommends man to follow the 
path of virtue from his very young age. A virtuous act per 
formed by a young man is more meritorious than the same act 
performed by ah old man. A man must begin practising virtue 
from his very young age. As in the case of good deeds and 
their meritoriousness, so in the case of evil actions and their 
sins. The burden of the sin of an evil action increases, as it 
were, with interest. A young man doing an evil act has long 


THR FAROKHSHi 493 


time and opportunities at his disposal to wash off, as it were, 
the effect of that act, either by repentance or by good deeds in 
return. If he does not take advantage of these. opportunities, _ 
the burden, of those evil deeds increases with time. 


’ Now, the veneration for the dead among the Zoroastri- 

Relation existing 8, rests on the belief, that the dead 
betwee site Ny ne have a future existence somewhere, and 
ugh the Fravashi. that there exists some relation, though 
invisible and spiritual, between the dead and the living 
(Yt. XIII, 49-52, 156-57). A father who did allhis best to 
look after the welfare of his children does not cease to do so 
altogether after his death. He continues to do so in an invi- 
sible or spiritual way. On the other/hand, the living who 
were loved and looked after by the. deceased father do. not 
and must not, forget the dead altogether. There exists some 
relation between, the living and the dead. The channel through 
which this relation continues is the Fravashis of the departed 
ones. We saw above, that on the death of a person, his soul 
(urvan or ravdn) meets with justice according to his merits or 
demerits. If he has deserved well, he goes to heaven, if not, to 
hell. His Fravashi, which guided him through life as a guiding 
spirit, parts from his soul and goes to its abode or place among 
all the Fravashis. It is the soul (urvan) that meets with good 
or evil consequences of its actions: The Fravashi or the guiding 
Spirit, was pure and perfect, unalloyed and uncontaminated 
from the beginning and has passed away as such. So it is this 
pure and perfect spiritual entity, the Fravashi, that is the medi- 
um,.as it were, of the continued relation between the living and 
the dead. After the third day after death, the Fravashi of the 


1 The belief of the ancient Egyptians about the future of the soul after 
death, was similar to that of the ancient Persians in several points. There 
was some similarity between the Fravashi of the Zoroastrians and the 
Ka of the Egyptians. For further particulars, vide my paper on ‘‘ The 
Belief about the Future of the soul among the ancient Egyptians and 
Iranians’? (Journal BB. BR. A.S. XIX, pp. 365-374, Vide my Asiatic 

- Papers, Part I, pp. 37-46.) 


424 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


departed dear one isinvoked. It is the Fravashi of the deceased 
that comes to the help of the living dear ones, provided they live 
a pure virtuous life and hold their departed dear ones in vene- 
ration. 


The relation subsisting between the two is, according to the 


Nature of the Avesta, reciprocal. Thé dead expect to be 
relation. remembered. by their living dear ones, and 


in their turn offer their help and assistance. We learn from the 
Farvardin Yasht what the wishes of the Fravashis of the depart- 
ed ones are. They exclaim: “ Who will praise us ?_ Who will 
offer us a sacrifice? Who will meditate upon us ? Who will 
bless us? Who will receive us with meat and elothes in his 
hand and with a prayer worthy of bliss 2? Of which of us will 
the name be taken for invocation ?’! These words of the 
Fravashis then show, what they expect from the living dear 
ones. They expect to be remembered and held in esteem and 

respect. In return, they offer the following blessings: ‘‘ May 

there be in this house flocks of animale and men! May theré 

be a swift horse and a‘solid.chariot.’’? Bearing in mind, that 

in those early days the cattle and the horse formed the wealth 

of a person, we understand by this, that the Fravashis in their 
turn offer to pray to God to give to their living dear ones pros- 
perity anda progeny of children. Again, we read: ‘‘ May 
these Fravashis come satisfied into this house; may they walk 
satisfied through this house! May they, being satisfied, bless 
this house, with the presence of the kind Ashi Vaughuhi! 
‘May they leave this house satisfied! May they carry back 
from here hymns and worship to the Maker, Ahura Mazda and 
the Amesha Spentas! May they not leave this house of us, 
the worshippers of Mazda, complaining!’ 3 (Yasht XIII, 
156-57.) Again, we read that those who “ treat the Fravashis 
of the faithful well’? 4 become independent and happy, their 


1S. B.E. Vol. XXIII, p. 199. (Yasht XIII, 49), 
2 Ibid, p. 193. 3 Ibid; p. 184: Yasht XIII, 18, 
4 Ibid, p. 230. 


THE FAROKHSHI 425 


difficulties are got rid of,) they are rewarded with success, 
health and glory,? and with an earnest desire to help the 
good and the virtuous? and to break the power of those who 
oppress the poor and the innocent.4 


Here, we see the relation supposed to subsist between the good 
that are living and the good that aredead. Those, that are gone 
wish and expect to be held in esteem and regard and to be \re+ 
membered and respected. The living, on their part, also desire 
that the dead may be remembered in their houses well and 
worthily and that they may return satisfied and contented. 
The Fravashis of the dead on their part pray for and offer 
blessings to the living that they may be blessed with worldly 
and spiritual wealth, that they may be happy and virtuous, 
that they may help the virtuous and punish the vicious. So, in 
short, the relation between the living and the dead is respect, 
regard, remembrance and esteem from one side and blessings 
from. the other. 


. The one essential thing for the living to receive the blessings 
of the good dead who are gone is, that they should be ashavan, 1.e., 
righteous. When the Fravashis are invoked in a house, they 
feel satisfied and contented if they see piety, virtue, righteous- 
ness in the house.’ If they do not see that, they return, unsatis- 
fied and distressed, All the prayers recited in the house in 
honour.of the dead must be prayers that “reach righteousness ” 
(asha naga nemangha). The Yagna (Hi XVI) again says, that 
“the dead rejoice at the brilliant deeds of righteousness, by the 
living.” If they will find the house virtuous, they will move 
therein, as it were, with pleasure and satisfaction, and bless the 
house with the gift of Ashi Vanghu. If they will find the con- 
trary, they will leave the house “complaining.” Righteous- 
ness inthe house is the sina qua non of their hearty, good recep- 
tion. Jf that is not seen in the house, hundred other things 


1 Yasht XIII, 20. 2 Yasht XIII, 24. 
3 Ibid, 25, 39. _ 4 Ibid, 31, 33, 39. 
64 


426 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


done for them go for nothing. If they will receive satisfaction 
from the house in, point of righteousness they will be the means 
of carrying the prayers of the living to the throne of Ahura 
Mazda, In that case, they (the Fravashis). will carry to the 
house! “the healing virtues of (their) blessed giftgs’as wide- 
spread as the earth, as far-spread as the rivers, as high-reaching 
as the sun, for the furtherance of the better men,.for the hind- 
rance of the hostile, and for the abundant growth of riches and 
of glory.’ 


1 §. B. E. Vol. XXXI, p. 311: Yacna Hé LX, 4. 

2 The veneration of the dead among the Zoroastrians, resembles, in 
some points, the veneration of the Manes of the dead among the Romans. 
The word ‘Manes’ comes from Latin manus, good, and the Fravashis of the 
Avesta are also spoken of always as ‘ the good’ (vanghuish). The Manea 
of the virtuous were known as the Lares. The Fravashis in the Avesta 
are spoken of as those of the house, of the street, of the village, of the 
country, (nmanay4o, vigydo; zantumao, dakhyumfo). I think a some- 
what similar division or nomenclature seems to have been made in the 
case of the Manes of the Romans. The Fravashis of the house ( Fravashayo 
nmdnydo trom nmdna, house) correspond to the Lares domestici (domus, 

_ house) of the,Romans: The Fravashis of the street Fravashayé vigydo 
(from vig, street) correspond to the Lares compitales (parts of a city 
marked out with compita or dots) of the Romans. The Fravashis of the 
village (Fravashayé Zanitumdo from Zantu, village) correspond to Lares 
rurales (rus, ruris, the country) of the Romans. Lastly, the Fravashis of 
the whole country (Fravashay6 dekhyumdéo) correspond to the Lares 
prestites of the Romans. The Lares publicii of the Romans correspond 
to the Fravashis of the public benefactors remembered in the Fravardin 
Yasht (vide my paperin Gujarati on Farohars in my ‘ Andhita and 
Farohar’’). 


CHAPTER XVIII. 
II.—THE SATOM. 


The word Sattiim means ‘praise’ It comes from Avesta siz, 

Siamese Sanskrit stu, to praise. It is a prayer recited 
of Praise for the on mealsin honour of the dead. It is so 
Raees called from the word ‘“staomi’” which 
occurs in the commencement of the 26th chapter of the Yagna 
which is recited in the the prayer of the Satim as its principal por- 
tion. The Chapter opens with the words ‘I praise. (Staomt), 
remember, and extol, the good, brave and beneficent Fravashis 
of the pious.” The word Satim corresponds to the Sanskrit 
stom which means a ‘‘ hymn of praise,”’as well as, ‘‘ a sacrifice, 
_ an oblation.” Thus the word Satim means a “ Hymn of 
Praise.” 


As seen from the sentence quoted above (Yacna Ha XXVI. 
1) it is a hymn of praise for all the Fravashis. Ab first, the 
Fravashis of all the Holy~ones are invoked: generally and 
then specially those of Ahura Mazda, His Amesha Spentas, of 
the pious Poiryé-tkaeshan, i.e., of the Mazda-vorshippers who 
preceded the time of Zoroaster, of Gayomard the first man, of 
Zoroaster, of King Gushtasp in whose reign Zoroaster flourished, 
of Isad-vaster, asonof Zoroaster who was a chief priest, 
of the Nabanazishtas, 7.e., of the contemporaries of Zoroaster 
who worshipped one God, of all pious souls, of all who were 
profound in religious lore and of all who were still acquiring that 
lore, and of all the pious, whether males or females, whether 
adults or minors. . 


The praise consists in remembering the dead, in remembering 
their good deeds and actions, But a most praise-worthy 
praise consists in your acting up to the high standard of the 
person‘or being whom you praise. So, in the Pazend Dibaché 


428 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


which.is recited after the recital of the above chapter of the 
Yagna which is known as “Satdm né Kardo,” i.e., “ the section 
of Satim,’’ the worshipper expresses a desire to that effect and 
says, “‘ May my Humata, Hukhta, Hvarshta, i.e., good thoughts, 
good words and good deeds, go to delight the Fravashis of the 
holy.”? Thus the worshipper is enjoined to act up tu the 
standard which Hana More points out in the lines. 


“Sweet is the breath of praise when 
given by those 


Whose own high merit claims the 
praise they give.” 


To praise.the dead is more praise-worthy than to praise the 
living, because in the latter case, it may be, that you perhaps 
expect something substantial from them in return, but in the 
former case, you expect nothing ‘substantial from the dead. 
What little you do is a kind of self-sacrifice. A Hymn of pure 
praise is better than a prayer_wherein you want something from 
the Higher Powers. 


The Satim prayer is generally recited over meals, In the 

Satdm reciteq a0ma Yasht (Yacna X, 18) we read: 
Pree wees ‘“‘O Haoma ! these Gathis are for thee, these 
satums (staomays) are for thee, these meals (chichashanéo) 
are for thee, these words of truth are for thee.’? Hence the 
custony seems to have arisen ‘to have a meal placed in a tray 
and then to recite the Saiim prayer over it. The presenta- 
tion of the meals is symbolic, showing that, there exists a 
kind of communion, mental or spiritual between the living 
und the unseen higher intelligences of the dead. In the case 
of the dead, the living present their meals, as it were, to the 
memory of the dead, and, while presenting them as an offering 
for them, offer at the same time, as said above, an expression 
of their will to offer their good theughts, good words and good 
deeds; . 


THE SATUM: — 429 


The meals are prepared carefully with an idea of purity and 
cleanliness. If in a Parsee household the daily meals are pre- 
pared by a non-Parsee cook, in the case of a meal prepared for 
the Sat@m prayer, the members of the family carefully wash 
the utensils clean, and prepare the meal themselves or engage 
&@ Parsee cook for the purpose. One or more dishes pre- 
pared according to the means of the family are arranged 
in a tray. A pot of pure water and a glass of wine are 
also placed in the tray. Then a vase of fire is placed in 
the front between the tray and the priest who recites the 
Satim prayer. The priest, while reciting the Satam, burns 
sandalwood and frankincense on the fire. In the recital of the 
Pazend DibAcheh, he mentions the name of the particular person 
in whose memory the Satém is recited. _ Together with his name - 
the names of the other departed ones of the family may also 
be remembered. ; 


When, the recital is finished; one or more members of the 
family place frankincense on the fire referred to above. Lobdn 
mukvun, t.e., to place the frankincense, isa part of the ceremony 
in which the ladies of the family take a special consolation for 
the separation of their dear ones. They remember the name of 
the particular dear one or dear ones whose memory they wish to 
honour, and, while doing so, place frankincense over the fire. 


Before. the large tray containing the meals, there 
Tho morsel of the i @ small plate containing a part of the 
dog. meals, not necessarily a part of all the 
dishes, This plate is for what is called Kuiré no bick,' 7.c., 
a morse! (lit. share) for the dog. Itreminds one of olden times, 


‘1 The word dich “44s now used by the Parsees seems to be 
Av. sa baga (Guj. i from Av. ant Sans. @4¢Y Lat. frangere 
to break) a broken piece. Or, perhaps it may be the Arabic word 
used in Persian, ‘bul? (s'€:) meaning “having little milk “ (Steingass). 
It ig a practice with some to give to a dog, on such an occasion, 
little milk, and a meal may bea substitute for such milk, 


430 OUTER LITURGICAL SERVICES 


when every Parsee street had a dog, not only for religious 
purposes as the sag-did but for Police purposes as well. 
Even now in a Parsee town like Naosari, some people feed, on 
some occasions, the dogs of the street. Up to a few years ago, 
it was a practice, even in Bombay, to send a bread or breads to 
the Towers when a corpse was carried there, to feed the dogs 
kept there for the sag-did. After the recital ofthe Satéim, this 
plate of meals is given to the dog or dogs of the street for food. 
When there are no such dogs, it may be given, to the poor as 
charity, or to young children of the family,on the principle, 
perhaps, that ‘‘ charity begins at home.” 


The occasions of the monthly. Baj, i.e, the monthly 

Occasions for r- Gay during the first year after death 
citing the Satdm. on which a) person died, and of the anni- 
versaries of death are the principal occasions for the Satim. 
It is also recited on other religious holidays like the 
GahambArs, the Fravardegan holidays, the Jashans, etc. Its re- 
cital is not necessarily connected with the dead. It may be 
recited even on joyous occasions, 


HAMAYASHT OR HOMASHT 431 


CHAPTER XIX. 


COMBINED GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 

Having described at some length, the liturgical services 
individually, I will now describe certain ceremonies or rather 
groups of ceremonies which are observed by celebrating a certain: 
number of the different services. Among such groups of services 
are the following :— 

1. The Hamayasht or Homasht. 
The Geti-Kharid. 
The Sarosh. 
The Zindeh-ravan 
The: Nirangdin. 
The Gahambar. 
The Jashan. 
The Farvardegan. 
The Faresta. 

1.. HAMAYASHT OR HOMASHT. 


The word “Hama Yasht ” means the praise or celebration 
(Yasht) of all (ham&) Yazatas or angels. The ceremony con- 
sists ofseveral celebrations of the Yagna and the Vendidad.. 
It is performed in honour or in memory of women either living 
or dead. The belief is, that women are, in their state of 
menstruation, and accouchément, enjoined to observe certain 
observances (Vide Purification ceremonies). There may have 
been or there may be derelictions in. the observance of those 
customs or in other worldly or religious duties.’ So, the perform- 
ance of these ceremonies act, as it were, as some means to make 
up for the deficiencies in the observance of the customs. 


The Hamayasht consists of 12 Kardds or sections. Each 
Kardd or section consists of twelve recitals in honour of one 


oes am PF bs 


432 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES 


particular Yazata. The recital varies according to the nature 
of the Hamayasht. There are two kinds of the HamAyasht :— 


(2) Moti (Aledtt) or the great HamAayasht. 
(5) Nani (etéeft) or the small Hamayasht. 


(a2) The first, te., the great Haméayasht consists in the 
recital of 144 Yagnas and 144 Vendidads with their rituals. 
The 144 Yacnas and Vendidads are recited in honour or with 
the Khshnuman of 12 Yazatas or angels, ¢.e., 12 Yagnas and 
12 Vendidads are celebrated in honour of each Yazata. 
These 12 Yazatas are the following:—.1. Ahura Mazda. 
2. Tishtar. 3. Khurshed. 4. Meher. 5. Abin. 6. Adar. 
7. Khurdéd. 8. Amerdad. 9. Spendérmad. 10. Goéad. 
11. Sarosh. 12. Arddfarosh (Farvardin). The above list is 
given in the order in which the celebrations in honour of 
each Yazata are performed. 


If one pair of priests, i.e, two priests, would peform the 
whole ceremony, it would take 144 days, z.e., about 5 months to 
complete it, as only one Yagna and one Vendidad can be recited 
every day. More than one Yagna can be recited by two priests 
during the Havan gah or the morning hours of the day, but, as 
only one Vendidid ¢an be recited during the Hoshain gah or 
the hours after midnight, one Yacna and Vendidad only can be 
celebrated per day. So, if one wishes the ceremony to be 
finished during a shorter period, one or more Jérs or. pairs of 
priests can be engaged for the service. While the ceremony 
lasts.an Afringan and a Bajin honour ofthe same Yazata in 
whose honour the Yacna and the Vendidid are recited, are 
also performed. 


(6) The smaller Hamayasht consists of the recital of 144 
Yacnas and 12 Vendidids. At the end of each Kardé or section, 
z.¢., at the end of the recital of 12 Yaenas in honour of one 
Yazata, one Vendidad is recited in his honour. Now, as one 
pair of priests can celebrate during a day more than one Yagna 
and as the Vendidad is to be recited at the end of each Kardd 

\ 


THE GETI-KHARID CEREMONY. - 433 


of 12 Yacnas, the smaller Hamfyasht can be finished sooner 
than the larger one. Again, if more than one pair of priests 
are employed, it can be finished much sooner. 


2. THE GETI-KHARID. 


The word Geti-kharid literally means, “the purchase 
(Kharid) of the world (geti).’’ It corresponds, to a certain 
extent, to the Christian word “ Redemption” which also 
comes from a root emere, meaning to buy. It is intended to 
be a ceremony for seeking salvation from the sins of the 
world. The original idea suggested by the name seems to 
be, that one should redeem his time and make the best 
use of it so as to save himself. It was something like 
that suggested by the following words of St. Paul in his Epistle 
to the Ephesians (Chap. V, 15, 16): « ‘See then that ye walk 
circumspectly, not as fools, but asswise. Redeeming the time, 
because the days are evil.” As the Patet says it is not money 
with which one has to purchase his salvation, but with his 
heart. One has to give away the money which he has when 
required for the good of others. He is to sacrifice even his life 
for the sake of truth». We read in the Patet (Karda 1): “‘ The 
whole powers which T possess, I possess in dependence on the 
Yazatas (Yazdan, i.e., God). To possess in dependence upon 
the Yazatas means (as much as) this: if anything happens, so 
that it behoves to give the body for the sake of the soul, I give 
it to them.” 1 So, the original idea is that of self-sacrifice. 


The ceremony that is now known by this name consists in the 
recital of nine Yazashnas or Yacnas. The first six Yazashnas 
are those of Mino-navar. They are performed for six days, one 
at a day, each of the two priests who perform them serving 
as Zaotd alternately. Then, on the sixth and the seventh or 
the seventh and the eighth day, they perform three more Yaz- 
ashnas, onein honour of Sraosh, another that of the Sirouzeh, 
and. the third the Visparad. 


1 Spiegel, translated by Bleeck, Vol. IiI. p. 153. 
55 


434 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES, 


3. SAROSH. 


By the name Sarosh are known thefuneral ceremonies that 

ee ae Kriya, are generally performed in honour of a 
ie, The Cere- deceased person during the first three days 
monies of Sraosha. ater death. At times some repeat these 
ceremonies even some time after death, even after months or 
years after death. These ceremonies are known by the name 
of Sarosh, because the prayers therein are recited in. honour 
of, or with the Khshnuman of, Sraosha. We will here shortly 
describe the functions of Sragsha, the Yazata or angel, which 
will enable one to see why the prayers are recited with his 
Khshnuman. 

In Zoroasikan angelology, Sraosha occupies a very high 

Sraosha, the position. As said by Dr. Geiger, he is a 
Yazata, “characteristic figure in the Avesta religion ” 
and “exemplifies clearly the ethico-philosophical spirit which 
predominates in the Zoroastrian system.”1 


The word comes from the root Sru, Sanskrit shru, to hear, or 
to cause to hear, and thence.to obey. So he presides over the 
abstract idea of obedience,—obedience to God. Obedience 
implies hearing. So he is the Yazata who hears from God, 
communicates to Man what he hears from God and asks Man to 
obey God’s message which he communicates. Hence he plays, 
to a, certain-extent, the same part in the Parsee books, as that 
which Gabriel plays in Christian books. He is a messenger of 
God communicating to Man the wishes and orders of God. It is 
generally through him that prophets and even righteous men are 
inspired by God. He protects the souls of men both during the 
day and during the night. His protection is greater at night. 
Hence it is that the Yashtsin his praise (Yasht XI and Yagna Ha 
LVII) are specially recited at night. The dog, who watches a 
house atnight, and the cock, that crows during the last part of 
the night and wakes men from sleep, are therefore the animals 


1 “Civilization of the Eastern Iranians in Ancient Times,” Introduce 
tion translated by Dastur Derab P, Sanjana, Vol. I, p. LI. 


THE SAROSH CEREMONY, 435 


that are associated with his work. (Bundehesh, Chap. XTX, 33). 
He protects man against the evils of ignorance, anger, sloth and 
intoxication. The pith of all that is said of him in. the Avesta 
and Pahlavi books is this: By obedience to the Commands of 
God, by conformity to His laws as seen in Nature, man protects 
his soul and moves in the proper path. Obedience to the Laws of 
God, as seen in his Nature over which Sraosha presides is every- 
thing. As M. Harlez says: “ L’accomplissement de la loiest la 
source de toute la prospérité.”} 


From all this we see that Sraosha is the guardian angel who 
protects the soul of man. He protects the soul of man not only 
during life but even after death (Yagna LVII, 25). His help or 
co-operation is required by the soul during its passage to the 
next world, especially during the first three days, when it is 
passing to a new plane of activity from the plane of this world 
to that of another. We read in the Minokherad (Chap. II, 115): 
“ The fourth day in the light-of dawn—with the co-operation of 
Srésh the righteous, V8é the good, and Vahram, the strong.... 
(the soul) goes up to the awful, lofty Chinvad bridge to which 
everyone, righteous and- wicked is coming.’ “ And the righteous 
soul passes over with the co-operation of Srésh the righteous ” 
(Chap. IT, '124).8 (Vide also Shayasht 14 Shayast, XVII, 3; 
Dadistém-i-Dini, XX VIII, 6-7). Thus, we see that the ceremonies 
are performed with the Khshnuman of Sraosha, because the soul 
in its passage to the next world has his help and guidance. So, 
the Sarosh ceremonies are on the one hand intended to signify 
thanksgiving to Sraosha for the protection that he had offered to 
the soul during his life-time and that he offers after death. They 
are at the same time intended to pray, that he (Sraosha) may 
continue that protection after death. After separation from the 
body, the soul, finding itself, as it were, on a quite new plane, in 
other spheres of activity, is in more need of help and protection. 


1 Le Zend Avesta: Introduction, CXV. 
38.B, E., XXIV, p. 17. 
3 Ibid. p, 19. 


436 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


The Sraosh ceremonies consist of the following :—(The Pahlavi 
Vendidad VIII 22 refers to some of these ceremonies). 


1. The recital of 3 Yacnas with the Khshnuman of the angel 
Sraosh during the morning hours. This recital is indis- 
pensable. For a child under seven, one Yayna is per- 
missible. (Ibid.) 


2. The recital of the Vendidid at midnight from one.to three 
in number. This is not necessary; it may or may not 
be made. 

3. The recital of the Sraosh Baj during each of the 5 gahs or 
periods of the day during the first 3 days. This recital 
is not indispensably necessary, but itis generally made. 


4. The recital of the Afringién of Sraosh (Yacna LVII, 15-18) 
in the first part of the night (Aiwisruthrem gah). This 
is indispensably necessary. It is generally recited 
in the house near the spot where the remains were placed 
before being carried to the Towers. This recital is 
ordinarily spoken of~as ‘“‘Sarosh no Kardo, +%.e., the 
. particular section in honour of Sraosha. 


5. The recital of the Ny&ishes and Yashts in each of the five 
gahs or periods of the day. During the three periods of 
the day;.the smaller Sraosh Baj, gdhs, the Khorshed 
and Meher Nyaishes and Patet are recited ; and, during the 
night, the smaller Sraosh Baj, the gdhs, the Yashts (Yacna 
LVII and Yasht XI) and the Patet are recited. These 
recitals are not indispensably necessary. 


6. The recitals at the Uthamna ceremony. They are necessary. 
Some perform this ceremony twice, once during the after- 
noon of the third day and the second time at the end of 
the third night. Only one of these two is necessary and 
especially that at the end of the third night. 


7. The recitals of the Four Bajs with a Sidv or suit of clothes 
during the latter part of the third night, (Vide Baj for the 
description of these). 


THE SAROSH CEREMONY. 437 


8. The recital of the Afring’n of Daham on the dawn of 
the third night. 
9. The Cheh4rum, or the fourth day ceremony. 


All the different ceremonies which make up the Sarosh 
ceremonies do not require any fuller explanation, as they have 
been treated under their respective headings, but the Uthamné 
and the Cheharum require a special mention. We will describe 
them at the end of the article on Sarosh. 


In the matter of the Sarosh ceremonies for the first three 
Na days after death, and subsequent ceremonies 
Jorani Kriya. 
during the first year or even after the first 
year, the practice is that if the deceased is a married 
person, the ceremonies—if not all, the principal according 
to one’s means—are performed not only in the name and in 
honour of the deceased but also-in the name of his or her 
partner, 2.¢., of the husband if the deceased is a female, 
and of the wife if he is a male, whether the partner be living or 
dead. The performance.of this double set of ceremonies is 
spoken of as “ Jorani, Maie{y Kriya,” 4.¢., ceremonies of the pair. 
This double performance is not referred to in old books and 
seems to be a later introduction. In case the deceased has gone 
through a second, marriage, the ceremonies are threefold. For 
example, if A dies and had married a second wile C after the death 
of his first-wife B, then on his demise, some of the ceremonies 
are performed in the name of all three A, Band C. This is not 
a general practice, but is resorted to by those able to afford. 
The custom of this double set of some ceremonies seems to have 
arisen from the belief that a pair once married is married for life 
and death. 
The Trustees of the Funds and properties of the Parsee 
Punchayet pay the funeral expenses of the 
Expenses of tho 5 : 
funeral ceremonies poor of their community who are not able 
ee first four to defray them. In case of those that have 
died utterly destitute and without anybody 
to perform the funeral cesemonies after them, they (the 


438 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


Trustees) get the ceremonies performed in a Fire-temple under 
the charge of a head-priest. I give below a list of the charges 
which will give one an idea, not only of the expenses, but 
also of the ceremonies that are thought to be absolutely and 
indispensably necessary. The total cost paid for the poor in 
Bombay, which is a big and rather expensive city is Rs. 45 


Rs. a. p. 

Fees received at the Tower of Silence for the wages 

of the corpse bearers, &c., in the case of poor 

persons is a7 a Ss ac eo 2 4 0 
Fees of two priests who perform the Get Srna cere- 

mony befére the removal of the corpse’. . . 38 0 
Recital of the three Yagnas of Sraosh * . 6 0 
Recital of the Ardafarosh on the Cheh4rum, 1.e., 4th 

day a ae a . - 200 


Recital of four Bajs on the 3rd day Noor sabtaiphe., 20 0 


Recital of the Karda of Sraosh for three nights .. 3 0 0 
The Uthamné and the Afringén on the dawn of the 

fourth day .. Pa ae ws ‘ - 40 0 
The Afringan Baj of Cheharum on the 4th i - 38 0 0 
Fruit, flowers; flour, sandal-wood, &c., ets ». 6 8 0 
The meal for the Satum on the Chehérum day - 100 


Siav vdsan(i.e., a suit of clothes, utensils, &c.) to be 
consecrated at the recital of the four Bajs on the 


ard day ee ar AP me aye - 7 4 0 


Total .. 40 0 0 


The word Uthamn4 comes from an Indian verb ‘uthvun’ 
meaning ‘to get up, to depart.’ According 

geet cere- tothe Parsee books, on the death of a person, 
his soul remains within the precincts of this 

world, generally at the place where he died, or at the place where 
his body had its last resting place. It is at the dawn of the 


THE SAROSH CEREMONY. 439 


third night, it gets up, as it were, and departs from this world 
to the world above. So, the ceremony performed on the third 
day after death is called ‘ Uthamné,’ i.¢., the ceremony of the 
day of the departure of the soul from this world.! The most - 
proper occasion for the ceremony is the dawn of the third night 
when the soul is believed to depart from the precincts of this 
world. The ceremony is performed at that time, but generally 
the custom is, that it is also performed in the afternoon of the . 
third day in order to make it convenient for the friends.and 
relations to attend at, and participate.in, the ceremony. 


Friends and relations and the invited priests assemble 
at about 3 p.m. at the place where the ceremony is to be per- 
formed. The place may be either the house-of the deceased, 
if it is convenient to accommodate the assembly there, or at an 
adjoining Fire-temple or another kind of public place. At three 
o’clock when the gdh (Uziran.) changes, most of the persons 
assembled perform their ablutions and perform the Kusti Padyab. 
They then stand turning to, the, West and recite the Khorshed, 
Meher Nydishes, the Dud ndm setiyashna and the nemd- 
adnghim prayer known as the nemdz of the four quarters of the 
world (Yagna I, 16). The Khorshed and the Meher Ny@ishes 
are repeated twice.” It is considered to be the duty of every 
Zoroastrian.to say his Khorshed Meher Nydishes three times 
( Hdvan, morning, Rapithwan, noon, and Uziran, afternoon ) 
during the day. So, the first set of the Nyaishes is recited with 
a view to do their own duty. The second is believed to be 
recited out of their duty and respect towards the dead. After 
the conclusion of the above prayers, all assembled perform the 
Hamazor with one another. They then sit down on the carpet 
and recite Uziran gah and Sarosh Hadokht (Yasht XI). 
They then recite the Pate or the prayer of repentance mention- 
ing the name of the deceased person in the last Kardeh or section. 


1 Some say that it is so called because, after its celebration, members 
of the family, get up from their deep mourning and go out for their usual 
avocations, - 


440 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


Tn all these prayers, the head or the senior priest leads the recital. 
During the recital of the Patet by the whole assembly, a priest 
standing before the fire, which burns in a vase, and with trays of 
fragrant flowers and of pots or vessels containing rose water and 
other perfumes before him, recites the Dhup-nirang (see below) 
mentioning the name of the deceased person. If the deceased. 
person is married, two priests say the Dhup-nirang prayer. 
In that case the ceremony is said to be that of Jordni 
Kriya, #.e., the ceremony of the married pair. 


At the conclusion of the Dhup-nirang prayer, one of the 
heirs of the deceased, generally the eldest son 
or a near relation is presented before the 
senior priest who makes him recite a form-of obligation which 
is spoken of as ‘‘ Sésh bhandvvi ” wherein a son or a near relation 
undertakes to perform certain religious ceremonies in honour of 
the deceased. The word Sosh seems to be a corruption of 
Sraosh which is the principal.ceremony for the dead. The 
obligation is to get the following recited or done :-— 


Sdsh, 


(a) Lakh bhanavvi, i.e, to get recited one lac, five hundred 
Ahunvars; 

(b) Three Yacnas. 

(c) Three Vendidads. 

(2) Twenty-four Daruns. 

(e) <Ashodad, 2.e., the gift to the righteous. 


This obligation now adays has become well nigh stcreo- 
typed. It seems that formerly the obligation was only for 
the ceremonies which the surviving relations wished to be 
performed. 

Then, if the deceased is a male of the age of 15 or above, 
an announcement is made as to who has been adopted as his 
son. Donations in charity in honour or in memory of the 
deceased are then announced. Then the assembly recites the 
Tandarugti prayer praying for blessings upon the surviving 
head of the family. Consecrated flowers are then distributed 
among, and rose-water besprinkled upon, the persons assembled. 


THE SAROSH CHREMONY. 44) 


Lastly, the family priest goes round among the persons 
assembled and makes salams or salutations. Thisis the way of 
thanking the people for their kind presence on the occasion. 
Formerly, the head of the family also followed the family priest 
in bidding the salutation. But that custom is not observed 
generally, though it is prevalent even now in mofussil towns 
like Naosari. 


The Ahunvar or Yathé Ahu Vairyé is a short prayer-like 
the Paternoster of the Christians. The 
relations undertook to get one lac (Jakh) 
and five hundred Ahunvars recited in honour of the deceased. 
They need not and cannot be recited at once...They can be 
recited at convenience during the first year after death. They 
may be recited by a priest or may be recited by a member of 
the family. 


(5) (c) (2d). The recital of the Yagna and the Vendidads refer 
to the recitals of these ceremonies during the first three days. 
The 24 Daruns refer to the sacred breads in the Baj ceremony 
performed at the latter part of the third night. 


The word Ashé-dad» means gifts to the righteous. The 
voluntary payments to the priests are 

aah The Asho- generally known by that name now. In the 
Uthamna ceremony, t+ the end, the 

head of the family or somebody in his behalf pays the 
priests their fees. The sums given vary according to the 
means.of the family. The head or the senior priest is paid 
more than others according to his status in his profession, 
Besides payment in money, each priest is generally given a 
sudrah or sacred shirt. The suit of clothes that is consecrated 
with the four Bajs on the third day after midnight and 
which is known as Sidv is also spoken of as Jameh 
Ashodad i.e., the clothes to be given ag gift to the righteous 


For & fuller “discription of this ceremony, vide my paper on “ the 
use of Rosaries among the Zorastrians” in the Sir J. J. Zarthoshti 
Madressa Jubilee volume. Vide my memorial Papers, pp. 63-64. 


56 


(a) The Lakh. 


442 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


poor. This suit of clothes is generally given to the family 
priest. 


It seems that formerly the family priest was given a cow 
in addition to payment in money and clothes. 
This custom seems to have arisen in India 
where Hindoos presented, cows to their Brahmins. Though 
the custom of giving a cow is no longer observed, its remnant 
has remained in a money payment to the family priest which 
is called the fee for Gae bhandvvi, t.e., the declaration in prayer 
for the gift of a cow. He is now given a sum varying from 
one Rupee to 5 Rupees under that name. As this fee is now 
‘given at the time when the above referred to Shos (or Sraosha) 
declaration or obligation is made, it is at times called the 
fee of sdésh (Sraosh) bhandvvi. - 


Dhup is an Indian word (Sanskrit dhup) meaning perfume. 
Dhup sarvi is the modern Indian name 
of the ceremony, of which the ancient 
Persian name is nirang-i-bui dddan, 7.¢., the ceremony of 
giving or distributing the perfumes. The ceremony is so called 
because during the performance of this ceremony, fragrant 
flowers, rose-water and other perfumes are placed in 
trays on carpets on which the assembly is seated. At the 
end of the ceremony these flowers are distributed and the 
rose-water..sprinkled among the persons assembled. Again, 
during the performance of the ceremony, fragrant wood like 
sandalwood and the agar and fragrant incense like frank-in- 
cense, are burned. 


Gae bhanavvi. 


Dhup-sarvi. 


Now, what do these perfumes of the fragrant flowers, rose- 
water and other odoriferous liquids seem to signify and symbo- 
lize ? The ceremony seems to signify that the path of the righteous 
(ashavan) soulsin the next worldis besprinkled with fragrance and 
joy. It moralises and says, asit were, to the people assembled : “A 
righteous soul that passes away to the next world has his way 
beset with fragrance and joy. Let us all think of that and bear 
that in mind and let us all so behave, that when our turn of 


THE SAROSH CEREMONY. 443 
departure comes, our way also may be so perfumed with 
fragrance and joy.” The Viraf-naémeh which, like the Divine 
Comedy of Dante gives a picture of what the righteous soul 
meets on his way to the next world, says that “ on the dawn of the 
third day the righteous soul moves about in the midst of fragrant 
plants” (Viraf nimeh, Chap. IV 15). So, the occasion when 
this Dhup ceremony is performed being that of the Uthamnd _ 
(q. v.) or the ceremony of the third day after death, fragrant 
flowers and perfumes are presented as symbols. 


The Dhup ceremony forms a part of the Oothamna ceremony. 
It consists in the recital of the Pazend Dibacheh, which precedes 
the recital of the Aftringén ceremony.The Dibacheh is 
preceded by a few additional words in the commencement 
(az ham& gunah patet pashemanum..Ashem, &c.) expressing | 
repentance of sins, if any. It ends.with a few more sentences 
expressive of good wishes for the deceased and for the living 
creation. 


The recital of the Dibacheh is spoken of as ‘“‘ Dhup sarvi.’ 
There are three ceremonies. with which the verb ‘ sdrvt’ is 
connected. The verb “sarvi ’ is Persian ‘ Sardidan ’ which means 
‘to cause to hear, to chant, to sing.’ It is the Avesta ‘Srévaya’ 
which is the causal,form of ‘sru,’ Sanskrit ‘sru,’ a root from 
which come the English words “celebrate” and ‘ laudation.’ 
The two other ceremonies with which this verb is connected 
are the \Ashirvid or marriage ceremony and the Geh sana 
ceremony or the recital of the Gatha& over the dead body before 
its removal to the Tower. One is spoken of as “ Ashirvad 
Sarva ” and the other as ‘‘ Geh Sarvi.” The use of this verb 
suggests that the recital of the prayers at these three 
ceremonies must necessarily be with a loud voice so as to be 
heard aloud by all the persons who assemble on the occasions. 


The word Chehdrum means “the fourth.” The fourth day 
and the ceremonies of the fourth day are 
known by that name. Though this day’s 
ceremonies do not strictly belong to the Sarosh ceremonies 


Cheharum. 


444 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES, 


properly so called, they are generally considered to form a part 
of these ceremonies. They consist of the recital of an Yagna, 
an Afringén and Baj, known as ‘Cheharum ni Ardafarosh 
(.e. the recital of the Yacna in honour of the Farohars or 
Fravashis on the fourth day) and ‘Cheh4rum nu Afringan 
Baj.’ The recital of the ‘Satum’ at about midday on the 
mid-day meal generally completes the ceremonies of the day. 
The priests who had been performing the Sarosh ceremonies 
for the preceding three days at the Fire-temple or Dar-i-Meher 
are generally invited to dine at this Chehérum midday meals. 
They partake of this solemn dinner with the recital of a Baj or 
prayer of grace mentioning the name of the deceased in the 
DPibacheh of the B4j. At the end of the meals the priests are 
given some small money gifts. For the first three days after 
. death, meat is prohibited. It is allowable from the fourth 
day. Wine is considered necessary in its celebration (Vide 
Pahlavi Vendidad VIII. 22 for the Chehérum, ceremony). 
4. ZINDEH RAVAN. 

The word Zindeh-ravén means a living soul and is opposed 
to Anosheh-ravan, #e., the dead (lit., immortal) soul. All the 
Parsee liturgical ceremonies are performed both in honour of 
the living and of the dead. As far as the recital of the 
prayers goes, the prayer is the same except this, that at that 
part of the prayer where the name of the person, in whose 
honourthe ceremony is performed, is mentioned in the 
Dibacheh, if he is living, the word Zindeh-ravdn is mentioned as 
an epithet before his name (e.g., Zindeh-ravan A or B), and if 
he is dead, the word anosheh-ravdn is mentioned. 


The word Zindeh-ravdn has come to assume a technical name 
; for a ceremony. It is the ceremony in hon- 
Zindeh ra v An, P a 
the name ofacere- our of Sradsh. On the death of a person, 
MOBY: the funeral religious ceremonies are 
performed with the Khushnuman of the Yazata Sraésh who 
is believed to be the angel protecting the souls of men. 
Tt is not only the souls of the dead that he protects 


ZINDEH RAViN CEREMONY, 445 


hut also the souls of the living. So, a Zoroastrian gets 
the Sraosh ceremony performed in his life-time. This 
Sraosh ceremony thus performed for one in his life-time 
is called his “ Zindeh-ravan.” So the Zindeh-ravén is the 
Sraosh ceremonies performed in one’s life-time. At times, 
it is continued for the whole year, ie. all the religious 
ceremonies during the first year—like the Cheharum, ¢.e., the 
Fourth day, the Dehum or Dacmu, i.e, the Tenth day,the 
Sirouz, i.e., the thirtieth day, and each subsequent 30th day or 
monthly day and the Salrouz or the anniversary—*are performed 
for a year. It is the ladies who generally get their Zindeh ravin 
performed. During the last generation, Parsee ladies, . when 
they got their Zindeh-ravan performed, looked*to the event with 
satisfaction as having done a necessary righteous work in their 
life. They looked to the event with satisfaction from the point 
of view, that, if on their death the necessary Sraosh ceremonies 
were not performed in their names by their relatives, or if some 
mishap—e.g., that of dying in an out of the place locality where 
there was not sufficient convenience for getting the ceremony 
performed—prevented their being performed, the Zindeh-ravin 
as the funeral ceremonies'in honour of Sraosh_ performed in their 
life-time would. stand them in good stead and would have his 
protecting or-beneficial effect. 


One hears here and there the story of an orthodox Parsee of 
the last generation taking so serious a view of the matter that he 
not. only got the funeral ceremony of Sraosh performed but 
also got the ceremony of géh sérnd performed, i.e., he washed 
and laid himself on an iron bier as if dead and got a couple of 
priests say the funeral service. 


This reminds one of one of the Kings of France-—it was one 
Louis—who is said to have got a solemn funeral service performed 
over himself, and this to such an extent, that he was carried to the 
graveyard and there laid in a grave, where the last of the services 
was performed, in which he himself joined solemnly. He when 
left the grave after all others had departed, 


446 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


The object of this ceremony was that it enabled one to take a 
serious view of life, and to consider, that in lifehe was in the 
midst of death, and that therefore it bchoved him to lead a good 
settled virtuous life. 

5. THE NIRANGDIN. 


Nirangdin is the name of the ceremony which consecrates 
the gadmez or the urine of the bull for ceremonial purposes. 
Tt consists of a Bareshnum ceremony by two. priests, 
then the Khupb ceremony, then the six Gewrés and then the 
final Vendidid. (Vide above (pp. 253-57), the Consecration 
Ceremonies for details). 


6 THE GAHAMBAR CEREMONY. 


The Gahambars are six holidays or periods of holidays, each 
of the duration of 5 days, that occur at 

Géaham bars, 3 ‘ 
their importance stated times of “the year. They derive 


toa two points of ¢heir importance from two points of view.— 


(A) Agricultural or seasonal. 

(B) Cosmogonical. 

The Avesta itself refers to them as agricultural or seasonal. 
The later writings connect them also with cosmogony. We will 
speak here of these two points. 


There are. three facts which lead to show that the 
A. Gia wars as Géhambars are season festivals. They are 
season festivals. the following. 


(a) The root and the,meaning of the word. 

(6) The meanings of the words which bear the names of the 
six Gahambars. 

(c) The description of the Gahambars found in the Parsee 
books. 


Gahambar is a later word, the exact corresponding word for 
Gi Réce ad which is not found in the extant Avesta. 
meaning of the If one were to coin a corresponding word, 
word Gahambar. i, would be “‘Gatuh@mbar.” But the 


GAHAMBAR CEREMONY. 447 


Avesta word which carries the meaning borne by the word 
Gahambar is “ Yairya” (Yagna I, 9). The word “ Yairya ” 
comes trom “ Yaré” which is the same as English ‘year.’ 
“ Yairya ”? means ‘seasonal divisions of the year.’ The word 
Gahambar itself is the Pahlavi Gasinbar. As the word 
‘ Yairya’ (Ydré, English year) comes from the root ‘ya’ 
to go, so the word gas in gdésdnbdr and gah in Géhambér comes 
irom the root gd, to go. 


‘ 


Dastur Peshotan gives the meaning of the word/as “ prayer 
(gatha) or the gift (bar, bar) of God.”. Mr. K. R. Cama thinks 
the last part of the word ‘bar ’ to be the same as ‘ ber’ in Septem- 
ber, October, &c. and undersstands it to mean ‘time’ (cf. the 
Gujarati word vér). He takes the whole word to mean “‘ the time 
for singing the Gathds.” He thinks that the word may also 
mean an assembly (ambar, Avesta-ham-bairya) of a particular 
time or place (géc or gatu). I thinkthe word means “collection 
(ambar) of time (gah),” 7.¢., “thefull time,” “ the proper (season) 
time.” 

(b) The six Ga- The Gahambérs are six in number. Their 
hambars and the ae 
meaning of their Very names signify that they are season 
name festivals. 


1. The. first Gahambar, which occurs from the 4lst to the 
45th day after Naoroz or the New Year’s day, is Maidhyozarem. 
Itsy name signifies ‘Midspring.’ (maidhya, middle and zaremya, 
spring from zar, sanskrit har to be green.) 

2. ‘The second from the 101st to 105th day is Maidhyéshem 
2.é., Mid-summer (shem, sanskrit samé, summer). 

3. The third fromthe 176th to 180th day is Paitishhayem. 
The word comes from patti and hahya, sanskrit sasya, corn 


and means ‘the time’of reaping the harvest.’ It is the time of 
autumn. 


4. The fourth from the 206th to 210th day is Ayathrem. 
The meaning oi the word is not clear. It is thought to be the 


448 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


time of prosperity and nourishment (thrima from thré to thrive). 
It is thought to be the breeding season of the cattle. 

5. The fifth from the 286th to 290th day is Maidhyarem, 7.¢., 
the season of Mid-winter. The word means ‘the midst of airya’ 
t.¢., rest. Mid-winter is the time when, owing to extreme cold, 
all agricultural work generally ceases. 


6. The sixth from the 36lst to the 365th day is Hamaspath- 
maédaém. It seems to signify the time when the path (pathan) 
of the year is the same (hama) or in the middle (madha). “It is 
the time of the Vernal Equinox when the days and nights are 
equal, when the heat and the cold are the same, 7.e., moderate. 


Though each of these six Gahambars lasts for 5 days, the 
principal day of the Gahambar is the last’ day. The preceding 
four days are as it were, of preliminary preparation and 
enjoyment. 

The description of the Gahambars as given in the Parsee books 
? _* also tends to show that they.are season 
ras mre festivals. ~The principal description of 
es tho Parsee this ‘is found in the Visparad (I, 2). 

The Bundehesh also refers to this fact. 
(Chap. XXV.) 


In the Pahlavi Commentary of the Afringan of Gaihambar 

B, Galinsibats, a2 and in the Afrin of the Gahambar, these 
connected with holidays are connected with the following 
Coatnogany. six principal creations of God :— 


1. The Heavens. 2. Water. 3. Earth. 4. Vegetable 
Creation. 5. Animal Creation. 6. Man. 


The consideration of the above facts shows that the principal 
. and the first object of the celebration of 

The object A 2 : ts 
of celebrating the the Gahambars was to offer thanksgiving 
Géham bars, to God for the institution of the different 
seasons, on the regularity of which depended the prosperity 
of the world. To this primary object was latterly added 


GAHAMBAR CEREMONY. 449 
the object of offering thanks for the creation of the six best 
and grand objects of Nature. The Minokherad (Chap. DX) 
speaks of seven principal acts of righteousness. Among these 
Charity (radih) is placed first ; then Truth (rAstih) and then the 
celebration of the Gahambar. There, it is said, that Gahambars 
or the phenomena of the seasons are one of the great acts of 
Wisdom worthy of the Omniscient Lord. 


The Shayast 14 Shayast (Chap. XII, 31) enumerates-some 
liturgical ceremonies which a Zoroastrian should celebrate. 
Among them the celebration of the Gihambars stands first. The 
Sad-dar (Chap. VI, 1-2) also places the celebration of the Gaham- 
bars at the head of a list of six religious acts... The Bahman 
Yasht prophesies that the non-celebration.of the Gahambirs 
will be an evil day for the world. To putt intoordinary language , 
what it means is this, that it will be an evil day when man will 
cease to offer thanks to God for.the creation of the phenomena 
of the seasons and for the different gifts that result from the 
phenomena. King Jamshed is said to be the first monarch of 


Persia who celebrated the G&hambars. 
® 


The two princi- There are two principal functions in the 
pal functions in .: x . 
the Gahambars. Celebration of the Gihambars. 


(A) ‘The performance of the Liturgical services relating to 
the Gahambars. 


(B).Solemn feasts accompanying ‘the services. Of these 
two, though the first is more important it is the latter that 
has appealed and appeals most to the generality of people. 
We will here describe these two functions. 


(A) The  differ- The following are the Liturgical services 
aaah ag “er that are generally celebrated on the occa- 
ambar ceremony. sions of the Gahambars :— 


1.. The Afringan of Gahambar. 
2. The Baj of Gahambar. 
8. The Yacna of Gahambar, known as the Visparad. 
4, The Pavi of Gahambar, 
B7 


450 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


Of these four, the first two form the necessary services. The 
next two may or may not be celebrated. Of these four, the first 
three have been referred to under the heading of Afringan, Baj 
and Visparad. So, we will describe the Pavi here. 


Two or more priests take part in this ceremony. One of the 

The Pavi of the priests must have recited beforehand the 
G&hambér, Baj of the Gahambar with Barsam. (Vide 
above pp. 369 and 371). The other priests then take the Baj, 
i.e., recite the first part of the second Baj of meals or grace. 
(Vide above p. 371.) They then recite in Baj_the Dibaché 
three times. (Vide above p. 377.) 

In the first recital of the Dibaché they mention the Khshnuman 
of the G&hambars, mentioning, out of the six names of the 
G&hambars, the name of the particular Gahambar during the 
period of which the service is being celebrated. During the 
second recital, the Khshnuman of the particular Hamkara is 
mentioned. During the third) the Khshnuman of Sraosh is 
mentioned. In each oi these recitals, the Yad (p. 381) is made in 
the pame of the person, for whom or in whose niyat or memory 
the Gahambar is performed. During these recitals, especially 
during the second and the third, the whole of the Dibaché need 
not be recited. Half of it, upto the part where the names of 
the persons are commemorated, is generally recited. 


In the ceremony of the Pavi, no fruits or flowers are required. 
The only thing required is milk. Each priest has before him a 
small metallic cup or glass in which, at each recital of the Dibaché 
a little milk is poured. Thus, all the recitals are made over milk. 
After this recital of the three Dibachés by all the priests, the 
particular priest who has performed the ceremony of the Baj of 
Gahambar recites alone the Dibaché again. At the end of 
each sentence of the Dibaché, the other priests say in chorus 
“¢ sidun-bad,” ¢.e., Amen. 

Between the first three recitals of the -Dibaché by all the 
priests together and this fourth by the priest who hed recited 
the Baj of Gahambar, there are two points of differetite. - 


GAHAMBAR CEREMONY. | 451 


1. During the first three recitals the three Khshnumans of 
of (a) the particular Gihambar, (6) the Hamkara of the day, 
and (c) Sraosh, are recited separately, each in each of the three 
Dibachés, but in the fourth recital, all the three Khshnumans 
are recited together. 


2. During the first three recitals, the sacred thing offered 
or produced is milk. Some make the recital on wine also. But in 
the case of the fourth recital it is made over pure water which 
the priest makes ‘pav,’ ¢.¢., ceremoniously pure “before the 
recital, 


The reason why this ceremony is called ‘Pavi’ would, at first 
sight, seem to be, that.-during its perfor- 
PS ite acetic mance, the priest while reciting the fourth 
Pavi. Dibéché commences \by making the cere- 
monial water ‘piv’ or ceremoniously pure. But the proper 
reason seems to be, that the ceremony was, in former times, 
performed in an enclosed space which is known as Pavi.! 
Of course, many liturgicalservices performed by the priests 
observing the Bareshnum are performed within a ‘ pAvi, ’ ‘but, 
as distinguished from these, this particular ceremony is called 
and specialized.as ‘ pavi,’ because while in those other services, 
the priests only take part, in this ceremony of the Pavi, the 
laity also take part. 


Asa matter of fact, now-a-days, the ceremony is not performed 
within an enclosed space or pdvi. So the name ‘ pivi’ would 
seem to be a misnomer. But, it appears, that though it may 
seem so now, it was not so formerly. It appears from Anquetil 
Du Perron, that as late as about 160 years ago, the ceremony was 
performed in a pdvi or an enclosed space. Anquetil, while 
describing this ceremony says: “ Les Parses étant rassemblés 
dans un jardin, et placés dans un endroit entouré d’un keisch, 
disent le Vadj Khordan, (i.e., the prayer of grace) : et I’Herbed 
aprés avoir béni trois Navés (vases qui contiennent ce qu‘on 


4 Vide the word Pdvi iti the chapter of Purification of ceremonies; 


452 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


va boire ou manger), prononce au milieu de l’assemblée cet 
Afrin du Roi Gahamb&r” (Le Zend Avesta, Vol. IT, pp. 121-122). 


The G&hamb4rs are generally accompanied with solemn 
feasts, wherein members of the family, or 
d j . ae 
Poe rls of the residents of a street, or a town participate. 
Gahambaérs: the ‘G&hambar-ni-chashni,’ 7.¢., the ceremonial 
solemn feast, : : ‘ 
and communal eating of the things offered in 
the Gahamb4r ceremonies, forms an important part in the 
Gahambar celebration. 


As said above, it was considered to be the duty ofa Zoroastrian 
to celebrate the Gahambars. Then how 

ao ou erate were the poor to celebrate these? The 
Afringan of the Gahambar suggests a way 

for that. It says that all may participate in the public 
Gihambiars and pay their mite, however poor, according 
to their means. Every Zoroastrian need not celebrate 
separately a G&hambar. There may be public Gahambars, 
celebrated by the members of a family or by the inhabitants 
of a particular street in/a.town or by those of a particular 
village or town. All may participate in these public Gaham.- 
bars. If one can afford, he may pay his mite in money 
or in kind, For/example, the Afringin says, if one can 
afford, he «may offer as his mite, a fat healthy goat or sheep 
or the public feast. If he cannot afford to do that, he may give 
@ quantity of wine. If one cannot afford even to do that, he 
may give a bundle of dry wood or fuel for cooking the food. 
Tfone cannot afford to do that even, let him give even one piece 
of fuel. Ifa poor man cannot affordto give even this small 
thing, never mind, let him go there and participate in the 
celebration by remembering his God there. He may join the 
celebration, say his prayer, and participate in the feast of the 
Gihambar. The four words used in the Afrin of Gahambar 
~——Yazad, sdzad, khurad, dehad, i.e., pray, perform, eat or give— 
seem to suggest the different ways in which one can participate 
in the celebration of the Gahéimbars or season festivals ty whieh 


. 


GAHiMBiR CEREMONY, 453 


a good deal of importance is attached in Parsee books, The. 
ways are the following :— : 
1. One may join in the prayers recited and pray. 
2. One may do some manual service. 
, 3. One may participate in the feast by offering some article 
of food. , 
4. One may give something in kind or money. 


The Shayasht 14 Shayast (Chap. XIX, 4) enjoins, that-in 
returning froma Gahambar feast. one must say four Yatha 
Ahu Vairyés. This injunction seems to have been, suggested 
by the fact of the recital of four Yathaé Ahu Vairyés at the 
commencement of the Afringén of Gahambar, and; I think, this 
number four symbolizes the above four ways in which one can 
participate in a Gahambar. 


The above description of the celebration of the Gahambars 
Gahambar feasts 2 ancient Iran reminds us of the following 
of the Zoroastrians description of similar sacred feasts of the 
and the sacred : i ° 
feasts of the anci- ancient Hebrews as described in the Old 


ent Jows, Testament (Deuteronomy XII, 6-7, 12): 


6. And thither ye shall bring your burnt offerings, and your 
sacrifices, and your tithes, and heave offerings of your hand, 
and your vows, and your freewill offerings, and the firstlings 
of your herds and of your flocks. 


7. And there ye shall eat before the Lord your God, and ye 
shall rejoice in all that ye put your hand into, ye and your 
households, wherein the Lord thy God hath blessed thee. ...... 


12. “And ye shall rejoice before the Lord your God, ye, 
and your sons, and your daughters, and your men servants, and 
your maidservants, and the Levite that is within your gates ; 
for as much as he hath no part nor inheritance with you.” 


One of the solemnities observed in solemn feasts like those 
Th . of the G&ahambars is that of washing 
e washing of ‘ 

the hand in such the hands before the meals. Though this 
solemn. feaste: eustom is tiow-#:days not generally observed 


454 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CRREMONIES. 


by the laity, the clergy do observe it still, A servant 
passes round with a water-pot and a large vessel and lets 
the guests wash their hands before the meals. It is this 
custom that is alluded to in the Bible where we read : 


1. Then came together upon him the Pharisees, and certain 
of the scribes, which came from Jerusalem. 


2. And when they saw some of his disciples eat bread with 
defiled, that is to say, with unwashen hands, they found fault. 


3. For the Pharisees, and all the Jews, except they wash 
their hands oft, eat not, holding the tradition of the elders. 


4. And when they come from the market, except they wash, 
they eat not........... .” (Mark, VIT. 1-4). 


At present, private individuals or families celebrate these 
The present prac- Gahambars. Inthe case of families, they 
tice of celebrating generally celebrate the six Gahambars 
ae Geen of the year during the first year of one’s 
death in the family circle. They celebrate the G&ahambars 
with the Yad or remembrance of his or her name in 
the recitals of the-prayers. But, besides these private 
celebrations, there are public celebrations in almost all 
Parsee towns. In some places, there are, what' may be called, 
Subscription Gahambars,” where only those who pay their 
mite, as-fixed and arranged, may join. In some places, 
there are generous donors who celebrate public Gahambars and 
invite.all Parsees of the town to the feast. In case of sub- 
scription Gahambars, at times, there are Gihambars of different 
tradesmen. For example, the Parsee cloth-merchants of 
Bombay have their own Gahambars. Different Parsee offices. 
have their own Gaéhambars. 


In Bombay, the Trustees of the funds and properties of 
the Parsee Punchayet hold a fund of about 

Bitsar Baer Rs. 150,000 made up by public subscrip- 
tions. From the income of this fund they 

eelebrate six publie Gdhambars: They spend Rs. 780 for the 


JASHAN. 455 
celebration of each of the Gdhambars. About Rs. 20 to Rs. 25 
go for the religious or ceremonial part, and the rest goes ‘in 
givinga public dinner, called Nid¢ (lit. caste dinner, to the whole 
community). A public invitation goes round and from about 
two to three thousand people take part in the dinner. The 
first Sir Jamsetjee Jejecbhoy Bart. -had great faith in the 
celebration of the Gahambars. He has set apart a large fund 
for the celebration of these Gahambars, not only in Bombay but 
insome of the big Moffusil Parsee centres like Surat, Naosari, 
Broach, etc. 


Of all ceremonial occasions, the Gahambars were ¢onsidered 

Gahambars, oc. © be the principal occasions for ceremonial 
casions of com- gatherings. Universal’ Brotherhood which 
munial gatherings. 1. often hear spoken of, was one of the 
principal objects aimed at in the public Gahambars. The 
rich and the poor—rich and poor not-only in wealth but in in- 
tellectual knowledge—of the town were expected to meet 
together and to learn from ‘each other’s company what 
was best in it. The inferiors coming into contact with the 
superiors learnt from them good manners and the traits of their 
nobility. The rich came to know the wants of the poor and 
pondered over their shortcomings which they thought of re- 
moving. 


7. JASHAN. 


The celebration of an important event or occasion, whethet 
joyful or melancholy, in a religious and 
Meaning of the golemn way with liturgical services, is known 
word Jashan, : 
as Jashan. The Jashans are known by 
special designations according to the occasions which require 
their celebration. For example, if it is to ‘celebrate the 
anniversary of the death of a person, it is said to be the 
“Jashan of -A or B’s -Baj.” -If it is to celebrate the 
anniversary ‘of the foundation of a —Fire-temple, -it.is said 
to -be ‘the “Jashan -of the Sal-gireh, é.¢., anniversary -of:the 
Fire:temple.” If it is to celebrate a Gahambér or season 


456 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


‘festival, it is said to ‘be the “Jashan of the G&hambar.” 
The Parsees have celebrated by Jashans, important events like 
_the Golden and Diamond Jubilees of Her late Majesty, Queen 
Victoria, and the Coronation of Emperor, Edward VII. Similarly 
they have celebrated Jashans to pray for the suppression of 
scourges like those of famine and pestilence, mutiny and war. 


The word Jashan is another from of Yazashna or Ijashna 
“meaning an homage of praise, from the root ‘yaz’ to praise, 
to worship. Some derive the word from ‘chash’ to taste, to 
- eat, from the fact that the Jashans end by a kind of communion, 
wherein ‘all the persons assembled partake of the Darun, the 
’ consecrated bread, and myazda, the consecrated fruits, and 
other eatakles. Some later Mahomedan,authors give the word 
as ‘chashan ’ instead of ‘ Jashan,’ thus’ suggesting the - above 
derivation of the word from ‘ chash.’ to taste. 


What Southey says of Festivals generally is specially true of 
Parsee Jashans. They, “ when duly observed, attach men to 
the civil and religious institutions of their country ; it is an 
evil, therefore, when they fall into disuse.” 


The liturgical ceremonies which are generally performed in a 
Jashan are the following:—l. The Afringin. 2. The Baj. 
3. The Yagna. 4. The Farokhshi. 6, The Satum. 


The last.three, or any one or more of them, may or may not 
be performed. But the first two are generally performed. 
Out of these two, the first, #.e., the Afringin is indispensably 
necessary. In fact it is the ceremony of the Jashan or it is the 
Jashan proper. It is generally performed in a large hall where 
many people can assemble and witness the ceremony. 


Three kardds or sections are generally recited in the Afring&ns 
of the Jashans. Of these three, two that are invariably recited 
always (except during the 5 days of the Gathas which are the-last 
5 intercalary days of the year when the Daham Afring4n is not 
recited) at the end are the Afringans‘ of Daham and Sraosh. 
‘The first kardé varies according to the occasion of the Jashan. 


JASHAN. 457 


ff the Jashan is for the anniversary of a deceased person, the 
karda of the Afringfin of Adrd&farosh is recited. If it is the 
anniversary of a Fire-temple or any such institution, the 
Afringin with the Khshnuman of the Yazata Behram (who 
presides over Victory) or with the Khshnuman of-the particular 
Yazata which presides over -the day is recited: If it is-the’ 
Jashan of Gahambir, the Afringin of Gahambar is recited. If 
it is the Jashan of Rapithvan, the Afringin of Rapithvan is 
recited, and so on. ; : 
There are particular Holidays in the year which are specially 
known as the Jashan Holidays and,they are 
specially known as the Jashans. These 
dashans or special Holidays can be divided into three classes. 


Jashan Holidays, 


I. Jashans connected with seasons or season festivals. Under 
this class fall the Jashans like those of (2)the Gahambars, (6) 
the Jamshedi Naoroz, (c) Meherangan, (d) Rapithvan, (e) 
Tirangan, (f) Khordadsal. 

II. Jashans in honour of the dead. Under this class are 
included Jashans like those of—(a) The 10 days of the Farvar- 
degin Holidays. (6) the Fravardian Jashans, i.e, the Jashans 
of roz Fravardin (the 19th day) and mah Fravardin (the first 
month). The 19th day Fravardin of each month also is held 
sacred to the “dead, through not to such an extent as the 19th 
day of the first month and the 19th day of the 9th month 
(Adar).(e) the Jashans of the 4th, 10th, 30th and the 
anniversary day after one’s death (Pahl. Vendidad VITI, 22). 

III.» The Jashans that have some connection with some 
historical events in ancient Iran. Some of the Jashans that fall 
under the first head fall also under this head, e.g., (2) the Jamshedi 
Naoroz, (6) the Meherangan, (c) the Tirangan. . 

Firstly, the object of most of the public Jashans, e.g., the 

; Jashans of the Season Festivals is to offer 
eae damaie thanks to the Almighty for His bountiful 
blessings and to pray for a continuance of 


the same. To a great extent they are thanks-giving services. 
: 58 


458 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES! 


Secondly, the public Jashans are intended to cement the tic 
of brotherhood. They aim at not only physical brotherhood, 
but spiritual brotherhood. The celebrant says in the recital 
of the Dibaché that the reward of all his prayers may go to the 
treasury of Aburamazda, i.e, for the good of all his fellow- 
creatures. This is what one may call “spiritual socialism.” . 


_ The Jashan days The following are the Jashan holiday: 
in a Parsee yoar. - during the year among the Parsces. 


I. During the first month Farvardin :— 

1. Naoroz or the New Year’s day. This day corresponded al 
one time with the Jamshedi Naoroz day (the 2Ist of March, 
the day of the Vernal Equinox), but as the-Parsees have ceased 
to observe intercalation since their imigration to India, this 
Naoroz. does not fall on the 21st of March. It is known as 
the Jamshedi Naoroz day, because, according to Firdousi, king 
Jamshed of the Peshdadian dynasty first observed it with eclat 
on the Vernal Equinox day (M., Mohl. I, p. 53). On this day, 
the Parsees, when meeting each other, perform the Hamazor. 


2. Rapithvan. On-the 3rd day. The word means the | 
pith (pithwa) or the middle portion of the day, the midday 
being the hottest part of the day. The Jashan day at the season 
when the sun begins to be hot is called the Rapithvan day. 
From the.New Year’s day (the Vernal Equinox), the winter 
being over, spring sets in and the sun begins to be hotter. The 
Rapithvan Gah prayer is recited from that day. So, the first 
of the month would be the proper day for the observation of the 
Rapithawin Jashan, but the third day Ardibehesht is observed 
as the day for the celebration, because Ardibehesht is associated 
with Fire which is the visible form on the surface of the Earth 
of the heat of the sun. 

3. Khordad Sal: 6th day. This day is spoken of in some old 
books as the Naoroz-i-khag, 7.¢., the special New Year's day, 
while the real New Year’s day was known as Naoroz-i-Am, i.e., 
common New Year’s day. It was specially (Khag,) observed by. 


JASHAN. asy 


the King and his nobility. It is said to be the day on which 
many historical events of old Iran are said to have happened.! 


4, Jashan of Farvardegan. Fravardin, the 19th day of the 
first month Farvardinis a Jashan day in honour of all the dead. 
The Yazata Farvardin presides over the Fravashis or Frohars. 
So, the day bearing the name of that Yazata occurring in the 
month which also bears the name of that Yazata is sacred to the 
memory of the Fravashis of all the dead.? 


If. ARDIBEHESHT MONTH. 


I. Ardibehesht Jashan. The 3rd day of the second month. 
Each of the 30 days of the Parsee month bears the name of the 
Yazata which is believed to preside on that day. Again, each 
of the 12 months bears the name of the Yazata which is believed 
to preside on that month. So, that.day of the month which 
bears the name of the Yazata whoypresides also over the month 
or whose name is also borne by the month, is held as a sacred 
Jashan day. So the 3rd day, Ardibehesht, of the second month 
Ardibehesht is the Jashan day of Ardibehesht. 


2. Maidhyozarem Gahambar Jashan days. From the llth 
to the 15th day. Vide above ‘ Maidhyozarem’ in the article 
on Gahambar. 


1 Vide KR. Cama Memorial Volume, pp, 122—29. Dastur Kaikhus- 
ru’s paper. 

2 It is something like the day of “All soursday ” of the Christians 
which falls on the 2nd of November, J remember having visited the ceme- 
tery. of ‘* Pérela Chaise ” in Paris on the Ist of November 1887, the day of 
ali saints (Tous saints). What I saw there reminded me of the Fravarde- 
gan Jashan of the Parsees of Bombay. I saw hundreds, nay thousands, 
going to the above cemetery with wreaths and crowns of flowers, real and 
artificial, In Bombay you see hundreds of Parsees going te the Towers 
of Silence, which, like the above cemetery of Paris, are situated on a hill, 
with pieces of sandal-wood for the sacred fire burning in a temple on the 
hill. Hundreds of priests go up the hill with fruits and flowers for the 
Afring&an ceremony to be performed there. In Paris I saw a number of 
Parisians giving their candles to be ignited at the altar. In Bombay, a 
number of Parsees give pieces of sandalwood to be ignited on the sacred 
fire, : ‘ 


460 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


111. MONTH KHORDAD. 


Khordad roz Jashan. The 6th day Khordad of the 3rd month 
Khordad is the ordinary. Jashan day. 


IV. MONTH TIR. 


1. Maidhyoshem G&hambar. From the llth to the 15th 
day. Vide Madhyoshem in the article on Gahambars. 

2. Tiryén. On the 13th day Tir of the 4th month ‘Tir. 
This day is also connected with an historical event/in the reign 
of King Minocheher, when a dispute about the boundary of 
Tran and Turin was decided by the throwing of an arrow (Tir) 
by an archer Erekhsha. 

V. AMERDAD. 


Amerdad Jashan. On the 7th day Amerdad of the 5th month 

Amerdad. 
VI. SHEHRIVAR. 

I. Shehrivar Jashan. On the’ 4th day Shehrivar of the 6th 
‘month Shehriver. 

2. Paitishhayem GShambar. From the 26th day to the 
30th day. Vide Paitishhayem in the article on Gahambars. 

VII MEHER. 


1. Meherangén. On the 16th day Meher of the 7th month 
Meher. It is'also connected with an event in the reign of Faridun. 
It was on this day that he took Zoh&k prisoner and ascended 
the throne of Persia. 

2. Ayaéthrem Gihambér. From the 26th to the 30th day. 
Vide ayerhrem in the article on Gahambirs. 


- VII. ABAN.. 


_ Aban Jashan. On the 10th day (Abin) of the’ Sth nacth 
Abin. It is a festival in honour of the Yazata presiding over 
waters. Hundreds of persons, especially the ladies, go to the 
sea-shore, to the banks of rivers and say prayers in honour of 
Aban who presides over water. 


JASHAN, 461. 


TX. ADAR. 


1. pene On the 9th day Adar of the 9th month Adar. 
It. is a festival in honour of the Yazata presiding over Fire. 
Hundreds of persons go to the Fire temples and récite Atash 
Nyaish in Bono of Adar, the Yazata that presides on 
.Fire.. nee Wy 
-2. Second Farvardegan Jashan.—This second Farvar- 
degan Jashan occurs on roz Farvardin, the 19th«day “of 
Adar, the 9th month. On that day, a number of Parsees go to 
the Hill where the Towers are built, , present picces of sandalwood 
to be burnt on the sacred fire there and say their prayers. The 
priests recite the Afringan prayers. This is a day for the - 
remembrance of the memory of all the dead. 


This day. is important in connection, with the dead i in another 
way. When a person dies in a way.as would not enable his 
relations to know the date of the Parsee month on which he died, 
then the roz Farvardin, t.e., the 19th of the month is taken to be 
the date of his death. When even the month is not known, then 
the 9th month, the Adar, is taken to be the month. For 
example, suppose a man-goes on a voyage.and his boat founders 
and he is lost, and his relatives do not know the date on 
which the ship or boat foundered and he died. Then, for the 
observance of the day and for the performance of the obsequies, 
they assume) Bravardin the 19th day of the month to be the 
date of the month of his death. Suppose even the month of his 
death-is not known; ! then they assume Adar, the 9th month, 
to be the month of his death. So, in such cases they take the 
i9th of the 9th month to be'the anniversaries of the deaths 
of perons whose date’ and month of death are not known, 
(Pahlavi Vendidéd, Chap. VIII, 22). The reason why the 
month of, Adar, and not any other month, was assumed to 
be the month of death, is said to be this tbat the injunction 
was made at a time, when, owing to the fact of an inter- 


' 1 In these days of fast and better ‘travelling and voyaging, such a 
vontingency hardly arises, but in old Iran it very frequently arose. 


462 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES, 


calary month being added in turn at the end of every 120 
years, Adar was considered to be the last month of the year. 
In the case of persons dying on one of the five Gathi days, 
t.e., the intercalary days, at the end of the year, there being no 
corresponding day for that day in the subsequent months, the 
day Farvardin is taken to be the day of his month and the 
‘monthly religious ceremonies. are enjoined to be performed ‘on 
that day every month. 


X. DEH. 


1—4. Deh-Dadar Jashans. The 10th month Deh is sacred 
to Ahura Mazda himself. Daepadar, Daep-Meher and Daepdin 
are the Hamkéars (lit: co-workres) of Oharmazd. So the Ist, the 
Sth, the 15th and the 23rd days of the month which bear the 
names Ormuzd, Daepddar, Daepmeher and Daepdin are held 
as the sacred Jashan days of Deh Dadar. 


5. Jarthoshtno-Diso. The 11th day Khorshed of the 
10th month Deh is held to be the anniversary of the death of 
Zoroaster. So, this day (diso) is observed as a Jashan day. 


6. Maidhyérem Gahamb&r. From the 16th to the 20th day. 
Vide the word Maidhyarem in the article on Gahambars. 


XI. BAHMAN. 


Bahmangan. On the 2nd day (Bahman) of the 11th month 
Bahman. Bahman being the Yazata that presides over cattle, 
the \Parsees abstain from meat diet-on this day and also on the 
Hamkér days of Bahman during the month, 7.e., on the 12th 
(Mohor), 14th (Gosh) and 21st (R&m) days. 


Il. ASPANDAD. 


1, Aspandid Jashan. On the 5th day (Aspand4d) of the 
12th month Aspendid. Aspendad is the Yazata presiding over 
earth. On this day the Parsees used to get particular Avesta 
Pahlavi passages written on pieces of‘ paper which were meant 
as charms for the destruction of small insects like, ants, serpents, 


JASHAN. 463 


etc,! They fixed these charm papers on the doors of their 
houses on this day, so that the house may be free during the 
year from the pest of these insects. It is also known as 
Jashan-i-Burzigaran (cultivators), because they used to use the 
charm for their fields. 


2. Avardad S4l gah. On the 6th day (Khordad) of the 
month Aspandad, It is said that, at one time, when the 
Parsees of some part of Persia observed intercalation at the end 
of every fourth year, they added a day at the ond of every 
fourth year and called it by that name. Since ‘they ceased 
observing intercalation, the Jashan has been attached to 
the sixth day (Khordad) of this last month, because Khordad 
is associated with time. 


3. Muktad Jashan Holidays. From the 26th day to the 5th 
Gatha day. (Vide. Fravardegan). 


4. Mino-Marespand Jashan. On the 29th day. It was sup- 
posed to be the day when Zoroaster convinced Gushtdsp about 
the truth of his new religion. 


Jashang mention. Firdousi often mentions three principal 
ed by Firdousi. Jashans of the ancient Iranians. They are: 


1. The Naoroz, i.e., the New Year’s day, the first day of the 
first month Fravardin. 


2. The Meherangin. Properly speaking, this Jashan, which 
is that of the antumnal equinox, must fall on the Ist day of the 
seventh month, i.e., exactly six months after the Jashan of the 
Vernal Equinox which fell on the Ist day of the Ist month. 
But the month being Meher, it was thought proper to celebrate 
the Jashan on the day which bears the name (Meher) of the 
month. Hence it is, that it is celebrated on the 16th day of 
the month Meher. It is the Jashan latterly shown as the feast 
of Mithras. 


i Vide my paper on “ Nirang-i-Jashan-i-Burzigarén (Journal of the 
Anthropological Society of Bombay, Vol. V, pp. 398-405). Vide my’ 
Anthropological Papers, Part 1., pp. 122-130. 


464 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


3. Jashan-i-Sadeh. On the 10th day (Abin) of the 10th 
month Deh. They say that a large fire was kindled in the fields 
on this day to symbolize the approach of winter which neces- 
sitated the kindling of fires. 


- According to Firdousi, the ancient. Iranian Kings took pride 
- Special Buildings in celebrating these Jashans with great 
for the celebration eclat. In the years succeeding great wars: 
of these Jashans. _ and victories, the Jashans were . celebrated 
with greater eclat to commemorate the events. of / victories. 
Other great events of a King’s reign were also comme- 
morated by observing the Jashans of the year with great 
eclat. There were special spacious buildings attached to Firc- 
temples for the celebration of these Jashans. For example, 
there were the “ Aiwan-i-Naoroz,” i.e, The Hall for (celebrat- 
ing) the Naoroz Jashan, and \the K&kh-i-Sadeh, #.e., the 
Mansion for (celebrating) the ,Jashan of Sadeh (M. Mohl 
V. p. 356, 558 ; VI p. 140, VII p. 36, 402). Kings Shapor I,. 
Behréamgore (Behrém V), Noshirvéan the Just (Chosroes 1), 
Khosro Parviz (Chosroes IT) and Shirin, the queen of Khosro 
Parviz, are mentioned by Firdousi as celebrating the Jashans of 
Naoroz and Sadeh and as endowing the Halls for the celebra- 
tion of these Jashans ([bid.). The Kings had a public audience 
of the great_men of their country, even of state prisoners, on 
these Jashan days. 
Tha\Jashans of Magoudi mentions the following Jashans 
Trén, according to of ancient. Iran :—-l. Naoroz. 2. Mehe- 
Macoudt. “ mike : 
: rangan. 3. Abangan. 4, Kaoosaj. 

5. Azerkhoosh. 


The first three are mtntioned above. The fourth is not 
referred to in old Parsee books, but it seems to be a later celebra- 
tion to mark the departure of winter. The fifth Jashan seems 
to be, as indicated by its name (Azer), some Jashan connected 
with fire, : 


PRAVABDEGIN OF MUETAD CEREMONIES, 465 


Albiruni’s list of Jashans. includes most of the Jashans 

enumerated above. The following are the 

ceibod be Altinent, principal of some of those mentioned for 
the first time. 


1. On roz Sarosh (17th) m&h Fravardin (Ist month). 
Albiruni says that the. custom of saying grace at meals and 
eating in silence first came into practice on this day. 


2. Jashan-i-Nilofér, i.e, the Jashan of the Waterdily, on 
voz 11th of the 4th month (Tir). 


3. The great Meherangan, or roz 21st of month Meher, 
i.¢., & days after the ordinary Meherangan. | 

4. Bahar Jashan, #.e., the Jashan to mark the approach of 
spring. It was on the first day of thé 9th month Adar. It 
seems to be the same as that of the Kaoosaj of Masoudi. 


5. Jashan of Khurram roz, on the Ist day of the month 
Deh which was also called Khur Mah. — 


Various other authors, and among them, Tabari and Mir. 

Jashans aceorga. Khond and the writers of the Dabistan and 
ing to other au- the Ain-i-Akbari, refer to the Jashans of 
sa the Iranians. Malcolm and Ousely describe 
at some length the Jashan of Naoroz as observed even now 
in Persia. (Vide my Lecture on ~udl Yael oval fen 
Ancient Iranian Festivals in my eared worn ot vil 
am, 4.e., Lectures and Sermons on Zoroastrian subjects, 
Part III, pp. 121-145). 


8. FRAVARDEGAN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 


The last ten days of the Parsee Year from roz Ast&d, the 26th 
dayof the last month Aspendd, to the day of 

Muktad Holidays the Vahishtoyisht Gath, are known as the 
Fravardegin or the Muktad Holidays. 

They are the principal holy days for the remembrance of 
the dead. In the case of the death of a member of a 
family during a year, these holidays are particularly observed 

59 


466 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES, 


. ceremoniously by the family during the first year. In other 
years, the ceremonies are often performed in turn jointly by 
several families that are chips of the same block. For example, 
A has left behind him three sons, B, C, D. After the death of 
A, the three sons observe the holidays ceremoniously and perform 
all religious ceremonies in turn every year in their own houses. 
In case B has a death in his family in a particular year, \he 
generally prefers to perform the ceremonies at his house, though 
‘it be not his turn, because it is the first year of the death of a 
member of hisfamily. In the case where ceremonies are per- 
formed in turns, the others pay their mite as a part of the 
expenses. For example, if it is B’s turn, then Cand D pay a 

_ certain sum as their mite for the expenses. 


These holidays are known by the following two names of 
which the first is the older name:—l. The Fravardegan 
‘ Holidays. 2. The Muktad Holidays. 


The word Fravardegan is the plural of the word Fravard 
}y) ‘Meaning. of: which.is another form of fravart of fravarti 
the word Fravar- which word, in its turn, is another form 
a as of Avesta Fravashi. So the word Fravar- 
degin means the ceremony in honour of the Fravashis, the 
Farohars or the guardian spirits (vide Fravashis). This is the 
proper Iranian name of une Holidays, as referred to in old 
Parsee books. 
At one time, I was inclined to think that the word Muktad 
is a Sanskrit word and that it came to be 
ak one ar ke, used in India since the time of the Sanskrit 
translation of the Avesta texts by Dastur 
Neryosang Dhaval who lived in about the 12th Century. Neryo- 
sang translated the words ‘‘ashaénam fravashindm, ” which 
often occur in the Avesta, by the Sanskrit words “ muktétman4 
vrudhdhi” the word muktdimd in this phrase is supposed to 
have given to the holidays its name ‘‘ Muktad.” As the last 
ten days of the year are the days for the remembrance of the 
' Holy Fravashis or Farohars, #,¢, the guardian spirits of the dead 


FRAVARDEGIN DR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 407 


and are therefore called Fravardegin days, so they were also 
thought to have been known as Muktad days from the word 
Muktétmad, the Indian or Sanskrit equivalent of the Avesta 
“ashaénam Fravashiném.” The Mukt&d holidays were thought 
to be the days for the remembrance of the Holy souls that 
have got their Mukti or salvation. 


But a Persian Revayet, known as Nariman Hoshung’s Rivayat 
leads us to think that the word Muktad is a corrupted form of 
Persian Mukhtdr, i.e., supreme, highest, choice. The Holidays 
are called Mukhtar, ¢.¢., the supreme or the highest, because 
they are the most principal among all Parsee holidays. 


The Fravardin Yasht, (Yasht XIII, 49), the Dinkard (Bk. 

; VIII, Chap. VII, 10-13);! the Din-i-Vajar- 
Vreven tase ‘kard,? the Vajarkard--Dini,? the Pahlavi 
Vendidad (VIII, 22), the Pahlavi Rivayat, 

the Nirangistan,® the Sad-dar,® the Persian Rivéyats’ and 
other later books all give/10 as the number of Fravardegan 
Holidays. Vide for the original passages my Gujrati book 
Asan KAW Boar 2 A euAN wad, sal, VR yada 
mar, away, ¢.e, An Inquiry from Pahlavi Persian and other 


18, B. E. XXXVL, p.17. 

2 Tbid., p., 440s 

3 Dastur Peshotan B. Sanjana’s Text, p. 56. 

4 Spiegel’s Pahlavi Vendidad, p. 111,1.4.; Dastur Jamasijji’s Gujarati 
Text, p. 68; Dastur Hoshang’s Text p. 321. 

5. Photo-zinco Manuscript, edited by Dastur Darab P. Sanjana, folio 
52a, folio 122a, Le Zend Avesta, par Darmesteter, Vol, III, p. 99. The 
Nirangstan, translated by Mr. Bulsara, pp. 111-114. 

5a, Ervad Dhabhar’s Text. 

6 (a) The Sad-dar Bundehesh, Vide the lithographed Rivayat of 

Mr. Maneckji R. Unvala, Vol. II, p. 600. 

(b) The Sad-dar-i-Nazam (chap 41), (c) The Sad-dar-i-Beher-i-Tavil 
(Chap. 41. Dastur Jamaspji’s Gujarati Translation, p. 216). (d) 
The Sad-dar-i-Nasar (Chap. 37, Mr. Maneckji R. Unvala’s litho- 
graphed Rivayat, vol. II, p. 404). Vide S. B. E. XXIV, p. 298. 

‘7 (a) Nariman Hoshang’s Rivayat, S. B. E. XXXVII, p. 429. 

(6) Kama Bohra’s Rivayat. Mr, Maneckji R. Unvala’s lithogreph« 
ed Rivayat, Vol II, p. 509, 


° 


des GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 
Works onthe subject of the Number of Days of the Fravarde- 
gan. 

Menander Protector, the Byzantine historian, who had lived 
in the reign of king Mauricius (Mauricius Flavius Tiberius, 
_ 682-602) and whe refers to these holidays as Furdigan, also 
gives ten as the number of these holidays.!  Albiruni? 
(973-1048) also gives the number as ten. Anquetil Du 


Perron 3 who was in India from 1755 to 1761 also says. that 
the Parsees at Surat observed 10 days as the Fravardegin 
holidays. 

Though all the old authorities give 10 days as the period of the 
Fravardegan | holidays, the Parsees seem to have extended 
the period to 18, They seem to have added at first to the period 
of 10 days, the day preceding the first day, which was held 
as a day of preparation for the Holidays. Again during the next 
seven days, t.¢., the seven days of the New Year, there occurred 

. Some other great holidays, like the New Year’s day or the first 
day of the New Year, the Rapithavan Jashan on the 3rd day, 
the Khordad Salon the 6thday. So these days and the intervening 
days were subsequently added to the Fravardegin holidays. 
Then the seventh day seems to have been subsequently added as 
the Ametdids@l holiday. So now, generally 18 days are ob: 
served as the Fravardegén days, though there are families 
who have reverted to the custom of observing only the original 
io ‘days: 

As to what the Fravashis or Farohars are, for whose tethemb: 
Yancethe 10 days of the Fravardegan are appointed, see the 
word Fravashi. 

The first five of these 10 days are known as the Panj-ickeh, 
ie., the lesser five days and the second five, which are the Gatha 
Gahambar intercalary days, as the -panj-i-meh, te., the 
greater five days. The latter are held in higher veneration 


1 Vide Datmesteter’s “Le Zend Avesta,” Vol. II, p. 503, n. 11. 


or eaieperen aes of Ancient Nations translated by Sachau, 
p. z > 
5 Zend Avesta, Tome Ir, P: BTB 


¥RAVARDEGIN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 46) 
than the first five from the fact (a) that they happen to be the 
last five days of the yeat, (6) that they are, in addition, the 
days of one of the Gahambars, (c) and that they are the 
intercalary days known as the Gatha days. 


Though according to the literal meaning of the word, they 

The Fravardegan te the holidays for the invocation of all 
holidays are espe- Fravashis, they: are principally for the 
cially for invokin, . , . 
the Fravashis of invocation and remembrance of the Fravashis 
sie idegd. of the dead (Vide the word / Fravashi). 
The Farvardin Yasht (Yasht XIII, 49) connects.them with 
the dead. They remined us of the Larentalia, the Ferolia 
or the Parentolia of the ancient Romans and the Anthesterion 
of the Greeks. 


The object of these Fravardegén holidays. is te remetil- 
: ber and honour. the Farohars or the 
Hi age ofthe spirits of the departed dear ones. Of 
course, the survivors do so on particular 
occasions like that of the anniversaries of their death, but the 
Fravardegan days are general holidays for the remembrance 
of all the departed ones. The Farvardin Yasht which treats 
of the subject of the Farohars in whose honour the Fravardegin 
holidays are_observed and the Fravardegin ceremonies are 
performed, thus refers to the subject of remembering the spirits 
of the dead-in these last ten days of the year. It says: “ We 
worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faithful, 
-who.come and go through the borough at the time of the Hamas- 
pathmaédha ; they go along there for ten nights, asking thus : 
“Who will praise us? Who will offer us a sacrifice? Who 
will meditate upon us? Who will bless us? Who will receive 
us with meat and clothes in his hand and with a prayer worthy 
of bliss ? Of which of us will the name be taken for invocation ? 
Of which of you will the soul be worshipped by you with a sacri- 
fice? To whom will this gift of ours be given, that he may 
have never-failing food for ever and ever.’ ””! 


470 GROUES: OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


From the above passage ‘of the Fravardin Vasht (Yasht 
XIII, 49-50), we learn that the Fravashis of the dead expect 
to be invoked by their names being mentioned in the ceremony. 
Hence it is a custom that in the recital of some of the liturgical 
ceremonies, especially the Afringén ceremony, the names of the 
deceased members of a family are recited from a list called 
némgrahan. 

The word nam-grahan comes from Avesta néman, name 
Galas: and garew, Sanscrit grah, German <ergreifen, 

to gripe or take. So nam-grahan means 
‘taking or remembering the names.’ Every family has a 
manuscript book or list known by that name. It contains 
the names of the departed ones of the family. Those who 
have died lately head the list. The priest while reciting the 
Pazend Dibaché in the Afringan, Satum, Farokhshi, &c., 
recites all the names in this list..At first he mentions or 
invokes the name of the particular deceased in whose honour 
the ceremony is performed and then the names of other deceased 
of the family. He then recites also the names of some of 
the departed Zoroastrian. worthies of ancient Iran and of 
India who have done-valuable services to. their community. 


In ancient Iran, the holidays, which occur at the end 
of the year on the Hamaspathmaedem 
Gahambar days, happened to come just before 
the setting in of the season of spring. On 
the expiry of these 10 holidays, the New Year began with the 
Vernal equinox. It isnot so now because since the Arab conquest 
of Persia, the Parsees have not been regularly keeping the leap 
year and so they are now much backward in their calculation of 
time. Among the Romansand the Greeks alsotheir holidays to 
tommemorate their deadtoccurred just before the commencement 
of the spring. As Prof. Darmesteter says: “The souls of the 
dead were supposed to partake of the new life then beginning 
to circulate through nature that had also been dead during the 
long months of winter.”’! 


18.B.E. XXIII, P, 1920.1 


The Holidaysjust 
before the Spring. 


FRAVARDEGiN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 47} 


Memory and Hope both render these holidays very important— 
Memory for the dead and Hope for our 
dy ee of future. They are the days for keeping 
green the memory of those who have 
departed and have laid us under some obligation either by 
their love and affection or by their services—services 
physical, mental, or pecuniary. People march and march 
during the whole of the year in their different avocations 
and walks of life. The arrival of these days calls. upon 
the Zoroastrians to halt in their march, to cast‘ an’ eye over 
the past and to look to the future. Looking to the past, they 
have not only to remember with respect, esteem_and gratitude 
their departed dear ones and their departed worthies, but to 
remember or to take stock of their actions during the year and 
then to hope for the better in the future. They have to reflect 
that as they have to remember with esteem and gratitude their 
departed dear ones, a time will come in future when they in their 
turn will expect to be remembered by their surviving dear ones. 
So, it would be well if they-behaved in a way as would enable 
them to be remembered: with esteem and gratitude. 


The principal observance during the holidays in several 
The _prifteigad Parsee families is that known as Muktdd. 
observance during mddvd, %.e., to arrange or lay the Mukidd, 
the Holidays, 
signifying thereby to make arrangement 
for remembering the pious souls of the dead. The house is 
cleaned and generally white-washed before the holidays. If 
not the whole house, at least a room where the ceremony is to 
be performed is washed clean with water and white-washed. 
Then on an-iron stand or on a table, water pots or flower-vases 
containing water and flowers are arranged. The place where 
the ceremonies are performed is lit &p at night. Fire is kept 
burning with fragrant sandal-wood and frankincense for a 
great part of the day. Visitors at the house during the holidays 
feed the fire with their own hands and remember at the same 
time the particular departed ones, to pay homage to whose 


472 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


memory they have paid the visit. The whole process is spoken 
of in the Vajarkard-i-Dini as ‘ Hurak itibunashna, #.e., ‘ to get 
a hurak seated.’ The Rivayats speak of it as “hurak . 
nashfindan ”’ which is a Persian rendering of the Pahlani 
expression. Jn ordinary pharseology, one hears the word 
‘Dosl4 madva,’ i.e, to arrange for the Dosla or the Dosa, 
i.e., the old because it is the old who generally form a large 
number of the dead. 


The Vajarkard-i-Dini thus refers to the subject; ‘“ During 
these ten days, in the house or in the Fire-temple a/clean and 
decent place may be chosen, away from the place where women 
seclude -themselves during their menses..There a ‘hurak’ 
may be arranged and it is necessary that-a good deal of the 
Avesta may be recited there. For the first 5 days, the Yagna 
in honour of Sraosh must be recited. The chapter of Fri- 
mraét, which is one of the chapters of the Yacna,! must be recited 
during the first five days with the Baj of Ardafarosh. If that 
is not possible, i.e. if one cannot recite the chapter, he must 
recite 1,200 Ashem Vohus with the Baj of Ardéfarosh. During 
the five days of the Gatha, the Has or chapter of the GAthis 
must be recited ........ If that is wot possible, there is 
no help for it, and one must recite 1,200 Yatha Ahu 
Vairyos.’”? 


The Sad-dar-i-Bundehesh says: “During the Fravardegin 
holidays, the spirits of the dead revisit this world. They go 
to their-respective houses........ There it is necessary for men 
to burn fragrance over fire during these ten days and remember 
their dear departed ones. They must perform the Darun, 
Myazd, and Afringan ceremonies and recite the Avesta. The 
spirits of the dead are thereby felicitated and pleased and they 
bless (the living ones). ‘Again it is necessary that during these 
ten days men must perform works of charity and be free from 
other ordinary work. The spirits of the dead thereby return 


1 Ha, XX, 
2 Translated from Dastur Peshotan’s Text, p- 56. 


FRAVARDEGIN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 473. 


(to their mansions in heaven) much pleased and they bless 
(their living dear ones) ”! 

Albiruni describes what was done in Persia during the holidays 

Albiruni’s refer. 2>0ut 900 years ago. His description, 
ence to the cys- though not quite correct, gives one an idea 
tom: of what was done and is still being done. 
He says: “ During this time, people put food in the hall of 
the dead....They fumigate their houses with juniper,that 
the dead may enjoy its smell. The spirits of the pious men 
dwell among their families, children, and relations, and 
occupy themselves with their affairs, although invisible to 
them.’”2 

Anquetil Du Perron refers to these holidays as observed by 

Mudaetil'a tera the Parsees of Sates 150 years ago, and 
ence to the custom says, that “they give them (the Fravashis) 
ata the most magnific reception. The houses 
are purified and decorated. They do not go out of the house.” 


With reference to the custom referred to by Anquetil of not 
going out of the house during the ten days, we find, that that was 
due to the injunction,that these days may be best spent in 
prayers and works of charity. We learn from. Menander, 
referred to above, that it was for this reason, that Noshirvan 
(Chosroes I) had»postponed the reception of the embassy of 
the Roman Emperor. 

Tedanipl terms One comes across the following words in 


about the arrange- the matter of the observation of the 
ment of flowers, ete. . : 


Fravardegin Holidays :— 
1. Hurak. 3. Takché. 
2. Machi. 4. Behrun. 


We will explain these words and the observances connected 
with them. 

1 Translated from the Sad-dar in the lithogrophed Rivayat, by 
Mr. M. R. Unvala, Vol. IT P. 500. : 

2 Albiruni’s Chronology of the Ancient Nations, by Dr. Sachau, p. 210. 

3 Tome II, p. 574. 


69 - 


. . é 
474 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONTES. 


The whole ceremony and process of arranging stands or 
Hace: platforms on which flowerpots or vases 
: are arranged to.hold water and flowers is 
spoken of as “‘hurak itibunashna,” in the Pahlavi Vajar- 
kard-i-Dini and “hurak nishandan” in the Rivayat. The 
expression means “to get the hurak seated, arranged or 
placed.” The signification of the word “hurak” is not clear. 
It seems to be the diminutive, of Persian hur, ¢.e., the sun. As 
the place is decorated with flowers and kept perfumed ‘with 
burning fragrant sandal-wood and frankincense, it was perhaps 
thought to be a place reminding of the heavens wherein the sun 
moved, and so it was perhaps taken as a small model of the para- 
dise. The Parsee books speak of several paradises one of which 
was Khorshed-paya, t.e., of the dignity or the place of the sun. 
* In this connection, one must remember that in the preparation 
and arrangement of the stand for.the flower-pots, etc., some give 
‘a part of the stand the form of a gumbad, or the dome of the 
sky. 


The metallic stand on which the flower-pots or vases are arrang- 

Machi or the ed is-called mdchi, a word that comes from 
stand for the Muk- Sanskrit manch meaning “a raised seat, 
Seek peremODy: a dias, a platform, a seat of honour, or a 
throne.” It is so-called because is is generally on a raised stand 
that the flower-pots are arranged. The flowers, fruits, and the 
water of the vases may be, and are generally, changed every day, 
but they must be changed at least at the interval of every five 
days. Each of those days when they must be changed is also 
called a mdcht from the fact that all the things on the mdchi 
or stand have to be changed on that day. So, during the 
period of the 18 days of Mukt4d as now observed by most 
_of the Parsees, there are three such MMdchis or days for the 
change of the fruits, flowers, etc. As observed generally now, 
the holidays begin on the 25th of the last month of the Parsee 
year. So, the first mdchi is five days after that, 7.e., on the 


FRAVARDEGIN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 475 


30th day of that month. The next mdchi called vachli 
mdchi, t.e., the middle mdchit falls on the Vahishtoisht Gath4, 
the last of the five intercalary days. The last. macht occurs 
on the fifth day of the first month of the new year. 


The short prayer recited in honour of the Fravashis at the 
place for the Mukt&dd ceremonies is known in some books 
as mdchi nd nemaz or namaskdr, %.e., the prayer of homage 
of the mdchi. The formula recited is very short. It says: 
“‘T repent of all my sins. We praise the good, brave, beneficent 
Fravashis of the holy.” 


In former times and even now in some houses, they arranged 
the flower-pots, etc., in-a_ large niche in a 
wall. Some houses formerly had a special 
room built for the purpose of the Fravardeg4n ceremonies 
wherein was provided a large arch-like niche with a platform. 
This arrangement was called a tdk)i.e., an arch. The word 
tékché occasionally used is-a diminutive of the word idk, as 
bdgiché of bag (garden). 


Tak or Takché. 


The Muktad ceremoniegare generally performed, as said above, 

Behré or the i one branch of the different branches of the 
uota for each chief stock. For example, A dies leaving three 
areveaht sons B, Cand D. Then the three sons, 
B, C and ‘D generally perform the muktad ceremonies in turn, 
every year. Ifit is B’s turn, he performs the ceremonies at his 
house, and C and D generally pay their share of the expenses. 
One whose turn it is to perform the ceremonies generally bears 
the. brunt of the expenses, the others merely paying a fixed 
sum as their share. Now for each dead of the family, there is at _ 
present the custom to place a separate vase or flower-pot for 
several number of years after death. For example, suppose a 
family has lost two-persons during a year, say E. and F. Then 
two separate vases each in memory of E and of F. are provided 
and placed on the stand or on the platform. That particular 
flower-pot or vase is said to be E or F’s Behru. Some say 
that the word comes from Gujarati bé, ic, twoand means 


476 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONTES. 


a pair, because the flower-pots in honour of each dead are 
generally two or more, one placed over the other. But I think, 
that the word is Persian ‘ behreh ’ meaning ‘share.’ The head 
of that branch of the family in which death has occurred during 
the year has to pay his quota in the general expenses. He 
pays that either in money or in kind, by sending some. articles 
of food, etc. He likewise provides a flower-pot which also. is 
considered something like paying in kind. It is the payment 
of a pot for putting the flowers in. So it is called Behreh) i.c., 
share. After a certain number of years after one’s death, 
- whichis not’ fixed, they discontinue providing a separate 
flower-pot for each particular deceased. ‘ 


During these holidays, the family is/visited by near friends 
and relatives. They carry strings of flowers called jari with 
them and place them upon the behrdn, i.e., flower-pot or pots 
of the particular departed whom they wish to honour. This 
is particularly done during the first year after the death of a 
Person. 


Flowers play a very important part in all Parsee religious 

Flowers and the °te™monies. tn the ceremonies tor the 
Memory of the dead, they are necessary in the Afringan 
vec ; ceremony. During the Muktad holidays 
flowers are kept day and night at a separate place of room 
in the-house set apart, as said above, for the purpose of the 
ceremony. -Almostall nations connect the memory of the dead 
with ‘flowers. One of the objects of the ceremonies in honour 
of the dead is to keep their memory ‘ green.’ So, the flowers 
are the best medium which could symbolically help men to 
keep the memory green. 


(a) In the Farvardin Yasht which treats of the Fravashis, 
the Fravashis or the spirits of the holy dead are associated with 
water and trees (Yasht XIII, 147). There we read: . ‘‘ May 
the good waters and the plants and the Fravashis of the faithful 
abide down here! May you be rejoiced and well received in 


FRAVARDEGAN OR MUKTAD CEREMONIES. 477 


this house! Here are the Athravans of the countries, thinking 
of good holiness. Our hands are lifted up for asking help, 
and for offering a sacrifice unto you, O most beneficent 
Fravashis!”1 Jn this passage we find, as it were, the origin of 
the Muktéd ceremonies in which water and flowers are placed 
in a particular clean part of the house, where they are invoked 
and praised by the Athravans or Fire-priests in the presence 
of fire and where the members of the family, offering flowers 
and fruits, ask the blessings of their dear departed ones. 


(b) Water, flowers or plants and the holy-Fravashis are 
associated together in the Hormazd Yasht also (Yasht I, 9). 
There, we find Ahura Mazda saying : “ Worship me, O Zarathush- 
tra, by day and by night, with offerings of libations well accepted. 
I will come unto thee for help and joy, I) Ahura Mazda; the good 
holy Sraosha will come unto thee for.help and joy ; the waters, 
the plants, and the Fravashis of the holy ones will come unto 
thee for help and joy.”2 There are several passages in the 
Avesta that point to water and flowers as the objects of 
nature with which the Fravashis of the dead are pleasantly 
associated. 


(c) In the Viraf-Nameh, the souls of the departed are repre- 
sented as moving in the midst of fragrant trees on the third 
dawn after death. There we read: “‘ On the third dawn, that 
pious-soul, moved about in the midst of sweet-scented trees ” 
(Viréf-Nameh, IV, i5). The fruits, flowers, water, etc., that 
are offered and over which the prayers are recited form the 
myazd, in the midst of which the Fravashis take delight to move 
about. We readin the Farvardin Yasht (Yasht XIII, 64) : “‘ We 
worship the good, strong, beneficent Fravashis of the faith- 
ful....who run by tens of thousands into the midst of the 
Myazdas. ’’8 : 


18. B, BE. XXL p. 228; Yasht XIII, 147. 
28, B. E. XXIIL pp. 25-26. 
3 &, B. E. XXIT, pp. 195-196, 


478 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


Just as the Christmas tree and the representation of the 
stable and the farm-yard during the Christ- 
The Fravarde- é é 
gan ceremonies ™as holidays remind one of the events 
symbolize some re- of Christ’s life, the decoration of flowers, 
ligious ideas. . A 
etc. at the place of the Muktad and the 
remembrance of the Fravashis of the dear departed ones in 
connection with the fragrant flowers reminds the survivors 
of the past righteous deeds of some of their fore fathers, 
deeds which have spread moral and spiritual perfume as 
strong or rather stronger than that of the flowers there. 


During these holidays the prayers that are generally recited 
tia: asses: by the priests at the house of the laymen 
cited atthe place Where the Muktad ceremonies are observed 
aay the holi- gre: (1) The Afringén, (2) the Satum and 
(3) the Farokhshi... In the Fire-temple, they 
perform the B&j ceremony. The Yagna, the Visparad and the 
Vendidad ceremonies are not. performed in all cases but only 
in those where the family is able to afford to pay for them. 
The laymen are required to recite during the first 5 days, 
the H& of Framraot:(Yagqna H& XX). If a person is illiterate 
and isnot able to recite that Ha, he may recite the short Ashem 
Vohu prayer 1,200 times with its Baj. 


During the next 5 days of the Gathas, the laymen are required 
to recite the Gdthd nd Ha, i.e., the chapters of the Gathas, each 
Gatha having to be recited on the particular day which bears its 
name. For example, on the first of the second batch of 5 days, 
hich is the Ahunvad G&tha day, they are to recite the seven 
chapters of the Ahunavaiti Gathd and so on. Ifa layman is 
unable to recite these Gathas, he may recite the Yathé Ahu 
Vairy6 prayer 1,200 times with the proper Baj. 


Again there is another ceremony known as Farvardian, a 
word which is another form of Fravardegin, 
The Farvardian. which is at times performed during the 
Fravardegin holidays by the priests at 


FARESTA CEREMONY. 479 


the Fire-temples in honour of a particular dead person. The 
ceremony consists in the recital and the performance of the 
following prayers and ceremonies : 


(a) The recital of two Yacnas by the priests at the Fire- 
temple during each of the ten days. During the first,five days 
(panj-i-keh), except that on the fourth day (roz Marespand), 
one of the two recitals is in honour of Sraosh and the other in 
honour of Ardafarosh. On the fourth day, one isin honour of 
Sraosh and the other in honour of the Yazata Marespand. 
During the second five days, (the panj-i-meh) one of the two 
recitals is in honour of Sraosh and the other, for any four days, 
in honour of the Gathas, but on one of the days in honour of the 
G&hambar (the Visparad). 


(6) The recital of 5 Vendidads on the following days : 


(1) Boz Ast&éd, the 26th day of the last month ; the first 
of the 10 days. 


(2) Roz Marespand, the fourth of the 10 days. 

(3) G&th&i Ahunvad, the 6th of the 10 days. 

(4) Gath4& Vohukhshathra, the 9th of the 10 days. 
(5) On roz Aspandarmad, the fifth in the new year. 


Then, there are the further recitals of one Yacna, the Yana 
of Rapithavan on the 3rd of the Ist month Fravardin, of two 
on the 5th day and of one on the 6th day. 


IX. FARESTA. 


Farest4 is Persian Firasta or Firashia, lit., one who is sent, 
meaning a messenger, and then an angel. 
Farest& or more correctly Firasté is the 
later name of the Avesta word Yazata. 
Faresté is the name given to a ceremony wherein all the 
angels (Firastés), or more properly, all the Yazatas 
are invoked. There are a large number of Yazatas, but 
33 are specialized. Of these thirty-three, thirty are those 


Meaning of the 
word Faresta. 


480 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


that preside over the 30 days of the month and three are 
extra. The Farest&é ceremony consists in reciting 33 Afrin- 
gins and 33 Bajs with their proper ritual in honour of, and 
with the Khshnuman of, these 33 Yazatas or angels. It would 
take very long for one pair of priests, who ordinarily perform 
the Afringan ceremony, to recite the 33 kardds or sections of the 
Afringans for 33 Yazatas, so more than one pair, generally two, 
are engaged to perform the ceremony. Thé same is the-case 
with the Baj. More than one priest, generally three or four, 
are engaged in reciting, with its ritual, the B&j in honour of and 
with the Khshnuman of these 33 Yazatas. 


The Farest@ ceremony is almost always/performed on merry 
occasions, like marriage, birthday, Naojote, the occupation of 
a newly-built house, the fulfilment of along cherished object. 
The ceremony is intended either as.thanksgiving for desires 
fulfilled or for invoking blessings oi the Almighty and His 
Higher Intelligences upon particular events of a man’s life or 
his undertakings. We will here shortly describe what a 
Yazata is and then enumerate them. 


,The word Yazata comes from the Avesta root yaz, Sanskrit yaj, 
“to praise, toinvoke.” Soit means, “ one 
worthy of being praised.” These Yazatas 
are all believed to be spiritual beings. Zoroaster was the only 
man, who, in the literal sense of the word ‘ Yazata,’ was considered 
to be worthy of being praised, adored or invoked. So he is 
considered to be an Yazata (Yacng. XVI 1-2), a great and known 
Yazata (Yacna VII, 21; If 21). In some later writings, 
supposed to serve as Avesta amulets, even King Faredun, who 
was supposed to be a great physician has been raised to the 
rank of Yazata (Westergaard, Text of the Avesta, p. 331: 
. Miscellaneous Fragments IT).! 


Yazata. 


1 Vide my paper on “An Avesta amulet.” Journal or the Anthro- 
pological Society of Bombay; Vol V, No. 7, pp, 418-21, Vide my Anthro: 
pological Papers, Part I. , ; ‘ 


FARESTA CEREMONY. 48) 


The Avesta speaks of two classes of the Yazatas: I. The 

‘Two classesofthe  +%28tas of the spiritual world (Yazatanim 
Yazatas according mainyavandm: Yacna III, 4). Ii. The 
a Ae ANC Yazatas of the Physical world (Yazata- 
nam gaéthyandm: Yasna III, 4). 


All Yazatas are spiritual beings. So, by the phrase “ the 
Yazatas of the Physical World ” are meant 
those that are believed to preside dver 
grand physical objects of Nature. The 30 
Yazatas, whose names are borne by the 30 days of the months, 
may be divided into these two classes as follows :— 


The Yazatas of 
the spiritual world. 


I: Yazatas of the Spiritual 


Yazatas of the Physical 


World.1 orld. 

1. Oharmazd. 9. Adar. 

2. Bahman. 10. Avan. 

3. Ardibehesht. ll. Khorshed. 

4, Shehrivar. 12. Mohor. 

5. Spendarmad. 13. Tir. 

6. Khordad. 14. Gosh. 

7. Amerdad. 16. Meher. 

8. Daé-pa-Adar. 19. Farvardin. 
15. Daé-pa-Meher. 21. Ram. 
17. -Sarosh. 22. Goad. 
18.. Rashna. 27. Asman. 
20... Behrain. 28. Zamyad. 
23. Dae-pa-Din. 30. Aneran. 
24, Din. 
25. Ashi. 
26. Astad. 


29. Marespand. 


1 The figures before these names give the. number of their position 
in the regular order in which they give their names to the 30 days of the 


month. 


61 


482 GROUPS OF LITURGICAL CEREMONIES. 


The Yazatas of this class are those that preside over abstract 
ideas, most of which are moral characteristics. The first seven 
Yazatas of this class stand higher in the rank of the Yazatas and 
are also called the Amesha-spentas. 


The word literally means the “ Immortal Bountiful ones.”’ 
They are seven in number including Ahura 
Mazda himself who is one of them. As 
archangels, their number corresponds to that of the seven Shadim 
or archangels of the Jews. Dr. Kohut says on this subject : 
“It is worthwhile observing that the fluctuation between the 
number six‘or seven of the Amesha-Cpentas, indeed, according 
as Ahuromazdao is counted or notin the class of the Amesha 
Cpentas of Yst. I, 36; 2, 1-6, recurs also “in the Jewish scrip- 
tures. Thus the so-called Jerusalem Targum to Deuter. 34, 6 
and the book of Enoch C. 20, where the list of “ watching 
angels” is counted up —— gives only six; the book of Toby 
12, 15 and of Enoch C. 90, 21 gives seven as the number of the 
Archangels.’’! 

_ The Christian Scriptures alse speak of seven Archangels or the 
Seven Spirits of God. We read in the Revelation (V. 6) : “And 
I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four 
beasts, and in the midst of the elders, stood a Lamb as it had 
been slain, having’seven horns and seven eyes, which are the 
seven Spirits of God sent forth into all the earth.” ( Vide also, 
Ibid. XV, land 6-7 ; XIII, 2; XVI, 1; Zechariah, IV, 10). 'The 
Apocrypha! Book (Tobit ch. XII, 15) also speaks of “ The seven 
holy angels...... which go in and out before the glory of the 
Holy one.” So Milton sings: 


Ameshasspentas. 


“The seven who in God’s presence nearest to His throne 
Stand ready at command.” 

The “Divine Powers’ of the Neo-Platonic philosophy of - 
‘Philo Judzus, who also corresponded to the Amesha Spentas 
of the Avesta and who stood “closest to the self-existent,’’”* 


_ i The Jewish Angelology and Demonology based upon Parsiism 
tranclated trom the German of Dr. Kohut by K. R, Cama, p. 4, n. 

2“ Philo Judceus or the Jewish Alexandrian Philosophy” by J. 
Drummond, Vol II., pp. 82-83. 


FARESTA CEREMONY. 483 


were six in number. Including the self-existent, their number 
was seven. The Gnostics also said that ‘‘the universe was 
created by the Seven Great Angels.” 

These seven Amosha Spentas had the rest of the Yazatas 
with them as their Hamkars, z.e., Co-operators or Co-labora- 
teurs. 

The word Hamkdr means co-laborateur. The thirty Yazatas 

Hamkars. Their OF angels that preside over the 30 days ot 

groups. the month are said to be the Hamkars of the 
first seven of those who are the Ameshd Spentas_or the Arch- 
angels. They are grouped as Hamkars or. co-laborateurs, 
because, to a certain extent, in their sphere of work, they are 
supposed to have some connection. The following list gives 
the. groups of these Hamkars :— 
Oharmazd-—Daépidar, Daepameher, Daepadin. 
Bahman—Mohor, Gosh, Ram. 
Ardibehesht—Adar, Sarosh, Behram. 
Shehrivar—-Khur (Khurshed), Meher, Asman, Aneran. 
Aspandaérmad—Avain, Din,.Ard (Ashisang), Marespand. 
Khordéd—tTir, Ardafarosh (Farvardin), Goad. 
Amerdad—Rashn, Astad, Zamyad. 

Thus, Daepadar,y Daepameher, Dacpadin are ae of as 
the Hamkars,or co-labourateurs of Oharmazd; Mohor Gosh, 
Ram of Bahman and so on. This Hamk&rship of co-labour ix, 
as ib were; recognized even in practice. For example, the 
Ameshaspand Bahman, presides over cattle. So many an 
orthodox Parsee, out of respect as it were for this Ameshaspand, 
abstains from meat diet not only on the roz Bahman, ?.e., the 
second day of each month, but also on the days of his co-labora- 
teurs, Mohor, Gosh, Ram, i.¢., the 12fh, 14th and 21st days of 
each month. Some abstain from meat diet also on the days 
next to these four, z.e., the 3rd (Ardibchesht), the 13th (Tir), 
the 15th (Daepameher) and the 22nd (Goad), because in a big 
city like Bombay, they know that the goats or sheep are slaugh- 
tered a day previous. If they were to eat meat on, say, roz 


XxVili 


INDEX 


A—contd. 

Page No. 

Afrin of Hamkaras 387, 390 
Myazd 387, 389 
Rapithwan 81, 387, 388 

Zartosht .. 387, 389-90 

Agharni ae bs  O4 
Agiary .. ee Bs +. 262 
Agnidhra, ee ea .. 838 
Agnihotri a + 299 


Agnishtoma, the 282, 299, 300 
Agraéréd, Agrératha, Agreras, 


Agriras oe 360, 365, 366 
Ahriman 49, 89, 116, 117, 17], 
° 172, 341 
Ahuiri Frashna Ne .. 340 
Ahuna Vairya 140 (See 


Ahunvar) Ahunavaiti (Ahun- 

vad) Gatha 65, 478, 479 
Ahunvar: prayer described— 
its importance 341-42; 
Ahunvar to be recited. on 
particular ocpasions 343-46 ; 
Ahunvars substituted for 
different prayers 342-43 ; its 
21 words corresponding to 
21 nasks 346-47; the sub- 
stance of Ahunvar 348 ;—8, 
110, 412, 117, 246, 286, 313, 
325,328, 332, 333, 340, 341, 

349, 440, 441 
Ahura Mazda 1, 14, 64, 65, 
68, 206, 218, 219, 220, 230, 
241, 242, 244, 251, 328, 332, 
333, 338, 341, 392, 410, 411, 

427, 482, 458, 462 482 

‘* Ahura, Mazda Khodai” pra- - 


yer oe .. 54, 190 
Ahura Mazda Yasht .. +. 348 
AiD-Akbari? ., 5, ee 465 


A—conta, 
Page No. 


‘ Airyama Ishy6é’ 327, 340 
Aiwan-i Naoroz rs .- 464 
Aiwisruthrem Gah 78, 232, 436 
Aiwyaonghana ceremony : the 
word explained 289-90; the 
ceremony of preparing “it 
and its signification + 291-93 
Aiwy@onghana (See .Kusti) 
183; 184, 268, 202 
Akhiana. origin of the cere- 
mony 52-53 ;—192, +» 407 
alat (religious requisites) ; ¢c n- 
secration ceremony  ces- 
cribed,, 253-59 ;—96, 133, 
134, 154, 155, 210, 268 
alat {metallic requisites) : des- 
cribed 274-89 ;-—306, 319 
alat-gah, dlat-khwan : described 
270-71 ; alat-gah of ancient 
times ae ‘te -. 372 
Glat-no-khwan (See dlai-gah). 
alat-no-takhto (See alat-gah). 


Albiruni . 373, 465, 468, 473 
Alexander the Great .. 2. 227 
Amerdad (Amshaspand) «+ 432 
Amerdad Jashan »- 460 
Amerdadsal_ .. ve «» 468 


Amesha-Spentas : enumerated 

397, 480; described 482-83 ;— 
64, 65, 323, 323, 332, 410, 427 
* Andarz-i Kutakan’ .. -- 18 
Anjuman ° .- 32, 80 252 
Anniversary of one’s death 355-56 

Anosheh-ravin ..9, 322, 383, 
444 

Anquetil du Perron, 8, 42, 46 
125, 181, 330, 451, 468, 473 
Apis ., ++ 257, 258 


INDEX xxix 
A—contd. A—conid, 
Page No. Page No. 

Apri of the Brahmins 377 (See Ashtad, Astad (yazata) 83, 84, 

Afringan). ; 85, 369, 421 
Aptoryaéma, the oe -. 282 | ashtra (see Kdplé). 
Aqua lustralis .. ie -. 91 | Asnatar 325, 336, 337, 
Arabia .. es ar .. 320 339 
Arabs, the 320, 321 | Aspandsd Jashan oe, 462 
Ardafarosh, Ardafarohar, Ar- Asparam flower 


dafarvash, 84, 85, 244, 251, 
344, 346, 387, 388, 390, 407, 
432, 438, 456, 472, 479, is 


Fravashi) 
Ardai fravard .. ee ~. 85 
Ardai Viraf .. - -- 420 
Arag river oe oe -» 317 
Ardashir Babakan 197, 198, 227 
Ardibehesht Jashan - 459 
Ardibehesht Yasht - 343 


Ardvigura .. 3, 270, 328, 342 
* Articles of Faith” trans- 


lated - 195 ;~-325 
Arus-i Razur .. i +. 333 
Asfandiar £89, £90 
Asha Vahishta, ee . 48 


Ashem Vohu: prayer dasstined 
—its importance 348-49 ; the 
importance of its recital at 
one’s death 53 ;—-55, 93, 
112, 128, 184, 325, 328, 

340, 341. 342, 401, 478 

Ashes : ceremony of removing 
the ashes of the sacred fire 
230 (See Bhasam). 

Ashi, Ashi Vanghu.. 48, 425 

Ashirwad : translated 35-41 ;— 

16, 56, 327, 395, 443 (See 
Marriage Ceremony), 
Ashodéd : deserited 407, 441. 
42 ;—401, 440 


Astéma, 268, 274-75 (see dldt, 
or, metallic requisites). 

Atar.. a 4 re | 

Atarvakhshi, Atare-Vakhsh, 
Atravakishi 79, 266, 274, 
314, 324, 228, 335, 386, 387, 

338, 377, 387, 391, 399, 402 

Atash Adaran: its consecra- 
tion 239-42 ;—211, 231, 232, 

262 (See Fire), 

Atash Beheram : its consecra- 
tion 211-39 ;—96, 126, 162, 
211, 227, 230, 231, 232, 
233, 259, 261, 262 (See Fire) 

Atash Dadg&éh: its consecra- 
tion 242-43 ;—211, 231, 232 
262 (See Fire). 

Atash-gah . 274, 336, 337 

Atash Nyaish 226, 233, £38, 

242, 328, 342, 403 
dtashté (See Khwén of Fire) 
273, a8, 319 

Athens... - 100 

Athornan, Aihivaran 239, 241, 

279, 305, 332, 477 

Auharmazd 49 (See Ahura Mazda), 

dv: application of dv in the 
Bareshnum Ceremony 140- 

41 ;—-99,. 114, 126, 143, 359 


-Avan Ardvigura Nyaish 328, 342 


Avard4d-sil Gah Ns oe 463 


. 396 # 


XXX 


A—coneld. 
Page No. | 
Ayathrem 460 (See Gahambar) 
Azerkhoosh ., ° -+ 464 
B 
Babylonia oe a .. 289 
Bahar Jashan .. 5s «- 465 | 


Bahman Yasht .. 58, 279, 280, 


: 449 

Baj : meaning and different sig- 
nifications of the word 354; 
Baj ceremonies on the dawn 
of the fourth day after death 
84-85; baj ceremonies in 
honour of the dead 355-56 ;_ 
bdj te, offerings made for 
the celebration and recital 
of the ritual 356-57 ; bdj 7.¢., 
utterance in a suppressed 
tone 269; 357-58; baj ie, 
prayers recited by the priests 
es a part of their liturgical 
service and the requisites for 
this kind of baj 358-60; 

’ different kinds’ of liturgical 
bajs enumerated 360-61; 
these bajs described 361-70 ; 

/ smaller béjs recited on differ- 
ent occasions 871-75; oba7 
recited at meals 371-73; 
baéj recited at natural func- 
tions 374; object aimed at. 
in the recital of bajs 

Baj of Agreras ; described 365- 

66 3-360 

Ardafarosh: described — 

368-69 ;—361, 363, 
"366, +369, 472 


———Neryosang : 


. 375 | 


” INDEX 


B—contd, 
Page No. 


Baj of Aspandad roz Farvar- 
din méh .- 360 
AvardAd-sal Gah -- 361 
Cheharum-ni Baimdéd : 
described _. .369-70-3-360 
Din-Beh Marespand .. 361 
Dis6 .. f .- 361 
Fareshta: described 363-. 
64 ;—360 
Farvardin roz;Adar méh 360 
Gahambar: described 
370 ;—361, 449, 450 
Gatha ae -- 361 
Haft-Amshaspand  .. 361 
Haptorang us -. 360 
Jashan-i Abangan -. 360 
Adargan .. 360 
Behmanyan .. 361 
—--—_-—_-_—Meherangan .. 360 
Tiryan .. -- 360 
Khordad roz, Farvardin - 
mah .. - -» 860 
Mino Ram for the zindeh 
TAVaN — er -. 361 
Nao-Navar: described 
370 ;—361 
descriked 
364-65 ;—360 
described 
361-62 ;—360, 363 
Pantha Yazata: des- 
cribed -. 364 5—~360 
for the performance of 
Khub in the Gatha 


-pinch-tat 


days: . «+ 361 
Ram .... -. 369 
Rapithwan; described 

370 ;-~36] 


B—contd. 
Page No. 


Rashne-Astad .. .. 369 

Shehen : described 370 ; 
—361 

Baj of Sirouzeh : described 370; 
—361 

Sraosha : described 362- 

63 ;—360, 369 


~ Vanant Yazata: des- 
cribed .. 366-68 ;—-360 
Baj-dharnu a «» 408 
Bij jamvini (see Jamvini bay). 
Baj-roegar .- 355 
Baodha 417, 418 


Bareshnum: this purificatory 
ceremony described 102-153 ; 
the meaning of the word and 
the object of the ceremony 
102-107 ; Darmesteter on 
Bareshnm 104-105; how 
it differs from Padyaébvand 
N&hn 102-103; present o- 
ject of Bareshnum 105-107 ; 
Bareshnum as.described in 
Vendidad 107-18 ; difference 
observed in the description 
of the three modes of Baresh- 
num.and its cause 113 ; how 
the ‘Bareshnum is adminis- 
tered to the candidate 130- 
44; different members of 
the body to be ceremonious- 
ly washed, enumerated in 
their order 133; the appli- 
cation of Nirang in the Ba- 
reshnum as enjoined in Ven- 
didad and as observed in 
modern practice 133-34 ; the 
dog in the Bareshnum cere- 


Bareshnum-i Noh Shab.. 


Xxxi 


B—conid, 


Page No, 


mony 135-39 ; why the dog’s 
presence is necessary 136-37 ; 
application of sand in the 
Bareshnum ceremony 139- 
40; application of conse¢ra- 
ted water in the ceremony 
140-41 ; how the final bath 
is administered 14] 3; number 
of applications of Nirang, 
sand and.@v (water) shown 
in a tabular form 142; con- 
secrating the clothes of the 
candidate 143; rotreat of 
nine days after the Baresh- 
num purification 144-46; 
navshu baths during the 
retreat 144-45; ceremony 
gone through during the dry 
season and its reason 147- 
48; causes that vitiate the 
Bareshnum 148-53 ; Baresh- 
num purification undergone 
by the Navar initiate des- 
eribed 200-201; —91, 96, 
159, 162-65, 169, 173, 200, 
201, 206, 216, 218, 224, 231, 
255, 256, 260, 261, 358, 377 
446, 
102 


Bareshnum-gah: Bareshnum- 


gah of the Vendidad des- 
eribed 118-22; a modern 
Bareshnum-gah 122-25 ; 
plans of Bareshnum-gah 
given by various scholars 
examined 125 “ preparing 
the Bareshnum-gah” 127- 


29; how th- cardidate is 


. 


451 


xxxil INDEX | 
B—contd. B—coneld. 
Page No. : Page No. 
prepared for the adminis- Betrothal: rites connected 


tration of Bareshnum in 
the Bareshnum-gah. .129-30 
Bareshnumwalla priest; how 
long he is qualified to hold 
the Bareshnum 148-53 
Barhis (Sacred grass) 281, 282 
‘Barsam : described—the num- 
ber of twigs used in varidus 
ceremonies 277-79 ; Barsam 
used in the. recital of grace 
before meals 280-81 ; its simi- 
larity to the barhis of the 
Hindus 281-82; object of 
the Barsam Ceremony 282- 
83; gathering and tying th» 
Barsam ceremoniously 284- 
86; Barsam twigs substi- 
tuted by metallic wires 
277-78 ;-58, 244, 267).268, 
269, 277, 289, 292, 306, 
307, 310, 321, 323, 324, 
325, 328, 329, 337, 338, 
361, 371, 450. 
Barsam-chin-(See Kdplo) ~ .. 


‘Barsam-dan ..277, 278, 279, 314 
Barsam Yasht .. ++ 279 
Bartholomze, Prof. .. -. 650 
Beho ‘in.. 13, 384 
Beheram (day) me -- 17 
Beheram fir (See Ahesh Behram), 
Beheramgore 101, 283, 464 
Behré, Behrun : explained 475- © 

76 ;—473 

Bejan .. ae a" .. 889 


Bell-riaging in the Bui Cere- 
mony : its signification - 238 
~ Bene-Israels 403,404 


with it 17-18 ; rites observed 
between the day of betro- 
thal and that of marriage «19-20 
Bhandér (Central well of “the 
Tower of Silence) 71, 247,251 - 
Bharucha, 8. D. as .. 340 
bhasam (consecra‘ed ash), 96, 
114, 126, 127, 155, 162, 259 
Birth : Ceremonies” and cus- 
toms observed at one’s birta 
1-13; birth of a child, an | 
auspicious event 1; first 
dyink given to the child 
after birth 8; naming a 
child—its religious signi- 
ficance 8-11; birth-day—its 
celebration .. os -. 12 
Blunt, Mr. W. F. a .. 87 
Body : its relation to the soul. 89 
Brahmins 186, 281, 299, 315, 
316, 338, 377, 342 


Bretagne, the .. 253,254 

Bridegroom, the: his dress 
describe 1 22, 23 

Breach .. 366 


but (See Aesma-bui) 

Bui Ceremony : of feeding the 
sacred fire—its various 
grades 230-39 

Bundahish 49, 173, 317, 332, 
334, 338, 365, 366, 396, 417, 

435, 448 

Burial : why it is prohibited 160-61 

Burnouf, M. 330, 415 

Burzigaran (agriculturists) .. 463 

Buzorgan (the departed wor- 
thies).. 387, 389, 390 


. INDEX 


Xxxili 


; Cc. 

; Page No. 
Callirhoe 5 -.  . «. 100 
Cama, K. RR... 340, 447 
Canis, Major .. ays -» 61 
Canis, Minor .. ee ~. 61 
Canopus es ase -. 365 
Casartelli, Dr. .. 90, 408 
Caspean Sea 270, 410 


Caucasus, the .. oa .. 304 
Chak farvun 235 (See Bui cere-_ ; 
mony) is - 235: 
chathru-chashma Be ten ZB 

Chashmi: (See Darun and: 
Gahambar-chashni), ‘ 
chauk .. a . 25 


Cheharum : Ceremonies of the 
Cheharun 443-44 ;—85, 355, 
369, 487, 438, 445 (See B&j 
of cheharum-ni Bamdad), 

Children 1-2; ancient writers 
on the procreation of child- 
ren 2; their duties 13; 
childlessness—a, curse 2; 

. children born‘of illicit inter- 
course 49:50; the period of . 
‘childhood +. be 12, 13 

Childbirth: place prepared and 
set apart for childbirth 5; 
lamp lighted at childbirth 
5-6 ; period of confinement 
after childbirth oe .. 6-7 

chint tree es eo 297 

Chinvad Bridge 61, 83, 421, 435 

Chosroes I 464, 473 

Chosroes. IT 281, 373, 464 

Christians 2, 90, 101, 175, 232, 403, 


441 
Christian martyrs... 2 
Christmas tree _ es «i 478 


C—conid.. 
oe Page No. 
Ohurch and State in Iran... 
227-28 


Clean and Unclean : the words. 
explained ‘from “the Tranian — 
- point of view 87-88 
Cleanliness : next to godliness 
89-91; 108 
** Confession of Faith *?; trans- 
lated - -- 193 
‘Confirmation ’ of the Chris- 
tians ., >. a .. 179 
Consecration*ceremonies : des- 
cribed 210-259; what ‘con- 
secration’ means 210; con- 
secration of sacred fires 21]- 
243 (See Fire) ; consecration 
of the Towers of Silence 244- 
252 (See Tower); conse- 
cration of dldt or the religi- © 
ous requisites 253-59 (See 
‘Alay > 
* Contacts ’ 1038, 158 (See. hamrit). 
Corpse, the: its ceremonial — 
washing 54-55; its .shroud 
55; danger of coming in. 
contact with it 55 ; how and 
in what position it is laid on . 
slabs of stone in the house 
56; kashas drawn round 
the corpse—itspurpose 57 ; 
fire kept -burning in the 
room where a corpse is laid 
6] ; why corpses are remoy; 
ed to the Tower during day- 
time only 62; removal. of 
the corpse from the house .. 66 
Corpse-bearers ; 62, 65, 66, 68 
69 (See Nasasalars). 


xxxiv 


C—coneld, 
Page No. 


Crescend-shaped stands (See 
Mab-rui), 

Cross, the * ae +. 401 

Cuneiform inscriptions -. 409 


Cups (fulidn) ; used in the 
Yagna ritual 276-77 
Cybele .. ane -+ 163, 164 
D 
Dabistan a «+ 465 
dagmu .. +. 445 


Dad-géh 211, 225, 231 (See Fire), 
Dadistan-i Dinik 49, 181, 182, 


187, 188, 263, 264, 273, 

277, 298, 312, 313, 338, 395, 435 
Daena .. oe. ee 2 417 
Daepadar 462, 483 
Daepmeher 462, 483 
Daepdin Ye 462, 483 
Daham Afringan +. 437 


dahi-koomro : its signification 
43-44 
Dahma (a righteous person) .. 53 
Dahmea afriti .. an -. 340 
Dahman Afrin -- 387, 390 
‘Daimons’ : compared with 


Fravashis  .. - 419 
Déity-gdtu (See Dad-gah). 
Damater en ae ..° 97 
dénare .. -+ 172 
Dante 60, 443 


Dar-i Meher: described 261- 
62 ;—144, 168, 204, 260, 
263, 291, 295, 305, 377, 444 


INDE 


D—contd. 
Page No. 


Darab Pahlan ae . 8,171 
Darmesteter, Prof. 50, 51, 90, 
104, 125, 160, 174, 199, 254 
278, 283, 299, 330, 340, 393, 470 
ddru.. ae $9 we 394 
Darun : description of a Darun 
296 ; naming the Darun 296 ; 
the Darun-chashni or chash- 
ni of Darun 298-99.;— 
325, 360, 362, 363, 367, 372 ; 
how the chashni is partaken 
of 362; weight of a Darun 
358 ;—149, 165, 265, 268, 
"300, 307, 312, 321, 322, 324, 
356, 359, 367, 392, 393, 440, 
441,456, .. oe és 
Dastanistan 171, 
Dasturi : formula recited by the 
Corpse-bearers 64; formula 
recited by the priest adminis- 
tering the Bareshnum 128, 216 
datik Nasks -. 350 
davd déru . 39¢ 
Dead, the: disposal of the dead 
in the Tower 68-69 ; by how 
many persons should the 
dead be carried 63-64; per- 
sons and things defiled by the 
dead—how treated 73-74; 
observances attended to in 
the house after the removal 
of the dead 74-75; Ceremo- 
nies for the soul of the 
dead 75-86 ; first three days 
ceremonies described 78-83 ; 
Commemorating the name 
of the dead 80-82; flowers 


INDEX “XRXV 
D—contd, D—concld, 
Page No. , Page No. 
and the memory of the dead Doa Nam Setéyashné «+ 403 


—476-77 ; apartment pro- 
vided for the dead—the 
Nasaékhan& 58; where 
should Nasakhanas be built 
58 (See Sagdid), . 

Deh (month) 462, 464, 465 


Deh Dadar Jashans -» 462 
Dehum -- 85, 335, 445 
Demater ete ~. 97 


Devs 366 (See Dasvash 
Dhup-Nirang : the ritual descri- 
bed .. - 442-43 ;—B80;. 440 
Dibache Afringan: described 
378-384 ;—79, 81, 355, 360, 
361, 363, 368, 371, 372, 427, 
429, 443, 444, 450, 451, 458, 


470 
Din (Yazata) .. i «s 7193 
Din-i Vajarkard oe » 467 
Dinkard 22, 25, 90, 179, 199, 


283, 284, 350, 395, 467 

Disinfection 73-74 ; of infected 

houses and things ..157-58, 160 
Disé we 361, 368 
Disposal of the "Dead (See the 

Dead): 

main principle underlying 

the custom of the disposal of 

the dead 51; Darmesteter 

on this principle 51-52 
divo : the rite of kindling a lamp 

after betrothal on -- 19 
Divorce: Causes leading to 

divorce according to old cus- 

tom 46-47 ; Causes according 

to Parsee Marriage and 

Divorce Act .. as ae 47 


Dog, the: the dog in the Ba- 
reshnum Ceremony 135-39; 
why a dog’s presence is ne- 
cessary in the Bareshnum 
Ceremony 136-37 ; a chathru- 
chashma dog, 59 ; the morsel 


of the dog 372; 429-30 
Dosl& .. : . 470 
Draona, Drén (See Darum) 85, 297 
Dravasp F sts -. 298 
Druj, the ne aie .. 180 
Druj-i Nasush 55, 56, 65, 104, 

133, 144, 164 
Dushmata . 77, 228, 238 
Duzikhta «« 77,228,238 


Duzvarshta .. . 717,228,238 
Dvazdeh-Homast 50, 174 (See 
Hamayasht). 


E 
Edn .. 64, 420 
Egyptians, the 166, 250, 257, 258 
Bki-beki ie e6 -. 44 
Elburz .. «- 302, 303, 366 
‘Epistles of Ménushehehr’ .. 113 
Eredhat-Fedhri See «49 
Erekhsha, -. 460 
Ervad . sis - 384 
Essenes, the ae - 186 
‘ Evicts ’ 158 (See dines: 
Ezekiel .. x oes «. 282 
‘ F 
Faredun ..17, 373, 460, 480 


Fareshta ; Ceremony described 
479-485;—12, 363 (Sce Ham- 
karas). 


XXxXvi 


INDEX 


F—contd, . 


Page No. 


Farnidyashni : explained 384 ; 
: 355, 
Farohar (Seq, Fravashi). 


389 


Farokhshi 456, 470, 478 (See ” 


Fravashi). 


Farvardegin | holidays ; 3 des- 


cribed 465-79; meaning of — 
the word 466-67 ; number of 


. Fatvardegan days 467-69; 
the object of the holidays 
469-70; when do they fall 
470 ; importance of the holi- 
days 471; principal obser- 
vance during the holidays 


473; the symbolism of tho 


observance °478; ritual 
recited during the holidays 
‘478-79 ;—101,- 


Farvardin Yasht 81, 365, 392, 
408, 409, 411, 417, 419,424, 
467, 469, 470, 476, 
Farziat-Nameh 8). 13, 174, 
Firdousi 16, 17,°35, 101, 277, 
281, 283. 357, 865, 399, 458, 
=>" "463, 
Fire : three grades of fire 211; 
‘their consecration described 
211-48 ; list of fires used for 
| different purposes as given in 
“Vendidad 211 ; fires collected 


for consecration purposes 


457 


477 


176 


464, 


“as observed in modern prac- 


tice 212 ; process of the col- 
lection, , purification and 
consecration described 213- 


24; final union of all fires 


224; final consecration of 
the united fires 225; con- 


F——contd. 


Page No. 
“secration of the ; sacred 
chamber of fire 225; spi- 


ritual jurisdiction of the 
sacred fire 226 ; signification 
of the consecration .f fizes 
228-29 ; the ashes of the fire 
230 ; but ceremony of feeding 
the fire, with different gra-les 
230-39; fire used in the 
Yagna ceremonial, with its 
accompaniments 
Flamines, the.< 
Florence 
Flowers ; used in the Afringan 
Ceremony . 396-98; flowers 
connected with all the Ya- 
zatas enumerated 397-98 ; 
the arrangement and the ex- 
change of flowers in the 
' Afringan described with 
.their symbolism 398-401 ; 
flowers and the memory of 


the dead 476-77 
Fraveretar 335-38, 
Frakand (See Caspian). 

Framrot Ha ... te gee 478 
Franciscan fathers .. 186 


Frasast (See Darun) 297, 356, 
359, 

Fravashis : the word explained 
408 ; what fravashis are 408- 
11; their work in the creation 
of the Universe 411; two 
classes of fravashis 411-16; 


fravashis compared with the 


‘Ideas’ of Plato, the ‘ Pat- 
terns’ of the Bible 


* Genius’ 


the 
of the Romans 


318-21 
.116, 152, 305 
.. 159 


362, 367 


“XxxVit- 


INDEX 
es arene, ¥ 
F—coneld. Q—contd. 

Page No. Page No. 
and the ‘Daimons’ of the services making up. the 
Greeks 414-419 ;—fravashis celebration 449-52; how 
of men 415-17; difference Gahambars are celebrated 
between urvdna (soul) and 452-53; Gahambar feasts 


fravashi 416-17; fravashis, 
the media between the living 
and the dead, 423-24;— 
1,54, 331, 364, 365, 368, 388, 
427, 459, 466, 468, 470, 475, 
476, 477, 478, 


Fshusha Manthra 327, 340 

Fumigation . 159 

Funeral ceremonies : dedentbed 
51-86; funeral procession 


described 67-68; the prin- 
ciple underlying all funeral 
ceremonies 73; a rough 
estimate of the expenses 
incurred in these ceremonies 
438 (see. the Dead and Sarosh 
ceremony ). 


Furdigan 468 (see 1 Farvardegan). 
419-23 


Future life : described 


Qa 


Gabriel . Ss 

gde bhandvvi (see Oothamn8) 

Gahambar : described 446-55 ; : 
their importance 446; Ga- 
hambars enumerated and 
the meaning assigned to 
each 447; connected with 
cosmogony 448; object of 
the celebration 449.52 ; prin- 
cipal functions in the cele- 
bration 449-52; liturgical 


+. 434 


442 


compared with those of the 
Jews 453-54; present prac- 
tice of the celebration of 
Gahambars 454-55; Gaham- 
bar-Pavi described *450-52 ; 
387, 390 ; Gahambar ch@shni 
390, 452; who can partici- 
pate in the chdshni of 
Gahambars 393-94; —186, 
221, 224, 335, 344, 372, 387, 

388, 390, 391, 394, 


G&hs (periods of the day): 
enumerated and described 
232 ;—62, 65, 78, 79, 144, 

211, 233, 288,. 239 
332, 343, 349, 363, 380, 


Galenus 

Ganj-i Shayagan 

G&o (Spirit of the Earth) 

Gaomez: gaomez as a disin- 
fectant 66-67; consecra- 
tion of gaomez 263-54; 
Wilhelm and Rapp = on 
gaomez 253-55; difference 
between ordinary and con- 
‘secrated gaomez 254 ;— 
54, 73, 74, 92, 95, 109, 11°, 
113, 145, 146, 156, 161, 164, 
172, 173, 174, 446 (see Nirang). 

gdsdnik nasks . 


Gathas: enumerated and the 


chapters of the Gathas indi- 
cated 326, 340, £43 ;—14, 


36 


436 


-» 254 
180, 417 


48 


- 350 


XXEVili 


INDEX 


Q—coneld, 
Page No. 


224, 302, 327, 338, 447, 456, 
462, 468, 469, 472, 478, 179 
Gayomard 390 (see Kayomars). 
_ Gehdn (bier): its consecration 363 
geh-strnd : recital of the geh- 
sdrnd and its object €4-65 ; 
geh-sdrnd of a pregnant wo- 
man 65, 66 ;—438, 443, 445 
Geiger, Dr. 331, 420, 484 
‘Genius’ of the Romans: 
Compared with fravashis 418-19 
Geti-Kharid : Ceremony des- 
cribed ws «- 433 
Ceremony described 


gewra : 

202-203 ;—-200, 201, 256, 
259, 446 

Gilan.. : Se -- (87 


gireh-ban, wigan 182, 183, 192 


Gnostics, the + 483 
Gofd (Yazata) 432 
Goethe Be Ns -. 88 
Gosh (Yazata) .. 295 
gosh-din : . 276 
goshudo ; described 299 268, 

307, 359, 362 


Greeks 90,100, 101, 419, 469, 470 
gurz (the mace) : the mace used 

in the Navar ceremony and 

its signification 204 ;—209, 225 
Gushtasp 389, 427, 463 


H 


v 


Hadhaménthrik Nasks . 850 
hadhdnaépata 61, 110, 167, 293, 
307, 320 


Hadhaokhta . 340 


H—contd, 


Page No. 


Hadokht Nask 53, 56, 76, 77, 
93, 827, 348, 420 
Haft Amshaspand . 390 
Hair, the : Ceremonial disposal 
of ote “xy i 
Heir of ae Sacred Bull: 
consecration 257-58; its use 
in the Yacna_..258 ;—263, 
286, 287, 311, 329 


Hamaspathmaedem 448, 470 
Hamayasht,. Homast: Cere- 


mony described 431-33; 
object. of the ceremony 431 ; 
two kinds of Hamayashts 
and their recjtals 432 ; names 
of Yazatas in whose honour 
the ceremony is performed 432 
Hamazor: meaning of the 
word 407; described 401. 
402; occasions on which it 
is performed 402-403 ; com- 
pared with similar formali- 
ties of other nations 403-404 ; 
the formula recited while 
performing it, with meaning 
405-406 ; its symbolism 406- 
407 3-328, 458 


Hameshtagehan 84, 422 
ham-kalém 256-57 
hamrit bal 158, 254 
Hannibal ze Ls -. 163 


Haoma; the word explained 
300-301; four haomas des- 
cribed 301; Haoma_ the 
Prophet 301-302; Haoma 
plant described 303- 305 ; — 
54, 275-77 ; antiquity of the 
Haoma Ceremony 305-306 ; 


{NDEX 


xxxix 


H—conid. 


Page No. 


symbolism of the ceremony 
312-13; compared with the 
Jyotishtoma sacrifice _315- 
16 ; ceremony described 306- 


15 ;—267, 268, 280, 286, 287, 
338 


Haoma Frashmi an . 301 
Haoma Duraosha (see sia, 
the Prophet). 
Haoma, the hero ae » 301 
Haoma juice : first drink after 
birth 8; last drink at death 
54 ;—8, 54, 287, 295, 298, 
300, 325, 329, 339, (see Haoma). 
Heaoma Kharenangha .. 301 
Haoma, the Prophet . 301-302 
Haoma-i Saphid (White Hao- 


ma) 54, 420 
Haoma Yazata 1, 8, 48 
Haotar, Hoté .. 315, 338 
Haptan Yasht .. -. 326 
Haptoiring 360, 365, 410 
Hara-Berezaiti (see Elburz). 
haradh (turmeric) ae - 26 
Harlez, M...16, 125, 331, 340, 

408, 435 
Hé’s of Yacna .. 266, 350 


hathevdré (hand-fastening) : its 
signification .. 32-34 
Haug, Dr. 59, 281, 299, 315, 
316, 330, 338, 339, 376, 392, 
409, 414 
Havan Gah 146, 219, 232, 233, 
239, 251, 308, 338, 432, 439 
(see Gah). 
Havana, Havanim: described 
275 ;—268, 269, 300, 302, 
307, 309, 313, 314, 315, 318, 
325, 329, 338 


H—concld. 
Page No. 
Havanana 275, 301, 335, 336, 
337, 338 


Health: health of mind de- 
pendent on health of body 89-90 
Heaven and Hell 421-22 

Hebrews 101, 161, 162, 165, 
176, 176, 453 

Herodotus 2, 8, 9,10, 12, 15, 

16, 17, 47, 150, 151, 179, 228, 
273, 317, 320, 382 


Hindhold, Hindhord;  descri- 
bed Ste 263-64 

Hindu Kush ss ae . 303 

Hindus, the 90, 100, 257, 282, 

305, 401, 420, 442 
Hippocrates... ie .. 254 
Hom Yasht 8, 274, 325 
Homajee Jamshedji of Broach 366 
Hormazd (day) ws -. 49 
Hormazd Yasht 192, 477 
Hom (see Haoma). 

Hoshbam A oe .. 326 
Hovelacque, Abel we .. 59 
Hukairya, Mt. . st . 302 
Hikhia 77, 228, "235, 297, 311, 

395, 400 
Humata 77, 228, 236, 297, 311, 

395, 400 
hurak : described 472.74 
Hushedar .. 313 
Hushedar Mah a .. 313 
Husparam Nask 5, 284 


hvavshta 77, 228, 235, 297, 311, 
395, 400 


* Ideas ’ of Plato co we B14 
Infection : conversation with 


xl ; . INDEX 


t--concld, . 
Page No. 


the infected 159-160 ; 166 
Initiation ceremonies : Ceremo- 
nies described 178-209 ;. 
initiation of a Zoroastrian 
child into the fold 178-196 
(see Navjote) ; initiation into 
_ Zoroastrian priestshood 197-209: 
(see Navar and Martab.) 
Intercalation 458, 461, 462, 468 


Isadvaster = a +, 427 
Isaiah 420 
Ismenus . oa 100 
Isolation : isolation for nine 
days after the Bareshnum 
144-47; isolation during 
the period of menses 171-72 
Israelites, the 210 


Italy ..  .. .. 60, 168 


Ithoter Rivayet 79212 
J 
jahi +. g . 48,49 
jaméa-pichhori 22, 42, 143, 208, 246 
Jamasp™ ne 279, 389 
Jamaspasa, Minocherjee Ja- 
maspjee - 211 
Jamshed 186, 198, 449, 458 
Jamshedi Naoroz .. 457, 458 
jamvdni Bdj: described 371-73 
jandt oe - 186 
jdt, ie .. 476 
Jarthosht-no Dis . © 462 


Jashans ; describe | 455-465 ; 
the meaning of the word 455- 
456; Ceremonies performed 

“in a Jashan 456; Jashan 
holidays divided into three .._. 


J—coneld. 
- Page No. 


classes 457; object of a 
Jashan 457-58 ; enumeration 
of Jashan days in a year 
458-464; special buildings 
erected for Jashan celebra- 
tions 464 ; Jashans according 
to Albiruni, Magoudi and 
other writers 464-65 ;—221, 
224, 225, 242, 243, 251, 372 


Jashan-i Burzigaran .. .. 463 
Jashan-i Khurram roz .» 465 
Jashan-i Nilofar ad .. 465 
Jashan-i Sadeh a3 -. 464 
Jasbnasfshéh .. a ieened 
Javid-shedd-dad Gd .. 350 
Jerusalem . 454 
Jews, the Se wee 482 


Jivdm: its preparation 295- 
96 ;—278, 280, 287, 299, 
306, 310-12, 321, 322, 325, 339 

jodd-ni Kriya : described 437 ;— 


370, 440 
Joti (see Zaota), 
jud-div-ddd 5 .. 350 
Jupiter ae a ». 152 


K 


Kabiseh 366 (see Intercalation), 


Kaikhosru “% oe .. 399 
Kakh-i Sadeh .. .. 464 
Kanga, K. E. 181, 331 
Kaoosaj. - 464, 465 


Kédplo (Knife) ; described 288 ;— 
268, 284, 286 

Kardas 350, 385, 386, 387, 398, 
399, 402, 480 

Karsevaj... -- Se ». 865 


INDEX : xl 


K —conid, 


Page No. 


Kasha, Karsha: . description 
of Kasha of the Bareshnum- 
gah 133-15; description of 
Kasha in the Yazashna-gah 
115; Kashas drawn round 
the corpse—its purpose 57 ;— 
109, 117, 120, 124, 125, 
128-31, 134, 135, 141, 146, 166 


(see Pavi), 
Kata (apartment of the dead) 57, 58 
Kaus ah ete as oe 17 


Kayomars 373 (see Gayomard) 
Kem-naé Mazda prayer 68, 110, 
112, 127, 139, 141, 143, 146, 


190, 375 

Keresani 6 Ar -« 302 
Kereshispa ae «. 410 
Kerman = “s 42, 113 
Keshvars ss ate v» 349 
Khdndhias = ats »» 66 
Khanirath te 53, 349 
Kherhab, the .. oF .. 250 
Khordad Jashan ~s 460 
Khordaéd-sal, .. 457, 458, 468 
Khordéd Yazata «+ 432 


Khorshed Nyaish 204, 233, 
342, 364, 403, 416, 436, 439 


Khorshed pay& «. 474 
Khorshed Yazata o. .. 432 
Khosro Parviz .. 281, 373, 464 
Khshathra Vairya -- 396 
Khshnuman ; the greater and 
amalier Khshnumans des- 
cribed 381-82 


Khub Ceremony: described 
147 ;—96,126, 146, 147, 148, 
{ 153, 154, 65, 208, 224, 230- 
33, 2:4, “46, 256, 259, 269, 


K—conid, 
Page No. 


284, 285, 201, 295, 306, 351, 
358, 361, 362, 371 


* 372, 446 
Khurd .. we we 1B. 
Khurram roz .. ve 465 


‘ Khushro Shirin ’ of Nizami.. 10 
Khwan (Stone-slabs) :' various 
Khwans used inthe Yazash- 
na-gah described 270-74; 
their positions indicated .. 271 
Khwan of Aesam-bui: deseri- 
bed 274 ;—270, 271 
Alat (see Al&t-g&h): 
destribed 325, 
837 ;~-270, 271 
Atash (see Adosht): 


described 273-74 ; 
270, 271, 819 
Kundi: described 


274 3-~-270, 271 
pane —Zoi : described 274 ; 
—270, 271, $28, 328, 337 


Kiss of Peace, the 403-404 
Kisseh (bag). -» 272 
Kiaseh-i Kerfeh oe ++ 183 
Kohut, Dr. ats A +» 482 


Kundi: described 288 :—268, 
278, 286, 306, 307, 309, $11, 817 
Kunkun (red pigment): the 
mark with Kunkun on the 
forehead and its signification 
23 ;—-22, 27, 192, 196 © 
Kushe grass .. 7 281, 282 
Kuati : the word explained 183- 
84; how it is woven—its 
structure 184; symbolism of 
the Kusti 185-89; different 
occasions when it is untied 


K—coneld. 


‘Page No. 


and retied 187; the signifi- 
cation of its knots 188; 
process of putting it on 
during the investiture 194-95 
Kusti-Padyab (see Padyab-Kusti), 


lakh (one lac of Ahunvars) 440, 441 
ldlé: described 75-76; 268, 309 


Leprosy: Iranian view on 
leprosy as am . 205 

Leviticus ‘ «. 175 

Liturgical ceremonies: Inher 
liturgical, services—described 
260-376; outer liturgical 
services described .. 377-485 

Lotus .. oe oe a (54 

Luke, St... 257 

M 


Machi: the feeding of the 
Beheram fire with sandal- 
wood arranged in the form of 


_  iméchi (a throne) 232, 233 

Machi: the stand for the e 
Muktad ceremony .. 473-75 

Machiavelli oe .. 365 
acoudi: 873, 464, 455 


‘ Madigan-i Hazar Dadistan .. 50 
Magav n ate . &4 
Maga ; its modern siguldedtion 


INDEX 


M—contd. 
Page No, 


123-125 ;—112, 120, 131, 
139, 173, 175, 217 (see Ba- 
teshnum). 
Magi, the ie va BN 
Mah Myaish .. as 
Mahomedans, the oe : 90 
méh- rut : described 277 268, 
278, 285, 307, 309, 310, 311, 323 


M&ahui Suri A 4 a .. 281 
Maidhyoshem .. -- 447, 460 
Maidhyarem 448, 462 
Maidhyozarem sce 447, 459 
Maleolm, John .. . 465 


Man: his . spiritual constitu- 


tion x8 417-18 
Mandav-saro.. Pe +. 20 
M4nushchiher .. . 113 
Margzad (mortuary) .. 58, 171 


Marriage : Marriage ceremonies 
and customs 14-50; reason 
why marriage is reeommend- 
ed 14; encouragement of 
matrimony—a meritorious 
act 15; religious part of 
the present ceremony is 
Persian in origin 16; 


martiageable age 16-17; 
early marriages discoun- 
tenanced 16-17; marriage- 


matches—how arranged 17; 
match-makers 17; days fixed 
for a marriage 20; time of 
the performance of the 
marriage ceremony 21; the. 
Dinkard on marriages in Tran 
2t, 25; marriage-gifts—by 
whom given 25; 
processions 25-26; welcoming 


marriage 


iInpEx 


xliif 


M—conéd. M—concid. 

Page No. Page No. 
ceremonies performed just Meher Nyaish 233, 342, 403, 
before the religious ceremony 416, 436, 439 
proper 27-3; marriage- Meherangaén 457, 460, 463, 
witnesses 31; tying of the 464, 465 
marriage knot, 32; throwing’ Meherjirana, E.S., Dastur  . 2212 
rice in the ceremony and its Menander Protector .. 468,'473 
signification 34-35 ; marriage Menses, Menstruation : its un-° 
benedictions—the Ashirwéd cleanness 171 ; purification 


—translated 35-41 ; marriage 
benedictions in Sanskrit 40- 
41 ; repeating’ the ceremony 
at midnight 42; marriage 
feast described—the ‘menu’ 
45-46 ; reason why meat diet 
was prohibited ata marriage 
feast bade a -«. 46 
Martab: Ceremony described 
208 ; ceremonies per/ormed 
by one who has gone through 
the Martab ceremony 207- 


208 ;—-178, 209, 2381, 261, 377. 
Marv river bie ~ «. 317 
Masistes > ese . Al 
Maspero » 66 
‘ Mass ’ of the Christians 392 
Match-makers .. a +. 17 
Mauricius, King ae «- 468 
Max-Muller, Prof. .. 420 
Mazendaran .. 57 


Meals: the Bajs recited iar 
meals 371-73; why silence 
is observed during meals 373-74 

Meat diet : when it is abstained 
from 75 ; reason why it was 
prohibited ‘at’ a marriage 
feast .. ee ae 46 

Meher (Yazata) 83, 84, 163, 
204, 262, 369, 421, 422, 432, 463 


from menses 173 ; observan-' 
ces—ancient and modern . 
—about monses 173-78 ; the 
Leviticus on menses 175-76 ; 
Pliny on menses 176-77; 
isolation during menses 171-72 
Mills, Dr. | ie »» 330, 340 
Minochehr, King se 365, 460 
Mino-Kherad 199, 283, 369, 
417, 420, 435, 449 


Mino-Marespand Jashan «+ 463 
Mino Névar Yasna 205, 208, 278, 
362, 433 
Mirkhond a oe os 465 
Mithra 1, 83, 163, 262, 364 (See 
Meher) 
Mithras oe +. 163, 463 
Mizbén .. 8 oe oe 393 
Modena os an +. 160 
Mohl, M. a6 oe os 464 
Moses .. . 90, 255, 414, 415 


Mourning for the dead: its 
duration oe oe -. 653 

Muktad:.meaning of mukidd 
466-467, Muktaéd Jashans 
463 (See Farvardegan) 

Myazd : described 392-94 ; 116, 
169, 307, 324, 387, 389, 391, 
398, 407, 438, 456, .472, 

te AF 


xliv 


Page No. 


Néhn : described 95-101 ; what 
the word means 95; dldé 
or Tequisite things for néhn 
96 ; occasions for undergoing 
the ceremony 100-101 ; time 
during which it can be gone 
through 147;—7, 21, 91, 


102, 130, 144, 166, 191 
Nahénias ay an os 166 
Néhnkhdnd.. oe +. 144 


Nails : Ceremonial disposal of, 170 
Names : Parsee names explain: - 
ed 10, 18; naming a child 
8-10; naming of a darun 
(See Darun) 


ndm-grahan : explained +» 470 
ndm-pddvin .. ae +. 118 
ndmzad .. ae S6 9, 18 


Nandi .. ie ee JA 
Naodar .. as isa 
Naogar (See Navgar) 
Naojote : meaning of the word 
178-69; age of Naojote 
investiture 179-80; ceremony 
described 190-96 ;—-9, 12, 


13, 56, 97, 100, 480 
Naoroz..406, 458, 463, 464, 465 
Naoroz-iAm ., ea ». 458 
Naoroz-i Khas ar a. 458 
Narashians ve te »» 364 
Nariman Hoshang.. «+ 467 
Nasdi-Kata ..  ..  .. 58 


Nas&khan&: where erected .. 58 
Nasasalars : (See Corpse-bearers) 
Nasks: Twenty-one naska 
enumerated ; three groups of 
the nasks .. .s 350 
Navat the word explained 199- 


INDEX 


N-~-conid, 
Page No. 


200; different stages of the 
ceremony 200-207; gurz, 
or the mace in the ceremony 
and its symbolism 204; the 
ceremony proper in the 
Dar-i Meher 204-206 ; 
Navarhood .compared with 
Christian Knighthood 208- 
209; the ceremonies whieh 
a Navar initiate-is qualified 
to perform, 206 ; the signifi- 
cation ofthis ceremony 
206-207 3-145, 178, 261, 265 
370, 377 
Navgar, Navgireh: described 
116-18 ;—99, 113, 126, 128, 
156 
nave... os 461 
navehu baths: described 145- 
147 ;—~148, 162 


ee oe 


nemaskdr 06 241, 475 
nemtz .. as 319, 475 
Nero, Emperor. . oe -. 150 
Neryosang Dhaval .. 409, 466 
Neryosang Yazata .. 360, 364 
New Testament ee o. 415 
Nicolas Demoscenes .. 151 
Nibadum Nask oe ve 82 
Nilofer .. e an ». 465 


Nirang : why so called 67 ; ap- 
plication of the nirang in 
the Bareshnum purification 
133-34 ;—114, 133, +134, 
138, 140, 157, 253 (See gaomez). 
Nirang Ab-i zar (< eeNirang gaomez): 
Nirang-i Gaomez 93, 191 
Nirang-i- Kusti: its substance 
1945-13, 54, 127, 144, 190, 191, 194 


inDE xlv 
N—coneld. . O—concld, 
Page No. Page No, 
Nireng for cutting the hair .. 184 | Ouseley,W. .. et .. 465 
Nirangdin ceremony : described Oxus, the an .. 270 
255-57 3~99, 146, 316, ir 
446 P 

Nirangdin (consecrated gaomez) 
90, 97, 98, 126, 185, | raster...» on NOD 8 

: r : Padan: described 116; the 
Nirangistan 264, 278, 284, 297, insignia of pyl@ated 152- 

i 298, 337, 338, 339,467 | 153. 56, 65, 113, 127, 155, 
Nishapur ae ae «. 36 169, 204, 314 
Nisami . a se ee: 0 Padashkhwargar, Mt .. ++ 365 
North, the: why facing the Pady4b : explained 92; the , 
North is avoided ae 56, 57 purification described 87-95 ; 
Noshirvan = os 464, 473 


Numbers : two persons or a pair 
at least must take part 
in funeral and other ceremo- 
nies—its signification 63-643 
number ‘three’ a sacred 
number 77; number ‘nine’ 
a sacred number -. 117 
Nusserwanjee Byramjee ss =O 


Nyaishes mm WwW. 18, 403 
Ny atush Ars oe +» 373 
° 


Oaths : Taking an oath vitiates 
the Bareshnum—its reason 
151 52 
Old Testament 161, 166, 277, 453 
Oothamnaé Ceremony : descri- 
bed 438-443 ;—-79, 80, 403, 
436, 437, 438, 441, 443 
Orion, the aa wie ~. 61 
Ormuzd (See Ahura Mazda) .. 
Oshta, Osta... aa 13, 384 


kind of padyab common to 


all nations 90-91 ; occasions 
for performing it 92-95 ;— 


100, 102, 145, 155, 174, 187, 
246, 259 
Padyab-Kusti 62, 65, 92, 95, 
96, 127, 129, 149, 184, 204, 
213, 216, 233, 256, 372, 378, 
391, 439 
Paevand-némeh as 16, 25 
paitidana 56, 169 (See Padan) 
Paitishayem .. .. 447, 480 
paiwand : ‘holding the pai- 
wand’—what it tmieang 
55 ;—58, 63-66, 68, 69, 96, 
213, 216, 217, 224, 230, 241, - 
246 
panam (See Padan) 
paych-masiun .. are a» 4 
Pinch.tai (see Baj cf panch-tii) 
Pand-namch of Aderbad 17,395 
Panini .. oe a 365 
Panj-i keh a +» 468,479 
Panj-i Meh be «468,479 
Pantha Yazata .. 360,364 


wit 
xivi 


INDEX 


P—conid. 


Page No. 


.Paragn’: the word explained 
266-67; this ceremony as 
distinguished from Yasna 
‘proper 231-22 ;—257, 312- 


15, 325, 329, 334, 351 
parahaoma 8, 300, 313, 315, 
(See Haoma Juice) 
pargard .. se 2 . 350 
parhizi 75 (See meat diet) 
Parsee Marriage and Divorce 
Act 17, 47 


Parsee Punchayet of Bombay 
. 47, 437, 454 
Parsinaémeh .. “se -. 88 
Pater Noster .. «. 842, 441 
Patet : explained 98 ;—52, 53, 
69, 78, 80, 95, 98, 130, 175, 
191, 192, 343, 346, 433, 436, 


439 

Patimokkha .. ie ». 98 

patrit .. 158, 254 
‘ Patterns ’ of the Bible : com- 

pared with Fravashts .. 414 

Pavri, Khurshedji E. .. . 340 

Paul, St... i ~. 433 


Pév : this cleaning process des- 
cribed 269-70 ;—-146, 155, 
230, 245, 256, 257, 273, 284, 
285, 286, 288, 291, 292, 295, 

306, 307, 314, 319, 359 


pév-mahal ceremonies (See 
Liturgical ceremonies— 
inner)... ar .. 258, 259 


pavi: the word defined and 
explained 115 ;—-68, 126-32, 
134, 199-41, 143, 146, 154. 
57, 226, 244, 248, 251, 258, 


264, 289, 358, 359, 372 


P—conid, 
Page No. 


Pavi of Gahambar (See Gahambar) 
Penim (See Padan) 


Peshotan + 280 
Pharisees, the .. os . 454 
Philo Judeus .. : - 482 
Phrygia oe -- 163 
Pindar .. aie f. -. 419 
Piran Re ¥ « 399 
Plague: Plague operations 
compared -with ‘the purifi- 
catory injunctions . 157-61 


Plato .. 151,179, 414, 419 
Pliny 176, 177, 254, 289 
Plutarch +e oe -- 396 
Poiryo-tkaeshan «. 427 


Ponegranate, the: the pome- 
granate as a symbol 96-97 
(See urvaram) 


Prastot4, the ., os +. 281 
Pratiharta, the an .. 281 
Pratiprashthata es -. 339 
Pregnancy: rites and cere- 
monies observed during 
pregnancy .. ve oe Bed 


Priest : Officiating and assist- 
ant priests—their functions 
and positions as given in 
the Visparad—shown with 
a plan 335-37; their positions 
as indicated in the Niran- 
gistan 337-39 ; priesthood— 
its insignia 152-58 ; heredi- 


tary priesthood s. 198-99 
Puiti Sea wr ish a. 270 
Pitika, the... oe .. 815 
Purans .. .. 373 


Purgatory 422 (See Hamishta- 
geh4n) 


INDEX xlvii 
P-—concld. R—conid. 
Page No, Page No. 
Purificatory ceremonies and Rathaeshtaran «. 2389, 240 


customs described 87-177; 
why importance is attached 
to these ceremonies 88-90 ; 
two main objects of the puri- 
fication ceremonies 91 ; four 
kinds of purificatory cere- 
monies 91-92; injunctions 
about purification compared 
with moder plague opera- 
tions 157-61; Hebrew, Ro- 
man and Egyptian puri- 
fications compared with the 
Tranian 161-66 ; purificatory 
processes and customs in 
daily life 166-77 ; purification 
of a house 167; purification 
of things defiled 167-68 (See 
Bareshnum, N&ahn and Riman) 
Purity and Impurity ™ the 
terms explained from an 
Iranian point\.of view 87-88 


Purodasha We ff -. 300 
R 

Ram Khvastra ise .. 84 

Ram, Yazata .. : 369 


Rapithwan 361, 370 (See Afrin- 
gan, Afrin and Baj of Rapi- 
thwan) 


‘Rapithwan gah 232, 233, 439, 


458 (See Gah) 
Rapithwin Jashan 457, 458, 468 


Rapp, Dr. 88, 254 
Rashna 83, 84, 85, 369, 421 
Ratu, Rad: the word ratu 


with different significations 
explained 332-33;—330, 331, 334 


RAathwi, Raspi (assistant priest) 
202, 205, 266, 274, 298, 314, 
323, 328, 335, 338, 378, 391, 
399, 400, 401,402 
Rathwishkara 335, 336, 837, 339 
Rawlinson ae ve te 8 
Renaisance, the Iranian 197, 227 
Retreat: Retreat of 9 days 
after Bareshnum purification 
144-146, 163; when is this 
retreat abandoned 148 (See 
Bareshnum) 
Revayets 4, 119, 287, 345, 


850, 358, 467, 472, 474, 475, 
Riman: the word explained 


153-54 ; the process of the 
riman purification 154; the 
place for this purification 
154; plan showing and ex- 
plaining how a riman is 
purified 155-57 391, 159, 
213, 215 
Romans, the 90, 101, 163, 164, 
165, 166, 305, 418, 419, 469, 


470 
Rome : 163, 373 
Ruskin .. a ‘ie .. 875 
Rustom « 17, 389 
Rustom Gushtasp -Ardeshir 198+ 
: 199 

cd 


Sacred bull: the ritual of its 
consecration 256-59 ;—263 


(See Vargyd) © 


xlvlil . 


- INDEX 


pap pore epacyf enr P A P CENS E PPTL TIE  DDET ATE SE BEEP LI SOP SIE I REET OED 


S—conid. 
Page No. 


Saddar 3, 5, 6, 66, 75, 180, 


449 467. 


Saddar Bundehesh .. «i 
Sadeh Jashan : described 
Sadi, Sheikh ..: : ~- 52 
Sagdid: explained; tis object of 
sagdid 58-61;—65, 86, 68, 137, 430 
Sagri os se ee eo «72 


Saliva: infection brought on 

by it . .. 169 
Sdlroz .. een! » 85, 355, 445 
Sam Nariman .. . 889 


Sand: the use of ae in. 
Bareshnum purification (See 
Bareshnum) 


Sanjana, E. D... afd «- 181 

Saptarashyahi .. oo .. 365 
 sdree ow se om, “42 
. ‘Sar-némeh Razi Yazdani’.,, 182 

Sarosh, Sroahsha: Sarosh 


ceremony described 434-44 ; 
Sarosh and his functions 
434-35 , different ceremonies 
making up. the whole ritual 
in honour-of Sarosh “436-37 
Sarosh as a protecting angel 
77-78 ;—-64, 85, 338, 339, 
432, 433, 445, 450, 4651, 
Sarosh Baj 13, 55, 58, 69, 78, 
128, 129, 133, 146, 213, 216, 
233, 244, 246, 346, 375, 436 

Sarosh Darun 298, 299, 324, 
359, 393 

Sarosh Hadokht 79, 327, 341,°¢ 
' 343, 345, 439 

Sarosh Yasht 78, 79, 327, 339, 
343 

Satum : described 27-28 ; reci- 


472 


8—contd. 
Page No. 


ted over meals 428-20; 

occasions for reciting the 

Satum 430- ;—326, 369, 444, 
456, 470, 478 


Satvas .. ae es ve 365 
' Segregation 73, 74, 108 
Sepinoud -. 101 
Sesheta, goddes .. 250 
Sexual intercourse +. 170 
Shah-asparem .. «+ 396, 397 
Shdhjan >. a, +s 22 
Shéh-némeh —., -. 198, 365 
Shapor I o+ 464 


Shayast 14 Shayast 2, 3, 66, 75, 
76, 78, 82, 85, 173, 180, 183, 
277, 278, 279, 285, 341, 343, 


345, 435, 449, 483 
Shehan Baj .. +» 861,370 
Shehrivar ws +» 396, 397— 
Shehrivar Jashan as .. 460 
Shirin . 464 
Shos, Sosh 440, 442 (See Ooth- 
amna) 

Shroud of the dead... .. «82 
Siva, Shiév, ..85, 436, 438 
Siaévakhsh ; . 389 
Sidra .. as oe we BA 
Sijda .. si as .. 66 
Sirius 365,° 366 
Sirkan .. - 118 
Siroz . 85, 355, 445 
Siroza 206, 361, 364, 370, 382, 433 
Siroza Yasht -. 382 
Smith, Dr. W. .. wee ae 418 


‘* Social Code of the Parsees” 50 
Soma .. 281, 282, 315, 420 
Sosh (See Shos) 


Sosh&ns ny Om ey 313 


INDEX 


xlix 
S—coneld. T—coneld. 
Page No. 3 . Page No. 
Soidaiel ashe 2a . 17 | takhté 271 (see Khwan) 


Soul, the: its destiny aftor 
death 419-23; the picture 
presented to it of its deeds 
76-77; its passage to the 
other world 83-84; the soul 
in relation to the body 69 
(See wrvdna) 


South, the ee oe -. 57 
Southey... eet et .. 456 
Spend Nask ... .. -. 82 
Spendarmad .. aa « 432 
Spiegel, Dr. .. 125, 331 


Sraosha-varez 335, 336, 337, 339 

Srosha (See Sarosh) 

Staota Yasna: chapters com- 
prising the Staota-Yasna 
according to different scho- 

lars 340 ;—327 
Stareta (See dldt gah) 


State.and Church in Iran ..227- 


28 


‘Strabo, 2, 150,151,160, 179, 


277, 282, 317 


Sudreh: meaning of the word 
181 ; its structure and sym- 
bolism , 182-83 ;—178, 186, 


407, 441 
Sulpicious os tu .. 152 
T 
Tabari .. ee ~. 198, 465 
Tabaristan oe as os 227 
Tacitus . ae -. 150 


tai 278, 361 (see Barsam) 
Tak, Takché; described 475 ;—473 


tan-pak 107, 200 (see Bareshnum) 

Taén& ceremony: description 
and signification 245-49 ; 
compared with thé founda- 
tion-ceremony a the Egyp: 


tians .. 250-51 
‘Tandarusti’ prayer: as: re- 
cited in the Ashirwad— 


with translation 41; as re- 
cited in the Naojote—with 


purport 196 ;—-228, 327, . 

: 872 

Tansar, Taosar. . 197, 198, 227 
Wen Perera gs PES .. 53 

tashta : described 276 268, 

329 | 

tashta surdkhdir 276, 329 
Tehemina gee “laa” ay. ae 
Thebes .. za “we. .- 100 
Thomson (poet) ee ~» 89 


Tibeb .. Ee ae .. 899 

Tiradata, Tiridates .. -. 150 

Tirang4n, Tiryan .. 457, 460 
Tishtar,Tishtrya 1, 365, 366, 

_ 432 

toran (exch)... ne -. 26 
Tower of Silence: described 
70-72 ; consecration 72, 244. 
52; the ceremony of laying 
the foundation 244 ;—57, 
58, 61, 62, 63, 68, 69, 106, 
171, 210, 430, 436, 438, 

a 461 

Tree of Life... a2 54, 420 

Turan .. «. 46] 
Turban, the : insignia of priest. 

hood ,. = ne 162-53 


a 


“U 
Page No. 
Udgata, the .. : 281 
Udambara tree ae 282 
Upasad coremony 300 


Urine of the bull (see gaomez), 
Ursa Major 365, 410 
urvana, urvan (soul) : difference 
between urvéna and fravashi 
416-17 ;—418, 423, (see Soul). 
urvaram: the ceremony of 
preparing the wrvardm des- 
cribed and its symbolism 
293-95 ;--8, 96, 267, 268, 
276, 306, 307, 309, 311, 313, 
321, 322, 325, 359, 363 
Urvasna 61, 110, 162, 167, 320 
Urvig, Aurvis 271, 277 (see 
Khwan of daz). 
Urvig-gih: defined and des- 
cribed ae ae 263-64 
Ushahin-gith 219, °°0, 232, 
239, 251, 257, 308, 35),.369, 
432 (see Gah). 
Ushtavaiti Gatha oe -. 76 
Uthamna (see Oothamna) : 
Uziran Gah°79, 84, 146, 232: 
335, 351,439, (see Gah) 


Vae (Yazata) .. 85, 435 
Vahishtoyasht Gatha .. 48, 465 
Vahram (Yazata) «- 433 
Vajarkard Dini 467 472, 474 
Valkhash oe -+ 150 


Vanant 365, 366, 367, (see 
Baj of Vanant), 


INDEX 


V—contd. 
Page No. 
Vanant Yasht .. se .- 368 
vanot Kapui : described 367-68 


Var behendoo .. ace, -. «28 


var-raja Ss is ». 23 
varadh-patra ... oe, ~. 20 


Varag (see Hair), ~  .. 

Varag-ni_ viti: ceremony. of 
twining the hair round the 
ving -described 286-88 ;— 

268, 277, 311, 312, 329 


_Varagyo (see Sacred bull). 


Varkash, Vouru. Kasha (see Caspean). 
vastra 85 (see Siév). 


Vastryoshain .. +e +. 239 
Vega... 365, 366 
Veh river ay a . 317 


Vendidad : ceremony described 
350-53 ; the order of the re- 
cital of its chaptera in the 
ritual .. en 851-58 

Vendidad Sadeh. en es B51 

Vernal Equinox 448, 458, 463, 

470 

Viraf-Nameh 50, 417, 420. 

fois 443, 447 

Vishtasp Yasht 263, 282 

Visparad : ceremony described 
330-49 ; the word explained 
330-32 ; object of the cere- 
mony 333-34; how it is 
recited in the ritual 334-35 ; 
Visparad of the Gahambar 
335 ; typical prayers enumes 
rated in the Visparad 340; 
—351, 352, 353, 433, 448, 479 

Vivanghant .. oe -- 302 

Vohugaona 61, 110, 161, 167, 320 

Aohukereti 1, 110, 161, 167, 320 


INDEX li 


V—coneld. 
Page No. 
Vohuman, Vohumana .. 182 
w 


** Washing the feet ”’ : the cere- 
mony of washing the feet of 
the bride and bridegroom— 
its signification .. «- 43 


Water : well-water required in 
ceremonies 269 ; water drawn 
from pipes not used in cere- 
monies—the reason assigned 


for it .. . «. 269 
West, Dr. 103, 126, 181, 334, 365 
Wilhelm, Prof. - -_ o> 253 


Windischmann, Dr. .. ~« 420 
Wine: what it was—as used 
in the Afringan Ceremony 394-95 


foo x 


Xenophon . on 
Xerxes .. +e .- «- 47 


Yagna: the ritual fully des- 
eribed 260-380; the word 
explained 266; celebration 
of the Yagna in two parts 
266 ; apparatus and requi- 
sites forthe ceremony 267- 
68; all the apparatus and 
requisites fully described 
269-321 ; the Khwans of the 
Yacna-gih 270-74; dlat or 


Y—conid. 
Page No. 


metallic requisites in the 
Yacna service 274-89 ; 
organic requisites used in 
the Yacna 289-316 ; the ritual 
compared with the  Jyo- 
tishtoma of the Brahmins 
299-300 ; the chapters of 
the Ya¢na summarized 322- 
29; antiquity of the cere- 


mony P ie +. 329 
Yacna of 9fPambar os +. 449 
Yaena of Rapithwan .. .. 479 


Yagna.Haptanghaiti 326, 340 
Ydd; the ydd in the Dibache 
described 383-84 ;—380, 
450, 454 
YVéirya 447 (see Gahambar). : 
Yaozdatar a .. 159, 162 
Yaozdathragar: his qualifica- 
tions 108-109 ; his charac. 
teristies 264-65;—-107, 224 
260 
Yashts .. a 7 ses dS 
“ Yatha ahu Vairyo” prayer 
(see Ahunvar), 
Yazashna (sce Yacna). 
Yazashna-géh : explained 263 ; 
—204, 205, 225, 264, 267, 
270, 271, 274, 277, 285, 288, 
289, 292, 295, 312, 325, 335, 
, 336, 358 
Yazata : its meaning 480 ; two 
classes described 481-82 ; 
Yenumerated 397-98, 481 ;—~ 


1, ll, 12, 396, 410, 417 
Yazdagard os 36, 281 
Yazdin sce »» 410 


“Yenghhe- Hatém’ prayer : 


hii INDEX 


Y¥—coneld. 
Page No. 


translated 349 ;—-325, 328, 


333, 340,341 


Yima, 302 (see Jamshed), 


Zz 
Zadsparant ls. ie -- 113 
Zal geo Mae aad © tn BB 
Zamzamé » 357 
zan-taja@ 46 (see Divorce). 
Zaota, Zaotar, (see Priest): 


79,202, 203, 205, 206, 264, 266, 
269, 270, 274, 292, 299, -306, 
312-16, 318, 319, 322, 324, 
325, 328, 329, 335-39, 377, 
378, 391, 399, 400, 401, 402, 433 

Zaothra, Zor: ceremony . of 
preparing the Zaothra water 
316-17; the. object and 
symbolism.of the ceremony — 


re) ek 
Q BRENCH 


vy, OF Tre 
< * 


ry 
Z—coneld. 
Page No. 


316-17 ; ritual of mixing the 
Zaothra water with the 
water of a well—zor-melovt 
318, 329; —267, 268,276, 282, 
285, 286, 287, 300; 306, 307, 
309, 310, 313, 321,322, 323 


325, 328, , 329,. 351, 405 


‘Zar woo QD. .. 389 


Zartusht 313, 387, 389, 390 (see 
Zaroaster). 
Zartusht-no Diso -. 861, 368 
Zindeh-ravin: ceremony des- 
ial object 444-45 ;— 
; 9, 322, 383, 384 
Z6d-gah, 274, 336 (see Khwan _. 
of Zoti). 
Zohak .. aie 
Zoroaster : Zoroaster—a, _ 
Yazata 480; portraits of , 
Zoroaster 117; —13, 186,332, *\ 
341, 388, 410, 427, 462, 469 


49, 373, 460 


UV UMCUT TY LAR 
00103753 


Digitiz from 


| 
i 
i i Ait
