The Dramatic Works of Molière, Vol. VI (Molière, 1876)
==========================================================
Vol. VI of van Laun's complete English Molière: The Rogueries of Scapin, The Countess of Escarbagnas, The Learned Ladies, The Imaginary Invalid, and the early farces. Translated by Henri van Laun (1876). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramaticworksofm06moliiala).

^ur  uuiriwfc

S  I  fflsi  •ijuif  §

O         ii.

f         W


vvlOS-ANCElfj.>          ^l-UBRARY^

A\\E-UNIVERS/A

VyVV  uyiirun  v7\«  oj'fc "  '\^  y-v

IJUITI  WlTi  1^

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS   OF  MOLIERE.

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS

M  O  L  I  E  R  E

RENDERED   INTO  ENGLISH

BY   HENRI  VAN   LAUN

A   NEW   EDITION
With    a    Prefatory    Memoir,    Introductory    Notices    and    Notes

ILLUSTRATED   WITH

NINETEEN   ENGRAVINGS  ON   STEEL

FROM    PAINTINGS   AND    DESIGNS   BY

Horace    Vernet,  Desenne,  Johannot   and  Hersent

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES

VOLUME  VI

PHILADELPHIA
GEORGE  BARRIE,  PUBLISHER

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

VOLUME  SIX.

THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.

Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin

THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.

La  Comtesse  D1  Escarbagnas    ............        57

THE  LEARNED  LADIES.

Les  Femmes  Sauantes    ...............        "3

THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.

Le  Malade  Imaginaire     ..............       *45

THE  JEALOUSY  OF  LE  BARBOUILLE.

La  Jalousie  du  Barbouille    .............      235

THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.

Le  Medecin  Volante  .....    ...........      255

2068915

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS.

VOLUME  SIX.

THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.     Act  II.,  Scene  9.

Les  Fourberies  de  Scapin Frontispiece

THE  LEARNED  LADIES.     Act  III.,  Scene  5.

Les  Femmes  Savantes 118

THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.    Act  I.,  Scene  i.

Le  Malade  Imaginaire 160

StacK

LES   FOURBERIES   DE   SCAPIN.

COMEDIE.

THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN,

A    COMEDY    IN    THREE    ACTS.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.}

MAY  24TH,  1671.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

WHILST  the  King  and  the  whole  Court  were  in  Flanders  in  1671,  Mo-
liere  wished  to  produce  a  new  play  for  the  theatre  of  the  Palais  Royal,
then  freshly  decorated,  and  he  wrote  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin,  which  was
performed  on  the  24th  of  May  of  the  same  year,  and  met  with  great  suc-
cess. It  has  been  said  that  Moliere  wrote  his  farces  to  please  the  people :
but  with  the  exception  of  this  comedy  and  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Him-
self, all  his  farces  were  written  for,  and  first  performed  before  the  Court.

This  comedy,  in  three  acts,  is  partly  classical,  partly  Italian,  and  partly
French,  and  the  character  of  Scapin  enlivens  the  whole.  Scapin  is  a
master  rogue,  who  robs,  steals,  and  perjures  himself;  but  all  this  in  the
most  good-natured  way  imaginable.  He  cheats,  not  to  benefit  hinfcelf,
but  to  be  of  advantage  to  Leander  and  Octave ;  he  makes  a  fool  of
Geronte  and  Argante,  merely  to  keep  his  hand  in,  and  thrashes  the  first
in  revenge  for  having  told  a  falsehood  of  him.  Such  a  love  for  truth  is
wonderful  in  a  man  like  Scapin  whose  intense  roguery,  fertile  imagina-
tion, and  gigantic  impudence  can  exist  only  on  the  stage,  but  would  soon,
reap  in  real  life  their  well  deserved  reward.

The  greater  part  of  this  play  is  taken  from  Terence's  Phormio  ;  or,  the
Scheming  Parasite,  of  which  the  following  is  the  subject.

Antipho,  the  son  of  Demipho,  an  Athenian,  sees  by  accident  Phanium,
the  unknown  daughter  of  his  uncle  Chremes,  and  by  the  advice  of  Phor-
mio, a  parasite,  marries  her  by  trickery.  Shortly  after,  his  father  and
uncle  return  upon  the  same  day,  and  are  much  vexed  on  hearing  of  this
marriage.  Phaedria,  the  son  of  Chremes,  wishes  to  raise  some  money  to
purchase  a  music-girl  with  whom  he  is  in  love  ;  and  Geta,  a  servant  of
Demipho,  and  Phormio  arrange  that  the  former  shall  pretend  to  the  old
man  that  Phormio  has  consented  to  take  back  the  woman  whom  Antipho
has  married,  if  Demipho  will  give  her  a  portion  of  thirty  minae.  The
latter  gives  the  money  to  Phaedria,  who  buys  the  girl.  At  this  conjunc-
ture, it  becomes  known  that  the  wife  of  Antipho  is  really  the  daughter  of
Chremes ;  and  they  wish  to  get  back  the  money  from  Phormio,  who  re-
fuses, and  finally  betrays  to  Nauaistrata,  the  Athenian  wife  of  Chremes,
the  intrigue  which  the  latter  had  carried  on  at  Lemnos  with  the  mother
of  Phanium.

The  details  of  Moliere's  comedy  are  either  from  French  or  Italian
origin.

It  is  said  that  the  idea  of  Scapin's  confession  (Act  ii.,  Scene  5)  is  taken

3

4  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.

from  an  Italian  farce,  Pantaloon,  the  Father  of  a  Family,  where  Harle-
quin, accused  of  having  stolen  something,  falls  on  his  knees  and  confesses
to  have  committed  many  robberies  of  which  he  was  never  suspected.  The
scene  of  the  sack  (Act  iii.,  Scene  2),  which  offended  Boileau  so  much,  was
probably  suggested  to  Moliere  by  a  farce  which  Tabarin  acted  in  the  open
air,  where  an  old  miser,  Lucas,  takes  the  place  of  Captain  Rodomont  in  a
sack,  and  gets  well  beaten  for  his  trouble  by  his  own  servant  Tabarin,  and
by  his  daughter  Isabella.  The  famous  eleventh  scene  of  the  second  act
of  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin  is  borrowed  chiefly  from  the  fourth  scene  of
the  second  act  of  The  Deceived  Pedant,  written  by  Cyrano  de  Bergerac,
which  was  published  about  1654,  and  certainly  acted  long  before  Mohere's
play.  The  rogue  in  The  Deceived  Pedant  is  called  Corbineli,  the  old
miser,  Granger — a  parody  of  Jean  Grangier,  professor  of  rhetoric,  and
principal  of  the  College  of  Beauvais — and  Sylvester  is  called  Paquier.
The  famous  exclamation,  ''What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  the  galley  ?"
is  to  be  found  there.  There  is  also  a  similarity  between  the  second  scene
of  the  third  act  of  Bergerac's  piece  and  the  third  scene  of  the  third  act  of
Molifire's  play.  Moliere,  who  probably  knew  Rorgerac,  when  accused
of  having  borrowed  these  scenes  from  the  latter,  is  said  to  have  replied,
"  These  scenes  were  pretty  good ;  I  have  taken  them.  People  get  hold
again  of  their  property  where  they  find  it."

There  is  also  in  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin  a  reminiscence  from  a  play  of
Plautus,  called  Bacchides ;  or,  the  Twin  Sisters.

Ravenscroft  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Love-  Tiff,  Vol.  I.,  and
Introductory  Notice  to  The  Forced  Marriage,  Vol  I.)  has  imitated  part
of  Moliere's  comedy  in  his  Scaramouch,  a  Philosopher,  Hirlequin,  a
School-boy,  Bravo,  Merchant  and  Magician,  acted  at  the  Theatre-Royal,
1677.  Argante  is  called  in  this  play  Pancrace ;  Scapin,  Plautino,  and
sometimes  Harlequin ;  Octave  is  called  Cynthio,  and  Leander  Octavio.

Thomas  Otway  has  also  translated  Moliere's  play  under  the  title  The
Cheats  of  Scapin,  acted  at  the  Duke's  Theatre  in  1677,  and  dedicated  to
John,  Earl  of  Rochester.  Sylvester  is  called  Shift ;  Argante,  Thrifty ;
GeYonte,  Gripe ;  Carlos,  Sly ;  Hyacinthe,  Clara ;  and  Zerbinette,  Lucia.
This  appears  to  me  the  sole  change  which  Otway  has  made,  except  that
he  has  abbreviated,  but  not  improved,  some  of  the  speeches.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

ARGANTE,  father  to  Octave  and  Zerbinette.
GERONTE,  father  to  Leander  and  Hyacinthe.
OCTAVE,  son  of  Argante,  and  betrothed  to  Hyacinthe.
LEANDER,  son  of  Geronte,  and  in  love  with  Zerbinette.
ZERBINETTE,  supposed  a  gipsy ,  afterwards  found  to  be

the  daughter  of  Argante,
HYACINTHE,  daughter  of  Geronte.
SCAPIN,    valet  to  Leander.
SYLVESTER,  valet  to  Octave.
NERINE,  nurse  to  Hyacinthe.
CARLOS,  Scapin' s  friend.

THE  SCENE  is  AT  NAPLES.*

1  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.     Scapin  is  one  of  the  tradi- "
tional  servants  of  the  commedia  dell '  arte.     The  name  Scapin  is  from  the
Italian  scappare,  to  run  away,  to  escape,  either  on  account  of  the  pol-
troonery which  he  displays  in  the  Italian  farces,  or  on  account  of  the  dex-
terity with  which  he  manages  to  commit  all  kinds  of  rogueries.

2  As  the  scene  is  laid  in  Naples,  it  shows  at  once  that  the  poet  will  give
free  scope  to  his  imagination.

THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN,

(LES  FOURBERIES  DE  SCAPIN.}

ACT  I.
SCENE  I. — OCTAVE,  SYLVESTER.

OCT.  Ah  !  this  is  dire  news  to  a  heart  in  love !  a  cruel
strait  to  which  I  find  myself  reduced  !  You  have  just
heard  at  the  port,  Sylvester,  that  my  father  is  about  to  re-
turn?

SYL.  Yes.

OCT.  That  he  will  arrive  this  very  morning?

SYL.  This  very  morning?

OCT.  And  that  he  comes  back  resolved  to  marry  me  ?

SYL.  Yes.

OCT.   To  a  daughter  of  Mr.  Geronte  ?

SYL.   Of  Mr.  Geronte.

OCT.  And  that  this  young  lady  has  been  sent  for  from
Tarente  for  that  purpose  ?

SYL.  Yes.

OCT.   And  you  have  got  this  news  from  my  uncle  ?

SYL.   From  your  uncle.

OCT.  To  whom  my  father  has  communicated  this  by
letter  ?

SYL.  By  letter.

OCT.  And  this  uncle,  you  say,  knows  all  about  our

affairs  ?

7

8  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  i.

SYL.  All  about  our  affairs.

OCT.  Do  speak,  if  it  be  all  the  same  to  you,  instead  of
having  the  words  dragged  out  of  your  mouth  in  that
manner.3

SYL.  What  more  would  you  have  me  say  ?  You  do  not
forget  a  single  particular,  and  you  state  things  just  as  they
are.

OCT.  Give  me  some  advice,  at  least,  and  tell  me  what  I
am  to  do  in  this  cruel  plight.

SYL.  In  truth,  I  find  myself  as  much  at  a  loss  as  you  are,
and  I  have  great  need  of  advice  myself.

OCT.  I  am  bored  to  death  by  this  confounded  return.

SYL.   I  am  not  the  less  so.

OCT.  When  my  father  hears  how  matters  stand,  I  shall
find  myself  overwhelmed  with  a  sudden  storm  of  vehement
scolding.

SYL.  Scolding  counts  for  nothing ;  and  would  to  Hea-
ven that  I  were  quit  at  that  rate  !  but,  for  my  part,  I  am
more  likely  to  pay  dearer  for  your  follies ;  and  I  see
already,  gathering  from  afar,  a  cloud  of  cudgel-blows  that
will  burst  on  my  shoulders.

OCT.  Oh  Heavens !  how  am  I  to  get  out  of  this
scrape  ?

SYL.  You  ought  to  have  thought  of  that  before  getting
into  it.

OCT.  Ah !  you  will  be  the  death  of  me  with  your  ill-
timed  lectures.

SYL.  You  will  be  much  more  the  death  of  me  with  your
thoughtless  actions.

Ocr.  What  am  I  to  do?  What  resolution  can  I  take ?
What  remedy  can  I  apply  ?

SCENE  II. — OCTAVE,  SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER.

SCA.  What  now,  Mr.  Octave  ?  What  ails  you  ?  What
is  the  matter  ?  What  is  amiss  ?  You  are  very  much  up-
set, I  see.

OCT.  Ah  my  good  Scapin,  I  am  lost ;  I  am  desperate  ;
I  am  the  most  unfortunate  of  men.

8  In  Mclicerte,  Act  ii.,  Scene   i   (see  Vol.  II.),  a  nearly  similar  scene
takes  place.

SCKNKH.J  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  9

SCA.  Why  so  ?

OCT.  Have  you  learned  nothing  about  what  concerns
me?

SCA.  No.

OCT.  My  father  is  coming  back  with  Mr.  Geronte,  and
they  wish  me  to  marry.

SCA.  Well,  what  is  there  so  terrible  in  that  ?

OCT.  Alas  !  do  you  not  know  the  cause  of  my  uneasi-
ness?

SCA.  No  ;  but  it  lies  entirely  with  you  for  me  to  know
it  shortly  ;  I  am  of  a  consoling  nature,*  and  ready  to  in-
terest myself  in  young  people's  affairs.

OCT.  Ah  !  Scapin,  if  you  could  invent  something,  con-
coct some  plot  to  get  me  out  of  the  difficulty  in  which  I
am,  I  should  think  that  I  owed  you  more  than  my  life.

SCA.  Truth  to  tell,  there  are  few  things  impossible  to
me,  when  it  pleases  me  to  meddle  with  them.  There  is
no  doubt  that  I  have  received  from  Heaven  a  genius,  suf-
ficiently fine  to  contrive  all  those  pretty  tricks  of  wit,
those  ingenious  intrigues,  to  which  the  ignorant  vulgar
give  the  name  of  rogueries ;  and  I  can  say,  without  boast-
ing, that  there  never  was  a  man  who  was  a  cleverer  mani-
pulator of  springs  and  traps,  and  who  has  won  more  glory
at  that  noble  craft  than  I.  But,  upon  my  word,  merit  is
too  badly  treated  now-a-days ;  and  I  have  given  up  all
these  things  since  a  certain  vexatious  affair  happened  to
me.

OCT.  How  !  what  affair,  Scapin  ?

SCAP.  An  adventure  through  which  I  became  embroiled
with  the  law.

OCT.  The  law  ?

SCA.  Yes,  we  had  a  little  quarrel  together.

SYL.  You  and  the  law?

SCA.  Yes.  It  treated  me  very  badly ;  and  I  felt  so
nettled  at  the  ingratitude  of  the  age,  that  I  made  up  my
mind  to  have  nothing  more  to  do  with  it.  Basta  !  Do
not  let  that  interrupt  the  story  of  your  adventure.

OCT.  You  are  aware,  Scapin,  that  two  months  ago  Mr.

4  The  original  has  je  suis  homme  consolatif.  This  last  adjective  is  no
longer  in  use.

10  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  _     [ACT  I.

Gdronte  and  my  father  went  together  on  a  voyage  about
a  certain  business  in  which  their  interests  are  connected.5

SCA.  I  know  that.

OCT.  And  that  Leander  and  I  were  left  by  our  fathers,
I  under  the  care  of  Sylvester,  and  Leander  under  yours.

SCA.  Yes.     I  have  very  well  discharged  that  duty.

OCT.  Some  time  after,  Leander  happened  to  meet  with
a  young  gipsy,  with  whom  he  fell  in  love.

SCA.  This  also  I  know.

OCT.  Being  fast  friends,  he  immediately  made  me  the
confidant. of  his  love,  and  took  me  to  see  this  girl,  whom
I  thought  handsome,  certainly,  but  not  so  much  so  as  he
would  have  had  me  think  her.  He  did  nothing  else  but
entertain  me  about  her  each  day,  exalting  every  moment
her  beauty  and  her  grace,  lauding  her  wit,  dilating  raptur-
ously upon  the  charms  of  her  conversation,  the  most
minute  details  of  which  he  reported  to  me,  and  which  he
always  endeavoured  to  make  me  find  the  most  witty  in  the
world.  Often  he  quarrelled  with  me  for  my  not  being
sensible  enough  to  what  he  was  telling  me,  and  inces-
santly blamed  me  for  my  indifference  to  the  flames  of
love.

SCA.  As  yet  I  fail  to  see  where  all  this  is  leading  to.

OCT.  One  day  when  I  accompanied  him  to  go  to  the
people  who  were  taking  care  of  the  object  of  his  love,  we
heard,  issuing  from  a  small  house,  in  an  out-of-the-way
street,  some  wailing  intermixed  with  many  sobs.  We  in-
quire the  cause ;  a  woman  answers  us,  sighing,  that  there
we  could  witness  a  most  pitiful  sight  of  some  foreign
people,  and  that,  unless  we  were  most  insensible,  we  could
not  fail  to  be  touched  by  it.

SCA.  Where  does  this  lead  us  to  ?

OCT.  Curiosity  made  me  induce  Leander  to  go  and  see
what  it  was.  We  entered  a  large  room,  where  we  saw  a
dying  old  woman,  nursed  by  a  servant  uttering  lamenta-
tions, and  a  young  girl,  the  most  handsome  and  the  most
interesting  that  ever  was  seen,  melting  into  tears.

SCA.  Ah!  ah!

5  All  that  follows  is  taken  from  Terence's  Phormio  ;  but  there  it  is  a
slave  who  tells  the  story.

SCENE  ii.  1  THE   ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  1 1

OCT.  Any  one  else  would  have  appeared  frightful  in  the
state  she  was  in ;  for  she  had  nothing  to  cover  her  but  a
miserable  scanty  petticoat,  with  a  night  boddice  of  com-
mon fustian ;  and  her  head-dress  was  a  yellow  mob-cap,
turned  up  on  the  crown,  from  which  her  hair  fell  in  dis-
order on  her  shoulders ;  and,  notwithstanding,  as  she
stood  there,  she  shone  with  a  thousand  attractions,  and
there  was  nothing  but  grace  and  charm  about  her.

SCA.   I  can  see  the  thing  coming.

OCT.  Had  you  seen  her,  Scapin,  in  the  state  in  which
I  have  described  her,  you  would  have  thought  her  lovely.

SCA.  Oh  !  I  do  not  doubt  it ;  and,  without  having
seen  her,  I  can  fancy  her  altogether  charming.

OCT.  Her  tears  were  none  of  those  disagreeable  tears
that  disfigure  a  face ;  even  in  weeping,  she  had  a  winning
grace,  and  her  sorrow  was  the  loveliest  in  the  world.

SCA.   I  can  perceive  all  this.

OCT.  She  moved  everyone  to  tears,  throwing  herself
affectionately  on  the  body  of  the  dying  woman,  whom  she
called  her  dear  mother ;  and  there  was  not  a  soul  which
was  not  touched  to  the  quick  at  seeing  such  a  good  cha-
racter.

SCA.  In  fact,  this  is  touching ;  and  I  can  easily  imagine
that  this  good  character  made  you  fall  in  love  with  her.

OCT.  A  barbarian  would  have  done  the  same,  Scapin.

SCA.  Of  course.     One  could  not  help  it !

OCT.  After  a  few  words,  with  which  I  tried  to  assuage
the  sorrow  of  this  charming  afflicted  girl,  we  went  out ;
and  asking  Leander  what  he  thought  of  her,  he  answered
me  coldly  that  she  was  tolerably  pretty.  I  felt  nettled  at
the  coldness  with  which  he  spoke  of  her,  and  I  did  not
wish  to  reveal  to  him  the  effect  which  her  beauty  had  pro-
duced on  my  heart.6

SYL.  (To  Octave}.  If  you  do  not  cut  this  story  short,
we  shall  be  in  for  it  till  to-morrow.  Let  me  sum  it  up  in
two  words.  (To  Scapin).  His  heart  is  all  ablaze  from
that  moment ;  life  becomes  unendurable  to  him  unless  he
goes  to  console  his  amiable  bereaved.  His  frequent  visits

6  Auger,  one  of  the  commentators  of  Moliere,  observes  that  Octave
does  not  find  Leander's  gipsy  sufficiently  pretty,  but  is  nettled  because
Leander  is  not  smitten  by  the  charms  of  Hyacinthe.

12  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  i.

are  declined  by  the  servant,  whom  the  death  of  the
mother  has  raised  to  the  post  of  governess.  Behold  my
master  in  despair ;  he  importunes,  begs,  implores  ;  all  of
no  use.  He  is  told  that  the  girl,  though  v/ithout  means
and  without  support,  is  of  good  family,  and  that  his  ad-
dresses will  not  be  tolerated,  unless  he  marries  her.  Be-
hold his  love  increased  by  obstacles.  He  racks  his  brain,
debates,  reasons,  hesitates,  takes  a  resolution  :  the  upshot
of  which  is  that  he  has  been  married  to  her  these  three
days.

SCA.  I  understand.

SYL.  Now,  add  to  this  the  unforeseen  return  of  his  father,
who  was  not  expected  these  two  months ;  the  discovery  by
the  uncle  of  the  secret  of  our  marriage,  and  the  other  pro-
jected union  with  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Geronte,  by  a  second
wife,  to  whom,  they  say,  he  was  married  at  Tarente.

OCT.  And,  in  addition  to  all  this,  put  the  poverty  in
which  this  amiable  creature  finds  herself,  and  my  inability
to  get  the  means  wherewith  to  relieve  her.

SCA.  And  is  this  all  ?  You  are  both  very  much  upset  by
a  trifle  !  There  is  certainly  much  to  be  alarmed  at !  Are
you  not  ashamed  to  be  thus  at  your  wits'  end,  for  so  small
a  matter  ?  What  the  devil  ?  there  you  are  as  tall  and  big
as  father  and  mother,  and  you  cannot  find  in  your  head,
nor  your  wit  invent  some  lover's  ruse,  some  honest  little
stratagem,  to  put  your  affairs  straight !  Fie  !  a  plague  upon
the  booby  !  I  wish  they  had  given  me  those  greybeards
of  bygone  days  to  lead  by  the  nose ;  I  would  have  had  no
difficulty  in  getting  the  better  of  them  all ;  and  I  was  not
bigger  than  this,  when  I  had  already  distinguished  myself
by  a  hundred  pretty  tricks.

SYL.  I  confess  that  Heaven  has  not  given  me  those
talents,  and  that  I  have  not  the  wit  to  entangle  myself
with  the  law,  as  you  have.

OCT.  But  here  comes  my  dear  Hyacinthe.

SCENE  III. — HYACINTHE,  OCTAVE,  SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER.

HYA.  Ah  !  Octave,  is  it  true  what  Sylvester  has  just  told
N6rine,  that  your  father  is  coming  back,  and  that  he  wishes
you  to  marry.

OCT.  Yes,  fair  Hyacinthe  ;  and  those  tidings  have  struck

SCENBIII.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  13

me  a  cruel  blow.  But  what  do  I  see?  you  weep!  Why
these  tears?  Do  you  suspect,  tell  me,  any  inconstancy
on  my  part  ?  and  are  you  not  convinced  of  my  love  for
you?

HYA.  Yes,  Octave,  I  am  certain  that  you  love  me,  but
I  am  not  so  sure  that  you  will  ,-  Iways  do  so.

OCT.  As  if  one  could  love  you,  and  not  love  you  for
life?

HVA.  I  have  heard  it  said,  Octave,  that  your  sex  loves
not  so  long  as  ours,  and  that  the  passions  which  men  betray
are  fires  which  are  as  easily  quenched  as  kindled.

OCT.  Ah !  my  dear  H  yacinthe,  my  heart  in  that  case  is
not  like  that  of  other  men;  and,  as  regards  myself,  I  feel
that  I  shall  love  you  till  death.

HYA.  I  believe  that  you  feel  as  you  say,  and  I  doubt
not  that  your  words  are  sincere ;  but  I  dread  a  power  which
will  combat,  in  your  heart,  the  tender  sentiments  which
you  may  have  for  me.  You  are  dependent  on  a  father,  who
wishes  to  marry  you  to  another ;  and  I  am  sure  that  1  should
die  should  this  misfortune  come  to  pass.

OCT.  No,  fair  Hyacinthe,  there  is  no  father  who  can
compel  me  to  break  my  faith  with  you ;  and,  rather  than
leave  you,  I  am  determined  to  quit  my  country,  and  life
itself  if  necessary.  Without  having  even  seen  her,  I  have
already  taken  an  unconquerable  dislike  to  the  lady  whom
they  intended  for  me,  and,  without  being  cruel,  I  wish  that
the  sea  would  drive  her  far  away  from  here  for  evermore.
Do  not  cry,  then,  I  beg  of  you,  sweet  Hyacinthe,  for  your
tears  kill  me,  and  I  cannot  look  at  them  without  being
grieved  to  the  heart.

HYA.  Since  you  wish  it,  I  shall  dry  them,  and  I  shall
steadfastly  await  what  it  shall  please  Heaven  to  do  with  me.

OCT.  Heaven  will  favour  us.

HYA.  As  long  as  you  are  true,  Heaven  cannot  be  adverse.

OCT.  I  assuredly  shall  be  so.

HYA.  In  that  case  I  shall  be  happy.

SCA.  (Aside).  Upon  my  word,  she  is  not  such  a  fool ;
and  I  find  her  pretty  tolerable.

OCT.  (Pointing  to  Scapiri).  Here  is  a  man  who,  if  he
liked,  could  be  of  wonderful  assistance  to  us  in  all  our
needs.

14  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  ,.

SCA.  I  have  made  a  solemn  vow  not  to  meddle  any
more  with  the  world  ;  but,  if  both  of  you  urge  me  very
strongly,  I  might  perhaps  .  .  .

OCT.  Ah!  if  it  wants  nothing  but  strong  urging  to
obtain  your  aid,  I  implore  you  with  all  my  heart  to
undertake  the  guidance  of  our  bark.

SCA.  ( To  Hyacinths).  And  you,  have  you  nothing  to
say  to  me  ?

HYA.  I  entreat  of  you,  likewise,  by  all  that  is  most
dear  to  you  in  this  world,  to  assist  us  in  our  love.

SCA.  One  must  give  way  sometimes,  and  show  some
human  feelings.  You  may  be  at  rest,  I  shall  interest
myself  for  you.

OCT.  Be  assured  that  .

SCA.  (To  Octave}.  Hush!  (To  Hyacinthe).  And  now
go,  and  make  yourself  easy.

SCENE  IV. — OCTAVE,  SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER.

SCA.  (To  Octave).  And  you,  prepare  yourself  with
firmnesss  to  meet  your  father.

OCT.  I  confess  that  this  meeting  makes  me  tremble
beforehand ;  and  I  feel  a  natural  timidity  which  I  cannot
overcome.

SCA.  You  must,  however,  appear  firm  at  the  first  shock,
for  fear,  that,  seeing  your  weakness,  he  will  lead  you  like
a  child.  There,  try  to  study  calmness.  A  little  boldness ;
and  take  care  to  answer  firmly  everything  which  he  may
tell  you.

OCT.  I  shall  do  my  very  best.

SCA.  Come,  let  us  rehearse  a  little,  just  to  get  your
hand  in.  Let  us  repeat  your  part  somewhat,  and  let  us
see  if  you  will  do  well.  Come !  a  firm  countenance,
head  erect,  looks  steady.

OCT.  Like  this !

SCA.  A  little  more  still.

OCT.  In  this  way  ?

SCA.  That  is  it.  Imagine  me  to  be  your  father,  who
has  just  arrived,  and  answer  me  unflinchingly,  as  if  I  were
he.  How !  you  scoundrel,  you  good  for  nothing  wretch,
you  son  unworthy  of  a  father  like  me,  do  you  dare  to
appear  before  me  after  your  nice  behaviour,  after  the  vile

SCENK  vi.]  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  15

trick  which  you  have  played  me  during  my  absence  ?  Is
this  the  fruit  of  all  my  cares,  you  rogue  ?  Is  this  the
fruit  of  all  my  cares  ?  the  respect  which  is  due  to  me,  the
esteem  which  you  have  for  me?  (That  is  it).  And  you
have  the  insolence,  you  knave,  to  engage  yourself  with-
out the  consent  of  your  father,  to  contract  a  clandestine
marriage  !  Answer  me,  you  rogue,  answer  me.  Let  us

hear  a  few  of  your  specious  arguments Ah  !  what

the  devil !  you  have  not  a  word  to  say.

OCT.  It  is  because  I  fancy  that  it  is  my  father  whom  I
hear.

SCA.  Eh.  He  of  course.  For  this  very  reason  you
ought  not  to  look  like  a  simpleton.

OCT.  I  shall  pluck  up  a  little  more  resolution,  and  I
shall  answer  with  firmness.

SCA.  Are  you  sure?

OCT.  I  am  sure.

SYL.  There  comes  your  father.

OCT.  Oh  Heaven  !    I  am  lost.7

SCENE  V. — SCAPIN,   SYLVESTER.

SCA.  Hullo,  Octave  !  stop,  Octave.    He  has  fled  !  What
a  poor  specimen  of  a  man  !  Let  us  wait  for  the  old  man.
SYL.  What  shall  I  say  to  him  ?
SCA.  Leave  it  to  me,  and  do  as  I  do.

SCENE   VI. — ARGANTE,   SCAPIN,  and   SYLVESTER,   at  the
farther  end  of  the  stage.

ARG.  {Believing  himself  alone).  Has  ever  the  like  been
heard  of  ?

SCA.  {To  Sylvester).  He  has  already  heard  of  the  affair;
and  it  so  runs  into  his  head,  that  he  speaks  aloud  of  it
when  alone.

ARG.  (Believing  himself  alone].  This  is  a  very  great
piece  of  audacity !

SCA.  (To  Sylvester}.     Let  us  listen  awhile.

ARG.  {Believing  himself  alone).  I  should  much  like
to  know  what  they  can  tell  me  about  this  lovely  marriage.

1  This  scene  is  taken  from  Terence,  but  is  much  shorter  in  the  Latin
dramatist.

1 6  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  i.

SCA.  (Aside).     We  have  already  thought  about  that.*

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  Will  they  try  to  deny
the  affair  ?

SCA.  (Aside).  No,  we  do  not  dream  of  such  a  thing.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone.)  Or  will  they  endea-
vour to  exonerate  themselves  ?

SCA.   (Aside).     Such  a  thing  might  be  done.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  Will  they  pretend  to
entertain  me  with  some  unlikely  stories  ?

SCA.  (Aside).     Perhaps  so.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone~).  All  their  speeches  will
be  useless.

SCA.  (Aside).  We  shall  see  about  that.8

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  They  shall  not  impose
upon  me.

SCA.   (Aside).  We  ought  not  to  swear  to  anything.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  I  shall  know  how  to
put  my  rascal  of  a  son  under  lock  and  key.

SCA.  (Aside).     We  shall  provide  for  that.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  And  as  for  this  scoun-
drel Sylvester,  I  shall  give  him  a  sound  thrashing.

SYL.  ( To  Scapin).  I  should  have  been  much  surprised
if  he  had  forgotten  me.

ARC.  (Perceiving  Sylvester).  Ah  !  Ah  !  you  are  there,
trustworthy  family  guardian,  conscientious  guide  of  young
men  !

SCA.  I  am  delighted  to  see  you  back  again,  sir.

ARC.  Good  day,  Scapin.  (To  Sylvester}.  You  have
really  carried  out  my  orders  in  a  nice  manner  !  and  my
son  has  behaved  very  properly  in  my  absence  !

SCA.  You  are  in  good  health,  from  what  I  see  ?

ARC.  Pretty  well.  (To  Sylvester).  You  have  nothing
to  say,  you  rascal,  nothing  at  all.

SCA.   Has  your  journey  been  a  pleasant  one  ?

ARC.  Pleasant  enough,  good  Heaven !  Let  me  have
my  quarrel  in  peace.

SCA.  You  wish  to  quarrel !

ARC.  Yes,  I  wish  to  quarrel.

SCA.  And  with  whom,  Sir  ?

8  This  is  borrowed  chiefly  from  Terence's  Phormio.

SCBNB  vi.]  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  1 7

ARC.  (Pointing  to  Sylvester).     With  this  scoundrel.

SCA.  And  why?

ARC.  Have  you  not  heard  what  has  happened  in  my
absence  ?

SCA.  I  have  heard  some  little  trifle  spoken  of.

ARC.  What !  some  little  trifle  !     An  affair  of  that  kind !

SCA.  You  are  somewhat  in  the  right.

ARG.  A  daring  like  this  \

SCA.   That  is  true.

ARG.  A  son  who  marries  without  the  consent  of  his
father  ?

SCA.  Yes,  there  is  something  to  be  said  in  that  respect.
But  I  would  advise  not  to  make  a  noise  about  it.

ARG.  I  am  not  at  all  of  this  opinion ;  and  I  will  make
as  much  noise  as  I  like.  What !  do  not  you  think  that  I
have  every  possible  reason  to  be  in  a  rage  ?

SCA.  Yes,  indeed.  I  was  so  myself  at  first,  when  I
came  to  know  of  it,  and  I  have  taken  your  part  so  far  as
to  quarrel  with  your  son.  Ask  him,  how  thoroughly  I
have  upbraided  him,  and  the  lesson  which  I  have  read  him
on  the  little  respect  he  showed  to  a  father  whose  footsteps
he  ought  to  kiss.  I  could  not  have  spoken  better  to  him,
had  I  been  yourself.  But  after  all !  I  have  come  back  to
reason,  and  I  have  reflected,  that  at  the  bottom,  he  is  not
so  much  to  blame  as  one  would  think.

ARG.  What  pretty  tale  is  this  ?  He  is  not  so  much  to
blame  to  go  and  get  married  point  blank  to  a  strange  girl  ?

SCA.  What  could  he  do  ?     He  was  led  to  it  by  his  fate.

ARG.  Ah  !  Ah  !  That  is  certainly  the  prettiest  reason
in  the  world.  One  has  only  to  commit  every  imaginable
crime,  to  cheat,  to  steal,  to  murder  and  to  say  in  excuse
that  one  was  led  to  it  by  one's  fate.

SCA.  Good  Heavens  !  you  take  my  words  in  too  philo-
sophical a  sense.  I  mean  to  say,  that  he  has  found  himself
fatally  entangled  in  this  affair.

ARG.  And  why  did  he  entangle  himself  in  it?

SCA.  Do  you  expect  him  to  be  as  wise  as  you  ?  Young
men  will  be  young  men,  and  have  not  all  the  prudence
necessary  to  keep  at  all  times  out  of  mischief:  witness
our  Leander,  who,  notwithstanding  all  my  lessons,  all  my
remonstrances,  has  gone,  and  done  very  much  worse  than

1 8  THE  ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  [ACT  t

your  son.  I  should  very  much  like  to  know  whether  you
yourself  have  not  been  young,  and  have  not,  in  your  time,
committed  follies  like  others.  I  have  heard  it  said  that,
in  by-gone  days,  you  were  a  regular  follower  of  the  ladies ;
that  you  held  your  own  with  the  most  gallant  of  that  time,
and  that  you  did  not  come  near  them  without  trying  your
utmost.

ARC.  That  is  true,  I  agree  to  that ;  bur  I  always  con-
fined myself  to  gallantry,  and  I  never  went  so  far  as  to  do
what  he  has  done.

SCA.  What  would  you  have  him  do  ?  He  sees  a  young
girl  who  looks  favourably  on  him  (for  he  takes  after  you
in  that,  and  is  well  looked  upon  by  every  woman) ;  he
finds  her  charming,  pays  her  visits,  whispers  sweet  nonsense
to  her,  sighs  gallantly,  tries  to  pass  for  a  passionate  lover.
She  yields  to  his  ardour ;  he  takes  advantage  of  his  good
luck.  Behold  him  caught  with  her  by  her  parents,  who,
by  compulsion,  oblige  him  to  marry  her.

SYL.  (Aside).  What  a  clever  rogue  this  !

SCA.  Would  you  have  preferred  him  to  allow  himself  to
be  killed  ?  It  is  better  to  be  married  than  to  be  dead.

ARG.  They  did  not  tell  me  that  the  affair  happened  thus.

SCA.  (Pointing  to  Sylvester).  Ask  him  if  you  like.  He
will  tell  you  nothing  to  the  contrary.

ARG.  (To  Sylvester).  Is  it  by  compulsion  that  he  was
married  ?

SYL.  Yes,  Sir.

SCA.  Would  I  tell  you  a  lie  ?

ARG.  He  ought  to  have  gone  then  to  a  notary  to  protest
against  this  violence.

SCA.  That  is  what  he  would  not  do.

ARG.  It  would  have  made  it  easier  for  me  to  annul  this
marriage.

SCA.  To  annul  this  marriage  ?

ARG.  Yes.

SCA.  You  will  not  annul  it.

ARG.  I  shall  not  annul  it,  say  you?

SCA.  No.

ARG.  What !  have  I  not  a  father's  rights  in  my  favour,
and  the  plea  of  the  violence  which  has  been  done  to  my
son?

SCENKV1.]  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  1 9

SCA.  Upon  this  point,  he  will  not  be  at  one  with  you.

ARG.  He  will  not  be  at  one  with  me  ?

SCA.   No.

ARG.   My  own  son  ?

SCA.  Your  own  son.  Would  you  have  him  confess  that
he  could  be  frightened,  and  that  it  was  by  force  that  they
have  made  him  do  those  things.  He  will  know  better
than  to  admit  that ;  it  would  be  wrong  to  himself,  and
proclaim  him  unworthy  of  a  father  like  you.

ARG.  I  do  not  care  for  that.

SCA.  It  is  necessary,  for  his  honour  and  for  yours,  that
he  say  in  society  that  he  has  married  her  of  his  own  free
will.

ARG.  And  I  desire,  I,  for  my  honour  and  for  his,  that
he  shall  say  the  reverse.  •

SCA.  No,  I  am  sure  he  will  not  do  so.

ARG.   I  shall  force  him  to  it.

SCA.   He  will  not  do  it,  I  tell  you.

ARG.  He  shall  do  it,  or  I  shall  disinherit  him.

SCA.  You?

ARG.  I.

SCA.  Good!

ARG.  What  do  you  mean  by  good  !

SCA.  You  will  not  disinherit  him.

ARG.   I  shall  not  disinherit  him  ?

SCA.   No.

ARG.  No?

SCA.  No.

ARG.  Aha !  that  is  a  good  joke  !  I  shall  not  disinherit
my  son  ?

SCA.  No,  I  tell  you.

ARG.  Who  shall  prevent  me?

SCA.  You,  yourself.

ARG.  I?

SCA.  Yes,  you  will  not  have  the  heart  to  do  it.

ARG.  I  shall.

SCA.  You  are  joking.

ARG.  I  am  not  joking  at  all.

SCA.  A  father's  feelings  will  perform  their  functions.

ARG.  They  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind.

SCA.  Yes,  yes.

2O  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  i.

ARC.  I  tell  you  that  it  shall  be.

SCA.  Nonsense.

ARC.  Do  not  say  that  it  is  nonsense.

SCA.  Good  Heavens !  I  know  you ;  you  are  naturally
good-hearted.

ARC.  I  am  not  at  all  good-natured,  and  I  can  be  very
spiteful  when  I  like.9  Let  us  drop  this  subject  which  pro-
vokes my  temper.  (To  Sylvester).  Go,  you  rascal,  go  and
fetch  my  scamp,  while  I  look  in  upon  Mr.  G6ronte,  to  tell
him  of  my  disgrace  ?

SCA.  Sir,  if  I  can  be  of  use  in  anything,  you  have  but
to  command.

ARC.  I  thank  you.  (Aside).  Ah !  why  should  he  be
an  only  son  !  and  why  have  I  not  at  this  hour  the  daugh-
ter of  whom  Heaven  has  deprived  me,  to  make  her  my
heiress.

SCENE  VII. — SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER.

SYL.  I  confess  that  you  are  a  great  man,  and  that  the
business  is  in  a  fair  way;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  we  are
urgently  pressed  for  money  for  our  wants;  and  on  all
sides  there  is  a  lot  of  people  barking  after  us.

SCA.  Let  me  manage  it,  the  trick  is  found.  I  am  only
seeking  in  my  own  mind  a  man  upon  whom  we  can  de-
pend to  impersonate  one  of  whom  I  am  in  want.  Wait.
Hold  yourself  up  a  little.  Slouch  your  cap  like  a  naughty
boy.  Put  one  leg  forward.  Put  your  hand  on  your  hip.
Just  look  ferocious.  Swagger  up  and  down  like  a  king  on
the  stage.  That  is  right.  Follow  me.  I  know  a  secret
to  disguise  your  face  and  voice.

SYL.  Let  me  beg  of  you,  at  least,  not  to  get  me  into  a
scrape  with  the  law.

SCA.  Be  not  afraid.  We  shall  share  the  danger  like
brothers ;  and  three  years  at  the  galleys  more  or  less  will
not  deter  a  noble  heart.

'  This  dialogue  from  "  I  shall  disinherit  him  "  until  "  when  I  like"  is
found  also  in  The  Imaginary  Invalid,  when  Argan  speaks  of  placing  his
daughter  in  a  convent.  Hence,  La  Grange,  and  Vinot,  the  first  editors  of
the  collected  works  of  Moliere,  ha\te  left  out  this  passage  in  The  Rogueries
ofScapin.

SCENE  I.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  21

ACT  II.

SCENE  I. — GERONTE,  ARGANTE.

GER.  Yes,  I  doubt  not,  if  this  weather  last,  we  shall
have  our  people  here  to-day;  and  a  sailor  who  came  from
Tarente  assures  me  that  he  has  seen  my  man  ready  to
embark.  But  the  arrival  of  my  daughter  will  find  things
in  an  unfavourable  state  for  what  we  proposed;  and  what
you  have  just  told  me  about  your  son  strangely  puts  an
end  to  the  measures  we  had  agreed  upon.

ARC.  Do  not  trouble  yourself  about  it ;  I  assure  you
that  I  shall  overthrow  this  obstacle,  and  I  shall  see  about
it  immediately.

GER.  Upon  my  word,  Mr.  Argante,  shall  I  tell  you?  the
bringing  up  of  children  is  a  thing  which  must  be  managed
with  a  firm  hand.

ARG.  Without  a  doubt.     What  do  you  mean,  though  ?

GER.  What  I  mean  is  this,  that  the  bad  conduct  of
young  people  is  most  frequently  caused  by  the  bad  edu-
cation which  their  fathers  have  given  them.

ARG.  This  happens  sometimes.  But  what  would  you
convey  by  this?

GER.  What  would  I  convey  by  this  ?

ARG.  Yes.

GER.  That  had  you,  as  a  strict  father,  kept  your  son
well  in  hand,  he  would  not  have  played  you  the  trick
which  he  has.

ARG.  Very  good.  Thus  you  have  kept  yours  better  in
hand?

GER.  There  is  no  doubt  of  it;  and  I  should  be  very
sorry  if  he  had  done  anything  like  this.

ARG.  And  if  this  son,  which,  as  a  strict  father,  you
have  kept  so  well  in  hand,  had  done  worse  still  than
mine?  Eh!

GER.   How?

ARG.  How?

GER.  What  does  that  mean  ?

ARG.  It  means,  Mr.  G6ronte,  that  one  must  not  be  too
quick  to  censure  the  conduct  of  others ;  and  that  those
who  are  fond  of  finding  fault  ought  to  look  first  at  home
to  see  if  there  be  nothing  wrong.

22  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  [ACT  H.

GER.  I  do  not  understand  this  riddle.

ARC.  It  shall  be  explained  to  you.

GER.  Have  you  perchance  heard  something  about  my
son?

ARC.  May  be.

GER.  And  what,  then  ?

ARC.  When  I  was  angry,  your  Scapin  told  me  the
affair  only  in  a  summary  way,  and  you  can  get  the  details
from  him,  or  from  some  one  else.  As  for  me,  I  am
going  quickly  to  consult  a  lawyer,  to  take  advice  about
the  means  which  I  have  to  use.  Till  by  and  by.

SCENE  II. — GERONTE,  alone.

GER.  What  can  this  affair  be  ?  Worse  still  than  his  ?
As  for  me,  I  cannot  see  that  one  could  do  worse  ;  and  I
think  that  to  marry  without  the  consent  of  one's  father  is
a  deed  that  excels  everything  imaginable.

SCENE  III. — GERONTE,  LEANDER.

GER.  Ah  !  here  you  are  !

LEA.  {Running  to  Geronte  to  embrace  hini}.  Ah !  father,
how  glad  I  am  to  see  you  back  again  !

GER.  {Refusing  to  embrace  Leander).  Gently.  A  little
business  first.

LEA.  Allow  me  to  embrace  you,  and  to  ...

GER.    (Still pushing  him  back}.  Gently,  I  tell  you.

LEA.  What,  father  !  you  refuse  me  to  show  you  my  joy
by  embracing  you  ?

GER.  Yes.  We  have  something  to  unravel  together.

LEA.   What  is  that  ?

GER.  Stand  straight,  that  I  may  look  you  in  the  face.

LEA.  What  is  the  matter  ?

GER.  Look  me  full  in  the  face.

LEA.  Well?

GER.  What  has  happened  here  ?

LEA.   Happened  here  ?

GER.  Yes.     What  have  you  done  in  my  absence  ?

LEA.  What  should  I  have  done,  father  ?

GER.  It  is  not  I  who  wish  to  have  done  something,  but
who  ask  what  you  have  been  doing  ?

SCKNBV.]  THE   ROGUERIES  OF   SCAPIN.  23

LEA.  I  ?  I  have  not  done  anything  of  which  you  have
cause  to  complain.

GER.  Not  anything  ?

LEA.   No.

GER.  You  are  very  firm.

LEA.  Because  I  am  perfectly  sure  of  my  innocence.

GER.  Scapin  has,  however,  told  me  some  news  about
you.

LEA.  Scapin  ?

GER.  Ah  !  ah  !  that  word  makes  you  blush.

LEA.  He  has  told  you  something  about  me  ?

GER.  This  is  not  at  all  the  proper  place  to  get  at  the
bottom  of  this  business,  and  we  shall  sift  it  elsewhere.
Go  home  ;  I  shall  be  back  there  presently.  Ah  !  wretch,
if  you  have  disgraced  me,  I  renounce  you  as  my  son,  and
you  can  make  your  mind  up  to  leave  my  presence  for
ever.

SCENE  IV. — LEANDER,  alone.

To  betray  me  in  this  manner.  A  scoundrel  who,  for  a
hundred  reasons,  ought  to  be  the  first  to  keep  secret  the
things  which  I  confide  to  him,  is  the  first  to  disclose  them
to  my  father.  Ah  !  I  swear  to  Heaven  that  his  treachery
shall  not  remain  unpunished.

SCENE  V. — OCTAVE,  LEANDER,  SCAPIN.

OCT.  My  dear  Scapin,  how  much  I  owe  to  your  cares  !
What  an  admirable  fellow  you  are !  and  how  good  has
Heaven  been  to  send  you  to  my  aid !

LEA.  Ah !  ah !  you  are  here  !  I  am  delighted  to  have
found  you,  Mr.  Rascal.

SCA.  Your  servant,  Sir.      You  do  me  too  much  honour.

LEA.  {Drawing  his  sword}.  You  play  the  saucy  fool.
Ah  !  I  shall  teach  you.  .  .  .

SCA.   {Falling  on  his  knees).     Sir  !

OCT.  (Coming  between  them  to  prevent  Leander  striking
Scapin).  Ah  !  Leander  !

LEA.  No,  Octave,  do  not  hold  me  back,  pray.

SCA.  {To  Leander}.  Eh!  Sir!

OCT.  (Holding  Leander  back).     For  mercy's  sake  !

LEA.  (  Wishing  to  strike  Scapin).  Let  me  satisfy  my  re-
sentment.

24  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  f ACT  n.

OCT.  For  friendship's  sake,  Leander,  do  not  ill-treat
him.

SCA.  What  have  I  done  to  you,  Sir  ?

LEA.  (  Wishing  to  strike  Scapin).  What  have  you  done
to  me,  you  wretch  !

OCT.  (Holding  Leander  again  back) .     Eh  !     Gently.

LEA.  No,  Octave,  I  wish  to  make  him  confess  the
treachery  which  he  has  practised  on  me  just  now.  Yes,
you  scoundrel,  I  know  the  trick  which  you  have  played
me ;  I  have  just  been  told  of  it,  and  you  did  not  think
perhaps  that  this  secret  would  be  revealed  to  me;  but  I
shall  have  the  confession  from  your  own  mouth,  or  I  shall
pass  this  sword  through  your  body.

SCA.  Ah,  Sir,  would  you  have  the  heart  to  do  this  ?

LEA.  Speak  then.

SCA.  Have  I  done  anything  to  you,  Sir  ?

LEA.  Yes,  you  scoundrel,  and  your  conscience  tells  you
but  too  plainly  what  it  is.

SCA.  I  assure  you  that  I  am  ignorant  of  it.

LEA.  (Advancing  to  strike  Scapin).  You  are  ignorant
of  it?

OCT.  (Holding  Leander  back}.     Leander!

SCA.  Well !  Sir,  since  you  will  have  it  so,  I  will  confess
that  I  and  my  friends  have  drunk  that  small  quarter  cask
of  Spanish  wine  which  you  had  as  a  present  a  few  days
ago ;  and  that  I  made  a  slit  in  the  barrel,  and  spilt  some
water  around  to  make  you  believe  that  the  wine  had  run
out.

LEA.  It  is  you,  you  gallows-bird,  who  have  drunk  my
Spanish  wine,  and  who  have  been  the  cause  of  my  scold-
ing the  servant,  thinking  it  was  she  who  had  played  me
that  trick  ?

SCA.  Yes,  Sir.     I  ask  your  pardon  for  it.

LEA.  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  this.  But  that  is  not  the
affair  in  question  at  present.

SCA.  It  is  not  that,  Sir.

LEA.  No :  it  is  something  else  which  concerns  me  much
more,  and  I  will  have  you  tell  me.

SCA.  I  do  not  remember  having  done  aught  else,  Sir.

LGA.  (  Wishing  to  strike  Scapin).     You  will  not  tell  me  ?

SCA.  Tell  what  ?

SCBNK  T.I  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  25

OCT.  (Holding  Leander).     Gently  !

SCA.  Well,  Sir,  it  is  true  that  three  weeks  ago  you  sent
me  one  evening  to  take  a  little  watch  to  the  young  gipsy
whom  you  love.  I  came  back  to  the  house,  my  clothes
covered  with  mud,  and  my  face  bleeding,  and  I  told  you
that  I  had  been  attacked  by  thieves  who  had  beaten  me
well,  and  stolen  the  watch.  It  was  myself  who  kept  it,
Sir.

LEA.  It  is  you  who  have  kept  my  watch  ?

SCA.   Yes,  Sir,  to  see  what  o'clock  it  is.

LEA.  Ah  !  Ah  1  these  are  pretty  things  to  find  out,  and
I  have  a  very  trusty  servant,  certainly  !  But  it  is  not  even
about  that  that  I  am  inquiring.

SCA.  It  is  not  that  ?

LEA.  No,  you  infamous  wretch ;  there  is  something  else
that  I  wish  you  to  confess  to  me.

SCA.   (Aside).     The  plague  take  it !

LEA.  Out  with  it,  quick,  I  am  in  a  hurry.

SCA.  This  is  all  that  I  have  done,  Sir.

LEA.  (  Wishing  to  strike  Scapiri).     Is  that  all  ?

OCT.  (Getting  in  front  of  Leander].     Ah!

SCA.  Well !  yes,  Sir.  You  remember  that  ghost,  six
months  ago,  who  dealt  you  such  a  lot  of  cudgel-blows  in
the  night,  and  nearly  made  you  break  your  neck  in  a  cel-
lar in  which  you  fell,  running  away.

LEA.  Well?

SCA.  It  was  I,  Sir,  who  played  the  ghost.

LEA.  It  was  you  who  played  the  ghost,  you  wretch  ?

SCA.  Yes,  Sir,  I  did  it  only  to  frighten  you,  and  to  pre-
vent you  from  letting  us  gad  about  every  night  as  you  did.

LEA.  I  shall  remember,  at  fit  time  and  place,  all  that  I
have  just  learned.  But  I  wish  to  come  to  the  fact,  and
have  you  to  confess  what  you  have  been  saying  to  my
father.

SCA.  To  your  father?

LEA.  Yes,  you  rascal,  to  my  father.

SCA.  I  have  not  even  seen  him  since  his  return.

LEA.  You  have  not  seen  him  ?

SCA.  No,  Sir.

LEA.  Are  you  sure?

SCA.  Quite  sure.     I  can  make  him  tell  you  so  himself.

26  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  n.

LEA.  It  is  from  himself  that  I  have  got  it.

SCA.  By  your  leave,  he  has  not  spoken  the  truth.

SCENE  VI. — LEANDER,  OCTAVE,  CARLOS,  SCAPIN.

CAR.  I  am  the  bearer  of  some  news,  Sir,  which  is  ill-
fated  to  your  love.

LEA.  How  so?

CAR.  The  gipsies  are  on  the  point  of  carrying  away
Zerbinette ;  and  she  herself,  with  tears  in  her  eyes,  has
charged  me  to  come  and  tell  you  quickly,  that  if  within
two  hours,  you  do  not  bring  them  the  money  which  they
claim  for  her,  you  will  lose  her  for  ever.

LEA.  In  two  hours  ?

CAR.  In  two  hours.

SCENE  VII. — LEANDER,  OCTAVE,  SCAPIN.

LEA.  Ah  ?  my  good  Scapin,  I  implore  you  to  help  me.

SCA.   (Passing  haughtily  before  JLeander}.  Ah,  my  good
Scapin  !     I  am  my  good  Scapin  now  that  you  need  me.
.    LEA.   Come,  I  forgive  you  for  all  you  have  said  to  me,
and  for  worse  still,  if  you  have  done  it  to  me.

SCA.  Not  at  all,  not  at  all,  do  not  forgive  me  anything;
run  your  sword  through  my  body  ;  I  shall  be  delighted  to
be  killed  by  you.

LEA.  No.  I  rather  beg  of  you  to  give  me  my  life,  by
helping  me  with  my  love.

SCA.  Not  so,  not  so ;  you  had  better  kill  me.

LEA.  You  are  too  precious  to  me ;  and  I  beseech  you
to  be  willing  to  employ  for  me  that  admirable  talent  of
yours  that  overcomes  all  things.

SCA.  No,  kill  me,  I  tell  you.

LEA.  Ah  !  for  mercy's  sake,  think  no  more  about  it,
and  set  your  wits  to  work  to  give  me  the  help  which  I  ask
from  you.

OCT.  Scapin,  you  must  do  something  for  him.

SCA.  How  can  I,  after  such  an  outrage.

LEA.  I  beg  of  you  to  forget  my  passion,  and  to  use  your
skill  for  me.

OCT.  I  add  my  prayers  to  his.

SCA.  I  have  that  insult  still  on  my  mind.

OCT.  You  must  forego  your  resentment.

SCENE  vii.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  27

LEA.  Would  you  leave  me,  Scapin,  in  this  cruel  plight
in  which  my  love  finds  itself?

SCA.  To  come  and  insult  me  unawares  in  that  way?

LEA.  I  am  in  the  wrong,  I  admit.

SCA.  To  call  me  a  scoundrel,  a  rascal,  a  gallows-bird,
an  infamous  wretch !

LEA.    I  regret  it  with  all  my  heart.

SCA.  To  wish  to  run  his  sword  through  my  body  !

LEA.  I  beg  your  pardon  for  it  from  the  bottom  of  my
heart ;  and  if  nothing  will  satisfy  you  but  to  see  me  on
my  knees  beseeching  you  once  more  not  to  abandon  me,
I  will  do  so.

OCT.  Ah !  upon  my  word,  Scapin,  you  ought  to  give
way  now.

SCA.  Rise.     The  next  time  do  not  be  so  hasty.

LEA.  Will  you  promise  me  to  set  to  work  for  me  ?

SCA.  We  will  think  about  it.

LEA.  But  time  presses,  as  you  know.

SCA.  Do  not  trouble  yourself  about  it.  How  much  do
you  want  ?

LEA.  Five  hundred  crowns.

SCA.  And  you?

OCT.  Two  hundred  pistoles.

SCA.  I  shall  draw  this  money  from  your  parents.  (To
Octave).  As  for  yours,  the  train  is  already  laid.  (To
Leander).  And,  as  regards  yours,  though  miserly  to  the
last  degree,  it  will  cost  far  less  trouble  still ;  for,  as  to  wit,
you  know,  Heaven  be  praised,  that  he  has  not  got  a  very
great  stock ;  and  I  think  him  a  sort  of  man  who  will  be-
lieve anything  which  you  tell  him.  This  without  offence
to  you ;  for  there  is  not  the  slightest  similarity  between
him  and  you ;  and  you  know  full  well  the  opinion  of  every
one,  that  he  is  your  father  only  for  form's  sake.

LEA.  Gently,  Scapin  !

SCA.  All  right,  one  does  not  mind  that !  Are  you  jest-
ing ?  But  I  see  Octave's  father  coming.  Let  us  begin
with  him,  since  he  comes  to  us.  Get  you  both  away.  (To
Octave).  And  you,  tell  your  Sylvester  to  come  quickly  to
play  his  part.

28  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACTII.

SCENE  VIII. — ARGANTE,  SCAPIN.

SCA.  (Aside).     He  is  chewing  the  cud.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone).  To  have  so  little  de-
cency and  consideration.  To  rush  headlong  into  an  en-
gagement like  this  !  Ah !  Ah !  impertinent  youth.

SCA.  Your  servant,  Sir.

ARC.  Good  day,  Scapin.

SCA.  You  are  thinking  about  this  affair  of  your  son  ?

ARC.  I  tell  you  candidly  that  it  puts  me  out  greatly.

ARC.  Life  is  bestrewed  with  crosses,  Sir;  it  is  as  well  to
be  always  prepared  for  them ;  and  I  always  bear  in  mind
the  saying  of  an  ancient,  which  I  heard  a  long  time  ago.

ARG.  What  is  it  ?

SCA.  That  when  a  father  of  a  family  has  been  away  from
home  for  some  time,  he  ought  to  let  his  mind  run  on  all
the  sad  accidents  which  he  may  meet  on  his  return  ;  ought
to  fancy  his  house  burned  down,  his  money  stolen,  hia
wife  dead,  his  son  maimed,  his  daughter  corrupted ;  and
whenever  one  of  these  things  has  not  happened,  impute  it
to  his  good  luck.  As  for  me,  I  have  always  practised  this
lesson  in  my  little  philosophy ;  and  I  have  never  returned
home  without  holding  myself  ready  for  the  anger  of  my
masters,  their  abuse,  their  insults,  their  kicks,  their  whacks,
their  thrashings ;  and  whenever  I  have  had  less,  I  have
thanked  my  stars  for  it.10

ARG.  This  is  all  very  well;  but  this  impertinent  mar-
riage, which  interferes  with  the  one  which  we  wish  to
contract,  is  a  thing  which  I  cannot  bear,  and  I  have  just
consulted  lawyers  to  undo  it.

SCA.  In  truth,  Sir,  if  you  take  my  advice,  you  will  try,
by  some  other  means,  to  arrange  this  affair.  You  know
what  law-suits  are  in  this  country,  and  you  will  get  your-
self into  some  strange  difficulties.

ARG.  You  are  right,  I  see  that  well  enough.  But  what
other  way  is  there  ?

SCA.  I  think  that  I  have  found  one.  The  sympathy
evoked  by  your  sorrow  just  now,  has  made  me  consider
about  some  means  of  quieting  your  uneasiness ;  for  I  do
not  like  to  see  honest  fathers  vexed  by  their  children,

10  This  speech  of  Scapin  is  again  borrowed  from  Terence.

SCENE   viii.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  29

without  feeling  for  them;  and  I  have  at  all  times  been  par-
ticularly fond  of  you.

ARG.  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you.

SCA.  I  have  been  therefore  to  see  the  brother  of  this
girl  who  has  been  married.  He  is  one  of  those  fire-eaters
by  profession,  those  people  who  are  all  cut  and  thrust,  who
talk  of  nothing  else  than  slashing,  and  who  make  no  more
ado  about  killing  a  man  than  about  swallowing  a  glass  of
wine.  I  have  got  him  to  speak  about  this  marriage,  have
shown  him  the  facility,  offered  by  his  own  violence,  to
undo  it,  your  prerogatives  as  a  father,  and  the  support  you
would  receive  from  the  law  by  reason  of  your  right,  your
money,  and  your  friends.  In  short,  I  have  so  turned  him
about  on  all  sides,  that  he  has  listened  to  the  proposals
which  I  have  made  to  him  to  settle  the  matter  for  a  certain
sum ;  and  he  will  give  his  consent  to  annul  the  marriage,
provided  you  give  him  the  money.

ARG.  And  what  did  he  require?

SCA.  Oh  !    everything  preposterous,  at  first.

ARG.  And  what  ?

SCA.   Extravagant  things.

ARG.   But  what,  pray  ?

SCA.  He  talked  of  no  less  than  five  or  six  hundred
pistoles.

ARG.  Five  or  six  hundred  quartan  fevers  to  make  an  end
of  him  !  Is  he  jesting  ?

SCA.  That  is  what  I  told  him.  I  utterly  rejected  all
such  proposals,  and  I  plainly  gave  him  to  understand  that
you  were  not  a  dupe,  to  ask  you  for  five  or  six  hundred
pistoles.  At  last,  after  a  great  deal  of  talk,  this  is  the
result  of  our  conference.  The  time  draws  near,  said  he  to
me,  that  I  must  set  out  for  the  army ;  I  am  busy  about  my
outfit,  and  the  need  which  I  have  of  some  money  makes
me  consent,  in  spite  of  myself,  to  what  is  proposed  to  me.
I  want  a  troop-horse,  and  I  cannot  have  one,  ever  so
middling,  for  less  than  sixty  pistoles.

ARG.  Very  well !    for  sixty  pistoles,  I  will  give  them.

SCA.  Then  the  accoutrements  and  the  pistols;  and
that  will  amount  at  least  to  twenty  pistoles  more.

ARG.  Twenty  pistoles  and  sixty  make  fourscore.

SCA.  Exactly.

30  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  u

ARC.  It  is  a  good  deal :  but  be  it  so.     I  consent  to  this.

SCA.  He  must  also  have  a  horse  for  his  servant,  which
will  cost  at  least  thirty  pistoles.

ARG.  What  the  deuce !  Let  him  go  on  foot ;  he  shall
have  nothing  at  all.

SCA.  Sir!

ARG.  No  :  he  is  an  impertinent  fellow.

SCA.  Would  you  have  his  servant  go  on  foot  ?

ARG.  Let  him  go  as  he  likes,  and  the  master  also.

SCA.  Good  Heaven,  Sir,  do  not  stop  short  at  such  a
trifle.  Do  not  go  to  law,  Sir,  I  beg  you;  and  sooner
give  it  all,  to  keep  clear  from  its  hands.

ARG.  Very  well  then ;  I  am  ready  to  give  also  the  thirty
pistoles.

SCA.  He  wants,  besides,  so  he  says,  a  mule  to  carry  .  .  .

ARG.  Let  him  go  to  the  devil  with  his  mule  !  It  is  too
much ;  and  we  shall  go  before  the  judges.

SCA.  For  mercy's  sake,  Sir  .    .    .

ARG.  No,  I  shall  do  nothing  at  all.

SCA.  A  tiny  mule,  Sir.

ARG.  I  shall  not  give  him  as  much  as  an  ass.

SCA.  Consider  .    .    .

ARG.  No,  I  prefer  going  to  law.

SCA.  Oh,  Sir,  what  are  you  talking  about,  and  what  a
resolution  to  take  ?  Just  cast  your  eyes  upon  the  ins  and
outs  of  the  laws.  Just  think  how  many  appeals  and
degrees  of  jurisdiction;  how  many  vexatious  proceedings;
how  many  delightful  animals,  through  whose  claws  you
will  have  to  pass :  sergeants,  attorneys,  counsels,  registrars,
substitutes,  reporters,  judges,  and  their  clerks.  Not  one
of  those  folks  but  who  will  oppose  the  most  straightfor-
ward case  in  the  world  for  the  merest  trifle.  A  bailiff11
will  serve  you  with  forged  deeds,  upon  which  you  shall  be
condemned  without  your  knowing  it.  Your  attorney  will
come  to  terms  with  the  other  side,  and  sell  you  for  ready
cash.  Your  counsel,  won  over  in  the  same  manner,  will
be  wanting  when  your  cause  has  to  be  pleaded,  or  adduce
reasons  that  shall  only  beat  about  the  bush,  but  not  go
home  to  the  facts.  The  registrar  will  deliver  sentence

11  The  original  has  sergeant.

SCBNKVIII.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  3!

and  judgment  against  you  in  your  absence.  The  clerk  of
the  reporter  will  make  away  with  documents,  or  the
reporter  himself  will  deny  what  he  has  seen  ;  and  when,
with  the  utmost  precautions,  you  shall  have  parried  all
this,  you  will  be  astonished  to  find  that  your  judges  have
been  prejudiced  against  you,  either  by  some  pious  people,
or  by  the  ladies  with  whom  they  are  in  love.  Oh  !  Sir,
if  it  be  in  your  power,  keep  out  of  this  hell.  It  is  to  be
damned  already  in  this  world,  to  have  to  plead ;  and  the
mere  notion  of  a  law-suit  would  be  enough  to  make  me
fly  as  far  as  the  Indies.12

ARC.  And  at  how  much  does  he  reckon  this  mule?

SCA.  For  the  mule,  Sir,  for  the  horse,  and  that  of  his
man,  for  the  accoutrements  and  pistols,  and  to  pay  a
little  bill  which  he  owes  his  landlady,  he  asks  in  all  two
hundred  pistoles.

ARG.  Two  hundred  pistoles  ?

SCA.  Yes.

ARG.  {Walking  about  in  a  passion).  Never,  never;  we
shall  go  to  law.

SCA.  Reflect  .    .    .

ARG.  I  shall  go  to  law.

SCA.   Do  not  throw  yourself  .    .    .

ARG.  I  shall  go  to  law.

SCA.  But  to  go  to  law,  you  want  money.  You  must
have  money  for  the  summons  ;  money  for  the  registration ;
money  for  the  letter  of  attorney ;  money  for  appearance,
counsel,  evidence,  and  solicitors'  fees.  Some  will  go  for
the  consultations  and  the  pleadings  of  the  barristers  ;  for
the  right  of  redemption,  and  for  engrossing  copies  of  the
case.  You  will  want  money  for  the  reports  of  substitutes,
for  the  sweetmeats  at  the  end  of  the  trial,13  for  the  regis-
tration of  the  verdict,  the  form  of  decree,  sentence,
arrests,  revision,  the  signing  and  countersigning  of  their
clerks,  without  reckoning  the  presents  which  you  will

"This  picture  of  the  vexations  of  a  lawsuit  in  Moliere's  time  is  not
much  exaggerated.

1S  The  original  has  epices,  spices,  because  formerly  those  who  had  a
lawsuit  gave  sweetmeats  to  the  judges,  to  thank  them  for  having  gained
their  suit,  and  because  spices  were  employed  instead  of  sugar  before  India
was  discovered.  These  epices,  which  were  at  first  voluntary,  became
afterwards  a  compulsory  tax,  which  was  paid  in  money.

32  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  n.

have  to  make.  Give  this  money  to  that  man,  and  the
affair  is  at  end.

ARG.  What  !  two  hundred  pistoles  !

SCA.  Yes.  You  will  be  a  gainer  by  it.  I  have  made  a
little  calculation,  mentally,  of  all  the  law  charges ;  and  I
have  found  that  by  giving  two  hundred  pistoles  to  your
man,  you  will  be  the  gainer  by  at  least  a  hundred  and
fifty,  without  counting  the  anxiety,  the  going  hither  and
thither,  and  the  bother  you  shall  save  yourself.  Were  it
for  nothing  else  than  to  have  to  put  up  with  the  insults
which  those  sorry  waggish  barristers  say  to  one  in  public,
I  would  sooner  give  three  hundred  pistoles  than  go  to
law.

ARG.  I  do  not  care  for  that,  and  I  defy  the  lawyers  to
say  anything  against  me.

SCA.  You  shall  do  as  you  please ;  but  if  I  were  you,  I
should  fight  shy  of  law-suits.

ARG.  I  shall  not  give  two  hundred  pistoles.

SCA.   Here  comes  the  very  man  we  are  speaking  of.  "

SCENE  IX. — ARGANTE,  SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER,  disguised  as  a
swash-buckler.

SYL.  I  say,  Scapin,  just  show  me  this  Argante,  the  fa-
ther of  Octave.

SCA.   Why,  Sir?

SYL.  I  have  just  been  told  that  he  wishes  to  go  to  law
with  me,  and  by  the  law  annul  my  sister's  marriage.

SCA.  I  do  not  know  if  he  intends  to  do  so ;  but  he  cer-
tainly does  not  consent  to  give  the  two  hundred  pistoles
which  you  desire ;  he  says  it  is  too  much.

SYL.  'Sdeath,  blood  and  wounds,15  if  I  find  him  I  shall
thrash  him  unmercifully,  were  I  to  be  racked  on  the  wheel
for  it  afterwards.  (Argante,  for  fear  of  being  seen,  stands

trembling  behind  Scapin.

SCA.  Let  me  tell  you,  Sir,  that  this  father  of  Octave  has
some  courage,  and  will  perhaps  not  be  at  all  afraid  of
you.

14  This  is  again  partly  borrowed  from  Terence.
16  The  original  has  far  la  tete  !  par  la  ventrt  I

SCKNK  ix-1  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  33

SYL.  What!  he?  he?  blood  and  thunder  ! 18  if  he  were
here,  I  would  give  him  at  once  a  taste  of  my  sword  in  his
belly.  (Perceiving  Argante).  Who  is  this  man?

SCA.  It  is  not  he,  Sir ;  it  is  not  he.

SYL.  But  perhaps  it  is  one  of  his  friends.

SCA.  No,  Sir ;  on  the  contrary,  it  is  his  greatest  enemy.

SYL.  His  greatest  enemy  ?

SCA.  Yes.

SYL.  Ah!  forsooth!  I  am  glad  of  it.  {To  Argante}.
Are  you  an  enemy  of  this  mean  rascal  of  an  Argante,  Sir  ?
Eh?

SCA.  Yes,  yes ;  I  can  answer  for  that.

SYL.  (Shaking  Argante' s  hand  violently}.  Grasp  it,  shake
hands.  I  give  you  my  word  and  pledge  you  my  honour,
by  the  sword  which  I  wear,  by  all  the  oaths  which  I  could
swear,  that  before  the  day  is  out  I  shall  rid  you  of  this  ar-
rant knave,  this  mean  scoundrel  of  an  Argante.  Trust  to
me.

SCA.  Violence  is  not  tolerated  in  this  country,  Sir.

SYL.  I  do  not  care  a  rap,  and  I  have  nothing  to  lose.

SCA.  He  will  be  on  his  guard,  you  may  depend ;  and  he
has  got  relatives,  friends  and  servants,  who  will  guard  him
against  your  resentment.

SYL.  Zounds !  that  is  all  I  ask,  that  is  all  that  I  ask  for.
(Drawing  his  Sword}.  Death  and  blood  !  Why  is  he  not
here  with  all  his  guard  !  Why  does  he  not  appear  before
me  surrounded  by  thirty  persons  !  Why  does  he  not  rush
down  upon  me,  arms  in  hand  !  (Standing  upon  his  guard).
Ah !  you  knaves,  you  have  the  audacity  to  attack  me.
Ah  !  Zounds  !  kill.  (Parrying  on  every  side,  as  if  he  had
several  people  to  deal  with).  No  quarter  !  Advance.  Stand
firm.  Push  on  !  A  sure  foot,  a  quick  eye.  Ah !  you
scoundrels,  you  scum  !  that  is  what  you  want !  You  shall
have  plenty  of  it.  Stand  firm,  you  knaves,  stand  firm.
Come  on.  Parry  this  thrust,  and  that  one  !  ( Turning
towards  Scapin  and  Argante}.  And  this  one.  And  that

16  The  original  has  par  la  sang,  par  la  tete.  Ventre  and  sang  are  mas-
culine, but  here  is  understood  par  la  vertu  de.  and  the  whole  oath  was/ar
la  vertu  du  sang^  or  du  ventre  de  Diett.  I  have  thought  it  needless  to  give
a  literal  translation  of  these  blasphemies.

34  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  [ACT  it

one.     What,  you  draw  back !     Stand  firm,  zounds,  stand
firm  ! "

SCA.  Eh  !  eh !  eh  !  Sir,  we  do  not  belong  to  them.

SYL.  That  will  teach  you  to  dare  to  meddle  with  me.

SCENE  X. — ARGANTE,  SCAPIN.

SCA.  Well  now !  you  see  how  many  persons  would  be
killed  for  two  hundred  pistoles.  After  this,  I  wish  you
good  luck.

ARC.  {Trembling  all  over).   Scapin  !

SCA.   If  you  please  ?

ARC.  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  give  the  two  hundred
pistoles.

SCA.  I  am  glad  of  it  for  your  sake.

ARG.  Let  us  go  and  find  him ;  I  have  got  them  with  me.

SCA.  You  have  only  to  hand  them  to  me.  You  cannot,
for  your  own  honour,  show  yourself  to  him,  after  having
passed  in  this  place  for  some  other  person  than  you  really
are ;  and  besides,  I  should  fear  that,  revealing  yourself  to
him,  he  might  take  it  into  his  head  to  ask  for  more.

ARG.  Yes ;  but  I  should  be  glad  to  see  how  I  part  with
my  money.

SCA.  Do  you  mistrust  me  ?

ARG.   It  is  not  that,  but  .    .    .

SCA.  Forsooth,  Sir,  I  am  a  rogue,  I  am,  or  an  honest
man ;  one  of  the  two.  Do  you  think  I  would  deceive  you,
and  that,  in  all  this,  I  have  aught  else  at  heart  than  your
interest  and  that  of  my  master,  to  whom  you  wish  to  be
allied  ?  If  you  suspect  me,  I  meddle  no  more  with  any-
thing, and,  from  this  moment,  you  may  look  for  some  one
to  arrange  your  affairs.

ARG.  Take  them.

SCA.  No,  Sir,  do  not  intrust  your  money  to  me.  I  shall
be  very  glad  if  you  would  employ  some  one  else.18

ARG.  Good  Heavens  !  take  it.

SCA.  No,  I  tell  you,  do  not  trust  yourself  to  me.  Who
knows  but  what  I  might  wish  to  swindle  you  out  of  your
money?

1T  A  similar  scene  has  been  employed  by  the  actor  and  dramatist  Rosi-
mond,  in  his  Dupe  in  Love,  performed  in  1670.
*8  This  is  from  Plautus'  Bacchis.

SCKNK  xi.]  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  35

ARG.  Take  it,  I  tell  you  ;  do  not  let  me  have  to  squabble
any  longer.  But  be  sure  to  take  good  guarantees  from
him.

SCA.  Let  me  manage  it ;  he  has  not  a  fool  to  deal  with.

ARG.  I  shall  wait  for  you  at  my  house.

SCA.  I  shall  not  fail  to  be  there.  (Alone],  That  is  one.
I  have  only  to  look  for  the  other.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,
here  he  is.  It  seems  that  Providence  brings  them  into  my
net,  one  after  another.

SCENE  XI. — GERONTE,  SCAPIN.

SCA.  {Pretending  not  to  see  Geronte).  Oh  Heavens !
Oh  unlooked-for  misfortune  !  Oh  wretched  father  !  Poor
Geronte,  what  will  you  do  ?

GER.  {Aside}.  What  is  he  saying  about  me,  with  that
sorrowful  face  ?

SCA.  Is  there  no  one  to  tell  me  where  I  can  find  M.
Geronte  ?

GER.   What  is  the  matter,  Scapin  ?

SCA.  {Running  about  the  stage,  and  pretending  not  to  see
nor  hear  Geronte).  Where  can  I  find  him,  to  tell  him  of
this  misfortune  ?

GER.   {Stopping  Scapin).     What  is  it?

SCA.   In  vain  do  I  run  everywhere  to  find  him.

GER.   Here  I  am.

SCA.  He  must  be  hiding  in  some  place  which  no  one
can  discover.

GER.  {Stopping  Scapin).  Hullo  !  are  you  blind  that
you  cannot  see  me  ?

SCA.  Oh !   Sir,  I  could  not  meet  you  anywhere.

GER.  I  have  been  standing  in  front  of  you  for  nearly
an  hour.  What  has  happened?

SCA.   Sir  ...

GER.  What?

SCA.   Your  son,  Sir  .    .    .

GER.   Well  !   my  son  .    .    .

SCA.   Has  met  with  the  strangest  accident  in  the  world.

GER.  What  is  it  ?

SCA.  A  short  time  ago  I  met  him  looking  so  very  sad
about  something  that  you  had  told  him,  and  in  which  you
have  unreasonably  enough  mixed  up  my  name ;  and  trying

36  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  11.

to  raise  his  low  spirits,  we  went  to  take  a  row  in  the  har-
bour. There,  amongst  several  other  things,  our  eyes  were
attracted  by  a  Turkish  galley,  tolerably  well  equipped.  A
young  Turk  with  a  pleasant  face,  invited  us  to  come  on
board,  and  held  out  his  hand  to  us.  We  went.  He
showed  us  a  thousand  civilities,  offered  us  a  lunch,  where
we  ate  the  most  excellent  fruit,  that  can  be  found,  and
drank  the  finest  wine  in  the  world.

GER.  What  is  there  so  very  grievous  in  all  this  ?

SCA.  Stay  a  minute,  Sir,  I  am  coming  to  it.  While  we
were  eating,  he  put  the  galley  out  to  sea ;  and,  finding
himself  far  enough  from  the  port,  he  had  me  put  into  a
boat,  and  sent  me  to  tell  you  that,  if  you  do  not  send  him
through  me,  immediately,  five  hundred  crowns,  he  will
carry  your  son  away  to  Algiers.

GER.  What,  the  deuce  !  five  hundred  crowns  !

SCA.  Yes,  Sir,  and  what  is  more,  he  has  only  given  me
two  hours  to  find  them.

GER.  Ah  !  the  gallows-bird  of  a  Turk  !  to  murder  me  in
this  manner.

SCA.  It  remains  with  you,  Sir,  to  take  prompt  measures
to  save  from  slavery  a  son  whom  you  so  tenderly  love.

GER.  What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?

SCA.  He  did  not  dream  of  what  would  happen.

GER.  Go,  Scapin,  go  quickly,  and  tell  this  Turk  that  I
shall  send  the  authorities  after  him.

SCA.  The  authorities  on  the  open  sea !  do  you  wish  to
make  fools  of  people  ?

GER.  What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?

SCA.  An  adverse  fate  often  leads  people.

GER.  You  must,  Scapin,  you  must  show  yourself  now  a
faithful  servant.

SCA.  How  so,  Sir  ?

GER.  By  going  to  tell  this  Turk  to  send  me  back  my
son,  and  by  putting  yourself  in  his  place,  until  I  can  raise
the  sum  which  he  asks.

SCA.  Eh  !  Sir,  do  you  know  what  you  are  saying?  and
do  you  imagine  that  this  Turk  will  have  so  little  sense  as
to  receive  a  poor  wretch  like  me  as  a  substitute  for  your
son  ?

GER.  What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley?

SCENE  xi.]  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  37

SCA.  He  did  not  dream  of  such  a  misfortune.  Remem-
ber, Sir,  that  he  has  given  me  only  two  hours.

GER.  He  wants,  you  say   .    .    .

SCA.  Five  hundred  crowns.

GER.  Five  hundred  crowns  !  Has  he  no  conscience  ?

SCA.  That  is  good  ;  a  Turk  a  conscience  !

GER.   Does  he  know  what  five  hundred  crowns  means  ?

SCA.  Indeed  he  does,  Sir ;  he  knows  that  it  is  fifteen
hundred  livres.

GER.  Does  he  think,  the  villain,  that  fifteen  hundred
livres  are  so  easily  to  be  found  ?

SCA.  They  are  people  who  do  not  understand  reason.

GER.  But  what  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?

SCA.  True.  But  after  all,  one  cannot  foresee  these
things.  Pray,  Sir,  make  haste.

GER.     Look  here,  there  is  the  key  of  my  cupboard.

SCA.     Good.

GER.     You  go  and  open  it.

SCA.     Very  good.

GER.  You  will  find  a  large  key  on  the  left  hand  side,
which  is  the  one  of  the  garret.

SCA.     Yes.

GER.  You  will  take  all  the  clothes  which  are  in  that
large  basket,  and  go  and  sell  them  to  the  old  clothes-men
to  redeem  my  son.

SCA.  [Handing  him  back  the  key].  Are  you  dreaming,
Sir?  The  whole  of  which  you  speak  will  not  fetch  a
hundred  francs ;  and  besides,  you  know  the  little  time  he
has  given  me.

GER.     But  what  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley?

SCA.  Oh  !  What  a  waste  of  words.  Leave  that  galley
alone,  and  remember  that  time  flies,  and  that  you  run  the
risk  of  losing  your  son.  Alas  !  my  poor  master  !  perhaps
I  shall  never  set  eyes  on  you  again  while  I  live,  and  at  this
very  moment  they  are  carrying  you  away  to  Algiers  as  a
slave.  But  Heaven  is  my  witness  that  I  have  done  all  that
I  could  for  you,  and  that,  if  you  are  not  bought  off,  noth-
ing but  the  want  of  fatherly  affection  is  to  blame.

GER.     Stay,  Scapin,  I  will  go  and  fetch  that  money.

SCA.  Be  quick  about  it,  Sir ;  I  tremble  to  hear  the
hour  strike.

38  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  n.

GER.     Did  you  not  say  four  hundred  crowns  ?

SCA.     No  :  five  hundred  crowns.

GER.     Five  hundred  crowns  1

SCA.     Yes.

GER.     What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?

SCA.     You  are  right :  but  make  haste.

GER.     Was  there  no  other  place  to  go  to  ?

SCA.     That  is  true :  but  be  quick.

GER.     Ah  !  that  confounded  galley.

SCA.  (Aside).   That  galley  lies  heavy  upon  his  heart.

GER.  Stay,  Scapin,  I  did  not  remember,  I  have  just
received  the  very  sum  in  gold,  and  I  did  not  think  that  I
would  have  to  part  with  it  so  soon.  {Taking his  purse
from  his  pocket,  and  holding  it  out  to  Scapiri).  There,  go  and
redeem  my  son.

SCA.   (Holding  out  his  hand).  Yes,  Sir.

GER.  (Still  holding  the  purse,  which  he  pretends  to  give
to  Scapin).  But  tell  this  Turk  that  he  is  a  scoundrel.

SCA.   (Still  holding  out  his  hand}.  Yes.

GER.  (Recommencing  the  same  thing}.  An  infamous
wretch.

SCA.  (Still  holding  out  his  hand}.  Yes.

GER.  A  man  without  honour,  a  robber.

SCA.  Let  me  manage  it.

GER.  That  he  extorts  five  hundred  crowns  from  me
against  all  right.

SCA.  Yes.

GER.  (Recommencing  the  same  thing).  That  I  do  not
make  them  a  present  to  him  for  ever.

SCA.  Very  good.

GER.  (Recommencing  the  same  thing).  And  that,  if  ever
I  catch  him,  I  shall  be  revenged  on  him.

SCA.  Yes.

GER.  (Putting  the  money  back  in  his  pocket  and  going).
Go,  go  quickly,  and  bring  back  my  son.

SCA.  (Running  after  Geronte).  Hullo,  Sir.

GER.  What?

SCA.  Where  is  this  money  ?

GER.  Have  I  not  given  it  to  you  ?

SCA.  No,  indeed ;  you  put  it  back  in  your  pocket.

GER.  Ah  !  it  is  this  trouble  that  upsets  my  senses.

SCENE  xii.]  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  39

SCA.    I  see  it  does.

GER.  What  the  devil  did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?  Con-
founded galley  !  Villain  of  a  Turk ;  may  the  devil  take
you !

SCA.  (Alone).  He  cannot  swallow  the  five  hundred
crowns  which  I  have  dragged  away  from  him ;  but  he  is
not  quits  with  me  yet ;  and  he  shall  pay  me  in  different
coin  for  the  trick  he  has  played  me  with  his  son.19

SCENE  XII. — OCTAVE,  LEANDER,  SCAPIN.

OCT.  Well !  Scapin,  have  you  succeeded  in  your  enter-
prise for  me  ?

LEA.  Have  you  done  anything  to  get  my  love  affair  out
of  the  plight  it  is  in  ?

SCA.  (To  Octave).  Here  are  two  hundred  pistoles
which  I  have  drawn  from  your  father.

OCT.  Ah  !  how  glad  you  make  me  !

SCA.  (To  Leander).  I  have  not  been  able  to  do  any-
thing for  you.

LEA.  (  Going).  I  had  better  go  and  make  an  end  of  my-
self ;  for  I  cannot  live  if  Zerbinette  is  taken  from  me.

SCA.  Hullo !  hullo !  gently.  What  a  dreadful  hurry
you  are  in  !

LEA.  {Turning  back).  What  is  to  become  of  me?

SCA.   Never  mind,  I  have  got  what  you  want.

LEA.  {Returning).  Ah  !  you  restore  life  to  me.

SCA.  But  on  condition  that  you  shall  allow  me  a  little
piece  of  retaliation  upon  your  father  for  the  trick  which
he  has  played  me.

LEA.    Anything  you  please.

SCA.  You  promise  it  before  a  witness  ?

LEA.  Yes.

SCA.  Catch  hold,  here  are  the  five  hundred  crowns.

LEA.  Let  us  go  quickly  to  redeem  my  charmer  with
them.

19  In  the  Introductory  Notice  I  have  already  stated  that  this  scene  is
borrowed  from  Cyrano  de  Bergerac's  play  The  Deceived  Pedant,  where  a
Turkish  galley  is  lying  at  anchor  in  the  Seine.  Moliere's  comedy  takes
place  on  a  coast  which  was  exposed  to  the  attacks  of  Turkish  rovers ;
besides,  the  taking  of  Candia  by  the  Turks,  in  1669,  had  given  a  fresh
interest  to  all  adventures  with  which  Turks  were  mixed  up.

4O  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  in.

ACT   III.

SCENE  I. — ZERBINETTE,  HYACINTHS,  SCAPIN,
SYLVESTER.

SYL.  Yes,  your  lovers  have  decided  between  them,  that
you  should  remain  together;  and  we  are  discharging  the
order  which  they  have  given  us.

HYA.  ( To  Zerbinette).  Such  an  order  has  nothing  but
what  is  very  agreeable  to  me.  I  gladly  welcome  such  a
companion;  and  it  will  not  be  my  fault  if  the  friendship
existing  between  the  persons  whom  we  love  does  not  extend
to  us.

ZER.  I  accept  the  proposal,  and  am  not  one  to  draw  back
when  friendship  is  in  question.

SCA.  And  when  love  is  in  question  ?

ZER.  As  for  love,  that  is  a  different  thing ;  one  runs  a
little  more  risk,  and  I  am  not  so  rash  about  that.

SCA.  You  are  so  against  my  master  now,  I  believe  ;  and
what  he  has  just  done  for  you  ought  to  give  you  the  heart
to  respond  in  the  right  manner  to  his  love.

ZER.  I  do  not  as  yet  trust  him  unconditionally  ;  and  all
that  he  has  done  does  not  entirely  reassure  me.  I  am  of
a  lively  disposition,  and  I  am  always  laughing  :  but  for  all
that,  I  am  serious  upon  certain  subjects  ;  and  your  master
will  make  a  mistake,  if  he  thinks  that  to  have  bought  me
is  sufficient  to  make  me  wholly  his  own.  It  will  cost  him
something  else  besides  money ;  and  if  he  wishes  that  I
should  return  his  passion  in  the  same  manner,  he  will  have
to  give  me  a  pledge  of  his  faith,  accompanied  by  certain
ceremonies  which  are  thought  indispensable.

SCA.  That  is  what  he  means  to  do.  His  intentions  are
nought  but  right  and  honourable  ;  and  I  would  not  have
been  the  one  to  meddle  with  this  affair  if  he  had  had  dif-
ferent intentions.

ZER.  That  is  what  I  wish  to  believe,  since  you  tell  me
so;  but,  on  the  father's  part,  I  expect  some  obstacles.

SCA.  We  shall  find  the  means  of  arranging  matters.

HYA.  (To  Zerbinette).  The  similarity  of  our  positions
ought  to  contribute  to  the  growth  of  our  friendship  ;  and
we  find  ourselves  both  in  the  same  plight,  both  exposed  to
the  same  misfortunes.

SCKNBI.J  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  41

ZER.  You  have  this  advantage  at  least  that  you  know
who  gave  you  birth,  and  that  the  support  of  your  parents,
whom  you  can  disclose,  is  likely  to  arrange  everything,  to
assure  your  happiness,  and  to  command  a  consent  to  a
marriage  which  is  already  contracted.  But,  as  for  me,  I
receive  no  assistance  from  my  position  in  life;  and  I  am
in  a  condition  which  will  hardly  mollify  a  father  who  looks
only  to  wealth.

HYA.  You  have  yet  the  advantage,  that  your  lover  is
not  tempted  by  another  match.

ZER.  The  change  in  a  lover's  heart  is  not  what  is  most
to  be  feared.  One  may  naturally  believe  one's  own  merits
sufficient  to  retain  one's  conquests  ;  and  what  I  dread  most
in  this  sort  of  affairs,  is  the  paternal  power,  in  whose  eyes
merit  counts  for  nothing.

HYA.  Alas  !  why  must  our  best  affections  be  thwarted  !
How  sweet  it  is  to  love,  when  there  are  no  obstacles  to
those  gentle  chains  with  which  two  hearts  are  united  !

SCA.  You  are  jesting ;  a  smooth  love  affair  is  a  disagree-
able calm.  An  uninterrupted  happiness  becomes  tiresome;
there  must  be  ups  and  downs  in  life ;  and  the  difficulties
about  things  awaken  the  desires,  and  increase  the  pleasures.

ZER.  By  the  bye,  Scapin,  tell  us  the  story,  which  I  have
been  given  to  understand  is  so  amusing,  of  the  trick  which
you  made  use  of  to  draw  money  from  your  old  miser.  You
know  that  it  is  not  labour  lost  to  tell  me  a  tale,  and  that
I  reward  it  well  enough  by  the  pleasure  which  it  gives  me.

SCA.  There  is  Sylvester,  who  will  manage  it  as  well  as
I.  I  have  got  a  little  bit  of  revenge  in  my  mind,  of  which
I  shall  relish  the  pleasure.

SYL.  Why  will  you,  out  of  mere  light-heartedness,  get
yourself  into  awkward  scrapes  ?

SCA.  I  like  to  attempt  hazardous  enterprises.

SYL.  I  have  already  told  you,  if  you  take  my  advice,  to
abandon  your  project.

SCA.  Just  so ;  but  I  shall  take  my  own  advice  in  this
matter.

SYL.  What  the  devil  are  you  going  to  be  up  to  ?

SCA.  What  the  devil  are  you  bothering  yourself  about  ?

SYL.  Because  I  see  that  you  are  running,  unnecessarily,
the  risk  of  drawing  a  storm  of  cudgel-blows  upon  you.

42  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  m.

SCA.  Well !  It  is  at  the  cost  of  my  back,  not  of  yours.

SYL.  It  is  true  that  you  are  master  of  your  own  shoulders,
and  may  dispose  of  them  as  you  please.

SCA.  That  kind  of  danger  has  never  stopped  me ;  and
I  hate  those  chicken-hearted  fellows,  who,  because  they
look  too  much  at  the  sequel  of  events,  never  dare  to  un-
dertake anything.

ZER.  (  To  Scapin).     We  shall  need  your  help.

SCA.  Lead  on.  I  shall  be  with  you  presently.  It  shall
never  be  said,  that  they  have  with  impunity  almost  made
me  betray  myself  and  disclose  secrets  which  it  would  be
as  well  that  nobody  knew.

SCENE  II. — GERONTE,  SCAPIN.

GER.  Well,  Scapin,  how  goes  the  affair  of  my  son  ?

SCA.  Your  son  is  safe  enough,  Sir ;  but  you  yourself,
Sir,  are  running  the  greatest  danger  in  the  world,  and  I
would  give  a  good  deal  that  you  were  in  your  own  house.

GER.  How  is  that  ?

SCA.  At  this  very  moment,  you  are  looked  for  every-
where to  be  killed.

GER.  I?

SCA.  Yes.

GER.  And  by  whom  ?

SCA.  By  the  brother  of  this  person  whom  Octave  has
married.  He  believes  that  the  design  which  you  have  to
place  your  daughter  in  the  position  now  occupied  by  his
sister,  is  the  reason  which  induces  Argante  to  leave  no
stone  unturned  to  annul  their  marriage;  and,  with  that
idea,  he  has  openly  reserved  to  vent  his  despair  on  you,
and  to  take  your  life  to  avenge  his  honour.  All  his  friends,
knights  of  the  blade  like  himself,  are  looking  for  you
everywhere,  and  inquiring  after  you.  I  myself  saw  here
and  there  some  soldiers  of  his  company,  who  are  guard-
ing in  platoons  every  approach  to  your  house,  examining
every  one  whom  they  meet :  so  much  so  that  you  cannot
go  home,  nor  walk  a  step,  right  or  left,  without  falling
into  their  hands.

GER.  What  am  I  to  do,  my  good  Scapin  ?

SCA.  I  do  not  know,  Sir;  it  is  a  strange  affair  alto-
gether. I  tremble  from  head  to  foot  for  you,  and  .  .  .

SCKNK  n]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  43

Wait  a  moment  {Scapin  pretends  to  look  at  the  farther  end
of  the  stage  whether  any  one  is  there.

GER.   {Trembling).     Eh?

SCA.  {Coming  back).     No,  no,  no,  it  is  nothing.

GER.  Cannot  you  find  some  means  to  get  me  out  of
trouble  ?

SCA.  I  have  thought  about  one ;  but  I  run  the  risk  of
being  knocked  down  myself.

GER.  Come  !  Scapin,  show  yourself  a  faithful  servant.
Do  not  leave  me  in  the  lurch,  I  beg  of  you.

SCA.  I  am  willing  enough.  I  have  this  much  regard
for  you,  that  I  should  not  like  to  leave  you  without  assist-
ance.

GER.  You  shall  be  well  rewarded  for  it,  I  assure  you ;
and  I  promise  you  this  coat,  when  I  have  worn  it  a  little.

SCA.  Stay.  Just  the  very  thing  I  have  hit  upon  to  save
you.  You  must  get  into  this  sack,  and  .  .  .

GER.  {Fancying  he  sees  somebody].     Ah  !

SCA.  No,  no,  no,  no,  there  is  no  one.  You  must,  I  say,
get  into  this,  and  take  care  not  to  stir  in  the  least.  I  shall
hoist  you  on  my  back  like  a  bundle  of  something,  and  I
shall  carry  you  in  that  way  through  the  midst  of  your
enemies,  into  your  house,  where,  once  we  get  in,  we  can
barricade  ourselves,  and  send  for  assistance  against  this
violence.

GER.  The  idea  is  good.

SCA.  The  best  in  the  world.  You  shall  see.  (Aside).
I  shall  be  even  with  you  for  the  cheat.

GER.  What  do  you  say  ?

SCA.  I  say  that  your  enemies  will  be  taken  in  nicely.
Get  well  to  the  bottom ;  and  above  all  take  care  not  to
show  yourself,  and  not  to  move,  happen  what  may.

GER.  Let  me  manage  :  I  know  how  to  keep  myself .  .  .

SCA.  Hide  yourself;  here  comes  a  swash-buckler  who  is
looking  out  for  you  (disguising  his  voice).  "What  !  shall
I  not  have  the  delight  of  killing  this  G6ronte,  and  will  no
one  out  of  charity  point  me  out  where  he  is?"  {To
Geronte  in  his  natural  voice}.  Do  not  stir.  "  Cad6dis  !
I  shall  find  him  if  he  were  hidden  in  the  bowels  of  the
earth."  {To  Geronte  in  his  natural  voice).  Do  not  show
yourself.  {The  counterfeited  language  is  supposed  to  be

44  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  f  ACT  m.

Gascon,  the  remainder  his  own). "  Ah  !  you  man  with
the  sack."  Sir.  "  I  will  give  you  a  louis  if  you  tell  me
where  I  can  find  this  Geronte."  You  are  looking  for  M.
G6ronte?  "Yes.  Zounds,  I  am  looking  for  him."  And
what  for,  Sir?  "What  for?"  Yes.  " Because  I  want
to  cudgel  the  life  out  of  him,  cadedis."  Oh,  indeed,  Sir;
but  folks  like  him  do  not  ordinarily  receive  cudgel-blows,
and  he  is  not  a  man  to  stand  that  sort  of  treatment.
"  Who  ?  that  booby  of  a  Geronte,  that  scoundrel,  that
blockhead?"  M.  Geronte,  Sir,  is  neither  a  booby,  nor
a  scoundrel,  nor  a  blockhead  ;  and  you  ought  to  speak  in
another  tone.  "  How  dare  you  give  me  any  of  your  in-
solence?" I  am  defending,  as  I  ought  to  do,  a  man  of
honour,  who  is  being  insulted.  "  Are  you  one  of  the
friends  of  this  Geronte?"  Yes,  Sir,  I  am.  "Ah!  ca-
d6dis,  you  are  one  of  his  friends.  So  much  the  better."
(Striking  several  times  on  the  sack  with  a  stick}.  "  There,
take  this,  and  that,  in  his  stead."  {Shrieking  as  if  he
were  being  struck).  Ah,  ah,  Sir,  that'll  do.  Ah,  ah,  Sir,
gently.  Ah,  gently.  Ah,  ah,  ah.  "  There,  give  him
this  from  me.  Adiusias."  {Complaining  and  moving  his
back  as  if  he  had  received  some  cudgel-blows}.  Ah,  the
devil  take  the  Gascon  !  Ah  !

GER.  {Thrusting  his  head  out  of  the  sack).  Ah,  Scapin,
I  can  endure  it  no  longer.

SCA.  Ah  !  Sir,  I  am  bruised  all  over,  and  my  shoulders
pain  me  dreadfully.

GER.  How  is  that  !  It  is  on  mine  that  he  has  been
beating.

SCA.  No,  indeed,  Sir,  it  is  my  back  that  he  has  been
pummelling.

GER.  What  do  you  mean?  I  have  felt  the  blows  well
enough,  and  feel  them  yet.

SCA.  No,  I  tell  you;  it  is  only  the  end  of  his  stick  that
came  down  upon  your  shoulders.

GER.  You  ought  therefore  to  have  gone  a  little  farther
away  in  order  to  spare  me  .  .  .

M  The  words  printed  in  italics  are  in  the  Gascon  dialect,  which  is  un-
translatable. Here  is  a  specimen  of  the  first  sentence  in  the  original :
Cadedis,  je  le  trouberai,  si  cahat-il  au  centre  de  la  terre.

scBNm  ii.]  THE   ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  45

SCA.  (Pushing  his  head  back  again  into  the  sack).  Be
careful;  here  comes  another,  who  has  the  look  of  a
stranger.  {This  by-play  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  Gascon,
for  the  change  of  language  and  the  stage-business]. a  "Gone,
I  have  been  running  like  a  Basque,  and  I  cannot  find  this
devil  of  a  Geronte."  Hide  yourself  well.  "Tell  me  a
little,  you  mister  Gentleman,  if  you  please,  do  not  you
know  where  this  Geronte  is,  whom  I  am  looking  for?"
No,  Sir,  I  do  not  know  where  Geronte  is.  "  Tell  me
candidly ;  I  do  not  want  much  with  him.  I  only  want  to
treat  him  to  a  dozen  or  so  of  cudgel-blows  on  his  back,
and  three  or  four  sword  thrusts  through  his  breast. "  I
assure  you  Sir,  that  I  do  not  know  where  he  is.  "  It
seems  to  me  that  there  is  something  moving  in  this  sack."
Not  at  all,  Sir.  "I  am  sure  that  there  is  something  in
there."  Not  at  all,  Sir,  "I  have  a  good  mind  to  pass
my  sword  through  this  sack."  Oh !  Sir,  do  not  do  any-
thing of  the  sort.  "  Let  me  look  a  little  what  is  in  there."
That  will  do,  Sir.  "  How,  that  will  do !"  You  have  no
business  with  what  I  am  carrying.  "  And  I  will  have
business  with  it."  You  shall  not  see  it.  "Ah!  what
nonsense  is  all  this."  They  are  some  clothes  belonging
to  me.  "  Show  me,  I  tell  you."  I  shall  do  nothing  of
the  kind.  "  You  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind  ?"  No.
"  Then  I  shall  break  this  stick  on  your  shoulders."  I  do
not  care  for  that.  "  Ah  you  want  to  play  the  fool  with
me. ' '  {Striking  the  sack  with  the  stick,  and  howling  as  if
he  were  receiving  the  blows).  Aye,  aye,  aye.  Ah!  Sir,  ah,
ah,  ah,  ah.  "Till  we  meet  again,  this  will  be  a  little
lesson  to  teach  you  not  to  be  insolent."  Ah  '  plague  on
the  jabbering  thief!  Ah!

GER.  {Thrusting  his  head  out  of  the  sack).  Ah!  I  feel
as  broken  on  the  wheel.

SCA.  Ah  !  I  am  dead.

GER.  Why  the  deuce  must  they  pummel  my  back?

SCA.    {Putting  his  head  back  into  the  sack).     Take  care  ;

11  My  foregoing  remark  as  TO  the  difficulty  of  rendering  provincial
dialect  into  English  applies  also  to  this  scene,  which  is  given  in  an  Alsa-
tian accent.  Here  is  the  first  sentence  in  the  original :  Parti  I  mot  courir
comme  une  Basque,  et  mot  ne  pouvre  point  troufair  de  tout  le  jour  sti
liable  de  Gironte.

46  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  in.

here  is  half  a  dozen  soldiers  together.  {Imitating  the
voices  of  several  persons).  "  Come  let  us  try  to  find
G6ronte,  let  us  look  everywhere.  Do  not  let  us  stand  still
over  it.  Let  us  rummage  the  whole  town.  Do  not  let
us  miss  a  single  spot.  Let  us  go  everywhere.  Let  us
peep  into  every  nook  and  corner.  Which  way  shall  we
go?  This  way.  No,  through  here.  To  the  left.  To
the  right.  Not  at  all.  Yes,  yes."  (To  Geronte,  in  his
natural  voice).  Hide  yourself  well.  "  Ah,  mates,  here
is  his  servant.  Come,  you  rascal,  you  must  tell  us  where
your  master  is."  Ah!  gentlemen,  do  not  ill-use  me.
"  Come,  tell  us  where  he  is.  Speak.  Make  haste,  look
sharp,  be  quick,  speak  up."  Oh,  gentlemen,  gently.
{Geronte,  thrusts  his  head  softly  out  of  the  sack,  ana
becomes  aware  of  Scapin's  trick).  "  If  you  do  not  help
us  to  find  your  master  directly,  we  shall  overwhelm  you
with  cudgel-blows."  I  prefer  suffering  everything  rather
than  show  you  my  master.  "  We  shall  beat  the  life  out
of  you."  Do  as  you  please.  "You  wish  to  be  cudgelled?"
I  will  not  betray  my  master.  "  Ah,  you  wish  to  be
beaten?  There  then  ..."  Ah  !  (As  ke  is  about  to
strike,  Geronte  gets  out  of  the  sack,  and  Scapin  runs  off.
GER.  (Alone).  Ah !  infamous  wretch  !  Ah !  traitor  !
Ah!  scoundrel !  Is  it  thus  that  you  assault  me?

SCENE  III. — ZERBINETTE,   GERONTE.

ZEF.  (Laughing,  without  perceiving  Geronte).  Ha,  ha  !
I  must  have  a  breath  of  air.

GER.  (Aside,  without  seeing  Zerbinette).  You  shall  pay
for  this,  I  swear.

ZER.  (Without  seeing  Geronte).  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  !  What
an  amusing  story  !  and  what  a  dupe  they  have  made  of  the
old  man  !

GER.  There  is  nothing  amusing  in  it;  and  you  have  no
business  to  laugh  at  it.

ZER.  What  is  the  matter !    what  do  you  mean,  Sir  ?

GER.  I  mean  that  you  have  no  business  to  make  a  jest
of  me.

ZER.  Of  you?

GER.  Yes.

ZER.  How  ?    Who  intends  to  make  a  jest  of  you  ?

SCBNSIII  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  47

GER.  Why  do  you  come  here  to  laugh  in  my  very  face  ?

ZER.  This  does  not  concern  you  at  all,  and  I  was  only
laughing  at  a  story  that  I  have  just  been  told,  the  funniest
I  ever  heard.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  is  because  I  am
interested  in  the  matter;  but  I  have  never  heard  anything
more  laughable  than  the  trick  that  has  just  been  played  by
a  son  on  his  father  to  get  hold  of  some  money.

GER.  By  a  son  on  his  father  to  get  hold  of  some  money?

ZER.  Yes.  If  you  are  at  all  curious,  you  shall  find  me
ready  enough  to  tell  you  the  tale ;  for  I  am  always  itching
to  retail  the  stories  I  know.

GER.  Pray  tell  me  this  one.

ZER.  I  do  not  mind.  I  shall  not  risk  much  by  telling
it  to  you,  and  it  is  an  adventure  that  will  not  long  remain
a  secret.  Fate  would  have  it  that  I  should  fall  among  a
gang  of  people  whom  they  call  gipsies,  and  who,  wan-
dering from  one  country  to  another,  make  it  their  business
to  tell  people's  fortunes,  and  to  do  many  things  besides.
On  reaching  this  town,  a  young  man  happened  to  see  me,
and  conceived  an  attachment  to  me.  From  that  moment,
he  dogged  my  footsteps ;  and  at  first  he  was  like  all  other
young  men,  who  think  that  they  have  only  to  speak,  and
that  at  the  least  word  which  they  say  to  us,  their  business
is  done ;  but  he  found  a  resistance  which  made  him  some-
what alter  his  first  opinions.  He  confided  his  passion  to
the  people  in  whose  hands  I  was ;  and  he  found  them
willing  to  leave  me  to  him,  in  consideration  of  a  certain
sum  of  money.  But  the  worst  of  the  thing  was,  that  my
lover  was  in  the  same  position  in  which  we  so  often  find
the  majority  of  young  men  of  good  birth,  that  is,  he  was
a  little  short  of  money.  His  father,  though  rich,  is  a
downright  skinflint,  the  nastiest  wretch  on  earth.  Wait
a  little.  Can  I  not  remember  his  name?  Stop.  Perhaps
you  can  help  me.  Can  not  you  name  some  one  in  this
town,  who  is  noted  for  being  miserly  to  the  last  degree?

GER.  No.

ZER.  There  is  a  ron   in   his   name  .    .    .  rente  .    .    .
Or  ...  Oronte.     No.     G6  .  .  .  Geronte.     Yes,  Geronte,
that  is  it ;    that  is  my  shabby  individual ;    I  have  got  it ;
that  is  the  stingy  churl  of  whom  I  am  talking.     To  come
to  our  story,  our  people  wished  to  get  away  from  this

48  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  MI.

town  to-day;  and  my  lover  was  going  to  lose  me  for
lack  of  money,  had  he  not  luckily  been  assisted  by  the
cleverness  of  his  servant  to  get  some  out  of  his  father.
As  for  the  name  of  the  servant,  I  know  it  perfectly  well.
It  is  Scapin ;  he  is  a  wonderful  fellow,  and  he  deserves  all
the  praise  in  the  world.

GER.   (Aside).     Ah  !    scoundrel  that  you  are  !

ZER.  This  is  the  trick  of  which  he  made  use  to  get  the
money  out  of  his  dupe.  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha !  I  cannot  help
laughing  heartily  when  I  think  of  it.  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha !
He  goes  to  this  stingy  cur  .  .  .  ha,  ha,  ha ;  and  tells
him  that  while  walking  with  his  son  near  the  port,  hi,  hi,
they  saw  a  Turkish  galley,  on  board  of  which  they  were
invited ;  that  a  young  Turk  offered  them  a  lunch.  Ha ;
that  while  they  were  at  table,  the  galley  was  put  off  to  sea,
and  that  the  Turk  had  sent  him  back  ashore  by  himself  in
a  skiff,  with  the  order  to  tell  his  master's  father  that  he
was  going  to  carry  his  son  away  to  Algiers  with  him  unless
he  sent  him  five  hundred  crowns  immediately.  Ha,  ha,
ha!  Behold  my  churl,  my  miser,  in  the  most  furious
agonies;  and  the  tenderness  for  his  son  struggling
curiously  with  his  avarice.  The  five  hundred  crowns  re-
quired of  him  are  just  so  many  dagger  thrusts  levelled  at
his  heart.  Ha,  ha,  ha.  He  cannot  make  up  his  mind  to
tear  that  sum  from  his  very  bowels ;  and  the  pain  which
he  suffers  makes  him  devise  a  hundred  ridiculous  ways  of
getting  his  son  back  again.  Ha,  ha,  ha.  He  wants  to
send  the  authorities  after  the  Turk's  galley  on  the  open  sea.
Ha,  ha,  ha.  He  induces  his  servant  to  go  and  offer  him-
self to  take  the  son's  place,  until  he  has  scraped  together
the  money  which  he  does  not  intend  to  part  with.  Ha,
ha,  ha.  In  order  to  make  up  the  five  hundred  crowns,  he
is  going  to  sell  four  or  five  old  suits  which  are  not  worth
thirty.  Ha,  ha,  ha.  The  servant  tries  at  every  turn  to
show  him  the  preposterousness  of  his  proposal ;  and  every
reflection  is  dolefully  accompanied  by  a  What  the  devil
did  he  want  in  that  galley  ?  Oh !  confounded  galley !
scoundrel  of  a  Turk !  At  last  after  many  twistings  and
turnings,  after  having  wailed  and  sighed  ever  so  long  .  .  .
But  it  seems  to  me  that  my  story  does  not  amuse  you ;
what  do  you  think  of  it  ?

SCENE  vi.]  THE   ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  49

GER.  I  think  that  the  young  man  is  a  hangdog,  an  in-
solent scoundrel,  who  shall  be  punished  by  his  father  for
the  trick  he  has  played  him ;  that  the  gipsy  is  a  jade,  an
impertinent  girl,  to  insult  a  man  of  honour  who  will  teach
her  to  come  here  and  corrupt  young  men  of  quality ;  and
that  the  servant  is  a  rascal  who  will  be  sent  to  the  gallows
by  G£ronte  before  to-morrow."

SCENE  IV. — ZERBINETTB,  SYLVESTER.

SYL.  Where  did  you  go  to  ?  Are  you  aware  that  you
have  been  talking  to  the  father  of  your  lover  ?

ZER.  I  just  thought  so ;  and,  inadvertently,  I  have
been  telling  him  his  own  story.

SYL.  How,  his  own  story  ?

ZER.  Yes.  I  was  full  of  the  tale,  and  bursting  to  tell  it
again.  But  what  does  it  matter  ?  So  much  the  worse  for
him.  I  do  not  see  that  things,  so  far  as  we  are  concerned,
can  be  mended  or  marred  by  it.

SYL.  You  had  a  great  mind  to  chatter ;  and  I  call  it
talking  with  a  vengeance  not  to  be  able  to  keep  one's
own  secrets.

ZER.  Would  he  not  have  found  it  out  from  some  one
User'

SCENE  V. — ARGANTE,  ZERBINETTE,  SYLVESTER.

ARC.   {Behind  the  scenes).   Hullo!   Sylvester.
SYL.  Go  indoors.     Heje  is  my  master  calling  me.

SCENE  VI. — ARGANTE,  SYLVESTER.

ARC.  So  you  have  put  your  heads  together,  you  rascals ;
you  have  arranged  between  you,  Scapin,  you  and  my  son,
to  cheat  me ;  and  you  think  that  I  shall  bear  it  ?

SYL.  Look  here,  Sir,  if  Scapin  cheats  you,  I  wash  my
hands  of  it,  and  assure  you  that  I  have  no  part  nor  parcel
in  it.

ARG.  We  shall  see  about  this  business,  you  rogue ;    we

«*  This  scene  is  also  partly  imitated  from  The  Deceived  Pedant  of
Cyrano  de  Bergerac ;  but  in  the  latter  play,  the  lady,  Genevote,  in  re-
lating the  story  to  the  pedant  Granger,  knows  that  he  was  the  hero  of  it:
whilst  Zerbinette  does  not  know  Geronte.

50  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  HI.

shall  see  about  this,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  be  treated  like  a
goose.*

SCENE  VII. — GERONTE,  ARGANTE,  SYLVESTER.

GER.  Ah !  M.  Argante,  you  behold  me  overwhelmed
with  disgrace.

ARC.  You  behold  me  also  in  a  terrible  affliction.

GER.  That  hangdog  Scapin,  by  one  of  his  roguish
tricks,  has  swindled  me  out  of  five  hundred  crowns.

ARG.  That  same  hangdog  Scapin,  by  a  similar  roguish
trick,  has  swindled  me  out  of  five  hundred  pistoles.

GER.  Not  content  with  doing  me  out  of  five  hundred
crowns,  he  has  treated  me  in  a  manner  which  I  am
ashamed  to  tell  you.  But  he  shall  pay  me  for  it.

ARG.  He  shall  have  to  give  me  satisfaction  for  the  trick
he  has  played  me.

GER.  And  I  mean  to  be  signally  revenged  upon  him.

SYL.  (Aside).  Would  to  Heaven  that  I  had  not  had  a
share  in  all  this !

GER.  But  this  is  not  all,  M.  Argante ;  and  one  misfor-
tune is  generally  the  fore-runner  of  another.  I  was  re-
joicing to-day  in  the  prospect  of  having  my  daughter,  who
is  my  only  consolation,  with  me,  and  now  I  have  just
heard  from  my  man  that  she  set  out  a  good  while  ago
from  Tarente,  and  that  it  is  thought  that  she  went  dowu
with  the  vessel  in  which  she  embarked.

ARG.  But  why,  pray,  did  you  keep  her  at  Tarente,  and
not  give  yourself  the  pleasure  of  having  her  always  with
you?

GER.  I  had  my  reasons  for  this  ;  and  family  interests
have  obliged  me  until  now  to  keep  my  second  marriage  a
great  secret.  But  whom  do  I  see  ?

SCENE  VIII. — ARGANTE,  GERONTE,  NERINE,  SYLVESTER.

GER.  What,  you  here,  nurse?

NER.  (  Throwing  herself  at  the  feet  of  Geronte).  Ah,  M.
Pandolphe  ....

18  The  original  has  je  ne  pretends  pas  qu'on  me  fosse  passer  la  plume
par  le  bee ;  because,  in  order  to  prevent  geese  from  going  through  the
hedges,  a  feather  is  stuck  through  the  upper  part  of  their  beaks.

Sc«N«ix.J  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  51

GER.  Call  me  Geronte,  and  do  not  use  this  name  any
longer.  The  reasons  no  longer  exist  which  obliged  me  to
take  it  among  you  at  Tarente.

NER.  Alas  !  what  troubles  and  uneasiness  this  change  of
name  has  caused  us  in  the  pains  which  we  took  to  find  you
out  here  !

GER.  Where  is  my  daughter  and  her  mother  ?

NER.  Your  daughter,  Sir,  is  not  far  from  this ;  but  be-
fore I  let  you  see  her,  I  must  beg  your  pardon  for  having
married  her,  in  the  destitute  condition  in  which  I  was
with  her,  through  not  finding  you.

GER.  My  daughter  married  ?

NER.  Yes,  Sir.

GER.  And  to  whom  ?

NER.  To  a  young  gentleman  named  Octave,  son  of  a
certain  M.  Argante.

GER.  Oh,  Heavens !

ARC.  What  a  coincidence  !

GER.   Take  us,  take  us  quickly  to  her.

NER.  You  have  only  to  enter  this  house.

GER.  Lead  the  way.  Follow  me,  follow  me,  M.
Argante.

SYL.  (Alone}.  This  is  an  adventure  which  is  altogether
surprising."

SCENE  IX. — SCAPIN,  SYLVESTER.

SCA.  Well,  Sylvester,  what  are  our  folks  doing?

SYL.  I  have  two  pieces  of  news  to  tell  you.  The  one
is,  that  the  affair  of  Octave  is  arranged.  Our  Hyacinthe
is  found  to  be  the  daughter  of  M.  Geronte ;  and  chance
has  accomplished  what  the  prudence  of  the  fathers  had
planned.  The  other  piece  of  news  is,  that  the  two  old
men  are  threatening  Heaven  and  earth  against  you ;  and
above  all  M.  Geronte.

SCA.  That  is  nothing.  .  Threats  have  never  done  me
any  harm;  and  they  are  clouds  that  pass  very  high  over
our  heads.

SYL.  Take  care  of  yourself.  The  sons  may  make  it  up
with  the  fathers,  and  you  be  left  in  the  lurch.

**  This  ending  again  is  partly  followed  from  the  last  scene  of  Terence's
Phormio.

52  THE  ROGUERIES   OF  SCAPIN.  [ACT  in.

SCA.  Let  me  manage.  I  shall  find  the  means  of  ap-
peasing their  anger,  and  .  .  .

SYL.  Get  away,  they  are  coming  out.

SCENE.    X. — GERONTE,    ARGANTE,    HYACINTHE,    ZER-
BINETTE,  NERINE,  SYLVESTER.

GER.  Come,  daughter,  come  home  to  me.  My  joy
would  have  been  complete,  if  I  could  have  seen  your
mother  with  you.

ARG.  Here  comes  Octave,  just  in  time.

SCENE  XI. — ARGANTE,  GERONTE,   OCTAVE,  HYACINTHE,
ZERBINETTE,  NERINE,  SYLVESTER.

ARC.  Come,  my  son ;  come  and  rejoice  with  us  in  the
happy  accident  of  your  marriage.  Heaven  .  .  .

OCT.  No,  father,  all  your  proposals  of  marriage  will  be
useless.  I  must  take  off  the  mask  with  you,  and  you  have
been  told  of  my  engagement.

ARG.  Yes,  but  you  do  not  know  .    .    .

OCT.  I  know  all  which  I  ought  to  know.

ARG.  I  wish  to  tell  you  that  the  daughter  of  M.
Geronte  .  .  .

OCT.  The  daughter  of  M.  Geronte  will  never  be  any-
thing to  me.

GER.  It  is  she  ...

OCT.  (To  Geronte).  No,  Sir;  I  ask  your  pardon ;  my
resolutions  are  taken.

SYL.  (To  Octave}.    Listen  .    .    .

OCT.  No.   Hold  your  tongue.    I  shall  listen  to  nothing.

ARG.   (To  Octave).  Your  wife  .    .    .

OCT.  No,  I  tell  you,  father;  I  shall  sooner  die  than
leave  my  gentle  Hyacinthe.  ( Crossing  the  stage  to  place
himself  at  the  side  of  Hyacinthe].  Yes,  you  may  do  what
you  like ;  here  she  is,  to  whom  my  troth  is  plighted.  I
shall  love  her  all  my  life,  and  do  not  want  another  wife.

ARG.  Very  well !  it  is  she  whom  we  give  to  you.  What
devil  of  a  madcap  who  always  goes  ahead  !

HYA.  (Pointing  to  Geronte^.  Yes,  Octave,  here  is  my
father,  whom  I  have  found  :  and  all  our  troubles  are
ended.

THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  53

GER.  Let  us  go  home ;  we  shall  be  more  comfortable
than  here  to  discuss  matters.

HYA.  (Pointing  to  Zerbinette).  Ah  !  father  ;  I  ask  you  as
a  favour  that  I  may  not  be  parted  from  this  amiable  girl
whom  you  see.  Her  merits  will  make  you  like  her,  when
you  come  to  know  her.

GER.  Would  you  have  me  harbour  a  person  with  whom
your  brother  is  in  love,  and  who  just  now  has  insulted  me
to  my  very  face?

ZER.  I  beg  of  you  to  excuse  me,  Sir.  I  should  not  have
spoken  so,  had  I  known  that  it  was  you ;  and  I  only  knew
you  by  hearsay.

GER.  How  !  only  by  hearsay  ?

HYA.  Father,  the  passion  which  my  brother  has  for  her
has  nothing  guilty  in  it,  and  I  answer  for  her  virtue.

GER.  That  is  very  good.  Would  you  not  have  me  marry
my  son  to  her?  A  strange  girl,  whose  profession  is  to
run  about  the  country.

SCENE  XII. — ARGANTE,  GERONTE,  LEANDER,  OCTAVE,
HYACINTHE,  ZERBINETTE,  NERINE,  SYLVESTER.

LEA.  Father,  do  not  complain  any  longer  that  I  love  a
stranger,  without  birth  or  riches.  Those  of  whom  I  have
bought  her  have  just  disclosed  to  me  that  she  belongs  to
this  town,  and  comes  of  an  honourable  family,  from  whom
they  kidnapped  her  at  the  age  of  four :  and  here  is  a
bracelet  which  they  have  given  me,  and  which  may  help
us  to  find  her  parents.

ARC.  Alas  !  to  see  this  bracelet,  it  must  be  my  daughter,
whom  I  lost  at  the  age  you  mention.

GER.  Your  daughter  ?

ARG.  Yes,  it  is  she;  and  I  see  in  every  one  of  her
features  the  certainty  of  it.  My  dear  daughter !  .  .  .

HYA.  Good  Heavens  !  what  extraordinary  adventures !

SCENE  XIII.— ARGANTE,  GERONTE,  LEANDER,  OCTAVE,
HYACINTHE,   ZERBINETTE,  NERINE,  SYLVESTER,   CARLOS.

CAR.  Alas  !  gentlemen,  a  strange  accident  has  just  now
happened.

GER.  What  is  it  ?

CAR.  Poor  Scapin  .    .    .

54  THE   ROGUERIES   OF   SCAPIN.  [ACT  m.

GER.  Is  a  scoundrel,  whom  I  shall  have  hanged.

CAR.  Alas,  Sir !  you  will  not  have  the  trouble.  In
passing  by  a  house  they  were  building,  there  fell  on  his
head  a  stone-mason's  hammer,  which  has  broken  the  bone
and  laid  bare  the  whole  of  his  brain.  He  is  dying,  and  he
has  begged  to  be  brought  here,  to  be  able  to  speak  to  you
before  he  dies.

ARC.  Where  is  he  ?

CAR.  Here  he  comes.

SCENE  XIV. — ARGANTE,  GERONTE,  LEANDER,  OCTAVE,

HYACINTHE,  ZERBINETTE,  NERINE,  SCAPIN,

SYLVESTER,  CARLOS.

SCA.  (Carried  by  two  men,  his  head  wrapt  round  with
bandages,  as  if  he  had  been  wounded}.  Aye,  aye,  gentle-
men, behold  me  .  .  .  Aye,  you  see  me  in  a  sad  condition.
Aye.  I  did  not  wish  to  die  before  having  asked  forgiveness
of  every  one  whom  I  may  have  offended.  Aye.  Yes,
gentlemen,  before  breathing  my  last  sigh,  I  beseech  you
with  all  my  heart,  to  forgive  me  for  all  I  may  have  done
to  you;  but  particularly  M.  Argante,  and  M.  G£ronte.
Aye.

ARG.  As  for  me,  I  forgive  you  ;  go,  die  in  peace.

SCA.  (T0  Geronte}.  It  is  you,  Sir,  whom  I  have  of-
fended most  by  the  cudgel-blows,  which  .  .  .

GER.  Speak  no  longer  of  it,  I  forgive  you  also.

SCA.  It  was  a  great  audacity  on  my  part,  those  cudgel-
blows,  which  .  .  .

GER.  Let  us  drop  that.

SCA.  Now  that  I  am  dying,  it  gives  me  inconceivable
pain  to  think  about  those  cudgel-blows  which  .  .  .

GER.  Good  Heaven  j   hold  your  tongue.

SCA.  Those  unlucky  cudgel -blows  which  I  ...

GER.  Hold  your  tongue,  I  tell  you ;  I  forget  everything.

SCA.  Alas !  what  goodness !  but  is  it  heartily,  Sir,  that
you  forgive  me  those  cudgel-blows  which  I  ...

GER.  Ah !  yes.  Let  us  speak  no  more  about  them :  I
forgive  you  everything :  there  is  an  end  of  it.

SCA.  Oh  Sir,  I  feel  altogether  relieved  by  that  word.

GER.  Yes ;  but  I  forgive  you  only  on  condition  that
you  shall  die.

SCENE  xiv.]  THE  ROGUERIES  OF  SCAPIN.  55

SCA.  How!  Sir?

GER.  I  retract  my  word,  if  you  recover.

SCA.  Aye,  aye.    There  is  my  faintness  coming  on  again.

ARG.  M.  Geronte,  in  return  for  our  joy,  you  must  for-
give him  unconditionally.

GER.  Be  it  so.

ARG.  Let  us  all  go  and  sup  together,  the  better  to  relish
our  pleasure.

SCA.  And  let  them  carry  me  to  the  foot  of  the  table,
while  I  am  waiting  for  my  death.

LA  COMTESSE  D'ESCARBAGNAS,

COMEDIE.

THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.

A    COMEDY    IN    ONE    ACT.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.)

DECEMBER  20,  1671.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

WE  have  already  stated  that  during  the  rejoicing  of  the  second  marriage
of  Monsieur,  the  brother  of  Louis.  XIV.,  with  the  Princess  Charlotte
Elizabeth  of  Bavaria,  the  King  had  given  some  splendid  festivals  for  the
reception  of  his  sister-in-law,  in  which  several  comedies  and  ballets  were
performed,  which  were  called  Ballet  des  ballets?-  Moliere  was  com-
manded to  write  a  comedy  in  which  all  the  different  entertainments,  opera
and  ballets,  should  be  combined;  and  hence  he  wrote  The  Countess  of
Escarbagnas,  which  was  represented  before  the  Court  at  Saint-Germain-
en-Laye  on  the  zd  of  December,  1671.  There  was  a  prologue  and  a
pastoral,  the  whole  forming  seven  acts,  each  followed  by  an  interlude.
The  prologue  and  interludes  were  taken  from  pieces  formerly  composed
for  the  Court,  such  as  The  Magnificent  Lovers,  George  Dandin,  The
Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman,  and  the  Ballet  of  the  Muses  :  but  it  is
not  known  what  these  seven  acts  were,  which  are  mentioned  in  the  official
book  of  the  ballet.

The  Countess  of  Escarbagnas  represents  nearly  all  provincials,  inhabi-
tants of  small  towns,  with  the  habits  and  manners  of  country  louts.  The
Countess  is  not  a  high-born  lady,  but  the  widow  of  some  petty  nobleman.
She  has  been  only  a  short  time  at  Court,  but  has  picked  up  sufficient
wickedness  to  allow  M.  Harpin,  one  of  her  three  admirers,  to  pay  for  the
expenses  of  her  household  and  her  tradesmen.  The  receiver  of  taxes
knows,  of  course,  the  power  of  money,  and  is  therefore  not  so  obsequious
to  birth  as  the  gentle,  gallant  counsellor-at-law.  He  shows,  on  the  con-
trary, his  purse-proud  vulgarity,  and  at  the  same  time  a  certain  shrewd-
ness, whilst  M.  Tibaudier  spends  his  time  in  writing  rubbish,  and  in  mix-
ing law  words  with  his  elegant  and  pretentious  phraseology,  but  in  such
a  way  as  not  to  offend  the  noble  widow.  M.  Bobinet  is  a  representative
of  that  class  who  are  obliged,  through  necessity,  to  teach,  and  whose  lot,
I  am  afraid,  has  not  much  improved  since  the  days  of  Moliere.  Even
the  servants  have  a '  distinct  physiognomy;  and  as  we  perceive  that  all
these  persons  move,  live,  and  stand  out  from  the  canvass, — and  that  in
one  act — we  recognize  the  masterhand  of  Moliere.

1  See  Introductory  Notice  to  Psychi.

59

60  THE  COUNTESS   OF  ESCARBAGNAS.

The  Countess  of  Escarbagnas  was  represented  in  the  theatre  of  the
Palais  Royal,  on  the  8th  of  July,  1672,  and  was  performed  fourteen  con-
secutive times,  always  with  The  Compulsory  Marriage,  which  seems  to
have  taken  the  place  of  the  Court  entertainments.  It  was  never  printed
during  Moliere's  lifetime,  and  appeared  for  the  first  time  only  in  the
edition  of  1682,  published  by  La  Grange  and  Vinot.

James  Miller  has  imitated  a  short  dialogue  between  the  Countess  and
Andree  in  The  Man  of  Taste  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Pretentious
Young  Ladies,  Vol.  I.,)  and  between  the  Countess  and  Criquet.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

THE  COUNT,  son  of  the  Countess  of  Escarbagnas.

THE  VISCOUNT,  Julia's  lover.

MR.  TIBAUDIER,  counsellor- at-law,  in  love  with  the  Countess.

MR.  HARPIN,  receiver  of  taxes,  also  in  love  with  the  Countess.

MR.  ROBINET,  tutor  to  the  Count.

JEANNOT,  Tibaudier's  lacquey.

CRIQUET,  the  Countess's  lacquey.

THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.

JULIA,  in  love  with  the  Viscount.

ANRH£E,  attendant  to  the  Countess.

THE  SCENE  is  AT  ANGOULEMB*

THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.

(LA  COMTESSE  D' ESCARBAGNAS).

SCENE  I. — JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT.

Vis.  Eh  what,  Madam  !   you  are  here  already  !

JUL.  Yes.  You  ought  to  blush  for  it,  Cleante ;  and  it
is  not  at  all  gallant  in  a  lover  to  be  the  last  at  the  trysting
place.

Vis.  I  should  have  been  here  an  hour  ago,  if  there  were
no  bores  in  the  world ;  and  I  have  been  stopped  on  the
road  by  an  old  troublesome  nobleman,  who  expressly  asked
me  for  tidings  from  the  court,  in  order  to  tell  me  some,
the  most  extravagant  that  could  well  be  retailed ;  and
these  great  newsmongers,  who  look  about  everywhere  to
spread  the  stories  which  they  pick  up,  are,  as  you  know,
the  plagues  of  small  towns.  This  one  has,  first  of  all,
shown  me  two  sheets  of  paper,  scribbled  up  to  the  edge
with  a  large  mass  of  nonsensical  stories,  which,  he  told  me,
came  from  the  most  reliable  sources.  After  which,  as  a
great  curiosity,  he  has  read  me  in  a  tiresome  way,  and  with
an  air  of  great  mystery,  all  the  bad  jokes  of  the  Dutch
Gazette?  the  interests  of  which  he  has  espoused.  His
opinion  is  that  France  is  battered  down  by  the  pen  of  this
writer ;  and  that  it  only  wants  this  wit  to  undo  all  our
troops;  and  from  this  he  has  thrown  himself  headlong  into

'  Louis  XIV.  had  just  succeeded  in  dissolving  the  triple  alliance  between
England,  Sweden,  and  the  United  Provinces  ;  hence  the  bitterness  of  the
Dutch  newspapers,  which  was  one  of  the  excuses  which  the  French  king
brought  forward  to  justify  the  war  with  Holland.

63

64  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  isc«w»  I.

reviewing  the  ministry,  whose  every  shortcoming  he
noticed ;  and  with  which,  I  thought,  he  would  never
have  finished.  To  hear  him  speak,  he  knows  the  secrets
of  the  cabinet  better  than  those  who  make  them.  The
policy  of  the  state  allows  him  to  see  all  its  designs  ;  and
it  moves  not  a  step,  of  which  he  cannot  fathom  the
motives.  He  informs  us  of  the  hidden  springs  of  every-
thing that  is  done,  lays  bare  to  us  the  prudential  views  of
our  neighbours,  and  sets  agoing,  at  his  own  fancy,  all  the
affairs  of  Europe.  His  information  extends  even  to  Africa
and  Asia ;  and  he  is  informed  of  everything  that  is  going
on  in  the  council  of  state  of  Prester-John*  and  of  the  great
Mogul.

JUL.  You  adorn  your  excuse  in  the  best  way  you  can,  in
order  to  make  it  agreeable,  and  to  have  it  more  easily
accepted.

Vis.  This  is,  fair  Julia,  the  true  cause  of  my  being  be-
hind ;  and,  if  I  wish  to  give  a  gallant  excuse,  I  should
only  have  to  tell  you  that  the  place  of  meeting  which  you
have  selected  might  authorize  the  delay  with  which  you
reproach  me;  that  to  induce  me  to  play  the  lover  of  the
mistress  of  the  house,  is  to  make  me  fear  of  being  here  the
first ;  that  this  feint  to  which  I  constrain  myself  being  only
to  please  you,  I  am  induced  not  to  wish  to  suffer  the  an-
noyance of  it,  except  in  the  presence  of  her  who  is  amused
by  it ;  that  I  avoid  the  tete-a-tete  with  this  ridiculous
Countess,  with  whom  you  hamper  me ;  and,  in  one  word,
that,  coming  here  but  for  you,  I  have  all  the  reasons  pos-
sible to  await  until  you  are  here.

JUL.  We  well  know  that  you  are  never  wanting  in  wit,
wherewith  to  give  nice  colours  to  the  faults  which  you
may  commit.  If,  however,  you  had  come  half-an-hour
earlier,  we  would  have  profited  by  all  these  moments ;  for
on  my  arrival,  I  found  that  the  Countess  had  gone  out,
and  I  do  not  doubt  that  she  has  gone  into  town  to  plume
herself  upon  the  comedy  which  you  give  me  in  her  name.

Vis.  But  in  all  earnest,  Madam,  when  will  you  put  an
end  to  this  annoyance,  and  make  me  buy  less  dearly  the
happiness  of  seeing  you  ?

1  Prester  John  was  a  fabulous  King  of  Teneduc,  or,  according  to
others,  of  Ethiopia.

SCENE  i.]  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  65

JUL.  When  our  parents  shall  be  able  to  agree ;  I  dare
not  hope  such  a  thing.  You  know,  as  well  as  I  do,  that
the  dissensions  of  our  families  do  not  allow  us  to  see  each
other  elsewhere,  and  that  my  brothers,  as  well  as  your
father,  are  not  sufficiently  reasonable  to  sanction  our  at-
tachment.

Vis.  But  why  not  take  more  advantage  of  the  place  of
meeting  which  their  animosity  still  leaves  open  to  us ;  and
oblige  me  to  lose  in  a  silly  feint  the  moments  which  I
spend  with  you?

JUL.  The  better  to  hide  our  love ;  and  again,  to  tell  you
the  truth,  this  feint  of  which  you  speak  is  a  very  pleasant
comedy  to  me ;  and  I  do  not  know  whether  the  one  you
are  going  to  give  us  to-day  will  amuse  me  better.  Our
Countess  of  Escarbagnas,  with  her  perpetual  hobby  of
quality,  is  as  good  a  character  as  one  could  put  on  the
stage.  The  little  excursion  which  she  has  made  to  Paris
has  brought  her  back  to  AngoulSme  more  perfect  than  she
was.  The  proximity  of  the  court-air  has  given  new
charms  to  her  absurdity,  and  her  silliness  does  but  grow
and  become  more  beautiful  every  day.

Vis.  Yes ;  but  you  do  not  consider  that  the  sport  which
amuses  you  keeps  my  heart  on  the  rack,  and  that  one  is
not  able  to  enjoy  this  very  long,  when  there  is  so  serious  a
passion  in  one's  mind  as  the  one  which  I  feel  for  you.  It
is  cruel,  fair  Julia,  to  let  this  amusement  rob  my  love  of
moments  which  it  would  employ  in  expressing  its  ardour
to  you ;  and,  this  night,  I  have  made  some  verses  upon  the
subject,  which  I  cannot  refrain  from  reciting  to  you,  with-
out your  asking  for  them,  so  much  is  the  eagerness  of  read-
ing one's  works  a  vice  inseparable  from  the  condition  of  a
poet !

Too  long,  Iris,  have  you  put  me  to  the  torture ;

Iris,  as  you  perceive,  is  put  there  for  Julia.

Too  long,  Iris,  have  you  put  me  to  the  torture,

And  if  I  obey  your  laws,  I  blame  them  silently

For  forcing  me  to  conceal  the  torment  which  I  endure,

To  confess  a  pain  which  I  do  not  feel.

66  THE    COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCBNB  i.

Must  your  fair  eyes,  to  which  I  yield  my  arms,
Amuse  themselves  with  my  sad  sighs  ?
And  is  it  not  enough  that  I  should  suffer  for  your  charms,
Without  making  me  also  suffer  for  your  pleasures  ?

This  double  martyrdom  is  too  much  at  one  time ;
And  what  I  am  to  keep  silent,  and  what  I  am  to  utter,
Exercises  equal  cruelty  on  my  heart.

Love  sets  it  on  fire,  restraint  kills  it ;
And  if  by  pity  you  are  not  overcome,
I  die  both  by  the  feint  and  by  the  truth.

JUL.  I  see  that  you  make  yourself  out  to  be  more  ill-
treated  than  you  are ;  but  to  tell  falsehoods  wantonly,  to
attribute  to  their  mistresses  cruelties  which  they  do  not
feel,  is  a  license  which  gentlemen  poets  take,  to  accommo-
date themselves  to  the  ideas  with  which  they  may  be  in-
spired. I  should,  however,  be  very  glad,  if  you  would
give  me  these  verses  in  writing.

Vis.  It  is  enough  to  have  recited  them  to  you,  and  I
must  stop  at  that.  It  is  allowed  to  be  sometimes  foolish
enough  to  make  verses,  but  not  to  wish  to  have  them
looked  at.

JUL.  It  is  useless  to  screen  yourself  behind  a  mock-
modesty  ;  the  world  knows  that  you  ^have  wit ;  and  I  do
not  see  any  reason  why  you  should  conceal  yours.

Vis.  For  Heaven's  sake  !  Madam,  let  us  carefully  pass
over  this,  if  you  please  ;  in  this  world  it  is  dangerous  to
meddle  with  having  wit.  There  is  a  certain  ridicule  at-
tached to  this  which  one  catches  easily,  and  some  of  our
friends  make  me  fear  their  example.

JUL.  Good  Heavens !  Cleante,  you  may  say  what  you
like.  I  see  for  all  this  that  you  are  dying  to  give  them  to
me  ;  and  I  would  embarrass  you  if  I  pretended  not  to  care
for  them.

Vis.  I,  Madam !  you  are  jesting ;  do  not  believe  that  I
am  so  much  of  a  poet  as  to  .  .  .  But  here  comes  our
Countess  of  Escarbagnas.  I  am  leaving  by  the  other  door
so  as  not  to  meet  her,  and  am  going  to  prepare  all  my
people  for  the  entertainment  which  I  have  promised  you.

SCENE  in.]  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  67

SCENE  II. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,  CRIQUET,  at
the  far  end  of  the  stage.

COUN.  Ah!  Good  Heavens!  Madam,  are  you  all  alone?
What  a  pity  that  is  !  All  alone  !  I  fancied  that  my  people
had  told  me  that  the  Viscount  was  here.

JUL.  It  is  true  that  he  came ;  but  it  was  quite  sufficient
for  him  to  know  that  you  were  not  here,  to  make  him
leave  again.

COUN.  What !  he  has  seen  you  ?

JUL.  Yes.

COUN.  And  has  he  said  nothing  to  you  ?

JUL.  No,  Madam ;  and  by  this  he  wished  to  show  that
he  is  entirely  devoted  to  your  charms.

COUN.  Really,  I  shall  tax  him  with  this  behaviour.
Whatever  love  one  may  have  for  me,  I  like  those  who  love
me  to  render  what  is  due  to  the  sex;  and  my  disposition
is  not  like  that  of  those  unjust  women  who  plume  them-
selves on  the  incivilities  which  their  lovers  show  to  other
fair  ones.

JUL.  You  should  not  be  surprised  at  his  behaviour,
Madam.  The  love  with  which  you  inspire  him  shows
itself  in  all  his  actions,  and  prevents  his  having  eyes  for
any  one  except  you.

COUN.  I  believe  myself  capable  of  causing  a  sufficiently
strong  passion,  and  I  think  myself  sufficiently  handsome,
young,  and  well-born,  thank  Heaven ;  but  that  does  not
hinder  that,  though  I  inspire  love,  they  should  be  civil  and
polite  to  others.  {Perceiving  Criquei).  What  are  you
doing  here,  fellow  ?  Is  there  no  ante-room  in  which  to
dawdle,  to  come  when  you  are  called  ?  It  is  strange  that
in  the  provinces  one  cannot  have  a  lacquey  who  knows
his  place  !  To  whom  am  I  speaking?  Will  you  go  out-
side, you  little  rogue  ?

SCENE  III. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE.

COUN.  (To  Andree).     Come  here,  girl.
AND.  What  may  you  please  to  want,  Madam  ?
COUN.  Take  off  my  hood.     Gently,  then,  you  awkward
girl :  how  you  pull  my  head  about  with  your  heavy  hands  !
AND.  I  am   doing  it,  Madam,  as  gently  as  I  can.

68  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCEKB  v

COUN.  Yes ;  but  as  gently  as  you  can  is  very  rough  to
my  head,  and  you  have  dislocated  it  for  me.  Hold  this
muff  also ;  do  not  let  all  this  trail  about,  and  take  it  to
my  wardrobe.  Well !  where  is  she  going  to  ?  where  is
she  going  to?  What  is  she  about,  this  goose?4

AND.  I  wish  to  take  this  to  your  mistress  of  the  robes,5
as  you  told  me.

COUN.  Good  Heavens  !  the  ninny  !  (To  Julia).  I  beg
your  pardon,  Madam.  {To  Andree).  I  said  to  you  my
wardrobe,  you  big  fool ;  that  means  where  my  dresses  are
kept.

AND.  Is  a  closet  called  a  wardrobe  at  court,  Madam  ?

COUN.  Yes,  booby ;  the  place  where  the  dresses  are
kept  is  so  called.

AND.  I  shall  bear  this  in  mind,  Madam,  for  your  attic
also,  which  ought  to  be  called  a  ward-furniture.'

SCENE  IV. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA.

COUN.  What  a  trouble  one  has  to  teach  these  animals  ?

JUL.  I  think  them  very  happy,  Madam  to  be  under
your  discipline.

COUN.  It  is  a  daughter  of  my  foster-mother  whom  I
have  taken  to  wait  upon  me ;  and  she  is  quite  new  to  it
yet.

JUL.  You  have  acted  nobly,  Madam  ;  and  it  is  glorious
to  train  creatures  like  that.

COUN.  Come,  seats  here.  Hullo,  fellows,  fellows,  fel-
lows !  Upon  my  word,  this  is  too  bad,  not  to  have  a
lacquey  to  hand  chairs  !  Girls,  fellows  ;  fellows,  girls  ;
some  one  !  I  believe  that  all  my  people  are  dead,  and
that  we  shall  be  obliged  to  get  chairs  for  ourselves.

SCENE  V. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE.

AND.  What  do  you  wish,  Madam  ?

COUN.  One  has  to  shout  loud  with  you  people.

4  The  original  has  oison  bride,  bridled  goose.     See  page  388,  note  23.

6  There  is  a  joke  in  the  original  which  cannot  be  rendered  into  English.
UtU garde-robe  is  a  wardrobe,  but  une  garde-robe  is  the  Mistress  of  the
Robes  at  Court.

•  The  original  has  garde-meuble,  furniture-warehouse,  lumber-room.

SCENE  vi.]  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS  69

AND.  I  was  putting  your  muff  and  hood  away  in  your
press  ...  I  mean,  in  your  wardrobe

COUN.  Call  me  this  little  rogue  of  a  lacquey.

AND.  Hullo  !  Criquet  !

COUN.  Leave  your  Criquet  alone,  you  awkward  wench,
and  call  lacquey.

AND.  Lacquey,  then,  and  not  Criquet,  come  and  speak
to  Madam.  I  think  he  is  deaf.  Criq  .  .  .  lacquey,
lacquey.

SCENE  VI. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,  CRIQUET.

CRI.  Did  you  call  ?

COUN.  Where  were  you,  you  little  rogue  ?

CRI.  In  the  street,  Madam.

COUN.   And  why  in  the  street  ?

CRI.  You  told  me  to  go  outside.

COUN.  You  are  a  little  jackanapes,  my  friend  ;  and  you
ought  to  know  that  outside,  as  these  words  are  used  by
persons  of  quality,  means  the  ante-room.  Andree,  re-
member by-and-by  to  have  this  little  rogue  whipped  by
my  equerry ;  he  is  a  little  incorrigible  fellow.

AND.  Who  is  your  equerry,  Madam  ?  Is  it  Master
Charles  whom  you  call  that  ?

COUN.  Hold  your  tongue  stupid  that  you  are :  you
cannot  open  your  lips  without  uttering  some  impertinence.
(To  Criquef).  Chairs.  (To  Andree).  And  you,  light  two
wax-candles  in  my  silver  candlesticks ;  it  is  already  get-
ting late.  What  is  the  matter,  that  you  look  at  me  so
wildly?

AND.  Madam  .    .    .

COUN.   Well,  Madam  !  What  is  it  ?

AND.  It  is  .    .    .

COUN.  Well?

AND.   It  is  that  I  have  no  wax -candles.

COUN.   How  is  this  !  you  have  none  ?

AND.  No,  Madam,  unless  it  be  tallow-candles.

COUN.  The  vulgar  wench  !  And  where  are  the  wax
ones  which  I  lately  bought  ?

AND.  I  have  not  seen  any  since  I  have  been  in  the
house.

COUN.  Get  out  of  my  sight,  insolent  hussy.     I   shall

70  THE  COUNTESS   OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCBNB  ix.

send  you  back  to  your  parents.      Bring   me  a  glass  of
water.

SCENE  VII. — THE  COUNTESS  and  JULIA,  making  mutual
ceremonies  to  sit  down.

COUN.  Madam  1
JUL.  Madam !
COUN.  Ah !  Madam  !
JUL.  Ah  !  Madam  !
COUN.   Pray,  Madam!
JUL.   Pray,  Madam  !
COUN.  Oh  !  Madam  !
JUL.  Oh  !  Madam  !
COUN.  Eh  !  Madam  !
JUL.  Eh  !  Madam.
COUN.  Eh,  come !  Madam.
JUL.  Eh,  come  !  Madam  !

COUN.  I  am  at  home,  Madam  !     We  are  agreed  upon
that.     Do  you  take  me  for  a  provincial,  Madam  ?
JUL.  Heaven  forfend,  Madam.7

SCENE  VIII. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,  carrying  a
glass  of  water  j  CRIQUET.

COUN.  (To  Andre e).  Go  away,  you  impertinent  girl;
I  drink  with  a  saucer.  I  tell  you  that  you  shall  go  and
get  me  a  saucer  to  drink  with.

AND.  Criquet,  what  is  a  saucer  ?

CRI.  A  saucer?

AND.  Yes.

CRI.  I  know  not.

COUN.  (  To  Andree).  You  do  not  move  ?

AND.  We  know  neither  of  us  what  a  saucer  is.

COUN.  Then  learn  that  it  is  a  plate  whereon  to  place
the  glass.

SCENE  IX. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA.

COUN. — There  is  but  one  Paris  to  be  well  waited  upon  !
You  are  understood  there  with  the  slightest  glance.

7  Nearly  a  similar  scene  is  found  in  A  Criticism  on  the  School  for
Wives,  Act  i.,  Scene  3  (see  Vol.  I.),  between  Climene  and  Eliza.

SCENE  xi.]  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  7 1

SCENE  X. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,    bringing  a
glass  of  water  with  a  plate  on  the  top,  CRIQUET.

COUN.  Well !  did  I  tell  you  thus,  ox-head  ?  You  should
put  the  plate  underneath.

AND.  That  is  easy  enough.

(Andre e  breaks  the  glass  in  putting
it  on  the  plate. )

COUN.  Well !  did  you  ever  see  such  a  blunderer  ?  You
shall  pay  for  my  glass.

AND.  Very  well !  yes,  Madam,  I  shall  pay  for  it.

COUN.  But  look  at  this  awkward  girl,  this  country  lass,
this  blockhead,  this  .  .  .

AND.  (Making  off}.  Really,  Madam,  if  I  have  to  pay
for  it,  I  do  not  want  to  be  scolded.

COUN.  Get  out  of  my  sight.

SCENE  XI. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA.

COUN.  In  truth,  Madam,  it  is  a  strange  thing,  these
small  towns  !  People  do  not  know  at  all  how  to  behave;
and  I  have  just  paid  two  or  three  visits,  where  they  nearly
drove  me  desperate  by  the  little  respect  they  showed  to
my  rank.

JUL.  Where  could  they  have  learnt  manners?  They
have  made  no  journey  to  Paris.

COUN.    They  could   nevertheless  learn,  if  they  would
listen  to  people;    but  the  worst  is  that  they  pretend  to
know  as  much  about  it  as  I,  who  have  been  two  months  in
Paris,  and  have  seen  the  whole  court.
JUL.  What  stupid  people  these  !

COUN.  They  are  unbearable  with  the  impertinent  equal-
ity with  which  they  treat  people.  For,  after  all,  there
must  be  some  subordination  in  things ;  and  what  puts  me
beside  myself,  is  that  a  town  gentleman,  of  two  days,  or
of  two  hundred  years'  standing,  should  have  the  effrontery
to  say  that  he  is  as  good  a  gentleman  as  my  late  husband,
who  lived  in  the  country,  who  had  his  pack  of  hounds,  and
who  took  the  title  of  count  in  all  the  contracts  which  he
made.

JUL.  They  live  better  in  Paris,  in  these  hotels,  the  re-
collection of  which  must  be  so  dear.  This  hotel  de  Mouhy,

72  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCBNB  xi.

Madam,  this  hotel  de  Lyon,  this  hotel  de  Hollande,  what
pleasant  places  they  are  ! 8

COUN.  No  doubt  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  difference
between  these  places,  and  all  these  here.  We  meet  there
with  good  society  which  does  not  haggle  to  pay  you  every
attention  you  could  wish.  Unless  one  likes,  one  needs  not
get  off  one's  chair ;  and,  whether  one  wishes  to  see  the
review,  or  the  great  ballet  of  Psyche,  you  are  served  punc-
tually.

JUL.  I  think,  Madam,  that,  during  your  stay  in  Paris,
you  must  have  made  many  conquests  of  people  of
rank.

COUN.  You  may  well  believe,  Madam,  that  every  one
who  could  be  called  a  court  gallant  did  not  fail  to  come
to  my  apartments,  to  say  soft  nothings  ;  and  I  keep  in  my
desk  their  notes,  which  might  show  what  proposals  I  have
refused  ;  it  is  not  necessary  to  tell  you  their  names.  You
know  what  I  mean  by  the  court  gallants.

JUL.  I  am  surprised,  Madam,  that  after  all  these  great
names  at  which  I  guess,  you  have  been  able  to  come  down
again  to  a  Mr.  Tibaudier,  a  counsellor  at  law,  and  to  a
Mr.  Harpin,  a  receiver  of  taxes.  The  fall  is  great,  I  con-
fess ;  for,  as  for  your  Viscount,  though  but  a  country  Vis-
count, he  is  at  any  rate  a  Viscount,  and  may  make  a  jour-
ney to  Paris,  if  he  have  not  already  done  so :  but  a  coun-
sellor at  law,  and  a  receiver  of  taxes  are  somewhat  inferior
lovers  for  a  grand  Countess  like  you.

COUN.  They  are  people  whom  we  conciliate  in  the
provinces  for  the  need  we  may  have  of  them ;  they  serve
at  least  to  fill  up  the  vacancies  of  gallantry ;  to  increase
the  number  of  suitors ;  and  it  is  well,  Madam,  not  to  let
one  lover  be  sole  master,  for  fear,  that,  failing  rivals,  his
love  may  go  to  sleep  through  too  much  confidence.

JUL.  I  confess  to  you,  Madam,  that  there  is  a  marvel-
lous deal  to  learn  by  what  you  say ;  your  conversation  is
a  school,  and  every  day  I  get  hold  of  something  in
it.

•The  name  hotel -was  given  to  a  nobleman's  or  rich  man's  town-house
as  well  as  to  an  hotel.  The  places  which  Julia  mentions  are  hotels  in  the
English  sense  of  the  word.

SCKNKXIV.]  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  73

SCENE  XII. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,  CRI-

QUET.

CRI.  (To  the  Countess).  Here  is  Jeannot  from  the
counsellor's,  who  is  asking  for  you,  Madam.

COUN.  Well !  you  little  rogue,  some  more  of  your  stu-
pidities. A  lacquey  who  knew  his  place,  would  have  gone
to  speak  quite  low  to  the  young  lady  attendant,  who  would
have  come  quietly  to  whisper  into  the  ear  of  her  mistress  :
Madam,  here  is  the  servant  of  master  so-and-so,  who
wishes  to  speak  a  word  to  you ;  to  which  the  mistress
would  have  answered  :  Let  him  come  in.

SCENE  XIII. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  ANDREE,  CRIQUET,
JEANNOT.

CRI.  Come  in,  Jeannot.

COUN.  Some  more  bungling.  (To  Jeannot}.  What  is
it,  fellow?  What  have  you  there  ?

JEAN.  It  is  the  counsellor,  Madam,  who  wishes  you  a
very  good  day,  and  before  coming  here,  sends  you  some
pears  from  his  garden,  with  this  little  note.

COUN.  It  is  some  bon-chretien,  which  is  very  nice.  An-
dree,  have  them  carried  to  the  pantry.

SCENE  XIV. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,   CRIQUET,
JEANNOT.

COUN.  (Giving  some  money  to  Jeannot}.  Here,  my
child,  here  is  something  to  drinK  my  health  with.

JEAN.   Oh  !  no,  Madam  !

COUN.  Take  it,  I  tell  you.

JEAN.  My  master  has  forbidden  me  Madam,  to  take
anything  from  you.

COUN.   That  does  not  matter.

JEAN.  Pardon  me,  Madam.

CRI.  Eh  !  take  it,  Jeannot.  If  you  do  not  want  it,  you
can  give  it  to  me.

COUN.  Tell  your  master  that  I  am  obliged  to  him.

CRI.  (To  feannot,  who  ts  going}.     Just  give  me  this.

JEAN.  Oh,  yes  !     Do  you  think  I  am  a  fool !

CRI.  It  is  I  who  made  you  take  it.

JEAN.  I  should  have  taken  it  well  enough  without  you.

74  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCENE  xv.

COUN.  What  pleases  me  in  this  Mr.  Tibaudier  is,  that
he  knows  how  to  behave  with  persons  of  my  rank,  and
that  he  is  very  respectful

SCENE  XV. — THE  VISCOUNT,  THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,
CRIQUET.

Vis.  Madam,  I  have  come  to  warn  you  that  the  come-
dy will  soon  be  ready,  and  that,  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour,
we  can  go  into  the  large  room.

COUN.  I  will  have  no  crush  at  least.  {To  Criquef).
Tell  my  porter  to  let  no  one  enter.

Vis.  In  this  case,  Madam,  I  must  inform  you  that  I
shall  abandon  the  comedy ;  and  I  cannot  take  any  plea-
sure in  it,  if  the  company  be  not  numerous.  Believe  me,
that  if  you  wish  to  amuse  yourself  well,  you  should  tell
your  people  to  let  the  whole  town  come  in.

COUN.  A  chair,  fellow.  {To  the  Viscount,  after  he  is
seated}.  You  are  come  just  in  time  to  receive  a  small
sacrifice  which  I  wish  to  make  to  you.  Look  here,  it  is
a  note  of  Mr.  Tibaudier,  who  sends  me  some  pears.  I
give  you  permission  to  read  it  aloud ;  I  have  not  seen  it
yet.

Vis.  (After  having  read  the  note  to  himself}.  This
note  is  in  capital  style,  and  well  merits  being  listened  to.
(He  reads).  "Madam,  I  could  not  have  made  you  the  pre-
sent which  I  send  you,  if,  I  gathered  as  little  fruit  from  my
garden  as  I  gather  from  my  love."

COUN.  This  shows  you  clearly  that  nothing  passes
between  us.

Vis.  "  The  pears  are  not  yet  very  ripe  ;  but  they  will  go
all  the  better  with  the  hardness  of  your  heart,  which,  by  its
continuous  disdain,  does  not  promise  me  anything  soft.9  Per-
mit me.  Madam,  without  entering  upon  an  enumeration  of
your  perfections  and  charms^  which  would  betray  me  in  a
never-ending  progress,  to  conclude  this  note  by  calling  your
attention  to  the  fact  that  I  am  as  good  a  Christian™  as  the
pears  which  I  send  you,  since  I  return  good  for  evil;  which
means,  Madam,  to  express  myself  more  intelligibly,  that  I

9  The  original  has  ne  me  prom et  pas  poires  molles.

10  These  pears  were  called  bon-chretien  ;  the  latter  word  means   also
Christian  ;  hence  the  play  on  words.

SCENE  xvi.]  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  75

offer  you  pears  of  bon-chretien  for  choke-fears11  which  your
cruelty  makes  me  swallow  every  day.

' '  Tibaudier,  your  unworthy  slave. ' '
This,  Madam,  is  a  note  to  preserve.

COUN.  There  may,  perhaps,  be  some  words  in  it  which
does  not  belong  to  the  Academy ;  but  I  can  read  a  cer-
tain respect  in  it  which  pleases  me  much.

JUL.  You  are  right,  Madam  ;  and,  at  the  risk  of  offend-
ing the  Viscount,  I  should  love  a  man  who  wrote  to  me
in  that  way.

SCENE  XVI. — MR.  TIBAUDIER,  THE  VISCOUNT,  THE  COUN-
TESS, JULIA.

COUN.  Come  here,  Mr.  Tibaudier ;  do  not  fear  to  come
in.  Your  note  has  been  well  received,  as  well  as  your
pears ;  and  behold  this  lady  pleading  for  you  against  your
rival.

MR.  TIB.  I  am  obliged  to  her,  Madam;  and  if  ever
she  have  a  suit  before  our  Court,  she  shall  see  that  I  am
not  forgetful  of  the  honour  she  does  me,  in  constituting
herself  the  defender  of  my  flame  before  your  charms.

JUL.  You  have  no  need  of  a  defender,  Sir,  and  your
cause  is  a  just  one.

MR.  TIB.  This  notwithstanding,  Madam,  a  good  case
has  need  of  aid ;  and  I  have  cause  to  fear  that  I  shall  see
myself  supplanted  by  such  a  rival,  and  that  the  Countess
will  be  circumvented  by  the  rank  of  the  Viscount.

Vis.  I  had  some  hope  before  your  note,  Mr.  Tibaudier ;
but  it  makes  me  fear  for  my  love.

MR.  TIB.  Madam,  these  are  also  two  little  verselets  or
couplets  which  I  have  composed  in  your  honour  and  glory.

Vis.  Ah !  I  did  not  think  that  Mr,  Tibaudier  was  a
poet ;  and  these  two  little  verselets  come  to  settle  me !

COUN.  He  means  two  strophes.  (To  Criquef).  Fellow,
hand  a  chair  to  Mr.  Tibaudier.  (Softly  to  Criquet,  who
brings  him  a  chair}.  A  folding  stool,  you  little  animal.18

11  The  original  has  poire  d  'angoisse,  an  instrument  of  torture  in  the  f
form  of  a  pear,  which  was  placed  into  the  mouth  of  the  victim.    Upon
turning  a  keg  a  number  of  springs  thrust  forth  points  of  iron,  so  that  it
could  only  be'  taken  out  by  means  of  the  key.

11  At  Court,  the  difference  of  rank  was  known  by  the  use  of  arm-chairs,
chairs  without  arms,  folding-stools,  and  foot-stools.

76  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCENE  xvi.

Mr.  Tibaudier,  place  yourself  there,  and  read  us  your
strophes.

MR.  TIB.  A  lady  of  quality

Ravishes  my  soul:

She  has  beauty,

I  have  love ;

But  I  blame  her

For  having  pride.

Vis.   I  am  lost  after  this.

COUN.  The  first  verse  is  beautiful.     A  lady  of  quality.
JUL.  I  think  it  is  a  little  too  long ;  but  one  may  take  a
certain  license  in  uttering  a  fine  thought.
COUN.  Let  us  hear  the  other  strophe.
MR.  TIB.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  doubt  my  perfect

love:

But  this  I  know,  that  my  heart,  at  each  mo-
ment,

Wishes  to  leave  its  melancholy  abode,
To  go,  out  of  respect,  and  pay  its  court  to

yours.

After  this,    however,   certain  of    my  affec-
tion,

And  of  my  fidelity,  unique  of  its  kind,
You  ought  in  your  turn,
Contenting  yourself  by  being  a  countess,
To  divest  yourself  in  my  favour  of  your  tigress

skin,
Which  hides  your  charms  by  night  as  well  as

by  day.

Vis.  Here  I  am  supplanted  by  Mr.  Tibaudier.
COUN.  Do  not  try  to  sneer;    for  verses  made  in  the
provinces,  these  verses  are  very  beautiful.

Vis.  How,  Madam,  to  sneer?  Though  his  rival,  I  think
these  verses  admirable,  and  not  only  call  them  two  strophes,
but  two  epigrams,  as  good  as  all  those  of  Martial.

COUN.  What !  does  Martial  make  verses  ?  I  thought  he
made  nothing  but  gloves."

x*  Martial  was  a  celebrated  perfumer  and  glove-seller  of  the  time,  as
well  as  valet  to  the  brother  of  Louis  XIV.

SCENE  xvn.]  THE  COUNTESS  OP  ESCARBAGNAS.  77

MR.  TIB.  It  is  not  that  Martial,  Madam  ;  it  is  an  author
who  lived  about  thirty  or  forty  years  ago."

Vis.  Mr.  Tibaudier  has  read  the  authors,  as  you  may
hear.  But  let  us  go  and  see,  Madam,  whether  my  comedy
and  my  music,  v/ith  my  entries  of  the  ballet  may  combat
in  your  mind  the  effect  of  these  two  strophes  and  of  the
note  which  we  have  just  read.

COUN.  My  son  the  Count  ought  to  be  one  of  the  party ;
for  he  arrived  this  morning  from  my  country-house  with
his  tutor,  whom  I  see  inside.

SCENE  XVII.  — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT,
MR.  TIBAUDIER,  MR.  BOBINET,  CRIQUET.

COUN.  Hullo  !  Mr.  Bobinet,  Mr.  Bobinet,  just  come  and
show  yourself.

MR.  BOB.  I  wish  the  honourable  company  good  evening.15
What  desires  the  Countess  of  Escarbagnas  from  her  very
humble  servant  Bobinet?

COUN.  At  what  hour,  Mr.  Bobinet,  did  you  start  from
Escarbagnas  with  my  son  the  Count  ?

MR.  BOB.  At  a  quarter  to  nine,  Madam,  as  your  orders
had  commanded  it  to  me.

COUN.  How  fare  my  two  other  sons,  the  Marquis  and
the  Commander  ?

MR.  BOB.  They  are,  Heaven  be  praised,  Madam,  in  per-
fect health.

COUN.   Where  is  the  Count?

MR.  BOB.  In  your  beautiful  apartment  with  the  alcove,
Madam.

COUN.  What  is  he  doing,  Mr.  Bobinet  ?

MR.  BOB.  He  is  composing  an  exercise,  Madam,  which
I  have  just  dictated  to  him  upon  an  epistle  of  Cicero.

COUN.  Fetch  him  hither,  Mr.  Bobinet.

MR.  BOB.  It  shall  be  done,  Madam,  according  to  your
wishes.

14  The  poet  Martial  lived  from  the  year  43  to  the  year  104 ;  hence  Ti-
baudier, in  correcting  the  Countess,  commits,  at  least  as  great  an  error.

16  The  original  \\asje  donne  le  ban  vtyres,  a  very  antiquated  and  pedan-
tic expression,  which  at  once  depicts  Mr.  Bobinet.

78  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.     [sc«n«  xix.

SCENE  XVIII. —  THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT,

MR.  TIBAUDIER.

Vis.  {To  Countess).  This  Mr.  Bobinet,  Madam,  has  a
very  learned  look  ;  and  I  believe  that  he  has  some  wit.

SCENE  XIV. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT,
THE  COUNT,  MR.  BOBINET,  MR.  TIBAUDIER.

MR.  BOB.  Come,  come,  show  that  you  profit  by  the
lessons  that  are  given  you.  A  bow  to  all  the  distinguished
company.

COUN.  (Pointing  to  Julia).  Count,  salute  this  lady;
bow  low  to  the  Viscount ;  salute  the  Counsellor.

MR.  TIB.  I  am  enchanted,  Madam,  that  you  concede
me  the  favour  of  embracing  the  Count,  your  son  One
cannot  love  the  trunk,  without  also  loving  the  branches.

COUN.  Good  Heaven  !  Mr.  Tibaudier,  what  compari-
son are  you  employing  there  ?

JUL.  Really,  Madam,  the  Count  is  altogether  charming.

Vis.  This  is  a  young  gentleman  who  enters  society  well.

JUL.  Who  would  have  thought,  Madame,  that  you  had
such  a  tall  child.

COUN.  Alas  !  when  he  was  born,  I  was  so  young  that  I
was  still  playing  with  a  doll.

JUL.  It  is  your  brother,  not  your  son.

COUN.  Have  at  least  a  care  about  his  education,  Mr.
Bobinet.

MR.  BOB.  Madam,  I  shall  overlook  nothing  to  cultivate
this  young  shoot,  of  which  your  goodness  has  done  me
the  honour  to  confide  the  training ;  and  I  shall  inculcate
in  him  the  seeds  of  virtue.

COUN.  Mr.  Bobinet,  just  make  him  repeat  some  little
gallantry  of  what  you  teach  him.

MR.  BOB.  Come,  Count,  recite  your  lesson  of  yesterday
morning.

COUNT.  Omne  viro  soli  quod  convenit  esto  verile,  Omne
viri  .  .  .

COUN.  Fie  !  Mr.  Bobinet,  what  nonsense  do  you  teach
him  there?"

16  There  is  a  play  on  words  here  which  cannot  be  explained.  The
second  line,  which  the  Countess  does  not  even  allow  her  son  to  finish  is

SCENE  xxi.]  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  79

MR.  BOB.  It  is  Latin,  Madam,  and  the  first  line  of
Jean  Despautere."

COUN.  Good  Heaven  !  this  Jean  Despautere  is  an  in-
solent fellow,  and  I  beg  you  will  teach  him  some  more
decent  Latin  than  that.

MR.  BOB.  If  you  wish  him  to  finish,  Madam,  the  gloss
will  explain  what  it  means.

COUN.  No,  no :  it  explains  itself  sufficiently.

SCENE  XX. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT,  MR.
TIBAUDIER,  THE  COUNT,  MR.  BOBINET,  CRIQUET.

CRI.  The  actors  send  me  to  say  that  they  are  quite
ready.

CRI.  Let  us  take  our  seats.  (Pointing  to  Julia).  Mr.
Tibaudier,  take  in  this  lady.

(jCriquet  ranges  the  chairs  on  one  side  of  the  stage ;
the  Countess ,  Julia,  and  the  Viscount  sit  down ;
Mr.  Tibaudier  places  himself  at  the  feet  of  the
Countess?)

Vis.  It  is  necessary  to  say  that  this  comedy  has  been
written  only  to  connect  together  the  different  pieces  of
music  and  dancing  of  which  they  wished  to  compose  this
entertainment,  and  that  .  .  .

COUN.  Good  Heavens  !  let  us  see  the  affair.  We  have
sufficient  sense  to  understand  things.

Vis.  Let  them  begin  as  quickly  as  they  can,  and  let
them  prevent,  if  possible,  any  intruder  from  troubling  our
entertainment.  (The  violins  commence  an  overture).

SCENE  XXI. — THE  COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE  VISCOUNT,
THE  COUNT,  MR.  HARPIN,  MR.  TIBAUDIER,  MR.
BOBINET,  CRIQUET.

MR.  HAR.  Zounds  !  that  is  a  pretty  set  out,  and  I  re-
joice to  see  what  I  do  see.

COUN.   Hullo !  Mr.  Receiver,  what  do  you  mean  by  this

Omne  viri  specie  pictum  vir  dicitur  esse,  and  both  lines  mean  :  "  All  that
suits  man  alone  is  of  the  masculine  gender,  and  so  is  all  that  is  represented
under  the  figure  of  a  man."

17  For  the  grammar  of  Despautere,  see  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Him-
self, Vol.  II.,  note  25.

8O  THE  COUNTESS   OF   ESCARBAGNAS.  [SCENE  XXL

behaviour?     Do  people  come  to  interrupt  a  comedy  in
this  way?

MR.  HAR.  Zounds  !  Madam,  I  am  enchanted  with  this
adventure ;  and  this  shows  me  what  I  am  to  believe  of
you,  and  the  certainty  which  there  is  in  the  grief  of  your
heart,  and  in  the  oaths  which  you  have  sworn  to  me  of  its
fidelity.

COUN.  But  really  one  does  not  come  to  throw  oneself
in  the  midst  of  a  comedy,  and  to  trouble  an  actor  who  is
speaking.18

MR.  HAR.  Eh  !  the  deuce  !  The  real  comedy  which  is
performed  here,  is  played  by  you ;  and  if  I  do  trouble  you,
I  care  very  little  about  it.

COUN.   Really,  you  do  not  know  what  you  are  saying.

MR.  HAR.   Indeed,    zounds  !    Indeed,    I  know   it  well

enough,  zounds !   and  .    .     .  ( Mr.  Bobinet,  frightened,  runs

off,  taking  the  Count  with  htm,  followed  by  Criquet.

COUN.  Fie,  Sir,  how  nasty  it  is  to  swear  in  that  way.

MR.  HAR.  Eh  !  Odds  bobs !  if  there  be  anything  nasty,
it  is  not  my  swearing,  but  your  goings  on  ;  and  it  would
be  better  for  you  to  swear,  heads,  'sdeaths,  and  blood,
than  to  do  what  you  are  doing  with  the  Viscount.

Vis.  1  do  not  know,  Mr.  Receiver,  of  what  you  have  to
complain;  and  if  ...

MR.  HAR.  {To  the  Viscount}.  As  for  you,  Sir,  I  have
nothing  to  say  to  you.  You  do  well  to  press  your  suit,  it
is  natural ;  I  find  nothing  strange  in  it,  and  I  ask  your
pardon  if  I  have  interrupted  your  comedy ;  but  you  cannot
think  it  strange  that  I  complain  of  her  behaviour ;  and  we
have  both  reason  to  act  as  we  are  acting.

Vis.  I  have  nothing  to  say  against  this,  and  do  not
know  the  causes  of  complaint  which  you  may  have  against
the  Countess  of  Escarbagnas.

COUN.  When  one  has  jealous  cares,  one  ought  not  to
behave  in  this  manner  ;  but  to  come  and  complain  gently
to  the  person  one  loves.

18  It  is  probable  that  when  this  play  was  represented  at  Saint-Germain,
Mr.  Harpin  interrupted  some  part  of  the  Ballet  des  ballets  ;  and  even  at
the  Palais  Royal,  some  dialogue  was  probably  spoken.  When  the
Countess  of  Escarbagnas  is  performed  now  at  the  Comidu-Francaise  a
part  of  one  of  Moliere's  plays  is  always  acted.

SCENE  xxi.]  THE  COUNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAS.  8 1

MR.  HAR.  I,  complain  gently  !

COUN.  Yes.  One  does  not  come  to  bawl  out  in  a  thea-
tre what  should  be  said  in  private.

MK.  HAR.  I  came,  zounds  !  expressly ;  it  is  just  the
place  I  want ;  and  I  could  wish  that  it  were  a  public
stage,  to  tell  with  more  effect  all  the  truths  about  you.

COUN.  Is  there  need  of  making  so  great  a  noise  about
a  comedy  with  which  the  Viscount  entertains  me  ?  You
see  that  Mr.  Tibaudier,  who  loves  me,  behaves  more  re-
spectfully than  you.

MR.  HAR.  Mr.  Tibaudier  behaves  as  it  pleases  him :  I
do  not  know  on  what  footing  Mr.  Tibaudier  is  with  you;
but  Mr.  Tibaudier  is  not  an  example  for  me,  and  I  am  not
disposed  to  pay  the  violins  to  let  others  dance.

COUN.  But  really,  Mr.  Receiver,  you  know  not  what
you  are  saying.  One  does  not  act  in  this  manner  with
ladies  of  quality ;  and  they  who  hear  you  would  think
that  there  was  something  strange  between  you  and  me.

MR.  HAR.  Eh  !  Odds  bobs !  Madam,  let  us  drop  this
nonsense.

COUN.  But  what  then  do  you  mean  with  your  :  Let  us
drop  this  nonsense  ?

MR.  HAR.  I  mean  that  I  find  nothing  strange  in  it  that
you  should  give  way  to  the  merits  of  the  Viscount ;  you
are  not  the  first  woman  who  plays  that  sort  of  character  in
society,  and  who  has  a  Receiver  after  her,  whose  affection
and  purse  one  finds  her  betray  for  the  first  comer  who
suits  her  views.  But  do  not  think  it  strange  that  I  am  not
the  dupe  of  an  infidelity  so  common  to  the  coquettes  of
the  present  day,  and  that  I  come  to  assure  you  before
company,  that  I  break  off  all  connection  with  you,  and
that  Mr.  Receiver  shall  no  longer  be  Mr.  Giver  to  you.

COUN.  It  is  marvellous  how  hot-headed  lovers  are  be-
coming the  fashion  !  One  sees  nothing  else  on  all  sides.
There,  there,  Mr.  Receiver,  drop  your  anger,  and  come
and  take  a  seat  to  see  the  comedy.

MR.  HAR.  I,  zounds !  take  a  seat !  (Pointing  to  Mr.
Tibaudier).  Seek  your  simpletons  at  your  own  feet.  I
leave  you,  Countess,  to  the  Viscount ;  and  it  is  to  him
that  I  shall  send  your  letters  by-and-by.  Now  my  scene  is
finished,  my  part  performed.  I  am  the  company's  servant.

82  THE  COtTNTESS  OF  ESCARBAGNAii.  [SCKNB  xxn.

MR.  TIB.  Mr.  Receiver  we  shall  meet  each  other  else-
where than  here ;  and  I  shall  show  you  that  I  can  use  the
sword  as  well  as  the  pen.19

MR.  HAR.  (Going).     You  are  right,  Mr.  Tibaudier.

COUN.  As  for  me,  I  am  taken  aback  by  this  insolence.

Vis.  Jealous  people,  Madam,  are  like  those  who  lose
lawsuits ;  they  have  the  privilege  of  saying  anything.  Let
us  be  silent  for  the  comedy.

SCENE  XXII. — THE   COUNTESS,  JULIA,  THE   VISCOUNT,
MR.  TIBAUDIER,  JEANNOT.

JEAN.  {To  Viscount.}  This  is  a  note,  which  I  have
been  told  to  give  you.

Vis.  {Reading).  "  In  case  you  have  any  measures  to
take,  I  promptly  send  you  some  news.  The  quarrel  between
your  parents  and  those  of  Julia  has  just  been  made  up  :  and
the  condition  of  this  reconciliation,  is  the  marriage  of  you
and  her.  Good  night.11  (To  Julia).  Upon  my  word,
Madam,  behold  our  comedy  also  finished.
( The  Viscount,  the  Countess,  Julia,  and  Mr.  Tibauder  rise.

JUL.  Ah !  Cleante,  what  happiness !  Could  our  affec-
tion have  dared  to  hope  for  so  happy  an  issue  ?

COUN.  How  now  ?     What  does  this  mean  ?

Vis.  This  means,  Madam,  that  I  marry  Julia ;  and  if
you  believe  me,  to  render  the  comedy  more  complete  in
all  points,  you  will  marry  Mr.  Tibaudier,  and  give  Miss
Andree  to  his  lacquey,  of  whom  he  shall  make  his  valet.

COUN.  What !   to  hoodwink  a  person  of  my  rank  thus  ?

Vis.  It  was  meant  without  offence,  Madam ;  comedies
require  these  sorts  of  things.

COUN.  Yes,  Mr.  Tibaudier,  I  marry  you  in  order  to
put  the  whole  world  in  a  rage.

MR.  TIB.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  me,  Madam.

Vis.  (To  the  Countess).  Permit  us,  Madam,  that  while
we  are  getting  into  a  rage  we  may  witness  the  end  of  the
performance.20

19  The  original  has  queje  suis  au  poll  et  a  la  plume,  a  term  of  the  chase
applied  to  dogs  which  could  follow  all  kinds  of  game.

*°  These  last  words  prove  that  there  was  some  part  of  a  play  or  ballet
coming  at  the  end  of  the  Countess  of  Escarbagnas  ;  this  was  probably  the
last  intermede  of  Psyche,  so  that  the  spectators  might  not  have  become  too
cloyed  with  operatic  splendours,  or  with  the  coarseness  of  Mr.  Harpin.

LES  FEMMES  SAVANTES.

COMEDIE.

THE  LEARNED  LADIES.

A  COMEDY  IN  FIVE  ACTS.

(  THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.)

MARCH  IITH,  1672.

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.

THE  comedy,  The  Learned  Ladies,  was  represented  on  the  nth  of  March
1672,  and  performed  nineteen  times,  partly  before,  and  partly  after  Easter.
In  this  play,  Moliere  aimed  not,  as  in  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies,  at
sketching  a  temporary  folly,  and  affectation  of  language  and  manners,
but  in  giving  us  characters  which  exist,  with  certain  modifications,  in  all
ages.  Philaminte  is  the  woman  who  rules  her  home  despotically,  wishes
to  be  the  queen  of  a  literary  meeting  to  be  held  at  her  house,  and  treats
her  husband  and  children  as  inferior  beings.  But  she  is  strong-minded,
and  remains  unmoved  when  she  thinks  that  misfortunes  overwhelm  her.
Belise,  the  sister  of  Chrysale,  is  of  weak  intellect,  with  a  very  limited
amount  of  brains,  and  fancies  that  everybody  is  in  love  with  her.  She  is
based  chiefly  upon  Hesperie, — a  character  taken  from  a  comedy  by  Des-
marets,  called  The  Visionaries.  Armande,  the  elder  daughter  of  Phila-
minte, is  jealous,  vindictive,  and  hides  her  evil  thoughts  under  a  pretended
Platonism.  These  three  ladies  are  regular  "blue  stockings,"  whilst
Henriette,  the  younger  daughter,  is  the  model  of  an  honest,  sensible,  and
well-brought-up  young  lady.  Chrysale  represents  the  weak-minded  man
who  thinks  he  is  always  leading  when,  in  reality,  he  is  only  led,  afraid  of
his  wife  and  of  quarrels,  and  giving  way  to  her,  whenever  she  insists.  He
thinks  he  is  the  master  because  he  talks  in  a  loud  voice.  Ariste,  Martine,
and  the  young  lover  Clitandre,  are  also  very  natural.  But  the  two  heroes
of  the  play  are  Trissotin  and  Vadius,  the  first  a  pedant  and  a  wit,  the
second  a  pedant  and  a  scholar ;  the  first  full  of  vanity  and  jealousy,  the
second  full  of  pride  and  odium  scholasticum  ;  finally,  the  first  anxious  for
the  dowry,  and  not  for  the  heart,  of  Henriette,  and  showing  openly  his
cupidity  when  he  imagines  that  her  parents  are  ruined.

It  is  said  that  Moliere  wished  to  put  upon  the  stage  the  Abb4  Cotin
and  Menage,  in  drawing  the  characters  of  Trissotin  and  Vadius.  Moliere
denied  the  latter  delineation,  and  Menage  himself  pretended  not  to
recognize  the  portrait  of  Vadius.  But  as  to  the  Abbe  Cotin,  no  doubt  is
possible ;  for  the  sonnet  "On  the  Ague  of  the  Princess  Uranie,"  and  the
madrigal  "  On  the  Amarant  Coach,"  are  taken  literally  from  the  works  of
the  Abbe,  published  in  1663.  The  Abbe1  was  a  fertile  rhymester  of  ran-
deaux,  madrigals,  riddles,  and  moreover  a  fashionable  preacher  in  Paris.
Born  in  1604,  he  became  chaplain  to  the  king  about  1635,  and  member  of
the  Academy  in  1655.  He  was  the  intimate  friend  of  Mademoiselle  de

85

86  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.

Montpensier,  who  read  his  riddles  to  the  king  and  queen,  and  gravely
called  himself  "The  Father  of  the  French  riddle."  He  attacked  the
Precievses,  Menage  and  Mademoiselle  de  Scudery,  and  thought  he  had
found  an  ally  in  Moliere.  He  quarrelled  also  with  Boileau,  against  whom
he  wrote  a  Satire,  and  who  replied  by  saying  that  "  He  who  despises
Cotin,  does  not  esteem  his  king,  and  has  according  to  Cotin,  no  belief  in
God,  faith,  or  law."  It  is  also  stated  that  he  had  written  against  Moliere  ;
and  hence  the  latters  attack  upon  him.  Cotin  died,  totally  forgotten,  in
1681.

I  have  already  given  my  opinion  about  the  bringing  upon  the  stage
of  living  personages.1  Let  me,  however,  state  that  only  the  ridiculous
side  of  Cotin's  character  appears  to  have  been  portrayed  by  Moliere,
but  that  no  one  ever  applied  to  the  Abbe,  the  villanous  traits  of  Taris-
sotin.

Several  English  Dramatists  appear  to  have  borrowed  from  this  play  of
Moliere.

Thomas  Wright,  in  The  Female  Virtuosoes,  performed  at  the  Theatre
Royal  in  1693,  has  imitated  partly  Moliere's  Learned  Ladies.  In  the
English  comedy,  the  characters  of  Sir  Maurice  Meanwell,  Mr.  Meanwell,
Clerimont,  Lady  Meanwell,  Mrs.  Lovewitt,  and  Catchat,  correspond  to
those  of  Chrysale,  Ariste,  Clitandre,  Philaminte,  Armande,  Henriette,
and  Belise  in  the  French  comedy,  whilst  Sir  Maggot  Jingle  is  Trissotin.
Lady  Meanwell  designs  however  Marianna  to  marry  Witless,  an  entirely
new  character,  not  to  be  found  in  the  original  play.  The  Female  Virtuo-
soes was  revived  at  the  theatre,  Lincoln's- Inn- Fields,  January  10,  1721,  as
No  Fools  like  Wits,  in  order  to  anticipate  Gibber  s  Refusal.  On  the  I4th
of  February  1721,  was  performed  at  the  theatre  Drury  Lane,  Gibber's
Refusal,  or  The  Ladies'  Philosophy,  which  is  chiefly  taken  from  Moliere's
Learned  Ladies.  Sir  Gilbert  Wrangle  (Chrysale),  becomes  a  South  Sea
director,  and  part  of  the  plot  depends  on  the  infatuation  of  the  South  Sea
scheme.  The  other  characters  are  like  Moliere's.  This  piece  ran  for
no  more  than  six  nights.

John  Miller,  in  the  Man  of  Taste  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Pre-
tentious Young  Ladies,  Vol.  I.,)  which  was  acted  at  Drury  Lane,  March
6th,  1735,  has  borrowed  from  Moliere's  Learned  Ladies  the  characters  of
Sir  Humphrey  and  Lady  Henpeck  ;  Ariste  becomes  Freelove,  and  Cli-
tandre is  changed  into  Harcourt.  At  the  end  of  Act  IV.,  Miller  has  some-
what freely  imitated  the  second  and  third  scenes  of  the  act  of  Moliere's
play ;  and  then  Freelove  takes  the  part  of  Martin,  the  servant.  The
ending  is  also  different  in  the  English  and  French  Comedies.

>  See  Introductory  Notice  to  the  Impromtu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

CHRYSALE,  a  citizen?

ARISTE,  his  brother.

CLITANDRE,  Henriettas  lover.

TRISSOTIN,  a  wit.

VADIUS,  a  savant.

LEPINE,  a  lacquey.

JULIEN,  Vadius"  servant.

A  NOTARY.

PHILAMINTE,    hrysale's  wife.

ARMANDE

HENRIETTE

BELISE,  Chrysale's  sister.

MARTINE,  a  kitchen  maid?

•)

\  daughters  of  Phrysale  and  of  Philaminte.
rE,  )

Scene. — PARIS,  IN  CHRYSALE'S  HOUSE.

*  Moliere  played  this  part.  According  to  the  inventory  taken  after  his
death,  and  given  by  the  late  M.  E.  Soulie,  his  dress  consisted  of  "  a  jerkin
and  breeches  of  black  velvet,  with  flowers,  on  a  dark  yellow  ground,  a
waistcoat  of  violet  and  gold  gauze,  adorned  with  buttons,  a  gold  band,
tags,  and  gloves."

3  It  is  said  that  this  small  part  was  played  by  a  servant  of  Moliere,
whose  name  was  really  Martine.

THE  LEARNED  LADIES.

(LES  FEMMES  SA  VANTES.}

ACT  I.

SCENE  I. — ARMANDE,  HENRIETTE.

AR.  What !  the  lovely  name  of  maid  is  a  title,  sister,
of  which  you  wish  to  abandon  the  sweet  charm  ?  And  you
dare  enjoy  the  thought  of  getting  married  ?  Can  such  a
vulgar  design  have  entered  your  head  ?

HEN.  Yes,  sister.

AR.  Ah  !  is  that  yes  to  be  borne  ?  And  can  it  be  heard
without  a  heart-ache?

HEN.  What  can  there  be  in  marriage  to  constrain  you,
sister  .  .  .  ?

AR.  Ah  !     good  Heavens  !     fie  !

HEN.  How?

AR.  Fie  !  I  tell  you.  Can  you  not  conceive  the  disgust
that  such  a  word  inspires,  the  moment  it  is  heard ;  with
what  a  strange  image  one  is  shocked,  on  what  filthy  pros-
pects it  leads  the  thought  ?  Do  not  you  shudder  at  it,  and
can  you,  sister,  bring  your  heart  to  contemplate  the  conse-
quences of  this  word  ?

HEN.  The  consequences  of  this  word,  when  I  contem-
plate them,  show  me  a  husband,  children,  a  household ;  and
I  see  nothing  there,  to  talk  rationally,  which  shocks  my
imagination  and  makes  me  shudder.

89

90  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACTI

AR.  Oh  Heavens  !  have  such  ties  aught  in  them  to
please  you?

HEN.  And  can  one  do  aught  better,  at  my  age,  than  to
attach  to  one's  self,  by  the  title  of  husband,  a  man  who
loves  you,  and  is  by  you  beloved ;  and  procure  from  a
union,  dictated  by  tenderness,  the  sweet  of  an  innocent
life  ?  Has  such  a  well-suited  tie  no  charms  ?

AR.  Good  Heavens  !  what  a  grovelling  mind  is  yours  !
What  a  mean  part  to  play  in  the  world,  to  imprison  your-
self within  a  household,  and  to  get  no  glimpse  of  more
exciting  pleasures  than  an  idolized  husband  and  brats  of
children  !  Leave  the  low  pleasures  of  such  things  to  coarse
people,  and  vulgar  persons.  To  higher  objects  raise  your
desires,  endeavour  to  have  a  taste  for  more  noble  pleasures,
and  treating  with  contempt  the  senses  and  matter,  abandon
yourself  entirely  to  the  mind,  as  we  do.  You  have  our
mother  as  an  example  before  you,  who  is  honoured  and
called  everywhere  a  learned  woman ;  try,  as  I  do,  to  prove
yourself  her  daughter.  Aspire  to  the  knowledge  which  is
in  the  family,  and  feel  the  sweet  charms  which  the  love  of
study  instils  into  people's  hearts.  Far  from  being  a  sub-
missive slave  to  the  laws  of  men,  wed  yourself  to  Philo-
sophy, sister,  which  elevates  us  above  the  whole  human
race,  and  invests  reason  with  sovereign  sway,  subjecting
to  her  laws  the  animal  part,  of  which  the  gross  appetite
places  us  on  a  level  with  brutes.  These  are  the  beautiful
desires,  the  sweet  ties,  which  ought  to  fill  up  the  moments
of  our  lives ;  and  the  anxieties  in  which  I  see  so  many
women  delight,  appear  to  my  eyes  the  most  horrible  mean-
ness.*

HEN.  Heaven,  whose  commands  we  see  to  be  all-power-
ful, fits  us  at  our  birth  for  different  functions;  and  every
mind  is  not  composed  of  the  stuff  cut  out  to  make  a
philosopher.  If  yours  is  apt  to  soar  to  the  heights  of
learned  speculations,  mine,  sister,  is  formed  to  creep,  and
to  small  concerns  its  weakness  confines  itself.  Let  us  not
disturb  the  righteous  arrangements  of  Heaven  ;  and  let  us
each  follow  the  promptings  of  our  instincts.  Dwell,
through  the  flight  of  a  grand  and  beautiful  genius,  in  the

4  Such  arguments  were  really  employed  by  the  Precituses.

SCENB  i.l  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  9 1

lofty  regions  of  philosophy,  while  my  mind,  remaining
here  below,  shall  taste  the  earthly  bliss  of  wedlock.  Thus,
differing  in  our  manner  of  living,  we  shall  both  imitate
our  mother :  you,  as  regards  the  soul  and  noble  aspira-
tions ;  I,  as  regards  the  senses  and  the  grosser  pleasures ;
you,  in  the  productions  of  mind  and  knowledge ;  I,  sister,
in  those  which  are  material.

AR.  If  we  pretend  to  model  ourselves  upon  another
person,  we  should  resemble  her  in  her  finest  parts,  and
only  to  cough  and  spit  like  her  is  not  at  all  taking  her,
sister,  for  a  model.5

HEN.  But  you  would  not  be  what  you  boast  yourself
to  be,  if  my  mother  had  possessed  only  those  finer  parts ;
and  it  is  well  for  you,  sister,  that  her  noble  genius  has  not
always  dwelt  upon  philosophy.  Pray,  grant  me,  with  some
kindness,  the  meanness  to  which  you  owe  your  being ;
and,  by  wishing  that  I  should  imitate  you,  do  not  suppress
some  little  savant  who  may  wish  to  come  into  the  world.

AR.  I  perceive  that  your  mind  cannot  be  cured  of  the
foolish  infatuation  of  getting  a  husband  :  but  let  us  know,
if  it  pleases  you,  whom  you  mean  to  take  :  you  surely  do
not  intend  to  take  Clitandre?

HEN.  And  why  should  it  not  be  so  ?  Is  he  devoid  of
merit  ?  Is  the  choice  mean  ?

AR.  No  ;  but  it  is  a  dishonest  design  to  endeavour  to
take  away  another's  conquest ;  and  it  is  not  a  fact  unknown
to  the  world,  that  Clitandre  has  openly  sighed  after  me.

HEN.  Yes ;  but  all  these  sighs  are  in  vain  with  you,
and  you  do  not  descend  to  human  weakness  ;  your  mind
has  for  ever  renounced  marriage,  and  philosophy  has  all
your  affection.  Therefore,  not  having  any  design  upon
Clitandre,  what  matters  it  to  you  if  someone  else  pretend
to  him  ?

AR.  This  empire  which  reason  holds  over  the  senses
does  not  make  us  renounce  the  charms  of  homage  ;  and
we  may  refuse  as  a  husband  a  deserving  man  whom  we
like  to  see  as  an  adorer  in  our  train.

5  The  original  has  ''  Et  ce  n'est  point  du  tout  la  prendre  pour  modele,
ma  soeur,  que  de  tousser  et  de  cracker  comme  elle."  This  was  a  prover-
bial expression  in  Mqjiere's  time.

92  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  r.

HEN.  I  have  not  prevented  him  from  continuing  to
worship  your  perfections ;  and  I  have  but  accepted,  after
your  refusal,  the  offer  of  the  homage  of  his  flame.

AR.  But,  pray,  do  you  think  there  is  perfect  security  in
the  offers  of  affection  from  a  spited  lover  ?  Do  you  be-
lieve that  his  passion  for  you  is  very  strong,  and  that  all
his  affection  for  me  is  quite  dead  in  his  heart  ?

HEN.  So  he  tells  me,  sister ;  and,  for  my  part,  I  be-
lieve him.

AR.  Do  not  be  so  credulous,  sister  ;  and  rather  believe,
when  he  says  he  has  left  me  and  loves  you,  that  he  does
not  reflect  seriously  upon  it,  and  deceives  himself.

HEN.  I  cannot  tell ;  but  to  cut  the  matter  short,  if  such
be  your  pleasure,  it  is  very  easy  to  find  out  the  truth  :  I
perceive  him  coming  ;  and  he  can  give  us  a  full  explana-
tion upon  the  subject.

SCENE  H.^-CLITANDRE,  ARMANDE,  HENRIETTE.

HEN.  To  dispel  the  doubt  in  which  my  sister  plunge-
me,  please  to  explain  your  feelings,  Clitandre,  as  regards
myself  and  her ;  bare  your  heart.,  and  vouchsafe  to  inform
us  which  of  us  has  the  right  to  pretend  to  your  love.

AR.  No,  no,  I  will  not  impose  the  rigour  of  an  expla-
nation on  your  passion ;  I  have  a  consideration  for  people,
and  know  how  embarrassing  must  be  the  constraining  effort
of  these  open  avowals.

CLI.  No,  Madam ;  my  heart,  which  dissimulates  little,
feels  no  constraint  to  make  a  frank  avowal.  Such  a  step
throws  me  into  no  confusion;  and  I  will  confess  openly,
frankly,  and  fearlessly,  that  the  bonds  which  hold  me
captive,  my  love  and  my  affection,  are  all  on  this  side
(Pointing  to  Henriette}.  Let  not  this  avowal  disturb  you ;
you  yourself  would  have  it  so.  Your  attractions  had  caught
me.  and  my  tender  sighs  sufficiently  proved  to  you  the
ardour  of  my  desires,  my  heart  burned  for  you  with  a
steadfast  flame :  but  your  eyes  did  not  think  their  conquest
sufficiently  beautiful.  I  have  borne  a  hundred  various  in-
sults under  their  yoke ;  they  swayed  my  heart  like  proud
tyrants;  and  I  sought  for  myself,  wearied  with  so  much
trouble,  conquerors  more  humane,  and  chains  less  galling.
{Pointing  to  Henriette).  I  have  met  them,  Madam,  in  those

SCENE  ii.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  93

eyes,  and  their  glances  are  forever  precious  to  me ;  by  one
pitying  look  they  have  dried  my  tears,  and  did  not  disdain
what  your  charms  rejected.  Such  rare  kindness  has  had
the  effect  of  so  moving  me,  that  there  is  nought  that  could
make  me  throw  off  my  fetters;  and  I  dare  now  beseech
you,  Madam,  to  make  no  attempt  to  regain  my  love,  nor
to  try  to  call  back  a  heart  resolved  to  die  in  this  sweet
transport.

AR.  Pray,  Sir,  who  tells  you  that  I  have  such  a  wish,
and  that  I  am  so  strongly  concerned  about  you?  I  think
it  amusing  of  you  to  imagine  such  a  thing,  and  very  im-
pertinent to  declare  it  to  me.8

HEN.  Eh  !  gently,  sister.  Where  then  is  that  morality,
which  knows  so  well  to  control  the  animal  parts,  and  to
keep  the  reins  tight  on  anger's  promptings?

AR.  But  you  who  speak  of  morality,  where  do  you
practise  it,  when  you  respond  to  the  passion  which  is
shown  to  you  without  the  leave  of  those  who  have  given
you  birth?  Know  that  duty  subjects  you  to  their  laws;
that  you  are  not  allowed  to  love  except  through  their
choice;  that  they  possess  supreme  authority  over  your
heart,  and  that  it  is  criminal  to  dispose  of  it  yourself.

HEN.  I  acknowledge  the  kindness  you  show  me  in  teach-
ing me  so  well  matters  connected  with  duty.  My  heart
shall  regulate  its  conduct  according  to  your  lessons;  and
to  show  you,  sister,  that  I  profit  by  them/Clitandre,  have
a  care  to  support  your  love  by  the  consent  of  those  who
gave  me  birth.  Obtain  a  legitimate  power  over  my  affec-
tion, so  that  I  may  love  you  without  crime.

CLI.  I  am  going  to  do  so  openly,  and  with  all  my
might ;  and  I  was  only  waiting  for  this  sweet  consent.

AR.  You  triumph,  sister,  and  look  as  if  you  imagined
that  this  vexes  me.

HEN.  I,  sister !  not  at  all.  I  know  that  the  dictates  of
reason  are  always  all-powerful  over  your  senses,  and  that
through  the  teachings  drawn  from  wisdom's  source  you  are
above  such  weaknesses.  Far  from  suspecting  you  of  such
vexation,  I  think  that  in  this  case  you  will  bestir  yourself

8  The  same  declaration  takes  place  in  The  Misanthrope,  Act  v.,  Scene  6
(see  Vol.  II.) ;  and  in  Psyche,  Act  i.,  Scene  3.

94  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACTI.

for  me,  second  his  demand,  and,  by  your  suffrage,  accele-
rate the  happy  moment  of  our  marriage.  I  entreat  you  to
do  so  and  to  work  at  it  .  .  .

AR.  Your  small  wit  pretends  to  jest ;  and  we  behold
you  quite  proud  of  a  heart  that  is  thrown  at  you.

HEN.  Much  as  this  heart  may  be  thrown,  it  would  not
at  all  displease  you;  and  if  your  eyes  could  pick  it  up
from  before  me,  they  would  easily  take  the  trouble  to  stoop.

AR.  I  do  not  deign  to  condescend  to  answer  this;  and
it  is  silly  prattle  which  ought  not  to  be  listened  to.

HEN.  That  is  very  well  on  your  part,  and  you  show  us
a  moderation  which  can  hardly  be  conceived.

SCENE  III. — CLITANDRE,  HENRIETTE.

HEN.  Your  sincere  avowal  has  surprised  her  not  a
little.

CLI.  She  sufficiently  merits  such  frankness,  and  all  the
haughtiness  of  her  foolish  pride  is,  at  least,  worthy  of  my
sincerity.  But  since  you  have  allowed  me,  I  am  going  to
your  father,  Madam  .  .  .

HEN.  The  surest  way  is  to  gain  over  my  mother.  My
father  is  of  a  disposition  to  consent  to  everything ;  but  he
attaches  little  weight  to  hrs  resolutions ;  he  has  received
from  Heaven  a  certain  kindness  of  heart  which  instantly
subjects  him  to  the  will  of  his  wife.  It  is  she  who  governs
and  absolutely  makes  her  pleasure  law.  I  should  wish
much  to  see  you  a  little  more  complaisant,  I  confess  it,  to
her  and  to  my  aunt,  of  a  disposition  which,  while  flattering
their  ideas,  might  attract  the  warmth  of  their  esteem.

CLI.  My  heart,  with  its  innate  sincerity,  never  could
flatter  their  character  even  in  your  sister ;  and  learned
women  are  not  at  all  to  my  taste.  I  admit  that  a  woman
may  be  enlightened  upon  everything :  but  I  do  not  wish
to  behold  the  unseemly  passion  of  making  her  learned  in
order  to  become  learned ;  and  I  like  that  she  should,  when
questioned,  often  pretend  to  be  ignorant  of  the  things
which  she  knows  :  in  short,  I  wish  her  to  hide  her  study-
ing ;  to  have  knowledge  without  wishing  it  to  be  known,
without  quoting  authors,  without  using  grand  words,  and
being  witty  on  the  least  opportunity.  I  much  respect
your  mother;  but  I  cannot  at  all  approve  of  her  whims,

SC«N«  in.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  95

and  constitute  myself  the  echo  of  all  the  incense  which  she
wafts  to  her  hero  for  wit.  Her  Mr.  Trissotin  annoys  and
wearies  me ;  and  it  makes  me  angry  to  find  her  esteem
such  a  man ;  that  she  should  rank  among  men  of  great
and  fine  mind,  a  booby  whose  writings  are  everywhere
damned ;  a  pedant  whose  copious  pen  furnishes  the  whole
market  with  waste  paper.

HEN.  His  writings,  his  speeches,  everything  from  him
seems  tiresome,  and  I  agree  in  a  great  measure  with  your
taste  and  views;  but,  as  he  has  much  influence  with  my
mother,  you  must  constrain  yourself  to  be  somewhat  com-
plaisant to  him.  A  lover  pays  his  court  where  his  heart
has  taken  root ;  he  aims  at  gaining  every  one's  favour  in
that  spot ;  and  so  as  to  have  no  one  opposed  to  his  flame,
he  endeavours  to  please  the  very  house-dog.7

CLI.  Yes,  you  are  right ;  but  Mr.  Trissotin  inspires  me
from  the  bottom  of  my  soul  with  a  dislike  which  prevails
over  everything.  I  cannot  consent,  to  gain  his  suffrages,
to  dishonour  myself  by  praising  his  works.  It  is  through
them  that  he  first  appeared  to  my  sight,  and  I  knew  him
before  I  had  seen  him.  I  perceived  in  the  trashy  writings
which  he  gives  us  what  his  pedantic  person  displays  in
every  spot,  the  constant  height  of  his  presumption,  his  in-
trepid good  opinion  of  himself,  the  indolent  state  of  ex-
treme confidence  which  renders  him  at  all  times  so  satis-
fied with  himself,  which  makes  him  smile  incessantly  at
his  own  merit,  which  makes  him  congratulate  himself  upon
everything  that  he  writes,  and  which  renders  him  unwil-
ling to  exchange  his  reputation  for  all  the  honours  of  the
general  of  an  army.

HEN.  One  must  be  sharp-sighted  to  perceive  all  this.

CLI.  It  went  even  so  far  as  his  figure ;  and  I  saw  by  the
verses  which  he  throws  at  our  heads  how  the  poet  was
shaped :  and  so  well  had  I  guessed  every  trait  of  him,  that,
meeting  in  the  Palais8  one  day  a  man,  I  laid  a  wager  that
it  was  Trissotin  in  person,  as  indeed  it  was.

HEN.  What  a  story  !

T  This  is  partly  taken  from  Plautus'  Asinaria.

8  The  Palais  stands  for  the  Palais  de  Justice,  of  which  the  galleries  were
crowded  with  shops,  much  frequented  in  Moliere's  time.  A  comedy  of
Corneille.  called  The  Gallery  of  the  Palace,  was  represented  in  1634.

96  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  I.

CLI.  No ;  I  tell  the  thing  as  it  happened.  But  I  per-
ceive your  aunt.  Permit  me,  pray,  in  this  spot  to  reveal
our  secret  to  her,  and  endeavour  to  gain  her  over  to  inter-
cede with  your  mother.

SCENE  IV. — BELISE,  CLITANDRE.

CLI.  Allow  a  lover,  Madam,  to  take  advantage  of  this
happy  moment,  to  speak  to  you,  and  to  reveal  to  you  the
sincere  flame  .  .  .

BEL.  Ah  !  gently ;  be  careful  not  to  bare  your  soul  too
much.  If  I  have  enrolled  you  in  the  ranks  of  my  lovers,
content  yourself  with  letting  your  eyes  be  the  sole  inter-
preters, and  do  not  explain  to  me,  in  another  language,
those  desires  which  with  me  pass  for  an  outrage.  Love
me,  sigh,  burn  for  my  charms  ;  but  allow  me  not  to  know
it.  I  may  shut  my  eyes  to  your  secret  flame  as  long  as  you
confine  yourself  to  dumb  interpreters ;  but  if  the  mouth
presume  to  meddle  with  it,  I  must  banish  you  for  ever
from  my  sight.9

CLI.  Do  not  take  alarm  at  the  projects  of  my  heart.
Henriette,  Madam,  is  the  object  which  charms  me ;  and
I  ardently  beseech  your  kindness  to  second  the  love  in-
spired by  her  beauty.

BEL.  Ah  !  certainly,  the  turn  is  witty,  I  must  confess.
This  subtle  subterfuge  deserves  to  be  praised ;  and  in  all
the  novels  which  I  have  read  I  have  met  with  nothing
more  ingenious.

CLI.  It  is  not  at  all  a  stroke  of  wit,  Madam  ;  but  it  is
a  frank  avowal  of  the  feelings  of  my  heart.  Heaven,  by
the  bonds  of  immutable  ardour,  has  fettered  me  to  the
beauties  of  Henriette ;  Henriette  holds  me  'neath  her
gentle  empire,  and  a  marriage  with  Henriette  is  the  bliss
to  which  I  aspire.  You  have  much  influence;  and  all
I  wish  is  that  you  would  deign  to  favour  my  affection.

BEL.  I  perceive  what  this  demand  is  gently  aiming  at,
and  I  know  what  I  am  to  understand  under  that  name.
The  figure  of  speech  is  clever  ;  and,  not  to  change  it,  in-
stead of  the  thingfe  which  my  heart  prompts  me  to  answer

'  Belise  speaks  like  a  regular  Precieuse.

SCENE  i.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  9  7

you,  I  shall  say  that  Henriette  is  opposed  to  wedlock,  and
that  without  claiming  aught  you  must  burn  for  her.

CLI.  Ah  !  Madam,  why  such  confusion  ?  and  why  will
you  imagine  what  has  no  existence  ?

BEL.  Good  Heavens!  no  compliments.  Cease  to  gain-
say what  your  looks  have  often  given  me  to  understand.
It  suffices  that  we  are  satisfied  with  the  subterfuge  of  which
your  love  adroitly  bethought  itself,  and  that  underneath
the  figure  which  respect  obliges  you  to  use,  we  are  good
enough  to  suffer  your  homage,  provided  its  transports,  en-
lightened by  honour,  offer  naught  but  refined  vows  on  my
altar.

CLI.  But  ...

BEL.  Farewell.  This  ought  to  suffice  you  for  once,  and
I  have  said  more  to  you  than  I  wished  to  say.

CLI.   But  your  mistake  .  .   .

BEL.  Enough ;  I  now  blush,  and  my  modesty  has  made
a  surprising  effort.

CLI.  I  will  be  hanged  if  I  love  you ;  and  prudent  .  .   .

BEL.  No,  no,  I  shall  hear  no  more.10

SCENE  V. — CLITANDRE,  alone.

The  deuce  take  the  foolish  woman  with  her  fancies  !
Has  the  like  madness  ever  been  seen  ?  Let  us  go  and
entrust  some  one  else  with  this  affair,  and  take  the  advice
of  some  clever  person.11

ACT  II.

SCENE  I. — ARISTE,  leaving  Clitandre,  but  still  speaking
to  him.

Yes,  I  shall  take  you  the  answer  as  soon  as  possible  ;  I
shall  insist,  and  press,  and  do  all  that  is  necessary.  What
a  deal  a  lover  has  to  say  that  could  be  said  in  one  word  !
And  how  impatiently  he  wishes  what  he  desires !
Never  .  .  .

10  The  character  of  B^lise  is  partly  taken  from  that  of  Hesperie  in  the
comedy,  The  Visionaries  of  Desmarets,  which  greatly  amused  Louis  XIV.
Thomas  Corneille  had  already  imitated  the  character  of  Hesperie,  in  The
Baron  of  Albikrac,  performed  four  years  before  The  Learned  Ladies.
11  This  is  the  only  monologue  in  The  Learned  Ladies.

98  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  u.

SCENE  II. — CHRYSALE,  ARISTE.

AR.  Ah  !   Heaven  guard  you,  brother  !

CH.  And  you  also,  brother  !

AR.  Do  you  know  what  brings  me  here  ?

CH.  No ;  but  if  you  wish,  I  am  ready  to  hear  it.

AR.  You  know  Clitandre  sufficiently  long  ?

CH.  No  doubt,  and  I  see  him  at  our  house.

AR.  In  what  esteem  do  you  hold  him,  brother  ?

CH.  As  a  man  of  honour,  of  wit,  of  courage,  and  well-
behaved  :  I  see  few  people  who  are  so  deserving.

AR.  A  certain  wish  of  his  brings  me  hither,  and  I  am
glad  that  you  set  store  by  him.

CH.  I  knew  his  late  father  in  my  journey  to  Rome.

AR.  Very  well.

CH.  He  was  a  sterling  gentleman,  brother.

AR.  So  they  say.

CH.  We  were  but  eight-and-twenty  at  that  time,  and,
on  my  word,  we  were  a  couple  of  brisk  young  fellows.

AR.  I  can  well  believe  it.

CH.  We  were  very  well  with  the  Roman  ladies,  and
every  one  there  spoke  of  our  pranks  :  we  caused  some
jealousies.

AR.  Nothing  could  be  better.  But  let  us  come  to  the
subject  which  brings  me  hither.

SCENE  III. — BELISE,  entering  softly  and  listening;
CHRYSALE,  ARISTE.

AR.  Clitandre  makes  me  his  spokesman  with  you,  and
his  heart  is  smitten  with  the  charms  of  Henriette.

CH.  What !  of  my  daughter  ?

AR.  Yes  ;  he  is  bewitched  by  her,  and  I  never  saw  a
more  fervid  lover.

BEL.  (70  Ariste).  No,  no;  I  hear  you.  You  are  igno-
rant of  the  story  ;  and  the  matter  is  not  as  you  believe  it
to  be.

AR.  How,  sister?

BEL.  Clitandre  abuses  your  minds ;  and  it  is  of  another
object  that  his  heart  is  enamoured.

AR.  You  are  jesting.  It  is  not  Henriette  whom  he
loves  ?

SCENE  HI.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  99

BEL.  No  ;  I  am  certain  of  it.

AR.  He  has  told  me  so  himself.

BEL.  Eh  !  yes.

AR.  You  behold  me,  sister,  commissioned  by  him  to  ask
her  from  her  father  this  day.

BEL.  Very  good.

AR.  And  his  very  love  has  urged  me  to  hasten  the
moment  of  such  an  alliance.

BEL.  Better  still.  One  cannot  deceive  more  gallantly.
Henriette,  among  ourselves,  is  an  amusement,  an  inge-
nious screen,  a  pretext,  brother,  to  hide  another  flame,
the  mystery  of  which  I  know ;  and  I  wish  to  disabuse  you
both  of  your  error.

AR,  But  since  you  know  so  many  things,  sister,  tell  us,
pray,  who  is  this  other  object  whom  he  loves.

BEL.  You  wish  to  know  it?

AR.  Yes,  what  of  it  ?

BEL.   Me!

AR.  You  ?

BEL.   Myself.

AR.  Eh,  sister  !

BEL.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  Eh?  and  what  is
there  surprising  in  what  I  say  ?  One  is  handsome  enough,
I  imagine,  to  be  able  to  say  that  it  is  not  one  heart  only
which  is  subject  to  our  empire;  and  Dorante,  Damis,
Cleonte,  and  Lycidas  may  show  that  we  have  some  charms.

AR.  These  gentlemen  love  you?

BEL.  Yes,  with  all  their  might.

AR.  They  have  told  you  so?

BEL.  No  one  has  taken  that  liberty ;  they  have  so  well
known  to  reverence  me  up  to  this  day,  that  they  never
breathed  a  word  of  their  love.  But  to  offer  me  their
hearts  and  to  devote  themselves  to  my  services,  dumb  in-
terpreters have  sufficiently  done  their  office.

AR.  We  hardly  ever  see  Damis  come  into  the  house.
'  BEL.  It  is  to  show  me  a  more  submissive  respect.

AR.  With  stinging  words,  Dorante  insults  you  every-
where.

BEL.  They  are  the  transports  of  a  jealous  rage.

AR.  Cleonte  and  Lycidas  have  both  taken  wives  to
themselves.

IOO  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  it

BEL.  It  is  through  the  despair  to  which  I  have  reduced
their  flames.

AR.  Upon  my  word,  dear  sister,  pure  fancies.

CH.  (To  Belize}.  You  ought  to  divest  yourself  of  those
fancies.

BEL.  Ah  !  Fancies !  they  are  fancies,  you  say.  Fancies,
I  !  Really,  fancies  is  very  good ;  I  am  very  happy  in
having  fancies,  brothers,  and  I  did  not  know  that  I  had
any  fancies.

SCENE  IV. — CHRYSALE,  ARISTE.

CH.  Yes,  our  sister  is  mad.

AR.  It  is  growing  day  by  day.  But  let  us  resume  our
conversation  once  more.  Clitandre  asks  you  to  give  him
Henriette  as  a  wife.  See  what  answer  is  to  be  made  to  his
flame.

CH.  Is  there  need  to  ask?  I  consent  with  all  my
heart,  and  consider  it  a  great  honour  to  be  allied  to  him.

AR.  You  know  that  he  has  no  great  abundance  of
worldly  goods  .  .  .

CH.  That  is  a  consideration  of  but  small  importance;
he  is  rich  in  virtues ;  that  is  worth  treasures ;  and  besides
his  father  and  I  were  but  one  soul  in  two  bodies.

AR.  Let  us  speak  to  your  wife,  and  endeavour  to  render
her  favourable  .  .  .

CH.  It  suffices ;  I  accept  him  for  a  son-in-law.

AR.  Yes;  but  to  strengthen  your  consent,  brother,  it
would  do  no  harm  to  have  her  permission.  Let  us  go.  .  .  .

CH.  Are  you  jesting?  There  is  no  need.  I  answer  for
my  wife,  and  take  the  matter  upon  myself.

AR.  But  ...

CH.  Leave  it  to  me,  I  tell  you,  and  be  under  no  appre-
hension. I  am  going  to  prepare  her  immediately.

AR.  Be  it  so.  I  am  going  to  sound  your  Henriette
upon  this,  and  shall  come  back  to  know.  .  .  .

CH.  The  business  is  concluded  ;  and  I  am  going  to
speak  to  my  wife  without  delay.

SCENE  V. — CHRYSALE,  MARTINE.
MAR.   Just  like    my  luck !     Alas !  it  is  a  true  saying ;

SCBNBV1.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  IOI

give  a  dog  a  bad  name,  and  hang  him;11  and  service  to
another  is  no  inheritance.

CH.  What  is  the  matter?     What  ails  you,  Martine?

MAR.   What  ails  me?

CH.  Yes.

MAR.  What  ails  me  is  that  they  have  discharged  me
to-day,  Sir.

CH.   Discharged !

MAR.  Yes.     Madam  sends  me  away.

CH.  I  do  not  understand  this.     How?

MAR.  I  am  threatened  with  a  hundred  blows,  if  I  do
not  leave  this.

CH.  No,  you  shall  stay ;  I  am  satisfied  with  you.
My  wife  is  at  times  somewhat  hot-headed;  and  I  will
not,  I  ...

SCENE  VI. — PHILAMINTE,    BELISE,  CHRYSALE,  MARTINE.

PHIL.  (Perceiving  Martine).  What !  I  still  find  you,
you  booby.  Quick,  out  with  you,  jade ;  come,  leave  the
place,  and  never  show  yourself  in  my  sight.

CH.  Gently.

PHIL.   No,  there  is  an  end  of  it.

CH.  Eh!
-  PHIL.   I  wish  her  to  go.

CH.  But  what  has  she  done,  to  insist  in  this  manner.  .  .

PHIL.  What !   you  back  her  up  ?

CH.  In  no  way.

PHIL.   Do  you  take  her  part  against  me  ?

CH.  Good  Heavens !  no ;  I  am  simply  asking  her
crime.

PHIL.  Am  I  likely  to  send  her  away  without  a  legitimate
cause  ?

CH.  I  do  not  say  that ;  but  it  is  right  that  our  people
should  .  .  ,

PHIL.  No ;  she  shall  leave  this,  I  tell  you.

CH.  Well !   yes.     Does  any  one  say  aught  against  it?

PHIL.  I  will  have  no  opposition  to  my  wishes.

CH.  Agreed.

"  The  original  has  qui  veut  noyer  son  chien  I 'accuse  de  la  rage,  he  who
wants  to  drown  his  dog  accuses  him  of  being  mad.

102  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  11

PHIL.  And  you  ought,  as  a  sensible  husband,  to  be  with
me  against  her,  and  share  my  anger.

CH.  (Turning  to  Martini).  So  I  do.  Yes,  my  wife  is
right  in  sending  you  away,  you  jade,  and  your  crime
deserves  no  mercy.

MAR.  But  what  have  I  done  then  ?

CH.  (Softly).    Upon  my  word,  I  do  not  know.

PHIL.  What  is  more,  she  is  disposed  to  make  very  light
of  it.

CH.  Has  she  broken  some  mirror  or  piece  of  porcelain,
that  you  are  so  incensed  against  her  ?

PHIL.  Should  I  send  her  away  ?  and  do  you  imagine
that  I  should  put  myself  in  a  temper  for  such  a  trifle  ?

CH.  (To  Martini).  What  does  it  mean  ?  (To  Phila-
minte). The  matter  is  of  importance,  then  ?

PHIL.  Undoubtedly.  Have  I  ever  been  found  an  un-
reasonable woman  !

CH.  Has  she,  through  a  spirit  of  negligence,  allowed
some  ewer  or  silver  platter  to  be  stolen  ?

PHIL.  That  would  be  nothing.

CH.  (To  Martini).  Oh  !  oh  !  the  deuce,  good  woman.
(To  Philaminte}.  What !  Have  you  surprised  her  in  being
dishonest  ?

PHIL.  It  is  worse  than  all  that.

CH.  Worse  than  all  that.

PHIL.  Worse.

CH.  (To  Martini)  How!  the  deuce,  you  jade!  (To
Philaminte).  Eh  !  Has  she  committed  .  .  .

PHIL.  She  has,  with  all  the  matchless  insolence,  after
thirty  lessons,  shocked  my  ear  by  the  impropriety  of  a  low
and  vulgar  word,  which  Vaugelas1*  condemns  in  decisive
terms.

CH.  Is  that  the  ....

PHIL.  What !  always,  notwithstanding  our  remon-
strances, to  be  upsetting  the  foundation  of  all  sciences,
grammar,  which  knows  how  to  control  even  kings,  and
makes  them,  with  a  high  hand  obey  its  laws  !

1S  Vaugelas,  who  died  in  1650,  that  is  twenty-two  years  before  The
Learned  Ladies  was  performed,  was  a  celebrated  grammarian,  who  wrote
Remarks  on  the  French  Language.  He  is  mentioned  five  times  in  Mo-
liere's  comedy.

SCENE  vi.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  103

CH.  I  thought  her  guilty  of  the  most  serious  misbe-
haviour.

PHIL.  What  !  you  do  not  think  this  crime  unpardon-
able ?

CH.  Indeed.

PHIL.  I  should  like  to  see  you  condone  her  !

CH.  I  do  not  think  of  it.

BEL.  It  is  true  that  these  are  pitiful  things.  All  con-
struing is  destroyed  by  her,  and  in  the  laws  of  language
she  has  been  instructed  a  hundred  times.

MAR.  All  that  you  preach  is,  I  believe,  well  and  good;
but  as  for  me  I  shall  never  know  how  to  speak  your
gibberish.

PHIL.  The  impudent  girl  !  to  call  gibberish  a  language
founded  on  reason  and  on  elegant  custom.

MAR.  We  always  speak  well  when  we  make  ourselves
understood,  and  all  your  beautiful  diction  does  not  serve
for  nothing.

PHIL.  Well !  is  that  not  another  sample  of  her  style  ?
does  not  serve  for  nothing  !

BEL.  O  indocile  brain  !  With  all  the  cares  which  we
are  incessantly  taking,  can  we  not  teach  you  to  speak  con-
gruously. In  joining  not  to  nothing  yon  make  a  repetition,
and  there  is,  as  you  have  been  told,  a  negative  too  much.

MAR.  Good  Heavens  !  I  have"  not  studied  like  you,
and  I  speak  straight  out  as  they  speak  our  way.

PHIL.  Ah  !  is  it  to  be  borne  ?

BEL.  What  horrible  solecism  !

PHIL.  It  is  enough  to  kill  a  sensitive  ear.

BEL.  Your  mind  must  be  very  material,  I  confess,  /is
but  a  singular,  while  have  in  this  case  is  a  plural.  Are
you  to  offend  against  grammar  all  your  life?

MAR.  Who  says  anything  about  offending  grandmother
or  grandfather  either  ?  w

PHIL.  O  Heavens !

BEL.  Grammar  is  taken  in  the  wrong  sense  by  you,
and  I  have  already  told  you  where  the  word  comes  from.

14  The  original  is/<»  avons.

15  A  play  on  the  word  grammaire,  grammar  ;  and  grand  'mere,  grand-
mother.

104  THE   LEARNED    LADIES.  [ACT  11.

MAR.  Upon  my  word  !  it  may  come  from  Chaillot,
Auteuil,  or  Pontoise,  for  all  it  matters  to  me.

BEL.  What  a  loutish  soul  !  Grammar  teaches  us  the
laws  of  the  verb  and  of  the  nominative,  as  well  as  of  the
adjective  in  connection  with  the  substantive.

MAR.  All  I  have  to  say,  Madam,  is  that  I  do  not  know
these  people.

PHIL.  What  a  martyrdom  !

BEL.  They  are  the  names  of  words  ;  and  one  has  to  con-
sider how  they  have  to  be  made  to  agree  together.

MAR.  They  may  agree  together,  or  tear  each  other  to
pieces,  for  what  I  care.16

PHIL.  (To  Belise}.  Eh!  Good  Heavens  !  Finish  this
conversation.  {To  Chrysale).  You  will  not,  you,  make
her  leave  ?

CH.  Yes,  indeed.  (Aside).  I  must  give  way  to  her
whim.  Go,  do  not  irritate  her  ;  retire,  Martine.

PHIL.  What !  You  are  afraid  to  offend  the  hussey !
You  speak  to  her  in  quite  an  obliging  tone  !

CH.  I  ?  Not  at  all.  (In  a  firm  tone).  Come,  you
must  go.  (In  a  more  gentle  tone~).  Go,  my  poor  child.

SCENE  VII. — PHILAMINTE,  CHRYSALE,  BELISE.

CH.  You  are  satisfied,  and  behold  her  gone  ;  but  I  do
not  at  all  approve  of  her  being  turned  away.  She  is  a  girl
who  does  her  duty  well,  and  you  discard  her  for  a  trifling
cause.

PHIL.  Do  you  wish  me  to  have  her  always  in  my  service,
to  put  my  ears  incessantly  to  the  torture,  to  break  every
rule  of  custom  and  reason  by  a  barbarous  heap  of  errors  in
speech,  mutilated  words  linked  together,  at  intervals,  by
proverbs  found  in  the  gutters  of  the  Halles  ?"

BEL.  It  is  true  that  it  makes  one  hot  to  have  to  bear  her
conversations;  she  tears  Vaugelas  to  shreds  every  day;
and  the  least  faults  of  this  coarse  mind  are  either  a  pleo-
nasm, or  cacophony.

CH.    What  does  it  matter  that  she  fails  in  the  laws  of

16  This  is  partly  taken  from  a  comedy  by  Larivey,  le  Fidele.
1T  The  Halles  are  the  markets  :  hence  these  proverbs  are  something  like
Billingsgate  language.

SCENE  vn.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  105

Vaugelas,  provided  she  does  not  fail  in  the  cooking  ?  I
would  rather,  I  would,  that  in  cleaning  the  vegetables  she
should  make  the  verbs  agree  ill  with  the  nouns,  and  say  a
hundred  times  a  low  or  bad  word,  than  that  she  should
burn  my  meat  or  put  too  much  salt  in  my  soup ;  I  live  on
good  soup,  and  not  on  fine  language.  Vaugelas  does  not
teach  how  to  make  a  good  soup,  and  Malherbe  and  Balzac,
so  learned  in  fine  words,  in  cookery  would  perhaps  have
been  real  ninnies.

PHIL.  How  horribly  this  coarse  conversation  shocks  one.
And  what  indignity  for  him  who  calls  himself  a  man  to  be
for  ever  grovelling  in  material  cares,  instead  of  elevating
himself  to  the  spiritual !  Is  this  body  of  ours,  this  rag,  of
sufficient  importance,  or  valuable  enough,  to  deserve  that
we  should  even  think  about  it  ?  And  ought  we  not  to  put
these  things  far  from  us?

CH.  Yes,  my  body  is  myself,  and  I  mean  to  take  care  of
it.  You  may  call  it  rag  if  you  will,  but  my  rag  is  dear  to
me.

BEL.  The  body  with  the  mind  is  something,  brother ;
but  if  you  are  to  believe  the  whole  of  the  learned  world,
the  mind  ought  to  take  precedence  of  the  body ;  and  our
greatest  care,  our  first  effort,  ought  to  be  to  nourish  it  with
the  juice  of  science.

CH.  Upon  my  word,  if  you  wish  to  nourish  your  mind,
it  is  with  very  empty  ideas,  according  to  what  every  one
says,  and  you  need  have  no  care,  no  solicitude,  to  ...

PHIL.  Ah  !  solicitude  sounds  very  roughly  to  my  ear ;  it
smacks  strangely  of  its  age.

BEL.  It  is  true  that  the  word  is  very  old-fashioned.18

CH.  Do  you  wish  me  to  tell  you  ?  I  shall  have  to  burst
out  at  last,  take  off  the  mask,  and  give  way  to  my  choler.
You  are  called  fools,  and  I  take  it  much  to  heart  .  .  .

PHIL.  What  now  ?

CH.  (To  Belize).     It  is  to  you  I  am  speaking,  sister.

18  The  original  has  le  mot  est  bien  collet  monte.  A  collet  monte  was  an
old-fashioned  ruff,  in  which  pasteboard  and  wire  were  used  to  hold  it  up  ;
therefore  Belise  intends  probably  to  say  that  the  word  ''solicitude"  was
very  old-fashioned.  Collet  monte,  in  speaking  of  persons,  was  generally
used  to  denote  people  of  either  stilted,  or  also  of  those  of  staid  and
serious  behaviour.

106  THE  LEARNED  LADIES.  [ACT  n.

The  least  solecism  in  speech  irritates  you ;  but  you  com-
mit some  strange  ones  in  your  conduct.  Your  everlasting
books  do  not  satisfy  me;  and,  with  the  exception  of  a
large  Plutarch  to  put  my  bands  in  19  you  ought  to  burn  the
whole  of  this  useless  trumpery,  and  leave  science  to  the
professors  in  town  ;  to  do  right,  you  should  remove  from
the  garret  that  long  spyglass  which  frightens  people,  and
a  thousand  other  trifles,  the  sight  of  which  annoys;  not
try  to  find  out  what  they  are  doing  in  the  moon,  and  in-
terest yourself  a  little  more  in  what  is  being  done  at  home,
where  we  find  everything  going  topsy-turvey.  It  is  not
very  proper,  and  for  several  reasons,  that  a  woman  should
study  and  know  so  many  things.  To  train  the  minds  of
her  children  in  good  morals  and  manners,  to  superintend
her  household  by  keeping  an  eye  on  her  servants,  and  to
control  the  expenditure  with  economy,  ought  to  be  her
study  and  philosophy.  Our  fathers,  on  this  point,  were
very  sensible,  who  said  that  a  woman  always  knows  enough
as  long  as  her  mind  rises  to  the  level  of  knowing  a  doublet
from  a  pair  of  breeches.  Theirs  did  not  read  much,  but
they  led  a  good  life ;  their  households  were  all  their
learned  occupations  ;  and  their  library,  a  thimble,  thread,
and  needles,  with  which  they  worked  at  the  outfit  of  their
daughters.  The  women  of  the  present  age  are  far  removed
from  these  manners  ;  they  wish  to  write  and  become  au-
thors. No  science  is  too  deep  for  them,  and  in  this  house
more  than  in  any  other  spot  in  this  world  ;  the  loftiest
secrets  are  pried  into,  and  everything  is  known  in  my
home,  except  what  ought  to  be  known.  They  know  the
motions  of  the  moon  and  the  polar  star,  of  Venus,  of  Sa-
turn, and  of  Mars,  with  which  I  have  no  concern  ;  and  in
this  vain  learning,  which  is  so  far-fetched,  my  food,  of
which  I  stand  so  much  in  need,  is  neglected.  My  servants
aspire  to  science  in  order  to  please  you,  and  all  neglect
nothing  so  much  as  what  they  have  to  do.  To  argue  is
the  occupation  of  the  whole  of  my  household,  and  argu-
ment banishes  reason  from  it.  The  one  burns  my  roast,

19  As  the  bands  were  starched  and  had  to  be  kept  straight,  they  were
often  put  between  the  leaves  of  a  big  book,  generally  a  folio.  In  the  in-
ventory taken  after  the  death  of  Moli£re's  mother,  and  in  the  one  taken
after  his  own  death,  there  was  a  copy  of  Plutarch's  works.

'THE  LEARNED  LADIES.  107

while  reading  some  history ;  the  other  dreams  of  verses,
while  I  am  asking  for  something  to  drink.  In  short,  I
see  your  example  followed  by  them,  and  though  I  have
servants,  I  am  not  served..  One  poor  servant  girl  at  least  re-
mained to  me,  whom  this  bad  air  had  not  infected,  and
behold  her  turned  out  with  a  great  ado,  because  she  fails
to  speak  according  to  Vaugelas.  I  tell  you,  sister,  that
all  these  doings  annoy  me ;  for  it  is  to  you,  as  I  have
told  you,  that  I  address  myself.  I  do  not  care  about  all
your  people  with  their  Latin  in  my  house,  and  above  all
this  Mr.  Trissotin  ;  it  is  he,  who  with  his  verses,  has
made  you  ridiculous  :  all  his  talk  is  so  much  foolish  trash.
One  has  to  look  for  what  he  has  said  after  he  has  spoken ;
and  as  for  me,  I  believe  him  to  be  a  little  cracked.

PHIL.  O  Heavens !  what  baseness  of  soul  and  language !

BEL,  Can  there  be  in  a  small  body  a  more  grovelling
aggregate,  a  mind  composed  of  more  vulgar  atoms?  And
can  I  be  of  the  same  blood  ?  I  mortally  hate  myself  for
belonging  to  your  family  ;  and  I  quit  the  place  in  confu-
sion.

SCENE  VIII. — PHILAMINTE,  CHRYSALE.

PHIL.  Have  you  yet  some  other  dart  to  level  at  me  ?

CH.  I?  No.  Let  us  quarrel  no  longer;  it  is  over.
Let  us  discourse  of  another  matter.  In  your  eldest
daughter  we  perceive  some  aversion  to  the  hymeneal  knot ;
she  is  in  short  a  philosopher.  I  say  nothing  about  it ;  she
is  well  ruled,  and  you  act  very  well.  But  her  younger
sister  is  of  quite  a  different  disposition  ;  and  I  believe  we
should  do  well  to  provide  and  to  choose  for  Henriette  a
husband  .  .  .

PHIL.  I  have  thought  about  it,  and  I  shall  communi-
cate to  you  my  intention.  This  Mr.  Trissotin,  who  is  so
railed  at,  and  who  has  not  the  honour  of  possessing  your
esteem,  is  the  one  whom  I  consider  to  be  the  husband  that
would  suit  her ;  and  I  am  a  better  judge  of  his  merits
than  you  are.  To  argue  in  this  case  is  superfluous ;  and
my  mind  in  this  matter  is  quite  made  up.  At  least  do  not
say  a  word  about  the  choice  of  this  husband  ;  I  wish  to
speak  to  your  daughter  about  it  before  you.  I  have  rea-

108  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  n.

sons  to  make  my  conduct  approved  of,  and  I  shall  know
well  enough  if  you  have  informed  her.

SCENE  IX. — ARISTE,  CHRYSALE.

ARIS.  Well !  brother,  your  wife  has  left  this  moment,
and  I  perceive  quite  well  that  you  had  just  some  conver-r
sation  together.

CH.  Yes.

ARIS.  And  with  what  success?  Shall  we  have  Hen-
riette  ?  Has  she  consented  ?  Is  the  affair  concluded  ?

CH.  Not  quite  as  yet.

ARIS.   Does  she  refuse  ?

CH.  No.

ARIS.  Does  she  waver?

CH.  In  no  way.

ARIS.  What  then  ?

CH.  She  proposes  some  one  else  for  my  son-in-law.

ARIS.  Some  one  else  for  your  son-in-law  ?

CH.  Some  one  else.

ARIS.  Whose  name  is  ...

CH.   Mr.  Trissotin.

ARIS.  What !  this  Mr.  Trissotin.  .  .  .

CH.  Yes,  who  is  always  talking  verses  and  Latin.

ARIS.   Have  you  accepted  him  ?

CH.  I,  not  all :  Heaven  forbid  !

ARIS.  What  answer  have  you  made?

CH.  None;  and  right  glad  I  am  not  to  have  spoken,
so  as  not  to  bind  myself.

ARIS.  The  reason  is  very  nice ;  and  you  have  taken  a
great  step !  Have  you  at  least  proposed  Clitandre  to  her  ?

CH.  No  ;  for  as  I  saw  that  there  was  a  question  of
another  son-in-law,  I  thought  it  better  to  let  it  alone.

ARIS.  Certainly,  your  prudence  is  excessively  rare.
Are  you  not  ashamed  of  your  want  of  firmness  ?  And  is
it  possible  for  a  man  to  be  so  weak  as  to  leave  his  wife  ab-
solute power,  and  not  dare  to  attack  what  she  has  resolved
upon?

CH.  Good  Heavens !  brother,  you  speak  very  easily  of
it,  but  you  do  not  know  how  noise  troubles  me.  I  am
very  fond  of  rest,  peace,  and  tranquillity,  and  my  wife  is
terrible  in  her  tempers.  She  greatly  considers  the  name

SCENE  ix.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  109

of  philosopher,  but  she  is  none  the  less  choleric ;  and  her
morality,  which  affects  to  despise  wealth,  does  not  operate
in  the  least  on  the  sting  of  her  anger.  If  in  the  slightest
matter  you  oppose  her  will,  a  terrible  tempest  rages  for  a
week  afterwards.  She  makes  me  tremble  the  moment  she
assumes  that  tone ;  I  do  not  know  where  to  hide  myself,
for  she  is  such  a  dragon ;  and  nevertheless,  with  all  her
devilry,  I  am  obliged  to  call  her  my  heart  and  my  love.20

ARIS.  Come,  this  is  mere  jest.  Between  ourselves,  your
wife  has  mastered  you  through  your  cowardice.  Her
power  is  based  only  on  your  weakness ;  it  is  from  you  that
she  takes  the  title  of  mistress  ;  you  allow  yourself  to  give
way  to  her  haughtiness,  and  are  led  by  the  nose  like  a
fool.  What !  cannot  you,  seeing  what  you  are  called,
make  up  your  mind  for  once  to  become  a  man,  to  bring
down  a  woman  to  your  wishes,  and  take  sufficient  courage
to  say,  I  will  have  it  so  !  You  will,  without  shame,  allow
your  daughter  to  be  sacrificed  to  the  silly  visions  which
are  holding  your  family  in  bondage,  and  endow  a  booby
with  all  your  wealth  in  return  for  six  words  of  Latin,
which  he  spouts  to  them ;  a  pedant,  whom  your  wife  at
every  turn  addresses  as  a  man  of  wit  and  a  great  philoso-
pher, as  a  man  who,  in  gallant  poetry,  never  had  his
equal,  and  who  is  nothing  of  the  sort,  as  every  one  knows.
Come,  once  more,  it  is  a  jest;  and  your  cowardice  de-
serves to  be  laughed  at.

CH.  Yes,  you  are  right,  and  I  see  that  I  am  wrong.
Come,  I  must  at  last  show  a  firmer  mind,  brother.

ARIS.  That  is  well  said.

CH.  It  is  an  infamous  thing  to  be  thus  under  the  sway
of  a  woman.

ARIS.  Very  good.

CH.  She  has  taken  too  great  an  advantage  of  my  soft-
ness.

ARIS.  It  is  true.

CH.  Too  much  imposed  upon  my  easy-going  nature.

*  These  last  words  are  an  imitation  of  Plautus'  Casino.,  or  the  Strata-
gem Defeated  (Act  ii.,  Scene  3),  when  Stalino,  on  seeing  his  wife  Cleo-
strata,  says  :  "  I  espy  her  standing  there  in  gloominess.  This  plaguy  bag-
gage must  be  addressed  by  me  with  civility.  (Going  towards  her).  My
own  wife  and  my  delight,  what  are  you  about  ?''

HO  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  in.

ARIS.  Undoubtedly,

CH.  And  I  will  have  her  know  this  very  day  that  my
daughter  is  my  daughter,  and  that  I  am  the  master,  to
take  for  her  a  husband  who  pleases  me.

ARIS.  Now  you  are  reasonable,  and  as  I  wish  you  to  be.

CH.  You  are  for  Clitandre,  and  know  his  address ;  send
him  to  me,  brother,  presently.

ARIS.  I  am  going  there  directly.

CH.  I  have  borne  it  too  long,  and  I  am  going  to  be  a
man  in  spite  of  every  one.

ACT  III.

SCENE    I. — PHILAMINTE,   ARMANDE,   BELISE,  TRISSOTIN,
LEPINE.

PHIL.  Ah  !  let  us  seat  ourselves  here  to  listen  at  our  ease
to  these  verses  which  should  be  weighed  word  by  word.

AR.  I  am  burning  to  see  them.

BEL.  And  we  are  dying  for  them.

PHIL.  (To  Trisstoin}.  Whatever  comes  from  you  has  a
charm  for  me.

AR.   To  me  it  is  a  matchless  sweetness.

BEL.  It  is  a  dainty  repast  provided  for  my  ears.

PHIL.  Do  not  prolong  such  pressing  desires.

AR.   Pray  hurry.

BEL.  Be  quick,  and  hasten  our  pleasures.

PHIL.  Offer  your  epigram  to  our  impatience.

TRIS.  ( To  Philaminte).  Alas  !  it  is  but  a  new-born
child,  Madam :  its  fate  may  surely  interest  you ;  and  it  is
in  your  courtyard  that  I  have  been  delivered  of  it.

PHIL.  Its  father  is  sufficient  to  make  it  dear  to  me.

TRIS.  Your  approbation  may  serve  it  as  a  mother.

BEL.  What  wit  he  has  !

SCENE  II. — HENRIETTE,  PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,  ARMANDE,
TRISSOTIN,  LEPINE.

PHIL.  ( To  Henriette,  -who  is  about  to  withdraw).  Hullo !
why  do  you  run  away?

HEN.  It  is  for  fear  of  disturbing  so  sweet  a  conversation.

SCENE  II.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  Ill

PHIL.  Draw  near,  and  come,  intently,  to  take  part  in
pleasure  of  hearing  some  marvels.

HEN.  I  know  but  little  of  the  beauties  of  the  people's
writings,  and  things  of  wit  are  beyond  me.

PHIL.  It  matters  not.  Afterwards,  I.  have  also  to  tell
you  a  secret,  of  which  it  would  be  as  well  that  you  were
informed.

TRIS.  (To  Henriette).  Science  has  nothing  that  can
inflame  you,  and  your  only  pride  is  to  know  how  to  charm.

HEN.  The  one  as  little  as  the  other ;  and  I  have  not
the  least  desire  .  .  .

BEL.   Come  !  let  us  see  to  the  new-born  child,  pray.

PHIL.  (To  Lepine).  Come,  lad,  quick,  the  wherewithal
to  seat  ourselves.  (Lepine  tumbles  down).  Look  at  the
awkward  fellow !  Ought  people  to  fall  after  they  have
learned  the  equilibrium  of  things  ?

BEL.  Do  not  you  see  the  causes  of  your  fall,  Ignoramus,
and  that  it  proceeded  from  your  deviation  from  the  fixed
point  which  we  call  the  centre  of  gravity.

LEP.  I  became  aware  of  it,  Madam,  when  I  was  on  the
ground.

PHIL.   (To  Lepine,  who  goes  ouf).  The  awkward  booby!

TRIS.   Well  for  him  he  was  not  made  of  glass.

AR.   Ah  !  wit  everywhere  !

BEL.  It  never  lags.  (They  sit  down.

PHIL.  Now  promptly  dish  us  up  your  amiable  repast.

TRIS.  For  such  great  hunger  as  is  shown  to  me,  a  dish
of  only  eight  verses  seems  very  little ;  and  I  think  that  I
shall  do  no  harm  here  in  joining  to  the  epigram,  or  to  the
madrigal,  the  relish  of  a  sonnet,  which  a  certain  princess
thought  rather  delicate.  It  is  seasoned  with  attic  salt
throughout,  and  I  believe  you  will  find  it  of  sufficiently
good  taste.

AR.  Ah  !  I  do  not  doubt  it.

PHIL.  Let  us  give  ear  immediately.

BEL.  {Interrupting  Trissotin  each  time  he  is  ready  to
begin).  I  feel  my  heart  beat  with  pleasure  beforehand.  I
love  poetry  to  distraction,  and  especially  when  the  verses
are  gallantly  turned.

PHIL.  If  we  are  always  speaking,  he  cannot  say  any-
thing.

112  THE  LEARNED  LADIES.  [ACT  nr.

TRIS.  A  son  .   .    .

BEL.  (To  Henriette}.  Silence,  niece.21
TRIS.  A  sonnet  to  the  Princess  Uranie,  on  her  Ague.™
Your  prudence  surely  is  asleep,
To  treat  and  sumptuously  to  keep,
To  lodge  in  state  and  luxury,
Your  most  hard-hearted  enemy.
BEL.  Ah  !  what  a  charming  beginning  !
AR.  How  prettily  he  turns  things  !
PHIL.  He  alone  possesses  the  talent  for  easy  verses.
AR.  To  prudence  asleep  we  must  yield  up  our  arms.
BEL.    To  lodge  an  enemy  is  for  me  full  of  charms.
PHIL.  I  like  sumptuously  and  state  and  luxury,  the  join-
ing of  these  last  words  does  admirably.
BEL.  Let  us  listen  to  the  rest.
TRIS.          Your  prudence  surely  is  asleep,

To  treat  and  sumptuously  to  keep,
To  lodge  in  state  and  luxury,
Your  most  hard-hearted  enemy.
AR.  Prudence  asleep  !
BEL.    To  lodge  an  enemy!
PHIL.   Sumptuously,  and  state  and  luxury!
TRIS.          Whatever  be  said,  drive  it  away,

From  'neath  your  roof  s  splendid  array,
Expel  the  ungrateful  wretch,  who  would
Attack  a  life  so  fair,  so  good.
BEL.  Ah  !   gently  ;  let  me  take  breath,  pray.
AR.  Give  us  leisure  to  admire,  if  you  please.
PHIL.  One  feels,  at  these  verses,  running  at  the  bottom
of  one's  heart,  a  something,  I  do  not  know  what,  that
makes  one  feel  faint.

AR.          Whate*  er  be  said,  drive  it  away,

From  ' '  neath  your  roof  s  splendid  array.
How  elegantly  is  'neath  your  roofs  splendid  array  ex-
pressed ;  and  how  wittily  the  metaphor  is  put !

PHIL.    Whate1  er  be  said,  drive  it  away  !    Ah!  what  an

J1  Henriette  has  been  saying  nothing,  yet  Belise,  who  talks  continually,
says  "  Silence."

30  This  sonnet  is  to  be  found  in  The  Gallant  Works,  in  prose  and  in
verse,  of  Mr.  Cotin,  Paris,  1663,  and  is  called,  A  Sonnet  to  Mademoiselle
de  Longueville,  now  Duchess  of  Nemours,  on  her  quartan  ague.

SCENE  ii.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  1 13

admirable  taste  is  displayed  in  this  drive  it  away.     This,
in  my  opinion,  is  an  invaluable  passage.

AR.  My  heart  is  likewise  smitten  with  whate'  er  be
said.

BEL.  I  am  of  your  opinion,  whate' er  be  said  is  a  happy
expression.

AR.   I  would  like  to  have  written  it.

BEL.  It  is  worth  a  whole  piece.

PHIL.  But  is  the  finesse  of  it  really  understood,  as  I
do?

AR.  AND  BEL.  Oh  !  oh !

PHIL.  Whate*  er  be  said,  drive  it  away.  Though  people
should  take  the  ague's  part,  do  not  pay  any  heed,  laugh
at  the  babbling.  Whate'' er  be  said,  drive  it  away,  whate'  er
be  said,  whate'  er  be  said.  This  whate' '  er  be  said  has
more  in  it  than  it  seems  to  have.  As  for  me,  I  do  not
know,  if  everyone  resembles  me  ;  but  I  perceive  a  mil-
lion words  beneath  it.

BEL.  It  is  true,  it  says  more  things  than  it  appears  to
do.

PHIL.  (To  Trissotin).  But  when  you  wrote  this  charm-
ing whate'  er  be  said,  did  you  yourself  comprehend  all  its
energy  ?  Did  you  yourself  reflect  upon  all  which  it
conveys  to  us  ?  And  did  you  at  that  time  think  of  put-
ting so  much  wit  in  it  ?

TRIS.   Eh!  Eh!

AR.  I  have  also  my  head  full  of  the  ungrateful  wretch,
that  ungrateful  ague,  unjust,  unmannerly,  which  treats
people  ill  who  give  it  a  lodging.

PHIL.  In  short,  the  quatrains  are  both  admirable.  Let
us  come  quickly  to  the  triplets,  pray.

AR.  Ah  !  if  you  please,  once  more  whatever  be  said.

TRIS.    Whate'  er  be  said,    drive  it  away.

PHIL.,  AR.,  AND  BEL.    Whate' er  be  said .'

TRIS.   From  '  neath  your  roof '  s  splendid  array  .  .  .

PHIL.,  AR.,  AND  BEL.    Your  roof  s  splendid  array  !  .  .  .

TRIS.    To  expel  the  ungrateful  wretch  that  could  .  .  .

PHIL.,  AR.,  AND  BEL.  This  ungrateful  fever  !

TRIS.  Attack  a  life  so  fair,  so  good.

PHIL.  A  life  so  fair,  so  good.

AR.  AND  BEL.  Ah  !

114  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  iu.

TRIS.          What !  not  respecting  your  high  rank,
Your  noble  blood  it  basely  drank.

PHIL.,  AR.,  AND  BEL.  Ah  !

TRIS.    And  day  and  night  insults  you  so  !
If  with  it  to  the  baths  you  go
Without  your  making  more  ado,
With  your  own  hands  then  drown  it  too.

PHIL.  We  are  exhausted.

BEL.  We  swoon.

AR.   We  die  with  pleasure.

PHIL.  It  gives  one  a  thousand  gentle  shiverings.

AR.  If  with  it  to  the  baths  you  go.

BEL.    Without  your  making  more  ado.

PHIL.  With  your  own  hands  then  drown  it  too.  With
your  own  hands,  then,  with  your  own  hands,  then  drown
it  too.

AR.  At  every  step  one  encounters  a  charming  trait  in
your  verses.

BEL.  Everywhere  we  wander  there  delighted

PHIL.  One  can  light  upon  nothing  but  fine  things  in
them.

AR.   They  are  small  paths  all  strewn  with  roses.

TRIS.  The  sonnet  then  seems  to  you  .    .    .

PHIL.  Admirable,  new ;  and  no  one  has  ever  made  any-
thing so  fine.

BEL.  (To  Henriette).  What!  were  you  not  touched  on
hearing  this  ?  You  made  but  a  sorry  figure,  niece.

HEN.  Each  one  makes  here  below  the  figure  that  one
can  make,  aunt ;  and  it  is  not  sufficient  to  wish  to  become
a  wit,  in  order  to  be  one.

TRIS.  Perhaps  my  verses  are  troublesome  to  this  lady.

HEN.  Not  at  all.     I  do  not  listen  to  them.

PHIL.  Ah !  let  us  have  the  epigram.

TRIS.  On  a  coach  of  an  amarant  colour  given  to  a  lady
of  his  acquaintance.'*

PHIL.  The  very  names  of  his  pieces  have  always  some-
thing peculiar.

AR.  Their  novelty  prepares  one  for  a  hundred  fine
strokes  of  wit.

18  This  epigram  is  in  the  same  volume  as  the  sonnet  mentioned  before,
and  bears  nearly  the  same  title  as  the  sonnet  of  Trissotin.

SCBNB<.I.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  115

TRIS.  Love  has  so  dearly  sold  me  to  his  chains,

PHIL.,  AR.,  AND  BEL.  Ah  !

TRIS.    That  half  of  my  estate  only  remains;

And  when  this  beauteous  couch  you  shall  behold,
On  which  there  are  embossed  such  heaps  of  gold,
That  all  the  country  wonders  at  the  ride,
And  makes  my  Lais  triumph  in  her  pride.
PHIL.  Ah  !  my  Lais  !    There  is  erudition !
BEL.  The  disguise  is  pretty,  and  worth  a  million.
TRIS.   And  when  this  beauteous  couch  you  shall  behold,
On  which  there  are  embossed  such  heaps  of  gold,
That  all  the  country  wonders  at  the  ride,
And  makes  my  Lais  triumph  in  her  pride,
No  longer  say  ' 'tis  amarant,
Say  rather  that  it  is  my  land.
AR.  Oh  !  oh  !  oh  !  that  was  not  at  all  expected.
PHIL.  Only  he  could  write  in  such  taste.
BEL.   No  longer  say  'tis  amarant,
Say  rather  that  it  is  my  land,
This  may  be  declined,  my  land,  of  my  land,  to  my

land*

PHIL.  I  know  not  whether  my  mind  was  prepossessed
in  your  favour,  from  the  moment  I  knew  you ;  but  I  ad-
mire everywhere  your  verse  and  your  prose.

TRIS.  (To  Philaminte}.  If  you  would  show  us  something
of  your  own,  we  in  our  turn  might  also  admire.

PHIL.  I  have  written  nothing  in  verse;  but  I  have
reason  to  hope  that  I  shall  soon  be  able  to  show  you,  as
among  friends,  eight  chapters  of  the  plan  of  our  academy.
Plato  foolishly  stopped  at  this  project,  when  he  wrote  the
treatise  upon  his  Republic  ;  but  I  shall  carry  out  the  idea
which  I  have  arranged  in  prose  upon  paper.  For,  in
short,  I  feel  strangely  annoyed  at  the  wrong  which  they
do  us  with  regard  to  wit ;  and  I  wish  to  vindicate  our-
selves, that  is  my  whole  sex,  from  the  unworthy  class  in
which  men  place  us,  by  confining  our  talents  to  trifling
things,  and  by  closing  against  us  the  entrance  to  sublime
lights.

24  The  original  has  Ne  dis  plus  gu'il  est  amarante,  dis  plutbt  quit  est  dc
ma  rente,  on  which  B&ise  justly  remarks,  "  this  may  be  declined  ma  rente,
de  ma  rente,  a  ma  rente.''

Il6  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  m.

AR.  It  is  giving  too  great  an  offence  to  our  sex  to  extend
the  effort  of  our  intelligence  no  farther  than  to  judge  about
a  skirt,  or  the  shape  of  a  mantle,  or  the  beauties  of  a  piece
of  lace,  or  of  a  new  brocade.

BEL.  We  must  rise  from  this  shameful  condition,  and
openly  set  our  genius  at  liberty.

TRIS.  My  respect  for  the  ladies  at  all  times  is  well  known ;
and,  if  I  render  homage  to  the  brilliancy  of  their  eyes,  I
also  honour  the  light  of  their  intelligence.

PHIL.  The  sex  likewise  does  you  justice  on  this  point ;
but  we  wish  to  show  to  certain  wits,  whose  proud  know-
ledge treats  us  with  disdain,  that  women  are  also  endowed
with  learning ;  that,  like  them,  they  can  hold  learned  as-
semblies, conducted  by  better  rules;  inasmuch  as  they
wish  to  unite  what  they  separate  elsewhere,25  join  fine  lan-
guage to  the  higher  sciences,  explore  nature  by  a  thousand
experiments,  and  upon  any  question  that  may  be  proposed,
bring  in  each  sect,  and  espouse  the  opinions  of  none.

TRIS.  For  order,  I  hold  by  peripateticism.26

PHIL.   For  abstractions,  I  love  platonism.

AR.  Epicurus  pleases  me,  and  his  dogmas  are  strong.

BEL.  I  accommodate  myself  sufficiently  well  to  the
atomic  system ;  but  I  think  a  vacuum  is  difficult  to  be
endured,  and  I  relish  the  subtle  matter  much  better.

TRIS.  As  for  the  properties  of  the  magnet,  Descartes
agrees  with  my  opinion.

AR.  I  am  fond  of  his  vortices.

PHIL.  I,  of  his  falling  worlds.

AR.  I  am  anxious  to  see  our  assembly  opened,  and  that
we  should  signalize  ourselves  by  some  discovery.

TRIS.  We  expect  much  from  your  enlightened  opinions;
for  nature  has  few  things  that  are  dark  to  you.

PHIL.  As  for  me,  without  flattering  myself,  I  have  already
made  one,  and  I  have  clearly  seen  men  in  the  moon.

BEL.  I  have  not  seen  men  as  yet,  as  I  think ;  but  I  have
seen  steeples  as  clearly  as  I  see  you.

AR.  We  shall  probe  grammar,  history,  poetry,  moral
philosophy,  and  politics,  as  well  as  physics.

K  An  allusion  to  the  French  Academy,  founded  in  1633,  and  the  Aca-
demy of  Sciences,  founded  in  1666.
M  That  is  the  doctrine  of  Aristotle.

SCENE  n.J  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  117

PHIL.  Moral  philosophy  has  charms  by  which  my  heart
is  smitten ;  and  it  was  formerly  the  passion  of  great  minds ;
but  I  yield  the  palm  to  the  Stoics,  and  I  find  nothing  so
beautiful  as  their  wise  men.

AR.  As  for  the  language,  they  shall  see  our  regulations
in  a  little  time,  and  we  pretend  to  make  some  revolutions.27
Through  antipathy,  either  just  or  natural,  we  have  each  of
us  conceived  a  mortal  hatred  for  a  number  of  words,
whether  verbs,  or  nouns  which  we  mutually  abandon.
Against  them  we  are  preparing  deadly  sentences,  and  we
design  to  open  our  learned  conferences  by  the  proscription
of  all  those  divers  words  of  which  we  wish  to  purge  both
prose  and  poetry.28

PHIL.  But  the  most  beautiful  project  of  our  academy,
a  noble  enterprise,  with  which  I  am  delighted,  a  design
full  of  glory,  and  which  shall  be  lauded  among  all  the
great  minds  of  posterity,  is  the  retrenching  of  these
filthy  syllables  which  cause  a  scandal  in  the  finest  words,
these  eternal  playthings  of  the  fools  of  all  times,  these
nauseous  commonplaces  of  our  sorry  jokers,  these  sources
of  a  mass  of  infamous  equivocations  with  which  they
insult  the  modesty  of  women.

TRIS.  These  are  certainly  admirable  projects.

BEL.  You  shall  see  our  statutes  when  they  shall  be
made.

TRIS.  All  are  certain  to  be  beautiful  and  wise.

AR.  We  shall  be,  by  our  laws,  the  judges  of  works ;  by
our  laws,  prose  and  verse,  everything  shall  be  submitted  to
us.  No  one  shall  have  any  wit  beyond  ourselves  and
friends.29  We  shall  seek  everywhere  to  find  something
to  cavil  at,  and  shall  see  none  but  ourselves  able  to  write
well.

JT  The  precieuses  really  held  dissertations  about  the  language,  and  first
brought  into  use  many  energetic  phrases,  and  the  present  orthography.

88  Several  members  of  the  Academy  intended  to  banish  from  the  French
language  such  words  as  car,  encore,  neanmoins,  pourquoi,  and  several
others.

w  This  saying,  Nul  riaura  de  I' esprit,  hors  nous  et  nos  amis,  has  be-
come proverbial,  and  seems  to  be  aimed  at  Menage  and  his  clique.

Il8  THE   LEARNED  LADIES.  [ACT  HI.

SCENE  III. — PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,  ARMANDE,  HENRIETTE,
TRISSOTIN,  LEPINE.

LEP.  (To  Trissotin).  A  man  is  there,  Sir,  who 'wishes  to
speak  to  you;  he  is  dressed  in  black,  and  speaks  in  a
soft  tone.  (  They  rise.

TRIS.  It  is  that  learned  friend  who  has  pressed  me  so
much  to  procure  him  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance.

PHIL.  You  have  our  full  consent  to  introduce  him.

(  Trissotin  goes  to  meet  Vadius.

SCENE  IV. — PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,  ARMANDE,  HENRIETTE.

Phil.  (  To  Armande  and  to  Belise).  Let  us  do  well  the
honours  at  least  of  our  wit.  (  To  Henriette,  who  wishes  to
go).  Hullo  !  I  have  told  you  very  distinctly  that  I  want
you.

HEN.  But  for  what  ?

PHIL.  Come  hither ;  we  shall  let  you  know  shortly.

SCENE    V. — TRISSOTIN,    VADIUS,    PHILAMINTE,    BELISE,
ARMANDE,    HENRIETTE.

TRIS.  (Presenting  Vadius).  Behold  the  man  who  is
dying  to  see  you.  In  introducing  him  here  I  do  not  fear
being  blamed  for  having  admitted  a  profane  among  you,
Madam.  He  can  hold  his  own  amongst  the  wits.

PHIL.  The  hand  that  presents  him  is  sufficient  guar-
antee.

TRIS.  He  has  a  perfect  knowledge  of  the  old  authors,
and  he  knows  Greek,  Madam,  as  well  as  any  man  in  France.

PHIL.  {To  Belise).  Greek,  O  Heavens!  Greek!  He
knows  Greek,  sister !

BEL.   (To  Armande).     Ah!    niece,  Greek  !

ARM.  Greek  !    how  charming  !

PHIL.  What !  This  gentleman  knows  Greek  !  Ah  !
permit  me,  pray,  that,  for  the  love  of  Greek,  Sir,  I  em-
brace you.  (  Vadius  embraces  Belise  and  Armande  also.

HEN.  (To  Vadius,  -who  wishes  to  embrace  her  also).
Excuse  me,  Sir,  I  do  not  understand  Greek.

(  They  sit  down.

PHIL.  I  have  a  marvellous  respect  for  Greek  books.

VAD.  I  fear  that,  through  the  anxiety  which  prompts

SCENB  v.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  119

me  to  pay  you  my  respects  to-day,  Madam,  I  am  in-
truding; and  that  I  shall  be  disturbing  some  learned
conversation.

PHIL.  With  Greek,  Sir,  nothing  can  be  spoilt.

TRIS.  Besides,  he  does  wonders  in  verse  as  well  as
prose,  and  could,  if  he  would,  show  you  something.

VAD.  The  fault  of  authors  is  to  tyrannize  in  conversa-
tion with  their  productions  ;  in  being  at  the  Palais™  in
public31  walks,  at  the  ruelles,  at  table  the  indefatigable  re-
citers of  their  own  tiresome  verses.  As  for  me,  I  see
nothing  more  absurd,  according  to  my  opinion,  than  an
author  who  goes  begging  everywhere  for  incense,  who,
catching  the  ears  of  the  first  comers,  often  makes  them  the
martyrs  of  his  vigils.  I  have  never  had  this  foolish  hobby;
and  I  am,  on  this  subject,  of  the  opinion  of  a  Greek  who,  by
an  express  dogma,  forbids  all  his  followers  the  undignified
eagerness  of  reading  their  own  works.  Here  are  some
small  verses  for  young  lovers,  upon  which  I  should  like  to
have  your  opinions.

TRIS.  Your  verses  have  charms  which  no  others  have.

VAD.  The  Graces  and  Venus  reign  in  all  yours.

TRIS.  Your  turn  is  unconstrained,  and  you  choose  your
words  well.

VAD.  Throughout  all  your  works  the  ithos  and  pathos 32
are  seen.

TRIS.  We  have  had  some  eclogues  from  you,  which
surpass  in  sweet  charms  Theocritus  and  Virgil.83

VAD.  Your  odes  have  a  noble  ring,  gallant  and  sweet,
which  leave  Horace  very  far  behind.8*

TRIS.  Is  there  aught  more  amorous  than  your  little
songs  ?

VAD.   Is  there  anything  to  equal  your  sonnets  ?

TRIS.  There  is  nothing  so  charming  as  your  little
rondeaux.

VAD.   Nothing  so  full  of  wit  as  your  madrigals.

80  See  page  433,  note  8.

81  The  original  has  Cours.

82  These  are  terms  of  rhetoric  borrowed  from  the  Greek ;  the  first  means
morals,  the  second  feeling.

33  Menage  wrote  some  eclogues  which  had  a  certain  reputation.
M  This  mutual  flattery  of  Trissotin  and  Vadius  has  been  suggested  by  a
passage  from  Erasmus'  Praise  of  Folly.

I2O  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  ni.

TRIS.  .In  the  ballads,  above  all,  you  are  admirable.

VAD.  And  in  bouts-rimes  I  think  you  adorable.35

TRIS.  If  France  could  but  know  your  worth.

VAD.  If  the  age  did  but  render  justice  to  men  of  wit.

TRIS.  In  a  gilded  coach  you  would  pass  through  the
streets.

VAD.  We  should  see  the  public  erect  statues  to  you  (to
Trissotin).  Hm  !  it  is  a  ballad,  and  I  should  like  you  to
tell  me  plainly

TRIS.  (To  Vadius).  Have  you  seen  a  little  sonnet  on
the  ague  which  has  attacked  the  princess  Uranie.88

VAD.  Yes;  it  was  read  to  me  yesterday  in  a  certain
company.

TRIS.  Do  you  know  the  author  of  it  ?

VAD.  No ;  but  I  know  well  enough  that,  not  to  flatter
him,  his  sonnet  is  worth  nothing.

TRIS.  Many  people  think  it  admirable,  however.

VAD.  That  does  not  prevent  it  from  being  very  wretch-
ed ;  and  if  you  had  read  it,  you  would  be  of  my  way  of
thinking.

TRIS.  I  know  that  I  should  differ  with  you  on  this
subject,  and  that  few  people  are  capable  of  such  a  sonnet.

VAD.  Heaven  preserve  me  from  writing  such !

TRIS.  I  maintain  that  nothing  better  could  be  written  ;
and  my  great  reason  is,  that  I  am  the  author  of  it.

VAD.  You?

TRIS.  I.

VAD.  I  do  not  know  then  how  the  affair  happened.

TRIS.  It  is  that  I  was  not  fortunate  enough  to  be  able  to
please  you.

VAD.  I  must  have  been  absent-minded  in  listening  to  it,
or  the  reader  must  have  spoilt  me  the  sonnet."  But  let  us
drop  the  subject  and  look  to  my  ballad.

85  Bouts-rimes  are  verses  in  which  the  final  words  were  given  first,  and
•which  had  then  to  be  filled  up.

M  Trissotin  and  Vadius  are  both  anxious  to  shine  before  the  ladies,  and
as  soon  as  the  latter  wishes  to  read  his  ballad,  the  former  begins  to  speak
of  his  sonnet.

37  Madame  de  Sevigne  mentions  in  one  of  her  letters  a  similar  fact,  how
Louis  XIV.  deceived  an  old  courtier,  the  Marshal  de  Grammont,  by  asking
his  opinion  about  a  madrigal,  which  the  king  pretended  to  think  rather
feeble.  De  Grammont  thought  it  wretched,  and  was  quite  dumbfounded
when  Louis  told  him  that  he  was  himself  the  author  of  it.

SCBNJJV].  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  121

TRIS.  A  ballad,  to  my  taste,  is  an  insipid  thing;  it  is  no
longer  the  fashion ;  it  smacks  of  ancient  times.

VAD.  The  ballad,  however,  charms  many  people.

TRIS.  That  does  not  prevent  it  from  displeasing  me.

VAD.  It  remains  none  the  worse  for  that.

TRIS.  It  has  wondrous  charms  for  certain  pedants.

VAD.  And  yet  we  see  that  it  does  not  please  you.

TRIS.  You  foolishly  attribute  your  own  qualities  to
others.  (  They  all  rise.

VAD.  You  throw  yours  at  me  very  impertinently.

TRIS.  Go  along,  you  little  dunce,  you  pitiful  scribbler.

VAD.  Go  along,  you  doggerel  rhymester,38  you  disgrace
of  the  profession.

TRIS.  Go  along,  you  second-hand  verse-dealer,  you  im-
pudent plagiarist.

VAD.  Go  along,  you  numbskull  .    .    .

PHIL.  He  !  gentlemen,  what  are  you  about?

TRIS.  {To  Vadius).  Go,  go,  and  make  restitution  of  your
shameful  larcenies  which  the  Greeks  and  Latins  claim  from
you.39

VAD.  Go,  go,  and  do  penance  to  Parnassus,  for  having
maimed  Horace  with  your  verses.

TRIS.  Remember  your  book,  and  the  little  stir  it
caused.

VAD.  And  you,  your  publisher  reduced  to  the  hospital.

TRIS.  My  fame  is  established ;  you  attack  it  in  vain.

VAD.  Yes,  yes ;  I  refer  you  to  the  author  of  the  Satires.

TRIS.  I  refer  you  also  to  him.

VAD.  I  have  the  satisfaction  of  people  seeing  that  he  has
treated  me  more  honourably.  He  gives  me  a  slight  dig,40
by  the  way,  among  many  authors  who  are  esteemed  at  the
Palais;  but  he  never  leaves  you  in  peace  in  his  verses,  and
we  find  you  a  butt  for  his  arrows  throughout.

TRIS.  It  is  by  this  that  I  hold  the  more  honourable
rank.  He  places  you  among  the  crowd  like  a  miserable
being ;  he  thinks  one  blow  enough  to  knock  you  down,  and

88  The  original  has  rimeur  de  balle,  because  things  of  inferior  quality
were  called  marchandises  de  dalle,  from  balle,  a  hawker's  bale.

w  Me'nage  is  said  to  have  pilfered  a  great  deal  from  the  ancients.

40  Boileau  has  attacked  Menage  only  once,  and  that  slightly,  in  his
fourth  satire.

122  THE  LEARNED  LADIES.  [ACT  m.

has  never  done  you  the  honour  to  repeat  it.  But  he  at-
tacks me  apart  as  a  noble  adversary,  against  whom  all  his
efforts  seem  necessary ;  and  his  blows,  repeated  against  me
everywhere,  show  that  he  never  believes  himself  certain
of  the  victory.

VAD.  My  pen  shall  teach  you  what  sort  of  a  man  I
can  be.

TRIS.  And  mine  will  make  you  see  your  master.

VAD.  I  defy  you  in  verse,  prose,  Greek,  and  Latin.

TRIS.  Well !  we  shall  see  each  other  alone  at  Barbin.41

SCENE  VI. — TRISSOTIN,  PHILAMINTE,  ARMANDE,  BELISE,
HENRIETTE.

TRIS.  Do  not  blame  me  for  giving  way  to  my  temper ;
it  is  your  judgment  which  I  defend,  Madam,  in  the  sonnet
which  he  has  had  the  audacity  to  attack.

PHIL.  It  shall  be  my  care  to  reconcile  you.  But  let  us
speak  of  something  else.  Draw  near,  Henriette.  For  a
long  time  my  heart  has  been  uneasy,  because  I  could
never  perceive  any  trace  of  wit  in  you ;  but  I  have  found
the  means  of  making  you  have  some.

HEN.  You  take  pains  for  me  which  are  unnecessary;
learned  conversations  are  not  at  all  in  my  way :  I  love  to
live  at  ease;  and,  in  whatever  is  said,  one  must  take  too
much  trouble  to  become  clever ;  it  is  an  ambition  which
does  not  at  all  enter  my  mind.  I  find  myself  very  well,
mother,  in  being  stupid ;  and  I  prefer  having  nothing
but  common-place  talk  to  tormenting  myself  to  say  fine
words.

PHIL.  Yes ;  but  I  am  hurt  at  it,  and  it  does  not  suit  me
to  bear,  in  my  own  family,  such  a  disgrace.  Beauty  of
countenance  is  but  a  frail  ornament,  a  transitory  flower,
the  dazzle  of  a  moment,  which  exists  but  in  the  epidermis  ;
but  that  of  the  mind  is  inherent  and  firm.  I  have,  there-
fore, long  looked  for  some  way  to  give  you  that  beauty
which  years  cannot  reap,  to  inspire  you  with  a  love  for
learning,  and  to  instil  into  you  a  desire  for  fine  know-
ledge; and,  in  short,  the  thought  to  which  my  wishes

41  Barbin  was  one  of  the  chief  booksellers  of  the  time,  and  his  shop  was
at  the  Palais.

SCKNKVIH.]  THE  LEARNED    LADIES.  123

tended,  is  to  attach  to  you  a  man  replete  with  intelligence.
(Pointing  to  Trissotiri).  And  that  man  is  this  gentleman,
whom  I  command  you  to  look  upon  as  the  husband  whom
my  choice  intends  for  you.

HEN.  I!  mother?

PHIL.  Yes,  you.     Play  the  fool  a  little.

BEL.  {To  Trissotin).  I  understand  you:  your  eyes
demand  my  consent  to  pledge  elsewhere  a  heart  which  I
possess.  Go,  I  am  willing.  To  this  bond  I  surrender
you ;  it  is  a  union  that  will  be  the  making  of  you.

TRIS.  (To  Henriette),  I  do  not  know  what  to  say  to
you  in  my  delight,  Madam ;  and  this  union,  with  which
I  see  myself  honoured,  puts  me  .  .  .

HEN.  Gently,  Sir;  it  is  not  yet  concluded:  do  not
hurry  yourself  so  much.

PHIL.  How  you  answer !  Do  you  know  that  .  .  .  ?
Enough.  You  understand  me.  (To  Trissoiiri}.  She  will
be  sensible.  Come,  let  us  leave  her.

SCENE  VII. — HENRIETTE,  ARMANDE

AR.  We  see  shining  forth  our  mother's  care  for  you;
and  she  could  not  have  chosen  a  more  illustrious  hus-
band .  .  .

HEN.   If  the  choice  be  so  fine,  why  do  not  you  take  it  ?

AR.  It  is  to  you,  not  to  me,  that  his  hand  is  given.

HEN.  I  surrender  it  all,  as  to  my  elder  sister.

AR.  If  wedlock  were  invested  with  any  charm  for  me,
as  it  is  for  you,  I  should  accept  your  offer  with  delight.

HENT.  If  I  had,  like  you,  my  head  full  of  pedants,
I  should  think  him  a  very  decent  match.

AR.  Though  our  tastes  in  this  may  be  different,  we
ought,  however,  to  obey  our  parents,  sister.  A  mother
has  an,  absolute  power  over  us ;  and  you  believe  in  vain,
by  your  resistance  .  .  .

SCENE    VIII. — CHRYSALE,  ARISTE,    CLITANDRE,  HEN-
RIETTE, ARMANDE.

CH.  (To  Henriette,  presenting  Clitandre  to  her).  Come,
daughter,  you  must  approve  my  design.  Take  off  your
glove.  Take  this  gentleman's  hand,  and  henceforth  con-
sider him  in  your  heart,  as  a  man  whose  wife  I  wish  you
to  be.

124  THE   LEARNED   LADIE3.  [ACT  iv.

AR,  On  this  side  your  likings  are  very  strong,  sister.

HEN.  We  must  obey  our  parents,  sister.  A  father  has
absolute  power  over  our  wishes.

AR.  A  mother  has  her  claim  to  our  obedience.

CH.  What  does  it  mean  ?

AR.  I  say  that  I  apprehend  much  that  on  this  my
mother  and  you  will  not  agree ;  and  that  it  is  another
husband  .  .  .

CH.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  saucy  jade ;  go  and  have
your  fill  at  philosophizing  with  her ;  and  do  not  concern
yourself  with  my  actions.  Tell  her  my  mind,  and  take
care  to  warn  her  not  to  come  and  pester  my  ears.  Go
quickly.

SCENE  IX. — CHRYSALE,  ARISTE,  HENRIETTE,  CLITANDRE.

ARI.  Very  good.     You  have  done  wonders.

CLI.  What  transport !  what  joy !  Ah,  how  sweet  is
my  lot !

CH.  {To  Clitandre}.  Come,  take  her  hand,  and  go  be-
fore us ;  conduct  her  to  her  room.  Ah !  the  sweet
caresses!  {To  Ariste).  There,  my  heart  leaps  at  all
these  tender  signs ;  it  makes  my  old  days  feel  young
again,  and  I  look  back  upon  my  youthful  love  affairs.

ACT   IV.
SCENE  I. — PHILAMINTE,  ARMANDE.

AR.  Yes,  nothing  has  kept  her  mind  in  check ;  she  is
proud  of  her  obedience.  Scarcely  has  her  heart  given  it-
self time  to  receive  the  order  in  my  presence  before  it  sur-
rendered, and  seemed  less  to  follow  the  wishes  of  a  father
than  affect  to  defy  the  orders  of  a  mother.

PHIL.  I  shall  soon  show  her  to  whose  orders  the  laws  of
reason  subject  her  wishes,  and  who  is  to  control,  her
mother  or  her  father,  the  mind  or  the  body,  the  form  or
the  matter.

AR.  The  compliment  of  it  was,  at  least,  due  to  you:
and  this  little  gentleman  behaves  strangely  in  wishing
to  become  your  son-in-law,  in  spite  of  you.

SCENE  ii.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  125

PHIL.  He  is  not  there  yet  where  his  heart  aspires  to  be.
I  thought  him  well  enough,  and  I  looked  with  pleasure  on
your  love-affairs ;  but  he  has  always  displeased  me  in  his
way  of  acting.  He  knew,  Heaven  be  thanked,  that  I  was
an  author;  and  yet  he  never  asked  me  to  read  anything
to  him.

SCENE  II. — CLITANDRE,  entering  softly,  and  listening  with-
out being  seen,  ARMANDE,  PHILAMINTE.

AR.  I  should  not  allow,  if  I  were  you,  that  he  should
ever  become  the  husband  of  Henriette.  It  would  be  do-
ing me  a  great  wrong  to  imagine  that  I  speak  about  this
as  an  interested  girl,  and  that  the  scurvy  trick  which  he
plays  me  produces  some  secret  spite  at  the  bottom  of  my
heart.  Against  such  blows  the  soul  is  strengthened  by
the  solid  assistance  of  philosophy,  and  through  her  we
may  place  ourselves  above  everything ;  but  to  treat  you
thus  is  to  drive  you  to  extremes.  It  becomes  your  honour
to  oppose  his  wishes ;  and  he  is  a  man,  in  short,  who
ought  not  to  please  you.  Between  ourselves,  I  never
knew  that  in  his  inmost  heart  he  had  any  esteem  for  you.

PHIL.  The  little  fool !

AR.  Whatever  praises  were  uttered  about  you,  he  al-
ways seemed  like  ice  when  it  came  to  lauding  you.

PHIL.  The  coarse  man !

AR.  And  twenty  times  I  have  read  him,  as  a  novelty,
some  of  your  verses  which  he  did  not  like.

PHIL.  The  impertinent  fellow  !

AR.  We  often  quarrelled  about  it ;  and  you  would  not
believe  how  much  nonsense  .  .  .

CLI.  (To  Armande).  Eh!  gently,  pray.  A  little  cha-
rity, Madam,  or,  at  least,  a  little  honesty.  What  harm
have  I  done  to  you?  and  what  is  my  offence,  to  have  all
your  eloquence  up  in  arms  against  me?  to  wish  to  destroy
me,  and  to  take  so  much  trouble  in  making  me  odious
with  people  of  whom  I  stand  in  need?  Speak,  say,
whence  comes  this  terrible  anger?  I  have  no  objection
that  this  lady  should  honestly  judge  between  us.

AR.  If  I  harboured  this  anger  of  which  you  wish  to  ac-
cuse me,  I  should  find  sufficient  to  justify  it.  You  but
too  well  deserve  it ;  and  a  first  love  establishes  such  sacred

126  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  iv.

rights  upon  the  heart,  that  sooner  than  burn  with  the
flame  of  another  passion,  one  should  lose  one's  fortune,
and  renounce  life.  Nothing  equals  the  horror  of  a
change  in  love  j  and  every  faithless  heart  is  a  monster  in
morality.

CLI.  Do  you  account  it  an  infidelity,  Madam,  to  do
what  the  pride  of  your  heart  has  commanded  me  ?  I  only
obey  its  commands ;  and,  if  I  offend  you,  that  alone  is  the
cause  of  it.  Your  charms  at  first  possessed  my  whole
heart ;  it  burned  constantly  for  two  years ;  no  assiduous
attentions,  duties,  respects,  services,  but  what  it  sacrificed
lovingly  to  you.  All  my  affection,  all  my  attentions,  avail
nothing  with  you;  I  find  you  opposed  to  my  sweetest
aspirations.  What  you  refuse,  I  offer  to  another.  Now
judge.  Is  it,  Madam,  my  fault  or  yours?  Does  my  heart
run  after  change,  or  does  yours  goad  me  to  it?  Is  it  I
who  leaves  you,  or  you  who  drives  me  away?

AR.  Do  you  call  it  being  opposed  to  your  desires,  Sir,
to  deprive  them  of  what  was  vulgar  in  them,  and  to  wish
to  reduce  them  to  that  purity  wherein  consists  the  beauty
of  perfect  love  ?  You  cannot  fop  me  keep  your  thoughts
clear  and  disentangled  from  the  commerce  of  the  senses ;
and  do  you  not  taste,  as  its  sweetest  charms,  this  union  of
hearts,  in  which  the  bodies  are  not  concerned.  You  can-
not love  except  with  a  gross  love,  and  with  all  its  train
of  material  bonds :  and,  to  feed  the  flames  produced  in
your  heart,  a  marriage  and  all  its  sequel  is  necessary.  Ah !
what  strange  love,  and  how  far  removed  are -noble  souls
from  burning  with  such  terrestrial  flames  !  The  senses
have  no  share  in  all  their  ardours ;  and  this  lovely  fire
unites  nought  but  hearts.  It  leaves  the  rest  as  an  unwor-
thy matter ;  it  is  a  fire,  pure  and  clear  as  the  heavenly
fire ;  one  utters  nought  but  virtuous  sighs,  and  does  not
tend  towards  filthy  desires.  Nothing  impure  is  mixed
with  the  proposed  aim ;  one  loves  for  the  sake  of  love,
and  for  nothing  else ;  it  is  to  the  mind  only  that  all
transports  are  directed,  and  one  never  perceives  that  one
has  a  body.

CLI.  As  for  me,  to  my  misfortune,  Madam,  I  perceive
but  too  plainly  that  I  have  a  body  as  well  as  a  soul ;  I  feel
that  it  sticks  too  closely  to  it  to  leave  it  aside.  I  do  not

SCENE  H.]  THE  LEARNED    LADIES.  127

know  the  art  of  these  separations ;  Heaven  has  denied  me
this  philosophy,  and  my  body  and  soul  go  together.
There  is  nothing  more  beautiful,  as  you  have  observed,
than  these  purified  desires,  which  regard  the  mind  only,
this  union  of  hearts,  and  these  tender  thoughts  so  disen-
tangled from  the  commerce  of  the  senses.  But  for  me
such  affections  are  too  subtle;  I  am  somewhat  gross,  as
you  accuse  me;  I  love  with  my  whole  self,  and  the  love
with  which  I  am  inspired,  is  meant,  I  confess,  for  the  whole
person.  This  is  not  a  matter  for  very  great  punishments;
and,  without  wronging  your  fine  sentiments,  I  perceive
that  in  the  world  my  method  is  greatly  followed,  and  that
marriage  is  much  the  fashion,  and  that  it  passes  for  a  suf-
ficiently sweet  and  honourable  tie,  for  me  to  have  desired
to  become  your  husband,  without  the  liberty  of  such  a
thought  giving  you  the  least  reason  for  being  offended.

AR.  Well !  Sir,  well !  since  your  coarse  sentiments  wish
to  gratify  themselves,  without  listening  to  me  ;  since,  to
induce  you  to  remain  faithful,  there  must  be  carnal  bonds,
corporeal  chains,  if  my  mother  wishes  it,  I  shall  make  up
my  mind  to  consent  for  your  sake  to  what  we  were  speak-
ing of.

CLI.  It  is  too  late,  Madam,  another  has  taken  your
place ;  and  it  would  ill  become  me  to  repay  in  such  a
manner  the  protection,  and  wound  the  kindness  that  shel-
tered me  against  your  pride.

PHIL.  But  in  short,  Sir,  do  you  count  upon  my  consent
when  you  contemplate  this  other  marriage?  and,  if  you
please,  do  you  imagine,  that  I  have  another  husband  quite
ready  for  Henriette  ?

CLI.  Eh  !  Madam,  consider  your  choice,  I  pray ;  ex-
pose me,  I  beseech  you,  to  less  ignominy,  and  do  not  con-
sign me  to  the  humbling  lot  of  seeing  myself  the  rival  of
Mr.  Trissotin.  The  love  of  wits,  which  makes  you  thwart
me,  cannot  oppose  me  a  less  noble  adversary.  There  are
many  men,  whom  the  bad  taste  of  the  age  has  given  credit
for  being  wits ;  but  Mr.  Trissotin  has  not  been  able  to
dupe  any  one,  and  all  do  justice  to  the  writings  which  he
gives  us.  Except  here,  he  is  valued  everywhere  at  his
real  worth  ;  and  what  has  a  score  of  times  astonished  me,
is  to  find  you  exalt  to  the  skies  silly  verses  which  you

128  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  FACT  IT

would  have   disavowed,    if    you    had    made  them   your-
self.

PHIL.  If  you  judge  him  altogether  otherwise  than  we,  it
is  because  we  see  him  with  other  eyes  than  yours.

SCENE  III. — TRISSOTIN,  PHILAMINTE,  ARMANDE,  CLI-

TANDRE.

TRIS.  {To  Philaminte).  I  have  come  to  tell  you  a  great
piece  of  news.  We  have,  Madam,  while  sleeping,  had  a
narrow  escape.  A  world  has  passed  along  by  us,  has  fallen
across  our  vortex,  and,  if  it  had  on  its  way  met  with  our
earth,  it  would  have  been  broken  into  pieces,  like  glass.*2

PHIL.  Let  us  remit  this  conversation  to  another  oppor-
tunity. This  gentleman  would  find  neither  rhyme  nor
reason  in  it ;  he  professes  to  love  ignorance,  and  above  all
to  hate  wit  and  learning.

CLI.  This  truth  requires  some  qualification.  I  shall  ex-
plain myself,  Madam  ;  and  I  hate  only  the  wit  and  learn-
ing that  spoil  people.  They  are  things  which,  in  them-
selves, are  good  and  great ;  but  I  should  prefer  being  in
the  rank  of  those  who  are  ignorant  to  being  learned  like
certain  persons.

TRIS.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  think  that  learning  can
spoil  anything,  whatever  may  be  supposed.

CLI.  And  it  is  my  opinion,  that  in  facts  as  well  as  in
conversations,  science  often  makes  great  fools.

TRIS.  That  is  a  great  paradox.

CLI.  Without  being  very  clever,  the  proof  of  it  would,
I  think,  be  very  easy  to  me.  If  reasons  failed,  I  am  sure
that  in  any  case  famous  examples  would  not  fail  me.

TRIS.  You  might  quote  some  which  would  prove  hardly
anything.

CLI.  I  should  not  have  far  to  go  to  find  what  I  want.

TRIS.  For  my  part,  I  do  not  see  those  famous  examples.

CLI.  As  for  me,  I  see  them  so  plainly,  that  they  stare
me  in  the  face.

TRIS.  I  have  hitherto  believed  that  it  was  ignorance
which  made  great  fools,  and  not  learning.

41  Cotin  had  published  a  very  long  dissertation,  called  A  Gallantry
about  the  Comet  which  appeared  in  December  1664,  and  January  f66j.

SCENE  in.]  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  1 29

CLI.  You  have  believed  very  wrongly,  and  I  will  be
bound  that  a  learned  fool  is  more  foolish  than  an  ig-
norant fool.

TRIS.  Common  opinion  is  against  your  maxims,  since
ignorant  and  fool  are  synonymous  terms.

CLI.  If  you  will  take  it  according  to  the  use  of  the
word,  the  affinity  is  greater  between  pedant  and  fool.

TRIS.  Folly,  in  the  one,  appears  perfectly  pure.

CLI.  And  study,  in  the  other,  adds  to  nature.

TRIS.  Learning  in  itself  has  eminent  merit.

CLI.    Learning  in  a  fop  becomes  impertinent.

TRIS.  Ignorance  must  have  great  charms  for  you,  since
you  take  up  arms  so  eagerly  in  its  defence.

CLI.  If  ignorance  has  such  great  charms  for  me,  it  is
since  I  have  seen  certain  learned  men.

TRIS.  Those  certain  learned  men  may,  when  they  are
known,  be  worth  certain  other  people  who  are  not  far  off.

CLI.  Yes,  if  certain  learned  people  were  to  be  judges ;
but  would  people  agree  to  it  ?

PHIL.  ( To  Clitandre).     It  seems  to  me,  sir  .    .    .

CLI.  Eh  !  Madam,  pray ;  this  gentleman  is  strong
enough  without  you  coming  to  his  aid.  I  have  already
too  formidable  an  assailant,  and  if  I  defend  myself,  I  only
do  so  by  retreating.

AR.  But  the  offensive  sharpness  of  each  repartee  of
which  you.  .  .  .

CLI.  Another  second  !    I  give  up  the  game.

PHIL.  We  allow  these  kinds  of  combats  in  conversation,
provided  the  person  be  not  attacked.

CLI.  Eh,  good  Heavens !  all  this  has  nothing  in  it  to
offend  him ;  he  understands  raillery  as  well  as  any  man  in
France ;  and  he  has  felt  himself  goaded  with  many  other
points,  without  his  glory  ever  doing  aught  but  smiling
at  it.*3

TRIS.  I  am  not  astonished  to  see  this  gentleman  set
forth  the  thesis  in  the  combat  which  I  maintain ;  he  is
much  at  court,  that  is  saying  everything.  The  court,  it
is  well  known,  does  not  stand  up  for  wit.  It  has  some  in-

43  The  Abbd  Cotin  was  pretty  quarrelsome,  and  had  had  many  literary
disputes.

IJO  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  iv.

terest  in  supporting  ignorance,  Madam;  and  it  is  as  a
courtier  that  he  takes  up  its  defence.

CLI.  You  are  very  hard  upon  this  poor  court ;  and  its
misfortune  is  great  to  find  you  gentlemen  of  wit  every  day
declaiming  against  it ;  laying  all  your  annoyances  at  its
door,  and  quarrelling  with  it  upon  its  bad  taste,  accusing
no  one  but  it  upon  your  ill  success.  Permit  me  to  tell
you,  Mr.  Trissotin,  with  all  the  respect  with  which  your
name  inspires  me,  that  you  and  your  brethren  would  do
very  well  to  speak  of  the  court  in  somewhat  gentler  tones ;
and  that,  after  all,  it  is  not  so  silly  as  you  and  these  other
gentlemen  imagine ;  that  it  has  common  sense  to  judge  of
everything ;  that  some  good  taste  may  be  formed  there,
and  that  the  knowledge  of  the  world  which  is  there  dis-
played is,  without  flattery,  worth  all  the  obscure  learning
of  pedantry.

TRIS.  Of  its  good  taste,  Sir,  we  behold  the  effects.

CLI.  Where,  Sir,  do  you  see  that  it  is  so  bad  ?

TRIS.  What  do  I  see,  Sir  ?  Is  ft  that  as  regards  learning
Rasius  and  Baldus  are  an  honour  to  France ;  and  that  all
their  merit,  clear  as  day,  attracts  neither  the  eyes  nor  the
gifts  of  the  court.

CLI.  I  perceive  your  annoyance,  Sir,  and  that,  from
modesty,  you  do  not  place  yourself  among  them;  and,
not  to  bring  you  therefore  into  the  question,  what  do
these  able  heroes  do  for  the  state  ?  in  what  way  are  their
writings  of  any  service  to  it  to  accuse  the  court  of  a  hor-
rible injustice,  and  complain  everywhere  that  it  fails  to
bestow  the  favour  of  its  gifts  on  their  learned  names?
Their  learning  is  very  necessary  to  France !  and  the  court
cares  much  about  the  books  which  they  write !  Three
beggarly  fellows  take  it  into  their  narrow  heads,  that  if
they  are  only  printed  and  bound  in  calf  they  are  import-
ant persons  in  the  state ;  that  with  their  pens  they  shape
the  destiny  of  crowns,  that  at  the  slightest  rumour  of  their
productions,  pensions  ought  to  come  flying  to  them;
that  the  universe  has  its  eyes  on  them ;  that  the  glory  of
their  name  is  bruited  about  everywhere ;  and  that  they  are
famous  prodigies  in  learning,  because  they  know  what  others
have  said  before  them,  because  they  have  had  eyes  and  ears
for  the  last  thirty  years,  and  because  they  have  spent  nine

SCENE  iv.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  131

or  ten  thousand  nights  in  confusing  themselves  with  Greek
and  Latin,  and  loading  their  minds  with  the  unintelligible
booty  of  all  the  old  trash  that  lies  scattered  about  in  books.
People  who  always  seem  drunk  with  their  learning;  have
no  other  merit  than  an  abundance  of  troublesome  talk;
good  for  nothing,  void  of  common  sense,  and  full  of  a
ridicule  and  an  impertinence  to  decry  everywhere  wit
and  learning.

PHIL.  Your  warmth  is  great ;  and  this  violence  marks
the  movement  of  nature  in  you.  It  is  the  name  of  rival
which  excites  in  your  heart  .  .  .

SCENE  IV. — TRISSOTIN,  PHILAMINTE,  CLITANDRE,
ARMANDE,  JULIEN.

JUL.  The  learned  gentleman  who  just  now  paid  you  a
visit,  and  whose  humble  servant  I  have  the  honour  to  be,
requests  you  to  read  this  note.

PHIL.  However  important  the  letter  may  be  which  I  am
desired  to  read,  know,  friend,  that  it  is  a  piece  of  rudeness
to  come  to  interrupt  people  in  the  midst  of  a  conversation ;
and  that  as  a  servant  who  knows  how  to  behave,  you  should
have  recourse  to  the  people  of  the  house  to  be  introduced.

JUL.  I  shall  note  that  down  in  my  book,  Madam.

PHIL.  (Reads).  "Trissotin  has  boasted,  Madam,  that  he
is  to  marry  your  daughter.  Let  me  inform  you  that  his  phi-
losophy aims  only  at  your  wealth,  and  that  you  would  do
well  not  to  conclude  this  marriage  until  you  have  read  the
poem  which  I  am  composing  against  him.  Whilst  this  sketch
is  preparing,  in  which  I  mean  to  depict  him  in  all  his  colours,
I  send  you  Horace,  Virgil,  Terence  and  Catullus,  where  you
will  see  noted  down  on  the  margin  all  the  passages  which  he
has  pillaged. ' '

On  account  of  this  intended  marriage,  a  man  of  merit  is
attacked  by  many  enemies;  and  this  very  villifying  induces
me  to-day  to  do  an  action  which  shall  confound  envy,  and
make  it  feel  that  its  efforts  accelerate  the  execution  of  that
which  it  wishes  to  undo.  (To  Julien).  Let  your  master
immediately  know  this ;  and  tell  him  that  to  show  what
great  store  I  set  on  his  noble  counsels,  and  how  worthy  I
think  them  of  being  acted  upon,  this  very  evening  I  marry
him  {Pointing  to  Trissotiri),  to  my  daughter.

132  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACTIT.

SCENE  V. — PHILAMINTE,  ARMANDE,  CLITANDRE.

PHIL.  (To  Clitandre).  You,  Sir,  as  a  friend  of  the
whole  family,  may  assist  at  the  signing  of  the  contract ;
and  I  wish  to  invite  you  to  it.  Armande,  take  care  to
send  for  the  notary,  and  to  inform  your  sister  of  the
business.

AR.  There  is  no  need  to  inform  my  sister ;  this  gentle-
man here  will  charge  himself  with  the  trouble  of  running
and  carrying  her  the  news  very  soon,  and  of  disposing  her
heart  to  be  rebellious  against  you.

PHIL.  We  shall  see  who  will  have  the  greatest  power
over  her,  and  if  I  shall  be  able  to  bring  her  to  her  duty.

SCENE  VI. — ARMANDE,  CLITANDRE.

AR.  I  regret  much  to  see,  Sir,  that  matters  do  not  alto-
gether turn  out  as  you  wished.

CLI.  I  am  going  to  set  about  it  zealously,  Madam,  so  as
not  to  leave  you  so  much  regret  in  your  heart.

AR.  I  am  afraid  that  your  efforts  will  not  have  too  good
a  result.

CLI.  Perhaps  you  will  not  see  your  fear  realized.

AR.  I  hope  so.

CLI.  I  am  convinced  of  it,  and.  that  I  shall  be  assisted
by  your  support.

AR.  Yes,  I  am  going  to  serve  you  with  all  my  might.

CLI.  And  this  service  is  sure  of  my  gratitude.

SCENE  VII. — CHRYSALE,  ARISTE,  HENRIETTE,
CLITANDRE.

CLI.  Without  your  support,  I  should  be  unhappy;
your  wife  has  rejected  my  addresses,  and  in  her  prejudiced
heart  wishes  Trissotin  for  her  son-in-law.

CH.  But  what  fancy  has  she  got  hold  of  ?  Why  the
deuce  does  she  wish  for  this  Mr.  Trissotin  ?

ARI.  It  is  because  his  name  has  the  honour  of  rhyming
with  Latin,  that  he  gains  an  advantage  over  his  rival.

CLI.  She  wishes  to  conclude  this  marriage  this  very
evening.

CH.  This  evening?

SCBNXVIH.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  133

CLI.  This  evening.

CH.  And  this  evening,  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to
marry  you  two,  to  thwart  her.

CLI.  She  has  sent  for  the  notary  to  draw  up  the
contract.

CH.  And  I  am  going  to  fetch  him  for  the  one  he  is
to  draw  up.

CLI.  {Pointing  to  Henriette).  And  this  lady  ought  to  be
informed  by  her  sister  of  the  marriage  to  which  they  wish
her  to  consent.

CH.  And  I  command  her,  with  plenary  power,  to  pre-
pare her  hand  for  this  other  union.  Ah  !  I  will  show  if
there  be  another  master  than  myself  in  my  house,  to  lay
down  the  law.  (To  Henriette).  We  are  coming  back,
take  care  to  wait  for  us.  Come,  follow  me,  brother,  and
you  also,  son-in-law.

HEN.  (To  Ariste).  Alas!  try  to  keep  him  always  in
this  humour.

ARI.  I  shall  do  everything  to  serve  your  love.

SCENE  VIII. — HENRIETTE,  CLITANDRE.

CLI.  Whatever  powerful  aid  he  promises  to  my  flame,
my  greatest  hope  is  in  your  heart,  Madam.

HEN.  As  for  my  heart,  you  may  be  assured  of  that.

CLI.   I  cannot  but  be  happy,  when  I  have  its  support.

HEN.  You  see  to  what  marriage  they  attempt  to  com-
pel it.

CLI.  As  long  as  it  shall  be  mine,  I  see  nothing  to  fear.

HEN.  I  am  going  to  try  everything  to  see  our  sweetest
wishes  fulfilled  ;  and  if  all  my  efforts  do  not  make  me
yours,  there  exists  a  retreat  where  the  soul  can  fly  to,  and
which  shall  prevent  me  from  belonging  to  any  other
person .

CLI.  May  a  just  Heaven  forfend  that  I  should  ever
receive  such  a  proof  of  your  affection  !

ACT   V.

SCENE  I. — HENRIETTE,  TRISSOTIN.
HEN.  It  is  about  the  marriage  for  which  my  mother  is
preparing  that  I  wished,  Sir,  to  talk  to  you  face-to-face ;

134  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  f  ACT  v.

and  I  thought  that  in  the  trouble  in  which  I  see  the  whole
household  plunged,  I  miglit  make  you  listen  to  reason.  I
know  that  you  expect  me  to  bring  you  a  considerable
marriage  portion ;  but  money,  of  which  so  many  people
are  fond,  has  only  charms  unworthy  of  a  real  philosopher;
and  the  contempt  for  wealth  and  frivolous  grandeur  ought
not  to  shine  in  your  words  alone.

TRIS.  Nor  is  it  that  which  charms  me  in  you ;  and  your
brilliant  attractions,  your  piercing  and  soft  eyes,  your
gracefulness  and  your  air,  are  the  wealth,  the  riches  which
draw  my  affection  and  my  tenderness  towards  you :  these
are  the  only  treasures  of  which  I  am  enamoured.

HEN.  I  am  much  beholden  to  your  generous  flame.
Such  obliging  love  confounds  me,  and  I  regret,  Sir,  not
to  be  able  to  respond  to  it.  I  esteem  you  as  much  as  one
can  esteem  ;  but  I  find  an  obstacle  to  loving  you.  A
heart,  you  know,  cannot  belong  to  two  people ;  and  I  feel
that  Clitandre  has  made  himself  master  of  mine.  I  know
that  he  has  much  less  merit  than  you,  that  I  am  no  good
observer  when  I  choose  him  for  a  husband ;  that  by  a
hundred  fine  accomplishments,  you  ought  to  please  me ;
I  see  well  enough  that  I  am  wrong,  but  I  cannot  help  it ;
and  the  only  effect  which  reason  has  upon  me  is  to  make
me  angry  with  myself  for  being  so  blind.

TRIS.  The  gift  of  your  hand,  to  which  I  am  encouraged
to  pretend,  shall  also  give  me  that  heart  which  Clitandre
possesses ;  and  I  have  reason  to  presume  that  by  a  thou-
sand gentle  cares  I  may  find  the  secret  of  making  myself
beloved.

HEN.  No  ;  my  heart  is  attached  to  its  first  affections,
and  cannot  be  touched,  Sir,  by  your  attentions.  I  dare
explain  myself  freely  with  you  here,  nor  has  my  avowal
anything  to  offend  you.  This  affectionate  ardour,  which
springs  up  in  the  heart,  is  not,  as  is  well  known,  an  effect
of  merit :  fancy  takes  its  share  in  it ;  and,  when  some  one
pleases  us,  we  often  find  a  difficulty  in  saying  why  it  is  so.
If  we  could  love,  Sir,  by  choice  and  prudence,  you  should
have  my  whole  heart,  and  my  whole  tenderness ;  but  we
see  that  love  is  controlled  otherwise.  Leave  me,  I  pray,
to  my  blindness,  and  do  not  take  advantage  of  this  vio-
lence, which,  for  your  sake,  they  wish  to  do  to  my  obe-

SCENE  i.]  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  135

(lience.  A  gallant  man  wishes  to  owe  nothing  to  the
power  which  parents  have  over  us.  He  has  a  repugnance
to  see  the  object  of  his  love  sacrificed,  and  does  not  wish
to  obtain  a  heart  except  from  that  heart  itself  Do  not
drive  my  mother  to  wish,  by  her  choice,  to  exercise  her
utmost  rights  upon  my  inclinations.  Take  back  your  love
from  me,  and  bear  to  some  other  the  homage  of  a  heart
so  precious  as  yours.

TRIS.  How  can  this  heart  obey  you  ?  Impose  upon  it
any  commands  which  it  can  execute.  Can  it  be  capable
of  not  loving  you,  unless  you  cease,  Madam,  to  be  loveable,
and  to  display  to  people's  eyes  heavenly  charms  .  .  .

HEN.  Nay,  Sir,  a  truce  to  this  idle  nonsense.  You  have
so  many  Irises,  Philises,  Amarantes,  which  throughout
your  verses  you  paint  as  charming,  and  to  whom  you  vow
so  much  amorous  ardour.  .  .  .

TRIS.  It  is  my  mind  that  speaks,  and  not  my  heart.  I
am  enamoured  of  them  only  as  a  poet ;  but  I  love  in  all
earnest  the  adorable  Henriette.

HEN.  Eh !    pray,  Sir.  .    .    .

TRIS.  If  it  offend  you,  my  offence  towards  you  is  not
likely  to  cease.  This  ardour,  hitherto  ignored  by  you,
swears  to  be  devoted  to  you  for  ever.  Nothing  can  stay
its  loving  transports ;  and,  although  your  charms  con-
demn my  efforts,  I  cannot  refuse  the  aid  of  a  mother,  who
proposes  to  crown  so  dear  a  flame;  and,  provided  I  obtain
so  sweet  a  happiness,  provided  you  become  mine,  the  rest
does  not  matter.

HEN.  But  do  you  know  that  you  risk  a  little  more  than
you  imagine  by  using  violence  with  a  heart ;  that  it  is  not
very  safe,  to  speak  frankly  to  you,  to  marry  a  girl  in
spite  of  herself;  and  that  she  may  have  recourse,  by  seeing
herself  forced,  to  resentments  which  a  'husband  ought  to
fear?

TRIS.  Such  a  discourse  has  nothing  in  it  to  make  me
uneasy;  a  wise  man  is  prepared  for  all  emergencies.
Cured  by  reason,  of  all  vulgar  weaknesses,  he  places  him-
self above  such  things,  and  takes  care  not  to  feel  the
least  annoyance  at  anything  which  does  not  depend
upon  himself.

HEN.  In  truth,  Sir,  I  am  delighted  with  you ;   and  I

136  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  |ACT  v.

did  not  imagine  that  philosophy  was  so  beautiful'  as  it  is,
thus  to  teach  people  to  bear  with  equanimity  such  ac-
cidents. This  firmness  of  soul,  so  singular  in  you,
deserves  to  have  an  illustrious  subject  to  work  upon,  is
worthy  to  find  some  one  who  lovingly  takes  continual
pains  to  place  it  in  its  full  light ;  and,  as  in  truth,  I  dare
not  believe  myself  very  fit  to  give  it  all  the  brilliancy  of
its  glory,  I  leave  it  to  some  one  else,  and  swear  to  you,
between  ourselves,  that  I  renounce  the  happiness  of  seeing
you  my  husband.

TRIS.  (Going).  We  shall  soon  see  how  the  affair  will
go  on ;  for  they  have  already  got  the  notary  within.

SCENE  II. — CHRYSALE,  CLITANDRE,  HENRIETTE,  MARTINE.

CH.  Ah !  daughter,  I  am  glad  to  see  you ;  come,  come,
and  do  your  duty,  and  submit  your  wishes  to  the  will  of  a
father.  I  intend,  I  mean  to  teach  your  mother  how  to  be-
have ;  and,  the  better  to  brave  her,  here  is  Martine  whom,
in  spite  of  her,  I  bring  back  and  re-instate  in  the  house.

HEN.  Your  resolutions  are  worthy  of  praise.  Take  care
not  to  change  this  disposition,  father ;  be  firm  in  having
your  wishes  carried  out ;  and  do  not  allow  them  to  induce
you  to  abandon  your  good  intentions.  Do  not  unbend,
and  manage  to  prevent  my  mother  from  gaining  a  victory
over  you.

CH.  How  !    Do  you  take  me  for  a  booby?

HEN.  Heaven  preserve  me  from  it  f

CH.  Am  I  a  simpleton,  please  ?

HEN.  I  do  not  say  so.

CH.  Am  I  thought  incapable  of  the  steadfast  senti-
ments of  a  reasonable  man  ?

HEN.  No,  father.

CH.  Should  I  not  have  the  sense,  at  my  age,  to  be  mas-
ter in  ray  own  house  ?

HEN.  Yes,  indeed.

CH.  Should  I  be  so  weak  in  mind  as  to  be  led  by  the
nose  by  my  wife  ?

HEN.   Eh  !  no,  father.

CH.  Lack-a-day  !  What,  then,  does  all  this  mean  ?  I
think  you  very  facetious  to  speak  to  me  thus  !

HEN.  If  I  have  offended  you,  it  was  not  my  intention.

SCHNBIII.]  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  IJ7

CH.  My  will  shall  be  carried  out  in  everything  in  this
house.

HEN.   Very  well,  father.

CH.  No  one  but  myself,  has  a  right  to  command  in  this
house.

HEN.  Yes ;  you  are  right.

CH.  It  is  I  who  hold  the  place  of  head  of  the  family.

HEN.  Agreed.

CH.  It  is  I  who  have  to  dispose  of  the  hand  of  my
daughter.

HEN.  Eh  !  yes.

CH.  Heaven  gives  me  full  authority  over  you.

HEN.  Who  says  the  contrary?

CH.  And  I  shall  soon  show  you  that  you  have  to  obey
your  father,  and  not  your  mother,  in  taking  a  husband.

HEN.  Alas  !  you  flatter  in  this  the  sweetest  of  my  incli-
nations ;  to  obey  you  is  all  I  wish.

CH.  We  shall  see  if  my  wife  opposes  my  wishes  .    .    .

CLIT.  Here  she  comes  bringing  the  notary  with  her.

CH.  Second  me  well,  all  of  you.

MAR.  Leave  it  to  me.  I  shall  take  care  to  encourage
you  if  there  be  any  need  of  it.

SCENE  III. — PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,  ARMANDE,  TRISSOTIN,
A    NOTARY,    CHRYSALE,    CLITANDRE,    HENRIETTE,
.  MARTINE.

PHIL.  (To  the  Notary).  Could  you  not  change  your
barbarous  style,  and  give  us  a  contract  in  beautiful  lan-
guage.

NOT.  Our  style  is  very  good,  Madam,  and  I  should  be  a
fool  to  wish  to  change  one  word  of  it.

BEL.  Ah  !  what  barbarism  in  the  very  midst  of  France !
But  at  least,  out  of  regard  for  learning,  Sir,  be  kind
enough  to  enumerate  the  dowry  in  minae  and  talents  instead
of  in  crowns,  livres,  and  francs,  and  to  date  by  the  words
of  ides  and  calends.

NOT.  I  ?  If  I  were  to  grant  your  requests,  Madam,  I
should  find  myself  hooted  by  all  my  colleagues.

PHIL.  We  complain  in  vain  against  this  barbarism.
Come,  Sir,  sit  down  and  write.  {Perceiving  Martini).

138  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACT  v.

Ah  !  ah !  this  impudent  girl  dares  to  show  her  face  here
ao-ain  !  Why,  pray,  bring  her  back  to  my  house  ?

CH.  Bye-and-bye,  at  our  leisure,  we  shall  tell  you.  Now
we  have  other  matters  to  look  after.

NOT.  Let  us  proceed  to  the  contract.  Where  is  the
intended  bride  ?

PHIL.  She  whom  I  marry  is  the  youngest  daughter.

NOT.  Very  well.

CH.  {Pointing  to  Henriette}.  Yes,  here  she  is,  Sir.
Her  name  is  Henriette.

NOT.  Very  good.      And  the  intended  bridegroom  ?

PHIL.  (Pointing  to  Trissotin}.  The  husband  whom  I
give  here  is  this  gentleman.

CH.  (Pointing  to  Clitandre}.  And  the  one  whom  I  my-
self intend  her  to  marry  is  this  gentleman.

NOT.  Two  husbands !  It  is  one  too  many,  according
to  custom.

PHIL.  {To  the  Notary}.  Why  do  you  stop  ?  Set  down,
set  down  Mr.  Trissotin,  for  my  son-in-law.

CH.  For  my  son-in-law,  set  down,  set  down,  Mr.  Clit-
andre.

NOT.  But  first  agree  among  yourselves,  and  after  having
well-weighed  everything,  decide  between  you  who  shall  be
the  intended  husband.

PHIL.  Follow  the  choice,  Sir,  upon  which  I  have  resolved.

CH.  Do  things  as  I  tell  you,  Sir.

NOT.  Tell  me  which  of  the  two  I  am  to  obey.

PHIL.  ( To  Chrysale).     What,  you  oppose  my  wish  !

CH.  I  shall  not  allow  my  daughter  to  be  courted  only
for  the  sake  of  my  family's  wealth.

PHIL.  Indeed,  your  wealth  is  a  great  deal  thought  of!
And  a  wise  man  takes  much  heed  of  that !

CH.  In  one  word,  I  have  made  choice  of  Clitandre
for  her  husband.

PHIL.  {Pointing  to  Trissotin}.  And  behold  the  one
whom  I  design  for  her.  My  choice  shall  prevail ;  I  have
made  up  my  mind  to  that !

CH.  Upon  my  word  !  You  carry  things  with  a  very
high  hand.

MAR.  It  is  not  for  the  wife  to  dictate,  and  I  am  for  giv-
ing way  in  things  to  the  men.

SCBNBIH.J  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  139

CH.  That  is  well  said.

MAR.  Were  I  ever  so  certain  of  being  turned  out,4*  the
hen  ought  not  to  crow  before  the  cock.

CH.  Undoubtedly.

MAR.  And  we  see  people  jeer  at  a  man  when  the  wife
at  home  wears  the  breeches.

CH.  That  is  true.

MAR.  I  say  that  if  I  had  a  husband,  I  should  like  him
to  be  master  in  his  own  house  :  I  should  not  like  him  to
play  the  nobody;*5  and,  if  I  went  against  him  through
some  whim  or  other,  if  I  spoke  too  loud,  I  should  think  it
very  good  that  he  lowered  my  tone  by  some  slaps.

CH.  That  is  sensibly  spoken.

MAR.  Master  is  reasonable  to  wish  a  proper  husband  for
his  daughter.

CH.  Yes.

MAR.  For  what  reason  should  Clitandre,  young  and
handsome  as  he  is,  be  refused  to  her?  And  why,  if  you
please,  give  her  a  scholar,  who  is  unceasingly  making  epi-
logues? She  wants  a  husband,  not  a  pedagogue;  and
having  no  wish  to  know  either  Greek  or  Latin,  she  has  no
need  of  Mr.  Trissotin.

CH.  Very  good.

PHIL.  We  must  allow  her  to  chatter  at  her  ease.

MAR.  Scholars  are  good  for  nothing  but  to  preach ;
and  for  my  husband,  yes,  I  have  said  it  a  thousand  times,
I  would  never  take  a  man  of  wit.  Wit  is  not  at  all  wanted
at  the  domestic  hearth.  Books  go  badly  with  wedlock ;
and  I  should  wish,  if  ever  my  troth  were  plighted,  a  hus-
band who  had  no  other  book  but  myself,  who,  without
offence  to  Madam,  knows  not  A  from  B,  and  who,  in  one
word,  should  only  be  a  doctor  for  his  wife.

PHIL.  (To  Chrysale).  Is  it  finished ?  And  have  I  lis-
tened quietly  enough  to  your  worthy  interpreter?

CH.  She  has  spoken  the  truth.

**  The  original  has  mon  congefent fois  mefut-il  hoc.  Hoc  means  "assured,"
but  its  etymology  is  uncertain.  Some  say  it  is  derived  from  a  game  of
cards  called  hoc;  others  from  hoc,  meaning  "yes  "  in  Provencal ;  others,
again,  from  hoc,  meaning  croc,  a  hook ;  and  finally,  hoc,  with  the  Latin
meaning  of  "  that."

46  The  original  has  s  ilfaisait  le  jfocrisse.

140  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACr  r.

PHIL.  And  I,  to  cut  short  this  dispute,  require  absolute-
ly that  my  plan  should  be  carried  out.  {Pointing  to  Triss-
otiti).  Henriette  and  this  gentleman  shall  be  joined  on
the  spot.  I  have  said  it,  I  will  have  it  so ;  do  not  answer
me.  And  if  your  word  has  been  pledged  to  Clitandre,  offer
him  to  marry  the  elder.

CH.  Here  is  a  way  to  settle  this  matter.  {To  Henriette
and  Clitandre].  Well  !  do  you  give  your  consent  to  it?

HEN.  Eh  !   father  .    .    .

CLI.   (To  Chrysale).  Eh  !  Sir  .    .    .

BEL.  We  might  make  proposals  to  him  that  should
please  him  better ;  but  we  are  for  establishing  a  kind  of
love  that  shall  be  pure  as  the  morning  star :  the  reflecting
substance  maybe  admitted  into  it;  but  we  banish  the  ex-
tended substance  from  it.

SCENE  IV.- —  ARISTE,  CHRYSALE,  PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,
HENRIETTE,  ARMANDE,  TRISSOTIN,  NOTARY,  CLITAN-
DRE, MARTINE.  •

ARI.  I  regret  to  trouble  a  festive  ceremony  by  the
sorrow  which  I  am  obliged  to  cause  here.  These  two  let-
ters make  me  the  bearer  of  two  tidings,  of  which  I  have
felt  great  grief  for  your  sakes.  (To  Philaminte}.  The  one
for  you  comes  to  me  from  your  solicitor.  {To  Chrysale}.
The  other  for  you  conies  to  me  from  Lyons.

PHIL.  Who  can  write  us  about  a  misfortune  worthy  of
troubling  us  ?

ARI.   This  letter  will  relate  one  to  you.

PHIL.  "Madam,  I  have  requested  your  brother  to  hand
you  this  letter,  which  will  inform  you  what  I  dared  not
come  to  tell  you.  The  great  neglect  which  you  show  for  your
affairs  has  caused  the  clerk  of  your  judge  not  to  give  me  notice,
and  you  have  irrevocably  lost  your  lawsuit,  which  you  ought
to  have  won.

CH.   {To  Philaminte).  Your  lawsuit  lost  !

PHIL.  You  trouble  yourself  much  !  My  heart  is  not  at
all  upset  by  this  blow.  Show  a  less  common  soul,  and
brave,  like  me,  the  strokes  of  fortune.  "  This  want  of  care
costs  you  forty  thousand  crowns;  and  you  have  been  condemn-
ed to  pay  this  sum  with  costs,  by  an  order  of  the  Court.  Con-

SCENE  v.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  141

demned  ?  Ah  !  this  word  is  offensive,  and  is  made  for
criminals  only  !

ARTS.  He  is  wrong,  in  fact ;  and  you  right  in  finding
fault. with  him.  He  ought  to  have  said  that  you  are
invited,  by  order  of  the  Court,  to  pay  as  quickly  as
possible  forty  thousand  crowns  and  the  necessary  ex-
penses.

PHIL.    Let  us  see  the  other.

CH.  "  Sir,  the  friendship  which  binds  me  to  your  broth-
er makes  me  take  an  interest  in  all  that  concerns  you.  2
know  that  you  have  placed  all  your  property  in  the  hands  of
Arganle  and  Damon,  and  I  beg  to  give  you  notice  that  they
have  both  become  bankrupts  on  the  same  day.  O  Heavens  !
at  once  to  lose  all  that  I  possess  !

PHIL.  (To  Chrysale).  Ah  !  What  a  shameful  outbreak  !
Fie  !  all  this  is  nothing.  To  the  real  philosopher  there
is  no  serious  reverse,  and,  losing  everything,  he  still  re-
mains all  in  all  to  himself.  Let  us  terminate  our  affair,
and  have  done  with  your  grief.  (Pointing  to  Trissotiri).
His  wealth  will  suffice  for  us  all.

TRIS.  No,  Madam  :  cease  to  press  this  matter.  I  see
that  every  one  is  opposed  to  this  marriage,  and  I  have  no
desire  to  force  people's  inclinations.

PHIL.  This  consideration  has  come  upon  you  very
quickly;  it  follows  very  closely,  Sir,  upon  our  misfor-
tune.

TRIS.  I  am  weary  at  last  of  so  much  resistance.  I  pre-
fer renouncing  all  this  bickering,  and  do  not  wish  for  a
heart  which  does  not  give  itself  freely.

PHIL.  I  see,  I  see  now,  and  not  at  all  to  your  credit,
what  hitherto  I  have  refused  to  believe  of  you.

TRIS.  You  may  believe  of  me  what  you  please,  and  I
care  little  how  you  take  it :  but  I  am  not  the  man  to  suffer
the  shame  of  the  offensive  refusals  which  I  have  under-
gone here.  I  am  well  worth  being  made  much  more  of
and  my  service  to  those  who  will  not  have  me.

SCENE  V. — ARISTE,  CHRYSALE,  PHILAMINTE,  BELISE,  AR-
MANDE,  HENRIETTE,  CLITANDRE,  NOTARY,  MARTJNE.

PHIL.  How  clearly  he  has  shown  his  mercenary  soul !

142  THE  LEARNED   LADIES.  [ACTV

and  how  little  there  is  of  the  philosopher  in  what  he  has
just  done !

CLI.  I  do  not  boast  of  being  such ;  but  in  one  word,  I
do  not  separate  my  fate  from  yours,  Madam  ;  and  I  dare
offer  you  with  my  person  the  little  which  fortune  has  be-
stowed upon  me.

PHIL.  You  charm  me,  Sir,  by  this  generous  trait,  and  I
will  crown  the  desires  of  your  affection.  Yes ;  I  grant
Henriette  to  the  eager  ardour  .  .  .

HEN.  No,  mother ;  I  now  change  my  mind.  Permit
me  to  resist  your  wishes.

CLIT.  What  1  you  oppose  my  happiness !  and,  when  I
see  every  one  yield  to  my  love  .  .  .

HEN.  I  know  the  smallness  of  your  fortune,  Clitandre ;
and  I  have  ever  desired  you  for  my  husband,  when  by
satisfying  my  sweetest  inclinations  I  saw  that  my  union
improved  your  affairs.  But  when  we  have  such  contrary
fates,  I  love  you  sufficiently  in  such  extremity,  not  to  bur-
den you  with  our  adversity.

CLIT.  Every  destiny  shared  with  you  would  be  plea-
sant; every  destiny  without  you  would  be  unbearable.

HEN.  Love,  in  its  transport,  speaks  always  thus.  Let
us  avoid  painful  and  unpleasant  reflections.  Nothing
wears  so  quickly  the  affections  of  the  tie  which  binds  us
as  the  sad  necessities  of  life's  cares ;  and  people  often,
upon  such  occasions,  accuse  each  other  mutually  of  all
the  dismal  griefs  which  proceed  from  such  engage-
ments.

ARI.  {To  Henriette).  Is  this  the  only  motive  which
makes  you  refuse  the  union  with  Clintandre  ?

HEN.  Without  this,  you  would  find  my  heart  leap  at  it ;
I  refuse  his  hand  only  because  I  love  him  too  well.

ARI.  Then  be  bound  by  such  beautiful  chains.  I  have
brought  you  only  false  tidings ;  and  it  is  a  trick,  a  sur-
prising device,  which  I  have  put  into  practice  to  serve
your  love,  to  undeceive  my  sister,  and  show  her  what  her
philosopher  would  prove  upon  trial.

CH.  Heaven  be  praised  for  it !

PHIL.  I  am  glad  at  the  vexation  which  it  will  give  this
base  deserter.  To  see  this  match  concluded  with  magnifi-
cence will  be  a  punishment  to  his  sordid  meanness.

SCENBV.]  THE   LEARNED   LADIES.  143

CH.  {To  Clitandre).  I  knew  well  enough  that  you
would  marry  her.

AR.  (To  Philaminti).  Then  you  sacrifice  me  to  their
love?

PHIL.  It  is  not  you  whom  I  sacrifice  to  them  ;  and  you
have  the  support  of  philosophy  to  .see  with  a  satisfied  eye
their  ardour  crowned.

BEL.  Let  him  beware,  at  least,  that  I  am  not  dwelling
in  his  heart.  One  marries  often  through  sudden  despair,
and  repents  all  one's  life  afterwards.

CH.  (  To  the  Notary}.  Come,  Sir,  follow  the  order
which  I  have  prescribed,  and  draw  up  the  contract  as  I
have  told  you.

LE  MALADE  IMAGINAIRE.

COMEDIE.

A  COMEDY  IN  THREE  ACTS.

INTERSPERSED  WITH  MUSIC  AND  DANCING.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.)

FEBRUARY  IOTH,  1673.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE

WHILST  Moliere  was  very  ill  and  nearly  dying,  when  he  felt  every  day
his  strength  failing  him,  and  his  life  passing  away  rapidly,  he  wrote  a
comedy,  The  Imaginary  Invalid,  in  which  he  depicts  the  folly  of  a  man
who,  though  in  good  health,  believes  himself  ill,  blindly  obeys  his  doctor,
and  swallows  and  takes  what  he  prescribes  for  him  ;  in  other  words,  the
very  counterpart  of  Moliere  himself.  This  comedy  was  first  performed
at  the  theatre  of  the  Palais  Royal,  on  the  loth  of  February,  1673.  Dur-
ing the  fourth  representation,  Moliere  became  ill  and  died  on  the  same
evening,  the  I7th  of  February.  The  theatre  did  not  open  until  the  24th
of  that  month,  with  The  Misanthrope,  and  with  Baron  in  the  part  of  Al-
ceste.  The  Imaginary  Invalid  was  performed  again,  with  La  Thorilliere
in  the  character  of  Argan,  and  was  acted  nine  times.  On  the  4th  of  May
1674,  it  was  acted  anew,  and  had  thirty-seven  consecutive  representations,
whilst  it  was  played  before  the  court  on  the  igth  of  July  of  the  same  year.
On  the  igth  of  November  it  was  brought  out  again,  and  played  eleven
times ;  so  that  it  was  represented  in  all  sixty-two  times — a  proof  that  the
public  was  not  tired  in  admiring  the  last  work  of  France's  great  dramatist.

In  the  character  of  Argan  Moliere  endeavoured  to  sketch  the  excessive
dread  of  death  and  its  consequences,  harshness  of  heart,  tyrannical  ego-
tism, and  an  extreme  facility  for  being  deceived.  Argan's  wife,  Beline,
tyrannizes  over  him,  Mr.  Purgon  and  Mr.  Fleurant  rule  him  with  a  rod
of  iron,  whilst  Beralde,  Argan's  brother,  is  a  sceptic  in  medicine,  and  pro-
bably is  only  the  mouth-piece  of  the  very  arguments  of  Moliere  himself.
The  burlesque  reception  of  Argan  as  a  doctor,  in  the  last  interlude,  is
very  similar  to  the  real  reception  of  a  doctor,  and  it  seems  that  some  of
Moliere's  medical  friends  assisted  him  in  th,s  description.  John  Locke,
who  passed  three  years  after  Moliere's  death  through  Montpellier,  was
present  at  the  examination  of  .-.  physician,  and  the  conferring  of  his  de-
gree, and  describes  a  procession  of  the  doctors  dressed  in  red,  with  black
caps  on  their  heads,  and  followed  by  ten  violin-players,  the  speech  of  the
president  against  the  circulation  of  the  blood,  the  different  compliments
of  the  newly  made  doctor,  and  his  putting  on  a  cap,  a  ring  on  his  finger,
and  a  golden  chain  round  his  loins.  In  Paris  there  was  no  music  when  a
docters  degree  was  conferred.

Moliere  had  nattered  himself  that    The  Imaginary  Invalid  should  be

147

148  THE    IMAGINARY   INVALID.

represented  at  court  during  the  carnival  of  1673,  and  the  Prologue  is  suffi-
cient evidence  of  this.  But  Louis  XIV.,  who,  during  the  preceding  sum-
mer, had  made  his  first  campaign  in  Holland,  had  probably  his  mind
filled  with  more  or  less  heroic  thoughts,  and  ordered  the  Mithridates  of
Racine,  to  be  performed  by  the  comedians  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne  ;
Lulli  also  made  some  opposition  with  regard  to  the  music,  which  was
forbidden  to  be  played  on  any  other  stage  than  the  Opera.

Dr.  Martin  Lister,  an  Englishman  who  was  in  Paris  in  1698,  says  : — l

"It  is  said  Moliere  died  suddenly  in  acting  the  Malade  Imaglnaire ;
which  is  a  good  instance  of  his  well  personating  the  play  he  made,  and
how  he  could  really  put  himself  into  any  passion  he  had  in  his  head.  .  .  .
He  is  reported  to  have  said,  going  off  the  stage,  '  Messieurs,  jfaijoue  le
Malade  Imaginaire,  mats  je  suis  veritablement  fort  malade  ;  and  he  died
two  hours  after.  This  account  of  Moliere  is  not  in  his  life  by  Perrault ;
but  it  is  true ;  and  yet  he  has  blamed  him  for  his  folly,  in  persecuting  the
art  of  physic,  not  the  men,  in  divers  of  his  plays.

"  Molilre  sent  for  Dr.  M ,  a  physician  of  Paris  of  great  esteem  and

worth,  and  now  in  London  a  refugee.  Dr.  M sent  him  word  he

would  come  to  him,  upon  two  conditions  ;  the  one,  that  he  should  answer
him  only  to  such  questions  as  he  should  ask  him,  and  not  otherwise  dis-
course him ;  the  other,  that  he  should  oblige  himself  to  take  the  medicines
that  he  should  prescribe  for  him.  But  Moliere  finding  the  doctor  too
hard  for  him,  and  not  easily  to  be  duped,  refused  them.  His  business,  it
seems,  was  to  make  a  comical  scene  in  exposing  one  of  the  most  learned
men  of  the  profession,  as  he  had  done  the  quacks.  If  this  was  his  inten-
tion, as  in  all  probability  it  was,  Moliere  had  as  much  malice  as  wit ;
which  is  only  to  be  used  to  correct  the  viciousness  and  folly  of  men  pre-
tending to  knowledge,  and  not  the  arts  themselves.'*

The  words  which  Dr.  Lister  attributes  to  Moliere  as  having  been  ut-
tered by  him  on  the  stage,  have  never  had  any  corroborative  evidence.
Who  the  Dr.  M.  may  be,  whom  the  learned  English  physician  mentions,
and  who  appears  to  have  told  him  a  cock-and-bull  story,  it  is  now  impos-
sible to  find  out ;  but  the  animus  of  Dr.  Lister,  and  his  spite  against  Mo-
liere, twenty-five  years  after  the  dramatist's  death,  is  distinctly  shown  in
the  extract  given  above.

As  the  king  had  early  in  the  year  1674  forbidden  The  Imaginary  In-
valid to  become  public  property,  until  it  was  printed,  and  as  the  troupe
of  Moliere  did  not  hasten  to  publish  it,  several  spurious  editions  soon  saw
the  light.  The  first  published  at  Amsterdam  by  D.  Elzevir,  in  1674,  and
probably  written  by  some  one  who  had  seen  the  play  in  Paris,  and  wrote
it  down  from  memory,  is  absolutely  valueless,  except  as  indicating  some
stage  play,  and  describing  the  dresses.  A  second  surreptitious  edition
was  published  the  same  year,  at  Cologne,  by  T-  Sambin,  and  appears  to
be  so  well  done  that  it  seems  possible  that  the  original  manuscript  has
been  consulted.  But  the  comedy,  as  we  now  know  it,  was  first  published
in  the  collected  edition  of  Moliere's  works  of  La  Grange  and  Vinot,  in
1682.  They  were  both  friends  of  Moliere,  the  first  even  a  fellow-actor,
and  had  consulted  the  manuscripts  lent  to  them  by  his  widow.  The  book  of
the  ballet  and  the  words  of  the  physician's  admission,  that  is  the  last  in-
terlude, had  been  separately  published  several  times  before.

In  the  eighth  volume  of  "  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,''  Lon-
don, 1732,  this  play  is  translated  under  the  name  of  the  Hypochondriac^,
and  dedicated  to  his  Grace  the  Duke  of  Argyle,  in  the  following  words  : — •

1A  yourney  to  Paris  in  the  year  1698.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  149

My  LORD, — By  prefixing  Your  Grace's  Name  to  this  Performance  I  have  quite
ruined  my  Dedication,  for  both  my  Author's  Character  as  a  Writer,  and  your
Grace's  for  fine  Sense,  Humanity,  and  Politeness,  are  so  thoroughly  known  and  so
strongly  established  in  the  World,  that  it  would  be  Impertinence  and  Presumption
to  say  anything  of  either,  Thus  deprived  of  the  two  great  Sources  of  an  Epistle
dedicatory,  what  can  I  do  ?  why  agreeable  to  the  common  Practice  of  my  cotem-
porary  Brethren  I  should  have  recourse  to  my  own  Abilities  and  the  Merit  of  my
Translation  :  But  those,  your  Grace,  I  fear,  will  be  too  readily  acquainted  with,  if
You  should  give  Yourself  the  trouble  to  cast  an  Eye  upon  what  I  have  done ;  I
shall  therefore  say  one  Word  only  in  behalt  of  the  Bookseller,  and  then  give  your
Grace  no  further  Trouble.  This  Volume  completes  the  Select  Collection  of  Mo-
Here's  Comedies  in  French  and  English,  to  the  success  of  which  your  Grace's
Favour  and  Protection  are  absolutely  necessary,  and  most  humbly  intreated.  As
the  Intention  of  this  Work  is  to  introduce  pure  Nature  and  true  Wit  once  more  in
our  Diversions,  and  to  chase  Folly  and  Vice  from  our  Conversations  and  Practice  ;
a  more  proper  Patron  could  not  possibly  be  found  to  recommend  it  to  the  World,
than  one  of  your  Grace's  Taste  and  Virtues. — I  am,  my  Lord,  Your  Grace's  most
obedient  and  most  humble  servant,  THE  TRANSLATOR.

Several  English  dramatists  have  borrowed  from  Moliere.  Mrs.  Aphra
Behn  has,  in  Sir  Patient  Fancy,  acted  at  the  theatre  Dorset  Garden,  in
1678  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  Vol.  II.,)  partly
imitated  Argan  in  Sir  Patient  Fancy.  A  great  portion  of  the  fifth  act  is
also  taken  from  Moliere  ;  but  the  whole  is  wilfully  indecent.

J.  Miller's  Mother-in- Law,  or  the  Doctor  the  Disease  (see  Introductory
Notice  to  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac ,  Vol.  III.,  page  85),  which  was
brought  out  at  the  Haymarket  Theatre  on  the  i2th  of  February  1734,  is
based  chiefly  on  Moliere's  play  The  Imaginary  Invalid,

Isaac  Bickerstaffe  wrote  Dr.  Last  in  his  Chariot,  a  comedy  performed
at  the  Haymarket  Theatre,  on  the  25th  of  August  1769  (see  Introduc-
tory Notice  to  Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  Vol.  II,  page  137),  of  which  the
bulk  is  taken  from  The  Imaginary  Invalid.  Argan  is  called  Ailwou'd ;
B6ralde,  Friendly ;  Cleante,  Hargrave  ;  Byline,  Mrs.  Ailwou'd ;  Ang<§li-
que,  Nancy  ;  Louison,  Polly ;  and  Toinette  is  changed  into  a  man-servant,
called  Wag.

PROLOGUE.

After  the  glorious  fatigues  and  the  victorious  exploits  of  our
august  monarch,  it  is  quite  right  that  those  who  write  should
labour  either  to  praise  or  to  amuse  him.  That  is  what  we  have
wished  to  do  here  ;  and  this  prologue  is  an  attempt  to  praise
this  grand  prince,  which  serves  to  introduce  the  comedy  of
The  Imaginary  Invalid,  of  which  the  purpose  was  to  give  him
relief  from  his  noble  works.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.
IN   THE   COMEDY.

ARGAN,  an  imaginary  invalid?
BKRALDE,  his  brother?
CLEANTE,  Angelique's  lover.*
MR.  PURGON,  Argan's physician.
MR.  DIAFOIRUS,  a  physician.
THOMAS  DIAFOIRUS,  'his  son,
betrothed  to  Angelique.*

MR.  FLEURANT,  an  apothecary?
MR.  DE  BONNEFOI,  a  notary.
BELINE,  Argan's  second  wife.
ANGELIQUE,  Argan's  daughter.
LOUISON  (a  little  girl),  Argan's

daughter.
TOINETTE,  a  servant.

IN    THE   PROLOGUE.

FLORA.    Two  DANCING  ZEPHYRS.    CLIMENE.    DAPHNE.
TIRCIS,  Chmene's  lover,  chief  of  a  troop  of  shepherds.
DORILAS,  Daphne's  lover,  chief  of  a  troop  of  shepherds.
SHEPHERDS  and  SHEPHERDESSES  of  the  suite  of  Tircis.
SHEPHERDS  and  SHEPHERDESSES  of  the  suite  of  Dor  Has.

FAUNS  (dancing).

IN   THE   INTERLUDES.

First  Act.

PUNCH.  AN  OLD  WOMAN.  VIOLIN-PLAYERS.

ARCHERS  (dancing  and  singing).

Second  Act.

FOUR  SINGING  GIPSIES.          OTHER  SINGING  AND  DANCING  GIPSIES.
Third  Act.

BACHELOR.

APOTHECARIES  (with  their  mor-
tars and  pestles').
SURGEONS.
SYRINGE-BEARERS.

SINGING  UPHOLSTERERS.
THE  PRESIDENT  OF  THE  MEDI-
CAL FACULTY.
PHYSICIANS.
ARGAN.

Scene. — PARIS.

2  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere.  According  to  the  description  of  the
dresses  given  in  the  first  surreptitious  publication  of  this  comedy,  by
Daniel  Elzevir,  Amsterdam,  1674,  ''  Argan  was  arrayed  as  an  invalid,
coarse  stockings,  slippers,  a  tight  pair  of  breeches,  a  red  waistcoat  with
some  embroidery  or  lace,  a  neckerchief  with  old  lace  negligently  fastened,.
a  night-cap  with  a  lace  skull-cap."

s  Dressed  as  a  modest  cavalier.

4  Dressed  as  a  gallant  and  a  lover.

5  Mr.  Diafoirus,  his  son,  and  Mr.  Purgon  are  all  dressed  in  black ;  the
first  two  as  ordinary  physicians,  and  the  last  with  a  large  smooth  collar,
having  long  sleek  hair,  and  a  cloak  coming  below  his  knees.

6  He  is  also  dressed  in  black  or  brownish  grey,  with  a  short  apron,  and
a  clyster  in  his  hand,  without  a  hat.

THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.

(LE  MALADE  IMAGINAIRE).

ECLOGUE  WITH  MUSIC  AND  DANCING.
The  Scene  represents  a  rustic,  pleasant  spot.

Scene  I. — Flora,  Two  Zephyrs,  dancing.

FLO.         Leave,  leave  your  flocks  ;

Come  shepherds,  shepherdesses  all ;

Assemble  'neath  these  youthful  elms:

I  have  come  to  announce  to  you  sweet  tidings,

Wherewith  these  hamlets  to  rejoice.

Leave,  leave  your  flocks;

Come  shepherds,  shepherdesses  all ;

Assemble  'neath  these  youthful  elms.

Scene  II. — Flora,  Two  Zephyrs  dancing;  Climene,
Daphne,  Tircis,  Dorilas.

CLI.  (To  Tircis}.     DAPH.   (To  Dorilas}.

Leave  your  protestations,  shepherd  :
It  is  Flora  who  now  calls.

TIR.  (To  Climene}.     DOR.  (To  Daphne}.

But  cruel  one,  tell  me  at  least,

If  by  a  little  friendship,  you  will  repay  my  vows.
TIR.  If  you  will  be  sensible  of  my  faithful  ardour.
CLI.  AND  DAPH.  It  is  Flora  who  now  calls.

153

154  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

TIR.  AND  DOR.  It  is  but  a  word,  a  word,  a  word  only
that  I  crave.

TIR.  Shall  I  for  ever  languish  in  my  mortal  pain  ?

DOR.  May  I  hope  that  one  day  you  shall  make  me
happy  ?

CLI.  AND  DAPH.  It  is  Flora  who  now  calls.

Scene  III.  —  Flora,  Two  Zephyrs  dancing;  Climene,
Daphne,  Tircis,  Dorilas,  Shepherds  and  Shepherd-
esses, of  the  suite  of  Tircis  and  Dorilas,  dancing
and  singing.

First  "Entry  of  the  Ballet.

All  the  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  place  themselves  around
Flora,  keeping  time  to  the  music.

CLI.          What  news  is  that,  O  goddess,

That  amongst  us  is  to  diffuse  so  much  joy  ?
DAPH.      We  burn  to  learn  from  you,

These  important  tidings.
DOR.        Eagerly  we  all  sigh  for  it.
CLI.,  DAPH.,  TIR.,  DOR.

With  impatience  we  die  for  it.
FLO.         Here  it  is ;  silence,  silence,

Your   prayers   have  been  granted,    Louis    is

returned ;
In  these  spots  he  brings  back  pleasures  and

love,

And  you  behold  an  end  to  your  mortal  alarms.
By  his  vast  exploits,  he  sees  everything  sub-
jected :

He  lays  down  his  arms,
Failing  foes.
CHORUS.       Ah  !  what  sweet  news  !

How  grand  it  is,  how  beautiful  it  is  !
What  pleasure  !   what  laughter !  what  sports  !

what  happy  successes  !

And  how  well  Heaven  has  fulfilled  our  wishes !
Ah  !  what  sweet  news  !
How  grand  it  is  !  how  beautiful  it  is  !

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  155

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

All  the  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  express  by  their  dances,
the  transports  of  their  joy.

FLO.  From  your  rural  pipes

Evoke  the  sweetest  sounds ;

Louis  offers  to  your  songs

The  most  beautiful  subject.

After  a  hundred  battles,

In  which  his  arm

Reaps  an  ample  victory,

Form  amongst  you

A  hundred  battles  still  more  sweet,

To  sing  his  glory.
CHORUS.      Let  us  form  amongst  us

A  hundred  battles  still  more  sweet,

To  sing  his  glory.
FLO.  My  youthful  lover,  in  these  woods,

From  my  empire  prepares  a  present,

As  a  prize  for  the  voice

Who  shall  best  succeed  in  telling  us

The  virtue  and  the  exploits

Of  the  most  august  of  kings.
CLI.  If  Tircis  has  the  advantage.
DAPH.  If  Dorilas  conqueror  be.
CLI.  To  cherish  him  I  promise.
DAPH.  To  his  ardour  I  will  give  myself.
TIR.  Oh  hope  too  dear  !
DOR.  Oh  word  replete  with  sweetness  !
TIR.  AND  DOR.   Could  grander  subject,  sweeter  reward
animate  a  heart  ?

The  violins  play  an  air  to  animate  the  two  shepherds  to  the
competition,  while  Flora,  as  umpire,  places  herself,  with  two
Zephyrs,  at  the  foot  of  a  beautiful  tree  in  the  middle  of  the
stage,  and  the  rest  occupy  the  two  sides,  as  spectators.

TIR.  When  the  melted  snow  swells  a  famous  torrent,
Against  the  sudden  effort  of  its  frothy  waves
There  is  nothing  sufficiently  solid  ;
Dykes,  castles,  towns,  and  woods,

156  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

Men  and  flocks  at  one  and  the  same  time,
All  things  bend  to  the  current  which  guides  it :
Such,  and  fiercer,  and  more  rapid  still
Louis  marches  in  his  exploits.

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  Shepherds  and   Shepherdesses  at  Tircis1   side  danct
round  him,  to  the  measure  of  a  ritornello,  to  express

their  applause.

DOR.  The  threatening  lightning  that  with  fury  pierces
The  horrible  darkness,  by  a  fiery  glow,
Causes,  with  fear  and  terror,
The  most  steadfast  heart  to  tremble  ;
But,  at  the  head  of  an  army,
Louis  inspires  more  terror  still.

Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.
The  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  at  Dorilas*  side  do  the

same  thing  as  the  others  have  done.
TIR.  We  see  the  fabulous  exploits  which  Greece  has

sung,

Effaced  by  many  grander  truths  ;
And  all  these  famous  demi-gods
Whom  past  history  vaunts,
Are  not  even  to  our  thoughts
What  Louis  is  in  our  eyes.

Fifth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  once  more  do  the  same
thing  that  the  others  have  done.

DOR.  In  our  days,  Louis,  by  his  astonishing  feats,

Makes  us  believe  the  grand  deeds  which  history

has  sung

Of  by-gone  ages ;
But  our  nephews,  in  their  glory,
Shall  have  nothing  that  can  make  believe
All  the  grand  feats  of  Louis.

Sixth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  at  Dowlas*  side  again  do
the  same  things.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  157

Seventh  Entry  of  the  Ballet,

The  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  on  both  sides  mingle  and
dance  together.

Scene   VI. — Flora,  Pan;   Two  Zephyrs  dancing;   Climene,
Daphne,  Tircis,  Dorilas,  Fauns  dancing,  Shepherds
and  Shepherdesses  dancing  and  singing.
PAN.  Abandon,  abandon,  shepherds,  this  bold  design,

Eh  !  what  would  you  do  ?

Sing  on  your  pipes

What  Apollo,  on  his  lyre,

With  his  most  lovely  songs,

Would  not  undertake  to  say?

It  is  giving  too  much  flight  to  the  fire  that  inspires
you,

It  is  mounting  towards  the  sky  on  waxen  wings,

To  drop  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  deep,

To  sing  the  intrepid  courage  of  Louis,

There  is  no  voice  that  is  learned  enough,

There  are  no  words  grand  enough  to  describe, it ;

Silence  is  the  language

That  must  laud  his  exploits.

Consecrate  other  cares  to  his  signal  victory ;

Your  praises  have  naught  that  flatters  his  desires :

Leave,  leave  his  glory  ;

Think  of  nothing  but  his  pleasures.
CHOR.    Leave,  leave  his  glory ;

Think  of  nothing  but  his  pleasures.
FLO.  (To  Tircis  and  to  Dor  Has}.

Although,  to  laud  his  immortal  virtues,

Strength  may  fail  your  minds,

Both  may  receive  the  prize.

In  grand  and  beauteous  things

It  is  sufficient  to  have  tried.

Eighth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  two  Zephyrs  dance  with  two  chaplets  of  flowers  in  their
hands,  which  they  afterwards  give  to  the  two  Shepherds.
CLI.  AND  DAPH.   (  Giving  their  lovers  their  hands}.
In  grand  and  beauteous  things,
It  is  sufficient  to  have  tried.

158  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

TIR.  AND  DOR.   Ah  !  with  what  sweet  rewards  our  bold-
ness has  been  crowned !

FLO.  AND  PAN.  What  one  does  for  Louis  is  never  lost.
CLI.,  DAPH.,  TIR.,  DOR.

Let  us  give  ourselves  henceforth  to  the

care  for  his  pleasures.
FLO.  AND  PAN.  Happy,  happy,  who  can  devote  his  life

to  him !

CHORUS.  In  these  woods  let  us  mingle
Our  flutes  and  our  voices;
This  day  invites  us  to  it.
And  let  us  make  the  echoes  resound  a  thou-
sand times,

Louis  is  the  greatest  of  kings,
Happy,  happy  who  can  devote  his  life  to  him !

Ninth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

Fauns,  Shepherds,  and  Shepherdesses  all  mingle  together  to

execute  a  dance ;  after  which  they  go  to  prepare

themselves  for  the  Comedy.

ANOTHER  PROLOGUE}
SCENE  I. — A  Shepherdess  singing.

Your  highest  knowledge  is  but  pure  chimera,
Vain  and  not  very  learned  doctors ;

You  cannot  cure,  by  your  grand  Latin  words,
The  grief  that  causes  my  despair.

Your  highest  knowledge  is  but  pure  chimera.

7  This  second  prologue  is  not  in  the  libretto  of  the  ballet.  It  was  pro-
ably  often  used,  both  for  shortness'  sake,  and  because  it  announces  the
subject  of  the  Comedy,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  Amsterdam  edition.  It
is  preceded  by  the  following  description  : —

The  theatre  represents  a  forest.  When  the  stage  is  seen,  an  agreeable
noise  of  instruments  is  heard.  Afterwards,  a  Shepherdess  comes  to  com-
plain tenderly  that  she  finds  no  remedy  for  the  pangs  which  she  suffers.
Several  Fauns  and  Egyptians,  assembled  for  their  peculiar  festival  and
games,  meet  the  Shepherdess.  They  listen  to  her  complaints,  and  form
a  very  amusing  spectacle.  Complaint  of  the  Shepherdess  : —

SCENE  i.J  THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.  159

Alas  !  alas  !  I  dare  not  reveal

My  love-sick  martyrdom
To  the  shepherd  for  whom  I  sigh,
And  who  alone  can  relieve  me.
Do  not  pretend  to  put  an  end  to  it,

Ignorant  doctors,  you  would  not  know  how  to  do  it :
Your  highest  knowledge  is  but  pure  chimera.

These  uncertain  remedies,  of  which  the  simple  people
Think  that  you  know  the  admirable  virtue,
Cannot  cure  the  ills  I  feel :
And  all  your  gibberish  can  be  received

Only  by  an  Imaginary  Invalid.
Your  highest  knowledge  is  but  pure  chimera,

Vain  and  little  informed  doctors,  etc.

The  Scene  changes,  and  represents  an  apartment.

ACT  I.

SCENE  I. — ARGAN,  seated  before  a  table,  is  adding  up  his
apothecary* s  bill  with  counters.

AR.  Three  and  two  make  five,  and  five  make  ten,  and
ten  make  twenty;  three  and  two  make  five.  "Besides,
on  the  ^twenty-fourth,8  a  small  clyster,  mild,  preparative
and  soothing,  to  soothe,  moisten,  and  refresh  Mr.  Argan's
inward  parts."  What  pleases  me  in  Mr.  Fleurant,  my
apothecary,  is  that  his  bills  are  always  so  civil.  "Mr.
Argan's  inward  parts,  thirty  sols."  Yes  ;  but,  Mr.  Fleu-
rant, to  be  civil  is  not  everything;  you  should  also  be
moderate,  and  not  flay  your  patients.  Thirty  sols  an
enema  I  I  am  your  humble  servant,  I  have  already  told
you ;  in  your  other  bills  you  have  put  them  at  only  twenty
sols;  and  twenty  sols  in  apothecary's  language  means  ten
sols  ;  here  they  are,  ten  sols.  "Besides,  on  the  said  date,
a  good  cleaning  clyster,  composed  of  double  catholicon,
rhubarb,  with  honey  of  roses,  and  other  ingredients,

8  As  Argan's  verification  of  medicine  delivered  during  the  entire  month
would  be  too  long,  the  curtain  rises  when  he  is  at  the  twenty-fourth  day.

l6o  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  I.

according  to  prescription,  to  scour,  wash  and  clean  the
lower  abdomen  of  Mr.  Argan,  thirty  sols."  By  your  leave,
ten  sols.  "Besides,  on  the  said  date,  in  the  evening,  a
julep  for  the  liver,  soporative  and  soporific,  composed  to
make  Mr.  Argan  sleep,  thirty-five  sols."  I  do  not  com-^
plain  of  this,  for  it  made  me  sleep  very  well.  Ten,  fifteen,
sixteen,  and  seventeen  sols,  six  deniers.9  "Besides,  on
the  twenty-fifth,  a  good  purgative  and  strengthening
draught,  composed  of  fresh  cassia,  with  Levantine  senna,
and  other  ingredients,  according  to  the  prescription  of
Mr.  Purgon,  to  expel  and  evacuate  Mr.  Argan's  bile,  four
francs."  Ah  !  Mr.  Fleurant,  this  is  too  much  of  a  joke:  one
should  give  and  take  with  patients.  Mr.  Purgon  did  not
order  you  to  put  down  four  francs.  Put  down,  put  down
three  francs,  if  you  please.  Twenty  and  thirty  sols.10
"Besides,  on  the  same  date,  an  anodyne  and  astringent
potion,  to  procure  Mr.  Argan  some  rest,  thirty  sols."
Good,  ten  and  fifteen  sols.u  "Besides,  on  the  twenty-
sixth,  a  carminative  clyster,  to  drive  away  Mr.  Argan's
flatulence,  thirty  sols."  Ten  sols,  Mr.  Fleurant.  "Besides
the  same  clyster,  repeated  in  the  evening,  as  above,  thirty
sols."  Mr.  Fleurant,  ten  sols.  "Besides,  on  the  twenty-
seventh,  a  good  draught  to  hasten  and  drive  out  the  bad
humours  of  Mr.  Argan,  three  livres."  Good,  twenty  and
thirty  sols ;  I  am  glad  that  you  are  reasonable.  "Besides,
on  the  twenty-eighth,  a  small  dose  of  clarified  and  edul-
corated milk,  to  soften,  temper,  refresh,  and  purify  Mr.
Argan's  blood,  twenty  sols."  Good,  ten  sols.12'  Besides,
a  cordial  and  preservative  potion,  composed  of  twelve
grains  of  bezoar,  syrup  of  lemon  and  pomegranates,  and
other  ingredients,  according  to  prescription,  five  livres."
Ah  !  Mr.  Fleurant,  gently  if  you  please,  if  you  go  on
thus,  one  would  no  longer  care  to  be  ill :  be  satisfied  with
four  francs  ;  twenty  and  forty  sols.  Three  and  two  make

9  Argan  always  puts  down  half  of  what  the  apothecary  asks.     Although
the  julep  has  done  him  good,  he  puts  down   only  seventeen  sous,  six
deniers, — half  of  Mr.  Fleurant's  charge,  which  was  thirty-five  sous.

10  Here  Argan  puts  down  again  the  half  of  the  three  francs,  the  apothe-
cary's charge,  and  says  "  thirty  sols."     He  first  marks  with  his  counters
twenty    sols,    and  then   adds  ten   more,  which   make  thirty,  but  never
thought  of  putting  down  fifty.

11  See  note  above.  1J  See  note  above.

SCKNKH.]  THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.  l6l

five,  and  five  make  ten,  and  ten  make  twenty.  Sixty-
three  livres,  four  sols,  and  six  deniers.  So  that,  this
month,  I  have  taken,  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven
and  eight  remedies ;  and  one,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,
seven,  eight,  nine,  ten,  eleven  and  twelve  enemas ;  and
the  other  month,  there  were  twelve  remedies  and  twenty
enemas.  I  am  not  surprised  that  I  am  not  so  well  this
month  as  the  other.  I  had  better  tell  this  to  Mr.  Purgon,
so  that  he  may  set  this  matter  to  rights.  Come,  take  all
this  away.  (Seeing  that  no  one  comes,  that  there  are  none
of  his  servants  in  the  room).  There  is  no  one  here.  I
may  say  what  I  like,  I  am  always  left  alone:  there  is  no
means  of  making  them  stay  here.  (After  having  rung  a
bell  that  is  on  the  table}.  They  do  not  hear,  and  my  bell
does  not  make  sufficient  noise.  Tingle,  tingle,  tingle.13
Not  a  bit  of  use.  Tingle,  tingle,  tingle !  They  are
deaf.  .  .  .  Toinette !  Tingle,  tingle,  tingle.  Just  as
if  I  did  not  ring  at  all.  You  wretch  !  you  slut !  Tingle,
tingle,  tingle."  I  am  in  a  rage !  Tingle,  tingle,  tingle  !
To  the  devil  with  you,  baggage  !  Is  it  possible  that  they
can  leave  a  poor  invalid  by  himself  in  this  way  ?  Tingle,
tingle,  tingle.  This  is  most  wretched.  Tingle,  tingle,
tingle!  Ah!  good  Heavens!  they  will  leave  me  to  die
here  1  tingle,  tingle,  tingle.

SCENE  II. — ARGAN,  TOINETTE.

Toi.   {Entering).  Coming,  coming.

ARG.  Ah  !  slut !  ah  !  baggage  .    .    .

Toi.  (Pretends  to  have  knocked  her  head").  The  deuce
take  your  impatience  !  You  hurry  people  so,  that  I  have
given  myself  a  great  knock  on  the  head  against  the  out-
side corner  of  the  shutter.

ARG.  (Angry).  Ah  !  you  wretch !   .    .    .

Toi.  (Interrupting  him).   Ah  !

ARG.  It  is  an  .    .    .

Toi.  Ah !  .    .    .

ARG.  It  is  an  hour  .    .    .

18  In  the  original,  Drelin,  a  word  invented  to  imitate  the  sound  of  a  bell
when  rung.

14  Argan  no  longer  rings  his  bell,  but  shouts.

l62  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACr  i

Toi.  Ah!

ARG.  That  you  have  left  me  .    .    .

Toi.  Ah!

ARG.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  slut,  that  I  may  scold  you.

Toi.  Upon  my  word,  I  like  that.  I  should  advise  you
to  do  so,  after  what  I  have  just  done  to  myself.

ARG.  You  have  given  me  a  sore  throat,  you  slut.

Toi.  And  you  have  given  me  a  broken  head  :  one  is  as
good  as  the  other.  We  are  quits,  if  you  like.

ARG.  What !  you  baggage  .    .    .

Toi.   If  you  scold,  I  shall  cry.

ARG.  To  leave  me,  you  wretch  .    .    .

Toi.   (  Once  more  interrupting  Argari).  Ah  !

ARG.  You  slut !    .    .    .    you  wish  me  to  ...

Toi.  Ah  !

ARG.  What  !  I  am  not  to  have  the  pleasure  of  scolding
her  1

Toi.  Scold  as  much  as  you  like  :  I  am  agreeable.

ARG.  You  prevent  me,  you  slut,  by  interrupting  me  at
every  point.

Toi.  If  you  have  the  pleasure  of  scolding,  I  may,  on
my  side,  have  the  pleasure  of  crying :  each  his  own  ;  that
is  not  too  much.  Ah  !

ARG.  Come,  I  shall  have  to  do  without  it.  Take  this
away,  you  wretch,  take  this  away.  (After  having  risen).
Has  my  enema  of  to-day  acted  well  ?

Toi.  Your  enema  ?

ARG.  Yes.     Had  I  much  bile  ?

Toi.  Upon  my  word,  I  do  not  meddle  with  these  things,
it  is  for  Mr.  Fleurant  to  put  his  nose  into  them,  since  he
profits  by  them.

ARG.  Let  them  take  care  to  keep  some  beef-tea  ready
for  me,  for  the  other  which  I  am  to  take  by-and-bye.

Toi.  This  Mr.  Fleurant,  and  this  Mr.  Purgon  amuse
themselves  very  much  with  your  body;  they  have  a  good
milch-cow  in  you ;  and  I  should  much  like  to  ask  them
what  disease  you  have,  to  want  so  many  remedies.

ARG.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  ignorant  woman ;  it  is  not
for  you  to  control  the  prescriptions  of  the  faculty.  Send
my  daughter  Angelique  to  me :  I  have  something  to  say
to  her.

SCENE  iv.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  163

Toi.  Here  she  comes  of  her  own  accord ;  she  has
guessed  your  thought.

SCENE  III. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

ARG.  Come  here,  Angelique  :  you  come  opportunely;
I  wished  to  speak  to  you.

AN.  Behold  me  ready  to  listen  to  you.

ARG.  Wait.  {To  Toinette).  Give  me  my  stick.  I  shall
be  back  in  a  moment.

Toi.  Go  quickly,  Sir,  go.  Mr.  Fleurant  gives  us  some
work.

SCENE  IV. — ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

AN.  Toinette  !

Toi.  What  !

AN.  Just  look  at  me.

Toi.  Well  !  I  am  looking  at  you.

AN.  Toinette  !

Toi.  Well !  what,  Toinette  ?

AN.  Cannot  you  guess  what  I  wish  to  speak  about  ?

Toi.  I  have  my  doubts  about  it :  of  our  young  lover ;
for  it  is  on  him  that  for  six  days  all  our  conversations
turn  ;  and  you  are  not  at  your  ease,  unless  you  talk  of
him  at  every  moment.

AN.  Since  you  know  that,  why  are  you  not  the  first  to
converse  with  me  about  it  ?  And  why  do  you  not  save
me  the  trouble  of  dragging  you  into  this  conversation  ?

Toi.  You  do  not  give  me  time  to  do  so ;  and  you  are
so  anxious  about  it,  that  it  becomes  difficult  to  forestall
you.

AN.  I  confess  to  you  that  I  cannot  tire  of  speaking  of
him  to  you,  and  that  my  heart  warmly  takes  advantage  of
every  moment  to  open  itself  to  you.  But  tell  me,  Toi-
nette, do  you  condemn  the  sentiments  which  I  have  for
him?

Toi.  I  have  no  such  thoughts.

AN.  Am  I  wrong  in  abandoning  myself  to  these  sweet
impressions?

Toi.  I  do  not  say  so.

AN.  And  would  you  have  me  be  insensible  to  the  ten-
der protestations  of  this  ardent  passion  which  he  shows
for  me  ?

164  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  ,.

Toi.   Heaven  forbid  !

AN.  Just  tell  me ;  do  not  you  see,  with  me,  something
from  Heaven,  some  working  of  destiny,  in  the  unexpected
adventure  of  our  acquaintance  ?

Toi.  Yes.

AN.  Do  not  you  find  that  this  action  of  taking  up  my
defence,  without  knowing  me,  is  altogether  that  of  a
gentleman  ?

Toi.  Yes.

AN.  That  one  could  not  have  behaved  more  gene-
rously ?

Toi.  Agreed.

AN.  And  that  he  did  all  this  with  the  best  possible
grace?

Toi.  Oh!  yes.

AN.  Do  not  you  think,  To'inette,  that  he  is  well  made
in  person  ?

Toi.   Assuredly.

AN.  That  he  has  the  finest  appearance  in  the  world  ?

Toi.  No  doubt.

AN.  That  his  conversations,  like  his  actions,  have  some-
thing noble?

Toi.   That  is  certain.

AN.  That  there  could  be  nothing  more  passionate  than
what  he  says  to  me?

Toi.  It  is  true.

AN.  And  that  there  is  nothing  more  annoying  than  the
restraint  under  which  I  am  kept,  which  stops  all  inter-
change of  the  sweet  eagerness  of  this  mutual  aifection  with
which  Heaven  inspires  us  ?

Toi.  You  are  right.

AN.  But,  my  dear  Toinette,  think  you  that  he  loves  me
as  well  as  he  says  to  me  ?

Toi.  Eh  !  eh !  these  things  are  sometimes  a  little  to  be
doubted.  The  vain  pretences  of  love  are  very  like  the
truth ;  and  I  have  seen  some  great  actors  on  that  subject.

AN.  Ah  !  Toinette,  what  are  you  saying  there  ?  Alas  1
from  the  way  he  speaks,  could  it  well  be  possible  that  he
does  not  tell  me  the  truth  ?

Toi.  At  any  rate,  you  will  be  soon  enlightened  ;  and
the  resolve,  of  which  he  wrote  to  you  yesterday,  that  he

SCENE  v.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  165

had  taken  to  ask  for  your  hand,  is  a  prompt  way  to  show
you  whether  he  loves  you  or  not. 15  That  will  be  the
right  proof.

AN.  Ah  !  Toinette,  if  this  one  deceives  me,  I  shall
never  in  my  life  believe  another  man.

Toi.  Here  is  your  father  coming  back.

SCENE  V. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

ARC.  Daughter,  I  am  .  going  to  tell  you  some  news
which,  perhaps,  you  did  not  expect.  You  are  being  asked
in  marriage.  What  is  this  ?  You  laugh  ?  That  is  plea-
sant, yes,  this  word  marriage !  There  is  nothing  more
funny  to  young  girls.  Ah  !  nature,  nature  !  From  what
I  can  perceive,  daughter,  I  need  hardly  ask  you,  whether
you  would  like  to  get  married.

AN.  I  must  do  all,  father,  that*  it  pleases  you  to  order
me.

ARG.  I  am  glad  to  have  so  .obedient  a  daughter :  so  the
matter  is  settled,  and  I  have  promised  your  hand.

AN.  It  is  for  me,  father,  blindly  to  follow  all  your
wishes.

ARG.  My  wife,  your  step-mother,  wished  me  to  make
you  a  nun,  as  well  as  your  little  sister  Louison ;  and  she
has  always  persisted  in  it.

Toi.  (Aside).     The  innocent  has  her  reasons.

ARG.  She  would  not  consent  to  this  marriage ;  but  I
have  carried  the  day,  and  I  have  given  my  word.

AN.  Ah !  father,  how  obliged  I  am  to  you  for  all  your
goodness !

Toi.  ( To  Argan).  Truly,  I  like  you  for  this ;  and  this
is  the  most  sensible  thing  you  ever  did  in  all  your  life.

ARG.  I  have  not  yet  seen  the  gentleman ;  but  I  have
been  told  that  I  should  be  satisfied  with  him,  and  you
also.

AN.  Assuredly,  father.

ARG.  How  !  have  you  seen  him  ?

AN.  Since  your  consent  authorizes  me  to  open  my  heart
to  you,  I  will  not  dissemble,  but  tell  you  that  accident

15  Toinette  prepares  us  for  the  mistake  of  the  next  scene,  by  informing
us  that  Cleante  had  asked  for  the  hand  of  Angelique.  In  the  third  act  we
shall  see,  however,  that  he  had  asked  Beralde  to  do  so.

1 66  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  I.

made  us  acquainted  six  days  ago,  and  that  the  request  which
has  been  made  to  you  is  the  result  of  the  inclination,
which  we,  at  this  first  sight,  have  conceived  for  each  other.

ARC.  They  did  not  tell  me  this :  but  I  am  very  glad  of
it,  and  it  is  much  better  that  matters  are  so.  They  tell
me  that  he  is  a  tall  young  man,  well  made,

AN.  Yes,  father.

ARC.  Of  good  stature.

AN.  No  doubt.

ARC.  Agreeable  in  person.

AN.  Assuredly.

ARC.  Good-looking.

AN.  Very  much  so.

ARC.  Steady  and  well  born.

AN.  Quite.

ARC.  Well  bred.

AN.   Could  not  possibly  be  better.

ARC.  Who  speaks  Latin  and  Greek  well.

AN.  That  is  what  I  do  not  know.

ARC.  And  that  he  will  take  his  diploma  as  a  physician
in  three  days.

AN.  He,  father  ?

ARC.  Yes.  Has  he  not  told  you  ?

AN.  No  indeed.     Who  told  you  ?

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon.

AN.  Does  Mr.  Purgon  know  him  ?

ARC.  A  pretty  question  !  He  should  know  him,  seeing
that  he  is  his  nephew.

AN.   Cleante,  the  nephew  of  Mr.  Purgon  ?

ARC.  Which  Cleante  ?  We  are  speaking  of  the  one
who  has  asked  you  in  marriage.

AN.  Well !  yes.

ARG.  Well !  he  is  the  nephew  of  Mr,  Purgon,  the  son
of  his  brother-in-law  Dr.  Diafoirus;  and  this  son's  name
is  Thomas  Diafoirus,  and  not  Cleante ;  and  we  have  settled
this  match  this  morning,  Mr.  Purgon,  Mr.  Fleurant,  and
I;  and  to-morrow  this  intended  son-in-law  is  to  be
brought  to  me  by  his  father.  What  is  the  matter  ?  You
look  altogether  amazed !

AN.  It  is  father,  because  I  find  that  you  have  been
speaking  of  one  person,  and  that  I  understood  another.

SCENE  v.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  167

Toi.  What !  Sir,  you  could  have  formed  that  ridiculous
design  ?  And,  with  all  the  wealth  you  have,  you  would
marry  your  daughter  to  a  physician  ?

ARC.  Yes.  What  are  you  interfering  with,  you  slut,
impudent  hussy  that  you  are  ?

Toi.  Good  gracious !  gently.     You  begin  immediately
with   invectives.      Can   we    not   argue  together  without
getting    into    a  passion  ?     There,  let  us   speak   in   cool  '
blood.       What   is   your  reason,  if  you  please,  for  such  a
match  ?

ARG.  My  reason  is  that,  seeing  myself  infirm  and  ill  as
I  am,  I  wish  to  have  a  son-in-law  and  relations  who  are
physicians,  so  as  to  have  the  support  of  good  assistance
against  my  illness,  to  have  in  my  own  family  the  sources
of  the  remedies  which  are  necessary  to  me,  and  to  be  in  a
position  of  having  consultations  and  prescriptions.

Toi.  Well !  that  is  giving  your  reason,  and  it  is  a  plea-
sure to  answer  each  other  gently.  But,  Sir,  consult  your
own  conscience.  Are  you  ill  ?

ARG.  How !  you  wretch  !  am  I  ill !  Am  I  ill,  impu-
dent hussey  !

Toi.  Well !  yes,  Sir ;  you  are  ill,  let  us  not  quarrel
about  that.  Yes,  you  are  very  ill,  I  am  agreed,  and  more
ill  than  you  imagine ;  that  is  settled.  But  your  daughter
must  marry  a  husband  for  herself;  and,  not  being  ill,  it  is
not  necessary  to  give  her  a  doctor.

ARG.  It  is  for  me  that  I  give  her  this  doctor ;  and  a
well  disposed  daughter  ought  to  be  delighted  to  marry  that
which  is  useful  to  the  health  of  her  father.

Toi.  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  shall  I  as  a  friend  give  you  an
advice?

ARG.  What  is  it,  this  advice  ?

Toi.  Not  to  think  of  this  marriage.

ARG.  And  the  reason  ?

Toi.  The  reason  is,  that  your  daughter  will  not  consent
to  it.

ARG.  She  will  not  consent  to  it  ?

Toi.  No.

ARG.  My  daughter  ?

Toi.  Your  daughter.  She  will  tell  you  that  she  has
nothing  to  do  with  Mr.  Diafoirus,  nor  with  his  son

!68  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  L

Thomas  Diafoirus,  nor  with  any  of  the  Diafoiruses  in  the

world.

ARG.  I  have  to  do  with  them,  besides  that  the  match  is
more  advantageous  than  the  world  imagines.  Mr.  Diafoi-
rus has  no  other  heir  than  this  son  ;  and,  what  is  more,
Mr.  Purgon,  who  has  neither  wife  nor  child,  leaves  him
all  his  property  in  consideration  of  this  marriage,  and  Mr.
Purgon  is  a  man  who  has  eight  thousand  livres  a-year.

Toi.  He  must  have  killed  a  good  many  people,  to  have
made  himself  so  rich  !

ARC.  Eight  thousand  livres  a-year  are  something,  with-
our  reckoning  the  father's  property.

Toi.  All  that  is  well  and  good,  Sir ;  but  I  am  always
coming  back  to  this :  I  advise  you,  between  ourselves,  to
choose  her  another  husband  ;  and  she  is  not  made  to  be
Mrs.  Diafoirus.

ARG.  And  I  wish  it  to  be  so.

Toi.  Eh,  fie  !  do  not  say  so.

ARG.  How !  do  not  say  so.

Toi.  Eh,  no.

ARG.  And  why  should  I  not  say  so  ?

Toi.  One  would  say  you  are  not  thinking  of  what  you
are  saying.

ARG.  One  may  say  what  one  likes ;  but  I  tell  you  that
it  is  my  wish  that  she  shall  fulfil  my  given  promise.

Toi.  No ;    I  am  sure  that  she  will  not  do  so.

ARG.  I  will  force  her  to  do  so.

Toi.  She  will  not  do  so,  I  tell  you.

ARG.  She  shall  do  so,  or  I  shall  put  her  in  a  convent.

Toi.  You?

ARG.  I.

Toi.  Good  !

ARG.  How  !  good  ?

Toi.  You  will  not  put  her  in  a  convent.

ARG.  I  will  not  put  her  in  a  convent  ?

Toi.  No.

ARG.  No?

Toi.  No.

ARG.  Hoity  toity !  This  is  pleasant !  I  shall  not  put
my  daughter  in  a  convent,  if  I  wish  it  ?

Toi.  No;    I  tell  you.

SCKNBV].  THE   IMAGINARY  INVALID.  169

ARC.  Who  shall  prevent  me?

Toi.  Yourself.

ARG.  I!

Toi.  Yes.     You  will  not  have  the  heart.

ARG.  I  shall  have  it.

Toi.  You  are  jesting.

ARG.  I  am  not  jesting  at  all.

Toi.  Your  paternal  tenderness  will  prevent  you.

ARG.  It  will  not  prevent  me.

Toi.  A  little  tear  or  two,  arms  thrown  round  the  neck,
"My  darling  little  papa,"  tenderly  pronounced,  will  be
enough  to  touch  you.

ARG.  All  that  will  have  no  effect.

Toi.  Yes,  yes.

ARG.  I  tell  you  that  I  shall  not  go  back  from  it.

Toi.  Nonsense.

ARG.  You  must  not  say,  Nonsense.

Toi.  Good  Heavens !  I  know  you,  you  are  naturally
kind-hearted.

ARG.  {Getting  angry).  I  am  not  kind-hearted,  and  I
am  very  spiteful  when  I  wish  to  be  so.16

Toi.  Gently,  Sir.     You  forget  that  you  are  ill.

AKG.  I  absolutely  command  her  to  prepare  herself  to
take  the  husband  I  tell  her.

Toi.  And  I  absolutely  forbid  her  to  do  anything  of  the
kind.

ARG.  Where  in  the  world  are  we  ?  and  in  what  sort  of
audacity  is  this,  for  a  slut  of  a  servant  to  talk  in  this
manner  before  her  master  ?

Toi.  When  a  master  forgets  what  he  is  doing,  a  sensible
servant  has  a  right  to  correct  him.

ARG.  {Running  after  Toinette).  Ah !  you  insolent  hussy,
I  shall  have  to  knock  you  down.

Toi.  (Avoiding  Argan,  placing  a  chair  between  herself
and  him}.  It  is  my  duty  to  oppose  myself  to  things  which
might  disgrace  you.

ARG.  (.Running  round  the  chair,  with  his  stick,  after
Toinette).  Come  here,  come,  that  I  may  teach  you  how  to
speak.

16  This  dialogue  is  copied  almost  literally  from  the  Sixth  Scene  of  the
First  Act  of  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin.

170  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  i.

Toi.  (Dodging  away  at  the  opposite  side}.  I  interest  my-
self, as  I  ought  to  do,  not  to  let  you  commit  any  folly.

ARC.   (Same  business].     You  slut !

Toi.  (Same  business}.  No,  I  shall  never  consent  to
this  marriage.

ARC.  (Same  business}.     You  good-for-nothing.

Toi.  (Same  business).  I  will  not  have  her  marry  your
Thomas  Diafoirus.

ARC.  (Same  business).     Baggage  !

Toi.  (Same  business).  She  will  obey  me  rather  than
you.

ARC.  {Stopping).  Angelique,  will  you  not  stop  this  slut
for  me  ?

AN.  Eh  !  father,  do  not  make  yourself  ill.

ARC.  {To  Angelique).  If  you  do  not  stop  her  for  me,  I
will  give  you  my  curse.

Toi.  (Going).  And  I  shall  disinherit  her,  if  she  obeys
you.

ARC.  (Throwing  himself  in  his  chair).  Ah!  Ah  !  I  am
exhausted.  This  is  enough  to  kill  me."

SCENE  VI. — BELINE,  ARGAN.

ARG.  Ah !  wife,  come  here.

BEL.  What  ails  you,  my  poor  husband  ?

ARG.  Come  here  to  my  assistance.

BEL.  But  what  is  the  matter,  dear  ?

ARG.  My  darling  !

BEL.  My  pet !

ARG.  I  have  been  put  into  a  passion.

BEL.  Alas !  poor  dear  husband  !  But  how,  my  friend  ?

ARG.  Your  slut  of  a  Toinette  has  been  more  insolent
than  ever.

BEL.  Do  not  excite  yourself.

ARG.  She  has  put  me  into  a  rage,  my  dear.

BEL.  Gently,  my  son.

ARG.  During  an  hour,  she  has  opposed  the  things  which
I  wish  to  do.

BEL.  There,  there,  gently.

17  Compare  the  Second  Scene  of  the  Second  Act  of  Tartuffe.  (See
Vol.  II.)

SCENE  vii. J  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  1 71

ARC.  And  she  has  had  the  effrontery  to  tell  me  that  I
am  not  ill.

BEL.  She  is  an  impertinent  hussey.

ARC.  You  know,  my  heart,  what  is  the  case.

BEL.  Yes,  my  heart,  she  is  wrong.

ARG.  My  love,  this  wretch  will  kill  me.

BEL.  Eh!  eh!

ARG.  She  is  the  cause  of  all  my  bile.

BEL.  Do  not  get  so  angry.

ARG.  And  I  have  told  you,  I  do  not  know  how  often,
to  get  rid  of  her.

BEL.  Good  Heavens  !  child,  there  are  neither  men  nor
women  servants  who  have  not  their  faults.  One  is  often
obliged  to  put  up  with  their  bad  qualities,  for  the  sake  of
their  good  ones.  This  one  is  handy,  careful,  diligent,  and
above  all  faithful ;  and  you  know  that  we  must  be  very
cautious  now-a-days  with  the  folks  we  take.18  Hullo  !
Toinette  !

SCENE  VII. — ARGAN,  BELINE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  Madam.

BEL.  Why  do  you  put  my  husband  into  a  passion  ?

Toi.  (Jn  a  coaxing  tone).  I,  Madam  ?  Alas  !  I  do  not
know  what  you  mean,  and  I  strive  to  please  master  in
everything.

ARG.  Oh  !  the  wretch  !

Toi.  He  told  us  that  he  wished  to  give  his  daughter  in
marriage  to  the  son  of  Mr.  Diafoirus :  I  answered  him  that
I  thought  that  the  match  was  advantageous  to  her,  but
that  I  believed  he  would  do  better  to  put  her  into  a  con-
vent.

BEL.  There  is  not  much  harm  in  that,  and  I  think  that
she  is  right.

ARG.  Ah  !  my  love,  do  you  believe  her  ?  She  is  a
good-for-nothing ;  she  has  said  a  hundred  insolent  things
to  me.

BEL.  Well !  I  believe  you,  my  friend.  There,  calm
yourself.  Listen,  Toinette :  if  ever  you  vex  my  husband,

18  This  defence  of  Toinette  by  Beline  shows  that  she  afterwards  intends
to  use  her ;  but  we  have  already  seen  in  the  servant's  exclamation  ''  What
an  innocent  woman !  "  that  Toinette  knows  her  well.

jy2  THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.  f  ACT  i.

I  will  put  you  out  of  the  house.  There,  now  give  me  his
furred  cloak  and  some  pillows,  that  I  may  make  him  com
fortable  in  his  chair.  You  are  I  do  not  know  how.  Pull
your  cap  well  over  your  ears  :  there  is  nothing  that  gives
cold  like  catching  a  draught  in  the  ears.

ARG.  Ah !  my  dear,  how  obliged  I  am  for  all  the  care
you  take  of  me.

BEL.  (Arranging  the  pillows  which  she  puts  round  Ar-
gan).  Just  lift  yourself,  that  I  may  put  this  under  you.
Let  us  place  this  one  to  lean  upon,  and  that  one  on  the
other  side.  Let  us  put  this  one  behind  your  back,  and
the  other  one  to  support  your  head.

Toi.  (Rudely  putting  a  pillow  on  his  head}.  And  this
one  to  keep  the  night  dew  away  from  you.

ARG.  (Rising  and  throwing  his  pillows  at  Toinette,  who
runs  away).  Ah,  you  wretch  !  you  want  to  stifle  me.

SCENE  VIII. — ARGAN,  BELINE.

BEL.  Hullo  !  hullo  !     What  is  the  matter  now  ?

ARG.  (Throwing  himself  into  his  chair).  Ah!  ah!  ah!
1  am  exhausted.

BEL.  Why  get  into  such  a  passion  ?  She  thought  of
doing  right.

ARG.  My  love,  you  do  not  know  the  spitefulness  of  the
good-for-nothing.  Ah  !  she  has  entirely  put  me  out ;  and
I  shall  want  more  than  eight  doses  of  medicine  and  twelve
enemas  to  put  all  this  right.

BEL.  There,  there,  my  little  dear,  try  to  quiet  yourself
a  little.

ARG.  My  darling,  you  are  my  only  consolation.

BEL.  Poor  dear  child  !

ARG.  To  try  to  acknowledge  the  love  which  you  have
for  me,  my  heart,  I  wish,  as  I  have  told  you,  to  make  my
will.

BEL.  Ah,  my  friend,  do  not  let  us  speak  of  this,  I  pray ;
I  cannot  bear  the  thought ;  and  the  very  word,  will,  makes
me  shudder  with  pain.

ARG.  I  had  told  you  to  speak  about  it  to  your  notary.

BEL.  He  is  just  inside.     I  brought  him  with  me.

ARG.  Make  him  come  in,  my  love.

SCKNEIX.J  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  1 73

BEL.  Alas !  my  friend,  when  one  loves  a  husband  well,
one  is  hardly  able  to  think  of  all  this.

SCENE  IX. — MR.  DE  BONNKFOI,  BELINE,  ARGAN.

ARC.  Draw  near,  Mr.  de  Bonnefoi ;  draw  near.  Take
a  seat,  if  you  please.  My  wife  has  told  me,  Sir,  that  you
are  a  very  honest  man,  and  altogether  her  friend ;  and  I
have  told  her  to  speak  to  you  about  a  will  which  I  wish
to  make.

BEL.  Alas  !  I  am  not  able  to  talk  of  these  matters.

MR.  DE  B.  She  has  explained  your  intentions  to  me,
Sir,  and  what  you  purpose  to  do  for  her;  and  I  must  tell
you  on  this  score  that  you  cannot  give  anything  to  your
wife  by  your  will.

ARG.  But  why?

MR.  DE  B.  Common  law  is  opposed  to  it.  If  you  were
in  a  country  where  there  is  statute  law,  it  could  be  done ;
but  in  Paris,  and  in  all  the  countries  where  common  law
exists,  at  least  in  most  of  them,  this  cannot  be  ;  and  the
disposition  would  be  invalid.  All  the  good  which  man
and  woman  joined  in  wedlock  can  do  to  each  other,  is  a
mutual  gift  while  living  ;  and  then  there  must  be  no  chil-
dren, either  of  the  two  contracting  parties,  or  of  one  of
them,  at  the  time  of  decease  of  the  one  who  dies  first.19

ARG.  This  is  a  Very  impertinent  custom,  that  a  husband
can  leave  nothing  to  a  wife  by  whom  he  is  tenderly  beloved,
and  who  takes  so  much  care  of  him  !  I  would  feel  inclined
to  consult  my  barrister,  to  see  how  I  might  act.

MR.  DE  B.  It  is  not  to  barristers  that  you  must  go ;  for
they  are,  as  a  rule,  very  strict  on  these  matters,  and
imagine  that  it  is  a  great  crime  to  dispose  of  property
contrary  to  law :  they  are  people  of  difficulties,  who  are
ignorant  of  the  intricacies  of  one's  conscience.  There  are
other  people  to  consult,  who  are  very  much  more  accom-
modating, who  have  expedients  to  glide  gently  over  the
law,  and  to  make  that  right  which  is  not  allowed ;  who
know  how  to  smooth  the  difficulties  of  an  affair,  and  to
find  means  of  eluding  custom  by  some  indirect  advantage.

19  This  is  according  to  articles  280  and  282  of  the  ancient  Common  Law
of  Paris.

I  74  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  i

Without  this,  where  should  we  be  every  day?  There  must
be  some  elasticity  in  affairs;  otherwise  we  should  do
nothing,  and  I  would  not  give  a  halfpenny  for  our  pro-
fession.

ARG.  My  wife  has  indeed  told  me,  Sir,  that  you  are  a
very  able  and  a  very  honest  man.  How  am  I  to  do,  if
you  please,  to  give  her  my  property,  and  to  deprive  my
children  of  it  ?

MR.  DE  B.  How  are  you  to  do  ?  You  can  quietly  choose
an  intimate  friend  of  your  wife's,  to  whom  you  will  give,
in  due  form,  by  your  will,  all  that  you  can ;  and  this  friend
shall  afterwards  give  it  all  back  to  her.  You  can  also
contract  a  great  many  plausible  obligations  for  the  benefit
of  various  creditors  who  will  lend  their  names  to  your  wife,
and  into  whose  hands  they  will  put  a  declaration  that  what
they  did  was  only  to  benefit  her.  You  can  also,  while  you
are  alive,  put  into  her  hands  ready  money,  or  bills  which
you  may  make  payable  to  the  bearer.

BEL.  Good  Heavens !  you  must  not  torment  yourself
about  all  that.  If  you  should  happen  to  die,  I  should  no
longer  remain  in  this  world.

ARG.  My  darling  !

BEL.  Yes,  my  friend,  if  I  am  unfortunate  enough  to
lose  you  .  .  .

ARG.  My  dear  wife !

BEL.  Life  will  no  longer  be  anything  to  me.

ARG.  My  love  !

BEL.  And  I  shall  follow  you,  to  show  the  tenderness  I
have  for  you.

ARG.  My  darling,  you  rend  my  heart !  Console  your-
self, I  pray  you.

MR.  DEB.  (To  Beline).  These  tears  are  unseasonable.
Matters  have  not  come  to  that  yet.

BEL.  Ah  !  Sir,  you  do  not  know  what  a  husband  is  whom
one  loves  tenderly.

ARG.  All  the  regret  which  I  shall  have,  if  I  die,  my
dear,  is  not  to  have  a  child  by  you.  Mr.  Purgon  had  told
me  that  I  should  have  one.

MR.  DE  B.  This  may  come  yet.

ARG.  I  must  make  my  will,  love,  in  the  manner  this
gentleman  says ;  but  as  a  precaution,  I  will  put  into  your

SCMNE  x.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  1 75

hands  the  twenty  thousand  francs  in  gold  which  I  have  in
the  wainscoting  of  the  recess  of  my  bed,  and  two  bills
payable  to  the  bearer,  one  from  Mr.  Damon,  and  the  other
from  Mr.  Gerante.

BEL.  No,  no,  I  will  have  nothing  of  all  this.  By  the
bye  !  .  .  .  how  much  say  you  is  there  in  your  recess  ?

ARC.  Two  thousand  francs,  my  love.

BEL.  Do  not  speak  to  me  of  property,  I  pray  you.  By
the  bye  !  .  .  .for  how  much  are  the  two  bills.

ARC.  They  are,  my  dear,  one  for  four  thousand  francs,
and  the  other  for  six.

BEL.  All  the  riches  in  the  world,  my  friend,  are  nothing
compared  with  you.

MR.  DE  B.  (T<?  Argan).  Shall  we  proceed  to  the  making
of  the  will  ?

ARG.  Yes,  Sir ;  but  we  shall  be  more  at  ease  in  my
little  study.  Pray,  my  love,  conduct  me.

BEL.  Come,  my  poor  dear  child.

SCENE  X. — ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  They  are  with  a  notary  and  I  heard  them  speak-
ing about  a  will.  Your  step -mother  does  not  go  to  sleep  ;
and  it  is  no  doubt  some  conspiracy  against  your  interests
to  which  she  drives  your  father.

AN.  Let  him  dispose  of  his  property  according  as  he
likes,  provided  he  does  not  dispose  of  my  heart.  You  see,
Toinette,  the  violent  designs  which  they  have  upon  it.  Do
not  abandon  me,  I  pray  you,  in  the  strait  I  am  in.

Toi.  I,  abandon  you  !  I  would  rather  die.  Your  step-
mother may  make  me  her  confidante,  and  draw  me  in  to
her  interests  as  much  as  she  likes,  I  was  never  able  to  like
her ;  and  have  always  been  on  your  side.  Let  me  man-
age ;  I  shall  do  everything  to  serve  you  ;  but,  to  do  so
with  more  effect,  I  shall  change  my  tactics,  conceal  the
interest  I  take  in  you,  and  pretend  to  enter  into  the  feel-
ings of  your  father  and  step-mother.

AN.  Try,  I  beseech  you,  to  send  C16ante  word  of  the
marriage  that  has  been  resolved  upon.

Tor.  I  have  no  one  that  I  can  employ  for  this  errand
but  the  old  usurer,  Punch,  my  lover ;  and  it  will  cost  me

176  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

some  sweet  words,  which  I  do  not  begrudge  for  your  sake.*
To-day  it  is  too  late,  but  the  first  thing  to-morrow  I  shall
send  for  him,  and  he  will  be  delighted  to  ...

SCENE  XI. — BELINE  in  the  house,  ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

BEL.  Toinette!

Toi.  ( To  Angelique).  I  am  being  called.     Good-night.
"Rely  upon  me.

FIRST  INTERL  UDE.

The  Scene  changes  and  represent  a  town.

Punch,  in  the  night,  conies  to  serenade  his  mistress.  He
is  first  of  all  interrupted  by  the  violins,  with  which  he  gets
into  a  passion,  and  afterwards  by  the  watch,  composed  of
dancers  and  musicians.

PUNCH.  (Alone).  O,  love,  love,  love,  love !  Poor
Punch,  what  a  deuce  of  a  fancy  has  got  into  your  brain  !
What  are  you  amusing  yourself  with,  wretched  idiot  that
you  are  ?  You  leave  the  care  of  your  business,  and  let
your  affairs  go  anyhow  ;  you  no  longer  eat,  you  do  hard-
ly drink,  you  lose  your  rest  at  night ;  and  all  this,  for
whom  ?  For  a  dragon,  a  downright  dragon  ;  a  she-devil
who  repulses  you,  and  mocks  at  all  you  say  to  her.  But
it  is  no  good  arguing  on  that  point.  You  will  it  so,
Cupid :  one  must  be  a  fool,  like  many  others.  It  is  not
the  wisest  thing  for  a  man  of  my  age;  but  what  can
I  do  to  it  ?  One  cannot  be  wise  when  one  will,  and  old
brains  get  out  of  order  as  well  as  young  ones.  I  have
come  to  see  if  I  cannot  soften  my  tigress  by  a  serenade.
At  times  there  is  nothing  so  touching  as  a  lover  who
comes  to  sing  his  plaints  to  the  bolts  and  bars  of  his  mis-
tress's door.  (After  having  taken  his  lute}.  Here  is  some-
thing to  accompany  my  voice  with.  Oh  night  !  O  dear
night !  carry  my  love-sick  plaints  to  the  bed  of  my  ob-
durate one.

30  Toinette  mentions  Punch  only  to  introduce  the  following  Interlude.

THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  177

Night  and  day  I  love  and  adore  you.
I  seek  a  yes  that  shall  restore  me;
But  if  you  answer,  No,
Fair  ingrate,  I  shall  die.

Hope  deferred
Makes  the  heart  sick;
And  far  from  you
It  consumes  its  hours.
This  sweet  error
That  does  persuade  me
That  my  grief  is  about  to  end,
Alas !   lasts  too  long.

Thus,  through  loving  you  too  much,  I  languish
and  I  die.

Night  and  day  I  love  and  adore  you.
I  seek  a  yes  that  shall  restore  me;
But  if  you  answer,  No,
Fair  ingrate,  I  shall  die.

If  you  are  not  asleep,

Think  at  least

Of  the  wounds
You  give  to  my  heart.

Ah !  pretend  at  least,

For  my  consolation,

If  you  will  kill  me,

To  be  in  the  wrong ;
Your  pity  will  assuage  my  martyrdom.

Night  and  day  I  love  and  adore  you.
I  seek  a  yes  that  shall  restore  rue ;
But  if  you  answer,  No,
Fair  ingrate,  I  shall  die.21

21  The  original  is  in  Italian.

178  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

SCENE  II. — PUNCH,  AN  OLD  WOMAN,  SHOWING  HERSELF

AT  THE  WINDOW,  AND  ANSWERING  PUNCH,  MOCKING  HIM.

OLD  WOMAN.  (Sings.') —

Gallants,  who,  at  every  moment,  with  deceitful  looks.

And  lying  wishes,

And  false  sighs,

And  perfidious  tores,

Pride  yourself  on  being  faithful,

Ah  !  do  not  deceive  yourselves.

From  experience  I  know

That  neither  constancy  nor  faithfulness

Is  to  be  found  in  you.
Ah !  how  foolish  is  she  who  believes  you !

These  languishing  regards
Do  not  inspire  me  with  any  love,
These  ardent  sighs
Do  not  inflame  me,
I  swear  to  you  on  my  faith.
Unhappy  gallant !

My  heart,  insensible  to  your  complaint,
Will  ever  laugh  at  it :
Believe  me;

For  from  experience  I  know
That  neither  constancy  nor  faithfulness
Is  to  be  found  in  you.
ill  \  how  foolish  is  she  who  believes  you ! w

SCENE  III. — PUNCH,  VIOLINS  BEHIND  THE  SCENES.

The  violins  commence  an  air,

PUNCH.  What  impertinent  harmony  comes  to  interrupt
my  song !

The  violins  continue  to  play.

PUNCH.  Peace,  there  !    be  still,  you  violins.      Let  me
bewail  at  my  ease  the  cruelties  of  my  inexorable  fair  one.

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Keep  still,  I  tell  you  :  it  is  I  who  wish  to  sing.

**The  original  is  also  in  Italian.

THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  I  79

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Silence  then!

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Good  gracious !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Ah !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Is  this  in  fun  ?

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  Ah  !  what  a  noise  !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  May  the  devil  take  you  !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  I  am  bursting  with  rage  !

The  violins  continue.

PUNCH.   You  will  not  be  still  then  !     Ah !  Heaven  be
praised !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  What !  again  ?

The  violins  continue.  •

PUNCH.  A  plague  upon  these  violins  !

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  What  silly  music  this  !

The  violins  continue.

PUNCH.  (Singing,  in  imitation  of  the  violins}.     La,  la,  la,
la,  la,  la.

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.   (Same}.     La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la.

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  (Same).     La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la.

l8o  THE   IMAGINARY    INVALID.

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  (Same).  La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la.

The  violins  continue.
PUNCH.  (Same}.  La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la.

The  violins  continue.

PUNCH.  Upon  my  word  this  amuses  me.  Go  on,  gen-
tlemen violin-players ;  you  are  giving  me  great  pleasure.
(No  longer  hearing  anything).  But  continue,  I  pray  you.

Scene  IV.  Punch,  alone.

This  is  the  way  to  quiet  them.  Music  is  accustomed  not
to  do  what  we  wish.  And  now,  it  is  my  turn.  I  must  pre-
lude a  bit,  and  play  a  little  piece  before  singing,  so  as  the
better  to  catch  my  tone.  (He  takes  his  lute,  upon  which
he  pretends  to  play,  imitating  with  his  lips  and  tongue
the  sound  of  that  instrument).  Plan,  plan,  plan,  plin,  plin,
plin.  This  is  a  nasty  time  to  tune  a  lute  to.  Plin,  plin,
plin.  Plin,  tan,  plan.  Plin,  plan.  The  strings  do  not
hold  in  such  weather.  Plin,  plin.  I  hear  some  noise.
Let  us  put  our  lute  against  the  door.

Scene  V. — Punch;  Archers  passing  in  the  street,  attracted
by  the  noise  which  they  hear.

ARCH.   (Singing).     Who  goes  there  !  who  goes  there  ?

PUNCH.  (Softly).  What  the  devil  is  that?  Is  it  the
fashion  to  speak  in  music  ?

ARCH.  Who  goes  there  ?  who  goes  there  ?  who  goes
there  ?

PUNCH.   (Frightened*).    I,  I,  I.

ARCH.   Who  goes  there  ?  who  goes  there  ?  I  ask  you.

PUNCH.  I,  I,  I  tell  you.

ARCH.  And  who  are  you?  who  are  you?

PUNCH.  I,  I,  I,  I,  I,  I.

ARCH.  Tell  your  name,  tell  your  name,  without  delay-
ing longer.

PUNCH.  (Pretending  to  be  courageous').  My  name  is,  Go
and  get  yourself  hanged.

ARCH.   Here,  comrades,  here.

And  seize  the  insolent  who  answers  us  thus.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  l8l

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  whole  of  the  watch   come,  seeking  for  Punch  in  the
dark.

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  Who  goes  there  ?

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  Who  are  the  scoundrels  whom  I  hear?

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  Ugh !

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  Hullo  !  my  servants  !  my  lacqueys  !

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  S'death!

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  S'blood!

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  I  shall  knock  some  of  them  down.

Violins  and  Dancers.

PUNCH.  Here  !  Champagne,  Poitevin,  Picard,  Basque,
Breton.23

Violins  and  Dancers.
PUNCH.  Just  hand  me  my  musket.  .  .  .

Violins  and  Dancers.

PUNCH.  (Pretending  to  discharge  a  Pistol'}.    Paff.

(  They  all  fall  down,  and  run  away  afterwards).

SCENE  VI. — PUNCH  (Alone}.

Ah !  ah !  ah !  ah !  what  a  fright  I  have  given  them  !
They  must  be  silly  people  to  be  afraid  of  me,  who  am
afraid  of  others.  Upon  my  word,  there  is  nothing  like
being  artful  in  this  world.  If  I  had  not  imitated  the

23  See  Pretentious  Young  Ladies,  Vol.  I.,  page  162,  note  40.

l82  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

grand  nobleman,  and  pretended  to  be  brave,  they  would
not  have  failed  to  lock  me  up.  Ah  !  ah !  ah  !  ( The  Ar-
chers draw  near,  and  having  heard  what  he  said,  catch  him
by  the  collar}.

SCENE  VII.— PUNCH;  ARCHERS,  singing.

ARCH.  (Seizing  Punch).

We  have  got  him.     Here,  comrades,  here !
Make  haste  ;  bring  a  light.
( The  whole  of  the  watch  come  with  lanterns}.

SCENE  VIII. — PUNCH  ;   ARCHERS,  dancing  and  singing.
ARCH.  Ah  !  traitor ;  ah  !  rogue,  it  is  you  ?

Wretch,  cur,  hangdog,  impudent,  audacious,

Insolent,    brazen-faced    fellow,   scoundrel,   cut-
purse  thief,

You  dare  give  us  a  fright !
PUNCH.  Gentlemen,  it  is  because  I  was  drunk.
ARCH.  No,  no,  no ;   no  arguing :

We  must  teach  you  to  behave.

To  prison,  quick,  to  prison.
PUNCH.  Gentlemen,  I  am  not  a  thief.
ARCH.  To  prison.

PUNCH.  I  am  a  citizen  of  the  town.
ARCH.  To  prison.
PUNCH.  What  have  I  done  ?
ARCH.   To  prison,  quick,  to  prison.
PUNCH.  Let  me  go,  gentlemen.
ARCH.  No.

PUNCH.  I  beseech  you  !
ARCH.  No.
PUNCH.  Eh  !
ARCH.  No.

PUNCH.  I  beseech  you.
ARCH.  No,  no.
PUNCH.  Gentlemen.
ARCH.  No,  no,  no.
PUNCH.  If  you  please !
ARCH.  No,  no.
PUNCH.  For  charity !
ARCH.  No,  no.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  183

PUNCH.  In  Heaven's  name  !
ARCH.  No,  no.
PUNCH.  Have  mercy.
ARCH.       No,  no,  no  arguing,

We  must  teach  you  to  behave.
To  prison,  quick,  to  prison.

PUNCH.  Eh  !  gentlemen,  is  there  nothing  capable  of
softening  your  hearts?

ARCH.       It  is  easy  to  move  us ;

And  we  are  more  tender-hearted  than   you

would  believe.
Only  give  us  six  pistoles  to  drink  your  health

with,

And  we  will  let  you  go.

PUNCH.  Alas  !  gentlemen,  I  assure  you  that  I  have  not
a  penny  upon  me.

ARCH.       In  default  of  six  pistoles,
Choose  then  without  ado
To  receive  thirty  fillips,
Or  twelve  blows  with  the  stick.

PUNCH.  If  it  must  be,  and  that  I  must  pass  through  that,
I  choose  the  fillips.

ARCH.       Come  then,  prepare  yourself,
And  count  the  fillips  well.

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  dancing  archers  give  him  the  fillips,  keeping  time  with
the  music.

PUNCH.  (Counting  the  fillips  which  they  are  giving  him).
One  and  two,  three  and  four,  five  and  six,  seven  and
eight,  nine  and  ten,  eleven  and  twelve,  and  thirteen,  and
fourteen,  and  fifteen.

ARCH.       Ah  !  ah !   you  will  pass  through  it !

Let  us  begin  once  more.

PUNCH.  Ah  !   gentlemen,  my  poor  head  can  stand  this

no  longer,  and  you  have  just  made  it  like  a  cooked  apple.

I  prefer  the  blows  with  the  stick  to  your  beginning  again.

ARCH.       Be  it  so.     Since  the  stick  has  more  charms

for  you,
You  shall  be  satisfied.

1 84  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  u.

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  dancing  archers  give  him  blows  with  the  stick,  keeping
time  to  the  music.

PUNCH.  {Counting  the  blows  of  the  stick).  One,  two,
three,  four,  five,  six.  Ah  !  ah !  ah !  I  can  resist  no  longer.
Here,  gentlemen,  here  are  six  pistoles  which  I  give  you.

ARCH.  Ah  !  what  a  gentleman  !     Ah  !  what  a  great  and

generous  soul ;
Good-bye,  Sir;  good-bye,  Mr.  Punch.

PUNCH.  Gentlemen,  I  wish  you  good-night.

ARCH.  Good-bye,  Sir;  good-bye,  Mr.  Punch.

PUNCH.  Your  servant.

ARCH.  Good-bye,  Sir;  good-bye,  Mr.  Punch.

PUNCH.  Your  very  humble  servant.

ARCH.  Good-bye,  Sir  ;  good-bye,  Mr.  Punch.

PUNCH.  Until  we  meet  again.

Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.
They  all  dance  from  joy,  at  the  money  they  have  received.

ACT  II.

The  scene  represents  Argan*  s  room.
SCENE  I. — CLEANTE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  (Not  recognizing  Cleante).  What  is  your  pleasure,
Sir?

CLE.  What  is  your  pleasure  ?

Toi.  Ah  !  ah  !  it  is  you  !  What  surprise  !  What  come
you  to  do  here  ?

CLE.  To  learn  my  fate,  to  speak  to  the  amiable  An-
gelique,  to  consult  the  sentiments  of  her  heart,  and  to  ask
her  decision  about  this  fatal  match  of  which  I  have  been
informed.

Toi.  Yes;  but  you  cannot  speak  so  inconsiderately  to
Angelique :  it  requires  secrecy,  and  you  have  been  told
of  the  careful  watch  that  is  kept  over  her,  that  she  is
never  allowed  to  go  out,  nor  to  speak  to  any  one ;  and
that  it  was  only  the  curiosity  of  an  old  aunt,  who  ob-

SCENE  HI.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  185

tained  permission  for  us  to  go  to  this  comedy,  which  gave
rise  to  your  passion ;  and  we  have  taken  good  care  not  to
speak  of  this  adventure.

CLE.  For  this  reason  do  I  not  come  as  Cl£ante,  and  in
the  guise  of  her  lover  ;  but  as  a  friend  of  her  music-
teacher,  of  whom  I  have  obtained  leave  to  say  that  he
sends  me  in  his  stead.

Toi.  Here  comes  her  father.  Just  retire  a  little,  and
let  me  tell  him  that  you  are  there.

SCENE  II. — ARGAN,  TOINETTE.

ARC.  (Believing  himself  alone,  and  not  noticing  Toinette).
Mr.  Purgon  has  told  me  to  walk  about  this  morning,  in
my  room,  a  dozen  times  up  and  a  dozen  times  down,  but
I  have  forgotten  to  ask  him  whether  it  should  be  the
length  or  the  breadth  of  the  room.

Toi.  Sir,  here  is  a  .    .    .

ARC.  Speak  low,  you  hang-dog.  You  shake  my  brain,
and  you  forget  that  invalids  should  not  be  spoken  to  so
loudly.

Toi.  I  wished  to  say  to  you,  Sir  .    .    .

ARG.  Speak  low,  I  tell  you.

Toi.   Sir  .    .    .  (She  pretends  to  speak.

ARG.  Eh?

Toi.  I  was  telling  you  that  .    .   .

(She  again  pretends  to  speak.

ARG.   What  do  you  say  ?

Toi.  {Loud}.  I  say  that  there  is  a  man  who  wishes  to
speak  to  you.

ARG.  Let  him  come  here.  {Toinette  beckons  Cleante  to
draw  near).

SCENE  III. — ARGAN,  CLEANTE,  TOINETTE.

CLE.  Sir  .    .    .

Toi.  (To  Cleante).  Do  not  speak  so  loud,  for  fear  of
shaking  master's  brain.

CLE.  Sir,  I  am  charmed  to  find  you  up,  and  to  see  that
you  are  convalescent.

Toi.  (Pretending  to  be  angry).  How  !  convalescent !
That  is  false.  Master  is  always  ill.

OLE.  I  heard  it  said  that  Mr.  Argan  was  getting  better ;
and  I  find  that  he  looks  well.

l86  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  n.

Toi.  What  do  you  mean  by  "he  looks  well?"  Master
looks  very  bad ;  and  they  are  impertinent  fellows  who
have  told  you  that  he  was  better.  He  has  never  been
worse.

ARC.  She  is  right.

Toi.  He  walks,  sleeps,  eats  and  drinks  like  other  peo-
ple ;  but  that  does  not  prevent  him  from  being  very  ill.

ARC.   That  is  true.

CLE.  I  am  sorely  grieved,  Sir.  I  come  from  your
daughter's  singing-master;  he  has  been  obliged  to  go  into
the  country  for  a  few  days,  and,  as  his  intimate  friend,  he
sends  me  in  his  stead  to  continue  the  lessons,  for  fear  that,
in  interrupting  them,  she  should  forget  what  she  already
knows.

ARG.  Very  good.     {To  Toinette).     Call  Angelique.

Toi.  I  think,  Sir,  that  it  would  be  better  to  take  this
gentleman  to  her  room.

ARG.  No.     Fetch  her  here.

Toi.  He  could  not  give  her  a  proper  lesson,  if  they  be
not  alone.

ARG.  Yes,  yes.

Toi.  It  will  upset  you,  Sir;  and  there  should  be
nothing  to  excite  you,  and  to  shake  your  brain,  in  the
state  you  are  in.

ARG.  Not  at  all,  not  at  all :  I  love  music,  and  I  shall
be  glad  to  .  .  .  Ah!  here  she  is.  (To  Toinette).  Go
you  and  see,  you,  whether  my  wife  is  dressed.

SCENE  IV. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE.

ARG.  Come  here,  daughter.  Your  music-master  is  gone
to  the  country ;  and  here  is  some  one  whom  he  sends  in
his  stead  to  teach  you.

AN.  (Recognizing  Cleante).     Oh  Heavens  !

ARG.   What  is  the  matter  ?     Whence  this  surprise  ?

AN.  It  is  .

ARC-  What  ?     What  moves  you  in  this  manner  ?

AN.  It  is  a  most  surprising  adventure  that  is  happening
here,  father.

ARG.  How?

AN.  I  dreamt  last  night  that  I  was  in  the  greatest  diffi-
culty, and  that  some  one,  just  like  this  gentleman,  pre-

SCENE  vi.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  187

sented  himself  to  me,  of  whom  I  implored  assistance,  and
who  came  to  deliver  me  from  the  trouble  in  which  I  was ;
and  my  surprise  was  great  to  see  unexpectedly,  on  arriving
here,  what  was  in  my  mind  all  night.

CLE.  It  is  being  very  fortunate  to  occupy  your  thoughts,
whether  sleeping  or  waking ;  and  my  happiness  would  be
great,  no  doubt,  if  you  were  in  some  danger,  from  which
you  deemed  me  worthy  to  extricate  you.  There  is  nothing
I  would  not  do  to  ...

SCENE  V. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  (To  Argari).  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  I  am  entirely
on  your  side  this  time,  and  I  retract  everything  which  I
said  yesterday.  Here  are  Mr.  Diafoirus,  the  father,  and
Mr.  Diafoirus,  his  son,  who  come  to  pay  you  a  visit.
What  a  nice  son-in-law  you  will  have  !  You  shall  see  the
handsomest  young  fellow  possible,  and  the  wittiest.  He
has  said  but  two  words  which  have  delighted  me,  and
your  daughter  will  be  charmed  with  him.

ARG.  (To  Cleante,  who  pretends  to  go}.  Do  not  go,  Sir.
My  daughter  is  about  to  be  married,  and  her  intended,
whom  she  has  not  seen  as  yet,  has  just  come.

CLE.  It  is  doing  me  a  great  honour,  Sir,  to  wish  me  to
assist  at  so  pleasant  an  interview.

ARG.  He  is  the  son  of  a  very  able  physician ;  and  the
marriage  is  to  take  place  in  four  days.

CLE.  Very  good.

ARG.  Just  mention  it  to  her  music-master,  so  that  he
may  be  at  the  wedding.

CLE.  I  will  not  fail  to  do  so.

ARG.  I  invite  you  also.

CLE.  You  are  doing  me  much  honour.

Toi.  Come,  let  us  place  ourselves  in  position;  here
they  are.

SCENE  VI. — MR.  DIAFOIRUS,  THOMAS  DIAFOIRUS,  ARGAN,
ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE,  TOINETTE,  A  LACQUEY.

ARG.  (Putting  his  hand  to  his  cap,  without  taking  it  ojf).
Mr.  Purgon,  Sir,  has  forbidden  me  to  uncover  my  head.
You  belong  to  the  profession  :  you  know  the  conse-
quences.

1 88  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACTII.

Mr.  D.   In  all  our  visits  we  aim  at  bringing   help  to
those  who  are  ill,  and  not  inconvenience.

(Argan  and  Mr.  Diafoirus  speak  at  the  same  time.}.

ARG.  I  receive,  Sir,

MR.  D.  We  come  here,  Sir,

ARG.  With  great  joy,

MR.  D.  My  son  Thomas,  and  I,

ARG.  The  honour  whkh  you  do  me,

MR.  D.  To  assure  you,  Sir,

ARG.  And  I  should  have  wished  .    .    .

MR.  D.  How  delighted  we  are  .    .    .

ARG.  To  be  able  to  go  to  you  .    .   .

MR.  D.  At  the  graciousness  you  show  us  ...

ARG.  To  assure  you  of  it ;

MR.  D.  In  receiving  us  ...

ARG.  But  you  know,  Sir,

MR.  D.  To  the  honour,  Sir,

ARG.  What  it  is  to  be  a  poor  invalid,

MR.  D.  Of  your  alliance ;

ARG.  Who  can  do  nothing  else  .    .    .

MR.  D.  And  to  assure  you  .    .    .

ARG.   Than  to  tell  you  in  this  spot  .    .    .

Mr.  D.  That  in  all  things  pertaining  to  our  profession,

ARG.  That,  he  will  seek  every  opportunity  .    .    .

MR.  D.  As  well  as  in  everything  else,

ARG.  To  tell  you,  Sir,

MR.  D.    We  shall  always  be  prepared,  Sir.

ARG.  That  he  is  entirely  at  your  service.

MR.  D.  To  prove  our  zeal  to  you.  ( To  his  son).  Come
Thomas,  approach  and  pay  your  respects.

THOM.  (To  Mr.  Diafoirus).  Is  it  not  with  the  father
that  I  ought  to  begin  ?  24

Mr.  D.  Yes.

THOM.  (To  Argan).  Sir,  I  come  to  salute,  to  acknowledge,
to  cherish,  and  to  revere  in  you  a  second  father,  but  a  second
father  to  whom,  I  make  bold  to  say,  I  find  myself  more
indebted  than  to  the  first.  The  first  engendered  me ;  but

14  In  the  edition  of  Moliere's  works  of  1682  is  the  following  note :  "  Mr.
Thomas  Diafoirus  is  a  great  booby,  having  newly  left  the  schools,  and
doing  everything  awkwardly  and  at  the  wrong  time."

SCENE  vi.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  189

you  have  chosen  me;  he  received  me  through  necessity,
but  you  have  accepted  me  out  of  kindness.26  What  I  have
from  him  is  the  work  of  his  body ;  but  what  I  have  from
you  is  the  work  of  your  will ;  and  inasmuch  as  the  spirit-
ual faculties  are  above  the  corporal,  so  much  the  more  do
I  owe  you,  and  so  much  the  more  do  I  hold  precious  this  fu-
ture filiation,  of  which  I  come  this  day  to  render  to  you,
before-hand,  the  very  humble  and  very  respectful  homage.

Toi.  Long  life  to  the  colleges  which  turn  out  so  able  a
man !

THOM.  (To  Mr.  Diafoirus}.  Has  this  been  right,  father?

MR.  D.  Optime.

ARC.   (To  Angtlique).     Come,  salute  this  gentleman.

THOM.  (To  Mr.  Diafoirus).     Shall  I  kiss  her?26

MR.  D.  Yes,  yes.

THOM.  (To  Angelique).  Madam,  it  is  with  justice,
that  Heaven  has  conceded  you  the  title  of  stepmother,
since  we  ...

ARC.  (To  Thomas  Diafoirus).  This  is  not  my  wife,  it  is
my  daughter  to  whom  you  are  speaking.

THOM.  Where  is  she  then  ?

ARC.  She  will  be  here  directly.

THOM.  Shall  I  wait,  father,  until  she  comes  ?

MR.  D.  Offer  your  compliments  to  the  young  lady.

THOM.  Miss,  neither  more  nor  less  than  the  statue  of
Memnon  gave  forth  an  harmonious  sound,  when  it  was
illuminated  by  the  rays  of  the  sun,  so  do  I  feel  myself
animated  by  a  sweet  transport  of  the  appearance  of  the
sun  of  your  charms ; 27  and  as  naturalists  observe  that  the
flower  named  heliotrope  turns  incessantly  towards  that
star  of  the  day,  so  shall  my  heart  henceforth  turn  towards
the  resplendent  star  of  your  adorable  eyes,  as  to  its  only
pole.  Permit  me  then,  Miss,  to  bring  to-day  to  the  altar
of  your  charms  the  offer  of  that  heart  which  aspires  and

25  This  beginning  seems  imitated  from  a  passage  of  a  speech  of  Cicero
— Ad  Qulrites,  post  reditum.

586  In  the  Elzevir  edition  of  this  play  we  find  here :  "  He  first  makes  a
bow,  and  then  turns  his  face  towards  his  father.  Isabelle  (Angelique)
receives  the  kiss  with  great  disdain,  while  turning  her  head  towards  Cato
(Toinette)."

47  The  Abbe  d'Aubignac,  in  a  dissertation  against  Corneille,  uses  nearly
the  same  simile.

190  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  IL

aims  at  no  other  glory  than  to  be,  all  its  life,  Miss,  your
very  humble,  very  obedient,  and  very  faithful  servant  and
husband.

Toi.  See  what  it  is  to  study  !  one  learns  to  say  beauti-
ful things.

ARC.  (To  Cleante).     Eh  !     What  say  you  to  this?

CLE.  That  this  gentleman  does  wonders,  and  that,  if
he  be  as  good  a  physician  as  he  is  an  orator,  it  would  be
a  pleasure  to  be  counted  among  his  patients.

Toi.  Assuredly.  It  will  be  something  admirable,  if  his
cures  are  as  good  as  the  speeches  which  he  makes.

ARC.  Come,  quick,  my  chair,  and  seats  for  everybody.
(Servants  hand  chairs).  Place  yourself  there,  daughter.
(To  Mr.  Diafoirus).  You  see,  Sir,  that  everyone  admires
your  'son ;  and  I  think  you  very  fortunate  in  finding
yourself  possessed  of  such  a  boy.

MR.  D.  Sir,  it  is  not  because  I  am  his  father;  but  I  can
say  that  I  have  reason  to  be  satisfied  with  him,  and  that
all  who  see  him  speak  of  him  as  a  youth  who  has  no  harm
in  him.  He  never  had  a  very  lively  imagination,  nor  that
brilliant  wit  which  is  noticed  in  some ;  but  it  is  exactly  on
this  account  that  I  have  argued  well  of  his  judgment,  a
quality  requisite  for  the  exercise  of  our  art.  He  never
was,  when  little,  what  they  call  sharp  and  wide-awake ;  he
was  always  seen  to  be  gentle,  peaceable  and  taciturn,
never  saying  a  word  and  never  playing  at  those  little
games  which  are  called  infantine.  They  had  all  the  dif-
ficulty in  the  world  in  teaching  him  to  read,  and  at  nine
years  of  age,  he  did  not  yet  know  his  letters.  Good,  said
I  to  myself,  the  backward  trees  are  those  that  bear  the  best
fruit.  One  cuts  into  marble  with  far  more  difficulty  than
into  sand ;  but  things  are  preserved  much  longer  there ;
and  that  slowness  of  apprehension,  that  dulness  of  imagi-
nation, is  the  sign  of  a  future  good  judgment.  When  I
sent  him  to  college,  he  found  it  very  hard,  but  he  bore  up
against  the  difficulties ;  and  his  tutors  always  praised  him
to  me  for  his  assiduity  and  his  application.  In  short,  by
dint  of  hammering,  he  has  gloriously  obtained  his  diplo-
mas ;  and  I  may  say,  without  vanity,  that  in  the  two  years
after  he  took  his  degree,  there  is  no  candidate  who  has
made  more  noise  than  he  in  all  the  disputes  of  our  school.

SCENE  vij  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  1 91

He  has  rendered  himself  formidable ;  and  there  is  no  act
propounded  upon  which  he  does  not  argue  as  long  as  he
can  for  the  contrary  proposition.  He  is  firm  in  a  dispute,
strenuous  as  a  Turk  in  his  principles,  and  pursues  an  argu-
ment into  the  farthest  recesses  of  logic.  But,  that  which
above  all  pleases  me  in  him,  and  in  which  he  follows  my
example,  is  that  he  attaches  himself  blindly  to  the  opinions
of  the  ancients,  and  that  he  never  would  understand  or
listen  to  the  reasonings  and  experiments  of  the  pretended
discoveries  of  our  age  in  reference  to  the  circulation  of  the
blood,  and  other  opinions  of  the  same  kind.28

THOM.  {Drawing  from  his  pocket  a  large  thesis  rolled
up,  which  he  presents  to  Angelique).  I  have  defended  a  the-
sis against  the  circulators,  which,  with  the  permission  of
your  father  (Bowing  to  Argan),  I  make  bold  to  offer  to
this  young  lady,  as  a  homage  which  I  owe  to  her  of  the
first  fruits  of  my  mind.

AN.  It  is  a  useless  piece  of  furniture  to  me,  Sir,  and  I
am  no  judge  in  these  matters.

Toi.  (Taking  the  thesis).  Give  it  all  the  same;  it  is
worth  taking  for  the  picture;  it  will  do  to  decorate  our
room.

THOM.  (Again  bowing  to  Argan).  Once  more,  with  the
permission  of  your  father,  I  invite  you  to  come  and  see,
one  of  these  days,  for  your  amusement,  the  dissection  of  a
woman,  upon  which  I  am  to  lecture.

Toi.  The  entertainment  will  be  pleasant.  There  are
some  people  who  treat  their  mistresses  to  a  comedy ;  but
to  provide  a  dissection  is  more  gallant.

MR.  D.  For  the  rest,  as  regards  the  requisite  qualities
for  wedlock  and  propagation,  I  assure  you  that,  according
to  the  rules  of  our  physicians,  he  is  such  as  could  be  wished
for ;  that  he  possesses  in  a  praiseworthy  degree  the  prolific
virtue,  and  that  he  is  of  the  proper  temperament  to  engen-
der and  procreate  well-conditioned  children.

ARC.    Is   it   not  your  intention,  Sir,  to  push   him  at

28  Harvey  discovered  the  circulation  of  the  blood  in  1619,  and  many
discussions  took  place  in  France  on  that  subject,  which  were  not  com-
pletely ended  when  Moliere's  last  play  was  performed.  This  same  year
(1673)  Louis  XIV.  instituted  at  the  jfardin  des  Plantes  a  special  chair  for
anatomy.

192  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  (ACT  n.

Court,  and  to  procure  for  him  the  place  of  a  physician  in
ordinary  ?

MR.  D.  To  speak  frankly  to  you,  our  profession  when
near  the  great  has  never  appeared  pleasant  to  me;  and  I
have  always  found  that  it  does  better  for  us  to  remain  with
the  public.  The  public  is  easy  to  deal  with;  you  are  re-
sponsible for  your  actions  to  no  one;  and  provided  you
follow  the  current  of  the  rules  of  your  art,  you  need  not  be
uneasy  about  what  may  happen.  But  what  is  vexatious
with  the  great,  is  that,  when  they  fall  ill,  they  absolutely
wish  their  physicians  to  cure  them.

Toi.  That  is  funny  !  and  they  are  very  impertinent  to
wish  you  gentlemen  to  cure  them  !  You  are  not  near  them
for  that ;  you  are  there  only  to  receive  your  fees,  and  to
order  them  remedies ;  it  is  for  them  to  get  better,  if  they
can.

MR.  D.  That  is  true ;  one  is  only  obliged  to  treat  peo-
ple according  to  the  rules.

ARG.  {To  Cleanti).  Just  make  my  daughter  sing  a  little
before  the  company,  Sir.

CLE.  I  was  awaiting  your  orders,  Sir;  and  an  idea  has
just  struck  me,  to  entertain  the  company,  to  sing  with  the
lady  a  scene  from  an  operetta  which  has  lately  been  com-
posed. (  To  Angelique,  giving  her  a  paper).  There,  this  is
your  part.

AN.  I?

CLE.  {Softly  to  Angelique'}.  Do  not  make  any  objection
to  it,  pray,  and  let  me  make  you  understand  what  the  scene
is  which  we  are  to  sing.  (Aloud}.  I  have  no  voice  for
singing ;  but  in  this  case  it  is  sufficient  that  I  can  make
myself  heard ;  and  you  will  have  the  kindness  to  excuse
me,  by  the  necessity  under  which  I  find  myself  to  make
the  young  lady  sing.29

ARG.   Is  the  poetry  good  ?

CLE.  It  is  properly  called  a  little  improvised  opera;  and
you  will  only  hear  sung  rhythmical  prose,  or  some  sort  of
blank  verse,  such  as  affection  and  necessity  might  suggest

29  A  similar  scene  is  also  to  be  found  in  The  Blunderer  (see  Vol.  I.),  The
School  for  Husbands  (see  Vol.  I.),  Love  is  the  Physician  (see  Vol.  II.),
The  Sicilian  (see  Vol.  II.),  and  The  Miser  (see  Vol.  III.)

SCENE  in.}  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  193

to  two  persons,  who  say  those  things  out  of  their  own
heads,  and  speak  on  the  spur  of  the  moment.

ARC.  Very  good.     Let  us  listen.

CLE.  This  is  the  plot  of  the  scene  :  A  shepherd  was
attentively  watching  the  beauties  of  a  spectacle  which  had
just  commenced,  when  his  attention  was  disturbed  by  a
noise  which  he  heard  at  his  side.  He  turns  round,  and
sees  a  coarse  fellow,  who  with  insolent  words  insults  a
shepherdess.  Immediately  he  espouses  the  interests  of
that  sex  to  which  all  men  owe  homage ;  and  after  having
given  the  coarse  fellow  the  punishment  due  to  his  in-
solence, he  comes  back  to  the  shepherdess,  and  beholds  a
young  person,  who,  from  the  most  lovely  eyes  which  he
had  ever  seen,  drops  tears  which  he  thinks  the  most  beau-
tiful in  the  world.  Alas  !  says  he  to  himself,  can  people
be  capable  of  insulting  so  amiable  a  being  !  and  what  in-
human monster,  what  barbarian  would  not  be  touched  by
such  tears  ?  He  busies  himself  to  stop  them,  these  tears
which  he  thinks  so  beautiful ;  and  the  gentle  shepherdess
takes  care  at  the  same  time  to  thank  him  for  his  slight
service,  but  in  a  manner  so  charming,  so  tender  and  so
impassioned,  that  the  shepherd  cannot  resist  it;  and  every
glance,  is  a  dart  full  of  fire  with  which  his  heart  feels  itself
pierced.  Is  there  ought,  said  he,  that  could  deserve  the
sweet  words  of  such  an  acknowledgment  ?  And  what
would  we  not  do,  to  what  services,  to  what  dangers  would
we  not  feel  delighted  to  run,  to  attract  to  ourselves,  but
for  one  moment,  the  moving  tenderness  of  so  grateful  a
heart  !  The  whole  of  the  spectacle  is  enacted  without  his
paying  the  least  attention  to  it ;  but  he  complains  that  it
is  too  short,  for  the  end  will  separate  him  from  his  ador-
able shepherdess  ;  and  from  this  first  sight,  from  this  first
moment,  he  brings  back  with  him  all  that  can  be  most
intense  in  a  passion  of  several  years'  duration.  Behold
him  immediately  experiencing  all  the  ills  of  absence,  and
he  is  tortured  by  seeing  no  longer  her  whom  he  has  seen
such  a  short  time.  He  does  all  he  can  to  enjoy  this  sight
once  more,  of  which  he  preserves  night  and  day  so  pre-
cious a  recollection;  but  the  great  restraint  under  which
his  shepherdess  is  kept  deprives  him  of  every  opportunity.
The  violence  of  his  passion  makes  him  resolve  to  ask  for

194  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  „.

the  hand  of  the  adorable  fair  one,  without  whom  he  can
no  longer  live  ;  and  he  obtains  her  permission  by  means
of  a  note  which  he  has  the  skill  to  have  conveyed  to  her.
But,  at  the  same  time,  he  is  informed  that  the  father  of
his  fair  one  has  projected  a  marriage  with  some  one  else,
and  that  everything  is  being  prepared  to  celebrate  the
ceremony.30  Judge  how  cruel  is  the  blow  to  the  heart  of
this  sad  shepherd  !  Behold  him  overwhelmed  by  a  mortal
grief;  he  cannot  bear  the  horrible  thought  of  seeing  all
he  loves  in  the  arms  of  another  ;  and  in  despair,  his  love
makes  him  find  the  means  of  introducing  himself  into  the
house  of  his  shepherdess  to  learn  her  feelings,  and  to  know
from  her  the  fate  to  which  he  is  to  submit.  He  there
meets  with  the  preparations  for  all  that  he  fears  ;  he  wit-
nesses the  coming  of  the  unworthy  rival  whom  the  whims
of  a  father  oppose  to  the  tenderness  of  his  love ;  he  sees
him  triumphant,  this  ridiculous  rival,  near  the  gentle
shepherdess,  as  if  the  conquest  were  sure ;  and  this  sight
fills  him  with  anger  which  he  can  scarcely  master  ;  he
darts  painful  glances  at  her  whom  he  adores;  and  the
respect  for  her,  and  the  presence  of  her  father,  prevent
his  saying  anything  to  her  except  by  his  looks ;  but  at
last  he  breaks  through  all  restraint,  and  the  transport  of
his  passion  obliges  him  thus  to  speak — (He  sings}

Beauteous   Philis,  it   is  too   much,   it  is  too

much  to  suffer  ;
Let  us  break  this  cruel  silence,  and  bare  your

thoughts  to  me.
Tell  me  my  fate .
Am  I  to  live  ?  am  I  to  die  ?

AN.   (Singing).  You  behold  me,  Tircis,  sad  and  melan-
choly,
At  the  preparations  for  the  marriage  which  alarms

you.

To  Heaven  I  lift  my  eyes,  I  look  at  you,  I  sigh ;
Need  I  to  tell  you  more  ?

30  Moliere  has  borrowed  this  tale  of  Cleante  most  probably  from  the
Sanish  of  Francisco  de  Roxas,  which  had  already  been  used  by  Thomas
Corneille,  in  Don  Bertrand  de  Cigarral,  a  comedy,  performed  in  1650.

SCENE  vi.J  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  195

ARC.  Lack-a-day  !  I  did  not  think  that  my  daughter
was  so  clever  as  to  sing  thus  at  first  sight,  without  hesi-
tating.

CLE.  Alas !   fair  Philis,

Can  it  be  that  the  enamoured  Tircis
Could  be  happy  enough
To  find  a  place  in  your  heart  ?

AN.  I  do  not  refuse  to  acknowledge  it,  in  this  exceed-
ing grief;

Yes,  Tircis,  I  love  you.
CLE.  O  word  full  of  charms  !

Have  I  heard  rightly  ?     Alas  !
Say  it  once  more,  Philis,  so  that  I  may  not  doubt.
AN.  Yes,  Tircis,  I  love  you.
CLE.  For  mercy's  sake,  once  more,  Philis.
AN.  I  love  you.

CLE.  Repeat  it  a  hundred  times ;  do  not  get  weary.
AN.  I  love  you,  I  love  you ;
Yes,  Tircis,  I  love  you.
CLE.  Ye  gods,  ye  kings,  who  look  down  upon  the  world

beneath  your  feet,

Can  you  compare  your  happiness  with  mine  ?
But,  Philis,  one  thought
Comes  to  trouble  this  sweet  bliss.
A  rival,  a  rival  .    .    .
AN.  Ah  !  I  hate  him  more  than  death  ;

And  his  presence  is  to  me,  as  it  is  to  you,
A  cruel  torture.

CLE.  But  a  father  wishes  to  compel  you  to  obey  his
wishes.

AN.  Sooner,  sooner  will  I  die
Than  ever  consent  to  it ;
Sooner,  sooner  will  I  die,  sooner  will  I  die.81
ARC.  And  what  says  the  father  to  all  this  ?
CLE.  He  says  nothing.

ARC.  That  is  an  idiot  of  a  father,  to  suffer  all  this  non-
sense without  saying  anything.

81  La  Grange  and  the  wife  of  Moliere  had  a  great  success  in  this  scene,
as  it  is  said  in  the  Sixth  of  the  Entretiens  Galants,  about  Music,  published
in  Paris  in  1681.

196  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  11.

CLE.  (  Wishing  to  continue  to  sing).
Ah !  my  love  .    .    .

ARC.  No,  no ;  this  is  enough  of  it.  This  comedy  sets
a  very  bad  example.  The  shepherd  Tircis  is  an  imperti-
nent fellow,  and  the  shepherdess  Philis  is  an  impudent  hussy
to  speak  in  that  way  before  her  father.  (To  Angelique).
Show  me  this  paper.  Ah  !  ah  !  but  where  are  the  words
which  you  have  spoken?  There  is  nothing  but  music
written  there  ?

CLE.  Do  not  you  know,  Sir,  that  it  has  been  recently
invented  to  write  the  words  with  the  notes  in  one  ?  M

ARC.  Very  good.  I  am  your  servant,  Sir;  good-bye.
We  could  have  very  well  dispensed  with  your  impertinent
opera.

CLE.  I  thought  to  amuse  you.

ARC.  Nonsense  does  not  amuse.  Ah  !  here  comes  my
wife.

SCENE  VII. — BELINE,  ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  MR.  DIAFOIRUS,
THOMAS  DIAFOIRUS,  TOINETTE.

ARG.  My  love,  this  is  the  son  of  Mr.  Diafoirus.

THOM.  Madam,  it  is  with  justice  that  Heaven  has  granted
you  the  title  of  stepmother,  for  we  see  in  your  face .  .  .  M

BEL.  Sir,  I  am  delighted  to  have  come  here  opportunely,
to  enjoy  the  honour  of  seeing  you.

THOM.  For  we  see  in  your  face  .  .  .for  we  see  in  your
face  .  .  .  Madam,  you  have  interrupted  me  in  the  midst
of  my  period,  and  that  has  confused  my  memory.

MR.  D.  Thomas,  reserve  this  for  another  opportunity.

ARG.  My  pet,  I  would  have  wished  you  to  be  here  just
now.

Toi.  Ah  !  Madam,  you  have  lost  a  great  deal  in  not
having  been  here  at  the  second  father,  at  the  statue  of
Memnon,  and  at  the  flower  called  heliotrope.

ARG.  Come,  daughter,  put  your  hand  in  this  gentle-
man's, and  pledge  him  your  faith,  as  to  your  husband.

82  In  the  Elzevir  edition  of  the  play,  Cleante  pretends  that  the  words  of
the  duet  are  old  and  well  known.

83  Thomas  Diafoirus  utters  a  compliment  which  he  has  studied,  but  can-
not finish  it.     Belle-mere  means  stepmother,  but  belle  mere  handsome
mother.

SCENE  vii.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  197

AN.  Father  .    .    .

ARC.  Well !    father  !    What  does  this  mean.

AN.  Pray,  do  not  hurry  matters.  Give  us  at  least  time
to  know  each  other,  and  to  see  grow  up  in  us  that  in-
clination for  one  another  which  is  so  necessary  to  form  a
perfect  union.

THOM.  As  for  me,  Miss,  it  is  already  entirely  grown  up
in  me ;  and  I  have  no  need  to  wait  any  longer.

AN.  If  you  are  so  prompt,  Sir,  it  is  not  the  same  with
me ;  and  I  confess  to  you  that  your  merit  has  not  as  yet
made  any  impression  on  my  heart.

ARC.  Oh  !  well,  well ;  there  will  be  ample  leisure  for
that  when  you  are  married.

AN.  Ah !  father,  give  me  some  time,  I  pray  you.
Wedlock  is  a  chain  to  which  we  should  never  subject  a
heart  by  force ;  and  if  this  gentleman  is  a  man  of  honour,
he  ought  not  to  wish  to  accept  a  person  who  would  be  his
by  coercion.

THOM.  Nego  consequentiam,  Miss ;  and  I  may  be  a  man
of  honour,  and  still  wish  to  accept  you  from  the  hands  of
your  father.

AN.  It  is  a  bad  means  of  making  yourself  beloved  by
any  one  by  doing  her  violence.

THOM.  We  read  of  the  ancients,  Miss,  that  their  custom
was  to  carry  away  by  force,  from  the  homes  of  their
fathers,  the  daughters  who  were  led  to  marriage,  so  that  it
might  not  appear  to  be  by  their  own  consent  that  they  flew
into  the  arms  of  a  man.

AN.  The  ancients,  Sir,  are  the  ancients ;  and  we  are
the  people  of  the  present  day.  Pretences  are  not  at  all
necessary  in  our  age ;  and  when  a  marriage  pleases  us,  we
know  well  enough  how  to  go  to  it,  without  being  dragged
to  it.  Have  patience  ;  if  you  love  me,  Sir,  you  ought  to
wish  everything  that  I  wish.

THOM.  Yes,  Miss,  up  to  the  interests  of  my  love,  ex-
clusively.

AN.  But  the  great  sign  of  love  is  to  submit  to  the
wishes  of  her  whom  we  love.

THOM.  Dtstinguo,  Miss.  In  what  concerns  not  her  pos-
session, concedo;  but  in  what  concerns  it,  nego.

Toi.  You    may  argue  as  much   as  you   please.      The

198  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACTII.

gentleman  is  fresh  from  college,  and  he  will  always  give
you  your  answer.  Why  resist  so  much,  and  refuse  the
glory  of  being  attached  to  the  body  of  the  faculty  ?

BEL.  Perhaps  she  has  some  other  inclination  in  her
mind.

AN.  If  I  had,  Madam,  it  would  be  such  as  reason  and
honour  would  allow.

ARG.  Good  gracious  !  I  am  acting  a  pretty  part  here.

BEL.  If  I  were  you,  child,  I  should  not  force  her  to
marry ;  and  I  know  well  enough  what  I  should  do.

AN.  I  am  aware,  Madam,  of  what  you  mean,  and  of  the
kind  feelings  which  you  have  towards  me ;  but  your  de-
signs may  not  perhaps  be  so  happy  as  to  be  executed.

BEL.  It  is  because  very  circumspect  and  very  respec-
table girls  like  you,  do  not  care  to  be  obedient  and  sub-
missive to  the  wishes  of  their  fathers.  That  was  very  well
in  times  gone  by.

AN.  The  duty  of  a  daughter  has  its  limits,  Madam ;
and  neither  reason  nor  the  laws  extend  it  to  other  mat-
ters.

BEL.  This  means  that  your  ideas  are  not  averse  to  mar-
riage ;  but  that  you  wish  to  choose  a  husband  according
to  your  own  fancy.

AN.  If  my  father  will  not  give  me  a  husband  whom  I
like,  I  shall  beseech  him,  at  least,  not  to  force  me  to  mar-
ry one  whom  I  cannot  love.

ARG.  Gentlemen,  I  ask  your  pardon  for  all  this.

AN.  Every  one  has  his  own  motive  for  marrying.  As
for  me,  who  wish  no  husband  but  to  truly  love  him,  and
who  intend  to  make  it  a  life-long  attachment,  I  confess  to
you  that  I  am  somewhat  cautious  about  it.  There  are
some  who  take  husbands  only  to  emancipate  themselves
from  the  restraint  of  their  parents,  and  to  place  themselves
in  a  position  to  do  as  they  like.  There  are  others,  Mad-
am, who  make  marriage  a  commerce  of  sheer  interest,
who  only  wed  in  order  to  obtain  jointures,  to  enrich
themselves  by  the  death  of  those  whom  they  espouse,  and
run  without  scruple  from  husband  to  husband,  to  appro-
priate to  themselves  their  spoils.  These  persons,  in  truth
do  not  stand  upon  so  many  ceremonies,  and  have  little
regard  to  the  persons  themselves.

SCENBIX.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  199

BEL.  I  find  you  in  a  great  mood  for  arguing  to-day,  and
I  should  like  to  know  what  you  mean  by  this.

AN.  I,  Madam?  What  should  I  mean  but  what  I
say?

BEL.  You  are  so  silly,  my  dear,  that  there  is  no  enduring
you  any  longer.

AN.  You  would  like  to  provoke  me,  Madam,  into  an-
swering you  by  some  impertinence ;  but  I  warn  you  that
you  shall  not  have  the  advantage.

BEL.  Your  insolence  is  matchless.

AN.  No,  Madam,  you  may  say  your  best.

BEL.  And  you  have  a  ridiculous  pride,  an  imperti-
nent presumption,  which  causes  every  one  to  shrug  their
shoulders.

AN.  All  this  will  be  of  no  avail,  Madam.  I  shall  be
prudent  in  spite  of  you ;  and  to  take  away  all  hope  of
your  succeeding  in  what  you  wish,  I  shall  retire  from  your
presence.

SCENE  VIII. — ARGAN,  BELINE,  MR.  DIAFOIRUS,  THOMAS

DlAFOIRUS,    TOINETTE.

ARC.  (  To  Angelique,  who  is  going).  Hark  ye.  There
is  no  middle  way  in  this  case  :  make  up  your  mind  to
marry  this  gentleman  in  four  days,  or  a  convent.  (  ToBeline).
Do  not  trouble  yourself:  I  shall  manage  her  properly.

BEL.  I  am  sorry  to  leave  you,  child ;  but  I  have  some
business  in  town  which  I  cannot  delay.  I  shall  soon  be
back  again.

ARC.  Go,  my  love,  and  call  in  at  your  notary,  that  he
may  attend  to  what  you  know.

BEL.  Farewell,  my  little  dear.

ARC.  Good  bye,  darling.

SCENE  IX. — ARGAN,  MR.  DIAFOIRUS,  THOMAS  DIAFOIRUS,
TOINETTE.

ARC.  There  is  a  woman  who  loves  me  .  .  .  it  is  not  to
be  believed.

MR.  D.  We  are  going  to  take  leave  of  you,  Sir.

ARC.  Pray,  Sir,  just  tell  me  in  what  condition  I  am.

MR.  D.  (Feeling  the  pulse  of  Argari}.  Come,  Thomas,
take  hold  of  the  other  arm  of  this  gentleman,  to  see

200  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  n.

whether  you   can  form  a  good  judgment  of  his   pulse.
Quid  diets  ?

THOM.  Dico,  that  this  gentleman's  pulse  is  the  pulse  of
a  man  who  is  not  in  good  health.

MR.  D.  Good,

THOM.  That  it  is  hardish   not  to  say  hard.

Dr.  D.  Very  well.

THOM.  That  it  acts  by  fits  and  starts.

Mr.  D.  Bene

THOM.  And  even  a  little  irregular.

MR.  D.    Optime.

THOM.  Which  is  a  sign  of  intemperature  in  the  splene-
tic parenchyma,  which  means  the  milt.

MR.  D.  Very  good.

ARC.  No;  Mr.  Purgon  says  that  it  is  my  liver  which  is
not  right.

MR.  D.  Well,  yes :  whosoever  says  parenchyma,  says
the  one  and  the  other,  on  account  of  the  close  sympathy
there  is  between  them  through  the  vas  breve,  the  pylorus,
and  often  through  the  meatus  cholidici.  He  no  doubt
orders  you  to  eat  much  roast  meat.

ARC.   No  ;  nothing  but  boiled.

MR.  D.  Well,  yes :  roast,  boiled,  the  same  thing.  He
prescribes  very  carefully  for  you,  and  you  cannot  be  in
better  hands.

ARC.  Sir,  how  many  grains  of  salt  ought  there  to  be
put  in  an  egg?

MR.  D.  Six,  eight,  ten,  in  even  numbers,  just  as  in
medicine  in  odd  numbers.

ARC.  Until  we  meet  again,  Sir.

SCENE  X. — BELINE,  ARGAN.

BEL.  I  have  come,  child,  before  going  out,  to  inform
you  of  something  to  which  you  ought  to  look.  In  passing
by  Angelique's  room,  I  noticed  a  young  man  with  her,
who  ran  away  the  moment  he  saw  me.

ARC.  A  young  man  with  my  daughter  !

BEL.  Yes.  Your  little  daughter  Louison  was  with  them,
who  can  tell  you  particulars  about  it.

ARC.  Send  her  here,  my  love,  send  her  here.    Ah !  the

SCENE  xi. 1  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  2OI

bold  hussy.     (Alone).     I  am  no  longer  astonished  at  her
resistance.

SCENE  XI. — ARGAN,  LOUISON.

Lou.  What  do  you  wish  with  me,  papa?  My  step-
mother has  told  me  that  you  want  me.

ARG.  Yes.  Come  here.  Come  closer.  Turn  round.
Turn  up  your  eyes.  Look  at  me.  Eh  ?

Lou.   What,  papa?

ARG.  So?

Lou.  What?

ARG.   Have  you  nothing  to  tell  me  ?

Lou.  I  will  tell  you,  if  you  like,  to  amuse  you,  the  story
of  The  Donkey's  Skin,  or  the  fable  of  The  Raven  and  the
Fox,  which  I  have  been  taught  lately.35

ARG.   That  is  not  what  I  ask  you.

Lou.  What  then  ?

ARG.  Ah  !  you  sly  girl,  you  know  very  well  what  I
mean  !

Lou.   I  beg  your  pardon,  papa.

ARG.  Is  it  thus  that  you  obey  me?

Lou.   What?

ARG.  Did  I  not  recommend  you  to  come  and  tell  me
directly  all  that  you  see  ?

Lou.  Yes,  papa.

ARG.  Have  you  done  so  ?

Lou.  Yes,  papa.  I  have  come  and  told  you  everything
I  saw.

ARG.  And  have  you  seen  nothing  to-day  ?

Lou.  No,  papa.

ARG.  No  ?

Lou.   No,  papa.

ARG.  You  are  sure?

Lou.   I  am  sure.

ARG.  Oh  !  very  well ;  I  shall  let  you  see  something.

Lou.  (Noticing  some  switches  which  Argan  has  taken
up).  Oh !  papa.

85  Perrault  published  the  story  of  Peru  <T Ane  (the  Donkey's  Skin),  in
1694,  and  as  The  Imaginary  Invalid  was  performed  in  1673,  it  is  a  proof
that  it  was  well  known  long  before  it  was  published.

202  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  u.

ARC.  Ah  !  Ah  !  you  little  deceiver,  you  do  not  tell  me
that  you  have  seen  a  man  in  your  sister's  room !

Lou.   (.Crying).     Papa!

ARC.  ( Taking  Louison  by  the  arm).  This  will  teach
you  to  tell  lies.

Lou.  (Throwing  herself  at  his  knees.}  Ah!  papa,  I
ask  your  pardon.  It  is  because  my  sister  told  me  not  to
tell  you ;  but  I  am  going  to  tell  you  all.

ARC.  First  of  all  you  must  be  whipped  for  having  told
a  lie.  Afterwards  we  shall  see  about  the  rest.

Lou.   Pardon,  papa.

ARC.  No,  no.

Lou.   Dear  papa,  do  not  whip  me.

ARC.  You  shall  be  whipped.

Lou.   In  Heaven's  name,  papa,  do  not  whip  me  !

ARC.  (  Wanting  to  whip  her).     You  shall,  you  shall.

Lou.  Ah  !  papa,  you  have  hurt  me.  Wait :  I  am
dead.  (She pretends  to  be  dead.

ARC.  Hullo  !  What  is  this  ?  Louison,  Louison  !  Ah !
great  Heaven  !  Louison  !  Ah  !  my  daughter.  Ah  !  un-
happy being  that  I  am  !  my  dear  daughter  is  dead  !  What
have  I  done,  wretch  that  I  am !  Ah !  these  cursed
switches  !  The  plague  take  the  switches  !  Ah  !  my  poor
daughter,  my  poor  little  Louison  !

Lou.  There,  there,  papa  do  not  cry  so :  I  am  not  en-
tirely dead.

ARG.  Do  you  see  the  artful  little  girl !  Well,  I  forgive
you  this  time,  provided  you  really  tell  me  everything.

Lou.   Oh  !  yes,  papa.

ARG.  You  had  better  be  careful  in  any  case;  for  this
little  finger  knows  everything,  and  will  tell  me  if  you  tell
lies.

Lou.   But,  papa,  do  not  tell  sister  that  I  have  told  you.

ARG.  No,  no.

Lou.  (After  having  made  sure  that  no  one  is  listening).
A  man  came  into  sister's  room  while  I  was  there.

ARG.  Well?

Lou.  I  asked  him  what  he  wanted,  and  he  told  me  that
he  was  her  singing-master.

ARG.  (Aside).  Hem,  hem  !  that  is  it.  (To  Louison).
Well?

SCENE  xii.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  203

Lou.  Sister  came  in  afterwards.

ARC.  Well?

Lou.  She  said  to  him :  begone,  begone,  begone.
Great  Heavens,  begone ;  you  will  drive  me  desperate.

ARG.  Well?

Lou.  And  he,  he  would  not  go.

ARG.  What  did  he  say  to  her?

Lou.  He  said  to  her  I  do  not  know  how  many  things.

ARG.  And  what  more  ?

Lou.  He  said  this,  that,  and  the  other,  that  he  loved
her  dearly,  and  that  she  was  the  prettiest  girl  in  the
world.

ARG.  And  after  that  ?

Lou.  And  after  that,  he  fell  down  on  his  knees  before
her.

ARG.  And  after  that  ?

Lou.  And  after  that,  he  kissed  her  hands.

ARG.  And  after  that  ?

Lou.  And  after  that,  stepmother  came  to  the  door,  and
he  ran  away.

ARG.  There  is  nothing  else  ?

Lou.  No,  papa.

ARG.  My  little  finger,  however,  mutters  something.
(Placing  his  finger  to  his  ear].  Wait.  Eh!  ah!  ah!  Yes?
oh  !  oh  !  Here  is  my  little  finger,  which  tells  me  of  some-
thing that  you  have  seen,  but  which  you  have  not  told  me.

Lou.  Ah !  papa,  your  little  finger  is  a  story-teller.

ARG.  Take  care.

Lou.  No,  papa;  do  not  believe  it:  it  tells  a  story,  I
assure  you.

ARG.  Oh  !  very  well,  very  well,  we  shall  see.  Go  now,
and  take  notice  of  everything  :  go.  (Alone).  Ah  !  there
are  no  longer  any  children  !  Ah!  what  perplexity!  I
have  not  even  so  much  leisure  as  to  think  about  my  illness.
Really,  I  can  hold  out  no  longer.  (He  drops  into  a  chair.

SCENE  XII. — BERALDE,  ARGAN.

BER.  Well,  brother  !  what  is  the  matter  ?  How  do  you
do?

AR.  Ah  !  brother,  very  poorly.

204  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

BER.  How  !  very  poorly  ?

AR.  Yes  !     I  am  in  so  weak  a  state,  that  it  is  incredible.

BER.  That  is  sad.

AR.   I  have  not  even  the  strength  to  be  able  to  speak.

BER.  I  came  hither,  brother,  to  propose  to  you  a  match
for  my  niece  Angelique.

AR.  (Speaking  excitedly,  and  rising  from  his  chair],
Brother,  do  not  speak  to  me  about  this  hussy.  She  is  a
wretch,  an  impertinent,  impudent  girl,  whom  I  shall  place
i  n  a  convent  before  two  days  are  over.

BER.  Ah !  that  is  right !  I  am  very  glad  that  your
strength  is  coming  back  a  little,  and  that  my  visit  is  doing
you  good.  Well,  we  will  talk  of  business  by-and-by.  I
have  brought  you  an  entertainment  with  which  I  fell  in,
which  will  dissipate  your  chagrin,  and  make  you  better
disposed  for  what  we  are  to  talk  about.  They  are  Gipsies
dressed  as  Moors,  who  perform  dances  intermixed  with
songs,  with  which  I  am  sure  you  will  be  pleased  ;  and  this
will  be  as  good  for  you  as  a  prescription  of  Mr.  Purgon.
Come.

SECOND  INTERLUDE,

The  brother  of  the  Imaginary  Invalid  brings,  to  amuse
him,  several  Gipsies  of  both  sexes,  dressed  as  Moors,  who
perform  some  dances  intermixed  with  music,

IST  MOORISH  WOMAN —

Sweet  youth,

Take  advantage  of  the  spring

Of  your  best  years ;

Take  advantage  of  the  spring

Of  your  best  years  ;

Abandon  yourself  to  the  tender  passion.

Without  the  amorous  flame,

The  most  charming  pleasures

Have  not  sufficient  powerful  attractions

To  satisfy  the  heart.

THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  205

Sweet  youth,

Take  advantage  of  the  spring

Of  your  best  years ;

Abandon  yourself  to  the  tender  passion.

Do  not  lose  these  precious  moments,
Beauty  vanishes,
Time  effaces  it ;
The  age  of  coldness
Comes  in  its  stead,

Which  takes  away  our  taste  for  these  sweet
pastimes.

Take  advantage  of  the  spring

Of  your  best  years,

Sweet  youth ;

Take  advantage  of  the  spring

Of  your  best  years ;

Abandon  yourself  to  the  tender  passion.

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet.
Dance  of  the  Gipsies.

2D  MOORISH  WOMAN —

What  are  you  thinking  of,

When  you  press  us  to  love  ?

Towards  the  tender  passion

Our  hearts,  in  our  youth,

Have  but  too  great  an  inclination.

Love  has,  to  catch  us,

Such  sweet  attractions,

That,  from  our  own  will,  without  waiting,

We  would  give  ourselves  up

To  its  first  solicitations  ;

But  all  that  we  hear

Of  the  poignant  griefs

And  the  tears  which  it  costs  us,

Makes  us  fear

All  its  sweetness.

206  THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.

30  MOORISH  WOMAN —

It  is  sweet,  at  our  age,
To  love  tenderly
A  lover

Who  is  faithful :
But,  if  he  be  fickle,
Alas  !   what  torture  !

4TH  MOORISH  WOMAN —

It  is  not  the  unhappiness

At  the  lover  who  breaks  his  vows  ;

The  pain

And  the  rage
Is  that  the  fickle  one
Keeps  possession  of  our  heart.

2D  MOORISH  WOMAN —

What  part  are  we  to  take,
To  defend  our  young  hearts  ?

30  MOORISH  WOMAN —

Must  we  deny  ourselves  to  it,
And  flee  from  its  delights.

4TH  MOORISH  WOMAN —

Are  we  to  surrender  them,
Notwithstanding  their  rigours  ?

TOGETHER —

Yes,  let  us  abandon  ourselves  to  its  ardours,

Its  transports,  its  whims,

Its  sweet  languors,

If  it  have  some  tortures,

It  has  a  thousand  delights

That  charm  the  heart.

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

All  the  Moors  dance  together,  and  make  the  apes,  which
they  have  brought  with  them  perform  some  jumping.

SCENE  in.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  207

ACT  III.
SCENE  I. — BERALDE,  ARGAN,  TOINETTE.

BER.  Well !  brother,  what  say  you  of  this  ?  Is  it  not
better  than  a  dose  of  cassia?

Toi.   Humph  !  good  cassia  is  good.

BER.  Well !  shall  we  talk  a  little  together  ?

ARC.  A  little  patience,  brother:  I  shall  be  back  di-
rectly.

Toi.  Stay,  Sir,  you  forget  that  you  cannot  walk  without
a  stick.

ARG.   You  are  right.

SCENE  II. — BERALDE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  Do  not  lose  sight,  if  you  please,  of  the  interests
of  your  niece.

BER.  I  shall  try  everything  to  obtain  for  her  what  she
wishes.

Toi.  We  must  absolutely  prevent  this  extravagant
match  which  he  has  taken  into  his  head ;  and  I  have
thought  to  myself  that  it  would  be  a  good  thing  to  intro-
duce into  the  place  a  doctor  of  our  own  choosing,36  to
disgust  him  with  his  Mr.  Purgon,  and  to  cry  down  his
treatment  of  him.  But  as  we  have  no  one  at  hand  to  do
this,  I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  play  a  trick  of  my  own.

BER.  How?

Toi.  It  is  a  whimsical  idea.  It  may  perhaps  turn  out
more  lucky  than  prudent.  Let  me  manage.  Act  you  on
your  side.  There  comes  our  man.

SCENE  III. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

BER.  You  will  allow  me,  brother,  to  ask  you,  before
all  things,  not  to  excite  yourself  in  our  conversation.

ARG.  Agreed.

BER.  To  reply  without  bitterness,  to  the  things  I  may
say  to  you.

ARG.  Yes.

BER.  And  to  argue  together  the  matters  which  we  have
to  discuss,  with  a  mind  free  from  all  passion.

86  In  the  original  un  me  dec  in  a  notre paste.

208  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  (AC,  „,

ARC.  Good  Heavens !  yes.     What  a  deal  of  preamble.

BER.  Whence  comes  it,  brother,  that  having  the  pro-
perty which  you  possess,  and  having  no  children  but  one
daughter,  for  I  do  not  reckon  the  little  one;  whence
comes  it,  I  say,  that  you  talk  of  placing  her  in  a  convent  ?

ARC.  Whence  comes  it  brother,  that  I  am  master  in  my
family,  to  do  as  I  think  best  ?

BER.  Your  wife  does  not  fail  to  advise  you  to  get  rid,
in  that  way,  of  your  two  daughters,  and  I  have  no  doubt
that,  through  a  spirit  of  charity,  she  would  be  delighted
to  see  them  both  good  nuns.

ARG.  There  now !  there  we  are.  There  is  the  poor
woman  at  once  brought  up.  It  is  she  who  does  all  the
harm,  and  every  one  has  a  grudge  against  her.

BER.  No,  brother ;  let  us  leave  her  out  of  the  question.
She  is  a  woman  who  has  the  best  possible  intentions  to-
wards your  family,  and  who  is  devoid  of  all  self-interest ;
who  has  a  wonderful  tenderness  toward  you,  and  who
shows  an  inconceivable  affection  and  kindness  for  your
children :  that  is  certain.  Let  us  not  speak  of  that,  and
let  us  go  back  to  your  daughter.  What  is  the  idea,
brother,  of  wishing  to  make  her  marry  the  son  of  a  doctor  ?

ARG.  The  idea  is,  of  giving  myself  such  a  son-in-law  as
I  want,  brother.

BER.  This  is  not  your  daughter's  case,  brother;  and  a
more  suitable  match  offers  itself  for  her.

ARG.  Yes ;  but  this  one,  brother  is  more  suitable  to  me.

BER.  But  must  the  husband  she  is  to  take,  brother,  be
for  her,  or  for  you  ?

ARG.  He  must  be  both  for  her  and  for  me,  brother ;
and  I  wish  to  get  into  my  family  the  people  of  whom  I
may  be  in  need.

BER.  For  this  reason,  if  your  little  girl  were  grown  up,
you  would  marry  her  to  an  apothecary.

ARG.  Why  not  ?

BER.  Is  it  possible  that  you  can  always  be  wrapt  up  in
your  apothecaries  and  your  doctors,  and  that  you  wish  to
be  ill  in  spite  of  mankind  and  of  nature  ?

ARG.  How  do  you  make  that  out,  brother?

BER.  I  make  it  out,  brother,  that  I  see  no  man  who  is
less  ill  than  you,  and  that  I  wish  for  no  better  constitution

SCENE  HI.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  209

than  your  own.  A  great  proof  that  you  are  in  good
health,  and  that  you  have  a  perfectly  sound  body  is,  that
with  all  the  pains  you  have  taken,  you  have  not  been  able
to  succeed  as  yet  in  spoiling  the  goodness  of  your  consti-
tution, and  that  you  are  not  dead  yet  with  all  the  physic
which  they  have  made  you  take.

ARC.  But  do  you  know,  brother,  that  it  is  this  which
preserves  me ;  and  that  Mr.  Purgon  says  that  I  should
succumb,  if  he  were  only  three  days  without  taking  care
of  me?

BER.  If  you  do  not  look  to  it,  he  will  take  so  much  care
of  you,  that  he  shall  send  you  into  the  next  world.

ARC.  But  let  us  reason  a  little,  brother.  You  do  not
believe  then  in  physic  ?

BER.  No,  brother,  and  I  do  not  see  that  it  is  necessary
to  salvation  to  believe  in  it.

ARC.  What !  you  do  not  hold  true  a  matter  established
throughout  the  world,  and  which  all  ages  have  reverenced.

BER.  Far  from  holding  it  true,  I  consider  it,  between
ourselves,  one  of  the  greatest  follies  of  mankind  ;  and  to
look  philosophically  at  things,  I  do  not  see  a  more  amu-
sing mummery ;  I  do  not  see  anything  more  ridiculous
than  for  one  man  to  undertake  to  cure  another.

ARG.  Why  cannot  you  admit,  brother,  that  one  man
may  be  able  to  cure  another  ?

BER.  For  this  reason,  brother,  that  the  springs  of  our
machine  are  a  mystery,  of  which,  up  to  the  present,  men
can  see  nothing ;  and  that  nature  has  placed  too  thick  a
veil  before  our  eyes  for  our  knowing  anything  about  it.

ARG.  Then,  in  your  opinion,  doctors  know  nothing?

BER.  True,  brother,  most  of  them  have  a  deal  of  classi-
cal learning,  know  how  to  speak  in  good  Latin,  can  name
all  the  diseases  in  Greek,  define  and  classify  them ;  but  as
regards  curing  them,  that  is  what  they  do  not  know  at
all.37

ARG.  But,  nevertheless,  you  must  agree  that,  on  this
head,  doctors  know  more  than  other  people.

BER.  They  know,  brother,  what  I  have  told  you,  which

w  Beralde's  attack  on  the  physicians  should  be  compared  with  the
thirty-seventh  chapter  of  the  Second  Book  of  the  Essays  of  Montaigne.

210  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  in.

does  not  cure  much ;  and  the  whole  excellence  of  their
art  consists  in  a  pompous  gibberish,  in  a  specious  verbiage,
which  gives  you  words  instead  of  reasons,  and  promises
instead  of  effects.

ARC.  But  after  all,  brother,  there  are  people  as  learned
and  as  clever  as  you ;  and  we  find  that,  in  case  of  illness,
everyone  has  recourse  to  doctors.

BER.  It  is  a  sign  of  human  weakness,  and  not  of  the
truth  of  their  art.

ARG.  But  doctors  must  believe  in  the  truth  of  their  art,
inasmuch  as  they  make  use  of  it  for  themselves.

BER.  That  is  because  there  are  some  among  them  who
themselves  share  in  the  popular  error  by  which  they  profit ;
and  others  who  profit  by  it  without  sharing  in  it.  Your  Mr.
Purgon,  for  instance,  does  not  discriminate  very  clearly ;
he  is  a  thorough  physician  from  head  to  foot ;  a  man  who
believes  in  his  rules  more  than  in  all  mathematical  demon-
strations, and  who  would  think  it  a  crime  to  wish  to  examine
them ;  who  sees  nothing  obscure  in  physic,  nothing  dubi-
ous, nothing  difficult,  and  who,  with  an  impetuosity  of
prejudice,  a  stiff-necked  assurance,  a  coarse  common  sense
and  reasoning,  rushes  into  purging  and  bleeding,  and
hesitates  at  nothing.  You  must  not  owe  him  a  grudge  for
all  he  might  do  to  you :  he  would  despatch  you  with  the
most  implicit  faith ;  and  he  would,  in  killing  you,  only  do
what  he  has  done  to  his  wife  and  children,  and  what,  if
there  were  any  need,  he  would  do  to  himself.

ARG.  That  is  because  you  bear  him  a  grudge  from  infancy,
brother.88  But  to  cut  it  short,  let  us  come  to  the  fact.
What  must  we  do,  then,  when  we  are  ill  ?

BER.  Nothing,  brother.

ARG.  Nothing?

BER.  Nothing.  We  must  remain  quiet.  If  we  leave
nature  alone,  she  recovers  gently  from  the  disorder  into
which  she  has  fallen.  It  is  our  anxiety,  our  impatience,
which  spoils  all ;  and  nearly  all  men  die  of  their  remedies,
not  of  their  diseases.-

ARG.  But  you  must  admit,  brother,  that  this  nature  may
be  assisted  by  certain  things.

18  The  original  has  vous  avez,  man  frere,  une  dent  de  /ait  contre  lui  ;
dent  de  lait  means  literally,  a  first  or  shedding  tooth.

SCENE  in.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  211

BER.  Good  Heavens  !  brother,  these  are  mere  ideas  with
which  we  love  to  beguile  ourselves;  and,  at  all  times,
beautiful  fictions  have  crept  in  amongst  men,  in  which  we
believe,  because  they  flatter  us,  and  because  it  were  to  be
wished  that  they  were  true.  When  a  physician  speaks  to
you  of  aiding,  assisting,  and  supporting  nature,  to  take
away  from  her  what  is  hurtful,  and  to  give  her  that  which
she  wants,  to  re-establish  her,  and  to  put  her  in  the  full
possession  of  her  functions ;  when  he  speaks  to  you  of
rectifying  the  blood,  of  regulating  the  bowels  and  the
brain,  of  relieving  the  spleen,  of  putting  the  chest  to  rights,
of  mending  the  liver,  of  strengthening  the  heart,  of  renew-
ing and  preserving  the  natural  heat,  and  of  being  possessed
of  secrets  to  prolong  life  till  an  advanced  age,  he  just  tells
you  the  romance  of  physic.  But  when  you  come  to  the
truth  and  experience,  you  find  nothing  of  all  this ;  and  it
is  like  those  beautiful  dreams,  which,  on  awaking,  leave
you  nothing  but  the  regret  of  having  believed  in  them.

ARC.  Which  means  that  all  the  knowledge  of  the  world
is  contained  in  your  head,  and  that  you  profess  to  know
more  about  it  than  all  the  great  physicians  of  our  age.

BER.  In  speaking  and  in  reality,  your  great  physicians
are  two  different  sorts  of  persons.  Hear  them  hold  forth,
they  are  the  cleverest  people  in  the  world ;  see  them  act,
they  are  the  most  ignorant  of  all  men.

ARC.  Lack-a-day!  you  are  a  great  doctor;  and  I  should
much  like  to  have  one  of  these  gentlemen  here,  to  refute
your  arguments,  and  to  take  you  down  a  peg  or  two.

BER.  I,  brother,  I  do  not  assume  the  task  of  combating
the  Faculty;  and  every  one,  at  his  own  risk  and  cost,
may  believe  whatever  he  pleases.  What  I  say  about  it  is
simply  between  ourselves,  and  I  should  have  wished  to  be
somewhat  able  to  dispel  the  error  in  which  you  are,  and
to  take  you,  for  your  amusement,  to  see  one  of  the  come-
dies of  Moliere  upon  this  subject,

ARC.  Your  Moliere,  with  his  comedies,  is  a  fine  imper-
tinent fellow !  and  I  think  it  is  like  his  impudence  to  go
and  bring  upon  the  stage  such  worthy  persons  as  the
physicians.

BER.  He  does  not  make  fun  of  physicians,  but  of  the
ridiculousness  of  physic.

212  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  HI.

ARC.  It  is  like  him  to  do  so,  to  interfere  about  con-
trolling the  Faculty  !  There  is  a  fine  booby,  a  brazen  im-
pertinent fellow,  to  make  fun  of  consultations  and  pre-
scriptions, to  attack  the  body  of  physicians,  and  to  put  on
his  stage  such  venerable  persons  as  these  gentlemen !

BER.  What  would  you  have  him  put  there  but  the
various  professions  of  men  ?  They  put  princes  and  kings
there  every  day,  who  are  of  quite  as  good  family  as
physicians.

ARG.  Now,  by  all  that  is  terrible  !w  if  I  were  the  physi-
cians, I  would  avenge  myself  of  his  impertinence;  and
would  let  him  die  without  assistance,  whenever  he  felt  ill.
He  might  say  and  do  what  he  liked ;  I  would  not  pre-
scribe even  the  least  bleeding,  or  the  smallest  enema;  and
I  would  say  to  him :  die,  die  ;  that  will  teach  you  another
time  to  make  fun  of  the  Faculty.

BER.  You  are  very  angry  with  him  ?

ARG.  Yes.  He  is  a  foolish  fellow  ;  and  if  the  physicians
be  wise,  they  will  do  what  I  say.

BER.  He  will  be  wiser  still  than  your  physicians,  for  he
will  not  ask  them  for  their  assistance.

ARG.  So  much  the  worse  for  him,  if  he  have  no
recourse  to  remedies.

BER.  He  has  his  reasons  for  not  wishing  for  them,  and
he  maintains  that  it  is  permitted  only  to  robust  and
vigorous  people,  who  have  sufficient  strength  left  to  bear
the  remedies  with  the  disease ;  but  that,  as  for  him,  he
has  just  strength  enough  to  bear  his  illness.

ARG.  Silly  reasons  these  !  There,  brother,  let  us  talk
no  more  about  this  man  ;  for  he  excites  my  bile,  and  you
will  bring  on  my  illness  again.

BER.  Very  well}  brother ;  and  to  change  our  conversa-
tion, I  will  tell  you,  that  on  account  of  a  trifling  repug-
nance on  the  part  of  your  daughter,  you  should  not  take
the  violent  resolution  to  place  her  in  a  convent :  that  in
the  choice  of  a  son-in-law,  you  should  not  blindly  yield
to  a  passion  which  carries  you  away;  and  that,  in  such
a  matter,  you  should  accommodate  yourself  somewhat  to

89  The  original  has  Par  la  mart  non  de  diable,  used  for  Par  la  mort  de
Dieit,  non,  de  diable  I

SCENE  v.l  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  2IJ

the  inclination  of  your  child,  seeing  that  it  is  for  her  life,
and  that  on  it  depends  the  happiness  of  a  union.

SCENE  IV. — MR.  FLEURANT,  carrying  a  syringe ;  ARGAN,
BERALDE.

ARC.  Ah !  by  your  leave,  brother.

BER.  What  are  you  going  to  do  ?

ARC.  Take  this  little  enema:  it  will  soon  be  done.

BER.  You  are  jesting.  Cannot  you  be  a  moment  with-
out an  enema  or  some  physic  ?  Put  it  off  till  another  time,
and  remain  quiet  a  little.

ARC.  It  will  be  for  to-night  or  for  to-morrow  morning,
Mr.  Fleurant.

MR.  F.  {To  Beralde).  With  what  do  you  meddle,  to
oppose  the  prescription  of  the  Faculty,  and  to  prevent
this  gentleman  from  taking  my  enema?  It  is  very  ridicu-
lous of  you  to  be  so  rash  !

BER.  Begone,  Sir ;  we  see  well  enough  that  you-  are
not  accustomed  to  speak  to  people's  faces.

MR.  F.  One  should  not  thus  make  fun  of  physic,  and
make  me  waste  my  time.  I  have  come  here  only  with  a
good  prescription  ;  and  I  shall  go  and  tell  Mr.  Purgon
how  I  have  been  prevented  from  executing  his  orders,
and  from  performing  my  function.  You  shall  see,  you
shall  see  .  .  .

SCENE  V. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

ARG.  You  will  be  the  cause  of  some  mishap  here,
brother.

BER.  A  great  mishap  not  to  take  an  enema  which  Mr.
Purgon  has  ordered  !  Once  more,  brother,  is  it  possible
that  there  is  no  way  of  curing  you  of  that  mania  for
physicians,  and  that  you  wish  to  be  buried  all  the  days  of
your  life  in  their  remedies  ?

ARG.  Good  Heavens  !  brother,  you  talk  of  it  as  a  man
who  is  in  perfect  health  ;  but  if  you  were  in  my  place,  you
would  soon  change  your  language.  It  is  easy  to  talk
against  physic,  when  one  is  in  good  health.

BER.  But  what  illness  have  you  ?

ARG.  You  will  drive  me  mad.     I  wish  you  had  it,  my

214  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  in.

illness,  just  to  see  whether  you  would  prate  so  much.     Ah  !
here  comes  Mr.  Purgon.

SCENE  VI. — MR.  PURGON,  AUGAN,  BERALDE,  TOINETTE.

MR.  P.  I  have  just  heard  some  pretty  news  at  the  door ;
that  people  are  making  jest  of  my  prescriptions  here,  and
refuse  to  take  the  remedies  which  I  have  prescribed.

ARC.  Sir,  it  is  not  .    .    .

MR.  P.  This  is  a  very  rash  proceeding,  a  strange  revolt
of  a  patient  against  his  physician.

Toi.  This  is  horrible,

MR.  P.  An  enema  which  I  had  taken  a  pleasure  in
compounding  myself.

ARC.  It  is  not  I  ...

MR.  P.  Invented  and  concocted  according  to  all  the
rules  of  the  art.

Toi.  He  is  wrong.

MR.  P.  And  which  was  to  produce  a  marvellous  effect  on
the  bowels.

ARC.  My  brother  .    .    .

MR.  P.  To  send  it  back  with  contempt !

ARC.   (Pointing  to  Beralde).  It  is  he  .    .    .    .

MR.  P.  It  is  a  most  daring  deed.

Toi.  That  is  true.

MR.  P.  An  enormous  outrage  against  the  medical  pro-
fession.

ARG.   (Pointing  to  Beralde).  He  is  the  cause  .    .    .

MR.  P.  A  crime  of  high  treason  against  the  Faculty,
which  cannot  be  sufficiently  punished.

Toi.  You  are  right.

MR.  P.  I  declare  that  I  break  off  all  connection  with
you.

ARG.  It  is  my  brother  .    .    .

MR.  P.  That  I  no  longer  desire  an  alliance  with  you.

Toi.  You  will  do  well.

MR.  P.  And  that  to  make  an  end  of  all  union  with
you,  there  is  the  deed  of  gift  which  I  made  to  my  nephew,
in  favour  of  the  marriage.  (He  tears  the  document  to
pieces,  and  throws  the  pieces  furiously  about.

SCENE  vi.]  THE   IMAGINARY    INVALID.  215

ARC.  It  is  my  brother  who  has  done  all  the  harm.

MR.  P.  To  despise  my  enema  !

ARC.  Let  it  be  brought ;  I  will  take  it.

MR.  P.  I  would  have  cured  you  before  long.

Toi.  He  does  not  deserve  it.

MR.  P.  I  was  going  to  cleanse  your  body,  and  drive  out
all  the  bad  humours.

ARC.  Ah  !  brother  !

MR.  P.  And  it  wanted  but  a  dozen  more  medicines  to
cure  you  completely.

Toi.  He  is  unworthy  of  your  care.

MR.  P.  But  as  you  do  not  wish  to  be  cured  by  my
hands .  .  .

ARC.  It  is  not  my  fault.

MR.  P.  Since  you  have  withdrawn  from  the  obedience
which  a  man  owes  to  his  physician  .  .  .

Toi.   That  cries  for  vengeance.

MR.  P.  Since  you  have  declared  yourself  a  rebel  against
the  remedies  which  I  prescribed  for  you  .  .  .

ARC.  Eh,  not  at  all.

MR.  P.  I  must  tell  you  that  I  give  you  up  to  your  bad
constitution,  to  the  intemperature  of  your  bowels,  to  the
corruption  of  your  blood,  to  the  acrimony  of  your  bile,
and  to  the  feculence  of  your  humours.

Toi.  That  is  very  well  done.

ARC.   Oh,  Heavens  !

MR.  P.  And  I  will  that  in  four  days  you  shall  be  in  an
incurable  state.

ARC.  Ah,  mercy  !

MR.  P.   That  you  fall  into  a  bradypepsia.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

MR.  P.  From  bradypepsia  into  dyspepsia.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

MR.  P.   From  dyspepsia  into  apepsy.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

MR.  P.  From  apepsy  into  lientery.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

MR.  P.   From  lientery  into  dysentery.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

MR.  P.  From  dysentery  into  dropsy.

ARC.  Mr.  Purgon  !

2l6  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  IIL

MR.  P.  And  from  dropsy  into  a  privation  of  life,
whither  your  folly  will  lead  you.40

SCENE  VII. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

ARC.  Ah,  Heavens  !  I  am  dead.  Brother,  you  have
undone  me.

BER.  Why !  what  is  the  matter  ?

ARC.  I  can  hold  out  no  longer.  I  already  feel  the  ven-
geance of  the  faculty.

BER.  Really,,  brother,  you  are  mad  ;  and  I  would  not
have  people  see  you  act  as  you  do,  for  a  great  deal.  Just
bear  up  a  little,  I  pray  ;  be  yourself,  and  do  not  give  way
so  much  to  your  imagination.

AEG.  You  see,  brother,  the  strange  diseases  with  which
he  has  threatened  me.

BER.  What  a  simpleton  you  are  !

ARC.  He  says  that  I  shall  become  incurable  before  four
days  are  over.

BER.  What  does  it  signify  what  he  says?  Is  it  an
oracle  that  has  spoken  ?  To  hear  you  speak,  it  looks  as  if
Mr.  Purgon  holds  in  his  hands  the  thread  of  your  life,  and
that  by  a  supreme  authority  he  lengthens  or  shortens  it
for  you,  as  it  pleases  him.  Remember  that  the  springs  of
your  existence  are  in  yourself,  and  that  the  wrath  of  Mr.
Purgon  is  as  little  capable  of  killing  you  as  his  remedies
are  of  keeping  you  alive.  Here  is  an  opportunity,  if  you
wish,  to  rid  yourself  of  the  physicians ;  or  if  you  were
born  so  as  not  to  be  able  to  do  without  them,  it  is  easy  to
have  another  with  whom,  brother,  you  may  run  a  little
less  risk.

ARC.  Ah !  brother,  he  knows  my  entire  constitution,
and  the  way  how  to  treat  me.

BER.  I  mus:  confess  to  you  that  you  are  a  man  of  great
prejudice,  and  that  you  look  at  matters  with  strange  eyes.

SCENE  VIII. — ARGAN,  BERALDE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  (7!>  Argan).  Sir,  here  is  a  doctor  who  wishes  to
see  you.

40  Brauypepsia  is  a  slow  and  imperfect  digestion  ;  apepsy  is  a  defective
digestion ;  lientery  is  a  diarrhoea,  in  which  the  food  is  discharged  only
half  digested.

SCENE  xii.]  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  217

ARC.  And  what  doctor  ?

Toi.  A  doctor  of  the  Faculty.

ARC.  I  ask  you  who  he  is.

Toi.  I  do  not  know  him,  but  he  is  as  like  me  as  two
drops  of  water ;  and  if  I  were  not  sure  that  my  mother
was  an  honest  woman,  I  should  say  that  this  was  some
little  brother  which  she  has  given  me  since  my  father's
death.

ARG.   Let  him  come  in.

SCENE  IX. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

BER.  You  are  served  according  to  your  wish.  One
physician  leaves  you;  another  presents  himself

ARG.  I  greatly  fear  that  you  may  be  the  cause  of  some
mishap.

BER.  Again !     You  will  always  harp  upon  this.

ARG.  But  look  you  !  All  these  diseases  of  which  I  know
nothing  weigh  on  my  mind ;  these  .  .  .

SCENE  X. — ARGAN,  BERALDE,  TOINETTE,  disguised  as  a
physician.

Toi.  Permit  me  to  pay  you  this  visit,  Sir,  and  to  offer
you  my  small  services  for  all  the  bleedings  and  purgings
of  which  you  may  be  in  want.

ARG.  Sir,  I  am  much  obliged  to  you.  ( To  Beralde) .
Upon  my  word,  this  is  Toinette  himself.

Toi.  Pray,  excuse  me,  Sir ;  I  have  forgotten  to  give  a
message  to  my  servant ;  I  shall  be  back  immediately.

SCENE  XI. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

ARG.  Eh?  would  you  not  swear  that  it  was  really
Toinette  ?

BER.  It  is  true  that  the  likeness  is  very  great  indeed  ;
but  it  is  not  the  first  time  that  we  have  seen  this  kind  of
things ;  and  history  is  full  of  these  freaks  of  nature.

ARG.  As  for  me,  I  am  amazed  at  it ;  and  .    .    .

SCENE  XII. — ARGAN,  BERALDE,  ToiNETTE.41
Toi.  What  do  you  want,  Sir  ?

*i  "  Toinette  has  doffed  her  physician's  dress  so  soon  that  it  is  difficuf
to  believe  that  she  appeared  as  a  doctor  before."  This  note  is  in  the  edi
tion  of  Moliere's  works  of  1682.

21 8  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  in.

ARC.  How?

Toi.  Did  not  you  call  me  ?

ARG.  I?  no.

Toi.  My  ears  must  have  tingled  then.

ARG.  Just  remain  here  a  moment,  to  see  how  this  phyis-
cian  resembles  you.

Toi.  (Going  out).  Yes,  indeed  !  I  have  business  else-
where ;  and  I  have  seen  him  enough.

SCENE  XIII. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

ARG.  If  I  had  not  seen  them  both,  I  should  have  be-
lieved it  was  but  one.

BER.  I  have  read  of  sift-prising  instances  of  these  kinds
of  likenesses ;  and  we  have  seen  some  of  them,  in  our
own  times,  by  which  the  whole  world  has  been  deceived.

ARG.  As  for  me,  I  should  have  been  deceived  by  this
one;  and  I  should  have  sworn  that  it  was  the  same  person.

SCENE  XIV.  — ARGAN,    BERALDE  ;    TOINETTE,  as  a  phy-
sician.

Toi.  Sir,  I  ask  your  pardon    with  all  my  heart.

ARG.   (Softly  to  Beralde).      This  is  wonderful.

Toi.  You  will  not  take  amiss,  pray,  the  curiosity  which
I  had  to  see  such  an  illustrious  patient  as  you ;  and  your
reputation,  which  has  spread  everywhere,  may  excuse  the
liberty  which  I  have  taken.

ARG.  I  am  your  servant,  Sir.

Toi.  I  perceive,  Sir,  that  you  are  looking  earnestly  at
me.  How  old  do  you  really  think  I  am  ?

ARG.  I  think  that  you  may  be  six  or  seven  and  twenty
at  the  most.

Toi.  Ha,  ha,   ha,  ha,  ha !  I  am  ninety.

ARG.  Ninety !

Toi.  Yes.  You  observe  an  effect  of  the  secrets  of  my
art,  to  keep  myself  so  fresh  and  vigorous.

ARG.  Upon  my  word,  this  is  a  fine  youthful  old  man
for  ninety !

Toi.  I  am  an  itinerant  physician  who  go  from  town
to  town,  from  province  to  province,  from  kingdom  to
kingdom,  in  search  of  illustrious  materials  for  my  art,  to
find  patients  worthy  of  my  attention,  capable  of  having

SCENE   xiv.J  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  219

applied  to  them  the  grand  and  beautiful  secrets  which  I
have  discovered  in  medicine.  I  disdain  to  amuse  myself
with  these  small  fry  of  ordinary  complaints,  with  trifling
rheumatisms  and  colds,  small  agues,  vapours,  and  head-
aches. I  want  diseases  of  importance,  real  non-intermit-
tent fevers,  with  a  disordered  brain,  real  purple  fevers,
real  plagues,  real  confirmed  dropsies,  real  pleurisies  with
inflammations  of  the  lungs  ;  these  are  what  please  me  ;
that  is  where  I  triumph ;  and  I  wish,  Sir,  that  you  had
been  given  up  by  all  the  physicians,  despaired  of,  at  the
point  of  death,  that  I  might  show  you  the  excellence  of
my  remedies,  and  the  desire  which  I  have  to  be  of  service
to  you.

ARG.  I  am  obliged  to  you,  Sir,  for  the  kindness  you
have  for  me.

Tor.  Let  me  feel  your  pulse.  Come,  beat  as  you
should.  Ah !  I  shall  make  you  go  as  you  ought.  Ho  !
this  pulse  plays  the  impertinent ;  I  perceive  well  enough
that  you  do  not  know  me  as  yet.  Who  is  your  physician  ?

ARG.  Mr.  Purgon.

Tor.  This  man  is  not  in  my  note-book  amongst  the
great  physicians.  From  what  does  he  say  that  you
suffer?

ARG.  He  says  it  is  from  the  liver,  and  others  say  it  is
from  the  spleen.

Toi.  They  are  all  blockheads.  It  is  from  the  lungs  that
you  are  ill.

ARG.  From  the  lungs?

Toi.  Yes.     What  do  you  feel  ?

ARG.     I  feel  from  time  to  time  qualms.

Toi.  Exactly,  the  lungs.

ARG.  I  seem  to  have  a  mist  before  my  eyes  some-
times.

Tor.  The  lungs.

ARG.  I  have  now  and  then  a  pain  at  the  heart.

Toi.  The  lungs.

ARG.  I  feel  a  weariness  in  my  limbs  at  times.

Toi.  The  lungs.

ARG.  And  now  and  then  I  am  taken  with  pains  in  the
stomach,  just  as  if  it  were  the  colics.

Toi.  The  lungs.     Do  you  relish  your  food  ?

22O  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  m.

ARC.  Yes,  Sir.

Toi.  The  lungs.     You  like  to  take  a  little  wine?

ARG.  Yes,  Sir.

Toi.  The  lungs.  You  feel  an  inclination  to  take  a  little
nap  after  your  meals,  and  you  are  glad  to  go  to  sleep?

ARG.  Yes,  Sir.

Toi.  The  lungs,  the  lungs,  I  tell  you.  What  does  the
doctor  order  you  to  eat?

ARG.  He  orders  me  soup.

Toi.  The  ignorant  fellow  !

ARG.  Poultry.

Toi.  The  ignorant  fellow !

ARG.  Veal.

Toi.  The  ignorant  fellow  !

ARG.  Broth.

Toi.  The  .ignorant  fellow!

ARG.  New-laid  eggs.

Toi.  The  ignorant  fellow !

ARG.  And  in  the  evening  some  prunes  to  loosen  the
belly.

Toi.  The  ignorant  fellow  !

ARG.   And  above  all,  to  take  my  wine  well  diluted.

Toi.  Ignorantus,  ignoranta,  ignorantum.  You  must
drink  your  wine  pure,  and,  to  thicken  your  blood,  which
is  too  thin,  you  must  eat  good  solid  beef,  good  solid  pork,
good  Dutch  cheese;  groats  and  rice,  and  chestnuts  and
thin  cakes,  to  thicken  and  conglutinate.  Your  doctor  is
an  ass.  I  shall  send  you  one  of  my  choice;  and  I  shall
come  to  see  you  from  time  to  time,  while  I  am  in  this
town.

ARG.  You  will  oblige  me  very  much.

Toi.  What  the  deuce  do  you  want  with  this  arm?

ARG.  How?

Toi.  I  would  have  this  arm  cut  off  instanter  if  I  were
you.

ARG.  And  why?

Toi.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  attracts  to  itself  all  the  nou1-
rishment,  and  that  it  prevents  this  side  from  growing.

ARG.  Yes ;  but  I  want  my  arm.

Toi.  You  have  a  right  eye  there,  too,  which  I  would
have  taken  out,  if  I  were  in  your  place.

SCENE  xvi].  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  221

ARC.  An  eye  taken  out?

Toi.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  incommodes  the  other,  and
robs  it  of  its  nourishment?  Believe  me,  have  it  taken  out
as  quickly  as  possible;  you  will  see  all  the  clearer  with  the
left  eye.

ARC.  There  is  no  hurry.

Toi.  Farewell.  I  am  sorry  to  leave  you  so  soon  ;  but  I
must  be  present  at  a  great  consultation  which  is  to  be  held
about  a  man  who  died  yesterday.

ARG.  About  a  man  who  died  yesterday  ?

Toi.  Yes :  to  consider  and  see  what  ought  to  have  been
done  to  cure  him.  Until  we  meet  again.

ARG.  You  know  that  invalids  are  excused  from  seeing
any  one  to  the  door.

SCENE  XV. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.

BER.  This  physician  really  seems  very  clever.

ARG.  Yes ;  but  he  does  things  a  little  too  quickly.

BER.  All  great  physicians  are  like  that.

ARG.  To  cut  off  an  arm,  to  take  out  an  eye,  so  that
the  other  may  be  better  !  I  much  prefer  that  the  other
should  not  be  quite  so  well.  A  fine  operation,  to  make
me  one-eyed  and  one-armed.

SCENE  XVI. — ARGAN,  BERALDE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  {Pretending  to  speak  to  some  one  outside).  Come,
come,  I  am  your  humble  servant,  I  am  in  no  mood  to  be
merry.

ARG    What  is  the  matter  ?

Toi.  Your  physician,  troth  who  wished  to  feel  my
pulse.

ARG.  Look  at  that,  at  the  age  of  ninety.

BER.  Well  now !  brother,  since  your  Mr.  Purgon  has
fallen  out  with  you,  will  you  not  give  me  leave  to  speak  to
you  about  the  match  which  is  proposed  for  my  niece.

ARG.  No,  brother :  I  mean  to  place  her  in  a  convent,
for  having  ran  counter  to  my  wishes.  I  perceive  well
enough  that  there  is  some  love-affair  in  the  case ;  and  I
discovered  a  certain  secret  interview  which  they  do  not
know  that  I  have  discovered.

BER.  Well !  brother  ;  and  suppose  there  is  some  slight

222  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  in.

inclination,  would  that  be  so  very  criminal  ?  And  can
there  be  aught  in  it  to  offend  you,  when  all  this  aims  only
at  what  is  honourable,  marriage.

ARG.  Be  that  as  it  may,  brother,  she  shall  be  a  nun ;
that  is  a  settled  thing.

BER.  You  wish  to  please  some  one.

ARG.  I  understand  you.  You  always  come  back  to  that,
and  you  dislike  my  wife.

BER  Well  then  !  yes,  brother :  since  I  am  to  speak
frankly  to  you,  it  is  your  wife  I  am  alluding  to ;  and  I
can  no  more  bear  your  infatuation  for  physic,  than  your
infatuation  for  her  and  see  you  running  headlong  into
all  the  snares  which  she  spreads  for  you.

Toi.  Ah  !   Sir,  do  not  talk  about  my  mistress;  she  is  a
woman  of  whom   nothing  can  be  said,  a  woman  without
any  guile,  and  who  loves  my  master,  who  loves  him  .    .    .
One  cannot  express  it.

ARG.  Just  ask  her  how  she  caresses  me.

Toi.  That  is  true.

ARG.  What  uneasiness  my  illness  causes  her.

Toi.  Assuredly.

ARG.   And  the  care  and  the  pains  she  takes  about  me.

Toi.  To  be  sure.  {To  Beralde).  Do  you  wish  me  to
convince  you,  and  to  show  you  immediately  how  my  mis-
tress loves  master  ?  (  To  Argari).  Allow  me  to  show  him
his  blunder,  Sir,  and  to  convince  him  of  his  error.42

ARG.  How?

Toi.  The  mistress  is  coming  back.  Put  yourself  at  full
length  in  this  chair,  and  pretend  that  you  are  dead.  You
shall  see  the  grief  she  shall  be  in,  when  I  tell  her  the  news.

ARG.  I  will  do  it.

Toi.  Yes  ;  but  do  not  leave  her  long  in  despair ;  for  she
might  die  of  it.

ARG.   Leave  it  to  me.

Toi.  {To  Btralde).  And  you,  hide  yourself  in  this
corner.

SCENE   XVII. — ARGAN,  BERALDE.
ARG.  Is  there  not  some  danger  in  counterfeiting  death?

42  The  original  has  souffrez  que  je  lui  montre  son  bec-jaune.  See  Vol.
II.,  Don  Juan,  page  101,  note  n.

SCBNK  XVIH.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  223

Toi.  No,  no.  What  danger  should  there  be?  Only
stretch  yourself  out  there.  (Softly}.  It  will  be  a  pleasure
to  confound  your  brother.  Here  comes  the  mistress.
Steady  as  you  are.

SCENE  XVIII. — BELINE,  ARGAN,  stretched  out  in  his  chair;

TOINETTE.

Toi.  (Pretending  not  to  see  JBeline).  Ah !  good  Hea-
vens !  Ah  !  what  a  misfortune  !  What  a  strange  accident !

BEL.  What  ails  you,  Toinette  ?

Toi.  Ah  !    mistress !

BEL.  What  is  the  matter  ?

Toi.  Your  husband  is  dead.

BEL.  My  husband  is  dead  ?

Toi.  Alas  !    yes  !    the  poor  man  is  gone.

BEL.  Are  you  sure?

Toi.  I  am  sure.  No  one  knows  the  accident  as  yet ;
and  I  was  here  all  alone.  He  just  now  passed  away  in  my
arms.  Look,  there  he  is  at  full  length  in  his  chair.

BEL.  Heaven  be  praised  for  it !  I  have  got  rid  of  a  great
burden.  How  silly  you  are,  Toinette,  to  make  yourself
miserable  about  this  death  !

Toi.  I  thought,  mistress,  that  I  ought  to  cry.

BEL.  Come,  come,  it  is  not  worth  while.  What  do  we
lose  in  him ;  and  what  good  was  he  upon  the  earth  ?  A
man  who  was  a  trouble  to  everybody,  dirty,  disgusting,
never  without  some  enema  or  physic  in  him,  always
blowing  his  nose,  coughing  or  spitting;  without  sense,
tiresome,  bad-tempered,  for  ever  fatiguing  people,  and
scolding  night  and  day  the  maids  and  the  servants.

Toi.  This  is  a  pretty  funeral  oration  !

BEL.  You  must  help  me,  Toinette,  to  execute  my  plan  ;
and  you  may  depend  upon  it  that,  in  helping  me,  your  re-
ward shall  be  sure.  Since,  by  good  fortune,  no  one  has  as
yet  been  told  of  the  affair,  let  us  carry  him  to  his  bed,
and  keep  his  death  secret,  until  I  have  managed  my  busi-
ness. There  are  some  papers,  there  is  some  money  which
I  wish  to  get  hold  of;  and  it  would  not  be  just  that  I
should  have  fruitlessly  wasted  the  prime  of  my  years  with
him.  Come,  Toinette;  let  us  first  of  all  take  his  keys.

ARC.   (Suddenly  getting  up).     Gently.

224  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [ACT  m.

BEL.  Oh!

ARC.  Aha !  my  lady,  that  is  how  you  love  me  !

Toi.  Ah !    Ah  !    the  dead  man  is  not  dead.

ARC.  ( To  Beline,  who  is  going).  I  am  very  glad  to  see
your  good  feeling,  and  to  have  heard  the  fine  panegyric
which  you  have  pronounced  on  me.  This  is  a  wholesome
advice  which  will  make  me  more  prudent  for  the  future,
and  which  will  prevent  me  from  doing  many  things.4*

SCENE  XIX. — BERALDE,  coming  out  of  the  corner  where  he
has  been  hit-den;  ARGAN,  TOINETTE.

BER.  Well,  brother,  you  see  now  ?

Toi.  Upon  my  word,  I  should  never  have  believed  this.
But  I  hear  your  daughter.  Place  yourself  again  as  you
were,  and  let  us  see  in  what  manner  she  will  take  your
death.  It  is  not  a  bad  thing  to  find  out ;  and,  while  you
are  about  it,  you  shall  know,  by  these  means,  the  feelings
of  your  family  for  you.

(Beralde  goes  into  hiding  again.

SCENE  XX. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  TOINETTE.

Toi.  (Pretending  not  to  see  Angelique}.  Oh,  Heaven  !
Ah,  sad  event !  Unhappy  day  !

AN.  What  ails  you  Toinette  ?  and  why  do  you  cry  ?

Toi.  Alas  !  I  have  sad  news  to  tell  you.

AN.  Eh  !  what  ?

Toi.  Your  father  is  dead.

AN.   My  father  is  dead,  Toinette  ?

Toi.  Yes.  There  he  is.  He  has  just  died  of  a  fainting
fit  that  took  him.

AN.  Oh,  Heaven  !  what  a  misfortune  !  what  a  cruel
blow  !  Alas !  am  I  to  lose  my  father,  the  only  thing  I  had
left  in  the  world  ;  and,  still  more,  to  complete  my  unhap-
piness,  must  I  lose  him  in  a  moment  when  he  was  angry
with  me  !  What  is  to  become  of  me,  unhappy  being  ?  and
what  consolation  shall  I  find  after  so  great  a  loss  ?

43  The  primary  idea  of  the  character  of  Beline  is  to  be  found  in  a  farce,
played  before  Moliere  came  to  Paris,  and  called  The  Sick  Husband  ; —
wherein  a  wife  rejoices,  with  her  lover,  on  hearing  of  the  death  of  her
spouse.

SCKNBXXii.]  THE  IMAGINARY   INVALID.  225

SCENE  XXI. — ARGAN,  ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE,  TOINETTE.

CLE.  What  is  the  matter,  fair  Angelique?  and  what
misfortune  are  you  bewailing?

AN.  Alas  !  I  am  bewailing  all  that  I  could  lose  of  what
is  most  dear  and  precious  in  life;  I  am  bewailing  the
death  of  my  father.

CLE.  Oh,  Heavens  !  what  an  accident !  what  an  unfore-
seen blow.  Alas  !  after  the  request  for  your  hand  which
I  besought  your  uncle  to  make  for  me,  I  came  to  intro-
duce myself  to  him,  and  to  try,  by  my  respects  and  en-
treaties, to  dispose  his  heart  to  grant  you  to  my  love.

AN.  Ah  !  Cleante  !  let  us  no  longer  talk  of  anything  ;
let  us  leave  all  thoughts  of  marriage.  After  the  loss  of
my  father,  I  will  no  longer  belong  to  this  world,  and  I
renounce  it  forever.  Yes,  father,  if  I  have  just  now  op-
posed your  inclinations,  I  shall  at  least  carry  out  one  of
your  intentions,  and  make  amends,  by  that,  for  the  grief
which  I  accuse  myself  of  having  caused  you.  ( Throwing
herself  at  his  fee/).  Suffer  me,  father,  now  to  pledge  you
my  word,  and  to  embrace  you,  to  show  you  my  repen-
tance.

ARG.  {Embracing  Angelique).    Ah!  daughter.

AN.  Oh!

ARG.  Come.  Have  no  fear ;  I  am  not  dead.  There,
you  are  my  own  flesh  and  blood,  my  own  dear  daughter j
and  I  am  delighted  to  have  seen  your  good  feeling.

SCENE  XXII.-ARGAN,  TOINETTE,  ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE,
BERALDE.

AN.  Ah  !  what  an  agreeable  surprise  !  Father,  since,
by  an  extreme  good  fortune,  Heaven  has  given  you  back
to  my  love,  suffer  me  to  throw  myself  at  your  feet  to  be-
seech you  for  one  thing.  If  you  are  not  favourable  to  the
inclination  of  my  heart ;  if  you  refuse  me  Cleante  for  a
husband,  I  implore  you,  at  least,  not  to  force  me  to  marry
another.  This  is  all  the  favour  I  ask  of  you.

CLE.  (Throwing  himself  at  Argan's  feet}.  Oh!  Sir,
allow  yourself  to  be  touched  by  her  prayers  and  mine ;
and  do  not  show  yourself  opposed  to  the  mutual  ardour  of
such  a  fine  affection.

BER.  Can  you  still  hold  out,  brother?

226  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  [lcr  IIL

Toi.  Can  you  be  insensible  to  so  much  love,  Sir  ?

ARC.  Let  him  become  a  doctor,  and  I  consent  to  the
marriage.  (To  Cleante}.  Yes,  become  a  physician,  and
I  give  you  my  daughter.

CLE.  With  all  my  heart,  Sir.  If  it  depends  but  upon
this  to  be  your  son-in-law,  I  shall  become  a  doctor,  an
apothecary  even,  if  you  wish  it.  It  is  not  much  to  do,
and  I  would  consent  to  many  other  things  to  obtain  the
fair  Angelique.

BER.  But,  brother,  a  thought  comes  into  my  head.  Be-
come a  physician  yourself.  The  convenience  will  be  still
greater  of  having  within  yourself  all  that  you  need.

Toi.  That  is  true.  That  is  the  proper  way  of  getting
quickly  cured  ;  and  there  is  no  complaint  so  daring  as  to
meddle  with  the  person  of  a  physician.

ARC.  I  think  that  you  are  jesting  with  me,  brother.  Am
I  of  an  age  to  study  ?

BER.  To  study  !  that  is  good.  You  are  learned  enough  ;
and  there  are  many  among  them,  who  are  not  mote  clever
than  you  are.

ARC.  But  one  should  know  to  speak  Latin  well,  under-
stand the  diseases,  and  the  remedies  to  apply.

BER.  In  receiving  the  gown  and  the  cap  of  a  physician,
you  will  learn  all  that ;  and  you  will  afterwards  be  more
skilful  than  you  like  to  be.

ARG.  What !  do  people  know  how  to  discourse  upon
diseases  when  they  have  on  that  gown  ?

BER.  Yes.  You  have  but  to  speak  with  a  gown  and  a
cap,  and  any  gibberish  becomes  learned,  and  all  nonsense
becomes  sense.

Toi.  There,  Sir,  if  it  was  only  for  your  beard,  that  goes
a  great  way  already ;  for  the  beard  makes  more  than  half
of  the  physician.

CLE.  In  any  case,  I  am  ready  to  do  everything.

BER.  Will  you  have  the  thing  done  immediately  ?

ARG.  How,  immediately?

BER.  Yes,  and  in  your  own  house.

ARG.  In  my  own  house  ?

BER.  Yes.  I  know  a  body  of  physicians,  friends  of
mine,  who  will  come  instantly  and  perform  the  ceremony
in  your  hall.  It  will  cost  you  nothing.

SCENE  xxin.]  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  227

ARC.  But  I,  what  am  I  to  say?  what  to  answer?

BER.  You  will  be  instructed  in  two  words,  and  they
will  give  you  in  writing  what  you  are  to  say.  Go  and  put
on  a  decent  dress.  I  shall  go  and  fetch  them.

ARG.  Well,  let  us  see  all  this.

SCENE  XXIII. — BERALDE,  ANGELIQUE,  CLEANTE,

TOINETTE.

CLE.  What  do  you  mean  ?  and  what  do  you  understand
by  these  physician  friends  of  yours  ?

Toi.  What  is  your  plan,  then  ?

BER.  To  amuse  ourselves  a  little  this  evening.  The
comedians  have  composed  a  slight  interlude  about  the  in-
stallation of  a  physician  with  music  and  dances.  I  wish
that  we  should  enjoy  the  entertainment  together,  and  that
my  brother  should  play  the  principal  personage  in  it.

AN.  But,  uncle,  I  think  that  you  are  jesting  a  little  too
much  with  my  father.

BER.  But,  niece,  it  is  rather  accommodating  ourselves
to  his  whims  than  jesting  with  him.  All  this  is  only  be-
tween ourselves.  We  can  each  of  us  take  a  part  in  it  our-
selves, and  thus  perform  the  comedy  for  one  another.
The  carnival  authorizes  all  this.  Come,  let  us  quickly  go
and  get  everything  ready.

CLE.  (To  Angelique).     Do  you  consent  ?

AN.  Yes,  since  my  uncle  manages  the  affair.

THIRD  INTERLUDE.

A  Burlesque  Ceremony  of  admitting  a  Doctor  of  Medi-
cine in  recitative  Music  and  Dancing.

Several  upholsterers  enter  to  prepare  the  hall,  and  place
the  benches  to  music.  After  which  the  -whole  assembly \  com-
posed of  eight  syringe -bearers,  six  apothecaries,  twenty-two
doctors,  and  the  person  that  is  to  be  admitted  physician,  eight
surgeons  dancing,  and  two  singing,  enter,  and  take  their
places,  each  according  to  his  rank.

228  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

PRAESES.      Savantissimi  Doctores,**
Medicinae  Professores,
Qui  hie  assemblati  estis ;
Et  vos,  altri  messiores,
Sententiarum  Facultatis
Fideles  executores ;
Chirurgiani  et  apothecari,
Atque  tota  compania  aussi,
Salus,  honor,  et  argentum,
Atque  bonum  appetitum.

Non  possum,  docti  confreri
En  moi  satis  admirari,
Qua! is  bona  inventio,
Est  medici  professio ;
Quam  bella  chosa  est  et  bene  trovata,
Medicina  ilia  benedicta,
Quae,  suo  nomine  solo,
Surprenanti  miraculo,
Depuis  si  longo  tempore,
Facit  a  gogo  vivere
Tant  de  gens  omni  genere.

Per  totam  terrum  videmus

Grandam  vogam  ubi  sumus;

Et  quods  grandes  et  petiti

Sunt  de  nobis  infatuti.
Totus  mundus,  currens  ad  nostros  remedies,

Nos  regardat  sicut  decs,

Et  nostris  ordonnanciis
Principes  et  Reges  soumissos  videtis.

Doncque  il  est  nostrae  sapientiae,
Boni  sensus  atque  prudentiae,

De  fortement  travaillare

A  nos  bene  conservare
In  tali  credito,  voga  et  honore ;

44  In  this  interlude  there  is  such  an  amount  of  Latin,  dog- Latin,  Italian,
French,  and  of  words  belonging  to  no  language  under  the  sun,  that,  by
rendering  any  of  it  into  English,  the  effect  of  the  whole  is  greatly  marred,
I  have,  therefore,  left  it  in  the  original.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  2 29

Et  prendere  gardam  a  non  recevere

In  nostro  docto  corpora,

Quam  personas  capabiles,

Et  tolas  dignas  remplire

Has  plasas  honorabiles.
C'est  pour  cela  que  nunc  convocatis  estis  j

Et  credo  quod  trovabitis

Dignam  matieram  medici

In  savanti  homine  que  voici ;

Lequel,  in  chosis  omnibus;

Dono  ad  interrogandum,

Et  a  fond  examinandum

Vostris  capacitatibus.

PRIMUS  DOCTOR.

Si  mihi  licentiam  dat  dominus  praeses,
Et  tanti  docti  doctores,
Et  assistantes  illustres,
Tres-savanti  bacheliero,
Quern  estimo  honoro,
Domandabo  causam  et  rationem  quare
Opium  facit  dormire.

BACHELIERUS.

Mihi  a  docto  doctore.
Domandatur  causam  et  rationem  quare
Opium  facit  domire.
A  quoi  respondeo ;
Quia  est  in  eo
Virtus  dormitiva,
Cujus  est  natura
Sensus  assoupire. tf

CHORUS.  Bene,  bene,  bene  respondere.
Dignus,  dignus  est  intrare
In  nostro  docto  corpore.
Bene,  bene  respondere.

45  In  Descartes'  time,  and  before  him,  everything  was  explained  by
forms,  virtues,  entities,  quiddities.  A  thing  was  cold  because  it  had  a
frigorific  virtue ;  hot  because  it  had  a  calorific  virtue.

230  THE  IMAGINARY  INVALID.

SECUNDUS  DOCTOR.

Cum  permissione  domini  praesidis

Doctissimae  Facultatis,

Et  totius  his  nostris  actis

Companiae  assistantis,
Domandabo  tibi,  docte  bachelierCe

Quae  sunt  remedia

Quae,  in  maladia

Dite  hydropisia

Convenit  facere?
BACHELIERUS.

Clysterium  donare,

Postea  seignare,

Ensuita  purgare.

CHORUS.  Bene,  bene,  bene,  bene  respondere-
Dignus,  dignus,  est  intrare
In  nostros  docto  corpora.
TERTIUS  DOCTOR.

Si  bonum  semblatur  domino  praesidi,
Doctissimae   Facultati,
Et  companiae  praesenti,

Domandabo  tibi,  docte  bacheliere,
Quae  remedia  eticis,
Pulrnonicis  atque  asmaticis
Trovas  a  propos  facere.

BACHELIERUS.

Clysterium  donare,
Postea  seignare,
Ensuita  purgare.

CHORUS.  Bene,  bene,  bene  respondere.
Dignus,  dignus  est  intrare
In  nostro  docto  corpore.

QUARTUS  DOCTOR.

Super  illas  maladias,
Doctus  bachelierus  dixit  maravillas ;
Mais,  si  non  ennuyo  dominum  praesidem.

Doctissimam  Facultatem,

Et  totam  honorabilem

Companiam  ecoutantem;

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  231

Faciam  illi  unam  questionem.
Dds  hiero  maladus  unus
Tombavit  in  meas  manus ;
Habet  grandam  fievram  cum  redoublamentis,
Grandam  dolorem  capitis,
Et  grandum  malurn  au  c6t6.
Cum  granda  difficultate
Et  pena  de  respirare.
Veillas  mihi  dire,
Docte  bacheliere
Quid  illi  facere.

BACHELIERUS.

Clysterium  donare,
Postea  seignare,
Ensuita  purgare.

QUINTUS  DOCTOR.

Mais,  si  maladia
Opiniatria
Non  vult  se  garire,
Quid  illi  facere?

BACHELIERUS.    Clysterium  donare
Postea  seignare,
Ensuita  purgare.
Reseignare,  repurgare,  et  reclysterisare.

CHORUS.    Bene,  bene,  bene,  bene  respondere:
Dignus,  dignus  est  intrare
In  nostro  docto  corpore.

PRAESES.  Juras  gardare  statuta

Per  Facultatem  prgescripta,
Cum  sensu  et  jugeamento  ?

BACHELIERUS.    Juro.46

46  It  is  said  that  Moli&re  felt  so  ill  on  pronouncing  these  words,  at  the
fourth  representation  of  The  Imaginary  Invalid,  that  he  could  not  get  on
any  longer,  and  the  curtain  was  obliged  to  fall.

232  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

PRAESES.  Essere  in  omnibus

Consultationibus,
Ancieni  aviso,
Aut  bono,
Aut  mauvaiso?

BACHELIERUS.    Juro.

PRAESES.  De  non  jamais  te  servire

De  remediis  aucunis,

Quam  de  ceuxseulement  doctae  Facultatis,

Maladus  dut-il  crevare

Et  mori  de  suo  malo  ?
BACHELIERUS.  Juro.

PRAESES.  Ego,  cum  isto  boneto

Venerabili  et  docto,
Dono  tibi  et  concedo
Virtutem  et  puissanciam

Medicandi,

Purgandi,

Seignandi,

Percandi,

Taillandi,

Coupandi,

Et  occidendi
Impune  per  totam  terram.

Entry  of  the  Ballet.

All  the  Surgeons  and  Apothecaries  come  to  do  him  reverence

to  Music.

BACH.  Grandes  doctores  doctrinae
De  la  rhubarbe  et  du  sene,
Ce  serait  sans  douta  a  moi  chosa  folia,
Inepta  et  ridicula,
Si  j'alloibam  m'  engageare
Vobis  louangeas  donare,
Et  entreprenoibam  adjoutare
Des  lumieras  au  soleillo,
Et  des  etoilas  au  cielo,
Des  ondas  a  1'  Oceano ;
Et  des  rosas  au  printano.

THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.  233

Agreate  qu'  avec  uno  mo  to
Pro  toto  remercimento
Rendam  gratias  corpori  tarn  docto.
Vobis,  vobis  debeo

Bien  plus  qu'  a  naturae  et  qu'  a  patri  meo.
Natura  et  pater  meus
Hominem  me  habent  factum ;
Mais  vos  me,  ce  qui  est  bien  plus,
Avetis  factum  medicum :
Honor,  favor  et  gratia,
Qui,  in  hoc  corde  que  voila,
Imprimant  ressentimenta
Qui  dureront  in  secula,

CHORUS.      Vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  cent  fois  vivat
Novus  doctor,  qui  tam  bene  parlat !
Mille,  mille  annis,  et  manget  et  bibat,
Et  seignet  et  tuat !

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

All  the  Surgeons  and  Apothecaries  dance  to  the  sound  of  the

Instruments    and     Voices,    and    clapping    of  hands,    and

Apothecaries'  Mortars.

Chirurgus.  Puisse-t-il  voir  doctas
Suas  ordonnancias,
Omnium  chirurgorum,
Et  apothicarum
Remplire  boutiquas !

Chorus.  Vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  cent  fois  vivat,

Novus  doctor,  qui,  tam  bene  parlat
Mille,  mille  annis,  et  manget  et  bibat,
Et  seignet  et  tuat !

Chirurgus.  Puissent  toti  anni
Lui  essere  boni
Et  favorabiles,
Et  n'  habere  jamais
Quam  pestas,  verolas,
Fievras,  pleuresias
Fluxus  de  sang  et  dyssenterias  I

234  THE   IMAGINARY   INVALID.

Chorus.  Vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  vivat,  cent  fois  vivat,

Novus  doctor,  qui  tarn  bene  parlat !
Mille,  mille  annis,  et  magnet  et  bibat,
Et  seignet  et  tuat !

The  Doctors,  Surgeons  and  Apothecaries  go  out  all  according
to  their  several  ranks,  with  the  same  ceremony  as  they
entered.0

47  There  exists  also  an  addition  to  the  ceremony,  namely,  speeches  of
three  other  doctors,  and  some  variations  in  those  of  the  physicians  who
have  spoken,  as  well  as  in  other  parts  of  the  ceremony.  But  as  these
changes  are  found  only  in  the  editions  of  Rouen  and  Amsterdam,  and  are
most  probably  not  by  Moliere,  we  do  not  give  them  here.

LA  JALOUSIE  DU  BARBOUILLE.

COMEDIE.

THE  JEALOUSY  OF  LE  BARBOUILLE.

A    COMEDY    IN   ONE   ACT.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSS.)

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE,

The  Jealousy  of  le  Barbouille  is  probably  an  imitation  of  one  of  the
Italian  commedia  del  'arte,  and  was  composed  when  Moliere  was  traveling
in  the  provinces,  when  he  sketched  or  wrote  a  certain  number  of  come-
diettas, or  rather  farces,  to  amuse  his  country  audiences.1  It  is  impossible
to  say  when  they  were  first  performed,  though  a  few  were  acted  even  after
Moliere's  return  to  Paris.

The  manuscript  of  The  yealousy  of  le  Barbouille,  and  of  the  following
farce,  The  Flying-  Doctor,  was,  in  1731,  in  the  hands  of  Jean  Baptiste
Rousseau,  who  lived  then  at  Brussels.  They  were  first  published  in  1819,
and  have  since  that  time  been  generally  added  to  the  other  dramatic
works  of  Moliere.  The  subject  of  The  Jealousy  of  le  Barbouille  appears
to  be  taken  from  one  of  Boccaccio's  tales,2  which  was  afterwards  devel-
oped in  George  Dandin.

1  The  titles  of  some  of  these  farces  are  to  be  found  in  the  Prefatory  Memoir  of
Moliere,  Vol.  I.,  page  xxv.
*'See  Introductory  Notice  to  George  Dandin,  Vol.  II.,  page  517.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

LE  BARBOUILLE,S  Angelique's  husband.

THE  DOCTOR.

VALERE,  Angelique's  lover.

GORG  I  BUS  ,  Angelique 's  father.

VlILEBREQUIN.

LA  VALLEE.
ANGELIQUE.
CATHAU,  her  maid.

3  Le  Barbouille'  means  the  besmeared,  because  probably  in  former  times
the  actor  who  played  this  part  rubbed  his  face  with  flour'.

THE  JEALOUSY  OF  LE  BARBOUILLE.

JALOUSIE  DU  BARBOUILLE.)

SCENE  I. — LE  BARBOUILLE,  alone.

It  must  be  admitted  that  I  am  the  most  unfortunate  of
all  men !  I  have  a  wife  who  drives  me  mad :  instead  of
relieving  me  and  doing  things  as  I  like,  she  makes  me  wish
myself  at  the  devil  twenty  times  a  day ;  instead  of  staying
at  home,  she  likes  to  go  walking  about,  loves  good  cheer,
and  keeps  company  with  I  do  not  know  what  kind  of  peo-
ple. Ah !  poor  Barbouille,  how  wretched  you  are !  She
must,  however,  be  punished.  Suppose  I  killed  her  .  .  .
that  idea  is  worth  nothing,  for  you  should  be  hanged.  If
you  had  her  put  in  prison  .  .  .  the  slut  would  find  a  way
out  of  it  with  her  master-key.  What  the  deuce  am  I  to
do  then?  But  here  is  the  doctor  coming.  I  must  ask  him
for  a  bit  of  advice  as  to  what  I  am  to  do.

SCENE  II. — THE  DOCTOR,  LE  BARBOUILLE.

BAR.  I  was  coming  after  you  to  make  a  request  of  you
upon  a  matter  of  importance  to  me.

Doc.  You  must  be  very  badly  brought  up,  very  clum-
sily, and  have  been  reprimanded  very  insufficiently,  friend,
to  accost  me  without  lifting  your  hat,  without  observing
rationem  loci,  temporis  et  persona.  What !  to  begin  with

241

242  THE  JEALOUSY  OF   LE  BARBOUILLE.  ISCEWB  «.

an  ill-arranged  discourse,  instead  of  saying:  Salve,  vel  Sal-
vus  si's,  Doctor,  doctorum  eruditissime.  Eh !  for  whom  do
you  take  me,  friend?

BAR.  Upon  my  word,  I  nope  you  will  excuse  me,  my
mind  was  embarrassed,*  and  I  was  not  paying  any  atten-
tion to  what  I  was  doing;  but  I  know  full  well  that  you
are  a  gallant  gentleman.

Doc.  Know  you  at  all  whence  comes  the  word  "  gallant
gentleman?"

BAR.  Let  it  come  from  Villejuif  or  Aubervilliers,  I  care
little.

Doc.  Know  that  the  word  gallant  gentleman  comes  from
"elegant;"  taking  the g  and  the  a  of  the  last  syllable,  that
makes  ga,  then  taking  //,  adding  an  a  and  the  last  two  let-
ters, that  makes  gallant,  and  then  adding  gentleman,  that
makes  gallant  gentleman.  But,  once  more,  for  whom  do
you  take  me  ?

BAR.  I  take  you  for  a  doctor.  But  let  us  talk  a  little
of  the  affair  which  I  wish  to  propose  to  you.  You  must
know  then  .  .  .

Doc.  Know  beforehand  that  I  am  not  only  once  a  doc-
tor, but  that  I  am  a  doctor  once,  twice,  three,  four,  five,
six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten  times,  ist.  Because  the  unit
being  the  basis,  the  foundation,  and  the  first  of  all  num-
bers, I  am  consequently  the  first  of  all  doctors,  the  learned
of  the  learned.  2d.  Because  two  faculties  are  necessary
for  the  perfect  knowledge  of  all  things,  the  senses  and  the
understanding ;  and,  as  I  am  all  sense  and  understanding,
I  am  twice  doctor.

BAR.  Agreed.     It  is  .   .    .

Doc.  30.  Because  the  number  of  three  is  that  of  per-
fection, according  to  Aristotle ;  and,  as  I  am  perfect,  and
all  my  productions  likewise,  I  am  three  times  doctor.

BAR.  Well,  Mr.  Doctor  .    .    .

Doc.  4TH.  Because  philosophy  has  four  parts:  logic,
morality,  physics,  and  metaphysics;  and,  as  I  possess
them  all  four,  and  am  perfectly  versed  in  them,  I  am  four
times  doctor.

4  The  original  has,favais  V  esprit  en  echarpe,  I  had  my  mind  in  a  sea
herefore  "  awry,"  "  embarrassed."

SCENE  n.J  THE  JEALOUSY   O*   LE   BARBOUILLE.  243

BAR.  What  the  deuce !  I  do  not  doubt  it.  Do  listen
to  me  then.

Doc.  5TH.  Because  there  are  five  universals ;  the  genus,
the  spices,  the  difference,  the  essence,  and  the  accident,
without  the  knowledge  of  which  it  becomes  impossible  to
reason  well ;  and,  as  I  employ  them  with  advantage,  and
know  their  usefulness,  I  am  five  times  doctor.

BAR.     I  must  have  a  deal  of  patience.

Doc.  6xH.  Because  the  number  six  is  the  number  of
labour ;  and,  as  I  labour  incessantly  for  my  glory,  I  am
six  times  doctor.

BAR.  Ho  !  speak  as  much  as  you  like.

Doc.  7TH.  Because  the  number  of  seven  is  the  number
of  felicity ;  and,  as  I  possess  a  perfect  knowledge  of  every-
thing that  can  confer  happiness,  and  as  I  am  so  indeed  by
my  talents,  I  feel  obliged  to  say  of  myself;  O  ter  quaterque
beatum  !  8th.  Because  the  number  of  eight  is  the  number
of  justice  by  reason  of  the  equality  found  in  it,  and  be-
cause the  justice  and  prudence  with  which  I  measure  and
weigh  all  my  actions  make  me  eight  times  doctor,
pth.  Because  there  are  nine  Muses,  and  because  I  am
equally  beloved  by  them.  loth.  Because,  as  we  cannot
pass  the  number  of  ten  without  making  a  repetition  of  the
other  numbers,  and  because  it  is  the  universal  number;
so,  so,  when  they  have  found  me  they  have  found  the
universal  doctor ;  I  contain  in  my  own  self  all  the  other
doctors.  Thus,  you  perceive  by  plausible,  true,  demon-
strative, and  convincing  arguments,  that  I  am  once,
twice,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine,  ten  times
doctor.

BAR.  What  the  deuce  is  this?  I  expected  to  find  a  very
learned  man,  who  would  give  me  good  advice,  and  I  find
a  chimney-sweep,  who,  instead  of  talking  to  me,  amuses
himself  by  playing  Morra6  with  me.  One,  two,  three,
four;  ha,  ha,  ha!  But  that  is  not  at  all  the  thing;  I  pray
you  to  listen  to  me,  and  to  think  that  I  am  not  the  man  to

5  Morra  is  an  Italian  game,  which  consists  in  holding  up  quickly  some
fingers  of  the  hand  raised  and  some  shut,  and  for  the  opposite  player  to
guess  the  precise  number  of  the  fingers  thus  held  up.  As  the  Doctor  in
counting  probably  held  up  his  fingers,  Le  Barbouille  evidently  alludes  to
the  Morra.

244  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  LE  BARBOUILLE.  [scnn  HL

make  you  waste  your  time,  and  that,  if  you  satisfy  me  in
what  I  wish  of  you,  I  will  give  you  anything  you  like;
money  if  you  wish  it.

Doc.  Money,  say  you?

BAR.  Yes,  money,  and  anything  else  you  might  like  to
ask.

Doc.  (Hitching  up  his  gown  behind  htm).  Then  you
take  me  to  be  a  man  who  would  do  anything  for  money,  a
man  bound  to  self-interest,  a  mercenary  soul?  Know,
friend,  that,  if  you  were  to  give  me  a  purse  full  of  pistoles,
if  this  purse  were  in  a  costly  box,  this  box  in  a  precious
case,  this  case  in  a  wondrous  casket,  this  casket  in  a  curious
cabinet,  this  cabinet  in  a  magnificent  room,  this  room  in
an  agreeable  apartment,  this  apartment  in  a  splendid  castle,
this  castle  in  a  matchless  citadel,  this  citadel  in  a  famous
town,  this  town  in  a  fruitful  island,  this  island  in  an
opulent  province,  this  province  in  a  flourishing  kingdom,
this  kingdom  stretching  over  the  whole  world ;  and  that
you  would  give  me  this  world  in  which  should  be  this
flourishing  kingdom,  in  which  should  be  this  opulent  pro-
vince, in  which  should  be  this  fruitful  island,  in  which
should  be  this  famous  town,  in  which  should  be  this
matchless  citadel,  in  which  should  be  this  splendid  castle,
in  which  should  be  this  agreeable  apartment,  in  which
should  be  this  curious  cabinet,  in  which  should  be  this
wondrous  casket,  in  which  should  be  this  precious  case,
in  which  should  be  this  costly  box,  and  in  which  should
be  enclosed  this  purse  full  of  pistoles,  I  should  care  as
little  about  your  money  and  about  yourself  as  about  that.

(He  departs.

BAR.  Upon  my  word !  I  have  made  a  mistake ;  I
thought  it  well  to  speak  to  him  of  money,  because  he
was  dressed  as  a  physician ;  but  as  he  does  not  want  it,
nothing  is  easier  than  to  satisfy  him :  I  will  run  after  him.

(He  goes  off.

SCENE  III. — ANGELIQUE,  VALERE,  CATHAU.

AN.  I  assure  you,  Sir,  that  you  will  oblige  me  greatly
by  keeping  me  company  now  and  then  ;  my  husband  is
so  ill-shaped,  so  debauched,  such  a  drunkard,  that  it  is

scKNsrv.]  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  LE  BARBOUILLE.  245

torture  to  me  to  be  with  him,  and  I  leave  you  to  guess
what  pleasure  one  can  derive  from  a  clodhopper  like  him.

VAL.  Madam,6  you  do  me  too  much  honour  in  bearing
with  me.  I  promise  you  to  contribute  everything  in  my
power  for  your  entertainment ;  and,  since  you  confess
that  my  society  is  not  disagreeabl j  to  you,  I  shall  show
you  by  my  attentions  how  much  pleased  I  am  at  the  news
which  you  tell  me.

CA.  Ah !  change  your  conversation ;  here  comes  kill-
joy.7

SCENE   IV. — LE  BARBOUILLE,  VALERE,  ANGELIQUE,
CATHAU.

VAL.  I  am  in  despair,  Madam,  at  having  to  bring  you
such  grievous  tidings;  but  you  might  have  learned  them
from  some  one  else ;  and,  as  your  brother  is  very  ill  ...

AN.  Sir,  do  not  tell  me  *s|  more  j  I  am  your  servant,
and  feel  obliged  to  you  «br  ;i/t  trouble  you  have  taken.

BAR.  Upon  my  were*,  «32e  fc  the  certificate  of  my
cuckoldom,  without  going  :o the  notary  for  it.  Ha!  ha!
mistress  slut,  I  find  you  with  a  man,  after  all  my  orders
to  the  contrary,  and  you  wish  to  send  me  from  Gemini  to
Capricorn ! 8

AN.  Well !  need  you  grumble  about  that  ?  This  gentle-
man has  come  to  tell  me  that  my  brother  is  very  ill :
what  is  there  to  complain  ?

CA.  Ah !  here  it  is ;  I  was  wondering  that  we  should
be  quiet  so  long.

BAR.  Upon  my  word,  you  are  spoiling  one  another,
you  sluts  ;  you  Cathau,  you  are  corrupting  my  wife :  since
you  have  been  in  her  service,  she  is  not  worth  half  of
what  she  was  before.

CA.  Indeed  yes,  a  pretty  story  that !

AN.  Leave  the  sot  alone ;  do  you  not  see  that  he  is  so
drunk  that  he  does  not  know  what  he  is  saying.

6  The  original  has  Mademoiselle,  see  Prefatory  Notice,  Vol.  I.,  page
32,  note  14.

7  The  original  \\asporte-guignon,  bearer  of  ill-luck.

8  See  Rabelais'  Pantagruel,  book  iii.  ch.  xxv.  "How  Panuige  consulted!
with  Herr  Trippa."

246  THE  JEALOUSY   OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  [SCENE  vi.

SCENE   V. —  GORGIBUS,  VILLEBREQUIN,   ANGELIQUE,
CATHAU,  LE  BARBOUILLE.

GOR.  Here  is  my  cursed  son-in-law  quarrelling  with  my
daugli.cr  again !

VIL.  Find  out  what  it  is.

GOR.  What !  always  squabbling !  Will  you  never  have
any  peace  among  you  ?

BAR.  This  wretch  calls  me  sot.  {To  Angelique],  Hold,
I  have  got  a  good  mind  to  slap  your  face9  in  the  presence
of  your  relatives.

GOR.  Cursed  be  the  purse,  if  you  have  done  what  he
reproaches  you  with.10

AN.  But  it  is  he  who  always  begins  to  ...

CA.  Cursed  be  the  hour  in  which  you  chose  this  cur-
mudgeon !

VIL.  Come,  hold  your  tongue ;  peace !

SCENE  VI. — GORGIBUS,  VILLEBREQUIN,  ANGELIQUE,
CATHAU,  LE  BARBOUILLE,  THE  DOCTOR.

Doc.  What  is  this  ?  What  disorder  !  what  quarrelling !
what  wrangling !  what  noise  !  what  confusion  !  what  fall-
ing out !  what  a  flare-up  !  What  is  the  matter,  gentlemen,
what  is  the  matter  ?  what  is  the  matter  ?  Come,  come,  let
us  see  if  there  is  no  way  of  making  you  agree  ;  let  me  be
your  peacemaker ;  let  me  bring  union  among  you.

GOR.  It  is  my  daughter  and  my  son-in-law  who  have
some  quarrel  between  them.

Doc.  And  what  is  it  ?  Just  tell  me  the  cause  of  their
difference.

GOR.  Sir  .   .   .

Doc.  But  in  few  words.

GOR.  Yes :  but  put  on  your  bonnet.

Doc.  Do  you  know  whence  comes  the  word  "bonnet"  ?

GOR.  No,  indeed.

'  The  original  has  j'e  suis  bien  tente  de  te  bailler  tine  quinte  major,  I  am
much  tempted  to  give  you  a  high  sequence  of  five.  The  expression
quinte  major,  now  called  quinte  majeure,  belongs  to  the  game  of  piquet,
for  which  see  Vol.  I.  The  Impertinent*,  Act  ii.,  Scene  2.

10  The  original  has  Je  dedonne  au  (liable  I'escarcelle  si  vous  Pavusfait.
This  phrase  is  very  obscure ;  I  have  followed  the  explanation  given  by  the
late  Mr.  E.  Despois.

SCENE  vi.]  THE  JEALOUSY   OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  247

Doc.  It  comes  from  bonum  est,  good  is,  that  is  good,
because  it  keeps  you  from  catarrhs  and  colds.

GOR.  Upon  my  word,  I  did  not  know  that.

Doc.   But  just  tell  me  quickly  about  this  quarrel.

GOR.  This  is  what  happened  .    .    .

Doc.  I  do  not  think  that  you  are  the  man  to  detain  me
long,  especially  as  I  request  you  not  to  do  so.  I  have  some
pressing  business  which  calls  me  into  town  ;  but,  to  restore
peace  in  your  family,  I  do  not  mind  stopping  for  a  mo-
ment.

GOR.  I  shall  have  done  in  a  moment.

Doc.  Be  quick  then.

GOR.   Done  immediately.

Doc.  You  must  admit,  Mr.  Gorgibus,  that  it  is  a  fine
gift  to  be  able  to  say  things  in  a  few  words,  and  that  great
talkers,  instead  of  being  listened  to,  often  make  themselves
so  obnoxious  that  one  does  not  hear  them ;  virtutem  pri-
mam  esse puta  compescere  linguam.11  Yes,  the  finest  quality
in  a  gentleman  is  to  speak  little.

GOR.  You  must  know  then  .    .    .

Doc.  Socrates  recommended  three  things  very  carefully
to  his  disciples :  prudence  in  actions,  sobriety  in  eating,
and  to  say  things  in  few  words.  Begin  then,  Mr.  Gorgibus.

GOR.  That  is  what  I  wish  to  do.

Doc.  In  few  words,  without  ceremony,  without  amusing
yourself  with  many  speeches,  spare  me  an  apophthegm  ;1J
quick,  quick,  Mr.  Gorgibus,  hurry  on,  avoid  prolixity.

GOR.  Let  me  speak  then.

Doc.  Mr.  Gorgibus,  shake  hands,  you  speak  too  much ;
some  one  else  will  have  to  tell  me  the  cause  of  this
quarrel.

VIL.  You  must  know  then,  Mr.  Doctor  .    .    .

Doc.  You  are  an  ignoramus,  an  illiterate,  a  man  devoid
of  all  method  and  order,13  in  good  French,  an  ass.  What !

11 "  Believe  that  the  first  of  virtues  is  to  restrain  one's  tongue."  This
is  one  of  Erasmus'  distichs.

la  In  The  Forced  Marriage  Pancrace  says  to  Sganarelle,  Tranchez-moi
votre  discours  cP  un  apophthegms  a  la  laconienne,  Contract  your  discourse
into  a  Laconian  apophthegm.  See  Vol.  I.,  scene  6,  page  484.

13  In  The  Forced  Marriage  Pancrace  calls  Sganar -lie  un  h  imme  ignore
de  tout  bonne  discipline,  a  man  ignorant  of  all  method  and  order.  See
Vol.  I,,  Scene  6,  page  489.

248  THE  JEALOUSY   OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  [SCENE  vi.

you  commence  your  narrative  without  a  word  of  exordium  !
Some  one  else  will  have  to  narrate  the  quarrel.  Madam,
tell  me  the  particulars  of  this  confusion.

AN.  Well !  you  see,  my  big  scamp,  my  wine  jug  of  a
husband  ?

Doc.  Gently,  if  you  please  :  speak  with  respect  of  your
husband,  when  before  the  beard  of  a  doctor  like  myself.

AN.  Ah !  indeed,  yes,  doctor  !  I  care  a  deal  about  you
and  your  doctrine,  and  I  am  a  doctor  when  I  like.

Doc.  You  are  a  doctor  when  you  like ;  but  I  think  that
you  would  make  a  funny  doctor.  You  look  to  me  much
as  if  you  would  follow  your  own  fancies :  of  the  parts  of
speech,  you  like  but  the  conjunction  ;  of  the  genders,  the
masculine;  of  the  declensions,  the  genitive:  of  syntax,
mobile  cumfixo,  and,  in  short,  of  quanti  y,  you  love  but
the  dactyl,  quia  constat  ex  una  longa  et  duabns  brevibus.™
Come  now,  just  tell  me  the  cause,  the  subject  of  your  com-
bustion.

BAR.  Mr.  Doctor  .    .    .

Doc.  Ah  !  that  is  well  begun  ;  Mr.  Doctor,  this  word
has  something  sweet  to  the  ear,  something  full  of  emphasis ;
Mr.  Doctor  !

BAR.  According  to  my  will  .    .    .

Doc.  That  is  good  .  .  .  according  to  my  will !  The
will  presupposes  the  wish,  the  wish  presupposes  the  means
arriving  at  its  ends,  and  the  end  presupposes  an  object ;
that  is  good  .  .  .  according  to  my  will.

BAR.   I  am  bursting  with  rage.

Doc.  Take  out  that  word,  I  am  bursting  with  rage ;  it
is  a  low  and  vulgar  term.

BAR.  Eh  !  Mr.  Doctor,  do  listen  to  me,  I  pray  you.

Doc.  Audi,  quaeso^  Cicero  would  have  said.

BAR.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,  if  it   breaks,16  smashes,  or  is
destroyed,  I  hardly  care ;   but  you  shall  hear  me,  or  I  will
smash  your  doctoral  snout ;  and  what  the  devil  is  this  ?
(JLe  Barbouille,  Angelique,   Gorgibus>  Cathau,    Villc-

w  This  Latin  cannot  be  translated.  The  rule  mobile  cum  fixo  is  taken
from  Despautere's  Syntax.  See  The  Ccuntes*  of  Escarbagnas,  Scene
19,  page  417,  note  17.

15  A  Latin  translation  of  Le  Barbouille's  words.

16  The  original  has  si  se  rompt,  a  pun  on  the  name  Ciceroru

SCKNBX.]  THE  JEALOUSY   OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  249

brequin,  each  wishing  to  tell  the  cause  of  the  quarrel,
and  the  Doctor  saying  that  peace  is  a  fine  thing,  speak
all  at  once.  In  the  midst  of  all  this  noise  Le  Bar-
bouille  fastens  a  rope  to  the  Doctor' s  foot,  and  makes
him  fall  on  his  back  j  Le  Bar  bouille  drags  him  away
by  the  rope,  which  he  had  fastened  to  his  foot,  while
the  Doctor  endeavours  to  speak  and  to  count  upon  his
fingers  all  his  reasons,  as  if  he  had  not  fallen  down
at  all.  Le  Barbouille  and  the  Doctor  disappear.
GOR.  Come  daughter,  go  inside,  and  try  to  live  in  peace
with  your  husband.

VIL.  Farewell,  good  night,  and  your  servant.

(Villebrequin,  Gor gibus,  and  Angelique  go  away .

SCENE  VII.— VALERE,  LA  VALLEE.

VAL.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  the  pains  you  have  taken,
Sir,  and  I  promise  you  to  be  at  the  appointed  place  in  an
hour.

LA  VAL.  It  cannot  be  postponed ;  and  if  you  but  delay
a  quarter  of  an  hour,  the  ball  will  be  finished :  you  shall
not  have  the  satisfaction  of  seeing  her  whom  you  love  if
you  do  not  come  directly.

VAL.  Let  us  go  together  this  very  moment.

(  They  go  away.

SCENE  VIII. — ANGELIQUE,  alone.

While  my  husband  is  out  of  the  way,  I  shall  go  and  take
a  turn  at  a  ball,  which  one  of  my  neighbours  is  giving.
I  shall  be  back  before  him,  for  he  is  somewhere  in  the
tavern ;  he  will  not  notice  that  I  am  out ;  the  rascal  leaves
me  alone  at  home,  as  if  I  were  his  dog.  (She  goes.

SCENE  IX. — LE  BARBOUILLE,  alone.
I  knew  well  enough  that  I  would  get  the  better  of  this
doctor  and  all  his  confounded  doctrine.  To  the  devil
with  the  ignorant  fellow  I  I  have  nicely  knocked  all  his
science  to  the  ground.  I  must,  however,  go  and  see  if
the  wife  has  prepared  my  supper.  (He  goes.

SCENE  X. — ANGELIQUE,  alone.

How  unlucky  I  am !  I  came  too  late,  the  party  is
over :  I  arrived  just  as  every  one  was  going ;  but  never

250  THE  JEALOUSY   OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  LSCBNB  XL

mind,  it  will  be  for  another  time.  I  shall  go  home,  how-
ever, as  if  nothing  had  happened.  Why  !  the  door  is
locked  ;  Cathau,  Cathau  !

SCENE  XI. — LE  BARBOUILLE,  at  the  window,  ANGELIQUE.

BAR.  Cathau,  Cathau !  Well,  what  has  she  done,
Cathau?  and  whence  come  you,  Madam  slut,  at  this
hour,  and  in  such  weather  ?

AN.  Whence  come  I  ?  just  open  the  door,  and  I  shall
tell  you  afterwards.

BAR.  Ah !  indeed,  you  can  go  and  sleep  where  you
came  from,  or,  if  you  like  it  better,  in  the  street ;  I  will
not  open  the  door  to  such  a  gad-about  as  you.  What  the
deuce  !  to  be  all  alone  at  such  an  hour  !  I  do  not  know
whether  it  is  my  fancy,  but  my  forehead  seems  half  as
rough  again  as  it  usually  is.

AN.  Well  !  and  what  if  I  am  alone,  what  do  you  mean
by  it?  You  quarrel  with  me  when  I  have  company:  what
would  you  have  me  do?

BAR.  You  ought  to  have  been  within,  to  look  after  the
supper,  to  take  care  of  the  house,  of  the  children ;  but,
without  so  many  useless  words,  good-bye,  good-night,  go
to  the  devil,  and  leave  me  in  peace.

AN.  You  will  not  open  to  me  ?

BAR.   No,  I  shall  not  open.

AN.  Eh !  my  dear  little  husband,  open,  I  beg  of  you,
my  dear  sweetheart.

BAR.  Ah  !  you  crocodile  !  ah  !  you  dangerous  serpent!
you  are  caressing  me  to  betray  me.

AN.   Open,  open  then.

BAR.  Good-bye  !      Vade  retro,  Satanas  /

AN.  What !  you  will  not  open  ?

BAR.  No!

AN.  And  you  have  no  pity  on  the  wife  who  loves  you
so  much  ?

BAR.  No,  I  am  inflexible ;  you  have  offended  me,  I  am
as  vindictive  as  the  devil,  that  is,  putting  it  more  strongly,
I  am  inexorable.

AN.  Are  you  aware  that,  if  you  drive  me  to  despair,  and
make  me  angry,  I  shall  do  something  which  you  will  regret?

BAR.  And  what  will  you  do,  you  nice  she-dog  ?

SCENKXI.]  THE  JEALOUSY  OF   LE  BARBOUILLf.  251

AN.  There ;  if  you  do  not  open  to  me,  I  shall  kill  my.
self  before  the  door ;  my  parents  who  will  no  doubt  come
here  before  going  to  bed,  to  know  if  we  have  made  it
up  together,  will  find  me  dead,  and  you  shall  be  hanged.
BAR.  Ah,  ah,  ah,  ah,  the  great  ninny !  and  who  of  the
vwo  will  lose  most  by  that  ?  Go,  go,  you  are  not  so  foolish
as  to  do  such  a  trick  as  that.

AN.  You  will  not   believe  it  then  ?    There,  there,  here
is  my  knife  quite  ready ;  if  you  do  not  open  to  me,  I  shall
plunge  it  into  my  heart  this  very  moment.
BAR.  Take  care,  the  point  is  very  sharp.
AN.  You  will  not  open  to  me  ?

BAR.  I  have  told  you  a  score  of  times  already  that  I  will
not  open ;  kill  yourself,  die,  go  to  the  devil ;  what  do  I
care.

AN.  (Pretending  to  stab  herself).  Good-bye  then  .  .  .
Ah  !  I  am  dead.

BAR.  Can  she  have  been  fool  enough  to  do  such  a  trick  ?
I  must  go  down  with  the  candle  to  see."

AN.  I  must  catch  you.  If  I  can  get  cunningly  into  the
house  while  you  are  looking  for  me,  it  will  be  my  turn
next.

BAR.  Well  !  just  as  if  I  ought  not  to  have  known  that
she  was  not  such  a  fool.  She  is  dead  ;  and,  however,  she
runs  like  Pacolet's  horse.18  Upon  my  word,  she  has  really
given  me  a  fright.  She  has  done  well  to  get  out  of  the
way ;  for  if  I  had  found  her  alive,  after  having  given  me
such  a  fright,  I  should  have  dealt  her  five  or  six  kicks  to
teach  her  to  play  the  fool.  I  shall  go  to  bed  now.  Oh  !
oh  !  I  think  that  the  .wind  has  closed  the  door.  Eh  !
Cathau,  Cathau,  open  the  door.

AN.  Cathau,  Cathau  !  Well  ?  what  has  she  done  to  you,
Cathau  ?  and  whence  come  you,  Master  sot  ?  Ah  !  indeed,
my  parents,  who  will  be  here  in  a  minute,  shall  know

17  Moliere  has  employed  a  great  part  of  this  scene  in  the  eighth  scene
of  the  third  act  of  George  Dandin.     See  Vol.  1 1.,  p.  560.

18  In  the  legend  of  Valentine  and  Orson,  Pacolet  is  a  dwarf  in  the  ser-
vice of  Lady  Clerimond,  who  has  an  enchanted  flying  horse  of  wood,
which  was  very  swift,  and  carried  the  rider  anywhere.     Rabelais  mentions
the  horse  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of  the  second  book  of  Panta-
gruel.

252  THE  JEALOUSY  OF  I.E   BARBOUILLE.          [SCENE  XHI.

the  truth.  Wine-barrel,  infamous  wretch,  you  do  not  stir
from  the  tavern,  and  you  leave  a  poor  woman  with  her
little  ones  to  dance  attendance  upon  you  all  day  long,
without  caring  whether  they  want  for  anything  or  not.

BAR.  Open  quickly,  you  she-devil,  or  I  shall  break
your  head.

SCENE  XII.— GORGIBUS,    VILLEBREQUIN,    ANGELIQUE,  LE
BARBOUILLE.

GOR.  What  is  this !  always  disputes,  quarrels,  and  dis-
sensions.

VIL.  Eh,  what !  will  you  never  be  agreed  ?

AN.  But  just  look,  here  he  is  drunk,  and  comes  back
at  this  hour,  to  make  a  horrible  noise  ;  he  threatens  me.

GOR.  But  this  is  also  not  a  time  to  come  home.  Ought
you  not,  as  a  good  father  of  a  family,  to  retire  early  and  live
in  concord  with  your  wife  ?

BAR.  May  the  devil  take  me  if  I  have  stirred  away  from
the  house  :  just  ask  these  gentlemen  who  are  yonder  in  the
pit ;  it  is  she  who  has  just  come  back.  Ah  !  how  inno-
cence is  oppressed.

VIL.  Come,  come,  make  it  up  ;  ask  her  pardon.

BAR.  I !  pardon  !  I  would  sooner  have  the  devil  run
away  with  her.  I  am  so  angry  that  I  do  not  know  what
I  am  doing.

GOR.  Come,  daughter,  kiss  your  husband,  and  be  good
friends.19

SCENE  XIII. — THE  DOCTOR,  at  the  window,  in  his  night-cap
and  vest;  LE  BARBOUILLE,  VILLEBREQUIN,  GORGIBUS,
ANGELIQUE..

Doc.  What !  for  ever  noise,  disorder,  dissension,  quar-
rels, debates,  differences,  combustions,  and  never  ceasing
altercations  ?  What  is  the  matter  ?  what  is  it  then  ?  There
is  no  peace  to  be  had.

19  These  three  last  scenes  have  been  utilized  by  Moliere  in  the  eighth
and  following  Scenes  of  the  third  Act  of  George  Dandin  (see  Vol.  II.,
p.  560 ;  just  as  the  scenes  in  which  the  Doctor  appears  seem  to  be  the
outline  of  the  sixth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  The  Love  Tiff  (see  Vol.
I.,  p.  97,  and  of  the  sixth  Scene  of  The  Forced  Marriage  (see  Vol.  I.,
p.  484.

SCENE  xiii.]  THE  JEALOUSY  OF   LE   BARBOUILLE.  253

VIL.  It  is  nothing,  Sir  Doctor ;  everyone  is  agreed.

Doc.  Talking  of  agreed,  would  you  like  me  to  read
you  a  chapter  of  Aristotle,  in  which  he  proves  that  all  the
parts  of  the  universe  exist  only  because  they  agree  among
themselves  ?  M

VIL.  Is  it  very  long  ?

Doc.  No,  not  very  long:  it  contains  about  sixty  or
eighty  pages.

VIL.  Good-bye,  good-night,  we  are  much  obliged  to  you.

GOR.   No,  we  do  not  want  it.

Doc.  You  do  not  wish  for  it  ?

GOR.  No.

Doc.  Good-bye  then,  since  it  is  even  so  ;  good-night :
latine,  bona  nox.

VIL.  Let  us  go  and  sup  together.

20  This  may  perhaps  be  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  apocryphal  treatise;
About  the  World.  It  is  not  very  long;  but  the  doctor  was  probably
going  to  comment  upon  it.

LE  MEDECIN  VOLANT.
COMEDIE.

THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.

A  COMEDY  IN  ONE  ACT.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.)

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

THE  subject  of  The  Flying  Doctor  is  probably  imitated  from  an  Italian
farce,  //  Medico  Volante,  which  was  never  printed,  but  often  acted,  and
in  which  the  celebrated  Harlequin,  Dominico,  who  arrived  at  Paris  in
1660,  produced  some  sensation.  Boursault  (see  Introductory  Notice  to
The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.,  p.  435,)  wrote  also  a  Flying  Doctor,
which  was  acted  in  the  month  of  November  1661,  at  the  Hotel  de  Bour-
gogne,  and  which  is  taken  either  from  the  Italian  farce  from  which  Mo-
liere borrowed  his  play,  or  from  Moliere  himself.

The  Flying  Doctor  was  acted  several  times  in  Paris,  from  the  years
1659  until  1664,  and  twice  at  Court.

Moliere  made  use  of  several  of  the  scenes  of  this  farce  for  his  Love  is
the  Best  Doctor  (see  Vol.  II.,  p.  135,  and  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Him-
self (see  Vol.  II.,  p.  247.).

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

GORGIBUS,  Lucile  s  father.
VALERE,  Lucile's  lover.
SGANARELLE,  his  setvantl
GROS-RENE,  Gorgibus'  servant?
A  LAWYER.

LuciLE,     Gorgibus1  daughter.
SABINE,  her  cousin.

1  Sganarelle  is,  in  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Himself  (see  Vol.  II.,  p.
249,)  also  the  name  of  the  servant,  disguised  as  a  physician.

2  See  Introductory  Notice  to   The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.,
page  435.

THE  FLYING  DOCTOR,

(LE  M&DECIN  VOLANT.)

SCENE  I. — VALERE,  SABINE.

VAL.  Well !  Sabine,  what  advice  do  you  give  me  ?

SAB.  Really,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  news.  My  uncle
wishes  resolutely  that  my  cousin  should  wed  Villebrequin,
and  matters  are  so  far  advanced  that  I  believe  they  would
have  been  married  this  very  day,  if  you  were  not  loved ;
but,  as  my  cousin  has  confided  to  me  the  secret  of  her
love  for  you,  and  as  we  find  ourselves  reduced  to  extremi-
ties through  the  avarice  of  my  niggardly  ancle,  we  have
bethought  ourselves  of  a  capital  trick  to  delay  the  mar-
riage. At  the  moment  I  am  speaking  to  you,  my  cousin
is  pretending  to  be  ill ;  and  the  good  old  man,  who  is
sufficiently  credulous,  has  sent  me  to  fetch  a  doctor.  If
you  could  send  one  of  your  intimate  friends,  to  act  in
concert  with  us,  he  would  advise  the  patient  to  take  the
country  air.  The  old  man  could  not  fail  to  lodge  my
cousin  in  the  pavilion  which  is  at  the  end  of  the  garden,
and,  by  this  means,  you  could  converse  with  her  without
the  old  man's  knowledge,  marry  her,  and  let  him  swear
his  fill  with  Villebrequin.

VAL.  But  the  difficulty  is  to  find  so  quickly  a  doctor
such  as  I  wish,  and  who  would  be  willing  to  risk  so  much
in  my  service.  I  tell  you  candidly,  I  do  not  know  one.

SAB.  I  have  bethought  myself  of  something.     Suppose

261

262  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  [SCKNBH.

you  dress  your  servant  up  as  a  doctor :  there  is   nothing
easier  than  to  hoodwink  the  old  man.

VAL.  He  is  a  clumsy  lout  who  would  spoil  everything  ;
but  for  want  of  some  one  else,  we  must  make  use  of  him.
Farewell,  I  am  going  to  fetch  him.  Where  am  I  to  find
that  scoundrel  just  now?  but  here  he  comes  quite  op-
portunely.

SCENE  II. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE.

VAL.  Ah !  my  poor  Sganarelle,  how  glad  I  am  to  see
you !  I  need  you  for  a  matter  of  importance ;  but,  as  I
do  not  know  what  you  are  capable  of  doing.  .  .  .

SCAN.  What  I  am  capable  of  doing,  Sir  ?  Just  try  me
in  any  matter  of  consequence,  or  for  something  important;
for  instance,  just  send  me  to  see  what  o'clock  it  is  by  some
time-piece,  to  find  out  the  price  of  butter  in  the  market,
to  bait  a  horse,  then  you  will  find  out  what  I  am  capable
of  doing.

VAL.  That  is  not  it ;  you  must  counterfeit  a  doctor.

SGAN.  I,  a  doctor,  Sir  !  I  am  ready  to  do  whatever
pleases  you  ;  but,  to  act  the  doctor,  by  your  leave  I  shall
do  nothing  of  the  kind  ;  and,  good  Heavens,  how  should
I  set  about  it  ?  Indeed,  Sir,  you  are  making  fun  of  me.

VAL.  If  you  will  undertake  this,  I  shall  give  you  ten
pistoles.

SCAN.  Ah  !  when  it  comes  to  ten  pistoles,  I  will  not
say  that  I  am  not  a  doctor  ;  for,  look  here,  Sir,  I  am  not
sufficiently  clever  to  tell  you  the  truth.  But  where  am  I
to  go  when  I  am  a  doctor  ?

VAL.  To  Mr.  Gorgibus,  to  see  his  daughter  who  is  ill ;
but  you  are  a  clumsy  lout  who,  instead  of  doing  things
rightly,  might  .  .  .

SCAN.  Eh  !  Good  Heavens,  Sir,  do  not  worry  yourself
so  much  ;  I  shall  answer  for  it  that  I  will  kill  a  person  as
easily  as  any  doctor  in  town.  There  is  a  common  pro-
verb- after  death  the  doctor  ;  but  you  shall  find  that,  if
I  have  a  hand  in  it,  they  shall  say :  after  the  doctor,  ware
death !  But  nevertheless,  when  I  think  of  it,  it  is  very
difficult  to  act  the  doctor,  and  suppose  I  do  no  good  .  .

VAL.  Nothing  is  more  easv  in  this  case  ;  Gorgibus  is  a
simplej  coarse  fellow,  who  will  allow  himself  to  be  non-

scwnt  IT.]  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  263

plussed  by  your  discourse,  provided  you  speak  of  Hippo-
crates and  Galen,  and  be  somewhat  brazen-faced.

SCAN.  Which  msans  that  I  am  to  talk  philosophy  and
mathematics  to  him.  Leave  it  to  me,  if  he  be  the  easy
fellow  you  say,  I  answer  for  it  all ;  only  come  and  get  me
a  doctor's  gown,  tell  me  what  I  am  to  do,  and  give  me
my  diploma,  which  are  the  ten  pistoles  promised.

(Exeunt  Valere  and  Sganarelle.

SCENE  III. — GORGIBUS,  GROS-RENE.

GOR.  Quick,  go  and  fetch  a  doctor  ;  for  my  daughter
is  very  ill,  and  make  haste.

GROS.  What  the  deuce  !  why  do  you  wish  to  give  your
daughter  to  an  old  man?  Do  not  you  think  that  it  is  the
wish  to  have  a  young  man  that  worries  her  ?  Do  you
perceive  the  connection  there  is,  etc.  {Gibberish). *

GOR.  Go,  quickly ;  I  see  well  enough  that  this  illness
will  postpone  the  nuptials.

GROS.  And  that  is  the  very  thing  that  annoys  me.  I
meant  to  line  my  belly  well,*  and  behold  me  done  out  of
it.  I  am  going  to  fetch  a  doctor  for  myself,  as  well  as  for
your  daughter.  I  am  desperate.  (Exit.

SCENE  IV. — SABINE,  GORGIBUS,  SGANARELLE.

SAB.  I  find  you  at  the  right  moment,  uncle,  to  tell  you
some  good  news.  I  bring  you  the  ablest  doctor  in  the
world,  a  man  who  comes  from  foreign  lands,  who  is  master
of  the  most  important  secrets,  and  who  will,  no  doubt,
cure  my  cousin.  By  some  good  fortune  he  has  been
pointed  out  to  me,  and  I  have  brought  him  hither.  He
is  so  learned  that  I  wish  with  all  my  heart  that  I  were  ill,
so  that  he  might  cure  me.

GOR.  Where  then  is  he?

SAB.  He  is  following  me ;  look,  here  he  is.

8  Jacqueline,  in  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Himself  (Act  ii.,  Scene  i),
makes  the  same  observation.  The  word  "  gibberish "  means  that  the
actor  who  played  the  part  improvised  after  this.

*The  original  has/#  croyais  refaire  man  venire  cTune  bonne  carrelure.
Carrelure  are  the  new  soles  put  on  shoes  or  boots, — hence  a  new  lining
for  the  stomach.  As  for  Gros  Rene's  corpulence,  see  The  Love-Ti/,
Vol.  I.,  page  79,  note  I.

264  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  [SCENE  iv.

GOR.  The  doctor's  most  humble  servant.  I  have  sent
for  you  to  look  at  my  daughter  who  is  very  ill ;  I  place
all  my  hope  in  you.

SCAN.  Hippocrates  says,  and  Galen,  by  undoubtful
arguments,  demonstrates  that  a  person  is  not  in  good
health  when  he  is  ill.  You  are  right  to  place  your  hope
in  me;  for  I  am  the  greatest,  the  ablest,  the  most  learned
physician  in  the  vegetable,  sensitive  and  mineral  faculty.

GOR.  I  am  delighted  at  it.

SCAN.  Do  not  imagine  that  I  am  an  ordinary  physician,
a  commonplace  doctor.  All  the  other  physicians  are,  in
my  opinion,  nothing  but  abortions  of  doctors.  I  have
peculiar  talents,  I  have  secrets.  Salamalec,  salamalec.
Rodriguez,  have  you  a  heart?  Signer,  si;  Signer,  no.
Per  omnia  scecula  s&culorum?  But  just  let  us  look.

SAB.  Eh !  it  is  not  he  who  is  ill,  it  is  his  daughter.

SCAN.  It  matters  not ;  the  blood  of  the  father  and  the
daughter  are  but  one  thing  ;  and,  by  the  change  of  the
father's,  I  can  ascertain  the  disease  of  the  daughter.  Mr.
Gorgibus,  is  it  possible  to  see  the  urine  of  the  patient?

GOR.  Certainly ;  Sabine,  go  quickly  and  get  the  urine
of  my  daughter.  {Exit  Sabine}.  Doctor,  I  am  very  much
afraid  that  she  is  dying.

SCAN.  Ah  !  let  her  be  careful  not  to  do  so  !  she  must
not  amuse  herself  by  allowing  herself  to  die  without  a  pre-
scription of  the  doctor.6  (Sabine  re-enters).  This  urine
shows  a  great  deal  of  heat,  a  great  inflammation  of  the
bowels ;  it  is,  however,  not  so  very  bad.

GOR.  Eh !  what,  Sir,  you  are  swallowing  it  ?

SCAN.  Do  not  be  surprised  at  that :  doctors,  as  a  rule,
are  satisfied  with  looking  at  it ;  but  I  am  a  doctor  out  of
the  common,  I  swallow  it,  for  by  tasting  it  I  discern  much
better  the  cause  and  the  effects  of  the  disease.  But,  to
tell  you  the  truth,  there  was  too  little  to  judge  by :  let
her  make  water  again.

5 The  words  which  Sganarelle  utters  are  partly  Italian,  Spanish,  Latin,
Arabic,  and  a  quotation  from  Corneille's  Cid.  Whilst  saying  them,  he
feels  Gorgibus'  pulse.

•  This  is  also  found  in  the  sixth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  The  Phy-
sician in  Spite  of  Himself.

SCBNIIV.]  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  265

SAB.  (Goes  and  comes  back  again}.  I  have  had  a  deal
of  trouble  to  make  her  pass  water.

SCAN.  Is  this  all !  it  is  not  worth  while !  Make  her
pass  water  copiously,  copiously.  If  all  patients  pass  water
in  this  way,  I  should  like  to  be  a  physician  all  my  life.

SAB.  (Goes  and  comes  back  again).  This  is  all  there  is
to  be  had  :  she  cannot  make  any  more.

SCAN.  What !  Mr.  Gorgibus,  your  daughter  passes  but
drops  ?  She  is  but  a  poor  performer,  your  daughter ;  I
see  well  enough  that  I  shall  have  to  prescribe  a  water-
making  potion.  Is  there  no  way  to  see  the  patient  ?

SAB.  She  is  up ;  if  you  wish,  I  will  make  her  come
hither.

SCENE  V. — SABINE,  GORGIBUS,  SGANARELLE,  LUCILE.

SCAN.  Well !  Miss,  you  are  ill  ?

Lu.  Yes,  Sir.

SCAN.  So  much  the  worse  !  It  is  a  sign  that  you  are
not  in  good  health.  Do  you  feel  any  great  pain  in  the
head,  or  in  the  loins?

Lu.  Yes,  Sir.

SCAN.  That  is  very  well.  Yes,  this  great  physician,  in
the  chapter  which  he  has  written  on  the  nature  of  animals,
says  ...  a  hundred  fine  things ;  and,  as  the  humours
which  have  a  connexion  have  much  of  a  relation ;  as,  for
instance,  as  melancholy  is  the  enemy  of  joy,  and  as  the
bile  which  spreads  through  the  body  makes  us  become
yellow,  and  as  nothing  is  more  opposed  to  health  than
disease,  we  may  say,  with  this  great  man,  that  your
daughter  is  very  ill.  I  must  give  you  a  prescription.

GOR.  Quick,  a  table,  paper  and  ink.

SCAN.  Is  there  any  one  here  who  knows  how  to  write  ?

GOR.  Do  not  you  know  how  to  do  so  ?

SCAN.  Ah  !  I  did  not  recollect ;  I  have  so  many  things
running  in  my  head  that  I  forget  half  of  them  ...  I
think  it  necessary  that  your  daughter  should  have  some
fresh  air ;  that  she  should  go  and  amuse  herself  in  the
country.

GOR.  We  have  a  very  fine  garden,  and  some  rooms
that  look  out  upon  it ;  if  you  deem  it  fit,  I  shall  make  her
lodge  there.

266  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  [SCKNK  vin.

SCAN.  Let  us  go  and  look  at  the  spot.          (Exeunt  all.
SCENE  VI. — THE  LAWYER,  alone.

I  have  heard  that  the  daughter  of  Mr.  Gorgibus  is  ill ;
I  must  inquire  about  her  health,  and  offer  her  my  services
as  a  friend  of  the  whole  family.  Hullo,  hullo  !  is  Mr.
Gorgibus  at  home?

SCENE  VII. — GORGIBUS,  THE  LAWYER.

LAW.  Having  heard  of  your  daughter's  illness,  I  have
come  to  tell  you  that  I  am  concerned  about  it,  and  to
offer  you  anything  in  my  power.

GOR.  I  was  within  with  the  most  learned  of  men.

LAW.  Is  there  no  means  of  conversing  with  him  for  a
moment  ?

SCENE  VIII. — GORGIBUS,  THE  LAWYER,  SGANARELLE.

GOR.  Sir,  this  is  one  of  my  friends,  a  very  able  gentle-
man, who  wishes  to  talk  to  you,  and  to  converse  with  you.

SCAN.  I  have  not  the  leisure,  Mr.  Gorgibus :  I  must
attend  to  my  patients.  I  will  not  take  the  right-hand  side
with  you,  Sir.

LAW.  Sir,  after  what  Mr.  Gorgibus  has  told  me  of  your
merit  and  knowledge,  I  have  the  greatest  desire  in  the
world  to  have  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance  ;  and  I
have  taken  the  liberty  to  greet  you  with  this  intention ;  I
hope  you  will  not  take  it  amiss.  We  must  admit  that  all
those  who  excel  in  any  science  are  worthy  of  great  praise,
and  particularly  those  who  profess  medicine,  as  much  for
its  own  usefulness  as  because  it  contains  several  other
sciences,  which  makes  its  perfect  knowledge  very  difficult :
and  it  is  much  to  the  point  that  Hippocrates  says,  in  his
first  aphorism  :  Vita  brevis,  ars  vero  longa,  occasio  autem
prceceps,  experimentum  periculosum,  judicium  difficile. 7

SCAN.  {To  Gorgibus).  Ficile  tantina pota  baril  cambus-
tibus*

T  Life  is  short,  art  is  long,  the  occasion  fleeting,  the  experiment  full  of
dangers,  the  appreciation  difficult.

8Sganarelle  has  remembered  only  part  of  the  last  vford,Jlci/e,  of  the
lawyer :  all  the  rest  is  nonsense.

SCENE  ix]  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  267

LAW.  You  are  not  one  of  those  physicians  who  apply
themselves  only  to  those  physics  called  rational  or  dog-
matic, and  I  believe  that  you  practise  it  daily  with  much
success,  experientia  magistra  rerum?  The  first  men  who
professed  medicine  were  so  much  esteemed  for  this  beau-
tiful science,  that  they  were  placed  among  the  gods  for
the  splendid  cures  which  they  performed  daily.  We  ought
not  to  despise  a  physician  for  not  having  restored  the
health  of  his  patient,  inasmuch  as  it  does  not  altogether
depend  upon  his  remedies,  nor  upon  his  knowledge,  inter-
dum  docta  plus  valet  arte  malum.10  I  fear  I  am  intruding,
Sir :  I  bid  you  farewell,  with  the  hope  that  at  the  next
opportunity  I  shall  have  the  honour  of  conversing  with
you  more  at  leisure.  Your  moments  are  precious,  etc.

(Exit  Lawyer.

GOR.  What  think  you  of  this  gentleman  ?

SCAN.  He  has  some  trifling  knowledge.  If  he  had  re-
mained a  little  longer,  I  should  have  led  him  on  to  some
sublime  and  elevated  matter.  I  must,  however,  take  my
leave  of  you.  ( Gorgibus  gives  him  some  money).  Eh  !
what  would  you  do  ?

GOR.  I  know  what  is  due  to  you.

SCAN.  Are  you  jesting,  Mr.  Gorgibus  ?  I  shall  not
accept  it;  I  am  not  a  mercenary  man.  (Taking  the  money}.
Your  very  humble  servant. u

(Exit  Sganarelle.    Gorgibus  enters  his  house.

SCENE  IX. — VALERE,  alone.

I  do  not  know  what  Sganarelle  may  have  been  up  to :  I
have  had  no  news  from  him,  and  I  am  very  anxious  where
to  find  him.  (Sganarelle  comes  back  in  his  servant* s  dress).
Good,  here  he  is.  Well !  Sganarelle,  what  have  you  done
since  I  saw  you  ?

9  It  is  experience  which  teaches  all  things.      This  is  one  of  Erasmus'
adages,  but  slightly  altered  in  sense  and  in  the  order  of  the  words.

10  This  is  from  Ovid's  Epistles.     Sometimes  the  evil  is  stronger  than  art
and  science.

11  This  is  also  found  in  the  eighth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  The  Phy-
sician in  Spite  of  Himself.

268  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  [SCKN*  XL

SCENE  X. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE.

SCAN.  Wonder  upon  wonder ;  I  have  managed  so  well
that  Gorgibus  takes  me  for  a  very  able  doctor.  I  have
introduced  myself  into  his  house  ;  I  have  advised  him  to
give  his  daughter  fresh  air ;  she  is  now  in  an  apartment  at
the  end  of  the  garden,  so  that  she  is  far  away  from  the  old
man,  and  you  may  go  and  see  her  very  easily,

VAL.  Ah,  what  joy  you  are  giving  me  !  Without  losing
any  time,  I  shall  go  and  see  hen  immediately.  (Exit.

SCAN.  One  must  confess  that  this  Mr.  Gorgibus  is  a
regular  nincompoop  to  allow  himself  to  be  deceived  in
this  manner.  (Perceiving  Gorgibus}.  Ah  !  good  Heavens,
all  is  lost ;  this  one  blow  knocks  the  whole  of  the  medical
faculty  down ;  but  I  must  hoodwink  him.

SCENE  XI. — SGANARELLE,  GORGIBUS.

GOR.  Good-day,  Sir.

SCAN.  Your  servant,  Sir ;  you  behold  a  poor  fellow  in
despair :  perhaps  you  may  know  a  physician  who  has  lately
arrived  in  this  town,  who  performs  some  wonderful  cures.

GOR.  Yes,  I  do  know  him ;  he  has  just  gone  away  from
here.

SCAN.  I  am  his  brother,  Sir :  we  are  twins ;  and,  as  we
resemble  each  other  very  much,  we  are  often  taken  for  one
another.

GOR.  May  the  deuce  take  me12  if  I  have  not  been  de-
ceived by  it.  And  what  is  your  name  ?

SCAN.  Narcissus,  Sir,  at  your  service.  You  must  know
that,  being  in  his  study,  I  spilt  two  vials  of  essence  which
were  at  the  edge  of  his  table.  At  once  he  flew  into  such
a  violent  rage  with  me,  that  he  has  turned  me  out  of  his
house ;  he  never  wishes  to  see  me  any  more,  so  that  I  am
a  poor  wretch  at  present,  without  support,  without  any
means,  without  an  acquaintance.

GOR.  Come,  I  will  make  your  peace ;  I  am  one  of  his
friends,  and  I  promise  to  make  it  up  for  you  with  him ;  I
shall  speak  to  him  about  it  the  moment  I  see  him.

14  The  original  has  Je  me  dedonne  au  diable.  See  The  Jealousy  of  le
Barbouille,  page  584,  note  10.

SCENE  xiii.]  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  269

SCAN.  I  shall  be  much  obliged  to  you,  Mr.  Gorgibus.

{Exit  Sganarelle,  who  re-enters  immediately
in  his  doctor* s  gown.

SCENE  XII. — SGANARELLE,  GORGIBUS.

SCAN.  One  must  admit  that  if  patients  will  not  follow
the  orders  of  the  doctor,  and  give  themselves  up  to
debauch  .  .  .

GOR.  Your  very  humble  servant,  Doctor.  I  have  come
to  ask  you  a  favour.

SCAN.  What  is  it,  Sir  ?  Is  it  a  question  of  rendering
you  a  service  ?

GOR.  I  have  just  met  your  brother,  Sir,  who  is  exceed-
ingly sorry  to  ...

SCAN.   He  is  a  rogue,  Mr.  Gorgibus.

GOR.  I  can  answer  for  it  that  he  so  much  regrets  that
he  has  made  you  angry  .  .  .

SCAN.  He  is  a  sot,  Mr.  Gorgibus.

GOR.  Eh  !  Sir,  do  you  wish  to  drive  the  poor  fellow  to
despair  ?

SCAN.  Let  me  hear  no  more  about  him  ;  but  look  at
the  impertinence  of  the  rogue  to  come  and  find  you  to
make  his  peace  for  him ;  I  beg  of  you  to  say  no  more
about  him.

GOR.  In  Heaven's  name,  Doctor  !  do  this  for  my  sake.
If  I  can  oblige  you  in  any  other  thing,  I  will  do  so  with
all  my  heart.  I  have  pledged  myself  to  this,  and  .  .  .

SCAN.  You  ask  me  with  so  much  urgency  that  although
I  had  sworn  never  to  pardon  him,  come,  shake  hands,  I
pardon  him.  I  assure  you  that  I  have  done  great  violence
to  myself,  and  that  I  must  feel  very  kindly  towards  you.
Farewell,  Mr.  Gorgibus.

{Gorgibus  enters  his  house,  exit  Sganarelle.

SCENE  XIII. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE.

VAL.  I  must  admit  that  I  could  never  have  believed
that  Sganarelle  could  have  acquitted  himself  so  well  of  his
task.  (Sganarelle  enters  in  his  servant's  dress~).  Ah  !  my
dear  fellow,  under  what  obligations  I  am  to  you !  what
joy  I  have  1  and  .  .  .

270  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  [SCENE  xv.

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  you  are  speaking  very  easily
about  it.  Gorgibus  fell  in  with  me  ;  and,  without  some
trick  which  I  contrived,  the  whole  of  the  train  would  have
been  discovered.  {Perceiving  Gorgibus},  But  be  off,  here
he  is.  {Exit  Valere.

SCENE  XIV.— GORGIBUS,  SGANARELLE.

GOR.  I  was  looking  everywhere  for  you  to  tell  you
that  I  have  spoken  to  your  brother :  he  has  pledged  me
his  word  that  he  would  forgive  you ;  but,  to  make  more
sure  of  it,  I  wish  him  to  embrace  you  in  my  presence  ;  go
into  my  house,  and  I  shall  go  and  fetch  him.

SCAN.  Ah  !  Mr.  Gorgibus,  I  do  not  think  you  will  find
him  just  now ;  and  besides,  I  shall  not  remain  in  your
house  :  I  fear  his  anger  too  much.

GOR.  Ah  !  but  you  shall  remain,  for  I  will  lock  you  in.
I  am  going  now  to  fetch  your  brother ;  fear  nothing,  I
answer  for  it  that  he  is  no  longer  angry.  (Exit  Gorgibus.

SGAN.  {From  the  window}.  In  truth  I  am  caught  this
time  ;  there  is  no  longer  a  means  of  escape.  The  cloud  is
very  thick,  and  I  am  sorely  afraid  that,  if  it  bursts,  it  will
hail  plentiful  cudgel-blows  on  my  back,  or  that,  by  some
prescription  much  stronger  than  that  of  any  doctor,  they
will  apply  at  least  a  royal  plaster  to  my  shoulders.13  My
prospects  look  very  bad :  but  why  despair  ?  Since  I  have
done  so  much,  let  us  play  the  rogue  to  the  end.  Yes,  yes,
I  must  still  get  out  of  it,  and  show  that  Sganarelle  is  the
king  of  rogues.

{Sganarelle  jumps  through
the  window  and  exit.

SCENE  XV. — GROS-RENE,  GORGIBUS,  SGANARELLE.

GROS.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,  this  is  funny !  what  the
deuce  are  they  leaping  through  the  windows  for  !  I  must
remain  here,  and  see  what  all  this  will  lead  to.

GOR.  I  cannot  find  this  doctor ;  I  do  not  know  where
the  deuce  he  has  hid  himself.  {Perceiving  Sganarelle,  who
is  coming  back  in  a  doctor* s  gown).  But  here  he  is.  Sir,
it  is  not  sufficient  to  have  pardoned  your  brother;  I

1S Sganarelle  means  by  "a  royal  plaster  "  a  brand.

SCENE  xv.]  THE  FLYING  DOCTOR.  271

beseech  you,  for  my  satisfaction,  to  embrace  him :  he  is
in  my  house,  and  I  have  been  looking  for  you  everywhere
to  entreat  you  to  make  this  reconciliation  in  my  presence.

SCAN.  You  are  jesting,  Mr.  Gorgibus;  is  it  not  suffi-
cient that  I  pardon  him  ?  I  never  wish  to  see  him  again.

GOR.  But,  Sir,  for  the  love  of  me.

SCAN.  I  can  refuse  you  nothing :  tell  him  to  come  down.

(While  Gorgibus  enters  the  house  by  tht
door,  Sganarelle  gets  in  at  the  window.

GOR.  (At  the  window}.  Here  is  your  brother  waiting
for  you  below ;  he  has  promised  me  to  do  all  you  wish.

SCAN.  (At  the  window}.  Mr.  Gorgibus,  I  entreat  you  to
make  him  come  here ;  I  beseech  you  let  it  be  in  private
that  I  ask  his  pardon,  for  no  doubt  he  will  inflict  a
hundred  reprimands,  a  hundred  reproaches  upon  me  be-
fore every  one.

(  Gorgibus  comes  out  of  his  house  by  the  door.
Sganarelle  by  the  window.

GOR.  Well,  then,  I  will  tell  him  so  ...  Sir,  he  says
he  is  ashamed,  and  begs  you  to  come  in,  so  that  he  may
ask  your  pardon  in  private.  Here  is  the  key ;  you  can
go  in ;  I  pray  you  not  to  refuse  me,  and  to  give  me  this
satisfaction.

SCAN.  There  is  nothing  I  would  not  do  for  your  satis-
faction ;  you  shall  hear  in  what  manner  I  will  treat  him.
(At  the  window}.  Ah  !  here  you  are,  you  rogue. — Brother,
I  ask  your  pardon,  I  assure  you  that  it  was  not  my  fault.
— Not  your  fault,  you  good-for-nothing,  you  rogue,  I  will
teach  you  manners,  to  have  the  audacity  to  bother  Mr.
Gorgibus,  to  pester  his  brain  with  your  stupid  tricks ! —
Brother — Hold  your  tongue,  I  tell  you — I  will  not  dis-
oblige .  .  .  Hold  your  tongue,  you  rogue.

GROS.  Who  the  deuce  think  you,  is  in  your  house  at
present  ?

GOR.  It  is  the  doctor  and  Narcissus,  his  brother ;  they
had  a  little  quarrel,  and  they  are  making  it  up.

GROS.  The  deuce  take  it !  they  are  but  one.

SCAN.  (At  the  window).  Sot  that  you  are,  I  will  teach
you  how  to  behave.  How  he  lowers  his  eyes !  he  knows

272  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  [SCENE  xv.

well  enough  that  he  has  done  wrong,  the  hang-dog  !  Ah!
the  hypocrite,  how  he  pretends  to  be  a  saint  ?

GROS.  Just  ask  him  a  moment,  Sir,  to  place  his  brother
at  the  window.

GOR.  I  say,  doctor,  I  pray  you  to  make  your  brother
come  to  the  window.

SCAN.  {From  the  windovj).  He  is  unworthy  to  be  seen
by  decent  people,  and  besides  I  cannot  bear  him  near  me.

GOR.  Do  not  refuse  me  this  favour,  Sir,  after  all  those
you  have  granted  me.

SCAN.  {From  the  window).  Really,  Mr.  Gorgibus,  you
have  such  a  power  over  me  that  I  can  refuse  you  nothing.
Show  yourself,  you  rogue.  {After  having  disappeared  for
a  moment,  he  comes  back  in  his  servant 's  clothes).  — Mr.
Gorgibus,  I  am  obliged  to  you.  (He  disappears  once
more,  and  re-appears  immediately,  in  his  doctors  gown). —
Well !  have  you  once  more  seen  this  image  of  a  good-for-
nothing  ?

GROS.  Upon  my  word,  they  are  but  one  j  and,  to  prove
it,  just  tell  him  that  you  would  like  to  see  them  together.

GOR.  But  do  me  the  favor  to  make  him  appear  togeth-
er with  you,  and  to  embrace  him  before  me  at  the
window.

SCAN.  {From  the  window).  It  is  a  thing  which  I  would
refuse  to  any  one  but  you ;  but,  to  show  you  that  I  will
do  anything  for  the  love  of  you,  I  will  resolve  to  do  it,
though  with  difficulty,  and  wish  him  beforehand  to  ask
your  pardon  for  all  the  trouble  which  he  has  given  you. —
Yes,  Mr.  Gorgibus,  I  ask  your  pardon  for  having  impor-
tuned you  so  much,  and  promise  you,  brother,  in  the
presence  of  Mr.  Gorgibus  here,  to  behave  so  well  for  the
future,  that  you  shall  have  no  more  grounds  of  complaint,
at  the  same  time  entreating  you  to  think  no  more  about
what  has  passed.

{He  embraces  his  cap  and  his  collar,
which  he  has  placed  on  his  elbow.

GOR.  Well,  are  they  not  both  there  ?
GROS.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,  he  is  a  sorcerer.
SCAN.  {Coming  out  of  the  house,  as  the  doctor).  Here  is
the  key  of  your  house  which  I  return  to  you,  Sir;  I  did

SCENE  xvi.J  THE   FLYING   DOCTOR.  273

not  wish  this  rogue  to  come  down  with  me,  for  he  dis-
graces me ;  I  should  not  like  him  to  be  seen  in  my  com-
pany, in  the  town  where  I  am  held  in  some  repute.  You
will  tell  him  to  come  out  when  it  shall  please  you.  I
wish  you  a  good-day,  and  am  your  servant,  &c.

(He pretends  to  go,  and  after  having  slipped  off
his  gown,  re-enters  the  house  by  the  window.

GOR.  I  must  go  and  set  this  poor  fellow  free  ;  in  truth,
if  he  has  forgiven  him,  it  has  not  been  without  much  ill-
treatment.  (He  enters  the  house,  and  comes  out  of  it
with  Sganarelle  in  his  servant' s  clothes.

SCAN.  I  thank  you,  Sir,  for  the  trouble  you  have  taken,
and  the  kindness  you  have  shown  ;  I  shall  be  obliged  to
you  all  my  life.

GROS.  Where  do  you  think  the  doctor  is  at  present  ?

GOR.  He  is  gone.

GROS.  (Who  has  picked  ufi  the  gown  of  Sganarelle}.  I
have  got  him  under  my  arm.  Here  is  the  rogue  who
acted  the  doctor,  and  who  deceived  you.  While  he  is  deceiv-
ing you,  and  acting  a  play  in  your  house,  Valere  and  your
daughter  are  together  going  to  the  very  devil.

GOR.  Oh  !  what  an  unfortunate  wretch  I  am !  but  you
will  be  hanged,  rogue,  scoundrel  !

SCAN.  Why  do  you  want  to  hang  me,  Sir  ?  Just  listen
to  one  word,  if  you  please ;  it  is  true  that  it  was  by  ray
contrivance  that  my  master  is  with  your  daughter ;  but,  in
serving  him,  I  have  done  you  no  harm  :  he  is  a  very  suita-
ble match  for  her,  by  birth  as  well  as  by  wealth.  Believe
me,  do  not  make  a  noise  which  would  lead  to  your  con-
fusion, and  send  this  rogue  to  the  devil  together  with
Villebrequin.  But  here  are  our  lovers.

SCENE  XVI. — VALERE,  LUCILE,  GORGIBUS,  SGANARELLE.

VAL.  We  throw  ourselves  at  your  feet.

GOR.  I  forgive  you,  and  reckon  myself  fortunate  to
have  been  deceived  by  Sganarelle,  seeing  that  it  gives  me
such  a  good  son-in-law.  Let  us  go  and  enjoy  ourselves,
and  drink  to  the  health  of  the  company.
