The Dramatic Works of Molière, Vol. V (Molière, 1876)
==========================================================
Vol. V of van Laun's complete English Molière: The Miser, Monsieur de Pourceaugnac, The Magnificent Lovers, The Citizen Who Apes the Nobleman, Psyche. Translated by Henri van Laun (1876). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramaticworksofm05moliiala).

g 

/•?  »e 

-\j\i-  iium"  ii  i  Vf  •<<j\x.  uunnn  i  o^r  .  .\\it  vni»inj//^  \ 

WIT  i  jjui?  I  !y=o  I 

not  ? 

"          M    O          ••• 

lARY4o  , 

£      u? 

&&MW 

*  ^ 

T  O 

o  "- 

3>  Z3 

'^  ^ 

fe* S^r  §  P 

%13W«V^  "%HBA 

^E-UNIVERS/A  ^vlOS-/ 

Q*  t—m.  ^~*  ^       *^m* 

S^-^NP  = 

^^=^^1  6 

I  *- 
N* 

IJUITl 

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS  OF  MOLIERE. 

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS 

OP 

M  O  L  I  E  R  E 

RENDERED  INTO  ENGLISH 

BY   HENRI   VAN   LAUN 

A   NEW    EDITION 
With    a    Prefatory    Memoir,    Introductory   Notices   and   Notes 

ILLUSTRATED  WITH 

NINETEEN   ENGRAVINGS  ON   STEEL 

FROM    PAINTINGS   AND   DESIGNS  BY 

Horace    Vernet,  Desenne,  Johannot  and  Hersent 

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES 

VOLUME  V 

PHILADELPHIA 
GEORGE  BARRIE,  PUBLISHER 

Annex 

6' 

\A4' 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

VOLUME  FIVE. 

THE  MISER. 

ISAvare 

MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC. 

ConUdie-  Ballet  ..................        83 

THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS. 

Les  Amants  Magnifiques      .............       j^q 

THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN. 

Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme  .............       193 

PSYCHE. 

Tragedie-  Ballet     .................      277 

20GS314 

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VOLUME  FIVE. 

THE  MISER.    Act  I.,  Scene  3. 

L1  Avare Frontispiece 

MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.    Act  I.,  Scene  16. 

Comedie- Ballet  1 12 

THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.    Act  III.,  Scene  2. 

Le  Bourgeois  Gentilhomme 224 

L'AVARE. 

COMEDIE. 

THE    MISER. 

A   COMEDY    IN    FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 
9TH  SEPT.  1668. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE 

The  Miser  was  first  represented  on  the  gth  of  September  1668,  and  was 
played  nine  times,  though  not  consecutively.  Two  months  afterwards,  it 
was  performed  again,  after  it  had  been  represented  at  Court ;  and  then  it 
was  acted  eleven  times.  It  was  evidently  not  a  success.  And  this  is  the 
more  astonishing,  because  the  murder  of  the  lieutenant  criminel  Tardieu 
and  of  his  wife — two  noted  misers,  who  had  been  assassinated  in  their 
own  house  three  years  before — was  as  yet  not  forgotten,  and  the  author 
could  therefore  calculate  upon  a  kind  of  curiosity  to  know  how  misers 
were  represented  on  the  stage,  as  well  as  on  the  intrinsic  merit  of  the 
piece.  Yet  Moliere's  play  is  crowded  with  general  traits,  and  not  with 
particular  allusions.  He  had  to  paint  a  vice  as  hateful  in  reality  as  it  is 
disagreeable  to  be  depicted  on  the  stage ;  and  he  succeeded  in  doing 
this,  whilst  enlivening  many  scenes  with  the  aid  of  funny  characters  or 
ridiculous  incidents. 

It  has  been  said  that  The  Miser  did  not  succeed  so  well  as  Moliere 
and  his  literary  friends  expected,  because  it  was  written  in  prose ;  but 
several  of  Moliere's  prose  plays  had  already  been  represented  in  former 
years,  and  had  met  with  great  and  deserved  success.  It  has  even  been  re- 
ported that  Racine,  who  had  quarrelled  with  Moliere,  remarked  one  day 
to  Boileau  that  he  was  the  only  one  who  was  laughing  during  a  repre- 
sentation of  The  Miser,  whereupon  Boileau  replied,  "  I  have  too  high  an 
opinion  of  you  to  believe  that  you  were  not  laughing  yourself,  at  least 
inwardly." 

Moliere's  comedy  is  based  on  Plautus'  Aulularia,  of  which  we  shall 
give  an  outline.1 

"  Euclio,  a  miserly  old  Athenian,  has  a  daughter  named  Phaedria,  who 
has  been  ravished  by  a  young  man  named  Lyconides,  but  is  ignorant 
from  whom  she  has  received  injury.  Lyconides  has  an  uncle  named  Me- 
gadorus,  who,  being  ignorant  of  these  circumstances,  determines  to  ask 
Phaedra  of  her  father  in  marriage  for  himself.  Euclio  has  discovered  a 
pot  of  gold  in  his  house,  which  he  watches  with  the  greatest  anxiety.  In 
the  meantime,  Megadorus  asks  his  daughter  in  marriage,  and  his  proposal 
is  accepted  ;  and  while  preparations  are  making  for  the  nuptials,  Euclio 
conceals  his  treasure,  first  in  one  place  and  then  in  another.  Strobilus, 
the  servant  of  Lyconides,  watches  his  movements,  and,  having  discovered 
it,  carries  off  the  treasure.  Whilst  Euclio  is  lamenting  his  loss,  Lyconides 
accosts  him,  with  the  view  of  confessing  the  outrage  he  has  committed  on 

1  Riley,  The  Comedies  of  Plautus,  I.,  Aulularia,  p.  374. 

4  THE   MISER. 

his  daughter,  and  of  announcing  to  him  that  his  uncle,  Megadorus,  has 
cancelled  his  agreement  to  marry  her  in  favour  of  himself.  Euclio  at  first 
thinks  that  he  is  come  to  confess  the  robbery  of  the  treasure.  After  much 
parleying,  his  mistake  is  rectified,  and  the  matter  is  explained  ;  on  which 
Lyconides  forces  Strobilus  to  confess  the  theft ;  and  (although  the  rest 
of  the  play  in  its  original  form  is  lost)  we  learn  from  acrostic  argument 
that  Strobilus  gives  up  the  treasure,  and  Lyconides  marries  the  daughter 
of  Euclio,  and  receives  the  gold  for  a.  marriage-portion.  The  Supple- 
ment, written  by  Codrus  Urcens,  supplies  the  place  of  what  is  lost." 

Plautus'  comedy  has  had  many  imitators  before  Moliere.  Lorenzino 
de  Medici,  the  murderer  of  the  first  Duke  of  Florence,  Alexander,  worked 
up  Terence's  Adelphi  with  Plautus'  Aulularia,  and  his  Mostellaria,  or, 
the  Haunted  House,  and  formed  of  the  whole  a  comedy  called  the  Ari- 
dosio,  which  was  cleverly  translated  in  French  by  Pierre  de  Larivey,  in 
1579,  under  the  title  of  The  Spirits.  The  miser  Severin  believes  his 
house  infested  by  evil  spirits,  and  therefore  thinks  it  safer  to  hide  a  purse, 
containing  two  thousand  crowns,  in  a  hole  outside.  His  anxiety  is  very 
amusing  to  know  where  to  hide  his  money,  and  at  last  he  cries  out, 
"  Good  Heavens !  it  seems  that  everyone  gazes  at  me ;  the  very  stones 
and  wood  look  at  me.  He !  my  little  hole,  my  darling,  I  recommend 
myself  to  you.  Now  then,  in  the  name  of  Heaven  and  of  Saint  Anthony 
of  Padua,  in  manus  tuas,  domine,  commendo  spiritum  meum."  In  spite 
of  his  pious  invocation,  Desire,  who  wishes  to  be  his  son-in-law,  and  who 
had  seen  him  hide  the  purse,  steals  it,  but  a  long  time  elapses  before  the 
miser  finds  it  out,  and  when  at  last  the  robbery  is  discovered,  he  breaks 
out  in  a  rage.  The  miser's  brother  comes  to  tell  him  that  his  money  is 
found  again,  but  he  does  not  believe  it.  Finally,  his  daughter  is  married 
to  Desire,  and  his  son  Urbain  to  Feliciane,  a  girl  whom  the  latter  had 
seduced,  and  whose  father,  a  Protestant,  comes  expressly  from  La  Ro- 
chelle,  to  give  her  a  splendid  dowry,  and  to  be  present  at  the  wedding. 

Although  Moliere  owes  several  scenes  to  the  Italian  play  of  Lorenzino 
de  Medici,  he  is  more  indebted  to  Plautus,  from  whom  he  borrowed  the 
idea  of  making  the  miser  his  chief  character.  He  also  took  some  scenes 
from  Ariosto's  /  Suppositi  ( The  Fictitio us  Characters),  and  from  several 
of  the  commedia  dell"  arte,  such  as  L'  Amante  tradito  ( The  betrayed 
Lover),  La  Comeriera  nobile  (The  noble- torn  Ladies-maid),  Le  Case 
svaliggiate  (The  robbed  House ,)  11  doctorBachettone  (The  bigoted  Doctor), 
and  also  one  scene  from  The  Fair  Female  Plaintiffe,  a  comedy  by  Bois- 
robert.  The  Miser  is  one  of  the  comedies  of  Moliere,  which  contains 
more  imitations  or  reminiscences  than  any  other  of  his  plays ;  and  yet 
his  genius  has  so  welded  the  whole  that  Goethe  has  declared  that  it 
possesses  extraordinary  grandeur,  and  is  in  a  high  degree  tragical.  This 
is  chiefly  because  Moliere  clearly  brings  out  the  consequences  of  extreme 
avarice,  which  is,  that  all  family  ties  are  thereby  destroyed,  all  human 
feelings  eradicated,  and  all  natural  affections  effectually  rooted  up. 
Horace  had  already  observed  this  in  his  Eighth  Satire  ;  but  Moliere  de- 
velops it  with  great  force  and  energy,  and  shows  how  the  miser  cares  only 
for  his  money,  and  considers  his  children  as  his  enemies,  how  the  son 
takes  up  loans  at  any  price,  and  how  the  daughter  has  an  intrigue  with 
her  lover,  disguised  as  a  steward. 

J.  J.  Rousseau  considered  that  though  it  is  wrong  to  be  a  miser,  and  to 
lend  money  at  an  usurious  interest,  yet  it  is  more  wrong  for  a  son  to  rob 
his  father,  to  be  wanting  in  respect  to  him,  and,  when  his  father  gives  him 
his  malediction,  to  reply,  ''  I  want  none  of  your  gifts."  The  critic  ap- 

THE   MISER.  J 

pears  to  have  forgotten  that  Moliere's  duty  as  a  dramatist  was  to  exem- 
plify the  consequences  of  vice,  and  to  show  to  the  spectators  that  a  miser- 
ly father  must  produce  a  spendthrift  son,  and  that  a  parent  who  neglects 
all  his  duties  will  be  punished  by  the  insolence  and  want  of  feeling  dis- 
played by  the  very  children  whom  he  has  neglected. 

MoliSre's  miser  moves  in  rather  a  fashionable  sphere ;  he  has  horses,  a 
carriage,  several  servants,  and  even  a  steward.  Of  course,  his  position  in 
society  compels  him  to  keep  them,  and  therefore  the  contrast  is  all  the 
stronger  between  the  pangs  caused  by  his  avarice,  and  the  necessity  which 
obliges  him  to  keep  up  a  certain  appearance.  He  has  horses,  but  they 
starve  ;  servants  who  are  neither  clothed  nor  dressed ;  a  steward  whom  he 
does  not  pay,  and  who  seems  a  meaner  fellow  than  he  is  himself.  He 
wishes  to  give  an  entertainment ;  but  it  must  cost-  him  nothing,  just  as  he 
desires  his  daughter  to  be  married,  without  giving  her  a  dowry.  His  fall- 
ing in  love — and  of  course  even  misers  can  feel  an  inferior  sort  of  love — 
deepens  only  the  more  the  traits  of  his  avarice,  and  in  the  end  he  prefers 
lei  beaux  yeux  de  sa  cassette  to  those  of  the  object  of  his  affections. 

There  exists  a  Chinese  comedy,  called  Khanthsian-non  (  The  Slave  of 
the  riches  which  he  guards},  which  depicts  a  miser  from  his  earliest  youth 
until  his  death.  His  end,  above  all,  is  characteristic.  His  son  has  bought 
for  the  sick  man  twopence-halfpenny's  worth  pease-pudding,  instead  of  one 
farthing's  worth,  as  his  father  had  told  him.  The  dying  man  observes  the 
sum  which  his  son  has  disbursed,  which  makes  him  very  uneasy  ;  and 
when,  finally,  he  is  at  his  last  gasp,  he  advises  his  son  to  bury  him  for 
economy's  sake  in  an  old  horse-trough  which  is  behind  the  house;  to  cut 
him  in  two  if  his  body  should  be  too  long ;  and,  above  all,  because  his 
bones  are  rather  hard,  not  to  use  his  own  axe,  but  to  borrow  his  neighbour's. 
This  is  a  frightful  example  of  "  the  ruling  passion  strong  in  death." 

In  the  first  volume  of  the  translation  of  ''  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de 
Moliere,  London,  1732,"  this  play  is  dedicated  to  his  Royal  Highness,  the 
frince  of  Wales,  in  the  following  words  : — 

SIR, 

The  Refin'd  Taste  you  are  so  well  known  to  have  in  the  Publick  Diversions, 
and  the  peculiar  Encouragement,  which  You  have  given  to  Theatrical  Entertain- 
ments, have  embolden'd  the  Translators  of  the  following  Work  to  implore  Your 
Favour  and  Protection. 

It  is  intended,  SIR,  to  publish  all  the  Comedies  of  Moliere  in  the  same  manner  in 
which  the  Miser  now  appears  to  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  :  and  tho'  we  are  very 
sensible  that  it  cannot  be  of  the  least  Advantage  to  Your  better  understanding  of 
the  Original  Author,  yet,  as  it  may  prove  very  serviceable  to  our  present  Dra- 
matick  Writers,  and  assist  'em  in  producing  Entertainments  more  agreeable  to 
Nature,  Good  Sense,  and  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS'S  Taste,  we  humbly  hope  that 
you  will  not  look  on  it  as  an  useless  undertaking. 

It  may  be  thought  perhaps  a  malicious,  an  ill-grounded  Suggestion,  to  insinuate 
that  those  amongst  us,  who  presume  to  write  for  the  Stage,  are  either  unacquainted 
with  Molitre,  or  ignorant  of  his  Language  ;  but  I  fear  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  has 
too  frequently  experienced  the  one,  and  from  thence  very  naturally  concluded  the 
other.  The  present  Productions  of  the  Theatre  are  most  of  'em  such  crude  un- 
meaning Rhapsodies,  so  foreign  to  Truth,  Vertue,  and  Politeness,  and  so  void  of 
all  the  rules  both  of  Poetry  and  Grammar,  that  the  authors  of  'em  may  justly  be 
suspected  of  Ignorance  in  the  living  Languages  as  well  as  in  the  Dead.  But  Your 
ROYAL  HIGHNESS  wants  no  more  to  be  informed  of  their  Defects,  than  of  Molitre' t 
Perfections  ;  as  You  know  how  to  taste  and  enjoy  the  one,  so  You  as  readily  can  see 
thro',  and  contemn  the  others,  tho'  You  are  led,  by  the  abundance  of  Your  Can- 
dour and  Good-nature,  not  entirely  to  reject  'em.  Moliere,  SIR,  has  been  trans- 
lated into  most  of  the  Languages,  and  patroniz'd  by  most  of  the  Princes  in 
Europe  ;  but  if  we  have  been  capable  of  doing  him  as  much  Justice  in  our  Ver- 
sion, as  we  have  been  prudent  enough  to  do  him  in  the  choice  of  a  Patron,  he'll 

6  THE  MISER. 

be  more  happy  in  speaking  English  than  in  all  the  rest ;  and  we  shall  be  esteemed 
as  good  Guardians  of  Moliere's  Fatherless  Muse,  as  we  really  are,  SIR,  Your 
ROYAI.  HIGHNESS'S  most  obedient  and  most  devoted  humble  Servants, 

THE  TRANSLATORS. 

Several  English  dramatists  have  partly  borrowed  from  Moliere.  The 
first  was  Mr.  Shadwell,  who  added  above  eight  new  characters  to  the 
French  play,  called  it  also  The  Miser,  and  had  it  acted  at  the  Theatre 
Royal  in  1671.  In  the  Preface  he  states  : — 

"  The  foundation  of  this  play  I  took  from  one  of  Moliere's,  called  L'- 
Avare ;  but  that  having  too  few  persons,  and  too  little  action  for  an  Eng- 
lish theatre,  I  added  to  both  so  much,  that  I  may  call  more  than  half  of 
this  play  my  own ;  and  I  think  I  may  say  without  vanity,  that  Moliere's 
part  of  it  has  not  suffered  at  my  hands ;  nor  did  I  ever  know  a  French 
comedy  made  use  of  by  the  worst  of  our  Poets,  that  was  not  bettered  by 
them.  It  is  not  barrenness  of  wit  or  invention,  that  makes  us  borrow 
from  the  French,  but  Laziness  ;  and  this  was  the  occasion  of  my  making 
use  of  L'Avare  .  .  .  The  great  haste  I  made  in  writing  made  me  very 
doubtful  of  the  success  of  it,  which  was  the  reason  that  at  first  I  did  not 
own  it,  but  concealed  my  name." 

But  Shadwell  is  not  satisfied  with  this,  and  in  the  Prologue  says : — 

"  French  plays,  in  which  true  wit's  as  rarely  found, 
As  mines  of  silver  are  on  English  ground  .  .  . 
But  stay,  I've  been  too  bold  ;  methinks  I  see 
The  English  Monsieurs  rise  in  mutiny, 
Crying,  Confound  him  !  does  he  damn  French  plays, 
*  The  only  pieces  that  deserve  the  Bays  ? 

France,  that  on  Fashion  does  strict  laws  impose, 

The  universal  monarchy  for  clothes, 

That  rules  our  most  important  part,  our  dress, 

Should  rule  our  wit,  which  is  a  thing  much  less. 

But,  Messieurs,  he  says,  farther  to  provoke  ye, 

He  would  as  soon  be  author  of  Tu  Quoque 

As  any  farce  that  e'er  from  France  was  sent  .  .  . 

For  our  good-natured  nation  thinks  it  fit 

To  count  French  toys,  good  wares  ;   French  nonsense,  wit." 

I  can  understand  the  bitterness  of  the  burly  old  'Whig  dramatist  against 
France.  I  can  even  find  an  excuse  for  his  not  understanding  French  wit 
— for  the  plea  may  be  brought  forward  of  a  want  of  appreciation  by  dis^ 
pensation  of  Providence, — but  surely  it  is  too  much  to  say  what  he  states 
in  the  Preface,  that  the  worst  English  poets  better  every  French  comedy 
which  they  use.  His  lofty  idea  of  his  own  and  his  professional  brethren's 
dramatic  capacities,  and  their  pretended  independence  of  French  wit 
whilst,  at  the  same  time,  they  pilfer  the  grandest  conceptions,  as  well  as 
the  smallest  trifles,  of  Gallic  dramatists,  has  come  down  to  a  much  later 
time,  and  is  perhaps  not  unknown  even  in  the  present  day. 

Voltaire  remarks  on  Shadwell's  preface,  "  that  if  a  man  has  not  wit 
enough  to  conceal  his  vanity  better,  he  has  not  wit  enough  to  do  better 
than  Moliere. 

Fielding's  play,  The  Miser,  professedly  taken  from  Plautus  and  Moliere 
was  acted  at  Drury  Lane  Theatre  on  the  i/th  of  February  1733.  It  was 
dedicated  to  Charles,  duke  of  Richmond  and  Lennox,  and  in  the  Preface 
he  speaks  of  dedicating  Moliere  to  his  Grace,  and  calls  himself  a  transla- 
tor. In  the  prologue  it  is  said  : — 

THE  MISER.  7 

"  To-night  our  Author  treats  you  with  Moliere, 
Moliere,  who  nature's  inmost  secrets  knew  ; 
Whose  potent  pen,  like  Kneller's  pencil,  drew. 
In  whose  strong  scenes  all  characters  are  shewn, 
Not  by  low  jests,  but  actions  of  their  own. 
Happy  our  English  bard,  if  your  applause 
Grant  has  not  injur'd  the  French  author's  cause. 
From  that  alone  arises  all  his  fear  ; 
He  must  be  safe,  if  he  has  saved  Moliere." 

This  is  very  discriminating  praise  of  Moliere's  play.  In  all  the  scenes 
which  Fielding  has  imitated  from  Moliere,  he  has  nearly  literally  followed 
him.  The  chief  difference  is  that,  in  Fielding's  play,  the  servant  man  and 
maid  have  more  scenes  allotted  to  them  than  in  the  French  comedy  ;  that  the 
maid,  Lappet,  in  connivance  with  Mariana,  succeeds  in  getting  a  bond  of 
ten  thousand  pounds  from  Lovegold,  the  miser,  to  be  forfeited,  in  case  he 
should  refuse  to  marry  the  young  lady :  that  the  latter  frightens  him,  by 
giving  the  most  extravagant  orders  to  different  tradesmen,  who  make  their 
appearance,  and  by  ordering  a  repast  on  a  most  elaborate  scale ;  that, 
finally,  Lovegold  endeavours  to  bribe  Lappet  to  swear  a  robbery  against 
Mariana,  who,  like  a  regular  English  girl,  has  far  more  spirit,  and  is  far 
more  active — I  would  nearly  have  said  is  more  intriguing — than  her 
French  prototype.  It  has  been  justly  said  of  Fielding's  Miser  that  "  it  has 
the  value  of  a  copy  from  a  great  painter  by  an  eminent  hand.'' 

The  Miser  has  been  translated  by  Michael  de  Boissy,  1752,  but  it  has 
never  been  performed. 

Mr.  Edward  Tighe  also  made  of  The  Miser  a  farce  in  one  act,  whilst 
James  Wild,  prompter  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre,  reduced  it  to  three  acts, 
and  had  it  played  in  the  year  1792. 

In  1856,  Engelbertus  Saegelken  published  at  Bremen  the  thesis,  De 
Mollerii  Fabula  Avari,  which  he  defended  for  his  degree  of  Doctor  of 
Philosophy,  and  which  was  dedicated  to  the  Rector  of  the  University  of 
that  town.  His  object  is  to  find  out  and  examine  in  how  far  Moliere  has 
followed  Plautus'  Aulularia  ;  the  points  of  resemblance  and  of  difference 
between  Euclio  and  Harpagon.  He  compares  the  first  Scene  of  the  first 
Act  and  the  fourth  Scene  of  the  fourth  Act  of  Plautus'  comedy  with  the 
third  Scene  of  the  first  Act  and  the  same  Scene  of  the  third  Act  of  Mo- 
liere's Miser ;  states  that  the  Latin  dramatist  holds  to  the  unities,  but  not 
the  French  one,  and  discusses  Schlegel's  dictum  that  Moliere  has  brought 
all  the  genuine  features  of  avarice  into  one  man — as  if  the  miser  who 
buried  his  treasure  in  the  ground  was  of  the  same  kind  as  he  who  makes 
money  by  usury.  Saegelken  thinks  this  is  not  a  fair  indictment  against 
Moliere,  and  concludes  by  giving  the  opinions  of  some  learned  critics. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

HARPAGON,  father  to  Cleante  and  Elise,  in  love  with  Ma- 
riane? 

CLEANTE,  Harpagon' s  son,  Mariane 's  lover. 
VALERE,  son  of  Anselme,  Elise's  lover. 
ANSELME,  father  to  Valere  and  Mariane. 
MASTER  SIMON,  agent. 

MASTER  JACQUES,  cook  and  coachman  to  Harpagon. 
LA  FLECHE,  Cleante' s  valet. 

BRINDAVOINE,    1 

>  Harpagon  s  lacqueys? 
LA  MERLUCHE,  ) 

A  MAGISTRATE  *  and  his  CLERK. 

ELISE,  Harpagon1  s  daughter,  Valere' s  sweetheart. 

MARIANE,  Cleante' s  sweetheart,  beloved  by  Harpagon. 

FROSINE,  a  designing  woman. 

MISTRESS  CLAUDE,  Harpagon' s  servant. 

The  scene  is  in  PARIS,  in  HARP  AGON'S  HOUSE. 

2  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.  His  dress  was  a  cloak, 
breeches  and  doublet  of  black  satin,  ornamented  with  coarse  black  silk 
iace,  hat,  wig,  and  shoes.  Harpagon  is  derived,  according  to  some  com- 
mentators, from  the  Latin  harpago,  a  hook,  itself  formed  from  a  Greek 
word ;  hence  a  man  with  crooked  fingers,  to  which  everything  sticks ;  the 
Latin  word  is  twice  used  in  the  Aulularia.  Luigi  Grotto,  the  author  of 
Emilia  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Blunderer,  Vol.  I.,  page  3),  had 
already  given  the  name  to  a  miser.  But  may  the  word  Harpagon  not  be 
connected  with  harpon,  a  harpoon,  and  harper,  to  seize  with  the  nails, 
from  the  old  high  German  harfan,  to  seize? 

s  Brindavoine  means  literally  "  oat-stalk,"  and  la  Merltiche  "  stock- 
fish ;"  both  lacqueys  being  probably  so  named  on  account  of  their  ema- 
ciated appearance. 

*  The  original  has  Commissaire,  see  Vol.  I.,  The  School  for  Husbands, 
page  261,  note  5. 

THE    MISER. 

(L'A  VARE). 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — VALERE,  ELISE. 

VAL.  Eh,  what !  charming  Elise,  you  are  growing  mel- 
ancholy, after  the  kind  assurances  which  you  were  good 
enough  to  give  me  of  your  love  !  Alas  !  I  see  you  sighing 
in  the  midst  of  my  joy !  Tell  me,  is  it  with  regret  at 
having  made  me  happy?  And  do  you  repent  of  that  en- 
gagement to  which  my  affection  has  induced  you?5 

EL.  No  Valere,  I  cannot  repent  of  anything  that  I  do 
for  you.  I  feel  myself  attracted  to  it  by  too  sweet  a 
power,  and  I  have  not  even  the  will  to  wish  that  things 
were  otherwise.  But,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  our  success 
causes  me  uneasiness;  and  I  am  very  much  afraid  of 
loving  you  a  little  more  than  I  ought. 

VAL.  Eh  !  what  is  there  to  fear,  Elise,  in  the  affection 
you  have  for  me  ? 

EL.  Alas !  a  hundred  things  at  once  :  the  anger  of  a 
father,  the  reproaches  of  my  family,  the  censure  of  the 
world;  but  more  than  all,  Valere,  the  change  of  your 
heart,  and  that  criminal  coolness  with  which  those  of  your 
sex  most  frequently  repay  the  too  ardent  proofs  of  an  in- 
nocent love. 

5  The  engagement  Val&re  mentions  is  a  reciprocal  marriage  promise, 
signed  by  himself  and  Elise  only  the  day  before ;  hence  his  joy.  He  ex- 
Dlains  this  fully,  Act  v.,  Scene  3. 

II 

12  THE   MISER.  [ACT  I. 

VAL.  Ah !  do  not  wrong  me  thus,  to  judge  of  me  by 
others !  Suspect  me  of  anything  Elise,  rather  than  of 
failing  in  my  duty  to  you,  I  love  you  too  well  for  that : 
and  my  affection  for  you  will  last  as  long  as  my  life. 

EL.  Ah,  Valere,  every  one  talks  in  the  same  strain  !  All 
men  are  alike  in  their  words;  their  actions  only  show 
them  to  be  different. 

VAL.  Since  actions  only  can  show  what  we  are,  wait 
then,  at  least,  to  judge  of  my  heart  by  them ;  and  do  not 
search  for  crimes  because  you  unjustly  fear,  and  wrongly 
anticipate.  Pray  do  not  kill  me  with  the  poignant  blows 
of  an  outrageous  suspicion  ;  and  give  me  time  to  convince 
you,  by  many  thousand  proofs,  of  the  sincerity  of  my 
affection. 

EL.  Alas,  how  easily  we  are  persuaded  by  those  we 
love  !  Yes,  Valere,  I  hold  your  heart  incapable  of  deceiv- 
ing me.  I  believe  that  you  truly  love  me,  and  that  you 
will  be  constant.  I  will  no  longer  doubt  of  it,  and  I  will 
confine  my  grief  to  the  apprehensions  of  the  blame  which 
people  may  utter  against  me. 

VAL.  But  why  this  uneasiness? 

EL.  I  should  have  nothing  to  fear,  if  every  one  could 
see  you  with  the  eyes  with  which  I  look  upon  you ;  and 
in  your  own  person  I  see  sufficient  to  justify  me  in  what  I 
do  for  you.  For  its  defence,  my  heart  pleads  all  your 
merit,  supported  by  the  help  of  a  gratitude  with  which 
Heaven  has  bound  me  to  you.  At  every  moment  I  call 
to  mind  that  supreme  danger  which  first  made  us  ac- 
quainted with  each  other ;  that  wonderful  generosity 
which  made  you  risk  your  life  in  order  to  snatch  mine 
from  the  fury  of  the  waves ;  those  most  tender  attentions 
which  you  lavished  upon  me,  after  having  dragged  me  out 
of  the  water,  and  the  assiduous  homage  of  that  ardent 
affection,  which  neither  time  nor  obstacles  have  been  able 
to  discourage,  and  which,  causing  you  to  neglect  relatives 
and  country,  detains  you  in  this  spot,  and  keeps  your 
position  unrecognized  all  on  my  account,  and  has  reduced 
you  to  assume  the  functions  of  servant6  to  my  father,  in 

•  The  original  has  domestique,  which  at  that  time  meant  simply  "  be- 
longing to  the  house  of,"  and  was  not  considered  humiliating. 

scBNBi.l  THE   MISER.  13 

order  to  see  me.  All  this  produces,  no  doubt,  a  marvel- 
lous effect  on  me,  and  quite  sufficient  to  justify,  in  my 
own  eyes,  the  engagement  to  which  I  have  consented ; 
but  it  is  not  perhaps  enough  to  justify  it  in  that  of  others, 
and  I  am  not  certain  that  the  world  will  enter  into  my 
sentiments. 

VAL.  Of  all  that  you  have  mentioned,  it  is  only  by  my 
love  that  I  pretended  to  deserve  anything  from  you ;  and 
as  for  the  scruples  which  you  have;  your  father  himself 
takes  but  too  good  care  to  justify  you  before  the  world ; 
and  the  excess  of  his  avarice,  and  the  austere  way  in 
which  he  treats  his  children,  might  authorize  stranger 
things  still.  Pardon  me,  charming  Elise,  for  speaking 
thus  before  you.  You  know  that,  on  that  subject,  no 
good  can  be  said.  But  in  short,  if  I  can,  as  I  hope  I 
shall,  find  my  relatives  again,  we  shall  have  very  little 
difficulty  in  rendering  them  favourable  to  us.  I  am 
impatient  to  receive  some  tidings  of  them ;  and  should 
they  be  delayed  much  longer,  I  will  myself  go  in  search 
of  them. 

EL.  Ah !  Valere,  do  not  stir  from  this,  I  beseech  you ; 
and  think  only  how  to  ingratiate  yourself  with  my 
father. 

VAL.  You  see  how  I  go  about  it,  and  the  artful  wheed- 
ling which  I  have  been  obliged  to  make  use  of  to  enter 
his  service  ;  beneath  what  mask  of  sympathy  and  affinity 
o."  sentiments  I  disguise  myself,  in  order  to  please  him ; 
ar  I  what  part  I  daily  play  with  him,  that  I  may  gain  his 
affection.  I  am  making  admirable  progress  in  it;  and 
experience  teaches  me  that  to  find  favour  with  men,  there 
is  no  better  method  than  to  invest  ourselves  in  their  eyes 
with  their  hobbies ;  than  to  act  according  to  their  maxims, 
to  flatter  their  faults  and  to  applaud  their  doings.  One 
needs  not  fear  to  overdo  this  complaisance ;  the  way  in 
which  one  fools  them  may  be  as  palpable  as  possible ;  even 
the  sharpest  are  the  greatest  dupes  when  flattery  is  in  the 
question;  and  there  is  nothing  too  impertinent  or  too 
ridiculous  for  them  to  swallow,  if  it  be  only  seasoned  with 
praises.  Sincerity  suffers  somewhat  by  the  trade  which  I 
follow ;  but,  when  we  have  need  of  people,  we  must  suit 
ourselves  to  their  tastes ;  and  since  they  are  to  be  gained 

(4  THE   MISER.  [ACTI. 

over  only  in  that  way,  it  is  not  the  fault  of  those  who 
flatter,  but  of  those  who  wish  to  be  flattered?7 

EL.  But  why  do  you  not  try  to  gain  the  support  of  my 
brother,  in  case  the  servant  should  take  it  into  her  head 
to  reveal  our  secret? 

VAL.  There  is  no  managing  them  both  at  once;  and 
the  disposition  of  the  father  and  that  of  the  son  are  so 
opposed  to  each  other,  that  it  becomes  difficult  to  arrange 
a  confidence  with  both.  But  you,  on  your  part,  act  upon 
your  brother,  and  make  use  of  the  affection  between  you 
two,  to  bring  him  over  to  our  interests.  He  is  just  coin- 
ing. I  go.  Take  this  opportunity  of  speaking  to  him, 
and  reveal  our  business  to  him,  only  when  you  judge  the 
fit  time  come. 

EL.  I  do  not  know  whether  I  shall  have  the  courage  to 
entrust  this  confidence  to  him. 

SCENE  II. — CLEANTE,  ELISE. 

CLE.  I  am  very  glad  to  find  you  alone,  sister ;  I  was 
dying  to  speak  to  you,  to  unburden  myself  to  you  of  a 
secret. 

EL.  You  find  me  quite  ready  to  listen,  brother.  What 
have  you  to  tell  me  ? 

CLE.  Many  things,  sister,  all  contained  in  one  word.  I 
am  in  love. 

EL.  You  are  in  love? 

CLE.  Yes,  I  am  in  love.  But  before  going  farther,  I 
know  that  I  am  dependent  on  my  father,  and  that  the  name 
of  son  subjects  me  to  his  will;  that  we  ought  not  to  pledge 
our  affection  without  the  consent  of  those  to  whom  we  owe 
our  life ;  that  Heaven  has  made  them  the  masters  of  our 
affection,  and  that  we  are  enjoined  not  to  dispose  of  it  but 
by  their  direction ;  that,  not  being  biassed  by  any  foolish 
passion,  they  are  less  likely  to  deceive  themselves  than  we 
are,  and  to  see  much  better  what  is  proper  for  us;  that  we 
ought  rather  to  be  guided  by  the  light  of  their  prudence 
than  by  the  blindness  of  our  passion ;  and  that  the  ardour 
of  our  youth  often  drags  us  to  dangerous  precipices.  I  tell 
you  all  this,  sister,  that  you  may  save  yourself  the  trouble 

T  M.Genin  has  observed  that  this  part  of  Val&re's  speech  is  written  in 
blank  verse. 

SCENE  ii.J  THE   MISER.  1  5 

of  telling  it  to  me;  for,  in  short,  my  love  will  not  listen  to 
anything,  and  I  pray  you  not  to  make  any  remonstrances. 

EL.  Have  you  pledged  yourself,  brother,  with  her  whom 
you  love? 

CLE.  No  ;  but  I  am  determined  to  do  so,  and  I  implore 
you,  once  more,  not  to  advance  any  reasons  to  dissuade  me 
from  it. 

EL.  Am  I  then  so  strange  a  person,  brother? 

CLE.  No,  sister;  but  you  are  not  in  love  ;  you  are  igno- 
rant of  the  sweet  empire  which  a  tender  passion  exercises 
over  our  hearts  ;  and  I  dread  your  wisdom. 

EL.  Alas  !  dear  brother,  let  us  not  speak  of  my  wisdom  ; 
there  is  no  one  who  does  not  fail  in  it,  at  least  once  in 
his  life  ;  and  were  I  to  open  my  heart  to  you,  perhaps  I 
would  appear  less  wise  in  your  eyes  than  yourself. 

CLE.  Ah  !  would  to  Heaven  that  your  heart,  like  mine 

EL.  Let  us  first  finish  your  affair,  and  tell  me  who  it  is 
whom  you  love. 

CLE.  A  young  person,  who  has  lately  come  to  live  in  this 
neighbourhood,  and  who  seems  to  be  made  to  inspire  love 
in  all  who  behold  her.  Nature,  sister,  has  created  nothing 
more  amiable  ;  and  I  felt  myself  carried  away  the  moment 
I  saw  her.  Her  name  is  Mariane,  and  she  lives  under  the 
protection  of  a  good  motherly  woman  who  is  nearly  always 
ill,  and  for  whom  this  dear  girl  entertains  feelings  of  friend- 
ship not  to  be  imagined.  She  waits  upon  her,  condoles 
with  her,  and  cheers  her  with  a  tenderness  that  would 
touch  you  to  the  very  soul.  She  does  things  with  the 
most  charming  air  in  the  world  ;  a  thousand  graces  shine 
through  her  every  action,  a  gentleness  full  of  attraction,  a 
most  prepossessing  kindness,  an  adorable  simplicity,  a  .  . 
Ah  !  sister,  I  wish  you  could  have  seen  her  !8 

EL.  I  see  much,  brother,  in  the  things  you  tell  me  ;  and 
to  understand  what  she  really  is,  it  is  sufficient  that  you 
love  her. 

+i'  °ne,<£t,he  commentators  of  Moliere.  makes  the  iust  remark, 
that  the  love  of  Cleante  for  Mariane  is  not  only  based  upon  her  personal 
attractions,  but  upon  her  kindness,  her  simplicity,  her  gentleness  So  in 
£Jl  R°Zle™*  °f  Scapin,  Molilre,  following  the  Roman  dramatist  Ter- 

dS^'t^S  *»*  £  HVe,!alV?  10VC  ?ith  Hyacinthe,  when  he  sees  her  shed- 
ding tears  at  the  death  of  her  mother. 

16  THE   MISER.  [ACTI. 

CLE.  I  have  learned,  secretly,  that  they  are  not  too  well 
off;  and  that  even  their  careful  way  of  living  has  some 
difficulty  in  making  both  ends  meet  with  the  small  means 
at  their  command.  Imagine,  dear  sister,  the  pleasure  it 
must  be  to  improve  the  condition  of  her  whom  we  love ;  to 
convey  delicately,  some  small  assistance  to  the  modest 
wants  of  a  virtuous  family ;  and  then  conceive  how  annoy- 
ing it  is  to  me  to  find  myself,  through  the  avarice  of  a  father, 
powerless  to  taste  that  joy,  and  to  be  unable  to  show  this  fair 
one  any  proof  of  my  love. 

EL.  Yes,  I  can  conceive  well  enough,  brother,  what  must 
be  your  grief. 

CLE.  Ah  !  sister,  it  is  greater  than  you  can  believe. 
For,  in  short,  can  anything  be  more  cruel  than  this  rigor- 
ous meanness  that  is  exercised  over  us,  this  strange  nig- 
gardliness in  which  we  are  made  to  languish  ?  What  good 
will  it  do  us  to  have  means,  when  we  shall  no  longer  be  of 
an  age  to  enjoy  them,  and  if,  to  maintain  myself,  I  am 
now  obliged  to  run  in  debt  on  all  sides  ;  if  I,  as  well  as 
you,  am  obliged  to  crave  daily  the  aid  of  tradesmen  in 
order  to  wear  decent  clothes?  In  short,  I  wished  to  speak 
to  you  to  help  me  to  sound  my  father  upon  my  present 
feelings ;  and  should  I  find  him  opposed  to  them,  I  am 
resolved  to  go  elsewhere,  with  this  dear  girl,  to  enjoy 
whatever  fortune  providence  may  have  in  store  for  us.  I 
have  endeavoured  to  raise  money  everywhere  for  this  pur- 
pose, and  if  your  affairs,  sister,  are  similar  to  mine,  and  if 
our  father  runs  counter  to  our  wishes,  we  shall  both  leave 
him,  and  emancipate  ourselves  from  that  tyranny  in  which 
his  insupportable  avarice  has  so  long  held  us. 

EL.  It  is  true  enough  that  every  day  he  gives  us  more 
cause  to  regret  the  death  of  our  mother,  and  that  .  .  . 

CLE.  I  hear  his  voice  ;  let  us  go  a  little  farther  to  finish 
our  confidences  ;  and  afterwards  we  will  join  our  forces  to 
attack  the  ruggedness  of  his  temper. 

SCENE  III. — HARPAGON,  LA  FLECHE. 

HAR.  Clear  out  of  this  immediately,  and  let  me  have 
no  reply  !  Get  away  out  of  my  house,  you  consummate 
cheat,  you  true  gallow's  bird  ! 

LA  FL.  (Astdi).     I  have   never  seen   anything   more 

SCKNE  m.]  THE  MISER.  17 

vicious  than  this  cursed  old  man ;  and  I  really  think — I 
speak  under  correction — that  he  has  got  the  devil  in  him. 

HAR.  You  are  muttering  between  your  teeth  ! 

LA  FL.  Why  are  you  sending  me  away  ? 

HAR.  It  well  becomes  you,  you  hang-dog,  to  ask  me 
my  reasons.  Out  with  you,  quickly  that  I  may  not  knock 
you  down. 

LA  FL.  What  have  I  done  to  you? 

HAR.  You  have  done  so  much  to  me  that  I  wish  you  to 
get  out. 

LA  FL.  Your  son,  my  master,  has  ordered  me  to  wait. 

HAR.  Go  and  wait  for  him  in  the  street,  then  ;  but  do 
not  remain  in  my  house,  planted  bolt  upright  as  a  sentry, 
taking  notice  of  everything  that  goes  on,  and  making  the 
best  use  of  it.  I  will  not  have  a  spy  of  my  concerns  eter- 
nally before  my  eyes,  a  wretch,  whose  cursed  eyes  watch 
every  one  of  my  actions,  covet  all  I  have,  and  ferret  about 
everywhere  to  see  if  there  is  nothing  to  pilfer.9 

LA  FL.  How  the  deuce  could  one  manage  to  rob  you  ? 
Are  you  a  likely  man  to  have  aught  stolen  from  you,  when 
you  lock  up  everything,  and  keep  guard  day  and  night  ? 

HAR.  I  shall  lock  up  whatever  I  think  fit,  and  keep 
guard  as  long  as  I  please.  A  nice  pass  it  has  come  to  with 
these  spies,  who  take  notice  of  everything  one  does. 
{Softly,  aside).  I  quake  for  fear  he  should  suspect  some- 
thing about  my  money.  (Aloud}.  Ah  !  are  you  not  just 
the  fellow  who  would  think  nothing  of  bruiting  the  tale 
about  that  I  have  money  hidden  in  my  house  ? 

LA  FL.  You  have  money  hidden? 

HAR.  No,  you  scoundrel,  I  do  not  say  that.  (To  him- 
self}. I  am  bursting  with  rage.  (Aloud}.  I  ask  whether 
you  would  not  from  sheer  malice,  bruit  the  story  about 
that  I  have  some. 

LA  FL.  Eh !  what  does  it  matter  to  us  whether  you  have 
any  or  not,  as  long  as  it  comes  to  the  same  thing  to  us  ? 

HAR.  (Lifting  up  his  hand,  to  slap  La  Fleche's  face). 
You  are  arguing  the  matter !  I  will  give  you  something 
for  this  reasoning  on  your  ears.  Once  more,  get  out  of 
this. 

9  This  is  imitated  from  the  first  scene  of  the  first  act  of  Plautus'  Aulula- 
ria,  where  Eticlio,  the  miser,  drives  out  the  female  slave,  Staphyla. 
VOL.   III.  B 

jg  THE   MISER.  [ACT  i. 

LA  FL.  Very  well !  I  am  going. 

HAR.  Wait :    you  are  not  taking  anything  away  with 

you? 

LA  FL.  What  should  I  take  from  you  ? 

HAR.  I  do  not  know  until  I  look.  Show  me  your 
hands  ? 

LA  FL.   Here  they  are. 

HAR.  The  others.10 

LA  FL.  The  others  ? 

HAR.  Yes. 

LA  FL.  Here  they  are. 

HAR.  (Pointing  to  the  breeches  of  La  Fleche').  Have  you 
put  nothing  in  there? 

LA  FL.  Look  for  yourself! 

HAR.  (Feeling  the  outside  of  La  Fleche'  s  pockets} .  Those 
wide  breeches  are  just  fit  to  become  receivers  for  things 
purloined,  and  I  wish  one  of  them  had  been  hanged  at  the 
gallows. 

LA  FL.  (Aside).  Ah,  how  a  man  like  this  well  deserves 
the  thing  he  fears !  and  how  much  pleasure  I  would  have 
in  robbing  him ! 

HAR.  Eh? 

LAFL.  What? 

HAR.  What  are  you  muttering  about  robbing  ! 

LA  FL.  I  am  saying  that  you  feel  carefully  everywhere 
to  see  if  I  have  robbed  you. 

HAR.  That  is  what  I  mean  to  do.  (Harpagon  fumbles 
in  La  Fie che1  s  pockets). 

LA  FL.  (Aside}.  May  the  plague  take  avarice  and  all 
avaricious  people  ! 

HAR.  What !   what  are  you  saying  ? 

LA  FL.   What  am  I  saying  ? 

10  This  is  again  imitated  from  Plautus'  Aulularia  (Act  iv.,  Scene  3), 
when  Euclro  asks  Strobilus,  the  servant  of  Lyconides,  whom  he  suspects 
of  having  robbed  him,  to  show  him  his  third  hand.  Chappuzeau,  in  the 
comedy  of  the  Riche  Vilain,  printed  in  1663,  has  also  borrowed  this  trait 
from  Plautus ;  but  he  makes  the  servant  Philipin  reply  to  the  miser, 
"  Have  I  a  dozen  of  hands?1  In  Tomkis'  play  Albumazar  the  Astrologer 
(Act  iii.,  Scene  8),  performed  in  1616  at  Trinity  College,  Cambridge,  and 
an  imitation  of  an  Italian  Comedy  by  Porta,  Ronca  answers  Trinculo,  who 
questions  him  in  a  similar  manner,  *'  Think  you  me  the  giant  with  an  hun- 
dred hands  ?" 

SCBNB  m.]  THE   MISER.  19 

HAR.  Yes ;  what  are  you  saying  about  avarice  and  ava- 
ricious people? 

LA  FL.  I  say  may  the  plague  take  avarice  and  all  ava- 
ricious people. 

HAR.  To  whom  are  you  alluding? 

LA  FL.  To  avaricious  people. 

HAR.  And  who  are  they,  these  avaricious  people  ? 

LA  FL.  Villains  and  curmudgeons. 

HAR.  But  whom  do  you  mean  by  that  ? 

LA  FL.  What  are  you  troubling  yourself  about  ? 

HAR.  I  am  troubling  myself  about  what  concerns  me. 

LA  FL.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  speaking  of  you  ? 

HAR.  I  think  what  I  think ;  but  I  wish  you  to  tell  me 
to  whom  you  are  addressing  yourself  when  you  say  that. 

LA  FL.  I  am  addressing  myself  ...  I  am  addressing 
myself  to  my  cap. 

HAR.  And  I  might  address  mvself  to  the  head  that  is 
in  it.11 

LA  FL.  Will  you  prevent  me  from  cursing  avaricious 
people  ? 

HAR.  No :  but  I  will  prevent  you  from  jabbering,  and 
from  being  insolent.  Hold  your  tongue  ! 

LA  FL.  I  name  no  one. 

HAR.    I  shall  thrash  you  if  you  say  another  word. 

LA  FL.  Whom  the  cap  fits,  let  him  wear  it." 

HAR.  Will  you  hold  your  tongue  ? 

LA  FL.  Yes,  against  my  will. 

HAR.    Ah!  Ah! 

LA  FL.  (Showing  Harpagon  a  pocket  in  his  double f). 
Just  look,  there  is  another  pocket ;  are  you  satisfied  ? 

HAR.  Come,  you  had  better  give  it  up  without  my 
searching  you. 

LAFL.  What? 

HAR.  What  you  have  taken  from  me. 

LA  FL.  I  have  taken  nothing  at  all  from  you. 

11  The  original  has,  ''  Je  pourrais  bien  purler  a  to,  barrette."     In  the 
Middle  Ages,  the  front  of  the  hood  was  called  barrette,  on  account  of  the 
different  ornaments  which  formed  bars  there.     Hence  parler  a  la  barrette 
was  a  familiar  term  for  scolding,  and  even  for  striking  one. 

12  The  original  has  "  Qui  se  sent  mtrveux,  quilse  mouche,"  "  He  that 
has  a  cold,  let  him  blow  his  nose.'* 

20  THE   MISER.  [ACT  i. 

HAR.  Assuredly? 

LA  FL.  Assuredly. 

HAR.  Good-bye,  then,  and  go  to  the  devil. 

LA  FL.  (Aside).  That  is  a  pretty  dismissal." 

HAR.  I  leave  you  to  your  own  conscience,  at  least. 

SCENE  IV. — HARPAGON,  alone. 

There  is  a  hang-dog  of  a  valet  who  is  very  much  in  my 
way ;  I  do  not  at  all  care  to  see  this  limping  cur  about  the 
place."  It  is  certainly  no  small  trouble  to  keep  such  a 
large  sum  of  money  in  one's  house  ;  and  he  is  a  happy 
man  who  has  all  his  well  laid  out  at  interest,  and  keeps 
only  so  much  by  him  as  is  necessary  for  his  expenses.  One 
is  not  a  little  puzzled  to  contrive,  in  the  whole  house,  a 
safe  hiding-place ;  for,  as  far  as  I  am  concerned,  I  distrust 
safes,  and  would  never  rely  on  them.  I  look  upon  them 
just  as  a  distinct  bait  to  burglars ;  for  it  is  always  the  first 
thing  which  they  attack. 

SCENE  V. — HARPAGON;    ELISE   and  CLEANTE  conversing 
together  at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage. 

HAR.  (Still  thinking  himself  alone).  For  all  that,  I  am 
not  quite  sure  if  I  have  done  right  in  burying  in  my  gar- 
den these  ten  thousand  crowns,  which  were  paid  to  me 
yesterday.  Ten  thousand  golden  crowns  in  one's  house 
is  a  sum  sufficient.  .  .  .  (Aside,  perceiving  Elise  and 
Cleante}.  Oh,  Heavens  !  I  have  betrayed  myself !  The 
excitement  has  carried  me  too  far,  and  I  verily  believe  I 
have  spoken  loud,  while  arguing  to  myself.  (To  Cleante 
and  Elise).  What  is  the  matter? 

CLE.  Nothing,  father? 

HAR.  Have  you  been  there  long  ? 

EL.  We  were  just  coming  in. 

HAR.  You  have  heard  .    .    . 

CLE.  What,  father? 

13  This  is  again  borrowed  from  the  Aulularia  (Act  iv.,  Scene  3). 

14  I  have  already  observed  that  Moliere  (see  The  Love  Tiff,  Vol.  I., 
page  79,  note  i,  took  advantage  even  of  the  physical  defects  of  the  mem- 
bers of  his  troupe,  in  writing  parts  for  them ;  hence  the  allusion  to  the 
lameness  of  Bejart.  his  brother-in-law.     For   Bejart,   see    Introductory 
Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I. 

SCBNBV.]  THE   MISER.  21 

HAR.  There  .    .    .  ' 

EL.  What? 

HAR.  What  I  said  just  now. 

CLE.  No. 

HAR.  Yes,  you  have. 

EL.  I  beg  your  pardon. 

HAR.  I  see  well  enough  that  you  overheard  some  words. 
I  was  talking  to  myself  about  the  difficulty  one  experiences 
now-a-days  in  finding  money,  and  I  was  saying  how  plea- 
sant it  must  be  to  have  ten  thousand  crowns  in  the 
house. 

CLE.  We  hesitated  to  speak  to  you,  for  fear  of  interrupt- 
ing you. 

HAR.  I  am  very  glad  to  tell  you  this,  so  that  you  may 
not  take  things  the  wrong  way,  and  I  imagine  that  I  said 
that  I  myself  had  ten  thousand  crowns. 

CLE.  We  have  no  wish  to  enter  into  your  concerns. 

HAR.  Would  to  Heaven  that  I  had  them,  ten  thousand 
crowns ! 

CLE.  I  do  not  think     .     .     . 

HAR.  It  would  be  a  capital  affair  for  me. 

EL.  These  are  things     .     . 

HAR.  I  am  greatly  in  need  of  them. 

CLE.  I  think     .     .     . 

HAR.  That  would  suit  me  very  well. 

EL.  You  are     .     .     . 

HAR.  And  I  should  not  have  to  complain  as  I  do  now, 
about  the  hard  times. 

CLE.  Good  Heavens  !  father,  you  have  no  need  to  com- 
plain, and  we  know  that  you  have  wealth  enough. 

HAR.  How !  I  wealth  enough !  Those  who  say  so 
surely  tell  a  lie.  Nothing  could  be  more  false ;  and  they 
are  but  a  pack  of  rascals  who  spread  all  these  reports 
about. 

EL.  Do  not  put  yourself  in  a  rage. 

HAR.  A  strange  thing,  that  my  own  children  should 
betray  me,  and  become  my  enemies. 

CLE.  Is  it  becoming  your  enemy  to  say  that  you  have 
wealth  ? 

HAR.  Yes.  Such  talk,  and  the  expenses  you  indulge  in 
will  be  the  cause  that  one  of  these  fine  days  people  will 

22  THE   MISER.  [ACT  i 

come  and  cut  my  throat,  in  my  own  house,  in  the  belief 
that  I  am  stuffed  with  gold  pieces.15 

CLE.  What  great  expenses  do  I  indulge  in  ? 

HAR.  Expenses?  Can  anything  be  more  scandalous' 
than  this  sumptuous  attire,  which  you  exhibit  about  the 
town  ?  I  scolded  your  sister  yesterday  ;  but  this  is  much 
worse.  This  cries  aloud  to  Heaven  for  vengeance ;  for, 
take  you  from  top  to  toe,  there  is  enough  to  ensure  a  hand- 
some competency.16  I  have  told  you  twenty  times,  son, 
that  all  your  manners  displease  me ;  you  are  furiously 
aping  the  aristocracy ;  and  to  go  dressed  as  you  do,  you 
must  rob  me. 

CLE.  Eh  !  how  rob  you  ? 

HAR.  How  do  I  know  ?  Where  can  you  get  the  means 
of  keeping  up  such  an  appearance  ? 

CLE.  I,  father  ?  it  is  because  I  play ;  and,  as  I  am  very 
lucky,  I  put  my  winnings  on  my  back. 

HAR.  That  is  very  bad.  If  you  are  lucky  at  play,  you 
should  profit  by  it,  and  lay  out  the  money  you  win  at 
decent  interest,  that  you  may  provide  for  a  rainy  day.17  I 
should  much  like  to  know,  leaving  all  other  things  aside, 
what  the  good  can  be  of  all  these  ribbons  with  which  you 
are  decked  out  from  head  to  foot,  and  if  half-a-dozen  tacks 
are  not  sufficient  to  fasten  your  breeches.  Is  it  at  all  necess- 
ary to  spend  money  upon  wigs  ?  when  one  can  wear  hair  of 
home  growth,  which  costs  nothing  !  I  would  bet  that 
your  wig  and  ribbons  cost  far  more  than  twenty  pistoles, 
and  twenty  pistoles,  at  a  little  more  than  eight  per  cent, 
bring  in  eighteen  livres,  six  pence,  and  eight  groats  a 
year. 18 

CLE.  You  are  perfectly  right. 

HAR.  Let  us  leave  the  subject,  and  talk  of  other  things. 

15  The  original  has  cousu  de pistoles.     See  The  Blunderer,  Vol.  I.,  page 
II,  note  7. 

16  In  the  original,  une  bonne  constitution.     The  constitution  was  a  con- 
tract by  which  he  who  borrowed  money  promised  to  pay  a  certain  sum 
every  year  to  the  lender. 

17  Harpagon  does  not  blame  Cl^ante  for  gambling,  so  long  as  the  latter 
wins  ;  he  simply  regrets  that  his  son  does  not  make  better  use  of  his  gains. 

18  The  original  for  "  a  little  more  than  eight  per  cent."  is  au  denier  douee, 
but  the  legal  interest  was,  at  the  time  Moliere  wrote   The  Miser,  five  per 
cent.     Harpagon  speaks  also  of  sous,  and  deniers. 

SCENIC]  THE   MISER.  23 

{Perceiving  that  Cleante  and  Elise  interchange  glances}. 
Eh  !  (Softly,  aside).  I  believe  that  they  are  making  signs 
to  each  other  to  rob  me  of  my  purse.  (Aloud}.  What 
mean  those  gestures? 

EL.  My  brother  and  I  are  arguing  who  shall  speak  first. 
We  have  each  something  to  say  to  you. 

HAR.  And  I  have  something  to  say  to  you  both. 

CLE.  It  is  about  marriage  that  we  wish  to  speak  to  you, 
father. 

HAR.  And  it  is  also  about  marriage  that  I  wish  to  con- 
verse with  you. 

EL.  Ah,  father! 

HAR.  Why  this  cry?  Is  it  the  word,  or  the  thing  itself 
that  frightens  you,  daughter? 

CLE.  The  way  you  may  look  at  marriage  may  frighten 
us  both  ;  and  we  fear  that  your  sentiments  may  not  happen 
to  chime  in  with  our  choice. 

HAR.  A  little  patience ;  do  not  alarm  yourselves.  I 
know  what  is  good  for  you  both,  and  neither  the  one  nor 
the  other  shall  have  cause  to  complain  of  what  I  intend  to 
do.  To  begin  at  one  end  of  the  story  (To  Cleante},  tell 
me,  have  you  noticed  a  young  person,  called  Mariane, 
who  lodges  not  far  from  here  ? 

CLE.  Yes,  father. 

HAR.  And  you? 

EL.  I  have  heard  her  spoken  of. 

HAR.   How  do  you  like  that  girl,  son  ? 

CLE.  .A  very  charming  person. 

HAR.  What  do  you  think  of  her  countenance? 

CLE.  Very  genteel,  and  full  of  intelligence. 

HAR.  Her  air  and  manner  ? 

CLE.  Without  doubt,  admirable. 

HAR.  Do  you  not  think  that  a  girl  like  that  deserves  to 
be  taken  notice  of? 

CLE.  Yes,  father. 

HAR.  That  it  would  be  a  desirable  match  ? 

CLE.  Very  desirable. 

HAR.  That  she  looks  as  if  she  would  make  a  good  wife  ? 

CLE.  Undoubtedly. 

HAR.  And  that  a  husband  would  have  reason  to  be 
satisfied  with  her  ? 

24  THE   MISER.  .  [ACT  I. 

CLE.  Assuredly. 

HAR.  There  is  a  slight  difficulty.  I  fear  that  she  has 
not  as  much  money  as  one  might  reasonably  pretend  to. 

CLE.  Ah  !  father,  money  is  not  worth  considering  when 
there  is  a  question  of  marrying  a  respectable  girl. 

HAR.  Not  so,  not  so.  But  this  much  may  be  said,  that 
if  one  finds  not  quite  so  much  money  as  one  might  wish, 
there  is  a  way  of  regaining  it  in  other  things. 

CLE.  Of  course. 

HAR.  Well,  I  am  very  glad  to  see  that  you  share  my 
sentiments  ;  for  her  genteel  behaviour  and  her  gentleness 
have  quite  gained  my  heart,  and  I  have  made  up  my  mind 
to  marry  her,  provided  she  has  some  dowry. 

CLE.  Eh  ! 

HAR.  What  no«v? 

CLE.  You  have  made  up  your  mind,  you  say  .    .    . 

HAR.  To  marry  Mariane. 

CLE.  Who?     You,  you? 

HAR.  Yes,  I,  I,  I.     What  means  this  ? 

CLE.  I  feel  a  sudden  giddiness,  and  I  had  better  go. 

HAR.  It  will  be  nothing.  Go  quickly  into  the  kitchen, 
and  drink  a  large  glassful  of  cold  water. 

SCENE  VI. — HARPAGON,  ELISE. 

HAR.  A  lot  of  flimsy  sparks,  with  no  more  strength 
than  chickens.  Daughter,  this  is  what  I  have  resolved 
upon  for  myself.  As  for  your  brother,  I  intend  him  for  a 
certain  widow,  of  whom  they  spoke  to  me  this  morning ; 
and  you,  I  will  give  you  to  Mr.  Anselme. 

EL.  To  Mr.  Anselme? 

HAR.  Yes,  a  staid,  prudent,  and  careful  man,  who  is  not 
above  fifty,  and  whose  wealth  is  spoken  of  everywhere. 

EL.  (Making  a  curtsey).  I  have  no  wish  to  get  married, 
father,  if  you  please. 

HAR.  (Imitating  her).  And  I,  my  dear  girl,  my  pet, 
I  wish  you  to  get  married,  if  you  please. 

EL.  {Curtseying  once  more).  I  beg  your  pardon, 
father. 

HAR.  (Imitating  Elise).     I  beg  your  pardon,  daughter. 

EL.    I     am     Mr.     Anselme's     most     humble     servant 

SCENBVII.J  THE  MISER.  25 

(curtseying  again)',  but,  with  your  leave,  I  shall  not 
marry  him. 

HAR.  I  am  your  most  humble  slave,  but,  (imitating 
Elise}  with  your  leave,  you  shall  marry  him  not  later  than 
this  evening. 

EL.   Not  later  than  this  evening? 

HAR.  Not  later  than  this  evening. 

EL.   {Curtseying  again).     That  shall  not  be,  father. 

HAR.     (Imitating  her  again).     This  shall  be,  daughter. 

EL.  No. 

HAR.  Yes. 

EL.  No,  I  tell  you. 

HAR.  Yes,  I  tell  you. 

EL.  That  is  a  thing  you  shall  not  drive  me  to. 

HAR.  That  is  a  thing  I  shall  drive  you  to. 

EL.  I  will  sooner  kill  myself  than  marry  such  a 
husband. 

HAR.  You  shall  not  kill  yourself,  and  you  shall  marry 
him.  But  has  such  boldness  ever  been  seen  !  Has  ever 
a  daughter  been  heard  to  speak  to  her  father  in  this 
manner  ? 

EL.  But  has  any  one  ever  seen  a  father  give  away  his 
daughter  in  marriage  in  this  manner? 

HAR.  It  is  a  match  to  which  no  one  can  object ;  and 
I  bet  that  every  one  will  approve  of  my  choice. 

EL.  And  I  bet  that  no  reasonable  being  will  approve 
of  it. 

HAR.  (Perceiving  Valere  in  the  distance).  Here  comes 
Valere.  Shall  we  make  him  judge  betwixt  us  in  this 
matter  ? 

EL.  I  consent  to  it. 

HAR.  Will  you  submit  to  his  judgment? 

EL.  Yes;    I  will  submit  to  what  he  shall  decide. 

HAR.  That  is  agreed. 

SCENE  VII. — VALERE,  HARPAGON,  ELISE. 

HAR.  Come  here,  Valere.     We  have  elected  you  to  tell 
us  who  is  in  the  right,  my  daughter  or  I. 
VAL.  You,  Sir,  beyond  gainsay. 
HAR.  Are  you  aware  of  what  we  are  talking  ? 

26  THE  MISER.  [ACT  i. 

VAL.  No.  But  you  could  not  be  in  the  wrong.  You 
are  made  up  of  right. 

HAR.  I  intend,  this  evening,  to  give  her  for  a  husband, 
a  man  who  is  as  rich  as  he  is  discreet ;  and  the  jade  tells 
me  to  my  face  that  she  will  not  take  him.  What  say  you 
to  this? 

VAL.  What  do  I  say  to  it  ? 

HAR.  Yes. 

VAL.  Eh!  eh! 

HAR.   What? 

VAL.  I  say,  that  in  the  main,  I  am  of  your  opinion; 
and  you  cannot  but  be  right.  But  on  the  other  side,  she 
is  not  altogether  wrong,  and  .  .  . 

HAR.  How  is  that  ?  Mr.  Anselme  is  a  desirable  match  ; 
he  is  a  gentleman  who  is  noble,19  kind,  steady,  discreet, 
and  very  well  to  do,  and  who  has  neither  chick  nor  child 
left  him  from  his  first  marriage.  Could  she  meet  with  a 
better  match  ? 

VAL.  That  is  true.  But  she  might  say  to  you  that  it  is 
hurrying  things  a  little  too  much,  and  that  you  should 
give  her  some  time  at  least  to  see  whether  her  inclinations 
would  agree  with  .  .  . 

HAR.  This  is  an  opportunity  which  should  be  taken  by 
the  forelock.  I  find  in  this  marriage  an  advantage 
which  I  could  not  find  elsewhere ;  and  he  agrees  to  take 
her  without  a  dowry. 

VAL.  Without  a  dowry  ? 

HAR.  Yes. 

VAL.  In  that  case,  I  say  no  more.  Do  you  see,  this  is 
altogether  a  convincing  reason ;  one  must  yield  to  that. 

HAR.  It  is  a  considerable  saving  to  me. 

VAL.  Assuredly ;  it  cannot  be  gainsaid.  It  is  true  that 
your  daughter  might  represent  to  you  that  marriage  is  a 
more  important  matter  than  you  think  ;  that  it  involves  a 
question  of  being  happy  or  miserable  all  one's  life  ;  and 
that  an  engagement  which  must  last  till  death  ought  never 
to  be  entered  upon  except  with  great  precautions. 

HAR.  Without  a  dowry  ! 

19  This  is  a  hit  at  the  men  who  pretended  to  be  of  noble  birth  and  were 
not  so.  Moliere  repeats  this  attack  in  the  fifth  Scene  of  the  fifth  Act, 
page  77. 

SCENE  viii.]  THE   MISER.  27 

VAL.  You  are  right.  That  decides  it  all,  of  course. 
There  are  people  who  might  tell  you  that  on  such  an 
occasion  the  wishes  of  a  daughter  are  something,  no  doubt, 
that  ought  to  be  taken  into  consideration ;  and  that  this 
great  disparity  of  age,  of  temper,  and  of  feelings  makes  a 
marriage  subject  to  very  sad  accidents. 

HAR.  Without  a  dowry ! 

VAL.  Ah  !  there  is  no  reply  to  that ;  I  know  that  well 
enough.  Who  the  deuce  could  say  anything  against  that? 
Not  that  there  are  not  many  fathers  who  would  prefer  to 
humour  the  wishes  of  their  daughters  to  the  money  they 
could  give  them ;  who  would  not  sacrifice  them  to  their 
own  interests,  and  who  would,  above  all  things,  try  to  in- 
fuse into  marriage  that  sweet  conformity,  which,  at  all 
times,  maintains  honour,  peace,  and  joy  ;  and  which  .  .  . 

HAR.  Without  a  dowry  ! w 

VAL.  It  is  true  ;  that  closes  one's  mouth  at  once.  With- 
out a  dowry  !  There  are  no  means  of  resisting  an  argu- 
ment like  that. 

HAR.  (Aside,  looking  towards  the  garden).  Bless  my 
soul !  I  think  I  hear  a  dog  barking.  Most  likely  it  is 
some  one  with  a  design  upon  my  money.  (To  Valere). 
Do  not  stir ;  I  am  coming  back  directly. 

SCENE  VIII. — ELISE,  VALERE. 

EL.  Are  you  jesting,  Valere,  to  speak  to  him  in  that 
manner  ? 

VAL.  It  is  in  order  not  to  sour  his  temper,  and  to  gain 
my  end  the  better.  To  run  counter  to  his  opinions  is  the 
way  to  spoil  everything;  and  there  are  certain  minds 
which  cannot  be  dealt  with  in  a  straightforward  manner; 
temperaments  averse  to  all  resistance ;  restive  characters, 
whom  the  truth  causes  to  rear,  who  always  set  their  faces 
against  the  straight  road  of  reason,  and  whom  you  cannot 
lead  except  by  turning  them  with  their  back  towards  the 
goal.  Pretend  to  consent  to  what  he  wishes,  you  will 
gain  your  end  all  the  better ;  and  .  .  . 

20  The  "  without  a  dowry"  is  as  lucky  a  dramatic  hit  as  "The  poor 
man  "  of  Tartitfe,  or,  "  What  the  devil  was  he  going  to  in  that  galley  ?" 
of  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin.  In  Plautus'  Aulularia  (Act  ii.,  Scene  2), 
old  Megadorus  asks  for  the  hand  of  young  Phaedra,  Euclio's  daughter, 
who  three  times  repeats  that  he  has  no  "  marriage  portion  "  to  give  her. 

28  THE   MISER.  [ACT  I. 

EL.  But  this  marriage,  Valere ! 

VAL.  We  will  find  some  pretext  to  break  it  off. 

EL.  But  what  to  invent,  if  it  is  to  be  consummated  this 
evening? 

VAL.  You  must  ask  for  a  delay,  and  pretend  to  be  ill. 

EL.  But  the  feint  will  be  discovered,  if  they  call  in  the 
doctors. 

VAL.  Are  you  jesting?  What  do  they  know  about  it  ? 
Come,  come,  with  them  you  may  have  whatever  illness 
you  please ;  they  will  find  you  some  reasons  to  tell  you 
whence  it  proceeds. 

SCENE  IX. — HARPAGON,  ELISE,  VALERE. 

HAR.  (Aside,  at  the  further  end  of  the  stage).  It  is 
nothing,  thank  Heaven. 

VAL.  {Not  seeing  Harpagon).  In  short,  our  last  re- 
source is  flight,  which  will  shelter  us  from  everything;  and 
if  your  love,  fair  Elise,  be  capable  of  acting  with  firm- 
ness .  .  .  (Perceiving  Harpagon).  Yes,  a  daughter  ought 
to  obey  her  father.  She  ought  not  to  look  at  the  shape 
of  a  husband ;  and  when  the  great  argument  of  without  a 
dowry  is  added  to  it,  she  must  be  ready  to  accept  what  is 
given  to  her. 

HAR.  Good :  that  is  well  spoken. 

VAL.  I  crave  your  pardon,  Sir,  if  I  am  a  little  warm, 
and  take  the  liberty  of  speaking  as  I  do. 

HAR.  How  now!  I  am  delighted  with  it,  and  I  wish 
you  to  take  an  absolute  control  over  her.  {To  Elise).  Yes, 
you  may  run  away  as  much  as  you  like,  I  invest  him  with 
the  authority  which  Heaven  has  given  me  over  you,  and 
I  will  have  you  do  all  that  he  tells  you. 

VAL.  {To  Elise).     After  that,  resist  my  remonstrances. 

SCENE  X. — HARPAGON,  VALERE. 

VAL.  With  your  leave,  Sir,  I  will  follow  her,  to  con- 
tinue the  advice  which  I  was  giving  her. 

HAR.  Yes,  you  will  oblige  me.     By  all  means  .    .     . 

VAL.  It  is  as  well  to  keep  her  tight  in  hand. 

HAR.  True.     We  must  .    .    . 

VAL.  Do  not  be  uneasy.     I  think  that  I  shall  succeed. 

SCBNB1.]  THE   MISER.  39 

HAR.  Do,  do.  I  am  going  to  take  a  little  stroll  in 
town,  and  I  shall  be  back  presently. 

VAL.  (Addressing  himself  to  Elise,  leaving  by  the  door, 
through  which  she  went  out).  Yes,  money  is  more  precious 
than  anything  else  in  this  world,  and  you  ought  to  thank 
Heaven  for  having  given  you  such  an  honest  man  for  a 
father.  He  knows  how  to  go  through  life.  When  any  one 
offers  to  take  a  girl  without  a  dowry,  one  should  look  no 
farther.  It  sums  up  everything ;  and  without  dowry 
makes  up  for  beauty,  youth,  birth,  honour,  wisdom,  and 
probity. 

HAR.  Ah  !  the  honest  fellow !  He  speaks  like  an  oracle. 
It  is  a  rare  piece  of  luck  to  have  such  a  servant ! 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — CLEANTE,  LA  FLECHE. 

CLE.  Ah !  wretch  that  you  are  !  where  have  you  been  ? 
Did  I  not  give  you  the  order  .  .  . 

LA  FL.  Yes,  Sir;  and  I  came  here  to  wait  for  you 
without  stirring  :  but  your  father,  the  most  surly  of  men, 
ordered  me  out  in  spite  of  myself,  at  the  risk  of  a 
thrashing. 

CLE.  How  is  our  affair  getting  on?  Matters  press 
more  than  ever,  and  since  I  have  seen  you,  I  have  found 
out  that  my  father  is  my  rival. 

LA  FL.  Your  father  in  love? 

CLE.  Yes ;  and  I  have  had  the  utmost  difficulty  in  con- 
cealing from  him  the  trouble  which  these  tidings  have 
caused  me. 

LA  FL.  He  meddle  with  love !  What  the  devil  put 
that  in  his  head  ?  Is  he  making  fun  of  every  one  ?  and 
has  love  been  made  for  people  like  him? 

CLE.  This  passion  must  have  got  into  his  head  to 
punish  me  for  my  sins. 

LA  FL.  But  for  what  reason  do  you  keep  your  love  a 
secret  from  him  ? 

CLE.  In  order  to  give  him  less  suspicion,  and  to  keep, 

30  THE   MISER.  [ACT  n. 

if  needs  be,  the  means  open  for  dissuading  him  from  this 
marriage.  What  answer  have  they  made  to  you  ? 

LA  FL.  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  borrowers  are  very  unlucky 
people ;  and  one  must  put  up  with  strange  things,  when 
one  is  compelled,  like  you,  to  pass  through  the  hands  of 
money-lenders.*1 

CLE.  Will  the  affair  fall  through? 

LA  FL.  I  beg  your  pardon.  Our  Master  Simon,  the 
agent  who  has  been  recommended  to  us,  an  active  and 
zealous  man,  says  that  he  has  done  wonders  for  you,  and 
he  assures  me  that  your  face  alone  has  won  his  heart. 

CLE.  Shall  I  have  the  fifteen  thousand  francs  which  I 
want? 

LA  FL.  Yes,  but  with  some  trifling  conditions  which 
you  must  accept,  if  you  purpose  that  the  affair  should  be 
carried  through. 

CLE.  Has  he  allowed  you  to  speak  to  the  person  who  is 
to  lend  the  money  ? 

LA  FL.  Ah !  really,  things  are  not  managed  in  that 
way.  He  takes  even  more  care  to  remain  unknown  than 
you  do ;  and  these  things  are  much  greater  mysteries  than 
you  think.  Simon  would  not  tell  me  his  name  at  all,  and 
he  will  be  confronted  with  you  to-day  in  a  house  borrowed 
for  the  occasion,  to  be  informed  by  you,  personally,  of 
your  own  substance  and  that  of  your  family ;  and  I  have 
no  doubt  that  the  very  name  of  your  father  may  make 
things  go  smoothly. 

CLE.  And  above  all  our  mother  being  dead,  whose 
property  cannot  be  alienated. 

LA  FL.  Here  are  some  clauses,  which  he  has  himself 
dictated  to  our  go-between,  to  be  shown  to  you  before 
doing  anything  :— "  Provided  that  the  lender  see  all  his 
securities,  and  that  the  borrower  be  of  age,  and  of  a 
family  whose  estate  is  ample,  solid,  secure,  and  undoubted, 
and  free  from  all  incumbrance,  a  binding  and  correct 

n  In  the  original,  des  fesse-matthieux ;  because  Saint  Matthew  was.  be- 
conversion,  a  tax-gatherer ;  a  profession  which  was,  at  all  times, 
considered  to  be  connected  with   usury.     Hence,  in  old  French  the  ex- 
pression/«/,.-  saint  Matthieu,  for  "  to  lend  monev  at  exorbitant  interest  •" 
the  usurer  himself  was  called  fesU-Matthieu,  which  became  cor- 
rupted \ntofesse-matthiev. 

SCENE  I.]  THE   MISER.  3! 

bond  shall  be  executed  before  a  notary,  the  most  honest 
man  to  be  found,  and  who,  for  this  purpose,  shall  be 
chosen  by  the  borrower,  to  whom  it  is  of  the  greatest 
importance  that  the  instrument  shall  be  regularly  drawn 
up." 

CLE.  There  is  nothing  to  object  to  that. 

LA  FL.  "The  lender,  in  order  not  to  charge  his  con- 
science with  the  least  scruple,  will  only  lend  his  money  at 
a  little  more  than  five  and  a  half  per  cent."22 

CLE.  At  a  little  more  than  five  and  a  half  per  cent  ? 
Zounds  !  that  is  honest  enough.  There  is  no  reason  to 
complain. 

LA  FL.  That  is  true.  "But  as  the  lender  has  not  the 
sum  in  question  by  him,  and  as,  to  oblige  the  borrower, 
he  is  himself  obliged  to  borrow  it  of  some  one  at  the  rate 
of  twenty  per  cent.,23  it  shall  be  agreed  that  the  said  first 
borrower  shall  pay  this  interest,  without  prejudice  of  the 
rest,  seeing  that  it  is  only  to  oblige  him  that  the  said 
lender  takes  up  that  loan." 

CLE.  What  the  devil !  what  Jew,  what  Arab  is  this  ? 
This  is  more  than  twenty-five  per  cent.24 

LA  FL.  It  is  true,  that  is  what  I  have  said.  It  is  for 
you  to  see  to  that. 

CLE.  What  can  I  see  ?  I  want  the  money,  and  I  am 
bound  to  consent  to  everything. 

LA  FL.  That  is  the  answer  which  I  made. 

CLE.  There  is  something  else  still  ? 

LA  FL.  Nothing  but  a  small  matter.  "Of  the  fifteen 
thousand  francs  required,  the  lender  can  count  down  in 
cash  only  twelve  thousand ;  and,  for  the  remaining 
thousand  crowns,  the  borrower  will  have  to  take  them  out 
in  chattels,  clothing,  and  jewelry,  of  which  the  following 
is  the  memorandum,  and  which  the  lender  has  set  down 
honestly  at  the  lowest  possible  price." 

CLE.  What  does  this  mean  ? 

LA  FL.  Listen  to  the  memorandum.       "First,  a  four- 

M  In  the  original  au  denier  dix-huit,  which  means  at  the  interest  of  one 
groat  for  every  eighteen  lent,  or  a  little  more  than  five  and  a  half  per 
cent. 

M  The  original  has  an  denier  cinq. 

24  In  the  original  au  denier  quatre. 

32  THE  MISER.  [ACT  n. 

post  bed,  elegantly  adorned  with  Hungary-lace  bands,  with 
hangings  of  olive  coloured  cloth,  with  six  chairs,  and  a 
counterpane  of  the  same ;  the  whole  in  very  good  con- 
dition, and  lined  with  a  shot  taffetas,  red  and  blue.  Item : 
a  tester  for  this  bed,  of  good  Aumale,  pale  rose-coloured 
serge,  with  large  and  small  silk  fringes. ' ' 

CLE.  What  does  he  want  me  to  do  with  it  ? 

LA  FL.  Wait.  "Item;  Tapestry  hangings,  represent- 
ing the  loves  of  Gombaud  and  Mac^e.25  Item:  a  large 
walnut  wood  table,  with  twelve  columns  or  turned  legs, 
which  draws  out  at  both  sides,  provided  with  six  stools 
underneath  it." 

CLE.  What  have  I  to  do,  Zounds  .    .    . 

LA  FL.  Only  have  patience.  "  Item  :  three  large  mus- 
kets inlaid  with  mother-of-pearl,  with  the  necessary  rests.26 
Item :  a  brick  furnace,  with  two  retorts,  and  three  re- 
ceivers very  useful  for  those  who  have  a  turn  for  dis- 
tilling." 

CLE.  I  am  going  mad. 

LA  FL.  Gently.  "Item:  a  Bologna  lute  with  all  its 
strings,  or  nearly  all.  Item :  a  trou-madame  table,"  a 

K  In  all  probability,  the  loves  of  Gombaud  and  Macee  formed  a  sort  of 
comic  pastoral,  which  must  have  been  very  popular  in  former  times,  and 
doubtless  had  become  rather  antiquated  when  La  Fleche  spoke  of  them. 
Still  they  are  mentioned  as  a  representation  of  rustic  gallantry  in  Brittany, 
as  late  as  1795.  In  the  inventory  of  goods  left  by  Moliere,  and  taken 
after  his  death,  we  find  "  some  Flanders  hangings  representing  a  land- 
scape "  (de  verdure),  and  valued  eight  hundred  livres,  which  seems  to  be 
the  same  as  those  valued  eleven  hundred  livres,  mentioned  in  the  mar- 
riage contract  of  M.  de  Montalant  with  the  daughter  of  Moliere,  and 
where,  however,  in  speaking  of  these  hangings,  they  are  said  to  be  adorned 
''with  some  small  figures."  In  the  inventory  taken  after  de  Montalant's 
death,  on  the  isth  of  September,  1738,  we  find  "some  Antwerp  hangings, 
valued  five  hundred  and  fifty  livres,  representing  the  history  of  Perseus 
and  Andromeda,"  which  may  have  belonged  to  Moliere.  In  the  first 
Scene  of  the  first  Act  of  L ove  is  the  best  Doctor  (see  Vol.  II.,  page  148),  M. 
Guillaume  advises  Sganarelle  to  buy  for  his  daughter  "a  beautiful  set  of 
hangings,  with  a  landscape,  or  some  figures  in  them."  I  owe  this  note  to 
the  late  M.  Soulie,  Recherches  sur  Moliere,  p.  270. 

26  The  soldiers  used  formerly  a  forked  stick,  which  they  stuck  with  the 
point  in  the  ground,  on  which  fork  they  rested  their  heavy  musket,  in 
order  to  aim  better. 

77  In  the  original  trou-madame.  Ash  in  his  dictionary  says:  "Trou- 
madame — a  play  in  which  a  bowl  is  thrown  so  as  to  pass  through  a  range 
of  holes  at  a  distance  properly  numbered  for  the  game." 

SCENE  i]  THE   MISER.  33 

draught-board,  with  the  game  of  mother  goose,  restored 
from  the  Greeks,  very  agreeable  to  pass  the  time  when  one 
has  nothing  else  to  do.  Item :  a  lizzard's  skin  of  three 
feet  and  a  half,  stuffed  with  hay :  a  very  pretty  curiosity 
to  hang  at  the  ceiling  of  a  room.  The  whole  of  the 
above-mentioned,  really  worth  more  than  four  thousand 
five  hundred  francs,  and  brought  down  to  the  value  of  a 
thousand  crowns,  through  the  discretion  of  the  lender."*8 

CLE.  May  the  plague  choke  him  with  his  discretion, 
the  wretch,  the  cut-throat  that  he  is !  Has  one  ever  heard 
of  similar  usury  ?  Is  he  not  satisfied  with  the  tremendous 
interest  which  he  demands,  but  must  needs  force  me  to 
take  for  the  three  thousand  francs  the  old  lumber  which 
he  picks  up  ?  I  shall  not  get  two  hundred  crowns  for  the 
whole  of  it ;  and  nevertheless  I  must  make  up  my  mind 
to  consent  to  what  he  wishes  ;  for  he  has  it  in  his  power 
to  make  me  accept  anything :  and  the  scoundrel  holds  me 
with  a  knife  to  my  throat. 

LA  FL.  Without  offence,  Sir,  I  see  you  exactly  in  the 
high  road  which  Panurge  took  to  ruin  himself:  taking 
money  in  advance,  buying  dear,  selling  cheap,  and  eating 
his  corn  whilst  it  was  but  grass.29 

CLE.  What  am  I  to  do  ?  See  to  what  young  people 
are  reduced  by  the  cursed  stinginess  of  their  fathers,  and 
then  people  are  surprised  when  sons  wish  their  fathers 
dead  ! 

LA  FL.  One  must  confess  that  yours,  with  his  stingi- 
ness, would  incense  the  steadiest  man  in  the  world.  I 
have,  Heaven  be  praised,  no  very  great  inclination  to  be 
hanged ;  and,  among  my  colleagues  whom  I  see  dabbling 
in  many  trifling  things,  I  know  well  enough  how  to  get 
cleverly  out  of  the  scrape,  and  to  keep  as  clear  as  possible 
of  these  little  amenities  which  savour  more  or  less  of  the 

28  The  idea  of  this  list  is  taken  from  a  comedy  of  Boisrobert,  called  la 
Belle  Plaideuse,  and  played  in  1654 ;  but  the  servant  Philipin  informs  his 
master  Ergaste,  that,  to  make  up  the  fifteen  thousand  francs  which  the 
latter  wishes  to  borrow,  the  lender  gives  only  one  thousand  crowns  cash, 
and  the  rest  in  "  monkeys,  very  fine  parrots,  and  twelve  large  cannons." 

29  Rabelais  in  his  Pantagruel  (Book  iii.,  ch.  2)  says  that  Panurge  was- 
*'  burning  the  great  logs  for  the  sale  of  the  ashes,  borrowing  money  before- 
hand, buying  dear,  selling  cheap,  and  eating  his  corn,  as  it  were,  whilst  it 
was  but  grass." 

VOL.  in.  c 

34  THE  MISER.  [ACT  a 

rope ;  but,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  he  would,  by  his  way  of 
acting,  give  me  the  temptation  to  rob  him ;  and  I  verily 
believe  that,  by  doing  so,  I  would  commit  a  meritorious 
action.80 

CLE.  Give  me  this  memorandum,  that  I  may  have  an- 
other look  at  it. 

SCENE  II. — HARPAGON,  MASTER  SIMON,  CLEANTE  and 
LA  FLECHE  at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage. 

SIM.  Yes,  Sir,  it  is  a  young  man  who  is  in  want  of 
money ;  his  affairs  compel  him  to  find  some,  and  he  will 
consent  to  all  that  you  dictate  to  him. 

HAR.  But  think  you,  Master  Simon,  that  there  is  no 
risk  to  run  ?  and  do  you  know  the  name,  the  property, 
and  the  family  of  him  for  whom  you  speak  ? 

SIM.  No.  In  reality  I  cannot  well  inform  you  about 
that,  and  it  is  only  by  chance  that  I  have  been  recom- 
mended to  him ;  but  he  will  himself  explain  all  these 
things  to  you,  and  his  servant  has  assured  me  that  you  will 
be  satisfied  when  you  shall  know  him.  All  that  I  am  able 
to  tell  you  is  that  his  family  is  very  rich,  that  he  has 
already  lost  his  mother,  and  he  will  engage  himself,  if  you 
wish  it,  that  his  father  shall  die  before  eight  months  are 
over. 

HAR.  That  is  something.  Charity,  Master  Simon,  en- 
joins us  to  be  agreeable  to  people  when  we  can. 

SIM.  That  needs  no  comment. 

LA  FL.  (Softly,  to  Cleante,  recognizing  Af aster  Simon). 
What  does  this  mean  ?  Master  Simon  who  is  speaking  to 
your  father? 

CLE.  (Softly,  to  La  Fleche}.  Can  any  one  have  told 
him  who  I  am  and  are  you  perhaps  betraying  me  ? 

SIM.  (To  Cleante  and  La  Fleche).  Ah,  ah  !  you  are  in 
a  great  hurry  !  Who  told  you  that  it  was  here.  (  To  Har- 
pagon).  It  is  not  I,  at  least,  Sir,  who  have  given  them 
your  name  and  address ;  but,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  no 
great  harm  in  this  ;  they  are  discreet  persons,  and  you  can 
here  come  to  an  understanding  with  one  another. 

80  These  words  of  La  Fleche  denote  that  he  intends  to  steal  the  miser's 
money-box  (see  Act  iv..  Scene  6),  but  more  to  play  the  latter  a  trick  than 
as  a  seriously  planned  robbery. 

SCENE  m.]  THE   MISER.  35 

HAR.  How? 

SIM.  (Pointing  to  Cleante).  This  gentleman  is  the 
party  who  wishes  to  borrow  the  fifteen  thousand  francs  of 
which  I  spoke. 

HAR.  What,  hangdog,  it  is  you  who  abandon  yourself 
to  these  culpable  extravagances. 

CLE.  What  !  it  is  you,  father,  who  lend  yourself  to 
these  shameful  deeds !  (Master  Simon  runs  away,  and 

La  JFleche  hides  himself. 

SCENE  III. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE. 

HAR.  It  is  you  who  wish  to  ruin  yourself  by  such  cen- 
surable loans? 

CLE.  It  is  you  who  seek  to  enrich  yourself  by  such 
criminal  usury  ? 

HAR.  Can  you  dare,  after  this,  to  appear  before  me  ? 

CLE.  Can  you  dare,  after  this,  to  show  your  face  to  the 
world.31 

HAR.  Are  you  not  ashamed,  tell  me,  to  practice  this 
sort  of  excesses,  to  rush  into  these  dreadful  expenses,  and 
to  dissipate  so  shamefully  the  property  which  your  parents 
have  amassed  for  you  by  the  sweat  of  their  brow  ? 

CLE.  Do  you  not  blush  to  dishonour  your  station  by  the 
trade  you  are  engaged  in  ;  to  sacrifice  glory  and  reputa- 
tion to  the  insatiable  desire  of  piling  crown  upon  crown, 
and  to  surpass,  in  matters  of  interest,  the  most  infamous 
tricks  that  were  ever  invented  by  the  most  notorious 
usurers  ? 

HAR,  Begone  out  of  my  sight,  scoundrel !  begone  out 
of  my  sight ! 

CLE.  Who,  think  you,  is  the  more  criminal — he  who 
buys  the  money  of  which  he  is  in  need,  or  he  who  steals 
money  for  which  he  has  no  use? 

HAR.  Begone,  I  say,  and  do  not  break  the  drums  of  my 
ears.  (Alone}.  After  all,  I  am  not  so  vexed  about  this 
adventure;  it  will  be  a  lesson  to  me  to  keep  more  than 
ever  an  eye  upon  his  proceedings. 

81  Moliere  has  borrowed  also  from  Boisrobert's  play,  mentioned  before, 
the  primary  idea  of  this  scene. 

yS  THE   MISER.  [ACT  n 

SCENE  IV. — FROSINE,  HARPAGON. 

FRO.  Sir. 

HAR.  Wait  a  moment :  I  shall  be  back  directly  to  speak 
to  you.  {{Aside}.  I  had  better  go  and  take  a  look  at  my 
money. 

SCENE  V. — LA  FLECHE,  FROSINE. 

LA  FL.  (Without  seeing  Frosine).  The  adventure  is 
altogether  funny  !  He  must  have  somewhere  a  large  store 
of  furniture ;  for  we  could  recognize  nothing  here  from 
what  is  in  the  memorandum. 

FRO.  Eh  !  is  it  you,  my  poor  La  Fleche  !  How  comes 
this  meeting? 

LA  FL.  Ah  !  ah  !  it  is  you,  Frosine  !  What  brings  you 
here? 

FRO.  The  same  that  brings  me  everywhere  else ;  to  fetch 
and  carry,  to  render  myself  serviceable  to  people,  and  to 
profit  as  much  as  possible  by  the  small  talents  of  which 
I  am  possessed.  You  know  that  in  this  world  we  must 
live  by  our  wits,  and  that  to  persons  like  me,  Heaven  has 
given  no  other  income  than  intrigue  and  industry. 

LA  FL.  Have  you  any  dealings  with  the  master  of  this 
house  ? 

FRO.  Yes.  I  am  arranging  some  small  matter  for  him, 
for  which  I  expect  a  reward. 

LA  FL.  From  him  ?  Ah  !  you  will  have  to  be  wide- 
awake enough  if  you  get  anything  out  of  him ;  and  I  warn 
you  that  money  is  very  scarce  in  this  house 

FRO.  There  are  certain  services  that  touch  to  the  quick 
marvellously. 

LA  FL.  I  am  your  humble  servant.  You  do  not  know 
Mr.  Harpagon  yet.  Mr.  Harpagon  is  of  all  human  beings 
the  least  human,  of  all  mortals  the  hardest  and  most  close- 
fisted.  There  is  no  service  that  touches  his  gratitude 
deeply  enough  to  make  him  unloose  his  purse-strings. 
Praise,  esteem,  kindness  in  words,  and  friendship,  as 
much  as  you  like ;  but  money,  nothing  of  the  kind. 
There  is  nothing  drier  and  more  arid  than  his  good  graces 
and  his  caresses ;  and  to  give  is  a  word  for  which  he  has 
such  an  aversion,  that  he  never  says  :  I  give  you,  but  I  lend 
you  good  day. 

SCENE  vi.]  THE   MISER.  37 

FRO.  Gad  !  I  have  the  art  of  drawing  something  out  of 
people  ;  I  have  the  secret  of  entering  into  their  affections, 
of  tickling  their  hearts,  and  of  finding  out  their  most  sen- 
sitive spots. 

LA  FL.  Of  no  avail  here.  I  defy  you  to  soften  the  man 
we  are  speaking  of,  so  that  he  will  give  money.  Upon 
this  subject  he  is  a  Turk,  but  of  a  turkishness  to  cause  the 
despair  of  every  one ;  and  one  might  starve,  and  he  would 
not  budge.  In  one  word,  he  loves  money  better  than 
reputation,  than  honour,  and  than  virtue;  and  the  very 
sight  of  one  who  asks  for  it  sends  him  into  fits;  it  is 
touching  him  in  his  mortal  part,  it  is  piercing  his  heart,  it 
is  tearing  out  his  very  entrails ;  and  if  ...  But  he  is 
coming  back ;  I  am  going. 

SCENE  VI. — HARPAGON,  FROSINE. 

HAR.  (Aside).  Everything  is  going  on  right.  (Aloud). 
Well !  what  is  it,  Frosine  ? 

FRO.  Gad,  how  weH  you  are  looking ;  you  are  the  very 
picture  of  health  ! 

HAR.  Who?    I! 

FRO.  I  never  saw  you  with  such  a  fresh  and  jolly  com- 
plexion. 

HAR.  Really? 

FRO.  How?  You  never  in  your  life  looked  so  young 
as  you  do  now;  I  see  people  of  five-and-twenty  who  look 
older  than  you. 

HAR.  I  am  over  sixty,  nevertheless,  Frosine. 

FRO.  Well !  what  does  that  signify,  sixty  years  ?  that 
is  nothing  to  speak  of!  It  is  the  very  flower  of  one's  age, 
that  is;  and  you  are  just  entering  the  prime  of  manhood. 

HAR.  That  is  true ;  but  twenty  years  less  would  do  me 
no  harm,  I  think. 

FRO.  Are  you  jesting?  You  have  no  need  of  that,  and 
you  are  made  of  the  stuff  to  live  a  hundred. 

HAR.  Do  you  think  so? 

FRO.  Indeed  I  do.  You  show  all  the  signs  of  it.  Hold 
up  your  head  a  moment.  Yes,  it  is  there,  well  enough 
between  your  eyes,  a  sign  of  long  life ! 

HAR.  You  are  a  judge  of  that  sort  of  thing? 

38  THE   MISER.  [ACTII 

FRO.  Undoubtedly  I  am.  Show  me  your  hand.  Begad, 
what  a  line  of  life ! 

HAR.  How? 

FRO.  Do  you  not  see  how  far  this  line  goes?32 

HAR.  Well !  what  does  it  mean  ? 

FRO.  Upon  my  word,  I  said  a  hundred ;  but  you  shall 
pass  six  score. 

HAR.  Is  it  possible? 

FRO.  They  will  have  to  kill  you,  I  tell  you ;  and  you  shall 
bury  your  children,  and  your  children's  children. 

HAR.  So  much  the  better !  How  is  our  affair  getting 
on? 

FRO.  Need  you  ask?  Does  one  ever  see  me  meddle 
with  anything  that  I  do  not  bring  to  an  issue  ?  But  for 
match-making,  especially,  I  have  a  marvellous  talent. 
There  are  not  two  people  in  the  world  whom  I  cannot 
manage,  in  a  very  short  time,  to  couple  together;  and  I 
believe  that,  if  I  took  it  into  my  head,  I  should  marry  the 
grand  Turk  to  the  republic  of  Venice.83  To  be  sure,  there 
were  no  very  great  difficulties  in  this  matter.  As  I  am 
intimate  with  the  ladies,  I  have  often  spoken  to  each  of 
them,  of  you ;  and  I  have  told  the  mother  of  the  design 
which  you  had  upon  Mariane,  from  seeing  her  pass  in  the 
street,  and  taking  the  fresh  air  at  her  window. 

HAR.  Who  answered  .    .    . 

FRO.  She  has  received  your  proposal  with  joy;  and  when 
I  gave  her  to  understand  that  you  very  much  wished  her 
daughter  to  be  present  this  evening  at  the  marriage-con- 
tract, which  was  to  be  signed  for  yours,  she  has  consented 
without  difficulty,  and  has  entrusted  her  to  me  for  the 
purpose. 

82  This  dialogue  is  translated  from  a  comedy  of  Ariosto,  /  Suppositi 
(Act  i.,  Scene  2). 

33  In  Rabelais'  forty-first  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  Pantagruel, 
"  How  Bridlegoose  relateth  the  history  of  the  reconcilers  of  parties  at 
variance  in  matter?  of  law/'  Peter  Dendin  says  to  his  son  Tenot — "  I  tell 
thee,  my  jolly  son  Dendin,  that  by  this  rule  and  method  I  could  settle  a 
firm  peace,  or  at  least  clap  up  a  cessation  of  arms,  and  truce  for  many 
years  to  come  betwixt  the  great  King  and  the  Venetian  State, — the 
Emperor  and  the  Cantons  of  Switzerland, — the  English  and  the  Scotch, 
and  betwixt  the  Pope  and  the  Ferrarians.  Shall  I  go  yet  further  ?  Yea, 
as  I  would  have  God  to  help  m>"  betwixt  the  Turk  and  the  Sophy,  the 
Tartars  and  the  Muscovites." 

SCENE  v..]  THE   MISER.  39 

HAR.  It  is  because  I  am  obliged  to  offer  a  supper  to 
Mr.  Anselme ;  and  I  shall  be  glad  that  she  share  the  treat. 

FRO.  You  are  right.  She  is  to  pay  a  visit  after  dinner 
to  your  daughter,  whence  she  intends  to  take  a  turn  in  the 
fair,  to  come  and  sup  here  afterwards. 

HAR.  Well !  they  shall  go  together  in  my  coach,  which 
I  will  lend  them. 

FRO.  That  will  do  very  nicely. 

HAR.  But,  Frosine,  have  you  spoken  to  the  mother  re- 
specting the  portion  she  can  give  her  daughter?  Have  you 
told  her  that  she  must  bestir  herself  a  little;  that  she 
should  make  some  effort ;  that  she  must  even  bleed  herself 
a  little  on  an  occasion  like  that?  For,  after  all,  one  does 
not  marry  a  girl  without  her  bringing  something. 

FRO.  How  something  !  She  is  a  girl  who  brings  you 
twelve  thousand  francs  a-year. 

HAR.  Twelve  thousand  francs  ! 

FRO.  Yes.  To  begin  with ;  she  has  been  brought  up 
and  accustomed  to  strict  economy  in  feeding.  She  is  a 
girl  used  to  live  on  salad,  milk,  cheese,  and  apples ;  and 
who,  in  consequence,  will  neither  want  a  well-appointed 
table,  nor  exquisite  broths,  nor  peeled  barley,  at  every  turn, 
nor  other  delicacies  which  would  be  necessary  to  any  other 
woman;  and  let  these  things  cost  ever  so  little,  they 
always  mount  to  about  three  thousand  francs  a-year  at  the 
least.  Besides  this,  she  has  no  taste  for  anything  but  the 
utmost  simplicity,  and  does  not  care  for  sumptuous  dresses, 
or  valuable  jewels  or  magnificent  furniture,  to  which  other 
young  ladies  are  so  much  given ;  and  that  comes  to  more 
than  four  thousand  francs  per  annum.  In  addition,  she 
has  a  terrible  aversion  to  gambling,  not  a  common  thing 
in  women  of  the  present  day ;  for  I  know  one  in  our 
neighbourhood  who  has  lost  more  "than  twenty  thousand 
francs  this  year  at  trenteet  quarante.  But  let  us  only  esti- 
mate it  at  a  fourth  of  that.  Five  thousand  francs  a-year 
at  play,  and  four  thousand  in  jewelry  and  dresses,  that 
makes  nine  thousand  ;  and  a  thousand  crowns,  say,  for 
the  food :  are  there  not  your  twelve  thousand  francs 
a-year  ?  M 

44  This  idea  is  probably  borrowed  from  Plautus'  Aulularia.  (Act  iii., 
Scene  10),  where  Megadorus  consoles  himself  for  having  a  bride  without 

40  THE   MISER.  [ACT  H. 

HAR.  Yes :  that  is  not  so  bad ;  but  this  reckoning  con- 
tains, after  all,  nothing  real. 

FRO.  Pardon  me.  Is  "it  not  something  real  to  bring 
you  for  a  marriage  portion  great  sobriety,  the  inheritance 
of  a  great  love  for  simplicity  of  dress,  and  the  acquisition 
of  a  great  hatred  for  gambling  ? 

HAR.  Surely  it  is  a  joke  to  wish  to  make  up  her  dowry 
to  me  out  of  expenses  to  which  she  will  not  go.  I  am  not 
going  to  give  a  receipt  for  what  I  do  not  receive ;  and  I 
shall  have  to  get  something  down  on  the  nail. 

FRO.  Good  gracious  !  you  shall  get  enough ;  and  they 
have  spoken  to  me  of  a  certain  country  where  they  have 
some  property,  whereof  you  will  become  the  master. 

HAR.  That  remains  to  be  seen.  But,  Frosine,  there  is 
something  else  still  which  makes  me  uneasy.  The  girl  i? 
young,  as  you  can  see ;  and  young  people  ordinarily  love 
only  their  equals,  and  seek  only  their  society.  I  am  afraid 
that  a  man  of  my  age  may  not  be  to  her  taste,  and  that 
this  might  produce  certain  little  troubles  in  my  house, 
which  would  not  at  all  suit  me. 

FRO.  Ah  !  how  little  you  know  her  !  This  is  another 
peculiarity  which  I  had  to  mention  to  you.  She  has  a 
frightful  aversion  to  young  people,  and  cares  for  none  ex- 
cept for  old  men. 

HAR.  She? 

FRO.  Yes,  she.  I  should  like  that  you  had  heard  her 
speak  upon  that  subject.  She  cannot  at  all  bear  the  sight 
of  a  young  man ;  but  nothing  gives  her  greater  delight, 
she  says,  than  to  behold  a  handsome  old  man  with  a 
majestic  beard.  The  oldest  are  the  most  charming  to 
her ;  so  I  warn  you  beforehand  not  to  make  yourself  look 
younger  than  you  really  are.  She  wishes  one  at  least  to  be 
a  sexagenarian  ;  and  it  is  not  more  than  four  months  ago, 
that,  on  the  point  of  being  married,  she  flatly  broke  off 
the  match,  when  it  came  out  that  her  lover  was  but  fifty- 
six  years  of  age,  and  that  he  did  not  put  spectacles  on  to 
sign  the  contract. 

HAR.  Only  for  that  ? 

a  dowry,  by  descanting  upon  the  ruinous  expenses  of  women  who  have 
brought  dowries  to  their  husbands. 

SCENE  YI.]  THE   MISER.  41 

FRO.  Yes.  She  says  fifty-six  will  not  do  for  her ;  and 
that  above  all  things  she  cares  for  noses  that  wear  spec- 
tacles. 

HAR.  You  certainly  tell  me  something  new  there. 

FRO.  She  carries  it  farther  than  I  could  tell  you.  One 
may  see  some  pictures  and  a  few  prints  in  her  room ;  but 
what  do  you  think  they  are?  Portraits  of  Adonis,  of 
Cephalus,  of  Paris,  and  of  Apollo?  Not  at  all.  Beautiful 
likenesses  of  Saturn,  of  king  Priam,  of  old  Nestor,  and  of 
good  father  Anchises  on  his  son's  back. 

HAR.  This  is  admirable.  That  is  what  I  should  never 
have  thought,  and  I  am  very  glad  to  hear  that  she  is  of 
that  disposition.  In  fact,  had  I  been  a  woman,  I  should 
never  have  cared  for  young  men. 

FRO.  I  should  think  so.  A  nice  lot  they  are  these 
young  men,  to  care  for  them !  pretty  beauties,  indeed, 
these  fine  sparks  to  be  enamoured  of!  I  should  like  to 
know  what  one  can  see  in  them ! 

HAR.  As  for  me,  I  cannot  understand  it  at  all.  I  do 
not  know  how  there  are  women  who  like  them  so  much. 

FRO.  They  must  be  downright  fools.  Does  it  sound 
like  common  sense  to  think  youth  amiable?  Are  they 
men  at  all,  these  young  fops,55  and  can  one  love  such 
animals  ? 

HAR.  That  is  what  I  say  every  day ;  with  their  voices 
like  chicken-hearted  fellows,  three  small  hairs  in  the  beard 
twirled  like  a  cat's  whiskers ;  their  tow-wigs,  their  breeches 
quite  hanging  down,  and  their  open  breasts  ! 

FRO.  Indeed  !  they  are  well  built  compared  with  a 
person  like  you !  That  is  what  I  call  a  man ;  there  is 
something  there  to  please  the  sight;  and  that  is  the  way 
to  be  made  and  dressed  to  inspire  love. 

HAR.  Then  you  like  my  appearance? 

FRO  Do  I  like  your  appearance  !  You  are  charming; 
your  figure  is  worth  painting.  Turn  round  a  little,  if  you 
please.  Nothing  could  be  better.  Let  me  see  you  walk. 
That  is  a  well-built  body,  free  and  easy  as  it  ought  to  be, 
and  without  a  sign  of  illness. 

»  The  original  has  blondim.  See  The  School  for  Husbands,  Vol.  I., 
page  264,  note  8. 

42  THE  MISER.  [ACT  n. 

HAR.  None  to  speak  of,  thank  Heaven."  Nothing  but 
my  cough,  which  worries  me  now  and  then. 

FRO.  That  is  nothing.  It  does  not  become  you  badly, 
seeing  that  you  cough  very  gracefully. 

HAR.  Just  tell  me  :  has  Mariane  not  seen  me  yet?  She 
has  not  taken  any  notice  of  me  in  going  past  ? 

FRO.  No;  but  we  have  spoken  a  great  deal  of  you. 
I  have  tried  to  paint  your  person  to  her,  and  I  have  not 
failed  to  vaunt  your  merits,  and  the  advantage  which  it 
would  be  to  her  to  have  a  husband  like  you. 

HAR.  You  have  done  well  and  I  thank  you  for  it. 

FRO.  I  have,  Sir,  a  slight  request  to  make  to  you. 
I  have  a  law-suit  which  I  am  on  the  point  of  losing  for 
want  of  a  little  money  {Harpagon  assumes  a  serious  look) ; 
and  you  might  easily  enable  me  to  gain  this  suit  by  doing 
me  a  little  kindness.  You  would  not  believe  how  de- 
lighted she  will  be  to  see  you.  {Harpagon  resumes  his 
liveliness).  How  you  will  charm  her,  and  how  this  old- 
fashioned  ruff37  will  take  her  fancy!  But  above  all  things, 
she  will  like  your  breeches  fastened  to  your  doublet  with 
tags;  that  will  make  her  mad  for  you;  and  a  lover  who 
wears  tags  will  be  most  acceptable  to  her. 

HAR.   Certainly,  I  am  delighted  to  hear  you  say  so. 

FRO.  Really,  sir,  this  law-suit  is  of  the  utmost  conse- 
quence to  me.  (Harpagon  resumes  his  serious  air).  If 
I  lose  it,  I  am  ruined ;  and  some  little  assistance  would  set 
my  affairs  in  order  ...  I  should  like  you  to  have  seen 
her  delight  at  hearing  me  speak  of  you.  (Harpagon 
resumes  his  liveliness).  Joy  shone  in  her  eyes  at  the 
enumeration  of  your  good  qualities;  and,  in  short, 
I  have  made  her  very  anxious  to  have  this  match  entirely 
concluded. 

HAR.  You  have  pleased  me  very  much,  Frosine ;  and  I 
confess  that  I  am  extremely  obliged  to  you. 

FRO.  I  pray  you,  Sir,  to  give  me  the  little  assistance 
which  I  ask  of  you.  (Harpagon  resumes  his  serious  air). 

36  In  saying  these  words,  Harpagon  begins  to  cough,  and  as  Moliere 
was  subject  to  this,  it  became  quite  natural  to  him,  when  he  played  this 
part, 

91  The  original  has  /raise  a  I'  antique.  See  The  School  for  Husbands, 
Vol.  I.,  page  266,  note  10. 

SCENE  i.J  THE   MISER.  43 

It  will  put  me  on  ray  legs  again,  and  I  shall  be  for  ever 
grateful  to  you. 

HAR.  Good-bye.     I  am  going  to  finish  my  letters. 

FRO.  I  assure  you,  Sir,  that  you  could  never  come  to 
my  relief  in  a  greater  need. 

HAR.  I  will  give  orders  that  my  coach  be  ready  to  take 
you  to  the  fair. 

FRO.  I  would  not  trouble  you,  if  I  were  not  compelled 
to  it  from  necessity. 

HAR.  And  I  will  take  care  that  the  supper  shall  be  served 
early,  so  as  not  to  make  you  ill. 

FRO.  Do  not  refuse  me  the  service  which  I  ask  of  you. 
You  would  not  believe,  Sir,  the  pleasure  which  .  .  . 

HAR.  I  must  begone.  Some  one  is  calling  me.  Till 
by-and-by. 

FRO.  (Alone).  May  ague  seize  you,  and  send  you  to  the 
devil,  you  stingy  cur !  The  rascal  has  resisted  firmly  all 
my  attacks.  But  I  must,  for  all  that,  not  abandon  the  at- 
tempt ;  and  I  have  got  the  other  side,  from  whom,  at  any 
rate,  I  am  certain  to  draw  a  good  reward. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — HARPAGON,   CLEANTE,   ELISE,  VALERE;    MIS- 
TRESS CLAUDE  holding  a  broom,  MASTER  JACQUES, 
LA  MERLUCHE,  BRINDAVOINE. 

HAR.  Come  here,  all  of  you,  that  I  may  give  you  my 
orders  for  just  now,  and  tell  every  one  what  he  has  to  do. 
Come  here,  Mistress  Claude;  let  us  begin  with  you. 
{Looking  at  her  brooni).  That  is  right,  arms  in  hand.  I 
trust  to  you  for  cleaning  up  everywhere:  and  above  all, 
take  care  not  to  rub  the  furniture  too  hard,  for  fear  of 
wearing  it  out.  Besides  this,  I  appoint  you  to  look  after 
the  bottles  during  the  supper ;  and,  if  one  is  missing,  or 
if  something  gets  broken,  I  shall  hold  you  responsible,  and 
deduct  it  from  your  wages. 

JAC.   (Aside).  There  is  policy  in  that  punishment. 

HAK.   (To  Mistress  Claude}.  You  can  go. 

44  THE   MISER.  fACT  „,. 

SCENE  II. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE,  ELBE,  VALERE,  MASTER 
JACQUES,  BRINDAVOINE,  LA  MERLUCHE. 

HAR.  You,  Brindavoine,  and  you,  La  Merluche,  I  con- 
fide to  you  the  care  of  rinsing  the  glasses,  and  of  serving 
out  the  drink,  but  only  when  the  people  are  thirsty,  and 
not  in  the  manner  of  these  impertinent  lacqueys  who  come 
and  provoke  them,  and  put  drinking  into  their  heads  when 
they  have  no  thought  of  such  a  thing.  Wait  till  you  are 
asked  for  it  more  than  once,  and  bear  in  mind  always  to 
bring  a  good  deal  of  water. 

JAC.  (Aside).  Yes.  Wine  undiluted  mounts  to  the 
head. 

MER,  Shall  we  throw  off  our  smocks,  Sir? 

HAR.  Yes,  when  you  see  the  people  coming ;  and  take 
care  not  to  spoil  your  clothes. 

BRIN.  You  know,  Sir,  that  the  front  of  my  doublet  is 
covered  with  a  large  stain  of  oil  from  the  lamp. 

MER.  And  I,  Sir,  I  have  a  large  hole  in  the  seat  of  my 
breeches,  and  saving  your  presence,  people  can  see  .  .  . 

HAR.  Peace ;  keep  it  adroitly  to  the  side  of  the  wall, 
and  always  show  your  front  to  the  world.  (To  Brinda- 
voine, showing  him  how  he  is  to  keep  his  hat  before  his 
doublet,  in  order  to  hide  the  s/ain.}.  And  you,  always 
hold  your  hat  thus  while  you  are  waiting  upon  the  guests. 

SCENE  III. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE,  ELISE,  VALERE, 
MASTER  JACQUES. 

HAR.  As  for  you,  daughter,  you  will  keep  an  eye  upon 
what  goes  away  from  the  table,  and  take  care  that  nothing 
be  wasted.  It  becomes  girls  to  do  so.  Meanwhile,  get 
yourself  ready  to  receive  my  intended  properly.  She  is 
coming  to  visit  you,  and  will  take  you  to  the  fair  with 
her.  Do  you  hear  what  I  say  to  you  ? 

EL.  Yes,  father. 

SCENE    IV. —  HARPAGON,    CLEANTE,    VALERE,    MASTER 
JACQUES. 

HAR.  And  you,  my  foppish  son,  to  whom  I  have  been 
good  enough  to  forgive  what  has  happened  just  now,  do 
not  take  it  into  your  head  to  show  her  a  sour  face. 

SCEN.V.J  THE  MISER.  45 

CLE.  I !   father  ?  a  sour  face.     And  for  what  reason  ? 

HAR.  Egad !  we  know  the  ways  of  children  whose 
fathers  marry  again,  and  with  what  sort  of  eyes  they  are 
in  the  habit  of  looking  at  their  so-called  stepmothers. 
But  if  you  wish  me  to  lose  the  recollection  of  this  last  es- 
capade of  yours,  I  recommend  you,  above  all,  to  show  this 
lady  a  friendly  countenance,  and  to  give  her,  in  short,  the 
best  possible  reception. 

CLE.  To  tell  you  the  truth,  father,  I  cannot  promise 
you  to  be  glad  that  she  is  to  become  my  stepmother.  I 
should  tell  a  lie  if  I  said  so  to  you ;  but  as  for  receiving 
her  well  and  showing  her  a  friendly  countenance,  I  pro- 
mise to  obey  you  punctually  on  this  head. 

HAR.  Take  care  you  do,  at  least. 

CLE.  You  shall  see  that  you  shall  have  no  cause  to  com- 
plain. 

HAR.   You  had  better. 

SCENE  V. — HARPAGON,  VALERE,  MASTER  JACQUES. 

HAR.  You  will  have  to  help  me  in  this,  Valere.  Now, 
Master  Jacques,  draw  near,  I  have  left  you  for  the  last. 

JAC.  Is  it  to  your  coachman,  Sir,  or  to  your  cook,  that 
you  wish  to  speak?  For  I  am  both  the  one  and  the 
other. 

HAR.  It  is  to  both. 

JAC.  But  to  which  of  the  two  first  ? 

HAR.  To  the  cook. 

JAC.  Then  wait  a  minute,  if  you  please. 

(Master  Jacques  takes  off  his  livery  coat, 
and  appears  in  a  cook's  dress). 

HAR.  What  the  deuce  does  that  ceremony  mean  ? 

JAC.  You  have  but  to  speak  now. 

HAR.  I  have  promised,  Master  Jacques,  to  give  a  supper 
to-night. 

JAC.  (Aside},     Most  miraculous ! 

HAR.  Just  tell  me :  will  you  dish  us  up  something 
good? 

JAC.  Yes,  if  you  give  me  plenty  of  money. 

HAR.  The  deuce,  always  money.  It  seems  to  me  as  if 
they  could  speak  of  nothing  else ;  money,  money,  money ! 
It  is  the  only  word  they  have  got  on  their  lips  ;  money  I 

46  THE   MISER.  [ACT  in. 

they  always  speak  of  money.  That  is  their  chief  argu- 
ment,38 money. 

VAL.  I  have  never  heard  a  more  impertinent  answer 
than  that.  A  great  wonder  to  dish  up  something  good 
with  plenty  of  money !  It  is  the  easiest  thing  in  the  world ; 
any  fool  can  do  as  much  ;  but  a  clever  man  should  speak 
of  dishing  up  something  good  with  little  money. 

JAC.  Something  good  with  little  money ! 

VAL.  Yes. 

JAC.  (To  Valere).  Upon  my  word,  Master  Steward,  you 
would  oblige  us  by  showing  us  that  secret,  and  by  taking 
my  place  as  cook ;  you  that  are  meddling  with  everything 
in  this  house,  and  playing  the  factotum. 

HAR.  Hold  your  tongue      What  shall  we  want  ? 

JAC.  Apply  to  your  steward  here,  who  will  dish  you  up 
something  good  for  little  money. 

HAR.   Enough  !     I  wish  you  to  answer  me. 

JAC.   How  many  people  are  to  sit  down  ? 

HAR.  We  shall  be  eight  or  ten  ;  but  you  must  not  count 
upon  more  than  eight.  If  there  is  enought  for  eight,  there 
is  enough  for  ten. 

VAL.   That  needs  no  comment. 

JAC.  Very  well !  we  must  have  four  first-rate  soups  and 
five  small  dishes.  Soups  .  .  .  Entrees  .  .  . 

HAR.  What  the  devil !  there  is  enough  to  feed  a  whole 
town. 

JAC.  Roast  .     .    . 

HAR.  (Putting  his  hand  over  Jacques*  mouth).  Hold  ! 
wretch,  you  will  eat  up  all  my  substance. 

JAC.  Side-dishes.39 

HAR.  (Putting  his  hand  over  Jacques1  mouth  again). 
What !  more  still  ? 

VAL.   (To Jacques).     Do  you  intend  to  make  every  one 

88  In  the  original  epic  de  chevet,  a  sword  that  hung  at  the  head  of  the 
bed,  and  was  always  ready  at  hand  when  needed ;  hence  figuratively  an 
argument,  an  answer  always  ready  at  hand. 

39  In  the  edition  of  1682,  Master  Jacques  mentions  a  great  many  dishes 
by  name  ;  but  this  is  clearly  an  interpolation  of  some  actor,  who  thought 
to  be  funnier  than  MoliSre,  but  who  forgot  that  Harpagon  would  never 
have  listened  quietly  to  a  long  list  of  different  things.  In  Fielding's  Miser 
James  (Jacques)  enumerates  also  a  great  many  eatables. 

SCENE  v.]  THE   MISER.  47 

burst  ?  and  think  you  that  master  has  invited  people  with 
the  intention  of  killing  them  with  food  ?  Go  and  read  a 
little  the  precepts  of  health,  and  ask  the  doctors  whether 
there  is  aught  more  prejudicial  to  man  than  eating  to 
excess. 

HAR.  He  is  right. 

VAL.  Learn,  Master  Jacques,  you  and  the  like  of  you, 
that  a  table  overloaded  with  viands  is  a  cut-throat  business ; 
that,  to  show  one's  self  the  friend  of  those  whom  one  in- 
vites, frugality  should  reign  in  the  meals  which  one  offers ; 
and  that  according  to  the  saying  of  an  ancient,  we  must 
eat  to  live,  and  not  live  to  eat.*** 

HAR.  Ah !  how  well  that  is  said  !  Come  here,  that  I 
may  embrace  you  for  that  saying.  This  is  the  finest  sen- 
tence that  I  ever  heard  in  my  life  ;  one  must  live  to  eat  and 
not  eat  toli.  .  .  No,  that  is  not  it.  How  do  you  put  it? 

VAL.    That  we  must  eat  to  live  and  not  live  to  eat. 

HAR.  (T0  Master  Jacques).  That  is  it.  Do  you  hear 
it?  {To  Valere).  Who  is  the  great  man  who  has  said 
that? 

VAL.  I  do  not  recollect  his  name  just  now. 

HAR.  Just  remember  to  write  down  these  words  for  me : 
I  wish  to  have  them  engraved  in  letters  of  gold  on  the 
mantel-piece  of  my  dining-room. 

VAL.  I  shall  not  forget  it.  And  as  for  your  supper,  you 
have  but  to  leave  it  to  me ;  I  shall  manage  everything 
right  enough. 

HAR.   Do  so. 

JAC.   So  much  the  better !  I  shall  have  less  trouble. 

HAR.  (To  Valere).  We  must  have  some  of  these  things 
of  which  people  eat  very  little,  and  which  fill  quickly ; 
some  good  fat  beans,  with  a  potted  pie,  well  stuffed  with 
chesnuts.  Let  there  be  plenty  of  that. 

VAL.  Depend  upon  me. 

HAR.  And  now,  Master  Jacques,  you  must  clean  my 
coach. 

JAC.  Wait ;  that  is  a  matter  for  the  coachman.  (Puts 
his  livery  coat  on).  You  were  saying  .  .  . 

40  The  Romans  had  a  kind  of  adage— ede  ut  vivas,  ne  vivas  ut  eda» — 
which  they  sometimes  expressed  by  the  initials  E.  V.  V.  N.  V.  V.  E. 

48  THE  MISER.  [ACT  m. 

HAR.  That  you  must  clean  my  coacn,  and  hold  the 
horses  in  readiness  to  drive  to  the  fair  .  .  . 

JAC.  Your  horses,  Sir?  Upon  my  word,  they  are  not 
at  all  in  a  fit  state  to  go.  I  will  not  tell  you  that  they  are 
on  the  straw;  the  poor  beasts  have  not  got  even  that 
much,  and  it  would  not  be  telling  the  truth;  but  you 
make  them  keep  such  austere  fasts  that  they  are  no  longer 
anything  but  ghosts  or  shadows,  with  horses'  shapes. 

HAR.  They  are  very  ill,  and  yet  they  are  doing  nothing  J 

JAC.  And  because  they  do  nothing,  Sir,  must  they  not 
eat?  It  would  be  far  better  to  work  the  poor  brutes 
much,  and  to  feed  them  the  same.  It  breaks  my  heart  to 
see  them  in  such  a  wretched  condition ;  for,  after  all,  I 
have  got  tender  feeling  for  my  horses;  it  seems  to  me 
it  is  myself,  when  I  see  them  suffer.  Not  a  day  passes  but 
I  take  the  meat  out  of  my  own  mouth  to  feed  them  ; 
and,  Sir,  it  is  being  too  cruel  to  have  no  pity  for  one's 
neighbour. 

HAR.  The  work  will  not  be  very  hard  to  go  as  far  as 
the  fair. 

JAC.  No,  Sir,  I  have  not  the  heart  to  drive  them,  and  I 
would  not  have  it  on  my  conscience  to  give  them  the 
whip  in  the  state  in  which  they  are.  How  can  you  wish 
them  to  draw  a  coach  when  they  can  hardly  drag  them- 
selves along? 

VAL.  Sir,  I  will  make  our  neighbour,  Picard,  take 
charge  of  them  and  drive  them ;  he  will  be  at  the  same 
time  needed  to  get  the  supper  ready. 

JAC.  Be  it  so;  I  prefer  their  dying  under  other  people's 
hands  than  under  mine. 

VAL.  Master  Jacques  is  getting  considerate  ! 

JAC.  Sir  Steward  is  getting  indispensable ! 

HAR.  Peace. 

JAC.  I  cannot  bear  flatterers,  Sir;  and  I  see  what  he 
makes  of  it ;  that  his  perpetual  looking  after  the  bread, 
the  wine,  the  wood,  the  salt,  the  candles,  is  done  only 
with  the  view  of  currying  favour  with  you,  and  getting 
into  your  good  books.  This  drives  me  mad,  and  I  am 
sorry  to  hear  every  day  what  the  world  says  of  you ;  for, 
after  all,  I  have  some  feeling  for  you;  and,  after  my 
horses,  you  are  the  person  whom  I  love  most. 

•CINE  vi.]  THE   MISER.  49 

HAR.  Might  I  know,  Master  Jacques,  what  people  say 
of  me. 

JAC.  Yes,  Sir,  if  I  could  be  sure  that  it  would  not  make 
you  angry. 

HAR.  No,  not  in  the  least. 

JAC.  I  beg  your  pardon ;  I  know  full  well  that  I  shall 
put  you  in  a  rage. 

HAR.  Not  at  all.  On  the  contrary,  it  will  be  obliging 
me,  and  I  shall  be  glad  to  learn  how  people  speak  of 
me. 

JAC.  Since  you  will  have  it,  Sir,  I  shall  tell  you  frankly 
that  people  everywhere  make  a  jest  of  you,  that  they  pelt 
us  with  a  thousand  jokes  from  every  quarter  on  your 
account,  and  that  they  are  never  more  delighted  than 
when  holding  you  up  to  ridicule,  and  continually  relating 
stories  of  your  meanness.  One  says  that  you  have  special 
almanacks  printed,  in  which  you  double  the  ember  weeks 
and  vigils,  in  order  to  profit  by  the  fast  days,  which  you 
compel  your  people  to  keep ;  another  that  you  have  always 
a  quarrel  ready  for  your  servants  at  New  Year's  day,  or 
when  they  leave  you,  so  that  you  may  find  a  reason  for 
not  giving  them  anything.  That  one  tells  that  you  once 
sued  one  of  your  neighbour's  cats  for  having  eaten  the 
remainder  of  a  leg  of  mutton ;  this  one  again  that  you 
were  surprised  one  night  in  purloining  the  hay  of  your 
own  horses,  and  that  your  coachman,  that  is,  the  one  who 
was  here  before  me,  dealt  you  I  do  not  know  how  many 
blows  in  the  dark,  of  which  you  never  broached  a  word. 
In  short,  shall  I  tell  you  ?  one  can  go  nowhere  without 
hearing  you  hauled  over  the  coals  on  all  sides.  You  are 
the  byword  and  laughing-stock  of  every  one;  and  you 
are  never  spoken  of,  except  under  the  names  of  miser, 
curmudgeon,  hunks  and  usurer. 

HAR.  (Thrashing  Master  Jacques).  You  are  a  numscull, 
a  rascal,  a  scoundrel,  and  an  impudent  fellow. 

JAC.  Well !  did  I  not  say  so  beforehand  ?  You  would 
not  believe  me.  I  told  you  well  enough  that  I  should 
make  you  angry  by  telling  you  the  truth. 

HAR.  That  will  teach  you  how  to  speak. 

VOL.  III. 

$0  THE   MISER.  [ACT  ln. 

SCENE  VI. — VALERE,  MASTER  JACQUES. 

VAL.  (Laughing).  From  what  I  can  see,  Master  Jacques, 
your  candour  is  ill  rewarded. 

JAC.  Zounds !  Master  Upstart,  who  assume  the  man  of 
consequence,  it  is  not  your  business.  Laugh  at  your  cud- 
gel-blows when  you  shall  receive  them,  but  do  not  come 
here  to  laugh  at  mine. 

VAL.  Ah  !  Sir  Master  Jacques,  do  not  get  angry,  I  beg 
of  you. 

JAC.  (Aside).  He  is  knuckling  under.  I  shall  bully 
him,  and,  if  he  is  fool  enough  to  be  afraid  of  me,  I  shall 
give  him  a  gentle  drubbing.  (Aloud  ).  Are  you  aware, 
Master  Laugher,  that  I  am  not  in  a  laughing  humour,  and 
that  if  you  annoy  me,  I  will  make  you  laugh  on  the  wrong 
side  of  your  mouth. 

(Master  Tacques  drives  Valere  to  the  far  end 
of  the  stage,  threatening  him. 

VAL.   Eh!  gently. 

JAC.  How,  gently  ?  it  does  not  suit  me. 

VAL.  Pray. 

JAC.  You  are  an  impertinent  fellow. 

VAL.  Sir  Master  Jacques  .    .     . 

JAC.  There  is  no  Sir  Master  Jacques  at  all.41  If  I  had 
a  stick,  I  would  give  you  a  good  drubbing. 

VAL.  How,  a  stick !  ( Valere  makes  Master  Jacques 
retreat  in  his  turn. 

JAC.  Eh  !  I  was  not  speaking  of  that. 

VAL.  Are  you  aware,  Master  Boaster,  that  I  am  the 
very  man  to  give  you  a  drubbing  myself? 

JAC.  I  do  not  doubt  it. 

ArAL.  That  you  are,  in  all,  nothing  but  a  scrub  of  a 
cook  ? 

JAC.  I  am  well  aware  of  it. 

VAL.  And  that  you  do  not  know  me  yet  ? 

JAC.  I  ask  your  pardon. 

VAL.  You  will  thrash  me,  say  you? 

JAC.  I  said  so  only  in  jest. 

VAL.  And   I   say,    that    I   do   not    relish    your   jests. 

41  The  original  has  pour  un  double.  A  double  was  a  very  small  coin  ; 
hence  it  is  used  for  "  not  at  all.'' 

SCBNEVIU.]  THE   MISER.  $1 

(Thrashing  him  with  a  stick).    This  will  teach  you,  that 
you  are  but  a  sorry  clown.42 

JAC.  (Alone).  The  plague  take  my  candour  !  it  is  a  bad 
business :  I  give  it  up  for  the  future,  and  I  will  no  more 
speak  the  truth.  I  might  put  up  with  it  from  my  master; 
he  has  some  right  to  thrash  me  ;  but  as  for  this  Master 
Steward,  I  will  have  my  revenge  if  I  can. 

SCENE  VII. — MARIANE,  FROSINE,  MASTER  JACQUES. 

FRO.  Do  you  know,  Master  Jacques,  if  your  master  is 
at  home  ? 

JAC.  Yes,  indeed,  he  is ;  I  know  it  but  too  well. 
FRO.  Tell  him,  pray,  that  we  are  here. 

SCENE  VIII. — MARIANE,  FROSINE. 

MAR.  Ah  !  I  feel  very  strange,  Frosine  !  and,  if  I  must 
tell  you  what  I  feel,  I  dread  this  interview  ! 

FRO.  But  why,  and  whence  this  uneasiness  ? 

MAR.  Alas  !  can  you  ask  me  ?  and  can  you  not  imagine 
the  alarms  of  any  one  at  the  sight  of  the  rack  to  which  she 
is  going  to  be  tied? 

FRO.  I  see  well  enough,  that  to  die  pleasantly,  Harpa- 
gon,  is  not  exactly  the  rack  which  you  would  care  to  em- 
brace ;  and  I  can  see  by  your  face,  that  this  young  spark, 
of  whom  you  spoke  to  me,  comes  afresh  into  your  head. 

MAR.  Yes  !  it  is  an  accusation,  Frosine,  from  which  I 
shall  not  defend  myself;  and  the  respectful  visits  which 
he  has  paid  us,  have,  I  confess,  made  some  impression  on 
my  heart. 

Fro.  But  have  you  ascertained  who  he  is  ? 

MAR.  No,  I  do  not  know  who  he  is.  But  this  I  know, 
that  he  is  made  to  be  beloved  :  that,  if  things  could  be 
left  to  my  choice,  I  would  sooner  have  him  than  any  other, 
and  that  he  is  the  chief  cause  in  making  me  feel  that  the 
husband  whom  they  wish  to  give  me  is  a  terrible  torment. 

FRO.  Egad,  all  these  youngsters  are  agreeable,  and  play 
their  part  well  enough,  but  most  of  them  are  as  poor  as 
church  mice :  it  will  be  much  better  for  you  to  take  an  old 

'  This,  according  to  Riccoboni,  seems  to  be  taken  from  an  Italian  play 
La  Cameriera  mobile  (the  noble-born  Ladies-Maid). 

52  THE  MISER.  [ACT  m. 

husband  who  will  make  you  a  good  settlement.  I  grant 
you  that  the  senses  will  not  find  their  account  so  well  on 
the  side  I  speak  of,  and  that  there  are  some  little  distastes 
to  overcome  with  such  a  spouse  ;  but  that  cannot  last,  and 
his  death,  believe  me,  will  soon  put  you  in  a  position  to 
take  one  who  is  more  amiable,  and  who  will  mend  all 
things. 

MAR.  Good  gracious  !  Frosine,  it  is  a  strange  thing 
that,  to  be  happy,  we  should  wish  for  or  await  the  death 
of  some  one  ;  the  more  so  as  death  does  not  always  accom- 
modate itself  to  our  projects. 

FRO.  Are  you  jesting  ?  You  marry  him  only  on  condi- 
tion of  soon  leaving  you  a  widow ;  and  that  must  be  one 
of  the  articles  of  the  contract.  It  would  be  impertinent 
in  him  not  to  die  within  three  months  !  **  Here  he  is  him- 
self! 

MAR.  Ah  !  Frosine,  what  a  figure  ! 

SCENE  IX. — HARPAGON,  MARIANE,  FROSINE. 

HAR.  ( To  Mariane).  Do  not  be  offended,  my  beauty, 
that  I  come  to  you  with  my  spectacles  on.  I  know  that 
your  charms  strike  the  eye  sufficiently,  are  visible  enough 
by  themselves,  and  that  there  is  no  need  of  spectacles  to 
perceive  them  ;  but  after  all,  it  is  through  them  that  we 
look  at  the  stars,"  and  I  maintain  and  vouch  for  it  that 
you  are  a  star ;  but  a  star,  the  brightest  in  the  land  of 
stars.  Frosine,  she  does  not  answer  a  word,  and  does  not 
testify,  from  what  I  can  perceive,  the  slightest  joy  in  see- 
ing me. 

FRO.  It  is  because  she  is  as  yet  taken  all  aback ;  and 
besides,  girls  are  always  ashamed  to  show  at  first  sight 
what  passes  in  their  hearts. 

48  In  the  second  scene  of  the  second  act,  Master  Simon  informs  Harpa- 
gon  that  Cteante  "  will  engage  himself,  that  his  father  shall  die  before 
eight  months  are  over."  Her  Frosine  says :  "  It  would  be  impertinent  in 
him  (Harpagon)  not  to  die  within  three  months."  These  unseemly  jokes 
are  signs  of  the  times  in  which  MoliSre  lived,  and  in  which  there  was  less 
outward  delicacy  of  feeling  than  at  present. 

44  The  French  for  spectacles  is  lunettes,  and  for  a  telescope,  lunette 
t'approche,  but  in  Molie're's  time  often  simply  lunette  ;  hence  the  play  on 
words. 

SCENE  xi.]  THE   MISER.  53 

HAR.  You  are  right.  (To  Mariane).  Here  comes  my 
daughter,  sweet  child,  to  welcome  you. 

SCENE   X. — HARPAGON,  ELISE,  MARIANE,  FROSINE. 

MAR.  I  am  much  behind,  Madam,  in  acquitting  myself 
of  such  a  visit. 

EL.  You  have  done,  Madam,  what  it  was  my  duty  to 
do,  and  it  was  my  place  to  have  been  beforehand  with 
you. 

HAR.  You  see  what  a  great  girl  she  is ;  but  ill  weeds 
grow  apace - 

MAR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Frosine}.  O !  what  an  un- 
pleasant man  ! 

HAR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Frosine).  What  says  the  fair  one? 

FRO.  That  she  thinks  you  admirable. 

HAR.  You  do  me  too  much  honour,  adorable  pet. 

MAR.  (Aside}.     What  a  brute ! 

HAR.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  these  sentiments. 

MAR.  (Aside).     I  can  hold  out  no  longer. 

SCENE  XI. — HARPAGON,  MARIANE,  ELISE,  CLEANTE, 
FROSINE,  BRINDAVOINE. 

HAR.  There  comes  my  son  also,  to  pay  his  respects  to 
you. 

MAR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Frosine).  Ah !  Frosine,  what 
a  meeting !  It  is  the  very  person  of  whom  I  spoke  to 
you. 

FRO.  (To  Mariane).     The  adventure  is  wonderful. 

HAR.  I  see  that  you  are  surprised  at  my  having  such 
grown-up  children ;  but  I  shall  soon  be  rid  of  one  and 
the  other. 

CLE.  (To  Mariane}.  Madam,  to  tell  you  the  truth, 
this  is  an  adventure,  which  no  doubt,  I  did  not  expect ; 
and  my  father  has  not  a  little  astonished  me,  when,  a 
short  time  ago,  he  communicated  to  me  the  plan  which 
he  had  formed. 

MAR.  I  may  say  the  same  thing.  It  is  an  unforeseen 
meeting  which  surprises  me  as  much  as  it  does  you ;  and 
I  was  not  at  all  prepared  for  such  an  adventure. 

CLE.  It  is  true  that  my  father,  Madam,  could  not  make 
a  better  choice,  and  that  the  honour  of  seeing  you  gives 

54  THE  MISER.  [ACT  in. 

me  unfeigned  joy,  but  for  all  that,  I  cannot  give  you  the 
assurance  that  I  rejoice  at  the  design  which  you  may  have 
of  becoming  my  step-mother.  I  avow  to  you  that  it  would 
be  too  much  for  me  to  pay  you  that  compliment ;  and  by 
your  leave,  it  is  a  title  which  I  do  not  wish  you.  This 
speech  may  become  coarse  to  some ;  but  I  am  sure  that 
you  will  be  the  one  to  take  it  in  the  proper  sense ;  that  it 
is  a  marriage,  Madam,  for  which,  as  you  may  well  imagine, 
I  can  have  only  repugnance ;  that  you  are  not  unaware, 
knowing  what  I  am,  how  it  clashes  with  my  interests;  and 
that,  in  short,  you  will  not  take  it  amiss  when  I  tell  you, 
with  the  permission  of  my  father,  that,  if  matters  depended 
upon  me,  this  marriage  would  not  take  place.  * 

HAR.  This  is  a  most  impertinent  compliment !  What 
a  pretty  confession  to  make  to  her ! 

MAR.  And  I,  in  reply,  must  tell  you,  that  things  are 
pretty  equal ;  and  that,  if  you  have  any  repugnance  in 
seeing  me  your  step-mother,  I  shall  have,  doubtless,  no 
less  in  seeing  you  my  step-son.  Do  not  think,  I  pray  you, 
that  it  is  I  who  seek  to  give  you  that  uneasiness.  I  should 
be  very  sorry  to  cause  you  any  displeasure ;  and  unless  I 
see  myself  compelled  to  it  by  an  absolute  power,  I  give 
you  my  word  that  I  shall  not  consent  to  a  marriage  that 
vexes  you. 

HAR.  She  is  right.  To  a  silly  compliment,  a  similar 
retort  is  neceseary.  I  beg  your  pardon,  my  dear,  for  the 
impertinence  of  my  son ;  he  is  a  young  fool,  who  does  not 
as  yet  know  the  consequence  of  what  he  says. 

MAR.  I  promise  you  that  what  he  has  said  has  not  at  all 
offended  me ;  on  the  contrary,  he  has  pleased  me  by  ex- 
plaining thus  his  real  feelings.  I  like  such  an  avowal  from 
his  lips;  and  if  he  had  spoken  in  any  other  way,  I  should 
have  esteemed  him  the  less  for  it. 

HAR.  It  is  too  good  of  you  to  be  willing  thus  to  con- 
done his  faults.  Time  will  make  him  wiser,  and  you  shall 
see  that  he  will  alter  his  sentiments. 

CLE.  No,  father,  I  am  incapable  of  changing  upon  that 
point,  and  I  beg  urgently  of  this  lady  to  believe  me. 

HAR.   But  see  what  madness  !  he  goes  still  more  strongly. 

45  In  the  original,  Quanta's  speech  is  uttered  in  irregular  blank  verse. 

SCENE  xii.]  THE   MISER.  55 

CLE    Do  you  wish  me  to  go  against  my  own  heart  ? 

HAR.  Again  !  Perhaps  you  will  be  kind  enough  to 
change  the  conversation. 

CLE.  Well !  since  you  wish  me  to  speak  in  a  different 
manner,  allow  me,  Madam,  to  put  myself  in  my  father's 
place,  and  to  confess  to  you  that  I  have  seen  nothing  in 
the  world  so  charming  as  you ;  that  I  conceive  nothing 
equal  to  the  happiness  of  pleasing  you,  and  that  the  title 
of  your  husband  is  a  glory,  a  felicity  which  I  would  prefer 
to  the  destinies  of  the  greatest  princes  on  earth.  Yes, 
Madam,  the  happiness  of  possessing  you  is,  in  my  eyes, 
the  best  of  all  good  fortunes;  the  whole  of  my  ambition 
points  to  that.  There  is  nothing  which  I  would  shrink 
from  to  make  so  precious  a  conquest;  and  the  most  pow- 
erful obstacles  .  .  . 

HAR.  Gently,  son,  if  you  please. 

CLE.  It  is  a  compliment  which  I  pay  for  you  to  this 
lady. 

HAR.  Good  Heavens !  I  have  a  tongue  to  explain  my- 
self, and  I  have  no  need  of  an  interpreter  like  you.  Come, 
hand  chairs. 

FRO.  No ;  it  is  better  that  we  should  go  to  the  fair  now, 
so  that  we  may  return  the  sooner,  and  have  ample  time 
afterwards  to  converse  with  you. 

HAR.  ( To  Brindavoine).  Have  the  horses  put  to  the 
carriage. 

SCENE    XII.  —  HARPAGON,    MARIANE,    ELISE,    CLEANTE, 
VALERE,   FROSINE. 

HAR.  {To  Mariane).  I  pray  you  to  excuse  me,  fair 
child,  if  I  forgot  to  offer  you  some  refreshments  before 
going. 

CLE.  I  have  provided  for  it,  father,  and  have  ordered 
some  plates  of  China  oranges,  sweet  citrons,  and  preserves, 
which  I  have  sent  for  in  your  name. 

HAR.   (Softly  to  Valere).     Valere  ! 

VAL.  ( To  Harpagon).     He  has  lost  his  senses. 

CLE.  Do  you  think,  father,  that  it  is  not  sufficient  ? 
This  lady  will  have  the  goodness  to  excuse  that,  if  it 
please  her. 

56  THE  MISER.  [4CT  nl. 

MAR.  It  was  not  at  all  necessary. 

CLE.  Have  you  ever  seen,  Madam,  a  diamond  more 
sparkling  than  the  one  which  you  see  on  my  father's 
finger  ? 

MAR.  It  sparkles  much  indeed. 

CLE.  (  Taking  the  diamond  off  his  father's  fingers,  and 
handing  it  to  Mariane).  You  must  see  it  close. 

MAR.  It  is  no  doubt  very  beautiful,  and  throws  out  a 
deal  of  light. 

CLE.  (Placing  himself  before  Mariane,  who  is  about  to 
return  the  diamond}.  No,  Madam,  it  is  in  hands  too 
beautiful.  It  is  a  present  which  my  father  makes  you. 

HAR.  I? 

CLE.  Is  it  not  true,  father,  that  you  wish  this  lady  to 
keep  it  for  your  sake. 

HAR.  (Softly  to  his  son).  How? 

CLE.  (To  Mariane).  A  pretty  request  indeed !  He  has 
given  me  a  sign  to  make  you  accept  it. 

MAR.  I  do  not  wish  to  ... 

CLE.  (To  Mariane).  Are  you  jesting?  He  does  not 
care  to  take  it  back. 

HAR.  (Aside).  I  am  bursting  with  rage  ! 

MAR.  It  would  be  ... 

CLE.  (Preventing  Mariane  from  returning  the  diamond). 
No,  I  tell  you;  you  would  offend  him. 

MAR.  Pray  .    .    . 

CLE.  Not  at  all. 

HAR.  (Aside).  May  the  plague  .    .    . 

CLE.  He  is  getting  angry  at  your  refusal. 

HAR.  (Softly  to  his  son).  Ah  !  you  wretch  ! 

CLE.  (To  Mariane).  You  see  that  he  is  getting  despe- 
rate. 

HAR.  (In  a  suppressed  tone  to  his  son,  threatening  him). 
Murderer  that  you  are  ! 

CLE.  It  is  not  my  fault,  father.  I  am  doing  all  that  I 
can  to  make  her  keep  it ;  but  she  is  obstinate. 

HAR.  (/«  a  great  passion,  whispering  to  his  son).  Hang- 
dog ! 

CLE.  You  are  the  cause,  Madam,  of  my  father's  upbraid- 
ing me. 

HAR.  {Same  as  before,  to  his  son).  The  scoundrel ! 

SCKNBXIV.I  THE   MISER.  57 

CLE.  (To  Mariane).  You  will  make  him  ill.  Pray, 
Madam,  do  not  resist  any  longer. 

FRO.  (To  Mariane).  Good  Heavens,  what  ceremonies! 
Keep  the  ring,  since  the  gentleman  wishes  it. 

MAR.  (To  Harpagon).  Not  to  put  you  into  a  passion,  I 
shall  keep  it  now,  and  I  shall  take  another  opportunity  of 
returning  it  to  you.46 

SCENE  XIII.  —  HARPAGON,    MARIANE,   ELISE,  CLEANTE, 
VALERE,  FROSINE,  BRINDAVOINE. 

BRIN.  Sir,  there  is  a  man  who  wishes  to  speak  to  you. 

HAR.  Tell  him  that  I  am  engaged,  that  he  is  to  return 
at  another  time. 

BRIN.  He  says  that  he  brings  you  some  money. 

HAR.  {To  Mariane).  I  beg  your  pardon;  I  shall  be 
back  directly. 

SCENE   XIV.  —  HARPAGON,   MARIANE,  ELISE,  CLEANTE, 
VALERE,  FROSINE,  LA  MERLUCHE. 

MER.  {Running  against  Harpagon,  whom  he  knocks 
down}.  Sir  .  .  . 

HAR.  Oh  !  I  am  killed  ! 

CLE.  What  is  it,  father?  have  you  hurt  yourself? 

HAR.  The  wretch  has  surely  been  bribed  by  my  debtors 
to  make  me  break  my  neck. 

VAL.  (To  Harpagon).  That  will  be  nothing. 

MER.  (To  Harpagon).  I  beg  your  pardon,  Sir;  I 
thought  I  was  doing  well  in  running  quickly. 

HAR.  What  have  you  come  here  for,  you  hangdog? 

MER.  To  tell  you  that  your  two  horses  have  lost  their 
shoes. 

HAR.  Let  them  be  taken  to  the  farrier  immediately. 

CLE.  While  waiting  for  their  being  shod,  I  will  do  the 
honours  of  your  house  for  you,  father,  and  conduct  this 
lady  into  the  garden,  whither  I  shall  have  the  refreshments 
brought. 

46  In  an  Italian  farce,  le  Case  svaliggiate  (the  robbed  house),  it  is  a 
servant  who  acts  in  the  same  way  as  Cleante  ;  but  Moliere  has  made  the 
scene  more  comical  by  letting  the  son  give  the  ring  in  his  father's  name. 

58  THE   MISER.  [ACT  iv. 

SCENE  XV. — HARPAGON,  VALERE. 

HAR.  Valere,  keep  your  eye  a  little  on  this,  and  take 
care,  I  pray  you,  to  save  as  much  of  it  as  you  can,  to  send 
back  to  the  tradespeople. 

VAL.  I  know. 

HAR.  (Alone).  O,  impertinent  son  !  do  you  mean  to 
ruin  me? 

ACT  IV. 

SCENE  I. — CLEANTE,  MARIANE,  ELISE,  FROSINE. 

CLE.  Let  us  go  in  here ;  we  shall  be  much  better. 
There  is  no  suspicious  person  near  us  now,  and  we  can 
converse  freely. 

EL.  Yes,  Madam,  my  brother  has  confided  to  me  the 
affection  which  he  feels  for  you.  I  am  aware  of  the  grief 
and  unpleasantness  which  such  obstacles  are  capable  of 
causing ;  and  it  is,  I  assure  you,  with  the  utmost  tender- 
ness that  I  interest  myself  in  your  adventure. 

MAR.  It  is  a  sweet  consolation  to  see  some  one  like  you 
in  one's  interest ;  and  I  implore  you,  Madam,  always  to 
reserve  for  me  this  generous  friendship,  so  capable  of 
alleviating  the  cruelties  of  fortune. 

FRO.  You  are,  upon  my  word,  both  unlucky  people,  in 
not  having  warned  me  before  this  of  your  affair.  I  would, 
no  doubt,  have  warded  off  this  uneasiness  from  you,  and 
not  have  carried  matters  so  far  as  they  now  are. 

CLE.  Whose  fault  is  it  ?  It  is  my  evil  destiny  that  has 
willed  it  so.  But  fair  Mariane,  what  have  you  resolved 
to  do? 

MAR.  Alas  !  am  I  able  to  make  any  resolutions?  And, 
in  the  dependent  position  in  which  you  see  me,  can  I  form 
aught  else  than  wishes  ? 

CLE.  No  other  support  in  your  heart  for  me  than  mere 
wishes?  No  strenuous  pity?  No  helping  kindness?  No 
energetic  affection  ? 

MAR.  What  can  I  say  to  you  ?  Put  yourself  in  my 
place,  and  see  what  I  can  do.  Advise,  command  your- 
self :  I  leave  the  matter  to  you ;  and  I  think  you  too  rea- 

SCENBI.]  THE   MISER.  59 

sonable  to  wish  to  exact  from  me  aught  but  what  may  be 
consistent  with  honour  and  decency. 

CLE.  Alas !  to  what  strait  do  you  reduce  me  by  driving 
me  back  to  what  the  annoying  dictates  of  a  rigorous 
honour  and  a  scrupulous  decency  only  will  permit? 

MAR.  But  what  would  you  have  me  to  do?  Even  if  I 
could  forego  the  many  scruples  to  which  my  sex  compels 
me,  I  have  some  consideration  for  my  mother.  She  has 
always  brought  me  up  with  the  utmost  tenderness,  and  I 
could  not  make  up  my  mind  to  cause  her  any  displeasure. 
Treat,  transact  with  her  ;  use  all  your  means  to  gain  her 
mind.  You  may  say  and  do  whatever  you  like,  I  give 
you  full  power ;  and  if  nothing  is  wanting  but  to  declare 
myself  in  your  favour,  I  am  willing,  myself,  to  make  to 
her  the  avowal  of  all  that  I  feel  for  you.*7 

CLE.   Frosine,  dear  Frosine,  will  you  try  to  serve  us? 

FRO.  Upon  my  word,  need  you  ask?  I  should  like  it 
with  all  my  heart.  You  know  that,  naturally,  I  am  kind- 
hearted  enough.  Heaven  has  not  given  me  a  heart  of 
iron,  and  I  have  only  too  much  inclination  for  rendering 
little  services  when  I  see  people  who  love  each  other  in  all 
decency  and  honour.  What  can  we  do  in  this  matter  ? 

CLE.  Pray  consider  a  little. 

MAR.  Give  us  some  advice. 

EL.   Invent  some  means  of  undoing  what  you  have  done. 

FRO.  That  is  difficult  enough.  {To  Mariane).  As  for 
your  mother,  she  is  not  altogether  unreasonable,  and  we 
might  perhaps  prevail  upon  her  and  induce  her  to  transfer 
to  the  son  the  gift  which  she  wished  to  make  to  the  father. 
(To  Cleante}.  But  the  mischief  in  it  is,  that  your  father  is 
your  father. 

CLE.  Of  course. 

FRO.  I  mean  that  he  will  bear  malice  if  he  finds  that  he 
is  refused,  and  that  he  will  not  be  of  a  mind  afterwards  to 
give  his  consent  to  your  marriage.  To  do  well,  the  refusal 
ought  to  come  from  himself,  and  she  ought  to  try,  by  some 
means,  to  inspire  him  with  a  disgust  towards  her. 

CLE.  You  are  right. 

FRO.  Yes  I  am  right ;   I  know  that  well  enough.     That 

47  Mariane's  speech,  according  to  M.  Genin,  is  written  in  blank  verse. 

60  THE  MISER.  [ACTIV. 

is  what  is  wanted,  but  how  the  deuce  can  we  find  the 
means?  Stop !  Suppose  we  had  some  woman  a  little  ad- 
vanced in  age  who  had  my  talent,  and  acted  sufficiently 
well  to  counterfeit  a  lady  of  quality,  by  the  help  of  a  retinue 
made  up  in  haste,  and  with  an  ecccentric  name  of  a  mar- 
chioness or  a  viscountess,  whom  we  will  suppose  to  come 
from  Lower  Brittany,  I  would  have  skill  enough  to  make 
your  father  believe  that  she  was  a  person  possessed  of  a 
hundred  thousand  crowns  in  ready  money,  besides  her 
houses;  that  she  was  distractedly  enamoured  of  him,  and 
had  so  set  her  mind  upon  being  his  wife,  that  she  would 
make  all  her  property  over  to  him  by  marriage-contract. 
I  do  not  doubt  that  he  would  lend  an  ear  to  this  proposal. 
For,  after  all,  he  loves  you  much,  I  know  it,  but  he  loves 
money  a  little  more;  and  when,  dazzled  with  this  bait, 
he  had  once  given  his  consent  in  what  concerns  you,  it 
would  matter  very  little  if  he  were  afterwards  disabused, 
when  he  wished  to  see  more  clearly  into  the  property  of 
our  marchioness. 

CLE.  All  this  is  very  well  conceived. 

FRO.  Let  me  manage.  I  just  recollect  one  of  my  friends 
who  will  suit  us. 

CLE.  Be  assured  of  my  gratitude,  Frosine,  if  you  carry 
out  this  matter.  But,  charming  Mariane,  let  us  begin,  I 
pray  you,  by  gaining  over  your  mother  ;  it  is  doing  much, 
at  any  rate,  to  break  off  this  match.  Make  every  possible 
effort  on  your  part,  I  entreat  you.  Employ  all  the  power 
which  her  tenderness  for  you  gives  you  over  her.  Show 
her  unreservedly  the  eloquent  graces,  the  all-powerful 
charms,  with  which  Heaven  has  endowed  your  eyes  and 
your  lips;  and  please  do  not  overlook  any  of  these  tender 
words,  of  these  sweet  prayers,  and  of  these  winning  caresses 
to  which,  I  am  persuaded,  nothing  can  be  refused. 

MAR.  I  will  do  my  best,  and  forget  nothing. 

SCENE  II. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE,  MARIANE,  ELISE, 
FROSINE. 

HAR.  {Aside,  without  being  seen).  Hey  day!  my  son 
kisses  the  hand  of  his  intended  stepmother ;  and  his  in- 
tended stepmother  does  not  seem  to  take  it  much  amiss! 
Can  there  be  any  mystery  underneath  this? 

SCENE  in.]  THE  MISER.  6l 

EL.  Here  is  my  father. 

HAR.  The  carriage  is  quite  ready;  you  can  start  as  soon 
as  you  like. 

CLE.  Since  you  are  not  going,  father,  permit  me  to 
escort  them. 

HAR.  No :  remain  here.  They  will  do  well  enough  by 
themselves,  and  I  want  you. 

SCENE  III. — HARP  AGON,  CLEANTE. 

HAR.  Now,  tell  me,  apart  from  becoming  your  step- 
mother, what  think  you  of  this  lady? 

CLE.  What  do  I  think  of  her? 

HAR.  Yes,  of  her  air,  of  her  figure,  of  her  beauty,  of 
her  mind  ? 

CLE.  So,  so. 

HAR.  That  is  no  answer. 

CLE.  To  speak  to  you  candidly,  I  have  not  found  her 
what  I  expected.  Her  air  is  that  of  a  downright  coquette, 
her  figure  is  sufficiently  awkward,  her  beauty  very  so-so, 
and  her  mind  very  ordinary.  Do  not  think,  father,  that 
this  is  said  to  give  you  a  distaste  to  her  ;  for,  stepmother 
for  stepmother,  I  would  as  soon  have  her  as  any  other. 

HAR.  You  said  to  her  just  now,  however  .    .    . 

CLE.  I  have  said  some  sweet  nothings  to  her  in  your 
name,  but  it  was  to  please  you. 

HAR.  So  much  so,  that  you  would  not  feel  any  inclina- 
tion towards  her  ? 

CLE.  I  ?  not  at  all. 

HAR.  I  am  sorry  for  it ;  for  it  does  away  with  an  idea 
that  came  into  my  head.  In  seeing  her  here,  I  have 
reflected  upon  my  age ;  and  I  thought  that  people  might 
find  something  to  cavil  at  in  seeing  me  marry  so  young  a 
girl.  This  consideration  has  made  me  abandon  the  plan; 
and  as  I  have  made  the  demand  of  her  hand,  and  am 
engaged  to  her  by  my  word,  I  would  have  given  her  to 
you,  had  it  not  been  for  the  aversion  which  you  show. 

CLE.  To  me  ? 

HAR.  To  you. 

CLE.  In  marriage  ? 

HAR.  In  marriage. 

CLE.  Listen.     It  is  true  that  she  is  not  much  to  my 

62  THE   MISER.  [ACT  IT. 

taste ;  but  to  please  you,  father,  I  would  make  up  my 
mind  to  marry  her,  if  you  wish  it. 

HAR.  I,  I  am  more  reasonable  than  you  give  me  credit 
for.  I  will  not  force  your  inclination. 

CLE.  Pardon  me  ;  I  will  make  this  effort  for  your  sake. 

HAR.  No,  no.  No  marriage  can  be  happy  where  there 
is  no  inclination. 

CLE.  Perhaps  it  will  come  afterwards,  father ;  they  say- 
that  love  is  often  the  fruit  of  wedlock. 

HAR.  No.  From  the  side  of  the  man,  one  must  not 
risk  such  a  thing ;  it  generally  brings  grievous  conse- 
quences, to  which  I  do  not  care  to  commit  myself.  Had 
you  felt  any  inclination  for  her,  it  would  have  been  a 
different  thing;  I  should  have  made  you  marry  her  instead 
of  me ;  but,  that  not  being  the  case,  I  will  follow  up  my 
first  plan,  and  marry  her  myself. 

CLE.  Well !  father,  since  matters  are  so,  I  must  lay 
open  my  heart  to  you ;  I  must  reveal  our  secret  to  you. 
The  truth  is,  I  love  her,  since,  on  a  certain  day,  I  saw  her 
walking  ;  that  my  plan  was,  a  short  while  ago,  to  ask  her 
to  become  my  wife,  and  that  nothing  restrained  me  but 
the  declaration  of  your  sentiments,  and  the  fear  of  dis- 
pleasing you. 

HAR.  Have  you  paid  her  any  visits  ?  a 

CLE.  Yes,  father. 

HAR.  Many  times? 

CLE.  Just  enough,  considering  the  time  of  our  ac- 
quaintance. 

HAR.   Have  you  been  well  received  ? 

CLE.  Very  well,  indeed,  but.  without  her  knowing  who 
I  was  ;  and  that  is  what  just  now  caused  the  surprise  of 
Mariane. 

HAR.  Have  you  declared  your  passion  to  her,  and  the 
design  you  had  to  marry  her? 

CLE.  Undoubtedly ;  and  I  even  made  some  overtures  to 
her  mother  about  it. 

HAR.  Has  she  listened  to  your  proposal  for  her 
daughter  ? 

48  In  the  original  Harpagon  who,  until  now,  has  "  thee  and  thoued  " 
his  son,  begins  to  employ  here  "  you." 

«C«NK  iv.]  THE  MISER.  63 

CLE.  Yes,  very  civilly. 

HAR.  And  does  the  girl  much  reciprocate  your  love  ? 

CLE.  If  I  am  to  believe  appearances,  I  flatter  myself, 
father,  that  she  has  some  affection  for  me. 

HAR.  (Softly,  to  himself).  I  am  glad  to  have  found  out 
such  a  secret ;  that  is  just  what  I  wished.  (Aloud).  Hark 
you,  my  son,  do  you  know  what  you  will  have  to  do.  You 
must  think,  if  you  please,  of  getting  rid  of  your  love,  of 
ceasing  from  all  pursuit  of  a  person  whom  I  intended  for 
myself,  and  of  marrying  shortly  the  one  who  has  been  des- 
tined for  you.49 

CLE.  So,  father  ;  it  is  thus  that  you  trick  me  !  Well ! 
since  matters  have  come  to  this  pass,  I  declare  to  you,  that 
I  will  not  get  rid  of  my  love  for  Mariane ;  that  there  is 
nothing  from  which  I  shall  shrink  to  dispute  with  you  'her 
possession ;  and  that,  if  you  have  the  consent  of  a  mother 
on  your  side,  I  have  other  resources,  perhaps,  which  will 
combat  on  mine. 

HAR.  What,  hang-dog,  you  have  the  audacity  to  poach 
on  my  preserves. 

CLE.  It  is  you  that  are  poaching  on  mine.  I  am  the 
first  comer. 

HAR.  Am  I  not  your  father,  and  do  you  not  owe  me 
respect  ? 

CLE.  This  is  not  a  matter  in  which  a  child  is  obliged 
to  defer  to  his  father,  and  love  is  no  respecter  of  persons. 

HAR.  I  will  make  you  respect  me  well  enough  with  some 
sound  cudgel-blows. 

CLE.  All  your  threats  will  do  nothing. 

HAR.  You  shall  renounce  Mariane. 

CLE.  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 

HAR.  Give  me  a  stick  immediately. 

SCENE  IV. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE,  MASTER  JACQUES. 

JAC.  Eh,  eh,  eh,  gentlemen,  what  is  all  this  ?  what  are 
you  thinking  about  ? 

CLE.  I  do  not  care  a  straw. 

49  This  scene  of  a  father,  rival  of  his  son,  says  Voltaire,  has  also  been 
treated  by  Racine,  in  his  tragedy  of  Mithridate  ;  but  Racine  caused  tears 
to  be  shed,  in  representing  the  amorous  weakness  of  a  great  king;  whilst 
Molidre  has  shown  the  ridiculous  affection  of  an  old  miser. 

64  THE  MISER.  [ACT  iv. 

JAC.  (To  Cleante).     Come,  Sir,  gently. 

HAR.  To  speak  to  me  with  such  impertinence  ! 

JAC.  (To  Harpagon).     Pray  Sir,  pray  ! 

CLE.  I  will  not  bate  a  jot. 

JAC.  (To  Clean  fe).     Eh  what !  to  your  father? 

HAR.  Let  me  alone. 

JAC.  (To  Harpagon).  What!  to  your  son?  I  could 
overlook  it  to  myself. 

HAR.  I  will  make  yourself,  Master  Jacques,  judge  in 
this  affair,  to  show  you  that  I  am  in  the  right. 

JAC.  I  consent.  (To  Cleante).  '  Get  a  little  farther 
away. 

HAR.  I  love  a  girl  whom  I  wish  to  marry  ;  and  the 
hang-dog  has  the  insolence  to  love  her  also,  and  to  aspire 
to  her  hand  in  spite  of  my  commands.50 

JAC.  He  is  wrong  there. 

HAR.  Is  it  not  a  dreadful  thing  for  a  son  to  wish  to 
enter  into  rivalry  with  his  father  ?  and  ought  he  not,  out 
of  respect,  to  abstain  from  meddling  with  my  inclina- 
tions? 

JAC.  You  are  right.  Let  me  speak  to  him,  while  you 
remain  here. 

CLE.  (To  Master  Jacques,  who  is  approaching  him), 
Well !  yes,  since  he  chooses  you  as  judge,  I  shall  not  draw 
back ;  it  matters  not  to  me  who  it  may  be ;  and  I  am 
willing  to  refer  to  you,  Master  Jacques,  in  this  our 
quarrel. 

JAC.  You  do  me  much  honour. 

CLE.  I  am  smitten  with  a  young  girl  who  returns  my 
affection,  and  tenderly  accepts  the  offer  of  my  love  :  and 
my  father  takes  it  into  his  head  to  come  and  trouble  our 
passion,  by  asking  for  her  hand. 

JAC.  He  is  assuredly  wrong. 

CLE.  Is  he  not  ashamed  at  his  age  to  think  of  marry- 
ing ?  Does  it  still  become  him  to  be  in  love,  and  should 
he  not  leave  this  pastime  to  young  people  ? 

JAC.  You  are  right.  He  is  only  jesting.  Let  me  speak 
a  few  words  to  him.  ( To  Harpagon).  Well !  your  son 

60  Master  Jacques,  who  has  been  so  badly  rewarded  for  his  love  of  truth 
in  the  fifth  scene  of  the  third  act,  adopts  here  another  line  of  conduct  which 
will  turn  out  still  worse  for  him. 

scENBiv.]  THE  MISER.  65 

is  not  so  strange  as  you  make  him  out,  and  he  is  amena- 
ble to  reason.  He  says  that  he  knows  the  respect  which 
he  owes  you,  that  he  was  only  carried  away  by  momentary 
warmth  ;  and  that  he  will  not  refuse  to  submit  to  your 
pleasure,  provided  you  will  treat  him  better  than  you  do, 
and  give  him  some  one  for  a  wife  with  whom  he  shall  have 
reason  to  be  satisfied. 

HAR.  Ah !  tell  him,  Master  Jacques,  that,  if  he  looks  at 
it  in  that  way,  he  may  expect  everything  of  me  and  that, 
except  Mariane,  I  leave  him  free  to  choose  whom  he 
likes. 

JAC.  Let  me  manage  it.  (To  Cleante).  Well  !  your 
father  is  not  so  unreasonable  as  you  make  him  out ;  and 
he  has  shown  me  that  it  was  your  violence  that  made  him 
angry  ;  that  he  objects  only  to  your  behaviour  ;  and  that 
he  will  be  very  much  disposed  to  grant  you  what  you  wish, 
provided  you  shall  do  things  gently,  and  show  him  the 
deference,  the  respect,  and  the  submission  which  a  son 
owes  to  his  father. 

CLE.  Ah !  Master  Jacques,  you  may  assure  him  that  if 
he  grants  me  Mariane,  he  will  always  find  me  the  most 
submissive  of  beings,  and  that  I  never  shall  do  anything 
except  what  he  wishes. 

JAC.  (To  Harpagori).  That  is  done.  He  consents  to 
what  you  say. 

HAR.  Then  things  will  go  on  in  the  best  possible  way. 

JAC.  (To  Cleante}.  Everything  is  arranged;  he  is  sat- 
isfied with  your  promises  ! 

CLE.   Heaven  be  praised  ! 

JAC.  Gentlemen,  you  have  but  to  talk  the  matter  over : 
you  are  agreed  now,  and  you  were  going  to  quarrel  for 
want  of  understanding  each  other. 

CLE.  My  dear  Master  Jacques,  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you 
all  my  life. 

JAC.  Do  not  mention  it,  Sir. 

HAR.  You  have  given  me  great  pleasure,  Master  Jac- 
ques ;  and  that  deserves  a  reward.  (Harpagon  fumbles  in 
his  pockets ;  Master  Jacques  holds  out  his  hand,  but  Harpa- 
gon only  draws  out  his  handkerchief}.  Go  now,  I  shall  re- 
member this,  I  assure  you. 

JAC.  I  kiss  your  hands. 

VOL.  III.  E 

66  THE  MISER.  [ACT  IT. 

SCENE  V. — HARPAGON,  CLEANTE. 

CLE.  I  ask  your  pardon,  father,  for  the  passion  which  I 
have  displayed. 

HAR.  Never  mind. 

CLE.  I  assure  you  that  I  regret  it  exceedingly. 

HAR,  And  I,  I  have  the  greatest  delight  in  seeing  you 
reasonable. 

CLE.  How  good  of  you  to  forget  my  fault  so  quickly ! 

HAR.  The  faults  of  children  are  easily  forgotten,  when 
they  return  to  their  duty. 

CLE.  What !  not  retain  any  resentment  for  all  my 
extravagance  ? 

HAR.  You  compel  me  to  it,  by  the  submission  and  the 
respect  to  which  you  pledge  yourself. 

CLE.  I  promise  you,  father,  that  I  shall  carry  the  recol- 
lection of  your  goodness  to  my  grave  with  me. 

HAR.  And  I,  I  promise  you,  that  you  may  obtain  any- 
thing from  me. 

CLE.  Ah !  father,  I  ask  for  nothing  more ;  you  have 
given  me  enough  by  giving  me  Mariane. 

HAR.  How! 

CLE.  I  say,  father,  that  I  am  too  well  pleased  with  you, 
and  that  I  find  everything  in  your  kindness  in  giving  me 
Mariane. 

HAR.  Who  says  anything  to  you  of  giving  you  Mariane? 

CLE.  You,  father. 

HAR.  I! 

CLE.  Undoubtedly. 

HAR.  What !  it  is  you  who  have  promised  to  renounce 
her. 

CLE.  I  renounce  her ! 

HAR.  Yes. 

CLE.  Not  at  all. 

HAR.  You  have  not  given  up  your  pretensions  to  her  ? 

CLE.  On  the  contrary,  I  am  more  determined  than  ever 
upon  them. 

HAR.  What !  hang-dog,  you  begin  afresh  ? 

CLE.  Nothing  can  change  my  mind. 

HAR.  Let  me  get  at  you,  wretch. 

CLE.  Do  what  you  like. 

SCENE  VH.]  THE  MISER.  67 

HAR.  I  forbid  you  ever  to  come  within  my  sight. 

CLE.  All  right. 

HAR.   I  abandon  you. 

CLE.  Abandon  as  much  as  you  like. 

HAR.  I  disown  you  as  my  son. 

CLE.  Be  it  so. 

HAR.  I  disinherit  you. 

CLE.  Whatever  you  please. 

HAR.  And  I  give  you  my  malediction. 

CLE.  I  want  none  of  your  gifts.57 

SCENE  VI.  — CLEANTE,  LA  FLECHE. 

LA  FL.  {Coming  from  the  garden  with  a  casket  under 
his  arm).  Ah  !  Sir,  I  find  you  in  the  nick  of  time  !  Follow 
me  quickly. 

CLE.  What  is  the  matter? 

LA  FL.  Follow  me,  I  tell  you ;  we  are  all  right. 

CLE.  How? 

LA  FL.  Here  is  your  affair. 

CLE.  What? 

LA  FL.  I  keep  my  eye  upon  this  the  whole  day. 

CLE.  What  is  it  ? 

LA  FL.  The  treasure  of  your  father,  which  I  have  laid 
hands  on. 

CLE.  How  did  you  manage  ? 

LA  FL.  You  shall  know  all.  Let  us  fly;  I  hear  his 
shouts. 

SCENE   VII. — HARPAGON,    aloud,   shouting  in  the  garden, 
rushing  in  without  his  hat. 

Thieves !  Thieves !  Murder !  Stop  the  murderers  ! 
Justice!  just  Heaven!  I  am  lost!  I  am  killed;  they  have 
cut  my  throat ;  they  have  stolen  my  money.  Who  can  it 
be?  What  has  become  of  him?  Where  is  he?  Where 
does  he  hide  himself?  What  shall  I  do  to  find  him? 
Where  to  run?  Where  not  to  run?  Is  he  not  there? 
Who  is  it  ?  Stop !  (  To  himself,  pressing  his  own  artri). 

5T  Several  of  Moliere's  commentators  have  observed  that  Cleante's  im- 
pudent answers  only  prove  the  truth  of  the  saying,  "like  father  like  soft," 
and  that  a  miserly  father  must  produce  such  a  disobedient  child. 

68  THE   MISER.  [ACT  v. 

Give  me  back  my  money,  scoundrel  .  .  .  Ah,  it  is 
myself!  My  senses  are  wandering,  and  I  do  not  know 
where  I  am,  who  I  am,  and  what  I  am  doing.  Alas !  my 
poor  money  !  my  poor  money  !  my  dearest  friend,  they 
have  deprived  me  of  you ;  and  as  you  are  taken  from  me, 
I  have  lost  my  support,  my  consolation,  my  joy:  every- 
thing is  at  an  end  for  me,  and  I  have  nothing  more  to  do 
in  this  world.  Without  you,  life  becomes  impossible. 
It  is  all  over;  I  am  utterly  exhausted;  I  am  dying; 
I  am  dead;  I  am  buried.  Is  there  no  one  who  will 
resuscitate  me  by  giving  me  back  my  beloved  money,  or 
by  telling  me  who  has  taken  it  ?  Eh !  what  do  you  say  ? 
There  is  no  one.  Whoever  he  is  who  has  done  this,  he 
must  have  carefully  watched  his  hour;  and  he  has  just 
chosen  the  time  when  I  was  speaking  to  my  wretch  of  a 
son.  Let  us  go.  I  must  inform  the  authorities,  and 
have  the  whole  of  my  household  examined;  female- 
servants,  male -servants,  son,  daughter,  and  myself  also. 
What  an  assembly !  I  do  not  look  at  any  one  whom  I  do 
not  suspect,  and  every  one  seems  to  be  my  thief.  Eh ! 
what  are  they  speaking  of  yonder?  of  him  who  has 
robbed  me?  What  noise  is  that  up  there?  Is  it  my  thief 
who  is  there?  For  pity's  sake,  if  you  know  any  news  of 
my  thief,  I  implore  you  to  tell  me.  Is  he  not  hidden 
among  you?  They  are  all  looking  at  me,  and  laughing  in 
my  face.  You  will  see  that  they  have,  no  doubt,  a  share 
in  the  robbery.  Come  quickly,  magistrates,  police- 
officers,  provosts,  judges,  instruments  of  torture,  gibbets, 
and  executioners.  I  will  have  the  whole  world  hanged ; 
and  if  I  do  not  recover  my  money,  I  will  hang  myself 
afterwards. 

ACT   V. 
SCENE  I. — HARPAGON,  A  MAGISTRATE. 

MAG.  Let  me  manage  it;  I  know  my  business,  thank 
Heaven.  To-day  is  not  the  first  time  that  I  am  engaged 
in  discovering  robberies;  and  I  should  like  to  have  as 
many  bags  of  a  thousand  francs  as  I  have  been  instrumen- 
tal in  hanging  people. 

SCENE  u.]  THE   MISER.  69 

HAR.  Every  magistrate  must  have  an  interest  in  taking 
this  matter  in  hand ;  and,  if  they  do  not  enable  me  to 
find  my  money  again,  I  shall  demand  justice  unpon  the 
authorities  themselves. 

MAG.  We  must  take  all  the  needful  steps.  You  said 
that  there  was  in  this  box  .  .  . 

HAR.  Ten  thousand  crowns  in  cash. 

MAG.  Ten  thousand  crowns ! 

HAR.  (Crying).     Ten  thousand  crowns. 

MAG.  The  robbery  is  considerable ! 

HAR.  There  is  no  punishment  great  enough  for  the 
enormity  of  this  crime ;  and,  if  it  remain  unpunished,  the 
most  sacred  things  are  no  longer  safe. 

MAG.  And  in  what  coin  was  this  sum? 

HAR.  In  good  louis  d'or  and  pistoles  without  a  flaw.5* 

MAG.  Whom  do  you  suspect  of  this  robbery  ? 

HAR.  Every  one ;  and  I  wish  you  to  arrest  the  town  and 
the  suburbs. 

MAG.  You  must,  if  you  will  take  my  opinion,  scare  no- 
body, but  endeavour  gently  to  collect  some  proofs,  in  order 
to  act  afterwards,  by  severer  process,  to  recover  the  coin 
which  has  been  taken  from  you. 

SCENE  II. — HARPAGON,  A  MAGISTRATE,  MASTER 
JACQUES. 

JAC.  (At  the  far  end  of  the  stage,  turning  towards  the  door 
by  which  he  entered}.  I  am  coming  back  directly.  Let  its 
throat  be  cut  immediately ;  let  them  singe  me  its  feet ;  let 
them  put  it  in  boiling  water,  and  let  them  hang  it  from 
the  ceiling. 

HAR.  Who?  he  who  has  robbed  me? 

JAC.  I  am  speaking  of  a  sucking  pig  which  your  steward 
has  just  sent  in,  and  I  wish  to  dress  it  for  you  after  my 
own  fancy. 

HAR.  There  is  no  question  of  that ;  and  this  is  a  gentle- 
man to  whom  you  must  speak  of  something  else. 

MAG.  (To  Master  Jacques}.     Do  not  be  alarmed.     I  am 

52  In  French  "  pistoles  without  a  flaw,"  are  pistoles  bien  trebuchantes. 
The  trebuchet  was  a  small  and  very  sensitive  pair  of  scales ;  hence  coin, 
which  had  not  its  full  weight,  was  not  called  trebuchant. 

70  THE  MISER.  [ACT  v. 

not  the  man  to  cause  any  scandal,  and  matters  will  be 
managed  in  a  gentle  way. 

JAC.  Is  this  gentleman  of  the  supper  party  ? 

MAG.  In  this  case,  dear  friend,  you  must  hide  nothing 
from  your  master. 

JAC.  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  I  shall  show  all  I  know,  and  I 
shall  treat  you  in  the  best  possible  way. 

HAR.  That  is  not  the  question. 

JAC.  If  I  do  not  dish  you  up  something  as  good  as  I 
could  wish,  it  is  the  fault  of  your  Master  Steward,  who  has 
clipped  my  wings  with  the  scissors  of  his  economy. 

HAR.  You  wretch  !  it  concerns  something  else  than  the 
supper;  and  I  wish  you  to  give  me  some  information  re- 
specting the  money  that  has  been  stolen  from  me. 

JAC.  They  have  stolen  some  money  from  you  ? 

HAR.  Yes,  you  scoundrel :  and  I  shall  have  you  hanged 
if  you  do  not  give  it  me  back  again. 

MAG.  (To  Harpagori).  Good  Heavens!  do  not  ill-use 
him.  I  perceive  by  his  face  that  he  is  an  honest  man,  and 
that,  without  having  him  locked  up,  he  will  inform  you  of 
what  you  wish  to  know.  Yes,  my  friend,  if  you  confess 
the  matter  to  me,  no  harm  will  come  to  you,  and  you  will 
be  suitably  rewarded  by  your  master.  They  have  robbed 
him  of  his  money  to-day  ;  and  it  is  scarcely  possible  that 
you  do  not  know  something  of  the  matter. 

JAC.  {Aside  to  himself}.  This  is  just  what  I  wish,  in 
order  to  revenge  myself  on  our  steward.  Since  he  has  set 
foot  in  this  house,  he  is  the  favourite  ;  his  counsels  are  the 
only  ones  listened  to ;  and  the  cudgel-blows,  just  now  re- 
ceived, are  also  sticking  in  my  throat. 

HAR.  What  are  you  muttering  to  yourself  about  ? 

MAG.  ( To  Harpagon).  Leave  him  alone.  He  is  prepar- 
ing to  give  you  satisfaction  ;  and  I  told  you  that  he  was 
an  honest  man. 

JAC.  If  you  wish  me  to  tell  you  things  as  they  are,  Sir, 
I  believe  that  it  is  your  dear  steward  who  has  done  this. 

HAR.  Valere! 

JAC.  Yes. 

HAR.   He  !  who  seemed  so  faithful  to  me? 

JAC.  Himself.  I  believe  that  he  is  the  one  who  robbed 
you. 

SCBNBII.]  THE  MISER.  Jl 

HAR.  And  upon  what  do  you  base  your  belief? 

JAC.  Upon  what  ? 

HAR.  Yes. 

JAC.  I  believe  it  ...  because  I  believe  it. 

MAG.  But  it  is  necessary  to  mention  the  evidence  which 
you  have. 

HAR.  Have  you  seen  him  hang  about  the  spot  where  I 
had  put  my  money  ? 

JAC.  Yes,  indeed.    Where  was  your  money  ? 

HAR.  In  the  garden. 

JAC.  That  is  just  where  I  have  seen  him  hanging  about, 
in  the  garden.  And  what  was  this  money  in  ? 

HAR.  In  a  cash-box. 

JAC.  The  very  thing.  I  have  seen  him  with  a  cash- 
box. 

HAR.  And  this  cash-box,  how  is  it  made  ?  I  shall  soon 
see  if  it  be  mine. 

JAC.  How  is  it  made  ? 

HAR.  Yes. 

JAC.  It  is  made  .    .    .  it  is  made  like  a  cash-box. 

MAG.  Of  course.  But  just  describe  it  a  little,  that  I 
may  see. 

JAC.  It  is  a  large  cash-box. 

HAR.  The  one  that  has  been  stolen  from  me  is  a  small 
one. 

JAC.  Eh  !  Yes,  it  is  small,  if  you  take  it  in  that  way ; 
but  I  call  it  large  on  account  of  its  contents. 

MAG.  And  what  colour  is  it  ? 

JAC.   What  colour? 

MAG.  Yes. 

JAC.  It  is  of  a  colour  .  .  .  of  a  certain  colour.  Could 
you  not  help  me  to  say? 

HAR.  Ah! 

JAC.   Is  it  not  red? 

HAR.   No,  grey. 

JAC.  Yes,  that  is  it,  greyish-red ;  that  is  what  I  meant. 

HAR.  There  is  no  longer  any  doubt ;  it  is  the  one 
assuredly.  Write  down,  Sir,  write  down  his  deposition. 
Heavens !  whom  is  one  to  trust  henceforth  !  One  must 
no  longer  swear  to  anything ;  and  I  verily  believe,  after 
this,  that  I  am  the  man  to  rob  myself. 

72  THE  MISER.  [ACT  v. 

JAC.  (To  Harpagon).  He  is  just  coming  back,  Sir.  Do 
not  tell  him,  at  least,  that  it  is  I  who  have  revealed  all 
this. 

SCENE  III. — HARPAGON,  MAGISTRATE,  VALERE,  MASTER 
JACQUES. 

HAR.  Come  near,  and  confess  to  the  blackest  deed,  the 
most  horrible  crime  that  ever  was  committed. 

VAL.  What  do  you  wish,  Sir  ? 

HAR.  How,  wretch  !  you  do  not  blush  for  your  crime. 

VAL.  Of  what  crime  are  you  talking  ? 

HAR.  Of  what  crime  am  I  talking,  infamous  monster ! 
as  if  you  did  not  know  what  I  mean  !  It  is  in  vain  that 
you  attempt  to  disguise  it ;  the  thing  has  been  discovered, 
and  I  have  just  learned  all.  How  could  you  thus  abuse 
my  kindness,  and  introduce  yourself  into  my  house  ex- 
pressly to  betray  me,  to  play  me  a  trick  of  that  sort  ? 

VAL.  Since  everything  has  been  revealed  to  you,  Sir,  I 
will  not  prevaricate,  and  deny  the  matter  to  you. 

JAC.  (Aside).  Oh !  Oh !  could  I  unconsciously  have 
guessed  aright ! 

VAL.  It  was  my  intention  to  speak  to  you  about  it,  and 
I  wished  to  wait  for  a  favourable  opportunity ;  but,  since 
matters  are  so,  I  implore  you  not  to  be  angry,  and  to  be 
willing  to  listen  to  my  motives. 

HAR.  And  what  pretty  motives  can  you  advance,  infa- 
mous thief? 

VAL.  Ah  !  Sir,  I  have  not  deserved  these  names.  It  is 
true  that  I  have  committed  an  offence  against  you ;  but 
after  all,  the  fault  is  pardonable. 

HAR.  How  !  pardonable  ?    A  trap,  a  murder  like  that. 

VAL.  For  pity's  sake,  do  not  get  angry.  When  you 
have  heard  me,  you  will  see  that  the  harm  is  not  so  great 
as  you  make  it. 

HAR.  The  harm  is  not  so  great  as  I  make  it !  What ! 
my  blood,  my  very  heart,53  hang-dog  ! 

VAL.  Your  blood,  Sir,  has  not  fallen  into  bad  hands. 
I  am  of  a  rank  not  to  do  it  any  injury ;  and  there  is 
nothing  in  all  this  but  what  I  can  easily  repair. 

M  The  original  has  entrailles,  bowels. 

SCEN.III.]  THE  MISER.  73 

HAR.  That  is  what  I  intend,  and  that  you  should  re- 
store to  me  what  you  have  robbed  me  of. 

VAL.  Your  honour  shall  be  amply  satisfied,  Sir. 

HAR.  There  is  no  question  of  honour  in  it.  But  tell 
me,  who  has  driven  you  to  such  a  deed  ? 

VAL.  Alas  !  need  you  ask  me  ? 

HAR.  Yes,  indeed,  I  do  ask  you. 

VAL.  A  god  who  carries  his  excuse  for  all  he  makes 
people  do.  Love. 

HAR.  Love? 

VAL.  Yes. 

HAR.  A  pretty  love,  a  pretty  love,  upon  my  word  !  the 
love  for  my  gold  pieces ! 

VAL.  No,  Sir,  it  is  not  your  wealth  that  has  tempted 
me ;  it  is  not  that  which  has  dazzled  me ;  and  I  protest 
that  I  have  not  the  slightest  design  upon  your  property, 
provided  you  leave  me  that  which  I  have  got. 

HAR.  No,  by  all  the  devils  I  shall  not  leave  it  to  you. 
But  see  what  insolence  to  wish  to  keep  that  of  which  he 
has  robbed  me  ! 

VAL.  Do  you  call  that  robbery  ? 

HAR.  If  I  call  it  a  robbery  ?  a  treasure  like  that ! 

VAL.  It  is  a  treasure,  that  is  true,  and  the  most  precious 
which  you  have  got,  no  doubt ;  but  it  would  not  be  losing 
it  to  leave  it  to  me.  I  ask  you  for  it  on  my  knees,  this 
treasure  full  of  charms  ?  and  to  do  right,  you  should  grant 
it  to  me. 

HAR.  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  What  does  it  all 
mean? 

VAL.  We  have  pledged  our  faith  to  each  other,  and 
have  sworn  never  to  part. 

HAR.  The  oath  is  admirable,  and  the  promise  rather 
funny. 

VAL.  Yes,  we  have  bound  ourselves  to  be  all  in  all  to 
each  other  for  ever. 

HAR.  I  shall  hinder  you  from  it,  I  assure  you. 

VAL.  Nothing  but  death  shall  separate  us. 

HAR.  It  is  being  devilishly  enamoured  of  my  money. 

VAL.  I  have  told  you  already,  Sir,  that  interest  did  not 
urge  me  to  do  what  I  have  done.  My  heart  did  not  act 
from  the  motives  which  you  imagine ;  a  nobler  one  in- 
spired me  with  this  resolution. 

74  THE  MISER.  [ACTT. 

HAR.  You  shall  see  that  it  is  from  Christian  charity 
that  he  covets  my  property  !  But  I  shall  look  to  that; 
and  the  law  will  give  me  satisfaction  for  all  this,  you  bare- 
faced rogue. 

VAL.  You  shall  act  as  you  like,  and  I  am  ready  to  bear 
all  the  violence  you  please ;  but  I  implore  you  to  believe, 
at  least,  that  if  harm  has  been  done,  I  only  am  to  be 
blamed,  and  that  in  all  this,  your  daughter  is  in  nowise 
culpable. 

HAR.  Indeed,  I  believe  you  !  it  would  be  very  strange 
if  my  daughter  had  had  a  part  in  this  crime.  But  I  will 
have  my  property  back  again,  and  I  will  have  you  confess 
where  you  have  carried  it  away  to. 

VAL.  I  ?  I  have  not  carried  it  away  at  all.  It  is  still 
in  your  house. 

HAR.  (Aside).  O !  my  beloved  cash-box !  (Aloud}. 
Then  it  has  not  gone  out  of  my  house? 

VAL.  No,  sir. 

HAR.  Just  tell  me  that  you  have  not  made  free  with  it  ? 

VAL.  I  make  free  with  it !  Ah !  you  wrong  us  both ; 
and  it  is  with  a  wholly  pure  and  respectable  ardour  that 
I  burn. 

HAR.  (Aside).  Burn  for  my  cash-box  ! 

VAL.  I  would  sooner  die  than  show  her  any  offensive 
thought :  she  is  too  prudent  and  honourable  for  that. 

HAR.  (Aside).  My  cash-box  too  honourable  ! 

VAL.  All  my  wishes  are  confined  to  enjoy  the  sight  of 
her ;  and  nothing  criminal  has  profaned  the  passion  with 
which  her  beautiful  eyes  have  inspired  me. 

HAR.  (Aside).  The  beautiful  eyes  of  my  cash-box !  He 
speaks  of  her  as  a  lover  speaks  of  his  mistress.5* 

VAL.  Mistress  Claude,  Sir,  knows  the  truth  of  this 
affair ;  and  she  can  testify  to  it. 

HAR.  What !  my  servant  is  an  accomplice  in  the 
matter  ? 

M  This  scene  must  necessarily  lose  much  of  its  comic  effect  in  transla- 
tion, for  the  obvious  reason  that  in  French  the  difference  between  cassette 
an&Jille,  "cash-box  "  and  "daughter,"  is  not  so  palpable  to  the  ear,  the 
feminine  adjective  and  pronoun  being  used  for  both ;  while  in  English 
such  is  not  the  case,  the  one  taking  "it"  as  its  pronoun,  and  the  otheX 
"she." 

SCENE  iv.J  THE   MISER.  75 

VAL.  Yes,  Sir  ;  she  was  a  witness  to  our  engagement ; 
and  it  is  after  having  known  the  honourable  intent  of  my 
passion,  that  she  has  assisted  me  in  persuading  your 
daughter  to  plight  her  troth,  and  receive  mine. 

HAR.  (Aside).  He?  Does  the  fear  of  justice  make  him 
rave  ?  ( To  Valere).  What  means  all  this  gibberish  about 
my  daughter  ? 

VAL.  I  say,  Sir,  that  I  have  had  all  the  trouble  in  the 
world  to  bring  her  modesty  to  consent  to  what  my  love 
wished  for. 

HAR.   The  modesty  of  whom  ? 

VAL.  Of  your  daughter ;  and  it  is  only  yesterday  that 
she  could  make  up  her  mind  to  sign  a  mutual  promise  of 
marriage. 

HAR.  My  daughter  has  signed  you  a  promise  of  mar- 
riage ? 

VAL.  Yes,  Sir,  as  I  have  signed  her  one. 

HAR.   O,  Heaven!  another  disgrace  I66 

JAC.   (To  the  Magistrate}.  Write,  Sir,  write. 

HAR.  More  harm  !  additional  despair ! M  (  To  the  Magis- 
trate). Come,  Sir,  do  the  duty  of  your  office;  and  draw 
up  for  him  his  indictment  as  a  felon  and  a  suborner. 

JAC.  As  a  felon  and  a  suborner. 

VAL.  These  are  names  that  do  not  belong  to  me  ;  and 
when  people  shall  know  who  I  am.  .  .  . 

SCENE  IV. — HARPAGON,  ELISE,  MARIANE,  VALERE, 
FROSINE,  MASTER  JACQUES,  A  MAGISTRATE. 

HAR.  Ah  !  graceless  child  !  daughter  unworthy  of  a 
father  like  me  !  it  is  thus  that  you  carry  out  the  lessons 
which  I  have  given  you  ?  You  allow  yourself  to  become 
smitten  with  an  infamous  thief;  and  you  pledge  him  your 
troth  without  my  consent  !  But  you  shall  both  find  out 
your  mistake.  (To  Elise).  Four  strong  walls  will  answer 
for  your  conduct ;  (to  Valere),  and  a  good  gibbet  will 
give  me  satisfaction  for  your  audacity. 

55  In  the  original  rengregement  de  mal.     Rengregement  is  the  compara- 
tive of  the  old  French  \i<yc&greigneur,  great. 

56  In  Plautus,  Aulularia  (Act  v..  Scene  3),  Euclio,  on  hearing  the  truth 
from  Lyconides,  exclaims  also,  "I'm  undone  entirely;  so  very  many  mis- 
fortunes unite  themselves  for  my  undoing.'1 

76  THE   MISER.  [ACT  Y, 

VAL.  It  will  not  be  your  passion  that  shall  judge  this 
matter ;  and  I  shall  get  at  least  a  hearing  before  being 
condemned. 

HAR.  I  have  made  a  mistake  in  saying  a  gibbet ;  and 
you  shall  be  broken  alive  on  the  wheel. 

EL.  {At  Harpagori 's  knees).  Ah  !  father,  show  a  little 
more  humanity  in  your  feelings,  I  beseech  you,  and  do  not 
push  matters  with  the  utmost  violence  of  paternal  power. 
Do  not  give  way  to  the  first  movements  of  your  passion, 
and  give  yourself  time  to  consider  what  you  do.  Take  the 
trouble  to  know  better  him  whom  you  believe  to  have 
offended  you.  He  is  quite  different  from  what  he  appears 
in  your  eyes ;  and  you  will  find  it  less  strange  that  I  have 
given  myself  to  him,  when  you  know  that,  had  it  not  been 
for  him,  you  would  long  ago  have  had  me  no  longer.  Yes, 
father,  it  is  he  who  saved  me  from  the  great  peril  I  was  in 
when  I  fell  into  the  water,  and  to  whom  you  owe  the  life 
of  that  very  daughter,  who  .  .  . 

HAR.  All  that  is  nothing ;  and  it  would  have  been  much 
better  for  me,  had  he  allowed  you  to  be  drowned,  than  to 
do  what  he  has  done. 

EL.  I  implore  you,  father,  by  your  paternal  love,  to  .  . 

HAR.  No,  no;  I  will  hear  nothing,  and  justice  must 
have  its  course. 

JAC.  You  shall  pay  me  my  cudgel-blows. 

FRO.  (Aside).  What  strange  confusion  is  this ! 

SCENE  V. — ANSELME,  HARPAGON,  ELISE,  MARIANE, 
FROSINE,  VALERE,  MAGISTRATE,  MASTER  JACQUES. 

AN.  What  is  the  matter,  Mr.  Harpagon?  I  find  you 
quite  upset. 

HAR.  Ah !  Mr.  Anselme,  I  am  the  most  unfortunate  of 
men ;  and  there  is  a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  disorder 
connected  with  the  contract  which  you  have  come  to  sign ! 
I  am  attacked  in  my  property,  I  am  attacked  in  my  honour ; 
and  behold  a  wretch,  a  scoundrel  who  has  violated  the 
most  sacred  rights ;  who  has  introduced  himself  into  my 
house  as  a  servant  to  rob  me  of  my  money,  and  to  tamper 
with  my  daughter. 

VAL.  Who  is  thinking  of  your  money,  of  which  you 
make  such  a  cock-and-bull  story? 

SCBHHV.]  THE   MISER.  77 

HAR.  Yes,  they  have  given  each  other  a  promise  of  mar- 
riage. This  insult  concerns  you,  Mr.  Anselme,  and  it  is 
you  who  ought  to  take  up  the  cudgels  against  him,  and  em- 
ploy all  the  rigours  of  the  law,  to  revenge  yourself  upon 
him  for  his  insolence. 

ANS.  It  is  not  my  intention  to  make  any  one  marry  me 
by  compulsion,  and  to  lay  claim  to  a  heart  which  has 
already  pledged  itself;  but,  as  far  as  your  interests  are 
concerned,  I  am  ready  to  espouse  them,  as  if  they  were  my 
own. 

HAR.  This  gentleman  here  is  an  honest  magistrate  who 
will  forget  nothing,  from  what  he  has  said  to  me,  of  the 
duties  of  his  office.  (To  the  Magistrate).  Charge  him, 
Sir,  in  the  right  fashion,  and  make  matters  very  criminal. 

VAL.  I  do  not  see  what  crime  can  be  made  out  against 
me  of  the  affection  which  I  entertain  for  your  daughter, 
and  to  what  punishment  you  think  I  can  be  condemned 
on  account  of  our  engagement  when  it  shall  be  known  who 
I  am  .  .  . 

HAR.  I  do  not  care  about  any  of  these  stories;  in  our 
days  the  world  is  full  of  these  assumed  noblemen;  of  these 
impostors,  who  take  advantage  of  their  obscurity,  and  with 
the  greatest  insolence  adopt  the  first  illustrious  name  which 
comes  into  their  head. 

VAL.  I  would  have  you  to  know  that  I  am  too  upright 
to  deck  myself  with  anything  that  does  not  belong  to  me ; 
and  that  all  Naples  can  bear  testimony  to  my  birth. 

ANS.  Gently!  take  care  what  you  are  going  to  say. 
You  run  a  greater  risk  in  this  than  you  think ;  you  are 
speaking  before  a  man  to  whom  all  Naples  is  known,  and 
who  can  easily  see  through  her  story. 

VAL.  (Proudly  putting  his  hat  on).  I  am  not  the  man 
to  fear  anything ;  and  if  you  know  Naples,  you  know  who 
was  Don  Thomas  d'Alburci. 

ANS.  No  doubt,  I  know;  and  few  people  have  known 
him  better  than  I. 

HAR.  I  do  not  care  for  Don  Thomas  nor  Don  Martin. 
(Seeing  two  candles  burning,  blows  one  out. " 

67  There  is  a  traditionary  stage  play  going  on  during  this  scene.  Whilst 
this  conversation  is  taking  place,  Harpagon  puts  out  one  of  the  candles 
which  are  on  the  table  ;  Jacques  lights  it  again  ;  Harpagon  blows  it  out 

78  THE  MISER.  [ACTV. 

ANS.  Pray  let  him  speak ;  we  shall  hear  what  he  means 
to  say  about  him. 

VAL.  I  mean  to  say  that  to  him  I  owe  my  birth. 

ANS.  To  him? 

VAL.  Yes. 

ANS.  Come ;  you  are  jesting.  Invent  some  other  story 
which  may  succeed  better,  and  do  not  attempt  to  save 
yourself  by  this  imposture. 

VAL.  Learn  to  speak  differently.  It  is  not  an  impos- 
ture, and  I  advance  nothing  but  what  can  be  easily  proved 
by  me. 

ANS.  What !  you  dare  call  yourself  the  son  of  Don 
Thomas  d'Alburci? 

VAL.  Yes,  I  dare;  and  I  am  prepared  to  maintain  this 
truth  against  any  one. 

ANS.  The  audacity  is  marvellous  !  Learn  to  your  con- 
fusion, that  it  is  sixteen  years  at  least  since  the  man  you 
speak  of  perished  at  sea  with  his  wife  and  children,  while 
endeavouring  to  save  their  lives  from  the  cruel  persecu- 
tions which  accompanied  the  troubles  at  Naples,  and 
which  caused  the  exile  of  several  noble  families. M 

VAL.  Yes;  but  learn,  to  your  confusion,  you,  that  his 
son,  seven  years  of  age,  with  a  servant,  was  saved  from  the 
wreck  by  a  Spanish  vessel,  and  that  this  son,  who  was 
saved,  is  the  person  who  spoke  to  you.  Learn  that  the 
captain  of  that  ship,  pitying  my  misfortune,  conceived  a 
friendship  for  me ;  that  he  had  me  educated  as  his  own 
son,  and  that  I  was  trained  to  the  profession  of  arms  ever 
since  I  was  old  enough ;  that  I  have  learned  lately  that  my 
father  is  not  dead,  as  I  always  believed;  that  passing 
through  here  to  go  in  search  of  him,  an  accident,  arranged 
by  Heaven,  brought  me  into  contact  with  the  charming 
Elise ;  that  the  sight  of  her  made  me  a  slave  to  her  beauty, 
and  that  the  violence  of  my  passion  and  the  harshness  of 

anew,  and  holds  it  in  his  hand,  but  whilst  he  is  listening,  the  servant  re- 
kindles it.  The  miser  sees  the  lighted  candle,  while  unfolding  his  arms ; 
he  extinguishes  it  anew,  and  puts  it  in  his  breeches'  pocket,  where  Jacques 
relights  it  again,  and  where  it  is  afresh  discovered  by  Harpagon.  Some 
commentators  of  Moliere's  hare  blamed  this  by-play. 

88  It  is  possible  that  Moliere  meant  to  speak  here  of  Masaniello's  re- 
bellion at  Naples,  in  the  years  1647  and  1648,  and  which  agrees,  in  the 
main,  with  the  age  of  the  different  personages. 

SC«N«V.]  THE  MISER.  79 

her  father  made  me  resolve  to  introduce  myself  into  his 
house,  and  to  send  some  one  else  in  quest  of  my  parents. 

ANS.  But  what  other  proofs  than  your  words  can 
guarantee  to  us  that  this  is  not  a  fable  based  upon  truth? 

VAL.  The  Spanish  captain ;  a  ruby  seal  which  belonged 
to  my  father ;  an  agate  bracelet  which  my  mother  had  on 
her  arm ;  old  Pedro,  the  servant,  who  was  saved  with  me 
from  the  wreck. 

MAR.  Alas  !  to  your  words  I  can  answer,  I,  that  you 
are  not  imposing,  and  all  that  you  say  shows  me  clearly 
that  you  are  my  brother 

VAL.  You,  my  sister ! 

MAR.  Yes.  My  heart  was  touched  the  moment  you 
opened  your  lips  ;  and  our  mother,  who  will  be  overjoyed 
at  seeing  you,  has  thousands  of  times  related  to  me  the 
misfortunes  of  our  family.  Heaven  also  permitted  us  not 
to  perish  in  this  dreadful  shipwreck  ;  but  our  lives  were 
saved  only  at  the  cost  of  our  liberty ;  and  they  were  pi- 
rates that  picked  us  up,  my  mother  and  me,  on  a  plank  of 
our  vessel.  After  ten  years  of  slavery,  a  happy  accident 
regained  for  us  our  freedom ;  and  we  returned  to  Naples, 
where  we  found  all  our  property  sold,  without  being  able  to 
trace  any  news  of  our  father.  We  then  travelled  to  Genoa, 
whither  my  mother  went  to  pick  up  some  miserable  re- 
mains of  an  inheritance  of  which  she  had  been  despoiled  ; 
and  thence,  flying  from  the  barbarous  injustice  of  her 
relatives,  she  came  hither,  where  she  has  almost  barely 
been  able  to  drag  on  her  life. 

ANS.  Oh  Heaven  !  how  great  is  the  evidence  of  thy 
power  !  and  how  well  showest  thou  that  it  belongs  only  to 
thee  to  perform  miracles  !  Embrace  me,  my  children,  and 
share  your  joys  with  those  of  your  father. 

VAL.  You  are  our  father  ? 

MAR.  It  is  you  whom  my  mother  has  so  much  bewailed. 

ANS.  Yes,  my  daughter,  yes,  my  son ;  I  am  Don 
Thomas  d'Alburci,  whom  Heaven  saved  from  the  waves, 
with  all  the  money  which  he  carried  with  him,  and  who, 
believing  you  all  dead  during  more  than  sixteen  years, 
prepared,  after  long  journeying,  to  seek,  in  the  union  with 
a  gentle  and  discreet  girl,  the  consolation  of  a  new  fami- 
ly. The  little  safety  which  I  found  for  my  life  in  Naples, 

80  THE  MISER.  [ACT  v. 

has  made  me  for  ever  abandon  the  idea  of  returning ;  and 
having  found  means  to  sell  all  that  I  possessed  there,  I  be- 
came used  to  this  place,  where,  under  the  name  of  Ansel- 
me,  I  wished  to  get  rid  of  the  sorrows  of  this  other  name, 
which  caused  me  so  many  misfortunes. 

HAR.   (To  Anselme).     Is  this  your  son? 

ANS.  Yes. 

HAR.  Then  I  hold  you  responsible  for  paying  me  ten 
thousand  crowns  of  which  he  has  robbed  me. 

ANS.  He  has  robbed  you  ! 

HAR.  Himself. 

VAL.  Who  tells  you  this  ? 

HAR.   Master  Jacques. 

VAL.   (  To  Master  Jacques).     Is  it  you  who  say  this  ? 

JACQ.  You  see  that  I  say  nothing. 

HAR.  Yes.  There  is  the  Magistrate  who  has  received 
his  deposition. 

VAL.  Can  you  believe  me  capable  of  so  base  an  action  ? 

HAR.  Capable  or  not  capable,  I  want  my  money  back 
again. 

SCENE  VI. — HARPAGON,  ANSELME,  ELISE,  MARIANE,  CLE- 
ANTE,  VALERE,  FROSINE,  A  MAGISTRATE,  MASTER 
JACQUES,  LA  FLECHE. 

CLE.  Do  not  worry  yourself  any  longer,  father,  and 
accuse  no  one.  I  have  discovered  tidings  of  your  affair ; 
and  I  have  come  to  tell  you,  that  if  you  will  make  up  your 
mind  to  let  me  marry  Mariane,  your  money  shall  be  re- 
turned to  you. 

HAR.   Where  is  it  ? 

CLE.  Do  not  grieve  about  that.  It  is  in  a  spot  for 
which  I  answer  ;  and  everything  depends  upon  me.  It  is 
for  you  to  say  what  you  resolve ;  and  you  can  choose, 
either  to  give  me  Mariane,  or  to  lose  your  cash-box. 

HAR.  Has  nothing  been  taken  out? 

CLE.  Nothing  at  all.  Now  make  up  your  mind  whether 
you  will  subscribe  to  this  marriage,  and  join  your  consent 
to  that  of  her  mother,  who  leaves  her  free  to  choose  be- 
tween us  two. 

MAR.  (To  Cleante}.  But  you  do  not  know  that  this 
consent  is  no  longer  sufficient ;  and  that  Heaven  restores 

SCBNBVI.]  THE   MISER.  8 1 

to  irre  not  only  a  brother  {pointing  to  Valere)  but  also  (point- 
ing to  Anselme)  a  father,  from  whom  you  must  obtain  me. 

ANS.  Heaven  has  not  restored  me  to  you,  my  children, 
to  go  contrary  to  your  desires.  Mr.  Harpagon,  you  are 
well  aware  that  the  choice  of  a  young  girl  will  fall  upon 
the  son  rather  than  upon  the  father ;  come,  do  not  oblige 
people  to  say  what  it  is  not  necessary  to  hear;  and  con- 
sent, as  well  as  I  do,  to  this  double  match. 

HAR.  To  be  well  advised,  I  must  see  my  cash-box. 

CLE.  You  shall  see  it  safe  and  sound. 

HAR.   I  have  no  money  to  give  my  children  in  marriage. 

ANS.  Well!  I  have  some  for  them;  do  not  let  that 
trouble  you. 

HAR.  Will  you  undertake  to  defray  all  the  expenses  of 
these  two  weddings? 

ANS.  Yes,  I  undertake  it.     Are  you  satisfied? 

HAR.  Yes,  provided  that  you  will  order  me  a  suit  for 
the  nuptials. 

ANS.  That  is  agreed.  Let  us  go  and  rejoice  in  the 
happiness  which  this  day  brings  us. 

MAG.  Hullo  !  gentlemen,  hullo !  Gently,  if  you  please. 
Who  is  to  pay  for  my  writing?  M 

HAR.   We  have  nothing  to  do  with  your  writings. 

MAG.  Yes !  but  I  do  not  pretend  to  have  written  tor 
nothing. 

HAR.  {Pointing  to  Master  Jacques).  For  your  payment, 
there  is  a  marl  of  whom  I  make  you  a  present;  and  you 
may  hang  him. 

JAC.  Alas  !  how  must  one  act  ?  I  get  cudgel-blows  for 
speaking  the  truth ;  and  they  wish  to  hang  me  for  telling 
a  lie! 

ANS.  Mr.  Harpagon,  you  must  forgive  him  this  im- 
posture. 

HAR.  Will  you  pay  the  magistrate,  then  ? 

ANS.  Be  it  so.  Come  let  us  go  quickly  to  share  our  joy 
with  your  mother. 

HAR.  And  I,  to  see  my  dear  cash-box. 

89  It  appears  that  in  MoliSre's  time  the  places  of  commissaire  were 
bought ;  hence  these  magistrates  were  very  liable  to  be  bribed.  Compare 
what  Sganarelle  says  to  one  of  them  in  TTu  School  for  Husbands  (Vol.  I., 
Act  >iii.,  Scene  5). 

VOU  III.  F 

MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC. 

COMEDIE-BALLET. 

MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC 

A  COMEDY-BALLET  IN  THREE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  PARTLY  IN  PROSE  AND  PARTLY  IN  VERSE.) 

OCTOBER  6xH,  1669. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

THE  whole  of  the  first  part  of  the  year  1669  was  occupied  with  Tartuffe. 
Only  in  the  month  of  October  of  the  same  year,  Monsieur  de  Pourceaug- 
nac, a  new  production  of  Moliere,  which  was  ordered  for  the  king,  and 
played  on  the  6th  of  that  month  at  Chambord,  saw  the  light.  Moliere 
and  his  troupe  received  6000  livres  for  their  acting  of  this  play,  which  was 
represented  at  the  theatre  of  the  Palais-Royal,  on  the  i$th  of  November 
of  the  same  year,  and  was  performed  twenty  times  in  succession.  It  was 
anew  acted  before  the  Court  on  the  6th  of  March  of  the  following  year. 
The  idea  of  putting  the  hero  of  the  comedy  in  the  hands  of  a  physician, 
to  be  cured  in  spite  of  himself,  and  making  the  first  believe  that  he  is  go- 
ing to  be  "  treated  as  well  as  possible,"  whilst  the  latter  thinks  that  he  has 
to  deal  with  a  patient,  is  to  be  found  in  many  of  the  early  fabliaux  ;  only 
the  scene  takes  place  between  a  priest,  who  imagines  that  he  has  to  exor- 
cise a  man,  whilst  this  one  is  a  creditor  who  flatters  himself  that  he  is  go- 
ing to  be  paid.  Later,  a  doctor  or  surgeon  was  put  in  the  place  of  the 
priest.  In  the  Histoire  generate  des  Larrons,  published  at  Lyons  hi  1639, 
a  tale  is  told  how  a  thief  brought  a  draper's  assistant  to  a  certain  surgeon. 
He  had  warned  the  latter  beforehand  that  he  should  bring  him  a  patient, 
and  ran  off  with  a  piece  of  cloth  which  he  had  ordered  in  the  name  of  the 
doctor,  who,  as  well  as  his  supposed  patient,  were  endeavouring  to  explain 
the  mistake  under  which  each  laboured.  This  trick  had  already  been 
represented  on  the  Theatre  du  Marais,  in  1661,  by  a  certain  Chevalier,  in 
a  farce  in  verse,  The  Desolation  of  the  Rogues  about  the  Prohibition  of 
Wearing  Arm!,  or  the  Patients  who  are  not  ill.  In  this  farce,  Guillot's 
master  gives  him  a  valuable  ring,  to  borrow  money  upon.  The  servant 
entrusts  the  ring  to  a  rascal,  who  gives  it  to  one  of  his  accomplices,  dressed 
as  a  physician,  the  latter  pretends  to  have  been  paid  to  cure  Guillot,  who 
refuses  to  place  himself  under  his  hands,  and  who  is  pursued  by  a  great 
many  apothecaries,  armed  with  syringes. 

MolieVe  received  the  first  hint  of  the  scene  in  which  Eraste  persuades 
M.  de  Pourceaugnac  that  they  are  old  friends,  from  a  tale  by  Scarron, 
published  in  1652,  and  called  Not  to  Believe  what  One  Sees.  The  scenes 
in  which  Pourceaugnac  is  pestered  by  N^rine,  Lucette,  and  their  children, 
and  the  flight  of  the  Limousin  gentleman,  dressed  as  a  woman  are  said  to 
be  found  in  an  Italian  farce,  The  Disgraces  of  Harlequin ;  but  the  date 
when  this  farce  was  first  played  is  not  known  with  any  certainty. 

It  has  been  stated  that  Moliere,  in  order  to  revenge  himself  upon  a  gen- 
tleman of  Limoges  who  had  insulted  him,  brought  his  caricature  upon  the 

86  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC. 

stage  as  M.  de  Pourceaugnac.  But  he  must  have  met  many  such  charac- 
ters during  his  peregrinations,  as  a  strolling  player,  in  the  provinces.  M. 
de  Pourceaugnac  is,  like  M.  de  Sotenville,  in  George  Dandin,  a  provin- 
cial gentleman ;  but  the  first  is  something  of  a  lawyer,  and  is  more  easily 
gulled,  though  brimful  of  suspicion  and  antiquated  prejudices.  He  is 
amusing  by  the  very  self-sufficiency  which  he  displays  in  all  his  mishaps. 
His  extravagant  and  farcical  adventures  divert  the  spectator,  chiefly  on 
account  of  the  natural  language  of  the  different  characters,  and  the  racy 
humour  and  broad  fun  which  pervade  the  whole  comedy. 

Moliere  attacks  the  doctors  in  this  play ;  but  he  almost  faithfully  repre- 
sents them  and  their  language.  The  consultation  of  the  two  physicians  is 
not  exaggerated ;  they  reason  well,  draw  consequences,  and  explain  the 
cause  of  the  disease  correctly ;  their  remedies  are  not  badly  applied,  but 
the  misfortune  is  that  Pourceaugnac  is  not  mad,  as  they  believe  him  to  be. 
Hence  all  their  arguments,  cleverness,  and  pedantry  only  bring  more  to 
the  light  their  egregious  blunder. 

Tradition  asserts  that  Lulli  once  played  the  part  of  De  Pourceaugnac. 
He  was  in  disgrace  with  the  king ;  and,  as  this  disgrace  had  lasted  for 
some  time,  he  made  an  arrangement  with  Moliere  to  assist  him.  When 
the  curtain  rose,  it  was  announced  that  Moliere  had  suddenly  become  in- 
disposed ;  Lulli  proposed  to  play  the  chief  character,  and  his  proposal 
was  accepted  by  Louis  XIV.  Lulli  played  with  much  spirit  and  vivacity, 
but  did  not  see  the  king  unbend.  When  the  scene  with  the  apothecaries 
came  on,  Lulli,  ran,  skipped,  leapt,  frisked  about,  but  all  in  vain,  the 
Grand  Monarque  did  not  even  smile.  At  last  the  wily  Italian  hit  upon 
an  inspiration.  Pursued  by  his  persecutors,  he  took  a  tremendous  leap, 
and  jumped  right  in  the  middle  of  a  spinnet  which  stood  in  the  orchestra, 
and  which  was  smashed  in  a  thousand  pieces.  He  ran  the  risk  of  break- 
ing his  legs,  but  he  was  satisfied ;  he  had  seen  the  king  laugh  and  ap- 
plaud ;  he  had  heard  the  Court  imitate  the  monarch ;  and  he  knew  when 
he  reappeared  on  the  stage  through  the  prompter's  box,  that  he  was  anew 
re-established  in  the  king's  favour. 

In  the  sixth  volume  of  the  translation  of  ''  Select  Comedies  by  M.  de 
Moli&re,  London,  1732,"  this  piece  under  the  title  of  Squire  Lubberly,  is 
dedicated  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lady  Mary  Wortley  Montague  in 
the  following  words : — 

MADAM, 

If  this  TRANSLATION  can  be  so  happy  as  to  please  Your  LADYSHIP,  it  is  almost 
certain  of  the  World's  Applause  :  For  Your  fine  Taste  and  distinguishing  judgment 
are  known  so  universally,  that  few  or  none  (as  fond  as  people  are  of  cavilling)  will 
dare  find  Fault  with  what  is  honoured  by  Your  LADYSHIP'S  Approbation.  But 
Your  LADYSHIP'S  high  Character  would  only  seem  a  Proof  of  my  Presumption  in 
this  Address,  were  it  not  remarkable  that,  with  the  Happiest  Genius  in  the  World, 
You  have  the  Best  Good-Nature,  and  can  pardon  the  Faults  of  others  with  the 
same  Facility  that  You  write  fine  Things  Your  self. 

It  is  no  easy  Task  to  preserve  the  Spirit  and  Humour  of  MOLIERE  in  a  TRANS- 
LATION that  is  almost  Literal :  This,  however,  has  been  my  attempt,  and  if,  in 
the  general,  I  have  succeeded,  Your  LADYSHIP,  I  assure  myself,  will  excuse  some 
few  Mistakes. 

I  shall  be  no  farther  troublesome  than  to  subscribe  myself  with  the  greatest  re- 
spect that's  possible, — MADAM,  Your  Ladyship's  most  Obedient,  and  most 
humble  Servant, 

THE  TRANSLATOR. 

Several  English  dramatists  have  imjt3»ed  either  the  whole-  or  some  of 
the  scenes  of  Moliere's  plar 

MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  87 

We  first  have  to  deal  with  Ravenscroft,  (See  Introductory  Notice  to 
The  Love-Tiff,  Vol.  I.,  page  76),  who  in  three  of  his  plays,  has  made 
•use  of  M.  de  Pourceaugnac.  In  his  Mamamouchi,  or  the  Citizen  turn'd 
Gentleman,  acted  in  1671,  a  play  chiefly  taken  from  Le  Bourgeois  Gentil- 
homme,  Sir  Simon  Softhead  is  Pourceaugnac.  In  the  Careless  Lovers,  a 
comedy  acted  at  the  Duke's  Theatre,  1673,  the  scene  in  the  fourth  act,  in 
which  Mrs.  Breedwell  and  Clapham  bring  in  their  children  and  pretend 
that  they  are  the  wives  of  De  Boastado,  is  taken  from  the  seventh  and 
eighth  scenes  of  the  last  act  of  the  French  comedy.  In  his  play,  Ravens- 
croft,  in  the  Epistle,  attacks  Dryden,  and  says  that  the  reason  that  they 
are  continually  falling  out,  is  "  that  two  of  a  trade  can  never  agree," 
whilst,  in  the  Prologue,  he  sneers  at  Almanzor  and  Love  in  a  Nunnery. 
In  his  Canterbury  Guests,  or  a.  Bargain  Broken,  played  at  the  Theatre 
Royal  in  1694,  Ravenscroft  has  reproduced  the  scene  of  the  women  and 
the  children  which  he  had  introduced  before  in  The  Careless  Lovers. 

Crowne,  in  his  Country  Wit  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Sicilian, 
Vol.  II.,  page  336),  has  sketched  a  character,  Sir  Mannerly  Shallow,  which 
has  evidently  been  inspired  by  M.  de  Pourceaugnac,  although  not  literally 
followed.  The  English  baronet  exclaims — 

"  Well  to  Cumberland  commend  me  for  gentility, 
But  to  London  for  good  breeding  and  civility ;" 

and  is  finally  married  to  a  porter's  daughter.  Ramble  and  Merry  at  times 
remind  me  of  Eraste  and  Sbrigani,  in  Moliere's  comedy. 

M.  de  Pourceaugnac,  Squire  Trelooby,  was  said  to  be  translated  by  Van- 
brugh,  Congreve,  and  Walsh,  with  a  prologue  by  Dr.  Garth.  It  was  first 
acted  at  the  Theatre,  Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,  March  2oth,  1704.  It  was  also 
acted  Jan.  3d,  1734,  under  the  title  of  The  Cornish  Squire. 

Charles  Shadwell  brought  out  at  Dublin  in  1720,  a  farce  called  The 
Plotting  Lovers  ;  or  the  Dismal  Squire,  which  is  a  free  translation  and 
condensation  of  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  into  one  act. 

Miller's  Mother-in- Law  ;  or,  the  Doctor  the  Disease,  a.  comedy  in  five 
acts,  in  prose,  was  performed  in  the  Haymarket  Theatre  on  the  I2th  of 
February,  1734,  and  met  with  great  success.  The  scene  of  it  is  laid  in 
London,  and  the  plot  is  compounded  of  two  comedies  of  Moliere,  M.  de 
Pourceaugnac  and  The  Hypochondriac.  The  author,  who  was  then  in 
orders,  dedicated  his  play  to  the  Countess  of  Hertford,  and  stated  in  his 
dedication  that  his  "  Comedy  .  .  .  has  not  in  it  one  indecent  expres- 
sion, or  one  immoral  thought,"  and  also  "  that  Moliere  is  properly  the 
author  of  this  play."  He  repeats  these  statements  more  emphatically  in 
the  Prologue,  and  harps  on  the  same  string  in  the  Epilogue,  where  we 
also  find  a  description  of  the  dress  of  the  ladies  and  gentlemen  of  those 
times.  Mrs.  Heron  as  Primrose  (Toinette)  states  of  the  great  dames, 

that 

"  In  round-ear'd  Coif,  white  Apron,  and  stuff  gown, 
Your  Lady  Betties  trip  about  the  town  ; 
Whilst  nice  Sir  Fopling,  and  his  Brother  Beaux, 
Transported,  step  into  their  Footmen's  Clothes  ; 
Proud  of  the  Oaken  Club,  and  tuck'd  up  Hair}> 
They  then,  first,  really  are  what  they  appear.' 

M  de  Pourceaugnac  is  called  in  Miller's  play,  "  Looby  Headpiece, 
nephew  to  Dr  Mummy  ; "  Beaumont,  the  lover,  is  a  mixture  of  Cl^ante, 
from  The  Hypochondriac,  and  of  Sbrigani,  from  M.  de  Pourceaugnac 
which  latter  character  is  also  partly  filled  up  by  Mrs.  Primrose  (Toi- 

38  MONSIEUR    DE   POUKCEAUGNAC. 

nette).  The  scene  where  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  is  in  woman's  clothes  and 
the  one  between  the  two  doctors  and  the  supposed  lunatic  are  the  same 
in  both  plays ;  but  Dr.  Mummy,  one  of  the  consulting  physicians,  discov- 
ers that  Looby  is  his  nephew,  who  afterwards  takes  the  character  of 
Thomas  Diafoirus,  from  The  Hypochondriac.  The  greater  part  of  The 
Mother-in- Law  is  taken  from  the  latter  comedy  ;  Argan  is  Sir  Credulous 
Hippish ;  Beralde  becomes  Heartwell ;  the  elder  Diafoirus,  Dr.  Mummy  ; 
M.  Fleurant,  Mr.  Galleypot;  M.  Bonnefoi,  Mr.  Cranny,  whilst  Belize; 
the  second  wife  of  Argan  in  the  French  comedy,  is,  in  the  English  one, 
called  Lady  Hippish ;  the  daughter  Angelique  becomes  Belina,  and  Loui- 
son,  the  younger  sister,  is  changed  into  Agnes. 

Thomas  Sheridan,  the  actor,  wrote  Captain  O'  Blunder ;  or  the  Brave 
Irishman,  a  farce  in  one  act,  performed  at  the  Theatre,  Goodman's  Field's 
on  the  3ist  of  January,  1746,  and  which  is  nearly  all  borrowed  from  M. 
de  Pourceaugnac,  who  for  the  nonce  is  turned  into  an  Irishman.  The 
consultation  with  the  doctors  is  there ;  the  Captain  kills  a  Frenchman  in 
a  duel,  and  is  obliged  to  fly,  and  Sbrigani  is  represented  by  Sconce. 
Eraste  is  called  Cheatwell,  and  he  marries  Betty,  the  maid ;  whilst  O' Blun- 
der marries  Lucy,  the  young  lady.  Nerine  and  Lucette  are  wanting  in 
this  farce. 

Mrs.  Parsons  wrote  a  comedy  in  two  acts,  The  Intrigues  of  a  Morning, 
played  at  the  Theatre,  Covent  Garden,  on  the  i8th  of  April,  1792.  It  is 
merely  a  poor  abbreviated  version  of  M.  de  Pourceaugnac. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

IN   THE   COMEDY. 

MONSIEUR    DE    POURCEAU- 

GNAC.1 

ORONTE. 

ERASTE,  Julia's  lover. 
SBRIGANI,  a  Neapolitan  ad- 
venturer. 
FIRST  DOCTOR. 
SECOND  DOCTOR. 
AN  APOTHECARY. 
A  PEASANT. 
A  FEMALE  PEASANT. 

FIRST  Swiss. 

SECOND  Swiss. 

A  POLICE  OFFICER. 

Two   INFERIOR  POLICE 
OFFICERS. 

JULIA,   Oronte 's  daughter. 

NERINE,  an  intriguing  wo- 
man, supposed  to  be  from 
Picardy. 

LUCETTE,  supposed  to  be  from 
Gascony. 

IN   THE    BALLET. 

A  FEMALE  MUSICIAN. 

Two  MUSICIANS. 

A  TROOP  OF  DANCERS. 

Two  DANCING  MASTERS. 

Two  DANCING  PAGES. 

FOUR  SPECTATORS,  dancing. 

Two  DANCING  Swiss. 

Two  GROTESQUE  DOCTORS. 

COMIC  DANCERS. 

Two  SINGING  ATTORNEYS. 

Two  DANCING  SOLICITORS. 

Two  SERGEANTS,  dancing. 

A  TROOP  OF  MASKED  PEO- 
PLE. 

A  MALE  SINGING  GIPSY. 

A  FEMALE  SINGING  GIPSY. 

A  PANTALOON,  singing. 

CHORUS  OF  SINGING  MASKS; 

DANCING  BISCAYANS  AND 
SAVAGES. 

THE  SCENE  is  IN  PARIS. 

1  This  part  was  created  by  Moliere,  who  wore  ''  breeches  of  red  damask, 
ornamented  with  lace,  a  blue  velvet  jacket,  ornamented  with  imitation 
gold  ;  a  belt  with  fringes,  green  garters,  a  grey  hat  with  a  green  feather,  a 
scarf  of  green  taffeta,  a  pair  of  gloves,  a  skirt  of  green  taffeta,  adorned  with 
lace,  and  a  cloak  of  black  taffeta.1'  The  name  Pourceaugnac  appears  to 
be  formed  from  pourceau,  a  pig,  with  the  Gascon  ending  ac.  A  drama- 
tist, Hauteroche,  introduced  in  his  Nobles  de  Province  (1677)  a  character, 
Cochonzac.  The  fun  of  calling  the  Limousin  gentlemen  "pigs"  appears 
to  be  old,  for  when  a  certain  Descars  boasted  that  he  had  four  thousand 
noblemen  of  that  province  who  would  oppose  the  Huguenots,  Jeanne 
d'Albert,  the  mother  of  Henri  IV.,  said  :  "They  are  called  noblemen  be- 
cause they  are  dressed  in  soie ;''  the  latter  word  meaning  "silk"  and 
''bristles."  The  Limousins  were  sometimes  called  mcichc-raves ,  turnip 
eaters,  and  Rabelais  also  makes  fun  of  a  Limousin  student. 

MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC 

(MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC). 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — ERASTE,  A  FEMALE  MUSICIAN,  Two  SINGING 
MUSICIANS  (several  others  performing  on  instruments), 
TROOP  OF  DANCERS. 

ERAS.  ( To  the  Musicians  and  Dancers?)  Carry  out  the 
orders  which  I  have  given  you  for  the  serenade.  As  for 
myself,  I  shall  retire,  and  I  do  not  wish  to  be  seen  here. 

SCENE  II. — A  FEMALE  MUSICIAN,  Two  SINGING  MU- 
SICIANS (several  others  playing  instruments),  A  TROOP  OF 
DANCERS. 

(This  serenade  is  composed  of  singing,  dancing,  and 
playing.  The  words  sung  refer  to  the  position  of 
Eraste  in  regard  to  Julia,  and  express  the  feelings  of 
the  two  lovers,  who  are  crossed  in  love  by  their 
parents). 

The  Female  Musician. 

Now  scatter,  O  charming  night,  on  every  eye, 
The  gentle  violence  of  thy  poppies ; 
Leave  none  in  these  enchanting  spots  awake 
But  those  hearts  which  Cupid's  power  sways. 
Thy  shades  and  thy  silence, 

91 

g2  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  I. 

More  fair  than  brightest  day. 
Offer  sweet  moments  in  which  to  sigh  with  love. 

First  Musician. 

How  sweet  a  thing  it  is 

To  sigh  with  love, 
When  nothing  our  affection  stays  ! 
To  amiable  inclinations  our  hearts  incline, 
But  there  are  tyrants  to  whom  we  owe  life. 

How  sweet  a  thing  it  is 

To  sigh  with  love, 

When  nothing  our  affection  stays ! 

Second  Musician. 

Whate'er  to  our  affections  thy' 11  oppose. 
Against  true  love  it  naught  avails: 
We  must  but  love  each  other  well, 
All  obstacles  to  overcome. 

The  Three  together. 

Let  us,  therefore,  love  each  other  with  eternal  ardour : 
The  parent's  harshness,  cruel  constraints, 
Absence,  labour,  adverse  fortune, 
Do  but  increase  a  faithful  friendship. 
Let  us,  therefore,  love  each  other  with  eternal  ardour : 
When  two  fond  hearts  .love  each  other  well. 
All  the  rest  is  nothing. 

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

(Dance  of  the  two  Dancing  Masters.) 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

(Dance  of  the  two  Pages). 

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

(Four  spectators,  who  quarreled  during  the  Page's  dance, 
now  dance  likewise,  fighting  all  the  while,  sword  in 
handX 

Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

(Two  Swiss  separate  the  four  combatants,  and  after  having 
reconciled  them,  dance  with  them.) 

SCENE  HI.]  MONSIEUR    DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  93 

SCENE  III. — JULIA,  ERASTE,  NERINE. 

JUL.  Good  Heavens !  Eraste,  let  us  take  care  not  to  be 
caught.  I  tremble  lest  we  should  be  seen  together  ;  and 
everything  would  be  lost  after  I  had  been  forbidden  to 
do  so. 

ERAS.  I  am  looking  out  on  all  sides,  and  can  see 
nothing. 

JUL.  {To  Nerine}.  Do  you  watch  also,  Nerine;  and 
take  care  that  no  one  comes. 

NER.  {Going  to  the  back  of  the  stage}.  Depend  upon 
me,  and  tell  fearlessly  what  you  have  to  say  to  each  other. 

JUL.  Have  you  bethought  yourself  of  something  favour- 
able in  our  affair?  and  think  you,  Eraste,  to  be  able  to 
prevent  this  vexatious  marriage  upon  which  my  father  has 
set  his  mind? 

ERAS.  Let  us  at  least  try  our  best;  and  we  have  already 
prepared  a  good  many  batteries  to  overturn  this  ridicu- 
lous design.  ; 

NER.  (Rushing  on  to  Julia).  As  I  live,  there  is  your 
father. 

JUL.   Quick,  let  us  separate ! 

NER.   No,  no,  no;  do  not  stir;  I  was  mistaken. 

JUL.  Good  Heavens!  Nerine,  how  silly  of  you  to 
frighten  us  so! 

ERAS.  Yes,  charming  Julia,  we  have  in  readiness  a 
quantity  of  engines  for  this  purpose ;  and  now  that  you 
have  given  me  permission,  we  shall  not  scruple  to  use 
them  all.  Do  not  ask  us  all  the  contrivances  which  we 
shall  bring  into  play ;  you  will  be  amused  by  them ;  and 
it  is  better  to  leave  you  the  pleasure  of  surprise,  as  they 
do  in  comedies,  and  to  warn  you  of  nothing  which  we 
mean  to  show  you.  Let  it  be  sufficient  to  tell  you  that 
we  have  various  stratagems  in  hand  to  be  produced  at  the 
fit  moment,  and  that  the  ingenious  Nerine  and  the  skilful 
Sbrigani  have  undertaken  the  affair. 

NER.  Assuredly.  Is  your  father  jesting  to  wish  to 
bother  you  with  his  lawyer  from  Limoges,  Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac,  whom  he  has  never  seen  in  his  life,  and 
who  is  coming  by  coach  to  take  you  away  before  our  very 
face?  Are  three  or  four  thousand  crowns  more,  and  for 

94  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACr  i. 

which  he  has  only  your  uncle's  word,  to  make  him  reject 
a  lover  whom  you  care  for?  and  is  a  girl  like  you  fit  for  a 
native  of  Limoges  ?  If  he  wishes  to  get  married  why  does 
he  not  take  a  lady  born  at  Limoges  for  a  wife,  instead  of 
troubling  decent  Christians  ?  The  name  alone  of  Monsieur 
de  Pourceaugnac  has  put  me  in  a  frightful  passion. 
I  am  in  a  rage  about  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  If  it 
were  nothing  but  his  name,  this  Monsieur  de  Pourceaug- 
nac, I  would  do  everything  to  succeed2  in  breaking  off 
this  marriage,  rather  than  that  you  should  be  Madam  de 
Pourceaugnac.  Pourceaugnac !  is  it  bearable  ?  No, 
Pourceaugnac  is  something  which  I  cannot  tolerate;  and 
we  shall  play  him  so  many  tricks,  we  shall  practice  so 
many  jokes  upon  jokes  upon  him,  that  we  shall  soon  send 
Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  back  to  Limoges  again. 

ERAS.  Here  comes  our  artful  Neapolitan,  who  will  give 
us  some  news. 

SCENE  IV. — JULIA,  ERASTE,  SBRIGANI,  NERINE. 

SBR.  Your  man  is  coming,  Sir :  I  have  seen  him  three 
kagues  from  here  where  the  coach  stopped,  and  where  he 
came  down  for  breakfast  in  the  kitchen.  I  have  studied 
him  for  full  half  an  hour,  and  I  know  him  already  by  heart. 
As  for  his  figure,  I  will  not  speak  of  it :  you  will  see  for 
yourself  how  nature  has  designed  him,  and  if  his  dress 
agrees  with  it.  But  as  for  his  wit,  I  tell  you,  beforehand, 
that  it  is  one  of  the  dullest  going,  that  we  will  find  in 
him  just  the  very  material  for  what  we  wish,  and  that  he 
is  the  very  man  to  fall  into  every  trap  which  you  may  set 
for  him. 

ERAS.  Are  you  telling  us  the  truth  ? 

SBR.  Yes,  if  I  know  the  world. 

NER.  Madam,  this  is  a  first-rate  personage.8  Your  affair 
could  not  be  in  better  hands,  and  he  is  the  hero  of  our  age 

1  The  original  has  j'y  brulerai  mes  livres,  "  I  shall  burn  my  books,"  a 
saying  borrowed  from  the  old  alchymists,  who,  after  having  tried  every- 
thing, burn  their  books,  because  they  are  sure  never  to  succeed ;  or  burn 
them,  because  they  have  nothing  more  to  heat  the  furnace  with. 

8  In  Plautus'  Asinaria;  or,  the  Ass-dealer  (Act  iii.,  Scene  2),  Libanus 
and  Leonida,  the  servants  of  Demenaetus,  an  aged  Athenian,  also  extol 
each  other's  exploits. 

sc*N*rf.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  9$ 

for  the  kind  of  exploits  in  question  ;  a  man  who,  twenty 
times  in  his  life,  has  generously  braved  the  galleys  to  serve 
his  friends ;  who,  at  the  risk  of  his  arms  and  shoulders, 
knows  to  put  an  end  nobly  to  the  most  difficult  adven- 
tures, and  who,  such  as  you  see  him,  has  been  exiled  from 
his  country  for  I  not  know  how  many  honourable  actions, 
which  he  has  generously  undertaken. 

SBR.  I  am  confused  by  the  praises  with  which  you 
honour  me ;  and  I  could,  with  greater  justice,  give  you 
some  upon  the  marvels  of  your  own  life,  and  principally 
on  the  glory  which  you  obtained  when,  with  great  honesty, 
you  cheated  at  play,  to  the  tune  of  twelve  thousand  crowns, 
that  foreign  young  nobleman  who  was  brought  to  your 
house ;  when  you  gallantly  made  that  false  contract,  which 
ruined  a  whole  family ;  when,  with  so  much  grandeur  of 
soul,  you  denied  the  deposit  which  had  been  entrusted  to 
you ;  and  when  we  saw  you  so  generously  give  your  evi- 
dence which  caused  two  people  to  be  hanged  who  had  not 
deserved  it. 

NER.  These  are  trifles  not  worth  speaking  of;  and  your 
praises  make  me  blush.* 

SBR.  I  will  spare  your  modesty ;  let  us  drop  this ;  and, 
to  make  a  beginning,  let  us  go  quickly  and  join  our  pro- 
vincials, while  you,  on  your  side,  shall  hold  the  other  ac- 
tors of  the  comedy  in  readiness  in  case  of  need. 

ERAS.  At  least,  Madam,  remember  your  part ;  and,  the 
better  to  hide  our  game,  pretend,  as  you  have  been  told,  to 
be  thoroughly  satisfied  with  your  father's  plans. 

JUL.  If  it  depends  but  on  this,  matters  will  proceed 
swimmingly. 

ERAS.  But,  fair  Julia,  if  [all  our  contrivances  should  be 
unsuccessful  ? 

JUL.  Then  I  shall  declare  my  true  feelings  to  my 
father. 

ERAS.  And  if.  against  your  feelings,  he  should  hold 
obstinately  to  his  plan? 

JUL.  I  would  threaten  him  to  bury  myself  in  a  convent. 

4  Several  of  Moliere's  commentators  blame  Eraste  and  Julia  for  employ- 
ing two  such  people  as  Nerine  and  Sbrigani ;  but  it  is  just  possible  that 
these  two  worthies  may  have  been  joking,  whilst  complimenting  each 
other  on  their  exploits. 

96  MONSIEUR   DE   FOURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  i. 

ERAS.  But  if,  nothwithstanding  all  this,  he  would  force 
you  to  this  marriage  ? 

JUL.  What  do  you  wish  me  to  say  to  you  ? 

ERAS.  What  do  I  wish  you  to  say  to  me  ? 

JUL.  Yes. 

ERAS.  What  one  says  when  one  loves  truly. 

JUL.  But  what  ? 

ERAS.  That  nothing  will  compel  you;  and  that,  not- 
withstanding all  a  father's  efforts,  you  will  promise  me  to 
be  mine. 

JUL.  Good  Heavens  !  Eraste,  content  yourself  with  what 
I  am  doing  now ;  and  do  not  tempt  the  resolutions  of  my 
heart  upon  what  may  happen  in  the  future ;  do  not  make 
my  duty  more  painful  with  proposals  of  annoying  rash- 
ness, of  which,  perhaps,  we  may  not  be  in  need ;  and  if 
we  are  to  come  to  it,  let  me,  at  least  be  driven  to  it  by  the 
turn  of  affairs. 

ERAS.  Well  .    .    . 

SBR.  By  my  truth  !  there  is  our  man ;  let  us  be  on  our 
guard. 

NER.  Ah  !  how  he  is  built ! 

SCENE  V. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  SBRIGANI. 

POUR.  (Remaining  on  the  side  from  which  he  enters, 
speaking  to  the  people,  who  are  following  him).  Well  ! 
what  ?  What  is  it  ?  What  is  the  matter  ?  The  devil  take 
the  silly  town  and  the  silly  people  in  it !  Not  to  be  able 
to  move  a  step  without  meeting  with  a  lot  of  boobies  who 
stare  at  you  and  laugh  in  your  face  !  Eh  !  gentlemen 
gapers,  attend  to  your  own  concerns,  and  allow  people  to 
pass  on  without  grinning  in  their  faces.  May  the  devil 
take  me,  if  I  do  not  pummel  the  first  whom  I  shall  catch 
laughing. 

SBR.  (Speaking  to  the  same  people).  What  is  the  matter, 
gentlemen?  what  does  this  mean?  with  whom  are  you 
quarrelling?  Are  folks  thus  to  make  a  jest  of  honest 
strangers  who  arrive  here  ? 

POUR.  This  is  a  sensible  man,  at  least. 

SBR.  What  behaviour  in  yours!  and  what  is  there  to 
laugh  at? 

POUR.  Very  good. 

SCMNHV.J  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  97 

SBR.  Is  there  anything  ridiculous  about  this  gentleman? 

POUR.  Yes. 

SBR.  Is  he  in  any  way  different  from  other  people  ? 

POUR.  Am  I  misshapen,  or  humpbacked  ? 

SBR.  You  should  know  how  to  treat  people. 

POUR.  That  is  well  said. 

SBR.  This  gentleman's  air  commands  respect. 

POUR.  That  is  true. 

SBR.  A  person  of  quality. 

POUR.  Yes.  A  gentleman  from  Limoges. 

SBR.  A  person  of  education. 

PGUR.  Who  has  studied  law.6 

SBR,  He  does  you  too  much  honour  by  coming  to  your 
town. 

POUR.   Undoubtedly. 

SBR.  This  gentleman  is  not  a  person  to  provoke  laughter. 

POUR!  Assuredly. 

SBR.  And  whoever  shall  laugh  will  have  to  deal  with 
me. 

POUR.  (To  Sbrigani}.  Sir,  I  am  infinitely  obliged  to 
you. 

SBR.  I  am  sorry,  Sir,  to  see  a  personage  like  you  re- 
ceived in  such  a  manner ;  and  I  ask  your  pardon  for  the 
town. 

POUR.  I  am  your  servant. 

SBR.  I  saw  you  this  morning,  Sir,  with  the  coach,  when 
you  were  breakfasting,  and  the  grace  with  which  you  ate 
your  bread,  immediately  made  me  conceive  a  friendship 
for  you;  and,  as  I  know  that  you  have  never  been  in 
these  parts,  and  that  you  are  altogether  new  to  them,  I 
am  very  glad  to  have  met  with  you,  to  offer  you  my  ser- 
vices on  this  arrival,  and  to  assist  you  in  your  behaviour 
amongst  this  people,  who  have  not  always  the  proper  con- 
sideration for  gentlemen. 

POUR.  You  are  doing  me  too  much  kindness. 

SBR.  I  have  already  said  to  you,  from  the  moment  I 
saw  you,  I  felt  an  inclination  towards  you. 

5  Of  course.  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  is  not  satisfied  with  being  a  person  of 
education,  but  says  that  he  "has  studied  law."  Afterwards,  in  the  twelfth 
Scene  of  the  second  Act,  he  denies  this. 

VOL.  III.  G 

98  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  f  ACT  I. 

POUR.  I  am  obliged  to  you. 

SBR.  Your  physiognomy  pleased  me. 

POUR.  It  is  too  much  honour  for  me. 

SBR.   I  perceived  something  honest  in  it. 

POUR.  I  am  your  servant. 

SBR.   Something  amiable. 

POUR.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

SBR.  Something  graceful. 

POUR.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

SBR.   Something  gentle. 

POUR.  Ah  !   ah  ! 

SBR.   Something  majestic. 

POUR.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

SBR.   Something  frank. 

POUR.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

SBR.  And  something  cordial. 

POUR.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

SBR.   I  assure  you  that  I  am  entirely  yours. 

POUR.   I  am  under  great  obligations  to  you. 

SBR.   I  speak  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart. 

POUR.   I  believe  you. 

SBR.  If  I  had  the  honour  of  being  known  to  you,  you 
would  be  aware  that  I  am  a  man  thoroughly  sincere. 

POUR.  I  do  not  doubt  it. 

SBR.  An  enemy  to  all  roguery. 

POUR.  I  am  convinced  of  it. 

SBR.  And  incapable  of  disguising  my  sentiments. 

POUR.  That  is  what  I  think. 

SBR.  You  are  looking  at  my  dress,  which  is  unlike  other 
people's  ;  but  I  hail  from  Naples,  at  your  service,  and  I 
wished  somewhat  to  preserve  the  fashion  of  dressing  and 
the  sincerity  of  my  country.6 

POUR.  That  is  quite  right.  As  for  me,  I  wished  to  be 
dressed  like  a  courtier  when  he  is  going  into  the  country. 

SBR.  Upon  my  word,  it  suits  you  better  than  any  of 
our  courtiers. 

POUR.  That  is  what  my  tailor  told  me.  The  dress  is 
suitable  and  rich,  and  it  will  attract  some  notice  herd 

6  The  dress  of  Sbrigani  is  the  traditional  one  of  Mascarille  and  Crispin, 
striped  red  and  white.  The  Neapolitans  had  the  reputation  of  being 
neither  very  sincere  nor  honest. 

SC«NB  vi.  |  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAQ.  99 

SBR.  Undoubtedly.     Shall  you  not  go  to  the  Louvre  ? 
POUR.  I  must  go  to  pay  my  court. 
SBR.  The  king  will  be  delighted  to  see  you. 
POUR.  I  think  so. 

SBR.  Have  you  fixed  upon  a  lodging  ? 
POUR.  No  ;  I  was  just  going  to  look  for  one. 
SBR.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  go  with  you  for  that  pur- 
pose ;  I  know  all  these  parts  well. 

SCENE  VI. — ERASTE,  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC, 
SBRIGANI. 

ERAS.  Ah  !  what  is  this  ?  What  do  I  see  ?  What  for- 
tunate meeting  !  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  !  How  de- 
lighted I  am  to  see  you  !  How  now !  it  seems  that  you 
have  a  difficulty  in  recognizing  me  ! 

POUR.  Sir,  I  am  your  servant. 

ERAS.  Is  it  possible  that  five  or  six  years  have  oblite- 
rated me  from  your  memory,  and  that  you  do  not  recognize 
the  best  friend  of  all  the  Pourceaugnac  family  ? 

POUR.  Pray,  pardon  me.  (Softly,  to  Sbrigani}.  Upon 
my  word,  I  do  not  know  who  he  is. 

ERAS.  There  is  not  a  Pourceaugnac  at  Limoges  whom  I 
do  not  know,  from  the  greatest  to  the  least ;  I  visited 
only  them  at  the  time  I  was  there,  and  I  had  the  honour 
of  seeing  you  nearly  every  day. 

POUR.  It  is  I  who  had  the  honour,  Sir. 

ERAS.  You  do  not  recollect  my  face  ? 

POUR.  Yes,  indeed.  (To  Sbrigant).  I  do  not  know 
him. 

ERAS.  You  do  not  remember  that  I  had  the  pleasure  of 
taking  wine  with  you,  I  do  not  know  how  many  times ! 

POUR.  Excuse  me.  (To  Sbrigani}.  I  do  not  know 
who  this  is. 

ERAS.  What  do  you  call  that  innkeeper  at  Limoges  who 
gives  such  good  cheer? 

POUR.  Petit-Jean? 

ERAS.  That  is  he.  We  generally  went  together  to  him 
to  feast.  What  do  you  call  that  place  at  Limoges  where 
people  promenade  ? 

POUR.  The  cemetery  of  the  Arenes  ? 

ERAS.  Exactly.      That  is  where  I  passed  such  sweet 

JOO  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  I. 

hours  in  enjoying  your  pleasant  conversation.  You  do  not 
recollect  all  that  ? 

POUR.  Excuse  me ;  I  am  beginning  to  remember.  (To 
Sbrigani}.  May  the  devil  take  me  if  I  recollect ! 

SBR.  (Softly,  to  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  There  are 
a  hundred  things  like  that  which  pac3  out  of  one's  head. 

ERAS.  But  pray  embrace  me,  I  beg,  and  let  us  renew  the 
bonds  of  our  old  friendship. 

SBR.  (To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  That  is  a  man 
who  loves  you  well. 

ERAS.  Just  tell  me  some  news  about  all  the  family. 

How  is  this  gentleman  your there  ....  the 

one  that  is  such  a  nice  fellow? 

POUR.   My  brother  the  consul  ? T 

ERAS.  Yes. 

POUR.  He  could  not  be  better. 

ERAS.  Certainly  I  am  delighted  to  hear  it.  And  the 
one  who  is  always  so  good-tempered  ?  There,  the  gen- 
tleman, your  .... 

POUR.  My  cousin,  the  assessor? 

ERAS.  Precisely. 

POUR.  Ever  gay  and  sprightly. 

ERAS.  Upon  my  word  this  gives  me  great  pleasure.  And 
your  uncle,  the  .... 

POUR.  I  have  no  uncle. 

ERAS.  You  had  one,  though,  at  that  time. 

POUR.  No,  nothing  but  an  aunt. 

ERAS.  That  is  what  I  meant,  the  lady  your  aunt.  How 
is  she? 

POUR.  She  has  been  dead  these  six  months. 

ERAS.  Alas  !  poor  woman  !  she  was  such  a  good  crea- 
ture. 

POUR.  Then  there  is  my  nephew,  the  canon,  who  nearly 
died  of  small-pox. 

ERAS.  What  a  pity  that  would  have  been  ! 

POUR.   Did  you  know  him  also  ? 

ERAS.  Indeed  ;  did  I  know  him  ?  A  tall  fine-made 
fellow. 

T  Consul  was  the  name  given  to  municipal  officers  in  the  southern  pro- 
vinces of  France. 

SCENE  vi.l  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGKAC.  IOI 

POUR.  Not  of  the  tallest ! 

ERAS.  No,  but  well  built. 

POUR.  Eh !  yes. 

ERAS.  Who  is  your  nephew  ? 

POUR.  Yes. 

ERAS.  Son  of  your  brother  and  sister  r 

POUR.  Exactly  so. 

ERAS.  Canon  of  the  church  of what  do  you 

call  it  ? 

POUR.  St.  Stephen. 

ERAS.  That  is  he.     I  do  not  know  any  other. 

POUR.   {To  Sbrigani).     He  mentions  the  whole  family. 

SBR.   He  knows  you  better  than  you  are  aware  of. 

POUR.  From  what  I  perceive,  you  stopped  a  long  while 
in  our  town. 

ERAS.  Two  whole  years. 

POUR.  Then  you  were  there  when  the  governor  stood 
sponsor  to  my  cousin,  the  deputy-assessor's8  child? 

ERAS.  Indeed  I  was  one  of  the  first  invited. 

POUR.  That  was  an  elegant  affair. 

ERAS.  Yes,  very  elegant ! 

POUR.  A  well-served  collation. 

ERAS.  There  is  no  doubt  of  that. 

POUR.  Then  you  must  have  witnessed  the  quarrel  which 
I  had  with  that  gentleman  from  Perigord. 

ERAS.  Yes. 

POUR.   Zounds !  he  found  his  match. 

ERAS.  Ha!  ha! 

POUR.  He  gave  me  a  slap,  but  I  told  him  what  I  thought 
of  him. 

ERAS.  To  be  sure.  However,  I  insist  upon  you  taking 
no  other  quarters  than  with  me. 

POUR.  Really  I  could  not  think  .    .    . 

ERAS.  Are  you  joking?  I  shall  not  allow  my  best  friend 
to  stop  anywhere  but  with  me. 

POUR.  It  would  be  ... 

ERAS.  No,  may  the  devil  fly  away  with  me  !  You  shall 
stay  with  me. 

8  The  original  has  I'elu.    See  Tartu/e,  Vol.  II.,  note  46. 

102  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  i. 

SBR.  ( To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  Since  he  is  ob- 
stinately bent  upon  it,  I  advise  you  to  accept  this  offer. 

ERAS.  Where  is  your  luggage  ? 

POUR.  I  left  it  with  my  servant  where  the  coach 
stopped. 

ERAS.  Let  us  send  some  one  to  fetch  them. 

POUR.  No,  I  have  forbidden  him  to  stir,  unless  I  came 
myself,  for  fear  of  some  roguery. 

SBR.   That  was  a  prudent  precaution. 

POUR.  One  must  be  somewhat  careful  in  these  parts. 

ERAS.  We  see  that  clever  people  are  up  to  everything. 

SBR.  I  will  accompany  this  gentleman,  and  conduct 
him  back  again  to  where  you  wish. 

ERAS.  Do  so.  I  shall  be  glad  to  give  some  orders,  and 
you  have  but  to  come  back  to  this  house. 

SBR.  We  shall  be  with  you  shortly. 

ERAS.  (  To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  I  shall  expect 
you  impatiently. 

POUR.  (To  Sbrigam).  This  is  an  acquaintance  which 
I  did  not  dream  of. 

SBR.   He  has  the  air  of  a  gentleman. 

ERAS.  {Alone}.  Upon  my  word,  Monsieur  de  Pour- 
ceaugnac, we  will  attack  you  on  all  sides.  Things  are 
prepared  ;  I  have  but  to  give  the  signal.  Hullo  ! 

SCENE  VII. — ERASTE,  AN  APOTHECARY. 

ERAS.  I  believe,  Sir,  you  are  the  doctor  who  has  been 
spoken  to  in  my  name. 

APOTH.  No,  Sir;  I  am  not  the  doctor;  that  honour 
does  not  belong  to  me;  I  am  but  an  apothecary,  an  un- 
worthy apothecary,  at  your  service. 

ERAS.  And  the  doctor,  is  he  within  ? 

APOTH.  Yes.  He  is  just  occupied  in  dispatching  some 
patients ;  and  I  will  go  and  tell  him  that  you  are  here. 

ERAS.  No,  do  not  stir.  I  will  wait  until  he  has  done. 
It  is  to  place  under  his  care  a  certain  relation  of  ours,  of 
whom  we  spoke,  and  who  has  been  attacked  by  a  fit  of 
madness,  which  we  should  be  very  glad  to  have  cured 
before  he  is  married. 

APOTH.  I  know  what  it  is,  I  know  all  about  it ;  and  I 
was  with  him  when  they  came  to  speak  to  him  about  this 

SCENE  VXI.J  MONSIEUR    DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  103 

matter.  Indeed,  you  could  not  have  addressed  yourself 
to  an  abler  doctor.  He  is  a  man  who  knows  medicine 
thoroughly,  as  I  know  my  alphabet,9  and  who  would  not 
abate  one  iota  of  the  rules  of  the  ancients,  even  if  people 
die  through  it.  Yes,  he  always  follows  the  high-road,  the 
high  road,  and  does  not  try  to  find  out  mares'  nests  ;  and 
for  all  the  gold  of  the  world,  he  would  not  cure  any  one 
with  other  remedies  than  those  which  the  faculty  pre- 
scribes. 

ERAS.  He  does  right.  A  patient  ought  not  to  wish  to 
be  cured  unless  the  faculty  permits  it. 

APOTH.  It  is  not  because  we  are  fast  friends  that  I  speak 
thus:  but  it  is  really  a  treat  to  be  his  patient.  I  had 
rather  die  by  his  remedies  than  be  cured  by  those  of  some 
one  else.10  For,  whatever  may  happen,  one  is  certain  that 
things  are  done  in  regular  order ;  and  when  one  dies  under 
his  treatment,  your  heirs  have  nothing  to  reproach  you 
with. 

ERAS.  That  is  a  great  consolation  to  a  defunct. 

APOTH.  Assuredly.  One  is  at  least  glad  to  have  died 
methodically.  For  the  rest,  he  is  not  one  of  those  doctors 
who  haggle  with  diseases ;  he  is  an  expeditious  man,  ex- 
peditious, who  loves  to  dispatch  his  patients ;  and  when 
one  has  to  die,  it  is  accomplished  with  the  greatest  possible 
quickness. 

ERAS.  In  fact,  there  is  nothing  like  having  done  with  a 
thing  promptly. 

APOTH.  That  is  true.  What  is  the  good  of  haggling  so 
much,  and  so  much  beating  about  the  bush  ?  One  ought 
to  know  quickly  the  short  or  long  of  an  illness. 

ERAS.     You  are  right. 

APOTH.  Already  there  are  three  of  my  children  whose 
complaints  he  has  done  me  the  honor  to  treat,  who  have 
died  in  less  than  four  days,  and  who  in  some  one  else's 
hands  would  have  languished  for  three  months  or  more. 

ERAS.  It  is  pleasant  to  have  such  friends. 

APOTH.  No  doubt  it  is.  I  have  only  two  children  left, 
of  whom  he  takes  care  as  if  they  were  his  own ;  he  treats 

9  The  original  has  ma  Croix-de-par-Dieu. 

10  Moliere  has  already  employed  this  joke  in  Love  is  the  best  Doctor, 
Act  ii.,  Scene  5  (see  Vol.  II  ) 

104  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT ,. 

and  controls  them  at  his  own  fancy,  without  my  interfering 
in  anything ;  and  generally,  when  I  come  back  from  town, 
I  am  quite  surprised  to  find  them  bled  or  purged  by  his 
orders. 

ERAS.  Most  tender  cares,  these. 

APOTH.  Here  he  is,  here  he  is,  here  he  comes. 

SCENE  VIII. — ERASTE,  FIRST  DOCTOR,  AN  APOTHECARY, 
A  PEASANT,  A  FEMALE  PEASANT. 

PEAS.  (To  the  Doctor).  He  can  bear  it  no  longer,  Sir  ; 
and  he  says  that  he  feels  the  most  awful  pains  in  his 
head. 

IST  Doc.  The  patient  is  a  fool:  seeing  that,  in  the 
complaint  with  which  he  is  attacked  he  ought  not,  accord- 
ing to  Galen,  to  suffer  from  the  head  at  all,  but  from  the 
spleen. 

PEAS.  Be  that  as  it  may,  Sir,  he  has  nevertheless  had 
looseness  of  the  bowels  for  the  last  six  months. 

IST  Doc.  Good  !  that  is  a  sign  that  it  is  getting  clear 
inside.  I  will  come  and  see  him  in  two  or  three  days ;  but, 
should  he  die  before  that  time,  do  not  fail  to  let  me  know ; 
for  it  is  not  etiquette  for  a  doctor  to  visit  the  dead. 

F.  PEAS.  {To  the  Doctor).  My  father,  Sir,  is  getting 
worse  and  worse. 

IST  Doc.  That  is  not  my  fault.  I  am  prescribing  him 
remedies :  why  does  he  not  get  better  ?  How  many  times 
has  he  been  bled  ? 

F.  PEAS.   Fifteen  times,  Sir,  in  twenty  days. 

IST  Doc.  Fifteen  times  bled? 

F.  PEAS.  Yes. 

IST  Doc.  And  he  does  not  get  better? 

F.  PKAS.  No,  Sir. 

IST  Doc.  That  shows  that  the  disease  is  not  in  the 
blood.  We  shall  purge  him  as  many  times,  to  find  out 
whether  it  is  not  in  the  humours ;  and,  if  that  does  not 
succeed,  we  shall  send  him  to  take  the  waters. 

APOTH.  That  is  the  end ;  that  must  be  the  end  of  all 
physic.11 

11  When  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  is  acted  at  the  Comedie  Fratifaise,  this 
scene  is  omitted. 

SCHNK  x.]  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  105 

SCENE  IX.— ERASTE,  FIRST  DOCTOR,  APOTHKCARY. 

ERAS.  {To  Doctor).  It  is  I,  Sir,  who  sent  to  speak  to 
you,  a  few  days  ago,  about  a  relative  who  is  somewhat 
troubled  in  his  mind,  whom  I  wish  to  place  under  your 
care,  so  that  he  may  be  cured  with  greater  facility,  and 
may  be  least  noticed. 

IST  Doc.  Yes,  Sir  ;  I  have  already  prepared  everything, 
and  promise  you  to  take  the  utmost  care  of  him. 

ERAS.  He  is  just  coming  now. 

IST  Doc.  That  happens  very  fortunately,  and  I  have 
here  one  of  my  old  friends  with  me,  with  whom  I  shall  be 
glad  to  consult  upon  his  illness. 

SCENE  X. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  ERASTE,  FIRST 
DOCTOR,  AN  APOTHECARY. 

ERAS.  {To  Monsieur  de  Peurceaugnac).  Some  little 
unforeseen  business  obliges  me  to  go  away  just  now  {Point- 
ing to  the  Doctor) ;  but  I  leave  you  in  the  hands  of  this 
gentleman, )who  will  take  care,  for  my  sake,  to  treat  you 
as  well  as  possible. 

IST  Doc.  The  duty  of  my  profession  enjoins  me  to  do 
so;  and  it  is  quite  sufficient  that  you  charge  me  with  this 
care. 

POUR.  {Aside).  It  is  his  steward  ;  and  he  must  be  a 
man  of  position. 

IST  Doc.  ( To  Eraste).  Yes,  I  assure  you  that  I  shall 
treat  this  gentleman  methodically,  and  according  to  every 
rule  of  our  art. 

POUR.  Good  Heavens  !  there  is  no  need  of  so  many 
ceremonies ;  and  I  have  not  come  here  to  cause  any  in- 
convenience. 

IST  Doc.  Such  an  occupation  gives  me  only  joy. 

ERAS.  (  To  the  Doctor).  Here  are  six  pistoles  in  advance, 
besides  what  I  have  promised  you. 

POUR.  No,  if  you  please,  I  shall  not  allow  you  to  go  to 
any  expense,  and  you  must  not  send  out  for  anything  on 
my  account. 

ERAS.  Pray  do  not  trouble  yourself;  it  is  not  for  what 
you  imagine. 

POUR.  I  beg  of  you  to  treat  me  only  as  a  friend. 

106  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT* 

ERAS.  That  is  what  I  intend  to  do.  (Softly  to  the  Doctor). 
I  recommend  you  above  all  not  to  let  him  slip  out  of 
your  hands  ;  for  he  sometimes  attempts  to  escape. 

IST  Doc.  Be  not  uneasy. 

ERAS.  (70  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac}.  I  pray  you  to 
excuse  my  incivility. 

POUR.  Do  not  mention  it ;  and  you  are  doing  me  too 
much  honour. 

SCENE  XI. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  FIRST  DOCTOR, 
SECOND  DOCTOR,  AN  APOTHECARY. 

IST  Doc.  It  is  a  great  honour  to  me,  Sir,  to  have  been 
selected  to  attend  to  you. 

POUR.  I  am  your  servant. 

IST  Doc.  This  is  a  colleague  of  mine,  an  able  man, 
with  whom  I  am  going  to  consult  about  the  manner  in 
which  we  shall  treat  you. 

POUR.  There  is  no  need  of  so  many  ceremonies,  I  tell 
you;  and  I  am  a  man  to  be  satisfied  with  ordinary  things. 

IST  Doc.  Come,  place  chairs. 

(  Two  Servants  enter  and  place  chairs. 

POUR.  (Aside).  These  are  very  lugubrious  servants  for 
a  young  man  to  keep. 

IST  Doc.   Come,  Sir;  take  a  seat,  Sir. 

(The  two  Doctors  make  Monsieur  de  Pour- 
ceaugnac  sit  down  between  them. 

POUR.  {Taking  a  seat}.  Your  very  humble  servant. 
( The  two  Doctors  each  take  one  of  his  hands  to  feel  his 
pulse}.  What  does  this  mean  ? 

IST  Doer.  Do  you  eat  well,  Sir?12 

POUR.  Yes ;  and  drink  better  still. 

IST  Doc.  So  much  the  worse.  This  great  craving  for 
cold  and  wet  is  an  indication  of  the  heat  and  dryness  in 
the  inside.  Do  you  sleep  soundly  ? 

POUR.  Yes,  when  I  have  supped  well. 

12  In  Plautus'  Afenachmi ;  or,  the  twin-brothers,  Menaechmus  Sosicles 
is  mistaken  for  his  twin-brother,  Menaechmus  of  Epidamnus,  and  behaves 
so  oddly,  that  the  tatter's  father-in-law  and  wife  consider  him  mad.  and 
wish  him  to  be  treated  by  a  doctor.  The  real  Mensechmus  makes  his  ap- 
pearance (Act  v.,  Scene  3)  and  the  scene  between  him  and  the  physician, 
who  thinks  he  is  insane,  is  like  the  one  between  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  and 
the  two  doctors. 

SCENE  xi. J  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  \VJ 

IST  Doc.  Have  you  any  dreams? 

POUR.  Sometimes. 

IST  Doc.  Of  what  nature  are  they? 

POUR.  Of  the  nature  of  dreams.  What  sort  of  a  con- 
versation is  this? 

IST  Doc.  Your  dejections,  how  are  they? 

POUR.  Upon  my  word,  I  understand  nought  of  these 
questions ;  and  I  prefer  something  to  drink. 

IST  Doc.  A  little  patience.  We  are  going  to  argue 
about  your  case  before  you ;  and  we  shall  do  so  in  French, 
to  be  the  more  intelligible. 

POUR.  What  great  arguing  is  needed  to  eat  a  morsel? 

IST  Doc.  Since  one  cannot  cure  a  disease,  unless  one 
knows  it  perfectly,  and  since  one  cannot  know  it  per- 
fectly without  establishing  a  particular  theory,  and  its 
real  kind,  by  its  diagnostic  and  prognostic  signs;  you  will 
allow  me,  my  elder  colleague,  to  enter  upon  the  conside- 
ration of  the  disease  in  question,  before  referring  to  the 
therapeutics,  and  the  remedies  which  we  shall  determine 
upon  for  the  perfect  cure  of  said  disease.  I  say,  then, 
Sir,  with  your  leave,  that  our  patient  here  present  is 
unfortunately  attacked,  affected,  possessed,  and  troubled 
by  that  kind  of  madness  which  we  very  aptly  denominate 
hypochondriacal  melancholy;  a  kind  of  madness  very 
troublesome,  and  which  requires  nothing  less  than  an 
Esculapius  like  yourself,  consummate  in  our  art  ;13  you,  I 
say,  who  have  grown  old  in  harness,  as  they  say,  and 
through  whose  hands  so  many  of  all  sorts  have  passed. 
I  call  it  hypochondriacal  melancholy  to  distinguish  it  from 
the  two  others ;  for  the  celebrated  Galen  has,  as  he  always 
does,  learnedly  established  three  kinds  of  this  disease, 
which  we  call  melancholy,  so  named  not  only  by  the 
Latins,  but  also  by  the  Greeks ;  which  is  to  be  well  ob- 
served in  our  case  :  the  first,  which  emanated  from  the 
really  bad  state  of  the  brain;  the  second,  which  proceeds 
entirely  from  the  blood,  made  and  become  atrabilious  ; 
the  third,  called  hypochondriacal,  which  is  ours,  and 
which  is  caused  by  some  defect  of  some  part  of  the  lower 

13  When  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  is  acted,  the  passage  from  "you,  I  say,*1 
until  "  proved  to  suffer  from,"  is  omitted. 

108  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  i. 

abdomen,  and  of  the  lower  region,  but  particularly  from 
the  spleen,  the  heat  and  inflammation  of  which  drives  to 
the  brain  of  our  patient  a  great  deal  of  fuliginous,  thick, 
and  gross  matter,  the  black  and  malignant  vapour  of 
which  causes  depravation  of  the  functions  of  the  principal 
faculty,  and  produces  the  complaints,  by  which,  according 
to  our  argument,  he  is  manifestly  attacked,  and  proved  to 
suffer  from.  That  it  be  so  :  and  as  an  incontestable  diag- 
nosis of  what  I  tell  yon,  you  have  only  to  consider  thv; 
great  seriousness  which  you  perceive,  this  gloominess,  ac 
companied  by  fear  and  mistrust,  pathognomonic  and  indi- 
vidual signs  of  this  complaint,  so  well  described  by  the  di- 
vine old  man,  Hippocrates ;  this  physiognomy,  these  red 
and  haggard  eyes,  this  great  beard,  this  state  of  the  body, 
thin,  emaciated,  black,  and  hairy  ;  which  signs  show  him 
tc  be  very  much  affected  by  this  disease,  proceeding  from 
the  illness  of  hypochondriasis ;  which  disease,  by  lapse  of 
time,  having  become  naturalized,  chronic,  habitual,  and 
ingrained  in  him,  might  well  degenerate  either  into  mania, 
or  into  consumption,  or  into  apoplexy,  or  even  into  de- 
termined phrenzy  and  raving.  All  this  taken  for  granted, 
since  a  disease  well  defined  is  half  cured,  for  ignotinulla 
est  curatio  morbi,™  it  will  not  be  difficult  to  determine  the 
remedies  which  we  must  give  to  this  gentleman.  Firstly, 
to  cure  this  obdurate  plethora,  and  this  luxuriant  cacochy- 
my  throughout  the  body,  I  am  of  the  opinion  that  he 
should  be  liberally  phlebotomized  ;  that  is  to  say,  that  he 
should  be  bled  frequently  and  copiously,  in  the  first  place, 
at  the  basilic  vein,  then  at  the  cephalic  vein,15  and  even, 
if  the  disease  be  obstinate,  that  the  vein  in  the  forehead 
should  be  opened,  and  that  the  opening  should  be  large, 
that  the  thick  blood  may  come  out ;  and  at  the  same 
time  that  he  should  be  purged,  deobstructed,  and  evacuated 
by  proper  and  suitable  purgatives  ;  that  means  by  chola- 
gogues,  melanogogues,16  et  cetera;  and  as  the  real  source  of 

14  There  is  no  cure  for  a  disease  which  is  not  known. 

15  The  basilic  vein  was  the  middle  vein  of  the  right   arm  ;  the  cephalic 
vein,  a  vein  running  along  the  arm,  so  named  because  the  ancients  used  to 
open  it  for  disorders  of  the  head. 

16  A  chologogue  is  a  cathartic  to  carry  off  the  bile ;  a  melanogogue  a 
remedy  to  drive  out  black  malignant  matter. 

SCENE  xi.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  109 

all  the  evil  is  either  a  gross  or  a  feculent  humour,  or  else  a 
black  and  thick  vapour,  which  obscures,  infects,  and  con- 
taminates the  animal  spirit,  it  is  proper  that  he  should 
afterwards  take  a  bath  of  soft  and  clean  water,  with  plenty 
of  whey,  to  purify,  by  the  water,  the  feculence  of  the  gross 
humours,  and  to  clear,  by  the  milk,  the  blackness  of  this 
vapour :  but,  before  all  things,  I  think  it  right  to  amuse 
him  by  agreeable  conversations,  songs  and  musical  instru- 
ments, to  which  we  might  add  some  dancers  without  any 
objection,  so  that  by  their  movements,  nimbleness,  and 
agility  they  may  excite  and  awaken  the  stagnation  of  his 
benumbed  spirits,  which  occasions  the  thickness  of  his 
blood,  by  which  this  disease  is  caused.  These  are  the  reme- 
dies of  which  I  have  been  thinking,  to  which  many  other 
and  better  ones  might  be  added  by  this  gentleman  our 
master  and  senior,  according  to  the  experience,  judgment, 
knowledge,  and  sufficiency  which  he  has  acquired  in  our 
art.  Dtxi. 

2d  Doc.  Heaven  forbid,  Sir,  that  I  should  entertain  the 
thought  of  adding  aught  to  what  you  have  just  said  !  You 
have  discoursed  so  well  on  all  the  signs,  symptoms,  and 
causes  of  this  gentleman's  complaint  ;  the  argument  which 
you  have  produced  is  so  learned  and  beautiful  that  it  is 
impossible  for  him  not  to  be  mad  and  hypochondriacally 
melancholic ;  and  should  he  not  be,  he  must  become  so 
for  the  sake  of  the  beautiful  things  which  you  have  said, 
and  for  the  justness  of  the  reasoning  which  you  have  pro- 
duced. Yes,  Sir,  you  have  very  graphically  depicted,  gra- 
phic depinxisti,  everything  that  pertains  to  this  disease. 
Nothing  could  be  more  learnedly,  wisely,  ingeniously  con- 
ceived, thought-out,  imagined,  than  that  which  you  have 
pronounced  on  this  complaint,  whether  regarded  as  diagno- 
sis, prognosis,  or  therapeutics  ;  and  nothing  remains  for  me 
to  do  here  but  to- congratulate  this  gentleman  upon  having 
fallen  into  your  hands,  and  to  tell  him  that  he  ought  to  be 
only  too  happy  to  be  mad,  to  prove  the  efficacy  and  gen- 
tleness of  the  remedies  which  you  have  so  judiciously  pro- 
posed. I  approve  of  them  all,  manibus  et  pedibus  descendo 
in  tuam  sententtam.™  All  that  I  would  wish  to  add  is  to 

17  "  I  am  hand  and  feet  of  your  opinion,''  because  in  the  Roman  Senate 

110  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  I. 

make  the  blood-lettings  and  purgatives  in  odd  numbers, 
numero  deus  imparc  gaudetf*  to  take  the  whey  before  the 
bath ;  to  apply  a  bandage  with  salt  to  his  forehead  (salt 
is  the  symbol  of  wisdom) ;  to  have  the  walls  of  his  room 
whitewashed,  in  order  to  dissipate  the  gloom  of  his  spirits, 
album  est  disgregativum  visits;™  and  to  give  him  by-and-by 
a  small  clyster,  to  serve  as  a  prelude  and  introduction  to 
those  judicious  remedies,  from  which,  if  he  is  to  be  cured 
at  all,  he  ought  to  receive  relief.  May  Heaven  grant  that 
these  remedies,  which  are  yours,  Sir,  may  prove  successful, 
according  to  our  intention  ! 

POUR.  Gentlemen,  I  have  been  listening  to  you  for  this 
hour.  Are  we  playing  a  comedy  here  ? 

IST  Doc.   No,  Sir,  we  are  not  playing  at  all. 

POUR.  What  is  all  this  ?  and  what  do  you  mean  by  all 
this  gibberish  and  foolery  ? 

IST  Doc.  Good  !  he  insults  us  !  that  is  a  diagnosis 
which  was  wanting  for  the  confirmation  of  the  disease ; 
and  this  might  be  turning  to  mania. 

POUR.  (Aside}.  With  whom  have  I  been  placed  here  ? 
(Jfe  expectorates  two  or  three  times). 

IST  Doc.  Another  diagnosis;    frequent  expectoration. 

POUR.  Let  us  drop  this,  and  get  away  from  here. 

IST  Doc.  Another  still ;  the  anxiety  to  be  moving. 

POUR.  But  what  is  all  this  affair,  and  what  do  you  want 
•with  me  ? 

IST  Doc.  To  cure  you,  according  to  the  order  which 
has  been  given  us. 

POUR.  To  cure  me  ? 

IST  Doc.  Yes. 

POUR.  Zounds  !  I  am  not  ill. 

IST  Doc.  A  bad  sign,  when  a  patient  does  not  feel  his 
complaint. 

POUR.  I  tell  you  that  I  am  very  well. 

IST  Doc.  We  know  better  than  you  how  you  are  ;  and 
we  are  physicians  who  see  clearly  into  your  constitution. 

those  who  were  of  the  same  opinion  as  the  proposer  of  a  certain  law,  went 
on  his  side,  and  even  sometimes  applauded. 

18  This  is  a  phrase  from  the  eighth  eclogue  of  Virgil,  "  An  odd  number 
pleases  the  god." 

19  White  wearies  the  sight. 

SC«N«XIII.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  Ill 

POUR,  if  you  are  physicians,  I  have  no  business  with 
you ;  and  I  do  not  care  a  straw  for  physic. 

IST  Doc.  Hum  !  hum  !  This  man  is  more  mad  than 
we  thought. 

POUR.  My  father  and  mother  would  never  take  medi- 
cine, and  they  both  died  without  doctor's  assistance. 

IST  Doc.  I  am  no  longer  surprised  that  they  have  pro- 
duced a  son  who  is  bereft  of  his  senses.  (To  the  second 
Doctor).  Let  us  proceed  to  the  cure;  and  by  the  ex- 
hilarating gentleness  of  harmony,  soften,  mitigate,  and 
calm  the  acerbity  of  his  spirits,  which  I  see  on  the  point 
of  becoming  inflamed.110 

SCENE  XII. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC. 

What  the  devil  is  this?  Have  the  people  of  these  parts 
taken  leave  of  their  wits?  I  have  never  seen  anything 
like  it,  and  I  understand  nothing  about  it. 

SCENE  XIII. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  Two  GRO- 
TESQUE DOCTORS,  They  first  all  sit  down,  the  Doctors 
rise  several  times  to  M.  de  Pourceaugnac,  who 
rises  as  often  to  return  the  compliment. 

THE  TWO  Doers.  Good  day,  good  day,  good  day,n 
Do  not  allow  yourself  to  be  killed 
By  melancholic  grief. 
We  will  make  you  laugh 
With  our  harmonious  songs. 
It  is  only  to  cure  you 
That  we  have  come  hither. 
Good  day,  good  day,  good  day. 

i  ST  Doc.  Madness  is  nothing  else 

But  melancholy. 
The  patient  need  not  despair. 
If  he  will  but  take  a  little  recreation. 
Madness  is  nothing  else 
But  melancholy. 

50  The  consultation  of  the  two  doctors  is  only  a  very  slight  caricature  of 
the  nonsense  spoken  by  physicians  in  Moliere's  time. 
"  The  original  is  sung  in  Italian. 

112  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  i. 

2  D  Doc.    Come,  take  courage ;  sing,  dance,  laugh ; 

And,  if  you  would  do  better  still, 
When  you  feel  your  fit  of  madness  come  on, 
Take  a  glass  of  wine, 
And  sometimes  a  pinch  of  snuff, 
Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac. 
Come,  keep  gay. 

SCENE  XIV. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  Two  GRO- 
TESQUE DOCTORS,  MuMMERS.22 

Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Dance  of  the  Mummers  round  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac. 

SCENE  XV. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  AN  APOTHE- 
CARY, (carrying  a  syringe). 

APOTH.  This  is  a  little  remedy,  a  little  remedy,  which 
we  must  apply,  if  you  please,  if  you  please.23 

POUR.  How  now?    I  do  not  want  it ! 

APOTH.  It  has  been  prescribed,  Sir,  it  has  been  pre- 
scribed. 

POUR.  Ah !    what  a  noise ! 

APOTH.  Take  it,  Sir,  take  it ;  it  will  do  you  no  harm, 
it  will  do  you  no  harm. 

POUR.  Ah  ! 

APOTH.  It  is  just  a  little  injection,  a  little  injection, 
gentle,  gentle;  it  is  gentle,  gentle;  there,  Sir,  take  it, 
take  it ;  it  is  to  open  the  bowels,  to  open  the  bowels,  to 
open  the  bowels. 

SCENE  XVI. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  AN  APOTHE- 
CARY, Two  GROTESQUE  DOCTORS,  MUMMERS 

Two  Doer.  Take  it,  Sir,  take,  take  it,  it  will  do  you  no 
harm;  take  it,  Sir,  take  it,  Sir.24 

w  The  original  has  matassins,  a  word  derived  either  from  the  Spanish  or 
Italian,  and  signifying  ''  dancers  who  engage  in  a  mock  battle." 

M  Such  a  scene,  which  would  offend  now,  was  not  considered  indelicate, 
in  Moliere's  time. 

M  We  give  the  original  Italian,  because  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  refers  to  it 
in  the  Fourth  Scene  of  the  Second  Act :  "  Piglialo  su, — Signer  monsu  ; — 
Piglialo,  piglialo,  piglialo  su, — Che  non  ti  fara  male. — Piglialo  su  questo 
serviziale  : — Piglialo  su, — Signor  monsu; — Piglialo,  piglialo,  piglialo  su." 

SCENE  i.J  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  113 

POUR.   Go  to  the  devil ! 

{Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac,  putting  on  his  hat  to  protect 
himself  against  the  syringes,  is  followed  by  the  two  Doctors 
and  the  Mummers  ;  he  passes  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  and 
returns  to  place  himself  again  on  his  chair,  near  which  he 
finds  the  Apothecary  waiting  for  him,  which  compels  him  to 
sit  down;  the  two  Doctors  and  Mummers  re-enter  also.) 

Two  Doc.  Take  it  Sir,  take,  take  it,  it  will  do  you  no 
harm ;  take  it,  Sir,  take  it,  Sir. 

(Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  takes  to  his  heels  with  the 
chair  behind  him;  the  Apothecary  places  his  syringe  against 
it,  and  the  Doctors  and  Mummers  follow  him.)  a 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — FIRST  DOCTOR,  SBRIGANI. 

IST  Doer.  He  has  forced  every  obstacle  which  I  had 
placed  in  his  way,  and  has  withdrawn  himself  from  the 
remedies  which  I  began  to  apply  to  him. 

SBR.  That  is  being  a  great  enemy  to  himself,  to  fly 
from  remedies  so  salutary  as  yours. 

IST.  Doc.  It  is  a  sign  of  a  disordered  brain,  and  of 
a  corrupted  reason,  not  to  wish  to  be  cured. 

SBR.  You  would  have  cured  him  without  any  difficulty. 

IST  Doc.  Undoubtedly:  even  if  there  had  been  a  com- 
plication of  a  dozen  diseases. 

SBR.  He  makes  you  lose  fifty  well-earned  pistoles  how- 
ever. 

IST  Doc.  I !  I  do  not  intend  to  lose  them,  and  I  mean 
to  cure  him  in  spite  of  himself.  He  is  bound  to  take  my 

25  One  of  the  grotesque  doctors  was  represented  by  the  famous  musician 
Lulli,  who,  it  is  said,  wrote  the  words,  and  certainly  composed  the  music, 
of  the  thirteenth  scene.  He  played  under  the  name  of  Signor  Chiacchia- 
rone.  This  stands  probably  in  the  book  of  the  ballet  for  the  Italian 
chiacckierone,  which  means  ''talker  of  nonsense,"  and  under  which  name 
he  also,  at  a  later  period,  played  the  Muphti,  in  the  Citizen  who  apes  the 
Nobleman.  The  pursuit  after  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  is  sometimes  more  or 
less  prolonged.  After  he  has  left  the  stage,  he  reappears  through  the 
prompter's  box,  with  all  his  enemies  in  full  pursuit ;  he  then  takes  a  deal 
board,  and  knocks  down  one  of  the  mummers,  who  is  carried  off.  He 
wishes  to  raise  a  laugh,  and  often  succeeds. 

VOL.  III.  H 

114  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  H. 

remedies,  and  I  will  have  him  apprehended  wherever  I 
find  him,  as  a  deserter  from  physic,  and  as  having  com- 
mitted an  infraction  of  my  prescriptions. 

SBR.  You  are  right.  Your  remedies  were  certain,  and 
it  is  robbing  you  of  so  much  money. 

IST  Doc.  Where  can  I  get  some  news  about  him  ? 

SBR.  At  Mr.  Oronte's,  surely,  whose  daughter  he  has 
come  to  marry,  and  who,  knowing  nothing  of  the  infir- 
mity of  his  intended  son-in-law,  will  perhaps  make  haste  to 
conclude  this  marriage. 

IST  Doc.  I  will  go  and  speak  to  him  directly. 

SBR.  You  can  do  no  harm. 

IST  Doc.  He  is  bound  to  my  consultations,  and  a  pa- 
tient shall  not  play  the  fool  with  a  doctor. 

SBR.  That  is  very  well  said  of  you ;  and  if  you  take 
my  advice,  you  will  not  allow  him  to  be  married  until  you 
have  physicked  him  to  your  heart's  content. 

IST  Doc.  Leave  me  to  manage  it. 

SBR.  {Going  aside).  I,  on  my  part,  will  go  and  bring 
another  battery  into  play ;  and  the  father-in-law  shall  be 
duped  as  much  as  the  son-in-law. 

SCENE  II. — ORONTE,  FIRST  DOCTOR. 

IST  Doc.  You  have  a  certain  Monsieur  de  Pourceau- 
gnac  with  you,  Sir,  who  is  to  marry  your  daughter? 

ORON.  Yes;  I  am  expecting  him  from  Limoges,  and  he 
ought  to  have  arrived  by  this  time. 

IST  Doc.  So  he  is,  and  he  has  run  away  from  my  house, 
after  having  been  placed  there ;  but  I  forbid  you,  in  the 
name  of  the  Faculty,  to  go  on  with  the  marriage  which 
you  have  arranged,  until  I  have  duly  prepared  him  for  it, 
and  put  him  in  a  condition  to  raise  up  children  sound  in 
both  body  and  mind. 

ORON.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

IST  Doc.  Your  intended  son-in-law  has  been  constituted 
my  patient ;  his  disease,  which  I  have  been  told  to  cure, 
is  property  which  belongs  to  me,  and  which  I  reckon 
among  my  possessions ;  and  I  declare  to  you  that  I  will 
not  suffer  him  to  marry  before  he  has  given  satisfaction  to 
the  medical  Faculty,  and  taken  the  remedies  which  I  have 
prescribed  for  him. 

SCENBIU.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  HJ 

ORON.  Is  there  any  complaint? 

IST  Doc.  Yes. 

ORON.  And  which,  pray? 

IST  Doc.  Do  not  make  yourself  uneasy. 

ORON.  Is  it  some  complaint  which  .    .    . 

IST  Doc.  Doctors  are  bound  to  secrecy.  It  is  sufficient 
that  I  command  you,  you  and  your  daughter,  not  to  cele- 
brate, without  my  consent,  the  nuptials  with  him,  under 
penalty  of  incurring  the  displeasure  of  the  Faculty,  and  of 
being  overwhelmed  with  every  disease,  as  it  pleases  us. 

ORON.  If  that  is  the  case,  I  do  not  intend  to  conclude 
this  match. 

IST  Doc.  He  has  been  placed  under  my  care ;  and  he  is 
bound  to  be  my  patient. 

ORON.   That  is  alt  right. 

IST  Doc.  He  may  run  away  as  much  as  he  likes  ;  I  shall 
have  him  condemned,  by  decree,  to  be  cured  by  me. 

ORON.  You  have  my  consent. 

IST  Doc.  Yes,  he  must  be  cured  by  me,  or  die. 

ORON.  I  am  quite  willing. 

IST  Doc.  And,  if  I  do  not  find  him,  I  shall  hold  you  re- 
sponsible ;  and  I  shall  cure  you  instead  of  him. 

ORON.  I  am  in  good  health. 

IST  Doc.  That  does  not  matter.  I  must  have  a  patient; 
and  I  shall  take  whom  I  can. 

ORON.  Take  whom  you  like;* but  it  shall  not  be  me. 
(Alone}.  That  is  a  nice  argument ! 

SCENE    III. — ORONTE,  SBRIGANI,  disguised  as  a  Flemish 
merchant. 

SBR.  Sir,  by  your  leave,  I  am  a  foreign  Flemish  mer- 
chant, who  should  wish  to  ask  you  for  some  little  infor- 
mation.16 

ORON.  What  is  it,  Sir  ? 

SBR.  Pray,  put  your  hat  on,  Sir. 

ORON.  Tell  me,  Sir,  what  you  wish  ? 

2(5  Sbrigani  speaks  a  kind  of  broken  French,  which  we  thought  it  useless 
to  try  and  imitate  in  English.  Here  is  his  first  phrase  in  the  original : 
"  Montsir,  avec  le  votre  permissione,  je  suisse  un  (rancher  marchand  flam- 
ane,  qui  voudroit  bienne  vous  temandair  un  petit  novvel.'' 

Il6  MONSIEUR   DE   POUKCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  n. 

SBR.  I  shall  not  do  so,  Sir,  unless  you  put  your  hat  on 
your  head. 

ORON.  Be  it  so,  then.     What  is  the  matter  ? 

SBR.  Do  you  know  perchance  in  this  town  a  certain 
Mr.  Oronte? 

ORON.  Yes,  I  do  know  him. 

SBR.  And  what  kind  of  man  is  he,  Sir,  if  you  please  ? 

ORON.  He  is  a  man  like  other  men 

SBK.  I  ask  you,  Sir,  whether  he  is  a  rich  man,  who  is 
well  to  do  ? 

ORON.  Yes. 

SBR.  But  very  much  rich,  I  mean,  Sir  ? 

ORON.  Yes. 

SBR.   I  am  very  glad  of  it,  Sir. 

ORON.  But  why  so  ? 

SBR.  It  is,  Sir,  for  a  certain  reason,  which  is  of  conse- 
quence to  us. 

ORON.  But  once  more,  why? 

SBR.  It  is,  Sir,  because  this  Mr.  Oronte  gives  his 
daughter  in  marriage  to  a  certain  Monsieur  de  Pour- 
ceaugnac. 

ORON.  Well? 

SBR.  And  this  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac,  Sir,  is  a  man 
who  owes  a  great  deal  to  ten  or  twelve  Flemish  merchants 
who  have  come  hither. 

ORON.  This  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  owes  a  great 
deal  to  ten  or  twelve  merchants  ? 

SBR.  Yes,  Sir;  and  eight  months  ago,  we  have  obtained 
a  little  judgment  against  him ;  and  he  has  put  off  paying 
all  his  creditors  until  this  marriage,  if  this  Mr.  Oronte 
gives  him  his  daughter. 

ORON.  Ho  !  ho  !  he  has  put  his  creditors  off  till  then  ? 

SBR.  Yes,  Sir ;  and  we  expect  this  marriage  with  great 
anxiety. 

ORON.  (Aside).  This  is  not  a  bad  warning.  (Aloud*).  I 
wish  you  good  day. 

SBR.  I  thank  you,  Sir,  for  your  great  favour. 

ORON.  Your  very  humble  servant. 

SBR.  I  am  so,  Sir,  after  the  great  obligation  for  the  in- 
formation which  you  have  given  me.  (Alone,  after  having 
taken  off  his  beard  and  undone  the  Flemish  dress,  which  he 

SCBNBIV.]  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  117 

wears  over  his).  Things  are  not  going  badly.  Let  us  doff 
our  Flemish  disguise,  to  bethink  ourselves  of  other  con- 
trivances ;  and  let  us  endeavour  to  sow  so  much  suspicion 
and  division  between  the  father  and  the  son-in-law,  that  it 
shall  break  off  the  proposed  marriage.  Both  are  equally 
disposed  to  swallow  the  baits  which  are  held  out  to  them ; 
and,  amongst  us  rogues  of  the  first  water,  it  is  but  child's 
play,  when  we  meet  with  such  easy  game  as  that. 

SCENE  IV. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUXJNAC,  SBRIGANI. 

POUR.  {Believing  himself  alone).  Piglialo  su,  piglialo 
su,  signor  Monsu.  What  the  devil  is  it  ?  (Perceiving 
Sbrigani}.  Ah  ! 

SBR.  What  is  it,  Sir?     What  ails  you? 

POUR.  Everything  which  I  see  appears  an  enemy  to  me. 

SBR.  How? 

POUR.  You  do  not  know  what  has  happened  to  me  in 
that  house,  to  the  door  of  which  you  escorted  me  ? 

SBR.  Indeed  I  do  not.     What  is  it  ? 

POUR.  I  thought  to  be  treated  there  in  a  proper  man- 
ner. 

SBR.  Well? 

POUR.  I  leave  you  in  the  hands  of  this  gentleman. 
Doctors  dressed  in  black.  In  a  chair.  Feel  the  pulse. 
That  it  be  so.  He  is  mad.  Two  stout  boobies.  Big  hats. 
Buon  di.  buon  di.  Six  pantaloons.  Ta,  ra,  ta,  ta  ;  ta,  ra, 
ta,  ta.  Allegramente,  monsu  Pourceaugnac.  An  apothe- 
cary. Injection.  Take  it,  Sir;  take  it,  take  it.  It  is 
gentle,  gentle,  gentle.  It  is  to  loosen,  to  loosen,  loosen. 
Piglialo  su,  signor  Monsu;  piglialo,  piglialo,  piglialo  su. 
Never  have  I  been  so  crammed  with  silliness. 

SBR.  What  does  all  this  mean? 

POUR.  It  means  that  this  man,  with  his  great  embraces, 
is  a  scamp,  who  has  put  me  in  a  house  to  make  a  fool  of 
me  and  to  play  me  a  trick. 

SBR.   Can  it  be  possible? 

POUR.  Undoubtedly.  There  were  a  dozen  of  mad  people 
at  my  heels,  and  I  have  had  the  greatest  trouble  in  the 
world  to  escape  from  their  paws. 

SBR.  Look  at  that  now;  faces  are  very  deceptive!  I 
should  have  thought  him  the  most  affectionate  of  your 

Il8  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  11 

friends.  This  is  one  of  my  surprises,  how  it  is  possible 
that  there  are  such  rogues  in  the  world. 

POUR.  Do  I  not  smell  of  an  injection  ?  Just  see,  if  you 
please. 

SBR.  Eh !  there  is  something  very  like  it. 

POUR.  My  mind  and  nose  are  full  of  it ;  and  it  always 
seems  to  me  that  I  see  a  dozen  syringes  taking  aim  at  me. 

SBR.  This  is  very  great  wickedness !  and  men  must  be 
great  wretches  and  scoundrels. 

POUR.  Pray,  tell  me  the  whereabouts  of  Mr.  Oronte's 
house ;  I  shall  be  glad  to  go  there  by  and  by. 

SBR.  Ah!  ah!  you  are  then  of  an  amorous  disposition? 
and  you  have  heard  it  mentioned  that  this  Mr.  Oronte  has 
a  daughter. 

POUR.  Yes,  I  come  to  marry  her. 

SBR.  Come  to  mar  .    .    .  marry  her  ? 

POUR.  Yes. 

SBR.  In  marriage? 

POUR.   In  what  way  then? 

SBR.  Ah!  that  is  a  different  thing;  and  I  ask  your 
pardon. 

POUR.  What  does  this  mean  ? 

SBR.  Nothing. 

POUR.  But  once  more? 

SBR.  Nothing,  I  tell  you.     I  spoke  somewhat  hastily. 

POUR.  I  beseech  you  to  tell  me  what  there  is  beneath 
this. 

SBR.  No,  that  is  not  necessary. 

POUR.  Pray. 

SBR.  No,  not  at  all ;  I  beg  of  you  to  excuse  me. 

POUR.  Are  you  not  a  friend  ? 

SBR.  Yes;  one  could  not  be  more  so. 

POUR.  Then  you  should  conceal  nothing  from  me. 

SBR.  It  is  a  matter  which  concerns  the  interest  of  our 
neighbour. 

POUR.  Well,  to  induce  you  to  open  your  heart  to  me, 
here  is  a  little  ring,  which  I  pray  you  to  keep  for  my  sake. 

SBR.  Just  allow  me  to  consider  whether  I  can  do  so  in 
all  conscience.  (After  having  gone  a  few  steps  away  from 
Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac\  Here  is  a  man,  who  looks 
after  his  welfare,  who  tries  to  provide  for  his  daughter  as 

SCENB  v.]  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  I  1 9 

advantageously  as  possible;  and  we  must  do  harm  to  no 
one.  Those  things  are  well  known,  it  is  true ;  but  I  am 
going  to  reveal  them  to  a  man  who  is  ignorant  of  them ; 
and  it  is  forbidden  to  bruit  scandal  about  one's  neighbour, 
that  is  true.  But,  on  the  other  hand,  here  is  a  stranger 
whom  they  wish  to  deceive,  and  who,  in  good  faith,  comes 
to  marry  a  girl  whom  he  does  not  know,  and  kas  never 
seen ;  a  gentleman  full  of  candour,  to  whom  I  feel  well 
disposed,  who  does  me  the  honour  to  look  upon  me  as 
his  friend,  places  confidence  in  me,  and  gives  me  a  ring 
to  wear  for  his  sake.  (To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac). 
Yes,  I  find  that  I  can  tell  you  matters  without  wounding 
my  conscience ;  but  let  us  try  to  tell  them  to  you  as  mildly 
as  possible,  and  to  spare  people  as  much  as  we  can.  To 
tell  you  that  this  girl  leads  a  dishonourable  life,  would  be 
putting  it  somewhat  too  strongly:  let  us  seek,  to  explain 
ourselves,  some  milder  terms.  The  word  galante,  again, 
seems  not  enough  ;  that  of  consummate  coquette  appears  to 
me  to  serve  our  end,  and  I  may  employ  it  to  tell  you  hon- 
estly what  she  is.27 

POUR.  Then  they  wish  to  make  me  their  dupe. 

SBR.  Perhaps,  at  bottom,  there  is  not  so  much  harm  as 
the  world  believes ;  and  after  all,  there  are  people  who 
are  above  these  kinds  of  things,  and  who  do  not  believe 
that  their  honour  depends  .  .  . 

POUR.  I  am  your  servant.  I  do  not  care  to  wear  a 
head-dress  like  that ;  and,  in  the  Pourceaugnac  family,  we 
like  to  go  about  with  heads  erect. 

SBRI.  Here  comes  the  father. 

POUR.  That  old  man. 

SBRI.  Yes.     I  leave  you. 

SCENE  V. — ORONTE,  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC. 

POUR.   Good  day,  Sir,  good  day. 
ORON.  Your  servant,  Sir,  your  servant. 
POUR.  You  are  Mr.  Oronte,  is  it  not  so? 
ORON.   Yes. 

27  The  meaning  of  the  words  has  changed  since  Molidre's  time,  when 
galante  was  considered  a  milder  term  than  coquette  ;  now,  it  is  the  con- 
trary. 

120  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  fACTii. 

POUR.  And  I  am  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac. 

ORON.  So  much  the  better. 

POUR.  Think  you,  Mr.  Oronte,  that  the  Limousins  are 
fools  ? 

ORON.  Think  you,  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac,  that  the 
Parisians  are  idiots. 

POUR.  Do  you  imagine,  Mr.  Oronte,  that  a  man  like 
me  is  so  hungry  after  a  woman  ? 

ORON.  Do  you  imagine,  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac, 
that  a  girl  like  mine  is  so  hungry  after  a  husband  ? 

SCENE  VI. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  JULIA, 
ORONTE. 

JUL.  They  have  just  told  me,  father,  that  Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac  has  arrived.  Ah  !  this  is  he  no  doubt,  and 
my  heart  tells  me  so.  How  well  he  is  built !  how  well 
he  looks !  and  how  glad  I  am  to  have  such  a  husband ! 
Permit  me  to  embrace  him,  and  to  show  him  that  .  .  . 

ORON.  Gently,  daughter,  gently. 

POUR.  {Aside).  The  devil !  what  a  forward  hussy  !  How 
she  fires  up  at  once ! 

ORON.  I  should  much  like  to  know,  Monsieur  Pour- 
ceaugnac, by  what  reason  you  come  to  ... 

JUL.  (Approaches  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac,  looks  at 
htm  with  a  languishing  air,  and  endeavours  to  take  his  hand}. 
How  glad  I  am  to  see  you !  and  how  I  burn  with  im- 
patience .  .  . 

ORON.  Ah  !  daughter,  get  you  gone  from  that,  I  tell 
you. 

POUR.   (Aside).  Oh  !  oh !  what  a  sprightly  wench  ! 

ORON.  I  should  like  to  know,  I  say,  by  what  reason,  if 
you  please,  you  have  the  audacity  .  .  . 

{Julia  continues  the  same  by -play.) 

POUR.  Odds,  upon  my  life  ! 

ORON.    {To  Julia).    Again!  What  does  this  mean  ? 

JUL.  May  I  not  caress  the  husband  whom  you  have 
chosen  for  me  ? 

ORON.   No.     Go  in-doors. 

JUL.  Let  me  look  at  him. 

ORON.  Go  in-doors,  I  tell  you. 

JUL.  I  wish  to  stop  here,  if  you  please. 

SCENE  vn.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  121 

ORON.  But  I  do  not  please ;  and,  if  you  do  not  go  in 
directly  .    .    . 

JUL.  Very  well !  I  am  going. 

ORON.  My  daughter  is  a  fool  who  does  not  understand 
these  matters. 

POUR.  (Aside}.     How  delighted  she  is  with  us  ! 

ORON.  ( To  Julia,  who  has  remained  after  having  taken 
a  few  steps,  pretending  to  go}.  You  will  not  go  then  ? 

JUL.  When  am  I  going  to  be  married  to  this  gentle- 
man ? 

ORON.  Never;  and  you  are  not  for  him. 

JUL.  But  I  will  be  for  him,  since  you  have  promised 
him  to  me. 

ORON.  If  I  promised  him,  I  retract  my  promise. 

POUR.   (Aside}.     She  would  like  to  make  sure  of  me. 

JUL.  You  may  do  what  you  like ;  we  shall  be  married 
in  spite  of  all  the  world. 

ORON.  I  shall  hinder  you  well  enough,  both  of  you,  I 
assure  you.  What  a  frenzy  possesses  her  all  at  once. 

SCENE    VII. — ORONTE,    MONSIEUR    DE    POURCEAUGNAC. 

POUR.  Good  Heavens  !  intended  father-in-law,  do  not 
give  yourself  so  much  trouble ;  we  do  not  mean  to  carry 
off  your  daughter,  and  all  your  make-believes  will  lead  to 
nothing. 

ORON.  Neither  will  yours  have  any  great  effect. 

POUR.  Did  you  imagine  that  Leonard  de  Pourceaugnac 
is  the  man  to  buy  a  pig  in  a  poke,28  and  that  there  was 
not  sufficient  judgment  in  him  to  know  how  to  manage  to 
be  informed  about  people's  history,  and  to  find  out  whe- 
ther, in  marrying,  he  had  sufficient  guarantee  for  his 
honour. 

ORON.  I  do  not  know  what  this  means  ;  but  did  you 
take  it  into  your  head  that  a  man  of  sixty-three  years  of 
age  would  have  so  little  brains,  and  so  little  considera- 
tion for  his  daughter,  as  to  marry  her  to  a  man  who  has, 
you  know  what,  and  who  has  been  put  into  the  hands  of 
a  doctor  to  be  cured  ? 

28 The  original  has  chat  en poche ;  hence  the  English  word  "poke,"  for 
a  sack,  a  bag. 

122  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  11. 

POUR.  That  is  a  trick  which  has  been  played  upon  me  ; 
and  I  suffer  from  no  complaint. 

ORON.  The  doctor  told  me  so  himself. 

POUR.  The  doctor  told  a  lie  then.  I  am  a  gentleman, 
and  I  shall  ask  him  satisfaction  sword  in  hand. 

ORON.  I  know  what  I  ought  to  believe ;  and  you  will 
not  disabuse  my  mind  upon  that  subject,  nor  upon  the 
debts  which  you  have  put  off  until  you  were  married  to 
my  daughter. 

POUR.  Which  debts  ? 

ORON.  The  pretence  is  useless;  and  I  have  seen  the 
Flemish  merchant,  who,  with  other  creditors,  obtained 
judgment  against  you  eight  months  ago. 

POUR.  What  Flemish  merchant  ?  What  creditors  ? 
What  judgment  obtained  against  me  ? 

ORON.  You  know  well  enough  what  I  mean. 

SCENE  VIII. — MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC,    ORONTE, 
LUCETTE,  Defending  to  be  a  woman  from  Languedoc? 

Luc.  Ah !  you  are  here,  and  I  find  you  at  last,  after 
my  many  journeys  in  search  of  you.  Can  you  bear  to 
look  me  in  the  face,  you  scoundrel  ? 

POUR.  What  does  this  woman  want  ? 

Luc.  What  do  I  want,  you  infamous  wretch  !  You 
pretend  not  to  know  me;  and  you  do  not  blush,  rogue 
that  you  are,  you  do  not  blush  to  see  me.  (To  Oronte). 
I  do  not  know,  Sir,  whether  it  is  you,  as  I  have  been  told, 
whose  daughter  he  wants  to  marry ;  but  I  declare  to  you 
that  I  am  his  wife,  and  that  seven  years  ago,  when  he  was 
passing  through  P6zenas,  he  was  artful  enough,  with  his 
pretty  speeches  in  which  he  is  so  clever,  to  gain  my  heart, 

19  In  the  original,  Lucette  talks  a  kind  of  Languedoc  dialect,  which  it 
would  be  impossible  to  render  into  English.  The  first  few  sentences  are 
as  follows  :  "  Ah  !  tu  es  assi,  et  a  la  fi  yen  te  trobi  apres  abe  fait  tant  de 
passes.  Podes-tu,  scelerat,  podes-tu  sousteni  ma  bisto  .  .  .  Que  te  boli  in- 
fame  /  Tufas  semblan  de  non  me  pas  connouisse,  et  non  rougisses  pas, 
impudent,  que  tu  sios,  su  ne  rougisses  pas  de  me  beyre."  Some  commenta- 
tors say  that  this  is  not  the  correct  language  of  Languedoc  ;  but  it  has 
been  justly  observed  that  Lucette  speaks  Languedoc  enough  to  deceive 
Pourceaugnac,  and  French  enough  to  be  understood  by  the  spectators. 
Besides,  Moliere  only  says  that  she  pretends  to  be  a  woman  from  Langue- 
doc, btit  not  that  she  is  really  one. 

SCMJBIX.]  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  123 

and,  by  these  means,  persuaded  me  to  give  him  my  hand 
in  marriage. 

ORON.  Oh  !  oh  ! 

POUR.  What  the- devil  is  this? 

Luc.  The  wretch  left  me  three  years  afterwards,  under 
the  pretext  of  some  business  which  took  him  to  his  coun- 
try ;  and  since  then  I  have  had  no  tidings  from  him ;  but 
when  I  was  least  thinking  about  it,  they  warned  me  that 
he  was  coming  into  this  town  to  marry  again  another 
young  girl  which  her  parents  had  promised  him,  without 
knowing  anything  of  his  first  marriage.  I  immediately 
left  everything,  and  I  have  come  hither  as  quickly  as  I 
could,  to  oppose  this  criminal  union,  and  to  unmask  the 
most  wicked  of  men  before  the  eyes  of  the  world. 

POUR.  This  is  a  strange  audacity  ! 

Luc.  Rascal !  are  you  not  ashamed  to  insult  me,  in- 
stead of  being  confused  by  the  secret  reproaches  which 
your  conscience  must  make  you  ? 

POUR.  I,  I  am  your  husband  ? 

Luc.  Infamous  wretch  !  dare  you  say  the  contrary  ? 
Ah  !  you  know  well  enough,  to  my  misfortune,  that  all 
which  I  say  is  but  too  true  :  and  would  to  Heaven  it  were 
not,  and  that  you  had  left  me  in  the  state  of  innocence 
and  the  tranquility  of  mind  in  which  I  lived  before  your 
charms  and  your  deceits  unfortunately  made  me  leave  it ! 
I  would  not  then  be  obliged  to  cut  the  sorry  figure  which 
I  do  now,  to  see  a  cruel  husband  despise  all  the  love  I  had 
for  him  ;  and  to  leave  me  mercilessly  to  the  mortal  grief 
which  I  feel  at  his  perfidious  behaviour. 

ORON.  I  cannot  help  crying.  ( To  Monsieur  de  Pour- 
ccaugnac).  Go,  you  are  a  wicked  man. 

POUR.  I  know  nothing  about  all  this. 

SCENE  IX. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  NERINE,  Lu- 

CETTE,  ORONTE. 
NER.80  (counterfeiting  a  woman  from  Picardy).     Ah  !  I 

80  The  same  observation  which  I  have  made  in  note  29,  page  122.  with 
regard  to  Lucette's  dialect,  applies  to  Ne"rine's,  of  which  we  give  the  first 
four  sentences :  "  Ah!  jen'en  pis  plus  ;  je  sis  tout  essoflee  !  Ah  !  fin- 
faron,  tu  m'as  bienfait  courir  ;  tu  ne  m'ecaperas  mie.  Justice  I  justice  / 
je  boute  empechement  au  mariage.  (a  Orontt)  Ches  man  meri,  monsieur, 
etje  veux  faire p'udre  che  ban pindard-la." 

124  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  n. 

am  exhausted ;  I  am  all  out  of  breath !  Ah ;  you  braggart, 
you  have  led  me  a  fine  dance,  but  you  shall  not  escape 
me.  Justice  !  justice  !  I  put  a  stop  to  this  marriage.  {To 
Oronte).  He  is  my  husband,  Sir,  and  I  mean  to  have  the 
gallows-bird  hanged. 

POUR.   What,  another  one  ! 

ORON.  {Aside}.     The  devil,  what  sort  of  fellow  is  this  ? 

Luc.  And  what  do  you  mean,  with  your  putting  a  stop 
to,  and  your  hanging  ?  Is  that  man  your  husband  ? 

NER.  Yes,  Madam,  and  I  am  his  wife. 

Luc.  That  is  false,  and  it  is  I  who  am  his  wife ;  and,  if 
he  is  to  be  hanged,  it  is  I  who  will  have  him  hanged. 

NER.   I  understand  nothing  of  all  this  gibberish. 

Luc.  I  tell  you  that  I  am  his  wife. 

NER.   His  wife? 

Luc.  Yes. 

NER.  I  tell  you  once  more  that  it  is  I  who  am  his 
wife. 

Lye.  And  I  maintain  that  it  is  I. 

NER.  It  is  four  years  since  he  married  me. 

Luc.  It  is  seven  since  he  took  me  to  wife. 

NER.  I  have  proofs  of  all  that  I  say. 

Luc.  All  my  country  knows  it. 

NER.  Our  town  is  witness  to  it. 

Luc.  All  Pezenas  saw  our  wedding. 

NER.  All  St.  Quentin  was  at  ours. 

Luc.  Nothing  can  be  more  true. 

NER.   Nothing  can  be  more  certain. 

Luc.  {To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac}.  Would  you 
dare  to  deny  it,  you  villain? 

NER.  Do  you  mean  to  give  the  lie  to  me,  you  wicked 
wretch  ? 

POUR.  The  one  is  as  true  as  the  other. 

Luc.  What  impudence !  How  now,  you  wretch,  you 
remember  no  longer  poor  little  Francois,  and  poor  Jean- 
nette,  who  are  the  fruits  of  our  union? 

NER.  Just  look  at  the  insolence !  What !  you  do  not 
remember  that  poor  child,  our  little  Madeline,  which  you 
left  me  as  a  pledge  of  your  fidelity? 

POUR.  What  impudent  sluts  ! 

Luc.  Come  here  Francois,  come  here  Jeannette,  come 

SCKNB  xn.J  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  12$ 

all  of  you,  come  and  show  an  unnatural  father  his  want 
of  feeling  for  us  all. 

NER.  Come,  Madeleine,  come,  my  child,  come  here  to 
shame  your  father  for  his  impertinence. 

SCENE  X. — MONSIEUR  POURCEAUGNAC,  ORONTE,  LUCETTE, 
NERINE,  several  children. 

THE  CHIL.  Ah,   papa  !    papa  !    papa ! 

POUR.  The  devil  take  the  strumpet's  brats  ! 

Luc.  What,  you  wretch,  you  are  not  overwhelmed  with 
shame  to  receive  your  children  thus,  and  to  close  your 
ears  to  all  paternal  tenderness!  You  shall  not  escape  me, 
you  infamous  rogue!  I  shall  follow  you  everywhere,  and 
reproach  you  with  your  crime  until  I,  shall  be  revenged, 
and  see  you  hanged.  You  scoundrel,  I  will  have  you 
hanged. 

NER.  Do  you  not  blush  to  speak  these  words,  and  to 
remain  insensible  to  the  caresses  of  this  poor  child  ?  But 
you  shall  not  get  out  of  my  clutches;  and,  in  spite  of  your 
teeth  I  shall  let  the  world  see  that  I  am  your  wife;  and 
I  shall  have  you  hanged. 

THE  CHIL.  Papa !    papa  !    papa ! 

POUR.  Help!  help!  Where  shall  I  fly?  I  can  bear 
this  no  longer. 

ORON.  Come,  you  will  do  well  to  have  him  punished ; 
and  he  deserves  to  be  hanged. 

SCENE  XI. — SBRIGANI,  alone. 

I  am  managing  these  things  very  nicely,  and  everything 
goes  well  as  yet.  We  shall  tire  our  provincial  to  such  an 
extent  that  upon  my  word,  he  will  be  obliged  to  decamp. 

SCENE  XII. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  SBRIGANI. 

POUR.  Ah  !  I  am  half  dead  !  What  troubles !  What 
a  cursed  town  !  Set  upon  from  all  sides ! 

SBR.   What  is  it,  Sir?     Has  something  else  happened? 

POUR.  Yes.  It  rains  syringes  and  women  in  this 
country. 

SBR.  How  is  that  ? 

POUR.  Two  jabbering  jades  have  come  and  accused  me 

126  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  11. 

of  having  married  them  both,  and  threaten  me  with  the 
law. 

SBR.  That  is  a  wicked  business;  and  the  law  in  these 
parts  is  very  rigorous  against  that  sort  of  crime. 

POUR.  Yes;  but  although  there  should  be  an  informa- 
tion, citation,  decree,  and  judgment  obtained  by  surprise, 
default  and  contumacy,  I  can,  by  availing  myself  of  a 
conflict  of  jurisdictions,  gain  time,  and  find  out  the  flaws 
which  shall  nullify  the  proceedings. 31 

SBR.  That  is  talking  of  it  in  the  right  terms,  and  it  is 
clear,  Sir,  that  you  are  of  the  profession. 

POUR.  I !  not  at  all.     I  am  a  gentleman. 

SBR.  To  speak  thus  you  must  have  studied  the  law. 

POUR.  In  no  wise.  It  is  only  common  sense  which 
makes  me  conclude  that  justifying  evidence  will  be  ad- 
mitted, and  that  I  cannot  be  condemned  on  a  simple 
accusation,  without  the  witnesses  being  examined  and 
confronted  with  the  accused  parties. 

SBR.  That  is  finer  still. 

POUR.  These  words  come  to  me  without  my  knowing 
it. 

SBR.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  common  sense  of  a  gentle- 
man may  go  as  far  as  to  conceive  what,  is  right  and  proper 
in  law,  but  not  to  know  the  legal  terms. 

POUR.  These  are  a  few  words  which  I  remember  from 
having  read  them  in  novels. 

SBR.  Ah !   that  is  all  right ! 

POUR.  To  show  you  that  I  understand  nothing  at  all  of 
a  lawyer's  profession,  I  pray  you  to  take  me  to  some  bar- 
rister to  consult  him  about  my  business. 

SBR.  I  shall  do  so,  and  shall  take  you  to  two  very  able 
men  ;  but  I  must  warn  you  beforehand  not  to  be  surprised 
at  their  way  of  speaking.  They  have  contracted  from  the 
bar  a  certain  habit  of  declamation  which  would  lead  one  to 
suppose  that  they  were  singing,  and  you  might  mistake 
everything  they  say  for  music. 

POUR.  What  does  it  matter  how  they  speak,  as  long  as 
they  tell  me  what  I  wish  to  know ! 

31  The  law  terms  ''information,  ajournement,  decret,  jusfement,  defaut, 
contumace,  and  conflit  de  juridiction"  were  all  correct  in  Moliere's  time. 

SCENE  xui.J  MONSIEUR   DE   POURGEAUGNAC.  127 

SCENE  XIII. — MONSIEUR  DE   POURCEAUGNAC,  SBRIGANI, 
Two  BARRISTERS,  Two  SOLICITORS,  Two  SERGEANTS. 

i  sf  Bar.    (Drawling  his  words  as  he  sings} — 

Polygamy  is  a  business, 
Is  a  hanging  business. 

zd  Bar.  (Singing  very  quickly,  and  stammering) — 

Your  case 

Is  plain  and  clear; 

And  all  the  law 

In  such  a  matter 

Decides  distinctly. 

If  you  consult  our  authors, 

Legislators,  and  commentators, 

Justinianus,  Pipinianus, 

Ulpianus,  and  Tribonianus, 

Fernand,  Rebuffe,  John  Imola, 

Paul  de  Castro,  Julianus,  Bartholine, 

Jason,  Alciati,  and  Cujas, 

That  great  man  so  able ; 

Polygamy  is  a  business, 

Is  a  hanging  business.32 

Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Dance  of  the  Two  Solicitors  and  the  Two  Sergeants. 
While  the  SECOND  BARRISTER  sings  the  following  words  : — 

All  people  that  are  civilized 

And  sensible, 

The  French,  the  English,  the  Dutch, 
The  Danes,  the  Swedes,  the  Poles, 
The  Portuguese,  the  Spaniards,  the  Flemish, 
The  Italians,  the  Germans, 
Have  all  a  like  law  on  this  case ; 
And  there  is  no  difficulty  in  the  matter. 

81  The  French  comic  dramatists  and  satirists  have  often  mentioned  the 
old  jurists.  Rebuffe  is  cited  by  Racine  in  Its  Plaideurs ;  Alciati,  by 
Boileau  in  the  Lutrin  ;  and  Jason,  the  least  known  of  all,  by  Corneille  in 
the  Menteur.  •'  To  study  Bartholine  or  Cujas  "'  was  then  a  peri  phrase  for 
'•'studying  law." 

128  MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  HI. 

Polygamy  is  a  business, 
Is  a  hanging  business. 

The  First  Barrister  sings  these  words : — 

Polygamy  is  a  business, 
Is  a  hanging  business. 

{Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  getting  impatient, 
drives  them  away.33 

ACT  III. 
SCENE  I. — ERASTE,  SBRIGANI. 

SBR.  Yes,  matters  are  proceeding  as  we  like ;  and  as  he 
is  not  particularly  bright,  and  his  understanding  is  of  the 
narrowest,  I  have  inspired  him  with  such  a  great  fear  of 
the  severity  of  the  law  in  these  parts,  and  of  the  prepara- 
tions which  are  already  being  made  for  his  execution,  that 
he  is  determined  to  take  flight,  and  to  evade  with  greater 
facility  the  people,  who  I  have  told  him  were  stationed  at 
the  gates  of  the  town  to  arrest  him,  he  has  made  up  his 
mind  to  disguise  himself,  and  the  disguise  which  he  has 
assumed  is  a  woman's  dress. 

ERAS.  I  should  like  much  to  see  him  in  that  dress. 

SBR.  You,  on  your  part,  should  think  of  finishing  the 
comedy ;  and  while  I  am  acting  my  scenes  with  him,  go 
and  .  .  .  {He  whispers  something  in  his  ear).  You 
understand  rightly? 

ERAS.  Yes. 

SBR.  And  when  I  shall  have  put  him  where  I  wish  .  .  . 
(  WJiispers  again). 

ERAS.  Very  good. 

SBR.  And  when  the  father  shall  have  been  warned  by 
me  ...  (  Whispers  again]. 

ERAS.   Things  could  not  go  on  better. 

SBR.  Here  comes  our  young  lady.  Go  quickly,  that 
we  may  not  be  seen  together. 

88  In  Moliere's  time,  a  bigamist  was  really  condemned  to  death.  In 
later  times,  he  was  put  in  the  stocks,  with  as  many  distaffs  tied  to  his  arms 
as  he  had  married  wives,  and  then  sent  to  the  galleys,  or  banished. 

SCENE  ii.]  MONSIEUR    DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  1 29 

SCENE  II. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  disguised  as  a 
woman,  SBRIGANI. 

SBR.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  believe  that  they  ever  could 
recognise  you  in  this  state;  and  as  you  are,  you  look  like 
a  woman  of  quality. 

POUR.  What  astonishes  me  is  that  the  forms  of  justice 
are  not  better  observed  in  these  parts. 

SBR.  Yes,  I  have  already  told  you,  they  begin  here  by 
hanging  a  man,  and  then  they  judge  his  case. 

POUR.  That  is  very  unjust  justice. 

SBR.  It  is  devilishly  severe,  especially  on  these  sorts  of 
crimes. 

POUR.  But  when  people  are  innocent  ? 

SBR.  It  matters  not ;  they  do  not  inquire  into  that ;  and 
besides,  they  have  got  a  terrible  hatred  in  this  town  for 
people  from  your  country ;  and  nothing  gives  them  greater 
delight  than  to  see  a  Limousin  hanged. 

POUR.  What  have  the  Limousins  done  to  them? 

SBR.  They  are  brutes  here,  foes  to  all  gentility  and 
merit  in  those  of  other  towns.  As  for  me,  I  confess  to 
you,  that  I  am  in  very  great  fear  for  you ;  and  I  should 
never  console  myself  if  you  were  to  be  hanged. 

POUR.  It  is  not  so  much  the  fear  of  death  that  makes 
me  run  away,  as  that  it  is  very  damaging  to  a  gentleman  to 
be  hanged  and  that  an  affair  like  that  would  ruin  our  title 
of  nobility.34 

SBR.  You  are  right ;  they  would  afterwards  dispute  your 
title  of  esquire.35  For  the  rest  take  great  care,  when  I 
shall  lead  you  by  the  hand,  to  walk  like  a  woman,  and  to 
assume  all  the  speech  and  manners  of  a  person  of  quality. 

POUR.  Let  me  manage  it.  I  have  seen  people  of  rank. 
The  only  thing  is,  that  I  have  a  bit  of  a  beard. 

SBR.  Your  beard  is  nothing;  there  are  women  who 
have  as  much  as  you.  Come,  let  us  see  how  you  mean 
to  set  about  it.  (After  Monsieur  Pourceaugnac  has  imi- 
tated a  woman  of  quality").  Good. 

POUR.  Now  then,  my  coach  !  Where  is  my  carriage ! 
Good  Heavens  !  how  wretched  it  is  to  have  people  like 

84  Nobles  were  formerly  decapitated,  commoners  hanged. 
35  Ecuyer,  esquire,  was  the  lowest  title  of  nobility. 
VOL.  III.  J. 

130  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  in. 

that  about  one  !  Will  they  keep  me  waiting  the  whole 
day  in  the  street,  and  will  my  coach  never  come  ! 

SBR!  Very  good. 

POUR.  Hullo  !  ho !  coachman,  little  page  !  Ah  !  you 
little  scamp, — I  shall  let  you  have  a  taste  of  the  whip  by- 
and-by  !  Little  page,  page  !  Where  is  my  little  page  ? 
Will  the  little  page  never  be  found  ?  Will  this  page  never 
come  ?  Have  I  not  a  little  page  left ! 

SBR.  This  is  capital.  But  I  notice  one  thing;  this 
hood  is  not  close  enough :  I  shall  go  and  get  one  that  is 
a  little  thicker,  the  better  to  conceal  your  face,  in  case  of 
some  meeting. 

POUR.  What  will  become  of  me  in  the  meantime  ? 

SBR.  Wait  for  me  here.  I  shall  be  with  you  again  in 
a  moment,  you  have  only  to  walk  about.  {Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac  walks  several  times  up  and  down  the  stage, 
always  trying  to  imitate  a  woman  of  quality. 

SCENE  III. — MONSIEUR   DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  Two  Swiss. 

IST  Swiss.36  {Not  seeing  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac). 
Come,  make  haste,  mate;  we  must  both  go  to  the  Greve, 
to  look  for  a  little  at  the  execution  of  this  Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac,  who  has  been  condemned  to  be  hanged  by 
the  neck. 

2ND.  (  Without  seeing  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  We 
must  hire  a  window  to  see  this  execution. 

IST  Swiss.  They  say  that  there  is  already  a  bran  new 
gallows  erected  on  which  to  hang  this  Pourceaugnac. 

20  Swiss.  It  would,  indeed,  be  a  great  pleasure  to  see 
this  Limousin  hung  on  it. 

iST  Swiss.  Yes,  to  see  him  kick  up  his  heels  before  all 
the  world. 

20  Swiss.  He  is  a  funny  fellow  ;  they  say  that  he  has 
been  three  times  married. 

IST  Swiss.  What  the  devil  did  he  want  with  three  wives 
to  himself !  one  ought  to  have  been  enough  for  him. 

M  See  my  observation,  page  122,  note  29.  I  give  the  first  sen'ence  in 
the  original:  "Allans,  depletions,  camerade ;  lifaut  allair  tous  deux  nuts 
ala  Crevepour  regarter  un  peu  chousticier  sti  monsiu  de  Pourcegnac,  qui 
I' a  a  etc  contane par  ortonnance  a  I 'etre pendu  par  son  cou." 

SCBNK  iv  1  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  131 

2D  Swiss.  {Perceiving  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  Ah ! 
good  day,  Miss. 

IST  Swiss.   What  are  you  doing  here  all  alone  ? 

POUR.  I  am  waiting  for  my  servants,  gentlemen 

2D  Swiss.   Upon  my  word  !   she  is  pretty. 

POUR.   Gently,  gentlemen. 

IST  Swiss.  Will  you  join  us,  Miss,  to  go  to  the  Greve  ? 
We  are  going  to  see  a  nice  little  hanging. 

POUR.  I  would  rather  not. 

2D  Swiss.  It  is  a  Limousin  gentleman,  who  is  to  be 
hanged  genteelly  upon  a  great  gallows. 

POUR.  I  have  no  wish  to  see  it. 

IST- Swiss.   There  is  a  little  breast  which  is  nice. 

POUR.  Gently! 

IST  Swiss.  Upon  my  word,  I  should  like  to  sleep  with 
you. 

POUR.  Ah !  this  is  too  much  !  and  these  sorts  of  ob- 
scenities are  not  uttered  to  a  woman  of  my  rank. 

2D  Swiss.  Leave  off,  you  ;  I  wish  to  sleep  with  her. 

IST  Swiss.  I  do  not  choose  to  leave  her  alone. 

20  Swiss.  And  I  wish  it. 

( The  two  Swiss  pull  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac 
about  in  a  violent  manner. 

IST  Swiss.   I  am  not  doing  anything. 

20  Swiss.  You  are  telling  a  lie. 

IST.  Go  away,  you  are  telling  a  lie  yourself. 

POUR.   Help!  Guard! 

SCENE  IV.  —  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  A  POLICE- 
OFFICER,  3T  TWO  INFERIOR  POLICE-OFFICERS, M  TWO 
Swiss. 

POL.  O.  What  is  the  matter  ?  What  violence  is  this  ? 
and  what  do  you  want  with  this  lady  ?  Come,  get  away 
from  this,  unless  you  wish  to  be  put  into  prison. 

IST  Swiss.   Go  away,  all  right.     You  shall  not  have  her. 

2D  Swiss.  Go  away,  good  ;  you  shall  not  have  her 
either. 

87  See  Introductory  Notice  to  Tartuffc,  Vol.  II. 

18  The  original  has  archer,  because  the  inferior  police-officers  formerly 
used  to  wear  cross-bows. 

132  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  in. 

SCENE  V. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  A  POLICE-OFFI- 
CER, TWO  INFERIOR  POLICE-OFFICERS. 

POUR.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  Sir,  for  having  freed 
me  from  these  two  insolent  fellows. 

POL.  O.  Hey-day  !  His  face  looks  very  much  like  the 
one  that  has  been  described  to  me. 

POUR.  It  is  not  I,  I  assure  you. 

POL.  O.  Ah !  ah  !  what  does  I  mean  .    . 

POUR.  I  do  not  know. 

POL.  O.  Why  do  you  say  so  then? 

POUR.  For  nothing. 

POL.  O.  This  speech  means  something ;  and  I  arrest 
you. 

POUR.   Pray !  Sir,  pray  ! 

POL.  O.  No,  no;  to  judge  from  your  face  and  speech, 
you  must  be  this  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  of  whom  we 
are  in  search,  and  who  is  said  to  have  disguised  himself 
in  this  fashion  ;  you  shall  come  to  prison  with  us  di- 
rectly. 

POUR.  Alas  ! 

SCENE  VI. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  SBRIGANI,  A 
POLICE-OFFICER,  TWO  INFERIOR  POLICE-OFFICERS. 

SBR.  (To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac).  Good  Heavens  ! 
what  means  this  ? 

POUR.   They  have  recognized  me. 

POL.  O.  Yes,  yes  ;  I  am  delighted  at  it. 

SBR.  {To  the  Police  Officer).  Ah,  Sir,  for  my  sake  ! 
You  know  that  we  are  friends  of  old  standing ;  I  beseech 
you  not  to  take  him  to  prison. 

POL.  O.  No,  no  :  that  is  impossible. 

SBR.  You  are  a  man  open  to  reason.  Is  there  no  way 
of  adjusting  this  matter  by  means  of  some  pistoles  ? 

POL.  O.  (To  the  Inferior  Police  Officers}.  Just  leave  us 
for  a  little  while. 

SCENE  VII. — MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC,  SBRIGANI, 
THE  POLICE-OFFICER. 

SBR.  {To  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac}.  You  must  give 
him  some  money  to  let  you  go.  Make  haste. 

SCENE  viii.J  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNj\C.  133 

POUR.  (Handing  some  money  to  Sbrigani}.  Ah  !  cursed 
town. 

SBR.  There,  Sir. 

POL.  O.  How  much  is  there  ? 

SBR.  One,  two,  three,  four,  five,  six,  seven,  eight,  nine, 
ten. 

POL.  O.  No  ;  my  orders  are  too  binding. 

SBR.  (To  the  Police  Officer,  who  wants  to  go  away}. 
Good  Heavens!  just  wait  a  moment.  (To  Monsieur  de 
Pourceaugnac}.  Make  haste ;  give  him  as  much  more. 

POUR.  But  .    .    . 

SBR.  Make  haste,  I  tell  you,  and  lose  no  time.  It 
would  please  you  much,  no  doubt,  to  be  hanged. 

POUR.  Ah  !  (He  hands  more  money  to  Sbri- 

gani. 

SBR.  ( To  the  Police  Officer}.  There,  Sir. 

POL.  O.  (To  Sbrigani).  I  shall  have  to  fly  with  him; 
for  there  is  no  security  for  me  here.  Let  me  conduct  him, 
and  do  not  stir  from  this. 

SBR.  I  beseech  you  then  to  take  great  care  of  him. 

POL.  O.  I  promise  you  not  to  leave  him,  until  I  have 
put  him  in  a  place  of  safety. 

POUR.  (To  Sbrigani}.  Good-bye.  This  is  the  only 
honest  man  whom  I  have  found  in  this  town. 

SBR.  Do  lose  no  time.  I  love  you  so  much,  that  I  wish 
that  you  were  already  far  from  this.  (Alone).  May 
Heaven  conduct  you  !  On  my  word,  this  is  a  great  gull. 
But  here  comes  .  .  . 

SCENE  VIII. — ORONTE,  SBRIGANI. 

SBR.  (Pretending  not  to  see  Oronte}.  Ah !  what  a  strange 
adventure  !  What  sad  news  for  a  father  !  Poor  Oronte, 
how  I  pity  you  !  What  will  you  say  ?  and  how  will  you 
bear  this  mortal  grief? 

ORON.  What  is  it  ?  what  misfortune  do  you  prophesy 
to  me?  tell  me. 

SBR.  Ah,  Sir  !  this  perfidious  Limousin,  this  wretch  of 
a  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac  abducts  your  daughter ! 

ORON.  He  abducts  my  daughter  ! 

SBR.  Yes.     She  has  become  so  crazy,  that  she  leaves 

1 34  MONSIEUR  DE  POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  ni. 

you  to  follow  him  ;  and  they  say  that  he  has  got  a  talis- 
man8" for  making  himself  beloved  by  all  women. 

ORON.  Come,  quick  to  the  authorities  !  Let  us  despatch 
the  police-officers  after  them  ! 

SCENE  IX. — ORONTE,  ERASTE,  JULIA,  SBRIGANL 

ERAS.  {To  Julia.}  Come,  you  shall  come  in  spite  of 
yourself,  and  I  shall  place  you  safely  again  in  the  hands  of 
your  father.  There,  Sir,  there  is  your  daughter,  whom  by 
force  I  have  dragged  from  the  hands  of  the  man  with  whom 
she  was  running  away  ;  not  from  love  for  her,  but  solely  out 
of  respect  for  you.  For,  after  what  she  has  done,  I  can 
only  despise  her,  and  cure  myself  completely  of  the  affec- 
tion which  I  had  for  her. 

ORON.  Ah  !  infamous  girl  that  you  are  ! 

ERAS.  {To  Julia}.  What!  treat  me  in  that  manner, 
after  all  the  marks  of  affection  which  I  have  given  you. 
I  do  not  blame  you  for  having  submitted  to  the  will  of  your 
father ;  he  is  prudent  and  judicious  in  everything  he  does ; 
t  and  I  do  not  complain  of  him  for  having  rejected  me  for 
another.  If  he  broke  the  word  which  he  had  given  me, 
he  had  no  doubt  his  reasons  for  it.  People  made  him  be- 
lieve that  this  other  was  richer  than  myself  by  four  or  five 
thousand  crowns  ;  and  four  or  five  thousand  crowns  is  a 
considerable  sum,  and  which  makes  it  worth  while  to  break 
one's  word.  But  to  forget  in  a  moment  all  the  love  which 
I  have  shown  you,  to  allow  yourself  to  be  captivated  by 
a  new  comer,  and  to  follow  him  in  a  shameless  manner, 
without  your  father's  consent,  and  after  the  crimes  which 
have  been  imputed  to  him,  this  must  be  condemned  by 
every  one,  and  for  this  my  heart  cannot  make  any  suffi- 
ciently cutting  reproaches. 

JUL.  Well,  then  ?  yes.  I  have  conceived  a  passion  for 
him,  and  wished  to  follow  him,  because  my  father  had 
chosen  him  as  my  husband,  Whatever  you  may  say  to  me, 
he  is  a  very  honourable  man  ;  and  all  the  crimes  of  which 
he  is  accused  are  horrible  falsehoods. 

ORON.  Hold  your  tongue ;  you  are  an  impudent  jade;  I 
know  better  than  you  what  he  is. 

w  The  original  has  un  caractere.  See  Amphitryon.  Vol.  II.,  page  506, 
note  31. 

SCENE  ix.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  135 

JUL.  They  are,  no  doubt,  tricks  which  have  been  played 
upon  him,  and  {Pointing  to  Eraste)  it  is  perhaps  he  who 
invented  this  artifice  to  disgust  you  with  him. 

ERAS.  I !  could  I  be  capable  of  such  a  thing  ? 

JUL.  Yes,  you. 

ORNE.   Hold  your  tongue,  I  tell  you ;  you  are  a  fool. 

ERAS.  No,  no,  do  not  think  that  I  have  the  least  desire 
to  interfere  with  this  marriage,  and  that  it  is  my  passion 
which  has  made  me  run  after  you.  I  have  already  told 
you  that  it  is  only  from  consideration  for  your  father ;  and 
I  could  not  bear  that  an  honourable  man  like  him  should 
be  exposed  to  the  shameful  scandal  which  a  step  like  yours 
might  entail. 

ORON.  I  am  infinitely  obliged  to  you  Mr.  Eraste. 

ERAS.  Good-by,  Sir.  I  had  the  greatest  wish  in  the 
world  to  become  related  to  you ;  I  have  done  all  that  I 
could  to  obtain  such  an  honour ;  but  I  have  been  unfortu- 
nate, and  you  did  not  think  me  worthy  of  such  favour. 
This  shall  not  prevent  me  from  entertaining  towards  you 
the  feelings  of  esteem  and  veneration  which  your  person 
compels ;  and  if  I  could  not  succeed  in  becoming  your 
son-in-law,  I  at  least  can  be  for  ever  your  servant. 

ORON.  Stay,  Mr.  Eraste ;  your  behaviour  touches  my 
heart,  and  I  give  you  my  daughter  in  marriage. 

JUL.  I  will  have  no  other  husband  than  Monsieur  de 
Pouceaugnac. 

ORON.  And  I,  I  will  have  you  accept  Mr.  Eraste  on  the 
spot.  Come,  your  hand. 

JUL.  No,  I  shall  not  do  so. 

ORON.  I  shall  box  your  ears. 

ERAS.  No,  no,  Sir ;  do  not  use  violence,  I  beseech  you. 

ORON.  It  is  for  her  to  obey,  and  I  will  show  her  that 
I  am  the  master 

ERAS.  Do  you  not  see  the  love  she  has  for  that  man  ? 
and  do  you  wish  me  to  possess  her  person,  while  another 
shall  possess  her  heart  ? 

ORON.  He  has  bewitched  her,  and  you  will  see  that  she 
will  change  her  opinions  shortly.  Give  me  your  hand. 
Come? 

JUL.  I  will  not.  .    .    . 

ORON.  Ah  !  what  a  noise  !  Come,  your  hand,  I  tell  you. 
Ah!  ah!  ah! 

136  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  [ACT  in. 

ERAS.  {To  Julia}.  Do  not  think  that  it  is  for  love  of 
you  that  I  give  you  my  hand ;  I  am  smitten  only  with 
your  father ;  and  it  is  he  whom  I  marry. 

ORON.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you;  and  I  add  ten 
thousand  crowns  to  the  marriage  portion  of  my  daughter. 
Come,  let  them  bring  the  notary  to  draw  up  the  contract.40 

ERAS.  While  awaiting  his  arrival,  we  may  enjoy  the 
entertainment  of  the  season,  and  usher  in  the  masks,  whom 
the  noise  of  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac's  nuptials  has  at- 
tracted here  from  all  parts  of  the  town. 

SCENE  X. — A  troop  of  Masks  singing  and  dancing.  Some 
are  on  balconies,  others  in  the  street,  and  by  divers  songs 
and  games,  try  to  enjoy  innocent  pleasures. 

A  MASC.  (dressed  as  a  female  gipsy.}  — 
Begone,  begone  from  this  spot, 
Sorrow,  Grief,  and  Sadness; 
Come,  came,  Laughter  and  Play, 
Pleasure,  Love  and  Tenderness; 
Let  us  think  of  nothing  else  but  joy, 
Let  pleasure  be  our  sole  aim. 

CHORUS  OF  SINGING  MASKS. — 

Let  us  think  of  nothing  else  but  joy 
Let  pleasure  be  our  sole  aim. 

F.   GIF.     To  follow  me  all  here 

Your  ardour  is  uncommon ; 

And  you  are  in  grief 

About  your  love : 

Be  always  in  love, 

It  is  the  way  to  be  happy. 

A  MASK  (dressed  as  a  gipsy}. — 
Let  us  love  till  death  ; 
Reason  tells  us  to  do  so. 
Alas  !    what  would  be  life 

40  It  is  customary  to  end  the  piece  here,  but  to  enliven  it  a  little,  M.  de 
Pourccaugnac,  dressed  as  a  woman,  appears  in  one  of  the  boxes,  makes  a 
friendly  gesture  to  Sbrigani,  and  recommends  him  to  come  and  see  him, 
if  ever  he  goes  to  Limoges.  This  ending  is  traditional  at  the  Comedie 
Franfaise,  and  allows  the  curtain  to  fall  amidst  roars  of  laughter. 

SCENE  x.]  MONSIEUR   DE   POURCEAUGNAC.  137 

If  people  loved  no  more  ? 
Ah  !  let  us  rather  lose  life 
Than  lose  our  love. 

BOTH  (in  dialogue) — 
All  treasures. 

F.    GIF.    Glory. 
M.  GIF.    Grandeur. 

F.    GIF.    The  sceptres  that  cause  such  envy. 
M.  GIF.  All   is   nothing,  if  love   does   not  infuse  its 
ardour. 

F.  GIF.  Without  love,  there  is  no  joy  in  life. 

The  two  together — 

Let  us  always  be  in  love, 

It  is  the  way  of  being  happy. 

Chorus.     Let  us  all  sing  together, 

And  dance,  and  jump,  and  merry  be. 

A  Mask  {dressed  as  a  noble  Venetian) — 

When  for  laughter  we  are  assembled 
The  wisest  are  those,  it  seems  to  me, 
Who  play  the  greatest  fools. 

All  together — 

Let  us  think  of  nothing  else  but  joy, 
Let  pleasure  be  our  sole  aim. 

First  Entry  of  the  BalUt. 

Dance  of  two  Old  Women,  two  Scaramouches,  two  Panta- 
loons, two  Doctors,  and  two  Peasants. 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Dance  of  Savages. 

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Dance  of  Biscayens. 

LES  AMANTS  MAGNIFIQUES. 

COMEDIE-BALLET. 

THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS 

A  COMEDY-BALLET  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  COMEDY  IN  PROSE,  THE  INTERLUDES  IN  VERSE.) 

FEBRUARY  4TH,  1670. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

ON  the  4th  of  February  1670  was  represented  at  Saint  Germain-en- Laye, 
before  the  King  and  the  whole  Court,  The  Magnificent  Lovers — of  which 
"  his  Majesty  chose  the  subject."  For  this  reason  it  was  called,  with  the 
interludes,  The  Divertissement  Royal.  Louis  XIV.  danced,  in  the  first 
interlude,  the  part  of  Neptune,  and  that  of  Apollo  in  the  sixth  ;  but  only 
during  the  first  representation  of  the  play.1  It  was  never  represented  at 
Paris,  and  was  printed  only  after  Moliere's  death,  in  the  first  collected 
edition  of  his  works.  It  has  no  particular  merit,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  and 
seems  to  be  borrowed  from  the  same  source  as  Corneille's  Don  Sancho  of 
Arragon. 

In  the  two  plays,  a  man  of  inferior  birth  is  in  love  with,  and  beloved  by 
a  princess  whose  hand  is  sought  by  two  rivals;  but  Don  Sancho,  before 
his  marriage,  is  discovered  to  be  a  King's  son,  whilst  Sostrates,  Moliere's 
hero,  remains  his  own  ancestor.  The  expenses  for  the  machinery  of  this 
play  were  considerable  ;  the  engineer  de  Vigarani  received  27,092  livres, 
while  16,000  livres  were  spent  for  the  entertainment  and  salary  of  Mo- 
liere's troupe  and  assistants  for  the  4th  of  February  only. 

In  a  little  book  just  published  2  I  find  an  account  of  the  expenses  of  the 
representation  of  Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac,  as  given  at  Saint-Germain-en- 
Laye  on  the  6th  of  March,  1670,  as  well  as  of  the  two  last  representations  of 
Tht  Magnificent  Lovers,  given  at  the  same  place.  Every  article  is  mentioned 
there,  even  the  price  of  the  carriage  which  brought  Moliere  from  Paris  to 
Saint-Germain  and  back  again  ;  the  cost  of  the  dresses  of  the  danseuses  ; 
the  sum  paid  for  the  cravats,  breeches,  stockings,  dancing  pumps,  garters, 
scarfs,  ribands,  gloves,  wigs,  beards,  and  even  the  pomatum  and  powder 
for  the  chief  actors,  as  well  as  for  the  supernumeraries.  The  cost  of 
printing  1700  ordinary  books  of  the  ballet  is  also  given,  as  well  as  that  of 
280  books  for  the  King,  the  royal  family,  and  their  immediate  followers, 
— which  latter  libretti  were  in  marble  covers,  and  ornamented  with 
ribands.  Among  the  different  items  specified,  I  find  one  for  glasses, 
bottles,  bread,  wine,  &c. ;  one  for  the  horses'  feed ;  one  for  the  carriage 
of  personal  luggage  and  musical  instruments ;  and  even  one  for  the  door- 

1  See  Vol-  II., page  300,  note  7. 

8  Emile  Campardon,  Nouvelles  Pieces  sur  Moliere,  &c  ,  1876,  pp.  92-103. 

141 

142  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS. 

keepers  ;  the  whole,  certified  by  Louis-Marie  d'Aumont  de  Rochebaron, 
Duke  and  Peer  of  France,  First  Gentleman  of  the  Chamber  of  the  King, 
at  16,808  livres  a  sols.  On  the  6th  of  September  of  the  same  year,  T/ie 
Magnificent  Lovers  was  played  before  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  in  a 
theatre  built  on  purpose,  and  at  a  cost  of  about  9000  livres. 

Moliere  was  now  the  regular  provider  of  Court  entertainments,  and  of 
the  plays  in  this  volume,  four  were  written  for  the  special  delectation  of 
Louis  XIV.,  then  thirty-one  years  old,  and  at  the  height  of  his  lustful  and 
gluttonous  appetites.  The  King  had  become  at  this  time  so  infatuated 
with  his  ideas  of  royal  dignity,  so  saturated  with  the  nauseous  flattery  of 
his  courtiers,  so  thoroughly  convinced  that  he  could  do  whatever  he 
wished  to  do,  that  he  probably  thought  he  was  really  conferring  a  favour 
on  Moliere  when  he  chose  a  subject  for  his  play.  But  kings  are 
seldom  good  collaborateurs,  and  the  Grand  Monarque  proved  no  excep- 
tion to  this  rule ;  hence  The  Magnificent  Lovers  is  perhaps  the  least  able 
play  of  Moliere. 

Still  it  is  not  wholly  without  talent ;  Clitidas  is  something  like  Moron, 
the  Court  fool  from  The  Princess  of  Eli s  (See  Vol.  II.,  page  35},  another 
comedy  written  by  order  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  certainly  not  one  of  Mo- 
liere's  best ;  and  Anaxarchus,  as  the  astrologer,  with  his  tricks  and  sham- 
Venus,  with  his  taking  money  from  two  rivals,  and  promising  both  of 
them  to  favour  their  suits,  is  very  amusing.  Astrology  had  not  com- 
pletely gone  out  of  fashion,  for  an  astrologer  drew  Louis  XIV.'s  horo- 
scope, officially,  at  his  birth  ;  and  about  twenty  years  before  this  play  had 
been  represented,  a  certain  physician  Morin,  who  had  abandoned  the 
practice  of  medicine  for  that  of  astrology, — thinking,  perhaps,  that  there 
was  less  guess-work  in  the  latter  science  than  in  the  first — was  the  hon- 
oured correspondent  of  the  celebrated  Descartes,  and  of  many,  I  shall 
not  say  high-bom,  but  highly  intellectual,  people  of  the  time.  He  lost, 
however,  a  great  deal  of  his  influence  by  predicting  the  death  of  the  well- 
known  philosopher  Gassendi,  who,  however,  did  not  die  until  five  years 
afterwards. 

The  Divertissement  Royal  was  acted  again  on  the  I3th  and  17*  of 
February,  and  on  the  4th  and  8th  of  March  of  the  year  1670,  and  had 
the  honour  of  being  officially  described  in  an  Extraordinary  Gazette. 
We  shall  give  only  the  beginning  of  that  description  : — 

"  Let  people  not  boast  any  longer  about  the  Olympic  games  and  the 
other  amusements  of  the  Greeks,  nor  about  the  Circuses  and  other  specta- 
cles of  the  Romans.  Those,  which  have  been  the  best  organized  and  the 
most  brilliant,  ought  to  lose  all  the  reputation  which  history  has  given 
them  when  compared  to  the  festivals  of  the  first  Court  of  the  world  .  .  . 
All  grace  and  gallantry  have  been  reserved  for  the  rejoicings  of  a  monarch 
who  serves  in  this  as  an  example  even  to  the  most  polished  princes  of 
his  century,  and  who  is  the  first  in  the  fine  manner  of  these  amusements, 
as  he  is  the  greatest  in  power  and  in  glory ;  and  who,  in  short,  does  not 
understand  less  to  honour  the  days  of  peace  which  he  has  so  generously 
given  to  Europe,  by  surprising  magnificences  and  rejoicings,  than  in  dis- 
playing in  war  victories  and  conquests  wholly  marvellous.  This  is  proved 
by  many  festivals  which  he  has  already  given  to  his  Court,  in  which  noth- 
ing has  been  seen  but  what  was  extraordinary  and  worthy  of  being  de- 
scribed for  posterity  ;  and  this  has  been  confirmed  by,this  last  amusement 
with  which  his  Majesty  has  wished  to  treat  his  Court  during  this  carnival, 
in  the  interval  of  the  great  cares  which  He  incessantly  takes  for  the  hap- 
piness of  his  peoples  and  for  the  glory  of  his  State." 

THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  143 

It  has  been  said  that  Benserade,  who  had  until  lately  written  the  verses 
for  the  ballets  danced  by  the  King. — verses  in  which  there  was  always 
some  political,  courtly,  or  amorous  allusion, — and  who  had  abdicated  his 
official  Court-poet  position  in  the  month  of  February  of  the  year  before, 
felt  rather  annoyed  when  Moliere  took  his  place.  On  having  been  told, 
probably  before  the  play  was  represented,  two  lines  of  the  third  interlude, 
"And  trace  on  the  verdure  the  image  of  our  songs,''  he  said  aloud  that  it 
ought  to  be  "the  image  of  our  dancing-pumps,"  playing  on  the  similarity 
between  the  words  chansons,  songs,  and  chaussons,  dancing-pumps. 
When  the  verses  on  the  King  representing  Neptune,  in  the  first  interlude, 
and  those  on  the  King  representing  the  Sun,  in  the  sixth,  were  read  the 
courtiers,  who  were  ignorant  that  Benserade  had  not  composed  these 
couplets,  complimented  the  latter  on  his  elegant  diction ;  and  this  gentle- 
man did  not  deny  the  impeachment,  until  Moliere  declared  that  he  had 
written  them,  to  the  great  confusion  of  the  discomfited  pretender. 
Another  rumour  of  the  period  says  that  Moli£re  wished  to  parody  Ben- 
serade's  style  and  manner ;  but  this  is  more  than  doubtful,  for  to  ridicule 
the  praises  bestowed  on  Louis  XIV.,  and  to  say  in  a  spirit  of  irony  "  that 
virtue  never  suffers  shipwreck"  with  the  King,  would  undoubtedly  have 
ended  seriously  for  our  dramatist. 

It  has  also  been  mentioned  that  Mademoiselle  de  Montpensier,  then 
forty  years  old,  a  niece  of  the  King,  wished  to  marry  the  Count  de  Lau- 
zun,  and  that  Moliere  knew  of  this,  and  endeavoured  to  predispose  the 
minds  of  the  courtly  public  by  sketching  the  love  of  the  high-born  Prin- 
cess Eriphila  for  the  low-born  general  Sostrates.  This  is  possible  ;  for 
The  Magnificent  Rivals  was  played  on  the  4th  of  February  1670,  and  it 
was  only  at  the  end  of  that  year  that  Mademoiselle  de  Montpensier  men- 
tioned her  project  to  the  King,  who  gave  his  consent  to  the  marriage  on 
the  15th  of  December,  and  withdrew  it  on  the  i8th  of  the  same  month. 
But  is  it  not  natural  to  suppose  that  Mademoiselle  de  Montpensier,  after 
seeing  the  play  of  MoliSre,  may  have  plucked  up  courage  to  inform  the 
Grand  Monarque  of  her  proposed  espousal  ? 

Wonderful  to  relate,  nothing  has  been  borrowed  from  this  play  by 
English  dramatists,  at  least  as  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  trace. 

PREFACE. 

The  King  who  will  have  nothing  but  what  is  extraordinary 
in  all  that  he  undertakes,  proposed  to  give  his  court  a  diversion 
made  up  of  all  those  that  the  stage  could  furnish ;  and,  to  take 
in  so  vast  an  idea,  and  chain  together  so  many  different  things, 
His  Majesty  chose  for  the  subject  two  rival  princes,  who,  in 
the  Vale  of  Tempe,  where  the  Pythian  games  were  to  be  cel- 
ebrated, vie  with  each  other  in  treating  a  young  princess  and 
her  mother  with  all  the  gallantries  that  could  be  thought  of. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

IN   THE    COMEDY. 

IPHICRATES,  a  prince,  in  love  with  Eriphila. 

TIMOCLES,  a  prince,  in  love  with  Eriphila. 

SOSTRATES,  a  general  in  the  army,  in  love  with  Eriphila. 

ANAXARCHUS,  an  astrologer. 

CLEON,  his  son. 

CHOREBUS,  in  the  suite  of  Aristione. 

CLITIDAS,  a  court  jester,  among  the  attendants  of  Eriphila* 

ARISTIONE,  a  princess,  mother  to  Eriphila. 

ERIPHILA,  a  princess,  her  daughter. 

CLEONICE,  her  confidante. 

A  SHAM  VENUS,  in  concert  with  Anaxarchus. 

IN   THE    INTERLUDES. 

First  Interlude. 

EOLUS,  SINGING  TRITONS,  SINGING  STREAMS,  SINGING  CU- 
PIDS, DANCING  CORAL-FISHERS,  NEPTUNE,  Six  SEA- 
DEITIES  (dancing). 

Second  Interlude. 
THREE  DANCING  MIMES. 

Third  Interlude. 
THE  NYMPH  OF  THE  VALLEY  OF  TEMPE. 

'This  part  was  played  by  Moliere.  In  the  inventory  taken  after  his 
death,  we  find  "  a  theatrical  classical  cuirass  (tonnelet),  a  chemisette,  a 
skirt,  a  pair  of  drawers  and  cuishes ;  the  above  cuirass  of  green  moire,  or- 
namented with  two  kinds  of  lace,.gold  and  silver ;  the  chemisette  of  velvet 
with  a  gold  ground ;  the  shoes,  garters,  stockings,  scallops,  ruff  and  ruffles, 
the  whole  ornamented  with  fine  silver." 

DRAMATIS  PERSON^.  —  Continued. 

IN    THE    PASTORAL. 

Musical. 

TIRCIS,  a  shepherd,  in   love 

with  Caliste. 
LYCASTE,  a  shepherd,  his 

friend. 
MENANDER,  a  shepherd,  his 

friend. 
FIRST  SATYR,  in  love  with 

Caliste. 

SECOND  SATYR,  in  love  with 
Caliste. 

Fourth  Interlude. 
EIGHT  DANCING  STATUES. 

PHILINTE,  a  shepherd. 
Six  DANCING  FAWNS. 
THREE  SMALL  DANCING 

FAWNS. 

CALISTE,  a  shepherdess. 
CLIMENE,  a  shepherdess. 
Six  DANCING  DRYADS. 
THREE  SMALL  DANCING 

DRYADS. 

Fifth  Interlude. 
FOUR  DANCING  MIMES. 

Sixth  Interlude. 
FEAST  OF  THE  PYTHIAN  GAMES. 

The  priestess,  two  singing  sacrificers,  six  ministers  of  the 
sacrifice  {carrying  hatchets,  dancing),  chorus  of  people, 
six  acrobats  (on  wooden  horses),  four  slave  leaders 
(dancing),  eight  dancing  slaves;  four  men  in  Greek 
dresses,  four  women  in  Greek  dresses,  a  herald,  six  trum- 
teters,  a  cup-bearer,  Apollo,  attendants  on  Apollo, 
dancing. 

Scene. — THESSALY,  IN  THE  VALE  OF  TEMPE. 

THE   MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS. 

(LES  AMANTS  MAGNIFIQUES.) 

FIRST  INTERLUDE. 

The  scene  opens  with  the  pleasant  sound  of  a  quantity  of 
instruments;  and  represents  at  first  a  sea  bordered  on  each 
side  by  four  large  rocks.  On  the  summit  of  each  is  a  River- 
god  leaning  upon  the  insignia  of  these  kinds  of  deities.  At 
the  foot  of  these  rocks  are  twelve  Tritons  on  each  side;  and 
in  the  middle  of  the  sea,  four  Cupids  on  dolphins,  and  behind 
them  the  god  Eolus,  floating  on  a  small  cloud  above  the 
"waves.  Eolus  commands  the  winds  to  withdraw;  and 
-while  the  four  Cupids,  twelve  Tritons,  and  eight  River-gods 
answer  him,  the  sea  becomes  calm,  and  an  island  rises  from 
the  waves:  Eight  fishermen  come  out  of  the  sea  with 
mother  of  pearl  and  branches  of  coral  in  their  hands,  and, 
after  a  charming  dance,  seat  themselves  each  on  a  rock  above 
a  River-god.  The  musical  chorus  announces  the  advent  of 
Neptune;  and  while  this  god  is  dancing  with  his  suite,  the 
fishermen^  Tritons,  and  River-gods  accompany  his  steps 
with  various  movements,  and  the  clattering  of  the  pearl 
shells.  The  whole  of  this  spectacle  is  a  splendid  compliment 
paid  by  one  of  the  princes  to  the  princesses  during  their 
maritime  excitrsion. 

149 

150  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS. 

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Neptune  and  Six  Sea-gods. 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Eight  Coral  Fishers. 

VERSES   SUNG. 

Recital  of  Eolus. 

Ye  winds,  who  trouble  the  fairest  days, 
Retire  into  your  deepest  grottos ; 
And  leave  the  Cupids  and  the  Zephyrs 
To  reign  over  the  waves. 

A   Triton. 

What  charming  eyes  have  penetrated  to  our  moist  abodes? 
Come,  come,  ye  Tritons ;  hide  yourselves,  ye  Nereids. 

All  the  Tritons. 

Let  us  all  advance  to  meet  these  divinities; 

And  to  their  charms  let  us  render  homage  by  our  songs. 

A   Cupid. 
Ah  !  How  fair  are  these  princesses  ! 

Another-  Cupid. 
What  hearts  could  withstand  them  ? 

Another  Cupid. 

The  fairest  of  immortals,  * 

Our  mother  has  less  charms  than  they. 

Chorus 

Let  us  all  advance  to  meet  these  divinities; 

And  to  their  charms  let  us  render  homage  by  our  songs. 

A   Triton. 

What  noble  spectacle  now  meets  our  eyes? 
Neptune,  the  great  god  Neptune,  with  his  court, 
Comes  with  his  august  presence 
To  shed  honour  on  this  charming  spot. 

THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  1$! 

Chorus. 

Let  us  our  songs  increase 
And  make  the  air  resound 
With  our  rejoicings. 

Verses  for  the  king,  representing  Neptune. 

Heaven,  among  the  most  renowned, 

Has  given  me  a  considerable  rank; 

And  in  vesting  me  with  sway  over  the  azure  waves, 

Renders  my  power  feared  by  the  whole  universe. 

There  is  no  land,  if  it  look  well  at  me, 

But  what  must  tremble  at  my  spreading  over  it ; 

No  state  but  what  at  any  moment  I  could  inundate 

With  the  impetuous  waves  which  my  power  commands. 

Nothing  could  stay  their  fierce  overflow ; 
And  if  a  threefold  dyke  opposes  their  force, 
We>  would  see  them  break  down  the  obstacle, 
And  easily  clear  for  themselves  a  way  anywhere. 

But  I  know  how  to  curb  the  fury  of  these  waves 
By  the  wise  equity  of  the  power  I  wield, 
And  to  maintain  everywhere,  to  the  sailors'  delight, 
The  sweet  liberties  of  a  peaceful  commerce 

Sometimes  there  are  shoals  found  in  my  States ; 

We  perceive  that  some  vessels  are  lost  there  by  storms ; 

But  against  my  power  there  is  no  murmuring, 

And  with  me  virtue  never  suffers  shipwreck.* 

For  M.  Le  Grand,  representing  a  sea-god. 

The  empire  in  which  we  live  is  fertile  in  treasures. 
All  mortals  in  crowds  rush  to  its  banks. 
And,  to  make  in  a  short  time  a  very  great  fortune, 
We  need  nothing  but  the  favour  of  Neptune. 

4  It  has  been  said  that  our  author  parodied  in  the  above  verses  the  way 
in  which  Benserade  wrote  his  poetic  flatteries,  but  we  doubt  if  Moliere 
would  have  dared  to  have  taken  this  liberty.  See  Introductory  Notice. 

152  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  i. 

For  M.  the  Marquis  De  Villeroi,  representing  a  sea-god. 

On  the  word  of  this  god  of  the  watery  empire, 
We  may  safely  embark  with  all  assurance. 
The  waves  themselves  may  inconstant  be, 
Not  so  Neptune,  he  is  ever  constant. 

For  M.  the  Marquis  De  Rassent,  representing  a  sea-god. 

Journey  on  this  sea  with  indomitable  zeal; 
These  are  the  means  to  curry  favour  with  Neptune. 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — SOSTRATES,  CLITIDAS. 

CLIT.  (Aside).  He  is  buried  in  thought. 

Sos.  (Believing  himself  alone}.  No,  Sostrates,  I  see  no- 
thing to  which  you  can  have  recourse,  and  your  ills  are  of 
such  a  nature  as  to  leave  you  no  hope  of  getting  rid  of 
them. 

CLIT.  (Aside).  He  argues  with  himself. 

Sos.   (Believing  himself  alone).  Alas  ! 

CLIT.  (Aside).  These  are  sighs  that  mean  something, 
and  my  conjectures  may  become  true. 

Sos.  (Believing  himself  alone).  On  what  fancies,  tell  me, 
could  you  build  any  hope,  and  what  else  stares  you  in  the 
face  but  a  horrible,  protracted  and  wretched  life,  and  an- 
noyances to  be  ended  only  by  death? 

CLIT.  (Aside).  This  head  is  more  confused  than  my  own. 

Sos.  (Believing  himself  alone}  Ah  !  my  heart !  ah  !  my 
heart !  to  what  have  you  brought  me  ? 

CLIT.  Your  servant,  my  lord  Sostrates. 

Sos.     Where  go  you,  Clitidas  ? 

CLIT.  But  you  rather,  what  are  you  doing  here?  and 
what  secret  melancholy,  what  sombre  humour,  if  it  please 
you,  retains  you  in  these  woods,  while  every  one  is  rushing 
to  the  magnificent  festival  with  which  the  love  of  prince 
Iphicrates  is  regaling  the  maritime  excursion  of  the  prin- 
cesses ;  while  they  are  receiving  marvellous  entertainments 
of  music  and  dancing,  and  while  even  the  rocks  and  the 

SCENE  I.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  1 53 

waves  deck  themselves  with  divinities  to  do  honour  to  their 
charms  ? 

Sos.  Without  seeing  it,  I  can  imagine  this  magnificence 
well  enough ;  and,  as  a  rule,  so  many  people  are  anxious 
to  add  to  the  crowds  at  these  festivals,  that  I  have  thought 
it  right  not  to  augment  the  number  of  nuisances. 

CLIT.  You  know  well  enough  that  your  presence  never 
spoils  anything,  and  that  you  are  never  one  too  many,  no 
matter  where  you  go.  Your  countenance  is  welcome  every- 
where ;  and  it  is  not  one  of  these  ill-favoured  countenan- 
ces which  are  never  well  received  by  sovereign  looks. 
You  stand  equally  well  with  the  two  princesses  ;  and  the 
mother  and  the  daughter  show  you  sufficiently  the  esteem 
in  which  they  hold  you,  to  prevent  all  dread  of  your 
tiring  their  sight ;  and,  in  short,  it  is  not  that  fear  which 
has  kept  you  back. 

Sos.  I  confess  that  I  have  no  great  natural  curiosity 
for  these  kind  of  things. 

CLIT.  Good  Heavens  !  even  if  one  had  no  curiosity  for 
these  things,  one  has  always  somewhere  to  go  where  one 
finds  everybody  else  ;  and,  whatever  you  may  say,  people 
do  not  remain  all  alone,  during  a  festival  dreaming 
among  the  trees,  as  you  do,  without  having  something  on 
their  minds  that  troubles  them. 

Sos.   What  should  I  have  on  my  mind? 

CLIT.  Ay,  I  do  not  know  where  it  comes  from ;  but 
there  is  a  scent  of  love  somewhere  here.  It  is  not  I.  Ah  ! 
upon  my  word,  it  is  you. 

Sos.  How  foolish  you  are,  Clitidas ! 

CLIT.  I  am  not  foolish.  You  are  in  love ;  I  have  a 
delicate  nose,  and  I  smelt  it  directly. 

Sos    On  what  do  you  found  this  idea  ? 

CLIT.  On  what  ?  You  would  be  very  much  surprised 
if  I  told  you,  besides,  with  whom  you  are  in  love. 

Sos.  I? 

CLIT.  Yes.  I  wager  that  I  shall  guess  on  the  spot  the 
one  whom  you  love.  I  have  my  secrets  as  well  as  our 
astrologer,  with  whom  the  princess  Aristione  is  so  taken 
up;  and,  if  he  be  possessed  of  the  science  of  reading  in 
the  stars  the  fate  of  men,  I  possess  the  one  of  being  able 
to  read  in  the  eyes  the  name  of  the  person  with  whom  one 

154  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [Acri. 

is  in  love.  Hold  up  your  head  a  little,  and  open  your 
eyes.  E,  making  a  syllable  by  itself;5  e,  r,  i,  eri;  p,  h, 
i,  phi;  1,  a,  la;  Eriphila.  You  are  in  love  with  the 
princess  Eriphila. 

Sos.  Ah !  Clitidas,  I  confess  that  I  cannot  conceal  my 
trouble,  and  you  strike  me  with  a  thunderbolt. 

CLIT.  Do  you  see  how  clever  I  am  ! 

Sos.  Alas  !  if,  by  some  accident,  you  have  been  able 
to  discover  the  secret  of  my  heart,  I  beseech  you  at  least 
not  to  reveal  it  to  any  one,  and  above  all  to  keep  it  con- 
cealed from  the  fair  princess  whose  name  you  have  just 
mentioned. 

CLIT.  And,  seriously  speaking,  if  I  have  been  able  from 
your  actions  for  some  time  to  find  out  the  passion  which 
you  wish  to  keep  secret,  do  you  think  that  the  princess 
Eriphila  could  have  been  so  obtuse  as  not  to  perceive  it? 
The  fair,  believe  me,  are  always  the  most  clear-sighted  in 
discovering  the  passions  which  they  inspire  ;  and  the  lan- 
guage of  the  eyes  and  of  sighs  is  better  understood  than 
any  other  by  the  one  to  whom  it  is  addressed. 

Sos.  Let  us  leave  her,  Clitidas,  let  us  leave  her  to  per- 
ceive, if  she  can,  in  my  sighs  and  looks,  the  passion  with 
which  her  charms  have  inspired  me  ;  but  let  us  take  great 
care  that  she  never  find  it  out  in  any  other  way. 

CLIT.  And  what  do  you  dread  ?  Is  it  possible  that  this 
same  Sostrates,  who  feared  neither  Brennus  nor  all  the 
Gauls,  and  whose  arm  has  so  gloriously  contributed  to  rid 
us  of  that  deluge  of  barbarians  which  ravaged  Greece  ;  is 
it  possible,  I  say,  that  a  man  so  dauntless  in  war  can  be 
so  timid  in  love,  and  that  I  see  him  tremble  at  the  very 
mention  that  he  does  love  ? 

Sos.  Ah  !  Clitidas,  I  tremble  with  reason  ;  and  all  the 
Gauls  in  the  world  are  much  less  to  be  dreaded  than  two 
beautiful  eyes  full  of  charms. 

CLIT.  I  am  not  of  that  opinion  ;  and  I  know  well,  as 
far  as  I  am  concerned,  that  one  single  Gaul,  sword  in 
hand,  would  make  me  tremble  more  than  fifty  beautiful 
eyes,  though  they  were  altogether  the  most  charming  in 

6  In  the  original  per  soi.  being  an  old  formula  for  "  making  a  syllable  by 
itself.1' 

SCINBI.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVEKS.  155 

the  world.  But,  just  tell  me,  what  do  you  intend  to 
do? 

Sos.   To  die  without  declaring  my  passion. 

CLIT.  That  is  a  fair  prospect !  Come,  come,  you  are 
jesting  ;  a  little  boldness  always  succeeds  with  lovers  : 
the  bashful  only  lose  in  the  game  of  love  ;  and  I  would 
declare  my  passion  to  a  goddess,  if  I  fell  in  love  with  her. 

Sos.  Too  many  things,  alas  !  condemn  my  passion  to 
eternal  silence. 

CUT.   Eh  !  what  ? 

Sos.  The  humbleness  of  my  condition,  with  which  it 
pleases  Heaven  to  abate  the  ambition  of  my  love ;  the 
rank  of  the  princess,  which  puts  between  her  and  my  de- 
sires a  distance  so  vexatious  ;  the  rivalry  of  two  princes 
supported  by  all  the  great  titles,  which  can  sustain  the 
pretensions  of  their  affection  ;  of  two  princes  disputing 
with  each  other  at  every  moment,  through  many  thousand 
splendours,  the  glory  of  winning  her,  and  whose  love  we 
expect  daily  to  be  decided  by  her  choice ;  but  more  than 
all,  Clitidas,  that  inviolable  respect  with  which  her  beau- 
tiful eyes  subjugate  all  the  violence  of  my  passion. 

CLIT.  Respect  very  often  does  not  lay  us  under  the 
many  obligations  that  love  does  ;  and  unless  I  am  very 
much  mistaken,  the  young  princess  is  aware  of  your  affec- 
tion, and  is  not  insensible  to  it. 

Sos.  Ah !  Do  not  endeavour  to  flatter  out  of  pity  the 
heart  of  a  poor  wretch. 

CLIT.  My  conjecture  is  well  founded  I  see  her  post- 
pone the  choice  of  a  husband  for  a  long  time,  and  I  wish 
to  find  out  something  of  this  little  matter.  You  know 
that  I  am  somewhat  in  favour  with  her,  that  I  have  free 
access  to  her,  and  that  by  giving  myself  a  deal  of  trouble, 
I  have  acquired  the  privilege  of  mixing  in  the  conversa- 
tion, and  of  speaking  at  random  upon  all  subjects.  Some- 
times it  does  not  succeed,  but  again  at  times  it  does. 
Let  me  manage  it ;  I  am  one  of  your  friends  ;  people  of 
merit  gain  my  heart,  and  I  shall  watch  my  time  to  enter- 
tain the  princess  with  .  .  . 

Sos.  Ah  !  for  pity's  sake,  with  whatever  kindness  my 
misfortune  may  inspire  you,  be  very  careful  not  to  tell  her 
anything  of  my  passion.  I  would  rather  die  than  lay  myself 

156  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  i. 

open  to  be  accused  by  her  of  the  slightest  impertinence ;  and 
this  profound  respect  with  which  her  divine  charms  .    .    . 
CLIT.  Silence,  here  comes  everyone. 

SCENE  II. — ARISTIONE,   IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES,    SOSTRA- 
TES,  ANAXARCHUS,  CLEON,  CLITIDAS. 

ARIS.  {To  Iphicrates).  Prince,  I  cannot  get  tired  of 
saying  so,  that  there  has  never  been  a  spectacle  in  the 
universe  to  vie  in  magnificence  with  the  one  which  you  have 
just  given  us.  This  festival  has  had  some  decorations  which, 
without  doubt,  surpass  everything  which  one  could  see  ; 
and  it  has  shown  us  something  so  noble,  so  grand,  and 
so  majestic,  that  Heaven  itself  could  no  farther  go ;  and 
I  can  say  with  confidence  that  there  is  nothing  in  the 
universe  that  could  equal  it. 

TIM.  They  are  decorations  with  which  we  could  not 
expect  every  vessel  to  be  adorned  ;  and  I  have  reason  to 
fear,  Madam,  for  the  simplicity  of  the  little  entertainment 
which  I  am  preparing  for  you  in  the  wood  of  Diana. 

ARIS.  I  think  that  we  shall  see  nothing  there  but  what 
is  very  agreeable  ;  and  we  must  certainly  admit  that  the 
country  ought  to  appear  beautiful  to  us,  and  that  we  have 
had  no  time  to  become  weary  in  this  charming  spot, 
which  all  the  poets  have  celebrated  under  the  name  of 
Tempe.  For,  after  all,  not  to  speak  of  the  pleasures  of  the 
chase  which  we  can  enjoy  at  any  hour,  and  of  the  solemnity 
of  the  Pythian  games  which  are  about  to  be  celebrated,  you 
both  take  care  to  glut  us  with  all  the  entertainments  that 
can  charm  the  most  melancholy  grief.  How  is  it  Sostrates 
that  we  did  not  see  you  at  our  maritime  excursion  ? 

Sos.  Madam,  a  slight  indisposition  prevented  me  from 
going  there. 

IPHIC.  Sostrates  is  one  of  those  men,  Madam,  who 
think  it  unbecoming  to  be  curious  like  others ;  and  it  is 
nice  to  affect  not  to  go  where  everyone  goes. 

Sos.  My  Lord,  affectation  has  no  share  whatever  in 
aught  that  I  do  ;  and,  without  wishing  to  compliment  you, 
there  were  things  at  this  entertainment  which  could  have 
attracted  me,  if  some  other  cause  had  not  detained  me. 

ARIS.  And  has  Clitidas  seen  it  all  ? 

CLIT.  Yes',  Madam,  but  from  the  banks. 

SCENE  n. J  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  157 

ARTS.  And  why  from  the  banks? 

CLIT.  Really,  Madam,  I  was  afraid  of  one  of  those  acci- 
dents which  generally  occur  in  these  confusions.  Last 
night  I  dreamt  of  dead  fishes  and  broken  eggs;6  and  I 
have  gleaned  from  Anaxarchus  that  broken  eggs  and  dead 
fishes  mean  mishap. 

ANAX.  I  always  remark  one  thing ;  that  Clitidas  would 
have  nothing  to  say,  if  he  did  not  speak  of  me. 

CLIT.  It  is  because  there  are  so  many  things  to  say  of 
you  that  one  cannot  speak  enough  of  them. 

ANAX.  You  might  choose  some  different  subjects  of 
conversation,  since  I  have  asked  you  to  do  so. 

CLIT.  But  how  can  I  ?  Do  not  you  say  that  destiny  is 
stronger  than  everything?  and  if  it  be  written  in  the 
stars  that  I  should  be  inclined  to  speak  of  you,  how  would 
you  have  me  resist  my  fate? 

ANAX.  With  all  due  respect  to  you,  Madam,  there  is 
something  that  is  very  annoying  at  your  court,  that  every 
one  there  takes  the  liberty  of  speaking,  and  that  the  most 
honourable  man  is  exposed  to  the  raillery  of  the  first  spite- 
ful wag  whom  he  meets. 

CLIT.  I  thank  you  for  the  compliment. 

ARIS.  (T0  Anaxarchus).  How  foolish  of  you  to  fret 
yourself  about  what  he  says. 

CLIT.  With  every  respect  for  you,  Madam,  there  is  one 
thing  that  astonishes  me  in  astrology :  how  people  who 
know  all  the  secrets  of  the  gods,  and  who  possess  the 
knowledge  to  place  themselves  above  all  men,  should  be 
in  need  of  paying  court,  and  of  asking  for  something. 

ANAX.  You  ought  to  earn  your  money  a  little  better, 
and  utter  some  wittier  jokes  to  this  lady. 

CLIT.  Upon  my  word,  one  gives  them  as  one  can.  It  is 
very  easy  for  you  to  speak  thus  ;  and  the  trade  of  a  wit  is 
not  like  that  of  an  astrologer:  to  tell  lies  well,  and  to  tell 
jokes  well  are  two  very  different  things;  and  it  is  far 
easier  to  deceive  people  than  to  make  them  laugh. 

ARIS.  Eh  !  what  does  this  mean  ? 

CLIT.  (Speaking  to  himself}.     Peace,  impertinent  fellow 

6  See  The  Love-Tiff,  Vol.  I.,  page  127,  note  23,  about  the  dreaming  of 
''broken  eggs." 

158  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  i. 

that  you  are  !  do  not  you  know  that  astrology  is  an  affair 
of  State,  and  that  you  must  not  touch  upon  that  point  ? 
I  have  told  you  so  several  times,  you  are  too  forward,  and 
you  are  taking  certain  liberties  which  will  play  you  a 
scurvy  trick,  I  warrant  you.  You  will  find  that  one  of 
these  days  you  will  be  kicked  out,  and  that  you  will  be 
bundled  off  like  a  rogue.  Hold  your  tongue  if  you  be 
wise. 

ARIS.  Where  is  my  daughter  ? 

TIM.  She  has  strolled  away,  Madam ;  and  I  offered  her 
my  arm,  which  she  refused  to  accept. 

ARIS.  Princes,  since  the  affection  which  you  have  for 
Eriphila  has  been  content  to  submit  itself  to  the  laws 
which  it  has  been  my  pleasure  to  impose  upon  you ;  since 
I  have  been  able  to  obtain  from  you  that  you  should  be 
rivals  without  becoming  enemies,  and  that  with  full  sub- 
mission to  the  sentiments  of  my  daughter  you  are  await- 
ing a  choice  in  which  I  have  left  her  sole  mistress,  open 
to  me,  both  of  you,  the  recesses  of  your  minds,  and  tell 
me  truly  what  progress  you  think  you  have  made  on  her 
heart. 

TIM.  Madam,  I  will  not  flatter  myself.  I  have  done  all 
I  could  to  move  the  heart  of  the  princess  Eriphila,  and  I 
have  set  about  it,  I  believe,  in  every  tender  way  that  a 
lover  could  adopt.  I  have  rendered  her  the  submissive 
homage  of  my  affection  ;  I  have  shown  assiduity ;  I  have 
paid  my  attentions  every  day ;  I  have  ordered  my  passion 
to  be  sung  to  her  with  the  most  melting  voices,  and  have 
given  it  expression  in  verses  composed  for  me  by  the  most 
delicate  of  pens  ;  I  have  complained  of  my  martyrdom  in 
the  most  impassioned  terms ;  I  have  made  my  eyes  as  well 
as  my  lips  speak  of  the  despair  of  my  love  ;  I  have  uttered 
languishing  sighs  at  her  feet ;  I  have  even  shed  tears ;  but 
all  that  was  useless,  and  I  am  not  aware  that  in  her  heart 
she  reciprocates  my  love. 

ARIS.  And  you,  prince? 

IPH.  As  for  me,  Madam,  knowing  her  indifference,  and 
the  little  value  which  she  sets  upon  the  attentions  paid  to 
her,  I  did  not  wish  to  waste  complaints,  sighs,  or  tears 
upon  her.  I  know  that  she  is  entirely  submissive  to  your 
wishes,  and  that  it  is  from  your  hand  alone  that  she  will 

SCENE  n.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  159 

accept  a  husband  ;  thus,  it  is  only  to  you  that  I  address 
myself  to  obtain  her ;  to  you  rather  than  to  her  that  I 
offer  all  my  attentions  and  all  my  homage.  And  would  to 
Heaven,  Madam,  that  you  could  have  resolved  to  take  her 
place ;  that  you  had  been  willing  to  enjoy  the  conquests 
which  you  make  for  her,  and  to  receive  for  yourself  the 
affection  which  you  refer  to  her  ! 

ARIS.  Prince,  the  compliment  is  that  of  a  skilful  lover, 
and  you  have  heard  it  said  that  one  must  cajole  the 
mothers  in  order  to  obtain  the  daughters ;  but,  in  this 
case,  unfortunately,  all  that  becomes  of  no  use,  and  I  have 
bound  myself  to  leave  the  choice  entirely  to  the  inclina- 
tion of  my  daughter. 

IPH.  With  whatever  power  you  may  have  invested  her 
for  this  choice,  it  is  not  a  compliment,  Madam,  that  I  have 
uttered  to  you.  I  pretend  to  the  princess  Eriphila  only 
because  she  is  of  your  blood ;  I  find  her  charming  through 
everything  which  she  derives  from  you,  and  it  is  you 
whom  I  adore  in  her. 

ARIS.   That  is  very  pretty. 

IPH.  Yes,  Madam,  every  one  sees  in  you  attractions  and 
charms,  which  I  ... 

ARIS.  Pray,  prince,  let  us  leave  those  charms  and  at- 
tractions; you  know  that  they  are  words  which  I  eliminate 
from  the  compliments  which  people  wish  to  pay  me.  I 
allow  folks  to  praise  my  sincerity ;  to  say  that  I  am  a 
worthy  princess,  that  I  have  a  good  word  for  everybody,  a 
warm  feeling  for  my  friends,  and  esteem  for  merit  and 
virtue  ;  I  can  digest  all  that,  but  as  for  charms  and  attrac- 
tions, I  am  very  glad  that  they  are  not  served  up  to  me ; 
and  whatever  truth  there  may  be  found  in  them,  one  must 
have  some  scruple  in  tasting  praises,  when  one  is  mother 
to  a  daughter  like  mine. 

IPH.  Ah  !  Madam,  it  is  you  who  will  play  the  mother 
in  spite  of  all  the  world ;  there  is  not  an  eye  that  does  not 
oppose  itself  to  it ;  and  if  you  wished  it,  the  princess 
Eriphila  might  pass  for  your  sister. 

ARIS.  Good  Heavens!  prince,  I  have  no  taste  for  all 
this  nonsense  which  most  women  like:  I  wish  to  be  a 
mother  because  I  am  one,  and  it  would  be  in  vain  not  to 
wish  it.  This  title  b.3s  nothing  to  shock  me,  since,  with 

l6o  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  i. 

my  own  consent,  I  have  exposed  myself  to  receive  it. 
This  is  a  weakness  of  our  sex,  from  which,  thank  Heaven, 
I  am  exempt ;  and  I  do  not  trouble  myself  about  these 
grand  disputes  about  age,  so  common  with  many  foolish 
women.  Let  us  come  back  to  our  conversation.  Is  it 
possible  that  up  till  now  you  have  been  unable  to  find  out 
which  way  the  inclination  of  Eriphila  tends  ? 

IPH.  It  is  a  mystery  to  me. 

TIM.  And  to  me  an  impenetrable  one. 

ARIS.  Modesty  perhaps  hinders  her  from  explaining 
herself  to  you  and  to  me.  Let  us  make  use  of  some  one 
else  to  find  out  the  secret  of  her  heart.  Sostrates,  do  this 
for  me,  and  render  this  good  office  to  these  princes,  to 
discover  skilfully  from  my  daughter  towards  which  of  the 
two  her  feelings  may  turn. 

Sos.  Madam,  you  have  a  hundred  persons  at  your  court 
on  whom  you  might  better  bestow  the  honour  of  such  a 
task;  and  I  feel  myself  ill-fitted  to  execute  what  you 
desire  of  me. 

ARIS.  Your  merit,  Sostrates,  is  not  confined  to  the 
employment  of  war  only ;  you  have  brain,  aptitude,  skill ; 
and  my  daughter  sets  store  by  you. 

Sos.  Some  one  better  than  I,  Madam  .    .    . 

ARIS.  No,  no ;  your  refusal  is  useless. 

Sos.  Since  it  is  your  wish,  Madam,  I  must  obey;  but  I 
swear  to  you  that,  in  all  your  court,  you  could  not  have 
chosen  any  one  who  would  not  have  been  able  to  acquit 
himself  far  better  than  I  can  of  such  a  commission. 

ARIS.  You  are  too  modest ;  and  you  will  always  acquit 
yourself  well  of  whatever  you  may  be  charged  with. 
Gently  find  out  the  sentiments  of  Eriphila,  and  make  her 
remember  that  she  is  to  go  in  good  time  to  the  wood  of 
Diana. 

SCENE  III. — IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES,  SOSTRATES,  CLITIDAS. 

IPH.  {To  Sostrates}.  Rest  assured  that  I  share  in  the 
esteem  which  the  princess  shows  you. 

TIM.  (To  Sostrates.^)  Rest  assured  that  I  am  delighted 
at  the  choice  that  has  been  made  of  you. 

IPH.  Now  you  are  in  a  position  to  serve  your  friends. 

SCBNB  vi.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  l6l 

TIM.  You  have  now  the  means  of  rendering  good  service 
to  the  people  whom  it  may  please  you  to  serve. 

IPH.  I  do  not  commend  my  interests  to  you. 

TIM.  I  do  not  ask  you  to  speak  for  me. 

Sos.  It  would  be  useless,  gentlemen.  I  should  be  wrong 
to  exceed  my  orders ;  and  you  will  not  think  it  amiss  if  I 
speak  neither  for  the  one  nor  the  other. 

IPH.  I  leave  you  to  do  as  you  please. 

TIM.  You  shall  act  as  you  judge  best. 

SCENE  IV. — IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES,  CLITIDAS. 

IPH.  (Aside  to  Clitidas).  Will  Clitidas  be  kind  enough 
to  remember  that  he  is  one  of  my  friends ;  I  recommend 
him  always  to  forward  my  interests  with  his  mistress 
against  those  of  my  rival. 

CLIT.  (Aside  to  Iphicrates).  Let  me  manage  it.  There 
is  no  comparison  between  you  and  him !  and  he  is  a 
finely-built  prince  to  dispute  her  with  you. 

IPH.  (Aside  to  Clitidas).    I  shall  remember  this  service. 

SCENE  V. — TIMOCLES,  CLITIDAS. 

TIM.  My  rival  pays  his  court  to  Clitidas ;  but  Clitidas 
knows  well  that  he  has  promised  me  to  support  the  pre- 
tensions of  my  love. 

CLIT.  Assuredly;  and  he  is  but  jesting  to  think  to  gain 
the  day  over  you.  A  nice  specimen  of  a  prince  he  is,  com- 
pared with  you ! 

TIM.  There  is  nothing  which  I  could  refuse  to  Clitidas. 

CLIT.  (Alone).  Sweet  words  on  all  sides  !  Here  comes 
the  princess;  I  shall  watch  my  opportunity  of  speaking 
to  her. 

SCENE  VI. — ERIPHILA,  CLEONICE. 

CLE.  People  will  think  it  strange,  Madam,  that  you 
have  thus  strolled  away  from  every  one. 

ERI.  Ah !  how  agreeable  a  little  solitude  sometimes  is  to 
persons  like  us,  who  are  always  pestered  with  so  many  peo- 
ple !  and  how  sweet  it  is,  after  a  thousand  impertinent 
conversations  to  commune  with  one's  own  thoughts  !  Let 
me  walk  here  all  alone. 

VOL.  III.  L 

l62  THE   MAGNIFICENT    LOVERS.  [ACT ,. 

CLE.  Would  you  not  like,  Madam,  to  see  a  little  speci- 
men of  the  agility  of  these  admirable  personages,  who  wish 
to  enter  your  service.  They  are  people  who,  by  their 
steps,  their  gestures  and  movements,  express  everything  to 
the  eye ;  and  we  call  them  pantomimists  ?  I  have  trem- 
bled to  say  this  word  to  you ; 7  and  there  are  people  in  your 
court  who  would  not  forgive  me  for  it. 

ERI.  You  look  to  me  much,  Cleonice,  as  if  you  intended 
to  treat  me  here  to  an  annoying  entertainment ;  for,  thank 
Heaven,  you  always  wish  to  produce  indiscriminately  every- 
thing that  is  offered  to  you  ;  and  yours  is  an  affability  that 
rejects  nothing ;  thus  it  is  to  you  alone  we  see  that  the 
Muses,  when  in  want,  have  recourse  ;  you  are  the  great 
patroness  of  unrecognized  merit ;  and  everything  in  the 
shape  of  indigent  virtue  in  the  world  steps  down  at  your 
place. 

CLE.  If  you  have  no  wish  to'see  them,  Madam,  you  have 
only  to  leave  them  where  they  are. 

ERI.  No,  no ;  let  us  see  them  :  let  them  come. 

CLE.  But  their  dance  may  be  bad,  perhaps,  Madam. 

ERI.  Bad  or  not,  we  must  see  it.  It  would  be  only  post- 
poning the  thing  with  you ;  and  it  is  better  to  have  done 
with  it. 

CLE.  It  will  be  only  an  ordinary  dance  now;  Madam, 
another  time  .  .  . 

ERI.  No  preamble ;  Cleonice,  let  them  dance. 

SECOND  INTERLUDE. 

The  confidante  of  the  young  Princess  calls  forth  three 
dancers,  under  the  name  of  pantomimists,  that  is,  who  ex- 
press all  sorts  of  things  by  their  movements.  The  Princess 
sees  them  dance,  and  receives  them  into  her  service. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet 
of  the  three  Pantomimists. 

7  A  proof  that  the  art  and  the  word  were  new  in  France  ;  pantomime, 
meaning  '  pantomime/'  was  introduced  much  later. 

SCSNKIII.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  163 

ACT     II. 

SCENE  I. — ERIPHILA,  CLEONICE. 

ERI.  Very  admirable,  indeed.  I  do  not  think  that  peo- 
ple could  dance  better,  and  I  am  very  glad  to  have  them 
belonging  to  me. 

CLE.  And  I,  Madam,  am  very  glad  that  you  have  seen 
that  I  have  not  such  bad  taste  as  you  thought. 

ERI.  Do  not  boast  too  much;  you  will  not  be  long  in 
giving  me  an  opportunity  of  vindicating  my  opinion. 
Leave  me  now. 

SCENE  II. — ERIPHILA,  CLEONICE,  CLITIDAS. 

CLE.  (  Coming  to  meet  Clitidas).  I  warn  you,  Clitidas, 
that  the  princess  wishes  to  be  alone. 

CLIT.  Let  me  manage  it,  I  know  my  court  etiquette  well 
enough. 

SCENE  III.  ERIPHILA,  CLITIDAS. 

CLIT.  (Singing).  La,  la,  la,  la.  Pretending  to  be  sur- 
prised at  seeing  EriphilaS)  Ah! 

ERI.  (To  Clitidas,  who  makes  a  show  of  going).  Clitidas! 

CLIT.  I  did  not  see  you  there  madam. 

ERI.  Come  here.     Where  do  you  come  from? 

CLIT.  I  have  just  left  the  princess,  your  mother,  who  is 
going  towards  the  temple  of  Apollo,  accompanied  by  a 
great  many  people. 

ERI.  Do  you  not  find  that  these  spots  are  the  most 
charming  in  the  world  ? 

CLIT.   Assuredly.     The  princes,  your  lovers,  were  there. 

ERI.  The  stream  Peneus  has  some  agreeable  windings 
here. 

CLIT.  Very  agreeable.     Sostrates  was  also  there. 

ERI.   How  is  it  that  he  did  not  come  to  the  excursion? 

CLIT.  He  has  something  on  his  mind  which  prevents 
him  from  taking  pleasure  in  all  these  beautiful  entertain- 
ments. He  wishes  to  speak  to  me  about  it ;  but  you  have 
so  expressly  forbidden  me  to  charge  myself  with  any  affair 
for  you,  that  I  did  not  wish  to  listen  to  him,  and  I  told  him 
at  once  that  I  had  no  time  to  hear  him. 

164  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  u. 

ERI.  You  were  wrong  to  tell  him  so,  and  you  ought  to 
have  listened  to  him. 

CLIT.  I  told  him  at  first  that  I  had  no  time  to  listen, 
but  I  gave  him  a  hearing  afterwards. 

ERI.  You  have  done  well. 

CLIT.  Truth  to  tell,  he  is  a  man  who  pleases,  a  man 
such  as  I  should  like  men  to  be,  not  assuming  boisterous 
manners  and  provoking  tone  of  voice ;  prudent  and  care- 
ful in  all  things,  never  speaking  but  to  the  point,  not  too 
prompt  in  deciding,  not  at  all  annoying  by  exaggeration  ; 
and,  whatever  beautiful  verses  our  poets  may  recite  to  him, 
I  have  never  heard  him  say,  There  !  that  is  more  beautiful 
than  anything  Homer  ever  wrote.  In  short,  he  is  a  man 
for  whom  I  feel  some  inclination  ;  and,  were  I  a  princess, 
he  would  not  be  unhappy.  « 

ERI.  He  is  a  man  of  great  merit,  no  doubt.  But  of 
what  did  he  speak  to  you  ? 

CLIT.  He  asked  me  whether  you  showed  much  pleasure 
at  the  magnificent  entertainment  which  they  have  given 
you,  spoke  of  you  with  greatest  possible  transports, 
lauded  you  to  the'  skies,  and  gave  you  all  the  praises  that 
one  could  give  to  the  most  accomplished  princess  on  earth, 
intermixing  them  with  sundry  sighs  that  told  more  than 
he  intended.  In  short,  by  dint  of  turning  him  on  all 
sides,  and  of  urging  him  to  tell  the  cause  of  that  profound 
melancholy  which  is  noticed  by  the  whole  court,  he  has 
been  obliged  to  acknowledge  to  me  that  he  is  in  love. 

ERI.  What,  in  love !  what  boldness  is  his  !  He  is  a 
hare-brained  fellow  whom  I  will  never  see  again  in  my 
life. 

CLIT.  Of  what  do  you  complain,  Madam? 

ERI.  To  have  the  audacity  to  love  me?  and  what  is  more, 
to  have  the  audacity  to  say  so  ! 

CLIT.  It  is  not  you  with  whom  he  is  in  love,  Madam. 

ERI.  It  is  not  I  ? 

CLIT.  No,  Madam ;  he  respects  you  too  much  for  that, 
and  is  too  sensible  to  think  of  it. 

ERI.  And  with  whom  then,  Clitidas  ? 

CLIT.  With  one  of  your  ladies-in-waiting,  young  Arsinoe.8 

8  In  the  first  Scene  of  the  fourth  Act  of  the  Princess  of  E Its  (see  Vol. 
II.,  p.  58),  there  is  a  similar  ruse  employed  by  the  princess. 

SCKNK  iv.J  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  l6$ 

ERI.  Has  she  so  many  charms  that  he  could  find  no  one 
worthier  of  his  love  than  she? 

CLIT.  He  loves  her  madly,  and  beseeches  you  to  honour 
his  flame  with  your  protection. 

ERI.  I? 

CLIT.  No,  no,  Madam.  I  see  that  the  affair  does  not 
please  you.  Your  anger  has  obliged  me  to  use  this  subter- 
fuge ;  and,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  it  is  you  whom  he  loves 
to  madness. 

ERI.  You  are  an  insolent  fellow  to  come  thus  to  surprise 
my  feelings.  Come,  leave  this;  you  would  read  into 
peoples'  thoughts,  penetrate  into  the  secrets  of  a  princess' 
heart !  Out  of  my  sight,  and  let  me  never  set  eyes  upon 
you  again,  Clitidas. 

CLIT.  Madam  ? 

ERI.  Come  here ;  I  forgive  you  this  affair. 

CLIT.  You  are  too  kind,  Madam  .    .    . 

ERI.  But  on  condition — mind  well  what  I  say  to  you — 
that  you  open  your  lips  to  no  one,  at  the  peril  of  your  life. 

CLIT.  That  is  sufficient. 

ERI.  Sostrates  has  told  you  then  that  he  loved  me  ? 

CLIT.  No,  Madam.  I  must  tell  you  the  truth.  I  have 
wrung  from  his  heart,  by  surprise,  a  secret  which  he  wishes 
to  hide  from  all  the  world,  and  with  which,  he  says,  he  is 
resolved  to  die.  He  is  in  despair  at  the  subtle  theft  which 
I  have  committed ;  and  very  far  from  charging  me  to  dis- 
cover it  to  you,  he  has  besought  me,  with  all  the  fervent 
prayers  one  could  utter,  to  reveal  nothing  of  it  to  you ;  and 
what  I  have  said  to  you  just  now  is  treason  against  him. 

ERI.  So  much  the  better  !  it  is  by  his  respect  only  that 
he  can  please  me ;  and,  if  he  were  bold  enough  to  declare 
his  love  to  me,  he  would  forever  lose  both  my  presence  and 
my  esteem. 

CLIT.  Have  no  fear,  Madam,  that  ...  . 

ERI.  Here  he  comes.  Remember,  at  least,  if  you  are 
wise,  what  I  have  forbidden  you. 

CLIT.  That  is  already  done,  Madam.  One  must  not  be 
an  indiscreet  courtier. 

SCENE  IV. — ERIPHILA,  SOSTRATES. 
Sos.  I  have  an  excuse,  Madam,  for  daring  to  disturb 

166  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  i 

your  solitude ;  and  I  have  received  from  the  princess,  your 
mother,  a  commission  which  authorizes  the  liberty  which 
I  now  take. 

ERI.  What  commission,  Sostrates? 

Sos.  This  one,  Madam,  to  endeavour  to  learn  from  you 
towards  which  of  the  two  princes  your  heart  inclines. 

ERI.  The  princess,  my  mother,  shows  a  judicious  spirit 
in  the  choice  which  she  has  made  of  you  for  such  a  task. 
This  commission,  Sostrates,  has,  no  doubt,  been  very  agree- 
able to  you,  and  you  have  accepted  it  with  great  joy  ? 

Sos.  I  have  accepted  it,  Madam,  through  the  necessity 
which  my  duty  imposes  upon  me  to  obey ;  and  if  the  prin- 
cess would  have  been  satisfied  with  my  excuses,  she  would 
have  honoured  some  one  else  with  this  commission. 

ERI.  What  reason,  Sostrates,  obliged  you  to  refuse  it  ? 

Sos.  The  fear,  Madam,  of  acquitting  myself  ill  in  it. 

ERI.  Do  you  think  that  I  do  not  esteem  you  sufficiently 
well  to  open  my  heart  to  you,  and  to  give  you  all  the  in- 
formation that  you  could  wish  about  these  two  princes? 

Sos.  I  desire  none  for  myself  upon  the  subject,  Madam  ; 
and  I  ask  for  no  other  than  that  which  you  may  deem 
yourself  obliged  to  accord  to  the  commands  which  bring 
me  here. 

ERI.  Till  now,  I  have  avoided  explaining  myself,  and 
the  princess,  my  mother,  has  been  kind  enough  always  to 
allow  me  to  postpone  the  choice  which  is  to  bind  me  ;  but 
I  should  be  very  glad  to  show  the  world  that  I  would  do 
something  for  the  love  of  you ;  and  if  you  press  me  to  it, 
I  shall  pronounce  the  verdict  for  which  they  have  already 
been  waiting  so  long. 

Sos.  It  is  a  matter,  Madam,  in  which  you  shall  not  be 
troubled  by  me ;  and  I  could  not  make  up  my  mind  to 
press  a  princess  who  so  well  knows  what  she  has  to  do. 

ERI.  But  that  is  what  the  princess  my  mother  expects 
from  you. 

Sos.  Have  I  not  told  her  also  that  I  should  but  ill  acquit 
myself  of  this  commission? 

ERI.  Come  now,  Sostrates,  people  like  you  have  always 
far-seeing  eyes ;  and  I  think  that  there  must  be  few  things 
that  escape  yours.  Have  your  eyes  not  been  able  to  dis- 
cover that  which  everybody  is  so  much  concerned  about ! 

SCKNB  v.l  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS,  167 

and  have  they  not  given  you  some  small  glimpse  of  the 
inclination  of  my  heart  ?  You  see  the  attentions  that  are 
paid  to  me,  the  homage  shown  to  me.  Upon  which  of  the 
two  princes,  think  you,  do  I  look  with  the  most  favourable 
eyes? 

Sos.  The  doubts  which  one  forms  upon  these  sorts  of 
matters  are  generally  regulated  by  the  interest  which  one 
takes  in  them. 

ERI.  For  which  of  the  two,  Sostrates,  would  you  incline? 
Which  is  the  one,  tell  me,  whom  you  would  wish  me  to 
marry? 

Sos.  Ah  !  Madam,  not  my  wishes,  but  your  inclination 
shall  decide  the  matter. 

ERI.  But  if  I  consulted  you  upon  this  choice  ? 

Sos.  If  you  consulted  me,  I  should  be  very  much  at  a  loss. 

ERI.  Could  not  you  say,  which  of  the  two  seems  to  you 
the  most  worthy  of  this  preference  ? 

Sos.  If  from  my  own  eyes  I  were  to  judge,  there  would 
be  no  one  worthy  of  this  honour.  All  the  princes  of  the 
world  are  not  good  enough  to  aspire  to  you;  the  gods 
only  might  pretend  to  do  so  ;  and  you  should  accept  from 
men  only  incense  and  sacrifice. 

ERI.  That  is  very  kind,  and  you  are  one  of  my  friends: 
but  I  wish  you  to  tell  me  for  which-of  the  two  you  feel  the 
greatest  inclination,  which  is  the  one  whom  you  would 
place  first  in  the  rank  of  your  friends.9 

SCENE  V. — ERIPHILA,  SOSTRATES,  CHOREBUS. 

CHOR.  Madam,  here  is  the  princess  who  comes  hither 
to  take  you  to  the  wood  of  Diana. 

Sos.  (Aside}.  Alas  !  how  seasonably  you  come  in,  little 
boy  ! 

SCENE  VI. — ARISTONE,  ERIPHILA,  IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES, 

SOSTRATES,  ANAXARCHUS,  CLITIDAS. 
ARIS.  You  have  been   asked  for,  daughter ;  and  there 
are  some  people  whom  your  absence  frets  very  much. 

'  It  has  been  well  said  that  princesses  are  condemned  in  friendship  as 
well  as  in  love,  to  make  overtures,  and  that  the  respect  which  surrounds 
them  often  obliges  the  most  discreet  and  the  most  proud  to  make  ad- 
vances, which  other  ladies  would  not  dare  to  do.  See,  in  confirmation  of 
this,  the  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play. 

l68  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  11. 

ERI.  I  think,  Madam,  that  I  have  been  asked  for  out 
of  compliment ;  and  that  people  do  not  fret  so  much  as 
you  say. 

ARIS.  There  is  such  a  series  of  entertainments  here 
given  for  our  sakes,  that  all  our  time  is  occupied ;  and 
we  have  not  a  moment  to  lose,  if  we  wish  to  enjoy  them 
all.  Let  us  quickly  enter  the  wood,  and  see  what  awaits 
us  there.  This  is  the  most  charming  spot  in  the  world ; 
let  us  take  our  places  quickly. 

THIRD  INTER L  UDE. 

The  stage  represents  a  forest  to  which  the  princess  has 
been  invited.  A  nymph  does  the  honours,  singing;  and  to 
amuse  them,  a  small  musical  comedy  is  played,  the  subject 
of  which  is  as  follows : — A  shepherd  complains  to  t'jo  others, 
his  friends,  of  the  coldness  of  her  whom  he  loves;  the  two 
friends  console  him;  at  that  moment  the  beloved  shepherdess 
appears,  and  the  three  retire  to  observe  her.  After  a  plain- 
tive love  ditty,  she  reclines  on  the  turf,  and  abandons  herself 
to  slumber.  The  lover  makes  his  two  friends  approach  to 
contemplate  the  charms  of  his  shepherdess,  and  invokes  all 
things  to  contribute  to  her  rest.  The  shepherdess,  on  waking, 
finds  her  swain  at  her  feet,  complains  of  his  persecution ; 
but,  taking  his  constancy  into  consideration,  grants  to  him 
what  he  wishes,  and  consents  to  be  beloved  by  him,  in  the 
presence  of*  the  two  shepherd  friends .  Upon  this  two  satyrs 
arrive,  upbraid  her  with  her  change  of  affection,  and 
feeling  the  disgrace  into  which  they  have  fallen,  seek  their 
consolation  in  wine. 

THE  PERSONAGES  OF  THE  PASTORAL. 

The  Nymph  of  the   Vale  of  Tempe,    Tircis,   Lycaste, 
Menander,  Caliste,  Two  Satyrs. 

PROLOGUE; 

The  Nymph  of  Tempe,  alone. 

Come,  great  princess,  with  all  your  charms, 
Come  view  the  innocent  delights 

SCENE  ii.  I  THE   MAGNIFICENT    LOVERS.  169 

Which  our  wilderness  presents  to  you; 

Do  not  seek  here  the  splendour  of  the  court  festivals ; 

Nothing  but  love  is  felt  in  these  spots, 

Love  is  the  sole  burden  of  our  songs. 

SCENE  I. — TIRCIS,  alone. 

You  sing  in  your  leafy  retreat, 

Sweet  nightingales  replete  with  love  ; 

And  with  your  tender  strains 

You  awake  by  turns 

The  echoes  of  these  groves. 

Alas  !   ye  little  birds,  alas ! 

Had  you  my  griefs,  you  would  not  sing. 

SCENE  II.— LYCASTE,  MENANDER,  TIRCIS. 

LYC.  Eh,    what !    ever   languishing,    sombre   and   cast 
down? 

MEN.  Eh,  what !   to  tears,  as  always,  wed? 

TIRC.   Ever  adorning  Caliste, 
And  ever  unhappy. 

LYC.  Then  overcome,  overcome,  ye  shepherd,  the  grief 
that  haunts  you. 

TIRC.  Alas  !    how  can  I,  alas  ! 

MEN.   Make,  make  an  effort  for  yourself. 

TIRC.  Alas  !   how  can  I,  when  the  evil  is  too  great  ? 

LYC.  The  evil  will  find  its  remedy. 

TIRC.  I  shall  not  be  cured  except  through  death. 

LYC.  &  MEN.   Ah !    Tyrcis  ! 

TIRC.  Ah  !   shepherds  ! 

LYC.  &  MEN.    Control  your  feelings  more. 

TIRC.  Nothing  can  come  to  my  aid. 

LYC.  &  MEN.   It  is  giving  way  too  much,  too  much. 

TIRC.  It  is  suffering  too  much,  too  much. 

LYC.  &  MEN.    What  weakness  ! 

TIRC.  What  martyrdom  ! 

LYC.  &  MEN.  You  must  take  courage. 

TIRC.  Rather  let  me  die. 

LYC.  There  is  no  shepherdess 

So  cold  and  so  severe, 

But  what  the  pressing  ardour 

170  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [SCBNM  m. 

Of  a  heart  that  perseveres, 

Can  overcome  her  coldness. 
MEN.     There  are,  in  these  affairs 

Of  amorous  mystery, 

Certain  little  moments 

In  which  the  most  severe  change, 

And  make  lovers  happy. 
TIRC.     I  behold  the  cruel  one 

Bending  her  steps  towards  this  spot. 

Let  us  take  care  not  to  be  seen  by  her ; 

For,  alas  !  the  ungrateful  one 

Would  not  then  come  hither. 

SCENE  III. — CALISTE,  alone. 

Ah,  how  on  our  hearts 

The  cruel  honour's  law 

Exercises  merciless  sway ! 

For  Tircis  I  show  nought  but  coldness  ; 

And  all  the  while,  too  sensible  to  his  poignant  grief, 

I  sigh  in  secret  over  his  languor, 

And  would  like  to  relieve  his  martyrdom. 

To  you  alone  I  breathe  this  much, 

Ye  trees,  do  not  repeat  the  words, 

Since  Heaven  has  been  pleased  to  create 

Within  us  hearts  which  love  can  kindle, 

What  pitiless  rigour 

Forces  us  to  arm  ourselves  against  his  sweetest  darts! 

And  why,  without  aught  to  be  blamed, 

Can  we  not  love 

What  we  find  loveable  ? 

Alas  !  how  happy  are  ye, 

Ye  guileless  beasts,  to  live  without  restraint, 

And  to  be  able  to  follow  without  fear 

The  sweet  transports  of  your  amorous  hearts  ! 

Alas  !  ye  little  birds,  how  happy  are  you 

To  feel  no  restraint, 

And  to  be  able  to  follow  without  fear 

The  sweet  transports  of  your  amorous  hearts  ! 

But  slumber  on  my  eyelids 

Sheds  the  agreeable  coolness  of  its  poppies ; 

SCENE  iv.]  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  17! 

I  yield  to  it  with  all  my  heart ; 

There  is  no  severe  law 

Forbidding  our  senses  to  taste  its  sweetness. 

SCENE  IV. — CALISTE  (asleep},  TIRCIS,  LYCASTE, 
MENANDER. 

TIRC.  Towards  my  charming  foe 

Let  us  without  noise  bend  our  steps, 
Yet  taking  care  not  to  awaken 
Her  coldness,  which  now  slumbers. 
ALL  THREE.  Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  fair  eyes,  lovely  con- 
querors ; 
And   taste   that    peace  which    you  wrest 

from  all  hearts ; 
Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  fair  eyes. 
TIRC.  Now  silence  keep,  ye  little  birds  ; 

Ye  winds,  stir  nought  around  ; 
Ye  stream,  run  sweetly  on  : 
For  Caliste  is  slumbering. 

ALL  THREE.  Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  fair  eyes,  lovely  con- 
querors ; 
And   taste   that   peace   which    you   wrest 

from  all  hearts ; 
Sleep  on,  sleep  on,  fair  eyes. 
CALIS.  (awakening,  to  Tircis). 

Ah  !  what  exceeding  cruelty  •. 
To  dog  my  steps  where'er  I  go  ! 
TIRC.  What  else  would  you  have  me  follow,  alas  ! 

But  the  beloved  ? 

CALIS.  Say,  shepherd,  what  would  you  with  me  ? 

TIRC.  To  die,  fair  shepherdess, 

To  die  at  your  feet. 
And  end  my  misery. 
Since,  in  vain,  at  your  feet  I  sigh, 
I  must  die  there. 
CALIS.          Hence,  Tircis ;  I  fear  that  this  day 

The  pity  in  my  heart  is  but  the  harbinger  of 

love. 

LYC.  &  MEN.  (one  after  another).     Be  it  pity,  be  it  love. 
It  well  becomes  to  be  tender ; 

172  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [SCBNK  r. 

You  too  long  have  been  unbending ; 

Shepherdess,  you  must  yield 

To  his  constant  flame. 

Be  it  pity,  be  it  love, 

It  well  becomes  to  be  tender. 
CAL.   (To  Tircis).     Too  severe,  too  cruel  I  have  been. 

Your  ardour  I  have  treated  ill, 

While  loving  you  all  the  time. 

Avenge  yourself  on  my  heart, 

Tircis,  which  I  now  yield  to  you. 

TIRC.  O,  Heavens,  shepherds !    Caliste,  I  am  beside 

myself 

If  joy  can  kill,  then  I  shall  lose  my  life. 
LYC.  Worthy  reward  of  your  love  ! 

MEN.  O  fate  to  be  envied. 

SCENE   V. — Two    SATYRS,    CALISTE,    TIRCIS,    LYCASTE, 
MENANDER. 

1  ST  SATYR.  (70  Caliste).    What,  you  fly  from  me;    and  I 

see  you, 

Ungrateful  woman,   prefer    this    shepherd   to 
me ! 

2  D  SATYR.  Have  my  vows  no  effect  upon  your  indiffer- 

ence? 

And  for  this  languid  swain   your  heart  is  sof- 
tened ! 
CAL.  Fate  wills  it  thus  ! 

Take  patience  both  of  you. 
IST  SATYR.  To  swains  who  are  driven  to  despair 

Love  causes  to  shed  tears ; 

But  this  is  not  to  our  taste, 

And  the  bottle  has  some  charms 

Which  console  us  for  everything. 
2D  SATYR.  Our  passion  does  not  aye  obtain 

Whate'er  it  may  desire  ; 

But  we  have  another  resource, 

And  good  wine  makes  us  laugh 

When  others  mock  our  loves. 
COL.  Ye  rustic  divinities, 

Ye  fauns,  and  dryads,  come  out 

SCBNB  v.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  173 

From  your  peaceful  retreats ; 
Join  your  steps  to  our  sounds, 
And  trace  on  the  verdure 
The  image  of  our  songs. 

FIRST  ENTRY  OF  THE  BALLET. 

At  the  same  time,  six  Dryads  and  six  Fauns  come  out  of 
their  grottos,  and  execute  a  beautiful  dance j  then  they 
open  their  ranks  all  at  once,  and  reveal  a  shepherd  and 
shepherdess  who  perform  a  small  musical  scene  of  a 
love-tiff. 

THE  LOVE-TIFF. 
Climene,  Philinte. 

PHIL.  When  I  was  pleasing  to  your  eyes, 

I  with  my  life  was  satisfied, 

And  saw  nor  king  nor  god, 

Whose  lot  inspired  me  with  envy. 
CLIM.  When  to  every  one  else 

Your  affection  preferred  me, 

I  would  have  left  a  crown 

To  reign  over  your  heart. 
PHIL.  Another  has  cured  my  heart 

Of  the  passion  which  I  had  for  you. 
CLIM.  Another  has  revenged  my  flame 

Of  your  perjured  faith. 
PHIL.  Chloris,  who  is  lauded  much, 

Loves  me  with  a  faithful  love ; 

If  her  eyes  told  me  to  die 

Gladly  I  would  expire  for  her. 
CLIM.  Myrtil,  so  worthy  of  envy, 

Cherishes  me  more  than  the  day ; 

And  I,  I  would  lose  my  life 

To  show  him  my  affection. 
PHIL.  What,  if  returning  love  again 

Should  make  me  your  bright  charms  adore, 

Should  Chloris  from  my  bosom  chase, 

And  re-instate  you  in  her  stead  ? 

174  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [SCBKK  v. 

CLIM.  Though  with  the  utmost  tenderness, 

Myrtil  might  ever  cherish  me, 
With  you,  I  still  confess,  I  would 
And  live,  and  die.10 
THE  TWO  TOGETHER.  More  than  ever  let  us  love 

And    live   and   die  in   bonds  so 
sweet. 

All  the  Actors  in  the  Pastoral. 

Ye  lovers,  how  sweet  and  nice 

Are  your  quarrels  and  bickerings  ! 

How  we  see  follow,  one  after  another, 

Pleasure  and  tenderness! 

Quarrel  continually 

To  make  it  up  again. 

Ye  lovers,  how  sweet  and  nice 

Are  your  quarrels  and  bickerings  !  &c. 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  Fauns  and  the  Dryads  recommence  their  dancing, 
which  the  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses  accompany  by  their 
music  and  song,  while  three  little  female  Dryads  and  three 
little  Fauns  reproduce,  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  everything 
that  goes  on  in  front. 

The  Shepherds  and  Shepherdesses. 

Let  us  enjoy,  let  us  enjoy,  the  innocent  pleasures 
With  which  the  fire  of  love  charms  our  senses. 
Let  those  who  like  care  for  grandeur ; 
All  these  honours  so  greatly  envied, 
Cause  grief  which  is  often  too  poignant. 
Let  us  enjoy,  let  us  enjoy,  the  innocent  pleasures 
With  which  the  fire  of  love  charms  our  senses. 

While  we  love,  everything  pleases  in  life ; 
Two  united  hearts  are  contented  with  their  lot, 
Such  ardour,  followed  up  by  pleasure, 

10  Moliere  had  already  attempted  a  paraphrase  of  Horace's  ode  Donee 
stratus  cram  tibi,  in  The  Love  Tiff,  as  well  as  in  Tartuffe  and  in  The 
Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman.  The  above  piece  bears  the  same  title  as 
the  first  mentioned  play. 

SCENE  i.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  175 

Makes  of  our  days  eternal  spring. 

Let  us  enjoy,  let  us  enjoy,  the  innocent  pleasures 
With  which  the  fire  of  love  charms  our  senses. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA,  IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES, 
ANAXARCHUS,  SOSTRATES,  CLITIDAS. 

ARIS.  The  same  words  come  continually  to  our  lips; 
one  must  always  exclaim :  That  is  admirable  !  nothing 
could  be  more  beautiful !  it  surpasses  aught  that  has  ever 
been  seen  ! 

TIM.  The  praise  is  too  great  for  such  trifles,  Madam. 

ARIS.  Trifles  like  these  may  agreeably  occupy  the  most 
serious  persons.  In  truth,  daughter,  you  are  very  much 
obliged  to  these  princes,  and  you  cannot  acknowledge 
sufficiently  all  the  trouble  which  they  take  for  you. 

ERI.  I  am  as  grateful  as  possible  for  it,  Madam. 

ARIS.  Still  you  make  them  languish  a  long  while  for 
what  they  expect  from  you.  I  have  promised  not  to  con- 
strain you ;  but  their  affection  urges  you  to  declare  your- 
self, and  no  longer  to  delay  the  reward  for  their  services. 
I  have  charged  Sostrates  gently  to  discover  the  sentiments 
of  your  heart ;  and  I  do  not  know  if 'he  has  begun  to  ac- 
quit himself  of  this  commission. 

ERI.  Yes,  Madam ;  but  it  seems  to  me  that  I  cannot  too 
long  postpone  the  choice  for  which  I  am  pressed,  and 
which  I  am  unable  to  make  without  being,  to  some  ex- 
tent, to  blame.  I  feel  equally  obliged  for  the  love,  the 
zeal,  and  the  services  of  these  two  princes ;  and  I  think 
it  somewhat  of  a  great  injustice  to  show  myself  ungrateful, 
either  to  the  one  or  the  other,  by  the  refusal  I  should  have 
to  make  in  my  preference  for  his  rival. 

IPH.  This  is  certainly,  Madam,  a  very  pretty  compli- 
ment, in  order  to  refuse  us  both. 

ARIS.  This  scruple,  daughter,  ought  not  to  trouble  you ; 
and  these  two  princes  have  submitted,  long  ago,  to  the 
preference  which  your  inclination  might  cause  you  to 
make. 

176  THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS  [ACT  HI, 

ERI.  Inclination,  Madam,  is  very  apt  to  be  mistaken, 
and  disinterested  eyes  are  much  more  capable  of  choosing 
justly. 

ARIS.  You  know  that  I  have  pledged  my  word  to  give 
no  opinion  upon  this;  and  between  these  two  princes, 
your  inclination  cannot  go  wrong,  or  make  a  choice  that 
can  be  bad. 

ERI.  In  order  not  to  violate  your  promise  or  my  scru- 
ples, please  to  accept,  Madam,  a  way  which  I  make  bold 
to  propose. 

ARIS.  What,  daughter? 

ERI.  Let  Sostrates  decide  whom  I  should  prefer.  You 
have  selected  him  to  find  out  the  secret  of  my  heart,  now 
permit  me  to  choose  him  to  get  me  out  of  the  plight  in 
which  I  find  myself. 

ARIS.  I  value  Sostrates  so  much,  that,  whether  you  wish 
to  employ  him  to  explain  your  sentiments,  or  whether  you 
will  be  absolutely  guided  by  him ;  I  value,  say  I,  his  virtue 
and  judgment  so  much,  that  I  consent  with  all  my  heart 
to  the  proposal  which  you  make  to  me. 

IPH.  That  means,  Madam,  that  we  must  pay  our  court 
to  Sostrates? 

Sos.  No,  my  lord,  you  will  have  to  pay  me  no  court ; 
and  with  all  the  respect  due  to  the  princesses,  I  decline 
the  glory  to  which  they  intend  to  raise  me. 

ARIS.  Whence  comes  that,  Sostrates? 

Sos.  I  have  reasons,  Madam,  which  do  not  allow  me  to 
receive  the  honour  which  you  offer  to  me. 

IPH.  Do  you  fear,  Sostrates,  to  make  yourself  an 
enemy? 

Sos.  I  would  little  fear,  my  lord,  the  enemies  whom  I 
might  make,  while  obeying  the  will  of  my  sovereigns. 

TIM.  For  what  reason,  then,  do  you  refuse  to  accept  the 
power  given  to  you,  and  to  acquire  the  friendship  of  that 
prince  who  shall  owe  all  his  happiness  to  you  ? 

Sos.  For  the  reason  that  I  am  unable  to  grant  that 
prince  what  he  would  wish  from  me. 

IPH.  What  might  that  reason  be? 

Sos.  Why  press  me  so  much  on  the  subject  ?  I  may, 
perhaps,  my  lord,  have  some  secret  interest  that  opposes 
itself  to  the  pretensions  of  your  love.  I  may,  perhaps,  have 

scw«I.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  177 

a  friend  whose  heart,  without  daring  to  avow  it,  burns 
with  a  respectful  flame  for  the  divine  charms  by  which  you 
are  captivated.  This  friend  is  perhaps  making  me  a  daily 
confidant  of  his  martyrdom,  is  daily  bewailing  to  me  the 
cruelty  of  his  fate,  and  is  looking  upon  the  nuptials  of  the 
princess  as  the  terrible  verdict  that  consigns  him  to  the 
grave ;  and  if  this  were  so,  my  lord,  would  it  be  just  that 
he  should  receive  his  death-blow  from  my  hands. 

IPH.  You,  Sostrates,  might  perhaps  yourself  be  that 
friend  whose  interests  you  have  so  much  at  heart. 

Sos.  Do  not  seek,  I  pray,  you,  to  render  me  odious  to 
the  persons  who  are  listening  to  you.  I  know  myself,  my 
lord ;  and  unfortunate  men  like  me  well  know  to  what 
their  permission  permits  them  aspire. 

ARIS.  Let  us  drop  this ;  we  shall  find  the  means  of 
overcoming  the  irresolution  of  my  daughter. 

ANA.  Can  there  be  a  better  way,  Madam,  to  conclude 
matters  to  the  satisfaction  of  everyone  than  the  light 
which  Heaven  can  throw  upon  this  match.  I  have,  there- 
fore, begun,  as  I  told  you,  to  cast  the  mysterious  figures 
which  our  art  teaches  us  ;  and  I  hope  to  be  able  to  show 
you  bye-and-bye  what  the  future  has  in  store  regarding 
this  much-desired  union.  Can  there  be  any  vacillation 
after  this  ?  Shall  the  glory  and  prosperity  which  Heaven 
promises  to  the  one  or  the  other  choice,  not  be  sufficient 
to  determine  it ;  and  can  the  rejected  one  be  offended, 
when  Heaven  itself  shall  decide  this  preference  ? 

IPH.  As  for  me,  I  submit  entirely  to  it ;  and  I  declare 
that  this  way  seems  to  me  the  most  reasonable. 

TIM.  I  am  of  the  same  opinion ;  and  Heaven  could  do 
nothing  but  what  I  would  subscribe  to  without  repug- 
nance." 

ERI.  But  my  lord  Anaxarchus,  do  you  really  see  so 
clearly  into  destiny  that  you  are  never  deceived,  and  who, 
pray,  will  be  the  guarantee  for  this  glory  and  prosperity, 
which,  say  you,  Heaven  promises  us  ? 

ARIS.  Daughter,  you  have  some  trifling  incredulity  that 
does  not  leave  you. 

11  We  shall  see,  farther  on,  in  the  fourth  Scene  of  the  third  Act  that  the 
astrologer  had  promised  to  be  favourable  to  each  of  the  two  rival  princes. 
VOL.  III.  M 

178  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  HI. 

ANA.  The  proofs,  Madam,  which  everybody  has  seen 
of  the  infallibility  of  my  predictions,  are  sufficient  guar- 
antees for  the  promises  which  I  can  make.  But,  in  short, 
when  I  shall  have  shown  you  what  Heaven  marks  out  for 
you,  you  shall  regulate  your  conduct  after  your  own 
fancy ;  and  it  will  be  for  you  to  choose  the  lot  of  either 
the  one  or  the  other. 

ERI.  Will  Heaven,  Anaxarchus,  show  me  the  good  or 
bad  fortune12  which  shall  attend  me  ? 

ANA.  Yes,  Madam  ;  the  happiness  which  shall  be  your 
lot,  if  you  marry  the  one  ;  and  the  misfortunes  which 
shall  accompany  you,  if  you  wed  the  other. 

ERI.  But  as  it  is  impossible  that  I  should  wed  them 
both,  it  must  then  be  written  down  in  Heaven,  not  only 
what  is  to  occur,  but  also  what  is  not  to  occur. 

CLIT.  {Aside'}.     Behold  my  astrologer  non-plussed. 

ANAX.  I  should  have  made  a  long  discussion  upon  the 
principles  of  astrology,  Madam,  to  make  you  understand 
this. 

CLIT.  Well  answered.  Madam,  I  say  no  harm  of 
astrology  :  astrology  is  a  good  thing,  and  my  lord  Anax- 
archus is  a  great  man. 

IPH.  The  truth  of  astrology  is  incontestable ;  and  there 
is  no  one  who  can  dispute  against  the  certainty  of  its 
prognostications. 

CLIT.  Assuredly. 

TIM.  I  am  incredulous  enough  about  many  things  ;  but 
as  regards  astrology,  there  is  nothing  more  sure  and  more 
constant  than  the  certainty  of  the  horoscopes  which  it 
draws. 

CLIT.  They  are  the  clearest  things  in  the  world. 

IPH.  A  hundred  foretold  adventures  happen  every  day, 
which  convince  the  most  stubborn. 

CLIT.  That  is  true. 

12  The  original  has  fortune,  which,  in  Moliere's  time,  meant  "  fate,  lot, 
luck/'  but  not  "  riches,''  as  it  does  generally  now.  Still  the  word  is  some- 
times used  in  its  proper  sense,  above  all,  with  an  adjective,  as  bonne  for- 
tune, mauvaise  fortune,  also  la  fortune  me  sourit.  In  English  we  have 
kept  generally  to  the  primary  meaning,  as  "  fortune  favours  the  brave ;" 
but  with  the  indefinite  article  it  often  means  "wealth,'1  as  ''he  has  a  for- 
tune of  ten  thousand  pounds.1' 

SCENB  i.J  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  179 

TIM.  Can  we  contest,  on  this  matter,  the  famous  inci- 
dents which  are  vouched  for  by  history  ? 

CLIT.  It  would  not  be  common  sense.  To  contest  what 
is  ordained. 13 

ARIS.  Sostrates  does  not  say  a  word.  What  is  his 
opinion  ? 

Sos.  Madam,  every  mind  is  not  born  with  the  qualities 
required  for  the  delicacy  of  these  grand  sciences,  which 
we  call  abstruse;  and  there  are  some  so  material,  that 
they  cannot  conceive  what  others  understand  in  the  easiest 
manner  possible.  There  is  nothing  more  agreeable, 
Madam,  than  all  the  great  promises  of  these  sublime 
studies.  To  transform  everything  into  gold ;  to  cause 
people  to  live  for  ever;  to  cure  by  words;  to  make 
ourselves  beloved  by  whom  we  wish;  to  know  all  the 
secrets  of  the  future ;  to  cause  to  descend  from  Heaven, 
at  one's  will,  impressions  of  good  fortune  on  metals ;  to 
command  demons ;  to  create  invisible  armies,  and  invul- 
nerable soldiers :  all  this  is  charming,  no  doubt ;  and 
there  are  people  who  have  not  the  slightest  trouble  in  com- 
prehending the  possibility  of  it ;  for  them  it  is  the  easiest 
thing  to  conceive.  But,  as  for  me,  I  confess  candidly  that 
my  coarse  mind  has  some  difficulty  in  understanding  and 
in  believing  it ;  and  I  have  always  found  it  too  good  to 
be  true.  All  these  beautiful  arguments  of  sympathy  of 
magnetic  force,  and  of  occult  influence,  are  so  subtle,  and 
delicate,  that  they  escape  my  material  understanding;  and, 
without  speaking  about  the  rest,  it  has  never  been  in  my 
power  to  conceive  how  the  smallest  particulars  of  the  least 
important  man's  fate  could  be  found  written  in  Heaven. 
What  relation,  what  connection,  what  correspondence  can 
there  be  between  us  and  globes  so  immeasurably  distant 
from  our  earth  ?  and  whence,  in  short,  can  this  beautiful 
science  have  come  to  man?  Which  god  has  revealed  it? 
or  what  experience  can  have  been  formed  from  observing 
this  great  number  of  stars  which  no  one  as  yet  has  been 
able  to  see  twice  in  the  same  order  ? 

ANAX.  It  will  not  be  difficult  to  make  you  conceive  it. 

18  The  original  has  moult,  printed.  Moliere  perhaps  did  not  like  to  us« 
the  word  imprime,  so  as  to  avoid  an  anachronism. 

l8o  THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  [ACr  in. 

Sos.  You  will  be  more  clever  than  all  others. 

CLIT.  {To  Sostrates}.  He  will  deliver  you  a  lecture 
upon  all  this,  whenever  you  like. 

IPH.  {To  Sostrates}.  If  you  do  not  understand  things, 
at  least  you  can  believe  them  from  what  we  see  every  day. 

Sos.  As  my  understanding  is  too  coarse  to  comprehend 
anything,  my  eyes  are  also  so  unfortunate  that  they  have 
never  seen  anything. 

IPH.  As  for  myself,  I  have  seen,  and  convincing  things 
too. 

TIM.  And  I  also. 

Sos.  Since  you  have  seen,  you  do  well  to  believe ;  and 
your  eyes  must  be  differently  made  from  mine. 

IPH.  But,  in  short,  the  princess  believes  in  astrology, 
and  it  seems  to  me  that  one  may  well  believe  after  her. 
Has  she  not  her  sense,  and  wits  about  her,  Sostrates? 

Sos.  The  question  is  somewhat  startling,  my  lord.  The 
understanding  of  the  princess  is  no  rule  for  mine ;  and 
her  intelligence  may  lift  her  to  glimpses  of  certain  things 
to  which  my  senses  cannot  soar. 

ARIS.  No,  Sostrates,  I  will  not  say  anything  about  a 
number  of  matters  to  which  I  give  no  more  credence  than 
you  do ;  but,  as  for  astrology,  I  have  been  told  and  have 
been  shown  things  so  positive,  that  I  cannot  doubt  them. 

Sos.  There  can  be  no  answer  to  that,  Madam. 

ARIS.  Let  us  drop  this  conversation,  and  please  to  leave 
us  for  a  moment.  Let  us  direct  our  walk  towards  this 
beautiful  grotto,  daughter,  whither  I  have  promised  to  go. 
Delicate  attentions  at  every  step ! 

FOURTH  INTERLUDE. 

The  stage  represents  a  grotto,  where  the  princesses  go  to 
take  a  walk;  and  whilst  they  are  entering  it,  eight  statues, 
each  bearing  two  torches  in  their  hands,  come  down  from 
their  recesses,  and  execute  a  varied  dance  of  different  figures 
and  several  fine  attitudes  in  which  they  pose  at  intervals. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet 
Of  Eight  Statues. 

SCENE    I.]  THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  l8l 

ACT    IV. 

SCENE  I. — ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA. 

ARIS.  From  whosoever  it  comes,  nothing  could  be  more 
gallant  and  better  arranged.  Daughter,  I  have  wished  to 
separate  from  the  crowd  to  converse  with  you ;  and  I  wish 
you  to  hide  nothing  of  the  truth  from  me.  Have  you  not 
in  your  heart  some  secret  inclination  which  you  will  not 
reveal  to  us? 

ERIPH.  I,  Madam? 

ARIS.  Speak  openly,  daughter.  What  I  have  done  for 
you  well  deserves  that  you  should  be  candid  with  me.  To 
turn  all  my  thoughts  upon  you,  to  prefer  you  to  aught 
else,  to  close  my  ears,  in  the  position  which  I  occupy,  to 
all  the  proposals  which  a  hundred  princesses,  in  my  place, 
would  have  listened  to  with  satisfaction ;  all  this  ought  to 
persuade  you  sufficiently  that  I  am  a  good  mother,  and 
that  I  am  not  likely  to  treat  with  severity  the  laying  bare 
of  your  heart. 

ERIPH.  If  I  had  so  badly  followed  your  example,  as  to 
have  allowed  myself  to  be  carried  away  by  some  feelings 
of  inclination  which  I  had  reason  to  hide,  I  should  have 
sufficient  self-control,  Madam,  to  impose  silence  on  such 
a  passion,  and  to  prevent  myself  from  displaying  aught 
that  were  unworthy  of  your  blood. 

ARIS.  No,  no,  daughter  ;  you  may,  without  scruple,  lay 
bare  your  feelings  to  me.  I  have  not  confined  your  incli- 
nation to  the  choice  between  the  two  princes;  you  may 
extend  it  to  wherever  you  wish;  and  merit,  with  me,  has 
so  great  an  influence,  that  I  consider  it  equal  to  every- 
thing ;  and  if  you  frankly  avow  matters  to  me,  you  will 
find  me  subscribe  without  repugnance  to  the  choice  which 
"Your  heart  has  made. 

ERIPH.  Madam,  I  cannot  sufficiently  extol  your  kindness 
to  me:  but  I  shall  not  put  it  to  the  test  in  the  matter  on 
which  you  are  speaking ;  and  all  that  I  ask  from  it  is  not 
to  urge  me  to  a  marriage  upon  which  I  am  as  yet  not  re- 
solved. 

ARIS.  Till  now  I  have  left  you  mistress  in  everything; 
and  the  impatience  of  the  princes,  your  suitors.  .  .  .  But 

l82  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  IY. 

what  is  this  noise  which  I  hear  ?  Ah  !  daughter,  what 
spectacle  meets  our  sight !  Some  divinity  descends  hither, 
and  it  is  the  goddess  Venus  who  apparently  wishes  to 
speak  to  us. 

SCENE  II. — VENUS,  accompanied  by  four  little  Cupids  in  a 
Machine;  ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA. 

VENUS.     (To  Aristione) — 

Princess,  in  your  cares  there  shines  an  exam- 

plary  zeal 

Which  by  immortals  ought  to  be  rewarded ; 
And  that  you  may  have  a  son-in-law  illustrious 

and  happy, 
Their  hand  will  point  you  out  the  choice  that 

you  ought  to  make. 

They  all  by  my  voice  announce  to  you 
The  glory  and  the  grandeur  which,  by  this 

worthy  choice, 

Your  house  for  ever  shall  enjoy. 
Then  there  is  an  end  to  your  difficulties ; 
Give  your  daughter 
To  him  who  shall  save  your  life. 

SCENE  III. — ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA. 
ARIS.  Daughter,  the  gods  impose  silence  on  all  our 
arguments.  After  this,  we  have  nothing  more  to  do  than 
to  receive  what  they  are  preparing  to  give  us,  and  you 
have  just  now  distinctly  heard  their  will.  Let  us  go  into 
the  first  temple  to  assure  them  of  our  obedience,  and  to 
render  them  thanks  for  their  favours. 

SCENE  IV. — ANAXARCHUS,  CLEON. 

CLE.  Behold  the  princess  just  going  ;  do  you  not  wish 
to  speak  to  her  ? 

ANA.  Let  us  wait  until  her  daughter  is  away.  She  has 
a  spirit  which  I  fear,  and  which  is  not  of  a  stamp  to  be 
led  like  that  of  her  mother.  At  last,  as  we  have  seen,  my 
son,  through  this  gap,  our  stratagem  has  succeeded.  Our 
Venus  has  done  wonders ;  and  the  admirable  engineer 
who  has  prepared  this  trick  has  so  well  arranged  every- 
thing, has  so  cleverly  cut  the  floor  of  this  grotto,  so  dex- 

SCENE  v.J  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  183 

terously  hidden  his  wires  and  all  his  springs,  so  nicely 
adjusted  his  lights,  and  tastefully  dressed  his  personages, 
that  there  are  few  people  who  would  not  have  been  de- 
ceived ;  and  as  the  princess  Aristione  is  very  superstitious, 
there  is  no  doubt  that  she  fully  believes  in  this  decep- 
tion. I  have  prepared  this  machine  a  long  while,  my 
son,  and  I  shall  soon  have  reached  the  goal  of  my  am- 
bition. 

CLE.  But  for  which  of  these  two  princes  have  you  in- 
vented this  contrivance  ? 

ANA.  Both  have  invited  my  assistance,  and  to  both  I 
have  promised  the  influence  of  my  art.  But  the  presents 
of  prince  Iphicrates  and  the  promises  which  he  has  made 
me  by  far  exceed  all  that  the  other  could  have  done.  Thus 
it  will  be  he  who  shall  receive  the  favourable  effects  of  all 
the  springs  which  I  have  set  in  motion  ;  and  as  his  ambi- 
tion will  owe  me  everything,  our  fortune,  my  son,  is  as 
good  as  made.  I  shall  take  my  time  to  keep  up  the  error 
in  the  mind  of  the  princess,  to  dispose  her  the  better  still 
by  the  connection  which  I  shall  skilfully  show  her  be- 
tween the  words  of  Venus  and  the  prognostications  of  the 
heavenly  signs  which  I  shall  tell  her  that  I  have  cast.  Go 
you,  and  look  to  the  rest  of  the  work  ;  prepare  our  six 
men  to  hide  themselves  carefully  in  their  boat  behind  the 
rock,  to  wait  quietly  until  the  princess  Aristione  comes  to 
take  her  evening's  walk  by  herself  on  the  shore ;  to 
pounce  upon  her,  at  the  right  time,  as  if  they  were  pirates, 
so  as  to  give  prince  Iphicrates  an  opportunity  of  bringing 
her  that  aid  which,  according  to  the  decrees  of  Heaven, 
is  to  place  in  his  hands  the  princess  Eriphila.  This  prince 
has  been  warned  by  me ;  and,  on  the  faith  of  my  predic- 
tion, is  to  hold  himself  in  readiness  in  this  little  wood 
which  abuts  on  the  shore.  But  let  us  get  out  of  this 
grotto  ;  while  we  are  walking  along,  I  shall  inform  you 
of  all  things  to  be  observed.  Here  comes  the  princess 
Eriphila ;  let  us  avoid  a  meeting  with  her. 

SCENE  V. — ERIPHILA,  alone. 

Alas!  what  a  destiny  is  mine  !  and  what  have  I  done 
to  the  gods  to  merit  all  the  care  which  they  wish  to  take 
of  me? 

184.  THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  [ACT  nr. 

SCENE  VI. — ERIPHILA,  CLEONICE. 

CLE.  I  have  found  him,  Madam,  and  here  he  is ;  and, 
at  your  first  commands,  he  has  followed  me  here. 

ERI.  Let  him  come  hither,  Cleonice  ;  and  leave  us  to- 
gether for  a  moment. 

SCENE  VII. — ERIPHILA,  SOSTRATES. 

ERI.  Sostrates,  you  love  me. 

Sos.  I,  Madam? 

ERI.  Enough,  Sostrates;  I  know  it,  I  approve  of  it, 
and  allow  you  to  tell  me  so.  Your  passion  seemed  to  me 
accompanied  by  all  the  worth  that  could  make  it  agreea- 
ble. Were  it  not  for  the  rank  in  which  Heaven  has  given 
me  birth,  I  might  tell  you  that  this  passion  would  not 
have  been  an  unhappy  one,  and  that  a  hundred  times  I 
should  have  wished  for  it  the  support  of  a  fate  which 
might  have  allowed  me  openly  to  show  the  secret  feelings 
of  my  soul.  It  is  not,  Sostrates,  because  merit  alone  has 
not  in  my  eyes  all  the  value  which  it  ought  to  have,  and 
because  I  do  not  prefer,  in  my  inmost  heart,  the  virtues 
which  you  possess  to  all  the  magnificent  titles  with  which 
the  others  are  clothed.  It  is  not  even  because  the  princess, 
my  mother,  has  not  left  me  the  disposal  of  my  feelings  ; 
and  I  do  not  doubt,  I  confess  to  you,  but  that  my  prayers 
could  have  turned  her  consent  the  way  which  I  would 
have  desired.  But  there  are  stations  in  life,  Sostrates,  in 
which  it  would  not  be  honourable  to  do  all  that  one  would 
wish.  It  is  sad  to  be  put  above  all  things  ;  and  the  vexa- 
tious reports  of  fame  often  make  us  pay  too  dearly  for  the 
pleasure  which  we  might  have  had  in  satisfying  our  incli- 
nations. To  this,  Sostrates,  I  could  never  have  made  up 
my  mind  ;  and  I  deemed  it  sufficient  to  avoid  the  engage- 
ments which  I  was  entreated  to  make.  But,  in  short,  the 
gods  themselves  will  take  the  burthen  of  providing  me 
with  a  husband ;  and  all  these  long  delays  with  which  I 
have  postponed  my  marriage,  and  which  the  kindness  of 
the  princess,  my  mother,  has  granted  to  my  wishes  ;  these 
delays,  I  say,  are  no  longer  permitted  to  me,  and  I  must 
resolve  to  submit  to  the  decree  of  Heaven.  Be  assured, 
Sostrates,  that  it  is  with  the  utmost  repugnance  that  I 
submit  to  this  marriage ;  and  that,  had  I  been  mistress  of 

VHI.]  THE  MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  185 

myself,  I  should  have  been  yours,  or  no  one's.  This,  Sos- 
trates,  is  what  I  had  to  tell  you ;  this  is  what  I  thought 
was  due  to  your  worth,  and  is  all  the  consolation  which 
my  tenderness  can  afford  to  your  affection. 

Sos.  Ah  !  Madam,  this  even  is  too  much  for  an  un- 
happy wretch  !  I  was  not  prepared  to  die  with  so  much 
glory;  and,  from  this  moment,  I  shall  cease  to  complain 
of  my  fate.  If  it  caused  me  to  be  born  in  a  station  less 
elevated  than  I  could  have  desired,  it  has  at  least  caused 
me  to  be  born  sufficiently  fortunate  to  attract  some  pity 
from  the  heart  of  a  great  princess ;  and  this  glorious  pity 
is  worth  crowns  and  sceptres,  is  worth  the  fortune  of  the 
greatest  princes  of  the  earth.  Yes,  Madam,  from  the  mo- 
ment I  have  dared  to  love  you  (it  is  you,  Madam,  who 
gave  me  leave  to  use  this  bold  word),  from  the  moment, 
I  say,  that  I  have  dared  to  love  you,  I  first  condemned 
the  pride  of  my  aspirations;  I  have  myself  prepared  that 
fate  which  I  ought  to  expect.  My  death-blow,  Madam, 
will  have  nothing  to  surprise  me,  as  I  was  prepared  for  it ; 
but  your  kindness  loads  it  with  an  honour  for  which  my 
affection  never  dared  to  hope ;  and  I  shall  die,  after  this, 
the  most  contented  and  glorious  of  all  mortals.  If  I  could 
still  wish  for  aught,  there  are  two  favours,  Madam,  which 
I  make  bold  to  ask  of  you  on  my  knees :  to  be  willing  to 
endure  my  presence  until  this  happy  marriage  which  is  to 
end  my  life  ;  and  amidst  this  great  glory  and  long  pros- 
perity which  Heaven  promises  to  your  union,  to  think 
sometimes  of  the  love-stricken  Sostrates.  May  I,  divine 
princess,  flatter  myself  with  this  so  precious  favour. 

ERI.  Go,  Sostrates,  depart  from  this.  You  do  not  care 
for  my  peace  in  asking  me  to  remember  you. 

Sos.  Ah  !  Madam,  if  your  peace  .    .    . 

ERI.  Away,  I  tell  you,  Sostrates,  spare  my  weakness,  and 
expose  me  to  no  more  than  I  have  resolved  upon. 

SCENE  VIII. — ERIPHILA,  CLEONICE. 

CLE.  Madam,  I  see  you  are  very  sad  in  spirit :  will  it 
please  you  that  your  dancers,  who  express  all  passions  so 
well,  shall  give  you  a  sample  of  their  skill? 

ERI.  Yes,  Cleonice ;  anything  they  like,  as  long  as  they 
leave  me  to  my  thoughts. 

l86  THE   MAGNIFICENT  LOVERS.  [ACT  v. 

FIFTH  INTERLUDE, 

Four  pantomimists,  as  a  sample  of  their  skill,  adjust  their 
movements  and  their  steps  to  the  uneasiness  of  the  young  prin- 
cess Eriphila. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Of  four  pantomimists. 

ACT  V. 
SCENE  I. — ERIPHILA,  CLITIDAS. 

CLI.  Which  way  shall  I  turn  ?  whither  can  I  go  ?  and 
where  am  I  now  likely  to  find  princess  Eriphila?  It  is  no 
small  advantage  to  be  the  first  to  carry  news.  Ah  !  there 
she  is !  Madam,  I  have  come  to  announce  to  you  that 
Heaven  has  just  now  given  you  the  husband  it  allotted  to 
you. 

ERI.  Eh  !  leave  me,  Clitidas,  to  my  gloomy  melancholy. 

CLI.  Madam,  I  ask  your  pardon.  I  thought  I  was  doing 
well  in  coming  to  tell  you  that  Heaven  has  just  now  given 
you  Sostrates  for  a  husband  ;  but,  as  it  seems  to  annoy  you, 
I  shall  pocket  my  news,  and  go  back  again  as  straight  as 
I  came. 

ERI.   Clitidas!     Clitidas! 

CLI.  I  leave  yo  u,  Madam,  to  your  gloomy  melancholy. 

ERI.  Stay,  I  tell  you ;  come  here.  What  have  you  come 
to  tell  me? 

CLI.  Nothing,  Madam.  One  is  sometimes  hasty  to  come 
to  tell  great  people  about  certain  things,  for  which  they  do 
not  care,  and  I  pray  you  to  excuse  me. 

ERI.  How  cruel  you  are  ! 

CLI.  Another  time  I  shall  have  the  discretion  not  to 
come  to  interrupt  you. 

ERI.  Keep  me  no  longer  in  suspense.  What  have  you 
come  to  tell  me? 

CLI.  Just  a  trifle  about  Sostrates,  Madam,  which  I  will 
tell  you  another  time,  when  you  shall  be  less  engaged. 

ERI.  Do  not  tire  me  any  longer,  I  say,  and  tell  me  the 
news. 

SCENBI.]  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  187 

CLI.  You  wish  to  know  it,  Madam? 

ERI.  Yes  ;  make  haste.  What  have  you  to  tell  me  about 
Sostrates  ? 

CLI.  A  marvellous  adventure,  which  no  one  expected. 

ERI.  Tell  me  quickly  what  it  is. 

CLI.  It  will  not  trouble  your  gloomy  melancholy,  Madam? 

ERI.  Come,  speak  promptly. 

CLI.  I  must  tell  you  then,  Madam,  that  the  princess, 
your  mother,  was  passing  nearly  alone  through  the  forest, 
by  those  little  paths  which  are  so  pleasant,  when  a  hideous 
wild  boar  (those  nasty  wild  boars  always  cause  such  dis- 
orders, and  they  ought  to  be  banished  from  well-kept 
forests),  when,  I  say,  a  hideous  wild  boar,  driven  at  bay, 
I  believe,  by  some  hunters,  crossed  the  road  where  we 
were.1*  In  order  to  adorn  my  tale,  I  ought  to  give  you  an 
elaborate  description  of  the  boar  of  which  I  speak ;  but 
you  will  dispense  with  it,  if  you  please,  and  I  shall  content 
myself  by  telling  you  that  it  was  a  formidable  animal. 
It  was  going  its  way,  and  it  would  have  been  as  well  not 
to  meddle  with  it,  to  pick  no  quarrel  with  it;  but  the 
princess  wished  to  show  her  dexterity,  and  inflicted  with 
her  dart,  which,  with  all  respect  to  her,  she  used  some- 
what untimely,  quite  a  small  wound  just  above  the  ear. 
The  boar,  ill-behaved,  impertinently  turned  round  on  us : 
we  were  two  or  three  wretches  there,  who  turned  pale 
with  fright ;  each  one  made  for  his  tree,  and  the  princess, 
defenceless,  remained  exposed  to  the  fury  of  the  brute, 
when  suddenly  Sostrates  appeared,  as  if  he  had  been  sent 
by  the  gods. 

ERI.     Well!     Clitidas? 

CLI.  If  my  story  wearies  you,  Madam,  I  shall  put  off 
the  remainder  till  another  time. 

ERI.  Finish  quickly. 

CLI.  Indeed,  it  is  quickly  that  I  shall  finish,  for  a  little 
bit  of  cowardice  has  prevented  me  from  noticing  all  the 
details  of  the  struggle ;  and  all  that  I  can  tell  you  is,  that, 
returning  to  the  spot,  we  found  the  boar  dead,  weltering 
in  his  blood ;  and  the  princess  full  of  joy,  proclaiming 

14  In  The  Princess  of  Elis  (  see  Vol.  II.),  a  wild  boar  threatens  also  the 
life  of  the  Princess,  and  terribly  frightens  Moron,  who  is  even  a  greater 
coward  than  Clitidas. 

188  THE  MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  [ACT  T. 

Sostrates  her  deliverer,  and  the  worthy  and  fortunate 
husband  whom  the  gods  destined  for  you.  At  these 
words,  I  thought  that  I  had  heard  enough,  and  I  hastened, 
before  every  one  else,  to  come  and  bring  you  the  news. 

ERI.  Ah !  Clitidas,  could  you  have  given  me  any  that 
was  more  agreeable  ? 

CLI.  Here  they  come  to  look  for  you. 

SCENE  II. — ARISTIONE,  SOSTRATES,  ERIPHILA,   CLITIDAS. 

ARIS.  I  see,  daughter,  that  you  already  know  everything 
that  we  can  tell  you.  You  see  that  the  gods  have 
explained  themselves  sooner  than  we  thought :  my  danger 
has  not  been  long  in  revealing  their  wishes  to  us;  and  it 
will  be  sufficiently  clear  that  it  is  they  who  have  interfered 
with  this  choice,  since  merit  alone  shines  out  in  this 
selection.  Can  you  have  any  repugnance  to  reward  with 
your  heart  one  to  whom  I  owe  my  life?  and  would  you 
refuse  Sostrates  for  your  husband  ? 

ERI.  Both  from  the  hands  of  the  gods  and  from  yours, 
Madam,  I  could  receive  no  gift  more  agreeable  to  me. 

Sos.  Heaven!  is  not  this  some  dream  replete  with 
glory,  with  which  the  gods  wish  to  flatter  me  ?  and  shall 
not  some  wretched  awakening  replunge  me  into  the  misery 
of  my  fate? 

SCENE  III. — ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA,  SOSTRATES,  CLEONICE, 
CLITIDAS. 

CLEON.  Madam,  I  have  come  to  tell  you  that,  till  now, 
Anaxarchus  has  been  deceiving  both  princes,  by  holding 
out  the  hope  that  the  selection  would  take  place,  for  which 
they  have  been  waiting  so  long;  and  that,  at  the  rumour 
of  your  accident,  they  have  both  given  way  to  their 
resentment  against  him,  to  that  extent  that,  from  words  tc 
words,  matters  have  become  more  warm,  and  he  has 
received  some  wounds,  of  which  the  issue  is  very  uncertain. 
But  here  they  come. 

SCENE  IV. — ARISTIONE,  ERIPHILA,  IPHICRATES,  TIMOCLES, 
SOSTRATES,  CLEONICE,  CLITIDAS. 

ARIS.  You  both  act  with  too  great  a  violence,  princes ; 

SC»N«  iv.]  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  189 

and  if  Anaxarchus  has  offended  you,  I  was  the  one  to  do 
you  justice. 

IPH.  And  what  justice,  Madam,  could  you  have  done 
us  with  him,  seeing  that  you  give  so  little  consideration 
to  our  rank  in  the  choice  which  you  make  ? 

ARIS.  Did  you  both  not  submit  to  what  the  decrees  of 
Heaven,  or  the  inclination  of  my  daughter,  might  decide 
in  this  matter  ? 

TIM.  Yes,  Madam,  we  submitted  to  what  they  might 
decide  between  prince  Iphicrates  and  myself,  but  not  to 
find  both  of  us  repulsed. 

ARIS.  And  if  each  of  you  could  have  submitted  to  see 
the  other  preferred,  what  has  occurred  for  which  you 
should  not  be  prepared  ?  and  what  difference  can  the  in- 
terests of  his  rival  make  to  either  the  one  or  the  other? 

IPH.  Yes,  Madam,  it  does  make  a  difference.  It  is  some 
consolation  to  see  a  man  equal  to  one's  self  preferred ; 
but  your  blindness  is  a  frightful  matter. 

ARIS.  Prince,  I  do  not  wish  to  fall  out  with  one  who 
has  been  so  gracious  as  to  pay  me  many  compliments ; 
and  I  pray  you,  with  all  possible  honesty,  to  base  your 
grief  upon  a  more  reasonable  foundation  ;  to  remember, 
if  you  please,  that  Sostrates  is  invested  with  a  worth  which 
has  shown  itself  to  all  Greece,  and  that  the  rank  to  which 
Heaven  raises  hfm  to-day,  will  fill  up  every  gulf  which  has 
existed  between  him  and  you. 

IPH.  Yes,  yes,  Madam,  we  shall  remember  it.  But 
perhaps  you  will  please  also  to  remember  that  two  out- 
raged princes  are  not  two  enemies  to  be  lightly  overlooked. 

TIM.  Perhaps,  Madam,  the  joy  of  having  despised  us 
will  not  be  tasted  long  in  peace. 

ARIS.  I  forgive  all  these  threats  for  the  sake  of  the  grief 
for  an  affection  which  believes  itself  insulted  ;  and  we 
shall  not  the  less  assist  at  the  feast  of  the  Pythian  games 
with  the  utmost  tranquillity.  Let  us  go  there  immediately, 
and  let  us  crown  by  this  glorious  spectacle  this  marvellous 
day. 

IQO  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS. 

SIXTH  INTERLUDE. 

WHICH   IS    THE    SOLEMNITY   OF   THE   PYTHIAN    GAMES. 

The  scene  represents  a  great  hall  in  the  form  of  an  am- 
phiiheatre  opening  upon  a  grand  arcade  at  the  farther  end, 
above  which  is  a  tribune,  closed  by  a  curtain,  and  in  the 
distance  is  seen  an  altar  prepared  for  sacrifice.  Six  men, 
dressed  as  if  they  were  almost  naked,  each  carrying  a 
hatchet  on  his  shoulder,  as  if  they  were  going  to  sacrifice, 
enter  by  the  portico,  to  the  sound  of  violins  and  are  followed 
by  two  sacrificers  who  play,  by  a  priestess,  also  playing,  and 
by  their  suite. 

The  Priestess. 

Sing  in  thousand  spots,  ye  people,  sing, 

The  brilliant  marvels  of  the  gods  whom  we  serve  ; 

Range  Heaven  and  earth  : 

No  song  so  precious  you  could  sing 

Nothing  so  dulcet  to  the  ear. 

A  Greek  Woman. 

Nothing  resists  this  god 

So  full  of  charm,  this  god  so  full  of  strength. 

Another  Greek  Woman. 

Nothing  on  earth  exists 
Except  by  his  goodness. 

Another  Greek  Woman. 

All  the  earth  is  sad 
When  he  is  not  seen. 

Chorus. 

Let  us  to  his  memory  sing 
Such  touching  concerts, 
That  from,  his  glory's  height, 
He  may  listen  to  our  song. 

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Six  men    carrying  hatchets  execute   among  themselves  a 

THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS.  191 

dance  exhibiting  all  the  postures  in  -which  strength  can  be 
expressed;  then  they  file  off  to  the  two  sides  of  the  stage  to 
make  room  for  six  vaulters. 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Six  vaulters  show,  to  music,  their  skill  upon  wooden 
horses,  which  are  brought  by  slaves. 

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Four  leaders  of  slaves  bring  in,  to  music,  twelve  slaves, 
who  dance  and  show  their  joy  at  having  recovered  their 
freedom. 

Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Four  men  and  four  women,  armed  in  the  Greek  fashion, 
execute  a  kind  of  assault  at  arms. 

The  tribune  opens.  A  herald,  six  trumpeters,  and  a  kettle- 
drum player,  joining  the  other  instruments,  proclaim,  with 
great  noise,  the  arrival  of  Apollo. 

Chorus. 

Let  us  all  open  our  eyes 
To  the  supreme  brilliancy 
Which  flashes  in  these  places. 

What  extreme  grace ! 
What  glorious  bearing ! 
Where  else  can  gods  be  seen 
Fashioned  as  he  is. 

Apollo,  to  the  sound  of  trumpets  and  violins,  enters  by  the 
portico,  preceded  by  six  young  men,  who  bear  laurel  wreathed 
round  a  stick,  and  a  golden  sun  at  the  top,  with  the  royal 
device  in  the  form  of  a  trophy.  The  six  young  men,  in  order 
to  dance  with  Apollo,  give  their  trophy  to  the  six  men  with 
hatchets  to  take  care  of,  and  begin,  with  Apollo,  a  heroic 
dance,  in  which  there  joins,  in  various  attitudes,  the  six  men 
carrying  the  trophy,  the  four  women  with  their  cymbals,  and 
the  four  men  with  their  drums,  while  the  six  trumpeters,  the 
kettle-drum  player,  the  sactificers,  the  priestess,  and  the 
chorus  of  music  accompany  all  this,  joining  it  at  different  in- 
tervals;  which  finishes  the  Pythian  games,  and  the  whole 
entertainment. 

»92  THE   MAGNIFICENT   LOVERS. 

Fifth  and  Last  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Apollo,  and  six  young  men  of  his  suite,  chorus  of  music. 
For  the  king  representing  the  sun. 

I  am  the  source  of  all  delight ; 
And  the  most  vaunted  stars, 
Whose  beauteous  circle  is  around  me, 
Are  only  brilliant  and  respected, 
By  the  splendour  which  I  give  them, 

From  the  car  on  which  I  sit, 
I  see  the  wish  to  behold  me 
Shared  by  the  whole  of  nature ; 
And  the  wide  world  has  but  its  hope 
In  the  sole  blessings  of  my  light. 

Very  happy  everywhere, 
And  full  of  exquisite  wealth, 
The  lands  on  which  I  throw 
The  sweet  caresses  of  my  glances.1* 

For  M.  Le  Grand,  attendant  of  Apollo. 

Though  near  the  sun  all  other  brilliancy  must  fade, 
One  does  not  the  less  desire  to  remain, 
And  thus  you  see,  that  whatever  he  may  do, 
One  always  remains  as  near  as  possible  to  him. 

For  the  Marquis  De  Villeroi,  attendant  of  Apollo. 

From  our  incomparable  master, 

You  behold  me  inseparable ; 

The  powerful  zeal  which  binds  me  to  his  command 

Follows  him  through  the  waters  and  the  flames. 

For  the  Marquis  de  Rassent,  attendant  of  Apollo. 

I  would  not  be  vain,  if  I  did  not  believe 
That  another  better  than  myself  can  follow  his  steps 
everywhere. 

15  These  verses  are  sufficiently  fulsome.     Can  we  wonder  that  Louis 
XIV.  thought  himself  made  of  a  different  clay  from  the  rest  of  humanity  ? 

LE  BOURGEOIS  GENTILHOMME. 

COMEDIE-BALLET. 

THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN 

COMEDY-BALLET  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE,  THE  INTERLUDES  IN  VERSE.) 

OCTOBER  ISTH,  1670. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

ON  the  i3th  of  October,  1670,  was  played  at  Chambord,  before  the  court, 
The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman,1  and  this  play  was  repeated  on  the 
20th  and  2ist  of  the  same  month  ;  then  at  Saint  Germain-en- Laye  on  the 
9th,  nth,  and  I3th  of  November.  On  the  23d  of  the  latter  month,  it  was 
played  for  the  first  time  at  the  Palais-Royal,  and  was  acted  alternately 
with  Corneille's  Berenice  from  the  a6th  of  the  same  month.  Moliere's 
comedy  was  represented  twenty-four  times,  until  the  theatre  closed  for 
Easter. 

In  M.  Jourdain,  Moliere  attacks  a  folly  more  pre-eminently  Gallic  than 
any  other — the  folly  of  strutting  about  in  the  dress  of  a  Mamamouchi — of 
becoming  a  somebody,  of  wearing  a  nice  embroidered  coat,  being  the 
cynosure  of  an  admiring  set  of  gapers.  The  desire  of  showing  off  one's 
personal  air  and  graces  ;  of  pretending  to  be  more  than  one  really  is ;  of 
taking  a  title  to  which  one  has  no  right :  of  wearing  a  coloured  ribband 
which  one  is  not  entitled  to  fasten  to  one's  button-hole ;  of  pluming  one's 
self  on  imaginary  intellectual  or  amatory  conquests,  was,  and  is  still,  char- 
acteristically French ; — and  something  like  an  epitome  of  these  follies 
may  be  seen  in  Moliere's  citizen.  The  purse-proud  vulgarian,  who  de- 
sires to  ally  himself  to  a  noble  family,  is  to  be  found  in  all  countries. 

Dorante,  the  representative  nobleman,  is  in  this  play  not  much  better 
than  the  bumptious  citizen.  He  is  not  so  insolent  as  Don  Juan,  nor  most 
probably  so  well  born  ;  but  he  is  mean  enough  to  borrow  money  from  a 
man  whom  he  despises  and  mocks ;  bad  enough  to  let  that  man  pay  for 
the  entertainments  and  presents  which  he  offers  to  the  object  of  his  love ; 
and  sufficiently  a  scoundrel  to  pretend  to  pander  to  Jourdain's  worst 

1  It  is  difficult  to  give  the  correct  meaning  of  the  French  title,  Le  Bourgeois 
Gentilhomme.  Mr.  Ozell  translates  it  The  Gentleman  Cit,  which  to  my  mind 
gives  the  idea  of  a  gentleman  who  was  also  a  citizen.  In  the  translation  of  the 
select  Comedies,  published  in  1732,  and  afterwards  brought  out  in  ten  volumes,  this 
play  is  called  The  Cit  turned  Gentleman,  which  is  not  correct,  for  Monsieur  Jour- 
dain never  became  a  gentleman.  Besides,  in  Moliere's  time  the  word  gentilhomme 
indicated  a  certain  noble  descent  or  rank,  and  was  also  bestowed  upon  the  holders 
of  some  offices  ;  in  the  same  sense  as  we  even  say  now  in  English.  "  The  Honour- 
able Corps  of  Gentlemen-at- Arms."  M.  Jourdain  was  not  a  noble  by  manners  or 
birth,  but  does  his  best  to  imitate  one:  I  first  intended  to  call  the  play  The  Citizen 
•who  would  become  a  Nobleman  ;  but  Jourdain  does  not  desire  to  be  ennobled,  but 
only  strives  to  imitate  the  man  of  quality's  elegant  manners,  splendid  apparel, 
loose  way  of  living,  and  learning. 

195 

196  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN. 

vices.  Such  a  character  was  not  improbable ;  and  many  of  the  courtly 
gallants  who  listened  to  the  remarks  of  Dorante  might  have  thought  him- 
self pourtrayed,  and  felt  perhaps  flattered  by  the  delineation.  The 
Memoires  of  the  Count  de  Grammont  prove  at  least  that  cheating  at  play, 
and  defrauding  even  with  violence,  were  not  unknown  to  the  courtiers  of 
Louis  XIV. 

Dorimene  and  Mrs.  Jourdain  offer  also  a  pretty  contrast.  The  first  is 
a  titled  widow  of  some  experience  v/ho  has  seen  the  world,  but  who  pre- 
tends to  be  innocence  itself,  and  who  does  not  at  all  suspect  that  the 
presents  which  her  swindling  lover  give,  come  from  the  old  idiot  who  is 
in  love  with  her.  The  second  is  an  honest  but  rather  common-place 
woman,  endowed  with  a  good  deal  of  shrewd  common-sense,  nearly  al- 
ways right  in  her  remarks ;  although  wrong  in  the  way  of  expressing  her- 
self. Mrs.  Jourdain  has  been  compared  to  Teresa,  the  wife  of  Sancho 
Panza,  the  worthy  squire  of  Don  Quixote,  and  it  is  certain  that  they  who 
will  read  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  second  part  of  that  celebrated  Spanish 
novel,  may  discover  a  great  analogy  between  the  domestic  consultation  of 
Sancho  and  his  wife  about  the  marriage  of  their  daughter  Mary,  whom 
Sancho  refuses  to  give  to  Lope,  "  old  Joan  Tocho's  son,  a  hale  jolly  young 
'  fellow,''  and  whom  he  wishes  to  marry  a  nobleman. 

It  has  been  said  that  Moliere  intended  to  sketch,  in  M.  Jourdain,  a 
certain  hat  manufacturer,  Gandouin,  who  had  spent  fifty  thousand  crowns 
with  a  woman  whom  Moliere  knew,  afterwards  tried  to  commit  a  murder, 
and  was  locked  up  in  a  lunatic  asylum,  whence  he  escaped.  But  all  this 
is  mere  guess-work ;  for  MoliSre  simply  formed  one  fool  from  the  many 
who  surrounded  him,  and  put  him  upon  the  stage,  as  a  lesson  for  others. 

It  has  also  been  mentioned  that  Moliere  invented  the  reception  of  Jour- 
dain as  Mamamouchi,  in  order  to  avenge  Louis  XIV.  for  an  imaginary 
slight  which  the  Turkish  ambassador  is  supposed  to  have  done  to  the 
King,  by  saying  that  the  Suite  11  had  more  precious  stones  on  the  trappings 
of  his  horse  than  there  were  on  the  royal  dress;  and  that  the  only  remark 
which  that  ambassador  made  when  he  saw  the  Citizen's  investiture,  was, 
"  that  the  bastinado  was  always  applied  to  the  soles  of  the  feet,  and  not 
to  the  back."  This  again  appears  to  be  a  mere  piece  of  groundless  gos- 
sip ;  for  the  Turkish  ambassador  extraordinary,  Muta  Ferrace,  had  left  on 
the  2gth  of  May  1670,  and  The  Citizen*  -who  apes  the  Kobleman  was  not 
represented  until  the  I3th  of  October  of  the  same  year.  Moreover,  ac- 
cording to  the  Memoires  of  the  Chevalier  d'Arvieux,  who  had  lived  twelve 
years  in  the  Levant,  and  spoke  Turkish  and  Arabic  perfectly  well,  it  was 
the  King  himself  who  had  ordered  him  to  arrange  with  Moliere  and  Lulli 
about  the  dresses,  manners,  and  customs  of  the  Turks  for  the  play  of  The 
Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman.  To  him  we  owe  also  the  few  Turkish 
and  Arabic  words  which  are  found  there. 

The  gullibility  of  M.  Jourdain  in  being  made  a  Mamamouchi  may  ap- 
pear incredible  ;  but  sixteen  years  after  the  first  representation  of  this  play, 
a  certain  Abbe  de  Saint  Martin  was  persuaded  that  the  Emperor  of  Siam 
had  sent  an  embassy  to  France,  to  create  him  a  mandarin  and  Marquess 
of  Miskou;  and  he  received  his  new  dignity  with  ceremonies  still  more 
extraordinary  than  those  employed  for  our  Citizen.  And  besides,  does 
not  every  day  produce  sufficient  evidence  that  credulity  knows  no  bounds, 
and  that  in  the  financial,  social,  political,  and  even  literary  world  noth- 
ing is  easier  to  discover  than  "blind  belief?"  There  are  many  people 
wandering  about  only  too  anxious  to  be  literally  and  figuratively  basted 
and  roasted. 

THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  197 

Lulli  composed  the  music  for  this  comedy,  and  played  the  part  of  the 
Mufti ;  but  this  gave  great  offence  to  the  secretaries  of  the  king,  of  whom 
Lulli  wished  to  be  one,  and  they  incited  M.  de  Louvois  to  speak  to  the 
Italian  musician.  The  minister  did  so,  and  said  that  he  was  astonished 
that  "  a  mere  musician,  whose  only  service  was  to  make  the  king  laugh, 
could  aspire  to  become  one  of  that  monarch's  secretaries."  "  You  would 
do  the  same,  if  you  could,"  replied  Lulli.  However  Louis  XIV.  had 
only  to  say  one  word,  and  the  musician  was  elected.  Nay,  more,  he 
gave  his  colleagues  a  splendid  repast,  and  afterwards  invited  them  to 
come  at  the  representation  of  The  Triumph  of  Love,  then  playing  at  the 
Opera.  M.  de  Louvois,  meeting  Lulli  some  time  afterwards  in  the  Gal- 
lery of  Versailles,  said  to  him,  with  a  grim  smile,  "  Good  morning,  col- 
league."' 

Tradition  says  that  Louis  XIV.,  during  the  first  representation  of  Mo- 
liere's  comedy,  did  not  utter  a  single  word,  nor  give  any  sign  that  he  was 
satisfied.  The  courtiers  thereupon  fell  foul  of  the  dramatist,  said  that  his 
vein  was  exhausted,  that  his  halo,  bala  bala  chou  proved  his  poverty  of  in- 
vention, and  showed  at  the  same  time  that  he  mistook  them  for  fools. 
During  the  seven  days  which  passed  between  the  first  and  second  repre- 
sentations Moliere  kept  his  room  at  Chaubord,  and  sent  Baron  to  find  out 
what  was  thought  of  his  piece ;  but  the  latter  brought  back  always  bad 
tidings.  '  After  the  second  representation,  the  King  said  to  MoliSre  :  "  I 
have  not  spoken  to  you  about  your  play  since  it  was  first  performed,  be- 
cause I  was  afraid  of  being  prejudiced  by  the  way  in  which  it  was  acted  ; 
but,  really,  Moli&re,  you  have  as  yet  not  written  anything  which  has 
amused  me  more,  and  your  piece  is  excellent  1"  Immediately  the  courtiers 
began  to  stammer  forth  a  chorus  of  praises,  declared  that  Moliere  was 
inimitable,  and  that  he  had  more  comic  power  than  all  the  ancients  taken 
together ! 

In  the  second  volume  of  the  translations  of  "  the  select  Comedies  of 
M.  de  Moliere,"  this  play,  under  the  title  of  The  Cit  turrid  Gentleman, 
is  dedicated  to  His  Royal  Highness,  the  Duke,  in  the  following  words : — 

SIR, — The  following  Attempt  to  make  the  BURGEOIS  of  Moliere  speak  English, 
implores  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS'S  Acceptance  and  Patronage.  Your  Name  is 
Ornamental,  and  will  be  auspicious  to  the  Work  ;  For  who  sees,  or  hears,  or  but 
reads  of  the  DUKE  OF  CUMBERLAND  without  Pleasure  ? 

That  Fair  Form,  SIR,  which  so  much  captivates  the  Eye,  that  Sweetness  and 
Condescension,  which  so  strongly  engage  the  Heart,  tho'  most  conspicuous,  are 
look'd  upon  as  Graces  of  an  inferior  Rank,  in  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS,  by  those 
who  have  the  Honour  to  be  near  Your  Person. 

You  no  less  charm  the  Public,  SIR,  whether  You  appear  in  the  Courtly  Circle, 
or  at  the  Head  of  Your  little  Military  Company,  marshalling  and  training  that 
Band  of  blooming  Heroes,  whose  Names,  under  Yours,  may  adorn  future  Histories  : 
Or,  whether  You  show  Your  Skill  and  Address  in  the  Menage,  by  provoking, 
curbing,  and  mastering  the  generous  Steed. 

Think,  YOUNG  PRINCE,  what  a  Figure  our  Imaginations  represent  You  as 
making  hereafter,  in  our  Fleets,  our  Armies,  or  our  Councils;  and  aspire  to  the 
arduous  Task  of  rising  above  our  Expectations. 

In  the  meantime,  SIR,  when  relax'd  from  Your  Princely  Studies,  and  Exercises, 
Moliere  waits  upon  You  to  divert  You  with  his  CIT  :  An  Author  justly  grown  to 
the  Authority  of  a  classic ;  than  whom  none  understood  or  copy'd  Nature  better  ; 
as  pure  in  his  Moral  as  he  is  terse  in  his  Wit ;  whose  Writings  therefore  can  be  no 
improper  Entertainment  for  a  Young  Prince  of  Virtue  and  Genius.  The  Folly  and 
Affectation  of  a  Cit  turn'd  Gentleman,  is  what  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  cannot 

198  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN. 

fail  of  observing  about  a  Court ;    and  as  the  Original  has  given  you  Diversion,  so 
'tis  hop'd,  will  a  Copy  drawn  at  full  length  by  Moliere. 

The  Translator  of  this  Piece,  SIR,  presumes  to  affirm  that  the  Text  of  Moliere 
presents  it  self  to  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  more  correct  and  beautiful  than  it  ever 
yet  appear' d.  But  he  is  too  conscious  of  the  fine  Taste  Your  HIGHNESS  has 
already  in  both  Languages,  and  his  own  Imperfections,  to  aspire  to  any  thing  more 
than  Your  Amusement,  by  giving  You  an  Opportunity  of  judging  how  hard  it  is  to 
transplant  the  Beauties  of  Moliere,  or  to  hit  the  Delicacy  of  his  Sentiments,  in  any 
other  Language  or  Words  than  his  own. 

The  Persons,  SIR,  for  whose  Use  this  Work  is  chiefly  calculated,  are  such  who 
neither  want  the  Taste,  nor  the  good  Sense  to  be  charmed  with  Mohere,  yet  are 
not  Masters  enough  of  his  Language  to  read  him  without  Assistance,  to  whom, 
that  He  may  have  the  strongest  Recommendation,  Your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS'S  name 
is  presum'd  to  be  plac'd  at  the  Head  of  this  Piece,  hoping  that  Goodness,  which  is 
so  natural  to  You,  will  pardon  this  Presumption  in, — SIR,  Your  Royal  Highness' f 
most  Devoted,  most  Obedient,  Humble  Servant, 

THE  TRANSLATOR. 

Ravenscroft  has  imitated  Moliere's  play  in  his  Mamamouchi ;  or  the 
Citizen  turned  Gentleman;  (see  Introductory  notice  to  M.  de  Pourceaug- 
nac ;)  and  also  in  his  Scaramouche ;  a  Philosopher,  Harlequin  a  School 
Boy,  Bravo,  Merchant  and  Magician.  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The 
Forced  Marriage,  Vol.  I.)  In  Ravenscroft's  first  play,  which  'is  dedicated 
to  Prince  Rupert,  and  is  a  medley  of  M.  de  Pourceaugnac  and  the  Citizen 
•who  apes  the  Nobleman,  it  is  Lucia  the  daughter  who  takes  the  part  of  the 
Master  of  Philosophy.  In  his  second  play  he  makes  use  of  whatever  he 
did  not  employ  of  Moliere's  comedy  in  his  Mamamouchi. 

Farquhar,  in  his  Love  and  a  Bottle,  acted  at  Drury-Lane  Theatre  in 
1699,  has  partly  imitated  M.  Jourdain  in  "  Mockmode,  a  young  Squire, 
come  newly  from  the  University,  and  setting  up  for  a  Beau  ;"  and  the 
scenes  between  the  Squire,  Rigadoon,  the  dancing-master,  and  Nimble- 
wrist,  a  fencing-master,  appear  to  be  freely  followed  from  Moliere's 
comedy. 

Foote's  The  Commissary,  acted  at  the  Haymarket  in  1765,  is  also  bor- 
rowed partly  from  Moliere.  Zachary  Fungus  had  acquired  a  large 
fortune  as  a  Commissary  in  Germany,  and  though  a  man  of  low  birth, 
wishes  to  be  made  a  complete  gentleman.  For  this  purpose  he  places 
himself  under  several  masters,  Mr.  Gruel  and  Dr.  Catgut, — by  whom  it  is 
said  Dr.  Arne  was  meant, — and  these  scenes  are  certainly  more  or  less 
borrowed  from  Moliere.  The  Commissary's  brother  Isaac  is  also  partly 
an  imitation  of  Madam  Jourdain.  The  fencing  scene  (Act  ii.,  Scene  i) 
between  the  Commissary  and  Mrs.  Mechlin,  is  nearly  identical  with  the 
scene  between  M.  Jourdain  and  Nicole  (Act  iii.,  Scene  3)  in  Moliere's 
play. 

There  exists  also  an  alteration  of  Moliere's  play,  called,  He  would  be  a 
Lord,  a  comedy  in  three  acts,  in  prose,  published  in  1874,  adapted  for 
male  characters,  and  which  is  a  curiosity  in  its  way.  It  appears  to  have 
been  arranged  for  Roman  Catholic  boys'  schools.  Instead  of  Madam 
Jourdain  we  have  "  George,  brother  to  M.  Jourdain;"  Nicole  becomes 
"  Nicholas,"  and  Cleonte,  Captain  Dubar.  The  pupil  of  the  music-master 
sings  in  the  first  act  a  song  to  the  air  of  "Tara's  Halls,"  of  which  the 
last  four  lines  are: — 

"  My  eye  runs  wet  when  mem'ry  brings 
Thy  image  to  my  soul, 
And  bounds  my  heart,  whene'er  I  see, 
The  picture  of  thy  pole." 

THE  CITIZEN    WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  199 

M.  Jourdain  sings  to  the  festive  tune  of  "We'll  not  go  home  until 
morning,"  the  song  "  Malbrough  has  gone  to  war,"  etc.  The  scene 
in  which  M.  Jourdain  is  made  a  Mamamouchi  is  omitted,  as  well  as 
several  others.  When  the  marriage-contract  has  been  signed,  in  which, 
of  course,  the  chief  character,  Lucile,  being  a  young  lady,  is  absent, 
M.  Jourdain  discovers  that  his  daughter  has  not  married  the  son  of 
the  Grand  Turk,  but  Gustavus  Dubar.  He  endeavours  to  refuse  his 
consent,  is  threatened  by  the  notary  with  "ten  years'  imprisonment  in 
Cayenne  and  perpetual  degradation,"  is  taken  prisoner  by  "an  officer" 
on  a  charge  of  procuring  and  wearing  a  dress  worn  only  and  exclu- 
sively by  the  peers  of  France,  is  accused  of  "high  treason,  and  that 
means  death,"  imagines  that  he  is  shot  dead,  and  falls  down;  and 
finally  accepts  Captain  Dubar  as  his  son-in-law. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

IN   THE   COMEDY 

MR.  JOURDAIN,  citizen* 
CLEONTE,  in  love  with  Lucille. 
DORANTE,  a  count,  Dorimene's 

lover. 

COVIELLE,  Cleonte's  valet. 
A  TEACHER  OF  Music. 
A  PUPIL  OF  THE  TEACHER  OF 

Music. 
A  DANCING-MASTER. 

A  FENCING-MASTEI 

A  PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY. 

A  MASTER  TAILOR. 

His  ASSISTANT. 

Two  LACQUEYS. 

MRS.  JOURDAIN. 

LUCILLE,  Jourdairfs  daughter. 

DORIMENE,  a  marchioness. 

NICOLE,  Jourdairis  maid  servant. 

IN    THE    BALLET. 

First  Act. 

A  FEMALE  MUSICIAN. 
Two  MUSICIANS. 
DANCERS. 

Second  Act. 
DANCING  TAILOR'S  ASSISTANTS. 

Third  Act. 
DANCING  COOKS. 
Fourth  Act  (Turkish  Interlude}. 
THE  MUFTI. 
TURKS,  the  Muftfs  Assistants 

(singing). 

SINGING  DERVISHES. 
DANCING  TURKS. 

Fifth  Act  (Ballet  of  Nations.} 
A  DISTRIBUTOR  OF  BOOKS 
(Dancing). 

HANGERS-ON  (Dancing). 
TROOP  OF  SPECTATORS  (Singing). 
FIRST  AND  SECOND  MAN. 
FIRST  AND  SECOND  WOMAN. 
FIRST  AND  SECOND  GASCON. 
A  Swiss. 

AN  OLD  CHATTERING  CITIZEN. 
AN  OLD  CHATTERING  FEMALE 

CITIZEN. 
SINGING  AND  DANCING 

SPANIARDS. 

AN  ITALIAN  MAN  AND  WOMAN. 
Two  SPRITES. 
Two  JESTERS. 
HARLEQUIN. 
Two  POITEVINS  (Singing  and 

Dancing). 
MEN  AND  WOMEN  (Poitevins 

Singing  and  Dancing). 

Scene. — PARIS,  IN  M.  JOURDAIN'S  HOUSE. 

1  Moliere  played  this  part  himself.  In  the  inventory  taken  after  his 
death,  we  find :  "  A  striped  dressing  gown,  lined  with  deep  yellow  and 
green  taffeta,  breeches  of  red  plush,  a  morning  jacket  of  blue  plush,  a 
night-cap  and  a  skull-cap,  hose  and  a  scarf  of  linen,  painted  like  chintz,  a 
Turkish  waistcoat  and  turban,  a  sword,  hose  of  flowered  silk  also  orna- 
mented with  green  and  deep  yellow  ribbands  and  two  Sedan  laces.  The 
doublet  of  green  taffeta,  ornamented  with  imitation  silver  lace.  The  belt, 
green  silk  stockings  and  gloves,  with  a  hat  with  dark  yellow  and  green 
feathers.''  M.  Souli£  justly  remarks  that  M.  Jourdain  "  showed  his 
music-master  his  tight  red  velvet  breeches  and  his  green  velvet  jacket , 
and  that  therefore  the  valuer  must  have  made  a  mistake  in  the  inventory." 

THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN. 

(LB  BOURGEOIS  GENT1LHOMME.) 

ACT  I. 

(  The  overture  is  played  by  a  great  many  instruments j  and 
in  the  middle  of  the  stage,  the  pupil  of  the  music-master 
is  busy  composing  a  serenade,  ordered  by  M.Jourdain). 

SCENE  I. — A  MUSIC-MASTER,  A  DANCING- MASTER,  THREE 
MUSICIANS,  Two  VIOLIN  PLAYERS,  FOUR  DANCERS. 

Mus.-MAS.  (To  the  Musicians).  Come,  retire  into  that 
room,  and  rest  yourselves  until  he  comes. 

DAN. -MAS.  (To  the  Dancers].  And  you  also,  on  that 
side. 

MUS.-MAS.   (To  his  Pupil).     Is  it  done? 

PUP.  Yes 

Mus.-MAS.  Let  me  look.  .    .    .  That  is  right. 

DAN.-MAS.   It  is  something  new  ? 

MUS.-MAS.  Yes,  it  is  an  air  for  a  serenade,  which  I 
made  him  compose  here,  while  waiting  till  our  gentleman 
is  awake. 

DAN.-MAS.  May  one  have  a  look  at  it? 

Mus.-MAS.  You  shall  hear  it  by-and-by  with  the  dia- 
logue, when  he  comes ;  he  will  not  be  long. 

DAN.-MAS.  Our  occupations,  yours  and  mine,  are  no 
small  matter  just  at  present. 

203 

204  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  i. 

Mus.-MAS.  True :  we  have  both  of  us  found  here  the 
very  man  whom  we  want.  It  is  a  nice  little  income  for 
us  this  Mr.  Jourdain,  with  his  notions  of  nobility  and 
gallantry,  which  he  has  taken  into  his  head ;  and  your 
dancing  and  my  music  might  wish  that  everyone  were 
like  him. 

DAN. -MAS.  Not  quite ;  and  I  should  like  him  to  be 
more  of  a  judge  than  he  is,  of  the  things  we  provide 
for  him. 

Mus.-MAS.  It  is  true  that  he  knows  little  about  them, 
but  he  pays  well ;  and  that  is  what  our  arts  require  just 
now  above  aught  else. 

DAN. -MAS.  As  for  myself,  I  confess,  I  hunger  somewhat 
after  glory.  I  am  fond  of  applause,  and  I  think  that,  in 
all  the  fine  arts,  it  is  an  annoying  torture  to  have  to 
exhibit  before  fools,  to  have  one's  compositions  subjected 
to  the  barbarism  of  a  stupid  man.  Do  not  argue ;  there 
is  a  delight  in  having  to  work  for  people  who  are  capable 
of  appreciating  the  delicacy  of  an  art,  who  know  how  to 
give  a  sweet  reception  to  the  beauties  of  a  work,  and 
who,  by  approbations  which  tickle  one's  fancy,  reward 
one  for  his  labour.  Yes,  the  most  pleasant  recompense 
one  can  receive  for  the  things  which  one  does,  is  to  find 
them  understood,  and  made  much  of  by  applause  which 
does  one  honour,  There  is  nothing  in  my  opinion,  that 
pays  us  better  for  all  our  troubles;  and  enlightened 
praises  are  exquisitely  sweet.3 

Mus.-MAS.  I  quite  agree  with  you,  and  I  enjoy  them 
as  much  as  you  do.  Assuredly,  there  is  nothing  that 
tickles  our  fancy  more  than  the  applause  you  speak  of; 
but  such  incense  does  not  give  us  our  livelihood.  Praise 
pure  and  simple  does  not  provide  for  a  rainy  day:  there 
must  be  something  solid  mixed  withal ;  and  the  best  way 
to  praise  is  to  put  one's  hand  in  one's  pocket.  M.  Jour- 
dain is  a  man,  it  is  true,  whose  knowledge  is  very  small, 
who  discourses  at  random  upon  all  things,  and  never 

s  The  dancing-master  speaks  in  the  language  of  the  Precieuses. 
Dancing-masters  were  held  in  high  estimation  at  the  court  of  Louis  XIV. ; 
hence  it  was  not  so  strange,  as  it  would  appear  at  the  present  time,  to 
have  a  dancing-master  prefer  praise  to  money. 

SCENE  ii.]         THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  2O$ 

applauds  but  at  the  wrong  time ;  but  his  money  makes  up 
for  his  bad  judgment ;  he  has  discernment  in  his  purse ; 
his  praises  are  minted,  and  this  ignorant  citizen  is  of 
more  value  to  us,  as  you  see,  than  the  great  lord  who 
introduced  us  here. 

DAN. -MAS.  There  is  some  truth  in  what  you  say  ;  but 
I  think  you  make  a  little  too  much  of  money ;  and  the 
interest  in  it  is  something  so  grovelling,  that  no  gentle- 
man ought  ever  to  show  any  attachment  to  it. 

Mus.-MAS.  You  are  glad  enough,  however,  to  receive 
the  money  which  our  gentleman  gives  you. 

DAN. -MAS.  Assuredly;  but  I  do  not  make  it  my  whole 
happiness  ;  and  I  could  wish  that  with  all  his  wealth  he 
had  also  some  good  taste. 

Mus.-MAS.  I  could  wish  the  same  ;  and  that  is  what  we 
are  aiming  at  both  of  us.  But,  in  any  case,  he  gives  us 
the  means  of  becoming  known  in  the  world  ;  and  he  shall 
pay  for  others,  and  others  shall  applaud  for  him. 

DAN.-MAS.  Here  he  comes. 

SCENE  II. — M.  JOURDAIN  (in  dressing-gown  and  night-cap~), 
MUSIC-MASTER,  DANCING-MASTER,  PUPIL  OF  MUSIC- 
MASTER,  A  FEMALE  MUSICIAN,  Two  MUSICIANS, 
DANCERS,  Two  LACQUEYS. 

M.  JOUR.  Well,  gentlemen  !  What  is  it  ?  Will  you 
show  me  your  little  drollery  ? 

DAN.-MAS.  How  now?     What  little  drollery  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Eh  !  the  .  .  .  What  do  you  call  it  ?  Your 
prologue  or  dialogue  of  songs  and  dancing. 

DAN.-MAS.  Ah  !  ah  ! 

Mus.-MAS.  We  are  quite  prepared. 

M.  JOUR.  I  have  kept  you  waiting  a  little ;  but  that  is 
because  I  am  to  be  dressed  to-day  like  your  people  of 
quality ;  and  my  tailor  has  sent  me  some  silk  stockings 
which  I  thought  I  would  never  get  on. 

Mus.-MAS.  We  are  here  only  to  await  your  leisure. 

M.  JOUR.  I  pray  you  both  not  to  go  away  until  my 
dress  has  been  brought,  so  that  you  may  see  it. 

DAN.-MAS.   Whatever  may  please  you. 

M.  JOUR.  You  shall  see  me  equipped  in  style,  from 
head  to  foot. 

2O6  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  ficr  t 

Mus.-MAS.  We  do  not  doubt  it. 

M.  JOUR.  I  have  had  this  chintz  dressing-gown  made 
for  me. 

DAN.-MAS.  It  is  very  handsome. 

M.  JOUR.  My  tailor  told  me  that  people  of  quality  wear 
one  like  this  in  the  morning. 

Mus.-MAS.   It  becomes  you  marvellously. 

M.  JOUR.  Fellows!  hullo  !  where  are  my  two  lacqueys? 

IST  LAC.  What  do  you  wish,  Sir  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Nothing.  It  is  only  to  see  whether  you  hear 
me  readily.  (To  the  Music-Master  and  Dancing- Master). 
What  do  you  think  of  my  liveries  ? 

DAN.-MAS.  They  are  magnificent. 

M.  JOUR.  (Partly  opening  his  dressing-gown,  and 
showing  his  tight  scarlet  velvet  breeches,  and  green  velvet 
morning  jacket).  This  is  a  kind  of  undress  to  go  about  in 
the  morning. 

Mus.-MAS.  It  is  charming. 

M.  JOUR.  Fellow ! 

IST  LAC.  Sir? 

M.  JOUR.  The  other  fellow  ! 

ZD  LAC.   Sir  ? 

M.  JOUR.  (Taking  his  dressing-gown  off}.  Hold  my 
gown.  (To  the  Music- Master  and  Dancing- Master).  Do 
you  think  I  look  well  like  this  ? 

DAN.-MAS.  Very  well,  indeed ;  it  could  not  be  better. 

M.  JOUR.  Now  let  us  have  a  look  at  this  matter  of 
yours. 

Mus.-MAS.  I  should  like  you  to  hear  beforehand  an  air 
which  (pointing  to  his  pupil)  he  has  composed  just  now 
for  the  serenade  which  you  asked  of  me.  He  is  one  of 
my  pupils,  who  has  an  admirable  talent  for  this  kind  of 
thing. 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  but  you  ought  not  to  have  left  this  to 
a  pupil ;  and  you  were  not  too  good  for  this  business 
yourself. 

Mus.-MAS.  You  must  not  let  the  name  of  pupil  impose 
upon  you,  Sir.  These  sort  of  pupils  know  as  much  as  the 
greatest  masters ;  and  the  air  is  as  beautiful  a  one  as  could 
be  composed.  Only  listen. 

M.  JOUR.    (To  his  lacqueys).     Hand  me  my  gown,  so 

SCKNKII.]         THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  2O/ 

that  I  may  hear  better  .  .  .  Stay,  I  think  I  shall  be 
better  without  it.  No,  give  it  me  back  again  ;  that  will 
be  best. 

FEM.  Mus.  I  languish  night  and  day,  past  bearing  is 

my  pain, 
Since  those   fair   eyes  imposed   their  cruel 

chain, 
If  thus,  fair  Iris,  you  treat  those  who  love 

you. 

Alas !  what  could  you  do  to  your  enemies. 
M.  JOUR.  This  song  seems  to  me  somewhat  lugubrious  ; 
it  sends  one  to  sleep,  and  I  should  like  you  to  enliven  it  a 
little  here  and  there. 

Mus. -MAS.  It  is  necessary  that  the  air  should  be  suited 
to  the  words,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  Somebody  taught  me  a  very  pretty  one  a 
little  while  ago.  Wait  a  moment  ....  the  .  .  .  How 
is  it? 

DAN. -MAS.  Really,  I  do  not  know. 
M.  JOUR.  There  is  a  sheep  in  it. 
DAN. -MAS.  A  sheep? 
M.  JOUR.  Yes.     Ah  !     (He  sings) — 
I  fancied  my  Jenny, 
As  gentle  as  fair; 
I  fancied  my  Jenny, 
More  gentle  than  a  sheep. 
Alas !  alas  ! 

She  is  a  hundred  times, 
A  thousand  times  more  cruel 
Than  a  tiger  in  the  woods. 
Is  it  not  pretty? 

Mus. -MAS.  The  prettiest  thing  in  the  world. 
DAN. -MAS.  And  you  sing  it  well. 
M.  JOUR.  And  that  without  having  learnt  music. 
Mus.-MAS.  You  ought  to  learn  it,  Sir,  as  you  do  danc- 
ing.    They  are  two  arts  which  are  closely  bound  together. 
DAN. -MAS.   And   which   open   a  man's   mind   to   the 
beauty  of  things. 

M.  JOUR.  Do  people  of  quality  learn  music  too  ? 

Mus.-MAS.  Yes,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  I  shall   learn  it  then.     But   I  do  not   know 

208  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  I. 

what  time  I  could  take  for  it;  for  besides  the  fencing- 
master  who  teaches  me,  I  have  engaged  a  professor  of 
philosophy  who  is  to  begin  this  morning. 

Mus.-MAS.  Philosophy  is  something,  but  music,  Sir, 
music  .  .  . 

DAN.-MAS.  Music  and  dancing  .  .  .  Music  and  danc- 
ing, that  is  all  that  is  necessary. 

Mus.-MAS.  There  is  nothing  so  useful  in  a  State  as 
music. 

DAN.-MAS.  There  is  nothing  so  necessary  to  men  as 
dancing. 

Mus.-MAS,  Without  music,  a  State  cannot  exist. 

DAN.-MAS.  Without  dancing,  a  man  can  do  nothing. 

Mus.-MAS.  All  the  disorders,  all  the  wars  that  occur  in 
the  world,  happen  because  people  have  not  learned  music. 

DAN.-MAS.  All  the  misfortunes  of  mankind,  all  the  sad 
reverses  with  which  history  is  filled,  the  political  blunders, 
the  miscarriage  of  great  commanders,  all  this  comes  from 
want  of  skill  in  dancing. 

M.  JOUR.  How  is  that? 

Mus.-MAS.  Does  not  war  proceed  from  want  of  concord 
among  men  ? 

M.  JOUR.  That  is  true. 

Mus.-MAS.  And  if  every  one  were  to  learn  music,  would 
that  not  be  the  means  of  harmonizing  together,  and  of 
seeing  universal  peace  in  the  world? 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  right. 

DAN.-MAS.  When  a  man  has  committed  an  error  in  his 
conduct,  be  it  in  family  affairs,  or  in  the  government  of  a 
State,  or  in  the  command  of  an  army,  is  it  not  always 
said :  So-and-so  has  made  a  false  step  in  such-and-such  an 
affair? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  that  is  what  people  say. 

DAN.-MAS.  And  can  a  false  step  proceed  from  aught  else 
than  from  not  knowing  how  to  dance? 

M.  JOUR.  That  is  true,  and  you  are  right,  both  of  you. 

DAN.-MAS.  That  will  show  you  the  excellence  and  the 
Utility  of  dancing  and  music.4 

4  It  is  said  that  Marcel,  a  well-known  male  dancer  of  the  last  century, 
pretended  to  know  a  politician  by  his  steps  in  dancing ;  and  that  Vestris, 

SCBNKH.J        THE   CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  209 

M.  JOUR.  I  perceive  it  at  a  glance. 

Mus.-MAS.  Will  you  look  at  our  two  compositions? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes. 

Mus.-MAS.  I  have  already  told  you  that  it  is  a  short  essay 
that  I  composed  formerly  upon  the  different  passions  which 
music  can  express, 

M.  JOUR.  Very  well. 

MUS.-MAS.  (  To  the  Musicians}  Come,  step  forward.  {To 
M.  Jourdain),  You  are  to  imagine  that  they  are  dressed  as 
shepherds. 

M.  JOUR.  Why  always  as  shepherds?  Nothing  else  is 
seen  anywhere. 

DAN. -MAS.  When  we  have  to  make  people  speak  in 
music,  it  is  necessary  that,  for  probability's  sake,  we  take 
to  the  pastoral.  Song  has  from  the  earliest  times  been 
affected  by  shepherds;  and  it  is  not  at  all  natural  that 
princes  or  citizens  should  sing  their  passions  in  dialogue.5 

M.  JOUR.  Proceed,  proceed.     Let  us  see  what  it  is. 

DIALOGUE  IN  MUSIC. 

A   FEMALE  MUSICIAN  AND  TWO  MALE  MUSICIANS. 

FEM.  M.  A  heart,  when  under  love's  empire, 

By  thousand  cares  is  always  swayed. 

It's  said  that  people  find  a  pleasure  in  languish- 
ing, in  sighing; 

But  whatever  may  be  said-, 

Nothing  is  so  sweet  as  liberty. 
IST  Mus.  There's  nought  so  sweet  as  the  tender  ardour 

Which  binds  two  hearts  in  self-same  flame; 

People  cannot  be  happy  without  an  amorous 
passion ; 

Take  love  away  from  life, 

You  take  away  its  pleasures. 

another  gentleman  of  the  same  profession,  and  of  nearly  the  same  period, 
said  in  a  serious  manner,  "  There  are  only  three  great  men  in  Europe  : 
the  King  of  Prussia,  Voltaire,  and  myself." 

6  This  is  a  hit  against  the  grand  Italian  opera  which  Mazarin  had  intro- 
duced in  1645.  Only  one  year  before  The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Noble- 
man was  represented,  the  Academie  royale  de  Musiqtie  had  been  insti- 
tuted. 

VOL.  III.  O 

210  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  u. 

2D  Mus.  Sweet  it  would  be  to  bow  to  love's  sway 

If  constancy  were  to  be  found  in  love ; 

But,  alas  !  O  severe  cruelty  ! 

We  see  no  faithful  shepherdess  ; 

And  this  fickle  sex,  too  unworthy  to  live, 

Is  the  cause  that  we  for  ever  abandon  love. 
IST  Mus.  Amiable  ardour  ! 
FEM.  M.  Happy  independence  } 
2D  Mus.  Deceitful  sex  ! 
IST  Mus.  How  dear  you  are  to  me  ! 
FEM.  M.  How  you  delight  my  heart ! 
2D  Mus.  How  I  abhor  you  ! 
IST  Mus.  Abandon,  for  love,  this  mortal  hate  ! 
FEM.  M.  We  can,  we  can  show  you 

A  faithful  shepherdess. 

2D  Mus.  Alas  !  where  could  we  see  one  now  ? 
FEM.  M.  In  defence  of  our  glory, 

I  offer  you  my  heart. 
20  Mus.  But  can  I  believe,  shepherdess, 

That  you  will  not  deceive  me? 
FEM.  M.  Let  us  see,  by  experience, 

Who  of  us  two  shall  love  best. 
20  Mus.    Whoever  shall  be  inconstant, 

May  the  gods  punish  him  ! 
ALL  THREE.  Let  our  hearts  be  kindled 

By  so  fair  a  flame  ; 

Ah  !  how  sweet  it  is  to  love, 

When  two  hearts  are  faithful. 
M.  JOUR.  Is  this  all  ? 
Mus. -MAS.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.  I  think  it  nicely  arranged,  and  there  are 
some  little  sayings  in  it  which  are  rather  pretty. 

DAN. -MAS.  Now  for  my  share,  a  little  essay  of  the 
nicest  movements  and  the  most  beautiful  attitudes  with 
which  a  dance  can  be  varied. 

M.  JOUR.  Are  they  shepherds  too  ? 
DAN. -MAS.  They  will  be  what  you  please.      (To  the 
Dancers}.     Come  ! 

ENTRY   OF   THE    BALLET. 

Four  Dancers  execute  the  various  movements  and  all  kinds 
of  steps  which  the  Dancing-Master  orders  them. 

SC«N«I.]          THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  211 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — M.  JOURDAIN,  MUSIC-MASTER,  DANCING- 
MASTER.' 

M.  JOUR.  This  is  not  at  all  bad  ;  and  these  folks  trip  it 
very  well. 

MUS.-MAS.  When  the  dance  shall  be  accompanied  by 
the  music,  it  will  have  greater  effect  still ;  and  you  shall 
see  something  very  gallant  in  the  little  ballet  which  we 
have  put  together  for  you. 

M.  JOUR.  That  will  be  for  by-and-by,  mind  !  and  the 
personage  for  whom  I  have  had  all  this  arranged  is  to  do 
me  the  honour  of  coming  to  dine  here. 

DAN. -MAS.    Everything  is  ready. 

Mus.-MAS.  Besides,  Sir,  this  is  not  enough;  a  person 
like  you,  who  are  so  splendid,  and  who  have  an  inclina- 
tion for  beautiful  things,  should  have  a  concert  at  his 
house  every  Wednesday  or  Thursday.7 

M.  JOUR.  Do  people  of  quality  have  it  ? 

Mus.-MAS.  Yes,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.   Then  I  shall  have  it.     Will  it  be  nice  ? 

Mus.-MAS.  Undoubtedly.  You  must  have  three  voices, 
a  treble,  a  counter-tenor,  and  a  bass,  which  must  be  ac- 
companied by  a  bass  viol,  a  theorbo-lute,  and  a  harpsi- 
chord for  the  thorough-basses,  with  two  violins  to  play 
the  refrains. 

M.  JOUR.  We  ought  also  to  have  a  trumpet-marine.8 
The  trumpet-marine  is  an  instrument  that  pleases  me,  and 
is  very  harmonious. 

6  The  acts  of  this  play  are  separated  by  interludes ;  but  as  the  same 
persons  are  always  on  the  stage,  nothing  would  be  easier  than  to  unite 
the  five  acts ;  for  The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman  is  in  reality  a  comedy 
in  one  act,  separated  by  entrees  de  ballet.  In  the  official  libretto,  it  has 
only  three  acts,  and  the  first  ''  entry  "  does  not  divide  the  first  and  second 
act. 

1  These  two  days  appear  to  have  been  specially  selected  for  private 
musical  parties,  because  then  no  representation  took  place  at  the  Opera. 
But  in  winter,  the  Thursday  was  an  opera-night,  and  generally  devoted  to 
the  production  of  new  pieces. 

8 A  trumpet-marine  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  navy;  but  it  is  an 
ancient  specimen  of  one-string  instrument,  played  with  a  bow,  and  pro- 
ducing a  sound  resembling  that  of  a  trumpet. 

212  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  n. 

MUS.-MAS.  Let  us  arrange  matters. 

M.  JOUR.  At  any  rate,  do  not  forget  to  send  me  some 
musicians  by-and-by  to  sing  at  table. 

Mus.-MAS.  You  shall  have  all  that  is  necessary. 

M.  JOUR.  But,  above  all,  let  the  ballet  be  nice. 

Mus.-MAS.  You  will  be  pleased  with  it ;  and,  amongst 
other  things,  with  certain  minuets  which  you  shall  see  in 
it. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah !  minuets  are  my  dance,  and  I  wish  you 
to  see  me  perform  one.  Come,  master. 

DAN. -MAS.  A  hat,  Sir,  if  you  please.  {M.Jourdain 
takes  the  hat  from  his  lacquey,  and  puts  it  on  the  top  of  his 
night-cap.  The  teacher  takes  hold  of  his  hands,  and  makes 
him  dance  to  a  minuet  air,  which  he  hums}.  La,  la,  la,  la, 
la,  la;  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la;  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la;  la,  la,  la, 
la,  la.  In  time,  if  you  please.  La,  la,  la,  la,  la.  The 
right  leg,  la,  la,  la.  Do  not  move  your  shoulders  so  much. 
La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la.  Your  two  arms  are  dis- 
abled. La,  la,  la,  la,  la.  Hold  up  your  head.  Turn  the 
point  of  the  foot  outwards.  La,  la,  la.  Your  body 
erect. 

M.  JOUR.  Eh  ! 

MUS.-MAS.  It  could  not  possibly  be  better. 

M.  JOUR.  While  I  think  of  it !  just  teach  me  how  I 
must  bow  to  salute  a  marchioness ;  I  shall  have  occasion 
for  it  by-and-by. 

DAN.-MAS.  A  bow  to  salute  a  marchioness? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes.  A  marchioness  whose  name  is  Dorimene. 

DAN.-MAS.  Give  me  your  hand. 

M.  JOUR.  No.  You  just  show  me ;  I  shall  remember  it 
quite  well. 

DAN.-MAS.  If  you  wish  to  salute  her  with  a  great  deal 
of  respect,  you  must  first  of  all  bow,  stepping  backward, 
then  come  towards  her,  bowing  three  times,  and  at  the 
last  one  down  to  her  very  knees. 

M.  JOUR.  Just  show  me  a  little.  {After  the  dancing- 
master  has  made  three  bows)  Right. 

SCENE  II. — M.  JOURDAIN,  MUSIC-MASTER,  DANCING- 
MASTER,  A  LACQUEY. 

LAC.  Sir,  your  fencing-master  is  here. 

SCKNBIII.]       THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  213 

M.  JOUR.  Tell  him  to  come  in  here  to  give  me  my  les- 
son. (To  the  Music  and  Dancing-Masters},  I  wish  you  to 
see  me  at  it. 

SCENE  III. — M.  JOURDAIN,  FENCING-MASTER,  MUSIC-MAS- 
TER, DANCING-MASTER,  LACQUEY,  carrying  two  foils. 

FEN. -MAS.  (After  having  taken  two  foils  from  the  hand 
of  the  lacquey \  and  having  presented  one  to  M.  Jourd&in), 
Come,  Sir,  salute.  Your  body  straight.  Lean  a  little  on 
the  left  thigh.  Your  legs  not  so  far  from  each  other. 
Your  feet  on  the  same  line.  Your  wrist  opposite  your 
hip.  The  point  of  your  sword  facing  your  shoulder. 
Your  arm  not  quite  so  straight.  The  left  hand  on  a  level 
with  your  eye.  The  left  shoulder  more  squared.  Your 
head  erect.  A  bold  look.  Advance.  Your  body  steady. 
Thrust  carte,  and  finish  off  the  same.  One,  two.  Reco- 
ver. Once  more,  your  feet  firm.  A  leap  back.  When 
you  make  a  pass,  your  sword  should  be  disengaged,  and 
your  body  kept  in  as  much  as  possible.  One,  two,  thrust 
tierce,  and  finish  the  same.  Advance,  the  body  firm. 
Advance.  Disengage.  One,  two.  Recover.  Once  more, 
one,  two.  A  leap  back.  Parry,  parry,  Sir.  (The Fencing- 
Master  makes  two  or  three  feints  at  him,  in  saying:  parry.*) 

M.  JOUR.  Eh  ! 

Mus.-MAS.  Admirable. 

FEN. -MAS.  I  have  already  told  you,  the  whole  secret 
of  fencing  consists  but  in  two  things,  to  give  and  not  to 
receive ;  and  as  I  showed  you  the  other  day  by  demon- 
strative reason,  it  is  impossible  for  you  to  be  hit,  if  you 
know  how  to  turn  the  sword  of  your  enemy  from  the  line 
of  your  body  ;  which  depends  only  on  a  slight  motion  of 
the  wrist,  either  inwards  or  outwards. 

M.  JOUR.  In  that  manner,  then,  a  man  without  having 
any  courage,  is  sure  of  killing  his  man,  and  of  not  being 
killed  himself? 

FEN. -MAS.  Undoubtedly ;  did  you  not  see  it  demon- 
strated ? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes. 

FEN. -MAS.  And  from  this  you  may  see  what  impor- 
tance we  must  be  to  the  State ;  and  how  highly  the  science 

214  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  n. 

of  arms  excels  all  the  other  useless  sciences,  such  as  danc- 
ing, music  .  .  . 

DAN. -MAS.  Gently,  Mr.  fencing-master  !  please  not  to 
speak  of  dancing,  except  with  respect. 

Mus.-MAS.  Learn,  pray,  to  treat  the  excellence  of 
music  somewhat  better. 

FEN. -MAS.  You  are  very  funny  people,  truly,  to  wish 
to  compare  your  sciences  to  mine ! 

Mus.-MAS.  Just  look  at  the  importance  of  the  man  ! 

DAN. -MAS.  A  funny  animal,  surely,  with  his  plastron. 

FEN.-MAS.  My  little  dancing-master,  I  shall  make  you 
dance  properly  directly.  And  you,  little  musician,  I  shall 
make  you  sing  prettily. 

DAN.-MAS.  Master  iron-beater,  I  shall  teach  you  your 
trade. 

M.  JOUR.  (To  the  Dancing-Master).  Are  you  mad  to 
go  and  seek  a  quarrel  with  him,  who  understands  tierce 
and  carte,  and  who  knows  how  to  kill  a  man  by  demon- 
strative reason  ? 

DAN.-MAS.  I  laugh  at  his  demonstrative  reason,  and  at 
his  tierce,  and  his  carte. 

M.  JOUR.  (To  the,  Dancing-Master}.  Gently,  I  tell 
you  ! 

FEN.-MAS.  (To  the  Dancing-Master).  How!  you  little 
impertinent  fellow  ! 

M.  JOUR.  He  !  Mr.  fencing-master. 

DAN.-MAS.  (To  the  fencing-Master).  How,  you  great 
coach-horse  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Eh  !  Mr.  dancing-master  ! 

FEN.-MAS.  If  I  were  to  fall  upon  you  .    .    . 

M.  JOUR.   (To  the  fencing  Master}.     Gently! 

DAN.-MAS.   If  I  were  to.  lay  hands  on  you  .    .    . 

M.  JOUR.  (To  the  fencing- Master).     Softly  ! 

FEN.-MAS.  I  shall  currycomb  you  in  such  a  manner 

M.  JOUR.  (To  the  fencing- Master).      Pray! 

DAN.-MAS.   I  shall  drub  you  in  such  style  .    .    . 

M.  Jour.  (To  the  Dancing-Master).  Let  me  beg  of 
you  .  .  . 

Mus.-MAS.  Just  leave  it  to  us  to  teach  him  how  to 
speak. 

SCENE  iv.]       THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  215 

M.  JOUR.  Good  Heavens  !  stop. 

SCENE  IV. — A  PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY,  M.  JOURDAIN, 
MUSIC-MASTER,  DANCING-MASTER,  FENCING-MASTER, 
A  LACQUEY. 

M.  JOUR.  Hullo  !  Mr.  Philosopher,  you  arrived  just  in 
time  with  your  philosophy.  Pray,  come  and  restore  peace 
a  little  between  these  people. 

PRO.  What  is  the  matter  then  ?  what  is  amiss,  gentle- 
men? 

M.  JOUR.  They  have  got  angry  about  the  preference  of 
their  professions  to  such  an  extent  as  to  insult  each  other, 
and  to  wish  to  come  to  blows. 

PRO.  How  now,  gentlemen  !  is  it  right  to  get  angry 
in  that  way?  and  have  you  not  read  the  learned  treatise 
that  Seneca  has  composed  about  anger?  Is  there  aught 
more  vile  and  shameful  than  this  passion,  which  changes 
man  into  a  ferocious  animal  ?  and  ought  reason  not  to  be 
the  mistress  of  all  our  actions  ? 

DAN. -MAS.  What,  Sir  !  he  comes  to  insult  us  both,  in 
despising  dancing  which  I  practice,  and  music,  which  is 
his  profession  ! 

PRO.  A  wise  man  is  above  all  the  insults  which  one  can 
give  him ;  and  the  great  answer  one  ought  to  give  to  all 
outrages,  is  moderation  and  patience. 

FEN. -MAS.  They  both  had  the  audacity  to  wish  to  com- 
pare their  professions  to  mine ! 

PRO.  Should  that  disturb  you  ?  Men  should  not  dispute 
about  vain-glory  and  rank  among  themselves;  and  that 
which  distinguishes  us  perfectly  one  from  another,  is 
wisdom  and  virtue. 

DAN. -MAS.  I  maintain  to  him  that  dancing  is  a  science 
to  which  too  great  an  honour  cannot  be  paid. 

Mus.-MAS.  And  I,  that  music  is  one  to  which  every  age 
has  paid  reverence. 

FEN. -MAS.  And  I,  I  maintain  against  them  both  that 
the  science  of  handling  arms  is  the  most  beautiful  and 
necessary  of  all  sciences. 

PRO.  And  what  will  become  of  philosophy  then? 
I  think  you  all  three  very  impertinent  in  speaking  before 
me  with  this  arrogance,  and  in  impudently  applying  the 

2l6  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  IL 

name  of  science  to  things  which  ought  not  even  to  be 
honoured  with  the  name  of  art,  and  which  can  only  be 
comprised  under  the  miserable  trade  of  gladiator,  singer, 
and  mountebank ! 

FEN.-MAS.  Away  with  you,  you  philosophic  cur. 

Mus.-MAS.  Away  with  you,  you  pedantic  noodle. 

DAN.-MAS.  Away  with  you,  you  arrant  college-scout. 

PRO.  What !  you  miserable  boobies.  .  .  .  ( The  Philo- 
sopher falls  upon  them,  and  the  three  belabour  him  with 
blows}. 

M.  JOUR.  Mr.  Philosopher ! 

PRO.  Rogues,  infamous,  insolent  wretches. 

M.  JOUR.  Mr.  Philosopher ! 

FEN.-MAS.  Plague  upon  the  beast ! 

M.  JOUR.  Gentlemen ! 

PRO.   Impertinent  wretches ! 

M.  JOUR.  Mr.  Philosopher. 

DAN.-MAS.  Devil  take  the  stupid  ass  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Gentlemen ! 

PRO.  Wretches  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Mr.  Philosopher  ! 

Mus.-MAS.  To  the  devil  with  the  impertinent  fellow ! 

M.  JOUR.  Gentlemen ! 

PRO.  Rogues,  beggars,  wretches,  impostors ! 

M.  JOUR.  Mr.  Philosopher !  Gentlemen  !  Mr.  Philoso- 
pher !  Gentlemen  !  Mr.  Philosopher ! 

(They  go  out,  fighting  together. 

SCENE  V. — M.  JOURDAIN,  A  LACQUEY. 

M.  JOUK.  Oh  !  fight  as  much  as  you  like  :  I  shall  not 
interfere  with  you,  and  spoil  my  gown  in  separating  you. 
I  should  be  very  foolish  to  thrust  myself  among  them,  and 
get  some  blows  that  might  hurt  me. 

SCENE  VI. — PROFESSOR  OF  PHILOSOPHY,  M.  JOURDAIN,  A 
LACQUEY. 

PRO.    (Putting  his  collar  straight}.    Now  for  our  lesson. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah,  Sir,  I  am  sorry  for  the  blows  they  have 
given  you. 

PRO.  It  is  nothing.  A  philosopher  knows  how  to  take 
these  things ;  and  I  shall  compose  against  them  a  satire  in 

SCBNMVI.]       THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  2IJ 

the  style  of  Juvenal,  which  shall  cut  them  up  most  glori- 
ously.    Let  that  pass.     What  have  you  a  mind  to  learn  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Whatever  I  can ;  for  I  have  every  possible 
desire  to  be  learned ;  and  it  drives  me  mad  to  think  that 
my  father  and  mother  did  not  make  me  study  all  the  sci- 
ences when  I  was  young. 

PRO.  That  is  a  reasonable  feeling ;  nam,  sine  doctrina, 
vita  est  quasi  mortis  imago.  You  understand  that,  and  you 
know  Latin,  no  doubt? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes ;  but  do  as  if  I  did  not  know  it.  Explain 
to  me  what  that  means. 

PRO.  It  means  that,  without  knowledge  life  is  as  it  were 
an  image  of  death. 

M.  JOUR.  That  Latin  is  right. 

PRO.  Have  you  not  some  principles,  some  rudiments  of 
the  sciences  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Oh  yes !  I  know  how  to  read  and  write. 

PRO.  Where  would  you  have  us  to  begin,  if  you  please  ?9 
Would  you  like  me  to  teach  you  logic  ? 

M.  JOUR.  What  may  this  logic  be  ? 

PRO.  It  is  that  which  teaches  the  three  operations  of  the 
mind. 

M.  JOUR.  What  are  they,  these  three  operations  of  the 
mind? 

PRO.  The  first,  the  second,  and  the  third.     The  first  is 
to  conceive  well,  by  means  of  universals ;    the  second,  to" 
judge  well,  by  means  of  categories;    and  the  third,  to 
draw  a  conclusion  properly   by  means  of  figures;    Bar- 
bara, Celarent,  Darii,  Ferio,  Baralipton^ 

M.  JOUR.  These  words  stick  in  my  throat  too  much. 
This  logic  does  not  seem  to  suit  me.  Let  us  learn  some- 
thing more  pretty. 

PRO.  Will  you  learn  moral  philosophy  ? 

•  There  is  some  analogy  between  this  dialogue  and  one  from  Aristo- 
phanes' Clouds— between  Socrates  and  Strepsiades. 

10  Universals  and  categories  are  words  belonging  to  the  antiquated 
jargon  of  logic.  The  barbarous  words  from  Barbara  to  Baralipton  were 
a  kind  of  memoria  technica  to  remember  the  nineteen  regular  syllogisms, 
formerly  taught  in  the  schools.  Each  word  is  formed  of  three  syllables, 
representing  the  three  propositions  of  a  syllogism,  and  the  vowel  of  each 
syllable  shows  the  nature  of  each  proposition.  See  also  The  Forced  Mar- 
riage, Vol.  I.,  page  484,  note  II. 

2l8  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  it 

M.  JOUR.  Moral  philosophy  ? 

PRO.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.  What  does  it  say,  this  moral  philosophy? 

PRO.  It  treats  of  happiness,  teaches  men  to  moderate 
their  passions,  and  .  .  . 

M.  JOUR.  No  ;  let  us  leave  that.  I  am  choleric  like 
the  very  devil ;  and  in  spite  of  morality,  I  will  put  my- 
self in  a  passion  as  much  as  I  like,  when  the  fit  takes 
me. 

PRO.  Will  you  learn  physics? 

M.  JOUR.  What  does  this  physics  say  for  itself? 

PRO.  Physics  is  that  which  explains  the  principles  of 
things  natural,  and  the  properties  of  bodies ;  which  dis- 
courses of  the  nature  of  elements,  of  metals,  of  minerals, 
of  stones,  of  plants  and  animals,  and  teaches  us  the  causes 
of  all  the  meteors,  the  rainbow,  wills-o'-the-wisp,  comets, 
lightning,  thunder,  thunder-bolts,  rain,  snow,  hail,  winds, 
and  whirlwinds. u 

M.  JOUR.  There  is  too  much  hurly-burly  in  this,  too 
much  confusion. 

PRO.  What  is  it  you  wish  me  to  teach  you  then  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Teach  me  orthography. 

PRO.  With  all  my  heart. 

M.  JOUR.  Afterwards  you  shall  teach  me  the  almanac, 
that  I  may  know  when  there  is  a  moon,  and  when  not. 

PRO.  Be  it  so.  To  pursue  this  thought  of  yours  in  the 
right  way,  and  treat  this  matter  as  a  philosopher,  we  must 
begin,  according  to  the  order  of  things,  with  an  exact 
knowledge  of  the  nature  of  letters,  and  the  different  ways 
of  pronouncing  them  all.  And  on  this  head,  I  must  tell 
you  that  letters  are  divided  into  vowels,  called  vowels  be- 
cause they  express  the  voice;  and  into  consonants,  called 
consonants  because  they  are  sounded  with  the  vowels,  and 

11  This  passage  seems  to  be  imitated  from  Lucretius  On  the  Nature  of 
Tilings,  Book  V.,  line  1189-1193,  which  says:  "Through  the  sky  the 
night  and  the  moon  are  seen  to  revolve  ;  the  moon,  I  say,  the  day  and  the 
night,  and  the  august  constellations  of  the  night,  and  the  nocturnal  lumi- 
naries of  the  heavens,  and  the  flying  meteors,  as  well  as  the  cloud?,  the 
sun,  rain,  snow,  winds,  lightnings,  hail,  and  the  vehement  noises  and  loud 
threatening  murmurs  of  the  thunder."  See  also  Introductory  Notice  to 
The  Misanthrope,  Vol.  II. 

SCBNB  vi.J       THE   CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  219 

only  mark  the  various  articulations  of  the  voice.  There 
are  five  vowels  or  voices :  A,  E.  I,  O,  U. u 

M.  JOUR.  I  understand  all  that. 

PRO.  The  vowel  A  is  formed  by  opening  the  mouth 
very  wide :  A. 

M.  JOUR.  A,  A.     Yes. 

PRO.  The  vowel  E  is  formed  by  drawing  the  lower  jaw 
near  to  the  upper :  A,  E. 

M.  JOUR.  A,  E,  A,  E.  Indeed  it  is.  Ah !  how  pretty 
that  is. 

PRO.  And  the  vowel  I,  by  drawing  the  jaws  still  nearer 
to  one  another,  and  stretching  the  two  corners  of  the 
mouth  towards  the  ears :  A,  E,  I. 

M.  JOUR.  A,  E,  I,  I,  I,  I.  There  is  truth  in  that. 
Long  life  to  science ! 

PRO.  The  vowel  O  is  formed  by  re-opening  the  jaws, 
and  by  drawing  in  the  lips  at  the  two  corners,  the  upper 
and  lower :  O. 

M.  JOUR.  O,  O.  Nothing  can  be  more  correct.  A,  E, 
I,  O,  I,  O.  That  is  admirable !  I,  O ;  I,  O. 

PRO.  The  opening  of  the  mouth  makes  exactly  a  little 
ring,  which  represents  an  O. 

M.  JOUR.  O,  O,  O.  You  are  right.  O.  Ah  !  how  nice 
it  is  to  know  something ! 

PRO.  The  vowel  U  is  formed  by  bringing  the  teeth 
together  without  altogether  joining  them,  and  pouting 
both  lips  outwardly,  bringing  them  likewise  together, 
without  absolutely  joining  them  :  U. 

M.  JOUR.   U,  U.     Nothing  could  be  more  true :  U. 

PRO.  Your  two  lips  must  pout  out,  as  if  you  were 
making  faces ;  so  that  if  you  wish  to  make  them  to  some 
one,  and  to  make  fun  of  him,  you  have  but  to  say  U. 

n  It  is  said  that  Moliere  owes  the  idea  of  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowels 
in  French — which  is  different  from  the  English — to  a  work  of  M.  de  Cor- 
demoy,  called  Discours  physique  de  la  Parole,  which  was  dedicated  to 
Louis  XIV.,  and  published  two  years  before  Moliere's  play  was  acted, 
This  work  is  a  translation  of  a  Latin  treatise  on  the  same  subject,  written 
in  the  fifteenth  century  by  Galeotus,  which  treatise  our  dramatist  seems 
also  to  have  known.  That,  however,  the  pronunciation  of  the  vowels 
may  be  well  and  scientifically  treated,  may  be  seen  in  Prof.  Max  Miiller's 
Lectures  on  the  Science  of  Language,  2d  Series,  pp.  115-125. 

220  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  n. 

M.  JOUR.  That  is  true.  U,  U.  Ah  !  why  did  I  not 
study  earlier  to  know  all  this  ! 

PRO.  To-morrow,  we  shall  pass  in  review  the  other 
letters,  which  are  the  consonants. 

M.  JOUR.  Is  there  anything  as  curious  in  them  as  in 
these  ? 

PRO.  Undoubtedly.  The  consonant  D,  for  instance,  is 
pronounced  by  clapping  the  tip  of  the  tongue  above  the 
upper  teeth :  DA. 

M.  JOUR.  DA,  DA.  Yes  !  Ah !  the  charming  things  ! 
the  charming  things ! 

PRO.  The  F,  in  pressing  the  upper  teeth  on  the  lower 
lip:  FA. 

M.  JOUR.  FA,  FA.  It  is  the  truth.  Ah  !  father  and 
mother,  what  a  grudge  I  owe  you  ! 

PRO.  And  the  R,  by  bringing  the  tip  of  the  tongue  to 
the  top  of  the  palate ;  so  that  being  grazed  by  the  air 
which  rushes  out  with  a  certain  strength,  it  yields  to  it, 
and  always  comes  back  to  the  same  place,  causing  a  kind 
of  thrill :  R,  RA. 

M.  JOUR.  R,  R,  RA  j  R,  R,  R,  R,  R,  RA.  That  is  true. 
Ah  !  What  a  clever  man  you  are,  and  how  have  I  lost  my 
time  !  R,  R,  R,  RA. 

PRO.  I  shall  explain  all  these  peculiarities  more  fully  to 
you. 

M.  JOUR.  Pray  do.  Besides,  I  must  impart  something 
in  great  confidence  to  you.  I  am  in  love  with  a  person  of 
great  quality,  and  I  should  like  you  to  help  to  write  some- 
thing to  her  in  a  small  note  which  I  intend  to  drop  at  her 
feet. 

PRO.    Very  well ! 

M.  JOUR.  It  will  be  gallant,  will  it  not  ? 

PRO.  Undoubtedly.  Are  they  verses  which  you  wish 
to  write  to  her  ? 

M.  JOUR.  No  no ;  no  verses. 

PRO.  You  wish  only  prose? 

M.  JOUR.  I  wish  neither  prose  nor  verse. 

PRO.  It  must  be  one  or  the  other. 

M.  JOUR.  Why  so  ? 

PRO.  For  the  reason,  Sir,  that,  to  express  one's  self, 
there  is  only  prose  or  verse. 

SCBNK  vi. j       THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  221 

M.  JOUR.   There  is  nothing  but  prose  or  verse? 

PRO.  No  Sir.  All  that  is  not  prose  is  verse,  and  all  that 
is  not  verse  is  prose. 

M.  JOUR.  And  what  is  it  when  we  speak  ? 

PRO.  Prose. 

M.  JOUR.  What !  when  I  say :  Nicole,  bring  me  my 
slippers,  and  give  me  my  night-cap,  is  that  prose?18 

PRO.  Yes,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  On  my  word,  I  have  been  speaking  prose  for 
more  than  forty  years,  without  being  aware  of  it;  and 
I  am  most  obliged  to  you  for  having  informed  me  of  it, 
Well,  then,  I  should  like  to  put  in  a  note :  Fair  marchion- 
ess, your  beautiful  eyes  make  me  die  with  love;  but  I 
should  like  this  put  in  a  gallant  manner,  nicely  turned. 

PRO.  You  would  like  to  put,  that  the  fire  of  her  eyes 
has  reduced  your  heart  to  ashes  ;  that  day  and  night  you 
suffer  on  account  of  her  the  tortures  of  ... 

M.  JOUR.  No,  no,  no,  I  do  not  wish  all  that.  I  simply 
wish  what  I  tell  you  :  Fair  marchioness,  your  beautiful  eyes 
make  me  die  with  love. 

PRO.  The  matter  must  be  somewhat  amplified. 

M.  JOUR.  No,  I  tell  you.  I  wish  nothing  but  these 
words  in  that  note;  but  turned  fashionably,  arranged  as 
they  should  be.  Pray  tell  me,  just  that  I  may  see,  the 
ways  in  which  they  could  be  put. 

PRO.  First  of  all,  they  could  be  put  as  you  have  said : 
Fair  marchioness,  your  beautiful  eyes  make  me  die  with  love. 
Or  else  :  with  love  they  make  me  die,  fair  marchioness,  your 
beautiful  eyes.  Or  else :  your  beautiful  eyes  with  love  make 
me,  fair  marchioness,  die.  Or  else :  die,  your  beautiful  eyes, 
fair  marchioness,  make  me.  Or  else :  me  make  your  beau- 
tiful eyes  die,  fair  marchioness,  with  love. 

M.  JOUR.  But  of  all  these  ways  which  is  the  best  ? 

PRO.  The  one  you  said  :  Fair  marchioness,  your  beauti- 
ful eyes  make  me  die  with  love. 

M.  JOUR.  Yet  for  all  that,  I  did  not  study;  and  I  did  it 
at  once.  I  thank  you  with  all  my  heart,  and  beg  of  you 
to  come  early  to-morrow. 

18  This  exclamation  is  said  to  have  been  uttered  by  the  Count  de 
Soissons,  if  we  may  believe  a  letter  of  Mad.  de  S^vigne.  dated  June  lath, 
1681. 

222  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  H. 

PRO.  I  shall  not  fail. 

SCENE  VII. — M.  JOURDAIN,  A  LACQUEY. 

M.  JOUR.  {To  his  Lacquey}.  What,  has  my  suit  not  come 
yet? 

LAC.  No,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  This  confounded  tailor  keeps  me  waiting  long 
enough,  and  just  a  day  when  I  have  so  much  to  do.  I 
burst  with  rage.  May  the  quartan  fever  catch  this  villain 
of  a  tailor !  To  the  devil  with  the  tailor !  may  the  plague 
choke  the  tailor.  If  I  had  him  here  now,  this  detestable 
tailor,  this  cur  of  a  tailor,  this  wretch  of  a  tailor,  I  ... 

SCENE  VIII. — M.  JOURDAIN,  A  MASTER  TAILOR,  THE 
ASSISTANT,  carrying  the  clothes  of  M.  Jourdain,  A  LACQUEY. 

M,  JOUR.  Ah !  you  are  there.  I  was  just  going  to  get 
in  a  rage  with  you.14 

TAIL.  I  could  not  come  sooner,  and  I  set  twenty  hands 
to  work  at  your  coat. 

M.  JOUR.  The  silk  stockings  you  sent  me  are  so  tight 
that  I  have  had  all  the  trouble  in  the  world  to  put  them 
on,  and  there  are  already  two  stitches  broken  in  them. 

TAIL.   They  will  be  but  too  large  soon  enough. 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  if  I  go  on  breaking  the  stitches.  The 
shoes  which  you  made  for  me  hurt  me  also  tremendously.1* 

TAIL.  Not  at  all,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  How !  not  at  all  ? 

TAIL.  No,  they  do  not  hurt  you. 

M.  JOUR.  I  tell  you  they  do  hurt  me. 

TAIL.  You  imagine  so. 

M.  JOUR.  I  imagine  so  because  I  feel  it.  A  nice  argu- 
ment that  is. 

TAIL.  There,  this  is  the  handsomest  coat  at  the  Court, 
and  the  most  suitable.  It  is  a  work  of  art  to  have  invented 
a  sober  coat,  that  was  not  black,  and  I  will  allow  the 
cleverest  tailors  to  try  six  times  to  do  the  like. 

14  The  very  polite  way  in  which  M.  Jourdain  addresses  the  tailor,  after 
having  stormed  against  him,  produces  a  very  ridiculous  effect, 

15  At  the  time  Moliere  wrote,  the  tailor  sold  everything  belonging  to 
the  dress  of  a  gentleman. 

SCENE  vm.]     THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  223 

M.  JOUR.  What  is  this?  You  have  put  the  flowers  with 
the  stalks  upwards. 

TAIL.  You  did  not  say  that  you  wanted  them  down- 
wards. 

M.  JOUR.  Is  it  necessary  to  say  so? 

TAIL.  Indeed  it  is.  All  people  of  quality  wear  them  in 
this  way. 

M.  JOUR.  People  of  quality  wear  their  flowers  with  the 
stalks  upwards? 

TAIL.  Yes,  Sir ! 

M.  JOUR.  Oh  !  then  it  is  all  right. 

TAIL.  If  you  wish,  I  will  put  them  with  the  stalks 
downwards. 

M.  JOUR.  No,  no. 

TAIL.   You  have  but  to  say  so. 

M.  JOUR.  No,  I  tell  you,  you  have  done  right.  Do 
you  think  that  my  coat  suits  me  ? 

TAIL.  A  pretty  question  !  I  defy  a  painter,  with  his 
brush,  to  make  you  anything  that  fits  better.  I  have  an 
assistant  at  home,  who,  for  mounting  a  rhingrave™  is  the 
greatest  genius  in  the  world;  another  who  in  putting 
together  a  doublet  is  the  hero  of  our  age. 

M.  JOUR.  The  wig  and  the  feathers,  are  they  as  they 
ought  to  be? 

TAIL.  Everything  is  right. 

M.  JOUR.  (Looking  at  the  tailor's  coat).  Ah,  ah !  Mr. 
Tailor,  here  is  some  of  the  stuff  of  the  last  suit  which 
you  made  for  me.  I  recognize  it  well  enough. 

TAIL.  The  stuff  seemed  so  nice  to  me  that  I  wished  to 
treat  myself  to  a  coat  of  it. 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  but  you  ought  not  to  have  treated  your- 
self with  my  stuff. 

TAIL.   Do  you  wish  to  put  your  coat  on  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  give  it  me. 

TAIL.  Stay,  we  must  not  do  things  like  this.  I  have 
brought  some  people  with  me  to  dress  you  to  music,  and 
these  kinds  of  coats  are  put  on  with  ceremony.  Hullo  ! 
come  in,  you. 

w  See  The  Misanthrope,  Vol.  II.,  page  206,  note  8. 

224  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  n. 

SCENE  IX. — M.  JOURDAIN,  MASTER  TAILOR,  ASSISTANT, 
ASSISTANT  TAILORS,  dancing,  A  LACQUEY. 

TAIL.  (To  his  assistants).  Put  this  gentleman's  coat 
on  him,  in  the  way  you  do  to  people  of  quality. 

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet, 

The  four  dancing  tailor's  assistants  draw  close  to  M. 
Jourdain.  Two  of  them  pull  off  his  breeches,  two  others  his 
jacket,  after  which  they  put  on  his  new  suit,  always  to 
music.  M.  Jourdain  walks  round  in  the  midst  of  them, 
to  see  whether  his  dress  fits  him. 

Assis.  My  lord,  please  to  give  the  assistants  something 
to  drink  your  health  with. 

M.  JOUR.  What  do  you  call  me  ? 

TAIL.  My  lord. 

M.  JOUR.  My  lord !  That  comes  from  being  dressed 
like  a  person  of  quality !  If  you  go  on  for  ever  in  the 
garb  of  a  citizen,  no  one  will  say  to  you,  my  lord. 
( Giving  him  some  money).  There,  this  is  for  my  lord. 

Assis.  Your  excellency,  we  are  infinitely  obliged  to 
you. 

M.  JOUR.  Your  excellency !  Oh  !  oh  !  Wait  a  minute, 
friend.  Your  excellency  deserves  something ;  it  is  not  a 
small  word  that,  your  excellency !  There,  that  is  what 
your  excellency  gives  you. 

Assis.  Your  excellency,  we  shall  drink  your  grace's 
health. 

M.  JOUR.  Your  grace  !  Oh  !  oh !  oh  !  Wait  a  minute, 
do  not  go  yet.  Your  grace  !  (Softly,  aside).  Upon  my 
word,  if  he  goes  as  far  as  Highness,  he  shall  have  the 
whole  purse.  (Aloud).  There,  that  is  for  my  grace. 

Assis.  Your  excellency,  we  humbly  thank  you  for  your 
generosity. 

M.  JOUR.  Indeed,  he  has  done  right.  I  was  going  to 
give  him  all. 

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  four  assistants  rejoice,  dancing  over  the  generosity  of 
M.  Jourdain. 

SCKNB  u.]        THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES   THE  NOBLEMAN.  22$ 

ACT    III. 

SCENE  I. — M.  JOURDAIN,  Two  LACQUEYS. 

M.  JOUR.  Follow  me,  that  I  may  go  and  show  my  suit 
ia  town,  and  take  care,  above  all,  to  walk  both  close  to 
my  heels,  so  that  the  people  may  see  that  you  belong  to 
me. 

LAC.  Yes,  Sir. 

M.  JOUR.  Just  call  Nicole,  that  I  may  give  her  some 
orders.  Do  not  stir ;  here  she  is. 

SCENE  II. — M.  JOURDAIN,  NICOLE,  Two  LACQUEYS. 

M.  JOUR.  Nicole! 

NIC.   Please? 

M.  JOUR.  Listen. 

NIC.   {Laughing).     Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi." 

M.  JOUR.   What  have  you  to  laugh  at  ? 

NIC.  {Laughing).     Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  What  does  this  slut  mean  ? 

NIC.   Hi,  hi,  hi.     How  you  are  built !     Hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  How  is  that? 

NIC.  Ah !  ah  !  good  Heaven  !     Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  What  jade  is  this?  Are  you  making  a  fool 
of  me? 

NIC.  Not  at  all,  Sir;  I  should  be  very  sorry.  Hi,  hi, 
hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  I  shall  tap  you  on  the  nose,  if  you  laugh  any 
more. 

NIC.  I  cannot  help  it,  Sir.     Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  Will  you  not  stop  ? 

NIC.  I  really  beg  your  pardon,  Sir;  but  you  look  so 
ridiculous,  that  I  cannot  keep  myself  from  laughing.  Hi, 
hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  Did  you  ever  see  such  insolence  ? 

NIC.   You  are  altogether  so  funny.     Hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  I  shall  .  .  . 

17  The  actress  who  played  this  part  was  Mademoiselle  Beauval,  who 
had  the  misfortune  of  nearly  always  laughing  when  on  the  stage,  which 
displeased  the  King.  Moliere  wrote  Nicole  on  purpose  for  her ;  and  she 
acted  it  so  well,  and  laughed  so  naturally,  that  Louis  XIV.  approved  of 
her. 

VOL.  III.  p 

226  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.          [ACT  m. 

NIC.  I  beg  of  you  to  excuse  me.     Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  Look  here,  if  you  laugh  again  in  the  least,  I 
swear  to  you  that  I  shall  give  you  one  of  the  finest  boxes 
on  the  ear  that  ever  was  given. 

NIC.  Well,  then,  Sir,  I  have  done,  I  shall  laugh  no 
more. 

M.  JOUR.  You  had  best  be  careful.  You  must  by- 
and-by  clean  .  .  . 

NIC.  'Hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  You  must  clean  properly  .  .  . 

NIC.  Hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  You  must,  I  say,  clean  the  drawing-room, 
and  .  .  . 

NIC.  Hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  What  again  ? 

NIC.  (falls  down  with  laughing).  There,  Sir,  beat  me 
rather,  but  let  me  have  my  laugh  out ;  that  will  do  me 
more  good.  Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.   I  am  bursting  with  rage. 

NIC.   Pray  Sir,  I  beg  of  you,  let  me  laugh.     Hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  If  I  take  you  .    .    . 

NIC.  I  shall  burst  if  I  do  not  laugh,  Sir.     Hi,  hi,  hi. 

M.  JOUR.  Did  one  ever  see  such  a  hussy  as  this,  who 
comes  and  laughs  insolently  in  my  face,  instead  of  attend- 
ing to  my  orders  ? 

NIC.  What  do  you  wish  me  to  do,  Sir? 

M.  JOUR.  That  you  take  care,  you  slut,  to  get  the  place 
ready  for  the  company  which  is  to  be  here  by-and-by. 

NIC.  (Getting up}.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,  I  have  no  more 
inclination  to  laugh ;  for  all  your  company  makes  such  a 
litter  here,  that  this  word  is  enough  to  put  me  out  of 
temper. 

M.  JOUR.  Would  you  have  me  shut  my  door  against 
society  to  please  you? 

NIC.  You  ought  at  least  to  shut  it  against  certain  people. 

SCENE  III. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  M.  JOURDAIN,  Two 
LACQUEYS. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Ha !  ha !  this  is  something  new  again  !  What 
is  the  meaning  of  this  curious  get-up,  husband  ?  Are  you 
setting  the  world  at  nought  to  deck  yourself  out  in  this 

SCKNBIII.]       THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  22? 

fashion?  and  do  you  wish  to  become  a  laughing-stock 
everywhere  ? 

M.  JOUR.  None  but  he-fools  and  she-fools  will  make  a 
laughing-stock  of  me,  wife. 

MRS.  JOUR.  In  truth,  they  have  not  waited  until  now ; 
and  all  the  world  has  been  laughing  for  a  long  while  already 
at  your  vagaries. 

M.  JOUR.  Who  is  all  this  world,  pray? 

MRS.  JOUR.  All  this  world  is  a  world  which  is  right,  and 
which  has  more  sense  than  you  have.  As  for  myself, 
I  am  disgusted  with  the  life  which  you  lead.  I  do  not 
know  whether  this  is  our  own  house  or  not.  One  would 
think  it  is  Shrove  Tuesday18  every  day ;  and  from  early 
morn,  for  fear  of  being  too  late,  one  hears  nothing  but  the 
noise  of  fiddles  and  singers  disturbing  the  whole  neighbour- 
hood. 

NIC.  The  mistress  is  right.  I  shall  never  see  the  ship- 
shape again  with  this  heap  of  people  that  you  bring  to 
your  house.  They  have  feet  that  pick  up  the  mud  in  every 
quarter  of  the  town  to  bring  it  in  here  afterwards  ;  and 
poor  Francoise  is  almost  worked  off  her  legs,  with  rubbing 
the  floors  which  your  pretty  tutors  come  to  dirty  again 
regularly  every  day. 

M.  JOUR.  Good  gracious !  Miss  Nicole,  your  tongue  is 
sharp  enough  for  a  country-lass  ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  Nicole  is  right ;  and  she  has  more  sense 
than  you  have.  I  should  much  like  to  know  what  you 
want  with  a  dancing-master,  at  your  age. 

NIC.  And  with  a  great  hulking  fencing-master,  who 
shakes  the  whole  house  with  his  stamping,  and  uproots  all 
the  floor-tiles  in  our  big  room. 

M.  JOUR.  Hold  your  tongues,  you  girl  and  my  wife. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Do  you  wish  to  learn  dancing  against  the 
time  when  you  shall  have  no  longer  any  legs  ? 

NIC.  Do  you  want  to  kill  any  one  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Hold  your  tongues,  I  tell  you  :  you  are  igno- 
rant women,  both  of  you;  and  you  do  not  know  the  ben- 
efits of  all  this. 

MRS.  JOUR.  You  ought  rather  to  think  of  seeing  your 
daughter  married,  who  is  of  an  age  to  be  provided  for. 

18  In  the  original,  careme-prenant,  the  days  which  precede  Lent. 

228  THE  CITIZEN    WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  in. 

M.  JOUR.  I  shall  think  of  seeing  my  daughter  married 
when  a  suitable  party  shall  present  himself  for  her  ;  but  I 
shall  also  think  of  acquiring  some  polite  learning. 

NIC.  I  have  also  heard,  Mistress,  that  for  fear  of  short- 
coming, he  has  taken  a  philosophy-master  to-day. 

M.  JOUR.  Very  good.  I  wish  to  improve  my  mind,  and 
to  know  how  to  argue  about  things  amongst  gentle-folks. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Shall  you  not  go,  one  of  these  days,  to 
school,  to  get  the  birch,  at  your  age  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Why  not  ?  Would  to  heaven  I  could  have 
the  birch  at  this  hour  before  everybody,  and  that  I  could 
know  all  that  they  teach  at  school ! 

NIC.  Yes,  indeed  !  that  would  improve  your  legs. 

M.  JOUR.  No  doubt  it  would. 

MRS.  JOUR.  All  this  is  highly  necessary  to  manage  your 
house  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Assuredly.  You  both  talk  like  fools,  and  I 
am  ashamed  at  your  ignorance.  (To  Mrs.  Jourdain^) 
For  instance,  do  you  know  what  you  are  saying  at  this 
moment  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes.  I  know  that  what  I  say  is  very  well 
said,  and  that  you  ought  to  think  of  leading  a  different  life. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  not  speaking  of  that.  I  am  asking  you 
what  these  words  are  which  you  are  speaking  just  now. 

MRS.  JOUR.  They  are  very  sensible  words,  and  your 
conduct  is  scarcely  so. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  not  speaking  of  that,  I  tell  you.  I  ask 
you,  what  I  am  speaking  with  you,  what  I  am  saying  to 
you  at  this  moment,  what  that  is? 

MRS.  JOUR.  Nonsense. 

M.  JOUR.  He,  no,  that  is  not  it.  What  we  are  saying 
both  of  us,  the  language  we  are  speaking  at  this  moment? 

MRS.  JOUR.  Well? 

M.  JOUR.  What  is  it  called? 

MRS.  JOUR.  It  is  called  whatever  you.  like. 

M.  JOUR.  It  is  prose,  you  stupid. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Prose? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  prose.  Whatever  is  prose  is  not  verse, 
and  whatever  is  not  verse  is  prose.  Eh  ?  that  comes  from 
studying.  (  To  Nicole?)  And  do  you  know  what  you  are 
to  do  to  say  U  ? 

SCBNKIII.J       THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  229 

NIC.  How? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes.     What  do  you  do  when  you  say  U  ? 

NIC.  What? 

M.  JOUR.  Say  U,  just  to  see. 

NIC.  Well  !  U. 

M.  JOUR.   What  do  you  do  ? 

NIC.  I  say  U. 

M.  JOUR.    Yes ;    but  when  you  say  U  what  do  you  do  ? 

NIC.  I  do  what  you  tell  me  to  do. 

M.  JOUR.  Oh  !  what  a  strange  thing  to  have  to  do  with 
fools  ?  You  pout  the  lips  outwards,  and  bring  the  upper 
jaw  near  the  lower  one ;  U,  do  you  see  ?  I  make  a 
mouth,  U. 

NIC.  Yes :    that  is  fine. 

MRS.  JOUR.  That  is  admirable  ! 

M.  JOUR.  It  is  quite  another  thing,  if  you  had  seen  O, 
and  DA,  DA,  and  FA,  FA. 

MRS.  JOUR.  But  what  is  all  this  gibberish  ? 

NIC.  What  aVe  we  the  better  for  all  this? 

M.  JOUR.  It  drives  me  mad  when  I  see  ignorant 
women. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Go,  you  should  send  all  these  people  about 
their  business,  with  their  silly  stuff. 

NIC.  And  above  all,  this  great  lout  of  a  fencing-master, 
who  fills  the  whole  of  my  place  with  dust. 

M.  JOUR.  Lord  !  this  fencing-master  sticks  strangely  in 
your  gizzard  !  I  will  let  you  see  your  impertinence  di- 
rectly. (After  having  had  the  foils  brought,  and  giving  one 
of  them  to  Nicole.}  Stay,  reason  demonstrative.  The 
line  of  the  body.  When  one  thrusts  in  carte,  one  has  but 
to  do  so,  and  when  one  thrusts  in  tierce,  one  has  but  to 
do  so.  This  is  the  way  never  to  be  killed  ;  and  is  it  not 
very  fine  to  be  sure  of  one's  game  when  one  has  to  fight 
somebody?  There,  just  thrust  at  me,  to  see. 

(Nicole  thrusts  several  times  at  M.  Jourdain. 

NIC.  Well,  what ! 

M.  JOUR.  Gently  !  Hullo !  ho  !  Softly  !  The  devil  take 
the  hussy ! 

NIC.  You  tell  me  to  thrust  at  you. 

M.  JOUR.  Yes ;  but  you  thrust  in  tierce,  before  thrust- 

230  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  m. 

ing  at  me  in  carte,  and  you  do  not  wait  for  me  to 
parry. 

MRS.  JOUR.  You  are  mad,  husband,  with  all  your  fan- 
cies ;  and  this  has  come  to  you  only  since  you  have  taken 
it  in  your  head  to  frequent  the  nobility. 

M.  JOUR.  When  I  frequent  the  nobility,  I  show  my 
judgment ;  and  it  is  better  than  to  frequent  your  citizens. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Indeed  ! 19  really  there  is  much  to  gain  by 
frequenting  your  nobles ;  and  you  have  done  a  great  deal 
of  good  with  this  beautiful  count,  with  whom  you  are  so 
smitten  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Peace  ;  take  care  what  you  say.  Do  you 
know,  wife,  that  you  do  not  know  of  whom  you  are 
speaking,  when  you  speak  of  him  ?  He  is  a  personage 
of  greater  importance  than  you  think,  a  nobleman  who  is 
held  in  great  consideration  at  court,  and  who  speaks  to 
the  King  just  as  I  speak  to  you.  Is  it  not  a  great  honour 
to  me  to  see  a  person  of  such  standing  come  so  frequently 
to  my  house,  who  calls  me  his  dear  friend,  and  who  treats 
me  as  if  I  were  his  equal  ?  He  has  more  kindness  for  me 
than  one  would  ever  imagine,  and,  before  all  the  world, 
shows  me  such  affection,  that  I  am  perfectly  confused 
by  it. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes,  he  shows  you  kindness  and  affection ; 
but  he  borrows  your  money. 

M.  JOUR.  Well,  is  it  not  an  honour  to  lend  money  to  a 
man  of  that  condition  ?  and  can  I  do  less  for  a  nobleman 
who  calls  me  his  dear  friend  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  And  this  nobleman,  what  does  he  do  for 
you  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Things  you  would  be  astonished  at,  if  you 
knew  them. 

MRS.  JOUR.  But  what  ? 

M.  JOUR.  That  will  do  !  I  cannot  explain  myself.  It 
is  enough  that  if  I  have  lent  him  money,  he  will  return  it 
to  me,  and  before  long. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes,  you  had  better  wait  for  it. 

19  The  original  has  famon  vraiment !  Genin,  in  his  Lexigue  compare 
de  la  langue  de  Moliere,  remarks  that  famon  is  formed  from  ce  a.  man,  and 
was  used  as  an  affirmative  exclamation ;  it  was  also  sometimes  employed 
with  a  negative,  as  ce  n  a  man. 

SCENK  iv.]       THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  231 

M.  JOUR.  Assuredly.     Has  he  not  said  so  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes,  yes,  he  will  be  sure  not  to  fail  in  it. 

M.  JOUR.   He  has  given  me  his  word  as  a  nobleman. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Stuff! 

M.  JOUR.  Good  gracious,  you  are  very  obstinate,  wife  ! 
I  tell  you  that  he  will  keep  his  word  ;  I  am  sure  of  it. 

MRS.  JOUR.  And  I,  I  am  sure  that  he  will  not,  and 
that  all  the  caresses  he  loads  you  with  are  only  so  much 
cajoling. 

M.  JOUR.  Hold  your  tongue.     Here  he  comes. 

MRS.  JOUR.  It  wanted  nothing  but  this.  He  comes 
perhaps  to  ask  you  for  another  loan ;  and  the  very  sight 
of  him  spoils  my  dinner. 

M.  JOUR.  Hold  your  tongue,  I  tell  you. 

SCENE    IV. — DORANTE,  M.    JOURDAIN,  MRS.   JOURDAIN, 
NICOLE. 

DOR.  My  dear  friend,  M.  Jourdain,  how  do  you  do? 

M.  JOUR.  Very  well  indeed,  Sir,  my  humble  service  to 
you. 

DOR.  And  Mrs.  Jourdain,  how  does  she  do  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  Mrs.  Jourdain  does  as  well  as  she  can. 

DOR.  Why,  M.  Jourdain,  you  look  most  handsome  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Do  you  see  ? 

DOR.  You  look  exceedingly  well  in  this  dress  ;  and  we 
have  no  young  people  at  court  who  are  better  made  than 
you. 

M.  JOUR.  He,  he  ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  (Aside).    He  scratches  him  where  it  itches. 

DOR.  Just  turn  round.  It  gives  you  quite  a  gallant  ap- 
pearance. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (Aside).  Yes,  as  foolish  behind  as  he  is 
in  front. 

DOR.  Upon  my  word,  M.  Jourdain,  I  was  rather  anxious 
to  see  you.  Of  all  men  I  esteem  you  most ;  and  no  later 
than  this  morning  I  was  speaking  of  you  in  the  King's 
apartments. 

M.  JOUR.  You  do  me  much  honour,  Sir.  (To  Mrs. 
Jourdain).  In  the  King's  apartments  ? 

DOR.   Come  !  put  on  your  hat. 

M.  JOUR.   Sir,  I  know  the  respect  I  owe  you. 

232  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACr  in. 

DOR.  Good  Heavens  !  put  on  your  hat.  No  ceremony 
betwixt  us,  I  pray. 

M.  JOUR.  Sir  .    .    . 

DOR.  Put  on  your  hat,  I  tell  you,  M.  Jourdain ;  you 
are  my  friend. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  your  servant,  Sir. 

DOR.   I  shall  not  put  mine  on,  unless  you  do. 

M.  JOUR.  {Putting  his  hat  on).  I'll  rather  be  uncivil 
than  troublesome.** 

DOR.  I  am  your  debtor,  as  you  know. 

MRS.  JOUR.    (Aside),     Yes  :  we  know  it  but  too  well. 

DOR.  You  have  generously  lent  me  money  on  several 
occasions ;  and,  certainly,  obliged  me  with  the  best  pos- 
sible grace. 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  jesting,  Sir. 

DOR.  But  I  know  how  to  return  what  is  lent  to  me,  and 
to  acknowledge  services  done  to  me. 

M.  JOUR.  I  do  not  doubt  it,  Sir. 

DOR.  I  wish  to  finish  this  little  business  between  us ; 
and  I  have  come  to  settle  our  accounts. 

M.  JOUR.  (Softly,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain).  Well  !  you  see 
your  impertinence  now,  wife. 

DOR.  I  am  a  man  who  likes  to  pay  my  debts  as  soon  as 
I  can. 

M.  JOUR.    (Softly,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain).     I  told  you  so. 

DOR.  Just  let  us  see  how  much  I  owe  you. 

M.  JOUR.  (Softly,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain).  There  you  are 
now,  with  your  ridiculous  suspicions. 

DOR.  Do  you  remember  rightly  all  the  money  you  have 
lent  me? 

M.  JOUR.  I  think  I  do.  I  have  made  a  little  memo- 
randum of  it.  Here  it  is.  Once  to  yourself  two  hundred 
louis. 

DOR.  That  is  true. 

M.  JOUR.  Another  time,  six  score. 

DOR.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.  And  another  time,  a  hundred  and  forty. 

DOR.  You  are  right. 

10  Compare  Shakspeare's  Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  (Act  i.,  Scene  i), 
when  Master  Slender,  upon  taking  precedence  of  Mrs.  Page,  at  her  re- 
peated request,  says':  "  I'll  rather  be  unmannerly  than  troublesome.'1 

SCENB  iv.]       THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  233 

M.  JOUR.  These  three  items  make  four  hundred  and 
sixty  louis,  which  come  to  five  thousand  and  sixty  li- 
vres.  a 

DOR.  The  account  is  quite  correct.  Five  thousand  and 
sixty  livres. 

M.  JOUR.  One  thousand  eight  hundred  and  thirty-two 
livres  to  your  plume-maker. 

DOR.  Correct. 

M.  JOUR.  Two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  eighty  li- 
vres to  your  tailor. 

DOR.   Quite  true. 

M.  JOUR.  Four  thousand  three  hundred  and  seventy-nine 
livres,  twelve  sols  eight  deniers  to  your  merchant. 

DOR.  Very  good.  Twelve  sols  eight  deniers;  the  ac- 
count is  quite  right. 

M.  JOUR.  And  one  thousand  seven  hundred  and  forty- 
eight  livres,  seven  sols  four  deniers  to  your  saddler. 

DOR.  All  that  is  correct.     How  much  does  that  make? 

M.  JOUR.  The  sum  total,  fifteen  thousand  eight  hundred 
livres. 

DOR.  The  sum  total  is  exact.  Fifteen  thousand  eight 
hundred  francs.  Add  to  this  two  hundred  pistoles,22  which 
you  are  going  to  give  me :  that  will  make  exactly  eighteen 
thousand  francs,  which  I  shall  pay  you  at  the  first  oppor- 
tunity. 

MRS.  JOUR,  (fn  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdairi}.  Well !  did 
I  not  guess  it? 

M.  JOUR.   {In  a  whisper,  to  Mrs.  Jourdairi).  Peace ! 

DOR.  Would  it  incommode  you  to  give  me  what  I  say? 

M.  JOUR.  Oh,  no. 

MRS  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdairi).  This  man  is 
making  a  milch-cow  of  you. 

M.  JOUR.  {In  a  whisper,  to  Mrs.  Jourdairi).  Hold  your 
tongue. 

DOR.  If  it  incommodes  you,  I  shall  get  it  elsewhere. 

M.  JOUR.  No,  sir. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdairi).  He  will  not 
be  satisfied  until  he  has  ruined  you. 

n  The  louis  was  worth  eleven  livres,  and  the  livre  was  about  a  franc. 
12  For  pistole  see  Vol.  I.,  page  26,  note  7.   The  louis   was  worth  eleven 
francs  ;  but  in  conversation  pistole  was  often  used  instead  of  louis. 

234  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  HI. 

M,  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain}.  Hold  your 
tongue,  I  tell  you. 

DOR.  You  have  but  to  tell  me  if  this  puts  you  to  any 
strait. 

M.  JOUR.  Not  at  all,  Sir. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain}.  He  is  a  re- 
gular cajoler. 

M.  JOUR.  (Jn  a  whisper,  to  Mrs .  Jourdain).  Do  hold 
your  tongue. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain).  He  will  suck 
you  to  the  last  penny. 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain).  Will  you 
hold  your  tongue. 

DOR.  Many  people  would  lend  it  me  with  pleasure ;  but 
as  you  are  my  best  friend,  I  thought  I  was  doing  you  a 
wrong  if  I  asked  it  of  any  one  else. 

M.  JOUR.  It  is  too  much  honour  you  do  me,  Sir.  I 
shall  go  and  fetch  what  you  want. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (  To  M.  Jourdain).  What !  you  are  going  to 
give  him  that  also  ? 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Mrs.  Jourdain].  What  am  I 
to  do  ?  Would  you  have  me  refuse  a  man  of  that  rank, 
who  spoke  of  me  this  morning  in  the  King's  apart- 
ments ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain}.  Go,  you  are 
a  regular  dupe. 

SCENE  V. — DORANTE,  MRS.  JOURDAIN,  NICOLE. 

DOR.  You  seem  very  low-spirited.  What  ails  you,  Mrs. 
Jourdain  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  My  head  is  bigger  than  my  fist,  and  yet  it 
is  not  swollen. 

DOR.  Your  daughter,  where  is  she,  that  I  have  not  seen 
her? 

MRS.  JOUR.  My  daughter  is  very  well  where  she  is. 

DOR.  How  is  she  going  on  ? 

MRS.  JOUR.  She  is  going  on  her  two  legs.2* 

DOR.  Would  you  not  like,  one  of  these  days,  to  come 

23  This  joke  is  borrowed  from  Terence's  Eunuch. 

SCENBVI.]       THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  235 

with  her  and  see  the  ballet  and  the  comedy  that  is  played 
at  court. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes,  indeed  !  we  have  great  inclination  to 
laugh,  great  inclination,  indeed  ! 

DOR.  I  think,  Mrs.  Jourdain,  that  you  must  have  had 
many  lovers  in  your  young  days,  handsome  and  good- 
humoured  as  you  must  have  been. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Zounds  !  Sir,  has  Mrs.  Jourdain  grown  de- 
crepit, and  is  she  shaking  her  head  already  ? 

DOR.  Ah  !  upon  my  word,  Mrs.  Jourdain,  I  ask  your 
pardon,  I  was  not  thinking  that  you  are  still  young  ;  and 
I  am  often  wandering.  I  beg  of  you  to  excuse  my  imper- 
tinence. 

SCENE  VI. — M.   JOURDAIN,    MRS.    JOURDAIN,    DORANTE, 
NICOLE. 

M.  JOUR.  {To  Dorante).  Here  are  two  hundred  louis 
cash. 

DOR.  I  assure  you,  M.  Jourdain,  that  I  am  entirely 
yours,  and  that  I  long  to  do  you  service  at  court. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  infinitely  obliged  to  you. 

DOR.  If  Mrs.  Jourdain  has  a  wish  to  see  the  royal  en- 
tertainment,3* I  will  procure  her  the  best  places  in  the 
room. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Mrs.  Jourdain  kisses  your  hands. 

DOR.  (Softly  to  M.  Jourdain].  Our  fair  marchioness, 
as  I  informed  you  by  my  note,  will  be  here  by-and-by  to 
be  present  at  the  ballet  and  the  collation  ;  and  I  have 
made  her  consent  at  last  to  accept  the  present  which  you 
wished  to  give  her. 

M.  JOUR.  Let  us  go  a  little  farther  away,  for  reasons. 

DOR.  I  have  not  seen  you  for  eight  days,  and  I  did  not 
send  you  any  tidings  about  the  diamond  which  you 
placed  in  my  hands  to  make  her  a  present  in  your  name  ; 
but  it  is  because  I  have  had  all  the  trouble  in  the  world  to 
overcome  her  scruples  ;  and  it  is  only  to-day  that  she  has 
made  up  her  mind  to  accept  it. 

M.  JOUR.  How  did  she  like  it  ? 

DOR.  Marvellously ;  and  unless  I  am  very  much  mis- 

24  See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Magnificent  Lovers. 

236  THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE   NOBLEMAN  [ACT  in. 

taken,  the  beauty  of  this  diamond  will  have  an  admirable 
effect  for  you  upon  her  mind. 

M.  JOUR.   Would  to  Heaven  ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  (To  Nicole).  When  once  he  is  with  him, 
he  cannot  leave  him. 

DOR.  I  have  made  her  estimate  properly  the  richness 
of  this  present,  and  the  violence  of  your  love. 

M.  JOUR.  This  kindness,  Sir,  overwhelms  me ;  and  I 
am  in  the  greatest  possible  confusion  to  see  a  man  of  your 
standing  lower  himself  for  me  to  do  what  you  do. 

DOR.  Are  you  jesting  ?  Does  one  stick  at  these  scru- 
ples among  friends  ?  And  would  you  not  do  the  same  for 
me,  if  the  opportunity  presented  itself? 

M.  JOUR.  Oh !  certainly,  and  with  all  my  heart ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  (To  Nicole).  How  his  presence  weighs  me 
down  ! 

DOR.  As  for  me,  I  never  mind  anything  when  I  am 
serving  a  friend ;  and  when  you  made  me  a  confidant  of 
the  passion  which  you  had  conceived  for  this  charming 
marchioness  with  whom  I  was  acquainted,  you  saw  that 
directly  I  myself  made  you  an  offer  to  serve  your  love-affair. 

M.  JOUR.  It  is  true.     These  favours  confound  me. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (To  Nicole).  Is  he  not  going  ? 

NIC.  They  are  very  comfortable  together. 

DOR.  You  have  taken  the  right  road  to  touch  her  heart. 
Women  love  above  all  the  expenses  which  we  make  for 
them ;  and  your  frequent  serenades,  your  continual  ban- 
quets, this  superb  display  of  fireworks  which  she  witnessed 
on  the  water,  the  diamond  which  she  received  from  you, 
and  the  entertainment  which  you  are  preparing  for  her ; 
all  this  says  more  in  favour  of  your  love  than  all  the  words 
which  you  could  have  spoken  to  her  yourself. 

M.  JOUR.  No  expense  would  be  too  great  for  me,  if  by 
that  means  I  could  find  the  way  to  her  heart.  A  woman 
of  quality  has  powerful  charms  for  me ;  and  it  is  an  honour 
which  I  would  purchase  at  any  price. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (Softly,  to  Nicole).  What  can  they  have  so 
much  to  say  to  each  other  ?  Just  go  softly  and  listen. 

DOR.  By-and-by  you  shall  enjoy  at  your  ease  the  pleas- 
ure of  seeing  her  ;  and  your  eyes  shall  have  ample  time  to 
satisfy  themselves. 

SCBNKVM1.]     THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  237 

M.  JOUR.  To  be  at  full  liberty,  I  have  arranged  so  that 
my  wife  shall  go  and  dine  with  my  sister,  where  she  will 
pass  the  whole  afternoon. 

DOR.  You  have  done  wisely,  and  your  wife  might  have 
been  somewhat  in  the  way.  I  have  given  the  necessary 
orders  for  you  to  the  cook,  and  for  all  the  things  that  are 
wanted  for  the  ballet,  I  have  invented  it  myself,  and  pro- 
vided the  execution  comes  up  to  the  conception,  I  am 
certain  that  it  will  be  found  .  .  . 

M.  JOUR.  (Perceiving  that  Nicole  is  listening,  and  giving 
her  a  box  on  the  ear).  Good  gracious,  you  are  very  imper- 
tinent! (To  Dorante).  Let  us  go  out  if  you  please. 

SCENE  VII. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  NICOLE. 

NIC.  Troth,  Mrs.  the  curiosity  has  cost  me  something; 
but  I  believe  there  is  a  snake  in  the  grass ;  and  they  were 
talking  of  some  affair  at  which  they  do  not  wish  you  to  be 
present. 

MRS.  JOUR.  This  is  not  the  first  time,  Nicole,  that  I 
have  conceived  some  suspicion  about  my  husband.  Unless 
I  am  most  cruelly  mistaken,  there  is  some  love  affair  going 
on  ;  and  I  am  doing  my  best  to  discover  what  it  may  be. 
But  let  us  think  of  my  daughter.  You  know  the  affection 
Cl6onte  has  for  her :  he  is  a  man  whom  I  like;  and  I  will 
aid  his  suit,  and  give  him  Lucile,  if  I  can. 

NIC.  Really,  Mrs.,  I  am  infinitely  delighted  to  find  you 
in  this  mind ;  for  if  the  master  suits  you,  the  servant  suits 
me  no  less;  and  I  could  wish  that  our  wedding  could  be 
close  upon  theirs. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Go  and  speak  to  him  in  my  name,  and  tell 
him  to  come  to  see  me  by-and-by,  so  that  we  may  make 
together  the  request  for  my  daughter's  hand  to  my  husband. 

NIC.  I  am  hastening  thither  joyfully,  Mrs.,  and  I  could 
not  receive  a  more  agreeable  commission.  (Alone).  I  fancy, 
I  shall  be  giving  much  pleasure  to  some  people. 

SCENE  VIII. — CLEONTE,  COVIELLE,  NICOLE. 

NIC.  (To  Cleonte*).  Ah  !  You  are  just  in  time  !  I  am 
a  messenger  of  joy,  and  I  come  .  .  . 

OLE.  Begone,  you  perfidious  woman,  and  do  not  come 
to  amuse  me  with  treacherous  speeches. 

238  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  m. 

NIC.  Is  it  thus  that  you  receive  .    .    . 

CLE.  Begone,  I  tell  you,  and  now  go  and  tell  your 
faithless  mistress,  •  that  she  shall  never  deceive  the  too 
simple  ClSonte. 

NIC.  What  craze  is  this?  My  poor  Covielle,  just  tell 
me  what  this  means? 

Cov.  You  poor  Covielle,  you  little  wretch!  Go  quickly 
out  of  my  sight,  hussy,  and  leave  me  in  peace. 

NIC.  What !  you  come  also  to     . 

Cov.  Get  out  of  my  sight,  I  say;  and  never  in  your  life 
speak  more  to  me. 

NIC.  (Aside).  Good  gracious !  what  gad-fly  has  stung 
them  both?  I  had  better  go,  and  tell  my  mistress  this 
pretty  story.  ** 

SCENE  IX. — CLEONTE,  COVIELLE. 

CLE.  What !  To  treat  a  lover  thus  ;  and  that  a  lover 
the  most  constant  and  the  most  passionate  of  all  lovers ! 

Cov.  It  is  a  most  horrible  thing  that  they  have  done  to 
us  both. 

CLE.  I  display  all  the  ardour  and  tenderness  imaginable 
to  a  lady;  I  love  no  one  on  earth  but  her,  and  think  of 
nothing  but  her ;  she  is  all  my  care,  all  my  desire,  all  my 
joy;  I  speak  but  of  her,  think  but  of  her,  dream  but  of 
her;  I  live  but  for  her,  my  heart  beats  but  for  her,  and 
this  is  the  worthy  reward  of  so  much  affection  !  I  am  two 
days,  which  to  me  are  two  horrible  ages,  without  seeing 
her  :  I  meet  her  by  accident;  at  the  sight  of  her  my  heart 
feels  quite  elated,  joy  is  displayed  on  my  countenance, 
rapturously  I  fly  towards  her,  and  the  faithless  one  averts 
her  looks,  and  passes  abruptly  on,  as  if  she  had  never  seen 
me  in  her  life ! 

Cov.  I  have  the  same  story  to  tell. 

CLE.  Has  aught  like  the  perfidy  of  this  ungrateful 
Lucile  ever  been  seen? 

Cov.  Or  anything,  Sir,  like  that  of  that  jade  Nicole  ? 

CLE.  After  the  many  ardent  sacrifices,  sighs  and  vows 
which  I  have  paid  to  her  charms ! 

25  This  is  the  third  time  Moliere  makes  use  of  a  tiff  between  lovers  and 
of  reconciliation  afterwards.  First  in  The  Love-  Tiff,  secondly  in  Tartufe, 
and  thirdly  above. 

SCBN*  ix.J        THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN,  239 

Cov.  After  such  assiduous  homage,  attentions  and  ser- 
vices which  I  have  rendered  to  her  in  the  kitchen  ! 

CLE.  The  many  tears  I  have  shed  at  her  feet ! 

Cov.  The  many  buckets  of  water  I  have  drawn  from 
the  well  for  her ! 

CLE.  The  warmth  I  have  shown  in  cherishing  her  more 
than  my  own  self! 

Cov.  The  heat  I  have  suffered  in  turning  the  spit  in 
her  place  ! 

CLE.  She  flees  from  me  with  disdain  ! 

Cov.  She  turns  her  back  upon  me  shamelessly ! 

CLE.   It  is  a  perfidy  deserving  the  greatest  punishment. 

Cov.  It  is  a  treachery  that  merits  a  thousand  slaps  in 
the  face. 

CLE.  Do  not  you,  I  pray,  attempt  ever  to  speak  of  her 
to  me. 

Cov.  I,  Sir  ?  Heaven  forbid  ! 

CLE.  Do  not  come  to  excuse  to  me  the  conduct  of  this 
faithless  girl. 

Cov.  You  need  not  fear. 

CLE.  No,  look  you  here,  all  your  speeches  in  her  de- 
fence will  avail  nothing. 

Cov.  Who  dreams  of  such  a  thing  ? 

CLE.  I  shall  nurse  my  spite  against  her,  and  break  off 
all  connection. 

Cov.  You  have  my  consent. 

CLE.  This  count  who  visits  at  her  house  excites  her 
fancy  perhaps ;  and  her  mind — I  see  it  well  enough — 
allow  itself  to  be  dazzled  by  rank.  But  I  am  bound,  for 
my  honour's  sake,  to  prevent  the  scandal  of  her  incon- 
stancy. I  will  go,  as  far  as  she  goes,  towards  the  change 
to  which  I  see  her  hastening,  and  not  leave  to  her  all  the 
glory  of  jilting  me. 

Cov.  That  is  well  said ;  and  as  far  as  I  am  concerned, 
I  share  all  your  sentiments. 

CLE.  Assist  me  in  my  resentment  and  support  my  re- 
solution against  every  remainder  of  affection  which  might 
plead  for  her.  Say,  I  entreat  you,  all  the  harm  of  her  that 
you  can.  Give  me  a  portrait  of  her  which  shall  render 
her  contemptible  in  my  sight,  and,  to  disgust  me  with  her, 
point  me  out  all  the  faults  which  you  can  see  in  her. 

240  THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  HI. 

Cov.  She,  Sir?  a  pretty  mawkin,  a  well-shaped,  preten- 
tious young  woman,26  to  be  so  much  enamoured  of!  I  see 
nothing  in  her  but  what  is  very  ordinary ;  and  you  will 
meet  a  hundred  women  more  worthy  of  you.  First  of  all, 
her  eyes  are  small. 

CLE.  That  is  true,  her  eyes  are  small ;  but  they  are  full 
of  fire,  the  most  brilliant,  the  most  piercing  in  the  world, 
and  tenderest  which  one  can  see. 

Cov.  She  has  a  large  mouth. 

CLE.  Yes ;  but  it  has  charms  not  to  be  found  in  other 
mouths;  and  this  very  mouth,  in  looking  at  it,  inspires 
desire,  and  is  the  most  attractive  and  amorous  in  the  world. 

Cov.  As  for  her  figure,  she  is  not  tall. 

CLE.  No;  but  is  full  of  ease,  and  well  shaped. 

Cov.  She  affects  a  carelessness  in  her  speech  and  move- 
ments. 

CLE.  It  is  true,  but  she  is  full  of  grace ;  and  her  man- 
ners are  engaging,  and  have  an  indefinable  charm  which 
twines  round  one's  heart. 

Cov.  As  to  her  wit  .    .    . 

CLE.  Ah !  she  has  that,  Covielle,  of  the  finest  and  of 
the  most  delicate. 

Cov.  Her  conversation  .    .    . 

CLE.  Her  conversation  is  charming. 

Cov.  It  is  always  grave. 

CLE.  Would  you  have  unrestrained  liveliness,  and  ever 
profuse  gaiety!  and  is  there  anything  more  annoying 
than  these  women  who  giggle  at  every  sally  ? 

Cov.  But,  after  all,  she  is  as  whimsical  as  anyone  could 
well  be. 

CLE.  Yes,  she  is  whimsical,  I  agree  with  you  there ;  but 
everything  becomes  the  fair  sex ;  one  allows  everything  to 
the  fair  sex." 

Cov.  Since  that  is  the  case,  I  see  plainly  that  you  are 
inclined  to  love  her  always. 

M  The  original  has  pimpesouee,  probably  from  the  old  verb  pimper,  to 
adorn  oneself — pimpant  still  exists  in  modern  French — and  the  old  adjec- 
tive soteef,  Latin  svavis,  sweet,  agreeable. 

27  It  is  said  that  Moliere,  in  delineating  Lucile,  described  his  spouse, 
who  played  the  character.  That  may  be  true;  but  the  real  passion, 
which  is  displayed  in  Cleonte's  answers  to  Covielle,  is,  in  every  way,  ad- 
mirable. 

SCBNKX.]         THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  241 

CLE.  I  ?  I  would  sooner  die ;  and  I  mean  to  hate  her 
as  much  as  I  have  loved  her. 

Cov.  But  how,  i  f  you  find  her  so  perfect  ? 

CLE.  That  is  where  my  revenge  shall  prove  itself  all  the 
more ;  where  I  shall  the  better  show  her  the  strength  of 
my  heart  to  hate  her,  to  leave  her,  beautiful,  full  of  attrac- 
tions, amiable  as  I  may  think  her.  Here  she  comes. 

SCENE  X. — LUCILE,  NICOLE,  CLEONTE,  COVIELLE. 

NIC.  {To  Lucile).  As  for  me,  I  was  perfectly  scanda- 
lized at  it. 

Luc.  It  can  be  nothing  else,  Nicole,  than  what  I  tell 
you.  But  here  he  is, 

CLE.  ( To  Covielle).     I  will  not  even  speak  to  her. 

Cov.  I  will  do  as  you  do. 

Luc.  What  is  it  Cl6onte  ?  what  is  the  matter  with  you? 

NIC.  What  is  the  matter  with  you,  Covielle  ? 

Luc.  What  grief  possesses  you  ? 

Nic.  What  ill-humour  has  got  hold  of  you  ? 

Luc.  Are  you  dumb,  Cleonte  ? 

NIC.  Have  you  lost  your  speech,  Covielle  ? 

CLE.  This  is  villainous  ! 

Cov.  It  is  Judas-like  ! 

Luc.  I  see  clearly  that  the  meeting  just  now  has  dis- 
turbed your  mind. 

CLE.  {To  Covielle).  Ah!  ah!  people  are  finding  out 
what  they  have  been  doing. 

NIC.  Our  reception  of  this  morning  has  made  you 
alarmed.28 

Cov.    {To  Cleonte'}.  They  have  found  out  the  sore.29 

Luc.  Is  it  not  true,  Cleonte,  that  this  is  the  reason  of 
your  huff? 

CLE.  Yes,  false  girl,  it  is  that,  since  I  am  to  speak ;  and 
I  must  tell  you  that  you  shall  not  glory,  as  you  think  you 

18  Prendre  la  chevre,  to  take  the  goat,  in  the  original ;  hence  probably 
the  meaning  of  to  rear,  to  get  frightened,  to  get  alarmed. 

29  The  original  has  on  a  devin'e  I' enclosure:  they  have  guessed  the 
sore,  because  in  shoeing  a  horse,  it  was  sometimes  wounded ;  and  this 
wound,  not  always  easy  to  find  out,  was  called  I'enclouure.  The  expres- 
sion has  also  been  used  in  the  fifth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  The 
Blunderer. 

VOL.  III.  Q 

242  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  m. 

shall,  in  your  faithlessness ;  that  I  shall  be  the  first  to 
break  with  you,  and  that  you  shall  not  have  the  advan- 
tage of  driving  me  away.  It  will  pain  me,  no  doubt,  to 
conquer  the  love  which  I  have  for  you ;  it  will  cause  me 
some  grief;  I  shall  suffer  for  some  time  ;  but  I  will  ac- 
complish it,  and  I  will  sooner  stab  myself  to  the  heart 
than  have  the  weakness  to  come  back  to  you. 

Cov.  {To  Nicole).  As  says  the  master,  so  .says  the  man.29 

Luc.  There  is  much  ado  about  nothing  !  I  wish  to  tell 
you  the  reason,  Cleonte,  which  made  me  avoid  you  this 
morning. 

CLE.  (  Trying  to  go  away  from  Lucile).  I  wish  to  listen 
to  nothing. 

NIC.  {To  Covielle).  I  wish  to  tell  you  the  reason  that 
made  us  pass  you  so  quickly. 

Cov.  {Also  endeavoring  to  go,  to  avoid  Nicole).  I  wish 
to  hear  nothing. 

Luc.  {Following  Cleonte).  You  must  know,  then,  that 
this  morning  .  .  . 

CLE.  {Moving  away,  without  looking  at  Lucile).  No  I 
tell  you. 

NIC.   {Following  Covielli).    Know  then  .    .    . 

Cov.  {Moving  away,  without  looking  at  Nicole).  No,  you 
wretch  ! 

Luc.    Listen. 

CLE.   Not  a  whit. 

NIC.   Let  me  speak. 

CL.   I  am  deaf. 

Luc.    Cleonte ! 

CLE.   No. 

NIC.  Covielle! 

Cov.   Not  a  bit. 

Luc.    Stay. 

CLE.    Stuff! 

NIC.  Hear  me. 

Cov.    Nonsense ! 

Luc.  One  moment, 

CLE.  Not  one. 

NIC.  A  little  patience. 

39  In  the  original,  queussi  queumi,  a  provincial  expression. 

SCENE  x.]         THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  243 

Cov.  Fiddle-sticks! 

Luc.  Two  words. 

CLE.  No  !  it  is  finished. 

NIC.  One  word. 

Cov.  No  more  dealings. 

Luc.  (Stopping).  Very  well  then!  Since  you  will  not 
hear  me,  keep  to  your  own  opinion,  and  do  as  you  please. 

NIC.  {Also  stopping).  Since  you  act  thus,  take  it  as  you 
will. 

CLE.  {Turning  Cowards  Lucile).  Let  us  know,  then, 
the  reason  of  such  a  pretty  welcome. 

Luc.  (  Going  in  her  turn,  to  avoid  Cleonte.~)  It  no  longer 
pleases  me  to  tell  it. 

Cov.  (Turning  towards  Nicole).  Well,  just  let  us  learn 
this  story. 

NIC.  (Also  going,  to  avoid  Covielle).  I  will  no  longer 
tell  it  to  you. 

CLE.   (Following  Lucile').    Tell  me  ... 

Luc.  (Moving  away,  without  looking  at  Cleonte).  No,  I 
shall  say  nothing. 

CLE.  Following  Nicole).    Relate  to  me  .    .    . 

NIC.  (Moving  away,  without  looking  at  Covielle).  No,  I 
shall  relate  nothing  to  you. 

CLE.  Pray. 

Luc.  No,  I  tell  you. 

Cov.  For  mercy's  sake. 

NIC.  Not  a  whit. 

CLE.  I  pray  you. 

Luc.  Leave  me. 

Cov.  I  beseech  you. 

NIC.  Begone  from  there 

CLE.    Lucile ! 

Luc.  No. 

Cov.  Nicole ! 

NIC.  Not  a  bit. 

CLE.   In  Heaven's  name. 

Luc.  I  will  not. 

Cov.   Speak  to  me. 

NIC.  Not  at  all. 

CLE.  Clear  up  my  doubts. 

Luc.  No  :  I  will  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 

244  THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.          [ACT  ni. 

Cov.  Ease  my  mind. 

NIC.   No :  I  do  not  choose. 

CLE.  Well !  since  you  care  so  little  to  cure  my  grief, 
and  to  justify  yourself  for  the  unworthy  treatment  which 
my  affection  has  received  from  you,  this  is  the  last  time 
that  you  shall  see  me,  ungrateful  girl :  and  I  shall  go  far 
away  from  you,  to  die  of  grief  and  love. 

Cov.   (To  Nicole).    And  I,  I  will  follow  his  steps. 

Luc.  (To  Cleonte,  who  is  going).    Cleonte! 

NIC.  (To  Covielle,  who  is  about  to  follow  his  master). 
Covielle ! 

CLE.   (Stopping).    Eh! 

Cov.  (Also  stopping).    Please? 

Luc.  Whither  are  you  going? 

CLE.  Where  I  have  told  you. 

Cov.  We  are  going  to  die. 

Luc.  You  are  going  to  die,  Cleonte? 

CLE.  Yes,  cruel  one,  since  you  will  it  so. 

Luc.  I !  I  wish  you  to  die  ? 

CLE.  Yes,  you  wish  it. 

Luc.  Who  says  so. 

CLE.  (Drawing  near  to  Ludle).  Is  it  not  wishing  it, 
when  you  will  not  clear  up  my  suspicions  ? 

Luc.  Is  it  my  fault  ?  and  if  you  had  listened  to  me, 
would  I  not  have  told  you  that  the  adventure  of  which 
you  complain  was  caused  this  morning  by  the  presence  of 
an  old  aunt,  who  insists  that  merely  the  approach  of  a  man 
dishonours  a  girl,  who  punctually  lectures  us  on  that 
chapter,  and  paints  us  all  men  as  devils  whom  we  should 
flee  from. 

NIC.  (To  Covielle}.     That  is  the  secret  of  the  affair. 

CLE.  Are  you  not  deceiving  me,  Lucile  ? 

Cov.  (To  Nicole).     Are  you  not  imposing  upon  me? 

Luc  (To  Cleonte).     Nothing  is  more  true. 

NIC.   (To  Covielle).     That  is  the  affair  as  it  is. 

Cov.  (To  Cleonte).     Shall  we  give  in  to  this? 

CLE.  Ah !  Lucile,  how  quickly  you  appease  things  in 
my  heart  by  a  single  word  from  your  mouth,  and  how 
easily  we  are  persuaded  by  those  whom  we  love  ! 

Cov.  How  easily  one  is  wheedled  by  those  confounded 
animals ! 

scmNKjui.]      THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  245 

SCENE  XL — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  CLEONTE,  LUCILE, 
NICOLE,  COVIELLE. 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  am  glad  to  see  you,  Cl6onte;  and  you 
are  just  in  good  time.  My  husband  is  coming ;  quickly 
choose  the  moment  to  ask  him  for  Lucile's  hand 

CLE.  Ah  !  Madam,  how  sweet  these  words  are,  and  how 
they  natter  my  wishes  !  Could  I  receive  a  more  charming 
command,  a  more  precious  favour? 

SCENE  XII. — CLEONTE,  M.  JOURDAIN,  MRS.  JOURDAIN, 
LUCILE,  COVIELLE,  NICOLE. 

CLE.  Sir,  I  did  not  wish  to  depute  any  one  else  to 
prefer  a  request  which  I  have  long  meditated.  It  concerns 
me  sufficiently  to  undertake  it  in  person ;  and  without 
farther  ado,  I  will  tell  you  that  the  honour  of  being  your 
son-in-law  is  a  glorious  favour  which  I  beg  of  you  to 
grant  me. 

M.  JOUR.  Before  giving  you  your  answer,  Sir,  I  pray 
you  to  tell  me  whether  you  are  a  nobleman 

CLE.  Sir,  most  people,  on  this  question,  do  not  hesitate 
much  ;  the  word  is  easily  spoken.  There  is  no  scruple  in 
assuming  that  name,  and  present  custom  seems  to  author- 
rize  the  theft.  As  for  me,  I  confess  to  you,  my  feelings  on 
this  point  are  rather  more  delicate.  I  think  that  all  im- 
posture is  unworthy  of  an  honest  man,  and  that  it  is  cow- 
ardice to  disguise  what  Heaven  has  made  us,  to  deck  our- 
selves in  the  eyes  of  the  world  with  a  stolen  title,  and  to 
wish  to  pass  for  what  we  are  not.  I  am  born  of  parents 
who,  no  doubt,  have  filled  honourable  offices ;  I  have  ac- 
quitted myself  with  honour  in  the  army,  where  I  served  for 
six  years ;  and  I  am  sufficiently  well  to  do  to  hold  a  middling 
rank  in  society  ;  but  with  all  this,  I  will  not  assume  what 
others,  in  my  position,  might  think  they  had  the  right  to 
pretend  to ;  and  I  will  tell  you  frankly  that  I  am  not  a 
nobleman. 

M.  JOUR.  Your  hand,  Sir ;  my  daughter  is  not  for  you. 

CLE.   How. 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  not  a  nobleman  :  you  shall  not  have 
my  daughter. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  is  it  you  mean  by  your  nobleman  ? 
Is  it  that  we  ourselves  are  descended  from  Saint  Louis  ? 

246  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  HI. 

M.  JOUR.  Hold  your  tongue,  wife;  I  see  what  you  are 
driving  at. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Are  we  two  descended  from  aught  else  than 
from  plain  citizens  ? 

M.  JOUR.  If  that  is  not  a  slander? 

MRS.  JOUR.  And  was  your  father  not  a  tradesman  as  well 
as  mine  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Plague  take  the  woman,  she  always  harps 
upon  that.  If  your  father  was  a  tradesman,  so  much  the 
worse  for  him ;  but  as  for  mine,  they  are  impertinent 
fellows  who  say  so.  All  that  I  have  to  say  to  you,  is  that 
I  will  have  a  nobleman  for  a  son-in-law. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Your  daughter  wants  a  husband  who  is 
suited  to  her ;  and  it  is  much  better  for  her  that  she 
should  have  a  respectable  man,  rich  and  handsome,  than 
a  beggarly  and  deformed  nobleman. 

NIC.  That  is  true;  we  have  the  son  of  our  village 
squire,  who  is  the  greatest  lout  and  the  most  stupid  nin- 
compoop that  I  have  ever  seen. 

M.  JOUR.  (To  Nicole).  Hold  your  tongue,  Miss  Imper- 
tinence ;  you  always  thrust  yourself  into  the  conversation. 
I  have  sufficient  wealth  to  give  my  daughter ;  I  wish  only 
for  honours,  and  I  will  make  her  a  marchioness. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Marchioness  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  marchioness. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Alas  !  Heaven  preserve  me  from  it  ! 

M.  JOUR.  It  is  a  thing  I  am  determined  on. 

MRS.  JOUR.  It  is  a  thing  to  which  I  shall  never  consent. 
Matches  with  people  above  one's  own  position  are  always 
subject  to  the  most  grievous  inconvenience.  I  do  not  wish 
a  son-in-law  of  mine  to  be  able  to  reproach  my  daughter 
with  her  parents,  or  that  she  should  have  children  who 
would  be  ashamed  to  call  me  their  grandmother.  If  she 
were  to  come  and  visit  me  with  the  equipage  of  a  grand 
lady,  and  that,  through  inadvertency,  she  should  miss 
curtseying  to  one  of  the  neighbourhood,  people  would  not 
fail  to  say  a  hundred  silly  things  immediately.  Do  you 
see  this  lady  marchioness,  they  would  say,  who  is  giving 
herself  such  airs  ?  She  is  the  daughter  of  M.  Jourdain, 
who  was  only  too  glad,  when  she  was  a  child,  to  play  at 
ladyship  with  us.  She  has  not  always  been  so  high  up  in 

SCKNBXIY.]      THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  247 

the  world,  and  her  two  grandfathers  sold  cloth  near  the 
St.  Innocent  gate.31  They  amassed  great  wealth  for  their 
children,  for  which  they^are  probably  paying  very  dearly 
in  the  other  world;  for  people  can  scarcely  become  so 
rich  by  remaining  honest  folks.  I  will  not  have  all  this 
tittle-tattle,  and  in  one  word,  I  wish  for  a  man  who  shall 
be  grateful  to  me  for  my  daughter,  and  to  whom  I  shall  be 
able  to  say :  Sit  down  there,  son-in-law,  and  dine  with 
me. 

M.  JOUR.  These  are  the  sentiments  of  a  narrow  mind, 
to  wish  to  remain  for  ever  in  a  mean  condition.  Do  not 
answer  me  any  more :  my  daughter  shall  be  a  marchioness 
in  spite  of  all  the  world  ;  and,  if  you  put  me  in  a  passion, 
I  shall  make  her  a  duchess.33 

SCENE  XIII. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  LUCILE,  CLEONTE,  NICOLE, 
COVIELLE. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Cleonte,  do  not  lose  courage  as  yet.  (To 
Lucile).  Come  with  me,  daughter,  and  tell  your  father 
plainly  that  if  you  cannot  have  him,  you  will  not  marry 
any  one. 

SCENE  XIV. — CLEONTE,  COVIELLE. 

Cov.  You  have  made  a  nice  thing  of  it  with  your  high- 
flown  sentiments ! 

CLE.  What  would  you  have  me  to  do?  I  have  scruples 
upon  this  subject  which  no  example  could  conquer. 

Cov.  Are  you  mad  to  look  at  it  seriously  with  a  man 
like  that  ?  Do  not  you  see  that  he  is  crazy  ?  and  would 
it  cost  you  aught  to  accommodate  yourself  to  his  fancies  ? 

CLE.  You  are  right ;  but  I  did  not  think  that  one  had  to 
give  proof  of  noble  birth  to  become  the  son-in-law  of 
M.  Jourdain. 

Cov.   (Laughing).     Ah!    ah!    ah! 

CLE.   What  are  you  laughing  at  ? 

Cov.  At  a  thought  that  comes  into  my  head  of  playing 

*i  There  was  no  gate  in  Paris  called  thus.  It  was  probably  the  gate  of 
the  well-known  cemetery  of  the  Saints-Innocents. 

31  See  in  the  Introductory  Notice  the  conversation  between  Sancho 
Panza  and  Teresa. 

248  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  in. 

a  trick  upon  our  man,  and  of  obtaining  for  you  what 
you  wish. 

CLE.  How? 

Cov.  The  idea  is  altogether  amusing. 

CLE.  What  is  it,  then? 

Cov.  There  was  a  little  'masquerade  performed  some 
time  ago,  which  would  fit  in  marvellously  here,  and  which 
I  propose  to  employ  in  the  trick83  that  I  wish  to  play 
upon  our  ridiculous  individual.  All  this  smacks  a  little  of 
comedy;  but,  with  him,  we  may  risk  anything;  we  have 
no  need  to  take  much  trouble,  and  he  is  just  the  man 
to  play  his  part  in  it  to  perfection,  and  to  take  for 
granted  all  the  tales  to  which  we  shall  treat  him.  I  have 
the  actors  and  the  dresses  quite  ready ;  just  let  me 
manage  it. 

CLE.  But  tell  me  ... 

Cov.  I  will  let  you  into  the  whole  of  it.  Let  us  with- 
draw ;  here  he  comes. 

SCENE  XV. — M.  JOURDAIN,  alone. 

What  the  deuce  is  it  all  ?  They  do  nothing  but  reproach 
me  with  my  great  lords,  and  I  myself  can  see  nothing  more 
beautiful  than  to  keep  company  with  great  lords ;  there  is 
only  honour  and  civility  with  them  ;  and  I  would  have 
given  two  fingers  of  my  hand,  to  have  been  born  a  count 
or  a  marquis. 

SCENE  XVI. — M.  JOURDAIN,  A  LACQUEY. 

LAC.  Sir,  here  is  the  count,  and  a  lady  whom  he  is 
handing  in. 

M.  JOUR.  Eh !  good  Heavens  !  I  have  some  orders  to 
give.  Tell  them  that  I  am  coming  in  a  minute. 

SCENE  XVII. — DORIMENE,   DORANTE,   A  LACQUEY. 
LAC.  Master  says  he  will  be  here  in  a  minute. 
DOR.  It  is  well. 

SCENE  XVIII. — DORANTI,    DORIMENE. 
DORI.  I  am  not  sure  Dorante,  but  I  am  taking  another 

M  The  original  has  bourle,  a  trick,  a  joke,  from  the  Italian  burla;  the 
adjective  burlesque  is  still  used. 

SCBNK  xviil-J  THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  249 

strange  step  in  allowing  you  to  bring  me  to  a  house  where 
I  know  nobody. 

DOR.  What  place  then,  Madam,  would  you  have  my  love 
choose  to  entertain  you,  since,  to  avoid  scandal,  you  do 
not  wish  to  use  either  your  house  or  mine. 

DORI.  But  you  do  not  mention  that  I  am  insensibly  in- 
duced every  day  to  receive  too  many  protestations  of  your 
passion.  I  may  defend  myself  as  much  as  I  like  from 
them ;  you  are  tiring  my  resistance,  and  you  have  a  civil 
kind  of  obstinacy,  which  is  gently  leading  me  on  to  what- 
ever you  please.  It  began  by  frequent  visits,  then  came 
declarations,  which  led  the  way  for  serenades  and  enter- 
tainments, to  be  followed  by  presents.  I  have  opposed  all 
this;  but  you  will  not  be  repelled,  and  inch  by  inch  you 
are  gaining  upon  my  resolutions.  As  for  me,  I  can  no 
longer  answer  for  anything,  and  I  believe  that  in  the  end 
you  will  drive  me  to  matrimony,  from  which  I  have  held 
myself  so  much  aloof. 

DOR.  Upon  my  word,  Madam,  you  ought  to  have  been 
there  already  :  you  are  a  widow,  and  your  own  mistress  ; 
I  am  my  own  master,  and  love  you  better  than  my  life: 
what  is  there  to  prevent  you  from  completing  my  happi- 
ness from  this  day  forward  ? 

DORI.  Great  Heavens  !  Dorante,  it  requires  many  qual- 
ities on  both  sides  to  live  happily  together,  and  the  two 
most  sensible  people  in  the  world  often  have  a  difficulty 
of  forming  a  union  with  which  they  shall  be  satisfied. 

DOR.  You  are  jesting,  Madam,  to  imagine  so  many 
difficulties ;  and  the  experiment  which  you  have  tried 
concludes  nothing  for  others. 

DORI.  In  short,  I  am  always  coming  back  to  this ;  the 
expenses  which  I  find  you  launch  into  for  me,  make  me 
uneasy  for  two  reasons :  one,  that  they  bind  me  more  than 
I  could  wish ;  and  the  other,  that  I  am  sure,  no  offence  to 
you,  that  you  cannot  make  them  without  incommoding 
yourself;  and  I  do  not  wish  for  that. 

DOR.  Ah  !  Madam,  they  are  mere  trifles,  and  it  is  not 
by  that  .  .  . 

DORI.  I  know  what  I  say,  and,  amongst  others,  the 
diamond  which  you  have  forced  upon  me  is  of  a  value 

250  THE  CITIZEN  WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.          [ACT  m. 

DOR.  Eh  !  Madam,  I  pray,  do  not  put  so  much  value 
upon  a  thing  which  my  love  thinks  unworthy  of  you,  and 
allow  me  ...  Here  is  the  master  of  the  house. 

SCENE  XIX. — M.  JOURDAIN,  DORIMENE,  DORANTE. 

M.  JOUR.  {After  having  made  two  bows,  finding  himself 
too  close  to  Dorimene).  A  little  farther  away,  Madam. 

DORI.    How  ? 

M.  JOUR.  One  step,  if  you  please. 

DORI.  What  then  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Fall  back  a  little  for  the  third. 

DOR.  Madam,  M.  Jourdain  knows  how  to  be  genteel. 

M.  JOUR.  Madam,  this  is  a  great  honour  to  me,  to  be 
sufficiently  fortunate,  to  be  so  happy,  to  have  the  felicity, 
that  you  have  had  the  goodness  of  granting  me  the  favor, 
of  doing  me  the  honour  of  honouring  me  with  the  favour 
of  your  presence  ;  and  if  I  had  also  the  merit  of  meriting 
a  merit  like  yours,  and  that  Heaven  .  .  .  envious  of  my 
happiness  .  .  .  had  accorded  me  .  .  .  the  advantage  of 
finding  myself  worthy  .  .  .  of  .  .  . 

DOR.  M.  Jourdain,  that  will  do.  This  lady  does  not 
like  elaborate  compliments,  and  she  knows  that  you  are  a 
man  of  wit  (in  a  whisper,  to  Dorimene).  He  is  an  inoffen- 
sive citizen,  sufficiently  ridiculous,  as  you  see,  in  all  his 
manners. 

DORI.  {In  a  whisper,  to  Dorante).  It  is  not  very  diffi- 
cult to  perceive  it. 

DOR.   Madam,  this  is  my  best  friend. 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  doing  me  too  much  honour. 

DOR.   An  out  and  out  gallant  man. 

DORI.  I  have  a  great  esteem  for  him. 

M.  JOUR.  I  have  done  nothing  yet,  Madam,  to  deserve 
this  favour. 

DOR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain).  Whatever  you  do, 
take  particular  care  not  to  mention  the  diamond,  which 
you  have  given  her. 

M.  JOUR.  {In  a  whisper,  to  Dorante}.  May  I  not  even 
ask  her  if  she  likes  it  ? 

DOR.  {In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain).  Not  for  worlds, 
and  take  great  care  you  do  not !  It  would  be  ill-man- 
nered of  you ;  and  to  act  gallantly,  you  must  act  as  if  it 

SCKNBXXI.J     THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  251 

were  not  you  who  had  made  her  that  present.  (Aloud}. 
M.  Jourdain,  Madam,  says  he  is  enchanted  to  see  you  at 
his  house. 

DORI.   He  honours  me  much. 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Dorante).  How  obliged  I  am 
to  you,  Sir,  for  speaking  thus  to  her  for  me. 

DOR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  M.  Jourdain].  I  have  had  a  ter- 
rible trouble  to  make  her  come  here. 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper,  to  Dorante).  I  do  not  know 
what  thanks  to  give  you. 

DOR.  He  says,  Madam,  that  he  thinks  you  the  most 
charming  person  on  earth. 

DORI.  It  is  a  great  favour  he  does  me. 

M.  JOUR.  Madam,  it  is  you  who  do  the  favours,  and 

DOR.  Let  us  see  about  the  dinner. 

SCENE  XX.  —  M.  JOURDAIN,    DORIMENE,   DORANTE,   A. 
LACQUEY. 

LAC.   (To  M.  Jourdain).  .Every  thing  is  ready,  Sir. 
DOR.  Then  let  us  sit  down,  and  have  the  musicians  in. 

SCENE  XXL—  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Six  cooks,  who  have  prepared  the  dinner,  dance  together, 
and  compose  the  third  interlude;  after  which  they  bring  in 
a  table  covered  with  several  dishes. 

ACT  IV. 

SCENE  I.  —  DORIMENE,  M.  JOURDAIN,   DORANTE,  THREE 
MUSICIANS,  A  LACQUEY. 

DORI.  How  now !  Dorante !  this  is  altogether  a  most 
magnificent  repast. 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  jesting,  madam,  and  I  wish  it  were 
more  worthy  of  your  acceptance.  (Dorimene,  M.  Jour- 
dain, Dorante,  and  the  three  musicians  sit  down  at  the 
table.} 

DOR.  M.  Jourdain  is'  right,  Madam,  in  what  he  says; 
and  he  obliges  me  by  doing  so  well  the  honours  of  his 

252  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  nr. 

house  to  you.  I  agree  with  him  that  the  repast  is  not 
worthy  of  you  As  it  is  I  who  ordered  it,  and  as  I  have 
not,  on  that  head,  the  knowledge  of  some  of  our  friends, 
you  have  not  here  a  very  studied  affair,  and  you  will  find 
many  incongruities  of  good  cheer,  and  many  barbarisms 
of  good  taste.  If  Damis  had  had  a  hand  in  this,  every- 
thing would  have  been  done  properly ;  there  would  have 
been  elegance  and  erudition  everywhere,  and  he  would  not 
have  failed  to  exaggerate  to  you  himself  every  item  of  the 
repast  which  he  was  giving  you,  and  to  force  you  to  agree 
as  to  his  great  capacity  in  the  way  of  gastronomy ;  to  hold 
forth  to  you  about  a  fancy  bread  with  golden  edges,84  crusty 
all  round,  daintily  crackling  under  your  teeth;  about  a 
wine,  strong-bodied  and  deep-coloured,  with  a  tartness 
which  does  not  predominate ;  about  a  loin  of  mutton  gar- 
nished with  parsley;  about  a  loin  of  Norman  veal,35  as  long 
as  this,  white,  delicate,  and  which  tastes,  under  the  teeth, 
like  real  almond  paste ;  about  partridges  of  a  surprising 
flavour;  and,  for  his  master-piece,36  about  a  jelly-broth, 
followed  by  a  young  fat  turkeyt  with  young  pigeons  at  the 
four  corners,  and  crowned  with  bleached  onions  and  chi- 
cory.31 But  as  for  me,  I  acknowledge  my  ignorance ;  and, 
as  M.  Jourdain  has  very  well  said,  I  should  wish  that  the 
feast  was  more  worthy  of  being  offered  to  you. 

DORI.  I  only  respond  to  this  compliment  by  eating  as 
I  do. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah  !  what  beautiful  hands  ! 

DORI.  The  hands  are  but  middling,  M.  Jourdain  ;  but 
you  are  alluding  to  the  diamond  which  is  very  beautiful. 

M.  JOUR.  I,  madam  ?  Heaven  preserve  me  from  allud- 
ing to  it ;  it  would  not  be  gallant  on  my  part ;  and  the 
diamond  is  of  very  little  consequence. 

DORI.  You  are  very  fastidious. 

M.  JOUR.  You  are  too  good  .    .   . 

84  The  original  has  pain  de  rive  a  biseau  dore. 

85  Veau  de  riviere  because  the  calves  were  reared  in  Normandy,  on  the 
banks  of  the  Seine. 

88  The  original  has  operat  which  was  often  employed  in  Moliere's  time 
for  "  master-piece." 

87  Un  dindon  .  .  ,  cantonne  de  pigeonneaux  is  the  expression  used. 
Cantonne,  cantoned,  is  a  heraldic  term. 

SCENE  i.J         THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  253 

DOR.  (After  having  given  a  sign  to  M.  Jourdain). 
Come,  pour  some  wine  to  M.  Jourdain,  and  to  these 
gentlemen,  who  will  do  us  the  favour  to  sing  us  a  drink- 
ing song. 

DORI.  It  gives  a  marvellous  relish  to  good  cheer  to  mix 
music  with  it ;  and  I  find  myself  admirably  entertained 
here. 

M.  JOUR.  Madam,  it  is  not  .    .    . 

DOR.  M.  Jourdain,  let  us  listen  to  these  gentlemen  ; 
what  they  will  tell  us  will  be  worth  much  more  than  all 
that  we  could  say. 

FISRT    DRINKING    SONG. 

First  and  Second  Musicians  together,  with  glasses  in  their 
hands. 

A  small  drop,  Phillis,  to  commence  the  round. 

Ah  !  how  agreeable  and  charming  a  glass  looks  in  your 

hands ! 

You  and  the  wine,  you  lend  each  other  arms, 
And  I  feel  my  love  for  both  increase, 
Between  it,  you  and  J,  my  fair  one,  let  us  swear,  let  us 

swear, 
An  eternal  friendship. 

How  by  wetting  your  lips,  it  receives  fresh  charms  ! 

And  how  we  see  your  lips  embellished  by  it ! 

Ah  !  both  inspire  me  with  envy, 

And  with  you  and  it,  I    intoxicate   myself  with  long 

draughts. 
Between  it,  you  and  I,  my  fair  one,  let  us  swear,  let  us 

swear, 
An  eternal  friendship. 

SECOND    DRINKING    SONG. 

Second  and  Third  Musicians  together. 

Let  us  drink,  dear  friends,  let  us  drink ; 
Fleeting  time  invites  us  to  it. 
Let  us  profit  by  life 
As  much  as  we  can. 

254  THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  iv. 

When  we  have  passed  the  black  gulf, 
Good  bye  to  wine  and  love. 
Let  us  make  haste  to  drink, 
For  we  cannot  always  drink. 

Let  us  leave  arguing  to  fools  ! 
On  the  true  happiness  of  life  ; 
Our  philosophy 
Places  it  in  the  bottle. 

Wealth,  knowledge  and  glory, 
Do  not  do  away  with  carking  care ; 
And  it  is  only  in  drinking, 
That  we  can  be  happy. 

All  three  together. 

Come  on,  come  on:    wine  everywhere:    pour  out  men, 

pour  out ; 
Pour  out,  pour  out  always,  until  we  say  enough. 

DORI.  I  think  no  one  could  sing  better;  and  it  is  alto- 
gether charming. 

M.  JOUR.  I  see  her,  Madam,  something  more  charming 
still. 

DORI.  Indeed !  M.  Jourdain  is  more  gallant  than 
I  thought. 

DOR.  How  so,  Madam !  for  whom  do  you  take  M. 
Jourdain. 

M.  JOUR.  I  wish  she  would  take  me  for  what  I  could 
name. 

DORI.    What  ?    Again  ? 

DOR.   (  To  Dorimene}.     You  do  not  know  him. 

M.  JOUR.   She  shall  know  me  when  it  pleases  her. 

DORI.   Oh  !    I  shall  run  away. 

DOR.  He  has  always  got  his  repartee  at  hand.  But  you 
do  not  see,  Madam,  that  M.  Jourdain  eats  every  morsel 
which  you  touch. 

DORI.   M.  Jourdain  is  a  man  who  charms  me. 

M.  JOUR.  If  I  could  charm  your  heart,  I  would  be  ... 

*e*NB  iii.l       THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  255 

SCENE  II. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,    M.    JOURDAIN,    DORIMENE, 
DORANTE,    MUSICIANS,  LACQUEYS. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Ah  !  ah  !  I  find  good  company  here,  and 
I  see  plainly  that  I  was  not  expected.  It  is  for  this  pretty 
affair  then,  husband,  that  you  were  so  anxious  to  send  me 
out  to  dine  with  my  sister  !  I  find  a  play  down  below,  and 
here  I  find  a  dinner  fit  for  a  wedding.  That  is  how  you 
spend  your  substance;  and  it  is  thus  that  you  feast  the 
ladies  in  my  absence,  and  give  them  music  and  comedy, 
while  you  send  me  out  of  the  way. 

DOR.  What  do  you  mean,  Mrs.  Jourdain?  and  what 
fancies  are  yours,  to  take  it  into  your  head  that  your  hus- 
band spends  his  substance,  and  that  it  is  he  who  gives  this 
entertainment  to  this  lady?  Know,  pray,  that  it  is  I;  that 
he  is  only  lending  me  his  house,  and  that  you  ought  to  be 
somewhat  more  careful  in  what  you  say. 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  impertinent  woman,  it  is  the  count  who 
provides  all  this  for  this  lady,  who  is  a  lady  of  quality. 
He  does  me  the  honour  of  borrowing  my  house,  and  of 
wishing  me  to  be  with  him. 

MRS.  JOUR.   That  is  all  stuff:  I  know  what  I  know. 

DOR.   Take  a  better  pair  of  spectacles,  Mrs.  Jourdain. 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  have  no  need  of  spectacles,  Sir,  and  I  see 
clearly  enough.  I  have  had  a  scent  of  this  for  some  time, 
and  I  am  not  a  fool.  It  is  very  base  in  you,  who  are  a 
great  lord,  to  lend  a  hand,  as  you  do,  to  the  follies  of  my 
husband.  And  you,  Madam,  for  a  lady  of  quality,  it  is 
neither  handsome  nor  honest  in  you,  to  sow  dissension 
in  a  family,  and  to  allow  my  husband  to  be  in  love  with 
you. 

DORI.  What  does  all  this  mean?  Indeed,  Dorante, 
it  is  too  bad  in  you  to  expose  me  to  the  silly  visions  of 
this  foolish  woman. 

DOR.  {Following  Dorimene,  who  goes  out}.  Madam 
.  .  .  Madam  !  where  are  you  running  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Madam.  .  .  .  Count,  make  my  excuses  to 
her,  and  endeavour  to  bring  her  back. 

SCENE  III. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  M.  JOURDAIN,  LACQUEY. 
M.  JOUR.  Ah !   impertinent  woman  that  you  are,  these 

256  THE   CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  rv. 

are  your  nice  doings  !     You  come  to  affront  me  before 
everyone ;  and  you  drive  people  of  quality  from  my  house ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  do  not  care  about  their  quality. 

M.  JOUR.  I  do  not  know  what  hinders  me,  you  cursed 
woman,  from  splitting  your  head  with  the  fragments  of 
the  repast  which  you  have  come  to  disturb. 

( The  Lacqueys  take  the  table  away. 

MRS.  JOUR.  {Going).  I  do  not  care  a  bit  for  all  this. 
I  am  defending  my  rights,  and  I  shall  have  all  the  women 
on  my  side. 

M.  JOUR.  You  do  well  to  get  out  of  the  way  of  my  fury. 

SCENE  IV. — M.  JOURDAIN,  alone. 

She  came  back  at  a  most  unlucky  time.  I  was  in  the 
humour  for  saying  pretty  things ;  and  never  did  I  find 
myself  so  witty.  But  what  is  this  ? 

SCENE  V. — M.  JOURDAIN  ;  COVIELLE,  disguised. 

Cov.  Sir,  I  do  not  know  whether  I  have  the  honour  of 
being  known  to  you. 

M.  JOUR.  No,  Sir. 

Cov.  {Holding  his  hand  about  a  foot  from  the  ground). 
I  have  seen  you  when  you  were  not  taller  than  this. 

M.  JOUR.  Me  ? 

Cov.  Yes.  You  were  the  prettiest  child  in  the  world, 
and  all  the  ladies  took  you  in  their  arms  to  kiss  you. 

M.  JOUR.  To  kiss  me  ?  \ 

Cov.  Yes.  I  was  a  great  friend  of  the  late  gentleman, 
your  father. 

M.  JOUR.  Of  the  late  gentleman,  my  father? 

Cov.  Yes.     He  was  a  very  respectable  gentleman. 

M.  JOUR.  How  say  you  ? 

Cov.  I  say  that  he  was  a  very  respectable  gentleman. 

M.  JOUR.  My  father  ? 

Cov.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.  You  have  known  him  well  ? 

Cov.  Indeed  I  have. 

M.  JOUR.  And  you  have  known  him  to  be  a  gentleman? 

Cov.   Undoubtedly. 

M.  JOUR.  Then  I  do  not  know  what  the  world  means ! 

SCKNK  v.]         THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  257 

Cov.  How? 

M.  JOUR.  There  are  silly  people  who  would  tell  me  that 
he  was  a  tradesman. 

Cov.  He,  a  tradesman  ?  It  is  downright  slander,  he 
never  was  one.  All  that  he  did,  is  that  he  was  extremely 
obliging,  and  very  polite;  and  as  he  was  a  very  great 
judge  of  stuffs,  he  went  and  chose  them  everywhere»  had 
them  carried  to  his  house,  and  gave  them  to  his  friends 
for  money. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  delighted  to  know  you,  so  that  you  may 
bear  this  testimony,  that  my  father  was  a  gentleman. 

Cov.  I  will  maintain  it  before  the  whole  world. 

M.  JOUR.  You  will  oblige  me.  What  business  brings 
you  here  ? 

Cov.  Since  I  knew  your  late  father,  a  respectable  gen- 
tleman as  I  have  told  you,  I  have  travelled  all  over  the 
world. 

M.  JOUR.  All  over  the  world? 

Cov.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.   I  fancy  it  must  be  very  far  to  that  country. 

Cov.  Indeed  it  is.  I  have  come  back  from  all  my  long 
travels  only  within  the  last  four  days;  and  from  the  inter- 
est which  I  take  in  everything  that  relates  to  you,  I  have 
come  to  announce  to  you  the  best  news  in  the  world. 

M.  JOUR.  Which  ? 

Cov.  You  know  that  the  son  of  the  Grand  Turk  is  here  ? 

M.  JOUR.  I?     No. 

Cov.  How  is  that  ?  He  has  the  most  magnificent  reti- 
nue ;  everyone  goes  to  see  him,  and  he  has  been  received 
in  this  country  as  an  important  nobleman. 

M.  JOUR.  Indeed,  I  did  not  know  that. 

Cov.  What  is  of  advantage  to  you,  is  that  he  is  in  love 
with  your  daughter. 

M.  JOUR.  The  son  of  the  Grand  Turk  ? 

Cov.  Yes  ;  and  he  wishes  to  be  your  son-in-law. 

M.  JOUR.  My  son-in-law,  the  son  of  the  Grand  Turk ! 

Cov.  The  son  of  the  Grand  Turk,  your  son-in-law.  As 
I  went  to  see  him,  understanding  his  language  perfectly, 
we  were  conversing  together ;  and  after  some  talk,  he  said 
to  me,  Acciam  croc  soler  onch  alia  moustaph  gidelum  aman- 
ahem  varahini  oussere  carbulath;  which  means,  have  you 

VOL.  III.  R. 

258  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  iv. 

not  seen  a  handsome  young  lady,  who  is  the  daughter  of 
M.  Jourdain,  a  Parisian  gentleman  ? 

M.  JOUR.  The  son  of  the  Grand  Turk  said  that  of  me  ? 

Cov.  Yes.  As  I  answered  him  that  I  knew  you  partic- 
ularly, and  that  I  had  seen  your  daughter ;  Ah !  said  he 
to  me,  marababa  sahem  /  which  means  :  Ah  !  how  enam- 
oured I  am  of  her  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Marababa  sahem  means  :  Ah !  how  enamoured 
I  am  of  her  ? 

Cov.  Yes. 

M.  JOUR.  Upon  my  word,  you  do  well  to  tell  me  ;  for, 
as  for  me,  I  should  never  have  thought  that  marababa 
sahem  meant :  Ah  !  how  enamoured  I  am  of  her !  It  is 
an  admirable  language,  this  Turkish  ! 

Cov.  More  admirable  than  you  would  think.  Do  you 
know  at  all  what  cacaracamouchen  means  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Cacaracamouchen  ?    No. 

Cov.  That  means,  My  dear  soul. 

M.  JOUR.   Cacaracamouchen  means  :  My  dear  soul  ? 

Cov.   Yes. 

M.  JOUR-  That  is  something  marvellous !  Cacaraca- 
mffuchen,  My  dear  soul.  Who  would  ever  think  so  ?  That 
is  something  that  puzzles  me. 

Cov.  In  short,  to  finish  my  mission,  he  comes  to  ask 
the  hand  of  your  daughter ;  and  in  order  to  have  a  father- 
in-law  that  shall  be  worthy  of  him,  he  wishes  to  make  you 
mamamouchi?*'  which  is  an  office  of  dignity  in  his  country. 

M.  JOUR.   Mamamouchi  ? 

Cov.  Yes,  Mamamouchi;  that  means  in  our  language, 
Paladine.     In  short,  [Paladines  are  those  ancient  .    .    . 
Paladines.     There  is  nothing  more  noble  in  the  world ; 
and  you  will  be  on  a  level  with  the  greatest  lords  of  the 
earth. 

M.  JOUR.  The  son  of  the  Grand  Turk  honours  me  much, 
and  I  pray  you  to  bring  him  here  that  I  may  tender  him 
my  thanks. 

Cov.  Why  !  he  is  just  coming  here. 

88  Nearly  all  the  Turkish  of  Covielle,  which  is  no  Turkish  at  all,  is  taken 
from  Rotrou's  comedy,  The  Sister.  There  are,  however,  a  few  corrupt 
Turkish  words  among  them.  The  word  mamamouchi,  created  by  Moliere, 
is  still  used  in  French. 

SCENE  vi.]      THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  259 

M.  JOUR.  He  is  coming  here  ? 

Cov.  Yes ;  and  he  brings  everything  with  him  for  the 
ceremony  of  investing  you  with  your  dignity. 

M.  JOUR.  That  is  very  prompt. 

Cov.  His  passion  will  brook  no  delay. 

M.  JOUR.  The  only  thing  that  perplexes  me  in  this 
affair  is,  that  my  daughter  is  an  obstinate  girl  who  has  her 
head  full  of  a  certain  Cleonte,  and  she  swears  that  she 
shall  marry  no  one  but  him. 

Cov.  She  will  change  her  mind  when  she  shall  see  the 
son  of  the  Grand  Turk;  and  the  most  marvellous  adven- 
ture in  this  case  is,  that  the  son  of  the  Grand  Turk 
resembles  this  C16onte,  with  perhaps  a  slight  difference. 
I  have  just  seen  him ;  he  has  been  pointed  out  tome;  and 
the  love  which  she  has  for  the  one  might  easily  pass  to  the 
other,  and  ...  I  hear  him  coming ;  here  he  is. 

SCENE  VI. — CLEONTE,  disguised  as  a  Turk;  THREE  PAGES, 
carrying  Cleonte' s  jacket;  M.  JOURDAIN,  COVIELLE. 

CLE.  Ambousahim  oqui  boraf,  Jordina,  salamalequi?* 

Cov.  {To  M.  Jourdairi).  That  means:  M.  Jourdain, 
may  your  heart  be  all  the  year  like  a  rose  tree  in  flower. 
These  are  the  prepossessing  ways  of  speaking  in  these 
countries. 

M.  JOUR.  I  am  his  Turkish  Highness'  most  humble 
servant. 

Cov.    Carigar  caboto  oustin  moraf, 

CLE.    Oustin  yoc  catamalequi  basum  base  alia  moran. 

Cov.  He  says :  May  Heaven  give  you  the  strength  of  a 
lion,  and  the  cunning  of  a  serpent. 

M.  JOUR.  His  Turkish  Highness  honours  me  too  much, 
and  I  wish  him  all  sorts  of  prosperity. 

Cov.    Ossa  binamen  sadoc  babally  oracaf  ouram. 

CLE.  Bel-men." 

Cov.  He  says  you  are  to  go  with  him  quickly  to  prepare 
yourself  for  the  ceremony,  so  that  he  may  see  your  daughter 
afterwards,  and  conclude  the  marriage. 

89  The  last  word  is  the  Arabic  salam  aleiqui,  may  salvation  be  on  your 
head ;  in  familiar  French,  there  exists  the  word  salamalec,  a  very  deep 
bow. 

*°  Bel-men  is  perhaps  the  Turkish  Oilmen,  I  do  not  know. 

260  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  iv. 

M.  JOUR.  So  many  things  in  two  words? 
Cov.  Yes.     The  Turkish  language  is  like  that,  it  says 
much  in  few  words.41     Go  quickly  where  he  wishes  you. 

SCENE  VII. — COVIELLE,  alone. 

Ah !  ah !  ah  !  Upon  my  word  this  is  very  funny.  What 
a  dupe !  If  he  had  learned  his  part  by  heart,  he  could  not 
play  it  better.  Ah !  ah ! 

SCENE  VIII. — DORANTE,  COVIELLE. 

Cov.  I  beg  of  you,  Sir,  to  be  good  enough  to  assist  us 
in  an  affair  that  is  going  on  in  this  house. 

DOR.  Ah!  ah!  Covielle,  who  would  have  known  you? 
How  you  are  got  up ! 

Cov.  You  see.     Ah !  ah ! 

DOR.  What  are  you  laughing  at. 

Cov.  At  something  Sir,  that  well  deserves  it. 

DOR.  What? 

Cov.  I  could  give  you  many  chances,  Sir,  to  guess  the 
trick  of  which  we  are  making  use  with  M.  Jourdain,  to 
induce  him  to  give  his  daughter  to  my  master. 

DOR.  I  cannot  guess  the  stratagem;  but  I  can  guess 
that  it  will  not  fail  to  produce  its  effect,  since  you  have 
taken  it  in  hand. 

Cov.  I  know,  Sir,  that  the  animal  is  not  unknown  to 
you. 

DOR.  Tell  me  what  it  is. 

Cov.  Take  the  trouble  to  draw  a  little  aside  to  make 
room  for  what  I  perceive  coming  along.  You  will  be  able 
to  see  a  part  of  the  story,  while  I  tell  you  the  rest. 

SCENE  IX. — TURKISH  CEREMONY.42  THE  MUFTI,  DER- 
VISHES, TURKISH  ASSISTANTS  OF  THE  MUFTI,  singing 
and  dancing. 

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Six  Turks  enter  gravely  two  by  two,  to  the  sound  of  in- 

41  This  remark  of  Covielle  is  taken  from  Rotrou's  comedy,  The  Sister, 
where  a  roguish  servant  also  takes  six  lines  to  express  the  meaning  of 
vare  hec. 

44  The  music  for  this  ceremony  was  by  the  celebrated  Lulli,  who  acted 
the  part  of  the  mufti. 

SCENE  xi.]       THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  26l 

struments.  They  carry  three  carpets,  which  they  lift  very 
high,  after  having  formed  several  figures  with  it,  while 
dancing.  The  singing  Turks  pass  beneath  these  carpets,  and 
range  themselves  on  both  sides  of  the  stage.  The  mufti, 
accompanied  by  the  dennshes,  close  up  the  procession.  Then 
the  Turks  lay  the  carpets  on  the  floor,  and  kneel  down  upon 
them.  The  mufti  and  the  dervishes  remain  standing  in  the 
midst  of  them;  and,  while  the  mufti  invokes  Mahomet, 
making  many  contortions  and  grimaces,  without  uttering  a 
single  word,  the  assistant  Turks  prostrate  themselves  on  the 
ground,  singing,  Alii,  then  raise  their  hands  to  heaven, 
singing,  Allah;  which  they  continue  to  do  until  the  end  of 
the  invocation,  after  which  they  all  rise,  singing,  Alia  eckber; 
and  two  dervishes  go  and  fetch  M.  Jourdain. 

SCENE  X. — THE  MUFTI,  DERVISHES,  TURKS,  singing  and 
dancing,  M.  JOURDAIN  dressed  in  Turkish  costume, . 
his  head  shaved,  without  turban  or  sabre. 

MUFTI.  (To  M.  Jourdain). 

If  you  know, 
You  answer ; 
If  you  do  not  know, 
You  be  silent,  silent. 
I  am  the  Mufti. 

Who  are  you,  you? 

Not  understand,  * 

You  be  silent. 
(Two  dervishes  retire  with  M.  Jourdatn. 

SCENE  XI. — THE  MUFTI,  DERVISHES,  TURKS,  singing 
and  dancing. 

MUFTI.    Say,  Turk,  who  is  that  one  ?     An  Anabaptist  ? 
an  Anabaptist? 
TURKS.  No. 
MUFTI.  A  Zwinglian? 
TURKS.   No. 
MUFTI.  A  Copht  ? 
TURKS.  No. 
MUFTI.  A  Hussite?    A  Moor?    A  Contemplative  man? 

262  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  IV. 

TURKS.  No,  no,  no. 
MUFTI.  No,  no,  no.     Is  he  a  Pagan? 
TURKS.  No. 
MUFTI.  A  Lutheran. 
TURKS.  No. 
MUFTI.  A  Puritan  ? 
TURKS.  No. 

MUFTI.  A  Brahmin  ?    A  Moffina?     A  Zurina?  ** 
TURKS.  No,  no,  no. 

MUFTI.  No,  no,  no.     A  Mahometan  ?     A  Mahometan  ? 
TURKS.  Yes,  by  Allah  ! 

MUFTI.   What  is  his  name  ?     What  is  his  name  ? 
TURKS.  Jourdain,  Jourdain." 

MUFTI.   (Jumping  and  looking  on  all  sides}.     Jourdain  ? 
Jourdain  ? 

TURKS.  Jourdain,  Jourdain. 
MUFTI.  Mahomet,  for  Jourdain, 

I  pray,  night  and  morning. 

I  wish  to  make  a  paladine 

Of  Jourdain,  of  Jourdain. 

Give  the  turban,  and  give  the  scimitar, 

With  the  galley,  and  the  brigantine 

To  defend  Palestine. 

Mahomet,  for  Jourdain, 

I  pray,  night  and  morning. 

(Tb  the  Turki).     Will  he  be  a  good  Turk,  Jourdain? 
TURKS.  Yes,  by  Allah. 

MUFTI.   Ha  la  ba,  ba  la  chou,  ba  la  ba,  ba  la  da.45 
TURKS.   Ha  la  ba,  ba  la  chou,  ba  la  ba,  ba  la  da. 

SCEtfE  XII. 
Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 
Singing  and  Dancing  Turks. 

43  These  two  last  words  belong  to  no  known  sect. 

44  The  whole  of  this  ceremony  is  written  in  the  lingua  franca,  the  lan- 
guage spoken  in  the  Levant.     Some  of  the  words  used  are  not  correctly 
spelt.     We  give  the  beginning  of  the  original :  THE  MUFTI.  Se  ti  sabir,  ti 
respondir ;  se  non  sabir  tazir,  tazir.     Mi  star  muphti,  ti  qui  star,  ti  ?    Non 
intendir  ?  tazir,  tazir. 

46  These  words  have  no  sense,  but  in  correcting  them  we  easily  get  the 
Turkish  words  Allah,  baba,  hou,  Allah,  baba,  God,  my  father,  God,  God, 
my  father. 

SCENE  xiii.J     THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  263 

SCENE  XIII. — THE  MUFTI,  DERVISHES,  M.  JOURDAIN. 
Singing  and  Dancing  Turks. 

The  Mufti  comes  back  with  his  state  turban,  which  is 
enormously  large,  and  decorated  with  four  or  five  rows  of 
lighted  candles  :  he  is  accompanied  by  two  dervishes  who 
carry  the  Koran,  and  who  have  pointed  caps,  also  decorated 
•with  candles. 

Two  other  dervishes  bring  in  M.Jourdain,  and  make  him 
kneel  down,  the  hands  on  the  ground,  so  that  his  back,  on 
which  is  placed  the  Koran,  may  serve  as  a  desk  to  the  Mufti, 
who  makes  a  second  burlesque  invocation,  knitting  his  eye- 
brows, and  opening  his  mouth,  without  saying  a  word;  then 
speaking  vehemently,  sometimes  softening  his  tone,  sometimes 
raising  it  with  such  an  enthusiasm,  as  to  make  one  tremble, 
holding  his  sides  with  his  hands,  as  if  to  make  the  words 
come  out,  beating  from  time  to  time  on  the  Koran,  and  turn- 
ing over  the  leaves  precipitately,  after  which,  lifting  his  hands 
to  heaven,  the  Mufti  cries  in  a  loud  voice,  Hou*  During 
this  invocation,  the  Turkish  assistants,  bowing  down  and 
rising  alternately,  also  sing  Hou,  hou,  hou. 

M.  JOUR.  (After  the  Koran  has  been  taken  from  his 
back}  Ouf. 

MUFTI.  {To  M.  Jourdain).     You  are  not  a  rogue? 

TURKS.  No,  no,  no. 

MUFTI.  Are  not  a  cheat  ? 

TURKS.  No,  no,  no. 

MUFTI.  {To  Turks').     Give  a  turban? 

TURKS.  You  are  not  a  rogue? 

No,  no,  no. 

Are  not  a  cheat  ? 

No,  no,  no. 

Give  a  turban.47 

46  Hou,  the  Arab  for  him,  is  one  of  the  names  which  the  Mussulmans 
give  to  God. 

47  Ti  non  star  furba — No,  no,  no. — Non  star  forfanta  ? — No,  no,  no. — 
Donar  turbanta. 

264  THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  v. 

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  dancing  Tutks  place  the  turban  on  the  head  of  A 
Jourdain  to  the  sound  of  the  instruments. 

MUFTI.  {Handing  a  sabre  to  M.  Jourdain). 

You  be  noble,  not  a  fable. 

Take  the  sabre.*8 
TURKS.  {Drawing  their  sabres). 

You  be  noble,  not  a  fable, 

Take  the  sabre. 

<  Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  dancing  Turks  give  M.  Jourdain  several  strokes  with 
the  sabre,  keeping  time  with  the  music. 

Fifth  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  dancing  Turks  give  M.  Jourdain  several  strokes  with 
the  stick,  keeping  time  to  the  music. 

MUFTI.         They  shall  give,  they  shall  give, 

The  bastonnade.49 
TURKS.         They  shall  give,  they  shall  give, 

The  bastonnade. 
MUFTI.         Not  to  have  shame 

Is  the  utmost  insult.50 
TURKS.         Not  to  have  shame 

Is  the  utmost  insult. 

The  mufti  commences  a  third  invocation.  The  dervishes 
support  him  under  his  arms  with  respect;  after  which  the 
singing  and  dancing  Turks,  jumping  round  the  mufti,  retire 
with  him,  taking  M.  Jourdain  with  them. 

ACT   V. 

SCENE  I. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,  M.  JOURDAIN. 

MRS.  JOURDAIN.  Have  mercy  upon  us,  good  Heaven ! 
What  is  this  ?  What  a  figure  !  Are  you  going  to  carry  a 

48  Ti  star  nobile,  non  star  fabbola — Pigliar  schiabbola. 

49  Dara,  dara,  bastonnara. 

40  Non  tener  honta; — Questa  star  1'ultima  affronta. 

SCENE  i.]          THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  265 

momon™-  and  is  this  a  time  to  go  out  masquerading? 
Speak,  what  is  all  this  ?  Who  has  dressed  you  out  in  this 
fashion  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Listen  to  the  impertinent  woman  !  to  speak 
in  this  manner  to  a  mamamouchi ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  is  that  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  you  will  have  to  show  me  a  little  more 
respect  now.  I  have  just  been  made  a  mamamouchi. 

MRS.  JOUR.   What  do  you  mean  with  your  mamamouchi  / 

M.  JOUR.  Mamamouchi,  I  tell  you.    I  am  mamamouchi. 

MRS.  JOUR.   What  sort  of  animal  is  that  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Mamamouchi,  that  means  in  our  language 
paladine. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Bladain!**  Are  you  of  an  age  to  dance  in 
the  ballet? 

M.  JOUR.  What  ignorance !  I  say  paladine :  it  is  a 
dignity  with  which  I  have  just  been  invested,  with  great 
ceremony. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  ceremony,  then  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Mahametaperjordina. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  does  that  mean. 

M.  JOUR.  Jordina,  means  Jourdain. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Well !     What,  Jourdain  ? 

M.  JOUR.    Voler far  un  faladina  de  Jordina. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What? 

M.  JOUR.  Dar  turbanta  con  galera. 

MRS.   JOUR.  What  does  it  mean,  that? 

M.  JOUR.  Per  defender  Palestina. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  is  it  you  wish  to  say? 

M.  JOUR.  Dara,  dara,  bastonnara. 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  is  all  this  gibberish  ? 

M.  JOUR.  Non  tener  honta,  questa  star  f  ultima  af- 
fronta. 

MRS.  JOUR.  But  what  is  it,  all  this  ? 

M.  JOUR.  (Singing  and  dancing].  Hou  la  ba,  ba  la 
chou,  ba  la  ba,  ba  la  da.  (ffe  falls  to  the  ground"). 

MRS.  JOUR.  Alas !  good  Heavens !  my  husband  is  gone 
mad! 

51  See  Vol.  I.,  page  46,  note  22. 

52  Madam  Jourdain  is  not  acquainted  with  the  word  "paladine,"  but 
knows  baladin,  a  ballet-dancer. 

266  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  T. 

M.  JOUR.  {Getting  up  and  walking  away).  Peace,  in- 
solent woman.  Show  respect  to  a  mamamouchi. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (Alone).  Where  could  he  have  lost  his 
senses?  I  had  better  run  and  prevent  his  going  out. 
(Perceiving  Dorimene  and  Dorante).  Ah  !  ah  !  it  wanted 
nothing  but  this."  I  see  nothing  but  grief  on  all  sides. 

SCENE  II. — DORANTE,  DORIMENE. 

DOR.  Yes,  Madam,  you  shall  witness  the  most  amusing 
thing  that  could  be  seen;  and  I  do  not  believe  that  it 
would  be  possible  to  find  in  the  whole  world  another  man 
so  mad  as  this  one.  And  besides,  Madam,  we  must  try 
to  forward  Cleonte's  love  affair,  and  to  support  all  his 
masquerade.  He  is  a  very  gentlemanly  man,  and  one 
who  deserves  that  we  should  interest  ourselves  in  him. 

DORI.  I  think  a  great  deal  of  him,  and  he  is  worthy  of 
a  good  fortune. 

DOR.  In  addition  to  all  this,  we  have  here,  Madam,  a 
ballet  that  is  owing  to  us,  and  which  we  must  take  care 
not  to  lose  ;  and  we  must  see  whether  my  idea  shall  not 
succeed. 

DORI.  I  have  noticed  some  magnificent  preparations, 
but  they  are  things,  Dorante,  which  I  can  no  longer  allow. 
Yes,  I  will  make  an  end  of  your  profusion  :  and  to  put  a 
stop  to  all  the  expenses  which  I  see  you  make  for  me,  I 
have  made  up  my  mind  to  be  married  quickly  to  you. 
That  is  the  real  secret ;  and  all  these  things  finish  with 
marriage. 

DOR.  Ah !  Madam,  is  it  possible  that  you  can  have 
taken  such  a  sweet  resolution  for  my  sake  ? 

DORI.  It  is  only  to  prevent  you  from  ruining  yourself; 
and  without  this,  I  see  plainly,  that,  before  long,  you  will 
not  possess  a  penny. 

DOR.  How  obliged  I  am  to  you,  Madam,  for  the  care 
which  you  take  to  preserve  my  estate!  It  is  entirely 
yours,  as  well  as  my  heart,  and  you  shall  do  with  it  as  you 
please. 

DORI.  I  shall  use  them  both  well.  But  here  comes  your 
man ;  he  has  a  nice  figure. 

53  In  the  original  void  jvstement  le  reste  de  noire  ecu,  "  here  is  just  the 
remainder  of  our  crown,"  meaning  "  this  completes  our  misfortune.'1 

SCENE  iv.]        THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  26? 

SCENE  III.  — M.  JOURDAIN,  DORIMENE,  DORANTE. 

DOR.  We  come  to  do  homage,  Sir,  this  lady  and  my- 
self, to  your  new  dignity,  and  to  rejoice  with  you  about 
the  marriage  of  your  daughter  with  the  son  of  the  Grand 
Turk. 

M.  JOUR.  (After  having  bowed  in  the  Turkish  fashion}. 
Sir,  I  wish  you  the  strength  of  the  serpent  and  the  cun- 
ning of  the  lion. 

DORI.  I  am  very  glad  to  be  among  the  first,  Sir,  to 
come  to  congratulate  you  upon  the  high  degree  of  honour 
which  you  have  reached. 

M.  JOUR.  Madam,  I  wish  you  all  the  year  your  rose- 
tree  in  flower.  I  am  infinitely  obliged  to  you  for  taking 
an  interest  in  the  honours  that  have  come  to  me ;  and  I 
have  much  joy  in  seeing  you  returned  here,  in  order  to 
tender  you  my  humble  excuses  for  the  foolish  behaviour 
of  my  wife. 

DORI.  Do  not  mention  it ;  I  can  excuse  this  kind  of 
feeling  in  her :  your  heart  must  be  precious  to  her  ;  and 
it  is  not  at  all  strange  that  the  possession  of  a  man  like 
you  must  inspire  her  with  some  alarm. 

M.  JOUR.  The  possession  of  my  heart  is  a  thing  which 
you  have  entirely  acquired. 

DOR.  You  see,  Madam,  that  M.  Jourdain  is  not  one  of 
those  people  who  are  blinded  by  prosperity,  and  that  even 
in  his  greatness,  he  knows  to  value  his  friends. 

DORI.  It  is  the  sign  of  a  perfectly  generous  heart. 

DOR.  But  where  is  his  Turkish  Highness?  As  your 
friends  we  should  like  to  pay  our  respects  to  him. 

M.  JOUR.  Here  he  comes ;  and  I  have  sent  for  my 
daughter  to  give  him  her  hand. 

SCENE  IV. — M.  JOURDAIN,  DORIMENE,  DORANTE, 
CLEONTE,  dressed  as  a  Turk. 

DOR.  (To  Cleonte).  Sir,  we  have  come  to  pay  our  com- 
pliments to  your  Highness,  as  friends  of  this  gentleman, 
your  father-in-law,  and  to  assure  you  respectfully  of  our 
humble  devotion. 

M.  JOUR.  Where  is  the  dragoman,  to  tell  him  who  you 
are,  and  to  make  him  understand  what  you  say  ?  You 

268  THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  v. 

shall  see  how  he  answers  you  ;  he  speaks  Turkish  marvel- 
lously. {To  Cleonte).  Hullo  !  where  the  deuce  is  he  gone 
to  ?  Strouf,  strif,  strof,  straf.  This  gentleman  is  grande 
segnore,  grande  segnore,  grande  segnore,  and  this  lady,  a 
granda  dama,  granda  dama.  (Seeing  that  he  cannot  make 
himself  understood}.  This  gentleman,  he,  French  mama- 
mouchi,  and  Madam,  French  female  mamamouchi.  I 
cannot  speak  more  clearly.  Good  !  here  comes  the  inter- 
preter. 

SCENE  V. — M.  JOURDAIN,  DORIMENE,  DORANTE,  CLEONTE 
dressed  as  a  Turk,  COVIELLE,  disguised. 

M.  JOUR.  Where  have  you  been  ?  We  do  not  know 
how  to  say  anything  without  you.  (Pointing  to  Cleonte). 
Just  say  this  lady  and  gentleman  are  people  of  quality, 
who  have  come  to  pay  their  respects  to  him,  as  my  friends, 
and  to  assure  him  of  their  devotion.  (To  Dorimene  and 
Dorante).  You  shall  see  how  he  will  answer.. 

Cov.   Alabala  crociam  acci  boram  alabamen. 

CLE.   Catalequi  tubal  ourin  soter  amalcwchan. 

M.  JOUR.   {To  Dorimene  and  Dot  ante).  Do  you  see? 

Cov.  He  says,  may  the  rain  of  prosperity  at  all  times 
water  the  garden  of  your  family. 

M.  JOUR.  I  told  you  well  enough  that  he  speaks 
Turkish. 

SCENE  VI. — LUCILE,  CLEONTE,  M.  JOURDAIN,  DORIMENE, 
DORANTE,  COVIELLE. 

M.  JOUR.  Come,  daughter,  draw  near,  and  give  your 
hand  to  this  gentleman,  who  does  you  the  honour  of 
asking  you  in  marriage. 

Luc.  How  now,  father,  how  you  are  dressed  out.  Is  it 
a  comedy  you  are  playing  ? 

M.  JOUR.  No,  it  is  not  a  comedy  ;  it  is  a  very  serious 
affair ;  one  as  full  of  honour  for  you  as  you  could  wish. 
(Pointing  to  Cleonte).  This  is  the  husband  whom  I  give 
you. 

Luc.  To  me,  father  ! 

M.  JOUR.  Yes,  to  you.  Come,  give  him  your  hand ; 
and  thank  Heaven  for  your  good  fortune. 

SCENE  vii.]       THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE  NOBLEMAN.  269 

Luc.  I  do  not  wish  to  marry. 

M.  JOUR.  But  I  wish  it,  I,  your  father. 

Luc.  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah  !  what  noise  !  Come,  I  tell  you.  Here, 
your  hand. 

Luc.  No,  father ;  I  have  told  you  there  is  no  power 
which  shall  force  me  to  take  another  husband  than 
Cleonte,  and  I  would  sooner  resolve  to  every  extremity 
than  to  .  .  .  {Recognising  Cleonte).  It  is  true  you  are  my 
father,  I  owe  you  entire  obedience ;  and  it  is  for  you  to 
dispose  of  me  according  to  your  will. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah !  I  am  delighted  to  find  you  so  promptly 
returned  to  your  duty ;  and  it  pleases  me  much  to  have 
a  daughter  so  obedient. 

SCENE  VII. — MRS.  JOURDAIN,   CLEONTE,  M.  JOURDAIN, 

LUCILE,   DORANTE,  DoRIMENE,  COVIELLE. 

MRS.  JOUR.  How  now  ?  What  is  all  this  ?  They  say 
that  you  wish  to  give  your  daughter  in  marriage  to  a 
mummer.54 

M.  JOUR.  Will  you  hold  your  tongue,  you  impertinent 
woman?  You  are  always  coming  to  mix  your  extra- 
vagances in  everything;  there  is  no  possibility  of  teaching 
you  to  be  reasonable. 

MRS.  JOUR.  It  is  you  whom  there  is  no  teaching  to  be 
sensible,  and  you  go  from  one  folly  to  another.  What  is 
your  intention?  What  do  you  mean  to  do  with  all  this 
company? 

M.  JOUR.  I  wish  to  marry  our  daughter  to  the  son  of 
the  Grand  Turk. 

MRS.  JOUR.  To  the  son  of  the  Grand  Turk  ? 

M.  JOUR.  {Pointing  to  Covielle).  Yes,  pay  him  your 
respects  through  the  dragoman,  whom  you  see  there. 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  dragoman ; 
and  I  will  tell  him  well  enough  myself,  and  to  his  face, 
that  he  shall  not  have  my  daughter. 

M.  JOUR.  Once  more,  will  you  hold  your  tongue? 

DOR.  What,  Mrs.  Jourdain,  you  oppose  yourself  to  an 

u  The  original  has  careme-'prenant.     See  page  227,  note  18. 

2/0  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  v 

honour  like  this?  You  refuse  his  Turkish  Highness  for 
a  son-in-law. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Good  Heavens  !  Sir,  concern  yourself  with 
your  own  affairs. 

DORIM.  It  is  a  great  honour,  which  you  should  not 
reject. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Madam,  I  also  beg  of  you  not  to  trouble 
yourself  with  what  does  not  concern  you. 

DOR.  It  is  the  friendship  we  have  for  you  which  makes 
us  take  an  interest  in  your  prosperity. 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  will  willingly  dispense  with  your  friend- 
ship. 

M.  JOUR.  Here  is  your  daughter  who  consents  to  the 
wishes  of  her  father. 

MRS.  JOUR.   My  daughter  consents  to  marry  a  Turk? 

DOR.   Undoubtedly. 

MRS.  JOUR.  She  can  forget  Cleonte  ? 

DOR.  What  does  one  not  do  to  become  a  grand  lady? 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  would  strangle  her  with  my  own  hands  if 
she  played  a  trick  like  that. 

M.  JOUR".  There  is  a  lot  of  cackle  !  I  tell  you  that 
this  marriage  shall  take  place. 

MRS.  JOUR.  And  I  tell  you  that  it  shall  not  take  place. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah  !  what  noise  ! 

Luc.  Mother  ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  Go,  you  are  a  jade. 

M.  JOUR.  {To  Mrs.  Jourdain).  What!  you  quarrel  with 
her  for  obeying  me  ! 

MRS.  JOUR.  Yes  !  she  belongs  to  me  as  well  as  to 
you. 

Cov.  (To  Mrs.  Jourdain).     Madam! 

MRS.  JOUR.  What  do  you  wish  with  me,  you  ? 

Cov.  One  word. 

MRS.  JOURDAIN.  I  do  not  wish  your  one  word. 

Cov.  (To  M.  Jourdain).  Sir,  if  she  will  but  listen  to 
one  word  in  private,  I  promise  you  to  make  her  consent 
to  your  wishes. 

MRS.  JOUR.  No. 

M.  JOUR.  (To  Mrs.  Jourdain).     Hear  him. 

MRS.  JOUR.  No,  I  shall  not  hear  him. 

M.  JOUR.  He  will  tell  you  .    .    . 

SCBNBVII.I      THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  271 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  do  not  wish  you  to  tell  me  anything. 

M.  JOUR.  Look  at  the  great  obstinacy  of  the  woman  ! 
Will  it  do  you  any  harm  to  listen  ? 

Cov.  Do  but  hear  me,  afterwards  you  shall  do  as  you 
please. 

MRS.  JOUR.  Very  well  !     What  ? 

Cov.  (In  a  whisper  to  Mrs.  Jourdairi).  For  the  last 
hour  we  have  been  making  signals  to  you.  Do  not  you 
see  that  all  this  is  done  to  accommodate  ourselves  to  the 
fancies  of  your  husband  ;  that  we  are  deceiving  him  under 
this  disguise ;  and  that  it  is  Cl6onte  himself  who  is  the  son 
of  the  Grand  Turk  ?  .  .  . 

M.  JOUR.   (In  a  whisper  to  Covielle].     Ah  !  ah  ! 

Cov.  (In  a  whisper  to  Mrs.  Jourdairi).  And  that  it  is 
I,  Covielle,  who  am  the  dragoman? 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper  to  Covielle}.  In  that  case  I 
surrender. 

Cov.  (In  a  whisper  to  Mrs.  Jourdairi].  Pretend  to 
know  nothing  of  the  matter. 

MRS.  JOUR.  (Aloud}.  Yes,  it  is  all  over.  I  consent  to 
the  match. 

M.  JOUR.  Ah  !  Every  one  becomes  reasonable.  (To 
Mrs.  Jourdairi).  You  would  not  hear  him.  I  know  well 
enough  that  he  would  explain  to  you  what  the  son  of  the 
Grand  Turk  was. 

MRS.  JOUR.  He  has  explained  it  to  me  properly,  and  I 
am  satisfied  with  it.  Let  us  send  for  the  notary. 

DOR.  That  is  well  said.  And  so  that  you  may  have 
your  mind  altogether  at  ease,  Mrs.  Jourdain,  and  may 
do  away  from  this  day  with  all  the  jealousy  that  you 
may  have  conceived  about  your  husband,  this  lady,  and 
I,  we  will  make  use  of  the  same  notary  to  get  mar- 
ried. 

MRS.  JOUR.  I  also  consent  to  this. 

M.  JOUR.  (In  a  whisper  to  Dorante).  It  is  to  hood- 
wink her. 

DOR.  (In  a  whisper  to  M.  Jourdairi).  We  must  amuse 
her  with  this  feint. 

M.  JOUR.  Good,  good.  (Aloud}.  Let  them  go  and 
fetch  the  notary. 

DOR.  In  the  meantime,  while  he  is  coming,  and  draws 

272  THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  [ACT  v. 

up  the  contracts,  let  us  see  our  ballet,  and  let  us  give  the 
entertainment  to  his  Turkish  Highness. 

M.  JOUR.  Well  thought  of.  Let  us  go  and  take  our 
seats. 

MRS.  JOUR.  And  Nicole. 

M.  JOUR.  I  give  her  to  the  dragoman,  and  my  wife  to 
whosoever  will  take  her. 

Cov.  Sir,  I  am  obliged  to  you.  (Aside).  If  it  be  possi- 
ble to  find  a  bigger  fool,  I  will  go  and  publish  it  in 
Rome.  (The  comedy  finishes  by  a  ballet,  which  had  been 
prepared}. 

BALLET  OF  THE  NATIONS. 

FIRST    ENTRY. 

(A  man  comes  to  hand  round  the  books  of  the  ballet,  who 
immediately  is  worried  by  a  multitude  of  people  of  different 
provinces,  who  cry  to  have  some  music,  and  by  three  trouble- 
some fellows,  who  are  dogging  his  footsteps. .) 

DIALOGUE    OF   THE   PEOPLE, 

Who  ask  books  to  the  accompaniment  of  music. 

ALL.  To  me,  Sir,  to  me  pray,  to  me,  Sir ;  a  book,  if 
you  please,  to  your  humble  servant. 

A  FASHIONABLE  GENTLEMAN.55  Distinguish  us,  Sir, 
from  amongst  the  folks  that  shout :  Some  books  here,  the 
ladies  beg  of  you. 

ANOTHER.  Hullo  !  Sir,  Sir,  have  the  kindness  to  throw 
some  to  our  side. 

A  FASHIONABLE  LADY.  Good  Heavens !  how  little 
honour  is  paid  to  people  of  importance  in  this  house  ! 

ANOTHER.  They  have  no  books  or  seats,  except  for 
grisettes* 

A  GASCON."  Ah !  you  man  with  the  books,  just  give 
me  some.  My  lungs  are  already  tired  out.  Do  not  you 

65  In  the  original,  homme  du  bel  air. 

88  This  word  was  used,  in  Moliere's  time,  to  designate  "  citizen's  daugh- 
ters." 

57  The  Gascons  speak  in  their  dialect,  which  consists  chiefly  of  using  a  b 
for  a  v,  as  libres  for  livres,  bovs  for  vous,  boyez  for  voyez,  and  also  using  z» 
for  b,  as  varon  for  baron;  they  also  accent  all  e's  asj'e,  que,  me. 

THE   CITIZEN   WHO   APES   THE   NOBLEMAN.  273 

see  that  everyone  laughs  at  me,  and  that  I  am  scandalized 
to  see  in  the  hands  of  the  rabble  what  is  being  refused  to 
me  by  you. 

ANOTHER.  He  !  zounds,  you  sir,  consider  who  one  may 
be.  A  book,  I  pray  you,  for  the  Baron  of  Asvarat.  Upon 
my  word,  I  think  that  the  coxcomb  has  not  the  honour 
of  knowing  me. 

A  Swiss.  You,  mister  giver  away  of  paper,58  what  means 
this  way  of  acting ;  I  am  crying  my  very  throat  to  pieces, 
without  being  able  to  obtain  a  book.  Upon  my  word, 
you  Sir,  I  think  that  you  are  drunk. 

AN  OLD  CHATTERING  CITIZEN.  Of  all  this,  plainly 
speaking,  I  am  very  ill-satisfied ;  and  it  is  far  from  nice 
that  our  daughter,  so  well-made  and  so  pretty,  the  object 
of  so  many  lovers,  should  not  have,  according  to  her 
wish,  a  book  of  the  ballet,  to  read  up  the  subject  of  the 
entertainment  about  to  be  given ;  and  that  all  our  family 
should  so  stylish  have  dressed  themselves  to  be  placed  at 
the  top  of  the  hall  where  the  interlopers59  are  generally 
placed.  Of  all  this,  plainly  speaking,  I  am  very  ill-satis- 
fied, and  it  is  far  from  nice. 

OLD  CHATTERING  FEMALE  CITIZEN.  It  is  quite  true,  it 
is  a  shame ;  the  blood  rushes  to  my  face  ;  and  this  poe- 
taster, who  overlooks  the  principals,  understands  his  busi- 
ness very  badly.  He  is  a  brute — no  better  than  a  horse — 
a  downright  animal,  to  take  so  little  notice  of  a  girl  who 
is  the  principal  ornament  of  the  neighbourhood  of  the 
Palais-Royal,  and  with  whom,  only  a  few  days  ago,  a 
count  opened  the  ball.  He  understands  his  business 
badly ;  he  is  a  brute — no  better  than  a  horse — a  down- 
right animal. 

FOPS,  MALE  AND  FEMALE,  TOGETHER.  Ah !  what  a 
noise !  what  a'  row  !  what  chaos !  what  a  medley  !  what 
confusion  !  what  strange  uproar !  what  disorder !  what 
tumult !  One  is  being  dried  up  here.  One  can  no 
longer  bear  it. 

GASCON.  Zounds  !  I  am  entirely  yours. 

58  The  Swiss  uses  his  dialect,  of  which  we  give  the  two  first  lines : 
"  Morisiur  le  donneur  de  papieir,  que  veul  dire  stifafon  defifre?' 

69  The  original  has  les  gens  de  I'entrignet,  of  which  the  meaning  is  only 
conjectural. 

VOL.  III.  S 

274  THE  CITIZEN  WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN. 

ANOTHER.  I  am  bursting  with  rage,  hang  it ! 

Swiss.  Ah  !  how  hot  it  is  in  this  room  ! 

GASCON.  I  am  choking ! 

ANOTHER.  I  am  losing  my  breath  ! 

Swiss.  Upon  my  word,  I  would  like  to  be  outside. 

OLD  CHATTERING  CITIZEN.  Come,  my  dear,  follow  my 
steps  I  pray  you,  and  do  not  leave  me.  They  take  too 
little  notice  of  us ;  and  I  am  tired  of  this  tumult.  All 
this  row,  this  confusion,  is  too  much  for  me.  If  ever  the 
inclination  takes  me  to  return,  any  day  of  my  life,  to 
comedy  or  ballet,  I  hope  they  may  maim  me.  Come,  my 
dear,  follow  my  steps,  I  pray  you,  do  not  leave  me ;  and 
they  take  too  little  notice  of  us. 

Old  Chattering  Female  Citizen.  Come  along  my  pet, 
my  son,  let  us  get  back  to  our  domicile.  And  let  us  de- 
part from  this  hole  where  one  cannot  sit  down.  They  will 
be  astonished  enough  when  they'll  find  us  gone.  Too 
much  confusion  reigns  in  this  room  ;  and  I  would  sooner 
be  in  the  midst  of  the  market.  If  ever  I  come  back  to  a 
similar  feast,  I  will  allow  them  to  slap  my  face  half-a-dozen 
times.  Come  along,  my  pet,  my  son,  let  us  go  back  to 
our  domicile,  and  depart  from  this  hole  where  one  cannot 
sit  down. 

ALL.  To  me,  Sir,  to  me,  pray,  to  me,  Sir ;  a  book  it 
you  please,  to  your  humble  servant. 

SECOND    ENTRY. 

The  three  troublesome  fellows  dance. 

THIRD    ENTRY. 

{Three  Spaniards  singing).  m 

I  know  that  I  am  dying  with  love,  and  I  court  grief. 
Though  dying  with  desire,  I  fade  with  so  much  grace,  that 
what  I  desire  to  suffer  is  more  than  what  I  suffer ;  and  the 
severity  of  my  grief  does  not  exceed  my  desire  for  it.  I 
know,  &c.,  &c. 

Fate  treats  me  with  so  forbearing  a  pity,  that  it  assures 
me  life  in  the  danger  of  death.  To  live  of  so  terrible  a 

*°  The  original  is  in  Spanish. 

THE  CITIZEN   WHO   APES  THE   NOBLEMAN.  275 

stroke  is  the  prodigy  of  my  deliverance.  I  know,  &c., 
&c.  {Eight  Spaniards  dance. 

IST  SPANIARD.  (Singing).  Ah  !  how  foolish  to  com- 
plain of  love,  so  harshly !  of  the  little  boy  who  is  gentle- 
ness itself  !  Ah !  what  folly !  ah  !  what  folly  ! 

2D  Spaniard.  (Singing).  Grief  torments  hkn  who  aban- 
dons himself  to  grief;  and  no  one  dies  of  love,  unless  it 
is  the  one  who  does  not  know  how  to  love. 

BOTH  SPANIARDS.  To  die  of  love  is  sweet  when  one  is 
repaid;  and  if  we  enjoy  it  to-day,  why  will  you  trouble 
death  ? 

IST  SPANIARD.  (Singing).  Let  the  lover  rejoice  and 
take  my  advice ;  for  when  one  desires,  everything  is  to  find 
the  means. 

THE  THREE  TOGETHER.  Come,  let  us  have  feasting  and 
dancing.  Let  us  be  gay  gay,  gay :  grief  is  nothing  but  a 
fancy. 

FOURTH  ENTKY — ITALIANS. 

An  Italian  female  musician  sings  the  first  recital  in  the 
following  words. 

Having61  armed  my  breast  with  sternness,  I  revolted 
against  Cupid ;  but  I  was  conquered,  with  the  swiftness  of 
lightning,  by  looking  at  two  fair  eyes.  Ah  !  how  little 
can  a  heart  of  ice  resist  a  dart  of  fire  ! 

My  torture  is,  however,  so  dear  to  me,  and  my  wound 
so  sweet,  that  my  pain  causes  me  to  be  happy,  and  that  to 
cure  me  would  be  tyranny.  Ah !  the  more  violent  the 
love,  the  more  charms  has  it  and  causes  the  more 
pleasure. 

After  the  musician  has  sung  this  air,  two  Scaramouches, 
two  Trivelins,  and  a  Harlequin,  represent,  in  the  Italian 
manner,  to  the  accompaniment  of  music,  night  to  be  falling. .M 
An  Italian  musician  joins  the  female  musician,  and  sings 
with  her  the  following  words : — 

MUSICIANS.  The  glorious  time  which  is  flying  past,  takes 

61  The  original  is  in  Italian. 

62  The  falling  night  was  represented  by  the  actors  wrapping  themselves 
in  dark  cloaks,  passing  slowly  across  the  stage,  keeping  time  to  slow  music. 

276  THE  CITIZEN   WHO  APES   THE   NOBLEMAN. 

also  our  pleasures  away ;  in  the  school  of  love  one  must 
profit  by  the  opportunity. 

FEMALE  MUSICIAN.  As  long  as  our  blooming  age  smiles 
upon  us,  which,  alas,  too  promptly  leaves  us. 

BOTH.  Let  us  sing,  let  us  enjoy  ourselves  in  the  beauti- 
ful days  of  our  youth  ;  a  thing  lost  is  never  recovered. 

FEMALE  MUSICIAN.  A  fair  eye  enchains  many  hearts; 
its  wounds  are  sweet ;  the  pain  it  causes  is  happiness. 

FEMALE.  But  when  icy  old  age  comes,  the  stagnant 
heart  has  no  longer  any  fire. 

BOTH.  Therefore  let  us  sing  and  enjoy  ourselves  in  the 
beautiful  days  of  our  youth ;  a  good  thing  lost  is  never 
recovered. 

After  the  Italian  dialogues,  the  Scaramouches  and  Trive- 
Uns  perform  a  merry  dance. 

FIFTH  ENTRY- — FRENCH. 

Two  Musicians  from  Poitou  dance  and  sing  the 
following  words : — 

FIRST  MINUET.  Ah  !  how  beautiful  it  is  in  these  groves, 
what  a  glorious  day  does  Heaven  send  us. 

ANOTHER  MUSICIAN.  The  nightingale,  beneath  this  ver- 
dant foliage,  warbles  to  the  echoes  the  song  of  his  sweet 
return.  This  beauteous  spot,  these  glorious  woods,  this 
beauteous  spot  invites  us  to  love. 

SECOND  MINUET.  (Both  together).  Behold,  dear  Climene, 
'neath  this  old  oak,  these  love-sick  birds  cooing.  Nothing 
obstructs  them  in  their  desires ;  their  hearts  are  filled  with 
their  sweet  flames ;  how  happy  they  are  !  We  both  might 
likewise,  if  you  so  wish  it,  be  as  happy  as  they. 

Six  other  Frenchmen  come  afterwards,  beautifully  dressed 
in  the  Poitou  costume,  three  men  and  three  women,  accompa- 
nied by  eight  flutes  and  hautboys,  and  dance  some  minuets. 

SIXTH   ENTRY. 

The  whole  finishes  up  by  a  medley  of  the  three  nations,  and 
the  applause  expressed  in  dancing  and  music  by  the  whole  of 
the  spectators  on  the  scene,  who  sing  the  following  two 
verses  : — 

What  charming  spectacle,  what  pleasures  are  we  enjoying, 
The  gods  themselves  have  none  so  sweet  as  these. 

PSYCHE. 

TRAGEDIE-  BALLET. 

PSYCHE. 

A   TRAGEDY-BALLET  IN   FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  Iff  VERSE.) 

JANUARY  lyxa,  1671. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

SINCE  the  death  of  Cardinal  Mazarin,  representations  of  operas  were  no 
longer  in  vogue ;  and  in  the  beginning  of  Louis  XIV.'s  reign,  it  was 
thought  that  no  audience  could  endure  music  for  three  hours.  Tragedies 
were  attempted,  with  songs  and  dances  in  the  interludes  ;  but  Lulli  and 
Quinault  first  snowed  that  all  emotions  could  be  expressed  by  music.  In 
1670,  the  King  wished  a  play  to  be  written,  in  which  tragedy,  music,  and 
splendid  stage-display  should  be  united,  and  Moliire  was  entrusted  with 
the  composition  of  it.  In  the  preface  of  the  bookseller  to  the  reader, 
we  see  what  share  he  had  in  Psyche — for  so  was  the  tragedy  called — and 
what  the  great  poet  Pierre  Corneille,  then  sixty-five  years  old,  wrote  of 
it.  All  the  words  that  were  sung  were  written  by  Quinault,  and  the 
music  was  by  Lulli.  Psyche  was  first  represented  at  the  Tuileries,  on  the 
lyth  of  January  1671,  before  Louis  XIV.,  the  Dauphin,  Monsieur, 
Mademoiselle  d'Orleans,  and  the  whole  court,  and  was  afterwards  re- 
peated several  times  before  the  same  high-born  audience.  It  ,was  acted, 
with  somewhat  diminished  splendour,  in  the  theatre  of  the  Palais-Royal, 
on  the  24th  of  July  of  the  same  year,  and  had  thirty-eight  consecutive 
representations. 

The  first  idea  of  Psyche  is  to  be  found  in  The  Golden  Ass,  a  romance  of 
the  second  century  of  the  Christian  era,  written  in  Latin,  by  Apuleius,  a 
Greek.  An  old  woman  relates  the  following  story  to  a  young  damsel, 
who  is  a  prisoner  of  "  savage  robbers."  It  is  in  the  fifth  episode  of  the 
fourth,  fifth,  and  sixth  books,  and  is  called  Cupid  and  Psyche.  We  give 
it  in  an  abbreviated  form  : — 

"  Once  upon  a  time,  in  a  certain  city,  there  lived  a  king  and  a  queen,  and  they 
had  three  fair  daughters.  The  transcendent  loveliness  of  the  younger  baffled  the 
power  of  human  language,  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  country  worshipped  her,  as  if 
she  had  been  Venus  herself.  This  incensed  the  Goddess,  and  she  sent  for  her 
winged  son  Cupid,  and  implored  him  to  punish  the  contumacious  beauty,  and  to 
inspire  her  heart  with  ardent  love  for  a  miserable  grovelling  outcast.  Psyche,  in 
spite  of  her  matchless  loveliness,  found  no  suitors,  and  her  father,  suspicious  of  the 
enmity  of  the  Celestials,  consulted  the  ancient  oracle  of  Apollo,  which  said  that  the 
maid  should  be  left  on  a  rock,  in  bridal  dress  arrayed,  to  find  as  bridegroom  'a 
wicked,  cruel,  viperous  elf.'  She  proceeded  to  the  lofty  rock,  and  was  left  there. 
Suddenly  the  mild  breath  of  Zepnvrus  blew  a  gentle  breeze,  and,  tenderly  lifting 
her  adown  the  mountain  height,  laia  her  in  the  flowery  lap  of  the  valley  below, 
where  there  was  a  spacious,  extensive  palace,  not  formed  by  human  hands,  wherein 
she  entered,  and  was  waited  upon  by  invisible  beings,  and  entertained  with  songs 
and  music  by  invisible  musicians.  Psyche  had  retired  to  rest,  when,  at  the  dead 

280  PSYCHE. 

of  night  a  gentle  murmuring  sound  fell  upon  her  ears.  Before  the  dawn  of  day, 
the  invisible  spouse  of  Psyche  had  left  her  and  fled  far  away,  and  the  voices  as  be- 
fore came  to  render  homage  to  their  mistress,  and  hail  the  new-made  bride.  By 
dint  of  supplications  and  remonstrances  she  obtained  permission  from  her  husband 

wjjO  remained  always  invisible — to  see  her  sisters,  but  he  strictly  enjoined  her  to 

keep  the  invisibility  of  his  form  a  profound  secret.  The  sisters  came,  and  Psyche 
gave  them  valuable  presents,  which  only  made  them  very  envious.  At  last  they 
pressed  her  so  often,  that  she  betrayed  her  husband's  secret.  They  then  told  her 
that  her  own  life  was  in  danger,  that  her  husband  was  a  serpent,  and  advised  her  to 
hide  a  lamp  and  sharp  knife,  and  when  he  was  asleep,  completely  to  cut  off  his  head. 
Now  when  her  husband  came,  and  was  overwhelmed  with  sound  sleep,  Psyche 
arose,  intending  to  fulfil  her  purpose,  but  the  rays  of  the  light  showed  that  her 
spouse  was  no  other  than  the  beautiful  God  of  love,  Cupid  himself.  She  stood  en- 
tranced when  a  drop  of  scalding  oil  spirted  on  Cupid's  right  shoulder.  Up  sprang 
the  scalded  deity,  and  in  spite  of  Psyche's  repeated  entreaties,  immediately  flew 
away  She  wished  to  drown  herself;  but  the  gentle  river  tossed  her  unhurt  and 
safe  upon  a  tuft  of  green  grass.  The  forlorn  young  wife  was  wandering  all  over  the 
country,  in  search  of  her  recreant  husband ;  her  two  sisters,  as  a  reward  for  their 
perfidy,  had  been  dashed  to  death  against  the  rocks.  Her  prayers  to  Ceres  and 
Juno  to  grant  her  assistance  were  ineffectual,  as  these  goddesses  did  not  like  to 
offend  Venus,  who  was  incensed  against  her,  because  Cupid  had  fallen  in  love  with 
Psyche,  instead  of  avenging  his  mother.  At  last  the  wretched  young  wife  falls  into 
Venus's  hands,  who  immediately  flew  violently  upon  her,  and,  rending  open  the 
bosom  of  her  dress,  and  tearing  her  clothes  in  a  great  many  places,  shook  her  by 
the  head,  pulled  out  her  hair  by  the  roots,  and  otherwise  grievously  ill-used  her. 
Then  she  commanded  her  to  separate  an  enormous  heap  of  mixed  seeds  of  wheat, 
barley,  millet,  poppy,  vetches,  lentils,  and  beans,  in  which  she  is  assisted  by  ants 
who  perform  the  task  for  her.  Another  day  Venus  told  her  to  fetch  some  wool  of  a 
flock  of  savage  sheep,  grazing  on  the  brink  of  whirling  eddies.  A  benevolent  reed 
showed  her  a  grove,  where,  on  the  branches  of  the  bushes,  she  found  the  golden 
wool  which  she  needed.  Another  day  she  is  sent  with  a  crystal  flagon  to  fill  it 
with  icy  water  of  the  highest  spring,  on  the  topmost  summit  of  craggy  and  distant 
mountains.  An  eagle  came,  seized  the  flagon  in  its  beak,  and  flapping  its  pinions 
as  it  steered  its  course,  had  it  filled,  and  returned  with  it  to  Psyche.  Then  Venus 
sent  her  with  a  box  to  Proserpine,  in  the  deadly  abode  of  Pluto,  to  request  some  of 
the  beauty  of  the  goddess  of  the  infernal  regions,  were  it  only  sufficient  to  last  a 
short  winter's  day.  She  started  with  two  barley-cakes  and  two  pieces  of  money; 
the  cakes  to  be  given  to  Cerberus,  the  coins  to  Charon,  and  finally  returns  to  the 
bright  light  of  day  with  the  box  which  Proserpine  had  given  her.  But  irresistible 
curiosity  seized  her.  See  wished  to  take  to  herself  a  morsel  of  divine  beauty,  were 
it  only  for  the  sake  of  fascinating  her  own  beautiful  lover.  She  opened  the  box, 
from  which  immediately  arose  an  infernal,  somniferous,  truly  Stygian  vapour, 
which  made  her  fall  down  with  limbs  collapsed,  and  motionless  as  a  corpse.  But 
Cupid,  who  had  recovered  from  the  effects  of  his  burn,  flew  away  from  his  mother's 
palace,  and  cutting  through  the  air  with  more  than  ordinary  rapidity,  very  soon 
reached  Psyche,  whom  he  relieved  from  the  obnoxious  vapour  ;  thence  darted  to  the 
abode  of  Jupiter,  before  whom  he  pleaded  the  pardon  of  Psyche  submissively. 
The  father  of  gods  and  men  granted  it,  saying  :  The  good  service  that  I  render 
thee  now  thou  mayest  one  day  requite,  if  peradventure  a  maiden  of  more  than  com- 
mon beauty  chance  to  fall  in  thy  way.  He  then  ordered  Mercury  to  find  Psyche, 
and  bring  her  up  to  Heaven,  gave  her  a  cup  of  ambrosia,  to  make  her  immortal, 
affianced  Cupid  to  her,  and  in  due  time  she  was  brought  to  bed  of  a  daughter, 
whom  we  call  Pleasure." 

It  is  clear  that  Apuleius,  in  this  fable,  wished  to  represent  allegorically 
the  career  of  the  human  soul,  through  scenes  of  mortal  tribulation,  to  a 
state  of  celestial  beatitude  after  death.  But  he  also  desired  to  teach,  I 
suppose,  that  we,  mortals,  ought  not  to  endeavour  to  fathom  the  mystery  of 
happiness  :  that  we  should  not  scrutinize  too  much  men's  actions,  but  ac- 
cept with  gratitudy  that  which  the  gods  in  their  wisdom  have  provided  for 
us! 

In  the  thirteenth  century,  Denys  Piramus,  the  author  of  Partcnopeus  of 
Blots,  treated  the  story  of  Psyche  from  a  chivalric  point  of  view.  The 

PSYCHE.  28l 

Spanish  dramatist  Calderon  composed  on  the  same  subject  an  auto  sacra- 
mentale,  in  which  Eros  represents  the  Saviour,  Psyche  the  soul  of  the 
faithful  aspiring  to  go  to  Him,  and  the  marriage  of  the  two  lovers  the 
union  of  God  and  man  in  the  Eucharist.  That  great  painter  Raphael  has 
also  immortalized  the  Greek  story  by  a  series  of  twelve  pictures,  and  by 
thirty-two  drawings,  which  have  been  engraved. 

La  Fontaine  published  in  1669  his  tale,  The  Loves  of  Psyche  and  Cupid; 
and  among  the  three  friends  to  whom  the  author  pretends  that  he  read  his 
work,  one  of  them,  Gelaste,  who  is  said  to  stand  for  Moliere,  defends 
laughter  and  comedy  against  tragedy. 

Moliere  had  already  sketched  the  plan  of  his  play,  written  the  Pro- 
logue, the  first  Act,  and  the  first  Scene  of  the  second  and  third  Acts, 
when  Louis  XIV.  expressed  his  will  to  have  Psyche  finished  before  Lent 
Moliere,  therefore,  took  Pierre  Corneille,  then  sixty -five  years  old,  to  as- 
sist him,  and  the  latter  wrote  the  other  scenes  in  a  fortnight.  Quinault 
wrote  the  words  of  the  songs ;  and  Lulli,  the  composer  of  the  music, 
added  the  Italian  verses  of  the  first  interlude. 

The  tragedie-ballet  Psyche  is  not  unworthy  of  the  illustrious  men  who 
had  a  hand  in  it.  The  grand  scene  of  the  second  Act  between  the  king 
and  his  daughter  is  generally  considered  very  heart-stirring ;  and  it  is  not 
impossible  that  Moliere  may  have  written  it  under  the  impression  of  some 
loss  which  he  deeply  felt.  Some  commentators  suppose  that  his  eldest 
son  died  about  this  time ;  but  this  is  impossible,  for  the  child  died  in  the 
same  year  in  which  he  was  born  (1664). l  The  appearance  of  the  two 
princes  in  the  infernal  regions  possesses  almost  a  Shakspearean  grandeur. 
Psyche,  declaring  her  love  to  Cupid,  is  one  of  the  most  tender  and 
natural  speeches  of  the  French  stage ;  and  as  a  whole,  everything  Cor- 
neille has  written  in  this  tragedy  bears  the  impress  of  his  lofty  genius,  and 
of  his  masterly  handling  of  verse. 

The  difference  between  the  influences  which  envy  works  in  the  charac- 
ters of  Psyche's  two  sisters,  Aglaura  and  Cydippe,  is  also  finely  delineated, 
and  reminds  one  of  the  brother  and  sister  of  Clarissa  Harlowe. 

The  author  of  the  pamphlet  Histoire  de  la  Guerin  (See  Introductory 
Notice  to  the  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  II.,)  says  that  Baron,  who  had 
quarrelled  with  Madame  Moliere  during  the  performance  of  Melicerte, 
(see  Introductory  Notice  to  Melicerte,  Vol.  I.,)  and  had  left  Moliere  and 
his  troupe,  made  his  re-appearance  as  Cupid  in  Psyche.  He  was  only 
eighteen  years  old ;  but  Moliere's  wife  is  rumoured  to  have  changed  her 
hatred  of  the  youthful  actor  into  a  feeling  of  warm  affection  and  love,  to 
which  Baron  is  accused  of  having  responded.  I  have  already  said  that 
the  scandalous  gossip  from  behind  the  wings  ought  hardly  to  deserve  any 
credence. 

In  1678,  seven  years  after  the  Psyche  of  Moliere  and  Corneille,  an 
opera  was  brought  out,  of  which  the  words  were  by  Fontenelle,  and  the 
music  by  Lulli.  It  was  only  a  transformation  of  the  original  play,  with 
the  classical  ending,  and  with  several  of  the  songs  of  the  old  tragedie- 
ballet. 

The  book  of  the  billet  of  Psyche  has,  by  some  commentators  of  Mo- 
li&re,  been  held  as  having  been  written  by  himself.  We  dare  not  decide 
that  question ;  but  we  do  not  print  it,  because  the  chief  difference  be- 
tween the  interludes  given  in  the  book,  and  those  as  produced  by  us,  is, 

1  Eud.Soulie,  Recherchts  sttr  Moiiiri. 

282  PSYCHE. 

that  in  the  first,  each  of  the  principal  divinities  only  declaims  a  recit, 
whilst  in  the  latter,  they  sing  also  a  song. 

Thomas  Heywood,  the  English  dramatist,  wrote  a  play,  Love ' s  Mis- 
tress ;  or,  the  Queen's  Masque,  which  was  published  in  1636.  The  second 
title  was  added  from  its  having  been  acted  at  court.  It  is  the  story  of 
Cupid  and  Psyche,  based  upon  Apuleius ;  and  Apuleius  himself  appears  as 
the  presenter,  and  explains  the  meaning  of  the  allegory,  as  it  goes  on,  to 
his  collocutor  Midas.  There  is  in  this  play  a  contention  between  Apollo 
and  Pan,  in  which  the  clown,  the  champion  of  the  latter  divinity,  sings  a 
song,  and  states  that  the  God  of  Verse  is  not  like  Pan,  nor  like  a  dripping- 
pan,  a  frying-pan,  a  pudding-pan,  or  a  warming-pan.  Midas,  who  is  the 
umpire  of  the  contest — probably  on  account  of  his  long  ears — adjudges 
the  victory  to  Pan,  whom  "  all  the  year  we  follow,  but  semel  in  anno  videt 
Apollo." 

Thomas  Shadwell  wrote  also  a  Psyche,  which  is  chiefly  taken  from  Mo- 
liere's  play  of  the  same  name,  with  some  additions.  It  was  brought  out  at 
the  theatre,  Dorset  Garden,  in  February  1673,  splendidiy  set  out  with 
new  scenes,  machinery,  dances,  and  costly  dresses,  and  was  very  success- 
ful. It  was  the  first  piece  Shadwell  wrote  in  verse  ;  hence,  says  Lang- 
baine,  "  most  of  the  Crambo-poets  were  up  in  arms  against  it." 

THE  BOOKSELLER  TO  THE  READER. 

THIS  work  was  not  all  done  by  one  hand,  M.  Quinault  wrote 
the  words  which  were  set  to  music,  except  the  Italian  com- 
plaint. M.  Moliere  drew  the  plan  of  the  piece,  and  regulated 
the  disposition,  in  which  he  regarded  beauty  and  pomp  of 
spectacle  more  than  exact  regularity.  As  for  the  versification, 
he  had  not  time  to  do  it.  The  Carnival  approached  ;  and  the 
pressing  orders  of  the  King,  who  wished  to  have  this  magnifi- 
cent entertainment  represented  several  times  before  Lent, 
obliged  him  to  allow  a  little  assistance.  Thus  only  the  pro- 
logue, the  first  act,  the  first  scene  of  the  second,  and  the  first 
of  the  third  acts  were  put  into  verse  by  him.  M.  Corneille 
employed  a  fortnight  on  the  rest ;  and,  by  these  means,  his 
Majesty  was  served,  in  the  time  he  commanded.* 

*  It  if  supposed  that  this  preface  of  the  bookseller  was  written  by  Moliere  him- 
self. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

JUPITER. 

VENUS. 
CUPID. 

ZEPHYR.3 

:i 

.  Graces. 
PHJENE, 

THE  KING,  father  to  Psyche. 
PSYCHE. 

AGLAURA,  1 

>  Psyche  s  sisters,. 
CYDIPPE,  J 

CLEOMENES,  ) 

>  in  love  with  Psyche. 
AGENOR,        ) 

LYCAS,  Captain  of  the  guards. 
A  RIVER  GOD. 
Two  SMALL  CUPIDS. 

•  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself;   and  small  as  it  was,  he 
managed  to  give  it  a  certain  individuality. 

PSYCHE. 

(PSYCH&.) 

PROLOGUE. 

The  scene  represents  in  front  of  the  stage  a  rustic  spot,  and 
at  the  back,  a  rock  with  an  opening  in  the  middle, 
through  which  the  sea  appears  in  the  distance. 

Flora  is  seen  in  the  midst  of  the  stage,  accompanied  by 

Vertumnus,  god  of  the  flowers  and  trees,  and  by  Palemon, 

god  of  the  streams.     Each  of  these  gods  conducts  a  troop  of 

divinities;  one  has  in  his  train  dryads  and  sy Ivans,  and  the 

other  river-gods  and  naiads. 

Flora  sings  the  following  lines  to  invite  Venus  to  descend  to 
the  earth : — 

War  has  ceased  ;  the  most  powerful  of  kings  interrupts 
his  exploits  to  give  peace  to  the  world.4  Descend,  mother 
of  Cupid,  come  and  bestow  upon  us  glorious  days. 

Vertumnus  and  Palemon,  with  the  divinities  by  which 
they  are  accompanied,  join  their  voices  to  that  of  Flora,  and 
sing  the  following  words  : — 

4  Peace  was  signed  at  Aix-la-Chapelle  on  the  ad  of  May  1668. 

287 

288  PSYCHE. 

Chorus  of  divinities  of  the  earth  and  the  streams,  com- 
posed of  Flora,  nymphs,  Palemon,  Vertumnus,  sy  Ivans, 
fauns,  dryads,  and  naiads. 

We  taste  profound  peace  ;  the  sweetest  games  are  here 
below.  We  owe  this  rest,  so  full  of  charms,  to  the  great- 
est king  in  the  world.  Descend,  mother  of  Cupid,  and 
bestow  upon  us  glorious  days. 

Then  follows  an  entry  of  the  ballet,  composed  of  two  dry- 
ads, four  sy  Ivans,  two  streams,  and  two  naiads;  after  which 
Vertumnus  and  Palemon  sing  the  following  dialogue  : — 

VER.  Surrender,  cruel  fair  ones,  it  is  now  your  turn  to 
sigh. 

PAL.  Behold  the  queen  of  beauty,  who  comes  to  inspire 
love. 

VER.  A  beauteous  object,  ever  severe,  can  never  be 
loved  well. 

PAL.  Beauty  may  be  first  to  please,  but  gentleness  ends 
by  charming. 

THE  TWO  TOGETHER.  Beauty  may  be  first  to  please,  but 
gentleness  ends  by  charming. 

VER.  Let  us  suffer  love  to  wound  us  ;  let  us  languish, 
since  we  must. 

PAL.  What  is  the  use  of  a  heart  without  tenderness  ? 
Can  there  be  a  greater  fault  ? 

VER.  A  beauteous  object,  ever  severe,  can  never  be 
loved  well. 

PAL.  Beauty  may  be  first  to  please,  but  gentleness  ends 
by  charming. 

Flora  answers  the  dialogue  of  Vertumnus  and  Palemon  by 
this  minuet j  and  the  other  divinities  join  their  dances 
to  it. 

Is  it  wise,  in  the  flower  of  life,  is  it  wise,  not  to  love  ? 
Let  us  hasten  to  taste  the  pleasures  here  below,  unceas- 
ingly. The  wisdom  of  youth  is  to  know  how  to  enjoy  its 
pleasures.  Love  charms  those  whom  he  disarms;  love 
charms;  let  us  all  yield  to  him.  Vain  would  be  our  ef- 
forts to  resist  his  darts;  with  whatever  chains  a  lover  may 
burden  himself,  liberty  has  nothing  half  so  sweet. 

PSYCHE.  289 

Venus  descends  from  the  heavens  in  a  great  machine,  with 
her  son  Cupid,  and  the  two  little  graces  called  ^Egiale  and 
Phcene  ;  and  the  divinities  of  the  earth  and  streams  begin  to 
unite  their  voices,  and  continue  by  their  dances  to  testify  their 
joy  at  her  arrival. 

Chorus  of  all  the  Divinities  of  the  Earth  and  Streams. 

We  taste  profound  peace  ;  the  sweetest  games  are  here 
below.  We  owe  this  rest,  so  full  of  charms,  to  the  greatest 
king  in  the  world.  Descend,  mother  of  Cupid,  and  bestow 
upon  us  glorious  days. 

VEN.  (In  her  machine].  Cease,  cease  for  me  those  songs 
of  joy  ;  such  rare  honours  do  not  belong  to  me  ;  and  the 
homage  which  your  goodness  now  addresses  to  me,  ought 
to  be  reserved  for  sweeter  charms.  It  is  too  old  a  method 
to  come  and  pay  your  court  to  me  ;  everything  has  its 
turn,  and  Venus  is  no  longer  in  fashion.  There  are  other 
new-born  attractions  to  which  incense  is  offered.  Psyche, 
Psyche,  the  fair  one,  now-a-days  takes  my  place.  Already 
the  whole  universe  hastens  to  adore  her  ;  and  it  is  too 
much  that,  in  my  disgrace,  I  still  find  some  one  who 
deigns  to  honour  me.  People  do  not  hesitate  between  the 
merits  of  us  both  ;  everyone  has  been  bold  enough  to  leave 
my  side,  and  of  the  numerous  crowd  of  favourite  Graces, 
whose  cares  and  friendship  followed  me  everywhere,  there 
remains  nothing  to  me  but  two  of  the  smallest,  who  ac- 
company me  out  of  pity.  Allow  these  sombre  abodes  to 
lend  their  solitude  to  my  troubled  heart,  and  let  me, 
amidst  their  shadows,  hide  my  shame  and  grief. 

Flora  and  the  other  divinities  retire,  and  Venus,  with  her 
retinue,  descends  from  the  machine. 

We  do  not  know  how  to  act,  goddess,  in  this  grief 
beneath  which  we  see  you  bowed  down.  Our  respect  tells 
us  to  keep  silent,  while  our  zeal  tells  us  to  speak. 

VEN.  Speak  ;  but  if  you,  by  your  attentions,  aspire  to 
please  me,  leave  all  your  counsels  for  another  time  ;  and 
do  not  speak  of  my  anger,  unless  it  be  to  tell  me  that  I  am 
right.  It  was  there,  it  was  there,  that  the  most  poignant 

VOL.  III.  T 

290  PSYCHE. 

offence  was  given  that  my  divinity  could  ever  receive  ;  but, 
if  the  gods  have  any  power,  I  shall  have  my  revenge. 

PH.  You  have  more  sense  and  wisdom  than  we  have  to 
judge  what  may  be  worthy  of  you ;  but,  as  for  me,  I  should 
have  thought  that  a  great  goddess  ought  to  have  put  her- 
self less  in  a  rage. 

VEN.  And  this5  is  the  very  reason  of  my  great  anger. 
The  more  exalted  my  rank,  the  more  glaring  becomes  the 
insult;  and  did  I  not  hold  such  a  supreme  degree,  the  re- 
sentment of  my  heart  would  be  less  violent.  I,  the  daughter 
of  the  god  who  launches  the  thunderbolts  ;  mother  of  the 
god  who  inspires  love ;  I,  the  most  ardently  wished-for  by 
Heaven  and  earth,  and  who  was  born  but  to  charm ;  I, 
who  have  seen  so  many  vows  offered  at  my  altars  by  every- 
thing that  breathes,  and  who,  by  immortal  rights,  have 
held  the  sovereign  empire  of  beauty  at  all  times  ;  I,  whose 
eyes  have  induced  two  great  deities  to  concede  to  me  the 
prize  of  being  the  most  beautiful,  I  behold  my  victory  and 
my  rights  disputed  by  a  puny  mortal !  The  ridiculous 
excess  of  a  mad  obstinacy  goes  so  far  as  to  oppose  to  me 
a  little  girl !  I  have  continually  to  listen  to  a  rash  judg- 
ment between  her  features  and  mine ;  and  from  the  height 
of  the  Heavens  in  which  I  shine,  I  have  to  hear  prejudiced 
mortals  exclaim :  She  is  more  beauteous  than  Venus  ! 

^Eo.  That  is  how  people  do ;  it  is  men's  style ;  they  are 
impertinent  in  their  comparisons. 

PH.  In  the  age  in  which  we  live  now,  they  cannot  praise 
without  at  the  same  time  outraging  some  of  the  greatest 
names. 

VEN.  Ah  !  how  well  the  insolent  sternness  of  these  three 
words  avenge  Juno  and  Pallas,  and  consoles  their  hearts 
for  the  brilliant  glory  which  the  famous  apple  conferred 
upon  my  charms  !  I  see  them  applauding  themselves  about 
my  uneasiness,  affecting  at  each  moment  a  malicious  laugh, 
and  with  a  stare,  searching  out  anxiously  my  confusion  in 
my  eyes.  Their  triumphant  joy,  in  the  midst  of  such  an 
outrage,  seems  to  come  and  tell  me,  as  an  insult  to  my 
anger  :  Boast,  boast,  Venus  !  of  the  traits  of  your  counte- 

5  This  speech  of  Venus  is  an  imitation  of  the  one  which  the  same  god- 
des,s  utters  in  Apuleius'  Golden  Ass. 

SCENK  i.|  PSYCHE.  291 

nance  !  In  the  judgment  of  one  only  you  vanquished  us  ; 
but,  in  the  judgment  of  all,  a  simple  mortal  has  the  advan- 
tage over  you.  Ah  !  this  blow  finishes  me ;  it  pierces  my 
heart ;  I  can  no  longer  suffer  this  unparalleled  severity ; 
the  raptures  of  my  rivals  are,  in  addition  to  my  poignant 
sorrow,  too  much.  My  son,  if  ever  I  had  any  influence 
with  you,  and  if  ever  I  were  dear  to  you,  if  your  heart  be 
capable  of  feeling  the  resentment  which  troubles  the  heart 
of  a  mother  who  so  tenderly  loves  you,  then  employ,  em- 
ploy now  the  effort  of  your  power  to  sustain  my  interests ; 
and,  by  your  darts,  make  Psyche  feel  the  darts  of  my  re- 
venge. To  make  her  heart  miserable,  take  one  of  your 
darts  most  calculated  to  please  me,  the  most  poisonous  of 
those  which  you  launch  forth  in  your  anger.  Make  her 
become  enamoured  to  madness  of  the  vilest,  basest,  and 
most  horrible  mortal,  so  that  she  may  suffer  the  most  cruel 
torture  of  loving  and  not  being  beloved. 

CUP.  Nothing  but  complaints  about  Cupid  are  heard  in 
this  world  ;  everywhere  a  thousand  sins  committed  are 
imputed  to  me,  and  you  would  not  believe  the  harm  and 
the  nonsense  that  are  told  of  me  every  day.  If  to  serve 
your  anger  .  .  . 

VEN.  Go,  do  not  oppose  the  wishes  of  your  mother ; 
do  not  apply  any  arguments,  except  to  look  out  for  the 
most  opportune  moments  to  bring  a  sacrifice  to  my  out- 
raged glory.  Depart,  for  all  response  to  my  solicitations; 
and  see  me  not  again  until  I  am  avenged. 

Cupid  flies  away,  and  Venus  retires  with  the  Graces.  The 
scene  changes  to  a  large  town,  with  palaces  and  houses,  of 
different  architecture,  on  both  sides  of  the  stage. 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE. 

AGL.  There  are  ills,  sister,  which  silence  embitters ;  let 
us,  therefore,  give  speech  to  your  grief  and  mine,  and  lay 
bare  the  burning  resentment  of  our  hearts  to  each  other. 
We  are  sisters  in  misfortune ;  and  yours  and  mine  are  so 
intimately  connected,  that  we  can  mix  the  two  into  one, 

2Q2  PSYCHE.  [ACT  t 

and,  in  our  righteous  indignation,  bewail,  in  common 
plaint,  the  cruelties  of  our  fate.  What  mysterious  fatality, 
sister,  subjects  the  whole  universe  to  the  charms  of  our 
youngest  sister,  and  why,  of  the  various  princes  whom 
accident  brings  to  this  spot,  does  it  not  throw  one  into 
our  chains?  What !  to  see  from  every  part  all  hearts 
eager  to  yield  to  her,  and  pass  by  our  attractions  without 
wishing  to  be  stayed  by  them !  What  fate  has  befallen 
our  eyes,  and  what  have  they  done  to  the  gods,  that  they 
think  them  not  worthy  to  enjoy  any  homage  amidst  all 
these  tributes  of  glorious  sighs,  the  proud  advantage  of 
which  causes  others  to  triumph  ?  Can  there  be  for  us, 
sister,  a  more  signal  disgrace  than  to  see  all  hearts  despise 
our  charms,  and  to  behold  the  happy  Psyche  insolently 
rejoicing  in  a  crowd  of  lovers  bound  to  her  steps  ! 

CYD.  Ah  !  sister,  it  is  an  adventure  to  make  us  lose  our 
senses,  and  all  the  other  ills  of  nature  are  nothing  in  com- 
parison. 

AGL.  As  for  me,  it  often  brings  the  tears  to  my  eyes. 
It  takes  away  all  pleasure,  all  rest ;  against  misfortune 
like  this,  my  constancy  is  without  arms.  This  grief,  for 
ever  present  to  my  mind,  keeps  before  my  eyes  the  dis- 
grace of  our  charms,  and  the  triumph  of  Psyche.  At 
night,  the  thought  of  it  is  eternally  recurring,  and  pre- 
vails over  all  else.  Nothing  can  drive  away  this  cruel 
image ;  and  no  sooner  comes  sweet  slumber  to  free  me 
from  it,  than  some  dream  immediately  recalls  it  to  my 
senses,  and  awakens  me  with  a  start. 

CYD.  This  is  my  martyrdom,  sister;  in  your  words  I 
see  myself;  and  you  have  just  said  what  passes  within  me. 

AGL.  But  once  more,  let  us  argue  a  little  upon  this  af- 
fair. In  what  lies  her  powerful  charms  ?  And  by  what, 
tell  me,  has  she  acquired  the  honour  of  that  grand  secret 
of  pleasing  by  her  slightest  looks  ?  What  do  they  see  in 
her  to  inspire  so  much  passion?  What  right  of  beauty 
gives  her  the  empire  over  all  hearts?  She  has  some 
charms,  some  of  the  brilliancy  of  youth  ;  we  are  agreed 
upon  that ;  I  do  not  gainsay  it.  But  if  we  concede  to 
her  a  great  deal  on  the  score  of  age,  are  we  entirely  with- 
out charms  ?  Are  our  figures  such  as  to  be  sneered  at  ? 
Have  we  not  some  fine  features  and  some  attractions,  com- 

SCENE  i.J  PSYCHE.  293 

plexions,  eyes,  air,  and  build  to  fasten  some  lovers  in  our 
chains.  Sister,  do  me  the  favour  of  speaking  frankly. 
Am  I  made  in  such  a  manner,  tell  me,  that  my  merit 
should  give  way  to  hers  ?  And  do  you  find  that  she  out- 
shines me  in  dress  ? 

CYD.  What  ?  you,  sister.  Not  at  all.  Yesterday,  at 
the  hunt,  near  her,  I  looked  at  you  for  a  long  time,  and, 
without  wishing  to  flatter  you,  I  thought  that  you  were  by 
fir  the  handsomer.  But  I  say,  sister,  without  wishing  to 
flatter  me,  are  they  visions  which  I  take  into  my  head, 
when  I  think  myself  made  to  merit  the  glory  of  some  con- 
quest? 

AGL.  You,  sister,  you  have,  without  disguising  aught, 
everything  to  inspire  an  amorous  flame.  Your  slightest 
actions  shine  with  charms  which  touch  my  heart,  and  were 
I  other  than  woman,  I  should  be  your  lover. 

CYD.  Whence  comes  it,  then,  that  she  obtains  the  vic- 
tory over  us ;  that  at  the  first  glance  all  hearts  lay  down 
their  arms,  and  that  by  no  tribute  of  sighs  and  vows  the 
least  honour  is  paid  to  our  charms? 

AGL.  All  ladies,  with  one  voice,  think  very  little  of  her 
attractions:  and  I  think,  sister,  that  I  have  discovered  the 
cause  of  the  number  of  lovers  whom  she  holds  beneath  her 
sway. 

CVD.  As  for  me,  I  guess  it ;  and  it  is  to  be  presumed 
that  some  mystery  must  be  concealed  underneath  this. 
This  secret  of  inflaming  everybody  is  not  a  common  effect  of 
nature ;  the  art  of  Thessalia  has  something  to  do  with 
this  ;6  and  no  doubt,  some  charm  has  been  given  to  her  to 
mike  herself  beloved. 

AGL.  My  belief  is  founded  upon  a  more  solid  basis; 
and  the  charm  which  she  possesses  for  gaining  all  hearts 
is  simply  an  air  at  all  times  devoid  of  sternness,  caressing 
looks  seconded  by  her  mouth,  a  smile  full  of  sweetness, 
which  holds  out  a  welcome  to  everyone,  and  which  prom- 
ises you  nothing  but  kindness.  Our  glory  now-a-days  is 
no  longer  kept  up ;  and  we  are  no  longer  in  the  age  of 
that  noble  haughtiness,  which,  by  a  dignified  attempt  at 
illustrious  cruelties,  wished  to  test  the  constancy  of  a 

•Thessalia  was  renowned  in  classical  times  for  its  magicians. 

294  PSYCHE.  [ACT  t 

lover.  We  have,  indeed,  come  down,  in  the  present  age, 
from  all  this  noble  pride  which  suited  us  so  well ;  and, 
unless  we  absolutely  throw  ourselves  at  men's  heads,  we 
are  reduced  to  hope  no  longer  for  anything.7 

CYD.  Yes,  that  is  the  secret  of  the  affair ;  and  I  see  that 
you  .understand  the  matter  better  than  I.  It  is  because 
we  keep  too  much  to  our  decorum  that  no  lover  wishes  to 
come  to  us,  sister ;  we  are  too  anxious  to  maintain  the 
honour  of  our  sex  and  of  our  birth.  Men  now-a-days  love 
those  who  smile  upon  them ;  hope,  more  than  love,  is 
what  attracts  them ;  and  it  is  through  this  that  Psyche 
robs  us  of  all  the  lovers  whom  we  see  beneath  her  empire. 
Let  us  follow,  let  us  follow  the  example,  and  accommo- 
date ourselves  to  the  times ;  let  us  lower  ourselves,  sister, 
to  make  advances,  and  care  no  longer  about  that  sad  pro- 
priety which  deprives  us  of  the  fruits  of  our  best  years. 

AGL.  I  approve  of  the  idea,  and  we  have  the  material 
on  which  to  make  the  first  trial,  in  the  two  princes  who 
have  recently  arrived.  They  are  charming,  sister;  and 
altogether  their  appearance  has  .  .  .  Have  you  noticed 
them? 

CYD.  Ah  !  sister,  they  have  both  an  air  which  my  heart. 
....  They  are  two  perfect  princes. 

AGL.  I  think  that  one  might  try  to  win  their  affection 
without  having  need  to  be  ashamed. 

CYD.  I  think  that  a  fair  princess  might,  without  shame, 
yield  them  her  heart. 

AGL.  Here  they  are  both,  and  I  admire  their  air  and 
their  appearance. 

CYD.  They  in  no  way  belie  what  we  have  just  said. 

SCENE  II. — CLEOMENES,  AGENOR,  AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE. 

AGL.  Whence  comes  it,  princes,  whence  comes  it,  that 
you  run  away  thus  ?  Have  you  taken  fright  in  seeing  us 
appear  ? 

CLE.  We  were  given  to  understand,  Madam,  that  the 
princess  Psyche  might  be  here. 

7  This  speech  of  Aglaura,  says  Petitot,  one  of  the  commentators  of 
Moliere,  is  a  proof  that  the  manners  of  the  age  had,  perhaps,  undergone 
a  great  change  since  the  first  representation  of  The  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies  (1659). 

SCENE  ii.]  PSYCHE.  295 

AGL.  Have  these  spots  no  attraction  fqr  you,  unless  you 
see  them  adorned  by  her  presence  ? 

Ac.  These  spots  may  have  many  sweet  charms ;  but  we 
are  impatiently  seeking  Psyche. 

CYD.  Something  very  pressing,  no  doubt,  must  make 
you  both  so  anxiously  seek  for  her  ? 

CLE.  The  motive  is  sufficiently  powerful,  since,  in  one 
word,  our  whole  happiness  depends  upon  it 

AGL.  It  would  be  too  much  for  us  to  inquire  into  the 
secret  which  these  words  may  conceal. 

CLE.  We  do  not  pretend  to  make  a  mystery  of  it :  in 
spite  of  us,  it  would  soon  be  revealed  ;  and  when  a  secret 
is  connected  with  love,  it  does  not  last  long,  Madam. 

CYD.  Without  going  any  farther,  princes,  this  means, 
that  you  both  love  Psyche  ? 

AG.  Both  subject  to  her  sway,  we  are  going,  in  concert, 
to  declare  our  passion  to  her. 

AGL.  It  is  a  novelty,  no  doubt,  sufficiently  strange,  to 
find  two  rivals  so  closely  united 

CLE.  It  is  true  that  the  thing  is  rare,  but  not  alto- 
gether impossible  to  two  trusty  friends. 

CYD.  Is  there  no  fair  one  except  her  in  these  spots,  and 
can  you  not  divide  your  affections? 

AGL.  Among  those  of  noble  blood  have  you  seen  none 
but  her,  who  might  be  deserving  of  your  passion  ? 

CLE.  Does  one  argue  at  the  moment  one  becomes 
smitten  ?  Do  we  choose  those  whom  we  would  love  ?  And 
do  we  look  what  right  the  one  to  whom  we  give  all  our 
soul  has  to  charm  us  ? 

AG.  Without  the  power  to  select,  one  follows,  in  such 
an  ardour,  something  which  attracts  us;  and  when  love 
touches  a  heart,  there  are  no  reasons  to  give. 

AGL.  In  truth,  I  pity  the  sad  confusion  into  which 
I  see  that  your  hearts  are  rushing.  You  love  one  whose 
provoking  charms  will  mix  some  grief  with  the  hope  which 
they  excite  in  you ;  and  her  heart  will  not  perform  all 
that  her  eyes  may  promise  you. 

CYD.  The  hope  which  now  calls  you  into  the  ranks  of 
her  lovers  will  find  some  disappointment  in  the  gentleness 
which  she  displays ;  and  the  sudden  changes  of  her  unequal 
temper  are  calculated  to  bring  some  very  sad  moments. 

296  PSYCHE.  [ACT  i. 

AGL.  A  clear  discernment  of  your  worth  makes  us  pity 
the  fate  to  which  this  passion  leads  you;  and  you  might 
both  find,  if  you  wished  it,  a  more  stable  heart,  with  as 
many  attractions. 

CYD.  By  a  choice  much  sweeter  by  half,  you  might 
save  your  friendship  from  the  clutches  of  love;  and 
such  rare  merit  is  found  in  you,  that  a  tender  counsel 
would  fain  prevent,  out  of  pity,  what  your  heart  prepares 
for  itself. 

CLE.  This  generous  advice  shows  a  kindness  for  us 
which  touches  our  hearts.  But  Heaven,  Madam,  has  re- 
duced us  to  the  misfortune  of  not  being  able  to  profit 
by  it. 

Ac.  Your  distinguished  pity  tries  in  vain  to  divert  us 
from  a  passion  of  which  we  both  fear  the  effect ;  but  what 
our  friendship  has  been  unable  to  accomplish,  Madam, 
nothing  can  accomplish  it. 

CYD.  The  power  of  Psyche  must  be  ...  Here  she 
comes. 

SCENE  III. — PSYCHE,  CYDIPPE,  AGLAURA,  CLEOMENES, 
AGENOR. 

CYD.  Come,  sister,  to  enjoy  what  is  being  prepared  for 
you. 

AGL.  Let  your  charms  hold  themselves  in  readiness  to 
receive  here  the  new  triumph  of  an  illustrious  conquest. 

CYD.  These  princes  have  both  so  thoroughly  felt  your 
darts,  that  their  lips  are  ready  to  acquaint  you  with  it. 

Ps.  I  did  not  think  myself  the  cause  of  their  stay 
amongst  us ;  and  I  should  have  believed  quite  another 
thing  in  seeing  them  speak  to  you. 

AGL.  Having  neither  beauty  nor  birth  to  deserve  their 
affection  and  attention,  they  have  at  least  favoured  us 
with  the  honour  of  their  confidence. 

CLE.  {To  Psyche).  The  confession  we  are  about  to 
make,  Madam,  to  your  divine  charms  is,  no  doubt,  a  rash 
avowal ;  but  so  many  hearts,  near  death,  are  obliged,  by 
similar  declarations,  to  incur  your  displeasure,  that  you 
are  compelled  not  to  punish  them  with  the  bolts  of  your 
anger.  You  behold  in  us  two  friends,  which  a  sweet  sym- 
pathy of  disposition  has  united  from  infancy  ;  and  these 

SCKNB  in.]  PSYCHE.  297 

tender  bonds  have  been  more  closely  tightened  by  a  hun- 
dred rivalries  of  esteem  and  gratitude.  The  rigorous 
assaults  of  hostile  fate,  the  contempt  for  death,  and  the 
sight  of  tortures,  have,  by  the  distinguished  instances  of 
reciprocal  services,  consolidated  the  splendid  ties  of  our 
friendship.  But,  whatever  trials  it  may  have  undergone, 
its  greatest  triumph  is  in  this  day  ;  and  nothing  could 
more  plainly  show  its  proved  constancy,  than  to  see  it 
preserved  in  the  midst  of  love.  Yes,  notwithstanding  so 
many  charms,  its  signal  constancy  has  submitted  all  our 
desires  to  the  laws  which  it  imposes  upon  us  ;  and  now  it 
comes,  with  a  gentle  and  complete  deference,  to  refer  the 
success  of  our  passion  to  your  choice  ;  and,  to  give  a 
greater  weight  to  our  rivalry,  which,  for  reasons  of  state, 
might  make  the  scale  incline  to  the  choice  of  one  of  us, 
this  same  friendship  offers,  without  any  repugnance,  to 
unite  our  two  states  with  the  fate  of  the  most  fortunate 
one. 

AG.  Yes,  of  these  two  states,  Madam,  which  we  offer  to 
unite  according  to  your  choice,  we  wish  to  make  a  support 
to  our  love  in  order  to  obtain  you.  That,  for  this  happi- 
ness, we  should  both  sacrifice  ourselves  with  the  king,  your 
father,  has  nothing  difficult  for  our  amorous  hearts ;  and 
it  is  simply  making  a  necessary  gift  to  the  most  fortunate 
one,  of  a  power  for  which  the  unhappy  one,  Madam,  will 
no  longer  have  any  use. 

Ps.  The  choice  which  you  offer  me,  princes,  is  sufficient 
to  satisfy  the  desires  of  the  proudest  heart ;  and  you  both 
adorn  it  in  such  a  manner,  that  nothing  more  precious 
could  be  offered.  Your  love,  your  friendship,  your  su- 
preme virtue,  everything  enhances  with  me  the  offer  of 
your  heart ;  and  I  see  a  merit  in  it,  which  itself  opposes 
what  you  wish  of  me.  It  is  not  to  my  own  heart  that  I 
must  defer,  to  enter  into  such  bond ;  my  hand,  for  its  be- 
stowal, awaits  the  commands  of  a  father,  and  my  sisters 
have  claims  which  go  before  mine.  But,  if  I  were  left  to 
my  own  absolute  desires,  you  might  both  at  the  same  time 
have  too  great  a  share  in  them  ;  and  the  whole  of  my 
esteem,  balanced  between  you,  could  not  determine  upon 
selecting  either  of  you.  I  could  well  enough  respond  to 
the  ardour  of  your  suit  by  my  gentlest  affection ;  but, 

298  PSYCHE.  [ACT  i. 

amid  so  much  merit,  two  hearts  are  too  much  for  me 
alone,  one  heart  between  you  two  is  not  enough.  I  should 
be  embarrassed  in  my  fondest  wishes  by  the  sacrifice  which 
your  friendship  makes ;  and  by  seeing  with  too  much  pity 
the  fate  to  which  the  other  was  drifting.  Yes,  princes, 
of  all  those  whose  love  has  followed  your  example,  I  should 
eagerly  prefer  you  both;  but  I  should  never  have  the  heart 
to  be  able  to  prefer  one  of  you  to  the  other.  My  tender- 
ness would  make  too  great  a  sacrifice  to  him  whom  I 
should  choose ;  and  in  the  wrong  I  should  do  the  other,  I 
would  impute  to  myself  the  most  barbarous  injustice.  Yes, 
you  have  both  shown  too  much  grandeur  of  soul  to  make 
one  of  you  unhappy ;  and  you  ought  to  seek  in  an  amor- 
ous flame  the  means  of  being  both  happy.  If  your  hearts 
consider  me  sufficiently  worthy  to  allow  me  to  dispose  of 
you,  I  have  two  sisters  capable  of  pleasing,  who  could 
well  make  your  lot  sufficiently  happy  ;  and  friendship 
renders  their  persons  sufficiently  dear  to  me  to  wish  you 
their  husbands. 

CLE.  Can  a  heart  whose  love  is  so  extreme,  alas  !  con- 
sent to  be  given  away  by  her  whom  it  loves  ?  We  concede 
to  your  divine  charms,  Madam,  a  supreme  power  over  our 
hearts ;  dispose  of  them  even  for  death  ;  but  have  the 
goodness  not  to  dispose  of  them  for  any  one  else  but  for 
yourself. 

Ac.  It  would  be  too  great  an  outrage  on  the  princesses, 
Madam;  and  the  remains  of  another  flame  are  an  un- 
worthy portion  for  their  charms.  It  requires  the  constant 
purity  of  a  first  love  to  aspire  to  that  honour  to  which 
your  goodness  invites  us.  Each  one  of  them  deserves  a 
heart  that  has  riot  sighed  except  for  her. 

AGL.  It  seems  to  me,  without  wishing  to  be  angry,  that 
before  defending  yourselves  from  this  proposal,  princes, 
you  ought  to  have  waited  until  people  had  explained  them- 
selves about  you.  Think  you  that  we  have  so  easy  and 
tender  a  heart  ?  And  when  there  is  question  of  giving 
you  to  us,  do  you  know  whether  we  are  willing  to  take 
you?8 

8  Compare  Arsinoe's  remarks  in  The  Misanthrope,  Act  v.,  Scene  6, 
(see  Vol.  II.) ;  and  also  those  of  Armande  in  The  Blue  Stockings,  Act  i, 
Scene  2. 

SCKNM  v.J  PSYCHE.  299 

CYD.  I  think  that  we  have  sufficiently  lofty  sentiments 
to  refuse  a  heart  which  has  to  be  solicited  ;  and  that  we 
wish  to  owe  the  conquest  of  our  lovers  solely  to  our  own 
merits. 

Ps.  I  thought,  sisters,  that  it  would  have  been  a  suffi- 
ciently great  glory  for  you,  if  the  possession  of  so  much 
merit  .  .  . 

SCENE  IV. — PYSCHE,  AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE,  CLEOMENES, 
AGENOR,  LYCAS. 

LY.   ( To  Psyche).  Ah  !  Madam  ! 

Ps.  What  is  the  matter  ? 

LY.     The  king  .    .    . 

Ps.   Well? 

LY.  Requires  your  presence. 

Ps.  What  am  I  to  expect  from  this  great  trouble  ? 

LY.  You  shall  know  it  but  too  soon. 

Ps.  Alas  !  you  cause  me  to  fear  for  the  king  ! 

LY.  Fear  only  for  yourself ;  it  is  you  who  are  to  be 
pitied. 

Ps.  Praise  be  to  Heaven ;  thus  vanishes  my  fright  to 
know  that  I  have  to  fear  but  for  myself.  But  tell  me, 
Lycas,  the  reason  of  your  emotion. 

LY.  Allow  me  to  obey  him  who  sends  me  here, 
Madam ;  it  is  better  that  you  should  learn  from  his  lips 
that  which  grieves  me  so  much. 

Ps.  Well,  let  us  go  and  learn  in  what  they  fear  my 
feebleness  so  much. 

SCENE  V. — AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE,  LYCAS. 

AGL.  If  your  order  does  not  extend  to  us,  tell  us  what 
great  misfortune  your  grief  hides  from  us. 

LY.  Alas!  this  great  misfortune,  already  bruited  about 
the  court,  behold  it  yourself,  princess,  in  the  oracle  which 
the  fates  have  rendered  to  the  king.     These  are  the  very 
words,  Madam,  which  grief  has  engraved  on  my  heart : 9 
"  Let  there  be  no  thought  of  wishing  to   conclude   the 

9  This  oracle  is  taken  from  Apuleius,  and  has  a  double  meaning,  be- 
cause all  that  is  said  about  the  monster  may  be  emphatically  applitd  to 
Cupid. 

300  PSYCHE.  [ACT  i. 

marriage  of  Psyche ;  but  let  her  be  quickly  conducted  in 
sombre  funeral  state  to  the  top  of  a  mount ;  and  let  her 
there,  abandoned  by  all,  wait  constantly  for  her  husband, 
a  monster  who  poisons  the  sight,  a  serpent  that  spreads  its 
venom  all  around,  and  in  its  rage  troubles  heaven  and 
earth."  After  so  severe  a  decree,  I  leave  you  to  judge 
between  yourselves  if  all  the  gods  could,  by  more  cruel  or 
sensible  strokes,  have  explained  their  displeasure  more 
fully. 

SCENE  VI. — AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE. 

CYD.  What  do  you  feel,  sister,  at  this  sudden  misfortune, 
into  which  we  see  Psyche  plunged  by  rigorous  fate? 

AGL.  But  you,  yourself,  what  do  you  feel  ? 

CYD.  To  tell  no  lie  about  it,  I  feel  that,  in  my  heart,  I 
am  not  grieved  at  it. 

AGL.  I  feel  something  in  my  own  which  is  not  unlike 
joy.  Come,  destiny  sends  us  an  evil,  which  we  may 
regard  as  a  blessing. 

FIRST  INTERL  UDE. 

The  scene  is  changed  to  horrible  rocks,  and  shows  a 
dreadful  gaping  cavern  in  the  distance.  This  is  the  desert 
in  which  Psyche  is  to  be  exposed,  to  obey  the  oracle.  A  troop 
of  afflicted  people  come  to  bewail  her  misfortune.  A  part  of 
this  afflicted  troop  show  their  pity  by  touching  complaints  and 
mournful  songs;  the  others  express  their  grief  by  a  dance 
full  of  every  mark  of  the  most  violent  despair. 

Wailings  in  Italian,™  sung  by  an  afflicted  female,  and 
two  afflicted  men. 

WOMAN.  Mix  your  tears  with  mine,  hard  rocks,  and  you 
frightful  tigers,  bewail  the  severe  fate  of  an  object  whose 
crime  it  is  to  possess  too  many  charms. 

10  All  the  interludes  are  by  Quinault,  with  the  exception  of  this  one,  the 
words  of  which  are  by  Lulli,  the  author  of  the  whole  of  the  music  in  this 
piece.  It  is  possible  that  Moliere  translated  these  words  into  French  for 
the  libretto  of  the  Ballet  des  ballets,  published  in  1671. 

SCENE  i.]  PSYCHE.  301 

IST  MAN.  Alas!  what  grief ! 

2D.  MAN.  Alas  !  what  martyrdom. 

IST  MAN.   Cruel  death  ! 

20  MAN.  Severe  fate  ! 

ALL  THREE.  To  doom-  to  die  such  beauty !  ye  Heavens ! 
ye  stars  !  what  cruelty  ! 

WOMAN.  Answer  to  my  complaints,  deep  caverns,  hid- 
den rocks !  respond  to  my  plaints,  ye  echoes  of  these 
woods  !  May  a  mournful  sound  burst  forth  from  the  depth 
of  these  forests ! 

IST  MAN.  Alas  !  what  grief ! 

20  MAN.  Alas  !  what  martyrdom  ! 

IST  MAN.   Cruel  death ! 

WOMAN  AND  2D  MAN.  Severe  fate ! 

ALL  THREE.  To  doom  to  die  such  beauty  !  ye  Heavens ! 
ye  stars  !  what  cruelty  ! 

20  MAN.  Who  of  you,  ye  gods,  wishes  to  dectroy,  with 
so  much  fury,  such  innocent  beauty !  1  iuless  Heaven, 
will  ye  outdo  hell  in  cruelty  by  such  rancour? 

IST  MAN.  Inhuman  cruelty ! 

20  MAN.  Severe  god  ! 

THE  Two  MEN.  Why  so  much  severity  against  an  inno- 
cent heart  ?  Unheard-of-sentence,  to  cut  off  suca  beauti- 
ful days  when  they  give  birth  to  so  much  love  ! 

WOMAN.  How  vain  are  useless  tears,  and  superfluous 
cries,  as  a  help  against  an  irreparable  ill !  When  Heaven 
has  given  absolute  commands,  human  effort  must  altoge- 
ther cease. 

Amidst  these  wailings  eight  afflicted  persons  enter,  dance  a 
ballet,  and  by  their  attitudes  express  their  grief. 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — THE  KING,  AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE,  LYCAS, 
SUITE. 

Ps.  The  reason  of  your  tears,  my  lord,  is  very  dear  to 
me;  but  it  is  giving  way  too  much  to  your  kindness 
towards  me,  to  allow  the  tenderness  of  a  father  to  pene- 
trate as  far  as  the  eyes  of  a  great  monarch.  The  tribute 

302  PSYCHE.  [ACT  ii. 

which  we  behold  you  to  pay  to  nature,  my  lord,  does  too 
much  injury  to  the  rank  which  you  hold ;  and  I  must 
therefore  decline  to  accept  its  touching  favours.  Let  your 
grief  take  less  empire  over  your  wisdom ;  and  cease  to 
honour  my  fate  with  tears,  which,  coming  from  the  heart 
of  a  king,  show  weakness. 

KING.  Ah  !  daughter !  let  my  eyes  indulge  in  tears. 
My  mourning  is  reasonable  even  if  it  be  extreme;  and 
when  one  is  about  to  lose  for  ever  what  I  am  losing,  wis- 
dom itself,  believe  me,  may  weep.  In  vain  the  pride  in- 
separable from  the  diadem  enjoins  us  to  be  insensible  to 
these  cruel  reverses ;  in  vain  reason  comes  to  our  aid  to 
command  us  to  behold  with  dry  eyes  the  death  of  those 
whom  we  love;  the  effort  to  do  so  is  barbarous  in  the 
sight  of  the  world,  and  is  rather  accounted  brutality 
than  supreme  virtue.  I  will  not,  in  this  adversity,  en- 
case my  heart  with  insensibility,  and  hide  the  grief  that 
moves  me.  I  renounce  the  vanity  of  this  fierce  harshness, 
which  is  called  firmness;  and  by  whatever  name  is  desig- 
nated this  poignant  grief  of  which  I  feel  the  smart,  I  will 
display  it,  daughter,  to  the  eyes  of  all,  and  show  in  the 
heart  of  a  king  that  of  a  man. 

Ps.  I  do  not  deserve  this  great  grief.  Oppose,  oppose 
some  resistance  to  the  rights  which  it  usurps  in  your 
heart,  of  which  a  thousand  events  have  shown  the  power. 
What!  are  you  to  renounce  for  my  sake,  my  lord,  this 
royal  constancy,  of  which  you  have  shown  such  famous 
proofs,  under  the  strokes  of  misfortune ! 

KING.  Constancy  is  easy  in  a  thousand  cases.  All  the 
revolutions  to  which  inhuman  fate  may  expose  us ;  the 
loss  of  greatness,  persecutions,  poisonous  envy,  and  the 
darts  of  hatred,  having  nothing  which,  if  needs  must,  the 
resolves  of  a  mind  in  which  reason  holds  a  somewhat 
sovereign  sway,  may  not  brave.  But  what  makes  our 
hearts  succumb  beneath  some  rigors,  and  the  burden  of 
bitter  grief,  are  the  harsh  blows  of  those  cruel  destinies, 
which  rob  us  for  ever  of  those  who  are  dear  to  us. 
Against  such  strokes,  reason  offers  no  available  arms ;  and 
these  are  the  bolts  most  to  be  feared,  which  the  angry 
gods  can  launch  at  us. 

Ps.  My  lord,  a  consolation  still  remains  to  you.  Your 

SCKNB  i.]  PSYCHE.  303 

marriage  has  received  more  than  one  gift  from  the  gods ; 
and,  by  a  plainly  shown  favour,  they  deprive  you  of 
nothing,  by  taking  me  away  from  you,  but  what  they  have 
taken  care  to  make  good.  There  still  remains  to  you 
wherewith  to  assuage  your  grief.  This  decree  of  Heaven, 
which  you  call  cruel,  leaves  still  to  a  father's  affection  the 
two  princesses,  my  sisters,  on  whom  to  lavish  all  its 
sweets. 

KING.  Ah  !  faint  relief  to  my  ills !  Nothing,  nothing 
offers  itself  to  me  which  consoles  me  for  your  loss.  My 
eyes  see  only  my  misfortunes ;  and  in  a  fate  so  dire,  I 
look  but  to  what  I  lose,  and  see  not  what  remains  to  me. 

Ps.  Better  still  than  I,  you  know,  my  lord,  that  to  the 
will  of  the  gods  we  must  submit  our  own ;  and  in  this  sad 
farewell  I  can  but  say  to  you,  what  you  could  so  much 
better  say  to  others.  These  gods  are  sovereign  masters 
of  the  gifts  which  they  deign  to  bestow  upon  us ;  and  leave 
them  in  our  hands  only  as  long  as  it  pleases  them.  When 
they  take  them  back  again,  we  have  no  right  to  murmur 
at  the  favours  which  their  hands  will  no  longer  bestow  upon 
us.  My  lord,  I  am  a  gift  which  they  granted  to  your  af- 
fection ;  and,  when  by  this  decree,  they  wish  to  take  me 
back  again,  they  deprive  you  of  nothing  but  what  you 
hold  of  them ;  and  you  ought  to  yield  me  without  a  mur- 
mur. 

KING.  Ah !  seek  a  better  foundation  for  the  consolations 
which  your  heart  offers  to  me ;  and  do  not  make  a  weapon 
of  the  fallacy  of  this  argument,  to  overwhelm  altogether 
this  poignant  grief,  of  which  I  suffer  the  torments.  Think 
you  in  this  to  give  me  a  powerful  reason  not  to  complain 
of  the  decree  of  Heaven  ?  And  cannot  you  perceive  a  de- 
stroying sternness  in  the  proceedings  of  the  gods,  with 
which  you  wish  me  to  be  satisfied  ?  Behold  the  condition 
in  which  these  gods  force  me  to  yield  you  up,  and  then 
look  at  the  one  in  which  my  wretched  heart  received  you; 
by  this  you  will  know  that  they  are  about  to  take  from  me 
much  more  than  what  they  gave  me.  I  received  from 
them  in  you,  daughter,  a  gift  which  my  heart  did  not  ask 
from  them;  I  found  little  attraction  enough  in  it  then,  and 
saw  them,  without  joy,  increase  my  family.  But  my  heart, 
as  well  as  my  eyes,  have  made  a  sweet  habit  of  this  gift ; 

304  PSYCHE.  [ACT  „. 

it  has  taken  me  fifteen  years  of  cares,  of  watching,  and  of 
study  to  render  it  precious  to  me ;  I  have  clothed  it  with 
the  amiable  riches  of  a  thousand  brilliant  virtues ;  and,  by 
assiduous  cares,  I  have  instilled  into  it  the  most  beautiful 
treasures  which  wisdom  could  furnish ;  I  have  attached  to 
it  all  my  soul's  tenderness;  I  have  made  it  the  charm  and 
the  joy  of  my  heart,  the  consol  ation  of  my  wearied  senses, 
the  sweet  hope  of  my  old  age.  They  take  all  this  from 
me,  these  gods !  And  you  wish  me  to  have  no  cause  of 
complaint  about  this  horrible  decree  of  which  I  suffer  the 
blow !  Ah !  their  power  plays  too  rigorously  with  the 
tenderness  of  our  hearts.  To  take  away  their  gift,  did 
they  need  to  wait  until  I  had  made  it  my  all-in-all?  Or 
rather,  if  they  had  the  design  to  take  it  back,  would  it  not 
have  been  better  never  to  have  given  me  any  thing? 

Ps.  My  lord,  fear  the  anger  of  these  gods  against  whom 
you  dare  to  inveigh. 

KING.  After  this  blow,  what  can  they  do  to  me?  They 
have  placed  me  in  a  condition  no  longer  to  fear  aught. 

Ps.  Ah !  my  lord,  I  tremble  at  the  crimes  I  cause  you 
to  commit ;  and  I  ought  to  hate  myself  .  .  . 

KING.  Let  them  at  least  allow  my  legitimate  complaints; 
it  is  sufficient  effort  on  my  part  to  obey  them ;  let  it  be 
sufficient  for  them  that  my  heart  yields  to  the  barbarous 
respect  which  we  must  have  for  them,  without  pretending 
to  allay  the  grief  with  which  the  horrible  decree  of  so  stern 
a  fate  fills  me.  My  just  despair  does  not  know  how  to  re- 
strain itself.  I  will,  I  will  indulge  my  grief  for  ever ;  I 
will  always  feel  the  loss  which  I  sustain ;  of  Heaven's  stern- 
ness I  will  always  complain ;  I  will,  unto  death,  inces- 
santly bewail  what  the  whole  universe  cannot  make  good 
to  me. 

Ps.  Ah!  my  lord,  I  beseech  you,  spare  my  weakness; 
I  have  need  of  fortitude  in  the  state  in  which  I  am.  Do 
not  increase  the  excess  of  my  grief  by  the  tears  of  your 
tenderness.  Alone  they  are  severe  enough,  and  my  fate 
and  your  grief  are  too  much  for  my  he  art. 

KING.  Yes,  I  ought  to  spare  you  my  inconsolable  grief. 
Now  is  the  fatal  moment  to  tear  myself  from  you  ;  but 
how  can  I  pronounce  this  horrible  word  ?  I  must,  how- 
ever; Heaven  makes  it  my  law  ;  relentless  fate  obliges  me 

SCENE  n-1  PSYCHE.  305 

to  leave  you  in  this  ominous  spot.     Farewen ;   i  go  .    .    . 
Farewell.11 

SCENE  II. — PSYCHE,  AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE. 

Ps.  Follow  the  king,  sisters;  you  will  dry  his  tears,  and 
assuage  his  grief;  and  you  would  overwhelm  him  with 
alarm  if  you  were  to  expose  yourselves  also  to  my  misfor- 
tunes. Preserve  for  him  what  remains.  The  serpent 
which  I  expect  might  be  fatal  to  you,  include  you  in  my 
lot,  and  deal  me  a  second  death-blow  in  you.  Heaven 
has  condemned  me  only  to  its  poisonous  breath ;  nothing 
can  succour  me  ;  and  I  have  no  need  of  an  example  to  die. 
AGL.  Do  not  envy  us  this  cruel  advantage  of  uniting 
our  tears  with  your  sorrows,  of  mingling  our  sighs  with 
your  last  sighs.  Grant  this  last  pledge  of  our  tender 
friendship. 

Ps.  It  is  risking  yourself  uselessly. 
CYD.  It  is  to  expect  a  miracle  in  your  favour,  or  to  ac- 
company you  as  far  as  the  mount. 

Ps.  What  is  there  still  to  hope  after  such  an  oracle? 
AGL.  An  oracle  is  never  without  vagueness.  The  more 
one  thinks  to  understand  it,  the  less  one  does  ;12  and  per- 
haps, after  all,  you  ought  to  expect  nought  but  glory  and 
happiness  from  it.  Suffer  us,  sister,  to  behold  this  mortal 
fear  happily  dispersed,  by  a  favourable  issue,  or  let  us  at 
least  die  with  you,  if  Heaven  shows  itself  relentless  to  our 
supplications. 

Ps.  Rather  listen  to  the  voice  of  nature,  sister,  which 
calls  you  near  the  king.  You  love  me  too  much  ;  duty 
murmurs  at  it ;  you  know  its  indispensable  law.  A  father 
ought  to  be  still  dearer  to  you  than  I.  Become  both  the 
supports  of  his  old  age  ;  you  owe  him  each  a  son-in-law 
and  nephews.  A  thousand  kings  vie  with  each  other  in 
reserving  for  you  their  tenderness ;  a  thousand  kings  vie 
with  each  other  in  offering  you  their  love.  The  oracle 
claims  me  alone ;  and  alone  also  I  will  die,  if  I  can,  with- 
out flinching ;  or  not  have  you  both  as  witnesses  of  that, 
which  in  spite  of  myself,  nature  has  instilled  into  me. 

11  All  that  follows  was  written  by  Pierre  Corneille,  with  the  exception 
of  the  first  Scene  of  the  third  Act,  which  is  by  M oliere. 

12  This  sentence  is  from  Corneille's  Horace  (iii.  3). 

VOL.  III.  U 

306  PSYCHE.  [ACT  11. 

AGL.  To  share  your  fate,  is  it  to  worry  you? 

CYD.  I  dare  say  something  more,  sister,  is  it  displeasing 
to  you? 

Ps.  No ;  but  in  one  word,  it  is  embarrassing  to  me,  and 
perhaps  redoubling  Heaven's  anger. 

AGL.  You  will  it  so,  and  we  depart,  ivtay  this 
same  Heaven,  more  just  and  less  severe,  vouchsafe  you  the 
lot  which  we  wish  you,  and  which  our  sincere  affection 
hopes  for  you  in  spite  of  the  oracle,  and  notwithstanding 
yourself. 

Ps.  Farewell.  This  hope,  sister,  and  these  wishes,  none 
of  the  gods  shall  ever  fulfil. 

SCENE  III. — PSYCHE,  alone. 

At  last,  alone  and  left  to  myself,  I  can  face  the  hideous 
change,  which  from  the  height  of  my  extreme  glory,  pre- 
cipitates me  down  to  the  tomb.  This  glory  was  unparal- 
leled ;  its  fame  spread  from  one  pole  to  another ;  every 
king  seemed  born  to  love  me ;  all  their  subjects,  talcing 
me  for  their  goddess,  began  to  accustom  me  to  the  incense 
which  they  unceasingly  offered  to  me  ;  their  sighs  pursued 
me  everywhere,  at  no  cost  of  mine ;  my  soul  remained  free 
while  captivating  many;  and  I,  amidst  so  many  vows,  was 
queen  of  every  heart,  and  mistress  of  mine  own.  O 
Heaven  !  have  you  imputed  this  insensibility  as  a  crime 
to  me  ?  Do  you  display  so  much  severity  to  me,  for  hav- 
ing rendered  to  their  love  nothing  but  esteem?  If  you 
imposed  this  law  upon  me  to  make  a  choice  in  order  not 
to  displease  you,  since  I  could  not  do  so,  why  did  you  not 
do  so  for  me  ?  Why  did  you  not  inspire  me  with  that 
which,  in  so  many  others,  is  inspired  by  merit,  love,  and 
.  .  .  But  what  do  I  behold  here  . 

SCENE  IV. — CLEOMENES,  AGENOR,  PSYCHE. 

CLE.  Two  friends,  two  rivals,  whose  only  care  is  to  ex- 
pose their  lives  to  save  yours. 

Ps.  Can  I  listen  to  you,  when  I  have  driven  two 
sisters  hence  ?  Think  you,  princes,  to  defend  me  against 
Heaven  ?  To  give  yourselves  up  to  the  serpent  which  I 
must  here  await,  this  is  a  despair  which  ill  becomes  great 

SCKNB  IT.]  PSYCHE.  307 

hearts ;  and  to  die  because  I  die,  is  to  overwhelm  a  loving 
soul  which  has  but  too  many  griefs. 

Ac.  A  serpent  is  not  invincible ;  Cadmus,  who  loved 
nothing,  vanquished  the  one  which  Mars  sent ;  we  love, 
and  Cupid  knows  how  to  make  everything  possible  to  the 
heart  that  follows  his  standards,  to  the  hand  of  which  he 
himself  guides  all  the  darts. 

Ps.  Would  you  have  him  serve  you  in  favour  of  an  un- 
grateful being  whom  all  his  arrows  have  not  been  able  to 
touch  ;  to  forego  his  revenge  at  the  moment  of  its  burst- 
ing forth,  and  help  you  to  shield  me  from  it  ?  Even  if 
you  shall  have  served  me,  when  you  have  given  me  back 
my  life,  what  recompense  do  you  expect  of  one  who  can- 
not love? 

CLE.  It  is  not  with  the  hope  of  so  charming  a  reward 
that  we  feel  ourselves  animated ;  we  seek  but  to  satisfy  the 
dictates  of  an  affection  which  dares  not  presume  that, 
whatever  it  may  do,  it  can  be  capable  of  pleasing  you,  and 
worthy  of  inflaming  you.  Live,  fair  princess,  and  live 
for  another ;  we  shall  behold  this  with  a  jealous  eye,  we 
shall  die  of  it,  but  of  a  death  more  sweet  than  if  we  had 
to  see  yours ;  and,  if  we  should  not  die  in  saving  your 
life,  whatever  love  you  may  prefer  in  our  sight  to  ours, 
we  would  indeed  die  of  grief  and  love. 

Ps.  Live,  princes,  live,  and  think  no  longer  to  avert 
my  fate  or  to  share  its  decree.  I  believe  I  have  told  you, 
Heaven  wants  me  only  ;  Heaven  has  condemned  me  only. 
I  fancy  I  can  hear  already  the  destroying  hisses  of  its 
minister  that  draws  near;  my  terror  depicts  and  shows 
him  to  me  at  every  moment ;  and  overmastered,  as  it 
has,  all  my  feelings,  it  figures  him  to  me  on  the  summit 
of  this  rock.  I  am  falling  with  weakness,  and  my  de- 
jected heart  sustains  with  difficulty  a  last  remnant  of 
courage.  Farewell,  princes;  fly,  that  it  may  not  poison 
you. 

AG.  Nothing  has  as  yet  shown  itself  to  your  eyes  that 
surprises  them  ;  and  when  you  imagine  your  end  so  near, 
if  your  strength  leaves  you,  we  both  have  hearts  and  arms 
which  hope  has  not  abandoned.  A  rival  may  perhaps 
have  dictated  this  oracle;  gold  may  have  influenced  the 
one  who  rendered  it.  It  would  not  be  a  miracle  if  a 

308  PSYCHE.  [ACT  „. 

human  being  had  answered  for  a  speechless  god  ;  and,  in 
every  country  we  have  but  too  many  examples  that  there 
are,  as  elsewhere,  wicked  men  in  the  temples. 

CLE.  Let  us  oppose,  to  the  base  ravisher  to  whom  sac- 
rilege delivers  you  unworthily,  a  love  which  Heaven  has 
chosen  as  the  champion  of  the  only  fair  one  for  whom  we 
desire  to  live.  If  we  dare  not  presume  to  possess  her, 
permit  us,  in  her  danger,  at  least  to  follow  the  dictates  of 
our  ardour  and  the  duty  of  our  passion. 

Ps.  Carry  them  to  my  other  selfs,13  princes,  carry  them 
to  my  sisters,  these  duties,  these  extreme  devotions  with 
which  your  hearts  are  filled  for  me ;  live  for  them,  while  I 
die ;  bewail  the  dire  rigour  of  my  fate,  without  giving  it 
new  causes  of  grief  in  your  behaviour.  These  are  my  last 
wishes ;  and  the  commands  of  the  dying  have  been,  at  all 
times,  accepted  as  sovereign  laws. 

CLE.  Princess  .    .    . 

Ps.  Once  more,  princes,  live  for  them.  As  long  as  you 
love  me,  you  should  obey.  Do  not  reduce  me  to  wishing 
to  hate  you,  and  to  look  upon  you  as  rebels,  through  your 
very  faithfulness  to  me.  Go,  leave  me  to  die  alone  in  this 
spot,  where  I  find  no  longer  a  voice,  except  to  bid  you 
farewell !  But  I  feel  that  I  am  being  lifted  up,  and  the  air 
opens  a  way  for  me,  whence  you  shall  no  longer  hear  this 
dying  voice.  Farewell,  princes;  farewell  for  the  last  time. 
See  whether  you  can  any  longer  entertain  a  doubt  about 
my  fate.  (Psche  is  lifted  up  into  the  air  by  two  Zephyrs. 

AG.  We  are  losing  sight  of  her.  Let  us  both  go  to 
seek  on  the  height  of  this  rock,  the  means,  princes,  of 
following  her. 

CLE.  Let  us  go  and  seek  the  means  of  not  surviving 
her. 

SCENE  V. — CUPID,  in  the  air.14 

Go  and  die,  rivals  of  a  jealous  god,  whose  anger  you 
deserve  for  having  had  your  hearts  alive  to  the  same 
charms.  And  you,  Vulcan,  cast  a  thousand  brilliant  orna- 

1J  The  original  has  cTautres  moi-memes. 

14  This  Cupid  was  probably  played  by  a  son  of  the  actor  La  ThorilliSre. 
(See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.)  In 
the  following  acts,  Baron  played  this  part. 

SCBNS  i.]  PSYCHE.  309 

ments  wherewith  to  adorn  a  palace,  in  which  Cupid  shall 
dry  Psyche's  tears,  and  surrender  his  arms  to  her. 

SECOND  INTERLUDE. 

The  scene  is  changed  to  a  magnificent  court,  adorned  with 
columns  of  lapis  lazuli,  and  enriched  by  golden  figures,  form- 
ing a  gorgeous  and  dazzling  palace  which  Cupid  has  prepared 
for  Psyche.  Six  Cyclops,  with  four  Fairies,  perform  an 
entry  of  a  ballet,  in  which,  keeping  time  to  music,  they  finish 
four  large  silver  vases,  which  the  Fairies  have  brought.  This 
entry  is  interrupted  by  the  recital  of  Vulcan,  which  he  re- 
peats twice. 

First  Couplet. 

Make  haste,  prepare  these  spots  for  the  most  amiable  of 
gods ;  let  every  one  be  interested  for  him ;  forget  nothing 
of  what  is  wanted.  When  Cupid  presses,  one  cannot  be 
too  quick. 

Cupid  does  not  like  postponing ;  work,  make  haste, 
strike ;  increase  your  blows :  let  the  desire  of  pleasing  him 
make  your  labours  of  the  sweetest. 

Second  Couplet. 

Serve  him  well,  this  charming  god ;  he  is  pleased  with 
great  attention.  Let  every  one  be  interested  in  him ;  for- 
get nothing  of  what  is  wanted.  When  Cupid  presses,  one 
cannot  be  too  quick. 

Cupid  does  not  like  postponing ;  work,  make  haste, 
strike  ;  increase  your  blows.  Let  the  desire  of  pleasing 
him  make  your  labours  of  the  sweetest. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — CUPID,"  ZEPHYR. 

ZE.  Yes,  I  think  I  have  acquitted  myself  very  gallantly 
of  the  commission  which  you  have  given  me.     From  the 

15  It  is  most  likely  that  Baron  played  Cupid  in  this  and  the  following 
acts,  otherwise  the  remarks  of  Zephyr  about  the  great  change  in  the  ap- 
pearance of  Love  would  be  out  of  place. 

310  PSYCHE.  [ACT  HI. 

summit  of  the  rock,  I  have  brought  this  beauty,  gently 
through  mid-air,  into  this  fair  enchanted  palace,  where, 
in  full  liberty,  you  can  dispose  of  her  fate.  But  you  sur- 
prise me,  by  the  great  change  which  you  have  made  in 
your  appearance ;  this  figure,  these  features,  and  this 
dress,  altogether  conceal  who  you  are  ;  and  I  give  it  to 
the  sharpest  to  recognize  Cupid  in  you  this  day. 

CUP.  Neither  do  I  wish  to  be  known  ;  my  heart  only  I 
wish  to  reveal  to  Psyche,  nothing  but  the  beautiful  trans- 
ports of  this  ardent  passion  with  which  her  sweet  charms 
have  inspired  it ;  and,  to  express  their  amorous  languor, 
and  to  conceal  who  I  may  be  from  the  eyes  of  her  who 
commands  me,  I  have  taken  the  form  which  you  now  be- 
hold. 

ZE.  You  are  a  great  master  in  everything  ;  it  is  by  this 
that  I  recognize  it.  Beneath  disguises  of  various  natures, 
we  have  seen  the  love-sick  gods  endeavour  to  relieve  the 
sweet  wound  which  hearts  receive  from  your  fiery  arrows ; 
but  you  have  the  superiority  over  them  in  good  sense ; 
and  this  is  just  the  very  figure  to  command  a  happy 
success  with  the  amiable  sex,  to  whom  we  offer  up  our 
devotions.  Yes,  the  assistance  derived  from  the  shape  is 
very  great ;  and,  apart  from  all  rank  or  wit,  whosoever 
finds  the  means  of  making  such  an  appearance  never  sighs 
in  vain. 

CUP.  I  have  resolved,  dear  Zephyr,  always  to  remain 
thus ;  and  no  one  will  find  anything  to  gainsay  in  that,  to 
the  eldest  of  all  the  love  gods.  It  is  time  to  leave  off  this 
long  infancy  which  tries  my  patience ;  it  is  time  that 
henceforth  I  should  become  grown-up. 

ZE.  Very  good.  You  cannot  do  better ;  the  more  so 
as  you  are  entering  upon  an  adventure  which  has  nothing 
childish  in  it. 

CUP.  This  change  will,  no  doubt,  vex  my  mother. 

ZE.  I  anticipate  some  little  anger  at  this.  Although 
disputes  about  age  should  have  no  place  among  immor- 
tals, your  mother,  Venus,  has  in  this  the  temper,  of  all  fair 
ones,  who  do  not  like  grown-up  children.16  But  where  I 

*'  Apuleius  makes  Venus  say,  "  Ought  I  not  to  be  very  happy  to  be 
crlled  a  grandmother  in  the  flower  of  my  age  ?" 

SCENBII.]  PSYCHE.  311 

think  her  most  offended,  is  in  the  proceeding  you  are  en- 
gaged in  ;  and  it  is  avenging  her  strangely  to  love  the 
fair  one  whom  she  wished  to  punish  !  This  hatred,  to 
which  it  was  her  desire  that  the  power  of  a  son,  whom 
even  the  gods  fear,  should  lend  itself  .  .  . 

CUP.  Let  us  leave  this,  Zephyr,  and  tell  me  if  you  do 
not  think  Psyche  the  fairest  maid  in  the  world  ?  Is  there 
aught  on  earth,  is  there  aught  in  the  Heavens,  that  could 
dispute  with  her  the  glorious  title  of  beauty  without  a 
rival  ?  But  I  see  her,  dear  Zephyr,  standing  astonished 
at  the  splendour  of  this  spot. 

ZE.  You  can  show  yourself,  to  finish  her  martyrdom,  to 
disclose  to  her  her  glorious  destiny,  and  to  tell  each  other, 
between  yourselves,  all  that  sighs,  lips,  and  eyes  can  con- 
vey. As  a  discreet  confidant,  I  know  what  I  have  to  do 
to  interrupt  an  amorous  interview.17 

SCENE  II. — PSYCHE,  alone. 

Where  am  I  ?  and  in  a  spot  which  I  imagined  desolate; 
what  skilful  hand  has  built  this  palace,  which  art  and 
nature  have  adorned  with  the  rarest  collection  that  the 
eyes  may  for  ever  go  on  admiring?  Everything  smiles, 
shines,  and  dazzles  in  these  gardens,  in  these  rooms,  the 
splendid  belongings  of  which  contain  nought  but  what 
enchants  and  pleases ;  and  in  which,  wherever  my  affrighted 
looks  turn,  I  behold  nought  but  gold  and  flowers  'neath  my 
steps.  Can  Heaven  have  made  this  pile  of  marvels  for  the 
abode  of  a  serpent;*  And  when,  by  their  sight,  it  amuses 
and  suspends  the  matchless  cruelty  of  my  relentless  fate, 
does  it  wish  to  show  its  repentance  thereat  ?  No,  no  ,*  it 
is  the  blackest,  the  severest  stroke  of  its  hatred,  so  fruitful 
in  cruelties,  which,  by  a  sternness  fresh  and  without 
parallel,  displays  the  choice  it  has  made,  of  everything  the 
most  beautiful  on  earth,  only  for  me  to  leave  it  with  the 
greater  regret.  How  ridiculous  is  my  expectation, 18  if  by 
this  it  thinks  to  assuage  my  grief!  Each  moment  that  my 
death  is  postponed  is  a  fresh  misfortune ;  the  longer  it 

17  Moliere  wrote  this  Act  himself. 

18  What  can  Psyche's  expectation  be,  unless,  as  Moland  suggests,  that 
she,  after  having  upbraided  Heaven  with  its  cruelty,  hopes  for  some  alle- 
viation of  her  lot,  some  repentance  of  stern  Fate. 

312  PSYCHE.  [ACT  m. 

delays,  the  oftener  I  die.  Do  not  make  me  languish  any 
longer  ;  come  to  take  your  victim,  your  monster,  who  are 
to  tear  me  asunder  !  Am  I  to  seek  you,  and  am  I  to 
stimulate  your  fury  to  devour  me?  If  Heaven  will  my 
death,  if  my  life  be  a  crime,  then  dare,  in  short,  to  seize 
upon  the  little  life  which  remains  to  me.  I  am  weary  of 
murmuring  against  a  legitimate  punishment ;  I  am  weary 
of  sighing;  come,  so  that  I  may  finish,  and  die. 

SCENE  III. — CUPID,  PSYCHE,  ZEPHYR. 

CUP.  Behold  him,  this  serpent,  this  pitiless  monster, 
which  a  wondrous  oracle  has  prepared  for  you,  and  who 
may,  perhaps,  not  be  so  horrible  as  you  imagined  him  to 
yourself.19 

Ps.  You,  my  lord,  can  you  be  this  monster  with  whom 
the  oracle  has  threatened  my  sad  days ;  you,  who  rather 
seem  a  god  who,  by  a  miracle,  has  vouchsafed  to  come 
to  my  aid  ! 

CUP.  What  need  of  aid  in  the  midst  of  an  empire  in 
which  everything  that  breathes  awaits  but  your  glances  to 
submit  to  their  laws,  where  you  have  to  fear  no  other 
monster  but  me  ? 

Ps.  How  little  fear  a  monster  like  you  inspires  !  And 
if  there  be  any  poison,  how  little  occasion  one  would 
have  to  venture  upon  the  least  complaint  against  a 
favourable  attack  of  which  every  heart  would  fear  the 
cure  !  Scarce  do  I  behold  you,  but  my  terrors  cease,  and 
let  the  image  of  my  death  vanish  into  air;  and  I  feel 
rushing  through  my  chilled  veins  an  indefinable  fire  which 
I  knew  not  before.  I  have  felt  esteem  and  good-will, 
friendship,  gratitude ;  innocent  sorrows  have  caused  me 
to  feel  the  power  of  compassion :  but  I  have  never  felt 
yet  what  I  feel  now.  I  know  not  what  it  is ;  but  I  know 
that  it  delights  me  ;  that  I  conceive  not  the  slightest 
alarm  at  it.  The  more  I  fix  my  eyes  on  you,  the  more  I 
feel  myself  charmed.  All  which  I  felt  before  did  not 

19  As  we  have  seen  in  the  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play,  Cupid  is  in- 
visible to  Psyche  in  Apuleius'  tale ;  Moliere  represents  him  as  a  young, 
handsome  mortal,  having  left  behind  him  his  wings,  his  bow  and  arrows, 
bis  torch,  and  all  his  god-like  attributes. 

scwf*iix.J  PSYCHE.  313 

produce  the  same  effect ;  and  if  I  knew  what  it  is  to  love, 
my  lord,  I  would  tell  you  that  I  love  you.  Do  not  turn 
from  me  those  eyes  which  poison  me,  those  tender,  pierc- 
ing, but  yet  amorous  eyes,  which  seem  to  share  in  the 
emotion  which  they  evoke.  Alas  !  the  more  dangerous 
they  are,  the  more  pleased  am  I  to  gaze  upon  them.  By 
what  command  of  Heaven,  which  I  cannot  understand, 
do  I  say  to  you  more  than  I  ought ;  I,  whose  modesty 
might  at  least  have  waited  until  you  explained  to  me  the 
trouble  in  which  I  see  you?  You  sigh,  my  lord,  as  I 
sigh  ;  your  senses  appear  stunned  as  well  as  mine.  It  is 
for  me  to  keep  silence,  for  you  to  tell  me  so ;  and  yet  it 
is  I  who  say  it.20 

CUP.  You  always  had  so  hard  a  heart,  Psyche,  that  you 
must  not  be  surprised  if,  to  repair  the  injury,  Love,  at 
this  moment,  repays  himself  with  usury  for  what  ought 
to  have  been  given  to  him.  The  moment  has  come  when 
your  lips  must  breathe  sighs  so  long  repressed  ;  when, 
tearing  you  away  from  this  sullen  humour,  a  multitude  of 
transports,  as  sweet  as  they  are  unknown,  come  all  to- 
gether to  touch  your  heart,  as  intensely  as  they  ought  to 
have  done  during  the  many  fine  days  of  which  this  un- 
feeling soul  has  profaned  the  flight. 

Ps.  Is  it  then  so  great  a  crime  not  to  love? 

CUP.  Do  not  you  suffer  a  great  punishment  from  it  ? 

Ps.  It  is  punishing  sweetly  enough. 

CUP.  It  is  choosing  its  legitimate  penalty,  and,  on  this 
glorious  day,  is  rendering  itself  justice  for  a  want  of  love, 
by  an  excess  of  love. 

Ps.  Why  have  I  not  been  punished  sooner  ?  I  place  all 
the  happiness  of  my  life  in  it.  I  ought  to  blush  at  it,  or 
say  it  more  softly  ;  but  the  punishment  has  too  many 

20  Tradition  states  that  these  beautiful  lines,  in  which  the  passion  of 
love  is  so  well  described,  were  written  by  Corneille,  then  sixty-five  years 
old,  and  at  that  time  enamoured  of  Madame  Moliere,  who  represented 
Psyche.  It  further  mentions  that,  a  year  later,  he  paid  her  fresh  homage 
in  putting  some  lines,  about  the  power  that  Cupid  possesses  in  the  hearts 
of  old  men,  into  the  mouth  of  Martian,  in  the  tragedy  of  Pulcheria.  It  is 
difficult  to  say  at  the  present  time  if  Corneille  was  ever  in  love  with  Mo- 
liere's  wife  ;  but  Pulcheria  was  acted,  not  at  the  Palais-Royal,  but  at  the 
Theatre  du  Marais,  and  the  part  of  the  heroine  was  played  by  Made- 
moiselle Dupin. 

3 14  PSYCHE.  [ACT  in. 

charms.  Allow  me  that,  aloud,  I  say  it  and  re-say  it ;  I 
would  say  it  a  hundred  times,  and  not  blush  at  it.  It  is 
not  I  who  speak ;  and  the  astonishing  empire,  the  gentle 
violence  of  your  presence,  take  possession  of  my  voice 
the  moment  I  wish  to  speak.  In  vain  my  modesty  is 
secretly  offended  by  it,  in  vain  my  sex  and  propriety  dare 
prescribe  me  other  laws  ;  your  eyes  themselves  choose  my 
answer  for  me,  and  my  lips,  enslaved  by  their  mighty 
power,  consult  me  no  longer  about  what  I  owe  to  myself. 

CUP.  You  may  believe,  fair  Psyche,  you  may  believe 
what  they  tell  you,  these  eyes  which  have  no  jealousy ;  let 
yours  vie  with  them  in  informing  me  of  all  that  passes 
within  you.  You  may  believe  in  this  heart  which  sighs, 
and  which,  as  long  as  yours  will  respond  to  it,  will  tell 
you  more  in  one  sigh  than  a  hundred  looks  could  tell.  It 
is  the  sweetest,  the  strongest,  and  the  surest  language 
of  all. 

Ps.  The  understanding  was  due  to  our  hearts  to  make 
them  equally  satisfied.  I  have  sighed,  you  have  under- 
stood me  ;  you  sigh,  I  understand  you.  But  leave  me  no 
longer  in  doubt,  my  lord,  and  tell  me,  if,  by  the  same 
route,  Zephyr  has  conducted  you  hither  after  me,  to  tell 
me  what  I  am  now  listening  to.  When  I  arrived,  were 
you  expected?  And  when  you  speak  to  him,  are  you 
obeyed  ? 

CUP.  In  these  sweet  regions  I  bear  sovereign  sway,  as 
you  bear  it  over  my  heart ;  Cupid  protects  me  ;  and  it  is 
for  his  sake  that  Eolus  has  placed  Zephyr  at  my  disposal. 
It  is  Cupid  himself  who,  to  see  my  devotions  rewarded, 
has  dictated  this  oracle,  which,  by  threatening  your  charm- 
ing existence,  has  rid  you  of  a  crowd  of  lovers,  and  de- 
livered of  the  eternal  obstacle  of  so  many  eager  sighs, 
which  were  not  worthy  of  being  addressed  to  you.  Do 
not  ask  me  which  is  this  province,  nor  the  name  of  its 
prince  :  you  shall  know  it  when  the  time  comes.  I  wish 
to  win  you  ;  but  it  is  by  my  attentions,  by  assiduous  care 
and  constant  devotion,  by  the  amorous  sacrifices  of  all 
that  I  am,  of  all  that  I  can  do,  without  the  dazzle  of  my 
rank  pleading  for  me,  without  making  a  merit  of  my 
power ;  and,  although  I  am  sovereign  in  this  happy  spot, 
I  will  not  owe  you,  Psyche,  to  anything  but  my  love. 

SCENIC.]  PSVCHE.  315 

Come,  and  admire  its  wonders,  princess,  and  prepare  your 
eyes  and  your  ears  for  its  delights.  In  it  you  shall  behold 
woods  and  meadows  contend  by  their  charms  with  gold 
and  precious  stones ;  you  shall  hear  nothing  but  sweet 
concerts ;  a  hundred  fair  ones  shall  attend  on  you,  who 
shall  adore  without  envying,  and  shall  sue  at  every  mo- 
ment, with  subjected  and  delighted  souls,  for  the  honour 
of  your  commands. 

Ps.  My  will  does  but  wait  upon  yours.  I  could  not 
have  any  other ;  but,  after  all,  your  oracle  separates  me 
from  two  sisters  and  the  king,  my  father,  whom  my 
imaginary  death  reduces,  all  three,  to  bewail  me.  To  dissi- 
pate the  error  by  which  their  bowed-down  hearts  find 
themselves  filled  with  mortal  grief,  suffer  my  sisters  to  be 
witnesses  of  my  glory  and  of  your  devotions.  Lend  them, 
as  you  have  done  to  me,  the  wings  of  Zephyr,  which  may 
facilitate,  as  they  have  done  to  me,  access  to  your  empire. 
Show  them  in  what  spot  I  breathe;  make  them  admire 
the  success  of  my  loss. 

CUP.  You  do  not  yield  all  your  heart  up  to  me,  Psyche ; 
this  tender  recollection  of  a  father  and  two  sisters  robs  me 
in  part  of  the  sweets  which  I  claim  all  in  all  for  my 
passion.  Have  no  eyes  but  for  me,  who  have  none  but  for 
you;  think  of  nought  but  of  loving  me,  think  of  nought 
but  of  pleasing  me ;  and,  when  such  cares  venture  to  dis- 
tract you  .  .  . 

Ps.   Can  one  be  jealous  of  the  affections  of  relatives  ? 

CUP.  I  am  so,  my  Psyche  ;  I  am  so  of  all  nature.  The 
sun's  rays  kiss  you  too  frequently ;  your  tresses  have  too 
much  of  the  dallyings  of  the  wind ;  the  moment  it  toys 
with  them,  I  murmur  at  it.  Even  the  air  which  you 
breathe  with  too  much  pleasure  passes  between  your  lips  : 
Your  dress  encircles  you  too  closely ;  and  when  you  sigh, 
I  know  not  what  makes  me  uneasy  and  fear,  amongst 
your  sighs,  some  errant  ones.  But  you  wish  for  your  sisters; 
go,  depart,  Zephyr;  Psyche  wills  it,  I  cannot  refuse  it.21 

SCENE  IV. — CUPID,  PSYCHE. 
CUP.  When  you  shall  show  them  this  h^npy  dwelling, 

n  This  passages  is  imitated  from  Theophile  de  Viau's  tragedy  of  Pyra* 
mus  and  Thisbe  (Act  iv.,  Scene  ij,  played  in  1621. 

3l6  PSYCHE.  rACT  m 

make  them  a  hundred  gifts  from  amo  g  these  treasures. 
Lavish  caresses  upon  caresses  on  them ;  and  exhaust  the 
tenderness  of  relationship  if  you  can,  to  abandon  yourself 
afterwards  entirely  to  my  love.  I  shall  not  intrude  my 
unwelcome  presence.  But  do  not  give  them  too  long  inter- 
views: whatever  amiability  you  have  for  them  must  be 
robbed  from  mine. 

Ps.  Your  love  grants  me  a  grace  which  I  shall  never 
abuse. 

CUP.  Let  us,  meanwhile,  go  and  see  these  gardens,  this 
palace,  in  which  you  shall  see  nothing  but  what  will  pale 
before  your  own  brilliancy.  And  you,  little  Loves,  and 
you,  young  Zepyhrs,  who  have  no  souls22  but  tender  sighs, 
now  vie  with  each  other  in  showing  what  you  feel  in  be- 
holding my  princess. 

THIRD   INTERLUDE. 

An  entry  of  the  ballet  of  four  Cupids,  and  four  Zephyrs, 
twice  interrupted  by  a  dialogue,  sung  by  a  Cupid  and  a 
Zephyr. 

CUPID,  PSYCHE. 

ZE.  Amiable  youth,  follow  tenderness;  join  to  fine 
days  the  sweets  of  love.  It  is  to  surprise  you,  that  they 
tell  you,  that  you  should  avoid  their  sighs,  and  fear  their 
desires.  Allow  them  to  teach  you  what  their  pleasures 
are. 

TOGETHER.  Everyone  is  bound  to  love  in  his  turn  ;  and 
the  more  charms  one  possesses,  the  more  one  owes  to 
Love. 

ZE.  A  young  and  tender  heart  is  made  to  surrender ; 
it  will  not  avail  to  turn  away  from  it. 

TOGETHER.  Every  one  is  bound  to  love  in  his  turn  ; 

M  Here  presents  itself  a  trifling  difficulty  in  the  translation.  The  ori- 
ginal copy  of  Psyche,  vhich  I  have  consulted,  has  ames,  ~  ..-is,  without  the 
circumflex  accent;  so  '.••.as  Lemerre,  in  the  faithful  reprint  orthe  first  edi- 
tion of  Moliere's  plays ;  Moland  has  antes.  But  Taschereau  :  1  Lou- 
andre,  in  their  editions  of  our  author,  have  armes,  arms,  which  seems  to 
me  to  make  better  sense.  However,  I  have  followed  the  original  copy. 

SCENE  1. 1  PSYCHE.  317 

and  the  more  charms  one  possesses,  the  more  one  owes  to 
Love. 

CUP.  Why  defend  one's  self?  What  boots  it  to  delay? 
One  day  lost,  is  lost  without  retrieve. 

TOGETHER.  Every  one  is  bound  to  love  in  his  turn  ; 
and  the  more  charms  one  possesses,  the  more  one  owes  to 
Love. 

SECOND  VERSE. 

ZE.  Love  has  his  charms.  Let  us  yield  him  our  arms. 
His  cares  and  his  tears  are  not  without  sweets.  To  follow 
him,  a  heart  abandons  itself  to  a  hundred  ills.  To  taste 
his  pleasures,  one  must  suffer  almost  death.  But  not  to 
love,  is  not  to  live. 

TOGETHER.  If  love  entails  so  many  cares  and  griefs, 
one  happy  moment  repays  a  thousand  ills. 

ZE.  There  is  fear,  there  is  hope ;  there  is  mystery 
needed;  but  nothing  good  is  ever  obtained  without 
trouble. 

TOGETHER.  If  love  entails  so  many  cares  and  griefs,  one 
happy  moment  repays  a  thousand  ills. 

CUP.  What  can  be  better  than  to  love  and  to  please  ? 
It  is  a  charming  care,  a  lover's  task. 

TOGETHER.  If  love  entails  so  many  cares  and  griefs,  one 
happy  moment  repays  a  thousand  ills. 

ACT  IV. 

The  scene  changes  to  another  magnificent  palace,  inter- 
sected at  the  back  by  a  vestibule,  across  which  is  seen  a 
charming  and  magnificent  garden,  decorat.J  with  several 
vases,  with  orange  ^::d  other  trees,  laden  wit?;  all  kinds  of 
fruits. 

SCENE  I — AcLAURA,28  CYDIPPE. 

ACL.  It  is  inc.-dible,  sister,  I  have  beheld  too  many 
marvels ;  futurity  will  have  a  great  difficulty  in  conceiv- 
ing fhem  ;  the  sun  who  sees  all,  and  who  shows  us  all, 
has  never  seen  the  like.  They  vex  my  mind  ;  this  bril- 

33  Aglaura's  speech  is  imitated  from  Apuleius. 

318  PSYCHE.  IACT  nr. 

liant  palace,  this  pompous  train,  are  so  much  odious  dis- 
play, which  fills  me  with  shame  as  much  as  with  vexation. 
How  niggardly  Fortune  treats  us,  and  how  blindly,  in 
her  indiscreet  prodigality,  she  lavishes,  nay,  exhausts, 
combines  all  her  efforts  to  heap  together  so  many  treasures 
for  the  share  of  a  younger  sister  ! 

CYD.  I  enter  into  all  your  feelings  ;  I  have  similar  vex- 
ations ;  and  everything  that  displeases  you  in  this  charm- 
ing spot  wounds  me  also  ;  all  that  you  take  as  a  mortal 
insult  overwhelms  me,  as  it  does  you,  and  leaves  me  with 
bitterness  in  the  heart  and  a  blush  on  the  brow. 

AGL.  No,  sister,  there  are  no  queens  who,  in  their  own 
state,  speak  as  sovereigns,  as  Psyche  speaks  in  these  re- 
gions ;  with  promptitude  she  is  obeyed,  and  an  amorous 
studiousness  fathoms  her  desires  from  her  very  eyes.  A 
thousand  fair  ones  press  around  her,  and  to  our  jealous 
glances  seem  to  say:  Whatever  our  attractions  may  be, 
she  is  still  more  beautiful,  and  we  who  serve  her,  are  yet 
more  fair  than  you.  She  pronounces,  they  execute  ;  no 
one  gainsays,  no  one  cavils.  Flora,  who  attends  her 
every  step,  strews  with  lavish  hands  around  her  her  sweet- 
est gifts.  Zephyr  flies  at  the  commands  which  she  gives ; 
and  his  mistress  and  he,  enchanted  by  her  charms,  forget 
to  love  each  other  in  their  eagerness  to  wait  upon  her. 

CYD.  She  has  gods  in  her  service ;  soon  she  will  have 
altars  ;  and  we  command  but  paltry  mortals,  whose  auda- 
city and  caprice,  revolting  secretly  each  moment  against 
us,  oppose  murmurs  or  artifice  to  our  desires. 

AGL.  It  was  little  that  at  our  court  all  hearts,  vicing 
with  each  other,  would  have  preferred  her  to  us ;  it  was 
not  enough  that,  night  and  day,  she  should  be  idolized 
there  by  a  host  of  lovers ;  when  we  were  consoling  our- 
selves to  see  her  in  her  grave  by  the  unforeseen  decree  of 
the  oracle,  she  wishes  to  display  the  miracle  of  her  fresh 
destiny  to  our  very  faco,  and  to  choose  our  eyes  to  witness 
that  which  we  de3i'rJ  -,;ke  least.24 

CYD.  What  vexes  r-te  most,  is  this  lover  so  perfect  and 
so  worthy  to  please,  *rho  is  captive  beneath  her  sway.  If 
we  could  choose  amongst  all  the  monarchs,  is  there  one, 

M  This,  again,  is  taken  from  Apuleius. 

SCBNBH.]  PSYCHE.  319 

from  among  so  many  kings,  who  bears  such  marks  of 
nobleness?  To  find  one's  self  favoured  beyond  one's 
wishes,  is  often  nothing  but  a  happiness  which  makes 
one  wretched ;  there  are  no  pompous  trains  nor  superb 
palaces  but  what  leave  some  door  open  to  incurable  evils, 
but  to  have  a  lover  of  consummate  worth,  and  to  see 
one's  self  dearly  beloved  by  him,  is  a  happiness  so  great, 
so  elevated,  that  its  grandeur  cannot  be  expressed. 

AGL.  Let  us  speak  no  longer  of  it,  sister,  we  should  die 
with  vexation.  Let  us  rather  think  about  revenge,  and 
let  us  find  the  means  of  breaking  this  adorable  under- 
standing between  him  and  her.  Here  she  comes.  I  have 
some  blows  ready  to  strike  her  with,  which  she  will  with 
difficulty  avoid. 

SCENE  II.- — PSYCHE,  AGLAURA,  CYDIPPE. 

Ps.  I  have  come  to  say  farewell  to  you ;  my  lover  sends 
you  back,  and  is  no  longer  able  to  endure  that  you  should 
debar  him  for  one  moment  from  the  joy  which  he  takes 
in  seeing  himself  the  only  one  to  attend  upon  me.  In  a 
simple  glance,  in  the  least  word,  his  love  finds  charms  of 
which  I  am  robbing  him,  in  favour  of  my  own  blood,  in 
bestowing  them  on  my  sisters. 

AGL.  The  jealousy  is  sufficiently  fine  drawn  ;  and  these 
delicate  feelings  well  deserve  the  idea  that  he  who  has 
so  much  warmth  for  you,  surpasses  the  ordinary  run  of 
lovers.  I  speak  to  you  thus,  for  want  of  knowing  him. 
You  do  not  know  his  name,  nor  those  who  gave  him 
birth :  our  minds  are  alarmed  at  it.  I  hold  him  to  be  a 
great  prince,  and  of  a  supreme  power,  far  above  that  of 
the  diadem ;  his  treasures,  lavishly  strewn  beneath  your 
steps,  are  such  as  to  make  abundance  itself  ashamed ;  you 
]  jve  him  as  much  as  he  loves  you ;  he  charms  you,  and 
you  charm  him ;  your  happiness  would  be  extreme,  sister, 
if  you  knew  whom  you  loved. 

Ps.  What  does  it  matter  to  me?  I  am  beloved  by  him. 
The  more  he  sees  me,  the  more  I  please  him.  There  are 
no  pleasures  that  could  delight  the  heart  but  what  antici- 
pate my  wishes ;  and  I  do  not  see  how  yours  need  be 
alarmed,  when  everything  serves  me  in  this  palace. 

AGL.  What  matters  it  that  everything  serves  you  here, 

320  PSYCHE.  [ACT  iv. 

if  this  lover  for  ever  conceals  from  you  who  he  is  ?  We 
are  alarmed  only  in  your  interest.  In  vain  everything 
smiles  upon  you,  in  vain  everything  pleases  you  here,  true 
love  conceals  nothing ;  and  he  who  persists  in  hiding  him- 
self feels  something  within  with  which  he  might  be  re- 
proached. If  this  lover  should  become  fickle,  for  often  in 
love  variety  is  sufficiently  sweet ;  and  I  make  bold  to  say 
it  between  ourselves,  for  great  as  is  the  brilliancy  with 
which  these  features  shine,  there  may  be  others  elsewhere 
as  beautiful  as  you ;  if,  I  say  another  object  should  draw 
him  beneath  another  sway ;  if,  in  the  position  I  see  you, 
alone  in  his  hands,  and  defenceless,  he  resorts  to  violence, 
on  whom  is  the  king  to  avenge  you  for  this  change,  or  for 
this  insolence? 

Ps.  Sister,  you  make  me  shudder.  Just  Heaven  !  could 
I  be  unfortunate  enough  .  . 

CVD.  Who  knows  but  what  the  bonds  of  Hymen  may 
already  .  .  . 

Ps.   Proceed  not ;  it  would  kill  me. 

AGL.  I  have  but  one  word  more  to  say  to  you.  This 
prince  who  loves  you,  and  who  commands  the  winds,  who 
gives  us  the  wings  of  Zephyr  as  a  car,  and  with  fresh  plea- 
sures loads  you  every  moment,  mixes  perhaps  with  all  his 
love  a  little  of  imposture,  when  he  to  your  eyes  breaks  the 
order  of  nature ;  perhaps  this  palace  is  nothing  but  an 
illusion,  and  these  gilded  wainscoatings,  this  heap  of  riches, 
with  which  he  buys  your  tenderness,  may  vanish  in  a  mo- 
ment, when  he  shall  have  become  tired  of  your  caresses. 
You  know  as  well  as  we  what  may  be  done  by  magic. 

Ps.    What  cruel  alarms  I  feel  in  my  turn  ! 

AGL.  Our  friendship  looks  but  to  your  good  ! 

Ps.  Farewell,  sisters  ;  let  us  finish  the  conversation.  I 
love,  and  I  fear  that  he  may  become  impatient.  Now  go ; 
and  to-morrow,  if  I  can,  you  shall  see  me  more  happy,  01 
more  overwhelmed  by  the  mortal  grief. 

AGL.  We  will  tell  the  king  what  fresh  glory,  what  excess 
of  happiness  is  being  showered  upon  you. 

CYD.  We  will  relate  to  him  the  surprising  and  marvel- 
lous history  of  so  sweet  a  change. 

Ps.  Do  not  make  him  uneasy,  sister,  by  your  suspicions; 
and  when  you  depict  to  him  so  charming  an  empire  .  .  . 

SCBNII  HI.)  KYCHE.  321 

AGL.  We  both  know  well  enough  what  to  withhold  or 
what  to  tell,  and  have  no  need  of  any  lessons  on  that 
score. 

(Zephyr  carries  the  two  sisters  of  Psyche  away  in  a 
cloud,  which  comes  down  to  the  earth,  and  in 
which  he  bears  them  rapidly  away.) 

SCENE  III. — CUPID,  PSYCHE. 

CUP.  At  last  you  are  alone,  and  I  can  tell  you  again, 
without  having  your  two  importunate  sisters  for  witnesses, 
what  sway  these  lovely  eyes  have  gained  over  me,  and 
what  excess  there  is  in  the  joys  inspired  by  sincere  affec- 
tion, the  moment  it  joins  two  hearts.  I  can  explain  to 
you  the  love-sick  ardour  of  my  ravished  soul,  and  swear 
to  you  that,  subjected  to  you  alone,  it  has  no  other  aim 
in  its  delights  than  to  see  this  ardour  met  by  a  similar 
ardour ;  to  conceive  no  other  wish  than  to  mould  my  de- 
votions to  your  desires,  and  to  take  all  my  pleasures  in 
whatever  pleases  you.  But  how  comes  it  that  a  sombre 
cloud  seems  to  dim  the  lustre  of  these  beautiful  eyes?  Is 
there  aught  you  wish  for  in  these  spots  ?  Do  you  disdain 
the  homage  of  the  devotion  offered  to  you  here  ? 

Ps.  No,  my  lord. 

CUP.  What  is  it  then  ?  and  whence  comes  my  misfor- 
tune? I  hear  fewer  sighs  of  love  than  of  grief;  I  perceive 
the  faded  roses  in  your  complexion  mark  a  secret  sorrow ; 
hardly  are  your  sisters  gone,  than  you  sigh  with  regret. 
Ah  !  Psyche,  when  the  passion  of  two  hearts  is  the  same, 
have  they  different  sighs?  And  when  one  loves  sin- 
cerely, and  beholds  what  one  loves,  can  one  think  of  re- 
latives? 

Ps.  It  is  not  that  which  afflicts  me. 

CUP.  Is  it  the  absence  of  a  rival,  and  of  a  beloved  rival > 
which  causes  me  to  be  neglected? 

Ps.  How  little  have  you  penetrated  into  a  heart  entirely 
yours !  I  love  you,  my  lord,  and  my  heart  is  annoyed  at 
the  unworthy  suspicion  which  you  have  formed.  You  do- 
not  know  your  own  worth,  if  you  fear  not  to  be  beloved. 
I  love  you ;  and  since  I  first  saw  the  light,  I  have  shown 
myself  proud  enough  to  disdain  the  devotion  of  more  than 
one  king.  And,  if  I  am  to  open  my  whole  heart  to  you, 

VOL.  III.  V 

322  PSYCHE.  [ACT  nr. 

I  have  found  no  one  but  you  who  was  worthy  of  me.  Ne- 
vertheless I  have  some  grief  which  in  vain  I  would  conceal 
from  you;  a  carking  care  mixes  with  all  my  affection,  from 
which  I  cannot  separate  it.  Do  not  ask  me  the  cause : 
perhaps,  knowing  it,  you  would  punish  me  for  it ;  and  if 
I  still  dare  to  aspire  to  any  thing,  I  am  at  least  sure  not  to 
incur  it. 

CUP.  What !  are  you  not  afraid  that  I,  in  my  turn,  shall 
be  annoyed  that  you  so  little  know  your  worth;  or  do  you 
pretend  not  to  know  how  absolute  your  sway  is  over  me  ? 
Ah  !  if  you  doubt  it,  be  undeceived.  Speak  ! 

Ps.  I  shall  have  the  affront  of  seeing  myself  refused. 

CUP.  Think  better  of  me;  the  trial  is  easy.  Speak, 
everything  holds  itself  in  readiness  for  your  commands. 
If,  to  believe  me,  you  require  oaths,  I  swear  by  your  lovely 
eyes,  those  masters  of  my  soul,  those  divine  authors  of  my 
love ;  and  if  it  be  not  enough  to  swear  by  your  lovely 
eyes,  I  swear  by  the  Styx,  as  the  gods  swear. 

Ps.  I  dare  to  fear  a  little  less,  after  this  assurance.  My 
lord,  I  here  behold  pomp  and  abundance ;  I  adore  you, 
and  you  love  me ;  my  heart  is  delighted  at  it,  my  senses 
charmed  by  it;  but,  amidst  this  supreme  happiness,  I  have 
the  misfortune  not  to  know  whom  I  love:  dissipate  this 
ignorance,  and  allow  me  to  know  so  perfect  a  lover. 

CUP.  Psyche,  what  have  you  said  ? 

Ps.  That  this  is  the  happiness  to  which  I  aspire :  and 
if  you  do  not  grant  it  to  me  .  .  . 

CUP.  I  have  sworn  it,  I  am  no  longer  the  master  of  it: 
but  you  do  not  know  what  you  ask.  Let  me  keep  my  se- 
cret. If  I  make  myself  known,  I  lose  you,  and  you  lose 
me.  The  sole  remedy  is  to  retract  it. 

Ps.  Is  that  my  sovereign  sway  over  you  ? 

CUP.  You  are  all-powerful,  and  I  am  entirely  yours. 
But  if  our  flame  seems  sweet  to  you,  do  not  place  an  ob- 
stacle to  its  charming  continuation ;  do  not  force  me  to 
flight ;  that  is  the  least  misfortune  that  could  result  to  us 
from  the  wish  that  has  seduced  you. 

Ps.  My  lord,  you  wish  to  test  me ;  but  I  know  what  I 
ought  to  believe.  Pray,  inform  me  of  the  whole  extent 
of  my  glory,  and  do  not  conceal  from  me  for  what  illus- 
trious choice  I  have  rejected  the  devotion  of  so  many  kings. 

SCENE  iv.]  PSYCHE.  323 

CUP.  Do  you  wish  it  ? 
Ps.  Let  me  beseech  you. 

CUP.   If  you  knew,  Psyche,  the  cruel  destiny  you  draw 
upon  yourself  by  this  .    .    . 

Ps.  You  render  me  desperate,  my  lord. 
CUP.  Reflect  well  upon  it ;  I  can  still  keep  silent. 
Ps.  Do  you  take  oaths  not  to  fulfil  them  ? 
CUP.  Well  then  !  I  am  the  god,  the  most  powerful  of  the 
gods,  absolute  on  earth,  absolute  in  the  Heavens ;  on  the 
waters,  in  the  air,  my  power  is  supreme :  in  one  word,  I 
am  Cupid  himself,  who  with  one  of  my  own  darts  had 
wounded  myself  for  you  ,K  and,  without  the  violence,  alas ! 
which  you  have  done  to  me,  and  which  has  just  changed 
my  love  into  anger,  I  should  have  become  your  husband. 
Your  wishes  are  satisfied,  you  know  now  whom  you  have 
loved ;  you  know  the  lover  whom  you  have  charmed;  be- 
hold, Psyche,  what  it  has  brought  you  to.  You  your- 
self force  me  to  leave  you ;  you  yourself  force  me  to  de- 
prive you  of  all  the  effect  of  your  victory.  Your  lovely 
eyes  may  perhaps  never  behold  me  again.  This  palace, 
these  gardens,  disappearing  with  myself,  will  make  your 
new-born  glory  vanish.  You  would  not  trust  to  me ;  and 
as  the  fruit  of  your  cleared-up  doubts,  Fate,  beneath  whom 
Heaven  trembles,  more  mighty  than  my  love,  than  all  the 
gods  together,  shall  show  you  her  hatred,  and  drives  me 
hence. 

Cupid  disappears  ;  and  at  the  same  moment  that  he 
flies  away,  the  magnificent  garden  vanishes  also. 
Psyche  remains  alone  in  the  midst  of  a  vast  plain, 
and  on  the  desolate  banks  of  a  great  river,  in  which 
she  wishes  to  throw  herself.  The  river-god  appears, 
seated  on  a  mass  of  reeds  and  water  plants,  and 
leaning  on  a  large  urn,  from  which  issues  a  thick 
jet  of  water. 

SCENE  IV. — PSYCHE,  THE  RIVER  GOD. 
Ps.  Cruel  destiny,  dire  anxiety  !  fatal  curiosity  !    Hor- 

18  This  idea  is  from  Apuleuis.  The  difference  between  the  treatment  of 
the  fable  of  Psyche  as  put  down  by  the  Latin  author  and  the  French  one, 
will  be  easily  perceived.  The  opera,  Psyche,  which  was  given  in  1678,  fol- 
lowed the  original  classical  idea  (see  Introductory  Notice). 

324  PSYCHE.  [ACT  lv. 

rible  solitude  !  what  have  you  done  with  all  my  happi- 
ness ?  I  loved  a  god,  I  was  adored  by  him  ;  my  happi- 
ness increased  at  every  moment,  and  I  behold  myself 
alone,  all  in  tears,  in  the  midst  of  a  desert,  where,  to 
overwhelm  me  altogether,  confused  and  despairing,  I  feel 
the  love  grow  stronger,  when  I  have  lost  the  lover.  The 
recollection  of  him  charms  and  poisons  me  ;  its  sweetness 
tyrannizes  over  a  wretched  heart  which  my  passion  has 
condemned  to  the  most  poignant  grief.  Oh  Heaven ! 
when  Cupid  abandons  me,  why  does  he  leave  me  the  love 
which  he  gave  me  ?  Source  of  all  good  inexhaustible  and 
pure,  master  of  men  and  of  gods,  dear  author  of  the  ills 
which  I  endure,  are  you  for  ever  vanished  from  my  sight? 
I  myself  have  banished  you  from  it :  in  an  excess  of  love, 
in  an  extreme  happiness,  my  heart  became  disturbed  by 
an  unworthy  suspicion.  Ungrateful  heart  !  yours  was  a 
flame  but  badly  kindled ;  and  one  cannot  wish,  the  mo- 
ment one  loves,  but  what  the  cherished  object  also  wishes. 
Let  me  die,  it  is  the  only  thing  left  for  me  to  do,  after  the 
loss  which  I  have  sustained.  For  whom,  great  gods  !  could 
I  wish  to  live?  and  for  whom  could  I  form  desires? 
Stream,  whose  waters  bathe  these  dreary  sands,  bury  my 
crime  in  your  waves,  and  to  put  an  end  to  evils  so  de- 
plorable, let  me  insure  my  rest  in  your  bed. 

THE  GOD.  Your  death  would  sully  my  waters,26  Psyche; 
Heaven  forbids  it  you  ;  and  perhaps  after  such  profound 
grief,  another  fate  awaits  you.  Flee  rather  from  the  im- 
placable anger  of  Venus :  I  see  her  coming  to  look  for 
you  and  to  punish  you  ;  the  love  of  the  son  has  evoked 
the  hatred  of  the  mother.  Fly,  I  shall  know  how  to  de- 
tain her. 

Ps.  I  am  prepared  for  her  avenging  fury ;  what  could 
they  have  in  store  for  me  but  what  would  be  too  sweet  ? 
She  who  seeks  death  fears  neither  gods  nor  goddess,  and 
may  brave  all  their  anger. 

SCENE  V. — VENUS,  PSYCHE,  THE  RIVER  GOD. 
VEN.  Proud  Psyche,  you  dare  then  await  me,  after  hav- 
ing usurped  my  honours  on  earth ;    after  your  seductive 

16  This  idea  is  again  borrowed  from  Apuleius,  though  the  reason  which 
the  river-god  gives  for  his  refusal  is  different. 

SCKN*  v.]  PSYCHE.  325 

features  have  received  the  incense  which  ought  to  have 
been  offered  only  to  mine  ?  I  have  seen  my  temples  de- 
serted, I  have  seen  all  mortals,  seduced  by  your  charms, 
idolize  your  sovereign  beauty,  offer  you  marks  of  respect 
undreamt  of  until  then,  and  not  at  all  considering  that 
there  was  another  Venus ;  and  after  this  I  see  you  still 
bold  enough  not  to  fear  your  just  punishments,  and  to 
look  me  in  the  face,  as  if  my  resentment  were  but  a  small 
matter ! 

Ps.  If  by  some  mortals  I  have  been  adored,  is  it  a  crime 
in  me  to  have  had  charms  with  which  their  thoughtless 
souls  allowed  their  eyes  to  be  charmed  which  had  not  be- 
held you  ?  I  am  what  Heaven  has  made  me ;  I  have 
nothing  but  the  beauties  which  it  has  been  good  enough 
to  lend  me.  If  the  devotions  that  were  offered  to  me  ill 
satisfied  you,  you  had  but  to  present  yourself  to  force  all 
hearts  to  carry  them  back  to  you ;  but  to  hide  no  longer 
from  them  this  perfect  beauty  which,  to  bring  them  back 
to  their  duty,  has  but  to  show  itself,  to  make  itself  adored. 

VEN.  You  ought  to  have  defended  yourself  better. 
These  marks  of  respect,  this  incense  ought  to  have  been 
refused;  and  the  better  to  undeceive  them,  you  ought, 
before  their  very  eyes,  to  have  given  them  up  to  me. 
You  cherished  the  mistake  for  which  you  ought  to  have 
had  nothing  but  horror ;  you  have  done  even  more ;  your 
arrogant  humour,  despising  a  thousand  kings,  has,  in  its 
extravagant  ambition,  carried  its  choice  as  far  as  Heaven. 

Ps.  I  have  carried  my  choice  as  far  as  Heaven,  god- 
dess? 

VEN.  Your  insolence  is  matchless.  To  disdain  all  the 
kings  on  earth,  is  that  not  aspiring  to  the  gods? 

Ps.  If  Cupid  had  hardened  my  heart  for  all  of  them, 
and  reserved  me  entirely  for  himself,  can  I  be  blamed  for 
that  ?  and  must  I  see  you  to-day  wishing  to  overwhelm  me 
with  eternal  grief  as  the  price  of  so  sweet  a  passion? 

VEN.  Psyche,  you  ought  to  have  known  better  what  you 
were,  and  who  this  god  was. 

Ps.  Has  he  given  me  the  time  and  the  opportunity,  he 
who  made  himself  master  of  my  whole  heart  at  the  first 
moment  ? 

VEN.  Your  whole  heart  allowed  itself  to  be  charmed  by 

326  PSYCHE.  fAcr  ,v. 

him,  and  you  loved  him  the  moment  he  said  to  you  I 
love. 

Ps.  Could  I  do  otherwise  than  love  the  god  who  in- 
spires love,  and  who  spoke  to  me  for  himself?  He  is 
your  son  :  you  know  his  power,  you  are  acquainted  with 
his  worth. 

VEN.  Yes,  he  is  my  son,  but  a  son  who  annoys  me,  a 
son  who  badly  renders  me  what  he  knows  to  be  my  due; 
a  son  who  causes  me  to  be  abandoned,  and  who  the  better 
to  flatter  his  unworthy  amours,  since  you  love  him,  no 
longer  wounds  any  one  who  comes  to  implore  my  assist- 
ance at  my  shrines.  You  have  made  of  him  a  rebel 
against  me:  I  will  be  revenged,  and  signally,  on  you; 
and  I  shall  teach  you  whether  a  mortal  ought  to  allow  a 
god  to  sigh  at  her  knees.  Follow  me ;  you  shall  see,  to 
your  cost,  to  what  mad  confidence  in  yourself  this  ambi- 
tion carried  you.  Come,  and  prepare  yourself  with  as 
much  patience  as  you  have  shown  presumption. 

FOURTH  INTERLUDE. 

The  scene  represents  the  infernal  regions.  A  sea  of  fire, 
the  waves  of  which  are  in  a  perpetual  state  of  agitation,  is 
seen.  This  horrible  sea  is  bordered  by  ruins  in  flames,  and 
in  the  midst  of  the  seething  waves,  through  a  frightful  orifice, 
appears  the  infernal  palace  of  Pluto.  Eight  furies  come  out 
of  it,  and  form  an  entry  of  the  ballet,  in  which  they  rejoice 
about  the  rage  they  have  excited  in  the  soul  of  the  gentlest  of 
all  divinities.  A  sprite  interferes  with  his  perilous  leaps  in 
the  dances,  while  Psyche,  who  has  passed  into  the  infernal 
regions  by  the  orders  of  Venus,  repasses,  in  the  boat  of  Cha- 
ron, with  the  casket  which  she  has  received  from  Proserpine 
for  the  goddess.™ 

ST  Between  the  fourth  act  and  the  fourth  interlude,  a  certain  time  is  sup- 
posed to  have  elapsed,  during  which  Psyche  has  undergone  the  different 
trials  to  which  Venus  exposed  her.  She  has  now  just  acquitted  herself  of 
the  last.  See  the  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play. 

SCKN*  i.]  PSYCHE.  327 

ACT  V 

SCENE  I. — PSYCHE,  alone. 

Terrible  windings  of  the  infernal  waves,  black  palaces, 
where  Megaera  and  her  sisters  hold  their  court,  eternal  fires 
of  light,  amidst  your  Ixions,  amidst  your  Tantaluses, 
amidst  so  many  tortures,  that  know  no  intervals,  are  there, 
in  your  horrible  dwelling,  penalties  equal  to  the  labours  to 
which  Venus  condemns  my  love  ?  There  is  no  satiating 
her ;  and  since  I  have  found  myself  subjected  to  her  laws, 
since  she  has  given  me  up  to  her  resentment,  I  need,  in 
these  cruel  moments,  more  than  one  soul,  more  than  one 
life  to  fulfil  her  commands.  I  would  suffer  all  with  joy, 
if,  amidst  the  rigours  which  her  hatred  displays,  my  eyes 
could  behold  again,  were  it  but  for  one  moment,  that  dear, 
that  adorable  lover.  I  dare  not  name  him;  my  lips,  too 
criminal  by  having  required  too  much  of  him,  have  become 
unworthy  of  him;  and  in  this  cruel  affliction,  the  most 
fatal  suffering,  with  which  an  ever-recurring  death  over- 
whelms me  at  each  moment,  is  that  of  not  seeing  him. 
If  his  anger  were  still  to  last,  no  misfortune  would  ever 
equal  mine  ;  but  if  he  took  pity  on  a  heart  which  adores 
him,  whatever  I  had  to  suffer  would  be  no  suffering  at  all. 
Yes,  ye  Fates,  if  his  just  anger  were  but  appeased,  all  my 
misfortunes  would  be  at  an  end  :  to  render  me  insensible 
to  the  fury  of  the  mother,  I  need  but  one  look  of  the  son. 
I  will  no  longer  doubt  it,  he  shares  my  sufferings  ;  he  sees 
what  I  suffer,  and  he  suffers  with  me.  Whatever  I  endure 
pains  him ;  it  becomes  a  law  of  love  for  him.  In  spite  of 
Venus,  in  spite  of  my  crime,  it  is  he  who  supports  me,  it 
is  he  who  reanimates  me  in  the  midst  of  the  perils  which 
they  make  me  undergo;  he  preserves  the  affection  with 
which  his  passion  inspires  him,  and  takes  care  to  endow 
me  with  new  life  each  time  I  must  die.  But  what  do  these 
two  shades  want  with  me,  whom  I  behold  advancing 
towards  me  through  the  bad  light  of  these  gloomy  regions? 

SCENE  II. — PSYCHE,  CLEOMENES,  AGENOR. 

Ps.  Cleomenes,  Agenor,  is  it  you  whom  I  behold  ?  Who 
has  deprived  you  of  life? 

328  PSYCHE.  [ACT  T. 

CLE.  The  most  righteous  grief  that  could  have  furnished 
us  with  grounds  for  despairing;  that  funeral  pomp,  where 
you  expected  the  utmost  harshness  of  the  most  dismal  fate, 
and  the  most  signal  injustice. 

Ac.  On  that  very  rock  where  Heaven  in  its  anger  pro- 
mised you,  instead  of  a  spouse,  a  serpent,  which  should 
suddenly  devour  you,  we  held  ourselves  in  readiness  to 
repulse  its  rage,  or  to  die  with  you.  You  know  it,  princess ; 
and  when  you  disappeared  in  mid-air  from  our  sight,  we 
both,  carried  away  by  love  and  grief,  threw  ourselves  from 
the  height  of  that  rock,  to  follow  your  charms,  or  rather 
to  taste  the  amorous  joy  of  offering  to  the  monster  a  first 
prey  for  you. 

CLE.  Happily  deceived  in  the  meaning  of  the  oracle,  we 
have  found  out  in  this  spot  the  miracle,  and  have  known 
that  the  serpent  ready  to  devour  you  was  the  god  of  love ; 
and  who,  though  a  god  adoring  you  himself,  could  not 
endure  that  mortals  like  us  should  dare  to  adore  you. 

Ac.  As  a  reward  for  having  followed  you,  we  here  taste 
a  sufficiently  pleasant  death.  What  had  we  to  do  with 
life,  if  we  could  not  belong  to  you?  We  here  behold  again 
your  loveliness,  which  neither  of  us  would  have  looked 
upon  again  above.  Happy  if  we  but  see  the  slightest  of 
your  tears  honour  the  misfortunes  which  you  have  caused 
us! 

Ps.  Can  I  have  any  tears  left,  when  misfortune  has 
been  carried  to  the  highest  degree?  Let  us  unite  our 
sighs  in  so  dire  a  calamity ;  sighs  do  not  exhaust  them- 
selves; but  you  princes,  will  sigh  for  an  ungrateful 
creature.  You  did  not  wish  to  survive  my  miseries ;  and 
whatever  grief  may  overwhelm  me,  it  is  not  for  you  that 
I  die. 

CLE.  Did  we  deserve  it,  we,  whjse  whole  passion  has 
but  wearied  you  with  the  story  of  our  sorrows  ? 

Ps.  You  might  have  deserved,  princes,  my  entire  affec- 
tion, had  you  not  been  rivals.  Those  incomparable 
qualities  which  attended  the  addresses  of  the  one  and  the 
other,  rendered  you  both  too  amiable  for  either  of  you  to 
be  scorned. 

Ac.  You  might,  without  being  unjust  and  cruel,  have 
refused  us  a  heart  reserved  for  a  god.  But  see  Venus 

SCBNK  HI.]  PSYCHE.  329 

once  more.  Fate  calls  us  back,  and  forces  us  to, bid  you 
farewell. 

Ps.  Does  she  not  leave  you  time  to  tell  me  where,  in 
these  regions,  you  dwell  ? 

CLE.  In  ever  verdant  groves,  where  one  breathes  by 
love,  the  moment  one  has  died  of  love.  By  love  one  is 
born  again  there,  with  love  one  sighs  there,  beneath  the 
gentlest  laws  of  his  happy  sway ;  and  eternal  night  dares 
not  drive  away  the  day,  with  which  he  himself  endows  the 
phantoms  which  he  j inspires,  and  of  which  he  makes  a 
court  in  the  infernal  regions  themselves. 

Ac.  Your  envious  sisters,  descended  after  us  to  destroy 
you,  have  destroyed  themselves ;  and  as  a  reward  for  a  sug- 
gestion which  cost  them  their  lives,  each,  by  turns,  suffers 
by  the  side  of  Ixion,  by  the  side  of  Tituos ;  sometimes  the 
wheel,  and  sometimes  the  vulture.  Cupid,  through  the 
Zephyrs,  took  swift  vengeance  for  their  envenomed  and 
jealous  malice;  these  winged  ministers  of  his  righteous 
anger,  under  the  pretext  of  conducting  them  once  more  to 
you,  plunged  them  both  to  the  bottom  of  a  precipice,28 
where  the  horrible  spectacle  of  their  torn  bodies  displays 
but  the  least  and  first  punishment  for  these  counsels, 
whereof  the  cunning  causes  the  ills  which  you  suffer. 

Ps.  How  I  pity  them  ! 

CLE.  You  alone  are  to  be  pitied.  But  we  have  stayed 
too  long  to  converse  with  you ;  farewell.  May  we  live  in 
your  remembrance  !  May  you  soon  have  nothing  more 
to  fear  !  May  Cupid  transport  you  shortly  to  the  Heavens, 
place  you  there  by  the  side  of  the  gods,  and  kindling  a 
love  which  cannot  be  extinguished,  emancipate  for  ever 
the  lustre  of  your  beauteous  eyes  to  increase  the  light  of 
these  regions ! 

SCENE  III. — PSYCHE,  alone. 

Unhappy  lovers  !  Their  passion  still  endures  !  Though 
dead,  they  both  still  adore  me ;  me,  whose  severity  so  ill 
received  their  affections  !  It  is  not  so  with  you ;  you  who 
alone  have  charmed  me,  beloved,  whom  I  love  still  a 

M  In  Apuleius  the  two  sisters  are  punished  by  Psyche  herself;  but. 
nothing  is  said  about  their  fate  in  the  infernal  regions. 

330  PSYCHE.  [ACT  v. 

hundred  times  more  than  my  life,  and  who  break  such 
beautiful  bonds  !  Flee  no  longer  from  me,  and  permit  me 
to  hope  that  one  day  you  will  cast  your  eyes  on  me ;  that, 
by  my  sufferings  I  shall  gain  something  to  please  you, 
something  to  recover  your  plighted  faith.  But  what  I  have 
suffered  has  too  much  disfigured  me  to  inspire  me  with 
such  hopes.  With  eyes  dejected,  sad,  despairing,  languid, 
and  faded,  how  can  I  prevail,  if  by  some  miracle,  impos- 
sible to  foresee,  my  beauty,  which  once  pleased  you,  is  not 
restored  ?  I  have  something  here  to  restore  it :  this  treasure 
of  divine  beauty,  which  Proserpine  has  placed  in  my  hands 
to  remit  to  Venus,  must  contain  some  charms  of  which 
I  can  take  possession  ;  and  the  splendor  of  them  must  be 
extreme,  since  Venus,  beauty  herself,  requires  them  to 
adorn  herself.  Would  it  be  so  great  a  crime  to  abstract  a 
little  from  them  ?  To  make  myself  pleasing  in  the  eyes  of 
a  god  who  made  himself  my  lover ;  to  regain  his  heart, 
and  put  an  end  to  my  torment;  is  not  all  this  but  too 
legitimate?  Let  me  open  it.  What  vapours  dim  my 
brain  ?  M  And  what  do  I  behold  coming  out  of  this  open 
box?  Cupid,  if  your  pity  does  not  oppose  my  destruction, 
I  descend  to  the  grave,  never  again  to  revive. 

(She  swoons.      Cupid  comes  down  to  her,  flying. 

SCENE  IV. — CUPID,  PSYCHE,  (in  a  swoon}. 

CUP.  Your  peril,  Psyche,  dispels  my  anger,  or  rather 
the  ardour  of  my  flame  has  not  ceased ;  and  though  you 
have  displeased  me  in  the  highest  degree,  I  have  only  in- 
terested myself  against  my  mother's  wrath.  I  have  seen 
all  your  labours,  I  have  followed  all  your  misery,  my  sighs 
have  everywhere  accompanied  your  tears.  Turn  your  eyes 
towards  me ;  I  am  still  the  same.  What !  I  say  and  re- 
peat aloud  that  I  love  you,  and  you  do  not  say  that 
you  love  me,  Psyche !  Are  your  lovely  eyes  closed  for 
ever?  Is  their  brightness  forever  gone  from  them?  O 
death  !  could  you  launch  so  criminal  a  dart,  and,  without 
any  respect  for  my  eternal  being,  attempt  my  own  life ! 
How  many  times,  ungrateful  deity,  have  I  swelled  your 

"  This,  again,  is  taken  from  Apuleius.  La  Fontaine,  in  his  tale,  makes 
come  from  the  box  a  thick  vapour,  which  makes  Psyche  look  like  an 
"  Ethiopian  woman." 

SCZNM  v-1  PSYCHE.  331 

gloomy  empire  by  the  contempt  or  cruelty  of  a  proud 
or  stern  fair  one  ?  Even  how  many  faithful  lovers,  if  I 
must  say  so,  have  I  sacrificed  to  you  by  excess  of  transports  ! 
Go !  I  will  no  longer  wound  souls,  I  will  no  longer  pierce 
hearts  but  with  darts  dipped  in  the  divine  liquid  with  which 
immortal  flames  are  nourished  by  Heaven  ;  and  I  will  no 
longer  launch  any  except  to  make,  before  your  very  eyes, 
so  many  gods  of  so  many  lovers.  And  you,  relentless 
mother,  who  compelled  death  to  snatch  from  me  all  that 
I  held  most  dear  to  me,  dread,  in  your  turn,  the  effect  of 
my  anger.  You  wish  to  lay  down  the  law  to  me,  you, 
whom  we  so  often  see  receive  it  from  me;  you,  who  have 
a  heart  as  susceptible  as  any  other,  you  envy  mine  the  de- 
lights which  your  own  enjoys  !  But  I  shall  pierce  that 
self-same  heart  with  strokes  that  shall  be  followed  by  noth- 
ing but  jealous  anxieties  ;  I  shall  overwhelm  you  with 
shameful  surprises,  and  everywhere  select,  for  your  sweetest 
affection,  Adonises  and  Anchiseses  who  will  only  hate 
you. 

SCENE  V. — VENUS,  CUPID,  PSYCHE,  still  in  a  swoon. 

VEN.  The  threat  is  respectful ;  and  the  presumptuous 
anger  of  a  child  who  rebels  .  .  . 

CUP.  I  am  no  longer  a  child,  and  I  have  been  too  much 
so  ',  and  my  anger  is  as  just  as  it  is  impetuous. 

VEN.  Its  impetuosity  should  be  restrained  ;  and  you 
might  remember  that  you  owe  your  being  to  me. 

CUP.  And  you  ought  not  to  forget  that  you  have  a  heart 
and  charms  which  depend  on  my  power  ;  that  my  quiver 
is  the  sole  support  of  yours ;  that  without  my  arrows  it  is 
nothing ;  and  that,  if  the  bravest  hearts  have  allowed 
themselves  to  be  led  in  triumph  by  you,  you  have  never 
made  slaves  but  those  whom  it  has  pleased  me  to  enchain. 
Boast  then  no  more,  about  those  rights  of  birth  which 
tyrannize  over  my  desires ;  and  if  you  do  not  wish  to  lose 
a  thousand  sighs,  remember,  when  you  see  me,  to  be  grate- 
ful ;  you  who  hold  through  my  power  both  your  glory  and 
your  pleasures. 

VEN.  How  have  you  defended  it,  this  glory  of  which 
you  speak  ?  How  have  you  rendered  it  to  me  ?  And 
when  you  saw  my  altars  desolate,  my  temples  violated,  my 

332  PSYCHE.  fACT  v 

honours  disparaged,  if  you  have  sympathized  with  so  much 
ignominy,  how  has  the  world  seen  Psyche  punished,  who 
robbed  me  of  them?  I  commanded  you  to  make  her 
charmed  with  the  vilest  of  all  mortals,  who  should  not 
deign  to  respond  to  her  inflamed  heart,  but  by  eternal  re- 
pulses, by  the  most  cruel  contempt ;  and  you  yourself  have 
loved  her!  You  have  seduced  immortal  beings  to  be 
against  me ;  it  is  for  you  that  the  Zephyrs  hid  her  from 
my  sight;  that  Apollo  himself,  suborned,  by  a  skilfully, 
tuned  oracle  had  so  cleverly  borne  her  away  from  me,  that 
if  her  curiosity  had  not,  by  a  blind  mistrust,  restored  her 
to  my  vengeance,  she  would  have  escaped  my  irritated 
heart.  Behold  the  condition  to  which  your  love  has 
brought  your  Psyche  ;  her  soul  is  about  to  depart ;  see  ; 
and  if  yours  is  still  enamoured  of  her,  receive  her  last  sigh. 
Threaten,  brave  me,  while  she  expires;  so  much  insolence 
becomes  you  well;  and  I  must  endure  whatever  you  please 
to  say,  I  who  can  do  nothing  without  your  darts. 

CUP.  You  can  do  but  too  much,  relentless  goddess  ! 
Fate  abandons  her  entirely  to  your  anger :  but  be  less  in- 
exorable to  the  prayers,  to  the  tears  of  a  son  at  your  feet. 
It  ought  to  be  a  sufficiently  pleasant  sight  to  you  to  behold 
with  one  eye  Psyche  dying,  and  with  the  other  this  son, 
with  a  supplicating  voice,  only  wishing  to  owe  his  happi- 
ness to  you.  Give  me  back  my  Psyche,  give  her  back  all 
her  charms  ;  give  her  back,  goddess,  to  my  tears ;  give 
back  to  my  love,  give  back  to  my  grief,  the  charm  of  my 
eyes  and  the  choice  of  my  heart. 

VEN.  With  whatever  love,  Psyche  may  inspire  you,  do 
not  expect  to  see  an  end  to  her  misfortune  through  me. 
If  Fate  abandons  her  to  me,  I  abandon  her  to  her  fate. 
Importune  me  no  more ;  and,  in  this  adversity,  let  her, 
without  Venus,  triumph  or  perish. 

CUP.  Alas !  if  I  importune  you,  I  would  not  do  so  if  I 
could  die. 

VEN.  This  is  no  common  grief  that  forces  an  immortal 
to  wish  for  death. 

CUP.  Perceive,  by  the  excess  of  my  passion,  how  strong 
it  is.  Will  you  extend  no  mercy  to  her  ? 

VEE.  I  own  your  passion  touches  my  heart ;  it  disarms  me, 
it  abates  my  rigour.  Your  Psyche  shall  see  the  light  again. 

SCKNKVI.I  PSYCHE.  333 

CUP.  How  I  will  make  you  everywhere  adored ! 

VEN.  Yes,  you  shall  again  behold  her  in  her  pristine 
beauty;  but  I  claim  the  entire  deference  of  your  grateful 
vows ;  I  claim  that  an  unfeigned  respect  shall  leave  my 
affection  to  choose  you  another  spouse. 

CUP.  And  I,  I  do  not  require  mercy  any  longer ;  I  re- 
sume all  my  boldness ;  I  desire  Psyche,  I  desire  her  love ; 
I  desire  her  to  live  again,  and  to  live  again  for  me ;  and 
I  am  indifferent  if  your  tired-out  hatred  satiate  itself  on 
another.  Jupiter,  who  is  appearing,  will  judge  between 
us  of  my  passionate  behaviour,  and  of  your  anger. 

(After  several  flashes  of  lightning  and  claps  of  thunder, 
Jupiter  appears  in  the  air,  on  his  eagle.) 

SCENE  VI. — JUPITER,  VENUS,  CUPID,  PSYCHE, 
still  in  a  swoon. 

CUP.  You,  to  whom  alone  everything  is  possible,  father 
of  gods,  sovereign  of  mortals,  abate  the  sternness  of  an 
unbending  mother,  who,  without  me,  would  have  no 
altars.  I  have  wept,  I  have  prayed,  I  sigh  and  threaten; 
but  in  vain  are  sighs  and  threats.  She  will  not  perceive 
that  on  my  displeasure  depends  the  happy  or  mournful 
aspect  of  the  whole  world;  and  that  if  Psyche  loses  her 
life,  if  Psyche  does  not  belong  to  me,  I  am  no  longer 
Cupid.  Yes,  I  shall  destroy  my  bow,  I  shall  break  in 
pieces  my  arrows;  I  shall  even  quench  my  torch,  and  let 
Nature  languish  until  it  dies ;  or,  if  I  yet  deign  to  pierce 
some  hearts  with  these  golden  points  which  command  obe- 
dience, I  shall  wound  you  all  up  there  for  mortal  females, 
and  shall  aim  none  at  them  but  blunted  darts  that  force  to 
hatred,  and  which  will  produce  naught  but  rebels,  in- 
grates,  and  cruel  ones.  *°  By  what  tyrannic  law  should  I 
be  bound  to  keep  my  weapons  ever  ready  to  serve  you, 
and  procure  for  you  one  conquest  after  another,  if  you 
forbid  me  to  make  one  for  myself? 

JUP.  (To  Venus).  Daughter,  be  less  severe  to  him: 
you  hold  the  fate  of  his  Psyche  in  your  hands;  the  fatal 

80  The  idea  of  the  effects  of  the  different  arrows  is  found  in  Ovid's 
Metamorphoses,  Book  I. ;  Voltaire  has  also  employed  it  in  his  comedy  of 
Nanine  (Act  i.,  Scene  i). 

334  PSYCHE.  A(n  v 

mister,  at  your  least  word,  will  follow  up  your  anger. 
Speak,  and  allow  yourself  to  be  overcome  by  a  mother's 
tenderness,  or  dread  an  anger  which  I  fear  myself.  Will 
you  deliver  up  the  world  as  a  prey  to  hatred,  disorder  and 
confusion  :  and  make  a  god  of  bitterness  and  strife  of  a  god 
of  union,  of  a  god  full  of  sweetness  and  of  joy?  Consider 
who  we  are,  and  if  we  ought  to  be  swayed  by  passions. 
The  more  vengeance  pleases  men,  the  more  it  becomes 
the  gods  to  pardon. 

VEN.  I  pardon  this  rebellious  son ;  but  do  you  wish  me 
to  submit  to  the  reproach  that  a  miserable  mortal,  the  ob- 
ject of  my  anger,  the  proud  Psyche,  because  she  is  some- 
what handsome,  should  sully  my  alliance  and  the  bed  of 
my  son  by  a  marriage  at  which  I  blush? 

JUP.  Well,  then !  I  will  make  her  immortal,  so  as  to 
render  things  equal. 

VEN.  I  have  no  longer  hatred  or  contempt  for  her,  and 
admit  her  to  the  honours  of  this  conjugal  bond.  Psyche, 
come  back  to  life,  never  to  lose  it  again.  Jupiter  has 
made  your  peace :  and  I  renounce  that  haughty  disposi- 
tion which  opposed  your  wishes. 

Ps.  {Recovering  from  her  swoon).  It  is  then  you,  great 
goddess,  who  give  life  again  to  this  innocent  heart ! 

VEN.  Jupiter  has  pardoned  you,  and  my  anger  ceases. 
Live,  Venus  commands  it ;  love,  she  consents  to  it. 

Ps.  (To  Cupid).  I  see  you  again  at  last,  dear  object 
of  my  flame  ! 

CUP.  (To  Psyche).  You  are  mine  at  last,  delight  of  my 
soul! 

JUP.  Come,  lovers,  ascend  to  Heaven,  to  consummate 
so  distinguished  and  worthy  a  union.  Come  thither, 
lovely  Psyche,  to  change  your  destiny.  Come  to  take 
your  place  among  the  gods. 

Two  large  machines  descend  at  the  two  sides  of  Jupiter, 
while  he  is  speaking  the  last  verses.  Venus,  with  her  attend- 
ants, mount  into  the  one,  Cupid  and  Psyche  into  the  other, 
and  they  all  go  together  up  into  the  sky. 

The  divinities,  who  had  been  divided  between  Venus  and 
her  son,  unite,  seeing  them  agreed;  and  all  by  concerts, 
songs,  and  dances,  celebrate  the  nuptials  of  Cupid.  Apollo 

SCENE  «.]  PSYCHE.  335 

/ 

appears  the  first,  and  as  the  god  of  harmony,  commences  to 
sing,  to  incite  the  other  gods  to  rejoice. 

Recital  of  Afjllo. 

Let  us  unite,  immortal  troop ;  the  god  of  love  becomes 
a  happy  lover,  and  Venus  has  regained  her  usual  gentle- 
ness in  favour  of  so  charming  a  son.  He  is  going  to 
taste,  after  a  long  torment,  a  happiness  which  shall  be 
eternal. 

All  the  divinities  sing  together  the  following  verses  in  honour 
of  Cupid. 

Let  us  celebrate  this  grand  day,  let  us  all  celebrate  so 
lovely  a  feast ;  let  our  songs  to  all  places  spread  the  tid- 
ings; let  them  re-echo  through  the  heavenly  regions.  Let 
us  sing,  and  repeat  by  turns,  that  there  is  no  heart  so  cruel 
but  what  sooner  or  later  surrenders  to  Cupid. 

Apollo  continues. 

The  god  who  invites  us  to  pay  him  his  court,  forbids  us 
to  be  too  wise.  Pleasures  have  their  turn :  it  is  their 
sweetest  use  to  finish  the  cares  of  day.  Night  is  the  in- 
heritance of  pleasures  and  love.  It  would  be  a  great  pity 
that,  in  this  charming  spot,  one  should  have  a  savage 
heart.  Pleasures  have  their  turn :  it  is  their  sweetest  use 
to  finish  the  cares  of  day.  Night  is  the  inheritance  of 
pleasures  and  love. 

Two  Muses,  who  have  always  avoided  to  enrol  themselves 
under  the  laws  of  Cupid,  counsel  those  fair  ones,  who  have 
not  loved  yet,  to  defend  themselves  with  great  care  from 
doing  so,  according  to  their  example. 

Song  of  the  Muses. 

Take  care,  severe  fair  ones,  love  causes  too  much  trou- 
ble ;  ever  fear  to  allow  yourself  to  be  charmed  too  much. 
When  one  has  to  sigh  with  love,  all  the  evil  does  not  con- 
sist in  becoming  enamoured ;  the  martyrdom  of  saying  it 
costs  a  hundred  times  more  than  to  love. 

Second  Couplet  of  the  Muses. 
One  cannot  love  without  pains ;  there  are  few  sweet 

336  PSYCHE.  [ACTV. 

chains ;  at  every  moment  one  feels  alarmed.  When  one 
has  to  sigh  with  love,  all  the  evil  does  not  consist  in  be- 
coming enamoured ;  the  martyrdom  of  saying  it  costs  a 
hundred  times  more  than  love. 

Bacchus  proclaims  that  he  is  not  so  dangerous  as  Cupid. 

Song  of  Bacchus. 

If  .at  times,  following  our  sweet  laws,  reason  is  lost  or 
forgotten,  the  follies  which  wine  causes  begin  and  finish 
in  one  day ;  but  when  a  heart  is  drunk  with  love,  it  is 
often  for  the  whole  of  life. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet, 

Composed  of  two  Menades  and  two  ^Egyptians  who  at- 
tend upon  Bacchus. 

Momus  declares  that  he  has  no  sweeter  employment  than 
to  ridicule,  and  that  it  is  Cupid  only  whom  he  dares  not 
attack. 

Recital  of  Momus. 

I  seek  to  ridicule,  on  earth  and  in  the  heavens  ;  I  sub- 
ject to  my  satire  the  greatest  of  the  gods.  There  is  no 
one  in  the  universe  but  Cupid  who  abashes  me.  He  is 
the  only  one  whom  I  now-a-days  spare.  It  is  given  only 
to  him  to  spare  no  one. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet, 

Composed  offourpunchinelloes  and  two  grotesque  dancers, 
who  attend  upon  Momus,  and  join  their  pleasantry  and  their 
gambols  to  the  attractions  of  this  grand  entertainment. 

Bacchus  and  Momus,  who  conduct  them,  sing  in  their 
midst,  each  a  song,  Bacchus  in  praise  of  wine,  and  Momus 
a  song  lauding  the  subject  and  advantage  of  ridicule. 

Recital  of  Bacchus. 

Let  us  admire  the  juice  of  the  grape  :  how  powerful  is 
it,  what  attractions  has  it !  It  adds  to  the  sweetness  of 
peace,  and  in  war  it  performs  wonders :  but  above  all  in 
love  wine  is  a  great  help. 

SCENE  VT.l  PSYCHE.  337 

Recital  of  Momus. 

Let  us  gambol  and  divert  ourselves.  Let  us  jeer,  we 
cannot  do  better ;  ridicule  is  necessary  in  the  sweetest 
games.  Without  the  pleasure  one  finds  in  ridiculing,  there 
are  few  pleasures  without  fatigue.  Nothing  is  so  pleasant 
as  to  laugh,  when  one  laughs  at  the  expense  Oi  others. 
Let  us  joke,  let  us  spare  nothing ;  let  us  laugh,  nothing  is 
more  in  fashion^  one  runs  the  risk  of  being  a  bore  by  say- 
ing too  much  good.  Without  the  pleasure  one  tastes  in 
ridiculing,  there  are  few  pleasures  without  fatigue.  Nothing 
is  so  pleasant  as  to  laugh  when  one  laughs  at  the  expense 
of  others. 

Mars  arrives  on  the  stage,  followed  bv  his  troop  of  war- 
riors, whom  he  excites  to  profit  by  their  leisure  time  in  taking 
part  in  the  recreations. 

Recital  of  Mars'. 

Let  us  leave  the  whole  world  in  peace;  let  us  seek  for 
sweet  amusements.  Amongst  the  most  charming  games, 
let  us  mix  the  image  of  war. 

Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

Follou>ers  of  Mars,  who,  dancing,  execute  with  banners 
and  standards  a  kind  of  evolution. 

Last  Entry  of  the  Ballet. 

The  different  troops  of  the  attendants  of  Apollo,  of  Bacchus, 
of  Momus,  of  Mars,  after  having  executed  their  separate  en- 
tries, unite  and  form  the  last  entry  together,  which  comprises  all 
the  others.  A  chorus  of  all  the  voices,  and  all  the  instru- 
ments, to  the  number  of  forty,  accompanies  the  general  dance, 
ana  finishes  the  celebration  of  the  nuptials  of  Cupid  and 
Psyche. 

Last  Chorus. 

Let  us  sing  the  charming  pleasures  of  the  happy  lovers. 
Let  the  whole  of  heaven  hasten  to  pay  their  court  to 
them.  Let  us  celebrate  this  glorious  day  by  a  thousand 
sweet  songs  of  joy ;  let  us  celebrate  this  glorious  day  by  a 
thousand  sweet  songs  full  of  love. 

VOL.  III.  W 

338  PSYCHE.  fACTV. 

In  the  great  hall  of  the  Tuileries,  where  Psyche  has  been 
represented  before  their  Majesties,  there  -were  kettledrums, 
trumpets,  and  drums  mixed  with  the  last  songs;  and  the  last 
song  was  sung  in  the  following  way. 

Let  us  sing  the  charming  pleasures  of  the  happy  lovers. 
Respond  to  it,  ye  trumpets,  kettledrums,  and  drums.  Be 
always  in  accord  with  the  sweet  sounds  of  the  bagpipes; 
be  always  in  accord  with  the  sweet  songs  of  love. 

ER 

^lOS-ANCUfjV 

o      c?    -— 

-n        5
