The Dramatic Works of Molière, Vol. II (Molière, 1875)
==========================================================
Vol. II of van Laun's complete English Molière: The School for Husbands, The Bores, The School for Wives (+ Criticised), The Impromptu of Versailles, The Forced Marriage. Translated by Henri van Laun (1875). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramaticworksofm02moliiala).

^OFCAIr 

>  YY— 

^    A  I 

^toUDNV-SOV^ 

33KV-Si 

->  ft    u 

vv 

R^i 

THE   DRAMATIC  WORKS  OF  MOLIERE. 

TIER  SCMQQJ&  !©H. 

M  O  L  I  E  R  E 

RENDERED   INTO  ENGLISH 

BY   HENRI   VAN   LAUN 

A   NEW    EDITION 
With    a    Prefatory    Memoir,    Introductory   Notices    and   Notes 

ILLUSTRATED  WITH 

NINETEEN    ENGRAVINGS   ON    STEEL 

FROM    PAINTINGS   AND    DESIGNS   BY 

Horace    Vernet,  Desenne,  Johannot   and  Hersent 

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES 

VOLUME  II 

PHILADELPHIA 
GEORGE  BARRIE,  PUBLISHER 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

VOLUME   TWO. 

Stack 

Annex 

• 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  HUSBANDS. 

/ 
UEcole  des  Marts I 

THE  BORES. 

Les  Facheux 43 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES. 

L'Ecole  des  Femmes 83 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED. 

La  Critique  de  F  Ecole  des  femmes 145 

THE  IMPROMPTU  OF  VERSAILLES. 

Z'  Impromptu  de  Versailles 179 

THE  FORCED  MARRIAGE. 

La  Mariage  Ford 215 

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VOLUME  TWO. 

r-AUii 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.     Act  V.,  Scene  4. 

L?  Ecole  des  Femmes Frontispiece 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  HUSBANDS.    Act  III.,  Scene  2. 

L1  Ecole  des  Marts 34 

THE  BORES.     Act  II.,  Scene  4. 

Les  F&cheux 66 

L'£COLE  DES  MARIS. 

COMEDIE. 

THE   SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS 

A    COMEDY     IN    THREE    ACTS. 
(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.) 

JUNE  24TH,  1661. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

The  School  for  Husbands  was  the  first  play  in  the  title  of  which  the  word 
*'  School "  was  employed,  to  imply  that,  over  and  above  the  intention  of 
amusing,  the  author  designed  to  convey  a  special  lesson  to  his  hearers. 
Perhaps  Moliere  wished  not  only  that  the  general  public  should  be  pre- 
pared to  find  instructions  and  warnings  for  married  men,  but  also  that 
they  who  were  wont  to  regard  the  theatre  as  injurious,  or  at  best  trivial, 
should  know  that  he  professed  to  educate,  as  well  as  to  entertain.  We 
must  count  the  adoption  of  similar  titles  by  Sheridan  and  others  amongst 
the  tributes,  by  imitation,  to  Moliere's  genius. 

This  comedy  was  played  for  the  first  time  at  Paris,  on  the  24th  of  June. 
1661,  and  met  with  great  success.  On  the  I2th  of  July  following  it  was 
acted  at  Vaux,  the  country  seat  of  Fouquet,  before  the  whole  court,  Mon- 
sieur, the  brother  of  the  King,  and  the  Queen  of  England ;  and  by  them 
also  was  much  approved.  Some  commentators  say  that  Moliere  was 
partly  inspired  by  a  comedy  of  Lope  de  Vega,  La  Discreta  enamorada, 
The  Cunning  Sweetheart ;  also  by  a  remodelling  of  the  same  play  by 
Moreto,  No puede  ser  guardar  una  muger,  One  cannot  guard  a  woman: 
but  this  has  lately  been  disproved.  It  appears,  however,  that  he  bor- 
rowed the  primary  idea  of  his  comedy  from  the  Adelphi  of  Terence ;  and 
from  a  tale,  the  third  of  the  third  day,  in  the  Decameron  of  Boccaccio, 
where  a  young  woman  uses  her  father-confessor  as  a  go-between  for  her- 
self and  her  lover.  In  the  Adelphi  there  are  two  old  men  of  dissimilar 
character,  who  give  a  different  education  to  the  children  they  bring  up. 
One  of  them  is  a  dotard,  who,  after  having  for  sixty  years  been  sullen, 
grumpy  and  avaricious,  becomes  suddenly  lively,  polite,  and  prodigal ; 
this  Moliere  had  too  much  common  sense  to  imitate. 

The  School  for  Husbands  marks  a  distinct  departure  in  the  dramatist's 
literary  progress.  As  a  critic  has  well  observed,  it  substitutes  for  situa- 
tions produced  by  the  mechanism  of  plot,  characters  which  give  rise  to 
situations  in  accordance  with  the  ordinary  operations  of  human  nature. 
Moliere's  method — the  simple  and  only  true  one,  and,  consequently,  the 
one  which  incontestably  establishes  the  original  talent  of  its  employer — is 
this :  At  the  beginning  of  a  play,  he  introduces  his  principal  personages : 
sets  them  talking ;  suffers  them  to  betray  their  characters,  as  men  and  wo- 
men do  in  every-day  life, — expecting  from  his  hearers  that  same  discern- 
ment which  he  has  himself  displayed  in  detecting  their  peculiarities :  im- 
ports the  germ  of  a  plot  in  some  slight  misunderstanding  or  equivocal 

3 

4  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS. 

act ;  and  leaves  all  the  rest  to  be  effected  by  the  action  and  reaction  of 
the  characters  which  he  began  by  bringing  out  in  bold  relief.  His  plots 
are  thus  the  plots  of  nature ;  and  it  is  impossible  that  they  should  not  be 
both  interesting  and  instructive.  That  his  comedies,  thus  composed,  are 
besides  amusing,  results  from  the  shrewdness  with  which  he  has  selected 
and  combined  his  characters,  and  the  art  with  which  he  arranges  the  situ- 
ations produced. 

The  character-comedies  of  Moliere  exhibit,  more  than  any  others,  the 
force  of  his  natural  genius,  and  the  comparative  weakness  of  his  artistic 
talent.  In  the  exhibition  and  the  evolution  of  character,  he  is  supreme. 
In  the  unravelling  of  his  plots  and  the  denouement  of  his  situations,  he  is 
driven  too  willingly  to  the  deus  ex  machina. 

The  School  for  Husbands  was  directed  against  one  of  the  special  and 
prominent  defects  of  society  in  the  age  and  country  in  which  Moliere 
lived.  Domestic  tyranny  was  not  only  rife,  but  it  was  manifested  in  one 
of  its  coarsest  forms.  Sganarelle,  though  twenty  years  younger  than 
Ariste,  and  not  quite  forty  years  old,  could  not  govern  by  moral  force ; 
he  relied  solely  on  bolts  and  bars.  Physical  restraint  was  the  safeguard 
in  which  husbands  and  parents  had  the  greatest  confidence,  not  perceiv- 
ing that  ithe  brain  and  the  heart  are  always  able  to  prevail  against  it. 
This  truth  Moliere  took  upon  himself  to  preach,  and  herein  he  surpasses 
all  his  rivals ;  in  nothing  more  than  in  the  artistic  device  by  which  he 
introduces  the  contrast  of  the  wise  and  trustful  Ariste,  raisonneur  as  he 
is  called  in  French,  rewarded  in  the  end  by  the  triumph  of  his  more  hu- 
mane mode  of  treatment.  Moliere  probably  expresses  his  own  feelings 
by  the  mouth  of  Ariste:  for  The  School  for  Husbands  was  performed  on 
the  24th  of  June,  1661,  and  about  eight  months  later,  on  the  2Oth  of 
February,  1662,  he  married  Armande  Bejart,  being  then  about  double 
her  age.  As  to  Sganarelle  in  this  play,  he  ceases  to  be  a  mere  buffoon,  as 
in  some  of  Moliere's  farces,  and  becomes  the  personification  of  an  idea 
or  of  a  folly  which  has  to  be  ridiculed. 

Moliere  dedicated  The  School  for  Husbands  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
the  King's  only  brother,  in  the  following  words : — 

MY  LORD, 

I  here  shew  France  things  that  are  but  little  consistent.  Nothing  can  be  so  great 
and  superb  as  the  name  I  place  in  front  of  this  book  ;  and  nothing  more  mean  than 
what  it  contains.  Every  one  will  think  this  a  strange  mixture ;  and  some,  to  ex- 
press its  inequality,  may  say  that  it  is  like  setting  a  crown  of  pearls  and  diamonds 
on  an  earthen  statue,  and  making  magnificent  porticos  and  lofty  triumphal  arches 
to  a  mean  cottage.  But,  my  Lord,  my  excuse  is,  that  in  this  case  I  had  no  choice 
to  make,  and  that  the  honour  I  have  of  belonging  to  your  Royal  Highness,1  abso- 
lutely obliged  me  to  dedicate  to  you  the  first  work  that  I  myself  published.2  It  is 
not  a  present  I  make  you,  it  is  a  duty  I  discharge ;  and  homages  are  never  looked 
upon  by  the  things  they  bring.  I  presumed,  therefore,  to  dedicate  a  trifle  to  your 
Royal  Highness,  because  I  could  not  help  it ;  but  if  I  omit  enlarging  upon  the  glo- 
rious truths  I  might  tell  of  you,  it  is  through  a  just  fear  that  those  great  ideas  would 
make  my  offering  the  more  inconsiderable.  I  have  imposed  silence  on  myself, 
meaning  to  wait  for  an  opportunity  better  suited  for  introducing  such  fine  things  ; 

MOLIERE. 

1  Moliere  was  the  chief  of  the  troupe  of  actors  belonging  to  the  Duke  of  Orleans, 
who  had  only  lately  married,  and  was  not  yet  twenty-one  years  old. 

*  Sganarelle  had  been  borrowed  by  Neufvillenaine ;  The  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies  was  only  printed  by  Moliere,  because  the  copy  of  the  play  was  stolen  from 
him  ;  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre  was  not  published  till  after  his  death,  in  1682. 

THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  5 

In  the  fourth  volume  of  the  "Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere, 
London,  1732,"  the  translation  of  The  School  for  Husbands  is  dedicated 
to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lady  Harriot  Campbell,  in  the  following 
words : — 

MADAM, 

A  Comedy  which  came  abroad  in  its  Native  Language,  under  the  Patronage  of 
the  Duke  of  ORLEANS,  Brother  to  the  King  of  FRANCE,  attempts  now  to  speak 
English,  and  begs  the  Honour  of  Your  LADYSHIP'S  Favour  and  Acceptance.  That 
distinguishing  good  Sense,  that  nice  Discernment,  that  refined  Taste  of  Reading 
and  Politeness  for  which  Your  LADYSHIP  is  so  deservedly  admir'd,  must,  I'm  per- 
suaded, make  You  esteem  Moliere  ;  whose  way  of  expression  is  easy  and  elegant, 
his  Sentiments  just  and  delicate,  and  his  morals  untainted  :  who  constantly  combats 
Vice  and  Folly  with  strong  Reason  and  well  turn'd  Ridicule  ;  in  short,  whose  Plays 
are  all  instructive,  and  tend  to  some  useful  Purpose  : — An  Excellence  sufficient  to 
recommend  them  to  your  LADYSHIP. 

As  for  this  Translation,  which  endeavours  to  preserve  the  Spirit  as  well  as 
Meaning  of  the  Original,  I  shall  only  say,  that  if  it  can  be  so  happy  as  to  please 
Your  LADYSHIP,  all  the  Pains  it  cost  me  will  be  over-paid. 

I  beg  Pardon  for  this  Presumption,  and  am,  with  the  greatest  Respect  that's  pos- 
sible, Madam,  Your  Ladyship's  Most  Obedient  and  most  Humble  Servant, 

THE  TRANSLATOR. 

Sir  Charles  Sedley,  well  known  through  a  history  of  a  "  frolick  ''  which 
Pepys  relates  in  his  "Diary,"*  wrote  The  Mulberry  Garden,  of  which 
Langbaine,  in  his  "An  Account  of  the  Dramatick  Poets,"  states,  ''  I  dare 
not  say  that  the  character  of  Sir  John  Everyoung  and  Sir  Samuel  Forecast 
are  copies  of  Sganarelle  and  Ariste  in  Moliere's  /  'fecoU  des  Marts  ;  but  I 
may  say,  that  there  is  some  resemblance,  though  whoever  understands 
both  languages  will  readily  and  with  justice  give  our  English  wit  the  pre- 
ference ;  and  Sir  Charles  is  not  to  learn  to  copy  Nature  from  the  French.'' 
This  comedy,  which  was  played  by  his  Majesty's  servants  at  the  Theatre 
Royal,  1688,  is  dedicated  to  the  Duchess  of  Richmond  and  Lennox,  a 
lady  who  has  *'  'scap'd  (prefaces)  very  well  hitherto,"  but, says  Sir  Charles, 
"  Madam,  your  time  is  come,  and  you  must  bear  it  patiently.  All  the 
favour  I  can  show  you  is  that  of  a  good  executioner,  which  is,  not  to  pro- 
long your  pain."  This  play  has  two  girls  like  Isabella,  called  Althea  and 
Diana,  two  like  Leonor,  Victoria  and  Olivia,  and  four  lovers,  as  well  as  a 
rather  intricate  plot.  The  Epilogue  is  amusing,  and  we  give  the  beginning 
of  it : — 

Poets  of  all  men  have  the  hardest  game, 
Their  best  Endeavours  can  no  Favours  claim. 
The  Lawyer  if  o'erthrown,  though  by  the  Laws, 
He  quits  himself,  and  lays  it  on  your  Cause. 
The  Soldier  is  esteem' d  a  Man  of  War, 
And  Honour  gains,  if  he  but  bravely  dare. 
The  grave  Physician,  if  his  Patient  dye. 
He  snakes  his  head,  and  blames  Mortality. 
Only  poor  Poets  their  own  faults  must  bear ; 
Therefore  grave  Judges  be  not  too  severe. 

Flecknoe  has  also  imitated  several  of  the  scenes  of  The  School  for  Hut- 
bands  in  The  Damoiselles  a  la  Mode,  which  is  a  medley  of  several  of 
Moliere's  plays  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies'). 

James  Miller  has  likewise  followed,  in  The  Man  of  Taste  (Act  i.,  Scene 

»  See  Pepys'  Diary,  October  23,  1668. 

6  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS. 

2),  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies),  one 
scene  of  the  first  act  of  Moliere's  The  School  for  Husbands. 

Murphy,  in  The  School  for  Guardians,  has  borrowed  from  three  plays 
of  Moliere.  The  main  plot  is  taken  from  The  School  for  Wives ;  some 
incidents  of  the  second  act  are  taken  from  The  Blunderer  (see  Introduc- 
tory Notice  to  The  Blunderer),  but  the  scenes  in  which  Oldcastle  and 
Lovibond  state  their  intention  of  marrying  their  wards,  and  the  way  in 
which  one  of  the  wards,  Harriet,  makes  her  love  known  to  Belford  is 
taken  from  The  School  for  Husbands,  though  Leonor  does  not  betray  in 
the  French  comedy,  as  she  does  in  the  English,  the  confidence  placed  in 
her.  The  French  Isabella  acts  like  Harriet,  but  then  she  has  a  foolish 
and  jealous  guardian. 

Wycherley,  in  The  Country  Wife,  probably  acted  in  1672  or  1673.  and 
which  is  partly  an  imitation  of  Moliere's  School  for  Wives,  has  borrowed 
from  The  School  for  Husbands,  the  letter  which  Isabella  writes  to  Valere 
(Act  ii.,  Scene  8),  and  also  the  scene  in  which  Isabella  escapes  disguised 
in  her  sister's  clothes :  but,  of  course,  to  give  an  additional  zest  to  the 
English  play,  the  author  makes  Pinchwife  himself  bring  his  wife  to  her 
lover,  Homer.  The  scene  hardly  bears  transcribing.  He  has  also  partly 
imitated  in  The  Gentleman  Dancing- Master,  first  performed  in  1673,  some 
scenes  of  The  School  for  Husbands. 

Otway,  in  The  Soldier's  Fortune  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  Sgana- 
relle,  or  The  Self-Deceived  Husband},  has  borrowed  from  Moliere's 
School  for  Husbands  that  part  of  his  play  in  which  Lady  Dunse  makes 
her  husband  the  agent  for  conveying  a  ring  and  a  letter  to  her  lover. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

SGANARELLE,  *  ] 

f  brothers. 
ARISTE,  J 

VALERE,  lover  to  Isabella. 
ERGASTE,  servant  to  Valere. 

A    MAGISTRATE.5 

A  NOTARY. 

•A,  ) 

f  sisters. 
i,    J 

ISABELLA, 

LEONOR, 

LISETTE,  maid  to  Isabella. 

Scene. — A  PUBLIC  PLACE  IN  PARIS. 

*  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.  In  the  inventory  taken 
after  Moliere's  death,  and  given  by  M.  Soulie,  we  find :  "  A  dress  for  The 
School  for  Husbands,  consisting  of  breeches,  doublet,  cloak,  collar,  purse 
and  girdle,  all  of  a  kind  of  brown  coloured  (couleitr  de  muse)  satin." 

6  The  original  has  un  Commissaire,  who  in  Moliere's  time,  appears  to 
have  been  a  kind  of  inferior  magistrate  under  the  authority  of  the  Lieu- 
tenant-general de  la  Police.  The  Commissaires  de  Police  were  not  estab- 
lished till  1699 ;  and  The  School  for  Husbands  was  played  for  the  first 
time  in  1661. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  HUSBANDS. 

(L'ECOLE  DES  MARIS). 

ACT   I. 

SCENE  I. —  SGANARELLE,  ARISTE. 

SCAN.  Pray,  brother,  let  us  talk  less,  and  let  each  of  us 
live  as  he  likes.  Though  you  have  the  advantage  of  me 
in  years,  and  are  old  enough  to  be  wise,  yet  I  tell  you  that 
I  mean  to  receive  none  of  your  reproofs ;  that  my  fancy 
is  the  only  counsellor  I  shall  follow,  and  that  I  am  quite 
satisfied  with  my  way  of  living. 

AR.  But  every  one  condemns  it. 

SCAN.  Yes,  fools  like  yourself,  brother. 

AR.  Thank  you  very  much.  It  is  a  pleasant  compli- 
ment. 

SCAN.  I  should  like  to  know,  since  one  ought  to  hear 
everything,  what  these  fine  critics  blame  in  me. 

AR.  That  surly  and  austere  temper  which  shuns  all  the 
charms  of  society,  gives  a  whimsical  appearance  to  all 
your  actions,  and  makes  everything  peculiar  in  you,  even 
your  dress. 

SCAN.  I  ought  then  to  make  myself  a  slave  in  fashion, 
and  not  to  put  on  clothes  for  my  own  sake?  Would  you 
not,  my  dear  elder  brother — for,  Heaven  be  thanked,  so 
you  are,  to  tell  you  plainly,  by  a  matter  of  twenty  years ;  and 
that  is  not  worth  the  trouble  of  mentioning — would  you 
not,  I  say,  by  your  precious  nonsense,  persuade  me  to 
adopt  the  fashions  of  those  young  sparks8  of  yours  ?  Oblige 

'  The  original  has  vos  jeunes  mugucts,  literally  "  your  young  lilies  of 
the  valley,'"  because  in  former  times,  according  to  some  annotators,  the 
courtiers  wore  natural  or  artificial  lilies  of  the  valley  in  their  button- 
holes, and  perfumed  themselves  with  the  essence  of  that  flower.  I  think 

9 

10  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  i. 

me  to  wear  those  little  hats  which  provide  ventilation  for 
their  weak  brains,  and  that  flaxen  hair,  the  vast  curls 
whereof  conceal  the  form  of  the  human  face ; 7  those  little 
doublets  but  just  below  the  arms,  and  those  big  collars 
falling  down  to  the  navel ;  those  sleeves  which  one  sees  at 
table  trying  all  the  sauces,  and  those  petticoats  called 
breeches ;  those  tiny  shoes,  covered  with  ribbons,  which 
make  you  look  like  feather-legged  pigeons;  and  those 
large  rolls  wherein  the  legs  are  put  every  morning,  as  it 
were  into  the  stocks,  and  in  which  we  see  these  gallants 
straddle  about  with  their  legs  as  wide  apart,  as  if  they  were 
the  beams  of  a  mill  ? 8  I  should  doubtless  please  you,  be- 
dizened in  this  way ;  I  see  that  you  wear  the  stupid  gew- 
gaws which  it  is  the  fashion  to  wear. 

AR.  We   should  always  agree  with  the  majority,  and 
never  cause  ourselves  to  be  stared  at.     Extremes  shock, 

that  muguet  is  connected  with  the  old  French  word  musguet,  smelling  of 
musk.  In  Moliere's  time  muguet  had  become  rather  antiquated ;  hence 
it  was  rightly  placed  in  the  mouth  of  Sganarelle,  who  likes  to  use  such 
words  and  phrases.  Rabelais  employs  it  in  the  eighth  chapter  of  Gargan- 
tua,  un  (as  de  muguets,  and  it  has  been  translated  by  Sir  Thomas  Urqu- 
hart  as  "  some  fond  wooers  and  wench-courters."  The  fashion  of  calling 
dandies  after  the  name  of  perfumes  is  not  rare  in  France.  Thus  Regnier 
speaks  of  them  as  marjolets,  from  marjolaine,  sweet  marjoram ;  and 
Agrippa  d'Aubigne  calls  them  muscadins  (a  word  also  connected  with  the 
old  French  musguet),  which  name  was  renewed  at  the  beginning  of  the 
first  French  revolution,  and  bestowed  on  elegants,  because  they  always 
smelled  of  musk. 

1  The  fashion  was  in  Moliere's  time  to  wear  the  hair,  or  wigs,  very  long, 
and  if  possible  of  a  fair  colour,  which  gave  to  the  young  fashionables, 
hence  called  blondins,  an  effeminate  air.  Sganarelle  addresses  Valere 
(Act  ii.  Scene  9),  likewise  as  Monsieur  aux  blonds  cheveux.  In  The  School 
for  Wives  (Act  ii.  Scene  6),  Arnolphe  also  tells  Agnes  not  to  listen  to  the 
nonsense  of  these  beaux  blondins.  According  to  Juvenal  (Satire  VI.) 
Messalina  put  a  fair  wig  on  to  disguise  herself.  Louis  XIV.  did  not  begin 
to  wear  a  wig  until  1673. 

8  The  original  has  marcher  ecarquilles  ainsi  que  dts  volants.  Early 
commentators  have  generally  stated  that  volants  means  here  "  the  beams 
of  a  mill,"  but  MM.  Moland  and  E.  Despois,  the  last  annotators  of 
Moliere,  maintain  that  it  stands  for  "shuttlecock,''  because  the  large 
rolls  (canons),  tied  at  the  knee  and  wide  at  the  bottom,  bore  a  great  re- 
semblance to  shuttlecocks  turned  upside  down.  I  cannot  see  how  this 
can  suit  the  words  marcher  ecarquilles,  for  the  motion  of  the  canons  of 
gallants,  walking  or  straddling  about,  is  very  unlike  that  produced  by 
shuttlecocks  beaten  by  battledores;  I  still  think  "beams  of  a  mill" 
right,  because,  though  the  canons  did  not  look  like  beams  of  a  mill,  the 
legs  did,  when  in  motion. 

SCENE  H.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  I  I 

and  a  wise  man  should  do  with  his  clothes  as  with  his 
speech;  avoid  too  much  affectation,  and  without  being 
in  too  great  a  hurry,  follow  whatever  change  custom  in- 
troduces. I  do  not  think  that  we  should  act  like  those 
people  who  always  exaggerate  the  fashion,  and  who  are 
annoyed  that  another  should  go  further  than  themselves 
in  the  extremes  which  they  affect ;  but  I  maintain  that  it 
is  wrong,  for  whatever  reasons,  obstinately  to  eschew  what 
every  one  observes ;  that  it  would  be  better  to  be  counted 
among  the  fools  than  to  be  the  only  wise  person,  in  oppo- 
sition to  every  one  else. 

SCAN.  That  smacks  of  the  old  man  who,  in  order  to 
impose  upon  the  world,  covers  his  grey  hairs  with  a 
black  wig. 

AR.  It  is  strange  that  you  should  be  so  careful  always 
to  fling  my  age  in  my  face,  and  that  I  should  continually 
find  you  blaming  my  dress  as  well  as  my  cheerfulness. 
One  would  imagine  that  old  age  ought  to  think  of  nothing 
but  death,  since  it  is  condemned  to  give  up  all  enjoyment ; 
and  that  it  is  not  attended  by  enough  ugliness  of  its  own, 
but  must  needs  be  slovenly  and  crabbed. 

SCAN.  However  that  may  be,  I  am  resolved  to  stick  to 
my  way  of  dress.  In  spite  of  the  fashion,  I  like  my  cap 
so  that  my  head  may  be  comfortably  sheltered  beneath 
it ;  a  good  long  doublet  buttoned  close,  as  it  should  be,9 
which  may  keep  the  stomach  warm,  and  promote  a  healthy 
digestion ;  a  pair  of  breeches  made  exactly  to  fit  my 
thighs ;  shoes,  like  those  of  our  wise  ancestors,  in  which 
my  feet  may  not  be  tortured :  and  he  who  does  not  like 
the  look  of  me  may  shut  his  eyes. 

SCENE  II. — LEONOR,   ISABELLA,    LISETTE;    ARISTE  and 
SGANARELLE,  conversing  in  an  under-tone,  unperceived. 

LEO.  {To  Isabella).  I  take  it  all  on  myself,  in  case  you 
are  scolded. 

Lis.  {To  Isabella).  Always  in  one  room,  seeing  no 
one? 

9  The  young  dandies  in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.,  wore 
slashed  doublets,  very  tight  and  short. 

12  THE  SCHOOL  FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  i. 

ISA.  Such  is  his  humour. 

LEO.  I  pity  you,  sister. 

Lis.  (To  Leonor).  It  is  well  for  you,  madam,  that  his 
brother  is  of  quite  another  disposition ;  fate  was  very  kind 
in  making  you  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  rational  person. 

ISA.  It  is  a  wonder  that  he  did  not  lock  me  up  to-day, 
or  take  me  with  him. 

Lis.  I  declare  I  would  send  him  to  the  devil,  with  his 
Spanish  ruff,10  and  .  .  . 

SCAN.  (Against  whom  Lisette  stumbles).  Where  are  you 
going,  if  I  may  ask  ? 

LEO.  We  really  do  not  know ;  I  was  urging  my  sister 
to  talk  a  walk,  and  enjoy  this  pleasant  and  fine  weather ; 
but  ... 

SCAN.  (To  Leonor).  As  for  you,  you  may  go  wherever 
you  please.  (To  Lisette}.  You  can  run  off;  there  are 
two  of  you  together.  (To  Isabella).  But  as  for  you,  I 
forbid  you — excuse  me — to  go  out. 

AR.  Oh,  brother !  let  them  go  and  amuse  themselves. 

SCAN.  I  am  your  servant,  brother. 

AR.  Youth  will  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Youth  is  foolish,  and  old  age  too,  sometimes. 

AR.  Do  you  think  there  is  any  harm  in  her  being  with 
Leonor? 

SCAN.  Not  so ;  but  with  me  I  think  she  is  still  better. 

AR.  But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  But  her  conduct  must  be  guided  by  me ;  in  short, 
I  know  the  interest  I  ought  to  take  in  it. 

AR.  Have  I  less  in  her  sister's? 

SCAN.  By  Heaven!  each  one  argues  and  does  as  he 
likes.  They  are  without  relatives,  and  their  father,  our 
friend,  entrusted  them  to  us  in  his  last  hour,  charging  us 
both  either  to  marry  them,  or,  if  we  declined,  to  dispose 
of  them  hereafter.  He  gave  us,  in  writing,  the  full  autho- 
rity of  a  father  and  a  husband  over  them,  from  their  in- 
fancy. You  undertook  to  bring  up  that  one ;  I  charged 

10  The  Spanish  ruff  (/raise)  was  in  fashion  at  the  end  of  Henri  IV.'s 
reign;  in  the  reign  of  Louis  XIII.,  and  in  the  beginning  of  Louis  XIV.  s, 
flat-lying  collars,  adorned  with  lace,  were  worn,  so  that  those  who  still 
stuck  to  the  Spanish  ruff  in  1661,  were  considered  very  old-fashioned 
people.  , 

SCENE  ii.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  13 

myself  with  the  care  of  this  one.  You  govern  yours  at 
your  pleasure.  Leave  me,  I  pray,  to  manage  the  other  as 
I  think  best. 

AR.  It  seems  to  me  .    .    . 

SCAN.  It  seems  to  me,  and  I  say  it  openly,  that  is  the 
right  way  to  speak  on  such  a  subject.  You  let  your  ward 
go  about  gaily  and  stylishly ;  I  am  content.  You  let  her 
have  footmen  and  a  maid;  I  agree.  You  let  her  gad 
about,  love  idleness,  be  freely  courted  by  dandies ;  I  am 
quite  satisfied.  But  I  intend  that  mine  shall  live  accord- 
ing to  my  fancy,  and  not  according  to  her  own ;  that  she 
shall  be  dressed  in  honest  serge,  and  wear  only  black  on 
holidays ;  that,  shut  up  in  the  house,  prudent  in  bearing,  she 
shall  apply  herself  entirely  to  domestic  concerns,  mend  my 
linen  in  her  leisure  hours,  or  else  knit  stockings  for  amuse- 
ment; that  she  shall  close  her  ears  to  the  talk  of  young 
sparks,  and  never  go  out  without  some  one  to  watch  her. 
In  short,  flesh  is  weak;  I  know  what  stories  are  going 
about.  I  have  no  mind  to  wear  horns,  if  I  can  help  it ; 
and  as  her  lot  requires  her  to  marry  me,  I  mean  to  be  as 
certain  of  her  as  I  am  of  myself. 

ISA.  I  believe  you  have  no  grounds  for  .    .    .    . 

SCAN.  Hold  your  tongue,  I  shall  teach  you  to  go  out 
without  us ! 

LEO.  What,  sir  .... 

SCAN.  Good  Heavens,  madam!  without  wasting  any 
more  words,  I  am  not  speaking  to  you,  for  you  are  too 
clever. 

LEO.  Do  you  regret  to  see  Isabella  with  us? 

SCAN.  Yes,  since  I  must  speak  plainly;  you  spoil  her 
for  me.  Your  visits  here  only  displease  me,  and  you  will 
oblige  me  by  honouring  us  no  more. 

LEO.  Do  you  wish  that  I  shall  likewise  speak  my 
thoughts  plainly  to  you  ?  I  know  not  how  she  regards  all 
this;  but  I  know  what  effect  mistrust  would  have  on  me. 
Though  we  are  of  the  same  father  and  mother,  she  is  not 
much  of  my  sister  if  your  daily  conduct  produces  any 
love  in  her. 

Lis.  Indeed,  all  these  precautions  are  disgraceful.  Are 
we  in  Turkey,  that  women  must  be  shut  up?  There,  they 
say,  they  are  kept  like  slaves ;  this  is  why  the  Turks  are 

14  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  i. 

accursed  by  God.  Our  honour,  sir,  is  very  weak  indeed, 
if  it  must  be  perpetually  watched.  Do  you  think,  after  all, 
that  these  precautions  are  any  bar  to  our  designs?  that 
when  we  take  anything  into  our  heads,  the  cleverest  man 
would  not  be  but  a  donkey  to  us?  All  that  vigilance  of 
yours  is  but  a  fool's  notion ;  the  best  way  of  all,  I  assure 
you,  is  to  trust  us.  He  who  torments  us  puts  himself  in 
extreme  peril,  for  our  honour  must  ever  be  its  own  protector. 
To  take  so  much  trouble  in  preventing  us  is  almost  to  give 
us  a  desire  to  sin.  If  I  were  suspected  by  my  husband, 
I  should  have  a  very  good  mind  to  justify  his  fears. 

SGAN.  (to  Ariste}.  This,  my  fine  teacher,  is  your  train- 
ing. And  you  endure  it  without  being  troubled? 

AR.  Brother,  her  words  should  only  make  you  smile. 
There  is  some  reason  in  what  she  says.  Their  sex  loves  to 
enjoy  a  little  freedom ;  they  are  but  ill-checked  by  so  much 
austerity.  Suspicious  precautions,  bolts  and  bars,  make 
neither  wives  nor  maids  virtuous.  It  is  honour  which  must 
hold  them  to  their  duty,  not  the  severity  which  we  display 
towards  them.  To  tell  you  candidly,  a  woman  who  is  dis- 
creet by  compulsion  only  is  not  often  to  be  met  with.  We 
pretend  in  vain  to  govern  all  her  actions ;  I  find  that  it  is 
the  heart  we  must  win.  For  my  part,  whatever  care  might 
be  taken,  I  would  scarcely  trust  my  honour  in  the  hands  of 
one  who,  in  the  desires  which  might  assail  her,  required 
nothing  but  an  opportunity  of  falling. 

SCAN.  That  is  all  nonsense. 

AR.  Have  it  so;  but  still  I  maintain  that  we  should 
instruct  youth  pleasantly,  chide  their  faults  with  great 
tenderness,  and  not  make  them  afraid  of  the  name  of 
virtue.  L6onor's  education  has  been  based  on  these  maxims. 
I  have  not  made  crimes  of  the  smallest  acts  of  liberty,  I 
have  always  assented  to  her  youthful  wishes,  and,  thank 
Heaven,  I  never  repented  of  it.  I  have  allowed  her  to  see 
good  company,  to  go  to  amusements,  balls,  plays.  These 
are  things  which,  for  my  part,  I  think  are  calculated  to 
form  the  minds  of  the  young ;  the  world  is  a  school  which, 
in  my  opinion,  teaches  them  better  how  to  live  than  any 
book.  Does  she  like  to  spend  money  on  clothes,  linen, 
ribands — what  then  ?  I  endeavour  to  gratify  her  wishes ; 
these  are  pleasures  which,  when  we  are  well-off,  we  may 

SCENE  ii.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  15 

permit  to  the  girls  of  our  family.  Her  father's  command 
requires  her  to  marry  me ;  but  it  is  not  my  intention  to 
tyrannize  over  her.  I  am  quite  aware  that  our  years  hardly 
suit,  and  I  leave  her  complete  liberty  of  choice.11  If  a  safe 
income  of  four  thousand  crowns  a-year,  great  affection  and 
consideration  for  her,  may,  in  her  opinion,  counterbalance 
in  marriage  the  inequality  of  our  age,  she  may  take  me  for 
her  husband;  if  not  she  may  choose  elsewhere.  If  she  can 
be  happier  without  me,  I  do  not  object ;  I  prefer  to  see  her 
with  another  husband  rather  than  that  her  hand  should  be 
given  to  me  against  her  will. 

SCAN,  Oh,  how  sweet  he  is!     All  sugar  and  honey! 

AR.  At  all  events,  that  is  my  disposition ;  and  I  thank 
Heaven  for  it.  I  would  never  lay  down  these  strict  rules 
which  make  children  wish  their  parents  dead. 

SCAN.  But  the  liberty  acquired  in  youth  is  not  so 
easily  withdrawn  later  on;  all  those  feelings  will  please 
you  but  little  when  you  have  to  change  her  mode  of 
life. 

AR.  And  why  change  it? 

SCAN.  Why? 

AR.  Yes. 

SCAN.  I  do  not  know. 

AR.  Is  there  anything  in  it  that  offends  honour? 

SCAN.  Why,  if  you  marry  her,  she  may  demand  the 
same  freedom  which  she  enjoyed  as  a  girl  ? 

AR.  Why  not  ? 

SCAN.  And  you  so  far  agree  with  her  as  to  let  her  have 
patches  and  ribbons  ? 

AR.  Doubtless. 

SCAN.  To  let  her  gad  about  madly  at  every  ball  and 
public  assembly? 

AR.  Yes,  certainly. 

SCAN.  And  the  beaux  will  visit  at  your  house  ? 

AR.  What  then  ? 

SCAN.  Who  will  junket  and  give  entertainments? 

11  The  School  for  Husbands  was  played  for  the  first  time,  on  the  24th  of 
June,  1661,  and  Moliere  married  Armande  Bejart(see  Prefatory  Memoir), 
on  the  aoth  of  February,  1662,  when  he  was  forty,  and  she  about  twenty 
years  old.  It  is  therefore  not  unreasonable  to  suppose  that  the  words  he 
places  in  the  mouth  of  Ariste  are  an  expression  of  his  own  feelings. 

1 6  THE  SCHOOL.  FOR  HUSBANDS.  [ACTH. 

AR.  With  all  my  heart. 

SCAN.  And  your  wife  is  to  listen  to  their  fine  speeches? 

AR.  Exactly. 

SCAN.  And  you  will  look  on  at  these  gallant  visitors 
with  a  show  of  indifference  ? 

AR.  Of  course. 

SCAN.  Go  on,  you  old  idiot.  (To  Isabella).  Get  in- 
doors, and  hear  no  more  of  this  shameful  doctrine. 

SCENE  III. — ARISTE,  SGANARELLE,  LEONOR,  LISETTE. 

AR.  I  mean  to  trust  to  the  faithfulness  of  my  wife,  and 
intend  always  to  live  as  I  have  lived. 

SCAN.  How  pleased  I  shall  be  to  see  him  victimized  ! 

AR.  I  cannot  say  what  fate  has  in  store  for  me  ;  but  as 
for  you,  I  know  that  if  you  fail  to  be  so,  it  is  no  fault  of 
yours,  for  you  are  doing  everything  to  bring  it  about. 

SCAN.  Laugh  on,  giggler !  Oh,  what  a  joke  it  is  to  see 
a  railer  of  nearly  sixty  ! 

LEO.  I  promise  to  preserve  him  against  the  fate  you 
speak  of,  if  he  is  to  receive  my  vows  at  the  altar.  He 
may  rest  secure ;  but  I  can  tell  you  I  would  pass  my  word 
for  nothing  if  I  were  your  wife. 

Lis.  We  have  a  conscience  for  those  who  rely  on  us ; 
but  it  is  delightful,  really,  to  cheat  such  folks  as  you. 

SCAN.  Hush,  you  cursed  ill-bred  tongue  ! 

AR.  Brother,  you  drew  these  silly  words  on  yourself. 
Good  bye.  Alter  your  temper,  and  be  warned  that  to 
shut  up  a  wife  is  a  bad  plan.  Your  servant. 

SCAN.  I  am  not  yours. 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Oh,  they  are  all  well  suited  to  one  another !  What  an 
admirable  family.  A  foolish  old  man 'with  a  worn-out 
body  who  plays  the  fop ;  a  girl-mistress  and  a  thorough 
coquette;  impudent  servants;— no,  wisdom  itself  could 
not  succeed,  but  would  exhaust  sense  and  reason,  trying 
to  amend  a  household  like  this.  By  such  associations,  Isa- 
bella might  lose  those  principles  of  honour  which  she 
learned  amongst  us ;  to  prevent  it,  I  shall  presently  send 
her  back  again  to  my  cabbages  and  turkeys. 

SCBNB  v.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  1  7 

SCENE  V. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE,  ERGASTE. 

VAL.  (Behind).  Ergaste,  that  is  he,  the  Argus  whom  I 
hate,  the  stern  guardian  of  her  whom  I  adore. 

SCAN.  (Thinking himself  alone).  In  short,  is  there  not 
something  wonderful  in  the  corruption  of  manners  now-a- 
days? 

VAL.  I  should  like  to  address  him,  if  I  can  get  a  chance, 
and  try  to  strike  up  an  acquaintance  with  him. 

SCAN.  {Thinking  himself  alone).  Instead  of  seeing  that 
severity  prevail  which  so  admirably  formed  virtue  in 
other  days,  uncontrolled  and  imperious  youth  here-about 
assumes  .  .  .  (  Valere  bows  to  SganareUefrom  a  distance). 

VAL.  He  does  not  see  that  we  bow  to  him. 

ERG.  Perhaps  his  blind  eye  is  on  this  side.  Let  us  cross 
to  the  right. 

SCAN.  I  must  go  away  from  this  place.  Life  in  town 
only  produces  in  me  .  .  . 

VAL.  {Gradually  approaching).  I  must  try  to  get  an 
introduction 

SCAN.  (Hearing  a  noise).  Ha !  I  thought  some  one 
spoke  .  .  .  {Thinking  himself  alone).  In  the  country, 
thank  Heaven,  the  fashionable  follies  do  not  offend  my 
eyes. 

ERG.  (71?  Valere').     Speak  to  him. 

SCAN.  What  is  it  ?  .  .  .  my  ears  tingle  .  .  .  There,  all 
the  recreations  of  our  girls  are  but  .  .  .  (He  perceives 
Valere  bowing  to  him).  Do  you  bow  to  me  ? 

ERG.  {To  Valere).     Go  up  to  him. 

SCAN.  {Not  attending  to  Valere).  Thither  no  coxcomb 
comes.  (  Valere  again  bows  to  him).  What  the  deuce  !  .  .  . 
{He  turns  and  sees  Ergaste  bowing  on  the  other  side). 
Another  ?  What  a  great  many  bows  ! 

VAL.  Sir,  my  accosting  you  disturbs  you,  I  fear  ? 

SCAN.  That  may  be. 

VAL.  But  yet  the  honour  of  your  acquaintance  is  so 
great  a  happiness,  so  exquisite  a  pleasure,  that  I  had  a 
great  desire  to  pay  my  respects  to  you. 

SCAN.  Well. 

VAL.  And  to  come  and  assure  you,  without  any  deceit, 
that  I  am  wholly  at  your  service. 

SCAN.  I  believe  it. 

1 8  THE  SCHOOL  FOR   HUSBANDS.  (•  ACT  ,. 

VAL.  I  have  the  advantage  of  being  one  of  your  neigh- 
bours, for  which  I  thank  my  lucky  fate. 

SCAN.  That  is  all  right. 

VAL.  But,  sir.  do  you  know  the  news  going  the  round 
at  Court,  and  thought  to  be  reliable  ? 

SCAN.  What  does  it  matter  to  me  ? 

VAL.  True ;  but  we  may  sometimes  be  anxious  to  hear 
it  ?  Shall  you  go  and  see  the  magnificent  preparations  for 
the  birth  of  our  Dauphin,  sir?12 

SCAN.  If  I  feel  inclined. 

VAL.  Confess  that  Paris  affords  us  a  hundred  delightful 
pleasures  which  are  not  to  be  found  elsewhere.  The 
provinces  are  a  desert  in  comparison.  How  do  you  pass 
your  time  ? 

SCAN.  On  my  own  business. 

VAL.  The  mind  demands  relaxation,  and  occasionally 
gives  way,  by  too  close  attention  to  serious  occupations. 
What  do  you  do  in  the  evening  before  going  to  bed  ? 

SCAN.  What  I  please. 

VAL.  Doubtless  no  one  could  speak  better.  The  answer 
is  just,  and  it  seems  to  be  common  sense  to  resolve  never 
to  do  what  does  not  please  us.  If  I  did  not  think  you 
were  too  much  occupied,  I  would  drop  in  on  you  some- 
times after  supper. 

SGAN.  Your  servant. 

SCENE  VI. — VALERE,  ERGASTE. 

VAL.  What  do  you  think  of  that  eccentric  fool  ? 

ERG.  His  answers  are  abrupt  and  his  reception  is 
churlish. 

VAL.  Ah  !  I  am  in  a  rage. 

ERG.  What  for? 

VAL.  Why  am  I  in  a  rage  ?  To  see  her  I  love  in  the 
power  of  a  savage,  a  watchful  dragon,  whose  severity  will 
not  permit  her  to  enjoy  a  single  moment  of  liberty. 

ERG.  That  is  just  what  is  in  your  favour.  Your  love 
ought  to  expect  a  great  deal  from  these  circumstances. 

11  The  Dauphin,  the  son  of  Louis  XIV.  was  bom  at  Fontainebleau, 
on  the  ist  of  November,  1661 ;  The  School  for  Husbands  was  first  acted 
on  the  24th  of  June  of  the  same  year ;  hence  Moliere  ventures  to  pro- 
phesy about  the  Dauphin's  birth. 

SCEN«  vi.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  1 9 

Know,  for  your  encouragement,  that  a  woman  watched  is 
half-won,  and  that  the  gloomy  ill-temper  of  husbands  and 
fathers  has  always  promoted  the  affairs  of  the  gallant.  I  in- 
trigue very  little ;  for  that  is  not  one  of  my  accomplish- 
ments. I  do  not  pretend  to  be  a  gallant ;  but  I  have  served 
a  score  of  such  sportsmen,  who  often  used  to  tell  me  that  it 
was  their  greatest  delight  to  meet  with  churlish  husbands, 
who  never  come  home  without  scolding, — downright 
brutes,  who,  without  rhyme  or  reason,  criticise  the  conduct 
of  their  wives  in  everything,  and,  proudly  assuming  the 
authority  of  a  husband,  quarrel  with  them  before  the  eyes 
of  their  admirers.  "One  knows,"  they  would  say,  "how 
to  take  advantage  of  this.  The  lady's  indignation  at  this 
kind  of  outrage,  on  the  one  hand,  and  the  considerate 
compassion  of  the  lover,  on  the  other,  afford  an  oppor- 
tunity for  pushing  matters  far  enough."  In  a  word,  the 
surliness  of  Isabella's  guardian  is  a  circumstance  sufficiently 
favourable  for  you. 

VAL.  But  I  could  never  find  one  moment  to  speak  to 
her  in  the  four  months  that  I  have  ardently  loved  her. 

ERG.  Love  quickens  people's  wits,  though  it  has  little 
effect  on  yours.  If  I  had  been  .  .  . 

VAL.  Why,  what  could  you  have  done?  For  one  never 
sees  her  without  that  brute ;  in  the  house  there  are  neither 
maids  nor  men-servants  whom  I  might  influence  to  assist 
me  by  the  alluring  temptation  of  some  reward. 

ERG.  Then  she  does  not  yet  know  that  you  love  her? 

VAL.  It  is  a  point  on  which  I  am  not  informed.  * 
Wherever  the  churl  took  this  fair  one,  she  always  saw  me 
like  a  shadow  behind  her ;  my  looks  daily  tried  to  explain 
to  her  the  violence  of  my  love.  My  eyes  have  spoken 
much ;  but  who  can  tell  whether,  after  all,  their  language 
could  be  understood  ? 

ERG.  It  is  true  that  this  language  may  sometimes  prove 
obscure,  if  it  have  not  writing  or  speech  for  its  interpreter. 

VAL.  What  am  I  to  do  to  rid  myself  of  this  vast  diffi- 
culty, and  to  learn  whether  the  fair  one  has  perceived  that 
I  love  her  ?  Tell  me  some  means  or  other. 

ERG.  That  is  what  we  have  to  discover.  Let  us  go  in 
for  a  while— the  better  to  think  over  it. 

20  THE   SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  [ACT  n. 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — ISABELLA,  SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  That  will  do ;  I  know  the  house,  and  the  person, 
simply  from  the  description  you  have  given  me. 

ISA.  (Aside).  Heaven,  be  propitious,  and  favour  to-day 
the  artful  contrivance  of  an  innocent  love  ! 

SCAN.  Do  you  say  they  have  told  you  that  his  name  is 
Valere? 

ISA.  Yes. 

SCAN.  That  will  do ;  do  not  make  yourself  uneasy  about 
it.  Go  inside,  and  leave  me  to  act.  I  am  going  at  once  to 
talk  to  this  young  madcap. 

ISA.  (As  she  goes  in).  For  a  girl,  I  am  planning  a  pretty 
bold  scheme.  But  the  unreasonable  severity  with  which 
I  am  treated  will  be  my  excuse  to  every  right  mind. 

SCENE  II, — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

(Knocks  at  the  door  of  Valere'' 's  house).  Let  us  lose  no 
time;  here  it  is.  Who's  there?  Why,  I  am  dreaming! 
Hulloa,  I  say!  hulloa  somebody!  hulloa!  I  do  not 
wonder,  after  this  information,  that  he  came  up  to  me 
just  now  so  meekly.  But  I  must  make  haste,  and  teach 
this  foolish  aspirant  .  .  . 

SCENE  III. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE,  ERGASTE. 

SCAN.  (To  Ergaste,  who  has  come  out  hastily).  A 
plague  on  the  lubberly  ox !  Do  you  mean  to  knock  me 
down — coming  and  sticking  yourself  in  front  of  me  like  a 
post? 

VAL.  Sir,  I  regret  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Ah !  you  are  the  man  I  want. 

VAL.  I,  sir? 

SCAN.  You.     Your  name  is  Valere,  is  it  not  ? 

VAL.  Yes. 

SCAN.  I  am  come  to  speak  to  you  if  you  will  allow  me. 

VAL.  Can  I  have  the  happiness  of  rendering  you  any 
service? 

SCAN.  No ;  but  I  propose  to  do  you  a  good  turn.  That 
is  what  brings  me  to  your  house. 

VAL.  To  my  house,  sir ! 

SCKNBIII.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  21 

SCAN.  To  your  house.  Need  you  be  so  much  aston- 
ished ? 

VAL.  I  have  good  reason  for  it ;  I  am  delighted  with 
the  honour  .  .  . 

SCAN.  Do  not  mention  the  honour,  I  beseech  you. 

VAL.  Will  you  not  come  in? 

SCAN.  There  is  no  need. 

VAL.  I  pray  you,  enter. 

SCAN.  No,  I  will  go  no  further. 

VAL.  As  long  as  you  stay  there  I  cannot  listen  to  you. 

SCAN.  I  will  not  budge. 

VAL.  Well,  I  must  yield.  Quick,  since  this  gentleman 
is  resolved  upon  it,  bring  a  chair. 

SCAN.  I  am  going  to  talk  standing. 

VAL.  As  if  I  could  permit  such  a  thing  ! 

SCAN.  What  an  intolerable  delay ! 

VAL.  Such  incivility  would  be  quite  unpardonable. 

SCAN.  Nothing  can  be  so  rude  as  not  to  listen  to  people 
who  wish  to  speak  to  us. 

VAL.  I  obey  you,  then. 

SCAN.  You  cannot  do  better.  {They  make  many  com- 
pliments about  putting  on  their  hats*).  So  much  ceremony 
is  hardly  necessary.  Will  you  listen  to  me? 

VAL.   Undoubtedly,  and  most  willingly. 

SCAN.  Tell  me :  do  you  know  that  I  am  guardian  to  a 
tolerably  young  and  passably  handsome  girl  who  lives  in 
this  neighbourhood,  and  whose  name  is  Isabella? 

VAL.  Yes. 

SCAN.  As  you  know  it,  I  need  not  tell  it  to  you.  But 
do  you  know,  likewise,  that  as  I  find  her  charming,  I  care 
for  her  otherwise  than  as  a  guardian,  and  that  she  is  des- 
tined for  the  honour  of  being  my  wife  ? 

VAL.  No! 

SCAN.  I  tell  it  you,  then ;  and  also  that  it  is  as  well 
that  your  passion,  if  you  please,  should  leave  her  in  peace. 

VAL.  Who?— I,  sir? 

SCAN.  Yes,  you.     Let  us  have  no  dissembling. 

VAL.  Who  has  told  you  that  my  heart  is  smitten  by  her? 

SCAN.  Those  who  are  worthy  of  belief. 

VAL.  Be  more  explicit. 

SCAN.  She  herself. 

THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  n. 

VAL.  She! 

SCAN.  She.  Is  not  that  enough  ?  Like  a  virtuous  young 
girl,  who  has  loved  me  from  childhood,  she  told  me  all 
just  now ;  moreover,  she  charged  me  to  tell  you,  that, 
since  she  has  everywhere  been  followed  by  you,  her  heart, 
which  your  pursuit  greatly  offends,  has  only  too  well  un- 
derstood the,  language  of  your  eyes ;  that  your  secret 
desires  are  well  known  to  her ;  and  that  to  try  more  fully 
to  explain  a  passion  which  is  contrary  to  the  affection  she 
entertains  for  me,  is  to  give  yourself  needless  trouble. 

VAL.  She,  you  say,  of  her  own  accord,  makes  you  .    . 

SCAN.  Yes,  makes  me  come  to  you  and  give  you  this 
frank  and  plain  message ;  also,  that,  having  observed  the 
violent  love  wherewith  your  soul  is  smitten,  she  would 
earlier  have  let  you  know  what  she  thinks  about  you  if, 
perplexed  as  she  was,  she  could  have  found  anyone  to  send 
this  message  by ;  but  that  at  length  she  was  painfully  com- 
pelled to  make  use  of  me,  in  order  to  assure  you,  as  I  have 
told  you,  that  her  affection  is  denied  to  all  save  me ;  that 
you  have  been  ogling  her  long  enough ;  and  that,  if  you 
have  ever  so  little  brains,  you  will  carry  your  passion  some- 
where else.  Farewell,  till  our  next  meeting.  That  is  what 
I  had  to  tell  you. 

VAL.  {Aside).  Ergaste,  what  say  you  to  such  an  adven- 
ture? 

SCAN.   {Aside,  retiring).     See  how  he  is  taken  aback  ! 

ERG.  (In  a  low  tone  to  Valere).  For  my  part,  I  think 
that  there  is  nothing  in  it  to  displease  you  ;  that  a  rather 
subtle  mystery  is  concealed  under  it ;  in  short,  that  this 
message  is  not  sent  by  one  who  desires  to  see  the  love  end 
which  she  inspires  in  you. 

SCAN.  (Aside.}     He  takes  it  as  he  ought. 

VAL.  (In  a  low  tone  to  Ergaste).  You  think  it  a 
mystery  .  .  . 

ERG.  Yes.  .  .  .  But  he  is  looking  at  us  ;  let  us  get  out 
of  his  sight. 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

How  his  face  showed  his  confusion  !  Doubtless  he  did 
not  expect  this  message.  Let  me  call  Isabella;  she  is 
showing  the  fruits  which  education  produces  on  the  mind. 

SCBNBV.J  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  23 

Virtue  is  all  she  cares  for  ;  and  her  heart  is  so  deeply 
steeped  in  it,  that  she  is  offended  if  a  man  merely  looks 
at  her. 

SCENE  V. — ISABELLA,  SGANARELLE. 

ISA.  (Aside,  as  she  enters).  I  fear  that  my  lover,  full  of 
his  passion,  has  not  understood  my  message  rightly  !  Since 
I  am  so  strictly  guarded,  I  must  risk  one  which  shall  make 
my  meaning  clearer. 

SCAN.  Here  I  am,  returned  again. 

ISA.  Well? 

SCAN.  Your  words  wrought  their  full  purpose ;  I  have 
done  his  business.  He  wanted  to  deny  that  his  heart  was 
touched  ;  but  when  I  told  him  I  came  from  you,  he  stood 
immediately  dumbfounded  and  confused;  I  do  not  believe 
he  will  come  here  any  more. 

ISA.  Ah,  what  do  you  tell  me  ?  I  much  fear  the  con- 
trary, and  that  he  will  still  give  us  more  trouble. 

SCAN.  And  why  do  you  fear  this  ? 

ISA.  You  had  hardly  left  the  house  when,  going  to  the 
window  to  take  a  breath  of  air,  I  saw  a  young  man  at 
yonder  turning,  who  first  came,  most  unexpectedly,  to 
wish  me  good  morning,  on  the  part  of  this  impertinent  man, 
and  then  threw  right  into  my  chamber  a  box,  enclosing  a 
letter,  sealed  like  a  love-letter.13  I  meant  at  once  to  throw 
it  after  him ;  but  he  had  already  reached  the  end  of  the 
street.  I  feel  very  much  annoyed  at  it. 

SCAN.  Just  see  his  trickery  and  rascality ! 

ISA.  It  is  my  duty  quickly  to  have  this  box  and  letter 
sent  back  to  this  detestable  lover ;  for  that  purpose  I  need 
some  one ;  for  I  dare  not  venture  to  ask  yourself  .  .  . 

SCAN.  On  the  contrary,  darling,  it  shows  me  all  the 
more  your  love  and  faithfulness ;  my  heart  joyfully  ac- 
cepts this  task.  You  oblige  me  in  this  more  than  I  can 
tell  you. 

ISA.  Take  it  then. 

1S  The  original  has  ««  poulet,  literally  "  a  chicken,"  because  love-letters 
were  folded  so  as  to  represent  a  fowl,  with  two  wings  j  this  shape  is  now 
called  cocotte,  from  cog,  and,  though  no  longer  used  to  designate  a  billet- 
doux,  is  often  employed  in  familiar  phraseology,  in  speaking  of  a  girl  who 
does  not  lead  a  moral  life. 

24  THE  SCHOOL  FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  11. 

SCAN.  Well,  let  us  see  what  he  has  dared  to  say  to  you. 

ISA.  Heavens  !  Take  care  not  to  open  it ! 

SCAN.  Why  so? 

ISA.  Will  you  make  him  believe  that  it  is  I  ?  A  re- 
spectable girl  ought  always  to  refuse  to  read  the  letters  a 
man  sends  her.  The  curiosity  which  she  thus  betrays 
shows  a  secret  pleasure  in  listening  to  gallantries.  I  think 
it  right  that  this  letter  should  be  peremptorily  returned  to 
Valere  unopened,  that  he  may  the  better  learn  this  day 
the  great  contempt  which  my  heart  feels  for  him ;  so  that 
his  passion  may  from  this  time  lose  all  hope,  and  never 
more  attempt  such  a  transgression. 

SCAN.  Of  a  truth  she  is  right  in  this  !  Well,  your  vir- 
tue charms  me,  as  well  as  your  discretion.  I  see  that  my 
lessons  have  borne  fruit  in  your  mind ;  you  show  yourself 
worthy  of  being  my  wife. 

ISA.  Still  I  do  not  like  to  stand  in  the  way  of  your 
wishes.  The  letter  is  in  your  hands,  and  you  can  open  it. 

SCAN.  No,  far  from  it.  Your  reasons  are  too  good ;  I 
go  to  acquit  myself  of  the  task  you  impose  upon  me ;  I 
have  likewise  to  say  a  few  words  quite  near,  and  will  then 
return  hither  to  set  you  at  rest. 

SCENE  VI. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

How  delighted  I  am  to  find  her  such  a  discreet  girl !  I 
have  in  my  house  a  treasure  of  honour.  To  consider  a 
loving  look  treason,  to  receive  a  love-letter  as  a  supreme 
insult,  and  to  have  it  carried  back  to  the  gallant  by 
myself!  I  should  like  to  know,  seeing  all  this,  if  my 
brother's  ward  would  have  acted  thus,  on  a  similar  occa- 
sion. Upon  my  word,  girls  are  what  you  make  them  .  .  . 
Hulloa !  (Knocks  at  Valere's  door}. 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  ERGASTE. 

ERG.  Who  is  there  ? 

SGAN.  Take  this ;  and  tell  your  master  not  to  presume 
so  far  as  to  write  letters  again,  and  send  them  in  gold 
boxes ;  say  also  that  Isabella  is  mightily  offended  at  it. 
See,  it  has  not  even  been  opened.  He  will  perceive  what 

SCENE  ix.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  25 

regard  she  has  for  his  passion,  and  what  success  he  can 
expect  in  it. 

SCENE  VIII. — VALERE,  ERGASTE. 

VAL.  What  has  that  surly  brute  just  given  you? 

ERG.  This  letter,  sir,  as  well  as  this  box,  which  he  pre- 
tends that  Isabella  has  received  from  you,  and  about 
which,  he  says,  she  is  in  a  great  rage.  She  returns  it  to 
you  unopened.  Read  it  quickly,  and  let  us  see  if  I  am 
mistaken. 

VAL.  {Reads).  "  This  letter  will  no  doubt  surprise  you ; 
both  the  resolution  to  write  to  you  and  the  means  of  conveying 
it  to  your  hands  may  be  thought  very  bold  in  me;  but  I  am 
in  such  a  condition,  that  I  can  no  longer  restrain  myself. 
Well-founded  repugnance  to  a  marriage  with  which  I  am 
threatened  in  six  days,  makes  me  risk  everything;  and  in 
the  determination  to  free  myself  from  it  by  whatever  means, 
I  thought  I  had  rather  choose  you  than  despair.  Yet  do  not 
think  that  you  owe  all  to  my  evil  fate;  it  is  not  the  constraint 
in  which  I  find  myself  that  has  given  rise  to  the  sentiments  1 
entertain  for  you ;  but  it  hastens  the  avowal  of  them,  and 
makes  me  transgress  the  decorum  which  the  proprieties  of  my 
sex  require.  It  depends  on  you  alone  to  make  me  shortly 
your  own  ;  I  wait  only  until  you  have  declared  your  inten- 
tions to  me  before  acquainting  you  with  the  resolution  I  have 
taken;  but,  above  all  .remember  that  time  presses,  and  that 
two  hearts,  which  love  each  other,  ought  to  understand  even 
the  slightest  hint.'" 

ERG.  Well,  sir,  is  not  this  contrivance  original  ?  For 
a  young  girl  she.  is  not  so  very  ignorant.  Would  one  have 
thought  her  capable  of  these  love  stratagems  ? 

VAL.  Ah,  I  consider  her  altogether  adorable.  This 
evidence  of  her  wit  and  tenderness  doubles  my  love  for 
her,  and  strengthens  the  feelings  with  which  her  beauty 
inspires  me  .  .  . 

ERG.  Here  comes  the  dupe  ;  think  what  you  will  say  to 
him. 

SCENE  IX. — SGANARELLE,  VALERE,  ERGASTE. 
SCAN.  {Thinking  himself  alone}.      Oh,  thrice  and  four 
times  blessed  be  the  law  which  forbids  extravagance  in 

26  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  11. 

dress  ! "  No  longer  will  the  troubles  of  husbands  be  so 
great  !  women  will  now  be  checked  in  their  demands. 
Oh,  how  delighted  I  am  with  the  King  for  this  proclama- 
tion ! 15  How  I  wish,  for  the  peace  of  the  same  husbands, 
that  he  would  forbid  coquetry,  as  well  as  lace,  and  gold 
or  silver  embroidery.  I  have  bought  the  law  on  purpose, 
so  that  Isabella  may  read  it  aloud  ;  and,  by  and  by,  when 
she  is  at  leisure,  it  shall  be  our  entertainment  after  supper. 
(Perceiving  Valere).  Well,  Mr.  Sandy-hair,16  would  you 
like  to  send  again  love-letters  in  boxes  of  gold  ?  You 
doubtless  thought  you  had  found  some  young  flirt,  eager 
for  an  intrigue,  and  melting  before  pretty  speeches.  You 
see  how  your  presents  are  received  !  Believe  me,  you 
waste  your  powder  and  shot.  Isabella  is  a  discreet  girl, 
she  loves  me  and  your  love  insults  her.  Aim  at  some  one 
else,  and  be  off ! 

VAL.  Yes,  yes ;  your  merits,  to  which  everyone  yields, 
are  too  great  an  obstacle,  sir.  Though  my  passion  be 
sincere,  it  is  folly  to  contend  with  you  for  the  love  of 
Isabella. 

SCAN.  It  is  really  folly. 

VAL.  Be  sure  I  should  not  have  yielded  to  the  fasci- 
nation of  her  charms,  could  I  have  foreseen  that  this 
wretched  heart  would  find  a  rival  so  formidable  as 
yourself. 

SCAN.  I  believe  it. 

VAL.  Now  I  know  better  than  to  hope ;  I  yield  to  you, 
sir,  and  that  too  without  a  murmur. 

SCAN.  You  do  well. 

VAL.  Reason  will  have  it  so;  for  you  shine  with  so 
many  virtues,  that  I  should  be  wrong  to '  regard  with  an 
angry  eye  the  tender  sentiments  which  Isabella  entertains 
for  you. 

SCAN.  Of  course. 

14  It  is  remarkable  that  Louis  XIV.,  who  was  so  extravagant  himself  in 
his  buildings,  dress,  and  general  expenses,  published  sixteen  laws  against 
luxury  ;  the  law  Sganarelle  speaks  of  was  promulgated  November  ayth, 
1660,   against  the  use  of  guipures,  cannetilles,  paillettes,  etc.,  on  men's 
dresses. 

15  The  original  has  decri,  a  proclamation  which  forbade  the  manufac- 
turing, sale  or  wearing,  of  certain  fabrics. 

16  See  Note  7,  page  264. 

SCENE  xi.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  2J 

VAL.  Yes,  yes,  I  yield  to  you;  but  at  least  I  pray  you, 
— and  it  is  the  only  favour,  sir,  begged  by  a  wretched 
lover,  of  whose  pangs  this  day  you  are  the  sole  cause, — 
I  pray  you,  I  say,  to  assure  Isabella  that,  if  my  heart  has 
been  burning  with  love  for  her  these  three  months,  that 
passion  is  spotless,  and  has  never  fostered  a  thought  at 
which  her  honour  could  be  offended. 

SCAN.  Ay. 

VAL.  That,  relying  solely  on  my  heart's  choice,  my 
only  design  was  to  obtain  her  for  my  wife,  if  destiny  had 
not  opposed  an  obstacle  to  this  pure  flame  in  you,  who 
captivated  her  heart. 

SCAN.  Very  good. 

VAL.  That,  whatever  happens,  she  must  not  think  that 
her  charms  can  ever  be  forgotten ;  that  to  whatever  decrees 
of  Heaven  I  must  submit,  my  fate  is  to  love  her  to  my 
last  breath;  and  that,  if  anything  checks  my  pursuit,  it  is 
the  just  respect  I  have  for  your  merits." 

SCAN.  That  is  wisely  spoken ;  I  shall  go  at  once  to  re- 
peat these  words,  which  will  not  be  disagreeable  to  her. 
But,  if  you  will  listen  to  me,  try  to  act  so  as  to  drive  this 
passion  from  your  mind.  Farewell. 

ERG.  (To  Valere).     The  excellent  dupe  ! 

SCENE  X. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

I  feel  a  great  pity  for  this  poor  wretch,  so  full  of  affec- 
tion. But  it  is  unfortunate  for  him  to  have  taken  it  into 
his  head  to  try  to  storm  a  fortress  which  I  have  captured. 

(Sganarelle  knocks  at  his  door.} 

SCENE  XI. — SGANARELLE,  ISABELLA. 

SCAN.  Never  did  lover  display  so  much  grief  for  a  love- 
letter  returned  unopened !  At  last  he  loses  all  hope,  and 
retires.  But  he  earnestly  entreated  me  to  tell  you,  that, 
at  least,  in  loving  you,  he  never  fostered  a  thought  at 
which  your  honour  could  be  offended,  and  that,  relying 

17  We  are  of  course  to  read  between  the  lines  :  "  If  there  is  anything 
which  could  strengthen  my  resolution  to  save  her,  it  is  the  natural  detes- 
tation which  I  feel  for  you." 

28  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACTII. 

solely  on  his  heart's  choice,  his  only  desire  was  to  obtain 
you  for  a  wife,  if  destiny  had  not  opposed  an  obstacle  to  his 
pure  flame,  through  me,  who  captivated  your  heart ;  that, 
whatever  happens,  you  must  not  think  that  your  charms 
can  ever  be  forgotten  by  him ;  that,  to  whatever  decrees 
of  Heaven  he  must  submit,  his  fate  is  to  love  you  to  his 
last  breath;  and  that  if  anything  checks  his  pursuit,  it  is 
the  just  respect  he  has  for  my  merits.  These  are  his  very 
words;  and,  far  from  blaming  hftn,  I  think  him  a  gentle- 
man, and  I  pity  him  for  loving  you. 

ISA.  (Aside).  His  passion  does  not  contradict  my  se- 
cret belief,  and  his  looks  have  always  assured  me  of  its 
innocence. 

SCAN.  What  do  you  say? 

ISA.  That  it  is  hard  that  you  should  so  greatly  pity  a 
man  whom  I  hate  like  death  ;  and  that,  if  you  loved  me 
as  much  as  you  say,  you  would  feel  how  he  insults  me  by 
his  addresses. 

SCAN.  But  he  did  not  know  your  inclinations ;  and, 
from  the  uprightness  of  his  intentions,  his  love  does  not 
deserve  .  .  . 

ISA.  Is  it  good  intentions,  I  ask,  to  try  and  carry  people 
off?  Is  it  like  a  man  of  honour  to  form  designs  for  mar- 
rying me  by  force,  and  taking  me  out  of  your  hands?  As 
if  I  were  a  girl  to  live  after  such  a  disgrace  ! 

SCAN.  How? 

ISA.  Yes,  yes,  I  have  been  informed  that  this  base  lover 
speaks  of  carrying  me  off  by  force ;  for  my  part,  I  cannot 
tell  by  what  secret  means  he  has  learned  so  early  that  you 
intend  to  marry  me  in  eight  days18  at  the  latest,  since  it 
was  only  yesterday  you  told  me  so.  But  they  say  that  he 
intends  to  be  beforehand  with  you,  and  not  let  me  unite 
my  lot  to  yours. 

SCAN.  That  is  a  bad  case. 

ISA.  Oh,  pardon  me!  He  is  eminently  a  gentleman, 
who  only  feels  towards  me  .  .  . 

SCAN.  He  is  wrong ;  and  this  is  past  joking. 

18  In  the  letter  which  Isabella  writes  to  Valere  (see  page  279),  she  speaks 
of  a  marriage  with  which  she  is  threatened  in  six  days.  This  is,  I  sup- 
pose, a  pious  fraud,  to  urge  Valere  to  make  haste,  for  here  she  mentions 
"  eight  days." 

3CENB  xi.)  THE  SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  29 

ISA.  Yes,  your  good  nature  encourages  his  folly.  If 
you  had  spoken  sharply  to  him  just  now,  he  would  have 
feared  your  rage  and  my  resentment ;  for  even  since  his 
letter  was  rejected,  he  mentioned  this  design  which  has 
shocked  me.  As  I  have  been  told,  his  love  retains  the 
belief  that  it  is  well  received  by  me;  that  I  dread  to 
marry  you,  whatever  people  may  think,  and  should  be  re- 
joiced to  see  myself  away  from  you. 

SCAN.  He  is  mad  ! 

ISA.  Before  you,  he  knows  how  to  disguise;  and  his 
plan  is  to  amuse  you.  Be  sure  the  wretch  makes  sport  of 
you  by  these  fair  speeches.  I  must  confess  that  I  am 
very  unhappy.  After  all  my  pains  to  live  honourably, 
and  to  repel  the  addresses  of  a  vile  seducer,  I  must 
be  exposed  to  his  vexatious  and  infamous  designs  against 
me  ! 

SCAN.  There,  fear  nothing. 

ISA.  For  my  part  I  tell  you  that  if  you  do  not  strongly 
reprove  such  an  impudent  attempt,  and  do  not  find  quickly 
means  of  ridding  me  of  such  bold  persecutions,  I  will 
abandon  all,  and  not  suffer  any  longer  the  insults  which 
I  receive  from  him. 

SCAN.  Do  not  be  so  troubled,  my  little  wife.  There,  I 
am  going  to  find  him,  to  give  him  a  good  blowing  up. 

ISA.  Tell  him  at  least  plainly,  so  that  it  may  be  in  vain 
for  him  to  gainsay  it,  that  I  have  been  told  of  his  inten- 
tions upon  good  authority;  that,  after  this  message,  what- 
ever he  may  undertake,  I  defy  him  to  surprise  me;  and, 
lastly,  that,  without  wasting  any  more  sighs  or  time,  he 
must  knowwhat  are  my  feelings  for  you  ;  that,  if  he  wishes 
not  to  be  the  cause  of  some  mischief,  he  should  not  require 
to  have  the  same  thing  told  twice  over. 

SCAN.  I  will  tell  him  what  is  right. 

ISA.  But  all  this  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  him  that  I 
really  speak  seriously. 

SCAN.  There,  I  will  forget  nothing,  I  assure  you. 

ISA.  I  await  your  return  impatiently.  Pray,  make  as 
much  haste  as  you  can.  I  pine  when  I  am  a  moment 
without  seeing  you. 

SCAN.  There,  ducky,  my  heart's  delight,  I  will  return 
immediately. 

30  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  11. 

SCENE  XII. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Was  there  ever  a  girl  more  discreet  and  better  behaved? 
Oh,  how  happy  I  am  !  and  what  a  pleasure  it  is  to  find  a 
woman  just  after  my  own  heart !  Yes,  that  is  how  our 
women  ought  to  be,  and  not,  like  some  I  know,  downright 
flirts,  who  allow  themselves  to  be  courted,  and  make  their 
simple  husbands  to  be  pointed  at  all  over  Paris.  {Knocks 
at  Valere1  s  door).  Hulloa,  my  enterprising,  fine  gallant ! 

SCENE  XIII. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE,  ERGASTE. 

VAL.  Sir,  what  brings  you  here  again  ? 

SGAN.  Your  follies. 

VAL.  How  ? 

SCAN.  You  know  well  enough  what  I  wish  to  speak  to 
you  about.  To  tell  you  plainly,  I  thought  you  had  more 
sense.  You  have  been  making  fun  of  me  with  your  fine 
speeches,  and  secretly  nourish  silly  expectations.  Look 
you,  I  wished  to  treat  you  gently ;  but  you  will  end  by 
making  me  very  angry.  Are  you  not  ashamed,  consider- 
ing who  you  are,  to  form  such  designs  as  you  do?  to  in- 
tend to  carry  off  a  respectable  girl,  and  interrupt  a 
marriage  on  which  her  whole  happiness  depends  ? 

VAL.  Who  told  you  this  strange  piece  of  news,  sir? 

SCAN.  Do  not  let  us  dissimulate ;  I  have  it  from  Isa- 
bella, who  sends  you  word  by  me,  for  the  last  time,  that 
she  has  plainly  enough  shown  you  what  her  choice  is  ;  that 
her  heart,  entirely  mine,  is  insulted  by  such  a  plan  ;  that 
she  would  rather  die  than  suffer  such  an  outrage  ;  and  that 
you  will  cause  a  terrible  uproar,  unless  you  put  an  end  to 
all  this  confusion. 

VAL.  If  she  really  said  what  J  have  just  heard,  I  confess 
that  my  passion  has  nothing  more  to  expect.  These  ex- 
pressions are  plain  enough  to  let  me  see  that  all  is  ended ; 
I  must  respect  the  judgment  she  has  passed. 

SCAN.  If ...  You  doubt  it  then,  and  fancy  all  the 
complaints  that  I  have  made  to  you  on  her  behalf  are  mere 
pretences  !  Do  you  wish  that  she  herself  should  tell  you 
her  feelings  ?  To  set  you  right,  I  willingly  consent  to  it. 
Follow  me ;  you  shall  hear  if  I  have  added  anything, 
and  if  her  young  heart  hesitates  between  us  two.  {Goes 
and  knocks  at  his  own  door). 

SCKNB  xiv.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  31 

SCENE  XIV. — ISABELLA,  SGANARELLE,  VALERE,  ERGASTE. 

ISA.  What !  you  bring  Valere  to  me  !  What  is  your 
design?  Are  you  taking  his  part  against  me?  And  do 
you  wish,  charmed  by  his  rare  merits,  to  compel  me  to 
love  him,  and  endure  his  visits  ? 

SCAN.  No,  my  love ;  your  affection  is  too  dear  to  me 
for  that;  but  he  believes  that  my  messages  are  untrue;  he 
thinks  that  it  is  I  who  speak,  and  cunningly  represent 
you  as  full  of  hatred  for  him,  and  of  tenderness  for  me  ;  I 
wish,  therefore,  from  your  own  mouth,  infallibly  to  cure 
him  of  a  mistake  which  nourishes  his  love. 

ISA.  (To  Valere).  What!  Is  not  my  soul  completely 
bared  to  your  eyes,  and  can  you  still  doubt  whom  I  love  ? 

VAL.  Yes,  all  that  this  gentleman  has  told  me  on  your 
behalf,  Madam,  might  well  surprise  a  man ;  I  confess  I 
doubted  it.  This  final  sentence,  which  decides  the  fate  of 
my  great  love,  moves  my  feelings  so  much  that  it  can  be 
no  offence  if  I  wish  to  have  it  repeated. 

ISA.  No,  no,  such  a  sentence  should  not  surprise  you. 
Sganarelle  told  you  my  very  sentiments  ;  I  consider  them 
to  be  sufficiently  founded  on  justice,  to  make  their  full 
truth  clear.  Yes,  I  desire  it  to  be  known,  and  I  ought  to 
be  believed,  that  fate  here  presents  two  objects  to  my  eyes, 
who,  inspiring  me  with  different  sentiments,  agitate  my 
heart.  One  by  a  just  choice,  in  which  my  honour  is  in- 
volved, has  all  my  esteem  and  love ;  and  the  other,  in  re- 
turn for  his  affection,  has  all  my  anger  and  aversion.  The 
presence  of  the  one  is  pleasing  and  dear  to  me,  and  fills  me 
with  joy  ;  but  the  sight  of  the  other  inspires  me  with  se- 
cret emotions  of  hatred  and  horror.  To  see  myself  the 
wife  of  the  one  is  all  my  desire  ;  and  rather  than  belong 
to  the  other,  I  would  lose  my  life.  But  I  have  sufficiently 
declared  my  real  sentiments ;  and  languished  too  long 
under  this  severe  torture.  He  whom  I  love  must  use  dili- 
gence to  make  him  whom  I  hate  lose  all  hope,  and  deliv- 
er me  by  a  happy  marriage,  from  a  suffering  more  terrible 
than  death. 

SCAN.  Yes,  darling,  I  intend  to  gratify  your  wish. 

ISA.  It  is  the  only  way  to  make  me  happy. 

SCAN.  You  shall  soon  be  so. 

32  THE   SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  [ACT  11. 

ISA.  I  know  it  is  a  shame  for  a  young  woman,  so  openly 
to  declare  her  love. 

SCAN.  No,  no. 

ISA.  But,  seeing  what  my  lot  is,  such  liberty  must  be 
allowed  me;  I  can,  without  blushing,  make  so  tender  a 
confession  to  him  whom  I  already  regard  as  a  husband. 

SCAN.  Yes,  my  poor  child,  darling  of  my  soul ! 

ISA.  Let  him  think,  then,  how  to  prove  his  passion 
for  me. 

SCAN.  Yes,  here,  kiss  my  hand. 

ISA.  Let  him,  without  more  sighing,  hasten  a  marriage 
which  is  all  I  desire,  and  accept  the  assurance  which  I 
give  him,  never  to  listen  to  the  vows  of  another.  (She 
pretends  to  embrace  Sganarelle,  and  gives  her  hand  to 
Valere  to  fa'ss.19 

SCAN.  Oh,  oh,  my  little  pretty  face,  my  poor  little  dar- 
ling, you  shall  not  pine  long,  I  promise  you.  (To  Valere}. 
There,  say  no  more.  You  see  I  do  not  make  her  speak  ; 
it  is  me  alone  she  loves. 

VAL.  Well,  Madam,  well,  this  is  sufficient  explanation. 
I  learn  by  your  words  what  you  urge  me  to  do ;  I  shall 
soon  know  how  to  rid  your  presence  of  him  who  so  greatly 
offends  you. 

ISA.  You  could  not  give  me  greater  pleasure.  For,  to 
be  brief,  the  sight  of  him  is  intolerable.  It  is  odious  to 
me,  and  I  detest  it  so  much  .  .  . 

SCAN.  Eh!  Eh! 

ISA.  Do  I  offend  you  by  speaking  thus  ?     Do  I  ... 

SCAN.  Heavens,  by  no  means  !  I  do  not  say  that.  But 
in  truth,  I  pity  his  condition ;  you  show  your  aversion  too 
openly. 

ISA.  I  cannot  show  it  too  much  on  such  an  occasion. 

VAL.  Yes,  you  shall  be  satisfied ;  in  three  days  your 
eyes  shall  no  longer  see  the  object  which  is  odious  to  you. 

ISA.  That  is  right.     Farewell. 

SCAN.  (To  Valere};     I  pity  your  misfortune,  but    .    .  . 

VAL.  No,  you  will  hear  no  complaint  from  me.     The 

19  This  stage  play  is  imitated  by  Congreve  in  The  Old  Bachelor,  (Act 
iv.,  Scene  22)  when  Mrs.  Fondlewife  goes  and  hangs  upon  her  husband's 
neck  and  kisses  him  ;  whilst  Bellmour  kisses  her  hand  behind  Fondle- 
wife's  back. 

SCMNB  XT.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  33 

lady  assuredly  does  us  both  justice,  and  I  shall  endeavour 
to  satisfy  her  wishes.     Farewell. 

SCAN.  Poor  fellow !  his  grief  is  excessive.  Stay,  em- 
brace me  :  I  am  her  second  self.  {Embraces  Valere. 

SCENE  XV. — ISABELLA,  SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  I  think  he  is  greatly  to  be  pitied. 

ISA.  Not  at  all. 

SCAN.  For  the  rest,  your  love  touches  me  "to  the  quick, 
little  darling,  and  I  mean  it  shall  have  its  reward.  Eight 
days  are  too  long  for  your  impatience ;  to-morrow  I  will 
marry  you,  and  will  not  invite  .  .  . 

ISA.  To-morrow ! 

SCAN.  You  modestly  pretend  to  shrink  from  it ;  but  I 
well  know  the  joy  these  words  afford  you;  you  wish  it 
were  already  over. 

ISA.  But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Let  us  get  everything  ready  for  this  marriage. 

ISA.  (Aside).  Heaven  !  Inspire  me  with  a  plan  to  put 
it  off! 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — ISABELLA,  alone. 

Yes,  death  seems  to  me  a  hundred  times  less  dreadful 
than  this  fatal  marriage  into  which  I  am  forced ;  all  that 
I  am  doing  to  escape  its  horrors  should  excuse  me  in 
the  eyes  of  those  who  blame  me.  Time  presses;  it  is 
night ;  now,  then,  let  me  fearlessly  entrust  my  fate  to  a 
lover's  fidelity. 

SCENE  II. — SGANARELLE,  ISABELLA. 

SCAN.  (Speaking  to  those  inside  the  house).  Here  I  am 
once  more ;  to-morrow  they  are  going,  in  my  name  .  .  . 

ISA.  O  Heaven  ! 

SCAN.  Is  it  you,  darling?  Where  are  you  going  so 
late  ?  You  said  when  I  left  you  that,  being  rather  tired, 
you  would  shut  yourself  up  in  your  room ;  you  even  begged 
that  on  my  return  I  would  let  you  be  quiet  till  to-morrow 
morning.  .  .  . 

ISA.  It  is  true;  but  .   .   . 

34  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  HI. 

SCAN.  But  what  ? 

ISA.  You  see  I  am  confused ;  I  do  not  know  how  to 
tell  you  the  reason. 

SGAN.  Why,  whatever  can  it  be  ? 

ISA.  A  wonderful  secret !  It  is  my  sister  who  now 
compels  me  to  go  out,  and  who,  for  a  purpose  for  which  I 
have  greatly  blamed  her,  has  borrowed  my  room,  in  which 
I  have  shut  her  up. 

SCAN.  What? 

ISA.  Could  it  be  believed?  She  is  in  love  with  that 
suitor  whom  we  have  discarded. 

SCAN.  WithValere? 

ISA.  Desperately  !  Her  passion  is  so  great  that  I  can 
compare  it  with  nothing;  you  may  judge  of  its  violence 
by  her  coming  here  alone,  at  this  hour,  to  confide  to  me 
her  love,  and  to  tell  me  positively  that  she  will  die  if  she 
does  not  obtain  the  object  of  her  desire;  that,  for  more 
than  a  year,  a  secret  intercourse  has  kept  up  the  ardour  of 
their  love ;  and  that  they  had  even  pledged  themselves  to 
marry  each  other  when  their  passion  was  new. 

SGAN.  Oh,  the  wretched  girl ! 

ISA.  That,  being  informed  of  the  despair  into  which  I 
had  plunged  the  man  whom  she  loves  to  see,  she  came  to 
beg  me  to  allow  her  to  prevent  a  departure  which  would 
break  her  heart;  to  meet  this  lover  to-night  under  my 
name,  in  the  little  street  on  which  my  room  looks,  where 
counterfeiting  my  voice,  she  may  utter  certain  tender  feel- 
ings, and  thereby  tempt  him  to  stay ;  in  short,  cleverly 
to  secure  for  herself  the  regard  which  it  is  known  he  has 
for  me. 

SGAN.  And  do  you  think  this  .    .    . 

ISA.  I?  I  am  enraged  at  it.  "What,"  said  I,  "sister, 
are  you  mad  ?  Do  you  not  blush  to  indulge  in  such  a  love 
for  one  of  those  people  who  change  every  day?  To  forget 
your  sex,  and  betray  the  trust  put  in  you  by  the  man 
whom  Heaven  has  destined  you  to  marry?  " 

SCAN-  He  deserves  it  richly ;  I  am  delighted  by  it. 

ISA.  Finally  my  vexation  employed  a  hundred  argu- 
ments to  reprove  such  baseness  in  her,  and  enable  me  to 
refuse  her  request  for  to-night ;  but  she  became  so  impor- 
tunate, shed  so  many  tears,  heaved  so  many  sighs,  said  so 

_s 

SCKNBU.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  35 

often  that  I  was  driving  her  to  despair  if  I  refused  to 
gratify  her  passion,  that  my  heart  was  brought  to  consent 
in  spite  of  me ;  and,  to  justify  this  night's  intrigue,  to 
which  affection  for  my  own  sister  made  me  assent,  I  was 
about  to  bring  Lucretia  to  sleep  with  me,  whose  virtues 
you  extol  to  me  daily ;  but  you  surprised  me  by  your 
speedy  return. 

SCAN.  No,  no,  I  will  not  have  all  this  mystery  at  my 
house.  As  .for  my  brother,  I  might  agree  to  it ;  but  they 
may  be  seen  by  some  one  in  the  street,  and  she  whom  I 
am  to  honour  with  my  body  must  not  only  be  modest  and 
well-born  ;  she  must  not  even  be  suspected.  Let  us  send 
the  miserable  girl  away,  and  let  her  passion  .  .  . 

ISA.  Ah,  you  would  overwhelm  her  with  confusion,  and 
she  might  justly  complain  of  my  want  of  discretion.  Since 
I  must  not  countenance  her  design,  at  least  wait  till  I 
send  her  away. 

SCAN.  Well,  do  so. 

ISA.  But  above  all,  conceal  yourself,  I  beg  of  you,  and 
be  content  to  see  her  depart  without  speaking  one  word 
to  her. 

SCAN.  Yes,  for  your  sake  I  will  restrain  my  anger ;  but 
as  soon  as  she  is  gone,  I  will  go  and  find  my  brother 
without  delay.  I  shall  be  delighted  to  run  and  tell  him 
of  this  business. 

ISA.  I  entreat  you,  then,  not  to  mention  my  name. 
Good  night;  for  I  shall  shut  myself  in  at  the  same 
time. 

SCAN.  Till  to-morrow,  dear.  .  .  How  impatient  I  am 
to  see  my  brother,  and  tell  him  of  his  plight !  The  good 
man  has  been  victimized,  with  all  his  bombast  I20  I  would 
not  have  this  undone  for  twenty  crowns  ! 

ISA.  (  Within).  Yes,  sister,  I  am  sorry  to  incur  your  dis- 
pleasure ;  but  what  you  wish  me  to  do  is  impossible.  My 
honour,  which  is  dear  to  me,  would  run  too  great  a  risk. 
Farewell,  go  home  before  it  is  too  late. 

M  The  original  has  phebus,  which  is  often  used  for  a  swollen  and  preten- 
tious style,  because  it  is  said  that  a  work  on  the  chase,  written  in  the  four- 
teenth century  by  Gaston,  Count  of  Foix,  in  such  a  style,  was  called 
Miroir  de  Phebus.  It  is  more  probable  that  the  word  phebus,  meaning 
showy  language,  is  derived  from  the  Greek  <£<n0o«,  brilliant. 

3*>  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  HI. 

SCAN.  There  she  goes,  fretting  finely,  I  warrant.  Let 
me  lock  the  door,  for  fear  she  should  return. 

ISA.  {Going  out  disguised^).  Heaven  !  abandon  me  not 
in  my  resolve  ! 

SCAN.  Whither  can  she  be  going  ?     Let  me  follow  her. 

ISA.  (Aside}.  Night,  at  least,  favours  me  in  my  distress. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  To  the  gallant's  house !  What  is  her 
design  ? 

SCENE  III. — VALERE,  ISABELLA,  SGANARELLE 

VAL.  (Coming  out  quickly).  Yes,  yes;  I  will  this  night 
make  some  effort  to  speak  to.  .  .  Who  is  there  ? 

ISA.  ( To  Valere).  No  noise,  Valere ;  I  have  forestalled 
you ;  I  am  Isabella. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  You  lie,  minx ;  it  is  not  she.  She  is  too 
staunch  to  those  laws  of  honour  which  you  forsake ;  you 
are  falsely  assuming  her  name  and  voice. 

ISA.  (To  Valere).  But  unless  by  the  holy  bonds  of  mat- 
rimony .  .  . 

VAL.  Yes ;  that  is  my  only  purpose  ;  and  here  I  make 
you  a  solemn  promise  that  to-morrow  I  will  go  wherever 
you  please  to  be  married  to  you. 

SCAN.  (Aside).     Poor  deluded  fool ! 

VAL.  Enter  with  confidence.  I  now  defy  the  power  of 
your  duped  Argus ;  before  he  can  tear  you  from  my  love, 
this  arm  shall  stab  him  to  the  heart  a  thousand  times. 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Oh,  I  can  assure  you  I  do  not  want  to  take  from  you  a 
shameless  girl,  so  blinded  by  her  passion.  I  am  not 
jealous  of  your  promise  to  her ;  if  I  am  to  be  believed, 
you  shall  be  her  husband.  Yes,  let  us  surprise  him  with 
this  bold  creature.  The  memory  of  her  father,  who  was 
justly  respected,  and  the  great  interest  I  take  in  her  sister, 
demand  that  an  attempt,  at  least,  should  be  made  to  re- 
store her  honour.  Hulloa,  there !  {Knocks  at  the  door  of 
a  magistrate)."* 

SCENE  V. — SGANARELLE,  A  MAGISTRATE,  A  NOTARY,  AT- 
TENDANT with  a  lantern. 

MAG.  What  is  it? 

sl  See  page  261,  note  5. 

SCBNBVI.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  37 

SCAN.  Your  servant,  your  worship.  Your  presence  in 
official  garb  is  necessary  here.  Follow  me,  please,  with 
your  lantern-bearer. 

MAG.  We  were  going    .    .    . 

SGAN.  This  is  a  very  pressing  business. 

MAG.  What  is  it? 

SGAN.  To  go  into  that  house  and  surprise  two  persons 
who  must  be  joined  in  lawful  matrimony.  It  is  a  girl  with 
whom  I  am  connected,  and  whom,  under  promise  of  mar- 
riage, a  certain  Valere  has  seduced  and  got  into  his  house. 
She  comes  of  a  noble  and  virtuous  family,  but  .  .  . 

MAG.  If  that  is  the  business,  it  was  well  you  met  us, 
since  we  have  a  notary  here. 

SGAN.  Sir? 

NOT.  Yes,  a  notary  royal. 

MAG.  And  what  is  more,  an  honourable  man. 

SGAN.  No  need  to  add  that.  Come  to  this  doorway; 
make  no  noise,  but  see  that  no  one  escapes.  You  shall  be 
fully  satisfied  for  your  trouble,  but  be  sure  and  do  not  let 
yourself  be  bribed. 

MAG.  What !  do  you  think  that  an  officer  of  justice  .  . 

SGAN.  What  I  said  was  not  meant  as  a  reflection  on 
your  position.  I  will  bring  my  brother  here  at  once ;  only 
let  the  lantern-bearer  accompany  me.  (Aside).  I  am 
going  to  give  this  placable  man  a  treat.  Hulloa !  (Knocks 
at  AristJ  s  door). 

SCENE  VI. — ARISTE,  SGANARELLE. 

AR.     Who  knocks?  Why,  what  do  you  want,  brother? 

SGAN.  Come,  my  fine  teacher,  my  superannuated  buck ; 
I  shall  have  something  pretty  to  show  you. 

AR.  How? 

SGAN.  I  bring  you  good  news. 

AR.  What  is  it? 

SGAN.  Where  is  your  L6onor,  pray? 

AR.  Why  this  question?  She  is,  as  I  think,  at  a  friend's 
house  at  a  ball. 

SCAN.  Eh !  Oh  yes !  Follow  me ;  you  shall  see  to 
what  ball  Missy  is  gone. 

AR.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

38  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  f  ACT  in. 

SCAN.  You  have  brought  her  up  very  well  indeed.  It 
is  not  good  to  be  always  finding  fault ;  the  mind  is  capti- 
vated by  much  tenderness;  and  suspicious  precautions, 
bolts,  and  bars,  make  neither  wives  nor  maids  virtuous; 
we  cause  them  to  do  evil  by  so  much  austerity;  their  sex 
demands  a  little  freedom.  Of  a  verity  she  has  taken  her 
fill  of  it,  the  artful  girl ;  and  with  her,  virtue  has  grown 
very  complaisant. 

AR.  What  is  the  drift  of  such  a  speech  ? 

SCAN.  Bravo,  my  elder  brother !  it  is  what  you  richly 
deserve ;  I  would  not  for  twenty  pistoles  that  you  should 
have  missed  this  fruit  of  your  silly  maxims.  Look  what 
our  lessons  have  produced  in  these  two  sisters:  the  one 
avoids  the  gallants,  the  other  runs  after  them. 

AR.  If  you  will  not  make  your  riddle  clearer  .    .    . 

SCAN.  The  riddle  is  that  her  ball  is  at  Valere's;  that  I 
saw  her  go  to  him  under  cover  of  night,  and  that  she  is  at 
this  moment  in  his  arms. 

AR.    Who? 

SCAN.  L6onor. 

AR.  A  truce  to  jokes,  I  beg  of  you. 

SCAN.  I  joke  .  .  .  He  is  excellent  with  his  joking ! 
Poor  fellow  !  I  tell  you,  and  tell  you  again,  that  Valere 
has  your  Leonor  in  his  house,  and  that  they  had  pledged 
each  other  before  he  dreamed  of  running  after  Isabella. 

AR.  This  story  is  so  very  improbable  .  .   . 

SCAN.  He  will  not  believe  it,  even  when  he  sees  it.  I 
am  getting  angry;  upon  my  word,  old  age  is  not  good  for 
much  when  brains  are  wanting ! 

{Laying  his  finger  on  his  forehead. 

AR.  What !  brother,  you  mean  to  ... 

SCAN.  I  mean  nothing,  upon  my  soul !  Only  follow  me. 
Your  mind  shall  be  satisfied  directly.  You  shall  see 
whether  I  am  deceiving  you,  and  whether  they  have  not 
pledged  their  troth  for  more  than  a  year  past. 

AR.  Is  it  likely  she  could  thus  have  agreed  to  this  en- 
gagement without  telling  me  ? — me  !  who  in  everything, 
from  her  infancy,  ever  displayed  towards  her  a  complete 
readiness  to  please,  and  who  a  hundred  times  protested  I 
would  never  force  her  inclinations. 

SCAN.  Well,  your  own  eyes  shall  judge  of  the  matter.    I 

SCBNKVIH.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  39 

have  already  brought  here  a  magistrate  and  a  notary.  We 
are  concerned  that  the  promised  marriage  shall  at  once 
restore  to  her  the  honour  she  has  lost ;  for  I  do  not  sup- 
pose you  are  so  mean-spirited  as  to  wish  to  marry  her  with 
this  stain  upon  her,  unless  you  have  still  some  arguments 
to  raise  you  above  all  kinds  of  ridicule. 

AR.  For  my  part,  I  shall  never  be  so  weak  as  wish  to 
possess  a  heart  in  spite  of  itself.  But,  after  all,  I  cannot 
believe  .  .  . 

SCAN.  What  speeches  you  make  !  Come,  this  might  go 
on  for  ever. 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  ARISTE,  A  MAGISTRATE,  A 
NOTARY. 

MAG.  There  is  no  need  to  use  any  compulsion  here, 
gentlemen.  If  you  wish  to  have  them  married,  your  anger 
may  be  appeased  on  the  spot.  Both  are  equally  inclined 
to  it ;  Valere  has  already  given  under  his  hand  a  statement 
that  he  considers  her  who  is  now  with  him  as  his  wife. 

AR.  The  girl  .    .    . 

MAG.  Is  within,  and  will  not  come  out,  unless  you  con- 
sent to  gratify  their  desires. 

SCENE  VIII. — VALERE,  A  MAGISTRATE,  A  NOTARY,  SGAN- 
ARELLE, ARISTE. 

VAL.  (At  the  window  of  his  house).  No,  gentlemen  ; 
no  man  shall  enter  here  until  your  pleasure  be  known  to 
me.  You  know  who  I  am ;  I  have  done  my  duty  in  sign- 
ing the  statement,  which  they  can  show  you.  If  you  in- 
tend to  approve  of  the  marriage,  you  must  also  put  your 
names  to  this  agreement ;  if  not,  prepare  to  take  my  life 
before  you  shall  rob  me  of  the  object  of  my  love. 

SCAN.  No,  we  have  no  notion  of  separating  you  from 
her.  (Aside}.  He  has  not  yet  been  undeceived  in  the 
matter  of  Isabella.  Let  us  make  the  most  of  his  mistake. 

AR.     (To  Valere).     But  is  it  Leonor? 

SCAN.  Hold  your  tongue  ! 

AR.  But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Be  quiet ! 

AR.  I  want  to  know  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Again  !     Will  you  hold  your  tongue,  I  say  ? 

40  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  IIL 

VAL.  To  be  brief:  whatever  be  the  consequence,  Isa- 
bella has  my  solemn  promise ;  I  also  have  hers ;  if  you 
consider  everything,  I  am  not  so  bad  a  match  that  you 
should  blame  her. 

AR.   What  he  says  is  not  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Be  quiet !  I  have  a  reason  for  it.  You  shall 
know  the  mystery.  {To  Valere).  Yes,  without  any  more 
words,  we  both  consent  that  you  shall  be  the  husband  of 
her  who  is  at  present  in  your  house. 

MAG.  The  contract  is  drawn  up  in  those  very  terms,  and 
there  is  a  blank  for  the  name,  as  we  have  not  seen  her. 
Sign.  The  lady  can  set  you  all  at  ease  by-and-by. 

VAL.  I  agree  to  the  arrangement. 

SGAN.  And  so  do  I,  with  all  my  heart.  (Aside).  We 
will  have  a  good  laugh  presently.  (Aloud}.  There, 
brother,  sign  ;  yours  the  honour  to  sign  first. 

AR.   But  why  all  this  mystery  .   .  . 

SCAN.  The  deuce  !  what  hesitation.  Sign,  you  simple- 
ton. 

AR.   He  talks  of  Isabella,  and  you  of  Leonor. 

SCAN.  Are  you  not  agreed,  brother,  if  it  be  she,  to 
leave  them  to  their  mutual  promises? 

AR.  Doubtless. 

SGAN.   Sign,  then ;  I  shall  do  the  same. 

AR.  So  be  it.     I  understand  nothing  about  it. 

SGAN.   You  shall  be  enlightened. 

MAG.  We  will  soon  return. 

(Exeunt  Magistrate  and  Notary  into  Valere1  s  house). 

SGAN.  (To  Ariste).  Now,  then,  I  will  give  you  a  cue 
to  this  intrigue.  (They  retire  to  the  back  of  the  stage). 

SCENE  IX. — LEONOR,  SGANARELLE,  ARISTE,  LISETTE. 

LEO.  Ah,  what  a  strange  martyrdom  !  What  bores  all 
those  young  fools  appear  to  me  !  I  have  stolen  away  from 
the  ball,  on  account  of  them. 

Lis.  Each  of  them  tried  to  make  himself  agreeable  to 
you. 

LEO.  And  I  never  endured  anything  more  intolerable. 
I  should  prefer  the  simplest  conversation  to  all  the 

SCKNK  ix.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR    HUSBANDS.  41 

babblings"  of  these  say-nothings.  They  fancy  that  every- 
thing must  give  way  before  their  flaxen  wigs,  and  think 
they  have  said  the  cleverest  witticism  when  they  come  up, 
with  their  silly  chaffing  tone,  and  rally  you  stupidly  about 
the  love  of  an  old  man.  For  my  part,  I  value  more  highly 
the  affection  of  such  an  old  man  than  all  the  giddy  rap- 
tures of  a  youthful  brain.  But  do  I  not  see  .  .  . 

SCAN.  {To  Ariste).  Yes,  so  the  matter  stands.  (Per- 
ceiving Leonor).  Ah,  there  she  is,  and  her  maid  with  her. 

AR.  Leonor,  without  being  angry,  I  have  reason  to 
complain.  You  know  whether  I  have  ever  sought  to  re- 
strain you,  and  whether  I  have  not  stated  a  hundred  times 
that  I  left  you  full  liberty  to  gratify  your  own  wishes ;  yet 
your  heart,  regardless  of  my  approval,  has  pledged  its 
faith,  as  well  as  its  love,  without  my  knowledge.  I  do  not 
repent  of  my  indulgence  ;  but  your  conduct  certainly  an- 
noys me ;  it  is  a  way  of  acting  which  the  tender  friend- 
ship I  have  borne  you  does  not  merit. 

LEO.  I  know  not  why  you  speak  to  me  thus ;  but  be- 
lieve me,  I  am  as  I  have  ever  been  ;  nothing  can  alter  my 
esteem  for  you ;  love  for  any  other  man  would  seem  to  me 
a  crime  ;  if  you  will  satisfy  my  wishes,  a  holy  bond  shall 
unite  us  to-morrow. 

AR.  On  what  foundation,  then,  have  you,  brother  .  .  . 

SCAN.  What!  Did  you  not  come  out  of  Valere's  house? 
Have  you  not  been  declaring  your  passion  this  very  day  ? 
And  have  you  not  been  for  a  year  past  in  love  with  him  ? 

LEO.  Who  has  been  painting  such  pretty  pictures  of 
me  ?  Who  has  been  at  the  trouble  of  inventing  such 
falsehoods  ? 

SCENE  X. — ISABELLA,  VALERE,  LEONOR,  ARISTE,  SGANA- 

RELLE,  MAGISTRATE,  NOTARY,  LISETTE,  ERGASTE. 
ISA.  Sister,  I  ask  you  generously  to  pardon  me,  if,  by 
the  freedom  I  have  taken,  I  have  brought  some  scandal 
upon   your  name.     The  urgent  pressure  of  a  great  neces- 
sity, suggested   to   me,  some   time   ago,  this   disgraceful 

22  The  original  has  contes  bleus,  literally  "blue  stories,'' because  old 
tales,  such  as  The  Four  Sons  ofAymon,  Fortunatus,  Valentine  and  Orson 
were  formerly  sold,  printed  on  coarse  paper  and  with  blue  paper  cover ; 
a  kind  of  popular,  but  not  political,  "blue-books." 

42  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   HUSBANDS.  [ACT  HI. 

stratagem.  Your  example  condemns  such  an  escapade ; 
but  fortune  treated  us  differently.  (To  Sganarelle).  As 
for  you,  sir,  I  will  not  excuse  myself  to  you.  I  serve  you 
much  more  than  I  wrong  you.  Heaven  did  not  design  us 
for  one  another.  As  I  found  I  was  unworthy  of  your  love, 
and  undeserving  of  a  heart  like  yours,  I  vastly  preferred 
to  see  myself  in  another's  hands. 

VAL.  (To  Sganarelle).  For  me,  I  esteem  it  my  greatest 
glory  and  happiness  to  receive  her,  sir,  from  your  hands. 

AR.  Brother,  you  must  take  this  matter  quietly.  Your 
own  conduct  is  the  cause  of  this.  I  can  see  it  is  your  un- 
happy lot  that  no  one  will  pity  you,  though  they  know 
you  have  been  made  a  fool  of. 

Lis.  Upon  my  word,  I  am  glad  of  this.  This  reward 
of  his  mistrust  is  a  striking  retribution. 

LEO.  I  do  not  know  whether  the  trick  ought  to  be  com- 
mended ;  but  I  am  quite  sure  that  I,  at  least,  cannot  blame 
it. 

ERG.  His  star  condemns  him  to  be  a  cuckold  ;  it  is 
lucky  for  him  he  is  only  a  retrospective  one. 

SCAN.  (Recovering  from  the  stupor  into  which  he  had 
been  plunged).  No,  I  cannot  get  the  better  of  my  aston- 
ishment. This  faithlessness  perplexes  my  understanding. 
I  think  that  Satan  in  person  could  be  no  worse  than  such 
a  jade  !  I  could  have  sworn  it  was  not  in  her.  Unhappy 
he  who  trusts  a  woman  after  this  !  The  best  of  them  are 
always  full  of  mischief;  they  were  made  to  damn  the 
whole  world.  I  renounce  the  treacherous  sex  for  ever,  and 
give  them  to  the  devil  with  all  my  heart ! 

ERG.  Well  said. 

AR.  Let  us  all  go  to  my  house.  Come,  M.  Valere,  to- 
morrow we  will  try  to  appease  his  wrath. 

Lis.  {To the  audience).  As  for  you,  if  you  know  any 
churlish  husbands,  by  all  means  send  them  to  school  with 
us.28 

28  This  is  the  last  time  Moliere  directly  addressed  the  audience  at  the 
end  of  one  of  his  plays ;  in  Sganarelle  he  did  it  for  the  first  time. 

LES   FACHEUX. 

COM£DIE. 

THE   BORES. 

A.    COMEDY    IN    THREE    ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.} 

AUGUST  lyTH,  1661. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

The  Bores  is  a  character-comedy ;  but  the  peculiarities  taken  as  the 
text  of  the  play,  instead  of  being  confined  to  one  or  two  of  the  leading 
personages,  are  exhibited  in  different  forms  by  a  succession  of  characters, 
introduced  one  after  the  other  in  rapid  course,  and  disappearing  after  the 
brief  performance  of  their  r61es.  We  do  not  find  an  evolution  of  natural 
situations,  proceeding  from  the  harmonious  conduct  of  two  or  three  indi- 
viduals, but  rather  a  disjointed  series  of  tableaux — little  more  than  a 
collection  of  monologues  strung  together  on  a  weak  thread  of  explana- 
tory comments,  enunciated  by  an  unwilling  listener. 

The  method  is  less  artistic,  if  not  less  natural ;  less  productive  of  situa- 
tions, if  capable  of  greater  variety  of  illustrations.  The  circumstances 
under  which  Moliere  undertook  to  compose  the  play  explain  his  resort  to 
the  weaker  manner  of  analysis.  The  Superintendent-General  of  finance,1 
Nicolas  Fouquet,  desiring  to  entertain  the  King,  Queen,  and  court  at  his 
mansion  of  Vaux-le-Vicomte,  asked  for  a  comedy  at  the  hands  of  the 
Palais- Royal  company,  who  had  discovered  the  secret  of  pleasing  the 
Grand  Monarque.  Moliere  had  but  a  fortnight's  notice  ;  and  he  was  ex- 
pected, moreover,  to  accommodate  his  muse  to  various  prescribed  styles 
of  entertainment. 

Fouquet  wanted  a  cue  for  a  dance  by  Beauchamp,  for  a  picture  by  Le- 
brun,  for  stage  devices  by  Torelli.  Moli&re  was  equal  to  the  emergency. 
Never,  perhaps,  was  a  literary  work  written  to  order  so  worthy  of  being 
preserved  for  future  generations.  Not  only  were  the  intermediate  ballets 
made  sufficiently  elastic  to  give  scope  for  the  ingenuity  of  the  poet's  auxil- 
iaries, but  the  written  scenes  themselves  were  admirably  contrived  to  dis- 
play all  the  varied  talent  of  his  troupe. 

The  success  of  the  piece  on  its  first  representation,  which  took  place  on 
the  lyth  of  August,  1661,  was  unequivocal ;  and  the  King  summoned  the 
author  before  him  in  order  personally  to  express  his  satisfaction.  It  is 
related  that,  the  Marquis  de  Soyecourt  passing  by  at  the  time,  the  King 
said  to  Moli&re,  "  There  is  an  original  character  which  you  have  not  yet 
copied."  The  suggestion  was  enough.  The  result  was  that,  at  the  next 

1  In  Sir  James  Stephen's  Lectures  on  the  History  of  France,  vol.  ii.  page  22,  I 
find  :  "  Still  further  to  centralize  the  fiscal  economy  of  France,  Philippe  le  Bel  cre- 
ated a  new  ministry.  At  the  head  of  it  he  placed  an  officer  of  high  rank,  entitled 
the  Superintendent-General  of  Finance,  and,  in  subordination  to  him,  he  appointed 
other  officers  designated  as  Treasurers." 

45 

46  THE    BORES. 

representation,  Dorante  the  hunter,  a  new  bore,  took  his  place  in  the 
comedy. 

Louis  XIV.  thought  he  had  discovered  in  Moliere  a  convenient  mouth- 
piece for  his  dislikes.  The  selfish  king  was  no  lover  of  the  nobility,  and 
was  short-sighted  enough  not  to  perceive  that  the  author's  attacks  on  the 
nobles  paved  the  way  for  doubts  on  the  divine  right  of  kings  themselves. 
Hence  he  protected  Moliere,  and  entrusted  to  him  the  care  of  writing 
plays  for  his  entertainments  ;  the  public  did  not,  however,  see  The  Bores 
until  the  4th  of  November  of  the  same  year  ;  and  then  it  met  with  great 
success. 

The  bore  is  ubiquitous,  on  the  stage  as  in  everyday  life.  Horace  painted 
him  in  his  famous  passage  commencing  Ibam  forte  via  Sacra,  and  the 
French  satirist,  Regnier,  has  depicted  him  in  his  eighth  satire. 

Moliere  had  no  doubt  seen  the  Italian  farce,  "  Le  Case  svaliggiate 
ovveragli  Interrompimenti  dl  Pantalone,"  which  appears  to  have  directly 
provided  him  with  the  thread  of  his  comedy.  This  is  the  gist  of  it.  A 
girl,  courted  by  Pantaloon,  gives  him  a  rendezvous  in  order  to  escape 
from  his  importunities ;  whilst  a  cunning  knave  sends  across  his  path  a 
medley  of  persons  to  delay  his  approach,  and  cause  him  to  break  his 
appointment.  This  delay,  however,  is  about  the  only  point  of  resem- 
blance between  the  Italian  play  and  the  French  comedy. 

There  are  some  passages  in  Scarron's  Epttres  chagrines  addressed  to 
the  Marshal  d'Albretand  M.  d'Elbene,  from  which  our  author  must  have 
derived  a  certain  amount  of  inspiration  ;  for  in  these  epistles  the  writer 
reviews  the  whole  tribe  of  bores,  in  coarse  but  vigorous  language. 

Moliere  dedicated  The  Bores  to  Louis  XIV.  in  the  following  words : 

SIRE, 

I  am  adding  one  scene  to  the  Comedy,  and  a  man  who  dedicates  a  book  is  a  spe- 
cies of  Bore  insupportable  enough.  Your  Majesty  is  better  acquainted  with  this 
than  any  person  in  the  kingdom  ;  and  this  is  not  the  first  time  that  you  have  been 
exposed  to  the  fury  of  Epistles  Dedicatory.  But  though  I  follow  the  example  of 
others,  and  put  myself  in  the  rank  of  those  I  have  ridiculed  ;  I  dare,  however,  as- 
sure Your  Majesty,  that  what  I  have  done  in  this  case  is  not  so  much  to  present  You 
a  book,  as  to  have  the  opportunity  of  returning  You  thanks  for  the  success  of  this 
Comedy.  I  owe,  Sire,  that  success,  which  exceeded  my  expectations,  not  only  to 
the  glorious  approbation  with  which  Your  Majesty  honoured  this  piece  at  first,  and 
which  attracted  so  powerfully  that  of  all  the  world;  but  also  to  the  order,  which 
You  gave  me,  to  add  a  Bore,  of  which  Yourself  had  the  goodness  to  give  me  the 
idea,  and  which  was  proved  by  every  one  to  be  the  finest  part  of  the  work.2  I  must 
confess,  Sire,  I  never  did  any  thing  with  such  ease  and  readiness,  as  that  part,  where 
I  had  Your  Majesty's  commands  to  work. 

The  pleasure  I  had  in  obeying  them,  was  to  me  more  than  Apollo  and  all  the 
Muses  ;  and  by  this  I  conceive  what  I  should  be  able  to  execute  in  a  complete 
Comedy,  were  I  inspired  by  the  same  commands.  Those  who  are  bom  in  an  ele- 
vated rank,  may  propose"  to  themselves  the  honour  of  serving  Your  Majesty  in  great 
Employments  ;  but,  for  my  part,  all  the  glory  I  can  aspire  to,  is  to  amuse  You.3 

8  See  Prefatory  Memoir,  page  xxviii.  ? 

8  In  spite  of  all  that  has  been  said  about  Moliere's  passionate  fondness  for  his  pro- 
fession, I  imagine  he  must  now  and  then  have  felt  some  slight,  or  suffered  from  some 
want  of  consideration.  Hence  perhaps  the  above  sentence.  Compare  with  this 
Shakespeare's  hundred  and  eleventh  sonnet : 

"  Oh  !  for  my  sake,  do  you  with  Fortune  chide          . 
The  guilty  goddess  of  my  harmful  deeds, 
That  did  not  better  for  my  life  provide 
Than  public  means  which  public  manners  breeds. 
Thence  comes  it  that  my  name  receives  a  brand ; 
And  almost  thence_  my  nature  is  subdu'd 
To  what  it  works  in,  like  the  dyer's  hand." 

THE   BORES.  47 

The  ambition  of  my  wishes  is  confined  to  this  ;  and  I  think  that,  to  contribute  any 
thing  to  the  diversion  of  her  King,  is,  in  some  respects,  not  to  be  useless  to  France. 
Should  I  not  succeed  in  this,  it  snail  never  be  through  want  of  zeal,  or  study  ;  but 
only  through  a  hapless  destiny,  which  often  accompanies  the  best  intentions,  and 
which,  to  a  certainty,  would  be  a  most  sensible  affliction  to  SIKE,  Your  MAJESTY'S 
most  humble,  most  obedient,  and  most  faithful  Servant, 

MOLIF.RE. 

In  the  eighth  volume  of  the  "  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,  Lon- 
don, 1732,"  the  play  of  The  Bores  is  dedicated,  under  the  name  of  The 
Impertinent!,  to  the  Right  Honourable  the  Lord  Carteret,4  in  the  follow- 
ing words : 

MY  LORD, 

It  is  by  Custom  grown  into  a  sort  of  Privilege  for  Writers,  of  whatsoever  Class, 
to  attack  Persons  of  Rank  and  Merit  by  these  kind  of  Addresses.  We  conceive  a 
certain  Charm  in  Great  and  Favourite  Names,  which  sooths  our  Reader,  and  pre- 
possesses him  in  our  Favour  :  We  deem  ourselves  of  Consequence,  according  to 
the  Distinction  of  our  Patron ;  and  come  in  for  our  Share  in  the  Reputation  he 
bears  in  the  World.  Hence  it  is,  MY  LORD,  that  Persons  of  the  greatest  Worth  are 
most  expos'd  to  these  Insults. 

For  however  usual  and  convenient  this  may  be  to  a  Writer,  it  must  be  confess'd, 
MY  LORD,  it  may  be  some  degree  of  Persecution  to  a  Patron  ;  Dedicators,  as  Mo- 
liere observes,  being  a  Species  of  Impertinents ,  troublesome  enough.  Yet  the 
Translator  of  this  Piece  hopes  he  may  be  rank'd  among  the  more  tolerable  ones,  in 
presuming  to  inscribe  to  Your  LORDSHIP  the  Facheux  of  Molitre  done  into  Eng- 
lish ;  assuring  himself  that  Your  LORDSHIP  will  not  think  any  thing  this  Author 
has  writ  unworthy  of  your  Patronage;  nor  discourage  even  a  weaker  Attempt  to 
make  him  more  generally  read  and  understood. 

Your  LORDSHIP  is  well  known,  as  an  absolute  Master,  and  generous  Patron  of 
Polite  Letters  ;  of  those  Works  especially  which  discover  a  Moral,  as  well  as  Ge- 
nius ;  and  by  a  delicate  Raillery  laugh  men  out  of  their  Follies  and  Vices  :  could 
the  Translator,  therefore,  of  this  Piece  come  anything  near  the  Original,  it  were  as- 
sured of  your  Acceptance.  He  will  not  dare  to  arrogate  any  thing  to  himself  on 
this  Head,  before  so  good  a  Judge  as  Your  LORDSHIP  :  He  hopes,  however,  it  will 
appear  that,  where  he  seems  too  superstitious  a  Follower  of  his  Author,  'twas  not 
because  he  could  not  have  taken  more  Latitude,  and  have  given  more  Spirit ;  but 
to  answer  what  he  thinks  the  most  essential  part  of  a  Translator,  to  lead  the  less 
knowing  to  the  Letter ;  and  after  better  Acquaintance,  Genius  will  bring  them  to 
the  Spirit. 

The  Translator  knows  your  LORDSHIP,  and  'Himself  too  well  to  attempt  Your 
Character,  even  though  he  should  think  this  a  proper  occasion  :  The  Scholar — the 

Genius — the  Statesman — the  Patriot — the  Man  of  Honour  and  Humanity. Were 

a  Piece  finish'd  from  these  Out-lines,  the  whole  World  would  agree  in  giving  it 
Your  LORDSHIP. 

But  that  requires  a  Hand the  Person,  who  presents  This,  thinks  it  sufficient  to 

be  indulg'd  the  Honour  of  subscribing  himself 

My  LORD,  your  Lordship's  most  devoted,  most  obedient,  humble  servant, 

THE    TRANSLATOR. 

Thomas  Shadwell,  whom  Dryden  flagellates  in  his  Mac-Flecknoe,  and 
in  the  second  part  of  Absalom  and  Achitophel,  and  whom  Pope  mentions 
in  his  Dunciad,  wrote  The  Sullen  Lovers,  or  the  Impertinents,  which  was 
first  performed  in  1668  at  the  Duke  of  York's  Theatre,  by  their  Majesties' 
Servants.  This  play  is  a  working  up  of  The  Bores  and  The  Misanthrope ; 
with  two  scenes  from  The  Forced  Marriage,  and  a  reminiscence  from 
The  Love-Tiff.  It  is  dedicated  to  the  "  Thrice  Noble,  High  and  Puissant 

4  John,  Lord  Carteret,  born  22d  April,  1690,  twice  Lord-Lieutenant  of  Ireland, 
was  Secretary  of  State  and  head  of  tne  Ministry  from  February,  1742,  until  No- 
vember 23 .  1744  became  Earl  Granville  that  same  year,  on  the  death  of  his  mother ; 
was  president  of  the  Council  in  1751,  and  died  in  1763. 

48  THE   BORES. 

Prince  William,  Duke,  Marquis,  and  Earl  of  Newcastle,"  because  all  Men, 
who  pretend  either  to  Sword  or  Pen,  ought  "  to  shelter  themselves  under 
Your  Grace's  Protection.'"  Another  reason  Shadwell  gives  for  this  dedi- 
cation is  in  order  "  to  rescue  this  (play)  from  the  bloody  Hands  of  the 
Criticks,  who  will  not  dare  to  use  it  roughly,  when  they  see  Your  Grace's 
Name  in  the  beginning."  He  also  states,  that  "  the  first  Hint  I  received 
was  from  the  Report  of  a  Play  of  Moliere's  of  three  Acts,  called  Les 
Fascheux,  upon  which  I  wrote  a  great  part  of  this  before  I  read  that." 
He  borrowed,  after  reading  it,  the  first  scene  in  the  second  act,  and  Mo- 
liere's story  of  Piquet,  which  he  translated  into  Backgammon,  and  says, 
"  that  he  who  makes  a  common  practice  of  stealing  other  men's  wit,  would 
if  he  could  with  the  same  safety,  steal  anything  else."  Shadwell  mentions, 
however,  nothing  of  borrowing  from  The  Misanthrope  and  The  Forced 
Marriage.  The  preface  was,  besides  political  difference,  the  chief  cause 
of  the  quarrel  between  Shadwell  and  Dryden ;  for  in  it  the  former  de- 
fends Ben  Jonson  against  the  latter,  and  mentions  that — "  I  have  known 
some  of  late  so  insolent  to  say  that  Ben  Jonson  wrote  his  best  playes 
without  wit,  imagining  that  all  the  wit  playes  consisted  in  bringing  two 
persons  upon  the  stage  to  break  jest,  and  to  bob  one  another,  which  they 
call  repartie."  The  original  edition  of  The  Sullen  Lovers  is  partly  in  blank 
verse;  but,  in  the  first  collected  edition  of  Shadwell's  works,  published 
by  his  son  in  1720,  it  is  printed  in  prose.  Stanford,  "  a  morose,  melan- 
choly man,  tormented  beyond  measure  with  the  impertinence  of  people, 
and  resolved  to  leave  the  world  to  be  quit  of  them,"  is  a  combination  of 
Alceste  in  The  Misanthrope,  and  Eraste  in  The  Bores  ;  Lovel,  "  an  airy 
young  gentleman,  friend  to  Stanford,  one  that  is  pleased  with,  and  laughs 
at,  the  impertinents;  and  that  which  is  the  other's  torment,  is  his  recrea- 
tion,''is  Philinte  of  The  Misanthrope  ;  Emilia  and  Carolina  appear  to  be 
Celimene  and  Eliante ;  whilst  Lady  Vaine  is  an  exaggerated  Arsino6  of 
the  same  play.  Sir  Positive  At-all,  "a  foolish  knight  that  pretends  to  un- 
derstand everything  in  the  world,  and  will  suffer  no  man  to  understand 
anything  in  his  Company,  so  foolishly  positive,  that  he  will  never  be  con- 
vinced of  an  error,  though  never  so  gross,"  is  a  very  good  character,  and 
an  epitome  of  all  the  Bores  into  one. 

The  prologue  of  The  Sullen  Lovers  begins  thus  : — 

"  How  popular  are  Poets  now-a-days  ! 
Who  can  more  Men  at  their  first  summons  raise, 
Than  many  a  wealthy  home-bred  Gentleman, 
By  all  his  Interest  in  his  Country  can. 
They  raise  their  Friends  ;  but  in  one  Day  arise 
'Gainst  one  poor  Poet  all  these  Enemies." 

PREFACE. 

Never  was  any  Dramatic  performance  so  hurried  as  this; 
and  it  is  a  thing,  I  believe,  quite  new,  to  have  a  comedy 
planned,  finished,  got  up,  and  played  in  a  fortnight.  I  do  not 
say  this  to  boast  of  an  impromptu,  or  to  pretend  to  any  repu- 
tation on  that  account :  but  only  to  prevent  certain  people, 
who  might  object  that  I  have  not  introduced  here  all  the 
species  of  Bores  who  are  to  be  found.  I  know  that  the 
number  of  them  is  great,  both  at  the  Court  and  in  the  City, 
and  that,  without  episodes,  I  might  have  composed  a  comedy 
of  five  acts  and  still  have  had  matter  to  spare.  But  in  the 
little  time  allowed  me,  it  was  impossible  to  execute  any  great 
design,  or  to  study  much  the  choice  of  my  characters,  or  the 
disposition  of  my  subject.  I  therefore  confined  myself  to 
touching  only  upon  a  small  number  of  Bores;  and  I  took 
those  which  first  presented  themselves  to  my  mind,  and  which 
I  thought  the  best  fitted  for  amusing  the  august  personages 
before  whom  this  play  was  to  appear  ;  and,  to  unite  all  these 
things  together  speedily,  I  made  use  of  the  first  plot  I  could 
find.  It  is  not,  at  present,  my  intention  to  examine  whether 
the  whole  might  not  have  been  better,  and  whether  all  those 
who  were  diverted  with  it  laughed  according  to  rule.  The 
time  may  come  when  I  may  print  my  remarks  upon  the  pieces 
I  have  written :  and  I  do  not  despair  letting  the  world  see  that, 
like  a  grand  author,  I  can  quote  Aristotle  and  Horace.  In 
expectation  of  this  examination,  which  perhaps  may  never 
take  place,  I  leave  the  decision  of  this  affair  to  the  multitude, 
and  I  look  upon  it  as  equally  difficult  to  oppose  a  work  which 
the  public  approves,  as  it  is  to  defend  one  which  it  condemns. 
There  is  no  one  who  does  not  know  for  what  time  of  re- 
joicing the  piece  was  composed;  and  lhat  fete  made  so  much 

49 

50  THE    BORES. 

noise,  that  it  is  not  necessary  to  speak  of  it6  but  it  will  not  be 
amiss  to  say  a  word  or  two  of  the  ornaments  which  have  been 
mixed  with  the  Comedy. 

The  design  was  also  to  give  a  ballet ;  and  as  there  was  only 
a.  small  number  of  first-rate  dancers,  it  was  necessary  to 
separate  the  entrees 6  of  this  ballet,  and  to  interpolate  them 
with  the  Acts  of  the  Play,  so  that  these  intervals  might  give 
time  to  the  same  dancers  to  appear  in  different  dresses ;  also 
to  avoid  breaking  the  thread  of  the  piece  by  these  interludes, 
it  was  deemed  advisable  to  weave  the  ballet  in  the  best  man- 
ner one  could  into  the  subject,  and  make  but  one  thing  of  it 
and  the  play.  But  as  the  time  was  exceedingly  short,  and 
the  whole  was  not  entirely  regulated  by  the  same  person, 
there  may  be  found,  perhaps,  some  parts  of  the  ballet  which 
do  not  enter  so  naturally  into  the  play  as  others  do.  Be  that 
as  it  may,  this  is  a  medley  new  upon  our  stage ;  although  one 
might  find  some  authorities  in  antiquity :  but  as  every  one 
thought  it  agreeable,  it  may  serve  as  a  specimen  for  other 
things  which  may  be  concerted  more  at  leisure. 

Immediately  upon  the  curtain  rising,  one  of  the  actors, 
whom  you  may  suppose  to  be  myself,  appeared  on  the  stage 
in  an  ordinary  dress,  and  addressing  himself  to  the  King, 
with  the  look  of  a  man  surprised,  made  excuses  in  great  dis- 
order, for  being  there  alone,  and  wanting  both  time  and  actors 
to  give  his  Majesty  the  diversion  he  seemed  to  expect;  at  the 
same  time  in  the  midst  of  twenty  natural  cascades,  a  large  shell 
was  disclosed,  which  every  one  saw :  and  the  agreeable  Naiad 
who  appeared  in  it,  advanced  to  the  front  of  the  stage,  and 
with  an  heroic  air  pronounced  the  following  verses  which  Mr. 
Pellison  had  made,  and  which  served  as  a  Prologue. 

6  The  Bores,  according  to  the  Preface,  planned,  finished,  got  up,  and 
played  in  a  fortnight,  was  acted  amidst  other  festivities,  first  at  Vaux,  the 
seat  of  Monsieur  Fouquet,  Superintendent  of  Finances,  the  I7th  of  Au- 
gust, 1661,  in  the  presence  of  the  King  and  the  whole  Court,  with  the 
exception  of  the  Queen.  Three  weeks  later  Fouquet  was  arrested,  and 
finally  condemned  to  be  shut  up  in  prison,  where  he  died  in  1672.  It  was 
not  till  November,  1661,  that  The  Bores  was  played  in  Paris. 

'See  Prefatory  Memoir,  page  xxx.,  note  12. 

PROLOGUE. 

(  The  Theatre  represents  a  garden  adorned  with  Termini  and 
several  fountains.  A  Naiad  coming  out  of  the  water  in  a 
shell.} 

Mortals,  from  Grots  profound  I  visit  you, 
Gallia's  great  Monarch  in  these  Scenes  to  view ; 
Shall  Earth's  wide  Circuit,  or  the  wider  Seas, 
Produce  some  Novel  Sight  your  Prince  to  please ; 
Speak  He,  or  wish :  to  him  nought  can  be  hard, 
Whom  as  a  living  Miracle  you  all  regard. 
Fertile  in  Miracles,  his  Reign  demands 
Wonders  at  universal  Nature's  Hands, 
Sage,  young,  victorious,  valiant,  and  august, 
Mild  as  severe,  and  powerful  as  he's  just, 
His  Passions,  and  his  Foes  alike  to  foil, 
And  noblest  Pleasures  join  to  noblest  Toil; 
His  righteous  Projects  ne'er  to  misapply, 
Hear  and  see  all,  and  act  incessantly : 
He  who  can  this,  can  all ;  he  needs  but  dare, 
And  Heaven  in  nothing  will  refuse  his  Prayer. 
Let  Lewis  but  command,  these  Bounds  shall  move. 
And  trees  grow  vocal  as  Dodona's  Grove. 
Ye  Nymphs  and  Demi-Gods,  whose  Presence  fills 
Their  sacred  Trunks,  come  forth  ;  so  Lewis  wills; 
To  please  him  be  our  task ;  I  lead  the  way, 

51 

52  THE   BORES. 

Quit  now  your  ancient  Forms  but  for  a  Day, 
With  borrow' d  Shape  cheat  the  Spectator's  Eye, 
And  to  Theatric  Art  yourselves  apply. 

{Several  Dryads,  accompanied  by  Fawns  and  Satyrs,  come  forth 
out  of  the  Trees  and  Termini.} 

Hence  Royal  Cares,  hence  anxious  Application, 
(His  fav'rite  Work)  to  bless  a  happy  Nation : 
His  lofty  Mind  permit  him  to  unbend, 
And  to  a  short  Diversion  condescend ; 
The  Morn  shall  see  him  with  redoubled  Force, 
Resume  the  Burthen  and  pursue  his  Course, 
Give  Force  to  Laws,  his  Royal  Bounties  share, 
Wisely  prevent  our  Wishes  with  his  Care. 
Contending  Lands  to  Union  firm  dispose, 
And  lose  his  own  to  fix  the  World's  Repose. 
But  now,  let  all  conspire  to  ease  the  Pressure 
Of  Royalty,  by  elegance  of  Pleasure. 
Impertinents,  avant ;  nor  come  in  sight, 
Unless  to  give  him  more  supreme  Delight.7 

(  The  Naiad  brings  -with  her,  for  the  Play,  one  part  of  the  Per- 
sons she  has  summoned  to  appear,  whilst  the  rest  begin  a 
Dance  to  the  sound  of  Hautboys,  accompanied  by  Violins. 

7  The  Naiad  was  represented  by  Madeleine  Bejart,  even  then  good- 
looking,  though  she  was  more  than  forty  years  old.  The  verses  are  taken 
from  the  eighth  volume  of  the  "  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere  in 
French  and  English,  London,  1732,"  and  as  fulsome  as  they  well  can  be. 
The  English  translation,  which  is  not  mine,  fairly  represents  the  official 
nonsense  of  the  original. 

DRAMATIS   PERSONS. 

ERASTE,  in  love  with  Orphise, 
DAMIS,  guardian  to  Orphise. 
ALCIDOR,      ^  f   DORANTE, 

LISANDRE,  J    CARITIDES,  ! 

ALCANDRE,    f  j    ORMIN, 

ALCIPPE,       J  I   FILINTE, 

LA  MONTAGNE,  servant  to  Eraste. 
L'EpiNE,  servant  to  Damis. 
LA  RIVIERE  and  Two  COMRADES. 

ORPHISE,  in  love  with  Eraste. 

ORANTE, 

CLIMENE, 

>   female  bores. 
'*}    ) 

Scene. — PARIS. 

8  Moliere  himself  played  probably  the  parts  of  Lisandre  the  dancer, 
Alcandre  the  duellist,  or  Alcippe  the  gambler,  and  perhaps  all  three,  with 
some  slight  changes  in  the  dress.  He  also  acted  Caritides  the  pedant,  and 
Dorante  the  lover  of  the  chase.  In  the  inventory  taken  after  Moliere's 
death  we  find:  "A  dress  for  the  Marquis  of  the  Facheux,  consisting  in  a 
pair  of  breeches  very  large,  and  fastened  below  with  ribbands,  (rhingrave), 
made  of  common  silk,  blue  and  gold-coloured  stripes,  with  plenty  of  flesh- 
coloured  and  yellow  trimmings,  with  Colbertine,  a  doublet  of  Colbertine 
cloth,  trimmed  with  flame-coloured  ribbands,  silk  stockings  and  garters.'' 
The  dress  of  Caritides  in  the  same  play,  "cloak  and  breeches  of  cloth, 
with  picked  trimmings,  and  a  slashed  doublet."  Dorante's  dress  was  pro- 
bably "a  hunting-coat,  sword  and  belt;  the  above-mentioned  hunting- 
coat  ornamented  with  fine  silver  lace,  also  a  pair  of  stag-hunting  gloves, 
and  a  pair  of  long  stockings  (bas  a  batter)  of  yellow  cloth."  The  original 
inventory,  given  by  M.  Souli£,  has  toile  Colbertine,  for  "  Colbertine  cloth.'' 
I  found  this  word  in  Webster's  Dictionary  described  from  The  Fop's  Dic- 
tionary ofl(x)O  as  "A  lace  resembling  net-work,  the  fabric  of  Mons.  Col- 
bert, superintendent  of  the  French  king's  manufactures."  In  Congreve's 
TTie  Way  of  the  World,  Lady  Wishfort,  quarrelling  with  her  woman  Foi- 
ble (Act  v.,  Scene  i],  says  to  her,  among  other  insults :  "  Go,  hang  out  an 
old  Frisoneer  gorget,  with  a  yard  of  yellow  colberteen  again !" 

THE    BORES. 

(L£S  FACHEUX.) 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ER.  Good  Heavens  !  under  what  star  am  I  born,  to  be 
perpetually  worried  by  bores  ?  It  seems  that  fate  throws 
them  in  my  way  everywhere ;  each  day  I  discover  some 
new  specimen.  But  there  is  nothing  to  equal  my  bore  of 
to-day.  I  thought  I  should  never  get  rid  of  him  ;  a  hun- 
dred times  I  cursed  the  harmless  desire,  which  seized  me 
at  dinner  time,  to  see  the  play,  where,  thinking  to  amuse 
myself,  I  unhappily  was  sorely  punished  for  my  sins.  I 
must  tell  you  how  it  happened,  for  I  cannot  yet  think 
about  it  coolly.  I  was  on  the  stage,9  in  a  mood  to  listen 
to  the  piece  which  I  had  heard  praised  by  so  many.  The 
actors  began ;  everyone  kept  silence ;  when  with  a  good 
deal  of  noise  and  in  a  ridiculous  manner,  a  man  with 
large  rolls  entered  abruptly,  crying  out  "  Hulloa,  there, 
a  seat  directly!"  and,  disturbing  the  audience  with  his 
uproar,  interrupted  the  play  in  its  finest  passage.  Heavens ! 
will  Frenchmen,  altho'  so  often  corrected,  never  behave 
themselves  like  men  of  common-sense  ?  Must  we,  in  a 
public  theatre,  show  ourselves  with  our  worst  faults,  and 
so  confirm,  by  our  foolish  outbursts,  what  our  neighbours 
everywhere  say  of  us  ?  Thus  I  spoke ;  and  whilst  I  was 

•  It  was  the  custom  for  young  men  of  fashion  to  seat  themselves  upon 
the  stage  (see  Vol.  I.,  Prefatory  Memoir,  page  26,  note  7).  They 
often  crowded  it  to  such  an  extent,  that  it  was  difficult  for  the  actors  to 
move.  This  custom  was  abolished  only  in  1*759,  when  the  Count  de 
Lauraguais  paid  the  comedians  a  considerable  sum  of  money,  on  the  con- 
dition of  not  allowing  any  stranger  upon  the  stage. 

55 

56  THE   BORES.  [ACT  ,. 

shrugging  my  shoulders,  the  actors  attempted  to  continue 
their  parts.  But  the  man  made  a  fresh  disturbance  in 
seating  himself,  and  again  crossing  the  stage  with  long 
strides,  although  he  might  have  been  quite  comfortable  at 
the  wings,  he  planted  his  chair  full  in  front,  and,  defying 
the  audience  by  his  broad  back,  hid  the  actors  from  three- 
fourths  of  the  pit.  A  murmur  arose,  at  which  anyone 
else  would  have  felt  ashamed;  but  he,  firm  and  resolute, 
took  no  notice  of  it,  and  would  have  remained  just  as  he 
had  placed  himself,  if,  to  my  misfortune,  he  had  not  cast 
his  eyes  on  me.  "  Ah,  Marquis  !"  he  said,  taking  a  seat 
near  me,  "  how  dost  thou  do?  Let  me  embrace  thee." 
Immediately  my  face  was  covered  with  blushes  that  people 
should  see  I  was  acquainted  with  such  a  giddy  fellow.  I 
was  but  slightly  known  to  him  for  all  that :  but  so  it  is 
with  these  men,  who  assume  an  acquaintance  on  nothing, 
whose  embraces  we  are  obliged  to  endure  when  we  meet 
them,  and  who  are  so  familiar  with  us  as  to  thou  and  thee 
.  us.  He  began  by  asking  me  a  hundred  frivolous  ques- 
tions, raising  his  voice  higher  than  the  actors.  Everyone 
was  cursing  him;  and  in  order  to  check  him  I  said,  "I 
should  like  to  listen  to  the  play."  "  Hast  thou  not  seen 
it,  Marquis  ?  Oh,  on  my  soul,  I  think  it  very  funny,  and 
I  am  no  fool  in  these  matters.  I  know  the  canons  of  per- 
fection, and  Corneille  reads  to  me  all  that  he  writes." 
Thereupon  he  gave  me  a  summary  of  the  piece,  informing 
me  scene  after  scene  of  what  was  about  to  happen  ;  and 
when  we  came  to  any  lines  which  he  knew  by  heart,  he 
recited  them  aloud  before  the  actor  could  say  them.  It 
was  in  vain  for  me  to  resist ;  he  continued  his  recitations, 
and  towards  the  end  rose  a  good  while  before  the  rest. 
For  these  fashionable  fellows,  in  order  to  behave  gallantly, 
especially  avoid  listening  to  the  conclusion.  I  thanked 
Heaven,  and  naturally  thought  that,  with  the  comedy,  my 
misery  was  ended.  But  as  though  this  were  too  good  to 
be  expected,  my  gentleman  fastened  on  me  again,  re- 
counted his  exploits,  his  uncommon  virtues,  spoke  of  his 
horses,  of  his  love-affairs,  of  his  influence  at  court,  and 
heartily  offered  me  his  services.  I  politely  bowed  my 
thanks,  all  the  time  devising  some  way  of  escape.  But 
he,  seeing  me  eager  to  depart,  said,  "Let  us  leave ;  every- 

SCENE  i.]  THE    BORES.  57 

one  is  gone."  And  when  we  were  outside,  he  prevented 
my  going  away,  by  saying,  "Marquis,  let  us  go  to  the 
Cours 10  to  show  my  carriage.  It  is  very  well  built,  and 
more  than  one  Duke  and  Peer  has  ordered  a  similar  one 
from  my  coach-maker."  I  thanked  him,  and  the  better 
to  get  off,  told  him  that  I  was  about  to  give  a  little  enter- 
tainment. "Ah,  on  my  life,  I  shall  join  it,  as  one  of  your 
friends,  and  give  the  go-by  to  the  Marshal,  to  whom  I  was 
engaged."  "My  banquet,"  I  said,  "is  too  slight  for 
gentlemen  of  your  rank."  "Nay,"  he  replied,  "I  am  a 
man  of  no  ceremony,  and  I  go  simply  to  have  a  chat  with 
thee  ;  I  vow,  I  am  tired  of  grand  entertainments."  "But 
if  you  are  expected,  you  will  give  offence,  if  you  stay 
away. ' '  "  Thou  art  joking,  Marquis  !  We  all  know  each 
other;  I  pass  my  time  with  thee  much  more  pleasantly." 
I  was  chiding  myself,  sad  and  perplexed  at  heart  at  the 
unlucky  result  of  my  excuse,  and  knew  not  what  to  do 
next  to  get  rid  of  such  a  mortal  annoyance,  when  a  splen- 
didly built  coach,  crowded  with  footmen  before  and 
behind,  stopped  in  front  of  us  with  a  great  clatter ;  from 
which  leaped  forth  a  young  man  gorgeously  dressed  ;  and 
my  bore  and  he,  hastening  to  embrace  each  other,  sur- 
prised the  passers-by  with  their  furious  encounter.  Whilst 
both  were  plunged  in  these  fits  of  civilities,  I  quietly  made 
my  exit  without  a  word ;  not  before  I  had  long  groaned 
under  such  a  martyrdom,  cursing  this  bore  whose  obsti- 
nate persistence  kept  me  from  the  appointment  which 
had  been  made  with  me  here. 

LA  M.  These  annoyances  are  mingled  with  the  pleasures 
of  life.  All  goes  not,  sir,  exactly  as  we  wish  it.  Heaven 
wills  that  here  below  everyone  should  meet  bores ;  without 
that,  men  would  be  too  happy. 

ER.  But  of  all  my  bores  the  greatest  is  Damis, 
guardian  of  her  whom  I  adore,  who  dashes  every  hope 
she  raises,  and  has  brought  it  to  pass  that  she  dares  not 
see  me  in  his  presence.  I  fear  I  have  already  passed  the 
hour  agreed  on ;  it  is  in  this  walk  that  Orphise  promised 
to  be. 

10  The  Cours  is  that  part  of  the  Champs-Elysees  called  le  Cours-la- 
Reine ;  because  Maria  de  Medici,  the  wife  of  Henry  IV.,  had  trees 
planted  there.  As  the  theatre  finished  about  seven  o'clock  in  the  even- 
ing, it  was  not  too  late  to  show  a  carriage. 

58  THE   BORES.  [ACT  i. 

LA  M.  The  time  of  an  appointment  has  generally  some 
latitude,  and  is  not  limited  to  a  second. 

ER.  True ;  but  I  tremble ;  my  great  passion  makes  out 
of  nothing  a  crime  against  her  whom  I  love. 

LA.  M.  If  this  perfect  love,  which  you  manifest  so  well, 
makes  out  of  nothing  a  great  crime  against  her  whom  you 
love;  the  pure  flame  which  her  heart  feels  for  you  on  the 
other  hand  converts  all  your  crimes  into  nothing. 

ER.  But,  in  good  earnest,  do  you  believe  that  I  am 
loved  by  her? 

LA  M.  What !  do  you  still  doubt  a  love  that  has  been 
tried  ? 

ER.  Ah,  it  is  with  difficulty  that  a  heart  that  truly  loves 
has  complete  confidence  in  such  a  matter.  It  fears  to 
flatter  itself;  and,  amidst  its  various  cares,  what  it  most 
wishes  is  what  it  least  believes.  But  let  us  endeavour  to 
discover  the  delightful  creature. 

LA  M.   Sir,  your  necktie  is  loosened  in  front. 

ER.   No  matter. 

LA  M.   Let  me  adjust  it,  if  you  please. 

ER.  Ugh,  you  are  choking  me,  blockhead ;  let  it  be 
as  it  is. 

LA  M.  Let  me  just  comb  .    .    . 

ER.  Was  there  ever  such  stupidity  !  You  have  almost 
taken  off  my  ear  with  a  tooth  of  the  comb.11 

LA  M.  Your  rolls  .    .    . 

ER.  Leave  them ;  you  are  too  particular. 

LA  M.  They  are  quite  rumpled. 

ER.  I  wish  them  to  be  so. 

LA  M.  At  least  allow  me,  as  a  special  favour,  to  brush 
your  hat,  which  is  covered  with  dust. 

ER.  Brush,  then,  since  it  must  be  so. 

LA  M.   Will  you  wear  it  like  that? 

ER.  Good  Heavens,  make  haste  ! 

LA  M.   It  would  be  a  shame. 

ER.   (After  waiting}.     That  is  enough. 

LA  M.   Have  a  little  patience. 

11  The  servants  had  always  a  comb  about  them  to  arrange  the  wigs  of 
their  masters,  whilst  the  latter  thought  it  fashionable  to  comb  and  arrange 
their  hair  in  public  (see  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies). 

SCENBIII.]  THE   BORES.  59 

ER.  He  will  be  the  death  of  me  ! 

LA  M.  Where  could  you  get  all  this  dirt  ? 

ER.  Do  you  intend  to  keep  that  hat  forever  ? 

LA  M.  It  is  finished. 

ER.  Give  it  me,  then. 

LA  M.  {Letting  the  hat  fall}.     Ah  ! 

ER.  There  it  is  on  the  ground.  I  am  not  much  the 
better  for  all  your  brushing  !  Plague  take  you  ! 

LA  M.  Let  me  give  it  a  couple  of  rubs  to  take  off  ... 

ER.  You  shall  not.  The  deuce  take  every  servant  who 
dogs  your  heels,  who  wearies  his  master,  and  does  nothing 
but  annoy  him  by  wanting  to  set  himself  up  as  indispen- 
sable ! 

SCENE  II. — ORPHISE,  ALCIDOR,  ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

{Orphise  passes  at  the  foot  of  the  stage ;  Alcidor  holds  her 

hand.} 

ER.  But  do  I  not  see  Orphise  ?  Yes,  it  is  she  who 
comes.  Whither  goeth  she  so  fast,  and  what  man  is  that 
who  holds  her  hand  ?  (He  bows  to  her  as  she  passes,  and 
she  turns  her  head  another  way}. 

SCENE  III. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ER.  What !  She  sees  me  here  before  her,  and  she 
passes  by,  pretending  not  to  know  me !  What  can  I  think  ? 
What  do  you  say  ?  Speak  if  you  will. 

LA  M.  Sir,  I  say  nothing,  lest  I  bore  you. 

ER.  And  so  indeed  you  do,  if  you  say  nothing  to  me 
whilst  I  suffer  such  a  cruel  martyrdom.  Give  me  some 
answer ;  I  am  quite  dejected.  What  am  I  to  think  ?  Say, 
what  do  you  think  of  it  ?  Tell  me  your  opinion. 

LA  M.  Sir,  I  desire  to  hold  my  tongue,  and  not  to  set 
up  for  being  indispensable. 

ER.  Hang  the  impertinent  fellow  !  Go  and  follow  them ; 
see  what  becomes  of  them,  and  do  not  quit  them. 

LA  M.  (Returning).     Shall  I  follow  at  a  distance  ? 

ER.  Yes. 

LA  M.  {Returning).  Without  their  seeing  me,  or  let- 
ting it  appear  that  I  was  sent  after  them? 

ER.  No,  you  will  do  much  better  to  let  them  know  that 
you  follow  them  by  my  express  orders. 

60  THE   BORES. 

[ACT  i. 

LA  M.   (Returning).     Shall  I  find  you  here? 
ER.  Plague  take  you.     I  declare   you  are  the  biggest 
bore  in  the  world  ! 

SCENE  IV. — ERASTE,  alone. 

Ah,  how  anxious  I  feel ;  how  I  wish  I  had  missed  this 
fatal  appointment !  I  thought  I  should  find  everything 
favourable ;  and,  instead  of  that,  my  heart  is  tortured. 

SCENE  V. — LISANDRE,  ERASTE. 

Lis.  I  recognized  you  under  these  trees  from  a  distance, 
dear  Marquis;  and  I  came  to  you  at  once.  As  one  of  my 
friends,  I  must  sing  you  a  certain  air  which  I  have  made 
for  a  little  Couranto, 12  which  pleases  all  the  connoisseurs 
at  court,  and  to  which  more  than  a  score  have  already 
written  words.  I  have  wealth,  birth,  a  tolerable  employ- 
ment, and  am  of  some  consequence  in  France;  but  I 
would  not  have  failed,  for  all  I  am  worth,  to  compose  this 
air  which  I  am  going  to  let  you  hear.  (He  tries  his  voice'}. 
La,  la;  hum,  hum;  listen  attentively,  I  beg.  (He  sings 
an  air  of  a  Couranto).  Is  it  not  fine? 

ER.  Ah! 

Lis.  This  close  is  pretty.  (He  sings  the  close  over  again 
four  or  five  times  successively).  How  do  you  like  it? 

ER.  Very  fine,  indeed. 

Lis.  The  steps  which  I  have  arranged  are  no  less  pleas- 
ing, and  the  figure  in  particular  is  wonderfully  graceful. 
(He  sings  the  words,  talks,  and  dances  at  the  same  time ; 
and  makes  Eraste perform  the  lady1  s  steps).  Stay,  the  gen- 
man  crosses  thus;  then  the  lady  crosses  again:  together: 
then  they  separate,  and  the  lady  comes  there.  Do  you 
observe  that  little  touch  of  a  faint?  This  fleuret?18  These 
coupes14  running  after  the  fair  one.  Back  to  back:  face 
to  face,  pressing  up  close  to  her.  (After  finishing).  What 
do  you  think  of  it,  Marquis? 

ER.  All  those  steps  are  fine. 

12  See  Vol.  I.,  page  164,  note  14. 

13  A  fleuret  was  an  old  step  in   dancing  formed  of  two  half  coupe'es 
and  two  steps  on  the  point  of  the  toes. 

14  A  coup£  is  a  movement  in  dancing,  when  one  leg  is  a  little  bent,  and 
raised  from  the  ground,  and  with  the  other  a  motion  is  made  forward. 

SCENE  VIII.] 

THE   BORES.  6 1 

Lis.  For  my  part,  I  would  not  give  a  fig  for  your  ballet- 
masters. 

ER.  Evidently. 

Lis.  And  the  steps  then  ? 

ER.  Are  wonderful  in  every  particular. 

Lis.  Shall  I  teach  you  them,  for  friendship's  sake? 

ER.  To  tell  the  truth,  just  now  I  am  somewhat  dis- 
turbed .  .  . 

Lis.  Well,  then,  it  shall  be  when  you  please.  If  I  had 
those  new  words  about  me,  we  would  read  them  together, 
and  see  which  were  the  prettiest. 

ER.  Another  time. 

Lis.  Farewell.  My  dearest  Baptiste15  has  not  seen  my 
Couranto ;  I  am  going  to  look  for  him.  We  always  agree 
about  the  tunes ;  I  shall  ask  him  to  score  it. 

(Eocit,  still  singing. 

SCENE  VI. — ERASTE,  alone. 

Heavens !  must  we  be  compelled  daily  to  endure  a  hun- 
dred fools,  because  they  are  men  of  rank,  and  must  we, 
in  our  politeness,  demean  ourselves  so  often  to  applaud, 
when  they  annoy  us  ? 

SCENE  VII. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

LA  M.  Sir,  Orphise  is  alone,  and  is  coming  this  way. 

ER.  Ah,  I  feel  myself  greatly  disturbed !  I  still  love 
the  cruel  fair  one,  and  my  reason  bids  me  hate  her. 

LA  M.  Sir,  your  reason  knows  not  what  it  would  be  at, 
nor  yet  what  power  a  mistress  has  over  a  man's  heart. 
Whatever  just  cause  we  may  have  to  be  angry  with  a  fair 
lady,  she  can  set  many  things  to  rights  by  a  single  word. 

ER.  Alas,  I  must  confess  it;  the  sight  of  her  inspires 
me  with  respect  instead  of  with  anger. 

SCENE  VIII. — ORPHISE,  ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 
ORPH.  Your  countenance  seems  to  me  anything  but 
cheerful.     Can  it  be  my  presence,  Eraste,  which  annoys 

16  Jean  Baptiste  Lulli  had  been  appointed,  in  the  month  of  May  of  1661, 
the  same  year  that  The  Bores  was  first  played,  Surintendant  et  Compositeur 
dt  la  musique  de  la  chambre  du  Jfoi. 

62  THE   BORES.  [ACT  t 

you?  What  is  the  matter?  What  is  amiss?  What  makes 
you  heave  those  sighs  at  my  appearance? 

ER.  Alas !  can  you  ask  me,  cruel  one,  what  makes  me 
so  sad,  and  what  will  kill  me?  Is  it  not  malicious  to  feign 
ignorance  of  what  you  have  done  to  me?  The  gentleman 
whose  conversation  made  you  pass  me  just  now  .  .  . 

ORPH.  (Laughing).     Does  that  disturb  you? 

ER.  Do,  cruel  one,  anew  insult  my  misfortune.  Cer- 
tainly, it  ill  becomes  you  to  jeer  at  my  grief,  and,  by 
outraging  my  feelings,  ungrateful  woman,  to  take  advan- 
tage of  my  weakness  for  you. 

ORPH.  I  really  must  laugh,  and  declare  that  you  are 
very  silly  to  trouble  yourself  thus.  The  man  of  whom 
you  speak,  far  from  being  able  to  please  me,  is  a  bore  of 
whom  I  have  succeeded  in  ridding  myself;  one  of  those 
troublesome  and  officious  fools  who  will  not  suffer  a  lady 
to  be  anywhere  alone,  but  come  up  at  once,  with  soft 
speech,  offering  you  a  hand  against  which  one  rebels.  I 
pretended  to  be  going  away,  in  order  to  hide  my  inten- 
tion, and  he  gave  me  his  hand  as  far  as  my  coach.  I  soon 
got  rid  of  him  in  that  way,  and  returned  by  another  gate 
to  come  to  you. 

ER.  Orphise,  can  I  believe  what  you  say  ?  And  is  your 
heart  really  true  to  me? 

ORPH.  You  are  most  kind  to  speak  thus,  when  I  justify 
myself  against  your  frivolous  complaints.  I  am  still  won- 
derfully simple,  and  my  foolish  kindness  .  .  . 

ER.  Ah!  too  severe  beauty,  do  not  be  angry.  Being 
under  your  sway,  I  will  implicitly  believe  whatever  you 
are  kind  enough  to  tell  me.  Deceive  your  hapless  lover 
if  you  will ;  I  shall  respect  you  to  the  last  gasp.  Abuse 
my  love,  refuse  me  yours,  show  me  another  lover  triumph- 
ant ;  yes,  I  will  endure  everything  for  your  divine  charms. 
I  shall  die,  but  even  then  I  will  not  complain. 

ORPH.  As  such  sentiments  rule  your  heart,  I  shall  know, 
on  my  side  .  .  . 

SCENE  IX. — ALCANDRE,  ORPHISE,  ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ALC.  (To  Orphise).  Marquis,  one  word.  Madame,  I 
pray  you  to  pardon  me,  if  I  am  indiscreet  in  venturing, 
before  you,  to  speak  with  him  privately.  {Exit  Orphise. 

SCENE  xi.]  THE   BORES.  63 

SCENE  X. — ALCANDRE,  ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ALC.  I  have  a  difficulty,  Marquis,  in  making  my  re- 
quest ;  but  a  fellow  has  just  insulted  me,  and  I  earnestly 
wish,  not  to  be  behind-hand  with  him,  that  you  would  at 
once  go  and  carry  him  a  challenge  from  me.  You  know 
that  in  a  like  case  I  should  joyfully  repay  you  in  the  same 
coin. 

ER.  (After  a  brief  silence).  I  have  no  desire  to  boast, 
but  I  was  a  soldier  before  I  was  a  courtier.  I  served  four- 
teen years,  and  I  think  I  may  fairly  refrain  from  such  a 
step  with  propriety,  not  fearing  that  the  refusal  of  my 
sword  can  be  imputed  to  cowardice.  A  duel  puts  one  in 
an  awkward  light,  and  our  King  is  not  the  mere  shadow 
of  a  monarch.  He  knows  how  to  make  the  highest  in  the 
state  obey  him,  and  I  think  that  he  acts  like  a  wise  Prince. 
When  he  needs  my  service,  I  have  courage  enough  to  per- 
form it;  but  I  have  none  to  displease  him.  His  com- 
mands are  a  supreme  law  to  me ;  seek  some  one  else  to 
disobey  him.  I  speak  to  you,  Viscount,  with  entire 
frankness;  in  every  other  matter  I  am  at  your  service. 
Farewell." 

SCENE  XI. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ER.  To  the  deuce  with  these  bores,  fifty  times  over  ! 
Where,  now,  has  my  beloved  gone  to? 

LA  M.  I  know  not. 

ER.  Go  and  search  everywhere  till  you  find  her.  I 
shall  await  you  in  this  walk. 

BALLET  TO  ACT  I. 
First  Entry. 

Players  at  Mall,  crying  out  "Ware!  "  compel  Eraste  to 
draw  back.  After  the  players  at  Mall  have  finished, 
Eraste  returns  to  wait  for  Orphise. 

16  During  his  long  reign,  Louis  XIV.  tried  to  put  a  stop  to  duelling ; 
and,  though  he  did  not  wholly  succeed,  he  prevented  the  seconds  from 
participating  in  the  fight, — a  custom  very  general  before  his  rule,  and 
to  which  Eraste  alludes  in  saying  that  he  does  not  "  fear  that  the  re- 
fusal of  his  (my)  sword  can  be  imputed  to  cowardice." 

64  THE   BORES.  [ACT  11. 

Second  Entry. 

Inquisitive  folk  advance,  turning  round  him  to  see  who 
he  is,  and  cause  him  again  to  retire  for  a  little  while. 

ACT  II. 
SCENE  I. — ERASTE,  alone. 

Are  the  bores  gone  at  last  ?  I  think  they  rain  here  on 
every  side.  The  more  I  flee  from  them,  the  more  I  light 
on  them ;  and  to  add  to  my  uneasiness,  I  cannot  find  her 
whom  I  wish  to  find.  The  thunder  and  rain  have  soon 
passed  over,  and  have  not  dispersed  the  fashionable  com- 
pany. Would  to  Heaven  that  those  gifts  which  it 
showered  upon  us,  had  driven  away  all  the  people  who 
weary  me  !  The  sun  sinks  fast ;  I  am  surprised  that  my 
servant  has  not  yet  returned. 

SCENE  II. — ALCIPPE,  ERASTE. 

ALC.   Good  day  to  you. 

ER.  (Aside).  How  now  !  Is  my  passion  always  to  be 
turned  aside? 

ALC.  Console  me,  Marquis,  in  respect  of  a  wonderful 
game  of  piquet  which  I  lost  yesterday  to  a  certain  Saint- 
Bouvain,  to  whom  I  could  have  given  fifteen  points  and 
the  deal.  It  was  a  desperate  blow,  which  has  been  too 
much  for  me  since  yesterday,  and  would  make  me  wish  all 
players  at  the  deuce ;  a  blow,  I  assure  you,  enough  to  make 
me  hang  myself  in  public. — I  wanted  only  two  tricks, 
whilst  the  other  wanted  a  piquet.  I  dealt,  he  takes  six, 
and  asks  for  another  deal.  I,  having  a  little  of  everything, 
refuse.  I  had  the  ace  of  clubs  (fancy  my  bad  luck !  )  the 
ace,  king,  knave,  ten  and  eight  of  hearts,  and  as  I  wanted 
to  make  the  point,  threw  away  king  and  queen  of  dia- 
monds, ten  and  queen  of  spades.  I  had  five  hearts  in 
hand,  and  took  up  the  queen,  which  just  made  me  a  high 
sequence  of  five.  But  my  gentleman,  to  my  extreme  sur- 
prise, lays  down  on  the  table  a  sequence  of  six  low  dia- 
monds, together  with  the  ace.  I  had  thrown  away  king 
and  queen  of  the  same  colour.  But  as  he  wanted  a  piquet, 
I  got  the  better  of  my  fear,  and  was  confident  at  least  of 

SCKNBII.]  THE   BORES.  65 

making  two  tricks.  Besides  the  seven  diamonds  he  had  four 
spades,  and  playing  the  smallest  of  them,  put  me  in  the 
predicament  of  not  knowing  which  of  my  two  aces  to 
keep.  I  threw  away,  rightly  as  I  thought,  the  ace  of 
hearts  ;  but  he  had  discarded  four  clubs,  and  I  found  my- 
self made  Capot  by  a  six  of  hearts,  unable,  from  sheer 
vexation,  to  say  a  single  word.17  By  Heaven,  account  to 
me  for  this  frightful  piece  of  luck.  Could  it  be  credited, 
without  having  seen  it  ? 18 

ER.  It  is  in  play  that  luck  is  mostly  seen. 

ALC.  'Sdeath,  you  shall  judge  for  yourself  if  I  am  wrong, 
and  if  it  is  without  cause  that  this  accident  enrages  me. 
For  here  are  our  two  hands,  which  I  carry  about  me  on 
purpose.  Stay,  here  is  my  hand,  as  I  told  you ;  and  here 

ER.  I  understood  everything  from  your  description,  and 
admit  that  you  have  a  good  cause  to  be  enraged.  But  I 
must  leave  you  on  certain  business.  Farewell.  But  take 
comfort  in  your  misfortune. 

ALC.  Who ;  I  ?  I  shall  always  have  that  luck  on  my 
mind  ;  it  is  worse  than  a  thunderbolt  to  me.  I  mean  to 

1T  In  the  seventeenth  century,  piquet  was  not  played  with  thirty-two, 
but  with  thirty-six,  cards ;  the  sixes,  which  are  now  thrown  away,  re- 
mained then  in  the  pack.  Every  player  received  twelve  cards,  and  twelve 
remained  on  the  table.  He  who  had  to  play  first  could  throw  away  seven 
or  eight  cards,  the  dealer  four  or  five,  and  both  might  take  fresh  ones  from 
those  that  were  on  the  table.  A  trick  counted  only  when  taken  with  one 
of  the  court-cards,  or  a  ten. 

Saint-Bouvain,  after  having  taken  up  his  cards,  had  in  hand  six  small 
diamonds  with  the  ace,  which  counted  7,  a  sequence  of  six  diamonds  from 
the  six  to  the  knave  counted  16,  thus  together  23,  before  he  began  to  play. 
With  his  seven  diamonds  he  made  seven  tricks,  but  only  counted  3, 
for  those  made  by  the  ace,  knave,  and  ten ;  this  gave  him  26.  Besides  his 
seven  diamonds  he  had  four  spades,  most  likely  the  ace,  king,  knave,  and 
a  little  one,  and  a  six  of  hearts ;  though  he  made  all  the  tricks  he  only 
counted  3,  which  gave  him  29.  But  as  Alcippe  had  not  made  a  single 
trick,  he  was  capot,  which  gave  Saint-Bouvain  40 ;  this  with  the  29  he  made 
before,  brought  the  total  up  to  69.  As  the  latter  only  wanted  a  piquet, 
that  is  60, — which  is  when  a  player  makes  thirty  in  a  game,  to  which  an 
additional  thirty  are  then  added,  Saint-Bouvain  won  the  game.  Alcippe 
does  not,  however,  state  what  other  cards  he  had  in  his  hand  at  the  mo- 
ment the  play  began  besides  the  ace  of  clubs  and  a  high  sequence  of  five 
hearts,  as  well  as  the  eight  of  the  same  colour. 

18  Compare  with  Moliere's  description  of  the  game  of  piquet  Pope's, 
poetical  history  of  the  game  of  Ombre  in  the  third  Canto  of  The  Rape  of 
the  Lock. 

66  THE   BORES.  [ACT  «. 

shew  it  to  all  the  world.     (He  retires  and  on  the  point  of 
returning,  says  meditatively]     A  six  of  hearts !  two  points. 
ER.  Where  in  the  world  are  we?     Go  where  we  will, 
we  see  nothing  but  fools. 

SCENE  III. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ER.  Hah !  how  long  you  have  been,  and  how  you  have 
made  me  suffer. 

LA  M.  Sir,  I  could  not  make  greater  haste. 

ER.  But  at  length  do  you  bring  me  some  news? 

LA  M.  Doubtless;  and  by  express  command,  from  her 
you  love,  I  have  something  to  tell  you. 

ER.  What  ?  Already  my  heart  yearns  for  the  message. 
Speak  ! 

LA  M.  Do  you  wish  to  know  what  it  is? 

ER.  Yes ;  speak  quickly. 

LA  M.  Sir,  pray  wait.  I  .have  almost  run  myself  out 
of  breath. 

ER.  Do  you  find  any  pleasure  in  keeping  me  in  sus- 
pense ? 

LA  M.  Since  you  wish  to  know  at  once  the  orders 
which  I  have  received  from  this  charming  person,  I  will 
tell  you  .  .  .  Upon  my  word,  without  boasting  of  my 
zeal,  I  went  a  great  way  to  find  the  lady ;  and  if ... 

ER.  Hang  your  digressions ! 

LA  M.  Fie !  you  should  somewhat  moderate  your  pas- 
sion; and  Seneca  .  .  . 

ER.  Seneca  is  a  fool  in  your  mouth,  since  he  tells  me 
nothing  of  all  that  concerns  me.  Tell  me  your  message 
at  once. 

LA  M.  To  satisfy  you,  Orphise  ...  An  insect  has  got 
among  your  hair. 

ER.  Let  it  alone. 

LA  M.  This  lovely  one  sends  you  word  .    .    . 

ER.  What? 

LA  M.  Guess. 

ER.  Are  you  aware  that  I  am  in  no  laughing  mood  ? 

LA  M.  Her  message  is,  that  you  are  to  remain  in  this 
place,  that  in  a  short  time  you  shall  see  her  here,  when 
she  has  got  rid  of  some  country-ladies,  who  greatly  bore 
all  people  at  court. 

SCBNB  iv.]  THE   BORES.  67 

ER.  Let  us  then  stay  in  the  place  she  has  selected. 
But  since  this  message  affords  me  some  leisure,  let  me 
muse  a  little.  (Exit  La  Montagne).  I  propose  to  write 
for  her  some  verses  to  an  air  which  I  know  she  likes. 

(He  walks  up  and  down  the  stage  in  a  reverie. 

SCENE  IV. — ORANTE,  CLIMENE,  ERASTE  (at  the  side  of  the 
stage,  unseen?) 

OR.   Everyone  will  be  of  my  opinion. 

CL.  Do  you  think  you  will  carry  your  point  by  obsti- 
nacy? 

OR.  I  think  my  reasons  better  than  yours. 

CL.  I  wish  some  one  could  hear  both. 

OR.  I  see  a  gentleman  here  who  is  not  ignorant ;  he 
will  be  able  to  judge  of  our  dispute.  Marquis,  a  word,  I 
beg  of  you.  Allow  us  to  ask  you  to  decide  in  a  quarrel 
between  us  two;  we  had  a  discussion  arising  from  our 
different  opinions,  as  to  what  may  distinguish  the  most 
perfect  lovers. 

ER.  That  is  a  question  difficult  to  settle;  you  had  best 
look  for  a  more  skilful  judge. 

OR.  No :  you  speak  to  no  purpose.  Your  wit  is  much 
commended;  and  we  know  you.  We  know  that  every- 
one, with  justice,  gives  you  the  character  of  a  .  .  . 

ER.  Oh,  I  beseech  you   .    .    . 

OR.  In  a  word,  you  shall  be  our  umpire,  and  you  must 
spare  us  a  couple  of  minutes. 

CL.  ( To  Orante).  Now  you  are  retaining  one  who  must 
condemn  you :  for,  to  be  brief,  if  what  I  venture  to  hold 
be  true,  this  gentleman  will  give  the  victory  to  my  argu- 
ments. 

ER.  (Aside).  Would  that  I  could  get  hold  of  any  rascal 
to  invent  something  to  get  me  off ! 

OR.  (To  Climene).  For  my  part,  I  am  too  much  assured 
of  his  sense  to  fear  that  he  will  decide  against  me.  ( To 
Erastc).  Well,  this  great  contest  which  rages  between  us 
is  to  know  whether  a  lover  should  be  jealous. 

CL.  Or,  the  better  to  explain  my  opinion  and  yours, 
which  ought  to  please  most,  a  jealous  man  or  one  that  is 
not  so? 

OR.    For  my  part,  I  am  clearly  for  the  last. 

68  THE   BORES.  [ACT  11. 

CL.  As  for  me,  I  stand  up  for  the  first. 

OR.  I  believe  that  our  heart  must  declare  for  him  who 
best  displays  his  respect. 

CL.  And  I,  that,  if  our  sentiments  are  to  be  shewn,  it 
ought  to  be  for  him  who  makes  his  love  most  apparent. 

OR.  Yes ;  but  we  perceive  the  ardour  of  a  lover  much 
better  through  respect  than  through  jealousy. 

CL.  It  is  my  opinion  that  he  who  is  attached  to  us,  loves 
us  the  more  that  he  shows  himself  jealous? 

OR.  Fie,  Climene,  do  not  call  lovers  those  men  whose 
love  is  like  hatred,  and  who,  instead  of  shqwing  their  re- 
spect and  their  ardour,  give  themselves  no  thought  save 
how  to  become  wearisome;  whose  minds,  being  ever 
prompted  by  some  gloomy  passion,  seek  to  make  a  crime 
out  of  the  slightest  actions,  are  too  blind  to  believe  them 
innocent,  and  demand  an  explanation  for  a  glance;  who, 
if  we  seem  a  little  sad,  at  once  complain  that  their  pre- 
sence is  the  cause  of  it,  and  when  the  least  joy  sparkles  in 
our  eyes,  will  have  their  rivals  to  be  at  the  bottom  of  it ; 
who,  in  short,  assuming  a  right  because  they  are  greatly  in 
love,  never  speak  to  us  save  to  pick  a  quarrel,  dare  to  for- 
bid anyone  to  approach  us,  and  become  the  tyrants  of  their 
very  conquerors.  As  for  me,  I  want  lovers  to  be  respect- 
ful ;  their  submission  is  a  sure  proof  of  our  sway. 

CL.  Fie,  do  not  call  those  men  true  lovers  who  are  ne- 
ver violent  in  their  passion ;  those  lukewarm  gallants,  whose 
tranquil  hearts  already  think  everything  quite  sure,  have 
no  fear  of  losing  us,  and  overweeningly  suffer  their  love  to 
slumber  day  by  day,  are  on  good  terms  with  their  rivals, 
and  leave  a  free  field  for  their  perseverance.  So  sedate  a 
love  incites  my  anger;  to  be  without  jealousy  is  to  love 
coldly.  I  would  that  a  lover,  in  order  to  prove  his  flame, 
should  have  his  mind  shaken  by  eternal  suspicions,  and,  by 
sudden  outbursts,  show  clearly  the  value  he  sets  upon  her 
to  whose  hand  he  aspires.  Then  his  restlessness  is  ap- 
plauded ;  and,  if  he  sometimes  treats  us  a  little  roughly, 
the  pleasure  of  seeing  him,  penitent  at  our  feet,  to  excuse 
himself  for  the  outbreak  of  which  he  has  been  guilty,  his 
tears,  his  despair  at  having  been  capable  of  displeasing  us, 
are  a  charm  to  soothe  all  our  anger. 

OR.   If  much  violence  is  necessary  to  please  you,  I  know 

SCENE  vii.]  THE   BORES.  69 

who  would  satisfy  you;  I  am  acquainted  with  several  men 
in  Paris  who  love  well  enough  to  beat  their  fair  ones 
openly. 

CL.  If  to  please  you,  there  must  never  be  jealousy,  I 
know  several  men  just  suited  to  you;  lovers  of  such  en- 
during mood  that  they  would  see  you  in  the  arms  of  thirty 
people  without  being  concerned  about  it. 

OR.  And  now  you  must,  by  your  sentence,  declare 
whose  love  appears  to  you  preferable. 

{Orphise  appears  at  the  back  of  the  stage,  and 
sees  Eraste  between  Orante  and  Climene). 

ER.  Since  I  cannot  avoid  giving  judgment,  I  mean  to 
satisfy  you  both  at  once  ;  and,  in  order,  not  to  blame  that 
which  is  pleasing  in  your  eyes,  the  jealous  man  loves  more, 
but  the  other  loves  wisely. 

CL.  The  judgment  is  very  judicious  ;  but  .    .    . 

ER.  It  is  enough.  'I  have  finished.  After  what  I  have 
said  permit  me  to  leave  you. 

SCENE  V. — ORPHISE,  ERASTE. 

ER.  (Seeing  Orphise,  and  going  to  meet  her).  How 
long  you  have  been,  Madam,  and  how  I  suffer  .  .  . 

ORPH.  Nay,  nay,  do  not  leave  such  a  pleasant  conversa- 
tion. You  are  wrong  to  blame  me  for  having  arrived  too 
late.  {Pointing  to  Orante  and  Climene,  who  have  just 
left}.  You  had  wherewithal  to  get  on  without  me. 

ER.  Will  you  be  angry  with  me  without  reason,  and  re- 
proach me  with  what  I  am  made  to  surfer  ?  Oh,  I  beseech 
you,  stay  .  .  . 

ORPH.  Leave  me,  I  beg,  and  hasten  to  rejoin  your  com- 
pany. 

SCENE  VI. — ERASTE,  alone. 

Heaven  !  must  bores  of  both  sexes  conspire  this  day  to 
frustrate  my  dearest  wishes  ?  But  let  me  follow  her  in 
spite  of  her  resistance,  and  make  my  innocence  clear  in 
her  eyes. 

SCENE  VII. — DORANTE,  ERASTE. 

DOR.  Ah,  Marquis,  continually  we  find  tedious  people 
interrupting  the  course  of  our  pleasures !  You  see  me 

70  THE   BORES.  [ACT  „ 

enraged  on  account  of  a  splendid  hunt,  which  a  booby 
...  It  is  a  story  I  must  relate  to  you. 

ER.  I  am  looking  for  some  one,  and  cannot  stay. 

DOR.  (Retaining  him).  Egad,  I  shall  tell  it  you  as  we 
go  along.  We  were  a  well  selected  company  who  met 
yesterday  to  hunt  a  stag ;  on  purpose  we  went  to  sleep  on 
the  ground  itself — that  is,  my  dear  sir,  far  away  in  the 
forest.  As  the  chase  is  my  greatest  pleasure,  I  wished,  to 
do  the  thing  well,  to  go  to  the  wood  myself;  we  decided 
to  concentrate  our  efforts  upon  a  stag  which  every  one 
said  was  seven  years  old.19  But  my  own  opinion  was — 
though  I  did  not  stop  to  observe  the  marks — that  it  was 
only  a  stag  of  the  second  year.20  We  had  separated,  as 
was  necessary,  into  different  parties,  and  were  hastily 
breakfasting  on  some  new-laid  eggs,  when  a  regular 
country-gentleman,  with  a  long  sword,  proudly  mounted 
on  his  brood-mare,  which  he  honoured  with  the  name  of 
his  good  mare,  came  up  to  pay  us  an  awkward  compli- 
ment, presenting  to  us  at  the  same  time,  to  increase  our 
vexation,  a  great  booby  of  a  son,  as  stupid  as  his  father. 
He  styled  himself  a  great  sportsman,  and  begged  that  he 
might  have  the  pleasure  of  accompanying  us.  Heaven 
preserve  every  sensible  sportsman,  when  hunting,  from  a 
fellow  who  carries  a  dog's  horn,  which  sounds  when  it 
ought  not ;  from  those  gentry  who,  followed  by  ten 
mangy  dogs,  call  them  ' '  my  pack, ' '  and  play  the  part  of 
wonderful  hunters.  His  request  granted,  and  his  know- 
ledge commended,  we  all  of  us  started  the  deer,21  within 
thrice  the  length  of  the  leash,  tally-ho  !  the  dogs  were  put 
on  the  track  of  the  stag.  I  encouraged  them,  and  blew  a 
loud  blast.  My  stag  emerged  from  the  wood,  and  crossed 
a  pretty  wide  plain,  the  dogs  after  him,  but  in  such  good 
order  that  you  could  have  covered  them  all  with  one 
cloak.  He  made  for  the  forest.  Then  we  slipped  the  old 
pack  upon  him ;  I  quickly  brought  out  my  sorrel-horse. 
You  have  seen  him  ? 

19  The  original  expression  is  ctrf  dix-corps ;  this,  according  to  the 
dictionnaire  de  chaise,  is  a  seven  years'  old  animal. 

10  The  technical  term  is:  ''a  knobbler;"  in  French,  «»  cerf  h.  sa  sec- 
onde  tete. 

21  The  original  has  frapper  d  nos  brisees;  brisees  means  ''blinks." 
According  to  Dr.  Ash's  Dictionary,  1775,  "  Blinks  are  the  boughs  or 
branches  thrown  in  the  way  of  a  deer  to  stop  its  course." 

SCBNBVH.]  THE   BORES  7 1 

ER.     I  think  not. 

DOR.  Not  seen  him?  The  animal  is  as  good  as  he  is 
beautiful;  I  bought  him  some  days  ago  from  Gaveau.22  I 
leave  you  to  think  whether  that  dealer,  who  has  such  a 
respect  for  me,  would  deceive  me  in  such  a  matter ;  I  am 
satisfied  with  the  horse.  He  never  indeed  sold  a  better, 
or  a  better-shaped  one.  The  head  of  a  barb,  with  a  clear 
star ;  the  neck  of  a  swan,  slender,  and  very  straight ;  no 
more  shoulder  than  a  hare;  short-jointed,  and  full  of  vi- 
vacity in  his  motion.  Such  feet — by  Heaven  !  such  feet ! 
— double-haunched :  to  tell  you  the  truth,  it  was  I  alone 
who  found  the  way  to  break  him  in.  Gaveau's  Little  John 
never  mounted  him  without  trembling,  though  he  did  his 
best  to  look  unconcerned.  A  back  that  beats  any  horse's 
for  breadth;  and  legs !  O  ye  Heavens ! a  In  short,  he  is  a 
marvel;  believe  me,  I  have  refused  a  hundred  pistoles 
for  him,  with  one  of  the  horses  destined  for  the  King  to 
boot.  I  then  mounted,  and  was  in  high  spirits  to  see 
some  of  the  hounds  coursing  over  the  plain  to  get  the 
better  of  the  deer.  I  pressed  on,  and  found  myself  in  a 
by-thicket  at  the  heels  of  the  dogs,  with  none  else  but 
Drecar.24  There  for  an  hour  our  stag  was  at  bay.  Upon 
this,  I  cheered  on  the  dogs,  and  made  a  terrible  row.  In 
short,  no  hunter  was  ever  more  delighted  !  I  alone  started 
him  again;  and  all  was  going  on  swimmingly,  when  a 
young  stag  joined  ours.  Some  of  my  dogs  left  the  others. 
Marquis,  I  saw  them,  as  you  may  suppose,  follow  with 
hesitation,  and  Finaut  was  at  a  loss.  But  he  suddenly 
turned,  which  delighted  me  very  much,  and  drew  the 
dogs  the  right  way,  whilst  I  sounded  horn  and  hallooed, 
"Finaut!  Finaut!"  I  again  with  pleasure  discovered 
the  track  of  the  deer  by  a  mole-hill,  and  blew  away  at  my 
leisure.  A  few  dogs  ran  back  to  me,  when,  as  ill-luck 
would  have  it,  the  young  stag  came  over  to  our  country 
bumpkin.  My  blunderer  began  blowing  like  mad,  and 
bellowed  aloud,  "Tallyho!  tallyho!  tallyho!"  All  my 

M  A  well-known  horse-  dealer  in  Moliere's  time. 

a  Compare  the  description  of  the  horse  given  by  the  Dauphin  in 
Shakespeare's  Henry  V.,  Act  iii.,  Scene  6,  and  also  that  of  the  "  round 
hoof'd,  short  jointed  "jennet  in  the  Venus  and  Adonis  of  the  same  author. 

M  A  famous  huntsman  in  Moliere's  time. 

72  THE   BORES.  [ACT  u. 

dogs  left  me,  and  made  for  my  booby.  I  hastened  there, 
and  found  the  track  again  on  the  highroad.  But,  my  dear 
fellow,  I  had  scarcely  cast  my  eyes  on  the  ground,  when 
I  discovered  it  was  the  other  animal,  and  was  very  much 
annoyed  at  it.  It  was  in  vain  to  point  out  to  the  country 
fellow  the  difference  between  the  print  of  my  stag's  hoof 
and  his.  He  still  maintained,  like  an  ignorant  sportsman, 
that  this  was  the  pack's  stag;  and  by  this  disagreement  he 
gave  the  dogs  time  to  get  a  great  way  off.  I  was  in  a 
rage,  and,  heartily  cursing  the  fellow,  I  'spurred  my  horse 
up  hill  and  down  dale,  and  brushed  through  boughs  as 
thick  as  my  arm.  I  brought  back  my  dogs  to  my  first 
scent,  who  set  off,  to  my  great  joy,  in  search  of  our  stag, 
as  though  he  were  in  full  view.  They  started  him  again ; 
but,  did  ever  such  an  accident  happen?  To  tell  you 
the  truth,  Marquis,  it  floored  me.  Our  stag,  newly  started, 
passed  our  bumpkin,  who,  thinking  to  show  what  an  ad- 
mirable sportsman  he  was,  shot  him  just  in  the  forehead 
with  a  horse-pistol  that  he  had  brought  with  him,  and 
cried  out  to  me  from  a  distance,  "Ah!  I've  brought  the 
beast  down!"  Good  Heavens!  did  any  one  ever  hear 
of  pistols  in  stag-hunting?  As  for  me,  when  I  came  to 
the  spot,  I  found  the  whole  affair  so  odd,  that  I  put  spurs 
to  my  horse  in  a  rage,  and  returned  home  at  a  gallop, 
without  saying  a  single  word  to  that  ignorant  fool. 

ER.  You  could  not  have  done  better ;  your  prudence 
was  admirable.  That  is  how  we  must  get  rid  of  bores. 
Farewell. 

DOR.  When  you  like,  we  will  go  somewhere  where  we 
need  not  dread  country-hunters. 

ER.  (Alone}.  Very  well.  I  think  I  shall  lose  patience 
in  the  end.  Let  me  make  all  haste,  and  try  to  excuse 
myself. 

BALLET  TO  ACT  II. 

first  Entry. 

Bowlers  stop  Eraste  to  measure  a  distance  about  which 
there  is  a  dispute.  He  gets  clear  of  them  with  difficulty, 
and  leaves  them  to  dance  a  measure,  composed  of  all  the 
postures  usual  to  that  game. 

SCKCMI.]  THE   BORES.  7J 

Second  Entry. 

Little  boys  with  slings  enter  and  interrupt  them,  who 
are  in  their  turn  driven  out  by 

Third  Entry. 

Cobblers,  men  and  women,  their  fathers,  and    others, 
who  are  also  driven  out  in  their  turn. 

Fourth  Entry. 
A  gardener,  who  dances  alone,  and  then  retires. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — ERASTE,  LA  MONTAGNE. 

ER.  It  is  true  that  on  the  one  hand  my  efforts  have  suc- 
ceeded; the  object  of  my  love  is  at  length  appeased. 
But  on  the  other  hand  I  am  wearied,  and  the  cruel  stars 
have  persecuted  my  passion  with  double  fury.  Yes, 
Damis,  her  guardian,  the  worst  of  bores,  is  again  hostile 
to  my  tenderest  desires,  has  forbidden  me  to  see  his  lovely 
niece,  and  wishes  to  provide  her  to-morrow  with  another 
husband.  Yet  Orphise,  in  spite  of  his  refusal,  deigns  to 
grant  me  this  evening  a  favour ;  I  have  prevailed  upon  the 
fair  one  to  suffer  me  to  see  her  in  her  own  house,  in  pri- 
vate. Love  prefers  above  all  secret  favours ;  it  finds  a 
pleasure  in  the  obstacle  which  it  masters ;  the  slightest 
conversation  with  the  beloved  beauty  becomes,  when  it  is 
forbidden,  a  supreme  favour.  I  am  going  to  the  rendez- 
vous ;  it  is  almost  the  hour ;  since  I  wish  to  be  there  rather 
before  than  after  my  time. 

LA  M.  Shall  I  follow  you  ? 

ER.  No.  I  fear  least  you  should  make  me  known  to 
certain  suspicious  persons. 

LA  M.  But  ... 

ER.  I  do  not  desire  it. 

LA  M.  I  must  obey  you.  But  at  least,  if  at  a  dis- 
tance .  .  . 

ER.  For  the  twentieth  time  will  you  hold  your  tongue  ? 
And  will  you  never  give  up  this  practice  of  perpetually 
making  yourself  a  troublesome  servant  ? 

74  THE  BORES.  [ACT  HI. 

SCENE  II. — CARITIDES;  ERASTE. 

CAR.  Sir,  it  is  an  unseasonable  time  to  do  myself  the 
honour  of  waiting  upon  you ;  morning  would  be  more  fit 
for  performing  such  a  duty,  but  it  is  not  very  easy  to  meet 
you,  for  you  are  always  asleep,  or  in  town.  At  least  your 
servants  so  assure  me.  I  have  chosen  this  opportunity  to 
see  you.  And  yet  this  is  a  great  happiness  with  which 
fortune  favours  me,  for  a  couple  of  moments  later  I  should 
have  missed  you. 

ER.  Sir,  do  you  desire  something  of  me  ? 

CAR.  I  acquit  myself,  sir,  of  what  I  owe  you ;  and  come 
to  you  .  .  .  Excuse  the  boldness  which  inspires  me, 
if ... 

ER.  Without  so  much  ceremony,  what  have  you  to  say 
to  me? 

CAR.  As  the  rank,  wit,  and  generosity  which  every  one 
extols  in  you  .  .  . 

ER.  Yes,  I  am  very  much  extolled.  Never  mind  that, 
sir. 

CAR.  Sir,  it  is  a  vast  difficulty  when  a  man  has  to  in- 
troduce himself;  we  should  always  be  presented  to  the 
great  by  people  who  commend  us  in  words,  whose  voice, 
being  listened  to,  delivers  with  authority  what  may  cause 
our  slender  merit  to  be  known.  In  short,  I  could  have 
wished  that  some  persons  well-informed  could  have  told 
you,  sir,  what  I  am  .  .  . 

ER.  I  see  sufficiently,  sir,  what  you  are.  Your  manner 
of  accosting  me  makes  that  clear. 

CAR.  Yes,  I  am  a  man  of  learning  charmed  by  your 
worth  ;  not  one  of  those  learned  men  whose  name  ends 
simply  in  us.  Nothing  is  so  common  as  a  name  with  a 
Latin  termination.  Those  we  dress  in  Greek  have  a  much 
superior  look ;  and  in  order  to  have  one  ending  in  e s,  I 
call  myself  Mr.  Caritides. 

ER.   Caritides  be  it.     What  have  you  to  say  ? 

CAR.  I  wish,  sir,  to  read  you  a  petition,  which  I  venture 
to  beg  of  you  to  present  to  the  King,  as  your  position 
enables  you  to  do. 

ER.  Why,  sir,  you  can  present  it  yourself!  .    .    . 

CAR.   It  is  true  that  the  King  grants  that  supreme  favour; 

SCENBIL]  THE   BORES.  75 

but,  from  the  very  excess  of  his  rare  kindness,  so  many 
villainous  petitions,  sir,  are  presented  that  they  choke  the 
good  ones ;  the  hope  I  entertain  is  that  mine  should  be 
presented  when  his  Majesty  is  alone. 

ER.   Well,  you  can  do  it,  and  choose  your  own  time. 

CAR.  Ah,  sir,  the  door-keepers  are  such  terrible  fellows ! 
They  treat  men  of  learning  like  snobbs  and  butts ;  I  can 
never  get  beyond  the  guard-room.  The  ill-treatment  I  am 
compelled  to  suffer  would  make  me  withdraw  from  court 
for  ever,  if  I  had  not  conceived  the  certain  hope  that  you 
will  be  my  Mecaenas  with  the  King.  Yes,  your  influence 
is  to  me  a  certain  means  .  .  . 

ER.  Well,  then,  give  it  me ;  I  will  present  it. 

CAR.  Here  it  is.     But  at  least,  hear  it  read. 

ER.  No  ... 

CAR.  That  you  may  be  acquainted  with  it,  sir,  I  beg. 
"  To  THE  KING. 

"  Sire, —  Your  most  humble,  most  obedient,  most  faithful 
and  most  learned  subject  and  servant,  Caritides,  a  French- 
man by  birth,  a  Greek"*  by  profession,  having  considered  the 
great  and  notable  abuses  which  are  perpetrated  in  the  in- 
scriptions on  the  signs  of  houses,  shops,  taverns,  bowling- 
alleys,  and  other  places  in  your  good  city  of  Paris ;  inas- 
much as  certain  ignorant  composers  of  the  said  inscriptions 
subvert,  by  a  barbarous,  pernicious  and  hateful  spelling, 
every  kind  of  sense  and  reason,  without  any  regard  for  ety- 
mology, analogy,  energy  or  allegory  whatsoever,  to  the  great 
scandal  of  the  republic  of  letters,  and  of  the  French  na- 
tion, -which  is  degraded  and  dishonoured,  by  the  said  abuses 
and  gross  faults,  in  the  eyes  of  strangers,  and  notably  of  the 
Germans,  curious  readers  and  inspectors  of  the  said  inscrip- 
tions ,  .  .  "» 

ER.  This  petition  is  very  long,  and  may  very  likely 
weary  .  .  . 

25  The  original  has  Grec,  a  Greek.     Can  Caritides  have  wished  to  allude 
to  the  grcBca  fides  f     Grec  means  also  a  cheat  at  cards,  and  is  said  to  owe 
its  name  to  a  certain  Apoulos,  a  knight  of  Greek  origin,  who  was  caught 
in  the  very  act  of  cheating  at  play  in  the  latter  days  of  Louis  XIV.'s  reign, 
even  in  the  palace  of  the  grand  monarque. 

26  This  is  an  allusion,  either  to  the  reputation  of  the  Germans  as  great 
drinkers,  or  as  learned  decipherers  of  all  kinds  of  inscriptions. 

76  THE   BORES.  [ACT  m. 

CAR.  Ah,  sir,  not  a  word  could  be  cut  out. 

ER.  Finish  quickly. 

CAR.  (Continuing).  "  Humbly  petitions  your  Majesty  to 
constitute,  for  the  good  of  his  state  and  the  glory  of  his  realm, 
an  office  of  controller,  supervisor,  corrector,  reviser  and 
restorer  in  general  of  the  said  inscriptions;  and  with  this 
office  to  honour  your  suppliant,  as  well  in  consideration  of  his 
rare  and  eminent  erudition,  as  of  the  great  and  signal  services 
which  he  has  rendered  to  the  state  and  to  your  Majesty,  by 
making  the  anagram  of  your  said  Majesty  in  French,  Latin, 
Greek,  Hebrew,  Syriac,  Chaldean,  Arabic  .  .  . 

ER.  {Interrupting  him).  Very  good.  Give  it  me  quickly 
and  retire :  it  shall  be  seen  by  the  King ;  the  thing  is  as 
good  as  done. 

CAR.  Alas !  sir,  to  show  my  petition  is  everything.  If 
the  King  but  see  it,  I  am  sure  of  my  point ;  for  as  his  jus- 
tice is  great  in  all  things,  he  will  never  be  able  to  refuse 
my  prayer.  For  the  rest,  to  raise  your  fame  to  the  skies, 
give  me  your  name  and  surname  in  writing,  and  I  will 
make  a  poem,  in  which  the  first  letters  of  your  name  shall 
appear  at  both  ends  of  the  lines,  and  in  each  half  mea- 
sure. 

ER.  Yes,  you  shall  have  it  to-morrow,  Mr.  Caritides. 
(Alone)  Upon  my  word,  such  learned  men  are  perfect 
asses.  Another  time  I  should  have  heartily  laughed  at 
his  folly. 

SCENE  III. — ORMIN,  ERASTE. 

ORM.  Though  a  matter  of  great  consequence  brings  me 
here,  I  wished  that  man  to  leave  before  speaking  to  you. 

ER.  Very  well.  But  make  haste;  for  I  wish  to  be 
gone. 

ORM.  I  almost  fancy  that  the  man  who  has  just  left  you 
has  vastly  annoyed  you,  sir,  by  his  visit.  He  is  a  trouble- 
some old  man  whose  mind  is  not  quite  right,  and  for  whom 
I  have  always  some  excuse  ready  to  get  rid  of  him.  On 
the  Mall,27  in  the  Luxembourg,28  and  in  the  Tuileries  he 

2J  The  Mall  was  a  promenade  in  Paris,  shaded  by  trees,  near  the 
Arsenal. 

88  The  Luxembourg  was  in  Moliere's  time  the  most  fashionable  pro- 
menade of  Paris. 

SCENE  HI.]  THE  BORES.  77 

wearies  people  with  his  fancies ;  men  like  you  should  avoid 
the  conversation  of  all  those  good-for-nothing  pedants. 
For  my  part  I  have  no  fear  of  troubling  you,  since  I  am 
come,  sir,  to  make  your  fortune. 

ER.  (Aside}.  This  is  some  alchymist :  one  of  those  crea- 
tures who  have  nothing,  and  are  always  promising  you 
ever  so  much  riches.  (Aloud}.  Have  you  discovered  that 
blessed  stone,  sir,  which  alone  can  enrich  all  the  kings  of 
the  earth? 

ORM.  Aha!  what  a  funny  idea!  Heaven  forbid,  sir, 
that  I  should  be  one  of  those  fools.  I  do  not  foster  idle 
dreams;  I  bring  you  here  sound  words  of  advice  which  I 
would  communicate,  through  you,  to  the  King,  and  which 
I  always  carry  about  me,  sealed  up.  None  of  those  silly 
plans  and  vain  chimeras  which  are  dinned  in  the  ears  of 
our  superintendents;29  none  of  your  beggarly  schemes 
which  rise  to  no  more  than  twenty  or  thirty  millions ;  but 
one  which,  at  the  lowest  reckoning,  will  give  the  King  a 
round  four  hundred  millions  yearly,  with  ease,  without 
risk  or  suspicion,  without  oppressing  the  nation  in  any 
way.  In  short,  it  is  a  scheme  for  an  inconceivable  profit, 
which  will  be  found  feasible  at  the  first  explanation.  Yes, 
if  only  through  you  I  can  be  encouraged  .  .  . 

ER.  Well,  we  will  talk  of  it.     I  am  rather  in  a  hurry. 

ORM.  If  you  will  promise  to  keep  it  secret,  I  will  unfold 
to  you  this  important  scheme. 

ER.  No,  no  ;  I  do  not  wish  to  know  your  secret. 

ORM.  Sir,  I  believe  you  are  too  discreet  to  divulge  it, 
and  I  wish  to  communicate  it  to  you  frankly,  in  two 
words.  I  must  see  that  none  can  hear  us.  (After  seeing 
that  no  one  is  listening,  he  approaches  Eraste1  s  ear).  This 
marvellous  plan,  of  which  I  am  the  inventor,  is  ... 

ER.  A  little  farther  off,  sir,  for  a  certain  reason. 

ORM.  You  know,  without  any  need  of  my  telling  you, 
the  great  profit  which  the  King  yearly  receives  from  his 
seaports.  Well,  the  plan  of  which  no  one  has  yet  thought, 
and  which  is  an  easy  matter,  is  to  make  all  the  coasts  of 
France  into  famous  ports.  This  would  amount  to  vast 
sums ;  and  if  ... 

29  This  is  an  allusion  to  the  giver  of  the  feast,  MODS.  Fouquet,  surin- 
tendant  des  finances.  See  also  page  299,  note  i. 

78  THE   BORES.  [ACT  11. 

ER.  The  scheme  is  good,  and  will  greatly  please  the 
King.  Farewell.  We  shall  see  each  other  again. 

ORM.  At  all  events  assist  me,  for  you  are  the  first  to 
whom  I  have  spoken  of  it. 

ER.  Yes,  yes. 

ORM.  If  you  would  lend  me  a  couple  of  pistoles,  you 
could  repay  yourself  out  of  the  profits  of  the  scheme  .  .  . 

ER.  {Gives  money  to  Ormtti).  Gladly.  {Alone).  Would 
to  Heaven,  that  at  such  a  price  I  could  get  rid  of  all  who 
trouble  me !  How  ill-timed  their  visit  is  !  At  last  I 
think  I  may  go.  Will  any  one  else  come  to  detain  me  ? 

SCENE  IV. — FILINTE,  ERASTE. 

FIL.  Marquis,  I  have  just  heard  strange  tidings. 

ER.  What? 

FIL.  That  some  one  has  just  now  quarrelled  with  you. 

ER.  With  me  ? 

FIL.  What  is  the  use  of  dissimulation  ?  I  know  on  good 
authority  that  you  have  been  called  out ;  and,  as  your 
friend,  I  come,  at  all  events,  to  offer  you  my  services 
against  all  mankind. 

ER.  I  am  obliged  to  you ;  but  believe  me  you  do  me  .  .  . 

FIL.  You  will  not  admit  it ;  but  you  are  going  out  with- 
out attendants.  Stay  in  town,  or  go  into  the  country, 
you  shall  go  nowhere  without  my  accompanying  you. 

ER.  {Aside}.     Oh,  I  shall  go  mad. 

FIL.  Where  is  the  use  of  hiding  from  me  ? 

ER.  I  swear  to  you,  Marquis,  that  you  have  been  de- 
ceived. 

FIL.  It  is  no  use  denying  it. 

ER.  May  Heaven  smite  me,  if  any  dispute  .    .    . 

FIL.  Do  you  think  I  believe  you  ? 

ER.  Good  Heaven,  I  tell  you  without  concealment 
that  .  .  . 

FIL.  Do  not  think  me  such  a  dupe  and  simpleton. 

ER.  Will  you  oblige  me  ? 

FIL.  No. 

ER.  Leave  me,  I  pray. 

FIL.  Nothing  of  the  sort,  Marquis. 

ER.  An  assignation  to-night  at  a  certain  place  .    .    . 

SCENE  v.]  THE   BORES.  79 

FIL.  I  do  not  quit  you.  Wherever  it  be,  I  mean  to 
follow  you. 

ER.  On  my  soul,  since  you  mean  me  to  have  a  quarrel, 
I  agree  to  it,  to  satisfy  your  zeal.  I  shall  be  with  you,  who 
put  me  in  a  rage,  and  of  whom  I  cannot  get  rid  by  fair 
means. 

FIL.  That  is  a  sorry  way  of  receiving  the  service  of  a 
friend.  But  as  I  do  you  so  ill  an  office,  farewell.  Finish 
what  you  have  on  hand  without  me. 

ER,  You  will  be  my  friend  when  you  leave  me. 
(Alone).  But  see  what  misfortunes  happen  to  me !  They 
will  have  made  me  miss  the  hour  appointed. 

SCENE  V. — DAMIS,  L'EpiNE,  ERASTE,  LA  RIVIERE,  and  his 
Companions. 

DAM.  (Aside).  What !  the  rascal  hopes  to  obtain  her 
in  spite  of  me  !  Ah !  my  just  wrath  shall  know  how  to 
prevent  him ! 

ER.  (Aside}.  I  see  some  one  there  at  Orphise's  door. 
What !  must  there  always  be  some  obstacle  to  the  passion 
she  sanctions ! 

DAM.  (To  L1  Epine).  Yes,  I  have  discovered  that  my 
niece,  in  spite  of  my  care,  is  to  receive  Eraste  in  her 
room  to-night,  alone. 

LA  R.  (To  his  companions).  What  do  I  hear  those 
people  saying  of  our  master?  Let  us  approach  softly, 
without  betraying  ourselves. 

DAM.  (To  L  Epine).  But  before  he  has  a  chance  of 
accomplishing  his  design,  we  must  pierce  his  treacherous 
heart  with  a  thousand  blows.  Go  and  fetch  those  whom 
I  mentioned  just  now,  and  place  them  in  ambush  where  I 
told  you,  so  that  at  the  name  of  Eraste  they  may  be  ready 
to  avenge  my  honour,  which  his  passion  has  the  presump- 
tion to  outrage ;  to  break  off  the  assignation  which  brings 
him  here,  and  quench  his  guilty  flame  in  his  blood. 

LA  R.  (Attacking  Damis  with  his  companions}.  Before 
your  fury  can  destroy  him,  wretch !  you  shall  have  to  deal 
with  us ! 

ER.  Though  he  would  have  killed  me,  honour  urges 
me  here  to  rescue  the  uncle  of  my  mistress.  (  To  Damis). 

80  THE   BORES.  [ACT  m. 

I  am  on  your  side,  Sir.     (He  draws  his  sword  and  attacks 
La  Riviere  and  his  companions ;  whom  he  puts  to  flight.} 

DAM.  Heavens !  By  whose  aid  do  I  find  myself  saved 
from  a  certain  death  ?  To  whom  am  I  indebted  for  so  rare 
a  service? 

ER.  {Returning).  In  serving  you,  I  have  done  but  an 
act  of  justice. 

DAM.  Heavens.  Can  I  believe  my  ears  !  Is  this  the 
hand  of  Eraste? 

ER.  Yes,  yes,  Sir,  it  is  I.  Too  happy  that  my  hand  has 
rescued  you  :  too  unhappy  in  having  deserved  your  hatred. 

DAM.  What !  Eraste,  whom  I  was  resolved  to  have  as- 
sassinated has  just  used  his  sword  to  defend  me  !  Oh, 
this  is  too  much ;  my  heart  is  compelled  to  yield ;  what- 
ever your  love  may  have  meditated  to-night,  this  remarka- 
ble display  of  generosity  ought  to  stifle  all  animosity.  I 
blush  for  my  crime,  and  blame  my  prejudice.  My  hatred 
has  too  long  done  you  injustice  !  To  show  you  openly  I 
no  longer  entertain  it,  I  unite  you  this  very  night  to  your 
love. 

SCENE  VI. — ORPHISE,  DAMIS,  ERASTE. 

ORPH.  {Entering  with  a  silver  candlestick  in  her  hand}. 
Sir,  what  has  happened  that  such  a  terrible  disturb- 
ance .  .  . 

DAM.  Niece,  nothing  but  what  is  very  agreeable,  since, 
after  having  blamed,  for  a  long  time,  your  love  for  Eraste, 
I  now  give  him  to  you  for  a  husband.  His  arm  has 
warded  off  the  deadly  thrust  aimed  at  me ;  I  desire  that 
your  hand  reward  him. 

ORPH.  I  owe  everything  to  you ;  if,  therefore,  it  is  to 
pay  him  your  debt,  I  consent,  as  he  has  saved  your  life. 

ER.  My  heart  is  so  overwhelmed  by  this  great  miracle, 
that  amidst  this  ecstasy,  I  doubt  if  I  am  awake. 

DAM.  Let  us  celebrate  the  happy  lot  that  awaits  you  ; 
and  let  our  violins  put  us  in  a  joyful  mood.  (As  the 
violins  strike  up,  there  is  a  knock  at  the  door). 

ER.  Who  knocks  so  loud  ? 

SCENE  VII. — DAMIS,  ORPHISE,  ERASTE,  L'EPINE. 
L'Ep.  Sir,  here  are  masks,  with  kits  and  tabors. 
(The  masks  enter,  filling  the  stage). 

SCENE  vii.]  THE   BORES.  8 1 

ER.  What !  Bores  for  ever  ?  Hulloa,  guards,  here. 
Turn  out  these  rascals  for  me. 

BALLET  TO  ACT  III. 

First  Entry. 

Swiss  guards,  with  halberds,30  drive  out  all  the  trouble- 
some masks,  and  then  retire  to  make  room  for  a  dance  of 

Second  Entry. 

Four  shepherds  and  a  shepherdess,  who,  in  the  opinion 
of  all  who  saw  it,  concluded  the  entertainment  with  much 
grace. 

MThe  origin  of  the  introduction  of  the  Swiss  Guards  (mercenaries)  in 
the  service  of  the  French  and  other  foreign  powers  may  be  ascribed  to  the 
fact  that  Switzerland  itself,  being  too  poor  to  maintain  soldiers  in  time  of 
peace,  allowed  them  to  serve  other  nations  on  condition  of  coming  back 
immediately  to  their  own  cantons  in  time  of  war  or  invasion. 

It  is  particularly  with  France  that  Switzerland  contracted  treaties  to 
furnish  certain  contingents  in  case  of  need.  The  first  of  these  dates  back 
as  far  as  1444  between  the  Dauphin,  afterwards  Charles  VII.,  and  the  dif- 
ferent cantons.  This  Act  was  renewed  in  1453,  and  the  number  of  soldiers 
to  be  furnished  was  fixed  once  for  all,  the  minimum  being  6,000,  and  the 
maximum  16,000.  The  Helvetians,  who  until  1515  had  always  been  faith- 
ful to  their  engagements,  turned  traitors  in  that  year  against  Francis  I., 
who  defeated  them  at  Marignan.  But  the  good  feeling  was  soon  after- 
wards re-established,  and  a  new  treaty,  almost  similar  to  the  former,  re- 
stored the  harmony  between  the  two  nations. 

Another  document  is  extant,  signed  at  Baden  in  1553,  by  which  the 
cantons  bind  themselves  to  furnish  Henry  II.  with  as  many  troops  as  he 
may  want.  It  is  particularly  remarkable,  inasmuch  as  it  served  as  a  basis 
for  all  subsequent  ones  until  1671.  These  conventions  have  not  always 
been  faithfully  carried  out,  for  the  Swiss  contracted  engagements  with 
other  nations,  notably  with  Spain,  Naples,  and  Sardinia,  and  even  with 
Portugal.  At  the  commencement  of  the  campaign  of  1697,  Louis  XIV. 
had,  notwithstanding  all  this,  as  many  as  32,000  Swiss  in  his  service,  the 
highest  number  ever  attained.  The  regulations  for  the  foreign  colonels 
and  captains  in  their  relations  among  themselves,  and  with  the  French 
Government,  were  not  unlike  those  in  force  at  present  for  the  native  sol- 
diery in  our  Indian  possessions.  Towards  the  end  of  Louis  XIV.'s  reign 
the  number  decreased  to  14,400,  officers  included ;  it  rose  in  1773  to 
19,836,  and  during  the  wars  of  1742-48.  to  21,300.  The  ebb  and  flow  of 
their  numbers  continued  from  that  time  until  the  Revolution  of  1830, 
when  they  were  finally  abolished. 

They  received  a  much  higher  pay  than  the  national  troops,  and  had 
besides  this  many  other  advantages,  one  of  them  being  that  the  officers 
had  in  the  army  the  next  grade  higher  than  that  which  they  occupied  in 
their  own  regiments ;  for  instance,  the  colonel  of  a  Swiss  regiment  had  the 
rank  of  a  major-general,  and  retired  on  the  pay  of  a  lieutenant-general, 
&c.  They  enjoyed  the  same  privileges,  with  some  slight  modifications, 
wherever  they  served  elsewhere. 

L'fcCOLE  DES  FEMMES. 

COMEDIE. 

THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES. 

A  COMEDY  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.) 

DECEMBER  26xH,  1662. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

The  School  for  Wives,  played  for  the  first  time  in  the  theatre  of  the 
Palais-Royal,  on  the  z6th  of  Dec.  1662,  was  the  complement  of  The 
School  for  Husbands,  which  it  succeeded  at  an  interval  of  eighteen  months. 
The  Bores  intervening.  The  one  no  doubt  suggested  the  other.  The 
central  situations  of  the  two  have  much  in  common :  the  arbitrary  and 
jealous  lover,  to  whom  circumstances  have  given  almost  the  authority  of 
a  husband  :  the  simple  ward,  rescued  from  physical  constraint  by  the  un- 
fettered cunning  of  love.  In  fact,  there  is  not  that  contrast  of  character 
between  the  two  plays,  which  the  antithesis  of  their  titles  might  lead  us  to 
expect.  The  text  is  not  altered  ;  we  have  merely  another  reading  of  the 
same  text.  Arnolphe  is  a  more  refined  and  rational  Sganarelle  ;  and  if  his 
fault  is  the  same,  and  his  catastrophe  similar,  we  do  not  despise  him  and 
rejoice  in  his  misfortune,  as  we  were  compelled  to  do  with  the  tyrant  of 
Isabella.  His  selfishness  is,  perhaps,  equally  great,  but  its  exhibition  does 
not  render  him  so  odious. 

The  reason  of  this  is  to  be  found  in  the  display  of  his  many  eccentrici- 
ties, his  system  of  education,  his  cunning,  his  choice  of  foolish  servants, 
his  absurd  whimsicalities,  his  pedantry,  and,  above  all,  his  perpetual  rest- 
lessness. He  hardly  ever  leaves  the  stage  during  the  whole  of  the  five 
acts  of  the  play :  he  goes  away,  appears  again,  moves  about,  plots,  scolds, 
loses  his  temper,  recovers  it,  dogmatizes,  entreats,  and,  after  all,  is  pun- 
ished by  his  very  faults.  His  servants  are  more  stupid  than  he  wishes 
them  to  be,  his  ward  more  simple  than  he  thought  her ;  he  has  jeered  at 
husbands  who  are  deceived,  and  he  himself  is  victimized ;  he  wanted  to 
abuse  the  confidence  Horace  placed  in  him,  and  becomes  himself  a  dupe ; 
he  intended  to  sacrifice  Agnes  to  his  own  happiness,  and,  at  the  end,  be- 
comes *'  The  most  unfortunate  of  mankind." 

The  troubles  of  Sganarelle  and  Arnolphe  are  the  troubles  of  jealous 
husbands  in  every  age,  and  it  would  be  idle  to  heap  up  instances  in  the 
predecessors  of  Moliere  which  may  have  contributed  to  form  his  concep- 
tions. One  of  those  that  come  nearest  to  the  type  before  us  is  the  story 
about  a  gentle  knight  of  Hainault,  in  the  forty-first  of  the  Nouvelles  nou- 
velles  du  Roi  Louis  XI.,  reproduced  by  Scarron  in  his  Nouvelles  tragi- 
comiques. 

Still  more  suggestive  is  Scarron's  la  Precaution  inutile,  partly  based 
upon  The  Jealous  Man  of  Estremadura,  by  Cervantes,  in  which  there 
are  several  situations  to  which  we  must  consider  Moliere  to  have  been  in- 

85 

86  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES. 

debted  for  his  first  and  second  acts.  The  ingenuous  self-confidence  of 
Arnolphe,  quaintly  contrasting  with  his  recurrent  jealousies,  finds  an  ante- 
type  in  many  an  ancient  Italian  story.  Straparola's  fourth  night  of  the 
Piacevoli  Notte  (Agreeable  Nights)  has  suggested  some  hints  for  the  third 
and  fourth  acts ;  the  fifth  is  wholly  original.  Moliere's  own  history  also 
furnished  him  with  his  subject.  We  already  mentioned  in  the  Introduc- 
tory Notice  to  The  School  for  Husbands  the  supposed  connection  be- 
tween Ariste  and  the  author ;  the  latter  was  now  married,  and  did  not  find 
in  marriage  the  happiness  he  hoped  for.  Without  wishing  to  attribute  to 
him  all  the  ridiculous  absurdities  of  Arnolphe,  or  to  suppose  that  his  wife 
was  another  Agnes,  still  we  imagine  that  though  he  had  scarcely  been 
married  a  year,  he  felt  already  the  necessity  of  watching  over,  and  if  pos- 
sible, of  guiding  the  steps  of  his  youthful  spouse.  It  seems  to  us  that  in 
many  of  the  sayings  of  Arnolphe,  there  is  to  be  found  a  feeling  of  bitter- 
ness and  passion,  rather  out  of  place  in  the  mouth  of  such  a  ridiculous 
personage,  but  which  give  clear  indications  of  what  was  even  then  passing 
in  the  mind  of  our  author.  The  words  which  Arnolphe  uses  when  kneel- 
ing at  the  feet  of  Agnes  show  what  tempestuous  passions  must  have  pos- 
sessed Moliere ;  and  though  it  is  often  dangerous  to  identify  a  poet  with 
his  creation,  still  there  must  be  always  some  part,  however  small,  of  the 
individuality  of  the  originator  in  the  character  he  produces. 

As  regards  Agnes,  whose  name  is  the  type  of  a  simple,  artless  girl,  her 
character  develops  as  the  plot  of  the  comedy  rolls  on.  In  the  first  scene, 
she  is  an  uneducated,  ingenuous  maiden ;  but  she  gradually  changes 
under  the  influence  of  love,  and  becomes  earnest,  intelligent,  and  even 
logical. 

This  comedy  was  fiercely  attacked  by  several,  who  accused  it  of  being 
wanting  in  good  taste,  sound  morality,  rules  of  grammar,  and,  what  was 
more  dangerous,  of  undermining  the  principles  of  religion.  The  second 
scene  of  the  third  act,  in  which  mention  is  made  of  "  boiling  cauldrons,1' 
of  a  soul  as  "  white  and  spotless  as  a  lily,"  but  "  as  black  as  coal,"  when 
at  fault ;  of  "  The  Maxims  of  Marriage  or  the  Duties  of  a  Wife,  together 
with  her  daily  exercise,"  gave  great  offence,  and  were  said  to  be  like  the 
phrases  of  the  catechism  or  the  confessional.  A  former  patron  of  Mo- 
liere, the  Prince  of  Conti,  who  had  become  a  mere  devotee,  wrote  against 
it  in  his  Traite  de  la  Comedie  et  des  Spectacles,  and  in  later  times,  even 
such  men  as  Fenelon,  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau,  and  Geoffrey,  a  critic  of 
the  beginning  of  this  century,  have  found  much  to  blame  in  this  comedy, 
whilst  several  literary  men,  Hazlitt  amongst  the  English,  and  Honore  de 
Balzac  amongst  the  French,  consider  this  play  as  Moliere's  masterpiece. 

This  play  was  dedicated  by  Moliere  to  the  Duchess  of  Orleans,1  in  the 
following  words : 

MADAM, 

I  am  the  most  perplexed  man  in  the  world  when  I  have  to  dedicate  a  book,  and  I 
am  so  little  cut  out  for  the  style  of  a  dedication,  that  I  do  not  know  how  to  get 
through  this.  Another,  in  my  place,  would  soon  think  of  a  hundred  fine  things  .to 
say  of  your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS,  upon  this  title  of  The  School  for  Wives,  and  upon  the 
offering  he  made  to  you  of  it.  But  for  my  part,  MADAM,  I  confess  my  weakness. 
I  have  not  the  talent  of  finding  any  relation  between  things  which  have  so  little  con- 

1  Henrietta  of  England,  daughter  of  Charles  I.,  first  wife  of  Monsieur,  brother  of 
Louis  XIV.,  died  at  Saint  Cloud,  the  3oth  of  June,  1670,  twenty-six  years  old.  Her 
funeral  sermon,  preached  by  Bossuet,  remains  a  perennial  monument  of  pulpit  elo- 
quence. 

THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  87 

ncction  ;  whatever  information  ray  brother-authors  every  day  give  me  in  such  cases, 
I  do  not  see  what  your  ROYAL  HIGHNESS  can  have  to  do  with  the  comedy  I  present 
to  you. 

Nobody  indeed  can  be  at  a  loss  how  to  praise  you.  The  matter,  Madam,  is  but 
too  obvious,  and  in  whatever  way  we  behold  you,  we  meet  with  glory  upon  glory, 
and  perfection  upon  perfection.  You  possess,  MADAM,  the  perfection  of  rank  and 
birth,  which  makes  you  respected  by  all  the  world.  You  possess  the  perfection  of 
charms,  both  of  the  mind  and  body,  which  makes  you  admired  by  all  who  see  you. 
You  possess  the  perfection  of  soul,  which,  if  any  one  dare  to  say  so,  makes  you  be- 
lovea  by  all  who  have  the  honour  to  come  near  you  :  I  mean  that  charming  gentle- 
ness, with  which  you  temper  the  stateliness  of  the  great  titles  you  bear ;  that 
obliging  goodness,  that  generous  affability,  which  you  shew  to  every  body  :  and 
particularly  these  last,  upon  which  I  find  plainly  I  one  day  shall  not  be  able  to  be 
silent.  But  once  more,  Madam,  I  am  ignorant  of  the  manner  how  to  bring  in  here 
such  shining  truths  ;  and  these  are  things,  in  my  opinion,  both  of  too  vast  an  ex- 
tent, and  of  too  high  a  merit  to  be  included  in  a  dedication,  and  mixed  with  trifles. 
All  things  considered,  Madam,  I  do  not  see  what  else  I  can  do,  beyond  dedicating 
my  comedy  to  you  ;  and  assuring  you,  with  all  possible  respect,  that  I  am,  MADAM, 
Your  Royal  Highness'  most  Humble,  most  Obedient,  and  most  Obliged  Servant, 

MOLIERE. 

Wycherley,  in  his  Country  Wife,  acted  probably  in  1672  or  1673,  and 
of  which  the  subject  is  so  indecent  that  it  cannot  even  be  mentioned  at 
the  present  time,  has  borrowed  from  Moliere's  School  for  Wives  the  cha- 
racter of  Agnes,  whom  he  calls  Mrs.  Pinchwife  ;  he  has  also  partly  imi- 
tated Amolphe  as  Mr.  Pinchwife,  and  followed  the  plot  of  the  French 
play  in  all  the  scenes  where  those  two  characters  are  mentioned,  and  in 
some  where  Alithea  and  Homer  appear.  Voltaire,  in  his  Essay  on  Eng- 
lish Comedy,  says  of  The  Country  Wife  :  "  This  piece,  I  admit,  is  not  a 
school  for  good  morals  and  manners,  but  it  is  really  a  school  for  wit  and 
sound  vis  comica."  Garrick,  in  his  Country  Girl,  acted  in  1776,  tried  to 
make  Wycherley's  play  more  fit  to  appear  on  the  English  stage,  but  with 
little  success.  It  is  true  he  changed  Mrs.  Pinchwife  into  Miss  Peggy  : 
but  he  also  destroyed  the  vigour  of  the  original,  and  introduced  some  al- 
terations in  the  ending  taken  chiefly  from  the  last  act  of  Moliere's  School 
for  Husbands.  Another  alteration  of  Wycherley's  play  was  a  farce,  in 
two  acts,  called  The  Country  Wife,  written  by  an  actor,  John  Lee,  and 
performed  at  Drury  Lane  in  1765,  for  his  benefit.  But  deservedly  it  met 
with  no  success. 

John  Caryl,  probably  a  Sussex  man,  and  of  the  Roman  Catholic  per- 
suasion, was  secretary  to  Queen  Mary,  the  wife  of  James  the  Second,  and 
one  who  followed  the  fortunes  of  his  abdicated  master.  For  his  attach- 
ment to  this  king  he  was  rewarded  by  him,  first,  with  the  honour  of 
knighthood,  and  afterwards  with  the  honorary  titles  of  Earl  Caryl,  Baron 
Dartford.  How  long  he  continued  in  the  service  of  James  is  unknown  ; 
but  he  was  in  England  in  the  reign  of  Queen  Anne,  and  recommended 
the  subject  of  Mr.  Pope's  Rape  of  the  Lock  to  that  author,  who,  on  its 
publication  addressed  it  to  him.  He  was  alive  in  1717,  and  at  that  time 
must  have  been  a  very  old  man.2  He  wrote  also  a  tragedy,  The  English 
Princess,  or  the  Death  of  Richard  the  Third,  1667,  and,  a  comedy,  Sir 
Salomon,  or  the  Cautious  Coxcomb,  which  was  not  printed  till  1671,  but 
was  certainly  acted  in  the  season  of  1669-1670  at  the  latest.  In  May 
1670,  the  king  and  the  court  being  at  Dover,  they  were  extremely  pleased 
with  the  performance  of  Sir  Salomon;  and  as  the  French  court  at  that 
time  wore  very  short  laced  coats,  the  actor,  Nokes,  had  one  made  still 
shorter,  in  which  he  acted  Sir  Arthur  Addell;  "  the  Duke  of  Monmouth 

*  Baker's  "  Biographica  Dramatica,"  1812,  vol.  i.,  p.  91. 

88  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES. 

gave  him  his  sword  and  belt  from  his  side,  and  buckled  it  on  himself,  on 
purpose  that  he  might  ape  the  French, — his  appearance  was  so  ridicu- 
lous, that  at  his  first  entrance  he  put  the  King  and  Court  in  an  excessive 
laughter ;  and  the  French  were  much  chagrined  to  see  themselves  aped 
by  such  a  buffoon  as  Sir  Arthur."3  All  dramatic  biographies  are  agreed 
that  Caryl  took  his  plot  from  Moliere's  School  for  Wives.  We  think  that 
though  several  of  the  scenes  are  imitated  from  Moliere,  the  plot  in  Sir 
Salomon  is  far  more  intricate.  In  the  English  play,  old  Sir  Salomon 
Single,  and  in  the  French  Arnolphe,  bring  up  in  strict  seclusion  a  young 
girl,  whom  they  afterwards  intend  to  marry,  and  in  both  plays  the  old 
men  are  made  the  confidants  of  the  lovers,  who  afterwards  really  marry 
the  innocent  maidens ;  but  in  The  School  for  Wives  the  characters  of 
young  Single,  Mr.  Barter,  an  Indy  merchant,  that  of  Timothy,  the  stew- 
ard, Mr.  Wary,  and  Mrs.  Julia,  are  wanting,  whilst  no  counterpart  of 
either  Chrysalde  or  Enrique  from  The  School  for  Wives  is  to  be  found  in 
Sir  Salomon.  Another  personage  not  in  the  French  comedy  is  Sir  Arthur 
Addell,  who  is  very  well  drawn  ;  his  way  of  wooing  is  at  least  original, 
and  so  are  the  following  four  lines  with  which  he  ends  the  first  act : 

"  As  sure,  as  Chick  in  Pouche,  or  ...  in  Bosome 
My  flames  are  raging  ;  and  who  dares  oppose  'em  ? 
They  soon  shall  thaw  her  Heart,  though  ne'er  so  Icy  ; 
Like  Julius  Caesar,  veni,  vidi,  vici." 

The  author,  however,  who  ought  to  be  the  best  judge  of  the  sources 
from  which  he  borrowed  his  play,  admits  his  thefts  in  the  epilogue  to  Sir 
Salomon, — an  epilogue  which  we  give  below,  and  of  which  some  of  the 
points  are  not  lost  even  at  the  present  day. 

Since  stealing's  grown  a  pretty  thriving  Trade, 

Which  many  Rich,  but  few  has  guilty  made  : 

To  needy  Poets  why  should  you  deny 

The  Privilege  to  steal,  as  well  as  lie  ? 

Their  Theft  (alas)  swells  not  the  Nation's  "Debt, 

Nor  makes  Wine  dear,  nor  will  Land-taxe  beget. 

Money  they  always  wanted ;  Now  they  grow 

No  less  in  Fancy,  than  in  Fortflne,  low ; 

And  are  compelled  to  rook,  as  Gamesters  are. 

That  can  hold  out  no  longer  on  the  square. 

Faith,  be  good  natur'd  to  this  hungry  Crew, 

Who  what  they  filch  abroad,  bring  home  to  you. 

But  still  exclude  those  men  from  all  Relief, 

Who  steal  themselves,  yet  boldly  cry,  Stop  Thief: 

Life  taking  Judges,  these  without  remorse 

Condemn  all  petty  Thefts,  and  practice  worse  ; 

As  if  they  robb'd  by  Patent,  and  alone 

Had  right  to  call  each  Foreign  play  their  own. 

What  we  have  brought  before  you,  was  not  meant 

For  a  new  Play,  but  a  new  Precedent ; 

For  we  with  Modesty  our  theft  avow, 

(There  is  some  conscience  shown  in  stealing  too) 

And  openly  declare  that  if  our  Cheer 

Does  hit  your  Palates.you  must  thank  Moliefe  : 

Moliere,  the  famous  Shakespeare  of  this  Age, 

Both  when  he  writes,  and  when  he  treads  the  Stage. 

I  hope  this  Stranger's  Praise  gives  no  pretence 

To  charge  us  with  a  National  Offence  : 

Since,  were  it  in  my  power,  I  would  advance 

French  Wit  in  England,  English  Arms  in  France. 

8  Geneste,   'Some  Account  of  the  English  Stage,"  10  vols.,  1832,  vol.  i.,  p.  107. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  89 

Mrs.  Cowley  composed,  with  Caryl's  Sir  Salomon  and  Moliere's  School 
for  Wives  a  comedy  called  More  Ways  than  One,  produced  at  Covent 
Garden  Theatre  in  1783,  in  which  the  only  novelty  appears  to  be  the  cha- 
racter of  a  rascally  doctor,  called  Barkwell,  and  a  lover,  Bellair,  who  pre- 
tends to  be  dying  in  order  to  be  near  the  object  of  his  affection.  Arabella, 
the  Agnes  of  the  French  play  ;  whilst  the  part  of  Sir  Maxwell  Mushroom 
is  borrowed  from  Sir  Positive  in  Shadwell's  Sullen  Lovers.  The  only 
thing  remarkable  in  this  comedy  is  the  high-flown  language  of  the  dedi- 
cation to  the  author's  husband  in  India,  of  which  we  give  the  beginning — 

Hence  !  Comic  Scenes,  to  where  rich  Ganges  laves 
Hindostan's  Golden  shores  with  hallowed  waves. 
Where  Palms  gigantic  rear  their  tufted  heads, 
And  all  colossal  vegetation  spreads, 
Where  rich  Ananas  court  the  Indian's  eye. 
And  Groves  of  Citrons  fan  the  feverish  sky, 
Where  rattling  Canes  along  the  rivulets  play, 
And  the  Centennial  Aloe  conquers  day, 
In  their  deep  Shades  bid  Lucidorus'  smile 
His  heavy  sense  of  distant  hours  beguile. 

A  collected  edition  of  the  works  of  Mrs.  Cowley  was  published  in 
1813,  in  three  volumes,  with  a  preface,  which  is  really  a  model  of  the 
longest  and  most  Latinized  words  in  the  English  language,  with  the  small- 
est possible  amount  of  sense. 

Edward  Ravenscroft  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  the  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies),  has,  in  London  Cuckolds,  acted  at  the  Duke's  Theatre,  1682, 
partly  imitated  The  School  for  Wives,  and  given  Arnolphe  the  name  of 
Wiseacre,  and  Agnes  that  of  Peggy  ;  but  the  whole  play  is  so  filthy  that 
nothing  can  be  quoted  from  it.  Until  1754  it  was  frequently  represented 
on  Lord  Mayor's  day,  in  contempt,  as  it  were,  of  the  City. 

Isaac  Bickerstaffe  wrote  'Love  in  the  City,  a  comic  opera,  which  was 
acted  at  Covent  Garden  in  1767,  but  did  not  meet  with  much  success. 
The  character  of  Priscilla,  an  unmanageable  Creole  girl,  is  partly  taken 
from  Agnes,  and  that  of  Barnacle  from  Chrysalde, — both  from  The  School 
for  Wives.  Priscilla  .persuades  her  lover,  young  Walter  Cockney,  that 

her  "  love  for  the  captain was  only  a  sham,"  and  that  if  she 

"  can  manage  it  she  will  go  off  with  .him  to  Scotland  to-night,  where  they 
say  folks  may  be  married  in  spite  of  anyone."  The  characters  of  Wagg, 
the  attorney,  who  disguises  himself  first  as  a  Colonel,  and  afterwards  as 
Captain  Delany  from  ''  the  county  of  Mayo,"  and  of  Spruce,  who  ap- 
pears as  a  Lord,  are  partly  borrowed  from  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies. 
The  argument!  of  Wagg  in  Act  Hi.,  Scene  2,  seem  to  owe  their  origin  to 
Gros-Rene^s  speech  jn  Sganarelle  or  the  Self'Deceived  Husband,  whilst 
the  whole  scene  appears  to  be  taken  from  the  sixth  scene  of  the  second 
act  of  Moliere's  School  for  Wives.  This  play,  with  the  characters  of 
Wagg,  Spruce,  and  Miss  Molly  Cockney  omitted,  and  cut  down  to  two 
acts,  was  brought  out  as  The  Romp,  and  met  with  great  success. 

PREFACE. 

A  great  many  people  at  first  hissed  this  comedy,  but  the 
laughers  were  for  it,  and  all  the  ill  that  was  said  of  it  could 
not  hinder  its  having  a  success  with  which  I  am  very  well 
satisfied.  I  know  it  is  expected  from  me  that  I  should  give 
some  preface  in  answer  to  the  critics,  and  in  justification  of 
my  work.  Doubtless  I  am  sufficiently  indebted  to  all  those 
who  have  given  it  their  approbation,  to  think  myself  obliged  to 
defend  their  judgment  against  that  of  others ;  but  a  great  many 
of  the  things  I  should  say  on  that  head  are  already  in  a  dis- 
sertation, which  I  have  written  in  the  form  of  a  dialogue,  with 
which  as  yet  I  do  not  know  what  I  shall  do.  The  idea  of  this 
dialogue,  or,  if  you  like  it  better,  of  this  little  comedy,4  came 
into  my  head  after  the  first  two  or  three  representations  of  my 
play.  I  mentioned  this  idea  one  evening  at  a  house  where  I 
visited ;  and  immediately  a  person  of  quality,  whose  wit  is 
sufficiently  known  to  the  world,5  and  who  does  me  the  honour 
to  call  me  his  friend,  liked  the  thought  of  it  so  well,  that  he 
not  only  begged  me  to  put  my  hand  to  it,  but  likewise  to  put 
his  own ;  and  I  was  amazed  that  two  days  afterwards  he 

4  This  was  The  School  for  Wives  criticised,  played  the  ist  of  June, 
1663. 

'The  Abbe1  Dubuisson,  who  was  called  the  grand  intraducteur  des 
ruelles.  (See  page  154,  note  25.) 

91 

92  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES. 

showed  me  the  whole  thing  done,  in  a  manner  which  was  in- 
deed better  written  and  more  witty  than  I  am  able  to  do  it. 
but  which  was  too  flattering  for  me,  so  that  I  was  afraid  that  if 
I  brought  that  work  out  in  our  theatre,  I  should  presently  be 
accused  of  having  begged  the  praises  which  were  therein  be- 
stowed upon  me.  Yet  that  hindered  me,  for  some  reason, 
from  finishing  what  I  had  begun.  But  so  many  people  daily 
urge  me  to  write  it,  that  I  do  not  know  what  will  be  done  ;  and 
this  uncertainty  is  the  reason  I  do  not  put  in  this  preface,  what 
will  be  seen  in  the  Criticism,  in  case  I  resolve  to  let  it  appear — 
which,  if  it  does,  I  say  it  again,  it  will  only  be  to  revenge  the 
public  for  the  squeamishness  of  some  people.  For  my  part,  I 
think  myself  sufficiently  revenged  by  the  success  of  my 
Comedy,  and  I  wish  that  all  I  shall  hereafter  write  may  re- 
ceive the  same  treatment  from  them,  provided  it  has  the  same 
good  fortune  elsewhere. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

ARNOLPHE,  6  alias  M.  DE  LA  SOUCHE. 

CHRYSALDE,/r?V;fr//0  Arnolphe. 

HORACE,  in  love  with  Agnes. 

ENRIQUE,  brother-in-law  of  Chrysalde. 

ORONTE,  father  to  Horace  and  a  great  friend  of  Arnolphe. 

ALAIN,  a  country  fellow,  servant  to  Arnolphe. 

A  NOTARY. 

AGNES,  a  young  innocent  girl,  brought  up  by  Arnolphe. 
GEORGETTE,  a  country-woman,  servant  to  Arnolphe. 

Scene. — A  SQUARE  IN  A  TOWN. 

6  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES. 

(JU  &COLE  DBS  FEMMES.) 

ACT   L 

SCENE  I. — CHRYSALDE,  ARNOLPHE. 

CH.  You  have  come  to  marry  her,  you  say  ? 

AR.  Yes,  I  mean  to  settle  the  business  to-morrow. 

CH.  We  are  here  alone,  and  I  think  we  can  speak  to- 
gether without  fear  of  being  overheard.  Do  you  wish  me 
to  open  my  heart  to  you  like  a  friend  ?  Your  plan  makes 
me  tremble  with  fear  for  you.  To  take  a  wife  is  a  rash 
step  for  you,  whichever  way  you  consider  the  matter. 

AR.  True,  my  friend.  Possibly  you  find  in  your  own 
home  reasons  why  you  should  fear  for  me.  I  fancy  that 
your  own  forehead  shows  that  horns  are  everywhere  the 
infallible  accompaniment  of  marriage. 

CH.  These  are  accidents  against  which  we  cannot  insure 
ourselves;  it  seems  to  me  that  the  trouble  people  take 
about  this  is  very  ridiculous.  But  when  I  fear  for  you,  it^ 
is  on  account  of  this  raillery  of  which  a  hundred  poor  hus- 
bands have  felt  the  sting.  For  you  know  that  neither 
great  nor  small  have  been  safe  from  your  criticism ;  that 
your  greatest  pleasure,  wherever  you  are,  is  to  make  a 
mighty  outcry  about  secret  intrigues  .  .  . 

AR.  Exactly.  Is  there  another  city  in  the  world  where 
husbands  are  so  patient  as  here  ?  Do  we  not  meet  with 
them  in  every  variety,  and  well  provided  with  everything  ? 
One  heaps  up  wealth,  which  his  wife  shares  with  those  who 
are  eager  to  make  him  a  dupe ;  another,  slightly  more  for- 
tunate, but  not  less  infamous,  sees  his  wife  receive  presents 
day  after  day,  and  is  not  troubled  in  mind  by  any  jealous 
twinge  when  she  tells  him  that  they  are  the  rewards  of  vir- 

95 

96  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  i. 

tue.  One  makes  a  great  noise,  which  does  him  not  the 
slightest  good  ;  another  lets  matters  take  their  course  in 
all  meekness,  and,  seeing  the  gallant  arrive  at  his  house, 
very  politely  takes  up  his  gloves  and  his  cloak.  One 
married  woman  cunningly  pretends  to  make  a  confidant 
of  her  confiding  husband,  who  slumbers  securely  under 
such  a  delusion,  and  pities  the  gallant  for  his  pains,  which, 
however,  the  latter  does  not  throw  away.  Another  married 
woman,  to  account  for  her  extravagance,  says  that  the  money 
she  spends  has  been  won  at  play ;  and  the  silly  husband, 
without  considering  at  what  play,  thanks  Heaven  for  her 
winnings.  In  short,  we  find  subjects  for  satire  everywhere, 
and  may  I,  as  a  spectator,  not  laugh  at  them  ?  Are  not 
these  fools  .  .  . 

CH.  Yes ;  but  he  who  laughs  at  another  must  beware, 
lest  he  in  turn  be  laughed  at  himself.  I  hear  what  is  said, 
and  how  some  folks  delight  in  retailing  what  goes  on  ;  but 
no  one  has  seen  me  exult  at  reports,  which  are  bruited 
about  in  the  places  I  frequent.  I  am  rather  reserved  in 
this  respect ;  and,  though  I  might  condemn  a  certain 
toleration  of  these  matters,  and  am  resolved  by  no  means  to 
suffer  quietly  what  some  husbands  endure,  yet  I  have  never 
affected  to  say  so  ;  for,  after  all,  satire  may  fall  upon  our- 
selves, and  we  should  never  vow  in  such  cases  what  we 
should  or  should  not  do.  Thus,  if  by  an  overruling  fate, 
some  natural  disgrace  should  ever  happen  to  my  brow,  I 
am  almost  sure,  after  the  way  in  which  I  have  acted,  that 
people  would  be  content  to  laugh  at  it  in  their  sleeve ; 
and  possibly,  in  addition,  I  may  reap  this  advantage,  that 
a  few  good  fellows  will  say  "What  a  pity!"  But  with 
you,  my  dear  friend,  it  is  otherwise.  I  tell  you  again  you 
are  running  a  plaguy  risk.  As  your  tongue  has  always 
persistently  bantered  husbands  accused  of  being  tolerant ; 
as  you  have  shown  yourself  like  a  demon  let  loose  upon 
them,  you  must  walk  straight  for  fear  of  being  made  a 
laughing-stock ;  and,  if  it  happens  that  they  get  the  least 
pretext,  take  care  they  do  not  publish  your  disgrace  at  the 
public  market-cross,  and  .  .  . 

AR.  Good  Heaven,  friend,  do  not  trouble  yourself. 
He  will  be  a  clever  man  who  catches  me  in  this  way.  I 
know  all  the  cunning  tricks  and  subtle  devices  which 

SCENE  i.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  97 

women  use  to  deceive  us,  and  how  one  is  fooled  by  their 
dexterity,  and  I  have  taken  precaution  against  this  mis- 
chance. She  whom  I  am  marrying  possesses  all  the  inno- 
cence which  may  protect  my  forehead  from  evil  influence. 

CH.  Why,  what  do  you  imagine  ?  That  a  silly  girl,  to 
be  brief  .  .  . 

AR.  To  marry  a  silly  girl  is  not  to  become  silly  myself. 
I  believe,  as  a  good  Christian,  that  your  better  half  is  very 
wise ;  but  a  clever  wife  is  ominous,  and  I  know  what  some 
people  have  to  pay  for  choosing  theirs  with  too  much 
talent.  What,  I  go  and  saddle  myself  with  an  intellectual 
woman,  who  talks  of  nothing  but  of  her  assembly  and 
ruelle ?  who  writes  tender  things  in  prose  and  in  verse, 
and  is  visited  by  Marquises  and  wits,  whilst,  as  "Mrs.  So- 
and-so's  husband,"  I  should  be  like  a  saint,  whom  no  one 
calls  upon !  No,  no,  I  will  have  none  of  your  lofty 
minds.  A  woman  who  writes  knows  more  than  she  ought 
to  do.  I  intend  that  my  wife  shall  not  even  be  clever 
enough  to  know  what  a  rhyme  is.  If  one  plays  at  cor- 
billon  with  her,  and  asks  her  in  her  turn  ' '  What  is  put 
into  the  basket,"  I  will  have  her  answer,  "A  cream 
tart."  8  In  a  word,  let  her  be  very  ignorant ;  and  to  tell 
you  the  plain  truth,  it  is  enough  for  her  that  she  can  say 
her  prayers,  love  me,  sew  and  spin. 

CH.  A  stupid  wife,  then,  is  your  fancy  ? 

AR.  So  much  so  that  I  should  prefer  a  very  stupid  and 
ugly  woman  to  a  very  beautiful  one  with  a  great  deal 
of  wit. 

CH.  Wit  and  beauty  .    .  . 

AR.  Virtue  is  quite  enough. 

CH.  But  how  can  you  expect,  after  all,  that  a  mere 
simpleton  can  ever  know  what  it  is  to  be  virtuous  ?  Be- 
sides, to  my  mind,  it  must  be  very  wearisome  for  a  man 
to  have  a  stupid  creature  perpetually  with  him.  Do  you 
think  you  act  rightly,  and  that,  by  reliance  on  your  plan, 

7  See  page  154,  note  24. 

8  In  France  there  was,  and  may  be  still,  a  kind  of  round  game  which 
consists  in  replying  with  a  word  ending  in  on  to  the  question,  Que  met 
on  dans  mon  corbillon  f — (what  is  put  into  my  little  basket  ?)  The  supposed 
answer  of  Agnes,  "  A  cream  tart,"  though  it  does  not  rhyme  with  cor- 
billon, may  come  natural  enough,  because  the  corbillon  was  a  kind  of 
basket  in  which  pastry-cooks  took  home  pastry  to  their  customers. 

98  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACT  i 

a  man's  brow  is  saved  from  danger?  A  woman  of  sense 
may  fail  in  her  duty  ;  but  she  must  at  least  do  so  know- 
ingly ;  a  stupid  woman  may  at  any  time  fail  in  hers,  with- 
out desiring  or  thinking  of  it. 

AR.  To  this  fine  argument,  this  deep  discourse,  I  reply 
as  Pantagruel  did  to  Panurge :  Urge  me  to  marry  any 
other  woman  than  a  stupid  one;  preach  and  lecture  till 
Whitsuntide,  you  shall  be  amazed  to  find,  when  you  have 
done,  that  you  have  not  persuaded  me  in  the  very 
slightest.9 

CH.  I  do  not  want  to  say  another  word. 

AR.  Every  man  has  his  own  way.  With  my  wife,  as  in 
everything,  I  mean  to  follow  my  fashion.  I  think  I  am 
rich  enough  to  take  a  partner  who  shall  owe  all  to  me, 
and  whose  humble  station  and  complete  dependence  can- 
not reproach  me  either  with  her  poverty  or  her  birth.  A 
sweet  and  staid  look  made  me  love  Agnes,  amongst  other 
children,  when  she  was  only  four.  It  came  into  my  mind 
to  ask  her  from  her  mother,  who  was  very  poor ;  the  good 
country-woman,  learning  my  wish,  was  delighted  to  rid 
herself  of  the  charge.  I  had  her  brought  up,  according 
to  my  own  notions,  in  a  little  solitary  convent ;  that  is  to 
say,  directing  them  what  means  to  adopt  in  order  to  make 
her  as  idiotic  as  possible.  Thank  Heaven,  success  has 
crowned  my  efforts  ;  and  I  am  very  thankful  to  say,  I  have 
found  her  so  innocent  that  I  have  blessed  Heaven  for  hav- 
ing done  what  I  wished,  in  giving  me  a  wife  according  to 
my  desire.  Then  I  brought  her  away ;  and  as  my  house 
is  continually  open  to  a  hundred  different  people,  and  as 
we  must  be  on  our  guard  against  everything,  I  have  kept 
her  in  another  house  where  no  one  comes  to  see  me ;  and 
-where  her  good  disposition  cannot  be  spoiled,  as  she 
meets  none  but  people  as  simple  as  herself.  You  will  say, 
"Wherefore  this  long  story?"  It  is  to  let  you  see  the 

9  In  the  fifth  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  Rabelais'  Pantagruel :  How 
Pantagruel  altogether  abhorreth  the  debtors  and  borrowers,  we  find  :  "  I 
understand  you  very  well,  quoth  Pantagruel,  and  take  you  to  be  very 
good  at  topics,  and  thoroughly  affectioned  to  your  own  cause.  But 
preach  it  up  and  patrocinate  it,  prattle  on  it,  and  defend  it  as  much  as 
you  will,  even  from  hence  to  the  next  Whitsuntide,  if  you  please  so  to  do, 
yet  in  the  end  will  you  be  astonished  to  find  how  you  shall  have  gained  no 
jjround  at  all  upon  me,  nor  persuaded  me  .  .  .  never  so  little." 

SCBNBI.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  yy 

care  I  have  taken.  To  crown  all,  and  as  you  are  a  trusty 
friend,  I  ask  you  to  sup  with  her  to-night.  I  wish  you 
would  examine  her  a  little,  and  see  if  I  am  to  be  con- 
demned for  my  choice. 

CH.  With  all  my  heart. 

AR.  You  can  judge  of  her  looks  and  her  innocence 
when  you  converse  with  her. 

CH.  As  to  that,  what  you  have  told  me  cannot    .    .    . 

AR.  What  I  have  told  you  falls  even  short  of  the  truth : 
I  admire  her  simplicity  on  all  occasions ;  sometimes  she 
says  things  at  which  I  split  my  sides  with  laughing.  The 
other  day — would  you  believe  it? — she  was  uneasy,  and 
came  to  ask  me,  with  unexampled  innocence,  if  children 
came  through  the  ears. 

CH.  I  greatly  rejoice,  Mr.  Arnolphe   .    .    . 

AR.  What !  will  you  always  call  me  by  that  name? 

CH.  Ah,  it  comes  to  my  lips  in  spite  of  me ;  I  never  re- 
member Mr.  de  la  Souche.  Who  on  earth  has  put  it  into 
your  head  to  change  your  name  at  forty-two  years  of  age, 
and  give  yourself  a  title  from  a  rotten  old  tree  on  your 
farm? 

AR.  Besides  that  the  house  is  known  by  that  name,  la 
Souche  pleases  my  ear  better  than  Arnolphe.10 

CH.  What  a  pity  to  give  up  the  genuine  name  of  one's 
fathers,  and  take  one  based  on  chimeras!  Most  people 
have  an  itching  that  way,  and,  without  including  you  in 
the  comparison,  I  knew  a  country-fellow  called  Gros- 
Pierre,  who,  having  no  other  property  but  a  rood  of  land, 
had  a  muddy  ditch  made  all  around  it,  and  took  the  high- 
sounding  name  of  M.  de  1'Isle.11 

AR.  You  might  dispense  with  such  examples.  But,  at 
all  events,  de  la  Souche  is  the  name  I  bear.  I  have  a 
reason  for  it,  I  like  it ;  and  to  call  me  otherwise  is  to 
annoy  me. 

10  Arnulphus  was  in  the  middle  ages  considered  the  patron  saint  of  de- 
ceived husbands  ;  this  belief  was  not  wholly  forgotten  in  the  seventeenth 
century  :  hence  the  dislike  of  Arnolphe  to  his  name. 

11  Some  contemporaries  of  Moliere  imagined  he  alluded  to  Thomas 
Corneille,  or  to  Charles  Sorel,  the  author  of  Franrion,  who,  it  is  said,  had 
both  adopted  the  name  of  M.  de  1'Isle. — As  Mr.  Big  Peter  (Gros-Pierre) 
had  made  of  his  rood  of  land  a  kind  of  island,  he  thought  he  had  a  right 
to  call  himself  after  an  isle. 

100  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACTI. 

CH.  Most  people  find  it  hard  to  fall  in  with  it ;  I  even 
yet  see  letters  addressed  .  .  . 

AR.  I  endure  it  easily  from  those  who  are  not  informed  ; 
but  you  .  .  . 

CH.  Be  it  so;  we  will  make  no  difficulty  about  that;  I 
will  take  care  to  accustom  my  lips  to  call  you  nothing 
else  than  M.  de  la  Souche. 

AR.  Farewell.  I  am  going  to  knock  here,  to  wish  them 
good  morning,  and  simply  to  say  that  I  have  come  back. 

CH.  (Aside).  Upon  my  word,  I  think  he  is  a  perfect 
fool. 

AR.  (Alone}.  He  is  a  little  touched  on  certain  points. 
Strange,  to  see  how  each  man  is  passionately  fond  of  his 
own  opinion.  (Knocks  at  his  door).  HulloaJ 

SCENE  II. — ARNOLPHE,  ALATN,  GEORGETTE,  within. 

AL.  Who  knocks  ? 

AR.  Open  the  door !  (Aside).  I  think  they  will  be 
very  glad  to  see  me  after  ten  days'  absence. 

AL.  Who  is  there  ? 

AR.  I. 

AL.  Georgette ! 

GEO.  Well! 

AL.  Open  the  door  there  ! 

GEO.  Go,  and  do  it  yourself! 

AL.  You  go  and  do  it! 

GEO.  Indeed,  I  shall  not  go. 

AL.  No  more  shall  I. 

AR.  Fine  compliments,  while  I  am  left  without.  Hul- 
loa!  Here,  please. 

GEO.  Who  knocks? 

AR.  Your  master. 

GEO.  Alain ! 

AL.  What! 

GEO.  It  is  the  master.     Open  the  door  quickly. 

AL.  Open  it  yourself. 

GEO.     I  am  blowing  the  fire. 

AL.  I  am  taking  care  that  the  sparrow  does  not  go  out, 
for  fear  of  the  cat. 

AR.  Whoever  of  you  two  does  not  open  the  door  shall 
have  no  food  for  four  days.  Ah  ! 

SCINK  in.]  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  IOI 

GEO.  Why  do  you  come  when  I  was  running  ? 

AL.  Why  should  you  more  than  I?  A  pretty  trick 
indeed ! 

GEO.   Stand  out  of  the  way. 

AL.  Stand  out  of  the  way  yourself. 

GEO.  I  wish  to  open  the  door. 

AL.  And  so  do  I. 

GEO.  You  shall  not. 

AL.  No  more  shall  you. 

GEO.  Nor  you. 

AR.  I  need  have  patience  here.  • 

AL.  (Entering).     There ;  it  is  I,  master. 

GEO.  (Entering).     Your  servant;  it  is  I. 

AL.  If  it  were  not  out  of  respect  for  master  here,  I  ... 

AR.  (Receiving  a  push  from  Alain).     Hang  it ! 

AL.  Pardon  me. 

AR.  Look  at  the  lout ! 

AL.  It  was  she  also,  master  .    .    . 

Ar.  Hold  your  tongues,  both  of  you.  Just  answer  me 
and  let  us  have  no  more  fooling.  Well,  Alain,  how  is 
every  one  here  ? 

AL.  Master,  we  ...  (Arnolphe  takes  off 'Alain' 's  hat}. 
Master,  we  ...  (Arnolphe  takes  it  off  again.}  Thank 
Heaven,  we  ... 

AR.  (  Taking  off  the  hat  a  third  time  and  flinging  it  on 
the  ground).  Who  taught  you,  impertinent  fool,  to  speak 
to  me  with  your  hat  on  your  head  ? 

AL.  You  are  right ;  I  am  wrong. 

AR.  (To  Al.}.  Ask  Agnes  to  come  down. 

SCENE  III. — ARNOLPHE,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  Was  she  sad  after  I  went  away  ? 

GEO.  Sad?     No. 

AR.  No? 

GEO.  Yes,  yes. 

AR.  Why,  then? 

GEO.  May  I  die  on  the  spot,  but  she  expected  to  see  you 
return  every  minute ;  and  we  never  heard  a  horse,  an  ass, 
or  a  mule  pass  by  without  her  thinking  it  was  you. 

IO2  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  I. 

SCENE  IV. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  Work  in  hand  ?  That  is  a  good  sign.  Well,  Agnes, 
I  have  returned.  Are  you  glad  of  it  ? 

Ac.  Yes,  sir,  Heaven  be  thanked. 

AR.  I  too  am  glad  to  see  you  again.  You  have  always 
been  well  ?  I  see  you  have. 

AG.  Except  for  the  fleas,  which  troubled  me  in  the  night. 

AR.  Ah,  you  shall  soon  have  some  one  to  drive  them 
away. 

AG.  I  shall  be  pleased  with  that. 

AR.  I  can  easily  imagine  it.     What  are  you  doing  there? 

AG.  I  am  making  myself  some  caps.  Your  night-shirts 
and  caps  are  finished. 

AR.  Ah,  that  is  all  right.  Well,  go  up  stairs.  Do  not 
tire  yourself.  I  will  soon  return,  and  talk  to  you  of  im- 
portant matters. 

SCENE  V. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

Heroines  of  the  day,  learned  ladies,  who  spout  tender 
and  fine  sentiments,  I  defy  in  a  breath  all  your  verses,  your 
novels,  your  letters,  your  love-letters,  your  entire  science, 
to  be  worth  as  much  as  this  virtuous  and  modest  ignorance. 
We  must  not  be  dazzled  by  riches ;  and  so  long  as  honour 
is  ... 

SCENE  VI. — HORACE,  ARNOLPHE. 

AR.  What  do  I  see?  Is  it  .  .  .  Yes.  I  am  mistaken. 
But  no.  No ;  it  is  himself.  Hor  .  .  . 

HOR.  Mr.  Arn  .    .    . 

AR.  Horace. 

HOR.  Arnolphe. 

AR.  Ah !  what  joy  indeed  !  And  how  long  have  you 
been  here  ? 

HOR.  Nine  days. 

AR.  Really. 

HOR.  I  went  straight  to  your  house,  but  in  vain. 

AR.  I  was  in  the  country 

HOR.  Yes,  you  had  been  gone  ten  days. 

AR.  Oh,  how  these  children  spring  up  in  a  few  years ! 
I  am  amazed  to  see  him  so  tall,  after  having  known  him 
no  higher  than  that. 

HOR.  You  see  how  it  is. 

SCBNKVI.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  103 

AR.  But  tell  me  how  is  Oronte,  your  father,  my  good 
and  dear  friend,  whom  I  esteem  and  revere  ?  What  is  he 
doing  ?  What  is  he  saying  ?  Is  he  still  hearty  ?  He 
knows  I  am  interested  in  all  that  affects  him  ;  we  have  not 
seen  one  another  these  four  years,  nor,  what  is  more, 
written  to  each  other,  I  think. 

HOR.  Mr.  Arnolphe,  he  is  still  more  cheerful  than  our- 
selves ;  I  had  a  letter  from  him  for  you.  But  he  has  since 
informed  me  in  another  letter,  that  he  is  coming  here, 
though  as  yet  I  do  not  know  the  reason  for  it.  Can  you 
tell  me  which  of  your  townsmen  has  returned  with  abund- 
ance of  wealth  earned  during  a  fourteen  years'  residence 
in  America? 

AR.  No.     Have  you  not  heard  his  name? 

HOR.  Enrique. 

AR.  No. 

HOR.  My  father  speaks  of  him  and  his  return,  as  though 
he  should  be  well  known  to  me ;  he  writes  that  they  are 
about  to  set  out  together,  on  an  affair  of  consequence,  of 
which  his  letter  says  nothing.  (Gives  Oronte' s  letter  to 
Arnolphe), 

AR.  I  shall  assuredly  be  very  glad  to  see  him,  and  shall 
do  my  best  to  entertain  him.  (After  reading  the  letter}. 
Friends  do  not  need  to  send  such  polite  letters,  and  all 
these  compliments  are  unnecessary.  Even  if  he  had  not 
taken  the  trouble  to  write  one  word,  you  might  have  freely 
disposed  of  all  I  have. 

HOR.  I  am  a  man  who  takes  people  at  their  word ;  and 
I  have  present  need  of  a  hundred  pistoles. 

AR.  Upon  my  word,  you  oblige  me  by  using  me  thus. 
I  rejoice  that  I  have  them  with  me.  Keep  the  purse  too. 

HOR.  I  must  .... 

AR.  Drop  this  ceremony.  Well,  how  do  you  like  this 
town  so  far? 

HOR.  Its  inhabitants  are  numerous,  its  buildings  splen- 
did, and  I  should  think  that  its  amusements  are  wonder- 
ful. 

AR.  Everyone  has  his  own  pleasures,  after  his  own 
fashion ;  but  for  those  whom  we  christen  our  gallants,  they 
have  in  this  town  just  what  pleases  them,  for  the  women 
are  born  flirts.  Dark  and  fair  are  amiably  disposed,  and 

IO4  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACTI. 

the  husbands  also  are  the  most  kind  in  the  world.  It  is  a 
pleasure  fit  for  a  King  ;  to  me  it  is  a  mere  comedy  to  see 
the  pranks  I  do.  Perhaps  you  have  already  smitten  some 
one.  Have  you  had  no  adventure  yet  ?  Men  of  your 
figure  can  do  more  than  men  who  have  money,  and  you 
are  cut  out  to  make  a  cuckold. 

HOR.  Not  to  deceive  you  as  to  the  simple  truth,  I  have 
had  a  certain-love  passage  in  these  parts,  and  friendship 
compels  me  to  tell  you  of  it. 

AR.  {Aside).  Good.  Here  is  another  queer  story  to 
set  down  in  my  pocket-book. 

HOR.  But  pray,  let  these  things  be  secret. 

AR.  Oh! 

HOR.  You  know  that  in  these  matters  a  secret  divulged 
destroys  our  expectations.  I  will  then  frankly  confess  to 
you  that  my  heart  has  been  smitten  in  this  place  by  a  cer- 
tain fair  maid.  My  little  attentions  were  at  once  so  suc- 
cessful that  I  obtained  a  pleasant  introduction  to  her ;  not 
to  boast  too  much,  nor  to  do  her  an  injustice,  affairs  go 
very  well  with  me. 

AR.  (Laughing).     Ha  !  ha  !     And  she  is  ... 

HOR.  (Pointing  to  the  house  of  Agnes}.  A  young  crea- 
ture living  in  yonder  house,  of  which  you  can  see  the  red 
walls  from  this.  Simple,  of  a  truth,  through  the  match- 
less folly  of  a  man  who  hides  her  from  all  the  world ;  but 
who,  amidst  the  ignorance  in  which  he  would  enslave  her, 
discloses  charms  that  throw  one  into  raptures,  as  well  as  a 
thoroughly  engaging  manner,  and  something  indescribably 
tender,  against  which  no  heart  is  proof.  But  perhaps  you 
have  seen  this  young  star  of  love,  adorned  by  so  many 
charms.  Agnes  is  her  name. 

AR.   (Aside'}.  Oh,  I  shall  burst  with  rage ! 

HOR.  As  for  the  man,  I  think  his  name  is  De  la  Zousse, 
or  Souche;  I  did  not  much  concern  myself  about  the 
name.  He  is  rich,  by  what  they  told  me,  but  not  one  of 
the  wisest  of  men ;  they  say  he  is  a  ridiculous  fellow.  Do 
you  not  know  him? 

AR.   {Aside).   It  is  a  bitter  pill  I  have  to  swallow! 

HOR.  Why,  you  do  not  speak  a  word. 

AR.  Oh  yes  .    .    .1  know  him. 

HOR.  He  is  a  fool,  is  he  not? 

SCBNB  vii.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  105 

AR.  Ugh! 

HOR.  What  do  you  say?  Ugh! — that  means  yes? 
Jealous,  I  suppose,  ridiculously  so?  Stupid?  I  see  he  is 
just  as  they  told  me.  To  be  brief,  the  lovely  Agnes  has 
succeeded  in  enslaving  me.  She  is  a  pretty  jewel,  to  tell 
you  honestly;  it  would  be  a  sin  if  such  a  rare  beauty  were 
left  in  the  power  of  this  eccentric  fellow.  For  me,  all  my 
efforts,  all  my  dearest  wishes,  are  to  make  her  mine  in 
spite  of  this  jealous  wretch;  and  the  money  which  I  so 
freely  borrow  of  you,  was  only  to  bring  this  laudable  en- 
terprise to  a  conclusion.  You  know  better  than  I,  that, 
whatever  we  undertake,  money  is  the  master-key  to  all 
great  plans,  and  that  this  sweet  metal,  which  distracts  so 
many,  promotes  our  triumphs,  in  love  as  in  war.  You 
seem  vexed?  Can  it  be  that  you  disapprove  of  my  de- 
sign? 

AR.  No ;  but  I  was  thinking   .    .    . 

HOR.  This  conversation  wearies  you?  Farewell.  I  will 
soon  pay  you  a  visit  to  return  thanks. 

AR.   (Thinking  himself  alone).  What!  must  it   .    .    . 

HOR.  (Returning).  Once  again,  pray  be  discreet;  do 
not  go  and  spread  my  secret  abroad. 

AR.   (Thir.king  himself  alone).  I  feel  within  my  soul  .    . 

HOR.  (Returning  again).  And  above  all  to  my  father, 
who  would  perhaps  get  enraged,  if  he  knew  of  it. 

AR.   (Expecting  Horace  to  return  again).  Oh !    . 

SCENE  VII. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

Oh,  what  I  have  endured  during  this  conversation! 
Never  was  trouble  of  mind  equal  to  mine !  With  what 
rashness  and  extreme  haste  did  he  come  to  tell  me  of  this 
affair !  Though  my  second  name  keeps  him  at  fault,  did 
ever  any  blunderer  run  on  so  furiously?  But,  having  en- 
dured so  much,  I  ought  to  have  refrained  until  I  had 
learned  that  which  I  have  reason  to  fear,  to  have  drawn 
out  his  foolish  chattering  to  the  end,  and  ascertained  their 
secret  understanding  completely.  Let  me  try  to  overtake 
him ;  I  fancy  he  is  not  far-off.  Let  me  worm  from  him 
the  whole  mystery.  I  tremble  for  the  misfortune  which 
may  befal  me ;  for  we  often  seek  more  than  we  wish  to 
find. 

106  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  11. 

ACT    II. 

SCENE  I. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

It  is  no  doubt  well,  when  I  think  of  it,  that  I  have  lost 
my  way,  and  failed  to  find  him;  for  after  all,  I  should  not 
have  been  able  entirely  to  conceal  from  his  eyes  the  over- 
whelming pang  of  my  heart.  The  grief  that  preys  upon 
me  would  have  broken  forth,  and  I  do  not  wish  him  to 
know  what  he  is  at  present  ignorant  of.  But  I  am  not  the 
man  to  put  up  with  this,  and  leave  a  free  field  for  this 
young  spark  to  pursue  his  design.  I  am  resolved  to  check 
his  progress,  and  learn,  without  delay,  how  far  they  un- 
derstand each  other.  My  honour  is  specially  involved  in 
this.  I  regard  her  already  as  my  wife.  She  cannot  have 
made  a  slip  without  covering  me  with  shame ;  and  what- 
ever she  does  will  be  placed  to  my  account.  Fatal  ab- 
sence !  Unfortunate  voyage !  (Knocks  at  his  door. 

SCENE  II. — ARNOLPHE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AL.  Ah,  master,  this  time  .    .    . 

AR.  Peace.  Come  here,  both  of  you.  That  way,  that 
way.  Come  along,  come,  I  tell  you. 

GEO.  Ah,  you  frighten  me ;  all  my  blood  runs  cold. 

AR.  Is  it  thus  you  have  obeyed  me  in  my  absence? 
You  have  both  combined  to  betray  me  ! 

GEO.  {Falling  at  Arnolphe1  s  feet}.  Oh  master,  do  not 
eat  me,  I  implore  you. 

AL.  (Aside).     I  am  sure  some  mad  dog  has  bitten  him. 

AR.  (Aside).  Ugh,  I  cannot  speak,  I  am  so  filled  with 
rage.  I  am  choking,  and  should  like  to  throw  off  my 
clothes  .  .  .  (To  Alain  and  Georgette).  You  cursed 
scoundrels,  you  have  permitted  a  man  to  come  .  .  .  (To 
Alain,  who  tries  to  escape).  You  would  run  away,  would 
you!  You  must  this  instant  .  .  .  (To  Georgette).  If 
you  move  .  .  .  Now  I  wish  you  to  tell  me  .  .  .  (To 
Alain).  Hi!  .  .  .  Yes,  I  wish  you  both  .  .  .  (Alain 
and  Georgette  rise,  and  again  try  to  escape)  .  .  .  Whoever 
of  you  moves,  upon  my  word,  I  shall  knock  him  down. 
How  came  that  man  into  my  house  ?  Now  speak.  Make 
haste,  quick,  directly,  instantly,  no  thinking  !  Will  you 
speak  ? 

SCBNK  111. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  107 

BOTH.  Oh,  oh ! 

GEO.   {Falling  at  his  knees).     My  heart  fails  me  ! 

AL.   (Falling  at  his  knees).     I  am  dying. 

ARN.  (Aside).  I  perspire  all  over.  Let  me  take  a 
breath.  I  must  fan  myself,  and  walk  about.  Could  I  be- 
lieve, when  I  saw  Horace  as  a  little  boy,  that  he  would 
grow  up  for  this  ?  Heaven,  how  I  suffer !  I  think  it 
would  be  better  that  I  should  gently  draw  from  Agnes' 
own  mouth  an  account  of  what  touches  me  so.  Let  me 
try  to  moderate  my  anger.  Patience,  my  heart;  softly, 
softly.  (To  Alain  and  Georgette).  Rise,  go  in,  and  bid 
Agnes  come  to  me  .  .  .  Stay,  her  surprise  would  be  less. 
They  will  go  and  tell  her  how  uneasy  I  am.  I  will  go 
myself  and  bring  her  out.  (To  Alain  and  Georgette). 
Wait  for  me  here. 

SCENE  III. — ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

GEO.  Heavens,  how  terrible  he  is  !  His  looks  made  me 
afraid — horribly  afraid.  Never  did  I  see  a  more  hideous 
Christian. 

AL.  This  gentleman  has  vexed  him ;  I  told  you  so. 

GEO.  But  what  on  earth  is  the  reason  that  he  so  strictly 
makes  us  keep  our  mistress  in  the  house  ?  Why  does  he 
wish  to  hide  her  from  all  the  world,  and  cannot  bear  to 
see  any  one  approach  her  ? 

AL.  Because  that  makes  him  jealous. 

GEO.  But  how  has  he  got  such  a  fancy  into  his  head? 

AL.  Because  .    .    .  because  he  is  jealous. 

GEO.  Yes ;  but  wherefore  is  he  so  ?  and  why  this  an- 
ger? 

AL.  Because  jealousy  .  .  .  understand  me,  Georgette, 
jealousy  is  a  thing  ...  a  thing  .  .  .  which  makes  peo- 
ple uneasy  .  .  .  and  which  drives  folk  all  round  the 
house.  I  am  going  to  give  you  an  example,  so  that  you 
may  understand  the  thing  better.  Tell  me,  is  it  not  true 
that,  when  you  have  your  broth  in  your  hand,  and  some 
hungry  person  comes  up  to  eat  it,  you  would  be  in  a  rage, 
and  be  ready  to  beat  him  ? 

GEO.  Yes,  I  understand  that. 

AL.  It  is  just  the  same.  Woman  is  in  fact  the  broth  of 
man  ;  and  when  a  man  sees  other  folks  sometimes,  trying 

I08  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVE6.  [ACT  11. 

to  dip  their  fingers  in  his  broth,  he  soon  displays  extreme 
anger  at  it. 

GEO.  Yes ;  but  why  does  not  every  one  do  the  same  ? 
Why  do  we  see  some  who  appear  to  be  pleased  when  their 
wives  are  with  handsome  fine  gentlemen  ? 

AL.  Because  every  one  has  not  the  greedy  love  which 
will  give  nothing  away. 

GEO.  If  I  am  not  blind,  I  see  him  returning. 

AL.  Your  eyes  are  good ;  it  is  he. 

GEO.  See  how  vexed  he  is. 

AL.  That  is  because  he  is  in  trouble. 

SCENE  IV. — ARNOLPHE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 
AR.  (Aside).  A  certain  Greek  told  the  Emperor 
Augustus,  as  an  axiom  as  useful  as  it  was  true,  that  when 
any  accident  puts  us  in  a  rage,  we  should,  first  of  all,  re- 
peat the  alphabet ;  so  that  in  the  interval  our  anger  may 
abate,  and  we  may  do  nothing  that  we  ought  not  to  do.11 
I  have  followed  his  advice  in  the  matter  of  Agnes ;  and  I 
have  brought  her  here  designedly,  under  pretence  of 
taking  a  walk,  so  that  the  suspicions  of  my  disordered 
mind  may  cunningly  lead  her  to  the  topic,  and,  by  sound- 
ing her  heart,  gently  find  out  the  truth. 

SCENE  V. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 
AR.   Come,    Agnes.     (To  Alain  and  Georgette).     Get 
you  in. 

SCENE  VI. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES. 

AR.  This  is  a  nice  walk. 

AG.  Very  nice. 

AR.  What  a  fine  day. 

AG.  Very  fine. 

AR.  What  news  ? 

AG.  The  kitten  is  dead. 

AR.  Pity  !     But  what  then  ?     We  are  all  mortal,  and 

11  The  story  is  in  Plutarch,  and  is  told  of  Athenodorus  from  Tarsus 
and  Augustus ;  only  the  stoic  philosopher  advised  the  Roman  emperor 
never  to  undertake  anything  until  he  had  said  twenty-four  letters  to  him- 
self. The  emperor  was  so  grateful  for  this  advice  that  he  kept  Athen- 
odorus another  year,  and  at  last  dismissed  him  with  a  rich  reward,  quoting 
a  line  from  Simonides,  imitated  by  Horace  in  the  second  ode  of  the  third 
book  :  There  is  a  certain  reward  even  for  silence. 

SCBNM  vi.j  THE   SCHOOL   FOR  WIVES.  IOQ 

every  one  is  for  himself.  Did  it  rain  when  I  was  in  the 
country  ? 

Ac.  No. 

AR.  Were  you  not  wearied  ? 

Ac.  I  am  never  wearied. 

AR.  What  did  you  do  then,  these  nine  or  ten  days  ? 

Ac.   Six  shirts,  I  think,  and  six  nightcaps  also. 

AR.  (After  musing).  The  world,  dear  Agnes,  is  a 
strange  place.  Observe  the  scandal/  and  how  everybody 
gossips.  Some  of  the  neighbours  have  told  me  that  an 
unknown  young  man  came  to  the  house  in  my  absence ; 
that  you  permitted  him  to  see  and  talk  to  you.  But  I  did 
not  believe  these  slandering  tongues,  and  I  offered  to  bet 
that  it  was  false  .  .  . 

Ac.  Oh,  Heaven,  do  not  bet ;  you  would  assuredly  lose. 

AR.  What !     It  is  true  that  a  man  .    .    . 

Ac.  Quite  true.  I  declare  to  you  that  he  was  scarcely 
ever  out  of  the  house. 

AR.  (Aside).  This  confession,  so  candidly  made,  at 
least  assures  me  of  her  simplicity.  {Aloud}.  But  I  think, 
Agnes,  if  my  memory  is  clear,  that  1  forbade  you  to  see 
any  one. 

Ac.  Yes;  but  you  do  not  know  why  I  saw  him;  you 
would  doubtless  have  done  as  much. 

AR.  Possibly;  but  tell  me  then  how  it  was. 

Ac.  It  is  very  wonderful,  and  hard  to  believe.  I  was 
on  the  balcony,  working  in  the  open  air,  when  I  saw  a 
handsome  young  man  passing  close  to  me  under  the  trees, 
who,  seeing  me  look  at  him,  immediately  bowed  very 
respectfully.  I,  not  to  be  rude,  made  him  a  curtsey.  Sud- 
denly he  made  another  bow;  I  quickly  made  another 
curtsey;  and  when  he  repeated  it  for  the  third  time,  I 
answered  it  directly  with  a  third  curtsey.  He  went  on, 
returned,  went  past  again,  and  each  time  made  me  an- 
other bow.  And  I,  who  was  looking  earnestly  at  all  these 
acts  of  politeness,  returned  him  as  many  curtseys ;  so  that 
if  night  had  not  fallen  just  then,  I  should  have  kept  on 
continually  in  that  way;  not  wishing  to  yield,  and  have 
the  vexation  of  his  thinking  me  less  civil  than  himself. 

AR.  Very  good. 

Ac.  Next  day,  being  at  the  door,  an  old  woman  ac- 

110  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACTH. 

costed  me,  and  said  to  me  something  like  this;  ie  My  child, 
may  good  Heaven  bless  you,  and  keep  you  long  in  all 
your  beauty.  It  did  not  make  you  such  a  lovely  creature 
to  abuse  its  gifts ;  you  must  know  that  you  have  wounded 
a  heart  which  to-day  is  driven  to  complain." 

AR.  (Aside).  Oh,  tool  of  Satan  !  damnable  wretch ! 

Ac.  "Have  I  wounded  any  one?"  I  answered,  quite 
astonished.  "Yes,"  she  said,  "wounded;  you  have  in- 
deed wounded  a  gentleman.  It  is  him  you  saw  yesterday 
from  the  balcony."  "Alas!"  said  I,  "what  could  have 
been  the  cause?  Did  I,  without  thinking,  let  anything 
fall  on  him?"  "No,"  replied  she;  "it  was  your  eyes 
which  gave  the  fatal  blow;  from  their  glances  came  all 
his  injury."  "Alas!  good  Heaven,"  said  I,  "I  am  more 
than  ever  surprised.  Do  my  eyes  contain  something 
bad,  that  they  can  give  it  to  other  people?"  "Yes," 
cried  she,  "your  eyes,  my  girl,  have  a  poison  to  hurt 
withal,  of  which  you  know  nothing.  In  a  word,  the  poor 
fellow  pines  away;  and  if,"  continued  the  charitable  old 
woman,  "  your  cruelty  refuses  him  assistance,  it  is  likely 
he  shall  be  carried  to  his  grave  in  a  couple  of  days." 
"Bless  me!  "  said  I,  "I  would  be  very  sorry  for  that;  but 
what  assistance  does  he  require  of  me?"  "My  child," 
said  she,  "he  requests  only  the  happiness  of  seeing  and 
conversing  with  you.  Your  eyes  alone  can  prevent  his 
ruin,  and  cure  the  disease  they  have  caused."  "Oh! 
gladly,"  said  I;  "and,  since  it  is  so,  he  may  come  to  see 
me  here  as  often  as  he  likes." 

AR.  (Aside).  O  cursed  witch !  poisoner  of  souls !  may 
hell  reward  your  charitable  tricks ! 

Ac.  That  is  how  he  came  to  see  me,  and  got  cured. 
Now  tell  me,  frankly,  if  I  was  not  right?  And  could  I, 
after  all,  have  the  conscience  to  let  him  die  for  lack  of 
aid? — I,  who  feel  so  much  pity  for  suffering  people,  and 
cannot  see  a  chicken  die  without  weeping ! 

AR.  (Aside).  All  this  comes  only  from  an  innocent 
soul;  I  blame  my  imprudent  absence  for  it,  which  left 
this  kindliness  of  heart  without  a  protector,  exposed  to 
the  wiles  of  artful  seducers.  I  fear  that  the  rascal,  in  his 
bold  passion,  has  carried  the  matter  somewhat  beyond  a 
joke. 

v,.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  I  I  I 

Ac.  What  ails  you?  I  think  you  are  a  little  angry. 
Was  there  anything  wrong  in  what  I  have  told  you? 

AR.  No.  But  tell  me  what  followed,  and  how  the 
young  man  behaved  during  his  visits. 

Ac.  Alas !  if  you  but  knew  how  delighted  he  was ;  how 
he  got  rid  of  his  illness  as  soon  as  I  saw  him,  the  present  lie 
made  me  of  a  lovely  casket,  and  the  money  which  Alain 
and  Georgette  have  had  from  him,  you  would  no  doubt 
love  him,  and  say,  as  we  say  .  .  . 

AR.  Yes.  But  what  did  he  do  when  he  was  alone  with  you  ? 

Ac.  He  swore  that  he  loved  me  with  an  unequalled 
passion,  and  said  the  prettiest  words  possible,  things  that 
nothing  ever  can  equal,  the  sweetness  of  which  charms  me 
whenever  I  hear  him  speak,  and  moves  I  know  not  what 
within  me. 

AR.  (Aside).  Oh  !  sad  inquiry  into  a  fatal  mystery,  in 
which  the  inquirer  alone  suffers  all  the  pain.  (Aloud}. 
Besides  all  these  speeches,  all  these  pretty  compliments, 
did  he  not  also  bestow  a  few  caresses  on  you  ? 

Ac.  Oh,  so  many !  He  took  my  hands  and  my  arms, 
and  was  never  tired  of  kissing  them. 

AR.  Agnes,  did  he  take  nothing  else  from  you  ?  (Seeing 
her  confused).  Ugh  ! 

Ac.  Why,  he  ... 

AR.  What? 

Ac.  Took  .    .    . 

AR.  Ugh! 

AG.  The  .    .    . 

AR.  Well? 

Ac.  I  dare  not  tell  you;  you  will  perhaps  be  angry 
with  me. 

AR.  No. 

Ac.  Yes,  but  you  will. 

AR.  Good  Heavens !  no. 

Ac.  Swear  on  your  word. 

AR.  On  my  word,  then. 

Ac.  He  took  my  .    .  .  You  will  be  in  a  passion. 

AR.  No. 

Ac.  Yes. 

AR.  No,  no,  no,  no !  What  the  devil  is  this  mystery  ? 
What  did  he  take  from  you  ? 

112  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  11 

Ac.  He  ... 

AR.  (Aside}.  I  am  suffering  the  torments  of  the 
damned. 

Ac.  He  took  away  from  me  the*  ribbon  you  gave  me. 
To  tell  you  the  truth,  I  could  not  prevent  him. 

AR.  {Drawing  his  breath}.  Oh !  let  the  ribbon  go. 
But  I  want  to  know  if  he  did  nothing  to  you  but  kiss 
your  arms. 

Ac.  Why !  do  people  do  other  things  ? 

AR.  Not  at  all.  But,  to  cure  the  disorder  which  lie 
said  had  seized  him,  did  he  not  ask  you  for  any  other 
remedy  ? 

Ac.  No.  You  may  judge  that  I  would  have  granted 
him  anything  to  do  him  good,  if  he  had  asked  for  it. 

AR.  (Aside).  By  the  kindness  of  Heaven,  I  am  cheaply 
out  of  it !  May  I  be  blessed  if  I  fall  into  such  a  mistake 
again  !  (Aloud).  Pooh !  That  is  the  result  of  your  in- 
nocence, Agnes.  I  shall  say  no  more  about  it.  What  is 
done  is  done.  I  know  that,  by  flattering  you,  the  gallant 
only  wishes  to  deceive  you,  and  to  laugh  at  you  afterwards. 

AG.  Oh,  no !  He  told  me  so  more  than  a  score  of 
times. 

AR.  Ah  !  you  do  not  know  that  he  is  not  to  be  be- 
lieved. But,  now,  learn  that  to  accept  caskets,  and  to 
listen  to  the  nonsense  of  these  handsome  fops,13  to  allow 
them  languidly  to  kiss  your  hands  and  charm  your  heart, 
is  a  mortal  sin,  and  one  of  the  greatest  that  can  be  com- 
mitted. 

Ac.   A  sin,  do  you  say?     And  why,  pray? 

AR.  Why?  The  reason  is  the  absolute  law  that  Heaven 
is  incensed  by  such  doings. 

Ac.  Incensed  !  But  why  should  it  be  incensed  ?  Ah, 
it  is  so  sweet  and  agreeable  !  How  strange  is  the  joy  one 
feels  from  all  this ;  up  to  this  time  I  was  ignorant  of  these 
things. 

AR.  Yes,  all  these  tender  passages,  these  pretty  speeches 
and  sweet  caresses,  are  a  great  pleasure ;  but  they  must 
be  enjoyed  in  an  honest  manner,  and  their  sin  should  be 
taken  away  by  marriage. 

11  The  original  has  beaux  blondint.     Seepage  264,  note  7. 

SCBNB  vi.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOK   WIVES.  113 

Ac.  Is  it  no  longer  a  sin  when  one  is  married  ? 

AR.  No. 

Ac.  Then  please  marry  me  quickly. 

AR.  If  you  wish  it,  I  wish  it  also;  I  have  returned 
hither  for  the  purpose  of  marrying  you. 

AG.  Is  that  possible  ? 

AR.  Yes. 

Ac.  How  happy  you  will  make  me  ! 

AR.  Yes,  I  have  no  doubt  that  marriage  will  please  you. 

AG.  Then  we  two  shall  .... 

AR.  Nothing  is  more  certain. 

AG.  How  I  shall  caress  you,  if  this  comes  to  pass. 

AR.  Ha  !  And  I  shall  do  the  same  to  you. 

AG.  I  can  never  tell  when  people  are  jesting.  Do  you 
speak  seriously  ? 

AR.  Yes,  you  might  see  that  I  do. 

Ac.  We  are  to  be  married  ? 

AR.  Yes. 

Ac.  But  when  ? 

AR.  This  very  evening. 

Ac.  (Laughing).  This  very  evening? 

AR.  This  very  evening.     Does  that  make  you  laugh  ? 

AG.  Yes. 

AR.  To  see  you  happy  is  my  desire. 

AG.  Oh,  how  greatly  I  am  obliged  to  you,  and  what 
satisfaction  I  shall  have  with  him  ! 

AR.  With  whom  ? 

Ac.  With  ....  him  there  .... 

AR.  Him  there  !  I  am  not  speaking  of  him  there. 
You  are  a  little  quick  in  selecting  a  husband.  In  a  word, 
it  is  some  one  else  whom  I  have  ready  for  you.  And  as 
for  that  gentleman,  I  require,  by  your  leave  (though  the 
illness  of  which  he  accuses  you  should  be  the  death  of 
him),  that  henceforth  you  break  off  all  intercourse  with 
him  ;  that,  when  he  comes  to  the  house,  you  will,  by  way 
of  compliment,  just  shut  the  door  in  his  face;  throw  a 
stone  out  of  the  window  at  him  when  he  knocks,  and 
oblige  him  in  good  earnest  never  to  appear  again.  Do 
you  hear  me,  Agnes  ?  I  shall  observe  your  behaviour, 
concealed  in  a  recess. 

AG.  Oh  dear,  he  is  so  handsome  !     He  is  .... 

114  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  m. 

AR.  Ha  !     How  you  are  talking  ! 
AG.  I  shall  not  have  the  heart  .... 
AR.  No  more  chatter.     Go  up  stairs 
AG.  But  surely !  Will  you  .... 

AR.  Enough.  I  am  master ;  I  command ;  do  you  go 
and  obey. 

ACT  III. 
SCENE  I. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  Yes,  all  has  gone  well ;  my  joy  is  extreme.  You 
have  obeyed  my  orders  to  perfection,  and  brought  the  fair 
seducer1*  to  utter  confusion.  See  what  it  is  to  have  a  wise 
counsellor.  Your  innocence,  Agnes,  had  been  betrayed  ; 
look  what  you  had  been  brought  to,  before  you  had  been 
aware  of  it.  You  were  treading,  deprived  of  my  warn- 
ings, right-down  the  broad  path  to  hell  and  perdition. 
The  way  of  all  these  young  fops  is  but  too  well  known. 
They  have  their  fine  rolls,  plenty  of  ribbons  and  plumes, 
big  wigs,  good  teeth,  a  smooth  address ;  but  I  tell  you 
they  have  the  cloven  foot  beneath ;  and  they  are  very 
devils,  whose  corrupt  appetites  try  to  prey  upon  the  hon- 
our of  women.  This  time,  however,  thanks  to  the  care 
that  has  been  taken,  you  have  escaped  with  your  virtue. 
The  style  in  which  I  saw  you  throw  that  stone  at  him, 
which  has  dashed  the  hopes  of  all  his  plans,  still  more  de- 
termines me  not  to  delay  the  marriage  for  which  I  told  you 
to  prepare.  But,  before  all,  it  is  well  I  should  speak  a  few 
words  with  you  which  may  be  salutary.  (To  Georgette 
and  Alain).  Bring  out  a  chair  in  the  open  air.  As  for 
you,  if  you  ever  .  .  . 

GEO.  We  shall  take  care  to  remember  all  your  instruc- 
tions, that  other  gentleman  imposed  on  us,  but  .  .  . 

AL.  If  he  ever  gets  in  here,  may  I  never  drink  another 
drop.  Besides  he  is  a  fool.  He  gave  us  two  gold  crowns 
the  other  day,  which  were  under  weight.15 

AR.  Well,  get  what  I  ordered  for  supper ;  and  as  to  the 

u  The  original  has  blondin  seducteur.     See  page  264,  and  note  7. 

15  The  clipping  of  coin  was  very  common  at  that  time.  The  golden 
crown  was  then  worth  five  livres  four  sous,  and  would  be  now  of  the 
value  of  ten  francs  and  a-half. 

SCBNHII.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  115 

contract  I  spoke  of,  let  one  of  you  fetch  the  notary  who 
lives  at  the  corner  of  the  market-place. 

SCENE  II. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES. 

AR.  (Seatect).  Agnes,  put  your  work  down,  and  listen 
to  me.  Raise  your  head  a  little,  and  turn  your  face  round. 
(Putting  his  finger  on  his  forehead}.  There,  look  at  me 
here  while  I  speak,  and  take  good  note  of  even  the  small- 
est word.  I  am  going  to  wed  you,  Agnes ;  you  ought  to 
bless  your  stars  a  hundred  times  a  day,  to  think  of  your 
former  low  estate,  and  at  the  same  time,  to  wonder  at  my 
goodness  in  raising  you  from  a  poor  country  girl  to  the 
honourable  rank  of  a  citizen's  wife ;  to  enjoy  the  bed  and 
the  embraces  of  a  man  who  has  shunned  all  such  trammels, 
and  whose  heart  has  refused  to  a  score  of  women,  well 
fitted  to  please,  the  honour  which  he  intends  to  confer  on 
you.  You  must  always  keep  in  mind,  I  say,  how  insigni- 
ficant you  would  be  without  this  glorious  alliance,  in 
order  that  the  picture  may  teach  you  the  better  to  merit 
the  condition  in  which  I  shall  place  you,  and  make  you 
always  know  yourself,  so  that  I  may  never  repent  of  what 
I  am  doing.  Marriage,  Agnes,  is  no  joke.  The  posi- 
tion of  a  wife  calls  for  strict  duties;  I  do  not  mean  to 
exalt  you  to  that  condition,  in  order  that  you  may  be 
free  and  take  your  ease.  Your  sex  is  formed  for  depen- 
dence. Omnipotence  goes  with  the  beard.  Though 
there  are  two  halves  in  the  connection,  yet  these  two 
halves  are  by  no  means  equal.  The  one  half  is  supreme, 
the  other  subordinate:  the  one  is  all  submission  to  the 
other  which  rules;  the  obedience  which  the  well  dis- 
ciplined soldier  shows  to  his  leader,  the  servant  to  his 
master,  a  child  to  his  parent,  the  lowest  rnonk  to  his 
superior,  is  far  below  the  docility,  obedience,  humility, 
and  profound  respect  due  from  the  wife  to  her  husband, 
her  chief,  her  lord,  and  her  master.  When  he  looks  at 
her  gravely,  her  duty  is  at  once  to  lower  her  eyes,  never 
daring  to  look  him  in  the  face,  until  he  chooses  to  favour 
her  with  a  tender  glance.  Our  women  now-a-days  do  not 
understand  this ;  but  do  not  be  spoiled  by  the  example  of 
others.  Take  care  not  to  imitate  those  miserable  flirts 
whose  pranks  are  talked  of  all  over  the  city;  and  do  not 

1 1 6  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  in. 

let  the  evil  one  tempt  you,  that  is,  do  not  listen  to  any 
young  coxcomb.  Remember,  Agnes,  that,  in  making  you 
part  of  my  self,  I  give  my  honour  into  your  hands,  which 
honour  is  fragile,  and  easily  damaged;  that  it  will  not  do 
to  trifle  in  such  a  matter,  and  that  there  are  boiling  caul- 
drons in  hell,  into  which  wives  who  live  wickedly  are 
thrown  for  evermore.  I  am  not  telling  you  a  parcel  of 
stories;  you  ought  to  let  these  lessons  sink  into  your 
heart.  If  you  practice  them  sincerely,  and  take  care  not 
to  flirt,  your  soul  will  ever  be  white  and  spotless  as  a  lily ; 
but  if  you  stain  your  honour,  it  will  become  as  black  as 
coal.  You  will  seem  hideous  to  all,  and  one  day  you 
will  become  the  devil's  own  property,  and  boil  in  hell  to 
all  eternity — from  which  may  the  goodness  of  Heaven 
defend  you  !  Make  a  curtsey.  As  a  novice  in  a  convent 
ought  to  know  her  duties  by  heart,  so  it  ought  to  be  on 
getting  married :  here  in  my  pocket  I  have  an  important 
document  which  will  teach  you  the  duty  of  a  wife.  I  do 
not  know  the  author,  but  it  is  some  good  soul  or  other ; 
and  I  desire  that  this  shall  be  your  only  study.  (Rises). 
Stay.  Let  me  see  if  you  can  read  it  fairly. 

Ac.  '  (Reads),  "  The  Maxims  of  Marriage;  or  the 
Duties  of  a  Wife;  together  with  her  Daily  Exercise. 

"  First  Maxim. 

"She  who  is  honourably  wed  should  remember,  not- 
withstanding the  fashion  now-a-days,  that  the  man  who 
marries  does  not  take  a  wife  for  anyone  but  himself." 

AR.  I  shall  explain  what  that  means,  but  at  present  let 
us  only  read. 

Ac.     (  Continues) — 

' '  Second  Maxim. 

"  She  ought  not  to  bedeck  herself  more  than  her  hus- 
band likes.  The  care  of  her  beauty  concerns  him  alone ; 
and  if  others  think  her  plain,  that  must  go  for  nothing. 

"  Third  Maxim. 

"  Far  from  her  be  the  study  of  ogling,  washes,  paints, 
pomatums,  and  the  thousand  preparations  for  a  good  com- 
plexion. These  are  ever  fatal  poisons  to  honour ;  and  the 

SCBNK  ii.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  I  I  7 

pains  bestowed  to  look  beautiful  are  seldom  taken  for  a 
husband. 

"Fourth  Maxim. 

"  When  she  goes  out,  she  should  conceal  the  glances  of 
her  eyes  beneath  her  hood,  as  honour  requires  ;  for  in 
order  to  please  her  husband  rightly,  she  should  please 
none  else. 

"Fifth  Maxim. 

"It  is  fit  that  she  receive  none  but  those  who  visit  her 
husband.  The  gallants  that  have  no  business  but  with  the 
wife,  are  not  agreeable  to  the  husband. 

"Sixth  Maxim. 

"  She  must  firmly  refuse  presents  from  men,  for  in  these 
days  nothing  is  given  for  nothing. 

"Seventh  Maxim. 

"Amongst  her  furniture,  however  she  dislikes  it,  there 
must  be  neither  writing-desk,  ink,  paper,  nor  pens.  Ac- 
cording to  all  good  rules  everything  written  in  the  house 
should  be  written  by  the  husband. 

"  Eighth  Maxim. 

"  Those  disorderly  meetings,  called  social  gatherings, 
ever  corrupt  the  minds  of  women.  It  is  good  policy  to 
forbid  them;  for  there  they  conspire  against  the  poor 
husbands. 

"Ninth  Maxim. 

"  Every  woman  who  wishes  to  preserve  her  honour 
should  abstain  from  gambling  as  a  plague  ;  for  play  is  very 
seductive,  and  often  drives  a  woman  to  put  down  her  last 
stake. 

"  Tenth  Maxim. 

"She  must  not  venture  on  public  promenades  nor  pic- 
nics ;  for  wise  men  are  of  opinion  that  it  is  always  the  hus- 
band who  pays  for  such  treats. 

"Eleventh  Maxim   .    .    ." 
AR.  You  shall  finish  it  by  yourself;  and,  by  and  by,  I 

Il8  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACT  m. 

shall  explain  these  things  to  you  properly,  word  for  word. 
I  bethink  myself  of  an  engagement.  I  have  but  one  word 
to  say,  and  I  shall  not  stay  long.  Go  in  again,  and  take 
special  care  of  this  volume.  If  the  notary  comes,  let  him 
wait  for  me  a  short  time. 

SCENE  III. — ARNOLPHE,  alone, 

I  cannot  do  better  than  make  her  my  wife.  I  shall  be 
able  to  mould  her  as  I  please ;  she  is  like  a  bit  of  wax  in 
my  hands,  and  I  can  give  her  what  shape  I  like.  She  was 
near  being  wiled  away  from  me  in  my  absence  through  her 
excess  of  simplicity;  but,  to  say  the  truth,  it  is  better  that 
a  wife  should  err  on  that  side.  The  cure  for  these  faults 
is  easy ;  every  simple  person  is  docile ;  and  if  she  is  led 
out  of  the  right  way,  a  couple  of  words  will  instantly  bring 
her  back  again.  But  a  clever  woman  is  quite  another  sort 
of  animal.  Our  lot  depends  only  on  her  judgment ;  nought 
can  divert  her  from  what  she  is  set  on,  and  our  teaching  in 
such  a  case  is  futile.  Her  wit  avails  her  to  ridicule  our 
maxims,  often  to  turn  her  vices  into  virtues,  and  to  find 
means  to  cheat  the  ablest,  so  as  to  compass  her  own  ends. 
We  labour  in  vain  to  parry  the  blow ;  a  clever  woman  is  a 
devil  at  intrigue,  and  when  her  whim  has  mutely  passed 
sentence  on  our  honour,  we  must  knock  under.  Many 
good  fellows  could  tell  as  much.  But  my  blundering 
friend  shall  have  no  cause  to  laugh ;  he  has  reaped  the  har- 
vest of  his  gossip.  This  is  the  general  fault  of  Frenchmen. 
When  they  have  a  love  adventure,  secrecy  bores  them,  and 
silly  vanity  has  so  many  charms  for  them,  that  they  would 
rather  hang  themselves  than  hold  their  tongues.  Ah !  wo- 
men are  an  easy  prey  to  Satan  when  they  go  and  choose 
such  addle-pates !  And  when  .  .  .  But  here  he  is  ... 
I  must  dissemble,  and  find  out  how  he  has  been  mortified. 

SCENE  IV. — HORACE,  ARNOLPHE. 

HOR.  I  am  come  from  your  house.  Fate  seems  resolved 
that  I  shall  never  meet  you  there.  But  I  shall  go  so  often 
that  some  time  or  other  .  .  . 

AR.  Bah,  for  goodness  sake,  do  not  let  us  begin  these 
idle  compliments.  Nothing  vexes  me  like  ceremony ;  and, 

SCHNK  iv.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  HQ 

if  I  could  have  my  way,  it  should  be  abolished.  It  is  a 
wretched  custom,  and  most  people  foolishly  waste  two- 
thirds  of  their  time  on  it.  Let  us  put  on  our  hat,  without 
more  ado.  (Puts  on  his  hat).  Well,  how  about  your  love 
affair?  May  I  know,  Mr.  Horace,  how  it  goes?  I  was 
diverted  for  a  while  by  some  business  that  came  into  my 
head;  but  since  then  I  have  been  thinking  of  it.  I  ad- 
mire the  rapidity  of  your  commencement,  and  am  inte- 
rested in  the  issue. 

HOR.  Indeed,  since  I  confided  in  you,  my  love  has  been 
unfortunate. 

AR.  Ay!     How  so? 

HOR.  Cruel  fate  has  brought  her  governor  back  from 
the  country. 

AR.  What  bad  luck ! 

HOR.  Moreover,  to  my  great  sorrow,  he  has  discovered 
what  has  passed  in  private  between  us. 

AR.  How  the  deuce  could  he  discover  this  affair  so  soon  ? 

HOR.  I  do  not  know;  but  it  certainly  is  so.  I  meant,  at 
the  usual  hour,  to  pay  a  short  visit  to  my  young  charmer, 
when,  with  altered  voice  and  looks,  her  two  servants  barred 
my  entrance,  and  somewhat  rudely  shut  the  door  in  my 
face,  saying  "  Begone,  you  bring  us  into  trouble  !  " 

AR.  The  door  in  your  face  ! 

HOR.  In  my  face. 

AR.  That  was  rather  hard. 

HOR.  I  wished  to  speak  to  them  through  the  door ;  but 
to  all  I  said  their  only  answer  was,  "  You  shan't  come  in; 
master  has  forbidden  it." 

AR.  Did  they  not  open  the  door  then  ? 

Hor.  No.  And  Agnes  from  the  window  made  me  more 
certain  as  to  her  master's  return,  by  bidding  me  begone 
in  a  very  angry  tone,  and  flinging  a  stone  at  me  into  the 
bargain. 

AR.  What,  a  stone  ? 

HOR.  Not  a  small  one  either;  that  was  how  she  re- 
warded my  visit  with  her  own  hands. 

AR.  The  devil !  These  are  no  trifles.  Your  affair 
seems  to  me  in  a  bad  way. 

HOR.  True,  I  am  in  a  quandary  through  this  unlucky 
return. 

120  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  HI. 

AR.  Really  I  am  sorry  for  you ;  I  declare  I  am. 

HOR.  This  fellow  mars  all. 

AR.  Yes ;  but  that  is  nothing.  You  will  find  a  way  to 
recover  yourself. 

HOR.  I  must  try  by  some  device  to  baffle  the  strict 
watch  of  this  jealous  fellow. 

AR.  That  will  be  easy :  after  all  the  girl  loves  you. 

HOR.  Doubtless. 

AR.  You  will  compass  your  end. 

HOR.  I  hope  so. 

AR.  The  stone  has  put  you  out,  but  you  cannot  wonder 
at  it. 

HOR.  True ;  and  I  understood  in  a  moment  that  my 
rival  was  there,  and  that  he  was  directing  all  without  being 
seen.  But  what  surprised  me,  and  will  surprise  you,  is 
another  incident  I  am  going  to  tell  you  of;  a  bold  stroke 
of  this  lovely  girl,  which  one  could  not  have  expected  from 
her  simplicity.  Love,  it  must  be  allowed,  is.  an  able 
master ;  he  teaches*  us  to  be  what  we  never  were  before ; 
a  complete  change  in  our  manners-  is  often  the  work  of  a 
moment  under  his  tuition.  He  breaks  through  the  impedi- 
ments in  our  nature,  and  his  sudden  feats  have  the  air  of 
miracles.  In  an  instant  he  makes  the  miser  liberal,  a 
coward  brave,  a  churl  polite.  He  renders  the  dullest  soul 
fit  for  anything,  and  gives  wit  to  the  most  simple.  Yes, 
this  last  miracle  is  surprising  in  Agnes ;  for,  blurting  out 
these  very  words:  "Begone,  I  am  resolved  never  to  re- 
ceive your  visits.  I  know  all  you  would  say,  and  there  is 
my  answer!  " — this  stone,  or  pebble,  at  which  you  are 
surprised,  fell  at  my  feet,  with  a  letter.  I  greatly  admire 
this  note,  chiming  in  with  the  significance  of  her  words, 
and  the  casting  of  the  stone.  Are  you  not  surprised  by 
such  an  action  as  this  ?  Does  not  love  know  how  to 
sharpen  the  understanding  ?  And  can  it  be  denied  that 
his  ardent  flames  have  marvellous  effects  on  the  heart  ? 
What  say  you  of  the  trick,  and  of  the  letter?  Ah,  do  you 
not  admire  her  dunning  contrivance  ?  Is  it  not  amusing 
to  see  what  a  part  my  jealous  rival  has  played  in  all  this 
game?  Say  .  .  . 

AR.  Ay,  very  amusing. 

HOR.  Laugh  at  it,  then.  (Arnalphc  forces  a  laugh.    This 

SCBNK  IV.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  I  2  I 

fellow,  garrisoned  against  my  passion,  who  shuts  himself 
up  in  his  house,  and  seems  provided  with  stones,  as  though 
I  were  preparing  to  enter  by  storm,  who,  in  his  ridiculous 
terror,  encourages  all  his  household  to  drive  me  away,  is 
tricked  before  his  very  eyes  by  her  whom  he  would  keep 
in  the  utmost  ignorance  !  For  my  part,  I  confess  that, 
although  his  return  throws  my  love  affair  into  disorder,  I 
think  all  this  so  exceedingly  comical,  that  I  cannot  forbear 
laughing  at  it  whenever  it  comes  into  my  head.  It  seems 
to  me  that  you  do  not  laugh  at  it  half  enough. 

AR.  (  With  a  forced  laugh).  I  beg  pardon ;  I  laugh  at 
it  as  much  as  I  can. 

HOR.  But  I  must  shew  you  her  letter,  for  friendship's 
sake.  Her  hand  knew  how  to  set  down  all  that  her  heart 
felt ;  but  in  such  touching  terms,  so  kind,  so  innocently 
tender,  so  ingenuous — in  a  word,  just  as  an  unaffected 
nature  confesses  its  first  attack  of  love. 

AR.  (Softly).  This  is  the  use  you  make  of  writing,  you 
hussey.  It  was  against  my  wish  you  ever  learned  it. 

HOR.  (Reads).  "I  wish  to  write  to  you,  but  I  am  at  a 
loss  how  to  begin.  I  have  some  thoughts  which  I  should 
like  you  lo  know;  but  I  do  not  know  how  to  tell  them  to  you^ 
and  I  mistrust  my  own  words.  As  I  begin  to  feel  that  I 
have  been  always  kept  in  ignorance,  I  fear  to  say  something 
which  is  not -right,  and  to  express  more  than  I  ought.  In 
fact  I  do  not  know  what  you  have  done  to  me;  but  I  feel 
that  I  am  desperately  vexed  at  what  I  am  made  to  do  against 
you,  that  it  will  be  the  hardest  thing  in  the  world  for  me  to 
do  without  you,  and  that  I  should  be  very  glad  to  be  with  you. 
Perhaps  it  is  wrong  to  say  that,  but  the  truth  is  I  cannot 
help  saying  it,  and  I  wish  it  could  be  brought  about  with- 
out harm.  I  am  assured  that  all  young  men  are  de- 
ceivers, that  they  must  not  be  listened  to,  and  that  all  you 
told  me  was  but  to  deceive  me;  but  I  assure  you  I  have  not 
yet  come  to  believe  that  of  you,  and  I  am  so  touched  by  your 
words  that  I  could  not  believe  them  false.  Tell  me  frankly 
if  they  be  :  for,  to  be  brief,  as  I  am  without  an  evil  thought, 
you  would  be  extremely  wicked  to  deceive  me,  and  I  think 
I  should  die  of  vexation  at  such  a  thing.1' 

AR.  {Aside').     Ah,  the  cat  I 

HOR.  What  is  wrong  ? 

122  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  HI. 

AR.  Wrong  ?     Nothing  !     I  was  only  coughing. 

HOR.  Have  you  ever  heard  a  more  tender  expression  ? 
In  spite  of  the  cursed  endeavours  of  unreasonable  power, 
could  you  imagine  a  more  genuine  nature  ?  Is  it  not  be- 
yond doubt  a  terrible  crime  villainously  to  mar  such  an 
admirable  spirit,  to  try  to  stifle  this  bright  soul  in  igno- 
rance and  stupidity  ?  Love  has  begun  to  tear  away  the 
veil,  and  if,  thanks  to  some  lucky  star,  I  can  deal,  as  I 
hope,  with  this  sheer  animal,  this  wretch,  this  hang-dog, 
this  scoundrel,  this  brute  .  .  . 

AR.  Good-bye. 

HOR.  Why  are  you  in  such  a  hurry  ? 

AR.  It  just  occurs  to  me  that  I  have  a  pressing  engage- 
ment. 

HOR.  But  do  you  not  know  anyone,  for  you  live  close 
by,  who  could  get  access  to  this  house  ?  I  am  open  with 
you,  and  it  is  the  usual  thing  for*  friends  to  help  each 
other  in  these  cases.  I  have  no  one  there  now  except 
people  who  watch  me ;  maid  and  man,  as  I  just  experi- 
enced, would  not  cease  their  rudeness  and  listen  to  me, 
do  what  I  would.  I  had  for  some  time  in  my  interest  an 
old  woman  of  remarkable  shrewdness  ;  in  fact  more  than 
human.  She  served  me  well  in  the  beginning ;  but  the 
poor  woman  died  four  days  ago.  Can,  you  not  devise 
some  plan  for  me  ? 

AR.  No,  really.  You  will  easily  find  some  one  with- 
out me. 

HOR.  Good-by  then.  You  see  what  confidence  I  put 
in  you. 

SCENE  V. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

How  I  am  obliged  to  suffer  before  him  !  How  hard  it 
is  to  conceal  my  gnawing  pain  !  What  !  Such  ready  wit 
in  a  simpleton  ?  The  traitress  has  pretended  to  be  so  to 
my  face,  or  the  devil  has  breathed  this  cunning  into  her 
heart.  But  now  that  cursed  letter  is  the  death  of  me.  I 
see  that  the  rascal  has  corrupted  her  mind,  and  has  estab- 
lished himself  there  in  my  stead.  This  is  despair  and 
deadly  anguish  for  me.  I  suffer  doubly  by  being  robbed 
of  her  heart,  for  love  as  well  as  honour  is  injured  by  it. 
It  drives  me  mad  to  find  my  place  usurped,  and  I  am  en- 

SCENE  v.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  I  23 

raged  to  see  my  prudence  defeated.  I  know  that  to 
punish  her  guilty  passion  I  have  only  to  leave  her  to  her 
evil  fate,  and  that  I  shall  be  revenged  on  her  by  herself; 
but  it  is  very  vexatious  to  lose  what  we  love.  Good 
Heaven  !  after  employing  so  much  philosophy  in  my 
choice,  why  am  I  to  be  so  terribly  bewitched  by  her 
charms  ?  She  has  neither  relatives,  friends,  nor  money ; 
she  abuses  my  care,  my  kindness,  my  tenderness ;  and  yet 
I  love  her  to  distraction,  even  after  this  base  trick!  Fool, 
have  you  no  shame?  Ah,  I  cannot  contain  myself;  I  am 
mad  ;  I  could  punch  my  head  a  thousand  times  over.  I 
shall  go  in  for  a  little  ;  but  only  to  see  what  she  looks  like 
after  so  vile  a  deed.  Oh  Heaven,  grant  that  my  brow  may 
escape  dishonour ;  or  rather,  if  it  is  decreed  that  I  must 
endure  it,  at  least  grant  me,  under  such  misfortunes,  that 
fortitude  with  which  few  are  endowed. 

ACT  IV. 

SCENE  I. — ARNOLPHE,  alone, 

I  declare  I  cannot  rest  anywhere ;  my  mind  is  troubled 
by  a  thousand  cares,  thinking  how  to  contrive,  both  in- 
doors and  out,  so  as  to  frustrate  the  attempts  of  this  cox- 
comb. With  what  assurance  the  traitress  stood  the  sight 
of  me  !  She  is  not  a  whit  moved  by  all  that  she  has  done, 
and  though  she  has  brought  me  within  an  inch  of  the 
grave,  one  could  swear,  to  look  at  her,  that  she  had  no 
hand  in  it.  The  more  composed  she  looked  when  I  saw 
her,  the  more  I  was  enraged,  and  those  ardent  transports 
which  inflamed  my  heart  seemed  to  redouble  my  great 
love  for  her.  1  was  provoked,  angry,  incensed  against 
her,  and  yet  I  never  saw  her  look  so  lovely.  Her  eyes 
never  seemed  to  me  so  bright ;  never  before  did  they  in- 
spire me  with  such  vehement  desires ;  I  feel  that  it  will  be 
the  death  of  me,  if  my  evil  destiny  should  bring  upon  me 
this  disgrace.  What !  I  have  brought  her  up  with  so  much 
tenderness  and  forethought ;  I  have  had  her  with  me  from 
her  infancy  ;  I  have  indulged  in  the  fondest  hopes  about 
her ;  my  heart  trusted  to  her  growing  charms ;  I  have 
fondled  her  as  my  own  for  thirteen  years,  as  I  imagined, 

124  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  f ACT  rr. 

— all  for  a  young  fool,  with  whom  she  is  in  love,  to  come 
and  carry  her  off  before  my  face,  and  that  when  she  is 
already  half  married  to  me  !  No,  by  Heaven — no,  by 
Heaven,  my  foolish  young  friend ;  you  will  be  a  cunning 
fellow  to  overturn  my  scheme,  for,  upon  my  word,  all 
your  hopes  will  be  in  vain,  and  you  shall  find  no  reason 
for  laughing  at  me  ! 

SCENE  II. — A  NOTARY,  ARNOLPHE. 

NOT.  Ah,  there  he  is.  Good-day.  Here  I  am,  ready 
to  draw  up  the  contract  which  you  wish. 

AR.  (Not  seeing  or  hearing  him).  How  is  it  to  be 
done? 

NOT.  It  must  be  in  the  usual  form. 

AR.  (Thinking  himself  alone).  I  shall  take  the  greatest 
possible  care. 

NOT.  I  shall  do  nothing  contrary  to  your  interests. 

AR.  (Not  seeing  him).  I  must  guard  against  all  sur- 
prise. 

NOT.  It  is  enough  that  your  affairs  are  placed  in  my 
hands.  For  fear  of  deception,  you  must  not  sign  the 
contract  before  receiving  the  portion. 

AR.  (Thinking  himself  alone).  I  fear,  if  I  let  anything 
get  abroad,  that  this  business  will  become  town  talk. 

NOT.  Well,  it  is  easy  to  avoid  this  publicity,  and  your 
contract  can  be  drawn  up  privately. 

AR.  {Thinking  himself  alone).  But  how  shall  I  manage 
it  with  her? 

NOT.  The  jointure  should  be  proportionate  to  the  for- 
tune she  brings  you. 

AR.  (Not  seeing  him).  I  love  her,  and  that  love  is  my 
great  difficulty. 

NOT.  In  that  case  the  wife  may  have  so  much  the  more. 

AR.  (Thinking  himself  alone).  How  can  I  act  towards 
her  in  such  a  case  ? 

NOT.  The  regular  way  is  that  the  husband  that  is  to  be 
settles  on  the  wife  that  is  to  be  a  third  of  her  marriage 
portion  as  a  jointure;  but  this  rule  goes  for  nothing,  and 
you  may  do  a  great  deal  more  if  you  have  a  mind  to  it. 

AR.  If  ...  (Seeing  him). 

SCBNBII.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  125 

NOT.  As  for  the  preciput, 16  that  is  a  question  for  both 
sides.  I  say  the  husband  can  settle  on  his  wife  what  he 
thinks  proper. 

AR.  Eh? 

NOT.  He  can  benefit  her,  when  he  loves  her  much,  and 
wishes  to  do  her  a  favour,  and  that  by  way  of  jointure,  or 
settlement  as  it  is  called,  which  is  lost  upon  her  death ; 
either  without  reversion,  going  from  her  to  her  heirs,  or 
by  statute,  as  people  have  a  mind,  or  by  actual  deed  of 
gift  in  form,  which  may  be  made  either  single  or  mutual. 
Why  do  you  shrug  your  shoulders?  Am  I  talking  like  a 
fool,  or  do  I  not  understand  contracts  ?  Who  can  teach 
me?  No  one,  I  imagine.  Do  I  not  know  that  when 
people  are  married,  they  have  a  joint  right  to  all  movea- 
bles,  moneys,  fixtures,  and  acquisitions,  unless  they  resign 
it  by  act  of  renunciation  ?  Do  I  not  know  that  a  third 
part  of  the  portion  of  the  wife  that  is  to  be  becomes  com- 
mon, in  order  .  .  . 

AR.  Yes,  verily,  you  know  all  this ;  but  who  has  said 
one  word  to  you  about  it  ? 

NOT.  You,  who  seem  to  take  me  for  a  fool,  shrugging 
your  shoulders,  and  making  faces  at  me. 

AR.  Hang  the  man  and  his  beastly  face  !  Good  day : 
that's  the  way  to  get  rid  of  you. 

NOT.  Was  I  not  brought  here  to  draw  up  a  contract  ? 

AR.  Yes,  I  sent  for  you.  But  the  business  is  put  off; 
I  shall  send  for  you  again  when  the  time  is  fixed.  What 
a  devil  of  a  fellow  he  is  with  his  jabbering  ! 

NOT.  (Alone).  I  think  he  is  mad,  and  I  believe  I  am 
right. 

SCENE  III. — A  NOTARY,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

NOT.  Did  you  not  come  to  fetch  me  to  your  master  ? 
AL.  Yes. 

NOT.  I  do  not  know  what  you  think ;  but  go  and  tell 
him  from  me  that  he  is  a  downright  fool. 
GEO.  We  will  not  fail. 

18  Preciput  is  an  advantage  stipulated  by  the  marriage-contract,  in 
favour  of  the  survivor,  and  which  is  taken  from  the  joint  fund  before 
the  property  is  divided. 

126  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACT  nr. 

SCENE  IV. — ARNOLPHE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

GEO.  Sir  ... 

AR.  Come  here !  You  are  my  faithful,  my  good,  my 
real  friends ;  I  have  news  for  you. 

AL.  The  notary  .    .    . 

AR.  Never  mind;  some  other  day  for  that.  A  foul 
plot  is  contrived  against  my  honour.  What  a  disgrace  it 
would  be  for  you,  my  children,  if  your  master's  honour 
were  taken  away !  After  that,  you  would  not  dare  to  be 
seen  anywhere ;  for  whoever  saw  you  would  point  at  you. 
So,  since  the  affair  concerns  you  as  well  as  me,  you  must 
take  care  that  this  spark  may  not  in  any  way  .  .  . 

GEO.  You  have  tanght  us  our  lesson  just  now. 

AR.  But  take  care  not  to  listen  to  his  fine  speeches. 

AL.  Oh,  certainly  .   .   . 

GEO.  We  know  how  to  deny  him. 

AR.  Suppose  he  should  come  now,  wheedling:  "Alain 
my  good  fellow  cheer  my  drooping  spirits  by  a  little  help. ' ' 

AL.  You  are  a  fool. 

AR.  You  are  right!  (To  Georgette).  "  Georgette,  my 
darling,  you  look  so  sweet-tempered  and  so  kind  !  " 

GEO.  You  are  a  lout. 

AR.  You  are  right.  (To  Alain).  "What  harm -do  you 
find  in  an  honest  and  perfectly  virtuous  scheme?" 

AL.  You  are  a  rogue. 

AR.  Capital!  (To  Georgette).  "I  shall  surely  die  if 
you  do  not  take  pity  on  my  sufferings." 

GEO.  You  are  a  brazen-faced  blockhead. 

AR.  First-rate!  (To  Alain).  "I  am  not  one  who  ex- 
pects something  for  nothing ;  I  can  remember  those  who 
serve  me.  Here,  Alain,  is  a  trifle  in  advance,  to  have  a 
drink  with;  and,  Georgette,  here  is  wherewith  to  buy  you 
a  petticoat.  (Both  hold  out  their  hands  and  take  the  money) . 
This  is  only  an  earnest  of  what  I  intend  to  do  for  you ;  I 
ask  no  other  favour  but  that  you  will  let  me  see  your 
pretty  mistress. ' ' 

GEO.   (Pushing  hint).     Try  your  games  elsewhere. 

AR.  That  was  good. 

AL.  (Pushing  him).     Get  out  of  this. 

AR.  Very  good ! 

SCENE  vi.]  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  127 

GEO.  (Pushing  him).     Immediately  ! 

AR.  Good  !     Hulloa,  that  is  enough. 

GEO.  Am  I  not  doing  right  ? 

AL.  Is  this  how  you  would  have  us  act  ? 

AR.  Yes,  capital;  except  for  the  money,  which  you 
must  not  take. 

GEO.    We  did  not  think  of  that. 

AL.  Shall  we  begin  again  now  ? 

AR.   No.     It  is  enough.     Go  in,  both  of  you. 

AL.  You  need  only  say  so. 

AR.  No,  I  tell  you;  go  in  when  I  desire  you.  You 
may  keep  the  money.  Go.  I  shall  soon  be  with  you 
again ;  keep  your  eyes  open,  and  second  my  efforts. 

SCENE  V. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

I  will  get  the  cobbler,  who  lives  at  the  corner  of  the 
street,  to  be  my  spy,  and  tell  me  everything.  I  mean  to 
keep  her  always  indoors,  watch  her  constantly  .  .  .  and 
banish  in  particular  all  sellers  of  ribbons,  tire-women, 
hair-dressers,  kerchief-makers,  glove-sellers,  dealers  in 
left-off  apparel,  and  all  those  folks  who  make  it  their  busi- 
ness clandestinely  to  bring  people  together  who  are  in 
love.  In  fact,  I  have  seen  the  world,  and  understand  its 
tricks.  My  spark  must  be  very  cunning,  if  a  love-letter 
or  message  gets  in  here. 

SCENE  VI. — HORACE,  ARNOLPHE. 

HOR.  How  lucky  I  am  to  meet  you  here  ?  I  had  a  nar- 
row escape  just  now,  I  can  assure  you.  As  I  left  you,  I 
unexpectedly  saw  Agnes  alone  on  her  balcony,  breathing 
the  fresh  air  from  the  neighbouring  trees.  After  giving 
me  a  sign,  she  contrived  to  come  down  into  the  garden 
and  open  the  door.  But  we  were  scarcely  into  her  room 
before  she  heard  her  jealous  gentleman  upon  the  stairs ; 
and  all  she  could  do  in  such  a  case  was  to  lock  me  into  a 
large  wardrobe.  He  entered  the  room  at  once.  I  did  not 
see  him,  but  I  heard  him  walking  up  and  down  at  a  great 
rate,  without  saying  a  word,  but  sighing  desperately  at  in- 
tervals, and  occasionally  thumping  the  table,  striking  a 
little  frisky  dog,  and  madly  throwing  about  whatever  came 
in  his  way.  In  his  rage  he  broke  the  very  vases  with 

128  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACT  iv. 

which  the  beauty  had  adorned  her  mantel-piece ;  doubt- 
less the  tricks  she  played  must  have  come  to  the  ears  of 
this  cuckold  in  embryo.  At  last,  having  in  a  score  of 
ways  vented  his  passion  on  things  that  could  not  help 
themselves,  my  restless  jealous  gentleman  left  the  room 
without  saying  what  disturbed  him,  and  I  left  my  ward- 
robe. We  would  not  stay  long  together,  for  fear  of  my 
rival ;  it  would  have  been  too  great  a  risk.  But  late  to- 
night I  am  to  enter  her  room  without  making  a  noise. 
I  am  to  announce  myself  by  three  hems,  and  then  the 
window  is  to  be  opened ;  whereby,  with  a  ladder,  and  the 
help  of  Agnes,  my  love  will  try  to  gain  me  admittance. 
I  tell  you  this  as  my  only  friend.  Joy  is  increased  by  im- 
parting it;  and  should  we  taste  perfect  bliss  a  hundred 
times  over,  it  would  not  satisfy  us  unless  it  were  known 
to  some  one.  I  believe  you  will  sympathize  in  my  success. 
Good-bye.  I  am  going  to  make  the  needful  preparations. 

SCENE  VII. — ARNOLPHE,  alone. 

What,  will  the  star  which  is  bent  on  driving  me  to  de- 
spair allow  me  no  time  to  breathe?  Am  I  to  see,  through 
their  mutual  understanding,  my  watchful  care  and  .my 
wisdom  defeated  one  after  another?  Must  I,  in  my  ma- 
ture age,  become  the  dupe  of  a  simple  girl  and  a  scatter- 
brained young  fellow  ?  For  twenty  years,  like  a  discreet 
philosopher,  I  have  been  musing  on  the  wretched  fate  of 
married  men,  and  have  carefully  informed  myself  of  the 
accidents  which  plunge  the  most  prudent  into  misfortune. 
Profiting  in  my  own  mind  by  the  disgrace  of  others,  and 
having  a  wish  to  marry,  I  sought  how  to  secure  my  fore- 
head from  attack,  and  prevent  its  being  matched  with  those 
of  other  men.  For  this  noble  end,  I  thought  I  had  put  in 
practice  all  that  human  policy  could  invent ;  but,  as  though 
it  were  decreed  by  fate  that  no  man  here  below  should  be 
exempt  from  it,  after  all  my  experience  and  the  knowledge 
I  have  been  able  to  glean  of  such  matters,  after  more  than 
twenty  years  of  meditation,  so  as  to  guide  myself  with  all 
precaution,  I  have  avoided  the  tracks  of  so  many  husbands 
to  find  myself  after  all  involved  in  the  same  disgrace! 
Ah,  cursed  fate,  you  shall  yet  be  a  liar !  I  am  still  pos- 

SCENE  viii.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR  WIVES.  129 

sessor  of  the  loved  one;  if  her  heart  be  stolen  by  this 
obnoxious  fop,  I  shall  at  least  take  care  that  he  does  not 
seize  anything  else.  This  night,  which  they  have  chosen 
for  their  pretty  plan,  shall  not  be  spent  so  agreeably  as 
they  anticipate.  It  is  some  pleasure  to  me,  amidst  all 
this,  to  know  that  he  has  warned  me  of  the  snare  he  is 
laying,  and  that  this  blunderer,  who  would  be  my  ruin, 
makes  a  confidant  of  his  own  rival. 

SCENE  VIII. — CHRYSALDE,  ARNOLPHE. 

CH.  Well,  shall  we  take  our  supper  before  our  walk? 

AR.  No,  I  fast  to-night. 

CH.  Whence  this  fancy? 

AR.  Pray  excuse  me ;  there  is  something  that  hinders 
me. 

CH.  Is  not  your  intended  marriage  to  take  place? 

AR.  You  take  too  much  trouble  about  other  people's 
affairs. 

CH.  Oh  ho,  so  snappish?  What  ails  you?  Have  you 
encountered  any  little  mishap  in  your  love,  my  friend? 
By  your  face  I  could  almost  swear  you  have. 

AR.  Whatever  happens,  I  shall  at  least  have  the  advan- 
tage of  being  unlike  some  folks,  who  meekly  suffer  the  vi- 
sits of  gallants. 

CH.  It  is  an  odd  thing  that,  with  so  much  intelligence, 
you  always  get  so  frightened  at  these  matters ;  that  you  set 
your  whole  happiness  on  this,  and  imagine  no  other  kind 
of  honour  in  the  world.  To  be  a  miser,  a  brute,  a  rogue, 
wicked  and  cowardly,  is  nothing  in  your  mind  compared 
with  this  stain;  and  however  a  man  may  have  lived,  he  is 
a  man  of  honour  if  he  is  not  a  cuckold.  After  all,  why 
do  you  imagine  that  our  glory  depends  on  such  an  acci- 
dent, and  that  a  virtuous  mind  must  reproach  itself  for  the 
evil  which  it  cannot  prevent  ?  Tel!  me,  why  do  you  hold 
that  a  man  in  taking  a  wife  deserves  praise  or  blame  for 
the  choice  he  makes,  and  why  do  you  form  a  frightful  bug- 
bear out  of  the  offence  caused  by  her  want  of  fidelity?  Be 
persuaded  that  a  man  of  honour  may  have  a  less  serious 
notion  of  cuckoldom ;  that  as  none  is  secure  from  strokes 
of  chance,  this  accident  ought  to  be  a  matter  of  indiffer- 
ence ;  and  that  all  the  evil,  whatever  the  world  may  say,  is 

130  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  |ACT  ^_ 

in  the  mode  of  receiving  it.  To  behave  well  under  these 
difficulties,  as  in  all  else,  a  man  must  shun  extremes ;  not 
ape  those  over-simple  folks  who  are  proud  of  such  affairs, 
and  are  ever  inviting  the  gallants  of  their  wives,  praising 
them  everywhere,  and  crying  them  up,  displaying  their 
sympathy  with  them,  coming  to  all  their  entertainments 
and  all  their  meetings,  and  making  everyone  wonder  at 
their  having  the  assurance  to  show  their  faces  there.  This 
way  of  acting  is  no  doubt  highly  culpable ;  but  the  other 
extreme  is  no  less  to  be  condemned.  If  I  do  not  approve 
of  such  as  are  the  friends  of  their  wives'  gallants ;  no  more 
do  I  approve  of  your  violent  men  whose  indiscreet  resent- 
ment, full  of  rage  and  fury,  draws  the  eyes  of  all  the  world 
on  them  by  its  noise,  and  who  seem,  from  their  outbreaks, 
unwilling  that  any  one  should  be  ignorant  of  what  is  wrong 
with  them.  There  is  a  mean  between  these  extremes,  where 
a  wise  man  stops  in  such  a  case.  When  we  know  how  to 
take  it,  there  is  no  reason  to  blush  for  the  worst  a  woman 
can  do  to  us.  In  short,  say  what  you  will,  cuckolding 
may  easily  be  made  to  seem  less  terrible ;  and,  as  I  told 
you  before,  all  your  dexterity  lies  in  being  able  to  turn  the 
best  side  outwards. 

AR.  After  this  fine  harangue,  all  the  brotherhood  owes 
your  worship  thanks ;  any  one  who  hears  you  speak  will  be 
delighted  to  enrol  himself. 

CH.  I  do  not  say  that ;  for  that  is  what  I  have  found 
fault  with.  But  as  fortune  gives  us  a  wife,  I  say  that  we 
should  act  as  we  do  when  we  gamble  with  dice,  when,  if 
you  do  not'  get  what  you  want,  you  must  be  shrewd  and 
good-tempered,  to  amend  your  luck  by  good  manage- 
ment. " 

AR.  That  is,  sleep  and  eat  well,  and  persuade  yourself 
that  it  is  all  nothing. 

CH.  You  think  to  make  a  joke  of  it ;  but,  to  be  candid, 
I  know  a  hundred  things  in  the  world  more  to  be  dreaded, 

17  This  is  from  Terence's  Adelphi,  Act  iv.,  Scene  8,  where  he  says: 
Life  is  like  a  game  where  dice  are  employed.  If  we  do  not  get  the  chance 
we  need,  the  science  of  the  player  ought  to  correct  fate.  It  may  perhaps 
not  be  unnecessary  to  hint  that  the  whole  of  Chrysalde's  speeches  are 
meant  ironically,  and  are  an  imitation  of  the  ancient  fabliaux  and  of  Ra- 
belais. 

SC«N«IX]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  13! 

and  which  I  should  think  a  much  greater  misfortune,  than 
the  accident  you  are  so  grievously  afraid  of.  Do  yon  think 
that,  in  choosing  between  the  two  alternatives,  I  should 
not  prefer  to  be  what  you  say,  rather  than  see  myself 
married  to  one  of  those  good  creatures  whose  ill-humour 
makes  a  quarrel  out  of  nothing — those  dragons  of  virtue, 
those  respectable  she-devils,  ever  piquing  themselves  on 
their  wise  conduct,  who,  because  they  do  not  do  us  a 
trifling  wrong,  take  on  themselves  to  behave  haughtily, 
and,  because  they  are  faithful  to  us,  expect  that  we  should 
bear  everything  from  them?  Once  more,  my  friend, 
know  that  cuckoldom  is  just  what  we  make  of  it,  that  on 
some  accounts  it  is  even  to  be  desired,  and  that  it  has  its 
pleasures  like  other  things. 

AR.  If  you  are  of  a  mind  to  be  satisfied  with  it,  I  am 
not  disposed  to  try  it  myself;  and  rather  than  submit  to 
such  a  thing  .  .  . 

CH.  Bless  me !  do  not  swear,  lest  you  should  be  for- 
sworn. If  fate  has  willed  it,  your  precautions  are  useless ; 
and  your  advice  will  not  be  taken  in  the  matter. 

AR.  I ! — I  a  cuckold  ! 

CH.  You  are  in  a  bad  way.  A  thousand  folks  are  so — 
I  mean  no  offence — who,  for  bearing,  courage,  fortune  and 
family,  would  scorn  comparison  with  you. 

AR.  And  I,  on  my  side,  will  not  draw  comparisons  with 
them.  But,  let  me  tell  you,  this  pleasantry  annoys  me. 
Let  us  have  done  with  it,  if  you  please. 

CH.  You  are  in  a  passion.  We  shall  know  the  cause. 
Good-bye ;  but  remember,  whatever  your  honour  prompts 
you  to  do  in  this  business,  to  swear  you  will  never  be  what 
we  have  talked  of  is  half-way  towards  being  it. 

AR.  And  I  swear  it  again  !  I  am  going  this  instant  to 
find  a  good  remedy  against  such  an  accident. 

SCENE  IX. — ARNOLPHE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  My  friends,  now  is  the  time  that  I  beg  your  assist- 
ance. I  am  touched  by  your  affection ;  but  it  must  be 
well  proved  on  this  occasion ;  and  if  you  serve  me  in  this, 
as  I  am  sure  you  will,  you  may  count  on  your  reward. 
The  man  you  wot  of  (but  not  a  word  !)  seeks,  as  I  under- 
stand, to  trick  me  this  very  night,  and  enter,  by  a  ladder, 

132  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACTV. 

into  Agnes'  room.  But  we  three  must  lay  a  trap  for  him.  I 
would  have  each  of  you  take  a  good  cudgel,  and,  when  he 
shall  .be  nearly  on  the  top  round  of  the  ladder  (for  I  shall 
open  the  window  at  the  proper  time),  both  of  you  shall 
fall  on  the  rascal  for  me,  so  that  his  back  may  be  sure  to 
remember  it,  in  order  that  he  may  learn  nevef  to  come 
here  again.  Yet  do  it  without  naming  me  in  any  way,  or 
making  it  appear  that  I  am  behind.-  Would  you  have  the 
courage  to  execute  my  resentment  ? 

AL.  If  the  thrashing  is  all,  sir,  rely  on  us.  You  shall 
see,  when  I  beat,  if  I  am  a  slow  coach. 

GEO.  Though  my  arm  may  not  look  so  strong,  it  shall 
play  its  part  in  the  drubbing. 

AR.  Get  you  in,  then  ;  and,  above  all,  mind  you  do  not 
chatter.  (Alone).  This  is  a  useful  lesson  for  my  neigh- 
bours ;  if  all  the  husbands  in  town  were  to  receive  their 
wives'  gallants  in  this  fashion,  the  number  of  cuckolds 
would  not  be  so  great. 

ACT  V. 

SCENE  I. — ARNOLPHE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  Wretches !  what  have  you  done  by  your  violence  ? 

AL.  We  have  obeyed  you,  sir. 

AR.  It  is  of  no  use  trying  to  defend  yourselves  by  such 
an  excuse.  My  orders  were  to  beat  him,  not  to  murder 
him.  I  told  you  to  discharge  your  blows  on  his  back, 
and  not  on  his  head.18  Good  Heavens!  into  what  a 
plight  my  fate  has  now  thrown  me !  And  what  course 
can  I  take,  as  the  man  is  dead  ?  Go  into  the  house,  and 
be  sure  to  say  nothing  of  the  harmless  order  that  I  gave 
you.  (Alone}.  It  will  be  daylight  presently,  and  I  shall 
go  and  consider  how  to  bear  myself  under  this  misfortune. 
Alas !  what  will  become  of  me  ?  And  what  will  Horace's 
father  say  when  he  shall  suddenly  hear  of  this  affair  ? 

18  This  is  imitated  by  Otway  in  The  Soldier's  Fortune  (Act  iv.,  Scene  the 
last),  when  Lady  Dunce  and  Sir  Jolly  Jumble  accuse  Sir  Davy  Dunce  of 
having  ordered  Beaugard  to  be  killed,  and  Sir  Davy  answers  ;  "  As  I  hope 
to  be  saved,  neighbour,  I  only  bargained  with  'em  to  bastinado  him  in  a 
way,  or  so,  as  one  Friend  might  do  to  another  ;  but  do  you  say  that  he  is 
dead?" 

SCENE  n.J  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  133 

SCENE  II. — ARNOLPHE,  HORACE. 

HOR.   (Aside).     I  must  go  and  make  out  who  it  is. 

AR.  (Thinking  himself  alone}.  Could  one  ever  have 
foreseen  .  .  .  (Running  against  Horace).  Who  is  there, 
pray? 

HOR.  Is  it  you,  Mr.  Arnolphe  ? 

AR.  Yes ;  but  who  are  you  ? 

HOR.  Horace.  I  was  going  to  your  house  to  beg  a 
favour.  You  are  out  very  early. 

AR.  (To  himself  aside).  Wonderful!  Is  it  magic?  Is 
it  a  vision? 

HOR.  To  tell  the  truth,  I  was  in  a  great  difficulty ;  I 
thank  Heaven's  great  goodness  that  at  the  nick  of  time  I 
thus  meet  you.  Let  me  tell  you  that  everything  has  suc- 
ceeded, much  better  even  than  I  could  have  predicted, 
and  by  an  accident  which  might  have  spoiled  all.  I  do 
not  know  how  our  appointment  could  possibly  have  been 
suspected ;  but  just  as  I  was  reaching  the  window,  I  un- 
luckily saw  some  persons,  who,  unceremoniously  raising 
their  hand  against  me,  made  me  miss  my  footing,  and  fall 
to  the  ground,  which,  at  the  expense  of  a  bruise,  saved 
me  from  a  score  of  blows.  These  people,  of  whom,  I 
fancy,  my  jealous  rival  was  one,  attributed  my  fall  to  their 
blows,  and  as  the  pain  compelled  me  to  lie  for  some  time 
motionless,  they  honestly  thought  they  had  killed  me, 
and  were  greatly  alarmed.  I  heard  all  their  noise  in  pro- 
found silence.  Each,  accusing  the  other  of  the  violence, 
and  complaining  of  their  ill  fortune,  came  softly,  without 
a  light,  to  feel  if  I  were  dead.  You  may  imagine  that  I 
contrived,  in  the  darkness  of  night,  to  assume  the  appear- 
ance of  a  real  corpse.  They  went  away  in  great  terror ; 
and  as  I  was  thinking  how  I  should  make  my  escape,  the 
young  Agnes,  frightened  by  my  pretended  death,  came  to 
me  in  great  concern.  For  the  talking  of  those  people 
had  reached  her  ears  from  the  very  first,  and,  being  un- 
observed during  all  this  commotion,  she  easily  escaped 
from  the  house.  But  finding  me  unhurt,  she  displayed  a 
transport  which  it  would  be  difficult  to  describe.  What 
more  need  I  say?  The  lovely  girl  obeyed  the  promptings 
of  her  affection,  would  not  return  to  her  room,  and  com- 

134  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACTV. 

mitted  her  fate  to  my  honour.  You  may  judge,  from  this 
instance  of  innocence,  to  what  she  is  exposed  by  the  mad 
intolerance  of  a  fool,  and  what  frightful  risks  she  might 
have  run,  if  I  were  a  man  to  hold  her  less  dear  than  I  do. 
But  too  pure  a  passion  fills  my  soul ;  I  would  rather  die 
than  wrong  her.  I  see  in  her  charms  worthy  of  a  better 
fate,  and  nought  but  death  shall  part  us.  I  foresee  the 
rage  my  father  will  be  in.  But  we  must  find  an  oppor- 
tunity to  appease  his  anger.  I  cannot  help  being  trans- 
ported by  charms  so  delightful;  and,  in  short,  we  must  in 
this  life  be  satisfied  with  our  lot.  What  I  wish  you  to  do, 
as  a  confidential  friend,  is  to  let  me  place  this  beauty 
under  your  care ;  and  that,  in  the  interest  of  my  love, 
you  will  conceal  her  in  your  house  for  at  least  a  day  or 
two.  For,  besides  that  I  must  conceal  her  flight  from 
every  one,  to  prevent  any  successful  pursuit  of  her,  you 
know  that  a  young  girl,  especially  such  a  beautiful  one, 
would  be  strongly  suspected  in  the  company  of  a  young 
man ;  and  as  I  have  trusted  the  whole  secret  of  my  passion 
to  you,  being  assured  of  your  prudence,  so  to  you  only, 
as  a  generous  friend,  can  I  confide  this  beloved  trea- 
sure. 

AR.  Be  assured  I  am  entirely  at  your  service. 

HOR.  You  will  really  do  me  so  great  a  favour  ? 

AR.  Very  willingly,  I  tell  you ;  I  am  delighted  at  the 
opportunity  of  serving  you.  I  thank  Heaven  for  putting 
it  in  my  way ;  I  never  did  anything  with  so  much  pleasure. 

HOR.  How  much  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  all  your  kind- 
ness !  I  feared  a  difficulty  on  your  part ;  but  you  know 
the  world,  and  your  wisdom  can  excuse  the  ardour  of 
youth.  One  of  my  servants  is  with  her  at  the  corner  of 
this  street. 

AR.  But  how  shall  we  manage,  for  day  begins  to  break  ? 
If  I  take  her  here,  I  may  be  seen  ;  and  if  you  come  to  my 
house  the  servants  will  talk.  To  take  a  safe  course  you 
must  bring  her  to  me  in  a  darker  place.  That  alley  of  mine 
is  convenient ;  I  shall  wait  for  her  there. 

HOR.  It  is  quite  right  to  use  these  precautions.  I  shall 
only  place  her  in  your  hands,  and  return  at  once  to  my 
lodgings,  without  more  ado. 

AR.  (Alone).     Ah,  fortune  !     This  propitious  accident 

sc«NBiv.J  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  1 35 

makes  amends  for  all  the  mischief  which  your  caprice  has 
done  !  (He  muffles  himself  up  in  his  cloak). 

SCENE  III. — AGNES,  HORACE,  ARNOLPHE. 

AR.  (To  Agnes],     Do  not  be  uneasy  at  the  place  I  am 
taking  you  to.     I  conduct  you  to  a  safe  abode.     It  would 
ruin  all  for  you  to  lodge  With  me.     Go  in  at  this  door,  and 
follow  where  you  are  led.   (Arnolphe  takes  her  hand,  with- 
out being  recognised  by  her). 

Ac.  (To  Horace).     Why  do  you  leave  me  ? 

Hor.  Dear  Agnes,  it  must  be  so. 

Ac.  Remember,  then,  I  pray  you  to  return  soon. 

HOR.  My  love  urges  me  sufficiently  for  that. 

Ac.  I  feel  no  joy  but  when  I  see  you. 

HOR.  Away  from  you  I  also  am  sad. 

Ac.  Alas,  if  that  were  so,  you  would  stay  here. 

HOR.  What !  Can  you  doubt  my  excessive  love  ? 

AG.  No ;  you  do  not  love  me  as  much  as  I  love  you  ! 
Ah  !  he  is  pulling  me  too  hard  !  (Arnolphe  pulls  her  away). 

HOR.  It  is  because  it  is  dangerous,  dear  Agnes,  for  us  to 
be  seen  together  here  ;  this  true  friend,  whose  hand  draws 
you  away,  acts  with  the  prudent  zeal  that  inspires  him  on 
our  behalf. 

AG.  But  to  follow  a  stranger  .    .    . 

HOR.  Fear  nothing.  In  such  hands  you  cannot  but  be 
safe. 

AG.  I  would  rather  be  in  Horace's ;  and  I  should  .    . 
(To  Arnolphe,  who  still  drags  her  away).     Stay  a  little. 

HOR.  Farewell.     The  day  drives  me  away. 

Ac.  When  shall  I  see  you,  then  ? 

HOR.  Very  soon,  you  may  be  sure. 

AG.  How  weary  I  shall  be  till  I  do ! 

HOR.  (Going).  Thank  Heaven,  my  happiness  is  no 
longer  in  suspense ;  now  I  can  sleep  securely. 

SCENE  IV. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES. 

AR.  ( Concealed  by  his  cloak,  and  disguising  his  voice). 
Come ;  it  is  not  there  you  are  going  to  lodge.  I  have 
provided  a  room  for  you  elsewhere,  and  intend  to  place 
you  where  you  will  be  safe  enough.  (Discovering  himself). 
Do  you  know  me  ? 

136  THE  SCHOOL   FOR  WIVES.  [ACT  v. 

AG.  Ah! 

AR.  My  face  frightens  you  now,  hussey;  it  is  a  disap- 
pointment to  you  to  see  me  here.  I  interrupt  your  love 
and  its  pretty  contrivances.  (Agnes  looks  for  Horace). 
Do  not  imagine  you  can  call  your  lover  to  your  aid  with 
those  eyes  of  yours ;  he  is  too  far  off  to  give  you  any  as- 
sistance. So,  so !  young  as  you  are,  you  can  play  such 
pranks.  Your  simplicity,  that  seemed  so  extraordinary, 
asks  if  infants  came  through  the  ear ;  yet  you  manage  to 
make  an  assignation  by  night,  and  to  slink  out  silently  in 
order  to  follow  your  gallant?  Gad,  how  coaxing  your 
tongue  was  with  him !  You  must  have  been  at  a  good 
school.  Who  the  deuce  has  taught  you  so  much  all  on  a 
sudden?  You  are  no  longer  afraid,  then,  to  meet  ghosts; 
this  gallant  has  given  you  courage  in  the  night  time.  Ah, 
baggage,  to  arrive  at  such  a  pitch  of  deceit !  To  form 
such  a  plot  in  spite  of  all  my  kindness  !  Little  serpent 
that  I  have  warmed  in  my  bosom,  and  that,  as  soon  as  it 
feels  it  is  alive,  tries  ungratefully  to  injure  him  that  cher- 
ished it ! 

Ac.  Why  do  you  scold  me? 

AR.  Of  a  truth,  I  do  wrong ! 

AG.  I  am  not  conscious  of  harm  in  all  that  I  have 
done. 

AR.  To  run  after  a  gallant  is  not,  then,  an  infamous 
thing? 

AG.  He  is  one  who  says  he  wishes  to  marry  me.  I  fol- 
lowed your  directions ;  you  have  taught  me  that  we  ought 
to  marry  in  order  to  avoid  sin. 

AR.  Yes;  but  I  meant  to  take  you  to  wife  myself;  I 
think  I  gave  you  to  understand  it  clearly  enough. 

AG.  You  did.  But,  to  be  frank  with  you,  he  is  more  to 
my  taste  for  a  husband  than  you.  With  you,  marriage  is 
a  trouble  and  a  pain,  and  your  descriptions  give  a  terrible 
picture  of  it ;  but  there — he  makes  it  seem  so  full  of  joy 
that  I  long  to  marry. 

AR.  Oh,  traitress,  that  is  because  you  love  him ! 

AG.  Yes,  I  love  him. 

AR.  And  you  have  the  impudence  to  tell  me  so  ! 

AG.  Why,  if  it  is  true,  should  I  not  say  so  ? 

AR.  Ought  you  to  love  him,  minx? 

SCENE  iv.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  137 

Ac.  Alas  !  can  I  help  it?  He  alone  is  the  cause  of  it ; 
I  was  not  thinking  of  it  when  it  came  about. 

AR.  But  you  ought  to  have  driven  away  that  amorous 
desire. 

Ac.  How  can  we  drive  away  what  gives  us  pleasure  ? 

AR.  And  did  you  not  know  that  it  would  displease  me  ? 

Ac.   I?     Not  at  all.     What  harm  can  it  do  you  ? 

AR.  True.  I  ought  to  rejoice  at  it.  You  do  not  love 
me  then  after  all  ? 

Ac.  You? 

AR.  Yes. 

Ac.  Alack!  no. 

AR.  How!     No? 

Ac.  Would  you  have  me  tell  a  fib? 

AR.  Why  not  love  me,  Madam  Impudence? 

AG.  Heaven !  you  ought  not  to  blame  me.  Why  did 
you  not  make  yourself  loved,  as  he  has  done?  I  did  not 
prevent  you,  I  fancy. 

AR.  I  tried  all  I  could ;  but  all  my  pains  were  to  no  pur- 
pose. 

Ac.  Of  a  truth  then  he  knows  more  about  it  than  you  ; 
for  he  had  no  difficulty  in  making  himself  loved. 

AR.  (Aside).  See  how  the  jade  reasons  and  retorts  ! 
Plague !  could  one  of  your  witty  ladies  say  more  about  it? 
Ah,  I  was  a  dolt ;  or  else,  on  my  honour,  a  fool  of  a  girl 
knows  more  than  the  wisest  man.  {To  Agnes).  Since 
you  are  so  good  at  reasoning,  Madam  Chop-logic,  should 
I  have  maintained  you  so  long  for  his  benefit  ? 

AG.  No.  He  will  pay  you  back,  even  to  the  last  far- 
thing.19 

AR.  (Aside).  She  hits  on  words  that  double  my  vexa- 
tion. (Aloud).  With  all  his  ability,  hussey,  will  he  dis- 
charge me  the  obligations  that  you  owe  me  ? 

AG.  I  do  not  owe  you  so  much  as  you  may  think. 

AR.  Was  the  care  of  bringing  you  up  nothing  ? 

AG.  Verily,  you  have  been  at  great  pains  there,  and 
have  caused  me  to  be  finely  taught  throughout.  Do  you 

19  In  the  original  jusqrf  au  dernier  double.  A  double  was  a  small  coin, 
worth  two  deniers,  of  which  twelve  made  one  sou ;  twenty  sous  made  a 
livre,  and  eleven  livrts  a  golden  louis. 

138  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES.  [ACTV. 

think  I  flatter  myself  so  far  as  not  to  know  in  my  own  mind 
that  I  am  an  ignoramus  ?  I  am  ashamed  of  myself,  and 
at  my  age,  I  do  not  wish  to  pass  any  longer  for  a  fool,  if  I 
can  help  it. 

AR.  You  shrink  from  ignorance,  and  would  learn  some- 
thing of  your  spark,  at  any  cost. 

Ac.  To  be  sure.  It  is  from  him  I  know  what  I  do 
know ;  I  fancy  I  owe  him  much  more  than  you. 

AR.  Really,  what  prevents  me  from  revenging  this  saucy 
talk  with  a  cuff?  I  am  enraged  at  the  sight  of  her  pro- 
voking coldness :  and  to  beat  her  would  be  a  satisfaction 
to  me. 

AG.  Ah,  you  can  do  that  if  you  choose. 

AR.  {Aside).  That  speech  and  that  look  disarm  my  fury, 
and  bring  back  the  tenderness  to  my  heart  which  effaces 
all  her  guilt.  How  strange  it  is  to  be  in  love  !  To  think 
that  men  should  be  subject  to  such  weakness  for  these 
traitresses !  Everyone  knows  their  imperfection.  They 
are  extravagant  and  indiscreet.  Their  mind  is  wicked  and 
their  understanding  weak.  There  is  nought  weaker,  more 
imbecile,  more  faithless ;  and,  in  spite  of  all,  everything 
in  the  world  is  done  for  the  sake  of  these  bipeds.  (To 
Agnes).  Well,  let  us  make  peace.  Listen,  little  wretch, 
I  forgive  all,  and  restore  you  to  my  affection.  Learn  thus 
how  much  I  love  you ;  and,  seeing  me  so  good,  love  me 
in  return. 

Ac.  With  all  my  heart  I  should  like  to  please  you,  if 
it  were  in  my  power. 

AR.  Poor  little  darling,  you  can  if  you  will.  Just  listen 
to  this  sigh  of  love.  See  this  dying  look,  behold  my  per- 
son, and  forsake  this  young  coxcomb  and  the  love  he  in- 
spires. He  must  have  thrown  some  spell  over  you,  and 
you  will  be  a  hundred  times  happier  with  me.  Your  de- 
sire is  to  be  finely  dressed  and  frolicsome ;  then  I  swear  you 
shall  ever  be  so ;  I  will  fondle  you  night  and  day,  I  will  hug 
you,  kiss  you,  devour  you;  you  shall  do  everything  you 
have  a  mind  to.  I  do  not  enter  into  particulars ;  and 
that  is  saying  everything.  (Aside),  To  what  length  will 
my  passion  go  ?  {Aloud].  In  short,  nothing  can  equal  my 
love.  What  proof  would  you  have  me  give  you,  ungrate- 
ful girl  ?  Would  you  have  me  weep  ?  Shall  I  beat  my- 

SCBNKVI.J  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  139 

self?  Shall  I  tear  out  one  half  of  my  hair?  Shall  I  kill 
myself?  Yes,  say  so  if  you  will.  I  am  quite  ready,  cruel 
creature,  to  convince  you  of  my  love. 

Ac.  Stay.  All  you  say  does  not  touch  my  heart. 
Horace  could  do  more  with  a  couple  of  words. 

AR.  Ah,  this  is  too  great  an  insult,  and  provokes  my 
anger  too  far.  I  will  pursue  my  design,  you  intractable 
brute,  and  will  pack  you  out  of  the  town  forthwith.  You 
reject  my  addresses  and  drive  me  to  extremities  :  but  the 
innermost  cell  of  a  convent  shall  avenge  me  of  all.20 

SCENE  V. — ARNOLPHE,  AGNES,  ALAIN. 

AL.  I  do  not  know  how  it  is,  master,  but  it  seems  to  me 
that  Agnes  and  the  corpse  have  run  away  together. 

AR.  She  is  here.  Go  and  shut  her  up  in  my  room. 
(Aside).  Horace  will  not  come  here  to  see  her.  Besides, 
it  is  only  for  half  an  hour.  {To  Alain).  Go  and  get  a 
carriage,  for  I  mean  to  find  her  a  safe  dwelling.  Shut 
yourselves  safely  in,  and,  above  all,  do  not  take  your  eyes 
off  her.  {Alone).  Perhaps  when  her  mind  is  buried  in 
solitude,  she  will  be  disabused  of  this  passion. 

SCENE  VI. — HORACE,  ARNOLPHE. 

HOR.  Oh,  I  come  here,  plunged  in  grief.  Heaven,  Mr. 
Arnolphe,  has  decreed  my  ill  fortune  !  By  a  fatal  stroke 
of  extreme  justice,  I  am  to  be  torn  away  from  the  beauty 
whom  I  love.  My  father  arrived  this  very  evening.  I 
found  him  alighting  close  by.  In  a  word  the  reason  of 
his  coming,  with  which,  as  I  said,  I  was  unacquainted,  is, 
that  he  has  made  a  match  for  me,  without  a  word  of  warn- 
ing ;  he  has  arrived  here  to  celebrate  the  nuptials.  Feel 
for  my  anxiety,  and  judge  if  a  more  cruel  disappointment 
could  happen  to  me.  That  Enrique,  whom  I  asked  you 
about  yesterday,  is  the  source  of  all  my  trouble.  He  has 
come  with  my  father  to  complete  my  ruin ;  it  is  for  his 

*  Moliere  probably  puts  in  the  mouth  of  Arnolphe  the  doubts  and  fears 
that  beset  himself  after  a  few  months  of  his  marriage  with  Armande 
Bejart,  who  was  about  half  his  age.  This  comedy  was  written  in  the  sum- 
mer of  1662,  and  was  performed  on  the  26th  of  December,  whilst  Moliere 
was  married  on  the  2Oth  of  February  of  the  same  year.  (See  Introductory 
Notice  to  this  play,  page  339.) 

140  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  v. 

only  daughter  that  I  am  destined.  I  thought  I  should 
have  swooned  when  they  first  spoke  of  it ;  not  caring  to 
hear  more,  as  my  father  spoke  of  paying  you  a  visit,  I 
hurried  here  before  him,  my  mind  full  of  consternation. 
I  pray  you  be  sure  not  to  let  him  know  anything  of  my 
engagement,  which  might  incense  him ;  and  try,  since 
he  has  confidence  in  you,  to  dissuade  him  from  this  other 
match. 

AR.  Ay,  to  be  sure  ! 

HCR.  Advise  him  to  delay  ;  and  thus,  like  a  friend, 
help  me  in  my  passion. 

AR.  No  fear  ! 

HOR.  All  my  hope  is  in  you. 

AR.  It  could  not  be  better  placed. 

HOR.  I  look  on  you  as  my  real  father.  Tell  him  that 
my  age  .  .  .  Ah,  I  see  him  coming  !  Hear  the  argu- 
ments I  can  supply  you  with. 

SCENE  VII. — ENRIQUE,    ORONTE,    CHRYSALDE,   HORACE, 
ARNOLPHE. 

(Horace  and  Arnolphe  retire  to  the  back  of  the  stage  and 
whisper  together). 

EN.  (To  Chrysalde).  As  soon  as  I  saw  you,  before 
anyone  could  tell  me,  I  should  have  known  you.  I  recog- 
nise in  your  face  the  features  of  your  lovely  sister,  whom 
marriage  made  mine  in  former  days.  Happy  should  I  have 
been  if  cruel  fate  had  permitted  me  to  bring  back  that 
faithful  wife,  to  enjoy  with  me  the  great  delight  of  seeing 
once  more,  after  our  continual  misfortunes,  all  her  former 
friends.  But  since  the  irresistible  power  of  destiny  has  for 
ever  deprived  us  of  her  dear  presence,  let  us  try  to  sub- 
mit, and  to  be  content  with  the  only  fruit  of  love  which 
remains  to  me.  It  concerns  you  nearly;  without  your 
consent  I  should  do  wrong  in  wishing  to  dispose  of  this 
pledge.  The  choice  of  the  son  of  Oronte  is  honourable 
in  itself;  but  you  must  be  pleased  with  this  choice  as  well 
as  I. 

CH.  It  would  argue  a  poor  opinion  of  my  judgment  to 
doubt  my  approbation  of  so  reasonable  a  choice. 

AR.  (Aside  to  Horace).     Ay,  I  will  serve  you  finely  ! 

SCBNBVII.J  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  14! 

HOR.  Beware,  once  more  .    .    . 

AR.  Have  no  uneasiness.  {Leaves  Horace,  and  goes  ///> 
to  embrace  Oronte). 

OR.  Ah,  this  is  indeed  a  tender  embrace. 

AR.   How  delighted  I  am  to  see  you  ! 

OR.  I  am  come  here  .    .    . 

AR.   I  know  what  brings  you,  without  your  telling  me. 

OR.  You  have  already  heard  ? 

AR.  Yes. 

OR.  So  much  the  better. 

AR.  Your  son  is  opposed  to  this  match;  his  heart  being 
pre-engaged,  he  looks  on  it  as  a  misfortune.  He  has  even 
prayed  me  to  dissuade  you  from  it ;  for  my  part,  all  the 
advice  I  can  give  you  is,  to  exert  a  father's  authority,  and 
not  allow  the  marriage  to  be  delayed.  Young  people 
should  be  managed  with  a  high  hand ;  we  do  them  harm 
by  being  indulgent. 

HOR.  {Aside).  Oh,  the  traitor ! 

CH.  If  it  is  repugnant  to  him,  I  think  we  ought  not  to 
force  him.  I  think  my  brother  will  be  of  my  mind. 

AR.  What  ?  Will  he  let  himself  be  ruled  by  his  son  ? 
Would  you  have  a  father  so  weak  as  to  be  unabje  to  make 
his  son  obey  him?  It  would  be  fine  indeed  to  see  him  at 
his  time  of  life  receiving  orders  from  one  who  ought  to 
receive  them  from  him.  No,  no,  he  is  my  intimate  friend, 
and  his  honour  is  my  own.  His  word  is  passed,  and 
he  must  keep  it.  Let  him  now  display  his  firmness,  and 
control  his  son's  affections. 

OR.  You  speak  well ;  in  this  match  I  will  answer  for 
my  son's  obedience. 

CH.  (To  Arnolphe).  I  am  indeed  surprised  at  the  great 
eagerness  which  you  shew  for  this  marriage,  and  cannot 
guess  what  is  your  motive  .  .  . 

AR.  I  know  what  I  am  about,  and  speak  sensibly. 

OR.  Yes,  yes,  Mr.  Arnolphe ;  he  is  .    .    . 

CH.  That  name  annoys  him.  He  is  Monsieur  de  la 
Souche,  as  you  were  told  before. 

OR.  It  makes  no  difference. 

HOR.  (Aside).     What  do  I  hear? 

AR.  (Turning  to  Horace).  Ay,  that  is  the  mystery; 
you  can  judge  as  to  what  it  behooved  me  to  do. 

142  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  [ACT  v 

HOR.  {Aside),     What  a  scrape  .    .    . 

SCENE  VIII. — ENRIQUE,  ORONTE,  CHRYSALDE,  HORACE, 
ARNOLPHE,  GEORGETTE. 

GEO.  Sir,  if  you  do  not  come,  we  shall  scarcely  be  able 
to  hold  Agnes ;  she  is  trying  all  she  can  to  get  away ;  I 
fear  she  will  throw  herself  out  of  the  window. 

AR.  Bring  her  to  me,  for  I  mean  to  take  her  away. 
{To  Horace).  Do  not  be  disturbed.  Continual  good  for- 
tune makes  a  man  proud.  Every  dog  has  his  day,  as  the 
proverb  says. 

HOR.  {Aside).  Good  Heaven,  what  misfortune  can 
equal  mine?  Was  ever  a  man  in  such  a  mess  as  this? 

AR.  {To  Oronte).  Hasten  the  day  of  the  ceremony 
I  am  bent  on  it,  and  invite  myself  beforehand. 

OR.  That  is  just  my  intention. 

SCENE  IX. — AGNES,  ORONTE,  ENRIQUE,  ARNOLPHE,  HO- 
RACE, CHRYSALDE,  ALAIN,  GEORGETTE. 

AR.  {To  Agnes).  Come  hither,  my  beauty,  whom  they 
cannot  hold,  and  who  rebels.  Here  is  your  gallant,  to 
whom,  to  make  amends,  you  may  make  a  sweet  and  hum- 
ble curtesy.  {To  Horace).  Farewell.  The  issue  rather 
thwarts  your  desires;  but  all  lovers  are  not  fortunate. 

Ac.  Horace,  will  you  let  me  be  carried  off  in  this 
manner? 

HOR.  I  scarcely  know  where  I  am,  my  sorrow  is  so 
great. 

AR.  Come  along,  chatterbox. 

AG.  I  shall  stay  here. 

OR.  Tell  us  the  meaning  of  this  mystery.  We  are  all 
staring  at  each  other  without  being  able  to  understand  it. 

AR.  I  shall  inform  you  at  a  more  convenient  time.  Till 
then,  good-bye. 

OR.  Where  are  you  going?  You  do  not  speak  to  us  as 
you  should. 

AR.  I  have  advised  you  to  complete  the  marriage,  let 
Horace  grumble  as  much  as  he  likes. 

OR.  Ay;  but  to  complete  it,  have  you  not  heard — if 
they  have  told  you  all — that  the  lady  concerned  in  this 
affair  is  in  your  house  ? — that  she  is  the  daughter  of  En- 

THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES.  143 

rique  and  of  the  lovely  Angelica,  who  v/ere  privately 
married?  Now,  what  was  at  the  bottom  of  your  talk  just 
now? 

CH.  I  too  was  astonished  at  his  proceedings. 

AR.   What? 

CH.  My  sister  had  a  daughter  by  a  secret  marriage, 
whose  existence  was  concealed  from  the  whole  family. 

OR.  And  in  order  that  nothing  might  be  discovered,  she 
was  put  out  to  nurse  in  the  country  by  her  husband,  under 
a  feigned  name. 

CH.  At  that  time,  fortune  being  against  him,  he  was 
compelled  to  quit  his  native  land. 

OR.  To  encounter  a  thousand  various  dangers  in  far- 
distant  countries,  and  beyond  many  seas. 

CH.  Where  his  industry  has  acquired  what  in  his  own 
land  he  lost  through  roguery  and  envy. 

OR.  And  when  he  returned  to  France,  the  first  thing  he 
did  was  to  seek  out  her  to  whom  he  had  confided  the  care 
of  his  daughter. 

CH.  This  country-woman  frankly  told  him  that  she  had 
committed  her  to  your  keeping  from  the  age  of  four. 

OR.  And  that  she  did  it  because  she  received  money 
from  you,  and  was  very  poor. 

CH.  Oronte,  transported  with  joy,  has  even  brought 
this  woman  hither. 

OR.  In  short,  you  shall  see  her  here  directly  to  clear  up 
this  mystery  to  every  one. 

CH.  ( To  Arnolphe).  I  can  almost  imagine  what  is  the 
cause  of  your  grief;  but  fortune  is  kind  to  you.  If  it  seems 
so  good  to  you  not  to  be  a  cuckold,  your  only  course  is 
not  to  marry. 

AR.  {Going  away  full  of  rage,  and  unable  to  speak). 
Ugh !  ugh !  ugh ! 

SCENE  LAST.  —  ENRIQUE,  ORONTE,  CHRYSALDE,  AGNES, 
HORACE. 

OR.  Why  does  he  run  away  without  saying  a  word? 

HOR.  Ah,  father,  you  shall  know  the  whole  of  this  sur- 
prising mystery.  Accident  has  done  here  what  your  wis- 
dom intended.  I  had  engaged  myself  to  this  beauty  in 
the  sweet  bonds  of  mutual  love ;  it  is  she,  in  a  word,  whom 

144  THE  SCHOOL  FOR   WIVES.  [ACTV. 

you  come  to  seek,  and  for  whose  sake  I  was  about  to  grieve 
you  by  my  refusal. 

EN.  I  was  sure  of  it  as  soon  as  I  saw  her;  my  heart  has 
yearned  for  her  ever  since.  Ah,  daughter,  I  am  overcome 
by  such  tender  transports ! 

CH.  I  could  be  so,  brother,  just  as  well  as  you.  But 
this  is  hardly  the  place  for  it.  Let  us  go  inside,  and  clear 
up  these  mysteries.  Let  us  shew  our  friend  some  return 
for  his  great  pains,  and  thank  Heaven,  which  orders  all 
for  the  best. 

LA  CRITIQUE  DE  L'ECOLE  DES  FEMMES. 

COMEDIE. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED. 

A    COMEDY    IN    ONE    ACT. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 

JUNE  IST,  1663. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

The  School  for  Wives  criticised  was  first  brought  out  at  the  theatre  of  the 
Palais  Royal,  on  the  ist  of  June,  1663.  It  can  scarcely  be  called  a  play, 
for  it  is  entirely  destitute  of  action.  It  is  simply  a  reported  conversation 
of  "  friends  in  council ;  "  but  we  cannot  be  surprised  that  it  had  a  tempo- 
rary success  on  the  stage.  It  was  acted  as  a  pendant  to  The  School  for 

Wives,  and  the  two  were  played  together,  with  much  profit  to  the  com- 
pany, thirty-two  consecutive  times.  Moliere,  in  the  Preface  to  The 
School  for  Wives,  mentions  that  the  idea  of  writing  The  School  for  Wives 
criticised  was  suggested  to  him  by  a  person  of  quality,  who,  it  is  said,  was 
the  Abb6  Dubuisson,  the  grand  introducteur  des  ruelles  or,  in  other 
words,  the  Master  of  the  Ceremonies  to  the  Precieuses.  Our  author  had 
also  just  been  inscribed  on  the  list  of  pensions  which  Louis  XIV.  allowed 
to  eminent  literary  men,  for  a  sum  of  a  thousand  livres. 

The  happy  idea  of  self-criticism  adopted  by  Moliere  in  this  piece  has 
been  caught  at  by  many  subsequent  French  writers.  Thus  we  find  la. 
Critique  du  Legataire,  by  Regnard  ;  la,  Critique  du  Philosophe  marie  by 
Destouches ;  le  Prods  de  la  Femme  juge  et partie,  by  Montfleury.  But 
in  none  of  these  is  the  subject  so  ably  treated  as  by  Moliere,  who  did  not 
scruple  to  attack  the  different  cabals  leagued  against  him.  Climene  is  an 
example  of  those  ladies  ''  whose  ears  are  more  chaste  than  all  the  rest  of 
their  body,"  and  is  a  preliminary  study  for  Philaminte  of  the  Femmes  Sa- 
vantes.  The  Marquis  represents  the  "noble  patron/'  who  judges  of  a 
play  before  he  has  seen  it,  who  is  a  critic  by  virtue  of  his  rank,  but  not  of 
his  knowledge;  Lysidas  is  the  envious  pedant,  who  ''damns  with  faint 
praise,"  who  wishes  everything  measured  according  to  the  rules  of  Cock- 
er's arithmetic,  who  employs  the  little  knowledge  with  which  Heaven  has 
afflicted  him  to  hide  his  own  mediocrity,  and  who  afterwards  will  be  farther 
developed  in  the  Femme  Savantes  as  Trissotin  and  Vadius.  Dorante,  the 
man  of  sense,  is  also  more  fully  shown  in  the  Clitandre  of  the  same  play. 
A  few  days  after  the  play  was  produced,  it  was  reported  that  Lysidas 
was  meant  for  Boursault,  the  ridiculous  Marquis  for  the  Duke  de  La 
Feuillade,  whilst  it  was  said  that  the  Abbe1  d'Aubignac  was  also  laughed 
at;  but  as  Moliere  himself  states  in  The  School  for  Wives  criticised: — 
"  All  the  ridiculous  delineations  which  are  drawn  on  the  stage  should  be 
looked  on  by  everyone  without  annoyance.  They  are  public  mirrors  in 
which  we  must  never  pretend  to  see  ourselves." 

147 

148  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED. 

Boursault  believed,  or  affected  to  believe,  that  Moliere  intended  to 
pourtray  him,  and  hence  replied  in  the  Portrait  du  Peintre  which  was  per- 
formed at  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne.  Tradition  mentions  that  the  Duke  de 
la  Feuilla.de  took  other  means  to  avenge  himself.  He  one  day  met  Mo- 
liere in  one  of  the  galleries  of  the  Palace  of  Versailles.  Pretending  to  be 
very  polite  and  courteous,  he  ran  towards  him  smiling,  and  whilst  em- 
bracing him,  and  rubbing  all  the  while  the  actor's  face  against  the  metal- 
worked  buttons  of  his  coat,  he  shouted  out,  "  Cream -tart,  Moliere! 
Cream-tart !  "  It  is  said  that  Louis  XIV.  banished  the  Duke  from  the 
Court  for  some  time  for  this  offence,  and  that  he  ordered  Moliere  to  take 
anew  vengeance  upon  his  enemies.  There  can  be  no  doubt  about  the 
order,  for  Moliere  states  so  expressly  in  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles. 

The  School  for  Wives  criticised  may  be  taken  as  Moliere's  general  re- 
ply to  his  critics ;  for  it  deals  as  much  with  the  points  of  good  and  bad 
criticism  as  with  the  special  features  of  The  School  for  Wives.  Indeed, 
the  defence  raised,  through  the  mouth  of  Dorante,  of  certain  passages  of 
the  latter  play  which  had  been  roughly  handled  by  the  poet's  contempora- 
ries, are  perhaps  the  weakest  parts  of  The  School  for  Wives  criticised; 
whereas  the  generalities  which  deal  with  the  art  and  practice  of  criticism 
are  exceptionally  shrewd  and  pungent. 

The  School  for  Wives  met  with  a  flattering  reception,  in  the  sense  that 
the  public  were  greatly  divided  as  to  its  merits,  and  carried  on  the  discus- 
sion of  it  with  much  warmth,  and  even  bitterness.  The  play  was  town- 
talk  for  many  days ;  and  in  this  sequel,  Moliere  no  doubt  reflected  the 
principal  arguments  of  his  friends  and  of  his  opponents.  If  he  reflected 
them  aright,  he  did  well  to  preserve  them  in  this  form,  side  by  side;  for 
Dorante,  Urania,  and  their  dissembling  ally  Eliza,  have  infinitely  the  best 
of  the  discussion,  whether  we  regard  them  as  champions  of  Moliere  only, 
or  as  vindicators  of  the  highest  principle  of  dramatic  criticism  in  general. 
Perhaps  the  "School  for  Critics"  would  better  describe  the  most  valuable 
half  of  the  piece. 

Moliere  dedicated  The  School  for  Wives  criticised  to  the  Queen- 
mother  !  in  the  following  words  : — 

MADAM, — I  very  well  know  that  your  Majesty  has  no  need  of  our  dedications, 
and  that  those  pretended  duties  of  which  people  elegantly  tell  you  they  acquit  them- 
selves, are  marks  of  respect  with  which,  to  speak  the  truth,  you  could  very  willingly 
dispense.  But  yet  I  have  the  boldness  to  dedicate  to  you  The  School  for  Wives 
criticised ;  and  I  could  not  omit  this  opportunity  of  testifying  to  your  Majesty  my 

WIK>,  ironi  yuur  luny  uiuugiiib  ctiiu  impui  Laiiu  ui*t-upctLiuiia,  ucscciiu  bu  Kiiiuiy  MJ  UM 
pleasure  of  our  performances,  and  who  do  not  disdain  to  smile  with  the  same  mouth 
with  which  you  pray  to  God  so  devoutly,  I  flatter  my  mind,  I  say,  with  the  expec- 

Thomas  Brown,  of  Shipnal,  in  Yorkshire,  so   well  known  for  his  free 

1  Anne  of  Austria,  eldest  daughter  of  Philip  III.,  King  of  Spain,  wife  of  Louis 
XIII.,  and  mother  of  Louis  XIV.,  was  born  in  1602,  and  died  the  zoth  of  January, 
1666,  sixty-four  years  old.  She  did  not  long  survive  the  "  happy  recovery  "  Mo- 
liere rnnirrafiilntec  her  nr^nn 

Here  congratulates  her  upon. 

THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  149 

and  easy  writings,  wrote  an  imitation  of  The  School  for  Wives  criticised, 
which  he  calls.  "  The  Stage-Beaux  toss'd  in  a  blanket,  or  Hypocrisie  a  la 
mode ;  Expos'd  in  a  true  picture  of  Jerry  ...  a  pretending  scourge  to 
the  English  Stage,  A  Comedy  with  a  Prologue  on  Occasional  Conformity  ; 
being  a  full  Explanation  of  the  Poussin  Doctor's  book  ;  and  an  Epilogue 
on  the  Reformers.  Spoken  at  the  Theatre-Royal  in  Drury  Lane,  with 
the  motto,  '  Simulant  Curios  et  Bacchanalia  vivunt, — Juv.'  London, 
Printed  and  Sold  by  J.  Nott,  near  Stationer's  Hall,  1704."  This  piece 
consists  of  three  acts,  while  the  French  has  only  one.  It  is  a  satire 
against  Jeremy  Collier,  on  account  of  his  Short  View  of  the  Immorality 
and  Prophaneness  of  the  English  Stage,  and  was  never  acted.  It  was 
severely  chastised  and  answered  in  sermons  and  pamphlets ;  amongst 
others,  in  "  Serious  Reflections  on  the  Scandalous  Abuse  and  Effects  of  the 
Stage,  in  a  Sermon  preached  at  Bristol,  Jany.  7th,  1704-5,  by  A.  Bed- 
ford," at  the  end  of  which  is  printed  "  a  copy  of  the  Presentation  of  the 
Grand  Jury  to  Mayor,  Aldermen,  and  Justices  of  the  Peace,  asking  them 
to  forbid  the  Acting  of  Plays,"  and  praising  them  ''  for  having  endeav- 
oured to  suppress  Musick-houses,  and  other  Lewd  and  Disorderly  Houses, 
Tipling,  or  Idle  walking  on  the  Lord's  Day ;  "  also  in  A  Representation 
of  the  Impiety  and  Immorality  of  the  English  Stage,  1704,  A.  Bedford  ; 
in  A  Second  Advertisement  concerning  the  Profaneness  of  the  Playhouse ; 
and  in  The  Evil  and  Danger  of  Stage  Plays  in  almost  2000  instances 
taken  from  the  plays  of  the  two  last  years,  by  A.  Bedford,  1706.  Again, 
in  A  Serious  Remonstrance  in  behalf  of  the  Christian  Religion  against 
the  horrid  Blasphemies  and  Impieties  -which  are  still  used  in  the  English 
Play- House,  etc.,  from  almost  7000  instances,  taken  out  of  the  Plays  of  the 
present  Century,  1719,  by  A.  Bedford ;  and  finally,  in  The  Absolute  un- 
lawfulness of  the  Stage  Entertainment  fully  demonstrated,  by  W.  Law, 
A.  M.,  1726.  The  Stage-Beaux  is  dedicated  to  Christopher  Rich,  pat- 
entee of  the  Theatre  Royal,  in  a  humorous  epistle,  in  which  Themistocles, 
Milton,  and  even  Collier  himself  are  mentioned  as  friends  of  the  Drama, 
and  in  which  it  is  stated  that  "  the  stage  exposes  Knaves  and  Fools, 
Misers,  Prodigals,  Affectation,  Hypocrisie,  etc.,  and  that  has  provoked 
some  to  be  its  zealous  Foes,  under  the  pretended  Name  of  Sanctity  and 
Religion."  The  Prologue,  spoken  by,  "  one  dress'd  one-half  like  a  Non- 
con  Parson,  and  the  other  like  an  Orthodox  Divine,"  opens  thus : — 

"  My  Dress  is  Odd,  but  yet  'tis  Alamode, 
Invented  to  unite  Mammon  with  God. 

TI_:_  o:j_  :_  TI l I  r..ll  ~c    v  ..:...  C_ 

The  character  in  Brown's  play  which  is  not  in  the  French  comedy  is 
Sir  Jerry  Witwind,  a  pert,  talkative,  half-witted  coxcomb,  an  arrant  hypo- 
crite, and  a  most  immoral  man, — a  rather  free  imitation  of  Tartuffe. 
whose  very  words  he  sometimes  employs,  and  whose  worst  actions  he  ex- 
aggerates at  the  end  of  the  third  act.  The  two  last  acts  of  the  Stage 
Beaux  are  chiefly  occupied  with  attacks  on  Collier,  some  of  which  are 

150  THE  SCHOOL   FOR    WIVES   CRITICISED. 

very  amusing ;  but  the  first   act  contains   a  very  fair   imitation  of  a  few 
scenes  of  The  School  for  Wives  criticised. 

Wycherley  has  also  borrowed  from  The  School  for  Wives  criticised  a 
scene  of  his  Plain-Dealer,  which,  as  a  whole,  is  partly  taken  from  Moliere's 
Misanthrope.  In  the  part  thus  imitated  he  tries  to  defend  The  Coun- 
try Wife,  and  boldly  states  that  "a  lady  may  call  her  own  modesty  in 
question  by  publicly  cavilling  with  the  poets  ;  "  but  Olivia's  defence  of  the 
play  is  as  bad  as  The  Country  Wife  itself.  She  reminds  us  of  a  certain 
French  wit,  of  the  last  century,  called  Duclos,  who  one  day  stated  in  the 
presence  of  some  ladies  that  respectable  women  might  hear  any  story 
without  being  shocked ;  and  then  he  went  on  relating  some,  which  were 
bad  enough,  and  was  going  to  tell  some  which  were  even  worse,  when 
one  of  the  ladies  present  stopped  him  by  saying,  ''  Monsieur  Duclos,  you 
really  believe  us  to  be  more  respectable  than  we  are." 

DRAMATIS   PERSONS. 

THE  MARQUIS. 

DORANTE,  or  THE  CHEVALIER. 

LYSIDAS,  a  poet. 

GALOPIN,  a  lackey. 

URANIA. 
ELIZA.  * 
CLIMENE. 

Scene. — PARIS,  IN  THE  HOUSE  OF  URANIA. 

*  Eliza  is  the  first  part  created  by  Moliere's  wife,  who  had  only  been 
married  about  fifteen  months.  Our  author  always  wrote  for  his  wife  parts 
in  which  sharp  sayings,  caustic  wit,  and  a  certain  amount  of  coquetry  are 
to  be  found.  Madam  Moltere  begins  as  Eliza,  and  ends  as  Celimene,  in 
The  Misanthrope. 

THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED. 

(LA  CRITIQUE  DE  L'  ECOLE  DES  FEMMES.) 

SCENE  I. — URANIA,  ELIZA. 

UR.  What !  cousin,  has  no  one  been  to  visit  you  ? 

EL.  Not  a  soul. 

UR.  I  am  really  astonished  that  we  have  both  of  us  been 
alone  the  whole  day. 

EL.  It  astonishes  me,  too;  for  it  is  by  no  means  usual; 
and  your  house,  thank  Heaven  !  is  the  ordinary  resort  of 
all  the  loungers  at  Court. 

UR.  The  afternoon,  to  be  candid,  seems  very  tedious 
to  me. 

EL.  And  I  have  found  it  very  short. 

UR.  That,  cousin,  is  because  witty  people  love  solitude. 

EL.  Oh !  I  am  not  one  of  those  witty  people.  You 
know  I  have  no  pretensions  to  that. 

UR.  For  my  part,  I  confess  I  like  company. 

EL.  So  do  I,  but  I  like  it  select ;  and  the  number  of 
stupid  visits  we  have  to  endure  is,  amongst  others,  the 
reason  why  I  often  take  pleasure  in  being  alone. 

UR.  It  is  an  over-refinement,  not  to  be  able  to  bear  any 
but  select  people. 

EL.  And  it  is  too  indiscriminate  a  complaisance  to  bear 
all  sorts  of  people  with  indifference. 

UR.  I  relish  those  who  are  sensible,  and  amuse  myself 
with  those  who  talk  nonsense. 

EL.  In  truth,  those  who  talk  nonsense  do  not  proceed 
far  without  wearying  you ;  and  most  of  those  folks  are  no 
longer  amusing  after  the  second  visit.  But,  talking  of 

154  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  [SCENE  i. 

your  nonsensical  people,  will  you  not  rid  me  of  your 
troublesome  Marquis  ?  Do  you  mean  always  to  leave  him 
on  my  hands,  and  do  you  think  that  I  can  hold  out  for 
ever  against  his  everlasting  quips  ? 3 

UR.  It  is  the  language  of  fashion,  and  they  make  merry 
over  it  at  Court. 

EL.  So  much  the  worse  for  those  who  do,  and  who  rack 
their  brains  all  day  long  to  talk  such  an  obscure  jargon. 
A  fine  thing,  to  introduce  into  the  conversation  of  the 
Louvre  their  stale  double  enfendres,  raked  together  from 
the  kennels  of  the  markets  and  of  the  Place  Maubert !  *  A 
pretty  style  of  jesting  for  courtiers,  and  for  a  man  to  dis- 
play his  wit  by  coming  up  to  you,  and  saying,  "  Madame, 
you  are  in  the  Place  Royale ;  every  one  sees  you  three 
leagues  from  Paris,  for  every  one  is  pleased  to  see  you  ; ' ' 
because  Bonneuil  is  a  village  three  leagues  off ! 5  Is  it  not 
very  gallant  and  very  witty  ?  And  ought  they  not  to  be 
proud  for  having  hit  upon  such  pretty  puns  ? 

UR.  At  the  same  time,  they  do  not  say  this  as  a  piece  of 
wit;  for  most  of  those  who  affect  this  language  know 
themselves  that  it  is  ridiculous. 

EL.  Worse  still,  to  be  at  such  pains  to  talk  nonsense, 

'The  original  has  turlupinades.  Turlupins  were  certain  heretics,  inthe 
thirteenth  and  fourteenth  centuries,  condemned  by  the  Roman  Catholic 
Church ;  hence  the  name,  after  some  time,  was  given  to  any  bad  joker. 
There  was  an  actor  at  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne,  Henri  Legrand,  who  died 
in  1634,  and  was  a  famous  turlupin.  After  the  performance  of  The  School 
for  Wives  Criticised,  the  Marquises  affected  the  name  of  turlupins. 

4  The  language  of  the  markets,  halles,  is  not  very  choice,  something 
like  '*  Billingsgate."  The  Place  Maubert  is  a  square  in  Paris,  at  the  foot 
of  the  Montagne  St.  Genevieve,  in  the  thickly  populated  neighbourhood  of 
the  quartier  Mouffetard.  Various  origins  are  adduced  for  its  name  but 
the  most  feasible  seems  to  me  this  one.  In  the  fourteenth  century,  a  cele- 
brated German  professor  of  Philosophy  settled  in  Paris,  and  met  in  a  short 
time  with  such  a  great  success  that  no  building  could  be  found  large 
enough  to  contain  his  audience.  He  therefore  delivered  his  lectures  in 
the  open  air.  His  name  was  maitre  Albert  Groot,  (Albertus  Magnus) 
hence  the  contraction  Maubert  for  maitre  Albert.  After  this  and  until  very 
lately,  in  fact  until  the  improvements  inaugurated  by  the  Empire  took  a 
corner  of  it  away  to  make  room  for  the  Boulevard  St.  Germain,  it  was  a 
rendezvous  for  mountebanks,  bear-leaders,  and  fire-eaters,  a  sort  of  fair 
as  is  now  the  Place  de  la  Bastille,  hence  the  allusion  to  the  double  entendres. 

6 There  is  a  pun  in  the  original  which  cannot  be  translated:  chacun 
vonsvoit  de  bonaeil  means  "  everyone  is  pleased  to  see  you,"  but  Bonneuil 
is  also  a  village  three  leagues  from  Paris. 

SCBNKII.J  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  155 

and  to  be  sorry  jokers  on  purpose  !  I  think  them  less  ex- 
cusable for  this  ;  and  if  I  were  their  judge,  I  know  well  to 
what  I  would  condemn  all  these  gentry,  the  punsters. 

UR.  A  truce  to  this  subject,  which  seems  to  excite  you ; 
let  us  talk  of  Dorante,  who,  methinks,  is  long  in  coming 
to  the  supper  we  are  to  take  together. 

EL.  Perhaps  he  has  forgotten  it,  and  .    .    . 

SCENE  II. — URANIA,  ELIZA,  GALOPIN. 

GAL.  Madam,  Climene  has  come  to  see  you. 

UR.  Oh  !  bless  me,  here  is  a  visit ! 

EL.  You  complained  of  being  alone ;  so  Heaven 
punishes  you  for  it. 

UR.  Quick  !  go  and  tell  her  I  am  not  at  home. 

GAL.   She  has  already  been  told  that  you  are  in. 

UR.  Who  is  the  fool  that  told  her? 

GAL.  I,  madam. 

UR.  Deuce  take  the  little  rascal !  I  shall  teach  you  to 
give  answers  on  your  own  behalf ! 

GAL.  I  go  and  tell  her,  madam,  that  you  do  not  wish 
to  be  at  home. 

UR.  Stay,  you  stupid  !  As  the  mischief  is  done,  let  her 
come  up. 

GAL.  She  is  still  talking  to  a  man  in  the  street. 

UR.  Ah !  cousin,  how  annoying  this  visit  is  just  now ! 

EL.  True  ;  the  lady  is  naturally  rather  troublesome.  I 
always  disliked  her  much ;  and,  though  she  is  a  lady  of 
rank,  she  is  the  most  stupid  creature  that  ever  pretended 
to  sense. 

UR.  The  term  is  rather  strong. 

EL.  Come,  come ;  she  richly  deserves  it,  and  more  too, 
if  justice  were  done  her.  Is  there  any  one  that  bette'r 
deserves  to  go  by  the  name  of  &precieuse*  than  she,  to  use 
the  word  in  its  worst  sense  ? 

UR.  She  disclaims  the  epithet,  at  all  events. 

EL.  So  she  does.  She  disclaims  the  epithet,  but  not  the 
thing ;  for  she  is  finical  from  head  to  foot,  and  the  most 
formal  creature  in  the  world.  Her  whole  body  appears  to 
be  out  of  joint,  and  the  motions  of  her  hips,  her  shoulders 

•  See  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies. 

IS  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  [SCENE  in. 

and  her  head  seem  to  go  like  a  piece  of  clock-work.  She 
always  assumes  a  languishing  and  silly  tone,  grimaces  to 
make  her  mouth  appear  small,  and  rolls  her  eyes  to  make 
them  seem  large. 

UR.  Softly,    pray.     If  she  should  happen  to   overhear 

EL.  No,  no  ;  she  is  not  coming  up  yet.  I  shall  never 
forget  that  evening  when  she  was  anxious  to  see  Damon, 
on  account  of  his  reputation,  and  of  the  books  he  had 
published.  You  know  the  man,  and  his  natural  indolence 
in  keeping  up  a  conversation.  She  had  invited  him  to 
supper  as  a  wit,  and  never  did  he  appear  such  a  fool  amidst 
half-a-dozen  people  for  whom  she  had  meant  him  to  be  a 
treat,  and  who  stared  at  him  with  all  their  might,  as  if  he 
ought  not  to  be  made  like  other  men.  They  all  thought 
he  was  there  to  entertain  the  company  with  witty  sayings ; 
that  every  word  from  his  mouth  was  to  be  something  ex- 
traordinary ;  that  he  ought  to  deliver  an  impromptu  repar- 
tee on  everything  that  was  said,  and  not  even  to  ask  for  a 
glass  of  wine  without  uttering  a  witticism.  But  he  took 
them  in  by  his  silence ;  and  the  lady  was  as  ill  pleased  with 
him  as  I  was  with  her. 

UR.  Be  quiet !     I  will  go  and  receive  her  at  the  door. 

EL.  One  word  more. — I  wish  she  was  married  to  the 
Marquis  we  spoke  of.  What  a  fine  match  it  would  be,  be- 
tween a  prtcieuse  and  a  turlupin  ! 

UR.  Will  you  be  quiet !     Here  she  comes. 

SCENE  III. — CLIMENE,  URANIA,  ELIZA,  GALOPIN. 

UR.  How  long  you  have  been  .    .    . 

"  CL.  Oh !  for  Heaven's  sake,  my  dear,  make  them  bring 
me  a  chair  immediately  ! 

UR.  (To  Galopin).     An  arm-chair  here,  quick! 

CL.  Oh,  good  Heaven  ! 

UR.  What  can  be  the  matter  ? 

CL.  I  can  bear  it  no  longer. 

UR.  What  ails  you  ? 

CL.  I  am  going  to  faint. 

UR.  Have  you  got  the  vapours  ? 

CL.  No. 

SCENE  HI.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR  WIVES   CRITICISED. 

UR.  Shall  I  unlace  you  ? 

CL.   O  lord  !  no,— Oh  ! 

UR.  What  is  your  ailment,  then?  When  did  it  seize 
you? 

CL.  Above  three  hours  ago ;  and  I  brought  it  from  the 
Palais  Royal.7 

UR.  How? 

CL.  I  have  just  seen,  as  a  punishment  for  my  sins,  that 
villainous  rhapsody  The  School  for  Wives.  I  feel  still  a 
twinge  from  the  fainting-fit  which  it  gave  me ;  I  believe  I 
shall  not  be  myself  again  for  a  fortnight. 

EL.  Just  see  how  our  ailments  arise  without  our  suspect- 
ing it ! 

UR.  I  do  not  know  what  stuff  my  cousin  and  I  are 
made  of;  but  we  were  at  the  same  play  the  day  before 
yesterday,  and  we  both  came  away  well  and  hearty. 

CL.  What  !  have  you  seen  it? 

Ur.  Yes,  and  listened  to  every  word. 

CL.  And  did  you  not  almost  go  into  convulsions,  my 
dear? 

UR.  I  am  not  so  delicate,  thank  Heaven  !  For  my 
part,  I  fancy  that  this  comedy  would  be  more  likely  to 
cure  folks,  than  to  make  them  sick. 

CL.  Oh,  good  Heaven !  What  are  you  saying  ?  Can 
such  a  proposition  be  advanced  by  any  one  who  has  the 
smallest  stock  of  common  sense?  Do  you  think  that 
everyone  can,  with  impunity,  insult  reason,  as  you  do  ? 
And  is  there  in  very  truth  a  mind  so  hungry  for  a  joke  as 
to  relish  the  silly  things  with  which  this  play  is  seasoned? 
I  confess,  for  my  part,  I  could  not  find  the  least  wit  in 
the  whole  of  it.  Children  through  the  ear  was,  to  my 
thinking,  in  execrable  taste  ;8  the  cream  tart 9  turned  me 
sick;  and  I  thought  I  must  have  vomited  when  I  heard 
broth™  mentioned. 

EL.  Heavens  !  most  elegantly  spoken  !  I  was  inclined 
to  think  the  piece  good  ;  but  the  lady's  eloquence  is  so 
persuasive,  and  gives  such  an  agreeable  turn  to  things, 
that  I  must  be  of  her  opijiion  in  spite  of  myself. 

7  Moliere's  troop  was  then  playing  at  the  Palais  Royal. 

8  See  page  351,  Act  i.,  Scene  2.    9See  page  352,  Act  i.,  Scene  i. 
10 See  page  353,  Act  ii.,  Scenes. 

158  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  [SCENE  in. 

UR.  For  my  part,  I  am  not  so  easily  moved.  To  be 
candid,  I  look  on  this  play  as  one  of  the  most  diverting 
which  the  author  has  produced. 

CL.  Oh  !  I  pity  you  for  talking  so.  I  cannot  let  you 
display  so  much  bluntness  of  perception.  Can  a  virtuous 
person  find  anything  pleasant  in  a  piece  that  keeps  her 
modesty  in  continual  alarm,  and  sullies  the  imagination 
at  every  turn  ? 

EL.  What  a  nice  way  of  speaking !  What  a  terrible 
hand  you  are  at  criticism,  madam ;  and  how  I  pity  poor 
Moliere  in  having  you  for  an  enemy  ! 

CL.  Believe  me,  dear,  correct  your  judgment  in  good 
earnest ;  for  the  sake  of  your  honour,  do  not  openly  say 
that  this  comedy  has  pleased  you. 

UR.  I  cannot  think  what  you  found  in  it  to  shock  your 
modesty. 

CL.  Good  lack !  all  of  it.  I  do  maintain  it  for  a  fact 
that  a  gentlewoman  cannot  see  it  without  confusion;  so 
much  impropriety  and  nastiness  did  I  find  in  it. 

UR.  You  must  have  a  special  discernment  for  impro- 
priety. I  own  I  could  see  none. 

CL.  It  is  undoubtedly  because  you  would  n.ot  see  it ; 
for  in  short,  all  its  impropriety,  thank  Heaven  !  is  plain 
enough.  It  has  not  the  least  cloak  to  hide  it;  and  the 
boldest  eyes  are  shocked  by  its  nakedness. 

EL.  Oh! 

CL.  Ah!  ah!  ah! 

UR.  Yet  once  more,  if  you  please,  point  out  to  me 
some  of  the  improprieties  you  speak  of. 

CL.  Alas !  is  it  necessary  to  point  them  out  ? 

UR.  Yes.  I  ask  of  you  but  one  passage  that  shocked 
you  very  much. 

CL.  Do  you  wish  any  other  than  the  scene  with  that 
Agnes,  when  she  tells  what  Horace  took  from  her  ? 

UR.  What  do  you  find  improper  in  that  ? 

CL.  Ah! 

UR.  Please. 

CL.  Fie! 

UR.  But  .    .    . 

CL.  I  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  you. 

UR.  For  my  part,  I  see  no  harm  in  it. 

SCKNKIII.]          THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  159 

CL.  So  much  the  worse  for  you. 

UR.  So  much  the  better,  I  think.  I  look  at  things  as 
they  are  shown  to  me,  and  do  not  turn  them  round  to 
look  at  what  should  not  be  seen. 

CL.  But  a  woman's  modesty  .    .    . 

UR.  A  woman's  modesty  does  not  consist  in  grimacing. 
It  ill  becomes  us  to  be  over-wise.  Affectation  of  this  kind 
is  worse  than  anything ;  and  I  see  nothing  more  ridicu- 
lous than  that  delicate  honour  which  takes  everything 
amiss,  gives  a  bad  meaning  to  the  most  innocent  words, 
and*  is  startled  at  shadows.  Believe  me,  those  who  make 
so  much  ado  are  not  esteemed  the  most  honest  women. 
On  the  contrary,  their  mysterious  severity  and  affected 
grimaces  provoke  public  animadversions  upon  the  actions 
of  their  own  lives.  The  world  is  only  too  glad  to  discover 
anything  to  carp  at.  To  give  you  a  proof,  there  were 
some  ladies  at  this  comedy  the  other  day,  in  a  box  oppo- 
site to  ours,  who,  by  their  affected  gestures  throughout 
the  piece,  by  averting  their  heads  and  hiding  u  their  faces, 
gave  rise  to  a  hundred  impertinent  remarks  upon  their 
behaviour,  which  would  never  have  been  uttered  but  for 
that;  one  of  the  footmen  even  cried  out  aloud  that  their 
ears  were  more  chaste  than  all  the  rest  of  their  bodies. 

CL.  In  short,  we  ought  to  be  blind  throughout  this 
play,  and  pretend  not  to  see  anything  in  it. 

UR.  We  ought  not  to  see  what  is  not  there. 

CL.  Do  not  tell  me.  I  maintain  that  the  improprieties 
are  glaring. 

UR.  And  I  remain  still  of  a  different  mind. 

CL.  What !  Is  not  modesty  plainly  shocked  by  Agnes 
in  the  passage  we  are  speaking  about  ? 

UR.  No,  truly.  She  does  not  say  a  word  which  is  in- 
delicate in  itself;  and  if  you  will  understand  something 
else,  it  is  you  who  create  the  impropriety,  and  not  she, 
for  she  only  speaks  of  the  ribbon  that  was  taken  from  her. 

CL.  Oh  yes,  the  ribbon  !  But  that  the,  when  she  checks 
herself,  is  not  put  there  for  nothing.  Odd  ideas  are  sug- 
gested by  this  the.  That  the  is  tremendously  scandalous. 

11  There  are  no  nouns  in  the  French  language  for  "averting."  and 
"  hiding ; "  Moliere  coins  here  detournement  and  cachement,  but  these 
words  have  not  been  adopted. 

l6o  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.          [SCENE  m. 

Say  what  you  will,  you  cannot  defend  the  coarseness  of 
this  the. 

EL.  True,  cousin,  I  am  with  this  lady  against  that  the. 
That  the  is  excessively  coarse ;  you  are  wrong  to  defend 
that  the. 

CL.  Its  obscenity  is  unbearable. 

EL.  What  word  do  you  use,  Madam  ? 

CL.  Obscenity,  Madam. 

EL.  Oh,  good  gracious  !  obscenity.  I  do  not  know 
the  meaning  of  the  word  ;  but  I  think  it  very  nice  !12 

CL.  There  !  You  see  how  your  own  relation  takes  my 
part. 

UR.  Ah  !  she  is  a  chatter-box,  who  does  not  speak  as 
she  thinks.  Do  not  trust  her  much,  if  you  will  take  my 
advice. 

EL.  Oh  !  you  wicked  creature,  to  try  to  make  this  lady 
suspect  me.  Just  think  what  would  become  of  me,  if 
she  were  to  believe  what  you  say.  Could  I  be  so  unfor- 
tunate, Madam,  as  to  have  you  think  this  of  me  ? 

CL.  No,  no.  I  do  not  mind  her  words,  and  I  believe 
that  you  are  more  sincere  than  she  says. 

EL.  Oh,  you  are  quite  right,  Madam ;  and  you  do  me 
justice  when  you  believe  that  I  think  you  the  most  enga- 
ging person  in  the  world ;  that  I  enter  into  all  your  senti- 
ments, and  am  charmed  with  every  expression  that  comes 
from  your  lips. 

CL.  Indeed,  I  speak  without  affectation. 

EL.  We  can  see  that,  Madam,  quite  well ;  and  every- 
thing about  you  is  natural.  Your  words,  the  tone  of  your 
voice,  your  gait,  your  actions,  and  your  dress,  have  an  in- 
describable air  of  fashion  about  them,  which  is  quite  en- 
chanting. I  study  you  with  my  eyes  and  ears;  and  I  am 
so  full  of  you  that  I  strive  to  ape  you  and  imitate  you  in 
everything. 

CL.  You  are  bantering  me,  Madam. 

EL.  Pardon  me,  Madam.     Who  could  banter  you? 

CL.   I  am  not  a  good  model,  Madam. 

EL.  Oh,  yes,  Madam. 

in  French  a  new  word  ;  it  was  employed  for  the 
first  time  by  the  translators  of  the  Bible,  called  traducteurs  de  Mons. 

SCKNB  iv.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  l6l 

CL.  You  flatter  me,  Madam. 

EL.  Not  at  all,  Madam. 

CL.  Spare  me,  I  beg  you,  Madam. 

EL.  I  do  spare  you,  Madam,  and  I  say  not  half  of  what 
I  think,  Madam. 

CL.  Ah,  good  Heavens  !  let  us  stop  it,  I  beseech  you. 
You  throw  me  into  a  dreadful  confusion.  (To  Urania}. 
There,  you  see  we  are  both  against  you,  and  obstinacy 
so  ill  becomes  clever  people  .  .  . 

SCENE   IV. — THE   MARQUIS,   CLIMENE,  URANIA,    ELIZA, 
GALOPIN. 

GAL.  (At  the  door).     Stop  sir,  please? 

MAR.  Do  you  not  know  me,  fellow? 

GAL.  Ay,  I  know  you;  but  you  shall  not  come  in. 

MAR.  What  a  noise  you  are  making,  little  lackey. 

GAL.  It  is  not  fair  to  wish  to  get  in  where  you  are  not 
wanted. 

MAR.  I  wish  to  see  your  mistress. 

GAL.   She  is  not  at  home,  I  tell  you. 

MAR.  Why,  she  is  in  her  room  there ! 

GAL.  That  may  be ;  she  is  there,  but  she  is  not  at  home. 

UR.  What  is  the  matter? 

MAR.  Your  lackey,  Madam,  is  playing  the  fool. 

GAL.  Madam,  I  am  telling  him  you  are  not  at  home, 
and  he  will  insist  on  coming  in. 

UR.  And  why  did  you  tell  this  gentleman  that  I  am 
not  at  home? 

GAL.  You  scolded  me  the  other  day  for  telling  him  you 
were  at  home. 

UR.  The  insolent  fellow !  Pray,  sir,  do  not  attend  to 
what  he  says.  He  is  a  little  stupid  creature,  who  takes 
you  for  some  one  else. 

MAR.  I  saw  as  much,  Madam;  and,  had  it  not  been  out 
of  respect  for  you,  I  should  have  taught  him  to  distinguish 
people  of  quality. 

EL.  My  cousin  is  much  obliged  to  you  for  this  deference. 

UR.  ( To  Galopiri).     Bring  a  chair  there,  impertinent. 

GAL.  Is  there  not  one  there? 

UR.  Bring  it  nearer!  (Galopin  pushes  it  ruddy  and  exit).. 

162  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED.  [SCENE  vi. 

SCENE  V. — THE  MARQUIS,  CLIMENE,  URANIA,  ELIZA. 

MAR.  Your  little  lackey,  madam,  has  a  special  contempt 
for  me. 

EL.  He  would  certainly  be  much  to  blame. 

MAR.  It  is  possibly  because  I  pay  interest  on  my  ill 
looks.  Ha,  ha,  ha!  (laughing). 

EL.  Age  will  make  him  know  people  of  fashion  better. 

MAR.  Of  what  were  you  speaking,  ladies,  when  I  inter- 
rupted you? 

UR.  Of  the  comedy,  The  School  for  Wives. 

MAR.  I  have  just  come  from  it. 

CL.  Well,  sir,  pray  how  do  you  like  it? 

MAR.  It  is  altogether  silly. 

CL.  Oh,  I  am  so  delighted  to  hear  you  say  so ! 

MAR.  The  most  wretched  piece  imaginable.  What  the 
deuce !  I  could  hardly  get  a  seat.  I  thought  I  should 
have  been  crushed  to  death  at  the  door,  and  I  was  never 
so  trampled  upon.  Pray  see  what  a  state  my  rolls  and 
ribbons  are  in ! 

EL.  That  certainly  speaks  volumes  against  The  School 
for  Wives,  and  you  justly  condemn  it 

MAR.  Never,  I  think,  was  such  a  wretched  play  composed. 

UR.  Ah,  here  is  Dorante,  whom  we  were  expecting. 

SCENE  VI. — DORANTE,  THE  MARQUIS,  CLIMENE,  ELIZA, 
URANIA. 

DOR.  Pray  do  not  move,  and  do  not  break  off  your  con- 
versation. You  are  on  a  subject  which,  for  four  days,  has 
been  the  common  talk  of  Paris ;  and  never  was  anything 
more  amusing  than  to  hear  the  various  judgments  that  are 
passed  upon  it.  For,  indeed,  I  have  heard  this  play  con- 
demed  by  some  for  the  very  things  that  others  most  praise. 

UR.  The  Marquis  speaks  very  ill  of  it. 

MAR.  It  is  true.  I  think  it  detestable,  detestable, 
egad  !  to  the  last  degree  detestable ;  what  you  may  call 
detestable  ! 

DOR.  And  I,  dear  Marquis,  think  the  judgment  detest- 
able. 

MAR.  How,  Chevalier,  do  you  mean  to  vindicate  this 
play? 

SCBNKVI.]  THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  163 

DOR.  Yes,  I  do  mean  to  vindicate  it. 

MAR.  Egad,  I  warrant  it  to  be  detestable. 

DOR.  That  guarantee  would  not  be  accepted  in  the 
city.15  But  Marquis,  for  what  reason,  pray,  is  this  comedy 
as  you  describe  it  ? 

MAR.  Why  detestable  ? 

DOR.  Ay. 

MAR.  It  is  detestable — because  it  is  detestable. 

DOR.  After  that,  there  is  not  a  word  to  be  said  ;  the 
cause  is  ended.  But  still,  instruct  us,  and  tell  us  its  faults. 

MAR.  How  can  I  ?  I  did  not  so  much  as  give  myself 
the  trouble  to  listen  to  it.  But  yet  I  assure  you  I  never 
saw  anything  so  wretched,  as  I  hope  to  be  saved ;  and 
Dorilas,  who  sat  opposite  to  me,  was  of  my  mind. 

DOR.  The  authority  is  weighty,  and  you  are  well  backed. 

MAR.  You  have  only  to  mark  the  continual  bursts  of 
laughter  from  the  pit.  I  wish  no  more  to  prove  its  utter 
worthlessness. 

DOR.  You  are  then,  Marquis,  one  of  those  grand  gen- 
tlemen who  will  not  allow  the  pit  to  have  common  sense, 
and  who  would  be  vexed  to  join  in  their  laugh,  though 
it  were  at  the  best  thing  conceivable  ?  The  other  day,  I 
saw  one  of  our  friends  on  the  stage,  who  made  himself 
ridiculous  by  this.  He  heard  the  piece  out  with  the  most 
gloomy  seriousness  imaginable;  and  whatever  tickled 
others  made  him  frown.  At  every  burst  of  laughter  he 
shrugged  his  shoulders  and  cast  a  look  of  pity  on  the  pit ; 
occasionally,  too,  he  glanced  contemptuously  at  them, 
saying  in  an  audible  voice,  "  Laugh  away,  pit,  laugh 
away !  "  "  Our  friend's  annoyance  was  a  second  comedy. 
He  acted  bravely  before  the  whole  house,  and  everyone 
agreed  that  he  could  not  have  played  his  part  better. 
Pray,  note,  Marquis,  and  your  friends  as  well,  that  com- 

18  The  original  has  la  caution  nest  fas  boiirgeoise,  a  saying  which  owes 
its  origin  to  the  ancient  custom  of  giving  a  certain  number  of  the  chief- 
citizens  of  a  town  as  hostages  to  a  conqueror ;  hence  it  came  to  mean  "  a 
security  as  good  as  that  of  any  well  known  townsman."  Moliere  uses  the 
same  term  in  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies,  when  Mascarille  says :  "  I 
shall  .  .  .  expect  very  good  security  that  they  do  me  no  mischief." 

14  The  name  of  this  fine  gentleman  has  come  down  to  us  ;  he  was  called 
Plapisson,  and  used  the  words  which  Dorante  mentions,  at  the  representa- 
tion of  The  School  for  Wives. 

164  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  [SCENE  vi. 

raon  sense  has  no  fixed  place  at  a  theatre ;  that  the  differ- 
ence between  half  a  louis  and  fifteen  sous15  makes  none 
whatever  in  the  matter  of  good  taste ;  that  whether  we  sit 
or  stand,  we  may  pass  a  bad  judgment ;  and  that,  in  short, 
speaking  generally,  I  would  place  considerable  reliance  on 
the  applause  of  the  pit,  because,  amongst  those  who  go 
there,  many  are  capable  of  judging  the  piece  according  to 
rule,  whilst  others  judge  it  as  they  ought,  allowing  them- 
selves to  be  guided  by  circumstances,  having  neither  a 
blind  prejudice,  nor  an  affected  complaisance,  nor'a  ridicu- 
lous refinement. 

MAR.  So,  sir,  you  are  a  defender  of  the  pit  !  Egad,  I 
am  glad  of  it ;  I  shall  not  fail  to  let  them  know  that  you 
are  one  of  their  friends.  Ha,  ha,  ha,  ha,  ha  ! 

DOR.  Laugh  as  much  as  you  like.  I  am  for  good  sense, 
and  I  cannot  bear  the  brain-bubbles  of  our  Mascarille- 
Marquises.16  It  drives  me  mad  to  see  people  make  them- 
selves ridiculous,  in  spite  of  their  rank  ;  folks  who  always 
decide,  and  talk  boldly  of  everything  without  knowledge : 
who  will  shout  with  pleasure  at  the  bad  parts  of  a  comedy, 
and  never  applaud  those  which  are  good;  who,  when 
they  see  a  picture,  or  go  to  a  concert,  blame  and  praise 
all  by  rule  of  contraries ;  who  pick  up  artistic  shibboleths 
wherever  they  can,  get  them  by  heart,  and  never  fail  to 
twist  and  misplace  them.  Zounds,  gentlemen,  hold  your 
peace.  Since  Heaven  has  not  blessed  you  with  the  know- 
ledge of  one  single  thing,  do  not  make  yourselves  laugh- 
ing-stocks to  those  who  hear  you ;  and  remember,  that, 
if  you  never  open  your  mouths,  you  may  perhaps  be  taken 
for  clever  men. 

MAR.  Egad,  sir,  you  are  carrying  this  .    .    . 

DOR.  Why,  Marquis,  I  am  not  speaking  to  you.  I  am 
addressing  a  round  dozen  of  those  gentry  who  disgrace 
courtiers  by  their  nonsensical  manners,  and  make  people 
believe  we  are  all  alike.  For  my  part,  I  shall  disclaim  it 
as  much  as  I  can.  I  shall  fall  foul  of  them  whenever  we 
meet,  until  they  grow  wise  at  last. 

MAR.   Now  tell  me,  sir,  do  you  think  Lysander  has  wit? 

15  See  Prefatory  Memoir,  page  26.,  note  7. 

16  See  Tkt  Pretentious  Yn-ung  Ladies,  page  130. 

SCENE  vi.]  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  165 

DOR.  Yes,  doubtless,  and  a  good  deal  of  it. 

UR.  That  is  what  no  one  can  deny. 

MAR.  Ask  him  what  he  thinks  of  The  School  for  Wives. 
You  shall  see  he  will  tell  you  he  does  not  like  it. 

DOR.  Upon  my  word,  there  are  plenty  who  are  spoiled 
by  too  much  wit,  who  see  things  imperfectly,  because  the 
light  is  too  strong,  and  who  would  even  be  very  sorry  to 
be  of  other  people's  opinion,  so  that  they  may  have  the 
glory  of  passing  judgment  themselves.17 

UR.  It  is  true.  Our  friend  is  doubtless  one  of  those 
people.  He  must  be  first  in  his  opinion,  and  would  have 
others  wait  respectfully  for  his  decision.  All  applause 
which  precedes  his  own  is  an  outrage  on  his  enlighten- 
ment, which  he  avenges  openly  by  taking  the  other  side. 
He  expects  people  to  consult  him  in  all  questions  of  wit : 
and  I  am  sure  that  if  the  author  had  shown  him  his  play 
before  he  let  the  public  see  it,  he  would  have  thought  it 
the  finest  in  the  world. 

MAR.  And  what  do  you  say  of  the  Marchioness  Ara- 
minta,  who  declares  The  School  for  Wives  everywhere 
dreadful,  and  says  she  never  could  endure  the  improprie- 
ties of  which  it  is  full  ? 

DOR.  I  say  that  this  is  of  a  piece  with  the  character  she 
assumes,  and  that  some  folks  make  themselves  ridiculous 
by  affecting  too  much  honour.  Witty,  no  doubt,  she  is, 
but  she  has  followed  the  bad  example  of  those  who,  being 
in  the  decline  of  life,  wish  to  replace  by  some  means  or 
other  what  they  have  lost,  and  fancy  that  grimaces  of  fas- 
tidious prudery  will  serve  instead  of  youth  and  beauty. 
The  lady  in  question  carries  it  farther  than  any  one ;  her 
scrupulous  ingenuity  finds  obscenity  where  no  one  would 
ever  have  seen  it.  I  hear  that  these  scruples  go  the  length 
of  disfiguring  our  language ;  and  that  there  are  scarcely 
any  words  in  it  .of  which  our  lady's  severity  will  not 
dock  either  head  or  tail,  on  account  of  the  immodest 
syllables  she  finds  in  them.18 

"Compare,  in  Vol.  II.,  in  The  Misanthrope  (Act  ii.  Scene  5),  the  de- 
scription of  Damis  by  C61imene. 

18  This  idea  is  also  developed  by  MoliSre  in  The  Countess  of  Escarbag* 
nas  (Scene  19),  and  in  The  Blue  Stockings  (Act  in.  Scene  2).  Both  these 
plays  will  be  found  in  the  third  volume. 

1 66  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.          [SCENE  vii 

UR.  What  a  wag  you  are,  Chevalier  ! 

MAR.  So,  Chevalier,  you  think  to  defend  your  play  by 
satirizing  those  who  condemn  it  ? 

DOR.  By  no  means  ;  but  I  think  that  this  lady  is  scan- 
dalized without  reason  .  .  . 

EL.  Gently,  Chevalier ;  there  may  be  other  ladies  of 
the  same  mind. 

DOR.  I  know,  at  all  events,  that  you  are  not ;  and  that 
when  you  saw  this  play  .  .  . 

EL.  True,  but  I  have  changed  my  opinion,  and  this 
lady  {pointing  to  Climene)  supports  her  by  such  convincing 
reasons,  that  she  has  won  me  over  to  her  side. 

DOR.  (To  Climene}.  Oh  !  Madam,  I  beg  your  pardon  ; 
and  if  you  will,  I  shall  for  your  sake  unsay  all  that  I  have 
said. 

CL.  I  will  not  have  it  for  my  sake,  but  for  reason's  sake: 
for  indeed  this  piece,  if  you  look  at  it  properly,  is  quite 
indefensible,  and  I  cannot  imagine  .  .  . 

UR.  Ah,  here  is  Mr.  Lysidas,  the  author.  He  comes 
just  in  time  for  this  discussion.  Mr.  Lysidas,  take  a  chair, 
and  sit  down  here. 

SCENE  VII. — LYSIDAS,  CLIMENE,  URANIA,  ELIZA, 
DORANTE,  THE  MARQUIS. 

LYS.  Madam,  I  am  rather  late ;  but  I  was  obliged  to 
read  my  piece  at  the  house  of  the  Marchioness,  of  whom  I 
spoke  to  you ;  the  praise  bestowed  on  it  kept  me  an  hour 
longer  than  I  anticipated. 

EL.  Praise  has  a  great  charm  to  delay  an  author. 

UR.  Sit  down,  then,  Mr.  Lysidas;  we  shall  read  your 
play  after  supper. 

LYS.  All  who  were  there  are  coming  to  the  first  repre- 
sentation, and  have  promised  to  do  their  duty  as  they 
ought. 

UR.  I  believe  it.  But  pray,  once  more,  please  to  sit 
down.  We  are  engaged  on  a  subject  which  I  shall  be  glad 
we  should  pursue. 

LYS.  I  trust,  Madam,  that  you  will  also  take  a  box  fbr 
that  day. 

UR.  We  shall  see.  Pray  let  us  go  on  with  our  conver- 
sation. 

SCBNB  vii.]         THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  167 

LYS.  I  warn  you,  Madam,  that  they  are  nearly  all  taken. 

UR.  That  is  capital.  Now  I  was  wanting  you  when  you 
came,  and  every  one  here  was  against  me. 

EL.  (To  Urania,  and  pointing  to  Dorante),  He  was  on 
your  side  at  first,  but  now  {pointing  to  Climeni)  that  he 
knows  that  Climene  is  at  the  head  of  the  opposite  party,  I 
fancy  you  may  just  look  for  other  aid. 

CL.  No,  no  ;  I  would  not  have  him  neglect  your  cousin, 
and  I  will  allow  his  wit  to  be  on  the  side  of  his  heart. 

DOR.  With  this  permission,  Madam,  I  shall  make  bold 
to  defend  myself. 

UR.  But  first  let  us  know  somewhat  of  Lysidas'  mind. 

LYS.   Upon  what,  Madam? 

UR.  On  the  subject  of  The  School  for  Wives. 

LYS.  Ah— h! 

DOR.  What  do  you  think  of  it  ? 

LYS.  I  have  nothing  to  say  on  that  head.  You  know 
that,  amongst  us  authors,  we  must  speak  of  each  other's 
works  with  great  circumspection. 

DOR.  But  still,  between  ourselves,  what  do  you  think  of 
this  play  ? 

LYS.  I,  Sir? 

UR.  Tell  us  your  candid  opinion. 

LYS.  I  think  it  very  fine. 

DOR.  Really? 

LYS.  Really.  Why  not?  Is  it  not  indeed  the  finest 
conceivable  ? 

DOR.  Hum,  hum ;  you  are  a  wicked  fellow,  Mr.  Lysi- 
das. You  do  not  speak  as  you  think. 

LYS.  Pardon  me. 

DOR.  Oh  dear,  I  know  you.     Do  not  dissemble. 

LYS.  I,  Sir? 

DOR.  I  see  clearly  that  you  praise  the  piece  only 
through  politeness,  and  that,  at  the  bottom  of  your  heart, 
you  agree  with  the  many  who  think  it  bad. 

LYS.  Ha,  ha,  ha ! 

DOR.  Come,  confess  that  this  comedy  is  a  wretched 
thing. 

LYS.  True,  it  is  not  admired  by  connoisseurs. 

MAR.  Upon  my  word,  Chevalier,  you  have  got  it !  You 
are  paid  for  your  raillery.  Ha,  ha,  ha ! 

i68 

THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  [SCENB  vii. 

DOR.  Laugh  away,  dear  Marquis,  laugh  away. 

MAR.  You  see  we  have  the  learned  on  our  side. 

DOR.  It  is  true.  Lysidas'  judgment  is  worth  considera- 
tion. But  he  will  excuse  me  if  I  do  not  yield  for  all  that; 
and  since  I  have  presumed  to  defend  myself  against  this 
lady's  opinion  {pointing  to  Climene),  he  will  not  take  it 
amiss  if  I  oppose  his. 

EL.  What !  when  you  see  this  lady,  the  Marquis,  and 
Mr.  Lysidas  against  you,  dare  you  still  resist?  Fie,  what 
bad  manners ! 

CL.  For  my  part,  what  confounds  me  is  that  sensible 
people  can  take  it  into  their  heads  to  defend  the  stupidities 
of  this  piece. 

MAR.  Egad,  Madam,  it  is  wretched  from  beginning  to 
end. 

DOR.  That  is  soon  said,  Marquis.  There  is  nothing 
more  easy  than  to  cut  the  matter  short  in  that  way ;  and 
I  do  not  see  anything  that  can  stand  against  the  sover- 
eignty of  your  decisions. 

MAR.  Gad,  all  the  other  actors  who  went  to  see  it  spoke 
all  the  ill  they  could  of  it. 

DOR.  Oh !  I  will  not  say  another  word.  You  are  right, 
Marquis.  Since  the  other  actors  speak  ill  of  it,  we  must 
certainly  believe  them.  They  are  all  discerning  gentle- 
men, and  speak  disinterestedly.  There  is  no  more  to  be 
said.  I  give  in. 

CL.  Give  in  or  not,  I  am  sure  you  will  never  persuade 
me  to  endure  the  immodesties  of  this  play,  any  more 
than  the  rude  satires  on  woman  which  are  to  be  found 
in  it. 

UR.  For  my  part,  I  shall  be  careful  not  to  be  offended, 
and  to  take  nothing  to  myself  that  is  said  in  it.  Satire 
of  this  kind  is  aimed  directly  at  habits,  and  only  hits 
individuals  by  rebound.  Let  us  not  apply  to  ourselves  the 
points  of  general  censure ;  let  us  profit  by  the  lesson,  if 
possible,  without  assuming  that  we  are  spoken  against. 
All  the  ridiculous  delineations  which  are  drawn  on  the 
stage  should  be  looked  oa  by  every  one  without  annoy- 
ance. They  are  public  mirrors,  in  which  we  must  never 
pretend  to  see  ourselves.  To  bruit  it  about  that  we  are 
offended  at  being  hit,  is  to  state  openly  that  we  are  at  fault. 

SCENE  vii.]          THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  169 

CL.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  speak  of  these  things  for  any 
part  I  may  have  in  them ;  I  think  I  live  in  such  a  manner 
before  the  world  as  not  to  fear  being  looked  for  in  a  pic- 
ture of  ill-behaved  women. 

EL.  Certainly,  Madam,  we  will  never  look  for  you 
there.  Your  conduct  is  sufficiently  well  known,  and  these 
are  things  that  no  one  thinks  of  discussing. 

UR.  (To  Climene}.  Madam,  I  said  nothing  that  could 
apply  to  you ;  my  words,  like  the  satire  of  a  comedy,  are 
confined  to  generalities. 

CL.  I  do  not  doubt  it,  Madam.  But  let  us  no  longer 
dwell  on  this  episode.  I  do  not  know  how  you  take  the 
insults  cast  upon  our  sex  in  a  certain  part  of  the  play ;  for 
my  part,  I  own  I  am  in  a  terrible  passion  to  hear  this 
impertinent  author  call  us  bipeds. 19 

UR.  Do  you  not  see  that  it  is  a  ridiculous  character  he 
makes  to  speak  so  ? 

DOR.  And  besides,  Madam,  do  you  not  know  that  the 
reproaches  of  lovers  never  offend  ;  that  it  is  pretty  much 
the  same  with  furious,  as  with  mawkish  lovers ;  and  that 
on  such  occasions  the  strangest  words,  and  worse  than 
strange,  are  often  taken  as  marks  of  affection  by  the  very 
persons  who  receive  them  ? 

EL.  Say  what  you  will,  I  cannot  digest  that,  any  more 
than  the  broth  and  cream  tart,  of  which  this  lady  was  just 
speaking. 

MAR.  Oh!  Upon  my  word,  yes ;  cream  tart!  That  is 
what  I  was  saying;  cream  tart!  How  I  thank  you, 
Madam,  for  reminding  me  of  cream  tart!  Are  there 
apples  enough  in  Normandy20  for  cream  tart?  Cream 
tart,  egad,  cream  tart ! 

DOR.  Well,  what  do  you  mean  with  your  cream  tart? 

MAR.   'Sdeath!      Cream  tart,  Chevalier  ! 

DOR.   But  what  ? 

MAR.   Cream  tart ! 

DOR.   Let  us  have  your  reasons. 

MAR.    Cream  tart .' 

"See  The  School  for  Wives,  Act  v.,  Scene  4. 

M  Normandy  is  especially  an  apple-growing  country ;  hence  the  allusion 
to  the  custom  of  throwing  cooked  or  raw  apples  at  the  actors  who  dis- 
please the  public. 

17°  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED.          [SCENB  vn. 

UR.  But  I  think  you  should  explain  your  meaning. 

MAR.    Cream  tart,  Madam  ! 

UR.  What  do  you  find  there  to  object  to  ? 

MAR.  I?     Nothing! — Cream  tart ! 

UR.  Oh  !  I  give  it  up. 

EL.  My  lord  goes  the  right  way  to  work,  and  gives  it 
you  nicely.  But  I  wish  Mr.  Lysidas  would  finish,  and 
give  them  a  touch  or  two  in  his  fashion. 

LYS.  It  is  not  my  wont  to  find  fault.  I  am  very  in- 
dulgent to  the  works  of  other  people.  But,  indeed,  with- 
out any  offence  to  the  friendship  which  the  Chevalier 
bears  to  the  author,  it  must  be  owned  that  comedies  of 
this  kind  are  not  genuine  comedies,  and  that  there  is  a 
vast  difference  between  these  trifles  and  the  beauty  of 
serious  pieces.  Yet,  every  one  gives  into  it  nowadays; 
nothing  else  is  run  after ;  we  find  lamentable  solitude  at 
great  productions,  whilst  these  stupid  plays  have  all  Paris 
after  them.  My  heart,  I  own,  bleeds  at  it  sometimes ;  it  is 
a  scandal  to  all  France. 

CL.  It  is  true  that  people's  taste  is  strangely  corrupted 
in  this  matter,  and  that  the  age  is  getting  very  low.21 

EL.  Oh,  that  is  exquisite  again — getting  very  low.  Did 
you  invent  that,  Madam? 

CL.  Ay! 

EL.  I  thought  so. 

DOR.  So  you  think,  Lysidas,  that  all  the  wit  and  beauty 
are  to  be  found  in  serious  poems,  and  that  comic  pieces 
are  trifles  which  deserve  no  praise  ? 

UR.  I  certainly  do  not  think  so.  Tragedy  no  doubt  is 
very  fine  when  it  is  well  written  ;  but  comedy  has  also  its 
charms,  and  I  believe  that  one  is  no  less  difficult  than  the 
other. 

DOR.  Assuredly,  Madam  ;  and  as  to  the  difficulty,  if 
you  should  rather  set  it  on  the  side  of  comedy,  perhaps 
you  would  not  be  far  wrong..  Indeed,  I  think  that  it  is 
much  easier  to  soar  with  grand  sentiments,  to  brave  for- 
tune in  verse,  to  arraign  destiny  and  reproach  the  Gods, 
than  to  broach  ridicule  in  a  fit  manner,  and  to  make  the 

21  The  original  has  J encanailler,  a  word  which  had  only  lately  been 
coined  by  the  Marchioness  de  Maulny,  one  of  the  precieuses. 

BCENBVII.]          THE   SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  1 71 

faults  of  all  mankind  seem  pleasant  on  the  stage.  When 
you  paint  heroes  you  can  do  as  you  like.  These  are  fancy 
portraits,  in  which  we  do  not  look  for  a  resemblance  ;  you 
have  only  to  follow  your  soaring  imagination,  which  often 
neglects  the  true  in  order  to  attain  the  marvellous.  But 
when  you  paint  men,  you  must  paint  after  nature.  We 
expect  resemblance  in  these  portraits  ;  you  have  done 
nothing,  if  you  do  not  make  us  recognise  the  people  of 
your  day.  In  a  word,  in  serious  pieces,  it  suffices,  to 
escape  blame,  to  speak  good  sense,  and  to  write  well. 
But  this  is  not  enough  in  comedy.  You  must  be  merry  ; 
and  it  is  a  difficult  undertaking  to  make  gentle  folks 
laugh. 

CL.  I  think  I  am  one  of  the  gentle  folks ;  and  yet  I  did 
not  find  cause  for  laughter  in  all  I  saw. 

MAR.  Upon  my  word,  no  more  did  I ! 

DOR.  Oh,  you,  Marquis — I  am  not  astonished.  That 
was  because  you  found  no  puns  in  it. 

LYS.  Faith,  sir,  what  we  find  there  is  not  much  better ; 
all  the  jokes  in  this  comedy  are  to  my  mind  a  little  insipid. 

DOR.  The  Court  did  not  think  so. 

LYS.  Ah,  sir,  the  Court? 

DOR.  Pray,  finish,  Mr.  Lysidas.  I  see  you  mean  to  say 
that  the  Court  is  no  judge  in  these  matters ;  and  this  is 
the  usual  refuge  of  you  gentlemen  authors,  in  the  scant 
success  of  your  own  works,  to  accuse  the  injustice  of  the 
age,  and  the  want  of  discernment  of  the  courtiers.  Be 
assured,  Mr.  Lysidas,  that  courtiers  have  as  good  eyes  as 
other  people ;  that  folks  who  wear  Venice  lace  and  feathers 
may  be  as  acute  as  those  who  wear  a  bob-wig  and  a  little 
all-round  cravat ;  that  the  grand  test  of  all  your  plays  is 
the  judgment  of  the  Court ;  that  you  must  study  its  taste, 
in  order  to  find  the  art  of  success  ;  that  there  is  no  place 
where  decisions  are  so  just ;  and  that,  not  to  speak  of  all 
the  learned  men  to  be  found  there,  a  style  of  wit  is  created 
amongst  them,  by  sheer  natural  common  sense  and  the 
intercourse  of  people  of  fashion,  which,  beyond  question, 
judges  more  delicately  of  things  than  all  the  rusty  learning 
of  pedants." 

n  Compare  Dryden's  Defence  of  the  Epilogue,  in  which  he  states  : — 

172  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.          [SCENE  vii. 

UR.  It  is  true  that,  however  little  you  remain  there,  you 
have  plenty  of  things  daily  passing  before  your  eyes  to  give 
you  a  habit  of  recognising  them ;  and  especially,  as  to 
what  concerns  good  or  bad  raillery. 

DOR.  The  Court,  I  grant  you,  has  a  few  ridiculous 
people  ;  and  I  am,  as  you  may  see,  the  first  to  banter  them. 
But,  upon  my  word,  there  is  a  great  number,  too,  amongst 
professional  wits ;  if  we  ridicule  some  Marquises,  I  fancy 
there  is  much  more  reason  to  ridicule  authors.  It  would 
be  amusing  to  put  them  on  the  stage,  with  their  learned 
antics  and  ridiculous  refinements ;  their  vicious  custom  of 
killing  folks  in  their  plays,  their  greed  of  praise,  their 
scantiness  of  thought,  their  traffic  of  reputation,  their 
cliques,  offensive  and  defensive,  as  well  as  their  wars  of  wit, 
and  combats  in  prose  and  verse. 

LYS.  Moliere  is  very  happy,  sir,  in  having  so  warm  a 
defender.  But,  to  come  to  facts,  the  question  is  whether 
this  piece  is  good ;  I  engage  to  shew  in  it  a  hundred 
manifest  faults. 

UR.  It  is  strange  in  you  gentlemen  poets  that  you  always 
condemn  the  pieces  which  every  one  runs  after,  and  speak 
well  only  of  those  which  no  one  goes  to  see.  You  display 
an  unconquerable  hatred  for  the  one,  and  an  inconceivable 
tenderness  for  the  others. 

DOR.  That  is  because  it  is  generous  to  side  with  the  un- 
fortunate. 

UR.  But,  pray,  Mr.  Lysidas,  point  us  out  some  of  those 
faults,  which  I  could  not  detect. 

LYS.  Those  who  are  versed  in  Aristotle  and  Horace, 
Madam,  see  at  once  that  this  comedy  sins  against  all  the 
rules  of  Art. 

UR.  I  confess  that  I  am  not  familiar  with  those  gentle- 
men, and  that  I  do  not  know  the  rules  of  Art. 

DOR.  You  are  a  most  amusing  set  with  your  rules  of 
Art,  with  which  you  embarrass  the  ignorant,  and  deafen 
us  perpetually.  To  hear  you  talk,  one  would  suppose  that 

"  Whence  is  it  that  our  conversation  is  so  much  refined  ?  I  must  freely, 
and  without  flattery,  ascribe  it  to  the  court ;  and  in  it,  particularly  to  the 
king,  whose  example  gives  a  law  to  it."  Sir  Walter  Scott,  in  a  note  on 
these  words,  remarks,  "  this  passage,  though  complimentary  to  Charles, 
contains  much  sober  truth.1' 

SCBNB  vii.]         THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  1/3 

those  rules  of  Art  were  the  greatest  mysteries  in  the  world  ; 
and  yet  they  are  but  a  few  simple  observations  which  good 
sense  has  made  upon  that  which  may  impair  the  pleasure 
taken  in  that  kind  of  poems;  and  the  same  good  sense 
which  in  former  days  made  these  observations  makes  them 
every  day  easily,  without  resorting  to  Horace  and  Aris- 
totle. I  should  like  to  know  whether  the  great  rule  of  all 
rules  is  not  to  please;  and  whether  a  play  which  attains 
this  has  not  followed  a  good  method  ?  Can  the  whole 
public  be  mistaken  in  these  matters,  and  cannot  everyone 
judge  what  pleases  him? 

UR.  I  have  observed  one  thing  in  these  gentlemen  ;  and 
that  is,  that  those  who  speak  most  of  rules,  and  who  know 
them  better  than  others,  write  comedies  which  no  one 
admires. 

DOR.  Which  shews,  Madam,  how  little  notice  we  should 
take  of  their  troublesome  objections.  For,  in  short,  if 
pieces  according  to  rule  do  not  please,  and  those  do  please 
which  are  not  according  to  rule,  then  the  rules  must,  of 
necessity,  have  been  badly  made.  So  let  us  laugh  at  the 
sophistry  with  which  they  would  trammel  the  public  taste, 
and  let  us  judge  a  comedy  only  by  the  effect  which  it  pro- 
duces upon  ourselves.  Let  us  give  ourselves  up  honestly 
to  whatever  stirs  us  deeply,  and  never  hunt  for  arguments 
to  mar  our  pleasure. 

UR.  For  my  part,  when  I  see  a  play,  I  look  only 
whether  the  points  strike  me;  and  when  I  am  well  en- 
tertained, I  do  not  ask  whether  I  have  been  wrong,  and 
whether  the  rules  of  Aristotle  would  forbid  me  to 
laugh. 

DOR.  It  is  just  as  if  a  man  were  to  taste  a  capital  sauce, 
and  wished  to  know  whether  it  were  good  according  to  the 
recipe  in  the  cookery-book. 

UR.  Very  true ;  and  I  wonder  at  the  critical  refine- 
ments of  certain  people  about  things  in  which  we  should 
think  for  ourselves. 

DOR.  You  are  right,  madam,  in  thinking  all  these  mys- 
terious critical  refinements  very  odd.  For  really,  if  they 
are  to  subsist,  we  are  reduced  to  discrediting  ourselves. 
Our  very  senses  must  be  slaves  in  everything  ;  and,  even 
in  eating  and  drinking,  we  must  no  longer  dare  to  find 

174  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.          [SCENE  vii. 

anything  good,  without  permission  from  the  committee 
of  Taste. 

LYS.  So,  sir,  your  only  reason  is  that  The  School  for 
Wives  has  pleased  you ;  you  care  not  whether  it  be  accord- 
ing to  rule,  provided  .  .  . 

DOR.  Gently,  Mr.  Lysidas;  I  do  not  grant  you  that.  I 
certainly  say  that  the  great  art  is  to  please ;  and  that,  as 
this  comedy  has  pleased  those  for  whom  it  was  written,  I 
think  that  is  enough,  and  that  we  need  not  care  about 
anything  else.  But,  at  the  same  time,  I  maintain  that  it 
does  not  sin  against  any  of  the  rules  to  which  you  allude. 
I  have  read  them,  thank  Heaven  !  as  well  as  other  men. 
and  I  could  easily  prove  that  perhaps  we  have  not  on  the 
stage  a  more  regular  play  than  this. 

EL.  Courage,  Mr.  Lysidas ;  we  are  undone  if  you  give 
way. 

LYS.  What,  sir  !  when  the  protasis,  the  epitasis,  the 
peripetia  .  .  . 

DOR.  Nay,  Mr.  Lysidas,  you  overwhelm  us  with  your 
fine  words.  Pray,  do  not  seem  so  learned.  Humanize 
your  discourse  a  little,  and  speak  intelligibly.  Do  you 
fancy  a  Greek  word  gives  more  weight  to  your  arguments  ? 
And  do  you  not  think  that  it  would  look  as  well  to  say, 
"the  exposition  of  the  subject,"  as  the  "  protasis  ;  "  the 
"  progress  of  the  plot,"  as  the  "  epitasis ;  the  "  crowning 
incident,"  as  the  "peripetia?" 

LYS.  These  are  terms  of  art  that  we  are  allowed  to  make 
use  of.  But  as  these  words  offend  your  ears,  I  shall  ex- 
plain myself  in  another  way ;  and  I  ask  you  to  give  me  a 
plain  answer  to  three  or  four  things  which  I  have  to  say. 
Can  a  piece  be  endured  which  sins  against  the  very  descrip- 
tion of  a  play?  For,  after  all,  the  name  of  a  dramatic 
poem  comes  from  a  Greek  word  which  signifies  to  act,  in 
order  to  shew  that  the  nature  of  the  poem  consists  in  ac- 
tion. But,  in  this  comedy,  there  are  no  actions  ;  it  is  made 
up  of  narratives  by  Agnes,  or  by  Horace. 

MAR.  Ha  !  ha  !  Chevalier. 

CL.  Ingeniously  said.    Now  we  come  to  the  point. 

LYS.  Can  anything  be  less  witty,  or,  rather,  more  low, 
than  some  of  the  words  at  which  every  one  laughs ;  above 
all,  children  through  the  ear  ? 

SCKNE  vn.]          THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED.  1 75 

CL.   Capital ! 

EL.  Oh! 

LYS.  Is  not  the  scene  of  the  servant-man  and  maid, 
indoors,  of  tedious  length,  and  absolutely  contemptible?23 

MAR.  True. 

CL.   Assuredly. 

EL.  He  is  right. 

LYS.  Does  not  Arnolphe  give  his  money  too  readily  to 
Horace  ?  And,  as  he  is  the  ridiculous  character  of  the 
piece,  ought  he  to  be  made  to  do  the  action  of  a  gentle- 
man? 

MAR.   Good  !     The  observation  is  good  again. 

CL.  Admirable ! 

EL.   Marvellous ! 

LYS.  Are  not  the  sermon  and  maxims  ridiculous,  offend- 
ing against  the  respect  due  to  religion  ?  M 

MAR.  Well  said  ! 

CL.  Spoken  as  it  ought  to  be  ! 

EL.  Nothing  could  be  better  ! 

LYS.  And  this  Monsieur  de  la  Souche,  to  be  brief,  who 
is  supposed  to  be  a  sensible  man,  and  who  appears  so  grave 
in  many  passages,  does  he  not  descend  to  something  too 
comical  and  too  exaggerated  in  the  fifth  act,  when  he  de- 
clares the  vehemence  of  his  love  for  Agnes,  with  that  wild 
rolling  of  his  eyes,  those  ridiculous  sighs,  those  silly  tears, 
which  set  every  one  laughing  ? 

MAR.  Wonderful,  egad  ! 

CL.  Miraculous  ! 

EL.  Long  live  Mr.  Lysidas  ! 

LYS.  I  pass  over  a  hundred  thousand  other  things,  for 
fear  of  being  tedious. 

MAR.    Upon  my  word,  Chevalier,  you  are  in  for  it ! 

DOR.  We  shall  see. 

MAR.  You  have  met  your  man. 

DOR.  Perhacps  so. 

MAR.   Answer,  answer,  answer,  answer. 

DOR.   Willingly.     It  is  .    .    . 

MAR.  Answer,  I  beg  you. 

2SSee  The  School  for  Wives,  Act  i.,  scene  2,  page  369. 
24  See  The  School  for  Wives,  Act  iii.,  Scene  2,  page  354. 

176  THE  SCHOOL  FOR  WIVES  CRITICISED.          [SCENE  VH. 

DOR.  Allow  me  then.     If  ... 

MAR.   'Gad,  I  defy  you  to  answer. 

Dor.  Yes.     If  you  talk  perpetually. 

CL.  Pray  let  us  hear  his  reasons. 

DOR.  First,  it  is  not  true  to  say  that  the  whole  piece 
consists  only  of  narratives.  There  is  a  good  deal  of  action 
in  it,  passing  on  the  stage ;  the  narratives  are  themselves 
actions,  according  to  the  constitution  of  the  piece,  inas- 
much as  these  narratives  are  all  naturally  told  to  the 
person  concerned,  who,  by  these  means,  is  every  moment 
thrown  into  a  confusion  which  delights  the  audience,  and 
who,  at  each  fresh  tiding,  takes  all  the  measures  he  can  to 
ward  off  the  misfortune  which  he  dreads. 

UR.  For  my  part,  I  think  the  beauty  of  the  subject  of 
The  School  for  Wives  consists  in  this  continual  confidence ; 
and  what  seems  to  me  diverting  enough  is,  that  a  sensible 
man  who  is  warned  of  everything  by  an  innocent  creature 
whom  he  loves,  and  by  a  marplot,  who  is  his  rival,  can- 
not, for  all  that,  escape  his  fate. 

MAR.   Nonsense  !    nonsense  ! 

CL.  A  weak  answer. 

EL.  Pitiful  reasons. 

DOR.  As  to  the  children  through  the  ear,  it  has  no  jest 
in  it  except  as  regards  Arnolphe;  the  author  did  not  in- 
sert it  as  a  jest,  but  only  as  a  characteristic  of  the  man, 
and  the  better  to  depict  his  craze  ;  since  he  repeats  a  vul- 
gar, stupid  saying  of  Agnes  as  the  finest  thing  in  the 
world,  and  one  which  has  given  him  inconceivable  plea- 
sure. 

MAR.  Wretchedly  answered. 

CL.  That  will  not  satisfy  us. 

EL.  It  is  saying  nothing. 

DOR.  As  to  the  money  which  he  gives  so  liberally,  be- 
sides that  the  letter  of  his  best  friend  is  a  sufficient  surety 
for  him,  it  is  by  no  means  incompatible  for  a  man  to  be 
ridiculous  in  some  things  and  worthy  in  others.  And  as 
to  the  scene  between  Alain  and  Georgette,  in  the  house, 
which  some  think  long  and  insipid,  it  is  certainly  not 
without  its  reasons ;  and  just  as  Arnolphe  is  victimized 
during  his  journey  by  the  pure  innocence  of  his  mistress, 
so,  on  his  return,  he  is  kept  a  long  time  at  his  own  door 

SCENE  vil.]          THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.  177 

by  the  innocence  of  his  servants,  just  that  he  may  be 
punished  throughout  by  the  very  things  whereby  he 
thought  to  make  his  precautions  good. 

MAR.  These  reasons  are  good-for-nothing. 

CL.  All  this  is  not  worth  a  jot. 

EL.  It  is  pitiful. 

DOR.  As  to  the  moral  discourse,  which  you  call  a  ser- 
mon, it  is  a  fact  that  truly  religious  people  who  heard  it 
saw  nothing  that  shocked  what  you  mentioned ;  and 
doubtless  those  words,  "  hell,"  and  "  boiling  cauldrons  " 
are  sufficiently  justified  by  the  extravagance  of  Arnolphe, 
and  by  the  innocence  of  her  to  whom  he  speaks.  As  for 
the  amorous  transports  of  the  fifth  act,  which  you  blame 
as  too  exaggerated  and  burlesqued,  I  should  like  to  know 
whether  this  is  not  a  satire  on  lovers,  and  whether  sober 
people,  and  even  the  most  staid,  on  such  occasions,  do 
not  do  things  .  .  . 

MAR.  Upon  my  word,  Chevalier,  you  had  better  hold 
your  tongue. 

DOR.  Very  well.  In  short,  if  we  were  to  look  at  our- 
selves when  we  are  much  in  love  .  .  . 

MAR.   I  will  not  so  much  as  listen  to  you. 

DOR.  Hear  me,  pray.     In  the  violence  of  our  passion  .  . 

MAR.  Tol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol,  tol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol. 
(Humming). 

DOR.  What? 

MAR.  Tol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol,  tol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol. 

DOR.  I  am  not  aware  .    .    . 

MAR.  Tol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol,  tol,  lol,  lol,  lol,  de  rol. 

UR.   I  think  that  .    .    . 

MAR.   Tol,  lol,  lol,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la. 

UR.  There  are  many  funny  things  in  our  discussion.  I 
fancy  a  little  comedy  might  be  made  out  of  them,  and 
that  it  would  not  be  a  bad  wind-up  to  The  School  for 
Wives. 

DOR.  You  are  right. 

MAR.  Egad,  Chevalier,  you  would  play  a  part  in  it  not 
at  all  to  your  advantage. 

DOR.  True,  Marquis. 

CL.  For  my  part,  I  wish  it  could  be  done,  if  they  could 
give  the  whole  thing  just  as  it  has  happened. 

178  THE  SCHOOL   FOR   WIVES   CRITICISED.        [SCENBLAST. 

EL.  And  I  would  gladly  furnish  them  with  my  part. 

LYS.  I  think  I  should  not  refuse  them  mine. 

UR.  As  every  one  is  satisfied,  Chevalier,  write  out  our 
discussion,  and  give  it  to  Moliere,  whom  you  know,  to 
work  into  a  play. 

CL.  He  would  not  care  for  it,  I  am  sure;  it  would  be 
no  panegyric  upon  him. 

UR.  No,  no,  I  know  his  mood ;  he  does  not  mind  if 
people  criticise  his  pieces,  so  that  they  come  to  see  them. 

DOR.  Ay.  But  what  ending  can  we  find  to  this  plot  ? 
For  there  can  be  neither  marriage  nor  recognition,  and  I 
do  not  see  how  we  can  finish  the  discussion. 

UR.  We  must  think  of  some  incident  for  that. 

SCENE    LAST. — CLIMENE,    URANIA,    ELIZA,   DORANTE, 
MARQUIS,  LYSIDAS,  GALOPIN. 

GAL.  Madam,  supper  is  ready. 

DOR.  Ah !  This  is  just  what  we  wanted  for  an  ending 
and  we  can  find  nothing  more  natural.  They  shall  dis- 
pute hard  and  fast  on  both  sides,  as  we  have  done,  with- 
out any  one  giving  way;  a  boy  shall  come  and  say  " sup- 
per is  ready ;"  every  one  shall  rise  and  go  to  supper. 

UR.  The  comedy  cannot  end  better;  we  shall  do  well 
to  stop  here. 

L'IMPROMPTU  DE  VERSAILLES. 

COMEDIE. 

THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES. 

A    COMEDY    IN   ONE    ACT. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 
OCT.    I4TH,    1663. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

IN  the  delightful  Impromptu  de  Versailles,  which  was  performed  for  the 
first  time  at  Versailles,  during  some  part  of  the  month  of  October,  1663,! 
Moliere  hits  round  freely  and  pleasantly  at  all  the  world,  himself  included  ; 
but  the  principal  object  which  he  had  in  its  conception  was  to  retaliate 
upon  his  critics,  and,  in  particular,  upon  his  rivals  of  the  h6tel  de 
Bourgogne.  The  School  for  Wives  criticised  had,  by  its  keen  satire, 
exasperated  that  part  of  Parisian  society  which  had  been  loudest  in  its 
cavils  at  Moliere's  genius  and  success;  and  they  who  had  felt  the  direct- 
ness of  his  blows  thirsted  for  revenge.  The  rival  company,  eager  to 
pay  their  satirist  in  his  own  coin,  and  anticipating  a  run  upon  a  play 
which  should  hold  the  poet  up  to  ridicule,  commissioned  a  young  and 
unknown  writer,  Edme  Boursault,2  to  supply  them  with  a  new  comedy, 
and  the  result  was  The  Painter's  Portrait,  in  which  The  School  for  Wives 
is,  one  of  the  staple  subjects  of  ridicule.  This  piece,  which  was  not 
represented  until  the  last  week  in  October,  was  well  attended,  and  still 
more  applauded ;  but  its  merits  were  not  such  as  to  bring  lasting  fame  to 
its  author.  There  can,  however,  be  no  doubt  that  Moliere  was  hit  by  it 
rather  harder  than  would  appear  from  the  dignified  manner  in  which 
he  rejoins — or  rather  declines  to  rejoin — to  it  in  the  Impromptu.  It  has 
been  said  that  Moliere  and  his  company  were  sent  for  by  the  King  to 
Versailles,  and  that  Louis  commanded  his  favourite  comic  dramatist  to 
reply  to  the  attack  of  his  critics,8  for  which  purpose  he  placed  the  Court 
theatre  at  his  disposal.  Moliere  found  the  task  a  difficult  one,  having 
only  a  few  days  in  which  to  execute  the  commission ;  but  he  cannot  be 
held  to  have  done  anything  unworthy  of  his  fame  in  the  bright  and 

1  According  to  Taschereau's  Histoire  de  la  vie  et  des  'ouvrages  de  Moliere,  Vol. 
I.,  page  82,  and  which  precedes  the  works  of  our  author,  edited  by  the  same  gen- 
tleman, in  1858,  in  six  volumes,  Moliere  and  his  troupe  did  not  go  to  Versailles  be- 
fore the  i6th  of  October,  and  remained  there  until  the  2pd  ;  hence  The  Impromptu 
could  not  have  been  performed  on  the  i4th  of  that  month,  as  is  generally  stated.    In 
looking,  however,  at  the  second  volume  of  Moliere's  works,  edited   by  the  same 
Mons.  Taschereau,  I  find,  page  353,  on  the  title-page  of  the  Impromptu  de    Ver- 
sailles, "  Representee  .  .  .  le  14  Octobre  ibbj.       The  edition,  published  by  M. 
Lemerre,  ana  which  is  a  faithful  reprint  of  the  original  editions  of  1666  and  1682, 
gives  the  same  date  ;   so  does  Jal  in  his  Dictionnaire ,  and  he  even  mentions  that 
the  King  gave  two  thousand  livres  to  Moliere  and  his  troupe  for  this  representation. 
M.  Moland  mentions  the  24th  of  October  1663. 

2  Edme  Boursault  (1638-1701)  was  a  dramatic  author  of  moderate  talents,  but 
whose  kind  and  frank  character  gained  him  many  friends.     Le  Mercure  Galant, 
Esope  a  la  ville,  and  Esope  a  la  cour,  are  considered  his  best  plays. 

»  See  page  448,  note  6. 

181 

1 82  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES. 

sparkling  Impromptu.  It  satisfied  the  King ;  and  as  a  reply  to  Bcmr- 
sault's  play,  was  acted  on  the  4th  of  November  at  the  Theatre  of  the 
Palais- Royal,  and  subsequently  for  three  weeks,  with  considerable  effect 
in  bringing  Moliere's  rivals  back  to  their  senses.  I  strongly  suspect  that 
between  the  performance  at  Court  and  that  before  the  public,  Moliere 
enhanced  and  deepened  some  of  his  remarks  against  Boursault,  and  that 
the  latter,  Montfleury  and  De  Villiers,  did  the  same  with  the  plays  they 
wrote,  attacking  Moliere.  In  any  case,  our  author  did  not  think  The 
Impromptu  of  Versailles  of  sufficiently  enduring  interest  to  merit  print- 
ing, and  it  was  not  until  after  his  death  that  his  friend  La  Grange  gave  it 
to  the  world. 

It  must  have  astonished  the  Court  to  see,  on  the  rising  of  the  curtain 
Moliere  and  his  troupe  not  disguised,  but  in  their  every  day  apparel,  with 
their  ordinary  countenances,  all  quarrelling  among  themselves,  grumbling 
at  the  manager  and  author,  preparing  for  a  rehearsal,  and  behaving  as  if 
there  was  no  public  before  them,  and,  above  all,  such  a  courtly  public  as 
was  to  be  found  in  the  Salle  des  Comedies  at  Versailles.  But  the  fiction 
that  the  King  was  not  present,  and  should  not  come  for  a  couple  of 
hours,  saved  appearances. 

It  is  to  be  regretted  that  Moliere  in  The  Impromptu  gave  way  to  per- 
sonalities,— a  habit  in  which  dramatic  authors  were  formerly  inclined  to 
indulge  too  freely  in  every  country,  and  which  the  improved  good  taste 
of  the  public  has  now  generally  banished  from  the  stage. 

The  Impromptu  was  attempted  to  be  answered  by  Montfleury,  junior, 
in  V Impromptu  de  I'hotel  de  Conde,  and  by  De  Villiers  in  la  Vengeance 
des  Marquis  ;  both  these  plays  were  acted  at  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne,  but 
are  now  deservedly  forgotten.  The  actors  of  the  h6tel  du  Marais  (see 
Prefatory  Memoir,)  tried  to  remain  neutral,  and  played  a  comedy  by 
Chevalier,  called  les  Amours  de  Calotin,  in  which  both  parties,  the  troupe 
of  Moliere  and  that  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne,  are  faintly  criticized. 
Two  dissertations  about  The  School  for  Wives,  in  the  form  of  dialogues, 
were  also  printed,  but  not  acted  ;  the  one  was  called  Le  Panegyrique  de 
I'Ecole  desfemmes,  ou  Conversation  comique  sur  les  Oeuvres  de  M.  de 
Moliere,  by  Robinet ;  the  other,  which  probably  concludes  in  favour  of 
Moliere,  bore  the  title  of  La  Guerre  comique,  ou  la  Defense  de  I'Ecole 
des  Femmes,  and  was  written  by  de  la  Croix.  In  "  Le  Panegyrique  de 
I'Ecole  des  Femmes,  published  in  Paris  by  Jean  Guignard,  le  fils,  en  la 
grande  salle  du  Palais,  a  F  image  de  St.  Jean,  1664,  the  author  makes  an 
Englishman  (Lysandre)  give  his  opinion  upon  The  School  for  Wives. 
Upon  being  asked  whether  he  had  seen  the  piece,  he  answers  that  if  busi- 
ness had  not  taken  him  to  Paris,  he  would  have  come  expressly  in  order 
to  see  it,  as  it  had  made  a  great  noise  already  in  England.  Says  he  in 
reply  to  a  question  as  regards  the  feeling  upon  it  in  his  own  country. 
"  Two  reasons  prevent  it  being  to  the  taste  of  every  one,  the  first  that  it  is 
a  languishing  comedy,  and  that  as  you  are  aware,  the  English  only  like 
pure  tragedy ;  the  second,  that  the  master  of  this  school  is  morose  and 
peevish,  and  wishes  to  make  husbands  the  reverse  of  what  they  are  in 
England,  at  which  our  ladies  are  not  altogether  pleased."  A  friend  of 
his,  a  Frenchman,  replies  to  this : — "  You  are  right,  the  husbands  there 
are  altogether  good,  I  know  it  by  experience.  I  have  seen  some  here, 
who  have  really  surprised  me  by  their  goodness.  Far  from  being  jealous 
of  their  wives,  they  like  those  who  pay  them  attentions,  and  you  can  do 
them  no  greater  favour  than  flatter  their  better  halves." 

As  in   The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Moliere's  actors  appear,  not  in 

THE  IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  183 

their  dramatic,  but  in  their  own,  characters,  it  behooves  us  to  say  some- 
thing of  them  here.  In  the  Prefatory  Memoir  we  have  stated  the  names 
of  those  actors  who  were  members  of  the  Illustre  Theatre,  as  well  as  those 
who  left  with  Moliere  for  the  provinces,  and  those  who  returned  to  Paris 
with  him.  We  shall  now  briefly  give  a  few  details  about  the  actors  of  the 
troupe  of  Moliere  in  1663.  Only  two  of  them,  Messrs.  Duparc  and  De- 
brie,  are  not  mentioned  in  the  list  of  Dramatis  Personse  of  The  Impromptu  ; 
later  on,  Hubert,  Baron,  Beauval  and  his  wife,  and  Marie  de  1'Estang 
became  members  of  his  company. 

Brecourt,  whose  real  name  was  Guillaume  Marcoureau,  was  a  member 
of  Moliere's  troupe  only  from  June  1662  until  Easter  1664 ;  before  that 
time  he  had  been  an  actor  at  the  Theatre  du  Marais,  and,  after  a  quarrel 
with  Moliere,  left  him  for  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne.  His  life  was  full  of 
accidents.  Having  killed  a  coachman,  he  was  obliged  to  fly  to  Holland ; 
took  service  there  under  the  Prince  of  Orange  ;  but  having  failed  in  his 
attempt  to  carry  off  one  of  his  countrymen  whom  the  French  ministry 
wished  to  get  hold  of,  and  whom  Brecourt  had  promised  to  deliver  into 
their  hands,  he  came  back  to  Paris,  received  his  pardon,  and  returned  to 
the  stage.  He  once,  in  presence  of  Louis  XIV.,  and  after  a  severe  strug- 
gle, killed  a  wild  boar  with  a  sword.  As  a  dramatic  author,  he  possesses 
some,  though  not  great,  merit.  One  of  his  pieces,  The  Ghost  of  Moliere, 
written  after  Moliere's  death,  and  in  his  praise,  is  dedicated  to  the  Duke 
d'Enghien,  formerly  a  great  enemy  of  Moliere ;  it  was  played  at  the  hotel 
de  Bourgogne  ;  and  was,  for  a  long  time,  printed  at  the  end  of  Moliere's 
works.  Brecourt  died  March  a8th,  1685,  from  his  having  broken  a  blood- 
vessel, whilst  playing  before  the  Court  in  his  own  comedy  Timon. 

Charles  Varlet,  known  as  de  la  Grange,  was  one  of  the  best  actors  of 
Moliere's  troupe,  and  the  very  words  our  author  uses  in  addressing  him 
(see  page  453,  prove  this.  He  was  the  official  orator  of  the  company,  de- 
livered all  the  customary  speeches,  and  announced  the  new  plays  at  the 
closing  or  opening  of  the  theatre.  Together  with  Vinot,  he  published  in 
1682  the  first  collected  edition  of  Moliere's  works,  in  which  appeared  for 
the  first  time,  Don  Garcia,  of  Navarre,  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Don 
Juan,  Melicerte,  The  Magnificent  Lovers,  The  Countess  of  Escarbagnas, 
and  The  Hypochondriac.  He  died  on  the  first  of  March,  1692,  and  left 
behind  him  a  manuscript  book,  in  quarto,  which  is  even  now  carefully 
kept  in  an  iron  chest  by  the  Come  die  francaise,  and  has  for  its  title  :  Ex- 
trait  des  receptes  et  des  affaires  de  la  Comedie  dtpuis  pasques  de  I'annee 
1659,  apartenant  au  sr.  de  la  Grange,  I'un  des  comediens  du  JRoy." 

Du  Croisy,  whose  real  name  was  Philbert  Gassot,  was  a  very  able  actor, 
who  played  the  part  of  Tartuffe.  After  Moliere's  death,  he  withdrew 
from  the  stage,  and  went  to  live  at  Conflans-Sainte-Honorine,  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood of  Paris,  where  he  died  in  1695. 

La  Thorilliere,  whose  real  name  was  Lenoir,  had  been  a  captain  in  an 
infantry  regiment,  and  marechal  de  camp.  Smitten  by  a  theatrical  mania, 
he  asked  and  obtained  permission  from  Louis  XIV.,  to  resign,  and  to 
adopt  the  stage  as  a  profession.  He  was  of  lofty  stature,  and  is  said  to 
have  played  kings  and  peasants  very  well,  for,  in  Moliere's  time,  these 
two  parts  were  played  by  the  same  actor.  A  tragedy  of  his,  Marc-Antoine 
et  Cleopatre,  which  was  never  printed,  had  some  success  in  its  time.  He 
died  in  1680. 

Louis  R«jart,  surnamed  L'Eguis^,  the  sharp  one,  one  of  the  early  actors 
in  Moliere's  troupe,  was  a  younger  brother  of  Madeleine  and  Genevieve 
B«5jart,  and  appears  to  have  acted  servants'  parts.  He  became  lame  in 

184  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES. 

trying  to  separate  two  of  his  friends  who  wished  to  fight  a  duel.  He  was 
pensioned  off  in  1670,  and  died  in  1678. 

Madame  Duparc  was  the  wife  of  Berthelot,  otherwise  called  Duparc, 
with  the  cognomen  of  Gros-Rene,  because  he  was  very  stout.  Both  hus- 
band and  wife  had  joined  Moliere's  troop  at  Lyons  in  1653,  and  remained 
with  him,  except  for  one  year,  when  they  were  with  the  troupe  of  the 
Marais.  Madame  Duparc  played  the  princesses  in  tragedies,  and  was  so 
very  handsome,  that  she  attracted,  and  scandal  says,  responded  to,  the  at- 
tentions of  some  of  the  most  celebrated  poets  of  the  day.  In  1667,  three 
years  after  the  death  of  her  husband,  she  went  to  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne, 
and  there  acted  Andromaque  in  Racine's  tragedy  of  that  name.  Report 
states  that  she  was  rather  stiff  and  ceremonious  :  hence,  in  answer  to  Mo- 
liere's remarks  in  the  Impromptu  (see  page  352),  she  replies  "  that  no  one 
in  the  world ''  is  less  so  than  she.  She  died  in  1668,  only  twenty-five 
years  old. 

Madame  Madeleine  Bejart's  life  has  been  already  described  in  the  Pre- 
fatory Memoir  ;  to  which  we  refer  the  reader. 

Madame  Debrie,  the  wife  of  Edme  Villequin  Debrie,  played  inferior 
parts  in  Moliere's  troupe.  The  stage  gossip  of  the  times,  at  no  period  a 
very  sound  authority,  pretends  that  she  had  been  beloved  by  Moliere. 
She  was  a  very  good  and  handsome  actress,  and  acted,  amongst  others, 
the  parts  of  Isabella  in  The  School  for  Husbands,  of  Agnes  in  The  School 
for  Wives,  and  of  6liante  in  The  Misanthrope.  She  retained  her  youth- 
ful appearance  to  an  advanced  age,  and  died  in  1706. 

Madame  Moliere  was  the  wife  of  our  celebrated  author.  In  the  Prefa- 
tory Memoir,  I  have  already  given  some  details  of  her  marriage,  and  of 
the  way  in  which  she  is  said  to  have  behaved  to  her  husband.  Her  great 
charm  appears  to  have  been  in  her  voice,  which,  according  to  all  accounts, 
was  both  musical  and  pre-eminently  feminine.  The  author  of  the  Entre- 
tiensgalants  says :  *'  Of  this  she  is  herself  so  well  aware,  that  she  has  a 
different  tone  of  voice  for  every  different  part  she  plays :'"  hence  she  was 
an  excellent  actress.  It  has  been  generally  said  that  Moliere  describes 
his  wife  in  The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman  (see  Vol.  III.  Act  iii.  Sc. 
9)  in  the  following  words  :  "  Her  eyes  are  not  large,  but  they  are  full  of 
fire,  the  most  brilliant,  the  most  piercing,  the  most  moving,  imaginable. 
Her  mouth  is  large  ;  but  it  possesses  attractions  unseen  in  other  mouths. 
She  is  not  tall ;  but  she  is  easy  and  elegant.  She  affects  a  careless  air  in 
her  speech  and  carriage,  but  there  is  grace  in  all,  and  her  manners  have 
an  inexpressible  charm  that  appeals  to  every  heart.  Her  wit  is  most  re- 
fined and  delicate ;  her  conversation  delightful ;  and  if  she  be  capricious 
"beyond  compare, — why,  everything  is  becoming  in  a  beauty,  and  we  bear 
•everything  from  a  beauty.'' 

If  we  are  to  believe  the  gossip  of  the  time,  as  repeated  but  not  sub- 
stantiated by  many  of  Moliere's  biographers,  Madame  Moliere  must  have 
been  a  very  depraved  woman,  who  chose  her  lovers  amongst  the  most 
elegant  courtiers,  such  as  the  Duke  de  Lauzun,  the  Abb6  de  Richelieu, 
Count  du  Quiche,  and  several  others.  These  accusations  are  really 
backed  by  very  little  proof;  but  that  Moliere  was  jealous  is  only  too  well 
ascertained.  According  to  a  libellous  booklet,  published  fifteen  years  after 
Moliere's  death,  and  called  :'  La  Femeuse  comedienne,  ou  Histoire  de  la 
Guerin,  auparavant  femme  et  veuve  de  Moliere ,*  which  is  a  store-house 
of  the  scandal  from  behind  the  wings,  and  has  been  a  repository  for  all 

.*  This  book  was  published  in  1688  at  Frankfort,  by  Frans  Rottemberg. 

THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  185 

the  attacks  made  against  Moliere  or  his  wife, — our  author  was  one  da/ 
walking  with  his  friend  Chapelle  in  his  garden  at  Auteuil,  "  who  perceiv- 
ing him  to  be  more  than  usually  out  of  sorts,  pressed  him  several  times 
to  tell  him  the  reason."  Moliere,  who  was  somewhat  ashamed  to  have  so 
little  fortitude  under  so  common  a  misfortune,  avoided  replying  as  long 
as  he  could ;  but,  as  he  was  just  then  in  one  of  those  moods  when  the 
heart  is  full,  so  well  known  to  persons  in  love,  he  yielded  to  the  desire  of 
unbosoming  himself,  and  confessed  frankly  to  his  friend  that  the  cause  of 
his  dejection  was  the  manner  in  which  he  was  compelled  to  treat  his  wife. 
Chapelle,  who  thought  Moliere  above  that  sort  of  thing,  rallied  him,  be- 
cause a  man  who  could  so  well  depict  the  foibles  of  others  gave  way  to 
the  very  one  he  was  constantly  attacking ;  adding,  that  the  most  absurd 
thing  of  all  was  to  continue  loving  a  woman  who  responds  in  no  way  to 
the  tenderness  lavished  upon  her!  "As  for  me,"  he  continued,  "  I  own 
that  if  I  were  so  unfortunate  as  to  find  myself  in  such  a  case,  and  if  I  had 
a  strong  suspicion  that  the  person  in  question  granted  her  favours  to 
others,  I  should  feel  so  much  scorn  for  her  that  it  would  infallibly  cure 
me  of  my  passion.  Moreover,  you  have  a  satisfaction  which  you  could 
not  have  were  she  a  mistress  ;  for  vengeance,  which  generally  succeeds  to 
love  in  a  heart  that  has  been  wronged,  may  indemnify  you  for  all  that  your 
wife  makes  you  suffer ;  since  you  have  only  to  shut  her  up,  and  that  will 
be  a  sure  means  of  setting  your  mind  at  rest."  Moliere,  who  had  listened 
to  his  friend  pretty  quietly,  here  interrupted  him  to  inquire  whether  he 
had  ever  been  in  love?  Yes,"  replied  Chapelle,  "  I  have  been  so,  as  a 
sensible  man  should  be ;  but  I  should  never  have  fretted  at  a  course 
which  my  honour  required  I  should  pursue ;  and  I  blush  to  find  you  so 
uneasy."  "  I  see  you  have  never  yet  been  really  in  love,"  answered  Mo- 
liere ;  *'  you  have  taken  the  semblance  of  love  for  love  itself.  1  will  not 
quote  you  a  great  many  examples  showing  the  potency  of  this  passion ;  I 
will  merely  describe  to  you  faithfully  my  own  condition,  that  you  may 
comprehend  how  little  one  is  master  of  oneself,  when  once  the  passion 
has  assumed  that  ascendency  of  which  temperament  is  usually  the  cause. 
In  answer  to  your  remark  upon  my  perfect  knowledge  of  the  human 
heart,  judging  by  those  delineations  of  character  which  I  daily  put  forth, 
I  agree  that  I  studied  myself  to  the  utmost,  in  order  the  more  thoroughly 
to  know  its  weakness ;  but  if  my  knowledge  has  taught  me  that  peril  is  to 
be  shunned,  my  experience  has  but  too  truly  proved  to  me  that  it  is  im- 
possible to  avoid  it ;  I  learn  this  every  day  in  my  own  case.  I  am  by 
nature  gifted  with  a  great  propensity  to  tenderness  .  .  .  ,  I  wished  that 
the  innocence  of  my  choice  should  be  a  guarantee  for  my  happiness.  I 
took  my  wife,  so  to  say,  from  her  cradle.  I  brought  her  up  with  a  care 
which  was  the  cause  of  the  rumours  you  have  no  doubt  heard.  I  im- 
agined that  force  of  habit  would  inspire  her  with  feelings,which  time  could 
not  destroy*  I  have  omitted  nothing  which  might  tend  to  win  them.  As 
she  was  very  young  when  I  married  her,  I  did  not  perceive  her  bad  ten- 
dencies ;  and  I  believed  myself  a  little  less  unfortunate  than  the  gen- 
erality of  those  who  enter  into  similar  engagements.  Marriage,  therefore, 
did  not  slacken  my  attentions:  but  I  discovered  in  her  so  much  indiffer- 
ence, that  I  began  to  perceive  that  all  my  precaution  had  been  useless, 
and  that  what  she  felt  towards  me  was  far  removed  from  what  I  could 
have  desired  to  form  my  happiness.  I  reproached  myself  with  feeling  a 
delicacy  which  seemed  to  me  ridiculous  in  a  husband.  I  attributed  to 
her  mood  what  was  in  fact  her  want  of  affection  for  me.  But  I  had  only 
too  many  opportunities  to  convince  me  of  my  error ;  and  the  foolish  pas- 

1 86  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES. 

sion  she  displayed  shortly  after  for  the  Count  de  Quiche  was  too  notorious 
for  me  to  remain  long  in  this  apparent  tranquillity.  As  soon  as  I  heard 
of  it,  I  spared  no  pains  to  conquer  my  own  feelings,  as  I  felt  it  impossible 
to  change  hers.  I  summoned  all  my  strength  of  mind  to  this  end.  I 
called  to  my  aid  everything  that  might  tend  to  console  me.  I  considered 
her  as  one  whose  sole  merit  was  her  innocence ;  and  who,  because  she 
was  unfaithful,  retained  none.  I  resolved  from  that  time  to  live  with  her 
as  a  man  of  honour  should  who  has  a  coquettish  wife,  and  who  believes, 
notwithstanding  what  is  generally  said,  that  his  good  name  is  not  depen- 
dent upon  his  wife's  ill  behaviour.  Yet  I  had  the  mortification  to  see  that 
a  woman  without  beauty,  and  one  who  owes  the  small  amount  of  wit  she 
possesses  to  the  education  which  I  had  given  her,  could  destroy,  in  a  single 
moment,  all  my  philosophy.  Her  presence  makes  me  forget  my  resolu- 
tions ;  and  the  very  first  word  she  says  to  me  in  her  own  defence  leaves 
me  so  convinced  that  my  suspicions  were  unfounded,  that  I  ask  her  par- 
don for  having  been  so  credulous.  Yet  my  indulgence  has  not  changed 
her.  I  have  therefore  determined  to  live  with  her  as  if  she  were  not  my 
wife ;  but  if  you  knew  what  I  suffer,  you  would  pity  me.  My  passion  has 
reached  such  a  height,  that  it  actually  takes  her  part  against  myself;  and 
when  I  reflect  how  impossible  it  is  to  overcome  what  I  feel  for  her,  I,  at 
the  same  time,  tell  myself  that  perhaps  she  has  equal  difficulty  in  sup- 
pressing her  inclination  for  coquetry :  thus  finding  myself  more  ready  to 
pity  than  to  blame  her.  No  doubt,  you  will  tell  me  that  a  man  must  be 
mad  to  love  in  such  a  manner ;  but,  in  my  opinion,  there  is  only  one  sort 
of  love,  and  those  who  have  never  had  such  delicate  feelings  have  never 
truly  loved.  Every  earthly  thing  is  associated  with  her  in  my  heart ;  my 
mind  is  so  full  of  her,  that  I  can  do  nothing  in  her  absence  to  divert  my 
thoughts.  When  I  behold  her,  a  thrill  of  emotion  and  transport,  which 
can  be  experienced  but  not  expressed,  deprives  me  of  composure.  I  have 
no  eyes  left  for  her  defects  :  I  see  only  all  that  renders  her  so  irresistible. 
Is  not  this  the  height  of  infatuation  ?  And  do  you  not  wonder  to  find 
that  what  sense  I  have  left  serves  but  to  make  me  perceive  my  weakness, 
without  the  power  of  conquering  it  ?"  ''  I  confess,  indeed,"  answered  his 
friend,  "  that  you  are  more  to  be  pitied  than  I  could  have  believed ;  but 
we  must  hope  all  from  time.  Meanwhile,  do  not  relax  your  efforts  ;  they 
will  produce  their  effect  when  you  least  expect  it.  For  my  part,  I  shall 
not  cease  my  prayers  that  your  wishes  may  speedily  be  crowned.'1  He 
thereupon  withdrew ;  leaving  Moliere,  who  remained  for  some  time  lost 
in  thought  on  the  means  of  relieving  his  distress  of  mind." 

Four  years  after  Moliere's  death  his  widow  married  another  comedian, 
Fran9ois  Guerin  duTricher  or  d'Estriche',  who  appears  not  to  have  pos- 
sessed the  intellectual  qualities  of  her  first  husband,  but  to  have  had  other 
charms  which  captivated  the  fair  widow,  if  we  can  believe  an  epigram 
written  at  the  time  of  her  marriage,  in  which  it  is  said  that  Mad.  Moliere 
had  little  love  for  her  first  husband,  who  was  all  mind,  but  much  for  her 
second,  who  was  all  body.  She  died  the  3oth  of  November,  1700,  about 
fifty-eight  years  old. 

Madame  Du  Croisy,  whose  maiden  name  was  Marie  Claveau,  was  an 
actress  of  very  little  talent.  Her  daughter  was  Madame  Poisson,  (see 
Prefatory  Memoir). 

Madame  Herv6,  whose  real  name  was  Genevieve  Bejart,  was  an  elder 
sister  of  Madame  Moliere,  and  took  the  name  of  Madame  Herve',  after 
her  mother.  She  was  twice  married.  Of  her  talents  as  an  actress,  very 
little  is  known.  As  to  her  acquaintance  with  Moliere,  we  have  given  a 

THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  187 

suggestion  of  Soulie  in  the  Prefatory  Memoir.    She  died  at  the  end  of 
June  1675. 

I  have  said  above  that  the  Impromptu  was  first  represented  before  Louis 
XIV.,  hence  its  name  of  Impromptu  de  Versailles.  It  may  be  interesting 
to  know  how  the  actors  and  actresses  were  treated  when  at  court.  They 
each  received  an  extra  pay  of  six  livres,  all  their  expenses  were  paid,  and 
even  carriages  were  provided.  If  they  had  to  go  out  of  town  the  troupe 
had  one  thousand  crowns  per  month,  and  each  actor  and  actress  two 
crowns  per  day  for  their  expenses,  as  well  as  free  lodgings.  In  summer, 
as  well  as  in  winter,  each  had  three  logs  (pieces)  of  wood,  one  bottle  of 
wine,  one  loaf,  and,  when  at  the  Louvre,  two  wax  candles ;  when  at  Saint 
Germain,  one  large  candle  weighing  two  pounds  j  they  also  had  every 
day,  when  they  played  at  the  King's,  a  lunch,  which  cost  twenty-five 
crowns.  This  is  what  M.  Chappuzeau  states  in  his  Theatre  Francais, 
but  the  picture  appears  a  little  over-drawn,  though  it  may  have  been  true 
during  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  Louis  XIV.  But  later  on,  if  we 
consult  the  registres  de  la  Come  die  francaise,  we  find  that  no  carriages  nor 
extras  were  provided,  and  that  often  the  indemnity  which  was  allowed,  did 
not  cover  the  expenses. 

DRAMATIS   PERSONS. 

MOLIERE,  a  ridiculous  Marquis, 

BRECOURT,  a  man  of  Quality. 

LA  GRANGE,  a  ridiculous  Marquis. 

Du  CROISY,  a  poet. 

LA  THORILLIERE,  a  fidgetty  Marquis. 

BEJART,  a  busybody. 

FOUR  BUSVBODIES. 

Mademoiselle  DUPARC,  6  a  ceremonious  Marchioness. 
Mademoiselle  BEJART,  a  prude. 
Mademoiselle  DEBRIE,  a  sage  coquette. 
Mademoiselle  MOLIERE,  a  satirical  wit. 
Mademoiselle  Du  CROISY,  a  whining  plague. 
Mademoiselle  HERVE,  a  conceited  chambermaid. 

Scene. — VERSAILLES,  IN  THE  KING'S  ANTECHAMBER. 

5  For  the  use  of  "  Mademoiselle"  instead  of  "  Madame,"  see  Prefatory 
Memoir. 

THE  IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES. 

(L 'IMPROMPTU  DE   VERSAILLES.) 

SCENE  I. — MOLIERE,  BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY, 
MAD.  DUPARC,  MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD. 
MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

MOL.  (Alone,  speaking  to  his  fellow-actors  behind  the 
scenes).  Come,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  is  this  delay  meant 
for  a  joke?  Are  you  never  coming  here?  Plague  take 
the  people !  I  say,  Brecourt ! 

BRE.  (Behind).     What? 

MOL.  La  Grange ! 

LA  GR.  (Behind).     What  is  it? 

MOL.  Du  Croisy! 

Du  C.  (Behind).  Who  calls? 

MOL.  Mademoiselle  Duparc ! 

MAD.  DUP.   (Behind).     Well? 

MOL.  Mademoiselle  Bejart ! 

MAD.  BEJ.  (Behind).     What  is  the  matter? 

MOL.  Mademoiselle  Debrie ! 

MAD.  DEB.  (Behind).     What  do  you  want  ? 

MOL.  Mademoiselle  Du  Croisy ! 

MAD.  Du  C.  (Behind}.     Whatever  is  it? 

MOL.  Mademoiselle  Herv6 ! 

MAD.  HER.   (Behind).     I  am  coming. 

MOL.  I  think  I  shall  go  mad  with  these  people.  Listen 
to  me !  (Enter  Brecourt,  La  Grange,  Du  Croisy).  Deuce 
take  me !  gentlemen,  will  you  drive  me  out  of  my  wits  to- 
day? 

191 

*92  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  [SCKNB  I. 

BRE.  What  would  you  have  us  do?  We  do  not  know 
our  parts,  and  you  will  drive  us  out  of  our  wits,  if  you 
force  us  to  play  in  this  style. 

MOL.  Oh,  what  an  awkward  team  to  drive  are  actors ! 
{Enter  Mesdemoiselles  Bejart,  Duparc,  Debric,  Moltere, 
Du  Croisy,  and  Herve}. 

MAD.  BEJ.  Well,  here  we  are.  What  do  you  mean  to  do? 

MAD.  DUP.  What  is  your  idea? 

MAD.  DEB.  What  is  to  be  done? 

MOL.  Pray,  let  us  take  our  positions;  and,  since  we  are 
ready  dressed,  and  the  King  will  not  come  for  a  couple  of 
hours,  let  us  employ  the  time  in  rehearsing  our  piece,  and 
see  how  we  are  to  play  our  parts. 

LA.  GR.  How  are  we  to  play  what  we  do  not  know? 

MAD.  DUP.  As  for  me,  I  declare  that  I  do  not  remem- 
ber a  word  of  my  part. 

MAD.  DEB.  I  am  sure  I  shall  have  to  be  prompted  from 
beginning  to  end. 

MAD.  BEJ.  And  I  just  mean  to  hold  mine  in  my  hand. 

MAD.  MOL.  So  do  I. 

MAD.  HER.   For  my  part,  I  have  not  much  to  say. 

MAD.  Du  C.  Nor  I  either;  but,  for  all  that,  I  would 
not  promise  not  to  make  a  slip. 

Du  C.  I  would  give  ten  pistoles  to  be  out  of  it. 

BRE.  I  would  stand  a  score  of  good  blows  with  a  whip 
to  be  the  same,  I  assure  you. 

MOL.  You  are  all  just  disgusted  at  having  parts  that  do 
not  please  you.  What  would  you  do  if  you  were  in  my 
place,  I  should  like  to  know. 

MAD.  BEJ.  Who,  you  ?  You  are  not  to  be  pitied ;  for 
having  written  the  piece,  you  need  not  be  afraid  of 
tripping. 

MOL.  And  have  I  nothing  to  fear  but  want  of  memory? 
Do  you  reckon  the  anxiety  as  to  our  success,  which  is 
entirely  my  own  concern,  nothing  ?  And  do  you  think 
it  a  trifle  to  provide  something  comic  for  such  an  assembly 
as  this  ;  to  undertake  to  excite  laughter  in  those  who  com- 
mand our  respect,  and  who  only  laugh  when  they  choose? 
Must  not  any  author  tremble  when  he  comes  to  such  a 
test  ?  Would  it  not  be  natural  for  me  to  say  that  I  would 
give,  everything  in  the  world  to  be  quit  of  it  ? 

SC«N«I.]  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  1 93 

MAD.  BEJ.  If  that  makes  you  tremble,  you  should  have 
been  more  careful,  and  not  have  undertaken  what  you 
have  done  in  eight  days 

MOL.  How  could  I  refuse  the  command  of  a  King  ? 

MAD.  BEJ.  How  ?  By  a  respectful  excuse,  based  on  the 
impossibility  of  the  thing  in  the  short  time  that  was  al- 
lowed you.  Anyone  else  in  your  place  would  have  thought 
more  of  his  reputation,  and  would  have  taken  care  not  to 
expose  himself,  as  you  are  doing.  What  will  you  do,  pray, 
if  the  thing  fails  ?  Think  what  advantage  all  your  ene- 
mies will  take  of  it. 

MAD.  DEB.  Ay,  to  be  sure  !  You  ought  to  have  re- 
spectfully excused  yourself  to  the  King,  or  required  more 
time. 

MOL.  Oh !  Mademoiselle,  Kings  like  nothing  better 
than  a  ready  obedience,  and  are  not  at  all  pleased  to  meet 
with  obstacles.  Things  are  not  acceptable,  save  at  the 
moment  when  they  desire  them ;  to  try  to  delay  their 
amusement  is  to  take  away  all  the  charm.  They  want 
pleasures  that  do  not  keep  them  waiting ;  and  those  that 
are  least  prepared  are  always  the  most  agreeable  to  them. 
We  ought  never  to  think  of  ourselves  in  what  they  desire 
of  us ;  our  only  business  is  to  please  them ;  and,  when 
they  command  us,  it  is  our  part  to  respond  quickly  to 
their  wish.  We  had  better  do  amiss  what  they  require  of 
us,  than  not  do  it  soon  enough  ;  if  we  have  the  shame  of 
not  succeeding,  we  always  have  the  credit  of  having 
speedily  obeyed  their  commands.  But  now,  pray,  let  us 
set  about  our  rehearsal. 

MAD.  BEJ.  What  would  you  have  us  do,  if  we  do  not 
know  our  parts  ? 

MOL.  I  tell  you,  you  shall  know  them  ;  even  if  you  do 
not  quite  know  them,  can  you  not  fill  in  out  of  your 
own  heads,  as  it  is  in  prose,  and  you  know  your  sub- 
ject? 

MAD.  BEJ.  Thank  you  for  nothing !  Prose  is  worse 
than  verse. 

MAD.  MOL.  Shall  I  tell  you  what  it  is  ?  You  ought  to 
write  a  comedy  in  which  you  could  act  all  alone. 

MOL.  Be  quiet,  wife.     What  a  dunce  you  are  ! 

MAD.  MOL.  Thanks,   dear  husband.     That  just  shows 

194  THE   IMPROMPTU  OF  VERSAILLES.  f  SCENE  i. 

how  strangely  marriage  alters  people.  You  would  not  have 
said  that  to  me  eighteen  months  ago. 

MOL.  Pray  be  quiet. 

MAD.  MOL.  It  is  an  odd  thing  that  a  trifling  ceremony 
deprives  us  of  all  our  good  qualities,  and  that  a  husband 
and  a  lover  regard  the  same  woman  with  such  different 
eyes. 

MOL.   Here  is  a  sermon  ! 

MAD.  MOL.  Upon  my  word,  if  I  were  to  write  a  comedy, 
that  should  be  my  subject ;  I  would  justify  women  in  many 
things  of  which  they  are  accused,  and  I  would  make  hus- 
bands afraid  of  the  contrast  between  their  abrupt  manners 
and  the  civility  of  lovers. 

MOL.  Well,  let  it  pass.  We  cannot  chatter  now ;  we 
have  something  else  to  do. 

MAD.  BEJ.  But,  since  you  were  ordered  to  work  on  the 
subject  of  the  criticism  that  is  passed  on  you,6  why  not 
write  that  comedy  of  actors7  that  you  have  talked  about 
so  long?  It  was  a  ready-made  notion,  and  would  have 
come  quite  pat;  the  more  so,  as,  having  undertaken  to 
delineate  you,  they  gave  you  an  opportunity  to  delineate 
them ;  it  might  have  been  called  their  portrait,  far  more 
justly  than  all  their  productions  can  be  called  yours.  For, 
to  try  to  mimic  a  comedian  in  a  comic  part  is  not  to  de- 
scribe himself,  but  only  after  him  the  characters  he  repre- 
sents, and  making  use  of  the  same  touches,  and  the  same 
hues  which  he  is  obliged  to  employ  in  the  various  ridicu- 
lous characters  that  he  draws  from  nature.  But  to  mimic 
an  actor  in  serious  parts  is  to  describe  him  by  faults  which 
are  entirely  his  own,  since  characters  of  this  kind  do  not 
carry  either  the  gestures  or  ridiculous  tones  by  which  the 
actor  is  recognised. 

MOL.  It  is  true ;  but  I  have  my  reasons  for  not  doing 
it ;  between  ourselves,  I  did  not  think  it  would  be  worth 
the  trouble ;  and,  besides,  I  should  want  more  time  to 
work  out  the  idea.  As  their  days  for  acting  are  the  same 

*  See  Introductory  Notice,  page  435. 

7  See  The  School  for  Wives  criticised,  where  Dorante  throws  out  this 
Idea :  "  It  would  be  amusing  to  put  them  (the  actors)  oil  the  stage,  with 
their  learned  antics  and  ridiculous  refinements,"  &c. 

SCENBI.]  THE   IMPROMPTU  OF  VERSAILLES.  1 95 

as  our  own,8 1  have  hardly  seen  them  three  or  four  times 
since  we  have  been  in  Paris;  I  have  caught  nothing  of 
their  style  of  delivery,  but  what  was  at  once  apparent  to 
the  eye ;  I  should  have  to  study  them  more,  to  make  my 
portraits  very  like  them.9 

MAD.  DUP.  I  must  say  I  have  recognised  some  of  them 
in  your  imitations. 

MAD.  DEB.  I  never  heard  this  talked  of. 

MOL.  I  had  the  idea  once  in  my  head,  but  I  dismissed 
it  as  a  trifle,  a  jest,  which  might  have  raised  a  laugh. 

MAD.  DEB.  Give  me  a  specimen,  as  you  have  given  it 
to  others. 

MOL.  We  have  no  time  now. 

MAD.  DEB.  Just  a  word  or  two  ! 

MOL.  I  thought  of  a  comedy  in  which  there  should  have 
been  a  poet,  whose  part  I  would  have  taken  myself,  com- 
ing to  offer  a  piece  to  a  strolling  company  fresh  from  the 
provinces.  "Have  you  actors  and  actresses,"  he  was  to 
say,  "capable  of  doing  justice  to  a  play?  For  my  play 
is  a  play  ..."  "Oh,  sir,"  the  comedians  were  to  an- 
swer, "we  have  ladies  and  gentlemen  who  have  passed 
muster  wherever  we  have  been."  "And  who  plays  the 
Kings  amongst  you?"  "There  is  an  actor  who  some- 
times undertakes  it."  "Who?  That  well-made  young 
man?  Surely  you  jest.  You  want  a  King  who  is  very 
fat,  and  as  big  as  four  men.  A  king,  by  Jove,  well  stuffed 
out.  A  king  of  vast  circumference,  who  could  fill  a 
throne  handsomely.10  Only  fancy  a  well-made  king! 
There  is  one  great  fault  to  begin  with;  but  let  me  hear 
him  recite  a  dozen  lines."  Then  the  actor  should  repeat 
for  example,  some  lines  of  the  king  in  Nicomede :  " 

8  By  "  their,"  is  meant  the  comedians  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne,  who, 
as  well  as  Moliere's  troupe,  played  on  Tuesdays,  Fridays  and  Sundays. 

9  A  clever  side  hit  at  the  rival  comedians  who  had  been  satirizing  our 
poet,  and  who  had  no  better  opportunity  of  studying  Moliere,  than  he  of 
studying  them. 

10  An  allusion  to  Montfleury,  an  actor  of  the  h&tel  de  Bourgogne  who 
was  very  stout,  and  of  whom  one  of  his  contemporaries  said :  "  He  is  so 
fat,  that  it  takes  several  days  to  give  him  a  sound  beating." 

11  Nicomede  is  a  tragedy  of  Corneille.    These  lines  are  said  by  Prusias. 
and  the  passage  is  Act  ii.,  Scene  i. 

196  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  i. 

' '  I  say,  Araspus,  he  has  too  well  served  me, 
Has  raised  my  power    ..." 

and  so  on,  in  the  most  natural  manner  he  could.  Then 
the  poet: — "What?  Call  you  that  reciting?  You  are 
joking.  You  should  say  things  with  an  emphasis.  Listen 
to  me."  (He  imitates  Montfleury,  a  comedian  of  the  hotel 
de  Bourgogne). 

"  I  say,  Araspus,"  &c. 

"Do  you  see  this  attitude?  Observe  that  well.  There, 
lay  the  proper  stress  on  the  last  line ;  that  is  what  elicits 
approbation,  and  makes  the  public  applaud  you."  "But, 
sir,"  the  actor  was  to  answer,  "  methinks  a  King  who  is 
conversing  alone  with  the  captain  of  his  guards  talks  a 
little  more  mildly,  and  hardly  uses  this  demoniacal  tone." 
"  You  do  not  understand  it.  Go  and  speak  in  your  way, 
and  see  if  you  get  an  atom  of  applause."  "Ah,  let  us 
hear  a  scene  between  a  lover  and  his  mistress."  On  which 
an  actor  and  actress  should  have  played  a  scene  together 
— that  of  Camilla  and  Curiatius  : — 12 

"Dost  go,  dear  soul,  and  does  this  fatal  honour 
So  charm  thee  at  the  cost  of  all  our  bliss  ? 
Ah  !  now  too  well  I  see,  etc  .    .    .    .  " 

— like  the  other,  as  naturally  as  they  could.  And  the  poet 
would  break  out :  "  You  are  joking ;  that  is  good  for 
nothing.  This  is  how  you  ought  to  recite  it :  "  {Imitating 
Mad.  de  Beauchateau,  an  actress  of  the  hotel  de  Btourgogne). 

"  Dost  go,  dear  soul,  &c. 

"  Nay,  but  I  know  the  better,  etc."  .    . 

"  See  how  natural  and  impassioned  this  is.  Admire  the 
smiling  face  she  maintains  in  the  deepest  affliction." 

12  Personages  from  Les  Horaces,  a  tragedy  by  P.  Corneille. 

18  Madeleine  de  Bouget,  the  wife  of  Beauchateau,  the  actor,  a  very 
handsome  and  clever  actress,  played  the  princesses  in  tragedy,  as  well  as 
the  ingenues  in  comedy.  She  died  at  Versailles,  on  the  6th  of  January, 
1683.  The  first  two  lines,  "  Dost  go, "are  from  les  Horaces  (Act  ii.,  Scene 
5) ;  the  third  is  the  answer  of  Curiatius,  to  whom  Camilla  replies  in  a 
speech  beginning  with,  "  Nay,  but  I  know  thee  better."  Moliere  probably 
imitated  the  actor  Beauchateau  as  Curiatius. 

SCENE  I.]  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  197 

There,  that  was  my  idea ;  and  my  poet  should  have  run 
through  all  the  actors  in  the  same  manner. 

MAD.  DEB.  I  like 'the  notion  ;  and  I  recognised  some 
of  them  by  the  very  first  lines.  Do  go  on. 

MOL.   (Imitating  Beauchateau  in  some  lines  from  Cid. u) 

"Pierced  to  the  centre  of  my  heart,"  &c. 

And  do  you  know  this  man  in  Sertorius' s  Pompey?  {Imi- 
tating JIauteroche,  a  comedian  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne^ 

"  The  enmity  which  either  faction  sways 
Engenders  here  no  honour,"  &c. 

MAD.  DEB.  I  think  I  know  him  a  little. 
MOL.  And  this  one  ?  (Imitating  de  Villiers,  another  come- 
dian of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne 1$) 

"  My  lord,  Polybius  is  dead,"  &c.n 

MAD.  DEB.  Yes,  I  know  who  he  is ;  but  I  fancy  there 
are  some  amongst  them  whom  you  would  find  it  hard  to 
mimic. 

MOL.  Good  Heavens  !  there  is  not  one  that  cannot  be 
had  somewhere,  if  I  had  studied  them  well.18  But  you 
make  me  lose  precious  time.  Pray,  let  us  think  of  our- 
selves, and  not  amuse  ourselves  any  longer  with  talking. 
(To  La  Grange).  Take  care  how  you  act  the  part  of 
Marquis  with  me. 

MAD.  MOL.  Marquises  again  ? 

MOL.  Yes,  Marquises  again.  What  the  deuce  would 
you  have  me  hit  on  for  a  character  acceptable  to  the 
audience  ?  The  Marquis  in  these  days  is  the  funny 

14  TTie  Cid  and  Sertorius  were  two  tragedies  by  P.  Corneille. 

ls  Noel  de  Breton,  sieur  de  Hauterocbe,  born  in  Paris  1617,  was  of  very 
good  family,  and  became  a  comedian  against  their  wish.  After  many  ad- 
ventures he  came  to  Paris,  where  he  played,  first  at  the  theatre  du  Marais, 
and  afterwards  at  the  h&tel  du  Bourgogne,  chiefly  the  confidants  of  the 
tragic  heroes.  Hauteroche  was  of  lofty  stature,  and  remarkably  lean ;  he 
was  also  an  author,  and  died  1707,  at  the  age  of  ninety  years. 

16  De  Villiers  answered  Moliere  in  la  Vengeance  des  Marquis. 

17  This  is  taken  from  the  third  scene  of  the  fifth  act  of  CEdipz,  a  tra- 
gedy by  Corneille,  but  it  ought  to  be  "  King  Polybius  is  dead." 

18  The  only  actor  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne  whom    Moliere  does  not 
imitate  is  Floridor,  who  was  really  excellent. 

198  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCKNE  i. 

character  in  a  comedy ;  and  as,  in  all  the  old  comedies,  there 
was  always  a  clownish  servant  to  make  the  spectators  laugh, 
so  now,  in  all  our  pieces,  there  must  be  always  a  ridiculous 
Marquis  to  divert  the  company. 

MAD.  BEJ.  It  is  true,  that  cannot  be  left  out. 

MOL.  As  to  you,  Mademoiselle  .    .    . 

MAD.  DUP.  Nay,  as  to  me,  I  shall  act  wretchedly;  I 
do  not  know  why  you  have  given  me  this  ceremonious 
part. 

MOL.  Good  Heavens !  Mademoiselle,  that  is  what  you 
said  when  you  had  your  part  in  The  School  for  Wives 
criticised;™  yet  you  acquitted  yourself  admirably,  and 
everyone  agreed  that  it  could  not  be  better  done.  Believe 
me,  this  will  be  the  same ;  you  will  play  it  better  than  you 
think. 

MAD.  DUP.  How  can  that  be?  There  is  no  one  in  the 
world  less  ceremonious  than  I. 

MOL.  True ;  and  that  is  how  you  prove  yourself  to  be 
an  excellent  actress,  representing  well  a  character  which 
is  opposed  to  your  mood.  Try  then,  all  of  you,  to  catch 
the  spirit  of  your  parts  aright,  and  to  imagine  that  you 
are  what  you  represent.  (  To  Du  Croisy).  You  play  a  poet, 
and  you  ought  to  be  taken  up  with  your  part ;  to  mark 
the  pedantic  air  which  is  maintained  amidst  the  converse 
of  the  fashionable  world ;  that  sententious  voice  and  pre- 
cision of  pronunciation,  dwelling  on  every  syllable,  and 
not  letting  a  letter  drop  from  the  strictest  spelling.  (To 
Brecourt).  As  for  you,  you  play  a  courtier,  as  you  have 
already  done  in  The  School  for  Wives  criticised;  that  is, 
you  must  assume  a  sedate  air,  and  a  natural  tone  of  voice, 
and  gesticulate  as  little  as  possible.  (To  La  Grange}. 
As  for  you,  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  you.  (  To  Mademoiselle 
Bejarf).  You  represent  one  of  those  women  who,  pro- 
vided they  are  not  making  love,  think  everything  else  is 
permitted  to  them ;  who  are  always  proudly  entrenched  in 
their  prudery,  looking  up  and  down  on  everyone,  holding 
all  the  good  qualities  that  others  possess  as  nothing  in 
comparison  with  a  miserable  honour  which  no  one  cares 

19  Madame  Duparc  played  the  part  of  Climene  in  The  School  for  Wives 
criticised. 

SCENE  n.j  THE    IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  199 

about.  Keep  this  character  always  before  your  eyes,  that 
you  may  show  all  its  tricks.  (To  Mademoiselle  Dcbrie). 
As  for  you,  you  play  one  of  those  women  who  think  they 
are  the  most  virtuous  persons  in  the  world,  so  long  as  they 
save  appearances  ;  who  believe  that  the  sin  lies  only  in  the 
scandal ;  who  would  quietly  carry  on  their  intrigues  in  the 
style  of  an  honourable  attachment,  and  call  those  friends 
whom  others  call  lovers.  (To  Mademoiselle  Moliere). 
You  play  the  same  character  as  in  The  School  for  Wives 
criticised,  and  I  have  nothing  more  to  say  to  you  than  to 
Mademoiselle  Duparc.  (To  Mademoiselle  Du  Croisy). 
As  for  you,  you  represent  one  of  those  people  who  are 
sweetly  charitable  to  every  one,  who  always  give  a  passing 
sting  with  their  tongues,  and  who  would  be  very  sorry  if  they 
let  their  neighbours  be  well  spoken  of.  I  believe  you  will 
not  acquit  yourself  badly  in  this  part.  (To  Mademoiselle 
Hervt).  For  you,  you  are  the  maid  of  the  flrea'euse,  who 
is  always  putting  her  spoke  into  the  conversation,  and 
picks  up  all  her  mistress"  expressions,  as" well  as  she  can.  I 
tell  you  all  your  characters,  that  you  may  impress  them 
strongly  on  your  minds.  Let  us  now  begin  to  rehearse, 
and  see  how  it  will  do.  Oh,  here  comes  a  bore.  This  is 
all  we  wanted ! 

SCENE  II. — LA    THORILLIERE,  MOLIERE,  BRECOURT,  LA 

GRANGE,  Du   CROISY,  MAD.    DUPARC,  MAD.    BEJART, 

MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD. 

HERVE. 

LA  THOR.  Good  day,  Moliere. 

MOL.  Sir,  your  servant.  (Aside).  Plague  take  the 
man. 

LA  THOR.  How  goes  it  ? 

MOL.  Very  well.  What  can  I  do  for  you  ?  (To  the 
actresses}.  Ladies,  do  not  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  I  come  from  a  place  where  I  have  been 
praising  you  up. 

MOL.  I  am  obliged  to  you.  (Aside).  The  devil  take 
you!  (To  the  actors).  Pray  take  care  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.    You  play  a  new  piece  to-night  ? 

MOL.  Yes,  sir.     (To  the  actresses).     Do  not  forget  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  The  King  got  you  to  do  it  ? 

2OO  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  [SCENK  11. 

MOL.  Yes,  sir.     {To  the  actors).     Pray  remember  .   .   . 

LA  THOR.  What  do  you  call  it? 

MOL.  Yes,  sir. 

LA  THOR.  I  ask  what  you  call  it  ? 

MOL.  Oh  !  Upon  my  word  I  do  not  know.  (To  tJie 
actresses).  You  must,  if  you  please  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  How  are  you  going  to  be  dressed  ? 

MOL.  As  you  see.     (To  the  actors).     I  beg  you  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  When  do  you  begin  ? 

MOL.  When  the  King  comes.  (Aside).  The  deuce 
take  him  and  his  questions. 

LA  THOR.  When  do- you  think  he  will  come? 

MOL.  May  the  quinsy  choke  me  if  I  know,  sir ! 

LA  THOR.  Do  you  not  know  .  .  . 

MOL.  Look  here,  sir;  I  am  the  most  ignorant  man  in 
the  world.  I  swear  I  know  nothing  of  anything  about 
what  you  may  ask.  (Aside).  I  am  going  mad.  This 
wretch  comes  cross-examining  me  in  his  cool  way,  never 
dreaming  that  I  may  have  other  things  to  attend  to. 

LA  THOR.  Ladies,  your  servant. 

MOL.  Ah  good  !  now  he  is  on  the  other  side. 

LA  THOR.  (To  Mademoiselle  Du  Croisy).  You  are  as 
handsome  as  a  little  angel.  Do  you  both  play  to-day  ? 
(Looking  at  Mademoiselle  Herve). 

MAD.  Du  C.  Yes,  sir. 

LA  THOR.  Without  you,  the  comedy  would  not  be  worth 
much.20 

MOL.  (  Whispering  to  the  actresses).  Can  you  not  send 
that  man  about  his  business  ? 

MAD.  DEB.  Sir,  we  have  a  rehearsal  on. 

LA  THOR.  Oh,  Zounds,  I  shall  not  prevent  you ;  you 
have  only  to  go  on. 

MAD.  DEB.  But  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  Nay,  nay,  I  should  be  sorry  to  trouble  any 
one.  Do  what  you  have  to  do  without  scruple. 

MAD.  DEB.  Yes ;  but  .  .  . 

LA  THOR.  I  assure  you,  I  am  a  man  of  no  ceremony ; 
and  you  can  rehearse  what  you  like. 

20  This  compliment  is  addressed  to  Mesdemoiselles  Du  Croisy  and 
Herv6,  two  of  the  weakest  actresses  in  Moliere's  troupe. 

SCBNBHI.]  THE   IMPROMPTU  OP   VERSAILLES.  2OI 

MOL.  Sir,  these  ladies  hesitate  to  tell  you  that  they 
would  much  prefer  that  no  one  should  be  present  during 
this  rehearsal. 

LA  THOR.  But  why  ?  You  have  nothing  to  fear  from 
me. 

MOL.  Sir,  it  is  their  custom ;  you  will  be  the  better 
pleased  when  the  thing  takes  you  by  surprise. 

LA  THOR.  Then  I  shall  go  and  tell  them  you  are  ready. 

MOL.  By  no  means,  sir ;  do  not  be  in  a  hurry,  pray. 

SCENE  III. — MOLIERE,  BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROI- 
SY,  MAD.  DUPARC,  MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD. 
MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

MOL.  Oh  dear,  this  world  is  full  of  impertinent  people ! 
But  now  come,  let  us  begin.  In  the  first  place,  then,  ima- 
gine that  the  scene  is  in  the  King's  antechamber;  for  it 
is  a  place  where  plenty  of  amusing  things  go  on  every  day. 
It  is  easy  to  introduce  there  whomsoever  we  please ;  and 
reasons  can  even  be  found  to  explain  the  appearance  of 
the  ladies  whom  I  bring  in.  The  comedy  opens  with  the 
meeting  of  two  Marquises.  (To  La  Grange).  Be  sure  and 
do  not  forget  to  come  from  that  side,  as  I  told  you,  with 
what  they  call  a  distinguished  air,  combing  your  wig,  and 
humming  a  tune  between  your  teeth.  La,  la,  la,  la,  la,  la, 
la!  Just  move  aside,  the  rest  of  you;  for  a  couple  of 
Marquises  require  room,  and  they  are  not  the  sort  of  per- 
sons to  be  satisfied  with  a  small  space.  ( To  La  Grange). 
Now  then,  speak. 

LA  GR,   "Good  day,  Marquis." 

MOL.  Oh  dear!  That  is  not  the  way  in  which  Mar- 
quises talk.  It  must  be  a  little  higher.  Most  of  these 
gentlemen  affect  a  special  tone  to  distinguish  themselves 
from  the  vulgar.  "Good  day,  Marquis."  Try  again. 

LA  GR.  "Good  day,  Marquis." 

MOL.  "Ah,  Marquis,  your  most  obedient." 

LA  GR.  "What  are  you  doing  there?" 

MOL.  "'Sdeath,  you  may  see.  I  am  waiting  until  all 
these  persons  have  cleared  away  from  the  door,  that  I  may 
show  my  face  there." 

LA  GR.  "  Zounds !  what  a  crowd !  I  do  not  care  to  go 
and  push  myself  through,  I  had  rather  wait  till  the  last." 

202  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  HI. 

MOL.  "There  is  a  score  there  who  have  no  chance  of 
getting  in,  but  they  take  good  care  to  press  forward,  and 
occupy  all  the  approaches  to  the  door." 

LA  GR.  "Let  us  call  out  our  names  to  the  door-keeper, 
so  that  he  may  summon  us." 

MOL.  "That  may  do  for  you;  but  I  do  not  wish  Mo- 
liere  to  take  me  off." 

LA  GR.  "Yet  I  think,  Marquis,  that  it  is  you  he  takes 
off  in  The  School  for  Wives  criticised. ' ' 

MOL.  "Me?  Most  mighty  potentate!  it  is  your  very 
self." 

LA  GR.  "Ah!  upon  my  word,  you  are  kind,  to  fit  me 
with  your  own  character." 

MOL.  "Death,  you  are  amusing,  to  give  me  what  be- 
longs to  yourself." 

LA  GR.  (Laughing).     "Ah,  ha!     How  entertaining!" 

MOL.  (Laughing).     "Ah,  ha!     How  comical!" 

LA  GR.  "What!  you  mean  to  maintain  that  it  is  not 
you  who  are  exhibited  in  the  Marquis  of  The  School  for 
Wives  criticised?' ' 

MOL.  "Just  so;  it  is  I.  'Detestable;  egad!  detest- 
able! Cream  tart!'  Oh,  it  is  I,  it  is  I,  assuredly  it  is 
I!" 

LA  GR.  "Yes,  it  is  you.  You  need  not  jest;  and  we 
shall  lay  a  wager,  if  you  like,  and  see  which  of  us  is 
right." 

MOL.  "Well  then,  what  will  you  bet?" 

LA  GR.   "I  bet  a  hundred  pistoles  that  it  is  you." 

MOL.   "And  I  bet  a  hundred  it  is  you." 

LA   GR.  "Money  down!" 

MOL.  "Money  down!  Ninety  on  Amyntas,  and  ten 
cash." 

LA  GR.  "Content!" 

MOL.   "Done,  then. 

LA  GR.   "Your  money  runs  a  great  risk." 

MOL.   "Yours  is  in  danger." 

LA   GR.   "  Who  shall  be  umpire?  " 

MOL.  "  Here  is  a  gentleman  who  shall  decide.  Che- 
valier !" 

BRE.   "What  is  it?" 

MOL.  Good.     Here  is  the  other  who  assumes  the  tone 

SCENE  in.j  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  203 

of  a  Marquis.  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  you  were  playing  a 
part  in  which  you  had  to  speak  naturally  ? 

BRE.  So  you  did. 

MOL.  Now  then.     "  Chevalier  .    .    .  " 

BRE.   "What  is  it?" 

MOL.  "  Just  decide  betwixt  us  on  a  wager  we  have 
made." 

BRE.   "What  wager?" 

MOL.  "We  cannot  agree  who  is  the  Marquis  in  Moliere's 
School  for  Wives  criticised.  He  bets  that  it  is  I,  and  I  bet 
that  it  is  he." 

BRE.  "  Well,  I  decide  that  it  is  neither  the  one  nor  the 
other.  You  are  fools,  both  of  you,  to  wish  that  these 
caps  should  fit ;  this  is  just  what  I  heard  Moliere  com- 
plaining of  the  other  day,  when  he  was  talking  to  some 
people  who  charged  him  with  the  same  thing.  He  said 
that  nothing  annoyed  him  so  much  as  to  be  accused  of 
animadverting  upon  anyone  in  the  portraits  he  drew;  that 
his  design  is  to  paint  manners  without  striking  at  indi- 
viduals, and  that  all  the  characters  whom  he  introduces  are 
imaginary — phantoms,  so  to  speak,  which  he  clothes  ac- 
cording to  his  fancy  in  order  to  please  his  audience ;  that 
he  would  be  much  vexed  to  have  hit  any  one  through  them ; 
and  that  if  aught  could  sicken  him  of  writing  comedies,  it 
would  be  the  resemblances  that  people  always  insisted  on 
finding,  and  on  which  his  enemies  maliciously  tried  to  fix 
attention,  in  order  to  do  him  an  injury  with  certain  persons 
of  whom  he  had  never  thought.  And,  indeed,  I  think  he 
is  right ;  for  why,  pray,  should  you  apply  all  his  actions 
and  words,  and  seek  to  draw  him  into  quarrels  by  pub- 
licly declaring  that  he  is  showing  up  so-and-so,  when  the 
facts  are  such  as  will  fit  a  hundred  people  ?  As  the  business 
of  comedy  is  to  represent  in  a  general  way  all  the  faults  of 
men,  and  especially  of  the  men  of  our  day,  it  is  impossible 
for  Moliere  to  create  any  character  not  to  be  met  with  in 
the  world ;  and  if  he  must  be  accused  of  thinking  of 
everyone  in  whom  are  to  be  found  the  faults  which  he 
delineates  he  must,  of  course,  give  up  writing  comedies. " 21 

21  This  is  an  intentional  and  very  forcible  self-defence  upon  the  part  of 
the  author,  to  which  the  nature  of  the  comedy  lends  itself  admirably.    No 

204  THE    IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCHKB  m. 

MOL.  "  Upon  my  word,  Chevalier,  you  wish  to  justify 
Moliere,  and  spare  our  friend  here." 

LA  GR.  ' '  Not  at  all.  It  is  you  he  spares ;  and  we  shall 
find  another  umpire." 

MOL.  "  So  be  it.  But  tell  me,  Chevalier,  do  you  not 
think  that  Moliere  is  exhausted  by  this  time,  and  that  he 
will  find  no  more  subjects  for  .  .  .  ?  " 

BRE.  "  No  more  subjects?  Ah,  dear  Marquis,  we  shall 
always  go  on  providing  him  with  plenty  ;  and  we  are 
scarcely  taking  the  course  to  grow  wise,  for  all  that  he  can 
do  or  say." 

MOL.  Stay.  You  must  be  more  emphatic  with  this  pas- 
sage. Just  listen  to  me  for  a  moment.22  "  And  that  he 
will  find  no  more  subjects  for  .  .  . — No  more  subjects  ? 
Ah,  dear  Marquis,  we  shall  always  go  on  providing  him 
with  plenty,  and  we  are  scarcely  taking  the  course  to  grow 
wise,  for  all  that  he  can  do  or  say.  Do  you  imagine  that 
he  has  exhausted  in  his  comedies  all  the  follies  of  men ;  and 
without  leaving  the  Court,  are  there  not  a  score  of  char- 
acters which  he  has  not  yet  touched  upon  ?  For  instance, 
has  he  not  those  who  profess  the  greatest  friendship  pos- 
sible, and  who,  when  they  turn  their  backs,  think  it  a 
piece  of  gallantry  to  tear  each  other  to  pieces  ?  Has  he 
not  those  unmitigated  sycophants,  those  vapid  flatterers, 
who  never  give  a  pinch  of  salt  with  their  praises,  and 
whose  flatteries  have  a  sickly  sweetness  which  nauseate 
those  who  hear  them?  Has  he  not  the  craven  courtiers 
of  favourites,  the  treacherous  worshippers  of  fortune,  who 
praise  you  in  prosperity,  and  run  you  down  in  adversity? 
Has  he  not  those  who  are  always  discontented  with  the 
Court,  those  useless  hangers-on,  those  troublesome,  officious 
creatures,  those  people  who  can  count  up  no  services  ex- 
cept importunities,  and  who  expect  to  be  rewarded  for 
having  laid  a  ten  years'  siege  to  the  King  ?  Has  he  not 

doubt  Moli&re  had  much  ado  to  keep  himself  out  of  an  endless  series  of 
personal  quarrels  with  those  whom  his  satire  affected ;  and  though  one 
object  of  The  School  for  Wives  criticised  was  to  lay  stress  on  the  general 
meaning  of  his  delineations,  its  immediate  effect  was,  doubtless,  to  aggra- 
vate the  annoyance  of  his  lay-figures.  The  Impromptu  could  not  fail  to 
allay  these  grievances,  and  to  conciliate  the  author's  contemporaries. 

12  This  is  very  skilful ;  Moliere  now  takes  up  his  own  argument  in  his 
proper  person,  thus  challenging  the  closer  attention  of  his  audience. 

scKNBiii.]  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  205 

those  who  fawn  on  all  the  world  alike,  who  hand  their 
civilities  from  left  to  right,  who  run  after  all  whom  they 
see,  with  the  same  salutations,  and  the  same  professions 
of  friendship?  'Sir,  your  most  obedient.  Sir,  I  am  en- 
tirely at  your  service.  Consider  me  wholly  yours,  dear 
sir.  Reckon  me,  sir,  as  the  warmest  of  your  friends.  Sir, 
I  am  enchanted  to  embrace  you.  Ah  !  sir,  I  did  not  see 
you.  Oblige  me  by  making  use  of  me  ;  be  assured  I  am 
wholly  yours.  You  are  the  one  man  in  the  world  whom  I 
most  esteem.  There  is  no  one  whom  I  honour  like  you. 
I  entreat  you  to  believe  it.  I  beg  of  you  not  to  doubt  it. 
Your  servant.  Your  humble  slave.'  Oh,  Marquis,  Mar- 
quis, Moliere  will  always  have  more  subjects  than  he 
needs ;  and  all  that  he  has  aimed  at  as  yet  is  but  a  trifle 
to  the  treasure  which  is  within  his  reach."  That  is  some- 
thing of  the  style  in  which  it  should  be  played. 

BRE.  It  is  sufficient. 

MOL.  Go  on. 

BRE.     "  Here  are  Climene  and  Eliza." 

MOL.  (To  Mesdemoiselles  Duparc  and Moliere}.  Here- 
upon you  two  are  to  come  up.  {To  Mademoiselle  Duparc). 
Be  sure,  you,  to  attitudinize  well,  and  observe  a  good 
many  formalities.  That  will  constrain  you  a  little ;  but 
it  cannot  be  helped.  One  must  sometimes  do  violence  to 
oneself. 

MAD.  MOL.  "  Madam,  I  easily  recognized  you  a  long 
way  off,  and  perceived  from  your  bearing  that  it  could  be 
no  other  than  you." 

MAD.  DUP.  "You  see,  I  have  come  to  wait  for  a  man 
with  whom  I  have  a  little  matter  of  business." 

MAD.  MOL.   "  That  is  just  my  case." 

MOL.  Ladies,  these  boxes  will  serve  you  for  arm-chairs. 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Come,  Madam,  I  beg  you  to  be  seated." 

MAD.  MOL.   "After  you,  Madam." 

MOL.  Good.  After  these  little  dumb  shows,  let  each 
take  a  seat,  and  speak  sitting,  whilst  the  Marquises  must 
sometimes  get  up  and  sometimes  sit  down  again,  in  ac- 
cordance with  their  natural  restlessness.  "  'Sdeath,  Che- 
valier, you  ought  to  physic  your  rolls." 

BRE.  "How  so?" 

MOL.  "They  look  ill.' 

206  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  m. 

BRE.   "  I  salute  your  punstership. " 

MAD.  MOL.  "Heavens,  Madam,  I  do  think  your  com- 
plexion dazzling  white,  and  your  lips  of  a  marvellous 
flame-colour. ' ' 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Ah  !  what  is  that  you  say,  Madam?  Do 
not  look  at  me ;  I  am  frightfully  ugly  to-day." 

MAD.  MOL.   "Do,  Madam,  just  raise  your  hood." 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Fie !  I  am  frightful,  I  tell  you,  and  shock 
even  myself." 

MAD.  MOL.   "  You  are  so  lovely. " 

MAD.  DUP.    "No,  no." 

MAD.  MOL.   "  Show  yourself. " 

MAD.  DUP.    "Oh,  pray  do  not." 

MAD.  MOL.  "Please  do." 

MAD.  DUP.    "  Heavens,  no !  " 

MAD.  MOL.  "Yes,  do." 

MAD.  DUP.    "How  troublesome  you  are!  " 

MAD.  MOL.   "Just  for  an  instant." 

MAD.  DUP.    "Ah!" 

MAD.  MOL.  "You  positively  shall  show  yourself.  We 
cannot  do  without  seeing  you." 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Good  gracious,  what  an  odd  creature  you 
are  !  What  you  wish  you  wish  so  desperately." 

MAD.  MOL.  "Ah,  Madam,  I  am  sure  you  need  not 
dread  the  broad  daylight.  How  wicked  people  are  to  say 
that  you  use  any  paint !  I  shall  certainly  be  able  to  con- 
tradict them  now." 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Lackaday,  I  do  not  so  much  as  know  what 
you  mean  by  using  paint !  But  where  are  those  ladies 
going?" 

MAD.  DEB.  "  Permit  us,  ladies,  to  give  you  in  passing 
the  most  agreeable  news  conceivable.  Here  is  Mr.  Lysi- 
das,  who  has  just  told  us  that  some  one  has  made  a  play 
against  Moliere,  which  the  grand  company  are  going  to 
act." 

MOL.  "  It  is  true,  they  wished  to  read  it  to  me.  A  cer- 
tain Br  .  .  .  Brou  .  .  .  Brossauthaswritten.it." 

Du  CR.  "  Sir,  it  is  advertised  under  the  name  of  Bour- 
sault ;  but,  to  let  you  into  the  secret,  many  people  have 
contributed  to  this  piece,  and  one  is  disposed  to  form 
pretty  high  expectations  of  it.  Since  all  authors  and 

SCHNEIII.]  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  207 

actors  look  on  Moliere  as  their  greatest  enemy,  we  all 
unite  against  him  to  do  him  an  ill  turn.  Each  of  us  has 
added  a  stroke  to  his  portrait ;  but  we  have  taken  good 
care  not  to  put  our  names  to  it.  It  would  have  been  too 
much  honour  for  him  to  succumb,  before  the  eyes  of  the 
world,  to  the  efforts  of  a  combined  Parnassus  ;  and  so,  to 
make  his  discomfiture  more  ignominious,  we  thought  of 
picking  out  on  purpose  an  author  without  repute." 

MAD.  DUP.  '•  For  my  part,  I  confess  that  I  am  greatly 
rejoiced  at  it." 

MOL.  "And  so  am  I.  Gad,  the  mocker  shall  be 
mocked  ;  upon  my  word,  he  shall  have  a  rap  over  the 
knuckles. ' ' 

MAD.  DUP.  "  That  will  teach  him  to  satirize  everybody. 
What  !  This  impertinent  fellow  will  have  it  that  women 
have  no  wit.  He  condemns  all  our  lofty  modes  of  expres- 
sion, and  makes  out  that  we  are  always  speaking  in  a 
humdrum  way." 

MAD.  DEB.  "Speech  matters  nothing;  but  he  blames 
all  our  intimacies,  however  harmless  they  may  be ;  and 
according  to  him-,  it  is  criminal  to  possess  merit." 

MAD.  Du  C.  "It  is  unbearable.  Women  can  do  noth- 
ing henceforth. '  Why  cannot  he  let  our  husbands  be  at 
peace,  without  opening  their  eyes  and  making  them  notice 
things  of  which  they  never  thought  ?  ' ' 

MAD.  BEJ.  "All  this  is  a  trifle  ;  but  he  satirizes  even 
virtuous  women  ;  the  wicked  buffoon  styles  them  'respect- 
able she-devils.'  "M 

MAD.  MOL.  "He  is  an  impertinent  wretch.  He  de- 
serves all  he  gets." 

Du  CR.  "  This  play,  Madam,  must  needs  be  supported  : 
and  the  comedians  of  the  hotel  ..." 

MAD.  DUP.  "  Oh,  let  them  have  no  fear.  I  will  lay 
my  life  on  the  success  of  this  piece." 

MAD.  MOL.  "  You  are  right,  Madam.  Too  many  peo- 
ple are  interested  in  thinking  it  good.  You  may  judge 
whether  all  those  who  believe  themselves  to  have  been 
satirized  by  Moliere  will  not  take  the  opportunity  of 
avenging  themselves  on  him  by  applauding  this  comedy." 

MSee  The  School  for  Wives,  Act  iv.,  Scene  8. 

208  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  in. 

BRE.  (Ironically).  "No  doubt;  and  for  my  part  I 
can  answer  for  a  dozen  Marquises,  six  precieuses,  a  score 
of  coquettes,  and  thirty  victimized  husbands,  who  will  not 
fail  to  applaud." 

MAD.  MOL.  "  Exactly  so.  Why  should  he  go  and  of- 
fend all  these  people,  and  especially  the  victimized  hus- 
bands, who  are  the  best  people  in  the  world?"  ** 

MOL.  "Gad,  I  have  been  told  that  they  will  have  a 
rub  both  at  him  and  at  all  his  plays,  in  fine  style,  and  that 
actors  and  authors,  from  great  to  small,  are  deucedly 
savage  against  him." 

MAD.  MOL.  "  That  just  serves  him  right.  Why  does  he 
write  wicked  pieces  that  all  Paris  goes  to  see,  and  in  which 
he  paints  people  so  well,  that  everybody  knows  himself? 
Why  does  he  not  make  plays  like  those  of  Mr.  Lysidas  ? 
He  would  have  no  one  against  him,  and  all  the  authors 
would  speak  well  of  him.  It  is  true  that  such  plays  do 
not  draw  large  audiences;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  they 
are  always  well  written  ;  nobody  writes  against  them,  and 
all  who  see  them  are  desperately  anxious  to  think  them 
fine." 

Du  CR.  "It  is  true  that  I  have  the  advantage  of  mak- 
ing no  enemies,  and  that  all  my  works  are  approved  of  by 
the  learned."25 

MAD.  MOL.  "  You  are  justified  in  being  satisfied  with 
yourself.  That  is  worth  more  than  all  the  applause  of  the 
public,  and  than  all  the  money  that  Moliere' s  pieces  may 
draw.  What  does  it  matter  to  you  whether  people  come 
to  see  your  plays,  so  long  as  they  are  praised  by  your  pro- 
fessional friends?" 

LA  GR.  "  But  when  will  The  Painter's  Portrait  be 
acted?" 

Du  CR.  "I  do  not  know ;  but  I  intend  to  appear  in  the 
front  seat,  and  cry,  This  is  something  like  a  play  ! ' ' 

MOL.  Gad,  and  I  too." 

LA  GR.   "And  so  do  I,  as  I  hope  to  be  saved." 

24  One  of  the  commentators  of  Moliere  says  that  the  proof  that  our 
author  was  not  jealous  is  to  be  found  in  the  words  he  puts  into  his  wife's 
mouth.     I  imagine  Mad.  Moliere  spoke  ironically. 

25  On  page  460  Moliere,  in  answer  to  Mad.  Debrie's  remarks,  replies 
for  Lysidas,  here  it  is  Du  Croisy  ;  this  seems  a  contradiction. 

SCENE  111. J  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  209 

MAD.  DUP.  "  For  my  part,  I  shall  show  myself  there, 
as  I  ought ;  and  I  will  answer  for  a  round  of  applause 
which  shall  drown  all  adverse  opinion.  It  is  really  the 
least  we  can  do,  to  assist  with  our  approbation  the  avenger 
of  our  cause. ' ' 

MAD.  MOL.  "Well  said!" 

MAD.  DEB.  "That  is  what  we  must  all  do." 

MAD.  BEJ.   "  Assuredly." 

MAD.  Du  C.   "  Undoubtedly." 

MAD.  HER.   "  No  quarter  to  this  mimic." 

MOL.  "  Upon  my  word,  Chevalier,  your  Moliere  must 
hide  his  head." 

BRE.  "Who?  He?  I  promise  you,  Marquis,  that  he 
intends  to  take  a  seat  upon  the  stage,  and  laugh  with  the 
rest  at  the  portrait  they  have  drawn  of  him."28 

MOL.  "  Gad,  then,  he  will  laugh  on  the  wrong  side  of 
his  face." 

BRE.  "  Come,  come  ;  perchance  he  will  find  more  cause 
for  laughter  than  you  think.  I  was  shown  the  play ;  and 
as  everything  amusing  in  it  was  exactly  taken  from  Mo- 
liere, the  pleasure  which  this  will  afford,  will  not  be  likely 
to  offend  him ;  for,  as  to  the  parts  where  they  set  them- 
selves to  blacken  him,  I  am  very  much  mistaken  if  this  is 
applauded  by  any  one.  And  as  for  all  the  people  whom 
they  have  tried  to  set  against  him,  of  whom,  it  is  said,  he 
had  drawn  too  faithful  likenesses,  not  only  is  it  in  bad 
taste,  but  I  never  saw  anything  more  ridiculous,  or  worse 
done ;  I  never  yet  thought  that  it  was  a  reproach  to  a 
dramatic  author  to  depict  men  too  well." 

LA  GR.  "  The  actors  told  me  they  expected  a  rejoinder 
from  him,  and  that  ..." 

BRE.  "A  rejoinder?  Verily,  I  should  think  him  a 
great  fool  if  he  took  the  trouble  to  reply  to  their  invec- 
tives. Every  one  knows  well  enough  from  what  motives 
they  must  be  acting ;  and  the  best  answer  which  he  can 
make  them  is  a  comedy  which  will  succeed  like  all  the 
others.  This  is  the  true  plan  of  being  avenged  on  them ; 

*•  De  Villiers,  in  the  Vengeance  des  Marquis,  mentions  that  Moliere 
took  one  day  a  seat  on  the  stage  of  the  hfttel  de  Bourgogne  to  listen  to 
Boursalt's  Painter's  Portrait. 

210  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  in. 

and  judging  from  what  I  know  of  their  disposition,  I  am 
sure  that  a  new  play,  which  will  take  their  audiences  from 
them,  will  annoy  them  much  more  than  all  the  satires 
which  could  be  written  against  them  individually." 

MOL.  "  But,  Chevalier  .    .    .  ?" 

MAD.  BEJ.  Let  me  interrupt  the  rehearsal  for  a  mo- 
ment. {To  Moliere).  May  I  make  a  suggestion?  If  I 
had  been  you,  I  should  have  treated  the  thing  in  another 
way.  Every  one  expects  a  vigorous  rejoinder  from  you ; 
and,  after  the  way  in  which  they  tell  me  you  have  been 
treated  in  this  comedy,  you  were  justified  in  saying  anything 
against  the  actors;  and  you  ought  not  to  spare  one  of  them. 

MOL.  I  am  annoyed  to  hear  you  speak  thus.  This  is 
just  the  way  with  you  ladies.  You  would  have  me  fire  up 
against  them,  and  follow  their  example  by  rushing  into 
invectives  and  insults.  A  great  deal  of  honour  I  should 
get  from  it,  and  a  vast  deal  of  vexation  I  should  bring 
them!  Are  they  not  quite  prepared  for  that  kind  of 
thing?  And,  when  they  were  discussing  whether  they 
should  play  The  Painter1  s  Portrait,  for  fear  of  a  rejoinder, 
did  not  some  of  them  say:  "  Let  him  abuse  us  as  much 
as  he  likes,  so  long  as  we  get  money  ?' ' — Is  not  that  the 
mark  of  a  soul  very  sensitive  to  shame  \  and  should  I  not 
be  well  avenged  by  giving  them  what  they  greatly  long  to 
receive  ? 

MAD.  DEB.  They  complained  strongly  of  three  or  four 
words  you  said  of  them  in  The  School  for  Wives  criticised, 
and  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies. 

MOL.  It  is  true  that  these  three  or  four  words  are  very 
offensive ;  and  they  have  great  reason  to  quote  them. 
Come,  come,  it  is  not  that.  The  greatest  harm  I  have 
done  them  is  that  I  have  been  fortunate  enough  to  please 
a  little  more  than  they  would  have  liked ;  their  whole  con- 
duct since  we  came  to  Paris  has  too  clearly  shown  what 
pricks  them.  But  let  them  do  what  they  will,  all  their 
efforts  cannot  disturb  me.  They  criticise  my  plays,  so 
much  the  better ;  and  Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  ever 
do  aught  that  pleased  them !  It  would  be  a  bad  business 
for  me. 

MAD.  DEB.  Still  there  is  not  much  pleasure  in  seeing 
one's  works  puHed  to  pieces 

s    INK   in  THE    IMPROMPTU    OF   VERSAILLES.  211 

MOL.  What  does  it  matter  to  me  ?  Have  I  not  got 
from  my  comedy  all  that  I  wished,  since  it  had  the  good 
fortune  to  please  those  lofty  personages  whom  I  specially 
aim  at  pleasing  ?  Have  I  not  cause  to  be  content  with 
my  lot,  and  are  not  all  their  censures  a  little  too  late  ? 
Does  that  affect  me  now,  pray  ?  When  they  attack  a 
piece  which  has  been  successful,  do  they  not  attack  the 
judgment  of  those  who  praised  it,,  rather  than  the  skill  of 
him  who  wrote  it  ? 

MAD.  DEB.  Upon  my  word,  I  should  have  had  a  hit  at 
that  little  scribe,  who  is  rash  enough  to  write  against 
people  who  do  not  trouble  their  heads  about  him. 

MOL.  How  silly  you  are.  A  fine  subject  for  diversion 
monsieur  Boursault  would  be  !  I  should  like  to  know 
how  he  could  be  tricked  out  to  make  him  amusing ; 
and  whether,  if  he  were  ridiculed  on  the  stage,  he  would 
be  fortunate  enough  to  make  any  one  laugh.  It  would  be 
too  much  honour  for  him,  to  be  represented,  before  an 
august  assembly.  He  would  ask  nothing  better ;  and  he 
attacks  me  wantonly  in  order  to  make  himself  known  in 
any  way.  He  is  a  man  who  has  nothing  to  lose,  and  the 
actors  have  let  him  loose  on  me  only  in  order  to  engage 
me  in  a  foolish  quarrel,  and  turn  me  aside,  by  this  dodge, 
from  other  works  which  I  have  on  hand ;  and  yet  you  are 
simple  enough  to  fall  into  the  trap.  But  I  shall  make  a 
public  declaration  on  this  point.  I  do  not  mean  to  make 
any  reply  to  all  their  criticisms  and  counter-criticisms. 
Let  them  say  all  the  evil  they  can  of  my  pieces ;  I  am 
quite  willing.  Let  them  take  our  leavings,  and  turn  them 
inside  out  like  a  coat,  to  bring  them  on  their  own  stage, 
and  try  to  profit  by  any  pleasant  thing  they  find  in  them, 
and  by  a  little  of  my  good  fortune  ;  I  give  them  leave ; 
they  have  need  of  it,  and  I  shall  be  happy  to  contribute 
to  their  necessities,  provided  they  will  be  satisfied  with 
what  I  can  decently  grant  them.  Courtesy  must  have  its 
limits ;  and  there  are  some  things  which  can  make  neither 
spectators  laugh,  nor  him  of  whom  they  are  spoken.  I 
gladly  leave  to  them  my  works,  my  figure,  my  attitudes, 
my  words,  the  tone  of  my  voice,  and  my  style  of  recita- 
tion, to  make  and  say  whatever  they  will  of  them,  if  they 
can  snatch  some  profit  from  them.  I  have  nothing  to  say 

212  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF  VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  iv. 

against  all  this,  and  shall  be  delighted  if  this  can  please 
people ;  but  whilst  I  give  them  all  this,  they  must  do  me 
the  favour  to  leave  me  the  remainder,  and  not  to  touch  on 
things  of  the  nature  of  those  upon  which,  I  hear,  they  at- 
tack me  in  their  comedies.27  This  I  shall  politely  request 
of  the  honourable  gentleman  who  undertakes  to  write  for 
them ;  and  this  is  all  the  answer  they  shall  have  from  me. 

MAD.  BEJ.  But,  in  a  word  ... 

MOL.  But,  in  a  word,  you  will  drive  me  mad.  Let  us 
say  no  more  of  this.  We  amuse  ourselves  by  talking 
when  we  ought  to  be  rehearsing  our  comedy.  Where 
were  we  ?  I  do  not  remember. 

MAD.  DEB.  You  were  at  the  very  place  .    .    . 

MOL.  Good  Heavens,  what  noise  do  I  hear?  Surely  the 
King  is  come  !  I  can  plainly  see  we  shall  have  no  time  to 
get  through  it.  That  is  what  comes  of  our  gossipping. 
Oh,  well,  you  must  do  the  best  you  can  with  the  rest. 

MAD.  BEJ.  On  my  word,  I  am  in  such  a  fright,  I  shall 
never  be  able  to  play  my  part  unless  I  rehearse  it  all. 

MOL.  What !  You  will  not  be  able  to  play  your  part. 

MAD.  BEJ.  No. 

MAD.  DUP.  Nor  I  mine. 

MAD.  DEB.  No  more  shall  I. 

MAD.  MOL.  Nor  I. 

MAD.  HER.  Nor  I. 

MAD.  Du  C.  Nor  I. 

MOL.  What  on  earth  do  you  mean  to  do  ?  Are  you  all 
mocking  me. 

SCENE  IV. — BEJART,    LA   THORILLIERE,  MOLIERE,   BRE- 

COURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  DUPARC,  MAD. 

BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY, 

MAD.  HERVE. 

BEJ.  Gentlemen,  I  come  to  inform  you  that  the  King 
has  arrived,  and  waits  for  you  to  begin. 

MOL.  Ah,  sir,  you  see  me  in  a  terrible  strait.  I  am  dis- 
tracted as  I  speak  to  you.  These  ladies  are  frightened, 
and  say  they  must  rehearse  their  parts  before  commencing. 

n  Most  likely  Boursault's  le  Portrait  du  Pointre,  Montfleury's  Im- 
promptu de  I  'hotel  de  Conde,  and  De  Villier's  la  Vengeance  des  Marquis, 
contained  some  personal  attacks,  either  against  Moliere,  his  wife,  or  his 
friends,  which  were  suppressed  when  those  plays  were  printed. 

SCKHB  ix.]  THE   IMPROMPTU   OF   VERSAILLES.  213 

We  beg  the  favour  of  another  moment.  The  King  is 
kind,  and  he  knows  well  that  the  piece  has  been  done 
hurriedly. 

SCENE  V. — LA  THORILLIERE,    MOLIERE,    BRECOURT,   LA 
GRANGE,    Du  CROISY,  MAD.   DUPARC,  MAD.   BEJART, 
MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD. 
HERVE. 
MOL.  Oh,   pray  try  and   recover    yourselves.      Take 

courage,  I  entreat  you. 

MAD.  DUP.  You  must  go  and  excuse  yourself. 
MOL.  How  can  I  excuse  myself? 

SCENE  VI. — A  BUSYBODY,  LA  THORILLIERE,  MOLIERE, 
BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  DUPARC, 
MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du 
CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

1  BUSY.  Gentlemen,  begin. 

MOL.  At  once,  sir.  I  believe  I  shall  go  out  of  my 
mind  over  this  precious  business  .  .  . 

SCENE  VII. — A  SECOND  BUSYBODY,  LA  THORILLIERE, 
MOLIERE,  BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD. 
DUPARC,  MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE, 
MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

2  BUSY.  Gentlemen,  begin  ! 

MOL.  In  a  moment,  sir.  {To  his  fellow-actors).  What, 
would  you  have  me  affronted  .  .  . 

SCENE  VIII. — A  THIRD  BUSYBODY,  LA  THORILLIERE,  MO- 
LIERE, BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  DU- 
PARC, MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE, 
MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

3  BUSY.  Gentlemen,  begin  ! 

MOL.  Yes,  sir,  that  is  what  we  are  about  to  do.  How 
officious  these  gentry  are,  coming  and  bidding  us  begin, 
when  the  King  did  not  order  them  ! 

SCENE  IX. — A  FOURTH  BUSYBODY,  LA  THORILLIERE,  MO- 
LIERE, BRECOURT,  LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  DU- 
PARC, MAD.  BEJART,  MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE, 
MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  HERVE. 

214  THE    IMPROMPTU    OF   VERSAILLES.  [SCENE  x. 

4  BUSY.  Gentlemen,  begin  ! 

MOL.  It  is  done  sir.  (70  his  fellow-actors].  What! 
must  I  be  covered  with  confusion  .  .  . 

SCENE  X. — BEJART,  LA  THORILLIERE,  MOLIERE,  BRECOURT, 
LA  GRANGE,  Du  CROISY,  MAD.  DUPARC,  MAD.  BEJART, 
MAD.  DEBRIE,  MAD.  MOLIERE,  MAD.  Du  CROISY,  MAD. 
HERVE. 

MOL.  Sir,  you  come  to  bid  us  begin,  but  .  .  . 
BEJ.  No,  gentlemen,  I  come  to  say  that  the  King  has 
heard  of  the  trouble  you  are  in,  and  that,  in  the  kindness 
which  distinguishes  him,  he  defers  your  new  comedy  to 
another  time,  and  will  be  satisfied  to-day  with  the  first  you 
can  give  him. 

MOL.  Oh,  sir,  you  give  me  new  life.  The  King  be- 
stows on  Us  the  greatest  possible  favour  in  giving  us  time 
for  that  which  he  desired ;  we  shall  all  go  and  thank  him 
for  the  extreme  goodness  which  he  displays  towards  us.28 

18  A  flattery  to  the  Grand  Monarque,  heightened  by  what  had  pre- 
viously been  said  by  Moliere  of  the  impatience  of  Kings  to  taste  the 
pleasures  on  which  they  have  set  their  minds.  (Scene  I,  adinit.). 

LE  MARIAGE  FORCE. 

COM&DIE. 

THE  FORCED  MARRIAGE. 

COMEDY  IN  ONE  ACT. 
(THE    ORIGINAL   IN  PROSE.) 

JAN.  29TH,  1664. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

The  Forced  Marriage  is  described  as  a  Comedie-ballet,  and  was  due  to 
the  request  made  to  Moliere  by  Louis  XIV.,  for  an  entertainment  in  the 
manner  of  The  Bores,  in  which  a  genuine  comedy  should  be  combined 
with  a  ballet,  and  wherein  the  Court  itself  might  figure  upon  the  stage. 
Even  Louis  did  not  disdain  to  show  himself  amongst  his  courtiers  on  spe- 
cial occasions  of  this  kind,  submitting  himself  to  the  direction  of  the  danc- 
ing-masters, who  held  no  contemptible  position  at  the  Court  of  the  Grand 
Monarque.  Moliere  had  recently  received  from  the  royal  grace  a  pension 
of  a  thousand  livres,  and  he  thus  had  more  than  one  inducement  to  do  his 
best  for  the  young  King's  pleasure.  It  was  on  the  zgth  of  January,  1664, 
in  the  drawing-room  of  the  Queen-mother,  at  the  Louvre,  that  The 
Forced  Marriage  was  first  produced.  Louis,  then  in  his  twenty-sixth 
year,  figured  as  one  of  the  gipsies  in  the  ballet.  The  play  had  three  acts, 
with  entries,  and,  as  the  King  danced  in  it,  was  called  the  Ballet  du  Roi. 

The  Comedy-ballet  was  subsequently  brought  out  at  the  Palais-Royal, 
at  great  expense,  and  had  a  run  of  thirteen  days.  But  Moliere  had 
separated  the  comedy  from  the  ballet,  and  reduced  the  former  from  three 
acts  to  one.  For  the  singing  magician  and  the  demons  who  frightened 
Sganarelle  into  trying  to  get  out  of  his  marriage  engagement,  the  poet 
substituted  the  twelfth  scene,  introducing  Alcidas,  who  is  called  Lycante 
in  the  ballet. 

The  comedy  supplies  us  with  yet  another  of  those  senile  gallants  whom 
the  poet  delights  to  paint ;  though  in  one  of  his  preceding  comedies,  The 
School  for  Husbands,  the  deceived  gallant,  Sganarelle,  is  twenty  years 
younger  than  the  wise  Ariste,  who  is  not  betrayed.  The  comic  element 
in  The  Forced  Marriage  springs,  not  only  from  the  incongruity  of  the 
amorous  old  suitor  and  the  coquettish  young  girl,  but  also  from  the  fact 
that  the  butt  of  the  piece  discovers  his  mistake  before  marriage,  into  which 
he  is  nevertheless  forced  with  the  full  knowledge  of  the  fate  that  is  await- 
ing him.  The  idea,  at  all  events  up  to  the  eve  of  the  catastrophe,  had 
been  worked  out  by  Rabelais,  whom  Moliere  follows  with  considerable 
closeness.  In  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  the  older  writer's 
work,  "  Panurge  asketh  counsel  of  Pantagruel  whether  he  should  marry, 
yea  or  nay  ?"  and  whether,  if  married,  he  will  be  able  to  escape  "  la  dis- 
grace dont  on  ne  plant personne."  Pantagruel  (the  Geronimo  of  the  play) 
gives  his  advice  in  the  same  complaisant  manner  as  Sganarelle's  crony, — 
"  Then  do  not  marry ;"  "  Then  marry,  in  the  name  of  God." 

What  Coleridge  says  of  this  chapter  of  Rabelais  may  well  be  applied 

2I7 

2l8  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE. 

to  the  first  scene  of  Moliere's  play : — "  Pantagruel  (Geronimo)  stands  for 
the  reason,  as  contradistinguished  from  the  understanding  and  choice, 
that  is,  from  Panurge  (Sganarelle) ;  and  the  humour  consists  in  the  latter 
asking  advice  of  the  former,  on  a  subject  in  which  the  reason  can  only 
give  the  inevitable  conclusion,  the  syllogistic  ergo,  from  the  premises  pro- 
vided by  the  understanding  itself,  which  puts  each  case  so  as  of  necessity 
to  predetermine  the  verdict  thereon.  This  chapter,  independently  of  the 
'allegory,  is  an  exquisite  satire  on  the  spirit  in  which  people  commonly  ask 
advice." 

But  Rabelais  himself  was  not  the  first  to  adopt  this  illustration  of  waver- 
ing advice ;  for  we  find  similar  scenes  in  Poggio,  and  in  the  Itinerarium 
Paradisi  of  Raulin,  a  preacher  of  the  beginning  of  the  fifteenth  century, 
in  his  sermon  De  Viduitate. 

The  two  philosophers  are  not  quite  original  creations,  Marphurius  being 
no  other  than  the  Ephectic  and  Pyrrhonian  sage  Trouillogan,  whom  Ra- 
belais delineates  in  the  thirty-fifth  and  thirty-sixth  chapters  of  the  third 
book  of  Pantagruel.  It  has  been  often  said  that  the  scenes  between  Sga- 
narelle and  the  two  philosophers  are  too  farcical,  and  only  Induce  laughter. 
But  Moliere  never  acted  more  courageously  than  in  writing  those  scenes ; 
for  he  openly  attacked  the  Aristotelian  philosophy,  so  strongly  defended 
by  the  University  of  Paris,  which  intended  to  get  confirmed  a  sentence  of 
the  parliament  of  Paris,  of  the  4th  of  September  1624,  by  which  all  those 
who  attacked  the  Aristotelian  doctrines  were  condemned  to  death.  Be- 
sides this,  the  above-mentioned  scenes  are  connected  with  several  philoso- 
phical observations,  to  be  found  in  The  Pretentious  Young  Ladies,  and  in 
The  Blue  Stockings  (see  Vol.  III).  Trissotin  and  Vadius,  in  the  latter 
play,  belong  to  the  same  race  as  the  illustrious  Pancrace  and  Marphurius. 

According  to  some  commentators  of  Moliere,  an  adventure  of  the 
Count  de  Grammont,  when  on  the  point  of  leaving  England,  has  given  to 
our  author  the  chief  idea  of  his  piece.  This  Count,  being  banished  from 
the  court  of  Louis  XIV.,  went  to  that  of  Charles  II.,  and  there  became 
engaged  to  Miss  Hamilton,  a  grand-daughter  of  the  Duke  of  Ormond. 
Being  suddenly  recalled  to  France,  he  forgot  his  engagement  and  left  at 
once.  But  the  two  brothers  of  the  young  lady  immediately  started  after 
him,  came  up  with  him  at  Dover,  and  asked  him  ''  if  he  had  not  forgotten 
anything  in  London?"  His  answer  was,  "  Pardon  me,  gentlemen,  I  have 
forgotten  to  marry  your  sister."  He  returned  with  them  married  Miss 
Hamilton,  and  went  back  with  her  to  France. 

Tradition  states  that  the  original  of  the  over-polite  Alcidas  was  a  cer- 
tain Marquis  de  la  Trousse,  killed  at  the  siege  of  Tortosa  in  1648,  and  who 
was  so  polite  that  he  always  used  compliments  when  fighting  a  duel,  and 
expressed  his  great  sorrow  whilst  killing  his  opponent. 

In  the  seventh  volume  of  "  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,"  pub- 
lished in  London,  1732,  this  play  is  dedicated  to  ^the  Right  Honourable 
the  Lady  Harvey,  in  the  following  words : 

MADAM, 

You  will  not,  I  hope,  be  frighted  at  the  sight  of  a  Dedication  with  Your  Name 
before  it,  when  I  promise  Your  LADYSHIP,  that  I  am  not  going  to  give  You  the  Pain 
of  reading  Your  own  Character  :  tho'  at  the  same  time,  I  must  assure  You,  that  it 
is  with  great  reluctance  I  relinquish  so  fair  an  Opportunity  of  describing  every- 
thing that  is  lovely,  desirable,  and  praiseworthy,  and  forbear  setting  before  the 
Beauties  of  the  present  Age  a  charming  Pattern,  which  the  greatest  and  best  of 
them  might  be  proud  to  copy.  But  for  fear  I  should  be  unable  to  resist  the  Temp- 
tation, if  I  think  any  longer  of  Lady  HARVEY,  I'll  conclude  this  Address,  with  de- 
siring Your  LADYSHIP'S  Acceptance  of  one  of  MOLIERB'S  Comedies,  which  has 

THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  2IQ 

both  Wit  and  Humour  in  the    Original.  .  .  I  hope,  too,  they  are  not  quite  lost  in 
the  Translation. 

Only  give  me  leave  to  add,  that  I  am,  MADAM,  your  Ladyship's  most  obedient 
and  most  humble  servant,  THE  TRANSLATOR. 

Ravenscroft  has  imitated  part  of  this  play  in  his  Scaramouch  a  Philoso- 
pher, Harlequin  a  School- Boy,  Bravo,  Merchant  and  Magician,  acted  at 
the  Theatre  Royal,  1677.  This  Comedy  is  a  medley  of  three  of  Moliere's 
plays,  The  Forced  Marriage,  The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman,  and 
The  Tricks  of  Scapin.  This,  with  a  Harlequin,  borrowed  from  an  Italian 
farce,  who  jumps  about  as  in  a  pantomime,  but  speaks,  forms  the  whole 
play.  It  appears  not  to  have  had  much  success.  The  actors  were  dilatory 
in  getting  it  up,  and  the  theatre  in  Dorset  Garden  forestalled  them  by 
bringing  out  a  translation  of  Moliere's  Tricks  of  Scapin.  This  is  what 
the  Prologue  says : 

Very  unfortunate  this  play  has  bin, 

A  slippery  trick  was  played  us  by  Scapin, 

Whilst  here  our  actors  made  a  long  delay, 

When  some  were  idle,  others  run  away, 

The  City  House  comes  out  with  half  our  Play. 

The  English  dramatist  ends  : 

Let  both  French  and  Italians  share  the  fame, 
But  iftbe  bad,  let  them  too  bear  the  blame. 

Mrs.  Centlivre,  who  was  then  Mrs.  Carroll,  has,  in  her  Love's  Contriv- 
ance, or  Le  Medecin  malgre  lui,  acted  at  Drury  Lane,  June  4,  1703,  bor- 
rowed nearly  everything  from  Moliere's  Forced  Marriage,  and  from  The 
Physician  in  spite  of  Himself,  (see  Vol.  ii.),  with  a  reminiscence  of  Sga- 
narelle.  She  impudently  states  in  the  Preface — "  Some  scenes,  I  confess, 
are  partly  taken  from  Moliere,  and  I  dare  be  bold  to  say  it  has  not  suffered 
in  the  translation.  .  .  .  The  French  have  that  light  airiness  in  their 
Temper,  that  the  least  Glimpse  of  Wit  sets  them  a-laughing,  when  t'would 
not  make  us  so  much  as  smile  ;  so  that  where  I  found  the  stile  too  poor, 
I  endeavoured  to  give  it  a  Turn.''  In  the  Prologue  she  says,  however — 

So  feverish  is  the  Humour  of  the  Town 

It  surfeits  of  a  Play  ere  three  Days  run. 

At  Locket's,  Brown's,  and  at  Pontack's '  enquire, 

What  modish  Kick-shaws  the  nice  Beaus  desire. 

What  famed  Ragouts,  what  new-invented  Sallaa 

Has  best  pretensions  to  regale  the  Palate. 

II  we  present  you  with  a  Medley  here, 

A  hodge-podge  Dish,    served  up  in  China  Ware, 

We  hope  'twill  please,  'cause  like  your  Bills  oi  Fare. 

Sganarelle  is  called,  in  the  English  comedy,  Sir  Toby  Doubtful,  and 
Geronimo,  Octavio.  The  only  new,  and  perhaps  original,  thing  in  Love's 
Contrivance  is  Bellmie's  former  servant,  Martin,  hiding  a  letter  in  an 
orange,  and  pretending  to  sell  fruit,  and  the  trick  being  discovered  by 
Self-will,  father  to  Lucinda,  the  heroine  of  the  play. 

Another  imitation,  An  Hour  before  Marriage,  was  written  by  an  Irish 
gentleman,  and  brought  out  at  Covent  Garden,  January  25,  1772,  with  a 
prologue  by  Colraan.  The  piece  was  very  unfavourably  received,  and 

1  Three  noted  restaurants  of  that  time.  The  last  one  is  mentioned  in  Sir  Walter 
Scott's  "  Fortunes  of  Nigel." 

220  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE. 

not  allowed  to  be  finished.  Why,  it  is  difficult  to  say,  for  it  is  a  very  good 
comedy  in  two  acts.  The  character  of  Sir  Andrew  Melville  is  drawn 
cleverly,  and  the  nice  way  in  which,  on  meeting  El  wood,  he  claims  first 
the  long-established  friendship,  the  early  and  close  intimacy  "  that  has 
subsisted  between  us  from  our  very  childhood,"  but  denies  this  friendship 
when  he  finds  out  that  Elwood  is  poor,  is  well  and  originally  delineated. 
.Very  forcibly  also  is  Miss  Melville's  (Dorimene)  brother  boasting  of  his 
ancient  descent,  which  is  not  in  the  French  play.  The  eighth  scene  of 
Moliere's  play  is  likewise  well  imitated  by  Mr.  Tardy,  the  lawyer,  and 
Stanley  ;  whilst  the  isth  and  i6th  scenes  are  thrown  into  one  in  the  Eng- 
lish version,  the  characters  of  Alcantor  and  Alcidas  having  been  combined 
in  the  personage  of  Sir  Andrew  Melville. 

The  Irish  Widow  is  another  imitation  of  Moliere's  Forced  Marriage, 
written  by  David  Garrick.  The  character  of  Widow  Brady  is  skilfully 
drawn ;  it  is  she  who,  dressed  in  the  uniform  of  a  lieutenant,  frightens 
poor  Whittle;  whilst  in  the  French  play,  it  is  Alcidas,  Dorimene's  brother, 
and  not  Dorimene  herself,  who  compels  Sganarelle  either  to  fight  or  to 
marry. 

Some  scenes  of  Moliere's  play  are  also  borrowed  in  Love  without  In- 
terest, or  The  Man  too  hard  for  the  Master.  The  author  of  this  piece  is 
unknown  ;  but  the  dedication  is  subscribed,  Penkethman,  and  is  directed 
to  six  lords,  six  knights,  and  twenty- four  esquires :  yet,  notwithstanding 
this  splendid  patronage,  it  met  with  very  little  success  on  its  appearance 
at  the  Theatre  Royal.2 

Shadwell,  in  The  Sullen  Lovers  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Bores), 
has  also  partly  imitated  the  fourth  and  sixth  scenes  of  The  Forced 
Marriage. 

*  Baker,  Reed,  and  Jones,  "  Biographica  Dramatica,"  1812,  ii.,  p.  391. 

DRAMATIS    PERSONS. 

SGANARELLE.  * 

GERONIMO. 

ALCANTOR,  father  to  Dorimene. 

ALCIDAS,  brother  to  Dorimene, 

LYCASTE,  in  love  with  Dorimene. 

PANCRACE,  an  Aristotelian  Philosopher. 

MARPHURIUS,  a  Pyrrhonian  Philosopher. 

DORIMENE,  a  young  coquette  betrothed  to  Sganarelle. 
Two  GIPSIES. 

The  Scene  is  in  a  Public  Place. 

8  Moliere  played  the  part  of  Sganarelle.  According  to  the  inventory 
taken  after  his  death,  and  given  by  M.  Eud.  Souli<§,  in  his  Recherches  sur 
Moliere,  we  find  "  a  dress  for  The  Forced  Marriage,  composed  of  breeches 
and  cloak  of  olive-colour,  lined  with  green,  adorned  with  violet  and  plate 
buttons,  and  a  satin  skirt  with  deep  yeSow-coloured  flowers,  with  the  same 
kind  of  buttons,  and  a  belt.'' 

THE  FORCED  MARRIAGE, 

(LE  MAR  I  AGE  FORCE.} 

SCENE  I. — SGANARELLE,  GERONIMO. 

SCAN.  (Speaking  behind  the  scenes  as  he  enters).  I  shall 
be  back  in  a  moment.  Take  good  care  of  the  house,  and 
let  everything  go  on  quite  regularly.  If  any  one  brings 
me  money,  come  for  me  quickly  at  Mr.  Geronimo's;  and 
if  any  one  comes  to  ask  for  any,  tell  him  I  am  out,  and 
shall  not  be  back  to-day. 

SCENE  II. — SGANARELLE,  GERONIMO. 

GER.  {Having  heard  the  last  words  of  Sganarelle).  That 
is  a  very  prudent  order. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  Geronimo,  well  met.  I  was  going  to  your 
house  to  look  for  you. 

GER.  And  why,  pray  ? 

SCAN.  To  tell  you  of  something  I  have  in  my  mind,  and 
ask  your  advice  about  it. 

GER.  Very  willingly.  I  am  glad  we  have  met ;  we  can 
speak  here  at  our  ease. 

SCAN.  Pray,  be  covered  then.  The  business  is  about 
something  of  importance  which  has  been  proposed  to  me. 
It  is  well  to  do  nothing  without  the  advice  of  one's 
friends. 

GER.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  having  chosen  me.  You 
have  only  to  tell  me  what  it  is. 

SCAN.  But,  first  of  all,  I  must  implore  you  not  to  flatter 
me,  but  to  tell  me  your  opinion  candidly. 

223 

224  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENB  n. 

GER.  Since  you  wish  it,  I  will. 

SCAN.  I  know  nothing  worse  than  a  friend  who  does  not 
speak  frankly. 

GER.  You  are  right. 

SCAN.   Now-a-days,  we  meet  few  sincere  friends. 

GER.  That  is  true. 

SCAN.  Promise  me,  then,  Geronimo,  to  speak  with  all 
frankness. 

GER.  I  promise. 

SCAN.   Swear  on  your  word. 

GER.  Ay,  on  the  word  of  a  friend.  Now,  do  tell  me 
your  business. 

SCAN.  I  wish  to  have  your  opinion  whether  I  shall  do 
well  to  marry. 

GER.  Who?    You? 

SCAN.  Yes,  I  myself.  What  is  your  advice  on  the  sub- 
ject? 

GER.  First  of  all,  I  beg  you  to  tell  me  one  thing. 

SCAN.  What  is  that  ? 

GER.  How  old  do  you  think  you  may  be  now  ? 

SCAN.  I? 

GER.  Yes. 

SCAN.  Why,  really  I  do  not  know ;  but  I  am  in  very 
good  health. 

GER.  What !  Do  you  not  know  your  age,  within  a 
year  or  two? 

SCAN.   No.     Who  thinks  about  his  age  ? 

GER.  Hem  !  Just  tell  me,  please,  how  old  you  were 
when  we  first  became  acquainted  ? 

SCAN.  Oh,  I  was  only  twenty  then. 

GER.   How  long  were  we  together  at  Rome  ? 

SCAN.  Eight  years. 

GER.   How  long  did  you  stay  in  England  ? 

SCAN.  Seven  years. 

GER.  And  in  Holland,  where  you  went  next? 

SCAN.  Five  years  and  a-half. 

GER.  How  long  is  it  since  you  returned  ? 

SCAN.  I  came  back  in  "fifty-two." 

GER.  From  "fifty-two"  to  "sixty-four"4  makes  twelve 

4  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  The  Forced  Marriage  was  played  in 
1664 ;  hence  Geronimo  counts  to  "  sixty-four." 

SCENE  ii.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  225 

years,  I  think.  Five  years  in  Holland  makes  seventeen ; 
seven  years  in  England  make  twenty-four  ;  eight  years  for 
our  stay  in  Rome  make  thirty-two;  and  twenty — your  age 
when  we  became  acquainted — make  just  fifty-two  years. 
So,  Sganarelle,  according  to  your  own  confession,  you  are 
in  about  your  fifty-second  or  fifty-third  year. 

SCAN.  Who?    I?    It  cannot  be. 

GER.  By  Jove,  the  reckoning  is  exact  ;  and  so  I  must 
tell  you  candidly,  and  as  a  friend,  as  you  made  me  pro- 
mise, that  marriage  is  hardly  in  your  line.  It  is  a  thing 
about  which  young  people  ought  to  think  seriously  before 
they  engage  in  it ;  but  persons  at  your  time  of  life  ought 
not  to  think  of  it  at  all.  If,  as  some  say,  marriage  is  the 
greatest  of  all  follies,  I  know  of  nothing  more  ridiculous 
than  to  commit  this  folly  at  a  season  when  we  ought  to  be 
most  prudent.  To  be  brief,  I  shall  tell  you  my  idea  in  a 
few  words.  I  advise  you  not  to  dream  of  marrying  ;  I 
should  think  you  the  silliest  man  in  the  world  if,  after 
remaining  free  up  to  this  time,  you  were  to  go  and  burden 
yourself  now  with  the  heaviest  of  all  chains. 

SCAN.  And  I  tell  you  in  return,  that  I  am  resolved  to 
marry  ;  and  that  I  shall  not  be  silly  in  marrying  the  girl 
I  am  after. 

GER.  Oh !  that  is  another  thing.  You  never  told  me 
that. 

SCAN.  I  like  the  girl ;  I  love  her  with  all  my  heart. 

GER.  You  love  her  with  all  your  heart  ? 

SCAN.  Undoubtedly ;  and  I  have  asked  her  of  her 
father. 

GER.  You  have  asked  her  ? 

SCAN.  Yes.  The  marriage  is  to  take  place  this  evening; 
and  I  have  plighted  my  troth. 

GER.  Oh !  marry  then.  I  have  not  another  word 
to  say. 

SCAN.  Am  I  to  abandon  my  design  ?  Do  you  imagine, 
Geronimo,  that  I  am  no  longer  fit  to  think  of  a  wife  ? 
Do  not  talk  of  what  my  age  may  be ;  but  let  us  look  at 
things  as  they  are.  Is  there  a  man  of  thirty  that  looks 
fresher  or  more  active  than  I  ?  Have  I  not  the  use  of  my 
limbs  as  much  as  ever  ?  Do  I  look  as  if  I  needed  a  carriage 
or  chair  to  get  about  in  ?  Are  not  all  my  teeth  in  ex- 

226  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  n. 

cellent  condition  ?  (Showing  his  teeth).  Do  I  not  eat 
heartily  four  times  a-day,  and  is  any  man's  stomach 
stronger  than  mine?  (Coughing).  Hem,  hem,  hem! 
What  say  you  ? 

GER.  You  are  right ;  I  was  mistaken.  Pray,  marry  ; 
you  cannot  do  better. 

SCAN.  I  used  to  fight  shy  of  it ;  but  now  I  have  strong 
reasons  in  its  favour.  Besides  the  pleasure  I  shall  have  in 
possessing  a  wife  to  fondle  me,  and  to  coddle  me  when  I 
am  tired  ;  besides  this  pleasure,  I  consider  that,  by  re- 
maining as  I  am,  I  suffer  the  race  of  the  Sganarelles  to 
become  extinct ;  whilst,  by  marrying,  I  may  see  myself 
reproduced,  and  shall  have  the  joy  of  seeing  children 
sprung  from  me,  little  images  as  like  me  as  two  peas,  who 
will  be  always  playing  about  the  house,  calling  me  their 
papa  when  I  come  back  from  town,  and  talking  nonsense 
to  me  in  the  pleasantest  manner  possible.  Oh,  I  can  fancy 
I  am  already  in  the  midst  of  them  ;  and  that  I  see  half-a- 
dozen  round  about  me.5 

GER.  Nothing  could  be  nicer  than  that ;  and  I  advise 
you  to  marry  as  quickly  as  possible. 

SCAN.   Seriously?    You  advise  it? 

GER.  Assuredly.     You  could  not  do  better. 

SCAN.  I  am  indeed  delighted  that  you  give  me  this  ad- 
vice as  a  true  friend. 

GER.  And  pray,  who  is  the  lady  whom  you  are  going  to 
marry  ? 

SCAN.   Dorimene. 

GER.  Young  Dorimene,  that  gay,  well-dressed  girl? 

SCAN.   Yes. 

GER.  Alcantor's  daughter? 

SCAN.  The  very  same. 

GER.  And  the  sister  of  Alcidas,  who  presumes  to  carry 
a  sword? 

SCAN.  That  is  the  girl. 

•GER.  My  goodness ! 

6  Moliere  has  evidently  been  influenced  in  writing  this  scene  by  the 
ninth  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  Rabelais'  Pantagruel,  and  by  a  passage 
from  a  Sermon  on  Widowhood  by  Jean  Raulin,  in  the  Itinerarium  Para- 
disi,  Paris,  1524,  which  has  been  elegantly  rendered,  under  the  name  of 
.Fredegonde,  in  Bon  Gautier's  Ballads. 

SCENE  iv.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  227 

SCAN.  What  have  you  to  say  to  it? 

GER.  A  good  match.     Make  haste  and  get  married. 

SCAN.  Have  I  not  made  an  excellent  choice? 

GER.  No  doubt  of  it.  Ah,  you  will  be  well  matched  ! 
Lose  no  time  about  it. 

SCAN.  I  am  overjoyed  to  hear  you  say  so.  I  thank  you 
for  your  advice,  and  I  invite  you  to  come  to-night  to  my 
wedding. 

GER.  I  shall  be  sure  to  be  there;  I  shall  come  masked, 
the  better  to  honour  the  occasion.6 

SCAN.  Good  day. 

GER.  (Aside).  Young  Dorimene,  Alcantor's  daughter, 
to  Sganarelle,  who  is  only  fifty-three.7  Oh!  what  a  fine 
match !  what  a  fine  match !  {He  repeats  this  over  and 
over  again,  as  he  goes  away), 

SCENE  III. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

This  marriage  ought  to  be  a  happy  one ;  for  it  pleases 
every  one.  All  laugh  to  whom  I  mention  it.  I  declare  I 
am  the  happiest  of  men ! 

SCENE  IV. — DORIMENE,  SGANARELLE. 

DOR.  {Speaking  to  a  page,  who  holds  up  her  train). 
Mind,  youngster,  hold  up  my  train  properly,  and  do  not 
be  playing  your  tricks. 

SCAN.  {Aside,  seeing  Dorimene).  Here  comes  my  mis- 
tress. Ah,  how  pleasing  she  is!  What  an  air,  what  a 
figure!  Who  could  see  her  without  wishing  to  marry  her? 
(Going up  to  her}.  Where  are  you  going,  pretty  darling, 
my  dear  wife  that  is  to  be? 

DOR.  I  am  going  to  make  a  few  purchases. 

SCAN.  Well,  my  dear,  both  of  us  are  going  to  be  happy 
now.  You  will  no  longer  have  a  right  to  refuse  me  any- 

8  The  Forced  Marriage  was  originally  a  Comedy-ballet,  and  most  like- 
ly Geronimo  said  "  he  should  come  masked  "  to  announce  a  masquerade 
of  young  people  in  honour  of  the  wedding  of  Sganarelle,  but  possibly 
Moliere  left  it  afterwards  with  an  ironical  meaning,  as  if  Geronimo  wanted 
to  hide  his  laughter  at  Sganarelle's  ridiculous  marriage. 

7  On  page  478  Geronimo  says,  "  Sganarelle,  you  are  in  about  your  fifty- 
second  or  fifty-third  year,"  giving  to  the  latter  "  the  benefit  of  a  doubt ," 
but  at  the  end  of  this  scene  he  states  frankly,  when  Sganarelle  has  left, 
that  the  latter  is  fifty-three  years  old. 

228  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE. 

[SCENE  iv. 

thing;  and  I  can  do  with  you  just  as  I  please,  without  any 
one  being  shocked.  You  will  be  mine  from  head  to  foot, 
and  I  shall  be  master  of  everything,  of  your  little  spark- 
ling eyes,  your  little  roguish  nose,  your  tempting  lips,  your 
lovely  ears,  your  pretty  little  chin,  your  little  round 
breasts,  your  ...  In  short,  your  whole  person  will  be 
mine,  to  do  what  I  like  with,  and  I  shall  be  entitled  to 
fondle  you  as  I  choose.  Are  you  not  glad  of  this  mar- 
riage, my  lovely  pet? 

DOR.  Immensely  glad,  I  assure  you.  For,  indeed,  my 
father's  severity  has  kept  me  hitherto  in  the  most  grievous 
subjection.  I  have  been  raging,  I  do  not  know  how  long, 
at  the  scanty  liberty  he  allows  me ;  I  have  wished  a  hundred 
times  that  he  would  get  me  a  husband,  so  that  I  might 
quickly  escape  from  the  durance  in  which  I  have  been  kept 
by  him,  and  be  able  to  do  as  I  pleased.  Thank  Heaven, 
you  luckily  came  in  the  way ;  I  mean  henceforth  to  give 
myself  up  to  pleasure,  and  make  up  finely  for  the  time  I 
have  lost.  As  you  are  a  well-bred  man,  and  know  the 
world,  I  think  we  shall  get  on  wonderfully  well  together, 
and  that  you  will  not  be  one  of  those  bothering  husbands 
who  wish  their  wives  to  live  like  owls.8  I  confess  that 
would  not  suit  me  !  Solitude  drives  me  mad.  I  like 
gambling,  visiting,  assemblies,  entertainments,  prome- 
nades; in  fact,  all  kinds  of  pleasure.  You  must  be 
overjoyed  to  have  a  wife  like  me.  We  shall  never  have  a 
difference  ;  I  shall  not  constrain  your  actions,  and  I  hope 
that  you  will  not  constrain  mine.  For  my  part,  I  think 
we  ought  to  be  mutually  complaisant,  and  not  be  married 
only  to  annoy  each  other.  In  a  word,  we  shall  live,  when 
we  get  married,  like  two  people  who  know  the  world.  No 
jealous  suspicions  shall  trouble  our  heads;  it  will  suffice 
for  you  to  be  assured  of  my  fidelity,  as  I  shall  be  persuaded 
of  yours.  But  what  is  the  matter  ?  A  change  has  come 
over  you.  • 

SCAN.  I  am  taken  with  a  sudden  pain  in  my  head. 

DOR.  That  is  a  malady  which  attacks  many  people  in 

8 The  original  has  loup-garou,  were-wolf,  a  warlock,  who,  in  the  form 
of  a  wolf,  roamed  about  devouring  men,  and  whose  hide  was  said  to  be 
bullet-proof.  It  is  curious  that  the  French  and  Germans  have  a  wolf  to 
frighten  timorous  people,  and  the  English  a  bugbear. 

SCENE  vi.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  229 

these  days ;  but  our  marriage  will  remove  all  that.  Good- 
bye. I  long  to  have  a  proper  dress,  that  I  may  quickly 
throw  these  rags  aside.  I  am  going  now  to  finish  the 
purchase  of  all  the  things  which  I  want ;  and  I  shall  send 
in  the  bills  to  you. 

SCENE  V. — GERONIMO,  SGANARELLE. 

GER.  Ah !  Sganarelle,  I  am  glad  to  find  you  here.  I 
have  met  with  a  goldsmith  who,  having  heard  that  you 
were  in  search  of  a  handsome  diamond  ring  to  make  a 
present  to  your  bride,  entreated  me  to  recommend  him  to 
you,  and  to  tell  you  that  he  has  one  to  sell,  the  finest  in 
the  world. 

SCAN.  God  bless  me !  there  is  no  hurry  for  that. 

GER.  How  ?  What  does  that  mean  ?  Where  is  the 
ardour  you  displayed  just  now? 

SCAN.  Within  the  last  few  moments,  I  have  had  some 
slight  scruples  as  to  marriage.  Before  going  farther  I  wish 
to  sift  this  matter  to  the  bottom,  and  to  have  interpreted 
to  me  a  dream  which  I  had  last  night,  and  which  just  re- 
curred to  me.9  You  know  that  dreams  are  like  mirrors, 
which  sometimes  show  all  that  is  to  happen  to  us.  I  dreamt 
I  was  in  a  ship,  on  a  rough  sea,  and  that  .  .  . 

GER.  Sganarelle,  I  have  a  little  business  on  hand,  which 
will  not  let  me  stay  to  hear  you.  I  do  not  understand 
dreams ;  and,  as  to  arguments  upon  marriage,  you  have  for 
neighbours  a  couple  of  scholars,  of  philosophers,  who  are 
just  the  men  to  tell  you  all  that  can  be  said  on  the  subject. 
As  they  belong  to  different  sects,  you  can  compare  their 
several  opinions  upon  it.  For  my  part,  I  adhere  to  what 
I  said  just  now,  and  am  your  servant. 

SCAN.  (Alone).  He  is  right.  I  must  consult  these  men 
in  my  present  uncertainty. 

SCENE  VI. — PANCRACE,  SGANARELLE. 
PAN.   {Speaking  to  somebody  within,  and  not  seeing  Sga- 
narelle). Go,  you  are  an  impertinent  fellow,  my  friend,  a 
man  ignorant  of  all  method  and  order,  who  ought  to  be 
expelled  the  Republic  of  letters. 

9 This  is  also  an  intimation  of  Rabelais'  Panurgc,  Book  III.,  Chapters 
13  and  14. 

230  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  vi 

SCAN.  Ah !  capital,  here  is  one  of  them  in  the  nick  of 
time. 

PAN.  (As  before,  and  not  seeing  Sganarelle).  Yes,  I  shall 
maintain  it  on  strong  grounds,  I  will  prove  it  you  out  of 
Aristotle,  the  philosopher  of  philosophers,  that  you  are 
ignorans,  ignorantissimus,  ignorantificans,  and  ignorantifica- 
fus,  in  all  imaginable  cases  and  moods. 

SCAN.  He  has  fallen  out  with  somebody.  (To  Pan- 
crace). Sir  ! 

PAN.  (As  before,  and  not  seeing  Sganarelle).  You  pre- 
sume to  argue,  and  do  not  know  the  very  elements  of 
reasoning. 

SCAN.  His  passion  prevents  his  seeing  me.  (To  Pan- 
crace). Sir ! 

PAN.  (As  before,  and  not  seeing  Sganarelle).  It  is  a  pro- 
position condemned  in  all  the  regions  of  philosophy. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  He  must  have  been  mightily  vexed. 
( To  Pancrace}.  I  say  .  .  . 

PAN.  {As  before,  and  not  seeing  Sganarelle).  Toto  coclo, 
toto  via  aberras.™ 

SCAN.  I  kiss  your  hands,  Master  Doctor ! 

PAN.  At  your  service. 

SCAN.  May  I  ... 

PAN.  {Turning  round  again).  Do  you  know  what  you 
have  perpetrated?  A  syllogism  in  Balordo'*1 

SCAN.  I  ... 

PAN.  (As  before).  The  major  is  foolish,  the  minor  tri- 
vial, and  the  conclusion  ridiculous. 

SCAN.  I  ... 

PAN.  (As  before).  I  would  rather  die  than  admit  what 
you  say ;  and  I  shall  maintain  my  opinion  to  the  last 
drop  of  my  ink. 

SCAN.  May  I  ... 

PAN.  (As  before).  Yes,  I  shall  defend  this  proposition 
pugnis  et  calcibus,  unguibus  et  rostro.™ 

10  The  literal  translation  is:   "You  err    the  whole  extent  of  Heaven, 
the  whole  length  of  the  road;  "  something  like  the  familiar  "You  are  as 
wrong  as  you  can  be." 

11  Pancrace  makes  here  a  scholastic  joke.     In  Moliere's  time  logic 
used  a   great  many  syllogisms,  which  were  called  by  barbarous  names, 
such  as,  Barbara,  Celerant,  Darii,  Ferio,  &c.t  but  the  doctor  invents  a 
syllogism  in  Balordo,  because  balourd  is  the  French  for  a  "  noodle." 

12  With  fists  and  feet,  with  nails  and  beak. 

SCKNHVI.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  231 

SCAN.  Mr.  Aristotle,  may  I  ask  what  has  put  you  in 
such  a  rage  ? 

PAN.  The  best  possible  reason. 

SCAN.  But  what? 

PAN.  An  ignoramus  dared  to  maintain  an  erroneous 
proposition,  a  frightful,  terrible,  execrable,  proposition. 

SCAN.  May  I  ask  what  it  is? 

PAN.  Ah,  Mr.  Sganarelle,  everything  nowadays  is  sub- 
verted, and  the  world  has  fallen  into  general  corruption,, 
A  horrible  license  reigns  everywhere ;  and  the  magistrates, 
who  are  appointed  to  maintain  order  in  the  state,  ought 
to  die  of  shame,  to  suffer  a  scandal  so  intolerable  as  this 
which  I  shall  reveal  to  you.13 

SCAN.  What  is  it  then  ? 

PAN.  Is  it  not  a  horrible  thing,  a  thing  crying  for  the 
vengeance  of  Heaven,  to  allow  any  one  to  say  in  public 
"the  form  of  a  hat?" 

SCAN.  How? 

PAN.  I  maintain  that  we  ought  to  say  "  the  figure  of  a 
hat,"  and  not  "  the  form ;  "  for  as  much  as  there  is  this 
difference  between  the  form  and  the  figure,  that  the  form 
is  the  external  disposition  of  animate  bodies,  and  the 
figure  is  the  external  disposition  of  inanimate  bodies  ;  and 
since  the  hat  is  an  inanimate  body,  we  ought  to  say,  "  the 
figure  of  a  hat,"  and  not  "the  form."  {Turning  again 
to  the  side  by  which  he  entered}.  Yes,  ignoramus  that  you 
are,  that  is  the  manner  in  which  you  ought  to  express  your- 
self, and  these  are  Aristotle's  own  terms  in  his  chapter  on 
Qualities. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  I  thought  we  were  all  undone.  (To 
Pancrace).  Master  Doctor,  think  no  more  of  this.  I  .  . 

PAN.  I  am  in  such  a  rage,  that  I  do  not  know  what  I 
am  doing. 

SCAN.  Leave  the  form  and  hat  in  peace.  I  have  some- 
thing to  tell  you.  I  ... 

PAN.  Impertinent  fellow !  u 

1S  This  is  a  hit  at  the  University  of  Paris,  who  prosecuted  those  who 
differed  in  opinion  from  it,  and  invoked  the  arms  of  the  magistrates  to 
punish  those  who  were  opposed  to  it.  See  Introductory  Notice  page  472. 

14  The  original  has  impertinent  fieffe,  a  relic  of  the  feudal  times,  when 
a  noble  who  possessed  a  fief  was  called  un  noble  ficffe,  or  one  who  pos- 

232  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  [SCBNB  vi. 

SCAN.  Pray,  be  quiet.     I  ... 

PAN.  Ignoramus  ! 

SCAN.  Good  Heavens  !  I  .    .    . 

PAN.  To  dare  to  maintain  such  a  proposition  ! 

SCAN.  He  is  wrong.     I  ... 

PAN.  A  proposition  condemned  by  Aristotle. 

SCAN.  It  is  true.     I  ... 

PAN.  In  so  many  words  ! 

SCAN.  You  are  right.  {Going  round  to  the  side  by 
•which  Pancrace  entered).  Yes,  you  are  a  fool,  an  impudent 
fellow,  to  pretend  to  argue  with  a  Doctor  who  can  read 
and  write.  Now,  that  is  done  with.  I  beg  you  to  listen 
to  me.  I  am  come  to  consult  you  on  an  affair  which  per- 
plexes me.  I  intend  to  take  a  wife,  to  keep  me  company 
at  home.  The  lady  is  handsome  and  well-made ;  she 
charms  me  greatly,  and  is  delighted  to  marry  me  ;  her 
father  has  given  her  to  me ;  but  I  am  rather  afraid  of,  you 
know  what — the  disgrace  for  which  no  one  pities  a  man  ; 
I  wish  much  to  beg  of  you,  as  a  philosopher,  to  give  me 
your  opinion.  Eh  ?  What  is  your  advice  in  the  matter  ? 

PAN.  Rather  than  admit  that  we  ought  to  say  "the  form 
of  a  hat,"  I  would  admit  that  datur  vacuum  in  rerum 
natura^  and  that  I  am  a  mere  ass. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  Plague  take  the  man.  {To  Pancrace). 
Why,  Master  Doctor,  do  hear  one  for  a  moment.  I  have 
been  talking  to  you  for  an  hour,  and  you  do  not  reply  to 
what  is  said  to  you. 

PAN.  I  ask  your  pardon.  A  just  wrath  engrosses  my 
mind. 

SCAN.  Well,  let  it  pass ;  and  be  at  pains  to  listen  to  me. 

PAN.  I  will.     What  do  you  wish  to  say  to  me  ? 

SCAN.  I  wish  to  speak  to  you  of  something. 

PAN.  And  what  tongue  would  you  use  with  me  ? 

SCAN.  What  tongue  ? 

PAN.  Ay. 

SCAN.  Zounds !  the  tongue  I  have  in  my  mouth.  I  do 
not  think  I  shall  go  and  borrow  my  neighbour's. 

sessed  all  advantages — namely,  title  and  property ;  hence  un  impertinent 
fieffe  is  a  fellow  who  possesses  all  the  qualifications  of  impertinence. 

15  Literally,  "  A  vacuum  exists  in  the  things  of  nature."  The  peripate- 
tic school  denied  the  existence  of  a  vacuum. 

SCBNE  vi.)  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  233 

PAN.  I  ask  you,  what  idiom,  what  language? 

SCAN.  Oh !  that  is  another  thing. 

PAN.  Do  you  wish  to  speak  to  me  in  Italian  ? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  Spanish? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.   German? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  English? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  Latin? 

SGAN.  No. 

PAN.   Greek? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  Hebrew? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.   Syriac  ? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  Turkish? 

SCAN.  No. 

PAN.  Arabic? 

SCAN.   No,  no  !  French,  French,  French  !  w 

PAN.  Ah,  French  ! 

SCAN.  Quite  so. 

PAN.  Then  go  to  the  other  side ;  for  this  ear  is  set 
apart  for  the  learned  and  foreign  languages,  and  the  other 
is  for  the  vulgar  and  mother  tongue. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  One  must  employ  many  ceremonies 
with  this  sort  of  people. 

PAN.  What  do  you  desire  ? 

SCAN.  To  consult  you  in  a  little  difficulty. 

PAN.  Ah  !  a  difficulty  in  philosophy,  no  doubt. 

SCAN.   Pardon  me.     I    ... 

PAN.  You  would  know  perhaps  if  substance  and  acci' 
dent  be  synonymous  terms,  or  equivocal  in  respect  of 
entity  ? 

SCAN.  Not  at  all.     I   ... 

16  In  the  ninth  chapter  of  the  second  book  of  Rabelais'  Pantagruel. 
"How  Pantagruel  found  Panurge,'' whom  he  loved  all  his  life-time,  the 
first  addresses  the  latter  also  in  a  dozen  different  languages,  before  speak- 
ing to  him. 

234  THE  FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  vi 

PAN.     If  logic  be  an  art  or  a  science  ? 

SCAN.  It  is  not  that.     I    ... 

PAN.  If  its  object  be  the  three  operations  of  the  mind, 
or  the  third  only  ? 

SCAN.  No.     I   ... 

PAN.  If  there  be  ten  categories,  or  only  one? 

SCAN.  Not  so.     I    ... 

PAN.  If  the  conclusion  be  of  the  essence  of  a  syllogism  ? 

SCAN.  No-o !     I   .    .    . 

PAN.  If  the  essence  of  good  be  placed  in  appetibility 
or  incongruity  ? 

SCAN.  No.     I    ... 
.  PAN.  If  good  be  reciprocal  with  finality  ? 

SCAN.  Oh,  no  !     I   ... 

PAN.  Whether  finality  can  affect  us  by  its  real,  or  by  its 
intentional  being? 

SCAN.  No,  no,  no,  no,  no  !     By  all  the  devils,  no  ! 

PAN.   Unfold  then  your  thought;  for  I  cannot  divine  it. 

SCAN.  That  is  just  what  I  wish  to  do;  but  you  must 
listen  to  me.  The  business  I  have  to  mention  to  you  is 
that  I  have  a  mind  to  marry  a  girl  who  is  young  and 
handsome.  I  love  her  very  much,  and  I  have  asked  her 
of  her  father  ;  but  I  fear  .  .  . 

PAN.  (Not  listening  to  Sganarelle).  Speech  has  been 
given  to  man  to  express  his  thoughts ; 1T  and  just  as 
thoughts  are  the  representations  of  things,  so  our  words 
are  the  representations  of  our  thoughts.  (Sganarelle  im- 
patiently stops  the  Doctor's  mouth  with  his  hand j  but  the 
latter  continues  to  speak  as  soon  as  Sganarelle  withdraws 
his  hand.  TTiis  is  repeated  several  times).  But  these  re- 
presentations differ  from  other  representations,  inasmuch 
as  these  other  representations  are  distinguished  everywhere 
by  their  originals,  whilst  speech  includes  its  original  in  it- 
self; being  nothing  but  thought  explained  by  an  external 
sign ;  whence  it  follows  that  they  who  think  well  are  also 
they  who  speak  the  best.  Explain  to  me  then  your 
thoughts  by  words,  which  are  the  most  intelligible  of  all 
signs. 

1T  A  formula  employed  by  several  of  Moliere's  successors.  The  re- 
verse has  also  been  maintained  : — ''  Speech  was  given  to  man  to  disguise 
his  thoughts." 

SCENE  vi.]  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  235 

SCAN.  (Pushing  the  Doctor  into  his  house,  and  pulling 
the  door  to  prevent  his  coming  out).  Plague  take  the  man  ! 

PAN.  (  Within).  Yes,  speech  is  animi  index  et  speculum, 
that  is,  the  interpreter  of  the  heart,  the  image  of  the  soul. 
(He  gets  up  to  the  window  and  continues).  It  is  a  mirror 
which  plainly  reproduces  for  us  the  innermost  secrets  of 
our  individualisms.  Since,  then,  you  have  the  faculty  of 
reasoning,  and  also  of  speaking,  why  do  you  not  make 
use  of  speech  in  order  to  make  me  understand  your 
thoughts  ? 

SCAN.  That  is  just  what  I  wish  to  do;  but  you  will  not 
listen  to  me. 

PAN.   I  listen  to  you  ;  speak. 

SCAN.  I  say  then,  Doctor,  that  .    .  . 

PAN.  But  above  all,  be  brief. 

SCAN.   I  will. 

PAN.  Avoid  prolixity. 

SCAN.  Oh  !  Sir  .    .    . 

PAN.  Contract  your  discourse  into  a  laconic  apophthegm. 

SGAN.  I  ... 

PAN.  No  diffuseness  nor  circumlocution.  (Sganarelle, 
in  his  vexation  at  being  unable  to  speak,  picks  up  stones  to 
throw  at  the  Doctor's  head).  Eh,  what  ?  Are  you  flying 
into  a  passion  instead  of  explaining  yourself?  Go  along, 
you  are  more  impertinent  than  the  fellow  who  would  have 
it  that  one  ought  to  say  "  the  form  of  a  hat ;"  and  I  will 
prove  to  you  upon  all  occasions,  by  clear  and  »convincing 
reasons,  and  by  arguments  in  Barbara,  that  you  are  not, 
and  never  will  be,  aught  but  an  animal,  and  that  I  am, 
and  ever  shall  be,  Doctor  Pancrace,  in  utroque  jure. 

SCAN.  What  an  eternal  gabbler  ! 

PAN.  {Coming  down).  A  man  of  letters,  a  man  of 
learning. 

SCAN.  What,  more  ? 

PAN.  A  man  of  sufficiency,  a  man  of  capacity.  (Going 
away).  A  man  supreme  in  all  the  sciences,  natural,  moral, 
and  political.  (Returning).  A  learned,  most  learned 
man,  per  omnes  modos  et  casus.  (Going  away).  A  man 
who  possesses,  in  the  superlative  degree,  a  knowledge  of 
fables,  mythologies,  and  histories — (returning) — grammar, 
poetry,  rhetoric,  dialectics,  and  sophistry — (going  away) 

236  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCBNK  vm. 

— mathematics,  arithmetic,  optics,  oneirocritics,  physics 
and  metaphysics — (returning)  —  cosmometry,  geometry, 
architecture,  the  speculory  and  speculatory  arts — (going 
away) — medicine,  astronomy,  astrology,  physiognomy, 
metoposcopy,  cheiromancy,  geomancy,  etc.18 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

The  devil  take  these  scholars,  who  will  never  listen  to 
people  !  I  was  rightly  informed  that  his  master,  Aristotle, 
was  nothing  but  a  talker.  I  must  go  and  find  the  other 
one.  Perhaps  he  may  be  more  composed  and  reasonable. 
Soho,  there  ! 

SCENE  VIII. — MARPHURIUS,  SGANARELLE. 

MAR.  What  do  you  want  with  me,  Mr.  Sganarelle  ? 

SCAN.  Doctor,  I  have  need  of  your  advice  in  a  little 
matter  of  business,  and  that  is  why  I  have  come  to  you. 
(Aside*).  Ah  !  this  is  all  right.  This  gentleman  lets  peo- 
ple speak. 

MAR.  Mr.  Sganarelle,  pray  change  this  mode  of  speak- 
ing. Our  philosophy  enjoins  us  not  to  enunciate  a  posi- 
tive proposition,  but  to  speak  of  everything  dubiously,  and 
always  to  suspend  our  judgment.  For  this  reason,  you 
should  not  say,  I  am  come,  but  it  seems  that  I  am  come, 

SCAN.   Seems? 

MAR.  Y$s. 

SGAN.  Upon  my  word  !  no  doubt  it  seems,  because  it  is 
so. 

MAR.  That  does  not  follow :  it  might  seem,  and  yet  not 
be  true. 

SCAN.  How?     Is  it  not  true  that  I  am  come? 

MAR.  That  is  questionable ;  and  we  must  doubt  every- 
thing. 

18  Instead  of  metaphysics  the  original  has  again  mathematics,  which  ap- 
pears an  error.  Oneirocritics  is  the  interpretation  of  dreams  ;  the  specu- 
lory art  showed  in  a  mirror  the  image  of  absent  persons  ;  the  speculatory 
art  interpreted  the  future  through  observing  thunder,  lightning,  and 
meteors;  metoposcopy  was  the  art  of  predicting  what  would  happen  by 
studying  the  countenance ;  cheiromancy  is  divination  by  looking  at  the 
lines  in  the  hand  ;  geomancy,  by  observing  the  lines,  or  crevices  and  un- 
dulations of  the  ground. 

SCBNBVIII.J  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  237 

SCAN.  What!  I  am  not  here?  and  you  are  not  speaking 
to  me? 

MAR.  It  appears  to  me  that  you  are  there,  and  it  seems 
that  I  am  speaking  to  you;  but  it  is  not  certain  that  it 
is  so. 

SCAN.  Eh !  what  the  deuce  !  You  are  joking.  Here  I 
am,  and  there  you  are,  plainly  enough ;  and  there  is  no 
"seems"  in  all  that.  Let  us  dispense  with  these  quirks 
and  quibbles,  I  beg,  and  talk  of  my  business.  I  am  come 
to  tell  you  that  I  wish  to  marry. 

MAR.  I  know  nothing  of  this. 

SCAN.  I  tell  it  you. 

MAR.  It  may  be  so. 

SCAN.  The  girl  whom  I  intend  to  marry  is  very  young 
and  very  lovely. 

MAR.   It  is  not  impossible. 

SCAN.   Shall  I  do  well  or  ill  to  marry  her  ? 

MAR.  The  one  or  the  other. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  Oh,  dear  !  here  is  another  tune.  I  ask 
you,  if  I  shall  do  well  to  marry  the  girl  I  speak  of? 

MAR.  As  it  may  chance. 

SCAN.  Shall  I  do  ill? 

MAR.  Just  as  it  happens. 

SCAN.  Pray,  answer  me  properly. 

MAR.  That  is  my  intention. 

SCAN.  I  have  a  great  liking  for  the  girl. 

MAR.  That  may  be. 

SCAN.  The  father  has  given  his  consent. 

MAR.   He  may  have  done  so. 

SCAN.  But  if  I  marry  her,  I  fear  to  be  made  a  cuckold. 

MAR.  The  thing  is  feasible. 

SCAN.  What  do  you  think  of  it  ? 

MAR.  There  is  no  impossibility  in  it. 

SCAN.  But  what  would  you  do,  if  you  were  in  my 
place  ? 

MAR.  I  do  not  know. 

SCAN.  What  do  you  advise  me  to  do  ? 

MAR.  Whatever  you  please. 

SCAN.  I  shall  go  mad  ! 

MAR.  I  wash  my  hands  of  it. 

SCAN.  Devil  take  the  dreamer ! 

238  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  x. 

MAR.  As  it  may  be.19 

SCAN.  (Aside}.  Plague  take  the  rascal  !  I'll  make 
you  change  your  tune,  mad  hang-dog  of  a  philosopher  ! 

(Beats  htm.} 

MAR.  Oh,  oh,  oh ! 

SCAN.  There  is  something  for  your  nonsense !  And  now 
I  am  satisfied  ! 

MAR.  How  !  What  insolence  is  this  !  To  outrage  me 
in  this  manner !  To  have  the  audacity  to  beat  a  philo- 
sopher like  me  ! 

SCAN.  Pray,  correct  this  manner  of  speaking.  We  are 
to  doubt  everything ;  and  you  ought  not  to  say  that  I  have 
beaten  you,  but  that  it  seems  I  have  beaten  you. 

MAR.  Ugh  !  I  shall  go  and  complain  to  a  magistrate  M 
of  this  beating. 

SCAN.  I  wash  my  hands  of  it. 

MAR.  I  have  the  marks  on  my  body. 

SCAN.  It  may  be  so. 

MAR.  You  know  it  was  you  who  did  it. 

SCAN.  It  is  not  impossible. 

MAR.  I  will  get  a  summons  against  you. 

SCAN.  I  know  nothing  about  it. 

MAR.  And  you  will  be  convicted. 

SCAN.  As  it  may  be. 

MAR.  Leave  me  alone  for  that. 

SCENE  IX. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

What  now  ?  One  cannot  get  a  word  from  that  beastly 
man,  and  I  am  as  wise  at  the  end  as  at  the  beginning. 
What  shall  I  do  in  this  uncertainty  as  to  the  consequences 
of  getting  married  ?  Never  was  a  man  more  perplexed 
than  I.  Ah  !  here  come  the  gipsies :  they  shall  tell  me 
my  fortune. 

SCENE  X. — Two  GIPSIES,  SGANARELLE. 
77ie  two  Gipsies  come  in,  with  tabors,  singing  and  dancing. 

SCAN.  They  are  very  merry.  I  say,  you  good  women, 
can  you  tell  me  my  fortune  ? 

19  This  scene  is  an  imitation  of  the  thirty-sixth  chapter  of  the  third  book 
of  Rabelais'  Pantagruel,  where  Panurge  asks  Trouillogan's  advice  if  he 
should  marry. 

*  The  original  has  commissaire  de  quartier.  See  The  School  for  Hus- 
bands. 

SCENE  xi.]  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  239 

1  GIP.  Ay,  my  good  sir,  both  of  us  here  will  tell  it  you. 

2  GIP.  Just  give  us  your  hand,  and  cross  ours  with  a 
small  bit  of  silver,21  and  we  shall  tell  you  something  that 
shall  be  of  service  to  you. 

SCAN.  Here :  there  are  both  my  hands,  with  what  you 
ask  in  them. 

1  GIP.  You  have  a  good  phiz,  master — a  good  phiz. 

2  GIP.  Ay,  a  good  phiz ;  the  phiz  of  a  man  that  will  be 
something  one  of  these  days. 

1  GIP.  You  will  be  married  before  long,  good  master, 
you  will  be  married  before  long. 

2  GIP.  You  will  wed  a  pretty  wife,  a  pretty  wife. 

1  GIP.  Ay,  a   wife   that  will  be  courted  and  loved  by 
every  one. 

2  GIP.   A  wife  that  will  make  you  many  friends,  good 
master,  many  friends. 

1  GIP.  A  wife  that  will  bring  plenty  to  your  house. 

2  GIP.  A  wife  that  will  gain  you  great  repute. 

1  GIP.  You  will  be  esteemed  for  her  sake,  good  master  ; 
you  will  be  esteemed  for  her  sake. 

SCAN.  That  is  well.  But  just  tell  me,  is  there  fear  of 
my  being  cuckold  ? 

2  GIP.  Cuckold  ! 
SCAN.  Ay! 

1  GIP.  Cuckold  ! 

SCAN.  Ay  ;  is  there  fear  of  my  being  cuckolded  ?  ( The 
Gipsies  sing  and  dance).  What  the  devil !  that  is  no 
answer.  Come  here.  I  ask  you  whether  I  shall  be  a 
cuckold. 

2  GIP.  A  cuckold  !  You  ? 
SCAN.  Ay,  shall  I  be  a  cuckold  ? 
i  GIP.  You  a  cuckold  ! 

SCAN.  Yes  ;  shall  I,  or  not  ? 

(The  Gipsies  go  off,  singing  and  dancing. 

SCENE  XI. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 
Plague  take  the  baggages  for  leaving  me  in  this  uncer- 

n  The  original  has  avec  la  croix  dedans,  literally,  with  a  cross  in  it ;  be- 
cause formerly  some  coins  had  on  one  side  a  cross;  hence  also  the  French 
for  playing  pitch  and  toss,jouer  <i  croix  ou  pile,  and  the  expression,  lager 
le  diable  dans  sa  bourse,  literally,  "  to  lodge  the  devil  in  cue's  purse,"  be- 
cause there  was  no  cross  to  drive  him  away. 

240  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  xn. 

tainty  !  I  must  really  know  the  upshot  of  my  marriage ; 
so  I  shall  go  and  find  that  great  magician  of  whom  every- 
body is  talking,  and  who,  by  his  marvelous  art,  enables  us 
to  see  all  that  we  wish.  Upon  my  word  !  I  believe  I  have 
only  to  go  to  the  magician,  and  he  will  show  me  all  that  I 
ask  of  him. 

SCENE  XII. — DORIMENE,  LYCASTE,  SGANARELLE  (put  of 
sight,  at  the  back  of  the  stage}. 

LYC.  What !  lovely  Dorimene,  do  you  speak  seriously? 

DOR.  Most  seriously. 

LYC.  You  really  mean  to  marry  ? 

DOR.  Really. 

LYC.  And  your  wedding  is  to  be  this  evening  ? 

DOR.  This  evening. 

LYC.  And  you  can  forget,  cruel  maid,  the  love  I  feel  for 
you,  and  the  kind  words  you  have  spoken  to  me  ? 

DOR.  I  ?  By  no  means.  I  shall  always  think  the  same 
of  you ;  and  this  marriage  need  not  trouble  you.  I  am 
not  marrying  the  man  for  love ;  it  is  only  his  wealth  that 
makes  me  resolve  to  accept  him.  I  have  no  fortune  ;  no 
more  have  you ;  and  you  know  that,  without  fortune,  it 
goes  hard  with  us  in  the  world.  At  whatever  cost,  therefore, 
we  must  try  to  get  it.  I  have  jumped  at  this  opportunity  of 
making  myself  comfortable ;  I  have  done  it  in  the  hope 
of  being  soon  delivered  from  the  old  fool  that  I  am  mar- 
rying. He  will  shortly  die;  he  has  not  more  than  six 
months  to  live.  I  guarantee  that  he  is  dead  in  the  time 
I  say  ;  I  shall  not  long  have  to  pray  Heaven  for  the  happy 
state  of  widowhood.  (Seeing  Sganarelle).  Ah,  we  were 
talking  of  you,  and  saying  much  in  your  praise  too. 

LYC.  Is  that  the  gentleman  .    .    . 

DOR.  Yes,  that  is  the  gentleman  who  is  going  to  marry 
me. 

LYC.  Allow  me,  sir,  to  congratulate  you  on  your  mar- 
riage, and  at  the  same  time  to  offer  you  my  most  humble 
services.  Let  me  tell  you  that  the  lady,  whom  you  are 
marrying,  possesses  great  merits;  as  for  you,  Miss  Dori- 
mene, I  congratulate  you  also  on  the  happy  choice  you 
have  made.  You  could  not  have  found  a  better,  and  this 
gentleman  has  all  the  appearance  of  making  a  very  good 

SCENE  xiv.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  241 

husband.  Yes,  sir,  I  should  be  delighted  to  strike  up  a 
friendship  with  you,  and  to  arrange  a  slight  interchange  of 
visits  and  entertainments. 

DOR.  You  are  doing  us  too  much  honour.  But  come, 
time  presses,  and  we  shall  have  plenty  of  opportunities  to 
converse  together. 

SCENE  XIII. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 
There,  now  I  am  fairly  disgusted  with  my  match ;  I 
think  I  shall  not  do  amiss  to  go  and  get  out  of  my  en- 
gagement. It  has  cost  me  a  little  money;  but  I  had 
better  even  lose  that  than  run  the  risk  of  something  worse. 
I  shall  try  if  I  cannot  be  clever  enough  to  get  out  of  this 
scrape.  Within  there !  (He  knocks  at  Alcantor1  s  door. 

SCENE  XIV. — ALCANTOR,  SGANARELLE. 

AL.  Ah,  son-in-law,  you  are  welcome. 

SCAN.  Sir,  my  duty  to  you. 

AL.  You  come  to  conclude  the  marriage? 

SCAN.  Excuse  me. 

AL.  I  promise  you  that  I  am  as  impatient  as  yourself. 

SCAN.  I  come  here  for  another  purpose. 

AL.  I  have  given  the  necessary  orders  for  the  entertain- 
ment. 

SCAN.  That  is  not  what  I  am  come  about. 

AL.  The  violins  are  engaged,  the  feast  is  bespoke,  and 
my  daughter  is  ready  dressed  to  receive  you. 

SCAN.  It  is  not  that  which  has  brought  me. 

AL.  In  short,  you  are  about  to  have  your  wish;  and 
nothing  can  delay  your  happiness. 

SCAN.  Good  Lord,  there  is  something  else  to  think  of. 

AL.   Come,  son-in-law,  will  you  walk  in? 

SCAN.  I  have  just  a  word  to  say  to  you. 

AL.  Oh  goodness,  let  us  have  no  ceremony!  Enter 
quickly,  if  you  please. 

SCAN.  No,  I  tell  you.     I  wish  to  speak  to  you  first. 

AL.  You  have  something  to  say  to  me? 

SCAN.  Yes. 

AL.  What  is  it,  then? 

SCAN.  Mr.  Alcantor,  it  is  true  I  asked  your  daughter  in 
marriage,  and  you  granted  my  request ;  but  I  find  that  I 

242  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  xiv. 

am  rather  old ;  I  think  that  I  am  by  no  means  a  proper 
match  for  her. 

AL.  Pardon  me.  My  daughter  likes  you  as  you  are; 
and  I  am  sure  that  she  will  live  very  happily  with  you. 

SGAN.  Nay.  I  am  given  to  strange  whims  at  times, 
and  she  would  have  too  much  to  endure  from  my  ill  hu- 
mour. 

AL.  My  daughter  is  of  a  very  mild  and  obliging  dispo- 
sition; you  shall  see  that  she  will  accommodate  herself 
entirely  to  you. 

SCAN.  I  have  some  bodily  infirmities  which  might  dis- 
gust her. 

AL.  That  is  nothing.  A  virtuous  woman  is  never  dis- 
gusted with  her  husband. 

SCAN.  Must  I  then  speak  plainly  ?  I  do  not  advise  you 
to  give  her  to  me. 

AL.  Surely  you  are  jesting?  I  would  rather  die  than 
break  my  word. 

SCAN.   Oh  dear,  I  absolve  you  from  it,  and  I  ... 

AL.  By  no  means.  I  have  promised  her  to  you,  and 
you  shall  have  her,  in  spite  of  all  who  are  running  after 
her. 

SCAN.   (Aside}.     The  devil  I  shall ! 

AL.  Look  here.  I  have  a  special  respect  and  friendship 
for  you ;  and  I  would  refuse  my  daughter  to  a  Prince,  to 
give  her  to  you. 

SCAN.  Mr.  Alcantor,  I  am  obliged  for  the  honour  you 
do  me,  but  I  declare  to  you  that  I  will  not  marry. 

AL.  Not  marry,  you  say  ? 

SCAN.  Yes,  not  marry. 

AL.  And  why? 

SCAN.  Why  ?  Because  I  feel  I  am  not  fit  for  marriage ; 
and  because  I  wish  to  be  like  my  father,  and  all  my  an- 
cestors, who  never  would  marry. 

AL.  Hark  ye.  Every  one  to  his  liking ;  I  am  not  the 
man  to  force  anyone.  You  gave  me  your  word  that  you 
would  marry  my  daughter,  and  everything  is  prepared  for 
the  wedding  ;  but  since  you  wish  to  withdraw,  I  shall  go 
and  see  what  can  be  done  in  the  matter  ;  you  shall  hear 
from  me  presently. 

SCBNK  xvi.]  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE 

SCENE  XV. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Now  he  is  more  reasonable  than  I  expected.  I  thought 
I  should  have  much  more  trouble  in  getting  off.  Upon 
my  word,  when  I  think  of  it,  I  have  done  very  prudently 
in  withdrawing  from  this  business.  I  was  going  to  take  a 
step  of  which  I  should  perhaps  have  repented  at  leisure. 
But  here  comes  the  son,  to  bring  me  my  answer. 

SCENE  XVI. — ALGID  AS,  SGANARELLE. 

ALGID.  (Jh  a  mild  and  complaisant  tone).  Sir,  your 
most  obedient  servant. 

SCAN.  Sir,  I  am  entirely  yours. 

ALGID.  My  father  has  told  me,  sir,  that  you  came  to 
withdraw  your  promise  to  marry  my  sister. 

SCAN.  Yes,  sir.     It  is  with  regret ;  but  .    .    . 

ALGID.  Oh  !  sir,  there  is  no  harm  in  that. 

SCAN.  I  am  extremely  sorry,  I  assure  you,  and  I  could 
wish  .  .  . 

ALGID.  That  is  nothing,  I  tell  you.  {Offers  Sganarelle 
two  swords).  Sir,  have  the  goodness  to  choose  one  of 
these  swords. 

SGAN.  One  of  these  swords  ? 

ALGID.  Yes,  if  you  please. 

SCAN.  For  what  ? 

ALGID.  Sir,  as  you  refuse  to  marry  my  sister,  after 
giving  your  word,  I  think  you  will  not  take  amiss  the  little 
compliment  I  have  paid  you. 

SGAN.  How? 

ALGID.  Other  people  would  make  more  noise,  and  get 
into  a  rage  with  you ;  but  we  are  the  sort  of  people  to 
take  things  quietly ;  and  I  have  come  to  tell  you  very 
politely  that  we  must,  by  your  favour,  cut  each  other's 
throats. 

SGAN.  That  is  a  sorry  compliment. 

ALGID.   Come,  sir,  I  beg  you  will  make  your  choice. 

SCAN.  I  am  your  very  humble  servant,  but  I  have  no 
throat  worth  cutting.  (Aside).  Here  is  a  scurry  style  of 
speech ! 

244  THE   FORCED   MARRIAGE.  [SCENE  xvn. 

ALCID.  Sir,  by  your  leave,  it  must  be  so. 

SCAN.  My  dear  sir,  a  truce,  I  beg,  to  this  compliment. 

ALCID.  Let  us  be  quick  about  it,  sir.  I  have  a  little 
business  on  hand. 

SCAN.  I  have  no  mind  for  this,  I  tell  you. 

ALCID.  You  will  not  fight  ? 

SCAN.  I  will  not,  upon  my  soul. 

ALCID.  You  mean  it  ? 

SCAN.  I  mean  it. 

ALCID.  {Giving  him  a  few  blows  with  his  cane).  At 
least,  sir,  you  cannot  complain  ;  you  see  that  I  do  things 
by  rule.  You  break  your  word  with  us,  I  wish  to  fight 
you,  you  refuse  to  fight,  I  cane  you, — all  that  is  according 
to  form;  and  you  are  too  much  of  a  gentleman  to  find 
fault  with  my  mode  of  acting. 

SCAN.  Aside).     Here  is  a  devil  of  a  fellow  ! 

ALCID.  (Again  offering  the  swords).  Come,  sir,  do 
things  like  a  gentleman,  before  I  pull  your  ears. 

SCAN.   What !  are  you  determined  ? 

ALCID.  Sir,  I  force  no  one ;  but  you  must  either  fight 
or  marry  my  sister. 

SCAN.   Sir,  I  assure  you,  I  cannot  do  either. 

ALCID.  Really? 

SCAN.   Really. 

ALCID.   By  your  leave  then    .    .    ,        (Beats  him  again. 

SCAN.  Oh,  oh,  oh ! 

ALCID.  Sir,  I  infinitely  regret  to  be  obliged  to  treat  you 
thus;  but  if  you  please  I  shall  not  stop  until  you  have 
promised  to  marry  my  sister.  (Raises  his  cane. 

SCAN.  Well  then,  I  will  marry,  I  will  marry  ! 

ALCID.  My  dear  Sir,  I  am  delighted  that  you  have 
returned  to  your  senses,  and  that  things  can  go  smoothly. 
For  I  swear  that  I  esteem  you  more  than  any  one  in  the 
world  ;  and  I  should  have  been  grieved  if  you  had  com- 
pelled me  to  maltreat  you.  I  shall  call  my  father,  and  let 
him  know  that  everything  is  settled. 

(  Goes  and  knocks  at  Alcantor1  s  door. 

SCENE  XVII. — ALCANTOR,  DORIMENE,  ALCIDAS,  SGANA- 
KELLE. 

ALCID.  Father,  this  gentleman  is  now  pleased  to  listen 

SCBNK  xvn-1  THE   FORCED    MARRIAGE.  245 

to  reason.      He  has  determined  to  do  things  with  a  good 
grace,  and  you  can  give  my  sister  to  him. 

ALCAN.  Sir,  here  is  her  hand ;  you  have  only  to  give  her 
yours.  Heaven  be  praised  !  I  have  got  rid  of  her ;  it  is 
for  you  henceforth  to  take  charge  of  her  character.  Let 
us  make  merry,  and  celebrate  this  happy  marriage. 

A 

A     000124140     5 

5    \  *••"/'" \    ; 

^SOJIWI-JO-^ 

-        {»•»*;  ***K  , 

iJUf?  1  IJU 

.^OF-CAL!FO% 

^-  ^ 

S  I  ¥ 

UNIVER5// 

^  ^ 

o      ^_ 

?7          C?    *3 

IFOfti'.        ^.OF-CAIIFOPA. 

%!
