The Dramatic Works of Molière, Vol. III (Molière, 1875)
==========================================================
Vol. III of van Laun's complete English Molière: The Princess of Elis, Don Juan, Love is the Best Doctor, The Misanthrope, The Physician in Spite of Himself. Translated by Henri van Laun (1875). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramaticworksofm03moliiala).

,.OKAL!FO/?4>        oxOf  CAHFOtofc 

y  /     )  ji.     ^    V/^-«»./  " 
A  I  iGi    -^      ^^    A  I IQK  • 

^         "^"^    -^ 
<I5130NV-S01^ 

f    S 

§     a- 

%a3AiNn-3\\v^ 

1 1  irr  1 1 1  irr 

in 

1Y0/         <^UIBRARYQ^ 

JO' 

<%        ^OF-CAUFOfyfc 

G3»    -' 

S  /•">- 

1    ^"^^U.     ,— 

^""""""•"J    \   >• 

7*^    f     fj      •  ' 

!•«"  ""f   r\   \  — 

<  OL^ZT 

u  °  y  ^ 

f-^K^/^; 

^      1>O    J  : 

^    rfTJi 

rjHOW-so^ 

%83AiNfl  ]\^' 

\\«-l'N!VEW/A        A^IOS- W,f  it; 

iOl^       %a3AINH-3V\V 
vvlOSANCElfJ> 

%/OJITVO-JO^ 

^OJIWO-JO^ 

.^OF-CAll  F0%  .^OF  CA1!  F0% 

^A    x-xt-  &<     ^^ 

CD  QC 

*  v'-'l  1 

^P   x 

'"\ 

^s 

5 1 

.  .\- 

§  1 

3r       A 

S;        ^\ 

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS  OF  MOLIERE. 

ITHIK  ; 

stems 

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS 

OF 

M  O  L  I  E  R  E 

RENDERED   INTO   ENGLISH 

BY   HENRI   VAN   LAUN 

A    NEW    EDITION 
With    a    Prefatory    Memoir,    Introductory   Notices    and   Notes 

ILLUSTRATED  WITH 

NINETEEN    ENGRAVINGS   ON    STEEL 

PROM    PAINTINGS    AND    DESIGNS   BY 

Horace    Vernet,  Desenne,  Johannot   and  Hersent 

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES 

VOLUME  III 

PHILADELPHIA 
GEORGE  BARRIE,  PUBLISHER 

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS. 

VOLUME  THREE. 

THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS. 

La  Princesse  d'1  Elide 

DON  JUAN;  OR,  THE  FEAST  WITH  THE  STATUE. 

Don  Juan  ;  ou,  Le  Festin  de  Pierre 69 

LOVE  is  THE  BEST  DOCTOR. 

L  Amour  Medecin 135 

THE  MISANTHROPE. 

Le  Misanthrope 171 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  SPITE  OF  HIMSELF. 

Le  Medecin  Malgre  lui 247 

LIST  OF  ILLUSTRATIONS. 

VOLUME  THREE. 

PAGB 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  SPITE  OF  HIMSELF.     Act  II.,  Scene  4. 

Le  Medecin  Malgre  lui Frontispiece 

DON  JUAN.    Act  II.,  Scene  5. 

Don  Juan;   ou,  Le  Festin  de  Pierre 94 

THE  MISANTHROPE.    Act  II.,  Scene  5. 

Le  Misanthrope 208 

LA  PRINCESSE  D'ELIDE. 

COMEDIE-BALLET. 

THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS. 

A  COMEDY-BALLET  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

(  THE  ORIGINAL  PARTLY  IN  PROSE  AND  PARTLY  IN  VERSE) 

STH  MAY  1664. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

IN  the  month  of  May  1664,  Louis  XIV.  entertained  the  Queen-mother, 
Anne  of  Austria,  and  his  own  wife,  Maria  Theresa,  with  a  brilliant  and 
sumptuous  fete  at  Versailles.  It  began  on  the  7th,  and  lasted  a  whole 
week.  The  duke  de  Saint- Aignan  was  commissioned  to  superintend  the 
arrangements ;  and  the  plan  he  adopted  was  suggested  by  the  materials 
which  he  discovered  in  the  6th  and  jth  cantos  of  Ariosto's  epic  poem, 
Orlando  Furioso,  which  describe  the  sojourn  of  Rogero  in  the  isle  and 
palace  of  the  enchantress  Alcina.  The  king  was  Rogero,  whilst  the  princes 
and  courtiers  personified  the  other  characters  mentioned  in  the  poem. 
We  shall  give  a  description  of  this  fete  farther  on. 

In  this  fete,  the  second  day  was  distinguished  by  the  representation  of 
The  Princes  of  Elis ;  and  subsequent  days  saw  the  production  of  The 
Bores,  The  Forced  Marriage,  and  the  first  three  acts  of  Tartuffe.  For 
their  services  on  this  occasion,  Moliere's  troupe  received  the  sum  of  4,000 
livres. 

The  Princess  of  Elis,  a  comedy-ballet,  was  intended  to  represent  the 
struggle  between  the  affections  of  the  male  and  female  sex, — a  struggle  in 
which  victory  often  remains  with  the  one  who  seems  the  farthest  from  ob- 
taining it.  Shakespeare  has  also  attempted  to  sketch  this  strife  in  Muck 
ado  about  Nothing,  in  As  You  like  it,  and  in  A  Midsummer  Night's 
Dream. 

Moliere  composed  this  comedy-ballet  at  the  special  request  of  the  king ; 
and  it  was  conceived  in  a  romantic  vein  suitable  to  the  character  of  the 
fete.  The  author's  natural  flow  of  wit  and  humour  was  checked  by  the 
necessity  of  accommodating  himself  to  the  conventionalities  of  courtly 
propriety ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  Moliere  mingled  a  good  deal  of 
water  with  his  wine,  in  order  to  please  the  fastidious  palates  of  the  cour- 
tiers. He  borrowed  his  subject  from  Moreto's  Spanish  comedy,  ElDesden 
con  el  Desden  (Scorn  for  Scorn).  The  idea  is  pretty,  and  there  is  abund- 
ant room  for  the  development  of  plot  and  passion ;  but  the  genius  of  the 
adapter  was  cramped,  and  The  Princess  o/E/is  is  certainly  not  one  of  his 
happiest  efforts.  He  has  narrowed,  rather  than  improved  upon,  the  treat- 
ment of  Moreto  ;  he  has  blunted  the  edge  of  the  Spaniard's  keenness,  and, 
taking  the  situations  almost  too  punctiliously,  has  rendered  them  bare  and 
barren.  He  transports  the  scene  to  Elis  ;  and  the  Count  of  Urgel,  the 
Prince  of  Beam,  the  Count  of  Foix,  are  disguised  under  the  Princes  of 
Ithaca,  Pylos,  and  Messena.  He  was  hurried  in  his  work ;  and,  almost 

3 

4  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

as  if  himself  craving  for  relief  from  an  unwelcome  mood,  he  created  and 
sustained  the  character  of  the  fool  Moron, — a  coward  who  gives  good 
advice,  and  is,  on  the  whole,  not  unlike  Butler's  Hudibras. 

The  piece  was  again  produced  in  July  of  the  same  year  at  Fontaine- 
bleau,  before  the  Pope's  Legate ;  and  in  November  and  December,  it  had 
a  run  of  twenty-five  days  at  the  theatre  of  the  Palais- Royal.  It  undoubt- 
edly hit  the  mark  with  some  amongst  Moliere's  contemporaries  whose 
tastes  were  similar  to  those  of  the  court.  As  an  ephemeral  production, 
therefore,  designed  for  a  temporary  purpose,  it  may  be  held  to  have  been 
successful. 

James  Miller  wrote  a  play  called  The  Universal  Passion,  acted  at  the 
Theatre,  Drury  Lane,  on  the  28th  of  February,  1737,  which  consists  of 
Shakespeare's  Much  ado  about  Nothing,  and  Moliere's  Princess  of  Elis. 
He  acknowledges  his  obligations  to  Shakespeare,  but  does  not  say  any- 
thing about  the  French  dramatist.  In  the  dedication  of  The  Universal 
Passion  to  Frederick  Frankland,  Esq.,  it  is  stated,  thai  "the  strict  Regard 
I  have  had  to  Decency  and  good  manners  ...  is  the  principal  Merit .  .  . 
the  World  is  at  present  happily  inclin'd  to  support  what  is  produced  with 
that  Intention."  The  Prologue,  spoken  by  Mr.  Gibber,  harps  on  the 
same  string,  and  ends  thus : 

"  Howe'er,  this  Merit  he  at  least  can  claim, 
That  sacred  Decency  's  his  constant  Aim  ; 
There's  nought  but  what  an  Anchoret  might  hear, 
No  Sentence  that  can  wound  the  chastest  Ear  .  .  . 
To  your  Protection  Shakespeare's  Offspring  take, 
And  save  the  Orphan  for  the  Father's  Sake." 

George  Hyde  wrote  Love's  Victory  ;  or  the  School  for  Pride,  a  comedy 
in  five  acts,  founded  on  the  Spanish  of  Moreto,  and  performed  at  Covent- 
Garden,  November  16,  1825.  As  Moliere  borrowed  from  the  same 
source,  there  is  a  great  similarity  in  the  plot  of  both  plays,  but  Hyde  has 
chiefly  followed  the  arrangement  of  a  German  author,  West,  and  can 
therefore  hardly  be  said  to  have  imitated  Moliere. 

As  we  have  already  mentioned,  Moliere's  play  formed  part  of  the  court 
entertainment,  and  was  published  in  Les  Plaisirs  de  V Isle  Enchantee: 
Course  de  Bague,  Collation  ornee  de  Machines,  Comedie  de  Moliere  de  la 
Princesse  d?  Elide,  meslee  de  Danse  et  de  Musique  Ballet  du  Palais  d'Al- 
cine,  feu  d' Artifice  :  Et  autres  Festes  galantes  et  magnifiques  ;  faites  par 
le  Roy  a  Versailles,  le  7  May,  1664.  Et  continuees  plusieurs  autres  yours. 
Paris,  Robert  Ballard,  1663.  Although  the  description  of  The  Pleasures 
of  the  Enchanted  Island  was  not  written  by  Moliere,  who  wrote  only 
comedy,  it  is  inserted  in  the  first  collected  edition  of  our  author's  works ; 
and  I  give  it  here  as  a  specimen  of  the  complimentary  style  of  the  official 
catalogue  of  entertainments  of  Louis  XIV.  I  am  indebted  for  the  com- 
pleteness and  accuracy  of  nearly  all  the  notes  which  illustrate  Les  Plaisirs 
de  I' Isle  Enchantee,  to  M.  Paul  Lacroix,  the  Biblioth^caire  de  1' Arsenal, 
well  known  as  the  Bibliophile  Jacob,  who  kindly  communicated  to  me 
the  genealogy  and  short  history  of  the  noble  ladies  and  gentlemen  who 
took  part  in  the  festivities  at  Versailles.  These  fetes,  given  nominally  in 
honour  of  the  two  Queens,  but  in  reality  to  please  the  queen,  Mademoi- 
selle de  la  Valliere,  "  whom  the  king  delighteth  to  honour,"  lasted  seven 
days ;  the  description  opens  thus : — 

"  The  King,  wishing  to  give  to  the  Queen  and  the  whole  Court  the 
pleasure  of  some  uncommon  entertainments,  in  a  spot  adorned  with  all 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  5 

thebeauties  to  be  admired  in  a  Country  Seat,  chose  for  that  purpose  Ver- 
sailles, four  leagues  from  Paris.  It  is  a  seat  which  may  justly  be  called  aa 
Enchanted  Palace  so  much  have  the  embellishments  of  Art  seconded  the 
care  which  Nature  has  taken  to  render  it  perfect.  It  is  every  way  charm- 
ing ;  everything  pleases  both  within  and  without :  gold  and  marble  vie 
there  in  beauty  and  splendour  ;  and  although  it  is  not  so  extensive  as  some 
of  her  Majesty's  other  Palaces,  yet  all  things  there  are  so  polished,  so  well 
contrived,  and  so  perfect,  that  nothing  can  equal  them.  Its  symmetry,  the 
richness  of  its  furniture,  the  beauty  of  its  walks,  and  the  infinite  number 
of  its  flowers,  as  well  as  of  its  orange-trees,  render  the  neighborhood  of 
that  place  worthy  of  its  singular  rarity.  The  different  animals  within  the 
two  parks  and  the  menagerie,  wherein  are  several  courts,  in  the  figure  of 
stars,  with  ponds  for  the  water-fowl,  together  with  great  structures,  add 
pleasure  to  magnificence,  and  create  a  palace  in  which  nothing  can  be 
found  to  criticise." 1 

First  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 

It  was  in  this  beautiful  place  that  on  the  fifth  of  May  all  the  Court  met, 
and  that  the  King  treated  above  six  hundred  persons  till  the  fourteenth, 
not  reckoning  a  great  number  of  persons  necessary  in  the  dancing  and  in 
the  play,  besides  all  kinds  of  workmen  who  came  from  Paris  ;  so  that  they 
looked  like  a  small  army. 

The  very  heavens  appeared  to  favour  his  Majesty's  designs,  since  in  a 
season  in  which  it  almost  always  rains,  there  was  only  a  slight  wind,  which 
seemed  to  rise  solely  in  order  to  show  that  the  King's  foresight  and  power 
were  proof  against  the  greatest  inconveniences.  High  cloths,  wooden 
buildings,  run  up  almost  in  an  instant,  and  a  prodigious  number  of  torches 
of  white  wax,  to  supply  daily  the  place  of  above  four  thousand  wax  can- 
dles, resisted  the  wind,  which  everywhere  else  would  have  rendered  these 
diversions  almost  impracticable. 

Monsieur  de  Vigarani,  a  gentleman  from  Modena,  very  skilful  in  all 
such  things,  invented  and  proposed  these.  The  King  commanded  the 
duke  de  Saint-Aignan,  who  was  then  first  Gentleman  of  the  Chamber,1 
and  who  had  ere  this  arranged  several  very  agreeable  balls,  to  plan  some- 
thing which  might  contain,  connect,  and  group  them  all,  so  that  they 
could  not  fail  to  please.  « 

He  took  for  his  subject  the  Palace  of  Alcina,3  which  gave  the  name  to 

1 1  am,  of  course,  not  answerable  for  the  peculiar  style  of  the  official  catalogue. 
A  "  Collation  adorned  with  machines  "  would  be  rather  hard  to  digest  in  the  pre- 
sent times.  One  statement  in  the  opening  paragraph  is  also  startling  :  "  Nature  has 
taken  care  to  render  it  (Versailles)  perfect."  Now  Nature  has  taken  no  care  to 
render  Versailles  perfect ;  and  it  is  said  to  have  cost  so  much  money,  that  Louis 
XIV.  did  not  like  the  fabulous  sums  spent  on  it  to  be  known,  but  threw  the  accounts 
into  the  fire.  The  palace  and  gardens  of  Versailles  were  begun  in  i66i,and  not  fin- 
ished until  1684.  The  King  did  not  reside  there  until  1682,  and  according  to  A.  de 
Laborde,  Versailles  ancien  et  moderne,  in  1664  the  palace  was  still  in  the  same 
state  as  Louis  XIII.  had  left  it. 

*  Francis  I.  instituted  in  1545  the  post  of  Gentilhomme  de  la  chatnbre  du  roi,  of 
which  there  were  two  at  the  first,  and  afterwards  four.      Each  served  a  year,  and 
received  9500  livres,  besides  considerable  perquisites,  and  a  pension  of  4500.  livres. 
Their  duties  were  to  give  orders  that  the  King's  first  mourning  garments  should  be 
made,  as  well  as  his  ball,  ballet,  and  theatrical  dresses;    they  also  regulated  the 
mourning  of  the  members  and  officers  of  the  royal  household  and  family,  the  ordi- 
nary and  extraordinary  expenses  for  the  King,  his  entertainments,  &c. 

*  Alcina,  who  changed  her  lovers  into  trees,  stones,  fountains,  or  beasts,  accord- 
ing to  her  fancy,  is,  in  Ariosto's  Orlando  Furioso,  the  personification  of  carnal 
pleasure. 

6  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

The  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island,  because,  according  to  Ariosto, 
the  brave  Rogero,  and  several  other  good  knights,  were  detained  thereby 
the  spell  of  beauty  (though  it  was  artificial),  and  by  the  incantations  of 
that  enchantress,  and  were  delivered,  after  a  long  time  spent  in  pleasures, 
by  a  ring,  which  destroyed  the  enchantment.  It  was  the  ring  of  Angelica, 
which  Melissa,  under  the  disguise  of  old  Allan tes,  at  length  placed  upon 
Rogero's  finger. 

In  a  few  days  there  was  fitted  up  a  round,  where  four  great  alleys  met 
between  high  palisades,  with  four  porticos  thirty-five  feet  high  and  twenty- 
two  feet  square,  and  several  festoons  enriched  with  gold  and  divers  paint- 
ings, with  his  Majesty's  arms. 

All  the  court  having  taken  their  places  on  the  seventh  ;  there  entered, 
at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening,  a  herald  at  arms,  represented  by  M.  des 
Bardins,  dressed  after  the  antique  manner,  in  flame- colour,  embroidered 
with  silver,  and  very  well  mounted. 

He  was  followed  by  three  pages.  The  King's  (M.  d'Artagnan)*  pre- 
ceded the  two  others,  very  richly  dressed  in  flame-colour,  his  Majesty's 
livery,  bearing  his  lance  and  shield,  whereon  sparkled  a  sun  of  precious 
stones,  with  these  words  :  Nee  cesso,  nee  erro  (I  neither  stay,  nor  stray), 
alluding  to  his  Majesty's  application  to  the  affairs  of  state  and  his  manner 
of  governing ;  which  was  likewise  represented  by  these  four  verses  of  the 
President  de  Pe"rigny,  author  of  the  said  device.5 

Not  without  reason  Heaven  and  earth  behold 
So  rare  an  object  with  the  utmost  wonder, 
Who  in  his  no  less  hard  than  glorious  course, 
Does  never  take  repose,  nor  ever  strays. 

The  two  other  pages  belonged  to  the  dukes  de  Saint-Aignan  and  de 
Noailles,  the  former  marshal  of  the  camp,  the  latter  judge  of  the  course. 
The  duke  de  Saint-Aignan's  page  bore  the  shield  of  his  device,  and  was 
dressed  in  his  livery  of  silver  cloth,  enriched  with  gold,  with  flesh-coloured 
and  black  plumes,  and  ribands  of  the  same.  His  device  was  the  bell  of  a 
clock,  with  these  words:  De  mis  golpes  mi  ruido  (From  my  strokes  (pro- 
ceeds) my  noise). 

The  duke  de  Noailles'  page  was  dressed  in  flame-colour,  silver  and 
black,  and  the  rest  of  the  livery  in  harmony.  The  device  on  his  shield 
was  an  eagle,  with  these  words  :'  Fidelis  et  audax  (Faithful  and  bold). 

Four  trumpeters  and  two  kettle-drummers  followed  these  pages,  dressed 
in  flame-colour  and  silver,  with  plumes  of  the  same,  and  the  caparisons 
of  their  horses  embroidered  in  the  same  colours,  with  very  brilliant  suns 

*  It  is  not  easy  to  say  who  M.  d'Artagnan  was,  for  many  of  the  Montesquiou 
family  bore  the  name  and  arms  of  d'Artagnan.  The  best  known,  however,  and 
the  on«  who  enjoyed  the  King's  confidence,  was  the  son  of  Henri  de  Montesquiou- 
d'Artagnan  and  of  Jeanne  de  Gassion  (a  sister  of  a  marshal  of  France  of  the  same 
name),  who  was  called  Charles  de  Bats,  capitaine-lieutenant  of  the  first  company 
of  the  King's  musketeers.  To  him  was  entrusted  the  guard  of  Foquet  (see  Preface 
to  The  Bores,  Vol.  I.),  until  the  latter  was  condemned.  The  well-known  pam- 
phleteer, Courtilz  de  Sandraz,  wrote  in  1700  the  Memoires  de  M.  efArtagnan, 
after  some  curious  notes  left  by  that  nobleman  ;  and  the  late  Alexandre  Dumas  has 
partly  followed  these  memoirs  in  The  Three  Musketeers. 

5  De  Perigny,  president  aux  enquetes  at  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  was  reader  to 
the  King  in  1663^  teacher  to  the  Dauphin  in  1666,  and  died  in  1670.  He  had  a 
wholly  literary  office  at  court.  In  1664  he  wrote  in  verse  the  ballet  of  the  Amours 
deguisis,  and  at  the  same  time,  under  the  eye  of  Louis  XIV.,  his  Journal  and 
Memoirs. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  7 

upon  the  bandrols  of  their  trumpets8   and   the  coverings   of  the   kettle- 
drums. 

The  duke  de  Saint-Aignan,  marshal  of  the  camp,  came  after  them, 
wearing,  in  the  Greek  fashion,  a  cuirass  of  silver-cloth,  covered  with  little 
scales  of  gold,  as  was  also  the  lower  part  of  his  cloak ; '  his  helmet  was 
adorned  with  a  dragon  and  a  great  number  of  white  feathers,  mixed  with 
flesh-coloured  and  black  ones.  He  rode  a  white  horse,  caparisoned  in 
the  same  fashion,  and  represented  Guido,  the  savage. 

Madrigal  for  the  duke  dt  Saint- Aignan,  representing  Guido,  the  savage. 

Those  combats  I  fought  in  the  dang'rous  isle, 

When  1  so  many  warriors  overcame, 

Followed  by  battles  of  an  am'rous  kind, 

Showed  what  my  strength  as  well  as  heart  could  do. 

My  well-known  force  in  lawful  frays  displayed, 

Or  in  forbidden  fields  exerted, 

Proclaim  it,  for  my  glory,  at  both  poles  ; 

None,  during  war,  deals  more  or  better  strokes. 

For  the  same. 

Singly  against  ten  warriors  and  ten  maids, 
I  am  engaged  in  two  peculiar  contests. 
If  I  with  honour  leave  this  twofold  field, 
Methinks  I'm  then  a  most  terrific  warrior.* 

Eight  trumpeters  and  eight  kettle-drummers,  dressed  like  the  first, 
walked  behind  the  marshal  of  the  camp. 

The  King,  representing  Rogero,  followed  them  upon  one  of  the  finest 
horses  in  the  world,  of  which  the  flame-coloured  trappings  shone  with 
gold,  silver,  and  precious  stones.  His  Majesty  was  armed  in  the  Greek 
fashion,  as  were  all  those  of  his  troop,  and  wore  a  cuirass  of  silver  plates, 
covered  with  a  rich  embroidery  of  gold  and  diamonds.  His  carriage  and 
whole  action  were  worthy  of  his  rank  ;  his  helmet,  entirely  covered  with 
flame-coloured  plumes,  looked  incomparably  beautiful ;  never  did  a  more 
free  or  warlike  air  raise  a  mortal  so  much  above  other  men.9 

•According  to  Ash's  "  Dictionary  of  the  English  Language,"  London,  1773,  a 
bandrol  is  "  a  little  flag  or  streamer,  the  fringed  flag  hung  on  to  a  trumpet." 

'  In  the  original,  son  bas  de  saie,  translated  by  my  predecessors  as  "  his  sills 
stockings,"  in  mistake  for  bas  de  soie. 

8  Francois  de  Beauvillier,  first  duke  de  Saint  Aignan,  born  in  1610,  was  peer  of 
France,  gentleman  of  the  King's  chamber,  and  lieutenant-general.  His  county  had 
been  erected  into  a  dttchi-prairie  in  December,  1663.  He  was  a  lover  of  literature, 
a  patron  of  Moliere,  a  member  of  the  French  Academy,  and  died  in  1679. — Guido, 
the  savage,  is,  in  Ariosto,  a  son  of  Constantia  and  Amon,  and  a  younger  brother  of 
Rinaldo.  Being  wrecked  on  the  coast  of  the  Amazons,  he  was  doomed  to  fight 
their  ten  male  champions,  and  having  killed  them  all,  was  obliged  to  marry  ten 
amazons  ;  hence  the  allusion.  At  last  he  succeeds  in  escaping  with  his  favourite 
wife  Alen'a,  and  joins  the  army  of  Charlemagne. — These  verses  and  the  following 
were  written  by  Benserade. 

*  Rogero,  the  brother  of  Marphisa,  was,  on  the  death  of  his  mother.  Galaciella, 
nursedby  a  lioness.  Brought  up  by  Atlantes,  the  magician,  who  gave  him  a  shield 
of  such  dazzling  splendour  that  every  one  quailed  who  set  eyes  on  it,  and  which 
shield  he  threw  into  a  well,  he  deserted  from  the  Moorish  army,  was  baptized, 
married  Bradamant,  Charlemagne's  niece,  and  became  King  of  Bulgaria. — I  wish 
to  draw  attention  to  the  official  flatteries  about  Louis  le  Grand's  "carriage," 
"  action,"  and  "  air ;  "  even  his  horse  and  helmet  come  in  for  their  share. 

8  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

Sonnet  for  the  King,  representing  Rogero. 

What  shape,  what  carnage  this  bold  conqu'ror  has, 

His  person  dazzles  each  beholder's  eye  ; 

And  though  by  his  high  post  he  is  distinguished. 

Yet  something  greater  sparkles  in  his  mien, 

Clearly  his  brow  his  future  fate  foretells 

His  virtue  outshines  all  his  ancestors  ! 

They  are  forgotten,     if  lie  continues  so, 

He'll  leave  them  far,  yea  very  far,  behind. 

His  generous  heart  delights  to  employ  its  time, 

To  act  for  others    and  not  for  himself. 

In  this  his  power  is  chiefly  occupied. 

All  ancient  heroes  pale  compared  to  him, 

Honour's  his  sole  aim;   he  only  draws 

The  sword  for  other  int'rests  than  his  own. 

The  duke  de  Noailles,  judge  of  the  lists,  by  the  name  of  Ogier  the 
Dane,10  marched  after  the  King,  wearing  flame-colour  and  black  under- 
neath a  rich  embroidery  of  silver ;  his  plumes,  as  well  as  the  rest  of  his 
equipage,  were  of  the  same  livery. 

For  the  Duke  de  Noailles,  judge  of  the  lists,  representing  Ogier  the  Dane. 

The  only  business  of  this  paladine 
Is  well  to  serve  the  greatest  king  on  earth, 
As  he  who  judges  well  must  act  as  well, 
Methinks  none  from  his  sentence  will  appeal. 

The  duke  de  Guise  and  the  count  d'Armagnac  went  after  him.  The 
former,  under  the  name  of  Aquilant  the  black,11  wore  a  black  dress  em- 
broidered with  gold  and  jet ;  his  horse  and  his  lance  being  matched  in 
the  same  colours.  The  count,  representing  Gryphon  the  white,12  wore  on 
a  dress  of  silver  cloth  several  rubies,  and  rode  on  a  white  horse  capari- 
soned in  the  same  colour. 

For  the  duke  de  Guise,  representing  Aquilant  the  black. 

Night  has  its  beauties,  and  so  has  the  day  ; 
Black  is  my  colour,  and  I  always  loved  it. 
But  if  obscurity  does  suit  my  love, 
"T  has  not  extended  to  my  well-known  fame. 

1U  Ogier  the  Dane,  a  paladin,  married  Ermellina,  the  daughter  of  Namus,  duke 
of  Bavaria,  of  whom  was  born  Dudon. — Anne  de  Noailles,  was  the  first  duke,  his 
county,  d'Ayen,  having  been  erected  into  a  duche-pairie  in  1663.  He  was  first 
captain  of  the  king's  life-guards,  lieutenant-general  of  Auvergne,  and  had  married 
in  1646  Louise  Boyer,  dame  d"atours  of  the  Queen  Anne  of  Austria.  He  died  :n 
1678.  Mad.  de  Sevigne's  letters  are  filled  with  details  about  him  and  his  family. 

11  Aquilant,  a  knight  in  Charlemagne's  army,  always  wore  black  armor.  Whilst 
Martano  was  strutting  about  in  Gryphon's  white  armour,  he  met  Aquilant,  who  took 
him  prisoner  to  Damascus. — The  duke  de  Guise,  Henri  de  Lorraine,  second  of  that 
name,  peer  and  grand  chamberlain  of  France,  was  born  in  1614,  and  died  twenty 
days  after  the  fetes  of  the  Isle  Enchantee,  on  the  2d  ot  June  1664.  He  had  been 
one  of  the  first  patrons  of  Moliere,  when  the  latter  acted  at  the  Illustre  Theatre 
in  1645.  This  prince,  who  had  attempted  rashly  to  become  King  of  Naples,  in 
1647,  died  unmarried. 

14  Gryphon,  a  brother  of  Aquilant,  ever  wearing  white  armour,  overthrew  the 
eight  champions  of  the  King  of  Damascus.  Whilst  asleep  Martano  stole  Gryphon's 
armour,  and  he  was  obliged  to  put  on  the  coward's  ;  hence  he  was  hooted  and  jos- 
tled by  the  crowd.  At  last  everything  is  discovered,  and  the  right  man  is  put  in  the 
right  place. — Louis  de  Lorraine  count  d'Armagnac,  son  of  Henri  de  Lorraine,  Count 
d'Harcourt,  was  grand  ecuyer  of  France,  seneschal  of  Bourgognc,  and  governor  of 
Anjou. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  9 

For  the  count  d*  Armagnac,  representing  Gryphon  the  white. 

Behold  what  candour  Heaven  has  placed  in  me  ; 
Thus  no  fair  maid  by  me  shall  be'deceived  ; 
When  it  is  time  to  attack  the  enemy 
My  sword  will  keep  my  colour  stainless  white. 

The  dukes  de  Foix  and  de  Coaslin  appeared  afterwards,  dressed,  the 
one  in  flesh-colour,  with  gold  and  silver,  and  the  other  in  green,  with  white 
and  silver ;  their  livery  and  horses  were  worthy  the  rest  of  their  equipage. 

For  the  duke  de  Foix,  representing  Rinaldo^ 

He  bears  a  glorious  name,  is  young  and  sage, 
To  speak  the  truth  he  lief  mounts  very  high  ; 
What  great  good  fortune,  at  so  young  an  age 
To  have  such  fire  as  well  as  so  much  calmness. 

For  the  duke  de  Coaslin,  representing  Dudo.^ 

None  can  too  far  in  glory's  course  engage, 
Though  seven  kings  I  were  to  conquer  bravely, 
And  see  them  subject  to  Rogero's  power, 
Yet  e'en  this  exploit  would  not  content  me. 

After  them  marched  the  Count  de  Lude  and  the  Prince  de  Marsillac. 
the  former  dressed  in  flesh-colour  and  white,  and  the  other  in  yellow,  white 
and  black,  enriched  with  silver  embroidery,  their  livery  of  the  same,  and 
very  well  mounted. 

For  the  count  de  Lude,  representing  AstolphoP 

Of  all  the  paladines  this  world  contains, 
No  knight  more  prone  to  love  was  ever  seen. 
Always  in  fresh  adventures  he'll  engage, 
And  ever  smitten  by  some  youthful  fay. 

For  the  Prince  de  Marsillac,  representing  Brandimart?* 

My  vows  will  be  content,  my  wishes  crowned, 
My  fortune  at  its  utmost  height  arriv'd, 
When,  lovely  Flordelice,  my  zeal  you  know, 
Indelibly  within  my  heart  imprest. 

ofh 
a  c 

lia 

WRinaldo,  in  Ariosto's  poem,  was  the  son  of  the  fourth  marquis  of  Este,  the  rival 
rhis  cousin  Orlando  for  the  love  of  Angelica,  who  detested  him,  and  the  leader  of 
corps  of  Scotch  and  English  auxiliaries  in  Charlemagne's  army. — Gaston-Jean- 
uaptiste  de  Foix  and  de  Candale,  peer  of  France,  eldest  son  of  the  countess  de 
Fleix,  was  called  Duke  de  Foix,  because  his  county  of  Randan  had  been  raised  by 
the  King  into  a  duche-pairie .  He  died  in  1665,  at  the  age  of  twenty-seven,  and  his 
brother  and  heir,  Henri  Francois  de  Foix,  then  took  the  title. 

14  Dudo  was  the  admiral  commanding  the  fleet  of  Orlando  and  Astolpho, — Ar- 
mand  du  Cambout,  duke  de  Coaslin,  peer  of  France,  chevalier  des  ordres  du  roi, 
lieutenant  general,  had,  only  in  the  beginning  of  1664,  been  made  a  duke  and 
peer ;  he  was  formerly  a  marquis. 

"Astolpho,  an  English  duke,  the  son  of  Otho,  joined  Charlemagne  against  the 
Saracens  ;  he  was  carried  upon  the  back  of  a  whale  to  the  island  of  Alcina,  who 
soon  tired  of  him  and  changed  him  into  a  myrtle.  His  descent  into  the  infernal  re- 
gions, and  his  flight  to  the  moon,  are  among  the  best  parts  of  the  Orlando  Furi- 
oso.— Henn  de  Daillon  count  de  Lude,  first  gentleman  of  the  King's  chamber, 
grand  master  of  the  artillery  captain  of  the  castles  of  St.  Germain  and  Versailles 

*H  •  eMU^eja"c  P'Cr  !"  T? 75>  and  died  w!thout  iss"e  'n  '685.     He  is  often  men- 
tioned in  Mad.  de  Sevigne  s   letters. 

IT^nn"""  "i'M*™1130  wa*  Francois  d.e  la  Rochefoucauld,  eighth  of  that 
name,  and  son  of  the  famous  duke  de  la  Rochefoucauld,  author  of  the  Maximt. 

JO  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

The  marquises  de  Villequier  and  de  Soyecourt  followed.  One  wore  blue 
and  silver,  the  other  blue,  white,  and  black,  with  gold  and  silver ;  their 
plumes  and  the  harness  of  their  horses  were  of  the  same  colour,  and 
equally  rich. 

For  the  Marquis  de   Villequier,  representing  RichardettoF 
No  one,  like  me,  with  gallantry  could  quit 
An  intrigue  where,  no  doubt,  some  skill  was  greatly  needed, 
No  one  deceived  his  fair  so  pleasantly,  methinks, 
While  all  the  time  remaining  faithful  to  her. 

For  the  Marquis  de  Soyecourt,  representing  Oliviero.^ 
Behold  the  honour  of  the  age,  compared  to  whom 
E'en  giants  and  ourselves  are  ordinary  men  ; 
This  valiant  knight,  prepared  for  all  that  come, 
Has  aye  his  lance  quite  ready  for  the  tilts. 

The  marquises  d'Humieres  and  de  la  Valli&re  followed  them.  The  first 
wore  flesh-colour  and  silver,  and  the  other  gridelin,19  white,  and  silver ; 
their  whole  livery  being  the  richest  and  best  matched  in  the  world. 

For  the  Marquis  d'Humieres,  representing  Ariodantes.^ 
Fevered  by  love,  I  tremble  in  my  fit, 
And  without  boast  elsewhere  I  ne'er  did  tremble  ; 
Handsome  young  Ginevra  is  the  only  fair 
Young  charmer  to  whose  laws  I  bow. 

For  the  Marquis  de  la  Valliere,  representing  Zerbino.^ 
Whate'er  grand  feelings  glory  may  inspire 
>Vhen  we  are  wholly  all-absorbed  in  love  ; 
To  die  in  the  arms  of  her  whom  we  admire, 
Methinks  is  of  all  deaths  the  one  most  pleasant. 

He  was  born  in  1639  and  died  in  I7I4-  He  married,  in  1659,  his  cousin,  Jeanne 
Charlotte  du  Plessis  Liancourt,  daughter  of  the  Count  de  la  Roche-Guyon. — Bran- 
dimart,  one  of  the  bravest  knights  in  Charlemagne's  army,  was  slain  by  Gradasso, 
King  of  Sericana  ;  he  was  the  brother-in-law  of  Orlando,  and  the  lover  of  Flordel- 
ice,  daughter  of  Dolistone.  According  to  Ariosto  (Orlando  Furioso)  Cant,  xlii., 
St.  14),  he  thus  spoke  to  Orlando,  when  dying  : — "  Ne  men  ti  raccomando  la  mio 
Fiordi.  .  .  Ma  der  non  puote  ligi  :  e  qui  nnio."  Rendered  by  Rose  in  his  transla- 
tion : — "  Nor  recommend  to  thee  less  warmly  my — " — Flordelice  would,  but  could 
not,  say — and  died. 

1J  Richardetto  was  the  son  of  Aymon  and  brother  of  Bradamant,  and  was  mistak- 
en by  Flordespine  for  his  sister  Bradamant.  This  rather  free  story  may  be  read 
in  the  twenty-fifth  canto  of  the  Orlando  Furioso. — Louis  Marie- Victor  d'Aumont, 
marquis  de  Villequier,  eldest  son  of  the  duke  d'Aumont,  born  in  1632,  was  first  gen' 
'  tleman  of  the  King's  chamber.  At  his  father's  death,  in  1669  he  became  duke 
peer,  and  marshal  of  France. 

18  Ojiverio  of  Burgundy  was  a  famous  paladin,  son  of  Rinieri  of  Vienna,  brother 
of  Alda,  and  father  of  Gryphon  and  Aquilant.  The  descriptive  verses  contain  an 
allusion  to  the  Marquis  de  Soyecourt's  prowess,  of  which  the  curious  may  find  thq 
details  in  the  chronique  scandaleuse  of  Louis  XIV. 's  age. — Maximilien  Antoine  de 
Belleforiere,  marquis  de  Soyecourt  or  Saucourt,  was  grand  master  of  the  King's 
wardrobe,  and  became  afterwards  master  of  the  hunt  to  the  King :  he  died  in  1670. 

i  '•>  the  Dorante  of  The  Sores  (see  Introductory  Notice,  Vol.  1 1. 

"According  to  several  old  dictionaries,  "gridelin"  is  a  colour  mixed  of  white  and 
red. 

»  Ariodantes,  an  Italian  knight  at  the  court  of  Scotland,  duke  of  Albany,  married 
•  e^T?f  the  daughter  of  that  king.— Louis  de  Crevant,  fourth  of  that  name,  mar- 
quis d  Humieres,  lieutenant-general,  was  made  a  duke  and  peer  in  1688,  and  at  the 
same  time  was  appointed  marshal  of  France  and  grand  master  of  the  artillery. 
Madame  de  Sevigne  mentions  his  name  several  times  in  her  letters. 

"Zerbmo.duke  of  Ross-shire,  was  the  son  of  the  King  of  Scotland,  and  the  inti- 
aate  friend  of  Orlando.  He  died  in  the  arms  of  the  sorrowing  Isabel. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  II 

Monsieur  the  Duke21  went  alone,  having  for  his  livery  flame-colour, 
white  and  silver ;  a  great  number  of  diamonds  were  fastened  to  the  mag- 
nificent embroidery  with  which  his  cuirass  and  the  lower  part  of  his  cloak 
were  covered ;  his  helmet,  and  the  harness  of  his  horse  being  likewise 
adorned  with  them. 

For  Monsieur  the  Duke,  representing  Orlando.™ 
Fame  will  in  distant  lands  Orlando's  name  make  known, 
Glory  shall  ne'er  depart  from  him  ; 
Descended  from  a  race  that  e'er  desires 
To  show  its  valour  when  war  is  proclaim'd. 

In   him,  to  speak  unvarnished  truth, 

Flows  the  pure  blood  of  Charlemagne.5* 

A  car,  eighteen  feet  high,  twenty-four  long,  and  fifteen  wide,  appeared, 
afterwards  shining  with  gold  and  divers  colours.  It  represented  the 
chariot  of  Apollo,  in  whose  honour  the  Pythian  games  were  formerly  cele- 
brated, which  those  knights  intended  to  imitate  in  their  lists  and  dresses. 
The  god,  radiant  with  light,  was  seated  on  the  top  of  the  car,  having  at 
his  feet  the  four  ages,  distinguished  by  rich  habits,  and  by  what  they  bore 
in  their  hands. 

The  golden  Age,  adorned  with  that  precious  metal,  was  also  decked 
with  different  flowers,  one  of  the  principal  ornaments  of  that  happy  age. 
The  silver  and  brass  Ages  had  also  their  distinguishing  marks.  The  iron 
Age  was  represented  by  a  warrior  of  terrible  aspect,  holding  his  sword  in 
one  hand,  and  his  buckler  in  the  other. 

Several  other  large  figures  in  relief  adorned  the  sides  of  the  magnifi- 
cent chariot.  The  celestial  monsters,  the  serpent  Python,  Daphne,  Hya- 
cinth, and  the  other  figures  which  are  suitable  to  Apollo,  with  an  Atlas 
bearing  the  globe,  were  also  elegantly  carved  upon  it.  Time,  represented 
by  M.  Millet,25  with  his  scythe,  his  wings,  and  that  decrepitude  in  which 
he  is  always  depicted,  was  the  coachman.  The  car  was  drawn  by  four 
horses,  of  uncommon  size  and  beauty,  abreast,  covered  with  large  hous- 
ings, ornamented  with  gold-worked  suns. 

The  twelve  hours  of  the  day,  and  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  splen- 
didly dressed,  as  the  poets  described  them,  walked  in  two  files  on  both 
sides  of  the  chariot.  All  the  knights'  pages  followed  it  in  pairs,  after  the 
duke's,  very  neatly  dressed  in  their  liveries,  with  a  great  many  plumes, 
bearing  their  master's  lances,  and  the  shields  with  their  devices. 

The  Duke  de  Guise,  representing  Aquilant  the  black,  having  for  his 
device  a  lion  sleeping,  with  these  words  Et  guiescente  pavescunt  (They  fear 
me  even  when  asleep). 

The  count  d'Armagnac,  representing  Gryphon  the  white,  having  for  his 
device  an  ermine,  with  these  words:  Ex  candore  decus  (My  beauty  pro- 
ceeds from  my  whiteness). 

The  duke  de  Foix,  representing  Rinaldo,  having  for  his  device  a  ship 

"The  "  Duke"  was  the  name  given  to  the   duke  of  Enghien,    the  son  of  the 

«  Orlando  was  lord  of  Anglant,  and  through  his  mother,  a  nephew  of  Charlemagne. 
Although  a  married  man,  he  fell  in  love  with^  Angelica,  Daughter  of  the^dif^k^ 

Orlando  recovers  his  wits  by  sniffing  at  the  urn. 

«  An  allusion  to  the  Prince  de  Conde  being  a  Bourbon. 

*  M   Millet  was  the  coachman  in  ordinary  to  Louis  XIV.,  and  celebrated  for  hia 
skill. 

12  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

on  the  sea,  with  these  words  :  Longe  levis  auraferet  (A  slight  breeze  will 
carry  it  far). 

The  duke  de  Coaslin,  representing  Dudo,  having  for  his  device  a  sun 
and  a  sun-flower,  with  these  words :  Splendor  ab  obsequio  (Its  splendour 
arises  from  its  obedience).26 

The  count  de  Lude,  representing  Astolphus,  having  for  his  device  a 
cypher  in  the  form  of  a  knot,  with  these  words  :  Non  fia  mat  sciolto  (It 
shall  never  be  broken). 

The  prince  de  Marsillac,  representing  Brandimart,  having  for  his  device 
a  watch  in  relief,  of  which  all  the  springs  were  visible,  with  these  words  : 
Chietofuor,  commoto  dentro  (Calm  without,  agitated  within). 

The  marquis  de  Villequier,  representing  Richardetto,  having  for  his 
device  au  eagle  soaring  before  the  sun,  with  these  words :  Uni  militat 
astro  (He  fights  for  a  single  star).27 

The  marquis  de  Soyecourt,  representing  Oliviero,  having  for  his  device 
Hercules'  club,  with  these  words  :  Vix  asquat  fama  labores  (his  fame  is 
scarce  equal  to  his  labours). 

The  marquis  d'Humieres,  representing  Ariodantes,  having  for  his  device 
all  sorts  of  crowns,  with  these  words  :  No  quiero  menos  (Less  will  not 
content  me). 

The  marquis  de  la  Valliere,  representing  Zerbino,  having  for  his  device 
a  phoenix  on  a  pile  set  on  fire  by  the  sun,  with  these  words  :  Hoc  juvat 
•uri  (It  is  pleasant  to  be  so  burnt).78 

The  Duke,  representing  Orlando,  having  for  his  device  a  dart,  wreathed 
with  laurel,  with  these  words:  Certoferit  (It  strikes  surely). 

Twenty  shepherds,  carrying  different  pieces  of  the  barrier  to  be  set  up  for 
the  tilting,  formed  the  last  troop  that  entered  the  lists.  They  were  dressed 
in  short  jackets  of  flame-colour,  adorned  with  silver,  and  caps  of  the 
same. 

As  soon  as  these  troops  entered  the  camp,  they  went  round  it,  and,  after 
having  paid  their  obeisance  to  the  queen,  they  separated,  and  each  took 
his  post.  The  pages  who  were  in  front,  the  trumpeters  and  kettle-drum- 
mers crossed,  and  stationed  themselves  at  the  wings.  The  King  advanc- 
ing towards  the  middle,  placed  himself  opposite  to  the  high  canopy  ;  the 
Duke  near  his  Majesty ;  the  dukes  de  Saint-Aignan  and  de  Noailles  on 
the  right  and  left ;  the  ten  knights  in  a  line  on  both  sides  of  the  chariot ; 
their  pages  in  the  same  order  behind  them  :  the  Hours  and  the  signs  of 
the  Zodiack  as  they  entered. 

When  they  had  thus  stopped,  a  profound  silence,  which  arose  from 
attention  and  respect,  gave  Mademoiselle  Debrie,29  who  represented  the 
Age  of  Brass,  an  opportunity  to  recite  these  verses,  in  praise  of  the 
Queen  addressed  to  Apollo,  represented  by  M.  de  la  Grange. 

THE  BRASS  AGE  (to  Apollo). 
Thou  dazzling  father  of  the  day,  whose  power 
Does  by  its  various  aspects  give  us  birth ; 

*  These  words  were  flattering  to  Louis  XIV.,  whose  device  was  the  sun. 
»  TKC  same  remarlc  can  be  applied  to  the  marquis  de  Villequier's  device. 

,f  „.„„».  ..„  it  by  stating  that  "  it  is  pleasant  to 

be  burnt  by  the  sun."     The  noble  Marquis  became  duke  de  la  Valliere  and  peer  in 
l6°°-  after  his  sister  had  taken  her  vows  in  the  Carmelite  convent. 

*  For  the  actors  and  actresses  of  Moliere's  troupe,  see  Introductory  Notice  to 
The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  13 

Hope  of  the  earth,  and  ornament  of  Heaven, 
Thou  fairest  and  most  necessary  god  ; 
Thou,  whose  activity  and  sovereign  bounty, 
In  every  place  makes  itself  seen  and  felt, 
Say  by  what  destiny,  or  what  new  choice, 
Thy  games  are  solemnized  on  Gallia's  shores.* 

APOLLO. 

If  all  th'  address,  the  glory,  valour,  merit, 
Which  made  Greece  shine,  are  found  on  these  blest  shores, 
Then  justly  hither  are  those  games  transferred, 
Which,  to  my  honour,  earth  nas  consecrated. 

I  ever  did  delight  to  pour  on  France 
The  balmy  influence  of  my  gentle  rays ; 
But  the  bright  dame  whom  Hymen  there  enthrones, 
Makes  me  for  her  disdain  all  other  realms. 

Since  for  the  wide  creation's  good  so  long 
I've  made  the  boundless  tour  of  seas  and  earth 
I  ne'er  saw  ought  so  worthy  of  my  fires, 
Such  noble  blood,  so  generous  a  heart, 
Never  such  lustre  with  such  innocence, 
Never  such  youth  with  so  much  sound  discretion ; 
Never  such  grandeur  with  such  condescension, 
Never  such  wisdom  joined  to  so  much  beauty. 

The  thousand  various  climates  which  are  ruled 
By  all  those  demi-gods  from  whom  she  springs, 
Led  by  their  own  devoir  and  her  high  merit, 
United,  will  one  day  confess  her  power. 

Whatever  grandeur  France  or  Spain  might  boast, 
The  rights  of  Charles  the  Fifth,  and  Charlemagne, 
Auspiciously  transmitted  in  her  blood, 
Will  to  her  throne  subject  the  universe  : 
But  a  yet  greater  title,  nobler  lot. 
Which  lifts  her  higher,  and  which  charms  her  more, 
A  name  which  in  itself  all  names  outweighs, 
Is  that  of  consort  to  the  mighty  Louis. 

SILVER  AGE. 

By  what  unjust  decree  has  fate  produced, 
A  star  so  kindly  in  the  age  of  iron  ? 

GOLDEN  AGE. 

Ah  I  Do  not  murmur  at  the  gods'  appointment. 
This  age  which  has  the  hate  of  Heav'n  deserv'd, 
Instead  of  growing  proud  with  that  rare  blessing, 
Ought  thence  to  augurate  its  approaching  ruin, 
And  think  a  virtue  which  it  can't  corrupt, 
Comes  rather  to  destroy  than  to  ennoble  it. 

As  soon  as  she  appeared  on  this  blest  earth, 
She  chased  away  the  furious  raging  war ; 
From  that  same  day  labour  unwearied  hands 
To  render  happy  all  humanity. 
See  by  what  hidden  springs  a  Hero  strives, 
To  banish  from  a  barbarous  age  its  horrors, 
And  kindly  to  assist  my  resurrection, 
With  all  those  joys  which  innocence  desires. 

IRON  AGE. 

I  know  what  enemies  have  planned  my  ruin, 
Their  plots  are  known,  their strategems  are  traced; 
But  yet  my  courage  is  not  so  far  sunk    .     .     . 

*>  The  president  de  Perigny  is  the  author  of  the  following  verses,  as  well  as  those 
pronounced  by  the  other  Ages,  by  Apollo,  the  Seasons,  Diana,  and  Pan.  I  have 
taken  them  from  some  older  translations  and  corrected  and  modified  them,  when 
necessary. 

14  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

APOLLO. 

Should  all  hell's  monsters  join  in  thy  defence, 
Feeble  and  vain  would  their  resistance  prove 
Against  such  grandeur  and  against  such  virtue  : 
Long  with  thy  galling  yoke  the  world  opprest 
Shall  by  thy  flight  a  happier  lot  enjoy. 
'Tis  time  that  thou  give  way  to  the  high  law 
Which  an  august  and  mighty  Queen  imposes. 
It  is  time  to  yield  to  the  illustrious  labours 
Of  a  great  King,  favoured  by  Heaven  and  Earth; 
But  here  too  long  this  quarrel  made  me  stay  ; 
These  lists  invite  to  much  more  gentle  combats, 
Let  us  ope  them  just  now,  and  laurels  wreathe 
To  bind  the  brows  of  our  most  famous  warriors. 

After  all  these  verses  were  spoken,  the  running  at  the  ring  began ; 
wherein,  after  they  had  admired  the  King's  skill  and  gracefulness  in  that 
exercise,  as  in  all  others,  and  after  several  fine  courses  of  all  these  knights, 
the  duke  de  Guise,  the  marquises  de  Soyecourt  and  de  la  Valliere  re- 
mained the  last.  The  last  bore  off  the  prize,  which  was  a  golden  sword 
enriched  with  diamonds,  with  very  valuable  buckles  for  the  belt,  which 
the  Queen-mother  gave,  and  wherewith  she  honoured  him  with  her  own 
hand. 

They  began  their  running  in  such  good  time,  that  just  when  it  was 
finished,  darkness  came  on ;  when  a  great  number  of  lights  illuminated 
this  beautiful  place,  and  thirty-four  musicians,  who  were  to  precede  the 
Seasons  entered  very  well  dressed,  and  performed  the  most  pleasant  music 
in  the  world. 

Whilst  the  Seasons  were  taking  up  the  delicious  viands  they  had  to 
carry  for  the  magnificent  entertainment  of  their  Majesties,  the  twelve 
signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  four  Seasons  danced  in  the  ring  one  of  the 
finest  entrees  ever  seen. 

Spring,  represented  by  Mademoiselle  Duparc,  afterwards  appeared  on 
a  Spanish  horse.  She  showed  the  skill  of  a  man,  as  well  as  womanly  at- 
tractions. Her  dress  was  green  with  silver  embroidery,  adorned  with 
flowers. 

M.  Duparc,  who  represented  Summer,  followed  upon  an  elephant 
covered  with  rich  housings. 

Next  came  M.  de  la  Thorilliere,  representing  Autumn,  as  splendidly 
dressed,  and  mounted  on  a  camel. 

Winter,  represented  by  M.  Bejart,  followed  on  a  bear. 

Forty-eight  persons  followed  them,  carrying  on  their  heads  large  basins 
for  the  lunch. 

The  first  twelve,  covered  with  flowers,  carried,  like  gardeners,  baskets 
painted  green  and  silver,  containing  a  great  many  china  dishes,  so  full 
of  preserves  and  many  other  delicious  things  of  the  season,  that  they  bent 
beneath  the  agreeable  load. 

Twelve  others,  like  reapers,  clothed  in  garments  which  suited  their  pro- 
fession, but  very  rich,  carried  basins  of  that  incarnadine  colour  which  may 
be  observed  at  sun-rise,  and  followed  Summer. 

Twelve  others,  dressed  like  vine-dressers,  were  covered  with  vine- 
leaves,  and  bunches  of  grapes,  and  bore  in  baskets  of  filemot  colour,31 
full  of  little  basins  of  the  same,  various  other  fruits  and  preserves.  These 
followed  Autumn. 

The  last  twelve  were  old  men,  nearly  frozen  to  death,  whose  furs  and 

81  The  original  \a&feuille-morte,  the  colour  of  a  dead  leaf.  '    •• 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  15 

gait  showed  how  they  felt  the  inclemency  of  the  weather,  as  well  as  their 
weakness,  bearing,  in  basins  covered  with  ice  and  snow  so  well  imitated 
that  they  might  have  been  taken  for  the  very  things  they  were  intended  to 
represent,  that  which  was  to  contribute  to  the  collation.  These  followed 
Winter. 

Fourteen  musicians  preceded  the  two  divinities  Pan  and  Diana,  with  an 
agreeable  harmony  of  flutes  and  bagpipes. 

Pan  and  Diana  then  appeared  upon  a  very  ingenious  carriage,  shaped 
like  a  little  mountain  or  rock,  shaded  by  several  trees,  and  so  wonderfully 
constructed,  that  the  machinery  which  held  it  in  the  air,  and  put  it  in  mo- 
tion, could  not  be  perceived. 

Twenty  other  persons  followed,  carrying  viands,  the  produce  of  Pan's 
menagerie  and  of  Diana's  chase. 

Eighteen  pages  of  the  King,  very  richly  clad,  who  were  to  wait  upon 
the  ladies  at  table,  came  last.  The  whole  troop  then  placed  themselves 
in  order.  Pan,  Diana,  and  the  Seasons  presented  themselves  before  the 
Queen,  whilst  Spring  first,  and  the  others  afterwards,  addressed  her  in  the 
following  words : 

SPRING  (to  the  Queen). 

Of  all  the  new-born  flowers  that  deck  my  gardens, 
Scorning  the  jessamine,  the  pinks  and  roses. 
These  lilies  I  have  chosen  to  pay  my  tribute, 
Which  in  your  earliest  years  you  so  much  cherished. 
Louis  has  made  them  shine  from  east  to  west, 
Whilst  the  charmed  world  at  once  respects  and  fears  them, 
But  still  their  reign's  more  soft  and  powerful  too, 
When,  brilliant-like,  they  beam  on  your  complexion. 

SUMMER. 

Seized  with  too  hasty  a  surprise,  I  bring 
A  slender  ornament  to  grace  this  feast ; 
Yet  know,  before  my  season's  passed  away, 
Your  warriors  in  the  fields  of  Thrace, 
Shall  reap  an  ample  crop  of  laurels. 

AUTUMN. 

The  Spring,  proud  of  the  beauty  of  those  flowers 
Which  to  his  lot  have  fortunately  fallen, 
Thinks  to  have  all  th'  advantage  of  this  feast. 
And  quite  obscure  us  by  his  lively  colours. 
But  you,  you  matchless  Princess,  well  remember 
What  precious  fruit  my  season  has  produced, 
Which  in  your  house  does  one  day  mean  to  prove 
The  darling  and  the  blessing  of  mankind.88 

WINTER. 

The  snow  and  icicles  I  hither  bring, 
Are  viands  far  from  being  rare  or  precious  ; 
But  they're  most  necessary  in  a  feast, 
Where  with  their  killing  eyes,  a  thousand  objects, 
Replete  with  charms,  so  many  flames  create. 

M  An  allusion  to  the  Dauphin,  born  on  the  ist  of  November,  1661.  What  Sum- 
mer has  said  before  about  the  "  ample  crop  of  laurels  "  your  warriors  shall  reap  in 
the  fields  of  Thrace,  I  cannot  elucidate,  because  in  1664  there  was  neither  war  nor 
rumours  of  war.  The  last  line  Pan  states,  "  "Tis  to  your  charms  that  happiness 
we  owe  "  refers  to  the  Peace  of  the  Pyrenees  in  1659,  and  the  subsequent  marriage 
of  Louis  XIV.  with  Maria  Theresa  of  Spain,  in  1660. 

l6  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

DIANA  (to  the  Queen). 

Our  woods,  our  rocks,  our  mountains,  all  our  hunters, 
And  my  companions  who  have  to  me  always 
Paid  sovereign  honours,  since  they  have  beheld 
Your  presence  here,  will  know  me  now  no  more  ; 
And  laden  with  their  presents,  come  with  me 
To  bring  this  tribute  to  you,  as  a  mark 
Of  their  allegiance. 

The  swift  inhabitants  of  those  blessed  groves, 
Make  it  their  choice  to  fall  into  your  nets, 
And  only  wish  to  perish  by  your  hands. 
Love,  whose  address  and  countenance  you  wear, 
Alone  with  you  this  wondrous  secret  shares. 

PAN. 

Be  not  surprised,  young  deity,  that  we 
In  this  famed  festival  approach  to  offer 
The  choice  of  what  our  pastures  can  bestow. 
For  if  our  flocks  their  herbage  taste  in  peace, 
'Tis  to  your  charms  that  happiness  we  owe. 

After  these  verses  had  been  spoken,  a  great  table  was  seen,  shaped  like 
a  half  moon,  concave  on  the  side  on  which  they  were  to  serve,  and 
adorned  with  flowers  on  the  convex  side. 

Thirty-six  violin  players,  very  well  dressed,  were  behind  on  a  little 
stage,  whilst  Messieurs  de  laMarche  and  Parfait,  father,  brother,  and  son, 
controllers- general,  by  the  names  of  Plenty,  Joy,  Cleanliness,  and  Good- 
cheer,  caused  the  aforesaid  table  to  be  covered  by  Pleasures,  Sports, 
Smiles,  and  Delights. 

Their  Majesties  sat  down  in  the  following  order,  which  prevented  all 
the  confusion  that  might  have  arisen  about  precedence  . 

The  Queen-mother  M  was  seated  in  the  middle  of  the  table,  and  had  at 
her  right  hand — The  King,  Mademoiselle  d'Alencon^  Madame  la  Prin- 
cessefb  Mademoiselle  d' Elbeuf**  Madame  de  Bethunef1  Madame  la 
duchess  de  Crequi^  Monsieur ,s9  Madame  la  duchesse  de  Saint- Aignar.P 

33 See  Vol.  I.,  page  402,  note  i. 

84  Mademoiselle  d'Alencon,  daughter  of  Gaston  or  France,  duke  of  Orleans,  and 
of  Marguerite  de  Lorraine,  was  born  in  1646,  married,  in  1667,  Louis  Joseph  de 
Lorraine,  duke  of  Guise,  and  died  in  1696. 

35  Madame  la  Princesse  was  the  name  given  at  court  to  Claire-Clemence  de  Maille, 
marchioness  of  Breze,  who  had  married,  in  1641,  Louis  II.,  prince  de  Conde,  called 
the  Grand  Conde.  Since  the  sixteenth  century,  the  princes  of  Conde  were  called 
Monsieur  le  Prince. 

88  Mademoiselle  d'Elbeuf,  Anne  Elisabeth  de  Lorraine,  was  the  daughter  of 
Charles  de  Lorraine,  third  of  that  name,  duke  d'Elbeuf,  and  of  his  first  wife, 
Anne  Elisabeth  de  Lannoi,  widow  of  the  count  de  la  Roche-Guyon.  Mademoiselle 
d'Elbeuf,  born  in  1649,  married,  in  1669,  Charles  Henri  de  Lorraine,  count  de 
Vaudemont. 

87  Anne  Marie  de  Beauvillier  was  the  wife  of  Hippolyte  de  Bethune,  count  de 
Selles  and  marquis  de  Cabris,  and  dame  tfatour  to  the  queen.      She  died  in  1688, 
a  widow,  at  the  age  of  seventy-eight  years. 

88  Armande  de  Saint-Gelais,  a  daughter  of  the  lord  de  Lansac,  marquis  de  Balon, 
was  the  wife  of  Charles  III.,  duke  de  Crequi,  peer  of  France,  prince  de  Poix,  first 
gentleman  of  the  chamber  to  the  King,  and  governor  of  Paris. 

89  Monsieur  was  the  title  of  the  eldest  brother  of  the  king.     He  married,  first, 
Henrietta  of  England,  a  sister  of  Charles  II.,  and,  after  her  death  (1670),  Charlotte 
Elizabeth  of  Bavaria.     He  was  said  to  be  a  good  general,  and  gained  a  brilliant 
victory  over  the  Prince  of  Orange  at  Cassel,  in  1676,  which  made  Louis  XIV.  so 
jealous  that  he  never  gave  his  brother  any  other  military  command.     He  died  sud- 
denly at  Saint-Cloud  in  1701. 

*>  Madame  la  duchesse  de  Saint-Aignan,  whose  maiden  name  was  Antoinette 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  17 

Madame  la  marechale  du  P'essis^-  Madame  la  marechale 
Madame  de  Gourdon^  Madame  de  Montespan,^  Madam  d'  '  Humicres^ 
Mademoiselle  de  Brancas,^  Madame  d'Armagnac,^  Madame  la  comtesse 
de  Soissons,4*  Madame  la  princesse  de  Bade,®  Mademoiselle  de  Grancey.  ^ 
On  the  other  side  were  seated  the  Queen,51  Madame  de  Carignan^ 

Servien,  was  the  first  wife  of  Francois  de  Beauvillier,  duke  of  Saint-Aignan,  whom 
she  married  in  1633.  She  died  in  1680,  and  her  husband  married  again  six  months 
after  her  death.  Madame  de  Sevigne  speaks  of  this  in  her  letters. 

41Colombe  de  Charron  was  the  wife  of  Cesar  de  Choiseul,  count,  and  afterwards, 
duke  de  Plessis-Praslin,  marshal  of  France,  who  died  in  1675,  seventy-eight  years 
old.  This  lady,  known  as  the  marechale  du  Plessis ,  had  great  influence  at  court, 
because  her  husband  had  been  governor  of  Philip  of  France,  duke  of  Orleans. 

^Madame  la  marechale  d'Etampes,  the  eldest  daughter  of  the  marquis  de  Praslin, 
marshal  of  France,  and  whose  maiden  name  was  Catherine  Blance  de  Choiseul, 
had  married,  in  1610,  Jacques  d'Etampes,  called  the  marshal  de  la  Ferte  d'Imbault, 
who  died  in  1668,  seventy-eight  years  old.  She  was  nearly  as  old  as  her  husband, 
was  called  at  court  la.  marechale  d" Estampes,  and  was  first  maid  of  honour  to 
Henrietta  of  England,  duchess  of  Orleans. 

43  Madame  de  Gourdon  belonged  to  the  household  of  Madame,  duchess  of  Or- 
leans, after  whose  death  she  was  falsely  accused  of  having  poisoned  her. 

44  Francoise  Athenais  de  Rochechouart,  daughter  of  Gabriel  de   Rochechouart, 
duke  de  Mortemart,  married,  in   1663,  Henri   Louis   de   Pardaillan  de   Gondrin, 
marquis  de  Montespan,  and  became  soon  after  this  dame  du  palais  to  the  queen. 
She  was  first  the  confidante,  and  afterwards  the  rival,  of  Mademoiselle  de  la  Val- 
liere.     In  1668,  Madame  de  Montespan  became  the  mistress  of  the  King,  and  lived 
long  enough  "  to  point  a  moral  and  adorn  a  tale." 

46  Louise  Antoinette  Therese  de  la  Chatre,  daughter  of  Edme  de  la  Chatre,  count 
of  Nancei,  married,  in  1653,  Louis  de  Crevant,  marquis  d'Humieres,  who  was  lieu- 
tenant-general, and  became,  in  1668,  marshal  of  France.      Madame  de  Sevigne 
mentions  him  in  her  letters. 

48  Mademoiselle  de  Brancas,  according  to  the  researches  of  the  eminent  French 
litterateur,  Paul  Lacroix,  made  kindly  and  specially  for  this  edition,  is  Marie  de 
Brancas,  daughter  of  count  Charles  de  Brancas,  who  married,  in  1667,  Alphonse- 
Henri-Charles  de  Lorraine,  prince  d'Harcourt,  and  became  then  dame  du  palais. 

47  Madame  d'Armagnac,  whose  maiden  name  was  Marguerite-Phillipe  de  Cam- 
bout,  was  the  widow  of  Antoine  de  1'Age,  duke  de  Puy-Laurens,  and  had  married 
again  Henri  de  Lorraine,  count  d'Armagnac,  second  son  of  Charles  de  Lorraine, 
first  of  that  name,  duke  d'Elbeuf.     She  died  in  1674. 

**  Madame  la  comtesse  de  Soissons,  Olympe  Mancini,  the  niece  of  Cardinal 
Mazarin,  was  born  at  Rome  in  1640.  She  inspired  a  great  passion  in  Louis  XIV. 
when  he  was  very  young,  but  she  married,  in  1657,  the  count  de  Soissons.  In  1664, 
she  was  made  grand-mistress  of  the  household  of  the  queen,  and  was  exiled  from  the 
court  the  following  year,  on  account  of  an  intrigue  which  she  had  planned  against 
Mademoiselle  de  la  Valliere,  whom  she  could  never  forgive  for  having  become  mis- 
tress to  the  King. 

49  Madame  la  Princesse  de  Bade  was  Louise  Christine  de  Savoie,  daughter  of 
Thomas  de  Savoie,  prince  de  Carignan,  and  of  Marie  de  Bourbon-Soissons.      She 
married,  in  1655,  Ferdinand  Maximilien,  marquis  of  Baden,  who  left  her  and  her 
son  behind  in  France,  five  years  after  his  marriage.      She  was  called  princesse  de 
Bade,  as  being  a  daughter  of  the  prince  of  Carignan. 

80  Mademoiselle  de  Grancey,  the  eldest  daughter  of  Jacques  Rouxel,  count  de 
Grancey,  marshal!  of  France,  was  afterwards  known  as  countess  de  Grancey. 

81  Maria  Theresa  of  Austria,  born  at  the  Escurial,  in  Spain,  in  1638,  daughter  of 
Philip  IV.,  King  of  Spain,  and  of  Elizabeth  of  France,  married  Louis  XIV.,  in 
1660,  and  suffered  all  her  life  long,  her  husband's  marital  infidelities  without  com- 
plaining. She  was  appointed  regentess  in  1672,  when  the  King  started  for  the  Dutch 
wars,  and  died  in  1683.     Of  her  six  children,  only  one  survived  her. 

M  Madame  de  Carignan's  name  was  Marie  de  Bourbon,  daughter  of  Charles,  count 
de  Soissons.  She  had  married,  in  1624,  Thomas  Francois  de  Savoie,  prince  de 
Carignan,  who  died  in  1656.  She  returned  then  to  the  court  of  France,  and  died  in 
1692.  Her  eldest  son  continued  the  branch  of  the  princes  of  Carignan  ;  her  second 
son,  Eugene  Maurice,  the  branch  of  the  Soissons. 

VOL.  II.  „ 

l8  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

Madame  de  Fleix**  Madame  la  duchesse  de  Foix  f*  Madame  de  Brancas?* 
Madame  de  Froulayf*  Madame  la  duchesse  de  Navailles^  Mademoiselle 
d' Ardennes,™  Mademoiselle  de  Coetlogonp*  Madame  de  Crussol,60  Ma- 
dame de  Montausier,61  Madame,6*  Madame  la  princesse  Benedictef*  Ma- 
dam la  Duchesse^  Madame  de  Rouvroy®*  Mademoiselle  de  la  AfotAe,66 
Madame  Marse6"1  Mademoiselle  de  la  Valliere^  Mademoiselle  d'Ar- 

63  Marie-Claire  de  Baufremont,  first  lady  of  honour  to  the  Queen  Anne  of  Austria, 
married,  in  1637,  Jean-Baptiste-Gaston  de  Foix,  count  de  Fleix,  after  whose  death, 
in  1646,  she  was  always  called  countess  de  Fleix.  She  was  held  in  great  considera- 
tion by  Louis  XIV. 

54  There  was  no  duchess  de  Foix  in  1664;   but  there  was  a  countess  of  Foix,  who 
took  the  title  of  duchesse,— a  title  which  no  one  disputed  with  her.      Her  maiden 
name  was  Madeleine  Charlotte  d'Ailli  d'AIbert,  daughter  of  Henri-Louis,  duke  de 
Chaulnes,  and  she  was  married  to  Gaston-Jean-Baptiste  de  Foix  et  de  Candale, 
whom  she  preceded  to  the  tomb  by  four  months. 

55  It  is  not  easy  to  state  exactly  who  was  the  real  Madame  de  Brancas,  for  at  that 
time  there  were  two  branches  of  the  family  of  Brancas,  the  Forcalquier-Cereste 
and  the  Brancas- Villars,  who  both  figured  at  the  entertainments  given  by  Louis 
XIV.     We  believe,  however,  that  the  lady  mentioned  here  was  Suzanne  Gamier, 
wife  of  Charles,  count  de  Brancas,  uncle  and  father-in-law  of  Louis  de  Brancas 
duke  de  Villars. 

66  Madame  de  Froulay,  widow  of  Charles,  count  de  Froulay,  grand-marechal  des 
logis  of  the   King,  was  a  very  intriguing  busybody,  who  at  last  rendered  herself 
obnoxious  to  Louis  XIV. 

67  Madame  la  duchesse  de  Navailles  was  the  daughter  of  Charles  de  Beauveau, 
count  de   Neuillan,  and  married,  in  1651,  Philippe   de   Montault-Benac,  due   de 
Navailles,  peer  and  marshal  of  France.     She  was  one  of  the  ladies-in-waiting  to 
the  Queen  Anne  of  Austria. 

8S  Mademoiselle  d' Ardennes  belonged  certainly  to  the  family  of  the  Rommilles  in 
Brittany,  who  were  lords  d'Ardennes.  She  was  most  likely  maid  of  honour  to  the 
Queen. 

59  Mademoiselle  Louise  Philippe  de  Coetlogon,  maid  of  honour  to  the  Queen,  was 
afterwards  married  to  the  marquis  de  Cavoye. 

60  Madame  de  Crussol  was  married,  March  i6th,  1664,  to  Emmanuel  de  Crussol, 
a  son  of  the  duke  d'Usez  ;  she  was  the  only  daughter  of  the  duke  de  Montausier, 
and  her  maiden  name  was  Julie  Marie  de  Sainte  Maure. 

61  Madame  de  Montausier,  the  celebrated  Julie  of  the  hotel  Rambouillet,  whose 
real  name  was  Julie  Lucie  d'Angennes,  marchioness  of  Rambouillet  and  Pisani, 
governess  of  the  dauphin,  and  lady  of  honour  to  the  Queen. 

62  For  Madame,  see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  School  for  Wives,  Vol.  I. 

63  Madame  la  princesse  Benedicte  belonged  most  probably  to  some  branch  of  the 
house  of  France.     I  have,  however,  not  been  able  to  discover  who  she  was. 

M  Madame  la  Duchesse  had  been,  for  a  year  (1663).  the  wife  of  Henry- Jules  de 
Bourbon,  duke  d'Enghein,  and  was  called,  according  to  custom,  Madame  la 
Duchesse.  She  was  the  daughter  of  Edward  of  Bavaria,  palatine  of  the  Rhine. 

45  Madame  de  Rouvroy  was  unmarried  in  1664,  when  the  fetes  at  Versailles  were 
given,  and  belonged  to  the  family  of  the  duke  of  St.  Simon.  She  was  maid  of  honour 
to  the  Queen,  and  married  the  count  de  St.  Vallier  in  1675.  Mad.  de  Sevigne 
speaks  of  her  and  her  mother  in  her  letters. 

66  Mademoiselle  de  la  Mothe,  daughter  of  the  marshal  Antoine  de  la  Mothe,  mar- 
quis d'Houdancourt,  was  maid  of  honour  to  the  Queen,  and  afterwards  duchess  de 
la  Vieuville. 

«7  Madame  de  Marse.  I  have  been  unable  to  discover  who  this  lady  was  ;  most 
likely  a  maid  of  honour  or  lady  in  waiting  on  the  Queen.  In  Burgundy  there  was 
a  lordship  de  Marze,  belonging  to  the  noble  family  of  Nanton. 

68  Mademoiselle  Louise  Francoise  de  La  Baume  Le  Blanc  de  la  Valliere,  the  king's 
present  mistress,  had,  only  five   months  before,  been  confined  of  her  first  child, 
and  sought,  afterwards,  by  a  cloistral  penance  of  twenty  years,  to  redeem  the  mis- 
take of  having  loved  that  coarse  and  egotistical  voluptuary,  Louis  XIV.     She  was 
born  at  Tours  in  1644,  and  was  maid  of  honour  to   Madame  in  1664.     In  1667,  the 
property  of  La  Valliere  was  made  a  duche-pairie  in  favour  of  Mademoiselle   de  la 
Valliere.  and  of  her  child,  fille  legitimee  de  France,  who  afterwards  became  prin- 
cess de  Conti.     Charles  II.,  King  of  England,   who  liked  to  imitate  Louis  XIV.  as 

THE   PRINCESS   OF    ELIS.  19 

iigny®  Mademoiselle  du  Bellay™  Mademoiselle  de  Dampierre,"11  Ma- 
demoiselle de  Fiettnes.T*. 

The  splendour  of  this  collation  surpasses  all  that  could  be  written  of  it, 
as  well  for  its  abundance,  as  for  the  delicacy  of  the  things  that  were 
served  up.  It  formed,  likewise,  the  finest  object  for  the  gratification  of 
the  senses ;  for,  in  the  night-time,  near  the  verdure  of  those  palisades,  a 
great  number  of  candlesticks  painted  green  and  silver,  each  of  them 
holding  twenty-four  tapers,  and  two  hundred  flambeaux  of  white  wax, 
held  by  as  many  masked  persons,  gave  a  light  almost  as  great  as,  and 
more  agreeable  than,  daylight.  All  the  knights,  with  their  helmets  covered 
with  plumes  of  different  colours,  and  their  tilting  dresses,  leaned  on  the 
barriers ;  and  the  great  number  of  officers,  richly  clad .  who  waited  at 
table,  enhanced  its  beauty,  and  rendered  that  ring  an  enchanted  place ; 
whence,  after  the  collation,  their  Majesties  and  all  the  court  went  out  by 
a  portico  opposite  the  lists,  and  in  a  great  number  of  very  comfortable 
carriages,  took  their  way  to  the  castle. 

The  Second  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 

On  the  evening  of  the  second  day,  their  Majesties  went  to  another  ring, 
surrounded  by  palisades  like  the  former,  and  in  the  same  line  still  pro- 
jecting towards  the  lake,  where  the  palace  of  Alcina  was  supposed  to  be 
built. 

The  plan  of  this  second  feast  was  that  Rogero  and  the  knights  of  his 
troop,  after  having  performed  wonders  in  the  lists,  which  by  order  of  the 
fair  magician  had  been  held  in  honour  of  the  Queen,  should  continue  in 
the  same  manner,  the  following  diversion ;  and  that  the  floating  island 
not  having  left  the  French  shore,  they  might  afford  her  Majesty  the  plea- 
sure of  a  comedy,  of  which  the  scene  was  laid  in  Elis. 

The  King  then  caused,  with  surprising  expedition,  the  whole  ring  to  be 
covered  with  cloths,  shaped  like  a  dome,  to  protect  against  the  wind  the 
great  number  of  flambeaux  and  wax  lights  which  were  to  light  up  the 
theatre,  of  which  the  decorations  were  very  pleasing.  They  then  repre- 

well  as  he  could,  bestowed  a  similar  reward  upon  Barbara  Villiers,  countess  of 
Castlemain,  for  similar  services  rendered  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  Love  is  the 
Beit  Doctor).  Louis  le  Grand  appears  to  have  acquired  the  name  of  "  great," 
solely  on  account  of  his  indomitable  will,  which  showed  itself  above  all  in  a  disre- 
gard for  the  feelings  of  others,  in  his  voracious  appetite,  in  the  repeated  gratifica- 
tion of  his  brutal  passions,  in  the  number  of  his  mistresses  and  bastards,  in  his 
cravings  for  swallowing  medicine,  and  finally,  in  the  revocation  of  the  Edict  of 
Nantes,  and  hi«  devotee  drivellings,  by  which  he  seemed  to  wish  to  cheat  Heaven, 
as  he  had  cheated  posterity,  out  of  the  nickname  of  "  Grand,"  by  a  sham  assump- 
tion of  dignity.  Injustice  to  Mons.  Paul  Lacroix,  whom  I  know  to  entertain  other 
opinions  in  regard  to  Louis  XIV.,  I  beg  to  state  these  remarks  on  the  Grand  Mon- 
arque  are  mine. 

*  Mademoiselle  d'Artigny  belonged  probably  to  the  family  de  Guast,  who  came 
from  the  Comtat  Venaissin,  in  which  the  name  and  lordship  of  d'Artigny  are  found. 
She  was  most  likely  one  of  the  maids  of  honour  to  the  Queen. 

70  Mademoiselle  du  Bellay ,  or  rather  de  Belloy,  was  probably  one  of  the  maids  of 
honour  to  the  queen,  and  belonged  to  the  ancient  and  illustrious  family  of  de  Belloy, 
of  which  a  great  many  representatives  were  in  the  King's  and  Queen's  retinue. 

71  Mademoiselle  de  Dampierre,  was  a   maid  of  honour  to  the  Queen,  and  after- 
wards married  to  Alphonse  de   Moreuil,  first  gentleman  of  the  chamber  to  the 
Prince  de  Conde. 

72  Mademoiselle  de  Fienne's  real    name  was   Mademoiselle  de  Fruges  ;  but  she 
took  the  first  title  because  she  belonged  to  that  noble  house.     She  married  Henri 
Gamier,  count  des  Chapelles,  governor  of  Montargis,  and  would  never  take  the 
name  of  her  husband.     She  was  maid  of  honour  to  the  Queen. 

2O  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

sented  The  Princess  of  Elis™  as  well  as  six  interludes.  Whilst  the 
shepherds  and  shepherdesses  were  singing  and  dancing  at  the  end  of  the 
sixth  interlude,  there  rose,  from  underneath  the  stage,  a  great  tree,  on 
which  were  sixteen  fauns,  eight  of  whom  played  on  the  flute,  and  the 
others  on  the  violin,  with  the  most  agreeable  harmony.  Thirty  violins 
answered  them  from  the  orchestra,  as  well  as  six  harpsichords  and  the- 
orbos. 

Four  shepherds  and  shepherdesses  came  and  danced  a  very  fine 
entree^  in  which  the  fauns,  who  had  come  down  from  the  tree,  mingled 
from  time  to  time.  This  whole  scene  was  so  grand,  so  busy,  and  so 
agreeable,  that  no  more  beautiful  ballet  was  ever  seen. 

Thus  the  amusements  of  this  day,  which  all  the  court  praised  no  less 
than  those  of  the  preceding,  ended  most  advantageously,  every  one  going 
away  well  satisfied,  and  having  great  expectations  of  the  sequel  of  so 
complete  a  festival. 

The  Third  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 

The  more  they  advanced  towards  the  great  round  water,  representing 
the  lake,  on .  which  formerly  the  palace  of  Alcina  was  built,  the  nearer 
they  came  to  the  end  of  the  amusements  of  the  Enchanted  Island,  as  if 
it  had  not  been  fit  that  so  many  valiant  knights  should  remain  away 
any  longer  in  an  idleness  which  would  have  wronged  their  glory. 

Therefore,  always  following  the  first  plan,  it  was  pretended  that,  Heaven 
having  resolved  to  set  free  these  warriors,  Alcina  had  some  forebodings  of 
it,  which  filled  her  with  terror  and  uneasiness.  She  resolved  to  do  all  she 
could  to  prevent  such  a  misfortune,  and  to  fortify,  by  all  possible  means, 
a  place  which  might  secure  her  entire  repose  and  joy. 

Within  this  round  lake,  of  which  the  size  and  shape  were  extraordinary, 
was  a  rock  situated  in  the  middle  of  an  island,  filled  with  different  ani- 
mals, as  if  they  would  forbid  the  entry  of  it. 

Two  other  islands,  longer,  but  not  so  wide,  were  on  both  sides  of  the 
first,  and  all  three,  as  well  as  the  banks  of  the  lake,  were  so  well  lit  up 
that  there  seemed  to  arise  a  new  day  amidst  the  darkness  of  the  night. 

As  soon  as  their  Majesties  had  arrived  and  taken  their  places,  one  of 
the  two  islands  which  were  by  the  sides  of  the  first  was  wholly  filled  with 
violin-players,  very  well  dressed.  The  opposite  island  was  at  the  same 
time  filled  with  trumpeters  and  kettle-drummers,  whose  dresses  were  no 
less  rich. 

But  what  was  more  surprising  was  to  see  Alcina  (Mademoiselle  Duparc) 
issue  from  behind  a  rock,  born  by  a  sea  monster  of  prodigious  size.  Two 
of  her  nymphs,  called  Celia  (Mademoiselle  Du  Brie)  and  Dirce  (Mademoi- 
selle Moliere),  followed  her ;  and,  placing  themselves  on  each  side  upon 
large  whales,  approached  the  bank  of  the  lake ;  while  Alcina  began  to 
recite  the  following  verses,  which  her  companions  answered,  and  which 
were  in  praise  of  the  Queen,  mother  of  the  King. 

ALCINA,  CKLIA,  DIRCH. 

Alcina.  You  who  both  share  my  happy  lot, 
Come  weep  with  me  in  this  extremity. 

Celia.  Why  such  alarms  so  unexpectedly  ? 
What  draws  such  floods  of  tears  from  those  bright  eyes  T 

T*In  the  official  description  of  The  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island ,  Moliere's 
comedy,  The  Princess  of  Elis,  is  placed  here.  I  have  printed  it  at  the  end  of  this 
Introductory  Notice. 

7*  See  Prefatory  Memoir,  Vol.  I. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  21 

Alcina.  I  can't  even  think  to  speak  on't  without  trembling. 
'Midst  the  dark  horrors  of  a  threatening  dream, 
A  spectre  with  a  hideous  voice  declared 
That  hell  no  longer  aids  me  with  its  force, 
That  a  celestial  power  arrests  its  aid, 
And  that  this  day  for  me  shall  be  the  last. 
All  the  malignant  influence  of  the  stars, 
Which  adverse  reigned  ascendant  at  my  birth, 
And  all  misfortunes  which  my  art  had  promised, 
This  dream  foreshadowed  in  such  lively  colours, 
That  ceaseless  to  my  waking  eyes  it  offers 
Melissa's  power  and  Bradamant's  good  fortune. 
These  evils  I  foresaw,  but  the  dear  pleasures, 
Which  here  seemed  even  to  forestal  our  wishes ; 
Our  lofty  palaces,  our  fields,  our  gardens, 
The  pleasing  converse  of  our  dear  companions, 
Our  songs  and  sports,  the  concerts  of  the  birds, 
The  zephyr's  fragrant  breath,  the  murmuring  waters, 
The  sweet  adventures  of  our  tender  loves, 
Made  me  forget  those  fatal  auguries  ; 
When  that  dire  dream,  which  still  distracts  my  senses, 
With  so  much  fury  brought  'em  to  my  mind. 
Methinks  I  see  my  troops  each  moment  routed, 
My  guards  all  slaughtered,  and  my  prisons  forced, 
A  thousand  lovers  by  my  art  transformed, 
Who  bent  on  my  destruction  full  of  rage, 

?uit,  all  at  once,  their  trunks  and  leafy  dwellings 
o  take  a  righteous   vengeance  upon  me ; 
And  last  methinks  I  see  my  dear  Rogero 
Ready  to  shake  off  my  despised  chains. 

Celia.  Fear  in  your  breast  has  gained  the  upper  hand. 
You  reign  sole  here  ;  for  you  alone  they  sigh  ; 
Nought  interrupts  the  course  of  your  contentment, 
But  plaintive  accents  of  your  mournful  lovers. 
Logistilla's76  troops  driven  from  our  fields 
Still  quake  with  fear,  hidden  in  their  far  mountains  ; 
And  even  Melissa's  name,  unheard  of  here 
Is  only  by  your  aug'ries  known  to  us. 

Dirce.  An  !  let  us  not  deceive  ourselves,  this  phantom 
Held,  this  last  night,  the  same  discourse  with  me. 

Alcina.  Alas  !  who  then  can  doubt  of  our  misfortunes  ? 

Celia.  I  see  a  sure  and  easy  remedy  ; 
A  queen  appears,  whose  most  auspicious  aid 
Will  guard  us  from  the  efforts  of  Melissa. 
The  goodness  of  this  queen  is  highly  praised. 
'Tis  said  her  heart,  whose  constancy  despised 
The  insolence  of  the  rebellious  waves,78 
Is  ever  open  to  her  subjects'  vows. 

Alcina.  'Tis  true,  I  see  her.     In  this  pressing  danger 
Let  us  endeavour  to  engage  her  succour. 
Let's  tell  her  that  the  public  voice  proclaims 
The  charming  beauties  of  her  royal  soul. 
Say  that  her  virtue,  higher  than  her  rank, 
Adorns  the  lustre  of  her  noble  blood  ; 
And  that  our  sex's  glory  she  has  borne 
So  far,  that  times  to  come  will  scarce  believe  it. 
That  her  great  heart,  fond  of  the  public  good, 
Gives  her  a  generous  contempt  of  dangers  ; 
Proof  against  ought  that  may  befall  herself, 
She  apprehends  for  nothing  but  the  state. 
Say  that  her  benefits  profusely  poured, 
Gain  her  the  love  and  rev'rence  of  mankind, 

^Logistilla  is  a  good  fairy,  and  the  sister  of  the  wicked  enchantress  Alcina. 
'•  This  is  an  allusion  to  the   troubles  of  the   Fronde  during  the  minority  of 
Louis  XIV. 

2J  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

That  even  the  shadow  of  an  ill  that  threats  her 

Is  cause  enough  to  put  the  world  in  mourning. 

Say  that  at  the  acme  of  an  absolute  power, 

Her  grandeur  without  pride  or  pomp  appears ; 

That  in  most  dangerous  times  her  constant  prudence 

Has  fearless  the  prerogative  supported  ; 77 

And  in  the  happy  calm  gained  by  her  labours 

Restores  it  to  her  son  without  regret. 

Say,  with  what  great  respect,  with  what  complaisance, 

That  glorious  son  rewards  her  for  her  cares. 

Let's  laud  the  just  laws,  and  the  life-long  labours 

Of  that  same  son,  the  greatest  of  all  monarchs  ; 

And  how  that  mother,  fortunately  fruitful, 

Giving  but  twice,  gave  so  much  to  the  world.78 

In  fine,  the  more  to  move  her  to  compassion, 

Let's  use  the  eloquence  of  sighs  and  tears, 

Then  we  amidst  our  greatest  pangs  may  find 

A  peaceful  refuge  at  her  royal  feet. 

DIRCE.  I  know  her  heart,  magnificently  generous, 
Does  kindly  listen  to  the  voice  of  misery; 
But  yet  she  ne'er  exerted  all  her  power, 
Unless  to  shield  the  innocent  from  wrong ; 
I  know  she  all  things  can,  but  dare  not  think 
She'll  stoop  so  low  as  to  defend  our  cause. 
She  may  have  been  informed  of  our  soft  errors, 
And  nothing  is  more  clashing  with  her  conduct  ; 
Her  well-known  zeal  for  piety  will  render 
Our  interests  odious  to  her  spotless  virtue  ; 
And  far  from  growing  less  at  her  approach 
My  fear  redoubling  chills  my  troubled  spirits. 

ALCINA.  Oh  !   my  own  fear's  sufficient  to  afflict  me. 
Do  not  augment  my  grief,  but  try  to  soothe  it, 
To  furnish  my  dejected  soul,  with  means 
Of  warding  off  the  ills  that  threaten  it. 
Meanwhile  let  all  the  palace  guards  be  doubled, 
And  if  there  be  no  sanctuary  for  us, 
Let  us  in  our  despair  our  comfort  seek, 
Nor  yield  ourselves  at  least  without  resistance. 

When  they  had  finished,  and  Alcina  had  gone  out  to  double  the  guards 
of  the  palace,  a  concert  of  violins  was  heard,  during  which  the  front  of 
the  palace  opened  with  wonderful  art,  and  towers  rose  to  view,  whilst  four 
giants  of  great  size  appeared  with  four  dwarfs,  who,  by  the  contrast  of 
their  little  stature,  made  that  of  the  giants  seem  still  more  excessive.  To 
these  giants  was  committed  the  guard  of  the  palace,  and  by  them  began 
the  first  entree. 

BALLET  OF  THE  PALACE  OF  ALCINA. 

The  first  entree  was  composed  of  four  giants  and  four  dwarfs :  the 
second,  of  eight  Moors,  to  whom  the  guard  of  the  interior  was  entrusted 
by  Alcina.  and  who  carefully  visited  it,  each  having  two  flambeaux. 

The  third -entree.  Meanwhile  some  lover's  quarrel  prompted  six  of  the 
knights  whom  Alcina  kept  near  her  to  attempt  to  get  out  of  the  palace ; 
but  fortune  not  seconding  the  endeavours  they  made,  in  their  despair  they 
were  overcome,  after  a  sharp  combat,  by  as  many  monsters  which  attack 
them. 

Fourth  entree.  Alcina,  alarmed  by  this  accident,  invokes  anew  all  her 
spirits,  and  demands  their  aid ;  two  of  them  present  themselves  before 
her,  leaping  with  wonderful  force  and  agility. 

17  Another  allusion  to  the  troubles  of  the  Fronde. 

"  Louis  XIV.  had  only  one  brother,  the  Duke  of  Orleans. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  23 

Fifth  entree.  Other  demons  came  and  seemed  to  reassure  the  enchan- 
tress that  they  shall  not  forget  anything  that  may  contribute  to  her  repose. 

Sixth  and  last  entree.  But  hardly  had  she  begun  to  reassure  herself, 
when  she  saw  the  wise  Melissa  appear  under  the  form  of  Atlant,  near 
Rogero  and  some  knights  of  his  train.  She  immediately  hastened  to  hin- 
der her  from  executing  her  intention ;  but  she  came  too  late  ;  Mclissahad 
already  placed  on  the  ringer  of  that  brave  knight  the  famous  ring  which 
destroys  enchantments.  Then  thunderclaps,  followed  by  several  flashes 
of  lightning,  portended  the  destruction  of  the  palace,  which  was  immedi- 
ately reduced  to  ashes  by  fireworks,  which  put  an  end  to  this  adventure, 
and  to  the  amusements  of  the  Enchanted  Island.79 

It  looked  as  if  Heave",  Earth,  and  Water  were  all  in  a  flame,  and  as  if 
the  destruction  of  the  splendid  palace  of  Alcina,  as  well  as  the  liberation 
of  the  knights  she  there  kept  in  prison,  could  be  effected  only  amidst 
prodigies  and  miracles.  The  height  and  number  of  rockets, — those  which 
fell  on  the  shore,  and  those  which  came  out  of  the  water  after  having 
fallen  into  it, — formed  a  spectacle  so  grand  and  magnificent,  that  nothing 
could  better  terminate  the  enchantments,  than  these  fireworks;  which, 
ending  at  last  after  an  extraordinary  length  and  noise,  redoubled  the  loud 
reports  which  had  begun  it. 

Then  all  the  court  withdrew,  and  confessed  that  nothing  could  be  more 
perfect  than  these  three  feasts.  It  is  sufficient  acknowledgment  of  this 
perfection,  to  say  that,  as  each  of  the  three  days  had  its  partisans,  as  every 
one  of  them  had  its  particular  beauties,  none  could  agree  which  ought  to 
bear  away  the  bell;  although  they  all  agreed  that  they  might  justly  dis- 
pute it  with  all  those  that  ever  had  been  seen  till  then,  and  perhaps  sur- 
pass them. 

The  Fourth  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island.  8° 

But  although  the  feasts  properly  belonging  to  the  pleasures  of  the  En- 
chanted Island  were  ended,  yet  all  the  diversions  of  Versailles  were  not  so. 
The  magnificence  and  gallantry  of  the  King  had  reserved  some  for  other 
days,  which  were  no  less  agreeable. 

On  Saturday,  the  loth,  his  Majesty  had  a  mind  to  run  at  heads, — an 
exercise  of  which  few  people  are  ignorant,  which  has  come  to  us  from  Ger- 
many, and  is  well  adapted  for  shewing  a  cavalier's  skill,  as  well  in  managing 
his  horse  in  times  of  war,  as  in  rightly  using  a  lance,  a  dart,  and  a  sword. 
If  there  are  any  who  never  saw  them  run  at,  being  not  so  common  as  the 
ring,  and  brought  hither  only  of  late,  they  may  here  find  a  description  of 
it ;  while  those  who  have  had  the  pleasure  of  seeing  them,  may  bear  with 
so  short  a  narrative. 

The  knights  enter  the  lists  one  after  another  with  lance  in  hand,  and  a 

"  The  names  of  all  the  dancers  are  given  in  the  official  description ;  but  we  have 
omitted  them,  as  not  possessing  the  smallest  interest  at  the  present  time.  Amongst 
them  appears,  however,  a  certain  Moliere,  who  was  a  professional  dancer  and 
singer,  and  several  times  displayed  his  talents  before  the  King.  He  was  in  Paris 
at  least  ten  years  before  Moliere,  and  has  composed  a  collection  of  songs,  which  is 
printed.  For  more  details  about  this  namesake  of  our  author,  see  a  note  by  the 
Bibliophile  Jacob  in  the  Catalogue  Soleinne,  Vol.  iii.,  9383.  There  had  also  been 
another  Moliere,  called  Francois,  who  died  in  1623,  and  whose  novt\Polixette,  pub- 
lished only  in  1632,  and  to  be  found  in  the  British  Museum,  caused  a  certain  sensa- 
tion in  those  times.  See  Prefatory  Memoir,  Vol.  I. 

*>  The  official  account  of  the  feast  no  longer  separates  the  days  •  but  as  nearly 
all  old  editions  of  Moliere  do  so,  I  have  followed  them. 

24  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

dart  under  the  right  thigh ;  and  after  one  of  them  has  run  and  borne  off  a 
head  of  thick  paste-board  painted,  and  like  a  Turk's,  he  gives  his  lance  to 
a  page,  and,  turning  the  horse  partly  round,  he  returns  at  full  gallop  to  the 
second  head,  which  is  like  a  Moor's  and  as  black,  bears  it  off  with  the 
dart,  with  which  he  strikes  it  as  he  passes;  then  taking  a  javelin  a  little 
different  in  form  from  a  dart,  in  a  third  turn  he  plants  it  in  a  buckler, 
whereon  is  painted  a  Medusa's  head ;  and  ending  his  demi-volt,  he  draws 
his  sword,  wherewith,  as  he  gallops  past,  he  bears  off  a  head  raised  half  a 
foot  from  the  ground ;  then  giving  way  to  another,  he  who  in  his  running 
bears  off  most,  gains  the  prize. 

All  the  courtiers  having  arranged  themselves  behind  a  balustrade  of 
iron  gilt,  which  went  quite  round  the  agreeable  house  of  Versailles,  and 
which  looks  into  the  trench,  where  the  lists  and  the  barriers  were,  the 
King  repaired  thither,  followed  by  the  same  knights  that  ran  at  the  ring. 
The  dukes  de  Saint-Aignan  and  de  Noailles  continued  in  their  former 
offices,  one  of  marshal  of  the  camp,  and  the  other  of  judge  of  the  course. 
Of  these,  many  were  run  very  handsomely  and  successfully ;  but  the 
King's  skill  gained  him  not  only  the  prize  of  the  ladies'  course,  but  like- 
wise that  which  was  given  by  the  queen.  It  was  a  rose  of  diamonds  of 
great  value,  which  the  King  won,  but  freely  gave  to  be  run  for  by  the 
other  knights,  and  for  which  the  marquis  de  Coaslin  contended  with  the 
marquis  de  Soyecourt,  and  gained. 

The  Fifth  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 

On  Sunday,  at  the  King's  Levee,  almost  all  the  conversation  turned  on 
the  fine  running  of  the  preceding  day,  and  occasioned  a  grand  challenge 
between  the  duke  de  Saint-Aignan,  who  had  not  yet  run,  and  the  marquis 
de  Soyecourt.  The  running  was  deferred  till  the  next  day,  because  the 
marshal  duke  de  Grammont,  who  bet  for  the  Marquis,  was  obliged  to  go 
to  Paris,  whence  he  was  not  to  return  till  that  time. 

On  that  afternoon,  the  king  took  all  the  court  to  his  aviary,  which  ex- 
cited great  admiration,  both  by  its  particular  beauties,  and  by  the  almost 
incredible  number  of  birds  of  all  sorts,  amongst  which  were  many  of  great 
rarity.  It  would  be  useless  to  mention  the  collation  which  followed  this 
diversion,  since,  for  eight  successive  days,  every  repast  might  be  esteemed 
one  of  the  greatest  feasts  that  could  be  made. 81 

In  the  evening,  his  Majesty  caused  to  be  represented,  on  one  of  those 
double  theatres  of  his  Salon  which  his  boundless  ingenuity  had  invented, 
the  very  clever  comedy  of  The  Bores,  (see  Vol.  I.,  p.  297),  written  by  the 
sieur  de  Moliere,  with  entrees  de  ballet. 

The  Sixth  Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 
The  rumour  of  the  challenge  which  was  to    be  run  on  Monday  the 
twelfth,  caused  an  infinite  number  of  bets  of  great  value   to  be  laid; 

81  It  must  not  be  forgotten  that  Louis  XIV.  was  an  omnivorous  eater.  As  an  ex- 
ample of  this,  I  shall  give  a  passage  from  one  of  the  letters  of  the  Princesse  palatine, 
duchess  of  Orleans  :  "  I  have  often  seen  the  king  eat  four  plates-full  of  different 
soups,  a  whole  pheasant,  a  partridge,  a  large  plate-  full  of  salad,  some  mutton 
roasted,  with  garlic,  two  good  slices  of  ham,  a  plate-full  of  pastry,  and  then  fruits 
and  sweets."  When  Louis  XIV.  was  seventy  years  old  (1708),  he  dieted  himself  as 
follows,  according  to  the  Journal  de  la  santt  du  Roy  :  "with  some  soup,  with  either 
some  pigeons  or  a  fowl  boiled  in  it,  and  three  roast  fowls,  of  which  he  ate  four  wings, 
the  breasts,  and  one  leg."  Of  course  the  courtiers  tried  to  imitate  him  ;  hence  the 
repeated  mention  of  repasts. 

THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  2$ 

although  that  of  the  two  knights  was  but  a  hundred  pistoles.  And  as  the 
duke,  by  a  happy  boldness,  gave  one  head  to  that  dexterous  marquis, 
several  betted  on  the  latter,  who,  coming  somewhat  late  to  the  King, 
found  a  challenge  to  hasten  him.  This  challenge  being  only  in  prose,  we 
have  not  inserted  here. 

The  duke  de  Saint-Aignan  had  likewise  shown  to  some  of  his  friends, 
as  an  happy  omen  of  his  victory,  these  three  verses : 

TO  THE    LADIES. 

If,  O  ye  fair,  your  sentiments  agree 

With  mine,  you  shall  confess  this  day,  that  he 

Who  conquers  Soyecourt  conquers  ten  besides — 

still  alluding  to  his  name  of  Guido  the  savage  whom  the  adventure  of  the 
dangerous  island  made  conqueror  over  ten  knights.  82  As  soon  as  the 
King  had  dined,  he  conducted  the  queens,  the  duke  and  duchess  of 
Orleans,  and  all  the  ladies,  to  a  place  where  a  lottery  was  to  be  drawn, 
that  nothing  might  be  wanting  to  the  gallantry  of  these  entertainments. 
The  prizes  were  precious  stones,  furniture,  plate  and  similar  things  ;  and 
though  chance  decided  these  presents,  yet  it  certainly  fell  in  with  his 
Majesty's  desire,  when  it  gave  the  great  prize  to  the  Queen.  Every  one 
left  that  place  very  well  pleased,  to  go  to  see  the  running  which  was 
about  to  begin. 

At  length  Guido  and  Oliviero  appeared  in  the  lists,  at  five  o'clock  in 
the  evening,  very  handsomely  dressed  and  well  mounted. 

The  King  and  all  the  court  honored  them  with  their  presence,  and  his 
Majesty  himself  read  the  conditions  of  the  running,  that  there  might  be 
no  difference  between  them.  The  duke  de  Saint-Aignan  was  fortunate, 
for  he  gained  the  day. 

At  night,  his  Majesty  caused  to  be  performed  the  first  three  acts  of  a 
comedy  called  Tartuffe,  which  the  sieur  de  Moliere  had  made  against 
the  hypocrites.  But  although  the  King  thought  it  very  diverting,  he 
found  so  much  conformity  between  those  whom  a  true  devotion  leads  in 
the  way  to  Heaven,  and  those  whom  a  vain  ostentation  of  good  works 
does  not  hinder  from  committing  evil  ones,  that  his  extreme  delicacy 
in  point  of  religion  could  hardly  bear  that  resemblance  of  vice  and  virtue 
which  might  be  mistaken  for  one  another.  And  although  he  did  not 
doubt  the  good  intentions  of  the  author,  he  forbade  its  being  acted  in 
public,  and  deprived  himself  of  that  pleasure,  so  as  not  to  deceive  others, 
who  were  less  capable  of  a  just  discernment. 

X 

The  Seventh   Day  of  the  Pleasures  of  the  Enchanted  Island. 

On  Tuesday  the  i3th,  the  King  was  pleased  again  to  run  at  heads,  as  a 
common  sport,  wherein  he  who  hit  most  was  to  win.  His  Majesty  gained 
anew  the  prize  of  the  course  of  the  ladies,  the  duke  de  Saint-Aignan  that 
of  the  sport ;  and  having  had  the  honour  to  enter  the  next  time  into 
competition  with  his  Majesty,  the  incomparable  skill  of  the  King  gained 
him  that  prize  also.  It  was  not  without  unavoidable  astonishment,  that 
the  King  was  seen  to  gain  four,  whilst  running  twice  to  the  head.  On 
the  same  night  was  played  the  comedy  of  The  forced  Marriage,  which 
was  likewise  the  work  of  the  same  Moliere.  The  King  then  took  his  way 

*  There  is  in  these  lines  an  allusion  to  the  marquis  de  Soyecourt's  well-known 
prowess  in  other  fields.  See  also  page  10,  note  18. 

20  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS. 

to  Fontainebleau  on  Wednesday  the  I4th.  All  the  court  was  so  satisfied 
with  what  they  had  seen,  that  every  one  was  of  opinion  that  it  ought  to 
be  put  in  writing,  to  give  some  idea  of  it  to  those  who  did  not  see  such 
varied  and  agreeable  entertainments,  wherein  were  at  once  to  be  admired 
the  project  and  the  success,  the  liberality  with  the  politeness,  the  multitude 
with  order,  and  the  satisfaction  of  all ;  wherein  the  indefatigable  pains  of 
Monsieur  Colbert  were  employed  through  all  these  diversions,  notwith- 
standing his  important  affairs ;  wherein  the  duke  de  Saint-Aignan  acted, 
as  well  as  invented  the  designs ;  wherein  the  fine  verses  of  the  president 
de  Perigny  in  praise  of  the  queens  were  so  justly  conceived,  so  agreeably 
turned,  and  repeated  with  so  much  art;  wherein  those  which  M.  de 
Benserade  made  for  the  knights  were  generally  approved;  wherein  the 
great  care  of  M.  Bontemps,  M  and  the  application  of  M.  de  Launay, M  let 
nothing  that  was  necessary  be  wanting ;  wherein  every  one  so  advan- 
tageously testified  his  design  of  pleasing  the  King,  at  a  time  when  his 
Majesty  himself  thought  of  nothing  but  pleasing;  and  wherein,  in  a  word, 
all  that  was  seen  will  for  ever  continue  in  the  memoiy  of  the  spectators, 
even  if  care  had  not  been  taken  to  preserve  in  writing  the  remembrance 
of  all  these  wonders. 

^Mons.  Bontemps  was  the  first  valet  de  chambre  of  the  King,  and  afterwards 
became  governor  of  the  castles  of  Versailles  and  Marly.  He  was  the  confidant  and 
favourite  of  Louis  XIV.,  to  whom  he  rendered  many  secret  services.  St.  Simon 
prajses  him  in  his  Memoires. 

M  M .  de  Launay  was  the  intendant  des  menus  plaisirs  et  affaires  de  la  chambre. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

PERSONAGES    IN    THE   COMEDY. 

IPHITAS,  father  to  the  Princess  of  Elis. 

EURYALUS,  Prince  of  Ithaca. 

ARISTOMENES,  Prince  of  Messena. 

THEOCLES,  Prince  of  Pylos. 

ARBATES,  governor  to  the  Prince  of  Ithaca. 

LYCAS,  attendant  on  Iphitas. 

MORON,  the  Princess 's  fool. 

THE  PRINCESS  OF  Bus.85 

AGLANTA,  cousin  to  the  Princess. 

CYNTHIA,  cousin  to  the  Princess. 

PHILLIS,  attendant  on  the  Princess. 

PERSONAGES    IN    THE    INTERLUDES. 

First  Interlude. 

AURORA. 

LYCISCAS,  a  huntsman.™ 
THREE  HUNTSMEN,  singing. 
WHIPPERS-IN,  dancing. 

Second  Interlude. 

MORON. 
HUNTSMEN,  dancing. 

Third  Interlude. 

PHILLIS. 

MORON. 

A  SATYR,  singing. 

SATYRS,  dancing. 

Fourth  Interlude. 

PHILLIS. 

TIRCIS,  a  singing  shepherd. 

MORON. 

Fifth  Interlude. 

THE  PRINCESS. 

PHILLIS. 

CLIMENE. 

Sixth  Interlude. 

SHEPHERDS  and  SHEPHERD- 
ESSES, singing. 

SHEPHERDS  and  SHEPHERD- 
ESSES, dancing. 

» It  has  been  said  in  the  pamphlet  la  Fameuse  comedienne  (See  Intro- 
ductory Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.,)  that  Madame 
Moliere,  whilst  acting  the  part  of  the  Princess  of  Elis,  attracted  the  atten- 
tion and  afterwards  responded  to  the  flame,  of  the  Count  de  Lauzun.  and 
also,  perhaps,  to  those  of  the  Abb<§  de  Richelieu  and  the  Count  de  Guiche. 
Several  of  Moliere's  biographers  have  repeated  this  accusation.  M.  Bazin, 
in  his  Notes  historiques  sur  la  Vie  de  Moliere,  has  proved  that  one  of  the 
accused  noblemen  was  at  that  time  in  Hungary,  and  the  other  in  Poland. 

88  This  short  part  was  created  by  Moliere  himself.  Moliere  acted  also 
the  part  of  Moron. 

THE  PRINCESS   OF  ELIS. 

(LA   PRhVCESSE  D' ELIDE. 

FIRST  INTERLUDE. 

SCENE  I. — AURORA. 

When  Love  presents  a  charming  choice 

Respond  to  his  flame,  oh  youthful  fair  ! 

Do  not  affect  a  pride  which  no  one  can  subdue, 

Though  you've  been  told  such  pride  becomes  you  well. 
When  one  is  of  a  lovely  age 
Naught  is  so  handsome  as  to  love. 

Breathe  freely  sighs  for  him  who  faithful  loves 

And  challenge  those  who  wish  to  blame  your  ways. 

A  tender  heart  is  lovely ;  but  a  cruel  maid 

Will  never  be  a  title  to  esteem. 

When  one  is  fair  and  beautiful 
Naught  is  so  handsome  as  to  love. 

SCENE  II. — WHIPPERS-IN  and  MUSICIANS. 

Whilst  Aurora  was  singing  these  verses,  four  whippers-in 
•were  asleep  on  the  grass,  one  of  whom,  called  Lyciscas,  rep- 
resented by  M.  de  Moliere,  an  excellent  actor,  who  had 
invented  the  verses  and  the  whole  comedy,  was  lying  between 
two,  whilst  the  third  was  at  his  feet.  The  other  huntsmen 
were  Messrs.  Estival,  Don,  and  Blondel,  musicians  of  the 
king,  who  had  admirable  voices,  and  who  awoke,  at  Aurora's 
call,  and,  as  soon  as  she  had  finished,  sang  in  recitativo. 

29 

30  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [FIRST  INTERLUDE. 

Hullo !  hullo !  get  up,  get  up,  get  up !  Everything  must 
be  prepared  for  the  hunting  match.  Hullo  !  get  up;  get 
up  quickly. 

1  WHIP.  Day  to  the  darkest  spots  imparts  its  light. 

2  WHIP.  The  air  distils  its  pearls  on  flowers. 

3  WHIP.  The  nightingales  begin  their  warbling  notes, 
and  with  their  little  concerts  thrill  the  air. 

ALL  THREE.  Come,  come,  get  up !  quick,  get  up!  (To 
Lyciscas  asleep).  What  is  the  matter,  Lyciscas?  What! 
you  are  snoring  still  !  you,  who  promised  to  outstrip 
Aurora  ?  Come,  get  up ;  get  up,  quick !  Everything 
must  be  prepared  for  the  hunting  match.  Get  up  quickly, 
get  up  !  Make  haste,  get  up  ! 

LYCISCAS.  (  Waking).  Zounds,  you  are  terrible  brawlers ! 
You  open  your  throats  early  in  the  morning. 

MUSICIANS.  Do  you  not  see  the  light  beams  everywhere ! 
Come,  get  up,  Lyciscas,  get  up. 

LYC.  Oh  !  let  me  sleep  yet  a  little  while,  I  entreat  you. 

Mus.   No,  no,  get  up,  Lyciscas,  get  up. 

LYC.  I  only  ask  about  a  quarter  of  an  hour. 

Mus.   Not  at  all,  not  at  all ;  get  up,  quick,  get  up. 

LYC.  Alas  !  I  pray  you. 

Mus.  Get  up. 

LYC.  A  moment. 

Mus.   Get  up. 

LYC.   I  beseech  you. 

Mus.   Get  up. 

LYC.  Oh! 

Mus.   Get  up. 

LYC.  I  ... 

JMus.  Get  up. 

LYC.  I  shall  have  done  immediately. 

Mus.  No,  no,  get  up,  Lyciscas,  get  up.  Everything 
has  to  be  prepared  for  the  hunting  match.  Quickly,  get 
up  ;  make  haste,  get  up. 

LYC.  Well,  be  quiet ;  I  shall  rise.  You  are  strange 
people  to  torment  me  thus.  You  will  be  the  cause  of  my 
being  unwell  all  day ;  for,  do  you  see,  sleep  is  necessary  to 
man,  and  when  one  does  not  sleep  one's  fill,  it  happens .  .  . 
that  .  .  .  one  is  not  .  .  .  (He  falls  asleep  again. 

i  Mus.  Lyciscas ! 

SCBNE  I.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  31 

2  Mus.  Lyscicas ! 

3  Mus.  Lyciscas! 
ALL.   Lyciscas ! 

LYC.  To  the  deuce  with  these  brawlers !  I  wish  your 
throats  were  stopped  with  scalding  porridge.87 

A.LL.  Get  up,  get  up ;  make  haste ;  get  up,  quick,  get 
up. 

LYC.    Oh  !  how  wearisome  not  to  sleep  one's  fill ! 

1  Mus.  Soho,  ho  ! 

2  Mus.  Soho,  ho ! 

3  Mus.  Soho,  ho  ! 
ALL.  Soho,  ho ! 

LYC.  Ho  !  ho  !  ho  !  ho  !  Plague  take  the  fellows  with 
their  howlings.  May  the  devil  take  me  if  I  do  not  give 
you  a  good  drubbing  for  this.  But  what  deuced  enthusi- 
asm possesses  them  to  come  and  caterwaul  in  my  ears  at 
this  rate  ? 

ALL.  Get  up ! 

LYC.   Again  ? 

ALL.   Get  up ! 

LYC.   The  devil  take  you ! 

ALL.  Get  up. 

LYC.  {Getting  up).  What!  again!  Was  there  ever 
such  a  passion  for  singing  ?  Zounds !  I  shall  go  mad ! 
Since  I  am  disturbed,  I  will  not  let  the  others  sleep.  I 
shall  torment  them  as  they  have  done  me.  Come,  soho  ! 
gentlemen,  get  up,  get  up,  quick;  you  have  been  sleeping 
too  long.  I  shall  make  a  devil  of  a  noise  everywhere. 
{He  shouts  with  all  his  might).  Get  up,  get  up,  get  up! 
Come  quick !  Soho,  ho  !  get  up,  get  up !  Everything 
must  be  prepared  for  the  hunt ;  get  up,  get  up !  Lyciscas, 
get  up  !  Soho  !  ho  !  ho  !  ho  ! 

Lyciscas  having  at  length  risen  with  the  greatest  difficulty, 
and  having  shouted  as  loud  as  he  could,  several  horns  and 
hunting-horns  are  blown,  which,  together  with  the  violins, 
begin  an  entree-tune,  to  which  six  whippers-in  dance  with 
great  precision  and  order,  whilst  winding  their  horns  at  cer- 
tain periods. 

87  In  Sir  Walter  Scott's  Rob  Roy,  chapter  xxxii.,  Bailie  Nicol  Jarvie 
says :  "  And  I  wish  Mr.  Jarvie's  boots  had  been  fu'  o'  boiling  water  when 
he  drew  them  on  for  sic  a  purpose." 

32  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  i. 

ACT  I. — ARGUMENT. 

This  hunt  was  prepared  by  the  Prince  of  Elis,  who,  being  of  a  gallant  and 
magnificent  disposition,  and  desirous  that  the  Princess,  his  daughter, 
would  think  of  marriage,  to  which  she  was  very  much  averse,  had  in 
vited  to  his  court  the  Princes  of  Ithaca,  Messena,  and  Pylos,  thinking 
that  whilst  hunting,  which  she  loved  much,  or  during  other  sports, 
chariot-races,  and  the  like  displays,  one  of  these  princes  might  perhaps 
please  her,  and  so  become  her  husband. 

SCENE  I. 

Euryalus,  Prince  of  Ithaca,  in  love  with  the  Princess  of 
Elis ;  Arbates,  his  governor,  who,  indulgent  to  the  prince' s 
passion,  praises  him  in  elegant  phraseology,  instead  of  blam- 
ing him. 

EURYALUS,  ARBATES. 

ARE.  This  dreamy  silence,  to  which  you  have  accus- 
tomed yourself  so  dolefully,  makes  you  continually  seek 
solitude,  those  deep  sighs  which  come  from  your  heart, 
and  that  gaze  so  full  of  languor,  certainly  say  much  to  one 
of  my  age.  I  believe,  my  lord,  I  understand  the  language ; 
but,  for  fear  of  running  too  great  a  risk,  I  dare  not  be  so 
bold  as  to  explain  it  without  your  leave. 

EUR.  Explain,  explain  with  all  freedom,  Arbates,  these 
sighs,  these  looks,  and  this  mournful  silence.  I  give  you 
leave  to  say  that  love  has  subjected  me  to  its  laws,  and  de- 
fies me  in  its  turn.  I  farther  admit  that  you  make  me 
ashamed  of  the  weakness  of  a  heart  which  suffers  itself  to 
be  overcome. 

ARE.  What,  my  lord,  shall  I  blame  you  for  the  tender 
emotions  with  which  I  now  see  you  inspired?  The  sour- 
ness of  old  age  cannot  embitter  me  against  the  gentle 
transports  of  an  amorous  flame.  Although  my  life  is  near 
its  close,  I  maintain  that  love  suits  well  such  men  as  you; 
that  the  tribute  paid  to  the  charms  of  a  beautiful  face  is  a 
clear  proof  of  a  beautiful  mind ;  and  that  it  is  not  easy 
for  a  young  prince  to  be  great  and  generous  without  being- 
in  love.  It  is  a  quality  I  admire  in  a  monarch.  Tender- 
ness of  heart  is  a  sure  sign  that  everything  may  be  ex- 
pected from  a  prince  of  your  age  as  soon  as  we  perceive 
that  his  soul  is  capable  of  love.  Yes,  that  passion,  the 
most  beautiful  of  all  others,  draws  a  hundred  virtues  in  its 

SCENKI.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  33 

train.  It  urges  the  heart  to  noble  deeds,  and  all  great 
heroes  have  felt  its  ardour.  Your  infancy,  my  lord,  was 
spent  under  my  eyes.  I  have  seen  realized  the  expecta- 
tions formed  from  your  virtues.  I  observed  in  you  quali- 
ties which  told  of  the  blood  from  which  you  sprung  ;  I 
discovered  in  you  a  fund  of  wit  and  brightness;  I  found 
you  handsome,  great,  and  noble  ;  your  courage  and  your 
abilities  shone  forth  every  day ;  but  I  was  concerned  be- 
cause I  did  not  perceive  any  traces  of  love.  Now  that  the 
pangs  of  an  incurable  wound  show  that  your  soul  is  insen- 
sible to  its  strokes,  I  triumph,  and  my  heart,  full  of  joy, 
looks  upon  you  as  a  finished  prince.88 

EUR.  If,  for  a  time,  I  defied  the  power  of  love,  alas ! 
my  dear  Arbates,  it  takes  ample  vengeance  for  it  now.  If 
you  knew  the  ills  into  which  my  heart  is  plunged,  you 
yourself  would  wish  that  it  had  never  loved.  For  this  is 
the  fate  that  awaits  me ;  I  love — I  ardently  love  the 
Princess  of  Elis ;  you  know  that  that  pride  which  lurks 
beneath  her  charming  aspect  arms  her  youthful  sentiments 
against  love ;  and  that  she  avoids,  during  this  grand  feast, 
the  crowd  of  lovers  who  strive  to  obtain  her  hand.  Alas  ! 
how  little  truth  is  there  in  the  saying  that  the  being  we 
love  -charms  us  at  first  sight,  and  that  the  first  glance 
kindles  in  us  those  flames  to  which  Heaven  at  our  birth 
destined  our  souls.  On  my  return  from  Argos,  I  passed 
this  way,  and  then  saw  the  Princess.  I  beheld  all  the 
charms  with  which  she  is  endowed,  but  looked  on  them  as 
one  would  look  on  a  fine  statue.  Her  brilliant  youth, 
which  I  observed  carefully,  did  not  inspire  my  soul  with 
one  secret  desire ;  I  quietly  returned  to  the  shores  of 
Ithaca,  without  so  much  as  recalling  her  to  my  mind  for 
two  years.  In  the  meantime,  the  rumour  spread  to  my 
court  that  she  was  known  to  entertain  a  contempt  for 
love ;  it  was  published  everywhere  that  her  proud  spirit 
had  an  unconquerable  aversion  to  marriage,  and  that,  with 
a  bow  in  her  hand,  and  a  quiver  on  her  shoulder,  she 

88  These  verses,  spoken  in  a  festival  given  by  Louis  XIV.  to  please 
Mademoiselle  de  la  Valliere,  contain  a  very  transparent  allusion  to  the 
monarch's  passion.  Of  course,  many  things  may  be  brought  forward  to 
excuse  Moliere ;  yet,  after  all,  although  we  admire  the  dramatist,  we  have 
not  the  same  feelings  for  the  courtier. 

VOL.   II.  c 

34  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACTI. 

roamed  through  the  woods  like  another  Diana,  loved 
nothing  but  hunting,  and  caused  all  the  young  heroes  of 
Greece  to  sigh  in  vain.  Admire  our  tempers  and  fate  ! 
What  her  presence  and  beauty  failed  to  do,  the  fame  of 
her  boldness  produced  in  my  heart.  An  unknown  trans- 
port was  born  within  me,  which  I  could  not  master.  Her 
disdain  so  bruited  about  had  a  secret  charm,  which  made 
me  carefully  call  to  remembrance  all  her  features.  Look- 
ing upon  her  with  new  eyes,  I  formed  an  image  of  her 
so  noble,  so  beautiful — picturing  to  myself  so  much  glory, 
and  such  pleasures,  if  I  could  but  triumph  over  her  cold- 
ness, that  my  heart,  dazzled  by  such  a  victory,  saw  its 
glorious  liberty  fade  away.  It  in  vain  resisted  such  a 
bait ;  the  sweetness  of  it  took  such  complete  possession  of 
my  senses  that,  impelled  by  an  invisible  power,  I  sailed  at 
once  from  Ithaca  hither,  concealing  my  ardent  passion 
under  the  pretence  of  wishing  to  be  present  at  these  re- 
nowned sports,  to  which  the  illustrious  Iphitas,  father  of 
the  princess,  has  invited  most  of  the  princes  of  Greece. 

ARE.  But  of  what  use,  my  lord,  are  the  precautions  you 
take ;  and  why  are  you  so  anxious  to  keep  it  a  secret  ? 
You  love  this  illustrious  princess,  you  say,  and  come  to 
signalize  yourself  before  her;  yet  neither  looks,  words, 
nor  sighs  have  informed  her  of  your  ardent  passion?  I 
cannot,  for  my  part,  understand  this  policy,  which  will 
not  allow  you  to  open  your  heart ;  nor  do  I  see  what  fruit 
can  be  expected  of  a  love  which  avoids  all  modes  of  dis- 
covering itself. 

EUR.  And  what  should  I  gain,  Arbates,  by  avowing  my 
pangs,  but  draw  down  on  myself  the  disdain  of  her  haughty 
soul,  and  throw  myself  into  the  rank  of  those  submissive 
princes,  whose  title  of  lovers  causes  her  to  look  on  them 
as  enemies  ?  You  see  the  kings  of  Messena  and  Pylos  in 
vain  lay  their  hearts  at  her  feet ;  the  lofty  splendour  of 
their  virtues,  accompanied  by  the  most  assiduous  respect, 
is  useless.  This  repulse  of  their  homage  makes  me  con- 
ceal, in  sad  silence,  the  warmth  of  my  love.  I  account 
myself  condemned  in  seeing  her  behaviour  towards  these 
famous  rivals,  and  read  my  own  sentence  in  the  contempt 
she  shows  to  them. 

ARE.  And  it  is  in  this  contempt  and  haughty  humour 

acKNE  L]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  35 

that  your  love  should  see  its  brightest  hope,  since  fortune 
presents  to  you  a  heart  to  conquer,  which  is  defended  only 
by  mere  coldness,  and  does  not  oppose  to  your  passion  the 
deep-rooted  tenderness  of  some  other  engagement.  A 
heart  already  occupied  resists  powerfully ;  but  when  the 
soul  is  free,  it  is  easily  overcome,  and  only  a  little  patience 
is  needed  to  triumph  over  all  the  pride  of  indifference. 
Conceal  no  longer  from  her  the  influence  which  her  eyes 
have  upon  you ;  openly  display  your  passion,  and,  far 
from  trembling  at  the  example  of  others,  fortify  yourself 
with  the  hope  that  you  will  be  successful  because  they 
have  been  repulsed.  Perhaps  you  may  possess  the  secret 
of  touching  her  obdurate  heart,  which  these  princes  have 
not.  And  if,  through  her  imperious  and  capricious  pride, 
you  should  not  meet  with  a  more  propitious  destiny,  it  is 
at  least  a  happiness  in  misfortunes  of  this  kind  to  see  one's 
rivals  rejected  with  oneself. 

EUR.  I  am  glad  to  find  that  you  approve  a  declaration 
of  my  passion ;  by  combating  my  reasons,  you  delight  my 
soul.  I  wished  to  see,  by  what  I  said,  whether  you  could 
approve  what  I  had  done.  In  short,  since  I  must  take 
you  into  my  confidence,  there  is  one  who  is  to  explain  my 
silence  to  the  Princess,  and  perhaps,  at  the  very  moment  I 
am  talking  to  you  here,  the  secret  of  my  heart  is  revealed. 
This  chase,  to  which  she  went,  you  know,  this  morning 
early,  in  order  to  avoid  the  crowd  of  her  adorers,  is  the 
opportunity  which  Moron  has  chosen  to  declare  my  pas- 
sion. 

ARE.  Moron,  my  lord  ? 

EUR.  My  choice  rather  astonishes  you ;  you  misjudge 
him  because  he  is  a  court  fool ;  but  you  must  know  that 
he  is  less  of  a  fool  than  he  wishes  to  appear,  and  that,  not- 
withstanding his  present  employment,  he  has  more  sense 
than  those  who  laugh  at  him.89  The  Princess  amuses  her- 
self with  his  buffooneries  :  he  his  obtained  her  favour  by 

*  The  office  of  court  fool  was,  at  the  time  Moliere  wrote,  not  wholly 
abolished ;  Louis  XIV.  still  kept  one,  called  1'Angeli,  who  formerly  be- 
longed to  the  Prince  de  Conde".  Very  little  is  known  of  him,  except  that 
he  was  biting  in  his  remarks,  and  at  last  obliged  to  leave  the  court.  I  do 
not  think  any  court  fool  was  represented  on  the  French  stage  from  the 
time  of  The  Princess  of  Ells  until  Victor  Hugo's  Triboulet  in  Le  Roi 

36  THE   PRINCESS  OF   ELIS.  [ACT  I. 

a  hundred  jests,  and  can  thus  say,  and  persuade  her  to, 
what  others  dare  not  hazard.  In  short,  I  think  him  fit  for 
my  purpose ;  he  says  he  has  a  great  affection  for  me,  and, 
having  been  born  in  my  country,  will  assist  my  love 
against  all  rivals.  A  little  money  given  him  to  sustain  his 
zeal  .  .  . 

SCENE  II. 

Moron,  represented  by  M.  de  Moliere,  arrives,  and,  being 
haunted  by  the  remembrance  of  a  furious  wild  boar,  before 
which  he  had  taken  flight  in  the  chase,  asks  for  assistance. 
Meeting  with  Euryalus  and  Arbates,  he  places  himself  be- 
tween them  for  greater  safety,  after  having  given  proofs  of 
his  terror  and  cracked  a  hundred  jokes  about  his  want  of 
courage. 

EURYALUS,  ARBATES,  MORON. 

MOR.  (Behind  the  scenes}.  Help,  help  !  save  me  from 
this  cruel  animal. 

EUR.  I  think  I  hear  his  voice. 

MOR.  {Behind  the  scenes).  Come  to  me !  for  mercy's 
sake,  come  to  me  ! 

EUR.  It  is  he.    Where  is  he  running  in  such  a  fright  ? 

MOR.  {Appearing  without  seeing  anyone).  How  shall 
I  avoid  this  frightful  boar  ?  Ye  gods !  preserve  me  from 
his  horrid  tusks,  and  I  promise  you,  if  he  does  not  catch 
me,  four  pounds  of  incense  and  two  of  the  fattest  calves. 
(Meeting  Euryalus,  whom  in  his  fright  he  takes  for  the  boar 
from  which  he  is  flying).  Oh  !  I  am  dead. 

EUR.  What  ails  you? 

MOR.  I  took  you  for  the  animal,  whose  throat  I  beheld 
ready  to  swallow  me ;  my  lord,  I  could  not  recover  from 
my  fright. 

EUR.  What  is  it  ? 

MOR.  Oh  !  what  a  strange  taste  the  Princess  has  ;  and, 
in  following  the  chase  and  her  extravagances,  what  foolish- 
ness we  must  put  up  with.  What  pleasure  can  these 
hunters  find  in  being  exposed  to  many  thousand  terrors  ? 
Now,  if  a  man  hunted  only  hares,  rabbits,  or  young  does, 
it  would  be  sensible ;  they  are  animals  of  a  very  gentle 
nature,  and  always  run  away  from  us.  But  to  go  and 

SOKNBII.J  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  37 

attack  these  unmannerly  beasts,  who  have  not  the  least 
respect  for  a  human  face,  and  who  hunt  those  who  come 
to  hunt  them;  that  is  a  foolish  pastime  that  I  cannot 
endure. 

EUR.  Tell  us  what  is  the  matter. 

MOR.  (Turning  round).  What  a  whim  of  the  Princess 
to  take  exercise  under  such  difficulties  !  I  could  have 
sworn  she  would  play  this  trick.  As  the  chariot-race 
came  on  to-day,  she  must  needs  go  hunt  to  show  her  open 
contempt  for  these  sports,  and  to  make  it  appear  .... 
But,  mum,  let  me  finish  my  tale,  and  resume  the  thread 
of  my  discourse.  What  was  I  saying. 

EUR.  You  were  talking  of  an  exercise  under  diffi- 
culties. 

MOR.  Ah !  yes.  Well,  then,  fainting  under  this  hor- 
rible labour  (for  I  was  up  at  break  of  day  fitted  out  like  a 
famous  hunter),  I  slunk  away  from  them  all  like  a  hero, 
and,  finding  a  good  place  to  take  a  nap  in,  I  laid  me 
down,  and,  composing  myself,  already  began  to  snore 
comfortably,  when  suddenly  a  frightful  noise  made  me 
open  my  eyes,  and  I  beheld,  coming  out  from  behind 
an  old  thicket  of  the  leafy  wood,  a  boar  of  enormous  size 
for.  .  . 

EUR.  What  now  ? 

MOR.  Nothing.  Do  not  be  afraid,  but  let  me  get  be- 
tween you,  for  a  reason  ;  I  may  then  be  better  able  to  tell 
you  the  whole  thing.  I  was  saying  I  beheld  the  boar, 
which,  being  pursued  by  our  people,  set  up  all  his  bristles' 
with  a  hideous  air ;  his  glaring  eyes  darted  only  threats, 
his  mouth  with  an  ugly  grin  shewed  through  the  foam 
certain  tusks,  for  those  who  ventured  near  him  ...  I 
leave  you  to  imagine  it.  At  this  terrible  sight,  I  seized 
my  weapons;  but  the  treacherous  brute  without  the 
slightest  fear  rushed  straight  at  me,  without  my  speaking 
a  word  to  him. 

ARE.  And  you  stood  your  ground  ? 

MOR.  I  was  not  such  a  fool !  I  threw  down  my  arms 
and  ran  like  a  dozen. 

ARE.  What !  Having  weapons,  and  yet  fly  from  a  boar  I 
That  was  not  a  valiant  action,  Moron. 

MOR.  I  confess  it  was  not  valiant,  but  sensible. 

38  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  [ACT  i. 

ARE.  But  if  one  does  not  immortalize  oneself  by  some 
exploit  .  .  . 

MOR.  I  am  your  servant.  I  had  rather  people  should 
say,  it  was  here  that  Moron,  by  flying  without  much  pres- 
sure, saved  himself  from  the  fury  of  a  wild  boar,  than  that 
they  should  say,  here  is  the  famous  spot  where  the  brave 
Moron,  with  heroic  boldness  facing  the  furious  rush  of  a 
wild  boar,  lost  his  life  by  a  wound  from  his  tusk. 

EUR.  Very  good. 

MOR.  Yes.  Without  offence  to  glory,  I  would  rather 
live  two  days  in  the  world,  than  a  thousand  years  in  history. 

EUR.  Your  death  would  indeed  grieve  your  friends; 
but  if  your  mind  has  recovered  from  its  fright,  may  I  in- 
quire if  the  passion  which  consumes  me  ... 

MOR.  My  lord,  I  will  not  dissemble  with  you.  I  have 
done  nothing  yet,  not  having  had  the  opportunity  to 
speak  with  the  Princess  as  I  desired.  The  office  of  court 
buffoon  has  its  prerogatives,  but  we  must  often  turn  aside 
from  our  free  attempts.  To  talk  of  your  flame  is  a  deli- 
cate matter ;  it  is  a  state  affair  with  the  Princess.  You 
know  in  what  title  she  glories,  and  that  her  brain  is  full 
of  a  philosophy  which  wars  against  marriage,  and  treats 
Cupid  as  a  minor  god.  I  must  manage  the  thing  skilfully 
for  fear  of  rousing  her  tiger  humour.  One  must  be  care- 
ful how  to  speak  to  great  folks,  for  they  are  very  ticklish 
sometimes.  Let  me  manage  it  by  degrees.  I  am  full  of 
zeal  for  you.  I  was  born  your  subject.  Some  other  obli- 
gations may  also  contribute  to  the  happiness  I  design  for 
you.  My  mother  was  esteemed  handsome  in  her  day,  and 
was  not  naturally  cruel ;  that  generous  Prince,  your  late 
father,  was  dangerously  gallant,  and  I  have  heard  that 
Elp6nor,  supposed  to  be  my  father  because  he  was  my 
mother's  husband,  related  to  the  shepherds  that  he  was 
occasionally  honoured  by  a  visit  from  the  Prince,  and 
that,  during  that  time,  he  had  the  advantage  of  being 
bowed  to  by  all  the  village.  That  is  sufficient !  Be  that 
as  it  may,  I  intend  by  my  labours  ...  But  here  is  the 
Princess  and  two  of  your  rivals. 

SCENE  III. 
T*he  Princess  of  E Its  appears  afterwards  with  the  Princes 

SCENBIU.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  39 

of  Messena  and  Pylos,  who  show  that  their  characters  are 
very  different  from  that  of  the  Prince  of  Ithaca,  which  pro- 
cured for  him,  in  the  heart  of  the  Princess,  all  the  advan- 
tages he  could  desire.  This  amiable  Princess  did  not  show, 
however,  that  the  merit  of  this  Prince  had  made  any  impres- 
sion on  her  mind,  or  that  she  had  so  much  as  observed  him. 
She  always  professed  that,  like  Diana,  she  only  loved  the 
chase  and  the  forests ;  and  when  the  Prince  of  Messena 
wished  to  mention  the  service  he  had  rendered  her  by  rescu- 
ing her  from  a  huge  boar  which  had  attacked  her,  she  told 
him  that,  without  diminishing  in  aught  her  gratitude ,  she  con- 
sidered his  assistance  so  much  the  less  considerable,  as  she, 
unaided,  had  killed  many  as  furious,  and  might  perhaps  have 
overcome  that  one. 

THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  ARISTOMENES,  THEO- 
CLES,  EURYALUS,  PHILLIS,  ARBATES,  MORON. 

ARIS.  Do  you  upbraid  us,  madam,  for  saving  your 
charms  from  this  peril?  For  my  part,  I  should  have 
thought  that  to  overcome  the  boar  which  was  about  to 
attack  you  so  furiously  was  an  adventure  (not  knowing  of 
the  hunt)  for  which  we  ought  to  have  thanked  our  happy 
fate  ;  but,  by  your  coldness,  I  see  plainly  that  I  ought  to 
be  of  another  opinion,  and  quarrel  with  that  fatal  power 
of  chance  which  made  me  take  part  in  an  affair  that  has 
given  you  offence. 

THEO.  For  my  part,  madam,  I  esteem  myself  very 
happy  in  having  performed  this  action  for  which  my 
whole  heart  was  anxious,  and,  notwithstanding  your  dis- 
pleasure, cannot  consent  to  blame  fortune  for  such  an  ad- 
venture. I  know  that,  when  one  is  disliked  everything 
one  does  displeases ;  but  even  were  your  anger  greater 
than  it  is,  it  is  an  extreme  pleasure,  when  one's  love  is 
extreme,  to  be  able  to  rescue  from  peril  the  object  of  one's 
love. 

PRIN.  And  do  you  think,  my  lord,  since  I  must  speak, 
that  there  would  have  been  anything  in  this  danger  to 
terrify  me  so  greatly  ?  That  the  bow  and  arrow,  which  I 
love  so  much,  would  have  been  a  useless  weapon  in  my 
hands?  And  that  I,  accustomed  to  traverse  our  moun- 
tains, our  plains,  our  woods,  might  not  dare  hope  to  suf- 

40  THE   PRINCESS   OF    ELIS.  [ACT  I. 

fice  for  my  own  defence  ?  Surely  I  have  made  but  little 
use  of  my  time  and  the  assiduous  labours  of  which  I  boast, 
if,  in  such  an  emergency,  I  could  not  have  triumphed 
over  a  wretched  animal.  At  least  if,  in  your  opinion,  my 
sex  in  general  is  unable  for  such  actions,  allow  me  the 
glory  of  a  higher  sphere,  and  do  me  the  favour,  both  of 
you,  to  believe  that,  whatever  the  boar  of  to-day  may 
have  been,  I  have  conquered  fiercer  ones  without  your 
help,  my  lords. 

THEO.  But,  madam  .    .    . 

PRIN.  Well,  be  it  so.  I  see  that  your  desire  is  to  shew 
me  that  I  owe  my  life  to  you ;  I  grant  it.  Yes,  without 
you  I  had  lost  my  life.  I  heartily  thank  you  for  your 
grand  assistance,  and  will  go  at  once  to  the  Prince  to  in- 
form him  of  the  kindness  with  which  your  love  has  in- 
spired you  for  me. 

SCENE  IV. — EURYALUS,  ARBATES,  MORON. 

MOR.  Well !  was  there  ever  seen  such  an  untamed  spirit? 
The  well-timed  death  of  that  ugly  boar  vexes  her.  Oh  ! 
how  willingly  would  I  have  rewarded  anyone  who  would 
have  rid  me  of  him  just  now  ! 

ARE.  (To  Euryalus).  I  see,  my  lord,  her  disdain  ren- 
ders you  pensive ;  but  it  ought  not  to  retard  in  the  least 
the  execution  of  your  plans.  Her  hour  must  come,  and 
perhaps  it  is  to  you  that  the  honour  of  conquering  her  is 
reserved. 

MOR.  She  must  know  of  your  passion  before  the  race, 
and  I  ... 

EUR.  No,  Moron,  I  do  not  wish  it  so  any  longer.  Be 
careful  to  say  nothing,  and  leave  rne  to  act ;  I  have  re- 
solved to  take  quite  a  different  course.  I  see  plainly  she 
is  resolved  to  despise  all  who  think  to  gain  her  heart  by 
deep  respect ;  and  the  deity  who  induces  me  to  sigh  for 
her  has  inspired  me  with  a  new  way  to  conquer  her.  Yes, 
it  is  he  who  has  caused  this  sudden  change,  and  from  him 
I  await  its  happy  conclusion. 

ARE.  May  one  know,  my  lord,  by  what  means  you 
hope  .  .  . 

EUR.  You  shall  see  it.     Follow  me  and  keep  silence. 

SCENE  n.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  4! 

SECOND   INTERLUDE 

ARGUMENT. 

The  agreeable  Moron  leaves  the  Prince  to  go  and  talk  of  his  growing 
passion  to  the  woods  and  the  rocks,  uttering  everywhere  the  beautiful 
name  of  his  shepherdess  Phillis ;  a  ridiculous  echo  answers  him  whim- 
sically ;  he  takes  so  great  a  pleasure  in  it,  that,  laughing  in  a  hundred 
ways,  he  makes  the  echo  answer  as  often,  without  seeming  at  all  tired 
of  it.  But  a  bear  interrupts  this  fine  amusement,  and  surprises  him 
so  much  by  the  unexpected  sight,  that  he  shows  visible  signs  of  terror, 
which  causes  him  to  make  before  the  bear  all  the  bows  he  can  think 
of  to  mollify  him.  At  length  he  is  going  to  run  up  a  tree  ;  but  seeing 
that  the  bear  is  also  going  to  climb,  he  cries  out  for  help  so  loudly, 
that  eight  peasants  armed  with  pointed  sticks  and  spears  appear,  whilst 
another  bear  comes  after  the  first.  A  battle  then  begins,  which  ends 
with  the  death  of  one  of  the  bears,  and  the  flight  of  the  other. 

SCENE  I. — MORON,  alone. 

Good  bye,  till  I  see  you  again ;  as  for  me,  I  shall  stay 
here,  and  have  a  little  conversation  with  these  trees  and 
rocks. 

Woods,  meadows,  fountains,  flowers,  that  behold  my 
pale  countenance,  if  you  do  not  know  it,  I  tell  you  I  am 
in  love.  Phillis  is  the  charming  object  who  has  fixed  my 
heart.  I  became  her  lover  by  seeing  her  milk  a  cow  ;  her 
fingers,  quite  full  of  milk,  and  a  thousand  times  whiter, 
squeezed  the  udder  in  an  admirable  manner.  Ouf !  the 
thought  of  it  will  drive  me  crazy.  Ah  !  Phillis  !  Phillis  ! 
(echo,  Phillis!)  ah!  (echo,  ah  !)  hem!  (echo,  hem!)  ah! 
(echo,  ah!)  oh!  (echo,  oh!)  oh!  (echo,  oh!)  This  is  a 
funny  echo  !  Horn  !  (echo,  horn  !)  ha  !  (echo,  ha  !)  ha  ! 
(echo,  ha  !)  hu !  (echo,  hu  !)  This  is  a  funny  echo. 

SCENE  II. — A  BEAR,  MORON. 

MOR.  (Seeing  a  bear  approaching).  Oh,  Master  bear,  I 
am  your  very  humble  servant.  Pray,  spare  me  ;  I  assure 
you  I  am  not  worth  eating ;  I  am  only  skin  and  bone,  and 
I  see  certain  people  yonder  who  would  serve  your  turn 
much  better.  Eh  !  eh !  eh !  my  lord,  gently,  if  you  please. 
There  (he  caresses  the  bear  and  trembles  with  fear),  there, 
there,  there.  Ha,  my  lord,  how  handsome  and  well-made 
your  highness  is !  You  look  quite  stylish,  and  you  have 
the  prettiest  shape  in  the  world.  Ah  !  what  beautiful 
bristles !  what  a  beautiful  head !  what  beautiful,  sparkling, 

42  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  [ACT  n. 

and  large  eyes  !  Ah  !  what  a  pretty  little  nose  !  what  a 
pretty  little  mouth  !  what  darling  little  teeth !  Ah  !  what 
a  beautiful  throat  !  what  beautiful  little  paws !  what  well- 
shaped  little  nails  (the  bear  gets  on  his  hind  legs)  \  Help  ! 
help !  I  am  dead !  Have  mercy !  Poor  Moron !  Oh !  good 
Heavens  !  Oh  !  quick,  I  am  lost.  ( The  huntsmen  appeat 
and  Moron  climbs  up  a  tree).  (He  addresses  the  huntsmen). 
Oh  !  gentlemen,  take  pity  upon  me.  (The  huntsmen  fight 
with  the  bear).  That  is  right  gentlemen,  kill  that  ugly 
beast  for  me.  Assist  them,  kind  Heaven  !  All  right  he 
runs  away ;  there  he  stops  and  falls  upon  them.  That  is 
right,  there  is  one  who  has  given  him  a  thrust  in  his  throat. 
They  all  surround  him.  Courage — stand  to  it !  well  done, 
my  friends !  That  is  right !  go  on !  again !  Oh !  there  he 
is  on  the  ground ;  it  is  all  over  with  him ;  he  is  dead. 
Let  us  come  down  now  and  give  him  a  hundred  blows. 
(Moron  comes  down  the  tree).  Your  servant,  gentlemen,  I 
am  much  obliged  to  you  for  having  delivered  me  from  this 
animal.  Now  that  you  have  killed  him,  I  am  going  to 
finish  him,  and  triumph  with  you. 

These  fortunate  huntsmen  had  no  sooner  gained  this  vic- 
tory, than  Moron,  grown  bold  by  the  danger  being  remote, 
wishes  to  go  and  give  a  thousand  blows  to  the  animal,  no 
longer  able  to  defend  himself,  and  does  all  that  a  braggart, 
not  over  bold,  would  have  done  on  such  an  occasion ;  the 
huntsmen,  to  show  their  joy,  dance  a  very  fine  entree. 

ACT  II. — ARGUMENT. 

The  Prince  of  Ithaca  and  the  Princess  had  a  very  gallant  conversation 
about  the  chariot  race  which  was  in  preparation.  She  had  ere  this 
told  one  of  the  princesses,  her  relatives,  that  the  insensibility  of  the 
Prince  of  Ithaca  disturbed  her,  and  was  disagreeable  to  her :  that,  al- 
though she  did  not  wish  to  love  any  one,  it  was  very  sad  to  see  that  he 
loved  nothing,  and  that,  although  she  had  resolved  not  to  go  to  see 
the  races,  she  now  would  go,  in  order  to  endeavour  to  triumph  over 
the  liberty  of  a  man  who  was  so  fond  of  it.  It  might  easily  be  per- 
ceived that  the  merit  of  this  prince  produced  its  ordinary  effect ; 
that  his  fine  qualities  had  touched  her  proud  heart,  and  had  begun 
partly  to  thaw  that  ice  which  had  resisted  until  then  all  the  ardour  of 
love.  Advised  by  Moron,  whom  he  had  gained  over,  and  who  knew 
weH  the  heart  of  the  Princess,  the  more  the  Prince  pretended  to  be 

scENK  i.j  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  43 

insensible,  although  he  was  but  too  much  in  love,  the  more  the  Princess 
resolved  to  win  his  affections,  though  she  did  not  intend  to  return  his 
love.  The  Princes  of  Messena  and  Pylos  took  their  leave  of  her,  to 
go  to  prepare  for  the  races,  and  spoke  of  the  expectation  they  had  of 
being  conquerors,  because  they  desired  to  please  her.  The  Prince 
of  Ithaca,  on  the  contrary,  told  her  that,  having  never  been  in  love 
with  any  thing,  he  was  going  to  try  to  obtain  the  prize  for  his  own 
satisfaction.  This  made  the  Princess  all  the  more  anxious  to  subdue 
a  heart,  already  sufficiently  subdued,  but  which  knew  how  to  disguise 
its  sentiments  in  a  wonderful  manner. 

SCENE  I. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS. 

PRIN.  Yes,  I  love  to  dwell  in  these  peaceful  spots. 
There  is  nothing  here  but  what  enchants  the  eye ;  and  all 
the  noble  architecture  of  our  palaces  must  yield  the  palm 
to  these  simple  beauties  formed  by  nature.  These  trees, 
these  rocks,  these  waters,  this  fresh  turf,  have  charms  for 
me  of  which  I  never  tire. 

AGL.  Like  you,  I  love  tranquil  retreats  where  one  avoids 
the  bustle  of  the  city.  Such  places  are  adorned  with  a 
thousand  charming  objects  ;  and  what  is  surprising  is  that, 
at  the  very  gates  of  Elis,  those  gentle  souls  who  hate  a 
crowd  may  find  so  vast  and  beautiful  a  solitude.  But,  to 
tell  you  the  truth,  in  these  days  of  rejoicing  your  retreat 
here  appears  somewhat  unseasonable,  and  puts  a  slight  on 
the  magnificent  preparations  made  by  each  prince  for  the 
public  entertainment.  The  grand  spectacle  of  the  chariot- 
race  merits  the  honour  of  your  notice. 

PRIN.  What  right  have  they  to  desire  my  presence,  and 
what  do  I  owe,  after  all,  to  their  magnificence  ?  They 
take  these  pains  on  purpose  to  win  me,  and  my  heart  is  the 
only  prize  for  which  they  all  strive.  But  with  whatever 
hope  they  may  flatter  themselves,  I  am  greatly  mistaken  if 
either  of  them  carries  it  off. 

CYN.  How  long  will  this  heart  be  provoked  at  the  in- 
nocent designs  which  are  formed  to  touch  it ;  and  regard 
the  trouble  which  people  give  themselves  as  so  many 
offences  against  your  person  ?  I  know  that  in  pleading 
the  cause  of  love,  I  am  exposed  to  your  displeasure,  but 
as  I  have  the  honour  to  be  related  to  you,  I  oppose  myself 
to  the  harshness  which  you  show ;  and  cannot  feed  by 
flattery  your  resolution  of  never  loving.  Is  anything  more 
beautiful  than  the  innocent  flame  which  brilliant  merit 

44  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  „. 

kindles  in  the  soul  ?  What  happiness  would  there  be  in 
life,  if  love  were  banished  from  among  mortals  ?  No,  no, 
the  delights  which  it  affords  are  infinite,  and  to  live  with- 
out loving  is,  properly  speaking,  not  to  live  at  all.90 

AGL.  For  my  part,  I  think  that  this  passion  is  the  most 
agreeable  business  of  life  ;  that,  in  order  to  live  happily, 
it  is  necessary  to  love,  and  that  all  pleasures  are  insipid 
unless  mangled  with  a  little  love. 

PRIN.  Can  you  two,  being  what  you  are,  talk  fchus? 
And  ought  you  not  to  blush  for  countenancing  a  passion 
which  is  nothing  but  error,  weakness,  and  extravagance, 
and  of  which  all  the  disorders  are  so  repugnant  to  the 
glory  of  our  sex  ?  I  intend  to  maintain  its  honour  until 
the  last  moment  of  my  life,  and  will  never  trust  those  men 
who  pretend  to  be  our  slaves,  only  to  become  in  time  our 
tyrants.  All  these  tears,  all  these  sighs,  all  this  homage, 
all  these  respects,  are  but  snares  laid  for  our  hearts,  and 
which  often  induce  them  to  act  basely.  For  my  part, 
when  I  behold  certain  examples,  and  the  hideous  mean- 
nesses to  which  that  passion  can  debase  persons  who  are 
under  its  sway,  my  whole  heart  is  moved  ;  I  cannot  bear 
that  a  soul  which  possesses  ever  so  little  pride  should  not 
feel  horribly  ashamed  of  such  weaknesses. 

CYN.  Ah,  madam,  there  are  certain  weaknesses  that  are 
not  at  all  shameful,  and  which  it  ie  beautiful  to  have  in 
the  highest  degree  of  glory.  I  hope  that  one  day  you  will 
change  your  mind  ;  and  if  Heaven  please,  we  shall  shortly 
see  your  heart  .  .  . 

PRIN.  Hold.  Do  not  finish  that  strange  wish.  I  have 
too  unconquerable  a  horror  of  such  debasement ;  if  I 
should  ever  be  capable  of  sinking  so  low,  I  should  cer- 
tainly never  forgive  myself. 

AGL.  Take  care,  madam  !  Love  knows  hovr  to  revenge 
himself  for  the  contempt  shown  him,  and  perhaps  .  .  . 

PRIN.  No,  no.     I  defy  all  his  darts ;  the  great  power 

90  As  far  as  this  line  the  play  is,  in  the  original,  in  verse ;  but  in  the 
printed  edition,  Moliere  inserted  the  following  notice :  "The  design  of 
the  author  was  to  treat  thus  the  whole  comedy.  But  an  order  of  the 
King,  who  hurried  on  this  affair,  compelled  him  to  finish  the  remainder  ia 
prose,  and  to  pass  lightly  over  several  scenes,  which  he  would  have  ex- 
tended if  he  had  had  more  leisure." 

SCENE  HI.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  45 

which  is  attributed  to  him  is  nothing  but  an  idle  fancy, 
and  an  excuse  for  feeble  hearts,  who  represent  him  as  in- 
vincible to  justify  their  weakness. 

CYN.  But  all  the  world  recognizes  his  power,  and  you 
see  that  the  gods  themselves  are  subject  to  his  empire.  We 
are  told  that  Jupiter  loved  more  than  once,  and  that 
Diana  herself,  whom  you  so  much  affect  to  imitate,  was  not 
ashamed  to  breathe  sighs  of  love. 

PRIN.  Public  opinions  are  always  mixed  with  error. 
The  gods  are  not  such  as  the  vulgar  make  them  out  to  be, 
and  it  is  a  want  of  respect  to  attribute  to  them  human 
frailties. 

SCENE  II. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS, 
MORON. 

AGL.  Come  hither,  Moron;  come,  help  us  to  defend 
love  against  the  Princess's  opinion. 

PRIN.  Your  side  is  strengthened  by  a  grand  defender 
truly! 

MOR.  Upon  my  word,  madam,  I  believe  that  after  my 
example  there  is  no  more  to  be  said,  and  that  none  should 
doubt  any  longer  the  power  of  love.  I  for  a  long  time 
defied  his  arms,  and  acted  like  a  rogue,  just  as  any  other ; 
but  at  length  my  pride  was  cowed,  and  you  have  a  traitress 
{pointing  to  Phillis)  who  has  made  me  tamer  than  a  lamb. 
After  that,  you  ought  to  have  no  scruples  to  love ;  and, 
since  I  have  submitted  to  him,  others  may  do  the  same. 

CYN.  What !   Moron  in  love  ? 

MOR.  Yes,  indeed. 

CYN.  And  is  he  beloved? 

MOR.  And  why  not  ?  Am  I  not  well  enough  made  for 
that  ?  I  think  this  face  is  passable  enough ;  and  as  to 
elegant  manners,  thank  Heaven,  we  yield  to  none. 

CYN.  Without  doubt,  it  would  be  wrong  to  ... 

SCENE  III. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  MORON, 
PHILLIS,  LYCAS. 

LYC.  Madam,  the  Prince,  your  father,  is  coming  hither 
to  seek  you ;  he  brings  with  him  the  Princes  of  Pylos,  of 
Ithaca,  and  of  Messena. 

PRIN.  Heavens  !  what  does  he  mean  by  bringing  them 

46  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  [ACT  n. 

to  me?     Has  he  resolved  on  my  ruin,  and  would  he  force 
me  to  choose  one  of  them  ? 

SCENE  IV. — IPHITAS,  EURYALUS,  ARISTOMENES,  THEOCLES, 
THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS,  MORON. 

PRIN.  (Iphitas).  My  lord,  I  beg  you  to  give  me  leave 
to  prevent,  by  two  words,  the  declaration  of  the  thoughts 
which  you  may  perhaps  foster.  There  are  two  truths,  my 
lord,  the  one  as  certain  as  the  other,  of  which  I  can 
assure  you ;  the  one  is,  that  you  have  an  absolute  power 
over  me,  and  that  you  can  lay  no  command  upon  me 
which  I  would  not  blindly  obey ;  the  other  is,  that  I  look 
upon  marriage  as  death,  and  that  it  is  impossible  for  me  to 
conquer  this  natural  aversion.  To  give  me  a  husband  and 
to  kill  me  are  the  same  thing ;  but  your  will  takes  prece- 
dence, and  my  obedience  is  dearer  to  me  than  life.  After 
this,  my  lord,  speak  ;  say  freely  what  you  desire. 

IPH.  Daughter,  you  are  wrong  to  be  so  alarmed ;  and  I 
am  grieved  that  you  can  think  me  so  bad  a  father  as  to  do 
violence  to  your  sentiments,  and  to  use  tyrannically  the 
power  which  Heaven  has  given  me  over  you.  I  wish,  in- 
deed, that  your  heart  were  capable  of  loving  some  one. 
All  my  desires  would  be  satisfied  if  that  were  to  happen ; 
and  I  proposed  to  celebrate  the  present  f£tes  and  sports 
only  to  assemble  all  the  illustrious  youth  of  Greece,  that 
amongst  them  you  might  meet  one  who  would  please  you 
and  determine  your  choice.  I  say,  I  ask  of  Heaven  no 
other  happiness  than  to  see  you  married.  To  obtain  this 
favour,  I  have  this  morning  again  offered  up  sacrifice  to 
Venus ;  and  if  I  know  how  to  interpret  the  language  of 
the  gods,  the  goddess  promised  me  a  miracle.  But,  be 
this  as  it  may,  I  will  act  like  a  father  who  loves  his 
daughter.  If  you  can  find  one  on  whom  to  fix  your  in- 
clination, your  choice  shall  be  mine,  and  I  shall  consider 
neither  interests  of  state  nor  advantages  of  alliance.  If 
your  heart  remains  insensible,  I  shall  not  attempt  to  force 
it.  But  at  least  be  polite  in  answer  to  the  civilities  offered 
to  you,  and  do  not  oblige  me  to  make  excuses  for  your 
coldness.  Treat  these  princes  with  the  esteem  which  you 
owe  them,  and  receive  with  gratitude  the  proofs  of  their 

SCBNKV.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  47 

zeal.  Come  and  see  this  race  in  which  their  skill  will 
appear. 

THEO.  {To  the  Princess}.  Every  one  will  do  his  ut- 
most to  gain  the  prize  of  this  chariot-race.  But  to  tell 
you  the  truth,  I  care  little  for  the  victory,  since  your 
heart  is  not  to  be  contended  for. 

ARIS.  For  my  part,  madam,  you  are  the  only  prize  I 
propose  to  myself  everywhere.  It  is  you  whom  I  imagine 
to  be  the  reward  in  these  combats  of  skill ;  I  aspire 
honourably  to  gain  this  race  only  to  obtain  a  degree  of 
glory  which  may  raise  me  nearer  to  your  heart. 

EUR.  As  for  me,  madam,  I  do  not  go  with  any  such 
thought.  As  I  have  all  my  life  professed  to  love  nothing, 
I  take  pains,  but  not  with  the  same  object  as  the  other 
princes.  I  do  not  pretend  to  obtain  your  heart,  and  the 
honour  of  gaining  the  race  is  the  sole  advantage  to  which 
I  aspire. 

SCENE  V. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS, 
MORON. 

PRIN.  Whence  proceeds  thus  unexpected  haughtiness? 
Princesses,  what  do  you  say  of  this  young  Prince  ?  .  Did 
you  observe  what  an  air  he  assumed  ? 

AGL.  It  is  true  it  was  somewhat  haughty. 

MOR.  (Aside).  Oh !  what  a  fine  trick  he  has  played 
her! 

PRIN.  Do  you  not  think  it  would  be  pleasant  to  humble 
his  pride,  and  to  abase  a  little  that  hectoring  heart  ? 

CYN.  As  you  are  accustomed  to  receive  nothing  but 
homage  and  adoration  from  the  whole  world,  such  a  com- 
pliment as  his  must  indeed  surprise  you. 

PRIN.  I  confess  it  has  caused  me  some  emotion  ;  and  I 
should  much  like  to  find  a  way  to  chastise  this  pride.  I 
had  no  great  desire  to  go  to  this  race,  but  now  I  shall  go 
on  purpose,  and  do  all  I  can  to  inspire  him  with  love. 

CYN.  Take  care,  madam,  the  enterprise  is  dangerous ; 
and  when  one  tries  to  inspire  love,  one  runs  a  risk  of 
receiving  it. 

PRIN.  Oh,  pray  apprehend  nothing.  Come,  I  shall 
answer  for  myself. 

48  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  u. 

THIRD   INTERLUDE. 

SCENE  I. — MORON,  PHILLIS. 

MOR.  Phillis,  stay  here. 

PHIL.  No,  let  me  follow  the  rest. 

•  MOR.  Oh  !  cruel  creature  !     If  Tircis  had  asked  you, 
you  would  have  stayed  fast  enough. 

PHIL.  That  may  be.  I  own  I  love  much  better  to  be 
with  him  than  with  you,  for  he  amuses  me  with  his  voice, 
and  you  deafen  me  with  your  cackle.  When  you  sing  as 
well  as  he  does,  I  promise  to  listen  to  you. 

MOR.  Oh,  stay  a  little. 

PHIL.  I  cannot. 

MOR.  Pray  do. 

PHIL.  No,  I  tell  you. 

MOR.     (Holding  Phillis).     I  will  not  let  you  go  ... 

PHIL.  What  a  bother  ! 

MOR.  I  only  ask  to  be  one  instant  with  you. 

PHIL.  Well,  I  shall  stay,  provided  you  promise  me  one 
thing. 

MOR.  What? 

PHIL.   Not  to  speak  at  all. 

MOR.  Oh,  Phillis. 

PHIL.  If  you  do,  I  shall  not  stay. 

MOR.  Will  you  .    .    . 

PHIL.  Let  me  go. 

MOR.  Well,  stay ;  I  shall  not  say  a  word. 

PHIL.  Take  care  you  do  not,  for  at  the  first  word  I  shall 
run. 

MOR.  Be  it  so (Making  some  gestures}.     Ha, 

Phillis  !     Ha !  ... 

SCENE  II. — MORON,  alone. 

She  runs  away,  and  I  cannot  overtake  her.  That  is 
the  mischief.  If  I  could  but  sing,  I  might  do  my  business 
better.  Most  women  now-a-days  are  caught  by  the  ear ; 
that  is  the  reason  why  every  one  learns  music ;  no  one 
succeeds  with  them  but  with  little  songs  and  little  verses 
that  are  warbled  to  them.  I  must  learn  to  sing  that  I  may 
act  like  others.  Oh  !  here  is  the  very  man. 

SCBNB  HI.]  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  49 

SCENE  III. — A  SATYR,  MORON. 

SAT.     (Sings).     La,  la,  la. 

MOR.  Ah,  friend  Satyr,  you  know  what  you  promised 
me,  ever  so  long  ago.  Pray  teach  me  to  sing. 

SAT.  I  will ;  but  first  listen  to  a  song  I  have  just  made. 

MOR.  {Aside  and  in  a  whisper).  He  is  so  used  to  sing 
that  he  cannot  speak  otherwise.  (Aloud}.  Come,  sing,  I 
am  listening  to  you.  ' 

SAT.     (Sings}.     I  was  carrying  .    .    . 

MOR.  A  song,  do  you  say  ? 

SAT.  I  was  .    .    . 

MOR.  A  song  to  be  sung  ? 

SAT.  I  was  .    .    . 

MOR.  A  lover's  song  ?     Hang  it ! 

SAT  I  was  carrying  in  a  cage  two  sparrows  I  had 
caught,  when  young  Chloris,  in  a  dark  grove,  showed  to 
my  astonished  eyes  her  blooming  and  lovely  countenance. 
When  I  beheld  her  gaze,  so  skilled  in  conquering,  I  said  to 
the  sparrows,  Alas !  console  yourselves,  poor  little  ani- 
mals, he  who  caught  you  is  much  more  caught  than  you 
are. 

Moron  was  not  satisfied  with  this  song,  though  he  thought 
it  very  pretty  ;  he  asked  for  one  with  more  passion  in  it,  and, 
begging  the  Satyr  to  sing  him  the  one  he  had  heard  him  sing 
some  days  before,  the  Satyr  thus  continued : 

In  your  songs  so  sweet,  sing  to  my  fair  one,  oh  birds, 
sing  all  my  mortal  pain.  But  if  the  cruel  maid  gets  angry 
when  she  hears  the  true  story  of  the  pangs  I  endure  for  her 
sake,  then,  birds,  be  silent. 

This  second  song  having  moved  Moron  very  much,  he  de- 
sires the  Satyr  to  teach  him  to  sing  it. 

MOR.  Ah  !  this  is  fine ;  teach  it  me. 
SAT.  La,  la,  la,  la. 
MOR.  La,  la,  la,  la. 
SAT.  Fa,  fa,  fa,  fa. 
MOR.  Fa  yourself." 

91  In  the  original  there  is  a  play  on  words  which  cannot  be  rendered 
into  English.  The  musical  scale  consisted  formerly  of  the  notes  ut,  r£, 
mi,  fa,  sol,  la,  si,  ut;  hence  when  Moron  answers  the  Satyr  Fat  toi- 
meme  ;  it  may  mean  "  fa  yourself,"  or  "  dandy  yourself." 

VOL.   II.  D 

JO  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  in. 

The  Satyr  gets  angry,  and  by  degrees  places  himself  in  an 
attitude  as  if  he  was  coming  to  fisticuffs;  the  violins  begin  to 
play,  and  several  Satyrs  dance  an  agreeable  entree.  w 

ACT  III.— ARGUMENT. 

In  the  meantime  the  Princess  of  Elis  was  very  uneasy ;  the  Prince  of  Ithaca 
had  gained  the  prize  at  the  races ;  afterwards  the  Princess  had  sung 
and  danced  in  an  admirable  manner ;  and  yet  it  did  not  seem  that 
these  gifts  of  nature  and  art  had  been  even  observed  by  the  Prince  of 
Ithaca j  she  complains  of  it  to  the  Princess,  her  relative;  she  also 
speaks  of  it  to  Moron,  who  calls  that  unfeeling  Prince  a  brute.  At 
last,  seeing  him  herself,  she  cannot  refrain  from  making  some  serious 
allusions  to  it ;  he  candidly  answers  that  he  loves  nothing  except  his 
liberty,  and  the  pleasures  of  solitude  and  the  chase,  in  which  he  de- 
lights. 

SCENE  I. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS. 

CYN.  It  is  true,  madam,  that  this  young  prince  showed 
uncommon  skill,  and  that  his  bearing  was  surprising.  He 
is  the  conqueror  in  this  race,  but  I  doubt  much  if  he  leaves 
with  the  same  spirit  with  which  he  came ;  for  you  aimed 
such  blows  at  him  that  it  was  difficult  to  defend  himself, 
and,  without  mentioning  anything  else,  your  graceful  danc- 
ing and  the  sweetness  of  your  voice  had  charms  to-day  to 
touch  the  most  insensible. 

PRIN.  There  he  comes,  conversing  with  Moron.  We 
shall  know  what  he  is  talking  of.  Let  us  not  interrupt 
them,  but  turn  this  way,  to  meet  them  again  by-and-bye. 

SCENE  II. — EURYALUS,  ARBATES,  MORON. 

EUR.  Ah,  Moron  !  I  confess  I  was  enchanted  ;  never 
have  so  many  charms  together  met  my  eyes  and  ears.  She 
is,  in  truth,  adorable  at  all  times  ',  but  she  was  at  that  mo- 
ment more  so  than  ever.  New  charms  enhanced  her  beauty. 
Never  was  her  face  adorned  with  more  lively  colours,  nor 
were  her  eyes  armed  with  swifter  or  more  piercing  shafts. 

91  Shakespeare,  in  his  Merchant  of  Venice  (Act  v.,  Scene  i.),  has  also 
given  a  kind  of  musical  interlude,  in  the  scene  between  Lorenzo  and  Jes- 
sica ;  but  in  it  the  sparkling  poetry  sometimes  soars  to  the  highest  realms 
of  lyric  enthusiasm ;  Moliere  wished  only  to  give  a  comic  scene,  inter- 
spersed with  some  songs. 

SCBN«IH.]  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  51 

The  sweetness  of  her  voice  showed  itself  in  the  perfectly 
charming  air  which  she  deigned  to  sing ;  and  the  marvel- 
lous tones  she  uttered  went  to  the  very  depth  of  my  soul, 
and  held  all  my  senses  so  enraptured  that  they  could  not 
recover.  She  then  showed  an  agility  altogether  divine ; 
her  lovely  feet  upon  the  enamel  of  the  soft  turf  traced  such 
delightful  steps  as  put  me  quite  beside  myself,  and 
bound  me  by  irresistible  bonds  to  the  easy  and  accurate 
motion  with  which  her  whole  body  followed  those  harmo- 
nious strains.  In  short,  never  did  soul  feel  stronger  emo- 
tions than  mine.  More  than  twenty  times  have  I  thought 
to  give  up  my  resolution,  cast  myself  at  her  feet,  and  de- 
clare to  her  frankly  the  ardour  which  I  felt  for  her. 

MOR.  Take  my  advice,  my  lord,  and  be  careful  how  you 
do  that. — You  have  discovered  the  best  method  in  the 
world,  and  I  am  greatly  deceived  if  it  does  not  succeed. 
Women  are  animals  of  a  whimsical  nature ;  we  spoil  them 
by  our  tenderness;  and  I  verily  believe  we  should  see 
them  run  after  us,  were  it  not  for  the  respect  and  sub- 
mission whereby  men  allure  them. 

ARB.  My  lord,  here  comes  the  princess,  a  little  in  ad- 
vance of  her  retinue. 

MOR.  At  least  continue  as  you  have  begun.  I  shall  go 
and  see  what  she  will  say  to  me.  In  the  meantime,  walk 
you  in  these  alleys  without  showing  any  desire  to  join  her, 
and  if  you  do  accost  her,  stay  as  little  with  her  as  you  can. 

SCENE  III. — THE  PRINCESS,  MORON. 

PRIN.  You  are  intimate,  Moron,  with  the  Prince  of 
Ithaca  ? 

MOR.  Ah,  madam  !  we  have  known  one  another  a  long 
time. 

PRIN.  What  is  the  reason  that  he  did  not  walk  so  far  as 
this,  but  turned  the  other  way  when  he  saw  me  ? 

MOR.  He  is  a  whimsical  fellow,  and  only  loves  to  con- 
verse with  his  own  thoughts. 

PRIN.  Were  you  present  just  now  when  he  paid  me  that 
compliment  ? 

MOR.  Yes,  madam,  I  was,  and  thought  it  rather  im- 
pertinent, under  favour  of  his  princeship. 

PRIN.  For  my  part,  I  confess,  Moron,  this  avoidance  of 

52  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  in 

me  offends  me.  I  have  a  great  desire  to  make  him  fall  in 
love  with  me,  that  I  may  bring  down  his  pride  a  little. 

MOR.  Upon  my  word,  madam,  you  would  not  do  ill;  he 
deserves  it :  but,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  have  great  doubts 
of  your  success. 

PRIN.  How  so  ? 

MOR.  How  ?  Why,  he  is  the  proudest  little  rogue  you 
ever  saw.  He  thinks  no  one  in  the  world  is  like  him,  and 
that  the  earth  is  not  worthy  to  bear  him. 

PRIN.  But  has  he  not  yet  spoken  of  me  ? 

MOR.  He?     No. 

PRIN.  Did  he  say  nothing  to  you  of  my  singing  and 
dancing  ? 

MOR.  Not  the  least  word. 

PRIN.  This  contempt  is  shocking.  I  cannot  bear  this 
strange  haughtiness,  which  esteems  nothing. 

MOR.  He  neither  esteems  nor  loves  any  one  but  himself. 

PRIN.  There  is  nothing  I  would  not  do  to  humble  him 
as  he  deserves. 

MOR.  We  have  no  marble  in  our  mountains  harder  or 
more  insensible  than  he. 

PRIN.  There  he  comes. 

MOR.  Do  you  see  how  he  passes  without  noticing  you  ? 

PRIN.  Pray,  Moron,  go  and  tell  him  I  am  here,  and 
oblige  him  to  come  and  speak  to  me. 

SCENE  IV. — THE  PRINCESS,  EURYALUS,  ARBATES,  MORON. 

MOR.  {Going  up  to  Euryalus  and  whispering  to  him). 
My  lord,  I  tell  you  everything  is  going  on  well.  The 
Princess  wishes  you  to  come  and  speak  to  her ;  but  take 
care  to  continue  to  play  your  part.  For  fear  of  forgetting 
it,  do  not  stay  long  with  her . 

PRIN.  You  are  very  solitary,  my  lord ;  and  it  is  an  ex- 
traordinary disposition  of  yours  to  renounce  our  sex  in 
this  manner,  and  to  avoid  at  your  age  that  gallantry  upon 
which  your  equals  pride  themselves. 

EUR.  This  disposition,  madam,  is  not  so  extraordinary 
but  that  we  may  find  examples  of  it  at  no  great  distance ; 
you  cannot  condemn  the  resolution  I  have  taken  of  never 
loving  anything,  without  also  condemning  your  own 
sentiments. 

SCENE  iv.]  THE  PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  53 

PRIN.  There  is  a  great  difference.  That  which  becomes 
well  our  sex  does  not  well  become  yours.  It  is  noble  for 
a  woman  to  be  insensible,  and  to  keep  her  heart  free  from 
the  flames  of  love  :  but  what  is  a  virtue  in  her  is  a  crime 
in  a  man ;  and  as  beauty  is  the  portion  of  our  sex,  you 
cannot  refrain  from  loving  us  without  depriving  us  of  the 
homage  which  is  our  due,  and  committing  an  offence  which 
we  ought  all  to  resent. 

EUR.  I  do  not  see,  madam,  that  those  who  will  not  love 
should  take  any  interest  in  offences  of  this  kind. 

PRIN.  That  is  no  reason,  my  lord;  for  although  we  will 
not  love,  yet  we  are  always  glad  to  be  loved. 

EUR.  For  my  part,  I  am  not  of  that  mood  ;  and  as  I 
design  to  love  none  I  should  be  sorry  to  be  beloved. 

PRIN.  Why  so  ? 

EUR.  Because  we  are  under  an  obligation  to  those  who 
love  us,  and  I  should  be  sorry  to  be  ungrateful. 

PRIN.  So  that,  to  avoid  ingratitude,  you  would  love  the 
one  who  loved  you  ? 

EUR.  I,  madam  ?  Not  at  all.  I  say  I  should  be  sorry 
to  be  ungrateful ;  but  I  would  sooner  be  so  than  be  amorous. 

PRIN.  Perhaps  such  a  person  might  love  you  that  your 
heart  .  .  . 

EUR.  No,  madam ;  nothing  is  capable  of  touching  my 
heart.  Liberty  is  the  sole  mistress  whom  I  adore ;  and 
though  Heaven  should  employ  its  utmost  care  to  form  a 
perfect  beauty,  in  whom  should  be  combined  the  most 
marvellous  gifts  both  of  body  and  mind ;  in  short,  though 
it  should  expose  to  my  view  a  miracle  of  wit,  cleverness, 
and  beauty,  and  that  person  should  love  me  with  all  the 
tenderness  imaginable,  I  confess  frankly  to  you  I  should 
not  love  her. 

PRIN.  (Aside).     Was  ever  anything  seen  like  this  ? 

MOR.  (To  the  Princess}.  Plague  take  the  little  brute! 
I  have  a  great  mind  to  give  him  a  slap  in  the  face. 

PRIN.  (Aside}.  This  pride  confounds  me  !  I  am  so 
vexed  that  I  am  beside  myself! 

MOR.  (In  a  whisper  to  the  Prince}.  Courage,  my  lord; 
everything  goes  as  well  as  can  be. 

EUR.  (To  Moron).  Ah,  Moron,  I  am  exhausted  !  I 
have  made  strange  efforts. 

54  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  m. 

PRIN.  {To  Euryalus).  You  must  be  very  unfeeling,  in- 
deed, to  talk  as  you  do. 

EUR.  Heaven  has  not  made  me  of  another  disposition. 
But,  madam,  I  interrupt  your  walk,  and  my  respect  ought 
to  inform  me  that  you  love  solitude. 

SCENE  V. — THE  PRINCESS,  MORON. 

MOR.  He  is  not  inferior  to  you,  madam,  in  hardness  of 
heart. 

PRIN.  I  would  willingly  give  all  I  possess  in  the  world 
to  triumph  over  him. 

MOR.  I  believe  you. 

PRIN.  Could  not  you  serve  me,  Moron,  in  such  a  de- 
sign? 

MOR.  You  know  well,  madam,  that  I  am  wholly  at  your 
service. 

PRIN.  Speak  of  me  to  him  in  your  conversation.  Cun- 
ningly praise  my  charms  and  my  lofty  birth ;  try  to  shake 
his  resolution  by  encouraging  him  to  hope ;  I  give  you 
leave  to  say  all  you  think  fit,  to  try  to  make  him  in  love 
with  me. 

MOR.  Leave  it  to  me. 

PRIN.  It  is  a  thing  I  have  set  my  heart  on.  I  ardently 
wish  he  may  love  me. 

MOR.  It  is  true,  the  little  rascal  is  well  made  ;  he  has  a 
good  appearance,  a  good  countenance,  and  I  believe  would 
suit  very  well  a  certain  young  Princess. 

PRIN.  You  may  expect  anything  from  me,  if  you  can 
but  find  means  to  inflame  his  heart  for  me. 

MOR.  Nothing  is -impossible;  but,  madam,  if  he  should 
come  to  love  you,  pray  what  would  you  do  ? 

PRIN.  Oh,  then  I  would  take  delight  in  fully  triumph- 
ing over  his  vanity ;  I  would  punish  his  disdain  by  my 
coldness,  and  practise  on  him  all  the  cruelties  I  could 
imagine. 

MOR.  He  will  never  yield. 

PRIN.  Ah  !  Moron,  we  must  make  him  yield. 

MOR.  No,  he  will  not ;  I  know  him ;  my  labour  will  be 
in  vain. 

PRIN.  We  must,  however,  try  everything,  and  prove  if 

SCBNK  ii.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF    ELIS.  55 

his  soul  be  entirely  insensible.     Come,  I  will  speak  to  him, 
and  follow  an  idea  which  has  just  come  into  my  head. 

FO URTH  INTERL  UDE. 

SCENE  I. — PHILLIS,  TIRCIS. 

PHIL.  Come,  Tircis,  let  them  go,  and  depict  to  me 
your  sufferings,  in  the  manner  you  know.  Your  eyes 
have  spoken  to  me  for  a  long  time,  but  I  should  be  more 
glad  to  hear  your  voice. 

TIR.  (Sings).  Alas!  you  listen  to  my  sad  complaints ; 
but,  O  matchless  fair  one,  I  am  not  the  better  for  it;  I 
make  an  impression  on  your  ears,  but  not  on  your  heart. 

PHIL.  Well,  well,  it  is  something  to  touch  the  ear;  time 
will  produce  the  rest.  Meanwhile,  sing  me  some  little 
ditty  that  you  have  made  for  me. 

SCENE  II. — MORON,  PHILLIS,  TIRCIS. 

MOR.  Oh  !  have  I  caught  you,  cruel  one  ?  You  slink 
away  from  the  company  to  listen  to  my  rival  ? 

PHIL.  Yes,  I  slink  away  for  that  reason.  I  repeat  it  to 
you,  I  find  a  pleasure  in  his  company ;  we  hearken  will- 
ingly to  lovers  when  they  complain  so  agreeably  as  he 
does.  Why  do  you  not  sing  like  him  ?  I  should  then, 
take  a  delight  in  listening  to  you. 

MOR.  If  I  cannot  sing,  I  can  do  other  things ;  and 
when  .  .  . 

PHIL.  Be  silent,  I  wish  to  hear  him.  Tircis,  say  what 
you  like. 

MOR.  Ah !  cruel  one  .    .    . 

PHIL.  Silence,  I  say,  or  I  shall  get  angry. 

TIR.  (Sings}.  Ye  tufted  trees ;  and  ye  enamelled 
meads ;  that  beauty  winter  stript  you  of  is  restored  to  you 
by  spring.  You  resume  all  your  charms ;  but,  alas  !  my 
soul  cannot  resume  the  joy  it  has  lost ! 

MOR.  Zounds !  why  cannot  I  sing  ?  Oh  !  stepmotherly 
nature,  why  did  you  not  give  me  the  means  of  singing  like 
any  other? 

PHIL.  Really,  Tircis,  nothing  can  be  more  agreeable, 
and  you  bear  away  the  bell  from  all  your  rivals. 

56  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  [ACT  HI. 

MOR.  But  why  can  I  not  sing  ?  Have  I  not  a  stomach, 
a  throat,  and  a  tongue,  as  well  as  as  any  other  man  ?  Yes, 
yes,  come  on  then.  I  too  will  sing,  and  show  you  that 
love  enables  one  to  do  all  things.  Here  is  a  song  I  made 
for  you. 

PHIL.  Come,  sing  it  then ;  I  shall  listen  to  you  for  the 
novelty  of  the  thing. 

MOR.  Pluck  up  your  courage,  Moron,  there  is  nothing 
like  boldness.  (He  sings).  Your  extreme  severity  cruelly 
wounds  my  heart.  Ah  !  Phillis,  I  am  dying  ;  deign  to 
lend  me  some  assistance.  Will  you  be  the  stouter  for  it, 
because  you  have  allowed  me  to  die  ?  .  .  .  Well  said, 
Moron. 

PAIL.  That  is  very  well.  But,  Moron,  I  should  like 
very  much  the  glory  of  having  some  lover  die  for  me  !  It 
is  an  advantage  I  have  not  yet  enjoyed  ;  I  find  I  should 
love  with  all  my  heart  a  person  who  would  love  me  suffi- 
ciently to  kill  himself. 

MOR.  You  would  love  the  person  that  would  kill  him- 
self for  you  ? 

PHIL.  Yes. 

MOR.  That  is  the  only  thing  to  please  you  ? 

PHIL.  Ay. 

MOR.  It  is  done  then.  I  will  show  you  that  I  can  kill 
myself  when  I  have  a  mind  to  it. 

TIR.  (Sings).  Ah  !  how  pleasant  it  is  to  die  for  the 
object  one  loves. 

MOR.  (10  Tircis).  It  is  a  pleasure  you  may  have  when 
you  like. 

TIR.  (Sings).  Take  courage,  Moron,  quickly  die,  like 
a  generous  lover. 

MOR.  {To  Tircis).  Pray,  mind  your  own  business, 
.and  let  me  kill  myself  as  I  like.  Come,  I  will  shame  all 
lovers.  (To  Phillis).  Behold,  I  am  not  a  man  who 
makes  many  compliments.  Do  you  see  this  dagger  ? 
Pray,  observe  how  I  shall  pierce  my  heart.  {Laughing  at 
Tircis).  I  am  your  servant ;  I  am  not  such  a  fool  as  I 
look. 

PHIL.  Come,  Tircis,  repeat  to  me,  in  an  echo,  what  you 
have  sung. 

SCBNKI.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   EUS.  57 

ACT  IV.— ARGUMENT. 

The  Princess  of  Elis,  hoping  by  a  stratagem  to  discover  the  sentiments  of 
the  Prince  of  Ithaca,  confides  to  him  that  she  loves  the  Prince  of  Mes- 
sena.  Instead  of  seeming  concerned  at  it,  he  gives  her  tit-for-tat,  and 
tells  her  that  he  is  enamoured  of  the  Princess,  her  relative,  and  that 
he  will  demand  her  in  marriage  of  the  King,  her  father.  At  this  un- 
expected news,  the  Princess  of  Elis  loses  all  firmness,  and  although 
she  tries  to  restrain  herself  before  him,  yet,  as  soon  as  he  is  gone,  she 
so  earnestly  entreats  her  cousin  not  to  listen  favourably  to  this  Prince, 
and  never  to  marry  him,  that  she  cannot  refuse.  The  Princess  com- 
plains even  to  Moron,  who,  having  freely  told  her  that  it  was  a  sign 
she  loved  the  Prince  of  Ithaca,  is  driven  from  her  presence  an  account 
of  his  remark. 

SCENE  I. — THE  PRINCESS,  EURYALUS,  MORON. 

PRIN.  Prince,  as  hitherto  we  have  shown  a  conformity 
of  sentiment,  and  Heaven  seems  to  have  imbued  us  both 
with  the  same  affection  for  liberty  and  the  same  aversion 
to  love,  I  am  glad  to  open  my  heart  to  you,  and  to  en- 
trust you  with  the  secret  of  a  change  which  will  surprise 
you.  I  have  always  looked  upon  marriage  as  a  frightful 
thing,  and  have  vowed  rather  to  abandon  life  than  to 
resolve  ever  to  lose  that  liberty  of  which  I  was  so  fond ; 
but  now,  one  moment  has  dispersed  all  these  resolutions. 
The  merit  of  a  certain  prince  has  to-day  become  obvious 
to  me ;  my  soul  suddenly,  as  it  were  by  a  miracle,  has 
become  sensible  to  that  passion  which  I  have  always 
despised.  I  presently  found  reasons  to  authorize  this 
change;  I  may  attribute  it  to  my  willingness  to  satisfy 
the  eager  solicitations  of  a  father,  and  the  wishes  of  a 
whole  kingdom ;  but,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I  dread  the 
judgment  you  may  pass  upon  me,  and  would  fain  know 
whether  or  not  you  will  condemn  my  design  of  taking  a 
husband. 

EUR.  You  may  make  such  a  choice,  madam,  that  I 
should  certainly  approve  of  it. 

PRIN.  Whom  do  you  think,  in  your  opinion,  I  intend 
to  choose? 

EUR.  If  I  were  in  your  heart  I  could  tell  you ;  but  as  I 
am  not,  I  do  not  care  to  answer  you. 

PRIN.  Guess,  name  some  one. 

EUR.  I  am  too  much  afraid  of  making  a  mistake. 

58  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  iv. 

PRIN.  But  for  whom  would  you  wish  that  I  should  de- 
clare myself  ? 

EUR.  I  know  well,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  for  whom  I 
could  wish  it ;  but,  before  I  explain  myself,  I  must  know 
your  thoughts. 

PRIN.  Well,  Prince,  I  will  disclose  it  to  you.  I  am 
sure  you  will  approve  of  my  choice;  and,  to  hold  you  no 
longer  in  suspense,  the  Prince  of  Messena  is  he  whose 
merit  has  made  me  love  him. 

EUR.   (Aside).     Oh,  Heavens  ! 

PRIN.  (Aside  to  Moron).  My  invention  has  succeeded, 
Moron.  He  is  disturbed. 

MOR.  (To  the  Princess}.  Good,  madam.  (To  the 
Ptince).  Take  courage,  my  lord.  {To the  Princess).  He 
is  hit  hard.  (To  the  Prince).  Do  not  be  disheartened. 

PRIN.  (To  Euryalus).  Do  you  not  think  that  I  am  in 
the  right,  and  that  the  Prince  possesses  very  great  merit  ? 

MOR.  (Aside  to  the  Prince).  Recover  yourself  and 
answer. 

PRIN.  How  comes  it,  Prince,  that  you  do  not  say  a 
word,  and  seem  thunderstruck  ? 

EUR.  I  am  so,  indeed,  and  I  wonder,  madam,  that 
Heaven  could  form  two  souls  so  alike  in  everything  as 
ours ;  two  souls  in  which  are  seen  the  greatest  conformity 
of  sentiment,  which  have  shown,  at  the  same  time,  a  re- 
solution to  brave  the  power  of  love,  and  which,  in  the 
same  instant,  have  shown  an  equal  facility  in  losing  the 
character  of  insensibility.  For,  in  short,  madam,  since 
your  example  authorizes  me,  I  shall  not  scruple  to  tell  you 
that  love,  this  very  day,  has  mastered  my  heart,  and  that 
one  of  the  princesses,  your  cousins,  the  amiable  and  beau- 
tiful Aglanta,  has  overthrewn  with  a  glance  all  my  proud 
projects.  I  am  overjoyed,  madam,  that  we  cannot  re- 
proach each  other,  as  we  are  equally  defeated.  I  do  not 
doubt  that,  as  I  praise  your  choice  greatly,  you  shall  also 
approve  mine.  This  miracle  must  become  apparent  to  all 
the  world,  and  we  ought  not  to  delay  making  ourselves 
both  happy.  For  my  part,  madam,  I  solicit  your  influ- 
ence, so  that  I  may  obtain  her  I  desire ;  you  will  not  ob- 
ject that  I  go  immediately  to  ask  her  hand  of  the  Prince, 
your  father. 

SCENE  HI.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  59 

MOR.  {Aside  to  Euryalus).  Ah,  worthy  heart  !  ah, 
brave  spirit ! 

SCENE  II. — THE  PRINCESS,  MORON. 

PRIN.  Ah,  Moron !  I  am  undone.  This  unexpected 
blow  absolutely  triumphs  over  all  my  firmness. 

MOR.  It  is  a  surprising  blow,  it  is  true ;  I  thought  at 
first  that  your  stratagem  had  taken  effect. 

PRIN.  Ah  !  this  vexation  is  enough  to  drive  me  mad  ! 
Another  has  the  advantage  of  subduing  a  heart  which  I 
wished  to  conquer. 

SCENE  III. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  MORON. 

PRIN.  Princess,  I  have  one  thing  to  beg  of  you,  which 
you  absolutely  must  grant  me.  The  Prince  of  Ithaca 
loves  you,  and  designs  to  ask  your  hand  of  the  Prince,  my 
father. 

AGL.  The  Prince  of  Ithaca,  madam  ! 

PRIN.  Yes ;  he  has  just  now  told  me  so  himself,  and 
asked  my  consent  to  obtain  your  hand  ;  but  I  conjure  you 
to  reject  this  proposal,  and  not  lend  an  ear  to  what  he 
may  say. 

AGL.  But,  madam,  if  it  be  true  that  this  prince  really 
loves  me,  and  as  you  have  yourself  no  design  to  gain  his 
affections,  why  will  you  not  suffer  .  .  . 

PRIN.  No,  Aglanta,  I  desire  it  of  you.  I  beg  you  to 
gratify  me  so  far ;  and,  as  I  have  not  the  advantage  of 
subduing  his  heart,  let  me  have  the  pleasure  of  depriving 
him  of  the  joy  of  obtaining  yours. 

AGL.  Madam,  I  must  obey  you  ;  but  I  should  think  the 
conquest  of  such  a  heart  no  contemptible  victory. 

PRIN.  No,  no,  he  shall  not  have  the  pleasure  of  braving 
me  entirely. 

SCENE   IV. — THE  PRINCESS,  ARISTOMENES,  AGLANTA, 

MORON. 

ARTS.  Madam,  at  your  feet  I  come  to  thank  love  for  my 
happy  fate,  and  to  testify  to  you,  by  my  transports,  how 
grateful  I  am  for  the  surprising  goodness  with  which  you 
deign  to  favour  the  most  humble  of  your  captives. 
PRIN.  How  ? 

60  THE   PRINCESS  OF   ELIS.  [ACT  iv. 

ARIS.  The  Prince  of  Ithaca,  madam,  just  now  assured 
me  that,  with  regard  to  that  celebrated  choice  which  all 
Greece  awaits,  your  heart  had  been  kind  enough  to  declare 
itself  in  my  favour. 

PRIN.  He  told  you  that  he  had  it  from  my  mouth  ? 

ARIS.  Yes,  madam. 

PRIN.  He  is  thoughtless,  and  you  are  a  little  too  credu- 
lous, prince,  to  believe  so  hastily  what  he  told  you  ;  such 
news,  in  my  opinion,  should  have  been  doubted  for  some 
time ;  and  you  could  have  done  no  more  than  believe  it, 
if  I  myself  had  told  it  you. 

ARIS.  Madam,  if  I  have  been  too  ready  in  persuading 
myself  .  .  . 

PRIN.  Pray,  my  lord,  let  us  break  off  this  conversation  ; 
and,  if  you  will  oblige  me,  let  me  enjoy  a  moment's  solitude. 

SCENE  V. — THE  PRINCESS,  AGLANTA,  MORON. 

PRIN.  With  what  strange  severity  Heaven  uses  me  in 
this  adventure !  At  least,  Princess,  remember  the  request 
I  have  made  to  you. 

AGL.  I  have  already  told  you,  madam,  that  you  shall 
be  obeyed. 

SCENE  VI. — THE  PRINCESS,  MORON. 

MOR.  But,  madam,  if  he  loved  you,  you  would  not  have 
him,  and  yet  you  will  not  let  him  be  another's.  It  is  just 
like  the  dog  in  a  manger.98 

PRIN.  No,  I  cannot  bear  that  he  should  be  happy  with 
another.  If  such  a  thing  is  to  be,  I  believe  I  shall  die 
with  vexation. 

MOR.  Come,  madam,  confess  all.  You  would  fain  have 
him  for  yourself ;  and  in  all  your  actions  it  is  easily  seen 
that  you  rather  love  this  young  prince 

PRIN.  I,  I  love  him?  Oh,  Heavens !  I  love  him?  Have 
you  the  insolence  to  pronounce  those  words  ?  Out  of  my 
sight,  impudent  man,  and  never  let  me  see  you  again. 

98  A  dog  in  a  manger  cannot  himself  eat  the  corn  and  straw  that  are 
there,  but  barks  if  any  other  animal  approaches,  and  will  not  allow  it  to 
eat  in  peace ;  this  is  called  in  French  faire  comme  le  chien  du  jardinier— 
because  a  dog  cannot  eat  cabbage,  and  does  not  permit  others  to  eat  it. 

SCENE  VH.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  6 1 

MOR.   Madam  .    .    . 

PRIN.  Begone,  I  say,  or  I  shall  make  you  leave  in  an- 
other manner 

MOR.  {Aside).  Upon  my  word,  her  heart  is  no  longer 
free,  and  .  .  .  {The  Princess  casts  a  look  upon  him  which 
sends  him  away}. 

SCENE  VII. — THE  PRINCESS,  alone  . 

What  unknown  emotion  do  I  feel  in  my  heart !  What 
secret  uneasiness  suddenly  disturbs  the  tranquillity  of  my 
soul !  Is  it  not  what  I  have  just  been  told,  and  do  I  love 
this  young  prince  without  knowing  it !  Ah  !  if  it  were 
so,  I  should  be  in  despair.  But  it  is  impossible  it  should 
be  so,  and  I  plainly  perceive  that  I  can  never  love  him. 
What !  I  be  capable  of  that  baseness  !  I  have  seen  the 
whole  world  at  my  feet  with  the  utmost  insensibility.  Re- 
spect, homage,  submission,  could  never  touch  my  soul ; 
and  shall  haughtiness  and  disdain  triumph  over  it?  I  have 
despised  all  those  who  have  loved  me,  and  shall  I  love  the 
only  one  who  despises  me  1  No,  no,  I  know  well  I  do  not 
love  him ;  there  is  no  reason  for  it.  But  if  this  is  not  love 
which  I  now  feel,  what  can  it  be?  And  whence  comes 
this  poison  which  runs  through  all  my  veins,  and  will  not 
let  me  rest?  Out  of  my  heart,  whatever  you  may  be,  you 
enemy  who  lurk  there  !  Attack  me  openly,  and  appear 
before  me  as  the  most  frightful  monster  of  all  our  forests,  so 
that  with  my  darts  and  javelins  I  may  rid  myself  of  you. 

FIFTH  INTERL  UDE. 
SCENE  I. — THE  PRINCESS,  alone. 

O,  you  admirable  ones,  who  by  your  sweet  songs  can 
calm  the  greatest  uneasiness,  draw  near,  I  pray  you,  and 
try  to  soothe,  with  your  music,  the  sorrow  which  I  feel. 

SCENE  II. — THE  PRINCESS,  CLIMENE,  PHILLIS. 

{Climene  and  Phi  His  sing  this  duef). 
CLIM.  Tell  me,  dear  Phillis,  what  think  you  of  love  ? 
PHIL.  Tell  me,  what  think  you,  my  -dear  trusty  friend  ? 

62  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  v. 

CLIM.  They  say  its  flame  is  worse  than  vulture's  gnawing, 

And  that  great  pangs  are  suffered  when  one  loves. 
PHIL.  They  say  no  fairer  passion  e'er  existed, 

And  that  we  live  not,  if  we  do  not  love. 
CLIM.  Which  of  us  two  shall  be  victorious  here? 
PHIL.  Must  we  believe  love  to  be  good  or  ill  ? 
BOTH.  Let's  love,  and  then  we'll  know 

What  we  ought  to  believe. 

PHIL.   Chloris  praises  love  and  its  flames  everywhere. 
CLIM.  For  its  sake,  Amarant  sheds  always  tears. 
PHIL.  If  it  fills  every  heart  with  so  much  pain 

Whence  comes  it  that  we  like  to  yield  to  it  ? 
CLIM.  If,  Phillis,  its  flame  is  so  full  of  charms 

Why  forbid  us  its  pleasures  to  enjoy  ? 
PHIL.  Which  of  us  two  shall  be  victorious  here  ? 
CLIM.  Must  we  believe  love  to  be  good  or  ill  ? 
BOTH.  Let's  love,  and  then  we'll  know 

What  we  ought  to  believe. 

PRIN.  (Interrupting  them  here,  says).  Finish  alone,  if 
you  like.  I  cannot  remain  at  rest ;  and  however  agreeable 
your  songs  are,  they  do  but  redouble  my  uneasiness. 

ACT  V. — ARGUMENT. 

The  heart  of  the  Prince  of  Messena  was  agitated  by  various  feelings ;  the 
joy  which  the  Prince  of  Ithaca  had  caused  by  maliciously  informing 
him  that  he  was  beloved  by  the  Princess,  had  compelled  him  to  go  to 
her,  with  a  want  of  consideration  which  nothing  but  extreme  love  could 
excuse ;  but  he  was  received  in  a  manner  very  different  from  what  he 
hoped  for.  She  asked  him  who  had  told  him  that  news ;  and  when 
she  knew  that  it  was  the  Prince  of  Ithaca,  that  knowledge  cruelly  in- 
creased her  disease,  and  made  her  nearly  beside  herself.  She  replied, 
"  He  is  thoughtless."  This  so  confounded  the  Prince  of  Messena  that 
he  departed  without  being  able  to  answer.  On  the  other  hand,  the 
Princess  went  to  the  King,  her  father,  who  came  with  the  Prince  of 
Ithaca,  and  told  the  latter  not  only  how  delighted  he  should  be  to  see 
him  allied  to  him,  but  even  the  opinion  he  entertained  that  his  daugh- 
ter did  not  hate  him.  No  sooner  was  the  Princess  in  her  father's  pre- 
sence than,  casting  herself  at  his  feet,  she  asked  him,  as  the  greatest 
favour  she  could  ever  receive,  that  the  Prince  of  Ithaca  might  not 
marry  the  Princess  Aglanta.  This  he  solemnly  promised  her ;  but  he 
told  her  that  if  she  did  not  wish  him  to  belong  to  another,  she  should 
take  him  herself.  She  answered  "  that  the  Prince  did  not  desire  it," 
but  in  such  a  passionate  manner  that  it  was  easy  to  see  the  sentiments 
of  her  heart.  Then  the  Prince,  abandoning  all  disguise,  avowed  his 
love  for  her,  and  the  stratagem  which,  knowing  her  disposition,  he  had 

•CBNKH.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  63 

made  use  of,  in  order  to  attain  the  object  he  had  now  reached.  The 
Princess  giving  him  her  hand,  the  King  turned  towards  the  two  Princes 
of  Messena  and  Pylos,  and  asked  them  if  his  two  relatives,  whose  me- 
rit was  equal  to  their  rank,  were  incapable  of  consoling  them  in  their 
disgrace.  They  answered  that,  the  honour  of  his  alliance  being  all 
they  wished  for,  they  could  not  expect  a  happier  lot.  This  occasioned 
so  great  a  joy  in  the  Court,  that  it  spread  over  the  whole  neighbour- 
hood. 

SCENE  I. — IPHITAS,  EURYALUS,  AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA, 
MORON. 

MOR.  {To  Iphitas).  Yes,  my  lord,  it  is  no  jest;  I  am 
what  they  call  in  disgrace.  I  was  forced  to  pack  up  my 
traps  as  quickly  as  I  could  ;  you  never  saw  any  one  more 
suddenly  in  a  passion  than  she  was. 

IPH.  {To Euryalus}.  Ah,  Prince  !  how  grateful  I  ought 
to  be  for  your  amorous  stratagem,  if  it  has  found  the 
secret  of  touching  her  heart ! 

EUR.  Whatever,  my  lord,  you  may  have  been  told,  I 
dare  not,  for  my  part,  yet  flatter  myself  with  that  sweet 
hope ;  but  if  it  is  not  too  presumptuous  in  me  to  aspire 
to  the  honour  of  your  alliance,  if  my  person  and  domin- 
ions .  .  . 

IPH.  Prince,  let  us  not  enter  upon  these  compliments. 
I  find  in  you  all  that  a  father  could  desire ;  and  if  you 
have  gained  the  heart  of  my  daughter,  you  want  nothing 
more. 

SCENE  II. — THE  PRINCESS,  IPHITAS,  EURYALUS,  AGLANTA, 
CYNTHIA,  MORON. 

PRIN.  Oh,  Heaven  !  what  do  I  see  here  ! 

IPH.  (To Euryalus).  Yes,  the  honour  of  your  alliance 
is  of  the  highest  value  to  me ;  and  without  any  farther 
difficulty  I  consent  to  your  request. 

PRIN.  (To  Iphitas).  My  lord,  I  throw  myself  at  your 
feet  to  beg  a  favour  of  you.  You  have  always  shewn  great 
tenderness  to  me ;  I  owe  you  much  more  for  your  kind- 
ness than  for  my  birth.  But  if  ever  you  had  any  affection 
for  me,  I  now  ask  the  greatest  proof  of  it  which  you  can 
show.  My  lord,  do  not  listen  to  that  prince's  request 
and  do  not  permit  the  princess  Aglanta  to  marry  him. 

IPH.  And  why,  daughter,  would  you  oppose  that 
union  ? 

64  THE   PRINCESS   OF   ELIS.  [ACT  iv. 

PRIN.  Because  I  hate  the  Prince,  and  will,  if  I  can, 
cross  his  designs. 

IPH.  You  hate  him,  daughter  ? 

PRIN.  Yes,  from  my  heart  I  confess  it. 

IPH.  And  what  has  he  done  to  you  ? 

PRIN.  He  has  despised  me. 

IPH.  And  how? 

PRIN.  He  did  not  consider  me  handsome  enough  to 
pay  his  addresses  to  me. 

IPH.  What  offence  does  that  give  you?  You  will 
accept  no  one's  hand. 

PRIN.  No  matter.  He  ought  to  have  loved  me  like  the 
rest,  and  at  least  have  left  me  the  glory  of  refusing  him. 
His  love  for  Aglanta  is  an  insult  to  me  ;  he  disgraces  me 
when,  in  my  presence  and  in  the  midst  of  your  court,  he 
has  sought  the  hand  of  any  other  but  me. 

IPH.   But  what  interest  can  you  have  in  him  ? 

PRIN.  My  lord,  I  wish  to  revenge  myself  for  his  dis- 
dain ;  and  as  I  know  he  is  very  much  in  love  with  Aglanta, 
with  your  permission  I  shall  prevent  him  from  being 
happy  with  her. 

IPH.   Then  you  take  this  to  heart  ? 

PRIN.  Without  doubt,  my  lord ;  and  if  he  obtains  his 
desires,  I  shall  die  before  your  eyes. 

IPH.  Come,  come,  daughter,  make  a  frank  confession. 
This  Prince's  merit  has  made  you  open  your  eyes ;  and  in 
short,  you  love  him,  say  what  you  will. 

PRIN.  I,  my  lord  ? 

IPH.  Yes,  you  love  him. 

PRIN.  I  love  him,  say  you?  Do  you  impute  such  base- 
ness to  me  ?  Oh,  Heavens !  how  great  is  my  misfortune ! 
Can  I  hear  these  words  and  live  ?  And  must  I  be  so  un- 
happy as  to  be  suspected  of  loving  him  ?  Oh  !  if  it  were 
anyone  but  you,  my  lord,  who  spoke  thus  to  me,  I  know 
not  what  I  should  do. 

IPH.  Well,  well,  you  do  not  love  him.  You  hate  him, 
I  grant;  and  I  am  resolved  to  content  you,  so  that  he 
shall  not  wed  the  Princess  Aglanta. 

PRIN.  Oh  !  my  lord,  you  give  me  life. 

IPH.  But  to  prevent  his  ever  being  hers,  you  must  take 
him  for  yourself. 

SCBNB  ii.]  THE   PRINCESS   OF    ELIS.  65 

PRIN.  You  are  joking,  my  lord,  and  that  is  not  what  he 
desires. 

EUR.  Pardon  me,  madam,  I  am  rash  enough  to  aspire 
so  high,  and  I  take  to  witness  the  prince,  your  father, 
if  it  was  not  your  hand  I  asked  of  him.  I  have  deceived 
you  too  long;  I  must  throw  off  the  mask,  and,  though  you 
use  it  against  me,  discover  to  your  eyes  the  real  sentiments 
of  my  heart.  I  have  never  loved  anyone  but  you,  and 
never  shall  I  love  any  other.  It  is  you,  madam,  who  took 
from  me  that  want  of  feeling  which  I  always  affected  ;  all 
I  said  to  you  was  only  a  feint  which  I  adopted,  inspired  by 
some  secret  motive  which  I  did  not  follow  up  without  doing 
the  greatest  violence  to  my  feelings.  It  must  soon  have 
ceased,  no  doubt,  and  I  am  only  astonished  that  it  lasted 
for  half  a-day  ;  for  I  was  dying,  my  soul  was  burning  within 
me,  when  I  disguised  my  sentiments  to  you ;  never  did  a 
heart  suffer  a  constraint  equal  to  mine.  If  this  feint, 
madam,  has  given  you  offence,  I  am  ready  to  die  to  avenge 
you  ;  you  have  only  to  speak,  and  my  hand  will  imme- 
diately glory  in  executing  the  decree  you  pronounce. 

PRIN.  No,  no,  Prince,  I  do  not  take  it  ill  that  you  have 
deceived  me ;  and  would  rather  that  all  you  have  said  to 
me  were  a  feint  than  not  the  truth. 

IPH.  So  that  you  accept  the  Prince  for  a  husband,  my 
daughter  ? 

PRIN.  My  lord,  I  do  not  yet  know  what  I  shall  do. 
Pray  give  me  time  to  think  of  it,  and  spare  a  little  the  con- 
fusion I  am  in. 

IPH.  Prince,  you  may  guess  the  meaning  of  this ;  and 
you  can  now  see  what  you  may  expect. 

EUR.  I  shall  wait  as  long  as  you  please,  madam,  for  this 
decree  of  my  destiny ;  and,  if  it  condemns  me  to  death,  I 
shall  obey  without  murmuring. 

IPH.  Come,  Moron,  this  is  a  day  of  peace,  and  I  restore 
you  to  favor  with  the  Princess. 

MOR.  My  lord,  I  shall  be  a  better  courtier  for  the  future, 
and  shall  take  very  good  care  not  to  say  what  I  think. 

SCENE  III. — ARISTOMENES,  THEOCLES,  IPHITAS,  the  PRIN- 
CESS, AGLANTA,  CYNTHIA,  MORON. 

IPH.    (  To  the  Princes  of  Messina   and  Pylos ).  I   am 

VOL.    II.  E 

66  THE  PRINCESS  OF  ELIS.  [ACT  iv. 

afraid,  princes,  that  my  daughter's  choice  is  not  in  your 
favour ;  but  there  are  two  princesses  who  may  console  you 
for  this  trifling  misfortune.94 

ARTS.  My  lord,  we  have  made  up  our  minds ;  and,  if 
these  amiable  Princesses  have  not  too  great  contempt  for 
hearts  which  have  been  repulsed,  we  may,  through  them, 
attain  to  the  honour  of  your  alliance. 

SCENE  THE  LAST. IPHITAS,   the   PRINCESS,  AGLANTA, 

CYNTHIA,  PHILLIS,  EURYALUS,  ARISTOMENES,  THEOCLES, 
MORON. 

PHIL.  (To  Iphitas).  My  lord,  the  goddess  Venus  has 
proclaimed  everywhere  the  change  in  the  Princess's  heart. 
All  the  shepherds  and  two  shepherdesses  testify  their  joy 
for  it  by  dances  and  songs ;  and,  if  it  is  not  a  spectacle 
which  you  despise,  you'  may  see  the  public  rejoicings  ex- 
tend as  far  as  this. 

94  The  hands  of  the  two  princesses,  Aglanta  and  Cynthia,  seem  to  be 
right  royally  disposed  of :  they  have  not  even  been  courted,  but  the  an- 
swers of  the  two  princes  denote  also  royal  causes  for  alliance. 

THE  PRINCESS  OF  BUS.  6/ 

SIXTH  INTERLUDE. 

A  chorus  of  SHEPHERDS  and  SHEPHERDESSES,  who  dance. 

Four  Shepherds  and  two  Shepherdesses,  dressed  in  heroic 
style,  and  holding  each  other's  hands,  sing  this  song,  to 
which  the  rest  answer. 

Proud  fair,  employ  in  better  way 
The  power  of  charming  all : 
Love,  darling  rustic  maidens: 
Our  hearts  are  made  to  love. 
However  much  we  e'er  may  try 
One  day  comes  when  we  love. 
Naught  does  exist  but  yet  it  yields 
To  the  sweet  charms  of  love. 
In  pristine  youth,  oh  follow 
The  ardent  love's  delight. 
A  heart  only  begins  to  live 
The  day  it  knows  to  love. 
However  much,  etc.,  etc. 

The  rest  of  the  Interlude  will  be  found  in  the  Introductory 
Notice  to  this  comedy,  page  22. 

DON  JUAN,  OU  LE  FESTIN  DE  PIERRE. 

COMEDIE. 

DON  JUAN:  OR,  THE  FEAST  WITH  THE  STATUE, 

A    COMEDY    IN    FIVE    ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 
FEBRUARY    151*1,    1665. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

AFTER  Moliere  had  written  Tartuffe,  he  found  it  impossible  to  get  per- 
mission to  play  it ;  all  his  attempts  were  in  vain  ;  the  clerical  party  was 
too  strong  for  him  ;  he  therefore  resolved  to  write  a  counterpart  to  it,  in 
Don  jfuan,  or  the  Feast  with  the  Statue.  This  play  was  acted  for  the  first 
time  on  the  isth  of  February,  1665.  It  contains,  perhaps,  more  severe 
attacks  upon  hypocrisy  than  does  even  Tartu/e.  It  depicts  the  hero  as 
a  man  who,  rich,  noble,  powerful,  and  bold,  respects  neither  heaven  nor 
earth,  and  knows  no  bounds  to  the  gratification  of  his  desires  or  his 
passions.  He  has  excellent  manners,  but  abominable  principles ;  he  is 
"  a  whited  sepulchre,"  and  abuses  the  privileges  of  nobility  without 
acknowledging  its  obligations  or  its  duties.  Moliere  sketches  no  longer 
the  nobleman  as  ridiculous,  but  makes  him  terrible,  and  shows  that  his 
exaggerated  hatred  of  cant  leads  to  the  commission  of  the  greatest  im- 
moralities, and  to  Atheism.  After  having  seduced  and  abandoned  many 
fair  maids ;  after  having  insulted  his  father,  and  openly  flaunted  the  most 
sceptical  doctrines,  Don  Juan  turns  hypocrite ;  for  hypocrisy  is  the  climax 
of  all  vices.  But  although  the  hero  of  the  play  is  young,  elegant,  and 
profligate,  Moliere  makes  us  feel  all  the  while  that,  underneath  that  charm- 
ing exterior  lurks  something  venomous.  No  doubt  he  is  witty,  but  too 
sarcastic  to  be  pleasant.  He  is  sensual,  but  less  than  is  generally  thought. 
He  is  not  so  much  a  libertine,  as  a  man  who  loves  to  set  all  rules  of  de- 
cency, order,  and  morality  at  defiance.  What  attracts  him  is  something 
eccentric,  violent,  and  scandalous.  He  likes  to  seduce  a  nun,  or  an  inno- 
cent country  girl,  who  is  already  engaged ;  and  this  not  through  mere 
lust,  but  in  order  to  prove  that  he  can  trample  upon  all  human  laws  ;  just 
as  he  invites  to  supper  the  statue  of  a  man  whom  he  has  killed,  and  plays 
the  hypocrite  in  order  to  show  his  scorn  for  all  divine  laws.  He  is  not  a 
follower  of  the  modern  romantic  school,  always  in  pursuit  of  an  eternal 
idea  of  beauty,  and  fluttering  from  flower  to  flower ;  he  has  arrived  at  that 
stage  of  satiety  that  only  the  pangs  of  his  victims  can  produce  any  emo- 
tion in  him.  This  is  proved  by  the  remark  he  makes  to  Sganarelle  on 
beholding  Donna  Elvira  (Act  i.,  Scene  2,  page  86).  He  has  something 
of  the  cruelty  of  Lovelace  in  Richardson's  Clarissa  Harlowe,  and  like 
him,  is  faithful  to  his  friends,  generous  to  his  enemies,  but  at  the  same  time 
cowardly  enough  to  sacrifice  any  woman  to  his  caprices. 

But  Molidre  has  not  made  the  hero  coarse  or  ribald ;  his  language  is 
always  well  chosen ;  and  although  his  morality  may  be  offensive,  his 
manners  are  never  so.  The  style  of  his  speech  is  generally  masterly,  often 

71 

72  DON   JUAN  ;    OR, 

eloquent,  and  not  seldom  characteristic  of  his  sneering,  insolent,  cruel, 
hypocritical  feelings.  The  author  sometimes  borders  upon  almost  forbid- 
den ground,  as,  for  example,  when  Don  Juan,  after  having  witnessed  the 
"surprising  miracle  of  a  moving  and  speaking  statue,"  says — "There  is 
really  something  in  that  which  I  do  not  understand  ;  but,  whatever  it  may 
be,  it  is  not  capable  either  of  convincing  my  judgment,  or  of  shaking  my 
nerves." 

And  yet  this  play  made  far  less  sensation  than  Tartu/e,  and  its  repre- 
sentations were  never  forbidden.  The  reason  of  this  is  simple ;  Don 
Juan,  attacked  an  abstract  idea,  but  Tartuffe  satirized  a  particular  class, 
"  the  unco  guid." 

This  drama  came  originally  from  Spain.  A  very  old  legend  relates  how 
one  of  the  twenty-four  governors  of  Sevilla,  Don  Juan  de  Tenorio,  ran 
away  with  the  daughter  of  the  venerable  Commander  Gonzalo  de  Ulloa, 
whom  he  killed  in  a  duel,  and  who  was  buried  in  the  church  of  the  Fran- 
ciscans, where  a  splendid  tomb  and  statue  were  erected  to  him.  For 
some  time,  the  murderer,  thanks  to  the  privileges  of  his  rank  and  the 
influence  of  his  family,  set  at  nought  human  justice,  when  a  rumour  was 
circulated  that,  Don  Juan  having  dared  to  insult  the  statue  of  his  victim, 
the  latter  had  come  down  from  his  marble  tomb,  had  seized  the  impious 
wretch,  and  had  precipitated  him  to  the  uttermost  depths  of  the  infernal 
regions.  Those  who  said  that  he  had  been  allured  into  the  church, 
under  some  pretext  or  other,  and  slain  there,  were  declared  unbelievers 
and  sceptics. 

One  of  the  Spanish  dramatists,  friar  Gabriel  Tellez,  who  lived  at  the 
beginning  of  the  sixteenth  century,  wrote,  under  the  name  of  Tirso  de 
Molina,  a  comedy  on  this  legend,  which  he  divided  into  three  jornades  or 
days,  and  which  he  called  The  Seducer  of  Sevilla  and  the  Stone  Guest. 

The  action  opens  at  Naples,  where  a  certain  Duchess  Isabella,  of  whom 
Don  Juan,  under  the  feigned  name  of  Duke  Ottavio,  has  taken  advantage 
complains  loudly  to  the  king,  who  orders  the  guilty  one  to  be  seized. 
The  seducer  escapes,  and  is  shipwrecked  on  the  coast  of  Tarragona,  in 
Spain,  where  he  meets  a  young  fisherman's  daughter,  Tisbea,  whom  he 
seduces  under  promise  of  marriage,  and  who,  when  undeceived,  throws 
herself  into  the  sea.  We  next  meet  him  at  Sevilla,  where,  under  the  name 
and  the  disguise  of  his  friend,  the  Marquis  de  la  Mota,  he  treats  Donna 
Anna,  the  daughter  of  the  Commander  de  Ulloa,  as  he  had  treated  Isa- 
bella. He  then  kills  the  Commander,  and  anew  takes  flight  into  the 
country,  where  he  meets  Aminta,  who  also  falls  a  victim  to  his  usual 
method  of  promising  marriage.  Don  Juan  secretly  returns  to  Sevilla, 
and  sees  in  the  church  the  mausoleum  of  the  Commander  de  Ulloa, 
bearing  the  inscription :  "  Here  the  most  loyal  of  gentlemen  awaits  until 
God  shall  avenge  him  on  a  traitor."  Don  Juan  and  his  servant,  Catali- 
non,  insult  him  and  invite  him  to  supper.  The  statue  makes  its  appear- 
ance and  requests  Don  Juan  to  come  to  feast  with  him  the  next  evening 
at  ten  o'clock  in  the  chapel.  He  goes,  and  the  seventeenth  scene  of  the 
third  day  shows  us  the  funeral  feast,  in  which  Don  Juan  and  the  statue 
sup  on  scorpions  and  vipers,  drink  gall  and  vinegar ;  and  in  which,  finally, 
the  libertine  repents,  and  asks  for  a  priest  to  be  confessed  and  to  receive 
absolution.  The  last  scene  of  the  play  represents  the  Alcazar  at  Sevilla, 
where  the  king  repairs  the  crimes  of  Don  Juan  by  giving  all  his  victims 
away  in  marriage,  and  commands  the  tomb  and  statue  of  the  Commanaer 
to  be  brought  to  Madrid,  to  remain  there  as  a  warning  for  all  time.  The 
Spanish  Don  Juan  is  not  a  heartless  and  deliberate  seducer,  a  thorough 

THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE  73 

unbeliever  but  an  easy-going  fellow,  swayed  by  his  passsion,  who  does 
not  repent  because  he  thinks  he  has  sufficient  time  for  it,  and  at  the  final 
catastrophe  proves  himself  a  good  Roman  Catholic.  Moreover,  he  meets 
the  statue,  not  because  he  disbelieves  in  miracles,  but  because  he  has 
given  his  word  to  come,  and  "  the  dead  man  might  otherwise  have  the 
right  to  call  (him)  me  infamous."  The  impression  which  the  Spanish  play 
leaves  on  the  mind  is  eminently  a  religious  one,  and  must  have  been 
strongly  felt  at  the  time  it  was  written, — a  feeling  enhanced  by  the  scene 
in  the  chapel,  with  the  moonlight  shining  through  the  stained  glass  win- 
dows, and  the  chorus  singing  :  "  Let  those  who  flee  from  the  punishments 
of  God,  know  that  there  is  no  term  nor  debt  which  must  not  be  paid.  No 
mortal  living  should  say, '  I  have  time  before  me,'  for  the  time  of  repent- 
ance is  so  short.'' 

From  Spain,  this  drama  went  to  Italy,  where  Onifrio  Giliberti  wrote  an 
imitation  of  the  Spanish  play,  called  //  Convitato  di  pietra,  and  which 
was  performed  in  1652,  in  which  Don  Juan  appears  as  a  high-born  free- 
lover,  making  fun  of  everything,  and  even  of  the  gods.  In  1657,  the 
Italian  actors  of  Torelli,  who  played  at  the  Theatre  du  petit  Bourbon,  in 
Paris,  gave  a  harlequinade,  based  on  Gilibertis'  imitation.  This  piece  was 
full  of  broad  fun ;  and  Arlequin,  the  servant,  is  the  principal  character, 
whose  chief  business  seems  to  be  to  crack  jokes  and  to  indulge  in  practi- 
cal horse-play. 

The  actor  Dorimond,  in  1658,  translated  the  Italian  play  for  the  come- 
dians of  Mademoiselle  (see  Prefatory  Memoir,  Vol.  I.),  who  were  then  at 
Lyons,  and  brought  it  to  Paris  in  1661.  The  translator  made  a  blunder 
in  the  very  title  of  the  piece.  //  convitato  means  "The  guest;''  but  Dori- 
mond thought  it  meant  "  feast,"  which  was  in  old  French  convive,  and  in 
Italian  convito,  and  thus  gave  to  his  piece  the  title,  Le  Festin  de  Pierre, 
the  Stone  Feast.  This  play  was  printed  only  in  1665,  after  the  great  suc- 
cess which  Moliere's  comedy  obtained.  Villiers  also  versified  an  imitation 
of  Giliberti's  comedy  for  the  actors  of  the  Hotel  de  Bourgogne,  with  the 
same  title  as  Dorimond's,  and  which  was  printed  in  1660.  It  is  probable 
that  the  Spanish  actors,  who  appeared  in  France  in  1659,  on  the  occasion 
of  the  marriage  of  Louis  XIV.,  with  the  Infanta  Maria  Theresa,  had  re- 
presented the  original  Spanish  play. 

Four  years  after  Moliere's  Don  Juan,  ou  le  Festin  de  Pierre — for  he 
kept  the  old  title  as  well — had  been  performed,  a  certain  actor,  Rosimond, ' 
wrote  for  the  Theatre  du  Marais  Le  Nouveau  Festin  de  Pierre,  ou  f  Athee 
foudroye,  in  which  he  made  of  Don  Juan  a  tiresome  controversialist. 

Don  yuan  was  played  from  February  isth,  1665,  until  the  2Oth  of 
March  of  the  same  year;  but  produced  so  much  irritation  and  remarks 
that  several  scenes, — for  example,  that  between  the  poor  man  and  Don 
Juan,  and  the  boldest  remarks  in  the  dialogue  between  Don  Juan  and 
Sganarelle,  had  to  be  suppressed  at  once.  It  may  even  be  supposed  that 
Moliere  received  a  hint  not  to  play  the  piece  again  ;  for  after  the  aoth  of 
March  it  disappeared  for  a  long  time  from  the  scene. 

In  the  month  of  April  1665,  a  pamphlet  appeared,  called  Observations 
sur  une  Comedie  de  Moliere  intitulee  le  Festin  de  Pierre,  and  written  by  a 
clergyman  called  de  Rochemont.  It  passed  through  three  or  four  edi- 
tions, which  followed  one  another  m  quick  succession,  and  is  written  in  a 
good  style,  but  full  of  the  most  bitter  animus  against  our  author.  It 
faintly  praises  Moliere,  admits  that  he  has  some  talent  for  farce,  that  he 
speaks  passable  French,  translates  Italian  pretty  well,  and  does  not  copy 
badly  other  authors  ;  but  states  that  he  is  always  the  same,  although  the 

74  DON  JUAN  ;    OR, 

public  should  be  indulgent  to  those  who  try  to  amuse  them.  If  Moliere 
had,  in  the  Precieuses,  only  criticised  th-;  little  doublets,  and  the  prodi- 
gious quantity  of  ribbands,  nobody  would  have  attacked  him,  or  been  in- 
dignant at  him  ;  but  to  make  fun  of  religion,  and  openly  to  display  scep- 
ticism, is  too  bad  for  a  mere  buffoon.  Don  yuan  has  caused  a  public 
scandal,  which  is  the  greater  because  it  was  performed  in  the  house  of  a 
Christian  prince,  and  in  the  presence  of  so  many  wise  and  pious  mag- 
istrates. Whilst  the  greatest  and  most  religious  monarch  in  the  world 
tries  to  destroy  heresy,  and  to  establish  real  devotion,  Moliere  raises 
altars  to  impiety ;  his  purpose  is  to  ruin  men  whilst  making  them  laugh  ; 
the  malicious  ingenuousness  of  his  Agnes  has  corrupted  more  maidens 
than  the  most  licentious  writings ;  Sganarelle  teaches  how  to  make  cuck- 
olds, and  The  School  for  Wives  how  to  debauch  them.  In  fact,  he  first 
destroys  the  morals  of  men,  and  then  their  religion.  To  use  his  own 
words  :  "  he  does  not  mind  if  people  criticise  his  pieces,  so  that  they  come 
to  see  them  "  *  and  pay  for  their  places.  Nothing  more  impious  has  ever 
appeared  than  Tartuffe  and  Don.  Juan;  even  Pagan  emperors  con- 
demned to  death  those  who  ridiculed  religion.  It  is  to  be  hoped  that  our 
great  Prince  will  put  a  stop  to  this  :  "  Deluge,  plague  and  famine  are  the 
consequences  of  Atheism  ;  when  Heaven  resolves  to  punish  it,  it  pours 
out  upon  us  all  the  vials  of  its  wrath  to  make  the  chastisement  more  im- 
pressive. The  wisdom  of  the  King  will  divert  those  misfortunes  which 
impiety  wishes  to  draw  upon  us  ;  it  will  establish  the  altars  which  it  en- 
deavours to  overturn ;  we  shall  see  everywhere  religion  triumph  over  its 
enemies,  under  the  sway  of  this  pious  and  invincible  monarch,  the  glory 
of  his  age,  the  ornament  of  his  states,  the  beloved  of  his  subjects,  the 
terror  of  the  unbelievers,  the  delight  of  the  whole  human  race.  Vivat 
rex,  vivat  in  cBtemum  !  May  the  King  live,  but  may  he  live  eternally  for 
the  good  of  the  Church,  for  the  tranquillity  of  the  State,  and  for  the  hap- 
piness of  all  nations !" 

These  observations  were  answered  in  a  Lettre  sur  les  Observations  d? 
une  Comedi  du  Sieur  Moliere,  intitulee  Le  Festin  de  Pierre,  published 
also  in  1665,  in  which  the  author  defends  Moliere  ;  says  that  he  is  more 
than  a  mere  buffoon  ;  that  the  very  fact  that  that  most  religious  King,  Louis 
XIV.,  allowed  Don  Juan  to  be  acted  before  him,  proves  that  there  is  no 
harm  in  the  play  ;  that  people  ought  not  to  accuse  Moliere  of  infidelity 
without  sufficient  proof ;  that  in  this  play  virtue  is  rewarded  and  vice 
punished  ;  that  in  Don  Juan,  as  well  as  in  Tartuffe,  hypocrisy  only  is  at- 
tacked, but  not  real  religion ;  and  that,  finally,  if  we  are  to  be  visited  by 
all  those  plagues  prophesied  by  the  Observateur,  the  hypocrites  will  be  the 
first  to  feel  the  effects  of  them. 

Another  very  badly  written  pamphlet  was  likewise  published  in  the 
same  year,  in  defence  of  Moliere,  having  for  its  title  Reponse  aux  Obser- 
vations touchant  Le  Festin  de  Pierre  de  Monsieur  de  Moliere. 

In  1667,  Don  yuan  re-appeared  on  the  French  stage,  but  remodelled 
and  put  into  verse  by  Thomas  Corneille.  This  version,  or  rather  perver- 
sion, of  Moliere's  play  was  acted  until  the  isth  of  January  1847,  when 
the  comedy,  as  originally  written,  was  again  performed,  and  continues  to 
be  so  until  the  present  day. 

Sir  Aston  Cokain  wrote  The  Tragedy  of  Ovid,  which  was  printed  in 
1662,  but  which  was  never  acted.  In  this,  the  passage  of  Captain  Hanni- 
bal (Don  Juan)  inviting  the  dead  body  of  Helvidius  to  supper,  and  the 

iSee  The  School  for  Wives  Criticised,  Vol.  I.,  Scene  vii. 

THE  FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  75 

Spectre  accepting  it,  and  the  latter  afterwards  inviting  Hannibal  to  sup- 
per, as  well  as  the  final  catastrophe,  seem  borrowed  from  the  Italian  play 
//  Atheisto  fulminato,  from  which  Moliere  appears  also  to  have  taken  sev- 
eral scenes.  In  any  case,  Cokain  cannot  have  borrowed  from  the  French 
author,  whose  play  was  not  brought  out  until  February  I5th,  1665. 

Thomas  Shadwell  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Bores,  Vol.  I.,  has, 
in  The  Libertine,  acted  at  Dorset  Garden  in  1676,  partly  imitated  Mo- 
liere. This  play  is  dedicated  to  William,  Duke  of  Newcastle  ;  and  in  the 
preface  it  is  admitted  that  ''  there  are  an  Italian,  a  Spanish,  and  four 
French  plays  on  the  story  of  Don  Juan,  the  character  of  the  libertine, 
and  consequently  those  of  his  friends  are  borrowed  ;  but  all  the  plot  till 
the  latter  end  of  the  fourth  act  is  new."  This  seems  not  quite  true  ;  for 
in  the  second  act  of  Shadwell's  comedy  there  are  evidently  some  scenes 
borrowed  from  Moliere.  In  the  English  play,  Don  -Juan  loves  wicked- 
ness, and  philosophizes  about  it  to  his  two  friends,  Don  Lopez  and  Don 
Antonio  ;  he  causes  his  own  father  to  be  murdered,  and,  on  the  whole, 
behaves  rather  like  a  madman.  The  scenes  between  Don  Juan,  The 
Statue,  and  Sganarelle — Jacomo  in  the  English  play — are  pretty  closely 
followed  from  Moliere,  but  made  more  horrible.  Shadwell's  comedy 
met  with  great  success,  although  our  author  states  :  "  there  being  no  act 
in  it  which  cost  me  above  five  days  writing,  and  the  two  last  (the  play- 
house having  great  occasion  for  a  play)  were  both  written  in  four  days." 
The  Prologue  opens  thus  : 

"  Our  Author  sent  me  hither  for  a  Scout, 
To  spy  what  bloody  Criticks  were  come  out. 
Those  Piccaroons  in  Wit,  wh'  infest  this  Road, 
And  snap  both  Friend  and  Foe  that  come  abroad. 
This  savage  Party  crueller  appears 
Than  in  the  Channel  Ostend  Privateers. 
You  in  this  Road,  or  sink  or  plunder  all ; 
Remorseless  as  a  Storm  on  us  you  fall. 
But  as  a  Merchant,  when  by  Storm  distres'd, 
Flings  out  his  bulky  goods  to  save  the  rest, 
Hoping  a  Calm  may  come,  he  keeps  the  best. 
In  this  black  Tempest  which  o'er  us  impends, 
Near  Rocks  and  Quicksands,  and  no  Port  of  Friends, 
Our  Poet  gives  this  over  to  your  Rage, 
The  most  irregular  Play  upon  the  Stage." 

Congreve  has  imitated,  in  Love  for  Love  (Act  i.,  Scene  i),  acted  for  the 
first  time  in  Little  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields  in  1695,  the  scene  from  Moliere's 
Don  jfuan  between  M.  Dimanche  and  the  hero  of  the  play.  Love  for 
Love  appears  to  me  to  be  a  free  imitation  of  three  of  Moliere's  plays ; 
the  scenes  between  Valentine  and  Jeremy  are  something  like  those  be- 
tween Don  Juan  and  Sganarelle,  from  Don  jfuan;  Scandal,  Tattle,  Mrs. 
Foresight,  and  Mrs.  Frail,  are  followed  from  similar  characters  in  The  Mis- 
anthrope ;  whilst  Foresight  seems  Harpagon  from  The  Miser.  Love  for 
Love  was,  curiously  enough,  acted  entirely  by  women  June  25th,  27th, 
and  agth,  1705 ;  the  two  first  times  most  likely  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields, 
the  last,  at  the  Haymarket. 

At  the  Royalty  Theatre  was  acted,  in  1787,  a  tragic  pantomimical  en- 
tertainment, called  Don  yuan,  or  the  Libertine  Destroyed,  composed  by 
M.  Delpini ;  the  songs,  duets,  and  choruses  by  Mr.  Reeve.  At  Drury 
Lane,  in  1790,  was  played  a  pantomime-ballet  of  the  same  name. 

Monorieff  wrote  an  operatic  extravaganza,  in  two  acts,  called  Giovanni 
in  London,  or  the  Libertine  Reclaimed.  ''  Don  Giovanni  having,  like  his 

76  DON   JUAN;    OR,    THE   FEAST   WITH    THE   STATUE. 

noble  compeers,  made  the  grand  tour,  and  also  acquired  additional  no- 
toriety, by  being  forcibly  ejected  from  that  place  where  Telemachus  went 
to  look  for  his  lather,  jumps  into  Charon's  boat,  re-passes  the  river  Styx, 
and  pays  a  visit  to  London,  for  the  purpose,  like  the  man  when  he  opened 
the  oysters,  of  astonishing  the  natives.  In  this  expedition  he  is  accom- 
panied by  his  valet,  pimp,  and  bottle-holder,  Leporello ;  and  whether  at 
the  Magpie  and  Punch-Bowl,  in  the  Borough — in  St.  Giles',  with  Mes- 
dames  Drainemdry,  Porous,  and  Simpkins — at  Chalk  Farm,  with  Finikin 
and  Popinjay — in  the  King's  Bench,  with  Shirk,  Sponge,  and  other  gen- 
tlemen who  pay  their  creditors  by  a  bill  at  three  months — or  at  Charing 
Cross,  in  company  with  King  Charles  on  horseback — their  adventures  are 
equally  wonderful  and  entertaining."  This  piece  was  originally  written 
for  the  Olympic  Theatre,  but  was  played  in  1827  both  at  Drury  Lane  and 
at  Covent  Garden.  In  the  last  mentioned  theatre  the  late  Madame 
Vestris  created  a  certain  furore,  in  acting  the  hero  of  the  piece. 

Thomas  Dibdin  wrote  a  similar  piece,  called  Don  Giovanni,  or  the 
Spectre  on  Horseback,  a  burlesque  on  Mozart's  celebrated  opera,  which 
was  acted  at  Bath,  on  the  igth  of  May,  1819. 

On  the  22d  of  December,  1821,  there  was  performed  at  Drury  Lane,  an 
opera  called  Giovanni  in  Ireland,  in  which  Madame  Vestris  again  played 
the  hero  ;  but  it  met  with  little  success. 

Goldine,  the  Italian  dramatist,  also  wrote  a  Don  yuan,  or  the  Libertine, 
a  comedy  in  five  acts,  and  in  blank  verse,  of  which  he  says  in  his  Auto- 
biography, "  Having  learned  enough  of  French  to  be  able  to  read  it,  I 
found  that  Moliere  and  Thomas  Corneille  had  employed  their  talents  on 
the  same  subject ;  I  undertook  also  to  give  a  similar  treat  to  my  country- 
men, that  I  might  be  on  somewhat  decent  terms  with  the  devil.  I  could 
not,  it  is  true,  give  the  same  title  to  it ;  for  in  my  piece,  the  statue  of  the 
Commander  neither  speaks,  moves,  nor  goes  to  sup  in  town.  ...  I  could 
not  dispense  with  the  thunder  which  strikes  Don  Juan,  because  the  wicked 
deserve  to  be  punished  ;  but  I  brought  about  the  event  in  such  a  way  that 
it  might  either  be  an  immediate  effect  of  the  wrath  of  God,  or  might  pro- 
ceed from  a  combination  of  secondary  causes  under  the  direction  of  the 
laws  of  providence." 

Mozart  also  composed  the  music  to  an  opera  called  Don  Giovanni, — 
in  which  the  Italian  librettist,  Delponte,  has  followed  rather  the  old 
Spanish  play  than  Moliere, — and  which  is  known  and  admired  wherever 
music  is  cultivated. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

DON  JUAN,  son  to  Don  Louis. 

DON  CARLOS,   ) 

DON  ALONZO,  ) 

DON  Louis,  father  to  Don  Juan. 

THE  STATUE  OF  THE  COMMANDER.* 

GUZMAN,  gentleman-usher  to  Donna  Elvira. 

M.  DIMANCHE,  a  tradesman. 

SGANARELLE,3  ^ 

VIOLETTE,         \servantstoDonJuan. 

RAGOTIN,         ) 

PIERROT,  a  countryman. 

LA  RAMEE,  a  swashbuckler. 

A  POOR  MAN. 

Don  Juan's  FOLLOWERS. 

Don  Carlos'  and  Don  Alonzo" s  FOLLOWERS. 

A  GHOST. 

DONNA  ELVIRA,  wife  to  Don  Juan. 

CHARLOTTE,   ) 

>•  country-women. 
MATHURINE,  ) 

*A  Commander  was  a  member  of  the  military-religious  order  of  the 
Knights  of  Malta,  or  of  any  other  similar  order,  who,  by  virtue  of  long  or 
meritorious  services,  had  the  control  of  a  manor,  with  lands  and  tene- 
ments appertaining  thereto,  part  of  the  proceeds  of  which  had  to  be  used 
for  the  benefit  of  that  oftier,  and  part  for  himself.  Such  a  manor  was 
called  a  commandery  or  preceptory. 

'  Moliere  played  this  part.  In  the  inventory  taken  after  the  author's 
death,  we  see  :  "  a  deep  gold-coloured  satin  little  jerkin,  with  long  skirts, 
a  linen  jacket  with  gold  facings,  a  doublet  of  flowered  satin  for  the  Festin 
de  Pierre."  I  doubt  if  this  was  part  of  the  dress  of  Sganarelle. 

DON  JUAN- 

OR, 

THE    FEAST    WITH    THE    STATUE. 

(DON  JUAN:  OU,  LE  FBSTIN  DE  PIERRE.) 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — (A  Palace}. — SGANARELLE,  GUZMAN. 

SCAN.  {With  a  snuff-box  in  his  hancT).  Whatever 
Aristotle  and  all  the  philosophers  may  say,  nothing  can  be 
compared  to  tobacco :  all  respectable  men  are  very  fond 
of  it,  and  he  who  lives  without  tobacco  deserves  not  to 
live.  It  not  only  enlivens  and  clears  a  man's  brains,  but 
it  also  teaches  men  to  be  virtuous ;  through  it  one  learns 
to  become  a  respectable  man.  Do  you  not  see  plainly,  as 
soon  as  we  take  it,  how  affable  we  become  with  everyone, 
and  how  delighted  we  are  to  give  right  and  left,  wherever 
we  are  ?  We  do  not  even  wait  till  it  is  asked  for,  but  we 
forestall  people's  wishes ;  so  true  it  is  that  tobacco  inspires 
all  those  who  take  it  with  sentiments  of  honour  and  virtue.* 
But  enough  of  this ;  let  us  rather  resume  our  discourse. 
So,  then,  dear  Guzman,  Donna  Elvira,  your  mistress,  being 

*  Tobacco  had  been. in  use  for  more  than  a  century.  It  was  introduced 
into  France,  in  the  year  1560,  by  Jean  Nicot,  lord  of  Villemain,  ambassa- 
dor of  Francis  II.  at  the  Court  of  Madrid,  who  made  a  present  of  it  to  the 
Queen,  Catherine  de  Medici :  hence  its  first  name  was  in  French  Herbe  df 
la  rein*  or  Nlcotiane. 

79 

80  DON    JUAN;   OR,  IACTL 

surprised  at  our  departure,  is  come  after  us;  and  my  master 
has  touched  her  heart  so  intensely,  that  you  say  she  cannot 
exist  without  coming  here  in  search  of  him.  Between 
ourselves,  do  you  wish  me  to  tell  you  my  thoughts  ?  I  am 
afraid  her  love  will  be  ill  repaid,  that  her  journey  to  this 
city  will  produce  little  fruit,  and  that  you  would  have 
gained  just  as  much  had  you  never  stirred  from  the  spot. 

Guz.  And  pray,  Sganarelle,  what  can  inspire  you  with 
a  terror  which  so  augurs  ill  ?  Has  your  master  opened  his 
heart  to  you  on  that  subject,  and  did  he  tell  you  that  his 
coldness  for  us  obliged  him  to  leave? 

SCAN.  Not  at  all ;  but,  by  what  I  see,  I  know  pretty 
well  how  things  are ;  and,  although  he  has  not  yet  said 
anything  to  me,  I  could  almost  lay  a  wager  that  the  busi- 
ness is  tending  that'way.  I  may,  perhaps,  be  mistaken ; 
but  yet,  in  such  cases,  experience  has  given  me  some  in- 
sight. 

Guz.  What !  Can  this  sudden  departure  be  caused  by 
the  faithlessness  of  Don  Juan.  Could  he  insult  so  greatly 
the  chaste  love  of  Donna  Elvira  ? 

SCAN.  No,  no,  he  is  young  yet,  and  has  not  the  courage 
to  ... 

Guz.  Can  a  man  of  his  rank  commit  so  base  an  action  ! 

SCAN.  Oh  yes,  his  rank  !  The  idea  is  really  admirable ; 
he  would  forbear  on  that  account ! 

Guz.  But  he  is  restrained  by  the  holy  bonds  of  matri- 
mony. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  poor  Guzman,  my  good  friend,  believe  me, 
you  do  not  know  yet  what  sort  of  man  Don  Juan  is. 

Guz.  Truly,  I  do  not  know  what  sort  of  a  man  he  may 
be,  if  he  has  acted  so  treacherously  towards  us.  I  do  not 
understand  how,  after  so  much  love  and  impatience  shown, 
such  homage  urged  upon  us,  such  vows,  sighs,  and  tears, 
so  many  passionate  letters,  such  ardent  protestations  and 
repeated  oaths,  such  transports  in  short,  and  such  out- 
bursts, forcing  even,  in  his  passion,  the  sacred  obstacle  of 
a  nunnery,  in  order  to  get  Donna  Elvira  in  his  power ;  I 
do  not  understand,  I  say,  how  after  all  this,  he  should  have 
the  heart  to  break  his  word. 

SCAN.  I  have  no  great  difficulty  in  understanding  this ; 
and,  if  you  knew  the  fellow,  you  would  think  the  thing 

SCRNE  i.J  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  8 1 

easy  enough  for  him.  I  do  not  say  that  he  has  changed 
his  sentiments  for  Donna  Elvira ;  I  am  not  yet  quite  sure 
of  it.  You  know  that  he  ordered  me  to  set  out  before 
him ;  and  since  his  arrival,  he  has  not  spoken  to  me  ;  but, 
by  way  of  precaution,  I  tell  you,  between  ourselves,  that 
Don  Juan,  my  master,  is  one  of  the  greatest  scoundrels 
upon  earth,  a  madman,  a  dog,  a  demon,  a  Turk,  a  here- 
tick,  who  believes  neither  in  Heaven,  hell,  nor  devil,  who 
passes  his  life  like  a  regular  brute  beast,  one  of  Epicurus' 
swine,  a  true  Sardanapalus,  who  shuts  his  ears  against  all 
Christian  remonstrances  that  can  be  made  to  him,  and 
considers  all  that  we  believe  as  so  much  nonsense.  You 
tell  me  that  he  has  married  your  mistress  ;  believe  me,  he 
would  have  done  more  to  satisfy  his  passion,  and  would, 
besides  herself,  have  married  you,  her  dog  and  her  cat  into 
the  bargain.  It  costs  him  nothing  to  contract  a  marriage ; 
he  uses  no  other  snares  to  entrap  the  fair  sex ;  and  he 
marries  whomsoever  he  can  get  hold  of.  A  lady,  gentle- 
woman, citizen's  daughter,  countrywoman  ;  he  thinks 
nothing  too  hot  or  too  cold  for  him  ;  and  if  I  were  to  tell 
you  the  names  of  all  those  whom  he  has  married  in  differ- 
ent places,  I  would  not  have  finished  until  night.5  You 
seem  surprised  and  change  colour  at  what  you  hear ; 
this  is  a  mere  outline  of  the  man  ;  and  many  other  touches 
would  be  required  to  finish  the  picture.  Let  it  be  sufficient 
that  some  day  or  other  Heaven  must  needs  overwhelm  him 
with  its  wrath ;  that  I  had  much  better  be  with  the  devil 
than  with  him,  and  that  he  makes  me  witness  so  many 
horrors,  that  I  could  wish  him  already  I  do  not  know 
where!  If  a  great  lord  is  a  wicked  man,  it  is  a  terrible 
thing.  I  must  be  faithful  to  him  in  spite  of  myself;  fear 
moves  me  instead  of  zeal,  curbs  my  sentiments,  and  often 
compels  me  to  applaud  what  I  detest  from  my  very  soul. 
See,  there  he  comes  to  take  a  walk  in  this  palace ;  let  us 
separate.  One  word  more ;  I  have  trusted  you,  and  not 

6  Moliere  has  not  given  a  list  of  the  names  of  the  different  wives  of  Don 
Juan,  to  be  found  in  the  Italian  piece  which  he  has  freely  followed,  and 
also  in  several  other  plays  of  that  time.  Perhaps  he  thought  the  idea  too 
hackneyed.  In  Mozart's  opera,  Don  Giovanni,  the  list  of  the  mille  e  tre 
conquests  of  the  hero,  as  sung  by  Leporello,  beginning  Madamina  il  cato- 
logo  e  guesto,  Delle  belle  ch'  amo  il  padron  mio,  produces  a  great  and  ad- 
mirable effect. 

VOL.    II.  F 

82  DON  JUAN;  OR,  [ACTI. 

concealed  anything  from  you  ;  it  came  a  little  too  quick- 
ly out  of  my  mouth ;  but,  if  ever  anything  should  reach 
his  ears,  I  shall  declare  flatly  that  you  have  told  a  lie. 

SCENE  II. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Ju.  What  man  was  just  now  talking  to  you  .  He 
has  very  much  the  air,  it  seems  to  me,  of  honest  Guzman, 
a  servant  of  Donna  Elvira. 

SCAN.  It  is  something  very  like  it. 

D.  Ju.  What !  it  is  he? 

SCAN.  The  very  man. 

D.  Ju.  And  how  long  has  he  been  in  town? 

SCAN.  Since  last  night. 

D.  Ju.  And  why  has  he  come  ? 

SCAN.  I  believe  you  may  imagine  well  enough  what  dis- 
turbs him. 

D.  Ju.  Our  departure,  no  doubt  ? 

SGAN.  The  good  man  is  quite  offended,  and  asked  me 
the  qause  of  it. 

D.  Ju.  And  what  answer  did  you  give  him  ? 

SCAN.  That  you  had  not  told  me  anything  about  it. 

D.  Ju.  But,  prithee,  what  do  you  think  of  it?  What 
do  you  imagine  about  this  affair  ? 

SCAN.  I?  I  believe,  without  wronging  you,  that  you 
have  some  new  love  affair  in  your  head. 

D.  Ju.  Do  you  think  so  ? 

SCAN.  Yes. 

D.  Ju.  Upon  my  word,  you  are  not  mistaken ;  and  I 
must  confess  another  object  has  driven  Elvira  from  my 
thoughts. 

SCAN.  Oh  !  good  Heavens  !  I  know  my  Don  Juan  at 
my  fingers'  ends,  and  that  your  heart  is  the  most  restless 
in  the  world ;  it  delights  to  rove  from  one  set  of  chains  to 
another  and  never  likes  to  stay  in  one  spot. 

D.  Ju.  And  tell  me,  do  you  not  think  I  am  right  in 
acting  in  such  a  manner  ? 

SCAN.  Oh  !     sir  ... 

D.  Ju.  What  !     Speak. 

SCAN.  Certainly,  you  are  right,  if  you  have  a  mind  to 
it ;  no  one  can  say  anything  against  it.  But,  if  you  had 
not  a  mind  to  it,  it  might  perhaps  be  another  affair 

sc«w».vr.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE.  83 

D.  Ju.  Well,  then,  I  give  you  leave  to  speak,  and  to 
tell  me  your  sentiments. 

SCAN.  In  that  case,  sir,  I  must  frankly  tell  you  that  I 
do  not  approve  of  your  goings  on,  and  that  I  think  it  very 
wicked  to  make  love  to  every  one,  as  you  do. 

D.  Ju.  What !  Would  you  have  a  man  bind  himself  to 
remain  with  the  first  object  which  has  caught  him,  re- 
nounce the  world  for  her  sake,  and  have  no  more  eyes  for 
anybody?  A  nice  thing  to  pique  one's  self  upon  the 
false  honour  of  being  faithful,  to  bury  one's  self  for  ever 
in  one  passion,  and  to  be  dead  from  our  very  youth  to  all 
other  beauties  that  may  strike  us  !  No,  no,  constancy  is 
fit  only  for  fools  ;  every  handsome  woman  has  a  right  to 
charm  us,  and  the  advantage  of  being  first  met  with  ought 
not  to  rob  others  of  the  just  pretensions  which  they  all 
have  upon  our  hearts.  As  for  me  beauty  delights  me 
wherever  I  meet  with  it,  and  I  easily  give  myself  up  to 
that  sweet  violence  with  which  it  hurries  us  along.  It 
does  not  matter  if  I  am  engaged ;  the  love  I  feel  for  one 
fair  does  not  induce  me  to  do  injustice  to  others ;  I  have 
eyes  to  see  the  merit  of  all,  and  pay  to  every  one  the 
homage  and  tribute  which  nature  demands  from  us. 
However  it  be,  I  cannot  refuse  my  heart  to  any  lovely 
creature  I  behold ;  and  as  soon  as  a  handsome  face  asks  it  of 
me,  if  I  had  ven  thousand  hearts,  I  would  give  them  all. 
Budding  inclinations,  after  all  have  a  charm  which  is  in- 
describable, and  all  the  pleasure  of  love  is  in  variety. 
One  takes  great  delight  in  reducing,  by  a  hundred  con- 
trivances, the  heart  of  a  young  beauty ;  in  seeing  every 
day  the  gradual  progress  one  has  made;  in  combating 
with  transports,  tears,  and  sighs,  the  innocent  bashfulness 
of  a  mind  which  can  hardly  prevail  upon  itself  to  surren- 
der ;  in  demolishing,  inch  by  inch,  all  the  little  resistance 
she  can  oppose  to  us ;  in  conquering  the  scruples  upon 
which  she  prides  herself,  and  in  leading  her  gently  whither 
we  have  a  mind  to  bring  her.  But  when  we  are  once  her 
master,  there  is  nothing  more  to  say,  nothing  more  to 
wish  for ;  all  the  charms  of  the  passion  are  over,  and  we 
are  lulled  asleep  in  the  tranquillity  of  such  a  love,  if  some 
new  object  does  not  awaken  our  desires  and  present  to  our 
heart  the  attractive  charms  of  a  conquest  still  to  make. 

84  DON  JUAN  ;  OR,  [ACT  ,. 

In  short,  there  is  nothing  so  pleasant  as  to  triumph  over 
the  resistance  of  a  fair  maiden ;  I  possess,  in  such  a  case, 
the  ambition  of  a  conqueror,  who  flies  perpetually  from 
one  victory  to  another,  and  can  never  resolve  to  set 
bounds  to  his  wishes.  Nothing  can  restrain  the  impetu- 
osity of  my  desires ;  I  feel  I  have  a  heart  that  could  love 
all  the  world,  and  like  Alexander,  I  could  wish  for  other 
worlds,  wherein  to  extend  my  amorous  conquests.6 

SCAN.  Ods'  boddikins,  how  you  talk !  It  seems  that 
you  have  learned  this  by  heart ;  you  speak  like  a  book. 

D.  Ju.  What  have  you  to  say  to  this? 

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  I  have  to  say  ...  I  do  not 
know  what  to  say  ;  for  you  turn  things  in  such  a  manner 
that  it  seems  you  are  right,  and  yet  it  is  certain  you  are 
not.  I  had  the  finest  thoughts  in  the  world,  but  your 
speech  has  put  them  all  out  of  my  head.  Let  me  alone  ; 
another  time  I  shall  write  down  all  my  arguments,  to  dis- 
pute with  you. 

D.  Ju.  Do  so. 

SCAN.  But,  sir,  would  it  be  included  in  the  permission 
you  have  given  me,  if  I  were  to  tell  you  that  I  am  some- 
what scandalized  at  the  life  which  you  lead. 

D.  Ju.   How?     What  life  do  I  lead ? 

SCAN.  A  very  good  one.  But,  for  example,  to  see  you 
marry  every  month,  as  you  do  ! 

D.  Ju.  Can  there  be  anything  more  agreeable  ? 

SCAN.  True,  I  should  think  it  very  agreeable  and  very 
amusing,  and  I  should  myself  like  it  well  enough  if  there 
were  no  harm  in  it ;  but,  sir,  to  make  thus  a  jest  of  a 
sacred  mystery,  and  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Well,  be  it  so ;  it  is  an  affair  between  Heaven 
and  me,  and  I  can  very  well  settle  it  without  your  troub 
ling  yourself  about  it. 

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  sir,  I  have  always  heard  it  s*a* 
that  to  jest  about  Heaven  is  wicked  jesting,  and  that 
libertines  always  come  to  a  bad  end. 

*  Lovelace,  in  Richardson's  Clarissa  Harlowe,  expresses  nearly  the 
same  sentiments,  and  writes,  "  the  Debellare  superbos  should  be  my  mot- 
to ;  I  always  considered  opposition  and  resistance  as  a  challenge  to  do 
my  worst" 

SCBNZII.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  85 

D.  Ju.  Hullo,  Master  Fool !  You  know  I  told  you  that 
I  do  not  like  persons  who  remonstrate. 

SCAN.  Therefore  I  do  not  speak  to  you  !  Heaven  for- 
bid !  You  know  what  you  do ;  and,  if  you  are  a  libertine7 
you  have  your  reasons  :  but  there  are  certain  punny  cox- 
combs in  this  world  who  are  so  without  knowing  why  or 
wherefore,  who  pretend  to  be  free-thinkers,  because  they 
think  it  becomes  them.  Had  I  a  master  of  that  kind,  I 
would  tell  him  plainly  to  his  face  :  "  Dare  you  thus  jest 
with  Heaven,  and  do  you  not  tremble  to  laugh,  as  you  do, 
at  things  the  most  sacred  ?  Does  it  become  you,  you  little 
earthworm,  you  mannikin  that  you  are  (I  speak  to  the 
master  I  mentioned),  does  it  become  you  to  wish  to  turn 
into  ridicule  what  all  men  revere  ?  Do  you  think  that 
because  you  are  a  man  of  rank,  because  you  wear  a  fair 
and  well-curled  wig,  have  some  feathers  in  your  hat,  a 
gold-laced  coat,  and  flame-coloured  ribbons8  (I  do  not 
speak  to  you  but  to  the  other) — do  you  think,  I  say,  that 
you  are  a  cleverer  man  for  all  this,  that  you  may  be 
allowed  to  do  everything,  and  that  no  one  should  dare  to 
tell  you  the  truth  ?  Learn  from  me,  who  am  your  servant, 
that  Heaven,  sooner  or  later,  punishes  the  impious ;  that 
a  wicked  life  leads  to  a  wicked  death ;  that  libertines  never 
come  to  a  good  end,  and  that  ..." 

D.  Ju.  Silence ! 

SCAN.  Why,  what  is  the  matter  ? 

D.  Ju.  The  matter  is,  that  I  inform  you  that  a  certain 
beauty  has  got  possession  of  my  heart,  and  that,  captivated 
by  her  charms,  I  followed  her  to  this  city. 

SCAN.  And  you  have  no  fear,  sir,  of  the  consequences 
of  the  death  of  that  Commander  whom  you  killed  six 
months  ago  ? 

7  The  French  word  libertin  had  formerly  not  only  the  signification  which 
it  has  in  our  days,  but  meant  also  a  free-thinker;  and  was  often  said  of  a 
man  or  woman  who  did  not  like  to  submit  to  the  ordinary  rules  and  regtr 
lations  of  society.     Libertine  was  also  formerly  applied,  in  English,  "  to 
certain  heretical  sects,  and  intended  to  mark  the  licentious  liberty  of  their 
creed  and  forms,"  says  Trench,  in  his  Select  Glossary,  "a  striking  evidence 
of  the  extreme  likelihood  that  he  who  has  no  restraints  on  his  belief  will 
ere  long  have  none  upon  his  life." 

8  Sganarelle  describes  the  apparel  Don  Juan  wears,  without  daring  to 
name  him. 

86  DON  JUAN  ;   OR,  [ACT  i. 

D.  Ju.  Why  should  I  be  afraid  ?  Did  I  not  kill  him 
honourably  ? 

SCAN.  Very  honourably ;  it  could  not  have  been  done 
more  so,  and  he  would  be  wrong  to  complain. 

D.  Ju.  I  had  my  pardon  for  this  affair. 

SCAN.  Yes ;  but  this  pardon  does  not  perhaps  stifle  the 
resentment  of  relatives  and  friends,  and  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Pooh  !  Let  us  not  think  of  any  harm  that  may 
happen  to  us,  but  only  of  what  can  give  us  pleasure.  The 
person  of  whom  I  speak  to  you  is  a  young  bride,  one  of  the 
prettiest  in  the  world,  who  was  brought  hither  by  the  very 
man  she  is  to  marry.  Chance  threw  this  pair  of  lovers  in 
my  way,  three  or  four  days  before  they  set  out  on  their 
journey.  Never  did  I  see  two  people  so  satisfied  with  each 
other ;  and  displaying  so  much  love.  The  visible  tender- 
ness of  their  mutual  flame  moved  me ;  I  felt  it  deeply,  and 
my  love  began  by  jealousy.  Yes,  I  could  not  at  first  sight 
endure  to  see  them  so  happy  together.  Resentment  kindled 
my  desire,  and  I  thought  it  would  cause  me  very  great 
pleasure  to  disturb  their  intimacy,  and  to  sever  that  union 
by  which  the  delicate  feelings  of  my  heart  were  offended ; 
but  hitherto  all  my  efforts  have  been  in  vain,  and  I  have 
recourse  to  the  final  stratagem.  This  intended  spouse  is 
to-day  to  treat  the  object  of  his  love  with  a  sail.  Without 
having  said  anything  to  you,  all  things  are  prepared  for 
gratifying  my  passion.  I  have  freighted  a  little  vessel,  and 
engaged  men  with  whose  assistance  I  can  easily  carry  off 
the  fair. 

SCAN.  Ah !  sir  ... 

D.  Ju.  What  ? 

SCAN.  You  have  done  quite  right,  and  you  take  things 
in  the  proper  way.  There  is  nothing  in  the  world  like 
satisfying  all  one's  desires. 

D.  Ju.  Get  ready  to  come  along  with  me,  and  take  care, 
you  yourself,  to  bring  all  my  arms,  so  that  .  .  .  (Iff  sees 
Donna  Elvira).  Oh !  most  unlucky  meeting.  Traitor, 
you  did  not  tell  me  she  was  here  herself. 

SCAN.  Sir,  you  did  not  so  much  as  ask  me. 

D.  Ju.  Is  she  mad  not  to  have  changed  her  dress,  and 
to  come  here  in  her  riding-habit  ?9 

'  This  remark  of  Don  Juan  on  beholding  a  woman  whom  he  has  aban- 

SCBNB  in.]  THE  FEAST  WITH   THE  STATUE.  87 

SCENE  III. — DONNA  ELVIRA,  DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  EL.  Will  you  do  me  the  favour,  Don  Juan,  to  notice 
me  ?  And  may  I  at  least  hope  that  you  will  deign  to  turn 
your  eyes  this  way  ? 

D.  Ju.  I  confess  to  you,  madam,  that  I  am  surprised, 
and  that  I  did  not  expect  you  here. 

D.  EL.  Yes,  I  see  plainly  that  you  did  not  expect  me 
here ;  and  you  are  indeed  surprised,  but  quite  otherwise 
than  I  hoped  for;  the  manner  in  which  you  appear  con- 
vinces me  fully  of  what  I  refused  to  believe.  I  am  aston- 
ished at  my  simplicity,  and  at  the  weakness  of  my  heart 
in  doubting  a  treachery  so  strongly  confirmed  by  appear- 
ances. I  was  simple-minded  enough,  I  confess  it,  or 
rather  foolish  enough,  to  be  willing  to  deceive  myself,  and 
to  take  pains  to  contradict  my  eyes  and  my  judgment.  I 
sought  for  reasons  to  excuse  to  my  affection  that  diminu- 
tion of  friendship  which  it  discovered  in  you  ;  and  I  pur- 
posely invented  a  hundred  legitimate  excuses  for  so  hurried 
a  departure,  to  clear  you  from  the  crime  of  which  my  rea- 
son accused  you.  All  that  my  just  suspicions  could  daily 
say  to  me  was  in  vain ;  I  would  not  listen  to  their  voice, 
which  represented  you  to  me  as  a  criminal ;  I  took  a  plea- 
sure in  giving  ear  to  a  thousand  ridiculous  fancies,  which 
depicted  you  to  my  heart  as  innocent ;  but,  at  last,  your 
reception  permits  me  no  longer  to  doubt,  and  the  glance 
with  which  you  received  me  informs  me  of  many  more 
things  than  I  would  wish  to  know.  .1  shall  be  glad,  never- 
theless, to  hear  from  your  own  mouth  the  reasons  for  your 
departure.  Pray,  speak,  Don  Juan,  let  us  hea'r  in  what 
way  you  can  justify  yourself. 

D.  Ju.  Madam,  there  is  Sganarelle,  who  knows  why  I 
went  away. 

SCAN.  ( Whispering  to  Don  Juan).  I,  sir !  By  your 
leave,  I  know  nothing  of  the  matter. 

doned,  shows  that  he  has  neither  feelings  nor  heart.  Louis  XIV..  then 
(1665)  in  the  height  of  his  passion  for  Mademoiselle  de  la  Valliere,  be- 
haved afterwards  to  her  as  badly  as  Don  Juan  does  to  Donna  Elvira.  It 
has  many  a  time  been  stated  that  the  King  was  neither  coarser  nor  more 
unfeeling  than  his  contemporaries.  We  have  only  to  look  at  the  Memoires 
du  Due  de  Saint  Simon,  to  see  what  at  least  one  of  them  thought  of  U 
Grand  Monarque.  But  Louis  XIV.  was  no  sceptic,  and  during  the  latter 
part  of  his  reign  he  became  even  a  fanatic  and  a  persecutor. 

88  DON  JUAN  ;    OR,  [ACT  r. 

D.  EL.  Well,  Sganarelle,  speak.  It  does  not  matter 
from  whose  mouth  I  hear  his  reasons. 

D.  Ju.  {Making  signs  to  Sganarelle  to  draw  near  him). 
Come,  speak  then  to  the  lady. 

SGAN.  (  Whispering  to  Don  Juan?)  What  would  you  have 
me  say? 

D.  EL.  Come  hither,  since  he  will  have  it  so,  and  tell 
me  the  causes  of  so  sudden  a  departure. 

D.  Ju.  Why  do  you  not  answer? 

SGAN.  (  Whispering  to  Don  Juan).  I  have  nothing  to 
answer.  You  make  fun  of  your  very  humble  servant. 

D.  Ju.  Will  you  answer,  I  say? 

SGAN.  Madam  .    .    . 

D.  EL.  What  ? 

SGAN.  (  Turning  towards  his  master).  Sir  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (  Threatening  him).  If  ... 

SGAN.  Madam,  the  conqueror,  Alexander,  and  the  other 
worlds,  are  the  cause  of  our  departure.  That  sir,  is  all  I 
can  say. 

D.  EL.  Will  you  be  pleased,  Don  Juan,  to  explain  to 
me  these  beautiful  mysteries  ? 

D.  Ju.   Madam,  to  say  the  truth  .    .    . 

D.  EL.  Fy !  how  badly  you  defend  yourself  for  a 
courtier,  who  should  be  accustomed  to  these  sort  of  things  ! 
I  pity  you  to  see  you  so  confused.  Why  do  you  not  arm 
your  brow  with  a  noble  impudence?  Why  do  you  not 
swear  that  you  entertain  still  the  same  feelings  for  me ; 
that  you  always  love  me  with  an  unparalleled  affection,  and 
that  nothing  but  death  can  sever  you  from  me  ?  Why  do 
you  not  tell  me  that  affairs  of  the  greatest  consequence 
compelled  you  to  set  out  without  informing  me  of  it ;  that, 
much  against  your  will,  you  must  stay  here  for  some  time ; 
.and  that  I  need  only  return  whence  I  came,  with  the 
assurance  that  you  will  follow  me  as  soon  as  possible ;  that 
it  is  certain  you  are  very  anxious  to  rejoin  me,  and  that, 
whilst  you  are  absent  from  me,  you  endure  the  pangs  of  a 
body  separated  from  the  soul  ?  That  is  the  way  to  defend 
yourself;  but  not  to  stand  thunderstruck  as  you  do. 

D.  Ju.  I  must  confess,  madam,  that  I  possess  not  a 
talent  for  dissimulation,  but  am  sincere  at  heart.  I  will 
not  tell  you  that  I  entertain  still  the  same  feelings  for  you, 

SCENE  in.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  89 

and  that  I  am  very  anxious  to  rejoin  you,  since  it  is  certain 
that  I  came  away  only  to  avoid  you ;  not  for  the  reasons 
you  imagine,  but  from  a  pure  motive  of  conscience,  and 
because  I  thought  I  could  not  live  with  you  any  longer 
without  sin.  I  felt  some  scruples,  madam ;  and  the  eyes 
of  my  mind  were  opened  to  what  I  was  doing.  I  reflected 
that,  in  order  to  marry  you,  I  took  you  from  the  precincts 
of  a  convent,  that  you  broke  vows  which  engaged  you 
elsewhere,  and  that  Heaven  is  very  jealous  of  such  things. 
I  was  seized  with  repentance,  and  dreaded  the  wrath  of 
Heaven.  I  thought  our  marriage  was  only  adultery  in 
disguise;  that  it  would  bring  down  upon  us  some  calamity, 
and  that,  in  short,  I  ought  to  endeavour  to  forget  you, 
and  to  give  you  an  opportunity  of  returning  to  your  former 
obligations.  Would  you  oppose  so  holy  a  design,  madam, 
and  would  you  have  me  expose  myself  to  the  vengeance 
of  Heaven  by  retaining  you ;  that  by  ... 

D.  EL.  Ah  !  wicked  wretch  !  now  I  know  you  -tho- 
roughly ;  and  to  my  misfortune  I  know  you  when  it  is  too 
late,  and  when  such  a  knowledge  can  only  serve  to  make 
me  despair.  But  be  assured  that  your  crime  will  not 
remain  unpunished,  and  that  the  same  Heaven  which  you 
mock  will  revenge  your  perfidy. 

D.  Ju.  Sganarelle,  Heaven  ! 

SCAN.  Oh,  yes,  we  care  much  for  that. 

D.  Ju.  Madam  .    .    . 

D.  EL.  It  is  enough.  I  do  not  wish  to  hear  anything 
more.  I  even  blame  myself  for  having  already  heard  too 
much.  It  is  meanness  to  have  our  shame  explained  too 
clearly,  and  in  such  cases,  a  noble  heart  should,  at  the 
very  first  word,  resolve  what  to  do.  Do  not  expect  me 
to  break  out  into  reproaches  and  opprobrious  language  ; 
no,  no,  my  wrath  does  not  spend  itself  in  vain  words ;  it 
reserves  all  its  ardour  for  vengeance.  I  tell  you  once 
more,  Heaven  will  punish  you,  wretch,  for  the  wrong  you 
have  done  me ;  and  if  you  have  nothing  to  fear  from 
Heaven,  fear  at  least  the  anger  of  an  injured  woman. 

SCENE  IV. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 
SCAN.   (Aside).  If  he  should  ever  feel  some  remorse. 

90  DON  JUAN  J   OR,  [ACT  11. 

D.  Ju.  (After  some  pause).  Let  us  go  and  think  of  the 
execution  of  our  amorous  enterprise. 

SCAN.  (Alone)  Oh  !  what  an  abominable  master  I  am 
forced  to  serve  ! 

ACT  II. 

(A  Landscape  near  the  sea  shore}. 
SCENE  I. — CHARLOTTE,  PIERROT.  10 

CHAR.  By  Jingo,  Pierrot,  you  were  there  just  in  the 
nick  of  time. 

PIER.  'Sbobs,  they  were  within  an  ace  of  being 
drowned,  both  of  them. 

CHAR.  Was  it  the  great  storm  this  morning  that  upset 
them  in  the  sea  ? 

PIER.  Look  you,  Charlotte,  I  shall  tell  you  outright  how 
it  happened ;  for,  as  the  saying  is,  I  saw  them  first,  first  I 
saw  them.  I  was  on  the  sea-shore,  I  and  fat  Lucas,  and 
we  were  a-larking  together  with  clods  of  earth,  that  we 
threw  at  one  another's  heads,  for  you  very  well  know  that 
fat  Lucas  likes  to  be  a-larking,  and  so  do  I  sometimes  too. 
So  as  we  were  a-larking,  for  we  were  a-larking,  I  perceived 
a  distance  off  something  that  stirred  in  the  water,  and 
that  came  bobbing  towards  us.  I  looked  fixedly  at  it,  but 
all  of  a  sudden  I  saw  that  I  saw  nothing  more.  Ay,  Lucas, 
says  I,  I  think  that  there  are  men  a-swimming  down 
there.  Oh,  says  he,  you  have  been  at  the  burial  of  a  cat, 
your  eyes  are  dazed.  'Sdeath,  says  I,  my  eyes  are  not 
dazed  ;  they  are  men.  No,  no,  says  he  to  me,  you  are 
purblind.  Would  you  wager,  says  I,  that  I  am  not  pur- 
blind, says  I,  and  that  they  are  two  men,  says  I,  who  are 
swimming  straight  this  way,  says  I.  Znigs,  says  he,  I  lay 

10  Charlotte  and  Pierrot  speak  in  a  provincial  dialect,  which  was  quite 
a  novelty  on  the  stage  in  the  time  of  Moliere ;  we  shall  give  an  example 
of  this : — CHARLOTTE  :  Notre  dinse  1  Piarrot,  tu  f  es  trouvt  Id  bien  d. 
point.  PIERROT.  Parquienne  !  il  ne  s'en  est  pas  f  all-it  F  epoisseur  tfane 
eplinque,  gu'il  ne  se  sayant  nayes  tous  deux.  CHARLOTTE.  C'est  done  le 
coui>  de  vent  d*  d  matin  qul  les  avait  ranvarses  dans  la  mar  f  &c.  As  it 
would  be  impossible  to  render  this  in  an  equivalent  dialect,  I  have  trans- 
lated it  in  plain  English. 

SCBNBI.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  9! 

a  wager  they  are  not.  Well,  come  on,  says  I,  I  will  lay  you 
tenpence  on  it  ?  Marry  will  I,  says  he,  and  to  show  thee, 
there  is  the  money  down  on  the  nail,  says  he.  I  was 
neither  a  fool  nor  a  gaby ;  I  boldly  threw  down  upon  the 
ground  four  silver  pennies  and  sixpenny  worth  of  ha'- 
pence, as  freely,  i'  faith,  as  if  I  had  drank  off  a  glass  of 
wine ;  for  I  am  very  venturesome,  and  go  on  any  way. 
Yet  I  knew  what  I  did  howsomdever.  I  am  not  such  a 
fool  as  I  look.  We  had  but  just  laid  the  wager  when  I 
saw  the  two  men  very  plainly,  who  made  signs  to  us  to 
come  and  fetch  them,  and  I  take  up  the  stakes.  Come, 
Lucas,  says  I,  you  see  that  they  call  us ;  let  us  go  at  once 
and  help  them.  No,  says  he,  they  have  made  me  lose. 
Then,  to  cut  short  my  story,  I  went  on  so,  and  at  last 
preached  so  much  to  him,  that  we  got  into  a  boat,  and 
then  I  made  so  much  ado  that  I  got  them  out  of  the 
water,  and  then  I  carried  them  home  to  the  fire,  and  then 
they  pulled  off  all  their  clothes  and  stripped  to  dry  them- 
selves, and  then  two  more  of  the  same  gang  came,  who 
had  saved  themselves  quite  alone,  and  then  comes  Mathu- 
rine,  and  one  of  them  cast  sheep's  eyes  at  her.  And  that 
is  precisely,  Charlotte,  how  all  this  has  happened. 

CHAR.  Did  you  not  say,  Pierrot,  that  one  of  them  is  a 
great  deal  handsomer  than  the  rest  ? 

PIER.  Ay,  he  is  the  master ;  he  must  be  some  great, 
great  man  to  be  sure,  for  he  has  gold  upon  his  clothes  from 
top  to  bottom,  and  his  servants  are  gentlefolks  themselves ; 
but  for  all  his  being  a  great  man,  he  would  have  been 
drowned  if  I  had  not  been  there. 

CHAR.  Lawk  a-day  ! 

PIER.  Ay,  indeed,  if  it  had  not  been  for  us  he  would 
have  had  his  fill  of  water. 

CHAR.  Is  he  still  at  your  house  without  his  clothes  on, 
Pierrot  ? 

PIER.  No,  no,  they  all  put  on  their  clothes  again  before 
us.  Mercy  on  me,  I  never  saw  any  of  these  folks  dress 
themselves  before  ;  what  a  parcel  of  gimcracks  these  cour- 
tiers wear  !  I  should  lose  myself  in  them,  and  I  was  quite 
flabbergasted  to  see  them.  Why,  Charlotte,  they  have  hair 
which  does  not  stick  to  their  heads,  and,  after  all,  they  put 
it  on  like  a  big  cap  of  unspun  flax.  They  have  smocks 

92  DON  JUAN  J   OR,  [ACT  n. 

with  sleeves  that  you  and  I  might  get  into;  instead  of 
breeches  they  have  an  apron  as  large  as  from  this  to  Easter, 
instead  of  doublets  they  have  little  tiny  waistcoats  that 
do  not  reach  to  their  middle,  and  instead  of  bands  a  great 
neck-handkerchief  all  open-worked  with  four  large  tufts  of 
linen  hanging  down  over  their  stomach.  They  have  bands 
about  their  wrists  too,  and  great  funnels  of  lace  about  their 
legs,  and  amongst  all  this  so  many  ribands,  that  it  is  a 
downright  shame.  Their  very  shoes  are  stuffed  with  them 
from  one  end  to  the  other,  and  they  are  made  in  such  a 
fashion  that  I  should  break  my  neck  in  them. 

CHAR.  I'  fakins,  Pierrot,  I  must  go  and  see  them. 

PIER.  Oh !  Hark  you,  Charlotte,  stay  a  little  first,  I 
have  something  else  to  say  to  you. 

CHAR.  Well,  tell  me,  what  is  it  ? 

PIER.  Do  you  not  see,  Charlotte,  that,  as  the  saying  is, 
I  must  unbosom  myself  to  you?  I  am  in  love  with  you, 
you  know  it  very  well,  I  am  for  us  being  married  together; 
but  's  boddikins,  I  am  not  pleased  with  you. 

CHAR.  How?  what's  the  matter? 

PIER.  The  matter  is,  to  tell  the  truth,  that  you  vex  my 
very  heart. 

CHAR.  How  so  ? 

PIER.  Because,  by  the  powers,  you  do  not  love  me. 

CHAR.  Ho  !  ho !     Is  that  all  ? 

PIER.  Ay,  that  is  all,  and  enough  too. 

CHAR.  Law,  Pierrot,  you  always  say  the  same  thing  tome. 

PIER.  I  always  say  the  same  thing  to  you  because  it  is 
always  the  same  thing  ;  and  if  it  was  not  always  the  same 
thing  I  would  not  always  say  the  same  thing. 

CHAR.  But  what  do  you  want  ?     What  do  you  wish? 

PIER.  Drat  it,  I  would  wish  you  to  love  me. 

CHAR.  Why,  do  I  not  love  you  ? 

PIER.  No,  you  do  not  love  me,  and  yet  I  do  all  I  can  to 
make  you.  I  do  not  mean  to  reproach  you,  but  I  buy  rib- 
bons for  you  of  all  the  pedlars  that  come  about,  I  risk  my 
neck  to  go  and  fetch  jackdaws  out  of  their  nests  for  you, 
I  make  the  piper  play  for  you  when  your  birthday  comes ; 
and  all  this  is  no  more  than  if  I  ran  my  head  against  the 
wall.  Do  ye  hear  ?  it  is  neither  fair  nor  honest  not  to 
love  folk  that  love  us. 

SCENE  i.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  93 

CHAR.  But,  lawk-a-day,  I  love  you  too. 

PIER.  Ay.  very  much  indeed  ! 

CHAR.  What  would  you  have  me  do  then  ? 

PIER.  I  would  have  you  do  as  folk  do  when  they  love 
as  they  ought. 

CHAR.  Why,  do  I  not  love  you  as  I  ought  ? 

PIER.  No,  when  that  is  the  case,  anyone  can  see  it;  peo- 
ple play  a  thousand  little  tricks  to  folk  when  they  love 
them  with  all  their  heart.  Look  at  stout  Thomasse,  how 
smitten  she  is  with  young  Robin  ;  she  is  always  about  him 
to  tease  him,  and  never  lets  him  alone.  She  is  always 
playing  him  some  trick  or  other,  or  hits  him  a  rap  when 
she  passes  by 'him.  The  other  day,  as  he  was  sitting  upon 
a  small  stool,  she  comes  and  pulls  it  from  under  him,  and 
down  falls  he  at  full  length  upon  the  ground.  Zounds, 
that  is  the  way  folk  do  when  they  are  in  love  ;  but  you 
never  say  a  word  to  me,  you  always  stand  like  a  log  of 
wood ;  I  may  go  by  ye  twenty  times  and  you  never  stir  to 
give  me  the  smallest  thump,  or  to  say  the  least  thing  to 
me.  Upon  my  word,  it  is  not  fair,  after  all,  and  you  are 
too  cold  for  folk. 

CHAR.  What  would  you  have  me  do  ?  My  temper  is 
such,  and  I  cannot  alter  myself. 

PIER.  Temper  or  no  temper,  when  a  body  loves  a  body 
one  always  gives  some  small  inkling  of  it. 

CHAR.  I  love  you  as  well  as  I  can,  and  if  you  are  not 
satisfied  with  that,  you  must  go  and  love  somebody  else. 

PIER.  Why  there  now !  I  have  got  what  I  bargained  for. 
Zooks,  if  you  loved  me  you  would  not  say  that. 

CHAR.  Why  do  you  come  and  worrit  me  so  ? 

PIER.  And  what  harm  do  I  do  you?  I  only  ask  a  little 
friendship  from  ye. 

CHAR.  Well,  let  me  alone  then  and  do  not  press  me  so, 
maybe  it  will  come  all  of  a  sudden,  without  thinking  of  it. 

PIER.  Shake  hands,  then,  Charlotte. 

CHAR.  {Gives  him  her  hand).     Well,  there. 

PIER.  Promise  me  that  you  will  do  your  best  to  love  me 
more. 

CHAR.  I  will  do  all  that  I  can,  but  it  must  come  of 
itself.  Pierrot,  is  that  the  gentleman  ? 

PIER.  Yes,  that  is  he. 

94  °ON  JUAN  ;  OR,  [ACT  H. 

CHAR.  Oh  1  lack-a-day,  how  nice  he  is  !  what  a  pity  it 
would  have  been  if  he  had  been  drowned. 

PIER.  I  shall  come  again  presently ;  I  shall  go  to  take 
a  pint  to  refresh  myself  a  little  after  my  fatigue. 

SCENE  II. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  CHARLOTTE  in  the 
background. 

D.  Ju.  We  have  failed  Li  our  plot,  Sganarelle,  and  this 
sudden  squall  has  overturned  our  sloop,  as  well  as  the  plan 
we  had  formed ;  but,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  the  country- 
wench  I  have  just  parted  with,  makes  amends  for  this  mis- 
fortune. I  have  found  such  charms  in  her  that  they  have 
effaced  from  my  mind  all  the  vexation  caused  by  the  ill 
success  of  our  enterprise.  This  heart  must  not  escape  me : 
I  have  already  disposed  it  in  such  a  manner  that  I  shall 
have  no  need  to  sigh  long  in  vain. 

SCAN.  I  confess,  sir,  you  astonish  me.  We  have  hardly 
escaped  from  the  jaws  of  death,  and  instead  of  thanking 
Heaven  for  the  mercy  it  has  granted  us,  you  labour  anew 
to  draw  down  its  wrath  by  your  usual  whims  and  your 
amours  .  .  .  (Seeing  Don  Juan  look  angry) .  Peace,  rascal 
that  you  are ;  you  do  not  know  what  you  are  talking  of, 
and  my  master  knows  what  he  does.  Come. 

D.  Ju.  (Perceiving  Charlotte).  Ha !  whence  comes  this 
other  country-girl?  Did  you  ever  see  anything  prettier? 
Tell  me,  do  you  not  think  she  is  as  handsome  as  the  other? 

SGAN.   Certainly.     (Aside').    Another  fresh  morsel. 

D.  Ju.  (To  Charlotte).  Whence  this  pleasant  meeting, 
fair  one  ?  What  ?  are  there  in  these  rural  spots,  amongst 
these  trees  and  rocks,  persons  as  handsome  as  you  are  ? 

CHAR.  As  you  see,  sir. 

D.  Ju.   Do  you  belong  to  this  village  ? 

CHAR.  Yes,  sir. 

D.  Ju.  And  do  you  live  there  ? 

CHAR.  Yes,  sir. 

D.  Ju.  What  is  your  name  ? 

CHAR.    Charlotte,  at  your  service. 

D.  Ju.  Ah  !  what  a  beauty !  what  piercing  eyes ! 

CHAR.  Sir,  you  make  me  quite  ashamed. 

D.  Ju.  Oh  !  do  not  be  ashamed  to  hear  the  truth. 
What  do  you  say,  Sganarelle?  Can  anything  be  more 

»CBNB  II.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  95 

agreeable  ?  Turn  about  a  little,  please.  Oh  !  what  a  fine 
shape.  Hold  up  your  head  a  little,  pray.  Oh !  what  a 
pretty  face  is  this !  Open  your  eyes  wide.  Oh !  how 
lovely  they  are.  Pray  let  me  see  your  teeth.  Oh  !  how 
love- inspiring  !  And  those  provoking  lips  !  For  my  part, 
I  am  delighted  ;  I  never  beheld  so  charming  a  person. 

CHAR.  Sir,  you  are  pleased  to  say  so ;  I  do  not  know 
whether  you  make  fun  of  me. 

D.  Ju.  I  make  fun  of  you  !  Heaven  forbid  !  I  love  you 
too  well  for  that ;  I  speak  to  you  from  the  bottom  of  my 
heart. 

CHAR.  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  if  it  is  so. 

D.  Ju.  Not  at  all ;  you  are  not  obliged  to  me  for  any- 
thing I  say;  you  owe  it  to  your  beauty  alone. 

CHAR.  Sir,  all  these  words  are  too  fine  for  me ;  I  have 
not  wit  enough  to  answer  you. 

D.  Ju.  Sganarelle,  just  cast  a  glance  on  her  hands. 

CHAR.  Fie,  sir  !    they  are  as  black  as  anything. 

D.  Ju.  Oh !  what  are  you  saying  ?  They  are  the  fairest 
in  the  world ;  pray,  allow  me  to  kiss  them. 

CHAR.  You  do  me  too  much  honour,  sir,  and  if  I  had 
known  it  just  now,  I  would  not  have  failed  to  have  washed 
them  with  bran. 

D.  Ju.  Pray,  tell  me,  pretty  Charlotte,  are  you  married  ? 

CHAR.  No,  sir,  but  I  am  to  be  very  soon,  to  Pierrot, 
our  neighbour  Simonetta's  son. 

D.  Ju.  What !  should  a  person  like  you  become  the 
wife  of  a  simple  clod-hopper  !  No,  no  !  that  would  be  a 
profanation  of  so  much  beauty ;  you  were  not  born  to  pass 
your  whole  life  in  a  village.  No  doubt  you  deserve  a.9 
better  fate  ;  Heaven,  which  very  well  knows  this,  has  led 
me  hither  on  purpose  to  prevent  this  match,  and  to  do 
justice  to  your  charms;  for,  in  short,  beauteous  Charlotte, 
I  love  you  with  all  my  heart ;  it  only  depends  upon  your- 
self whether  I  shall  carry  you  off  from  this  wretched  place, 
and  put  you  in  the  position  you  deserve.  This  passion  is 
doubtless  very  sudden ;  but  what  then ;  it  is  owing  to 
your  great  beauty  ;  I  love  you  as  much  in  one  quarter  of 
an  hour  as  I  would  another  in  six  months. 

CHAR.  Really,  I  do  not  know  what  to  do  when  you 
speak.  What  you  say  pleases  me,  and  I  should  very  much 

96  DON   JUAN  ;   OR,  [ACT  „. 

like  to  believe  you ;  but  I  have  always  been  told  that  we 
must  never  believe  gentlemen,  and  that  you,  courtiers, 
are  cozeners  who  think  of  nothing  but  of  making  fools  of 
young  girls. 

D.  Ju.  I  am  not  one  of  these. 

SCAN.  Not  at  all !     Not  at  all ! 

CHAR.  Look  ye,  sir,  there  is  no  pleasure  in  being  im- 
posed upon.  I  am  but  a  poor  country-wench,  but  I  value 
honour  above  everything ;  I  would  sooner  die  than  lose 
my  honour. 

D.  Ju.  I  have  a  soul  so  wicked  as  to  impose  on  such  a 
person  as  you  !  I  should  be  so  base  as  to  dishonor  you  ! 
No,  no,  I  am  too  conscientious  for  that.  I  love  you,  Char- 
lotte, virtuously  and  honourably  ;  and  to  show  you  that  I 
speak  the  truth,  be  convinced  that  I  have  no  other  design 
than  to  marry  you.  Can  you  have  any  greater  proof? 
Here  I  am  ready,  whenever  you  please,  and  I  call  this 
fellow  to  be  a  witness  of  the  promise  which  I  make  you. 

SCAN.  No,  no,  never  fear.  He  will  marry  you  as  much 
as  you  please. 

D.  Ju.  Ah  !  Charlotte,  I  plainly  perceive  you  do  not  yet 
know  me.  You  do  me  great  wrong  in  judging  of  me  by 
others ;  and  if  there  are  rogues  in  the  world,  people  who 
only  endeavour  to  make  fools  of  young  women,  you  ought 
not  to  consider  me  one  of  them,  and  never  doubt  the  sin- 
cerity of  my  love ;  besides,  your  beauty  is  a  guarantee  for 
everything.  When  a  woman  is  as  handsome  as  you  are 
she  ought  never  to  entertain  such  fears ;  believe  me,  you 
do  not  look  as  if  you  could  be  made  a  fool  of.  As  for 
me,  I  protest  I  would  stab  myself  a  thousand  times  to 
the  heart  if  I  fostered  the  least  thought  of  betraying  you. 

CHAR.  Good  Heavens !  I  do  not  know  whether  you 
speak  the  truth  or  not ;  but  you  make  people  believe 
you. 

D.  Ju.  You  do  me  justice  most  certainly  by  believing 
me ;  I  repeat  anew  the  promise  which  I  have  made  you. 
Do  you  not  acceot  it  ?  Will  you  not  consent  to  become 
my  wife  ? 

CHAR.  Yes,  provided  my  aunt  has  no  objection. 

D.  Ju.  Give  me  your  hand  then  upon  it,  Charlotte, 
since  you  do  not  object. 

SCBNH  in.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  97 

CHAR.  But  at  the  very  least,  sir,  pray,  do  not  deceive 
me  ;  it  would  be  a  sin,  and  you  see  how  honestly  I  act. 

D.  Ju.  What !  you  seem  to  doubt  still  my  sincerity  ! 
Would  you  have  me  swear  the  most  frightful  oaths  ?  May 
Heaven  .  .  . 

CHAR.  Bless  me,  do  not  swear,  I  believe  you. 

D.  Ju.  Give  me  one  little  kiss,  then,  as  a  pledge  of 
your  promise. 

CHAR.  Nay,  sir,  pray,  wait  till  we  are  married,  and  then 
I  shall  kiss  you  as  much  as  you  wish. 

D.  Ju.  Well,  pretty  Charlotte,  I  will  do  whatever  you 
please ;  only  give  me  your  hand,  and  let  me,  by  a  thou- 
sand kisses,  express  the  rapture  I  am  in  ... 

SCENE   III. DON   JUAN,    SGANARELLE,    PIERROT, 

CHARLOTTE. 

PIER.  {Getting  between  them  and  pushing  away  Don 
Juan).  Gently,  sir,  if  you  please,  you  are  getting  too 
warm  ;  you  may  get  a  pleurisy. 

D.  Ju.  {Pushing  away  Pierrot  roughly].  What  brings 
this  impertinent  fellow  here? 

PIER.  (Placing  himself  between  Don  Juan  and  Char- 
lotte). Hold  hard,  sir,  you  must  not  kiss  our  wives  that 
are  to  be. 

D.  Ju.  (Pushing  Pierrot  again  away).  Ha  !  what  a 
noise ! 

PIER.   'Sdeath  !     People  are  not  to  be  pushed  thus. 

CHAR.  {Taking  Pierrot  by  the  arm).  Let  him  alone, 
Pierrot. 

PIER.  What !  let  him  alone  ?     I  will  not,  not  I ! 

D.  Ju.  Hah  ! 

PIER.  Drat  it,  because  you  are  a  gentleman,  you  come 
here  to  caress  our  wives  under  our  very  noses  ?  Go  and 
kiss  your  own. 

D.  Ju.  What  ? 

PIER.  What  ?  (Don  Juan  gives  him  a  box  on  the  ear.) 
Darn  it,  do  not  strike  me;  (another).  Hang  it!  (another!) 
Zounds !  (another).  'Sblood  and  wounds  !  it  is  not  fair, 
to  beat  people !  Is  this  my  reward  for  saving  you  from 
being  drowned? 

CHAR.  Do  not  be  angry,  Pierrot. 

VOL.  II.  G 

98  DON  JUAN;    OR,  [ACT  n. 

PIER.  I  will  be  angry ;  and  you  are  a  hussy,  to  let  him 
cozen  you. 

CHAR.  Oh,  Pierrot !  it  is  not  as  you  think.  This  gen- 
tleman will  marry  me,  and  you  should  not  be  in  a  passion. 

PIER.  Ha !     But  you  are  engaged  to  me. 

CHAR.  That  makes  no  matter,  Pierrot.  If  you  love 
me,  should  ye  not  be  glad  that  I  am  to  be  made  a 
madam  ? 

PIER.  No,  I  would  as  soon  see  you  hanged  as  see  you 
another's. 

CHAR.  Come,  come,  Pierrot,  do  not  fret  yourself.  If 
I  am  a  madam  I  shall  make  you  gain  something ;  you 
shall  serve  us  with  butter  and  cheese. 

PIER.  Zounds  !  I  shall  never  serve  you  with  anything, 
even  if  you  would  pay  me  twice  as  much.  Do  not  listen 
thus  to  what  he  says.  'Sfish,  had  I  known  this  just  now, 
I  should  not  have  taken  him  out  of  the  water  at  all,  but 
I  would  have  given  him  a  good  rap  upon  the  head  with 
my  oar. 

D.  Ju.  {Coming  up  to  Pierrot  to  strike  him).  What  is 
that  you  say? 

PIER.  {Getting  behind  Charlotte}.  Drat  it!  I  fear  no 
man. 

D.  Ju.  {Coming  towards  him).  Let  me  only  get  hold 
of  you. 

PIER.  {Gets  on  the  other  side  of  Charlotte}.  I  do  not 
care,  not  I. 

D.  Ju.  {Running  after  hint).     We  shall  try  that. 

PIER.  {Getting  anew  behind  Charlotte}.  I  have  seen 
many  a  man  as  good  as  you. 

D.  Ju.  What  ? 

SGAN.  Oh,  sir,  let  the  poor  wretch  alone.  It  is  a  pity 
to  beat  him.  {Placing  himself  between  Don  Juan  and 
Pierrot,  and  addressing  the  latter).  Harkee,  my  poor  lad, 
move  off,  and  do  not  talk  to  him. 

PIER.  {Passing  before  Sganarelle,  and  looking  boldly  at 
Don  Juan).  I  will  talk  to  him. 

D.  Ju.  {Lifts  up  his  hand  and  intends  to  give  Pierrot  a 
box  on  the  ear).  Ha !  I  shall  teach  you.  {Pierrot  ducks 
down  his  head,  so  that  Sganarelle  receives  if). 

SCAN.   {Looking  at  Pierrot).   Plague  take  the  booby  ! 

SCEHMT.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  99 

D.  Ju.  (To  Sganarelle).  That  is  a  reward  for  your 
charity. 

PIER.  Zounds !  I  shall  go  and  tell  her  aunt  of  all  her 
goings-on. 

SCENE  IV. — DON  JUAN,  CHARLOTTE,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Ju.  (To  Charlotte).  At  last  I  am  going  to  be  the 
happiest  of  men,  and  I  would  not  change  my  happiness  for 
all  the  world  could  give  me.  What  pleasures  shall  we 
have,  when  you  are  my  wife,  and  what  .  .  . 

SCENE  V. — DON  JUAN,  CHARLOTTE,  MATHURINE, 
SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  (Perceiving  Mathurine).  So,  so. 

MATH.  (To  Don  Juan).  Sir,  what  are  you  doing  there 
with  Charlotte  ?  Are  you  courting  her  too  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  No ;  on  the  contrary  she 
told  me  she  wished  to  be  my  wife,  and  I  told  her  I  was 
engaged  to  you. 

CHAR.  ( To  Don  Juan).  What  is  that  Mathurine  wants 
with  you  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  She  is  jealous  of  my  speaking 
to  you,  and  would  like  me  to  marry  her ;  but  I  tell  her  it 
is  you  whom  I  wish  to  have. 

MATH.  What !   Charlotte  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  All  you  can  say  to  her  will 
be  of  no  use  ;  she  took  this  into  her  head. 

CHAR.  What  then,  Mathurine  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  It  is  in  vain  to  talk  to  her, 
you  will  not  get  this  whim  out  of  her  head. 

MATH.  Would  you  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine}.  There  is  no  possibility  of 
making  her  listen  to  reason. 

CHAR.  I  should  like  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  She  is  as  obstinate  as  the 
devil. 

MATH.  Really  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  Do  not  say  anything  to 
her,  she  is  a  fool. 

CHAR.  I  think  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte}.  Let  her  alone,  she  is  silly. 

ioo  DON  JUAN;  OR,  fAcru. 

MATH.  No,  no,  I  must  speak  to  her. 

CHAR.  I  will  hear  some  of  her  reasons. 

MATH.  What  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  {Aside  to  Mathurine).  I  will  lay  you  a  wager  that 
she  tells  you  that  I  promised  to  marry  her. 

CHAR.  I  ... 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  I  will  bet  you  anything  that 
she  Will  maintain  that  I  have  given  her  my  word  to  make 
her  my  wife. 

MATH.  Hark  you,  Charlotte,  it  is  not  right  to  meddle 
with  other  folks'  bargains. 

CHAR.  It  is  not  polite  to  be  jealous  because  the  gentle- 
man speaks  to  me. 

MATH.  The  gentleman  saw  me  first. 

CHAR.  If  he  saw  you  first,  he  saw  me  second,  and  has 
promised  to  marry  me. 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  Well,  did  I  not  tell 
you  so  ? 

MATH.  (To  Charlotte'].  Your  humble  servant,  it  was  me 
and  not  you  whom  he  promised  to  marry. 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte}.  Did  I  not  guess  right  ? 

CHAR.  You  may  tell  that  to  others,  if  you  please,  but 
not  to  me  ;  it  was  me  he  promised  to  marry,  I  tell  you. 

MATH.  You  make  fun  of  folks  ;  once  more  it  was  me  he 
promised  to  marry. 

CHAR.  There  he  is;  he  can  tell  you  whether  I  am 
right. 

MATH.  There  he  is ;  he  can  give  me  the  lie  if  I  do  not 
speak  the  truth  ? 

CHAR.  Did  you  promise  to  marry  her  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  You  are  joking. 

MATH.  Is  it  true,  sir,  that  you  have  given  your  word 
to  be  her  husband  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  Could  you  entertain  such 
a  thought  ? 

CHAR.  You  see  she  affirms  it. 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Charlotte).  Let  her  alone. 

MATH.  You  are  witness  how  positive  she  is. 

D.  Ju.  (Aside  to  Mathurine).  Let  her  say  what  she  likes. 

CHAR.  No,  no,  we  must  know  the  truth. 

MATH.  We  must  have  it  decided. 

SCENE  v.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE  STATUE.  1OI 

CHAR.  Yes,  Mathurine,  I  will  have  the  gentleman  show 
you  your  mistake.11 

MATH.  Yes,  Charlotte,  I  will  have  the  gentleman  make 
you  look  foolish." 

CHAR.  Decide  the  quarrel,  sir,  if  you  please. 

MATH.  Satisfy  us,  sir. 

CHAR.  You  shall  see. 

MATH.  And  you  shall  see  too. 

CHAR.  {To  Don  Juan).  Speak. 

MATH.  {To  Don  Juan).  Speak. 

-  D.  Ju.  What  would  you  have  me  say?  You  both  main- 
tain that  I  have  promised  to  marry  you.  Does  not  each 
of  you  know  the  whole  business  without  any  necessity  for 
me  giving  any  more  explanations  ?  Why  should  you 
oblige  me  to  repeat  what  I  have  said  ?  Has  not  the  person 
to  whom  I  really  gave  the  promise  sufficient  reasons  within 
herself  to  laugh  at  what  the  other  says ;  and  ought  she  to 
trouble  herself,  provided  I  keep  my  promise?  All  the 
speeches  do  not  forward  affairs ;  we  must  act  and  not  talk, 
and  facts  prove  more  than  words.  Therefore,  that  is  the 
only  way  in  which  I  shall  satisfy  you,  and  when  I  marry, 
you  shall  see  which  of  you  two  has  my  heart.  (Aside  to 
Mathurine).  Let  her  believe  what  she  will.  {Aside  to 
Charlotte).  Let  her  natter  herself  in  her  own  imagination. 
{Aside  to  Mathurine).  I  adore  you.  {Aside  to  Charlotte). 
I  am  entirely  yours.  {Aside  to  Mathurine}.  All  faces  are 
ugly  in  comparison  with  yours.  {Aside  to  Charlotte). 
When  a  man  has  once  seen  you  he  cannot  bear  to  look  at 
others.  {Aloud  to  both).  I  have  some  trifling  message  to 
deliver;  I  shall  be  back  again  in  a  quarter  of  an  hour.11 

11  The  original  has  %  veux  que  monsieur  vcus  montre  votre  bee  jaune  ; 
literally,  "  I  will  that  the  gentleman  should  show  you  your  yellow  beak." 
This  is  a  phrase  which  dates  from  the  days  when  falconry  was  a  favourite 
sport.     A  bird  with  a  yellow  beak  is  a  very  young  bird,  hence  young  scho- 
lars, greenhorns,  were  called  bejaunes,  and  tljus  montrer  a  qvelqu'un  son 
bejavne  or  son  bee  jaune  came  to  mean,  "  to  show  one  he  was  duped"  or 
foolishly  taken  in.     ''Green,'1  instead  of  jaune,  yellow,  appears  to  have 
the  same  signification  in  very  familiar  English  phraseology. 

12  In  the  original  we  find,  Je  veux  que  monsieur  vous  rende  unpeu  ca- 
muse,  literally,  "  I  wish  the  gentleman  would  make  you  a  little  flat-nosed.'* 
or  figuratively,  as  above.    Avoir  un  pied  de  nez,  literally  "  to  have  a  nose 
a  foot  long,"  has  the  same  meaning  when  used  as  a  familiar  form  of  speech. 

18  On  reading  this  scene  it  seems  forced  and  unnatural,  but  on  the  stage, 
when  acted  well,  it  is  very  amusing. 

102  DON  JUAN  ;   OR,  [ACT  n. 

SCENE     I. — CHARLOTTE,  MATHURINE,  SGANARELLE. 

CHAR.  (  To  Mathurine).  I  am  the  one  he  loves,  however. 

MATH.   {To  Charlotte).  He  will  marry  me. 

SCAN.  {Stopping  Charlotte  and  Mathurine).  Ah  !  poor 
girls,  I  pity  your  innocence.  I  cannot  bear  to  see  you  run 
thus  to  your  destruction.  'Believe  me  both,  do  not  be  im- 
posed upon  by  the  stories  he  tells  you,  but  stay  in  your 
village. 

SCENE  VII. — DON  JUAN,  CHARLOTTE,  MATHURINE,  SGA- 
NARELLE. 

D.  Ju.  (In  the  background,  aside).  I  would  fain  know 
why  Sganarelle  does  not  follow  me. 

SCAN.  My  master  is  a  knave  ;  he  only  wishes  to  make 
fools  of  you ;  he  has  made  fools  of  a  good  many  others  ; 
he  marries  the  whole  sex,  and  .  .  .  (Seeing  Don  Juan).  It 
is  false,  and  whoever  tells  you  this  you  may  tell  him  he 
lies.  My  master  does  not  marry  the  whole  sex ;  he  is  no 
knave;  he  does  not  intend  to  deceive  you,  nor  has  he  ever 
made  a  fool  of  any  one.  Oh,  stay!  here  he  is;  ask  him  himself. 

D.  Ju.  {Looking  at  Sganarelle,  and  suspecting  him  of 
having  said  something).  Yes! 

SCAN.  Sir,  as  the  world  is  full  of  backbiters,  I  was  be- 
forehand with  them  ;  and  I  was  telling  these  girls  that  if 
anybody  should  say  anything  wrong  of  you  they  ought  not 
to  believe  him,  and  be  sure  to  tell  him  that  he  lied. 

D.  Ju.  Sganarelle  ! 

SCAN.  (  To  Charlotte  and  Mathurine~).  Yes,  my  master 
is  an  honourable  man  ;  I  warrant  him  such. 

D.  Ju.  Hem ! 

SCAN.  They  are  impertinent  rascals. 

SCENE  VIII. — DON  JUAN,  LA  RAMEE,  CHARLOTTE,  MA- 
THURINE, SGANARELLE. 

LA  R.  (Aside  to  Don  Juart).     Sir,  I  come  to  tell  you 
that  it  is  not  quite  safe  for  you  to  be  here. 
D.  Ju.  How  so  ? 

LA  R.  Twelve  men  on  horseback  are  in  search  of  you  ; 
they  will  be  here  in  a  moment.  I  do  not  know  how  they 
have  followed  you  ;  but  I  have  learned  these  tidings  from 
a  countryman  of  whom  they  inquired,  and  to  whom  they 

SCENE  x.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  103 

described  you.  As  there  is  no  time  to  lose,  the  sooner 
you  leave  here  the  better. 

SCENE  IX. — DON  JUAN,  CHARLOTTE,  MATHURINE,  SGA- 

NARELLE. 

D.  Ju.  (To  Charlotte  and  Mathurine).  Urgent  business 
obliges  me  to  leave  this  place,  but  I  entreat  you  to  remem- 
ber the  promise  which  I  made  you  ;  depend  upon  it,  you 
shall  hear  from  me  before  to-morrow  evening. 

SCENE  X. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

1  D.  Ju.  As  we  are  unequally  matched  we  must  make  use 
of  a  stratagem,  and  cleverly  escape  from  the  misfortune 
that  pursues  me.  Sganarelle  you  shall  put  on  my  clothes, 
and  I  ... 

SCAN.  Sir,  you  are  joking.  To  expose  me  to  be  killed 
in  your  clothes,  and  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Make  haste,  I  do  you  too  much  honour.  Happy 
is  the  servant  who  has  the  glory  of  dying  for  his  master. 

SCAN.  Thank  you  for  such  an  honour.  (Alone).  As  it 
is  a  case  of  death,  grant  me  the  favour,  oh  Heaven  !  not 
to  be  taken  for  another. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — (A  Forest}. — DON  JUAN,  dressed  as  a  country 
gentleman,  SGANARELLE,  as  a  physician. 

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  sir,  acknowledge  that  I  was 
right,  and  that  we  are  both  wonderfully  well  disguised. 
Your  first  plan  would  by  no  means  have  been  opportune  ; 
this  conceals  us  much  better  than  what  you  would  have 
done. 

D.  Ju.  It  is  true,  you  look  very  well ;  I  cannot  imagine 
where  you  have  unearthed  this  ridiculous  apparel. 

SCAN.  Yes  !  It  is  the  dress  of  an  old  physician  which 
was  left  in  pawn  in  the  place  where  I  got  it,  and  it  cost 
me  some  money  to  have  it.  But  do  you  know,  sir,  that 
this  dress  has  already  obtained  me  some  consideration ; 
that  the  people  I  meet  bow  to  me,  and  that  they  come  to 
consult  me  as  an  able  man  ? 

104  DON  JUAN  I  OR»  [ACT  in. 

D.  JU.    HOW? 

SCAN.  Five  or  six  countrymen  and  countrywomen, 
seeing  me  pass,  came  to  ask  my  advice  upon  different 
diseases. 

D.  Ju.  You  answered  that  you  knew  nothing  of  the 
matter  ? 

SCAN.  I?  Not  at  all.  I  wished  to  keep  up  the  honour 
of  my  dress;  I  speechified  about  the  disease,  and  gave 
each  of  them  a  "prescription. 

D.  Ju.  And  what  remedy  did  you  prescribe? 

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  sir,  I  picked  them  up  where  I 
could.  I  prescribed  at  random ;  it  would  be  a  funny  thing 
if  the  patients  should  get  cured,  and  come  to  thank  me. 

D.  Ju.  And  why  not-?  Why  should  you  not  have  the 
same  privileges  as  all  other  physicians?  They  have  no 
more  to  do  with  the  recovery  of  their  patients  than  you 
have,  and  all  their  art  is  mere  pretence.  They  do  nothing 
but  get  honour  if  they  succeed;  and  you  may  take 
advantage,  as  they  do,  of  a  patient's  good  luck,  and  see 
attributed  to  your  remedies  what  is  owing  to  a  lucky 
chance  and  the  powers  of  nature.14 

SCAN.  What,  sir?  You  are  also  an  unbeliever  in 
medicine? 

D.  Ju.  It  is  one  of  the  greatest  errors  of  mankind.15 

SCAN.  What !  you  have  no  belief  in  senna,  cassia,  or 
antimonial  wine?16 

14  This  remark,  which  Moliere  has  also  made  use  of  in  Love  is  the  best 
Doctor,  is  taken  from  Montaigne's  Essays.     "  If  good  fortune,  nature,  or 
some  other  strange  cause,  produce  something  good  and  healthy  within  us, 
it  is  the  privilege  of  medicine  to  see  it  attributed  to  it ;  all  the  fortunate 
successes  which  happen  to  a  patient  who  is  under  the  hands  of  physicians, 
are  ascribed  to  it." 

15  This  is  the  first  satirical  outburst  of  Moliere  against  the  physicians ; 
but  as  it  was  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  man  who  believed  in  nothing,  and 
attacked  everything,  the  doctors  and  the  public  in  general  did  not  think 
they  were  the  expression  of  the  feelings  of  the  author.     His  next  play, 
Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  undeceived  them. 

16  In  Moliere's  time,  several  works,  pamphlets,  and  satires  had  been 
written  against,  or  in  favour  of  a  comparative  new  remedy,  a  preparation 
of  antimony,  called  emetic,  or  antimonial  wine.     But  in  1658,  Louis  XIV. 
fell  ill  at  Calais,  and  was  cured  by  it,  so  that  this  medicine  became  quite 
the  fashion.     In  1666,  about  one  year  after  the  first  performance  of  Don 
Juan,  the  parliament  decided  that  antimony  could  be  used  by  the  physi- 
cians of  the  Faculte. 

SCBNKI.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  IO$ 

D.  Ju.  And  why  would  you  have  me  believe  in  them  ? 

SCAN.  You  are  of  a  very  unbelieving  temper.  Yet  you 
know  how,  of  late,  great  noise  has  been  made  about  antk- 
monial  wine  ?  The  miracles  it  has  produced  have  con- 
verted the  most  incredulous  minds;  and  it  is  but  three 
weeks  ago  since  I  myself,  who  am  speaking  to  you,  saw  a 
marvellous  effect  of  it. 

D.  Ju.  What? 

SCAN.  There  was  a  man  who,  for  six  days,  was  dying ; 
they  did  not  know  what  more  to  prescribe  for  him,  and  all 
the  remedies  produced  no  effect;  at  last  the  doctors  took 
it  into  their  heads  to  give  him  an  emetic. 

D.  Ju.  He  recovered,  did  he  not  ? 

SCAN.  No,  he  died. 

D.  Ju.  The  effect  is  admirable. 

SCAN.  I  should  say  so  !  He  could  not  die  for  six  whole 
days,  and  that  made  him  die  at  once.  Could  you  have 
anything  more  efficacious  ? 

D.  Ju.  You  are  right. 

SCAN.  But  let  us  drop  physic,  in  which  you  do  not 
believe,  and  talk  of  other  things ;  for  this  dress  inspires 
me,  and  I  feel  in  the  humour  of  disputing  with  you.  You 
know  you  allow  me  to  dispute,  and  forbid  me  only  to 
remonstrate. 

D.  Ju.  Well  ? 

SCAN.  I  would  fain  know  your  innermost  thoughts.  Is 
it  possible  that  you  do'not  believe  at  all  in  Heaven  ? 

D.  Ju.  Let  us  leave  that  alone. 

SCAN.  That  means  no.     And  in  hell  ? 

D.  Ju.  Eh? 

SCAN.  The  same  thing  over  again.  And  in  the  devil, 
if  you  please  ? 

D.  Ju.  Yes,  yes. 

SCAN.  Very  little  also.  Do  you  not  believe  in  a  life 
after  this  ? 

D.  Ju.  Ha !  ha !  ha ! 

SCAN.  I  shall  have  some  trouble  in  converting  this  man. 
Tell  me  what  do  you  think  of  the  moine  bourru  ?  "  Eh  ? 

17  The  moine  bourru,  literally,  "  the  gruff  monk,"  was  a  phantom  who, 
it  is  said,  ran  through  the  streets  at  night,  and  beat  the  belated  wayfarers. 
This  connecting  a  superstition  with  the  highest  belief  gave  great  offence 

jo6  DON  JUAN;   OR,  [ACTIIL 

D.  Ju.  A  plague  on  the  fool ! 

SCAN.  That  is  what  I  cannot  bear ;  for  nothing  can  be 
more  true  than  the  moine  bourru.  I  will  be  hanged  if  it 
is  not  true  !  People  must  believe  something  in  this  world. 
What  do  you  believe  ? 

D.  Ju.  What  do  I  believe  ? 

SCAN.  Yes. 

D.  Ju.  I  believe  that  two  and  two  are  four,  Sganarelle, 
and  that  twice  four  are  eight. 

SCAN.  A  fine  belief,  and  nice  articles  of  faith  !  As  far 
as  I  can  see,  your  religion  is  arithmetic.  It  cannot  be 
denied  that  strange  follies  run  in  the  heads  of  men,  and 
that  those  who  have  studied  are  often  not  the  wiser  for  it. 
As  for  me,  sir,  thank  Heaven  !  I  have  not  studied  as  you 
have,  and  no  one  can  boast  of  ever  having  taught  me 
anything ;  but  with  my  small  amount  of  sense,  and  my 
little  judgment,  I  can  see  things  more  clearly  than  all 
books,  and  I  can  very  well  understand  that  this  world 
which  we  behold  has  not  sprung  up  of  itself  in  one  night, 
like  a  mushroom.  I  should  like  to  ask  you  who  has  created 
these  trees,  these  rocks,  this  earth,  and  this  sky  above  us; 
and  if  all  this  has  sprung  up  of  itself.  There  you  are ;  I 
take  you  as  an  example ;  there  you  are :  did  you  make 
yourself  alone,  and  was  not  your  father  obliged  to  sleep 
with  your  mother  to  make  you?  Can  you  see  all  the 
inventions  of  which  the  human  machine  is  composed 
without  wondering  how  the  one  influences  the  other? 
these  nerves,  these  bones,  these  veins,  these  arteries, 
these  .  .  .  this  lung,  this  heart,  this  liver,  and  all  these 
other  ingredients  to  be  found  there,  and  which  .  .  .  Oh, 
Lord !  interrupt  me,  if  you  please.  I  cannot  argue  unless 
I  am  interrupted.  You  do  not  say  a  single  word  on  pur- 
pose, and  allow  me  to  go  on  out  of  spite. 

D.  Ju.  I  am  waiting  for  your  arguments  to  be  finished. 

SCAN.  My  arguments  are  that  there  exists  something 
admirable  in  man,  whatever  you  may  say,  which  all  the 
philosophers  cannot  explain.  Is  it  not  marvellous  that  I 

in  Moli&re's  time,  and  our  author  had  probably  to  suppress  this  passage 
after  the  first  representations  of  Don  Juan.  But  very  likely  he  only 
wished  to  show  that  people  like  Sganarelle  have  a  greater  belief  in  super- 
stitions  than  in  the  highest  abstract  truths. 

SCKNKII.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE  STATUE.  107 

am  here,  and  that  I  have  something  in  my  head  which 
thinks  a  hundred  different  things  in  one  moment,  and  does 
with  my  body  all  that  it  wishes  to  do?  I  wish  to  clasp  my 
hands,  to  lift  up  my  arm,  to  raise  my  eyes  towards  Heaven, 
to  bend  my  head,  to  move  my  feet,  to  go  to  the  right,  to 
the  left,  forwards,  backwards,  turn  .  .  .  (He  falls  down 
whilst  turning  round}. 

D.  Ju.   There  is  an  end  of  all  your  arguing. 

SCAN.  Zounds  !  I  am  a  fool  to  amuse  myself  in  arguing 
with  you ;  believe  what  you  like ;  it  does  not  matter  a 
straw  to  me  whether  you  are  damned  ! 

D.  Ju.  I  believe  that  whilst  arguing  we  have  lost  our 
way.  Call  that  man  we  see  yonder,  and  let  us  ask  him  our 
road.18 

SCENE  II. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  A  POOR  MAN. 

SCAN.  Hullo !  ho !  I  say,  you  man  !  ho !  my  good 
fellow  !  friend,  a  word  with  you,  pray.  Show  us  the  way 
to  the  town. 

POOR  M.  You  have  only  to  follow  that  path,  gentlemen, 
and  turn  to  the  right  when  you  come  to  the  end  of  the 
forest !  but  I  warn  you  to  be  upon  your  guard,  for  there 
have  been  robbers  about  for  some  time. 

D.  Ju.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  friend,  and  thank 
you  with  all  my  heart. 

POOR  M.  If  you  would  kindly  assist  me,  sir,  with  some 
trifle  ? 

D.  Ju.  Ha,  ha  J  your  advice  is  interested,  I  see. 

POOR  M.  I  am  a  poor  man,  sir,  living  alone  in  this  for- 
est these  ten  years ;  and  I  shall  pray  to  Heaven  to  grant 
you  all  kinds  of  prosperity. 

D.  Ju.  Pray  Heaven  to  give  you  a  coat,  and  do  not 
trouble  yourself  about  other  people's  business. 

18  Moliere  intended  to  print  his  Don  yuan,  but  this  was  never  done. 
In  1682,  eight  years  after  his  death,  La  Grange  and  Vinot,  in  the  first  col- 
lected edition  of  Moliere's  works,  printed  this  play ;  but  they  had  to  sup- 
press several  passages,  which  were  afterwards  found  in  a  copy,  that 
belonged  to  M.  de  la  Reynie,  then  lieutenant-general  of  police,  and  which 
was  discovered  only  in  1825.  Some  passages  are  found  only  in  the  edi- 
tions printed  at  Amsterdam  in  1683,  and  at  Brussels  in  1694.  None  of 
these  has  ever  before  been  translated  into  English.  The  suppressed  words 
being  page  105,  "  Don  Juan.  Let  us  leave  that  alone,"  until  nearly  the 
end  of  the  scene. 

108  DON  JUAN  ;    OR,  [ACT  m. 

SCAN.  My  good  man,  you  do  not  know  this  gentleman  ; 
he  only  believes  that  two  and  two  make  four,  and  that 
twice  four  are  eight. 

D.  Ju.  What  is  your  occupation  among  these  trees  ? 

POOR  M.  To  pray  to  Heaven  for  the  prosperity  of  all 
kind  people  who  give  me  something. 

D.  Ju.  You  are  pretty  well  off,  then? 

POOR  M.  Alas  !  sir,  I  am  as  poor  as  poor  can  be. 

D.  Ju.  You  are  joking:  a  man  who  prays  to  Heaven 
every  day  must  be  very  well  off. 

POOR  M.  I  assure  you,  sir,  that  frequently  I  have  not 
even  a  piece  of  bread  to  eat. 

D.  Ju.  That  is  strange  ;  your  assiduity  is  ill  rewarded. 
Ha,  ha !  I  am  going  to  give  you  directly  a  piece  of  gold, 
provided  you  swear  a  round  oath. 

POOR  M.  Oh  !  sir,  would  you  wish  me  to  commit  such 
a  sin? 

D.  Ju.  Will  you  gain  a  piece  of  gold  ?  yes  or  no.  Here 
is  one  for  you,  if  you  swear.  There  ;  now  swear. 

PooRM.  Sir  ... 

D.  Ju.  Unless  you  swear,  you  shall  not  get  it. 

SCAN.  Well,  well ;  swear  ever  so  little ;  there  is  no 
harm  in  it. 

D.  Ju.  Take  it ;  here  it  is ;  take  it,  I  tell  you ;  but 
swear. 

POOR  M.  No,  -sir,  I  would  rather  die  of  hunger. 

D.  Ju.  There,  there ;  I  give  you  this  piece  of  gold  be- 
cause you  are  a  human  being.19  {Looking  into  the  forest). 
But  what  do  I  see  ?  One  man  attacked  by  three  !  The 
match  is  too  unequal,  and  I  ought  not  to  allow  so  base  an 
action.  (He  draws  his  sword  and  hastens  to  the  spot 
where  the  attack  was  going  on}. 

19 The  original  has  •pour  V amour  de  I'humanite,  for  the  love  of 
humanity.  Humanite  often  meant  with  Moliere  "  the  quality  of  being 
human,"  and  not  what  it  usually  means  now,  "  mankind  collectively." 
The  passages  suppressed  in  the  first  printed  and  uncastrated  edition  of 
this  play  are  on  page  108,  from  "  I  have  not  even  apiece  of  bread  to 
eat,"  to,  "  I  would  rather  die  of  hunger."  The  rest  of  the  scene  is  found 
only  in  the  Amsterdam  edition  of  1684.  This  whole  scene  caused  an 
immense  scandal  in  the  beginning,  and  Moliere  was  accused  of  impiety 
(see  Introductory  Notice.) 

SCHNB  iv.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STAUTE.  109 

SCENE  III. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

My  master  is  truly  mad  to  run  unsought  into  danger. 
But,  upon  my  word  his  assistance  has  been  of  some  use ; 
the  two  have  put  the  three  to  flight. 

SCENE  IV. — DON  JUAN,  DON  CARLOS,  SGANARELLE,  in  the 
background. 

D.  CAR.  {Putting  up  his  sword}.  The  flight  of  these 
robbers  shows  me  what  I  owe  to  your  arm.  Allow  me, 
sir,  to  return  you  thanks  for  so  generous  an  action,  and 
let  ... 

D.  Ju.  I  have  done  nothing,  sir,  but  what  you  would 
have  done  in  my  place.  Such  adventures  touch  our 
honour ;  the  action  of  these  rogues  was  so  cowardly,  that 
it  would  have  been  taking  part  with  them  not  to  have  op- 
posed them.  But  how  fell  you  into  their  hands  ? 

D.  CAR.  By  chance  I  strayed  from  my  brother  and  all 
our  retinue;  and  whilst  I  was  endeavouring  to  rejoin 
them,  I  fell  in  with  these  robbers,  who  immediately  killed 
my  horse,  and  would  have  done  as  much  for  me,  had  it 
not  been  for  your  valour. 

D.  Ju.  Do  you  intend  to  go  towards  the  town  ? 

D.  CAR.  Yes  but  I  do  not  intend  to  go  into  it;  my 
brother  and  I  are  obliged  to  roam  about  on  account  of 
one  of  those  sad  affairs  which  compel  noblemen  to  sacri- 
fice themselves  and  their  families  to  their  untarnished 
honour ;  it  is  ever  fatal,  even  if  we  do  succeed ;  if  we  do 
not  lose  our  life,  we  are  compelled  to  leave  the  kingdom. 
This  is  the  reason  why  I  think  it  unfortunate  to  be  a 
nobleman,  for  however  discreetly  and  honestly  he  may 
live  himself,  he  cannot  prevent  the  laws  of  honour  from 
connecting  him  with  the  disgraceful  conduct  of  other 
people,  nor  from  having  his  life,  repose,  and  property 
depend  upon  the  whims  of  the  first  audacious  fellow  who 
takes  it  into  his  head  to  do  him  one  of  those  injuries  for 
which  a  gentleman  must  lose  his  life. 

D.  Ju.  There  is,  however,  this  advantage,  that  those 
who  take  it  into  their  head  to  offend  us  out  of  mere  wan- 
tonness run  the  same  risks,  and  spend  their  time  just  as 
uncomfortably.  But  if  I  am  not  indiscreet,  may  I  ask 
what  this  sad  affair  is  ? 

1 10  DON  JUAN;   OR,  [Acrm. 

D.  CAR.  It  has  gone  so  far  that  the  secret  can  no  longer 
be  kept.  When  the  insult  is  once  public,  our  honour 
does  not  oblige  us  to  conceal  our  shame,  but  openly  to 
blazon  forth  our  vengeance,  and  even  to  proclaim  that  we 
intend  to  avenge  ourselves.  Therefore,  sir,  I  have  no 
scruples  in  telling  you  that  the  offence  which  we  wish  to 
avenge  is  the  seduction  of  a  sister,  who  was  carried  off 
from  a  convent,  and  that  the  author  of  this  offence  is  Don 
Juan  Tenorio,  son  of  Don  Louis  Tenorio.  We  have  been 
in  search  for  him  for  some  days,  and  we  have  followed  him 
this  morning,  upon  the  information  of  a  servant,  who  told 
us  that  he  had  gone  out  on  horseback,  with  four  or  five 
others,  and  that  he  had  taken  this  route;  but  all  our 
pains  have  been  useless,  and  we  cannot  discover  what  has 
become  of  him. 

D.  Ju.  Do  you  know  this  Don  Juan,  sir,  of  whom  you 
speak. 

D.  CAR.  No,  sir,  I  do  not.  I  never  saw  him,  and  I 
have  only  heard  my  brother  describe  him  ;  but  his  reputa- 
tion is  none  of  the  best ;  he  is  a  man  whose  life  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Stop,  sir,  if  you  please.  He  is  rather  a  friend 
of  mine,  and  it  would  be  base  in  me  to  allow  any  one  to 
speak  ill  of  him. 

D.  CAR.  Out  of  respect  for  you,  sir,  I  shall  say  nothing 
of  him.  As  you  have  saved  my  life,  certainly  the  least 
thing  I  can  do  is  not  to  speak  before  you  of  one  of  your 
acquaintances,  when  I  can  say  nothing  but  evil  of  him. 
But  however  much  his  friend  you  may  be,  I  venture  to  hope 
that  you  will  not  approve  of  this  action  of  his,  or  think 
it  strange  that  we  should  endeavour  to  avenge  ourselves. 

D.  Ju.  On  the  contrary,  I  will  serve  you  in  this,  and 
spare  you  some  fruitless  trouble.  I  am  Don  Juan's  friend, 
I  cannot  help  being  so ;  but  it  is  not  right  that  he  should 
offend  gentlemen  with  impunity,  and  I  promise  you  in 
his  name  that  he  shall  give  you  satisfaction. 

D.  CAR.  And  what  satisfaction  can  he  give  for  these 
sorts  of  injuries  ? 

D.  Ju.  All  that  your  honour  can  desire ;  and,  without 
giving  you  any  further  trouble  to  look  for  Don  Juan,  I 
engage  that  he  shall  be  forthcoming  wherever  you  like, 
when  you  please. 

SCENE  v.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE.  Ill 

D.  CAR.  This  is  very  pleasant  news,  sir,  to  outraged 
hearts ;  but  after  what  I  owe  you,  it  would  be  very  painful 
to  me,  if  you  were  to  be  one  of  the  combatants. 

D.  Ju.  I  am  so  intimately  connected  with  Don  Juan 
than  he  cannot  fight  unless  I  must  fight  too;  but  I  answer 
for  him  as  for  myself,  and  you  have  only  to  say  when  you 
wish  to  meet  him,  and  give  you  satisfaction. 

D.  CAR.  How  cruel  is  my  lot  !  Must  I  owe  my  life  to 
you,  and  Don  Juan  be  one  of  your  friends  ? 

SCENE  V. — DON  ALONZO,  DON  CARLOS,  DON  JUAN, 
SGANARELLE. 

D.  AL.  {Speaking  to  his  retinue,  without  seeing  Don 
Carlos  or  Don  Juan).  Give  some  water  to  my  horses,  and 
then  lead  them  after  us ;  I  shall  walk  a  little.  (Seeing 
them  botfi).  Heavens!  what  do  Isee?  What!  brother, 
you  are  in  conversation,  with  our  mortal  enemy  ? 

D.  CAR.  Our  mortal  enemy  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Clapping  his  hand  to  his  sword}.  Yes,  I  am 
myself,  Don  Juan  ;  and  your  superior  number  shall  not 
force  me  to  wish  to  disown  my  name. 

D.  AL.  (Drawing  his  sword}.  Ah  !  traitor,  you  must 
die,  and  .  .  .  (Sganarelle  runs  away  and  hides  him- 
self}. 

D.  CAR.  Stay,  brother.  I  owe  my  life  to  him  ;  and 
had  he  not  come  to  my  assistance,  the  robbers  whom  I 
encountered  would  have  killed  me. 

D.  AL.  And  would  you  allow  this  consideration  to  pre- 
vent our  vengeance  ?  Whatever  service  the  hand  of  an 
enemy  may  render  us,  it  ought  to  have  no  influence  upon 
our  heart ;  if  we  are  to  measure  the  obligation  by  the 
injury,  then  your  gratitude,  brother,  is-  in  this  case  ridicu- 
lous; for  honour  is  infinitely  more  precious  than  life,  and 
therefore  we  owe  nothing  when  we  owe  our  life  to  him 
who  has  taken  away  our  honour. 

D.  CAR.  I  know  the  difference,  brother,  that  a  gentle- 
man ought  always  to  make  between  the  one  and  the  other ; 
and  gratitude  for  the  obligation  does  not  efface  within  me 
resentment  for  the  injury ;  but  allow  me  to  give  back  to 
him  on  this  very  spot  what  he  has  lent  me ;  let  me  repay 
him  immediately  the  life  I  owe  him,  by  delaying  our  ven- 

112  DON   JUAN;    OR,  [ACTIH 

geance,  and  by  allowing  him  the  liberty  of  enjoying,  for 
a  few  days,  the  benefit  of  this  kind  action  to  me. 

D.  AL.  No,  no,  we  run  the  risk  of  not  wreaking  our 
vengeance  if  we  delay  it,  and  the  opportunity  of  taking  it 
may  never  come  again.  Heaven  offers  it  to  us  now,  and 
we  ought  not  to  let  it  pass.  When  honour  is  mortally 
wounded,  we  should  not  think  of  keeping  any  modera- 
tion ;  if  you  do  not  like  to  engage  personally  in  this 
action,  you  need  only  retire,  and  leave  to  my  arm  the 
glory  of  such  a  sacrifice. 

D.  CAR.  Pray,  brother  .   .   . 

D.  AL.  All  further  conversation  is  unnecessary ;  he 
must  die. 

D.  CAR.  Hold,  I  say,  brother.  I  will  not  allow  any 
attempt  upon  his  life  ;  and  I  swear  by  Heaven  that  I  shall 
defend  him  here  against  any  and  every  one;  that  very  life 
which  he  has  saved  shall  always  guard  him;  if  you  attempt 
to  kill  him,  you  must  first  pierce  me. 

D.  AL.  What !  you  side  with  our  enemy  against  me ; 
and,  instead  of  feeling  the  same  rage  on  beholding  him  as  I 
do,  you  show  feelings  full  of  gentleness ! 

D.  CAR.  Brother,  let  us  show  moderation  in  a  lawful 
action ;  and  not  avenge  our  honour  with  so  much  violence. 
Let  us  master  our  courage ;  let  us  show  valour  without 
ferocity,  which  only  proceeds  from  mature  deliberation 
and  reason,  not  from  the  impulse  of  a  blind  rage.  I  will 
not  remain  in  debt,  brother,  to  my  enemy ;  I  am  under 
an  obligation  to  him,  which  I  must  repay  before  I  do  any- 
thing else.  Our  revenge  will  not  be  the  less  exemplary 
for  being  deferred  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  will  be  the  great- 
er ;  and  the  opportunity  we  have  had  of  taking  it,  will 
make  it  appear  more  just  in  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world. 

D.  AL.  O,  the  strange  weakness  and  dreadful  blindness 
of  thus  hazarding  the  interests  of  our  honour  for  the  ridicu- 
lous idea  of  a  fanciful  obligation  ! 

D.  CAR.  No,  brother,  do  not  trouble  yourself  about 
that.  If  I  commit  a  fault,  I  shall  make  amends  for  it,  and 
take  care  of  our  honour ;  I  know  to  what  it  obliges  us,  and 
this  delay  of  one  day,  which  my  gratitude  asks  for  him, 
will  only  augment  my  desire  to  satisfy  it.  You  see,  Don 
Juan,  how  anxious  I  am  to  return  you  the  favour  I  have 

SCKNBVI.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE  STATUE.  113 

received  ;  by  this  you  can  judge  of  the  consequences ;  rest 
assured  that  I  discharge  with  the  same  warmth  what  I  owe, 
and  that  I  shall  not  be  the  less  punctual  in  repaying  you 
the  insult  than  the  kindness.  I  will  not  oblige  you  to  ex- 
press your  sentiments  now ;  I  allow  you  to  think  at  your 
leisure  about  what  you  are  resolved  to  do.  You  very  well 
know  the  great  injury  you  have  done  us  ;  you  shall  your- 
self judge  what  reparation  it  demands.  There  are  peace- 
ful means  of  giving  us  satisfaction  ;  there  are  violent  and 
bloody  ones ;  but  finally,  whatever  choice  you  may  make, 
you  have  passed  me  your  word  to  let  Don  Juan  give  me  satis- 
faction. Pray,  mind  to  do  so,  and  remember  that,  out  of 
this  place,  my  only  duty  is  for  my  honour. 

D.  Ju.  I  have  asked  nothing  of  you,  and  shall  keep  my 
promise. 

D.  CAR.  Come,  brother,  a  moment's  forbearance  does 
not  injure  the  severity  of  our  duty. 

SCENE  VI. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Ju.   Hullo  !  hey  !  Sganarelle  ! 

SCAN.  (  Coming  out  of  a  place  where  he  had  hid  himself}. 
What  is  your  pleasure,  sir  ? 

D.  Ju.  How  !  scoundrel,  you  run  away  when  I  am 
attacked  ? 

SCAN.  I  beg  your  pardon,  sir ;  I  was  quite  near.  I  be- 
lieve that  this  gown  is  purgative,  and  that  to  wear  it  is  as 
good  as  taking  medicine. 

D.  Ju.  Plague  on  your  insolence  !  Hide  your  coward- 
ice at  least  behind  a  more  decent  covering.  Do  you  know 
who  the  gentleman  is  whose  life  I  saved  ? 

SCAN.  I?    No. 

D.  Ju.  It  is  a  brother  of  Elvira. 

SCAN.  A  ... 

D.  Ju.  He  is  gentlemanly  enough,  and  behaved  pretty 
well ;  I  am  sorry  I  have  a  quarrel  with  him. 

SCAN.  It  would  be  easy  for  you  to  arrange  all  things. 

D.  Ju.  Yes,  but  my  passion  for  Elvira  is  worn  out,  and 
it  does  not  suit  my  mood  to  engage  myself.  You  know  I 
love  liberty  in  love,  and  I  cannot  resolve  to  immure  my 
heart  between  four  walls.  I  have  told  you  a  score  of  times 
I  have  a  natural  propensity  to  give  way  to  whatever  at- 

VOL.    II.  H 

114  DON  JUAN;  OR,  [ACT  HI. 

tracts  me.  My  heart  belongs  to  the  whole  fair  sex  ;  and 
they  must  take  it  by  turns,  and  keep  it  as  long  as  they 
can.  But  what  splendid  edifice  do  I  see  amongst  those 
trees  ? 

SCAN.  Do  you  not  know  it  ? 

D.  Ju.  No,  indeed. 

SCAN.  Why  !  it  is  the  tomb  which  the  Commander 
ordered  to  be  built  when  you  killed  him. 

D.  Ju.  Ha  !  you  are  right.  I  did  not  know  that  it  was 
hereabout.  Every  one  says  it  is  wonderfully  well  done, 
and  the  statue  of  the  Commander  as  well ;  I  have  a  mind 
to  go  and  see  it. 

SCAN.   Do  not  go  there,  sir. 

D.  Ju.  Why  not  ? 

SCAN.  It  is  not  courteous  to  go  to  pay  a  visit  to  a  man 
whom  you  have  killed. 

D.  Ju.  On  the  contrary ;  I  intend  to  be  courteous  by 
paying  him  a  visit,  which  he  ought  to  receive  politely,  if 
he  is  anything  of  a  gentleman.  Come,  let  us  go  in.  (The 
tomb  opens,  and  discovers  a  splendid  mausoleum  and  the 
statue  of  the  Commander). 

SCAN.  Ah  !  how  beautiful  that  is  !  what  fine  statues  ! 
what  beautiful  marble  !  what  fine  pillars !  ah  !  how  beauti- 
ful that  is  !  What  do  you  say  of  it,  sir  ? 

D.  Ju.  That  the  pride  of  a  dead  man  cannot  possibly 
go  farther.  What  I  think  admirable  is  that  a  man,  who, 
whilst  he  was  alive,  was  satisfied  with  quite  a  plain 
abode,  should  desire  so  magnificent  a  one,  when  he  has 
tio  longer  occasion  for  it. 

SCAN.  Here  is  the  statue  of  the  Commander. 

D.  J.  Zounds  !  he  looks  very  well  in  the  dress  of  a 
Roman  emperor  ! 

SCAN.  Upon  my  word,  sir,  it  is  very  well  made.  It 
seems  as  if  he  were  alive,  and  going  to  speak.  He  looks  at 
Us  in  such  a  manner  that  it  would  frighten  me  if  I  were 
quite  alone ;  I  do  not  think  he  likes  to  see  us. 

D.  Ju.  He  would  be  wrong ;  and  it  would  be  an  un- 
handsome reception  of  the  honour  I  do  him.  Ask  him  if 
he  will  come  to  take  supper  with  me. 

SCAN.  That  is  a  thing  he  has  no  occasion  for,  I  believe. 

D.  Ju.  Ask  him,  I  say. 

SCENE  I.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE  STATUE.  115 

SCAN.  You  are  jesting.  It  would  be  madness  to  go  and 
speak  to  a  statue. 

D.  Ju.  Do  what  I  bid  you. 

SCAN.  How  ridiculous  !  Mr.  Commander  .  .  .  (Aside). 
I  laugh  at  my  folly,  but  my  master  makes  me  do  it. 
(Aloud).  Mr.  Commander,  my  master,  Don  Juan,  asks 
whether  you  will  do  him  the  honour  to  come  to  take  sup- 
per with  him.  (The  statue  nods  its  head}.  Ah ! 

D.  Ju.  What  is  the  matter?  What  ails  you?  Tell  me. 
Will  you  speak? 

SCAN.  (Nodding  his  head  like  the  statue).  The 
statue  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Well,  what  do  you  mean,  villain  ? 

SCAN.  I  say  that  the  statue  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  Well !  what  of  the  statue?  Speak,  or  I  will  break 
every  bone  in  your  body. 

SCAN.  The  statue  made  a  sign  to  me. 

D.  Ju.  Plague  take  the  rascal ! 

SCAN.  I  tell  you  it  made  a  sign  to  me ;  there  is  nothing 
more  true.  Go  and  speak  to  him  yourself,  and  then  you 
will  see.  Perhaps  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Come  rogue,  come.  I  will  convict  you  clearly 
of  cowardice.  Observe.  Will  his  Excellency  the  Com- 
mander come  to  take  supper  with  me  ?  ( The  statue  nods 
his  head  again. ) 

SCAN.  I  would  not  take  ten  pistoles  to  see  it  again. 
Well,  sir? 

D.  Ju.  Come,  let  us  begone. 

SCAN.  (Alone).  These  are  your  free-thinkers  who  be- 
lieve in  nothing. 

ACT  IV. 

SCENE  I. — (A  Room  in  Don  Juan's  Palace).    DON  JUAN, 
SGANARELLE,  RAGOTIN. 

D.  Ju.  (To  Sganarelle).  Be  it  as  it  will;  let  us  drop  it. 
It  is  but  a  trifle,  and  we  may  have  been  deceived  by  a 
false  light,  or  surprised  by  some  giddiness  which  disturbed 
our  sight. 

Il6  DON  JUAN;   OR,  [ACT  iv. 

SCAN.  Ah !  sir,  do  not  try  to  deny  what  we  saw  with 
our  own  eyes.  Nothing  can  be  more  certain  than  that 
nod;  I  make  no  doubt  that  Heaven  offended  by  your  way 
of  living  has  wrought  this  miracle  to  convince  you,  and 
to  reclaim  you  from  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Harkee.  If  you  bother  me  any  more  with  your 
foolish  morality ;  if  you  say  another  word  on  that  subject, 
I  shall  call  one  of  the  servants,  send  for  a  strong  switch, 
have  you  held  down  by  three  or  four  men,  and  give  you  a 
thousand  lashes.  Do  you  understand  me  ?  20 

SCAN.  Very  well,  sir,  perfectly  well.  You  explain  your- 
self clearly;  that  is  one  good  thing  in  you  that  you  never 
affect  a  roundabout  way ;  you  express  yourself  with  won- 
derful plainness.21 

D.  Ju.  Come,  let  me  have  supper  as  soon  as  possible. 
A  chair  here,  boy. 

SCENE    II. — DON    JUAN,  SGANARELLE,    LA  VIOLETTE, 
RAGOTIN. 

LA  V.  Sir,  here  is  one  of  your  tradesmen,  M.  Dimanche, 
who  wishes  to  speak  to  you. 

SCAN.  That  is  all  right ;  we  only  wanted  to  be  bothered 
by  a  creditor !  What  put  it  into  his  head  to  come  to  ask 
us  for  money  ?  why  did  you  not  tell  him  that  your  master 
was  not  at  home  ? 

LA  V.  I  have  been  telling  him  so  these  three-quarters  of 
an  hour,  but  he  would  not  believe  me,  and  sat  down  within 
to  wait. 

SCAN.  Let  him  wait  as  long  as  he  likes. 

D.  Ju.  No,  on  the  contrary  bid  him  come  in.  It  is 
very  bad  policy  to  hide  from  your  creditors.  It  is  good  to 
pay  them  something ;  and  I  possess  the  secret  of  sending 
them  away  satisfied  without  giving  them  a  farthing. 

SCENE  III. — DON  JUAN,  M.  DIMANCHE,  SGANARELLE,  LA 

VIOLETTE,  RAGOTIN. 
D.  Ju.  Ha  !  M.  Dimanche,  come  this  way.     How  de- 

20  This  is  the  first  time  that  Don  Juan  threatens  Sganarelle  in  a  positive 
and  serious  way, — a  proof  that  he  is  disturbed  by  what  he  has  seen. 
Hence  the  slightest  contradiction  kindles  his  fury. 

11  This  is  an  imitation  of  the  Andria  of  Terence,  Act  i.,  Scene  a. 

SCBNBIH.J  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  117 

lighted  I  am  to  see  you  !  And  how  angry  I  am  that  my 
people  did  not  show  you  in  immediately  !  I  had  given 
orders  that  I  would  not  see  any  one  ;  but  this  order  was 
not  meant  for  you,  and  you  have  a  right  never  to  have 
the  door  shut  against  you  in  my  house. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you. 

D.  Ju.  (To  La  Violette  and  Ragotiri),  Zounds!  ras- 
cals, I  shall  teach  you  to  leave  M.  Dimanche  in  the  ante- 
chamber, and  I  shall  let  you  know  who  is  who. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  it  is  not  of  the  slightest  consequence. 

D.  Ju.  (To  M.  Dimanche).  What!  to  say  I  was  not 
within,  to  M.  Dimanche,  my  very  best  friend  ! 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  I  am  your  servant ;  I  came  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  Here,  quick,  a  seat  for  M.  Dimanche. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  I  am  very  well  as  I  am. 

D.  Ju.   No,  no ;  I  will  have  you  sit  down  by  me. 

M.  DIM.  It  is  not  necessary. 

D.  Ju.  Take  away  that  stool,  and  bring  an  arm  chair. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  you  are  jesting,  and  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  No,  no ;  I  know  what  I  owe  you ;  and  I  will 
not  allow  them  to  make  any  difference  between  us  two. 

M.  DIM.  Sir.  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  Come,  sit  down. 

M.  DIM.  There  is  no  need  for  it,  sir.  I  have  only  one 
word  to  say  to  you.  I  was  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Sit  you  down  there,  I  say. 

M.  DIM.  No,  sir,  I  am  very  well.     I  come  to  ... 

D.  Ju.  No,  I  will  not  hear  you  if  you  do  not  sit  down. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  I  do  as  you  wish. — I  •    .    . 

D.  Ju.  Upon  my  word,  M.  Dimanche,  you  look  very 
well. 

M.  DIM.  Yes,  sir,  at  your  service.     I  came  to  ... 

D.  Ju.  You  have  an  admirable  constitution,  rosy  lips, 
a  ruddy  complexion,  and  sparkling  eyes. 

M.  DIM.  I  should  be  glad  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  How  is  Mrs.  Dimanche,  your  good  lady  ? 

M.  DIM.  Very  well,  sir,  thank  Heaven. 

D.  Ju.   She  is  a  good  woman 

M.  DIM.  She  is  your  humble  servant,  sir.     I  came  .    .   . 

D.  Ju.  And  how  is  your  little  daughter,  Claudine  ? 

M.  DIM.  As  well  as  possible. 

n8  DON  JUAN;  OR,  [ACTIV. 

D.  Ju.  What  a  pretty  little  girl  she  is  !  I  love  her  with 
all  my  heart. 

M.  DIM.  You  do  her  too  much  honour,  sir.     I  ... 

D.  Ju.  And  does  little  Colin  make  as  much  noise  as 
ever  with  his  drum  ? 

M.  DIM.   Always  the  same,  sir.     I  ... 

D.  Ju.  And  your  little  dog,  Brusquet,  does  he  still 
bark  as  loudly,  and  as  lustily  bite  the  legs  of  the  people 
who  visit  you  ? 

M.  DIM.  More  than  ever,  sir ;  and  we  cannot  break 
him  off  it. 

D.  Ju.  Do  not  be  surprised  if  I  ask  after  your  whole 
family ;  for  I  take  a  very  great  interest  in  them  all. 

M.  DIM.  We  are  infinitely  obliged  to  you,  sir.  I  ... 
D,  Ju.  {Holding  out  his  hand}.  Shake  hands,  then,  M. 
Dimanche.  Are  you  really  a  friend  of  mine  ? 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  I  am  your  servant. 

D.  Ju.  I'  gad,  I  am  yours  with  all  my  heart. 

M.  DIM.  You  do  me  too  much  honour.     I  ... 

D.  Ju.  There  is  nothing  I  would  not  do  for  you. 

M.  DIM.  Sir,  you  are  too  kind. 

D.  Ju.  And  that  without  any  motive,  believe  me. 

M.  DIM.  I  have  certainly  not  deserved  this  favour. 
But,  sir  .  .  . 

D.  Ju.  Nonsense !  Come,  Mr.  Dimanche,  will  you 
take  supper  with  me  without  any  ceremony  ? 

M.  DIM.  No,  sir;  I  must  return  home  immediately.  I.  .  . 

D.  Ju.  (Rising).  Here,  quick,  a  candle  to  light  Mr. 
Dimanche,  and  let  four  or  five  of  my  fellows  take  their 
blunderbusses  to  escort  him. 

M.  DIM.  {Rising  also).  Sir,  this  is  not  necessary ;  I  can 
very  well  go  alone.  But  .  .  .  (Sganarelle  quickly  removes 
the  chairs}. 

D.  Ju.  What  ?  They  shall  escort  you ;  I  take  too  great 
an  interest  in  you.  I  am  your  humble  servant,  and  your 
debtor  to  boot. 

M.  DIM.  Ah  !  sir  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  I  do  not  conceal  it,  and  I  tell  it  to  everyone. 

M.  DIM.  If ... 

D.  Ju.  Do  you  wish  me  to  see  you  home  ? 

M.  DIM.  Oh,  sir !  you  jest.     Sir  .    .    . 

IOTNBIV.J  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  119 

D.  Ju.  Embrace  me  then,  pray.  Once  more  I  desire 
you  to  be  convinced  that  I  am  entirely  yours,  and  that 
there  is  nothing  in  the  world  which  I  would  not  do  to 
serve  you. 

SCENE  IV. — M.  DIMANCHE,  SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  I  must  needs  own  that  my  master  is  a  man  who 
loves  you  much. 

M.  DIM.  It  is  true ;  he  is  so  polite  to  me,  and  pays  me 
so  many  compliments,  that  I  can  never  ask  him  for  money. 

SCAN.  I  assure  you  that  his  whole  household  would  lay 
down  their  lives  for  you  ;  and  I  wish  something  would 
happen  to  you,  that  somebody  would  take  it  into  his  head 
to  cudgel  you,  then  you  should  see  how  .  .  . 

M.  DIM.  I  believe  it ;  but,  Sganarelle,  pray  speak  a 
word  to  him  about  my  money. 

SCAN.  Oh  !  do  not  you  trouble  yourself  about  that,  he 
will  pay  you  as  well  as  anyone. 

M.  DIM.  But  you,  Sganarelle,  you  owe  me  something 
on  your  own  account. 

SCAN.  Fie  !  do  not  speak  of  that. 

M.  DIM.  What?     I  ... 

SCAN.  Do  I  not  know  what  I  owe  you  ? 

M.  DIM.  Yes.     But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Come,  Mr.  Dimanche,  I  am  going  to  light  you 
to  the  door. 

M.  DIM.  But  my  money  .    .    . 

SCAN.  {Taking  M.  Dimanche  by  the  arm).  You  are 
only  jesting. 

M.  DIM.  I  wish  to  ... 

SCAN.  {Pulling  him).  Come. 

M.  DIM.  I  intend  to  ... 

SCAN.  (Pushing  him  towards  the  door}.  Fiddlesticks  ! 

M.  DIM.  But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  (Pushing  him  again).  Fie  ! 

M.  DIM.  I  .    . 

SCAN.  (Pushing  him  quite  off  the  stage).  Fie  I  say. M 

M  Sganarelle  has  not  much  more  money  to  give  than  his  master ;  but 
as  he  has  not  the  same  means  of  awing  or  of  flattering  M.  Dimanche,  he 
uses  but  few  words,  and  trusts  to  the  strength  of  his  arm  to  silence  his 
creditor,  and  to  turn  him  out  of  the  house.  The  servant,  as  well  as  the 
master,  are  true  to  their  natures. 

120  DON   JUAN;   OR,  (ACT  iv 

SCENE  V. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  LA  VIOLETTE. 

LA  V.  {To  Don  Juan}.     Sir,  here  is  your  father. 

D.  Ju.  Oh  !  This  completes  the  business !     It  wanted 

Jy  this  to  drive  me  mad  ! 

SCENE  VI. — DON  Louis,  DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Louis.  I  see  plainly  that  I  disturb  you,  and  that  you 
could  very  easily  have  dispensed  with  my  visit.  It  is  true 
we  are  a  thorn  in  one  another's  path,  and  if  you  are  tired 
of  seeing  me,  I  am  also  very  tired  of  your  unruly  beha- 
viour. Alas  !  how  little  do  we  know  what  we  do,  when 
we  do  not  allow  Heaven  to  judge  what  we  need,  when  we 
wish  to  be  wiser  than  it,  and  importune  it  by  our  blind 
wishes  and  inconsiderate  demands  !  I  most  anxiously 
wished  for  a  son ;  I  incessantly  prayed  with  incredible  fer- 
vour for  one;  and  this  son,  whom  I  obtained  by  wearying 
Heaven  with  my  prayers  is  the  plague  and  punishment  of 
that  very  life,  of  which  I  thought  he  would  be  the  joy  and 
consolation  !  With  what  eye,  do  you  think,  can  I  behold 
the  many  unworthy  actions,  whose  wickedness  can  hardly 
be  palliated  before  the  world,  that  continuance  of  dis- 
graceful affairs  which  daily  compels  us  to  weary  the  good- 
ness of  our  sovereign,  and  which  has  exhausted,  in  his 
opinion,  the  merit  of  my  services,  and  the  influence  of  my 
friends  ?  Ah  !  what  a  mean  spirit  you  have  !  Do  you 
blush  because  you  so  little  deserve  your  lofty  birth  ?  Tell 
me,  pray,  what  right  have  you  to  be  proud  of  it  ?  and 
what  have  you  done  in  this  world  that  gives  you  a  claim 
to  be  considered  a  nobleman  ?  Do  you  think  it  is  suffi- 
cient to  bear  the  title  and  arms  of  one,  and  that  it  is  any 
glory  to  be  descended  of  noble  blood,  if  one  lives  in  in- 
famy? No,  no  !  Rank  is  nothing  without  virtue.28  We 
have  therefore  no  share  in  the  glory  of  our  ancestors,  un- 
less we  strive  to  be  like  them  ;  and  the  lustre  which  their 
actions  reflect  upon  us,  demands  that  we  should  do  them 
like  honour,  follow  in  their  footsteps,  and  not  degenerate 
from  their  virtues,  if  we  would  be  deemed  their  true  de- 
scendants. Hence  in  vain  are  you  born  of  lofty  progeni- 

23  Burns  also  says  ''  The  rank  is  but  the  guinea  stamp, 
The  man's  the  gowd  for  a'  that." 

SCENE  vn.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE.  121 

tors ;  they  disown  you  as  one  of  their  race,  and  all  the 
illustrious  deeds  that  they  have  achieved  confer  no  advan- 
tage upon  you  ;  on  the  contrary,  their  renown  only  re- 
dounds to  your  discredit;  and  their  glory  is  a  shining 
light  which  renders  clear  to  the  eyes  of  all  the  infamy  of 
your  actions.  Know,  finally,  that  a  nobleman  who  leads 
a  wicked  life  is  a  monster  in  nature ;  that  virtue  is  the 
prime  badge  of  nobility  ;  that  I  regard  much  less  the 
nime  which  a  man  bears  than  the  actions  which  he  com- 
mits, and  that  I  should  value  more  highly  a  porter's  son 
who  was  an  honest  man,  than  a  monarch's  son  who  led 
such  a  life  as  yours.21 

D.  Ju.  Sir,  if  you  were  to  take  a  seat,  you  would  speak 
more  at  your  ease. 

D.  Louis.  No,  insolent  wretch ;  I  will  neither  take  a 
seat  nor  speak  any  more,  and  I  plainly  perceive  that  all 
my  words  have  no  effect  upon  you ;  but  learn,  unworthy 
son,  that  by  your  actions  you  have  worn  out  a  father's 
love ;  that,  sooner  than  you  think,  I  shall  put  a  stop  to 
your  irregularities,  forestall  the  vengeance  of  Heaven,  and, 
by  your  punishment,  blot  out  the  shame  of  being  your 
father. 

SCENE  VII. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Ju.  (Still  addressing  his  father,  although  he  has  left). 
Why !  die  as  soon  as  you  can,  it  is  the  best  thing  you  can 
possibly  do.  Every  one  must  have  his  turn  ;  it  drives  me 
mad  to  see  fathers  live  as  long  as  their  children.  {He 
throws  himself  down  in  his  arm-chair). 

SGAN.   Ah  !   sir,  you  are  in  the  wrong. 

D.  Ju.   {Rising}.   I  in  the  wrong. 

SGAN.   (Trembling).   Sir  .    .    . 

D.  Ju.  I  in  the  wrong?25 

SGAN.  Yes,  sir,  you  were  wrong  in  having  listened  to 
what  he  said  to  you,  and  you  ought  to  have  turned  him 
out  by  the  shoulders.  Did  any  one  ever  see  anything 

M  Nearly  the  whole  of  Don  Louis'  speech,  beginning  from,  *'  Oh !  what 
a  mean  spirit  you  have,"  is,  in  the  original,  in  blank  verse. 

25  Don  Juan  twice  says  to  Sganarelle,  "  I  in  the  wrong  ? "  The  re- 
proaches of  his  servant  would  not  sting  him  so  much  if  he  did  not  feel 
he  deserved  them. 

122  DON  JUAN;   OR,  fxcmv. 

more  impertinent  ?  A  father  to  come  and  remonstrate 
with  his  son,  and  tell  him  to  reform  his  ways,  not  to  forget 
his  lofty  birth,  to  live  the  life  of  a  respectable  man,  and 
a  hundred  other  silly  things  of  the  same  kind  !  Can  a 
man  like  you,  who  knows  how  to  live,  stand  such  a  thyig 
as  that?  I  wonder  at  your  patience.  Had  I  been  in 
your  place,  I  should  have  sent  him  about  his  business. 
(Aside}.  O  cursed  complaisance,  what  do  you  bring 
me  to! 

D.  Ju.  Will  supper  be  ready  soon  ? 

SCENE  VIII. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  RAGOTIN. 

RAG.  Sir,  a  lady,  with  her  face  veiled,  wishes  to  speak 
to  you. 

D.  Ju.  Who  can  that  be  ? 
SCAN.  You  must  see. 

SCENE  IX. — DONNA  ELVIRA,  veiled,  DON  JUAN, 
SGANARELLE. 

D.  ELV.  Do  not  be  surprised,  Don  Juan,  to  see  me  at 
this  hour,  and  in  this  dress.  An  urgent  motive  obliges 
me  to  make  you  this  visit ;  what  I  have  to  say  will  admit 
of  no  delay.  I  do  not  come  here  possessed  by  that  wrath 
I  showed  a  little  while  ago ;  I  am  changed  from  what  I 
was  this  morning.  I  am  no  longer  that  Donna  Elvira 
who  uttered  imprecations  against  you,  whose  angry  soul 
vented  nothing  but  threats,  and  breathed  only  revenge. 
Heaven  has  banished  from  my  heart  all  that  unworthy 
passion  which  I  entertain  for  you,  all  those  tumultuous 
upheavings  of  a  criminal  attachment,  all  those  shameful 
outbursts  of  an  earthly  and  gross  love ;  and  it  has  left  in 
my  heart  a  flame  which  burns  for  you  without  any  sensual 
affection,  a  tenderness  entirely  holy,  a  love  detached  from 
everything,  which  is  not  actuated  by  selfishness,  and  cares 
only  for  your  good. 

D.  Ju.   {Whispering to  Sganarelle).     I  think  you  weep? 

SCAN.  Excuse  me. 

D.  ELV.  It  is  this  perfect  and  pure  love  which  brings 
me  hither  for  your  sake,  to  impart  to  you  a  warning  from 
Heaven,  and  endeavour  to  turn  you  away  from  that  preci- 
pice whither  you  are  .hastening.  Yes,  Don  Juan,  I  know 

SCENBIX.]  THE  FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE.  123 

all  the  irregularities  of  your  life;  and  that  same  Heaven 
which  has  touched  my  heart,  and  made  me  see  the  errors 
of  my  own  conduct,  has  inspired  me  to  come  to  you,  and 
to  tell  you  in  its  name  that  your  crimes  have  tired  out  its 
mercy,  that  its  dreadful  wrath  is  ready  to  fall  upon  you, 
that  you  can  avoid  this  by  a  speedy  repentance,  and  that 
perhaps  not  another  day  is  left  to  save  yourself  from  the 
greatest  of  all  miseries.  As  for  me,  no  earthly  ties  bind 
me  any  longer  to  you.  Thanks  be  to  Heaven,  I  have 
abandoned  all  foolish  thoughts.  I  am  resolved  to  retire 
into  a  nunnery;  I  only  hope  to  live  long  enough  to  ex- 
piate the  crime  I  have  committed,  and,  by  an  austere 
penance,  to  deserve  pardon  for  the  blindness  into  which  I 
have  been  plunged  by  the  violence  of  a  guilty  passion. 
But,  when  I  am  retired  from  the  world,  it  would  greatly 
pain  me  if  a  person,  whom  I  once  tenderly  loved,  should 
be  made  an  ominous  example  of  the  justice  of  Heaven ;  it 
will  be  an  unspeakable  delight  to  me  if  I  can  prevail  upon 
you  to  ward  off  the  dreadful  blow  that  threatens  you.  I 
beseech  you,  Don  Juan,  grant  me  as  a  last  favour  this 
soothing  consolation  ;  refuse  me  not  your  own  salvation, 
which  I  beg  of  you  with  tears  ;  if  you  are  not  moved  for 
your  own  sake,  let  at  least  my  entreaties  prevail,  and  spare 
me  the  terrible  grief  of  seeing  you  condemned  to  eternal 
punishments. 

SCAN.  (Aside).   Poor  lady  ! 

D.  ELV.  I  once  loved  you  very  tenderly ;  nothing  in 
this  world  was  so  dear  to  me  as  you ;  I  forgot  my  duty 
for  your  sake;  I  have  done  every  thing  for  you;  all  the 
reward  I  desire  is  that  you  should  amend  your  life,  and 
ward  off  your  destruction.  Save  yourself,  I  beseech  you, 
either  for  your  own  sake  or  mine.  Once  more,  Don  Juan, 
I  beg  it  of  you  with  tears ;  and  if  the  tears  of  a  person 
you  once  loved  have  no  influence  with  you,  I  conjure  you 
by  everything  that  is  most  capable  of  moving  you. 

SCAN.  (Aside,  looking  to  Don  Juan).  You  have  the 
feelings  of  a  tiger. 

D.  ELV.  I  leave  you  now ;  that  is  all  I  had  to  say  to 
you. 

D.  Ju.  Madam,  it  is  late,  stay  here.  We  shall  give  you 
as  good  a  room  as  we  can. 

1 24  DON  JUAN  ;   OR,  [ACT  nr. 

D.  ELV.   No,  Don  Juan,  do  not  detain  me  longer. 

D.  Ju.  Madam,  you  will  oblige  me  by  remaining,  I 
assure  you. 

D.  ELV.  No,  I  tell  you,  let  us  not  waste  time  in  need- 
less words.  Let  me  go  immediately;  do  not  insist  upon 
accompanying  me,  and  think  only  of  profiting  by  my 
advice. 

SCENE  X. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  J.  Do  you  know  that  I  felt  something  stirring  in 
my  heart  for  her,  that  I  was  rather  pleased  with  this 
strange  unexpected  adventure,  and  that  her  careless  dress, 
her  languishing  air,  and  her  tears,  rekindled  within  me 
some  small  embers  of  an  extinguished  flame  ? 

SGAN.  That  is  as  much  as  to  say  her  words  did  not 
make  any  impression  on  you. 

D.  Ju.   Supper,  quickly. 

SCAN.   Very  well. 

SCENE  XI. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  LA  VIOLETTE, 
RAGOTIN. 

D.  Ju.  (Sitting  down  at  table).  Sganarelle,  we  must 
really  think  of  amending  our  lives. 

SGAN.  Ay,  that  we  must ! 

D.  Ju.  Yes,  upon  my  word,  we  must  reform.  Twenty 
or  thirty  years  more  of  this  life,  and  then  we  shall  consider 
about  it. 

SGAN.  Oh! 

D.  Ju.  What  do  you  say  to  that  ? 

SGAN.  Nothing.  Here  comes  supper,  (ffe  takes  a  bit 
from  one  of  the  dishes  that  was  brought  in,  and  puts  it  into 
his  mouth). 

D,  Ju.  Methinks  you  have  a  swollen  cheek :  what  is  the 
matter  with  it  ?  Speak.  What  have  you  in  your  mouth  ? 

SGAN.  Nothing. 

D.  Ju.  Show  it  me.  Zounds  !  he  has  got  a  swelling  in 
his  cheek.  Quick  !  a  lancet  to  open  it.  The  poor  fellow 
cannot  stand  this  any  longer,  and  this  abscess  may  choke 
him.  Wait !  see  it  is  quite  ripe.  'Ha  !  you  rascal ! 

SGAN.  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  I  wished  to  see  whether 
your  cook  had  not  put  in  too  much  pepper  or  salt. 

D.  Ju.   Come,   sit  down  there  and  eat.     I  have  some 

SCBNEXUU]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE   STATUE.  12$ 

business  for  you  as  soon  as  I  have  finished  supper.  I  per- 
ceive you  are  hungry. 

SCAN.  (Sitting  down  at  the  table).  I  should  think  so, 
Sir,  I  have  not  eaten  anything  since  this  morning.  Taste 
that,  it  is  very  good.  (Ragotin  takes  Sganarelle1  s  plate 
away,  as  soon  as  he  has  got  anything  upon  it  to  eat).  My 
plate,  my  plate  !  Gently,  if  you  please.  Ods  boddikins  ! 
my  mannikin,  how  nimble  you  are  in  giving  clean  plates  ! 
I  say,  little  la  Violette,  you  are  not  very  handy  in  giving 
a  man  something  to  drink  !  ( WJiilst  la  Violette  gives 
Sganarelle  something  to  drink  Ragotin  again  takes  away  his 
plate}. 

D.  Ju.  Who  can  it  be  that  knocks  in  such  a  manner  ? 

SCAN.  Who  the  deuce  comes  to  disturb  us  at  our  meal  ? 

D.  Ju.  I  wish  to  take  my  supper  at  least  in  peace  ;  let 
no  one,  therefore,  come  in. 

SCAN.   Let  me  alone,  I  shall  go  to  the  door  myself. 

D.  Ju.  (Seeing  Sganarelle  return  frightened}.  What  ails 
you  ?  What  is  the  matter  ? 

SCAN.  (Nodding  his  head  as  the  statue  did}.  The  .  .  . 
is  there. 

D.  Ju.  Let  us  go  and  see,  and  let  us  show  that  nothing 
can  move  me. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  poor  Sganarelle,  where  will  you  hide  your- 
self? 

SCENE  XII. — DON  JUAN,  THE  STATUE  OF  THE  COM- 
MANDER, SGANARELLE,  LA  VIOLETTE,  RAGOTIN. 

D.  Ju.  (To  his  servants}.  A  chair  and  a  plate  here. 
Quick  !  (Don  Juan  and  the  Statue  sit  down  at  the  table}. 
(To  Sganarelle}.  Come,  sit  down. 

SCAN.  Sir,  I  have  lost  my  appetite. 

D.  Ju.  Sit  down  here,  I  say.  Give  me  something  to 
drink.  The  Commander's  health,  Sganarelle.  Give  him 
some  wine. 

SCAN.  Sir,  I  am  not  thirsty. 

D.  Ju.  Drink,  and  sing  a  song  to  entertain  the  Corr- 
mander. 

SCAN.  I  have  got  a  cold,  Sir. 

D.  Ju.  No  matter.  Begin.  (To  his  servants}.  You, 
there,  come  and  sing  along  with  him. 

126  DON  JUAN;  OR,  [ACrv. 

STAT.  It  is  enough,  Don  Juan.  I  invite  you  to  come 
and  take  supper  with  me  to-morrow.  Will  you  be  so 
bold? 

D.  Ju.  Yes.     Sganarelle  alone  shall  accompany  me. 

SCAN.  I  thank  you,  to-morrow  is  fast-day  with  me. 

D.  Ju.   {To  Sganarelle).     Take  a  light. 

STAT.   No  need  of  light  for  those  whom  Heaven  guides. 

ACT  V. 

(  The  theatre  represents  a  landscape). 
SCENE  I. — DON  Louis,  DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  Lou.  What  !  my  son,  is  it  possible  that  the  mercy 
of  Heaven  has  granted  my  prayers?  Is  what  you  tell  me 
really  true?  Do  you  not  deceive  me  with  a  false  expecta- 
tion ?  and  can  I  indeed  believe  the  astonishing  tidings  of 
your  conversion  ? 

D.  Ju.  (Playing  the  hypocrite). ."*  Yes,  I  have  seen  the 
error  of  my  ways ;  I  am  no  longer  the  same  I  was  last 
night ;  and  Heaven  has  suddenly  wrought  a  change  in  me, 
which  will  surprise  every  one.  It  has  touched  my  heart 
and  opened  my  eyes ;  I  look  back  with  horror  upon  my 
long  blindness,  and  the  crimes  and  disorders  of  the  life  I 
have  led.  In  my  own  mind  I  consider  all  my  former 
abominations  ;  I  am  astonished  that  Heaven  could  bear 
with  me  so  long,  and  that  it  has  not  twenty  times  dis- 
charged upon  my  head  the  thunderbolts  of  its  terrible  jus- 
tice. I  see  how  kind  and  merciful  it  has  been  to  me  in 
not  punishing  my  crimes ;  I  intend  to  profit  by  it  as  I 
ought,  to  show  openly  to  the  world  a  sudden  change  in  my 
life,  to  repair,  by  those  means,  the  scandal  of  my  past 
actions,  and  endeavour  to  obtain  from  Heaven  a  full  re- 

26  Don  Juan  until  now  was  swayed  only  by  his  passions,  and  a  slave 
to  pleasure  and  debauchery.  When  he  finds  himself  everywhere 
detested,  when  he  sees  the  anger  of  powerful  families  raised  against  him, 
when  his  friends  leave  him  isolated,  and  his  creditors  become  importunate, 
when  even  his  own  father  has  cursed  and  disinherited  him,  and  when  he 
imagines  that  the  shadow  of  a  man  he  has  killed  pursues  him,  the  only 
way  that  is  left  open  to  him,  is  falsehood  and  hypocrisy.  He  does  not 
change  his  character,  it  is  true,  but  his  conversation  and  behaviour. 

sc«i«  ii.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE.  12J 

mission  of  my  sins.  I  am  now  going  to  strive  for  this;  I 
beg  of  you,  Sir,  to  aid  me  in  this  design,  and  to  assist  me 
in  making  choice  of  a  person,  who  may  serve  me  as  a 
guide,  and  under  whose  conduct  I  may  walk  safely  in  the 
way  upon  which  I  am  entering. 

D.  Lo.  Ah !  my  son  !  how  easily  does  the  love  of  a 
father  return,  and  how  quickly  do  the  offences  of  a  son 
fade  from  the  memory  at  the  least  mention  of  repentance ! 
I  have  already  forgotten  all  the  sorrows  you  have  caused 
me ;  everything  is  effaced  by  the  words  you  have  just 
spoken.  I  confess  I  am  beside  myself;  I  shed  tears  of  joy ; 
all  my  prayers  are  answered,  and  henceforth  I  have  noth- 
ing to  ask  from  Heaven.  Embrace  me,  my  son,  and  per- 
sist, I  conjure  you,  in  this  praiseworthy  resolution.  As 
for  me,  I  shall  go  immediately  to  carry  these  happy  tidings 
to  your  mother,  unite  with  her  in  expressing  our  delight, 
and  return  thanks  to  Heaven  for  the  holy  thoughts  with 
which  it  has  vouchsafed  to  inspire  you. 

SCENE  II. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  Ah,  Sir,  how  glad  I  am  to  see  you  converted !  I 
have  long  been  waiting  for  this  ;  and  now,  thanks  to  Hea- 
ven, all  my  wishes  are  accomplished. 

D.  Ju.    Hang  the  booby  ! 

SCAN.  How,  booby  ? 

D.  Ju.  What,  do  you  think  I  was  serious  in  what  I  said 
just  now,  and  do  you  imagine  that  my  mouth  uttered  what 
my  heart  believed  ? 

SCAN.  What !  it  is  not  .  .  .  You  do  not  .  .  .  Your 
.  .  .  (Aside).  Oh !  what  a  man  !  what  a  man  !  what  a 
man! 

D.  Ju.  No,  no,  I  am  not  altered,  and  my  feelings  are 
always  the  same. 

SCAN.  What,  do  you  not  yield  to  the  surprising  miracle 
of  a  moving  and  speaking  statue  ? 

D.  Ju.  There  is  really  something  in  that  which  I  do 
not  understand ;  but,  whatever  it  may  be,  it  is  not  capable 
either  of  convincing  my  judgment,  or  of  snaking  my  nerves, 
and  if  I  said  I  wished  to  reform  my  conduct,  and  was  going 
to  lead  an  exemplary  life,  it  is  a  plan  which  I  have  formed 
out  of  pure  policy,  a  useful  stratagem,  a  necessary  disguise 

128  DON  JUAN  ;    OR,  [ACT  v. 

which  I  am  willing  to  adopt,  in  order  to  spare  the  feelings 
of  a  father,  whose  assistance  I  want,  and  to  screen  myself, 
with  respect  to  mankind,  from  the  consequences  of  a 
hundred  disagreable  adventures.  Sganarelle,  I  make  you 
my  confidant  in  this  case,  and  I  am  very  glad  to  have  a 
witness  of  the  feeling  of  my  inmost  soul,  and  of  the  real 
motives  which  instigate  me  to  act  as  I  do.27 

SCAN.  What !  you  believe  in  nothing,  and  you  pretend 
at  the  same  time  to  set  up  as  a  virtuous  man  ! 

D.  Ju.  And  why  not?  There  are  many  others  besides 
myself,  who  carry  on  this  trade,  and  who  make  use  of  the 
same  mask  to  deceive  the  world. 

SCAN.   (Aside).     Oh  !  what  a  man  !  what  a  man  ! 

D.  Ju.  There  is  no  longer  any  shame  in  acting  thus : 
hypocrisy  is  a  fashionable  vice,  and  all  fashionable  vices 
pass  for  virtues.  The  character  of  a  virtuous  man  is  the 
best  part  which  one  can  play.  Now-a-days,  the  profession 
of  hypocrite  possesses  marvellous  advantages.  It  is  an  art, 
the  quackery  of  which  is  always  respected ;  and  although 
it  be  seen  through,  no  one  dares  to  say  anything  against  it. 
All  other  vices  of  mankind  are  liable  to  censure,  and 
everyone  is  at  liberty  to  attack  them  openly ;  but  hypocrisy 
is  a  privileged  vice,  which,  with  its  own  hand,  closes  the 
mouth  of  all  the  world,  and  peacefully  enjoys  a  sovereign 
impunity.  By  mere  force  of  humbug,  a  compact  body  is 
formed  by  the  whole  set.  He  who  offends  one,  brings 
them  all  upon  him;  and  those,  whom  every  one  knows  to 
act  in  all  good  faith,  and  to  be  perfectly  sincere, — even 
those,  I  say,  are  generally  the  dupes  of  the  others ;  they 
simply  fall  into  the  traps  of  the  humbugs,  and  blindly 
support  those  who  ape  their  own  conduct.  How  many, 
think  you,  do  I  know  who,  by  this  stratagem,  have  adroitly 
patched  up  the  errors  of  their  youth ;  who  put  on  a  cloak 
of  religion,  and  beneath  this  venerated  habit  obtain  leave 

27  The  maxims  which  Don  Juan  promulgates  farther  on  in  defence  of 
hypocrisy,  are  not  so  much  for  Sganarelle  as  for  the  audience  who  listen 
to  the  piece ;  hence  the  statement  that  he  is  "  very  glad  to  have  a  wit- 
ness ...  of  the  (his)  real  motives,"  which  he  then  unfolds.  Don  Juan  is 
above  all  afraid  that,  for  one  single  moment,  he  could  be  thought  sincerely 
repentant,  and  is  glad  to  have  some  confidant  who  can  testify  to  his 
hypocrisy.  I  doubt,  however,  if  the  real  hypocrite  ever  unbosoms  himself, 
even  to  his  most  intimate  companion.  Tartuffe  has  no  confidant. 

SCKNB  ii.J  THE  FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE. 

to  be  the  most  wicked  fellows  on  earth?  It  signifies 
nothing  that  their  intrigues,  and  they  themselves,  are 
known  for  what  they  are,  they  have  none  the  less  influence 
in  society;  a  demurely  bent  head,  a  canting  sigh,  and  a 
pair  of  up-turned  eyes,  justify  with  the  world  all  that  they 
can  do.  It  is  under  this  favourable  shelter  that  I  intend 
to  take  refuge,  and  arrange  matters  comfortably.  I  shall 
not  abandon  my  darling  habits,  but  I  shall  take  care  to 
conceal  them,  and  amuse  myself  quietly.  If  I  should  be 
discovered,  I  shall,  without  stirring  a  finger,  find  my 
interests  espoused  by  the  whole  crew,28  and  be  defended  by 
them  through  thick  and  thin  against  every  one.  In  short, 
this  is  the  true  way  of  doing  with  impunity  all  that  I 
please.  I  shall  set  myself  up  as  a  censor  of  the  actions 
of  others,  judge  ill  of  every  one,  and  think  well  only  of 
myself.  Whoever  has  offended  me,  however  slightly,  I 
shall  never  forgive;  but  preserve,  without  much  ado,  an 
irreconcilable  hatred.  I  shall  announce  myself  as  the 
advocate  of  the  interests  of  Heaven ;  and,  under  this  con- 
venient pretext,  I  shall  persecute  my  enemies,  accuse  them 
of  impiety,  let  loose  against  them  those  rash  zealots  who, 
without  knowing  why  or  wherefore,  will  raise  an  outcry 
against  them,  overwhelm  them  with  abuse,  and  openly 
condemn  them  to  perdition  on  their  own  private  authority. 
It  is  thus  that  we  must  profit  by  men's  weaknesses,  and 
that  a  man  who  is  no  fool  adapts  himself  to  the  vices  of 
his  age."9 

SCAN.  O  Heavens  !  what  do  I  hear  ?  You  only  wanted 
to  be  a  hypocrite  to  make  you  perfect ;  and  now  you  have 
reached  the  height  of  your  abominations.  Sir,  your  last 
stroke  is  more  than  I  can  bear,  and  I  cannot  help  speak- 
ing. Do  what  you  please  with  me ;  beat  me,  break  every 
bone  in  my  body,  kill  me  if  you  like ;  I  must  discharge 
my  conscience,  and,  like  a  faithful  servant,  tell  you  what 
I  ought.  Know,  sir,  that  the  pitcher  goes  so  often  to  the 

"The  original  has  a  "cabale,"  which  was  formerly  said  only  of  the  clique 
of  The  Precieuscs ;  but,  when  Don  Juan  was  performed  (1665),  it  had 
come  to  mean  "  a  set  of  organized  devotees." 

49  These  words  contain  a  vigorous  protest  against  those  who  had  attacked 
Tartuffe, — which  had  already  been  played  tentatively — and  through  whose 
machinations  it  had  been  forbidden  to  be  brought  out. 

VOL.   II.  I 

13°  ON  JUAN;  OR,  [ACTV. 

well,  that  it  comes  home  broken  at  last,  and  as  that 
author,  whose  name  I  have  forgotten,  very  well  says,  man 
is,  in  this  world,  like  a  bird  on  a  bough ;  the  bough  is 
fixed  to  the  tree;  he  who  clings  to  the  tree  follows  good 
precepts ;  good  precepts  are  better  than  fair  words ;  fair 
words  are  found  at  court ;  at  court  are  courtiers ;  the 
courtiers  follow  the  fashion ;  fashion  proceeds  from  fancy ; 
fancy  is  a  faculty  of  the  soul;  the  soul  gives  us  life;  life 
ends  in  death ;  death  causes  us  to  think  of  Heaven ; 
Heaven  is  above  the  earth  ;  the  earth  is  not  the  sea  ;  the 
sea  is  subject  to  storms ;  the  storms  toss  vessels ;  vessels 
have  need  of  a  good  pilot ;  a  good  pilot  is  prudent ; 
young  people  are  not  prudent;  young  people  ought  to 
obey  old  people;  old  people  love  riches;  riches  make 
men  rich  ;  the  rich  are  not  poor ;  the  poor  have  necessi- 
ties ;  necessity  has  no  law ;  he  who  knows  no  law  lives 
like  a  brute  beast,  and  consequently  you  shall  be  con- 
demned to  the  bottomless  pit.30 

D.  Ju.  What  fine  arguments ! 

SCAN.  If  you  do  not  give  in,  after  this,  so  much  the 
worse  for  you. 

SCENE  III. — DON  CARLOS,  DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

D.  CAR.  Don  Juan,  I  meet  you  just  in  time ;  and  I  am 
glad  to  address  you  here  rather  than  at  your  own  house, 
to  ask  you  what  you  are  resolved  to  do.  You  know  that 
it  concerns  me,  and  that,  in  your  presence,  I  took  upon 
me  to  watch  over  this  affair.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  con- 
ceal it,  I  sincerely  wish  that  things  may  be  arranged  in 
an  amicable  way ;  there  is  nothing  which  I  would  not  do 
to  induce  you  to  take  that  course,  and  to  see  you  publicly 
recognize  my  sister  as  your  wife. 

D.  Ju.  (In  a  hypocritical  tone).  Alas  !  I  should  indeed 
like  to  give  you,  with  all  my  heart,  the  satisfaction  you 
desire ;  but  Heaven  is  directly  opposed  to  it ;  it  has  in- 
spired me  with  the  design  of  amending  my  life;  and  I 

80  Some  of  the  early  editions  have  Sganarelle's  speech  only  as  far  as 
"  in  death."  At  last,  Sganarelle's  indignation  is  roused  by  Don  Juan's 
Tiypocrisy ;  he  flies  in  a  passion,  and  attacks  his  master  violently,  but 
flounders  in  the  midst  of  his  reasonings,  talks  nonsense,  and  ends  rather 
abruptly. 

SCENE  m.]  THE   FEAST  WITH   THE   STATUE.  131 

now  entertain  no  other  thoughts  than  entirely  to  abandon 
all  that  binds  me  to  this  world,  to  strip  myself  as  soon  as 
possible  of  all  sorts  of  pomps  and  vanities,  and  henceforth 
to  correct,  by  an  austere  behaviour,  all  those  criminal 
irregularities  into  which  a  blind  and  youthful  ardour 
led  me. 

D.  CAR.  This  design,  Don  Juan,  does  not  clash  with 
what  I  propose,  and  the  company  of  a  lawful  wife  is  not 
1  in  opposition   to   the   praiseworthy   designs  with    which 
Heaven  has  inspired  you. 

D.  Ju.  Alas !  that  is  by  no  means  the  case.  Your  sister 
herself  has  formed  this  same  plan ;  she  has  resolved  to 
withdraw  into  a  nunnery ;  and  we  have  been  both  touched 
by  grace  at  the  same  time. 

D.  CAR.  Her  going  into  a  nunnery  cannot  give  us 
satisfaction,  since  it  may  be  attributed  to  the  contempt 
which  you  show  to  her  and  our  family;  our  honour  de- 
mands that  she  should  be  married  to  you. 

D.  Ju.  I  assure  you  that  that  cannot  be.  I  was  very 
much  inclined  towards  that  union ;  and  this  very  day  I 
asked  counsel  from  Heaven  about  it ;  but,  when  I  did  so 
I  heard  a  voice  which  told  me  that  I  ought  not  to  think 
of  your  sister,  and  that  most  certainly  I  could  not  be 
saved  with  her. 

D.  CAR.  Do  you  think,  Don  Juan,  that  you  can  blind 
us  with  such  fine  excuses  ? 

D.  Ju.   I  obey  the  voice  of  Heaven. 

D.  CAR.  What  ?  would  you  have  me  be  satisfied  with 
such  a  speech  ? 

D.  Ju.   Heaven  will  have  it  so. 

D.  CAR.  Have  you  taken  my  sister  out  of  a  nunnery,  to 
abandon  her  at  last  ? 

D.  Ju.  Heaven  ordains  it  so. 

D.  CAR.  Shall  we  suffer  such  a  blot  upon  our  family  ? 

D.  Ju.  Seek  your  redress  from  Heaven. 

D.  CAR.  Pooh  !  why  always  Heaven  ? 

D.  Ju.  Heaven  wishes  it  should  be  so. 

D.  CAR.  It  is  enough,  Don  Juan ;  I  understand  you. 
This  spot  is  not  favourable  for  what  I  have  to  say  about 
it ;  but  I  shall  find  you  before  long. 

D.  Ju.  You  may  do  as  you  please.    You  know  I  am  not 

132  DON  JUAN  J   OR,  [ACT  v. 

wanting  in  courage,  and  can  use  my  sword,  if  need  be.  I 
am  going  directly  through  that  little  lonely  street  which 
leads  to  the  great  convent ;  but  I  declare  to  you,  solemnly, 
I  do  not  wish  to  fight ;  Heaven  forbid  the  thought ;  and 
if  you  attack  me,  we  shall  see  what  will  come  of  it.*1 
D.  CAR.  Truly,  we  shall  see,  we  shall  see. 

SCENE  IV. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.  Sir,  what  a  devil  of  a  style  have  you  adopted  ? 
This  is  worse  than  all  the  rest,  and  I  liked  you  much  better 
as  you  were  before.  I  always  hoped  you  might  be  saved ; 
but  now  I  despair  of  it ;  I  believe  that  Heaven,  which  has 
endured  you  hitherto,  can  never  bear  this  last  abomination. 

D.  Ju.  Pooh !  Pooh  !  Heaven  is  not  so  particular  as 
you  think ;  and  if  men  were  every  time  to  ... 

SCENE  V. — DON  JUAN,  SGANARELLE,  A  GHOST  in  the  form 
of  a  veiled  woman. 

SCAN.  (Seeing  the  Ghost).  Ah !  Sir,  Heaven  speaks  to 
you ;  it  is  a  warning  it  gives  you. 

D.  Ju.  If  Heaven  gives  me  a  warning,  it  must  speak 
more  plainly,  if  it  wishes  me  to  understand  it. 

GHOST.  Don  Juan  has  but  a  moment  to  take  advantage 
of  the  mercy  of  Heaven ;  and  if  he  does  not  repent  now, 
his  perdition  is  certain. 

SCJAN.  Do  you  hear,  sir? 

D.  Ju.  Who  dares  to  utter  such  words?  I  think  I  know 
that  voice. 

SGAN.  Oh,  sir,  it  is  a  Ghost,  I  know  it  by  its  step. 

D.  Ju.  Ghost,  phantom,  or  devil,  I  shall  see  what  it  is. 
(The  Ghost  changes  its  shape,  and  represents  time  with  a 
scythe  in  its  hand). 

SGAN.  Oh  Heavens  !  do  you  see  this  change  of  shape, 
sir? 

D.  Ju.  No,  no,  nothing  can  frighten  me ;  and  I  shall 
try  with  my  sword  whether  it  is  a  body  or  a  spirit.  {The 
Ghost  vanishes  the  instant  Don  Juan  offers  to  strike  it). 

n  In  the  former  scene,  Don  Juan  has  laid  down  the  theory  of  hypocrisy  ; 
in  this  scene,  he  brings  it  into  practice. 

SCKNKVII.]  THE   FEAST   WITH   THE  STATUE-  133 

SCAN.  Ah,  sir,  yield  to  so  many  proofs,  and  repent 
immediately. 

D.  Ju.  No,  no,  come  what  will,  it  shall  never  be  said 
that  I  was  capable  of  repentance.  Come,  follow  me. 

SCENE  VI. — THE  STATUE  OF  THE  COMMANDER,  DON 
JUAN,  SGANARELLE. 

STAT.  Stay,  Don  Juan.  You  gave  me  your  word  yester- 
day that  you  would  come  and  sup  with  me. 

D.  J.  Yes.     Where  shall  we  go  ? 

STAT.  Give  me  your  hand. 

D.  Ju.  Here  it  is. 

STAT.  Don  Juan,  a  terrible  death  is  the  consequence  of 
persistency  in  sin  ;  and  when  the  mercy  of  Heaven  is 
refused,  its  thunder  appears. 

D.  Ju.  Oh  Heavens !  what  do  I  feel  ?  an  inward  flame 
devours  me,  I  can  bear  it  no  longer,  and  my  whole  body 
is  on  fire.  Oh  !  (Loud  claps  of  thunder  are  heard;  great 
flashes  of  lightning  fall  upon  Don  Juan.  The  earth  opens 
and  swallows  him  up;  flames  burst  out  on  the  very  spot 
where  he  went  down). 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Alas  !  my  wages  !  my  wages  !  Every  one  is  satisfied  by 
his  death.  Offended  Heaven,  violated  laws,  maids  se- 
duced, families  dishonoured,  parents  outraged,  wives 
ruined,  husbands  driven  to  despair,  all  are  satisfied.  I 
alone  am  unhappy.  My  wages,  my  wages,  my  wages  !** 

w  This  exclamation  of  Sganarelle  about  his  wages  gave  great  offence. 
People  considered  that  a  man  who  could  remain  cool  and  collected  in  the 
presence  of  such  a  miracle,  was  nothing  better  than  an  infidel,  and  that 
instead  of  shouting  for  his  wages,  he  would  have  done  better  to  remain 
dumb,  as  struck  by  a  religious  terror.  Moliere  had  to  leave  out  the  ex- 
clamation, "my  wages."  But,  a  few  years  later,  it  was  allowed  to  pass 
without  any  remarks  when  put  into  the  mouth  of  Arlequie  in  a  stupid 
farce  by  a  certain  actor,  Rosimond. 

L'AMOUR  MEDECIN. 

COMEDIE. 

LOVE  IS  THE  BEST  DOCTOR 

A    COMEDY    IN    THREE    ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 

SEPTEMBER  15x11,  1665. 

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE. 

ON  the  Ijth  of  September,  1665,  was  represented  at  Versailles  an  im- 
promptu comedy,  "  interspersed  with  tunes,  symphonies,  singing,  and 
dancing,"  called  Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  in  which  Moliere  most  strenu- 
ously attacked  the  faculty  of  medicine.  He  had  already  begun  this  criti- 
cism in  Don  yuan ;  but,  as  it  was  put  into  the  mouth  of  a  complete 
sceptic  in  everything,  it  was  not  considered  as  very  serious.  In  Love  is 
the  best  Doctor,  however,  he  ridiculed  the  most  fashionable  physicians,  and 
the  patients  who  consulted  and  trusted  them.  Four  doctors  are  called  in 
to  a  consultation,  in  which,  instead  of  comparing  notes  about  the  state  of 
the  patient,  they  converse  about  things  in  general  and  nothing  in  particu- 
lar ;  at  the  end,  the  distracted  father  finds  himself  more  bewildered  than 
before,  and  rushes  out  of  the  house  to  buy  a  quack  medicine,  which  the 
quack  declares  "  cures  by  its  excellence  rare  more  complaints  than  are 
counted  up  in  a  whole  year,"  and  the  great  virtues  of  which  could  ne'er 
be  *'  repaid  by  the  gold  of  all  climes  which  by  the  ocean  are  bound,"  but 
for  which  the  anxious  but  avaricious  parent  only  pays  "  thirty  sous," 
"  which,"  he  says,  addressing  the  quack,  "  you  will  take,  if  you  please." 
The  professional  discussions  of  the  learned  brethren,  and  the  shrewd  in- 
terested advice  of  Dr.  Filerin,  who  rebukes  them,  and  tells  them  not  to 
quarrel  before  the  public,  and  thus  to  lessen  their  influence,  but  to  main- 
tain a  sedate  and  deeply  anxious  look,  are  admirable,  and  suitable,  not 
for  one  but  for  all  ages.  As  long  as  credulous  and  physic-swallowing 
people  exist,  and  as  long  as  external  appearances  will  be  taken  as  an  indi- 
cation of  true  knowledge  and  worth,  so  long  will  Moliere's  comedy  retain 
its  sting.  In  nice  contrast  to  the  contentious  practitioners,  is  the  sharp 
common-sense  of  the  maid  Lisette,  and  the  stubbornness  and  miserly  feel- 
ings of  the  father  Sganarelle,  who  asks  advice,  but  does  not  follow  it, 
refuses  to  give  his  daughter  in  marriage  because  "  he  means  to  keep  his 
wealth,''  and  is  finally  tricked  out  of  his  daughter  and  a  dowry  as  well. 

Although  1  do  not  deny  the  courage,  I  cannot  admire  the  taste,  of 
Moliere,  in  bringing  four  famous  court  physicians  bodily  on  the  stage,  in 
exposing  the  physical  defects  of  two  of  them, — the  one  a  stammerer,  the 
other  a  very  rapid  talker, — and  in  even  barely  disguising  their  names 
under  Greek  denominations,  and  which,  tradition  affirms,  are  due  to 
Boileau.  It  is  always  right  to  attack  and  ridicule  a  vice  on  the  stage, 
when  by  so  doing,  an  author  conscientiously  believes  that  he  is  improving 
his  fellow-men  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  amusing  them,  and  is  holding  "a 
mirror  up  to  nature ;"  but  it  can  never  be  defensible  to  imitate  living  per- 

137 

138  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR. 

sons,  to  mimic  their  defects,  to  ape  their  attitudes — nay,  to  wear  their  very 
dress.  The  representative  of  a  vice  or  virtue  should,  I  imagine,  be  an 
embodiment  of  many  persons,  possessed  of  such  good  or  evil  qualities, 
but  not  the  faithful  portrait  of  one  man  or  woman.  To  say  that  such  an 
imitation  is  Aristophanesk,  is  simply  to  disguise  a  very  ugly,  and  not  even 
a  very  artistical,  thing,  under  a  not  over-nicely  sounding  adjective. 

According  to  some  annotators,  Moliere  meant  by  Desfonandres,  com- 
pounded of  two  Greek  words,  phonos,  murder,  and  andres,  men,  a  certain 
Dr.  Elie  Beda,  who,  at  the  time  when  Love  is  the  best  Doctor  was  first 
represented,  must  have  been  about  seventy  years  old.  He  had  adopted 
the  name  of  Des  Fougerais,  and  was  the  favourite  physician  of  the  high 
nobility  and  magistracy.  Born  a  Protestant,  he  became  a  Roman  Catho- 
lic in  1648,  is  said  to  have  been  a  regular  medical  Vicar  of  Bray,  and 
never  to  have  changed  his  religious  or  medical  opinions,  except  to  benefit 
himself  and  his  family.  M.  A.  Jal,  in  his  Dictionnaire  critique,  pretends 
that  Guenault  is  caricatured  in  Desfonandres,  because  he  killed  so  many 
patients  by  antimony,  and  because  Desfonandris  boasts,  in  the  third  scene 
of  the  second  act,  that  he  has  "an  astonishing  horse,  an  indefatigable 
animal."  Now,  it  was  well  known  in  Moliere's  time,  that  Guenault  was 
the  only  doctor  who  always  rode  on  horseback,  whilst  his  colleagues  went 
about  in  carriages,  sedan  chairs,  or  on  foot. 

Bahis  (barker),  seems  to  have  been  intended  for  Dr.  Esprit,  whose  real 
name  was  Andre,  and  who  spoke  very  fast.  He  had  been  one  of  the 
physicians  of  Cardinal  Richelieu,  afterwards  of  Cardinal  Mazarin,  and 
finally  of  Monsieur,  brother  of  the  King,  and  was  a  declared  partizan  of 
emetics.  According  to  Raynaud,  les  Medecines  au  temps  de  Moliere,  1683, 
the  physician  Brayer  is  meant  by  Bahis,  chiefly  because  Bahis  is  in  French 
"  brailleur,  shouter,"  and  therefore  there  is  a  similarity  in  name,  and  also 
because  he  was  one  of  the  four  physicians  who  held  a  famous  consultation 
at  Vincennes,  when  Cardinal  Mazarin  was  dying. 

By  Macroton  (stammerer),  it  is  generally  believed  that  Dr.  Fra^ois 
Guenault  is  meant,  because  he  spoke  very  slowly.  This  gentleman  was 
one  of  the  best  known  and  most  celebrated  medical  men  of  the  time,  and 
had  been  physician  to  the  Prince  de  Conde,  and  then  to  the  Queen.  He  had 
often  professionally  attended  on  the  King,  and  scarcely  a  man  of  rank  fell 
ill  who  did  not  consult  him.  It  is  said  that  he  was  very  fond  of  money, 
and  a  declared  champion  of  antimony,  and,  through  his  influence 
amongst  the  great,  a  decided  lord  amongst  doctors. 

Tomes  (the  bleeder),  was  intended  for  Vallot,  first  physician  to  the  King 
with  the  rank  of  grand  Chamberlain,  as  well  as  with  the  hereditary  title 
of  Count ;  and  who  exercised  supreme  jurisdiction  over  all  the  doctors 
and  apothecaries  in  the  kingdom.  He  kept  a  Journal  de  la  Sante  du 
Roy  (Louis  XIV.),  published  in  1662,  which  contains  all  the  recipes  "  with 
which  Heaven  inspired  "'  him,  to  keep  the  monarch  in  health.  Bleeding 
and  purgatives  appear  to  have  been  the  doctor's  two  favourite  remedies. 
He  was  a  strenuous  defender  of  emetics,  Peruvian  bark  and  laudanum, 
and  obtained  a  great  triumph  when  he  cured,  in  1650,  Louis  XIV.,  with 
antimonial  wine  ;  but  became  anew  the  butt  of  many  satires  and  epigrams, 
on  the  death  of  Henrietta  of  France,  Queen  of  England,  whom  his  oppo- 
nents accused  him  of  having  killed  by  his  prescriptions. 

In  the  character  of  Dr.  Filerin  (a  friend  of  death),  it  is  said  that  Mo- 
liere wished  to  have  a  hit  at  the  whole  medical  faculty.  Mons.  E.  Soulie1, 
in  the  Recherches  sur  Moliere,  states  that  in  Moliere's  time,  there  lived  a 
certain  well-known  fencing-master,  Andre  Fillerin,  and  that  therefore,  the 

LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  139 

joke  must  have  been  enjoyed  by  the  audience,  on  hearing  that  name 
given  to  a  physician  who  killed  his  man. 

Love  is  the  best  Doctor  was,  according  to  the  preface,  "  sketched,  written 
off,  learned,  and  acted  in  five  days."  It  was  three  times  represented  at 
Versailles,  and  played,  for  the  first  time,  in  Paris,  on  the  22d  of  September 
1665,  when  it  was  acted  twenty-six  times  consecutively. 

Several  English  dramatists  have  borrowed  or  imitated  Moliere's 
comedy. 

The  first  imitator  of  Moliere's  Love  is  the  best  Doctor  is  John  Lacy, 
who  was  greatly  admired  by  Pepys1  and  by  Charles  II.,  and  was  an  ex- 
cellent low-comedy  actor.  During  the  civil  wars,  he  served  as  lieutenant 
in  the  King's  army,  and  returned  to  the  stage  at  the  Restoration.  It  has 
been  rumoured  that  Lacy  was  a  great  favourite  of  Nell  Gwyn,  and  taught 
her,  amongst  other  things,  the  art  of  acting.  He  lived  to  an  advanced 
age.  and  died  on  the  lyth  of  September  1681.  He  wrote  several  plays, 
one  of  which  was  Tht  Dumb  Lady,  or  the  Farrier  made  a  Physician,  a 
farce  in  five  acts,  performed  about  1672,  of  which  the  main  plot  is  taken 
from  Moliere's  Mock  Doctor,  and  the  catastrophe  is  borrowed  from  his 
Love  is  the  Best  Doctor.  Lacy,  who  himself  most  probably  played  the 
part  of  Drench,  the  farmer,  dedicates  his  play  to  the  high-born  and  most 
hopeful  Prince  Charles.  Lord  Limerick,  and  Earl  of  Southampton,  the 
eldest  of  the  three  natural  sons  of  Charles  II.,  by  Barbara  Villiers,  wife  of 
Roger  Palmer,  Earl  of  Castlemain,  better  known  as  Duchess  of  Cleveland.2 
This  dedication  is  couched  in  such  high-flown  and  fawning  language,  that 
I  give  it  here  as  a  specimen  of  what  flattery  was  in  the  days  of 
Charles  II. : 

"  GREAT  SIR, — When  I  began  to  write  this  dedication  my  hand  shook,  a  fear  pos- 
sessed me,  and  I  trembled  ;  my  pen  fell  from  me,  and  my  whole  frame  grew  disordered, 
as  if  blasted  with  some  sudden  upstart  comet.  Such  awe  and  reverence  waits  on  dig- 
nity, that  I  now  find  it  fit  for  me  to  wish  I  had  been  refused  the  honour  of  my  dedi- 
cation, rather  than  undertake  a  task  so  much  too  great  for  me.  How  shall  I  excuse 
this  bold  and  saucy  fault  ?  How  shall  my  mean,  unworthy  pen  render  you  your 
attributes  ?  Now  I  find  presumption  is  a  sin  indeed.  I  have  given  myself  a  wound 
beyond  the  cure  of  common  men  :  heal  me,  then,  great  sir  ;  for  where  princes 
touch  the  cure  is  infallible.  And  now,  since  you  so  graciously  have  received  my 
Farrier,  who  dares  say  he  is  no  Physician  ?  When  you  vouchsafe  to  call  him  Doc- 
tor, he  has  commenced,  and  from  your  mouth  he  has  taken  his  degree  ;  for  what 
you  say  is,  and  ought  to  be.  Such  a  power  is  due  to  you  from  the  greatness  of  your 
blood.  I  and  my  abject  muse  had  perished  but  for  you  ;  and  in  such  distress  whi- 
ther should  we  flee  for  shelter  but  to  him  that  has  power  to  spread  his  wings  and 
cover  us  ?  And  you  have  done  it  generously.  Yet  am  I  not  to  wonder  at  this 
virtue  in  you,  since  your  high  birth  can  do  no  less  for  you  than  to  make  you  good  ; 
and  you  are  so.  And  may  that  goodness  and  humility  which  so  early  appears  in 
you  increase  to  a  full  perfection !  May  your  virtues  prove  as  beautiful  as  your  per- 
son !  May  they  still  endeavour  to  out-vie  each  other,  yet  neither  obtain,  but  still 
walk  hand  in  hand  till  your  virtues  in  you  be  reverenced  by  all  mankind,  and  your 
lovely  person  honoured  by  all  women  ;  and  so  may  you  continue  to  a  long  and 
happy  life.  But  I  need  not  wish  this,  nor  the  world  doubt  it,  for  already  you're 
possessed  of  all  those  virtues  that  men  hereafter  may  reasonably  expect  from  you  ; 
for,  being  supported  by  majesty  of  one  side,  and  so  admired  and  beautiful  a  mother 
on  the  other,  besides  her  great  and  honourable  birth,  on  such  sure  foundations  you 
cannot  fail  our  hopes  ;  and  that  you  never  may,  shall  be  forever  the  prayers  of  your 
most  faithful  and  most  obedient  servant,  JOHN  LACY." 

1  See  Pepys'  Diary,  aist  and  22d  of  May  1662  ;  loth  and  iath  of  June  1663  ;  isth 
of  April,  ist  of  May,  and  i3th  of  August  1667  ;  and  28th  of  April  1608. 

*  This  dignity  was  conferred  upon  her,  according  to  Collins'  Peerage,  on  account 
of  the  high  opinion  Charles  II.  entertained  of  her  "  personal  virtues.  For  a  simi- 
lar high  opinion  entertained  by  Louis  XIV.,  the  latter  made  a  duchess  of  Mademoi- 
selle de  la  Valliere. — See  Introductory  Notice  to  the  Princess  of  Elis. 

140  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR. 

Mrs.  Aphra  Behn  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies,  Vol.  I.,  has,  in  Sir  Patient  Fancy — an  imitation,  partly  of  Mo- 
liere's Malade  Imaginaire,  and  of  M.  de  Pourceaugnac ,  and  acted  at  the 
Duke's  Theatre,  1678 — borrowed  and  amplified  all  the  scenes  of  Love  is 
the  best  Doctor,  in  which  the  physicians  consult.  But  the  patient  to  be 
cured  is  a  hypochondriac,  and  not  a  young  girl ;  Sir  Patience  himself  is 
present  at  the  consultation,  and  the  doctors'  names  are  also  altered  to 
Turboon,  Amsterdam,  Leyden,  Brunswick,  and  Sir  Credulous. 

As  a  second  imitation  of  Love  is  the  test  Doctor  I  have  to  mention 
"  The  Quacks,  or  Love's  the  Physician,  as  it  was  acted  (after  being  twice 
forbid)  at  the  Theatre-Royal  in  Drury  Lane  (March  i8th,  1705),  by  Mr. 
Swiney.  Quod  libet,  licet.  London,  Printed  for  Benj.  Bragg,  at  the 
Blew  Ball  in  Avemary  Lane,  1705."  In  the  Preface,  Swiney  states  that 
"  this  Play  was  to  be  stifled  because  the  other  House  were  to  Act  one 
upon  the  same  Subject,"  and  that  "  the  hints  of  this  Play  were  taken  from 
a  petit  piece  of  Moliere  call'd  L'Amour  Medecin,"  but  "  I  can't  stile  it  a 
translation,  the  Doctor's  part  being  intirely  new,  much  of  the  other  cha- 
racters alter'd,  and  the  Contrivance  somewhat  Chang'd."  He  ends  by 
saying  that  "  the  Noise  of  these  Scenes  Alarm'd  the  Licenser,  who  gen- 
erally destroys  with  as  much  Distinction  as  the  old  Woman  in  Don  Quix- 
ot's  Library."  Swiney  harps  on  the  same  string  in  the  Prologue,  by 
saying  : 

"  Let  every  Quack  be  comforted  to-Night, 
Care  has  been  taken  that  he  shall  not  Bite." 

The  play  is,  for  the  most  part,  a  bad  translation  of  Moliere's  play,  with 
a  few  alterations  and  additions  which  do  not  improve  it.  The  scene  of 
Sganarelle  and  his  advisers  is  left  out ;  while  a  nurse  and  two  servant-men, 
Harry  and  Edward,  are  needlessly  introduced.  The  doctors'  names  are 
changed  into  Medley,  Caudle,  Tickle,  Pulse,  Novice,  Refugee,  and  the 
conversation  is  slightly  altered.  In  the  end,  Clitandre  and  Lucinda,  who 
have  been  really  married  by  a  priest  disguised  as  a  footman,  acknowledge 
their  deceit,  and  are  forgiven. 

James  Miller  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Pretentious  Young 
Ladies,  Vol.  I.,  wrote  a  comedy,  Art  and  Nature,  acted  at  the  Theatre 
Royal,  Drury  Lane,  1738  ;  and,  according  to  Baker's  Biographia  Drama- 
tica,  the  principal  scenes  in  this  play  are  founded  on  the  Arlequin  Sauvage 
of  M.  De  1'Isle  and  Le  Flatteur  of  Rousseau.  But  it  met  with  no  suc- 
cess, because  the  Templars  had  taken  an  unreasonable  prejudice  against 
Miller,  on  account  of  his  farce  of  The  Coffee  House,  in  which  they  thought 
themselves  attacked,  and  seem  to  have  been  determined  to  condemn  any 
piece  known  to  be  his.  Miller  has  imitated  the  first,  second,  fifth,  and 
sixth  scenes  of  the  first  act  of  Love  is  the  best  Doctor.  In  his  Preface  to 
the  Right  Honourable  the  Lady.  .  .  .  Miller  states,  "  that  he  never  knew 

a  Play  destroy'd  with  so  much  Art But  in  Paris  there  is  an  Academy 

founded  for  the  Encouragement  of  Wit  and  Learning,  so  in  London,  it  is 
said,  there  is  a  Society  established  for  the  Demolition  of  them."  He  also 
says  in  the  Prologue,  that  he  hopes  there  is  none  in  the  theatre,  "  who'd 
aim,  Thro'  Wantonness  of  Heart,  to  blast  his  Fame." 

Another  translation  of  Moliere's  play,  under  the  title  of  Love  is  the 
Doctor,  was  performed  as  a  comedy  in  one  act,  at  Lincoln's  Inn  Fields, 
on  April  4,  1734,  for  the  benefit  of  the  author,  but  has  never  been  printed. 

Bickerstaffe  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  School  for  Wives,  Vol. 
I.,  in  Dr.  Last  in  his  Chariot — an  imitation  of  Moliere's  Malade  Im- 

LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  14! 

aginaire,  acted  at  the  Haymarket,  1769 — acknowledges  his  ooligation  to 
Mr.  Foote  for  a  whole  scene  in  the  first  act,  the  consultation  of  the  physi- 
cians. This  acknowledgment  is  certainly  a  proof  of  Bickerstaffe's  grati- 
tude, but  none  of  his  reading ;  otherwise  he  might  have  discovered  that 
Foote  had  simply  taken  it  from  Moliere's  Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  and 
considerably  enlarged  it ;  the  doctors  are  called  Coffin,  Skeleton,  Bul- 
ruddery,  and  of  course  Doctor  Last 

TO   THE   READER. 

THIS  is  only  a  slfght  impromptu,  a  simple  pencil  sketch,  which 
it  has  pleased  the  King  to  have  made  into  an  entertainment. 
It  is  the  most  hastily  composed  of  all  those  written  by  order  of 
his  Majesty ;  and  when  I  say  that  it  was  sketched,  written, 
learned,  and  acted  in  five  days,  I  shall  only  be  speaking  the 
truth.  There  is  no  need  to  tell  you  that  many  things  depend 
entirely  on  the  manner  of  the  performance.  Every  one  knows 
well  enough  that  comedies  are  written  only  to  be  acted  ;  and  I 
advise  no  one  to  read  this,  unless  he  have  the  faculty,  while 
doing  so,  of  catching  the  meaning  of  the  business  of  the  stage. 
I  shall  say  only  one  thing  more,  that  it  is  to  be  wished  that 
these  sorts  of  works  could  always  be  shown  with  the  same 
accessories,  with  which  they  are  accompanied  when  played 
before  the  King.  One  would  then  see  them  under  much  more 
agreeable  conditions ;  and  the  airs  and  symphonies  of  the  in- 
comparable M.  Lulli,  added  to  the  sweet  voices  and  agility  of 
the  dancers,  invest  them,  undoubtedly,  with  certain  graces, 
with  which  they  could  with  difficulty  dispense. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

IN    THE    PROLOGUE. 

COMEDY.       |      Music.       |      THE  BALLET  (Dancing). 

IN    THE   COMEDY. 

SGANARELLE,  father  to  Lu- 

cinde? 
CLITANDRE,  in  love  with  Lu- 

cinde. 
M.    GUILLAUME,    dealer    in 

hangings. 

M.  JOSSE,  goldsmith. 
M.  TOMES,  a  physician. 
M.  DESFONANDRES,  " 
M.  MACROTON,         " 
M.  BAHIS,  " 

M.  FILERIN,  physician. 

A  NOTARY. 

CHAMPAGNE,  Sganarelle 's 
servant. 

LUCINDE,  daughter  of  Sgan- 
arelle. 

AMINTA,  Sganarelle' s  neigh- 
bour. 

LUCRETIA,  Sganarelle' s  niece. 

LISETTE,  maid  to  Lucinde. 

IN   THE    BALLET. 

First  Entry. 
CHAMPAGNE,  Sganarelle' s 

servant,  dancing. 
FOUR  PHYSICIANS, 

dancing. 

Second  Entry. 

A  QUACK,  singing. 

TRIVELINS  and  SCARAMOU- 
CHES,* dancing  in  the  suite 
of  the  quack. 

Third  Entry. 

COMEDY.          |          Music.          |      THE  BALLET. 
SPORTS,  LAUGHTER,  and  PLEASURES,  dancing. 

Scene. — PARIS,  IN  ONE  OF  THE  ROOMS  OF   SGANARELLE'S 
HOUSE. 

*  It  is  more  than  probable  that  Moliere  played  this  part.  In  the  inventory  taken 
after  his  death,  and  given  by  M.  E.  Soulie,  we  find,  "  a  box  of  clothes  for  the  repre- 
sentation of  the  Medecins, — for  this  was  the  name  often  given  to  Love  is  the  best 
Doctor  by  Moliere's  contemporaries,— -consisting  in  a  doublet  of  common  satin,  cut 
out  on  golden  roc  (sic),  cloak  and  breeches  of  velvet,  with  a  gold  ground,  adorned 
with  a  loop  and  buttons." 

4  Tiberio  Fiorilli,  an  Italian  actor,  was  born  near  Naples,  in  1608,  and  died  at 
Paris,  on  the  8th  of  December,  1694.  He  was  much  liked  by  Louis  XIV.,  and 
acted  the  character  of  Scaramouch,  a  braggart,  a  poltroon,  and  a  fool,  always 
dressed  in  black,  with  a  large  white  collar.  In  Italian,  a  skirmish  is  called  scarra- 
muccia;  hence  perhaps  the  name.  Isaac  Disraeli  in  his  excellent  chapter  "The 
Pantomimical  Characters  "  in  the  Curiotitiet  of  Literature ,  says  :  "  When  Charles 
V.  entered  Italy,  a  Spanish  captain  was  introduced  ;  a  dreadful  man  he  was  too,  if 

in  compliment  to  themselves.  When  the  Spaniards  lost  their  influence  in  Italy, 
the  Spanish  Captain  was  turned  into  Scaramouch,  who  still  wore  the  Spanish  dress, 
and  was  perpetually  in  a  panic.  The  Italians  could  only  avenge  themselves  on  the 
Spaniards  in  pantomime. 

LOVE  IS  THE  BEST  DOCTOR 

(L' AMOUR   M&DECIN.) 

PROLOGUE. 

COMEDY,  Music,  THE  BALLET. 
Comedy.  Let  us  our  fruitless  quarrels  banish, 

Each  other's  talents  not  by  turns  dispute: 
But  greater  glory  to  attain 
This  day  of  all  let  be  our  aim. 
Let  us  all  three  unite  with  matchless  zeal 
The  greatest   King  on  earth  with  pleasure  to 
provide. 

The  three  together.  Let  us  all  three  unite  with  matchless 

zeal 

The  greatest    King   on   earth   with 
pleasure  to  provide. 

Comedy.  From  toils  more  irksome  than  can  be  imagined. 
Amongst  us,  now  and  then,  he  comes  to  un- 
bend, 

Can   greater   glory,    greater   pleasure  be  our 
share  ? 

The  three  together.  Let  us  all  three  unite  with  matchless 

zeal 

The   greatest   King  on   earth   with 
pleasure  to  provide.6 

'  The  Prologue  is  in  the  original  in  verse. 

147 

148  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  I. 

ACT  I. 

SCENE  I. — SGANARELLE,  AMINTA,  LUCRETIA,  M.  GUIL- 

LAUME,    M.    JOSSE. 

SCAN.  What  a  strange  thing  is  life  !  and  well  may  I 
say  with  a  great  ancient  philosopher,  that  he  who  has 
much  land  has  also  strife,6  and  misfortune  seldom  comes 
alone.  I  had  but  one  wife,  and  she  is  dead. 

M.  Gu.  And,  pray,  how  many  would  you  have  ? 

SGAN.  She  is  dead,  friend  Guillaume.  I  take  this  loss 
very  much  to  heart,  and  I  cannot  think  of  it  without  tears. 
I  was  not  altogether  satisfied  with  her  behaviour,  and  we 
often  quarrelled  ;  but,  after  all,  death  settles  everything. 
She  is  dead  ;  I  bewail  her.  If  she  were  alive,  we  would 
very  likely  quarrel.  Of  all  the  children  God  sent  me,  He 
has  left  me  but  one  daughter,  and  it  is  she  who  is  the 
cause  of  all  my  trouble  ;  for  I  see  her  plunged  in  the  most 
dismal  melancholy,  the  greatest  sadness,  of  which  there  is 
no  way  of  getting  rid,  and  the  cause  of  which  I  cannot 
even  learn.  I  declare  I  am  at  my  wit's  end,  and  am  very 
much  in  want  of  good  advice  about  it.  {To  Lucretid}, 
You  are  my  niece  ;  {To  Aminta),  you  my  neighbour  ;  {To 
M.  Guillaume  and  M.  Josse},  you  my  companions  and 
friends  :  tell  me,  I  pray,  what  I  am  to  do. 

M.  Jo.  As  for  me,  I  think  that  finery  and  dress  are  the 
things  which  please  young  girls  most ;  and  if  I  were  you, 
I  should  buy  her,  this  very  day,  a  handsome  set  of  dia- 
monds, or  rubies,  or  emeralds. 

M.  Gu.  And  I,  if  I  were  in  your  place,  I  would  buy  her 
a  beautiful  set  of  hangings,  with  a  landscape,  or  some 
figures  in  them,  and  I  should  have  them  hung  up  in  her 
room  to  cheer  her  spirits  and  to  please  her  eyes. 

AMIN.  As  for  me,  I  would  not  take  so  much  trouble ;  I 
would  marry  her  well,  and  as  quickly  as  I  could,  to  that 
young  man  who  asked  her  hand  some  time  ago,  as  I  have 
been  told. 

Luc.  And  I,  I  think   your  daughter  is  not  at  all  fit  to 

6  It  was  not  an  ancient  philosopher  who  said  this.  It  is  simply  a  wise 
saw  of  the  Middle  Ages,  common  to  the  French  and  the  Italians,  qui  terre 
a  guerre  a  and  chi  compra  terra  compra  terra  compra  guerra. 

SCBNBII.]  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  149 

be  married.  She  has  too  delicate  and  unhealthy  a  consti- 
tution, and  it  is  almost  sending  her  wilfully  and  speedily 
to  the  next  world,  to  expose  her  to  bear  children  in  the 
state  she  is  in.  The  busy  world  does  not  suit  her  at  all, 
and  I  would  advise  you  to  put  her  in  a  convent,  where  she 
will  find  some  amusements  more  to  her  taste. 

SCAN.  All  this  advice  is  certainly  admirable,  but  I  think 
it  rather  interested,  and  I  find  that  you  are  giving  it  very 
much  for  your  own  benefit.  You  are  a  goldsmith, 
M.  Josse  ;  and  your  advice  savours  of  a  man  who  wants 
to  get  rid  of  his  wares.  You  sell  hangings,  M.  Guillaume, 
and  you  look  to  me  as  if  you  had  some  which  you  would 
fain  part  with.  The  young  man  whom  you  are  in  love 
with,  fair  neighbour,  is,  I  have  been  told,  the  very  one 
who  is  somewhat  favourably  disposed  towards  my 
daughter;  and  you  would  not  be  sorry  to  see  her  the 
wife  of  another.  And  as  for  you,  my  dear  niece,  it  is  not 
my  intention,  as  is  well  known,  to  allow  my  daughter  to 
get  married  at  all,  for  reasons  best  known  to  myself;  but 
your  advice  to  make  a  nun  of  her  is  that  of  a  woman  who 
might  charitably  wish  to  become  my  sole  heiress.  There- 
fore, ladies  and  gentlemen,  although  your  counsels  be  the 
best  in  the  world,  with  your  permission,  I  shall  not  follow 
a  single  one  of  them.  (Alone).  So  much  for  those  fash- 
ionable advisers. 

SCENE  II. — LUCINDE,  SGANARELLE. 

SGAN.  Ah,  here  is  my  daughter  come  to  take  a  breath 
of  air.  She  does  not  see  me.  She  is  sighing ;  she  looks 
up  to  the  sky.  {To  Lucinde}.  May  Heaven  protect  you  ! 
Good  morning,  my  darling.  Well,  what  is  the  matter  ? 
How  do  you  feel  ?  What !  always  so  sad  and  so  melan- 
choly, and  you  will  not  tell  me  what  ails  you  ?  Come, 
open  your  little  heart  to  me.  There,  my  poor  pet,  come 
and  tell  your  little  thoughts  to  your  little  fond  papa. 
Keep  your  spirits  up.  Let  me  give  you  a  kiss.  Come. 
(Aside).  It  makes  me  wild  to  see  her  in  that  humour. 
(To  Lucinde).  But  tell  me,  do  you  wish  to  kill  me  with 
displeasure ;  and  am  I  not  to  know  the  reason  of  this  great 
listlessness  ?  Tell  me  the  cause,  and  I  promise  that  I 
shall  do  everything  for  you.  Yes,  if  you  will  only  tell  me 

1 50  LOVE  IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [Acr  i. 

why  you  are  so  sad,  I  assure  you  and  swear  on  this  very 
spot,  that  I  shall  leave  nothing  undone  to  please  you ;  I 
cannot  say  more.  Are  you  jealous  because  one  of  your 
companions  is  better  dressed  than  yourself,  and  is  it  some 
new-fashioned  stuff  of  which  you  want  a  dress  ?  No.  Is 
your  room  not  furnished  nicely  enough,  and  do  you  wish 
for  one  of  those  cabinets  from  St.  Laurent's  Fair?7  It  is 
not  that.  Do  you  feel  inclined  to  take  lessons  in  some- 
thing, and  shall  I  get  you  a  master  to  teach  you  how  to 
play  upon  the  harpsichord  ?  No,  not  that  either.  Are 
you  in  love  with  some  one,  and  do  you  wish  to  be  mar- 
ried ?  (Lucinde  gives  an  affirmative  sign). 

SCENE  III. — SGANARELLE,  LUCINDE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  Well,  sir,  you  have  just  been  talking  to  your 
daughter.  Have  you  found  out  the  cause  of  her  melan- 
choly ? 

SCAN.  No.     She  is  a  hussy  who  enrages  me. 

Lis.  Let  me  manage  it,  sir ;  I  shall  pump  her  a  little. 

SCAN.  There  is  no  occasion  ;  and  since  she  prefers  to 
be  in  this  mood,  I  am  inclined  to  let  her  remain  in  it. 

Lis.  Let  me  manage  it,  I  tell  you.  Perhaps  she  will 
open  her  heart  more  freely  to  me  than  to  you.  How  now  ! 
Madam,8  you  will  not  tell  us  what  ails  you,  and  you  wish 
to  grieve  everyone  around  you  ?  You  ought  not  to  be- 
have as  you  do,  and  if  you  have  any  objection  to  explain 
yourself  to  a  father,  you  ought  to  have  none  to  open 
your  heart  to  me.  Tell  me,  do  you  wish  anything  from 
him  ?  He  has  told  us  more  than  once  that  he  will  spare 
nothing  to  satisfy  you.  Does  he  not  allow  you  all  the 

7  In  Le  Tracas  de  Paris,  the  Hubbub  of  Paris,  described  in  burlesque 
verses  by  F.  Colletet,  written  in  1665,  and  re-edited  by  the  Bibliophile 
Jacob  in  1859,  I  nn<i  a  l°nS  and  not  rery  poetical  description  of 
this  fair,  which  seems  to  have  been  frequented,  if  not  by  bad,  at 
least  by  very  mixed  company.  Formerly  this  fair  lasted  only  eight 
days,  then  three  weeks  and  finally  three  months  ;  it  was  probably  held 
in  Moliere's  time  where  the  church  St.  Laurent  is  now,  Boulevard  de 
Strassbourg. 

8Lisette  addresses  Lucinde  as  "Madam"  in  the  presence  of  her 
father.  This  seems  to  me  to  be  ironical,  as  Madam  was  used  only 
in  speaking  to  ladies  of  high  nobility.  When  later,  in  Clitandre,  the 
lover  calls  her  by  that  same  name,  it  appears  to  me  to  be  done  as  a  piece 
of  flattery. 

.J  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  151 

freedom  you  could  wish  for  ?  And  do  pleasure  parties 
and  feasts  not  tempt  you?  Say!  has  anyone  displeased 
you?  SayS  have  you  not  some  secret  liking  for  some  one 
to  whom  you  would  wish  your  father  to  marry  you  ? 
Ah!  I  begin  to  understand  you;  that  is  it?  Why  the 
deuce  so  many  compliments?  Sir,  the  secret  is  found 
out,  and  .  .  . 

SCAN.  (Interrupting  her).  Go,  ungrateful  girl  ;  I  do 
not  wish  to  speak  to  you  any  more,  and  I  leave  you  in 
your  obstinacy. 

Luc.  Dear  father,  since  you  wish  me  to  tell  you  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Yes,  I  am  losing  all  my  regard  for  you. 

Lis    Her  sadness,  sir  .    .    . 

SCAN.  She  is  a  hussy  who  wishes  to  drive  me  to  my 
grave. 

Luc.  But,  father,  I  am  willing  .    .    . 

SCAN.  That  is  not  a  fit  reward  for  having  brought  you 
up  as  I  have  done. 

Lis.  But,  sir  .    .    . 

SGAN.  No,  I  am  in  a  terrible  rage  with  her. 

Luc.  But,  father  .    .    . 

SCAN.  I  do  not  love  you  any  longer. 

Lis.  But  .    . 

SCAN.  She  is  a  slut. 

Luc.   But  .    .   . 

SCAN.  An  ungrateful  girl. 

Lis.  But  .    .    . 

SCAN.  A  hussy  who  will  not  tell  me  what  is  the  matter 
with  her. 

Lis.  It  is  a  husband  she  wants. 

SCAN.  {Pretending  not  to  hear).     I  have  done  with  her. 

Lis.  A  husband. 

SCAN.  I  hate  her. 

Lis.  A  husband. 

SCAN.  And  disown  her  as  my  daughter. 

Lis.  A  husband. 

SCAN.  Do  not  speak  to  me  any  more  about  her. 

Lis.  A  husband. 

SCAN.  Speak  no  more  to  me  about  her. 

Lis.  A  husband. 

SCAN.  Speak  no  more  to  me  about  her. 

I  $2  LOVE  IS  THE  BEST  DOCTOR.  [ACT  i. 

Lis.  A  husband,  a  husband,  a  husband. 

SCENE  IV. — LUCINDE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  True  enough,  none  so  deaf  as  those  who  will  not 
hear. 

Luc.  Well,  Lisette,  I  was  wrong  to  hide  my  grief !  I 
had  but  to  speak  to  get  all  I  wished  from  my  father !  You 
see  now. 

Lis.  Upon  my  word,  he  is  a  disagreeable  man ;  and  I 
confess  that  it  would  give  me  the  greatest  pleasure  to  play 
him  some  trick.  But  how  is  it,  Madam,  that,  till  now, 
you  have  kept  your  grief  from  me  ? 

Luc.  Alas !  what  would  have  been  the  use  of  telling  you 
before  ?  and  would  it  not  have  been  quite  as  well  if  I 
had  kept  it  to  myself  all  my  life  ?  Do  you  think  that  I 
have  not  foreseen  all  which  you  see  now,  that  I  did  not 
thoroughly  know  the  sentiments  of  my  father,  and  that 
when  he  refused  my  hand  to  my  lover's  friend,  who  came 
to  ask  for  it  in  his  name,  he  had  not  crushed  every  hope 
in  my  heart  ? 

Lis.  What !  this  stranger,  who  asked  for  your  hand,  is 
the  one  whom  you  .  .  . 

Luc.  Perhaps  it  is  not  altogether  modest  in  a  girl  to 
explain  herself  so  freely;  but,  in  short,  I  tell  you  candidly, 
that,  were  I  allowed  to  wish  for  any  one,  it  is  he  whom  I 
should  choose.  We  have  never  had  any  conversation 
together,  and  his  lips  have  never  avowed  the  love  he  has 
for  me;  but,  in  every  spot  where  he  had  a  chance  of 
seeing  me,  his  looks  and  his  actions  have  always  spoken  so 
tenderly,  and  his  asking  me  in  marriage  seems  to  me  so 
very  honourable,  that  my  heart  has  not  been  able  to  remain 
insensible  to  his  passion ;  and  yet,  you  see  to  what  the 
harshness  of  my  father  is  likely  to  bring  all  this  tenderness. 

Lis.  Let  me  manage  it.  Whatever  reason  I  have  to 
blame  you  for  the  secret  you  kept  from  me,  I  shall  not  fail 
to  serve  your  love;  and,  provided  you  have  sufficient 
resolution  .  .  . 

Luc.  But  what  am  I  to  do  against  a  father's  authority? 
And  if  he  will  not  relent  .  .  . 

Lis.  Come,  come,  you  must  not  allow  yourself  to  be  led 
like  a  goose,  and  provided  it  be  done  honourably,  we  can 

SCBNEVI.]  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  1 53 

free  ourselves  from  a  father's  tyranny.  What  does  he  wish 
you  to  do  ?  Are  you  not  of  an  age  to  be  married,  and 
does  he  think  you  are  made  of  marble  ?  Once  more  bear 
up,  I  shall  take  in  hand  your  love  affair,  and  from  this 
very  moment  do  all  I  can  to  favour  it,  and  you  shall  see 
that  I  know  some  stratagems  .  .  .  But  I  see  your  father. 
Let  us  go  in,  and  leave  me  to  act. 

SCENE  V. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

It  is  good  sometimes  to  pretend  not  to  hear  things, 
which  one  hears  only  too  well ;  and  I  have  done  wisely 
to  ward  off  the  declaration  of  a  wish  which  I  have  no 
intention  of  satisfying.  Was  there  ever  a  greater  piece  of 
tyranny  than  this  custom  to  which  they  wish  to  subject  all 
fathers ;  anything  more  preposterous  and  ridiculous  than 
to  amass  great  wealth  by  hard  work,  and  to  bring  up  a  girl 
with  the  utmost  tenderness  and  care,  in  order  to  strip  one's 
self  of  the  one  and  of  the  other,  for  the  benefit  of  a  man 
who  is  nothing  to  us  ?  No,  no,  I  laugh  at  that  custom, 
and  I  mean  to  keep  my  wealth  and  my  daughter  to  myself. 

SCENE  VI. — SGANARELLE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  {Running  on  to  the  stage  and  pretending  not  to  see 
Sganarelle).  Oh !  what  a  misfortune !  Oh !  what  a  ca- 
lamity !  Poor  Mr.  Sganarelle  !  where  can  I  find  him  ? 

SCAN.  (Aside).     What  does  she  say? 

Lis.  (Still  running  about).  Oh!  wretched  father  !  what 
will  you  do  when  you  hear  this  news  ? 

SGAN.  (Aside).     What  can  it  be  ? 

Lis.  My  poor  mistress  ! 

SGAN.  I  am  undone  ! 

Lis.  Ah! 

SGAN.  (Running  after  Lisette).     Lisette ! 

Lis.  What  a  misfortune ! 

SGAN.  Lisette ! 

Lis.  What  an  accident ! 

SGAN.  Lisette  ! 

Lis.  What  a  calamity  ! 

SGAN.  Lisette! 

Lis.  Oh,  Sir ! 

SGAN.  What  is  the  matter  ? 

154  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  HI. 

Lis.  Sir! 

SCAN.  What  has  happened  ? 

Lis.  Your  daughter  .   .   .  ' 

SCAN.  Oh!  Oh! 

Lis.  Do  not  cry  in  such  a  way,  sir.  You  will  make  me 
laugh. 

SCAN.  Tell  me  quickly. 

Lis.  Your  daughter,  overcome  by  your  words,  and  see- 
ing how  dreadfully  angry  you  were  with  her,  went  quietly 
up  to  her  room,  and,  driven  by  despair,  opened  the  win- 
dow that  looks  out  upon  the  river. 

SGAN.  Well! 

Lis.  Then,  casting  her  looks  up  to  Heaven  :  No,  said 
she,  it  is  impossible  for  me  to  live  under  my  father's  anger, 
and  as  he  disowns  me  for  his  child,  I  shall  die. 

SCAN.  She  has  thrown  herself  out  of  the  window? 

Lis.  No,  sir.  She  gently  closed  it,  and  lay  down  upon 
her  bed.  There  she  began  to  cry  bitterly  ;  all  at  once  she 
turned  pale,  her  eyes  rolled  about,  her  strength  failed  her, 
and  she  became  stiff  in  my  arms. 

SCAN.  Oh,  my  child  !     She  is  dead  ? 

Lis.  No,  sir.  I  pinched  her  till  she  came  to  herself 
again ;  but  she  relapses  every  moment,  and  I  believe  she 
will  not  live  out  the  day. 

SCAN.  Champagne  !  Champagne !  Champagne  ! 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  CHAMPAGNE,  LISETTE. 

SGAN.  Quick,  go  and  fetch  me  some  doctors,  and  bring 
a  lot  of  them.10  One  cannot  have  too  many  in  a  crisis  like 
this.  Oh  my  daughter  !  my  poor  child  ! 

FIRST    ENTRY.11 

Champagne,  servant  to  Sganarelle,  knocks,  dancing,  at 
the  doors  of  four  Physicians. 

•Moliere  has  also  employed  the  beginning  of  this  scene  in  The 
Rogueries  of  Scapin.  (See  Vol.  III.) 

10  Compare   Shakespeare's  Second  Part  of  King  Henry  IV.  (Act  ii., 
Scene  i),  when  Fang,  being  kept  off  by  Falstaff  and  Bardolph,  shouts 
"'A  rescue!    a  rescue  !"    and  Hostess  quickly  exclaims,  "Good  people, 
bring  a  rescue  or  two  I" 

11  The    original    has    entre-actre,    which    might    perhaps   have    been 
translated  by  "  interlude." 

8CENKH.]  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  155 

The  four  Physicians  dance,  and  ceremoniously  enter  into 
Sganarelle 's  house. 

ACT   II. 

SCENE  I. — SGANARELLE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  What  do  you  want  with  four  physicians,  sir?  Is 
one  not  enough  to  kill  one  person  ? 

SCAN.  Hold  your  tongue.  Four  heads  are  better  than 
one. 

Lis.  Cannot  your  daughter  die  well  enough  without 
the  assistance  of  those  gentlemen  ? 

SCAN.  Do  you  think  people  die  through  having  physi- 
cians ? 

Lis.  Undoubtedly;  and  I  knew  a  man  who  maintained 
— and  proved  it,  too,  by  excellent  reasons — that  we  should 
never  say,  Such  a  one  has  died  of  a  fever,  or  from  inflam- 
mation of  the  lungs,  but,  Such  a  one  has  died  of  four 
physicians  and  two  apothecaries. 

SCAN.  Hush  !  do  not  offend  those  gentlemen. 

Lis.  Upon  my  word,  sir,  our  cat  had  a  narrow  escape 
from  a  leap  he  took,  a  little  while  ago,  from  the  top  of 
the  house  into  the  street;  he  was  three  days  without 
eating,  and  unable  to  wag  head  or  foot ;  but  it  is  very 
lucky  that  there  are  no  cat  doctors,  else  it  would  have 
been  all  over  with  him,  for  they  would  have  physicked 
and  bled  him. 

SCAN.  Will  you  hold  your  tongue  when  I  bid  you? 
What  next  !  Here  they  are. 

Lis.  Look  out ;  you  are  going  to  be  finely  edified. 
They  will  tell  you  in  Latin  that  your  daughter  is  ill. 

SCENE  II. — MM.  TOMES,  DESFONANDRES,  MACROTON, 

BAHIS,    SGANARELtE,    LlSETTE. 

SCAN.  Well,  gentlemen  ? 

M.  To.  We  have  examined  the  patient  sufficiently,  and 
undoubtedly  there  is  a  great  deal  of  impurity  in  her. 

SCAN.  Is  my  daughter  impure  ? 

M.  To.  I  mean  to  say  that  there  is  a  great  deal  of  im- 
purity in  her  system,  and  much  corrupt  matter. 

156  LOVE  IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  u. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  I  understand  you  now. 

M.  To.  But  .    .    .  We  are  going  to  consult  together. 

SCAN.  Come,  hand  some  chairs. 

Lis.   (To  M.  Tomes}.    Ah  !  sir,  are  you  with  them  ? 

SCAN.  (To  Lisette).  How  do  you  know  this  gentle- 
man? 

Lis.  From  having  seen  him  the  other  day  at  a  dear 
friend's  of  your  niece. 

M.  To.   How  is  her  coachman  ? 

Lis.  Very  well  indeed.     He  is  dead. 

M.  To.  Dead? 

Lis.  Yes. 

M.  To.  That  cannot  be. 

Lis.  I  do  not  know  whether  it  can  be  or  not ;  but  I 
know  well  enough  that  it  is. 

M.  To.  He  cannot  be  dead,  I  tell  you. 

Lis.  And  I  tell  you  that  he  is  dead  and  buried. 

M.  To.  You  are  mistaken. 

Lis.  I  have  seen  him. 

M.  To.  It  is  impossible.  Hippocrates  says  that  these 
sorts  of  diseases  end  only  on  the  fourteenth  or  twenty-first 
day ;  and  he  has  been  ill  only  six. 

Lis.  Hippocrates  may  say  what  he  likes ;  but  the 
coachman  is  dead. 

SCAN.  Peace !  chatterbox.  Come,  let  us  leave  this 
room.  Gentlemen,  I  pray  you  to  consult  carefully.  Al- 
though it  is  not  the  custom  to  pay  beforehand,  yet,  for 
fear  I  should  forget  it,  and  to  have  done  with  it,  here 
is  ...  (He  hands  them  some  money,  and  each  one,  on 

(receiving  it,  makes  a  different  gesture. ) 

SCENE  III. — MM.  DESFONANDRES,  TOMES,  MACROTON, 
BAHIS.      (They  all  sit  down  and  begin  to  cough}. 

M.  DES.  Paris  is  marvellously  large,  and  one  has  to 
take  long  journeys  when  business  is  a  little  brisk, 

M.  To.  I  am  glad  to  say  that  I  have  got  a  wonderful 
mule  for  that ;  and  that  one  would  hardly  believe  what  a 
deal  of  ground  he  takes  me  over  daily. 

M.  DES.  I  have  got  an  astonishing  horse,  and  it  is  an 
indefatigable  animal. 

M.  To.  Do   you  know  the  ground  my  mule  has  been 

SCENE  in]  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST    DOCTOR.  1 57 

over  to-day?  I  have  been,  first,  close  by  the  Arsenal ;  from 
the  Arsenal,  to  the  end  of  the  faubourg  Saint  Germain ; 
from  the  faubourg  Saint  Germain,  to  the  lower  part  of  the 
Marais ;  from  the  lower  part  of  the  Marais,  to  the  Porte 
Saint-Honor^;  from  the  Porte  Saint-Honore,  to  the  fau- 
bourg Saint-Jacques ;  from  the  faubourg  Saint-Jacques,  to 
the  Porte  de  Richelieu ;  from  the  Porte  de  Richelieu,  here ; 
and  from  here,  I  have  yet  to  go  to  the  Place  Roy  ale.12 

M.  DES.  My  horse  has  done  all  that  to-day;  and, 
besides,  I  have  been  to  see  a  patient  at  Ruel.13 

M.  To.  But,  by  the  bye,  which  side  do  you  take  in  the 
quarre  1  between  the  two  physicians  Theophrastus  and 
Artemius?  for  it  is  a  matter  that  divides  our  profession. 

M.   DES.  I  ?   I  am  for  Artemius. 

M.  To.  So  am  I.  It  is  true  that  his  advice  killed  the 
patient,  as  we  have  experienced,  and  that  Theophrastus' s 
was  certainly  much  better ;  but  the  latter  is  wrong  in  the 
circumstances,  and  ought  not  to  have  been  of  a  different 
opinion  from  his  senior.  What  do  you  say? 

M.  DES.  Certainly.  We  ought  at  all  times  to  preserve 
the  professional  etiquette,  whatever  may  happen. 

M.  To.  For  my  part,  I  am  excessively  strict  on  that 
subject,  except  among  friends.  The  other  day  three  of 
us  were  called  in  to  to  consult  with  an  outsider  ;u  but  I 
stopped  the  whole  affair,  and  would  hold  no  consultation 
unless  things  were  conducted  according  to  etiquette.  The 
people  of  the  house  did  what  they  could  and  the  case  grew 
worse ;  but  I  would  not  give  way,  and  the  patient  bravely 
died  during  the  contention. 

M.  DES.  It  is  highly  proper  to  teach  people  how  to 
behave,  and  to  show  them  their  inexperience.15 

M.  To.  A  dead  man  is  but  a  dead  man,  and  of  very 
little  consequence;  but  professional  etiquette  neglected 
does  great  harm  to  the  whole  body  of  physicians. 

11  M.  Tomes  states,  in  detail,  that  he  has  been  from  one  end  of  Paris  to 
the  other. 

18  Ruel,  a  village  on  the  road  to  Saint  Germain,  was  at  that  time 
(1665)  a  very  fashionable  residence ;  the  Cardinal  de  Richelieu  had  a 
country  seat  there,  under  Louis  XIII. 

14  A  physician,  who  had  not  taken  his  degree  in  Paris,  was  called  "an 
outsider,"  un  medecin  de  dehors. 

14  The  original  has  leur  montrer  leur  bee  jaune. 

158  LOVE   IS  THE    BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  n. 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  MM.  TOMES,  DESFONANDRES, 
MACROTON,  BAHIS. 

SCAN.  Gentlemen,  my  daughter  is  growing  worse ;  I 
beg  you  to  tell  me  quickly  what  you  have  decided  on. 

M.  To.   (  To  M  De sfonandres).  The  word  is  with  you,  Sir. 

M.  DBS.  No,  Sir ;  it  is  for  you  to  speak  if  you  please. 

M.  To.   You  are  jesting. 

M.  DES.  I  shall  not  speak  first. 

M.  To.     Sir. 

M.  DES.  Sir. 

SCAN.  For  mercy's  sake,  gentlemen,  drop  these  cere- 
monies, and  consider  that  matters  are  urgent. 

(  They  all  four  speak  at  the  same  time.} 

M.  To.  Your  daughter's  complaint  .    .    . 

M.  DES.  The  opinion  of  all  these  gentlemen  .    .    . 

MAC.  M.  After  hav-ing  care-fully  consi-dered  .    .    . 

M.  BA.  In  order  to  deduce  .    .    . 

SCAN.  Ah!  gentlemen,  one  at  a  time,  pray  .    .    . 

M.  To.  Sir,  we  have  duly  argued  upon  your  daughter's 
complaint,  and  my  own  opinion  is,  that  it  proceeds  from 
the  overheating  of  the  blood,  consequently  I  would  have 
her  bled  as  soon  as  possible. 

M.  Des.  And  I  say  that  her  illness  arises  from  a  putre- 
faction of  humours,  caused  by  too  great  repletion ;  conse- 
quently I  would  have  her  given  an  emetic. 

M.  To.    I  maintain  that  an  emetic  will  kill  her. 

M.  DES.  And  I,  that  bleeding  will  be  the  death  of  her. 

M.  To.    It  is  like  you  to  set  up  for  a  clever  man ! 

M.  DES.  Yes,  it  is  like  me ;  and  I  can,  at  any  rate,  cope 
with  you  in  all  kinds  of  knowledge. 

M.  To.  Do  you  recollect  the  man  you  killed  a  few  days 
ago? 

M.  DES.  Do  you  recollect  the  lady  you  sent  to  the  other 
world  three  days  ago  ? 

M.  To.    (To  Sganarelle).  I  have  given  you  my  opinion. 

M.  DES.  (To  Sganarelle}.  I  have  told  you  what  I  think. 

M.  To.  If  you  do  not  have  your  daughter  bled  directly, 
she  is  a  dead  woman.  (Exit. 

M.  DES.  If  you  have  her  bled,  she  will  not  be  alive  a 
quarter  of  an  hour  afterwards.  (Exit. 

SCENE  v-1  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  159 

SCENE  V. — SGANARELLE,  MM.  MACROTON,  BAHIS. 

SCAN.  Which  of  the  two  am  I  to  believe  ?  And  who  can 
decide  amidst  such  conflicting  opinions?  Gentlemen,  I 
beseech  you  to  guide  me,  and  to  tell  me,  dispassionately, 
the  best  means  of  relieving  my  daughter. 

M.  MAC.  (Drawling  out  his  words).  Sir,  in  these  kind- 
of-ca-ses,  one  must  pro-ceed  ve-ry  care-fully,  and  do  no- 
thing in-con-si-der-ate-ly,  as  the  say-ing  is ;  the  more  so, 
as  the  mis-takes  one  may  make,  ac-cord-ing  to  our  mas-ter 
Hip-po-cra-tes,  have  the  most  fatal  con-se-quen-ces. 

M.  BA.  {Jerking  out  his  words  hastily).  That  is  true 
enough,  one  must  take  great  care  what  one  does ;  for  this 
is  not  child's  play  ;  and,  when  a  mistake  has  been  made, 
it  is  not  easy  to  rectify  it,  nor  make  good  what  one  has 
spoilt:  experimentum periculosum.  It  is,  therefore,  as  well 
to  argue  beforehand,  to  weigh  things  duly,  to  consider  the 
constitution  of  people,  to  examine  the  causes  of  the  com- 
plaint, and  to  decide  upon  the  remedies  to  be  adopted. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  One  moves  like  a  tortoise,  while  the 
other  gallops  like  a  post-horse. 

M.  MAC.  Yes,  sir,  to  come  to  the  fact,  I  find  that  your 
daugh-ter  has  a  chro-nic  dis-ease,  to  which  she  will  suc- 
cumb if  re-lief  be  not  giv-en  to  her,  the  more  as  the  symp- 
toms give  in-di-ca-tions  of  e-mit-ting  fu-li-gi-nous  and 
mor-di-cant  ex-ha-la-tions  which  ir-ri-tate  the  ce-re-bral 
mem-branes.  And  these  va-pours,  which  in  Greek  we  call 
At-mos,  are  caus-ed  by  pu-trid,  te-na-ci-ous,  and  con-glu-^ 
ti-nous  hu-mours,  which  have  ag-glo-mer-at-ed  in  the  ab- 
do-men.16 

M.  BA.  And  as  these  humours  were  engendered  there 
by  a  long  succession  of  time,  they  have  become  hardened, 
and  have  assumed  those  malignant  fumes  that  rise  towards 
the  region  of  the  brain. 

M.  MAC.  Con-se-quent-ly,  in  or-der  to  with-draw,  to 
de-tach,  to  loos-en,  to  ex-pel,  to  e-va-cu-ate  these  said  hu- 

16  This  is  the  theory  of  "  the  humours"  then  in  vogue  amongst 
physicians.  According  to  them,  every  disease  arose  from  a  superabun- 
dance of  humours,  which  were  either  in  too  great  quantity  or  of  too  bad 
a  quality  ;  the  first  was  called  plethora,  and  was  supposed  to  be  cured  by 
copious  bleedings ;  against  the  second,  cacochymia,  a  frequent  use  of 
purgatives  was  recommended. 

J6o  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  it 

mours,  a  ve-ry  strong  pur-ga-tive  is  ne-ces-sa-ry.  But  first 
of  all,  I  think  it  as  well,  and  it  will  not  cause  any  in-con- 
ve-ni-ence,  to  em-ploy  some  lit-tle  a-no-dyne  me-di-ci-nes, 
that  is  to  say,  small  e-mol-li-ent  and  de-ter-sive  in-jec- 
ti-ons,  re-fresh-ing  ju-leps  and  sy-rups,  which  may  be 
mix-ed  with  her  bar-ley  wa-ter. 

M.  BA.  After  that,  we  will  come  to  the  purgatives,  and 
to  the  bleeding,  which  we  shall  repeat,  if  necessary. 

M.  MAC.  We  do  not  say  that  your  daugh-ter  may  not 
die  for  all  this;  but  you  will  at  least  have  the  sat-is-fac- 
tion  of  hav-ing  done  some-thing,  and  the  con-so-la-tion  of 
know-ing  that  she  died  ac-cord-ing  to  rule. 

M.  BA.  It  is  better  to  die  according  to  rule  than  to 
recover  in  violation  of  it. 

M.  MAC.  We  have  sin-ce-re-ly  told  you  our  o-pi-ni-ons. 

M.  BA.  And  we  have  spoken  to  you  as  to  our  own 
brother. 

SCAN.  {To  M.  Macroton,  drawling  out  his  words},  lam 
hum-bly  o-bli-ged  to  you.  {To  M.  Bahis,  sputtering). 
And  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you  for  the  trouble  you 
have  taken. 

SCENE  VI. — SGANARELLE,  alone. 

Here  I  am,  a  little  more  in  the  dark  than  I  was  before." 
Zounds.  I  have  got  an  idea !  I  will  buy  some  Orvietan,18 

17  The  result  of  the  consultation  of  the  physicians  is  the  same  for 
Sganarelle  as,  in  the  Phormio  (ii.,  4)  of  Terence,  the  result  of  the  consul- 
tation  of   the   three  lawyers   Cratinus,   Hegio,  Crito.     Demiphon,  after 

hearing  it,  cries  out,   ''  Incertior  sum  multo  quam  dudum I  am 

much  more  uncertain  than  before.'1 

18  Towards  the  year  1639,  a  quack  began  to  sell,  on  the  Pont-Neuf  in 
Paris,   specifics   against   all    maladies,   and   especially    an   antidote,   the 
Orvietan,  so  called  because  it  was  prepared  by  a  certain  doctor  Lupi,  at 
Orvieto,  a  town  in  Italy.     His  real  name  was  Jacques  Ovyn,   and  he 
had  a  brother,  a  clergyman,  who,  as  well  as  himself,  was  called  de  f 
Orvietan;   hence  Jal,  in  his  Dictionnaire  critique,  supposes  that  their 
father  must  already  have  sold  this  electuary.      His  probable  successor 
was  Christoforo  Contugi,  who  called  himself  "Antidotaire  du  Roi,"  and 
who,  according  to  Guy- Fating,  bribed  twelve  Paris  physicians,  who  had 
afterwards  to  ask  their  pardon  from  the  Faculty  of  Paris,  to  give  him  a 
certificate.     According  to  a  note  of  M.  Pauly,  in  the  edition  of  Moliere, 
published  by  M.  Lemerre,  Paris,  Vol.  IV.,  Orvietan  was  an  antidote,  of 
which  the  secret  was  communicated,  in  1560,  by  Cardinal  Deodati  to 
his   apothecary,    Martin   Guerche.      It   was   then   called  antitan,  which 
means  antidote  of  the   time.      It  was  named  Orvietan  by  Hieronimo 

SCENE  vii.J  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  l6l 

and  I  will  make  her  take  it.  Orvietan  is  a  kind  of  remedy 
that  has  done  a  great  deal  of  good  to  many.  Soho  ! 

SCENE  VII. — SGANARELLE,  A  QUACK. 

SCAN.  Will  you,   Sir,   kindly  give  me  a  box  of  your 
Orvietan,  for  which  I  shall  pay  you  ? 

QUACK.  (Stngs}.  The  gold  of  all  climes  which  by  the 

ocean  are  bound 

Can  e'er  it  repay  this  important  secret  ? 
My  remedy  cures,  by  its  excellence  rare, 
More  complaints  than  are  counted  up  in 

a  whole  year : 

The  itch,  the  mange,  the  scurf,  the  fever,  the  plague, 
The  gout,  the  small-pox,  ruptures,  the  measles, 
Great  power  possesses  my  Orvietan. 
SCAN.  Sir,  I  am  willing  to  believe  that  all  the  gold  in 
the  world  could  not  pay  for  your  remedy !  but  here  is  a 
piece  of  thirty  sous,  which  you  will  take,  if  you  please. 
QUACK.  (Sings}.    Admire  how  good  I  am.     For  a  few 

paltry  pence, 

I  dispense  freely  such  marvellous  treasure. 
With  this  you  may  brave,  quite  devoid  of 

all  fear, 
All  the  ills  to  which  mortals  are  subject 

down  here : 

The  itch,  the  mange,  the  scurf,  the  fever,  the  plague, 
The  gout,  the  small-pox,  ruptures,  the  measles, 
Great  power  possesses  my  Orvietan. 

SECOND    ENTRY. 

Several  Trivelins19  and  Scaramouches,  servants  of  the 
quack,  come  in  dancing. 

Feranti,  a  native  of  Orvieto,  whose  successor,  Giovanni  Vitrario,  trans- 
mitted the  recipe  for  it  to  his  son-in-law,  Christoforo  Contugi,  who  sold 
it  at  Paris,  in  virtue  of  a  royal  privilege,  dated  gth  April  1647.  In  the 
thirteenth  chapter  of  Kenilworth,  Sir  Walter  Scott  describes  how  Way- 
land  successfully  endeavoured  to  collect  materials  for  making  the 
Orvietan,  or  Venice  treacle,  as  it  was  sometimes  called, — understood  to  be 
a  sovereign  remedy  against  poison. 

19  Domenico  Lucatelli,  was  an  Italian  comedian,  who  died  in  1671 
and  acted  at  Paris  the  part  of  Trivelin,  a  kind  of  harlequin. 

VOL.  II.  K 

l62  LOVE  IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  HI. 

ACT     III. 

SCENE  I. — MM.  FILERIN,  TOMES,  DESFONANDRES. 

M.  FIL.  Are  you  not  ashamed,  gentlemen,  for  men  of 
your  age  to  show  so  little  discrimination,  and  to  quarrel 
like  young  madcaps  ?  Do  you  not  plainly  see  the  harm 
which  these  kinds  of  disputes  do  us  with  the  world  ?  and 
is  it  not  sufficient  that  the  learned  perceive  the  dissensions 
and  differences  between  our  contemporaries  and  the  old 
masters  of  our  craft,  without  revealing  to  the  public,  by 
our  quarrels  and  bickerings,  the  boasting  of  our  art  ?  As 
for  me,  I  do  not  at  all  understand  the  mischievous  policy 
of  some  of  our  brethren  ;  and  it  must  be  admitted  that  all 
these  controversies  have  somewhat  strangely  disparaged 
us,  and  that,  if  we  are  not  careful,  we  shall  ruin  ourselves. 
I  do  not  say  so  for  my  own  interest,  for,  Heaven  be 
praised,  my  little  affairs  are  already  settled.  Whether  it 
blows,  rains, .or  hails,  those  who  are  dead  are  dead,  and  I 
have  sufficient  to  be  independent  of  the  living ;  yet  all 
these  disputes  do  physic  no  good.  Since  Heaven  has  done 
us  the  favour,  that,  for  so  many  centuries,  people  remain 
infatuated  with  us,  let  us  not  open  their  eyes  by  our  ex- 
travagant cabals,  and  let  us  take  advantage  of  their  folly 
as  quietly  as  possible.  We  are  not  the  only  ones,  as  you 
know  full  well,  who  try  to  make  the  best  of  human  foibles. 
The  whole  study  of  the  greatest  part  of  mankind  tends 
towards  that ;  and  every  one  endeavours  to  speculate  on 
man's  weakness,  in  order  to  derive  some  benefit  from 
them.  Flatterers,  for  example,  seek  to  profit  by  men's 
love  for  praise,  by  giving  them  all  the  vain  incense  they 
crave ;  it  is  an  art  by  which,  as  we  may  see,  large  fortunes 
are  made.  Alchemists  seek  to  profit  by  the  passion  for 
wealth  by  promising  mountains  of  gold  to  those  who 
listen  to  them ;  the  drawers  of  horoscopes,  by  their  de- 
ceitful prophecies,  profit  by  the  vanity  and  ambition  of 
credulous  minds.  But  the  greatest  failing  in  men  is  their 
love  of  life ;  by  our  pompous  speeches  we  benefit  by  it, 
and  know  how  to  take  advantage  of  the  veneration  for 
our  profession  with  which  the  fear  of  death  inspires  them. 
Let  us,  therefore,  maintain  ourselves  in  that  esteem  in 

]  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST    DOCTOR.  163 

which  their  foibles  have  placed  us,  and  let  us  agree  before 
our  patients,  so  as  to  claim  for  ourselves  the  credit  of  the 
happy  issue  of  the  complaint,  and  to  throw  on  Nature  all 
the  blunders  of  our  art.  Let  us  not,  I  say,  foolishly 
destroy  the  happy  accident  of  an  error,  which  gives  bread 
to  so  many  people,  and  which  allows  us  to  raise  every- 
where such  beautiful  estates  with  the  money  of  those  whom 
we  have  sent  to  the  grave.20 

M.  To.  You  are  right  in  all  that  you  say;  but  some- 
times one  cannot  control  one's  temper. 

M.  FIL.  Come,  gentlemen,  lay  aside  all  animosity,  and 
make  up  your  quarrel  on  the  spot. 

M.  DBS.  I  consent.  Let  him  allow  me  to  have  my  way 
with  the  emetic  for  the  patient  in  question  ;  and  I  will  let 
him  have  his  with  the  first  patient  he  shall  be  concerned 
with. 

M.  FIL.  Nothing  could  be  better  said,  and  that  is  rea- 
sonable. 

M.  DES.  Very  well,  that  is  settled. 

M.  FIL.  Shake  hands  then.  Farewell.  Another  time, 
show  more  tact. 

SCENE  II. — M.  TOMES,  M.  DESFONANDRES,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  What  !  gentlemen,  you  are  here,  and  you  do  not 
think  of  repairing  the  wrong  done  to  the  medical  profes- 
sion? 

M.  To.  What  now  ?     What  is  the  matter  ? 

Lis.  Some  insolent  fellow  has  had  the  impudence  to 
encroach  upon  your  trade,  and,  without  your  prescription, 
has  killed  a  man  by  running  a  sword  clean  through  his 
body. 

M.  To.  Look  you  here,  you  may  laugh  at  us  now ;  but 
you  shall  fall  into  our  hands  one  of  these  days. 

Lis.  If  ever  I  have  recourse  to  you,  I  give  you  leave  to 
kill  me. 

M  A  great  part  of  Dr.  Filerin's  speech  sets  forth  some  of  Montaigne's 
ideas,  contained  in  the  Essays,  Book  II.,  chapter  xxxvii.  Moliere  re- 
peats some  of  these  same  ideas,  clothed  in  dog- Latin,  and  puts  them 
into  the  opening  speech  of  the  president  of  the  learned  assembly  of 
persons  connected  with  the  medical  profession,  in  the  third  Interlude  of 
the  Hypochondriac  (See  Vol.  III.) 

164  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  in. 

SCENE   III. — CLITANDRE,  disguised  as  a  physician, 

LlSETTE. 

CLIT.  Well,  Lisette,  what  do  you  think  of  my  disguise? 
Do  you  believe  that  I  can  trick  the  good  man  in  these 
clothes  ?  Do  I  look  all  right  thus. 

Lis.  It  could  not  be  better ;  and  I  have  been  waiting 
impatiently  for  you.  Heaven  has  given  me  the  most  hu- 
mane disposition  in  the  world,  and  I  cannot  bear  to  see 
two  lovers  sigh  for  one  another,  without  entertaining  a 
charitable  tenderness  towards  them,  and  an  ardent  wish  to 
relieve  the  ills  which  they  are  suffering.  I  mean,  no  mat- 
ter at  what  cost,  to  free  Lucinde  from  the  tyranny  to  which 
she  is  subjected,  and  to  confide  her  to  your  care.  I  liked 
you  at  first  sight :  I  am  a  good  judge  of  people,  and  she 
could  not  have  made  a  better  choice.  Love  risks  extra- 
ordinary things,  and  we  have  concocted  a  little  scheme, 
which  may  perhaps  be  successful.  All  our  measures  are 
already  taken :  the  man  we  have  to  deal  with  is  not  one 
of  the  sharpest ;  and  if  this  trick  fail,  we  shall  find  a  thou- 
sand other  ways  to  encompass  our  end.  Just  wait  here  a 
little,  I  shall  come  back  to  fetch  you.  (Clitandre  retires 
to  the  far  end  of  the  stage. 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  Hurrah !  hurrah !  Sir. 

SCAN.  What  is  the  matter  ? 

Lis.  Rejoice. 

SCAN.  At  what  ? 

Lis.  Rejoice,  I  say. 

SCAN.  Tell  me  what  it  is  about,  and  then  I  shall  rejoice, 
perhaps. 

Lis.  No.  I  wish  you  to  rejoice  first,  I  wish  you  to  sing, 
to  dance. 

SCAN.  On  what  grounds? 

Lis.  On  my  bare  word. 

SCAN.  Be  it  so.  (He  sings  and  dances}.  La,  lera,  la, 
la,  la,  lera,  la.  What  the  deuce  ! 

Lis.  Your  daughter  is  cured,  Sir. 

SCAN.  My  daughter  is  cured  ? 

Lis.  Yes.     I  have  brought  you  a  doctor,  but  a  doctor 

SCENBVI.]  LOVE   IS  THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  l6$ 

of  importance,  who  works  wonderful  cures,  and  who 
laughs  at  the  other  physicians. 

SCAN.  Where  is  he  ? 

Lis.  I  shall  bring  him  in. 

SCAN.  {Alone).  It  remains  to  be  seen  if  he  will  do 
more  than  the  others. 

SCENE  V. — CLITANDRE  disguised  as  a  physician,  SGANA- 

RELLE,  LlSETTE. 

Lis.   (Leading  Clitandre).     Here  he  is. 

SCAN.  That  doctor  has  not  much  beard,  as  yet. 

Lis.  Knowledge  is  not  measured  by  the  beard,  and  his 
skill  does  not  lie  in  his  chin. 

SCAN.  Sir,  they  tell  me  that  you  have  some  capital  re- 
cipes for  relieving  the  bowels. 

CLIT.  My  remedies,  sir,  are  different  from  those  of 
other  physicians.  They  use  emetics,  bleeding,  drugs, 
and  injections  ;  but  I  cure  by  vords,  sounds,  letters,  tal- 
ismans, and  rings. 

Lis.  Did  I  not  tell  you  so  ? 

SCAN.  A  great  man  this ! 

Lis.  Sir,  as  your  daughter  is  yonder,  ready  dressed,  in 
her  chair,  I  shall  bring  her  here. 

SCAN.  Yes,  do. 

CLIT.  (Feeling  Sganarelle1  s  pulse).  Your  daughter  is 
very  ill,  Sir. 

SCAN.  You  can  tell  that  here  ? 

CLIT.  Yes,  by  the  sympathy  which  exists  between 
father  and  daughter. 

SCENE  VI. — SGANARELLE,  LUCINDE,  CLITANDRE,  LISETTE. 

Lis.  (To  Clitandr/s).  Sir,  here  is  a  chair  near  her.  (To 
Sganarelle}.  Come,  let  us  leave  them  to  themselves. 

SCAN.  Why  so  ?     I  wish  to  remain  here. 

Lis.  Are  you  jesting  ?  We  must  leave  them.  A  doctor 
has  a  hundred  things  to  ask,  which  it  is  not  decent  for  a 
man  to  hear.  (Sganarelle  and  Lisette  retire. 

CLIT.  (Softly  to  Lucinde).  Ah  !  lady,  how  great  is  my 
delight !  and  how  little  do  I  know  how  to  begin  my  dis- 
course !  As  long  as  I  spoke  to  you  only  with  my  eyes,  it 
seemed  to  me  that  I  had  a  hundred  things  to  say ;  and 

l66  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACT  in. 

now  that  I  have  the  opportunity  of  speaking  to  you,  as 
I  wished,  I  remain  silent,  and  my  great  joy  prevents  my 
utterance. 

Luc.  I  may  say  the  same ;  and  I  feel,  like  you,  thrills 
of  joy  which  prevent  me  from  speaking. 

CLIT.  Ah !  madam,  how  happy  should  I  be,  if  it  were 
true  that  you  feel  all  I  do,  and  that  I  were  allowed  to 
judge  of  your  heart  by  mine.  But,  may  I  at  least  believe, 
dear  lady,  that  I  owe  to  you  the  idea  of  this  happy  scheme 
which  enables  me  to  enjoy  your  presence. 

Luc.  If  you  do  not  altogether  owe  the  thought  to  me, 
you  are,  at  any  rate,  my  debtor  for  having  gladly  approved 
of  the  proposal. 

SCAN.  (To  Lisette).  It  seems  to  me  that  he  talks  very 
close  to  her. 

Lis.  He  is  studying  her  physiognomy,  and  all  the  features 
of  her  face. 

CLIT.  {To  Lucinde).  Will  you  be  constant,  dear  lady, 
in  these  favours  which  you  are  bestowing  upon  me  ? 

Luc.  But  you,  will  you  be  firm  in  the  resolutions  which 
you  have  taken  ? 

CLIT.  Ah  !  madam,  till  death.  I  desire  nothing  so 
much  as  to  be  yours  ;  and  I  shall  prove  it  to  you. 

SCAN.  (To  Clitandre).  Well!  how  does  our  patient? 
She  seems  a  little  more  cheerful. 

CLIT.  That  is  because  I  have  already  tried  upon  her  one 
of  the  remedies  which  my  art  teaches  me.  As  the  mind 
has  a  great  influence  on  the  body,  and  as  it  is  from  the 
first  that  diseases  most  generally  arise,  my  custom  is  to 
cure  the  mind  before  dealing  with  the  body.  I  have 
therefore  studied  this  young  lady's  looks,  her  features,  and 
the  lines  of  both  her  hands ;  and  by  the  knowledge  which 
Heaven  has  bestowed  upon  me,  I  have  discovered  she  is 
ill  in  mind,  and  that  the  whole  of  her  complaint  arises 
only  from  a  disordered  imagination,  from  an  inordinate 
desire  of  being  married.  As  for  myself,  I  think  nothing 
more  extravagant  and  ridiculous  than  this  hankering  after 
marriage. 

SGAN.    (Aside) .  A  clever  fellow  this  ! 

CLIT.  And  I  have  and  always  shall  have,  a  frightful 
dislike  to  it. 

SCENE  vi.]  LOVE  IS  TnE  BEST  DOCTOR.  167 

SCAN.  (Aside).  A  great  doctor  this  ! 

CLIT.  But  as  we  must  humour  the  imagination  of 
patients,  and  as  I  have  perceived  in  her  a  wandering  of 
the  mind,  and  even  that  there  was  great  danger  in  not 
giving  her  prompt  relief,  I  have  taken  her  at  her  foible, 
and  told  her  that  I  came  here  to  solicit  her  hand  from 
you.  Suddenly  her  countenance  changed,  her  complexion 
cleared,  her  eyes  became  animated ;  and  if  you  will  leave 
her  for  a  few  days  in  this  error,  you  will  see  that  we  shall 
cure  her. 

SCAN.  Indeed,  I  do  not  mind. 

CLIT.  After  that,  we  shall  apply  other  means  to  cure  her 
of  this  fancy. 

SCAN.  Yes,  that  will  do  very  well.  Listen  !  my  girl, 
this  gentleman  wishes  to  marry  you,  and  I  have  told  him 
that  I  give  my  consent. 

Luc.  Alas  !  can  it  be  possible  ? 

SCAN.  Of  course. 

Luc.  But  really,  in  earnest  ? 

SCAN.   Certainly. 

Luc.  ( To  Clitandre).  What !  You  wish  to  be  my 
husband  ? 

CLIT.  Yes,  madam. 

Luc.  And  my  father  consents  to  it  ? 

SCAN.  Yes,  my  child. 

Luc.  Ah  how  happy  I  am  !  if  that  is  true. 

CLIT.  Doubt  it  not,  madam.  My  love  for  you,  and  my 
ardent  wish  to  be  your  husband,  do  not  date  from  to-day, 
I  came  only  for  this ;  and,  if  you  wish  me  to  tell  you  the 
plain  truth,  this  dress  is  nothing  but  a  mere  disguise ;  I 
acted  the  physician  only  to  get  near  to  you,  and  the  more 
easily  to  obtain  what  I  desire. 

Luc.  These  are  signs  of  a  very  tender  love,  and  I  am 
fully  sensible  of  them. 

SCAN.  (Aside).      Oh,   poor  silly  girl !  silly  girl !  silly 

girl! 

Luc.  You  do  consent  then,  father,  to  give  me  this  gen- 
tleman for  a  husband  ? 

SCAN.  Yes,  certainly.  Come,  give  me  your  hand.  Give 
me  yours  also,  Sir,  for  a  moment. 

CLIT.  But,  Sir  ... 

l6S  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  [ACTIU. 

SCAN.  {With  suppressed  laughter).     No,  no,  it  is  . 
to  satisfy  her  mind.     Take  it.     That  is  over. 

CLIT.  Accept,  as  a  pledge  of  my  faith,  this  ring  which 
I  give  you  (Softly  to  Sganarelle).  It  is  a  constellated  ring, 
which  cures  aberrations  of  the  mind.22 

Luc.  Let  us  draw  up  the  contract,  so  that  nothing  may 
be  wanting. 

CLIT.  I  have  no  objections,  Madam.  (Softly  to  Sgana- 
relle). I  will  bring  the  fellow  who  writes  my  prescriptions, 
and  will  make  her  believe  that  he  is  a  notary. 

SCAN.  Just  so. 

CLIT.  Hulloo !  send  up  the  notary  I  have  brought  with 
me. 

Luc.  What !  you  brought  a  notary  with  you  ? 

CLIT.  Yes,  Madam. 

Luc.  I  am  glad  of  that. 

SCAN.  Oh  the  poor  silly  girl  !  the  silly  girl ! 

SCENE  VII. — THE  NOTARY,  CLITANDRE,  SGANARELLE, 

LUCINDE,    LlSETTE. 

{Clitandre  speaks  softly  to  the  Notary. .) 

SCAN.  {To  the  Notary).  Yes,  Sir,  you  are  to  draw  up 
a  contract  for  these  two  people.  Write.  {To  Lucinde). 
We  are  making  the  contract.  {To  the  Notary).  I  give 
her  twenty  thousand  crowns  as  a  portion.  Write  that 
down. 

Luc.  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you,  dear  father. 

NOT.  That  is  done.     You  have  only  to  sign  it. 

SCAN.  That  is  a  quickly  drawn  contract. 

CLIT.  {To  Sganarelle).     But  at  least,  Sir  .    .    . 

M  These  rings,  sometimes  called  also  "  planetary  rings ''  had  certain 
stars  or  planets  engraved  upon  them,  and  were  supposed  to  soothe  the  mind  ; 
a  reminiscence  of  the  feeling  that  stars  influenced  human  destiny.  The 
metals  from  which  these  rings  were  made  appear  also  to  be  thought  to 
have  some  mysterious  power,  for  the  seven  metals — gold,  silver,  mercury, 
copper,  iron,  tin,  and  lead, — were  under  the  influence  of  the  Sun,  the 
Moon,  Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn.  If  the  rings  were  com- 
posed of  several  metals,  then,  of  course,  different  influences  were  at 
work ;  if  made  of  all  the  metals — the  electron  of  Paracelsus — they  pos- 
sessed the  highest  power.  I  imagine  that  the  metals  used  in  the 
manufacture  of  such  rings  must  also  have  had  some  connection  with  the 
horoscope  of  the  person  for  whom  it  was  made. 

SCENE  ix.]  LOVE   IS   THE   BEST   DOCTOR.  169 

SCAN.    No,  no,  I  tell  you.     Do  we  not  all  know  .    .    . 
(71?  the  Notary).     Come,  hand  him  the  pen  to  sign.    (70 
Lucinde}.     Come  you,  sign  now,  sign,  sign.    Well,  I  shall 
sign  presently. 

Luc.  No,  no,  I  will  have  the  contract  in  my  own  hands. 

SCAN.  Well  !  there  then.  (After  having  signed}.  Are 
you  satisfied  ? 

Luc.  Better  than  you  can  imagine. 

SCAN.  That  is  all  right,  then,  that  is  all  right. 

CLIT.  I  have  not  only  had  the  precaution  to  bring  a 
notary;  I  have  also  brought  singers,  musicians,  and 
dancers  to  celebrate  the  feast,  and  for  our  enjoyment. 
Let  them  come  in.  They  are  people  I  always  have  with 
me,  and  whom  I  daily  make  use  of  to  calm,  by  their  har- 
mony and  dancing,  the  troubles  of  the  mind. 

SCENE  VIII. — COMEDY,  THE  BALLET,  Music." 

Together.  Without  our  aid,  all  humankind 
Would  soon  become  unhealthy. 
We  are  indeed  the  best  of  all  physicians. 
COMEDY.       Would  you  dispel  by  easy  means 

Splenetic  fumes  that  man  is  heir  to. 
Avoid  Hippocrates,  and  come  to  us. 
TOGETHER.  Without  our  aid,  all  humankind 
Would  soon  become  unhealthy. 
We  are  indeed  the  best  of  all  physicians. 
(  While  the  Sports,  Laughter,  and  Pleasures  are  dancing  . 
together,  Clitandre  leads  Lucinde  away). 

SCENE  IX— SGANARELLE,  LISETTE,  Music,  THE  BALLET, 
SPORTS,  LAUGHTER,  PLEASURES. 

SCAN.  A  pleasant  way  of  curing  people  this  !  But  where 
are  my  daughter  and  the  doctor? 

Lis.  They  are  gone  to  finish  the  remaining  part  of  the 
marriage. 

SCAN.   What  do  you  mean  by  the  marriage? 

11  Here  the  words  "third  entry"  ought  to  come,  or  perhaps  above  the 
words  "while  the  sports,"  etc.,  but  nothing  is  given  in  the  original  copies 
I  have  compared. 

170  LOVE  IS  THE  BEST  DOCTOR.  [ACT  in. 

Lis.  The  fact  is,  Sir,  you  have  been  cleverly  done;54 
and  the  joke  you  thought  to  play  remains  a  truth. 

SCAN.  The  devil  it  does!  (He  wishes  to  rush  after 
Clitandre  and  Ludnde,  the  dancers  restrain  him).  Let  me 
go,  let  me  go,  I  tell  you.  (  The  dancers  still  keep  hold  of 
him.~}  Again  !  (They  wish  to  make  him  dance  by  force). 
Plague  take  you  all ! 

24  The  original  has  la  becasse  est  bridee,  the  woodcock  is  caught,  an 
allusion  to  the  snare  in  which  those  birds  catch  themselves. 

LE   MISANTHROPE. 

COMEDIE. 

THE  MISANTHROPE 

A  COMEDY  IN  FIVE  ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.) 
JUNE  4TH,  1666. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

The  Misanthrope,  Mcliere's  masterpiece,  according  to  Voltaire,  was  first 
acted  on  the  4th  of  June,  1666,  at  the  theatre  of  the  Palais  Royal,  and, 
in  spite  of  what  has  generally  been  believed,  was  no  complete  failure  ;  for 
it  was  represented  twenty-one  consecutive  times.1  It  is,  however,  not  to 
be  expected  that  a  comedy  like  The  Misanthrope  should  please  the  gen- 
eral public  as  much  as  a  farce.  But  those  who  admired  noble  thoughts, 
select  language,  accurate  delineations  of  character,  and  a  perfect  and  en- 
tertaining style,  placed  this  comedy  from  the  very  beginning  where  it  is 
now  generally  put,  with  the  common  consent  of  all  students  of  sound  lit- 
erature, in  the  foremost  rank  of  the  good  comedies  of  Moliere. 

The  subject  of  a  misanthrope  has  been  treated  at  all  times  and  in  all  lite- 
ratures. Antiquity  possessed  a  proverbial  misanthrope,  which  Plutarch 
mentions  in  his  Lives  of  Illustrious  Men  (Timon)  in  the  following  words : 

"  Anthony  in  the  meantime  forsook  the  city  and  the  society  of  his 
friends,  and  retired  to  a  small  house  which  he  had  built  himself  near 
Pharos,  on  a  mound  he  had  cast  up  in  the  sea.  In  this  place,  sequestered 
from  all  commerce  with  mankind,  he  affected  to  live  like  Timon,  because 
there  was  a  resemblance  in  their  fortunes.  He  had  been  deserted  by  his 
friends,  and  their  ingratitude  had  put  him  out  of  humour  with  his  own 
species. 

"  This  Timon  was  a  citizen  of  Athens,  and  lived  about  the  time  of  the 
Peloponnesian  war,  as  appears  from  the  comedies  of  Aristophanes  and 
Plato  in  which  he  is  exposed  as  the  hater  of  mankind.  Yet,  although  he 
hated  mankind  in  general,  he  caressed  the  bold  and  impudent  boy  Alci- 
biades,  and  being  asked  the  reason  of  this  by  Apemantus,  who  expressed 
some  surprise  at  it,  he  answered,  it  was  because  he  foresaw  that  he  would 
plague  the  people  of  Athens.  Apemantus  was  the  only  one  he  admitted 
to  his  society,  and  he  was  his  friend  in  point  of  principle.  At  the  feast 

1  M.  E.  Despois,  in  his  very  accurate  book,  Le  Theatre  francaise  sous  Louis 
XIV.,  states  that  The  Misanthrope  was  neither  a  great  success,  nor  a  complete 
failure.  At  its  first  representation,  1447  livres,  10  sous  were  received,  which  was  a 
considerable  "  take"  for  that  time  ;  but  from  the  third  representation,  the  receipts 
went  down  to  between  600  and  700  livres,  and  the  tenth  brought  only  212  livres. 
It  is  therefore,  more  than  probable  that,  if  this  comedy  had  not  been  Moliere's, 
and  played  in  his  own  theatre,  it  would  have  been  withdrawn.  The  twenty- 
first  representation  took  place  on  a  Sunday,  when  there  was  generally  a  good  deal 
of  money  taken  at  the  door  and  brought  only  268  livres. 

173 

174  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

of  sacrifices  for  the  dead,  these  two  dined  by  themselves,  and  when  Ape- 
mantus  observed  that  the  feast  was  excellent,  Timon  answered,  "  It  would 
be  so  if  you  were  not  here.''  Once,  in  an  assembly  of  the  people,  he 
mounted  the  rostrum,  and  the  novelty  of  the  thing  occasioned  a  universal 
silence  and  expectation  ;  at  length  he  said,  "  People  of  Athens,  there  is  a 
fig-tree  in  my  yard,  on  which  many  worthy  citizens  have  hanged  them- 
selves, and  as  I  have  determined  to  build  upon  the  spot,  I  thought  it  ne- 
cessary to  give  this  public  notice,  that  such  as  choose  to  have  recourse  to 
this  tree  for  the  aforesaid  purpose  may  repair  to  it  before  it  is  cut  down." 

"  He  was  buried  at  Halae  near  the  sea,  and  the  water  surrounded  his 
tomb  in  such  a  manner  that  he  was  even  then  inaccessible  to  mankind. 

"  The  following  epitaph  is  inscribed  on  his  monument : 

'  At  last  I've  bid  the  knaves  farewell ; 
Ask  not  my  name — but  go — to  hell.' 

"  It  is  said  that  he  wrote  this  epitaph  himself.  That  which  is  commonly 
repeated  is  by  Callimachus. 

'  My  name  is  Timon,  knaves  begone  1 
Curse  me,  but  come  not  near  my  stone !' 

*'  These  are  some  of  the  many  anecdotes  we  have  concerning  Timon." 
In  Lucian's  "  Dialogues  of  the  Dead,"  Dialogue  XXIV.,  Timon  is 
represented  as  finding  fault  with  Jupiter  about  his  half-heartedness,  twit- 
ting him  with  his  want  of  energy,  that  when  they  despoiled  his  temples 
and  robbed  him  on  Olympus,  he  dared  not  set  the  dogs  after  therm,  nor 
call  the  neighbours  to  his  assistance,  and  compares  his  own  case  with  that 
of  Jove.  Jupiter  does  not  altogether  like  this,  and  wishes  to  know  from 
Mercury  who  that  dirty  fellow  is,  standing  at  the  foot  of  Hymettus,  abus- 
ing him — coming  to  the  conclusion  that  it  must  be  some  philosopher  rail- 
ing against  him.  Upon  being  informed  by  his  son  who  he  really  is,  the 
Thunderer  expresses  his  surprise  and  sorrow  at  the  change  that  has  taken 
place  in  the  condition  of  the  once  so  wealthy  man,  and  inquires  the 
causes  of  this  decline.  "  To  speak  simply,'1  answered  Mercury,  "  bene- 
volence has  ruined  him,  also  philanthropy  and  compassion  towards  all 
in  need ;  but  to  speak  truly,  folly  and  simplicity  in  choosing  his  friends, 
who  were  only  so  many  vultures  gnawing  his  liver,  treating  him  with  dis- 
dain afterwards,  when  he  was  no  longer  useful,  and  even  pretending  not 
to  know  his  name."  Jove  now  begins  to  remember  Timon  in  his  better 
days,  and  chides  himself  for  his  neglect  in  having  forgotten  him ;  alleging, 
however,  as  the  cause,  the  noise  which  the  perjured  and  the  wicked  make 
around  him,  not  leaving  him  a  moment's  leisure  to  look  into  Attica.  He 
commands  Mercury  to  take  Plutus  with  him,  to  seek  Timon.  and  remain 
with  him,  even  should  he  endeavour  to  drive  them  from  his  house  by  re- 
peating his  former  acts  of  benevolence.  He  also  promises  revenge  upon 
those  who  have  been  ungrateful  to  Timon  when  his  thunderbolts  shall  be 
repaired,  which  are  out  of  order  just  then,  he  having  hurled  them  at  the 
sophist  Anaxagoras,  who  was  persuading  his  disciples  that  the  gods  did 
not  exist  at  all.  Plutus  refuses  to  go  to  Timon  because  he  insulted  him, 
and  divided  him  amongst  flatterers  and  parasites ;  and  begs  Jove  to  send 
him  to  those  who  will  appreciate  him,  and  not  squander  him  in  benevo- 
lence. Jupiter  informs  Plutus  that  Timon  shall  not  do  so  again,  having 
gained  experience  by  his  misfortunes ;  at  the  same  time  telling  him  that 
he  has  often  complained  of  different  treatment  by  being  completely  im- 
prisoned under  bars  and  keys.  Plutus  gives  him  to  understand  that  he 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  175 

prefers  the  middle  way,  and  does  not  like  the  greed  of  some,  any  more 
than  the  lavishness  of  others.  He  prepares  to  go  in  company  with  Mer- 
cury to  find  Timon.  They  meet  with  him  close  at  hand,  digging  the  soil. 
Plutus  thinks  that,  surrounded  as  he  is  by  Labour,  Wisdom,  Strength, 
and  Fortitude,  they  cannot  do  much  for  him,  and  wishes  them  to  leave 
him.  Poverty,  who  is  closely  attending  Timon,  resents  the  intrusion  of 
Plutus  and  Mercury,  telling  them  that  he  had  formed  the  man  perfectly 
to  his  work,  which  they  would  only  undo  again,  and  Timon  also  reviles 
them  for  having  come  to  disturb  him,  threatening  to  strike  them.  The 
two  gods  reveal  themselves  to  him,  offering  him  wealth.  Timon  tells  Plu- 
tus to  go  and  hang  himself,  and  offers  to  smash  him  to  pieces.  Plutus  in- 
tends to  depart,  Mercury  persuades  Timon  to  reconsider  his  decision,  but 
Timon  persists,  telling  them  he  has  no  need  of  their  services,  that  his 
spade  is  wealth  enough,  and  that  he  will  be  perfectly  happy  if  but  left 
alone,  asking  them  to  convey  his  thanks  to  Jupiter  for  his  kind  attentions, 
but  persistently  refusing  to  have  ought  to  do  with  Plutus,  ascribing  all  his 
misfortunes  to  the  blind  god,  who  offers  to  defend  himself  from  the  accu- 
sations, Timon  permitting  him  to  do  so  in  a  few  words  only.  Timon  re- 
luctantly consents  to  become  rich  again  in  obedience  to  Jupiter,  upon 
which  all  his  parasites  anew  assemble  round  him. 

The  above  sketches  fairly  represent  the  idea  which  antiquity  formed  of 
a  misanthrope. 

Moliere's  play  of  The  Misanthrope,  his  only  comedy  which  represents 
courtiers  and  courtly  people,  opens  with  great  spirit,  and  shows  us  the 
hero  Alceste  attacking  his  friend  Philinte  for  being  too  lenient  and  toler- 
ant to  the  foibles  of  mankind,  whilst  the  defence  of  the  latter  is  plausible, 
perhaps  too  much  so.  Then  we  have  Oronte,  the  high-born  but  wretched 
poet,  who,  offended  by  Alceste's  blunt,  honest  opinion,  goes  away  fuming 
and  fretting.  The  coquettish,  evil-speaking  Celimene,  beloved  by  Al- 
ceste, spurns  an  honest  man's  affection,  through  vanity  and  thoughtless- 
ness, enlivens  the  comedy,  and  is  finally  rewarded  and  cruelly  mortified 
by  being  discarded.  Such  men  as  Acaste  and  Clitandre,  represent  the 
butterflies  of  society,  fluttering  from  one  drawing-room  to  another,  but 
instead  of  distilling,  as  from  flowers,  sweet  odours,  only  carrying  venom- 
ous poison  with  glib  and  smooth  small  talk.  The  charming  Miss  Elian te, 
whose  beauty  is  enhanced  by  modest  behaviour,  finally  receives  the  hand 
of  Philinte. 

I  think  no  better  delineation  has  been  given  of  this  play  than  the  fol- 
lowing one  by  M.  Taine,  in  his  "  History  of  English  Literature  :" — "  A 
doeen  conversations  make  up  the  play  of  The  Misanthrope.  The  same 
situation,  five  or  six  times  renewed,  is  the  whole  of  /'  £cole  des  Femmes. 
These  pieces  are  made  out  of  nothing.  They  have  no  need  of  incidents, 
they  find  ample  space  in  the  compass  of  one  room  and  one  day,  without 
surprises,  without  decoration,  with  an  arras  and  four  arm-chairs.  This 
paucity  of  matter  throws  out  the  ideas  more  clearly  and  quickly ;  in  fact, 
their  whole  aim  is  to  bring  those  ideas  prominently  forward ;  the  simpli- 
city of  the  subject,  the  progress  of  the  action,  the  linking  together  of  the 
scenes, — to  this  everything  tends.  At  every  step  clearness  increases,  the 
impression  is  deepened,  vice  stands  out :  ridicule  is  piled  up,  until,  before 
so  many  apt  and  united  appeals,  laughter  forces  its  way  and  breaks  forth. 
And  this  laughter  is  not  a  mere  outburst  of  physical  amusement ;  it  is  the 
judgment  which  incites  it.  The  writer  is  a  philosopher,  who  brings  us 
into  contact  with  a  universal  truth  by  a  particular  example.  We  under- 
stand through  him,  as  through  La  Brayere  or  Nicole,  the  force  of  pre- 

176  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

judice,  the  obstinacy  of  conventionality,  the  blindness  of  love.  The  cou- 
plets of  his  dialogue,  like  the  arguments  of  their  treatises,  are  but  the 
worked-out  proof  and  the  logical  justification  of  a  preconceived  conclu- 
sion. We  philosophize  with  him  on  humanity ;  we  think  because  he  has 
thought.  And  he  has  Only  thought  thus  in  the  character  of  a  French- 
man, for  an  audience  of  French  men  of  the  world.  In  him  we  taste  a 
national  pleasure.  French  refined  and  systematic  intelligence,  the  most 
exact  in  seizing  on  the  subordination  of  ideas,  the  most  ready  in  separa- 
ting ideas  from  matter,  the  most  fond  of  clear  and  tangible  ideas,  finds  in 
him  its  nourishment  and  its  echo.  None  who  have  sought  to  show  us  man- 
kind, has  led  us  by  a  straighter  and  easier  mode  to  a  more  distinct  and 
speaking  portrait.  I  will  add,  to  a  more  pleasing  portrait, — and  this  is 
the  main  talent  of  comedy  :  it  consists  in  keeping  back  what  is  hateful ; 
and  observe  that  that  which  is  hateful  abounds  in  the  world.  As  soon  as 
you  will  paint  the  world  truly,  philosophically,  you  meet  with  vice,  in- 
justice, and  everywhere  indignation ;  amusement  flees  before  anger  and 
morality.  ...  In  The  Misanthrope,  is  not  the  spectacle  of  a  loyally  sincere 
and  honest  man,  very  much  in  love,  whom  his  virtue  finally  overwhelms 
with  ridicule  and  drives  from  society,  a  sad  sight  to  see?  .  .  .  How  every- 
thing changes  under  the  hand  of  the  mercurial  Frenchman  !  how  all  this 
human  ugliness  is  blotted  out !  how  amusing  is  the  spectacle  which  Mo- 
liere  has  arranged  for  us  !  how  we  ought  to  thank  the  great  artist  for 
having  transformed  his  subjects  so  well !  At  last  we  have  a  cheerful 
world,  on  canvas  at  least ;  we  could  not  have  it  otherwise,  but  this  we 
have.  How  pleasant  it  is  to  forget  truth  !  what  an  art  is  that  which  di- 
vests us  of  ourselves !  what  a  point  of  view  which  converts  the  contor- 
tions of  suffering  into  funny  grimaces  !  Gaiety  has  come  upon  us,  the 
dearest  possession  of  a  Frenchman.  The  soldiers  of  Villars  used  to  dance 
that  they  might  forget  they  had  no  longer  any  bread.  Of  all  French 
possessions,  too,  it  is  the  best.  This  gift  does  not  destroy  thought,  but  it 
masks  it.  In  Moliire,  truth  is  at  the  bottom,  but  concealed ;  he  has 
heard  the  sobs  of  human  tragedy,  but  he  prefers  not  to  re-echo  them.  It 
is  quite  enough  to  feel  our  wounds  smart ;  let  us  not  go  to  the  theatre  to 
see  them  again.  Philosophy,  while  it  reveals  them,  advises  us  not  to 
think  of  them  too  much.  Let  us  enliven  our  condition  with  the  gaiety  of 
easy  conversation  and  light  wit,  as  we  would  the  chamber  of  sickness.  .  . 
Let  Alceste  be  grumpy  and  awkward.  It  is  in  the  first  place  true,  be- 
cause our  more  valiant  virtues  are  only  the  outbreaks  of  a  temper  out  of 
harmony  with  circumstances  ;  but,  in  addition,  it  will  be  amusing.  His 
mishaps  will  cease  to  make  him  the  martyr  of  justice ;  they  will  only  be 

the  consequences  of  a  cross-grained  character Moliere  is  the  only 

man  who  gives  us  models  without  getting  pedantic,  without  trenching  on 
the  tragic,  without  growing  solemn. 

"This  model  is  the  'respectable  man,' as  the  phrase  was,  Philinte, 
Ariste,  Clitandre,  Eraste ;  there  is  no  other  who  can  at  the  same  time  in- 
struct and  amuse  us.  His  talent  has  reflection  for  its  basis,  but  it  is  culti- 
vated by  the  world.  His  character  has  honesty  for  its  basis,  but  it  is  in 
harmony  with  the  world.  You  may  imitate  him  without  transgressing 
either  reason  or  duty  ;  he  is  neither  a  coxcomb  nor  a  roisterer.  You  can 
imitate  him  without  neglecting  your  interests  or  making  yourself  ridicu- 
lous ;  he  is  neither  an  ignoramus  nor  unmannerly.  He  has  read  and  un- 
derstands the  jargon  of  Trissotin  and  Lycidas,  but  in  order  to  pierce 
them  through  and  through,  to  beat  them  with  their  own  arguments,  to  set 
the  gallery  in  a  roar  at  their  expense.  He  will  discuss  even  morality  and 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  177 

religion,  but  in  a  style  so  natural,  with  proofs  so  clear,  with  warmth  so  genu- 
ine, that  he  interests  women,  and  is  listened  to  by  men  of  the  world.  He 
knows  man,  and  reasons  about  him,  but  in  such  brief  sentences,  such  living 
delineations,  such  pungent  humour,  that  his  philosophy  is  the  best  of  enter- 
tainments. He  is  faithful  to  his  ruined  mistress,  his  calumniated  friend,  but 
gracefully,  without  fuss.  Allhisactions.evennobleones.havean  easy  way 
about  them  which  adorns  them  ;  he  doesnothing  without  pleasantness.  His 
great  talent  is  knowledge  of  the  world ;  he  shows  it  not  only  in  the  trivial 
circumstances  of  every-day  life,  but  in  the  most  passionate  scenes,  the 
most  embarrassing  positions.  A  noble  swordsman  wants  to  take  Philinte, 
the  'respectable  man,'  as  his  second  in  a  duel ;  he  reflects  a  moment,  ex- 
cuses himself  in  a  score  of  phrases,  and,  '  without  playing  the  Hector,' 
leaves  the  bystanders  convinced  that  he  is  no  coward.  Armande  insults 
him,  then  throws  herself  in  his  arms ;  he  politely  averts  the  storm,  de- 
clines the  reconciliation  with  the  most  loyal  frankness,  and  without  employ- 
ing a  single  falsehood,  leaves  the  spectators  convinced  that  he  is  no  boor. 
When  he  loves  Eliante,  who  prefers  Alceste,  and  whom  Alceste  may  pos- 
sibly marry,  he  proposes  to  her  with  a  complete  delicacy  and  dignity, 
without  lowering  himself,  without  recrimination,  without  wronging  himself 
or  his  friend.  When  Oronte  reads  him  a  sortnet,  he  does  not  assume  in 
the  fop  a  nature  which  he  has  not,  but  praises  the  conventional  verses  in 
conventional  language,  and  is  not  so  clumsy  as  to  display  a  poetical  judg- 
ment which  would  be  out  of  place.  He  takes  at  once  his  tone  from  the 
circumstances;  he  perceives  instantly  what  he  must  say  and  what  be  silent 
about,  in  what  degree  and  what  gradations,  what  exact  expedient  will 
reconcile  truth  and  conventional  propriety,  how  far  he  ought  to  go  or 
where  to  take  his  stand,  what  faint  line  separates  decorum  from  flattery, 
truth  from  awkwardness.  On  this  narrow  path  he  proceeds  free  from  em- 
barrassment or  mistakes,  never  put  out  of  his  way  by  the  shocks  or 
changes  of  circumstances,  never  allowing  the  calm  smile  of  politeness  to 
quit  his  lips,  never  omitting  to  receive  with  a  laugh  of  good  humour  the 
nonsense  of  his  neighbour.  This  cleverness,  entirely  French,  reconciles 
in  him  fundamental  honesty  and  worldly  breeding ;  without  it,  he  would 
be  altogether  on  the  one  side  or  the  other.  In  this  way  comedy  finds  its 
hero  half  way  between  the  roue  and  the  preacher.1' 

Thus  far  M.  Taine.  His  definition  of  the  respectable  man  fhonnete 
homme,  does  not,  in  my  opinion,  apply  to  Philinte,  but  is  quite  necessary 
in  the  present  age,  when  honnete  homme  means  no  longer  a  well-born  man 
and  gentleman,  as  well  as  an  honest  man ;  hence  Alceste  says  rightly  to 
Oronte,  in  the  second  scene  of  the  first  act  of  The  Misanthrope,  "  do  not 
....  forfeit  the  reputation  you  enjoy  at  court  of  being  a  man  of  sense 
and  a  gentleman  (honnete  homme},  to  take  from  the  hands  of  a  greedy 
printer  that  of  a  ridiculous  and  wretched  author.''  In  the  beginning  of 
the  seventeenth  century,  a  certain  Mons.  Nicholas  Faret,  first  secretary  of 
the  count  of  Harcourt, — and  who  has  gone  down  to  posterity  as  an  invet- 
erate drinker,  because  his  friend  Saint-Amant  made  his  name  rhyme  with 
cabaret,  a  public  house, — wrote  a  book,  which  was  then  in  everybody's 
hand,  called  L'Honeste  homme  ou  I' Art  de  plaire  d  la  Cour.  This  book, 
a  sort  of  "  Handbook  of  Politeness,"  was  first  published  in  1630,  but 
several  editions  had  been  printed  since  that  time,  and  it  was  still  the 
fashionable  guide-book  of  manners  in  1666.  It  is  probable  that  Moliere 
got  inspired  by  a  description  given  by  Faret  of  V honnete  homme,  when  in 
love,  which  had  been  copied  from  Lucretius,  and  that  our  author  then 
referred  to  the  original  Latin  author,  whose  fourth  canto  of  De  Natura 

VOL.  II.  L 

178  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

Rerum  he  utilizes  for  Eliante's  description  of  the  power  of  self-deception 
in  love,  in  the  fifth  scene  of  the  second  act.  Moliere  has  also  borrowed 
some  lines  from  Lucretius,  for  the  speech  of  the  Master  of  Philosophy  in 
the  sixth  scene  of  the  second  act  of  The  Citizen  who  Apes  the  Gentleman 
(see  Vol.  III.).  But  thence  to  conclude  that  Moliere  had  translated  Lu- 
cretius, which  translation  has  been  lost  to  posterity,  is  going  rather  too  far. 
The  only  biographer  of  Moliere  who  mentions  this  is  Grimarest  (1659- 
1713),  who  is  far  from  trustworthy,  and  who  may  have  supposed  that  a 
whole  translation  of  Lucretius  existed,  when  only  a  few  lines  had  been 
transposed. 

It  has  been  said  that  Moliere,  at  the  time  he  wrote  The  Misanthrope, 
endured  the  pangs  of  jealousy,  and  that  he  was  shamefully  betrayed  by 
his  wife,  but  could  not  resist  loving  her.  It  seems  more  than  likely  that, 
in  Alceste's  admiration  for  the  spoiled  beauty,  Moliere  gave  vent  to  his 
own  feelings  of  mixed  jealousy  and  admiration  of  his  wife,  and  that  our 
author's  attempt  to  depict  the  hero  of  this  play  trying  to  free  himself  from 
the  toils  of  feminine  and  personal  charms,  is  only  heightened  in  intensity 
and  force  by  an  impulse  from  within.  Still,  although  we  admit  that  these 
anecdotes  about  a  great  man  may  sometimes  give  the  complexion  of  the 
times — as,  for  example,  the  story  told  about  Shakespeare  and  Burbage — 
they  are  not  seldom  the  mere  groundless  gossip  of  his  professional  friends 
and  foes,  the  rakings  of  the  tap-rooms  frequented  by  the  hangers-on  of  the 
great  man,  and  even,  now  and  then  the  venomous  utterings  of  the  hero's 
enemies.  This  appears  to  have  been  the  case  with  the  accusations  brought 
against  Moliere's  wife,  which  are  chiefly  based  on  a  libellous  pamphlet, 
published  nominally  at  Frankfort,  but  in  reality  in  Holland,  fifteen  years 
after  our  author's  death,  and  called  :  La  Fameuse  comedienne,  ou  Histoire 
de  la  Guerin,  auparavant femme  et  veuve  de  Moliere,  and  which,  in  my 
opinion,  deserve  not  the  smallest  amount  of  credit.  (See  Vol.  I.,  Intro- 
ductory Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles.')  There  can  be  no  doubt 
that  Moliere  was  jealous.  This  cannot  be  wondered  at,  when  we  find 
that  he  was  about  twenty  years  older  than  his  wife,  who  appears  to  have 
been  rather  a  coquette,  with  a  great  amount  of  levity,  very  fond  of  admira- 
tion, and  nearly  always  moving  about  amidst  a  retinue  of  young  and  ele- 
gant courtiers,  crowding  round  the  favourite  actress  of  the  day  to  pay  her 
homage.  It  is  more  than  probable  that  Moliere  wrote  the  greater  part  of 
The  Misanthrope  during  a  season  of  illness  and  convalescence,  and  there- 
fore the  bitterness  of  his  feelings  must  have  increased  a  hundredfold  when 
he  found  himself  alone  in  his  sick-room,  and  his  youthful  spouse  gadding 
about  with  the  gaudy  and  sprightly  noblemen.  But  this  is  really  all  that 
can  be  said,  with  any  certainty,  against  Moliere's  wife. 

It  has  also  been  stated  that  Moliere  attacked  and  satirized  several 
noblemen  in  The  Misanthrope,  and  took  literary  vengeance  upon  some  of 
the  supposed  admirers  of  his  wife,  such  as  the  Count  de  Guiche,  the  Abbe 
de  Richelieu,  and  the  Duke  de  Lauzun,  whom  he  is  said  to  have  drawn 
in  this  play  ;  as  well  as  the  Count  de  Saint  Gilles  in  Timante  ;  Madame  de 
Longueville,  or  some  other  great  lady — according  to  some  even  Ma- 
dame Moliere — in  Celimene  ;  the  Duke  de  Saint- Aignan,  in  Oronte  ;  Mo- 
liere's friend  Chapelle,  in  Philinte;  Mademoiselle  Debrie  in  feliante. 
Besides  this,  characters  were  found  in  real  life  for  the  prudish  and  slander- 
ing Arsinoe\  the  ridiculous  Cleonte,  the  reasoning  Damon,  the  tiresome 
story-teller  Geralde,  the  poor  silly  woman  Belise,  the  conceited  Adraste, 
the  foolish  Cleon,  the  would-be  witty  Damis,  and  even  "  the  great  hulk- 
ing booby  of  a  viscount."  This,  like  many  other  statements  about  our 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  1/9 

author's  presumed  personal  attacks,  may  be  probable,  but  has  really  never 
been  proved.  There  is  no  doubt  that  personalities  were  then  in  fashion, 
and  that  Moliere  often  used,  and  even  sometimes  abused,  his  powerful 
pen  to  describe,  and  tosatarize,  his  rivals  and  his  enemies.  But  as  Urania 
says  in  The  School  for  Wives  criticised  (See  Vol.  I.,  Scene  7),  "  Let  us 
not  apply  to  ourselves  the  points  of  general  censure ;  let  us  profit  by  the 
lesson,  if  possible,  without  assuming  that  we  are  spoken  against.  All  the 
ridiculous  delineations  which  are  drawn  on  the  stage,  should  be  looked  on 
by  every  one  without  annoyance.  They  are  public  mirrors,  in  which  we 
must  never  pretend  to  see  ourselves.  To  bruit  it  about  that  we  are  of- 
fended at  being  hit,  is  to  state  openly  that  we  are  at  fault." 

Tradition  also  states  that  Moliere  intended  Alceste  as  a  portrait  of  the 
virtuous  Charles  de  Ste.-Maure,  Duke  de  Montausier,  and  that  some  of 
our  author's  enemies  induced  this  nobleman  to  go  and  see  The  Mis- 
anthrope, but  that,  instead  of  being  offended  at  Moliere's  sketch,  he  took 
it  as  a  compliment,  and  said  that  he  should  be  delighted  to  resemble  such 
an  honest  man  as  Alceste. 

An  attempt  has  been  made  to  draw  a  parallel  between  Moliere's  Mis- 
anthrope and  Shakespeare's  Timon  of  Athens.  Though  the  nature  of 
their  subject  may  appear  at  the  first  glance,  similar,  nothing  could  be 
more  opposite  than  these  two  personages.  Timon  becomes  a  misanthrope 
through  sentiment  and  experience,  for  he  has  been  shamefully  abandoned 
by  his  pseudo-friends  when  in  poverty,  and  hence  his  savage  onslaughts 
on  society :  but  Alceste  was  born  splenetic.  The  one  is  continually 
showering  gifts  and  favours  around  him,  even  on  the  most  worthless  ob- 
jects, whilst  the  other  would  only  have  assisted  a  man  if  he  were  thoroughly 
honest  and  respectable.  The  character  of  Apemantus  is,  if  anything, 
much  more  like  Alceste's  than  that  of  the  Athenian  lord  himself.  Shakes- 
peare's work  points  a  moral  at  ingratitude  and  indiscriminate  benevolence 
and  its  rewards :  Moliere's  is  a  satire  against  spleen.  Alceste  is  a  well- 
born, honourable,  and  wealthy  man,  who  rails  against  society,  with  which 
he  is  angry,  through  an  innate  and  exaggerated  sentiment  of  honour ;  and 
although  he  is  nearly  always  right  in  principle  and  theory,  he  is  nearly 
always  wrong  in  practice  and  form.  He  is  unbendingly  strict  in  the  most 
trifling,  as  well  as  in  the  gravest,  matters.  He  is  sincere  and  earnest,  but 
blunt  and  passionate :  and  it  is  through  this  very  passion  that  he  is  be- 
trayed into  an  exaggeration,  and  a  quarrelsomeness  which  render  him 
ridiculous  and  amusing.  His  is  a  sort  of  finnikin  fastidiousness  which  is 
entirely  absent  in  Timon.  In  iact,  Shakespeare  works  with  a  Nasmyth's 
steam  hammer  to  demolish  the  vices,  while  Moliere,  with  due  regard  for 
the  spirit  of  his  age,  and  especially  that  of  the  King,  uses  an  ordinary  mal- 
let, with  which  he  does  nearly  as  much  execution  as  the  Englishman, 
without  exerting  himself  so  powerfully. 

It  is  doubtful  if  Moliere  would  have  been  allowed  the  same  latitude  by 
Louis  XIV.,  as  Shakespeare  was  by  Elizabeth,  who  never  took  the  slight- 
est notice  of  his  attacks  upon  her  father,  Henry  VIII.  It  may  be  safely 
asserted  that  the  Grand  Monarque  was  not  averse  to  hear  serious  reason- 
ing railed  at  and  ridiculed,  but  that  he  would  soon  have  interfered  had  the 
prominent  vices  of  the  court  been  attacked  too  strongly.  Philinte,  the 
worldling,  is  but  a  strong  reproduction  of  Ariste  in  The  School  for  Hus- 
bands, and  of  Chrysalde  in  The  School  for  Wives.  That  he  has  his  re- 
ward at  the  end  of  the  play— if  it  be  a  reward — by  being  made  happy  with 
the  hand  of  Eliante,  while  the  Misanthrope  is  left  out  in  the  cold,  may  be 
taken  as  a  concession  of  Moliere's  to  the  prevailing  feeling  at  the  court, 

l8o  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

which  was  more  likely  to  sympathize  with  Philinte,  their  representative, 
than  to  grieve  over  the  sorrow  of  Alceste,  their  antagonist.  It  must,  how- 
ever, be  admitted  that  the  only  show  of  criticism  which  Moliere  displayed 
against  the  person  of  the  King,  is  to  be  found  in  this  play,  because  our 
author,  in  attacking  the  men  who  filled  public  offices,  reflects  on  the  Mon- 
arch who  appointed  them. 

Metaphysically  considered,  Alceste  is  not  unlike  Hamlet.  Neither  of 
them  is  fit  to  live  in  this  world.  Both  feel  they  are  powerless  in  changing 
the  decrees  of  fate :  but  the  causes  which  have  produced  that  inability 
differ.  In  Alceste,  it  is  a  brusque  candour,  swooping  unexpectedly  down 
upon  meretricious  society ;  but  Hamlet  has  "  that  within  which  passeth 
show,"  "  the  time  is  out  of  joint,"  and  the  will  is  puzzled  by  thinking  of 
"  the  undiscover'd  country,  from  whose  borne  no  traveller  returns." 

The  Misanthrope  has  been  attacked  and  defended  by  so  many  eminent 
men,  that  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  give  a  short  resume  of  some  of  their 
opinions,  and  let  the  reader  himself  draw  his  own  conclusions.  Let  us  be- 
gin with  those  who  attack  him.  First  we  have  the  celebrated  morose 
philosopher,  Jean  Jacques  Rousseau.  If  it  be  true  that  "  a  fellow  feeling 
makes  us  wondrous  kind,"  Rousseau  must  have  felt  some  sympathy  for 
the  tetchy,  irritable,  well-meaning  Alceste.  In  a  letter  to  d'Alembert,  he 
advances  the  following  objections  to  Moliere.s  play  :  "  Alceste  is  a  sin- 
cere, estimable,  honest  man,  and  the  author  makes  him  simply  ridiculous. 
This  alone  would  be  without  excuse.  Moreover,  Alceste  is  not  a  man- 
hater  or  Misanthrope,  as  the  title  of  the  piece  implies,  for  in  that  case  none 
of  the  audience  would  like  to  meet  such  a  man,  as  the  hero  of  the  play, 
for  whom  they  feel,  at  the  bottom  of  their  heart,  a  certain  respect.  The 
virtuous  man  is  made  ridiculous  and  is  opposed  to  Philinte  one  of  those 
honest  and  fashionable  men  whose  maxims  are  very  much  like  those  of  a 
scoundrel ;  one  of  those  gentle  and  even-tempered  optimists  who  are  sat- 
isfied with  everybody  and  everything;  who  never  imagine  anybody  can 
be  hungry,  so  long  as  they  can  sit  down  at  a  well  furnished  table ;  who 
cannot  understand  people  to  be  poor,  because  they  have  money  in  their 
pockets,  and  who,  from  their  well-protected  house,  would  see  the  whole 
of  mankind  robbed,  pillaged,  slaughtered,  and  even  murdered,  without 
being  moved  in  the  least.  Moliere  was  wrong  in  having  sketched  the 
Misanthrope  as  a  man  who  gets  angry  about  trifles ;  Alceste  knows  man- 
kind, and  ought  therefore  not  to  be  astonished  or  enraged  at  anything  they 
can  do,  neither  at  the  treachery  of  a  perfidious  coquette,  nor  at  the  neglect 
of  false  friends ;  hence  Moliere  has  not  well  understood  the  character  of  the 
Misanthrope,  and  has  made  him  ridiculous  in  order  to  please  the  pub- 
lic." 

Fenelon,  in  his  Lettre  sur  I' Eloquence,  also  attacks  Moliere,  because  he 
says  he  "has  a  ...  fault,  which  many  clever  people  forgive  in  him,  but 
which  I  do  not,  namely,  that  he  has  made  vice  graceful,  and  virtue  se- 
verely ridiculous  and  odious.  I  can  understand  that  his  champions  will 
bring  forward  that  he  has  treated  real  honesty  in  an  honourable  manner, 
that  he  has  only  attacked  splenetic  virtue  and  detestable  hypocrisy  :  but, 
without  entering  into  any  long  discussions,  I  maintain  that  Plato,  and  the 
other  legislators  of  Pagan  antiquity,  would  never  have  admitted  in  their 
republics  such  a  play  about  morals." 

Augustus  William  Schlegel,  in  his  Course  of  Lectures  (XXI.)  on  Dra- 
matic Art  and  Literature,  says — "  In  The  Misanthrope  ....  the  action 
which  is  also  poorly  invented,  is  found  to  drag  heavily ;  for,  with  the  ex- 
ception of  a  few  scenes  of  a  more  sprightly  description,  it  consists  alto- 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  l8l 

gather  of  discourses  formally  introduced  and  supported,  while  the  stag- 
nation is  only  partially  concealed  by  the  art  employed  on  the  details  of 
versification  and  expression.  In  a  word,  these  pieces  are  too  didactic,  too 
expressly  instructive ;  whereas,  in  comedy,  the  spectator  should  only  be 
instructed  incidentally,  and,  as  it  were,  without  its  appearing  to  have  been 
intended As  is  well  known  The  Misanthrope  was  at  first  very  cold- 
ly received,  because  it  was  even  less  amusing  than  The  School  for  Wives 
and  The  Blue-Stockings,  the  action  is  less  rapid,  or  rather  there  is  none  at 
all ;  and  there  is  a  great  want  of  coherence  between  the  meagre  incidents 
which  give  only  an  apparent  life  to  the  dramatic  movement, — the  quarrel 
with  Oronte  respecting  the  sonnet,  and  its  adjustment ;  the  decision  of  the 
law-suit,  which  is  ever  being  brought  forward ;  the  unmasking  of  Celi- 
mene, through  the  vanity  of  the  two  Marquises,  and  the  jealousy  of  Ar- 
sinoe.  Besides  all  this,  the  general  plot  is  not  even  probable.  It  is 
framed  with  a  view  to  exhibit  the  thorough  delineation  of  a  character  ; 
but  a  character  discloses  itself  much  more  in  its  relations  with  others  than 
immediately.  How  comes  Alceste  to  have  chosen  Philinte  for  a  friend 
a  man  whose  principles  were  directly  the  reverse  of  his  own  ?  How  comes 
he  also  to  be  enamoured  of  a  coquette,  who  has  nothing  amiable  in  her 
character,  and  who  entertains  us  merely  by  her  scandal  ?  We  might  well 
say  of  this  Celimene,  without  exaggeration,  that  there  is  not  one  good 
point  in  her  whole  composition.  In  a  character  like  that  of  Alceste,  love 
is  not  a  fleeting  sensual  impulse,  but  a  serious  feeling  arising  from  a  want 
of  a  sincere  mental  union.  His  dislike  of  flattery,  falsehood,  and  mali- 
cious scandal,  which  always  characterize  the  conversation  of  Celimene, 
breaks  forth  so  incessantly,  that  we  feel  the  first  moment  he  heard  her 
open  her  lips,  ought  to  have  driven  him  for  ever  from  her  society.  Finally 
the  subject  is  ambiguous,  and  that  is  its  greatest  fault.  The  limits  within 
which  Alceste  is  in  the  right,  and  beyond  which  he  is  in  the  wrong,  it  would 
be  no  easy  matter  to  fix,  and  I  am  afraid  the  poet  himself  did  not  here  see 
very  clearly  what  he  would  be  at.  Philinte,  however,  with  his  illusory 
justification  of  the  way  of  the  world  and  his  phlegmatic  resignation,  he 
paints  throughout  as  the  intelligent  and  amiable  man.  As  against  the 
elegant  Celimene,  Alceste  is  most  decidedly  in  the  right,  and  only  in  the 
wrong  in  the  inconceivable  weakness  of  his  conduct  towards  her.  He  is 
in  the  right  in  his  complaints  of  the  corruption  of  the  social  constitution  ; 
the  facts,  at  least,  which  he  adduces,  are  disputed  by  nobody.  He  is  in 
the  wrong,  however,  in  delivering  his  sentiments  with  so  much  violence, 
and  at  an  unseasonable  time  ;  but  as  he  cannot  prevail  upon  himself  to 
assume  the  dissimulation  which  is  necessary  to  be  well  received  in  the 
world,  he  is  perfectly  in  the  right  in  preferring  solitude  to  society.'1 

The  defenders  of  Moliere's  views  are  numerous.  We  shall  take  the 
oldest  of  his  champions  first,  viz. :  Donneau  de  Vis£,  a  former  enemy, 
who  had  attacked  The  School  for  Wives  in  his  Zelin.de,  but  who  had  seen 
his  mistake,  most  probably  because  a  play  of  his,  La  Mere  Coquette,  had 
been  performed  on  the  5th  of  October  of  the  year  before,  at  the  theatre 
of  the  Palais-Royal.  He  wrote  a  letter  in  defence  of  the  piece,  which 
was  printed  with  the  original  edition,  and  has  always  since  been  published 
with  it.  He  therein  says,  "  Before  we  go  to  the  foundation  of  the  comedy, 
it  is  proper  to  see  what  was  the  author's  aim."  "  That  the  author's  de- 
sign being  to  please,  and  the  comedy  having  pleased,  the  critics  cannot 

say  he  has  done  ill It  was  not  his  intention  to  write  a  comedy  full 

of  incidents,  but  only  a  play  wherein  he  might  speak  against  the  manners 
of  the  age ;"  hence  he  chose  a  Misanthrope  for  his  hero,  whose  "  in- 

l82  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

firmity  sets  off  his  friend's  (Philinte)  wisdom."  He  further  says,  that  the 
choice  of  Celimene,  a  woman  given  to  slander,  and  of  a  man  who  hates 
mankind,  as  mouthpieces  for  railing  at  the  manners  of  the  age,  is  very  in- 
genious ;  for  what  the  hero  may  forget  the  coquette  will  add ;  praises  the 
skilful  opening  of  the  piece,  the  scene  between  Oronte  and  Alceste,  and 
adds,  ''  the  sonnet  is  not  bad  according  to  the  manner  of  writing  now-a- 
days  ;  and  those  who  love  what  we  men  call  points  or  conclusions,  rather 
than  good  sense,  will  certainly  like  it.  Nay,  I  saw  some,  at  the  first  repre- 
sentation of  this  piece,  who  exposed  their  own  character  to  the  ridicule 
of  this  scene,  whilst  it  was  being  acted,  for  they  cried  out  that  the  sonnet 
was  good,  until  the  Misanthrope  had  criticised  it,  and  then  they  were  all 
confounded."  De  Vise  praises  also  the  way  in  which  Moliere  delineates 
the  power  of  love,  as  seen  in  Alceste ;  speaks  highly  of  the  scene  between 
Celimene  and  Arsino£,  and  the  "  vigour  with  which  the  character  of  the 
hero  is  maintained,"  without  being  made  ridiculous;  considers  that  the 
part  of  Philinte  is  reasonable,  and  that  every  one  ought  to  imitate  him, 
and  finishes  thus :  "  In  this  comedy  backbiting  coquettes,  after  the  ex- 
ample of  Celimene,  seeing  that  they  cannot  avoid  encounters  that  will 
make  them  contemptible,  ought  to  learn  not  to  rail  at  their  best  friends 
behind  their  backs.  False  prudes  ought  to  learn,  that  their  grimaces  are 
of  no  use ;  and  that  though  they  were  indeed  as  sage  as  they  would  be 
thought,  they  would  nevertheless  be  blamed  so  long  as  they  set  up  for 
prudes.  I  say  nothing  of  the  Marquises  ;  I  think  them  the  most  incorri- 
gible of  all ;  and  there  are  so  many  things  in  them  still  to  be  found  fault 
with,  that  everybody  owns  they  may  yet  for  a  long  time  afford  matter  for 
ridicule,  though  they  themselves  are  far  from  allowing  this  to  be  true. 

Voltaire,  though  calling  The  Misanthrope  Moliere's  masterpiece,  pre- 
tends that  the  intrigue  hangs  fire  now  and  then  ;  that  the  conversation  is 
sparkling,  but  not  always  necessary  to  the  action  ;  and  finally,  that  the 
ending,  though  well  managed,  leaves  the  spectator  indifferent,  for  he  does 
not  care  whether  the  Misanthrope  marries  the  coquette  or  not. 

Chamfort,  in  the  Eloge  de  Moliere,  says  : — "  If  ever  any  comic  author 
has  proved  that  he  understood  the  system  of  society,  it  is  Moliere  in  The 
Misanthrope.  There,  whilst  showing  its  abuses,  he  teaches  at  what  cost  a 
wise  man  should  obtain  the  advantages  which  it  grants  ;  that,  in  a  system 
of  union  based  upon  mutual  indulgence,  perfect  virtue  is  out  of  place 
amongst  men,  and  torments  itself  without  correcting  them.  It  is  a  gold 
which  needs  alloy  to  become  firm  and  be  of  much  use  to  society ;  but,  at 
the  same  time,  the  author  shows,  by  the  constant  superiority  of  Alceste 
over  all  the  other  personages,  that  virtue,  in  spite  of  the  ridicule  caused 
by  his  austerity,  eclipses  all  that  surrounds  it ;  and  that,  though  gold  has 
been  alloyed,  it  is  yet  the  costliest  of  metals." 

La  Harpe,  in  his  Cours  de  Litterature, — a  work  formerly  too  much 
lauded,  and  at  present  too  much  neglected, — defends  Moliere  against 
Rousseau ;  says  that  the  dramatist  does  not  ridicule  Alceste's  honesty  and 
sincerity,  but  the  excess  of  those  qualities,  and  that  every  exaggeration 
belongs  to  the  domain  of  comedy;  that  whenever  Alceste  attacks  slander, 
nobody  feels  inclined  to  laugh,  but  that  when  he  states  that  he  should  like 
to  lose  his  lawsuit,  for  the  fun  of  the  thing,  everybody  laughs  at  him,  and 
justly  so.  Sincerity  is  a  good  thing,  but  it  does  not  give  a  man  the  right 
to  become  ridiculous  with  impunity ;  hence  Moliere  has  done  rightly  in 
even  attempting  to  teach  honesty  not  to  exceed  the  ordinary  limits  of 
moderation.  Rousseau  himself  admits  that  "  people  feel  at  the  bottom 
of  their  heart  a  certain  respect "  for  Alceste,  though  he  professes  faults, 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  183 

at  which  they  justly  laugh.  The  accusation  that  Moliere  has  not  under- 
stood the  character  of  a  Misanthrope,  because  the  latter  does  not  always 
rage  against  public  vices,  and  feels  the  sting  of  personal  offences,  is  un- 
just, because  man  remains  always  a  man.  The  accusation  that  Moliere 
sacrificed  everything  to  the  necessity  of  making  the  pit  laugh  is  unjust, 
because  he  attacked  only  what  was  laughable,  and,  like  Horace,  said  the 
truth  whilst  laughing.  As  to  Rousseau's  hard  words  against  Philinte, 
whom  he  calls  "  a  scoundrel,1'  "a  gentle  and  even-tempered  optimist," 
he  appears  to  forget  that  scoundrels  are  never  optimists,  but  pessimists 
plausibly  assuming  that  the  world  could  not  be  worse,  and  seemingly  so 
much  the  more  severe  in  morals  and  honesty  as  they  never  attempt  to 
bring  them  into  practice. 

Nisard,  a  well  known  modern  French  literary  critic,  defends  The  Mis- 
anthrope, and  states  that  this  play  cannot  be  analyzed  nor  reproduced 
with  any  chance  of  success ;  that  the  action  takes  place  in  the  drawing- 
room  of  a  heartless  coquette  of  fashion,  vrho  has  many  gallants.  Only 
one  of  them,  Alceste,  really  loves  her.  He  is  not  wrong  in  despising 
men,  but  wrong  in  stating  his  feelings  openly,  when  he  discovers  at  last 
that  he  is  betrayed.  This  is  the  whole  plot  of  the  piece,  and  the  situa- 
tions are  just  as  commonplace,  even  if  they  do  exist.  The  characters 
unfold  themselves.  Alceste  has  a  lawsuit,  but  he  will  not  go  and  visit  his 
judge ;  he  has  a  duel,  because  he  does  not  wish  to  abandon  his  reputation 
as  an  honnete  homme  ;  Celimene  is  a  flirt  and  triumphs  over  the  prude 
Arsinoe',  but  is  punished  by  Alceste.  And  this  is  the  peculiarity  of  The 
Misanthrope.  Every  one  is  punished  by  his  or  her  own  vices  or  faults; 
and  even  Alceste,  though  he  is  too  honest  to  deserve  marrying  a  coquette, 
is  in  perpetual  opposition  during  the  whole  play,  receives  a  great  shock  at 
,the  end,  and  all  this,  because,  although  an  honest  man,  he  thinks  he  is 
the  only  honest  man  in  the  world. 

It  has  often  been  said  that  posterity  is  represented  by  foreigners :  let  us 
listen  for  a  few  minutes  to  English,  German,  and  Swiss  critics  on  this 

Play- 
William  Hazlitt  says,  in  his  Lectures  on  Wit  and  Humour — "With 
respect  to  his  two  most  laboured  comedies,  the  '  Tartuffe'  and  '  Misan- 
thrope,' I  confess  I  find  them  rather  hard  to  get  through.  They  have 
much  of  the  improbability  and  extravagance  of  the  others,  united  with 
the  endless  common-place  prosing  of  French  declamation.  What  cart 
exceed,  for  example,  the  absurdity  of  the  Misanthrope,  who  leaves  his 
mistress  after  every  proof  of  her  attachment  and  constancy,  for  no  other 
reason  than  that  she  will  not  submit  to  the  technical  formality  of  going  to 
live  with  him  in  a  wilderness?  The  characters,  again,  which  Celimene 
gives  of  her  female  friends,  near  the  opening  of  the  play,  are  admirable 
satires  (as  good  as  Pope's  characters  of  women),  but  not  exactly  in  the 
spirit  of  comic  dialogue.1' 

Prescott,  in  his  Biographical  and  Critical  Miscellanies,  has  a  very  good" 
Essay  on  Moliere,  in  which  he  says  :  "  We  are  now  arrived  at  that  period 
of  Moliere's  career  when  he  composed  his  '  Misanthrope'  a  play  which 
some  critics  have  esteemed  his  master-piece,  and  which  all  concur  in  admir- 
ing as  one  of  the  noblest  productions  of  the  modern  drama.  Its  literary 
execution,  too,  of  paramount  importance  in  the  eye  of  a  French  critic,  is 
more  nicely  elaborated  than  any  other  of  the  pieces  of  Moliere,  if  we 
except  the  Tartuffe,  and  its  didactic  dialogue  displays  a  maturity  of 
thought  equal  to  what  is  to  be  found  in  the  best  satires  of  Boileau.  It  is 
the  very  didactic  tone  of  this  comedy,  indeed,  which,  combined  with  its 

184  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

want  of  eager,  animating  interest,  made  it  less  popular  on  its  representa- 
tion than  some  of  his  inferior  pieces."  With  regard  to  Moliere's  sketch- 
ing himself  and  his  wife  in  the  roles  of  Alceste  and  Celimene,  Prescott 
comments  thus  upon  it :  "  The  respective  parts  which  they  performed  in 
this  piece,  corresponds  precisely  with  their  respective  situations  ;  that  of 
Celimene,  a  fascinating  capricious  coquette,  insensible  to  every  remon- 
strance, and  selfishly  bent  on  the  gratification  of  her  own  appetites ;  and 
that  of  Alceste,  perfectly  sensible  of  the  duplicity  of  his  mistress,  whom 
he  vainly  hopes  to  reform,  and  no  less  so  of  the  unworthiness  of  his  own 
passion,  from  which  he  as  vainly  hopes  to  extricate  himself.  The  coinci- 
dences are  too  exact  to  be  wholly  accidental." 

John  Sterling,  in  his  critical  essay  on  Characteristics  of  German  Genius, 
says  :  "The  genius  of  Moliere  rose  above  the  pitch  of  his  contemporaries, 
and  in  spite  of  seeming  destiny,  made  him  a  great  original  painter  of  life, 
and  a  worthy  companion  of  Montaigne  and  Rabelais,  who  had  preluded, 
somewhat  as  Chaucer  among  us,  to  the  glories  of  a  later  age.  His  Mis- 
anthrope is  more  truly  Shakespearean,  more  simply,  deeply  drawn  from  the 
realities  of  the  human  soul,  than  anything  we  have  seen  of  the  professedly 
Shakespearean  school  now  shedding  blood  by  pailfuls  on  the  Parisian  stage. 
This  play,  in  fact,  anticipates  Rousseau,  and  stands  in  a  very  singular 
relation  between  Hamlet  and  Faust ;  and  in  like  manner  Tartuffe  strikes 
the  key-note  of  much  that  distinguishes  Voltaire." 

A  Swiss  literary  critic,  M.  E.  Rambert,  in  his  work  Corneille,  Racine 
et  Moliere,  writes  that,  in  poets  of  the  second  order,  speech  kills  the 
action  :  in  Moliere,  on  the  contrary,  it  serves  and  vivifies  it ;  that  it  is  true 
that  there  is  in  The  Misanthrope  a  moral  question,  but  this  always  hap- 
pens in  lofty  dramatic  poetry  ;  that  no  one  can  analyze  a  fictitious  or  real 
character,  without  stumbling  upon  some  philosophic  or  moral  problem, 
which  ought  to  arise  from  the  character  of  the  hero.  He  further  affirms 
that  Philinte  is  not  created  only  to  give  a  reply,  but  that  he  is  the  model  of 
a  true  friend,  who  bears  all  Alceste's  whims  and  rebuffs.  He  also  prefers 
Alceste  to  Tartuffe,  because  the  first  is  one  of  those  who  possess  all  the 
attributes  of  humanity  ;  says  Alceste  is  superior  to  Shakespeare's  Timon 
— whom  he  calls  "  a  Job  on  his  dunghill,  but  a  Job  full  of  hatred  and 
bile  " — because  Alceste's  hatred  is  akin  to  love,  Timon's  only  humiliation 
and  thirst  for  vengeance ;  believes  that  The  Misanthrope  produces  in  us 
a  poetical  impression,  and  contains  not  a  satire,  but  a  lesson,  which  leaves 
us  in  thought,  but  not  haunted,  as  it  were,  by  one  idea,  which  becomes 
fatiguing.  M.  Rambert  ends  by  stating,  that,  after  the  troubles  of  the 
Fronde,  society  had  become  philosophical,  and  liked  to  speculate  on  ab- 
struse questions  of  morality  ;  hence  the  appearance  of  La  Rochefoucauld's 
JMaxims — of  which  the  first  edition  was  published  in  1665 — and  hence  the 
Misanthrope,  who  gets  angry  at  the  wickedness  of  men,  whilst  the  noble 
moralist  judges  them,  despises  them,  but  remains  cool  all  the  time. 

Goethe,  in  his  Conversations  with  Eckermann  (1825),  says  :  "  MoliSre  is 
so  great,  that  one  is  astonished  anew  every  time  one  reads  him.  He  is  a 
man  by  himself— his  pieces  border  on  tragedy ;  they  are  apprehensive, 
and  no  one  has  the  courage  to  imitate  them."  And  in  1827,  the  great 
German  says  :  "  The  Misanthrope,  which  I  read  over  and  over  again,  as 
one  of  my  most  favourite  pieces,  is  repugnant  to  him  (Schlegel)."  "  It'is 
not  to  be  denied,"  continues  he,  "  that  Schlegel  knows  a  great  deal,  and 
one  is  almost  terrified  at  his  extraordinary  attainments  and  his  extensive 
reading.  But  this  is  not  enough.  All  the  learning  in  the  world  is  still  no 
judgment.  His  criticism  is  completely  one-sided,  because  in  all  theatri- 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  185 

cal  pieces  he  merely  regards  the  skeleton  of  the  plot  and  arrangement, 
and  only  points  out  small  points  of  resemblance  to  great  predecessors, 
without  troubling  himself  in  the  least  as  to  what  the  author  brings  forward 
of  graceful  life  and  the  culture  of  a  high  soul.  But  of  what  use  are  all 
the  arts  of  a  talent  if  we  do  not  find  in  a  theatrical  piece  an  amiable  or  a 
great  personality  of  the  author.  This  alone  influences  the  cultivation  ot 
the  people.'' 

Paul  Lindau,  a  living  German  critic  of  some  celebrity,  and  who  has 
written  a  Life  of  Moliere,  says,  that  "  when  our  author  wrote  this  play,  he 
was  forty-four  years  old ;  his  friend  Racine  had  betrayed  him  ;  his  patro- 
ness, the  Queen-Mother  was  dead  ;  his  enemies  at  Court  had  prevented 
the  representation  of  the  Tartvfe  ;  his  youthful  wife  gave  him  reason  to 
be  jealous  ;  he  had  been  ill  for  two  months ;  and  yet,  in  spite  of  all  that, 
he  wrote  The  Misanthrope.''  In  this  play,  he  attacks  the  court,  its  hol- 
lowness,  its  empty  glitter  and  heads  ;  for  in  spite  of  his  admiration  for 
Louis  XIV.,  Moliere  did  not  spare  the  courtiers.  Amidst  the  splendour 
of  Versailles,  its  triumphant  paeans,  its  sparkling  fountains,  shaded  walks 
and  rustling  trees,  where  puppets,  in  velvet  and  silk,  jump  about  and 
dance  and  sing,  and  think  not  of  the  morrow,  our  Moralist  appears  and 
asks  himself — How  are  all  these  enjoyments  obtained  ?  And  the  answer 
is :  "  By  lies  and  hypocrisy."  The  philosopher  looks  underneath  the 
masks  and  the  paint,  and  beholds  the  spectre  of  misery.  He  warns  men 
to  become  sincere,  honest,  and  true,  for  the  earth  trembles  under  their 
feet,  the  foundations  of  society  are  undermined  by  the  worm  of  falsehood, 
thunder  rolls  in  the  distance  and  will  break  out  a  hundred  years  later. 
Alceste  is  the  precursor  of  a  threatening  social  revolution  ;  these  feelings 
have  unconsciously  moved  him  to  speak ;  hence  his  dislike  and  hatred  for 
lies  and  liars,  and,  "  as  all  men  are  liars,"  the  cause  of  his  being  a  Misan- 
thrope. 

In  the  preface  to  this  translation  (Vol.  I.,)  I  have  stated  that  Philinte 
"pourtrays  quiet  common  sense,  amiability,  intelligence,  instruction, 
knowledge  of  the  world,  and  a  spirit  of  refined  criticism."  He  possesses 
rather  too  much  of  all  these  qualities,  which  thus  become  faults.  I  ima- 
gine that  Moliere  clearly  indicates  that  Philinte  has  a  far  greater  contempt 
for  men  than  Alceste.  The  latter  is  very  loud  in  all  his  denunciations 
against  wickedness  ;  his  passion  for  sincerity  often  carries  him  to  ridicu- 
lous extremes,  but  amidst  all  his  vapouring,  we  feel  that  he  is  angry  with 
rampant  falsehood  and  deceit,  but  not  that  he  hates  his  fellow-creatures  : 
in  fact,  his  very  rage  proves  the  contrary.  Philinte  has  over  much  "quiet 
common  sense  ;'  he  "  treats  the  man  of  worth  and  the  fop  alike ;"  he  has 
too  much  "  amiability,"  for  he  pays  compliments  to  old  Emilia,  to  Dori- 
las,  to  Oronte  about  his  sonnet ;  he  shows  his  "spirit  of  refined  criticism  " 
by  stating  that  "  whatever  he  may  discover,  at  any  moment,  people  do  not 
see  him  in  a  rage  ,  .  .  that  he  takes  men  quietly  just  as  they  are  ;"  "  that 
his  mind  is  not  more  shocked  at  seeing  a  man  a  rogue,  unjust,  or  selfish, 
than  at  seeing  vultures  eager  for  prey,  mischievous  apes,  or  fury-lashed 
wolves."  When  he  hears  Alceste  thundering  against  Celimene,  Acaste 
and  Clitandre  slandering  their  acquaintances,  he  proves  his  "  knowledge 
of  the  world  "  by  coolly  asking  his  friend  why  he  takes  such  a  great  in- 
terest in  those  people.  He  never  blames  nor  admires  anything,  except 
with  some  feeble  adjectives.  When  Eliante  states  that  she  esteems  Al- 
ceste, he  only  expresses  his  astonishment  at  seeing  him  in  love.  When 
his  friend's  heart  is  torn  by  jealousy,  he  can  say  nothing  warmer  than 
that  "  a  letter  may  sometimes  deceive  by  appearances,  and  not  be  as 

1 86  THE  MISANTHROPE. 

guilty  as  you  think."  His  "intelligence"  is  as  characteristic  as  all  his 
other  qualities ;  he  first  tells  his  friend  that  the  sincere  Eliante  has  some 
inclination  for  him,  and  then,  when  Eliante  informs  Philinte  that  she 
might  be  induced  to  receive  Alceste's  addresses,  he  coolly  informs  her 
that  in  case  his  friend  does  not  answer  her  love,  he  would  only  be  too 
happy  to  have  her  affection  transferred  to  himself.  When  in  the  last 
scene  Eliante  offers  him  her  hand,  he  seems  to  get  excited,  and  ex- 
claims that  he  "could  sacrifice  my  (his)  life  and  soul  for  it;"  but  the 
lukewarmness  he  has  displayed  in  his  courtship,  during  the  whole  play, 
proves  his  excitement  to  be  abnormal.  It  is  true  that  he  bears  with 
the  rebuffs  of  Alceste,  but  this  is  not  out  of  friendship,  but  simply  because 
he  is  too  amiable ;  hence  it  would  be  too  much  trouble  to  argue.  He 
has  no  warm  blood  coursing  through  his  veins.  I  said  just  now  that 
Philinte  had  a  far  greater  contempt  for  men  than  Alceste.  I  do  not  mean 
that  he  shows  this  contempt  openly.  But  the  man  to  whom  good  or  evil 
is  theoretically  alike,  to  whom  all  men  are  the  same,  and  who  is  the  same 
to  all  men,  is  the  greatest  Misanthrope  that  ever  existed,  for  he  is  above 
or  below  humanity.  It  is  not  necessary  that  Philinte  should  have  acted 
up  to  his  principles  ;  his  very  contempt  for  men  forbids  such  a  thing  as 
action.  What  would  be  the  good  of  it?  His  feebly  beating  heart  cannot 
contain  such  a  feeling  as  healthy  hatred  or  even  love.  I  imagine  that  he 
must  have  uttered  his  speeches  with  an  affected  drawl,  as  painful  for  him 
to  produce  as  for  his  audience  to  listen  to.  He  is  the  real  prototype  of 
the  nil  admirari  school ;  he  is  no  "  scoundrel,"  as  Rousseau  says,  for  he 
has  no  passions,  good  or  evil :  he  does  not  play  the  fool,  for  it  requires 
not  an  intelligent,  but  a  wise  man,  to  play  the  fool ;  he  is  the  chief  of  the 
pococuranti,  who  pursue  the  even  tenor  of  their  ways,  without  being 
moved  or  stirred  by  anything,  who  are  too  critically  refined  ever  to  do  an 
evil  deed  or  to  admire  a  noble  action  ;  the  worthy  ancestor  of  those  petits 
creves,  who  strut  languidly  through  life  with  their  dainty  dress  and  man- 
ners, with  their  eternal  grin,  their  want  of  heart  and  patriotism,  and  their 
never  varying  answer,  pas  si  bete. 

In  the  third  volume  of  the  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,  London, 
1732,  The  Misanthrope  is  dedicated  to  the  Duke  of  Montagu,  under 
the  name  of  The  Man-Hater  in  the  following  words  : — 

The  Misanthrope  of  MOLIERE  in  French  and  English,  assumes  the  honour  of 
appearing  in  the  World  under  your  GRACE'S  Patronage.  The  Translator  doubts 
not  but  Your  GRACE  will  be  the  first  to  forgive  what  has  the  Face  of  monstrous  Im- 
priety,  his  dedicating  the  Man-hater  to  the  most  humane  Man  in  England. 

Your  GRACE  very  well  knows  that  this  Play  has  always  bore  the  Character, 
amongst  Men  of  Taste  and  Judgment,  of  being  the  most  finished  Piece  of  this 
Author,  in  which  are  united  the  utmost  Efforts  of  Genius  and  Art. 

The  Subject,  MY  LORD,  is  single,  and  the  Unities  exactly  observ'd.  The  princi- 
pal Character  is  strong,  and  distinguish'd  with  the  boldest  Strokes  of  a  masterly 
Pencil ;  'tis  well  preserv'd,  and  throughout  intirely  uniform.  The  under  Charac- 
ters are  equally  well  drawn,  and  admirably  chose  to  cast  each  their  proper  De- 
gree of  Light  upon  the  Chief  Figure  :  The  Scenes  and  Incidents  are  so  contriv'd 
and  conducted  as  to  diversify  the  main  Character,  and  set  it  in  all  the  different 
Points  of  Light  one  can  wish  to  see  it  in.  The  Sentiments  are  not  only  proper,  but 
strong  and  nervous,  and  the  whole  Piece  so  fraught  with  good  Sense,  that  twere 
hard  to  find  an  indifferent  Line  in  it.  So  just  is  the  Observation  of  Rapin,  that  the 
Misanthrope  is  the  most  finish'd,  and  withal  the  most  singular  Character  that  ever 
appear' d  on  the  Stage. 

Not  but  that  the  Title  of  Man-Hater,  MY  LORD,  has  been  famous  in  the  World 
for  many  Centuries,  and  is  as  well  known  as  the  Name  of  Timon  of  Athens  ;  with- 
out any  Impeachment  of  what  the  French  Critic  has  said  of  the  singularity  of  our 
Misantfirope  ;  tor  the  Character  of  the  antient  Man-Hater  had  little  uncommon  in 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  187 

it,  it  took  its  Rise  merely  from  personal  Ill-usage  and  Disappointment,  and  was 
no  more  Strange  than  that  one  who  suffers  by  Excess  of  Good-nature  and  Credulity, 
shou'd  run  into  the  other  Extreme  of  being  excessively  revengeful  and  suspicious. 

Whereas  MOLIBRB'S  Man-Hater  owes  his  Character  to  an  over-rigid  Virtue, 
which  cou'd  give  no  Quarter  to  the  Vices  of  Mankind  ;  to  a  Sincerity,  particularly, 
which  disdain'd  that  undistinguishing  Complaisance,  those  surfeiting  expressions 
of  Kindness  to  all  in  common,  which  leave  Men  no  Language  to  express  Approba- 
tion and  Friendship  to  the  wise  and  virtuous,  but  what  is  prostituted  to  flatter 
Fools  and  Knaves  :  so  that  Alcestes  hates  men  not  to  injure,  but  to  avoid  them. 

It  must  at  the  same  time,  be  confess'd,  MY  LORD,  that  MOLIERE  drew  not  this 
Character  for  Imitation.  Had  he  done  so,  he  wou'dmade  him  only  a  good-natured, 
brave,  and  generous  Plain-dealer,  not  a  Man-Hater  ;  as  far  from  the  Churlishness 
of  Alcestes  as  from  the  Over-civility  of  Philintes.  He  wou'd  have  drawn  him  se- 
vere, but  not  Cynical ;  an  Enemy  to  Men's  Vices  but  not  to  their  Persons  ;  inflexi- 
bly virtuous,  but  not  ill-natur'd  ;  reserved,  yet  not  unsociable  ;  sincere  with  good 
Manners.  In  short,  he  wou'd  have  made  him  a  MONTAGU.  The  character  had 
then  been  unexceptionable — I  am,  My  LORD,  Your  GRACE'S  most  Faithful,  most 
Obedient  Humble  Servant,  THE  TRANSLATOR. 

An  author  of  the  end  of  last  century,  Fabre  d'  Eglantine,  who  devoted 
his  time  partly  to  politics  and  partly  to  literature,  wrote  a  play,  The 
Philinte  of  Moliere,  in  which  he  made  of  Philinte  an  odious  and  miser- 
able egotist,  and  of  Alceste  an  exagerated  philanthropist.  Geoffrey,  a 
celebrated  French  critic,  said  that  The  Philinte  compared  to  The  Mis- 
anthrope, was  like  anarchy  in  comparison  with  a  good  government. 
Several  other  Misanthropes  have  also  been  attempted  on  the  French 
stage.  Br^court  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Ver- 
sailles, Vol.  I.,)  wrote  a  comedy  in  one  act,  called  Timon,  first  performed 
on  the  lath  of  August,  1684 ;  and  Delisle  wrote  a  three-act  play,  called 
Timon  the  Misanthrope,  first  brought  out  on  the  2d  of  January,  1782, 
and  in  which  an  ass  is  changed  into  harlequin,  and  gives  lessons  of  kindness 
and  wisdom  to  his  former  master  Timon. 

In  English,  part  of  The  Misanthrope  has  been  borrowed  by  Wycherley 
for  The  Plain  Dealer,  of  which  Manley  and  Olivia  are  decided  imitations 
of  Alceste  and  Celimene,  and  in  which  one  scene  is  imitated  from  The 
School  for  Wives  criticised  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  School  for 
Wives  criticised,  Vol.  I.).  Baker,  in  his  ''  Biographia  Dramatica,"  most 
amusingly  says : — "  The  Misanthrope  (of  Moliere),  and  other  things, 
seem  to  have  been  in  Wycherley's  mind  when  he  traced  his  characters  ; 
but  when  subjects  are  so  well  handled,  it  is  but  mean  cavilling  to  say  so 
much  about  it,  and  in  revenge,  if  he  had  recourse  to  French  writers, 
English  writers  have  had  recourse  to  him."  M.  Taine  has  another  opin- 
ion of  Wycherley  and  his  play,  and  I  entirely  agree  with  him.  He  says 
in  the  History  of  English  Literature  : — "  If  he  (Wycherley)  translates 
the  part  of  Moliere,  he  wipes  out  at  one  stroke  the  manners  of  a  great 
lady,  the  woman's  delicacy,  the  tact  of  the  lady  of  the  house,  the  polite- 
ness, the  refined  air,  the  superiority  of  wit  and  knowledge  of  the  world, 
in  order  to  substitute  for  them  the  impudence  and  deceit  of  a  foul- 
mouthed  courtezan.  .  .  A  certain  gift  hovers  over  all — namely,  vigour.  .  . 
He  is  a  realist,  not  on  set  purpose,  as  the  realist  of  our  day,  but  naturally. 

.  .  .  Our  modern  nerves  could  not  endure  the  portrait  Olivia  draws  of 
Manley.  .  .  The  woman's  independence  is  like  a  professed  courtezan's. 

.  .  .  Manley  is  copied  after  Alceste  .  .  .  and  is  not  a  courtier  but  a  ship- 
captain,  with  the  bearing  of  the  sailor  of  the  time,  his  cloak  stained  with 
tar,  and  smelling  of  brandy,  ready  with  blows  or  foul  oaths,  calling  those 
he  came  across  dogs  and  slaves,  and  when  they  displeased  him,  kicking 
them  down  stairs  .  .  .  Wycherley  took  to  himself  in  his  dedication  the 

188  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

title  of  his  hero,  Plain  Dealer  ;  he  fancied  he  had  drawn  the  portrait  of 
a  frank,  honest  man  ...  he  had  only  given  .  .  .  the  model  of  an  unre- 
served and  energetic  brute." 

Sir  Walter  Scott,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Drama,  says, — "  The  Plain  Dealer 
is,  indeed,  imitated  from  Moliere ;  but  the  principal  character  has  more 
the  force  of  a  real  portrait,  and  is  better  contrasted  with  the  perverse, 
bustling,  masculine,  petty  fogging,  and  litigious  character  of  Widow 
Blackacre,  than  Alceste  is  with  any  character  of  The  Misanthrope" 

The  late  Lord  Macaulay,  in  his  Essay  on  the  Comic  Dramatists  of  the 
Restoration,  uses  the  following  words  about  Wycherley's  Plain  Dealer ; 
— "  Moliere  exhibited  in  his  Misanthrope  a  pure  and  noble  mind,  which 
had  been  sorely  vexed  by  the  sight  of  perfidy  and  malevolence,  disguised 
under  forms  of  politeness.  As  every  extreme  naturally  generates  its  con- 
trary, Alceste  adopts  a  standard  of  good  and  evil  directly  opposed  to  that 
of  the  society  which  surrounds  him.  Courtesy,  seems  to  him  a  vice ;  and 
those  stern  virtues  which  are  neglected  by  the  fops  and  coquettes  of  Paris 
become  too  exclusively  the  objects  of  his  veneration.  He  is  often  to 
blame ;  he  is  often  ridiculous ;  but  he  is  always  a  good  man ;  and  th£ 
feeling  which  he  inspires  is  regret  that  a  person  so  estimable  should  be  so 
unamiable.  Wycherley  borrowed  Alceste,  and  turned  him — we  quote  the 
words  of  so  lenient  a  critic  as  Mr.  Leigh  Hunt — into  '  a  ferocious  sensual- 
ist, who  believed  himself  as  great  a  rascal  as  he  thought  everybody  else.' 
The  surliness  of  Moliere 's  hero  •  is  copied  and  caricatured.  But  the 
most  nauseous  libertinism  and  the  most  dastardly  fraud  are  substituted 
for  the  purity  and  integrity  of  the  original.  And,  to  make  the  whole  com- 
plete, Wycherley  does  not  seem  to  have  been  aware  that  he  was  not  draw- 
ing the  portrait  of  an  eminently  honest  man.  So  depraved  was  his  moral 
taste,  that,  while  he  firmly  believed  that  he  was  producing  a  picture  of 
virtue  too  exalted  for  the  commerce  of  the  world,  he  was  really  delineating 
the  greatest  rascal  that  is  to  be  found,  even  in  his  own  writings." 

Voltaire  has  imitated  The  Plain  Dealer  in  a  five-act  comedy  in  verse, 
called  La  Prude,  and  represented  for  the  first  time  in  the  private  theatre 
of  the  Duchess  of  Maine,  at  Anet.  It  is  one  of  the  funniest,  and,  for  the 
student,  one  of  the  most  interesting  imitations  I  have  ever  read ;  and  the 
attempt  of  Voltaire  to  hide  the  coarseness  of  Manley  and  Olivia  under  an 
elegant  French  dress,  and  to  make  them  fit  to  be  represented  before  the 
rather  finical,  although  witty,  company  at  Anet,  is  highly  entertaining. 
This  is  the  moral  of  the  piece  after  Dorfise  (Olivia)  is  found  out:  "Cua 
Pourra  d' abord  faire  jaser  ;  mats  tout  s'appaise,  et  tout  doit  s'appaiser." 

Sheridan  has  also  borrowed  some  scenes  from  The  Misanthrope  for  The 
School  for  Scandal,  a  comedy  of  which  M.  Taine,  in  his  work  already 
mentioned,  says, — "Sheridan  took  two  characters  from  Fielding,  Blifil  and 
Tom  Jones ;  two  plays  of  Moliere,  Le  Misanthrope  and  Tartvffe ;  and 
from  these  puissant  materials,  condensed  with  admirable  cleverness,  he  has 
constructed  the  most  brilliant  firework  imaginable.  Moliere  has  only  one 
female  slanderer,  Celimene ;  the  other  characters  serve  only  to  give  her  a 
cue :  there  is  quite  enough  of  such  a  jeering  woman ;  she  rails  on  within 
certain  bounds,  without  hurry,  like  a  true  queen  of  the  drawing-room,  who 
has  time  to  converse,  who  knows  that  she  is  listened  to,  who  listens  to  herself  ; 
she  is  a  woman  of  society,  who  preserves  the  tone  of  refined  conversation  ; 
and  in  order  to  smooth  down  the  harshness,  her  slanders  are  interrupted 
by  the  calm  reason  and  sensible  discourse  of  the  amiable  Eliante.  Moliere 
represents  the  malice  of  the  world  without  exaggeration ;  but  in  Sheridan 
they  are  rather  caricatured  than  depicited. 

THE   MISANTHROPE.  189 

The  sixth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  Congreve's  The  Way  of  the 
World,  performed  at  the  theatre,  Lincoln's-Inn-Fields,  in  1700,  has  also 
been  partly  inspired  by  the  fifth  scene  of  the  second  act  of  Moliere's  play. 
Congreve  seems  to  have  liked  Moliere's  Misanthrope,  for  he  imitated  the 
same  scenes  of  the  same  play  in  Love  for  Love  (Act  i.p  scenes  9-15).  (See 
Introductory  Notice  to  Don  Juan).  The  characters  there  are  called  Val- 
entine, Scandal,  Tattle,  and  Mrs.  Frail,  and  are  certainly  not  copied,  but 
based  upon  those  of  Moliere. 

Th.  Shadwell,  in  The  Sullen  Lovers  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The 
Bores,  Vol.  I.),  has  likewise  imitated  the  first  scene  of  the  first  act  of  The 
Misanthrope. 

In  Baker's  Biographia  Dramatica,  it  is  stated  that  a  certain  Mr.  John 
Huges  translated  The  Misanthrope  from  Voltaire— Moliere  is  evidently 
meant ;  and  that  this  translation  .  .  .  .  "  was  afterwards  reprinted  with 
Moliere's  other  plays  translated  by  Ozell,  without  any  notice  by  whom  it 
was  Englished. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

ALCESTE,  in  love  with  Celimene* 
PHILINTE,  his  friend. 
ORONTE,  in  love  with  Celimene. 
CELIMENE,  beloved  by  Alceste. 
ELIANTE,  her  cousin. 
ARSINOE,  Celimene1  s  friend. 

ACASTE,         \ 

>  marquises. 
CLITANDRE,  J 

BASQUE,  servant  to  Ceftmene. 

DUBOIS,  servant  to  Alceste. 

AN  OFFICER  OF  THE  MARECHAUSSEE.* 

Scene. — AT  PARIS,  IN  CELIMENE' s  HOUSE. 

1  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.  In  the  inventory  taken 
after  Moliere's  death,  and  given  by  M.  E.  Souli£  in  the  Recherchei  sur 
Moliere,  we  find  the  dress  for  the  representation  of  The  Misanthrope,  con- 
sisting of  breeches  and  jacket  of  a  gold-coloured  and  grey  striped  brocade, 
lined  with  tabby,  ornamented  with  green  ribbands ;  the  waistcoat  of  gold 
brocade,  silk  stockings  and  gaiters. 

8  The  marichaussee  was  a  kind  of  mounted  police,  doing  formerly  the 
same  duty  as  the  gendarmerie  does  now.  It  was  commanded  by  a.prev!X- 
gineral,  under  the  orders  of  the  marshals  of  France. 

THE   MISANTHROPE. 

(LE  MISANTHROPE). 

ACT   I. 

SCENE  I. — PHILINTE,  ALCESTE. 

PHIL.  What  is  the  matter  ?     What  ails  you  ? 

ALC.   (Seated).    Leave  me,  I  pray. 

PHIL.  But,  once  more,  tell  me  what  strange  whim  .  .  . 

ALC.  Leave  me,  I  tell  you,  and  get  out  of  my  sight. 

PHIL.  But  you  might  at  least  listen  to  people,  without 
getting  angry. 

ALC.  I  choose  to  get  angry,  and  I  do  not  choose  to 
listen. 

PHIL.  I  do  not  understand  you  in  these  abrupt  moods, 
and  although  we  are  friends,  I  am  the  first  .  .  . 

ALC.  (Rising  quickly).  I,  your  friend  ?  Lay  not  that 
flattering  unction  to  your  soul.  I  have  until  now  professed 
to  be  so ;  but  after  what  I  have  just  seen  of  you,  I  tell 
you  candidly  that  I  am  such  no  longer  ;  I  have  no  wish 
to  occupy  a  place  in  a  corrupt  heart. 

PHIL.  I  am  then  very  much  to  be  blamed  from  your 
point  of  view,  Alceste? 

ALC.  To  be  blamed  ?  You  ought  to  die  from  very 
shame;  there  is  no  excuse  for  such  behaviour,  and  every 
man  of  honour  must  be  disgusted  at  it.  I  see  you  almost 
stifle  a  man  with  caresses,  show  him  the  most  ardent  affec- 
tion, and  overwhelm  him  with  protestations,  offers,  and 

VOL.    II.  N  IQ3 

194  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  I. 

vows  of  friendship.  Your  ebullitions  of  tenderness  know 
no  bounds ;  and  when  I  ask  you  who  that  man  is,  you  can 
scarcely  tell  me  his  name  ;  your  feelings  for  him,  the  mo- 
ment you  have  turned  your  back,  suddenly  cool ;  you 
speak  of  him  most  indifferently  to  me.  Zounds  !  I  call  it 
unworthy,  base,  and  infamous,  so  far  to  demean  one's 
self  as  to  act  contrary  to  one's  own  feelings,  and  if,  un- 
fortunately, I  had  done  such  a  thing,  I  should  go  that 
very  instant,  and  hang  myself  out  of  sheer  A  'exation. 

PHIL.  I  do  not  see  that  it  is  a  hanging  matter  at  all ; 
and  I  beg  of  you  not  to  think  it  amiss  if  I  ask  you  to  show 
me  some  mercy,  for  I  shall  not  hang  myself,  if  it  be  all 
the  same  to  you. 

ALC.   That  is  a  sorry  joke. 

PHIL.  But,  seriously,  what  would  you  have  people  do  ? 

ALC.  I  would  have  people  be  sincere,  and  that,  like 
men  of  honour,  no  word  be  spoken  that  comes  not  from 
the  heart. 

PHIL.  When  a  man  comes  and  embraces  you  warmly, 
you  must  pay  him  back  in  his  own  coin,  respond  as  best 
you  can  to  his  show  of  feeling,  and  return  offer  for  offer, 
and  vow  for  vow. 

ALC.  Not  so.  I  cannot  bear  so  base  a  method,  which 
your  fashionable  people  generally  affect ;  there  is  nothing 
I  detest  so  much  as  the  contortions  of  these  great  time- 
and-lip  servers,  these  affable  dispensers  of  meaningless 
embraces,  these  obliging  utterers  of  empty  words,  who  vie 
with  every  one  in  civilities,  and  treat  the  man  of  worth 
and  the  fop  alike.  What  good  does  it  do  if  a  man  heaps 
endearments  on  you,  vows  that  he  is  your  friend,  that  he 
believes  in  you,  is  full  of  zeal  for  you,  esteems  and  loves 
you,  and  lauds  you  to  the  skies,  when  he  rushes  to  do  the 
same  to  the  first  rapscallion  he  meets  ?  No,  no,  no  heart 
with  the  least  self-respect  cares  for  esteem  so  prostituted ; 
ihe  will  hardly  relish  it,  even  when  openly  expressed, 
when  he  find?  that  he  shares  it  with  the  whole  universe. 
Preference  must  be  based  on  esteem,  and  to  esteem  every 
one  is  to  esteem  no  one.  As  you  abandon  yourself  to  the 
"vices  of  the  times,  zounds  !  you  are  not  the  man  for  me. 
I  decline  this  over-complaisant  kindness,  which  uses  no 
discrimination.  I  like  to  be  distinguished  ;  and,  to  cut 

SCKNEI.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  195 

the  matter  short,  the  friend  of  all  mankind  is  no  friend  of 
mine. 

PHIL.  But  when  we  are  of  the  world,  we  must  conform 
to  the  outward  civilities  which  custom  demands. 

ALC.  I  deny  it.  We  ought  to  punish  pitilessly  that 
shameful  pretence  of  friendly  intercourse.  I  like  a  man 
to  be  a  man,  and  to  show  on  all  occasions  the  bottom 
of  his  heart  in  his  discourse.  Let  that  be  the  thing  to 
speak,  and  never  let  our  feelings  be  hidden  beneath  vain 
compliments. 

PHIL.  There  are  many  cases  in  which  plain  speaking 
would  become  ridiculous,  and  could  hardly  be  tolerated. 
And,  with  all  due  allowance  for  your  unbending  honesty, 
it  is  as  well  to  conceal  your  feelings  sometimes.  Would 
it  be  right  or  decent  to  tell  thousands  of  people  what  we 
think  of  them  ?  And  when  we  meet  with  some  one  whom 
we  hate  or  who  displeases  us,  must  we  tell  him  so  openly? 

ALC.  Yes. 

PHIL.  What!  Would  you  tell  old  Emilia,  that  it  ill 
becomes  her  to  set  up  for  a  beauty  at  her  age,  and  that 
the  paint  she  uses  disgusts  everyone  ? 

ALC.  Undoubtedly. 

PHIL.  Or  Dorilas,  that  he  is  a  bore,  and  that  there  is 
no  one  at  court  who  is  not  sick  of  hearing  him  boast  of 
his  courage,  and  the  lustre  of  his  house  ? 

ALC.  Decidedly  so. 

PHIL.  You  are  jesting. 

ALC.  I  am  not  jesting  at  all ;  and  I  would  not  spare  any 
one  in  that  respect.  It  offends  my  eyes  too  much ;  and 
whether  at  Court  or  in  town,  I  behold  nothing  but  what 
provokes  my  spleen. '  I  become  quite  melancholy  and 
deeply  grieved  to  see  men  behave  to  each  other  as  they 
do.  Everywhere  I  find  nothing  but  base  flattery,  injus- 
tice, self-interest,  deceit,  roguery.  I  cannot  bear  it  any 
longer ;  I  am  furious ;  and  my  intention  is  to  break  with 
all  mankind. 

PHIL.  This  philosophical  spleen  is  somewhat  too  savage. 
I  cannot  but  laugh  to  see  you  in  these  gloomy  fits,  and 
fancy  that  I  perceive  in  us  two,  brought  up  together, 
the  two  brothers  described  in  The  School  for  Husbands, 
who  . 

196  THE  MISANTHROPE.  [ACTI. 

ALC.   Good  Heavens  !  drop  your  insipid  comparisons. 

PHIL.  Nay,  seriously,  leave  off  these  vagaries.  The 
world  will  not  alter  for  all  your  meddling.  And  as  plain 
speaking  has  such  charms  for  you,  I  shall  tell  yo"u  frankly 
that  this  complaint  of  yours  is  as  good  as  a  play,  wherever 
you  go,  and  that  all  those  invectives  against  the  manners 
of  the  age,  make  you  a  laughing-stock  to  many  people. 

ALC.  So  much  the  better,  Zounds  !  so  much  the  better. 
That  is  just  what  I  want.  It  is  a  very  good  sign,  and  I 
rejoice  at  it.  All  men  are  so  odious  to  me,  that  I  should 
be  sorry  to  appear  rational  in  their  eyes. 

PHIL.  But  do  you  wish  harm  to  all  mankind  ? 

ALC.  Yes;  I  have  conceived  a  terrible  hatred  for 
them. 

PHIL.  Shall  all  poor  mortals,  without  exception,  be  in- 
cluded in  this  aversion  ?  There  are  some,  even  in  the  age 
in  which  we  live  .  .  . 

ALC.  No,  they  are  all  alike  ;  and  I  hate  all  men :  some, 
because  they  are  wicked  and  mischievous ;  others  because 
they  lend  themselves  to  the  wicked,  and  have  not  that 
healthy  contempt  with  which  vice  ought  to  inspire  all 
virtuous  minds.  You  can  see  how  unjustly  and  excessively 
complacent  people  are  to  that  bare-faced  scoundrel  with 
whom  I  am  at  law.  You  may  plainly  perceive  the  traitor 
through  his  mask;  he  is  well  known  everywhere  in  his 
true  colours ;  his  rolling  eyes  and  his  honeyed  tones  im- 
pose only  on  those  who  do  not  know  him.  People  are 
aware  that  this  low-bred  fellow,  who  deserves  to  be  pillo- 
ried, has,  by  the  dirtiest  jobs,  macfe  his  way  in  the  world ; 
and  that  the  splendid  position  he  has  acquired  makes  merit 
repine  and  virtue  blush.  Yet  whatever  dishonourable 
epithets  may  be  launched  against  him  everywhere,  nobody 
defends  his  wretched  honour.  Call  him  a  rogue,  an  in- 
famous wretch,  a  confounded  scoundrel  if  you  like,  all 
the  world  will  say  "yea,"  and  no  one  contradicts  you. 
But  for  all  that,  his  bowing  and  scraping  are  welcome 
everywhere ;  he  is  received,  smiled  upon,  and  wriggles 
himself  into  all  kinds  of  society;  and,  if  any  appoint- 
ment is  to  be  secured  by  intriguing,  he  will  carry  the 
day  over  a  man  of  the  greatest  worth.  Zounds  !  these 
are  mortal  stabs  to  me,  to  see  vice  parleyed  with ;  and 

SCENE  i.j  THE   MISANTHROPE.  iqj 

sometimes  I  feel  suddenly  inclined  to  fly  into  a  wilderness 
far  from  the  approach  of  men. 

PHIL.  Great  Heaven  ?  let  us  torment  ourselves  a  little 
less  about  the  vices  of  our  age,  and  be  a  little  more  leni- 
ent to  human  nature.  Let  us  not  scrutinize  it  with  the 
utmost  severity,  but  look  with  some  indulgence  at  its  fail- 
ings. In  society,  we  need  virtue  to  be  more  pliable.  If 
we  are  too  wise,  we  may  be  equally  to  blame.  Good  sense 
avoids  all  extremes,  and  requires  us  to  be  soberly  rational.* 
This  unbending  and  virtuous  stiffness  of  ancient  times 
shocks  too  much  the  ordinary  customs  of  our  own  ;  it  re- 
quires too  great  perfection  from  us  mortals  ;  we  must  yield 
to  the  times  without  being  too  stubborn  ;  it  is  the  height 
of  folly  to  busy  ourselves  in  correcting  the  world.  I,  as 
well  as  yourself,  notice  a  hundred  things  every  day  which 
might  be  better  managed,  differently  enacted  ;  but  what- 
ever I  may  discover  at  any  moment,  people  do  not  see  me 
in  a  rage  like  you.  I  take  men  quietly  just  as  they  are;  I 
accustom  my  mind  to  bear  with  what  they  do  ;  and  I  be- 
lieve that  at  Court,  as  well  as  in  the  city,  my  phlegm  is  as 
philosophical  as  your  bile. 

ALC.  But  this  phlegm,  good  sir,  you  who  reason  so  well, 
could  it  not  be  disturbed  by  anything  ?  And  if  perchance 
a  friend  should  betray  you ;  if  he  forms  a  subtle  plot  to 
get  hold  of  what  is  yours ;  if  people  should  try  to  spread 
evil  reports  about  you,  would  you  tamely  submit  to  all  this 
without  flying  into  a  rage  ? 

PHIL.  Ay,  I  look  upon  all  these  faults  of  which  you 
complain  as  vices  inseparably  connected  with  human  na- 
ture ;  in  short,  my  mind  is  no  more  shocked  at  seeing  a 
man  a  rogue,  unjust,  or  selfish,  than  at  seeing  vultures, 
eager  for  prey,  mischievous  apes,  or  fury-lashed  wolves. 

ALC.  What !  I  should  see  myself  deceived,  torn  to  pieces, 
robbed,  without  being  .  .  .  Zounds !  I  shall  say  no  more 
about  it ;  all  this  reasoning  is  full  of  impertinence ! 

PHIL.  Upon  my  word,  you  would  do  well  to  keep  silence. 
Rail  a  little  less  at  your  opponent,  and  attend  a  little  more 
to  your  suit. 

*  Compare  St.  Paul's  Epistle  to  the  Romans,  xii.  3,  "  Not  to  think  more 
highly  than  he  ought  to  think  ;  but  to  think  soberly." 

198  THE  MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  i. 

ALC.  That  I  shall  not  do ;  that  is  settled  long  ago. 

PHIL.   But  whom  then  do  you  expect  to  solicit  for  you? 

ALC.  Whom  ?     Reason,  my  just  right,  equity. 

PHIL.  Shall  you  not  pay  a  visit  to  any  of  the  judges  ? 

ALC.  No.     Is  my  cause  unjust  or  dubious  ? 

PHIL.  I  am  agreed  on  that ;  but  you  know  what  harm 
intrigues  do,  and  .  .  . 

ALC.  No.  I  am  resolved  not  to  stir  a  step.  I  am  either 
right  or  wrong. 

PHIL.  Do  not  trust  to  that. 

ALC.  I  shall  not  budge  an  inch. 

PHIL.  Your  opponent  is  powerful,  and  by  his  underhand 
work,  may  induce  .  .  . 

ALC.  It  does  not  matter. 

PHIL.  You  will  make  a  mistake. 

ALC.  Be  it  so.     I  wish  to  see  the  end  of  it. 

PHIL.  But  .    .    . 

ALC.  I  shall  have  the  satisfaction  of  losing  my  suit. 

PHIL.  But  after  all  .    .    . 

ALC.  I  shall  see  by  this  trial  whether  men  have  sufficient 
impudence,  are  wicked,  villainous,  and  perverse  enough 
to  do  me  this  injustice  in  the  face  of  the  whole  world. 

PHIL.  What  a  strange  fellow ! 

ALC.  I  could  wish,  were  it  to  cost  me  ever  so  much, 
that,  for  the  fun  of  .the  thing,  I  lost  my  case. 

PHIL.  But  people  will  really  laugh  at  you,  Alceste,  if 
they  hear  you  go  on  in  this  fashion. 

ALC.  So  much  the  worse  for  those  who  will. 

PHIL.  But  this  rectitude,  which  you  exact  so  carefully 
in  every  case,  this  absolute  integrity  in  which  you  intrench 
yourself,  do  you  perceive  it  in  the  lady  you  love  ?  As  for 
me,  I  am  astonished  that,  appearing  to  be  at  war  with  the 
whole  human  race,  you  yet,  notwithstanding  everything 
that  can  render  it  odious  to  you,  have  found  aught  to 
charm  your  eyes.  And  what  surprises  me  still  more,  is 
the  strange  choice  your  heart  has  made.  The  sincere 
filiante  has  a  liking  for  you,  the  prude  Arsino6  looks  with 
favour  upon  you,  yet  your  heart  does  not  respond  to  their 
passion;  whilst  you  wear  the  chains  of  Celimene,  who 
sports  with  you,  and  whose  coquettish  humour  and  mali- 
cious wit  seems  to  accord  so  well  with  the  manner  of  the 

SCKNBII.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  199 

times.  How  comes  it  that,  hating  these  things  as  mortally 
as  you  do,  you  endure  so  much  of  them  in  that  lady? 
Are  they  no  longer  faults  in  so  sweet  a  charmer  ?  Do  not 
you  perceive  them,  or  if  you  do,  do  you  excuse  them? 

ALC.  Not  so.  The  love  I  feel  for  this  young  widow  does 
not  make  me  blind  to  her  faults,  and,  notwithstanding  the 
great  passion  with  which  she  has  inspired  me,  I  am  the 
first  to  see,  as  well  as  to  condemn,  them.  But  for  all  this, 
do  what  I  will,  I  confess  my  weakness,  she  has  the  art  of 
pleasing  me.  In  vain  I  see  her  faults  ;  I  may  even  blame 
them ;  in  spite  of  all,  she  makes  me  love  her.  Her  charms 
conquer  everything,  and,  no  doubt,  my  sincere  love  will 
purify  our  heart  from  the  vices  of  our  times.5 

PHIL.  If  you  accomplish  this,  it  will  be  no  small  task. 
Do  you  believe  yourself  beloved  by  her? 

ALC.  Yes,  certainly  !  I  should  not  love  her  at  all,  did  I 
not  think  so. 

PHIL.  But  if  her  love  for  you  is  so  apparent,  how  comes 
it  that  your  rivals  cause  you  so  much  uneasiness  ? 

ALC.  It  is  because  a  heart,  deeply  smitten,  claims  all  to 
itself;  I  come  here  only  with  the  intention  of  telling  her 
what,  on  this  subject,  my  feelings  dictate. 

PHIL.  Had  I  but  to  choose,  her  cousin  Eliante  would 
have  all  my  love.  Her  heart,  which  values  yours,  is  stable 
and  sincere ;  and  this  more  compatible  choice  would  have 
suited  you  better. 

ALC.  It  is  true ;  my  good  sense  tells  me  so  every  day ; 
but  good  sense  does  not  always  rule  love. 

PHIL.  Well,  I  fear  much  for  your  affections;  and  the 
hope  which  you  cherish  may  perhaps  .  .  . 

SCENE  II. — ORONTE,  ALCESTE,  PHILINTE. 

ORON.  (To  Alceste).  I  have  been  informed  yonder,  that 
Eliante  and  Cdimene  have  gone  out  to  make  some  pur- 
chases. But  as  I  heard  that  you  were  here,  I  came  to  tell 
you,  most  sincerely,  that  I  have  conceived  the  greatest 
regard  for  you,  and  that,  for  a  long  time,  this  regard  has 
inspired  me  with  the  most  ardent  wish  to  be  reckoned 

'  Compare  the  supposed  conversation  between  Moliere  and  Chapelle  in 
the  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I. 

200  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  i. 

among  your  friends.  Yes ;  I  like  to  do  homage  to  merit ; 
and  I  am  most  anxious  that  a  bond  of  friendship  should 
unite  us.  I  suppose  that  a  zealous  friend,  and  of  my 
standing,  is  not  altogether  to  be  rejected.  (All  this  time 
Alceste  has  been  musing,  and  seems  not  to  be  aware  that 
Oronte  is  addressing  him.  He  looks  up  only  when  Oronte 
says  to  him,} — It  is  to  you,  if  you  please,  that  this  speech  is 
addressed. 

ALC.    To  me,  sir? 

ORON.  To  you.     Is  it  in  any  way  offensive  to  you  ? 

ALC.  Not  in  the  least.  But  my  surprise  is  very  great ; 
and  I  did  not  expect  that  honour. 

ORON.  The  regard  in  which  I  hold  you  ought  not  to 
astonish  you,  and  you  can  claim  it  from  the  whole  world. 

ALC.    Sir  .    .    . 

ORON.  Our  whole  kingdom  contains  nothing  above  the 
dazzling  merit  which  people  discover  in  you. 

ALC.  Sir  .    .    . 

ORON.  Yes ;  for  my  part,  I  prefer  you  to  the  most  im- 
portant in  it. 

ALC.   Sir  .    .    . 

ORON.  May  Heaven  strike  me  dead,  if  I  lie  !  And,  to 
convince  you,  on  this  very  spot,  of  my  feelings,  allow  me, 
sir,  to  embrace  you  with  all  my  heart,  and  to  solicit  a 
place  in  your  friendship.  Your  hand,  if  you  please.  Will 
you  promise  me  your  friendship  ? 

ALC.  Sir  .    .    . 

ORON.  What !  you  refuse  me  ? 

ALC.  Sir,  you  do  me  too  much  honour ;  but  friendship 
is  a  sacred  thing,6  and  to  lavish  it  on  every  occasion  is 
surely  to  profane  it.  Judgment  and  choice  should  preside 
at  such  a  compact ;  we  ought  to  know  more  of  each  other 
before  engaging  ourselves ;  and  it  may  happen  that  our 
dispositions  are  such  that  we  may  both  of  us  repent  of  our 
bargain. 

ORON.  Upon  rr?  word  !  that  is  wisely  said ;  and  I  es- 
teem you  all  the  more  for  it.  Let  us  therefore  leave  it  to 

•The  original  has  ramitie  demande  un  peu  plus  de  mystere,  friendship 
demands  a  little  more  mystery.  I  imagine  this  to  be  an  allusion  to  the 
mystery  of  religion.  Hence  the  idea  of  sacredness  ;  for  otherwise  it  is 
unintelligible  why  friendship  should  demand  mystery. 

SCBNH  ii.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  2OI 

time  to  form  such  a  pleasing  bond  ;  but,  meanwhile  I  am 
entirely  at  your  disposal.  If  you  have  any  business  at 
Court,  every  one  knows  how  well  I  stand  with  the  King ; 
I  have  his  private  ear  ;  and,  upon  my  word,  he  treats  me 
in  everything  with  the  utmost  intimacy.  In  short,  I  am 
yours  in  every  emergency ;  and,  as  you  are  a  man  of 
brilliant  parts,  and  to  inaugurate  our  charming  amity,  I 
come  to  read  you  a  sonnet  which  I  made  a  little  while 
ago,  and  to  know  whether  it  be  good  enough  for  pub- 
licity. 

ALC.  I  am  not  fit,  sir,  to  decide  such  a  matter.  You 
will  therefore  excuse  me. 

ORON.  Why  so  ? 

ALC.  I  have  the  failing  of  being  a  little  more  sincere  in 
those  things  than  is  necessary. 

ORON.  The  very  thing  I  ask  ;  and  I  should  have  reason 
to  complain,  if,  in  laying  myself  open  to  you  that  you 
might  give  me  your  frank  opinion,  you  should  deceive  me, 
and  disguise  anything  from  me. 

ALC.  If  that  be  the  case,  sir,  I  am  perfectly  willing. 

ORON.  Sonnet .  .  It  is  a  sonnet  .  .  .  Hope  ...  It 
is  to  a  lady  who  flattered  my  passion  with  some  hope. 
Hope  .  .  .  They  are  not  long,  pompous  verses,  but 
mild,  tender  and  melting  little  lines. 

(At  every  one  of  these  interruptions  he   looks  at 
Alceste. 

ALC.  We  shall  see. 

ORON.  Hope  ...  I  do  not  know  whether  the  style 
will  strike  you  as  sufficiently  clear  and  easy,  and  whether 
you  will  approve  of  my  choice  of  words. 

ALC.  We  shall  soon  see,  sir. 

ORON.  Besides,  you  must  know  that  I  was  only  a  quar- 
ter of  an  hour  in  composing  it. 

ALC.  Let  us  hear,  sir ;  the  time  signifies  nothing. 

ORON.  (Reads).  Hope,  it  is  true,  oft  gives  relief, 

Rocks  for  a  while  our  tedious  pain, 
But  what  a  poor  advantage,  Phillis, 
IVhen  nought  remains,  and  all  is  gone  / 

PHIL.  I  am  already  charmed  with  this  little  bit. 

ALC.  (Softly  to  Philinte).  What !  do  you  mean  to  tell 
me  that  you  like  this  stuff? 

202  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  i. 

ORON.    You  once  had  some  complacency, 
But  less  would  have  sufficed, 
You  should  not  take  that  trouble 
To  give  me  nought  but  hope. 

PHIL.   In  what  pretty  terms  these  thoughts  are  put ! 
ALC.  How  now  !  you  vile  flatterer,  you  praise  this  rub 
bish! 

ORON.  If  I  must  wait  eternally, 

My  passion,  driven  to  extremes, 
Will  fly  to  death. 

Your  tender  cares  cannot  prevent  this, 
Fair  Phillis,  aye  we1  re  in  despair, 
When  we  must  hope  for  ever. 

PHIL.  The  conclusion  is  pretty,  amorous,  admirable. 
ALC.  (Softly,  and  aside  to  Philinte}.     A  plague  on  the 
conclusion  !      I  wish  you  had  concluded  to  break  your 
nose,  you  poisoner  to  the  devil ! 

PHIL.  I  never  heard  verses  more  skilfully  turned.7 
ALC.  (Softly,  and  aside}.     Zounds !  .    .    . 
ORON.  (To  Philinte}.     You  flatter  me;    and   you  are 
under  the  impression  perhaps  .    .    . 
PHIL.  No,  I  am  not  flattering  at  all. 
ALC.   (Softly,  and  aside}.     What  else  are  you  doing,  you 
wretch  ? 

ORON.  (To  Alceste}.  But  for  you,  you  know  our  agree- 
ment. Speak  to  me,  I  pray,  in  all  sincerity. 

ALC.  These  matters,  sir,  are  always  more  or  less  deli- 
cate, and  every  one  is  fond  of  being  praised  for  his  wit. 
But  I  was  saying  one  day  to  a  certain  person,  who  shall  be 
nameless,  when  he  showed  me  some  of  his  verses,  that  a 
gentleman  ought  at  all  times  to  exercise  a  great  control 
over  that  itch  for  writing  which  sometimes  attacks  us,  and 
should  keep  a  tight  rein  over  the  strong  propensity  which 
one  has  to  display  such  amusements ;  and  that,  in  the 
frequent  anxiety  to  show  their  productions,  people  are 
frequently  exposed  to  act  a  very  foolish  part. 

7  One  of  the  commentators  of  Moliere,  Aim^-Martin,  thinks  that  the 
praises  which  Philinte  bestows  on  Oronte's  sonnet  prove  his  kind  feeling. 
I  think  the  saying,  "  I  never  heard  verses  more  skilfully  turned,"  proves 
more  than  this. 

SCENE  ii.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  203 

ORON.  Do  yon  wish  to  convey  to  me  by  this  that  I  am 
wrong  in  desiring  .  .  . 

ALC.  I  do  not  say  that  exactly.  But  I  told  him  that 
writing  without  warmth  becomes  a  bore  ;  that  there  needs 
no  other  weakness  to  disgrace  a  man  ;  that,  even  if  peo- 
ple on  the  other  hand,  had  a  hundred  good  qualities,  we 
view  them  from  their  worst  sides. 

ORON.  Do  you  find  anything  to  object  to  in  my  sonnet  ? 

ALC.  I  do  not  say  that.  But,  to  keep  him  from  writing, 
I  set  before  his  eyes  how,  in  our  days,  that  desire  has 
spoiled  a  great  many  very  worthy  people. 

ORON.  Do  I  write  badly?    Am  I  like  them  in  any  way  ? 

ALC.  I  do  not  say  that.  But,  in  short,  I  said  to  him, 
What  pressing  need  is  there  for  you  to  rhyme,  and  what 
the  deuce  drives  you  into  print  ?  If  we  can  pardon  the 
sending  into  the  world  of  a  badly-written  book,  it  will 
only  be  in  those  unfortunate  men  who  write  for  their  live- 
lihood. Believe  me,  resist  your  temptations,  keep  these 
effusions  from  the  public,  and  do  not,  how  much  soever 
you  may  be  asked,  forfeit  the  reputation  which  you  enjoy 
at  Court  of  being  a  man  of  sense  and  a  gentleman,  to 
take,  from  the  hands  of  a  greedy  printer,  that  of  a  ridicu- 
lous and  wretched  author.  That  is  what  I  tried  to  make 
him  understand. 

ORON.  This  is  all  well  and  good,  and  I  seem  to  under- 
stand you.  But  I  should  like  to  know  what  there  is  in  my 
sonnet  to  ... 

ALC.  Candidly,  you  had  better  put  it  in  your  closet. 
You  have  been  following  bad  models,  and  your  expressions 
are  not  at  all  natural.  Pray  what  is — Rocks  for  a  while  our 
tedious  pain?  And  what,  When  nought  remains,  and  all  is 
gone  ?  What,  You  should  not  take  that  trouble  to  give  me 
nought  but  hope?  And  what,  Phi  His,  aye  we're  in  despair 
when  we  must  hope  for  ever?  This  figurative  style,  that 
people  are  so  vain  of,  is  beside  all  good  taste  and  truth  ;  it 
is  only  a  play  upon  words,  sheer  affectation,  and  it  is  not 
thus  that  nature  speaks.  The  wretched  taste  of  the  age  is 
what  I  dislike  in  this.  Our  forefathers,  unpolished  as  they 
were,  had  a  much  better  one ;  and  I  value  all  that  is  ad- 
mired now-a-days  far  less  than  an  old  song  which  I  am 
going  to  repeat  to  you : 

2O4  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  I. 

"  Had  our  great  monarch  granted  me 
His  Paris  large  and  fair  ; 
And  I  straightway  must  quit  for  aye 
The  love  of  my  true  dear; 
Then  would  I  say,  King  Hall,  I  pray, 
Take  back  your  Paris  fair, 
I  love  much  mo  my  dear,  I  trow, 
I  love  much  mo  my  dear. ' ' 

This  versification  is  not  rich,  and  the  style  is  antiquated ; 
but  do  you  not  see  that  it  is  far  better  than  all  those  trum- 
pery trifles  against  which  good  sense  revolts,  and  that  in 
this,  passion  speaks  from  the  heart? 

"  Had  our  great  monarch  granted  me 
His  Paris  large  and  fair; 
And  I  straightway  must  quit  for  aye 
The  love  of  my  true  dear; 
Then  would  I  say,  King  Hall,  I  pray, 
Take  back  your  Paris  fair, 
I  love  much  mo  my  dear,  I  trow, 
I  love  much  mo  my  dear." 

This  is  what  a  really  loving  heart  would  say.  (To  Philinte, 
who  is  laughing).  Yes,  master  wag,  in  spite  of  all  your 
wit,  I  care  more  for  this  than  for  all  the  florid  pomp  and 
the  tinsel  which  everybody  is  admiring  now-a-days. 

ORON.  And  I,  I  maintain  that  my  verses  are  very  good. 

ALC.  Doubtless  you  have  your  reasons  for  thinking  them 
so ;  but  you  will  allow  me  to  have  mine,  which,  with  your 
permission,  will  remain  independent. 

ORON.   It  is  enough  for  me  that  others  prize  them. 

ALC.  That  is  because  they  know  how  to  dissemble,  which 
I  do  not. 

ORON.  Do  you  really  believe  that  you  have  such  a  great 
share  of  wit  ? 

ALC.  If  I  praised  your  verses,  I  should  have  more. 

ORON.  I  shall  do  very  well  without  your  approbation. 

ALC.  You  will  have  to  do  without  it,  if  it  be  all  the 
same.  • 

SCENE  iii.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  2O$ 

ORON.  I  should  like  much  to  see  you  compose  some  on 
the  same  subject,  just  to  have  a  sample  of  your  style. 

ALC.  I  might,  perchance,  make  some  as  bad ;  but  I 
should  take  good  care  not  to  show  them  to  any  one. 

ORON.  You  are  mighty  positive;  and  this  great  suffi- 
ciency .  .  . 

ALC.  Pray,  seek  some  one  else  to  flatter  you,  and 
not  me. 

ORON.  But,  my  little  sir,  drop  this  haughty  tone. 

ALC.   In  truth,  my  big  sir,  I  shall  do  as  I  like. 

PHIL.  {Coming  between  them).  Stop,  gentlemen  !  that  is 
carrying  the  matter  too  far.  Cease,  I  pray. 

ORON.  Ah!  I  am  wrong,  I  confess;  and  I  leave  the 
field  to  you.  I  am  your  servant,  sir,  most  heartily. 

ALC.  And  I,  sir,  am  your  most  humble  servant. 

SCENE  III. — PHILINTE,  ALCESTE. 

PHIL.  Well !  you  see.  By  being  too  sincere,  you  have 
got  a  nice  affair  on  your  hands ;  I  saw  that  Oronte,  in 
order  to  be  flattered  .  .  . 

ALC.  Do  not  talk  to  me. 

PHIL.  But  .    .    . 

ALC.  No  more  society  for  me. 

PHIL.  Is  it  too  much  .    .    . 

ALC.  Leave  me  alone. 

PHIL.  If  I  .    .    . 

ALC.  Not  another  word. 

PHIL.  But  what  .   .    . 

ALC.  I  will  hear  no  more. 

PHIL.  But  .   .   . 

ALC.  Again  ? 

PHIL.  People  insult  .   .    . 

ALC.  Ah !  zounds  !  this  is  too  much.  Do  not  dog  my 
steps. 

PHIL.  You  are  making  fun  of  me ;  I  shall  not  leave 
you. 

ACT  II. 

SCENE  I. — ALCESTE,  CELIMENE. 
ALC.  Will  you  have  me  speak  candidly  to  you,  madam  ? 

206  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  11. 

Well,  then,  I  am  very  much  dissatisfied  with  your  be- 
haviour. I  am  very  angry  when  I  think  of  it ;  and  I  per- 
ceive that  we  shall  have  to  break  with  each  other.  Yes  ; 
I  should  only  deceive  you  were  I  to  speak  otherwise. 
Sooner  or  later  a  rupture  is  unavoidable  ;  and  if  I  were  to 
promise  the  contrary  a  thousand  times,  I  should  not  be 
able  to  bear  this  any  longer. 

CEL.  Oh,  I  see !  it  is  to  quarrel  with  me,  that  you 
wished  to  conduct  me  home  ? 

ALC.  I  do  not  quarrel.  But  your  disposition,  madam, 
is  too  ready  to  give  any  first  comer  an  entrance  into  your 
heart.  Too  many  admirers  beset  you;  and  my  temper 
cannot  put  up  with  that. 

CEL.  Am  I  to  blame  for  having  too  many  admirers  ? 
Can  I  prevent  people  from  thinking  me  amiable  ?  and  am 
I  to  take  a  stick  to  drive  them  away,  when  they  endeavour 
by  tender  means  to  visit  me  ? 

ALC.  No,  madam,  there  is  no  need  for  a  stick,  but  only 
a  heart  less  yielding  and  less  melting  at  their  love-tales. 
I  am  aware  that  your  good  looks  accompany  you,  go 
where  you  will ;  but  your  reception  retains  those  whom 
your  eyes  attract ;  and  that  gentleness,  accorded  to  those 
who  surrender  their  arms,  finishes  on  their  hearts  the  sway 
which  your  charms  began.  The  too  agreeable  expectation 
which  you  offer  them  increases  their  assiduities  towards 
you ;  and  your  complacency,  a  little  less  extended,  would 
drive  away  the  great  crowd  of  so  many  admirers.  But, 
tell  me,  at  least,  Madam,  by  what  good  fortune  Clitandre 
has  the  happiness  of  pleasing  you  so  mightily?  Upon 
what  basis  of  merit  and  sublime  virtue  do  you  ground  the 
honour  of  your  regard  for  him  ?  Is  it  by  the  long  nail  on 
his  little  finger  that  he  has  acquired  the  esteem  which  you 
display  for  him?  Are  you,  like  all  the  rest  of  the  fashion- 
able world,  fascinated  by  the  dazzling  merit  of  his  fair 
wig?  Do  his  great  rolls  make  you  love  him?  Do  his 
many  ribbons  charm  you?  Is  it  by  the  attraction  of  his 
large  rhingrave*  that  he  has  conquered  your  heart,  whilst 
at  the  same  time  he  pretended  to  be  your  slave  ?  Or  have 

8  The  rhingrave  was  a  large  pair  of  breeches,  introduced  into  France 
by  a  certain  Count  von  Salm,  who  was  called  the  Rheingraf. 

SCKNHI.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  2O7 

his  manner  of  smiling,  and  his  falsetto  voice,9  found  out 
the  secret  of  moving  your  feelings  ? 

CEL.  How  unjustly  you  take  umbrage  at  him  !  Do  not 
you  know  why  I  countenance  him ;  and  that  he  has  pro- 
mised to  interest  all  his  friends  in  my  lawsuit  ? 

ALC.  Lose  your  lawsuit,  madam,  with  patience,  and  do 
not  countenance  a  rival  whom  I  detest. 

CEL.  But  you  are  getting  jealous  of  the  whole  world. 

ALC.  It  is  because  the  whole  world  is  so  kindly  received 
by  you. 

CEL.  That  is  the  very  thing  to  calm  your  frightened 
mind,  because  my  goodwill  is  diffused  over  all :  you  would 
have  more  reason  to  be  offended  if  you  saw  me  entirely 
occupied  with  one. 

ALC.  But  as  for  me,  whom  you  accuse  of  too  much 
jealousy,  what  have  I  more  than  any  of  them,  madam, 
pray? 

CEL.  The  happiness  of  knowing  that  you  are  beloved. 

ALC.  And  what  grounds  has  my  love-sick  heart  for 
believing  it  ? 

CEL.  I  think  that,  as  I  have  taken  the  trouble  to  tell 
you  so,  such  an  avowal  ought  to  satisfy  you. 

ALC.  But  who  will  assure  me  that  you  may  not,  at  the 
same  time,  say  as  much  to  everybody  else  perhaps  ? 

CEL.  Certainly,  for  a  lover,  this  is  a  pretty  amorous 
speech,  and  you  make  me  out  a  very  nice  lady.  Well !  to 
remove  such  a  suspicion,  I  retract  this  moment  everything 
I  have  said ;  and  no  one  but  yourself  shall  for  the  future 
impose  upon  you.  Will  that  satisfy  you  ? 

ALC.  Zounds  !  why  do  I  love  you  so  !  Ah  !  if  ever  I  get 
heart-whole  out  of  your  hands,  I  shall  bless  Heaven  for 
this  rare  good  fortune.  I  make  no  secret  of  it ;  I  do  all 
that  is  possible  to  tear  this  unfortunate  attachment  from 
my  heart ;  but  hitherto  my  greatest  efforts  have  been  of  no 
avail ;  and  it  is  for  my  sins  that  I  love  you  thus. 

CEL.  It  is  very  true  that  your  affection  for  me  is 
unequalled. 

9  Compare  with  this  what  Moliere  says  in  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles, 
Vol.  I.,  Scene  iii.,  when  he  reprimands  La  Grange.  "That  is  not  the 
way  in  which  Marquises  talk.  It  must  be  a  little  higher.  Most  of  these 
gentlemen  affect  a  special  tone  to  distinguish  themselves  from  the  vulgar.'' 

208  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  n. 

ALC.  As  for  that,  I  can  challenge  the  whole  world.  My 
love  for  you  cannot  be  conceived ;  and  never,  madam,  has 
any  man  loved  as  I  do. 

CEL.  Your  method,  however,  is  entirely  new,  for  you 
love  people  only  to  quarrel  with  them ;  it  is  in  peevish 
expressions  alone  that  your  feelings  vent  themselves ;  no 
one  ever  saw  such  a  grumbling  swain. 

ALC.  But  it  lies  with  you  alone  to  dissipate  this  ill- 
humour.  For  mercy's  sake  let  us  make  an  end  of  all 
these  bickerings ;  deal  openly  with  each  other,  and  try  to 
put  a  stop  .  .  .  10 

SCENE  II. — CELIMENE,  ALCESTE,  BASQUE. 

CEL.  What  is  the  matter  ? 

BAS.  Acaste  is  below. 

CEL.  Very  well !  bid  him  come  up. 

SCENE  III. — CELIMENE,  ALCESTE. 

ALC.  What !  can  one  never  have  a  little  private  con- 
versation with  you?  You  are  always  ready  to  receive 
company ;  and  you  cannot,  for  a  single  instant,  make  up 
your  mind  to  be  "not  at  home." 

CEL.  Do  you  wish  me  to  quarrel  with  Acaste  ? 

ALC.  You  have  such  regard  for  people,  which  I  by  no 
means  like. 

CEL.  He  is  a  man  never  to  forgive  me,  if  he  knew  that 
his  presence  could  annoy  me. 

ALC.  And  what  is  that  to  you,  to  inconvenience  your- 
self so  ... 

CEL.  But,  good  Heaven !  the  amity  of  such  as  he  is  of 
importance;  they  are  a  kind  of  people  who,  I  do  not 
know  how,  have  acquired  the  right  to  be  heard  at  Court. 
They  take  their  part  in  every  conversation ;  they  can  do 
you  no  good,  but  they  may  do  you  harm ;  and,  whatever 
support  one  may  find  elsewhere,  it  will  never  do  to  be  on 
bad  terms  with  these  very  noisy  gentry. 

w  It  has  been  justly  remarked  by  Genin,  that  Racine,  who  until  then 
had  treated  love  in  La  Thebdide,  and  Alexandra,  as  a  heroic  passion,  was 
taught,  probably  by  The  Misanthrope,  to  treat  that  passion  in  a  natural 
manner ;  for  thus  he  displays  it  in  Andromaque,  which  appeared  a  year 
after  Moliere's  play. 

SC»N«V.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  209 

ALC.  In  short,  whatever  people  may  say  or  do,  you 
always  find  reasons  to  bear  with  every  one ;  and  your  very 
careful  judgment  .  .  . 

SCENE  IV. — ALCESTE,  CELIMENE,  BASQUE. 

BAS.  Clitandre  is  here  too,  madam. 

ALC.  Exactly  so.     (  Wishes  to  go). 

CEL.  Where  are  you  running  to  ? 

ALC.  I  am  going. 

CEL.  Stay. 

ALC.  For  what  ? 

CEL.  Stay. 

ALC.  I  cannot. 

CEL.  I  wish  it. 

ALC.  I  will  not.  These  conversations  only  weary  me  ; 
and  it  is  too  bad  of  you  to  wish  me  to  endure  them. 

CEL.  I  wish  it,  I  wish  it. 

ALC.  No,  it  is  impossible. 

CEL.  Very  well,  then  !  go,  begone ;  you  can  do  as  you 
like. 

SCENE  V. — ELIANTE,  PHILINTE,  ACASTE,  CLITANDRE, 
ALCESTE,  CELIMENE,  BASQUE. 

EL.  (To  Celimene).  Here  are  the  two  marquises  coming 
up  with  us.  Has  anyone  told  you  ? 

CEL.  Yes.  (To  Basque}.  Place  chairs  for  everyone. 
(Basque places  chairs,  and  exit).  (To  Alcesti).  You  are 
not  gone? 

ALC.  No ;  but  I  am  determined,  madam,  to  have  you 
make  up  your  mind  either  for  them  or  for  me. 

CEL.  Hold  your  tongue. 

ALC.  This  very  day  you  shall  explain  yourself. 

CEL.  You  are  losing  your  senses. 

ALC.  Not  at  all.     You  shall  declare  yourself. 

CEL.  Indeed! 

ALC.  You  must  take  your  stand. 

CEL.  You  are  jesting,  I  believe. 

ALC.  Not  so.  But  you  must  choose.  I  have  been  too 
patient.11 

11  Whilst  this  "  aside  "  is  going  on  between  Alceste  and  Celimene,  all  the 
other  persons  have  taken  seats  on  the  stage  in  a  semi-circle,  facing  the 
VOL.  II.  o 

210  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  n. 

CL.  Egad !  I  have  just  come  from  the  Louvre,  where 
Cleonte,  at  the  levee,  made  himself  very  ridiculous.  Has 
he  not  some  friend  who  could  charitably  enlighten  him 
upon  his  manners  ? 

CEL.  Truth  to  say,  he  compromises  himself  very  much 
in  society;  everywhere  he  carries  himself  with  an  air 
that  is  noticed  at  first  sight,  and  when  after  a  short 
absence  you  meet  him  again,  he  is  still  more  absurd  than 
ever. 

Ac.  Egad !  Talk  of  absurd  people,  just  now,  one  of  the 
most  tedious  ones  has  annoyed  me.  That  reasoner, 
Damon,  kept  me,  if  you  please,  for  a  full  hour  in  the 
broiling  sun,  away  from  my  Sedan  chair.12 

CEL.  He  is  a  strange  talker,  and  one  who  always  finds 
the  means  of  telling  you  nothing  with  a  great  flow  of 
words.  There  is  no  sense  at  all  in  his  tittle-tattle,  and 
all  that  we  hear  is  but  noise. 

EL.  {To  Philinte).  This  beginning  is  not  bad;  and 
the  conversation  takes  a  sufficiently  agreeable  turn  against 
our  neighbours. 

CL.  Timante,  too,  Madam,  is  another  original. 

CEL.  He  is  a  complete  mystery  from  top  to  toe,  who 
throws  upon  you,  in  passing,  a  bewildered  glance,  and 
who,  without  having  anything  to  do,  is  always  busy. 
Whatever  he  utters  is  accompanied  with  grimaces;  he 
quite  oppresses  people  by  his  ceremonies.  To  interrupt  a 
conversation,  he  has  always  a  secret  to  whisper  to  you, 
and  that  secret  turns  out  to  be  nothing.  Of  the  merest 
molehill  he  makes  a  mountain,  and  whispers  everything  in 
your  ear,  even  to  a  "  good-day." 

spectators.  After  they  have  been  thus  settled,  Clitandre  begins  the 
conversation  j  Alceste  has  a  chair  on  the  extreme  right,  rather  at  the 
background. 

12  It  is  odd  that  English  authorities  pretend  that  Sedan  chairs  were 
introduced  from  France.  D'Israeli,  in  his  Curiosities  of  Literature,  states 
that  the  Duke  of  Buckingham  introduced  Sedan  chairs  into  England; 
Hone,  in  The  Every-Day  Book,  vol.  ii.,  p.  902,  says  in  a  note :  "  Sedan 
chairs  were  first  introduced  into  England  in  1634.  The  first  was  used 
by  the  Duke  of  Buckingham,  to  the  indignation  of  the  people,  who  ex- 
claimed, that  he  was  employing  his  fellow-creatures  to  do  the  services 
of  beasts.*'  According  to  a  note  of  M.  E.  Despois  in  the  Precieuses 
Ridicules,  it  was  the  Marquis  de  Montbrun  who  first  introduced  the 
covered  Sedan  chairs  from  England  into  France. 

SL-RNBV.  i  THE   MISANTHROPE.  211 

Ac.    And  Geralde,  Madam? 

CEL.  That  tiresome  story-teller !  He  never  comes  down 
from  his  nobleman's  pedestal;  he  continually  mixes  with 
the  best  society,  and  never  quotes  any  one  of  minor  rank 
than  a  Duke,  Prince,  or  Princess.  Rank  is  his  hobby, 
and  his  conversation  is  of  nothing  but  horses,  carriages, 
and  dogs.  He  thee* s  and  thou's  persons  of  the  highest 
standing,  and  the  word  Sir  is  quite  obsolete,  with  him. 

CL.  It  is  said  that  he  is  on  the  best  of  terms  with 
Belise. 

CEL.  Poor  silly  woman,  and  the  dreariest  company! 
When  she  comes  to  visit  me,  I  suffer  from  martyrdom ; 
one  has  to  rack  one's  brains  perpetually  to  find  out  what  to 
say  to  her ;  and  the  impossibility  of  her  expressing  her 
thoughts  allows  the  conversation  to  drop  every  minute. 
In  vain  you  try  to  overcome  her  stupid  silence  by  the 
assistance  of  the  most  commonplace  topics ;  even  the  fine 
weather,  the  rain,  the  heat  and  the  cold  are  subjects, 
which,  with  her,  are  soon  exhausted.  Yet  for  all  that, 
her  calls,  unbearable  enough,  are  prolonged  to  an  insuffer- 
able length;  and  you  may  consult  the  clock,  or  yawn 
twenty  times,  but  she  stirs  no  more  than  a  log  of  wood. 

Ac.  What  think  you  of  Adraste  ? 

CEL.  Oh  !  What  excessive  pride !  He  is  a  man  posi- 
tively puffed  out  with  conceit.  His  self-importance  is 
never  satisfied  with  the  Court,  against  which  he  inveighs 
daily ;  and  whenever  an  office,  a  place,  or  a  living  is 
bestowed  on  another,  he  is  sure  to  think  himself  unjustly 
treated. 

CL.  But  young  Cl6on,  whom  the  most  respectable  peo- 
ple go  to  see,  what  say  you  of  him  ? 

CEL.  That  it  is  to  his  cook  he  owes  his  distinction,  and 
to  his  table  that  people  pay  visits. 

EL.  He  takes  pains  to  provide  the  most  dainty  dishes. 

CEL.  True  ;  but  I  should  be  very  glad  if  he  would  not 
dish  up  himself.  His  foolish  person  is  a  very  bad  dish, 
which,  to  my  thinking,  spoils  every  entertainment  which 
he  gives. 

PHIL.  His  uncle  Damis  is  very  much  esteemed ;  what 
say  you  to  him,  Madam  ? 

CEL.  He  is  one  of  my  friends. 

212  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  u. 

PHIL.  I  think  him  a  perfect  gentleman,  and  sensible 
enough. 

CEL.  True ;  but  he  pretends  to  too  much  wit,  which 
annoys  me.  He  is  always  upon  stilts,  and,  in  all  his  con- 
versations, one  sees  him  labouring  to  say  smart  things. 
Since  he  took  it  into  his  head  to  be  clever,  he  is  so  diffi- 
cult to  please  that  nothing  suits  his  taste.  He  must  needs 
find  mistakes  in  everything  that  one  writes,  and  thinks 
that  to  bestow  praise  does  not  become  a  wit,  that  to  find 
fault  shows  learning,  that  only  fools  admire  and  laugh, 
and  that,  by  not  approving  of  anything  in  the  works  of  our 
time,  he  is  superior  to  all  other  people.  Even  in  conver- 
sations he  finds  something  to  cavil  at,  the  subjects  are  too 
trivial  for  his  condescension ;  and,  with  arms  crossed  on 
his  breast,  he  looks  down  from  the  height  of  his  intellect 
with  pity  on  what  everyone  says. 

Ac.  Drat  it !  his  very  picture. 

CL.  (To  Celimene).  You  have  an  admirable  knack  of 
portraying  people  to  the  life. 

ALC.  Capital,  go  on,  my  fine  courtly  friends.  You 
spare  no  one,  and  every  one  will  have  his  turn.  Never- 
theless, let  but  any  one  of  those  persons  appear,  and  we 
shall  see  you  rush  to  meet  him,  offer  him  your  hand,  and, 
with  a  flattering  kiss,  give  weight  to  your  protestations  of 
being  his  servant. 

CL.  Why  this  to  us  ?  If  what  is  said  offends  you,  the 
reproach  must  be  addressed  to  this  lady. 

ALC.  No,  gadzooks  !  it  concerns  you  ;  for  your  assent- 
ing smiles  draw  from  her  wit  all  these  slanderous  remarks. 
Her  satirical  vein  is  incessantly  recruited  by  the  culpable 
incense  of  your  flattery ;  and  her  mind  would  find  fewer 
charms  in  raillery,  if  she  discovered  that  no  one  applauded 
her.  Thus  it  is  that  to  flatterers  we  ought  everywhere  to 
impute  the  vices  which  are  sown  among  mankind. 

PHIL.  But  why  do  you  take  so  great  an  interest  in  those 
people,  for  you  would  condemn  the  very  things  that  are 
blamed  in  them  ? 

CEL.  And  is  not  this  gentleman  bound  to  contradict  ? 
Would  you  have  him  subscribe  to  the  general  opinion; 
and  must  he  not  everywhere  display  the  spirit  of  con- 
tradiction with  which  Heaven  has  endowed  him  ?  Other 

SCBNK  v.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  213 

people's  sentiments  can  never  please  him.  He  always  sup- 
ports a  contrary  idea,  and  he  would  think  himself  too 
much  of  the  common  herd,  were  he  observed  to  be  of 
any  one's  opinion  but  his  own.  The  honour  of  gainsay- 
ing has  so  many  charms  for  him,  that  he  very  often  takes 
up  the  cudgels  against  himself;  he  combats  his  own  sen- 
timents as  soon  as  he  hears  them  from  other  folks'  lips.13 

ALC.  In  short,  madam,  the  laughers  are  on  your  side ; 
and  you  may  launch  your  satire  against  me. 

PHIL.  But  it  is  very  true,  too,  that  you  always  take  up 
arms  against  everything  that  is  said ;  and,  that  your 
avowed  spleen  cannot  bear  people  to  be  praised  or 
blamed. 

ALC.  'Sdeath  !  spleen  against  mankind  is  always  season- 
able, because  they  are  never  in  the  right,  and  I  see  that, 
in  all  their  dealings,  they  either  praise  impertinently,  or 
censure  rashly. 

CEL.  But  .    .    . 

ALC.  No,  madam,  no,  though  I  were  to  die  for  it,  you 
have  pastimes  which  I  cannot  tolerate;  and  people  are 
very  wrong  to  nourish  in  your  heart  this  great  attachment 
to  the  very  faults  which  they  blame  in  you. 

CL.  As  for  myself,  I  do  not  know;  but  I  openly 
acknowledge  that  hitherto  I  have  thought  this  lady 
faultless. 

Ac.  I  see  that  she  is  endowed  with  charms  and  attrac- 
tions ;  but  the  faults  which  she  has  have  not  struck  me. 

ALC.  So  much  the  more  have  they  struck  me;  and  far 
from  appearing  blind,  she  knows  that  I  take  care  to 
reproach  her  with  them.  The  more  we  love  any  one,  the 

18  This  passage  has  been  applied  by  Moliere's  contemporaries  to  the 
Duke  de  Montausier.  It  is  said  that  this  nobleman  was  one  day  walking 
with  a  friend,  near  the  Tuileries,  when  the  latter  remarked  how  foolish 
Renard,  the  proprietor  of  some  gardens  close  by,  was  to  allow  the 
public  to  enter  there,  instead  of  keeping  them  only  for  himself  and  his 
friends.  The  Duke  replied  that  Renard  could  not  do  better  than  receive 
respectable  people  in  his  grounds,  and  proved  this  convincingly.  On 
the  next  day,  being  by  accident  in  the  same  neighbourhood,  Montausier's 
friend  observed  how  praiseworthy  it  was  in  Renard  to  allow  good  com- 
pany to  enter  his  grounds;  but  the  Duke  replied,  that  only  a  madman 
could  spoil  his  own  and  his  friends'  pleasures,  in  order  to  allow  all  the 
idlers  of  the  court  and  town  to  saunter  there.  It  is  said  that  Manage 
related  this  anecdote. 

214  THE  MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  n. 

less  we  ought  to  flatter  her.  True  love  shows  itself  by 
overlooking  nothing;  and,  were  I  a  lady,  I  would  banish 
all  those  mean-spirited  lovers  who  submit  to  all  my  sen- 
timents, and  whose  mild  complacencies  every  moment 
offer  up  incense  to  my  vagaries. 

CEL.  In  short,  if  hearts  were  ruled  by  you  we  ought, 
to  love  well,  to  relinquish  all  tenderness,  and  make  it  the 
highest  aim  of  perfect  attachment  to  rail  heartily  at  the 
persons  we  love. 

EL.  Love,  generally  speaking,  is  little  apt  to  put  up 
with  these  decrees,  and  lovers  are  always  observed  to 
extol  their  choice.  Their  passion  never  sees  aught  to 
blame  in  it,  and  in  the  beloved  all  things  become  love- 
able.  They  think  their  faults  perfections,  and  invent 
sweet  terms  to  call  them  by.  The  pale  one  vies  with  the 
jessamine  in  fairness;  another,  dark  enough  to  frighten 
people,  becomes  an  adorable  brunette ;  the  lean  one  has 
a  good  shape  and  is  lithe ;  the  stout  one  has  a  portly  and 
majestic  bearing;  the  slattern,  who  has  few  charms, 
passes  under  the  name  of  a  careless  beauty  ;  the  giantess 
seems  a  very  goddess  in  their  sight ;  the  dwarf  is  an 
epitome  of  all  the  wonders  of  Heaven  ;  the  proud  one 
has  a  soul  worthy  of  a  diadem ;  the  artful  brims  with  wit ; 
the  silly  one  is  very  good-natured;  the  chatterbox  is 
good-tempered ;  and  the  silent  one  modest  and  reticent. 
Thus  a  passionate  swain  loves  even  the  very  faults  of 
those  of  whom  he  is  enamoured.1* 

ALC.  And  I  maintain  that    .    .    . 

CEL.  Let  us  drop  the  subject,  and  take  a  turn  or  two  in 
the  gallery.  What !  are  you  going,  gentlemen  ? 

CL.  AND  Ac.  No,  no,  madam. 

ALC.  The  fear  of  their  departure  troubles  you  very 
much.  Go  when  you  like,  gentlemen ;  but  I  tell  you  be- 
forehand that  I  shall  not  leave  until  you  leave. 

14 1  have  already  said  that  Grimarest  stated  that  Moliere  had  prepared 
a  translation  of  Lucretius  in  verse ;  and  that  he  intended  to  read  part  of 
it  at  an  evening-party  given  at  the  house  of  M.  du  Broussin,  in  1664,  but 
did  not  think  his  verses  worthy  of  coming  after  those  of  Boileau,  who 
read  before  him.  All  this  rests  upon  very  slight  tradition  ;  the  only  traces 
of  Lucretius  in  Moliere's  works  are  a  few  lines  of  The  Citizen  who  apes 
the  Nobleman  (See  Vol.  III.),  and  the  above  passage. 

SCKNF.  vn.l  THE   MISANTHROPE.  21$ 

Ac.  Unless  it  inconveniences  this  lady,  I  have  nothing 
to  call  me  elsewhere  the  whole  day. 

CL.  I,  provided  I  am  present  when  the  King  retires,15 
I  have  no  other  matter  to  call  me  away. 

CEL.   (To  Alceste}.     You  only  joke,  I  fancy. 

ALC.  Not  at  all.  We  shall  soon  see  whether  it  is  me  of 
whom  you  wish  to  get  rid. 

SCENE  VI. — ALCESTE,  CELIMENE,  £LIANTE,  ACASTE,  PHI- 
LINTE,  CLITANDRE,  BASQUE. 

BAS.  (To  Alceste).  There  is  a  man  down  stairs,  sir,  who 
wishes  to  speak  to  you  on  business  which  cannot  be  post- 
poned. 

ALC.  Tell  him  that  I  have  no  such  urgent  business. 

BAS.  He  wears  a  jacket  with  large  plaited  skirts  em- 
broidered with  gold. 

CEL.  ( To  Alceste).  Go  and  see  who  it  is,  or  else  let 
him  come  in. 

SCENE  VII. — ALCESTE,  CELIMENE,  ^LIANTE,  ACASTE,  PHI- 
LINTE,  CLITANDRE,  A  GUARD  OF  THE  MARECHAUSSEE.16 

ALC.  (Going  to  meet  the  guard}.  What  may  be  your 
pleasure?  Come  in,  sir. 

GUARD.  I  would  have  a  few  words  privately  with  you, 
sir. 

ALC.  You  may  speak  aloud,  sir,  so  as  to  let  me  know. 

GUARD.  The  Marshalls  of  France,  whose  commands  I 
bear,  hereby  summon  you  to  appear  before  them  immedi- 
ately, sir. 

ALC.  Whom?    Me,  sir? 

GUARD.  Yourself. 

ALC.  And  for  what  ? 

18  The  original  has  petit  couche.    See  Vol.  I.,  p.  151. 

18  The  dress  of  the  guards  of  the  mare'chauss^e,  was  something1  like 
that  of  the  "  buflfetiers  "  of  the  Tower  01  London ;  hence  the  allusion  to 
"  the  planted  skirts."  The  marechaux  de  France  formed  a  tribunal,  which 
inquired  into  affairs  of  honour  among  noblemen  or  officers.  The  garde 
de  la  connetablie  was  under  its  orders,  and  made  the  offended  parties 
appear  before  the  tribunal  of  the  mare'cnausse'e,  who  settled  the  reparation 
to  be  given.  See  also  page  191,  note  3. 

2l6  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  nt 

PHIL.  {To  Alceste).  It  is  this  ridiculous  affair  between 
you  and  Oronte. 

CEL.   (  To  Philinte).     What  do  you  mean  ? 

PHIL.  Oronto  and  he  have  been  insulting  each  other 
just  now  about  some  trifling  verses  which  he  did  not  like; 
and  the  Marshalls  wish  to  nip  the  affair  in  the  bud. 

ALC.  But  I  shall  never  show  any  base  complacency. 

PHIL.  But  you  must  obey  the  summons  :  come,  get  ready. 

ALC.  How  will  they  settle  this  between  us?  Will  the 
edict  of  these  gentlemen  oblige  me  to  approve  of  the  verses 
which  are  the  cause  of  our  quarrel  ?  I  will  not  retract 
what  I  have  said ;  I  think  them  abominable. 

PHIL.   But  with  a  little  milder  tone  .    .    . 

ALC.  I  will  not  abate  one  jot ;  the  verses  are  execra- 
ble. 

PHIL.  You  ought  to  show  some  more  accommodating 
spirit.  Come  along. 

ALC.  I  shall  go,  but  nothing  shall  induce  me  to  retract. 

PHIL.   Go  and  show  yourself. 

ALC.  Unless  an  express  order  from  the  King  himself 
commands  me  to  approve  of  the  verses  which  cause  all  this 
trouble,  I  shall  ever  maintain,  egad,  that  they  are  bad,  and 
that  a  fellow  deserves  hanging  for  making  them.17  (To 
Clitandre  and  A  caste  who  are  laughing).  Hang  it !  gen- 
tlemen, I  did  not  think  I  was  so  amusing. 

CEL.  Go  quickly  whither  you  are  wanted. 

ALC.  I  am  going,  madam ;  but  shall  come  back  here  to 
finish  our  discussion. 

ACT  III. 

SCENE  I. — CLITANDRE,  ACASTE. 

CL.  My  dear  marquis,  you  appear  mightily  pleased  with 
yourself;  everything  amuses  you,  and  nothing  discom- 
poses you.  But  really  and  truly,  think  you,  without  flat- 

17  Tradition  pretends  that  when  Boileau  was  told  that  Colbert  was  very 
intimate  with  Chapelain,  that  even  the  King  liked  the  tatter's  poem 
La  Pucelle,  and  that  therefore  the  first-mentioned  should  be  more  careful 
in  his  criticisms,  he  exclaimed,  "The  King  and  M.  Colbert  may  do  what 
they  please,  but  unless  his  Majesty  expressly  commands  me  to  consider 
the  verses  of  M.  Chapelain  good,  I  shall  always  maintain  that  a  man, 
after  having  written  such  a  poem,  deserves  to  be  hanged." 

SCENKI.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  217 

taring  yourself,  that  you  have  good  reasons  for  appearing 
so  joyful. 

Ac.  Egad,  I  do  not  find,  on  looking  at  myself,  any 
matter  to  be  sorrowful  about.  I  am  wealthy,  I  am  young, 
and  descend  from  a  family  which,  with  some  appearance 
of  truth,  may  be  called  noble  ;  and  I  think  that,  by  the 
rank  which  my  lineage  confers  upon  me,  there  are  very 
few  offices  to  which  I  might  not  aspire.  As  for  courage, 
which  we  ought  especially  to  value,  it  is  well  known — this 
without  vanity — that  I  do  not  lack  it ;  and  people  have 
seen  me  carry  on  an  affair  of  honour  in  a  manner  suffi- 
ciently vigorous  and  brisk.  As  for  wit,  I  have  some,  no 
doubt ;  and  as  for  good  taste,  to  judge  and  reason  upon 
everything  without  study;  at  "first  nights,"  of  which  I 
am  very  fond,  to  take  my  place  as  a  critic  upon  the  stage, 
to  give  my  opinion  as  a  judge,  to  applaud,  and  point  out 
the  best  passages  by  repeated  bravoes,  I  am  sufficiently 
adroit ;  I  carry  myself  well,  and  am  good-looking,  have 
particularly  fine  teeth,  and  a  good  figure.  I  believe,  with- 
out flattering  myself,  that,  as  for  dressing  in  good  taste,  very 
few  will  dispute  the  palm  with  me.  I  find  myself  treated 
with  every  possible  consideration,  very  much  beloved  by 
the  fair  sex;  and  I  stand  very  well  with  the  King.  With 
all  that,  I  think,  dear  marquis,  that  one  might  be  satisfied 
with  oneself  anywhere. 

CL.  True.  But,  finding  so  many  easy  conquests  else- 
where, why  come  you  here  to  utter  fruitless  sighs  ? 

Ac.  I  ?  Zounds !  I  have  neither  the  wish  nor  the  dis- 
position to  put  up  with  the  indifference  of  any  woman.  I 
leave  it  to  awkward  and  ordinary  people  to  burn  con- 
stantly for  cruel  fair  maidens,  to  languish  at  their  feet,  and 
to  bear  with  their  severities,  to  invoke  the  aid  of  sighs  and 
tears,  and  to  endeavour,  by  long  and  persistent  assiduities, 
to  obtain  what  is  denied  to  their  little  merit.  But  men  of 
my  stamp,  marquis,  are  not  made  to  love  on  trust,  and  be 
at  all  the  expenses  themselves.  Be  the  merit  of  the  fair 
ever  so  great,  I  think,  thank  Heaven,  that  we  have  our 
value  as  well  as  they ;  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to  enthrall 
a  heart  like  mine  without  its  costing  them  anything  ;  and 
that,  to  weigh  everything  in  a  just  scale,  the  advances 
should  be,  at  least,  reciprocal. 

2l8  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  HI. 

CL.  Then  you  think  that  you  are  right  enough  here, 
marquis  ? 

Ac.  I  have  some  reason,  marquis,  to  think  so. 

CL.  Believe  me,  divest  yourself  of  this  great  mistake  ? 
you  flatter  yourself,  dear  friend,  and  are  altogether  self- 
deceived. 

Ac.  It  is  true.  I  flatter  myself,  and  am,  in  fact,  alto- 
gether, self-deceived. 

CL.  But  what  causes  you  to  judge  your  happiness  to  be 
complete  ? 

Ac.  I  flatter  myself. 

CL.  Upon  what  do  you  ground  your  belief? 

Ac.  I  am  altogether  self-deceived. 

CL.  Have  you  any  sure  proofs? 

Ac.  I  am  mistaken,  I  tell  you. 

CL.  Has  Celimene  made  you  any  secret  avowal  of  her 
inclinations  ? 

Ac.  No,  I  am  very  badly  treated  by  her. 

CL.  Answer  me,  I  pray. 

Ac.  I  meet  with  nothing  but  rebuffs. 

CL.  A  truce  to  your  raillery ;  and  tell  me  what  hope 
she  has  held  out  to  you. 

Ac.  I  am  the  rejected,  and  you  are  the  lucky  one.  She 
has  a  great  aversion  to  me,  and  one  of  these  days  I  shall 
have  to  hang  myself. 

CL.  Nonsense.  Shall  we  two,  marquis,  to  adjust  our 
love  affairs,  make  a  compact  together  ?  Whenever  one  of 
us  shall  be  able  to  show  a  certain  proof  of  having  the 
greater  share  in  Celimene's  heart,  the  other  shall  leave  the 
field  free  to  the  supposed  conqueror,  and  by  that  means 
rid  him  of  an  obstinate  rival. 

Ac.  Egad  !  you  please  me  with  these  words,  and  I  agree 
to  that  from  the  bottom  of  my  heart.     But,  hush. 
SCENE  II. — CELIMENE,  ACASTE,  CLITANDRE. 

CEL.  What !  here  still  ? 

CLI.  Love,  madam,  detains  us. 

CEL.  I  hear  a  carriage  below.    Do  you  know  whose  it  is? 

CLI.  No. 

SCENE  III. — CELIMENE,  ACASTE,  CLITANDRE,  BASQUE. 
BAS.  Arsino£,  Madam,  is  coming  up  to  see  you. 

SCMNMV.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  219 

CEL.  What  does  the  woman  want  with  me? 

BAS.  filiante  is  down  stairs  talking  to  her. 

CEL.  What  is  she  thinking  about,  and  what  brings  her 
here? 

Ac.  She  has  everywhere  the  reputation  of  being  a  con- 
summate prude,  and  her  fervent  zeal  .  .  . 

CEL.  Psha,  downright  humbug.  In  her  inmost  soul  she 
is  as  worldly  as  any ;  and  her  every  nerve  is  strained  to 
hook  some  one,  without  being  successful,  however.  She 
can  only  look  with  envious  eyes  on  the  accepted  lovers  of 
others;  and  in  her  wretched  condition,  forsaken  by  all, 
she  is  for  ever  railing  against  the  blindness  of  the  age. 
She  endeavours  to  hide  the  dreadful  isolation  of  her  home 
under  a  false  cloak  of  prudishness;  and  to  save  the  credit 
of  her  feeble  charms,  she  brands  as  criminal  the  power 
which  they  lack.  Yet  a  swain  would  not  come  at  all  amiss 
to  the  lady;  and  she  has  even  a  tender  hankering  after 
Alceste.  Every  attention  that  he  pays  me,  she  looks  upon 
as  a  theft  committed  by  me,  and  as  an  insult  to  her  attrac- 
tions ;  and  her  jealous  spite,  which  she  can  hardly  hide, 
breaks  out  against  me  at  every  opportunity,  and  in  an  un- 
derhand manner.  In  short,  I  never  saw  anything,  to  my 
fancy,  so  stupid.  She  is  impertinent  to  the  last  degree  .  . 

SCENE  IV. — ARSINOE,  CELIMENE,  CLITANDRE,  ACASTE. 

CEL.  Ah !  what  happy  chance  brings  you  here,  madam  ? 
I  was  really  getting  uneasy  about  you. 

ARS.  I  have  come  to  give  you  some  advice  as  a  matter 
of  duty. 

CEL.  How  very  glad  I  am  to  see  you ! 

(Exeunt  Clitandre  and  Acaste,  laughing). 

SCENE  V. — ARSINOE,  CELIMENE. 

ARS.  They  could  not  have  left  at  a  more  convenient 
opportunity. 

CEL.  Shall  we  sit  down  ? 

ARS.  It  is  not  necessary.  Friendship,  madam,  must 
especially  show  itself  in  matters  which  may  be  of  conse- 
quence to  us;  and  as  there  are  none  of  greater  importance 
than  honour  and  decorum,  I  come  to  prove  to  you,  by  an 

220  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  m. 

advice  which  closely  touches  your  reputation,  the  friend- 
ship which  I  feel  for  you.  Yesterday  I  was  with  some 
people  of  rare  virtue,  where  the  conversation  turned  upon 
you ;  and  there,  your  conduct,  which  is  causing  some  stir, 
was  unfortunately,  madam,  far  from  being  commended. 
That  crowd  of  people,  whose  visits  you  permit,  your  gal- 
lantry and  the  noise  it  makes,  were  criticised  rather  more 
freely  and  more  severely  than  I  could  have  wished.  You 
can  easily  imagine  whose  part  I  took.  I  did  all  I  could 
to  defend  you.  I  exonerated  you,  and  vouched  for  the 
purity  of  your  heart,  and  the  honesty  of  your  intentions. 
But  you  know  there  are  things  in  life,  which  one  cannot 
well  defend,  although  one  may  have  the  greatest  wish  to 
do  so ;  and  I  was  at  last  obliged  to  confess  that  the  way 
in  which  you  lived  did  you  some  harm;  that,  in  the  eyes 
of  the  world,  it  had  a  doubtful  look;  that  there  was  no 
story  so  ill-natured  as  not  to  be  everywhere  told  about  it ; 
and  that,  if  you  liked,  your  behaviour  might  give  less 
cause  for  censure.  Not  that  I  believe  that  decency  is  in 
any  way  outraged.  Heaven  forbid  that  I  should  harbour 
such  a  thought !  But  the  world  is  so  ready  to  give  credit 
to  the  faintest  shadow  of  a  crime,  and  it  is  not  enough  to 
live  blameless  one's  self.  Madam,  I  believe  you  to  be  too 
sensible  not  to  take  in  good  part  this  useful  counsel,  and 
not  to  ascribe  it  only  to  the  inner  promptings  of  an  af- 
fection that  feels  an  interest  in  your  welfare. 

CEL.  Madam,  I  have  a  great  many  thanks  to  return  you. 
Such  counsel  lays  me  under  an  obligation  ;  and,  far  from 
taking  it  amiss,  I  intend  this  very  moment  to  repay  the 
favour,  by  giving  you  an  advice  which  also  touches  your 
reputation  closely ;  and  as  I  see  you  prove  yourself  my 
friend  by  acquainting  me  with  the  stories  that  are  current 
of  me,  I  shall  follow  so  nice  an  example,  by  informing 
you  what  is  said  of  you.  In  a  house  the  other  day,  where 
I  paid  a  visit,  I  met  some  people  of  exemplary  merit,  who, 
while  talking  of  the  proper  duties  of  a  well  spent  life,  turned 
the  topic  of  the  conversation  upon  you,  madam.  There  your 
prudishness  and  your  too  fervent  zeal  were  not  at  all  cited 
as  a  good  example.  This  affectation  of  a  grave  demeanour, 
your  eternal  conversations  on  wisdom  and  honour,  your 
mincings  and  mouthings  at  the  slightest  shadows  of  in- 

SCBN*  v.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  221 

dency,  which  an  innocent  though  ambiguous  word  may 
convey,  that  lofty  esteem  in  which  you  hold  yourself,  and 
those  pitying  glances  which  you  cast  upon  all,  your  fre- 
quent lectures  and  your  acrid  censures  on  things  which  are 
pure  and  harmless  ;  all  this,  if  I  may  speak  frankly  to  you, 
madam,  was  blamed  unanimously.  What  is  the  good,  said 
they,  of  this  modest  mien  and  this  prudent  exterior,  which 
is  belied  by  all  the  rest  ?  She  says  her  prayers  with  the 
utmost  exactness;  but  she  beats  her  servants  and  pays 
them  no  wages.  She  displays  great  fervour  in  every  place 
of  devotion  ;  but  she  paints  and  wishes  to  appear  hand- 
some. She  covers  the  nudities  in  her  pictures  ;  but  loves 
the  reality.  As  for  me,  I  undertook  your  defence  against 
everyone,  and  positively  assured  them  that  it  was  nothing 
but  scandal ;  but  the  general  opinion  went  against  me, 
and  they  came  to  the  conclusion  that  you  would  do  well 
to  concern  yourself  less  about  the  actions  of  others,  and 
take  a  little  more  pains  with  your  own  ;  that  one  ought  to 
look  a  long  time  at  one's  self  before  thinking  of  con- 
demning other  people;  that  when  we  wish  to  correct 
others,  we  ought  to  add  the  weight  of  a  blameless  life;  and 
that  even  then,  it  would  be  better  to  leave  it  to  those 
whom  Heaven  has  ordained  for  the  task.  Madam,  I  also 
believe  you  to  be  too  sensible  not  to  take  in  good  part  this 
useful  counsel,  and  not  to  ascribe  it  only  to  the  inner 
promptings  of  an  affection  that  feels  an  interest  in  your 
welfare. 

AR.  To  whatever  we  may  be  exposed  when  we  reprove, 
I  did  not  expect  this  retort,  madam,  and,  by  its  very  sting, 
I  see  how  my  sincere  advice  has  hurt  your  feelings. 

CEL.  On  the  contrary,  madam  ;  and,  if  we  were  reason- 
able, those  mutual  counsels  would  become  customary.  If 
honestly  made  use  of,  it  would  to  a  great  extent  destroy 
the  excellent  opinion  people  have  of  themselves.  It  de- 
pends entirely  on  you  whether  we  shall  continue  this  trust- 
worthy practice  with  equal  zeal,  and  whether  we  shall  take 
great  care  to  tell  each  other,  between  ourselves,  what  we 
hear,  you  of  me,  I  of  you. 

AR.  Ah  !  madam,  I  can  hear  nothing  said  of  you.  It 
is  in  me  that  people  find  so  much  to  reprove. 

CEL.  Madam,  it  is  easy,  I  believe,  to  blame  or  praise 

222  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  in. 

everything;  and  everyone  may  be  right,  according  to 
their  age  and  taste.  There  is  a  time  for  gallantry,  there 
is  one  also  for  prudishness.  One  may  out  of  policy  take  to 
it,  when  youthful  attractions  have  faded  away.  It  some- 
times serves  to  hide  vexatious  ravages  of  time.  I  do  not 
say  that  I  shall  not  follow  your  example,  one  of  these  days. 
Those  things  come  with  old  age;  but  twenty,  as  everyone 
well  knows,  is  not  an  age  to  play  the  prude. 

AR.  You  certainly  pride  yourself  upon  a  very  small 
advantage,  and  you  boast  terribly  of  your  age.  Whatever 
difference  there  may  be  between  your  years  and  mine, 
there  is  no  occasion  to  make  such  a  tremendous  fuss  about 
it ;  and  I  am  at  a  loss  to  know,  madam,  why  you  should 
get  so  angry,  and  what  makes  you  goad  me  in  this  manner. 

CEL.  And  I,  madam,  am  at  an  equal  loss  to  know  why 
one  hears  you  inveigh  so  bitterly  against  me  everywhere. 
Must  I  always  suffer  for  your  vexations?  Can  I  help  it, 
if  people  refuse  to  pay  you  any  attentions?  If  men  will 
fall  in  love  with  me,  and  will  persist  in  offering  me  each 
day  those  attentions  of  which  your  heart  would  wish  to 
see  me  deprived,  I  cannot  alter  it,  and  it  is  not  my  fault. 
I  leave  you  the  field  free,  and  do  not  prevent  you  from 
having  charms  to  attract  people. 

AR.  Alas !  and  do  you  think  that  I  would  trouble 
myself  about  this  crowd  of  lovers  of  which  you  are  SQ 
vain,  and  that  it  is  not  very  easy  to  judge  at  what  price 
they  may  be  attracted  now-a-days  ?  Do  you  wish  to  make 
it  be  believed,  that,  judging  by  what  is  going  on,  youi 
merit  alone  attracts  this  crowd  ;  that  their  affection  foi 
you  is  strictly  honest,  and  that  it  is  for  nothing  but  youi 
virtue  that  they  all  pay  you  their  court  ?  People  are  not 
blinded  by  those  empty  pretences ;  the  world  is  not  duped 
in  that  way ;  and  I  see  many  ladies  who  are  capable  of 
inspiring  a  tender  feeling,  yet  who  do  not  succeed  in 
attracting  a  crowd  of  beaux ;  and  from  that  fact  we  may 
draw  our  conclusion  that  those  conquests  are  not  altogether 
made  without  some  great  advances ;  that  no  one  cares  to 
sigh  for  us,  for  our  handsome  looks  only ;  and  that  the 
attentions  bestowed  on  us  are  ^generally  dearly  bought. 
Do  not  therefore  puff  yourself  up  with  vain-glory  about 
the  trifling  advantages  of  a  poor  victory ;  and  moderate 

SCKNBVII.]  THE  MISANTHROPE.  223 

slightly  the  pride  on  your  good  looks,  instead  of  looking 
down  upon  people  on  account  of  them.  If  I  were  at  all 
envious  about  your  conquests,  I  dare  say,  that  I  might 
manage  like  other  people ;  be  under  no  restraint,  and  thus 
show  plainly  that  one  may  have  lovers,  when  one  wishes 
for  them. 

CEL.  Do  have  some  then,  madam,  and  let  us  see  you 
try  it ;  endeavour  to  please  by  this  extraordinary  secret ; 
and  without  .  .  . 

AR.  Let  us  break  off  this  conversation,  madam,  it  might 
excite  too  much  both  your  temper  and  mine ;  and  I  would 
have  already  taken  my  leave,  had  I  not  been  obliged  to 
wait  for  my  carriage. 

CEL.  Please  stay  as  long  as  you  like,  and  do  not  hurry 
yourself  on  that  account,  madam.  But  instead  of  weary- 
ing you  any  longer  with  my  presence,  I  am  going  to  give 
you  some  more  pleasant  company.  This  gentleman,  who 
comes  very  opportunely,  will  better  supply  my  place  in 
entertaining  you.18 

SCENE  VI. — ALCESTE,  CELIMENE,  ARSINOE. 

CEL,  Alceste,  I  have  to  write  a  few  lines,  which  I  cannot 
well  delay.  Please  to  stay  with  this  lady ;  she  will  all  the 
more  easily  excuse  my  rudeness. 

SCENE  VII. — ALCESTE,  ARSINOE. 

AR.  You  see,  I  am  left  here  to  entertain  you,  until  my 
coach  comes  round.  She  could  have  devised  no  more 
charming  treat  for  me,  than  such  a  conversation.  Indeed, 
people  of  exceptional  merit  attract  the  esteem  and  love  of 

18  One  of  the  commentators  of  Moliere,  M.  Auger,  has  justly  observed 
how  admirably  Celimene  and  Arsinoe  vent  their  malignity,  under  the 
pretext  of  doing  their  duty  as  friends.  Both  are  equally  bad,  both  hate 
and  insult  each  other ;  but  yet,  although  their  feelings  and  situations  are 
the  same,  Moliere  shows  with  a  master  hand  the  difference  between  them. 
The  prude  Arsinoe1  is  bitter  and  angry  in  '••er  speech ;  the  coquette  Celi- 
mene jocular  and  calm ;  the  first,  by  getting  in  a  rage,  is  wholly  off  her 
guard,  and  exposes  herself  to  the  most  terrible  blows :  the  second,  keep- 
ing cool,  preserves  all  her  advantages,  and  makes  the  best  possible  use  of 
them.  The  reason  of  it  is  that  the  one  is  of  a  certain  age,  and  of  uncertain 
charms,  whilst  the  other  is  in  the  flower  of  her  youth  and  beauty ;  the  one 
is  a  hypocrite,  whose  mask  has  been  snatched  off;  the  other  is  a  rather 
impudent  young  woman,  whose  faults  are  obvious. 

224.  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  in. 

every  one ;  and  yours  has  undoubtedly  some  secret  charm, 
which  makes  me  feel  interested  in  all  your  doings.  I 
could  wish  that  the  Court,  with  a  real  regard  to  your 
merits  would  do  more  justice  to  your  deserts.  You  have 
reason  to  complain  ;  and  it  vexes  me  to  see  that  day  by 
day  nothing  is  done  for  you. 

ALC.  For  me,  madam  ?  And  by  what  right  could  I 
pretend  to  anything  ?  What  service  have  I  rendered  to 
the  State  ?  Pray,  what  have  I  done,  so  brilliant  in  itself, 
to  complain  of  the  Court  doing  nothing  for  me  ? 

AR.  Not  everyone  whom  the  State  delights  to  honour, 
has  rendered  signal  services;  there  must  be  an  opportu- 
nity as  well  as  the  power ;  and  the  abilities  which  you 
allow  us  to  perceive,  ought  .  .  . 

ALC.  For  Heaven's  sake,  let  us  have  no  more  of  my 
abilities,  I  pray.  What  would  you  have  the  Court  to  do  ? 
It  would  have  enough  to  do,  and  have  its  hands  full,  to 
discover  the  merits  of  people. 

AR.  Sterling  merit  discovers  itself.  A  great  deal  is 
made  of  yours  in  certain  places ;  and  let  me  tell  you  that, 
not  later  than  yesterday,  you  were  highly  spoken  of  in 
two  distinguished  circles,  by  people  of  very  great  standing. 

ALC.  As  for  that,  madam,  everyone  is  praised  now-a- 
days,  and  very  little  discrimination  is  shown  in  our  times. 
Everything  is  equally  endowed  with  great  merit,  so  that  it 
is  no  longer  an  honour  to  be  lauded.  Praises  abound, 
they  throw  them  at  one's  head,  and  even  my  valet  is  put 
in  the  gazette.19 

AR.  As  for  me,  I  could  wish  that,  to  bring  yourself  into 
greater  notice,  some  place  at  Court  might  tempt  you.  If 
you  will  only  give  me  a  hint  that  you  seriously  think 
about  it,  a  great  many  engines  might  be  set  in  motion  to 
serve  you ;  and  I  know  some  people  whom  I  could  em- 

19  The  only  newspaper  then  (1666)  known  was  the  official  Gazette  de 
France,  established  by  Renaudot  in  1631 ;  Denis  de  Sallo  founded,  in 
1665,  a  literary  and  scientific  paper,  called  le  Journal  des  Savants.  As 
the  news  given  by  the  Gazette  was  very  meagre,  there  arose  the  gazettes 
secretes,  which  were  rigorously  prosecuted,  and,  if  possible,  suppressed, 
&iid  the  authors,  if  got  hold  of,  publicly  flagellated  and  imprisoned. — Com- 
pare Byron's  Jine  in  Don  Juan,  "  And  even  my  servant's  put  in  the 
fkizette." 

SCENE vn.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  225 

ploy  for  you,  and  who  would  manage  the  matter  smoothly 
enough. 

ALC.  And  what  should  I  do  when  I  got  there,  madam? 
My  disposition  rather  prompts  me  to  keep  away  from  it. 
Heaven,  when  ushering  me  into  the  world,  did  not  give 
me  a  mind  suited  for  the  atmosphere  of  a  Court.  I  have 
not  the  qualifications  necessary  for  success,  nor  for  making 
my  fortune  there.  To  be  open  and  candid  is  my  chief 
talent ;  I  possess  not  the  art  of  deceiving  people  in  con- 
versation ;  and  he  who  has  not  the  gift  of  concealing  his 
thoughts,  ought  not  to  stay  long  in  those  places.  When 
not  at  Court,  one  has  not,  doubtless,  that  standing,  and 
the  advantage  of  those  honourable  titles  which  it  bestows 
now-a-days  ;  but,  on  the  other  hand,  one  has  not  the  vexa- 
tion of  playing  the  silly  fool.  One  has  not  to  bear  a 
thousand  galling  rebuffs;  one  is  not,  as  it  were,  forced  to 
praise  the  verses  of  mister  so-and.so,  to  laud  madam 
such  and  such,  and  to  put  up  with  the  whims  of  some 
ingenuous  marquis.40 

AR.  Since  you  wish  it,  let  us  drop  the  subject  of  the 
Court :  but  I  cannot  help  grieving  for  your  amours ;  and, 
to  tell  you  my  opinions  candidly  on  that  head,  I  could 
heartily  wish  your  affections  better  bestowed.  You  cer- 
tainly deserve  a  much  happier  fate,  and  she  who  has  fas- 
cinated you  is  unworthy  of  you. 

ALC.  But  in  saying  so,  madam,  remember,  I  pray,  that 
this  lady  is  your  friend. 

AR.  True.  But  really  my  conscience  revolts  at  the 
thought  of  suffering  any  longer  the  wrong  that  is  done  to 
you.  The  position  in  which  I  see  you  afflicts  my  very 
soul,  and  I  caution  you  that  your  affections  are  betrayed. 

ALC.  This  is  certainly  showing  me  a  deal  of  good  feel- 
ing, madam,  and  such  information  is  very  welcome  to  a 
lover. 

AR.  Yes,  for  all  Celimene  is  my  friend,  I  do  not  hesi- 
tate to  call  her  unworthy  of  possessing  the  heart  of  a  man 
of  honour ;  and  hers  only  pretends  to  respond  to  yours. 

10  This  is,  I  believe,  the  only  direct  attack  Moliere  ever  made  against 
the  Court,  and  by  so  doing,  he  ran  the  risk  of  offending  Louis  XIV. 
Part  of  this  outbreak  may  be  found  in  Juvenal,  and  also  one  of  Boileau's 
satires. 

VOL.  II.  p 

226  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  iv. 

ALC.  That  is  very  possible,  madam,  one  cannot  look 
into  the  heart ;  but  your  charitable  feelings  might  well 
have  refrained  from  awakening  such  a  suspicion  as  mine. 

AR.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  say  no  more  about  it,  if 
you  do  not  wish  to  be  undeceived. 

ALC.  Just  so.  But  whatever  may  be  openly  said  on  this 
subject  is  not  half  so  annoying  as  hints  thrown  out ;  and 
I  for  one  would  prefer  to  be  plainly  told  that  only  which 
could  be  clearly  proved. 

AR.  Very  well !  and  that  is  sufficient ;  I  can  fully  en- 
lighten you  upon  this  subject.  I  will  have  you  believe 
nothing  but  what  your  own  eyes  see.  Only  have  the 
kindness  to  escort  me  as  far  as  my  house ;  and  I  will  give 
you  undeniable  proof  of  the  faithlessness  of  your  fair  one's 
heart ; 21  and  if,  after  that,  you  can  find  charms  in  anyone 
else,  we  will  perhaps  find  you  some  consolation. 

ACT  IV. 

SCENE  I. — &LIANTE,  PHILINTE. 

PHIL.  No,  never  have  I  seen  so  obstinate  a  mind,  nor 
a  reconciliation  more  difficult  to  effect.  In  vain  was 
Alceste  tried  on  all  sides  ;  he  would  still  maintain  his 
opinion  ;  and  never,  I  believe,  has  a  more  curious  dispute 
engaged  the  attention  of  those  gentlemen.  "  No,  gentle* 
men,"  exclaimed  he,  "  I  will  not  retract,  and  I  shall  agree 
with  you  on  every  point,  except  on  this  one.  At  what  is 
Oronte  offended  ?  and  with  what  does  he  reproach  me  ? 
Does  it  reflect  upon  his  honour  that  he  cannot  write 
well?  What  is  my  opinion  to  him,  which  he  has  alto- 
gether wrongly  construed  ?  One  may  be  a  perfect  gentle- 
man, and  write  bad  verses  ;  those  things  have  nothing  to 
do  with  honour.  I  take  him  to  be  a  gallant  man  in  every 
way  ;  a  man  of  standing,  of  merit,  and  courage,  anything 
•  you  like,  but  he  is  a  wretched  author.  I  shall  praise,  if 

21  The  original  has  a  bad  play  on  words,  or  rather  on  the  antithesis  of 
thought,  as  shown  in  the  sentence:  je  vousferai  voir  une preuve  fi dele, 
de  I'infidelite  du  caeur  de  votre  belle.  This  was  quite  in  the  taste  of  the 
times,  though  happily  no  longer  so. 

SCENE  ,.1  THE  MISANTHROPE.  22J 

you  wish,  his  mode  of  living,  his  lavishness,  his  skill  in 
riding,  in  fencing,  in  dancing  ;  but  as  to  praising  his 
verses,  I  am  his  humble  servant ;  and  if  one  has  not  the 
gift  of  composing  better,  one  ought  to  leave  off  rhyming 
altogether,  unless  condemned  to  it  on  forfeit  of  one's 
life.""  In  short,  all  the  modification  they  could  with  dif- 
ficulty obtain  from  him,  was  to  say,  in  what  he  thought  a 
much  gentler  tone — "  I  am  sorry,  Sir,  to  be  so  difficult  to 
please ;  and  out  of  regard  for  you,  I  could  wish,  with  all 
my  heart,  to  have  found  your  sonnet  a  little  better."  And 
they  compelled  them  to  settle  this  dispute  quickly  with 
an  embrace. 

EL.  He  is  very  eccentric  in  his  doings ;  but  I  must  con- 
fess that  I  think  a  great  deal  of  him ;  and  the  candour 
upon  which  he  prides  himself  has  something  noble  and 
heroic  in  it.  It  is  a  rare  virtue  now-a-days,  and  I,  for 
one,  should  not  be  sorry  to  meet  with  it  everywhere. 

PHIL.  As  for  me,  the  more  I  see  of  him,  the  more  I  am 
amazed  at  that  passion  to  which  his  whole  heart  is  given 
up.  I  cannot  conceive  how,  with  a  disposition  like  his, 
he  has  taken  it  into  his  head  to  love  at  all ;  and  still  less 
can  I  understand  how  your  cousin  happens  to  be  the  per- 
son to  whom  his  feelings  are  inclined. 

EL.  That  shows  that  love  is  not  always  produced  by 
compatibility  of  temper;  and  in  this  case,  all  the  pretty 
theories  of  gentle  sympathies  are  belied. M 

PHIL.  But  do  you  think  him  beloved  in  return,  to  judge 
from  what  we  see? 

EL.  That  is  a  point  not  easily  decided.  How  can  we 
judge  whether  it  be  true  she  loves  ?  Her  own  heart  is  not 
so  very  sure  of  what  it  feels.  It  sometimes  loves,  without 

BSee  page  216,  note  16.    This  passage  reminds  me  of  a  nearly  similar 
one  in  the  ninth  satire  of  Boileau,  in  which  he  says  of  Chape  lain— 
Let  aye  his  honesty  and  his  fair  name  be  praised ; 
His  candour  and  civility  be  highly  valued ; 
Let  him  be  gentle,  pliant,  upright,  o'er-polite; 
Amen,  I  say  to  this,  not  one  word  will  I  utter. 
But  when  they  say  his  writings  are  the  very  best, 
When  he's  the  amplest  paid  of  all  the  wits  in  town, 
When  they  declare  him  king  of  all  the  author's  tribe, 
Then  I'm  quite  in  a  rage,  anxious  to  scribble  too. 

"The  word  "Sympathy"  was  then  used  to  express  in  an  elegant 
manner,  the  feeling  of  love. 

228  THE   MISANTHROPE. 

[ACT  iv. 

being  quite  aware  of  it,  and  at  other  times  thinks  it  does, 
without  the  least  grounds. 

PHIL.  I  think  that  our  friend  will  have  more  trouble 
with  this  cousin  of  yours  than  he  imagines ;  and  to  tell 
you  the  truth,  if  he  were  of  my  mind,  he  would  bestow 
his  affections  elsewhere ;  and  by  a  better  choice,  we  should 
see  him,  madam,  profit  by  the  kind  feelings  which  your 
heart  evinces  for  him. 

EL.  As  for  me,  I  do  not  mince  matters,  and  I  think  that 
in  such  cases  we  ought  to  act  with  sincerity.  I  do  not  run 
counter  to  his  tender  feelings;  on  the  contrary,  I  feel  in- 
terested in  them ;  and,  if  it  depended  only  on  me,  I  would 
unite  him  to  the  object  of  his  love.  But  if,  as  it  may  hap- 
pen in  love  affairs,  his  affections  should  receive  a  check, 
and  if  Celimene  should  respond  to  the  love  of  any  one 
else,  I  could  easily  be  prevailed  upon  to  listen  to  his  ad- 
dresses, and  I  should  have  no  repugnance  whatever  to 
them  on  account  of  their  rebuff  elsewhere. 

PHIL.  Nor  do  I,  from  my  side,  oppose  myself,  madam, 
to  the  tender  feelings  which  you  entertain  for  him ;  and 
he  himself,  if  he  wished,  could  inform  you  what  I  have 
taken  care  to  say  to  him  on  that  score.  But  if,  by  the 
union  of  those  two,  you  should  be  prevented  from  accept- 
ing his  attentions,  all  mine  would  endeavour  to  gain  that 
great  favour  which  your  kind  feelings  offer  to  him  ;  only 
too  happy,  madam,  to  have  them  transferred  to  myself,  if 
his  heart  could  not  respond  to  yours. 

EL.  You  are  in  the  humour  to  jest,  Philinte. 

PHIL.  Not  so,  madam,  I  am  speaking  my  inmost  feel- 
ings. I  only  wait  the  opportune  moment  to  offer  myself 
openly,  and  am  wishing  most  anxiously  to  hurry  its 
advent. 

SCENE  II. — ALCESTE,  ELIANTE,  PHILINTE. 

ALC.  Ah,  madam  !  obtain  me  justice  for  an  offence 
which  triumphs  over  all  my  constancy. 

EL.  What  ails  you?     What  disturbs  you? 

ALC.  This  much  ails  me,  that  it  is  death  to  me  to  think 
of  it ;  and  the  upheaving  of  all  creation  would  less  over- 
whelm me  than  this  accident.  It  is  all  over  with  me  .  .  . 
My  love  ...  I  cannot  speak. 

SCKNBII.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  229 

EL.  Just  endeavour  to  be  composed. 

ALC.  Oh,  just  Heaven  !  must  so  many  charms  be  allied 
to  most  odious  vices  of  the  most  perfidious  hearts. 

EL.  But,  once  more,  what  can  have  .    .    . 

ALC.  Alas !  All  is  ruined  '  I  am !  I  am  betrayed !  I  am 
stricken  to  death !  Celimene  .  .  .  would  you  credit  it ! 
Celimene  deceives  me  and  is  faithless.24 

EL.  Have  you  just  grounds  for  believing  so  ? 

PHIL.  Perhaps  it  is  a  suspicion,  rashly  conceived ;  and 
your  jealous  temper  often  harbours  fancies  .  .  . 

ALC.  Ah !  'Sdeath,  please  to  mind  your  own  business, 
sir.  (To  Eliante}.  Her  treachery  is  but  too  certain,  for  I 
have  in  my  pocket  a  letter  in  her  own  handwriting.  Yes, 
madam,  a  letter,  intended  for  Oronte,  has  placed  before 
my  eyes  my  disgrace  and  her  shame;  Oronte,  whose 
addresses  I  believed  she  avoided,  and  whom,  of  all  my 
rivals,  I  feared  the  least. 

PHIL.  A  letter  may  deceive  by  appearances,  and  is 
sometimes  not  so  culpable  as  may  be  thought. 

ALC.  Once  more,  sir,  leave  me  alone,  if  you  please,  and 
trouble  yourself  only  about  your  own  concerns. 

EL.  You  should  moderate  your  passion;  and  the  in- 
sult .  .  . 

ALC.  You  must  be  left  to  do  that,  madam ;  it  is  to  you 
that  my  heart  has  recourse  to-day  to  free  itself  from  this 
goading  pain.  Avenge  me  on  an  ungrateful  and  perfidious 
relative  who  basely  deceives  such  constant  tenderness. 
Avenge  me  for  an  act  that  ought  to  fill  you  with  horror. 

EL.  I  avenge  you?     How? 

ALC.  By  accepting  my  heart.  Take  it,  madam,  instead 
of  the  false  one;  it  is  in  this  way  that  I  can  avenge 
myself  upon  her ;  and  I  shall  punish  her  by  the  sincere 
attachment,  and  the  profound  love,  the  respectful  cares, 
the  eager  devotions,  the  ceaseless  attentions  which  this 
heart  will  henceforth  offer  up  at  your  shrine. 

EL.  I  certainly  sympathize  with  you  in  your  sufferings, 
and  do  not  despise  your  proffered  heart ;  but  the  wrong 

2i  The  words  from  "  What  ails  you  "  till  "  faithless,"  are  with  some 
slight  alterations,  taken  from  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre,  Act  iv.,  Scene  7, 
Vol.  I. 

230  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  iv. 

done  may  not  be  so  great  as  you  think,  and  you  might 
wish  to  forego  this  desire  for  revenge.  When  the  injury 
proceeds  from  a  beloved  object,  we  form  many  designs 
which  we  never  execute ;  we  may  find  as  powerful  a  reason 
as  we  like  to  break  off  the  connection,  the  guilty  charmer 
is  soon  again  innocent ;  all  the  harm  we  wish  her  quickly 
vanishes,  and  we  know  what  a  lover's  anger  means. 

ALC.  No,  no,  madam,  no.  The  offence  is  too  cruel ; 
there  will  be  no  relenting,  and  I  have  done  with  her. 
Nothing  shall  change  the  resolution  I  have  taken,  and  I 
should  hate  myself  for  ever  loving  her  again.  Here  she 
comes.  My  anger  increases  at  her  approach.  I  shall 
taunt  her  with  her  black  guilt,  completely  put  her  to  the 
blush,  and,  after  that,  bring  you  a  heart  wholly  freed  from 
her  deceitful  attractions. 

SCENE  III. — CELIMENE,  ALCESTE. 

ALC.  (Aside),  Grant,  Heaven,  that  I  may  control  my 
temper. 

CEL.  (Aside).  Ah!  (70  Alceste}.  What  is  all  this 
trouble  that  I  see  you  in,  and  what  mean  those  long-drawn 
sighs,  and  those  black  looks  which  you  cast  at  me? 

ALC.  That  all  the  wickedness  of  which  a  heart  is  capa- 
ble is  not  to  be  compared  to  your  perfidy ;  that  neither 
fate,  hell,  nor  Heaven  in  its  wrath,  ever  produced  anything 
so  wicked  as  you  are.25 

CEL.  These  are  certainly  pretty  compliments,  which  I 
admire  very  much. 

ALC.  Do  not  jest.  This  is  no  time  for  laughing.  Blush 
rather,  you  have  cause  to  do  so;  and  I  have  undeniable 
proofs  of  your  treachery.  This  is  what  the  agitations  of 
my  mind  prognosticated ;  it  was  not  without  cause  that 
my  love  took  alarm  ;  by  these  frequent  suspicions,  which 
were  hateful  to  you,  I  was  trying  to  discover  the  misfortune 
which  my  eyes  have  beheld  ;  and  in  spite  of  all  your  care 
and  your  skill  in  dissembling,  my  star  foretold  me  what  I 
had  to  fear.  But  do  not  imagine  that  I  will  bear  un- 
avenged this  slight  of  being  insulted.  I  know  that  we 

25  These  words,  from  "  That  all "  till  "you  are,"  are  also  in  Don  Garcia 
of  Navarre,  Act  iv.,  Scene  8,  Vol.  I. 

SCENE  in.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  231 

have  no  command  over  our  inclinations,  that  love  will 
everywhere  spring  up  spontaneously,  that  there  is  no  en- 
tering a  heart  by  force,  and  that  every  soul  is  free  to  name 
its  conqueror :  I  should  thus  have  no  reason  to  complain 
if  you  had  spoken  to  me  without  dissembling,  and  re- 
jected my  advances  from  the  very  beginning  ;  my  heart 
would  then  have  been  justified  in  blaming  fortune  alone. 
But  to  see  my  love  encouraged  by  a  deceitful  avowal  on 
your  part,  is  an  action  so  treacherous  and  perfidious,  that 
it  cannot  meet  with  too  great  a  punishment ;  and  I  can 
allow  my  resentment  to  do  anything.  Yes,  yes ;  after 
such  an  outrage,  fear  everything;  I  am  no  longer  myself, 
I  am  mad  with  rage.26  My  senses,  struck  by  the  deadly 
blow  with  which  you  kill  me,  are  no  longer  governed  by 
reason ;  I  give  way  to  the  outbursts  of  a  just  wrath,  and 
am  no  longer  responsible  for  what  I  may  do. 

CEL.  Whence  comes,  I  pray,  such  a  passion  ?  Speak  ! 
Have  you  lost  your  senses  ? 

ALC.  Yes,  yes,  I  lost  them  when,  to  my  misfortune,  I 
beheld  you,  and  thus  took  the  poison  which  kills  me,  and 
when  I  thought  to  meet  with  some  sincerity  in  those 
treacherous  charms  that  bewitched  me. 

CEL.  Of  what  treachery  have  you  to  complain  ? 

ALC.  Ah !  how  double-faced  she  is !  how  well  she 
knows  how  to  dissemble  !  But  I  am  fully  prepared  with 
the  means  of  driving  her  to  extremities.  Cast  your  eyes 
here  and  recognize  your  writing.  This  picked-up  note  is 
sufficient  to  confound  you,  and  such  proof  cannot  easily 
be  refuted. 

CEL.  And  this  is  the  cause  of  your  perturbation  of 
spirits  ? 

ALC.  You  -do  not  blush  on  beholding  this  writing  ! 

CEL.  And  why  should  I  blush  ? 

ALC.  What !  You  add  boldness  to  craft  !  Will  you  dis- 
own this  note  because  it  bears  no  name? 

CEL.  Why  should  I  disown  it,  since  I  wrote  it.17 

*  The  whole  of  Alceste's  speech,  from  "Blush  rather"  until  "mad 
with  'rage,"  is,  with  some  slight  alterations,  taken  from  Don  Garcia  of 
Navarre,  Act  iv.,  Scene  8,  Vol.  I. 

«*  The  words  "Whence  comes  I  pray"  until  "since  I  wrote  it,"  are, 
with  some  slight  alterations,  taken  from  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre,  Act.  ii., 
Scene  5,  Vol.  I. 

232  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  iv. 

ALC.  And  you  can  look  at  it  without  becoming  confused 
at  the  crime  of  which  its  style  accuses  you ! 

CEL.  You  are,  in  truth,  a  very  eccentric  man. 

ALC.  What  !  you  thus  out-brave  this  convincing  proof! 
And  the  contents  so  full  of  tenderness  for  Oronte,  need 
have  nothing  in  them  to  outrage  me,  or  to  shame  you  ? 

CEL.  Oronte  !  Who  told  you  that  this  letter  is  for 
him  ? 

ALC.  The  people  who  put  it  into  my  hands  this  day. 
But  I  will  even  suppose  that  it  is  for  some  one  else.  Has 
my  heart  any  less  cause  to  complain  of  yours  ?  Will  you, 
in  fact,  be  less  guilty  toward  me  ? 

CEL.  But  if  it  is  a  woman  to  whom  this  letter  is  ad- 
dressed, how  can  it  hurt  you,  or  what  is  there  culpable 
in  it? 

ALC.  Hem  !  The  prevarication  is  ingenious,  and  the 
excuse  excellent.  I  must  own  that  I  did  not  expect  this 
turn ;  and  nothing  but  that  was  wanting  to  convince  me. 
Do  you  dare  to  have  recourse  to  such  palpable  tricks? 
Do  you  think  people  entirely  destitute  of  common  sense  ? 
Come,  let  us  see  a  little  by  what  subterfuge,  with  what 
air,  you  will  support  so  palpable  a  falsehood;  and  how 
you  can  apply  to  a  woman  every  word  of  this  note  which 
evinces  so  much  tenderness  !  Reconcile,  if  you  can,  to 
hide  your  deceit,  what  I  am  about  to  read.  .  .  . 

CEL.  It  does  not  suit  me  to  do  so.  I  think  it  ridiculous 
that  you  should  take  so  much  upon  yourself,  and  tell  me 
to  my  face  what  you  have  the  daring  to  say  to  me ! 

ALC.  No,  no,  without  flying  into  a  rage,  take  a  little 
trouble  to  explain  these  terms. 

CEL.  No,  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind,  and  it  matters 
very  little  to  me  what  you  think  upon  the  subject. 

ALC.  I  pray  you,  show  me,  and  I  shall  be  satisfied,  if 
this  letter  can  be  explained  as  meant  for  a  woman. 

CEL.  Not  at  all.  It  is  for  Oronte  ;  and  I  will  have  you 
believe  it.  I  accept  all  his  attentions  gladly ;  I  admire 
what  he  says,  I  like  him,  and  I  shall  agree  to  whatever 
you  please.  Do  as  you  like,  and  act  as  you  think  proper; 
let  nothing  hinder  you,  and  do  not  harass  me  any  longer. 

ALC.  (Aside),  Heavens  !  can  anything  more  cruel  be 
conceived,  and  was  ever  heart  treated  like  mine  ?  What ! 

scHNBiii.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  2JJ 

I  am  justly  angry  with  her,  I  come  to  complain,  and  I  am 
quarrelled  with  instead  !  My  grief  and  my  suspicions  are 
excited  to  the  utmost,  I  am  allowed  to  believe  everything, 
she  boasts  of  everything  ;  and  yet,  my  heart  is  still  suffi- 
ciently mean  not  to  be  able  to  break  the  bonds  that  hold 
it  fast,  and  not  to  arm  itself  with  a  generous  contempt  for 
the  ungrateful  object  of  which  it  is  too  much  enamoured. 
{To  Celimene).  Perfidious  woman,  you  know  well  how  to 
take  advantage  against  myself  of  my  great  weakness,  and 
to  employ  for  your  own  purpose  that  excessive,  astonish- 
ing, and  fatal  love  which  your  treacherous  looks  have  in- 
spired I28  Defend  yourself  at  least  from  a  crime  that  over- 
whelms even  me,  and  cease  that  affectation  of  being 
culpable  against  me.  Show  me,  if  you  can,  the  innocence 
of  this  note ;  my  affection  will  even  consent  to  assist  you. 
At  any  rate,  endeavour  to  appear  faithful,  and  I  shall 
strive  to  believe  you  such. 

CEL.  Bah,  you  are  mad  with  your  jealous  frenzies,  and 
do  not  deserve  the  love  which  I  have  for  you.  I  should 
much  like  to  know  what  could  compel  me  to  stoop  for  you 
to  the  baseness  of  dissembling ;  and  why,  if  my  heart  were 
disposed  towards  another,  I  should  not  say  so  candidly. 
What !  does  the  kind  assurance  of  my  sentiments  towards 
you  not  defend  me  sufficiently  against  all  your  suspicions? 
Ought  they  to  possess  any  weight  at  all  with  such  a 
guarantee  ?  Is  it  not  insulting  me  even  to  listen  to  them  ? 
And  since  it  is  with  the  utmost  difficulty  that  we  can  re- 
solve to  confess  our  love,  since  the  strict  honour  of  our 
sex,  hostile  to  our  passion,  strongly  opposes  such  a  con- 
fession, ought  a  lover  who  sees  such  an  obstacle  overcome 
for  his  sake,  doubt  with  impunity  our  avowal  ?  And  is 
he  not  greatly  to  blame  in  not  assuring  himself  of  the 
truth  of  that  which  is  never  said  but  after  a  severe  struggle 
with  oneself?29  Begone,  such  suspicions  deserve  my 
anger,  and  you  are  not  worthy  of  being  cared  for.  I  am 

18  The  phrase  *'  Perfidious  woman "  until  "  inspired "'  is  with  few 
alterations,  to  be  found  in  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre,  Act  iv.,  Scene  8, 
Vol.  I. 

29  The  words  "  And  since  it  is"  until  "with  one's  self"  are  found,  with 
some  slight  alterations,  in  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre,  Act  iii.,  Scene  i, 
Vol.  I. 

234  THE  MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  IV. 

silly,  and  am  vexed  at  my  own  simplicity  in  still  pre- 
serving the  least  kindness  for  you.  I  ought  to  place  my 
affections  elsewhere,  and  give  you  a  just  cause  for  com- 
plaint. 

ALC.  Ah !  you  traitress !  mine  is  a  strange  infatuation 
for  you;  those  tender  expressions  are,  no  doubt,  meant 
only  to  deceive  me.  But  it  matters  little,  I  must  submit 
to  my  fate ;  my  very  soul  is  wrapt  up  in  you ;  I  will  see  to 
the  bitter  end  how  your  heart  will  act  towards  me,  and 
whether  it  will  be  black  enough  to  deceive  me. 

CEL.  No,  you  do  not  love  me  as  you  ought  to  love. 

ALC.  Indeed !  Nothing  is  to  be  compared  to  my  ex- 
ceeding love;  and,  in  its  eagerness  to  show  itself  to  the 
whole  world,  it  goes  even  so  far  as  to  form  wishes  against 
you.  Yes,  I  could  wish  that  no  one  thought  you  hand- 
some, that  you  were  reduced  to  a  miserable  existence;  that 
Heaven,  at  your  birth,  had  bestowed  upon  you  nothing ; 
that  you  had  no  rank,  no  nobility,  no  wealth,  so  that  I 
might  openly  proffer  my  heart,  and  thus  make  amends  to 
you  for  the  injustice  of  such  a  lot;  and  that,  this  very 
day,  I  might  have  the  joy  and  the  glory  of 'seeing  you  owe 
everything  to  my  love.30 

CEL.  This  is  wishing  me  well  in  a  strange  way ! S1 
Heaven  grant  that  you  may  never  have  occasion  .  .  .  But 
here  comes  Monsieur  Dubois  curiously  decked  out. 

SCENE  IV. — CELIMENE,  ALCESTE,  DUBOIS. 

ALC.  What  means  this  strange  attire,  and  that  frightened 
look?     What  ails  you? 
Du.  Sir  .    .    . 

30  The  words  "  so  that "  until  "  love"  are,  with  some  alterations,  found 
also  in  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre,  Act  i.,  Scene  3,  Vol.  I. 

81  It  has  been  said  that  Moliere  has  reproduced  an  incident  of  his 
own  life,  with  his  wife,  out  of  despair  that  her  love  for  the  Count  of 
Guiche  was  not  returned,  threw  herself  into  the  arms  of  the  Duke  of 
Lauzun,  and  that  the  liaison  was  betrayed  to  Moliere  by  the  Abbe  de 
Richelieu ;  that  when  Moliere  reproached  his  wife  with  her  conduct, 
she  answered  that  she  was  guilty  only  of  thoughtlessness,  and  begged 
his  pardon ;  that  he  forgave  her ;  that  for  some  time  they  lived  happily 
together ;  but  that,  on  her  return  to  Paris,  she  broke  out  again.  For 
all  these  and  similar  stories,  there  is  no  other  foundation  than  the  well- 
known  pamphlet,  La  Fameuse  comedienne.  (See  Introductory  Notice 
to  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.  See  also  Note  85,  page  27.) 

SCKNK  iv.]  *HE   MISANTHROPE.  235 

ALC.  Well? 

Du.  The  most  mysterious  event. 

ALC.  What  is  it? 

Du.  Our  affairs  are  turning  out  badly,  sir. 

ALC.  What? 

Du.  Shall  I  speak  out? 

ALC.  Yes,  do,  and  quickly. 

Du.  Is  there  no  one  there  ? 

ALC.   Curse  your  trifling !     Will  you  speak? 

Du.   Sir,  we  must  beat  a  retreat. 

ALC.  What  do  you  mean? 

Du.  We  must  steal  away  from  this  quietly. 

ALC.  And  why? 

Du.  I  tell  you  that  we  must  leave  this  place. 

ALC.  The  reason? 

Du.  You  must  go,  sir,  without  staying  to  take  leave. 

ALC.  But  what  is  the  meaning  of  this  strain  ? 

Du.  The  meaning  is,  sir,  that  you  must  make  yourself 
scarce. 

ALC.  I  shall  knock  you  on  the  head  to  a  certainty, 
booby,  if  you  do  not  explain  yourself  more  clearly. 

Du.  A  fellow,  sir,  with  a  black  dress,  and  as  black  a 
look,  got  as  far  as  the  kitchen  to  leave  a  paper  with  us, 
scribbled  over  in  such  a  fashion  that  old  Nick  himself 
could  not  have  read  it.  It  is  about  your  law-suit,  I  make 
no  doubt ;  but  the  very  devil,  I  believe,  could  not  make 
head  nor  tail  of  it. 

ALC.  Well!  what  then?  What  has  the  paper  to  do 
with  the  going  away  of  which  you  speak,  you  scoundrel  ? 

Du.  I  must  tell  you,  sir,  that,  about  an  hour  afterwards, 
a  gentleman  who  often  calls,  came  to  ask  for  you  quite 
eagerly,  and  not  finding  you  at  home,  quietly  told  me, 
knowing  how  attached  I  am  to  you,  to  let  you  know  .  .  . 
Stop  a  moment,  what  the  deuce  is  his  name  ? 

ALC.  Never  mind  his  name,  you  scoundrel,  and  tell  me 
what  he  told  you. 

Du.  He  is  one  of  your  friends,  in  short,  that  is  suffi- 
cient. He  told  me  that  for  your  very  life  you  must  get 
away  from  this,  and  that  you  are  threatened  with  arrest. 

ALC.  But  how !  has  he  not  specified  anything  ? 

Du.  No.     He  asked    me  for  ink  and  paper,  and  has 

236  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  v. 

sent  you  a  line  from  which  you  can,  I  think,  fathom  the 
mystery ! 

ALC.  Hand  it  over  then. 

CEL.  What  can  all  this  mean? 

ALC.  I  do  not  know;  but  I  am  anxious  to  be  informed. 
Have  you  almost  done,  devil  take  you? 

Du.  (After  having  fumbled  for  some  time  for  the  Note}. 
After  all,  sir,  I  have  left  it  on  your  table. 

ALC.  I  do  not  know  what  keeps  me  from  .    .    . 

CEL.  Do  not  put  yourself  in  a  passion,  but  go  and 
unravel  this  perplexing  business. 

ALC.  It  seems  that  fate,  whatever  I  may  do.  has  sworn 
to  prevent  my  having  a  conversation  with  you.  But,  to 
get  the  better  of  her,  allow  me  to  see  you  again,  madam, 
before  the  end  of  the  day. 

ACT  V. 

SCENE  I. — ALCESTE,  PHILINTE. 

ALC.  I  tell  you,  my  mind  is  made  up  about  it. 

PHIL.  But,  whatever  this  blow  may  be,  does  it  compel 
you  .  .  . 

ALC.  You  may  talk  and  argue  till  doomsday  if  you 
like,  nothing  can  avert  me  from  what  I  have  said.  The 
age  we  live  in  is  too  perverse,  and  I  am  determined  to 
withdraw  altogether  from  intercourse  with  the  world. 
What !  when  honour,  probity,  decency,  and  the  laws,  are 
all  against  my  adversary ;  when  the  equity  of  my  claim  is 
everywhere  cried  up ;  when  my  mind  is  at  rest  as  to  the 
justice  of  my  cause,  I  meanwhile  see  myself  betrayed  by 
its  issue  !  What !  I  have  got  justice  on  my  side,  and  I 
lose  my  case  !  A  wretch,  whose  scandalous  history  is  well 
known,  comes  off  triumphant  by  the  blackest  falsehood  ! 
All  good  faith  yields  to  his  treachery  !  He  finds  the 
means  of  being  in  the  right,  whilst  cutting  my  throat ! 
The  weight  of  his  dissimulation,  so  full  of  cunning,  over- 
throws the  right  and  turns  the  scales  of  justice  !  He  obtains 
even  a  decree  of  court  to  crown  his  villainy.  And,  not 
content  with  the  wrong  he  is  doing  me,  there  is  abroad  in 

SCKMMI.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  237 

society  an  abominable  book,  of  which  the  very  reading  is 
to  be  condemned,  a  book  that  deserves  the  utmost  severity, 
and  of  which  the  scoundrel  has  the  impudence  to  proclaim 
me  the  author.32  Upon  this,  Oronte  is  observed  to  mutter, 
and  tries  wickedly  to  support  the  imposture  !  He,  who 
holds  an  honourable  position  at  Court,  to  whom  I  have 
done  nothing  except  having  been  sincere  and  candid,  who 
came  to  ask  me  in  spite  of  myself  of  my  opinion  of  some 
of  his  verses ;  and  because  I  treat  him  honestly,  and  will 
not  betray  either  him  or  truth,  he  assists  in  overwhelming 
me  with  a  trumped-up  crime.  Behold  him  now  my 
greatest  enemy  !  And  I  shall  never  obtain  his  sincere 
forgiveness,  because  I  did  not  think  that  his  sonnet  was 
good !  Sdeath !  to  think  that  mankind  is  made  thus  ! 
The  thirst  for  fame  induces  them  to  do  such  things ! 
This  is  the  good  faith,  the  virtuous  zeal,  the  justice  and 
the  honour  to  be  found  amongst  them  !  Let  us  begone ; 
it  is  too  much  to  endure  the  vexations  they  are  devising ; 
let  us  get  out  of  this  wood,  this  cut-throat  hole;  and 
since  men  behave  towards  each  other  like  real  wolves, 
wretches,  you  shall  never  see  me  again  as  long  as  I  live. 

PHIL.  I  think  you  are  acting  somewhat  hastily ;  and  the 
harm  done  is  not  so  great  as  you  would  make  it  out. 
Whatever  your  adversary  dares  to  impute  to  you  has  not 
had  the  effect  of  causing  you  to  be  arrested.  We  see  his 
false  reports  defeating  themselves,  and  this  action  is  likely 
to  hurt  him  much  more  than  you. 

ALC.  Him?  he  does  not  mind  the  scandal  of  such 
tricks  .'as  these.  He  has  a  license  to  be  an  arrant  knave; 
and  this  event,  far  from  damaging  his  position,  will  ob- 
tain him  a  still  better  standing  to-morrow. 

PHIL.  In  short,  it  is  certain  that  little  notice  has  been 
taken  of  the  report  which  his  malice  spread  against  you ;  ** 
from  that  side  you  have  already  nothing  to  fear ;  and  as 
for  your  law-suit,  of  which  you  certainly  have  reason  to 

M  According  to  Grimarest,  there  was  at  that  time  secretly  in  circulation 
''  a  terrible  book,"  published  under  Moliere's  name.  Of  course  it  was 
said  that  his  opponents,  very  angry  at  the  Tartuffe,  were  the  authors  of  it : 
hence  the  allusion. 

**  These  words  of  Philinte  may  perhaps  vaguely  refer  to  the  accusation 
brought  by  Montfleury  against  Moliere  in  1663.  (See  Prefatory  Memoir, 
Vol.  I.) 

238  THE   MISANTHROPE.  [ACTV. 

complain,  it  is  easy  for  you  to  bring  the  trial  on  afresh, 
and  against  this  decision  .  .  . 

ALC.  No,  I  shall  leave  it  as  it  is.  Whatever  cruel 
wrong  this  verdict  may  inflict,  I  shall  take  particular 
care  not  to  have  it  set  aside.  We  see  too  plainly  how 
right  is  maltreated  in  it,  and  I  wish  it  to  go  down  to 
posterity  as  a  signal  proof,  as  a  notorious  testimony  of  the 
wickedness  of  the  men  of  our  age.  It  may  indeed  cost 
me  twenty  thousand  francs,  but  at  the  cost  of  twenty 
thousand  francs  I  shall  have  the  right  of  railing  against 
the  iniquity  of  human  nature,  and  of  nourishing  an  un- 
dying hatred  of  it. 

PHIL.  But  after  all  .    .    . 

ALC.  But  after  all,  your  pains  are  thrown  away.  What 
can  you,  sir,  say  upon  this  head  ?  Would  you  have  the 
assurance  to  wish,  to  my  face,  to  excuse  the  villainy  of  all 
that  is  happening  ? 

PHIL.  No,  I  agree  with  you  in  all  that  you  say.  Every- 
thing goes  by  intrigue,  and  by  pure  influence.  It  is  only 
trickery  which  carries  the  day  in  our  time,  and  men  ought 
to  act  differently.  But  is  their  want  of  equity  a  reason  for 
wishing  to  withdraw  from  their  society  ?  All  human  fail- 
ings give  us,  in  life,  the  means  of  exercising  our  philoso- 
phy. It  is  the  best  employment  for  virtue ;  and  if  pro- 
bity reigned  everywhere,  if  all  hearts  were  candid,  just, 
and  tractable,  most  of  our  virtues  would  be  useless  to  us, 
inasmuch  as  their  functions  are  to  bear,  without  annoy- 
ance, the  injustice  of  others  in  our  good  cause  ;  and  just 
in  the  same  way  as  a  heart  full  of  virtue  .  .  . 

ALC.  I  know  that  you  are  a  most  fluent  speaker,  sir; 
that  you  always  abound  in  fine  arguments ;  but  you  are 
wasting  your  time,  and  all  your  fine  speeches.  Reason 
tells  me  to  retire  for  my  own  good.  I  cannot  command 
my  tongue  sufficiently ;  I  cannot  answer  for  what  I  might 
say,  and  should  very  probably  get  myself  into  a  hundred 
scrapes.  Allow  me,  without  any  more  words,  to  wait  for 
Celimene.  She  must  consent  to  the  plan  that  brings  me 
here.  I  shall  see  whether  her  heart  has  any  love  for  me ; 
and  this  very  hour  will  prove  it  to  me. 

PHIL.  Let  us  go  upstairs  to  Eliante,  and  wait  her 
coming. 

SCENE  ii.J  THE   MISANTHROPE.  239 

ALC.  No,  my  mind  is  too  harassed.  You  go  and  see 
her,  and  leave  me  in  this  little  dark  corner  with  my  black 
care. 

PHIL.  That  is  strange  company  to  leave  you  in ;  I  will 
induce  Eliante  to  come  down. 

SCENE  II. — CELIMENE,  ORONTE,  ALCESTE. 

ORON.  Yes,  madam,  it  remains  for  you  to  consider 
whether,  by  ties  so  dear,  you  will  make  me  wholly  yours, 
I  must  be  absolutely  certain  of  your  affection  :  a  lover  dis- 
likes to  be  held  in  suspense  upon  such  a  subject.  If  the 
ardour  of  my  affection  has  been  able  to  move  your  feelings, 
you  ought  not  to  hesitate  to  let  me  see  it ;  and  the  proof, 
after  all,  which  I  ask  of  you,  is  not  to  allow  Alceste  to 
wait  upon  you  any  longer;  to  sacrifice  him  to  my  love, 
and,  in  short,  to  banish  him  from  your  house  this  very 
day. 

CEL.  But  why  are  you  so  incensed  against  him;  you, 
whom  I  have  so  often  heard  speak  of  his  merits? 

ORON.  There  is  no  need,  madam,  of  these  explanations; 
the  question  is,  what  are  your  feelings  ?  Please  to  choose 
between  the  one  or  the  other;  my  resolution  depends  en- 
tirely upon  yours. 

ALC.  {Coming  out  of  his  corner).  Yes,  this  gentleman 
is  right,  madam,  you  must  make  a  choice ;  and  his  request 
agrees  perfectly  with  mine.  I  am  equally  eager,  and  the 
same  anxiety  brings  me  here.  My  love  requires  a  sure 
proof.  Things  cannot  go  on  any  longer  in  this  way,  and 
the  moment  has  arrived  for  explaining  your  feelings. 

ORON.  I  have  no  wish,  sir,  in  any  way  to  disturb,  by 
an  untimely  affection,  your  good  fortune. 

ALC.  And  I  have  no  wish,  sir,  jealous  or  not  jealous,  to 
share  aught  in  her  heart  with  you. 

ORON.  If  she  prefers  your  affection  to  mine   .    .    . 

ALC.  If  she  has  the  slightest  inclination  towards 
you  .  .  . 

ORON.  I  swear  henceforth  not  to  pretend  to  it  again. 

ALC.  I  peremptorily  swear  never  to  see  her  again. 

ORON.  Madam,  it  remains  with  you  now  to  speak  openly. 

ALC.  Madam,  you  can  explain  yourself  fearlessly. 

240  THE  MISANTHROPE.-  [ACT  v. 

ORON.  You  have  simply  to  tell  us  where  your  feelings 
are  engaged. 

ALC.  You  may  simply  finish  the  matter,  by  choosing 
between  us  two. 

ORON.  What !  you  seem  to  be  at  a  loss  to  make  such  a 
choice. 

ALC.  What !  your  heart  still  wavers,  and  appears  un- 
certain ! 

CEL.  Good  Heavens,  how  out  of  place  is  this  persist- 
ence, and  how  very  unreasonable  you  both  show  your- 
selves !  It  is  not  that  I  do  not  know  whom  to  prefer,  nor 
is  it  my  heart  that  wavers.  It  is  not  at  all  in  doubt  be- 
tween you  two ;  and  nothing  could  be  more  quickly  ac- 
complished than  the  choice  of  my  affections.  But  to  tell 
the  truth,  I  feel  too  confused  to  pronounce  such  an  avowal 
before  you;  I  think  that  disobliging  words  ought  not  to 
be  spoken  in  people's  presence ;  that  a  heart  can  give  suf- 
ficient proof  of  its  attachment  without  going  so  far  as  to 
break  with  every  one ;  and  gentler  intimations  suffice  to 
inform  a  lover  of  the  ill  success  of  his  suit. 

ORON.  No,  no,  I  do  not  fear  a  frank  avowal ;  for  my  part 
I  consent  to  it. 

ALC.  And  I  demand  it ;  it  is  just  its  very  publicity  that 
I  claim,  and  I  do  not  wish  you  to  spare  my  feelings  in  the 
least.  Your  great  study  has  always  been  to  keep  friends 
with  everyone;  but  no  more  trifling,  no  more  uncertainty. 
You  must  explain  yourself  clearly,  or  I  shall  take  your 
refusal  as  a  verdict ;  I  shall  know,  for  my  part,  how  to 
interpret  your  silence,  and  shall  consider  it  as  a  confirma- 
tion of  the  worst. 

ORON.  I  owe  you  many  thanks,  sir,  for  this  wrath,  and 
I  say  in  every  respect  as  you  do. 

CEL.  How  you  weary  me  with  such  a  whim  !  Is  there 
any  justice  in  what  you  ask  ?  And  have  I  not  told  you 
what  motive  prevents  me  ?  I  will  be  judged  by  £liante, 
who  is  just  coming. 

SCENE  III. — &LIANTE,  PHILINTE,  CELIMENE,  ORONTE, 
ALCESTE. 

CEL.  Good  cousin,  I  am  being  persecuted  here  by  peo- 
ple who  have  concerted  to  do  so.  They  both  demand, 

SCINKIV/I  THE   MISANTHROPE.  24! 

with  the  same  warmth,  that  I  should  declare  whom  my  heart 
has  chosen,  and  that,  by  a  decision  which  I  must  give  be- 
fore their  very  faces,  I  should  forbid  one  of  them  to  tease 
me  any  more  with  his  attentions.  Say,  has  ever  such  a 
thing  been  done  ? 

EL.  Pray,  do  not  consult  me  upon  such  a  matter.  You 
may  perhaps  address  yourself  to  a  wrong  person,  for  I  am 
decidedly  for  people  who  speak  their  mind. 

ORON.   Madam,  it  is  useless  for  you  to  decline. 

ALC.  All  your  evasions  here  will  be  badly  supported. 

ORON.  You  must  speak,  you  must,  and  no  longer 
waver. 

ALC.  You  need  do  no  more  than  remain  silent. 

ORON.  I  desire  but  one  word  to  end  our  discussions. 

ALC.  To  me  your  silence  will  convey  as  much  as  speech. 

SCENE  IV. — ARSINOE,  CELIMENE,  ELIANTE,  ALCESTE, 
PHILINTE,  ACASTE,  CLITANDRE,  ORONTE. 

Ac.  (To  Celimene).  We  have  both  come,  by  your 
leave,  madam,  to  clear  up  a  certain  little  matter  with  you. 

CL.  (To  Oronte  and  Alceste).  Your  presence  happens 
fortunately,  gentlemen ;  for  this  affair  concerns  you  also. 

ARS.  (To  Cttimene).  No  doubt  you  are  surprised  at 
seeing  me  here,  madam;  but  these  gentlemen  are  the 
cause  of  my  intrusion.  They  both  came  to  see  me,  and 
complained  of  a  proceeding  which  I  could  not  have  cre- 
dited. I  have  too  high  an  opinion  of  your  kindness  of 
heart  ever  to  believe  you  capable  of  such  a  crime ;  my 
eyes  even  have  refused  to  give  credence  to  their  strongest 
proofs,  and  in  my  friendship,  forgetting  trivial  disagree- 
ments, I  have  been  induced  to  accompany  them  here,  to 
hear  you  refute  this  slander. 

Ac.  Yes,  madam,  let  us  see,  with  composure,  how  you 
will  manage  to  bear  this  out.  This  letter  has  been  written 
by  you,  to  Clitandre. 

CL.  And  this  tender  epistle  you  have  addressed  to 
Acaste. 

Ac.  (To  Oronte  and  Alee ste).  This  writing  is  not  alto- 
gether unknown  to  you,  gentlemen,  and  I  have  no  doubt 
that  her  kindness  has  before  now  made  you  familiar  with 

VOL.    II.  O 

242  THE    MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  v. 

her  hand.      But  this  is  well  worth  the  trouble  of  read- 
ing." 

"  You  are  a  strange  man  to  condemn  my  liveliness  of 
spirits,  and  to  reproach  me  that  I  am  never  so  merry  as  when 
I  am  not  with  you.  Nothing  could  be  more  unjust y  and  if 
you  do  not  come  very  soon  to  ask  my  pardon  for  this  offence, 
I  shall  never  forgive  you  as  long  as  I  live.  Our  great  hulk- 
ing booby  of  a  Viscount."™  He  ought  to  have  been  here. 
"  Our  great  hulking  booby  of  a  Viscount,  with  whom  you 
begin  your  complaints,  is  a  man  who  would  not  at  all  suit 
me  ;  and  ever  since  I  watched  him  for  full  three-quarters  of 
an  hour  spitting  in  a  well  to  make  circles  in  the  water,  I 
never  could  have  a  good  opinion  of  him.  As  for  the  little 
Marquis  ..."  that  is  myself,  ladies  and  gentlemen,  be 
it  said  without  the  slightest  vanity,  .  .  .  "  As  for  the 
little  Marquis,  who  held  my  hand  yesterday  for  a  long  while, 
I  think  that  there  is  nothing  so  diminutive  as  his  whole  per- 
son, and  his  sole  merit  consists  in  his  cloak  and  sword.  As 
to  the  man  with  the  green  shoulder  knot."**  {To  Alceste}. 
It  is  your  turn  now,  Sir.  "  As  to  the  man  with  the  green 
shoulder  knot,  he  amuses  me  sometimes  with  his  bluntness 
and  his  splenetic  behaviour  ;  but  there  are  hundreds  of  times 
when  I  think  him  the  greatest  bore  in  the  world.  Respecting 
the  man  with  the  big  waistcoat .  .  .  "37  (To  Oronte). 
This  is  your  share.  "  Respecting  the  man  with  the  big 
waistcoat,  who  has  thought  fit  to  set  up  as  a  wit,  and  wishes 
to  be  an  author  in  spite  of  every  one,  I  cannot  even  take  the 
trouble  to  listen  to  what  he  says;  and  his  prose  bores  me  just 

84  Acaste  reads  the  letter  written  to  Clitandre ;  and  Clitandre,  the  one 
written  to  Acaste. 

85  It  has  been  said  that  the  "great  hulking  booby  of  a  Viscount "  was 
intended  for  the  Count  de  Guiche,  and  that  Madame,  the  wife  of  Louis 
XIV.'s  brother,  whose  Chevalier  he  was,  wished  the  description  to  be 
omitted,  but  that  the  King  told  Moliere  to  leave  it  in.     All  this  appears  to 
be  mere  gossip,  unsupported  by  anything. 

86  On  page  191,  note  2,  we  find  that  Moliere,  on  playing  the  part  of 
Alceste,  wore  a  dress  ''  ornamented  with  green  ribands  ;"    hence  the  allu- 
sion to  "  the  green  shoulder  knot." 

87  Oronte  wore  a  big  waistcoat  (veste)  to  distinguish  himself  from  the 
other  personages.     But  afterwards  everyone  wore  such  a  waistcoat ;  and 
La  Grange  and  Vinot,  the  editors  of  the  first  collected  edition  of  Mo- 
liere's  works,  finding  that  this  no  longer  distinguished  Oronte,  called  him 
I'homme  au  sonnet,  the  sonnetteer. 

SCENE  vi.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  243 

as  much  as  his  poetry.  Take  it  then  for  granted  that  I  do 
not  always  enjoy  myself  so  much  as  you  think  ;  and  that  I 
wish  for  you,  more  than  I  care  to  say,  amongst  all  the  enter- 
tainments to  which  I  am  dragged;  and  that  the  presence  of 
those  we  love  is  an  excellent  relish  to  our  pleasures.'1 

CL.  Now  for  myself. 

"  Your  Clitandre,  whom  you  mention  to  me,  and  who 
has  always  such  a  quantity  of  soft  expressions  at  his  com- 
mand, is  the  last  man  for  whom  I  could  feel  any  affection. 
He  must  be  crazed  in  persuading  himself  that  I  love  him; 
and  you  are  so  too  in  believing  that  I  do  not  love  you.  You 
had  better  change  your  fancies  for  his,  and  come  and  see  me 
as  often  as  you  can,  to  help  me  in  bearing  the  annoyance  of 
being  pestered  by  him.1'  This  shows  the  model  of  a  lovely 
character,  madam ;  and  I  need  not  tell  you  what  to  call  it. 
It  is  enough.  We  shall,  both  of  us,  show  this  admirable 
sketch  of  your  heart  everywhere  and  to  everybody. 

Ac.  I  might  also  say  something,  and  the  subject  is 
tempting ;  but  I  deem  you  beneath  my  anger ;  and  I  will 
show  you  that  little  marquises  can  find  worthier  hearts 
than  yours  to  console  themselves. 

SCENE  V. — CELIMENE,   £LIANTE,    ARSINOE,    ALCESTE, 
ORONTE,  PHILINTE. 

ORON.  What !  Am  I  to  be  pulled  to  pieces  in  this  fash- 
ion, after  all  that  you  have  written  to  me  ?  And  does  your 
heart,  with  all  its  semblance  of  love,  plight  its  faith  to  all 
mankind  by  turns !  Bah,  I  have  been  too  great  a  dupe, 
but  I  shall  be  so  no  longer.  You  have  done  me  a  service, 
in  showing  yourself  in  your  true  colours  to  me.  I  am  the 
richer  by  a  heart  which  you  thus  restore  to  me,  and  find 
my  revenge  in  your  loss.  (To  Alceste).  Sir,  I  shall  no 
longer  be  an  obstacle  to  your  flame,  and  you  may  settle 
matters  with  this  lady  as  soon  as  you  please. 

SCENE  VI. — CELIMENE,  &LIANTE,  ARSINOE,  ALCESTE, 

PHILINTE. 

ARS.  (To  Celimlne}.  This  is  certainly  one  of  the  basest 
actions  which  I  have  ever  seen  ;  I  can  no  longer  be  silent, 
and  feel  quite  upset.  Has  any  one  ever  seen  the  like  of 
it  ?  I  do  not  concern  myself  much  in  the  affairs  of  other 

244  THE  MISANTHROPE-  [ACTV. 

people,  but  this  gentleman  {pointing  to  Alceste),  who  has 
staked  the  whole  of  his  happiness  on  you,  an  honourable 
and  deserving  man  like  this,  and  who  worshipped  you  to 
madness,  ought  he  to  have  been  .  .  . 

AL.  Leave  me,  I  pray  you,  madam,  to  manage  my  own 
affairs  ;  and  do  not  trouble  yourself  unnecessarily.  In 
vain  do  I  see  you  espouse  my  quarrel.  I  am  unable  to 
repay  you  for  this  great  zeal ;  and  if  ever  I  intended  to 
avenge  myself  by  choosing  some  one  else,  it  would  not  be 
you  whom  I  would  select. 

ARS.  And  do  you  imagine,  sir,  that  I  ever  harboured 
such  a  thought,  and  that  I  am  so  very  anxious  to  secure 
you  ?  You  must  be  very  vain,  indeed,  to  flatter  yourself 
with  such  an  idea.  Celimene's  leavings  are  a  commodity 
of  which  no  one  needs  be  so  very  much  enamoured.  Pray, 
undeceive  yourself,  and  do  not  carry  matters  with  so  high 
a  hand.  People  like  me  are  not  for  such  as  you.  You 
will  do  much  better  to  remain  dangling  after  her  skirts, 
and  I  long  to  see  so  beautiful  a  match. 

SCENE  VII.  —  CELIMENE,   ELIANTE,  ALCESTE,  PHILINTE. 

AL.  (To  Celimene).  Well  !  I  have  held  my  tongue, 
notwithstanding  all  I  have  seen,  and  I  have  let  everyone 
have  his  say  before  me.  Have  I  controlled  myself  long 
enough  ?  and  will  you  now  allow  me  .  .  . 

CEL.  Yes,  you  may  say  what  you  like  ;  you  are  justified 
when  you  complain,  and  you  may  reproach  me  with  any- 
thing you  please.  I  confess  that  I  am  in  the  wrong ;  and 
overwhelmed  by  confusion  I  do  not  seek  by  any  idle  ex- 
cuse to  palliate  my  fault.  The  anger  of  the  others  I  have 
despised  ;  but  I  admit  my  guilt  towards  you.  No  doubt, 
your  resentment  is  just ;  I  know  how  culpable  I  must  ap- 
pear to  you,  that  every  thing  speaks  of  my  treachery  to 
you,  and  that,  in  short,  you  have  cause  to  hate  me.  Do 
so,  I  consent  to  it. 

ALC.  But  can  I  do  so,  you  traitress  ?  Can  I  thus  get 
the  better  of  all  my  tenderness  for  you  ?  And  although  I 
wish  to  hate  you  with  all  my  soul,  shall  I  find  a  heart 
quite  ready  to  obey  me.  (To  Eliante  and Philinte).  You 
see  what  an  unworthy  passion  can  do,  and  I  call  you  both 
as  witnesses  of  my  infatuation.  Nor,  truth  to  say,  is  this 

SCENE  viii.]  THE   MISANTHROPE.  245 

all,  and  you  will  see  me  carry  it  out  to  the  bitter  end,  to 
show  you  that  it  is  wrong  to  call  us  wise,  and  that  in  all 
hearts  there  remains  still  something  of  the  man.  (To  Ce~ 
limene).  Yes,  perfidious  creature,  I  am  willing  to  forget 
your  crimes.  I  can  find,  in  my  own  heart,  an  excuse  for 
all  your  doings,  and  hide  them  under  the  name  of  a  weak- 
ness into  which  the  vices  of  the  age  betrayed  your  youth, 
provided  your  heart  will  second  the  design  which  I  have 
formed  of  avoiding  all  human  creatures,  and  that  you  are 
determined  to  follow  me  without  delay  into  the  solitude 
in  which  I  have  made  a  vow  to  pass  my  days.  It  is  by 
that  only,  that,  in  every  one's  opinion,  you  can  repair  the 
harm  done  by  your  letters,  and  that,  after  the  scandal 
which  every  noble  heart  must  abhor,  it  may  still  be  pos- 
sible for  me  to  love  you. 

CEL.  What !  I  renounce  the  world  before  I  grow  old, 
and  bury  myself  in  your  wilderness  ! 

ALC.  If  your  affection  responds  to  mine  what  need  the 
rest  of  the  world  signify  to  you  ?  Am  I  not  sufficient  for 
you? 

CEL.  Solitude  is  frightful  to  a  widow  of  twenty.88  I  do 
not  feel  my  mind  sufficiently  grand  and  strong  to  resolve 
to  adopt  such  a  plan.  If  the  gift  of  my  hand  can  satisfy 
your  wishes,  I  might  be  induced  to  tie  such  bonds ;  and 
marriage  .  .  . 

ALC.  No.  My  heart  loathes  you  now,  and  this  refusal 
alone  effects  more  than  all  the  rest.  As  you  are  not  dis- 
posed, in  those  sweet  ties,  to  find  all  in  all  in  me,  as  I 
would  find  all  in  all  in  you,  begone,  I  refuse  your  offer, 
and  this  much-felt  outrage  frees  me  for  ever  from  your 
unworthy  toils. 

SCENE  VIII. — &LIANTE,  ALCESTE,  PHILINTE. 

ALC.  (To  Eliante).  Madam,  your  beauty  is  adorned  by 
a  hundred  virtues ;  and  I  never  saw  anything  in  you  but 
what  was  sincere.  For  a  long  while  I  thought  very  highly 

88  It  would  be  against  all  the  traditions  of  the  French  stage  to  let  a 
respectable  unmarried  young  lady  be  visited  by  gentlemen  ;  hence  Alceste 
says  (Act  i.,  Scene  I,  page  199),  that  "  Celimene  is  a  young  widow." 
Arsinoe  also  would  not  have  given  vent  to  her  insinuations  (page  222)  if 
this  had  not  been  the  case. 

246  THE  MISANTHROPE.  [ACT  T. 

of  you ;  but  allow  me  to  esteem  you  thus  for  ever,  and 
suffer  my  heart  in  its  various  troubles  not  to  offer  itself  for 
the  honour  of  your  acceptance.  I  feel  too  unworthy,  and 
begin  to  perceive  that  Heaven  did  not  intend  me  for  the 
marriage  bond ;  that  the  homage  of  only  the  remainder 
of  a  heart  unworthy  of  you,  would  be  below  your  merit, 
and  that  in  short  .  .  . 

EL.  You  may  pursue  this  thought.  I  am  not  at  all 
embarassed  with  my  hand ;  and  here  is  your  friend,  who, 
without  giving  me  much  trouble,  might  possibly  accept  it 
if  I  asked  him. 

PHIL.  Ah !  Madam,  I  ask  for  nothing  better  than  that 
honour,  and  I  could  sacrifice  my  life  and  soul  for  it. 

ALC.  May  you,  to  taste  true  contentment,  preserve  for 
ever  these  feelings  towards  each  other !  Deceived  on  all 
sides,  overwhelmed  with  injustice,  I  will  fly  from  an  abyss 
where  vice  is  triumphant,  and  seek  out  some  small  secluded 
nook  on  earth,  where  one  may  enjoy  the  freedom  of  being 
an  honest  man. 

PHIL.  Come,  madam,  let  us  leave  nothing  untried  to 
deter  him  from  the  design  on  which  his  heart  is  set. 

LE  MEDECIN  MALGRE  LUI. 

COMEDIE. 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  SPITE  OF  HIMSELF. 

A    COMEDY    IN    THREE    ACTS. 

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  PROSE.) 

AUGUST  6xH,  1666. 

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE. 

The  Physician  in  spite  of  Himself  was  played  for  the  first  time  on  the 
6th  of  August,  1666,  according  to  Moliere's  nearly  invariable  rule,  by 
which  he  always  produced  a  farcical  work,  which  made  people  laugh, 
after  a  serious  one,  which  had  caused  people  to  reflect.  The  plot  of  this 
play  was  not  entirely  new  ;  it  existed  probably  in  the  outline  of  the  Italian 
Commedia  delFarte,  and  was  found  among  the  stories  related  by  the  trou- 
badours and  trouveres.  Moliere  must  have  often  played  a  remodelling  of 
it  in  the  Provinces.  La  Grange,  in  his  Register  (see  Introductory  Notices 
to  The  School  for  Wives  critised,  Vol.  I.,),  speaks  of  a  farce  called  Le 
Fagotier,  of  another  called  Le  Fagoteux — both  words  meaning  The  Fag- 
got-Maker— and  of  a  third  called  Le  Medecin  par  force.  But  all  these 
small  plays  appear  to  refer  to  one  jocular  short  comedy,  which  was 
changed  and  doctored  to  suit  the  tastes  of  the  different  provincial  audi- 
ences. Moliere  got  his  chief  plan  from  these,  and  probably  from  nothing 
else.  The  Physician  in  spite  of  Himself  consists  of  two  different  parts, 
each  drawn  from  a  different  source.  There  is,  first,  the  idea  of  a  clodhop- 
per on  whom  his  wife  wishes  to  be  avenged,  and  whom  she  pretends  to  be 
a  skilful  physician,  whose  zeal  has  to  be  stimulated  by  the  stick  :  and  there 
is,  secondly,  the  idea  of  a  girl  who  feigns  to  be  dumb,  but  who  recovers 
speech  again,  and  abuses  it  in  such  a  manner  that  every  one  wishes  her  to 
be  speechless. 

One  of  the  oldest  accounts  of  the  story  on  which  Moliere's  play  is 
based,  but  which  we  are  convinced  the  French  dramatist  never  saw,  is  the 
following, — to  be  found  in  a  Sanscrit  collection,  La  Couka  Saptali. 

"  In  the  town  of  Pantchapoura  lived  a  king  called  Satroumardana.  His 
daughter,  named  Madanarekha,  had  an  abscess  in  her  throat.  The  doc- 
tors applied  all  kinds  of  plasters,  but  without  effect,  so  at  last  they  agreed 
that  there  was  no  remedy  for  the  disease.  Then  the  King  proclaimed  in 
every  country  that  he  who  cured  the  Princess  should  be  richly  rewarded. 
The  wife  of  a  Brahmin  who  lived  in  a  village,  having  heard  the  proclama- 
tion, said  to  the  messenger,  '  My  husband  is  the  most  skilful  magician 
and  charmer  in  the  world,  Take  him  with  you ;  he  will  cure  the  Princess.' 
And  she  said  to  her  husband,  '  Pretend  to  be  a  magician  and  a  charmer, 
and  go  boldly  into  the  town  and  cure  the  Princess.  You  won't  waste 
your  time.'  The  Brahmin  went  to  the  palace  and  to  the  Princess,  sprinkled 
her  with  water,  blew  at  her,  and  imitated  the  charmers,  muttering  the 

249 

250  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF. 

while  between  his  teeth.  Suddenly  he  cried  out  at  the  top  of  his  voice, 
and  uttered  a  farrago  of  the  most  absurd  words  he  could  think  of.  On 
hearing  all  these  strange  utterances,  the  Princess  was  taken  with  such  a 
fit  of  laughter,  that  the  abscess  broke  and  she  was  cured.  The  King, 
transported  with  joy,  overloaded  the  Brahmin  with  presents.1' 

It  is,  however  possible  that  Moliere  may  have  seen  Olearius'  Scientific 
Journey  to  Moscow  and  Persia,  which  history  was  translated  into  French 
as  early  as  the  year  1656  by  the  celebrated  Wickefort. 

The  account  to  be  found  there  is  as  follows  :  "  The  Grand  Duke  Boris 
Gudenow,  who  reigned  during  the  years  1597  and  1605,  was  according  to 
the  relation  of  Olearius,  very  much  afflicted  with  the  gout.  At  a  certain 
period,  when  he  suffered  very  severe  pains,  he  caused  it  publicly  to  be 
proclaimed  at  Moscow,  that  he  would  reward  with  extraordinary  favour 
and  great  riches,  the  man,  whoever  he  might  be,  that  would  relieve  him 
from  those  pains.  It  seems  that  no  one  voluntarily  appeared  to  earn  the 
favour  of  the  Grand  Duke  :  and,  indeed,  no  wonder,  for  a  doctor  had  his 
whole  existence  at  stake  in  those  times  in  Russia  if  his  cure  failed,  upon 
some  high  or  noble  patient ;  and  Gudenow  was  in  the  habit  of  making 
the  surgeon,  as  if  he  considered  the  latter  as  absolute  master  of  nature, 
responsible  for  the  result  of  his  art. 

"  The  wife  of  a  certain  bojaar,  or  councillor  of  the  cabinet,  who  re- 
ceived very  harsh  treatment  from  her  husband,  took  the  advantage  of  this 
public  edict  of  the  Grand  Duke  to  revenge  herself,  in  a  cunning  manner, 
on  her  cruel  husband.  She  therefore  had  the  Duke  informed  that  her 
husband  possessed  an  infallible  remedy  for  the  gout,  but  that  he  was  not 
sufficiently  humane  to  impart  it. 

"  The  bojaar  was  immediately  sent  for  to  court,  and  strictly  examined. 
The  latter  declared,  by  all  that  was  holy,  that  he  was  unacquainted  with 
any  such  remedy,  and  had  not  the  slightest  knowledge  of  medicine.  But 
oaths  would  not  avail  him  ;  Gudenow  had  him  severely  whipped  and  con- 
fined. When,  shortly  after,  he  was  again  examined,  he  repeated  the  same 
declarations,  adding  that  this  trick  was  probably  played  upon  him  by  his 
wife ;  the  Duke  had  him  whipped  a  second  time,  but  more  severely,  and 
threatened  him  with  death  if  he  did  not  speedily  relieve  him  from  pain. 
Seized  with  terror,  the  bojaar  was  now  entirely  at  a  loss  what  to  be  at. 
He  promised  to  do  his  best,  but  requested  a  few  days  in  order  to  have  the 
necessary  drugs  gathered.  Having  with  great  difficulty,  had  his  request 
granted,  he  sent  to  Ozirbalt,  two  days'  journey  from  Moscow,  in  order  to 
get  thence  all  sorts  of  drugs  which  were  to  be  had  there.  He  sent  for  a 
cartload  of  them,  mixed  them  all  together,  and  prepared  therewith  a  bath 
for  the  Duke,  in  the  hope  of  his  blind  cure  proving  successful.  Gudenow, 
after  having  used  the  bath,  really  found  some  relief,  and  the  bojaar  had 
his  life  spared  him.  Nevertheless,  because  he  had  known  such  an  art, 
denied  his  knowledge  of  it,  and  refused  his  assistance  to  the  Grand  Duke, 
the  latter  had  him  again  thoroughly  whipt,  and  after  being  entirely  re- 
covered, he  gave  him  a  new  dress,  two  hundred  rubles,  and  eighteen 
slaves,  by  way  of  a  present.  In  addition  to  this,  he  seriously  admonished 
the  doctor  never  to  be  revenged  on  his  wife.  It  is  said  that  the  bojaar,  after 
this  occurrence,  lived  many  years  in  peace  and  happiness  with  his 
spouse." 

The  idea  of  a  woman  avenging  herself  on  her  husband,  by  pretending 
that  he  is  a  doctor,  and  must  be  compelled  to  exercise  his  art,  is  found  in 
many  ancient  fabliaux  ;  above  all,  in  one  of  the  twelfth  century,  Le  vilain 
Mire,  the  rustic  physician,  which  is  nearly  the  same  story  as  that  told  by 

THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  251 

Olearius,  except  that  it  is  the  king's  daughter  who  has  a  fish-bone  sticking 
in  her  throat,  which  prevents  her  eating  and  drinking.  The  rustic's  wife, 
who  is  the  daughter  of  a  poor  knight,  and  whom  her  husband  has  mal- 
treated, revenges  herself  in  the  same  way  as  the  bojaar's  spouse,  but  the 
cure  is  different ;  the  rustic  scratches  himself  in  all  kinds  of  ridiculous  at- 
titudes, so  that  the  royal  maiden  laughs  to  such  a  degree  that  the  fish- 
bone flies  out.  The  ending  is  also  different.  The  king,  delighted  that 
his  daughter  has  been  cured,  sends  for  a  great  many  sick  people,  and 
orders  the  physician  to  restore  them  to  health.  He  refuses,  and  is  beaten  ; 
whereupon  he  commands  a  great  fire  to  be  kindled  in  the  large  hall,  tells 
all  his  patients  that  he  has  an  infallible  remedy,  and  that  he  is  going  to 
put  the  most  seriously  ill  of  them  into  the  fire,  to  give  his  ashes  to  the 
others  to  drink,  and  that  then  they  shall  be  cured.  It  is  needless  to  say 
that  all  immediately  recover  their  health  in  a  great  measure. 

Rabelais,  in  the  twenty-fourth  chapter  of  the  third  book  of  Pantagruel, 
relates  that  he  and  some  of  his  friends  acted  in  his  youth  "the  moral 
comedy  of  him  who  had  espoused  and  married  a  dumb  wife.  .  .  .  The 
good  honest  man,  her  husband,  was  very  earnestly  urgent  to  have  the 
fillet  of  her  tongue  untied,  and  would  needs  have  her  speak  by  any  means. 
At  his  desire,  some  pains  were  taken  on  her,  and  partly  by  the  industry 
of  the  physician,  other  part  by  the  expertness  of  the  surgeon,  the  ency- 
liglotte  which  she  had  under  her  tongue  being  cut,  she  spoke,  and  spoke 
again  ;  yea,  within  a  few  hours  she  spoke  so  loud,  so  much,  so  fiercely, 
and  so  long,  that  her  poor  husband  retuined  to  the  same  physician  for  a 
receipt  to  make  her  hold  her  peace.  There  are,  quoth  the  physician, 
many  proper  remedies  in  our  art  to  make  dumb  women  speak,  but  there 
are  none  that  ever  I  could  learn  therein  to  make  them  silent.  The  only 
cure  which  I  have  found  out  is  their  husband's  deafness.  The  wretch  be- 
came within  a  few  weeks  thereafter,  by  virtue  of  some  drugs,  charms,  or 
enchantments,  which  the  physician  had  prescribed  unto  him,  so  deaf,  that 
he  could  not  have  heard  the  thundering  of  nineteen  hundred  cannons  at 
a  salvo.  His  wife,  perceiving  that  indeed  he  was  as  deaf  as  a  door  nail, 
and  that  her  scolding  was  but  in  vain,  sith  that  he  heard  her  not,  she  grew 
stark  mad.  Some  time  after  the  doctor  asked  for  his  fee  of  the  husband ; 
who  answered,  That  truly  he  was  deaf,  and  so  was  not  able  to  understand 
what  the  tenour  of  his  demand  might  be.  Whereupon  the  leech  be- 
dusted  him  with  a  little,  I  know  not  what,  sort  of  powder ;  which  rendered 
him  a  fool  immediately,  so  great  was  the  stultificating  virtue  of  that 
strange  kind  of  pulverized  dose.  Then  did  this  fool  of  a  husband,  and 
his  mad  wife,  join  together,  and  falling  on  the  doctor  and  the  surgeon,  did 
so  scratch,  bethwack,  and  bang  them,  that  they  were  left  half  dead  upon 
the  place,  so  furious  were  the  blows  which  they  received.  I  never  in  my 
lifetime  laughed  so  much,  as  at  the  acting  of  that  buffoonery," 

Menage  and  Brossette  mention  that  Moliere  intended  Sganarelle  for  a 
certain  wig-maker  of  his  time,  Didier  1'Amour,  whose  shop  was  under  the 
stairs  of  la  Sainte  Chapelle,  whose  first  wife  was  very  violent,  like  Martine, 
and  to  whom  Boileau,  later  on,  gave  a  place  in  the  Lutrin.  It  really 
seems  that  Sganarelles  may  be  found  in  every  country, — men  who,  with  a 
certain  amount  of  natural  mother-wit,  and  a  few  sesquipedalian  words, 
acquired  heaven  knows  where,  are  the  heroes  of  the  bar-parlour,  and  the 
admired  of  all  admirers  among  their  boon-companions.  Such  men  may 
possibly  love  their  wives,  but  they  box  their  ears ;  they  may  have  a  cer- 
tain feeling  for  their  children,  but,  instead  of  giving  them  bread,  they 
squander  their  scanty  wages,  lazily  gained,  in  the  public-house,  caring 

252  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF. 

neither  for  the  day  nor  the  morrow,  never  thinking  of  the  future  or  the 
past,  and  deserving,  in  one  word,  the  reputation  of  "  real  good  fellows." 

It  has  been  well  said  by  Boileau,  that  "  in  the  smallest  farces  of  Mo- 
liere,  there  are  some  admirable  touches  that  may  vainly  be  sought  in  the 
finest  pieces  of  other  comic  authors."  The  Physician  in  spite  of  Himself 
is  a  proof  of  this.  It  is  written  in  a  most  unbounded  spirit  of  mirth,  the 
matrimonial  breezes  wafting  a  certain  amount  of  refreshing  coolness 
through  it  all.  The  way  in  which  Sganarelle  is  dubbed,  or  rather  drubbed 
a  doctor,  is  highly  amusing  ;  and  the  cure  of  the  dumb  girl,  and  the  use 
which  she  makes  of  her  recovered  speech,  contains  a  philosophical  lesson 
which  may  be  sometimes  applied  to  the  way  in  which  nouveaux  riches 
spread  their  newly  acquired  wealth.  The  learned  and  anatomical  dis- 
quisitions between  Sganarelle  and  Geronte  are  also  very  entertaining,  as 
well  as  the  growth  of  greed  in  the  rustic  physician. 

In  the  second  volume  of  the  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,  Lon- 
don, 1732,  The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Himself  is  dedicated  to  Dr.  Mead, 
under  the  title  of  Doctor  and  no  Doctor,  in  the  following  words  : 

SIR, — MOLIERE  having  sent  most  of  his  Performances  Patronless  into  the  World, 
his  Translators  have  determined  to  supply  this  his  only  Defect  by  prefixing  some 
favourite  Name  to  each  of 'em,  in  order  to  recommend  'em  the  more  powerfully  to 
the  perusal  of  their  Countrymen.  None  can  have  a  stronger  Influence  in  this  re- 
spect than  that  of  Dr  Mead,  for  if  we  have  but  as  many  Readers  as  owe  to  him  being 
in  a  Capacity  of  reading  at  all,  our  Bookseller  will  have  no  cause  to  repent  of  his 
undertaking. — It  may,  by  some,  be  here  expected,  that  I  should  apologize  for  my 
Author,  as  having  in  this  and  several  other  of  his  Comedies  treated  Medicine  and 
its  Professors  with  a  severe  kind  of  Freedom  ;  but  this,  Sir,  to  one  of  Your  Discern- 
ment and  Politeness  would  be  highly  impertinent. 

As  'twas  perverted  Medicine  alone,  and  its  quack  Professors  that  were  the  sub- 
jects of  his  Ridicule,  Dr  Mead  can  be  no  more  affected  by  it  than  a  true  Prophet 
by  the  Punishment  of  Imposture,  nor  be  displeas'd  with  a  Satire  he  could  not 
fear. 

You  are  too  well  acquainted,  Sir,  with  the  universal  History  of  Physick,  to  be 
ignorant  of  the  State  of  it  at  Paris  in  Moliere' s  time,  or  the  Characters  of  their 
Physicians.  AH  they  employed  themselves  about,  was  searching  after  visionary 
Specificks,  and  trying  of  chemical  Tricks  ;  the  Cause  of  a  Disease  was  never  en- 
quir'd  into,  nor  the  Symptoms  of  it  regarded,  but  hypothetical  Jargon  and  random 
Prescription  serv'd  in  the  room.  This  made  Medicine  become  a  Pest,  instead  of  a 
Remedy,  on  which  account  you'll  readily  acknowledge  that  the  Chastisement  was 
just.  On  the  contrary,  Sir,  Your  Practice  was  founded  on  the  Rock  of  sound 
Learning,  and  Your  Success  secur'd  by  an  extensive  and  well-mark'd  Experience  ; 
by  which  means  You  have  established  the  Honour  of  the  Profession,  are  become  a 
general  Blessing  to  the  Society  You  belong  to,  and  have  been  capable,  as  a  good 
Physician,  of  doing  more  Service  in  Your  Generation  than  all  the  bad  ones  have 
done  Mischief. 

It  will  be  thought,  I  know,  by  the  World,  that  when  I'm  speaking  of  Dr  Mead, 
I  should  not  only  celebrate  him  as  an  excellent  Physician,  but  as  an  excellent  Man 
likewise,  and  an  accomplish'd  Gentleman  ;  but  these  Characters  are  necessary  to 
and  included  in  the  other.  To  be  a  good  Physician,  a  Man  must  possess  all  the 
Virtues  of  Humanity  and  Politeness,  he  must  be  Eyes  to  the  blind,  Feet  to  the 
lame,  and  Health  and  Refreshment  to  the  sick  and  needy ;  he  must  be  a  fine  Schol- 
ar by  Education,  and  a  fine  Gentleman  by  being  obliged  to  converse  with  the  best 
Company  :  In  all  these  respects,  therefore,  You  are  certainly  as  eminent,  Sir,  as 
You  are  in  Your  Profession. 

THAT  Heaven  may  prolong  Your  Life  for  the  Benefit  of  Your  Fellow-creatures, 
as  long  as  Life  can  be  a  Good,  and  that  at  last,  when  you  must  quit  this  mortal  Coil, 
You  may  do  it  with  that  Ease,  which  You  have  so  often  procur'd  for  others  in  those 
critical  Moments,  is  the  sincere  Prayer  of  all  that  ever  heard  of  Your  Name,  but  of 
none  more  sincerely  than  of,— SIR,  Your  most  obedient  humble  Servant, 

THE  TRANSLATOR. 

The  Physician  in  Spite  of  Himself  has  been  often  imitated  by  English 

THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE  OF   HIMSELF.  253 

dramatists ;  first  by  Lacy  in  The  Dumb  Lady ;  or  the  Farrier  made  a 
Physician,  a  farce  in  five  acts,  acted  about  1672,  and  in  which  the  adapter 
played  probably  ''  Drench,  the  farrier."  The  main  plot  is  taken  from 
Moliere's  play,  and  the  catastrophe  from  Love  is  the  best  Doctor  (see  In- 
troductory Notice  to  Love  is  the  best  Doctor). 

Another  partial  adaptation  of  Moliere's  play  is  by  Mrs.  Centlivre,  who. 
in  Love's  Contrivance,  acted  in  1703  at  Drury  Lane,  imitated  several  of 
the  French  author's  comedies  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Forced 
Marriage,  Vol.  I). 

Henry  Fielding  has  also  nearly  literally  followed  Moliere's  play,  and 
has  added  some  songs,  in  a  "  ballad  farce,"  called  The  Mock  Doctor ;  or 
the  Dumb  Lady  Cured,  acted  at  Drury  Lane  in  1732.  This  piece  was, 
and  has  remained,  a  great  favourite  on  the  English  stage. 

Another  imitation  of  Moliere's  Physician,  in  Spite  of  Himself,  or  rather 
a  remodelling  of  Fielding's  translation,  is  George  Wood's  The  Irish  Doc- 
tor; or  the  Dumb  Lady  cured,  first  performed  at  the  Queen's  Theatre, 
November  igth,  1844.  It  is  Fielding's  Mock  Doctor,  with  all  the  spirit 
evaporated.  Sganarelle  becomes  an  Irish  broom-maker,  Dennis  Murphy, 
and  Ge"ronte,  Sir  Ralph  Credulous. 

The  "  high-born  and  most  hopeful  prince,"  to  whom  Lacy  inscribed 
his  play,  was  the  eldest  of  the  three  natural  sons  of  Charles  II.  by  Bar- 
bara Villiers,  wife  of  Roger  Palmer,  Earl  of  Castlemaine,  better  known  as 
Duchess  of  Cleveland,  a  dignity  conferred  by  her  royal  keeper  in  testi- 
mony of  the  high  opinion  he  entertained  of  her  "  personal"  virtues,1 — at 
least  so  runs  the  preamble  of  the  patent  of  creation. 

At  the  date  of  the  play,  the  hopeful  prince  enjoyed  the  title  of  Earl  of 
Southampton,  "  as,''  says  Collins,  the  Peerage  writer,  "  heir  of  his  mother, 
the  Duchess  of  Cleveland,"  that  being  her  second  title.  Upon  the  ist  of 
April  1673,  he  was  installed  a  Knight  of  the  Garter,  and  upon  the  loth  of 
September  1675  was  created  Duke  of  Southampton,  Earl  of  Chichester, 
and  Baron  of  Newberry,  with  remainder  to  the  heirs-male  of  his  body, 
whom  failing,  to  his  younger  brother  George,  Duke  of  Northumberland, 
Upon  the  death  of  his  mother,  at  her  house  of  Chiswick,  in  the  county  of 
Middlesex,  on  the  gth  October  1709,  the  title  of  Cleveland,  under  the 
limitations  in  the  patent,  devolved  on  her  eldest  son  Charles.  His  Grace 
married,  when  eighteen,  Mary,  heiress  of  Sir  Henry  Wood,  the  elder 
brother  of  Thomas,  Bishop  of  Litchfield  and  Coventry.  The  Duchess  died 
in  1680,  and  was  buried  in  Westminster  Abbey.  By  her  he  had  no  issue. 
This  lady  seems  to  have  brought  him  a  very  handsome  fortune,  as  in  Mi- 
chaelmas term  1685  he  had  a  decree  in  Chancery  against  the  Bishop  for 
,£30,000,  "  as  part  of  his  lady's  fortune." 

In  1694,  the  Duke  took  to  wife  Anne,  daughter  of  Sir  William  Pulteny 
of  Misterton,  in  the  county  of  Leicester,  by  whom  he  had  three  sons  and 
three  daughters.  He  died  on  the  gth  September  1730,  and  was  succeeded 
by  his  eldest  son  William,  who  died  without  issue  in  1774,  so  that  the 
titles  of  Cleveland  and  Southampton  became  extinct,  and  remained  so  for 
more  than  half  a  century,  when  the  Dukedom  of  Cleveland  was  revived 
in  the  person  of  the  Earl  of  Darlington,  the  heir  of  line  of  Lady  Grace 
Fitzroy,  the  second  daughter  of  Duke  Charles,  who  married  Henry  Vane, 
son  of  Lord  Barnard.  Her  eldest  sister  Barbara  died  unmarried ;  and 
her  younger  sister,  Lady  Anne,  who  married  John  Paddey,  Esq.,  departed 
this  life  at  Waterford,  Herts,  on  the  23d  of  January  1769. 

>  Collins'  Peerage,  vol.  i.,  p.  56.  London,  1741.  8vo.  See  also  Introductory 
Notice  to  The  Priucess  of  Elis,  and  Introductory  Notice  to  Love  is  the  best 
Doctor. 

DRAMATIS  PERSONS. 

GERONTE,  father  to  Lucinde. 
LEANDRE,  Lucinde' 's  lover. 
SCAN ARELLE,  husband  to  Martine.  * 
M.  ROBERT,  Sganarelle1  s  neighbour. 
LUCAS,  husband  to  Jacqueline. 
VALERE,  Geronte1  s  servant? 

THIBAUT,  i 

\  peasants. 
PERRIN,  his  son,  J 

LUCINDE,  Geronte's  daughter. 

MARTINE,  Sganarelle' s  wife. 

JACQUELINE,  nurse  at  Geronte1  s,  and  Lucas1  wife. 

*.  This  part  was*played  by  Moliere  himself.  In  the  inventory  of  his 
dresses,  given  by  M.  E.  Soulie",  and  taken  after  his  death,  we  find,  "  The 
clothes  for  the  representation  of  The  Physician  in  spite  of  Himself,  con- 
sisting of  a  doublet,  breeches,  collar,  girdle,  ruff,  woollen  stockings,  and 
pouch,  all  of  yellow  serge,  trimmed  with  green  radon;*  a  satin  dress  with 
breeches  of  short  nap,  flowered  velvet." 

8  The  original  has  domestique,  which  in  the  seventeenth  century  meant 
a  steward,  a  secretary,  a  trustworthy  man. 

*  I  have  not  been  able  to  find  this  word  in  any  dictionary. 

THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  SPITE  OF  HIMSELF. 

(LE  MEDECIN  MALGR&  LUI.) 

ACT  I. 

The  Scene  represents  a  Forest. 

SCENE  I. — SGANARELLE,  MARTINE  (appearing  on  the  stage, 
quarrelling). 

SCAN.  No  ;  I  tell  you  that  I  will  do  nothing  of  the 
kind,  and  that  it  is  for  me  to  speak,  and  to  be  master. 

MART.  And  I  tell  you  that  I  will  have  you  to  live  as  I 
like,  and  that  I  am  not  married  to  you  to  put  up  with 
your  vagaries. 

SCAN.  Oh  !  what  a  nuisance  it  is  to  have  a  wife  !  and 
Aristotle  is  perfectly  right  in  saying  that  a  woman  is  worse 
than  a  demon.* 

MART.  Look  at  Master  Clever,  with  his  silly  Aristotle  ! 

SCAN.  Yes,  Master  Clever.  Find  me  another  faggot- 
binder  who  can  argue  upon  things  as  I  can,  who  has  served 
a  famous  physician  for  six  years,  and  who,  when  only  a 
boy,  had  his  rudiments  at  his  fingers'  ends !' 

4  It  would  be  difficult  to  give  the  passage  in  Aristotle,  where  such  a 
thing  is  stated. 

6  The  rudiments  stand  here  for  a  little  book  containing  the  elements  of 
the  Latin  tongue.  Compare  Shakespeare  in  As  You  Like  It  (Act.  v., 
Scene  4),  who  says —  "  This  boy  is  forest-born. 

And  has  been  tutored  in  the  rudiments 
Of  many  desperate  studies." 
VOL.  II.  R  257 

258  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  r. 

MART.  Plague  on  the  arrant  fool.6 

SCAN.  Plague  on  the  slut ! 

MART.  Cursed  be  the  hour  and  the  day  when  I  took  it 
into  my  head  to  say  yes. 

SCAN.  Cursed  be  the  cuckold  of  a  notary  that  made  me 
sign  my  own  ruination. 

MART.  Certainly  it  well  becomes  you  to  complain  on 
that  score.  Ought  you  not  rather  to  thank  Heaven  every 
minute  of  the  day  that  you  have  me  for  a  wife?  and  did 
you  deserve  to  marry  a  woman  like  me  ? 

SCAN.  It  is  true  you  did  me  too  much  honour,  and  I 
had  great  occasion  to  be  satisfied  with  my  wedding-night. 
Zounds  !  do  not  make  me  open  my  mouth  too  wide :  I 
might  say  certain  things  .  .  . 

MART.  What?     What  could  you  say? 

SGAN.  Enough ;  let  us  drop  the  subject.  It  is  enough 
that  we  know  what  we  know,  and  that  you  were  very  glad 
to  meet  with  me. 

MART.  What  do  you  call  very  glad  to  meet  with  you? 
A  fellow  who  will  drive  me  to  the  hospital — a  debauched, 
deceitful  wretch,  who  gobbles  up  every  farthing  I  have 
got! 

SCAN.  That  is  a  lie :  for  I  drink  part  of  it. 

MART.  Who  sells  piecemeal  every  stick  of  furniture  in 
the  house  ! 

SCAN.  That  is  living  upon  one's  means. 

MART.   Who  has  taken  the  very  bed  from  under  me  ! 

SCAN.   You  will  get  up  all  the  earlier. 

MART.  In  short,  who  does  not  leave  me  a  stick  in  the 
whole  house. 

SCAN.  There  will  be  less  trouble  in  moving. 

MART.  And  who  from  morning  to  night  does  nothing 
but  gamble  and  drink  ! 

SCAN.  That  is  done  in  order  not  to  get  in  the  dumps. 

MART.  And  what  am  I  to  do  all  the  while  with  my 
family? 

SCAN.  Whatever  you  like. 

MART.  I  have  got  four  poor  children  on  my  hands. 

SCAN.  Put  them  down. 

6 The  original  has  foufieffe.     See  Vol.  I.,  page  486,  note  14. 

SCENE  ii.]  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  259 

MART.  Who  keep  asking  me  every  moment  for  bread. 

SCAN.  Whip  them.  When  I  have  had  enough  to  eat  and 
to  drink,  every  one  in  the  house  ought  to  be  satisfied. 

MART.  And  do  you  mean  to  tell  me,  you  sot,  that  things 
can  always  go  on  so? 

SCAN.  Wife,  let  us  proceed  gently,  if  you  please. 

MART.  That  I  am  to  bear  forever  with  your  insolence 
and  your  debauchery? 

SCAN.  Do  not  let  us  get  into  a  passion,  wife. 

MART.  And  that  I  do  not  know  the  way  to  bring  you 
back  to  your  duty? 

SCAN.  Wife,  you  know  that  I  am  not  very  patient,  and 
that  my  arm  is  somewhat  heavy. 

MART.  I  laugh  at  your  threats. 

SCAN.  My  sweet  wife,  my  pet,  your  skin  is  itching  as 
usual. 

MART.  I  will  let  you  see  that  I  am  not  afraid  of  you. 

SCAN.  My  dearest  rib,  you  have  set  your  heart  upon  a 
thrashing.7 

MART.  Do  you  think  that  I  am  frightened  at  your  talk  ? 

SCAN.   Sweet  object  of  my  affections,  I  shall  box  your 
ears  for  you. 

MART.  Sot  that  you  are ! 

SCAN.   I  shall  thrash  you. 

MART.  Walking  wine-cask ! 

SCAN.  I  shall  pummel  you. 

MART.  Infamous  wretch ! 

SCAN.  I  shall  curry  your  skin  for  you. 

MART.  Wretch !  villain  !  deceiver !  cur !  scoundrel !  gal- 
lows-bird !  churl !  rogue  !  scamp  !  thief !    .    .    . 

SCAN.  You  will  have  it,  will  you? 

(  Takes  a  stick  and  beats  her. 

MART,   (shrieking}.     Help !  help  !  help  !  help  ! 

SCAN.  That  is  the  real  way  of  quieting  you. 

SCENE  II. — M.  ROBERT,  SGANARELLE,  MARTINE. 
M.  ROB.  Hulloa,  hulloa,  hulloa  !     Fie  !     What  is  this? 

7  The  original  has  Vous  avez  envie  de  me  derober  quelque  chose,  Yon 
wish  to  rob  me  of  something, — meaning,  of  course,  "  of  a  box  on  the 
ear."  In  English  we  say  also  familiarly  of  any  one  who  receives  some- 
thing which  he  richly  deserves  :  He  has  not  stolen  that. 

260  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  I. 

What  a  disgraceful  thing  !  Plague  take  the  scamp  to  beat 
his  wife  so. 

MART.  (Her  arms  akimbo,  speaks  to  M.  Robert,  and 
makes  him  draw  back;  at  last  she  gives  him  a  slap  on  the 
face}.  And  I  like  him  to  beat  me,  I  do. 

M.  ROB.   If  that  is  the  case,  I  consent  with  all  my  heart. 

MART.  What  are  you  interfering  with  ? 

M.  ROB.  I  am  wrong. 

MART.  Is  it  any  of  your  business? 

M.  ROB.  You  are  right. 

MART.  Just  look  at  this  jackanapes,  who  wishes  to  hin- 
der husbands  from  beating  their  wives  ! 

M.  ROB.  I  apologize. 

MART.  What  have  you  got  to  say  to  it  ? 

M.  ROB.  Nothing. 

MART.  Is  it  for  you  to  poke  your  nose  into  it? 

M.  ROB.  No. 

MART.  Mind  your  own  business. 

M.  ROB.  I  shall  not  say  another  word. 

MART.  It  pleases  me  to  be  beaten. 

M.  ROB.  Agreed. 

MART.  It  does  not  hurt  you. 

M.  ROB.  That  is  true. 

MART.  And  you  are  an  ass  to  interfere  with  what  does 
not  concern  you. 

M.  ROB.  Neighbour,  I  ask  your  pardon  with  all  my 
heart.  Go  on,  thrash  and  beat  your  wife  as  much  as  you 
like ;  I  shall  help  you,  if  you  wish  it.  (He  goes  towards 
Sganarelle,  who  also  speaks  to  him,  makes  him  draw  back, 
beats  him  with  the  stick  he  has  been  using,  and  puts  him  to 
flight}. 

SCAN.  I  do  not  wish  it. 

M.  ROB.  Ah  !  that  is  a  different  thing. 

SCAN.  I  will  beat  her  if  I  like ;  and  I  will  not  beat  her 
if  I  do  not  like. 

M.  ROB.  Very  good. 

SCAN.  She  is  my  wife,  and  not  yours. 

M.  ROB.  Undoubtedly. 

SCAN.  It  is  not  for  you  to  order  me  about. 

M.  ROB.  Just  so. 

SCAN.  I  do  not  want  your  help. 

SCBNB  iv.]          THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  261 

M.  ROB.  Exactly  so. 

SCAN.  And  it  is  like  your  impertinence  to  meddle  with 
other  people's  business.  Remember  that  Cicero  says  that 
between  the  tree  and  the  finger  you  should  not  put  the 
bark. 8  (He  drives  him  away,  then  comes  back  to  his  wife, 
and  says  to  her,  squeezing  her  hand], 

SCENE  III. — SGANARELLE,  MARTINE. 

SCAN.   Come,  let  us  make  it  up.     Shake  hands. 

MART.  Yes,  after  having  beaten  me  thus  ! 

SCAN.  Never  mind  that.     Shake  hands. 

MART.  I  will  not. 

SCAN.  Eh? 

MART.  No. 

SCAN.   Come,  wife ! 

MART.  I  shall  not. 

SCAN.  Come,  I  tell  you. 

MART.  I  will  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 

SCAN.   Come,  come,  come. 

MART.   No ;  I  will  be  angry. 

SCAN.  Bah !  it  is  a  trifle.     Do. 

MART.  Leave  me  alone. 

SCAN.  Shake  hands,  I  tell  you. 

MART.  You  have  treated  me  too  ill. 

SCAN.  Well !  I  beg  your  pardon ;  put  your  hand  there. 

MART.  I  forgive  you;  (aside,  softly},  but  I  shall  make 
you  pay  for  it. 

SCAN.  You  are  silly  to  take  notice  of  it;  these  are 
trifles  that  are  necessary  now  and  then  to  keep  up  good 
feeling  ;  and  five  or  six  strokes  of  a  cudgel  between  peo- 
ple who  love  each  other,  only  brighten  the  affections. 
There  now !  I  am  going  to  the  wood,  and  I  promise  you 
that  you  shall  have  more  than  a  hundred  faggots  to-day. 

SCENE  IV. — MARTINE,  alone, 

Go,  my  lad,  whatever  look  I  may  put  on,  I  shall  not 
forget  to  pay  you  out ;  and  I  am  dying  to  hit  upon  some- 

8  Sganarelle  quotes  the  proverb  wrong,  which  says  that  between  the  tree 
and  the  bark  one  ought  not  to  put  one's  finger,  which  means  figuratively, 
"  Never  interfere  in  things  which  do  not  concern  you."  Of  course  Cicero 
says  nothing  of  the  kind. 

262  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  i. 

thing  to  punish  you  for  the  blows  you  gave  me.  I  know 
well  enough  that  a  wife  has  always  the  means  of  being 
revenged  upon  her  husband  ;  but  that  is  too  delicate  a 
punishment  for  my  gallows-bird  ;  I  want  a  revenge  that 
shall  strike  home  a  little  more,  or  it  will  not  be  satisfaction 
for  the  insult  which  I  have  received. 

SCENE  V. — VALERE,  LUCAS,  MARTINE. 

Luc.  {To  Valere,  without  seeing  Martine).  I'facks  we 
have  undertaken  a  curious  errand  ;  and  I  do  not  know, 
for  my  part,  what  we  shall  get  by  it.9 

VAL.  (To  Lucas,  without  seeing  Mar  tine).  What  is  the 
use  of  grumbling,  good  foster-father  1  we  are  bound  to  do 
as  our  master  tells  us ;  and,  besides,  we  have  both  of  us 
some  interest  in  the  health  of  his  daughter,  our  mistress ; 
for  her  marriage,  which  is  put  off  through  her  illness,  will 
no  doubt  bring  us  in  something.  Horace,  who  is  gener- 
ous, is  the  most  likely  to  succeed  among  her  suitors  ;  and 
although  she  has  shown  some  inclination  for  a  certain 
Leandre,  you  know  well  enough  that  her  father  would 
never  consent  to  receive  him  for  his  son-in-law. 

MART.  {Musing  on  one  side,  thinking  herself  alone).  Can 
I  not  find  out  some  way  of  revenging  myself? 

Luc.  {To  Valere).  But  what  an  idea  has  he  taken  into 
his  head,  since  the  doctors  are  quite  at  a  loss.10 

VAL.  {To  Lucas).  You  may  sometimes  find  by  dint  of 
seeking,  what  cannot  be  found  at  once ;  and  often  in  the 
most  unlikely  spots  you  may  .  .  . 

MART.  {Thinking  herself  always  alone).  Yes;  I  must 
pay  him  out,  no  matter  at  what  cost.  Those  cudgel  blows 
lie  heavy  on  my  stomach  ;  I  cannot  digest  them ;  and  .  .  . 
{She  is  saying  all  this  musingly,  and  as  she  moves,  she  comes 
in  contact  with  the  two  men).  Ah,  gentlemen,  I  beg  your 
pardon,  I  did  not  notice  you,  and  was  puzzling  my  brain 
about  something  that  perplexes  me. 

9  Lucas  speaks  in  a  provincial  dialect,  which  I  think  it  unnecessary 
to  endeavour  to  imitate  in  English. 

10  The  original  has  puisque  les  medecins  y  avont  tons  pardu  leur  latin 
"  since  the  doctors  have  lost  all  their  Latin  over  it."     I  suppose  in  allusion 
to  the  latinized  gibberish  which  the  doctors  in  Moliere's  time  used  to 
employ  in  their  consultations. 

SCENE  v.]  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  263 

VAL.  Every  one  has  his  troubles  in  this  world,  and  we 
also  are  looking  for  something  that  we  should  be  very  glad 
to  find. 

MART.  Is  it  something  in  which  I  can  assist  you  ? 
VAL.  Perhaps.  We  are  endeavouring  to  meet  with 
some  clever  man,  some  special  physician,  who  could  give 
some  relief  to  our  master's  daughter,  seized  with  an  illness 
which  has  at  once  deprived  her  of  the  use  of  her  tongue. 
Several  physicians  have  already  exhausted  all  their  know- 
ledge on  her  behalf;  but  sometimes  one  may  find  people 
with  wonderful  secrets,  and  certain  peculiar  remedies,  who 
very  often  succeed  where  others  have  failed  :  and  that  is 
the  sort  of  man  we  are  looking  for. 

MART.  (Softly  and  aside).  Ah  !  This  is  an  inspiration 
from  Heaven  to  revenge  myself  on  my  rascal.  (Aloud}. 
You  could  never  have  addressed  yourselves  to  any  one 
more  able  to  find  what  you  want ;  and  we  have  a  man 
here,  the  most  wonderful  fellow  in  the  world  for  desperate 
maladies. 

VAL.  Ah  !  for  mercy's  sake,  where  can  we  meet  with 
him  ? 

MART.  You  will  find  him  just  now  in  that  little  spot 
yonder,  where  he  is  amusing  himself  in  cutting  wood. 

Luc.  A  doctor  who  cuts  wood  ! 

VAL.  Who  is  amusing  himself  in  gathering  some  sim- 
ples, you  mean  to  say  ? 

MART.  No ;  he  is  a  strange  fellow  who  takes  a  delight 
in  this ;  a  fantastic,  eccentric,  whimsical  man,  whom  you 
would  never  take  to  be  what  he  really  is.  He  goes  about 
dressed  in  a  most  extraordinary  fashion,  pretends  some- 
times to  be  very  ignorant,  keeps  his  knowledge  to  himself, 
and  dislikes  nothing  so  much  every  day  as  using  the  mar- 
vellous talents  which  God  has  given  him  for  the  healing 
art. 

VAL.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing  that  all  these  great  men 
have  always  some  whim,  some  slight  grain  of  madness 
mixed  with  their  learning. 

MART.  The  madness  of  this  man  is  greater  than  can  be 
imagined,  for  sometimes  he  has  to  be  beaten  before  he 
will  own  his  ability ;  and  I  warn  you  beforehand  that  you 
will  not  succeed,  that  he  will  never  own  that  he  is  a  phy- 

264  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  i. 

sician,  unless  you  take  each  a  stick,  and  compel  him,  by 
dint  of  blows,  to  admit  at  last  what  he  will  conceal  at 
first.  It  is  thus  that  we  act  when  we  have  need  of  him. 

VAL.  What  a  strange  delusion  ! 

MART.  That  is  true ;  but,  after  that,  you  shall  see  that 
he  works  wonders. 

VAL.  What  is  his  name? 

MART.  His  name  is  Sganarelle.  But  it  is  very  easy  to 
recognise  him.  He  is  a  man  with  a  large  black  beard, 
and  who  wears  a  ruff,  and  a  yellow  and  green  coat. 

Luc.  A  yellow  and  green  coat !  He  is  then  a  parrot- 
doctor  ? 

VAL.  But  is  it  really  true  that  he  is  as  clever  as  you  say  ? 

MART.  As  clever.  He  is  a  man  who  works  miracles. 
About  six  months  ago,  a  woman  was  given  up  by  all  the 
other  physicians;  she  was  considered  dead  at  least  six 
hours,  and  they  were  going  to  bury  her,  when  they 
dragged  by  force  the  man  we  are  speaking  of  to  her  bed- 
side. Having  seen  her,  he  poured  a  small  drop  of  some- 
thing into  her  mouth  ;  and  at  that  very  instant  she  rose 
from  her  bed,  and  began  immediately  to  walk  in  her 
room  as  if  nothing  had  happened. 

Luc.  Hah! 

VAL.  It  must  have  been  a  drop  of  liquid  gold.11 

MART.  Possibly  so.  Not  more  than  three  weeks  ago, 
a  young  child,  twelve  years  old,  fell  from  the  top  of  the 
belfry,  and  smashed  his  head,  arms,  and  legs  on  the 
stones.  No  sooner  took  they  our  man  to  it,  than  he 
rubbed  the  whole  body  with  a  certain  ointment,  which  he 
knows  how  to  prepare;  and  the  child  immediately  rose  on 
its  legs,  and  ran  away  to  play  at  chuck-farthing. 

Luc.  Hah! 

VAL.  This  man  must  have  the  universal  heal-all." 

MART.  Who  doubts  it  ? 

Luc.  Odds-bobs  !  that  is  the  very  man  we  want.  Let 
us  go  quickly  and  fetch  him. 

11  The  liquid  gold  (aurum  potabile)  was  long  thought  to  be  a  most 
wonderful  remedy,  and  was  in  use  even  during  the  last  century. 

12  Liquid  gold  was  formerly  thought   to  cure  all  diseases,  hence  the 
name  of  "universal  heal-all." 

SCENE  vi.]          THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  265 

VAL.  We  thank  you  for  the  service  you  have  rendered 
us. 

MART.  But  do  not  fail  to  remember  the  warning  I  have 
given  you. 

Luc.  Hey !  Zooks  !  leave  it  to  us.  If  he  wants  noth- 
ing but  a  thrashing,  we  will  gain  our  point.13 

VAL.  (To  Lucas}.  We  are  very  glad  to  have  met  with 
this  woman ;  and  I  conceive  the  best  hopes  in  the  world 
from  it. 

SCENE  VI. — SGANARELLE,  VALERE,  LUCAS. 
SCAN.   (Singing  behind  the  Scene).     La,  la,  la  ... 
VAL.  I  hear  some  one  singing  and  cutting  wood. 
SCAN.   {Coming  on,  with  a  bottle  in  his  hand,  without 
perceiving  Valere  or  Lucas).     La,   la,   la.  .    .    .  Really  I 
have  done  enough  to  deserve  a  drink.    Let  us  take  a  little 
breath.     (He  drinks}.    This  wood  is  as  salt  as  the  very 
devil."  (Sings). 

How  sweet  to  hear, 
My  pretty  flask, 
How  sweet  to  hear, 
Your  little  gull,  gull ! 
No  fate  with  mine  could  vie, 
If  never  you  ran  dry, 
Oh  /  darling  little  flask, 
But  constantly  were  full!™ 

18  In  the  original  la  vache  est  a  nous,  the  cow  is  ours.  • 

14  Meaning  that  he  wants  something  to  drink. 

15  Tradition  mentions  that  the  President  Rose,  a  few  days  after  the  first 
representation  of  The  Physician  in  spite  of  himself,  met  Moliere  at  the 
Duke  de  Montausier,  and  accused  the  dramatist,  before  a  numerous  com- 
pany, of  having  translated  Sganarelle's  couplet  from  the  Latin,  which  was 
itself   borrowed    from  the   Greek.      Moliere  denied    the  fact;    and  to 
his    great    surprise,   the   President  recited  the   following  verses,   which 
astounded  Moliere,  and  which  were  afterwards  admitted  by  Rose  to  be 
a  translation  from  the  playwright's  original,  which  we  give  as  well : — 

Qu'ils  sont  doux,  Quam  dulces, 

Bouteille  jolie,  Amphora  amcena, 

Qu'ils  sont  doux,  Quam  dulces, 

Vos  petits  glougloux  !  Sunt  tuae  voces  ! 

Mais  mon  sort  ferait  bien  des  jaloux,     Dum  fundis  merum  in  calices, 

Si  vous  £tiez  toujours  remplie,  Utinam  semper  esses  plena ! 

Ah !  bouteille,  ma  mie,  Ah !  Ah !  cara  mea  lagena, 

Pourquoi  vous  videz-vous  ?  Vacua  cur  jaces  ? 

266  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  [ACT  i. 

Come !  Zounds !  we  must  take  care  not  to  get  the 
blues. 

VAL.   (Softly  to  Lucas).    This  is  the  very  man. 

Luc.  (Softly  to  Valere).  I  think  you  are  right,  and 
that  we  have  just  hit  upon  him. 

VAL.  Let  us  look  a  little  closer. 

SCAN.  (Hugging  the  bottle).  Ah !  you  little  rogue  !  I 
love  you,  my  pretty  dear !  (He  sings ;  but  perceiving  Lucas 
and  Valere,  who  are  examining  him,  he  lowers  his  voice. 

No  fate  .    .    .  with  mine  .    .    .  could .    .    .  vie, 
Is.    ,    . 

(Seeing  that  they  examine  him  more  closely].  Whom  the 
deuce  do  these  people  want  ? 

VAL.  (To  Lucas).     It  is  surely  he. 

Luc.  (To  Valere).  There  he  is,  exactly  as  he  has  been 
described  to  us. 

SCAN.  (Aside\  (At  this  point  he  puts  down  his  bottle  ; 
and  Valere  stooping  down  to  bow  to  him,  he  thinks  that  it  is 
in  order  to  snatch  it  away,  and  puts  it  on  the  other  side. 
As  Lucas  is  doing  the  same  thing  as  Valere,  Sganarelle 
takes  it  up  again,  and  hugs  it  to  his  breast,  with  various 
grimaces  which  make  a  great  deal  of  by-play).  They  are 
consulting  each  other,  while  looking  at  me.  What  can  be 
their  intentions ! 

VAL.  Sir,  is  not  your  name  Sganarelle  ? 

SGAN.  Hey!   What  I 

VAL.  I  ask  you  if  your  name  is  not  Sganarelle. 

SCAN.  ( Turning  first  to  Valere,  then  to  Lucas\  Yes, 
and  no.  It  depends  on  what  you  want  with  him. 

VAL.  We  want  nothing  with  him,  but  to  offer  him  our 
utmost  civilities. 

SGAN.  In  that  case  my  name  is  Sganarelle. 

VAL.  We  are  delighted  to  see  you,  Sir.  We  have  been 
recommended  to  you  for  what  we  are  in  search  of;  and 
we  have  come  to  implore  your  help,  of  which  we  are  in 
want. 

SGAN.  If  it  be  anything,  gentlemen,  that  belongs  to  my 
little  trade,  I  am  quite  ready  to  oblige  you. 

VAL.  You  are  too  kind  to  us,  Sir.  But  put  your  hat 
on,  Sir,  if  you  please ;  the  sun  might  hurt  you. 

SCENE vi.]          THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OE   HIMSELF.  267 

Luc.   Pray,  Sir,  put  it  on. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  What  a  deal  of  ceremony  these  people 
use.  (He puts  his  hat  on), 

VAL.  You  must  not  think  it  strange,  Sir,  that  we  have 
addressed  ourselves  to  you.  Clever  people  are  always 
much  sought  after,  and  we  have  been  informed  of  your 
capacity. 

SCAN.  It  is  true,  gentlemen,  that  I  am  the  best  hand  in 
the  world  at  making  faggots. 

VAL.  Oh  !  Sir  .    .    . 

SCAN.  I  spare  no  pains,  and  make  them  in  a  fashion 
that  leaves  nothing  to  be  desired. 

VAL.  That  is  not  the  question  we  have  come  about,  Sir. 

SCAN.  But  I  charge  a  hundred  and  ten  sous  the  hun- 
dred. 

VAL.  Let  us  not  speak  about  that,  if  you  please. 

SCAN.  I  pledge  you  my  word  that  I  could  not  sell  them 
for  less. 

VAL.  We  know  what  is  what,  Sir. 

SCAN.  If  you  know  what  is  what,  you  know  that  I 
charge  that  price. 

VAL.  This  is  a  joke,  Sir,  but  .    .    . 

SCAN.  It  is  no  joke  at  all,  I  cannot  bate  a  farthing. 

VAL.   Let  us  talk  differently,  please. 

SCAN.  You  may  find  some  elsewhere  for  less ;  there  be 
faggots  and  faggots ;  but  for  those  which  I  make  .  .  . 

VAL.  Let  us  change  the  conversation,  pray,  Sir. 

SGAN.  I  take  my  oath  that  you  shall  not  have  them  for 
less,  not  a  fraction. 

VAL.  Fie!  Fie! 

SCAN.  No,  upon  my  word,  you  shall  have  to  pay  that 
price.  I  am  speaking  frankly,  and  I  am  not  the  man  to 
overcharge. 

VAL.  Ought  a  gentleman  like  you,  Sir,  to  amuse  him- 
self with  those  clumsy  pretences,  to  lower  himself  to  talk 
thus?  Ought  so  learned  a  man,  such  a  famous  physician 
as  you  are,  to  wish  to  disguise  himself  in  the  eyes  of  the 
world  and  keep  buried  his  great  talents  ? 

SCAN.  (Aside).     He  is  mad. 

VAL.  Pray,  Sir,  do  not  dissemble  with  us. 

SCAN.  What  do  you  mean  ? 

268  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  I. 

Luc.  All  this  beating  about  the  bush  is  useless.  We 
know  what  we  know. 

SCAN.  What  do  you  know  ?  What  do  you  want  with 
me  ?  For  whom  do  you  take  me  ? 

VAL.  For  what  you  are,  a  great  physician. 

SCAN.  Physician  yourself;  I  am  not  one,  and  I  have 
never  been  one. 

VAL.  (Aside).  Now  the  fit  is  on  him.  (Aloud}.  Sir, 
do  not  deny  things  any  longer,  and  do  not,  if  you  please, 
make  us  have  recourse  to  unpleasant  extremities. 

SCAN.  Have  recourse  to  what  ? 

VAL.   To  certain  things  that  we  should  be  sorry  for. 

SCAN.  Zounds!  Have  recourse  to  whatever  you  like. 
I  am  not  a  physician,  and  do  not  understand  what  you 
mean. 

VAL.  (Aside}.  Well,  I  perceive  that  we  shall  have  to 
apply  the  remedy.  (Aloud}.  Once  more,  Sir,  I  pray  you 
to  confess  what  you  are. 

Luc.  Odds  bobs,  do  not  talk  any  more  nonsense ;  and 
confess  plainly  that  you  are  a  physician.  » 

SCAN.    (Aside).     I  am  getting  in  a  rage. 

VAL.  What  is  the  good  of  denying  what  all  the  world 
knows  ? 

Luc.  Why  all  these  funny  falsehoods?  What  is  the 
good  of  it  ? 

SCAN.  One  word  is  as  good  as  a  thousand,  gentlemen. 
T  tell  you  that  I  am  not  a  physician. 

VAL.   You  are  not  a  physician  ? 

SCAN.  No. 

Luc.  You  are  not  a  physician  ? 

SCAN.   No,  I  tell  you. 

VAL.  Since  you  will  have  it  so,  we  must  make  up  our 
minds  to  do  it.  (  They  each  fake  a  stick,  and  thrash  him). 

SCAN.  Hold  !  hold  !  hold,  gentlemen  !  I  will  be  any- 
thing you  like. 

VAL.  Why,  Sir,  do  you  oblige  us  to  use  this  violence  ? 

Luc.  Why  do  you  make  us  take  the  trouble  of  giving 
you  a  beating  ? 

VAL.  I  assure  you  that  I  regret  it  with  all  my  heart. 

Luc.  Upon  my  word  I  am  sorry  for  it  too. 

SCAN.  What  the  devil  does  it  all  mean,  gentlemen  ? 

SCBNM  vi.]          THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  269 

For  pity's  sake,  is  it  a  joke,  or  are  you  both  gone  out  of 
your  minds,  to  wish  to  make  me  out  a  physician? 

VAL.  What !  you  do  not  give  in  yet,  and  you  still  deny 
being  a  physician  ? 

SCAN.  The  devil  take  me  if  I  am  one  ! 

Luc.   Are  you  not  a  physician  ? 

SCAN.  No,  plague  choke  me  !  (They  begin  to  thrash 
him  again).  Hold  !  hold  !  Well,  gentlemen,  yes,  since 
you  will  have  it  so,  I  am  a  physician,  I  am  a  physician — 
an  apothecary  into  the  bargain,  if  you  like.  I  prefer 
saying  yes  to  everything  to  being  knocked  about  so. 

VAL.  Ah  !  that  is  right,  Sir ;  I  am  delighted  to  see  you 
so  reasonable. 

Luc.  It  does  my  heart  good  to  hear  you  speak  in  this 
way. 

VAL.  I  beg  your  pardon  with  all  my  heart. 

Luc.  I  hope  you  will  forgive  me  for  the  liberty  I  have 
taken. 

SCAN.  (Aside}.  Bless  my  soul !  Am  I  perhaps  myself 
mistaken,  and  have  I  become  a  physician  without  being 
aware  of  it  ? 

VAL.  You  shall  not  regret,  Sir,  having  shown  us  what 
you  are  ;  and  you  shall  certainly  be  satisfied. 

SCAN.  But,  tell  me,  gentlemen,  may  you  not  be  your- 
selves mistaken  ?  Is  it  quite  certain  that  I  am  a  physi- 
cian? 

Luc.  Yes,  upon  my  word  ! 

SCAN.  Really  and  truly. 

VAL.  Undoubtedly. 

SCAN.  The  devil  take  me  if  I  knew  it ! 

VAL.  Nonsense  !  You  are  the  cleverest  physician  in  the 
world. 

SCAN.  Ha,  ha ! 

Luc.  A  physician  who  has  cured  I  do  not  know  how 
many  complaints. 

SCAN.  The  dickens  I  have  ! 

VAL.  A  woman  was  thought  dead  for  six  hours ;  she 
was  ready  to  be  buried  when  you,  with  a  drop  of  some- 
thing, brought  her  to  again,  and  made  her  walk  at  once 
about  the  room. 

SCAN.  The  deuce  I  did  ! 

270  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  [ACT  11. 

Luc.  A  child  of  twelve  fell  from  the  top  of  the  belfry, 
by  which  he  had  his  head,  his  legs,  and  his  arms  smashed; 
and  you,  with  I  do  not  know  what  ointment,  made  him 
immediately  get  up  on  his  feet,  and  off  he  ran  to  play 
chuck-farthing. 

SGAN.  The  devil  I  did  ! 

VAL.  In  short,  Sir,  you  will  be  satisfied  with  us,  and 
you  shall  earn  whatever  you  like,  if  you  allow  us  to  take 
you  where  we  intend. 

SGAN.   I  shall  earn  whatever  I  like  ? 

VAL.  Yes. 

SGAN.  In  that  case  I  am  a  physician  :  there  is  no  doubt 
of  it.  I  had  forgotten  it ;  but  I  recollect  it  now.  What 
is  the  matter  ?  Where  am  I  to  go  ? 

VAL.  We  will  conduct  you.  The  matter  is  to  see  a  girl 
who  has  lost  her  speech. 

SGAN.    Indeed  !   I  have  not  found  it. 

VAL.  {Softly  to  Lucas}.  How  he  loves  his  joke  !  {To 
Sganarelle).  Come  along,  Sir ! 

SGAN.  Without  a  physician's  gown  ! 

VAL.  We  will  get  one. 

SGAN.  {Presenting  his  bottle  to  Valere).  You  carry  this : 
I  put  my  juleps  in  there  (  Turning  round  to  Lucas  and  spit- 
ting on  the  ground).  And  you,  stamp  on  this,  by  order  of 
the  physician. 

Luc.  Odds  sniggers  !  this  is  a  physician  I  like.  I  think 
he  will  do,  for  he  is  a  comical  fellow. 

ACT  II. 

{The  scene  represents  a  room  in  Geronte*  s  house.') 
SCENE  I. — GERONTE,  VALERE,  LUCAS,  JACQUELINE. 

VAL.  Yes,  sir,  I  think  you  will  be  satisfied ;  we  have 
brought  the  greatest  physician  in  the  world  with  us. 

Luc.  Oh !  Zooks !  this  one  beats  everything ;  all  the 
others  are  not  worthy  to  hold  the  candle  to  him.16 

18  The  original  has  tous  Its  a-utres  ne  sont  pas  daignes  de  li  dechausser 
ses  soulies,  all  the  others  are  not  worthy  to  take  off  his  shoes. 

SCENE  ii.]  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  271 

VAL.  He  is  a  man  who  has  performed  some  marvellous 
cures. 

Luc.  Who  has  put  dead  people  on  their  legs  again. 

VAL.  He  is  somewhat  whimsical,  as  I  have  told  you ; 
and  at  times  there  are  moments  when  his  senses  wander, 
and  he  does  not  seem  what  he  really  is. 

Luc.  Yes,  he  loves  a  joke,  and  one  would  say  some- 
times that  he  has  got  a  tile  loose  somewhere.17 

VAL.  But  in  reality,  it  is  all  learning  this ;  and  very 
often  he  says  things  quite  beyond  any  one's  comprehen- 
sion. 

Luc.  When  he  sets  about  it,  he  talks  as  finely  as  if  he 
were  reading  a  book. 

VAL.  He  has  already  a  great  reputation  hereabout,  and 
everybody  comes  to  consult  him. 

GER.  I  am  very  anxious  to  see  him  ;  send  him  to  me 
quickly. 

VAL.  I  am  going  to  fetch  him. 

SCENE  II. — GERONTE,  JACQUELINE,  LUCAS. 

JACQ.  Upon  my  word,  Sir,  this  one  will  do  just  the  same 
as  all  the  rest.18  I  think  it  will  be  six  of  the  one  and  half- 
a-dozen  of  the  others;  and  the  best  medicine  to  give  to 
your  daughter  would,  in  my  opinion,  be  a  handsome  strap- 
ping husband,  for  whom  she  could  have  some  love.19 

Ger.  Lord  bless  my  soul,  nurse  dear,  you  are  meddling 
with  many  things ! 

Luc.  Hold  your  tongue,  mother  Jacqueline;  it  is  not 
for  you  to  poke  your  nose  there. 

JACQ.  I  tell  you,  and  a  dozen  more  of  you,20  that  all 
these  physicians  do  her  no  good ;  that  your  daughter 

1T  The  original  has  qu'il  a  quelque  petit  coup  de  hache  a  la  tcte,  that 
he  has  received  some  small  blow  with  an  axe  on  his  head. 

18  Jacqueline  talks   in   a   kind   of  peasants'  dialect,  which  cannot  be 
translated.     The  first  sentence  is  thus  in  the  original :  Par  mafi,  monsieu, 
ceti-ciferajustement  ce  qu  ant  fait  Us  autres. 

19  Something  similar  is  said  by  Gros-Rene  in  the  third  scene  of  one  of 
Moliere's  early  farces,    The  flying  Physician  (Le  Medecin  volant},  which 
will  be  given  in  the  last  volume  of  this  edition. 

10  The  original  has  an  attempt  at  a  play  on  words  :  je  vans  dis  et  vous 
douse,  because  dis,  say,  and  dix,  ten,  have  nearly  the  same  pronunciation. 

272  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  n. 

wants  something  else  than  rhubarb  and  senna,  and  that  a 
husband  is  a  plaster  which  cures  all  girls'  complaints. 

GER.  Would  any  one  have  her  in  her  present  state,  with 
that  affliction  on  her  ?  and  when  I  intended  her  to  marry, 
has  she  not  opposed  my  wishes  ? 

JACQ.  No  wonder.  You  wished  to  give  her  a  man 
whom  she  does  not  like.  Why  did  you  not  give  her  to 
Monsieur  Leandre,  who  takes  her  fancy?  She  would  have 
been  very  obedient,  and  I  vouch  for  it  that  he  will  take 
her  as  she  is,  if  you  but  give  her  to  him. 

GER.  Leandre  is  not  the  man  we  want ;  he  has  not  got 
a  fortune  like  the  other. 

JACQ.  He  has  got  an  uncle  who  is  so  rich,  and  whose 
fortune  he  will  inherit. 

GER.  All  these  expectations  seem  to  me  but  moonshine. 
Brag  is  a  good  dog,  but  Holdfast  is  a  better ;  and  we  run 
a  great  risk  in  waiting  for  dead  men's  shoes.  Death  is  not 
always  at  the  beck  and  call  of  gentlemen  heirs ;  and  while 
the  grass  grows,  the  cow  starves.21 

JACQ.  That  is  all  well  and  good,  but  I  have  always  heard 
that  in  marriage,  as  in  everything  else,  happiness  excels 
riches.  Fathers  and  mothers  have  this  cursed  habit  of 
asking  always,  "How  much  has  he  got?"  and  "  How 
much  has  she  got  ? ' '  And  gaffer  Peter  has  married  his 
Simonette  to  that  lout  Thomas,  because  he  has  got  a  few 
more  vineyards  than  young  Robin,  for  whom  the  girl  had 
a  fancy ;  and  now  the  poor  creature  is  as  yellow  as  a 
guinea,  and  has  not  looked  like  herself  ever  since.  That 
is  a  good  example  for  you,  Sir.  After  all,  folks  have  but 
their  pleasure  in  this  world  ;  and  I  would  sooner  give  my 
daughter  a  husband  whom  she  likes,  than  have  all  the 
riches  in  the  country.22 

n  This  is  rather  a  free  translation  of  Geronte's  speech.  The  original 
has :  Tous  ces  Hens  d  venir  me  semblent  autant  de  chansons.  II  n'est  rien 
telce  quon  tient ;  et  I'on  courtgrand  risque  de  s'abuser,  lorsgue  Ton  compte 
sur  le  lien  qu'un  autre  vous  garde.  La  mort  n'a  pas  toujours  les  oreilles 
ouvertes  aux  yeux  et  aux  prieres  de  messieurs  les  heritiers  ;  et  I'on 
a  le  temps  d' avoir  les  dents  longues,  lorsqu'  on  attend,  pour  vivre,  le trepas 
de  quelqu'un.  Avoir  les  dents  longues  is,  according  to  Gdnin's  Lexique 
compare  de  la  langue  de  Moliere,  to  be  hungry,  because  hunger  is  sup- 
posed to  sharpen  one's  teeth. 

n  The  original  has  to-utes  les  rentes  de  la  Biausse,  of  Beauce,  becanse 
it  is  one  of  the  richest  agricultural  parts  of  France — Beauce  having  for 

SCENE  in.]         THE  PHYSICIAN  IN  SPITE  OF   HIMSELF.  273 

GER.  Bless  me,  nurse,  how  you  chatter  !  Hold  your 
tongue,  let  me  beg  of  you ;  you  take  too  much  upon  your- 
self, and  you  will  spoil  your  milk. 

Luc.  (Slapping  Geronte1  s  shoulder  at  every  word\  In- 
deed, be  silent ;  you  are  too  saucy.  The  master  does  not 
want  your  speeches,  and  he  knows  what  he  is  about.  All 
you  have  got  to  do  is  to  suckle  your  baby,  without  arguing 
so  much.  Our  master  is  the  girl's  father,  and  he  is  good 
and  clever  enough  to  know  what  she  wants. 

GER.  Gently,  gently. 

Luc.  (Still slapping  Geronte1  s  shoulder).  I  wish  to  show 
her  her  place,  and  teach  her  the  respect  due  to  you,  Sir. 

G-ER.  Very  well.  But  it  does  not  need  all  this  gesticu- 
lating. 

SCENE  III. — VALERE,  SGANARELLE,  GERONTE,  LUCAS, 
JACQUELINE. 

VAL.  Look  out,  Sir,  here  is  our  physician  coming. 

GER.  ( To  Sganarelle).  I  am  delighted  to  see  you,  Sir, 
at  my  house,  and  we  have  very  great  need  of  you. 

SCAN.  (In  a  physician* s  gown  with  a  very  pointed  cap). 
Hippocrates  says  .  .  .  that  we  should  both  put  our  hats  on. 

GER.  Hippocrates  says  that? 

SCAN.  Yes. 

GER.  In  which  chapter,  if  you  please? 

SCAN.  In  his  chapter  ...  on  hats. 

GER.  Since  Hippocrates  says  so,  we  must  obey. 

SCAN.  Doctor,  having  heard  of  the  marvellous  things  .  .  . 

GER.  To  whom  are  you  speaking,  pray  ? 

SGAN.  To  you. 

GER.  I  am  not  a  physician 

SCAN.  You  are  not  a  physician  ? 

GER.  Indeed  I  am  not. 

its  principal  towns  Dreux,  Chartres,  and  Chateaudun.  Rabelais,  in  his 
Gargantua,  Book  I.,  Chapter  16,  relates  how  the  huge  mare  on  which 
Gargantua  rode  destroyed  the  ox-flies  of  the  Beauce  with  her  enormous 
tail,  "and  felled  everywhere  the  wood  with  as  much  ease,  as  the  mower 
doth  the  grass,  in  such  sort  that  never  since  hath  there  been  there 
neither  wood  nor  dorflies :  for  all  the  country  was  thereby  reduced  to  a 
plain  champagne  field,  which  Gargantua  took  great  pleasure  to  behold, 
and  said  to  his  company  no  more  but  this,  'Je  trouve  beau  ce,"  I  find 
this  pretty ;  whereupon  that  country  hath  been  ever  since  that  time  called 
Beauce." 

VOL.  II.  S 

2/4  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE  OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  „. 

SCAN.  Really? 

GER.  Really.  (Sganarelle  takes  a  stick  and  thrashes 
Geronte).  Oh!  Oh!  Oh! 

SCAN.  Now  you  are  a  physician,  I  have  never  taken  any 
other  degree. 

GER.  (To  Valere).  What  a  devil  of  a  fellow  you  have 
brought  me  here ! 

VAL.  Did  I  not  tell  you  that  he  was  a  funny  sort  of  a 
physician? 

GER.  Yes;  But  I  shall  send  him  about  his  business  with 
his  fun. 

Luc.  Do  not  take  any  notice  of  it,  Sir.  It  is  only  his 
joking. 

GER.  The  joking  does  not  suit  me. 

SCAN.  Sir;  I  beg  your  pardon  for  the  liberty  I  have 
taken. 

GER.  I  am  your  humble  servant,  Sir. 

SCAN.  I  am  sorry  .    .    . 

GER.  It  is  nothing. 

SCAN.  For  the  cudgelling  I  ... 

GER.   There  is  no  harm  done. 

SCAN.  Which  I  have  had  the  honour  to  give  you. 

GER.  Do  not  say  any  more  about  it,  Sir.  I  have  a 
daughter  who  is  suffering  from  a  strange  complaint. 

SCAN.  I  am  delighted,  Sir,  that  your  daughter  has  need 
of  my  skill  ;  and  I  wish,  with  all  my  heart,  that  you  stood 
in  the  same  need  of  it,  you  and  all  your  family,  in  order 
to  show  you  my  wish  to  serve  you. 

GER.  I  am  obliged  to  you  for  these  kind  feelings. 

SCAN.  I  assure  you  that  I  am  speaking  from  my  very 
heart. 

GER.  You  really  do  me  too  much  honour. 

SGAN.  What  is  your  daughter's  name? 

GER.  Lucinde. 

SCAN.  Lucinde!  Ah!  a  pretty  name  to  physic!  Lu- 
cinde ! ffl 

GER.  I  will  just  see  what  she  is  doing. 

SCAN.  Who  is  that  tall  woman? 

GER.  She  is  my  baby's  nurse. 

23  Not  unlikely  this  was  an  allusion  to  the  Juno  Lucinda. 

SCBNKV.J  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  275 

SCENE  IV. — SGANARELLE,  JACQUELINE,  LUCAS. 

SCAN.  (Aside).  Zounds,  that  is  a  fine  piece  of  household 
furniture.  (Aloud').  Ah,  nurse!  Charming  nurse!  my 
physic  is  the  very  humble  slave  of  your  nurseship,  and 
I  should  like  to  be  the  fortunate  little  nursling  to  suck 
the  milk  of  your  good  graces.  (He  puts  his  hand  on  her 
bosom}.  All  my  nostrums,  all  my  skill,  all  my  cleverness, 
is  at  your  service ;  and  .  .  . 

Luc.  By  your  leave,  Mr.  Doctor ;  leave  my  wife  alone, 
I  pray  you. 

SCAN.  What!  is  she  your  wife? 

Luc.  Yes. 

SCAN.  Oh !  indeed !  I  did  not  know  that,  but  I  am  very 
glad  of  it  for  the  love  of  both.  (He  pretends  to  embrace 
Lucas  j  but  embraces  the  nurse. 

Luc.  (Pulling  Sganarelle  away,  and  placing  himself 
between  him  and  his  wife).  Gently,  if  you  please. 

SCAN.  I  assure  you  that  I  am  delighted  that  you  should 
be  united  together.  I  congratulate  her  upon  having  such 
a  husband  as  you ;  and  I  congratulate  you  upon  having  a 
wife  so  handsome,  so  discreet,  and  so  well-shaped  as  she 
is.  (He  pretends  once  more  to  embrace  Lucas,  who  holds 
out  his  arms,  he  slips  under  them  and  embraces  the  nurse. 

Luc.  (Pulling  him  away  again).  Do  not  pay  so  many 
compliments,  I  beg  of  you. 

SCAN.  Shall  I  not  rejoice  with  you  about  such  a  lovely 
harmony  ? 

Luc.  With  me  as  much  as  you  like;  but  a  truce  to 
compliments  with  my  wife. 

SCAN.  I  have  both  your  happiness  equally  at  heart; 
and  if  I  embrace  you  to  show  my  delight  in  you,  I  em- 
brace her  to  show  my  delight  in  her.  (Same  by-play}. 

Luc.  {Pulling  him  away  for  the  third  time).  Odds 
boddikins,  Mr.  Doctor,  what  vagaries ! 

SCENE  V. — GERONTE,  SGANARELLE,  LUCAS,  JACQUELINE. 

GER.  My  daughter  will  be  here  directly,  Sir. 
SCAN.  I  am  awaiting  her,  Sir,  with  all  my  physic. 
GER,  Where  is  it  ? 

276  THE  PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  n. 

SCAN.   (Touching  his  forehead).     In  there. 

GER.  That  is  good. 

SCAN.  But  as  I  feel  much  interested  in  your  family,  I 
should  like  to  test  the  milk  of  your  nurse,  and  examine  her 
breasts.  (  He  draws  close  to  Jacqueline). 

Luc.  ( Pulling  him  away,  and  swinging  him  round). 
Nothing  of  the  sort,  nothing  of  the  sort.  I  do  not  wish  it. 

SCAN.  It  is  the  physician's  duty  to  see  the  breasts  of 
the  nurse. 

Luc.  Duty  or  no  duty,  I  will  not  have  it. 

SGAN.  Have  you  the  audacity  to  contradict  a  physician  ? 
Out  with  you. 

Luc.  I  do  not  care  a  straw  about  a  physician. 

SCAN.  (Looking  askance  at  him).  I  will  give  you  a 
fever. 

JACQ.  {Taking  Lucas  by  the  arm,  and  swinging  him 
round  also).  Get  out  of  the  way.  Am  I  not  big  enough 
to  take  my  own  part,  if  he  does  anything  to  me  which 
he  ought  not  to  do  ? 

Luc.  I  will  not  have  him  touch  you,  I  will  not. 

SCAN.  For  shame  you  rascal,  to  be  jealous  of  your  wife. 

GER.  Here  comes  my  daughter. 

SCENE  VI. — LUCINDE,  GERONTE,  SGANARELLE,  VALERE, 
LUCAS,  JACQUELINE. 

SCAN.  Is  this  the  patient  ? 

GER.  Yes  I  have  but  one  daughter;  and  I  would  never 
get  over  it  if  she  were  to  die. 

SGAN.  Do  not  let  her  do  anything  of  the  kind.  She 
must  not  die  without  a^rescription  of  the  physician.2* 

GER.  A  chair  here  ! 

SGAN.  (Seated  between  Geronte  and  Lucinde).  This  is 
not  at  all  an  unpleasant  patient,  and  I  am  of  opinion  that 
she  would  not  be  at  all  amiss  for  a  man  in  very  good 
health. 

GER.  You  have  made  her  laugh,  Sir. 

SGAN.  So  much  the  better.  It  is  the  best  sign  in  the 
world  when  a  physician  makes  the  patient  laugh.  {To 

24  Geronte  and  Sganarelle's  remarks  are  also  found  slightly  altered  in 
Moliere's  The  flying  Physician,  one  of  his  early  farces. 

SCENE  vi.J          THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE  OF   HIMSELF.  277 

Lucinde].  Well,  what  is  the  matter?  What  ails  you? 
What  is  it  you  feel  ? 

Luc.  (Replies  by  motions,  by  putting  her  hand  to  her 
mouth ,  her  head,  and  under  her  chin).  Ha,  hi,  ho,  ha  ! 

SCAN.  What  do  you  say  ? 

Luc.  (Continues  the  same  motions}.  Ha,  hi,  ho,  ha,  ha, 
hi,  ho  ! 

SCAN.  What  is  that? 

Luc.  Ha,  hi,  ho ! 

SCAN.  (Imitating  her).  Ha,  hi,  ho,  ha,  ha !  I  do  not 
understand  you.  What  sort  of  language  do  you  call  that  ? 

GER.  That  is  just  where  her  complaint  lies,  Sir.  She 
has  become  dumb,  without  our  having  been  able  till  now 
to  discover  the  cause.  This  accident  has  obliged  us  to 
postpone  her  marriage. 

SCAN.  And  why  so  ? 

GER.  He  whom  she  is  going  to  marry  wishes  to  wait 
for  her  recovery  to  conclude  the  marriage. 

SCAN.  And  who  is  this  fool  that  does  not  want  his  wife 
to  be  dumb  ?  Would  to  Heaven  that  mine  had  that  com- 
plaint !  I  should  take  particular  care  not  to  have  her 
cured. 

GER.  To  the  point,  Sir.  We  beseech  you  to  use  all 
your  skill  to  cure  her  of  this  affliction. 

SCAN.  Do  not  make  yourself  uneasy.  But  tell  me,  does 
this  pain  oppress  her  much  ? 

GER.  Yes,  Sir. 

SCAN.  So  much  the  better.    Is  the  suffering  very  acute  ? 

GER.  Very  acute. 

SCAN.  That  is  right.  Does  she  go  to  .  .  .  you  know 
where  ? 

GER.  Yes. 

SCAN.  Freely? 

GER.  That  I  know  nothing  about. 

SCAN.  Is  the  matter  healthy  ? 

GER.  I  do  not  understand  these  things. 

SCAN.  ( Turning  to  the  patient).  Give  me  your  hand. 
(To  Geronte\  The  pulse  tells  me  that  your  daughter  is 
dumb. 

GER.  Sir,  that  is  what  is  the  matter  with  her ;  ah  !  yes, 
you  have  found  it  out  at  the  first  touch. 

278  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE  OF   HIMSELF.  [ACx  n. 

SCAN.  Of  course ! 

JACQ.   See  how  he  has  guessed  her  complaint. 

SCAN.  We  great  physicians,  we  know  matters  at  once. 
An  ignoramus  would  have  been  nonplussed,  and  would 
have  told  you :  it  is  this,  that,  or  the  other ;  but  I  hit  the 
nail  on  the  head  from  the  very  first,  and  I  tell  you  that 
your  daughter  is  dumb. 

GER.  Yes ;  but  I  should  like  you  to  tell  me  whence  it 
arises. 

SCAN.  Nothing  is  easier ;  it  arises  from  loss  of  speech. 

GER.  Very  good.  But  the  reason  of  her  having  lost  her 
speech,  pray? 

SCAN.  Our  best  authorities  will  tell  you  that  it  is  be- 
cause there  is  an  impediment  in  the  action  of  her 
tongue. 

GER.  But,  once  more,  your  opinion  upon  this  impedi- 
ment in  the  action  of  her  tongue. 

SCAN.  Aristotle  on  this  subject  says  ...  a  great  many 
clever  things. 

GER.  I  dare  say. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  He  was  a  great  man  ! 

GER.  No  doubt. 

SGAN.  Yes,  a  very  great  man.  {Holding  out  his  arm, 
and  putting  a  finger  of  the  other  hand  in  the  bend}.  A  man 
who  was,  by  this,  much  greater  than  I.  But  to  come 
back  to  our  argument :  I  am  of  opinion  that  this  impedi- 
ment in  the  action  of  her  tongue  is  caused  by  certain  hu- 
mours, which  among  us  learned  men,  we  call  peccant  hu- 
mours; peccant — that  is  to  say  .  .  .  peccant  humours; 
inasmuch  as  the  vapours  formed  by  the  exhalations  of  the 
influences  which  rise  in  the  very  region  of  diseases,  com- 
ing, .  .  .  as  we  may  say  to  ...  Do  you  understand 
Latin  ? 

GER.  Not  in  the  least. 

SCAN.    (Suddenly  rising).      You   do   not  understand 
Latin  ? 

GER.  No. 

SCAN.  (Assuming  various  comic  attitudes}.  Cabricias 
arci  thuram,  catalamus,  singulariter,  nominative,  hcEC 
musa,  the  muse,  bonus,  bona,  bonum.  Deus  sanctus,  est- 
ne  oratio  latinas  ?  Etiam,  Yes.  Quare  ?  Why.  Quiet 

SCKNMVI.]         THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  279 

substantive  et  adjectivum,  concordat  in  generi,  numerum,  ct 
casus."* 

GER.  Ah  !  Why  did  I  not  study  ? 

JACQ.  What  a  clever  man  ! 

Luc.  Yes,  it  is  so  beautiful  that  I  do  not  understand  a 
word  of  it. 

SCAN.  Thus  these  vapours  which  I  speak  of,  passing 
from  the  left  side,  where  the  liver  is,  to  the  right  side, 
where  we  find  the  heart,  it  so  happens  that  the  lungs, 
which  in  Latin  we  call  armyan,  having  communication 
with  the  brain,  which  in  Greek  we  style  nasmus,  by  means 
of  the  vena  cava,  which  in  Hebrew,  is  termed  cubile™ 
meet  in  their  course  the  said  vapours,  which  fill  the  ven- 
tricles of  the  omoplata ;  and  because  the  said  vapours  .  .  . 
now  understand  well  this  argument,  pray  .  .  .  and  be- 
cause these  said  vapours  are  endowed  with  a  certain  ma- 
lignity .  .  .  listen  well  to  this,  I  beseech  you. 

GER.  Yes. 

SCAN.  Are  endowed  with  a  certain  malignity  which  is 
caused  .  .  .  pay  attention  here,  if  you  please. 

GER.  I  do. 

SCAN.  Which  is  caused  by  the  acridity  of  these  humours 
engendered  in  the  concavity  of  the  diaphragm,  it  happens 
that  these  vapours.  .  .  .  Ossabandus,  nequeis,  nequer, 
potarinum,  puipsa  mt'/us.2"1  That  is  exactly  the  reason  that 
your  daughter  is  dumb. 

JACQ.  Ah  !  How  well  this  gentleman  explains  all  this. 

Luc.  Why  does  not  my  tongue  wag  as  well  as  his  ? 

GER.  It  is  undoubtedly  impossible  to  argue  better. 
There  is  but  one  thing  that  I  cannot  exactly  make  out : 
that  is  the  whereabouts  of  the  liver  and  the  heart.  It  ap- 

15  The  first  four  words  of  Sganarelle's  address  are  words  of  Moliere's 
coining,  and  belong  to  no  language ;  the  rest  is  a  truncated  quotation 
of  the  following  passage  from  the  old  Latin  grammar  of  Despautere : 
Deus  sanctus,  est-ne  oratio  latino,  f  Etiam.  Quare  f  Quia  substantivum 
et  adjectivum  concordant  ingenere,  numero,  casu.  In  pronouncing  the 
word  casus,  which  means  "case,"  and  "fall,"  the  actor,  who  plays  the 
part  of  Sganarelle,  upsets  his  chair  whilst  sitting  down,  and  falls  on  the 
floor,  according  to  tradition. 

M  Armyan  and  Nasmus  belong  to  no  language ;  cubile  is  the  Latin 
for  bed  or  den. 

27  These  words  belong  to  no  language. 

280  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  11. 

pears  to  me  that  you  place  them  differently  from  what 
they  are ;  that  the  heart  is  on  the  left  side,  and  the  liver 
on  the  right. 

SGAN.  Yes ;  this  was  so  formerly ;  but  we  have  changed 
all  that,  and  we  now-a-days  practise  the  medical  art  on  an 
entirely  new  system. 

GER.  I  did  not  know  that,  and  I  pray  you  pardon  my 
ignorance. 

SCAN.  There  is  no  harm  done ;  and  you  are  not  obliged 
to  be  so  clever  as  we  are. 

GER.  Certainly  not.  But  what  think  you,  Sir,  ought 
to  be  done  for  this  complaint  ? 

SCAN.   What  do  I  think  ought  to  be  done  ? 

GER.  Yes. 

SCAN.  My  advice  is  to  put  her  to  bed  again,  and  make 
her,  as  a  remedy,  take  plenty  of  bread  soaked  in  wine. 

GER.  Why  so,  sir  ? 

SCAN.  Because  there  is  in  bread  and  wine  mixed  to- 
gether a  sympathetic  virtue  which  produces  speech.  Do 
you  not  see  that  they  give  nothing  else  to  parrots-,  and 
that,  by  eating  it,  they  learn  to  speak  ? 

GER.  That  is  true.  Oh !  the  great  man  !  Quick,  plenty 
of  bread  and  wine. 

SCAN.  I  shall  come  back  to-night  to  see  how  the  patient 
is  getting  on. 

SCENE  VII. — GERONTE,   SGANARELLE,  JACQUELINE. 

SCAN.  {To  Jacqueline).  Stop  a  little  you.  (To  Geronte). 
Sir,  I  must  give  some  medicine  to  your  nurse. 

JACQ.  To  me,  Sir  ?     I  am  as  well  as  can  be. 

SCAN.  So  much  the  worse,  nurse,  so  much  the  worse. 
This  excess  of  health  is  dangerous,  and  it  would  not  be 
amiss  to  bleed  you  a  little  gently,  and  to  administer  some 
little  soothing  injection. 

GER.  But,  my  dear  Sir,  that  is  a  method  which  I  can- 
not understand.  Why  bleed  folks  when  they  are  not  ill  ? 

SCAN.  It  does  not  matter,  the  method  is  salutary ;  and 
as  we  drink  for  the  thirst  to  come,  so  must  we  bleed  for 
the  disease  to  come.* 

K  This  is  really  no  joke.  It  was  the  custom  in  Moliere's  time  to 
swallow  a  certain  amount  of  physic  as  a  matter  of  precaution,  and  in 
case  of  future  maladies. 

SCENKVIII.]       THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  28l 

JACQ.  (Going}.  I  do  not  care  a  fig  for  all  this,  and  I 
will  not  have  my  body  made  an  apothecary's  shop. 

SCAN.  You  object  to  my  remedies  ;  but  we  shall  know- 
how  to  bring  you  to  reason. 

SCENE  VIII. — GERONTE,   SGANARELLE. 

SCAN.   I  wish  you  good  day. 

GER.  Stay  a  moment,  if  you  please. 

SCAN.  What  are  you  going  to  do? 

GER.  Give  you  your  fee,  sir. 

SCAN.  (Putting  his  hands  behind  him,  from  under  his 
gown,  while  Geronte  opens  his  purse}.  I  shall  not  accept 
it,  Sir. 

GER.  Sir. 

SCAN.  Not  at  all. 

GER.   One  moment. 

SGAN.   On  no  consideration. 

GER.  Pray  ! 

SCAN.  You  are  jesting. 

GER.  That  is  settled. 

SCAN.  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind. 

GER.  What ! 

SCAN.  I  do  not  practise  for  money's  sake.29 

GER.  I  am  convinced  of  that. 

SCAN.  (After  having  taken  the  money}.  Are  they  good 
weight  ? 

GER.  Yes,  Sir. 

SCAN.  I  am  not  a  mercenary  physician. 

GER.  I  am  well  aware  of  it. 

SCAN.  I  am  not  actuated  by  interest. 

GER.  I  do  not  for  a  moment  think  so. 

SCAN.   (Alone,   looking  at  the  money  he  has  received}. 

29  This  is  taken  from  Rabelais'  Pantagruel,  Book  III.,  Chapter  34, 
when  Panurge,  having  taken  counsel  with  the  physician  Rondibilis, 
clapped  into  his  hand,  without  the  speaking  of  so  much  as  one  word,  four 
rose  nobles.  "  Rondibilis  did  shut  his  fist  upon  them  right  kindly;  yet,  as 
if  it  had  displeased  him  to  make  acceptance  of  such  golden  presents,  he 
in  a  start  as  if  he  had  been  wroth,  said,  He,  he,  he,  he,  he,  there  was  no 
need  of  anything,  I  thank  you  nevertheless.  From  wicked  folks  I  never 
get  enough,  and  from  honest  people  I  refuse  nothing.  I  shall  be  always, 
Sir,  at  your  command.  Provided  that  I  pay  you  well,  quoth  Panurge. 
That,  quoth  Rondibilis,  is  understood.1' 

282  THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  n. 

Upon  my  word,  this  does  not  promise  badly ;  and  pro- 
vided .    .    . 

SCENE  IX. — LEANDRE,  SGANARELLE. 

LEAN.  I  have  been  waiting  some  time  for  you,  Sir,  and 
I  have  come  to  beg  your  assistance. 

SCAN,   (feeling  his  pulse).     That  is  a  very  bad  pulse. 

LEAN.  I  am  not  ill,  Sir ;  and  it  is  not  for  that  I  am 
come  to  you. 

SCAN.  If  you  are  not  ill,  why  the  devil  do  you  not  tell 
me  so? 

LEAN.  No.  To  tell  you  the  matter  in  a  few  words, 
my  name  is  Leandre.  I  am  in  love  with  Lucinde  to 
whom  you  have  just  paid  a  visit ;  and  as  all  access  to  her 
is  denied  to  me,  through  the  ill-temper  of  her  father,  I 
venture  to  beseech  you  to  serve  me  in  my  love  affair,  and 
to  assist  me  in  a  stratagem  that  I  have  invented,  so  as  to  say 
a  few  words  to  her,  on  which  my  whole  life  and  happiness 
absolutely  depend. 

SCAN.  (In  apparent  anger).  Whom  do  you  take  me 
for?  How  dare  you  address  yourself  to  me  to  assist  you 
in  your  love  affair,  and  to  wish  me  to  lower  the  dignity  of 
a  physician  by  an  affair  of  that  kind  ! 

LEAN.  Do  not  make  a  noise,  Sir. 

SCAN.  {Driving  him  back).  I  will  make  a  noise.  You 
are  an  impertinent  fellow. 

LEAN.  Ah  !   gently,  Sir. 

SCAN.   An  ill-mannered  jackanapes. 

LEAN.  Pray ! 

SCAN.  I  will  teach  you  that  I  am  not  the  kind  of  man 
you  take  me  for,  and  that  it  is  the  greatest  insolence  .  .  . 

LEAN.  (Taking  out  a  purse).     Sir.    .    . 

SCAN.  To  wish  to  employ  me  .  .  .  (taking  the  purse). 
I  am  not  speaking  about  you,  for  you  are  a  gentleman ; 
and  I  should  be  delighted  to  be  of  any  use  to  you ;  but 
there  are  certain  impertinent  people  in  this  world  who 
take  folks  for  what  they  are  not ;  and  I  tell  you  candidly 
that  this  puts  me  in  a  passion. 

LEAN.  I  ask  your  pardon,  Sir,  for  the  liberty  I  have  .  .   . 

SCAN.   You  are  jesting.     What  is  the  affair  in  question  ? 

LEAN.  You  must  know  then,  Sir,  that  this  disease  which 

SCENE  i.)  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SFITE   OF   HIMSELF.  283 

you  wish  to  cure  is  a  feigned  complaint.  The  physicians 
have  argued  about  it,  as  they  ought  to  do,  and  they  have 
not  failed  to  give  it  as  their  opinion, — this  one,  that  it 
arose  from  the  brain ;  that  one,  from  the  intestines ; 
another,  from  the  spleen  ;  another,  again,  from  the  liver  j 
but  the  fact  is  that  love  is  its  real  cause,  and  that  Lucinde 
has  only  invented  this  illness  in  order  to  free  herself  from 
a  marriage  with  which  she  has  been  harassed.  But  for 
fear  that  we  may  be  seen  together,  let  us  retire ;  and  I 
will  tell  you  as  we  go  along,  what  I  wish  you  to  do. 

SCAN.  Come  along,  then,  Sir.  You  have  inspired  me 
with  an  inconceivable  interest  in  your  love ;  and  if  all  my 
medical  science  does  not  fail  me,  the  patient  shall  either 
die  or  be  yours. 

ACT  III. 

{The  scene  represents  a  spot  near  Geronte1  s  house.*) 
SCENE  I. — LEANDRE,  SGANARELLE. 

LEAN.  I  think  that  I  am  not  at  all  badly  got  up  for  an 
apothecary ;  and  as  her  father  has  scarcely  ever  seen  me, 
this  change  of  dress  and  wig  is  likely  enough,  I  think,  to 
disguise  me. 

SCAN.  There  is  no  doubt  of  it. 

LEAN.  Only  I  should  like  to  know  five  or  six  big  medi- 
cal words  to  leaven  my  conversation  with,  and  to  give  me 
the  air  of  a  learned  man. 

SCAN.  Go  along,  go  along ;  it  is  not  at  all  necessary. 
The  dress  is  sufficient;  and  I  know  no  more  about  it  than 
you  do. 

LEAN.  How  is  that ! 

SCAN.  The  devil  take  me  if  I  understand  anything 
about  medicine  !  You  are  a  gentleman,  and  I  do  not 
mind  confiding  in  you,  as  you  have  confided  in  me. 

LEAN.  What !     Then  you  are  not  really  .  .  . 

SCAN.  No,  I  tell  you.  They  have  made  me  a  physician 
in  spite  of  my  teeth.  I  have  never  attempted  to  be  so 
learned  as  that ;  and  all  my  studies  did  not  go  farther 
than  the  lowest  class  at  school.  I  do  not  know  how  the 

284  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  in. 

idea  has  come  to  them ;  but  when  I  saw  that  in  spite  of 
every  thing  they  would  have  it  that  I  was  a  physician,  I 
made  up  my  mind  to  be  so  at  somebody's  expense.  You 
would  not  believe,  however,  how  this  error  has  spread, 
and  how  everyone  is  possessed,  and  believes  me  to  be  a 
learned  man.  They  come  seeking  me  on  all  sides;  and 
if  things  go  on  in  this  way,  I  am  resolved  to  stick  to  the 
profession  all  my  life.  I  find  that  it  is  the  best  trade  of 
all ;  for,  whether  we  manage  well  or  ill,  we  are  paid  just 
the  same.  Bad  workmanship  never  recoils  on  us  ;  and 
we  cut  the  material  we  have  to  work  with  pretty  much  as 
we  like.  A  shoemaker,  in  making  a  pair  of  shoes,  cannot 
spoil  a  scrap  of  leather  without  having  to  bear  the  loss ; 
but  in  our  business  we  may  spoil  a  man  without  its  cost- 
ing us  a  farthing.  The  blunders  are  never  put  down  to 
us,  and  it  is  always  the  fault  of  the  fellow  who  dies.  The 
best  of  this  profession  is,  that  there  is  the  greatest  honesty 
and  discretion  among  the  dead ;  for  you  never  find  them 
complain  of  the  physician  who  has  killed  them. 

LEAN.  It  is  true  that  the  dead  are  very  honourable  in 
that  respect. 

SCAN.  (Seeing  some  people  advancing  towards  him). 
There  come  some  people,  who  seem  anxious  to  consult 
me.  (To  Leandre}.  Go  and  wait  for  me  near  the  house 
of  your  lady-love. 

SCENE  II. — THIBAUT,  PERRIN,  SGANARELLE. 

THIB.  Sir,  we  come  to  look  for  you,  my  son  Perrin  and 
myself.30 

SCAN.  What  is  the  matter  ? 

THIB.  His  poor  mother,  whose  name  is  Perrette,  has 
been  on  a  bed  of  sickness  for  the  last  six  months. 

SCAN.  (Holding  out  his  hand  as  if  to  receive  money). 
What  would  you  have  me  do  to  her  ? 

THIB.  I  would  like  you  to  give  me  some  little  doctor's 
stuff  to  cure  her. 

SCAN.  We  must  first  see  what  is  the  matter  with  her. 

THIB.  She  is  ill  with  the  hypocrisy,  Sir. 

10  In  the  original,  Thibaut  speaks  like  a  peasant ;  as  Mounsie,  j'e  venous 
vous  charcher,  monfils  Perrin  et  moi. 

SCENE  ii.j          THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  285 

SCAN.  With  the  hypocrisy? 

THIB.  Yes ;  I  mean  she  is  swollen  everywhere.  They 
say  that  there  is  a  lot  of  seriosities  in  her  inside,  and  that 
her  liver,  her  belly,  or  her  spleen,  as  you  would  call  it, 
instead  of  making  blood  makes  nothing  but  water.  She 
has,  every  other  day,  the  quotiguian  fever,  with  lassitude 
and  pains  in  the  muscles  of  her  legs.  We  can  hear  in  her 
throat  phlegms  that  are  ready  to  choke  her,  and  she  is 
often  taken  with  syncoles  and  conversions,  so  that  we 
think  she  is  going  off  the  hooks.  We  have  got  in  our 
village  an  apothecary — with  respect  be  it  said — who  has 
given  her,  I  do  not  know  how  much  stuff;  and  it  has 
cost  me  more  than  a  dozen  good  crowns  in  clysters, 
saving  your  presence,  in  apostumes  which  he  has  made 
her  swallow,  in  infections  of  hyacinth,  and  in  cordial 
potions.  But  all  this,  as  people  say,  was  nothing  but  an 
ointment  of  fiddle-faddle.  He  wanted  to  give  her  a  cer- 
tain drug  called  ametile  wine;  but  I  was  downright 
afeard  that  this  would  send  her  to  the  other  world  alto- 
gether; because  they  tell  me  that  those  big  physicians 
kill,  I  do  not  know  how  many,  with  that  new-fangled 
notion.81 

SCAN.  (Still  holding  out  his  hand,  and  moving  it  about 
to  show  that  he  wants  money).  Let  us  come  to  the  point, 
friend,  let  us  come  to  the  point. 

THIB.  The  point  is,  Sir,  that  we  have  come  to  beg  of 
you  to  tell  us  what  we  must  do. 

SCAN.  I  do  not  understand  you  at  all. 

PER.  My  mother  is  ill,  Sir,  and  here  are  two  crowns 
which  we  have  brought  you  to  give  us  some  stuff. 

SCAN.  Ah  !  you  I  do  understand.  There  is  a  lad  who 
speaks  clearly,  and  explains  himself  as  he  should.  You 
say  that  your  mother  is  ill  with  the  dropsy ;  that  she  is 
swollen  all  over  her  body ;  that  she  has  a  fever,  with  pains 
in  the  legs ;  that  she  sometimes  is  taken  with  syncopes 
and  convulsions,  that  is  to  say  with  fainting  fits. 

PER.  Indeed,  Sir !  that  is  just  it. 

n  Of  course,  Thibaut  mispronounces  nearly  every  word,  and  also  the 
medical  words.  Sganarelle  corrects  him  a  little  further  on.  For  emetic 
wine,  which  he  calls  ''ametile  wine,"  see  page  104.  note  16. 

286  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN  SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  HI. 

SCAN.  I  understand  you  at  once.  Your  father  does  not 
know  what  he  says.  And  now  you  ask  me  for  a  remedy? 

PER.  Yes,  sir. 

SCAN.  A  remedy  to  cure  her? 

PER.  That  is  just  what  I  mean. 

SCAN.  Take  this  then.  It  is  a  piece  of  cheese  which 
you  must  make  her  take. 

PER.  A  piece  of  cheese,  Sir  ? 

SCAN.  Yes ;  it  is  a  kind  of  prepared  cheese,  in  which 
there  is  gold,  coral,  and  pearls,  and  a  great  many  other 
precious  things. 

PER.  I  am  very  much  obliged  to  you,  Sir,  and  I  shall 
go  and  make  her  take  it  directly. 

SCAN.  Go,  and  if  she  dies,  do  not  fail  to  bury  her  in 
the  best  style  you  can. 

SCENE  III. — (The  Scene  changes,  and  represents,  as  in  the 
Second  Act,  a  room  in  Geronte 's  house} — JACQUELINE, 
SGANARELLE,  LUCAS,  at  the  far  end  of  the  stage. 

SCAN.  Here  is  the  pretty  nurse.  Ah !  you  darling 
nurse,  I  am  delighted  at  this  meeting ;  and  the  sight  of 
you  is  like  rhubarb,  cassia,  and  senna  to  me,  which  purges 
all  melancholy  from  my  mind. 

JACQ.  Upon  my  word,  Mr.  Physician,  it  is  no  good 
talking  to  me  in  that  style,  and  I  do  not  understand  your 
Latin  at  all. 

SCAN.  Get  ill,  nurse,  I  beg  of  you ;  get  ill  for  my  sake. 
I  shall  have  all  the  pleasure  in  the  world  of  curing  you. 

JACQ.  I  am  your  humble  servant ;  I  would  much  rather 
not  be  cured. 

SCAN.  How  I  grieve  for  you,  beautiful  nurse,  in  having 
such  a  jealous  and  troublesome  husband. 

JACQ.  What  am  I  to  do,  Sir  ?  It  is  as  a  penance  for 
my  sins;  and  where  the  goat  is  tied  down  she  must 
browse. 

SCAN.  What !  Such  a  clod-hopper  as  that  !  a  fellow 
who  is  always  watching  you,  and  will  let  no  one  speak  to 
you  ! 

JACQ.  Alas !  you  have  seen  nothing  yet ;  and  that  is 
only  a  small  sample  of  his  bad  temper. 

SCENE  v.]  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  287 

SCAN.  Is  it  possible?  and  can  a  man  have  -so  mean  a 
spirit  as  to  ill-use  a  woman  like  you  ?  Ah  !  I  know  some, 
sweet  nurse,  and  who  are  not  very  far  off,  who  would  only 
be  too  glad  to  kiss  your  little  feet  !  Why  should  such  a 
handsome  woman  have  fallen  into  such  hands !  and  a  mere 
animal,  a  brute,  a  stupid,  a  fool  .  .  .  Excuse  me,  nurse, 
for  speaking  in  that  way  of  your  husband. 

JACQ.  Oh  !  Sir,  I  know  full  well  that  he  deserves  all 
these  names. 

SCAN.  Undoubtedly,  nurse,  he  deserves  them ;  and  he 
also  deserves  that  you  should  plant  something  on  his  head 
to  punish  him  for  his  suspicions. 

JACQ.  It  is  true  enough  that  if  I  had  not  his  interest 
so  much  at  heart,  he  would  drive  me  to  do  some  strange 
things. 

SCAN.  Indeed  it  would  just  serve  him  right  if  you  were 
to  revenge  yourself  upon  him  with  some  one.  The  fellow 
richly  deserves  it  all,  I  tell  you,  and  if  I  were  fortunate 
enough,  fair  nurse,  to  be  chosen  by  you  .  .  . 

(While  Sganarelle  is  holding  out  his  arms  to  embrace 
Jacqueline,  Lucas  passes  his  head  under  them,  and 
comes  between  the  two.  Sganarelle  and  Jacqueline 
stare  at  Lucas,  and  depart  on  opposite  sides,  but  the 
doctor  does  so  in  a  very  comic  manner}. 

SCENE  IV. — GERONTE,  LUCAS. 

GER.  I  say,  Lucas,  have  not  you  seen  our  physician 
here? 

Luc.  Indeed  I  have  seen  him,  by  all  the  devils,  and  my 
wife  too. 

GER.  'Where  can  he  be  ? 

Luc.  I  do  not  know ;  but  I  wish  he  were  at  the  devil. 

GER.  Just  go  and  see  what  my  daughter  is  doing. 

SCENE  V. — SGANARELLE,  LEANDRE,  GERONTE. 

GER.  I  was  just  inquiring  after  you,  Sir. 

SCAN.  I  have  just  been  amusing  myself  in  your  court 
with  expelling  the  superfluity  of  drink.  How  is  the 
patient  ? 

GER.   Somewhat  worse  since  your  remedy. 

SCAN.  So  much  the  better  ;  it  shows  that  it  takes  effect. 

288  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  m. 

GER.  Yes ;  but  while  it  is  taking  effect,  I  am  afraid  it 
will  choke  her. 

SCAN.  Do  not  make  yourself  uneasy ;  I  have  some 
remedies  that  will  make  it  all  right !  and  I  will  wait  until 
she  is  at  death's  door. 

GER.  {Pointing  to  Leandre).  Who  is  this  man  that  is 
with  you  ? 

SGAN.  (Intimates  by  motions  of  his  hands  that  it  is  an 
apothecary).  It  is 

GER.  What? 

SCAN.  He  who  .  .  . 

GER.  Oh! 

SCAN.  Who  .... 

GER.  I  understand. 

SGAN.  Your  daughter  will  want  him. 

SCENE  VI. — LUCINDE,  GERONTE,  LEANDRE,  JACQUELINE, 
SGANARELLE. 

JACQ.  Here  is  your  daughter,  Sir,  who  wishes  to  stretch 
her  limbs  a  little. 

SGAN.  That  will  do  her  good.  Go  to  her,  Mr.  Apothe- 
cary, and  feel  her  pulse,  so  that  I  may  consult  with  you 
presently  about  her  complaint.  (At  this  point  he  draws 
Geronte  to  one  end  of  the  stage,  and  putting  one  arm  upon 
his  shoulder,  he  places  his  hand  under  his  chin,  with  which 
he  makes  him  turn  towards  him,  each  time  that  Geronte 
wants  to  look  at  what  is  passing  between  his  daughter  and 
the  apothecary,  while  he  holds  the  following  discourse  with 
him).  Sir,  it  is  a  great  and  subtle  question  among  physi- 
cians to  know  whether  women  or  men  are  more  easily 
cured.  I  pray  you  to  listen  to  this,  if  you  please.  Some 
say  "no,"  others  say  "yes:"  I  say  both  "yes"  and 
"no;"  inasmuch  as  the  incongruity  of  the  opaque  hu- 
mours, which  are  found  in  the  natural  temperament  of 
women,  causes  the  brutal  part  to  struggle  for  the  mastery 
over  the  sensitive,32  we  find  that  the  conflict  of  their  opin- 
ion depends  on  the  oblique  motion  of  the  circle  of  the 
moon ;  and  as  the  sun,  which  darts  its  beams  on  the  con- 
cavity of  the  earth,  meets  .  .  . 

33  Compare  Gros  Rene's  Speech  in  The  Love  Tiff,  Act  iv.,  Scene  ii., 
Vol.  I.,  page  115. 

SCENE  vi.]         THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  289 

Luc.  (To  Leandre).  No  j  I  am  not  at  all  likely  to 
change  my  feelings. 

GER.  Hark  !  my  daughter  speaks  !  O,  great  virtue  of 
the  remedy  !  O,  excellent  physician  !  How  deeply  am  I 
obliged  to  you,  Sir,  for  this  marvellous  cure  !  And  what 
can  I  do  for  you  after  such  a  service  ? 

SCAN.  (Strutting  about  the  stage,  fanning  himself  with 
his  hat).  This  case  has  given  me  some  trouble. 

Luc.  Yes,  father,  I  have  recovered  my  speech;  but  I 
have  recovered  it  to  tell  you  that  I  will  never  have  any 
other  husband  than  Leandre,  and  that  it  is  in  vain  for  you 
to  wish  to  give  me  to  Horace. 

GER.  But    .    .    . 

Luc.  Nothing  will  shake  the  resolution  I  have  taken. 

GER.  What    .    .    . 

Luc.   All  your  fine  arguments  will  be  in  vain 

GER.  If   ... 

Luc.  All  you  talking  will  be  of  no  use. 

GER.  I    ... 

Luc.   I  have  made  up  my  mind  about  the  matter. 

GER.  But     .     . 

Luc.  No  paternal  authority  can  compel  me  to  marry 
against  my  will. 

GER.  I  have    .     .    . 

Luc.  You  may  try  as  much  as  you  like. 

GER.  It    ..." 

Luc.  My  heart  cannot  submit  to  this  tyranny. 

GER.  The    .    .    . 

Luc.  And  I  will  sooner  go  into  a  convent  than  marry 
a  man  I  do  not  love. 

GER.  But    ... 

Luc.  (In  a  loud  voice).  No.  By  no  means.  It  is  of  no  use. 
You  waste  your  time.  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  I 
am  fully  determined. 

GER.  Ah  !  what  a  torrent  of  words  !  One  cannot  hold 
out  against  it.  ( To  Sganarelle).  I  beseech  you,  Sir,  to 
make  her  dumb  again. 

SCAN.  That  is  impossible.  All  that  I  can  do  in  your 
behalf  is  to  make  you  deaf,  if  you  like. 

GER.  I  thank  you.     (To  Lucinde).    Do  you  think  .  .  . 

VOL.  II.  T 

290  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACT  in. 

Luc.  No  ;  all  your  reasoning  will  not  have  the  slightest 
effect  upon  me. 

GER.  You  shall  marry  Horace  this  very  evening. 

Luc.  I  would  sooner  marry  death  itself. 

SCAN.  (To  Geronte).  Stop,  for  Heaven's  sake!  stop. 
Let  me  doctor  this  matter ;  it  is  a  disease  that  has  got 
hold  of  her,  and  I  know  the  remedy  to  apply  to  it. 

GER.  Is  it  possible,  indeed,  Sir,  that  you  can  cure  this 
disease  of  the  mind  also  ? 

SCAN.  Yes;  let  me  manage  it.  I  have  remedies  for 
every  thing ;  and  our  apothecary  will  serve  us  capitally 
for  this  cure.  (To  Leandre}.  A  word  with  you.  You  per- 
ceive that  the  passion  she  has  for  this  Leandre  is  alto- 
gether against  the  wishes  of  the  father ;  that  there  is  no 
time  to  lose ;  that  the  humours  are  very  acrimonious ;  and 
that  it  becomes  necessary  to  find  speedily  a  remedy  for 
this  complaint,  which  may  get  worse  by  delay.  As  for 
myself,  I  see  but  one,  which  is  a  dose  of  purgative  flight, 
mixed,  as  it  should  be,  with  two  drachms  of  matrimonium, 
made  up  into  pills.  She  may,  perhaps,  make  some  diffi- 
culty about  taking  this  remedy ;  but  as  you  are  a  clever 
man  in  your  profession,  you  must  induce  her  to  consent  to 
it,  and  make  her  swallow  the  thing  as  best  you  can.  Go 
and  take  a  little  turn  in  the  garden  with  her  to  prepare 
the  humours,  while  I  converse  here  with  her  father ;  but, 
above  all,  lose  not  a  moment.  Apply  the  remedy  quick  ! 
apply  the  specific ! 

SCENE  VII. — GERONTE,  SGANARELLE. 

GER.  What  drugs  are  those  you  have  just  mentioned, 
Sir  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  I  never  heard  of  them  before. 

SCAN.  They  are  drugs  which  are  used  only  in  urgent 
cases. 

GER.  Did  you  ever  see  such  insolence  as  hers  ? 

SCAN.  Daughters  are  a  little  headstrong  at  times. 

GER.  You  would  not  believe  how  she  is  infatuated  with 
this  Leandre. 

SCAN.  The  heat  of  the  blood  produces  those  things  in 
young  people. 

GER.  As  for  me,  the  moment  I  discovered  the  violence 

*C*NK  ix.J         THE   PHYSICIAN    IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  291 

of  this  passion,  I  took  care  to  keep  my  daughter  under 
lock  and  key. 

SCAN.  You  have  acted  wisely. 

GER.  And  I  have  prevented  the  slightest  communica- 
tion between  them. 

SGAN.  Just  so. 

GER.  They  would  have  committed  some  folly,  if  they 
had  been  permitted  to  see  each  other. 

SCAN.  Undoubtedly. 

GER.  And  I  think  she  would  have  been  the  girl  to  run 
away  with  him. 

SCAN.  You  have  argued  very  prudently. 

GER.  I  was  informed,  that  he  tried  every  means  to  get 
speech  of  her. 

SGAN.   The  rascal ! 

GER.   But  he  will  waste  his  time. 

SGAN.  Aye  !  Aye  ! 

GER.  And  I  will  effectually  prevent  him  from  seeing 
her. 

SGAN.  He  has  no  fool  to  deal  with,  and  you  know  some 
tricks  of  which  he  is  ignorant.  One  must  get  up  very 
early  to  catch  you  asleep. 

SCENE  VIII. — Lucas,  GERONTE,  SGANARELLE. 

Luc.  Odds  bobs  !  Sir,  here  is  a  pretty  to  do.  Your 
daughter  has  fled  with  her  Leandre.  It  was  he  that  played 
the  apothecary,  and  this  is  the  physician  who  has  per- 
formed this  nice  operation. 

GER.  What !  to  murder  me  in  this  manner !  Quick, 
fetch  a  magistrate,  and  take  care  that  he  does  not  get 
away.  Ah  villain  !  I  will  have  you  punished  by  the  law. 

Luc.  I  am  afraid,  Mister  Doctor,  that  you  will  be 
hanged.3*  Do  not  stir  a  step,  I  tell  you. 

SCENE  IX. — MARTINE,  SGANARELLE,  LUCAS. 

MART.  (To  LUCAS)  Good  gracious !  what  a  difficulty 
I  have  had  to  find  this  place  !  Just  tell  me  what  has  be- 
come of  the  physician  I  recommended  to  you  ? 

33  A  nearly  similar  saying  is  also  used  by  Georgibus  in  one  of  Moliere's 
early  farces,  The  Flying  Physician. 

292  THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF   HIMSELF.  [ACr  in. 

Luc.  Here  he  is ;  just  going  to  be  hanged. 

MART.  What !  my  husband  hanged !  Alas,  and  for 
what? 

Luc.  He  has  helped  some  one  to  run  away  with  master's 
daughter. 

MART.  Alas,  my  dear  husband,  is  it  true  that  you  are 
going  to  be  hanged  ? 

SCAN.  Judge  for  yourself.     Ah  ! 

MART.  And  must  you  be  made  an  end  of  in  the  presence 
of  such  a  crowd. 

SCAN.  What  am  I  to  do? 

MART.  If  you  had  only  finished  cutting  our  wood,  I 
shonld  be  somewhat  consoled. 

SCAN.  Leave  me,  you  break  my  heart. 

MART.  No,  I  will  remain  to  encourage  you  to  die;  and 
I  will  not  leave  you  until  I  have  seen  you  hanged. 

SCAN.  Ah! 

SCENE  X. — GERONTE,  SGANARELLE,  MARTIN  E. 

GER.  (To  Sganarelle).  The  magistrate  will  be  here 
directly,  and  we  shall  put  you  in  a  place  of  safety  where 
they  will  be  answerable  for  you. 

SCAN.  (On  his  knees,  hat  in  hand}.  Alas!  will  not  a 
few  strokes  with  a  cudgel  do  instead  ? 

GER.  No,  no;  the  law  shall  decide.  But  what  do  I 
see? 

SCENE    XI. — GERONTE,    LEANDRE,    LUCINDE,  SGANA- 
RELLE, LUCAS,  MARTINE. 

LEAN.  Sir,  I  appear  before  you  as  Leandre,  and  am 
come  to  restore  Lucinde  to  your  authority.  We  intended 
to  run  away,  and  get  married ;  but  this  design  has  given 
way  to  a  more  honorable  proceeding.  I  will  not  presume 
to  steal  away  your  daughter,  and  it  is  from  your  hands 
alone  that  I  will  obtain  her.  I  must  at  the  same  time 
acquaint  you,  that  I  have  just  now  received  some  letters 
informing  me  of  the  death  of  ray  uncle,  and  that  he  has 
left  me  heir  to  all  his  property. 

GER.  Really,  Sir,  your  virtue  is  worthy  of  my  utmost 
consideration,  and  I  give  you  my  daughter  with  the  great- 
est pleasure  in  the  world. 

SCBNKXI.]         THE   PHYSICIAN   IN   SPITE   OF    HIMSELF.  293 

SCAN.   (Aside).  The  physician  has  had  a  narrow  escape ! 

MART.  Since  you  are  not  going  to  be  hanged,  you  may 
thank  me  for  being  a  physician  ;  for  I  have  procured  you 
this  honour. 

SCAN.  Yes,  it  is  you  who  procured  me,  I  do  not  know 
how  many  thwacks  with  a  cudgel. 

LEAN.  (To  Sganarelle}.  The  result  has  proved  too 
happy  to  harbour  any  resentment. 

SCAN.  Be  it  so.  (To  Martini).  1  forgive  you  the  blows 
on  account  of  the  dignity  to  which  you  have  elevated  me  ; 
but  prepare  yourself  henceforth  to  behave  with  great  re- 
spect towards  a  man  of  my  consequence ;  and  consider 
that  the  anger  of  a  physician  is  more  to  be  dreaded  than 
people  imagine. 

fl 

\\U 

AUIBRARYQ* 

v^clOS-ANCElfj. 

>'<"/()  JITV3-  JO 

A     000124141     3 

-MU1BRARY0/ 

JJMIVERS/A       ,^IOS  ANGELA 

I      -'  v*'  V     I 

n  I  s  • 

115^^
