The Dramatic Works of Molière, Vol. IV (Molière, 1876)
==========================================================
Vol. IV of van Laun's complete English Molière: Mélicerte, The Sicilian, Tartuffe, Amphitryon, George Dandin. Translated by Henri van Laun (1876). Public domain. Sourced from Internet Archive (https://archive.org/details/dramaticworksofm04moliiala).

University  of
Southern  R«
Library  F{

'flAUVHHIlr

OF-CALIFOffii

liJ

O         ii_

\VK-tlNIVERtov

,x\ios;

-3         rjf    .,?**>

THE   DRAMATIC  WORKS   OF  MOLIERE.

THE  DRAMATIC  WORKS

OF

M  O  L  I  E  R  E

RENDERED   INTO   ENGLISH

BY   HENRI    VAN    LAUN

A   NEW    EDITION
With    a    Prefatory    Memoir,    Introductory   Notices    and    Notes

ILLUSTRATED   WITH

NINETEEN    ENGRAVINGS   ON    STEEL

FROM    PAINTINGS   AND    DESIGNS   BY

Horace    Vernet,  Desenne,  Johannot   and  Hersent

COMPLETE  IN  SIX  VOLUMES

VOLUME  IV

PHILADELPHIA
GEORGE  BARRIE,.  PUBLISHER

TABLE  OF  CONTENTS.

VOLUME  FOUR.

MELICERTE.

Comedie  Pastorale  Heroique I

A  COMIC  PASTORAL.

Pastorale  Comique 27

THE  SICILIAN  ;  OR,  LOVE  MAKES  THE  PAINTER.

Le  Sicilien ;  ou,  L?Am  ur  Peintre 39

TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

Tartuffe  ;  ou,  L'  Imposteur 67

AMPHITRYON.

Amphitryon  Comedie 161

GEORGE  DANDIN  ;  OR,  THE  ABASHED  HUSBAND.

George  Dandin  ;  ou,  Le  Mart  Confondu 221

Stack
Annex

LIST    OF   ILLUSTRATIONS.

VOLUME  FOUR.

TARTUFFE.     Act  III.,  Scene  6.

Tartuffe ;  ou,  L1  Imposteur Frontispiece

AMPHITRYON.     Act  I.,  Scene  2.

Amphitryon-  Comedie 176

GEORGE  DANDIN.    Act  II.,  Scene  3.

George  Dandin ;  ou,  Le  Mari  Confondu 250

MELICERTR

COMEDIE  PASTORALE  HERO1QUE.

MELICERTE.

A  HEROIC   PASTORAL  IN  TWO  ACTS

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.)

DECEMBER  2ND,  1666.

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.

ON  the  ist  of  December,  1666,  the  troupe  of  Moliere  set  out  for  Saint-
Germain-en-Laye,  where  it  was  employed,  as  well  as  the  troupe  of  the
hotel  de  Bourgogne,  and  the  Italian  and  Spanish  comedians,  in  the  Ballet
des  Muses,  which  inaugurated  the  renewal  of  the  court-festivals,  inter-
rupted for  nearly  a  year  through  the  death  of  the  Queen-mother.  The
celebrated  musician,  Lulli,  composed  the  music  for  the  ballet ;  whilst  the
King,  Madame,1  Mesdemoiselles  de  la  Valliere  and  de  la  Mothe,  Mesdames
de  Montespan  and  de  Ludre — four  ladies  whom  the  King  delighted
to  honour — and  the  principal  personages  of  the  court,  took  an  active  part
in  the  entries,2  the  dancing,  and  the  mythological  sports.

Moliere  was  entrusted  with  the  task  of  writing  a  comedy  for  these
entertainments,  and  he  chose  for  his  subject  a  similar  one  to  the  history
of'Florizel  and  Perdita.  in  Shakespeare's  Winter's  Tale.  It  is  said  that
Moliere  owed  his  episode  of  Melicerte  to  that  part  of  Mademoiselle  de
Scude'ry's  novel  Cyrus,  which  relates  the  love-scenes  between  Sesostris
and  Timarete,  a  young  shepherd  and  shepherdess,  who  became  enam-
oured of  each  other,  and  are  afterwards  proved  to  be  of  noble  origin.
But  the  charm  of  his  writing,  the  exquisite  delicacy  of  the  sentiment,  and
the  freshness  of  the  pastoral  scenes,  cause  us  to  regret  that  Moliere  wrote
only  the  two  first  acts  of  this  play,  and  never  finished  it.  Those  who
wish  to  study  Moliere,  and  not  to  leave  any  of  his  writings  neglected,
will  discover  in  some  of  his  most  slighted  plays,  such  as  Don  Garcia  of
Navarre,  The  Princess  of  Elis,  Melicerte,  The  Magnificent  Lovers,  an
under-current  of  sentimentality,  sometimes  a  little  too  courtly,  at  other
times  of  rather  too  pastoral  and  lackadaisical  a  flavour,  but  always  bear-
ing the  impress  of  genuine,  real,  heartfelt  emotion,  worthy  of  being
carefully  observed,  as  perhaps  a  nevr  trait  in  Moliere's  character,

Melicerte  was  acted  on  the  2d  of  December,  1666,  and  young  Michel
Boiron,  better  known  as  Baron,  played  in  it  the  chief  character  of  Myrtil.
Tradition  states,  that,  during  the  rehearsals,  the  wife  of  Moliere,  jealous
of  the  influence  of  the  young  actor — for  he  was  only  thirteen  years  old —
over  the  heart  of  her  husband,  boxed  Baron's  ears ;  at  which  the  latter

1  See  Vol.  I.,  page  340,  note  x.  'See  Vol.  I.,  page  xxx.,  note  n.

4  MKLICERTE.

was  so  offended  that  he  refused  to  play.  The  matter  was  arranged  with
great  difficulty ;  but  immediately  after  Melicerte  had  been  performed,
Baron  asked  Louis  XIV. s  permission  to  leave  Moliere's  troupe,  and  for
three  years  remained  in  the  provinces.  The  scandalous  gossip  of  those
times  says  that  Mad.  Moliere's  hatred  of  Baron  changed  afterwards  into  a
warmer  sentiment,  which  he  returned.

This  play  was  not  published  during  Moliere's  lifetime,  but  sixteen  years
after  his  death  by  La  Grange  and  Vinot.  (See  Introductory  Notice  to
TTie  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.).  In  1699,  seventeen  years  after  it
had  been  published,  Guerin,  a  son  of  the  husband  of  Moliere's  widow,
and  who  professed  a  great  admiration  for  Moliere,  altered  Melicerte  partly,
changed  the  metre  into  an  irregular  one,  made  Myrtil  give  to  Melicerte  a
nosegay  instead  of  a  bird,  and  added  an  entire  third  act.  But  in  spite  of
the  music  of  Lalande  and  the  protection  of  the  Princess  of  Conti,  the
piece  had  no  success.

Moliere  and  his  troupe  remained  at  Saint  Germain-en-Laye  from  the
ist  of  December,  1666,  until  the  25th  of  February,  1667,  and  received
from  the  King,  for  the  time  spent  in  his  pleasures,  two  years  of  their
pension.3  During  that  time,  the  dramatist  produced  Melicerte,  the
Pastorale  Comique  and  The  Sicilian.  The  Ballet  des  Muses  was  arranged
by  Benserade,  the  official  manager  of  nearly  all  the  courtly  entertain-
ments, who  wrote  also  the  verses  or  recits:  *  but  as  this  Ballet  lasted  for
nearly  three  months,  it  must  have  been  often  changed,  for  variety  is  one  of
the  necessities  of  courtly  amusements.  It  opened  with  Mnemosyne,  the
goddess  of  memory,  who,  remembering  the  great  heroes  of  antiquity,
wished  to  see  the  august  prince  who  had  such  a  glorious  reputation,  and
who  caused  all  arts  to  flourish  in  his  dominions.  She  was  accompanied
by  the  nine  Muses  who  sang,  and  by  seven  arts.  Urania,  and  seven
planets,  represented  by  dancers  in  brilliant  dresses,  formed  the  first  entry.
The  second  entry  was  Pyramus  and  Thisbe ;  Pyramus  was  acted  by  the
Count  of  Armagnac,  generally  called  Monsieur  le  Grand,  because  he  was
"  Grand  Ecuyer ''  (Master  of  the  horse),  and  Thisbe  by  the  Marquis  de
Mirepoix,  who  we  sincerely  trust  played  better  than  Nick  Bottom,  the
weaver,  and  Francis  Flute,  the  bellows- mender.  The  third  entry  was
Thalia  and  Melicerte,5  represented  by  Moliere  and  his  troupe,  "  of  all  our
poets,"  says  the  official  description,  "  the  one  who,  in  this  kind  of  writing,
may  with  the  greatest  justice  be  compared  to  the  ancients."  The  fourth
entry  was  in  honour  of  Euterpe,  a  pastoral  muse  ;  eight  shepherds  and
eight  shepherdesses  sang  some  verses  in  praise  of  the  power  of  Love ;
four  other  shepherds  and  four  other  shepherdesses  danced,  whilst  the  six-
teen were  singing.  Amongst  the  dancers  were  Louis  XIV.  and  the  Mar-
quis de  Villeroi,  and  amongst  the  danseuses  Madame,  Madame  de  Mon-
tespan,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Valliere  and  Mademoiselle  de  Toussi.  The
fifth  entry,  in  honour  of  Clio,  the  muse  of  history,  was  a  ballet  represent-
ing the  battle  between  Alexander  and  Porus.  I  cannot  imagine  that  the
battle  was  well  represented ;  for  the  official  description  gives  only  the

*The  munificence  displayed  by  Louis  XIV.  to  Moliere  and  his  troupe  has  been
too  much  extolled.  Since  the  year  1665,  they  received  6,000  livres,  and  during  the
last  two  years  of  Moliere's  life,  7,000  livres;  but  the  troupe  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne
received  12,000  livres,  and  the  Italian  troupe  15,000  livres  yearly.

4  See  Vol.  I.,  page  xxx.,  note  12.

*  There  is  a  little  doubt  whether  Melicerte  or  the  Pastorale  Comique  was  repre-
sented in  the  third  entry  ;  most  probably  the  former.

MELICERTE.  5

names  of  five  Greeks  and  the  same  number  of  Indians,  while  each  army
has  one  drummer  and  two  flute  players.  The  sixth  entry  in  honour  of  Cal-
liope, "  the  mother  of  fine  verses,"  was  a  little  comedy,  called  The  Poets.
acted  by  the  troupe  of  the  hotel  de  Bourgogne,  when  a  Spanish  Masca-,
rade  was  represented,  in  which  the  King  and  several  noblemen,  as  well  as
Madame,  Madame  de  Montespan,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Valliere,  and
several  noble  ladies,  danced.  There  were  also  four  Spaniards  who  played
on  the  harp  and  guitar,  the  same  number  who  sang,  and  four  Spanish
ladies  who  sang  also  ;  and  if  these  Spanish  actors  were — as  is  most  likely
. — the  comedians  patronised  by  the  Queen  Maria  Theresa,  herself  a  Span-
ish princess,  and  on  the  point  of  giving  birth  to  a  child,6  it  is,  to  say  the
least  of  it,  singular,  that  they  should  have  sung  in  her  presence,  as  well  as
in  that  of  the  King's  favourites,  verses  which  say,  "  the  most  charming
youth,  without  love,  is  nothing;  some  little  tenderness  increases  all
charms.  None  can  refrain  from  the  power  of  love,  but  if  my  heart  is
tender,  it  is  not  so  for  you."  In  the  seventh  entry,  Orpheus,  sung  by  Lulli,
was  represented  as  bewailing  and  feeling  the  influence  of  love  ;  a  nymph
and  eight  Thracians  are  also  there.  The  eighth  entry  represented  Erato,
''  who,  above  all  others,  is  invoked  in  love,"  and  six  lovers  taken  from  the
most  famous  novels  ;  amongst  others  Louis  XIV.,  came  forward  as  Cyrus.
The  ninth  entry  was  in  honour  of  Polyhymnia,  "  whose  power  extends
over  eloquence  and  dialectics  ;  "  three  Greek  and  three  Roman  orators
are  ridiculed  by  the  same  number  of  French  and  Italian  actors.  The
tenth  entry  was  in  honour  of  Terpsichore,  "  to  whom  the  invention  of
rustic  song  and  dance  is  attributed  ;  "  four  Fauns  and  four  savage  women
dance,  and  a  Satyr  sings  verses,  of  course  in  praise  of  Love.  The
eleventh  entry  consisted  of  the  nine  Muses  and  the  nine  daughters  of
Pierro  vicing  with  each  other  in  dancing,  and  all  represented  by  noble
ladies,  amongst  whom  were  Madame,  Mademoiselle  de  La  Valliere,
Madame  de  Ludre,  and  Madame  de  Montespan.  The  twelfth  entry  was
composed  of  three  nymphs,  who  were  umpires,  of  which  the  King  was  one.
The  last  entry  consisted  of  the  Pierides  resisting,  and  Monsieur  Le  Grand,
as  Jupiter,  changing  them  into  birds.

It  will  be  seen  that  the  Grand.  Monarque  danced  several  times  himself
in  the  Ballet  des  Muses ;  he  always  liked  dancing,  and  however  much
his  early  education  may  have  been  neglected,  upon  that  point  it  left
nothing  to  be  desired.  But  to  judge  rightly  how  much  dancing  was  es-
teemed at  that  time,  we  have  but  to  look  at  what  was  paid  to  the  King's
different  masters  in  1660  —he  was  then  twenty-three  years  old.  We  find
that  the  yearly  salary  of  his  dancing  master  was  2000  livres,  of  his  draw-
ing master  1500  livres,  and  of  his  writing  master  300  livres,  the  same,  in
fact,  as  that  of  the  scullions  of  the  royal  kitchen — perhaps  a  just  retribu-
tion for  neglect,  for  Louis  XIV.,  wrote  a  royally  bad  hand  all  his  lifetime,
but  was  considered  a  first-rate  dancer.  He  instituted  in  1661,  an  Acade-
mie  royale  de  danse,  formed  of  thirteen  dancing  masters,  who  "  shall  have
to  remedy  the  disorders  and  confusion  which  the  late  wars  have  intro-
duced in  the  aforesaid  art/'  says  the  official  preamble.  This  Academy
enjoyed  the  same  privileges  as  the  Academie  de  peinture  et  de  sculpture  ;
and  probably  the  dancing  master  of  The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman,
was  one  of  its  members.  The  official  Gazette  always  gave  a  minute  and
detailed  report  of  the  most  trifling  mythological  or  allegorical  ballet
danced  at  court,  but  never  an  analysis  of  any  masterpiece  of  the  French

*  This  child,  a  girl,  was  born  on  the  ad  of  January,  1667.

6  M£LICERTE.

stage.     It  continued  to  do  this,  even  after  the  King  no  longer  danced
himself.7

*  It  is  generally  stated  that  Louis  XIV.  never  danced  more  in  a  ballet,  after
Racine  had  put  the  following  words  in  the  mouth  of  Burrhus  in  the  tragedy  of
Britannicus,  represented  during  the  latter  part  of  the  year  1669.  We  see,  how-
ever, that  the  King,  according  to  the  Gazette,  represented  Apollo  and  Neptune  in
a  ballet,  on  the  9th  of  February,  1670  ;  but  after  that  time,  he  never  more  appeared
in  public.  The  lines  are  as  follows  : —

"  His  greatest  merit  and  his  rarest  virtue,
Is  skilfully  to  guide  his  chariot's  course,
To  vie  with  others  for  unworthy  prizes,
And  to  become  a  public  sight  in  Rome."

DRAMATIS   PERSONS.

MYRTIL,  in  love  with  Melicerte.

ACANTHE,  in  love  with  Daphne.

TYRONE,  in  love  with  Eroxene.

LYCARSIS,  herdsman,  supposed  father  to  Myrtil?

NICANDRE,  shepherd.

MOPSE,  shepherd,  supposed  uncle  to  Melicerte.

MELICERTE,  shepherdess.

DAPHNE,  shepherdess.

EROXENE,  shepherdess.

CORINNE,  confidante  of  Melicerte.

Scene. — THESSALY,  IN  THE  VALLEY  OF  TEMPE.

8  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.

MELICERTE.

(MELICERTE^.

ACT  I.

SCENE  I. — DAPHNE,  EROXENE,  ACANTHE,  TYRENE.

ACAN.  Ah !  charming  Daphne  !
TYR.  Too  lovely  Eroxene !
DAPH.   Leave  me,  Acanthe.
EROX.  Do  not  follow  me  Tyrene.
ACAN.  (To  Daphne).  Why  do  you  drive  me  away?
TYR.  (To  Eroxene).  Why  do  you  fly  from  me?
DAPH.  (  To  Acanthe}.  You  please  me  most  when  far  away.
EROX.  (To  Tyrene).  I  love  to  be  where  you  are  not.
ACAN.  Why  not  cease  this  killing  severity?
TYR.  Why  not  cease  to  be  so  cruel?
DAPH.  Why  not  cease  your  useless  protestations?
EROX.  Why  not  cease  to  bore  me  ?
ACAN.  I  die  with  grief,  unless  you  pity  them.
TYR.  Unless  you  succour  me,  my  death  is  but  too  sure.
DAPH.  Unless  you  go,  I  leave  this  place.
EROX.  If  you  remain,  I  say  good-bye.
ACAN.  Well,  be  it  so  !  to  please  you  I  will  go.
TYR.  When  I  am  gone,  I  am  sure  you  will  be  pleased.
ACAN.  Generous  Eroxene,  vouchsafe,  for  pity's  sake,  to
say  a  word  or  two  to  her  in  favour  of  my  passion.

9

10  MfeLICERTE.  [ACT  i.

TYR.  Obliging  Daphne,  speak  to  this  inhuman  creature,
and  learn  whence  proceeds  so  much  hatred  towards  me.

SCENE   II. — DAPHNE,  EROXENE.

EROX.  Acanthe  has  some  merit,  and  loves  you  dearly.
How  is  it  that  you  treat  him  so  harshly?

DAPH.  Tyrene  has  much  worth,  and  pines  for  your  love.
Whence  comes  it  that,  without  pity,  you  behold  him
shedding  tears?

EROX.  Since  I  put  the  question  first,  it  is  but  fair  that
you  should  answer  before  me.

DAPH.  All  Acanthe's  attentions  make  no  impression  on
me,  because  I  care  for  some  one  else.

EROX.  I  treat  Tyrene  with  harshness,  because  another
is  master  of  my  heart.

DAPH.  May  I  know  this  choice  which  you  conceal  ?

EROX.  Yes,  if  you  tell  me  this  secret  of  yours.

DAPH.  I  can  easily  satisfy  your  wish  without  telling  you
the  name  of  him  I  love.  I  have  an  admirable  portrait  of
him  in  my  pocket,  the  work  of  Atis,  that  inimitable  painter,
so  like  him  in  every  feature,  that  I  am  sure  you  will  re-
cognise him  at  a  glance.

EROX.  I  can  satisfy  you  by  the  same  means,  and  repay
your  secret  in  the  like  coin,.  I  also  have  a  lovely  portrait
by  this  famous  painter,  of  the  object  of  my  affections,  so
like  him  in  every  feature,  and  in  his  exceeding  grace,  that
you  will  name  him  at  first  sight.

DAPH.  The  case  which  the  painter  has  had  made  for  me
is  exactly  like  yours.

EROX.  It  is  true.  They  are  exactly  alike,  and  certainly
Atis  must  have  had  them  made  together.

DAPH.  Let  us  now,  by  means  of  these  few  tints,  show
each  other  the  secret  of  our  hearts.  •

EROX.  Let  us  see  who  will  soonest  understand  this
language,  and  which  work  speaks  most  plainly.

DAPH.  This  is  a  droll  mistake,  and  you  have  made  a
nice  blunder:  instead  of  your  portrait,  you  have  given
me  back  my  own.

EROX.  Indeed  I  have ;  I  do  not  know  how  I  came  to
do  it.

DAPH.  Give  it  me.     It  is  because  you  were  dreaming.

SCKNK  ii.]  MELICERTE.  1 1

EROX.  What  is  the  meaning  of  this  ?  I  believe  we  are
joking  with  each  other.  You  have  made  the  same  blun-
der as  I  have  with  the  portraits.

DAPH.  This  is  certainly  enough  to  make  one  laugh.
Give  it  me  back  again.

EROX.  {Placing  the  two  portraits  side  by  side}.  This  is
the  true  way  not  to  make  a  blunder.

DAPH.   Is  this  an  illusion  of  my  preoccupied  senses?

EROX.  Is  my  mind  affecting  my  eyes?

DAPH.  Myrtil  is  shown  to  me  in  this  work.

EROX.  Of  Myrtil's  features  I  see  the  image.

DAPH.  It  is  young  Myrtil  who  has  kindled  my  flame.

EROX.  It  is  to  young  Myrtil  that  all  my  wishes  tend.

DAPH.  I  came  to-day  to  entreat  you  to  tell  him  how  his
merits  interest  me  in  his  lot.

EROX.  I  came  to  ask  you  to  assist  me  in  my  affections ;
to  help  me  to  gain  his  heart.

DAPH.  Is  this  affection  with  which  he  inspires  you  so
powerful?

EROX.  Is  your  love  for  him  so  violent  ?

DAPH.  He  could  inflame  the  coldest  heart ;  and  his
budding  charms  must  delight  everyone.

EROX.  Not  a  nymph,  but  would  esteem  herself  happy
in  loving  him.  Diana  herself  might  without  shame  be
enamoured  of  him.

DAPH.  Nothing  but  his  bright  presence  charms  me
now-a-days ;  and  had  I  a  hundred  hearts,  they  should  all
be  his.

EROX.  He  blots  every  other  sight  from  my  eyes;  and
had  I  a  sceptre  he  should  be  master  of  it.

DAPH.  It  would  be  useless,  then,  to  try  to  tear  this  love
from  our  breasts.  Our  hearts  are  too  steadfast  in  their
wishes.  Only  let  us  try,  if  possible,  to  remain  friends ;
and  since  we  both  have  formed  the  same  designs  for  the
same  youth,  let  us  act  with  the  utmost  candour  in  this
matter,  and  not  take  a  mean  advantage  of  each  other.
Let  us  hasten  together  to  Lycarsis,  and  confide  to  him  our
tender  feelings  for  his  son.

EROX.  I  can  hardly  conceive,  so  great  is  my  surprise,
how  such  a  son  could  spring  from  such  a  father.  His
shape,  his  mien,  his  words,  his  eyes,  all  make  you  believe

12  MEL1CERTE.  [ACT  i.

that  the  blood  ot  the  gods  runs  in  his  veins.  But  I  con-
sent, let  us  go  and  find  the  father.  Let  us  open  our  hearts
to  him,  and  agree  that  Myrtil  shall  decide  by  his  own
choice  afterwards  this  contest  of  our  desires.

DAPH.  Be  it  so.  I  perceive  Lycarsis  with  Mopse  and
Nicandre.  They  will  leave  him  perhaps.  Let  us  hide
ourselves  till  they  do.

SCENE  III. — LYCARSIS,  MOPSE,  NICANDRE.

NIC.  (To  LYCARSIS).     Tell  us  your  news?

LYC.  Ah !  how  you  press  me  !  It  does  not  do  .to  tell
these  things  as  you  imagine.

MOP.  What  silly  ceremonies,  and  what  tomfoolery !
Menalcus  does  not  make  more  to  sing.

LYC.  Amongst  the  busy -bodies  in  political  matters,  the
divulging  of  news  generally  causes  a  great  stir.  I  wish  to
be  considered  as  rather  a  man  of  importance,  and  enjoy
your  impatience  a  little  longer.

NIC.  Do  you  wish  to  tire  us  both  by  your  delay?

MOP.  Do  you  take  pleasure  in  making  yourself  a  bore  ?

NIC.   Prithee,  speak  out,  and  stop  these  grimaces.

LYC.  Ask  me  both  in  a  decent  manner,  and  tell  me
what  you  will  give  me  if  I  do  as  you  wish.

MOP.  Plague  take  the  fool !  Let  us  leave  him,  Nicandre.
He  is  more  anxious  to  tell  than  we  are  to  hear.  His  news
weighs  him  down,  he  wishes  to  get  rid  of  it,  and  we  will
just  vex  him  by  not  listening.

LYC.  Eh!

NIC.  It  serves  you  right  for  your  ado.

LYC.  I  will  tell  it  you,  listen.

MOP.  Not  at  all.

LYC.  What  1   you  do  not  wish  to  hear  me  ?

NIC.  No.

LYC.  Very  well.  I  will  not  say  a  word,  and  you  shall
know  nothing.

MOP.  All  right.

LYC.  You  shall  not  know,  then,  that  the  King  has  come
to  honour  Tempe  with  his  presence  in  the  most  magnifi-
cent style ;  and  that  he  made  his  entry  into  Larissa  yes-
terday afternoon  ;  and  that  I  saw  him  there  comfortably
installed  with  the  whole  Court ;  that  these  woods  will  be

SCBN*  iv.]  MKL1CERTK.  13

rejoiced  to-day  at  the  sight  of  him ;  and  that  there  are  a
great  many  rumours  abroad  in  connection  with  his  visit.9

NIC.   We  do  not  wish  to  know  anything.

LYC.  I  have  seen  a  hundred  things  there,  delightful  to
behold.  Nothing  but  great  lords,  glittering  and  brilliant
from  head  to  foot,  as  if  dressed  for  a  holiday  ;  they
astonish  one's  eyes ;  and  are  more  dazzling  than  our
meadows  at  spring-time  with  all  their  flowers.  As  for  the
prince  himself,  he  is  easily  known  among  all  the  rest ;  he
looks  like  a  grand  monarch  a  mile  off.10  There  is  a  some-
thing about  him  that  makes  you  tell  at  once  that  he  is  a
master  King.  He  performs  his  part  with  matchless  grace ;
and  to  say  the  truth,  it  suits  him  admirably.  You  would
hardly  believe  how  every  one  at  court  eagerly  watches  for
a  glance  ;  there  reigns  around  him  a  pleasant  confusion  ;
and  one  would  think  it  a  swarm  of  brilliant  insects  follow-
ing everywhere  a  sweet  honeycomb.  In  short,  I  have
seen  nothing  so  lovely  under  the  canopy  of  Heaven  ;  and
our  much  cherished  feast  of  Pan  is  a  mere  piece  of  trash
compared  with  this  spectacle.  Since  you  seem  so  proud,
I  keep  my  news  to  myself,  and  shall  tell  nothing.

MOP.  And  we  do  not  in  the  least  wish  to  hear  you.

LYC.  Go  to  the  right  about.

MOP.  Go  and  hang  yourself.

SCENE  IV. — EROXENE,  DAPHNE,  LYCARSIS.

LYC.  {Believing  himself  alone].  That  is  the  way  to
punish  people  when  they  are  foolish  and  impertinent.

DAPH.  Heaven  always  preserve  your  flock,  shepherd  !

EROX.  May  Ceres  always  keep  your  barns  full  of  corn.

LYC.  And  may  the  great  Pan  give  to  each  of  you  a  hus-
band, who  will  love  you  much  and  be  worthy  of  you !

DAPH.  Ah,  Lycarsis  !  our  wishes  tend  to  the  same  end.

9  Moliere  has  also  employed  in   George   Dandin  a  talkative  servant
named    Lubin,  who   tells   his  secret,  after  having  said   that  his  hearer
should  know  nothing.

10  This  was  intended  as  a  compliment  to  Louis  XIV.    The  original  has
Et  (Tune  stade  loin  tl  sent  son  grand  monarque.     Of  course,  Moliere  did
not  intend  to  insinuate  anything  :  yet  it  is  rather  funny  that  he  should  use
the  words  il sent,  "he  smells,"  considering  the  uncleanly  personal  habits
of  Louis  XIV.,  and  his  intense  dislike  to  ablutions,  as  mentioned  by  Saint
Simon  in  his  Memoires.

14  MELICERTE.  [ACTI.

EROX.   Both  our  hearts  sigh  for  the  same  object.  •

DAPH.  And  that  boy  Cupid,  the  cause  of  all  our  lan-
guor, has  borrowed  from  you  the  darts  with  which  he
wounds  our  hearts.

EROX.  And  we  have  come  here  to  seek  your  coun-
tenance, and  to  see  which  of  us  two  shall  have  the
preference.

LYC.  Nymphs.  .    .    .

DAPH.  For  this  alone  we  sigh.

LYC.  I  am.  .    .    .

EROX.  For  this  happiness  only  we  wish.

DAPH.   We  express  our  thoughts  somewhat  freely.

LYC.  Why  so  ?

EROX.  Good  breeding  seems  somewhat  outraged.

LYC.  Not  at  all !

DAPH.  But  when  the  heart  is  consumed  with  a  noble
flame,  one  may,  without  any  shame,  make  a  candid  avowal
of  it.

LYC.  I.  ...

EROX.  We  may  be  allowed  this  freedom,  and  the  beauty
of  our  hearts'  choice  warrants  it.

LYC.  You  shock  my  modesty  by  flattering  me  thus.

EROX.  No,  no ;  affect  no  modesty  in  this  case.

DAPH.  In  short,  all  our  happiness  is  in  your  keeping.

EROX.  Our  only  hope  depends  on  you.

DAPH.  Shall  we  find  any  difficulty  in  you?

LYC.  Ah!

EROX.  Tell  me,  shall  our  wishes  be  rejected  ?

LYC.  No.  Heaven  has  given  me  no  cruel  heart.  I  take
after  my  late  wife ;  and  I  feel,  like  her,  a  great  sympathy
with  the  desires  of  others.  And .  I  am  not  the  man  to
show  much  pride.11

DAPH.  Then  grant  us  Myrtil  to  our  ardent  love.

EROX.  And  allow  his  choice  to  adjust  our  quarrel.

LYC.  Myrtil?

DAPH.  Yes,  it  is  Myrtil  whom  we  desire  of  you.

EROX.  Of  whom  did  you  think  we  were  speaking?

11  Auger,  one  of  the  commentators  of  Moliere,  thinks  that  the  wife  of
Lycarsis  was  mentioned  here  on  purpose,  because  it  was  probably  the  in-
tention of  Moliere  afterwards  to  explain  how  Myrtil  had  passed  so  long
for  Lycarsis'  son.

SCENES.]  MELICERTE.  15

LYC.  I  do  not  know;  but  Myrtil  is  not  of  an  age  to
take  the  yoke  of  matrimony  upon  himself.

DAPH.  His  growing  merit  may  strike  other  eyes ;  and
we  wish  to  secure  so  precious  a  possession,  to  forestall
others,  and  to  brave  fortune  under  the  firm  ties  of  a  com-
mon bond.

EROX.  As  by  his  wit  and  other  brilliant  qualities,  he  is
out  of  the  common  order,  and  outstrips  time  ;  so  shall  our
affection  for  him  do  the  same,  and  regulate  all  his  wishes
according  to  his  exceeding  merit.

LYC.  It  is  true  that  for  his  age  he  sometimes  surprises
me;  and  that  this  Athenian,  who  stayed  with  me  for
twenty  months,  finding  him  so  handsome,  took  a  fancy  to
fill  his  mind  with  his  philosophy.  He  has  made  him  so
clever  upon  certain  subjects,  that,  great  as  I  am,  he  often
puzzles  me.  But,  after  all,  he  is  still  a  child,  and  his
knowledge  is  mixed  with  a  great  deal  of  innocence.

DAPH.  He  is  not  such  a  child  but  that  I,  who  see  him
every  day,  believe  him  somewhat  love-sick  already ;  and
I  have  noticed  many  a  thing  that  shows  that  he  is  after
young  Melicerte.

EROX.  They  may  be  in  love  with  each  other,  and  I  can
see.  .  .  .

LYC.  Nonsense.  As  for  her,  I  do  not  say,  she  is  two
years  older  than  he,  and  two  years  with  her  sex  means  a
great  deal.  But  as  for  him,  he  dreams  of  nothing  but
play,  I  think,  and  of  his  little  vanities  of  being  dressed
like  the  shepherds  of  lofty  rank.

DAPH.  In  short,  we  wish,  by  the  marriage  tie  to  attack
his  fortune  to  ours.

EROX.  We  are  both  equally  eager  to  assure  ourselves
before-hand  of  the  mastery  of  his  heart.

LYC.  I  feel  myself  more  honoured  than  you  would  think.
I  am  but  a  poor  herdsman ;  and  it  is  certainly  too  much
glory  that  two  nymphs  of  the  highest  rank  in  the  land
should  contend  for  making  my  son  their  husband.  Since
he  pleases  you  so  much,  let  the  matter  be  arranged  in  this
way.  I  consent  that  his  choice  shall  adjust  your  dispute  ;
and  she,  whom  his  decree  shall  set  aside,  may  marry  me
in  compensation,  if  she  likes.  At  all  events,  it  is  the  same
blood,  and  almost  the  same  thing.  But  here  he  is.  Allow

1 6  MKLICEKTE.  [ACT   i.

me  to  prepare  him  a  little.     He  has  some  sparrow  newly
caught :  and  this  is  nearly  all  his  love  and  attachment.

SCENE  V. — EROXENE,  DAPHNE,  and  LYCARSIS  (at  the  fur-
ther end  of  the  stage),  MYRTIL.

MYR.  (Relieving  himself  alone,  carrying  a  sparrow  in  a
cage).  Innocent  little  bird,  that  thus,  before  me,  beat
your  wings  so  violently  against  your  prison  walls,  bewail
not  your  loss  of  freedom.  Yours  is  a  glorious  fate.  I  have
caught  you  for  Melicerte.  She  will  kiss  you,  and  take  you
in  her  hands,  and  grant  you  the  favour  of  nestling  in  her
bosom.  Can  there  be  a  sweeter  and  happier  lot  ?  Oh,
happy  little  sparrow,  where  is  the  King  that  would  not
change  places  with  you?

LYC.  A  word  with  you,  Myrtil.  Leave  these  playthings
alone.  It  is  a  question  of  something  else  than  sparrows.
These  two  nymphs,  Myrtil,  lay  claim  to  you  at  the  same
time,  and  young  as  you  are,  desire  you  for  their  husband.
I  am  to  secure  you  to  them  by  marriage ;  and  they  wish
you  to  choose  one  of  them.

MYR.  These  nymphs?

LYC.  Yes.  Of  the  two  you  must  select  one.  Look  at
the  happiness  in  store  for  you,  and  bless  your  good  for-
tune.

MYR.  Can  this  proffered  choice  be  deemed  happiness,
if  my  heart  does  not  in  the  least  wish  for  it?

LYC.  At  least,  acknowledge  it;  and  respond  properly,
and  without  confusion,  to  the  honour  intended  for  you.

EROX.  Behold,  Myrtil,  notwithstanding  the  pride  which
reigns  amongst  us,  two  nymphs  who  offer  themselves  to
you.  The  marvellous  promise  of  your  worth  reverses  the
order  of  things  in  this  case.

DAPH.  We  leave  you,  Myrtil,  as  the  best  judge,  in  this
matter,  to  consult  your  own  eyes  and  heart :  nor  will  we
influence  your  choice  by  a  flowery  description  of  our  own
perfections.

MYR.  You  intend  me  an  honour  the  greatness  of  which
dazzles  me  ;  but  I  confess  that  this  honour  is  too  great  for
me.  I  must  oppose  your  exceeding  goodness  ;  I  am  of  too
little  worth  to  deserve  such  fortune ;  and  however  great

SCKNB  v.]  MELICERTE.  1  7

its  attractions  might  be,  I  should  be  sorry  that,  for  my
sake,  you  should  be  blamed  for  having  chosen  beneath
you.

EROX.  Comply  with  our  wishes  whatever  may  be  said
of  it,  and  do  not  trouble  yourself  with  the  care  of  our
glory.

DAPH.  No,  do  not  think  so  humbly  of  yourself,  and
leave  us  to  be  the  judges  of  your  deserts.

MYR.  Even  the  proffered  choice  opposes  itself  to  your
expectations,  and  alone  would  prevent  my  heart  from  sat-
isfying you.  How  am  I  to  choose  between  two  great
beauties,  equal  in  birth  and  rare  perfections?  To  reject
either  would  be  a  terrible  crime,  and  it  is  much  more  rea-
sonable to  choose  neither.

EROX.  But  in  refusing  to  comply  with  our  desires,  in-
stead of  one,  you  offend  two,  Myrtil.

DAPH.  Since  we  are  willing  to  abide  by  your  decision,
you  cannot  defend  yourself  with  these  reasons.

MYR.  Well  then  !  if  these  reasons  do  not  satisfy  you,
this  one  will:  I  love  other  charms,  and  I  feel  full  well,
that  a  heart,  which  a  beautiful  object  engrosses,  is  indif-
ferent and  deaf  to  all  other  advantages.

LYC.  What  now !  What  means  all  this  ?  Who  could
have  thought  it  ?  And  do  you  know,  boy,  what  love  is  ?

MYR.  Without  knowing  it  myself,  my  heart  does.

LYC.  But  this  love  displeases  me,  and  is  not  wanted.

MYR.  If  it  displeases  you,  you  ought  not  to  have  given
me  such  a  tender  and  sensitive  heart.

LYC.  But  this  heart  that  I  have  given  you  owes  me  obe-
dience.

MYR.  Yes,  when  it  is  in  its  power  to  obey.

LYC.  But  it  ought  not  to  love  without  my  leave.

MYR.  Why  did  you  not  hinder  it,  then,  from  being
charmed  ?

LYC.  Well !  I  forbid  you  to  let  this  continue.

MYR.  I  am  afraid  your  prohibition  comes  too  late.

LYC.  What !  has  not  a  father  superior  rights  ?

MYR.  Even  the  much  greater  gods  cannot  control  our
hearts.

LYC.  The  gods  .    .    .  Peace,  little  fool.   This  philosophy

makes  me  .    .    .

1 8  MELICERTE.  [ACT  H.

DAPH.   Do  not  be  angry,  pray.

LYC.  No :  he  shall  choose  one  of  you,  or  I  will  whip
him  before  your  faces.  Ha,  ha,  I  will  let  you  know  that  I
am  your  father.

DAPH.  Pray,  let  us  manage  matters  without  anger.

EROX.  May  we  inquire  of  you,  Myrtil,  the  name  of  the
charming  object  whose  beauty  has  made  you  her  swain?

MYR.  Melicerte,  Madam.  She  may  make  others  love
her.

EROX.  Do  you  compare  her  attractions  to  ours,  Myrtil  ?

DAPH.  The  choice  between  her  and  us  is  unequal  enough.

MYR.  Nymphs,  in  Heaven's  name,  do  not  say  any  ill  of
her.  Pray  consider  that  I  love  her,  and  do  not  upset  my
mind.  If,  by  loving  her,  I  outrage  your  heavenly  charms,
she  has  no  part  in  that  crime ;  all  the  offence  comes  from
me,  if  you  please.  It  is  true  that  I  know  the  difference
between  you  and  her ;  but  we  cannot  escape  our  fate.  In
short,  Nymphs,  I  feel  that  Heaven  has  granted  me  all
imaginable  respect  for  you,  but  for  her  all  the  love  of
which  a  heart  is  capable.  I  perceive,  by  the  blush  that
rises  in  your  face,  that  my  words  do  not  please  you.  My
heart  fears  to  hear  in  your  answer  what  may  wound  it  in
its  most  tender  part ;  and  to  avoid  such  a  blow,  I  prefer
taking  my  leave  of  you,  Nymphs.

LYC.  Hullo,  Myrtil,  hullo  !  Will  you  come  back,  you
wretch  ?  He  is  off ;  but  we  shall  see  who  is  master.  Do
not  concern  yourself  about  all  these  idle  raptures;  you
shall  have  him  for  a  husband,  I  answer  with  my  life  for
that.

ACT  II.
SCENE  I. — MELICERTE,  CORINNE.

MEL.  Ah  !  Corinne,  you  have  heard  it  from  Stella,  and
she  has  got  the  news  from  Lycarsis  ?

COR.  Yes.

MEL.  That  Myrtil's  charms  have  touched  the  hearts  of
Eroxene  and  Daphn6  ?

COR.  Yes.

MEL.    That  they  are  so  eager  to  secure  him,  that  both
together  have  asked  for  his  hand,  and  that,  in  their  dis-

sc«N«n.J  MELICERTE.  !•)

cussion,  they  have  decided  to  claim  it  this  very  hour  ?
How  unwilling  you  are  to  speak !  and  how  little  my  mis-
fortune touches  you !

COR.  But  what  would  you  have  me  say  ?  This  is  the
truth,  and  you  repeat  every  word  exactly  as  I  told  them
to  you."

MEL.  But  how  does  Lycarsis  take  this  matter  ?

COR.  As  an  honour,  I  believe,  that  ought  to  please  him
mightily.

MEL.  And  do  not  you  see,  you  who  know  my  feelings
to  well,  that,  alas  !  with  these  words  you  pierce  me  to  the
heart  ?

COR.  How  so  ?

MEL.  By  showing  me  thus  plainly  that  implacable  fate
makes  me  of  so  little  consequence  as  compared  with  them.
Is  not  the  thought,  that  they  will  be  preferred  to  me,  on
account  of  their  rank,  enough  to  drive  me  mad  ?

COR.  But  I  only  answer  and  say  what  I  think.

MEL.  Oh!  you  kill  me  with  your  indifference.  But  tell
me,  what  feelings  did  Myrtil  show?

COR.  I  know  not.

MEL.  That  is  just  what  you  ought  to  know,  cruel  girl !

COR.  In  truth  I  do  not  know  what  to  do.  Whatever  I
do,  I  am  sure  to  displease  you.

MEL.  It  is  because  you  do  not  enter  into  the  feelings
of  a  heart  too  full,  alas  !  of  tender  passion.  Go  :  Leave
me  alone  in  this  solitude  to  pass  a  few  moments  of  my
anxiety.

SCENE  II. — MELICERTE,  alone.

Behold,  my  heart,  what  it  is  to  love.  Too  well  Belise
warned  me  of  it.  That  darling  mother,  before  her  death,
said  to  me,  one  day  on  the  banks  of  the  Peneus,  "  Be-
ware, daughter ;  Love  always  comes  to  young  hearts
surrounded  by  sweet  guiles.  At  first  it  offers  nought  but
what  is  agreeable  ;  but  it  drags  horrible  troubles  after  it ;
and  if  you  wish  to  pass  your  days  in  peace,  ever  defend

11  This  coolness  of  the  confidant,  as  opposed  to  the  impatience  of  the
loved  one,  is  also  found  in  The  Rogueries  of  Scapin  (See  Vol.  III.),  when
in  the  first  Scene  of  the  first  Act,  Octave  repeats  the  words  which  his  ser-
vant Sylvestre  utters.

20  MELICERTE.  [ACT  „.

yourself  from  its  darts,  as  from  an  evil."  And  Oh  !  my
heart,  well  did  I  remember  those  lessons,  and  when  first  I
beheld  Myrtil,  when  he  played  with  me,  and  paid  me  at-
tentions, I  always  told  you  to  delight  less  in  them.  But
you  believed  me  not ;  and  your  complacency  soon
changed  into  too  much  goodwill.  You  imagined  nought
but  joy  and  pleasure  from  this  budding  love  that  flattered
your  desires.  Now  you  behold  the  cruel  misfortune  with
which  fate  threatens  you  in  this  ominous  day,  and  the
deadly  pangs  to  which  it  reduces  you.  Ah  my  heart !  my
heart !  I  warned  you.  But  let  us,  if  we  can,  conceal  our
grief.  Here  comes  .  .  .

SCENE  III. — MYRTIL,  MELICERTE.

MYR.  I  just  now,  charming  Melicerte,  took  a  little  pri-
soner, which  I  have  kept  for  you,  and  of  which  I  may
perhaps  become  jealous  one  of  these  days.  It  is  a  young
sparrow,  which  I  myself  intend  to  tame  with  great  care,
and  for  your  acceptance.  The  present  is  not  great ;  but
the  gods  themselves  take  note  of  the  will  only.  The  in-
tention is  everything;  and  it  is  never  the  value  of  presents
that  .  .  .  But,  Heaven,  whence  this  sadness?  What
ails  you,  Melicerte,  and  what  dark  sorrow  is  reflected  in
your  dear  eyes  this  morning  ?  You  do  not  answer  me ;
and  this  mournful  silence  redoubles  my  anxiety  and  im-
patience. Speak,  what  has  annoyed  you  ?  What  is  it  ?

MEL.  It  is  nothing.

MYR.  It  is  nothing,  you  say,  and  yet  I  see  your  eyes
full  of  tears.  Does  this  agree,  fair  charmer  ?  Oh,  do  not
kill  me  by  concealing  it,  but  explain  to  me  what  those
tears  mean.

MEL.  It  would  do  me  no  good  to  let  you  know  this
secret.

MYR.  Ought  you  to  have  anything  that  I  may  not  know?
Do  you  not  offend  this  day  our  loves  by  wishing  to  rob  me
of  my  share  of  your  troubles  ?  .  Oh  !  do  not  hide  it  from
my  affection.

MEL.  Well !  Myrtil,  be  it  so.  I  must  tell  it  you,  then.
I  have  been  informed  that,  by  a  choice  very  glorious  for
you,  firoxene  and  Daphne"  wish  you  for  their  husband;
and  I  will  confess,  Myrtil,  that  I  have  the  weakness  of  not

SCENE  HI.]  MELICERTE.  2  I

being  able  to  hear  this  without  grief;  without  accusing
fate  of  her  rigorous  law,  which  renders  their  desires  prefer-
able to  mine.

MYR.  And  you  can  harbour  this  unjust  grief!  You  can
suspect  my  love  of  weakness,  and  you  imagine  that,  bound
by  such  sweet  charms,  I  could  ever  be  another's  !  that  I
would  accept  any  other  proffered  hand  !  Ah  !  what  have
I  done,  cruel  Melicerte,  that  you  treat  my  tenderness  so
harshly,  and  judge  my  heart  so  badly  ?  What !  ought  you
even  to  doubt  it?  It  makes  me  very  wretched  to  suffer
this  suspicion.  What  is  the  good  of  love  like  mine,  alas !
when  you  are  so  ready  to  disbelieve  it  ?

MEL.  I  would  fear  these  rivals  less,  Myrtil,  if  things
were  equal  on  both  sides ;  and  were  I  of  similar  rank,  I
might  dare  to  hope  that  perhaps  love  would  prefer  me.
But  the  inequality  of  wealth  and  birth,  which  makes  the
difference  between  them  and  me  .  .  .

MYR.  Ah  !  their  rank  will  not  conquer  my  heart,  and
your  divine  charms  stand  you  instead  of  all.  I  love  you :
that  is  sufficient ;  and  in  you  I  see  rank,  wealth,  treasures,
states,  sceptre,  crown.  Were  the  greatest  monarch's  power
offered  to  me,  I  would  not  change  it  for  the  bliss  of  pos-
sessing you.  This  is  the  sincere  and  unvarnished  truth,
which  to  doubt  is  an  insult  to  me.

MEL.  Well !  Myrtil,  since  you  wish  it,  I  believe  that
your  vows  are  not  shaken  by  their  rank  ;  and  that,  not-
withstanding their  nobility,  riches,  and  beauty,  your  heart
loves  me  well  enough  to  love  me  better  than  them.  But
you  will  not  follow  the  voice  of  love.  Your  father,  Myr-
til, will  dictate  your  choice,  and  I  am  not  dear  to  him,  as
I  am  to  you,  that  he  should  prefer  a  simple  shepherdess  to
aught  else.

MYR.  No,  dear  Melicerte,  neither  father  nor  gods  shall
force  me  to  discard  your  lovely  eyes  ;  for  ever,  queen  of
my  heart,  as  you  are  .  .  .

MEL.  Ah,  Myrtil,  take  care  what  you  are  doing.  Do
not  indulge  my  heart  with  hope,  which  it  would  perhaps
too  willingly  receive,  and  which,  vanishing  afterwards  like
a  passing  flash  of  lightning,  would  render  my  misfortune
the  more  cruel.

MYR.  What !  Am  I  to  invoke  the  aid  of  oaths,  when  I

MELICERTE.

[ACT   II.

promise  to  love  you  for  ever?  How  you  wrong  yourself
by  such  alarms  !  How  little  you  know  the  power  of  your
charms  !  Well !  since  you  wish  it,  I  swear  by  the  gods ;
and,  if  that  be  not  enough,  I  swear  by  your  eyes,  that  I
shall  sooner  be  killed  than  leave  you.  Accept  here  on  the
spot  the  pledge  which  I  give  you,  and  suffer  my  lips  to
seal  the  oath  with  transport  on  this  fair  hand.

MEL.  "Ah  !  Myrtil,  get  up  for  fear  you  may  be  seen.

MYR.  Is  there  aught  .  .  .  But,  oh  Heavens,  some  one
comes  to  disturb  my  bliss.

SCENE  IV. — LYCARSIS,  MYRTIL,  MELICERTE.

LYC.  Do  not  let  me  disturb  you.

MEL.  (Aside).     Cruel  fate  !

LYC.  Not  at  all  bad,  this !  go  on  you  two.  Bless  my
heart,  dear  son,  how  tender  you  look,  and  how  like  a  mas-
ter you  set  about  it  already  !  Has  this  sage,  whom  Athens
exiled,  taught  you  all  these  pretty  things  in  his  philoso-
phy? And  you,  my  gentle  shepherdess,  who  so  sweetly
give  him  your  hand  to  kiss,  does  honour  teach  you  these
tender  wiles  wherewith  you  thus  debauch  young  hearts  ?

MYR.  Refrain  from  these  degrading  insinuations,  and
do  not  pain  me  with  a  discourse  that  insults  her.

LYC.  I  will  speak  to  her,  I  will.  All  this  billing  and
cooing  .  .  .

MYR.  I  will  not  allow  her  to  be  abused.  My  birth
obliges  me  to  have  some  respect  for  you  ;  but  I  shall  be
able  to  punish  you,  upon  myself,  for  this  outrage.  Yes,  I
call  Heaven  to  witness,  that  if,  against  my  wishes,  you
utter  again  to  her  the  least  harsh  word,  I  shall  with  this
sword  give  her  satisfaction.  My  pierced  heart  shall  be
your  punishment,  and  my  spilled  blood  promptly  convince
her  how  highly  I  disapprove  of  your  anger.

MEL.  No,  no ;  do  not  believe  that  I  purposely  inflame
him,  and  that  it  is  my  design  to  seduce  his  heart.  It  is  by
his  own  free  will  that  he  cares  to  see  me,  and  bears  me
some  goodwill ;  I  do  not  force  him.  Not  that  I  wish  to
refrain  from  responding  to  his  tender  passion  by  an
equally  tender  one.  I  love  him,  I  own  it,  as  much  as
possible ;  but  this  attachment  has  nothing  that  ought  to
alarm  you.  And  to  disarm  all  your  unjust  fears,  I  promise

SCENK  v.j  MELICERTE.

you  now  to  avoid  his  presence,  to  make  room  for  the
choice  you  have  resolved  upon,  and  not  to  listen  to  his
protestations  of  love  unless  you  wish  it.

SCENE  V. — LYCARSIS,  MYRTIL.

MYR.  Well  !  now  she  is  gone,  you  triumph.  She  has
spoken,  and  you  have  obtained  all  that  you  desire.  But
know  that  you  rejoice  in  vain,  and  that  you  will  be  disap-
pointed in  your  expectations ;  and  that  do  what  you  will,
all  your  power  shall  not  shake  my  determination.

LYC.  What  presumption  is  this,  sirrah?  Is  this  the
way  to  talk  to  me  ?

MYR.  Yes,  I  am  wrong,  it  is  true :  and  my  anger  is  not
seemly.  I  will  change  my  tone,  as  becomes  me  ;  and  I
beseech  you  father,  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  and  by  all
that  can  be  most  dear  to  yon,  not  to  use  in  this  conjunc-
ture the  supreme  power  which  nature  gives  you  over  me.
Do  not  embitter  your  most  precious  gifts.  I  owe  my
being  to  you ;  but  shall  I  be  indebted  to  you  this  day  if
you  render  life  unbearable  to  me  ? 13  Without  Mdlicerte,
it  becomes  a  torment ;  nothing  is  of  value  to  me  without
her  divine  charms.  They  contain  all  my  happiness  and
all  my  desires,  and  if  you  take  them  away,  you  take  life
itself.

LYC.  (Aside).  He  makes  me  share  his  heart-felt  grief.
Who  would  have  ever  thought  it  of  the  little  rogue  ?  What
passion  !  what  excitement !  what  talk  for  one  of  his  age  !
It  quite  confuses  me,  and  I  feel  that  I  am  interested  in  his
love.

MYR.  {Throwing  himself  at  Lycarsis1  knees}.  Say,  will
you  condemn  me  to  die  ?  You  have  but  to  speak :  I  am
ready  to  obey.

LYC.  (Aside).  I  can  hold  out  no  longer:  he  draws
tears  from  me,  and  his  tender  words  make  me  yield.

MYR.  If  in  your  heart  a  spark  of  friendship  inspires
you  with  the  slightest  pity  for  my  fate,  grant  Melicerte
to  my  ardent  desire,  and  you  will  give  me  more  than  life.

LYC.  Get  up.

18  Nearly  these  very  words  are  used  by  Marianne,  when  she  endeavours
to  soften  the  heart  of  her  father,  Orgon,  in  the  third  Scene  of  the  fourth
Act  of  Tartuffe.

24  MELICERTE.  [ACT  u.

MYR.  Will  you  take  pity  on  my  sighs?

LYC.  Yes.

MYR.  Shall  I  obtain  the  object  of  my  desires?

LYC.  Yes.

MYR.  You  will  make  her  uncle  give  me  her  hand  ?

LYC.  Yes,  get  up,  I  tell  you.

MYR.  Oh  !  best  of  fathers,  let  me  kiss  your  hands  after
so  much  kindness.

LYC.  Ah !  how  weak  a  father  is  for  his  children  !  Can
we  refuse  aught  to  their  tender  words  ?  Do  we  not  feel
some  sweet  emotions  within  us,  when  we  reflect  that  they
are  part  of  ourselves?

MYR.  But  will  you  keep  your  given  promise  ?  Tell  me
that  you  will  not  change  your  mind.

LYC.  No.

MYR.  If  any  one  should  make  you  change  your  feelings,
have  I  your  leave  to  disobey  you  ?  Say  !

LYC.  Yes.  Ah,  Nature !  Nature !  I  will  go  and  see
Mopse,  and  acquaint  him  with  the  love  his  niece  and  you
have  for  each  others.

MYR.  How  much  I  owe  to  your  exceeding  kindness.
{Alone).  What  happy  news  to  tell  M6licerte !  I  would  not
accept  a  crown  in  exchange  for  the  pleasure  of  telling  her
this  marvellous  success  that  will  please  her  so  much.

SCENE  VI. — ACANTHE,  TYRENE,  MYRTIL.

ACAN.  Ah,  Myrtil,  the  charms  which  you  have  received
from  Heaven  are  the  cause  of  tears  in  us ;  their  dawning
beauty,  so  fatal  to  our  desires,  robs  us  of  the  hearts  ot
those  we  love.

TYR.  May  we  inquire,  Myrtil,  which  of  these  two  fair
ones  you  will  choose,  of  which  there  is  so  much  talk  ?  and
upon  which  of  us  two  the  blow  is  to  fall  that  shatters  all
our  expectant  affections?

ACAN.  Do  not  let  two  lovers  pine  any  longer.  Tell  us
what  fate  your  heart  prepares  for  us.

TYR.  It  is  better,  when  one  fears  such  terrible  misfor-
tune, to  be  killed  outright  by  one  blow,  than  to  linger  so
long.

MYR.  Let  your  love  resume  its  calm  career,  noble  shep-
herds ;  the  lovely  Melicerte  has  captivated  my  heart.  My

SCENE  vii. J  MELICERTE.  25

lot  is  sweet  enough  with  her  not  to  wish  to  encroach  upon
you,  and  if  your  passions  have  only  mine  to  fear,  neither
of  you  will  have  any  cause  to  complain.

ACAN.  Can  it  be,  Myrtil,  that  two  sad  lovers  .    .    .

TYR.  Can  it  be  true  that  Heaven,  giving  way  to  our
tortures  .  .  .

MYR.  Yes,  content  with  my  fetters  as  with  a  victory,  I
have  declined  this  choice  so  full  of  glory.  I  have  also
changed  my  father's  wishes,  and  made  him  consent  to  my
happiness.

ACAN.  (To  Tyre ne).  Ah!  what  a  charming  miraculous
adventure  is  this,  and  what  a  great  obstacle  it  removes  to
our  pursuits !

TYR.  It  may  restore  these  nymphs  to  our  love,  and  be
the  means  of  making  us  both  happy.

SCENE  VII. — NICANDRE,  MYRTIL,  ACANTHE,  TYRENE.

NIC.  Do  you  know  where  Melicerte  may  be  found  ?

MYR.  What  do  you  mean  ?

NIC.  She  is  being  looked  for  everywhere.

MYR.  And  why  ?

NIC.  We  shall  soon  lose  this  beauty.  It  is  for  her  that
the  King  has  come  hither ;  it  is  said  that  he  will  marry
her  to  some  great  lord.

MYR.  Oh,  Heaven  !  explain  these  words,  I  pray.

NIC.  They  are  important  and  mysterious  events.  Yes,
the  King  has  come  to  seek  Melicerte  in  these  spots,  and
they  say  that  formerly  her  mother  Belise,  of  whom  all
Tempe  believed  Mopse  to  be  the  brother  .  .  .  But  I  have
undertaken  to  look  for  her  everywhere.  You  shall  know
all  about  it  by-and  bye.

MYR.  Oh,  great  gods,  what  a  calamity  !  He  !  Nicandre,
Nicandre  !

ACAN.   Let  us  follow  him  that  we  may  know  all.14

14  La  Grange  and  Vinot,  the  editors  of  the  first  collected  edition  of  Mo-
liere's  works  (1682),  and  who  published  for  the  first  time  Melicerte,  state
*'  this  comedy  has  not  been  finished ;  only  these  two  acts  were  done  when
the  King  asked  for  it.  His  Majesty  having  been  satisfied  with  it,  for  the
feast  where  it  was  represented,  M.  de  Molierehas  not  finished  it.''

PASTORALE  COMIQUE.

A  COMIC  PASTORAL.

INTRODUCED  BY  MOLIERE   IN

THE  BALLET  OF  THE  MUSES.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.}

JANUARY  STH,  1667.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

THE  Pastorale  Comique  was  probably  represented  before  the  Court  on
the  5th  January,  1667  ;  it  formed  part  of  the  Ballet  of  the  Muses,  and
moit  likely  replaced  the  unfinished  Melicerte  when  the  ballet  was  again
given  in  the  beginning  of  that  month.  We  cannot  now  discover  what
plan  Moliere  has  followed,  or  what  he  intended  with  the  Pastorale  Co-
mique :  he  himself  suppressed  or  destroyed  the  manuscript,  and  we  have
only  now  the  couplets  that  were  sung,  and  which  are  preserved  in  the
ballet-book  and  in  the  musical  partition.  They  show,  according  to  some
commentators,  a  violent  desire,  in  Moliere,  to  deaden  his  feelings.  I  con-
fess that  I  can  see  in  them  only  the  ordinary  words  of  an  operatic  libretto.
We  know  that  our  author  played  the  part  of  Lycas,  after  he  had  just  been
ill ;  it  is  possible  that  his  hollow  and  lean  features  may  intentionally  have
rendered  more  ridiculous  his  love  declarations.

I  have  not  thought  it  necessary  to  give  the  names  of  the  dancers,
singers,  musicians,  or  gipsies,  which  are  stated  in  the  official  programme
of  the  (easts.  We  have  followed  in  the  headings  the  collected  edition  of
Moliere's  works,  1734.

DRAMATIS   PERSONS.

•»

IN    THE   PASTORAL.

LYCAS,  a  rich  shepherd  in  love  with  Iris.1
PHILENE,  a  rich  shepherd  in  love  with  Iris.
CORYDON,  a  young  shepherd,  friend  of  Lycas,  in

love  with  Iris.

A  HERDSMAN,  friend  of  Philene.
A  SHEPHERD.
IRIS,  a  young  shepherdess.

IN  THE  BALLET.

DANCING  MAGICIANS

SINGING  MAGICIANS.

DANCING  DEMONS.

PEASANTS.

A  SINGING  AND  DANCING  GIPSY.

DANCING  GIPSIES.

Scene. — THESSALY,  IN  A  SMALL  VILLAGE  IN  THE
VALLEY  OF  TEMPE.

1  Moliere  played  this  part  himself!

A  COMIC  PASTORAL.

(PASTORALE  COMIQUE).

SCENE  I. — LYCAS,  CORVDON.

SCENE  II. — LYCAS,   DANCING  AND   SINGING  MUSICIANS,
DEMONS.

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

Two  Musicians  begin  dancing  a  kind  of  enchantment  to
beautify  Lycas.  They  strike  the  ground  with  their
wands,  whereupon  six  Demons  spring  from  it,  who
join  them.  Three  more  Musicians  appear  from  un-
derground.

THREE  MAGICIANS  (singing).  Goddess  of  charms,  re-
fuse us  not  the  favour  which  our  lips  implore  of  you.  We
beseech  you  for  it  by  your  ribbons,  by  your  diamond
buckles,  by  your  paint  and  powder,  by  your  patches,
your  mask,  your  head-dress,  and  your  gloves.

A  MAGICIAN  (by  himself}.  O  you !  who  can  beautify
the  plainest  faces,  deign  to  spread,  O  Venus !  two  or  three
charitable  doses  of  your  charms  over  this  freshly  clipped
snout !

THE  THREE  MAGICIANS  (singing).  Goddess  of  charms,
refuse  us  not  the  favour  which  our  lips  implore  of  you.
We  beseech  you  for  it  by  your  ribbons,  by  your  diamond

33

34  A   COMIC   PASTORAL.  [SCBNB  m.

buckles,  by  your  paint  and  powder,  by  your  patches,  your
mask,  your  head-dress,  and  your  gloves.

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  six  dancing  Demons  dress  Lycas  up  in  a  ridiculous
and  strange  fashion.

THE  THREE  MAGICIANS  (singing).  Ah  !  how  lovely  the
youngster  is  now  !  Ah !  how  lovely  !  how  lovely !  How
many  fair  ones  he  will  kill.  The  most  cruel  maids  will
jump  out  of  their  skin  when  they  approach  him.  Ah  !
how  lovely  the  youngster  is  now.  Ah !  how  lovely,  how
lovely !  Ho,  ho,  ho,  ho,  ho,  ho  !

Third  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  Magicians  and  the  Demons  continue  their  dancing,
whilst  the  three  singing  Magicians  continue  to  make
fun  of  Lycas.

THREE  MAGICIANS  (singing).  How  fair  is  he !  how
pretty  and  polished  !  How  fair  is  he  !  how  fair  is  he  !
Are  there  any  eyes  that  can  withstand  him  ?  He  is  more
lovely  than  the  late  Narcissus,  who  was  a  consummate
beau.  How  fair  is  he  !  how  pretty  and  polished  !  How
fair  is  he  !  Hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi,  hi !

(The  three  singing  Magicians  disappear  in  the  ground,
and  the  dancing  Magicians  exeunt  at  the  sides.

SCENE  III. — LYCAS,  PHILENE.

PHIL,  (without  perceiving  Lycas,  sings).  Browse,  my
pretty  lambs,  the  sprouting  grass.  These  meadows  and
these  brooks  have  something  to  charm  you.  But  if  you
wish  to  live  content  forever,  dear  little  innocents,  beware
of  love.

LYC.  (without  perceiving  Philene,  and  wishing  to  com-
pose some  verses  for  his  mistress,  pronounces  the  name  of
Iris  loud  enough  for  Philene  to  hear  if).

PHIL.  Is  it  you  whom  I  hear,  audacious  wretch  ?  Is  it
you  who  dare  pronounce  the  name  of  her  who  holds  me
'neath  her  sway.

LYC.  Yes,  it  is  I ;  yes,  it  is  I.

SCBNBIX.]  A   COMIC   PASTORAL.  35

PHIL.  How  dare  you  in  any  way  profane  that  lovely
name?

LYC.  Eh,  why  not?  why  not?

PHIL.  Iris  charms  my  soul ;  and  whosoever  shall  dare
to  indulge  in  the  slightest  spark  of  love  for  her  will  repent
of  it.

LYC.  I  do  not  care  for  that,  I  do  not  care  for  that.

PHIL.  I  will  strangle  and  eat  you,  if  ever  you  name  my
fair.  Whatever  I  say  I  do — I  will  strangle  and  eat  you.
It  is  enough  that  I  have  sworn  it.  Even  if  the  gods  take
your  part,  I  will  strangle  and  eat  you,  if  ever  you  name
my  fair.

LYC.  Nonsense,  nonsense.

SCENE  IV. — IRIS,  LYCAS.

SCENE  V. — LYCAS,  A  COWHERD.

A  Cowherd  brings  Lycas  a  challenge  from  Philene,

his  rival.

SCENE  VI. — LYCAS,  CORYDON.
SCENE  VII. — PHILENE,  LYCAS.

PHIL,  (sings).  Stay  wretch !  turn  round ;  and  let  us
see  which  of  us  two  shall  gain  the  day.

(Lycas  hesitates  to  fight.
Enough  of  chatter;  come,  you  must  die.

SCENE  VIII. — PHILENE,  LYCAS,  EIGHT  PEASANTS.

The  peasants  rush  in  to  separate  Philene  and  Lycas.

Fourth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

The  peasants  begin  to  quarrel  among  themselves,  while
they  are  trying  to  separate  the  two  shepherds,  and  dance
while  fighting.

SCENE  IX. — CORYDON,  LYCAS,  PHILENE,  PEASANTS.

Corydon,  by  speaking  to  them,  finds  means  to  appease
the  dispute  of  the  peasants.

Fifth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.
The  reconciled  peasants  dance  together.

36  A  COMIC  PASTORAL.  [SCENE  xin.

SCENE  X. — CORYDON,  LYCAS,  PHILENE.
SCENE  XI. — IRIS,  CORYDON.

SCENE  XII. — PHILENE,  LYCAS,  IRIS,  CORYDON.

Lycas   and  Philene,  the  two  lovers  of  the  shepherdess,
press  her  to  decide  which  of  them  she  prefers.

PHIL,  (to  Iris}.  Do  not  expect  me  to  boast  about  the
choice  regarding  which  you  hesitate;  you  can  see  I  love
you;  that  tells  you  enough.

The  shepherdess  decides  in  favour  of  Corydon.

SCENE  XIII. — PHILENE,  LYCAS.

PHIL.  Alas  !  can  any  one  feel  a  more  poignant  grief?
A  menial  shepherd  is  to  us  preferred,  oh  Heavens  !

LYC.   (sings'}.     Oh  fates  !

PHIL.  What  harshness !

LYC.  What  a  blow !

PHIL.  So  many  tears,

LYC.  And  so  much  perseverance,

PHIL.  Such  languor,

LYC.  So  much  suffering,

PHIL.  Such  protestations,

LYC.  And  such  cares,

PHIL.  Such  ardour,

LYC.  So  much  love,

PHIL.  Are  treated  with  so  much  disdain  this  day !  Ah  !
cruel  one !

LYC.  Hard-hearted  fair  !

PHIL.  And  tigress  too !

LYC.  Merciless  maid !

PHIL.  Inhuman  one !

LYC.  You  stubborn  girl !

PHIL.  Ungrateful  one !

LYC.  Pitiless  one  !

PHIL.  You  wish  to  kill  us  then  ?  it  is  well ;  we  shall
content  you.

LYC.  We  shall  obey  you.

PHIL,  (drawing  his  javelin).     Lycas,  let  us  die.

LYC.  (drawing  his  javelin).     Philene,  let  us  die.

SCENE  xv.]  A  COMIC  PASTORAL.  37

PHIL.  Let  us  end  our  sufferings  with  this  steel.
LYC.  Pierce !
PHIL.  Be  firm  !
LYC.  Take  courage  !
PHIL.   Come,  you  first.
LYC.  No,  I  will  be  last.

PHIL.  Since  the  same  misfortune  this  day  brings  us  to-
gether, let  us  depart  together.

SCENE  XIV.— A  SHEPHERD,  LYCAS,  PKILENE.

THE  SHEPHERD  (sings).  What  folly  to  quit  life  for  a
fair  one  who  rejects  us !  We  might  wish  to  quit  this  life
for  a  lovely  object's  sake,  whose  heart  favours  us,  but  to
die  for  the  fair  one  who  rejects  us,  is  folly !

SCENE  XV. — A  GIPSY,  DANCING  GIPSIES.

THE  GIPSY.  Relieve  the  torment  of  a  poor  heart.  Of  a
poor  heart  relieve  the  suffering.  In  vain  I  depict  my  ar-
dent flame  ;  I  see  you  laugh  at  my  repining  :  Ah  !  cruel
one,  I  die  through  so  much  harshness.  Relieve  the  mar-
tyrdom of  a  poor  heart ;  of  a  poor  heart  relieve  the  suffer-
ing.

Sixth  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

Twelve  gipsies,  of  whom  four  play  the  guitar,  four  the  cas-
tagnettes,  four  the  gnacares^  dance  with  the  gipsy  to
the  measure  of  her  song.

THE  GIPSY.  Believe  me,  let  us  hasten,  my  Sylvia,  and
profit  well  by  the  precious  time  ;  let  us  here  satisfy  our
desires.  The  passions  of  our  age  invite  us ;  you  and  I
could  not  do  better.

Winter  has  covered  our  fields  with  ice,  Spring  comes  to
take  her  place  again,  and  to  our  pastures  gives  their  charms.
But  when,  alas  !  old  age  has  chilled  us;  our  happy  days
return  no  more.

Let  us  seek  all  day  naught  but  what  pleases  us ;  let  us

2  The  gnacares  were  cymbals  of  small  size,  and  of  unequal  diameter.
The  Saracens  used  them  on  horseback  to  regulate  the  march  of  their
squadrons.

38  A   COMIC   PASTORAL.  [SCBNB  xv.

both  be  earnest  about  it ;  let  pleasures  be  our  business  ;
let  us  get  rid  of  all  our  troubles;  a  time  will  come  when
we  shall  have  enough  of  them.

Winter  has  covered  our  fields  with  ice,  Spring  comes  to
take  her  place  again,  and  to  our  pastures  gives  their  charms.
But  when,  alas  !  old  age  has  chilled  our  feelings,  our
happy  days  return  no  more.

LE  SICILIEN;  OU,  L'AMOUR  PEINTRE.

COMEDIE.

THE  SICILIAN;  OR,  LOVE  MAKES  THE  PAINTER

COMEDY-BALLET  IN  ONE  ACT.

(THE  ORIGINAL  PARTLY  IN  PROSE  AND  PARTLY  IN  VERSE.)

FEBRUARY  14x11  (?)  1667.

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.

TTie  Sicilian  ;  or,  Love  makes  the  Painter,  was  represented,  probably  on
the  I4th,  or  the  i6th  of  February  1667,  at  the  palace  of  Versailles,  before
Louis  XIV.  and  the  whole  court.  It  was  not  placed,  like  Mellcerte  and
the  Pastorale  Comique,  in  the  third  entry  of  the  Ballet  des  Muses,  but
formed  a  fourteenth  entry,  with  the  following  official  heading  : — "  Four-
teenth entry.  After  so  many  different  nations  which  the  Muses  made  to
appear  in  the  divers  assemblies  which  formed  the  entertainment  which
they  gave  to  the  King,  there  was  nothing  wanting  but  to  bring  upon  the
stage  Turks  and  Moors ;  and  that  is  what  they  have  thought  of  doing  in
this  last  entry,  with  which  they  have  connected  a  little  comedy  to  give
scope  to  the  charms  of  music  and  dancing,  by  which  they  wish  to  end."
We  give  the  official  libretto  of  the  analysis  of  The  Sicilian,  omitting
only  the  names  of  the  dancers  and  singers.  The  senator  of  the  comedy  is
here  called  "a  Sicilian  magistrate."

Scene  ist.  tlali,  by  his  master's  orders,  brings  upon  the  stage  three
Turkish  musicians  to  give  a  serenade.

Scene  2d.  Adraste  asks  for  the  three  musicians,  and,  to  oblige  Isidore
to  come  to  the  window,  lets  them  sing  a  scene  from  a  comedy.

Scene  3d.  Don  Pedro,  in  the  dark,  comes  out  of  the  house  in  a  dress-
ing-gown, to  try  to  discover  who  gives  the  serenade.

Scene  4th.  Hali  promises  his  master  to  invent  some  trick  in  order  to  let
Isidore  know  the  love  which  he  has  for  her.

Scene  5th.  Isidore  complains  to  Don  Pedro  of  the  precaution  he  takes
to  bring  her  everywhere  with  him.

Scene  6th.  Hali,  endeavouring  to  let  Isidore  know  his  master's  love,
cleverly  makes  use  of  five  Turkish  slaves,  of  whom  one  sings  and
the  four  others  dance,  proposing  them  to  Don  Pedro  as  slaves
agreeable  and  capable  of  amusing  him.  A  Turkish  slave  sings  at
first,  "An  impassioned  heart  follows  his  beloved  object  everywhere,
&c.,"  by  which  he  pretends  to  express  the  passion  of  Adraste,
and  to  make  it  known  to  Isidore  in  the  presence  of  Don  Pedro.
The  Turkish  slave,  after  having  sung,  fearing  that  Don  Pedro
might  understand  the  meaning  of  what  he  had  just  said,  and
perceive  the  trick,  turns  wholly  towards  Don  Pedro,  and  to  amuse
him,  sings  in  the  lingua  franca  these  words,  ''  Chiribirida  houcha

41

42  THE  SICILIAN;  OR,

la,  &c.,"  whereupon  the  four  other  Turkish  slaves  dance.  The
slave,  who  is  a  musician,  begins  again  "  Chiribirida  houcha  la,
&c. ;"  then,  convinced  that  Don  Pedro  suspects  nothing,  he  ad-
dresses himself  to  Isidore  and  sings,  "  It  is  a  complete  martyr-
dom, &c."  As  soon  as  he  has  finished,  always  afraid  that  Don
Pedro  may  perteive  something,  he  begins  again,  "  Chiribirida
houcha  la,  &c. ;"  then  the  four  slaves  dance  again.  At  last  Don
Pedro,  perceiving  the  trick,  sings  in  his  turn  the  words,  "  Do  you
know,  you  scamp,  &c."1

Scene  yth.  Hali  informs  his  master  of  what  he  has  done,  and  his  master
communicates  to  him  the  stratagem  he  has  planned.

Scene  8th.  Adraste  goes  to  Don  Pedro's  house  to  paint  the  portrait  of
Isidore.

Scene  9th.  Hali,  disguised  as  a  Sicilian  gentleman,  comes  to  ask  Don
Pedro's  advice  about  an  affair  of  honour.

Scene  loth.  Isidore  commends  the  politeness  of  Adraste  to  Don  Pe-
dro.

Scene  nth.  Zaide  comes  to  throw  herself  into  the  arms  of  Don  Pedro,
so  that  he  might  protect  her  against  the  pretended  anger  of
Adraste.

Scene  I2th.  Adraste  pretends  that  he  wishes  to  kill  Zaide;  but  at  Don
Pedro's  intercession,  he  moderates  his  wrath,

Scene  I3th.  Don  Pedro  places  Isidore,  under  the  veil  of  Zaide,  in  the
hands  of  Adraste.

Scene  I4th.  Zaide  reproaches  Don  Pedro  with  his  jealousy,  and  tells
him  that  Isidore  is  no  longer  in  his  power.

Scene  i5th.  Don  Pedro  goes  to  complain  before  a  Sicilian  magistrate,
who  only  speaks  to  him  about  a  masquerade  of  Moors,  which
ends  the  Comedy  and  the  Ballet.

The  dancing  Moors  were  of  three  kinds — Moors  and  Moorish  girls  of
quality,  who  were  the  King,  M.  le  Grand,  the  Marquesses  de  Villeroi
and  de  Rassan,  Madame,  Mademoiselle  de  la  ValliSre,  Madame  de
Rochefort,  and  Mademoiselle  de  Brancas;  naked  Moors  and  Maures  a
capots,  or  Moors  with  light  dresses  to  imitate  skin,  who  were  professional
dancers.

This  comedy  was  not  given  to  the  public  before  the  loth  of  June  1667,
when  it  was  acted  for  the  first  time,  with  the  eighteenth  representation  of
Attila,  a  tragedy  by  P.  Corneille.  This  delay  had  been  caused  by  an  at-
tack of  illness  of  Moliere.

In  this  little  comedy,  the  author  has  often  employed  blank  verse;  and
that  he  has  done  so  purposely  has  clearly  been  proved.

John  Crowne,  in  The  Country  Wit,  acted  at  the  Duke's  Theatre  in  1675,
has  imitated  a  large  portion  of  the  plot,  as  well  as  of  the  language  of  The
Sicilian.  Crownejs  play  is  said  to  have  been  a  great  favourite  with  Charles
II.  and  also  with  the  public,  although  the  author,  in  the  dedication  to  the
Right  Honourable  Charles,  Earl  of  Middlesex,  better  known  as  the  Earl  of
Dorset,  states  that  it  <l  stood  firmer  than  I  expected,  and  withstood  the
battery  of  a  whole  party  who  did  me  the  honour  to  profess  themselves  my
enemies,  and  made  me  appear  more  considerable  than  ever  I  thought
myself,  by  shewing  that  no  less  tha,n  a  confederacy  was  necessary  to  ruin
my  reputation."  Both  in  the  prologue  and  in  the  dedication,  the  author

1  This  is  the  ninth  scene  of  the  Comedy.

LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  43

sarcastically  states  that  every  man  thinks  himself  a  wit,  and  that  "  city  and
country  is  with  wit  o'erflown."  Country  Wit  is  rather  a  good,  though  a
very  coarse,  play.  Don  Pedro  is  called  Lord  Drybone ;  Isidore,  Betty
Frisque ;  Hali,  Merry ;  and  Adraste,  Ramble  ;  but  there  is  also  another
plot  in  this  comedy,  in  which  Sir  Thomas  Rash  wishes  his  daughter  Chris-
tina to  marry  Sir  Mannerly  Shallow,  a  foolish  country  knight.  Instead  of
Hali  and  Pedro  quarrelling,  as  in  The  Sicilian,  Sir  Thomas  and  Lord
Drybone  fight  and  are  seized  by  the  watch  ;  in  the  English  play,  it  is  also
Merry,  the  servant,  who  advises  his  master  to  go  to  Betty  Frisque's  house
as  a  painter,  whilst,  in  the  French  comedy,  Adraste  plans  it  himself.
Lady  Faddle,  Sir  Mannerly  Shallow,  and  the  porter,  Thomas  Rash,  and
his  wife  are  not  to  be  found  in  The  Sicilian.  The  first  two  characters
appear  to  be  a  reminiscence  of  Moliere's  Countess  of  Escarbagnas  and
Monsieur  de  Pourceaugnac ,  whilst  some  of  the  scenes  between  Rambler
and  his  man  seem  to  be  freely  followed  from  some  in  the  French  author's
Amphitryon.  Crowne's  play  gives  a  very  peculiar  idea  of  the  manners
and  customs  of  the  times  in  which  he  wrote.  The  licentiousness  of  his
personages  is  only  equalled  by  the  excessive  freedom  of  language  which
they  use ;  a  language  which  must  have  startled  some  of  the  audience,  even
in  Charles  II.'s  reign.

Sir  Richard  Steele,  in  The  Tender  Husband,  acted  for  the  first  time  at
the  Theatre,  Drury  Lane,  1703,  has  also  imitated  the  twelfth  scene  of
Moliere's  play ;  but  Adraste  is  there  called  Captain  Clerimont,  and  Isi-
dore, simply  Niece.  I  imagine  that  Sir  Richard  also  took  the  liberty  of
borrowing  from  Crowne's  Sir  Mannerly  Shallow  and  transforming  him  into
Humphrey  Gubbin.  Addison  wrote  the  prologue,  and  is  said  to  have
given  some  assistance  in  the  composition  of  this  play.

Charles  Dibdin  also  wrote  an  opera  called  The  Metamorphoses,  acted
at  the  Haymarket,  probably  at  the  end  of  1776,  but  not  with  much  suc-
cess, and  which  is  borrowed  chiefly  from  Moliere's  Sicilian,  with  one  cha-
racter from  George  Dandin.  Don  Pedro  wishes  to  marry  his  ward  Mar-
cella.  Fabio,  the  servant,  assumes,  like  Hali,  various  disguises.  The
catastrophe  in  which  Juletta  enters,  veiled,  Don  Pedro's  house,  and  asks
the  latter  to  protect  her  against  Lysander,  her  husband's  wrath,  and  in
which  Marcella  leaves  her  home  muffled  in  the  veil  of  Juletta,  is  borrowed
from  The  Sicilian ;  the  booby  servant  Perer  is  imitated  from  George
Dandin,

DRAMATIS    PERSONS.

DON  PEDRO,  a  Sicilian  gentleman*

ADRASTE,  a  French  gentleman,  in  love  with  Isidore*

ISIDORE,  a  Greek  girl,  Don  Pedro's  slave.

A  SENATOR.

HALT,  a  Turk,  Adraste's  slave.

ZAIDE,  a  young  slave  girl.

Two  SERVANTS.

MUSICIANS.

A  SLAVE,  singing.

SLAVES,  dancing.

MOORS  OF  BOTH  SEXES,  dancing.

*  This  part  was  played  by  Moliere  himself.  In  the  inventory  taken
after  Moliere's  death,  and  given  by  M.  E.  Soulie"  in  the  Recherches  sur
Moliere,  we  find :  "  A  dress  for  The  Sicilian,  the  breeches  and  cloak  of
violet  satin,  embroidered  with  gold  and  silver,  lined  with  green  tabby,  the
skirt  of  gold-colour  watered  silk,  with  sleeves  of  silver  cloth,  adorned  with
silver  embroideries ;  also  a  night-cap,  a  wig,  and  a  sword."

THE  SICILIAN;  OR,  LOVE  MAKES  THE  PAINTER

LE  SIC  I  LI  EN;    OU,    L }  AMOUR   PEINTRE.

SCENE  I. — HALI,  MUSICIANS.

HALT.  {To  the  musicians}.  Hush.  Do  not  come  any
farther,  and  stay  where  you  are  until  I  call  you.

SCENE   II. — HALT,  alone.

It  is  as  dark  as  pitch.  The  sky  is  dressed  like  a  Scara-
mouche* this  evening,  and  I  do  not  see  a  star  that  shows
the  tip  of  its  nose.  What  a  droll  condition  is  that  of  a
slave,  never  to  live  for  one's  self,  and  always  to  be  entirely
engrossed  by  the  passions  of  one's  master,  to  be  controlled
by  nothing  but  his  whims,  and  to  see  one's  self  reduced
to  make  all  his  cares  one's  own  concern  !  Mine  makes
me  here  share  his  anxieties  ;  and  because  he  is  in  love,  I

*  See  Vol.  II.,  page  145,  note  4.  Let  me  state,  at  the  same  time,  that
Scaramouche  was  very  much  liked  by  Louis  XIV.,  and,  when  first  pre-
sented, sang  a  trio  with  a  trained  dog  and  a  parrot.  In  the  latter  part  of
his  life,  Scaramouche  had  the  misfortune  to  marry  a  coquette ;  but  the
King  took  an  interest  in  the  actor's  marital  misfortunes,  and  even  got  his
minister  to  write  to  the  Lieutenant-General  of  Police  about  her  conduct.
The  magistrate  threatened  her  with  imprisonment,  if  she  did  not  lead  a
more  moral,  sober,  and  righteous  life.

47

4§  THE   SICILIAN  ;   OR,  [SCENE  HI.

am  forced  to  lose  my  rest  both  day  and  night.     But  here
come  some  torch-bearers.     It  is  he,  no  doubt.4

SCENE  III. — ADRASTE,  Two  SERVANTS,  each  carrying  a
torch,  HALL

ADR.  Is  it  you,  Hali  ?

HALL  And  who  should  it  be  but  me  ?  At  this  hour  of
the  night,  except  you  and  me,  sir,  I  do  not  think  that
anyone  takes  it  into  his  head  to  roam  the  streets  now.

ADR.  Nor  do  I  think  that  anyone  can  be  met  who  feels
in  his  heart  the  grief  that  I  do.  For,  after  all,  it  is  no-
thing to  have  to  overcome  the  indifference  or  the  harsh
treatment  of  the  fair  one,  whom  one  loves;  one  has  always,
at  least,  the  pleasure  of  complaining,  and  the  liberty  of
sighing  for  her.  But  not  to  be  able  to  find  any  opportu-
nity of  speaking  to  her  whom  one  adores,  not  to  be  able  to
learn  from  the  fair  one  whether  the  passion  which  her  eyes
have  kindled  pleases  or  displeases  her ;  that  is,  in  my
opinion,  the  most  annoying  of  all  anxieties ;  and  that  is
to  what  I  am  reduced  by  that  tiresome,  jealous  fellow,
who  watches  with  such  care  over  my  charming  Greek,  and
who  does  not  stir  a  step,  without  dragging  her  at  his  side.

HALL  But  in  love  there  are  various  ways  of  speaking  to
each  other ;  and  it  seems  to  me  that  your  eyes  and  hers
have  told  many  things  during  nearly  two  months.

ADR.  It  is  true  that  she  and  I  have  frequently  spoken  to
each  other  through  our  eyes ;  but  how  to  find  out  if  we

4  We  have  said  in  the  Introductory  Notice,  that  Moliere  has  employed
blank  verse  in  this  play.  We  give  below  Mali's  soliloquy  in  French,  not
as  it  is  printed  in  the  original,  but  scanned  :

''  II  fait  noir  comme  dans  un  four,
Le  ciel  s'est  habille  ce  soir  en  Scaramouche,

Et  je  ne  vois  pas  une  etoile
Qui  montre  le  bout  de  son  nez.
Sotte  condition  que  celle  d'un  esclave,
De  ne  vivre  jamais  pour  soi,
Et  d'etre  toujours  tout  entier
Aux  passions  d'un  maitre  .  .  .
Le  mien  me  fait  ici
Epouser  ses  inquietudes ;
Et,  parce  qu'il  est  amoureux
II  faut  que  nuit  et  jour  je  n'aie  aucun  repos.
Mais  voici  des  flambeaux,  et,  sans  doute,  c'est  lui."

SCENE  iv.J  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  49

have  correctly  interpreted  this  language,  on  either  side  ?
And  how  do  I  know,  after  all,  whether  she  quite  under-
stands everything  that  my  glances  tell  her,  and  whether
hers  tell  me  that  which  I  sometimes  fancy  they  do  ?

HALI.  We  must  find  some  other  mode  of  speaking  with
her.

ADR.  Have  you  your  musicians  here?

HALI.  Yes.

ADR.  Tell  them  to  come  near.  (Alone}.  I  will  make
them  sing  here  until  daybreak,  and  see  whether  their
music  will  not  oblige  the  fair  one  to  come  to  one  of  the
windows.

SCENE  IV. — ADRASTE,  HALI,  MUSICIANS.

HALI.  Here  they  are.     What  shall  they  sing?

ADR.  What  they  think  best

HALI.  They  must  sing  the  trio  that  they  sung  to  me  the
other  day.

ADR.  No.     That  is  not  what  I  want.

HALI.  Ah  !  sir,  it  is  in  that  beautiful  natural.

ADR.  What  the  deuce  do  you  mean  by  that  beautiful
natural  ?

HALI.  Sir,  I  am  fond  of  the  natural.  You  know  that  I
am  a  judge.  I  love  the  natural;  without  the  natural,
there  is  no  salvation  in  harmony.  Just  listen  for  a  little
to  this  trio.

ADR.  No,  I  wish  something  tender  and  impassioned ;
something  that  will  lull  me  as  in  a  sweet  dream.

HALI.  I  see  that  you  prefer  the  flat ; 6  but  there  is  a  way
of  satisfying  us  both.  They  shall  sing  a  certain  scene  of
a  little  comedy  that  I  have  heard  them  attempt.  Two
shepherds,  in  love,  quite  full  of  languor,  separately  come
into  a  grove  to  make  their  complaints  in  a  flat ;  they  con-
fide to  each  other  the  cruelty  of  their  mistresses ;  then
comes  a  jovial  shepherd  with  an  admirable  natural,  who
laughs  at  their  weakness.

ADR.  Very  well.     Let  us  hear  what  it  is.

HALI.  Here  is  just  the  very  spot  to  serve  as  a  stage ;
and  here  are  two  torches  to  throw  a  light  upon  the  play.

6  The  French  for  a  natural  is  becarre,  and  for  a  flat  bemoL

50  THE  SICILIAN;   OR,  [SCENE  n.

ADR.  Place  yourself  against  this  house,  so  that  at  the
slightest  noise  inside,  we  may  extinguish  the  lights.

FRAGMENT  OF  A  COMEDY,  SUNG  AND  ACCOMPANIED  BY
THE  MUSICIANS  WHOM  HALI  HAS  BROUGHT.

SCENE  I. — PHILENE,  TIRCIS.

FIRST  MUSICIAN  (who  represents  Philene).  If  with  the
sorrowful  tale  of  my  grief  I  disturb  the  quiet  of  your  soli-
tude, do  not  be  angry,  O  rocks.  Rocks,  though  you  are,
you  will  be  touched,  when  you  know  the  excess  of  my
hidden  anguish.

SECOND  MUSICIAN  (who  represents  Tirris}.  The  glad-
some birds,  when  day  begins  to  break,  renew  their  song
in  these  vast  forests  ;  and  I  renew  my  languishing  sighs,
and  my  sad  regrets.  Ah  !  dear  Philene.

PHIL.  Ah  !  dear  Tircis !

TIR.  What  grief  I  feel !

PHIL.  What  cares  I  have  !

TIR.  Ever  deaf  to  my  sighs  is  the  ungrateful  Climene.

PHIL.  Chloris  has  no  sweet  looks  for  me.

BOTH  TOGETHER.  O  too  inhuman  law !  If  you  cannot
compel  them  to  love,  O  Cupid !  why  do  you  leave  them
the  power  of  charming?

SCENE  II. — PHILENE,  TIRCIS,  A  SHEPHERD.

THIRD  MUSICIAN  (who  represents  a  shepherdT).  Poor
lovers,  what  a  mistake  to  adore  merciless  creatures  !  Sen-
sible minds  ought  never  to  bear  with  harsh  treatment;
and  favors  are  the  chains  which  ought  to  bind  our  hearts.
Here  are  a  hundred  fair  ones  to  whom  I  hasten  to  offer
my  tender  cares;  it  is  my  greatest  delight.  But  when
they  act  like  tigresses,  upon  my  word  I  become  a  tiger
too.

PHIL.  AND  TIR.  (Together).  Happy,  alas !  are  they
who  can  love  thus.

HALI.  Sir,  I  just  heard  some  noise  inside.

ADR.  Be  off  quickly,  and  extinguish  the  torches.

SCBNE  vi.]  LOVE   MAKES  THE   PAINTER.  5  I

SEENE  V. — DON  PEDRO,  ADRASTE,  HALI.

DON  P.  (In  a  night-cap  and  a  dressing-gown,  with  a
sword  under  his  arm,  coming  out  of  his  house).  I  have
noticed  this  singing  going  on  for  some  time  at  my  door ;
and  no  doubt  this  is  not  done  for  nothing.  I  must  try  to
discover  in  the  dark  who  these  people  can  be.

ADR.  Hali.

HALI.  What  is  it  ?

ADR.  Do  you  no  longer  hear  anything  ?

HALI.   No.     (Don  Pedro  is  behind  them,  listening).

ADR.  What  !  are  all  our  efforts  to  speak  for  one  moment
with  this  pretty  Greek  in  vain ;  and  shall  this  cursed  jeal-
ous fellow,  this  wretched  Sicilian,  for  ever  bar  all  access
to  her?

HALI.  I  wish  with  all  my  heart  that  the  devil  had  taken
him  for  the  trouble  he  gives  us,  the  tiresome  fellow,  the
hangdog  that  he  is.  Ah  !  if  we  only  had  him  here,  how
delighted  should  I  be  to  avenge  upon  his  back  all  the
fruitless  steps  which  his  jealousy  causes  us.

ADR.  We  must,  for  all  that,  find  some  means,  some
trick,  some  stratagem,  to  catch  our  brute.  I  am  too  far
advanced  to  be  baffled  now ;  and  although  I  should  have
to  use  .  .  .

HALI.  I  do  not  know  what  this  means,  but  the  door  is
open,  Sir ;  and,  if  you  like,  I  will  go  in  softly  and  find
out  what  is  the  cause  of  this.

(Don  Pedro  goes  back  to  his  door.

ADR.  Yes,  do  so ;  but  do  not  make  a  noise.  I  shall
not  be  far  away.  Would  to  Heaven  it  were  the  charming
Isidore !

DON  P.  {Giving  Hali  a  slap  in  the  face).  Who  goes
there  ?

HALT.  {Doing  the  same  to  Don  Pedro).    A  friend.

DON  P.  Hullo  !  Francisque,  Dominique,  Simon,  Martin
Pierre,  Thomas,  Georges,  Charles,  Barthelemy.  Come,
look  sharp,  my  sword,  my  buckler,  my  halberd,  my  pistols,
my  blunderbusses,  my  guns.  Quick,  make  haste.  Here,
kill  and  slay,  give  no  quarter.

SCENE  VI. — ADRASTE,  HALI.
ADR.  I  hear  not  a  soul  stir.     Hali,  Hali !

52  THE  SICILIAN  ;    OR,  [SCENE  VH.

HALI.    (Hid  in  a  corner).     Sir  ?

ADR.  Where  are  you  hiding  yourself?

HALI.   Have  these  people  come  out  ?

ADR.   No.     No  one  is  stirring.

HALI.  {Coming  out  of  his  corner).  If  they  do  come,
they  shall  have  a  drubbing.

ADR.  What !  Shall  all  our  trouble  be  for  nothing  ?
Shall  this  tiresome,  jealous  fellow  always  laugh  at  our
attempts  ?

HALL  No.  I  get  angry,  and  my  honour  is  at  stake;  it
shall  not  be  said  that  anyone  has  outwitted  me.  My
reputation  as  a  rogue  disdains  all  these  obstacles ;  and
I  am  determined  to  show  the  talents  that  Heaven  has
given  me.

ADR.  I  only  wish  her,  by  some  means,  by  some  note,
by  some  voice,  to  be  informed  of  my  feelings  towards  her,
and  in  return,  to  know  hers  upon  the  subject.  After  that,
we  can  easily  find  some  means  .  .  .

HALI.  Only  let  me  manage  it.  I  shall  try  so  many  sorts
of  things,  that,  something  or  other,  in  short,  may  suc-
ceed. Come,  day  breaks  ;  I  shall  go  and  fetch  my  men,
and  wait  here,  until  our  jealous  fellow  goes  out.

SCENE  VII. — DON  PEDRO,  ISIDORE.

ISID.  I  do  not  know  what  pleasure  you  can  have  in
waking  me  so  early.  It  agrees  badly,  I  think,  with  your
intention  of  having  my  portrait  painted  to-day.  You  can
hardly  expect  me  to  have  a  fresh  complexion  and  sparkling
eyes  by  making  me  get  up  at  break  of  day.

DON  P.  Some  business  compels  me  to  go  out  at  this
hour.

ISID.  But  this  business  can  be  very  well  transacted,  I
believe,  without  my  presence ;  and  you  might,  without
incommoding  yourself,  have  allowed  me  to  taste  the
sweets  of  the  morning's  slumber.

DON  P.  Yes.  But  I  am  very  glad  of  having  you  always
with  me.  It  is  as  well  to  be  on  one's  guard  a  little  against
those  vigilant  swains ;  and  not  later  than  last  night,  people
came  and  sang  under  our  windows.

ISID.  That  is  true.     The  music  was  charming.

DON  P.  It  was  intended  for  you  ?

SCENE  vii.]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  53

ISID.  I  must  believe  so,  since  you  say  so.

DON  P.  Do  you  know  who  gave  this  serenade  ?

ISID.  I  do  not ;  but,  whoever  he  was,  I  am  obliged  to  him.

DON  P.  Obliged?

ISID.  Undoubtedly,  since  he  seeks  to  amuse  me.

DON  P.  You  think  it  right,  then,  that  people  love
you?

ISID.  Decidedly.  There  is  never  anything  offensive  in
that?

DON  P.  And  you  wish  well  to  all  who  take  that  trouble?

ISID.  Certainly.

DON  P.  You  say  pretty  plainly  what  you  think.

ISID.  What  is  the  good  of  dissimulating?  Whatever
we  may  pretend,  we  are  always  well  pleased  to  be  loved.
This  homage  to  our  charms  is  never  disagreeable  to  us.
Whatever  we  may  say,  believe  me,  the  great  ambition  of
women  is  to  inspire  love.  All  the  cares  they  bestow  upon
themselves  are  for  that  only;  and  the  proudest  inwardly
applauds  herself  for  the  conquests  which  her  eyes  make.

DON  P.  But  if  you  take  so  much  pleasure  in  being  be-
loved, do  you  know  that  I,  who  love  you,  do  not  take
any  in  it?

ISID.  I  do  not  know  why  this  should  be,  and  if  I
loved  any  one,  I  should  have  no  greater  pleasure  than  see-
ing her  beloved  by  everyone.  Is  there  anything  which
marks  more  plainly  the  beauty  of  one's  choice?  and  ought
we  not  to  congratulate  ourselves  in  thinking  that  what  we
love  is  found  very  loveable?

DON  P.  Each  one  loves  in  his  own  peculiar  fashion,  and
this  is  not  my  way.  I  should  be  very  delighted  if  people
did  not  think  you  so  beautiful,  and  you  will  oblige  me  by
not  trying  to  appear  so  in  other  people's  eyes.

ISID.  What !  are  you  jealous  of  these  things  ?

DON  P.  Yes,  jealous  of  these  things  ;  but  as  jealous  as
&  tiger,  or,  if  you  like  it  better,  as  a  devil.  My  love
claims  you  all  for  itself.  Its  delicacy  is  offended  at  a
smile,  at  a  glance  which  may  be  drawn  from  you ;  and  all
the  precautions  which  I  take  are  only  to  bar  every  access
to  those  admirers,  and  to  assure  myself  of  the  possession
of  a  heart,  the  slightest  part  of  which  I  cannot  bear  to
be  robbed  of.

54  THE  SICILIAN;   OR,  [SCENKVHI.

ISID.  In  good  truth,  shall  I  tell  you?  you  enter  upon  a
wrong  path ;  and  a  possession  of  a  heart  is  but  badly
secured,  if  it  is  to  be  retained  by  force.  As  for  me,  I
admit  candidly,  that  were  I  the  admirer  of  a  woman  who
was  in  some  one's  power,  I  would  study  everything  to
make  that  other  person  jealous,  and  to  compel  him  to
watch  night  and  day  over  her  whom  I  should  like  to  win.
It  is  an  admirable  way  to  forward  our  wishes,  and  people
are  never  very  long  in  profiting  by  the  spite  and  anger
which  restraint  and  servitude  awake  in  the  breast  of  a
woman.

DON  P.  At  this  rate,  if  any  one  made  love  to  you,  he
would  find  you  disposed  to  receive  his  addresses?

ISID.  I  will  say  nothing  about  that.  But,  in  short,
women  do  not  like  to  be  restrained ;  and  it  is  running  a
great  risk  to  show  them  your  suspicions,  and  to  keep  them
imprisoned.

DON  P.  You  but  little  acknowledge  what  you  owe  me ;
and  it  seems  to  me  that  a  slave,  to  whom  I  have  given  her
freedom,  and  whom  I  wish  to  make  my  wife.  .  .  .

ISID.  Where  is  the  obligation,  if  you  but  change  one
slavery  into  another  more  severe  still,  and  if  you  do  not
allow  me  to  enjoy  the  least  freedom,  and  tire  me,  as  you
do,  with  continual  watching?

DON  P.  But  all  this  proceeds  but  from  an  excess  of
love.

ISID.  If  that  is  your  way  of  loving,  I  beseech  you  to
hate  me.

DON  P.  You  are  in  a  pettish  humour  to-day ;  and  I  for-
give you  your  words  on  account  of  the  annoyance  which
you  may  feel  at  having  risen  so  early.

SCENE  VIII. — DON  PEDRO,  ISIDORE,  HALI  (dressed  as  a
Turk,  bowing  repeatedly  to  Don  Pedro).

DON  P.  A  truce  to  these  ceremonies.  What  do  you
want?

HALI.  (Placing  himself  between  Don  Pedro  and  Isidore,
At  each  word  which  he  speaks  to  Don  Pedro  he  turns  to
Isidore,  and  makes  signs  to  her  to  let  her  understand  the
designs  of  his  master).  Signor  (with  the  Signora's  leave),
I  will  tell  you  (with  the  signora's  leave),  that  I  have  come

SCBNB  ix.]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.

to  see  you  (with  the  signora's  leave),  to  ask  you  (with  the
signora's  leave),  to  have  the  kindness  (with  the  signora's
leave).  .  .  .

DON  P.  With  the  signora's  leave,  come  a  little  on  this
side.  {Don  Pedro  places  himself  between  Isidore  and
Hal't).

HALI.   I  am  a  virtuoso,6  signer.

DON  P.  I  have  nothing  to  give  away.

HALI.  I  am  not  asking  for  anything.  But  as  I  meddle
a  little  with  music  and  dancing,  I  have  taught  some  slaves,
who  would  be  glad  to  find  a  master  who  takes  a  delight  in
these  things ;  and  knowing  that  you  are  a  gentleman  of
some  importance,  I  have  come  to  ask  you  to  look  at  them
and  to  listen  to  them,  to  buy  them  if  they  please  you,  or
to  recommend  them  to  one  of  your  friends,  who  might
be  willing  to  engage  them.

ISID.  We  might  see  their  performance  ;  it  will  amuse
us.  Fetch  them  hither.

HALI.  Chala,  bala.  That  is  a  new  song,  the  latest  out.
Listen  well.  Chala,  bala.

SCENE  IX. — DON  PEDRO,  ISIDORE,  HALI,  TURKISH
SLAVES.

A  SLAVE.  (Singing  to  Isidore).  A  lover  with  an  impas-
sioned heart  follows  its  beloved  object  everywhere ;  but
the  eternal  watchfulness  of  an  odious  jealousy  prevents  him
speaking  to  her  except  by  his  eyes.  Can  there  be  aught
more  painful  to  a  heart  in  love?7  (To  Don  Pedro).  Chiri-
birida  ouch  alia,  Star  bon  Turca,  Non  aver  danara.  Ti
voler  comprara?  Mi  servir  a  ti,  Se  pagar  per  mi;  Far
bona  cucina,  Mi  levar  matin  a,  Far  boiler  caldara ;  Parlara,
parlara,  Ti  voler  comprara?8

'  Moliere  was  the  first  to  employ  the  word  virtuose  as  a  French  noun,
though  Madame  de  Motteville  had  already  used  it  in  its  Italian  form.

7  The  ballet-book,  which  is  given  in  the  Introductory  Notice,  mentions
here  some  indications  of  stage  play,  which  are  very  useful  for  the  better
understanding  of  this  scene.

8  This  couplet  is  in  lingua,  franca,  and  with  the  exception  of  the  first
line,  too  free  to  be  translated,  is  as  follows :  I  am  a  good  Turk,  I  have  no
money.    Will  you  buy  me  ?     I  shall  serve  you,  if  you  pay  for  me.     I
shall  do  good  cooking,  I  shall  rise  early,   I  shall  make  the  pot  boil.
Speak,  speak,  will  you  buy  me  ?

5  6  THE  SICILIAN  ;   OR,  [SCENE  ix.

First  Entry  of  the  Ballet.

Dance  of  the  Slaves.

A  SLAVE.  (Singing  to  Isidore).  It  is  a  complete  torture
under  which  this  lover  expires ;  but  if  the  fair  one  will
only  look  upon  his  martyrdom  with  a  gentle  eye,  and  con-
sent that  he  may  sigh  for  her  charms  in  the  eyes  of  the
whole  world,  then  he  may  soon  laugh  at  all  the  precau-
tions of  jealousy.  (To  Don  Pedro).  Chiribirida  ouch
alia,  Star  bon  Turca,  Non  aver  danara  ;  Ti  voler  compra-
ra?  Mi  servir  a  ti,  Se  pagar  per  mi ;  Far  bona  cucina,
Me  levar  matina,  Far  boiler  caldara;  Parlara,  parlara,  Ti
voler  comprara  ?

Second  Entry  of  the  Ballet.
The  Slaves  recommence  dancing.

DON.  P.  (Sings);  Do  you  know,  you  scamps,  that  this
song  smells  of  stick  for  your  backs  ?  Chiribirida  ouch
alia,  Mi  ti  non  comprara,  Ma  ti  bastonara,  Si  ti  non
andara ;  Andara,  andara,  O  ti  bastonara.9

Oh!  oh!  what  merry  sparks!  (To  Isidore).  Come,
let  us  go  in  again :  I  have  changed  my  mind  ;  and  more-
over, the  weather  looks  rather  threatening.  (To  Hali,
who  comes  back).  Ah !  you  rogue !  let  me  catch  you  at
it  again !

HALT.  Well !  yes,  my  master  adores  her.  He  has  no
greater  desire  than  to  show  her  his  love ;  and,  if  she  con-
sents to  it,  to  take  her  for  his  wife.

DON  P.  Yes,  yes,  I  will  keep  her  for  him.

HALT.  We  shall  get  her  in  spite  of  you.

DON  P.  What  do  you  mean,  you  scoundrel  .    .    .

HALI.  We  shall  get  her,  I  tell  you,  in  spite  of  your
teeth.

DON  P.  If  I  take  .    .    .

HALI.  You  may  watch  as  much  as  you  like.  She  shall
"be  ours ;  I  have  sworn  it.

DON  P.  Leave  me  alone,  I  shall  catch  you  without  fa-
tiguing myself.

9  The  meaning  of  these  words,  which  are  also  in  lingua  franca,  is  :  I
will  not  buy  you,  but  I  will  give  you  a  cudgelling,  if  you  do  not  go  away.
Go  away,  go  away,  or  I  will  give  you  a  cudgelling.

SCENE  x.]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  57

HALI.  It  is  we  who  will  catch  you.  She  shall  be  our
wife  ;  OUT  mind  is  made  up.  (Alone].  I  must  accom-
plish it,  or  perish  in  the  attempt.

SCENE  X. — ADRASTE,  HALI,  Two  SERVANTS.

ADR.   Well,  Hali,  are  our  affairs  improving?

HALI.  I  have  already  made  some  little  attempt,  sir;  but
I  ...

ADR.  Do  not  trouble  yourself  about  it ;  I  have  found,
by  accident,  all  that  I  wish;  and  I  shall  enjoy  the  happi-
ness of  seeing  this  fair  one  in  her  own  house.  I  happened
to  be  at  Damon's,  the  artist,  who  told  me  that  he  had  to
go  to-day  to  paint  the  portrait  of  this  charming  creature;
and  as  we  are  intimate  friends  of  long  standing,  he  wishes
to  serve  my  flame,  and  sends  me,  in  his  place,  with  a  few
words  of  introduction.  You  know  that  I  was  always  fond
of  painting,  and  that  I,  sometimes  handle  the  brush  myself,
much  against  the  French  custom,  which  forbids  a  nobleman
to  know  how  to  do  anything ; 10  so  shall  I  have  the  liberty
of  seeing  this  fair  one  at  my  ease.  But  I  do  not  doubt
that  my  jealous  bore  will  always  be  there,  and  prevent
any  conversation  between  us ;  and,  to  tell  you  the  truth,  I
have,  by  the  aid  of  a  young  slave  girl,  prepared  a  stratagem
to  get  this  fair  Greek  out  of  the  hands  of  her  tormentor,
if  I  can  prevail  with  her  to  consent  to  it.

HALI.  Leave  it  to  me;  I  will  put  you  in  the  way  to
converse  with  her.  (  Whispers  to  Adraste).  It  shall  not
be  said  that  I  count  for  nothing  in  this  affair.  When  are
you  going  there?

ADR.  This  very  minute ;  I  have  already  prepared  every-
thing.

HALI.  And  I  am  going,  on  my  part,  to  prepare  myself.

ADR.  I  will  lose  no  time.  Hullo  !  I  will  not  delay  the
pleasure  of  seeing  her.11

10  Several  great  writers  of  the  age  of  Louis  XVI.  have  made  fun  of  this
privilege  of  idleness,  which  many  of  the  French  nobles  thought  to  belong
to  them.

11  When  The  Sicilian  is  performed  in  the  present  day,  the  scene  changes
to  the  interior  of  Don  Pedro's  house.

58  THE  SICILIAN;   OR,  [SCENE  xn.

SCENE  XL — DON  PEDRO,  ADRASTE,  Two  SERVANTS.

DON  P.  For  whom  are  you  looking  in  this  house  sir?

ADR.   I  am  looking  for  Don  Pedro.

DON  P.  He  stands  before  you.

ADR.  He  will  take  the  trouble  to  read  this  letter,  if  it
it  please  him,

DON  P.  I  send  you,  instead  of  myself,  for  the  portrait  in
question,  this  French  gentleman,  who,  anxious  to  oblige,  has
been  good  enough  to  undertake  this  task  at  my  wish.  He  is
unquestionably,  the  first  man  in  the  world  for  this  sort  of
work,  and  I  thought  that  I  could  do  you  no  more  agreeable
service  than  to  send  him  to  you,  since  you  intend  to  have  a,
finished  portrait  of  the  person  whom  you  love.  But,  above
all,  take  care  not  to  speak  to  him  about  any  remuneration;
for  he  would  be  offended  at  it,  and  does  these  things  only  for
the  sake  of  fame  and  reputation.  Sir  Frenchman,  you  in-
tend doing  me  a  great  favour,  and  I  am  very  much  obliged
to  you.

ADR.  All  my  ambition  is  to  oblige  people  of  standing
and  merit.

DON  P.  I  will  call  the  person  in  question.

SCENE   XII. — ISIDORE,   DON   PEDRO,   ADRASTE,   Two
SERVANTS.

DON  P.  {To  Isidore).  This  is  a  gentleman  whom  Damon
sends  us,  and  who  will  be  kind  enough  to  undertake  your
portrait.  ( To  Adraste,  who,  in  saluting  Isidore,  embraces
her).  Hullo !  Sir  Frenchman,  this  way  of  saluting  is  not
the  fashion  in  this  country.

ADR.  It  is  the  fashion  of  France.

DON  P.  The  fashion  of  France  may  suit  your  ladies ;
but  for  ours,  it  is  somewhat  too  familiar.

ISID.  I  accept  this  honour  with  much  pleasure.  The
adventure  surprises  me  immensely ;  and,  to  tell  the  truth
I  did  not  expect  to  have  such  an  illustrious  painter.

ADR.  There  is  no  one,  doubtless,  who  would  not  think
it  an  honour  to  engage  on  such  a  work.  I  have  no  great
talent ;  but,  in  this  case,  the  subject  provides  more  than
enough  in  itself,  and  we  can  do  something  beautiful  with
such  an  original  to  work  from.

SCHNEXII.]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  59

Ism.  The  original  is  but  little  to  speak  of;  but  the
skill  of  the  painter  will  be  able  to  hide  its  defects.

ADR.  The  painter  cannot  perceive  any ;  and  all  that  he
wishes  is  to  be  able  to  represent  its  charms  to  the  world's
eyes  in  the  same  perfection  as  he  sees  them.

ISID.  If  your  brush  flatter  as  much  as  your  tongue,  you
will  paint  a  portrait  which  will  not  be  at  all  like  me.

ADR.  Heaven,  who  made  the  original,  has  prevented  us
from  making  a  portrait  of  it  that  could  be  flattering.

ISID.  Whatever  you  may  say,  Heaven  has  not  .    .    .

DON  P.  Let  us  finish  this,  pray.  Let  us  leave  com-
pliments, and  think  about  the  portrait.

ADR.  (7<?  the  servants}.  Come,  bring  my  things.
{They  bring  the  necessary  painting  implements}.

ISID.  {To  Adraste}.     Where  shall  I  sit?

ADR.  Here.  This  is  the  right  spot,  and  catches  best  the
precise  light  we  want.

ISID.   (After  sitting  down).     Am  I  right  thus  ?

ADR.  Yes.  Hold  yourself  up  a  little.  A  little  more
that  way.  Your  body  turned  thus.  You  head  raised  a
little,  to  show  the  beauty  of  the  throat.  This  a  little
more  open.  (He  uncovers  her  neck  a  little  more}.  That  is
it.  There,  a  little  more ;  just  another  shade.

DON  P.  (To  Isidore}.  What  a  fuss  to  put  you  right;
cannot  you  sit  properly?

ISID.  These  things  are  altogether  new  to  me ;  and  it  is
for  this  gentleman  to  place  me  as  he  likes.

ADR.  (Seated}.  There,  it  could  not  be  better,  and  you
sit  admirably.  (Turning  her  a  little  towards  him}.  Like
this  if  you  please.  The  whole  depends  upon  the  attitude
which  we  give  to  the  people  we  paint.

DON  P.  Very  good.

ADR.  A  little  more  this  way.  Your  eyes  turned  to-
wards me,  I  pray ;  your  looks  fixed  on  mine.

ISID.  I  am  not  like  those  ladies,  who,  having  theii
portraits  painted,  wish  them  to  be  unlike  themselves,  and
are  not  satisfied  with  the  painter  unless  he  makes  them
more  lovely  than  the  day.  To  content  them,  one  ought
to  make  but  one  picture  for  them  all;  for  they  all  ask  for
the  same  thing, — a  complexion  entirely  of  lilies  and  roses,
a  well  shaped  nose,  a  small  mouth,  and  large  sparkling

60  THE   SICILIAN;    OR,  [SCENE  xiii.

eyes ;  and,  above  all,  the  face  no  larger  than  a  hand,  even
if  they  have  one  a  foot  wide.  As  for  me,  I  ask  you  for  a
portrait  that  is  like  me,  and  which  shall  not  compel  people
to  ask  whose  it  is.

ADR.  It  would  be  difficult  to  have  it  asked  of  yours ;
and  your  features  are  very  unlike  those  of  others.  How
sweet  and  charming  they  are,  and  how  much  risk  there  is
in  painting  them  !

DON  P.  The  nose  seems  to  me  a  little  too  large.

ADR.  I  have  read,  I  know  not  where,  that  Apelles,  of
old,  painted  a  mistress  of  Alexander,  so  marvellously
beautiful,  that,  while  painting,  he  became  so  hopelessly
enamoured  of  her,  that  it  nearly  cost  him  his  life;  had  not
Alexander,  out  of  generosity,  ceded  to  him  the  object  of
his  love.  (To  Don  Pedro?)  I  might  do  the  same  here  as
Apelles  did  of  old;  but  you  would  not  do  the  same  perhaps,
as  Alexander.  (  Don  Pedro  makes  a  grimace.

ISID.  (To  Don  Pedro).  This  is  like  all  those  of  his
nationality.  These  French  gentlemen  have  always  such
a  stock  of  gallantry  that  they  scatter  it  everywhere.

ADR.  One  is  seldom  mistaken  in  this  sort  of  thing,  and
you  have  too  much  good  sense  not  to  see  whence  come
the  words  which  one  says  to  you.  Yes,  were  Alexander
present,  and  your  lover,  I  could  not  help  telling  you  that
I  have  never  beheld  aught  so  beautiful  as  what  I  see  now,
and  that  .  .  .

DON  P.  Sir  Frenchman,  I  think  you  ought  not  to  talk
so  much ;  it  takes  your  attention  from  your  work.

ADR.  Ah  !  Not  at  all.  I  am  in  the  habit  of  talking
when  I  paint,  and  a  little  conversation  is  necessary  in
these  cases  to  wake  up  the  mind,  and  to  keep  the  faces  of
those  we  paint  in  the  requisite  gay  mood.

SCENE   XIII. — HALT  disguised  as  a  Spanish  gentleman. "
DON  PEDRO,  ADRASTE,  ISIDORE.

DON  P.  What  does  this  man  want?  And  who  lets
people  walk  up  without  announcing  them  ?

HALT.  (To  Don  Pedro}.     I  have    entered  boldly;  but

11  In  the  ballet,  Hali  is  dressed  as  a  Sicilian  gentleman  ;  but  here,  as  a
Spanish  one.  Hence  his  Castilian  name,  Don  Gilles  d'Avalos.

SCENE  xin.]  LOVE  MAKES  THE   PAINTER.  6 1

between  gentlemen,  such  freedom  is  allowed.  Sir,  am  I
known  to  you?

DON  P.  No,  Sir.

HALI.  I  am  Don  Gilles  d'Avalos;  and  the  history  of
Spain  must  have  made  you  acquainted  with  my  merit.

DON  P.   Do  you  wish  anything  from  me?

HALI.  Yes,  advice  upon  an  affair  of  honour.  I  know
that  it  would  be  difficult  to  find  a  gentleman  more  perfect
in  these  matters  than  you ;  but  I  must  beg  of  you  as  a
favour  to  draw  a  little  aside.

DON  P.  This  will  be  fair  enough.

ADR.  To  Don  Pedro,  who  catches  him  whispering  to
Isidore).  She  has  blue  eyes.

HALI.  {Drawing  Don  Pedro  away  from  Adraste  and
Isidore).  Sir,  I  have  received  a  slap  in  the  face.  You
know  what  a  slap  is, ls  when  it  is  given  with  an  open  hand,
in  the  very  middle  of  the  cheek.  I  take  this  slap  much  to
heart ;  and  I  am  uncertain  whether  to  avenge  the  insult,
I  ought  to  fight  my  man,  or  rather  to  have  him  assassi-
nated.

DON  P.  Assassinated ;  that  is  the  surest  and  quickest
way.  Who  is  your  enemy?

HALI.  Let  us  speak  low,  if  you  please.

(Halt  holds  Don  Pedro,  while  speaking  to  him  in  such  a
manner  that  he  cannot  see  Adraste.

ADR.  (At  Isidore's  knees,  while  Halt  and  Don  Pedro
whisper  together).  Yes,  charming  Isidore,  my  looks  have
told  you  as  much  for  the  last  two  months,  and  you  have
understood  them.  I  love  you  more  than  aught  else,  and
I  have  no  other  thought,  no  other  aim,  no  other  passion,
than  to  be  yours  all  my  life.

Ism.  I  do  not  know  whether  you  speak  the  truth ;  but
you  make  me  believe  you.

ADR.  But  do  I  make  you  believe  me  sufficiently  to
inspire  you  with  ever  so  little  kindness  towards  myself?

ISID.  I  only  fear  I  have  too  much.

ADR.  Have  you  enough,  fair  Isidore,  to  consent  to  the
plan  of  which  I  have  told  you  ?

ISID.  I  cannot  tell  you  yet.

11  Hali  has  given  a  slap  in  the  face  to  Don  Pedro  in  the  fifth  scene.

62  THE   SICILIAN;    OR,  [SCKNBXIV.

ADR.  What  are  you  waiting  for?

ISID.  To  make  up  my  mind.

ADR.  Ah  !  when  people  love  with  all  their  hearts,  they
make  up  their  minds  quickly.

ISID.   Very  well  then  !  yes,  I  consent  to  it.

ADR.  But  do  you  consent,  tell  me,  that  it  be  this  very
moment?

ISID.  Very  well  then ;  yes,  I  consent  to  it.

ADR.  But  do  you  consent,  tell  me,  that  it  be  this  very
moment  ?

ISID.  When  once  our  mind  is  made  up  about  a  thing,
do  we  consider  the  time  ?

DON  PED.  (To  Hali).  This  is  my  opinion,  and  I  kiss
your  hands.

HALI.  Sir  if  you  ever  receive  a  slap  in  the  face,  I  am
also  a  man  of  counsel;  and  I  may  be  able  to  return  the
service.

DON  P.  You  will  pardon  me  for  not  seeing  you  to  the
door;  but,  between  gentlemen,  such  freedom  is  allowed.

ADR.  (To  Isidore*).  No,  there  is  nothing  that  could
efface  from  my  heart  the  tender  proofs  .  .  .  (To  Don
Pedro,  who  perceives  him  speaking  very  closely  to  Isidore).
I  was  looking  at  this  little  dimple  which  she  has  got  at  the
side  of  her  chin,  and  I  thought  at  first  that  it  was  a  mole.
But  we  have  done  enough  for  to-day ;  we  will  finish  at  an-
other time.  (To  Don  Pedro,  who  wishes  to  see  the  portrait).
No,  do  not  look  at  anything  yet.  Have  it  carefully  put
aside,  I  pray ;  (To  Isidore),  and  you,  I  beseech  you,  not  to
give  way,  and  to  keep  your  spirits  up,  in  order  that  I  may
finish  my  work.

ISID.  I  shall  reserve  all  the  gaiety  I  can  for  this. "

SCENE  XIV. — DON  PEDRO,  ISIDORE.
ISID.    What  say  you  ?     This  gentleman  seems  to  me  the
most  polite  in  the  world ;  and  one  must  admit  that  the  French

14  One  of  the  most  usual  contrivances  on  the  stage  to  see  a  lover  dis-
guising himself  in  order  to  get  an  opportunity  of  speaking  with  the  object
of  his  love.  Moliere  has  employed  it  four  times.  In  this  play  Adraste  is
a  painter ;  in  Love  is  the  best  Doctor,  Clitandre  is  a  physician  ;  in  The
Physician  in  spite  of  himself  ,  Leander  is  an  apothecary  ;  and  in  Le  Malade
Imaginaire  (see  Vol.  III.),  Cldante  is  a  music  master.

SCBNK  xvi.]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  0  J

have  in  them  something  so  polished,  so  gallant,  which
other  nations  have  not.

DON  P.  Yes ;  but  they  have  that  against  them  that  they
are  somewhat  too  free,  and  that,  madcap-like,  they  are
too  fond  of  whispering  sweet  nothings  to  every  woman
whom  they  meet.

Ism.  It  is  because  they  know  that  those  things  please
the  ladies.

DON  P.  True ;  but  if  they  please  the  ladies,  they  very
much  displease  the  gentlemen  ;  and  one  is  not  very  glad
to  see  one's  wife  or  mistress  openly  courted  to  one's  very
face.

ISID.  They  do  so  only  in  sport.

SCENE  XV. — ZAIDE,  DON  PEDRO,  ISIDORE.

ZAI.  Ah,  Sir,  save  me,  I  beseech  you,  from  the  hands
of  an  enraged  husband  who  is  close  upon  my  heels.  His
jealousy  is  incredible,  and  surpasses  in  its  violence  every-
thing imaginable.  He  carries  it  so  far  as  to  wish  me
to  be  always  veiled ;  and  for  having  found  me  with  my
face  a  little  uncovered  he  has  drawn  his  sword,  and  he  has
.  compelled  me  to  throw  myself  upon  you,  and  to  ask  for
your  protection  against  his  injustice.  But  I  see  him  com-
ing ;  for  heaven's  sake,  honoured  Sir,  save  me  from  his  fury.
DON  P.  (To  Zaide,  pointing  to  Isidore).  Go  in  there
with  her,  and  fear  nothing.

SCENE  XVI. — ADRASTE,  DON  PEDRO.

DON  P.  What,  sir,  is  it  you  ?  So  much  jealousy  in  a
Frenchman.  I  fancied  that  only  we  were  capable  of  such
a  thing.

ADR.  The  French  always  excel  in  everything  they
do ;  and,  when  we  take  it  into  our  heads  to  be  jealous,
we  are  twenty  times  more  so  than  a  Sicilian.  This  in-
famous girl  thinks  to  have  found  a  safe  refuge  with  you  ;
but  you  are  too  sensible  to  blame  my  resentment.  Allow
me,  I  pray  you,  to  treat  her  as  she  deserves.

DON  P.  Ah  !  for  pity's  sake,  stop.  The  offence  is  too
trifling  for  so  much  anger.

ADR.  The  extent  of  the  offence  lies  not  in  the  import-
ance of  the  deed :  it  is  in  the  transgression  of  the  given

64  THE   SICILIAN;    OR,  [SCBNE  xix.

orders ;  and  in  such  matters  that  which  is  only  a  trifle
becomes  very  criminal  when  it  is  forbidden.

DON  P.  To  judge  by  what  she  has  said,  all  that  she  has
done  was  unintentional ;  and  I  pray  you  to  be  reconciled.

ADR.  What !  you  take  her  part,  you  who  are  so  par-
ticular in  matters  of  that  kind.

DON  P.  Yes,  I  take  her  part ;  and  if  you  would  oblige
me,  you  will  forget  your  anger,  and  be  reconciled  to  each
other.  It  is  a  favour  which  I  ask  of  you,  and  I  shall  look
upon  it  as  an  earnest  of  the  friendship  which  I  should  like
to  subsist  between  us.

ADR.  Under  these  conditions,  I  can  refuse  you  nothing.
I  will  do  as  you  wish.

SCENE  XVII. — ZAIDE,  DON  PEDRO,  ADRASTE,  hidden  in
a  corner  of  the  stage.

DON  P.  (To  Zaide~].  Come  along,  I  say.  Only  follow
me,  I  have  made  your  peace.  You  could  not  have  fallen
into  better  hands.

ZAI.  I  am  much  more  obliged  to  you  than  you  think  ;
but  I  shall  take  my  veil ;  I  shall  take  care  not  to  appear
before  him  without  it.

SCENE  XVIII. — DON  PEDRO,  ADRASTE.

DON  P.  She  will  be  here  directly;  and  I  assure  you
that  she  seemed  very  glad  when  I  told  her  that  I  had
made  it  all  right.

SCENE  XIX. — ISIDORE,  with  Zaide' s  veil,  ADRASTE,
DON  PEDRO.

DON  P.  Since  you  have  consented  to  forego  your  re-
sentment, allow  me  to  make  you  shake  hands  together
here  ;  and  to  beg  of  you  to  live  henceforth,  for  my  sake,
in  a  perfect  understanding.

ADR.  Yes,  I  promise  you,  that  for  your  sake,  I  shall
live  on  the  best  possible  terms  with  her.

DON  P.  You  oblige  me  greatly,  and  I  shall  bear  it  in
mind.

ADR.  I  give  you  my  word,  Don  Pedro,  that  out  of  con-

SCBNHXXI]  LOVE   MAKES   THE   PAINTER.  65

sideratiou  for  you,  I  shall  treat  her  with  the  utmost  pos-
sible kindness.

DON  P.  You  are  really  too  kir.d.  (Alone).  It  does  one
good  to  make  matters  pleasant  and  peaceful.  Hullo,
Isidore,  come.

SCENE  XX. — ZAIDE,  DON  PEDRO.

DON  P.  What  is  this  !     What  means  this  ?

ZAI.  (  Without  her  veil*).  What  means  this  ?  That  a
jealous  man  is  a  monster  hated  by  all  the  world  ;  and  that
everyone  delights  to  annoy  him  for  annoyance'  sake  ;  that
all  the  locks  and  bolts  cannot  keep  people  :  and  that  the
heart  must  be  won  by  gentleness  and  kindness ;  that  Isidore
is  in  the  hands  of  a  gentleman  whom  she  loves,  and  that
you  have  been  duped.

DON  P.  And  shall  Don  Pedro  suffer  this  mortal  insult  !
No,  no,  I  have  too  much  courage ;  and  I  shall  go  and  de-
mand the  assistance  of  the  authorities  to  punish  this
perfidy  to  the  utmost.15  Here  lives  a  senator.  Hullo  !

SCENE  XXI. — A  SENATOR,  DON  PEDRO.

SEN.  Your  servant,  Don  Pedro.  How  opportunely  you
come !

DON  P.  I  come  to  complain  to  you  of  an  insult  which
I  have  suffered.

SEN.  I  have  just  arranged  the  most  beautiful  masquerade
in  the  world.

DON  P.  A  treacherous  Frenchman  has  played  me  a  trick.

SEN.  You  have  never,  in  all  your  life,  seen  anything  so
beautiful.

DON  P.  He  has  abducted  a  girl  to  whom  I  had  given
her  freedom.

SEN.  They  are  people  dressed  like  Moors,  who  dance
admirably.

DON  P.  You  may  judge  whether  this  is  an  insult  which
I  ought  to  bear.

SEN.  Most  marvellous  dresses,  made  expressly.

16  If  a  ballet  ends  this  play,  the  stage  changes  here  again  to  the  market-
place of  the  first  scene.     But  when  there  is  no  ballet,  the  piece  ends  here.

66  THE  SICILIAN;  LOVE  MAKES  THE  PAINTER.  [SCENE xxn.

DON  P.  I  demand  the  assistance  of  the  authorities  in
this  matter.

SEN.  I  wish  you  to  see  this.  They  are  going  to  rehearse
it  to  amuse  the  people.

DON  P.  What  are  you  talking  about?

SEN.   I  am  speaking  about  rny  masquerade.

DON  P.  I  am  speaking  of  my  affair.

SEN.  I  will  not  occupy  myself  about  any  matter,  except
pleasure,  to-day.  Come,  gentlemen,  come.  Let  us  see
whether  it  will  go  all  right.

DON  P.  Plague  take  the  fool,  with  his  masquerade  !

SEN.     The  deuce  take  the  bore,  with  his  affair !

SCENE  XXII. — A  SENATOR,  TROUP  OF  DANCERS.
Entry  of  the  Ballet.

Several  dancers,  dressed  as  Moros,  dance  before  the
Senator,  and  finish  the  comedy.

TARTUFFE;  OU  L'IMPOSTEUR.

COMEDIE.

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

A  COMEDY  IN  FIVE  ACTS.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.)

AUGUST  5th,  1667.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

HYPOCRISY  has  at  all  times  been  a  legitimate  subject  of  satire  io
modern  society.  In  classical  literature,  such  a  vice  seems  to  have  been
unknown ;  for  it  can  develop  itself  only  in  the  midst  of  a  society  based,
or  pretending  to  be  based,  upon  religion.  Wherever  indifference  in  mat-
ters of  religion  existed  among  the  ancients,  the  hypocrite  must  have  been
rare ;  for  his  outward  adornment  of  wise  and  moral  saws  could  have  been
of  no  service  to  him.  But  as  soon  as  religion  became  part  and  parcel  of
the  State  policy,  men  found  it  convenient  and  profitable  to  shelter  their
vices  under  a  cloak  of  outward  decorum,  and  tried  to  make  the  best  of
both  worlds :  but,  above  all,  of  this  one.  Literary  men  were  not  slow  in
describing  this  new  character ;  and  from  the  middle  ages  down  to  the
present  time,  in  all  climes  and  in  all  countries,  the  hypocrite  appears  on
the  scene.  He  plays  the  principal  part  in  the  Fabliaux  ;  and  whether  as
an  incontinent  hermit,  a  lecherous  chaplain,  an  intriguing  monk,  or  a
faithless  confessor,  he  is  always  described  in  bold,  but  rather  coarse,
strokes,  and  gets  generally  punished  and  jeered  at  in  the  end.  We  find
him  in  some  of  the  early  German  satirical  poems ;  and  in  the  latter  part
of  the  epic,  Reynard  the  Fox.  Rutebeuf,  a  trouvere  of  the  thirteenth
century,  gives  us,  in  the  Chanson  des  Ordres,  the  portrait  of  a  Pharisee,
who  seems  an  ancestor  of  Tartuffe,  and  who  goes  about  in  a  large  plain
woollen  gown,  with  a  thin  and  pale  face,  austere  mien  and  words,  and
who  has  the  ambition  of  a  lion,  the  claws  of  a  leopard,  and  the  malice  of
a  scorpion.

In  the  continuation  of  The  Romaunt  of  the  Rose,  by  Jean  de  Meung,
appears  Faux  Semblaunt,  an  ancestor  of  Tartuffe,  whom  Chaucer,  in  his
translation,  makes  speak  as  follows :

"  Now  am  I  knight,  now  chastelaine,
Now  prelate,  and  now  chaplaine,
Now  priest,  now  clerke,  now  fostere,
Now  am  I  master,  now  schollere.
Now  monke,  now  chanon,  now  baity,
What  ever  mister  man  am  I  ....
Well  can  I  beare  me  under  wede.
Unlike  is  my  word  to  my  dede.

69

70  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

The  conversation  between  Love  and  Faux  Semblaunt  is  also  from  the
same  Romaunt,  and  shows  the  perfect  hypocrite.

"  Tell  forth,  and  shame  thee  never  adele,

For  as  thine  habit  sheweth  wele,

Thouservest  an  holy  hermite."
"  Sooth  is,  but  I  am  but  an  hypocrite,

Thou  goest  and  preachest  poverte  ?"
"  Yea,  sir,  but  Richesse  hath  poste,

Thou  preachest  abstinence  also?"
"  Sir,  I  woll  fillen,  so  mote  I  go,

My  paunche  of  good  meat  and  wine

As  should  a  maister  of  divine,

For  how  that  I  me  poore  fame,

Yet  all  poore  folke  I  disdaine."

Boccaccio,  in  his  Decameron,  describes  several  times  the  hypocrite,  and
Machiavelli,  in  his  play,  the  Mandragore,  acted  in  1515  before  the  Pope
and  his  Court,  sketches  a  monkish  pander,  who  lays  down,  in  rather  broad
language,  the  maxim  that  the  intentions  of  a  man  are  everything,  and  that
his  actions  are  nothing.

About  the  same  time,  there  was  played  in  France  la  Farce  des  Brus,  in
which  friar  Ancelot  and  friar  Anselme  are  still  more  cynical  than  their
prototype,  friar  Timoteo.  .  In  the  Satyr e  Menippee,  the  hypocrite  also  ap-
pears, but  full  of  sedition,  and  warlike.  Mathurin  Regnier  describes,  in
the  eighteenth  of  his  Satires,  Macette,  a  hypocritical  lady,  in  the  follow-
ing words :  "  Night  and  day  she  goes  from  convent  to  convent,  visits  the

holy  places,  confesses  herself  often She  dwells  and  lives  apart

from  the  world ;  her  penitent  eyes  weep  only  holy  water."  Such  is  her
portrait :  but  this  is  what  she  herself  says  :  "  That  is  why  I  disguise  the
up-wellings  of  my  heart,  envelop  my  ardour  in  sackcloth  and  ashes,  and
hide  my  purpose,  which  is  to  abandon  myself  to  pleasures.  A  concealed
sin  is  half  forgiven  ;  the  fault  does  not  lie  only  in  its  being  forbidden,  but
scandal  and  disgrace  are  the  causes  of  the  offence.  Provided  it  be  not
known,  no  matter  how,  as  long  as  we  can  deny  it,  we  sin  not  at  all.
Moreover,  the  goodness  of  Heaven  is  greater  than  our  offences,  and  pro-
vided we  confess,  we  are  always  pardoned."  The  portrait  is  more  odious,
but  is  not  very  unlike  Tartuffe,

In  Pascal's  Provinciates,  the  Jesuitical  hypocrite  is  also  well  described.
All  this  tends  to  prove  that  of  Tartuffe  can  be  said  what  may  be  stated
of  all  masterpieces  of  the  human  intellect, — that  it  is  the  most  finished  and
best  expressed  result  of  a  series  of  more  or  less  complete  ideas,  which,
for  ages,  men  have  attempted  to  shape  into  a  certain  form.

Moliere  evidently  owes  something  to  a  tragi-comic  tale  of  Scarron,
called  The  Hypocrites.  In  this  tale,  the  author  relates  how  a  certain  ad-
venturer, called  Montufar,  and  two  queans,  the  younger  of  whom  was
named  Helen,  and  the  older  Mendez,  resolved  to  take  advantage  of  the
credulity  of  the  inhabitants  of  Seville,  by  pretending  to  be  devout.

"  They  alighted  within  a  league  of  the  city,  and  having  satisfied  the  muleteer,
got  thither  about  the  dusk  of  the  evening,  and  took  up  their  lodgings  at  the  first  inn
they  found.  Montufar  hired  a  house,  furnished  it  with  very  ordinary  furniture,
and  dressed  himself  all  in  black,  with  a  cassock  and  cloak  of  the  same  colour.
Helen  assumed  the  habit  of  a  religious  sister,  that  had  devoted  herself  to  pious
works,  and  Mendez  went  dressed  like  a  saint,  valuing  herself  upon  her  hoary  locks,
and  a  huge  monstrous  chaplet,  each  bead  of  which  was  big  enough  to  load  a  demi-
culverin.  The  very  next  day  after  their  arrival,  Montufar  showed  himself  in  the
street,  apparelled  as  I  have  already  described  him,  marching  with  his  arms  across,

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        71

and  looking  on  the  ground  whenever  he  met  any  woman.  He  cried  out,  with  a
voice  shrill  enough  to  have  rent  a  rock,  '  Blessed  be  the  holy  sacrament  of  the  altar,
and  the  thrice  happy  conception  of  the  immaculate  virgin  ! '  and  uttered  many  more
devout  exclamations  with  the  same  everlasting  lungs  of  leather.  He  made  the
children  whom  he  met  in  the  streets  repeat  the  same  words  after  him  ;  and  more-
over, assembled  them  sometimes  together,  to  teach  them  to  sing  hymns  and  songs
of  devotion,  and  to  instruct  them  in  their  Catechism.  He  repaired  to  the  gaols  and
preached  to  the  prisoners,  comforting  some  and  relieving  others,  begging  victuals
and  other  provisions  for  them,  and  frequently  walking  with  a  heavy  basket  upon  his
back.  O,  detestable  villain  !  thou  wantedst  nothing  but  to  set  up  for  a  hypocrite,
to  be  the  most  profligate  accompllsh'd  rascal  in  the  Universe.  These  actions  of
virtue,  in  a  fellow  that  was  the  least  virtuous  of  mankind,  procur'd  him  in  a  little
time  the  reputation  of  a  saint.  Helen  and  Mendez  likewise  did  all  that  in  them
lay  to  deserve  canonization.  The  one  called  herself  the  mother,  the  other  the  sis-
ter of  the  thrice  blessed  Friar  Martin.  They  went  every  day  to  the  hospitals,
where  they  assisted  the  sick,  made  their  beds,  washed  their  linen,  and  did  all  this
at  their  own  expense.  By  these  means  the  most  vicious  people  in  Spain  obtained
the  universal  admiration  of  all  Seville.  About  this  time,  a  gentleman  of  Madrid
happened  to  come  thither  about  some  private  affairs  ;  he  had  formerly  been  one
of  Helen's  lovers,  for  women  of  this  character  have  commonly  more  than  one  string
to  their  bow.  He  knew  Mendez  to  be  a  notorious  cheat,  and  Montufar  to  be  no
better.  One  day  as  they  came  out  of  church,  encompassed  by  a  great  number  of
persons,  who  kissed  their  very  garments,  and  conjur'd  them  to  remember  them  in
their  prayers,  they  were  known  by  the  aforesaid  gentleman  ;  who,  burning  with  a
Christian  zeal,  and  not  able  to  suffer  three  such  notorious  impostors  to  abuse  the
credulity  of  the  whole  city,  broke  through  the  crowd,  and  giving  a  hearty  box  on
the  ear  to  Montufar,  '  You  wicked  cheat,'  cried  he,  '  do  you  neither  fear  God  nor
man?'  He  would  have  said  more,  but  his  good  intention,  which  in  truth  was  some-
what of  the  rashes t,  had  not  the  success  it  deserved;  all  the  people  fell  on  him
whom  they  believed  to  have  committed  sacrilege,  in  offering  this  violence  to  their
saint.  He  was  beaten  to  the  ground,  and  had  certainly  been  torn  to  pieces  by  the
mob,  had  not  Montufar,  by  a  wonderful  presence  of  mind,  undertaken  his  protection
by  covering  him  with  his  body,  keeping  off  those  that  were  most  enraged  with  him.
and  exposing  himself  to  their  blows.  '  My  brethren,'  cried  he  to  them  as  loud  as
he  could  bawl  'let  the  poor  wretch  alone,  for  the  love  of  God:  be  quiet,  for
the  love  of  the  blessed  Virgin.'  These  few  words  having  appeased  this  horrible
tempest,  the  people  made  room  for  brother  Martin  to  pass,  who  went  up  to  the  un-
fortunate gentleman,  well-pleased  in  his  heart  to  see  him  so  used,  though  showing
outwardly  a  mighty  concern  for  him.  He  raised  him  up  from  the  ground,  em-
braced and  kissed  him,  all  covered  as  he  was  with  blood  and  dirt,  and  reprimanded
the  people  for  their  rude  behaviour.  '  I  am  a  wicked  man,'  said  he  to  the  standers-
by.  '  I  am  a  sinner  ;  I  am  one  that  never  did  anything  pleasing  in  the  eyes  of
God.  Do  you  believe,'  continued  he,  '  because  you  see  me  dressed  in  this  religious
garb,  that  I  have  not  been  a  robber  all  my  life-time,  the  scandal  of  others  and  the
destruction  of  myself?  Alas!  you  are  mistaken,  my  brethren,  make  me  the  mark
of  your  contumelies,  pelt  me  with  stones,  nay,  draw  your  swords  upon  me.'  Hav-
ing spoken  these  words  with  a  counterfeit  sorrow,  he  threw  himself,  with  a  zeal  yet
more  counterfeit,  at  the  feet  of  his  enemy,  and  kissed  them,  not  only  begged  his
pardon,  but  likewise  gathered  up  his  sword,  cloak,  and  hat,  which  he  had  lost  in
the  scuffle.  He  helped  him  on  with  them  again,  and  leading  him  by  the  hand  to
the  end  of  the  street,  took  his  leave  of  him,  after  he  had  bestowed  abundance  of  em-
braces and  as  many  benedictions  on  him.  The  poor  man  was,  as  it  were,  out  of
his  wits  at  what  he  had  seen,  and  with  what  had  been  done  to  him,  and  was  so  full
of  confusion  that  he  durst  hardly  show  his  head  all  the  while  his  affairs  detained
him  at  Seville.  Montufar  had  won  the  hearts  of  all  the  city  by  this  pretended  act
of  devotion;  the  people  gaz'd  at  him  with  admiration,  and  the  children  cried  after
him,  '  a  Saint,  a  Saint,'  as  they  cried  out '  a  Fox,  a  Fox,'  when  they  saw  his  enemy
in  the  street.  From  this  moment,  he  lived  the  happiest  life  in  the  world.  Some
nobleman,  cavalier,  magistrate,  or  prelate  perpetually  invited  him  to  dinner,  and
strove  who  should  have  the  most  of  his  company.  If  he  were  asked  his  name,  he
would  answer,  '  He  was  a  beast  of  burthen,  a  sink  of  filth,  vessel  of  iniquity,'  and
such  like  noble  attributes  which  his  counterfeit  devotion  dictated  to  him.  When
he  visited  any  of  the  ladies,  he  complained  to  them  incessantly  of  the  nothingness
of  his  dispensation,  and  the  deadness  of  the  inward  man,  adding,  he  wanted  con-
centration of  heart  and  recollection  of  spirit.  In  short,  he  always  talked  to  them  in
this  magnificent  cant  and  holy  gibberish.  No  alms  were  given  in  Seville  but  what

72        TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

passed  through  his  hands,  or  those  of  Helen  and  Mendez,  who  were  not  wanting
likewise  to  act  their  parts  to  admiration,  and  stood  as  fair  for  a  red-letter  prefer-
ment in  the  almanack  (I  mean  to  be  sainted)  as  Montufar  himself.  A  lady  of  qual-
ity who  was  a  widow,  and  devout  even  to  superstition,  sent  them  every  day  two
dishes  of  meat  for  dinner,  and  as  many  for  supper  ;  and  you  must  know,  these
dishes  were  dressed  by  the  very  best  cooks  in  Seville.  Their  house  was  too  little
to  receive  the  numerous  presents  which  were  daily  sent  to  them.  A  woman  that
had  a  mind  to  be  with  child  put  her  petition  into  their  hands,  to  the  end,  by  their
mediation  it  might  be  presented  to  the  tribunal  of  heaven.  Another  that  had  a  son
in  the  Indies  did  the  same  ;  as  likewise  a  third  that  had  a  brother,  prisoner  in  Al-
giers Nay,  the  poor  widow  who  had  to  contest  with  a  powerful  adversary  before
an  ignorant  or  covetous  judge,  did  not  doubt  the  success  of  her  cause,  when  she  had
once  made  a  present  to  them  according  to  her  ability.  Some  gave  them  sweet-
meats and  conserves,  others  pictures  and  ornaments  for  their  closets.  Several  char-
itable persons  trusted  them  with  great  quantities  of  linen  and  woollen  cloth  to  dispose
among  the  needy  that  were  ashamed  to  beg,  and  with  considerable  sums  of  money
to  distribute  as  they  saw  convenient.  No  one  came  to  visit  them  empty-handed,
and  their  future  canonization  was  as  firmly  believed  as  an  article  of  faith.  At  last
the  credulity  of  the  people  ran  so  high,  that  they  came  to  consult  them  about  their
doubtful  affairs  and  things  to  come.  Helen,  who  was  as  subtle  as  a  devil,  managed
all  the  answers,  delivering  her  oracles  in  few  words,  and  those  capable  of  receiving
different  interpretations.  Their  beds  were  mean  and  homely  ;  but  at  night,  with
all  the  fine  furniture  a  man  could  desire,  that  loves  to  sleep  deliciously,  their  house
being  plentifully  furnished  with  good  feather  beds,  fine  coverlids,  and,  in  short,
with  all  sorts  of  movables  that  contribute  to  the  convenience  and  pleasure  of  life  ;
and  all  this  they  pretended  was  to  be  given  to  some  poor  widow,  whose  goods  had
been  seized  in  execution,  or  to  furnish  some  young  woman's  house  who  had  married
without  any  fortune.  Their  doors  were  shut  up  in  winter  at  five,  and  in  summer  at
seven  o'clock,  as  punctually  as  in  a  well-regulated  convent :  and  then  Jack  was
wound  up,  the  spits  turned  merrily  round,  the  capons  put  down  to  the  fire,  the  table

same  complexion,  copied  so  pious  an  example.  As  for  the  good  Mendez,  she  al-
vrays  lay  alone,  being  more  taken  up  with  contemplation  than  with  action  ever
since  she  had  addicted  herself  to  the  black  art.  This  was  their  constant  practice,
instead  of  employing  their  time  in  mental  prayer  or  in  doing  penance.  'Tis  no
wonder  if,  living  so  jolly  a  life,  they  looked  plump  and  fat ;  all  the  city  blessed
hiaven  for  it,  and  were  mightily  surprised  that  persons  of  so  much  austerity  and
self-denial  should  look  better  than  those  that  lived  in  luxury  and  ease.  For  the
space  of  three  years  they  deceived  the  eyes  of  all  the  inhabitants  of  Seville,  and  by
receiving  presents  from  everyone,  and  appropriating  to  their  own  use  the  alms  that
passed  through  their  hands,  they  heaped  together  an  incredible  number  of  pistoles.
All  good  success  was  ascribed  to  the  efficacy  of  their  prayers  ;  they  stood  god-
fathers to  all  children,  made  matches  for  all  the  city,  and:  were  the  common  arbitra-
tors of  differences.  At  last,  heaven  was  weary  of  conniving  any  longer  at  their
impious  lives.  Montufar,  who  was  cholerick  in  his  temper,  used  frequently  to  beat
his  valet,  who  could  not  bear  it,  and  had  quitted  his  service  a  hundred  times,  if
Helen,  who  was  more  discreet  than  her  gallant,  had  not  prevented  it  by  appeasing
him  with  fair  words  and  presents.  One  day,  having  drubbed  him  immoderately,
for  little  or  no  reason,  the  boy  got  to  the  door,  and  blinded  by  his  passion,  ran  di-
rectly to  the  magistrates  to  inform  against  these  three  hypocrites,  whom  the
world  took  for  saints.  Helen's  diabolical  spirit  foretold  what  would  happen,  there-
fore advised  Montufar  to  run  off  with  all  the  gold  they  had  in  the  house  and  retire
to  some  place  of  security  till  this  tempest,  which  threatened  them,  had  spent  itself.
It  was  no  sooner  said  than  put  into  execution  ;  they  carried  off  the  most  valuable
things,  and  walking  down  the  street  as  unconcerned  as  if  they  had  dreaded  nothing,
went  out  at  one  gate."  *

Twenty  years  after  Tartu/e  had  been  played,  La  Bruyere  added,  in  the
sixth  edition  of  the  Caracteres,  the  portrait  of  Onuphre  the  hypocrite.  We
give  it  here  below :

1  Translated  by  Mr.  Thomas  Brown,  Mr.  Savage,  and  others      London,  1727.

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        73

"  Onuphre  has  no  other  bed  but  a  cover  of  grey  serge,  but  he  sleeps
upon  cotton  and  down;  he  is  also  dressed  simply  but  comfortably.  I
mean  that  he  wears  some  very  light  clothing  in  summer,  and  some  very
soft  and  woolly  in  winter ;  he  wears  very  fine  shirts,  which  he  takes  very
good  care  to  hide.  He  does  not  say  my  hairshirt  and  my  scourge ;  on  the
contrary,  he  would  pass  then  for  what  he  is,  a  hypocrite,  and  he  wishes  to
pass  for  what  he  is  not,  for  a  devout  man.  It  is  true  that  he  acts  in  such
a  manner  that  people  believe,  without  his  saying  so,  that  he  wears  a  hair-
shirt,  and  that  he  flagellates  himself.  There  are  some  books  lying,  all
over  his  room,  accidentally.  Open  them,  they  are  The  Spiritual  Combat,
The  Inward  Christian,  The  Holy  Year ;  other  books  are  under  lock  and
key.  If  he  walks  through  the  town,  and  if  he  sees  from  afar  a  man  before
whom  it  is  necessary  that  he  should  pretend  to  be  religious,  downcast  eyes,  a
slow  and  modest  gait,  a  collected  air,  are  familiar  to  him  ;  he  plays  his  part.
If  he  enters  a  church,  he  observes,  to  begin  with,  by  whom  he  can  be  seen,
and,  according  to  what  he  has  discovered,  he  kneels  down  and  prays,  or  he
neither  thinks  of  kneeling  down  or  of  praying.  If  a  good  man,  and  one  in
authority,  draws  near  to  him,  who  can  see  and  hear  him,  he  not  only  prays
but  is  lost  in  meditation  ;  he  has  upheavings  of  the  spirit,  he  sighs  aloud ;
but  if  the  good  man  goes  away,  the  latter,  who  sees  him  depart,  gets
calmed  down,  and  no  longer  utters  a  sound.  Another  time  he  enters  a
church,  makes  his  way  through  the  crowd,  chooses  a  place  where  he  can
collect  his  thoughts,  where  everyone  can  see  how  he  humbles  himself.  If
he  hears  courtiers  talking  or  laughing,  or  who  are  less  silent  in  church  than
in  an  ante-chamber,  he  makes  more  noise  than  they  to  get  them  to  be
silent ;  he  begins  again  his  meditation,  which  is  always  a  comparison  be-
tween those  persons  and  himself,  and  by  which  he  does  not  lose.  He
avoids  an  empty  and  solitary  church,  where  he  might  hear  two  masses,
one  after  another,  and  a  sermon,  attend  vespers  and  compline, — all  this
between  God  and  himself,  and  without  anybody  thanking  him  for  it.  He
loves  the  parish  church ;  he  frequents  churches  where  there  are  a  great
many  people ;  people  are  sure  not  to  come  there  for  nothing :  people  are
seen  there.  He  chooses  two  or  three  days  in  the  year,  when,  without  any
necessity  whatever,  he  fasts  or  mortifies  himself;  but  at  the  end  of  the
winter,  he  coughs ;  there  is  something  wrong  in  the  chest ;  he  is  bilious  ;
he  has  an  attack  of  ague,  people  entreat,  urge  him,  and  even  quarrel  with
him,  so  that  he  should  not  keep  his  fasts,  when  he  has  begun  them,  and
he  gives  way  out  of  complaisance.  If  Onuphre  is  named  an  umpire  in  a
quarrel  between  relatives,  or  in  a  lawsuit  amongst  a  family,  he  is  on  the
side  of  the  strongest,  I  mean  the  richest ;  and  he  cannot  persuade  himself
that  a  man  who  has  much  wealth  can  be  in  the  wrong.  If  he  is  on  a
good  footing  with  a  rich  man,  who  is  ignorant  of  his  real  character,  whose
parasite  he  is,  and  who  may  assist  him  very  much,  he  does  not  cajole  that
rich  man's  wife  ;  he  makes  her  no  advances,  nor  a  declaration  of  his  love ;
he  will  run  away,  he  will  leave  his  cloak  behind  him,  if  he  is  not  as  sure  of
her  as  he  is  of  himself ;  he  has  not  the  least  idea  of  employing  devotional
phrases  to  seduce  her ;  he  does  not  employ  them  usually ;  but  on  set  pur-
pose, and  when  they  can  be  useful  to  him,  and  never  when  they  would
only  serve  to  make  him  very  ridiculous.  He  knows  where  to  find  more
sociable  and  more  docile  females  than  the  wife  of  his  friend ;  he  does  not
abandon  them  for  long,  even  if  it  should  only  be  to  have  it  said  that  he  has
withdrawn  from  the  world  for  some  time.  And  who  could  have  any
doubts  about  it,  when  they  see  him  make  again  his  appearance  with  an
emaciated  countenance,  and  like  a  man  who  has  mortified  himself.  More-

74  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

over,  the  women  who  flourish  and  prosper  as  devotees  suit  him,  only  with
this  small  difference,  that  he  neglects  those  who  have  grown  old,  and  that
he  looks  after  the  young  ones,  and  amongst  those  the  most  beautiful  and
the  best  shaped;  that  is  his  attraction  ;  they  go  away  and  he  goes  away;
they  return  and  he  returns ;  they  remain  and  he  remains ;  he  has  the
consolation  of  seeing  them  in  every  place  and  at  every  hoar.  Who  would
not  be  edified  by  that  ?  They  are  pious  and  he  is  pious.  He  does  not
forget  to  take  advantage  of  the  blindness  of  his  friend,  and  of  the  way  he
is  prepossessed  in  his  favour  :  now  he  borrows  money  from  him  ;  again  he
acts  in  such  a  manner  that  his  friend  offers  it  to  him  ;  his  friends  fall  foul
of  him  because  he  has  no  recourse  to  them  when  he  is  in  want.  Some-
times he  will  not  receive  a  farthing  without  giving  his  note  of  hand  for  it
which  he  is  quite  sure  never  to  take  up.  Another  time  he  states,  and  with
a  certain  intonation,  that  he  wants  nothing,  and  that  he  does  when  he  only
wants  a  small  sum  ;  at  some  other  time  he  praises  publicly  the  generosity
of  a  certain  man,  in  order  to  work  upon  his  friend's  honour,  and  to  induce
him  to  put  down  a  very  large  sum  ;  he  does  not  think  of  accaparating  the
whole  of  his  succession,  nor  of  obtaining  a  general  donation  of  all  his
property,  above  all  if  the  question  is  to  take  them  away  from  a  son,  the
lawful  heir.  A  devout  man  is  neither  a  miser,  nor  violent,  nor  unjust,  nor
even  interested.  Onuphre  is  not  devout,  but  he  wishes  to  be  thought  so,
and  through  a  perfect,  though  false  imitation  of  piety,  advances  his  inter-
ests in  an  underhand  manner.  He  therefore  does  not  come  into  collision
with  direct  heirs ;  he  never  insinuates  himself  in  a  family  where  there  is  a
daughter  to  be  provided  for,  and  a  son  to  be  established  ;  their  rights  are
too  powerful  and  too  inviolable ;  they  cannot  be  infringed  without  public
scandal,  and  that  he  fears ;  without  such  an  undertaking  coming  to  the
ears  of  the  prince,  from  whom  he  hides  all  his  dealings,  for  fear  of  being
discovered,  and  of  appearing  in  his  true  character.  He  plots  against  col-
lateral heirs,  who  can  be  attacked  with  more  impunity  ;  he  is  the  terror  of
male  and  female  cousins,  of  the  nephew  and  the  niece ;  the  flatterer  and
the  firm  friend  of  every  uncle  who  has  made  a  fortune.  He  pretends  to  be
the  legitimate  heir  of  every  old  man  who  dies  rich  and  without  children ;
and  the  latter  must  disinherit  him  if  he  wishes  his  relatives  to  receive  what
he  leaves  behind.  If  Onuphre  does  not  find  an  opportunity  to  deprive
them  wholly  of  it,  he  takes  at  least  a  good  part  of  it ;  a  little  slander,  less
than  that,  a  trifling,  slighting  remark,  suffices  for  that  pious  design,  and
such  a  talent  he  possesses  in  the  highest  degree  of  perfection ;  he  often
considers  it  his  obligation  not  to  let  it  lie  by  uselessly ;  according  to  him  it
is  our  duty  to  attack  certain  people ;  and  these  are  the  people  whom  he
does  not  like,  whom  he  wishes  to  harm,  and  whose  spoils  he  longs  for.  He
obtains  what  he  wishes  without  even  taking  the  trouble  of  opening  his
mouth  ;  they  speak  to  him  of  Eudoxe,  he  smiles  or  sighs ;  they  ask  some
more  questions,  they  insist  that  he  should  answer,  he  replies  nothing ;  and
he  is  right,  he  has  said  enough."

We  can  now  compare  La  Bruyere's  careful  delineation  of  the  hypo-
crite with  Moliere's  masterly,  life-like  creation  of  him.  There  is  no  doubt,
in  my  mind,  that  La  Bruyere  wished  to  correct  his  master ;  the  mention
he  makes  of  "  a  hairshirt  and  a  scourge,  of  a  daughter  to  be  provided
for,  and  a  son  to  be  established,"  sufficiently  prove  this.  But  I  do  not
think  he  has  succeeded.  La  Bruyere  has  given  an  almost  photographic
sketch  of  the  canting  hypocrite  such  as  he  appeared  in  1690  ;  he  has  de-
scribed to  us  his  dress,  his  manners,  his  slang,  and  even  the  religious
books  then  in  vogue  :  but  we  feel  all  the  time  that  Onuphre  only  pretends

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        75

to  be  religious,  because  it  was  then  the  fashion  to  be  so,  because  the  king
gave  the  tone  to  the  courtiers  to  be  pious.  In  the  following  reign,  Onu-
phre  would  have  been  most  probably  a  roue,  and  exchanged  his  cloak  of
hypocrisy  for  a  velvet  jacket,  adorned  with  gold  lace ;  he  would  have  for-
saken the  handsome  pious  young  devotees  to  go  and  make  his  appear-
ance at  the  suppers  of  the  Regent.  Onuphre  is  not  a  man :  he  is  only  an
automaton,  set  in  motion  by  every  blast  of  court  favour  or  disfavour  ;  he
is  a  model  of  a  time-serving  couitier.  That  La  Bruyere  may  have  thought
so  himself  is  not  impossible,  for  Onuphre's  portrait  is  to  be  found  in  the
chapter  on  Fashion  amongst  the  delineations  of  the  amateur  of  flowers,
the  collector  of  engravings,  the  lover  of  birds ;  and  immediately  preced-
ing it,  is  a  sketch  of  a  courtier.  If  the  real  hypocrite  had  been  limned,
his  portrait  would  have  found  a  place  in  the  chapter  On  Man,  or  in  that
On  jfudgments.

But  Moliere  gives  us  the  hypocrite  by  nature,  the  man  who  would  be  a
canting  scoundrel,  even  if  it  did  not  pay ;  who  cannot  help  being  so ;
who  is  a  human  being,  and  therefore  not  perfect ;  who  is  a  man,  and  thus
sensually  inclined ;  who  employs  certain  means  to  subdue  his  passions,
and  to  become  a  '*  whited  sepulchre,"  but  who  gives  all  the  more  way  to
them  when  he  imagines  that  he  can  do  so  with  impunity.  Even  from  a
dramatic  point  of  view,  La  Bruyere's  portrait  of  a  man  whom  nothing
can  move,  who  is  always  prudent  and  circumspect,  is  only  possessed  by
one  idea,  has  but  a  single  object  which  he  pursues,  and  who  covers  his
vices  with  such  an  impenetrable  veil,  and  is  for  ever  so  much  on  his  guard
that  he  can  never  be  caught  in  a  snare ;  would  not  make  a  character  fit
for  the  stage,  and  would  disgust  an  audience.  Besides,  how  could  the
arrant  hypocrite  be  punished  unless  he  fell  in  love,  and  that  with  the  wife
of  his  benefactor,  for  otherwise  Orgon  might  perhaps  have  pitied  him  still
and  exclaimed  "  the  poor  man  1"

Moliere's  Tartuffe  is  the  hypocrite  of  all  ages  and  for  all  times,  who
does  not  depend  on  the  meretricious  allurements  of  the  court  to  become
one,  but  who  would  be  one,  I  am  afraid,  even  in  England,  and  at  the
present  day.  Pecksniff  seems  to  me  to  be  a  relative  of  Tartuffe,  although
his  cant  is  more  about  humanity,  and  less  about  religion.  But  I  imagine
Tartuffe  to  have  been  a  man  of  a  rather  florid  complexion,  with  "  red  ears
and  ruddy  lips,"  inclined  to  be  stout,  with  expressive  eyes,  and  very  beau-
tiful, white,  plump  hands,  of  which  he  takes  great  care,  and  which  he  is
very  fond  of  showing.  He  is  always  well  dressed  in  clothes  of  sombre
hue ;  his  linen  is  scrupulously  white ;  his  manners  are  gentlemanlike  and
insinuating  ;  he  is  ever  polite,  but  can  be  firm,  and  shows  sometimes  that
he  can  be  so  ;  he  is  slow  and  impressive  of  speech,  with  an  unctuous  or
rather  oily  flavour ;  he  persuades  now  and  then  some  hysterical  females
of  defective  education,  but  oftener  terrifies  the  old  and  feeble-minded ;  he
is  a  middle-aged  man,  of  rather  goodly  shape,  and  capable  of  inspiring
one  of  those  semi-mystic,  semi-sensual  passions,  of  whose  baneful  existence
evidence  crops  up  at  certain  periods  amongst  so-called  civilized  nations,
e  certainly  never  can  have  been  the  low-bred,  sniffling,  caddish-looking,
soddened.  pasty-faced  beadle,  which  is  generally  represented  as  his  proto-
type on  the  stage.  If  Tartuffe  had  been  such  a  man,  he  would  not  have
obtained  a  footing  at  Orgon's  house ;  and  might  have  entertained  the  idea
of  courting  a  kitchen-wench  or  a  scullery-maid,  but  would  never  have
dared  to  attempt  to  seduce  the  virtuous  and  lady-like  Elmire.

It  has  been  stated  that  Moliere,  in  delineating  Tartuffe,  intended  to  de-
pict the  Abb£  de  Rouquette,  who  became  afterwards  Bishop  of  Aurun.

76        TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

This  town  appears  to  have  been  unfortunate  in  its  episcopal  guides ;  for
Talleyrand,  was  also  for  some  time  bishop  of  that  place.  But  the  identity
of  the  Abbe  de  Rouquette  with  Tartuffe  is  more  than  doubtful,  and  rests
on  a  tradition  that  M.  de  Guilleragues,  who  lived  in  the  hotel  of  the
Prince  de  Conti  with  the  Abbe,  must  have  communicated  to  Moliere
some  of  the  latter's  hypocritical  tricks.  According  to  others,  Tartuffe's
adventure  with  Elmire  happened  to  the  Abbe  at  the  duchess  de  Longue-
ville's  house.  The  duchess  de  Longueville,  a  sister  of  the  great  Conde,
had,  at  the  time  Tartuffe  was  first  represented,  only  just  become  a
widow,  and  was  already  forty-five  years  old,  whilst  the  Abbe  was  four
years  younger.  Although,  therefore,  it  may  have  happened  at  the
duchess's  house,  it  is  very  unlikely  to  have  occurred  with  that  lady
herself.  The  whole  story  appears  doubtful ;  for  at  the  death  of  the
duchess,  her  relatives  chose  de  Rouquette  who,  in  the  meantime  had
become  Bishop  of  Autun,  to  preach  her  funeral  sermon.  This  choice
would  not  have  been  made  if  he  had  disgraced  himself  in  any  way  at
the  noble  lady's  house.  The  Abbe  preached  so  well,  that  Madame  de
Sevigne,  who  was  present,  wrote  to  her  daughter:  "He  was  not  Tar-
tuffe, he  was  not  a  pantaloon,  but  an  eminent  prelate."  At  another  time,
she  wrote  to  the  same  :  "  We  were  obliged  to  go  and  dine  with  M.  d' Au-
tun. The  poor  man!"  This  only  proves  to  my  mind  that  Madame  de
Sevigne  thought  that  the  Abbe  was  like  Tartuffe,  but  is  no  proof  that  Mo-
liere, in  writing  this  comedy,  intended  to  hit  the  rather  worldly-minded
Abbe,  who  is  said  to  have  been  a  great  intriguant,  and  to  have  preached
sermons  which  he  did  not  write,  if  we  may  believe  the  following  epigram,
which  circulated  at  that  time : —

Sermons  penned  by  other  men,

Roquette  preaches,  people  state  ;

I,  who  know  where  they  are  bought,

Say  they  are  his,  at  any  rate.

Another  tradition,  which  rests  upon  even  fewer  grounds,  mentions  that
Louis  XIV.,  one  evening  during  the  campaign  of  1662,  just  at  the  point
of  going  to  dine,  advised  Perefixe,  Bishop  of  Rhodez,  who  had  been  the
king's  teacher,  to  do  likewise.  As  it  was  a  fast-day,  the  bishop  said  he
was  only  going  to  take  a  slight  meal.  When  he  had  retired,  the  king  saw
one  of  the  bystanders  smiling ;  and  upon  his  asking  him  the  reason  of
this,  the  latter  replied  that  His  Majesty  need  not  be  uneasy  about  M.  de
Rhodez,  and  then  told  what  he  had  seen  the  bishop  eat  for  his  dinner.  At
the  mention  of  each  dish,  it  is  said  that  the  king  exclaimed  each  time,
"  The  poor  man !"  and  that  Moliere  was  present  at  this  scene,  and  after-
wards reminded  Louis  XIV.,  of  it.

I  can  only  say  that  all  these  traditions  seem  to  me  very  unlikely.  One
thing  is  certain,  that  the  noun  Tartuffe  is  connected  with  the  old  French
truffe,  truffle,  a  truffle,  and  also  a  jest,  a  fib.  In  cognate  languages,
in  the  Italian  comedia  dett'  arte,  we  find  Truffd  and  Truffaldino,  as
rascally  servants;  in  the  Venetian,  Tofolo  and  Tiritofolo,  a  stout  but
small  knavish  servant ;  in  the  Milanese  dialect,  we  have  Tartuffol ;  a
dotard  as  well  as  a  truffle;  and  in  the  Neapolitan  tongue,  Taratufolo,
a  simpleton.1  All  these  seem  to  be  connected  with  the  low  Latin  word

*It  is  odd  ftaA  fungus,  in  Latin,  a  mushroom,  also  means  "a  dolt;"  so  the  Ital-
ian, zucca,  a.  pumpkin,  is  employed  in  the  same  way.  The  French,  un  melon,  un
concombre,  un  cornichon,  a  girkin,  and  une  citronille,  a  pumpkin,  all  vegetables
which  are  watery  and  faint  in  taste,  are  often  used  to  characterize  a  person  of  weak
intellect.

TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  77

trvffactor,  deceiver,  with  the  augmentative  tra :  hence  tratttfar,  eupho-
nically  tratuffar.  Perhaps  Moliere  may  have  thought  of  some  imaginary
connection  between  the  supposed  erotic  powers  of  the  truffle,  and  the
amativeness  of  the  hypocritical  title-role  of  his  play ;  but,  in  any  case,
he  could  have  found  the  name  tartuffo  in  //  Malmantilc  racquistato,  a
facetious  Italian  poem  by  Lorenzo  Lippi,  which  circulated  in  manu-
script in  France,  long  before  Tartuffe  was  performed.  The  author  of
the  Observations  sur  une  comedie  de  Moliere  (see  Introductory  Notice  to
Don  yuan,  which  appeared  after  Tartuffe's  first  three  acts  had  been
represented  on  the  sixth  day  of  the  Pleasure  of  the  Enchanted  Island,
always  calls  the  hero  of  the  piece  Tartouffle.  Montufar,  the  chief  cha-
racter in  Scarron's  tale,  The  Hypocrites,  probably  from  the  Spanish  tufo,
vapour,  may  also  have  partly  led  Moliere  to  use  the  name  of  his  hero.  In
an  old  French  translation  of  Platina's  De  Honesta  Voluptate,  published
in  1505,  truffe  and  tartuffe  are  used  as  synonymous  words  for  hypo-
crites ;  and  Moliere,  in  his  first  petition  to  the  King,  speaks  of  the  tar-
tuffes,  meaning  the  impostors, — not  using  the  word  as  a  personal,  but
as  a  generic  name.

We  have  already  said  that  the  first  three  acts  of  Tartuffe  were  first
performed  at  Versailles,  on  the  12th  of  May  1664,  and  that  the  king
forbade  it  to  be  given  to  the  public ;  for,  in  the  official  Gazette  of  the
ijth  of  the  same  month,  we  find: — "This  great  monarch  is  careful  to
cut  off  all  the  seeds  of  division  in  the  Church,  and  none  of  his  prede-
cessors bore  ever  more  gloriously  the  title  of  its  Eldest  Son,  which  he
keeps  up  by  that  delicacy  which  he  shows  for  everything  which  regards
it,  as  he  has  shown  it  lately  by  his  prohibiting  the  performance  of  a-
comedy,  called  The  Hypocrite,  which  His  Majesty,  piously  enlightened
in  everything,  judged  absolutely  injurious  to  religion,  and  capable  of
producing  very  dangerous  effects."

The  King  was  staying  at  Fontainebleau  from  the  i6th  of  May  until
the  isth  August  of  the  same  year  (1664),  and  it  was  during  that  time
that  the  Vicar  of  St.  Barthelemy,  Pierre  Roules  (see  Prefatory  Memoir,
Vol.  I.,  presented  to  the  King  his  pamphlet :  Le  Roi  glorieux  au  monde,
ou  Louis  XIV.,  le  plus  glorieux  de  tons  les  rois  du  monde.  In  this  pam-
phlet, which  is  full  of  flattery — I  had  nearly  said  idolatry — of  Louis
XIV.,  Moliere  is  attacked.  I  shall  give  first,  as  a  curiosity,  a  passage
in  which  the  King  is  sufficiently  bespattered  with  praise :  "  There  are
certainly,  on  the  whole  earth  we  live  on,  sufficient  kings,  but  few  who
are,  and  who  can  be  qualified,  and  really  be  called  glorious  kings.
But  amongst  all,  and  even  if  they  should  be  numberless,  Louis  XIV.,
who  reigns  in  France,  has  the  happiness  and  glory  of  belonging  to  them.
And  to  know  that  he  is  in  that  position,  and  to  be  convinced  of  hon-
ouring him  with  respect  in  this  supreme  and  royal  quality  and  dignity,
what  else  is  necessary  but  to  behold  his  grandeur  and  glory,  the  lustre
and  the  brilliant  splendour  of  his  virtues,  the  lofty  elevation  of  his
power,  and  his  very  great  merits,  and  the  esteem  in  which  they  are
held,  or  otherwise  to  measure  him  by  his  countenance ;  but  I  make  a
mistake,  by  the  highest  perfection  amongst  all  the  other  kings  of  the
whole  world.  I  am  not  ignorant  that  comparisons  are  odious,  that  it
is  not  a  title  to  consideration,  nor  a  very  glorious  advantage  to  be  grand
and  eminent,  only  because  others  are  disparaged  and  valued  less  highly.
I  desire,  therefore,  not  to  raise  the  lofty  and  eminent  glory  of  Louis  XIV.,
by  despising  and  lowering  every  one,  but  by  this  characteristic  that  he  has
the  honour  of  being  the  master  and  the  sovereign  of  all  things,  which,

78        TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

without  being  idolaters,  we  worship  and  reverence  publicly  in  his  royal
Majesty,  because  he  is  a  terrestrial  god  and  a  divine  man,  without  exam-
ple and  without  equal,  having  nothing  to  struggle  against  or  to  dispute
with  except  himself."

I  think  this  laudation  is  sufficiently  nauseous.  Let  us  see  now  what
this  pious  vicar  has  to  say  for  Moliere  : — "  A  man,  or  rather,  a  demon  in-
carnate and  dressed  like  a  man,  the  greatest  unbeliever  and  free-thinker
that  ever  existed  even  in  past  ages,  possessed  sufficient  impiety  and
abomination  to  draw  out  of  his  diabolical  mind  a  play  quite  ready  to  be-
come public,  in  having  it  represented  upon  a  stage,  to  make  a  mockery
of  the  whole  Church,  to  contemn  the  most  sacred  character  and  the  most
divine  function  and  that  which  is  most  holy  in  the  Church.  .  .  .  He  de-
served for  this  sacrilegious  and  impious  attempt  a  final,  exemplary  and
public  punishment,  and  even  the  stake,  a  fore-runner  of  the  fires  of  hell,
to  expiate  so  heinous  a  crime  of  high-treason  against  Heaven,  which  aims
at  destroying  the  Catholic  religion,  in  criticising  and  jeering  at  its  most
religious  and  holy  practices.  .  .  .  But  His  Majesty,  after  having  given
him  a  severe  reprimand,  and  animated  by  a  just  wrath,  has,  by  a  trait  of
his  usual  clemency,  in  which  he  imitates  the  essential  gentleness  of  God,
condescendingly  forgiven  him  his  insolence  and  his  demoniacal  boldness,
in  order  to  give  him  time  to  repent  of  it  publicly  and  solemnly  all  his  life.
And  to  stop  successfully  the  exposition  and  the  sale  of  his  impious  and
irreligious  production,  and  of  his  licentious  and  free-thinking  poetry,  he
has  commanded  him,  under  pain  of  death,  to  suppress  and  tear  up,  to
hush  up  and  burn  all  that  was  written  of  it."

Although  this  language  was  pretty  strong,  it  did  not  prevent  the  troupe
of  Moliere  from  being  invited  to  come  to  Fontainebleau,  to  contribute  to
the  amusements  presented  to  Monsignore  Chigi,  the  Pope's  Nuncio.
They  remained  there  from  the  aist  of  July  to  the  i3th  of  August,  and  it
appears  that,  during  that  time,  Moliere  read  to  the  Nuncio  Tartuffe,  and
that  the  Nuncio  did  not  disapprove  of  it.  He  then  presented  to  Louis
XIV.,  the  following  petition  :

Sire,3 — The  aim  of  comedy  being  to  correct  men  by  amusing  them,  I  thought
that  in  the  situation  which  I  occupy,*  I  could  not  do  better  than  attack  by  pictures
full  of  ridicule  the  vices  of  my  age ;  and  hypocrisy  being  no  doubt  not  only  one  of
the  most  usual  among  them,  but  also  one  of  the  most  annoying  as  well  as  most  dan-
gerous, I  had  the  idea,  Sire,  that  I  would  be  rendering  not  a  small  service  to  the  honest
people  of  your  kingdom,  if  I  wrote  a  comedy  that  should  decry  the  hypocrites,  ex-
pose plainly  the  studied  grimaces  of  those  ultra-godly  people,  all  the  covert  scoun-
drelism  of  these  false  coiners  of  devotion,  who  try  to  inveigle  people  with  their
counterfeit  zeal,  and  their  sophistic  charity.

I  have  constructed  this  comedy,  Sire,  with  all  the  care,  and,  as  I  believe,  with
all  the  circumspection  demanded  by  the  delicacy  of  the  material ;  and  the  better
to  preserve  the  esteem  and  respect  due  to  the  truly  pious,  I  have  distinguished  as
much  as  I  could  the  character  which  I  had  to  sketch.  I  have  left  no  room  for
equivocal  interpretation,  I  have  left  out  everything  that  could  confound  the  good
with  the  bad,  and  have  employed  in  this  picture  only  those  express  colours  and
essential  traits  which  would  serve  to  reveal,  at  the  first  glance,  the  veritable  and
downright  hypocrite.  Nevertheless,  all  my  precautions  have  been  useless.  Peo-
ple have  taken  advantage,  Sire,  of  the  delicacy  of  your  feelings  on  the  subject  of
religion,  and  have  succeeded  in  probing  you  in  your  only  vulnerable  spot,  I  mean

'This  petition  is  a  reply  to  the  pamphlet  Le  Roi  glorieux  au  monde,  and  is
often  quoted  by  de  Rochemont  in  his  Observations  (see  Introductory  Notice  to
Don  yuan,  Vol.  II.)

4  This  situation  was  that  of  manager  of  the  troupe  of  the  theatre  of  the  Palais
Royal.

TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  79

your  respect  for  sacred  things.  The  Tartuffes  on  the  sly,  have  been  artful  enough
to  find  grace  in  your  Majesty's  sight;  in  short,  the  originals  have  caused  the  copy
to  be  suppressed,  no  matter  how  innocent  and  startlingly  like  it  may  have  been.

Great  as  was  the  blow  caused  by  the  suppression  of  this  work,  my  misfortune  has
been  mitigated  by  the  manner  in  which  your  Majesty  explained  yourself  on  this
subject ; 6  and  I  have  seen,  Sire,  that  all  cause  of  complaint  was  taken  away  froiii
me,  when  you  declared  kindly  that  you  found  nothing  objectionable  in  this  comedy,
which  you  nevertheless  forbade  me  to  produce  in  public.

But  notwithstanding  this  glorious  declaration  of  the  greatest  and  most  enlightened
monarch  in  the  universe,  even  notwithstanding  the  approbation  of  Monsignor  the
Nuncio,  and  the  majority  of  our  prelates,  who,  when  I  privately  read  my  work  to
them,  have  all  fully  concurred  in  the  sentiments  of  your  Majesty, — notwithstanding
all  this,  I  say,  a  book  has  been  published  which  openly  contradicts  all  those  august
testimonies.*  Your  Majesty  may  say  what  he  pleases,  the  Nuncio  and  the  pre-
lates may  proclaim  their  judgment  as  much  as  they  like,  my  comedy,  without
having  even  been  seen,  is  diabolical,  and  as  diabolical  is  my  brain ;  I  am  a  demon  incar-
nate, and  dressed  like  a  man,  an  unbeliever,  an  impious  wretch,  deserving  of  exem-
plary punishment.  It  is  not  enough  that  the  flames  expiate  my  offence  in  public,  I
should  be  quit  of  it  at  too  cheap  a  rate ;  the  charitable  zeal  of  this  gallant  and  good
man  hardly  cares  to  stop  there ;  he  requires  that  I  shall  find  no  mercy  at  the  hands
of  God,  he  insists  absolutely  that  I  must  be  damned  ;  that  is  a  settled  affair.

This  book,  Sire,  has  been  presented  to  your  Majesty,  and  you  can  yourself  doubt-
less judge  how  annoying  it  is  to  me  to  see  myself  daily  exposed  to  the  insults  of
these  gentlemen  ;  the  harm  these  slanders  do  me  in  the  eyes  of  the  world,  whether
they  are  to  be  meekly  borne,  and  the  interest  I  have  to  rid  myself  of  its  imposture,
and  to  show  the  public  that  my  comedy  is  nothing  less  than  what  it  is  said  to  be.
I  shall  not  say  anything,  Sire,  about  the  claims  due  to  my  reputation,  or  to  the
justification  of  the  innocence  of  my  work  in  the  eyes  of  the  world ;  enlightened
Kings,  like  you,  have  no  need  to  have  people's  wishes  pointed  out  to  them;  they
perceive,  like  God,  our  wants,  and  know  better  than  we  do,  what  they  ought  to
grant  us.7  It  is  sufficient  for  me  to  place  my  interests  in  your  Majesty's  hands,
and  to  await  respectfully  from  him  whatever  he  may  be  pleased  to  ordain  on  the
subject.

Although  the  King  did  not  yet  allow  Tartuffe  to  be  performed  in
public,  the  first  three  acts  were  played,  by  order  of  Monsieur,  the  only
brother  of  the  King,  on  the  2$th  of  September  1664,  at  Villers-Cotterets,
before  the  King  and  the  whole  court ;  and  the  complete  comedy,  in  five
acts,  was  played  at  Raincy,  the  seat  of  the  Princess  Palatine,  and  by
order  of  the  Prince  de  Conde",  on  the  agth  of  November  1664,  and  on  the
8th  of  November  of  the  following  year.  During  all  this  time  Moliere's
influence  at  court  had  been  strengthened;  the  Misanthrope  had  been
successfully  played ;  he  had  contributed  during  the  winter,  1666-1667,
several  comedies  to  the  Ballet  des  Muses,  and  when,  in  the  summer  of
the  latter  year,  the  King  set  out  for  his  campaign  in  Flanders,  Moliere,
reckoning  upon  a  verbal  authorization  of  Louis,  brought  out  Tartuffe
at  the  Palais-Royal,  on  the  sth  of  August  1667,  under  the  name  of  The
Impostor.  Tartuffe  became  a  layman,  and  was  called  Panulphe ;  he  wore
a  little  hat,  long  hair,  a  large  collar,  a  sword,  and  lace  all  over  his  coat ;
whilst  some  passages  were  altogether  suppressed  or  toned  down.  But
the  next  day  the  play  was  forbidden  by  order  of  the  first  President  of
the  Parliament  of  Paris,  M.  de  Lamoignon.  On  the  Sth  of  the  same
month,  two  actors  of  MoliSre's  troupe,  La  Grange  and  La  Thorilliere,
started  off  in  a  post-chaise,  in  order  to  go  and  present  to  the  King,
who  was  at  that  time  before  Lille,  the  following  petition  :

•See  Introductory  Notice  to  the  Princess  of  Elis.

•  This  refers  to  Le  Roiglorieux  au  monde,  and  Moliere  quotes  all  the  phrases
from  that  pamphlet.

*  Moliere  imitates  here  the  language  of  his  accuser  de  Routes.

8o  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

SIRE, — It  is  a  very  bold  step  on  my  part  to  come  and  trouble  a  great  monarch  in
the  midst  of  his  glorious  conquests  ;  but  in  the  position  in  which  I  am,  Sire,  where
am  I  to  find  protection  except  in  the  place  where  I  have  come  to  seek  for  it?  And
what  am  I  to  invoke  against  the  authority  of  the  power  that  overwhelms  me,  unless
it  be  the  source  of  that  power  and  authority,  the  just  dispenser  of  the  absolute  com-
mands, the  sovereign  judge,  and  the  master  of  all  things.

Until  now,  Sire,  my  comedy  has  not  met  with  your  Majesty's  favor.  In  vain
have  I  produced  it  under  the  title  of  The  Impostor,  and  disguised  the  personage
beneath  the  garb  of  a  man  of  the  world  ;  8  vainly  have  I  given  him  a  small  hat
long  hair,  a  great  collar,  a  sword,  and  lace  over  the  whole  of  his  dress  ;  in  vain
have  I  modified  it  in  several  places,  and  carefully  cut  out  everything  that' I  deemed
could  furnish  the  shadow  of  a  pretext  to  the  celebrated  originals  of  the  portrait  I
wanted  to  paint ;  all  has  been  of  no  use.  The  cabal  has  re-awoke  at  the  simple
conjectures  which  they  may  have  had  about  the  matter.  They  have  found  means
to  surprise  minds,  who,  on  any  other  subject,  profess  never  to  allow  themselves  to
be  surprised.9  No  sooner  did  my  comedy  appear  than  it  has  found  itself  struck
down  by  the  blow  of  a  power  which  is  entitled  to  respect ;  and  all  I  have  been  able
to  do  in  this  struggle,  in  order  to  save  myself  from  the  burst  of  this  tempest,  was  to
say  that  your  Majesty  had  had  the  kindness  to  allow  me  the  representation,  and
that  I  did  not  think  there  was  any  need  to  ask  this  permission  from  others,  seeing
that  it  was  your  decree  only  which  had  prohibited  it.

I  doubt  not,  Sire,  that  the  people  whom  I  depict  in  my  comedy  will  employ
many  artifices  with  your  Majesty,  and  will  try  to  enlist  among  their  party  many
truly  pious,  who  are  the  more  susceptible  of  being  deceived,  because  they  judge
others  by  themselves.  They  have  the  knack  of  investing  their  intentions  with
most  beautiful  colours.  Whatever  face  they  may  put  upon  them,  it  is  not  really
God's  interest  that  causes  them  to  move  in  this  ;  they  have  shown  this  sufficiently
well  in  the  comedies  which  they  have  allowed  so  often  to  be  played  in  public  with-
out saying  a  word  about  them.  Those  only  attacked  piety  and  religion,  for  which
they  care  very  little  ;  but  this  one  attacks  and  shows  them  up  personally,  and  that  is
what  they  cannot  tolerate.10  They  cannot  forgive  me  for  having  unmasked  their  im-
postures to  the  eyes  of  the  whole  world  ;  and,  doubtlessly,  they  will  not  fail  to  tell
your  Majesty  that  everybody  has  been  scandalized  at  my  comedy.  But  the  real
truth,  Sire,  is  that  all  Paris  has  only  been  scandalized  at  the  prohibition  of  it;  that
the  most  scrupulous  have  found  the  representation  of  it  most  salutary  ;  and  that
people  have  been  astonished  that  persons  of  such  well-known  probity  should  show
such  great  deference  for  those  whom  the  whole  world  ought  to  hold  in  horror,  and
should  be  so  opposed  to  that  true  piety  which  they  profess.

I  await  respectfully  the  verdict  which  your  Majesty  will  deign  to  pronounce
upon  this  subject;  but  certain  is  it,  Sire,  that  I  must  no  longer  think  of  writing
comedies,  if  the  Tartuffes  should  gain  the  day,  because  they  will,  through  this,  as-
sume the  right  to  prosecute  me  more  than  ever,  and  find  something  to  cavil  at
in  the  most  innocent  things  that  will  fall  from  my  pen.

May  your  kindness,  Sire,  vouchsafe  to  protect  me  against  their  venomous  hatred  !
and  permit  me  to  hope  that  at  your  return  from  so  glorious  a  campaign,  I  may  be
able  to  divert  your  Majesty  after  the  fatigues  of  your  conquests,  to  provide  you
with  some  innocent  pleasures  after  such  noble  works,  and  to  make  the  monarch
smile  who  caused  all  Europe  to  tremble.  n

*  This  pre-supposes  that  Moliere  intended  to  make  originally  a  clergyman  of
Tartuffe.

9  Moliere  speaks  here  of  the  first  President  of  the  Parliament  of  Paris,  M.  de
Lamoignon,  who  had  forbidden  Tartuffe  to  be  played.

10  This  phrase  is  nearly  word  for  word  what  the  Prince  de  Conde  replied  to  Louis
XIV.  with  regard  to  Scaramouch,  a  hermit.     In  the  preface   to  Tartuffe,  which
was  printed  two  years  after  this  petition  had  been  presented,  Moliere  names  the

post  from  Paris  to  obtain  an  audience  from  the  King  respecting  said  prohibit.  His
Majesty  was  at  the  siege  of  Lille  in  Flanders,  where  we  were  very  well  received.
Monsieur  gave  us  his  protection  as  usual,  and  His  Majesty  sent  us  word  that,  at

TARTUFKE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        81

On  the  nth  of  August  of  the  same  year  (1667)  there  appeared  an  order
of  Hardouin,  Archbishop  of  Paris,  addressed  to  all  the  vicars  and  curates
of  Paris  and  the  suburbs,  "  forbidding  all  persons  of  our  diocese  to  repre-
sent, read,  or  hear  read  the  above  mentioned  comedy  {Tartuffe},  either
publicly  or  privately,  under  any  name  or  pretext  whatever,  and  that  un-
der pain  of  excommunication."  On  the  aoth  of  the  same  month,  there
was  published  a  Lettre  sur  la  comedie  de  V  Imposteur,  which  has  sometimes
been  attributed  to  Moliere  himself,  but  which  bears  no  marks  of  his  style
or  of  his  clearness  of  expression.  It  is  possible,  however,  that  one  of
his  friends  may  have  written  it,  and  brought  forward  some  of  the  author's
arguments,  but  not  in  Moliere's  words.  This  letter,  which  is  rather  pro-
lix, begins  with  a  careful  and  interesting  analysis  of  the  play,  well  worth
reading,  even  at  the  present_time,  and  which  shows  the  alterations  which
it  underwent  since  its  first  representation,  and  ends  with  two  reflections — •
the  first,  that  some  people  think  that  the  religious  subjects  should  never
be  mentioned  on  the  stage.  The  author  combats  this  opinion  by  stating
that  "  religion  is  only  the  perfection  of  reason,  at  least  as  regards  morality  ;
that  it  purifies  and  elevates  it,  that  it  dispels  only  the  darkness  which  sin
has  spread  in  the  place  where  it  dwells ;  in  short,  that  religion  is  only  a
more  perfect  reason."  He  further  argues  that  though  "religion  has  its
places  and  times  fixed  for  its  sacrifices,  its  ceremonies,  and  its  other
mysteries,  ....  its  truths,  expressed  in  words,  belong  to  all  times  and
all  places ;"  that  the  ancients  never  scrupled  to  produce  their  gods  upon
the  stage,  and  that  in  early  times  Passion-plays  were  represented.  His
second  reflection  is  that  this  comedy  has  given  a  fatal  blow  to  what  is
called  "  solid  gallantry,"  and  that  "though  preachers  thunder  against  it,
confessors  reprove  it,  pastors  threaten,  well  constituted  minds  lament  it,
parents,  husbands,  and  masters  incessantly  watch  over  it,  and  labour  con-
tinually and  strenuously  in  vain  to  check  the  impetuous  torrent  of  impu-
rity which  desolates  France ;  it  is,  however,  considered  ridiculous  amongst
fashionable  people  not  to  be  carried  away  by  it ;  and  that  some  glory  not
more  in  loving  incontinency  than  others  in  reproving  it."

Lille  surrendered  on  the  2yth  of  August.  Louis  XIV.  returned  to  Saint
Germain  on  the  7th  of  September  ;  but  no  permission  was  given  to  play
Tartuffe,  and  on  the  25th  of  September,  1667,  the  theatre  of  the  Palais-
Royal  opened  with  The  Misanthrope,  But  during  the  last  months  of  the
year,  Moliere  did  not  play.  I  suppose  he  exemplified  the  truth  of  the
saying,  "  Hope  deferred  maketh  the  heart  sick."  He  played  again,  how-
ever, in  the  beginning  of  the  year  1668,  had  Amphitryon  performed  on
the  I3th  of  January,  George  Dandin  and  The  Miser  in  the  same  year.
At  last,  after  two  years'  waiting,  and  after  Tartuffe  had  been  read  repeat-
edly at  the  houses  of  the  principal  nobility  and  gentry,  and  been  played
anew,  on  the  aoth  of  September,  1668,  at  Chantilly,  the  seat  of  the  Prince
de  Conde\  in  the  presence  of  Monsieur  and  his  wife,  permission  was
granted  to  play  it;  and  on  the  5th  of  February,  1669,  it  appeared  for  the
first  time  before  the  public.  That  very  day,  Moliere  sent  to  the  King  the
following  petition : —

SIRE. — A  most  respectable  physician,12  whose  patient  I  have  the  honour  to  be,

his  return  to  Paris,  he  would  have  the  comedy  of  Tartuffe  examined,  and  that  we
should  play  it.  After  this,  we  came  back.  The  journey  cost  a  thousand  francs  to
the  company,  They  did  not  play  during  our  voyage,  and  we  resumed  acting  the
asth  September.

18  His  name  was  Mauvillain,  according  to  Grimarest.  It  was  in  speaking  of
Maurillain  that  Louis  XIV.  said  one  day  to  Moliere:  "You  have  got  a  physician,

82        TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

promises  me,  and  will  bind  himself  by  a  legal  act,  executed  before  a  notary,  to
make  me  live  thirty  years  longer  if  I  can  procure  him  a  favour  of  your  Majesty.
In  answer  to  his  promise,  I  have  told  him  that  I  do  not  want  as  much,  and  that  I
would  be  satisfied  if  he  would  only  promise  me  not  to  kill  me.  This  favour,  Sire,  is  a
canonry  in  your  royal  palace  of  Vincennes,  vacant  through  the  death  of  ...

May  I  still  venture  to  ask  this  favour  of  your  Majesty,  the  very  day  of  the  great
resurrection  of  Tartuffe,  resuscitated  by  your  kindness  ?  I  am,  through  this  first
favour,  reconciled  with  the  devotees  :  and  through  the  second,  I  shall  be  reconciled
with  the  doctors.  For  me  it  is,  no  doubt,  too  many  favours  at  one  time,  but  per-
haps it  is  not  too  many  for  your  Majesty ;  and  1  await,  with  a  little  respectful  ex-
pectation, the  answer  to  my  petition.

The  Tartuffe  was  a  great  success,  and  was  played  nearly  forty-four  con-
secutive times  at  the  Palais-Royal,  before  crowded  houses,  besides  five
times  at  noblemen's  seats.

At  the  end  of  the  year  1669,  appeared  a  liftle  piece,  in  one  act,  and  in
verse,  called  La  Critique  du  Tartuffe,  which  seems  never  to  have  been
played,  and  preceded  by  a  satire,  also  in  verse,  in  which  Pradon,  the
great  enemy  of  Boileau,  appears  to  have  had  a  hand.  In  it,  is  stated
that  the  great  success  of  Moliere's  play  was  owing  to  its  having  been  for-
bidden so  long.  In  the  Critique  itself,  it  is  said  that  "  he  steals  from  a
thousand  authors,  Spanish  nonsense,  but  the  age  allows  it,  and  in  spite  of
all  my  sense  ;  the  poor  man!  .  .  .  I  pardon  him."

The  storms  that  were  now  raised  against  Tartuffe  originated  chiefly
with  the  clergy.  Bourdaloue,  in  his  sermon  for  the  seventh  Sunday  after
Easter — preached  in  1669 — pretends  that  "  as  true  and  false  piety  have  a
great  number  of  actions  in  common,  and  as  the  external  appearances  of
both  are  almost  wholly  similar,  the  traits  with  which  false  religion  are  de-
picted harm  the  true  one."  This,  he  says,  happens  "  when  they  put  upon
the  stage  and  expose  to  public  mockery  an  imaginary,  or  even,  if  you
like,  a  real  hypocrite,  and,  by  portraying  him,  turn  into  ridicule  the
holiest  things,  the  fear  for  the  judgments  of  God,  the  horror  against  sin,
the  most  praiseworthy  and  the  most  Christian  practices  in  themselves."  1S

It  may  not  be  amiss  to  state  here  that  Bossuet,  in  the  Maximes  et  Re-
flexions sur  la  Comedie,  which  were  written  in  answer  to  the  Lettre  d'un

what  does  he  do  to  you?"  "Sire,"  answered  Moliere,  "we  chat  together;  he
prescribes  remedies;  I  do  not  take  them,  and  I  get  better."  M.  Maurice  Ray-
naud,  in  les  Medecins  au  temps  de  Moliere,  says :  "  Mauvillain  had  numerous
friends  amongst  the  Faculty.  He  showed  some  talents  as  professor  of  botany,  and
later,  assisted  Fagon  in  the  Hortus  regius.  The  theses  defended,  whilst  he  was

her,  wholly  devoted  to  the  prescribing  ot  many  drugs,  praising  the  singular  virtues
of  the  rhinoceros'  horn,  of  the  sapphire,  the  emerald,  the  besoar,  and  above  all,  of
antimony,  and  making  great  fun  of  the  antiquated  partisans  of  senna  and  syrup
of  pale  roses, — or  are  about  some  facetious  subject  like :  An  pallidis  virginum
coloribus  Venus,  giving  scope  to  all  kinds  of  equivocal  sayings  or  broad  jokes,
told  in  very  good  Latin.  All  this  seems  to  show  us  a  man  of  very  independent
character,  very  jovial,  very  irritable,  naturally  inclined  to  opposition,  and,  in  the
quarrels  of  the  school  of  medicine,  acting  the  part  of  the  leader  of  a  party."
Moliere  obtained  the  canonry  he  asked  for  the  son  of  this  physician.  Let  me  draw
attention  to  the  free  and  easy  style  in  which  Moliere  addresses  the  King.

13  Bourdaloue  seems  not  to  have  remembered  the  saying  of  Cleante  (Act  i.,  Scene
6)  to  Orgon — "  There  are  hypocrites  in  religion  as  well  as  pretenders  to  courage.

.  .  .  I  know  no  character  more  worthy  of  esteem  than  the  truly  devout,  nor
anything  in  the  world  more  noble  or  beautiful  than  the  holy  fervour  of  sincere
piety  :  so  I  know  nothing  more  odious  than  the  whited  sepulchre  of  a  pretended
zealot."

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        83

Theologien,  translated  into  French  from  the  Italian  of  Father  Caffaro,  a
Sicilian  Theatine  monk,  defending  the  stage,  and  which  Maximes  were
only  published  in  1694,  twenty  years  after  Moliere's  death,  attacks  Mo-
liere, and  says:  "  we  must  then  consider  as  honest  the  impieties  and  infa-
mies with  which  the  comedies  of  Moliere  are  filled,  and  not  count  amongst
the  pieces,  represented  in  the  present  times,  those  of  an  author  who  died,
so  to  speak,  before  our  eyes,  and  who  even  now  fills  the  stage  with  the
coarsest  equivoques,  with  which  the  ears  of  Christians  have  ever  been
poisoned.  .  .  .  Only  think  if  you  will  dare  to  maintain  before  Heaven
plays  in  which  virtue  and  piety  are  always  ridiculed,  corruption  always
excused  and  always  made  laughable."  And  speaking  of  Moliere's  death,
that  same  eminent  and  charitable  divine  says  :  "  Posterity  will  know,  per-
haps, the  end  of  this  author  and  comedian,  who,  in  performing  his  Malade
Imaginaire,  or  his  Medecin  par  force,  received  the  last  stroke  of  that  ill-
ness of  which  he  died  a  few  hours  later,  and  passed  from  the  jokes  upon
the  stage,  amongst  which  he  almost  breathed  his  last  sigh,  before  the  tribu-
nal of  Him  who  has  said,  '  Woe  unto  you  that  laugh  now,  ye  shall
weep.' "

The  purpose  of  Moliere's  play  is  most  powerfully  defended  by  himself
in  his  preface ;  and  that  he  is  now  considered  as  having  been  right,  is
proved  by  its  having  taken  a  permanent  place  on  nearly  every  European
stage ;  at  least  the  stage  of  every  country  where  hypocrites  are  found,
men  who  use  religion  as  a  cloak  in  order  to  further  their  own  personal  or
carnal  designs.

The  skill  with  which  Moliere  has  drawn  the  hypocrite  of  his  time,  a
sensualist  and  a  casuist,  and  the  way  in  which,  during  two  acts,  he  pre-
pares and  leads  up  to  his  appearance,  are  very  great.  Tartuffe's  first  scene
with  Elmire  is  described  in  plain,  but  not  indelicate,  language,  of  which
the  truth  is  for  all  ages ;  it  is  only  surpassed  by  Tartuffe's  second  scene
with  Orgon's  wife,  in  which  he  begins  to  show  his  suspicion,  is  extremely
cautious  and  guarded,  but  at  last,  blinded  by  passion,  falls  into  the  trap
laid  for  him.  The  blasphemous  cant  used  by  the  hypocrite  when  he  bares
what  he  calls  his  soul  in  order  to  poison  the  air  with  the  expression  of  his
foul  wishes,  and  at  last  says  that  "  the  greatest  offence  of  sin  lies  in  scan-
dal and  riot,  but  that  it  is  no  sin  if  you  sin  by  stealth,"  is,  and  will  be  true
at  all  times.  The  credulity  of  Orgon  is  thought  by  some  to  be  very  im-  ,
probable ;  but  can  we  go  through  the  world  without  seeing  every  day
examples  of  it  ?  If  there  were  no  credulous  people,  how  could  political,
religious,  legal,  medical,  financial,  commercial,  and.  I  am  sorry  to  say,
literary  quacks,  thrive  now-a-days  so  wonderfully  well !  The  impetuous
Damis,  fee  sensible,  clear-headed  Ceante,  the  plain-spoken  waiting-maid
Dorine,  the  bigoted,  infatuated  Madame  Pernelle,  and  the  modest  Elmire,
are  all  drawn  with  masterly  hand,  and  bear  the  impress  of  the  genius
which  created  them.

It  may  be  interesting  to  give  Napoleon  I.'s  opinion  about  Tartuffe,  and
about  its  performance  having  been  prohibited  :  "  After  dinner,"  says  Las-
Cases  in  the  Memorial  de  Saint  Helene,  "  the  Emperor  read  Tartuffe  to
us,  but  he  was  so  tired  that  he  could  not  finish  it ;  he  put  down  the  book,
and  after  having  paid  a  just  tribute  of  praises  to  Moliere,  he  ended  in  a
manner  we  did  not  expect,  and  said,  '  Certainly  the  whole  of  Tartuffe  is
masterly  ;  it  is  one  of  the  best  works  of  an  inimitable  man  ;  however,  this
comedy  has  such  a  character  that  I  am  not  at  all  astonished  that  its  ap-
pearance upon  the  stage  has  been  the  subject  of  repeated  negotiations  at
Versailles,  and  of  much  hesitation  in  the  mind  of  Louis  XIV.  If  I  am

84  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

astonished  at  anything,  it  is  that  the  king  allowed  it  to  be  performed.  In
my  opinion  it  presents  religious  feeling  under  colours  so  odious  ;  a  certain
scene  is  so  decidedly  and  completely  indecent,  that,  as  regards  myself,  I
do  not  hesitate  to  say  that  if  that  comedy  had  been  written  in  my  time,
I  would  not  have  permitted  it  to  be  brought  out.'"

M.  Eugene  Despois,  the  learned  editor  of  Moliere 's  plays,  now  in  course
of  publication  in  Paris,  says  in  Le  Theatre  franfais  sous  Louis  XIV.  that
only  since  Don  Juan  and  Tartuffe  had  been  performed,  did  the  clergy
act  rigidly  against  plays  and  actors,  and  brought  into  use  laws  which  had
long  lain  dormant.  He  also  makes  in  the  same  book  the  following  remarks
about  Tartuffe  :  "  When  we  speak  of  this  immortal  picture  of  hypocrisy,
we  must  at  least  be  ourselves  sincere,  and  not  pretend  to  be  astonished  at
the  storm  of  anger  raised  by  this  comedy.  It  might  be  indeed  supposed
that  only  the  Tartuffes  were  irritated,  and  that  whoever  said  anything
against  that  play  showed  himself  a  hypocrite.  We  do  not  know  precisely
what  were  the  intentions  of  Moliere,  and  if  he  himself  knew  them  ;  but
could  he  have  any  illusion  about  the  import  of  his  play  ?  Nearly  all  those
distinctions  which  Moliere  made  between  true  and  false  devotion,  and
which  are  still  repeated  about  this  comedy,  disappeared ;  and  just  as  Mo-
liere, in  attacking  much  less  serious  things,  the  pretended  Precieuses,  might
indeed  expect  that  the  real  Precieuses  would  feel  themselves  attacked,  so
this  twofold  caricature  of  a  sincere  religious  feeling  in  Orgon,  and  a  lying
religious  feeling  in  Tartuffe,  gave  rise  to  comparisons  which  Moliere  ought
to  have  foreseen.  We  must  be  honest.  I  ask  every  sincere  believer,  whatever
his  creed  may  be — religious  philosophical,  or  political — would  he  be  glad  to
see  an  opportunity  given  to  his  adversaries  of  confounding  too  easily  what
may  be  respectable  in  the  convictions  of  some,  comical  or  odious  in  those
of  others  ?  Let  us  abandon  for  a  moment  the  opinions  which  separate  us  ;
there  is  one,  at  least,  which  unites  us  all,  at  least  in  theory — patriotism,
which  has  also  its  Orgons  and  Tartuffes.  What  sincere  patriot  would  not
see  an  inconvenience  in  the  pourtraying  of  the  abuses,  the  absurdities,  and
even  the  hypocrisy  of  patriotism,  at  least  as  each  one  understands  it  for
himself  and  his  party  ?  A  sincere  man,  if  he  is  accustomed  to  scrutinize
his  conscience,  finds  it  difficult  enough  to  understand  the  ideas  of  others,
which  he  does  not  share,  and  expects  to  meet  the  same  prepossessions,
and  to  hear  the  name  of  calculated  hypocrisy  given  to  what  perhaps  is
only  his  weakness  or  inconsistency.  Yes,  Bourdaloue  and  others,  just  as
little  suspected  of  resembling  Tartuffe,  had  a  right  to  be  scandalized,  and
to  consider  that  comedy  dangerous.  These  cursory  remarks  are  made  only
to  excuse  prepossessions,  which  were  but  too  natural,  and  not  an  intole-
rance, and  above  all  calumnies,  which  are  never  to  be  excused."

I  shall  only  remark  on  this,  that  if  the  stage  is  intended  "  to  hold  the
mirror  up  to  nature,"  there  can  be  no  harm  in  showing  up  hypocrites,
either  social,  religious,  philosophical,  or  political.  The  real  honest  be-
liever, the  true  philosopher,  or  the  sincere  patriot,  are  in  nowise  affected
by  these  caricatures.  As  regards  tolerance  for  the  opinions  of  others,
which  we  do  not  share,  this  is  a  question  of  philosophy,  but  has  nothing
to  do  with  comedy,  or,  if  it  has,  it  tends  to  destroy  all  comedy,  which  is
nearly  always  the  exposition  of  a  folly,  or  of  a  vice  made  ridiculous ;  or,
as  Moliere  himself  says  in  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles^  "  the  business
of  comedy  is  to  represent,  in  a  general  way,  all  the  faults  of  men,  and
especially  of  men  of  our  day."

MSee  The  Impromptu  of  Versailles,  Vol.  I.,  Scene  iii.  See  also  what  Molier*
says  in  the  same  play  about  the  subjects  for  Comedy,  p.  458.

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        85

Monsieur  Paul  Albert,  in  his  excellent  work,  La  Literature  francaise
au  170  siecle,  says  :  "  The  endings  of  Moliere's  plays  have  often  been  criti-
cised. As  a  general  rule,  he  does  not  seem  to  care  sufficiently  about
them  ;  they  arrive  a  little  at  haphazard,  and  because  the  play  must  have
some  ending  or  other.  Some  even  are  very  far-fetched,  and  quite  con-
trary to  all  rules  of  art,  as,  for  example,  the  intervention  of  the  exempt  in
Tartuffe.  I  do  not  know  how  the  critics  manage  to  get  Moliere  out  of
this  scrape,  but  I  should  like  to  be  allowed  to  venture  upon  an  explana-
tion. The  compulsory  ending  of  every  Tragedy  is  the  violent  death  of
one  of  the  personages  ;  the  compulsory  ending  of  every  Comedy  is  a  mar-
riage :  that  was  traditional,  and  exists  even  at  the  present  time.  As  mar-
riage was  considered  a  happy  ending,  every  comedy  was  to  end  well.
But  this  could  only  happen%  when  the  hero,  the  very  centre  of  the  play,
and  the  pivot  on  which  the  action  turns,  was  either  conquered,  or  would
suddenly  change  his  determination.  In  reality,  he  appears  from  the  very
first  scenes  as  the  most  serious,  the  only  obstacle  to  the  union  of  the
youthful  lover  and  the  fair  object  of  his  love.  He  is  opposed  to  it  because
his  ruling  passion,  his  egotism,  is  not  satisfied  by  it.  The  Citizen  who
apes  the  Nobleman,  the  Miser,  the  Hypochondriac,  the  Blue  Stocking,  the
Devotee,  repel  a  son-in-law  who  would  not  suit  their  daughter,  because
they  wish  for  a  son-in-law  who  would  suit  themselves,  a  noble,  a  rich  man,
a  physician,  a  pedant,  a  devotee.  How  can  one  conquer  that  resistance,
destroy  that  tyranny  ?  Let  us  look  at  society:  How  are  things  going  on
there  ?  At  the  present  time,  a  young  girl  who  is  persecuted  to  marry  some
one  whom  she  does  not  love,  can  always  say  '  nay'  at  the  last  moment,  and
the  law  protects  her  as  well  as  it  can  ;  as  soon  as  she  is  twenty  years  old,
she  can  say  '  yes '  to  whomsoever  she  likes,  and  without  consulting  any
one.15  It  was  not  thus  in  the  seventeenth  century ;  it  was  necessary  to
yield  or  to  enter  a  convent.  This  was  one  of  the  darkest  sides  of  that  society
so  much  lauded.  At  every  stage  of  it  we  find  despotism.  What  has  the
comic  poet  to  do  ?  The  rules  of  his  art  compel  him  to  end  his  play  with
a  marriage  ;  but  the  reality  which  he  has  before  his  eyes  gives  the  lie  to
the  theory.  Neither  Orgon,  M.  Jourdain,  Argan,  nor  Philaminte  yield ;
the  young  girls  are  sacrificed.  Is  it  moreover  likely  that,  in  so  unequal  a
struggle,  victory  should  belong  to  the  weaker?  The  parents  have  on  their
side  authority,  custom,  the  inflexibility  of  a  foregone  conclusion,  the
violence  of  an  exclusive  passion  ;  the  poor  child  has  only  her  tears  and
entreaties;  very  eloquent,  it  is  true,  and  which,  for  one  moment,  move  the
hearts  of  the  cruel  parents,  but  the  sacrifice  is  at  last  accomplished.  Be-
tween the  theatrical  law,  which  prescribed  a  happy  ending,  and  the  social
law,  which  presented  another,  Moliere  was  obliged  to  take  the  first ;  but
he  took  it  so  unwillingly,  and  so  grumpily,  if  we  may  say  so,  that  we  can
perceive  that  the  second  ending  seemed  to  him  to  be  the  only  true  one.
Here  the  thinker  betrays  himself,  and  the  work,  outwardly  so  light  and
lively,  discovers  gloomy  depths.  It  seems  that  Moliere  cries  to  us :  '  Do
not  believe  in  these  happy  endings  ;  you  see  that  they  are  unlikely,  impos-
sible. No,  the  officer  will  not  interfere  to  prevent  Orgon  from  being

1*  Before  the  first  French  Revolution,  marriage  in  France  could  take  place  only
in  church,  and  the  priest  could  refuse  or  grant  it ;  now  only  the  civil  marriage  is
legal.  But  every  child,  whose  parents  are  alive,  must  have  their  permission  even
now  (1877),  before  he  or  she  can  legally  marry ;  and  only  when  a  young  man  is
twenty-three  and  a  young  girl  twenty  years  old,  can  they  compel  their  parents  to
give  mem  that  permission,  by  sending  to  them  a  legal  officer  with  what  is  oddly
enough  called  une  sommation  nspcctueust.

86  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

robbed,  or  Tartuffe  from  entering  the  house  into  which  she  has  stolen,  or,
perhaps,  even  the  bed  of  the  daughter  of  his  victim.  Tartuffe  is  stronger
than  Orgon ;  Tartuffe  will  triumph.  The  fire  from  heaven  will  not  fell
upon  Don  Juan  ;  the  old  legend  says  so,  but  Don  Juan  will  quietly  con-
tinue the  course  of  his  acts  of  scoundrelism,  only  he  will  put  on  the  mask
of  religion,  and,  after  having  frightened  people,  he  will  edify  them  in  order
to  deceive  them  better.  The  hypochondriac  will  not  become  a  physician ;
that  is  a  funny  excuse  which  I  have  imagined  to  rid  myself  of  a  difficulty  ;
he  will  take  Diafoirus  as  his  son-in-law,  who  will  physic  him  for  nothing.
The  Citizen  who  apes  the  Nobleman  will  not  be  taken  in  by  the  farce  of
the  Mamamouchi :  he  will  give  his  daughter  to  a  friend  of  Dorante,  to
some  ruined  nobleman,  who  will  ruin  him,  and  laugh  at  him.  Above  all,
do  not  believe  that  Celimene's  gallants  will  leave  her,  indignant  at  her
coquettish  actions ;  Celimene  shall  always  have  plenty  of  followers ;  the
more  treacherous  she  is,  the  greater  will  be  the  desire  to  please  her ;  Al-
ceste  will  come  back  the  first,  will  throw  himself  at  her  feet,  and  beg  her
pardon  ;  she  will  only  know  solitude  when  she  will  be  old  and  wrinkled.
Justice  is  not  of  this  world,  sincerity  is  not  of  this  world  ;  the  strong  and
the  wicked  devour  the  good  and  the  meek.  Perhaps  a  poet  will  be  born
one  day  who  will  dare  to  show  to  society,  society  such  as  it  is,  but  that  day
is  yet  far  off !  I  moralize  and  make  fun  as  well  as  I  can,  about  marriage,
which  is  everything ;  in  two  hundred  years  people  will  moralize  still,  but
will  no  longer  make  fun.  You  shall  behold  your  miseries  face  to  face,
and  that  will  kill  all  joy  in  you.  Has  Moliere  gone  as  far  as  this  ?  I  do
not  know.  Who  can  pretend  to  set  limits  to  the  man  who  has  written
The  Misanthrope,  Tartuffe,  Don  Juan  ?  For  the  last  two  hundred  years
the  critics  turn  these  strange  works  in  and  out,  and  in  all  directions,  and
have  come  to  no  conclusion  as  yet."

Goethe  says,  in  his  Conversations,  "  a  piece  to  be  so  constructed  as  to
be  fit  for  the  theatre,  must  be  symbolical,  that  is  to  say,  each  incident
must  be  significant  in  itself,  and  lead  to  another  still  more  important.  The
Tartuffe  of  Moliere  is,  in  this  respect,  a  great  example.  Only  think  what
an  introduction  is  the  first  scene !  From  the  very  beginning,  everything
is  highly  significant,  and  leads  us  to  expect  something  still  more  import-
ant which  is  to  come  .  .  !  that  of  the  Tartuffe  comes  only  once  into
the  world  ....  it  is  the  greatest  and  best  thing  that  exists  of  the  kind."

In  another  part  of  his  works,  the  great  German  author  says :  ''  The  Tar-
tuffe of  Moliere  makes  us  hate  him ;  he  is  a  criminal  who  pretends,  like  a
hypocrite,  to  be  pious  and  moral,  in  order  to  ruin  completely  an  honest
family  ;  the  ending  by  a  police  officer  is  therefore  quite  natural,  and  very
well  received.  Latterly,  this  piece  has  been  played  again,  and  brought
forward,  because  it  served  to  show  the  underhand  dealings  of  a  certain
class  of  men  who  threatened  to  pervert  Government.  It  was  not  the  beau-
ty and  genius  of  the  work  which  were  felt  and  applauded ;  the  play  was
only  a  hostile  weapon ;  the  different  parties  were  engaged,  the  one  wished
to  destroy  the  evils  which  the  other  tried  to  spread.  That  which  appeared
striking  in  the  piece,  was  that  the  subject  is  still  of  the  day,  and  that  it
will  never  lose  its  effect,  on  account  of  the  art  with  which  it  has  been
treated."

Moliere  had  the  Tartuffe  printed  at  his  own  cost,  and  corrected  or  wrote
it  so  carefully,  that  there  is  hardly  any  difference  between  the  first  and  the
three  following  editions  of  this  comedy.

The  German'dramatist,  Karl  Gutzkow,  wrote  in  1844,  a  comedy  in  five
acts,  and  in  prose,  called  Das  Urbild  des  Tartuffe  ( The  Exemplar  of  Tar-

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        87

tvffe),  of  which  he  admits  that  he  planned  it  chiefly  with  a  view  to  the
circumstances  which  then  took  place  in  Germany,  and  to  the  severe  mea-
sures which  the  Government  and  police  took,  at  that  time,  to  suppress  all
obnoxious  ideas  in  print.  With  the  exception  of  a  complete  neglect  of  all
historical  accuracy,  this  play  is  very  good,  and  the  intrigue  depends  chief-
ly on  the  interdiction  to  play  the  Tartuffe.  The  president,  La  Roquette,
is  the  model  of  a  Tartuffe,  and  he  employs  all  the  means  in  his  power  to
prevent  Moliere's  play  from  being  performed.  Moliere,  Louis  XIV.,  and
the  minister  of  police,  Lionne,  are  also  chief  characters  in  the  German
play,  as  well  as  La  Chapelle,  who,  according  to  Gutzkow,  is  not  the  friend,
but  an  envious  enemy,  of  Moliere.  The  King  is  in  love  with  Armande
Bejart,  who  is  engaged  to  be  married  to  Moliere  ;  he  refuses  his  consent
to  the  performance  of  Tartuffe,  because  he  has  been  informed  that  the
expected  profits  of  the  comedy  will  serve  for  the  buying  of  the  trousseau
of  Armande.  He  gives  his  consent  at  last,  because  the  actress  has  prom-
ised to  wear  a  blue  neckerchief,  if  she  will  lend  a  favourable  ear  to  his
wishes,  and  in  the  contrary  case  a  yellow  one  ;  and  Tartuffe  is  the  only
play  which  is  ready  to  be  acted,  in  which  she  can  wear  a  neckerchief.  In
the  fifth  act,  which  takes  place  in  the  ante-chamber  of  the  King's  private
box  in  the  theatre,  Moliere  wears  the  dress  of  La  Roquette,  and  is  mis-
taken for  him,  whilst  the  president  is  mistaken  for  the  actor ;  Armande
refuses  to  listen  to  Louis  XIV.,  who  consoles  himself  with  the  thought  of
encouraging,  in  his  own  peculiar  way,  the  budding  talents  and  charms  of
her  younger  sister,  Madeleine.  Tartuffe  is  a  success,  and  the  hypocrite
La  Roquette  ends  the  play  with  the  following  words :  "  They  may  drive
us  away  like  wolves ;  we  come  back  like  foxes.  Revenge  yourselves  !
Revenge  yourselves  !  We  shall  do  the  same.  (In  a  very  humble  voice)  I
shall  enter  the  order  of  Jesuits.'1

Goldoni,  the  Italian  dramatist,  wrote  also  a  play  called  Moliere,  of  which
he  gives  an  outline  in  his  autobiography,  where  he  says — "  I  was  ac-
quainted with  Moliere,  and  respected  this  master  of  the  art  as  highly  as
the  Piedmontese,  and  I  was  seized  instantly  with  a  desire  to  give  them  a
convincing  proof  of  it.  I  immediately  composed  a  comedy  in  five  acts,
and  in  Verse,  without  masks  or  change  of  scene,  of  which  the  title  and
principal  subject  were  Moliere  himself.  The  argument  was  taken  from
two  anecdotes  of  his  private  life ;  the  one,  his  projected  marriage  with  Isa-
belle,  the  daughter  of  Bejart ;  and  the  other,  the  prohibition  of  his  Tar-
tuffe. These  two  historical  facts  accord  so  well  together,  that  the  unity
of  action  is  perfectly  observed.  The  impostors  of  Paris,  alarmed  at  the
comedy  of  Moliere,  knew  that  the  author  had  sent  to  the  camp,  where
Louis  XIV.,  then  was,  to  obtain  permission  for  its  representation,  and
they  were  afraid  lest  the  revocation  of  the  prohibition  should  be  obtained.

"  I  employed  in  my  piece  a  person  of  the  name  of  Pirlon,  a  hypocrite
in  every  sense  of  the  word,  who  introduces  himself  into  the  author's
house,  discovers  to  La  Bejart  Moliere's  love  for  her  daughter,  of  which
she  was  yet  ignorant,  engages  her  to  quit  her  companion  and  director ;  be-
haves in  the  same  manner  to  Isabelle,  holding  up  to  her  the  situation  of
an  actress  as  the  road  to  perdition,  and  endeavours  to  seduce  La  Foret,
their  waiting-woman,  who,  more  adroit  than  her  mistresses,  dupes  the
duper,  inspires  him  with  a  love  for  her,  and  takes  his  cloak  and  hat  from
him  to  give  to  Moliere,  who  appears  on  the  stage  with  the  dress  of  the
impostor.  I  was  bold  enough  to  exhibit  it  in  my  piece,  a  much  more
marked  hypocrite  than  that  of  Moliere ;  but  hypocrites  had  then  lost  a
great  deal  of  their  ancient  credit  in  Italy.

88  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

"  During  the  interval  between  the  fourth  and  last  act  of  my  comedy,
iheTartu/^e  of  Moliere  is  acted  in  the  theatre  of  the  Hotel  de  Bourgogne  ;
all  the  characters  of  my  piece  make  their  appearance  in  the  fifth  act,  for
the  purpose  of  complimenting  Moliere ;  Pirlon,  concealed  in  a  closet,
where  he  was  expecting  La  Foret,  is  forced  to  come  forth  in  the  presence
of  the  spectators,  and  is  assailed  with  the  sarcasms  which  he  so  richly  de-
served :  and  Moliere,  to  add  to  his  joy  and  happiness,  marries  Isabelle,  in
spite  of  the  mother,  who  aspired  to  the  conquest  of  her  future  son-in-law.

"  In  this  piece  are  to  be  found  several  details  of  the  life  of  Moliere.
The  character  of  Valerio  is  Baron,  an  actor  of  Moliere's  company.
Leander  is  a  copy  of  La  Chapelle,  a  friend  of  the  author,  and  often  men-
tioned in  the  account  of  his  life.  .  .  .  This  work  is  in  verse.  ...  As  the
subject  was  a  French  author,  who  wrote  largely  in  that  style,  it  became
necessary  to  imitate  him."

I  have  read  Goldoni's  play,  and  do  not  think  that  he  has  either  suc-
ceeded in  giving  a  good  idea  of  the  character  of  Moliere,  or  of  a  hypo-
crite. Moliere,  in  the  Italian  play,  in  a  conversation  with  Valerio  (Act
iv.  scene  8)  says,  "  Philosophy  teaches  us,  and  experience  proves  it  to  us,
that  no  other  love  exists  here  below  but  self-love."  This  is  certainly  not
in  conformity  with  Moliere's  life.  Pirlon,  the  hypocrite,  when  discovered
repents,  and  begs  pardon  on  his  knees ;  and  this  also  Tartuffe  would  not
have  done.  Mercier  has  remodelled  and  altered  the  Moliere  of  Goldoni
for  the  French  stage  ;  where  it  was  represented,  but  it  did  not  meet  with
much  success.

In  the  fifth  volume  of  the  "Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Moliere,  Lon-
don, 1732,"  is  found  a  translation  of  Tartuffe,  under  the  name  of  The
Impostor,  written  by  Mr.  Martin  Clare,  a  schoolmaster.  He  dedicates  it
to  Mr.  Wyndham,  of  Clower-Wall,  in  Gloucestershire,  who  appears  to
have  had  ''  a  very  promising  eldest  son,"  a  pupil  of  the  pedagogue,  and
who  was  going  to  play  a  part  in  the  translation  of  Moli&re's  comedy.
Unforeseen  circumstances  prevented  this  piece  being  brought  out;  but
Mr.  Clare — I  suppose  with  an  eye  to  future  favours — says  that  the  young
gentleman  would,  he  knows,  have  done  '•  great  justice  to  any  one  of  the
parts."  Mr.  Clare  might,  like  Hamlet,  exclaim,  "  O  my  prophetic  soul."
The  dedication  is  as  follows :

SIR,

I  take  leave  to  offer  You  the  Fruit  of  a  few  leisure  Hours,  spent  in  translating
one  of  the  most  celebrated  pieces  of  the  famous  Moliere.  It  was  first  intended  to
be  exhibited  as  a  publick  Exercise  by  my  YOUNG  GENTLEMAN  (in  which  Your
very  promising  eldest  son,  whose  Tuition  You  have  been  pleased  to  intrust  me
•with,  would,  I  know  do  great  Justice  to  any  one  of  the  Parts)  but  on  Account  of  the
useful  Publication  of  this  excellent  Comic  Writer,  I  am  inclin'd  to  send  it  into  the
world  under  Your  Patronage  and  Protection.

The  Original  has  occasionally  given  Offence  to  the  Body  of  Zealots  and  Hypo-
crites in  France,  and  wherever  else  their  Numbers  were  considerable  ;  but  from
its  intrinsick  Merit,  the  Truth  of  the  Drawing,  and  Justness  of  the  colouring,  this
particular  Piece  has  never  wanted  for  Patrons,  among  Persons  of  the  greatest
Sense,  Virtue,  Learning,  and  Taste,  to  support  it  against  the  violent  Opposition  it
has  met  with.

What  Success  the  Translation  may  have  I  cannot  foresee.  But  as  it  is  thrown
under  the  Guardianship  of  a  Gentleman,  who,  both  in  publick  and  private  Life,
has  always  been  a  profess'd  Enemy  to  Artifice,  Disguise,  and  Fraud,  I  _am  en-
courag'd  to  hope,  that  a  moderate  Version  of  a  Piece,  wherein  those  Vices  are
finely  expos'd  will  not  be,  for  Your  sake,  ill  received  by  the  Publick.  I  am  with
creat  Regard,  SIR,  Your  most  Obliged,  and  Obedient.  Humble  Servant,

MARTIN  CLARE.

Academy  in  Soh->  Square.  London,  "July  25,  1732.

TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  89

There  is  also  a  Prologue  to  Mr.  Clare's  Impostor,  spoken  by  a  young
gentleman  of  the  Academy  in  Soho  Square,  when  acted  there  in  the  year
1726  ;  and  an  Epilogue  spoken  by  another  young  gentleman  in  the  char-
acter of  "  Madam  Parnelle,"  which  I  doubt  very  much  if  any  school-
master would  let  one  of  his  pupils  recite  at  the  present  time.

Matthew  Melbourne,  an  actor  of  considerable  eminence,  belonging  to
the  Duke  of  York's  theatre  in  the  reign  of  King  Charles  II.,  wrote  a
translation,  in  blank  verse,  of  the  Tartuffe;  which  he  dedicated  to  tin-
Right  Honourable  Henry,  Lord  Howard  of  Norfolk.  The  translator,  a
Roman  Catholic,  seems  to  have  been  accused,  by  the  well  known  Dr.  Ti-
tus Gates,  of  complicity  in  the  supposed  Catholic  plot,  for  he  was  impris-
oned, and  died  in  Newgate  in  1679.  His  translation,  called  Tartuffe,  or
the  French  Puritan — Puritan  stands  for  Huguenot — was  acted  at  the  The-
atre-Royal, 1670,  and,  according  to  the  author's  account,  seems  to  have
met  with  great  success.  There  are  several  new  scenes  added  in  the  Eng-
lish play  which  are  not  found  in  the  original  comedy,  and  which  certainly
do  not  improve  it.  They  are  the  following : — At  the  end  of  the  first  act
of  The  French  Puritan,  Laurence,  Tartuffe's  man-servant,  and  Dorina,
the  waiting-maid,  meet;  he  behaves  rather  rudely  to  her;  but  she  dis-
covers that  he  is  not  a  servant,  but  a  confederate  of  his  supposed  master,
because  he  addresses  the  latter  only  by  his  name.  Tartuffe  who,  in  the
original  play,  does  not  appear  until  the  second  scene  of  the  third  act,  in
this  translation,  "passes  (now)  over  the  stage  in  a  demure  posture."  In
the  fifth  scene  of  the  second  act  of  the  English  play,  Laurence  confesses
to  Dorina  that  he  is  not  so  holy  as  he  seems ;  and  in  order  to  prove  it
sings  a  very  indecent  song.  In  the  eighth  scene  of  the  third  act,  Tartuffe
unfolds  his  plans  broadly  to  Laurence  ;  whilst,  in  the  ninth  scene  of  the
same  act,  Madame  Pernelle  expresses  her  delight  to  "  Flypote"  that  her
grandson  is  disinherited  in  favour  of  Tartuffe.  In  the  second  scene  of  the
fourth  act,  Laurence  advises  Dorina  to  procure  a  meeting  between  Elmire
and  Tartuffe,  and  to  let  Orgon  be  a  secret  witness  of  it.  In  the  original
French  play,  Elmire  plans  the  meeting  herself.  The  fifth  act  of  The
French  Puritan  differs  also  from  Moliere's  comedy ;  Laurence  betrays  his
master,  and  produces  the  cabinet  and  writings  which  Tartuffe  had  appro-
priated ;  and  then  all  the  characters  of  the  play  end  with  a  dance  !

Crowne  wrote  a  play,  The  English  Friar,  acted  in  1690,  of  which  the
hypocrite,  Father  Finical,  is  certainly  suggested  by  Tartuffe.  Nobody
can  read  the  last  scene  of  the  fifth  act  of  the  English  play  without  becom-
ing convinced  of  this.  Some  of  the  very  words  of  Tartuffe,  Crowne
puts  into  Finical's  mouth.

The  Nonjuror,  a  very  successful  comedy,  by  Colley  Gibber,  acted  at
Drury  Lane,  Dec.  6th,  1717,  is  another  imitation  of  Tartuffe.  In  the
dedication  to  the  King,  Gibber,  with  an  eye  to  business,  says  that  "  the
Sullen  and  Disaffected,  ....  for  want  of  proper  Amusement,  often  enter
into  Wild  and  Seditious  Schemes  to  reform."  Of  course,  the  most  pro-
per amusement  is  the  Theatre,  and  to  prove  this  further,  he  says  :  "  It
has  even  discovered  the  Strength  and  Number  to  be  much  less  than  may

have  been  artfully  insinuated of  which  your  Majesty  may  have

lately  seen  an  Instance,  in  the  Insuppressible  acclamations  that  were
given  on  your  appearing  to  Honour  this  Play  with  your  Royal  Presence.1'
For  this  dedication,  Gibber  received  two  hundred  pounds  from  George  I.
Dr.  Wolff  is  a  close  copy  from  the  French  original,  although  the  English
dramatist  says  (in  his  Apology)  that  it  was  his  intention  to  pourtray  "  an
English  popish  priest  lurking  under  the  doctrine  of  our  own  church,  to

90        TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

raise  his  fortune  upon  the  ruin  of  a  worthy  gentleman,  whom  his  dissem-
bled sanctity  had  seduced  into  the  treasonable  cause  of  a  Roman  Catho-
lic outlaw.''  The  parts  of  Dorinathe  waiting-maid,  Cleante,  and  Madame
Pernelle  are  omitted;  but  that  of  Marianne  (Maria)  is  improved,  and  has
been  made  one  of  the  best  coquettes  on  the  stage.  Gibber  has  been  ac-
cused of  having  stolen  the  plot,  characters,  incidents,  and  most  part  of
the  language  from  Medbourne  ;  but  this  is  untrue.  What  he  has  taken
from  him  is  the  servant  Charles  (Laurence),  who  also  betrays  his  mas-
ter. The  prologue  of  The  Nonjuror,  written  by  Rowe,  is  chiefly  ad-
dressed to  the  Jacobites,  and  ends  thus : —

"  Ship  off,  ye  Slaves,  and  seek  some  passive  Land,
Where  Tyrants  after  your  own  Hearts  command,
To  your  Transalpine  Master's  Rule  resort,
And  fill  an  empty  abdicated  Court.
Turn  your  Possessions  here  to  ready  Rhino,
And  buy  ye  Lands  and  Lordships  at  Urbino."

Macaulay  in  his  History  of  England,  8vo,  1855,  Vol.  III.,  ch.  xiv.,
"General  character  of  the  Nonjuring  Clergy,''  states,  "the  public  voice
loudly  accused  many  nonjurors  of  requiting  the  hospitality  of  their  bene-
factors with  villany  as  black  as  that  of  the  hypocrite  depicted  in  the  mas-
terpiece of  Moliere.  Indeed,  when  Gibber  undertook  to  adapt  that  noble
comedy  to  the  English  stage,  he  made  his  Tartuffe  a  nonjuror ;  and
Johnson,  who  cannot  be  supposed  to  have  been  prejudiced  against  the
nonjurors,  frankly  owned  that  Gibber  had  done  them  no  wrong.''

According  to  Maidment  and  Logan's  Introductory  Notice  to  The
English  Friar,  Gibber  owed  a  great  deal  of  his  success  to  Crowne's  play  :
"  For  instance,  Father  Finical  becomes  a  bishop,  so  does  Dr.  Wolff;  both
priests  are  of  an  amorous  complexion  ;  Finical  courts  the  maid,  Wolff
the  mistress,  both  are  detected,  and  pretty  much  in  the  same  manner.
The  Biographia  Dramatica  says,  '  The  Coquet  Maria  is  truly  original,
and  most  elegantly  spirited  ;  '  is  not  this  precisely  the  character  of  Laura,
the  eldest  daughter  of  Lord  Stately,  who  is  described  amongst  the  Dra-
matis Personal '  a  great  Gallant  and  Coquet  ? '  Not  to  multiply  points  of  '
resemblance,  it  is  plain  that  Gibber  had  some  remembrance  of  The  English
Friar  when  he  was  preparing  the  Nonjuror  for  the  stage."

It  is  said  that  Pope  wrote  "  a  Compleate  Key  to  The  Nonjuror,"  under
the  name  of  Joseph  Guy,  in  which  a  comparison  is  drawn — and  not  in
the  choicest  language — between  Moliere's  Tartuffe  and  Gibber's  Nonjuror,
greatly — and  justly  so — to  the  disadvantage  of  the  latter.  Among  other
compliments,  it  is  said :  "  Mr.  Gibber  did  not  want  an  old  woman  to
strengthen  the  bigotry  of  her  weak  son  (Gibber  had  not  plagiarized  Ma-
dame Pernelle),  and  therefore  has  made  that  son  a  very  old  woman."

On  June  zoth.  1718,  Medbourne's  translation  of  Tartuffe,  which  had
not  been  acted  for  thirty  years,  was  performed  at  Lincoln's  Inn-Fields,
with  a  prologue,  said  to  be  written  by  Pope  in  imitation  of  Rowe,  and
ending  almost  in  his  very  words,  thus :

"  Ship  off,  ye  Saints,  and  seek  some  righteous  Land,
Where  Pastors  after  your  own  Hearts  command;
Like  Criminals  adjudg'd  to  leave  the  nation,
Go,  take  the  Benefit  of  Transportation.
Turn  your  possessions  here  to  ready  Rhino,
And  Preach  abroad  by  Jure  non  Divino."

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.        91

Isaac  Bickerstaffe  altered  Colley  Gibber's  play,  and  called  it  The  Hypo-
crite, which  was  acted  at  Drury  Lane  on  the  I7th  of  November  1768.
This  is  The  Nonjuror,  with  the  names  altered,  the  bitter  attacks  against
Jacobites  and  Nonjurors,  and  a  good  deal  of  the  spirit  left  out,  Madame
Pernelle  (old  Lady  Lambert),  from  Tartuffe,  added,  and  a  new  cha-
racter,— which  I  venture  to  think  very  vulgar — Mawworm,  inserted.
The  hypocrite  is  called  Dr.  Cantwell,  the  credulous  Orgon,  Sir  John  Lam-
bert, and  the  coquette,  Charlotte.

Sheridan,  in  The  School  for  Scandal,  has  partly  imitated  Tartuffe  in
Joseph  Surface,  and  the  third  scene  of  the  fourth  act  of  his  play  seems
to  me  based  upon  the  fifth  scene  of  the  fourth  act  of  Tartuffe ;  it  is
only  based  upon,  not  borrowed  from,  Moliere.

Mr.  John  Oxenford,  the  eminent  theatrical  critic,  has  also  written  a
translation  of  Tartuffe,  in  blank  verse,  which  was  performed,  with  great
success,  some  years  ago,  at  the  Adelphi  Theatre,  London ;  this  play  has
never  been  printed.

PREFACE.16

THIS  is  a  comedy  about  which  there  has  been  a  great  deal  ot
noise,  which  has  been  for  a  long  time  persecuted ;  and  the
people  whom  it  holds  up  have  well  shown  that  they  are  the
most  powerful  in  France  of  all  those  whom  I  have  hitherto
portrayed.  The  marquises,  the  blue  stockings,  the  cuckolds
and  the  doctors,  have  quietly  suffered  themselves  to  be  repre-
sented, and  have  pretended  to  be  amused,  in  common  with  all
the  world,  at  the  sketches  which  I  have  made  of  them  ;  but
the  hypocrites  have  not  taken  the  joke.  At  first  they  were
somewhat  amazed,  and  found  it  strange  that  I  should  have
had  the  presumption  to  make  free  with  their  grimaces,  and
wish  to  decry  a  trade  much  indulged  in  by  honest  people.  It
is  a  crime  which  they  could  not  pardon  me,  and  they  have  all
risen  'up  in  arms  against  my  comedy  with  a  terrible  fury.
They  took  particular  care  not  to  attack  it  from  a  point  of  view
where  it  wounded  them — they  have  too  much  policy  for  that,
and  are  too  knowing  to  lay  bare  the  bottoms  of  their  hearts.
In  accordance  with  their  laudable  customs,  they  have  con-
cealed their  interests  beneath  the  cloak  of  God's  cause ;  and
to  listen  to  them,  The  Tartuffe  is  a  piece  that  offends  piety.
It  is,  from  beginning  to  end,  full  of  abominations,  and  nothing
is  found  in  it  but  what  deserves  the  fire.  Every  syllable  in  it
is  impious  ;  the  gesticulations  themselves  are  criminal ;  and
the  least  glance  of  the  eye,  the  slightest  shake  of  the  head,
conceal  mysteries  which  they  find  means  to  explain  to  my
disadvantage.

Of  little  avail  was  it  to  submit  it  to  the  criticism  of  my
friends,  and  to  the  censorship  of  the  public ;  the  corrections
which  I  have  made,  the  judgment  of  the  King  and  the  Queen,
who  have  seen  it ;  the  approbation  of  the  great  princes  and

18  This  preface  was  written  for  the  first  edition  of  the   Tartuffe,  in  1669,  and  is
therefore  posterior  to  the  petitions  given  in  the  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play.

93

94  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

the  great  ministers,  who  honoured  the  performance  with  their
presence;  the  testimony  of  people  of  worth,  who  found  it  in-
structing— all  this  was  of  no  use.  They  will  not  abate  one
jot;  and  they  still  continue,  every  day,  to  set  their  indiscreet
zealots  on  me  in  public,  who  piously  load  me  with  insults,  and
charitably  consign  me  to  perdition.

I  would  care  very  little  for  what  they  could  say,  were  it  not
for  their  artfulness  in  bringing  people  whom  I  respect  to  be  at
enmity  with  me,  and  in  enlisting  among  their  ranks  the  truly
good,  whose  good  faith  they  take  advantage  of,  and  who,  by
the  warmth  of  their  interest  in  the  cause  of  Heaven,  are  apt  to
receive  the  impresssions  which  they  wish  to  give  them.  It  is
this  which  compels  me  to  defend  myself.  It  is  with  the  truly
pious  that  I  everywhere  wish  to  justify  myself  as  to  the  ar-
rangement of  my  comedy ;  and  I  implore  them,  with  all  my
heart,  not  to  condemn  things  before  they  have  seen  them,  to
divest  themselves  of  all  bias,  and  not  to  be  the  tool  of  the  pas-
sions of  those  whose  grimaces  are  a  disgrace  to  them.

If  they  will  take  the  trouble  to  examine  my  comedy  in  good
faith,  they  will  perceive,  doubtless,  the  honesty  of  my  inten-
tions everywhere,  and  that  it  is  not  intended  to  hold  sacred
things  up  to  ridicule ;  that  I  have  treated  it  with  every  precau-
tion which  the  delicacy  of  the  subject  required  ;  and  that  I
have  employed  every  possible  art  and  care  plainly  to  show
the  difference  between  the  character  of  the  hypocrite  and  that
of  the  truly  devout.  For  this  purpose  I  have  devoted  two  en-
tire acts  to  prepare  my  audience  for  the  advent  of  my  scoun-
drel. He  does  not  make  the  spectator  waver  for  an  instant ;
he  is  known  immediately  by  the  marks  which  I  have  given
him ;  and,  from  first  to  last,  he  does  not  utter  a  word,  nor
make  a  movement,  but  what  depicts  to  the  beholder  the  char-
acter of  a  wicked  man,  in  violent  contrast  to  the  really  good
one  whom  I  have  placed  in  opposition  to  him.

I  am  well  aware  that,  in  reply,  those  gentlemen  have  en-
deavoured to  insinuate  that  the  stage  is  not  fit  for  the  discus-
sion of  these  subjects  ;  but,  by  their  leave,  I  ask  them  upon
what  they  base  this  beautiful  maxim.  It  is  a  theory  which
they  only  advance,  and  which  they  do  not  prove  by  any
means ;  and  it  would  doubtless,  not  be  difficult  to  show  them
that,  with  the  ancients  comedy  derived  its  origin  from  religion,
and  was  a  part  of  their  mysteries  ;  that  the  Spaniards,  our
neighbours,  never  celebrate  a  feast  in  which  comedy  is  not
mixed  up  ;  and  that,  even  amongst  us  it  owes  its  birth  to  the
cares  of  a  brotherhood  to  which  the  h&tel  de  Bourgogne  still
belongs ;  that  it  was  a  place  given  to  them  to  represent  in  it
the  most  important  mysteries  of  our  faith;  that  comedies
printed  in  Gothic  characters,  under  the  name  of  a  doctor  of

TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  95

the  Sorbonne,  may  still  be  seen  there  ;  and,  without  carrying
the  matter  so  far,  that,  in  our  days,  sacred  pieces  of  M.  de
Corneille17  have  been  performed,  which  were  the  admiration
of  the  whole  of  France.  If  it  be  the  aim  of  comedy  to  correct
man's  vices,  then  I  do  not  see  for  what  reason  there  should  be
a  privileged  class.  Such  a  one  is,  in  the  State,  decidedly
more  dangerous  in  its  consequences  than  any  other ;  and  we
have  seen  that  the  stage  possesses  a  great  virtue  as  a  correct-
ive medium.  The  most  beautiful  passages  in  a  serious  moral
are  most  frequently  less  powerful  than  those  of  a  satire  ;  and
nothing  admonishes  the  majority  of  people  better  than  the
pourtrayal  of  their  faults.  To  expose  vices  to  the  ridicule  of  all
the  world  is  a  severe  blow  to  them.  Reprehensions  are  easily
suffered,  but  not  so  ridicule.  People  do  not  mind  being
wicked;  but  they  object  to  being  made  ridiculous.

The  reproach  against  me  is  that  I  have  put  pious  terms  in
the  mouth  of  my  impostor.  How  could  I  avoid  it,  wishing  to
represent  the  character  of  a  hypocrite  accurately  ?  It  is  suffi-
cient, I  think,  that  I  show  the  criminal  motives  which  make
him  say  these  things,  and  that  I  have  eliminated  from  them
the  sacred  terms,  the  bad  use  of  which  might  have  caused
pain.18  "  But  in  the  fourth  act  he  gives  vent  to  a  pernicious
moral."  But  has  not  this  moral  been  dinned  into  everybody's
ears  ? 19  Does  it  say  aught  that  is  new  in  my  comedy  ?  And
is  there  any  fear  that  things  so  universally  detested  shall  leave
any  impression  on  men's  minds  ?  that  I  can  make  them  dan-
gerous by  introducing  them  on  the  stage ;  that  they  are  likely
to  receive  any  authority  from  the  lips  of  a  scoundrel  ?  There
is  not  the  least  indication  of  that ;  and  one  ought  to  approve
the  comedy  of  Tartuffe,  or  condemn  all  comedies  wholesale.

It  is  that  which  people  have  attacked  furiously  of  late  ;  and
never  has  the  stage  been  so  furiously  tilted  at.  I  cannot  deny
that  there  have  been  Fathers  of  the  Church  who  have  con-
demned comedy ;  but  neither  can  it  be  denied  to  me  that
there  have  been  some  who  have  treated  it  more  leniently.
Thus  the  authority  upon  which  people  seek  to  found  their
censorship  is  destroyed  by  this  division ;  and  all  that  can  be
deduced  from  this  diversity  of  opinions  in  equally  enlightened
minds,  is  that  they  have  regarded  comedy  from  a  different
point  of  view,  and  that  while  some  have  looked  at  it  in  its
purifying  influence,  others  have  considered  it  in  its  corrupting

w  Polyeucte ;  and  Thtodore,  virgin  and  martyr.

18  Moliere  alludes  here  to  a  line  of  Tartuffe,  in  the  eighth  scene  of  the  third  act,
which  was  in  the  first  representation,  "  Forgive  him,  O  Heaven !    as  I   forgive
him."

19  Moliere  speaks  of  the  false  casuistical  morals  attacked  by  Pascal  in  the  sev-
enth Provinciale.

96  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

tendency,  and  confounded  it  with  those  vile  spectacles,  rightly
named  exhibitions  of  turpitude.

And  in  fact,  since  we  have  to  argue  upon  things,  and  not
upon  words;  and  that  the  majority  of  contradictions  cannot
well  be  reconciled,  and  that  the  same  word  often  envelops  two
opposite  meanings,  we  have  but  to  lift  the  veil  of  the  equivo-
cal, and  to  look  what  comedy  is  in  itself,  to  see  whether  it  is
to  be  condemned.  It  is,  doubtless,  well  known  that,  being
nothing  else  but  an  ingenious  poem,  which,  by  its  agreeable
teaching,  seeks  to  point  out  the  faults  of  mankind,  it  does  not
deserve  to  be  so  unjustly  censured  ;  and  if  we  may  listen  on
that  point  to  the  testimony  of  antiquity,  it  will  tell  us  that  her
most  famous  philosophers  have  eulogized  comedy ;  they  who
professed  such  austere  wisdom,  and  who  were  incessantly  de-
crying the  vices  of  their  age.  It  will  show  us  that  Aristotle
devoted  many  of  his  vigils  to  the  theatre,  and  took  the  trouble
to  reduce  to  precept  the  art  of  constructing  comedies.  It  will
teach  us  that  her  greatest  men,  foremost  in  dignity,  have  glo-
ried in  composing  some  themselves ;  that  there  were  others
who  did  not  disdain  to  recite  in  public  those  which  they  had
composed  ;  that  Greece  proclaimed  her  appreciation  of  that
art  by  the  glorious  prizes  she  awarded  to,  and  the  magnificent
theatres  she  built  in  honour  of  it ;  and  lastly,  that  in  Rome  this
same  art  was  crowned  with  extraordinary  honours.  I  do  not
say  in  debauched  Rome,  under  the  licentious  emperors,  but  in
disciplined  Rome,  under  the  wisdom  of  her  consuls,  and  at
the  most  vigorous  period  of  Roman  virtue.

I  admit  that  there  have  been  times  in  which  comedy  be-
came corrupt.  And  what  is  there  in  this  world  that  does  not
become  corrupt  every  day  ?  There  is  nothing  so  pure  but
what  mankind  can  bring  crime  to  bear  upon  it ;  no  art  so  sal-
utary but  what  they  can  reverse  its  intentions ;  nothing  so
good  in  itself  but  what  they  can  turn  to  a  bad  use.  Medicine
is  a  profitable  art,  and  every  one  esteems  it  as  one  of  the  most
excellent  things  in  existence ;  and  yet  there  have  been  periods
in  which  it  has  made  itself  odious,  and  has  often  been  used  to
poison  people.  Philosophy  is  a  gift  of  Heaven;  it  was  given
to  us  to  lead  our  minds  to  the  knowledge  of  God  by  the  con-
templation of  nature's  wonders  ;  still  we  are  not  unaware  that
it  has  often  been  diverted  from  its  use,  and  employed  openly
to  support  impiety.  Even  the  most  sacred  things  are  not  safe
from  men's  corruption  ;  and  we  see  the  greatest  scoundrels
daily  abusing  piety,  and  wickedly  making  it  the  tool  for  the
most  abominable  crimes.  But  for  all  that,  we  do  not  fail  to
make  those  distinctions  which  it  is  right  we  should  make.
We  do  not  envelop  in  the  same  warp  of  a  false  deduction  the
good  of  the  thing  corrupted  with  the  malice  of  the  cor-

TAKTUFFE;  on,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  97

rupter.  We  always  separate  the  bad  use  from  the  honest
intention  of  art,  and  no  more  than  we  would  dream  of  defend-
ing the  banishment  of  medicine  from  Rome,  or  the  public
condemnation  of  philosophy  at  Athens,  ought  we  to  put  a  veto
upon  comedy  for  having  been  censured  at  certain  times.
This  censuring  had  its  reasons  which  have  no  existence  here.
It  confined  itself  strictly  to  what  it  saw  ;  and  we  ought,  there-
fore, not  to  drag  it  beyond  the  limits  which  it  has  adopted,
extend  it  farther  than  necessary,  or  make  it  class  the  guilty
with  the  innocent.  The  comedy  which  it  designed  to  attack
is  not  at  all  the  comedy  which  we  wish  to  defend.  We  must
take  good  care  not  to  confound  the  one  with  the  other.  They
are  two  persons  whose  morals  are  totally  opposed.  They  bear
no  relation  to  each  other  except  the  resemblance  of  the  name  ;
and  it  would  be  a  crying  injustice  to  wish  to  condemn  Olym-
pia,  who  is  an  honest  woman,  because  there  was  another
Olympia,  who  was  a  loose  character.20  Such  verdicts  would,
doubtless,  produce  a  great  disorder  in  the  world.  Everything
would  be  open  to  condemnation  ;  and,  since  this  rigour  is  not
carried  out  with  reference  to  all  other  things  which  are  daily
abused,  we  ought  to  extend  the  same  grace  to  comedy,  and
approve  those  plays  in  which  instruction  and  honesty  are
made  manifest.

I  am  well  aware  that  there  are  certain  minds  whose  delicacy
can  tolerate  no  comedy  whatsoever ;  who  say  that  the  most
honest  ones  are  the  most  dangerous;  that  the  passions  which
they  depict  are  so  much  the  more  touching  because  they  are
full  of  virtue  ;  and  that  people  are  too  much  affected  by  this
kind  of  representations.  I  do  not  see  any  great  crime  in  be-
coming affected  at  the  sight  of  an  honourable  passion  :  or  that
the  complete  state  of  insensibility  to  which  they  would  elevate
our  feelings  would  indicate  a  high  standard  of  virtue.  I  am
inclined  to  doubt  whether  such  great  perfection  be  in  the
power  of  human  nature,  and  whether  it  would  not  be  better  to
endeavour  to  rectify  and  mollify  men's  passions,  than  to  elim-
inate them  altogether.  I  admit  that  there  are  places  which  it
would  be  more  salutary  to  frequent  than  theatres  ;  and  if  we
take  it  for  granted  that  all  things  that  do  not  directly  concern
God  and  our  salvation  are  reprehensible,  then  it  becomes  cer-
tain that  comedy  should  be  one  of  them,  and  I  for  one  could
not  object  that  it  should  be  condemned  among  the  rest.  But
let  us  suppose,  as  it  is  true,  that  there  must  be  intervals  to

» It  has  been  said  that  Moliere,  in  mentioning  the  name  of  Olympia,  wished  to
hit  at  Olympia  Maldachini,  a  sister-in-law  of  Pope  Innocent  X.  This  Pope  died
in  1655,  and  was  the  author  of  the  bull  against  the  five  propositions  of  Tansemus.
The  life  of  the  lady,  who  was  far  from  a  saint,  had  only  lately  been  translated  from
the  Italian  into  French.

98  TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

pious  devotions,  and  that  we  have  need  of  amusement  during
that  time,  then  I  maintain  that  nothing  more  innocent  than
comedy  could  be  found.  I  have  digressed  too  far.  Let  me
wind  up  with  the  remark  of  a  great  prince21  on  the  comedy  of
Tartuffe.  A  week  after  it  had  been  forbidden,  there  was
performed  before  the  court  a  piece  entitled  Scaramouch,  a  her-
mit™ and  the  King,  coming  out  of  the  theatre,  said  to  the
prince  of  whom  I  have  just  spoken,  "  I  should  like  to  know
why  the  people,  who  are  so  very  much  shocked  at  the  comedy
of  Moliere,  do  not  say  a  word  about  Scaramouch"  to  which
the  prince  answered,  "  The  reason  of  that  is,  that  the  comedy
of  Scaramouch  makes  game  of  Heaven  and  religion,  about
which  these  gentlemen  care  very  little  ;  but  Moliere' s  makes
game  of  them  ;  it  is  that  which  they  cannot  tolerate.''

«  The  Prince  de  Conde.

25 The  farce  of  Scaramouch,  a  hermit  contained  many  indecent  situations;
amongst  others,  that  of  a  monk  entering  by  the  balcony  into  the  house  of  a  married
woman,  and  reappearing  from  time  to  time  before  the  public,  saying,  "  Questo  e  per
tnorti  ficar  la  came."

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

ORGON,  husband  to  Elmire.^

DAMIS,  his  son.

VALERE,  Mariane's  lover.

CLEANTE,  Organ's  brother-in-law.

TARTUFFE.

M.  LOYAL,  a  tipstaff.™

A  POLICE  OFFICER.  M

ELMIRE,  Organ's  wife.

MADAME  PERNELLE,  Organ's  mother.

MARIANNE,  Organ's  daughter.

DORINE,  her  maid.

FLIPOTE,  Madame  Perne lie's  servant.

The  scene  is  in  PARIS,  in  ORGON'S  HOUSE.

"This  part  was  played  *by  Moliere  himself.  In  the  inventory  taken
after  Moliere's  death,  we  find  "  the  dress  for  Orgon  consisting  of  a  doublet,
breeches,  and  cloak  of  black  venitienne,  the  cloak  lined  with  tabby,  and
adorned  with  English  lace,  the  garters,  rosettes  of  the  shoes,  and  the
shoes  adorned  in  the  same  manner."  Madame  Moliere  played  the  part
of  Elmire.

M  The  original  has  sergent.  The  tipstaffs  of  the  upper  court  were
called  huissiers;  in  Paris,  huissiers  <J  verge;  and  of  a  lower  court,  ser-
gents.

18  The  original  has  exempt,  from  the  verb  exemfiter,  to  be  free  from,  be-

ormerly  non-commissioned  officers  of  the  cavalry,  who  commanded

ie  absence  of  their  superiors,  were  free  from  all  other  duties,  and  were

exempt;  such  officers  commanded  the  marechaussee  or  prevotai  guard

when  it  arrested  anyone.

TARTUFFE;  OR.  THE  HYPOCRITE.

(TARTUFFE;    OU,  L' IMPOSTEUR).

ACT   I.

SCENE    I. — MADAME   PERNELLE,    ELMIRE,    MARIANE,
CLEANTE,  DAMIS,  DORINE,  FLIPOTE.

M.  PER.  Come  along,  Flipote,  gome  along ;  let  us  get
rid  of  them.

ELM.  You  walk  so  fast,  that  one  can  hardly  keep  up
with  you.

M.  PER.  Do  not  trouble  yourself,  daughter-in-law,  do
not  trouble  yourself,  do  not  come  any  farther ;  there  is  no
need  for  all  this  ceremony.

ELM.  We  only  give  you  your  due.  But  pray,  mother,
why  are  you  in  such  haste  to  leave  us?

M.  PER.  Because  I  cannot  bear  to  see  such  goings  on.
No  one  cares  to  please  me.  I  leave  your  house  very  little
edified :  all  my  advice  is  despised ;  nothing  is  respected,
every  one  has  his  say  aloud,  and  it  is  just  like  the  court  of
King  Petaud.26

18  Petaud,  from  the  Latin  j>eto,  I  ask,  was  formerly,  the  name  of  the  chief
of  the  beggars  in  France.  As  his  subordinates  were  very  unruly,  a  house
where  everybody  gave  orders  was  called  figuratively  "  the  court  of  King
Pe'taud."  In  Mr.  Clare's  translation,  mentioned  in  the  Introductory
Notice,  this  court  is  called  "  Dover's  Court."

101

io2  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTI.

DOR.  If .    .    .

M.  PER.  You  are,  my  dear,  a  little  too  much  of  a  talker,
and  a  great  deal  too  saucy  for  a  waiting  maid.  You  give
your  advice  about  everything.

DAM.  But  .    .    .

M.  PER.  Four  letters  spell  your  name,  my  child,  a
"fool:"  I,  your  grandmother,  tell  you  so;  and  I  have
already  predicted  to  my  son,  your  father,  a  hundred  times,
that  you  are  fast  becoming  a  good-for-nothing,  who  will
give  him  nought  but  trouble.

MAR.   I  think  .    .    .

M.  PER.  Good-lack !  grand-daughter,  you  play  the
prude,  and  to  look  at  you,  butter  would  not  melt  in  your
mouth.  But  still  waters  run  deep,  as  the  saying  is;  and
I  do  not  like  your  sly  doings  at  all.

ELM.  But,  mother  .    .    .

M.  PER.  By  your  leave,  daughter-in-law,  your  whole
conduct  is  altogether  wrong ;  you  ought  to  set  them  a
good  example ;  and  their  late  mother  managed  them  a
great  deal  better.  You  are  extravagant ;  and  it  disgusts
me  to  see  you  decked  out  like  a  princess.27  The  woman
who  wishes  to  please  her  husband  only,  daughter-in-law,
has  no  need  of  so  much  finery.

CLE.  But  after  all,  Madam  .    .    .

M.  PER.  As  for  you,  Sir,  who  are  her  brother,  I  esteem,
love,  and  respect  you  very  much;  but,  nevertheless,  if  I
were  my  son  and  her  husband,  I  would  beg  of  you
earnestly  not  to  enter  our  house.  You  are  always  laying
down  maxims  which  respectable  people  ought  not  to  follow.
I  speak  to  you  rather  frankly ;  but  it  is  a  way  I  have  got,'
and  I  do  not  mince  my  words  when  I  have  something  on
my  mind.

DAM.  Your  Mr.  Tartuffe  is  an  angel,  no  doubt  .    .    .

M.  PER.  He  is  a  very  worthy  man,  who  ought  to  be  lis-

27  According  to  Grimarest's  Vie  de  Moliere,  our  author  went  into  the
dressing-room  of  his  wife — who  was  going  to  play  the  part  of  Elmire— a
quarter  of  an  hour  before  the  piece  began.  He  found  her  clothed  in  a
magnificent  dress,  which  she  had  put  on,  without  telling  her  husband  of
it.  Moliere  insisted  that  she  should  put  it  off,  and  take  one  more  in  ac-
cordance with  Elmire's  character.  I  am  afraid  that  this  anecdote  rests
only  on  mere  tradition;  still  it  proves  that  Mrs.  Orgon  was  too  well
dressed  to  suit  even  the  taste  of  her  mother-in-law.

SCENE  i.j  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  103

tened  to ;  and  I  cannot,  without  getting  angry,  suffer  him
to  be  sneered  at  by  a  fool  like  you.

DAM.  What !  am  I  to  allow  a  censorious  bigot  to  usurp
an  absolute  authority  in  this  house  !  and  shall  we  not  be
permitted  to  amuse  ourselves,  unless  that  precious  gentle-
man condescends  to  give  us  leave !

DOR.  If  any  one  were  to  listen  to  him  and  believe  in
his  maxims,  one  could  not  do  anything  without  commit-
ting a  sin  ;  for  he  controls  everything,  this  carping  critic.

M.  PER.  And  whatever  he  does  control,  is  well  con-
trolled. He  wishes  to  lead  you  on  the  road  to  Heaven :
and  my  son  ought  to  make  you  all  love  him.

DAM.  No,  look  here,  grandmother,  neither  father  nor
anyone  else  shall  ever  induce  me  to  look  kindly  upon  him.
I  should  belie  my  heart  to  say  otherwise.  His  manners
every  moment  enrage  me  ;  I  can  foresee  the  consequence,
and  one  time  or  other  I  shall  have  to  come  to  an  open
quarrel  with  this  low-bred  fellow. 28

DOR.  Certainly,  it  is  a  downright  scandal  to  see  a
stranger  exercise  such  authority  in  this  house  ;  to  see  a
beggar,  who,  when  he  came,  had  not  a  shoe  to  his  foot,
and  whose  whole  dress  may  have  been  worth  twopence,  so
far  forget  himself  as  to  cavil  at  everything,  and  to  assume
the  authority  of  a  master.

M.  PER.  Eh  !  mercy  on  me  !  things  would  go  on  much
better  if  everything  were  managed  according  to  his  pious
directions.

DOR.  He  passes  for  a  saint  in  your  opinion  ;  but  believe
me,  he  is  nothing  but  a  hypocrite.

M.  PER.  What  a  tongue  !

DOR.  I  should  not  like  to  trust  myself  with  him,  nor
with  his  man  Laurent,  without  a  good  guarantee.

M.  PER.  I  do  not  know  what  the  servant  may  be  at
heart ;  but  as  for  the  master,  I  will  vouch  for  him  as  a
good  man.  You  bear  him  ill-will,  and  only  reject  him  be-
cause he  tells  all  of  you  the  truth.  It  is  against  sin  that
his  heart  waxes  wroth,  and  his  only  motive  is  the  interest
of  Heaven.

18  The  original  has  pied-plat,  flat  foot,— I  suppose  on  account  of  an
imaginary  connection  between  a  high  instep  and  aristocratic  descent.

104  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTI.

DOR.  Ay;  but  why,  particularly  for  some  time  past,
can  he  not  bear  any  one  to  come  to  the  house  ?  What  is
there  offensive  to  Heaven  in  a  civil  visit,  that  there  must
be  a  noise  about  it  fit  to  split  one's  ears?  Between  our-
selves, do  you  wish  me  to  explain?  .  .  .  {Pointing  to  El-
mire).  Upon  my  word,  I  believe  him  to  be  jealous  of  my
mistress.

M.  PER.  Hold  your  tongue,  and  mind  what  you  say.  It
is  not  he  only  who  blames  these  visits.  All  the  bustle  of
these  people  who  frequent  this  house,  these  carriages  ever-
lastingly standing  at  the  door,  and  the  noisy  crowd  of  so
many  servants,  cause  a  great  disturbance  in  the  whole
neighbourhood.  I  am  willing  to  believe  that  there  is
really  no  harm  done ;  but  people  will  talk  of  it,  and  that
is  not  right.

CLE.  Alas,  Madam,  will  you  prevent  people  talking?
It  would  be  a  very  hard  thing  if,  in  life,  for  the  sake  of
the  foolish  things  which  may  be  said  about  us,  we  had  to
renounce  our  best  friends.  And  even  if  we  could  resolve
to  do  so,  do  you  think  we  could  compel  every  one  to  hold
his  tongue  ?  There  is  no  protection  against  slander.  Let
us,  therefore,  pay  no  regard  to  all  this  silly  tittle-tattle ;
let  us  endeavour  to  live  honestly,  and  leave  the  gossips  to
say  what  they  please.

DOR.  May  not  Daphne,  our  neighbour,  and  her  little
husband,  be  those  who  speak  ill  of  us  ?  They  whose  own
conduct  is  the  most  ridiculous  are  always  the  first  to  slan-
der others.  They  never  fail  to  catch  eagerly  at  the  slight-
est rumour  of  a  love-affair,  to  spread  the  news  of  it  with
joy,  and  to  give  it  the  turn  which  they  want.  They  think
to  justify  their  own  actions  before  the  world  by  those  of
others,  painted  in  colours  of  their  choosing,  either  in  the
false  expectation  of  glossing  over  their  own  intrigues  with
some  semblance  of  innocence,  or  else  by  making  to  fall
elsewhere  some  part  of  that  public  blame  with  which  they
are  too  heavily  burdened."

M.  PER.  All  these  arguments  are  nothing  to  the  pur-

89  This  is  said  to  be  an  allusion  to  Olympia  Mancini,  Countess  de  Sois-
sons,  who  spread  a  report,  and  even  informed  the  queen,  of  the  rising
love  of  Louis  XIV.  for  Mademoiselle  de  la  Valliere.  See  Introductory
Notice  to  The  Princess  of  Elis.

SCKOTII.]  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  105

pose.  Orante  is  known  to  lead  an  exemplary  life.  All
her  cares  tend  to  Heaven ;  and  I  have  learned  by  people
that  she  strongly  condemns  the  company  who  visit  here.

DOR.  An  admirable  pattern  indeed,  and  she  is  very
good,  this  lady  !  It  is  true  that  she  lives  very  austerely  ;
but  age  has  put  this  ardent  zeal  into  her  breast ;  people
know  that  she  is  a  prude,  against  her  own  will.  She
enjoyed  her  advantages  well  enough  as  long  as  she  was
capable  of  attracting  attentions ;  but,  seeing  the  lustre  of
her  eyes  become  somewhat  dim,  she  renounces  the  world
which  is  renouncing  her,  and  conceals  under  the  pompous
cloak  of  lofty  wisdom,  the  decay  of  her  worn-out  charms.
These  are  the  vicissitudes  of  coquettes  in  our  time.  They
find  it  hard  to  see  their  admirers  desert  them.  Thus
forsaken,  their  gloomy  anxiety  sees  no  other  resource  but
that  of  prudery ;  and  the  severity  of  these  good  women
censures  everything  and  pardons  nothing.30  Loudly  they
blame  everyone's  life,  not  through  charity,  but  through
envy,  which  cannot  bear  another  to  enjoy  those  pleasures
for  which  their  age  gives  them  no  longer  a  relish.81

M.  PER.  {To  Elmire).  These  are  cock-and-bull  stories,
made  to  please  you,  daughter-in-law.  One  is  obliged  to
keep  silence  here,  for  Madam  keeps  the  ball  rolling  all
day.  But  I  also  will  have  my  say  in  my  turn.  I  tell  you
that  my  son  has  never  done-anything  more  sensible  than  in
receiving  this  devout  personage  in  his  house;  that  Heaven
itself,  in  time  of  need,  has  sent  him  here  to  reclaim  all
your  erring  minds;  that  for  your  salvation's  sake,  you
ought  to  listen  to  him;  and  that  he  censures  nothing  but
what  is  reprehensible.  These  visits,  these  balls,  these
conversations,  are  all  inventions  of  the  evil  one.  One

80  This  is  said  to  be  a  hit  at  the  Duchess  de  Navailles  (see  Introductory
Notice  to  TTte  Princess  of  Elis),  who  caused  iron  railings  to  be  placed  at
the  entrance  of  the  rooms  of  the  maids  of  honour,  in  order  to  prevent
Louis  XIV.  from  visiting  Mademoiselle  de  Lamothe  Houdancourt.  The
duchess  owed  her  fortune  to  Cardinal  Mazarin,  whose  intrigues  she  had
aided  during  the  troubles  of  the  Fronde,  when  she  was  Mademoiselle  de
Neuillant.

11  The  Lettre  sur  I'/mposteur  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play)
mentions  a  couplet  of  Madame  Pernelle,  and  a  biting  answer  of  Cteante,
which  were  spoken  at  the  first  representation  of  Tartnffe,  then  called
F/mposteur,  and  which,  no  doubt,  Moliere  afterwards  suppressed.

106  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  i.

never  hears  a  pious  word  uttered  at  any  of  them ;  nothing
but  tittle-tattle,  nonsense,  and  silly  prattle.  Very  often
our  neighbour  comes  in  for  his  share  of  it,  and  there  is
back-biting  going  on  right  and  left.  In  short,  sensible
people  have  their  heads  turned  by  the  confusion  of  such
meetings.  A  thousand  idle  stories  are  told  in  no  time;
and,  as  a  certain  doctor  said  very  aptly  the  other  day,  it
is  a  perfect  tower  of  Babylon,32  for  every  one  chatters  to
his  heart's  content;  and  to  show  you  what  brought  this
up.  .  .  .  (Pointing  to  Cleante}.  But  here  is  this  gentle-
man giggling  already  !  Go  and  look  for  some  fools  to
laugh  at,  and  without  .  .  .  (To  Elmire).  Good  bye,
daughter-in-law ;  I  will  say  no  more.  I  make  you  a
present  of  the  rest,  but  it  will  be  a  fine  day  when  I  set
my  foot  in  your  house  again.  (Slapping  Flipote1  s  face).
Come  along  you,  you  stand  dreaming  and  gaping  here.
Ods  bobs  !  I  shall  warm  your  ears  for  you.  March  on,
slut,  march  on.

SCENE  II. — CLEANTE,  DORINE.

CLE.  I  shall  not  go  with  her,  for  fear  she  should  fall  foul
of  me  again  ;  that  this  good  lady  .  .  .

DOR.  Ah !  it  is  a  pity  that  she  does  not  hear  you  say  so :
she  would  tell  you  that  you  are  good,  but  that  she  is  not
yet  old  enough  to  be  called  so.

CLE.  How  she  fired  up  against  us  for  nothing  !  And
how  infatuated  she  seems  with  her  Tartuffe  !

DOR.  Oh  !  indeed,  all  this  is  nothing  compared  with  the
son  :  and  if  you  saw  him,  you  would  say  it  is  much  worse.
During  our  troubles 33  he  acted  like  a  man  of  sense,  and
displayed  some  courage  in  the  service  of  his  prince;34  but
since  he  has  grown  so  fond  of  this  Tartuffe,  he  is  become
a  perfect  dolt.  He  calls  him  brother,  and  loves  him  in

3:1  Madame  Pernelle  says  "  the  Tower  of  Babylon,"  instead  of  "  the
Tower  of  Babel.''  A  certain  Jesuit,  Caussin  (1583-1651),  wrote  in  one
of  his  books,  The  Holy  Court,  that  "  men  built  the  tower  of  Babel,  and
women  the  tower  of  Babble  (Babil)."

33  This  refers  to  the  troubles  of  the  Fronde,  during  the  minority  of
Louis  XIV.

w  The  Lettre  sur  I' Imposteur  shows  that  this  play  was  originally  some-
what different  here.

SCENE  in. j  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  107

his  very  soul  a  hundred  times  better  than  either  mother,
son,  daughter,  or  wife.  He  is  the  sole  confidant  of  all  his
secrets,  and  the  prudent  director  of  all  his  actions  ;  he
caresses  him,  embraces  him  ;  and  one  could  show  no  more
affection,  I  think,  to  a  mistress.  He  will  have  him  seated
at  the  upper  end  of  the  table,  and  is  delighted  to  see  him
eat  as  much  as  half  a  dozen  ;  the  choicest  morsels  of  every-
thing must  be  given  to  him;  and,  if  he  happens  to  belch,
he  says  to  him  "God  preserve  you."35  In  short,  he  is
crazy  about  him ;  he  is  his  all, his  hero;  he  admires  every-
thing he  does,  he  quotes  him  on  all  occasions ;  he  looks
upon  his  most  trifling  actions  as  miracles,  and  every  word
he  utters  is  considered  an  oracle.  The  other,  who  knows
his  dupe,  and  wishes  to  make  the  most  of  him,  has  the  art
of  dazzling  him  by  a  hundred  deceitful  appearances.  His
pretended  devotion  draws  money  from  him  at  every  hour
of  the  day ;  and  assumes  the  right  of  commenting  upon
the  conduct  of  every  one  of  us.  Even  the  jackanapes,  his
servant,  pretends  also  to  read  us  a  lesson ;  he  comes
preaching  to  us  with  fierce  looks,  and  throws  away  our
ribbons,  our  paint,  and  our  patches.  Only  the  other  day,
the  wretch  tore  a  handkerchief  which  he  had  found  be-
tween the  leaves  of  "  The  Flower  of  the  Saints,'"  M  saying
that  it  was  a  dreadful  sin  to  bring  these  holy  things  into
contact  with  the  devil's  deckings.

SCENE  III. — ELMIRE,    MARIANE,    DAMIS,    CLEANTE,
DORINE.

ELM.  (To  Cleante).  You  are  very  fortunate  not  to
have  assisted  at  the  speech  to  which  she  treated  us  at  the
door.  But  I  have  just  seen  my  husband ;  and  as  he  did
not  see  me,  I  shall  go  up  stairs  to  await  his  coming.

85  All  the  original  editions  have  the  following  note,  which  may  probably
be  attributed  to  Moliere :  "  It  is  a  servant  who  speaks."

36  This  book  was  called  Flos  Sanctorum,  o  libra  de  las  vidas  de  los
Santos,  and  was  written  by  Pedro  Ribadeneira,  a  celebrated  Spanish
Jesuit  (1527-1611).  It  was  translated  into  French  as  Fleurs  des  vies  des
Saints,  and  published  in  Paris  in  1641,  and  at  Lyons  in  1666,  in  two  folio
volumes ;  and  later  in  English,  as  Lives  of  the  Saints,  and  in  the  same
number  of  volumes.  There  was  also  another  book,  originally  in  French,
with  the  same  title,  written  by  a  Jesuit,  Bonnefons,  published  first  in  1663,
and  which  had  already  reached  its  third  edition  in  1664.

I08  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  i.

CLE.  I  will  wait  for  him  here,  with  small  pleasure ;  and
merely  say  how  do  ye  do  to  him.

SCENE  IV. — CLEANTE,  DAMIS,  DORINE.

DAM.  Just  sound  him  about  this  marriage  of  my  sister.
I  suspect  that  Tartuffe  is  opposed  to  it,  because  he  makes
my  father  use  so  many  evasions ;  and  you  are  not  igno-
rant how  greatly  I  am  interested  in  it  .  .  .If  the  same
passion  fires  my  sister's  and  Valere's  heart,  the  sister  of
this  friend  is,  as  you  know,  dear  to  me ;  and  if  it  were
necessary  .  .  .

DOR.  Here  he  is.

SCENE  V. — ORGON,  CLEANTE,  DORINE.

ORG.  Ha !  good  morrow,  brother.

CLE.  I  was  just  going,  and  am  glad  to  see  you  returned.
The  country  is  not  very  cheering  at  present.

ORG.  Dorine  .  .  .  {To  Cleante).  Pray,  one  moment,
brother-in-law.  Allow  me  to  inquire  the  news  here  to  ease
my  mind.  {To  Dorine}.  Has  everything  gone  on  well
these  two  days  ?  What  are  they  doing,  and  how  are  they
all?

DOR.  The  day  before  yesterday  my  mistress  had  an
attack  of  fever  until  evening,  accompanied  by  an  extraor-
dinary headache.

ORG.  And  Tartuffe  ?

DOR.  Tartuffe  !  He  is  wonderfully  well,  stout  and  fat,
with  a  fresh  complexion,  and  a  ruddy  mouth.

ORG.  Poor  fellow  !

DOR.  In  the  evening  she  felt  very  sick,  and  could  not
touch  a  morsel  of  supper,  so  violent  was  still  the  pain  in
her  head.

ORG.  And  Tartuffe  ?

DOR.  He  supped  by  himself  in  her  presence  ;  and  very
devoutly  ate  two  partridges,  and  half  a  leg  of  mutton
hashed.

ORG.  Poor  fellow  !

DOR.  The  whole  night  she  did  not  close  her  eyes  for  a
moment.  She  was  so  feverish  that  she  could  not  sleep,
and  we  were  obliged  to  sit  up  with  her  until  morning.

ORG.  And  Tartuffe  ?

SCBNB  vi.j  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  109

DOR.  Pleasantly  overcome  with  sleep,  he  went  to  his
room  when  he  left  the  table ;  and  jumped  into  his  cozy
bed,  where  he  slept  undisturbed  until  morning.

ORG.   Poor  fellow !

DOR.  We  at  length  prevailed  upon  the  mistress  to  be
bled  ;  and  she  was  almost  immediately  relieved.

ORG.  And  Tartuffe  ?

DOR.  He  picked  up  his  courage  again  as  he  ought  to  ;
and,  to  fortify  himself  against  all  harm,  he  drank  four
large  draughts  of  wine  at  breakfast,  to  make  up  for  the
blood  that  the  mistress  had  lost.

ORG.  Poor  fellow  !

DOR.  At  present,  they  are  both  well ;  and  I  shall  go
and  inform  the  mistress  how  glad  you  feel  at  her  recovery.

SCENE  VI. — ORGON,  CLEANTE.

CLE.  She  is  laughing  at  you  to  your  face,  brother :  and,
without  wishing  to  make  you  angry,  I  must  tell  you  can-
didly that  it  is  not  without  reason.  Was  there  ever  such
a  whim  heard  of?  Can  it  be  possible  that  any  man  could
so  charm  you  now-a-days  as  to  make  you  forget  every-
thing for  him  ?  That  after  having  relieved  his  indigence,
in  your  own  house,  you  should  go  as  far  as  ...

ORG.  Stop,  brother-in-law,  you  do  not  know  the  man
of  whom  you  are  speaking  ?

CLE.  I  do  not  know  him,  if  you  like ;  but  after  all,  in
order  to  know  what  sort  of  man  he  is  .  .  .

ORG.  You  would  be  charmed  to  know  him,  brother ;
and  there  would  be  no  end  to  your  delight.  He  is  a  man
.  .  .  who  .  .  .  ah  .  .  .a  man  ...  in  short,  a  man."
One  who  acts  up  to  his  own  precepts,  enjoys  a  profound
peace,  and  looks  upon  the  whole  world  as  so  much  dirt.
Yes ;  I  am  quite  another  man  since  I  conversed  with  him ;
he  teaches  me  to  set  my  heart  upon  nothing ;  he  detaches
my  mind  from  all  friendship ;  and  I  could  see  brother,
children,  mother,  and  wife  die,  without  troubling  myself
in  the  least  about  it.

87  This  line  has  given  rise  to  many  different  readings ;  but  according
to  the  Lettre  sur  V Imposteur,  and  of  which  a  resume  is  given  in  the  In-
troductory Notice  to  this  play,  Orgon  intends  to  quote  all  the  good
qualities  of  Tartuffe,  and  can  find  nothing  else  to  say  of  him  but  that  he

110  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  I.

CLE.  Humane  sentiments  these,  brother  !

ORG.  Ah  !  if  you  had  seen  how  I  first  met  him,  you
would  have  conceived  the  same  friendship  for  him  that  I
feel.  Every  day  he  came  to  church,  and,  with  a  gentle
mien,  kneeled  down  opposite  me.  He  attracted  the  notice
of  the  whole  congregation  by  the  fervency  with  which  he
sent  up  his  prayers  to  heaven.  He  uttered  sighs,  was  en-
raptured, and  humbly  kissed  the  ground  every  moment :
and  when  I  went  out,  he  swiftly  ran  before  me  to  offer  me
holy  water  at  the  door.  Informed  by  his  servants,  who
imitates  him  in  everything,  of  his  poverty,  and  who  he
was,  I  made  him  some  presents  :  but,  with  great  modesty,
he  always  wished  to  return  some  part  of  them.  "It  is  too
much,"  he  said ;  "too  much  by  half ;  I  do  not  deserve
your  pity."  And  when  I  refused  to  take  them  back  again,
he  would  go  and  give  them  to  the  poor  before  my  face.
At  length  Heaven  moved  me  to  take  him  to  my  house,
and  since  then,  everything  seems  to  prosper  here.  I  per-
ceive that  he  reproves  everything,  and  that  he  takes  a
great  interest,  even  in  my  wife,  for  my  sake.  He  warns
me  of  the  people  who  look  too  lovingly  at  her,  and  he  is
six  times  more  jealous  of  her  than  I  am.  But  you  cannot
believe  how  far  his  zeal  goes  :  the  slightest  trifle  in  him-
self he  calls  a  sin ;  a  mere  nothing  is  sufficient  to  shock
him ;  so  much  so  that  he  accused  himself,  the  other  day,
of  having  caught  a  flea  whilst  he  was  at  his  devotions,  and
of  having  killed  it  with  too  much  anger.88

CLE.  Zounds !    I  believe  you  are  mad,  brother.     Are

38  Moliere  takes  care  to  demonstrate,  from  the  very  beginning,  that
Tartuffe  is  a  hypocrite,  and  the  whole  speech  of  Orgon  shows  him  to  be
so.  The  killing  of  the  flea  is  taken  from  the  life  of  Saint  Macarius  in
Giacomo  da  Voragine  (1230-1298),  Historia  Lombardica,  seu  Legenda
Sanctorum,  which  was  more  familiarly  known  as  the  Legenda  aurea,  or
Golden  Legend.  The  first  English  edition  was  one  of  the  books  which
Caxton  printed  and  published  in  1483.  The  story  is  thus  related,  by  the
Rev.  Alban  Butler,  in  The  Lives  of  the  Saints  :'  "  Saint  Macarius  hap-
pened one  day  to  kill  a  gnat  that  was  biting  him  in  his  cell ;  reflecting
that  he  had  lost  the  opportunity  of  suffering  that  mortification,  he  hastened
from  the  cell  for  the  marshes  of  Scete,  which  abound  with  great  flies,
whose  stings  pierce  even  wild  boars.  There  he  continued  six  months,  e'x-
posed  to  those  ravaging  insects ;  and  to  such  a  degree  was  his  whole  body
disfigured  by  them  with  sores  and  swellings,  that  when  he  returned,  he  was
only  to  be  known  by  his  voice."

SCENE  vi.]  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  I  I  I

you  making  game  of  me  with  such  a  speech  ?  and  do  you
pretend  that  all  this  fooling  .  .  .

ORG.  Brother,  this  discourse  savours  of  free-thinking.89
You  are  somewhat  tainted  with  it ;  and,  as  I  have  often
told  you,  you  will  get  yourself  into  some  unpleasant
scrape.

CLE.  The  usual  clap-trap  of  your  set ;  they  wish  every-
one to  be  blind  like  themselves.  To  keep  one's  eyes  open
is  to  be  a  free-thinker ;  and  whosoever  does  not  worship
pretentious  affections  has  neither  respect  for,  nor  faith  in
holy  things.  Go  along  ;  all  your  speeches  do  not  frighten
me  ;  I  know  what  I  am  saying,  and  Heaven  sees  my  heart.
We  are  not  the  slaves  of  your  formalists.  There  are  hypo-
crites in  religion  as  well  as  pretenders  to  courage  ;  and  as
we  never  find  the  truly  brave  man  make  much  noise  where
honour  leads  him,  no  more  are  the  good  and  truly  pious,
whom  we  ought  to  follow,  those  who  make  so  many  gri-
maces. What !  would  you  make  no  distinction  between
hypocrisy  and  true  devotion  ?  Would  you  treat  them  both
alike,  and  give  the  same  honour  to  the  mask  as  to  the
face ;  put  artifice  on  a  level  with  sincerity,  confound  ap-
pearance with  reality,  value  the  shadow  as  much  as  the
substance ;  and  false  coin  the  same  as  real  ?  Men,  for  the
most  part,  are  strange  creatures,  and  never  keep  the  right
mean;  reason's  boundaries  are  too  narrow  for  them;  in
every  character  they  overact  .their  parts ;  and  they  often
spoil  the  noblest  designs,  because  they  exaggerate,  and
carry  them  too  far.  This  by  the  way,  brother.

ORG.  Yes,  you  are  no  doubt  a  doctor  to  be  looked  up
to  ;  you  possess  all  the  world's  wisdom  ;  you  are  the  only
sage,  and  the  only  enlightened  man,  an  oracle,  a  Cato  of
the  present  age;  and  all  men,  compared  with  you,  are
fools.

CLE.  I  am  not,  brother,  a  doctor  to  be  looked  up  to ;
nor  do  I  possess  all  the  world's  wisdom.  But,  in  one  word,
I  know  enough  to  distinguish  truth  from  falsehood.  And
as  I  know  no  character  more  worthy  of  esteem  than  the
truly  devout,  nor  anything  in  the  world  more  noble  or

89  The  original  has  libertinage,  which,  as  well  as  libertin,  libertine,  was
formerly  employed  in  French,  as  well  as  in  English,  in  speaking  of  those
who  took  great  liberty  with  the  belief  generally  entertained.

1 1  2  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  ,.

beautiful  than  the  holy  fervour  of  sincere  piety,  so  I  know-
nothing  more  odious  than  the  whited  sepulchre  of  a  pre-
tended zealot,  than  those  downright  impostors,  those  de-
votees, for  public  show,40  whose  sacrilegious  and  deceitful
grimaces  abuse  with  impunity,  and  make  a  jest,  according
to  their  fancy,  of  what  men  hold  most  holy  and  sacred ;
those  men  who,  from  motives  of  self-interest,  make  a  trade
of  piety,  and  would  purchase  honour  and  reputation  at  the
cost  of  a  hypocritical  turning  up  of  the  eyes  and  pretended
raptures ;  those  men,  I  say,  whom  we  see  possessed  with
such  an  uncommon  ardour  for  the  next  world,  in  order
to  make  their  fortunes  in  this ;  who,  with  great  affectation
and  many  prayers,  daily  recommend  and  preach  solitude
in  the  midst  of  the  court ;  who  know  how  to  reconcile
their  zeal  with  their  vices  ;  who  are  passionate,  vindictive,
without  belief,  full  of  artifice,  and  would,  in  order  to  de-
stroy a  man,  insolently  cover  their  fierce  resentment  under
the  cloak  of  Heaven's  interests.  They  are  the  more  dan-
gerous in  their  bitter  wrath  because  they  use  against  us
weapons  which  men  reverence,  and  because  their  passion,
for  which  they  are  commended,  prompts  them  to  assassi-
nate us  with  a  consecrated  blade.  One  sees  too  many  of
those  vile  characters,  but  the  really  devout  at  heart  are
easily  recognized.  Our  age  has  shown  us  some,  brother,
who  may  serve  us  as  glorious  examples.  Look  at  Ariston,
look  at  Periandre,  Oronte,  Alcidamas,  Polydore,  Clitan-
dre — no  one  disputes  their  title.  But  they  do  not  boast
of  their  virtue.  One  does  not  see  this  unbearable  osten-
tation in  them  ;  and  their  piety  is  human,  is  tractable ;
they  do  not  censure  all  our  doings,  they  think  that  these
corrections  would  show  too  much  pride  on  their  part ;  and,
leaving  big  words  to  others,  they  reprove  our  actions  by
their  own.  They  do  not  think  anything  evil,  because  it
seems  so,  and  their  mind  is  inclined  to  judge  well  of  others.
They  have  no  cabals,  no  intrigues ;  all  their  anxiety  is  to
live  well  themselves.  They  never  persecute  a  sinner ;  they
hate  sin  only,  and  do  not  vindicate  the  interest  of  Heaven
with  greater  zeal  than  Heaven  itself.  These  are  my  people,

**  The  original  has  devots  de  place.  In  former  times,  servants  who
wished  to  be  hired,  went  to  the  market-place  to  show  themselves ;  these
were  called  domestiques  de  plac'e  ;  hence  Moliere  coined  devots  de  place.

SCENE  vi.J  TARTUFFE  J   OR,    THE   HYPOCRITE.  113

that  is  the  true  way  to  act ;  that  is,  in  short,  an  example
to  be  followed.  To  say  the  truth,  your  man  is  not  of  that
stamp;  you  vaunt  his  zeal  with  the  best  intention  ;  but  I
believe  that  you  are  dazzled  by  a  false  glare.

ORG.  My  dear  brother-in-law,  have  you  had  your  say  ?

CLE.  Yes.

ORG.  (Going).     I  am  your  humble  servant.

CLE.  Pray,  one  word  more,  brother.  Let  us  drop  this
conversation.  You  know  that  Valere  has  your  promise  to
be  your  son-in-law.

ORG.  Yes.

CLE.  And  that  you  would  appoint  a  day  for  the  wed-
ding.

ORG.  True.

CLE.  Why  then  defer  the  ceremony?

ORG.  I  do  not  know.

CLE.  Have  you  another  design  in  your  mind?

ORG.  Perhaps  so.

CLE.  Will  you  break  your  word  ?

ORG.  I  do  not  say  that.

CLE.  There  is  no  obstacle,  I  think,  to  prevent  you  from
fulfilling  your  promise  ?

ORG.  That  is  as  it  may  be.

CLE.  Why  so  much  ado  about  a  single  word  ?  Valere
sent  me  to  you  about  it.

ORG.  Heaven  be  praised  for  that !

CLE.  But  what  answer  shall  I  give  him  ?

ORG.  Whatever  you  please.

CLE.  But  it  is  necessary  to  know  your  intentions.  What
are  they?

ORG.  To  do  just  what  Heaven  ordains.

CLE.  But  to  the  point.  Valere  has  your  promise  :  will
you  keep  it  or  not  ?

ORG.  Farewell.

CLE.  (Alone).  I  fear  some  misfortune  for  his  love,  and
I  ought  to  inform  him  of  what  is  going  on. a

41  Several  of  Moliere's  annotators  greatly  praise  this  first  act,  which
gives,  as  it  were,  a  key  to  the  whole  comedy.  We  see  at  one  glance  the
interior  of  Orgon's  household  :  the  silly  talk  of  an  old  woman ;  the  foolish
infatuation  of  the  master  of  the  house  for  TartufTe ;  the  pretended  reli-
gious zeal  of  that  hypocrite ;  the  quiet  reserve  of  Elmire  ;  the  impetuosity

IJ4  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTH.

ACT  II.

SCENE  I. — ORGON,  MARIANE.

ORG.  Mariane.

MAR.  Father?

ORG.  Come  here;  I  have  something  to  say  to  you
privately.

MAR.  (To  Orgon,  who  is  looking  into  a  closet}.  What
are  you  looking  for  ?

ORG.  I  am  looking  whether  there  is  anyone  there  who
might  overhear  us;  for  it  is  a  most  likely  little  place  for
such  a  purpose.  **  Now  we  are  all  right.  Mariane,  I
have  always  found  you  of  a  sweet  disposition,  and  you
have  always  been  very  dear  to  me.

MAR.  I  am  much  obliged  to  you  for  this  fatherly
affection.

ORG.  That  is  very  well  said,  daughter ;  and  to  deserve
it,  your  only  care  should  be  to  please  me.

MAR.  That  is  my  greatest  ambition.

ORG.  Very  well.      What  say  you  of  our  guest  Tartuffe?

MAR.  Who?    I?

ORG.  You.     Be  careful  how  you  answer.

MAR.  Alas  !  I  will  say  whatever  you  like  of  him.

SCENE  II. — ORGON,  MARIANE,  DORINE,  (entering  softly  and
keeping  behind  Orgon,  without  being  seen).

ORG.  That  is  sensibly  spoken  .  .  .  Tell  me  then,  my
child,  that  he  is  a  man  of  the  highest  worth ;  that  he  has

of  Damis,  the  son  ;  the  sound  philosophy  of  Cleante ;  the  familiarity  and
sharpness  of  the  servant  Dorine  ;  the  gentle  timidity  of  Mariane  ;  every-
thing which  afterwards  comes  out  in  the  play  is  foreshadowed  there,  even
the  passion  of  Tartuffe  for  Elmire.  This  first  act  also  shows  how  every-
thing in  the  house  is  in  dire  confusion  ;  religious  war  rages  there  with  all
the  intensity  of  the  odium  theologicum  ;  the  grandmother  has  become  the
foe  of  her  son's  children  ;  the  father  wishes  to  tyrannize  over  his  daughter
and  every  one  else ;  whilst,  on  the  other  side,  Damis  Is  always  in  a  rage,
Dorine  for  ever  on  the  verge  of  impudence,  and  even  the  calm  Cleante
appears  to  have  some  difficulty  in  keeping  his  temper.  The  spirit  with
which  Moliere  opens  the  first  act  is  kept  up  throughout  the  whole  piece.

a  It  is  from  this  "most  likely  little  place"  that  Damis,  in  the  third
Scene  of  the  third  Act,  overhears  Tartuffe  declaring  his  love  to  Elmire.
Moliere  always  takes  care  to  throw  out  such  hints,  in  order  to  prepare  the
mind  for  what  is  to  come.

SCENE  ii.]  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  I  I  5

touched  your  heart ;  and  that  it  would  be  pleasant  to  you
to  see  him,  with  my  approbation,  become  your  husband.
He  ?  (Mariane  draws  away  with  surprise).

MAR.  He!

ORG.  What  is  the  matter?

MAR.  What  did  you  say  ?

ORG.  What?

MAR.  Did  I  mistake?

ORG.  How?

MAR.  What  would  you  have  me  say  has  touched  my
heart,  father,  and  whom  would  it  be  pleasant  to  have  for
a  husband,  with  your  approbation  ?

ORG.  Tartuffe.

MAR.  But  it  is  nothing  of  the  kind,  father,  I  assure
you.  Why  would  you  have  me  tell  such  a  falsehood  ?

ORG.  But  I  wish  it  to  be  a  truth ;  and  it  is  sufficient
for  you  that  I  have  resolved  it  so.

MAR.  What,  father  would  you  .    .    .

ORG.  Yes,  daughter,  I  intend  by  your  marriage  to  unite
Tartuffe  to  my  family.  He  shall  be  your  husband ;  I
have  decided  that ;  and  as  on  your  duty  I  ...  {Per-
ceiving Dorine).  What  are  you  doing  here  ?  Your  anxious
curiosity  is  very  great,  my  dear,  to  induce  you  to  listen  to
us  in  this  manner.

DOR.  In  truth,  I  do  not  know  whether  this  is  a  mere
report,  arising  from  conjecture  or  from  chance ;  but  they
have  just  told  me  the  news  of  this  marriage,  and  I  treated
it  as  a  pure  hoax.

ORG.  Why  so  !    Is  the  thing  incredible  ?

DOR.  So  much  so,  that  even  from  you,  Sir,  I  do  not
believe  it.

ORG.  I  know  how  to  make  you  believe  it,  though.

DOR.  Yes,  yes,  you  are  telling  us  a  funny  story.

ORG.  I  am  telling  you  exactly  what  you  will  see
shortly.

DOR.  Nonsense!

ORG.  What  I  say  is  not  in  jest,  daughter.

DOR.  Come,  do  not  believe  your  father ;  he  is  joking.

ORG.  I  tell  you  .   .   .

DOR.  No,  you  may  say  what  you  like;  nobody  will
believe  you.

n6  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  n.

ORG.   My  anger  will  at  last  .    .    .

DOR.  Very  well !  we  will  believe  you  then ;  and  so
much  the  worse  for  you.  What !  is  it  possible,  Sir,  that,
with  that  air  of  common  sense,  and  this  great  beard  in
the  very  midst  of  your  face,  you  would  be  foolish  enough
to  be  willing  to  ...

ORG.  Now  listen :  you  have  taken  certain  liberties  in
this  house,  which  I  do  not  like ;  I  tell  you  so,  my  dear.

DOR.  Let  us  speak  without  getting  angry,  Sir,  I  beg.  Is
it  to  laugh  at  people  that  you  have  planned  this  scheme  ?
Your  daughter  is  not  suitable  for  a  bigot :  he  has  other
things  to  think  about.  And,  besides,  what  will  such  an
alliance  bring  you  ?  Why,  with  all  your  wealth,  go  and
choose  a  beggar  for  your  son-in-law  .  .  .

ORG.  Hold  your  tongue.  If  he  has  nothing,  know  that
it  is  just  for  that  that  we  ought  to  esteem  him.  His  po-
verty is  no  doubt  an  honest  poverty;  it  ought  to  raise  him
above  all  grandeur,  because  he  has  allowed  himself  to  be
deprived  of  his  wealth  by  his  little  care  for  worldly  affairs,
and  his  strong  attachment  to  things  eternal.  But  my
assistance  may  give  him  the  means  of  getting  out  of  his
troubles,  and  of  recovering  his  property.  His  estates  are
well  known  in  his  country;  and,  such  as  you  see  him,  he
is  quite  the  nobleman.

DOR.  Yes,  so  he  says ;  and  this  vanity,  Sir,  does  not
accord  well  with  piety.  Whosoever  embraces  the  inno-
cence of  a  holy  life  should  not  boast  so  much  about  his
name  and  his  lineage ;  and  the  humble  ways  of  piety  do
but  ill  agree  with  this  outburst  of  ambition.  What  is  the
good  of  this  pride  .  .  .  But  this  discourse  offends  you :
let  us  speak  of  himself,  and  leave  his  nobility  alone.
Would  you,  without  some  compunction,  give  a  girl  like
her  to  a  man  like  him  ?  And  ought  you  not  to  have  some
regard  for  propriety,  and  foresee  the  consequences  of  such
a  union  ?  Be  sure  that  a  girl's  virtue  is  in  danger  when
her  choice  is  thwarted  in  her  marriage;  that  her  living
virtuously  depends  upon  the  qualities  of  the  husband
whom  they  have  chosen  for  her,  and  that  those  whose
foreheads  are  pointed  at  everywhere  often  make  of  their
wives  what  we  see  that  they  are.  It  is,  in  short,  no  easy
task  to  be  faithful  to  husbands  cut  out  after  a  certain

SCENE  ii.]  TARTUFFE;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  II  J

model ;  and  he  who  gives  to  his  daughter  a  man  whom
she  hates,  is  responsible  to  Heaven  for  the  faults  she  com-
mits. Consider  to  what  perils  your  design  exposes  you.

ORG.  I  tell  you  I  must  learn  from  her  what  to  do  !

DOR.  You  cannot  do  better  than  follow  my  advice.

ORG.  Do  not  let  us  waste  any  more  time  with  this  silly
prattle,  daughter;  I  am  your  father,  and  know  what  is
best  for  you.  I  had  promised  you  to  Valere  ;  but  besides
his  being  inclined  to  gamble,  as  I  am  told,  I  also  suspect
him  to  be  somewhat  of  a  free-thinker;  I  never  notice  him
coming  to  church.

DOR.  Would  you  like  him  to  run  there  at  your  stated
hours,  like  those  who  go  there  only  to  be  seen  ?

ORG.  I  am  not  asking  your  advice  upon  that.  The
other  candidate  for  your  hand  is,  in  short,  on  the  best  of
terms  with  Heaven,  and  that  is  a  treasure  second  to  none.
This  union  will  crown  your  wishes  with  every  kind  of
blessings,  it  will  be  replete  with  sweetness  and  delight.
You  shall  live  together  in  faithful  love,  really  like  two  chil-
dren, like  two  turtle-doves;  there  will  be  no  annoying
disputes  between  you ;  and  you  will  make  anything  you
like  of  him.

DOR.  She  ?  she  will  never  make  anything  but  a  fool  **
of  him,  I  assure  you.

ORG.   Heyday  !  what  language  !

DOR.  I  say  that  he  has  the  appearance  of  one,  and  that
his  destiny,  Sir,  will  be  stronger  than  all  your  daughter's
virtue.

ORG.  Leave  off  interrupting  me,  and  try  to  hold  your
tongue,  without  poking  your  nose  into  what  does  not  con-
cern you.

DOR.  (She  continually  interrupts  him  when  he  turns
round  to  speak  to  his  daughter).  I  speak  only  for  your
interest,  Sir.

ORG.  You  interest  yourself  too  much;  hold  your
tongue,  if  you  please.

DOR.  If  one  did  not  care  for  you  .    .   .

ORG.  I  do  not  wish  you  to  care  for  me.

DOR.  And  I  will  care  for  you,  Sir,  in  spite  of  yourself.

**  The  original  has  sot,  which  often  meant  also  a  victimized  husband.

n8  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTH.

ORG.  Ah!

DOR.  Your  honour  is  dear  to  me,  and  I  cannot  bear  to
see  you  the  byeword  of  everyone.

ORG.  You  will  not  hold  your  tongue  ?

DOR.  It  is  a  matter  of  conscience  to  allow  you  to  form
such  an  alliance.

ORG.  Will  you  hold  your  tongue,  you  serpent,  whose
brazen  face  .  .  .

DOR.  What !    you  are  religious,  and  fly  in  a  rage  !

ORG.  Yes,  all  your  nonsense  has  excited  my  choler,  and
once  for  all,  you  shall  hold  your  tongue.

DOR.  Be  it  so.  But,  though  I  do  not  say  a  word,  I  will
think  none  the  less.

ORG.  Think,  if  you  like ;  but  take  care  not  to  say  a
word,  or  ...  {Turning  to  his  daughter).  That  will  do.
As  a  sensible  man,  I  have  carefully  weighed  everything.

DOR.  (Aside).  It  drives  me  mad  that  I  must  not
speak.

ORG.   Without  being  a  fop,  Tartuffe's  mien  is  such  .  .  .

DOR.  Yes,  his  is  a  very  pretty  phiz  !

ORG.  That  even  if  you  have  no  sympathy  with  his
other  gifts  .  .  .

DOR.  (Aside).  She  has  got  a  bargain  !  (  Organ  turns  to
Donne,  and,  with  crossed  arms,  listens  and  looks  her  in  the
face).  If  I  were  in  her  place,  assuredly  no  man  should
marry  me  against  my  will  with  impunity ;  and  I  would
show  him,  and  that  soon  after  the  ceremony,  that  a  woman
has  always  a  revenge  at  hand.

ORG.  (To  Dorine).     Then  you  do  not  heed  what  I  say?

DOR.  What  are  you  grumbling  at  ?  I  did  not  speak  to  you.

ORG.  What  did  you  do  then?

DOR.  I  was  speaking  to  myself.

ORG.  (Aside).  Very  well!  I  must  give  her  a  back-
hander to  pay  her  out  for  her  extreme  insolence.  (He  puts
himself  into  a  position  to  slap  Donne's  face;  aud,  at  every
word  which  he  says  to  his  daughter,  he  turns  round  to  look
at  Dorine)  who  stands  bolt  upright  without  speaking).  You
ought  to  approve  of  my  plan,  daughter  .  .  .  and  believe
that  the  husband  whom  I  have  selected  for  you  .  .  .  (To
Dorine).  Why  do  you  not  speak  to  yourself?

DOR.  I  have  nothing  to  say  to  myself.

sc.NBin.1       TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  I  19

ORG.  Just  another  little  word.

DOR.  It  does  not  suit  me.

ORG.  I  was  looking  out  for  you,  be  sure.

DOR.   I  am  not  such  a  fool  as  you  think  me !

ORG.  In  short,  daughter,  you  must  obey,  and  show  a
complete  deference  to  my  choice.

DOR.  {Running  away}.  I  would  not  care  a  straw  for
such  a  husband.

ORG.  (failing  to  slap  Donne's  face).  You  have  a  pes-
tilent hussy  with  you,  daughter,  with  whom  I  cannot  put
up  any  longer  without  forgetting  myself.  I  do  not  feel
equal  to  continue  our  conversation  now;  her  insolent
remarks  have  set  my  brain  on  fire,  and  I  must  have  a
breath  of  air  to  compose  myself.

SCENE  III. — MARIANE,  DORINE.

DOR.  Tell  me  have  you  lost  your  speech  ?  And  must  I
act  your  part  in  this  affair?  To  allow  such  a  senseless
proposal  to  be  made  to  you,  without  saying  the  least  word
against  it!

MAR.  What  would  you  have  me  do  against  a  tyrannical
father  ?

DOR.  That  which  is  necessary,  to  ward  off  such  a  threat.

MAR.  What?

DOR.  Tell  him  that  you  cannot  love  by  proxy,  that  you
marry  for  yourself,  and  not  for  him  ;  that  you  being  the
only  one  concerned  in  this  matter,  it  is  you,  and  not  he,
who  must  like  the  husband,  and  that  since  Tartuffe  is  so
charming  in  his  eyes,  he  may  marry  him  himself  without
let  or  hindrance.

MAR.  Ah  !  a  father,  I  confess,  has  so  much  authority
over  us,  that  I  have  never  had  the  courage  to  answer
him.

DOR.  But  let  us  argue  this  affair.  Valere  has  proposed
for  you :  do  you  love  him,  pray,  or  do  you  not  ?

MAR.  Ah  !  you  do  my  feelings  great  injustice,  Dorine,
to  ask  me  such  a  question.  Have  I  not  a  hundred  times
opened  my  heart  to  you  ?  and  do  not  you  know  the
warmth  of  my  affection  for  him  ?

DOR.   How  do  I  know  whether  your  lips  have  spoken

I2O  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,    THE    HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  H.

what  your  heart  felt  ?  and  whether  you  have  any  real  re-
gard for  this  lover  ?

MAR.  You  wrong  me  greatly  in  doubting  it,  Dorine  ;
for  my  true  sentiments  have  been  but  too  clearly  shown.

DOR.   You  really  love  him,  then  ?

MAR.  Yes,  very  passionately.

DOR.  And,  to  all  appearance,  he  loves  you  as  well  ?

MAR.  I  believe  so.

DOR.  And  you  are  both  equally  eager  to  marry  each
other  ?

MAR.  Assuredly.

DOR.  What  do  you  expect  from  this  other  match  then?

MAR.   To  kill  myself,  if  they  force  me  to  it.

DOR.  Very  well.  That  is  a  resource  I  did  not  think
of;  you  have  only  to  die  to  get  out  of  trouble.  The  re-
medy is  doubtless  admirable.  It  drives  me  mad  to  hear
this  sort  of  talk.

MAR.  Good  gracious  !  Dorine,  what  a  temper  you  get
into  !  You  do  not  sympathize  in  the  least  with  people's
troubles.

DOR.  I  do  not  sympathize  with  people  who  talk  stu-
pidly, and,  when  an  opportunity  presents  itself,  give  way
as  you  do  !

MAR.  But  what  would  you  have  me  do?  If  I  am
timid  .  .  .

DOR.  Love  requires  firmness.

MAR.  But  have  I  wavered  in  my  affection  towards
Valere  ?  and  is  it  not  his  duty  to  obtain  a  father's  con-
sent ?

DOR.  But  what !  if  your  father  is  a  downright  churl,
who  is  completely  taken  up  with  Tartuffe,  and  will  break
off  a  match  he  had  agreed  on,  is  your  lover  to  be  blamed
for  that  ?

MAR.  But  am  I,  by  a  flat  refusal  and  a  scornful  disdain,
to  let  everyone  know  how  much  I  am  smitten  ?  However
brilliant  Valere  may  be,  am  I  to  forget  the  modesty  of  my
sex,  and  my  filial  duty  ?  And  would  you  have  me  display
my  passion  to  the  whole  world  .  .  .

DOR.  No,  I  would  have  you  do  nothing  of  the  sort,
perceive  that  you  would  like  to  be  Mr.  TartufTe's ;  and  I
should  be  wrong,  now  that  I  come  to  think  of  it,  to  turn

SCENBIII.J  TARTUFFE;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.

you  from  such  a  union.  What  right  have  I  to  oppose
your  wishes  ?  The  match  in  itself  is  very  advantageous.
Monsieur  Tartuffe  !  oh,  oh  !  is  no  small  fry.  Certainly
Monsieur  Tartuffe,  all  things  considered,  is  no  fool;*4  no,
not  at  all,  and  it  is  no  small  honour  to  be  his  better  half.
Already  every  one  crowns  him  with  glory.  He  is  a  noble
in  his  own  country,  handsome  in  appearance ;  he  has  red
ears  and  a  florid  complexion.  You  will  live  only  too
happily  with  such  a  husband.

MAR.  Good  gracious  !  .    .    .

DOR.  How  joyful  you  will  be  to  see  yourself  the  wife
of  such  a  handsome  husband  !

MAR.  Ah  !  leave  off  such  talk,  I  pray,  and  rather  assist
me  to  free  myself  from  this  match.  It  is  finished :  I  yield,
and,  am  ready  to  do  anything.

DOR.  No,  a  daughter  ought  to  obey  her  father,  even  if
he  wishes  her  to  marry  an  ape.  Yours  is  an  enviable
fate  :  of  what  do  you  complain  ?  You  will  drive  down  in
the  stage-coach  to  his  native  town,  where  you  will  find
plenty  of  uncles  and  cousins,  whom  it  will  be  your  great
delight  to  entertain.  You  will  be  introduced  directly  into
the  best  society.  You  will  go  and  pay  the  first  visits  to
the  wife  of  the  bailie, tt  and  of  the  assessor,  **  who  will  do
you  the  honour  of  giving  you  a  folding-chair.  *7  There,
at  carnival  time,  you  may  expect  a  ball,  with  the  grand
band*8  of  musicians,  to  wit,  two  bagpipes,  and  sometimes

44  The  original  has  ''  Monsieur  Tartuffe  .  .  .  n'est  pas  un  homme  .  .  .
qui  se  mouche  du  pied;  literally,  ''  Mr. Tartuffe  ...  is  not  a  man:  who
blows  his  nose  with  his  foot."  To  pretend  to  blow  one's  nose  with  one's
foot  was  considered  a  favourite  trick  of  jugglers  and  acrobats ;  hence  a
man  who  could  do  such  a  thing  was  no  fool.

46  The  bailli,  whose  office  dates  probably  from  the  eleventh  century,
was  the  representative  of  the  king  or  lord  in  the  northern  provinces  of
France ;  whilst  in  the  west  and  south  he  was  called  the  senechal.  But,  in
Moliere's  time,  the  duties  of  their  office  had  been  much  reduced ;  they
could  no  longer  call  out  the  military  force,  or  regulate  the  finances  of  any
province.  They  were  simply  a  kind  of  minor  judges,  though  nominally
at  the  head  of  the  provincial  nobility.

46  In  French  I'elue,    The  elu  was  a  kind  of  assessor  who  regulated  the
taxes.

47  A  folding-chair  was  always  given  to  people  of  inferior  rank  to  sit  on
when  in  the  presence  of  their  superiors.

48  In  French  la  grand'  bande.     Jn  Moliere's  time  any  band  of  musi-
cians was  called  une  bande,  just  as  in  English  "  band  "  is  used  now.   There

122  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTH.

Fagotin*9  and  the  marionnettes.  If  your  husband,  how-
ever .  .  .

MAR.  Oh !  you  kill  me.  Try  rather  to  assist  me  with
your  counsels.

DOR.  I  am  your  servant.

MAR.  Ah  !  for  pity's  sake,  Dorine  .    .    .

DOR.  This  affair  ought  to  go  on,  to  punish  you.

MAR.  There  is  a  good  girl !

DOR.  No.

MAR.  If  I  declare  to  you  that  .    .    .

DOR.  Not  at  all.  Tartuffe  is  your  man,  and  you  shall
have  a  taste  of  him.

MAR.  You  know  that  I  have  always  confided  in  you:
do  ...

DOR.  No,  it  is  of  no  use,  you  shall  be  Tartuffed.

MAR.  Very  well,  since  my  misfortunes  cannot  move
you,  leave  me  henceforth  entirely  to  my  despair.  My
heart  shall  seek  help  from  that ;  and  I  know  an  infallible
remedy  for  my  sufferings.  (She  wishes  to  go.

DOR.  Stop,  stop,  come  back.  I  give  in.  In  spite  of  all,
I  must  take  compassion  on  you.

MAR.  Look  here,  Dorine,  if  they  inflict  this  cruel  mar-
tyrdom upon  me,  I  shall  die  of  it,  I  tell  you.

DOR.  Do  not  worry  yourself.  We  will  cleverly  pre-
vent .  .  .  But  here  comes  Valere,  your  lover.

SCENE  IV. — VALERE,  MARIANE,  DORINE.

VAL.  I  have  just  been  told  a  piece  of  news,  Madam,
which  I  did  not  know,  and  which  is  certainly  very  pretty.

MAR.  What  is  it  ?

VAL.  That  you  are  going  to  be  married  to  Tartuffe.

MAR.  My  father  has  taken  this  idea  into  his  head,  cer-
tainly.

VAR.  Your  father,  Madam  .    .    .

MAR.  Has  altered  his  mind  :  he  has  just  proposed  this
affair  to  me.

was  then  at  Court  la  bande  des  Vingt-  Quatre,  or  the  great  violins,  and  la
petite  bande,  or  the  little  violins,  of  which  Lulli  was  the  conductor.
There  was  also  a  third  bande,  that  of  the  Grande-fecurie.

49  Fagotin  was  the  name  of  a  famous  trained  monkey,  very  much  ad-
mired in  Paris,  in  Moliere's  time.  La  Fontaine  mentions  him  in  his
fable  of  The  Court  of  the  Lion.

SCBNEW.]  TAKTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  I  2J

VAL.   What !  seriously  ?

MAR.  Yes,  seriously,  he  has  openly  declared  himself  for
this  match.

VAL.  And  what  have  you  decided,  in  your  own  mind,
Madam  ?

MAR.   I  know  not.

VAL.  The  answer  is  polite.     You  know  not  ?

MAR.  No.

VAL.  No?

MAR.  What  do  you  advise  me  ?

VAL.  I,  I  advise  you  to  take  this  husband.

MAR.  Is  that  your  advice  ?

VAL.  Yes.

MAR.  Seriously  ?

VAL.  Doubtless.  The  choice  is  glorious,  and  well
worth  consideration.

MAR.  Very  well,  Sir,  I  shall  act  upon  the  advice.

VAL.   That  will  not  be  very  painful,  I  think.

MAR.  Not  more  painful  than  for  you  to  give  it.

VAL.  I  gave  it  to  please  you,  Madam.

MAR.  And  I  shall  follow  it  to  please  you.

DOR.  {Retiring  to  the  further  part  of  the  stage).  Let  us
see  what  this  will  come  to.

VAL.  This  then  is  your  affection  ?  And  it  was  all  de-
ceit when  you  .  .  .

MAR.  Do  not  let  us  speak  of  that,  I  pray.  You  have
told  me  quite  candidly  that  I  ought  to  accept  the  husband
selected  for  me ;  and  I  declare  that  I  intend  to  do  so,
since  you  give  me  this  wholesome  advice.

VAL.  Do  not  make  my  advice  your  excuse.  Your  reso-
lution was  taken  beforehand ;  and  you  catch  at  a  frivolous
pretext  to  justify  the  breaking  of  your  word.

MAR.   Very  true,  and  well  put.

VAL.  No  doubt ;  and  you  never  had  any  real  affection
for  me.

MAR.  Alas  !   think  so,  if  you  like.

VAL.  Yes,  yes,  if  I  like ;  but  my  offended  feelings  may
perhaps  forestall  you  in  such  a  design ;  and  I  know  where
to  offer  both  my  heart  and  my  hand.

MAR.  Ah  !  I  have  no  doubt  of  it ;  and  the  love  which
merit  can  command  .

124  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTIL

VAL.  For  Heaven's  sake,  let  us  drop  merit.  I  have  but
little,  no  doubt ;  and  you  have  given  proof  of  it.  But  I
hope  much  from  the  kindness  of  some  one  whose  heart  is
open  to  me,  and  who  will  not  be  ashamed  to  consent  to
repair  my  loss.

MAR.  The  loss  is  not  great :  and  you  will  easily  enough
console  yourself  for  this  change.

VAL.  I  shall  do  my  utmost,  you  may  depend.  A  heart
that  forgets  us  wounds  our  self-love ;  we  must  do  our  best
to  forget  it  also  ;  if  we  do  not  succeed,  we  must  at  least
pretend  to  do  so :  for  the  meanness  is  unpardonable  of
still  loving  when  we  are  forsaken.

MAR.  This  is,  no  doubt,  an  elevated  and  noble  senti-
ment.

VAL.  It  is  so  ;  and  every  one  must  approve  of  it.
What !  would  you  have  me  forever  to  nourish  my  ardent
affection  for  you,  and  not  elsewhere  bestow  that  heart
which  you  reject,  whilst  I  see  you,  before  my  face,  pass
into  the  arms  of  another?

MAR.  On  the  contrary  ;  as  for  me,  that  is  what  I  would
have  you  do,  and  I  wish  it  were  done  already.

VAL.  You  wish  it?

MAR.  Yes.

VAL.  That  is  a  sufficient  insult,  Madam ;  and  I  shall
satisfy  you  this  very  moment.  (He  pretends  to  go.

MAR.   Very  well.

VAL.  {Coming  back).  Remember  at  least,  that  you
yourself  drive  me  to  this  extremity.

MAR.  Yes.

VAL.  ( Coming  back  once  more}.  And  that  I  am  only
following  your  example.

MAR.   Very  well,  my  example.

VAL.  {Going).  That  will  do  :  you  shall  be  obeyed  on
the  spot.

MAR.  So  much  the  better.

VAL.  {Coming  back  again).  This  is  the  last  time  that
you  will  ever  see  me.

MAR.  That  is  right.

VAL.   {Goes,  and  turns  round  at  the  door).     He?

MAR.    What  is  the  matter  ?

VAL.   Did  not  you  call  me  ?

SCENE  iv.]  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

MAR.  I !     You  are  dreaming.

VAL.  Well !  then  I  will  be  gone.     Farewell,  Madam.

(He  goes  slowly.

MAR.  Farewell,  Sir.

DOR.  (71?  Mariane}.  I  think  that  you  are  losing  your
senses  with  all  this  folly.  I  have  all  along  allowed  you  to
quarrel,  to  see  what  it  would  lead  to  at  last.  Hullo,  Mr.
Valere.  (She  takes  hold  of  Valere' s  arm.

VAL.  (Pretending  to  resist).  He?  what  do  you  want,
Dorine  ?

DOR.   Come  here.

VAL.  No,  no,  I  feel  too  indignant.  Do  not  hinder  me
from  doing  as  she  wishes  me.

DOR.  Stop.

VAL.  No  ;  look  here,  I  have  made  up  my  mind.

DOR.  Ah!

MAR.  (Aside}.  He  cannot  bear  to  see  me,  my  presence
drives  him  away ;  and  I  had  therefore  much  better  leave
the  place.

DOR.  (Quitting  Valere  and  running  after  Mariane).
Now  for  the  other  !  Where  are  you  running  to  ?

MAR.  Let  me  alone.

DOR.  You  must  come  back.

MAR.   No,  no,  Dorine  ;  it  is  of  no  use  detaining  me.

VAL.  (Aside).  I  see,  but  too  well,  that  the  sight  of  me
annoys  her  ;  and  I  had,  no  doubt,  better  free  her  from  it.

DOR.  (Leaving  Mariane  and  running  after  Valere).
What,  again  !  The  devil  take  you  !  Yes.  I  will  have  it
so.  Cease  this  fooling,  and  come  here  both  of  you.

(She  holds  them  both.

VAL.  (To  Dorine).     But  what  are  you  about  ?

MAR.  ( To  Dorine).     What  would  you  do?

DOR.  I  would  have  you  make  it  up  together,  and  get
out  of  this  scrape.  (To  Valere).  Are  you  mad  to  wran-
gle in  this  way?

VAL.   Did  you  not  hear  how  she  spoke  to  me  ?

DOR.  (To  'Mariane).  Are  you  silly  to  have  got  into
such  a  passion  ?

MAR.  Did  you  not  see  the  thing,  and  how  he  has  treated
me?

DOR.   Folly  on  both  sides.     (To  Valere).     She   has  no

I  26  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,    THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  u.

other  wish  than  to  remain  yours,  I  can  vouch  for  it.  {To
Mariane).  He  loves  none  but  you,  and  desires  nothing
more  than  to  be  your  husband.  I  will  answer  for  it  with
my  life.

MAR.  (To  Valere).  Why  then  did  you  give  me  such
advice  ?

VAL.  {To  Mariane).  Why  did  you  ask  me  for  it  on
such  a  subject  ?

DOR.  You  are  a  pair  of  fools.  Come,  your  hands,  both
of  you.  {To  Valere).  Come,  yours.

VAL.  (  Giving  his  hand  to  Dorine).  What  is  the  good  of
my  hand  ?

DOR.   {To  Mariane}.  Come  now  !   yours.

MAR.   {Giving hers).  What  is  the  use  of  all  this?

DOR.  Good  Heavens !  quick,  come  on.  You  love  each
other  better  than  you  think.  (  Valere  and  Mariane  hold
each  other1  s  hands  for  some  time  without  speaking,

VAL.  {Turning  towards  Mariane),  Do  not  do  things
with  such  a  bad  grace,  and  cast  a  glance  upon  one  without
any  hatred.  {Mariane  turns  to  Valere,  and  smiles  on  him.

DOR.  Truth  to  tell,  lovers  are  great  fools  !

VAL.  {To  Mariane).  Now  really !  have  I  no  reason  to
complain  of  you ;  and,  without  an  untruth,  are  you  not  a
naughty  girl  to  delight  in  saying  disagreeable  things  ?

MAR.  And  you,  are  you  not  the  most  ungrateful  fel-
low .  .  .

DOR.  Leave  all  this  debate  till  another  time,  and  let  us
think  about  averting  this  confounded  marriage.

MAR.  Tell  us,  then,  what  we  are  to  do.

DOR.  We  must  do  many  things.  {To  Mariane).  Your
father  does  but  jest;  {To  Valere),  and  it  is  all  talk.  {To
Mariane).  But  as  for  you,  you  had  better  appear  to  comply
quietly  with  his  nonsense,  so  that,  in  case  of  need,  it  may
be  easier  for  you  to  put  off  this  proposed  marriage.  In
gaining  time,  we  gain  everything.  Sometimes  you  can
pretend  a  sudden  illness,  that  will  necessitate  a  delay;
then  you  can  pretend  some  evil  omens,  that  you  unluckily
met  a  corpse,  broke  a  looking-glass,  or  dreamed  of  muddy
water.  In  short,  the  best  of  it  is  that  they  cannot  unite
you  to  any  one  else  but  him,  unless  you  please  to  say  yes.
But,  the  better  to  succeed,  I  think  it  advisable  that  you

SCENE i.i  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THL  HYPOCRITE.  127

should  not  be  seen  talking  together.  {To  Valere}.  Now
go ;  and  without  delay,  employ  your  friends  to  make  Orgon
keep  his  promise  to  you.  We  will  interest  her  brother,
and  enlist  her  mother-in-law  on  our  side.  Good-bye.

VAL.  {To  Mariani).  Whatever  efforts  we  may  make
together,  my  greatest  hope,  to  tell  the  truth,  is  in  you.

MAR.  {To  Valere).  I  cannot  answer  for  the  will  of  a
father;  but  I  shall  be  no  one  but  Valere's.

VAL.  Oh,  how  happy  you  make  me  !  And,  whatever
they  may  attempt  .  .  .

DOR.  Ah !  lovers  are  never  weary  of  prattling.  Be  off,
I  tell  you.

VAL.    ( Goes  a  step,  and  returns).  After  all  .    .    .

DOR.  What  a  cackle !  Go  you  this  way ;  and  you,  the
other.  {Dorine  pushes  each  of  them  by  the  shoulder,  and
compels  them  to  separated)

ACT  III.

SCENE  I. — DAMIS,  DORINE.

DAM.  May  lightning  strike  me  dead  on  the  spot,  may
every  one  treat  me  as  the  greatest  of  scoundrels,  if  any
respect  or  authority  shall  stop  me  from  doing  something
rash!

DOR.  Curb  this  temper  for  Heaven's  sake :  your  father
did  but  mention  it.  People  do  not  carry  out  all  their
proposals ;  and  the  road  between  the  saying  and  the  doing
is  a  long  one.

DAM.  I  must  put  a  stop  to  this  fellow's  plots,  and
whisper  a  word  or  two  in  his  ear.

DOR.  Gently,  pray !  leave  him,  and  your  father  as  well,
to  your  mother-in-law's  management.  She  has  some  in-
fluence with  Tartuffe :  he  agrees  to  all  that  she  says,  and  I
should  not  wonder  if  he  had  some  sneaking  regard  for  her.
Would  to  Heaven  that  it  were  true !  A  pretty  thing  that
would  be.50  In  short,  your  interest  obliges  her  to  send

»°  This  is  the  third  time  the  audience  has  heard  that  Tartuffe  loves  El-
mire,  and  Moliere  does  this  in  order  that  the  public  should  not  afterwards
be  too  suddenly  horrified  when  the  hypocrite  is  unmasked.

128  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  m

for  him :  she  wishes  to  sound  him  about  this  marriage  that
troubles  you,  to  know  his  intentions,  and  to  acquaint  him
with  the  sad  contentions  which  he  may  cause,  if  he  enter-
tains any  hope  on  this  subject.  His  servant  told  me  he
was  at  prayers,  and  that  I  could  not  get  sight  of  him;  but
said  that  he  was  coming  down.  Go,  therefore,  I  pray  you,
and  let  me  wait  for  him.

DAM.  I  may  be  present  at  this  interview.

DOR.  Not  at  all.     They  must  be  alone.

DAM.  I  shall  not  say  a  word  to  him.

DOR.  You  deceive  yourself:  we  know  your  usual  out-
bursts ;  and  that  is  just  the  way  to  spoil  all.  Go.

DAM.   No  ;  I  will  see,  without  getting  angry.

DOR.  How  tiresome  you  are  !  Here  he  comes.  Go
away.  (Damis  hides  himself  in  a  closet  at  the  farther

end  of  the  stage).

SCENE  II. — TARTUFFE,  DORINE.

TAR.  ( The  moment  he  perceives  Dorine,  he  begins  to
speak  loudly  to  his  servant,  who  is  behind)  ^  Laurent,  put
away  my  hair  shirt  and  my  scourge,  and  pray  that  Heaven
may  ever  enlighten  you.  If  any  one  calls  to  see  me,  say
that  I  have  gone  to  the  prisoners  to  distribute  the  alms
which  I  have  received.

DOR.    (Aside).     What  affectation  and  boasting  !

TAR.  What  do  you  want  ?

DOR.  To  tell  you  .    .    .

TAR.  (Pulling  a  handkerchief  from  his  pocket).  Foi
Heaven's  sake  !  before  you  go  any  farther,  take  this  hand-
kerchief, I  pray.

DOR.  For  what  ?

TAR.  Cover  this  bosom,  which  I  cannot  bear  to  see.
The  spirit  is  offended  by  such  sights,  and  they  evoke
sinful  thoughts.

DOR.  You  are,  then,  mighty  susceptible  to  temptation ;
and  the  flesh  seems  to  make  a  great  impression  on  your

51  The  foul  hero  of  the  play  only  makes  his  appearance  now,  in  the
second  Scene  of  the  third  Act.  According  to  the  Lettre  sur  P  Imposteur
(see  Introductory  Notice,  page  377),  this  was  done  by  Moliere  on  pur-
pose, because  such  a  character  could  appear  only  when  the  action  was  in
full  force.

SCENE  iii.j  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  I  29

senses  !  I  cannot  tell,  of  course,  what  heat  inflames  you :
but  my  desires  are  not  so  easily  aroused ;  and  I  could  see
you  naked  from  top  to  toe,  without  being  in  the  least
tempted  by  the  whole  of  your  skin.

TAR.  Be  a  little  more  modest  in  your  expressions,  or  I
shall  leave  you  on  the  spot.

DOR.  No,  no,  it  is  I  who  am  going  to  leave  you  to
yourself;  and  I  have  only  two  words  to  say  to  you.  My
mistress  is  coming  down  into  this  parlour,  and  wishes  the
favor  of  a  minute's  conversation  with  you.

TAR.  Alas  !  with  all  my  heart.

DOR.  {Aside).  How  he  softens  down  !  Upon  my  word,
I  stick  to  what  I  have  said  of  him.

TAR.  Will  she  be  long  ?

DOR.  Methinks  I  hear  her.  Yes,  it  is  herself,  and  I
leave  you  together.

SCENE  III. — ELMIRE,  TARTUFFE.

TAR.  May  Heaven,  in  its  mighty  goodness,  for  ever  be-
stow upon  you  health,  both  of  soul  and  body,  and  bless
your  days  as  much  as  the  humblest  of  its  votaries  desires.

ELM.  I  am  much  obliged  for  this  pious  wish.  But  let
us  take  a  seat,  to  be  more  at  ease.

TAR.  (Seated^).  Are  you  quite  recovered  from  your  in-
disposition ?

ELM.   (Seated'}.  Quite ;  this  fever  has  soon  left  me.

TAR.  My  prayers  are  not  deserving  enough  to  have
drawn  this  grace  from  above ;  but  not  one  of  them  as-
cended to  Heaven  that  had  not  your  recovery  for  its
object.

ELM.  You  are  too  anxious  in  your  zeal  for  me.

TAR.  We  cannot  cherish  your  dear  health  too  much  ;
and  to  re-establish  yours,  I  would  have  given  mine.

ELM.  That  is  pushing  Christian  charity  very  far ;  and  I
feel  much  indebted  to  you  for  all  this  kindness.

TAR.  I  do  much  less  for  you  than  you  deserve.

ELM.  I  wished  to  speak  to  you  in  private  about  a  cer-
tain matter,  and  am  glad  that  no  one  is  here  to  ob-
serve us.

TAR.  I  am  equally  delighted  ;  and  no  doubt,  it  is  very
pleasant  to  me,  Madam,  to  find  myself  alone  with  you.  I

13°  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  HI.

have  often  asked  this  opportunity  from  Heaven,  but,  till
now,  in  vain.

ELM.  What  I  wish  is  a  few  words  with  you,  upon  a
small  matter,  in  which  you  bare  your  heart  and  conceal
nothing  from  me.  (Damis,  without  showing  himself,  half
opens  the  door  of  the  closet  into  which  he  had  retired  to  listen
to  the  conversation}.

TAR.  And  I  will  also,  in  return  for  this  rare  favour,  un-
bosom myself  entirely  to  you,  and  swear  to  you  that  the
reports  which  I  have  spread  about  the  visits  which  you  re-
ceive in  homage  of  your  charms,  do  not  spring  from  any
hatred  towards  you,  but  rather  from  a  passionate  zeal
which  carries  me  away,  and  out  of  a  pure  motive  .  .  .

ELM.  That  is  how  I  take  it.  I  think  it  is  for  my  good
that  you  trouble  yourself  so  much.

TAR.  (Taking  Elmire1  s  hand  and  pressing  her  fingers}.
Yes,  Madam,  no  doubt ;  and  my  fervour  is  such  .  .  .

ELM.   Oh  !  you  squeeze  me  too  hard.

TAR.  It  is  through  excess  of  zeal.  I  never  had  any  in-
tention of  hurting  you,  and  would  sooner  .  .  .  (He places
his  hand  on  Elmire'  s  knee}.

ELM.  What  does  your  hand  there  ?

TAR.  I  am  only  feeling  your  dress :  the  stuff  is  very
soft.

ELM.  Oh  !  please  leave  off,  I  am  very  ticklish.  (Elmire
pushes  her  chair  back,  and  Tartu ffe  draws  near  with  his).

TAR.  (Handling  the  collar  of  Elmire}.  Bless  me!  how
wonderful  is  the  workmanship  of  this  lace !  They  work  in
a  miraculous  manner  now-a-days ;  never  was  anything  so
beautifully  made.52

ELM.  It  is  true.  But  let  us  have  some  talk  about  our
affair.  I  have  been  told  that  my  husband  wishes  to  retract
his  promise,  and  give  you  his  daughter.  Is  it  true  ?  Tell
me.

TAR.  He  has  hinted  something  to  me  ;  but  to  tell  you
the  truth,  Madam,  that  is  not  the  happiness  for  which  I

68  Rabelais,  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  the  second  book  of  Pantagruel,
says  of  Panurge :  "  When  he  came  into  the  company  of  some  good  ladies,
he  would  trifle  them  into  a  discourse  of  some  fine  workmanship  of  bone-
lace,  and  then  immediately  put  his  hand  into  their  bosom,  asking  them,
'And  this  work,  is  it  of  Flanders,  or  of  Hainault  ? ' "

SCENE  in.]  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,    THE   HYPOCRITE.  IJI

am  sighing:  I  behold  elsewhere  the  marvellous  attractions
of  that  bliss  which  forms  the  height  of  my  wishes.

ELM.  That  is  because  you  have  no  love  for  earthly
things.

TAR.  My  breast  does  not  contain  a  heart  of  flint.

ELM.  I  believe  that  all  your  sighs  tend  towards  Heaven,
and  that  nothing  here  below  rouses  your  desires.

TAR.  The  love  which  attaches  us  to  eternal  beauties
does  not  stifle  in  us  the  love  of  earthly  things ;  our  senses
may  easily  be  charmed  by  the  perfect  works  which  Heaven
has  created.  Its  reflected  loveliness  shines  forth  in  such
as  you ;  but  in  you  alone  it  displays  its  choicest  wonders.
It  has  diffused  on  your  face  such  beauty,  that  it  dazzles
the  eyes  and  transports  the  heart ;  nor  could  I  behold  you,
perfect  creature,  without  admiring  in  you  nature's  author,
and  feeling  my  heart  smitten  with  an  ardent  love  for  the
most  beautiful  of  portraits,  wherein  he  has  reproduced
himself.  At  first  1  feared  that  this  secret  ardour  might  be
nothing  but  a  cunning  snare  of  the  foul  fiend ;  and  my
heart  even  resolved  to  fly  your  presence,  thinking  that  you
might  be  an  obstacle  to  my  salvation.  But  at  last  I  found,
oh  most  lovely  beauty,  that  my  passion  could  not  be
blameable ;  that  I  could  reconcile  it  with  modesty ;  and
this  made  me  freely  indulge  it.  It  is,  I  confess,  a  great
presumption  in  me  to  dare  to  offer  you  this  heart ;  but  I
expect,  in  my  affections,  everything  from  your  kindness,
and  nothing  from  the  vain  efforts  of  my  own  weakness.
In  you  is  my  hope,  my  happiness,  my  peace ;  on  you
depends  my  torment  or  my  bliss;  and  it  is  by  your
decision  solely  that  I  shall  be  happy  if  you  wish  it;  or
miserable,  if  it  pleases  you.

ELM.  The  declaration  is  exceedingly  gallant ;  but  it  is,
to  speak  truly,  rather  a  little  surprising.  Methinks  you
ought  to  arm  your  heart  better,  and  to  reflect  a  little  upon
such  a  design.  A  pious  man  like  you,  and  who  is  every-
where spoken  of  ...

TAR.  Ah  !  although  I  am  a  pious  man,  I  am  not  the
less  a  man;88  and,  when  one  beholds  your  heavenly

M  Some  annotators  of  Moliere  pretend  that  he  took  this  line  from  Cor-
neille's  tragedy,  Sertorius,  where  we  find,  '•  And  though  I  am  a  Roman,
I  am  not  the  less  a  man."  It.  is  also  found  in  the  eighth  tale  of  the  third
day  of  Boccaccio's  Decameron.

132  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  m.

charms,  the  heart  surrenders  and  reasons    no  longer.     I
know  that  such  discourse  from  me  must  appear  strange ;
but,  after  all,   Madam,  I  am  not  an  angel ;   and  if  my
confession  be  condemned  by  you,  you  must  blame  your
own  attractions  for  it.     As  soon  as  I  beheld  their  more
than  human  loveliness,  you  became  the  queen  of  my  soul.
The  ineffable   sweetness   of  your   divine    glances   broke
down  the  resistance  of  my  obstinate  heart;  it  overcame
everything — fastings,  prayers,  tears — and  led  all  my  de-
sires to  your  charms.     My  looks  and  my  sighs  have  told
you  so  a  thousand  times;  and,  the  better  to  explain  my-
self, I  now  make  use  of  words.     If  you  should   graciously
contemplate  the  tribulations  of  your  unworthy  slave ;  if
your  kindness  would  console  me,  and  will  condescend  to
stoop  to  my  insignificant  self,  I  shall  ever  entertain  for
you,  oh  miracle  of  sweetness,  an  unexampled  devotion.
Your  honour  runs  not  the  slightest  risk  with  me,  and  need
not  fear  the  least  disgrace  on  my  part.     All  these  court
gallants,  of  whom  women  are  so  fond,  are  noisy  in  their
doings  and  vain  in  their  talk ;  they  are  incessantly  plum-
ing themselves   on  their  successes,  and   they  receive  no
favours  which   they  do    not    divulge.      Their    indiscreet
tongues,  in  which  people  confide,  desecrate  the  altar  on
which  their  hearts  sacrifice.     But  men  of  our  stamp  love
discreetly,  and  with  them  a  secret  is  always  surely  kept.
The  care  which  we  take  of  our  own  reputation  is  a  suffi-
cient guarantee  for  the  object  of  our  love ;  and  it  is  only
with  us,  when  they  accept  our  hearts,  that  they  find  love
without  scandal,  and  pleasure  without  fear.84

ELM.  I  have  listened  to  what  you  say,  and  your  rhetoric
explains  itself  in  sufficiently  strong  terms  to  me.  But  are
you  not  afraid  that  the  fancy  may  take  me  to  tell  my
husband  of  this  gallant  ardour;  and  that  the  prompt
knowledge  of  such  an  amour  might  well  change  the
friendship  which  he  bears  you.

TAR.  I  know  that  you  are  too  gracious,  and  that  you
will  pardon  my  boldness;  that  you  will  excuse,  on  the

64  Boccaccio's  Feronde  uses  some  of  Tartuffe's  expressions  in  the  tale
mentioned  in  note  53.  Regnier's  Macette  says  also :  ''  More  discreet,  they
(the  hypocrites)  know,  in  loving,  to  give  more  satisfaction,  though  with
less  ostentation."

SCENE  IT.]  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  133

score  of  human  frailty,  the  violent  transports  of  a  passion
which  offends  you,  and  consider,  by  looking  at  yourself,  that
people  are  not  blind,  and  men  are  made  of  flesh  and  blood.
ELM.  Others  would  perhaps  take  it  in  a  different  fashion ;
but  I  shall  show  my  discretion.  I  shall  not  tell  the  matter
to  my  husband :  but  in  return,  I  require  something  of
you :  that  is,  to  forward,  honestly  and  without  quibbling,
the  union  of  Valere  with  Mariane,  to  renounce  the  unjust
power  which  would  enrich  you  with  what  belongs  to
another;  and  .  .  .

SCENE  IV. — ELMIRE,  DAMIS,  TARTUFFE.

DAM.  {Coming  out  of  the  closet  in  which  he  was  hidden}.
No,  Madam,  no ;  this  shall  be  made  public.  I  was  in  there
when  I  overheard  it  all ;  and  Providence  seems  to  have
conducted  me  thither  to  abash  the  pride  of  a  wretch  who
wrongs  me ;  to  point  me  out  a  way  to  take  vengeance  on
his  hypocrisy  and  insolence ;  to  undeceive  my  father,  and
to  show  him  plainly  the  heart  of  a  villain  who  talks  to  you
of  love.

ELM.  No,  Datnis;  it  suffices  that  he  reforms,  and
endeavours  to  deserve  my  indulgence.  Since  I  have
promised  him,  do  not  make  me  break  my  word.  I  have
no  wish  to  provoke  a  scandal ;  a  woman  laughs  at  such
follies,  and  never  troubles  her  husband's  ears  with  them.

DAM.  You  have  your  reasons  for  acting  in  that  way,  and
I  also  have  mine  for  behaving  differently.  It  is  a  farce  to
wish  to  spare  him  ;  and  the  insolent  pride  of  his  bigotry
has  already  triumphed  too  much  over  my  just  anger,  and
caused  too  much  disorder  amongst  us.  The  scoundrel  has
governed  my  father  too  long,  and  plotted  against  my  affec-
tions as  well  as  Valere1  s.  My  father  must  be  undeceived
about  this  perfidious  wretch ;  and  Heaven  offers  me  an  easy
means.  I  am  indebted  to  it  for  this  opportunity,  and  it  is
too  favourable  to  be  neglected.  I  should  deserve  to  have
it  snatched  away  from  me,  did  I  not  make  use  of  it,  now
that  I  have  it  in  hand.

ELM.  Damis  .    .    .

DAM.  No,  by  your  leave,  I  will  use  my  own  judgment
I  am  highly  delighted :  and  all  you  can  say  will  be  in  vain

134  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  m.

to  make  me  forego  the  pleasure  of  revenge.     I  shall  settle
this  affair  without  delay;  and  here  is  just  the  opportunity.

SCENE  V. — ORGON,  ELMIRE,  DAMIS,  TARTUFFE.

DAM.  We  will  enliven  your  arrival,  father,  with  an  alto-
gether fresh  incident,  that  will  surprise  you  much.  You  are
well  repaid  for  all  your  caresses,  and  this  gentleman  rewards
your  tenderness  handsomely.  His  great  zeal  for  you  has
just  shown  itself;  he  aims  at  nothing  less  than  at  dis-
honouring you ;  and  I  have  just  surprised  him  making  to
your  wife  an  insulting  avowal  of  a  guilty  passion.  Her
sweet  disposition,  and  her  too  discreet  feelings  would  by
all  means  have  kept  the  secret  from  you;  but  I  cannot
encourage  such  insolence,  and  think  that  to  have  been  silent
about  it  would  have  been  to  do  you  an  injury.

ELM.  Yes,  I  am  of  opinion  that  we  ought  never  to
trouble  a  husband's  peace  with  all  those  silly  stories;  that
our  honour  does  not  depend  upon  that ;  and  that  it  is
enough  for  us  to  be  able  to  defend  ourselves.  These  are
my  sentiments;  and  you  would  have  said  nothing,  Damis,
if  I  had  had  any  influence  with  you.

SCENE  VI. — ORGON,  DAMIS,  TARTUFFE.

ORG.  What  have  I  heard  !  Oh  Heavens  !  is  it  credi-
ble ?

TAR.  Yes,  brother,  I  am  a  wicked,  guilty,  wretched
sinner,  full  of  iniquity,  the  greatest  villain  that  ever  ex-
isted. Each  moment  of  my  life  is  replete  with  pollutions ;
it  is  but  a  mass  of  crime  and  corruption ;  and  I  see  that
Heaven,  to  chastise  me,  intends  to  mortify  me  on  this  oc-
casion. Whatever  great  crime  may  be  laid  to  my  charge,
I  have  neither  the  wish  nor  the  pride  to  deny  it.  Believe
what  you  are  told,  arm  your  anger,  and  drive  me  like  a
criminal  from  your  house.  Whatever  shame  you  may  heap
upon  me,  I  deserve  still  more.

ORG.  (To  his  Son}.  What,  wretch  !  dare  you,  by  this
falsehood,  tarnish  the  purity  of  his  virtue?

DAM.  What, -shall  the  pretended  gentleness  of  this  hypo-
crite make  you  belie  .  .  .

ORG.   Peace,  cursed  plague  !

TAR.  Ah !  let  him  speak ;  you  accuse  him  wrongly,  and

SCENE  vi-1  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,    THE   HYPOCRITE.  I  35

you  had  much  better  believe  in  his  story.  Why  will  you
be  so  favourable  to  me  after  hearing  such  a  fact  ?  Are
you,  after  all,  aware  of  what  I  am  capable  ?  Why  trust  to
my  exterior,  brother,  and  why,  for  all  that  is  seen,  believe
me  to  be  better  than  I  am  ?  No,  no,  you  allow  yourself
to  be  deceived  by  appearances,  and  I  am,  alas  !  nothing
less  than  what  they  think  me.  Everyone  takes  me  to  be
a  godly  man,  but  the  real  truth  is  that  I  am  very  worthless.
(Addressing  himself  to  Damis).  Yes,  my  dear  child,  say
on  ;  call  me  a  perfidious,  infamous,  lost  wretch,  a  thief,  a
murderer ;  load  me  with  still  more  detestable  names  :  I
shall  not  contradict  you,  I  have  deserved  them  ;  and  I  am
willing  on  my  knees  to  suffer  ignominy,  as  a  disgrace  due
to  the  crimes  of  my  life.55

ORG.  (To  Tartuffe).  This  is  too  much,  brother.  (To his
Son).  Does  not  your  heart  relent,  wretch  ?

DAM.  What  !  shall  his  words  deceive  you  so  far  as
to  ...

ORG.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  hangdog.  (Raising  Tar-
tuffe). Rise,  brother,  I  beseech  you.  (To  his  Son).  In-
famous wretch  !

DAM.  He  can  .    .

ORG.  Hold  your  tongue.

DAM.  I  burst  with  rage.  What  !  I  am  looked  upon
as  ...

ORG.   Say  another  word,  and  I  will  break  your  bones.

TAR.  In  Heaven's  name,  brother,  do  not  forget  your-
self! I  would  rather  suffer  the  greatest  hardship,  than
that  he  should  receive  the  slightest  hurt  for  my  sake.

ORG.   (To  his  Son).     Ungrateful  monster  !

TAR.  Leave  him  in  peace.  If  I  must  on  both  knees,
ask  you  to  pardon  him  .  .  .

ORG.  ( Throwing  himself  on  his  knees  also,  and  embrac-
ing Tartuffe).  Alas  !  are  you  in  jest?  (To  his  Son).  Be-
hold his  goodness,  scoundrel  '

DAM.   Thus  .    .    .

ORG.  Cease.

DAM.   What  !  I  .

88  Compare  this  speech  of  Tartuffe  with  Montufar*s,  in  Scarron's  tale
The  Hypocrites,  in  the  Introductory  Notice  to  this  play,  page  365.

136  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  m.

ORG.  Peace,  I  tell  you  :  I  know  too  well  the  motive  of
your  attack.  You  all  hate  him,  and  I  now  perceive  wife,
children,  and  servants  all  let  loose  against  him.  Every
trick  is  impudently  resorted  to  to  remove  this  pious  per-
son from  my  house ;  but  the  more  efforts  they  put  forth  to
banish  him,  the  more  shall  I  employ  to  keep  him  here,
and  I  shall  hasten  to  give  him  my  daughter,  to  abash  the
pride  of  my  whole  family.

DAM.  Do  you  mean  to  compel  her  to  accept  him  ?

ORG.  Yes,  wretch !  and  to  enrage  you,  this  very  eve-
ning. Yes !  I  defy  you  all,  and  shall  let  you  know  that  I
am  the  master,  and  that  I  will  be  obeyed.  Come,  retract ;
throw  yourself  at  his  feet  immediately,  you  scoundrel,  and
ask  his  pardon.

DAM.  What !  I  at  the  feet  of  this  rascal  who,  by  his
impostures  .  .  .

ORG.  What,  you  resist,  you  beggar,  and  insult  him  be-
sides!  (To  Tartuffe).  A  cudgel!  a  cudgel !  do  not
hold  me  back.66  (To  his  Son).  Out  of  my  house,  this
minute,  and  never  dare  to  come  back  to  it.

DAM.  Yes,  I  shall  go ;  but  .    .    .

ORG.  Quick,  leave  the  place,  I  disinherit  you,  you
hangdog,  and  give  you  my  curse  besides.

SCENE  VII.  —  ORGON,  TARTUFFE.

ORG.  To  offend  a  saintly  person  in  that  way !

TAR.  Forgive  him,  oh  Heaven !  the  pang  he  causes  me.57
(To  Organ).  Could  you  but  know  my  grief  at  seeing  my-
self blackened  in  my  brother's  sight  .  .  .

ORG.  Alas  !

TAR.  The  very  thought  of  this  ingratitude  tortures  my
soul  to  that  extent  .  .  .  The  horror  I  conceive  of  it

56  Some  actors,  whilst  playing  the  part  of  Tartuffe,  do  not  move,  whilst
Orgon  is  shouting  "  do  not  hold  me  back."  But  Moliere  can  never  have
intended  to  let  the  spectator  suppose  that  Tartuffe  wished  Damis  to  be
beaten.  On  the  contrary,  his  pretended  opposition  to  Orgon's  passion
Heightens  his  influence ;  for  an  angry  father,  when  his  passion  is  abated,
cannot  take  it  amiss  that  a  stranger  prevents  him  from  chastising  his  son.
According  to  tradition,— a  tradition  supported  by  the  actor  Baron,  a
pupil  of  Moltere,— this  line  was  originally  "  Forgive  him,  O  Heaven,  as  I
forgive  him ;''  but  it  was  altered,  because  some  people  said  it  was  a  parody
on  a  passage  in  the  Lord's  Prayer.

SCBNKVII.I  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  137

.  .  .  My  heart  is  so  oppressed  that  I  cannot  speak,  and  I
believe  it  will  be  my  death.

ORG.  (Running,  all  in  tears,  towards  the  door,  by  which
his  son  has  disappeared).  Scoundrel !  I  am  sorry  my
hand  has  spared  you,  and  not  knocked  you  down  on  the
spot.  (To  Tartuffe}.  Compose  yourself,  brother,  and
do  not  grieve.

TAR.  Let  us  put  an  end  to  these  sad  disputes.  I  per-
ceive what  troubles  I  cause  in  this  house,  and  think  it
necessary,  brother,  to  leave  it.

ORG.  What !  you  are  jesting  surely?

TAR.  They  hate  me,  and  I  find  that  they  are  trying  to
make  you  suspect  my  integrity.

ORG.  What  does  it  matter  ?  Do  you  think  that,  in  my
heart,  I  listen  to  them  ?

TAR.  They  will  not  fail  to  continue,  you  may  be  sure  ;
and  these  self-same  stories  which  you  now  reject,  may,
perhaps,  be  listened  to  at  another  time.

ORG.  No,  brother,  never.

TAR.  Ah,  brother !  a  wife  may  easily  impose  upon  a
husband.

ORG.  No,  no.

TAR.  Allow  me,  by  removing  hence  promptly,  to  de-
prive them  of  all  subject  of  attack

ORG.  No,  you  shall  remain ;  my  life  depends  upon  it.

TAR.  Well !  I  must  then  mortify  myself.  If,  however,
you  would  .  .  .

ORG.  Ah!

TAR.  Be  it  so:  let  us  say  no  more  about  it.  But  I
know  how  to  manage  in  this.  Honour  is  a  tender  thing,
and  friendship  enjoins  me  to  prevent  reports  and  causes
for  suspicion.  'I  shall  shun  your  wife,  and  you  shall  not
see  me  .  .  .

ORG.  No,  in  spite  of  all,  you  shall  frequently  be  with
her.  To  annoy  the  world  is  my  greatest  delight ;  and  I
wish  you  to  be  seen  with  her  at  all  times.  Nor  is  this  all :
the  better  to  defy  them  all,  I  will  have  no  other  heir  but
you,  and  I  am  going  forthwith  to  execute  a  formal  deed
of  gift  of  all  my  property  to  you.  A  faithful  and  honest
friend,  whom  I  take  for  son-in-law,  is  dearer  to  me  than
son,  wife,  and  parents.  Will  you  not  accept  what  I  propose?

138  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTIV.

TAR.  The  will  of  Heaven  be  done  in  all  things.
ORG.  Poor  fellow.     Q\iick !  let  us  get  the  draft  drawn
up :  and  then  let  envy  itself  burst  with  spite  I

ACT  IV.
SCENE  I. — CLEANTE,  TARTUFFE.

CLE.  Yes,  everyone  talks  about  it,  and  you  may  believe
me.  The  stir  which  this  rumour  makes  is  not  at  all  to
your  credit ;  and  I  have  just  met  you,  Sir,  opportunely,
to  tell  you  my  opinion  in  two  words.  I  will  not  sift  these
reports  to  the  bottom ;  I  refrain,  and  take  the  thing  at
its  worst.  Let  us  suppose  that  Damis  has  not  acted  well,
and  that  you  have  been  wrongly  accused ;  would  it  not  be
like  a  Christian  to  pardon  the  offence,  and  to  smother  all
desire  of  vengeance  in  your  heart  ?  And  ought  you,  on
account  of  a  dispute  with  you,  to  allow  a  son  to  be  driven
from  his  father's  home?  I  tell  you  once  more,  and  can-
didly, that  great  and  small  are  scandalized  at  it ;  and,  if
you  will  take  my  advice,  you  will  try  to  make  peace,  and
not  push  matters  to  extremes.  Make  a  sacrifice  to  God  of
your  resentment,  and  restore  a  son  to  his  father's  favour.

TAR.  Alas !  for  my  own  part,  I  would  do  so  with  all
my  heart.  I  do  not  bear  him,  Sir,  the  slightest  ill-will;  I
forgive  him  everything;  I  blame  him  for  nothing;  and
would  serve  him  to  the  best  of  my  power.  But  Heaven's
interest  is  opposed  to  it ;  and,  if  he  comes  back,  I  must
leave  the  house.  After  his  unparalleled  behaviour,  com-
munication with  him  would  give  rise  to  scandal :  Heaven
knows  what  all  the  world  would  immediately  think  of  it !
They  would  impute  it  to  sheer  policy  on  my  part ;  and
they  would  say  everywhere,  that  knowing  myself  to  be
guilty,  I  pretend  a  charitable  zeal  for  my  accuser;  that  I
am  afraid,  and  wish  to  conciliate  him,  in  order  to  bribe
him,  in  an  underhand  manner,  into  silence.

CLE.  You  try  to  put  forward  pretended  excuses,  and  all
your  reasons,  Sir,  are  too  far-fetched.  Why  do  you  charge
yourself  with  Heaven's  interests?  Has  it  any  need  of  us
to  punish  the  guilty?  Leave  to  it  the  are  of  its  own

SCENE  i  TAKTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  139

vengeance;  think  only  of  the  pardon  which  it  enjoins  for
offences,  and  do  not  trouble  yourself  about  men's  judg-
ments, when  you  are  following  the  sovereign  edicts  of
Heaven.  What  !  shall  the  trivial  regard  for  what  men
may  think  prevent  the  glory  of  a  good  action  ?  No,  no  ;
let  us  always  do  what  Heaven  prescribes,  and  not  trouble
our  heads  with  other  cares.

TAR.  I  have  already  told  you  that  from  my  heart  I  for-
give him  ;  and  that,  Sir,  is  doing  what  Heaven  commands
us  to  do :  but  after  the  scandal  and  the  insult  of  to-day,
Heaven  does  not  require  me  to  live  with  him.

CLE.  And  does  it  require  you,  Sir,  to  lend  your  ear  to
what  a  mere  whim  dictates  to  his  father,  and  to  accept  the
gift  of  a  property  to  which  in  justice  you  have  no  claim
whatever?

TAR.  Those  who  know  me  will  not  think  that  this  pro-
ceeds from  self-interest.  All  the  world's  goods  have  but
few  charms  for  me ;  I  am  not  dazzled  by  their  deceptive
glare :  and  should  I  determine  to  accept  from  his  father
that  donation  which  he  wishes  to  make  to  me,  it  is  only,
in  truth,  because  I  fear  that  all  that  property  might  fall
into  wicked  hands;  lest  it  might  be  divided  amongst  those
who  would  make  a  bad  use  of  it  in  this  world,  and  would
not  employ  it,  as  I  intend,  for  the  glory  of  Heaven  and
the  well-being  of  my  fellow-men.

CLE.  Oh,  Sir,  you  need  not  entertain  those  delicate
scruples,  which  may  give  cause  for  the  rightful  heir  to
complain.  Allow  him  at  his  peril  to  enjoy  his  own,  with-
out troubling  yourself  in  any  way ;  and  consider  that  it  is
better  even  that  he  should  make  a  bad  use  of  it,  than  that
you  should  be  accused  of  defrauding  him  of  it.  My  only
wonder  is,  that  you  could  have  received  such  a  proposal
unblushingly.  For  after  all,  has  true  piety  any  maxim
showing  how  a  legitimate  heir  may  be  stripped  of  his  pro-
perty ?  And  if  Heaven  has  put  into  your  head  an  invin-
cible obstacle  to  your  living  with  Damis,  would  it  not  be
better  that  as  a  prudent  man  you  should  make  a  civil  re-
treat from  this,  than  to  allow  that,  contrary  to  all  reason,
the  son  should  be  turned  out  of  the  house  for  you.  Believe
me,  Sir,  this  would  be  giving:  a  proof  of  your  probity  .  .

TAR.   Sir,  it  is  half  past  three :   certain  religious  duties

140  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.

call  me  upstairs,  and  you  will  excuse  my  leaving  you  so
soon.

CLE.  (Alone).     Ah  !

SCENE  II. — ELMIRE,  MARIANE,  CLEANTE,  DORINE.

DOR.  (To  Cleante).  For  Heaven's  sake,  Sir,  bestir  your-
self with  us  for  her  :  she  is  in  mortal  grief ;  and  the  mar-
riage 'contract  which  her  father-  has  resolved  upon  being
signed  this  evening,  drives  her  every  moment  to  despair.
Here  he  comes  !  Pray,  let  us  unite  our  efforts,  and  try,
by  force  or  art,  to  shake  this  unfortunate  design  that
causes  us  all  this  trouble.

SCENE  III. — ORGON,  ELMIRE,  MARIANE,  CLEANTE,
DORINE.

ORG.  Ah  !  I  am  glad  to  see  you  all  assembled.  (To
Mariane).  There  is  something  in  this  document  to  please
you,  and  you  know  already  what  it  means.

MAR.  (At  Organ's  feet).  Father,  in  the  name  of
Heaven  which  knows  my  grief,  and  by  all  that  can  move
your  heart,  relax  somewhat  of  your  paternal  rights,  and
absolve  me  from  obedience  in  this  case.  Do  not  com-
pel me,  by  this  harsh  command,  to  reproach  Heaven
with  my  duty  to  you ;  and  alas  !  do  not  make  wretched
the  life  which  you  have  given  me,  father.  If,  contrary  to
the  sweet  expectations  which  I  have  formed,  you  forbid
me  to  belong  to  him  whom  I  have  dared  to  love,  kindly
save  me  at  least,  I  implore  you  on  my  knees,  from  the
torment  of  belonging  to  one  whom  I  abhor ;  and  do  not
drive  me  to  despair  by  exerting  your  full  power  over  me.

ORG.  (Somewhat  moved).  Firm,  my  heart;  none  of
this  human  weakness  !

MAR.  Your  tenderness  for  him  causes  me  no  grief;  in-
dulge it  to  its  fullest  extent,  give  him  your  wealth,  and  if
that  be  not  enough,  add  mine  to  it ;  I  consent  to  it  with
all  my  heart,  and  I  leave  you  to  dispose  of  it.  But,  at
least,  stop  short  of  my  own  self;  and  allow  me  to  end.  in
the  austerities  of  a  convent,  the  sad  days  which  Heaven
has  allotted  to  me.

ORG.  Ah,  that  is  it !  When  a  father  crosses  a  girl's
love-sick  inclination,  she  wishes  to  become  a  nun.  Get

SCKNB  in.]  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  14!

up.  The  more  repugnance  you  feel  in  accepting  him,  the
greater  will  be  your  merit.  Mortify  your  senses  by  this
marriage,  and  do  not  trouble  me  any  longer.

DOR.  But  what  .    .

ORG.  Hold  your  tongue.  Meddle  only  with  what  con-
cerns you.  I  flatly  forbid  you  to  say  another  word.

CLE.  If  you  will  permit  me  to  answer  you,  and  ad-
vise .  .  .

ORG.  Your  advice  is  the  best  in  the  world,  brother ;  it
is  well  argued,  and  I  set  great  store  by  it :  but  you  must
allow  me  not  to  avail  myself  of  it.

ELM.  {To  her  husband}.  I  am  at  a  loss  what  to  say,  after
all  I  have  seen ;  and  I  quite  admire  your  blindness.  You
must  be  mightily  bewitched  and  prepossessed  in  his  favour,
to  deny  to  us  the  incidents  of  this  day.

ORG.  I  am  your  servant,  and  judge  by  appearances.  I
know  your  indulgence  for  my  rascal  of  a  son,  and  you  were
afraid  of  disowning  the  trick  which  he  wished  to  play  on
the  poor  fellow.  But,  after  all,  you  took  it  too  quietly  to
be  believed ;  and  you  ought  to  have  appeared  somewhat
more  upset.

ELM.  Is  our  honour  to  bridle  up  so  strongly  at  the
simple  avowal  of  an  amorous  transport,  and  can  there  be
no  reply  to  aught  that  touches  it,  without  fury  in  our  eyes
and  invectives  in  our  mouth?  As  for  me,  I  simply  laugh
at  such  talk;  and  the  noise  made  about  it  by  no  means
pleases  me.  I  love  to  show  my  discreetness  quietly,  and
am  not  at  all  like  those  savage  prudes,  whose  honour  is
armed  with  claws  and  teeth,  and  who  at  the  least  word
would  scratch  people's  faces.  Heaven  preserve  me  from
such  good  behaviour!  I  prefer  a  virtue  that  is  not  dia-
bolical, and  believe  that  a  discreet  and  cold  denial  is  no
less  effective  in  repelling  a  lover.

ORG.  In  short,  I  know  the  whole  affair,  and  will  not  be
imposed  upon.

ELM.  Once  more,  I  wonder  at  your  strange  weakness ;
but  what  would  your  unbelief  answer  if  I  were  to  show
you  that  you  had  been  told  the  truth.

ORG.  Show!

ELM.  Aye.

ORG.  Stuff.

142  TARTUFFE  ;    OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  iv.

ELM.   But  if  I  found  the  means  to  show  you  plainly?  .  .  .

ORG.  Idle  stories.

ELM.  What  a  strange  man  !  Answer  me,  at  least.  I  am
not  speaking  of  believing  us;  but  suppose  that  we  found
a  place  where  you  could  plainly  see  and  hear  everything,
what  would  you  say  then  of  your  good  man?

ORG.  In  that  case,  I  should  say  that  ...  I  should  say
nothing,  for  the  thing  cannot  be.

ELM.  Your  delusion  has  lasted  too  long,  and  I  have
been  too  much  taxed  with  imposture.  I  must,  for  my
gratification,  without  going  any  farther,  make  you  a  witness
of  all  that  I  have  told  you.

ORG.  Be  it  so.  I  take  you  at  your  word.  We  shall  see
your  dexterity,  and  how  you  will  make  good  this  promise.

ELM.   {To  Dorine).  Bid  him  come  to  me.

DOR.  {To  Elmire).  He  is  crafty,  and  it  will  be  difficult,
perhaps,  to  catch  him.

ELM.  (To  Dorine).  No;  people  are  easily  duped  by
those  whom  they  love,  and  conceit  is  apt  to  deceive  itself.
Bid  him  come  down.  (To  Cleante  and  Mariane).  And  do
you  retire.

SCENE   IV. — ELMIRE,  ORGON.

ELM.  Come,  and  get  under  this  table.

ORG.  Why  so?

ELM.  It  is  necessary  that  you  should  conceal  yourself
well.

ORG.  But  why  under  this  table  ?

ELM.  Good  Heavens !  do  as  you  are  told ;  I  have  thought
about  my  plan,  and  you  shall  judge.  Get  under  there,  I
tell  you,  and,  when  you  are  there,  take  care  not  to  be  seen
or  heard.

ORG.  I  confess  that  my  complaisance  is  great ;  but  I
must  needs  see  the  end  of  your  enterprise.

ELM.  You  will  have  nothing,  I  believe,  to  reply  to  me.
(To  Orgon  under  the  table).  Mind  !  I  am  going  to  meddle
with  a  strange  matter,  do  not  be  shocked  in  any  way.  I
must  be  permitted  to  say  what  I  like  ;  and  it  is  to  con-
vince you,  as  I  have  promised.  Since  I  am  compelled  to
it,  I  am  going  to  make  this  hypocrite  drop  his  mask  by
addressing  soft  speeches  to  him,  flatter  the  shameful  de-

SCENE  v.]  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  143

sires  of  his  passion,  and  give  him  full  scope  for  his  au-
dacity. As  it  is  for  your  sake  alone,  and  the  better  to
confound  him,  that  I  pretend  to  yield  to  his  wishes,  I
shall  cease  as  soon  as  you  show  yourself,  and  things  need
not  go  farther  than  you  wish.  It  is  for  you  to  stop  his
mad  passion,  when  you  think  matters  are  carried  far
enough,  to  spare  your  wife,  and  not  to  expose  me  any
more  than  is  necessary  to  disabuse  you.  This  is  your
business,  it  remains  entirely  with  you,  and  58  .  .  .  But
he  comes.  Keep  close,  and  be  careful  not  to  show  your-
self.

SCENE  V. — TARTUFFE,  ELMIRE,  ORGON  (under  the  table'}.

TAR.  I  have  been  told  that  you  wished  to  speak  to  me
here.

ELM.  Yes.  Some  secrets  will  be  revealed  to  you.  But
close  this  door  before  they  are  told  to  you,  and  look  about
everywhere,  for  fear  of  a  surprise.  (Tartuffe  closes  the
door,  and  comes  back}.  We  assuredly  do  not  want  here  a
scene  like  the  one  we  just  passed  through  :  I  never  was  so
startled  in  my  life.  Damis  put  me  in  a  terrible  fright  for
you ;  and  you  saw,  indeed,  that  I  did  my  utmost  to  frus-
trate his  intentions,  and  calm  his  excitement.  My  con-
fusion, it  is  true,  was  so  great,  that  I  had  not  a  thought
of  contradicting  him  :  but,  thanks  to  Heaven,  everything
has  turned  out  the  better  for  that,  and  is  upon  a  much
surer  footing.  The  esteem  in  which  you  are  held  has
allayed  the  storm,  and  my  husband  will  not  take  any  um-
brage at  you.  The  better  to  brave  people's  ill-natured
comments,  he  wishes  us  to  be  together  at  all  times ;  and
it  is  through  this  that,  without  fear  of  incurring  blame,  I
can  be  closetted  here  alone  with  you ;  and  this  justifies
me  in  opening  to  you  my  heart,  a  little  too  ready  perhaps,
to  listen  to  your  passion.

TAR.  This   language   is   somewhat   difficult   to   under-

58  These  words  of  Elmire  are,  in  reality,  addressed  to  the  audience,  to
remind  them  of  the  necessity  of  unmasking  the  hypocrite  ;  they  contain
also  an  excuse  for  her  farther  behaviour ;  for,  in  spite  of  her  modesty,  she
is  compelled  to  give  convincing  proof  to  her  husband  that  Tartuffe  is  a
scoundrel.

144  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTIV.

stand,  Madam  ;  and  you  just  now  spoke  in  quite  a  dif-
ferent strain.

ELM.  Ah  !  how  little  you  know  the  heart  of  a  woman,
if  such  a  refusal  makes  you  angry  !  and  how  little  you  un-
derstand what  it  means  to  convey,  when  it  defends  itself
so  feebly  !  In  those  moments,  our  modesty  always  com-
bats the  tender  sentiments  with  which  we  may  be  in-
spired.59 Whatever  reason  we  may  find  for  the  passion  that
subdues  us,  we  always  feel  some  shame  in  owning  it.  We
deny  it  at  first :  but  in  such  a  way  as  to  give  you  suffi-
ciently to  understand  that  our  heart  surrenders  ;  that,  for
honour's  sake,  words  oppose  our  wishes,  and  that  such
refusals  promise  everything.  This  is,  no  doubt,  making  a
somewhat  plain  confession  to  you,  and  showing  little  re-
gard for  our  modesty.  But,  since  these  words  have  at  last
escaped  me,  would  I  have  been  so  anxious  to  restrain
Damis,  would  I,  pray,  have  so  complacently  listened,  for
such  a  long  time,  to  the  offer  of  your  heart,  would  I  have
taken  the  matter  as  I  have  done,  if  the  offer  of  that  heart
had  had  nothing  in  it  to  please  me  ?  And,  when  I  myself
would  have  compelled  you  to  refuse  the  match  that  had
just  been  proposed,  what  ought  this  entreaty  to  have  given
you  to  understand,  but  the  interest  I  was  disposed  to  take
in  you,  and  the  vexation  it  would  have  caused  me,  that
this  marriage  would  have  at  least  divided  a  heart  that  I
wished  all  to  myself?60

59  In  the  original  French,  there  is  a  delicacy  which  can  hardly  be  ren-
dered into  English.  Elmire  almost  always  avoids  the  use  of  a  per-
sonal pronoun,  but  employs  the  indefinite  on,  during  the  whole  of  this
scene.  This  may  be  grammatically  wrong,  but  is,  dramatically,  emi-
nently successful.  We  give,  as  an  example,  the  following  four  lines  in
the  original :

"  Quelque  raison  qu'on  trouve  a  1'amour  qui  nous  dompte
On  trouve  a  1'avouer  toujours  un  peu  de  honte.
On  s'en  defend  d'abord :  mais  de  Pair  qu'on  s'y  prend
On  fait  connaitre  assez  que  notre  coeur  se  rend.1'

80  Here,  again,  there  is  a  delicacy  in  the  original  French  which  cannot
be  rendered  into  English.  Elmire  is  full  of  hesitation  in  what  she  is  going
to  say,  and  she  expresses  this  even  in  her  grammar,  which,  although  far
from  clear,  beautifully  reflects  the  trouble  of  her  mind.  We  give  the  four
last  lines  of  her  speech,  crowded  with  que.  I  agree  with  Sainte-Beuve  that
Moliere  placed  them  there  purposely.

SCENE  v.j  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  145

TAR.  It  is  very  sweet,  no  doubt,  Madam,  to  hear  these
words  from  the  lips  we  love;  their  honey  plentifully  dif-
fuses a  suavity  throughout  my  senses,  such  as  they  never
yet  tasted.  The  happiness  of  pleasing  you  is  my  highest
study,  and  my  heart  reposes  all  its  bliss  in  your  affection  ;
but,  by  your  leave,  this  heart  presumes  still  to  have  some
doubt  in  its  own  felicity.  I  may  look  upon  these  words  as
a  decent  stratagem  to  compel  me  to  break  off  the  match
that  is  on  the  point  of  being  concluded;  and,  if  I  must
needs  speak  candidly  to  you,  I  shall  not  trust  to  such  ten-
der words,  until  some  of  those  favours,  for  which  I  sigh,
have  assured  me  of  all  which  they  intend  to  express,  and
fixed  in  my  heart  a  firm  belief  of  the  charming  kindness
which  you  intend  for  me.

ELM.  (After  having  coughed  to  warn  her  husband}.
What !  would  you  proceed  so  fast,  and  exhaust  the  tender-
ness of  one's  heart  at  once  ?  One  takes  the  greatest  pains
to  make  you  the  sweetest  declarations  ;  meanwhile  is  not
that  enough  for  you?  and  will  nothing  content  you,  but
pushing  things  to  the  utmost  extremity  ?

TAR.  The  less  a  blessing  is  deserved,  the  less  one  pre-
sumes to  expect  it.  Our  love  dares  hardly  rely  upon  words.
A  lot  full  of  happiness  is  difficult  to  realize,  and  we  wish
to  enjoy  it  before  believing  in  it.  As  for  me,  who  think
myself  so  little  deserving  of  your  favours,  I  doubt  the  suc-
cess of  my  boldness ;  and  shall  believe  nothing,  Madam,
until  you  have  convinced  my  passion  by  real  proofs.

ELM.  Good  Heavens  !  how  very  tyrannically  your  love
acts !  And  into  what  a  strange  confusion  it  throws  me  !
What  a  fierce  sway  it  exercises  over  our  hearts  !  and  how
violently  it  clamours  for  what  it  desires  !  What !  can  I
find  no  shelter  from  your  pursuit  ?  and  will  you  scarcely
give  me  time  to  breathe  ?  Is  it  decent  to  be  so  very  exact-
ing, and  to  insist  upon  your  demands  being  satisfied  imme-
diately ;  and  thus,  by  your  pressing  efforts,  to  take  ad-
vantage of  the  weakness  which  you  see  one  has  for  you?

"  Qu'est-ce  que  cette  instance  a  du  vous  faire  entendre,
Que  1'inteYet  qu'en  vous  on  s'avise  de  prendre,
Et  1'ennui  qu'on  aurait  que  ce  noeud  qu'on  r^sout
Vint  partager  du  moins  un  co2ur  que  Ton  veut  tout  ?  "

146  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  iv.

TAR.  But  if  you  look  upon  my  addresses  with  a  favour-
able eye,  why  refuse  me  convincing  proofs  ?

ELM.  But  how  can  I  comply  with  what  you  wish,  with-
out offending  that  Heaven  of  which  you  are  always  speak-
ing?

TAR.  If  it  be  nothing  but  Heaven  that  opposes  itself  to
my  wishes,  it  is  a  trifle  for  me  to  remove  such  an  obstacle;
and  that  need  be  no  restraint  upon  your  love.

ELM.  But  they  frighten  us  so  much  with  the  judgments
of  Heaven !

TAR.  I  can  dispel  these  ridiculous  fears  for  you,  Madam,
and  I  possess  the  art  of  allaying  scruples.  Heaven,  it  is
true,  forbids  certain  gratifications,  but  there  are  ways  and
means  of  compounding  such  matters.61  According  to  our
different  wants,  there  is  a  science  which  loosens  that
which  binds  our  conscience,  and  which  rectifies  the  evil
of  the  act  with  the  purity  of  our  intentions.62  We  shall  be
able  to  initiate  you  into  these  secrets,  Madam;  you  have
only  to  be  led  by  me.  Satisfy  my  desires,  and  have  no
fear;  I  shall  be  answerable  for  everything,  and  shall  take
the  sin  upon  myself.  (Elmire  coughs  louder).  You  cough
very  much,  Madam  ?

ELM.  Yes,  I  am  much  tormented.

TAR.  Would  you  like  a  piece  of  this  liquorice  ?

ELM.  It  is  an  obstinate  cold,  no  doubt;  and  I  know  that
all  the  liquorice  in  the  world  will  do  it  no  good.

TAR.  That,  certainly,  is  very  sad

ELM.  Yes,  more  than  I  can  say.

TAR.  In  short,  your  scruples,  Madam,  are  easily  over-
come. You  may  be  sure  of  the  secret  being  kept,  and
there  is  no  harm  done  unless  the  thing  is  bruited  about.
The  scandal  which  it  causes  constitutes  the  offence,  and
sinning  in  secret  is  no  sinning  at  all.

61  In  the  original  edition  there  is  a  note  saying,  ''  It  is  a  scoundrel  who
speaks."

6:1  Pascal  uses  nearly  the  same  words  in  the  seventh  Provinciate:
"When  we  cannot  prevent  the  action,  we  purify  at  least  the  intention;
and  thus  we  correct  vice  by  means  of  the  purity  of  the  end."  The  Jan-
senists  considered  for  some  time  the  Tartuffe  as  a  sequel  to  Pascal's
Letters.  Machiavelli,  in  the  Mandragore,  makes  Friar  Timotheo  use  the
same  arguments  in  order  to  persuade  a  married  woman  to  procure  an  heir
to  her  husband.

SCENE  vi.]  TARTUFFE;   OR,   THE    HYPOCRITE.  147

ELM.  {After  having  coughed  once  more}.  In  short,  I  see
that  I  must  make  up  my  mind  to  yield  ;  that  I  must
consent  to  grant  you  everything ;  and  that  with  less  than
that,  I  ought  not  to  pretend  to  satisfy  you,  or  to  be
believed  (?).  It  is  no  doubt  very  hard  to  go  to  that  length,
and  it  is  greatly  in  spite  of  myself  that  I  venture  thus  far;
but,  since  people  persist  in  driving  me  to  this;  since  they
will  not  credit  aught  I  may  say,  and  wish  for  more  con-
vincing proofs,  I  can  but  resolve  to  act  thus,  and  satisfy
them.63  If  this  gratification  offends,  so  much  the  worse
foi  those  who  force  me  to  it :  the  fault  ought  surely  not  to
be  mine.

TAR.  Yes,  Madam,  I  take  it  upon  myself;  and  the  thing
in  itself  .  .  .

ELM.  Open  this  door  a  little,  and.  see,  pray,  if  my  hus-
band be  not  in  that  gallery.

TAR.  What  need  is  there  to  take  so  much  thought  about
him  ?  Between  ourselves,  he  is  easily  led  by  the  nose.  He
is  likely  to  glory  in  all  our  interviews,  and  I  have  brought
him  so  far  that  he  will  see  everything,  and  without  be-
lieving anything.

ELM.  It  matters  not.  Go,  pray,  for  a  moment  and  look
carefully  everywhere  outside.

SCENE  VI. — ORGON,  ELMIRE.

ORG.  {Coming  from  under  the  table}.  This  is,  I  admit
to  you,  an  abominable  wretch !  I  cannot  recover  myself,
and  all  this  perfectly  stuns  me.

ELM.  What,  you  come  out  so  soon  !  You  are  surely
jesting.  Get  under  the  table-cloth  again ;  it  is  not  time
yet.  Stay  to  the  end,  to  be  quite  sure  of  the  thing,  and
do  not  trust  at  all  to  mere  conjectures.

ORG.   No,  nothing  more  wicked  ever  came  out  of  hell.

68  See  page  438,  note  50.  Elmire,  of  course,  uses  on  here  to  designate
Orgon,  though  Tartuffe  takes  it  for  himself.  If  she  had  not  used  this  in-
definite pronoun  from  the  very  beginning,  the  hypocrite's  suspicions  might
have  been  roused.  We  give  the  four  last  lines  in  the  original :

"  Mais,  puisque  1'on  s'obstine  a  m'y  vouloir  re"duire,
Puisqu  on  ne  veut  point  croire  a  tout  ce  qu'on  peut  dire,
Et  qu'on  veut  des  te'moins  qui  soient  plus  convaincants,
II  faut  bien  s'y  r&oudre,  et  contenter  les  gens."

148  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTIV.

ELM.  Good  Heavens !  you  ougnt  not  to  believe  things
so  lightly.  Be  fully  convinced  before  you  give  in ;  and
do  not  hurry  for  fear  of  being  mistaken.64  (  Elmire  pushes
Organ  behind  her).

SCENE  VII. — TARTUFFE,  ELMIRE,  ORGON.

TAR.  (Without  seeing  Organ).  Everything  conspires,
Madam,  to  my  satisfaction.  I  have  surveyed  the  whole
apartment ;  there  is  no  one  there ;  and  my  delighted
soul  .  .  .  (At  the  moment  that  Tartuffe  advances  with
open  arms  to  embrace  Elmire,  she  draws  back,  and  Tar-
tuffe perceives  Organ).

ORG.  (Stopping  Tartuffe*).  Gently  !  you  are  too  eager
in  your  amorous  transports,  and  you  ought  not  to  be  so
impetuous.  Ha !  ha !  good  man,  you  wished  to  victimize
me !  How  you  are  led  away  by  temptations  !  You  would
marry  my  daughter,  and  covet  my  wife  !  I  have  been  a
long  while  in  doubt  whether  you  were  in  earnest,  and  I
always  expected  you  would  change  your  tone ;  but  this  is
pushing  the  proof  far  enough :  I  am  satisfied,  and  wish
for  no  more.

ELM.  (To  Tartuffe).  It  is  much  against  my  inclina-
tions that  I  have  done  this :  but  I  have  been  driven  to
the  necessity  of  treating  you  thus.

TAR.  (To  Organ).    What!  do  you  believe  .    .    .

ORG.  Come,  pray,  no  more.  Decamp,  and  without
ceremony.

TAR.  My  design65  ...

ORG.  These  speeches  are  no  longer  of  any  use ;  you  must
get  out  of  this  house,  and  forthwith.

TAR.  It  is  for  you  to  get  out,  you  who  assume  the
mastership:  the  house  belongs  to  me,  I  will  make  you
know  it,  and  show  you  plainly  enough  that  it  is  useless
to  resort  to  these  cowardly  tricks  to  pick  a  quarrel  with

•*  Elmire  does  not  joke  with  Orgon,  but  is  really  angry  that  she  has
been  obliged  to  do  violence  to  her  innate  modesty,  in  order  to  convince
him.

46  Tartuffe,  no  doubt,  was  going  to  say,  "  My  design  was  to  put  to  the
proof  the  virtue  of  your  wife."  The  often-mentioned  Lettre  sur  I'impos-
teur  says  that  Tartuffe  here  calls  Orgon  his  brother,  and  begins  to  justify
himself.  Moliere  most  probably  modified  this  passage.

SCENE  vin.j          TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  149

me ;  that  one  cannot  safely,  as  one  thinks,  insult  me ;
that  I  have  the  means  of  confounding  and  of  punishing
imposture,  of  avenging  offended  Heaven,  and  of  making
those  repent  who  talk  of  turning  me  out  hence.

SCENE  VIII. — ELMIRE,  ORGON.

ELM.  What  language  is  this  ?  and  what  does  he  mean  ?

ORG.  I  am,  in  truth,  all  confusion,  and  this  is  no
laughing  matter.

ELM.  How  so?

ORG.  I  perceive  my  mistake  by  what  he  says ;  and  the
deed  of  gift  troubles  my  mind.

ELM.  The  deed  of  gift?

ORG.  Yes.  The  thing  is  done.  But  something  else
disturbs  me  too.

ELM.  And  what  ?

ORG.  You  shall  know  all.  But  first  let  us  go  and  see
if  a  certain  box  is  still  upstairs.

ACT  V.

SCENE  I. — ORGON,   CLEANTE.

CLE.  Where  would  you  run  to  ?

ORG.  Indeed  !  how  can  I  tell  ?

CLE.  It  seems  to  me  that  we  should  begin  by  consulting
together  what  had  best  be  done  in  this  emergency.

OKG.  This  box  troubles  me  sorely.  It  makes  me  de-
spair more  than  all  the  rest.

CLE.  This  box  then  contains  an  important  secret  ?

ORG.  It  is  a  deposit  that  Argas  himself,  the  friend  whom
I  pity,  entrusted  secretly  to  my  own  hands.  He  selected
me  for  this  in  his  flight ;  and  from  what  he  told  me,  it
contains  documents  upon  which  his  life  and  fortune  de-
pend.

CLE.  Why  then  did  you  confide  it  into  other  hands  ?

ORG.  It  was  from  a  conscientious  motive.  I  straight-
way confided  the  secret  to  the  wretch ;  and  his  arguing
persuaded  me  to  give  this  box  into  his  keeping,  so  that,  in
case  of  any  inquiry,  I  might  be  able  to  deny  it  by  a  ready

150          TARTUFFE  ;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.         f ACT  v.

subterfuge,  by  which  my  conscience  might  have  full  abso-
lution for  swearing  against  the  truth.66

CLE.  This  is  critical,  at  least,  to  judge  from  appear-
ances; and  the  deed  of  gift,  and  his  confidence,  have  been,
to  tell  you  my  mind,  steps  too  inconsiderately  taken.
You  may  be  driven  far  with  such  pledges ;  and  since  the
fellow  has  these  advantages  over  you,  it  is  a  great  impru-
dence on  your  part  to  drive  him  to  extremities ;  and  you
ought  to  seek  some  gentler  method.

ORG.  What !  to  hide  such  a  double-dealing  heart,  so
wicked  a  soul,  under  so  fair  an  appearance  of  touching
fervour  !  And  I  who  received  him  in  my  house  a  beggar
and  penniless.  ...  It  is  all  over  ;  I  renounce  all  pious
people.  Henceforth  I  shall  hold  them  in  utter  abhorrence,
and  be  worse  to  them  than  the  very  devil.

CLE.  Just  so!  you  exaggerate  again  !  You  never  preserve
moderation  in  anything.  You  never  keep  within  reason's
bounds ;  and  always  rush  from  one  extreme  to  another.
You  see  your  mistake,  and  find  out  that  you  have  been
imposed  upon  by  a  pretended  zeal.  But  is  there  any
reason  why,  in  order  to  correct  yourself,  you  should  fall
into  a  greater  error  still,  and  say  that  all  pious  people
have  the  -same  feelings  as  that  perfidious  rascal  ?  What  !
because  a  scoundrel  has  audaciously  deceived  you,  under
the  pompous  show  of  outward  austerity,  you  will  needs
have  it  that  every  one  is  like  him,  and  that  there  is  no
really  pious  man  to  be  found  now-a-days?  Leave  those
foolish  deductions  to  free-thinkers :  distinguish  between
real  virtue  and  its  counterfeit ;  never  bestow  your  esteem
too  hastily,  and  keep  in  this  the  necessary  middle  course.
Beware,  if  possible,  of  honouring  imposture ;  but  do  not
attack  true  piety  also ;  and  if  you  must  fall  into  an  ex-
treme, rather  offend  again  on  the  other  side.

SCENE  II. — ORGON,  CLEANTE,  DAMIS.

DAM.  What !  father,  is  it  true  that  this  scoundrel  threat-
ens you  ?  that  he  forgets  all  that  you  have  done  for  him,

68  Tartuffe  has  taught  Orgon  the  doctrine  of  ''  mental  reservation,"  just
as  he  wished  to  teach  Elmire  that  of  "  purity  of  intention."  Pascal  at-
tacks those  casuistical  subtleties  in  the  ninth  Provinciate.

SCHNHIII]  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  151

and  that  his  cowardly  and  too  contemptible  pride  turns
your  kindness  for  him  against  yourself?

ORG.  Even  so,  my  son  ;  and  it  causes  me  unutterable
grief.

DAM.  Leave  him  to  me,  I  will  slice  his  ears  off.  Such
insolence  must  not  be  tolerated  :  it  is  my  duty  to  deliver
you  from  him  at  once  ;  and,  to  put  an  end  to  this  matter,
I  must  knock  him  down.

CLE.  Spoken  just  like  a  regular  youth.  Moderate,  if
you  please,  these  violent  transports.  We  live  under  a
government,  and  in  an  age,  in  which  violence  only  makes
matters  worse.

SCENE  III. — MADAME  PERNELLE,  ORGON,  ELMIRE,  CLE-
ANTE,  MARIANE,  DAMIS,  DORINE.

MAD.  P.  What  is  all  this  ?  What  dreadful  things  do  I
hear!

ORG.  Some  novelties  which  my  own  eyes  have  witnessed,
and  you  see  how  I  am  repaid  for  my  kindness.  I  affec-
tionately harbour  a  fellow  creature  in  his  misery,  I  shelter
him  and  treat  him  as  my  own  brother;  I  heap  favours
upon  him  every  day  ;  I  give  him  my  daughter,  and  every-
thing I  possess  :  and,  at  that  very  moment,  the  perfidious,
infamous  wretch  forms  the  wicked  design  of  seducing  my
wife ;  and,  not  content  even  with  these  vile  attempts,  he
dares  to  threaten  me  with  my  own  favours ;  and,  to  en-
compass my  ruin,  wishes  to  take  advantage  of  my  indis-
creet good  nature,  drive  me  from  my  property  which  I
have  transferred  to  him,  and  reduce  me  to  that  condition
from  which  I  rescued  him  !

DOR.  Poor  fellow  !

MAD.  P.  I  can  never  believe,  my  son,  that  he  would
commit  so  black  a  deed.

ORG.  What  do  you  mean  ?

MAD.  P.  Good  people  are  always  envied.

ORG.  What  do  you  mean  by  all  this  talk,  mother  ?

MAD.  P.  That  there  are  strange  goings-on  in  your
house,  and  that  we  know  but  too  well  the  hatred  they
bear  him.

ORG.  What  has  this  hatred  to  do  with  what  I  have  told
you?

152  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  v.

MAD.  P.  I  have  told  you  a  hundred  times,  when  a  boy,

"  That  virtue  here  is  persecuted  ever ;
That  envious  men  may  die,  but  envy  never."

ORG.  But  in  what  way  does  this  bear  upon  to-day's
doings  ?

MAD.  P.  They  may  have  concocted  a  hundred  idle
stories  against  him.

ORG.  I  have  already  told  you  that  I  have  seen  every-
thing myself.

MAD.  P.  The  malice  of  slanderers  is  very  great.

ORG.  You  will  make  me  swear,  mother.  I  tell  you  that
with  my  own  eyes  I  have  witnessed  this  daring  crime.

MAD.  P.  Evil  tongues  have  always  venom  to  scatter
abroad,  and  nothing  here  below  can  guard  against  it.

ORG.  That  is  a  very  senseless  remark.  I  have  seen  it,  I
say,  seen  with  my  own  eyes,  seen,  what  you  call  seen.  Am
I  to  din  it  a  hundred  times  in  your  ears,  and  shout  like
four  people  ?

MAD.  P.  Goodness  me !  appearances  most  frequently
deceive :  you  must  not  always  judge  by  what  you  see.

ORG.  I  am  boiling  with  rage  !

MAD.  P.  Human  nature  is  liable  to  false  suspicions,  and
good  is  often  construed  into  evil.

ORG.  I  must  construe  the  desire  to  embrace  my  wife
into  a  charitable  design !

MAD.  P.  It  is  necessary  to  have  good  reasons  for  accus-
ing people  ;  and  you  ought  to  have  waited  until  you  were
quite  certain  of  the  thing.

ORG.  How  the  deuce  could  I  be  more  certain  ?  Ought
I  to  have  waited,  mother,  until  to  my  very  eyes,  he  had
.  .  .  You  will  make  me  say  some  foolish  thing.

MAD.  P.  In  short,  his  soul  is  too  full  of  pure  zeal ;  and
I  cannot  at  all  conceive  that  he  would  have  attempted  the
things  laid  to  his  charge.

ORG.  Go,  my  passion  is  so  great  that,  if  you  were  not
my  mother,  I  do  not  know  what  I  might  say  to  you.

DOR.  (To  Orgori).  A  just  reward  of  things  here  below,
Sir ;  you  would  not  believe  anyone,  and  now  they  will
not  believe  you.

CLE.  We  are  wasting  in   mere  trifling,  the  time  that

SCBNEIV.]  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  153

should  be  employed  in  devising  some  measures  We  must
not  remain  inactive  when  a  knave  threatens.

DAM.  What !  would  his  effrontery  go  to  that  extent  ?

ELM.  As  for  me,  I  hardly  think  it  possible,  and  his  in-
gratitude here  shows  itself  too  plainly.

CLE.  {To  Orgon).  Do  not  trust  to  that;  he  will  find
some  means  to  justify  his  doings  against  you ;  and  for  less
than  this,  a  powerful  party67  has  involved  people  in  a  vexa-
tious maze.  I  tell  you  once  more,  that,  armed  with  what
he  has,  you  should  never  have  pushed  him  thus  far.

ORG.  True  enough;  but  what  could  I  do?  I  was
unable  to  master  my  resentment  at  the  presumption  of  the
wretch.

CLE.  I  wish,  with  all  my  heart,  that  we  could  patch  up
even  a  shadow  of  peace  between  you  two.

ELM.  Had  I  but  known  how  he  was  armed  against  us,
I  would  have  avoided  bringing  things  to  such  a  crisis;
and  my  .  .  .

ORG.  {To  Dorine,  seeing  M.  Loyal  come  in).  What
does  this  man  want  ?  Go  and  see  quickly.  I  am  in  a
fine  state  for  people  to  come  to  see  me !

SCENE    IV. — ORGON,    MADAME    PERNELLE,    ELMIRE,
MARIANE,  CLEANTE,  DAMIS,  DORINE,  MR.  LOYAL.

M.  LOY.  (To  Dorine  at  the  farther  part  of  the  stage}.
Good  morning,  dear  sister;68  pray,  let  me  speak  to  your
master.

DOR.  He  is  engaged ;  and  I  doubt  whether  he  can  see
anyone  at  present.

M.  LOY.  I  do  not  intend  to  be  intrusive  in  his  own
house.  I  believe  that  my  visit  will  have  nothing  to  dis-
please him.  I  have  come  upon  a  matter  of  which  he  will
be  very  glad.

DOR.  Your  name?

M.  LOY.  Only  tell  him  that  I  am  come  from  Monsieur
Tartuffe,  for  his  good.

«  The  originate  has  cabale.    See  Vol.  II.,  page  129,  note  28.
•»  M.  Loyal,  in  employing  the  words  "  dear  sister,"  shows  at  once  that
te  is  worthy  oif  being  employed  by  Tartuffe.

154  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTV.

DOR.  (To  Organ).  This  is  a  man  who  comes,  in  a
gentle  way,  from  Monsieur  Tartuffe,  upon  some  business,
of  which  he  says,  you  will  be  very  glad.

CLE.  (To  Organ).  You  must  see  who  this  man  is,  and
what  he  wants.

ORG.  (To  Cleante).  Perhaps  he  comes  to  reconcile  us:
How  shall  I  receive  him?

CLE.  You  must  not  allow  your  anger  to  get  the  upper
hand,  and  if  he  speaks  of  an  arrangement,  you  should
listen  to  him.

M.  LOY.  (To  Orgori).  Your  servant,  Sir !  May  Heaven
punish  those  who  would  harm  you,  and  may  it  favour  you
as  much  as  I  wish  !

ORG.  (Softly  to  Cleante).  This  mild  beginning  confirms
my  opinion,  and  augurs  already  some  reconciliation.

M.  LOY.  Your  whole  family  has  always  been  dear  to
me,  and  I  served  your  father.

ORG.  I  am  ashamed,  Sir,  and  crave  your  pardon  for  not
knowing  you  or  your  name.

M.  LOY.  My  name  is  Loyal,  a  native  of  Normandy,68
and  I  am  a  tipstaff  to  the  court  in  spite  of  envy.70  For
the  last  forty  years,  I  have  had  the  happiness,  thanking
Heaven,  of  exercising  the  functions  thereof  with  much
honour ;  and  I  have  come,  with  your  leave,  Sir,  to  serve
you  with  a  writ  of  a  certain  decree  .  .  .

ORG.  What  !  you  are  here  .  .  .

M.  LOY.  Let  us  proceed  without  anger,  Sir.  It  is  no-
thing but  a  summons;  a  notice  to  quit  this  house,  you
and  yours,  to  remove  your  chattels,  and  to  make  room
for  others,  without  delay  or  remissness,  as  required
hereby.

ORG.  I !  leave  this  house !

M.  LOY.  Yes,  Sir,  if  you  please.  The  house  at  present,
as  you  well  know,  belongs  incontestably  to  good  Monsieur
Tartuffe.  Of  all  your  property,  he  is  henceforth  lord  and
master,  by  virtue  of  a  contract  of  which  I  am  the

69  The  Normans  had  the  reputation  of  being  very  cautious  (avise) — the
Scotch  express  it  by  pawky— and  also  of  being  very  fond  of  going  to  law  ;
hence  the  allusion.     The  original  has  huissier  a  verge.

70  See  page  393,  note  24.

SCBNB  iv.|  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  155

bearer.  It  is  in  due  form,  and  nothing  can  be  said
against  it.

DAM.  {To  M.  Loyal}.  Certainly  this  impudence  is
immense,  and  I  admire  it !

M.  LOY.  {To  Damis).  Sir,  my  business  lies  not  with
you  ;  (Pointing  to  Orgon),  it  is  with  this  gentleman.  He
is  both  reasonable  and  mild,  and  knows  too  well  the  duty
of  an  honest  man  to  oppose  the  law  in  any  way.

ORG.  But  ...

M.  LOY.  Yes,  Sir,  I  know  that  you  would  not  rebel  for
a  million  of  money,  and  that,  like  a  gentleman,  you  will
allow  me  to  execute  here  the  orders  which  I  have  received.

DAM.  Mr.  Tipstaff,  you  may  chance  to  get  your  black
gown  well  dusted  here.

M.  LOY.  {To  Orgon}.  Order  your  son  to  hold  his
tongue  or  to  retire,  Sir.  I  should  be  very  loth  to  have
recourse  to  writing,  and  to  see  your  name  figure  in  my
official  report.

DOR.  {Aside).  This  Mr.  Loyal  has  a  very  disloyal  air.

M.  LOY.  Having  a  great  deal  of  sympathy  with  all
honest  people,  I  charged  myself  with  these  documents,
Sir,  as  much  to  oblige  and  please  you,  as  to  avoid  the
choice  of  those  who,  not  having  the  same  consideration
for  you  that  inspires  me,  might  have  proceeded  in  a  less
gentle  way.

ORG.  And  what  can  be  worse  than  to  order  people  to
quit  their  own  house  ?

M.  LOY.  You  are  allowed  time,  and  I  shall  suspend
until  to-morrow  the  execution  of  the  writ,  Sir.  I  shall
come  only  to  pass  the  night  here  with  ten  of  my  people
without  noise  or  without  scandal.  For  form's  sake,  you
must,  if  you  please,  before  going  to  bed,  bring  me  the
keys  of  your  door.  I  shall  take  care  not  to  disturb  your
rest,  and  to  permit  nothing  which  is  not  right.  But  to-
morrow, you  must  be  ready  in  the  morning,  to  clear  the
house  of  even  the  smallest  utensil ;  my  people  shall  assist
you,  and  I  have  selected  strong  ones,  so  that  they  can
help  you  to  remove  everything.  One  cannot  act  better
than  I  do,  I  think  ;  and  as  I  am  treating  you  with  great
indulgence,  I  entreat  you  also,  Sir.  to  profit  by  it,  so  that
I  may  not  be  annoyed  in  the  execution  of  my  duty.

1^6  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  [ACT  r,

ORG.  (Aside}.  I  would  willingly  give  just  now  the  best
hundred  gold  pieces  of  what  remains  to  me  for  the
pleasure  of  striking  on  this  snout  the  soundest  blow  that
ever  was  dealt.

CLE.  (Softly  to  Organ}.  Leave  well  alone.  Do  not  let  us
make  things  worse.

DAM.  I  can  hardly  restrain  myself  at  this  strange  imper-
tinence, and  my  fingers  are  itching.

DOR.  Upon  my  word,  Mr.  Loyal,  with  such  a  broad
back,  a  few  cudgel  blows  would  do  you  no  harm.

M.  LOY.  We  might  easily  punish  these  infamous  words,
sweetheart ;  and  there  is  a  law  against  women  too.

CLE.  (To  Monsieur  Loyal}.  Pray,  let  us  put  an  end  to
all  this,  Sir.  Hand  over  this  paper  quickly,  and  leave  us.

M.  LOY.  Till  by-and-by.     May  Heaven  bless  you  all !

ORG.  And  may  it  confound  you,  and  him  who  sends
you?

SCENE  V. — ORGON,  MADAME  PERNELLE,  ELMIRE,
CLEANTE,  MARIANE,  DAMIS,  DORINE.

ORG.  Well !  mother,  do  you  see  now  whether  I  am
right  ;  and  you  may  judge  of  the  rest  from  the  writ.  Do
you  at  last  perceive  his  treacheries  ?

MAD.  P.  I  stand  aghast,  and  feel  as  if  dropped  from
the  clouds  !

DOR.  (To  Orgori).  You  are  wrong  to  complain,  you
are  wrong  to  blame  him,  and  his  pious  designs  are  con-
firmed by  this.  His  virtue  is  perfected  in  the  love  for  his
neighbour.  He  knows  that  worldly  goods  often  corrupt
people,  and  he  wishes,  from  pure  charity,  to  take  every-
thing away  from  you  which  might  become  an  obstacle  to
your  salvation.

ORG.  Hold  your  tongue.     I  must  always  be  saying  that

to  you.

CLE.  (To  Organ).  Let  us  consult  what  had  best  be
done.

ELM.  Go  and  expose  the  audacity  of  the  ungrateful
wretch.  This  proceeding  destroys  the  validity  of  the
contract ;  and  his  treachery  will  appear  too  black  to  allow
him  to  meet  with  the  success  which  we  surmise.

SCENE  vii.,  TARTUFFE  ;   OR,   THE   HYPOCRITE.  ^57

SCENE  VI. — VALERE,  ORGON,  MADAME  PERNELLE,
ELMIRE,  CLEANTE^  MARIANE,  DAMIS,  DORINE.

VAL.  It  is  with  great  regret,  Sir,  that  I  come  to  afflict
you  ;  but  I  see  myself  compelled  to  it  by  pressing  danger.
A  most  intimate  and  faithful  friend,  who  knows  the  inter-
est which  I  take  in  you,  has,  for  my  sake,  by  a  most  haz-
ardous step,  violated  the  secrecy  due  to  the  affairs  of  the
State,  and  has  just  sent  me  an  intimation,  in  consequence
of  which  you  will  be  obliged  to  flee  immediately.  The
scoundrel  who  has  long  imposed  upon  you  has  an  hour
since  accused  you  to  the  King,  and  amongst  other  charges
which  he  brings  against  you,  has  lodged  in  his  hands  im-
portant documents  of  a  state-criminal,  of  which,  he  says,
contrary  to  the  duty  of  a  subject,  you  have  kept  the  guilty
secret.  I  am  ignorant  of  the  details  of  the  crime  laid  to
your  charge ;  but  a  warrant  is  out  against  you ;  and  the
better  to  execute  it,  he  himself  is  to  accompany  the  person
who  is  to  arrest  you.

CLE.  These  are  his  armed  rights ;  and  by  this  the
traitor  seeks  to  make  himself  master  of  your  property.

ORG.  The  man  is,  I  own  to  you,  a  wicked  brute  !

VAL.  The  least  delay  may  be  fatal  to  you.  I  have  my
coach  at  the  door  to  carry  you  off,  with  a  thousand  louis
which  I  bring  you.  Let  us  lose  no  time ;  the  blow  is
terrible,  and  is  one  of  those  which  are  best  parried  by
flight.  I  offer  myself  to  conduct  you  to  a  place  of  safety,
and  will  accompany  you  to  the  end  of  your  flight.

ORG.  Alas,  what  do  I  not  owe  to  your  obliging  cares  !
I  must  await  another  opportunity  to  thank  you ;  and  I
implore  Heaven  to  be  propitious  enough  to  enable  me
one  day  to  acknowledge  this  generous  service.  Farewell :
be  careful,  the  rest  of  you  .  .  .

CLE.  Go  quickly.  We  will  endeavour,  brother,  to  do
what  is  necessary.

SCENE  VII. — TARTUFFE,   A    POLICE    OFFICER,    MADAME
PERNELLE,  ORGON,  ELMIRE,  CLEANTE,  MARIANE,  VA-
LERE, DAMIS,  DORINE.
TAR.  {Stopping   Orgori).     Gently,   Sir,  gently,  do  not

run  so  fast.    You  will  not  have  to  go  far  to  find  a  lodging ;

we  take  you  a  prisoner  in  the  King's  name.

158  TAKTUFFE;  O'R,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  fxcrv.

ORG.  Wretch !  you  have  reserved  this  blow  for  the  last :
this  is  the  stroke,  villain,  by  which  you  dispatch  me;  and
which  crowns  all  your  perfidies.

TAR.  Your  abuse  cannot  incense  me ;  Heaven  has
taught  me  to  suffer  everything.

CLE.  Your  moderation  is  great,  I  confess.

DAM.   How  impudently  the  villain  sports  with  Heaven  !

TAR.  All  your  outrages  cannot  move  me  in  the  least ;
and  I  think  of  nothing  but  my  duty.

MAR.  You  may  glorify  yourself  very  much  upon  this ;
and  this  task  is  very  honourable  for  you  to  undertake.

TAR.  A  task  cannot  but  be  glorious  when  it  proceeds
from  the  power  that  sends  me  hither.

ORG.  But  do  you  remember,  ungrateful  wretch ;  that
my  charitable  hand  raised  you  from  a  miserable  con-
dition?

TAR.  Yes,  I  know  what  help  I  received  from  you ;  but
the  King's  interest  is  my  first  duty.  The  just  obligation
of  this  sacred  duty  stifles  all  gratitude  of  my  heart ;  and
to  such  a  powerful  consideration,  I  would  sacrifice  friend,
wife,  kindred,  and  myself  with  them.

ELM.  The  hypocrite  !

DOR.  How  artfully  he  makes  himself  a  lovely  cloak  of
all  that  is  sacred.

CLE.  But  if  this  zeal,  which  guides  you,  and  upon
which  you  plume  yourself  so  much,  be  so  perfect  as  you
say,  why  has  it  not  shown  itself  until  Orgon  caught  you
trying  to  seduce  his  wife;  and  why  did  you  not  think  of
denouncing  him  until  his  honour  obliged  him  to  drive
you  from  his  house  ?  I  do  not  say  that  the  gift  of  all  his
property,  which  he  has  made  over  to  you,  ought  to  have
turned  you  from  your  duty;  but  why,  wishing  to  treat
him  as  a  criminal  to-day,  did  you  consent  to  take  aught
from  him?

TAR.  {To  the  Officer}.  Pray,  Sir,  deliver  me  from  this
clamour,  and  be  good  enough  to  execute  your  orders.

OFFI.  Yes,  we  have  no  doubt,  delayed  too  long  to  dis-
charge them ;  your  words  remind  me  of  this  just  in  time ;
and  to  execute  them,  follow  me  directly  to  the  prison
which  is  destined  for  your  abode.71

71  This  is  a  just  counterpart  of  the  deus  ex  machina  of  Tartuffe,  when

ICKNK  vii.]          TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  159

TAR.  Who?   I  Sir?

OFFI.  Yes,  you.

TAR.  Why  to  prison  ?

OFFI.  I  have  no  account  to  give  to  you  (To  Orgon].
Compose  yourself,  Sir,  after  so  great  an  alarm.  We  live
under  a  monarch,  an  enemy  of  fraud,  a  monarch  whose
eyes  penetrate  into  the  heart,  and  whom  all  the  art  of
impostors  cannot  deceive.  Blessed  with  great  discernment,
his  lofty  soul  looks  clearly  at  things;  it  is  never  betrayed
by  exaggeration,  and  his  sound  reason  falls  into  no  excess.
He  bestows  lasting  glory  on  men  of  worth  ;  but  he  shows
this  zeal  without  blindness,  and  his  love  for  sincerity  does
not  close  his  heart  to  the  horror  which  falsehood  must
inspire.72  Even  this  person  could  not  hoodwink  him,  and
he  has  guarded  himself  against  more  artful  snares.  He
soon  perceived,  by  his  subtle  penetration,  all  the  vileness
concealed  in  his  inmost  heart.  In  coming  to  accuse  you,
he  has  betrayed  himself,  and,  by  a  just  stroke  of  supreme
justice,  discovered  himself  to  the  King  as  a  notorious
rogue,  against  whom  information  had  been  laid  under
another  name.  His  life  is  a  long  series  of  wicked  actions,
of  which  whole  volumes  might  be  written.  Our  monarch,
in  short,  has  detested  his  vile  ingratitude  and  disloyalty
towards  you ;  has  joined  this  affair  to  his  other  misdeeds,
and  has  placed  me  under  his  orders,  only  to  see  his  imper-
tinence carried  out  to  the  end,  and  to  make  him  by  him-
self give  you  satisfaction  for  everything.  Yes,  he  wishes
me  to  strip  the  wretch  of  all  your  documents  which  he
professes  to  possess,  and  to  give  them  into  your  hands.
By  his  sovereign  power  he  annuls  the  obligations  of  the
contract  which  gave  him  all  your  property,  and  lastly,
pardons  you  this  secret  offence,  in  which  the  flight  of  a
friend  has  in volved '  you ;  and  it  is  the  reward  of  your
former  zeal  in  upholding  his  rights,  to  show  that  he  knows
how  to  recompense  a  good  action  when  least  thought  of;

he  says,  in  the  seventh  scene  of  the  fourth  act,  to  Orgon,  "  It  is  for  you  to
get  out,  you  who  assume  the  mastership :  the  house  belongs  to  me,  I  will
make  you  know  it."

w  This  praise  was  not  wholly  undeserved  in  1669 ;  although  there  seems
to  me  rather  too  much  of  it.  When  Tartu/e  was  played  during  the  first
French  Revolution,  these  lines  were  altered  to  suit  the  times,  and,  of
course,  the  praise  of  the  King  was  omitted.

160  TARTUFFE;  OR,  THE  HYPOCRITE.  [ACTV.

that  merit  never  loses  aught  with  him;  and  that  he
remembers  good  much  better  than  evil.75

DOR.  Heaven  be  praised  !

MAD.  P.  I  breathe  again.

ELM.  Favourable  success  !

MAR.  Who  dared  foretell  this  ?

ORG.  (To  Tartu/e,  whom  the  officer  leads  t>/").  Well,
wretch,  there  you  are  .  .  .

SCENE  VIII. — MADAME  PERNELLE,  ORGON,  ELMIRE,  MAR-
IANE,  CLEANTE,  VALERE,  DAMIS,  DORINE.

CLE.  Ah !  brother,  stop  ;  and  do  not  descend  to  indig-
nities. Leave  the  wretch  to  his  fate,  and  do  not  add  to
the  remorse  that  overwhelms  him.  Rather  wish  that  his
heart,  from  this  day,  may  be  converted  to  virtue ;  that  he
may  reform  his  life,  in  detesting  his  vice,  and  soften  the
justice  of  our  great  prince ;  while  you  throw  yourself  at
his  knees  to  render  thanks  for  his  goodness,  which  has
treated  you  so  leniently.

ORG.  Yes,  it  is  well  said.  Let  us  throw  ourselves  joy-
'fully  at  his  feet,  to  laud  the  kindness  which  his  heart  dis-
plays to  us.  Then,  having  acquitted  ourselves  of  this  first
duty,  we  must  apply  ourselves  to  the  just  cares  of  another,
and  by  a  sweet  union  crown  in  Valere  the  flame  of  a  gen-
erous and  sincere  lover.

73  The  analysis  of  the  officer's  speech  given  in  the  so-often-quoted
Lettre  svr  V Imp osteur  proves  that  it  was  different  from  what  it  now  is.
In  speaking  of  Louis  XIV.,  he  says  that  "the  prince  had  seen  into
the  heart  of  the  wretch,  by  an  intuition,  which  monarchs  possess  above
all  other  men,  that  calumny  is  abashed  by  his  mere  presence,"  and  that
he  dislikes  hypocrisy  as  much  as  it  has  influence  over  his  subjects.
All  these  remarks  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  officer's  speech  as  we  now
possess  it.

AMPHITRYON.

COMEDIE.

AMPHITRYON.

A  COMEDY  IN  THREE  ACTS.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.)

I3TH  JANUARY  1668.

INTRODUCTORY   NOTICE.

THE  history  of  Amphitryon  and  Alcmena,  or  rather  the  myth  of  the  birth
of  Hercules,  is  certainly  very  old,  and  is  to  be  found  in  the  literature  of
different  nations.  The  Indians,  the  Greeks,  and  the  Romans  were  ac-
quainted with  it ;  and  it  exists  also  among  the  legendary  tales  of  the  Mid-
dle Ages,  but  always  modified  according  to  the  several  nationalities  where
we  meet  with  it,  and  has  sometimes  a  tragical,  sometimes  a  jocular  or
ironical,  ending.

Voltaire,  in  his  Historical  Fragments  about  India,  in  the  twenty-eighth
article  on  The  Terrestrial  Paradise  of  the  Indians,  relates  how  the  story
of  Amphitryon  is  found  amongst  the  oldest  fables  of  the  Brahmins.  A
certain  Brahmin  having  quarrelled  with  his  wife,  gave  her  a  beating  and
left  her ;  an  Indian  divinity  of  an  inferior  rank  adopted  the  appearance  of
the  Brahmin,  made  his  peace  with  her,  and  lived  for  some  time  with  her,
until  the  real  husband,  who  repented  of  his  former  behaviour,  came  back
again.  But  the  man  in  possession  declared  that  the  other  was  an  impos-
tor, and  at  last  the  affair  was  brought  before  the  Synod  of  Benares,  who
ordered  an  ordeal,  which  cannot  be  related,  but  in  which  finally  the  evil-
minded  divinity  betrayed  himself,  and  the  lawful  husband  was  reinstated
in  the  matrimonial  abode.1

Euripides,  Epicharmus,  and  Archippos  have  also  handled  this  subject,
and  produced  it  on  the  Greek  stage  ;  but  their  plays  are  lost.  Plautus,
the  father  of  Roman  comedy,  has  written  an  Amphitruo,  which  he  him-
self calls  in  the  prologue  "  Tragico-Comoedia."  As  Moliere  owes  a  great
deal  of  his  comedy  to  his  Latin  prototype,  we  cannot  do  better  than  give
Sir  Walter  Scott's  Introduction  to  Dryden's  remodelling  of  Amphitryon  :
— "  Plautus,  the  venerable  father  of  Roman  comedy,  who  flourished  dur-
ing the  second  Punic  war,  left  us  a  play  on  the  subject  of  Amphitryon,
which  has  had  the  honour  to  be  deemed  worthy  of  imitation  by  Moliere
and  Dryden.  It  cannot  be  expected  that  the  plain,  blunt,  and  inartificial
style  of  so  rude  an  age  should  bear  any  comparison  with  that  of  the  au-
thors who  enjoyed  the  highest  advantages  of  the  polished  times  to  which
they  were  an  ornament.  But  the  merit  of  having  devised  and  embodied
most  of  the  comic  distresses,  which  have  excited  laughter  throughout  so

1  Moland  and  several  other  commentators  of  Moliere  say  that  Voltaire  found  this
Indian  legend  in  Colonel  Dow's  book.  I  have  looked  in  Voltaire  ;  but  he  does  not
say  so,  nor  can  I  find  it  in  Dow's  Inaijat  Allah, — tales  translated  from  the  Per-
sian, nor  in  his  History  of  Hindustan.

164  AMPHITRYON.

so  many  ages,  is  to  be  attributed  to  the  ancient  bard  upon  whose  original
conception  of  the  plot  his  successors  have  made  few  and  inconsiderable
improvements.  It  is  true  that,  instead  of  a  formal  Prologue  who  stepped
forth  in  the  character'  of  Mercury  and  gravely  detailed  to  the  audience
the  plot  of  the  play,  Moliere  and  Dryden  have  introduced  it  in  the  mod-
ern, more  artificial  method,  by  the  dialogue  of  the  actors  in  the  first  scene.
It  is  true,  also,  that  with  great  contempt  of  one  of  the  unities,  afterwards
deemed  so  indispensable  by  the  ancients,  Plautus  introduces  the  birth  of
Hercules  into  a  play,  founded  upon  the  intrigue  which  occasioned  the
event.  Yet  with  all  these  disadvantages,  and  that  rude  flatness  of  his  dia-
logue, —  resting  frequently,  for  wit,  upon  the  most  miserable  puns,  —  the
comic  device  of  the  two  Sosias,  the  errors  into  which  the  malice  of  Mer-
cury plunges  his  unlucky  original,  the  quarrel  of  Alcmena  with  her  real
husband,  and  her  reconciliation  with  Jupiter  in  his  stead,  the  final  con-
fronting of  the  two  Amphitryons,  and  the  astonishment  of  the  unfortunate
general  at  finding  every  proof  of  his  identity  exhibited  by  his  rival,  are  all,
however  rudely  sketched,  the  inventions  of  the  Roman  poet.  In  one  re-
spect it  would  seem  that  thejeu  de  theatre  necessary  to  render  the  piece
probable  upon  the  stage,  was  better  managed  in  the  time  of  Plautus  than
in  that  of  Dryden  and  Moliere.  Upon  a  modern  stage  it  is  evidently  diffi-
cult to  introduce  two  pairs  of  characters  so  extremely  alike  as  to  make  it
at  all  probable,  or  even  possible,  that  the  mistakes,  depending  upon  their
extreme  resemblance,  could  take  place.  But,  favoured  by  the  masks  and
costume  of  the  ancient  theatre,  Plautus  contrived  to  render  Jupiter  and
Mercury  so  exactly  like  Amphitryon  and  Sosia,  that  they  were  obliged  to
retain  certain  marks,  supposed  to  be  invisible  to  the  other  persons  of  the
drama,  by  which  the  audience  themselves  might  be  enabled  to  distinguish
the  gods  from  the  mortals  whose  forms  they  had  assumed."

The  history  of  Amphitryon,  strangely  disguised,  is  also  found  in  the
long  series  of  the  romances  of  the  San-Graal  and  of  the  Round  Table,  and
refers  to  the  birth  of  King  Arthur,  and  not  to  that  of  Hercules.  In  the
following  manner  Robert  of  Gloucester  tells  the  tale,  after  Geoffry  of
Monmouth  and  Wace  :  —

"At  the  fest  of  Estre  the  kyng  (Uther  Pendragon)  sende  ys  sonde,
That  heo  comen  alle  to  London  the  hey  men  of  this  londe    .    .    .
Alle  the  noble  men  of  this  lond  to  the  noble  fest  come,
And  heore  wyves  and  heore  dogtren  with  hem  mony  nome,
This  fest  was  noble  ynow,  and  nobliche  y  do  ;

For  mony  was  the  faire  ledy,  that  y  come  was  therto.

Ygerne,  Gorloys  wyf,  was  iairest  of  echon,

That  was  contasse  of  Cornewail,  for  so  fair  nas  ther  non.

The  kyng  by  huld  hire  faste  y  now,  and  ys  herte  on  hired  caste,
And  thogte,  thay  heo  were  wyf,  to  do  folye  atte  laste."

But  she  refused  to  listen  to  him,  and  told  all  to  her  husband,  who,  full
of  anger  and  "  with  oute  leve  of  the  kyng,"  went  back  to  his  own  coun-
try. Then  Gorloys  placed  his  wife  and  some  of  his  troops  in  a  very  strong
fortress,  Tintagell,  and  went  himself  with  a  division  of  his  retainers  into
another  fortress  of  Cornwall.  Uther  soon  made  his  appearance,  and  "  the
castel,  that  the  erl  inne  was,  the  king  by  segede  faste.''  But  Ygerne  was
never  out  of  his  thoughts,  and  "  the  castel  ys  so  strong  that  the  lady  ys
inne,"  that  he  gave  himself  up  to  the  greatest  despair.  Merlyn,  who
"was  sory  ynow  for  the  kynge's  folye,''  was  sent  for,  and  by  his  magic  art
he  gave  to  Uther  the  appearance  of  Gorloys,  while  he  himself,  and  Ulfyn,
the  king's  confidant,  assumed  the  outward  looks  of  two  of  the  earl  01

AMPHITRYON.  165

Cornwall's  "  men,"  Brithoel  and  Jordan.  Thus  changed,  they  appear  be-
fore the  castle,  where  the  countess  was,  and  the  porter,  seeing  his  lord  and
his  friends,  let  them  in,  "  The  contas  was  glad  y  now,  tho  hire  lord  to  hire
com,  and  eyther  other  in  here  armes  myd  gret  joye  nom."  In  the  mean-
time the  king's  men  took  the  castle  where  the  earl  was,  Gorloys  was  slain,
and  these  tidings  were  brought  to  Ygerne.  The  pretended  earl  told  her]
however,  that  he  had  left  his  own  castle  secretly,  "that  none  of  myne
menyt  nuste,"  and  that  he  was  going  back  to  "the  kynge,  and  make  my
pays  with  him."  He  went  away  and  "  come  toward  ys  men,  ys  own  forme
he  nom."  Afterwards  king  Uther  married  the  noble  and  widowed  coun-
tess, but  on  that  night,  when  he  appeared  as  Gorloys,

"Bi  gete  was  the  beste  body,  that  ever  was  in  this  londe,
Kyng  Arthure  the  noble  mon,  that  ever  worthe  understonde."

There  is  a  great  difference  between  the  Celtic  and  classical  tradition.
Ygerne  is  not  wholly  !  unlike  Alcmena ;  but  the  comical  element  is  totally
wanting  in  the  first,  whilst  Arthur  and  Merlin,  although  peculiar  in  their
notions  of  love  and  morality,  are  staid  and  mysterious  personages.

Plautus'  Amphitryo  was  acted  in  Latin,  in  Italy,  in  the  fifteenth  cen-
tury, and  in  1560,  Lodovico  Dolce  brought  out  an  imitation  of  it,  under
the  title  of  //  Marito.  But  two  earlier  translations  of  this  play  already
existed  in  Spanish ;  one  in  prose,  done  by  Francisco  de  Villalobos,  physi-
cian to  Charles  the  Fifth,  which  was  published  in  1515,  and  another  by
Fernando  Perez  de  Oliva,  principal  of  the  university  of  Salamanca.
Camoens,  the  poet  of  the  Lusiad,  produced  a  piece  in  imitation  of  Plautus'
comedy,  which,  according  to  de  Sismondi's  Historical  view  of  the  Litera-
ture of  the  South  of  Europe,  "  is  executed  with  considerable  wit  and  spirit."
In  1638,  Jean  de  Rotrou  published  an  imitation  of  the  Latin  comedy,  in
French,  which  he  called  The  Two  Sosias,  and  in  1650,  only  a  short  time
before  his  death,  he  remodelled  his  piece,  for  the  theatre  du  Marais,  as
une  grande  piece  a  machines,  which  bore  the  title  of  The  birth  of  Hercules.
In  1653  there  was  represented  at  the  court  the  grand  Ballet  of  Night,  ar-
ranged by  Benserade,  with  machinery  by  Torelli.  The  sixth  entree  of  the
second  veille,  is  occupied  by  a  pantomime  (comedie  muette},  which  is
chiefly  based  on  Plautus'  plot.

Fifteen  years  after  this  pantomime,  Moliere  fixed  upon  the  same  sub-
ject, and  wrote  his  Amphitryon,  one  of  the  most  charming  and  natural
comedies  composed  in  French  verse.  But  his  husband  is  not  the  Roman
spouse,  who  is  rather  proud  of  having  a  god  for  collaborateur,  nor  does
his  Jupiter,  who  threatens  to  kill  himself  before  Alcmena's  eyes,  give  a
very  correct  idea  of  the  classical  ''  father  of  gods  and  men."  But,  on
the  other  hand,  his  Cleanthis  is  a  happy  creation,  and  the  model  of  a
"  nagging  "  but  virtuous  woman,  so  fond  of  using  her  tongue,  that  even
Mercury,  although  a  god  under  the  disguise  of  her  husband,  rather  avoids
responding  to  her  uxorious  advances,  and  thereby  causes  an  increase  of
the  wrath  of  the  shrew.  This  greatly  enhances  the  comic  interest  of  the
play,  and  forms  an  amusing  contrast  to  the  display  of  conjugal  tenderness
between  Jupiter,  the  pretended  Amphitryon,  and  the  newly-married
Alcmena.  Sprightliness  and  vivacity  abound  in  this  comedy,  which  are
enhanced  by  the  short  and  long  verses,  used  whenever  suitable,  and  the
alternate  rhymes,  in  which  it  is  written.

It  has  been  said  that  Moliere,  in  producing  his  Amphitryon,  wished  to
flatter  the  nascent  passion  of  Louis  XIV.  for  Madame  de  Montespan.  but

1 66  AMPHITRYON.

this  accusation  seems  to  me  absolutely  without  foundation.  This  play
was  represented  on  the  I3th  of  January,  1668 ;  and  it  was  only  some
months  later  that  this  high-born  lady  became  the  recognized  mistress  of
the  King,  who  would  not  have  permitted  any  allusions  to  be  made  to  his
amours.  Moreover,  Amphitryon  was  not  represented  at  Court,  but  at  the
theatre  of  the  Palais  Royal,  so  that  the  allusions — if  any  existed — must  have
appeared  to  the  Parisian  public,  at  all  times  inclined  to  be  satirical,  as  far
from  complimentary.  In  any  case  the  comedy  was  very  successful,  and
was  represented  twenty-nine  consecutive  times.

Amphitryon  was  dedicated  to  the  Prince  de  Conde  in  the  following
words : —

My  Lord,

Under  favor  of  the  Wits,  I  know  nothing  more  impertinent  than  Dedications  ;
and  Your  most  serene  Highness  will  give  me  leave  not  to  follow  here  the  style  of
those  gentlemen,  and  to  omit  using  two  or  three  miserable  thoughts,  which  have
been  turned  and  returned  so  often,  that  they  are  worn  threadbare.  The  name  of
the  Great  Conde  is  too  glorious  a  name  to  be  treated  like  other  names.  That
illustrious  name  must  be  applied  to  no  uses  unworthy  of  it  ;  and  were  I  to  say  fine
things,  I  would  rather  talk  of  putting  it  at  the  head  of  an  army,  than  at  the  head  of
a  book ;  and  I  should  much  better  conceive  what  it  is  able  to  do,  by  opposing  it
to  the  forces  of  the  enemies  of  the  state,  than  by  opposing  it  to  the  criticism  of  the
enemies  of  a  Play.

Not  but  that  your  serene  highness'  approbation  is  a  powerful  protection  for  all
these  kind  of  works,  and  that  people  are  persuaded  of  your  knowledge,  as  well  as
of  your  intrepid  courage  and  your  greatness  of  soul.  It  is  known  throughout  the
whole  world,  that  your  merit  is  not  circumscribed  by  the  bounds  of  that  unconquer-
able valour  which  gains  adorers  even  amongst  those  whom  it  vanquishes  ;  that
that  merit  extends  even  to  the  nicest  and  sublimest  sciences  ;  and  that  your  decis-
ions concerning  intellectual  works  never  fail  to  be  assented  to  even  by  the  most
fastidious.  But  it  is  likewise  known,  my  Lord,  that  all  those  glorious  approba-
tions which  we  boast  of  to  the  public  cost  us  nothing  to  print,  and  that  they  are
things  which  we  dispose  of  at  pleasure.  It  is  known,  I  say,  that  an  epistle  dedica-
tory says  what  it  pleases,  and  that  an  author  has  it  in  his  power  to  lay  hold  of  the
most  august  persons,  and  to  adorn  the  first  leaves  of  his  book  with  their  great
names ;  that  he  has  the  liberty  herein  to  give  himself  the  honour  of  their  esteem
as  much  as  he  will,  and  to  make  to  himself  protectors  who  never  had  the  least
thoughts  of  being  so.

I  shall  neither  abuse  your  name  nor  your  goodness,  my  Lord,  to  oppugn  the
critics  of  Amphitryon,  and  to  assume  a  glory  which  perhaps  I  have  not  deserved ;
and  I  take  the  liberty  of  offering  you  my  play,  only  to  have  the  opportunity  of
letting  you  know  that  I  incessantly  regard  you  with  profound  veneration,  the  great
qualities  which  you  join  to  the  august  blood  from  which  you  descend,  and  that  I
am,  my  Lord,  with  all  possible  respect  and  imaginable  zeal,  your  most  serene
Highness'  very  humble,  very  obedient,  and  very  obliging  servant,

MOLIERE.

In  the  seventh  volume  of  the  translated  Select  Comedies  of  M.  de  Mo-
liere,  London,  1732,  this  play  is  dedicated  to  the  Right  Honourable  George
Dodington,  Esq.,  in  the  following  words:

SIR  : — You  are  so  generally  known  to  be  an  Encourager  of  Literature,  that  every
Professor  of  it,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest,  considers  you  as  his  Friend  ;  and
grows  ambitious  of  paying  his  best  Respects  to  one  whose  Genius,  Learning,  Po-
liteness, Candour,  Benevolence,  and  Love  of  the  Muses  are  so  eminently  remarkable.
Give  me  leave  therefore  to  lay  before  you  a  Translation  of  MOLIERB'S  Amphitryon. •
the  Fruits  of  my  leisure  Hours.  And  as  the  Rhyme  and  Measure  of  the  Verses  in
the  Original  make  it  difficult  to  be  render' d  literally  into  English  Prose,  be  so
good  as  to  excuse  such  Passages  as  your  Judgment  cannot  approve.

Most  Writers  would  launch  out  on  this  occasion,  and  elaborately  draw  a  Charac-
ter which,  however  pleasing  it  might  prove  to  others,  would,  I  am  confident,  be
disagreeable  to  you. — But,  for  my  part,  I  shall  only  add,  that  whatsoever  Motives

AMPHITRYON.  167

Dedications  usually  proceed  from,  the  sole  Intent  of  this  to  assure  you  and  all  the
World,  that  1  am,  with  great  esteem,  SIR, —  Your  most  Obedient  Humble  Servant

THE  TRANSLATOR.

John  Dryden,  in  his  Amphitryon,  performed  in  1690,  has  borrowed
both  from  Plautus  and  Moliere ;  "  But,1'  says  Sir  Walter  Scott,  "  the
wretched  taste  of  the  age  has  induced  him  to  lard  the  piece  with  gratui-
tous indelicacy.  He  is,  in  general,  coarse  and  vulgar,  where  Moliere  is
witty ;  and  where  the  Frenchman  ventures  upon  a  double  meaning,  the
Englishman  always  contrives  to  make  it  a  single  one.  Yet,  although  in-
ferior to  Moli&re,  and  accommodated  to  the  gross  taste  of  the  seventeenth
century,  "  Amphitryon  "  is  one  of  the  happiest  effusions  of  Dryden's
comic  muse.  He  enriches  the  plot  by  the  intrigue  of  Mercury  and  Phas-
dra  ;  and  the  petulant  interested  "  Queen  of  Gipsies,"  as  her  lover  terms
her,  is  a  bad  paramour  for  the  God  of  Thieves.  In  the  scenes  of  a  higher
cast  Dryden  far  outstrips  both  the  French  and  Roman  poets.  The  sensa-
tion to  be  expressed  is  not  that  of  sentimental  affection,  which  the  good
father  of  Olympus  was  not  capable  of  feeling ;  but  love  of  that  grosser  and
subordinate  kind,  which  prompted  Jupiter  in  his  intrigues,  has  been  by
none  of  the  ancient  poets  expressed  in  more  beautiful  verse  than  that  in
which  Dryden  has  clothed  it,  in  the  scenes  between  Jupiter  and  Alc-
mena."

Dr.  Hawkesworth  remodelled  and  castrated  Dryden's  Amphitryon,  in
which  altered  form  it  was  acted  at  the  Theatres  Royal,  Drury  Lane  and
Covent-Garden.  ''  Dryden's  comedy,"  says  the  Doctor,  "  is  so  tainted
with  the  profaneness  and  immodesty  of  the  times  in  which  he  wrote,  that
the  present  time,  however  selfish  and  corrupt,  has  too  much  regard  to  ex-
ternal decorum  to  permit  the  representation  of  it  upon  the  stage,  without
drawing  a  veil,  at  least,  over  some  parts  of  its  deformity."  It  is  further
stated,  in  the  preface  to  Dr.  Hawkesworth's  alteration,  ''  In  the  scene  be-
tween Sosia  and  Mercury,  in  the  second  act,  Amphitryon  is  supposed  to
have  sent  a  buckle  of  diamonds  by  Sosia  as  a  present  to  Alcmena ;  for
Sosia  first  asks  Mercury  if  Amphitryon  did  send  a  certain  servant  •with  a
present  to  his  wife  ;  and  soon  after  asks  him,  "  What  that  present  was ;"
which,  by  Mercury's  answer,  appears  to  be  the  diamond  buckle.  Yet  in
the  scene  between  Amphitryon  and  Alcmena  in  the  third  act,  when  Alc-
mena asks  him,  as  a  proof  of  having  been  with  her  before,  from  whose
hands  she  had  the  jewel,  he  cries  out,  "  This  is  amazing ;  have  I  already

given  you  those  diamonds?  the  present  I  reserved ."  And  instead

of  supposing  that  Sosia  had  delivered  them  as  part  of  his  errand,  which
he  pretended  he  could  not  execute,  he  appeals  to  him  for  their  being  in
safe  custody,  reserved  to  be  presented  by  himself.  This  is  an  incon-
sistency peculiar  to  Dryden,  for  neither  Plautus  nor  Moliere  anywhere
mention  the  present  to  have  been  sent  by  Sosia.  There  is  another  inac-
curacy of  the  same  kind  which  occurs  both  in  Plautus  and  Moliere.  It
appears,  in  the  second  scene  of  the  second  act,  that  one  part  of  Sosia's
errand  was  to  give  Alcmena  a  particular  account  of  the  battle  ;  and  So-
sia's account  of  his  being  prevented  is  so  extravagant  and  absurd  that
Amphitryon  cannot  believe  it ;  yet,  when  Alcmena,  in  the  third  scene,
asks  Amphitryon  how  she  came  to  know  what  he  had  sent  Sosia  to  tell
her,  Amphitryon,  in  astonishment,  seems  to  admit  that  she  could  know
these  particulars  only  from  himself,  and  does  not  consider  her  questions
as  a  proof  that  Sosia  had  indeed  delivered  his  message,  though,  for  some
reasons,  he  had  pretended  the  contrary,  and  forged  an  incredible  story
to  account  for  his  neglect.  As  it  would  have  been  so  much  more  natural

1 68  AMPHITRYON.

for  Amphitryon  to  have  supposed  that  Sosia  had  told  him  a  lie,  than  that
Alcmena  had  by  a  miracle  learned  what  only  he  and  Sosia  could  tell
her,  without  seeing  either  of  them ;  this  inaccuracy  is  removed  by  intro-
ducing such  a  supposition,  and  making  the  dialogue  correspond  with  it.
In  the  second  Act,  Jupiter,  in  the  character  of  Amphitryon,  leaves  Alc-
mena with  much  reluctance,  pretending  haste  to  return  to  the  camp,  and
great  solicitude  to  keep  his  visit  to  her  a  secret  from  Thebans ;  yet  when
he  appears  again  in  the  third  Act,  which  he  knew  would  be  taken  for  the
third  appearance  of  Amphitryon,  he  does  not  account  for  his  supposed
second  appearance  at  the  return  of  the  real  Amphitryon,  just  after  his  de-
parture, which  seems  to  be  absolutely  necessary  to  maintain  his  borrowed
character  consistently ;  and  without  dropping  the  least  hint  of  his  being
no  longer  solicitous  to  conceal  his  excursion  from  the  camp,  he  sends
Sosia  to  invite  several  of  the  citizens  to  dinner.  Many  other  inaccura-
cies less  considerable  and  less  apparent  have  been  removed,  which  it
is  not  necessary  to  point  out :  whoever  shall  think  it  worth  while  dili-
gently to  compare  the  play  as  it  stood,  with  the  altered  copy,  can  scarce
fail  to  see  the  reason  of  the  alterations  as  they  occur.  It  must  be  con-
fessed that  there  are  still  many  things  in  Amphitryon,  which,  though  I
did  not  obliterate,  I  would  not  have  written  ;  but  I  think  none  of  these
are  exceptionable  in  a  moral  view."  Let  us  add  to  this,  that  the  Doc-
tor altered  also  some  of  Dryden's  songs,  and  substituted  others  which
are  very  flat.  In  the  Prologue  he  says :

"The  scenes  which  Plautus  drew  to-night  we  shew,
Touched  by  Moliere,  by  Dryden  taught  to  glow.
Dryden  ! — in  evil  day  his  genius  rose,
When  wit  and  decency  were  constant  foes  :
Wit  then  defiled  in  manners  and  in  mind,
Whene'er  he  sought  to  please,- disgrac'd  mankind,
Freed  from  his  faults,  we  bring  him  to  the  fair."

A  German  literateur,  Heinrich  von  Kleist  (1776-1811)  has  also  written
an  Amphitryon,  in  which  he  freely  imitates  Moliere.  The  great  differ-
ence is  in  the  conversation  between  Jupiter,  as  Amphitryon,  and  Alc-
mena, which,  in  the  German  author  is  full  of  a  certain  kind  of  mystic
sentimentality,  and  in  which  Jove,  disguised  as  Amphitryon,  informs
her  that  the  real  Amphitryon,  who  has  visited  her,  is  the  father  of
gods  and  men.

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

IN  THE  PROLOGUE.
MERCURY.  |  NIGHT.

IN  THE  COMEDY.

JUPITER,  in  the  form  of  Amphitryon.
MERCURY,  in  the  form  of  Sosia.
AMPHITRYON,  general  of  the  Thebans.
ARGATIPHONTIDAS,  -|

NAUCRATES,

}•  Theban  captains.
POLIDAS,

PAUSICLES,

SOSIA,  Amphitryon's  servant*
ALCMENA,  Amphitryon's  wife.
CLEANTHIS,  her  maid,  Sosia's  wife

Scene. — THEBES,  BEFORE  AMPHITRYON'S  HOUSE.

1  This  part  was  played  by  the  author  himself.  In  the  inventory  given
by  M.  Soulie1,  and  so  often  quoted,  Moli&re's  dress  in  the  character  of
Sosia  consists  of:  "  the  sleeves  and  the  lower  part  of  the  theatrical  classi-
cal cuirass  (tonnelef)  of  green  taffeta,  with  a  small  lace  of  fine  silver,  a
chemisette  of  the  same  taffeta,  two  leggings  of  red  satin,  a  pair  of  shoes,
with  tags,  ornamented  with  silver  lace,  with  a  silk  stocking  of  a  peculiar
kind  of  light  green  colour  (Celadon),  the  festoons,  the  belt  and  a  skirt,  and
a  cap,  embroidered  with  fine  gold  and  silver."

AMPHITRYON.

PROLOGUE.

MERCURY,  on  a  cloud  j    NIGHT,  drawn  through  the  air  by
two  horses.

MERC.  Gently  !  charming  Night,  deign  to  stay  a-while.
Some  help  is  wanted  of  you ;  and  I  have  two  words  to
say  to  you  from  Jupiter.

NIGHT.  Ah !  it  is  you,  Sir  Mercury !  who  would  have
thought  of  you  in  such  a  position  ?

MERC.  Upon  my  word,  getting  tired,  and  not  being
able  to  fulfil  the  different  duties  which  Jupiter  lays  upon
me,  I  quietly  sat  down  on  this  cloud  to  await  your  coming.

NIGHT.  You  are  jesting,  Mercury;  and  you  do  not
mean  it ;  does  it  become  the  gods  to  say  that  they  are
tired  ?

MERC.  Are  the  gods  made  of  iron  ?

NIGHT.  I  wot  not ;  but  it  is  meet  to  preserve  continu-
ally the  divine  decorum.  There  are  certain  words  the  use
of  which  lowers  this  sublime  attribute,  and  which  should
be  left  to  men,  because  they  are  undignified.

MERC.  How  easily  you  speak  of  it ;  and  you  have,  fair
charmer,  a  chariot,  in  which,  like  a  careless  great  lady,
you  are  drawn  by  two  good  horses  wherever  you  like.  But
it  is  not  the  same  thing  with  me,  and  I  cannot,  in  my
fatal  destiny,  bear  the  poets  too  great  a  grudge,  for  their
extreme  impertinence,  in  having,  by  an  unjust  law,  of
which  they  wish  to  keep  up  the  custom,  given  to  each

171

172  AMPHITRYON.

god,  for  his  behoof,  a  special  conveyance,  and  have  left
me  to  go  on  foot,  me,  like  a  village  messenger ;  I,  who,
as  is  well  known,  am  the  famous  messenger  of  the  sove-
reign of  the  gods,  in  the  skies  and  on  the  earth ;  and  who,
without  exaggerating  anything,  stand  more  than  any  one
else  in  need  of  the  means  of  travelling  about,  on  account
of  all  the  duties  which  he  lays  upon  me.

NIGHT.  How  can  you  help  it  ?  The  poets  do  as  they
like.  It  is  not  the  first  stupidity  which  we  have  seen  these
gentlemen  commit.  But  at  any  rate,  your  irritation
against  them  is  unreasonable,  for  the  wings  at  your  feet
are  due  to  their  care.

MERC.  Yes ;  but  does  one  tire  oneself  less  in  going
more  quickly  ?

NIGHT.  Let  us  leave  this,  Sir  Mercury,  and  come  to  the
point.

MERC.  It  is  Jupiter,  as  I  have  told  you,  who  wishes  the
sombre  favour  of  your  cloak  for  a  certain  gallant  adven-
ture, with  which  a  new  love-affair  provides  him.  His  tac-
tics are  not  new  to  you,  I  believe  :  he  very  often  neglects
the  skies  for  the  earth ;  and  you  are  not  ignorant  that  this
master  of  the  gods  is  fond  of  becoming  humanized  for
mortal  beauties,  and  has  a  hundred  ingenious  tricks  to
vanquish  the  most  cruel.  He  has  felt  the  darts  of  Alc-
mena's  eyes  ;  and  whilst  Amphitryon,  her  husband,  com-
mands the  Theban  troops  on  Beoetia's  plains,  he  has  as-
sumed his  form,  and  under  that  disguise  relieves  his  pains,
in  the  possession  of  the  sweetest  pleasures.  The  condition
of  the  wedded  pair  is  propitious  to  his  flame :  Hymen  has
united  them  only  a  few  days  since  ;  and  the  still  young
fire  of  their  tender  love  has  made  Jupiter  have  recourse  to
this  pretty  artifice.  In  this  case  his  stratagem  has  proved
successful ;  but  with  many  a  cherished  object  a  similar
disguise  would  be  of  no  use,  and  to  assume  the  form  of  a
husband  is  not  everywhere  a  good  means  of  pleasing.

NIGHT.  I  admire  Jupiter,  and  I  cannot  conceive  all  the
disguises  that  come  into  his  head.

MERC.  In  this  way,  he  wishes  to  have  a  taste  of  all  sorts
of  conditions ;  and  it  is  not  at  all  acting  as  a  stupid  god.
From  whatever  point  of  view  he  may  be  regarded  by
mortals,  I  would  think  very  little  of  him  if  he  never  aban-

AMPHITRYON.  I  73

doned  his  redoubtable  mien,  and  were  always  full  of  affec-
tation, in  the  highest  part  of  Heaven.  In  my  opinion,
there  can  be  nothing  more  foolish  than  to  be  always  im-
prisoned in  one's  grandeur  ;  and,  above  all,  a  lofty  rank
becomes  very  inconvenient  in  the  transports  of  amorous
ardour.  Jupiter,  who,  no  doubt,  is  a  good  judge  of
pleasure,  knows  how  to  descend  from  the  height  of  his
supreme  glory  ;  and,  to  enter  into  every  thing  that  pleases
him,  he  leaves  his  individuality  behind  him,  and  it  is  no
longer  Jupiter  who  appears.

NIGHT.  One  might  yet  overlook  seeing  him  descend
from  his  sublime  estate  to  enter  into  that  of  men,  to  enjoy
all  the  transports  of  which  their  hearts  are  capable,  and  to
accommodate  himself  to  their  jests,  if,  in  the  changes  to
which  his  disposition  drives  him,  he  would  confine  him-
self to  human  nature.  But  to  see  Jupiter  as  a  bull,  a  ser-
pent, a  swan,  or  anything  else,  I  do  not  think  it  nice,  and
am  not  at  all  astonished  that  it  is  sometimes  talked  about.

MERC.  Let  all  the  cavillers  talk  :  such  changes  have  a
charm  which  surpasses  their  understanding.  This  god
knows  well  enough  what  he  is  about  there  as  elsewhere :
and  that,  in  the  movements  of  their  tender  passions,  the
brutes  are  not  so  stupid  as  one  would  think.

NIGHT.  Let  us  return  to  the  fair  one  whose  favours  he
enjoys.  If,  by  his  stratagem,  he  finds  that  his  passion  is
successful,  what  more  can  he  wish,  and  what  can  I  do  ?

MERC.  That,  to  satisfy  the  desires  of  his  enamoured
soul,  you  should  slacken  the  pace  of  your  horses,  to  make
of  so  delightful  a  night,  the  longest  night  of  all ;  that  you
should  allow  more  time  to  his  transports,  and  that  you
should  retard  the  break  of  day  which  must  hasten  the  re-
turn of  him  whose  place  he  takes.

NIGHT.  This  is  no  doubt  a  nice  employment,  which  the
great  Jupiter  reserves  for  me  !  And  an  honourable  name
is  given  to  the  service  required  of  me !

MERC.  You  are  rather  old-fashioned  for  so  young  a  god-
dess !  Such  an  employment  has  nothing  degrading  except
among  people  of  low  birth.  When  one  has  the  happiness
of  being  in  a  lofty  rank,  whatever  is  done  is  always  well
and  good;  and  things  change  their  names  according  to
what  one  may  be.

1 74  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  i.

NIGHT.  You  know  more  about  such  matters  than  I  do  ;
and  I  shall  believe  in  your  superior  knowledge,  and  accept
this  employment.

MERC.  Now,  now,  Madam  Night,  a  little  gently,  I  pray.
In  the  world  you  have  the  reputation  of  not  being  so  par-
ticular. In  a  hundred  different  climates  you  are  made  the
confidant  of  many  gallant  adventures  :  and,  to  tell  you  my
mind  plainly,  I  believe  that  we  have  nothing  with  which
to  reproach  each  other.

NIGHT.  Let  us  drop  these  bickerings,  and  remain  what
we  are.  Let  us  not  give  mankind  cause  to  laugh  by  tell-
ing each  other  the  truth.

MERC.  Farewell.  I  am  going  yonder  on  this  business,
promptly  to  doff  the  form  of  Mercury,  to  don  the  figure
of  Amphitryon's  servant.

NIGHT.  I  am  going  to  make  a  stay  in  this  hemisphere
with  my  dark  train.

MERC.  Good  day,  Night.

NIGHT.  Farewell,  Mercury.8

{Mercury  descends  from  his  cloud ;  Night  crosses
the  stage.

ACT  I

SCENE  I. — SOSIA,  alone.

Who  goes  there?  He?  My  fear  increases  at  every
step  !  Gentlemen,  I  am  a  friend  to  everyone.  Ah  !  what
extraordinary  boldness  to  be  abroad  at  such  an  hour  as
this !  What  a  scurvy  trick,  my  master,  covered  as  he  is
with  glory,  plays  me  here  !  What !  would  he  have  me  set
out  in  such  a  dark  night,  if  he  had  any  love  for  his  fellow-
man  !  Could  he  not  as  well  have  waited  till  daylight,  to
send  me  to  announce  his  return  and  the  details  of  his
victory?  To  what  slavery  is  thy  life  subjected,  Sosia!

8  Moliere  got  the  primary  idea  of  this  Prologue  from  Plautus'  Amphi-
tryon (Act  i.,  Scene  i),  where  Mercury  addresses  Night  thus:  "Go  on,
Night,  as  you've  begun,  and  pay  obedience  to  my  father.  In  best  style,
the  best  of  services  are  you  performing  for  the  best  of  beings ;  in  giving
this,  you  reap  a  fair  return."

SCENE  i.j  AMPHITRYON.  175

Our  lot  is  much  harder  with  the  great  than  with  the  little.
They  will  have  it  that  everything  in  nature  be  compelled  to
be  sacrificed  to  them.  Night  and  day,  hail,  wind,  danger,
heat  cold,  the  moment  they  speak  we  must  fly.  Twenty
long  years  of  hard  services  avail  us  nothing  with  them.
The  slightest  whim  draws  down  their  anger  upon  us.  In
spite  of  all  this,  our  foolish  hearts  cling  to  the  empty  honour
of  remaining  with  them,  and  will  be  contented  with  the
false  notion,  which  all  other  people  share,  that  we  are
happy.4  In  vain,  reason  calls  us  to  retire ;  in  vain  our
spite  sometimes  consents  to  this ;  their  presence  has  too
powerful  an  influence  on  our  zeal,  and  the  slightest  favour
of  a  caressing  look  re-engages  us  more  firmly  than  ever.
But  at  last,  I  perceive  our  house  through  the  darkness,  and
my  fear  vanishes.5  I  must  have  some  set  speech  for  my
mission.  I  owe  to  Alcmena  some  military  sketch  of  the
great  battle  which  sent  all  our  enemies  to  the  right-about.
But  how  the  deuce  am  I  to  describe  it,  when  I  was  not
there?  No  matter,  let  us  speak  of  cut  and  thrust,  as  if
I  had  been  eye-witness.  How  many  people  tell  of  battles,
from  which  they  kept  far  enough  away  !  In  order  to  act
my  part  with  credit,  I  will  rehearse  it  a  little.  This  is
supposed  to  be  the  room  in  which  I  enter  as  the  bearer
of  despatches;  and  this  lantern  is  Alcmena,  whom  I  have
to  address.6  {He  sets  his  lantern  on  the  ground  and
addresses  his  speech  to  if).  Madam,  Amphitryon,  my
master  and  your  husband,  .  .  .  (Good !  that  is  a  nice
beginning!)  whose  thoughts  are  ever  filled  with  your
charms,  has  been  pleased  to  choose  me  from  amongst  all

4  Sosia  expresses  himself  as  a  courtier  of  Louis  XIV.     Plautus'  Sosia
complains  only  of  the  harsh  condition  of  a  slave,  but  says  nothing  "  of  the
honour  of  remaining  "  with  the  master.

5  In  Plautus'  Amphitryon,  Sosia  is  very  much  afraid  of  meeting  some
one,  and  of  being  beaten.     Still,  he  seems  in  no  hurry  to  arrive,  for  he
utters  a  soliloquy  of  about  two  hundred  lines.     Moliere  makes  Sosia  per-
ceive the  house,  and  thus  his  fear  vanishes.

6  The  scene  in  which  Sosia  addresses  the  lantern  is  an  imitation  of  a
scene  in  the  fifth  fable  of  the  third  night  of  the  Piacevoli  Notti  of  Stra-
parola ;  with  this  difference,  that,  in  the  Italian  tale,  the  servant  who  has
killed  the  bull  with  the  golden  horns,  in  order  to  give  those  horns  to  his
mistress,  hangs  his  clothes  upon  a  branch  of  a  tree,  and  then  addresses
'them  in  an  explanatory  speech,  which  he  intends  afterwards  to  deliver  to

his  master,  who  has  confided  the  bull  to  his  guard.

1 76  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  ,.

to  give  you  tidings  of  the  success  of  his  arms,  and
of  his  desire  to  be  with  you.  "Ah!  really,  my  good
Sosia,  I  am  heartily  delighted  to  see  you  back  again."
Madam,  you  do  me  too  much  honour,  and  my  lot  is  to
be  envied.  (Well  answered  !)  "How  fares  Amphitryon?"
Madam,  as  a  man  of  courage  should,  whenever  an  occasion
offers  for  behaving  with  glory.  (Capital !  that  is  well  con-
ceived !)  "When  will  he,  by  his  charming  return,  satisfy
my  heart?"  As  quickly  as  he  can,  assuredly,  Madam,  but
much  less  early  than  his  heart  desires.  (Ah!)  "But  in
what  state  has  the  war  left  him?  What  says  he?  What  does
he?  Set  my  heart  at  rest."  He  says  far  less  than  he
does,  Madam,  and  makes  his  enemies  tremble.  (Plague  !
where  do  I  get  all  these  pretty  speeches?)  What  are
the  rebels  doing?  tell  me,  what  is  their  present  condi-
tion ?"  They  could  make  no  stand  against  us,  Madam ;  we
cut  them  to  pieces,  put  their  chief,  Pterelas,7  to  death,
took  Telebos8  by  storm;  and  the  whole  port  rings  already
with  our  prowess.  "Ah !  what  success !  ye  gods !  Who
could  ever  have  thought  it?  Tell  me,  Sosia,  how  it  all  oc-
curred." Willingly,  Madam;  and  without  boasting.
I  can  give  you,  very  accurately,  the  details  of  this  victory.
Imagine,  then,  Madam,  that  Telebos  is  on  this  side.
(Sosia  marks  the  places  on  his  hand,  or  on  the  ground*).
It  is  a  city  really  almost  as  large  as  Thebes.  The  river  is,
as  it  were,  there.  Our  people  encamped  here ;  and  that
space  here  was  occupied  by  our  enemies.  On  a  height,
somewhere  thereabout,  was  their  infantry;  and  a  little
lower  down,  towards  the  right,  their  cavalry.  After
having  addressed  our  prayers  to  the  gods,  and  issued  every
order,  the  signal  was  given.  The  enemy,  thinking  to  cut
out  work  for  us,  divided  their  horse  into  three  platoons ;
but  we  soon  cooled  their  courage,  and  you  shall  see  how.
There,  is  our  vanguard  eager  to  be  at  work;  there,  stood
the  archers  of  our  king,  Creon ;  and  here,  was  the  main
body  of  the  army  (Some  noise  from  within),  which  was

7  Pterelas  did  not  live  in  the  time  of  Amphitryon,  but  was  the  son  of
Taphius,  a  son  of  a  niece  of  Alcaeus,  the  father  of  Amphitryon.     Plautus
and  Moliere  have  made  the  same  mistake.

8  Telebos  was  the  capital  of  the  island  of  Taphe,  not  far  from  Ithaca,  on
the  coast  of  Acarnania.

Horace  Vemet

SCENE  ii.]  AMPHITRYON.  I  77

about  to  ...  Stay,  the  main  body  of  the  army  is  afraid;
I  hear  some  noise,  methinks.9

SCENE  II. — MERCURY,  SOSIA.

MERC.  (In  the  form  of  Sosia,  coming  out  of  Amphytriorf  s
house).  Under  this  guise  which  resembles  him,  let  us  drive
away  this  babbler,  whose  unfortunate  arrival  might  disturb
the  happiness  which  our  lovers  are  enjoying  together.

Sos.  (Not  seeing  Mercury).  My  spirits  revive  a  little,
and  after  all,  I  think  it  was  nothing.  For  fear  of  a
sinister  adventure,  however,  let  us  go  and  finish  the  con-
versation indoors.

MERC.  (Aside).  Unless  you  be  stronger  than  Mercury,
I  shall  prevent  your  doing  so.

Sos.  (  Without  seeing  Mercury).  This  night  seems  to  me
inordinately  long.  Judging  by  the  time  I  have  been  on
the  way,  my  master  must  have  mistaken  evening  for
morning,  or  fair  Phoebus  lies  too  long  in  bed  through
having  taken  too  much  wine.

MERC.  (Aside~).  With  what  irreverence  this  lout  speaks
of  the  gods !  My  arm  shall  just  now  chastise  well  this
insolence ;  and  I  shall  have  some  real  fun  with  him  by
stealing  his  name  as  well  as  his  likeness.

Sos.  (Perceiving  Mercury  a  little  way  off~).  Ah  !  upon
my  word,  I  was  right  after  all :  it  is  all  over  with  me,  poor
wretch  !  I  perceive,  before  our  house,  a  man,  whose  mien
bodes  me  no  good.  To  appear  easy,  I  shall  hum  a  little.10

(He  sings).

MERC.  What  fellow  is  this,  who  takes  the  liberty  to  sing
and  to  deafen  me  in  this  manner  ?  (As  Mercury  speaks,
Sosia' s  voice  grows  gradually  weaker).  Does  he  wish  me
to  give  him  a  drubbing  ?

Sos.  (Aside).  Assuredly  that  fellow  has  no  love  for
music.11

•  Plautus'  Sosia  gives  a  serious  and  detailed  narrative  of  the  battle ;
Moliere's  preserves  the  real  comedy  tone.

10  Compare   Nick    Bottom    in    Shakespeare's  A  Midsummer- Nigh?  s
Dream  (Act  iii.,  Scene  i),  saying,  "I  will  sing  that  they  shall  hear  I  am
not  afraid.' '

11  This  dialogue  is  imitated  from  Plautus,  except  Sosia's  remark  about
the  fellow  having  no  love  for  music.

178  AMPHITRYON.  [A.CT  i.

MERC.  For  the  last  week,  I  have  found  no  one  whose
bones  I  could  break  ;  my  arm  loses  its  strength  in  this
idleness  ;  and  I  am  looking  out  for  some  back  to  regain
my  cunning.

Sos.  (Aside).  What  the  deuce  of  a  fellow  is  this?  My
heart  is  big  with  mortal  fear.  But  why  should  I  tremble
so  ?  Perhaps  the  fellow  is  just  as  much  afraid  as  I  am,
and  speaks  in  that  way  to  hide  his  fear  underneath  a  pre-
tended audacity.  Yes,  yes,  let  us  not  allow  him  to  think
us  a  goose.  If  I  am  not  bold,  let  me  try  to  appear  so.  Let
us  reason  ourselves  into  courage ;  he  is  alone  like  me ;  I
am  strong,  I  have  a  good  master,  and  there  is  our  house.

MERC.   Who  goes  there  ?

Sos.   I.

MERC.  Who,  I  ?

Sos.  I.     (Aside).     Courage,  Sosia.

MERC.   What  is  your  condition  in  life,  tell  me  ?

Sos.  To  be  a  man,  and  to  speak.

MERC.  Are  you  master,  or  servant?

Sos.  As  the  whim  takes  me.
•   MERC.  Whither  are  your  steps  bent  ?

Sos.  Where  I  intend  to  go.

MERC.  Ah  !  this  displeases  me.

Sos.  I  am  delighted  to  hear  it.

MERC.  Positively,  by  fair  means  or  foul,  I  shall  know
from  you,  wretch,  what  you  are  doing,  where  you  came
from  before  day-break,  whither  you  are  going,  and  who
you  may  be.

Sos.  I  do  good  and  ill  by  turns ;  I  come  hence ;  I  go
thither;  I  belong  to  my  master.12

MERC.  You  show  some  wit,  and  you  have  a  mind,  I
perceive,  to  assume  with  me  the  man  of  importance.  I  feel
inclined,  to  make  acquaintance,  to  give  you  a  box  on  the
ear  with  my  own  hand.

Sos.  To  me?

MERC.  To  you ;  and  there  it  is  for  you,  to  make  sure  of
it.  (Mercury  slaps  Sosia' s  face).

Sos.  Ho  !  ho  !  this  is  in  earnest  ?

12  Nearly  the  whole  of  this   lively  dialogue   is    partly  imitated  from
Plautus.

SCBNB  n.]  AMPHITRYON.  1 79

MERC.  No,  it  is  only  for  fun,  and  in  answer  to  your
jokes.

Sos.  Zounds  !  friend,  how  you  deal  your  blows  about
without  one's  saying  anything  to  you.

MERC.  These  are  the  least  of  my  blows  ;  my  little  ordi-
nary boxes  on  the  ear.

Sos.  Were  I  as  hasty  as  you,  we  should  make  nice  work
of  it.

MERC.  All  this  is  nothing  as  yet.  We  shall  see  some-
thing better  anon  ;  but  to  provide  a  little  interval,  let  us
continue  our  conversation.

Sos.  I  give  up  the  game.     (  Wishes  to  go.

MERC.   {Stopping  hint).     Where  are  you  going?

Sos.  What  does  it  matter  to  you  ?

MERC.   I  wish  to  know  where  you  are  going.

Sos.  To  get  that  door  opened  to  me.  Why  do  you  de-
tain me?

MERC.  If  you  are  impudent  enough  to  go  only  near  it,
I  shall  shower  down  a  storm  of  blows  upon  you.

Sos.  What  !  you  wish,  by  your  threats,  to  prevent  my
entering  our  own  house  ?

MERC.   How  !  our  house  ?

Sos.  Yes,  our  house.

MERC.  O,  the  wretch!  you  belong  to  that  house,  you
say?

Sos.  Indeed  I  do.  Is  not  Amphitryon  the  master  of
it?

MERC.  Well!  what  does  that  prove?

Sos.  I  am  his  servant.

MERC.  You !

Sos.  I.

MERC.  His  servant  ?

Sos.  Without  a  doubt.

MERC.  The  servant  of  Amphitryon  ?

Sos.  Of  Amphitryon,  of  him.

MERC.  Your  name  is?  .    .    .

Sos.  Sosia.

MERC.  Heh!  what?

Sos.  Sosia.

MERC.  Harkee !  do  you  know  that,  with  my  fist,  I  shall
knock  you  down  on  the  spot?

1 80  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  i.

Sos.  For  what?     What  fury  seizes  you?

MERC.  Tell  me,  who  made  you  so  rash  as  to  assume  the
name  of  Sosia?

Sos.  I,  I  do  not  assume  it ;  I  have  had  it  all  my
life.

MERC.  O  what  a  horrible  lie,  and  what  extreme  im-
pudence !  You  dare  to  maintain  that  Sosia  is  your  name !

Sos.  Indeed  I  do ;  I  maintain  it,  for  the  very  good
reason  that  the  gods  have  so  ordained  it  by  their  supreme
decree,  and  that  it  lies  not  in  my  power  to  say  nay,  and  to
be  any  other  than  myself.

MERC.  A  thousand  cudgel- strokes  ought  to  be  the  re-
ward of  such  effrontery.

Sos.  (Beaten  by  Mercury).  Justice,  citizens  !  Help !  I
beseech  you.

MERC.  How,  you  hang-dog,  you  cry  out !

Sos.  You  kill  me  with  a  thousand  blows,  and  you  do
not  wish  me  to  cry  out?

MERC.  It  is  thus  that  my  arm  .    .    .

Sos.  It  is  an  unworthy  action.  You  take  advantage
of  the  superiority  which  my  want  of  courage  gives  you  over
me ;  and  that  is  not  fair.  It  is  mere  hectoring  to  wish  to
profit  by  the  poltroonery  of  those  whom  we  thrash.  To
beat  a  man  who  we  know  will  not  fight,  is  not  a  generous
action ;  and  to  show  courage  against  those  who  have  none,
is  blamable.

MERC.   Well!  are  you  Sosia  now?  what  say  you?

Sos.  Your  blows  have  effected  no  metamorphosis  in
me;  and  all  the  change  that  I  can  find  in  the  case  is  that
I  am  Sosia  beaten.

MERC.  (Threatening  Sosia].  Again!  A  hundred  fresh
blows  for  this  new  impudence.

Sos.   Pray,  cease  your  blows.

MERC.  Then  cease  your  insolence.

Sos.  Anything  you  please ;  I  keep  silence.  The  dispute
is  too  unequal  between  us.

MERC.  Are  you  Sosia  still ?  say,  wretch?

Sos.  Alas !  I  am  what  you  please :  dispose  of  my  fate
entirely  according  to  your  wish ;  your  arm  has  made  you
master  of  it.

MERC.  Your  name  was  Sosia,  by  what  you  said  ?

SCENE  n.j  AMPHITRYON.  l8l

Sos.  It  is  true,  until  now  I  thought  the  thing  plain
enough;  but  your  stick  has  made  me  see  that  I  was  mis-
taken in  the  matter.

MERC.  It  is  I  who  am  Sosia,  and  all  Thebes  confesses
it :  Amphitryon  has  never  had  any  other  than  me.

Sos.  You,  Sosia?

MERC.  Yes,  Sosia !  and  if  any  one  plays  tricks  with  him,
let  him  look  to  himself.

Sos.  (Aside).  Heaven  !  must  I  thus  renounce  my  own
self,  and  see  my  name  stolen  from  me  by  an  impostor.
How  extremely  fortunate  it  is  for  him  that  I  am  a  coward,
or  else,  'sdeath !  .  .  .

MERC.  You  are  murmuring,  I  know  not  what,  between
your  teeth.

Sos.  No.  But,  in  the  name  of  the  gods,  give  me  leave
to  speak  for  one  moment  to  you.

MERC.  Speak.

Sos.  But  promise  me,  I  pray,  that  there  shall  be  no
blows.  Let  us  sign  a  truce. ls

MERC.  Proceed :  go  on,  I  grant  you  that  point.

Sos.  Who,  tell  me,  put  this  fancy  into  your  head?
What  good  will  it  do  you  to  take  my  name  away  from  me  ?
And,  even  were  you  a  demon,  could  you,  in  short,  prevent
me  from  being  myself,  from  being  Sosia?

MERC.   (Lifting his  stick}.     How!  Can  you  .    .    .

Sos.  Ah !  hold ;  we  have  discarded  blows.

MERC.  What !   hangdog,  impostor,  rascal  !  .    .    .

Sos.  As  for  names,  call  me  as  many  as  you  like ;  these
are  slight  wounds,  and  I  am  not  angry  at  them.

MERC.  You  say  you  are  Sosia  ?

Sos.  Yes.     Some  nonsensical  tale  has  been  .   .    .

MERC.  Now  then,  I  break  our  truce,  and  take  back  my
word.

Sos.  No  matter.  I  cannot  annihilate  myself  for  you,
and  stand  a  speech  so  very  improbable.  Is  it  in  your
power  to  be  what  I  am?  and  can  I  cease  to  be  myself?
Did  anyone  ever  hear  of  such  a  thing?  And  can  one
give  the  lie  to  a  hundred  convincing  proofs?  Do  I  dream?
Am  I  asleep  ?  Is  my  mind  disturbed  by  some  powerful

M  This  dialogue  is  again  followed  from  Plautus.

1 82  AMPHITRYON.  [ACTI.

transport?  Do  I  not  plainly  feel  that  I  am  awake?  Am
I  not  in  my  right  senses?  Has  not  my  master,  Amphi-
tryon, charged  me  to  come  hither  to  Alcmena  his  wife  ?
Am  I  not  to  extol  his  love  for  her,  and  to  give  an  account
of  his  deeds  against  our  enemies?  Have  I  not  just  come
from  the  harbour  ?  Have  I  not  a  lantern  in  my  hand  ?
Have  I  not  found  you  in  front  of  our  dwelling?  Did  I
not  talk  to  you  in  a  perfectly  kind  manner  ?  Do  you  not
take  an  advantage  of  my  cowardice,  to  hinder  me  from
entering  our  house?  Have  you  not  spent  your  rage  upon
my  back?  Have  you  not  belaboured  me  with  blows?
Ah  !  all  this  is  but  too  real ;  and  would  to  Heaven,  it  were
less  so !  Cease  therefore  to  insult  a  wretch's  lot ;  and  leave
me  to  acquit  myself  of  the  calls  of  my  duty.

MERC.  Stop,  or  the  least  step  brings  down  upon  your
back  a  thundering  outbreak  of  my  just  wrath.  All  that
you  have  mentioned  just  now  is  mine,  except  the  blows.

Sos.  This  lantern  knows  how,  my  heart  full  of  fear,  I
departed  this  morning  from  the  vessel.  Has  not  Am-
phitryon sent  me  to  Alcmena,  his  wife,  from  the  camp  ?

MERC.  You  have  told  a  lie.  It  was  I  whom  Amphitryon
deputed  to  Alcmena,  and  who,  at  this  moment,  arrives  from
the  Persian  Port ; u  I,  who  come  to  announce  the  valour
of  his  arm  which  gained  us  a  complete  victory,  and  slew  the
chief  of  our  enemies.  In  short,  it  is  I  who  assuredly  am
Sosia,  son  of  Davus,  an  honest  shepherd ;  brother  to  Har-
page  who  died  in  a  foreign  country;  husband  to  that
prude  Cleanthis,  whose  temper  drives  me  mad ;  who  has
received  a  thousand  lashes  at  Thebes,  without  ever  saying
aught  about  it ;  and  who  was  formerly  publicly  marked
on  the  back,  for  being  too  honest  a  man. 15

Sos.  {Quietly  aside}.  He  is  right.  Unless  one  be
Sosia,  one  cannot  know  all  he  says  ;  and  amidst  the  as-
tonishment which  seizes  upon  me,  I  begin,  in  my  turn,  to
believe  him  a  little.  In  fact,  now  that  I  look  at  him,  I

14  According  to  Riley,  Plautus  is  here  guilty  of  an  anachronism  ;  for  the
''  Portus  Persicus,"  which  was  on  the  coast  of  Euboea,  was  so  called  from
the  Persian  fleet  lying  there  on  the  occasion  of  the  expedition  to  Greece,
many  ages  after  the  time  of  Amphitryon.

15  Among  the  ancients,  marking  with  a  red-hot  iron  upon  the  shoulder
was  unknown  as  a  public  punishment.     In  Plautus,  Sosia  says,  that  he
has  been  whipped.

AMPHITRYON.

18-

perceive  that  he  has  my  figure,  my  face,  my  gestures.  Let
me  ask  him  some  question,  in  order  to  clear  up  this  mys-
tery. (Aloud).  What  did  Amphitryon  obtain  for  his
share  of  all  the  plunder  taken  from  our  enemies  ?

MERC.  Five  very  large  diamonds,  neatly  set  in  a  clus-
ter, with  which  their  chief  used  to  adorn  himself  as  a  rare
piece  of  workmanship.16

Sos.   For  whom  does  he  intend  such  a  rich  present  ?

MERC.   For  his  wife  ;  and  he  wishes  her  to  wear  them.

Sos.  But  where  is  it  placed  at  present,  until  it  shall  be
brought  ?

MERC.   In  a  casket  sealed  with  the  arms  of  my  master."

Sos.  (Aside).  He  does  not  tell  a  single  lie  in  any  of
his  answers ;  and  I  begin  really  to  be  in  doubt  about
myself.  With  me  he  is  already,  by  sheer  force,  Sosia ;
and  he  might  perhaps  also  be  he  by  reason.  And  yet
when  I  touch  myself  and  recollect,  it  seems  to  me  that  I
am  myself.  Where  shall  I  find  some  trustworthy  light  to
clear  up  what  I  see  ?  What  I  have  done  alone,  and  what
no  one  has  seen,  cannot  be  known  unless  by  myself.  By
that  question,  I  must  astonish  him ;  and  that  is  enough  to
puzzle  him,  and  we  shall  see.  (Aloud).  When  they  were
fighting,  what  did  you  do  in  our  tents ;  whither  you  ran
alone  to  hide  yourself?

MERC.  From  off  a  ham  .    .    .

Sos.  (Quietly  aside).     That  is  it !

MERC.  Which  I  unearthed,  I  bravely  cut  two  juicy
slices,  with  which  I  stuffed  myself  nicely.  And  adding
thereto  a  wine  of  which  they  are  very  chary,  and  the  sight
of  which  pleased  me  even  before  I  tasted  it,  I  imbibed
some  courage  for  our  people  who  were  fighting.

Sos.  (Softly  aside).  This  matchless  proof  concludes
well  in  his  favour :  and,  unless  he  were  in  the  bottle,
nothing  is  to  be  said  against  it.18  (Aloud).  From  the

16  In   Plautus,  Amphitryon  receives  a  ''  golden  goblet "  for  his  share,
which  has  become  almost  historical,  because  historians  have  mentioned  it,
and  described  its  form.

17  Arms  were  unknown  to  the  ancients,  for  heraldry  came  in  only  with
chivalry.     But  the  ancients  used  signet  rings  upon  which  was  engraved
some  peculiar  sign.

18  This  is  also  taken  from  Plautus;  only  Mercury  speaks  there  of  "an
earthen  pot,"  and  not  of  a  bottle.

184  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  i.

proofs  laid  before  me,  I  cannot  deny  that  you  are  Sosia,
and  I  acknowledge  it.  But,  if  you  are  he,  tell  me  whom
you  wish  me  to  be  ;  for  after  all  I  must  be  somebody.

MERC.  When  I  shall  be  no  longer  Sosia,  you  may  be
he,  I  agree  to  that ;  but  while  I  am  he.  it  will  be  your
death  to  take  such  a  fancy  into  your  head.

Sos.  All  this  confusion  sets  my  wit  on  edge,  and  reason
is  contrary  to  what  one  sees.  But  there  must  be  an  end
to  this  somehow  or  other ;  and  the  shortest  way  for  me  is
to  go  in  there.

MERC.  Ah  !  you  hangdog,  you,  with  another  taste  of  the
stick.

Sos.  {Beaten  by  Mercury).  Ah  !  what  is  this  ?  Great
gods  !  he  strikes  harder  still ;  and  my  back  will  be  sore
for  a  month  to  come.  Let  me  leave  this  devil  of  a  fellow,
and  return  to  the  harbour.  O  just  Heavens,  I  have  made
a  pretty  embassy  !

MERC.  (Alone}.  At  last  I  have  made  him  fly ;  and,  by
this  treatment,  he  has  got  his  punishment  for  many  of  his
deeds.  But  I  perceive  Jupiter,  who,  very  politely,  escorts
the  amorous  Alcmena.

SCENE  III. — JUPITER  under  the  form  of  Amphitryon,  ALC-
MENA, CLEANTHIS,  MERCURY.

JUP.  Forbid,  dear  Alcmena,  the  torch-bearers  to  ap-
proach. They  afford  me  delight  in  beholding  you;  but
might  betray  my  coming  hither,  which  had  best  remain
concealed.  My  love,  restrained  by  all  these  weighty
cares  with  which  the  glory  of  our  arms  held  me  fettered,
has  stolen  the  moments  which  it  has  just  given  to  your
charms  from  the  duties  of  my  post.  This  theft,  which  my
heart  devoted  to  your  beauty,  might  be  blamed  by  the
public  voice ;  and  the  only  witness  whom  I  wish,  is  she
who  can  thank  me  for  it.

ALC.  I  take  great  interest,  Amphitryon,  in  the  glory
which  your  illustrious  exploits  shed  upon  you;  and  the
fame  of  your  victory  moves  my  heart  in  its  most  sensible
part.  But  when  I  perceive  that  this  fatal  honour  keeps
away  from  me  him  whom  I  love,  I  cannot  forbear,  in  my
excessive  tenderness,  to  bear  it  some  ill-will,  and  even  to
cavil  at  the  supreme  order  which  makes  you  the  Thebans

SCBNB  in.]  AMPHITRYON.  185

general.  It  is  sweet  after  a  victory  to  see  the  glory  of  one
whom  we  love  ;  but  among  the  perils  inseparable  from
this  glory,  a  fatal  stroke,  alas  !  may  quickly  come.  With
how  many  fears  is  our  heart  seized  at  the  rumour  of  the
slightest  skirmish  !  In  the  horrors  of  such  a  thought,  can
we  ever  see  aught  with  which  to  console  ourselves  for  the
threatened  blow?  And  with  whatever  laurels  the  con-
queror may  be  crowned,  whatever  share  one  may  have  in
that  high  honour,  is  it  worth  that  which  it  costs  to  a
tender  heart,  which  trembles  every  moment  for  him  whom
it  loves  ? 19

JUP.  I  see  nothing  in  you  but  what  increases  my  pas-
sion ;  everything  proves  to  my  eyes  a  thoroughly  ena-
moured heart ;  and  it  is,  I  own  it,  a  charming  thing,  to
find  so  much  love  in  a  beloved  object.  But,  if  I  may
dare  to  say  so,  one  scruple  troubles  me  in  the  tender  sen-
timents which  you  show  to  me  ;  and  in  order  to  relish
them  the  more,  my  passion,  dear  Alcmena,  would  owe
nothing  to  your  duty.  Let  the  favours,  which  I  receive
from  you,  be  due  to  your  love,  and  to  my  person  only ;
and  let  not  my  position  as  your  husband  be  the  motive  for
their  bestowal.

ALC.  It  is  from  that  name,  however,  that  the  ardour
which  devours  me  holds  its  right  to  show  itself;  and  I  do
not  understand  this  new  scruple  with  which  your  passion
is  perplexed.

JUP.  Ah !  the  love  and  tenderness  which  I  have  for  you
exceeds  also  that  of  a  husband  ;  and  in  those  sweet  mo-
ments you  are  not  aware  of  its  delicacy :  you  do  not
understand  that  an  enamoured  heart  is  studiously  intent
upon  a  hundred  trifles,  and  worries  itself  about  the  manner

19  The  Alcmena  of  Plautus  utters  sentiments  more  worthy  of  a  Roman
matron.  This  is  what  she  says  of  her  husband  (Act  ii.,  Scene  2) :  "  This,
at  least,  makes  me  happy,  that  he  has  conquered  the  foe,  and  has  returned
home  laden  with  glory.  Let  him  be  absent,  if  only  with  fame  acquired
he  betakes  himself  home.  I  shall  bear  and  ever  endure  his  absence  with
mind  resolved  and  steadfast ;  if  only  this  reward  is  granted  me,  that  my
husband  shall  be  hailed  the  conqueror  in  the  warfare,  sufficient  for  myself
will  I  deem  it.  Valour  is  the  best  reward ;  valour  assuredly  surpasses  all
things :  liberty,  safety,  life,  property  and  parents,  country  too,  and  chil-
dren, by  it  are  defended  and  preserved.  Valour  comprises  everything  in
itself:  all  blessings  attend  him  in  whose  possession  is  valour."

1 86  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  L

of  being  happy.  In  me,  fair  and  charming  Alcmena,  you
behold  a  lover  and  a  husband ;  but,  to  speak  frankly,  it  is
the  lover  only  I  care  for;  and  I  feel  that,  when  near  you,
the  husband  checks  him.  This  lover,  jealous  of  your  affec-
tion to  the  last  degree,  wishes  your  love  to  abandon  itself
to  him  alone;  and  his  passion  desires  nothing  that  the
husband  gives  him.  From  the  fountain-head,  he  wishes  to
obtain  your  love,  and  to  owe  nothing  to  the  bonds  of
wedlock;  nothing  to  a  wearying  duty  which  makes  the
heart  ache,  and  by  which  the  sweetness  of  the  most  valued
favours  is  daily  poisoned.  In  the  scruples,  in  short,  by
which  he  is  tormented,  he  wishes,  in  order  to  satisfy  his
delicacy,  that  you  separate  himself  from  that  which  is
offensive  to  him,  and  that  the  husband  be  only  for  your
virtue ;  and  that  the  lover  shall  have  all  the  affection  and
tenderness  of  your  heart,  which  is  all  gentleness.

ALC.  Really,  Amphitryon,  you  must  be  jesting,  to  talk
in  this  manner ;  and  I  should  be  afraid,  that  if  anyone
heard  you,  you  would  be  thought  out  of  your  right  senses.

JUP.  There  is  more  sense  in  this  discourse,  Alcmena,
than  you  think.  But  a  longer  stay  would  render  me  too
guilty,  and  the  time  presses  for  my  return  to  the  port.
Farewell.  The  harsh  dictates  of  my  duty  tear  me  away
from  you  for  a  while ;  but,  fair  Alcmena,  try  at  least,  I
pray  you,  when  you  see  the  husband,  to  recollect  the
lover.

ALC.  I  do  not  separate  that  which  the  Gods  unite,  and
husband  and  lover  are  very  precious  to  me.

SCENE  IV. — CLEANTHIS,  MERCURY.

CLE.  (Aside).  O  Heaven  !  how  sweet  are  the  caresses
of  an  ardently  beloved  husband  !  and  how  far  is  my  wretch
of  a  husband  from  all  this  tenderness.

MERC.  (Aside).  I  must  inform  Night  that  she  has  but
to  furl  all  her  sails,  and  the  sun  may  now  arise  from  his
bed  to  put  out  the  stars.

CLE.  (Stopping  Mercury).  What !  Is  it  thus  that  you
leave  me  ?

MERC.  And  how  then  ?  Would  you  wish  me  not  to
acquit  myself  of  my  duty,  and  follow  Amphitryon's  foot-
steps ?

SCENE  iv.]  AMPHITRYON.  l8j

CLE.  But  to  separate  from  me  in  this  abrupt  fashion,
you  wretch.

MERC.  A  fine  subject  to  be  angry  about  !  We  have  still
so  long  to  remain  together  !

CLE.  But  what !  to  go  in  such  a  brutal  manner,  without
saying  a  single  kind  word  to  cheer  me  up.

MERC.  Where  the  deuce  would  you  have  my  brains
fetch  you  this  silly  stuff  from?  Fifteen  years  of  marriage
exhaust  one's  discourse  ;  and  we  have  said  all  that  we  had
to  say  to  each  other  long  ago.

CLE.  Look  at  Amphitryon,  you  wretch  ;  see  how  he
shows  his  ardour  for  Alcmena  :  and  after  that,  blush  for
the  little  passion  that  you  display  towards  your  wife.

MERC.  Eh  !  good  gracious,  Cleanthis,  they  are  still
lovers.  There  comes  a  certain  age  when  all  this  is  done
with  ;  and  what  in  those  beginnings  suits  them  well
enough,  would  look  very  awkward  in  us,  old  married
folks.  It  would  be  a  pretty  sight  to  see  us,  face  to  face,
saying  sweet  things  to  each  other.

CLE.  What  !  perfidious  wretch,  am  I  past  hoping  that  a
heart  might  sigh  for  me  ?

MERC.  No,  I  should  be  sorry  to  say  so ;  but  I  have  too
grey  a  beard  to  dare  to  sigh,  and  I  should  make  you  die
with  laughter.

CLE.  You  hangdog,  do  you  deserve  the  signal  luck  of
having  a  virtuous  woman  like  me  for  your  wife  ?

MERC.  Great  Heavens  !  if  anything  you  are  too  vir-
tuous ;  all  this  merit  is  of  little  value  to  me.  Be  a  little
less  an  honest  woman,  and  do  not  pester  my  brains  so  much.

CLE.  How !  do  you  find  fault  with  me  for  being  too
virtuous  ?

MERC.  A  woman's  sweet  temper  is  her  chief  charm ;
and  your  virtue  makes  such  a  clamour  that  it  never  ceases
deafening  me.

CLE.  You  wish  for  a  heart  full  of  feigned  tenderness,
for  those  women  with  the  laudable  and  pretty  talent  of
knowing  how  to  smother  their  husbands  with  caresses  in
order  to  make  them  swallow  the  existence  of  a  gallant.

MERC.  Upon  my  word,  shall  I  tell  you  candidly?  An
ideal  evil  affects  only  fools;  and  I  would  take  for  my
device:  "  Less  honour  and  more  quietness."

1 88  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT 11.

CLE.  What !  would  you  endure,  without  repugnance,
that  I  should  love  a  gallant  without  any  shame  ?

MERC.  Yes,  if  I  were  no  longer  pestered  with  your
scolding,  and  if  I  could  see  you  change  your  temper  and
your  way.  I  would  sooner  have  a  convenient  vice,  than  a
worrying  virtue.  Farewell,  Cleanthis,  my  dear  soul;  I
must  follow  Amphitryon.

CLE.  (  Uone).  Why  has  not  my  heart  sufficient  resolu-
tion to  punish  this  infamous  wretch  !  Ah,  how  it  maddens
me,  in  this  instance,  to  be  an  honest  woman  !

ACT.  II.
SCENE   I. — AMPHITRYON,  SOSIA.

AMPH.  Come  here,  you  gallows-bird,  come  here.  Do
you  know,  Master  Scoundrel,  that  your  talk  is  enough  for
me  to  knock  you  down,  and  that  my  anger  only  waits  for
a  stick  to  beat  you  as  I  wish?

Sos.  If  you  take  it  in  that  strain,  Sir,  I  have  nothing
more  to  say;  and  you  will  be  always  in  the  right.

AMPH.  What,  you  wretch  !  you  wish  to  foist  upon  me  as
truths  stories  which  I  know  to  be  impossibly  extravagant  ?

Sos.  No  :  I  am  the  servant,  and  you  are  the  master ;
it  shall  be  just  as  you  wish  it,  Sir.

AMPH.  Come,  I  will  suppress  the  anger  that  is  burning
within  me,  and  listen  at  length  to  the  details  of  your
mission.  I  must  clear  up  this  confusion  before  seeing  my
wife.  Collect  yourself,  consider  well  within  yourself,  and
answer  word  for  word  to  each  question.

Sos.  But  for  fear  of  making  a  mistake,  tell  me  before-
hand, if  you  please,  in  what  manner  you  wish  this  matter
explained.  Shall  I  speak,  Sir,  according  to  my  conscience,
or  in  the  manner  usually  employed  when  addressing  the
great  ?  Must  I  tell  the  truth,  or  am  I  to  be  complaisant  ?

AMPH.  No  ;  I  shall  only  compel  you  to  give  me  a  very
straightforward  account.

Sos.  Very  well.  That  is  sufficient,  leave  it  to  me ;  you
have  only  to  question  me.

AMPH.  Upon  the  order  which  I  lately  gave  you  .    .    .

SCENE  LJ  AMPHITRYON.  189

Sos.  I  set  out,  the  skies  veiled  with  a  black  crape,
swearing  strongly  against  you  under  this  vexatious  mar-
tyrdom, and  cursing  twenty  times  the  order  of  which  you
speak.

AMPH.   How  so,  you  scoundrel !

Sos.  Sir,  you  have  only  to  say  the  word,  and  I  shall  tell
lies,  if  you  wish.

AMPH.  That  is  how  a  servant  shows  his  zeal  for  us !  No
matter.  What  happened  to  you  on  the  road  ?

Sos.  To  have  a  mortal  fright  at  the  slightest  object
that  I  saw.

AMPH/  Poltroon  !

Sos.  Nature  has  her  whims  in  forming  us ;  she  bestows
on  us  various  inclinations ;  some  find  a  thousand  delights
in  exposing  themselves ;  I  find  them  in  keeping  myself
safe.

AMPH.  When  you  reached  the  house  .    .    .

Sos.  I  wished  to  rehearse  a  little  before  the  door,  in
what  strain  and  in  what  manner  I  would  give  a  glorious
account  of  the  battle.

AMPH.  What  then?

Sos.  Some  one  came  to  disturb  and  embarrass  me.

AMPH.  Who?

Sos.  Sosia;  another  I,  jealous  of  your  orders,  whom
you  sent  from  the  port  to  Alcmena,  and  who  has  as  full
knowledge  of  our  secrets  as  I  who  speak  to  you.

AMPH.  What  tales !

Sos.  No,  Sir,  it  is  the  plain  truth :  this  I,  sooner  than
I,  found  himself  at  our  house;  and  I  swear  to  you,  Sir,
that  I  was  there  before  I  had  arrived.

AMPH.  Whence  proceeds,  I  pray  you,  this  confounded
nonsense?  Is  it  a  dream?  is  it  drunkenness?  aberration
of  mind,  or  a  bad  joke?

Sos.  No,  it  is  the  thing  as  it  is,  and  not  at  all  an  idle
tale.  I  am  a  man  of  honour,  I  give  you  my  word !  and
you  may  believe  it,  if  you  please.  I  tell  you  that,  believing
to  be  but  one  Sosia,  I  found  myself  two  at  our  house ;  and
that  of  these  two  I's,  jealous  of  each  other,  one  is  at  home,
and  the  other  is  with  you ;  that  the  I  whom  you  see  here,
tired  to  death,  found  the  other  I  fresh,  jovial,  and  active,
and  having  no  anxiety  but  to  fight  and  break  bones.

190  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  n.

AMPH.  I  must  be,  I  confess,  of  a  temper  very  staid,  very
calm,  and  very  gentle,  to  allow  a  servant  to  entertain  me
with  such  nonsense  !

Sos.  If  you  put  yourself  in  a  passion,  no  more  conference
between  us ;  you  know  all  is  over  at  once.

AMPH.  No,  I  will  listen  to  you  without  excitement;  I
promised  it.  But  tell  me  in  sober  conscience,  is  there  any
shadow  of  probability  in  this  new  mystery  which  you  have
just  been  telling  me?

Sos.  No ;  you  are  right,  and  the  affair  must  appear  to
everyone  past  belief.  It  is  an  incomprehensible  fact,  an
extravagant,  ridiculous,  irksome  tale :  it  shocks  common
sense ;  but  it  is  not  the  less  a  fact.

AMPH.  How  can  a  man  believe  it,  unless  he  be  bereft
of  his  senses?

Sos.  I  did  not  believe  it  myself  without  the  utmost
difficulty.  I  thought  myself  touched  in  my  mind  to  believe
myself  two,  and  for  a  long  time  I  treated  this  other  self
as  an  impostor:  but  he  forced  me  at  last  to  recognise
myself ;  I  saw  that  it  was  I,  without  the  least  stratagem ;
from  head  to  foot  he  is  exactly  like  me — handsome,  a  noble
mien,  well  favoured,  charming  manners ;  in  short,  two
drops  of  milk  are  not  more  alike ;  and  were  it  not  that  his
hands  are  somewhat  too  weighty,  I  should  be  perfectly
satisfied  about  it.

AMPH.  With  how  much  patience  I  must  arm  myself!
But  after  all,  did  you  not  go  into  the  house?

Sos.  That  is  good,  go  in  !  He  !  In  what  way  ?  Did  I
ever  wish  to  listen  to  reason  ?  and  did  I  not  forbid  myself
to  enter  our  door?

AMPH.  How?

Sos.  With  a  stick,  of  which  my  back  feels  still  the
smarting  pain.

AMPH.  You  have  been  beaten?

Sos.  Indeed  I  have.

AMPH.  And  by  whom  ?

Sos.  By  myself.

AMPH.  You,  beat  yourself?

Sos.  Yes,  I ;  not  the  I  that  is  here,  but  the  I  from  the
house,  who  strikes  like  four.

AMPH.  Heaven  confound  you  for  talking  to  me  thus !

SCKNKI.]  AMPHITRYON.  I ';  I

Sos.  I  am  not  joking:  the  I  whom  I  met  just  now  has
great  advantages  over  the  I  who  is  speaking  to  you.
He  has  a  strong  arm  and  a  lofty  courage;  I  have  had
proofs  of  it;  and  this  devil  of  an  I  has  thrashed  me
properly;  he  is  a  fellow  who  does  impossible  things.

AMPH.  Let  us  have  done.     Have  you  seen  my  wife?

Sos.  No.

AMPH.  Why  not?

Sos.  For  a  sufficiently  strong  reason.

AMPH.  Who  hindered  you,  rascal?     Explain  yourself.

Sos.  Must  I  repeat  the  same  thing  twenty  times  to
you?  I,  I  tell  you,  this  I  stronger  than  I;  this  I  who,  by
force,  took  possession  of  the  door;  this  I  who  made  me
decamp;  this  I  who  wishes  to  be  the  only  I;  this  I  jealous
of  myself;  this  valiant  I,  whose  anger  showed  itself  to  this
cowardly  I;  in  short,  this  I  who  is  at  home;  this  I  who
has  shown  himself  my  master;  this  I  who  has  racked  me
with  blows.20

AMPH.  His  brain  must  be  disturbed  by  having  had  too
much  drink  this  morning.

Sos.  May  I  be  hanged  if  I  have  had  anything  but
water !  You  may  believe  me  on  my  oath.

AMPH.  Then  your  senses  must  have  been  asleep,  and
some  bewildering  dream  has  shown  you  all  these  confused
fancies  which  you  foist  upon  me  for  truths.

Sos.  As  little  as  the  other.  I  have  not  been  asleep,
and  do  not  even  feel  inclined  for  it.  I  am  speaking  to  you
wide-awake;  I  was  quite  wide-awake  this  morning,  upon
my  life,  and  quite  wide-awake  was  also  the  other  Sosia,
when  he  belaboured  me  so  well.

AMPH.  Follow  me ;  I  command  you  to  be  silent :  You
have  wearied  my  mind  enough ;  and  I  must  be  the  veriest
fool  to  have  the  patience  to  listen  to  the  nonsense  which  a
servant  utters.

Sos.  (Aside).  Every  discourse  is  nonsense  coming  from
an  obscure  fellow.  If  some  great  man  were  to  say  the
same  things,  they  would  be  exquisite  words.

10  In  Plautus,  Sosia,  when  interrogated  by  Amphitryon,  who  has  been
beating  him,  replies  also,  "  I  myself,  who  am  now  at  home,  beat  me  my-
self."

IQ2  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  n.

AMPH.  Let  us  go  in  without  waiting  any  longer.  But
here  comes  Alcmena  in  all  her  charms.  Doubtless  she
does  not  expect  me  at  this  moment,  and  my  arrival  will
surprise  her.

SCENE  II. — ALCMENA,  AMPHITRYON,  CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

ALC.  (  Without  seeing  Amphitryon).  Come,  Cleanthis,  let
us  approach  the  gods,  and  offer  up  our  homages  for  my
husband,  and  render  them  thanks  for  the  glorious  success,
of  which  Thebes,  by  his  arm,  reaps  the  advantage.  (Per-
ceiving Amphitryon}.  O  ye  gods!

AMPH.  Heaven  grant  that  victorious  Amphitryon  may  be
once  more  met  with  pleasure  by  his  wife!  And  that  this
day  may  be  propitious  to  my  passion,  and  restore  you  to
me  with  the  same  affection  !  May  I  find  as  much  fondness
as  my  heart  brings  back  to  you !

ALC.  What !  returned  so  soon  ?

AMPH.  Truly,  this  is,  in  this  instance,  to  give  me  but  a
sorry  proof  of  your  affection :  and  this,  "What!  returned
so  soon,"  is  hardly  the  language  on  such  an  occasion  of  a
heart  truly  inflamed  with  love.  I  presumed  to  flatter  my-
self that  I  had  stayed  away  from  you  too  long.  The  ex-
pectation of  an  ardently  longed  for  return  invests  each
moment  with  excessive  length;  and  the  absence  of  what
we  love,  however  short,  is  always  too  long.

ALC.  I  do  not  see  .    .    .

AMPH.  No,  Alcmena,  we  measure  the  time  in  such  cases
by  our  own  impatience;  and  you  count  the  moments  of
absence  as  one  who  does  not  love.  When  we  really  love,
the  least  separation  kills  us ;  and  the  one  whom  we  delight
to  see  never  comes  back  too  soon.  I  confess  that  my  fond
affection  has  reason  to  complain  at  your  reception ;  and  I
expected  different  transports  of  joy  and  tenderness  from
your  heart.

ALC.  I  am  at  a  loss  to  understand  on  what  you  found
the  words  which  I  hear  you  speak ;  and  if  you  complain
of  me,  I  do  not  know  in  good  truth  what  would  needs
satisfy  you.  It  seems  to  me  that  last  night,  at  your  happy
return,  I  showed  a  sufficiently  tender  joy,  and  repaid  your
proofs  of  affection  by  everything  which  you  had  reason  to
expect  from  my  love.

SCENE  IL]  AMPHITRYON.  193

AMPH.  How  ?

ALC.  Did  I  not  show  plainly  enough  the  sudden  ecsta-
cies  of  a  perfect  joy  !  And  can  a  heart's  transports  be
better  expressed  at  the  return  of  a  husband  who  is  tender-
ly loved  ?

AMPH.  What  is  it  you  tell  me  ?

ALC.  That  even  your  affection  showed  an  incredible  joy
at  my  reception  ;  and  that,  having  left  me  at  the  break
of  day,  I  do  not  see  that  my  surprise  at  this  sudden  return
is  so  much  to  blame.

AMPH.  Has  some  dream  last  night,  Alcmena,  anticipated
in  your  fancy  the  reality  of  my  return,  which  I  hastened ;
and  having,  perhaps,  used  me  kindly  in  your  sleep,  does
your  heart  imagine  my  love  sufficiently  repaid  ?

ALC.  Has  some  disease  in  your  mind,  Amphitryon,  by
its  malignity,  obscured  the  truth  of  last  night's  return  ?
and  as  to  the  tender  welcome  I  gave  you,  does  your  heart
pretend  to  rob  me  of  all  my  honest  affection  ?

AMPH.  Methinks  this  disease  with  which  you  entertain
me  is  somewhat  strange.

ALC.  It  is  the  only  thing  one  can  give  in  exchange  for
the  dream  of  which  you  talk  to  me.

AMPH.  Unless  by  a  dream,  one  can  certainly  not  excuse
what  you  tell  me  now.

ALC.  Unless  by  a  disease  which  troubles  your  mind,
one  cannot  justify  what  I  hear  from  you.

AMPH.  Let  us  have  done  with  this  disease  for  a  moment,
Alcmena.

ALC.  Let  us  have  done  with  this  dream  for  a  moment,
Amphitryon.

AMPH.  As  to  the  subject  in  question,  the  jest  may  be
carried  too  far.

ALC.  Undoubtedly ;  and,  as  a  sure  proof  of  it,  I  begin
to  feel  somewhat  moved.

AMPH.  It  is  in  this  way  then  that  you  wish  to  try
to  make  amends  for  the  welcome  of  which  I  com-
plained ?

ALC.  And  you  wish  to  try  to  divert  yourself  by  this
feint?

AMPH.  For  Heaven's  sake !  let  us  cease  this,  I  pray
you,  Alcmena,  and  let  us  talk  seriously.

194  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  „.

ALC.  It  is  carrying  the  jest  too  far,  Amphitryon ;  let
us  end  this  raillery.

AMPH.  What  !  dare  you  maintain  to  my  face  that  I  was
seen  at  this  spot  before  this  hour  ?

ALC.  What !  have  you  the  assurance  to  deny  that  you
came  hither  yesterday  towards  evening  ?

AMPH.  I !  I  came  yesterday?

ALC.  Undoubtedly  ;  and,  just  before  the  break  of  day,
you  went  away  again.

AMPH.  (Aside).  Heavens !  was  ever  such  a  debate  as
this  heard  of?  And  who  would  not  be  astonished  at  all
this  ?  Sosia  !

Sos.  She  has  need  of  half-a-dozen  grains  of  hellebore,
Sir ;  her  brain  is  turned.

AMPH.  Alcmena,  in  the  name  of  all  the  gods,  this  dis-
course will  have  strange  consequences !  Recollect  yourself
a  little  better,  and  reflect  upon  what  you  say.

ALC.  I  am  indeed  seriously  reflecting ;  and  all  the
inmates  of  the  house  witnessed  your  arrival.  I  do  not  know
what  motive  makes  you  act  thus;  but  if  the  thing  had
need  of  proof,  if  it  were  true  that  one  could  not  recollect
such  a  thing,  from  whom,  but  yourself,  could  I  hold  the
news  of  the  latest  of  all  your  battles,  and  the  five  diamonds
worn  by  Pterelas,  plunged  into  eternal  night  by  the  force
of  your  arm  ?  What  surer  proof  could  one  wish  ?

AMPH.  What?  have  I  already  given  you  the  cluster  of
diamonds  which  I  had  for  my  share,  and  which  I  intended
for  you?

ALC.  Assuredly  it  is  not  difficult  to  convince  you  thor-
oughly of  it.

AMPH.  And  how?

ALC.  (Pointing  to  the  cluster  of  diamonds  at  her  girdle}.
Here  it  is.

AMPH.   Sosia!

Sos.  (Taking  a  casket  from  his  pockef).  She  is  jesting,
and  I  have  it  here.  The  feint  is  useless,  Sir.

AMPH.  (Examining  the  casket}.  The  seal  is  unbroken  ?

ALC.  (Presenting  the  diamonds  to  Amphitryon).  Is  it  an
illusion?  There.  Will  you  think  this  proof  strong
enough  ?

AMPH.  O  Heaven  !     O  just  Heaven  !

SCBNBII.]  AMPHITRYON.  195

ALC.  Come,  Amphitryon,  you  are  joking  with  me  by
acting  in  this  way ;  and  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  it.

AMPH.   Break  this  seal  quickly.

Sos.  {Having  opened  the  casket}.  Upon  my  word,  it  is
empty.  It  must  have  been  abstracted  by  witchcraft,  or  else
it  must  have  come  by  itself,  without  a  guide,  to  her  whom
it  knew  that  it  was  intended  to  adorn.

AMPH.  (Aside}.  Ye  gods,  whose  power  directs  all  things,
what  is  this  adventure,  and  what  can  I  augur  from  it  at
which  my  passion  startles  not  ?

Sos.  (To  Amphitryon).  If  she  speaks  the  truth,  we  share
the  same  fate,  and  like  me,  Sir,  you  are  double. 21

AMPH.  Hold  your  tongue.

ALC.  What  is  there  to  be  so  much  surprised  at?  and
whence  this  great  emotion  ?

AMPH.  {Aside}.  O  Heaven!  what  strange  confusion  !  I
see  supernatural  incidents,  and  my  honour  fears  an  adven-
ture which  my  senses  do  not  understand.

ALC.  Do  you  still  think  to  deny  your  sudden  return,
when  you  have  so  sensible  a  proof  of  it  ?

AMPH.  No;  but  be  so  kind,  if  it  be  possible,  to  relate  to
me  what  happened  at  this  return?

ALC.  Since  you  ask  an  account  of  the  matter,  you  still
wish  to  insinuate  that  it  was  not  you  ?

AMPH.  Pray,  pardon  me ;  but  I  have  a  certain  reason  for
asking  you  to  relate  it.

ALC.  Have  the  important  affairs  which  may  occupy
your  mind,  made  you  so  soon  lose  the  remembrance  of  it  ?

AMPH.  Perhaps  so :  but,  in  short,  you  would  oblige  me
by  telling  me  the  whole  story.

ALC.  The  story  is  not  long.  I  advanced  towards  you
full  of  fond  surprise  ;  I  embraced  you  tenderly,  and  more
than  once  testified  my  joy.

AMPH.  (Aside).  Ah!  I  could  have  done  without  so
sweet  a  welcome.

ALC.  You  first  made  me  this  valuable  present,  destined
for  me  from  the  conquered  plunder.  Your  heart  vehemently

>l  In  Plautus  (Actii.,  Scene  2)  Sosia  says:  "You  have  brought  forth
another  Amphitryon,  I  have  brought  forth  another  Sosia ;  now  if  the
goblet  has  brought  forth  a  goblet,  we  have  all  produced  our  doubles."

Ip6  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  n.

unfolded  to  me  all  the  fire  of  your  passion,  and  the  carking
cares  which  had  kept  it  enchained  in  the  joy  of  seeing  me
again,  the  pangs,  of  absence,  all  the  trouble  caused  by
your  impatience  to  return  ;  and  never,  on  similar  occasions,
did  your  love  seem  to  me  so  tender  and  so  passionate.

AMPH.  (Aside).  Can  one  be  more  exquisitely  tortured
to  death !

ALC.  As  you  may  well  believe,  all  these  transports,  all
this  tenderness  did  not  displease  me;  and  if  I  must  confess
it,  my  heart,  Amphitryon,  found  a  thousand  charms  in
them.

AMPH.  What  then,  pray?

ALC.  We  interrupted  each  other  with  a  thousand  fond
inquiries.  The  repast  was  served.  We  supped  by  our-
selves ;  and  the  supper  over,  we  retired  to  bed.

AMPH.  Together?

ALC.  Assuredly.     What  a  question  is  that?

AMPH.  (Aside).  Ah  ;  this  is  the  most  cruel  blow  of  all,
and  of  which  my  jealous  passion  trembles  to  assure  it-
self.

ALC.  Whence  comes,  at  this  word,  so  deep  a  blush?
Have  I  done  any  harm  in  sleeping  with  you?

AMPH.  No,  to  my  great  grief,  it  was  not  I ;  and  whoso-
ever says  that  I  came  hither  yesterday,  tells,  of  all  false-
hoods, the  most  horrible.

ALC.  Amphitryon!

AMPH.  Perfidious  woman  !

ALC.  Ah  !  what  outburst  is  this !

AMPH.  No,  no,  no  more  fondness,  no  more  respect :  this
misfortune  puts  an  end  to  all  my  firmness;  and  my  heart
at  this  fatal  moment,  breathes  only  fury  and  revenge.

ALC.  And  on  whom  would  you  be  revenged  ?  and  what
want  of  faith  makes  you  treat  me  now  as  a  criminal  ?

AMPH.  I  know  not,  but  it  was  not  I ;  and  this  is  a
despair  which  renders  me  capable  of  anything.

ALC.  Away,  unworthy  husband,  the  fact  speaks  for
itself,  and  the  imposture  is  frightful.  This  is  taking  too
great  an  advantage  of  me,  and  it  is  too  much  to  condemn
me  for  faithlessness.  If,  in  this  confused  outburst,  you  are
seeking  a  pretext  for  breaking  the  nuptial  bonds  which
hold  me  enchained  to  you,  all  these  excuses  are  superfluous,

SCENBIU.]  AMPHITRYON.  197

for  I  am  fully  determined  that  this  very  day  all  our  bonds
shall  be  dissolved.22

AMPH.  After  the  disgraceful  insult,  which  has  been  re-
vealed to  me,  it  is  what,  no  doubt,  you  should  prepare  for  :
it  is  the  least  that  can  be  expected ;  and  things  may  per-
haps not  rest  there.  The  dishonour  is  certain,  my  misfor-
tune is  plainly  revealed  to  me,  and  my  love  endeavours  in
vain  to  conceal  it  from  me;  but  I  am  as  yet  unacquainted
with  the  particulars,  and  my  just  wrath  demands  to  be  en-
lightened. Your  brother  can  openly  vouch  for  it  that  I  did
not  leave  him  until  this  morning  :  I  am  going  to  seek  him,
in  order  that  I  may  confound  you  about  this  return  which
is  falsely  imputed  to  me.  Afterwards,  we  shall  penetrate
to  the  bottom  of  a  mystery  unheard  of  until  now;  and,  in
the  transports  of  a  righteous  wrath,  woe  be  to  him  who
has  betrayed  me !

Sos.  Sir  .    .    .

AMPH.  Do  not  accompany  me,  but  wait  here  for  me.

CLE.   (To  Alcmena).     Must  I  ...

ALC.  I  can  attend  to  nothing:  leave  me  alone,  and
follow  me  not.23

SCENE  III. — CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

CLE.  (Aside).  Something  must  have  disordered  his
brain  ;  but  the  brother  will  immediately  put  an  end  to
this  quarrel.

Sos.  (Aside).  This  is  a  sufficiently  severe  blow  for  my
master ;  and  his  adventure  is  cruel.  I  very  much  fear
something  of  the  same  kind  for  myself,  and  I  will  very
gently,  explain  myself  to  her.

CLE.  (Aside}.  Let  us  see  whether  he  will  so  much  as
speak  to  me  !  But  I  will  let  nothing  appear.

22  In  Plautus,  when  the  real  Amphitryon  comes  back,  Alcmena  expresses
her  astonishment  at  his  unexpected  return ;  but  when  her  husband  loads
her  with  reproaches,  she  replies,  like  a  true  Roman  matron,  I  have  brought
you  "that  which  is  called  a  dowry,  I  do  not  deem  the  same  my  dowry ;
but  chastity,  and  modesty,  and  subdued  desires,  fear  of  the  Gods,  and  love
of  my  parents,  and  concord  with  my  kindred ;  to  be  obedient  to  yourself,
and  bounteous  to  the  good,  ready  to  aid  the  upright."  In  Moliere,  Alcmena
is  the  young  loving  Frenchwoman.

**  This  scene,  which  is  really  the  principal  one  of  the  comedy,  is  wholly
taken  from  Plautus.

198  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  11.

Sos.  (Aside).  These  things  are  often  annoying  to
know,  and  I  tremble  to  ask  her.  Would  it  not  be  better,
for  safety's  sake,  to  remain  altogether  ignorant  of  what
may  be  the  truth  ?  Yet,  at  all  events,  I  must  try  and  find
out.  I  cannot  help  doing  so.  One  of  the  weaknesses  of
human  nature  is  curiosity  to  learn  things  which  it  would
not  like  to  know.  May  Heaven  preserve  you,  Cleanthis  !

CLE.  Ah  !  you  dare  to  come  near  me,  you  wretch?

Sos.  Great  Heaven  !  what  ails  you  ?  You  are  always
in  a  temper,  and  you  get  angry  about  nothing  !

CLE.  What  do  you  call  about  nothing  ?     Say  ?

Sos.  I  call  about  nothing  what  is  called  about  nothing
in  verse  as  well  as  prose  ;  and  nothing,  as  you  well  know,
means  nothing,  or  at  least  very  little.

CLE.  I  do  not  know  what  prevents  my  scratching  your
eyes  out,  infamous  wretch,  and  teaching  you  how  far  the
anger  of  a  woman  can  go.

Sos.  Hullo  !  Whence  comes  this  furious  outburst  ?

CLE.  What !  then  you  reckon  as  nothing  what  you  have
done  to  me  ?

Sos.  What  ?

CLE.  What  ?  you  pretend  to  be  innocent  ?  Is  it  by  the
example  of  your  master  that  you  will  say  that  you  did  not
return  here  ?

Sos.  No,  I  know  the  contrary  too  well ;  but  I  shall  not
be  cunning  with  you.  We  had  drunk  of  I  do  not  know
what  wine,  which  made  me  forget  all  that  I  might  have  done.

CLE.  You  imagine,  perhaps,  to  excuse  yourself  by  this
trick  .  .  .

Sos.  No,  seriously  you  may  believe  me.  I  was  in  a
condition  in  which  I  may  have  done  things  for  which  I
should  be  sorry,  and  of  which  I  have  no  recollection.

CLE.  You  do  not  at  all  remember  the  manner  in  which
you  treated  me  when  you  came  from  the  port  ?

Sos.  Not  in  the  least.  You  had  better  give  me  an  ac-
count of  it :  I  am  just  and  sincere,  and  would  eondemn
myself  if  I  am  wrong.

CLE.  How  !  Amphytryon  having  warned  me,  I  sat  up
until  you  came  ;  but  I  never  beheld  such  coldness  :  I  had
to  remind  you  of  your  having  a  wife ;  and  when  I  wished  to
kiss  you,  you  turned  away  your  head,  and  presented  your  ear.

SCENE  in.]  AMPHITRYON.  199

Sos.  Good  !

CLE.  What  do  you  mean  by  good  ?

Sos.  Good  Heavens  !  You  do  not  know  why  I  talk
thus,  Cleanthis.  I  had  been  eating  garlic,  and  like  a
well-behaved  man  did  quite  right  in  turning  my  breath  a
little  away  from  you.

CLE.  I  gave  you  to  understand  the  tenderness  of  my
heart ;  but  you  were  as  deaf  as  a  post  to  all  that  I  said  ;
and  not  a  kind  word  passed  your  lips.

Sos.  Courage  !

CLE.  In  short,  notwithstanding  my  advances,  my  chaste
flame  found  nothing  in  you  but  ice ;  and  I  felt  disap-
pointed to  receive  no  response  from  you,  even  so  far  as  to
refuse  to  take  your  place  in  bed  which  the  laws  of  wed-
lock oblige  you  to  occupy.

Sos.  What !  did  I  not  go  to  bed  ?

CLE.  No,  you  sneak.

Sos.  Is  it  possible?

CLE.  Wretch,  it  is  but  too  true.  Of  all  affronts  this  is
the  greatest ;  and,  instead  of  your  heart  making  amends
for  it  this  morning,  you  separated  from  me  with  words  of
undisguised  contempt.

Sos.   Bravo,  Sosia !

CLE.  Eh,  what !  This  is  the  effect  of  my  complaint !
You  laugh  at  this  pretty  piece  of  work  !

Sos.  How  satisfied  I  am  with  myself !

CLE.  Is  this  the  way  to  express  your  regret  for  such  an
outrage  ?

Sos.  I  should  never  have  believed  that  I  could  so  well
control  myself.

CLE.  Far  from  condemning  yourself  for  such  perfidious
behaviour,  you  show  your  joy  for  it  in  your  face !

Sos.  Good  gracious  !  not  so  fast !  If  I  appear  to  be
joyous,  think  that  I  have  a  strong  inward  reason  for  it,
and  that,  without  thinking  of  it,  I  never  did  better  than
in  behaving  to  you  in  such  a  way  just  now.

CLE.  Are  you  making  fun  of  me,  you  wretch  ?

Sos.  No,  I  am  speaking  frankly  to  you.  In  the  condi-
tion in  which  I  was,  I  had  a  certain  fear,  which,  by  your
words,  you  have  dissipated.  I  was  very  apprehensive,  and
feared  that  I  had  committed  some  foolishness  with  you.

2OO  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  11.

CLE.  What  is  this  fear  ?  and  let  us  know  wherefore  ?

Sos.  The  doctors  say  that,  when  one  is  drunk,  one
should  abstain  from  one's  wife,  and  that,  in  that  state
there  can  be  no  other  result  than  children  who  are  dull,
and  who  cannot  live.  Reflect,  if  my  heart  had  not
armed  itself  with  coldness,  what  inconveniences  might
have  followed  !

CLE.  I  do  not  care  a  pin  for  doctors,  with  their  insipid
arguments.  Let  them  give  rules  to  the  sick,  without
wishing  to  govern  people  who  are  in  good  health.  They
meddle  with  too  many  affairs  in  pretending  to  put  a  curb
upon  our  chaste  desires ;  and  in  addition  to  the  dog-days,
they  give  us,  besides  their  severe  rules,  a  hundred  cock-
and-bull  stories  into  the  bargain.

Sos.     Gently.

CLE.  No.  I  maintain  that  theirs  is  a  wrong  conclusion ;
those  reasons  emanate  from  crack-brained  people.  Neither
wine  nor  time  can  be  fatal  to  the  performance  of  the  duties
of  conjugal  love  ;  and  the  doctors  are  asses.

Sos.  I  beseech  you,  moderate  your  rage  against  them  ;
they  are  honest  people,  whatever  the  world  may  say  of
them.

CLE.  You  are  altogether  in  the  wrong  box ;  your  sub-
mission is  in  vain ;  your  excuse  will  not  pass ;  and  sooner
or  later  I  will  pay  you  out,  between  ourselves,  for  the  con-
tempt which  you  show  me  every  day.  I  keep  in  mind  all
the  particulars  of  our  conversation,  and  I  shall  try  to  profit
by  the  liberty  which  you  allow  me,  you  cowardly  and
perfidious  husband.

Sos.  What?

CLE.  You  told  me  just  now,  you  mean  wretch,  that  you
would  freely  consent  that  I  should  love  another.

Sos.  Ah !  as  for  that,  I  am  wrong.  I  retract ;  my
honour  is  too  much  concerned.  You  had  better  beware
of  giving  way  to  that  passion.

CLE.  If  I  can,  however,  but  once  make  my  mind  up  to
it  ...

Sos.  Let  us  suspend  this  conversation  for  a  little.
Amphitryon  returns,  who  seems  quite  contented.

SCKNB  vi.J  AMPHITRYON  2OI

SCENE  IV. — JUPITER,  CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

JUP.  (Aside).  I  shall  take  this  opportunity  of  appeas-
ing Alcmena,  of  banishing  the  grief  in  which  her  heart
wishes  to  indulge,  and,  under  the  pretext  that  brings  me
hither,  of  giving  my  passion  the  sweet  pleasure  of  recon-
ciling myself  with  her.  (To  Cleanthis}.  Alcmena  is  up
stairs  is  she  not?

CLE.  Yes;  full  of  uneasiness  she  seeks  solitude,  and  has
forbidden  me  to  follow  her.

JUP.  Whatever  prohibition  she  may  have  made  does  not
apply  to  me.

SCENE  V. — CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

CLE.  He  has  soon  got  over  his  grief,  from  what  1  can
see.

Sos.  What  say  you,  Cleanthis,  to  this  cheerful  mien,
after  his  terrible  quarrel  ?

CLE.  That  we  would  do  well  to  send  all  the  men  to  the
devil,  and  that  the  best  of  them  is  not  worth  much.

Sos.  These  things  are  said  in  a  passion ;  but  you  are
too  much  taken  up  with  the  men  ;  and,  upon  my  word,
you  would  all  look  very  glum,  if  the  devil  should  carry  us
all  off.

CLE.  Indeed    .    .    .

Sos.  Hush.     Here  they  come.

SCENE  VI. — JUPITER,  ALCMENA,  CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

JUP.  Alas  !  Do  you  wish  to  drive  me  to  despair  ?  Stay,
fair  Alcmena.

ALC.   No,  I  cannot  stay  with  the  author  of  my  grief.

JUP.  I  entreat  you  1

ALC.  Leave  me.

JUP.     What   .    .    .

ALC.  Leave  me,  I  tell  you.

JUP.  (Softly,  aside).  Her  tears  touch  me  to  the  heart,
and  her  grief  saddens  me.  (Aloud}.  Allow  my  heart  to

ALC.  No,  do  not  follow  me.
JUP.   Whither  would  you  go  ?

202  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  u.

ALC.  Where  you  shall  not  be.2i

JUP.  That  would  be  a  vain  attempt  on  your  part.  I  am
attached  to  your  beauty  by  too  tight  a  bond  to  be  separated
for  one  moment  from  it.  I  shall  follow  you  everywhere,
Alcmena.

ALC.  And  I  shall  fly  from  you  everywhere.

JUP.  I  am  very  dreadful,  then  !

ALC.  More  than  I  can  express,  to  me.  Yes,  I  look
upon  you  as  a  frightful  monster,  a  cruel,  furious  monster,
whose  approach  is  to  be  feared  ;  as  a  monster  to  fly  from
everywhere.  The  sight  of  you  gives  me  incredible  pain  ;
it  is  a  torment  that  overwhelms  me ;  and  I  see  nothing
under  Heaven  of  what  is  frightful,  horrible,  odious,  which
would  not  be  to  me  more  bearable  than  you.

JUP.  This  is,  alas  !  what  your  own  mouth  says.

ALC.  I  have  much  more  in  my  heart ;  and  it  is  but  too
sorry  that  it  cannot  find  words  to  express  it  all.

JUP.  And  what  has  my  passion  done  to  you,  Alcmena,
that  I  should  be  looked  upon  by  you  as  a  monster.

ALC.  Ah !  just  Heavens !  and  he  can  ask  that  ?  Is  it
not  enough  to  drive  one  distracted  ?

JUP.  Ah  !  in  a  gentler  spirit   .    .    .

ALC.  No ;  I  wish  neither  to  see  nor  to  hear  anything  of
you.

JUP.  Have  you  the  heart  to  treat  me  thus?  Is  this  the
tender  love  which  was  to  last  so  long,  when  I  came  hither
yesterday?

ALC.  No,  no,  it  is  not ;  and  your  cowardly  insults  have
willed  it  otherwise.  It  exists  no  longer,  this  passionate
and  tender  love;  you  have  cruelly  destroyed  it  in  my
heart  by  a  hundred  piercing  wounds.  In  its  place  stands
an  unbending  wrath,  a  keen  resentment,  an  invincible
contempt,  the  despair  of  a  heart  justly  incensed,  which
intends  to  hate  you  for  this  grievous  affront,  as  much  as
it  intended  to  love  you ;  and  which  means  to  hate  as
much  as  possible.

JUP.  Alas!  how   little   strength   your  love  must  have

24  These  two  lines  are  also  found,  with  some  slight  alteration,  in  the
sixth  Scene  of  the  second  Act  of  Don  Garcia  of  Navarre.  (See  Vol.  I.,
page  225).

SCHNHVI.J  AMPHITRYON.  203

had,  if  it  can  be  destroyed  by  so  small  a  matter  !  Must
that  which  was  only  play,  occasion  a  divorce?  and  is  there
any  occasion  to  be  so  angry  at  a  joke?

ALC.  Ah  !  it  is  just  this  at  which  I  am  offended,  and
which  my  anger  cannot  forgive :  I  should  have  felt  less
hurt  at  the  true  outbursts  of  a  fit  of  jealousy.  Jealousy
produces  impressions  of  which  the  force  often  carries  us
away;  and  the  most  collected  mind  at  such  times  finds
it,  without  doubt,  difficult  enough  to  be  answerable  for
its  emotions.  The  violence  of  a  heart  which  may  have
been  mistaken  has  something  to  bring  back  a  soul  which
it  has  offended,  and  in  the  love  which  gave  it  birth  it
finds,  at  least,  in  spite  of  all  its  violence,  reasons  for
being  excused.  Those  outbursts  have  always  as  an  excuse
against  anger  that  cause  which  created  them;  and  we  easily
forgive  that  which  we  cannot  master.  But,  in  wanton-
ness of  heart,  to  get  into  an  uncontrollable  fury,  so  deeply
to  injure,  without  cause,  the  tenderness  and  honour  of  a
heart  that  dearly  loves  you,  ah!  is  too  cruel  a  blow,  and
one  which  my  grief  will  never  forget.

JUP.  Yes,  you  are  right,  Alcmena;  I  must  submit.
This  action  is  no  doubt  an  odious  crime ;  I  do  not  pre-
tend to  defend  it  any  longer :  but  allow  my  heart  to  ex-
onerate itself  in  your  eyes,  and  to  tell  who  is  to  blame
for  this  insulting  outburst.  To  make  a  frank  avowal  of  it,
Alcmena,  it  is  the  husband  who  has  committed  all  the
evil ;  it  is  the  husband  whom  you  must  regard  as  guilty :
the  lover  had  no  share  in  this  brutal  transport,  and  his
heart  is  not  capable  of  offending  you.  This  heart  has  too
much  respect  and  tenderness  for  you  ever  to  dream  of  it ;
and  if  it  had  the  guilty  weakness  to  do  aught  to  wound
you,  he  would  pierce  it  with  a  hundred  stabs  before  your
face.  But  the  husband  has  stepped  out  of  that  humble
respect  which  should  always  be  your  due ;  by  his  harsh
proceeding,  the  husband  has  shown  himself,  and  he
thought  that  the  laws  of  marriage  permitted  him  every-
thing. Yes,  it  is  no  doubt  he  who  is  guilty  towards  you ;
he  alone  has  maltreated  your  amiable  person.  Hate,
detest  the  husband ;  I  consent  to  it,  and  leave  him  to
your  mercy;  but,  Alcmena,  preserve  the  lover  from  the
resentment  which  such  an  offence  raises  in  you ;  do  not

204  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  n.

throw  the  effect  of  it  on  him  ;  separate  him  somewhat
from  the  guilty  one ;  and,  in  order  to  be  just,  do  not
punish  him  for  what  he  has  not  done.

ALC.  Ah  !  all  these  subtleties  are  but  frivolous  excuses ;
and  such  language  is  only  an  annoyance  to  irritated  minds.
You  use  in  vain  this  ridiculous  prevarication.  I  distin-
guish nothing  in  him  who  offends  me ;  everything  becomes
the  object  of  my  anger,  and  in  its  just  violence,  the  hus-
band and  the  lover  are  confounded.  Both  alike  occupy
my  thoughts ;  and,  by  my  wounded  heart,  are  painted  in
the  same  colours  to  my  eyes.  Both  alike  are  criminal ;
both  alike  have  offended  me ;  and  both  alike  are  odious
to  me.

JUP.  Very  well !  since  you  wish  it,  I  must  then  charge
myself  with  the  crime.  Yes,  you  are  right  when  you  im-
molate me  to  your  resentment,  as  a  guilty  victim.  A  too
just  anger  against  me  sways  you;  and  all  this  great  wrath
which  you  now  display  is  making  me  suffer  only  lawful  tor-
ments. It  is  right  that  you  shun  me,  and  that  in  your
anger  you  threaten  to  fly  from  me  everywhere.  I  must  be
an  odious  object  to  you;  you  must  wish  me  a  great  deal  of
harm.  My  transgression  in  having  offended  your  charming
eyes  surpasses  every  horror ;  it  is  a  crime  to  offend  men  and
gods;  and  in  short,  I  deserve  as  punishment  for  my  audacity
that  your  hatred  should  employ  its  most  furious  darts  against
me.  But  my  heart  craves  your  mercy;  to  ask  it  I  throw
myself  on  my  knees,  and  implore  it  in  the  name  of  the
most  brilliant  flame  of  the  tenderest  love  with  which  a  soul
can  ever  burn  for  you.  If  your  heart,  charming  Alcmena,
refuses  me  the  pardon  which  I  dare  to  request,  a  sudden
stroke  must  deliver  me  by  death  from  the  harsh  rigour  of  a
penalty  which  I  am  unable  to  endure.  Yes,  this  condition
drives  me  to  despair.  Do  not  think,  Alcmena,  that  loving
as  I  do,  your  heavenly  charms,  I  can  live  one  day  under
your  anger.  The  merciless  length  of  those  moments  makes
my  afflicted  heart  already  succumb  beneath  their  deadly
blows;  and  the  cruel  wounds  of  a  thousand  vultures  are
nothing  compared  to  my  violent  grief.  Alcmena,  you
have  only  to  declare  it  to  me  if  I  have  no  pardon  to  hope
for:  this  sword  shall  immediately,  by  a  well  aimed  blow,
pierce  before  your  eyes  the  heart  of  a  miserable  wretch ;

SCENE  vi.]  AMPHITRYON.  205

that  heart,  that  treacherous  heart  only  too  deserving  of
death,  since  it  could  offend  so  adorable  a  being;  only  too
happy  if,  in  descending  to  the  dark  regions,  my  death  may
appease  your  anger;  and  if  after  this  mournful  day,  it
leaves  in  your  soul  no  impression  of  hatred  whilst  remem-
bering my  love  !  That  is  all  which  I  expect  as  a  sovereign
favour.

ALC.  Ah !  too  cruel  husband !

JUP.  Say,  speak,  Alcmena!

ALC.  Must  I  still  feel  kindness  for  you,  and  see  you
outrage  me  by  so  many  insults?

JUP.  Whatever  resentment  an  outrage  may  cause,  can
it  hold  out  against  the  remorse  of  a  really  enamoured
heart  ?

ALC.  A  heart  full  of  passion  would  sooner  expose  itself
to  a  thousand  deaths,  than  offend  the  object  of  its  love.

JUP.  The  more  one  loves,  the  less  difficulty  one  feels  .  .

ALC.  No,  speak  no  more  about  it ;  you  deserve  my
hatred.

JUP.  You  hate  me  then?

ALC.  I  make  every  effort  to  do  so,  and  I  am  vexed  to
think  that  all  your  insults  cannot  bring  my  heart  even  so
far  to  indulge  in  that  revenge.

JUP.  But  why  this  violence,  since,  to  revenge  yourself,
I  offer  you  my  life  ?  Pronounce  its  doom,  and  immediately
I  shall  obey.

ALC.   Can  she  who  cannot  hate  desire  your  death  ?

JUP.  And  I,  I  cannot  live  unless  you  forego  this  anger
that  overwhelms  me,  and  unless  you  grant  me  the  favour  of
a  pardon  which  I  implore  at  your  feet.  (Sosia  and  Clean-
this  kneel  likewise).  Decide  upon  one  of  the  two  quickly,
either  to  punish,  or  to  absolve  me.

ALC.  Alas !  what  I  can  resolve  has  appeared  much  clearer
than  I  wish.  My  heart  has  too  well  betrayed  me,  for  me
to  wish  to  keep  up  the  wrath  which  you  mention  :  to  say
that  we  cannot  hate,  is  it  not  saying  that  we  forgive?

JUP.  Ah,  charming  Alcmena,  I  must  in  the  excess  of  my
joy  ...

ALC.  Desist ;  I  am  angry  with  myself  for  so  much
weakness.25

*  In  Plautus,  the  real  Amphitryon  threatens  his  wife  with  a  divorce,  and

206  AMPHITRYON.

[ACT  in.

JUP.  Go  Sosia,  and  make  haste  ;  a  sweet  rapture  charms
my  soul.  See  what  officers  of  the  army  you  can  find,  and
invite  them  to  dine  with  me.  (Softly,  aside}.  Mercury
can  supply  his  place,  while  he  is  away  from  this.

SCENE  VII. — CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

Sos.  Well !  Cleanthis,  you  see  how  they  arrange  mat-
ters. Will  you,  in  imitation  of  their  example,  make  up  a
little  peace  between  us,  some  little  reconciliation  ?

CLEANT.  For  the  sake  of  your  beautiful  face, M  truly !
yes,  to  be  sure.

Sos.   What !  you  will  not  then  ?

CLEANT.  No.

Sos.  It  signifies  little  to  me.  So  much  the  worse  for
you.

CLEANT.  Well,  well,  come  back.

Sos.  Zounds  !  no,  I  shall  do  nothing  of  the  kind,  and
I  shall  be  angry  in  my  turn  now.

CLEANT.  Get  you  gone,  you  wretch  !  leave  me  alone  :
one  gets  weary  sometimes  of  being  a  virtuous  woman.

ACT  III.
SCENE  I. — AMPHITRYON,  alone.

Yes,  without  doubt,  fate  conceals  him  purposely  from
me  ;  and  I  am  weary  at  last  of  trying  to  find  him  out.
Nothing  can  be  more  cruel  than  my  lot.  Notwithstanding

when  Jupiter  appears,  under  his  semblance,  and  tries  to  make  peace  with
Alcmena,  she  says  (Act  iii.,  Scene  2) :

ALC  .  By  my  virtue  have  I  rendered  these  accusations  vain.  Since  then
I  eschew  conduct  that's  unchaste,  I  would  wish  to  avoid  imputations  of
unchastity.  Fare  you  well,  keep  your  own  property  to  yourself,  return
me  mine.  Do  you  order  any  maids  to  be  my  attendants  ?

JUP.  Are  you  in  your  senses  ?

ALC.  If  you  don't  order  them,  let  me  go  alone ;  chastity  shall  I  take  as
my  attendant.  (Going).

JUP.  Stay— at  your  desire,  I'll  give  my  oath  that  I  believe  my  wife  to  be
chaste.  If  in  that  I  deceive  you,  then,  thee.  supreme  Jupiter,  do  I  entreat
that  thou  wilt  ever  be  angered  against  Amphitryon.

ALC.  Oh!  rather  may  he  prove  propitious.

26  The  original  has  Cestpour  ton  nez,  vraiment  I  "  It  is  for  your  nose,
really."

SCRMB  tj  AMPHITRYON.  207

all  my  peregrinations,  I  cannot  find  him  for  whom  I  am
looking ;  I  meet  all  those  for  whom  I  do  not  look.  A
thousand  cruel  bores,  who  do  not  imagine  themselves  to
be  so,  without  knowing  much  of  me,  are  driving  me  mad
with  their  congratulations  upon  our  exploits.  In  the  cruel
perplexity  of  the  care  that  harasses  me,  they  overwhelm
me  with  their  embraces,  and  their  rejoicings  only  increase
my  uneasiness.  In  vain  I  endeavour  to  pass  them  by,  to
fly  from  their  persecutions ;  their  killing  friendship  27  de-
lays me  everywhere ;  and  whilst  I  reply  to  the  ardour  of
their  expressions  by  a  nod  of  the  head,  I  silently  mutter  a
hundred  curses  upon  them.  Ah  !  how  little  we  feel  flat-
tered by  praise  and  honour,  and  all  the  fruits  of  a  great
victory,  when  in  our  inmost  soul  we  are  suffering  a  poig-
nant grief!  And  how  willingly  would  we  barter  all  this
glory  to  have  the  heart  at  rest  !  Every  minute  my  jealousy
harps  upon  my  disgrace ;  and  the  more  my  mind  reverts
to  it,  the  less  am  I  able  to  disentangle  its  direful  confusion,
The  theft  of  the  diamonds  does  not  surprise  me  ;  seals  may
be  tampered  with  unperceived  ;  but  she  will  have  it  that
yesterday  I  presented  the  gift  to  her  personally,  and  this
is  what  puzzles  me  most  cruelly.  Nature  sometimes  pro-
duces resemblances,  of  which  some  impostors  have  availed
themselves  to  deceive ;  but  it  is  preposterous  that,  under
such  a  semblance,  a  man  should  pass  himself  off  as  a  hus-
band ;  and  in  such  a  case  there  are  a  thousand  differences
which  a  wife  can  easily  detect.  The  wonderful  effects  of
Thessalian  magic  have  at  all  times  been  extolled  ;  but
those  famous  stories,  everywhere  related  of  it,  have  always
passed  with  me  for  idle  tales ;  it  would  be  a  hard  fate  in-
deed, that  I,  fresh  from  a  complete  victory,  should  be
compelled  to  believe  them  at  the  cost  of  my  own  honour.28
I  will  once  more  interrogate  her  upon  this  vexatious  mys-
tery, and  find  out  if  it  be  not  some  idle  fancy  that  has  im-
posed upon  her  disordered  senses.  Grant,  O  righteous

v  The  original  has  tuante  amitii  ;  I  do  not  think  that  the  word  tuante,
killing,  is  often  used  in  this  way  in  French.

18  The  Amphitryon  of  Plautus  thinks  his  "  doubleganger  "  to  be  a  magi-
cian, a  sorcerer,  an  enchanter ;  but  Moliere's  hero  does  not  believe  any-
thing of  the  kind ;  he  is  therefore  in  a  much  greater  perplexity,  and  his
situation  is  much  more  comical.

208  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  in.

Heavens,  that  this  thought  may  prove  true,  and  that,  for
my  happiness,  she  may  have  lost  her  senses!

SCENE  II. — MERCURY,  AMPHITRYON.

MERC.  (On  the  balcony  of  Amphitryon! s  house,  without
being  seen  or  heard  by  him).  Since  love  offers  me  no
pleasures  here,  I  will  make  myself  some  of  a  different
nature ;  and  enliven  my  dull  leisure  by  putting  Amphitryon
out  of  all  patience.  This  may  not  be  very  charitable  in  a
god ;  but  I  shall  not  trouble  myself  much  about  that ;  I
find,  by  my  star,  that  I  am  somewhat  disposed  to  malice.29

AMPH.  How  comes  it  that  at  this  hour  the  door  is
closed  ?

MERC.  Hullo!  gently.     Who  knocks?

AMPH.   {Not  seeing  Mercury).    I.

MERC.  Who  is  I  ?

AMPH.  (Perceiving  Mercury  whom  he  takes  for  Sosia).
Ah !  open  !

MERC.  Open  indeed  !  And  who  may  you  be,  to  make
such  an  uproar,  and  to  speak  in  this  strain?

AMPH.  What!   do  not  you  know  me?

MERC.  No,  and  have  no  wish  to.

AMPH.  (Aside).  Is  every  one  losing  his  senses  to-day?
Has  the  distemper  spread  ?  Sosia  !  hullo,  Sosia !

MERC.  Well  !  Sosia,  yes,  that  is  my  name;  are  you
afraid  of  my  forgetting  it  ?

AMPH.  Do  you  see  me  clearly?

MERC.  Clearly  enough.  What  can  possess  your  arm
to  make  so  great  a  noise?  What  do  you  want  down
there?

AMPH.  I,  you  hangdog  !  what  do  I  want?

MERC.  What  do  you  not  want  then?  speak,  if  you
would  have  me  understand  you.

AMPH.  Wait,  you  wretch  !  I  will  come  up  there  with  a
stick  to  make  you  understand,  and  to  teach  you  properly
to  dare  speak  to  me  in  this  manner.

MERC.  Gently!  If  you  make  the  slightest  attempt  at

19  Mercury,  in  astrology,  "  signifieth  subtill  men,  ingenious,  inconstant ;
rymers,  poets,  advocates,  orators,  phylosophers,  arithmeticians  and  busie
fellowes."

scKNuii.i  AMPHITRYON.  209

disturbance,  I  shall  send  from  this  some  messengers  which
you  will  not  like.

AMPH.  Oh  Heavens  1  has  such  insolence  ever  been,
heard  of?  Can  one  conceive  it  from  a  servant  from  a
beggar !

MERC.  Well!  what  is  the  matter?  Have  you  quite
summed  me  up?  Have  you  stared  enough  at  me?  How
wide  he  opens  his  eyes ;  how  wild  he  looks !  If  looks
could  bite,  he  would  have  torn  me  to  shreds  ere  now.

AMPH.  I  tremble  at  what  you  are  bringing  upon  your-
self with  all  these  impudent  remarks.  What  a  terrible
storm  you  are  brewing  for  yourself !  What  a  hurricane  of
blows  will  descend  upon  your  back  ?

MERC.  Look  here,  friend ;  if  you  do  not  make  your-
self scarce  from  this  place,  you  may  come  in  for  some
knocking  about.

AMPH.  Ah  !  you  shall  know  to  your  cost,  you  scoundrel,
what  it  is  for  a  servant  to  insult  his  master.

MERC.  You,  my  master  !

AMPH.  Yes,  scoundrel!  dare  you  deny  me?

MERC.   I  recognise  no  other  master  but  Amphitryon.

AMPH.  And  who,  except  myself,  can  this  Amphitryon
be?

MERC.  Amphitryon !

AMPH.  No  doubt.

MERC.  What  illusion  is  this !  Tell  me  in  what  honest
tavern  have  you  been  muddling  your  brain  ?

AMPH.  What !  again  ?

MERC.  Was  the  wine  of  the  right  sort?

AMPH.  O  Heavens !

MERC.   Was  it  old  or  new?

AMPH.  What  insults !

MERC.  New  is  apt  to  get  into  one's  head,  if  drunk  with-
out water.

AMPH.  Ah !  certainly  I  shall  tear  out  that  tongue  of
yours.

MERC.  Pass  on,  my  good  friend ;  believe  me  that  no
one  here  will  listen  to  you.  I  have  some  respect  for
wine.  Go  on,  get  you  away,  and  leave  Amphitryon  to
tfie  pleasures  which  he  is  enjoying.

AMPH.  What !  is  Amphitryon  inside  there?

2IO  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  in.

MERC.  Indeed  he  is ;  he  himself,  covered  with  the
laurels  of  a  single  victory,  is  with  the  fair  Alcmena,
tasting  the  sweets  of  a  charming  interview.  They  are
indulging  in  the  pleasures  of  a  reconciliation,  after  a  rather
whimsical  love-tiff.  You  had  better  beware  how  you  dis-
turb their  sweet  privacy,  unless  you  wish  him  to  punish
you  for  your  excessive  rashness.

SCENE  III. — AMPHITRYON,  alone.

Ah  !  how  strangely  he  has  shocked  my  soul !  and  how-
cruelly  disturbed  my  mind  !  And  if  matters  stand  as  this
wretch  says,  to  what  condition  do  I  see  my  honour  and
affection  reduced?  Upon  what  am  I  to  resolve?  Am  I
to  make  it  public  or  to  keep  it  secret  ?  And  ought  I,  in
my  anger,  to  lock  the  dishonour  of  my  house  in  my  own
breast,  or  spread  it  abroad  ?  What !  is  there  any  need  of
consideration  in  so  gross  an  insult  ?  I  have  nothing  to
expect,  and  nothing  to  compromise ;  and  all  my  uneasiness
only  ought  to  tend  to  my  revenge.

SCENE  IV.— AMPHITRYON,  SOSIA,  NAUCRATES  and  POLIDAS,
at  the  farther  fart  of  the  stage.

Sos.  {To  Amphitryon).  Sir,  with  all  my  diligence,  all
that  I  have  been  able  to  do  is  to  bring  you  these  gentlemen
here.

AMPH.  Ah !  you  are  here  !

Sos.  Sir.

AMPH.  Insolent,  bold  fellow !

Sos.  What  now?

AMPH.  I  shall  teach  you  to  treat  me  thus.

Sos.  What  is  the  matter?  what  ails  you?

AMPH.   {Drawing his  sword}.    What  ails  me,  wretch?

Sos.  {To  Naucrates  and  Polidas).  Help,  gentlemen!
please  come  quickly.

NAU.  {To  Amphitryon).  Oh,  pray  stop  !

Sos.  What  have  I  done  ?

AMPH.  You  ask  me  that,  you  rogue?  (To  Naucrates}.
No,  let  me  satisfy  my  just  anger.

Sos.  When  they  hang  a  fellow,  they  at  least  tell  him
why  they  do  it.

SCBNB  iv.]  AMPHITRYON.  211

NAU.  (To  Amphitryon).  Please  to  tell  us  what  his
crime  is.

Sos.  Yes,  gentlemen,  please  to  insist  upon  that.

AMPH.  How !  he  just  now  had  the  audacity  to  shut  the
door  in  my  face,  and  to  add  threats  to  a  thousand  insolent
expressions !  (  Wishing  to  strike  him).  Ah  !  you  scoundrel !

Sos.   (Dropping  on  his  knees}.     I  am  dead.

NAU.  (To  Amphitryori).     Calm  this  passion.

Sos.  Gentlemen!

POL.  (To  Sosia).     What  is  it?

Sos.  Has  he  struck  me  ?

AMPH.  No;  he  must  have  his  deserts  for  the  language
he  made  free  with  just  now.

Sos.  How  could  that  have  been,  when  I  was  elsewhere
occupied  by  your  orders?  These  gentlemen  here  can  bear
witness  that  I  have  just  invited  them  to  dine  with  you.

NAU.  It  is  true  that  he  brought  us  this  message,  and
would  not  leave  us.

AMPH.  Who  gave  you  that  order?

Sos.  You.

AMPH.  And  when  ?

Sos.  After  your  reconciliation.  Amidst  the  transports
of  a  soul  delighted  at  having  appeased  Alcmena's  anger.

(Sosia  gets  up. )

AMPH.  O  Heaven !  every  instant,  every  step  adds  some-
thing to  my  cruel  martyrdom;  and,  in  this  fatal  confusion,
I  no  longer  know  what  to  believe  or  what  to  say.

NAU.  All  that  he  has  just  related  to  us,  of  what  hap-
pened at  your  house,  surpasses  the  natural  so  much,  that
before  doing  anything,  and  before  flying  into  a  passion,  you
ought  to  clear  up  the  whole  of  this  adventure.

AMPH.  Come;  you  may  assist  my  efforts ;  and  Heaven
brings  you  opportunely  hither.  Let  us  see  what  fortune
may  attend  me  to-day ;  let  us  clear  up  this  mystery,  and
know  our  fate.  Alas  !  I  burn  to  learn  it,  and  I  dread  it
more  than  death.30  (Amphitryon  knocks  at  the  door  of  his
house).

80  Plautus,  who  has  this  scene  also,  brings  upon  the  stage  only  one  wit-
ness— the  pilot  Blepharo ;  Moliere  introduces  here  two,  and  afterwards,
in  the  eighth  scene,  two  fresh  witnesses.

212  AMPHITRYON  I  ACT  in.

SCENE  V. — JUPITER,  AMPHITRYON,  NAUCRATES,  POLIDAS,

SOSIA.

JUP.  What  is  this  noise  that  obliges  me  to  come
down  ?  And  who  knocks  as  if  he  were  the  master  where
I  am?

AMPH.  Just  gods !    what  do  I  see  ?

NAU.  Heaven !  what  prodigy  is  this  ?  What !  two
Amphitryons  are  here  produced  before  us  !

AMPH.  {Aside).  My  senses  are  struck  dumb  !  Alas,  I  can
no  longer  bear  it,  the  adventure  is  at  an  end ;  my  fate  is
clear  enough,  and  what  I  behold  tells  me  everything.

NAU.  The  more  closely  I  view  them,  the  more  I  find
that  they  are  like  each  other  in  everything.

Sos.  {Crossing  to  the  side  of  Jupiter],  Gentlemen,  this
is  the  true  one;  the  other  is  an  impostor  who  deserves
chastisement.

POL.  Certainly,  this  wonderful  resemblance  keeps  my
judgment  in  suspense.

AMPH.  We  have  been  deceived  too  much  by  an  execrable
scoundrel ;  I  must  break  the  spell  with  this  steel.

NAU.  (  To  Amphitryon,  who  has  drawn  his  sword).    Stay  !

AMPH.  Let  me  alone  !

NAU.  Ye  gods  !  what  would  you  do  ?

AMPH.  Punish  the  vile  deceptions  of  an  impostor  !

JUP.  Gently,  gently  !  There  is  very  little  need  of  pas-
sion ;  and  when  a  man  bursts  out  in  such  a  manner,  it
leads  us  to  suspect  the  goodness  of  his  reasons.

Sos.  Yes,  it  is  a  magician,  who  has  a  talisman31  about
him  to  resemble  the  masters  of  houses.

AMPH.  {To  Sosia).  I  shall  let  you  feel,  for  your
share,  a  thousand  blows  for  this  abusive  language.

Sos.  My  master  is  a  man  of  courage,  and  he  will  not
allow  his  people  to  be  beaten,

AMPH.  Let  me  satiate  my  fury  and  wash  out  my  affront
in  this  villain's  blood.

NAU.  {Stopping  Amphitryon).  We  shall  not  suffer  this
strange  combat  of  Amphitryon  against  himself.

AMPH.  What !  does  my  honour  receive  this  treatment
from  you  !  and  do  my  friends  embrace  the  cause  of  a

81  The  original  has  un  caractere.

SCENE  v.l  AMPHITRYON.  213

rogue  !  Far  from  being  the  first  to  take  up  my  revenge,
they  themselves  prove  an  obstacle  to  my  resentment  !

NAU.  What  would  you  have  us  resolve  at  this  sight,
when  between  two  Amphitryons  all  our  friendship  is  in
suspense  ?  Should  we  now  show  our  zeal  to  you,  we  fear
making  a  mistake,  and  not  recognizing  you.  We  see  full
well  in  you  the  image  of  Amphitryon,  the  glorious  sup-
port of  the  Thebans'  welfare  ;  but  we  also  see  the  same
image  in  him,  nor  are  we  able  to  judge  who  is  the  real
one.  What  we  have  to  do  is  not  doubtful,  and  the  im-
postor ought  to  die  by  our  hands  ;  but  this  perfect  resem-
blance conceals  him  between  you  two ;  and  it  is  too  haz-
ardous a  stroke  to  undertake  without  being  certain.  Let
us  ascertain  gently  on  which  side  the  imposture  can  be  ;
and  the  moment  we  have  disentangled  the  adventure,  you
will  have  no  need  to  tell  us  our  duty.

JUP.  Yes,  you  are  right,  and  this  resemblance  author-
izes you  to  doubt  about  both  of  us.  I  am  not  offended  at
seeing  you  wavering  thus ;  I  am  more  reasonable,  and
can  make  allowances  for  you.  The  eye  can  detect  no
difference  between  us,  and  I  see  that  one  can  easily
be  mistaken.  You  do  not  see  me  show  my  anger,  nor
draw  my  sword  ;  that  is  a  bad  method  of  clearing  up  this
mystery,  and  I  can  find  one  more  gentle  and  more  cer-
tain. One  of  us  is  Amphitryon,  and  both  of  us  may  seem
so  to  your  eyes.  It  is  for  me  to  put  an  end  to  this  con-
fusion ;  and  I  intend  to  make  myself  so  well  known  to
every  one,  that  at  the  convincing  proofs  of  who  I  may  be,
he  himself  shall  agree  about  the  blood  from  which  I  spring,
and  not  have  any  further  occasion  to  say  anything.  In
the  sight  of  all  the  Thebans  I  will  discover  to  you  the  real
truth ;  and  the  matter  is,  undoubtedly,  of  sufficient  im-
portance to  require  the  circumstance  of  it  being  cleared
up  before  every  one.  Alcmena  expects  from  me  this
public  testimony  :  her  virtue,  which  is  being  outraged  by
the  publicity  of  this  disorder,  demands  justification,  and
I  am  going  to  take  care  of  it.  My  love  for  her  binds  me
to  it ;  and  I  shall  convene  an  assembly  of  the  noblest
chiefs,  for  an  elucidation  which  her  honour  requires.  While
awaiting  these  desirable  witnesses,  pray,  please  to  honour
the  table  to  which  Sosia  has  invited  you.

214  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  ln<

Sos.  I  was  not  mistaken,  gentlemen ;  this  word  puts  an
end  to  all  irresolution ;  the  real  Amphitryon  is  the  Am-
phitryon who  gives  dinners.32

AMPH.  O  Heavens  !  can  I  see  myself  humiliated  much
lower  ?  What !  must  I  suffer  the  martyrdom  of  listening
to  all  that  this  impostor  has  just  said  to  my  face,  and  have
my  hands  tied,  whilst  his  discourse  drives  me  furious !

NAU.  (To  Amphitryon).  You  complain  wrongly.  Allow
us  to  await  the  elucidation  which  shall  render  resentments
seasonable.  I  do  not  know  whether  he  imposes  upon  us ;
but  he  speaks  as  if  he  had  right  on  his  side.

AMPH.  Go,  weak  friends,  and  flatter  the  imposture.
Thebes  has  other  friends,  different  from  you :  and  I  am
going  to  find  some  who,  sharing  the  insult  done  to  me,
will  know  how  to  lend  their  hand  to  avenge  my  just
anger.

JUP.  Well !  I  await  them,  and  I  shall  know  to  decide
the  quarrel  in  their  presence.

AMPH.  Scoundrel,  you  think  perhaps  to  escape  by  these
means ;  but  nothing  shall  shield  you  from  my  revenge.

JUP.  I  shall  not  condescend  to  answer  this  insulting
language  at  present ;  and  by  and  by  I  shall  be  able  to
confound  this  rage  with  two  words.

AMPH.  Not  Heaven,  not  Heaven  itself,  shall  shield  you
from  it ;  and  I  shall  dog  your  footsteps  even  unto  hell.

JUP.  There  will  be  no  need  of  that ;  and  you  shall  soon
see  that  I  will  not  fly.

AMPH.  (Aside).  Come,  let  us,  before  he  gets  out  with
them,  make  haste  to  assemble  such  friends  as  will  second
my  vengeance,  and  who  will  come  to  my  house  to  lend
me  assistance  to  pierce  him  with  a  thousand  wounds.

SCENE  VI. — JUPITER,  NAUCRATES,  POLIDAS,  SOSIA.

JUP.  No  ceremony,  I  beseech  you ;  let  us  go  quickly
within  doors.

NAU.  Certainly,  the  whole  of  this  adventure  puzzles  the
senses  and  the  reason.

Sos.  A  truce,  gentlemen,  to  all  your  surprises  ;  and
joyfully  sit  down  to  feast  till  morning.  (Alone).  Now  for

M  This  last  saying  is  even  now  used  as  a  proverb.

9CKNEVH.J  AMPHITRYON.  215

a  good  feed,  and  to  put  myself  in  condition  to  relate  our
valiant  deeds  !  I  am  itching  to  be  at  it  ;  and  I  was  never
so  hungry  in  my  life.33

SCENE  VII. — MERCURY,  SOSIA.

MER.  Stop.  What  !  you  come  to  poke  your  nose  in
here,  you  impudent  plate-licker  !

Sos.  For  mercy's  sake,  gently  !

MER.  Ah  !  you  are  at  it  again  !  I  shall  dust  your  coat
for  you.

Sos.  Alas  !  brave  and  generous  I,  compose  yourself,  I
beg  of  you.  Sosia,  spare  Sosia  a  little,  and  do  not  amuse
yourself  in  cudgelling  yourself.

MER.  Who  gave  you  permission  to  call  yourself  by
that  name  ?  Did  I  not  expressly  forbid  you  to  do  so,
under  penalty  of  a  thousand  blows  ?

Sos.  It  is  a  name  we  both  may  bear  at  the  same  time,
under  the  same  master.  I  am  known  for  Sosia  every-
where ;  I  allow  that  you  should  be  he,  allow  that  I  may  be
he  also.  Let  us  leave  it  to  the  two  Amphitryons  to  display
their  jealousies,  and,  amidst  their  contentions,  let  us  make
the  two  Sosias  live  in  peace.

MER.  No,  one  is  quite  enough ;  and  I  am  obstinate  in
allowing  no  dividing.

Sos.  You  shall  have  the  precedence  over  me  j  I  shall  be
the  younger,  and  you  the  elder.

MERC.  No  !  a  brother  is  troublesome,  and  is  not  to  my
taste ;  and  I  wish  to  be  an  only  son.

Sos.  O  barbarous  and  tyrannical  heart !  Allow  me  at
least  to  be  your  shadow.

MER.  Nothing  of  the  kind.

Sos.  Let  your  soul  humanize  itself  with  a  little  pity !
Suffer  me  to  be  near  you  in  that  capacity ;  I  shall  be  such
a  submissive  shadow  everywhere,  that  you  shall  be  satisfied
with  me.

MER.  No  quarter;  the  decree  is  immutable.  If  you
again  have  the  audacity  to  enter  there,  a  thousand  blows
shall  be  the  consequence.

33  From  this  to  the  end  of  the  comedy,  Amphitryon  belongs  entirely  to
Moliere.

2l6  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  m.

Sos.  Alack !  poor  Sosia,  to  what  cruel  disgrace  are  you
reduced  !

MER.  What !  your  lips  still  take  the  liberty  of  giving
yourself  a  name  which  I  forbid !

Sos.  No,  I  was  not  hearing  myself;  and  I  was  speaking
of  an  old  Sosia,  who  was  formerly  a  relative  of  mine,  and
whom,  with  the  greatest  barbarity,  they  drove  out  at  the
dinner  hour.

MER.  Beware  of  falling  into  that  mistake,  if  you  wish  to
remain  among  the  living.

Sos.  (Aside}.  How  I  would  thrash  you  if  I  had  the
courage,  for  your  too  inflated  pride,  you  double  son  of  a
strumpet !

MER.  What  are  you  saying?

Sos.  Nothing.

MER.  You  are,  I  believe,  muttering  something  to  your-
self.

Sos.  Ask  any  one;   I  did  not  so  much  as  breathe.

MER.  Certain  words  about  the  son  of  a  strumpet  have
struck  my  ear,  nothing  is  more  certain.

Sos.  It  must  be  some  parrot  awakened  by  the  beautiful
weather.

MER.  Farewell.  If  your  back  should  itch,  this  is  the
spot  where  I  reside.

Sos.  (Aloni).  O  Heavens !  the  cursedest  hour  to  be
turned  out  of  doors  is  the  dinner  hour.  Come,  let  us  sub-
mit to  fate  in  our  affliction.  Let  us  to-day  follow  blind
caprice,  and  by  a  proper  union,  join  the  unfortunate  Sosia
to  the  unfortunate  Amphitryon.  I  perceive  him  coming
in  good  company.34

SCENE  VIII. — AMPHITRYON,  ARGATIPHONTIDAS,  PAUSICLES,
SOSIA,  in  a  corner  of  the  stage,  without  being  seen.

AMPH.  {To  several  other  officers  who  accompany  him).
Stay  here,  gentlemen  :  follow  us  from  a  little  distance,  and
do  not  all  come  forward,  I  pray  you,  until  there  is  need
for  it.

PAUS.  I  understand  that  this  blow  must  touch  you  to
the  very  heart.

s*  This  scene  is  taken  from  Rotrou's  Les  deux  Sosies.

SC«N«  vin.]  AMPHITRYON.  2  1 7

AMPH.  My  grief,  alas!  is  poignant  at  all  points,  and  I
suffer  in  my  affection,  as  much  as  in  my  honour.

PAUS.  If  this  resemblance  is  such  as  is  said,  Alcmena,
without  being  to  blame  .  .  .

AMPH.  Ah !  in  the  matter  in  question,  a  simple  error
becomes  a  real  crime,  and  against  its  will,  innocence  perishes
in  it.  Such  errors,  look  at  them  in  whatever  light  you
will,  touch  us  in  the  most  delicate  parts ;  and  reason  often
pardons  them,  when  honour  and  love  cannot  do  so.

ARGAT.  I  do  not  perplex  my  thoughts  about  that ;  but  I
hate  your  gentlemen  for  their  shameful  delay ;  and  that  is
a  proceeding  which  wounds  me  to  the  quick,  and  of  which
people  who  have  their  hearts  in  the  right  place,  will  never
approve.  When  anyone  employs  us,  we  should  headfore-
most, throw  ourselves  into  his  concerns.  Argatiphontidas
is  not  for  compromising  matters.  It  does  not  become  men
of  honour  to  listen  to  the  arguments  of  a  friend's  adversary;
one  should  listen  only  to  revenge  at  such  times.  Such  a
proceeding  does  not  suit  me;  and  one  should  begin  always
in  those  quarrels,  by  running  a  man  through  the  body,
without  much  ado.  Yes,  you  shall  see,  whatever  happens
that  Argatiphontidas  goes  straight  to  the  point ;  and  I  must
crave  as  a  particular  favour  that  the  scoundrel  shall  die  by
no  other  hand  than  mine.

AMPH.  Come  on.

Sos.  (To  Amphitryon).  I  come,  Sir,  to  undergo  on
both  knees  the  just  punishment  of  a  cursed  insolence.
Strike,  beat,  thrash,  overwhelm  me  with  blows.  Kill  me
in  your  anger,  you  will  do  well,  I  deserve  it :  and  I  shall
not  say  a  word  against  you.

AMPH.  Get  up.     What  are  they  doing  ?

Sos.  I  have  been  turned  away  without  ceremony;  and
thinking  to  eat  and  be  merry  like  them,  I  did  not  imagine
that,  in  fact,  I  was  waiting  there  to  give  myself  a  beating.
Yes,  the  other  I,  servant  to  the  other  you,  has  played  the
very  devil  with  me  again.  The  same  harsh  destiny  seems
to  pursue  us  both  at  present,  Sir ;  and,  in  short,  they  have
un-Sosiad  me,  as  they  un-Amphitryon'd  you.85

*  Plautus  is  full  of  similar  plays  on  words.  For  example,  in  Trinum-
mus  ;  the  three  pieces  of  money,  Act  iv.,  Scene  2,  the  Sharper  says  to  Char-
mides,  an  Athenian  merchant,  and  whom  he  does  not  believe  to  be  "  his

2l8  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  HI.

AMPH.  Follow  me.

Sos.  Is  it  not  better  to  see  if  anybody  is  coming?

SCENE  IX. — CLEANTHIS,  AMPHITRYON,  ARGATIPHONTIDAS,
POLIDAS,  NAUCRATES,  PAUSICLES,  SOSIA.

CLE.  O  Heaven  !

AMPH.  What  scares  you  so  ?  What  is  the  fear  with
which  I  inspire  you  ?

CLE.  Lord-a-mercy !  you  are  up  there,  and  yet  I  see
you  here  !

NAU.  Do  not  be  in  a  hurry;  here  he  comes  to  give  the
wished-for  explanation  before  us  all,  and  which,  if  we  may
believe  what  he  has  just  said  about  it,  shall  at  once  dispel
your  trouble  and  care.

SCENE   X. — MERCURY,  AMPHITRYON,  ARGATIPHONTIDAS,

POLIDAS,  NAUCRATES,  PAUSICLES,  CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.

MER.  Yes,  you  all  shall  see  him  ;  and  know  beforehand
that  it  is  the  great  master  of  the  gods,  whom,  under  the
beloved  features  of  this  resemblance,  Alcmena  has  caused
to  descend  hither  from  the  Heavens.  And  as  for  me,  I
am  Mercury,  who,  not  knowing  what  to  do,  has  thrashed
more  or  less  him  whose  form  I  have  assumed  :  but  now  he
may  comfort  himself;  for  the  blows  of  a  god  confer  hon-
our upon  him  who  receives  them.

Sos.  Upon  my  word,  Mister  god,  I  am  your  servant ;
but  I  could  have  dispensed  with  your  courtesy.

MER.  I  henceforth  give  him  leave  to  be  Sosia.  I  am
tired  of  wearing  such  an  ugly  face ;  and  I  am  going  to  the
skies  to  wash  it  off  entirely  with  ambrosia.

(Mercury  ascends  to  Heaven.

Sos.  May  Heaven  forever  deprive  you  of  the  fancy  of
coming  near  me  again !  Your  fury  against  me  has  been
too  inveterate  ;  and  never  in  my  life  did  I  see  a  god  who
was  more  of  a  devil  than  you !

SCENE  XI. — JUPITER,  AMPHITRYON,  NAUCRATES,  ARGA-
TIPHONTIDAS, POLIDAS,  PAUSICLES,  CLEANTHIS,  SOSIA.
JUP.  (Announced  by  the  noise  of  thunder,  armed  with  his

own  self,"  "  therefore,  in  such  manner  as  you  Charmidised  yourself,  do
you  again  un-Charmidise  yourself."

SCBNE  xi.]  AMPHITRYON.  21 9

thunder-bolt,  in  a  cloud,  on  his  eagle).  Behold,  Amphi-
tryon, who  has  imposed  upon  you;  and  see  Jupiter  appear
in  his  own  features.  By  these  signs  you  may  easily  recog-
nise him ;  and  it  is  sufficient,  I  think,  to  re-instate  your
heart  in  the  condition  in  which  it  ought  to  be,  and  to  re-
store peace  and  happiness  in  your  family.  My  name,
which  the  whole  world  incessantly  worships,  quells  in  this
case  all  scandal  that  might  be  spread.  A  share  with  Jupi-
ter has  nothing  dishonourable  in  it,  and  doubtless,  it  can
be  only  glorious  to  find  one's  self  the  rival  of  the  sovereign
of  the  gods.  I  see  no  reason  in  it  that  your  love  should
murmur,  and  it  is  I,  god  as  I  am,  who,  in  this  adventure,
should  be  jealous.  Alcmena  is  wholly  yours,  whatever
pains  may  be  taken ;  and  it  must  be  very  gratifying  to
your  love  to  see  that  there  is  no  other  way  of  pleasing  her
than  to  assume  the  appearance  of  her  husband ;  that  even
Jupiter,  adorned  by  his  immortal  glory,  could  not  by  him-
self conquer  her  fidelity ;  and  that  what  she  granted  him
has,  by  her  ardent  heart,  been  granted  only  to  you.36

Sos.  My  lord  Jupiter  knows  how  to  gild  the  pill.

JUP.  Banish,  therefore,  your  gloomy  and  heart-felt
grief,  and  restore  its  wonted  calm  to  the  ardour  which
consumes  you.  In  your  house  shall  be  born  a  son,  who,
under  the  name  of  Hercules,  shall  fill  the  vast  universe
with  his  exploits.  A  glorious  fate,  bearing  a  thousand
blessings,  shall  prove  to  every  one  that  I  am  your  support ;
I  shall  make  your  destiny  the  envy  of  the  whole  world.
You  may  safely  flatter  yourself  with  these  promised  hopes.
It  is  a  crime  to  doubt  them :  the  words  of  Jupiter  are  the
decrees  of  fate.  (He  vanishes  in  the  clouds.

NAU.  Certainly  I  am  enraptured  at  these  brilliant
marks  .  .  .

SOL.  Gentlemen,  will  you  please  to  follow  my  opinion  ?
Embark  not  in  these  pretty  congratulations  :  it  is  a  bad
investment;  and  pretty  phrases  are  embarrassing  on
either  side,  in  such  a  compliment.  The  great  god  Jupi-
ter has  done  us  much  honour,  and,  no  doubt,  his  good-

*  If  in  this  play  there  had  been  the  slightest  allusion  to  the  love  of
Louis  XIV.  for  Madame  de  Montespan  Moliere  would  certainly  not  have
slipped  in  this  compliment  to  her  husband.

220  AMPHITRYON.  [ACT  HI.

ness  towards  us  is  unequalled ;  he  promises  the  certain
felicity  of  a  glorious  fate,  bearing  a  thousand  blessings,
and,  that  in  our  house  shall  be  born  a  very  mighty  sou.
Nothing  could  be  better  than  all  this.  But,  in  short,  a
truce  to  speeches,  and  let  every  one  retire  in  peace.  It
is  always  best  in  these  matters  to  say  nothing.

GEORGE  DANDIN;  OU,  LE  MARI  CONFONDU.

C  O  M  E  D I  E .

GEORGE  DANDIN;  OR,  THE  ABASHED  HUSBAND.

A  COMEDY  IN  THREE  ACTS.

(THE  ORIGINAL  IN  VERSE.)
JULY  l8TH  1668.

INTRODUCTORY  NOTICE.

THE  treaty  of  Aix-la-Chapelle  having  been  ratified  on  the  and  of  May,
1668,  and  peace  being  assured,  at  least  for  some  time,  Louis  XIV.  re-
solve'd  to  give  a  festival  in  his  favourite  gardens  of  Versailles,  as  he  had
already  done  in  1664.  (See  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Princess  of  Elis.)
This  festival  was  held  on  the  i8th  of  July  1668,  and  Mohere's  comedy,
George  Dandin,  formed  the  chief  entertainment.  Our  author  took  the
plot  chiefly  from  one  of  his  farces,  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille,  in
which  a  wife,  who  comes  home  rather  late,  finds  the  door  shut,  and  threat-
ens to  kill  herself  if  her  husband  does  not  let  her  in.  She  pretends  to  do
so  •  the  good  man  rushes  out  of  the  house  quite  terrified  ;  the  wife,  mean-
wh'ile  sneaks  in,  and  he  in  his  turn  is  locked  out.  This  idea  is  found  in  an
Indian  tale,  in  la  Roman  de  Dolopathos,  written  in  the  beginning  of  the
thirteenth  century,  and  also  in  the  fourth  story  of  the  seventh  day  of
Boccaccio's  Decameron.  But  Moliere  thought  very  likely  that  this  plot
was  too  slight  for  a  comedy,  and  added  to  it  a  second  idea,  which  exists
in  all  literatures,  namely,  the  danger  of  inequality  of  rank  or  education  in
marriage.  Most  probably,  he  took  it  from  the  eighth  story  of  the  seventh
day  of  the  Decameron,  in  which  is  related  how  Arriguccio  Berlinghieri,  a
rich  merchant,  married  a  noble  lady,  named  Sismonda.  His  wife  deceives
him  ;  he  thinks  he  has  found  her  out,  cuts  off  all  her  hair,  gives  her  a
sound  beating,  and  even  disfigures  her.  But  when  he  returns  with  her
family — a  mother  and  three  brothers — his  wife  appears  in  all  her  beauty
and  with  all  her  hair,  because  she  had  bribed  one  of  her  servants  to  take
the  well-deserved  punishment  in  her  stead.  Hereupon  the  wife  accuses
her  husband  of  being  a  drunkard ;  he  is  soundly  rated  both  by  the
mother  and  the  three  brawny  brothers,  and  warned  not  to  misbehave
again.

The  whole  of  the  play  is  rather  extravagant,  but  it  is  full  of  humour ;
the  characters  are  very  well  drawn,  and  the  dialogue  is  spirited.  The
servant  girl  Claudine  is  certainly  one  of  the  most  impudent  hussies  whom
even  Moliere  has  sketched  ;  whilst  the  family  de  Sotenville  faithfully  rep-
resent the  poor  but  proud  French  provincial  nobles,  as  they  existed  in
Moliere's  time.

It  cannot  be  denied  that  the  impression  which  George  Dandin  leaves
upon  our  minds  is  not  a  healthy  one,  and  that  the  triumph  of  an  adulter-
ous woman  over  a  husband,  who,  after  all,  is  only  guilty  of  having

223

224  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;     OR,

married  above  his  station,  cannot  be  justified.  But,  in  extenuation,  we
may  say  that  George  Dandin  was  written  only  for  a  courtly  "  high  jinks  ;"
to  excite  the  laughter  of  a  public,  whose  risible  muscles  were  not  easily
moved ;  and  that,  after  all,  the  ideas  about  matrimonial  fidelity  were  not
the  same  at  the  court  of  Louis  XIV.  as  they  are  at  the  present  time
amongst  civilized  nations.  The  same  year  (1668)  in  which  Moliere's  play
was  acted  before  the  Court,  Madame  de  Montespan,  a  married  woman,
became  the  recognized  mistress  of  the  Grand  Monarque,  whilst,  later,  her
children  by  that  King  became  enfants  legitimes  de  France.

This  piece  was  only  performed  in  the  theatre  of  the  Palais  Royal  on  the
9th  of  November, — precisely  two  months  after  the  first  representation  of
The  Miser.  Grimarest  relates  an  anecdote  about  Moliere,  which  seems
to  me  very  unlike  his  character,  namely,  that  he  read  his  comedy  to  a  real
Dandin  before  giving  it  to  the  public,  in  order  to  conciliate  the  foolish
husband,  who  appears  to  have  been  a  man  of  some  influence  ;  and  that
the  latter  became  one  of  the  warmest  patrons  of  the  play.

Several  English  dramatists  have  imitated  this  piece.  Betterton,  the
actor,  wrote  a  partial  imitation  of  it,  which,  under  the  name  of  The  Am-
orous Widow,  or  The  Wanton  Wife,  was  brought  out  at  the  theatre  in
Lincoln's-Inn-Field  in  1670.  As  Moliere's  play  is  in  three  acts,  and  Bet-
terton's  in  five,  the  latter  tacked  an  underplot  to  it,  consisting  of  an  amor-
ous widow,  vastly  "  prone  to  an  iteration  of  nuptials,"  and  who  at  last,
not  finding  any  one  willing  to  marry  her,  takes  up  with  the  Viscount  Sans
Terre,  who  proves  to  be  a  falconer  in  disguise,  and  is  a  reminiscence  of
the  Marquis  de  Mascarille  and  the  Viscount  de  Jodelet  in  The  Pretentious
Young  Ladies.  Geneste  says,1 — "That  part  of  it  which  is  taken  from
George  Dandin  is  very  good,  the  other  part  of  it  is  indifferent."  *

On  the  i8th  of  April,  1781,  was  represented  at  Covent  Garden  Theatre
Barnaby  Brittle,  or  a  Wife  at  her  Wit's  end,  a  farce  in  two  acts,  altered
from  Moliere  and  Betterton.  It  is  a  condensation  of  Moliere's  play,  with
something  added  from  Mrs.  Centlivre's  Artifice,  namely,  the  scene  when
the  servant  Jeremy  brings  his  Mistress'  clogs  on  a  plate,  and  the  one  in
which  Mrs.  Brittle  pretends  to  have  broken  her  leg.  Barnaby  is  a  glass-
man.

A  farce,  called  George  Dandin,  was  also  acted  once  at  Drury  Lane
Theatre,  November  25,  1747 ;  but  it  has  never  been  printed.

Dibdin,  in  The  Metamorphoses  (see  Introductory  Notice  to  The  Sicilian}
has  imitated  from  Moliere's  play,  the  second  Scene  of  the  first  Act  and  the
seventh  Scene  of  the  second  Act.  The  hero  is  called,  in  the  English  play,
Don  Pedro,  and  the  loutish  servant,  Perez.

An  operatic  farce,  December  and  May,  written  by  Dimond,  and  founded
on  Moliere's  comedy,  was  brought  out  on  the  i6th  of  May  1818,  at  Co-
vent  Garden  Theatre.  The  only  novelty  in  it  is  that  Zodolet,  the  servant
of  the  fast  young  nobleman,  is  partly  bribed  and  partly  frightened  to  bear
false  witness.

In  the  fifth  volume  of  the  translation  of  "Select  Comedies  of  Mr.  de

1  Geneste,  Some  account  of  the  English  Stage,  ^832,  10  vols.,  Ljo8.

*In  the  British  M
1729.  the  fourth  edit

«In  the  British  Museum,  there  is  a  copy  of  The  Amorous  Widow,  printed  in
lition,  with  the  names  of  three  London  printers,  and  containing

the  original  copy,"  and  which  contains  a  aescripuvc  IB  ^,^.^^

wanting  in  the  first  mentioned  copy,  but  has  neither  Prologue  nor  Epilogue.

THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  225

Moliere,  published  in  London,  1732,"  George  Dandln  has  a  most  impu-
dent dedication  to  tbe  Right  Honourable  the  Lady  *  *  *  *

MADAMB,

There's  no  body  to  whom  this  Play  can  with  so  much  propriety  be  addressed,
as  to  your  LADYSHIP,  whose  real  Story  abounds  with  more  Intrigue  and  Contri-
vance than  all  that  the  fruitful  Fancy  of  Moliere  has  been  able  to  invent.

Your  dexterous  Management  of  a  Husband  is  so  extraordinary,  that  other  Wives
behold  it  with  Envy  and  Emulation ;  your  Example  plainly  showing  that  a  Wo-
man may  heartily  despise  her  Husband,  and  at  the  same  time  make  him  believe  she
loves  him,  and  that  Matrimony  is  so  far  from  restraining  that  it  may  be  made  even
subservient  to  Gallantry.

An  Husband  not  overwise  is  a  Conveniency  your  LADYSHIP  well  knows  how  to
make  proper  Use  of— most  people  were  indeed  supriz'd  at  your  marrying  Mr
*****.  but  you  Madame,  (whese  Schemes  are  beyond  the  Reach  of  Common
Capacities)  easily  foresaw  the  advantage  of  being  the  Wife  of  one  whom  Your
superior  Rank  and  Alliances  would  overawe,  whom  Your  Wit  would  entirely  di-
rect and  govern,  and  whose  large  Fortune  would  supply  the  necessary  Expenses  of
a  fine  Lady.

I  shall  attempt  no  further  a  Task  I  am  unequal  to,  but  leave  the  World  to  praise
You  as  You  deserve;  permit  me  only  to  declare,  that  I  am,  with  a  great  deal  of
Admiration,  MADAM,  Your  Ladyship's  most  obedient,  and  most  humble  Servant,

THE  TRANSLATOR.

As  we  have  already  mentioned,  Moliere's  play  formed  part  of  the  court
entertainment,  of  which  a  description  was  published  in  1668,  under  the
name  of  Relation  de  la  Fete  de  Versailles.  This  narative  was  written  by
Felibien,  but  the  verses  by  Moliere.  We  here  give  a  resume  of  the  official
description : —

"  Having  granted  peace  at  the  instance  of  his  allies  and  at  the  desire  of
all  Europe ;  having  given  marks  of  an  unexampled  moderation  and  kind-
ness, even  in  the  midst  of  his  most  glorious  conquests,  the  king  had  no
other  thought  than  to  apply  himself  to  the  affairs  of  his  kingdom,  when,
in  order  to  make  up  a  little  for  the  pleasures  which  the  court  had  lost  dur-
ing his  absence  in  carnival  time,  he  resolved  to  give  a  fete  in  the  gardens
of  Versailles,  where,  amidst  the  pleasures  to  be  found  in  so  delicious  a  re-
treat, the  mind  could  not  fail  to  be  charmed  with  those  many  astonishing
and  extraordinary  beauties  with  which  this  great  prince  knew  so  well  how
to  season  all  his  entertainments.

"  To  attain  this  effect,  wishing  to  have  a  comedy  after  a  collation,  and
the  supper  after  the  comedy,  to  be  followed  up  by  a  ball  and  a  display  of
fireworks,  he  selected  those  persons  whom  he  thought  most  capable  of
performing  these  things  properly.  He  himself  marked  out  for  them  those
spots,  the  situation  of  which  he  deemed  most  suitable,  from  their  natural
beauty,  to  contribute  advantageously  to  their  decoration  ;  and  because  one
of  the  most  beautiful  ornaments  of  this  house  is  the  quantity  of  water
which  art  has  brought  there,  notwithstanding  that  nature  had  not  provided
it,  his  Majesty  ordered  them  to  make  the  utmost  use  of  it  to  enhance  the
embellishment  of  said  spots,  and  even  gave  them  the  means  to  employ  it,
and  to  obtain  the  greatest  possible  effects  from  it.

"  For  the  execution  of  this  fete,  the  duke  de  Crequy,  as  first  gentleman
of  the  chamber,  was  charged  with  everything  that  belonged  to  the  comedy  ;
the  marshall  de  Bellefonds,  as  first  steward  of  the  royal  household,  took
care  of  the  collation,  of  the  supper,  and  of  everything  that  belonged  to
-he  service  of  the  table ;  and  Monsieur  Colbert,  as  superintendent  of  the
royal  buildings,  had  the  different  places  for  the  royal  entertainment  con-
structed and  embellished.and  gave  the  orders  for  the  performance  of  the

226  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,

display  of  fireworks.  The  sieur  Vigarani  was  commanded  to  arrange  the
theatre  for  the  comedy ;  the  sieur  Gissey  to  prepare  a  room  for  the  supper;
and  the  sieur  Le  Vau,  first  architect  of  the  king,  another  for  the  ball.

"  On  Wednesday,  the  eighteenth  day  of  July,  the  king  came  from  Saint
Germain  to  dine  at  Versailles  with  the  queen,  Monseigneur  the  dauphin
Monsieur  and  Madame.  The  remainder  of  the  court  having  also  arrived
immediately  after  mid-day,  were  met  by  the  king's  officers,  who  did  the
honours,  and  received  everybody  in  the  salons  of  the  castle,  where  in
several  places,  were  tables  for  refreshments ;  the  principal  ladies  were
conducted  to  the  private  apartments  to  take  some  rest.

"At  six  o'clock  at  night,  the  king  having  given  the  order  to  the  Mar-
quis de  Gesvres,  the  captain  of  his  guards,  to  have  all  the  doors  thrown
open,  so  that  there  might  be  nobody  that  did  not  take  part  in  the  enter-
tainment, walked  out  of  the  castle  with  the  queen  and  rest  of  the  court,  to
amuse  themselves  with  a  promenade."

Felibien,  after  having  followed  the  king  through  all  the  particulars  of
his  promenade,  and  having  described  the  splendour  of  the  theatre  con-
structed in  the  garden  continues,  as  follows : —

Though  the  piece  represented  must  be  regarded  as  an  impromptu,  and
one  of  these  works,  in  which  the  necessity  to  satisfy  the  orders  of  the  king
on  the  spot,  leaves  not  always  time  completely  io  finish  and  to  polish  it,  it
is  nevertheless  certain  that  it  is  composed  of  parts  so  diversified  and  plea-
sant, that  we  may  safely  say  that  none  have  appeared.on  the  stage  so  well
calculated  to  please  the  eyes  and  ears  of  the  spectators  at  the  same  time.
The  prose  which  has  been  employed  is  a  very  fit  language  for  the  action
it  represents,  and  the  verses  which  are  sung  between  the  acts  of  the  co-
medy, accord  so  well  with  the  subject,  and  express  so  tenderly  the  pas-
sions with  which  they  who  recite  them  must  be  moved,  that  there  never
has  been  heard  anything  more  stirring.  Though  it  appears  that  there  are
two  comedies,  which  are  being  played  at  the  same  time,  one  of  which  is
in  prose  and  the  other  verse,  they  are  however  so  well  adapted  to  the
same  subject,  that  they  make  but  one  piece,  and  represent  but  one  action.
The  overture  of  the  stage  is  performed  by  four  shepherds,  disguised  as
servants  of  the  fete,  who  accompanied  by  four  other  shepherds,  playing
upon  the  flute,  perform  a  dance,  in  which  they  force  a  rich  peasant,  whom
they  have  met,  to  take  a  part,  and  who,  dissatisfied  with  his  marriage,
has  his  head  full  of  annoying  thoughts  ;  therefore  he  very  soon  retires
from  their  society  where  he  only  remained  by  compulsion.

"  Climeneand  Chloris,  who  are  two  companion  shepherdesses,  hearing
the  sound  of  the  flutes,  come  to  add  their  voices  to  the  instruments,  and
sing —

The  other  day,  I  heard

Annette's  voice,  who,

Whilst  playing  on  the  bagpipe,

Was  singing  in  our  woods  :

0  love,  how  'neath  thy  sway
One  suffers  poignant  grief  I

1  may  well  say  it,
Since  I  feel  it,

At  the  same  moment

Young  Lisette,

In  the  same  rhythm  as  Annette,

Responded  tenderly:

0  love,  if  'neath  thy  sway,

1  suffer  poignant  grief,

It  is  because  I  dare  not  say
All  that  I  feel.

THE  ABASHED  HUSBAND.  227

"Tircis  and  Philene,  the  lovers  of  those  two  shepherdesses,  accost  them
to  tell  them  of  their  passion,  and  go  through  a  musical  scene  with  them.

CHLORIS.  Leave  us  in  peace,  Philene.

CLIMENE.  Tircis,  do  not  stop  my  way.

TIRCIS  AND  PHILENE.  Ah,  cruel  fair  one,  vouchsafe  one  moment  to
listen  to  me.

CLIMENE  AND  CHLORIS.  But  what  have  you  to  say  ?

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  Oh  with  what  immortal  flame,  my  heart  burns
'neath  your  sway.

THE'TWO  SHEPHERDESSES.  That  is  nothing  new.  You  have  told  me
so  a  thousand  times.

PHILENE.  ( To  Chloris).  What !  do  you  wish  me  to  love  all  my  lifetime
and  obtain  nothing  ?

CHLORIS.  No,  that  is  not  my  wish.     Love  no  longer;  I  am  satisfied.

TIRCIS.  (To  Climene).  Heaven  forces  me  to  pay  you  the  homage,  of
which  all  these  woods  are  witness.

CLIMENE.  Then  it  is  for  Heaven,  since  he  constrains  you,  to  pay  you
for  your  trouble.

PHILENE.  ( To  Chloris).  It  is  by  your  extraordinary  merits,  that  you
have  won  my  affection.

CHLORIS.  If  I  deserve  to  be  loved,  I  owe  nought  to  your  affection.

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  The  dazzle  of  your  eyes  kills  me.

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDESSES.  Then  turn  away  from  me.

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDS.  But  I  like  to  look  at  them.

THE  TWO  SHEPHERDESSES.  Then,  shepherd,  do  not  complain.

PHILENE.  Ah  !  charming  Climene  I

TIRCIS.  Ah  !  charming  Chloris  !

PHILENE.  (To  Climene).  Render  her  a  little  more  human  towards
me.

TIRCIS.  ( To  Chloris).  Make  her  less  contemptuous  towards  me.

CLIMENE.  ( To  Chloris).  Be  sensible  to  the  love  that  Philene  has  for
you.

CHLORIS.  ( To  Climene).  Be  sensible  to  the  ardour  by  which  Tircis  is
smitten.

CLIMENE.  (To  Chloris).  If  you  will  show  me  your  example,  shepherd-
ess, perhaps  I  shall  follow  it.

CHLORIS.  ( To  Climene).  If  you  will  resolve  to  go  first,  it  is  possible
that  I  may  follow  you.

CLIMENE.  (  To  Philene).  Farewell,  shepherd.

CHLORIS.  ( To  Tircis).  Farewell,  shepherd.

CLIMENE.  (To  Philene).  Await  a  favourable  turn.

CHLORIS.  ( To  Tircis).  Await  a  sweet  success  for  the  grief  which  you
feel.

TIRCIS.  I  await  no  remedy.

PHILENE.  And  I  await  nought  but  death.

TIRCIS  AND  PHILENE.  Since  we  are  doomed  to  languish  under  such
disgrace,  let  us,  by  dying,  make  an  end  to  our  grievous  sighing.

*'  These  two  shepherds  retire,  their  hearts  big  with  grief  and  despair ;
and,  following  up  this  music,  the  first  act  of  the  comedy  in  prose
begins.

"  The  subject  of  it  is,  that  a  rich  farmer,  having  married  the  daughter
of  a  country  gentleman,  gets  nothing  but  contempt  from  his  wife,  as  well
as  from  his  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law,  who  had  only  accepted  him
as  their  son-in-law  for  his  large  property.

228  GEORGE   DANDIN7  ;    OR,

"  The  whole  of   this  piece  is  treated  in  the  same  style  in  which  the
sieur  de  Moliere  is  accustomed  to  construct  his  other  stage  plays ;  which
means,  that  he  portrays  in  the  most  natural  colours  the  characters  of  the
personages  whom  he  introduces  ;  so  much  so,  that  nothing  has  ever  been
seen  more  closely  resembling  the  vexations  in  which  people  often  find
themselves  who  marry  above  their  station,  than  what  he  has  written  ;  and
when  he  depicts  the  humour  and  manners  of  certain  provincial  nobles,  he
forms  no  traits  but  what  perfectly  convey  their  true  portraits.     At  the
end  of  the  act  the  peasant  is  interrupted  by  a  shepherdess,  who  comes  to
tell  him  of  the  despair  of  the  two  shepherds ;  but  being  troubled  with
other  concerns,  he  leaves  her  in  anger ;  thereupon  Chloris  enters,  lament-
ing the  death  of  her  lover  in  the  following  verses . —
Ah  !  mortal  grief,
What  else  can  still  befall  me  ?
Flow  on,  flow  on,  my  tears  ;
I  cannot  shed  too  many.
Why  does  a  tyrannical  honour
Hold  our  soul  bound  in  slavery  ?
Alas  !  in  order  to  satisfy  its  cruel  harshness,
I  have  driven  my  lover  to  abandon  life.
Ah !    mortal  grief!
What  else  can  still  befall  me  ?
Flow  on,  flow  on,  my  tears  ;
I  cannot  shed  too  many.
Can  I  ever  forgive  myself,  in  this  fatal  affair,
The  severe  coolness  with  which  I  had  armed  myself?
Why  then,  my  dear  lover  !  have  I  given  you  up  to  death?
Is  that,  alas  !  the  price  for  having  loved  me  so  much"
Ah  !  mortal  grief !
What  else  can  still  befall  me  ?
Flow  on,  flow  on,  my  tears ;
I  cannot  shed  too  many.

*  After  this  lament  began  the  second  act  of  the  prose  comedy.  It  is  a
continuation  of  the  annoyances  of  the  manied  peasant,  who  is  once  more
interrupted  by  the  same  shepherdess,  who  comes  to  tell  him  that  Tircis
and  Philene  are  not  dead,  but  have  been  saved  by  the  boatmen  who  ac-
company her.  The  peasant,  worried  by  all  these  importunities,  retires
and  leaves  the  place  free  to  the  boatmen,  who,  delighted  with  the  reward
they  have  received,  execute  a  dance,  and  go  through  various  evolutions
with  their  boat  hooks,  after  which  the  third  act  of  the  prose  comedy  is
played.

"  In  this  last  act,  the  peasant  is  seen  overwhelmed  with  grief,  through
the  bad  behaviour  of  his  wife.  Finally,  one  of  his  friends  advises  him  to
drown  his  sorrows  in  the  wine-cup,  and  takes  him  with  him  to  join  his
troupe,  having  just  perceived  the  advent  of  the  crowd  of  amorous  shep-
herds, who  enter  and  begin  to  celebrate,  with  songs  and  dances,  the  power
of  Love.

"  Here  the  scenery  is  changed  instantaneously;  and  it  is  hardly  to  be
conceived  how  so  many  real  water-jets  disappear  so  suddenly,  or  by  what
artifice,  instead  of  all  the  alleys  and  harbours,  one  sees  nothing  but  grand
rocks,  interspersed  with  trees,  on  which  are  shepherds  who  dance,  and  play
on  all  sorts  of  instruments.  Chloris  is  the  first  to  join  her  voice  to  the
sound  of  the  flutes  and  bagpipes.

Chloris.

In  this  spot  the  shadow  of  the  elms

Imparts  a  freshness  to  the  grass  ;

And  the  banks  of  those  streams

Are  brilliant  with  a  thousand  flowerets,

THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  22Q

Which  are  reflected  in  the  water.
Shepherds,  take  your  bagpipes,
Attune  your  piping  reeds,
And  let  us  mix  our  songs
With  those  of  the  little  birds.
•  Zephyr,  through  these  streams
Takes  a  thousand  secret  windings,
And  the  young  nightingales
Impart  their  love- breathing  ditties
To  the  tender  branches,
Shepherds,  take  your  bagpipes,
Attune  your  piping  reeds,
And  let  us  mix  our  songs
With  those  of  the  little  birds.

"  While  the  music  continues  to  charm  the  ears,  the  eyes  are  no  less
agreeably  occupied  in  seeing  several  elegantly  dressed  shepherds  and
shepherdesses  perform  a  dance,  while  Climene  sings —

Ah!  how  sweet  is  it,  charming  Sylvia.
Ah  !  how  sweet  is  it  to  be  inflamed  by  love.
That  time  of  life,  which  is  not  spent  like  this
Should  be  deducted  from  our  days.

Chloris.

Ah  !  the  sweet  days  which  Love  vouchsafes  us,
When  his  burning  torch  unites  two  hearts  I
Is  there  either  glory  or  crown
Which  can  compare  with  his  least  delights?

Tircis.

How  unjustly  we  complain  of  a  martyrdom
Which  is  followed  by  such  sweet  delights  !

Philene.

One  moment's  happiness,  in  love's  empire,
Repays  ten  years  of  sighing.

All  together.

Let  us  all  sing  Love's  admirable  power ;
In  this  spot  let  us  all  sing
His  glorious  charms.
He  is  the  most  amiable,
As  well  as  the  greatest  of  all  the  gods.

"At  these  words,  there  was  seen  to  approach,  from  the  back  of  the
stage,  a  great  rock,  planted  with  trees,  on  which  was  seated  the  whole
troupe  of  Bacchus,  composed  of  forty  satyrs.  One  of  them  obtrudes  his
head,  and  proudly  sings  the  following  words :

Stay !  this  is  too  much  to  venture.
Another  god,  whose  edicts  we  follow.
Opposes  himself  to  the  honour,  which
Your  pipes  and  voices  dare  offer  unto  Love .
To  such  exalted  titles  Bacchus  alone  pretends  ;
And  we  are  here  to  defend  his  rights

Chorus  of  Satyrs.

We  the  delightful  sway  of  Bacchus  follow
In  every  spot  we  bow
To  his  glorious  attractions
He  is  the  most  amiable,
And  greatest  of  all  gods.

"  Several  of  the  Bacchus  party  accompany  the  music  with  their  dance  ;
and  then  was  seen  a  combat  between  the  Bacchanalian  dancers  and  sing-
ers, and  those  who  upheld  the  honour  of  Love.

230  GEORGE  DANDIN;   OR,

CMorit.

It  is  Spring  which  restores  life
To  our  fields  strewn  with  flowers,
But  it  is  Love  and  his  torch
That  re-animates  our  hearts.

A  follower  of  Bacchus.
The  sun  disperses  the  shadows
With  which  the  Heavens  are  obscured,
And  from  the  most  sombre  hearts
Bacchus  drives  care  away.

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Bacchus  is  worshipped,  on  the  earth  and  on  the  wares

The  followers  of  Love.
And  Love  is  the  god  who  is  adored  everywhere.

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Bacchus  has  yoked  beneath  his  sway  the  whole  world

The  followers  of  Love.
And  Love  has  vanquished  gods  as  well  as  men.

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Nothing  can  equal  his  matchless  sweetness

The  followers  of  Love.
Nothing  can  equal  his  precious  charms.

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Fie  upon  Love  and  upon  his  flames.

The  followers  of  Love.
Ah  !  what  pleasure  it  is  to  love  !

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Ah  !  what  pleasure  it  is  to  drink  !

The  followers  of  Love.
To  him  who  lives  without  love,  life  has  no  charms

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
To  live  and  not  drink  is  simply  to  die.

The  followers  of  Love.

Sweet,  charming  bonds !

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.

Sweetest  of  victories.

The  followers  of  Love.

Ah  1  what  pleasure  it  is  to  love  1

The  Bacchanalian  Chorus.
Ah !  what  pleasure  it  is  to  drink  1

Thf  two  Chorusses  together.
No,  no,  it  is  a  mistake,
The  greatest  god  of  all  ...
The  followers  of  Love.

Is  Love.

The  Bacchanalian  Chorut.
Is  Bacchus.

"  Upon  this  a  shepherd  arrives,  who  throws  himself  between  the  two
contending  parties  to  separate  them,  and  who  sings  these  verses.

Shepherds!  this  is  too  much.     He!   why  this  contention ?

Let  reason  make  but  one  assembly  of  us.

Love  has  his  charms,  Bacchus  has  his  attractions.

They  are  two  deities,  who  go  very  well  together;

Let  us  not  divide  them.

THE  ABASHED  HUSBAND.  231

The  two  Chorusses,

Let  us  therefore  join  their  amiable  attractions,
Let  us  join  our  voices  in  this  delightful  spot,
And  let  us  make  the  surrounding  echoes  repeat
That  naught  is  sweeter  than  Bacchus  and  Love.

11  All  these  dancers  join  together,  and  amidst  the  shepherds  and  shep-
herdesses are  seen  four  followers  of  Bacchus,  with  thyrses,  and  four
bacchantes,  carrying  a  kind  of  tambourines,  which  are  intended  to  rep-
resent the  sieves,  formerly  used  at  the  feasts  of  Bacchus.  With  these
thyrses  the  followers  strike  on  the  sieves  of  the  bacchantes,  and  arrange
different  postures,  while  the  shepherds  and  shepherdesses  dance  more
calmly.

''  It  may  be  safely  asserted  that  in  this  work,  the  sieur  Lulli  has  found
the  secret  of  satisfying  and  delighting  everybody,  for  never  has  anything
so  beautiful  and  so  well  conceived  been  witnessed.  As  regards  the  dances,
there  are  no  steps,  but  what  express  the  action  which  the  dancers  are  to
carry  out,  and  no  gestures  but  what  are  as  so  many  unspoken  words.  If
we  come  to  judge  the  music,  there  is  nothing  but  what  conveys  perfectly
the  passions,  and  which  does  enchant  the  spectators.

"  But  what  had  never  been  seen  before  is  the  harmony  of  voices  so
agreeable,  the  symphony  of  the  instruments,  the  beautiful  blending  of  the
different  chorusses,  the  sweet  songs,  the  dialogues  so  tender  and  amorous
those  echoes ;  and,  in  short,  the  admirable  management  in  every  part,  in
which,  from  the  first  recitals,  the  music  goes  on  increasing,  from  having
begun  with  one  single  voice,  ending  in  a  concert  of  nearly  a  hundred
persons,  which  on  one  stage,  and  at  the  same  time,  were  seen  to  join
their  instruments,  their  voices,  and  their  movements  in  the  finale  of  the
piece,  leaving  everybody  in  such  an  admiration  as  would  be  difficult  to
express."

The  narrative  then  continues  to  describe  the  beauty  of  the  decorations,
gives  the  name  of  the  ladies  who  were  honoured  with  an  invitation  to  the
table  of  the  king  to  supper,* — Louis  XIV.  and  his  brother,  being  the  only  two
gentlemen — gets  enthusiastic  over  the  different  dishes,  and  a  wonderful  rock
on  which  was  stuck  pastry,  preserves,  and  candied  fruit  "  which  seemed
to  grow  among  the  stones  and  to  belong  to  it,"  tells  us  that  the  queen
presided  at  one  table,  and  that  there  were  a  great  many  other  tables  laden
with  eatables,  wines,  liqueurs,  and  many  other  delicacies  "  which  showed
that  the  magnificence  of  the  king  was  lavished  everywhere,"  becomes
quite  lyric  when  giving  the  details  of  a  room  made  of  foliage,  in  which
were  waterworks  wonderful  to  behold  ;  and  in  which  their  Majesties  and
the  whole  court  had  a  ball ;  and  is  full  of  fervour  when  graphically  deline-
ating the  astonishing  fireworks,  when  all  kinds  of  monsters  vomited  rock-
ets, &c.

M.  Fe"libien  ends  thus: — "People  can  see  that  his  Majesty  performs
all  his  actions  with  equal  grandeur,  and  that  he  is  inimitable,  whether
in  peace  or  in  war.  However  much  I  have  endeavoured  to  describe
this  beautiful  fe"te,  I  acknowledge  that  my  description  is  very  imper-
fect: people  cannot  form  any  idea  whatever,  by  what  I  have  written,  of
the  reality.

*  Among  the  ladies  invited  at  the  king's  table  I  see  the  name  of  the  Duchess  de
la  Valliere,  who  was  then  only  tolerated,  but  not  that  of  Madame  de  Montespan,
at  that  time  the  Grand  Monargue's  mistress .

DRAMATIS  PERSONS.

GEORGE  DANDIN,  a  rich  farmer,  husband  to  Angelique*
M.  DE  SOTENVILLE,  a  country  gentleman,  A  nge  lique'  s  father.
CLITANDRE,  in  love  with  Angelique,
LUBIN,  a  peasant,  Clitandre*  s  servant
COLIN,  George  Dandirf  s  servant.
ANGELIQUE,  George  Dandin' s  wife.
MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE.
CLAUDINE,  Angelique' s  maid.

THE  SCENE  is  BEFORE  GEORGE  DANDIN'S  HOUSE  IN  THE
COUNTRY.

*  Moliere  played  this  part  himself.  His  dress  for  this  part  consisted,
according  to  M.  E.  Soulie's  inventory,  so  often  quoted,  of"  breeches  and
cloak  of  light  brown  taffeta,  with  collar  of  the  same;  the  whole  adorned
with  lace  and  silver  buttons,  a  belt  of  the  same  :  a  little  doublet  of  crim-
son silk  ;  another  doublet  of  brocade  of  different  colours  and  silver  lace,
to  ^rear  over  it ;  a  large  ruff  and  shoes.''  Dandin  is,  according  to  Nicot,
Tresor  de  la  langue  franfaise,  published  in  1606,  used  to  designate  a  man
who  foolishly  and  open-mouthed  stares  about,  ineptus  and  insipidus.
Rabelais  uses  this  word  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  the  first  book  of
Gargantua,  which  Sir  Thomas  Urquhart  translates  "  ninny  lobcock.''  He
employs  Dandin  also  as  the  proper  name  of  a  judge  and  his  son,  because
it  is  supposed  that  this  judge  used  to  dangle  his  legs  about,  just  as  the
sound  of  the  bells  seemed  to  go,  din,  dan,  din  (Pantagruel,  3,  41).  Racine
calls  his  judge  in  the  Plaideurs,  Perrin  Dandin,  so  does  La  Fontaine  in  his
fable  of  L '  Hultre  et  les  Plaideurs.  In  old  French,  dandeau  was  said  of  a
wilful  cuckold.  Etienne  Pasquier  (1529-1615}  connects  it  with  dindan,
the  noise  produced  by  ringing  the  bells*;  and  Hensleigh  Wedgwood,  in
his  Dictionary  of  English  Etymology,  states  that  the  French  words  dodiner,
to  rock,  to  shake  ;  dandiner,  to  sway  the  body  to  and  fro ;  dodeliner,  to
rock  or  jog  up  and  down,  to  dandle :  dondeliner,  to  wag  the  head ;  and
the  Italian  dondolare,  to  dandle  a  child,  to  loiter;  and  dondola,  a  tov.  a
child's  playing  baby,  are  all  more  or  less  connected  with  the  English
words  "  dandle  "  and  "  dandy."

GEORGE  DANDIN;  OR,  THE  ABASHED  HUSBAND.

0

^GEORGE  DANDIN:    OU,  LE  MARI  CONFONDU.)

ACT  I.

SCENE  I. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.

AH  !  what  a  strange  thing  it  is  to  be  a  woman  of  quality5
and  a  wife !  and  what  an  instructive  lesson  my  marriage  is
to  all  peasants  who  wish  to  raise  themselves  above  their
condition,  and  to  ally  themselves,  as  I  have  done,  to  a  no-
bleman's family.  Nobility,  in  itself,  is  good;  it  is  a  thing
worthy  of  respect,  surely:  but  it  is  attended  by  so  many
ugly  circumstances,  that  it  is  better  not  to  come  in  contact
with  it.  I  have  become  very  knowing  on  that  subject,  to
my  cost,  and  understand  now  the  way  of  noblemen,  when
they  allow  us  to  enter  their  families.  We  ourselves  count
for  very  little  in  the  match :  they  only  marry  our  property ;
and  I  would  have  done  much  better,  rich  as  I  am,  to  marry
a  good  and  honest  peasant's  daughter,  than  to  take  a  wife
who  holds  herself  above  me,  is  ashamed  to  bear  my  name,
and  imagines  that  with  all  my  wealth  I  have  not  paid  dear
enough  for  the  honour  of  being  her  husband.  George
Dandin  !  George  Dandin !  you  have  committed  the  great-
est folly  in  the  world.  My  home  has  become  unbearable

•  The  original  has/emme  demoiselle.    See  Vol.  I,,  note  14,  page  xxxii.

235

236  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,  [ACT  i.

to  me  now,  and  I  never  enter  it  without  finding  some  an-
noyance.6

SCENE  II. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  LUBIN.

DAN.  (Aside,  seeing  Lubin  come  out  of  his  house).  What
the  devil  can  that  fellow  want  in  my  house?

LUB.  (Aside,  perceiving  George  Dandiri).  There  is  some
one  looking  at  me.

DAN.  (Aside).  He  does  not  know  me.

LUB.   (Aside).  He  suspects  something.-

DAN.  (Aside).  Bless  my  soul !  he  will  barely  nod  to  me.

LUB.  (Aside).  I  am  afraid  he  will  say  that  he  saw  me
come  from  within.

DAN.  Good  day  to  you.

LUB.  Your  servant.

DAN.  You  do  not  belong  to  this  place,  I  believe?

LUB.  No :  I  have  come  only  to  see  the  feast  to-morrow.

DAN.  Just  tell  me,  if  you  please,  did  not  you  come  out
thence  ?

LUB.  Hush!

DAN.  Why  so?

LUB.  Be  quiet !

DAN.  What  is  the  matter?

LUB.  Not  a  word  !  You  must  not  say  that  you  saw  me
come  out  there.

DAN.  Why?

LUB.  Good  Heavens!  because  .    .

DAN.  Well?     What?

LUB.  Softly.     I  am  afraid  they  will  hear  us.

DAN.   Not  at  all,  not  at  all.

LUB.  Because  I  have  just  been  delivering  a  message  to
the  mistress  of  the  house  from  a  certain  gentleman  who  has
an  eye  upon  her;  and  it  must  not  be  known.  Do  you
understand?

DAN.  Yes.

LUB.  I  have  been  told  to  take  care  that  no  one  should
see  me ;  and  let  me  beg  of  you,  at  least,  not  to  say  that
you  have  seen  me.

6  Strepsiades,  the  principal  character  of  Aristophanes'  comedy,  The
Clouds,  utters  the  same  complaint,  and  for  the  same  reason.

SCENE  ii.J  THE  ABASHED   HUSBAND.  237

DAN.  I  do  not  mean  to.

LUB.  I  am  very  glad  to  do  things  secretly,  as  I  have
been  told.

DAN.  That  is  all  right.

LUB.  The  husband,  from  what  they  tell  me,  is  dread-
fully jealous,  who  will  not  allow  his  wife  to  be  made  love
to ;  and  there  would  be  the  devil  to  pay  if  it  came  to  his
ears.  Now,  do  you  understand  ?

DAN.  Very  well.

LUB.   He  is  to  know  nothing  of  all  this.

DAN.  To  be  sure.

LUB.  They  wish  to  deceive  him  quietly.  You  under-
stand me  ?

DAN.  Perfectly.

LUB.  If  you  go  and  say  that  you  have  seen  me  come
out  of  his  house,  you  will  spoil  the  whole  affair.  Do  you
understand  ?

DAN.  Indeed,  I  do.  What  is  the  name  of  him  who  sent
you  there  ?

LUB.  He  is  our  squire,  Viscount  of  ...  somebody  .  .  .
By  my  troth !  I  never  remember  how  the  deuce  they
manage  to  pronounce  that  name.  Mr.  Cli .  .  .  Clitandre.

DAN.  Is  it  that  young  courtier  who  lives  .    .    .  ?

LUB.  Yes  ;  not  far  from  those  trees.

DAN.  (Aside).  That  is  why  this  civil  young  spark  has
come  to  live  so  close  to  me.  I  smell  a  rat,  certainly ;  and
his  vicinity  had  already  given  me  some  suspicions.

LUB.  Gadzooks !  he  is  the  most  gentlemanlike  man  you
ever  met  with.  He  has  given  me  three  gold  pieces  only
to  go  and  tell  the  lady  that  he  is  in  love  with  her,  and  that
he  very  much  wishes  the  honour  of  being  able  to  speak
with  her.  It  was  not  much  trouble  to  be  so  well  paid  for  it,
compared  with  a  day's  work,  for  which  I  get  only  ten  sous.

DAN.  Well !  have  you  delivered  your  message  ?

LUB.  Yes.  I  found  inside  a  certain  Claudine,  who  un-
derstood directly  what  I  wanted,  and  who  gained  me
speech  with  her  mistress.

DAN.   (Aside).  Oh  !  what  a  jade  that  maid  is  !

LUB.  Odds  bobs!  this  Claudine  is  as  pretty  as  can  be:
I  have  taken  a  fancy  to  her,  and  it  will  be  her  fault  if  we
are  not  married.

238  GEORGE  DANDIN;  OR,  [ACTL

DAN.  But  what  answer  has  the  mistress  made  to  this
Mr.  Courtier?

LUB.  She  has  told  me  to  tell  him  .  .  .  stop  ;  I  do  not
know  if  I  shall  remember  it  all ;  that  she  is  very  much
obliged  to  him  for  his  affection  towards  her,  and  that  he
must  be  very  careful  not  to  show  it,  on  account  of  her
husband,  who  is  whimsical,  and  that  he  must  bethink  him-
self to  invent  something,  so  that  they  may  converse  with
each  other.

DAN.  (Aside].   Ah  !  baggage  of  a  wife  !7

LUB.  Jeminy !  that  will  be  funny ;  for  the  husband  will
not  dream  of  the  trick  ;  that  is  the  best  of  it,  and  he  will
be  taken  in  for  all  his  jealousy.  Is  it  not  so  ?

DAN.   That  is  true.

LUB.  Good-bye.  Keep  silence,  mind  !  Keep  the  secret
well,  so  that  the  husband  may  not  know  of  it.

DAN.  Yes,  yes.

LUB.  As  for  myself,  I  shall  pretend  to  know  nothing.
I  am  a  cunning  fellow,  and  people  would  not  think  that  I
have  anything  to  do  with  it.

SCENE  III. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.

Well !  George  Dandin,  you  see  how  your  wife  treats
you  !  That  is  your  reward  for  having  wished  to  marry  a
lady  of  quality !  You  are  completely  done  for, 8  without
being  able  to  revenge  yourself;  and  nobility  ties  your  hands.
Equality  of  condition  leaves  the  husband  at  any  rate  the
freedom  of  resentment ;  and  if  this  were  a  country  wench,
you  would  now  have  full  liberty  to  right  yourself  by  giving
her  a  good  thrashing.  But  you  wished  to  have  a  taste  of
nobility ;  and  you  were  tired  of  being  master  in  your  own
house.  Ah  !  I  am  bursting  with  rage,  and  would  willingly
box  my  own  ears.  What!  to  listen  impudently  to  the
declaration  of  some  fop,  and  to  promise  him  at  the  same

7  Aime"- Martin  says  that  the  resemblance  between   George  Dandin  and
The  School  for  Wives  (see  Vol.  I.)  has  struck  all  commentators  of  Mo-
liere.     Dandin   is  always   told  of  the   faithlessness  of  his  wife,  just  as
Arnolphe  is  about  the  stratagems  of  AgnSs.     Neither  of  them,  however,
succeeds  in  surprisng  the  guilty.

8  The  original  has  L'on  vous  accommode  de  toutes  pieces,  because,  in
former  times,  a  knight  completely  armed  was  called  so.

SCBNK  iv.J  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  239

time  that  his  love  would  be  returned !  Zounds  !  I  will
not  let  such  an  opportunity  slip  me.  I  must,  at  this  very
moment,  go  and  complain  to  her  father  and  mother,  and
take  them  to  witness,  at  all  events,  of  the  vexations  and
annoyance  which  their  daughter  causes  me.  But  here
they  come,  just  at  the  right  moment.

SCENE  IV. — M.  DE  SOTENVILLE,  MADAM  DE   SOTENVILLE,
GEORGE  DANDIN.

M.  DE  S.  What  is  the  matter,  son-in-law?  You  seem
quite  upset.

DAN.  So  I  have  cause    to  be,  and  .

MAD.  DE  S.  Good  Heavens!  son-in-law,  how  unpolite
you  are,  not  to  bow  to  people  when  you  approach  them  !

DAN.  Upon  my  word  !  mother-in-law,  it  is  because  I
have  other  matters  to  think  of;  and  .  .  .

MAD.  DE  S.  Again  !  Is  it  possible,  son-in-law,  that  you
know  fashion  so  little,  and  is  there  no  teaching  you  how
to  behave  among  people  of  quality  ?

DAN.  What  do  you  mean?

MAD.  DE  S.  Will  you  never  divest  yourself,  with  me,  of
the  familiarity  of  that  word,  mother-in-law,  and  can  you
not  accustom  yourself  to  call  me  Madam  ?

DAN.  Zounds  !  If  you  call  me  your  son-in-law,  it  seems
to  me  that  I  may  call  you  my  mother-in-law.

MAD.  DE  S.  That  remains  to  be  seen,  and  the  case  is
not  the  same.  Please  to  understand  that  it  is  not  for  you
to  use  that  word  with  a  person  of  my  rank ;  that,  although
you  may  be  our  son-in-law,  there  is  a  great  difference  be-
tween us,  and  that  you  ought  to  know  your  place.

M.  DE  S.  That  is  enough,  my  love ;  let  us  drop  that.

MAD.  DE  S.  Good  Heavens !  M.  de  Sotenville,  you  are
more  indulgent  than  any  one  else,  and  you  do  not  know
how  to  make  people  give  you  your  due.

M.  DE  S.  Egad  !  I  beg  your  pardon :  I  do  not  require
any  lessons  upon  that  subject ;  and  during  my  life,  I  have
shown  by  a  score  of  energetic  actions  that  I  am  not  a  man
ever  to  abate  a  tittle  of  my  pretensions ;  but  a  hint  is  quite
sufficient  for  him.  Let  us  know  a  little,  son-in-law,  what
you  have  got  on  your  mind.

240  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,  [ACTI.

DAN.  Since  I  am  to  speak  categorically,  I  shall  tell  you,
M.  de  Sotenville,  that  I  have  cause  to  ...

M.  DE  S.  Gently,  son-in-law.  Let  me  tell  you  that  it
is  not  respectful  to  address  people  by  their  names,  and
that  we  must  only  say,  "Sir,"  to  those  above  us.

DAN.  Well  then,  only  say  Sir,  and  no  longer  M.  de
Sotenville,  I  must  tell  you  that  my  wife  gives  me  .  .  .

M.  DE  S.  Softly !  Let  me  also  tell  you  that  you  ought
not  to  say  my  wife  when  you  speak  of  our  daughter.

DAN.  I  have  no  patience  !  What !  is  not  my  wife  my
wife?

MAD.  DE  S.  Yes,  son-in-law,  she  is  your  wife;  but  you
must  not  call  her  so.  You  could  not  do  more,  if  you  had
married  one  of  your  equals.

DAN.  (Aside).  Ah !  George  Dandin,  what  a  hole  you
have  got  into !  (Aloud}.  For  gracious  sake,  put  your
gentility  aside  for  a  moment,  and  allow  me  now  to  speak
to  you  as  best  I  can.  (Aside).  A  plague  upon  all  this
nonsensical  tyranny!  (To  M.  de  Sotenville).  I  tell  you
then  that  I  am  very  much  dissatisfied  with  my  marriage.

M.  DE  S.  And  the  reason,  son-in-law?

MAD.  DE  S.  What !  to  speak  thus  of  an  affair  from
which  you  have  derived  such  great  advantages !

DAN.  And  what  advantages,  Madam,  since  "Madam"
it  is  to  be  ?  The  bargain  has  not  been  a  bad  one  for  you ;
for,  by  your  leave,  your  affairs,  had  it  not  been  for  me,
would  have  been  in  a  very  dilapidated  condition,  and  my
money  has  served  to  stop  pretty  large  gaps ;  but,  as  for
myself,  what  have  I  profited  by  it,  pray,  unless  it  be  the
lengthening  of  my  name,  and  instead  of  being  George
Dandin,  to  have  received,  through  you,  the  title  of  M.  de
La  Dandiniere  ?

M.  DE  S.  Do  you  reckon  for  nothing,  son-in-law,  the
advantage  of  being  allied  to  the  house  of  Sotenville?

MAD.  DE  S.  And  to  that  of  La  Prudoterie,  from  which
I  have  the  honour  of  being  descended  ;  a  house  where  the
females  ennoble,  and  which,  by  that  valuable  privilege,
will  make  your  sons  noblemen.9

9  The  contrary  was  generally  the  law  in  France ;  for  if  a  lady  of  noble
birth  married  a  commoner,  she  lost  her  own  rank,  and  her  children  be-
came commoners.  But  exceptionally,  it  was  the  custom  in  the  province

SCINK  rv.j  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  241

DAN.  Oh!  that  is  good,  my  sons  shall  be  noblemen:
but  I  shall  be  myself  a  cuckold,  unless  care  be  taken.

MAD.  DE  S.  What  does  this  mean,  son-in-law  ?

DAN.  It  means  that  your  daughter  does  not  behave  as
a  wife  ought  to  do,  and  that  she  does  things  which  are
contrary  to  honour.

MAD.  DE  S.  Gently.  Take  care  what  you  are  saying.
My  daughter  belongs  to  a  race  too  full  of  honour,  ever  to
do  aught  that  might  offend  honesty ;  and  as  for  the  house
of  La  Prudoterie,  thank  Heaven,  it  has  been  observed
that  for  more  than  three  hundred  years  no  woman  has
been  talked  about.

M.  DE  S.  Egad !  there  has  never  been  a  flirt  in  the
house  of  Sotenville ;  and  bravery  is  not  more  hereditary
in  the  males  than  chastity  in  the  females.

MAD.  DE  S.  We  have  had  a  Jacqueline  de  la  Prudoterie,
who  would  never  be  the  mistress  of  a  duke  and  peer,
governor  of  our  province.

M.  DE  S.  There  was  a  Mathurine  de  Sotenville  who
refused  twenty  thousand  crowns  from  a  favourite  of  the
King,  who  asked  only  for  the  favour  of  speaking  to  her.

DAN.  Well !  your  daughter  is  not  so  straight-laced  as
all  that ;  and  she  has  grown  tractable  since  she  has  been
with  me.

M.  DE  S.  Explain  yourself,  son-in-law.  We  are  not
people  to  support  her  in  any  wrong  actions,  and  we  would
be  the  first,  her  mother  and  I,  to  do  you  justice.

MAD.  DE  S.  We  do  not  understand  jesting  in  matters
of  honour;  and  we  have  brought  her  up  in  the  greatest
possible  strictness.

DAN.  All  I  can  tell  you  is,  that  there  is  a  certain  court-
ier thereabout,  whom  you  have  seen,  who  is  in  love  with
her,  under  my  very  nose,  and  who  has  sent  her  a  declaration
of  his  love,  to  which  she  has  very  feelingly  listened.

MAD.  DE  S.  By  the  Heavens  above  !    I  would  strangle

of  Champagne  that  the  children  born  either  from  a  father  or  mother  of
noble  rank,  became  nobles  themselves.  According  to  tradition,  this
privilege  was  granted  to  the  inhabitants  of  that  province,  because  they
had  lost  so  many  men  of  high  birth  in  the  battle  of  Fontenay  (841),  near
Auxerre,  fought  between  Charles  the  Bald  and  his  brothers.

242  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;   OR,  [ACT  i.

her  with  my  own  hands,  were  she  to  deviate10  from  her
mother's  virtuous  path.

M.  DE  S.  Zounds,  I  would  pass  my  sword  through  her
body,  and  that  of  her  gallant,  were  she  to  forfeit  her
honour.

DAN.  I  have  told  you  what  is  going  on,  to  justify  my
complaints;  and  I  ask  you  for  satisfaction  in  this  matter.

M.  DE  S.  Do  not  torment  yourself:  I  will  get  it  you
from  both ;  and  I  am  the  man  to  keep  a  tight  hold  over,11
no  matter  whom.  But  are  you  quite  positive  about  what
you  have  told  us?

DAN.  Quite.

M.  DE  S.  Take  great  care;  for,  between  gentlemen,
these  are  ticklish  subjects;  and  you  must  not  make  a
mistake.

DAN.  I  have  said  nothing,  I  tell  you,  but  the  truth.

M.  DK  S.  My  love,  go  and  talk  to  your  daughter,  while
I,  with  my  son-in-law,  will  go  and  speak  with  that  man.

MAD.  DE  S.  Is  it  possible,  my  son,  that  she  could  so  far
forget  herself,  after  the  good  example  which,  as  you  well
know,  I  have  set  her.

M.  DE  S.  We  are  going  to  clear  the  matter  up.  Follow
me,  son-in-law,  and  do  not  trouble  yourself.  You  shall
see  what  we  are  made  of,  when  people  attack  those  who
may  belong  to  us.

DAN.  There  he  is  coming  toward  us.

SCENE  V. — M.  DE  SOTENVILLE,  CLITANDRE,  GEORGE
DANDIN.

M.  DE  S.  Do  you  know  me,  Sir?

CLIT.  Not  that  I  am  aware  of,  Sir.

M.  DE  S.  My  name  is  the  Baron  de  Sotenville.

CLIT.  I  am  very  happy  to  hear  it.

M.  DE  S.  My  name  is  well  known  at  court ;  and  in  my

10  The  original  \\asforligner,  an  antiquated  word,  which   means,  liter-
ally, "to  deviate  from  the  line."     It  was  applied  to  nobles  who  had  de-
generated.

11  In  the  original  serrer  le  bouton,  literally,   "  to  tighten  the  leathern
buckle  which  holds  the  reins  together;"  hence,   figuratively,  to  keep  a
tight  hold  over  any  one.

SCENE v.J  THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  2  4.5

youth,  I  had  the  honour  of  being  one  of  the  first  to  distin-
guish myself  in  the  arriere-ban12  at  Nancy.

CLIT.  So  much  the  better.

M.  DE  S.  My  father,  Jean-Gilles  de  Sotenville,  had  the
honour  of  assisting  in  person  at  the  great  siege  of  Mont-
auban.13

CLIT.  I  am  delighted  to  hear  it.

M.  DE  S.  And  one  of  my  ancestors,  Bertrand  de  Soten-
ville, enjoyed  so  much  consideration  in  his  time,  that  he  was
permitted  to  dispose  of  all  his  property,  to  cross  the  seas.

CLIT.  I  can  easily  believe  it.

M.  DE  S.  It  has  been  reported  to  me,  Sir,  that  you  are
in  love  with,  and  run  after  a  young  person,  who  is  my
daughter,  in  whom  I  am  interested  {pointing  to  George
Dandiri),  as  well  as  in  this  man  whom  you  see,  who  has
the  honour  of  being  my  son-in-law.

CLIT.  Who?    I?

M.  DE  S.  Yes ;  and  I  am  glad  of  the  opportunity  of
speaking  to  you,  in  order  to  have  this  affair  explained,  if
you  please.

CLIT.  What  strange  slander  is  this  !  Who  has  told  you
that,  Sir?

M.  DE  S.  Somebody  who  believes  himself  well  informed.

CLIT.  This  somebody  has  told  a  lie.  I  am  a  gentleman.
Do  you  think  me  capable,  Sir,  of  such  a  base  act  ?  What !
I,  love  a  young  and  handsome  person  who  has  the  honour
of  being  the  daughter  of  the  Baron  de  Sotenville !  I
respect  you  too  much  for  that,  and  am  too  much  your
humble  servant.  Whoever  has  told  you  this  is  a  fool.

M.  DE  S.  Now,  son-in-law.

DAN.  What?

CLIT.  He  is  a  rogue  and  villain.

M.  DE  S.  {To  George  Dandiri).  Answer  him.

DAN.  Answer  him  yourself.

CLIT.  If  I  knew  who  it  could  be,  I  would  in  your
presence  run  my  sword  through  his  body.

M.  DE  S.  (To  George  Dandiri).  Support  your  assertion.

u  The  arriere-ban  was  the  convocation  originally  made  by  the  King  of
all  the  nobles  of  his  states,  to  march  against  the  enemy.

1S  The  siege  alluded  to  here  is  no  doubt  the  one  undertaken  by  Louis
XIII.  in  1621,  about  a  year  before  Moliere's  birth.

244  GEORGE   DANDJN  ;   OR,  [ACT  I.

DAN.  It  is  fully  supported.     It  is  true.

CLIT.  Is  it  your  son-in-law,  Sir,  who  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  Yes,  it  is  he  himself^  who  complains  to  me
about  it.

CLIT.  Certainly  he  may  thank  his  stars  for  belonging  to
you  ;  and  without  that,  I  would  pretty  well  teach  him  to
talk  in  such  a  manner  about  a  person  like  me.

SCENE  VI. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  ANGELIQUE,
CLITANDRE,  GEORGE  DANDIN,  CLAUDINE.

MAD.  DE  S.  With  regard  to  that,  jealousy  is  a  strange
thing !  I  have  brought  my  daughter  here,  to  clear  the
matter  up  in  the  presence  of  every  one.

CLIT.  ( To  Angelique).  It  is  you  then,  Madam,  who
have  told  your  husband  that  I  am  in  love  with  you.

ANG.  I  ?  And  how  could  I  have  told  him  ?  Is  it  so
then  ?  I  should  really  like  to  see  you  in  love  with  me.
Just  attempt  it,  pray ;  you  will  find  out  with  whom  you
have  to  deal ;  I  advise  you  to  try  the  thing  !  Have  re-
course, by  way  of  experiment,  to  all  the  lovers'  stratagems :
just  attempt  to  send  me,  for  the  fun  of  it,  some  messages,
to  write  me  some  small  love  letters  secretly ;  to  watch  the
moments  of  my  husband's  absence,  or  when  I  am  going
out  to  tell  me  of  your  love  :  you  have  only  to  set  about  it,
I  promise  you  you  shall  be  received  as  you  ought.

CLIT.  Gently,  gently,  Madam ;  there  is  no  need  to  read
me  such  a  lesson,  or  to  be  so  scandalized.  Who  told  you
that  I  thought  of  loving  you?

ANG.  How  do  I  know,  who  told  me  just  now  these
stories  ?

CLIT.  They  may  say  what  they  like ;  but  you  know  best
whether  I  ever  spoke  of  love  to  you  when  we  met.

ANG.  You  should  only  have  done  so,  you  would  have
been  welcome !

CLIT.  I  assure  you  that  you  have  nothing  to  fear  from
me ;  that  I  am  not  a  man  to  vex  the  fair ;  and  that  I  re-
spect you  and  your  parents  too  much,  to  have  even  the
thought  of  falling  in  love  with  you.

MAD.  DE  S.  {To  George  Dandin^)     Well,  now  you  see  !

M.  DE  S.  Are  you  satisfied,  son-in-law  ?  What  do  you
say  to  that  ?

SCBNB  v».]  THE  ABASHED   HUSBAND.  245

DAN.  I  say  that  these  are  cock-and-bull  stories;  that
I  know  what  I  know;  and  that,  since  I  am  to  speak
plainly,  she  has  just  now  received  a  message  from  him.

ANG.  What  !   I  have  received  a  message  ?

CLIT.  I  have  sent  a  message  ?

ANG.  Claudine  ?

CLIT.  (To  Claudine}.     Is  it  true?

CLAU.  Upon  my  word,  that  is  a  strange  falsehood !

DAN.  Hold  your  tongue,  slut  that  you  are.  I  know
your  tricks ;  and  it  is  you  who  introduced  the  messenger
just  now.

CLAU.  Who?     I?

DAN.  Yes,  you.     Do  not  look  so  innocent.

CLAU.  Alas  !  how  full  of  wickedness  people  are  now-
a-days,  to  suspect  me  thus,  I,  who  am  innocence  itself !

DAN.  Hold  your  tongue,  you  bad  lot.  You  pretend  to
be  a  saint,  but  I  have  known  you  for  a  long  time ;  and
you  are  a  sly  jade.

CLAU.  (To  Angelique).     Madam,  have  I  .    .    .

DAN.  Hold  your  tongue,  I  tell  you ;  you  may  bear  the
brunt  for  all  the  others ;  and  your  father  is  not  a  noble-
man.

ANG.  It  is  a  falsehood  so  gross,  and  which  affects  me
so  much,  that  I  have  not  even  the  strength  to  answer  it.
It  is  very  horrible  to  be  accused  by  a  husband,  when  one
has  done  nothing  wrong  to  him !  Alas  !  if  I  am  to  blame
at  all,  it  is  for  treating  him  too  well.

CLAU.  Indeed  you  have.

ANG.  My  great  misfortune  is  that  I  consider  him  too
much ;  and  would  to  Heaven  that  I  could  tolerate,  as  he
says,  the  attentions  of  some  one  else  !  I  should  not  be  so
much  to  be  pitied.  Good-bye  ;  I  withdraw,  and  I  cannot
longer  bear  to  be  thus  insulted.

SCENE  VII. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  CLITANDRE,
GEORGE  DANDIN,  CLAUDINE.

MAD.  DE  S.  (To  George  Dandiri).  Go,  you  do  not
deserve  the  virtuous  wife  you  have  got.

CLAU.  Upon  my  word,  he  deserves  that  she  should
make  his  words  come  true ;  and  if  I  were  in  her  place,  I
would  not  hesitate  about  it.  (To  Clitandre).  Yes,  sir,

246  GEORGE  DANDIN;   OR,  [ACTI.

you  ought  to  make  love  to  my  mistress,  to  punish  him.
Insist,  it  is  I  who  tell  you  ;  it  will  be  worth  your  while ;
and  I  offer  to  assist  you,  since  he  has  already  taxed  me
with  it.  (Exit  Claudine.

M.  DE  S.  You  deserve,  son-in-law,  to  have  these  things
said  to  you ;  and  your  behaviour  sets  every  one  against
you.

MAD.  DE  S.  Go,  endeavour  to  treat  a  gentlewoman
better ;  and  take  care  not  to  make  any  more  such  blun-
ders for  the  future.

DAN.  (Aside).  It  makes  me  mad  to  be  put  in  the
wrong,  when  I  am  in  the  right.

SCENE  VIII. — M.  DE  SOTENVILLE,   CLITANDRE,  GEORGE
DANDIN.

CLIT.  (To  M.  de  Sotenville).  You  see,  sir,  how  falsely
I  have  been  accused  ;  you  are  a  gentleman  who  know  the
punctilios  of  honour ;  and  I  demand  satisfaction  for  the
insult  that  has  been  offered  to  me.

MAD.  DE  S.  That  is  just ;  and  it  is  the  right  way  of
proceeding.  Come,  son-in-law,  give  this  gentleman  satis-
faction.

DAN.  How  !  satisfaction  ?

M.  DE  S.  Yes,  it  is  right  according  to  usage,  for  having
wrongly  accused  him.

DAN.  That  is  something  with  which  I  do  not  at  all
agree,  that  I  have  wrongly  accused  him ;  and  I  know  well
enough  what  I  think  of  it.

M.  DE  S.  That  does  not  matter.  Whatever  thought
may  remain  in  your  mind,  he  denies  it ;  that  must  satisfy
people,  and  they  have  no  right  to  complain  of  any  man
who  gainsays  a  thing.

DAN.  Thus,  if  I  had  found  him  in  bed  with  my  wife,  he
would  get  off  by  simply  denying  it  ?

M.  DE  S.  No  more  arguments.  Make  him  the  apolo-
gies which  I  tell  you.

DAN.  I  ?    I  am  to  make  him  apologies  after  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  Come,  I  tell  you  ;  there  is  nothing  to  hesitate
about,  and  there  is  no  need  of  being  afraid  of  overdoing
the  thing,  since  you  are  guided  by  me.

SCENE  VHI.]  THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  247

DAN.  I  cannot  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  Zounds  !  son-in-law,  do  not  make  me  angry.
I  shall  be  taking  his  part  against  you.  Come,  be  guided
by  me.

DAN.   (Aside).     Ah  !   George  Dandin  !

M,  DE  S.  First,  take  your  cap  in  hand :  This  gentleman
is  a  nobleman,  and  you  are  not.

DAN.   (Cap  in  hand,  aside).     I  am  boiling  with  rage  !

M.  DE  S.   Repeat  after  me  :  Sir  .    .    .

DAN.  Sir  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  I  crave  your  pardon  .  .  .  (Seeing  that  George
Dandin  hesitates  to  obey).  Ah  !

DAN.  I  crave  your  pardon  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  For  the  bad  thoughts  which  I  have  had  of  you.

DAN.  For  the  bad  thoughts  which  I  have  had  of  you.

M.  DE  S.  It  was  because  I  had  not  the  honour  of  know-
ing you.

DAN.  It  was  because  I  had  not  the  honour  of  knowing
you.

M.  DE  S.  And  I  beg  you  to  believe  .    .    .

DAN.  And  I  beg  you  to  believe  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  That  I  am  your  servant.

DAN.  Would  you  have  me  to  be  the  servant  of  a  man
who  wants  to  make  me  a  cuckold  ?

M.  DE  S.   (Threatening  him  again).     Ah  !

CLIT.  It  is  sufficient,  Sir.

M.  DE  S.  No.  I  will  have  him  finish  it,  and  that
everything  should  be  done  in  due  form :  That  I  am  your
servant.

DAN.  That  I  am  your  servant.

CLIT.  (To  George  Dandin).  Sir,  I  am  yours  with  all
my  heart ;  and  shall  think  no  more  of  what  has  happened.
(To  M.  de  Sotenville).  As  for  you,  Sir,  I  wish  you  good-
day,  and  am  sorry  that  you  have  had  some  annoyance.

M.  DE  S.  I  kiss  your  hand;  and,  whenever  you  like,
shall  give  you  some  sport  in  coursing.

CLIT.  You  do  me  too  much  honour.     (Exit  Clitandre.

M.  DE  S.  That  is  how  things  ought  to  be  managed,  son-
in-law.  Farewell.  Remember  that  you  have  entered  a
family  that  will  support  you,  and  not  suffer  you  to  be
affronted. '

248  GEORGE   DANDIN;   OR,  [ACT  ii.

SCENE  IX. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.

Ah  !  that  I  ...  You  would  have  it  so,  you  would  have
it  so ;  George  Dandin,  you  would  have  it  so ;  this  suits
you  very  nicely,  and  you  are  served  right ;  you  have  pre-
cisely what  you  deserve.  Come,  everything  depends  only
on  undeceiving  the  father  and  mother ;  and  perhaps  I
may  find  some  means  of  succeeding.

ACT  II.
SCENE  I. — CLAUDINE,  LUBIN.

CLAU.  Yes,  I  guessed  well  enough  that  it  must  have
come  from  you,  and  that  you  told  it  to  some  one,  who
related  it  to  master.

LUB.  Upon  my  word,  I  mentioned  only  a  word  of  it,
as  I  was  passing  by,  to  a  man,  that  he  might  not  say  that
he  had  seen  me  come  out.  People  must  be  great  chatter-
boxes in  these  parts !

CLAU.  Really,  the  Viscount  has  well  chosen  his  man  in
taking  you  for  his  messenger;  and  he  has  employed  a
fellow  who  is  very  lucky.

LUB.  Never  mind,  I  shall  be  more  artful  the  next  time,
and  take  greater  care.

CLAU.  Yes,  yes,  it  will  be  high  time  !

LUB.   Let  us  speak  no  more  of  this.     Listen.

CLAU.  What  am  I  to  listen  to  ?

LUB.  Turn  your  face  a  little  towards  me.

CLAU.  Well !    what  is  it  ?

LUB.   Claudine  ?

CLAU.  Well?

LUB.  Lack-a-day  !    Do  you  not  know  what  I  mean  ?

CLAU.    No.

LUB.  I'  faiks  !    I  love  you.

CLAU.   Really?

LUB.  Yes,  the  devil  take  me !  you  may  believe  me,  as
I  have  sworn  it.

CLAU.  So  much  the  better.

SCBNI  i.J  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  249

LUB.  I  feel  my  heart  going  pit-a-pat1*  when  I  look
at  you.

CLAU.  I  am  very  glad  of  it.

LUB.  What  do  you  do  to  be  so  pretty  ?

CLAU.  I  do  like  others.

LUB.  Look  ye  here,  a  nod  is  as  good  as  a  wink  to  a
blind  horse;1*  if  you  like,  you  shall  be  my  wife,  I  shall  be
your  husband,  and  we  shall  be  man  and  wife  together.

CLAU.  Perhaps  you  will  be  jealous  like  master.

LUB.  Not  at  all.

CLAU.  As  for  me,  I  hate  your  suspicious  husbands,  and
I  want  one  who  is  frightened  at  nothing ;  one  so  full  of
confidence  and  so  sure  of  my  chastity,  that  he  could  see
me  in  the  midst  of  thirty  men  without  being  uneasy.

LUB.  Very  well ;  I  shall  be  all  that.

CLAU.  It  is  the  silliest  thing  in  the  world  to  mistrust  a
wife  and  to  torment  her.  The  truth  of  the  matter  is  that
one  gains  nothing  "by  it :  it  only  makes  us  think  of  harm ;
and  most  frequently  husbands  make  themselves  what  they
are  by  their  hubbub.

LUB.  Well !  I  shall  leave  you  free  to  do  whatever  you
like.

CLAU.  That  is  what  you  should  do  in  order  not  to  be
deceived.  When  a  husband  relies  on  our  discretion,  we
take  no  more  liberty  than  what  is  right.  It  is  just  with
them  as  with  those  who  open  their  purses  to  us,  saying :
take.  We  use  them  discreetly,  and  content  ourselves  with
what  is  right ;  but  those  who  cavil  with  us,  we  try  to  fleece
them,  and  do  not  spare  them.

LUB.  Be  easy,  I  shall  be  like  those  who  open  their
purse ;  and  you  have  only  to  marry  me.

CLAU.  Very  well !    we  shall  see.

LUB.  Come  here,  Claudine.

CLAU.  What  do  you  want  ?

LUB.  Come  here,  I  tell  you.

CLAU.  Softly.     I  do  not  like  fumblers.

14  The  original  hasj'e  me  sens  tout  tribouiller  le  cantr.     Tribouiller,  to
disturb,  to  stir,  is  a  very  old  French  verb.

15  The   original  has   il  ne  faut  point  tant  de  beurre  pour  faire  un
quarteron :    not  so    much   butter   is   needed   to   make  a  quarter  of  a
pound.

250  GEORGE   DANDIN;   OR,  [ACTII.

LUB.  Just  a  little  bit  of  coddling.

CLAU.  Let  me  alone,  I  tell  you ;  I  do  not  understand
these  jokes.

LUB.  Claudine.

CLAU.  (Repulsing  Lubiri).     Have  done  !

LUB.  Ah !  haw  cross  you  are  with  folks  !  Fie,  how  dis-
agreeable to  refuse  people !  Are  you  not  ashamed  to  be
so  pretty,  and  not  wishing  to  be  caressed  ?  He  !  there  !

CLAU.  I  shall  slap  your  face.

LUB.  Oh !  how  fierce !  how  savage  she  is  !  Fie,  out  upon
you,  you  cruel  minx  !

CLAU.  You  are  too  fast.

LUB.  What  harm  would  it  do  to  let  me  have  my  way  a
little?

CLAU.  You  must  have  patience.

LUB.  Only  a  little  kiss  on  account.

CLAU.  I  am  your  humble  servant.

LUB.  Come,  Claudine,  you  can  deduct  it  afterwards.16

CLAU.  Not  if  I  know  it !  I  have  been  taken  in  before.
Good-bye.  Go,  and  tell  the  Viscount  that  I  shall  take
care  to  deliver  his  note.

LUB.  Good-bye,  you  cruel  fair.

CLAU.  That  is  affectionate.

LUB.  Good-bye,  you  rock,  you  flint,  you  stone-block,
you  everything  that  is  hard  in  the  world.

CLAU.  (Alone).  I  must  deliver  this  to  my  mistress.  .  .
But  here  she  comes  with  her  husband  :  let  us  get  out  of
the  way,  and  wait  until  she  is  alone.

SCENE  II. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  ANGELIQUE.

DAN.  No,  no ;  I  am  not  so  easily  deceived,  and  I  am
but  too  certain  that  what  I  have  been  told  is  true.  I  have
better  eyes  than  people  fancy  ;  and  your  talk  just  now  has
not  dazzled  me.

SCENE  III.— CLITANDRE,  ANGELIQUE,  GEORGE  DANDIN.

CLIT.  (Aside,  at  the  far  end  of  the  stage).  Ah  !  here  she
is ;  but  her  husband  is  with  her.

M  The  original  has  sur  V et-tant-moins,  an  old  law-term.

SCENE  iv.]  THE   ABASHED   HUSBAND.  251

DAN.  (  Without  seeing  Clitandre}.  Underneath  all  your
grimaces,  I  have  perceived  the  truth  of  what  I  have  been
told  and  the  little  respect  which  you  have  for  the  tie  that
binds  us.  (Clitandre  and  Angelique  bow  to  each  other}.
Good  Heavens!  leave  your  bowing  and  scraping;  it  is  not
that  kind  of  respect  of  which  I  am  talking,  and  you  need
not  play  the  fool  with  me.

ANG.  I  !  play  the  fool !     Not  at  all.

DAN.  I  know  your  thoughts,  and  understand  .  .  .
{Clitandre  and  Angelique  bow  again).  Again!  Come,
let  us  cease  joking.  I  am  well  aware  that  you  think  me
much  beneath  you,  on  account  of  your  birth,  and  the
respect  of  which  I  speak  does  not  concern  myself;  I  mean
that  which  you  owe  to  such  sacred  ties  as  those  of  wedlock.
(Angelique  makes  a  sign  to  Clitandre}.  You  need  not  shrug
your  shoulders.  I  am  not  talking  nonsense.

ANG.  Who  dreams  of  shrugging  her  shoulders  ?

DAN.  Good  Heavens  !  I  am  not  blind.  I  tell  you  once
more  that  marriage  is  a  bond  to  which  we  owe  every  re-
spect ;  and  that  it  ill  becomes  you  to  behave  as  you  do.  (An-
gelique nods  to  Clitandre).  Yes,  yes,  it  is  very  bad  of  you ,
and  you  need  not  nod  your  head,  and  make  faces  at  me.

ANG.  I  ?    I  do  not  know  what  you  mean.

DAN.  I  know  it  well  enough  ;  and  I  know  your  con-
tempt for  me  too.  If  I  was  not  born  a  nobleman,  I  be-
long at  least  to  a  race  on  which  there  is  no  stain :  and  the
family  of  the  Dandins  .  .  .

CLIT.  {Behind  Angelique,  without  being  seen  by  George
Dandin).  One  moment's  conversation  !

DAN.   (  Without  seeing  Clitandre~}.   He  ?

ANG.  What !     I  did  not  say  a  word.

(  George  Dandin  turns  round  his  wife,  and  Clitandre
retires,  making  him  a  profound  bow.

SCENE  IV. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  ANGELIQUE.

DAN.  There  he  is,  prowling  about  you.

ANG.  Well  !  is  it  my  fault  ?  What  do  you  wish  me
to  do?

DAN.  I  wish  you  to  do  what  a  wife  who  only  wishes  to
please  her  husband  should  do.  Whatever  people  may  say,
gallants  never  trouble  a  woman  unless  she  wishes  it.  There

252  GEORGE    DANDIN;   OR,  OCTH.

are  certain  sweet  looks  which  attract  them,  as  honey  does
flies ;  and  virtuous  women  have  a  manner  that  drives  them
away  immediately.

ANG.  I  drive  them  away  !  and  for  what  reason  ?  I  am
not  scandalized  at  being  thought  handsome,  and  it  affords
me  pleasure.

DAN.  Just  so  !  But  what  part  would  you  have  the
husband  act  during  this  gallant  performance?

ANG.  The  part  of  a  sensible  man,  who  is  glad  to  see  his
wife  admired.

DAN.  Much  obliged.  That  does  not  suit  me ;  and  the
Dandins  are  not  accustomed  to  that  fashion.

ANG.  Then  the  Dandins  will  be  good  enough  to  accus-
tom themselves  to  it ;  for,  as  to  me,  I  declare  that  I  do
not  intend  to  renounce  the  world,  and  to  bury  myself
alive  with  a  husband.  What !  because  a  man  thinks  fit  to
marry  us,  everything  must  be  at  an  end  immediately,  and
we  must  break  off  all  intercourse  with  every  living  being !
This  tyranny  of  husbands  is  a  marvellous  thing ;  and  I
think  it  very  kind  of  them  to  wish  that  we  should  be  dead
to  all  amusements;  and  that  we  should  live  for  them  only!
I  laugh  at  that,  and  do  not  wish  to  die  so  young.

DAN.  Is  it  thus  that  you  keep  the  vows  of  fidelity  which
you  made  to  me  before  the  world  ?

ANG.  I?  I  did  not  make  them  willingly,  and  you
forced  them  from  me.  Did  you,  before  marriage,  ask  me
my  consent,  and  whether  I  cared  for  you  ?  You  consulted
only  my  father  and  mother.  In  reality,  they  have  mar-
ried you,  and  therefore  you  will  do  well  always  to  com-
plain to  them  about  the  wrongs  which  you  may  suffer.  As
for  me,  who  did  not  tell  you  to  marry  me,  and  whom  you
took  without  consulting  my  feelings,  I  do  not  pretend  to
be  obliged  to  submit,  like  a  slave,  to  your  will ;  and,  by
your  leave,  I  mean  to  enjoy  the  few  happy  days  of  my
youth,  to  take  the  sweet  liberties  which  the  age  allows  me,
to  see  the  fashionable  world  a  little,  and  to  taste  the
pleasure  of  having  pretty  things  said  to  me.  Prepare
yourself  for  this,  for  your  punishment ;  and  thank  Heaven
that  I  am  not  capable  of  something  worse."

17  One  of  the  commentators  of  MoliSre,  Petitot,  has  justly  observed  that
the  great  difficulty  in  George  Dandin  was  the  part  of  Angelique.     If  she

SCENE  vi.J  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  253

DAN.  Indeed  !  that  is  how  you  take  it  ?  I  am  your
husband,  and  tell  you  that  I  do  not  understand  this.

ANG.  I,  I  am  your  wife,  and  tell  you  that  I  understand
it  perfectly  well.

DAN.  (Aside).  I  have  a  great  mind  to  beat  her  face  to
a  jelly>  and  to  bring  it  to  a  condition  never  more  to  charm
those  gallant  sparks.  Ah !  come,  George  Dandin  ;  you
can  hardly  restrain  yourself,  and  you  had  better  leave  the
place.

SCENE  V. — ANGELIQUE,    CLAUDINE.

CLAU.  I  have  been  on  the  tenterhooks  for  him  to  go,
Madam,  to  give  you  this  note  from  you  know  who.

ANG.  Let  us  see.  (She  reads  softly.

CLAU.  (Aside).  To  judge  by  appearances,  what  he  tells
her  seems  not  at  all  displeasing.

ANG.  Ah !  Claudine,  how  prettily  this  note  is  worded  !
How  agreeable  these  courtiers  are  in  all  their  words  and
in  all  their  actions  !  And  what,  after  all,  are  our  country
people  compared  with  them  ?

CLAU.  I  think  that,  after  having  seen  them,  the  Dan-
dins  hardly  please  you.

ANG.  Remain  here :   I  am  going  to  answer  it.

CLAU.  (Alone).  I  have  no  need,  I  think,  to  recom-
mend her  to  make  it  agreeable.  But  here  he  comes  .  .  .

SCENE  VI. — CLITANDRE,  LUBIN,    CLAUDINE.

CLAU.  Really,  Sir,  you  have  chosen  a  clever  messenger.

CLIT.  I  dared  not  send  one  of  my  own  servants ;  but  I
must  reward  you,  my  pretty  Claudine,  for  the  good  ser-
vices which  you  have  rendered  me.  (He  feels  in  his  pocket.

had  been  painted  as  a  victim,  she  might  easily  have  become  too  interest-
ing ;  but,  although  she  states  that  she  was  married  without  having  her
feelings  consulted,  she  does  not  pretend  to  be  sacrificed,  but  simply  says
that  she  means  to  enjoy  herself.  Later  on,  we  may  laugh  at  the  follies
and  at  the  humiliations  of  George  Dandin ;  but  we  can  never  approve  of
the  tricks  which  his  wife  plays.  She  does  not  show  any  delicacy,  and
takes  advantage  of  the  credulity  of  her  parents,  and  the  weakness  of  her
husband,  whom  she  wishes  above  all  to  make  her  very  humble  servant.
Molifcre's  genius  was  the  first  to  represent  upon  the  stage  a  woman
deceiving  her  husband,  and  yet  not  enlisting  the  sympathies  of  the
audience.

254  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;   OR,  [ACT  n.

CLAU.  Eh  !  Sir,  there  is  no  occasion  for  it.  No,  no,
Sir,  you  need  not  give  yourself  that  trouble  ;  I  serve  you
because  you  merit  it,  and  because  I  like  you  at  heart.

CLIT.   (Giving  her  some  money).     I  am  obliged  to  you.

LUB.  (To  Claudine).  As  we  are  going  to  be  married,
give  it  to  me,  that  I  may  put  it  with  mine.

CLAU.  I  will  keep  it  for  you,  as  well  as  the  kiss.

CLIT.  (To  Claudine).  Tell  me,  have  you  given  my  note
to  your  charming  mistress?

CLAU.  Yes.     She  has  just  gone  to  answer  it.

CLIT.  But,  Claudine,  is  there  no  way  to  speak  to  her?

CLAU.  Yes  :  come  along  with  me  ;  I  shall  let  you  speak
to  her.

CLIT.  But  will  she  not  be  displeased  ?  and  is  there  no
risk?

CLAU.  No,  no.  Her  husband  is  not  at  home ;  and,  be-
sides, he  is  not  most  to  be  considered ;  it  is  her  father  and
mother  ;  and  as  long  as  they  are  prepossessed  in  favour  of
their  daughter,  there  is  nothing  to  fear  from  the  rest.

CLIT.  I  trust  myself  to  your  guidance  !

LUB.  (Alone).  Odd  boddikins,  what  a  clever  wife  I
shall  have  !  She  has  wit  enough  for  four.

SCENE  VII. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  LUBIN.

DAN.  (Softly,  aside).  There  is  my  man  I  saw  just  now.
Would  to  Heaven  he  could  be  brought  to  bear  witness  to
the  father  and  mother  of  what  they  will  not  believe  !

LUB.  Ah,  there  you  are,  Mr.  Tittle-tattle,  whom  I
recommended  so  much  not  to  talk,  and  who  promised  so
much  that  he  would  not !  You  are  a  chatterbox,  then,
and  you  go  and  tell  again  what  other  people  say  to  you  in
secret  ?

DAN.  I?

LUB.  Yes.  You  have  repeated  everything  to  the  hus-
band, and  you  are  the  cause  of  his  having  made  a  row.  I
am  glad  to  know  what  a  tongue  you  have  got ;  and  it  will
teach  me  not  to  tell  you  anything  more.

DAN.  Listen,  friend.

LUB.  If  you  had  not  blabbed,  I  would  have  told  you
what  is  going  on  just  now ;  but,  for  your  punishment,  you
shall  know  nothing  at  all.

SCBNRVIII.]  THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  255

DAN.  How !     What  is  going  on  ?

LUB.  Nothing,  nothing.  See  what  you  get  by  chatter-
ing ;  you  will  not  get  another  taste,  so  you  can  smack
your  lips  at  it.

DAN.  Stop  a  little.

LUB.  Not  at  all.

DAN.  I  wish  to  say  only  a  word  to  you.

LUB.  Nay,  nay.     You  wish  to  pump  me.

DAN.  No,  it  is  not  that.

LUB.  I  am  not  such  a  fool  as  I  look.  I  see  what  you
are  driving  at.

DAN.  It  is  something  else.     Listen.

LUB.  Nothing  of  the  sort.  You  would  like  me  to  tell
you  that  the  Viscount  gave  some  money  just  now  to
Claudine,  and  ,that  she  has  taken  him  to  her  mistress.
But  I  am  not  so  silly.

DAN.  Pray  .    .    .

LUB.  No.

DAN.  I  will  give  you  .    .    .

LUB.  Fiddlesticks.

SCENE  VIII. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.

I  could  not,  with  this  idiot,  make  use  of  the  idea  which
I  had.  But  the  fresh  intelligence  that  has  escaped  him
shall  serve  the  same  purpose ;  and  if  the  gallant  is  indoors,
that  will  be  proof  enough  for  the  father  and  mother,  and
fully  convince  them  of  their  daughter's  shamelessness.
The  mischief  is,  that  I  do  not  know  how  to  make  the  best
of  this  piece  of  news.  If  I  go  indoors,  the  rascal  will
escape ;  and  however  clearly  I  may  see  my  own  dishon-
our, I  shall  not  be  believed  on  my  oath,  and  I  shall  be
told  that  I  am  dreaming.  If,  again,  I  fetch  my  father-in-
law  and  mother-in-law,  without  being  sure  of  finding  the
gallant  inside,  it  will  be  no  other  thing,  and  I  shall  be  in
the  same  plight  as  before.  Can  I  not  find  out  quietly  if
he  be  there  still  ?  (After  having  looked  through  the  key-
hole}. Oh,  Heavens !  there  is  no  longer  any  doubt.  I
have  just  seen  him  through  the  key-hole.  Fate  gives  me
an  opportunity  of  confounding  my  adversary ;  and,  to
complete  the  adventure,  it  sends  the  judges  whom  I
need  at  the  right  moment.

256  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;   OR,  FACT  H.

SCENE  IX. — M.  DE  SOTENVILLE,  MADAM  DE  SOTEN-
VILLE,  GEORGE  DANDIN.

DAN.  Just  now,  you  would  not  believe  me,  and  your
daughter  got  the  better  of  me  ;  but  at  present  I  have
proofs  at  hand  how  she  serves  me ;  and,  thank  Heaven,
my  dishonour  is  so  plain  now,  that  you  cannot  doubt  it
any  longer.

M.  DE  S.  How  now !  son-in-law,  you  are  still  harping
upon  this?

DAN.  Yes,  I  am ;  and  I  have  never  had  greater  cause
to  do  so.

MAD.  DE  S.  You  are  going  once  more  to  cram  your
nonsense  into  our  heads?

DAN.   Yes,  Madam,  and  they  do  worse  to  mine.

M.  DE  S.  Are  you  not  weary  of  making  yourself  such  a
nuisance  ?

DAN.  No ;  but  I  am  very  weary  of  being  made  a  dupe
of.

MAD.  DE  S.  Will  you  never  get  rid  of  your  preposterous
fancies  ?

DAN.  No,  Madam ;  but  I  would  like  to  get  rid  of  a  wife
who  dishonours  me.

MAD.  DE  S.  Good  Heavens!  son-in-law,  be  careful
how  you  speak.

M.  DE  S.  Zounds !  Try  to  find  some  less  offensive
terms.

DAN.  The  merchant  who  loses  cannot  laugh.

MAD.  DE  S.  Remember  that  you  have  married  a  lady
of  noble  birth.

DAN.  I  remember  it  well  enough,  and  shall  remember
it  only  too  much.

M.  DE  S.  If  you  do  remember  it,  endeavour  to  speak  of
her  more  respectfully.

DAN.  But  why  does  she  not  endeavour  to  treat  me  more
honestly?  What !  because  she  is  a  lady  of  noble  birth,  is
she  to  be  free  to  do  as  she  likes  to  me,  without  my  daring
to  say  a  word?

M.  DE  S.  What  is  the  matter  with  you,  and  what  can
you  say  ?  Did  you  not  see,  this  morning,  that  she  denied
all  knowledge  of  the  person  you  spoke  to  me  about?

SCENE  x.]  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  257

DAN.  Yes.  But  you,  what  would  you  say  if  I  show  you
at  this  moment  that  the  gallant  is  with  her  ?

MAD.  DE  S.  With  her?

DAN.  Yes,  with  her,  and  in  my  house.

M.  DE  S.  In  your  house  ?

DAN.  Yes,  in  my  own  house.

MAD.  DE  S.  If  such  be  the  case,  we  shall  take  your  part
against  her.

M.  DE  S.  Yes.  The  honour  of  our  family  is  dear  to  us
above  everything;  and  if  you  speak  the  truth,  we  shall
discard  her  as  our  child,  and  leave  her  to  your  resent-
ment.

DAN.  You  have  only  to  follow  me.

MAD  DE  S.  Take  care  not  to  be  mistaken.

M.  DE  S.  Do  not  do  as  you  did  before.

DAN.  Good  Heavens  !  you  shall  see.  {Pointing  to  Cli-
tandre,  who  comes  out  of  the  house  with  Angelique).  There,
have  I  told  a  lie  ?

SCENE  X.  —  ANGELJQUE,  CLITANDRE,  CLAUDINE,  M.  DE

SOTENVILLE,      MADAM    DE    SOTENVILLE,      With     GEORGE

DANDIN  at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage.

ANG.  (To  Clitandre}.  Good-bye.  I  am  afraid  that  you
should  be  caught  here,  and  I  have  to  keep  up  appear-
ances.

CLIT.  Promise  me>  then,  Madam,  to  let  me  speak  to
you  this  night.

ANG.  I  shall  try  my  best.

DAN.  (To  M.  and  Mad.  de  Sotenville).  Let  us  get  be-
hind softly,  and  try  not  to  be  seen.

CLAU.  (To  Angelique).  Ah!  Madam,  all  is  lost!
Here  are  your  father  and  mother,  and  your  husband  with,
them.

CLIT.  Ah,  Heavens !

ANG.  (Softly  to  Clitandre  and  Claudine*}.  Take  no  no-
tice, and  leave  it  to  me.  {Aloud  to  Clitandre).  What !
dare  you  to  behave  in  such  a  manner,  after  the  affair  of
just  now?  and  is  it  thus  that  you  disguise  your  sentiments?
I  am  told  that  you  are  in  love  with  me;  and  that  you  in-
tend to  declare  your  affection  for  me ;  I  show  my  annoy-
ance at  it,  and  explain  myself  clearly  to  you  before  every

258  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,  [ACT  „.

one  :  you  stoutly  deny  the  thing,  and  pledge  me  your
word  that  you  have  no  thought  of  offending  me ;  and  yet,
the  self-same  day,  you  have  the  impudence  to  come  and
call  upon  me,  to  tell  me  that  you  love  me,  to  say  a  hun-
dred silly  things  to  me  to  persuade  me  to  respond  to  your
follies :  just  as  if  I  were  a  woman  to  break  the  vows  which
I  have  pledged  to  my  husband,  and  ever  to  stray  from  that
virtue  which  my  parents  have  taught  me.  If  my  father
knew  of  this,  he  would  teach  you  indeed  to  attempt  such
things'!  But  an  honest  woman  does  not  like  to  make  a
stir :  I  do  not  care  to  tell  him  of  it ;  (Making  a  sign  to
Claudine  to  bring  a  stick)  and  I  shall  show  you  that,  wo-
man as  I  am,  I  have  courage  enough  to  revenge  myself  for
the  insults  offered  to  me.  You  have  not  acted  like  a  no-
bleman, and  therefore  I  shall  not  treat  you  as  one.  {An-
gelique  takes  the  stick,  and  lifts  it  against  Clitandre,  who
places  himself  in  such  a  position  that  the  blows  fall  upon
Dandin. )

CLIT.  (Crying  as  if  he  had  been  struck).  Ah  !  Ah  !  Ah !
Ah  !  gently.

SCENE  XI. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  ANGELIQUE,
GEORGE  DANDIN,  CLAUDINE.

CLAUD.  Strike  hard,  Madam !  lay  it  on  thickly.

ANG.  (Pretending  to  speak  to  Clitandre).  If  you  have
anything  more  on  your  mind,  I  am  ready  to  answer  you.  w

CLAU.  That  will  teach  you  whom  you  have  got  to  deal
with.

ANG.  (Pretending  to  be  surprised}.  Ah!  father,  you
here!

M.  DE  S.  Yes,  daughter,  and  I  am  glad  to  see  that  in
your  discretion  and  courage  you  show  yourself  a  worthy
offspring  of  the  house  of  Sotenville.  Come  here ;  let  me
embrace  you.

MAD.  DE  S.  Embrace  me  also,  daughter.  There !  I
weep  for  joy,  and  recognise  my  blood  in  what  you  have
just  now  done.

18  In  one  of  Moliere's  early  farces,  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille  (see
vol.  III.),  and  which  he  played  in  the  provinces,  the  Barbouill6,  followed
by  Villebrequin,  his  father-in-law,  wishes  to  surprise  his  wife  and  her
gallant  and  receives  the  blows  which  she  pretends  to  deal  to  the  latter.

SCENE  xm.]  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  259

M.  DE  S.  Son-in-law,  how  delighted  you  ought  to  be !
and  how  satisfied  you  should  be  with  this  incident !  You
had  just  cause  to  be  alarmed ;  but  your  suspicions  are
allayed  in  the  most  fortunate  manner.

MAD.  DE  S.  Without  doubt,  son-in-law;  and  you  ought
now  to  be  the  most  satisfied  of  husbands.

CLAU.  Assuredly.  This  is  what  I  call  a  woman  !  You
ought  to  be  only  too  happy,  and  kiss  the  ground  she
walks  on.

DAN.  {Aside).     Oh,  you  wretch  !

MAD.  DE  S.  What  is  the  matter,  son-in-law?  Why  do
you  not  thank  your  wife  a  little  for  the  affection  which
you  see  she  shows  for  you.

ANG.  No,  no,  father,  there  is  no  need  for  that.  There
is  no  necessity  to  thank  me  for  what  he  has  just  witnessed;
whatever  I  have  done  is  only  out  of  self-respect.

M.  DE  S.   Where  are  you  going,  daughter?

ANG.  I  am  going  away,  father,  not  to  be  obliged  to
receive  his  compliments.

CLAUD.  (To  George  Dandiri).  She  is  right  to  be  angry.
She  is  a  woman  who  deserves  to  be  worshipped ;  and  you
do  not  treat  her  as  you  ought.

DAN.  {Aside).     Wicked  wretch  !

SCENE  XII. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  GEORGE
DANDIN.

M.  DE  S.  She  is  rather  angry  at  what  happened  just
now,  and  it  will  pass  away  if  you  caress  her  a  little.
Farewell,  son-in-law;  you  see  you  have  no  occasion  to
be  any  longer  uneasy.  Go  and  make  it  up  together,  and
try  to  appease  her  by  apologizing  for  your  anger.

MAD.  DE  S.  You  ought  to  consider  that  she  is  a  girl
strictly  brought  up,  and  who  is  not  accustomed  to  see
herself  suspected  of  any  bad  action.  Farewell.  I  am
delighted  to  see  your  quarrels  ended,  and  the  great  joy
which  her  conduct  must  afford  you.

SCENE  XIII. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.
I   do   not   say  a  word,  for  I  should  gain  nothing  by
speaking  ;  and  never  was  anything  known  like    my  dis-
grace.    Yes,  I  wonder  at  my  misfortune,  and  the  subtle

260  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;   OR,  [ACT  HI.

skill  of  my  jade  of  a  wife  to  be  always  in  the  right,  and
put  me  in  the  wrong.  Is  it  possible  that  I  shall  always
be  outdone  by  her ;  that  appearances  will  always  go
against  me,  and  that  I  shall  never  have  a  chance  of  pro-
ving the  guilt  of  my  shameless  wife  !  O  Heaven  !  assist
me  in  my  plans,  and  vouchsafe  me  the  favour  of  letting
the  world  see  that  I  am  dishonoured !

ACT  III.

SCENE  I. — CLITANDRE,  LUBIN.

CLIT.  The  night  is  pretty  far  advanced,  and  I  am
afraid  that  it  is  too  late.  I  cannot  see  where  I  am  going
Lubin  !

LUB.    Sir?

CLIT.   Is  this  the  way  ?

LUB.  I  think  it  is.  Odds-bobs  !  This  is  a  silly  night,
to  be  so  dark  as  this.

CLIT.  It  is  certainly  not  right;  but  if,  on  the  one  hand,
it  prevents  us  from  seeing,  on  the  other,  it  prevents  our
being  seen.

LUB.  You  are  right,  it  is  not  so  far  wrong  after  all.  It
should  like  to  know,  sir,  you  who  are  so  learned,  why  it  is
not  day  at  night  ?

CLI.  That  is  a  great  question,  and  one  which  is  difficult
to  answer.  You  are  inquisitive,  Lubin.

LUB.  Yes  :  if  I  had  studied,  I  should  have  thought
about  things  of  which  no  one  ever  thinks  now.

CLI.  Yes,  I  believe  that.  You  appear  to  have  a  subtle
and  penetrating  mind.

LUB.  That  is  true.  Look  here,  I  explain  Latin  although
I  never  learned  it ;  and  the  other  day,  when  I  saw  col-
legium written  upon  a  large  door,  I  guessed  that  it  meant
college.

CLI.  Marvellous  !     You  can  read  then,  Lubin  ?

LUB.  Yes.  I  can  read  print ;  but  I  never  could  learn  to
read  writing.

CLI.  We  are  near  the  house.  (After  clapping  his  hands}
This  is  the  signal  that  Claudine  has  given  me.

SCENE  ii.]  THE  ABASHED   HUSBAND.

LUB.   Upon  my  word  !  she  is  worth  her  weight  in  gold  ;
and  I  love  her  with  all  my  heart.

CLI.  That  is  why  I  took  you  with  me  to  entertain  her.

LUB.  Sir,  I  am  .    .    .

CLI.  Hush !     I  hear  a  noise.

SCENE  II. — ANGELIQUE,   CLAUDINE,  CLITANDRE,   LUBIN.

ANG.  Claudine?

CLAU.  Well?

ANG.  Leave  the  door  ajar.

CLAU.  I  have  done  so.  (They  are  groping  about  for
each  other  in  the  dark.

CLI.  (To  Lubin).  It  is  they.     Hush.

ANG.  Hush.

LUB.  Hush.

CLAU.  Hush.

CLI.  (  To  Claudine,  whom  he  mistakes  for  Angelique}.
Madam !

ANG.  (  To  Lubin,  whom  she  mistakes  for  Clitandre).
What?

LUB.  (To  Angelique,  whom  he  mistakes  for  Claudine).
ClaudineJ

CLAU.  (To  Clitandre,  whom  she  mistakes  for  Lubin).
What  is  it  ?

CLI.  (  To  Claudine,  thinking  he  is  speaking  to  Angelique).
Ah,  Madam,  how  happy  you  make  me !

LUB.  (  To  Angelique,  thinking  he  is  speaking  to  Claudine).
Claudine !  my  poor  Claudine '

CLAU.  (To  Clitandre}.  Gently,  Sir.

ANG.  (To  Lubin).  Softly,  Lubin.

CLI.  Is  it  you,  Claudine?

CLAU.  Yes.

LUB.  Is  it  you,  Madam?

ANG.  Yes.

CLAU.  (To  Clitandre).  You  have  taken  the  one  for
the  other.

LUB.  (To  Angelique}.  Upon  my  word!  at  night  one
cannot  see  a  bit.

ANG.  Is  it  not  you,  Clitandre?

CLI.  Yes,  Madam.

262  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,  [ACT  in.

ANG.  My  husband  is  snoring  nicely,  and  I  have  taken
the  opportunity  for  our  conversing  together.

CLI.  Let  us  look  for  a  seat  somewhere.

CLAU.  That  is  a  good  idea.  (Angelique,  Claudine  and
Clitandre  sit  down  at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage,  upon  a
piece  of  turf  at  the  foot  of  a  tree.

LUB.  (Seeking  for  Claudine}.  Claudine !  whereabouts  are
you?

SCENE  III. — ANGELIQUE,   CLITANDRE,   CLAUDINE,  seated

at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage,  GEORGE  DANDIN,  partly
dressed,  LUBIN.

DAN.  (Aside).  I  heard  my  wife  go  downstairs,  and  I  have
quickly  dressed  myself  to  go  down  after  her.  Where  can
she  have  gone  to?  Has  she  left  the  house?

LUB.  {Seeking  for  Claudine  and  catching  hold  of  Dandin
for  her).  But  where  are  you,  Claudine  ?  Ah  !  here  you
are.  Upon  my  word,  your  master  is  nicely  caught,  and  I
think  it  as  funny  as  the  cudgel-blows  just  now,  of  which
I  was  told.  Your  mistress  says  he  was*  snoring  at  this
moment,  like  a  pig;  and  he  does  not  know  that  the  Vis-
count and  she  are  together,  while  he  sleeps.  I  should  like
to  know  what  sort  of  a  dream  he  is  having  now.  It  is
quite  laughable.  Why  does  he  get  it  into  his  head  to  be
jealous  of  his  wife,  and  to  wish  to  keep  her  all  to  himself?
It  is  like  his  impudence,  and  the  Viscount  does  him  too
much  honour.19  You  are  not  saying  a  word,  Claudine?
Come,  let  us  follow  them ;  and  -give  me  your  little  hand
that  I  may  kiss  it.  Ah  !  how  sweet  it  is !  it  is  like  eating
jam.  (To  George  Dandin,  whom  he  still  takes  for  Claudine,
and  who  rudely  repulses  him).  The  deuce  !  how  you  go  it,
your  little  hand  is  mighty  hard.

DAN.  Who  is  there?

LUB.  No  one.

DAN.  He  runs  away,  and  leaves  me  convinced  of  a  fresh
deception  of  my  wretch.  Come,  I  must  send  for  her
mother  and  father  without  delay,  so  that  this  adventure
may  get  me  separated  from  her.  Hullo  !  Colin  !  Colin  !

19  This  is  the  third  time  that  Lubin  has  made  a  confidant  of  George
Dandin,  but  darkness  is  the  cause  of  it ;  twice  before  it  was  through
Lubin's  simplicity.

aCBNBiv.]  THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  263

SCENE  IV. — ANGELIQUE,  CLITANDRE,  CLAUDINE,  LUBIN,
still  seated  at  the  farther  end  of  the  stage,  GEORGE
DANDIN,  COLIN.

COL.   (At  the  window}.  Sir  !

DAN.   Quick,  come  down.

COL.  (Leaping  out  of  the  window).  Here  I  am,  I  could
not  come  more  quickly.

DAN.  Are  you  there  ?

COL.  Ay,  Sir !

(  Whilst  Dandin  looks  for  Colin  on  the  side  where  he
has  heard  his  voice,  Colin  crosses  to  the  other  and
falls  asleep,

DAN.  {Turning  to  the  side  where  he  believes  Colin  to  be}.
Softly.  Speak  low.  Listen.  Run  to  my  father-in-law
and  mother-in-law,  and  say  that  I  beseech  them  very
urgently  to  come  down  here  immediately.  Do  you  hear?
Come,  Colin  !  Colin  1

COL.  {On  the  other  side,  waking  up).  Sir?

DAN.  Where  the  devil  are  you?

COL.  Here.

DAN.  Plague  take  the  booby,  who  is  moving  away  from
me  !  (  Wfiile  Dandin  returns  to  the  side  where  he  thinks
that  Colin  has  remained,  Colin,  half  asleep,  crosses  over  to
the  other,  and  falls  asleep  again).  I  say  that  you  are  to  go
directly  to  my  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law,  and  tell
them  that  I  implore  them  to  come  here  immediately.
Do  you  understand  me?  Answer.  Colin  !  Colin  !

COL.   (On  the  other  side,  waking  up~).    Sir  !

DAN.  The  scoundrel  will  drive  me  mad.  Come  here,
I  say!  (They  run  against  each  other  and  fall  down).
Ah!  the  wretch  !  he  has  maimed  me.  Where  are  you?
Come  here  that  I  may  thrash  the  life  out  of  you.  I
believe  he  is  running  away  from  me.

COL.   Of  course  I  am.

DAN.  Will  you  come  here?

COL.  Not  likely.

DAN.  Come  here,  I  tell  you.

COL.  Not  a  bit.     You  wish  to  thrash  me.

DAN.  Well !  I  will  not  thrash  you.

COL.   For  certain  ?

264  GEORGE   DANDIN;   OR,  [ACT  in.

DAN.  Yes.  Come  close.  ( To  Colin,  whom  he  holds  by
the  arm).  Good  !  It  is  lucky  that  I  need  you.  Go
quickly  and  ask  my  father-in-law  and  mother-in-law,  in
my  name,  to  come  down  here  as  soon  as  possible,  and  tell
them  that  it  is  on  a  matter  of  the  utmost  consequence ;
and,  should  they  hesitate  on  account  of  the  time,  do  not
fail  to  insist  upon  it,  and  to  give  them  to  understand  that
it  is  most  important  they  should  come,  no  matter  how
they  are  dressed.  You  understand  me  thoroughly  now  ?

COL.  Yes,  Sir.

DAN.  Get  along  then  and  come  back  quickly.  (  Thinking
himself  alone).  And  I,  I  will  go  indoors,  to  wait  till  .  .  .
But  I  hear  some  one.  Can  it  be  my  wife  ?  I  must  listen,
and  take  advantage  of  this  darkness.

(He  places  himself  at  his  door.

SCENE  V. — ANGELIQUE,  CLITANDRE,  CLAUDTNE,  LUBIN,
GEORGE  DANDIN

ANG.  (To  Clitandre).  Good-bye.  It  is  time  to  separate
now.

CLI.  What!  already?

ANG.  We  have  conversed  enough.

CLI.  Ah  !  Madam,  can  I  have  enough  of  your  conversa-
tion, and  find  in  so  short  a  time  all  the  words  I  need.  It
would  take  whole  days  to  explain  to  you  clearly  all  that  I
feel ;  and  I  have  not  told  you  yet  the  smallest  part  of  what
I  have  to  say  to  you.

ANG.  We  shall  hear  some  more  at  another  time.

CLI.  Alas  !  how  you  pierce  my  heart  when  you  talk  of
'withdrawing ;  and  with  what  amount  of  grief  you  leave  me
now!

ANG.  We  shall  find  means  of  seeing  each  other  again.

CLI.  Yes.  But  I  cannot  help  remembering  that,  when
you  leave  me,  you  go  back  to  a  husband.  This  thought
kills  me ;  and  a  husband's  privileges  are  cruel  things  to  a
fond  lover.

ANG.  Are  you  weak  enough  to  have  such  anxiety,  and
do  you  think  it  possible  to  love  a  certain  sort  of  husbands?
We  marry  them,  because  we  cannot  help  ourselves,  and
because  we  depend  upon  our  parents,  who  look  only  to

SCENE  viii.]  THE   ABASHED    HUSBAND.  265

riches  ;  but  we  know  how  to  be  even  with  them,  and  we
take  good  care  not  to  value  them  above  their  deserts.

DAN.  (Aside).     These  are  our  strumpets  of  wives  !

CLI.  Alas  !  it  must  be  admitted  that  the  one  they  have
given  you  little  deserved  the  honour  which  he  received,
and  that  the  union  of  a  woman  like  you  with  a  man  like
him  is  somewhat  strange.

DAN.  (Aside).  Poor  husbands  !  that  is  how  they  treat
you.

CLI.  You  deserve,  no  doubt,  a  quite  different  lot;
Heaven  did  not  create  you  to  be  a  peasant's  wife.

DAN.  Would  to  Heaven  she  were  yours !  you  would  tell
a  different  tale  !  Let  us  go  in  ;  it  is  enough.

{He  goes  in  and  locks  the  door  inside.

SCENE  VI. — ANGELIQUE,    CLITANDRE,    CLAUDINE,  LUBIN.

CLAU.  Madam,  if  you  have  any  harm  to  say  of  your  hus-
band, you  had  better  make  haste,  for  it  is  getting  late.

CLI.  Ah  !    Claudine,  how  cruel  you  are  !

ANG.   (To  Clitandre).     She  is  right.    We  must  separate.

CLI.  Since  you  wish  it,  I  must  submit  to  it.  But  I  pray
you  to  pity  me,  at  least,  for  the  wretched  moments  that
I  am  to  pass.

ANG.  Farewell.

LUB.  Where  are  you,  Claudine,  that  I  may  bid  you
good-night  ?

CLAU.  Do  not  trouble.  I  accept  it  at  a  distance,  and
send  you  back  the  same.

SCENE  VII. — ANGELIQUE,  CLAUDINE.

ANG.  Let  us  go  in  without  making  a  noise.

CLAU.  The  door  is  shut.

ANG.  I  have  the  master-key.

CLAU.  Then  open  it  softly.

ANG.  It  is  bolted  inside,  and  I  do  not  know  what  we
shall  do.

CLAU.  Call  the  boy  who  sleeps  there.

ANG.  Colin  !  Colin  !  Colin  !
SCENE  VIII. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  ANGELIQUE,  CLAUDINE.

DAN.  (At  the  window).  Colin!  Colin!  Ah  I  I  have
caught  you  at  it  this  time,  Mistress  Dandin;  and  you

266  GEORGE   DANDIN;    OR,  [xcrm.

make  little  escapades20  while  I  am  asleep.     I  am  very  glad
of  it,  and  to  see  you  abroad  at  this  hour.

ANG.  Well !  what  great  harm  is  there  in  taking  the
fresh  air  at  night?

DAN.  Yes,  yes.  This  is  the  right  time  to  take  the  fresh
air  !  It  is  rather  the  warm  air,  Mistress  Jade ;  and  we
know  all  about  the  appointment  between  you  and  your
spark.  We  heard  the  whole  of  your  gallant  conversation,
and  the  beautiful  verses  in  my  praise  which  you  sang  to
each  other.  But  my  consolation  is  that  I  am  going  to  be
avenged,  and  that  your  father  and  mother  will  be  convinced
now  of  the  justice  of  my  complaints,  and  of  your  dis-
orderly conduct.  I  have  sent  for  them,  and  they  will  be
>iere  in  a  moment.

ANG.  (Aside).    Oh  Heavens !

CLAU.  Madam!

DAN.  That  is  a  blow,  doubtless,  which  you  did  not
expect.  It  is  now  my  turn  to  win,  and  I  have  the  where-
withal to  put  down  your  pride,  and  spoil  your  stratagems.
Up  till  now,  you  have  laughed  at  my  accusations,  thrown
dust  in  your  parents'  eyes,  and  patched  up  your  misdeeds.
I  might  see  and  say  what  I  would,  your  cunning  always
got  the  better  of  my  righteous  cause,  and  you  have  always
found  some  way  to  appear  in  the  right ;  but  this  time,
thank  Heaven,  matters  will  be  cleared  up,  and  your  shame-
lessness  will  be  quite  confounded.

ANG.  Pray  let  me  in.

DAN.  No,  no  :  you  must  wait  the  arrival  of  those  I  have
sent  for ;  I  wish  them  to  find  you  out-of-doors  at  this  nice
time  of  night.  While  you  are  waiting  for  them,  you  had
better  contrive,  if  you  like,  some  new  scheme  to  get  out
of  this  scrape ;  to  invent  some  way  to  palliate  your  esca-
pade ;  to  find  some  pretty  trick  to  hoodwink  the  world
and  to  appear  innocent ;  some  specious  pretext  of  a  noc-
turnal pilgrimage,  or  of  some  female  friend  of  yours  in
labour,  whom  you  have  just  assisted.

ANG.  No.  I  have  no  intention  of  disguising  anything
from  you.  I  do  not  pretend  to  defend  myself,  nor  to
deny  things,  since  you  know  them.

20  The  original  has  escampativos,  a  burlesque  expression,  derived  from
the  old  French  verb  escamfer,  to  escape,  to  take  flight.

SCBNK  viii.]  THE   ABASHED     HUSBAND.  267

DAN.  That  is  because  you  find  no  loophole  left  to  you,
and  that  in  this  affair,  you  cannot  invent  an  excuse  of
which  it  would  not  be  easy  for  me  to  show  the  falshood.

ANG.  Yes,  I  confess  that  I  am  in  the  wrong,  and  that
you  have  reason  to  complain.  But  I  beg  of  you,  I  beseech
you,  not  now  to  expose  me  to  the  anger  of  my  parents,
and  let  me  in  quickly.

DAN.   I  would  see  you  far  enough  first.

ANG.  There  is  a  dear  good  husband  !  I  implore  you,
do!

DAN.  A  dear  good  husband,  am  I !  I  am  your  dear
good  husband  now,  because  you  are  caught.  I  am  very
glad  of  it ;  but  you  never  took  it  into  your  head  to  say
these  sweet  things  before.

ANG.  There ;  I  promise  never  again  to  give  you  any
cause  for  displeasure,  and  to  ...

DAN.  All  that  does  not  signify.  I  will  not  lose  this
opportunity ;  and  I  am  determined  that  the  world  shall
know  thoroughly  your  misconduct  this  time.

ANG.  For  mercy's  sake,  let  me  speak  to  you.  I  pray
you  for  a  moment's  hearing.

DAN.  Well !  what  is  it  ?

ANG.  It  is  true,  I  have  been  at  fault ;  I  admit  it  once
again,  and  that  your  resentment  is  just ;  that  I  have  taken
advantage  of  your  sleep  to  slip  out :  and  that  I  went  out
to  keep  an  appointment  with  the  person  whom  you  know.
But  after  all,  these  are  actions  which  you  ought  to  pardon
at  my  age ;  the  follies  of  a  young  woman  who  has  had  no
experience,  and  has  but  just  entered  the  world ;  liberties
to  which  one  gives  way,  without  thinking  of  any  harm,
and  which,  in  reality,  have  nothing  .  .  .

DAN.  Ay:  as  you  say,  these  are  things  in  which  one
ought  to  have  implicit  faith.

ANG.  I  do  not  wish  to  pretend  by  this,  that  I  am  with-
out blame  towards  you ;  and  I  only  entreat  of  you  to  forget
an  offence  for  which  I  heartily  beg  your  pardon,  and  to
spare  me,  for  this  once  only,  the  vexation  of  the  severe
reproaches  of  my  father  and  mother.  If  you  will  gene-
rously grant  me  the  favour  which  I  ask  from  you,  your
obliging  conduct,  your  kindness  towards  me,  will  win  me
over  entirely;  it  will  thoroughly  touch  my  heart,  and  pro-

268  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;    OR,  [ACT  in.

duce  there  for  you  what  neither  the  authority  of  my  parents
nor  the  bonds  of  marriage  have  been  able  to  instil  into  it.
In  short,  it  will  cause  me  to  renounce  all  gallantries,  and
to  be  attached  solely  to  you.  Yes,  I  pledge  my  word,  that
henceforth  I  will  be  the  best  wife  in  the  world  to  you,  and
that  I  will  show  you  so  much  affection,  yes,  so  much,  that
you  will  be  satisfied.

DAN.  Ah !  you  crocodile,  that  flatters  people  to  strangle
them  !  21

ANG.  Grant  me  this  favour.

DAN.  Not  a  jot.     I  am  inexorable.

ANG.  Show  yourself  generous.

DAN.  No.

ANG.  For  pity's  sake  !

DAN.  Not  at  all.

ANG.  I  implore  you  with  all  my  heart.

DAN.  No,  no,  no.  I  wish  them  to  be  undeceived  about
you,  and  that  your  disgrace  may  be  made  public.

ANG.  Very  well !  if  you  drive  me  to  despair,  I  warn
you  that  a  woman,  in  that  condition,  is  capable  of  every-
thing, and  that  I  shall  do  something  of  which  you  shall
repent.22

DAN.  And  what  will  you  do,  pray?

ANG.  I  shall  be  driven  to  the  most  desperate  resolution ;
and  with  this  knife  shall  I  kill  myself  on  the  spot.23

DAN.  Ha!    ha!    Well  and  good.

ANG.  Not  so  well  and  good  as  you  imagine.  People  are
acquainted,  on  all  hands,  with  our  quarrels  and  the  per-
petual ill-will  which  you  foster  against  me.  When  they
find  me  dead,  no  one  will  doubt  that  you  have  killed  me;
and,  certainly,  my  parents  are  not  the  people  to  leave  my
death  unpunished,  and  they  will  punish  you  to  the  utmost
extent  which  the  law  and  the  heat  of  their  resentment  will
allow.  That  is  the  way  in  which  I  shall  find  means  to  be
revenged  upon  you;  and  I  am  not  the  first  who  has  had

«  In  the  eleventh  scene  of  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille  (see  Vol.  III.),
one  of  Moliere's  earliest  farces,  which  he  played  in  the  provinces,  the
Barbouill<§  says  almost  the  same  thing  to  his  wife,  who  is  also  called
Angelique.

22  Angelique,  in  the  eleventh  scene  of  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille.
says  nearly  the  same  thing.

88  This  is  also  said  by  Angelique  in  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille.

SCENE  x.]  THE  ABASHED   HUSBAND  269

recourse  to  that  kind  of  vengeance;  and  who  has  not
scrupled  to  take  her  own  life,  in  order  to  destroy  those
who  had  the  cruelty  to  drive  her  to  this  last  extremity.

DAN.  I  am  not  to  be  caught  in  that  way.  People  no
longer  kill  themselves;  and  the  fashion  has  gone  out
long  since.

ANG.  You  may  rely  upon  my  doing  it ;  and  if  you  per-
sist in  your  refusal,  if  you  do  not  let  me  in,  I  swear  to  you
that  I  shall  immediately  show  you  how  far  the  resolution  of
a  desperate  woman  will  go.

DAN.  Nonsense,  nonsense.     You  wish  to  frighten  me.

ANG.  Very  well !  since  it  must  be,  this  will  content  us
both,  and  will  show  whether  I  am  jesting.  (After  having
pretended  to  kill  herself}.  Ah  !  it  is  done.  Heaven
grant  that  my  death  may  be  avenged  as  I  wish,  and
that  he  who  is  the  cause  of  it  may  receive  a  just  chastise-
ment for  his  cruelty  towards  me  !

DAN.  Good  gracious !  can  she  have  been  malicious
enough  to  kill  h«rself  to  get  me  hanged  ?  Let  us  take  a
bit  of  candle  to  go  and  see.2*

SCENE  IX. — ANG£LIQUE,  CLAUDINE.

ANG.  Hush  !  keep  still.  Let  us  place  ourselves  imme-
diately, one  on  each  side  of  the  door.

SCENE  X. — ANGELIQUE  and  CLAUDINE,  entering  the  house
as  soon  as  George  Dandin  comes  out,  and  immediately
bolting  the  door  inside ;  GEORGE  DANDIN,  with  a  can-
dle in  his  hand,  without  perceiving  them.

DAN.  Can  the  wickedness  of  a  woman  go  as  far  as  that  ?
(Alone,  after  looking  everywhere).  There  is  no  one  here.
Well !  I  thought  so  ;  and  the  hussy  is  gone  away,  finding
that  she  could  gain  nothing  from  me,  either  by  prayers  or
threats.  So  much  the  better  !  it  will  make  matters  still
worse  for  her ;  and  her  father  and  mother  will  see  her
crime  all  the  more  plainly  when  they  come.  (After  hav-

**Ang£lique'slast  remark  and  Dandin's  reply  are,  with  some  variations,
found  also  in  The  Jealousy  of  the  Barbouille.  (See  Vol.  III.).  In  the
old  fabliaux,  there  is  a  tale  similar  to  George  Dandin.  (See  Introductory
Notice) ;  but  the  woman,  in  order  to  frighten  her  husband,  throws  a  big
stone  into  a  well.

2  "JO  GEORGE   DANDIN;   OK,  [ACT  in

ing  been  at  his  door,  to  go  in].  Ah  !  ah  !  the  door  has
fallen  to.  Hullo  !  ho  !  some  one  !  open  the  door  for  me
quickly  !

SCENE  XL — ANGELIQUE  and  CLAUDINE,  at  the  window,
GEORGE  DANDIN.

ANG.  What !  is  it  you  ?  Where  have  you  been,  you
wretch  ?  Is  this  a  time  to  come  home,  when  it  is  nearly
daybreak  ?  and  is  this  the  life  which  an  honest  husband
ought  to  lead?

CLAU.  A  pretty  thing  to  go  about  drinking  all  night,
and  to  leave  a  poor  young  creature  of  a  wife  by  herself  at
home?

DAN.   What !  you  have  .    .    .

ANG.  Get  along,  you  wretch,  get  along ;  I  am  sick  of
your  goings-on,  and  I  will  complain  of  them,  without  de-
lay, to  my  father  and  mother.

DAN.  What !     You  dare  to  ...

SCENE  XII. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  in  their
night-gowns,  COLIN,  carrying  a  lantern,  ANGELIQUE
and  CLAUDINE,  at  the  window,  GEORGE  DANDIN.

ANG.  {To  M.  and  Madam  de  Sotenville).  Pray  come
here  to  protect  me  against  the  most  consummate  insolence
of  a  husband,  whose  brain  has  been  so  muddled  by  wine
and  jealousy  that  he  no  longer  knows  what  he  is  saying  or
doing,  and  has  himself  sent  for  you  to  make  you  wit-
nesses of  the  most  extravagant  behaviour  you  ever  heard
of.  This  is  how  he  comes  back,  as  you  may  see,  after
making  me  wait  all  night  for  him  ;  and  were  you  to  lis-
ten to  him,  he  will  tell  you  that  he  has  the  greatest  com-
plaints to  make  against  me ;  that  while  he  was  asleep,  I
left  his  side  to  go  gadding  about,  and  a  hundred  other
stories  of  the  same  nature,  which  he  has  taken  into  his
head.

DAN.  (Aside).    There  is  a  wicked  strumpet !

CLAU.  Yes,  he  wishes  to  make  out  that  he  was  in  the
house,  and  that  we  were  outside  ;  and  it  is  a  fancy  which
we  cannot  drive  out  of  his  head.

M.  DE  S.  How  now  !     What  means  all  this  ?

SCHNKXH.J  THE  ABASHED    HUSBAND.  271

MAD.  DE  S.  Here  is  a  confounded  impudence,  to  senc*
for  us.

DAN.  Well  I  never  .    .    .

ANG.  No,  father,  I  can  no  longer  put  up  with  such  a
husband :  my  patience  is  exhausted ;  and  he  has  been
saying  all  manner  of  insulting  words  to  me.

M.  DE  S.  (To  George  Dandiri).  Zounds  !  you  are  a  vile
fellow.

CLAU.  It  is  pity  to  see  a  poor  young  wife  treated  in
such  a  fashion ;  it  cries  to  Heaven  for  vengeance.

DAN.   Can  any  one  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  You  ought  to  die  with  shame.

DAN.  Allow  me  to  say  two  words.

ANG.  Only  listen  to  him  :  he  will  tell  you  something
pretty  !

DAN.  (Aside}.  I  give  it  up  in  despair.

CLAU.  He  has  drunk  so  much,  that  there  is  no  staying
near  him  ;  and  the  scent  of  the  wine  which  he  exhales
comes  up  even  to  us.

DAN.  Sir  father-in-law,  I  implore  you  .   .   .

M.  DE  S.  Withdraw:  your  breath  smells  offensively  of
wine.25

DAN.  I  pray  you,  Madam  .   .   .

MAD.  DE  S.  Away !  do  not  come  near  me ;  your  breath
is  filthy.

DAN.   (To  M.  de  Sotenville~}.   Allow  me  to  ...

M.  DE  S.  Withdraw :  I  tell  you,  there  is  no  bearing
you.

DAN.  (To  Mad.  de  Sotenville~}.  For  pity's  sake,  let
me  .  .  .

MAD.  DE  S.  Fie  upon  it!  you  make  me  sick.  Speak  if
you  will,  but  at  a  distance.

18  Chamfort,  in  his  Eloge  de  la  Fontaine,  says  justly :  "  Who  represents
best  the  effects  of  prejudice  :  M.  de  Sotenville,  saying  to  a  man  who  has
not  been  taking  a  drop  of  wine,  "  Withdraw,  your  breath  smells  offen-
sively of  wine,"  or  the  Bear  (in  La  Fontaine's  fable  of  The  Bear  and  the
two  Comrades'),  who,  in  taking  a  living,  but  sleeping,  man  for  a  corpse,
says  to  himself,  "  Let  us  go  away,  for  he  smells?  "  Compare  Congreve's
The  Way  of  the  World  (iv.,  10  and  n),  where  Mrs.  Millamant  says  to
Lady  Wishfort,  "  Your  pardon,  Madam,  I  can  stay  no  longer;  Sir  Wilful
grows  very  powerful.  Eh  !  how  he  smells,  I  shall  be  overcome,  if  I  stay."
And  Lady  Wishfort  replying,  "  Smells !  He  would  poison  a  tallow-chandler
and  his  family."  But  Sir  Wilful  Witwould  is  really  intoxicated.

272  GEORGE   DANDIN  ;   OR,  FACT  in.

DAN.  Very  well,  then,  I  will  speak  at  a  distance.  I
swear  to  you  that  I  have  not  stirred  out  of  the  house,  and
that  it  was  she  who  went  out.

ANG.  Did  I  not  tell  you  so  ?

CLAU.  You  see  how  likely  that  is.

M.  DE  S.  (To  George  Dandin).  Go,  you  are  jesting
with  people.  Descend,  daughter,  and  come  here.

SCENE  XIII. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  GEORGE
DANDIN,  COLIN.

DAN.  I  take  Heaven  to  witness  that  I  was  in  the  house,
and  that  .  .  .

M.  DE  S.  Hold  your  tongue ;  this  extravagance  is  un-
bearable.

DAN.  May  a  thunderbolt  strike  me  on  the  spot,  if  ...

M.  DE  S.  Do  not  pester  my  head  any  longer,  but  rather
think  of  asking  your  wife's  pardon.

DAN.  I !  ask  pardon  ?

M.  DE  S.  Yes,  pardon,  and  immediately.

DAN.  What !     I  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  Zounds  !  if  you  answer  me,  I  shall  teach  you
what  it  is  to  make  fools  of  us.

DAN.  Ah  !  George  Dandin !

SCENE  XIV. — M.  and  MADAM  DE  SOTENVILLE,  ANGELIQUE,
CLAUDINE,  GEORGE  DANDIN,  COLIN.

M.  DE  S.  Come  hither,  daughter,  that  your  husband
may  ask  your  pardon.

ANG.  I !  pardon  him  all  that  he  has  said  to  me  ?  No,
no,  father,  I  cannot  possibly  make  up  my  mind  to  it ;  and
I  beg  of  you  to  separate  me  from  a  husband  with  whom  I
can  no  longer  live.

CLAU.  How  can  she  bear  it?

M.  DE  S.  Such  separations,  daughter,  are  not  brought
about  without  a  great  deal  of  scandal ;  and  you  should
show  yourself  wiser  than  he,  and  be  patient  once  more.

ANG.  How  can  I  be  patient  after  such  indignities?  No,
father,  I  cannot  consent  to  it.

M.  DE  S.  You  must,  daughter;  I  command  you.

ANG.  This  word  stops  my  mouth.  You  have  absolute
authority  over  me.

CLAU.    What  gentleness !

SCBNKXV.I  THE   ABASHED   HUSBAND.  273

ANG.  It  is  vexatious  to  have  to  overlook  such  insults;
but,  whatever  violence  I  may  do  to  my  feelings,  it  is  my
duty  to  obey  you.

CLAU.  Poor  lamb !

M.  DE  S.  (To  Angelique).     Draw  near.

ANG.  Whatever  you  make  me  do  will  be  of  no  use;
we  shall  have  to  recommence  to-morrow,  you  will  see.

M.  DE  S.  We  shall  put  a  stop  to  it.  (To  George  Dan-
din),  Come !  go  down  on  your  knees.

DAN.  On  my  knees?

M.  DE  S.  Yes,  on  your  knees,  and  without  delay.

DAN.  (Kneeling  with  a  candle  in  his  hands).  (Aside}.
Oh  !  Heavens !  (To  M.  de  Sotenville).  What  am  I  to  say?

M.  DE  S.    Madam,  I  beg  of  you  to  pardon  me  .    .    .

DAN.   Madam,  I  beg  of  you  to  pardon  me  .    .    .

M.  DE  S.  The  folly  I  have  committed  .    .    .

DAN.  The  folly  I  have  committed  ,  .  .  (Aside),  of
marrying  you.

M.  DE  S.  And  I  promise  you,  to  behave  better  for  the
future. x

DAN.  And  I  promise  you,  to  behave  better  for  the
future.

M.  DE  S.  (To  George  Dandiri),  Take  care,  and  re-
member that  this  is  the  last  of  your  impertinences  that  we
shall  endure.

MAD.  DE  S.  By  the  Heavens  above  us  !  if  you  try  them
again,  you  shall  be  taught  the  respect  due  to  your  wife,
and  to  those  from  whom  she  is  descended.

M.  DE  S.  The  day  is  breaking.  Farewell.  (To  George
Dandin).  Go  in,  and  learn  to  behave  better.  (To  Madam
de  Soten-ville).  And  we,  love,  let  us  go  to  bed.

SCENE  XV. — GEORGE  DANDIN,  alone.
Ah  !  I  give  it  up  altogether,  and  I  can  see  no  help  for
it.     When  one  has   married,  as  I  have  done,  a  wicked
wife,  the  best  step  which  one  can  take  is  to  go  and  throw
one's  self  into  the  water,  head  foremost.

26  In  former  times,  criminals  were  sometimes  legally  condemned  to  ask
pardon  publicly.  This  was  called  amende  honorable.  The  culprit  was  in
his  shirt,  with  a  burning  torch  in  one  hand,  kneeling,  and  with  a  rope
round  his  neck.  George  Dandin.  half-undressed,  with  his  candle,  and  on
his  knees,  gives  no  bad  idea  of  such  an  exhibition.

o      •''

^3          <"P

^.OfiALifO/i'^

A  <^-
I  3

*-*.  /  >•

\\\K',N'IVEiHy/,

=-=

g     =

<.     5

S3      o

<?    %

o      ..•

O        ti_

5»      c?.

<^HIBRARY0/
u?

P2
£*•

University  of  California

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388

Return  this  material  to  the  library

from  which  it  was  borrowed.

OCT    1

QUAR";

A(!FO%

••••""""ST  i

A    000124H2
ZJI   I  5    s  Jl   I  5      ^*~<~

' —
