THE  CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE  SERIES.
Edited  by  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.


HYPNOTISM.


in  2014


H  YPNOTISM


ALBERT  MOLL

[Of  Berlin).


LONDON :

WALTER  SCOTT,

24,  WARWICK  LANE,  PATERNOSTER  ROW
1890.


CI  A:


r.AT cyur  a  R  D.

p  V  !  f~  p


CONTENTS.


l'AGE

Preface ... ... ... ... ... ...  ix,  xi


CHAPTER  I.
History  of  Hypnotism ...  ...

Empirical  period — The  first  scientific  systems — Mesmer —
Animal  magnetism  in  France  and  in  Germany — Decline  of
animal  magnetism — Braid  and  the  electro-biologists— Occa-
sional works  about  hypnotism — Hypnotism  in  Germany  in
1880 — The  school  of  Nancy  —  Latest  development  of
hypnotism  in  France,  outside  of  France,  in  Germany.


CHAPTER  II.
General  Considerations  ...

Examples  of  hypnosis — Terminology — Production  of  hypno-
sis—  Psychical  methods  —  Physical  methods  —  Combined
methods  —  The  awakening  —  Disposition  to  hypnosis —
Hypnoscope  —  Physical  and  mental  aptitudes  —  Hypnosis
without  the  consent  of  the  subject — Percentage  of  hypno-
tizable  persons — Stages  of  hypnosis.


VI


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  III.

PAGE

The  Symptoms  of  Hypnosis ... ... ...  53

Division  of  psychical  and  physical  symptoms — Definition  of
suggestibility — (1)  Physiology  :  Voluntary  muscular  action
— Suggestions —  Fascination  —  Catalepsy  by  suggestion  —
Contractures,  automatic  movements — Ocular  symptoms —
Appearance  of  new  reflex  actions  in  hypnosis — Objective
changes — Variations  of  the  ordinary  reflex  movements — The
organs  of  sense — Hallucinations  of  the  senses — Negative
hallucinations  —  Hyperesthesia  of  the  organs  of  sense —
General  sensations — Perception  of  pain — Mental  condition
— Involuntary  muscular  action — Pulse  and  Respiration —
Suggestions  —  Secretion  —  Organic  changes  —  Anatomical
changes — Forel's  experiments — (2)  Psychology  :  Memory
— Post-hypnotic  memory — Suggestion  during  hypnosis  and
after  hypnosis  —  Post-hypnotic  suggestion — Estimation  of
time — Condition  whilst  carrying  out  the  suggestion — Con-
dition between  awakening  and  carrying  out  the  suggestion —
Reasons  given  for  the  execution  of  the  suggestion — Post-
hypnotic suggestion  without  loss  of  memory — Activity  of
the  intellect — Mechanical  associations — Logical  thinking  in
hypnosis  —  Rapid  change  of  suggested  ideas  —  Rapport —
Consciousness  and  will  —  No  loss  of  consciousness  in
hypnosis  —  Resistance  to  suggestions  and  successful  con-
trol— Other  expressions  of  the  consciousness  and  will —
Transitional  forms  of  hypnosis — Training.

CHAPTER  IV.
Cognate  States ... ... ... ... ...  192

Sleep  —Dreams — Somnambulism — Mental  derangements —
Neuroses — Suggestions  in  the  waking  state — Hypnosis  in
animals — Fakirs.

CHAPTER  V.

The  Theory  of  Hypnotism 218

General  —  Credulity — Appearance  of  expected  results  —
Derangements  of  movement  —  hallucinations — Rapport —
Negative hallucinations — Memory — Post-hypnotic  sugges-


CONTENTS.


Vll


tion— Actions  performed  without,  and  contrary  to,  will —
Actions  with  loss  of  memory  of  the  command — Automatic
writing — Adherence  to  appointed  time — Further  analogies
of  post-hypnotic  suggestion — Post-hypnotic  hallucinations-
Other  psychological  theories — Inhibition  during  hypnosis —
Time  of  reaction — Physiological  theories  —  Heidenhain's
theory — Circulation  of  blood  in  the  brain— Physiological
speculation.

CHAPTER  VI.
Simulation ...  273

General  principles— Points  of  difference  between  the  schools
of  Charcot  and  of  Nancy — Main  points  in  judging  the  ques-
tion of  simulation  —  Limits  of  trustworthiness  of  single
symptoms — Psychical  symptoms — Probable  signs  of  simu-
lation.

CHAPTER  VII.
The  Medical  Aspects  of  Hypnotism ... ...  290

Empirical  therapeutics  of  suggestion — Suggestion  the  main
point  of  hypnosis — Objections  to  suggestive  therapeutics —
Objections,  and  the  opposing  party — Ewald's  objection —
The  dangers  of  hypnosis  and  their  prevention — Further
objections  —  Indications  and  contra-indications  — Interpre-
tation of  results — Rules  for  suggestive  therapeutics — Impor-
tance of  suggestion — Importance  of  psychology  to  the
physician — Utilization  of  hypnotism  in  surgery  and  obste-
trics— Utilization  of  hypnotism  in  teaching  and  education —
Importance  of  hypnotism  for  psychology.

CHAPTER  VIII.
The  Legal  Aspects  of  Hypnotism ... ...  334

Historical  —  Crimes  committed  on  hypnotized  subjects  —
Crimes  committed  by  hypnotized  subjects — Importance  of
hypnosis  in  civil  law — Retroactive  hallucinations — Forensic
utilization  of  hypnotism — Refusal  of  testimony  or  confessions
— Loss  of  memory  in  the  waking  state  of  what  has  hap-
pened during  hypnosis — Legal  proposals.


viii


CONTENTS.


CHAPTER  IX.

PAGE

Animal  Magnetism,  etc  357

Definition  of  animal  magnetism — Methods  of  magnetizing —
Theories — Telepathy — Clairvoyance — Transference  of  senses
— Heidenhain's  experiments — Effect  of  the  magnet  in  hypnosis
— Historical — Transference — Polarization — Influence  of  the
respiration — Action  of  drugs  at  a  distance — Criticism  of
experiments— Sources  of  error.

Index  of  Contents 381

Index  of  Names ... ... ... ... ...  393

Bibliography  ... ... ... ... ... ...  409


PREFACE


TO  THE  FIRST  EDITION.


In  writing  this  book  I  was  guided  by  the  wish  to
offer  to  the  reader  a  survey  of  all  that  is  most  impor-
tant in  the  whole  province  of  hypnotism.  While  in  the
numerous  and  detailed  works  on  this  subject  which
have  lately  appeared,  sometimes  its  therapeutics  and
sometimes  its  forensic  significance  have  been  exclu-
sively brought  forward,  I,  for  my  part,  have  endea-
voured to  treat  hypnotism  broadly  and  from  various
points  of  view,  avoiding  irrelevant  matter  ;  and,  being
aided  by  my  own  experiments,  I  was  in  a  position  to
add  much  that  was  new  to  what  was  already  known.

I  here  express  my  hearty  thanks  to  Prof.  August
Forel,  Director  of  the  Cantonal  Lunatic  Asylum  in
Zurich,  who  placed  several  of  his  most  valuable  ex-
periments at  my  disposal  for  this  book  ;  also  to  Dr.
Max  Dessoir,  of  Berlin,  who  has  assisted  me  both


X


PREFACE.


with  his  wide  acquaintance  with  the  literature  of
hypnotism  and  with  much  good  advice  ;  finally,  to
all  who  have  in  other  ways  helped  me  in  the
work.

A.  MOLL.

Berlin,  April,  18S9.


PREFACE


TO  THE  SECOND  EDITION.


I  HAVE  substantially  enlarged  the  second  edition  of
my  book,  and  have  completely  remodelled  several
sections  ;  for  example,  the  theoretical  part.  The
appearance  of  some  new  works  on  hypnotism  and
some  later  experiments  of  my  own  made  these
alterations  advisable.

I  have  willingly  yielded  to  wishes  expressed  to  me
in  numerous  criticisms  on  the  first  edition.  I  cannot,
however,  yield  to  what  several  critics  desired,  namely,
that  I  should  write  the  book  for  physicians  only,
because  I  believe  that  hypnotism  is  a  province  of
psychology,  and  is  in  consequence  of  as  much  inte-
rest to  psychologists  and  lawyers  as  to  doctors.  In
order,  however,  not  to  weary  the  latter  with  explana-
tions of  medical  expressions  inserted  in  the  text,  I
shall  give  these  in  the  index  which  is  to  be  found  at
the  end  of  the  book.


xii


PREFACE.


It  is  a  pleasant  duty  to  offer  my  tribute  of  thanks
to  all  those  who  have  helped  me  with  advice  in  the
preparation  of  the  second  edition.  I  owe  gratitude
in  particular  to  Prof.  August  Forel,  of  Zurich,  and  to
Dr.  Eduard  Hartmann,  of  Gross-Lichterfeld,  as  well
as  to  Drs.  Max  Dessoir  and  Arthur  Sperling,  of  Berlin.


Berlin,  January,  1890.


A.  MOLL.


HYPNOTISM.


CHAPTER  I.

HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.

In  order  to  understand  the  gradual  development
of  modern  hypnotism  from  animal  magnetism,  wc
must  distinguish  two  points  :  firstly,  that  there  are
human  beings  who  can  exercise  a  personal  influence
over  others,  either  by  direct  contact  or  even  from  a
distance  ;  and,  secondly,  the  fact  that  particular
psychical  states  can  be  induced  in  human  beings  by
certain  physical  processes.

This  second  fact  especially  has  long  been  known
among  the  Oriental  peoples,  and  was  utilized  by
them  for  religious  purposes.  Kiesewetter  attributes
the  early  soothsaying  by  means  of  precious  stones  to
hypnosis,  which  was  induced  by  steadily  gazing  at
the  stones.  This  is  also  true  of  divination  by  looking
into  vessels  and  crystals,  as  the  Egyptians  have  long
been  in  the  habit  of  doing,  and  as  has  often  been  done  in
Europe :  by  Cagliostro,  for  example.  These  hypnotic
phenomena  are  also  found  to  have  existed  several
thousand  years  ago  among  the  Persian  magi
(Fischer),  as  well  as  up  to  the  present  day  among
Indian  yogis  and  fakirs,  who  throw  themselves  into

2


2


HYPNOTISM.


the  hypnotic  state  by  means  of  fixation  of  the  gaze.
"The  same  thing  has  occurred  since  the  eleventh
century  in  many  convents  of  the  Greek  Church
(Fischer).  Among  the  best  known  are  the  Hesy-
chasts,  or  Omphalopsychics,  of  Mount  Athos,  who
hypnotize  themselves  by  gazing  at  the  umbilicus.
The  fact  has  often  been  verified  in  popular  opinion,
apart  from  these  religious  customs,  that  it  was
possible  to  induce  sleep  by  looking  fixedly  at  a
certain  point  ;  for  example,  at  the  tip  of  the  nose.
Hypnotic  conditions  appear  often  to  occur  among
uncivilized  peoples,  as  is  clearly  to  be  gathered  from
the  information  of  many  travellers,  and  as  Bastian,  a
chief  authority  on  ethnology,  has  particularly  shown.
He,  as  well  as  Stoll,  has  pointed  out  the  near  rela-
tionship of  many  phenomena  among  uncivilized
populations  to  hypnotism.  Bastian  believes  that  a
more  exact  study  of  hypnotism  by  individual
travellers  would  be  of  great  service  to  popular
psychology  ;  the  phenomena  which  occur  spon-
taneously among  uncivilized  populations  could  be
more  carefully  examined  and  brought  into  closer
relation  to  hypnotism.

Independently  of  this  there  has  existed  at  all
times  in  many  quarters  the  belief  that  particular
individuals  could  influence  their  fellows  by  the
exercise  of  certain  powers.  This  influence  could
be  used  as  well  for  good  as  for  evil.  Of  the  first
use  we  are  reminded  by  the  laying  on  of  hands  in
benediction  ;  also  by  the  healing  by  touch  which
was  obtained  by  the  old  Egyptians  and  other
Oriental  nations  :  numerous  old  monuments  testify
to  this.  If  the  meaning  of  many  of  them  is
not  clear,  in  the  case  of  others  hardly  a  doubt
exists  as  to  the  right  interpretation. The  Ebers


J


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


3


Papyrus  also,  which  represents  the  state  of
Egyptian  medicine  before  the  year  1552  B.C.,  con-
tains a  statement,  according  to  which  the  laying
of  hands  on  the  head  of  a  patient  plays  a  part  in
his  treatment.1  We  see  the  same  thing  later  in
the  cures  which  King  Pyrrhus  and  the  Emperor
Vespasian  are  said  to  have  effected.

It  is  known  that  Francis  I.  of  France,  and  other
French  kings  up  to  Charles  X.,  healed  by  the
imposition  of  hands.  We  see  here  already  that  this
individual  power  took  effect  through  contact ;  how-
ever, this  appears  not  to  have  been  always  necessary,
as  is  witnessed  by  the  widespread  and  continued
belief  in  sorcerers,  who  could  bewitch  other  persons.
The  belief  in  sorcerers  indicates  that  contact  was
by  no  means  always  necessary  to  produce  an  effect,
which,  it  is  pretended,  could  be  induced  even  from  a
great  distance.

The  question  here  is  only  of  solitary  facts  in
which  no  scientific  system  is  discoverable.  A  system
presents  itself  to  us  only  after  the  end  of  the  Middle
Ages.  It  develops  itself  out  of  the  doctrine  of  the
influence  of  the  stars  upon  men  which,  as  is  known,
astrology  puts  forward.  Even  nowadays  we  find
remains  of  it,  especially  in  the  belief  in  the  influence
which  the  moon  is  supposed  to  exercise.  It  is  well
known  that  many  people  expect  warts  and  so  forth
to  disappear  as  the  moon  wanes  ;  while  more  modern
doctors  of  mental  diseases  called  in  the  influence  of
the  moon  to  explain  special  periodical  mental  dis-
turbances.

At  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages,  Theophrastus

1  For  the  knowledge  of  this  I  have  to  thank  a  private  com-
munication from  Dr.  Heinrich  Joachim,  of  Berlin,  who  has
made  a  German  translation  of  the  Ebers  Papyrus,


4


HYPNOTISM.


Paracelsus  in  particular  (1530)  came  forward  with
the  theory  of  the  effect  of  the  heavenly  bodies
on  mankind,  more  especially  on  their  diseases.
Out  of  this  the  belief  gradually  developed  itself
that  not  only  did  the  stars  influence  men,  but  that
men  also  mutually  influenced  each  other — a  belief
which,  as  we  have  already  seen,  had  already  arisen
sporadically.

Van  Helmont  taught  with  more  precision  that
man  possessed  a  power  by  means  of  which  he  could
magnetically  affect  others,  particularly  the  sick.  Per-
haps Helmont  obtained  the  main  features  of  his
doctrine  from  Godenius.

The  Scotchman  Maxwell  maintained  something  of
the  same  kind  later  (about  1600).  He  attributed
to  the  human  excreta,  and  also  to  mummies,  an
effect  upon  human  beings;  they  could  be  utilized
for  the  curing  of  diseases  (sympathetic  cures)  ;  also
men  could  cure  themselves  of  diseases  by  transferring
them  to  animals  or  plants.  A  remnant  of  this  system
developed  by  Maxwell  still  exists  in  country  places,
where  people  occasionally  apply  excreta  to  their
wounds.  Maxwell  assumed  in  particular  a  vital
spirit  of  the  universe  {spiritus  vitalis),  by  means  of
which  all  bodies  were  related  to  each  other.  This
vital  spirit  seems  to  be  the  same  thing  which  Mesmer
later  called  the  universal  fluid.

In  the  beginning  of  the  eighteenth  century  we
find  Santanelli  in  Italy  asserting  a  like  proposition.
Everything  material  possesses  a  radiating  atmosphere
which  operates  magnetically.  Santanelli,  however,
recognized  the  great  influence  of  the  imagination
(Ave  Lallemant).

Although  the  foundation  of  the  doctrine  of  animal
magnetism  was  thus  laid,  universal  attention  was


HIS  TOR  Y  OF  H  YPNO  TISM.


5


first  drawn  to  it  by  Mesmer,1  a  Viennese  doctor
(1734— 1 8 1 5).  He  studied  in  his  dissertation  the
influence  of  the  planets  upon  human  bodies.  At
the  beginning  Mesmer  made  great  use  of  the  magnet
in  the  treatment  of  diseases.  In  the  year  1775  he  sent
out  a  circular  letter,  particularly  addressed  to  several
academies.  In  this  he  maintained  the  existence  of
animal  magnetism,  by  means  of  which  persons  could
influence  each  other;  he,  however,  distinguished
animal  magnetism  completely  from  the  magnetism
of  metals,  which  later  he  ceased  to  employ.  The
only  academy  which  replied  to  him  was  that  of
Berlin,  at  Sulzer's  instigation,  and  its  reply  was
unfavourable.  However,  about  this  time  Mesmer
was  nominated  a  member  of  the  Academy  of
Bavaria.

Mesmer  made  much  use  of  "  animal  magnetism  "
in  the  treatment  of  diseases.  He  cured  at  first  by
contact,  but  believed  later  that  different  objects  of
wood,  glass,  iron,  and  so  forth,  were  also  capable  of
receiving  the  magnetism.  Consequently  he  made
use  of  these  as  means  for  conveying  his  magnetism,
especially  later  in  Paris,  where  he  went  in  1778,
chiefly  in  consequence  of  the  enmities  he  had  aroused
in  Vienna.  In  Paris  Mesmer  constructed  the  baquet,
which  was  magnetized  by  him,  and  which  was  sup-
posed to  transmit  the  magnetism.  Bailly  represents
it  as  a  very  complicated  apparatus  ;  an  oak  chest  or

1  The  name  is  often  written  "  Messmer,"  instead  of
"  Mesmer ; "  the  latter  spelling  is,  however,  decidedly  the
correct  one.  At  least  it  is  so  found  in  the  book  which  Mesmer
himself  brought  out — "General  Explanations  of  Magnetism,"
by  Mesmer,  Carlsruhe,  181 5.  Mesmer's  friend,  Wolfart,  and
his  biographer,  Justinus  Kerner,  write  the  name  also  with
one  s.


6


HYPNOTISM.


tub,  with  appendages  of  iron,  &c.  Mesmer  found
many  adherents  in  Paris — Dr.  Deslon  joined  him
first  of  all — but  he  also  encountered  many  opponents.
Several  scientific  Commissions  which  examined  the
question  pronounced,  in  1784,  against  the  existence
of  animal  magnetism,  particularly  the  one  to  which
Bailly  was  reporter.  One  of  the  members  of  the
Commission,  Jussieu,  made,  however,  a  separate
report,  which  was  not  considered  decisive.  No  one,
however,  denied  that  far-reaching  effects  were  pro-
duced by  imagination  ;  it  was  only  denied  that  there
was  a  physical  force  resembling  true  magnetism.  In
spite  of  all  attacks,  Mesmer  made  disciples.  His
pupils  and  successors  are  generally  called  mesmerists,
and  the  doctrine  of  animal  magnetism  is  also  called
mesmerism,  vital  magnetism,  bio-magnetism,  or  zoo-
magnetism.

I  do  not  wish  to  join  the  contemptible  group  of  Mesmer' s
professional  slanderers.  He  is  dead,  and  can  no  longer  defend
himself  from  those  who  disparage  him  without  taking  into  con-
sideration the  circumstances  or  the  time  in  which  he  lived.

Against  the  universal  opinion  that  he  was  avaricious,  I
remark  that  in  Vienna,  as  well  as  later  in  Morsburg  and
Paris,  he  always  helped  the  poor  without  reward.  I  believe
that  he  erred  in  his  teaching,  but  think  it  is  just  to  attack  this
only,  and  not  his  personal  character.  Mesmer  was  much
slandered  in  his  lifetime,  and  these  attacks  upon  him  have
been  continued  till  quite  lately.  Let  us,  however,  consider  more
closely  in  what  his  alleged  great  crime  consisted.  He  believed
in  the  beginning  that  he  could  heal  by  means  of  a  magnet,
and  later  that  he  could  do  so  by  means  of  a  personal  in-
dwelling force  which  he  could  transfer  to  the  baquet.  This
was  evidently  his  firm  belief,  and  he  never  made  a  secret  of
it.  Others  believed  either  that  the  patient's  mere  imagination
played  a  part,  or  that  Mesmer  produced  his  effects  by  some
concealed  means.  Then,  by  degrees,  arose  the  legend
that Mesmer possessed some secret  by  means  of  which


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


7


he  was  able  to  produce  effects  on  people  such  as  the  cure  ot
diseases,  but  that  he  would  not  reveal  it.  In  reality  the
question  was  not  at  all  of  a  secret  purposely  kept  back  by  him,
since  he  imagined,  and  always  insisted,  that  he  exercised  some
individual  force.  Finally,  if  he  used  this  supposititious  in-
dividual force  for  the  purpose  of  earning  money,  he  did  nothing
worse  than  do  modern  physicians  and  proprietors  of  institu-
tions who  likewise  do  not  follow  their  calling  from  pure  love
of  their  neighbour,  but  seek  to  earn  their  own  living  by  it,
as  they  are  quite  justified  in  doing.  Mesmer  did  not  behave
worse  than  those  who  nowadays  discover  a  new  drug,  and
regard  the  manufacture  of  it  as  a  means  of  enriching  them-
selves. Let  us  at  last  be  just  and  cease  to  slander  Mesmer,
who  did  only  what  is  done  by  the  people  just  mentioned.
That  those  who  defame  Mesmer  know  the  least  about  his
teaching,  and  have  the  least  acquaintance  with  his  works,  is
very  clearly  shown  by  a  whole  series  of  books  about  modern
hypnotism.

A  follower  of  Mesmer,  Chastenet  de  Puysegur,
whose  good  faith  cannot  be  doubted  (Dechambre)
discovered,  in  1784,  a  state  which  was  named  artificial
somnambulism.  Apart  from  some  falsely  interpreted
phenomena  (thought-transference,  clairvoyance,  &c.)
the  chief  characteristic  of  this  state  was  a  sleep,  in
which  the  ideas  and  actions  of  the  magnetized  person
could  be  directed  by  the  magnetizer.  Whether  Mes-
mer knew  of  this  condition  or  not  is  uncertain,  but  it
seems  to  me  probable  that  he  did.  About  the  same
time  Petetin,  a  doctor  of  Lyons,  occupied  himself
with  magnetism  ;  besides  catalepsy  Petetin  describes
phenomena  of  sense  transference  (hearing  with  the
stomach).  The  French  Revolution  and  the  wars
repressed  the  investigation  of  magnetism  in  France
till  about  the  year  181 3.

In  Germany  animal  magnetism  was  recognized
at  the  same  time  in  two  different  places — on  the
Upper  Rhine  and  in  Bremen. In the  year  1786


8


HYPNOTISM.


Lavater  paid  a  visit  to  Bremen,  and  exhibited  the
magnetizing  processes  to  several  doctors,  particularly
to  Wienholt,  through  whom  Albers,  Bicker,  and
later  also  Heineken,  were  likewise  made  acquainted
with  magnetism.  Bremen  was  for  a  long  time  a
focus  of  the  new  doctrine  ;  the  town  was  often  even
brought  into  bad  repute  in  the  rest  of  Germany  on
account  of  the  general  dislike  to  animal  magnetism.
About  the  same  time  the  doctrine  of  animal  magnet-
ism spread  from  Strassburg  over  the  Rhine  provinces  ;
Bockmann,  of  Carlsruhe,  and  Gmelin,  of  Heilbronn,
occupied  themselves  with  it  ;  later  they  were  joined
by  Pezold,  of  Dresden.  Getting  encouragement  from
Bremen,  people  began  to  make  experiments  in  other
parts  of  Germany.  Selle,  of  Berlin,  brought  forward,
in  1789,  a  series  of  experiments  made  at  the  Charite,
by  which  he  confirmed  a  part  of  the  alleged  phe-
nomena, but  excluded  all  that  was  super-normal
(clairvoyance).

Notwithstanding  the  early  dislike  to  it  magnetism
finally  gained  ground  in  Germany.  In  particular
animal  magnetism  flourished  much  in  Germany  during
the  first  twenty  years  of  this  century.  In  Austria  only,
it  met  with  ill-fortune  ;  the  exercise  of  magnetism  was
even  forbidden  in  the  whole  of  Austria  in  181 5.  I
do  not  enter  more  fully  into  the  details  of  the  teaching
of  different  individuals,  as  they  have  no  close  connec-
tion with  hypnotism.  In  the  main  two  different
tendencies  can  be  distinguished — one  critical  and
scientific,  and  the  other  mystical  (Ave  Lallemant).
While  the  first  had  the  preponderance  in  the  begin-
ning, later  on  the  last  came  to  the  fore  and  led  to  the
downfall  of  magnetism.  Besides  the  scientific  inquirers
already  mentioned  I  may  name  Treviranus,  Schelling,
Kieser,  Passavant,  Kluge  ;  also  Pfaff,  who  attacked


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


9


clairvoyance  in  particular  ;  and  further,  Stieglitz  and
Hufeland.  The  last,  who  was  at  first  a  decided
opponent,  acknowledged  certain  facts  later  on,  but
excluded  all  the  super-normal.  He  thus  drew  upon
himself  the  hatred  of  the  mystics.  Even  in  the  year
1834  Hufeland  expressed  himself  as  recognizing-,  to  a
certain  extent,  the  existence  of  animal  magnetism
and  its  value  in  healing.  Among  the  mystics  I  may
mention  Ziermann,  Eschenmayer,  Justinus  Kerner,
the  well-known  poet  and  editor  of  the  "  Seeress  of
Prevorst."  Wolfart  of  Berlin  must  here  be  especially
mentioned.

In  the  year  181 2  the  Prussian  Government  sent
Wolfart  to  Mesmer  at  Frauenfeld,  in  order  that  he
might  there  make  himself  acquainted  with  the  subject.
Wolfart  came  back  a  thorough  adherent  of  Mesmer,
introduced  magnetism  into  the  hospital  treatment,  and
afterwards  became  a  professor  at  the  university.  A
prize  which  was  offered  by  the  Berlin  Academy  of
Sciences,  at  the  request  of  the  Prussian  Government,
for  an  Essay  on  Animal  Magnetism  was,  it  appears,
withdrawn.  However,  magnetism  flourished  so  much
at  that  time  in  Berlin  that,  as  Wurm  relates,  the  Berlin
physicians  placed  a  monument  on  the  grave  of  Mesmer
at  Morsburg,  and  theological  candidates  received  in-
struction in  physiology,  pathology,  and  the  treatment
of  sickness  by  vital  magnetism.  It  was  Mesmer's  idea  to
teach  it  to  the  clergy.  The  well-known  physician
Koreff,  also,  whom  Varnhagen  von  Ense  mentions  as
one  of  the  most  gifted  of  men,  and  of  whom  Cuvier
said  that  if  he  were  not  already  in  Paris  he  must  be
entreated  to  come  there,  interested  himself  much  in
magnetism,  and  often  made  use  of  it  for  healing
purposes  so  long  as  he  lived  in  Berlin.
1 In  the  rest of  Germany also,  many  inquirers


IO


HYPNOTISM.


occupied  themselves  with  animal  magnetism  ;  in
several  universities  a  knowledge  of  the  phenomena
was  spread  by  means  of  lectures — for  example,  by
Wolfart  in  Berlin,  and  by  Bartels  in  Breslau.  As
many  authors  inform  us,  a  royal  order  in  February,
1 8 1 7,  made  magnetization  in  Prussia  the  privilege  of
physicians  only ;  but  in  the  official  code  of  laws
nothing  is  to  be  found  on  the  subject.  At  the  same
time  such  laws  were  enacted  in  other  countries.
Magnetism  was  introduced  everywhere,  especially  in
Russia  and  Denmark.  In  Switzerland  and  Italy  it
was  at  first  received  with  less  sympathy.

After  Mesmer  had  left  France  in  the  time  of  the
Revolution,  in  order,  after  prolonged  travels,  to  settle
himself  at  his  native  place  on  the  Bodensee,  magnetism
only  regained  its  importance  in  France  at  the  begin-
ning of  the  present  century. In  Germany  there  were
more  physicians  who  turned  to  the  study  of  animal
magnetism,  which  in  France  fell  for  the  most  part
into  the  hands  of  laymen. Among  the  most  earnest
inquirers  Deleuze  must  here  be  mentioned. But  the
whole  doctrine  received  a  great  impetus  through  the
Abbe  Faria,  who  came  to  Paris  from  India.  In
1 8 1 4—  1 5  he  showed  by  experiments,  whose  results  he
published,  that  no  unknown  force  was  necessary  for
the  production  of  the  phenomena  ;  the  cause  of  the
sleep,  said  he,  was  in  the  person  who  was  to  be  sent
to  sleep  ;  all  was  subjective. This  is  the  main  prin-
ciple  of  hypnotism and  of  suggestion,  of  which
Faria  even  then  made  use  in  inducing  sleep.  Two
other  investigators  in  France  must  be  mentioned,
Bertrand and Noizet, who paved the way  for
the  doctrine  of  suggestion,  in  spite  of  much  incli-
nation to  animal  magnetism. In  1820  experiments
were  begun  in  the  Paris  hospitals,  chiefly  under  the


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


1 1


direction  of  Du  Potet.  At  the  proposal  of  Foissac,
and  at  the  recommendation  of  Husson,  the  Paris
Academy  of  Medicine  in  1826  appointed  a  Commis-
sion to  examine  the  question  of  animal  magnetism.
The  Commission  worked  for  six  years  and  pronounced
a  favourable  opinion  in  1831  ;  but  the  Academy  was
evidently  not  convinced.  In  spite  of  several  further
experiments,  for  example  those  of  Berna,  no  other
result  was  obtained.  Particularly  because  the  chief
emphasis  was  laid  on  the  mystical  side  of  the  question
the  struggle  was  made  substantially  easier  to  the
opponents  of  mesmerism,  among  whom  Dubois  was
prominent.

The  candidates  for  the  Burdin  prize  for  clairvoy-
ance, Pigeaire,  Hublier,  and  Teste,  failed  to  obtain  it ;
and  in  1840  the  Academy  declined  to  discuss  the
question  further.

Meanwhile,  although  in  Germany  another  series
of  investigators  were  busying  themselves  with  mes-
merism, on  the  whole,  after  about  1820,  the  belief  in
magnetism  declined  more  and  more  ;  the  cognate
phenomena  also  received  hardly  any  attention.  This
retrogression  was  caused  as  much  by  the  rise  of  the
exact  natural  sciences  as  by  the  unscientific  and
uncritical  hankering  after  mystical  phenomena,  which
could  not  but  revolt  serious  investigators.  Mesmerism
flourished  relatively  the  longest  in  Bremen  and  in
Hamburg,  where  Siemers  was  its  advocate ;  also  in
Bavaria,  where  Hensler  and  Ennemoser,  between  the
years  1830  and  1840,  still  represented  it.  In  other
towns  we  likewise  still  find  a  number  of  thoughtful
inquirers,  who  allowed  themselves  to  be  influenced
neither  by  the  passion  for  the  wonderful  nor  by  the
attacks  of  the  principal  opponents  of  magnetism,  and
who  sought  to  defend  their  position  in  a  thoroughly


12


HYPNOTISM.


scientific  manner  ;  Most,  Fr.  Fischer,  and  Hirschel,
may  be  mentioned.  It  may  also  be  emphatically
insisted  that  a  series  of  philosophers  have  be-
lieved firmly  and  persistently  in  the  reality  of  the
phenomena,  although  not  much  regard  has  been  paid
to  this  fact.  They  have  even  founded  scientific  sys-
tems upon  the  phenomena :  i.e.,  Schopenhauer,  Carus,
Pfnor.  Although  magnetism  lost  many  adherents  in-
the  scientific  world,  among  the  people  the  belief  in
the  mysterious  force  continued  prevalent.  The
more  science  drew  back  the  more  shameless  became
the  cheating  and  fraud ;  although  in  Germany
there  were  fewer  attempts  to  make  money  by  it  than
in  France.  The  abuse  grew  so  strong  that  the
Catholic  Church  several  times  came  forward  to  inter-
fere. But  the  more  the  extravagance  and  cheating
increased  the  less  inclined  were  serious-minded  persons
to  interest  themselves  in  these  matters.

In  England,  in  spite  of  the  efforts  of  the  London
physicians  Elliotson  and  Ashburner,  magnetism  could
get  no  footing.  When  the  French  magnetizer,  La
Fontaine,  exhibited  magnetic  experiments  in  Man-
chester in  1 84 1,  Braid,  a  doctor  of  that  place,  interested
himself  in  the  question.  He  showed,  like  Faria,  but
with  more  method,  that  the  phenomena  were  of  sub-
jective nature.  By  carefully  fixing  the  eyes  upon  any
object  a  state  of  sleep  was  induced,  which  Braid  called
"  Hypnotism."  1

At  first  Braid  considered  hypnotism  to  be  identical
with  the  mesmeric  states,  but  he  soon  gave  up  this
view ;  he  was  of  opinion  that  the  two  conditions  were
only  analogous,  and  he  left  mesmerism  in  an  inde-

1  This  name  was  not,  however,  altogether  new,  as  already
Henin  de  Cuvillers  had  talked  of  "  hypnoscope  "  and  "hypno-
bat,"  with  reference  to  magnetic  states  (Max  Dessoir).


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


13


pendent  position  by  the  side  of  hypnotism.  Braid
was  acquainted  with  the  cataleptic  phenomena,  and
certain  suggestions,  and  used  hypnotism  therapeuti-
cally ;  in  particular  he  used  it  to  perform  painless
surgical  operations.  Already,  earlier,  mesmerism  had
been  several  times  made  use  of  in  surgical  operations.
In  the  result  we  see  mesmerism  and  Braidism,  as  the
state  investigated  by  Braid  is  occasionally  called,  used
by  different  persons  for  the  like  purpose.  Among
those  who  used  animal  magnetism  or  hypnotism  in
surgery,  the  following  deserve  to  be  mentioned :
Loysel,  Fontan,  Topham,  Joly,  Ribaud,  Kiaro  (accord-
ing to  Max  Dessoir),  Varges,  Herzog.  Hypnotism,
however,  found  no  general  acceptation,  in  spite  of  the
fact  that  a  well-known  physiologist,  Carpenter,  as  well
as  Laycock,  James  Simpson,  Mayo,  and  others,  con-
firmed the  facts.

In  America,  meanwhile,  animal  magnetism  had
taken  root ;  New  Orleans  was,  for  a  long  time,  its
chief  centre.  A  few  years  later  than  Braid,  Grimes
appeared  in  the  United  States,  and,  independently  of
Braid,  obtained  like  results.  His  methods  were  not
essentially  different  from  those  of  Braid  ;  the  states
produced  by  Grimes  were  called  electro-biological.
Among  his  adherents  Dods  and  Stone  must  be
mentioned.  In  1850  Darling  came  from  America  to
England,  where  he  exhibited  the  phenomena  of
electro-biology  ;  their  identity  with  those  of  hypno-
tism was  soon  recognized.  Durand  de  Gros,1  a  French
doctor  who  had  lived  in  America,  returned  in  1853  to
Europe,  and  exhibited  the  phenomena  of  electro-
biology  in  several  countries,  but  aroused  little  interest.

Braid's  discovery  was  first  made  known  in  Bordeaux
by  Azam,  in  1859. Encouraged  by  Bazin  and  mocked
1  He  wrote  under  the  pseudonym  of  Philips.


14


HYPNOTISM.


by  others,  Azam  made  some  hypnotic  experiments  ;
he  communicated  the  results  to  Broca  in  Paris.  The
latter  discussed  hypnotism  before  the  Academie  des
Sciences.  It  was  made  use  of  several  times  to  per-
form painless  operations  ;  Velpeau,  Follin,  and
Guerineau  in  particular  made  experiments.  Other
physicians,  Demarquay  and  Giraud-Teulon,  as  well  as
Berend  in  Berlin,  Pincus  in  Glogau,  and  Heyfelder  in
St.  Petersburg,  showed  the  slight  value  of  hypnotism
for  surgery.  In  consequence  of  this  it  found  no
acceptance  in  medicine  at  that  time.  The  experiments
of  Lasegue  in  1865,  when  he  obtained  cataleptic
phenomena  by  closing  the  eyes,  aroused  no  particular
interest.

Meanwhile,  Liebeault,  who  later  removed  to  Nancy,
had  made  himself  familiar  with  the  phenomena  of
hypnotism  and  animal  magnetism.  The  last  he
endeavoured  to  refute,  and  he  became  the  real  founder
of  the  therapeutics  of  suggestion.  His  book,  published
in  1866  (Du  Sommeil,  &c),  which  is  even  to-day  very
well  worth  reading,  contains  his  ideas  ;  they  remained
little  known,  and  the  author  was  much  laughed  at.
Independently  of  him  Charles  Richet  came  forward
in  Paris  in  1875  to  contend  for  the  real  existence  of
hypnotism,  which  he  called  "  Somnambulisme  pro-
voque."

In  the  year  1878  Charcot  began  his  public  classes,
in  which  he  directed  attention  to  the  physical  states
of  hystero-epileptics  during  hypnosis  ;  in  1881  Paul
Richer  published,  in  his  book  on  "  La  grande  hysterie,"
many  experiments  performed  on  the  lines  of  Charcot.
Among  the  later  pupils  of  Charcot  I  should  name  :
Binet,  Fere,  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  Babinski,  Barth,
Bourneville,  Regnard.

In  1880  many  investigators  in  Germany,  particularly


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


15


Weinhold,  Opitz,  and  Riihlmann  in  Chemnitz,  Heiden-
hain,  and  Berger  in  Breslau,  besides  Mobius,  Benedikt,
Eulenburg,  Senator,  Adamkiewicz,  Borner,  Meyersohn,
and  Baumler,  occupied  themselves  with  the  subject,
incited  thereto  by  the  exhibitions  of  Hansen.  The
investigations  of  hypnotism  in  animals,  published  in
1872  by  Czermak,  and  after  him  by  Preyer,  aroused  no
lasting  interest.  The  movement  of  1880  also  soon
ceased,  although  Preyer  often  pointed  out  the  impor-
tance of  Braidism.

The  researches  of  Charcot  likewise  had  little  effect
upon  the  further  pursuit  of  the  inquiry — as  little  as
had  the  book  of  Prosper  Despine  on  Somnambulism,
which  appeared  in  1880.  It  is  true  that  in  some
hospitals  investigations  were  undertaken,  particularly
by  Dumontpallier  in  Paris,  by  Pitres  in  Bordeaux,
also  by  Ladame  in  Geneva,  and  later  by  Binswanger
in  Jena  ;  these  researches  were,  however,  sporadic.

Only  when  a  second  medical  school  in  France —
that  of  Nancy  —  approached  the  subject,  did  the
interest  become  more  general.  Prof.  Bernheim,
of  Nancy,  who,  incited  by  Dumont,  had  studied
the  question  with  Liebeault,  and  had  accepted
the  latter's  views,  published  a  book,  "  De  la  Sug-
gestion," &c,  in  1884.  He  gave  in  it  examples
of  the  curative  effects  of  hypnotism,  the  phenomena
of  which,  he  says,  are  entirely  of  a  psychical  nature.
Besides  this,  in  Nancy,  Beaunis  worked  at  the  physio-
logy of  hypnotism,  and  Liegeois  at  the  forensic  side
of  the  question.  Then  followed  in  France  the  contest
between  the  schools  of  Charcot  and  of  Nancy,  which
is  not  yet  entirely  settled  ;  the  latter,  however,  has
gained  ground  more  and  more.

People  began  to  busy  themselves  with  hypnotism,
in  other  countries  as  well  as  France,  chiefly  on  the


i6


HYPNOTISM.


lines  of  the  school  of  Nancy. It  is  true  that,  as
has  already  been  mentioned,  the  study  of  hypnotism
had  been  begun  in  various  countries  in  connection
with  the  work  of  Charcot. As,  however,  in  conse-
quence of  the  rather  one-sided  standpoint  of  these
investigations,  the  different  inquirers  failed  to  find
any  lasting  satisfaction,  even  the  name  of  Charcot
was  powerless  to  give  a  general  extension  to  the
study  of  hypnotism. Only  when the  school  of
Nancy  created  a  surer  basis  for  hypnotism  by  a
profounder psychological  conception could  people
elsewhere  begin  to  devote  themselves  on  a  larger
scale  to  the  study  of  it. In  France  itself  the  im-
portance of  the  Nancy  investigators  was  more  and
more  recognized. A.  Voisin,  Berillon,  and  numerous
other  experimenters  occupied  themselves  with  the
subject,  and  even  those  who  had  at  first  considered
the  experiments  of  Charcot  to  be  of  higher  value
turned  in  large  numbers  to  the  school  of  Nancy.
Hypnotism  found  an  entrance  to  other  countries,
and  it  appears  that  in  the  north  of  Europe  a  rela-
tively greater number of  investigators  interested
themselves  in  it  than  in  France. In  Belgium  the
eminent  psychologist  Delbceuf,  of  Liege,  smoothed
the  way  for  it  ; numerous  physicians — Van  Ren-
terghem,  Van  Eeden,  De  Jong,  and  others — made
use  of  hypnotism  in  Holland  for  curative  purposes.
In  Denmark,  Sweden,  and  Norway  we  find  also  a
series of inquirers  —  Johannessen, Sell,  Frankel,
Carlsen,  Schleisner,  Velander,  and  most  particularly
Wetterstrand,  of  Stockholm,  who  uses  hypnotism
therapeutically to a very great extent ; also  in
Russia, where Stembo and Tokarski should  be
noticed. In  Greece,  Italy,  and  Spain,  where  Pulido
used  suggestion  therapeutically  many  years  before


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


17


Bernheim,  hypnotism  is  gaining  in  importance.  In
England  there  exists  a  society  of  private  investi-
gators— the  Society  for  Psychical  Research —which,
besides  examining  certain  mysterious  phenomena,
also  studies  hypnotism.  Gurney  and  F.  Myers  must
here  be  especially  mentioned.  Before  this,  in  Eng-
land, Hack  Tuke  had  often  called  attention  to
hypnotism  and  its  therapeutic  value.

In  other  quarters  of  the  globe,  especially  in
America,  hypnotism  has  also  awakened  great  in-
terest. Beard  had  already  long  ago  interested
himself  in  the  question.  Unluckily  his  investiga-
tions are  not  known  to  the  extent  which  they
certainly  merit.  An  American  Society  for  Psychical
Research  has  also  been  formed  in  the  United  States.1
In  several  of  the  South  American  States  serious  in-
quirers have  turned  to  the  study  of  hypnotic  phe-
nomena ;  for  example,  Octavio  Maira  and  David
Benavente  in  Chili.

Meanwhile,  through  Forel,  hypnotism  had  gained
ground,  more  particularly  in  Switzerland,  and  there
is  no  doubt  that  the  great  movement  spread  to
Germany  from  thence.  Obersteiner  of  Vienna,  Frankel
of  Dessau,  and  Mobius,  had  already  endeavoured  to
draw  attention  to  hypnotism  in  Germany,  by
clear  and  impartial  reports.  Lesser  experiments
in  therapeutics  had  also  been  made  by  Creutz-
feldt,  Wiebe,  Fischer,  and  Berkhan.  But  a  really
stirring  activity  has  only  just  lately  set  in  ;  it  began
about  two  years  ago,  and  was  the  result  of  the  publi-
cations of  Forel,  which  appeared  in  the  German
periodicals.  They  demonstrate  the  great  impor-
tance of  hypnotism  for  therapeutics.  The  essential
importance  of  suggestion  had  not  hitherto  had  suffi-
1  Now  affiliated  to  the  English  Society.


i8


HYPNOTISM.


cient  stress  laid  upon  it,  and  in  consequence  many
hypnotic  experiments  may  have  remained  fruitless.
Many  other  investigators,  following  the  example  of
Forel,  have  made  experiments  in  medical  treatment
by  hypnotism  in  Germany  lately  ;  among  them  may
be  especially  mentioned  :  Sperling,  Nonne,  Michael,
Hess,  Schrenck-Notzing,  Hosslin,  Baierlacher  (who
became  known  by  his  discovery  of  reaction  of
degeneration,  and  who,  unfortunately,  died  a  short
time  ago),  Corval,  Schuster,  Hirt,  Ad.  Barth,  Brligel-
mann.  We  find  likewise  a  number  of  physicians
in  Austria  active  in  the  same  field  ;  Krafft-Ebing,
Freud,  Frey,  Schnitzler,  and  F.  Miiller  may  be
named.  Other  men — for  example,  Ziemssen,  See-
ligmuller,  Koberlin — set  their  faces  most  decidedly
against  the  therapeutic  use  of  hypnotism.  Other
authors,  again,  worked  at  the  particular  subjects  .
which  have  a  relation  to  hypnotism  without  laying
special  stress  on  its  therapeutic  value ;  and  here
the  works  of  Forel,  Lilienthal,  and  Rieger  must  be
named,  which  inquired  into  the  legal  side  of  the
question.  Krafft-Ebing  published  an  extremely  de-
tailed experimental  study  of  one  case ;  Max  Dessoir
compiled  a  valuable  Bibliography  of  Modern  Hypno-
tism ;  further,  Bleuler,  Hiickel,  Maack,  Weiss,  Sallis,
Dreher,  may  be  mentioned.

In  spite  of  the  great  importance  of  hypno-
tism to  therapeutics,  I  think  it  a  great  mistake
when  some  doctors  fix  the  therapeutic  value  of
hypnotism  as  the  standard  by  which  it  is  to  be
judged  ;  and  here  another  factor — the  founding  of
an  experimental  psychology — may  be  well  taken  into
consideration.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  a  large  number
of  investigators  have  recognized  the  great  value  of
hypnotism,  particularly  in  this  direction— above  all,


HISTORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


19


Krafft  -Ebing,  Forel,  Max  Dessoir  ;  and  several
scientific  societies  have  been  formed  in  Germany
after  the  pattern  of  the  above-mentioned  English
Society  for  Psychical  Research,  in  the  programme
of  which  it  is  essentially  the  use  of  hypnotism  in
the  carrying  out  of  psychological  experiments  which
plays  the  chief  part.  Such  are  the  Psychological
Society  in  Munich  and  the  Society  for  Experimental
Psychology  in  Berlin,  to  which  we  already  owe  a
series  of  remarkable  works  by  Max  Dessoir,  Bastian,
Hellwald,  and  Bentivegni.

Hypnotism  has,  moreover,  made  its  entrance  into
the  lecture-rooms  of  several  German  universities  ;
lectures  are  delivered  about  it  in  Berlin,  by  the
well-known  physiologist,  Preyer,  and  at  Freyburg,  in
Baden,  by  Miinsterberg,  a  distinguished  psychologist.
In  order  to  facilitate  a  general  discussion  of  the  most
important  questions  in  the  domain  of  hypnotism,  a
Congress  met  in  Paris  in  1889,  where  nearly  all
civilized  nations  were  represented,  and  where  a  sub-
stantial clearing-up  of  opinions  on  some  important
points  was  attained,  In  general  it  may  be  said
that  the  views  of  the  school  of  Nancy  carried  the
day.

In  any  case  hypnotism  has  for  the  time  won  great
importance,  as  may  be  estimated  from  the  fact  that
it  influences  even  literary  circles.  As  in  former  days
animal  magnetism  provided  Alexander  Dumas  and
Balzac  with  material  for  romances,  so  in  later  times
several  authors  have  chosen  their  themes  out  of
the  domain  of  hypnotism.  Those  who  have  become
best  known  are  Claretie,  Belot,  Meding,  Epheyre,
Finally,  it  must  be  mentioned  that  animal  magnetism,
out  of  which  hypnotism  has  developed  itself,  has  re*
tained  some  adherents  in  the  scientific  world — R


20


HYPNOTISM.


Myers,  Richet,  Langley  ;  so  that  at  present  we  can
distinguish  three  great  schools  with  many  points  of
transition  (Max  Dessoir)  :  (i)  The  school  of  Charcot ;
(2)  the  school  of  Nancy  ;  and  (3)  the  school  of  the
mesmerists.


CHAPTER  II.

GENERAL  CONSIDER  A  TIONS.

In  order  to  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  the  pheno-
mena of  hypnotism  it  will  be  best,  first  of  all,  to
describe  a  few  experiments.  The  phenomena  will  in
this  way  be  made  more  comprehensible  than  by
means  of  any  number  of  definitions.

First  Experiment.  I  begin  the  experiments
with  a  young  man  of  twenty.  I  request  him  to
seat  himself  on  a  chair,  and  give  him  a  button  to
hold,  telling  him  to  look  at  it  fixedly.  After  three
minutes  his  eyelids  fall  ;  he  tries  in  vain  to  open  his
eyes,  which  are  fast  closed  ;  his  hand,  which  until
now  has  grasped  the  button,  drops  upon  his  knee.  I
assure  him  that  it  is  impossible  for  him  to  open  his
eyes.  (He  makes  vain  efforts  to  open  them.)  I  now
say  to  him,  "Your  hands  are  stuck  fast  to  your  knee;
you  cannot  possibly  raise  them."  (He  raises  his
hands,  however.)  I  continue  to  converse  with  him  ;
I  find  that  he  is  perfectly  conscious,  and  I  can  dis-
cover no  essential  change  in  him  whatever.  I  raise
one  of  his  arms  ;  directly  I  let  go,  he  drops  it  as  he
pleases.  Upon  which  I  blow  upon  his  eyes,  which
open  at  once,  and  he  is  in  the  same  state  as  before
the  experiment.  The  young  man  remembers  all  that
I  have  said  to  him.  The  only  striking  thing  is,  there-


22


HYPNOTISM.


fore,  that  he  could  not  open  his  eyes,  and  that  he
feels  a  certain  degree  of  fatigue.

Second  Experiment.  This  is  a  woman  of  fifty-
three.  When  she  has  seated  herself  on  a  chair  I
place  myself  before  her  ;  I  raise  my  hands,  and  move
them  downwards,  with  the  palms  towards  her,  from
the  top  of  the  head  to  about  the  pit  of  the  stomach.
I  hold  my  hands  so  that  they  may  not  touch  her,  at
a  distance  of  from  two  to  four  centimetres.  As  soon
as  my  hands  come  to  the  lowest  part  of  the  stroke
I  carry  them  in  a  wide  sweep  with  outspread  arms  up
over  the  subject's  head.  I  then  repeat  exactly  the
same  movements  ;  that  is,  passes  from  above  down-
wards, close  to  the  body,  and  continue  this  for  about
ten  minutes.  At  the  end  of  this  time  the  subject
is  sitting  with  closed  eyes,  breathing  deeply  and
peacefully.  When  I  ask  her  to  raise  her  arms,  she
raises  them  only  slightly  ;  they  then  fall  down  again
heavily.  When  I  ask  her  how  she  feels,  she  ex-
plains that  she  is  very  tired.  I  forbid  her  to  open
her  eyes.  (She  makes  useless  attempts  to  open
them.)  Now  I  lift  up  her  right  arm  ;  it  remains  in
the  air,  even  after  I  have  let  go.  I  command  her  to
drop  her  arm.  (She  drops  it.)  I  lift  it  again,  and  again
it  remains  in  the  air  ;  upon  which  I  request  her  to
drop  her  arm,  declaring  at  the  same  time  that  she  can-
not do  it.  (She  now  makes  vain  efforts  to  drop  her  arm,
but  it  remains  in  the  air.)  The  same  thing  happens
with  the  other  arm.  When  I  forbid  her  she  is  unable
to  drop  it  ;  she  cannot  pronounce  her  own  name
directly  I  have  assured  her  that  she  is  dumb.  (She
only  makes  movements  with  her  mouth,  without  pro-
ducing any  sound.)  I  tell  her  that  now  she  can
speak.  (She  speaks  at  once.)  I  say  to  her  :  "  You
hear  music." (The  woman  shakes  her  head  to  show


GENERAL  CONSIDERA  TIONS.


23


that  she  hears  no  music.)  I  wake  her  by  passes  from
below,  upwards,  over  the  surface  of  her  body,  turning
the  back  of  the  hand  towards  her.  (She  now  opens
her  eyes,  and  can  control  all  her  movements.)

We  see  here,  then,  that  not  only  are  the  eyes  closed
during  hypnosis,  but  that  all  sorts  of  different  move-
ments become  impossible  to  the  subject  when  I
forbid  them.

Third  Experiment.  This  is  with  a  boy  of  sixteen,
whom  I  have  hypnotized  several  times.  I  request
him  to  look  me  straight  in  the  eyes.  After  he  has
done  this  for  some  time  I  take  him  by  the  hand  and
draw  him  along  with  me.  Then  I  let  go,  but  our
eyes  remain  fixed  on  each  other's.  Then  I  lift  up
my  right  arm.  (The  boy  does  the  same.)  I  raise  my
left  arm.  (He  does  the  same.)  I  make  him  understand
by  a  gesture  that  he  must  kneel  down.  (He  does  so.)
He  tries  to  rise,  but  does  not  succeed  so  long  as  I
look  at  him,  and  fix  him  to  the  floor  by  a  movement
of  the  hand.  Finally  I  cease  to  look  at  him  ;  the
charm  is  at  once  broken.

We  see  here,  then,  a  young  man  whose  movements
take  the  character  of  imitation,  and  whose  eyes  at  the
same  time  are  wide  open  and  fixed  upon  mine.

Fourth  Experiment.  Mr.  X.,  forty-one  years  old,
seats  himself  on  a  chair.  I  tell  him  that  he  must
try  to  sleep.  "  Think  of  nothing  but  that  you  are  to
go  to  sleep."  After  some  seconds  I  continue  :  "  Now
your  eyelids  are  beginning  to  close  ;  your  eyes  are
growing  more  and  more  fatigued  ;  the  lids  quiver
more  and  more.  You  feel  tired  all  over  ;  your  arms  go
to  sleep  ;  your  legs  grow  tired  ;  a  feeling  of  heaviness
and  the  desire  for  sleep  take  possession  of  your  whole
body.  Your  eyes  close  ;  your  head  feels  duller  ;  your
thoughts  grow  more  and  more  confused. Now  you


24


HYPNOTISM.


can  no  longer  resist  ;  now  your  eyelids  are  closed.
Sleep  !  "  After  the  eyelids  have  closed  I  ask  him  if
he  can  open  them.  (He  tries  to  do  so,  but  they  are
too  heavy.)  I  raise  his  left  arm  high  in  the  air.  (It
remains  in  the  air,  and  cannot  be  brought  down  in
spite  of  all  his  efforts.)  I  ask  him  if  he  is  asleep.
"  Yes."  "  Fast  asleep  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  Do  you  hear  the
canary  singing  ? "  "  Yes."  "  Now  you  hear  the
concert  ?  "  "  Certainly."  Upon  this  I  take  a  black
cloth  and  put  it  into  his  hand.  "  You  feel  this  dog
quite  plainly  ?  "  "  Quite  plainly."  "  Now  you  can
open  your  eyes.  You  will  see  the  dog  clearly.  Then
you  will  go  to  sleep  again,  and  not  wake  till  I  tell
you."  (He  opens  his  eyes,  looks  at  the  imaginary
dog  and  strokes  it.)  I  take  the  cloth  out  of  his  hand,
and  lay  it  on  the  floor.  (He  stands  up  and  reaches
out  for  it.)  Although  he  is  in  my  room,  when  I  tell
him  that  he  is  in  the  Zoological  Gardens  he  believes
it  and  sees  trees,  and  so  on.

In  this  case  X.  is  thrown  into  the  hypnotic  state
by  my  arousing  in  his  mind  an  image  of  the  sleep.
This  manner  of  hypnotizing  is  used  by  the  Nancy
investigators,  and  may  be  called  the  method  of  Nancy.
The  subject  is  completely  without  a  will  of  his  own.  It
is  not  only  possible  in  his  case  to  prevent  the  most
various  movements  by  a  mere  prohibition,  but  I  can
also  control  his  sense  perceptions.  On  my  assurance,
he  thinks  he  hears  a  canary,  or  hears  music.  He
takes  a  handkerchief  for  a  dog,  and  believes  himself
to  be  in  the  Zoological  Gardens  when  he  is  in  my
room.  But  the  following  phenomenon  is  still  more
striking.  X.  hears  all  that  I  say  to  him,  and  allows
himself  to  be  influenced  by  me  in  every  way.  Yet
two  other  men,  A.  and  B.,  who  are  present,  appear
not  to  be  observed  by  the  hypnotic  at  all. A.  lifts


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


25


up  the  arm  of  the  subject;  the  arm  falls  loosely  down,
and  when  A.  desires  the  arm  to  remain  in  the  air  the
subject  takes  no  notice.  He  obeys  my  orders  only,
and  is  en  rapport  with  me  only.  In  order  to  wake
him  I  now  call  to  him  :  "  Wake  up  ! "  He  wakes
at  once,  but  only  remembers  going  to  sleep ;  of
what  happened  during  the  sleep  he  knows  nothing.

I  interrupt  here  for  a  time  the  description  of  the
experiments ;  I  shall  describe  others  in  the  course  of
this  work,  and  shall  occasionally  return  to  those
already  depicted.  I  will  merely  remark  that  in  all
these  experiments,  however  different  they  might  be,
the  voluntary  movements  were  always  inhibited,  that
in  one  case  hallucinations  of  the  senses  could  be
induced,  and  that  it  was  possible  for  me  in  all  cases
to  converse  with  the  subject,  and  we  could  understand
each  other.

I  wished  to  bring  forward  these  examples  in  order
that  the  reader  might  understand  to  a  certain  extent,
in  spite  of  the  absence  of  living  subjects,  what
different  states  are  included  in  the  idea  of  hypnosis,
and  how  it  is  induced  and  terminated.  The  above
experiments  are  typical,  and  every  one  who  makes
proper  experiments  can  always  repeat  them.

At  the  conclusion  of  these  experiments  I  add  a
short  Terminology,  which,  however,  is  by  no  means
complete,  as  some  particular  ideas  can  only  be  made
clear  in  the  further  course  of  the  work.

I  mean  by  hypnosis  the  state  into  which  the  subjects
were  thrown  during  the  experiments  described
above.

Hypnotism  is  not  the  name  of  the  state  itself,  but
of  the  whole  science  which  deals  with  the  phenomena
of  this  state.


26


HYPNOTISM.


A  person  in  the  hypnotic  state  is  called  a  hypnotic,
or  subject.

A  hypnotist  is  a  man  who  hypnotizes  for  scientific
purposes.  A  hypnotizer  is  a  man  who  makes  hypno-
tism a  profession.

The  different  commands  which  are  given  to  the
subjects  in  the  experiments  described,  the  prompting
and  persuasion,  are  called  suggestion,  a  word  to  which
I  shall  return,  and  which  I  shall  define  more  exactly
later  on.

I  shall  use  the  phrase,  "  to  suggest  "  for  the  giving
of  these  hints  or  promptings.

If  the  suggestion  takes  effect  it  is  said,  from  the
point  of  view  of  hypnotism,  that  the  subject  is  under
the  influence  of  suggestion.

There  are  several  methods  of  inducing  hypnosis,  as
can  be  gathered  from  the  above  examples.

In  order  to  make  a  systematic  survey,  we  divide
these  methods  into  two  groups — the  mental  and  the
physical.

The  mental  methods  induce  hypnosis  by  giving
a  particular  direction  to  the  subject's  imagination  ;
this  is  done  either  by  concentrating  the  attention
upon  an  arbitrary  point  (Braid),  or  by  raising  an
image  of  the  hypnotic  state  in  the  subject's  mind.
The  latter  is  most  easily  done  by  speech,  as  we
have  seen  in  the  above  four  examples.  Liebeault
originated  the  process,  which  deserves  particular  atten-
tion, as  by  the  use  of  it  unpleasant  accompanying
phenomena  are  more  surely  avoided.  As  a  matter
of  course,  the  methods  are  slightly  modified  to  suit
special  cases,  because  individual  character  plays  an
incomparably  larger  part  in  mental  states  than  in
ordinary  physiological  investigations. Naturally,  it


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


27


is  quite  possible  to  call  up  the  image  of  the  hypnotic
states  by  other  means  than  speech,  and  thus  to  induce
them,  by  the  influence  of  imitation,  for  example.  The
hypnotic  state  is  occasionally  induced  by  the  mere
sight  of  others  in  that  condition,  as  well  as  by  speech.
The  recollection  of  earlier  hypnoses  has  the  same
effect  ;  upon  this  fact  depends  the  induction  of
hypnosis  by  means  of  letters,  or  of  the  telephone
(Liegeois).

It  is  certain  that  these  mental  influences  play  a
large  part  in  hypnosigenesis,1  that  is,  in  the  origination
and  production  of  hypnosis.  It  is  equally  sure  that
they  suffice  in  many  cases  to  induce  hypnosis,  par-
ticularly when  the  person  concerned  has  already  been
hypnotized.  Bernheim  and  Forel  even  consider  the
mental  factor  as  indispensable  to  hypnosis  ;  they  hold
the  opinion  that  all  the  other  methods  mentioned
below  only  succeed  when  they  are  of  a  kind  to  call  up
the  picture  of  hypnosis.  As,  under  certain  circum-
stances which  we  shall  examine  later,  the  hypnosis
may  be  a  momentary  one  (that  is,  may  pass  away
quickly),  and  as  further  in  certain  circumstances  it
need  only  consist  of  one  solitary  recognizable  symptom,
the  representation  necessary  for  the  purpose  need  not
be  a  very  complicated  picture  (v.  Bentivegni).  Under
some  circumstances  the  mere  idea  that  an  arm  has
lost  the  power  of  motion  is  enough  to  cause  hypnosis,
of  which  precisely  this  loss  of  motion  is  the  only,  or
the  most  important,  symptom.

1  Although  the  terminology  up  to  the  present  time  is  very
deficient,  I  will  not  make  use  of  new  expressions.  Only  instead
of  "  hypnogen  "  and  "  hypnogenesis"  (=  induction  of  sleep),  I
shall  use  "  hypnosigen  "  and  "hypnosigenesis  "  (=  induction  of
hypnotic  sleep).  "  Hypnogen  "  is  derived  from  v-xvog — sleep —
and  is  often  used  for  "  sleep-producing."  "  Hypnosigen  "  is
derived  from  hypnosis  ;  and  its  use  will  prevent  confusion.


23


HYPNOTISM.


Here  belongs  also  autohypnosis,  or  self-hypnosis.
In  this  the  idea  of  the  hypnosis  is  not  aroused  by
another  person,  but  the  subject  generates  the  image
himself.  This  can  only  happen  by  an  act  of  will.  Just
as  the  will  is  otherwise  able  to  produce  particular
thoughts,  so  it  can  allow  the  idea  of  hypnosis  to  become
so  powerful  that  finally  hypnosis  is  induced  ;  this  is,
however,  rare.  Autohypnosis  generally  takes  place  in
consequence  of  some  incident  by  means  of  which
the  idea  of  the  hypnosis  is  produced ;  this  often
happens  when  the  subject  has  been  frequently  hypno-
tized. It  is  possible  that  some  states  of  sleep  which
are  generally  considered  pathological,  belong  to  auto-
hypnosis.

Faria  formerly  made  use  of  a  mental  method  to
obtain  hypnosis.  After  he  had  strained  the  attention
of  the  subject  as  much  as  possible,  he  called  out
suddenly,  "  Sleep  !"  Liebeault  substantially  developed
and  completed  this  process,  Bernheim  made  it  more
universally  known.

I  will  now  speak  of  the  physical  methods,  which
for  a  long  time  were  the  only  ones  used.  They  con-
sist of  certain  stimuli  of  sight,  hearing,  and  touch.
Taste  and  smell  (Binet,  Fere)  have  been  rarely  tried,
and  have  generally  given  negative  results.  The  best
known  is  the  so-called  method  of  Braid.  The
hypnosis  is  caused  by  a  fixed  gaze  at  some  object  or
other.  It  is  of  little  consequence  whether  the  object
is  bright  or  not.  Later,  Braid  gave  up  placing  the
object  so  close  as  to  cause  a  convergence  of  the
eyes.  It  is  considered  advantageous  to  hold  the
object  so  much  above  the  eyes  that  the  eyelids  are
strained  as  much  as  possible  in  keeping  the  eyes  open.
Instead  of  a  lifeless  object,  such  as  was  used  in  the
first  experiment  mentioned  above,  the  experimenter


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.  29


can  make  use  of  his  finger  for  the  purpose,  or,  as  the
professional  magnetizers  prefer  to  do,  of  his  eye  (Du
Potet).  Lately,  Luys  has  used  a  rapidly  revolving
mirror,  in  order  to  produce  speedy  and  extreme
fatigue  of  the  eye.  Just  the  same  effect  can  be  pro-
duced by  hearing  as  by  sight  ;  for  this  the  ticking  of
a  watch  is  preferred  (Weinhold,  Heidenhain).  Among
uncivilized  races  particular  instruments  are  used  to
produce  analogous  states  ;  for  example,  the  sound  of  a
magic  drum  among  the  Lapps  ;  among  other  races
the  monotony  of  uniform  rhythm  in  song  (Bastian).
Instead  of  these  continuous,  monotonous,  weak  stimu-
lations of  the  senses,  we  see  also  sudden  and  violent
ones  made  use  of,  for  example,  in  the  Salpetriere,  the
field  of  Charcot's  work,  the  loud  noise  of  a  gong  or  a
sudden  ray  of  the  Drummond  light.  However,  it  is
more  than  doubtful  whether  these  sudden  strong
physical  stimuli,  without  any  mental  element,  can
induce  true  hypnosis.  Perhaps  we  have  to  do  here
with  states  not  far  removed  from  paralysis  from  fright ;
at  least  subjects  thus  hypnotized  often  wear  an  ex-
pression of  fear  (Richer).  The  effect  can  be  also
produced  through  the  sense  of  touch,  even  by  a  gentle
stroking  of  the  skin,  or  by  pressure  upon  it.  Some
have  also  sought  to  induce  hypnosis  by  the  stimulus
of  heat — e.g.,  warm  plates  of  metal  (Berger).  It  is
known  that  warmth  easily  brings  on  natural  sleep,
while  cold,  if  it  is  not  too  great,  keeps  it  off.

I  here  mention  in  particular  the  so-called  mesmeric,
mesmerizing,  or  magnetic  passes,  upon  which  Richet
sets  great  value.  I  have  already  shown  and  described
above,  in  the  second  experiment,  how  they  are  made  ;
I  mention  them  here,  though  the  question  of  how  they
act  is  not  yet  satisfactorily  settled.  It  is  not  certain
whether  the  stimulation  of  temperature,  as  Heidenhain


3o


HYPNOTISM.


and  Berger  suppose,  or  the  slight  motion  of  the  air,  or
the  mental  influence,  is  the  efficient  agent  in  this  case.
I  myself  consider  it  most  likely  that  the  various
agencies  combine,  but  that  the  mental  factor  is  the  most
important.  It  is  not  necessary  to  assume  the  existence
of  any  peculiar  force,  such  as  the  magnetic  fluid  of
the  mesmerist.  An  old  hypothesis  has  been  recently
revived,  namely,  that  we  have  to  do  with  an  electrical
action  (Rostan,  J.  Wagner).  Tarchanoff  has  shown
that  by  means  of  gentle  stimulations  of  the  skin  weak
electric  currents  can  be  produced  in  it,  but  that  these
same  can  also  be  produced  by  strong  concentration  of
the  will,  in  consequence  of  which  there  is  always
muscular  contraction.  Now,  as  the  mesmerists  con-
sider a  strong  effort  of  will  necessary  on  the  part  of
the  operator,  it  is  possible  that  a  peripheral  develop-
ment of  electricity  takes  place  in  him,  which  has  an
effect  upon  the  mesmerized  subject.  This  idea  is,
however,  merely  a  supposition  of  individual  investiga-
tors ;  we  know  nothing  certain  about  it  yet.

We  should  note  that  the  method  of  so-called  "  mesmeric
passes"  was  not  used  by  Mesmer  ;  it  is  true  that  he  endeavoured
to  influence  by  touch,  but  these  peculiar  monotonous  long-con-
tinued passes  which  I  have  described  above,  were  unknown  to
him.

Pitres  maintains  that  certain  portions  of  the  body
are  particularly  sensitive  to  stimulation  of  the  skin.
The  "zones  hypnogenes"  described  by  him  some-
times exist  on  only  one  side  of  the  body,  and  some-
times on  both.  Stimuli  applied  to  them  are  said  to
produce  hypnosis  in  certain  persons,  as  is  indeed
maintained  of  other  parts.  Among  these  parts  of  the
body  the  crown  of  the  head,  the  root  of  the  nose,  the
thumb,  the  elbow,  &c,  are  particularly  named.  Accord-


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


31


ing  to  Chambard  and  Laborde  a  gentle  scratching  of
the  skin  of  the  neck  induces  hypnosis.  I  myself  have
seen  many  persons  who  maintained  that  they  became
hypnotized  only  when  I  touched  their  foreheads.  It
is  often  stated  that  touches  on  the  forehead  induce  a
sleepy  state  in  many  persons  (Purkinje,  Spitta).  An
Englishman  named  Catlow  magnetized  by  means  of
gentle  stroking  of  the  forehead  (Baumler).  I  also
know  some  persons  who,  in  order  to  go  to  sleep  more
easily,  cause  other  parts  of  the  body  to  be  gently
stimulated — the  head,  or  soles  of  the  feet,  for  example.
Eulenburg  maintains  that  pressure  on  the  cervical
vertebrae  induces  hypnosis.

Finally,  I  mention  the  action  of  the  electric  battery,
whose  influence,  according  to  Weinhold,  has  the  same
effect  as  mesmeric  passes.  Weinhold,  however,
writing  in  a  critical  spirit,  does  not  consider  that
mental  influences  are  in  this  case  excluded.  When
Eulenburg  obtained  a  lethargic  condition,  resembling
hypnosis,  by  galvanizing  the  head,  this  experiment
did  not  prove  a  true  hypnosis,  since  the  person
experimented  upon  had  already  had  attacks  of
lethargy.  It  is  certain  that  in  many  cases  where
hypnosis  is  supposed  to  have  been  caused  by  the
application  of  electricity  to  the  head,  the  hypnosis
has  only  come  on  because  the  subject  believed  that
electricity  induced  hypnosis.  Hirt  often  uses  elec-
tricity in  this  way,  but  is  at  the  same  time  perfectly
clear  that  it  is  not  the  electricity  but  the  subject's
belief  in  its  effect,  that  produces  the  hypnosis.

To  conclude,  I  further  mention  stimulations  of  the
muscular  sense,  such  as  the  cradle  rocking  used  to
send  little  children  to  sleep  ;  I  leave  on  one  side  the
question  as  to  whether  hypnosis  can  be  attained  by  this
means. Similar  states  are  said  to  be  produced  among


32


HYPNOTISM.


uncivilized  peoples  by  violent  whirling  or  dancing
movements ;  the  movements  are,  however,  accom-
panied by  music  and  other  mental  excitations.  The
best  known  are  the  Ai'ssaouas,  in  Algiers  (Figuier,
Bert,  Delphin).  "They  carry  on  their  business  chiefly
in  the  Algerian  town  of  Constantine.  They  are  able
by  means  of  dancing  and  singing  to  throw  themselves
into  a  state  of  ecstasy  difficult  to  describe,  in  which
their  bodies  seem  to  be  insensible  even  to  severe
wounds.  They  run  pointed  iron  and  sharp  knives  into
their  heads,  eyes,  necks,  and  breasts,  without  injuring
themselves"  (Hellwald).  The  same  thing  is  related
of  the  Buddhist  convents  in  Tibet  (Hellwald,
Gabriel  Hue),  and  Dr.  Sperling  has  told  me  that
he  has  himself  seen  dervishes  in  Constantinople,  who,
from  the  expression  of  their  eyes  and  their  whole
appearance,  as  well  as  from  the  peculiar  postures
they  maintained  for  a  length  of  time,  impressed  him
as  being  in  a  hypnotic  state.  The  state  may  have
been  induced  by  monotonous  singing  and  uniform
whirling  movements.  As  Dr.  Sperling  has  a  par-
ticularly wide  experience  in  the  field  of  hypnotism
and  is  one  of  the  most  competent  authorities  on  the
subject,  his  opinion  is  of  peculiar  value.

I  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  sense-stimuli  among
the  physical  methods.  But  it  must  also  be  mentioned
that  the  absence  of  these  stimuli  is  likewise  specified
as  an  expedient  for  hypnosigenesis.  Jendrassik,
of  Buda-Pesth,  expresses  the  opinion  that  fixed
attention  is  only  effective  because  it  causes  fatigue
of  the  nerves  of  sight,  and  consequently  produces
insensibility  to  stimulation.  Perhaps  the  case  related
by  Striimpell  is  of  this  class  ;  he  observed  a  person
who  fell  asleep  immediately  on  the  cessation  of  sense-
stimulation.


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.  33


This  classification  of  hypnogenetic  expedients
is  merely  theoretical  (Forel,  Levillain)  ;  and  that
for  two  reasons.  In  the  first  place  we  cannot
regard  body  and  mind  as  two  factors  which  are
independent  of  one  another.  Sense-stimuli,  which
affect  the  body,  nearly  always  exercise  a  certain
effect  on  the  mind  ;  the  mind,  on  the  other  hand,  can
act  upon  nothing  which  has  not  previously  entered  it
by  means  of  the  organs  of  sense.  In  the  second
place,  in  practice  several  hypnogenetic  processes  are
habitually  used  at  the  same  time.  This  will  become
perfectly  clear  if  the  hypnotized  person  is  watched  :
let  him  be  told  that  he  must  keep  any  particular  idea
well  in  mind,  that  he  must  concentrate  his  whole
attention  on  the  idea  of  sleep ;  he  will  then,  in  order
to  obey  the  command,  look  steadily  at  some  point,  or
at  once  shut  his  eyes,  in  order  as  much  as  possible  to
prevent  distraction  of  thought.

Thus  Bernheim  occasionally  uses  fixed  attention
at  the  same  time  as  the  mental  methods.  Braid,
again,  who  made  use  of  fixation  almost  entirely,  yet
considered  a  particular  mental  activity  also  necessary.
This  is  particularly  to  be  noticed,  because  some
people  nowadays  believe  that  they  are  using  the
method  of  Braid  when  they  tell  the  subject  to  look
steadily  at  something.  In  reality  Braid  considered  a
steady  attention  as  well  as  a  steady  gaze  indispen-
sable if  hypnosis  were  to  be  attained  ;  the  subject
must  think  steadily  of  the  thing  he  was  looking  at,
and  must  not  allow  himself  to  be  diverted  from  it.
According  to  Braid,  one  can  hypnotize  even  in  the
dark.

But  even  theoretically  we  cannot  always  keep
these  things  apart.  Closing  of  the  eyes,  with  slight
pressure  upon  them,  often  leads,  as  Lasegue  showed,

.4


34


HYPNOTISM.


to  hypnotic  states.  How  these  come  about,  whether
through  the  cessation  of  the  sense  stimulation,  or
through  the  idea  of  sleep,  which  the  closing  of  the
eyes  certainly  easily  calls  up,  cannot  be  decided.
After  these  details,  the  much  discussed  and  disputed
question  must  be  answered,  whether  a  person  can  ^>
be  hypnotized  without  his  knowledge  ;  whether  any
one  can  be  thrown  into  the  hypnotic  state  merely  by
sense-stimuli,  without  these  arousing  an  image  of  the
hypnosis.  I  know  of  no  well-authenticated  case  in
which  sense  stimulation  has  produced  hypnosis  by
a  purely  physiological  action.  Most  people  upon
whom  such  experiments  are  made  know  that  an
attempt  is  being  made  to  hypnotize  them  ;  they  have
been  already  hypnotized,  and  the  stimuli  arouse
conscious  or  unconscious  mental  images  of  the
hypnosis  ;  or  they  have  seen  the  same  experiments
with  others,  or  have  heard  of  them.  Even  when  this
is  not  the  case,  the  objection  of  Bernheim  and  Forel
remains  to  be  considered,  that  the  stimuli  induce  a
feeling  of  fatigue,  and  through  this  induce  the
hypnosis.

Which  of  the  above  methods,  or  which  combination
of  them  is  the  best  for  practical  use,  is  a  question  the
answer  to  which  is  not  so  simple  that  every  one  who
has  made  a  dozen  experiments  is  justified  in  trying
to  reply  to  it.  When  we  find  that  Richet  thinks  he
can  throw  nearly  anybody  into  the  hypnotic  state  by
means  of  mesmeric  passes,  that  Liebeault  hypnotizes
nearly  all  his  patients  by  means  of  the  Nancy  process,
that  Braid  hypnotized  ten  persons  out  of  fourteen
by  means  of  fixed  attention,  we  see  that  different
methods  bring  about  nearly  identical  results.  I  am
decidedly  of  opinion  that  in  each  individual  case
that  method  should  be  selected  by  means  of  which


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.  35


the  most  vivid  picture  of  the  hypnosis,  and  the
conviction  that  it  will  come  on,  can  be  produced  in
the  subject.  I  lay  stress  on  the  fact  that  in  individual
cases  persons  appear  refractory  to  one  method  while
another  succeeds.  I  have  found  persons  insusceptible
to  the  use  of  fixed  attention,  or  to  the  method  of
Nancy,  while  I  obtained  results  by  mesmeric  passes.
Evidently  this  proves  nothing  against  mental  action,
as  many  persons  believe  they  can  only  be  influenced
by  some  particular  process.  On  the  other  side  I  have
seen  that  intense  fixity  of  gaze  sometimes  induces
hypnosis  when  other  methods  are  useless,  perhaps
because  the  subjective  expectation  of  the  hypnosis
is  sooner  aroused  by  the  long,  intense  stare,  than
by  verbal  orders.  Again,  in  some  cases  it  is  well  to
attain  the  aim  quickly,  by  means  of  a  sharp  shock
(Sperling,  Forel,  Van  Eeden,  Van  Renterghem).

I  should  here  mention  that,  according  to  Landouzy,  Proust,
Ballet,  and  Benedikt,  the  magnet  also  has  a  hypnotizing  effect,
although  my  own  numerous  experiments  have  been  unsuc-
cessful. That  the  bending  back  of  the  head  can  induce
hypnosis,  as  Eulenburg  says  it  does,  must  surely  be  founded
on  a  mistake.

Chambard  puts  chloroform,  ether,  &c,  among  the  hypno-
genetic  agents.  In  any  case,  many  phenomena  analogous  to
those  of  hypnosis  have  been  observed  in  the  sleep  induced  by
these  agents  (Spring,  Rifat,  Herrero,  Roth).  I  consider  it
better  to  distinguish  these  agents  from  hypnosis  (F.  Myers).

The  waking  from  hypnosis  (dehypnotization)  can
also  occur  in  two  ways—through  immediate  action  on
the  imagination,  or  through  sense  stimulation,  exactly
as  waking  out  of  the  natural  sleep  occurs  sometimes
from  mental  causes,  for  example,  from  habit,  or
from  the  resolution  to  awake  at  a  certain  hour  ;  and
sometimes  from  stronger  stimuli  of  the  senses,  for


36


HYPNOTISM.


example,  a  loud  noise.  It  is  nearly  always  possible
to  put  an  end  to  the  hypnosis  by  mental  means,
that  is,  by  the  command  to  wake  up,  or  to  wake  up
at  a  particular  signal.  It  is  hardly  ever  necessary  to
use  other  means,  such  as  fanning,  excitation  by  the
faradism,  sprinkling  with  water,  loud  calls,  &c.  I
cannot  confirm  the  statement  of  some,  that  cold  has
an  arousing  effect.  Just  as  the  mesmerizing  passes
induce  hypnosis,,  so  the  demesmerizing  passes — as  I
used  them  in  the  second  experiment,  above  described
—  cause  it  to  disappear.  Whether  the  cool  current  of
air,  which  is  nearly  always  thereby  generated,  causes
the  awakening,  or  whether  it  is,  as  I  think  more
probable,  the  belief  of  the  subject  that  he  must  wake,
remains  undecided.  Pitres  and  others  think  that  there
are  parts  of  the  body  where  stimulation  produces
awakening ;  they  are  called  " zoiies  kypno-fernatrices."
Among  them  the  ovarian  regions  are  particularly  ^
notable.  Finally,  I  mention  the  forcible  opening  of
the  eyes  as  a  means  of  ending  the  hypnosis.  Other
processes  which  have  been  given,  and  which  were
supposed  to  induce  awakening  by  physical  means,
such  as  bringing  a  coal  near  the  patient,  have  only  a
mental  effect,  as  they  are  understood  as  a  command
to  awake.  In  rare  cases  these  artificial  means  of
awakening  do  not  succeed  quickly  ;  a  feeling  of
fatigue  then  continues.  We  feel  the  same  thing
occasionally  when  we  wake  out  of  natural  sleep.
After  deep  and  long  hypnosis  a  temporary  state
like  extreme  sleepiness  follows,  in  which  certain  hyp-
notic phenomena  continue.

If  the  awakening  is  not  brought  about  by  artificial
means,  persons  in  a  light  hypnotic  state,  such  as  is
described  in  the  first  two  experiments,  habitually
wake  of  their  own  accord  after  a  few  minutes  or  even


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.  37


seconds  ;  this  especially  happens  when  the  continu-
ance of  the  state  has  not  been  expressly  ordered.
Some  people  wake  at  the  exact  moment  when  the
experimenter  leaves  them,  as  they  then  no  longer
think  themselves  under  his  influence.  Others  awake
of  their  own  accord  out  of  deep  hypnosis  if  they  hear
an  unexpected  and  loud  noise,  or  have  exciting
dreams.  Thus,  I  once  saw  a  grown-up  person  wake
herself  by  screaming,  because  in  the  hypnotic  state
she  had  believed  herself  to  be  a  little  child,  and  in  that
character  had  begun  to  cry.  The  awakening  which
comes  about  without  any  apparent  cause  is  remark-
able and  unexplained  (mouvement  psychique.)  The
same  thing  is  sometimes  observed  in  natural  sleep,
especially  at  its  beginning  ;  O.  Rosenbach  traces  it
to  increase  of  the  reflexes.  Generally,  however,  the
deep  hypnoses  continue  for  some  time  when  they  are
not  artificially  terminated.  Sometimes  many  hours
pass  before  the  subject  wakes.

The  old  mesmerists  (Du  Potet,  Lafontaine)  describe
as  a  rare  occurrence  in  hypnotic  experiments  a  state
of  lethargy,  in  which  artificial  awakening  was  im-
possible. After  some  time  there  was  a  spontaneous
awakening,  and  no  evil  consequences  were  to  be
observed.  Guermonprez  described  lately  how  a
person  had  remained  three  days  in  hypnosis,  nobody
being  able  to  wake  him.  It  appears  that  these  inci-
dents occur  more  often  when  sense  stimulations  are
used — for  example,  the  fixed  gaze  or  the  mesmeric
passes.  And  again,  this  state  has  only  been  observed
among  hysterical  subjects,  so  far  as  I  am  aware.
Therefore  I  believe  that  this  lethargy  must  be  dis-
tinguished from  hypnosis,  the  chief  symptoms  of
which  are  wanting.  We  cannot  identify  this  state
with  hypnosis,  merely  because  it  is  a  result  of  the  same


38


HYPNOTISM.


processes  ;  the  identity  could  only  be  proved  by  a
likeness  of  symptoms,  not  by  a  likeness  in  the  manner
of  their  production.  When  one  person  receives  a  blow
on  the  ear  and  haemorrhage  under  the  skin  follows,
while  another  receives  a  like  blow,  and  has  the  drum
of  the  ear  burst :  these  are  two  different  injuries,  and
the  fact  that  they  have  the  same  cause  does  not  make
them  identical.

Who  is  hypnotizable  ?  In  order  to  settle  this
question  without  hypnotic  experiments,  Ochorowicz
has  invented  a  special  instrument — the  hypnoscope  :
it  is  an  iron  magnet  in  the  form  of  a  ring,  which  the
person  to  be  tested  puts  on  his  finger.  Hypnotizable
persons  are  supposed  to  experience  certain  sensations
in  the  skin  and  twitchings  of  the  muscles,  while
with  the  insusceptible  nothing  of  the  kind  takes
place.  The  researches  of  other  investigators  have
not  confirmed  this  (Obersteiner,  Gessmann,  Grasset,
Bottey).  Other  signs  which  are  supposed  to  indicate
susceptibility  to  hypnotism  I  consider  untrustworthy.

Neither  neurasthenia  nor  pallor,  neither  hysteria
nor  general  feebleness  of  health,  produce  a  disposition
to  hypnosis.  As  far  as  hysteria  is  concerned,  it  is  not
in  my  experience  peculiarly  suited  to  hypnotism.
Our  ordinary  hysteria  with  its  variable  characteristics
of  headache  and  the  feeling  of  a  lump  in  the  throat
(globus)  combined  with  the  general  hysterical  desire
to  be  interesting  and  to  exaggerate  the  sufferings  en-
dured, produces,  according  to  my  experience,  very
little  disposition  to  hypnosis.  The  spirit  of  contra-
diction, very  strongly  developed  in  such  patients,
contributes  not  a  little  to  this.  The  mistaken  notion
that  hysterical  or  nervous  patients  are  particularly
susceptible  to  hypnotism  results  from  the  fact  that
most  physicians  have  experimented  with  them  only  ;


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


39


besides  which  it  is  very  easy  to  discover  in  all
persons  something  which  may  be  explained  as  a
hysterical  symptom,  if  only  we  try  to  do  so.  If,
however,  we  consider  every  one  who  submits  himself
to  a  hypnotic  experiment  to  be  "  nervous,"  then,
naturally,  only  nervous  persons  can  be  put  into  the
hypnotic  state  ;  but  this  view  cannot  be  taken
seriously.  In  reality,  if  we  are  to  take  a  patho-
logical condition  of  the  organism  as  a  necessary
condition  for  hypnosis,  we  shall  be  obliged  to  conclude
that  nearly  everybody  is  not  quite  right  in  the  head.
For  the  rest,  the  old  mesmerists  in  part  (Wirth  and
others)  maintained  that  hysteria  only  produced  a
disposition  to  the  magnetic  sleep.

Further,  if  general  weakness  is  to  be  put  forward
as  a  predisposing  factor,  I,  for  my  part,  must  empha-
size the  fact  that  I  have  hypnotized  many  very
muscular  persons.  It  is  known  that  Hansen,  whose  „
practical  experience  is  of  some  value,  always  preferred
muscular  people  for  his  experiments.  The  suscepti-
bility of  tuberculous  patients  is  striking  (Bernheim.)

With  regard  to  mental  aptitudes,  Forel  believes
that  every  mentally  healthy  human  being  is  hypno-
tizable.  In  Liebeault's  opinion  heredity  plays  a  great
part  in  the  disposition  to  hypnosis.  It  is  universally
agreed  that  the  mentally  unsound,  particularly  idiots,
even  if  not  wholly  insusceptible,  are  still  very  much
more  difficult  to  hypnotize  than  the  healthy.  How-
X  ever,  A.  Voisin  informs  us  that  he  has  succeeded  in
hypnotizing  ten  per  cent,  of  the  mentally  unsound,  by
exercising  the  necessary  patience.  With  regard  to
intelligence,  intelligent  persons  are  more  easily
hypnotizable  than  the  dull  and  stupid.  Among  the
lower  classes  the  mentally  superior  are  undoubtedly
easier  to  hypnotize  than  others. Mental  excitement


4o


HYPNOTISM.


easily  prevents  hypnosis.  The  numerous  observations
made  by  Wetterstrand,  Ringier,  and  others,  that
certain  individuals  are  occasionally  refractory  to
hypnosis,  may  be  connected  with  this  fact.  I
could  confirm  this  occasional  disinclination  to
hypnosis  by  a  whole  series  of  cases.  I  consider  it  a
complete  mistake  to  say  that  the  disposition  to
hypnosis  is  a  sign  of  weakness  of  will.  Without
doubt  the  ability  to  maintain  a  passive  state  has  a
predisposing  effect.  This  is  why  soldiers  are  in
general  easy  to  hypnotize.  The  ability  to  direct  one's
thoughts  in  any  particular  direction  is  also  very
favourable.  As  we  habitually  consider  this  power  to
be  a  sign  of  strength  of  will,  the  disposition  to
hypnosis  would  rather  be  a  sign  of  strength  than  of
weakness  of  will.  This  ability  to  give  the  thoughts  a
certain  prescribed  direction  is  partly  natural  capacity,
partly  a  matter  of  habit,  and  often  an  affair  of
will.  Those,  on  the  contrary,  who  can  by  no  possi-
bility fix  their  attention,  who  suffer  from  continual
absence  of  mind,  can  hardly  be  hypnotized  at  all.  It
is  specially  among  the  nervous  that  a  strikingly  large
number  of  this  last  class  are  to  be  found,  who  cannot
hold  fast  to  a  thought,  and  in  whom  a  perpetual
wandering  of  the  mind  predominates.  The  disposi-
tion to  hypnosis  is  also  not  specially  common  among
those  persons  who  are  otherwise  very  impressible.  It
is  well  known  that  there  are  some  who  can  be  easily
influenced  in  life,  who  believe  all  that  they  are  told,
upon  whom  the  most  unimportant  trifles  make  an
impression,  nevertheless,  when  an  effort  is  made  to
hypnotize  them,  they  offer  a  lively  resistance,  and  the
typical  symptoms  of  hypnosis  cannot  be  induced  in
them.

Nationality  (Evvaldj,  or  local  surroundings  (Brugia),


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.  41


have  no  influence  upon  susceptibility  to  hypnotism.
Forel  in  Zurich,  Renterghem  in  Amsterdam,  and
Wetterstrand  in  Stockholm,  have  shown  that  Teu-
tonic peoples  are  as  easy  to  hypnotize  as  Latin.
Wetterstrand  only  failed  to  hypnotize  eighteen  people
out  of  718  in  Stockholm.  Besides,  Braid's  experi-
ences in  England  show  nearly  the  same  thing.
Recently  it  has  been  pointed  out  in  many  quarters
that  Russians  are  more  easily  hypnotized  than  any
other  people  (Poirault  and  Drzewiecki).  In  any  case
it  may  be  considered  settled  that  susceptibility  to
hypnotism  is  no  peculiar  privilege  of  the  Latin  races.
With  regard  to  age,  children  under  three  years  cannot
be  hypnotized  at  all,  and  even  up  to  about  eight
years  of  age  they  can  only  be  hypnotized  with
difficulty.  Although  children  are  otherwise  easily
influenced,  their  thoughts  are  so  easily  distracted
that  they  cannot  fix  their  minds  on  a  prescribed
picture,  such  as  that  of  hypnosis.  Old  age  is  by
no  means  refractory  to  hypnosis.  According  to  the
experiences  of  the  school  of  Nancy,  with  which  mine
agree,  older  persons  more  often  remember,  after
hypnosis,  all  that  has  happened  than  do  younger
ones.  Sex  has  no  particular  influence  ;  it  is  a
mistake  to  suppose  that  women  are  better  adapted
than  men.

Besides  this,  individual  observers  (Bremaud,  Maack)  men-
tion some  points  which  are  supposed  to  be  favourable  or
unfavourable.  Bre'maud,  for  example,  mentions  alcohol  as
favourable,  Maack  as  unfavourable.  But  universal  conclusions
should  not  be  drawn  from  a  few  observations,  as  so  doing  will
not  contribute  to  any  clear  understanding.  For  the  same
reason  I  question  the  general  accuracy  of  some  of  Ringier's
statements,  though  the  rest  of  his  remarks  have  a  great
practical  value.  According  to  him,  hypnotism  is  less  easily
practised  in  winter  than  in  summer,  because  cold  is  supposed


42


HYPNOTISM.


to  be  unfavourable  ;  thus  persons  who  were  easily  hypnotized
in  summer  become  refractory  in  winter.

The  frequency  with  which  an  attempt  should  be
repeated  on  the  same  person  is  of  more  importance.
While,  according  to  Hahnle,  only  one  person  in  ten
proves  susceptible  on  a  first  attempt,  the  proportion
increases  enormously  with  the  frequency  of  the
sittings.  This  is  not  to  be  wondered  at,  from  the
mental  excitement  shown  by  many  people  in  the
beginning.  And  as  it  is  most  important  to  hypnosis
that  the  attention  should  not  be  distracted,  many
people  are  first  of  all  obliged  to  learn  to  concentrate
their  thoughts.  There  are  even  experimenters  who
maintain  that  everybody  is  hypnotizable,  if  only  the
attempt  is  continued  long  enough.  Without  de-
claring this  view  to  be  false,  I  may  remark  that  I
have  made  forty  or  more  attempts  with  some  persons
without  obtaining  hypnosis.  Perhaps  by  even  longer
continued  efforts  a  result  would  have  been  attained,
as  indeed  has  happened  to  me  many  times  after  forty
vain  attempts.  It  may  be  something  the  same  thing
as  with  the  great  lottery  prize.  According  to  pro-
bability everybody  would  win  once,  if  they  could
only  live  and  play  long  enough.

Besides  these  subjective  conditions  there  are  some
other  objective  ones.  Thus,  for  example,  disturb-
ing noises  at  the  first  experiment  have  power  to
prevent  the  hypnosis  ;  they  draw  off  the  attention,
and  thus  interfere  with  the  mental  state  necessary  for
hypnosis.  Later,  when  the  subject  has  learnt  to  con-
centrate his  thoughts,  noises  are  less  disturbing.  But
in  hypnotic  experiments  the  most  absolute  avoidance
by  those  present  of  any  sign  of  mistrust  is  necessary.
The  least  word,  a  gesture,  may  thwart  the  attempt  to
hypnotize. As  the  mood  of  a  large  company  is  often


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


43


distrustful,  as  a  whole  generation  also  is  sometimes
sceptical,  the  great  variations  in  susceptibility  to
hypnosis  which  have  shown  themselves  at  different
times  and  places  are  explicable.  It  is  not  surprising
that  on  one  occasion  ten  persons,  one  after  the  other,
are  hypnotized,  while  on  another  occasion  ten  other
persons  all  prove  refractory.

Experience  and  a  knowledge  of  the  mental  con-
ditions of  mankind  are  indispensable  for  the  hypno-
tizer.  The  first  is  absolutely  necessary  ;  it  is  more
important  than  a  knowledge  of  anatomy  and  physio-
logy. By  experience  one  learns  to  discriminate  and
to  enter  into  the  particular  character  of  the  subject.
Practice  and  a  gift  for  observation  enable  the  right
stress  to  be  laid  at  the  right  moment  either  on  fixed
attention  or  on  the  closing  of  the  eyes.  The  experi-
enced experimenter  knows  how  to  judge  whether  it
is  best  in  any  particular  case  to  attain  his  aim  by
speaking  or  whether,  as  sometimes  happens,  speech
would  be  a  hindrance,  and  the  chief  stress  would  be
best  laid  on  fixed  attention,  &c.  A  person  who  is
easily  hypnotized  can  be  hypnotized  by  any  one  ;
but  one  who  is  hypnotized  with  difficulty  can  only
be  thrown  into  hypnosis  by  a  good  and  experienced
experimenter.  It  is  by  no  means  a  contradiction  of
this  that  the  personal  impression  made  by  the  ex-
perimenter may  be  very  important  and  have  great
influence.  In  consequence  of  this  it  happens  that  a
certain  person  A.  can  be  hypnotized  by  B.,  while
he  remains  refractory  to  the  efforts  of  C.  On  the
other  hand,  it  may  happen  that  D.  can  be  hyp-
notized by  C.  but  not  by  B.  This  shows  that  the
influence  of  one  person  over  another  is  dependent
on  the  individuality  of  both.  We  find  the  same  in
life,  in  the  relation  of  teacher  to  pupil,  and  of  pupil


44


HYPNOTISM.


to  teacher,  in  the  reciprocal  relations  of  friends,  or
lovers.  The  influence  of  one  person  on  another
always  depends  on  the  individuality  of  both.

That  there  exists  an  individual  aptitude  for  hypno-
tization,  and  for  making  the  suggestions  which  will  be
discussed  later,  is  certain.  It  is  true  that  we  must  not
think  of  this  ability  as  did  the  older  mesmerists,  who
supposed  that  certain  persons  exercised  a  peculiar
physical  force  upon  others  ;  we  must  represent  this
natural  ability  to  ourselves  as  we  do  many  others,
when  we  have  to  do  with  particular  mental  apti-
tudes. Calm,  presence  of  mind,  and  patience  are
essential,  and  not  every  one  can  exercise  these
qualities.  To  busy  oneself  with  hypnotizing  a
subject  daily  for  hours  at  a  time  demands  a  per-
severance which  everybody  does  not  possess.  Very
much  more  patience  is  necessary  for  this  than  for
writing  prescriptions,  for  example,  several  hundreds
of  which  could  be  produced  in  the  same  length  of  time.

The  question  whether  hypnosis  can  be  induced
against  the  wish  of  the  subject  is  by  no  means  un-
important. We  must  distinguish  here  whether  the
subject  complies  with  the  prescribed  conditions  or
whether  he  does  not.  If  he  does  ;  if,  for  example,
he  sufficiently  concentrates  his  attention  ;  if  he  gazes
at  some  object  with  the  necessary  attention,  then
hypnosis  may  be  produced  at  the  first  attempt,  even
against  the  wish  of  the  person  experimented  on.
However,  it  must  be  remembered  that  a  person  who
does  not  intend  to  allow  himself  to  be  hypnotized
will  hardly  place  himself  in  the  necessary  mental
state.  He  will  not  generally  fulfil  the  conditions  ;
he  will  fix  his  eyes,  but  will  allow  his  attention  to
wander. However,  I  think  I  may  assert  that  certain


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


45


persons  accustomed  to  obedience  can  be  hypnotized
at  the  first  attempt  even  against  their  will,  and  with-
out the  ordinary  necessary  straining  of  the  attention,
if  only  they  are  told  that  hypnosis  will  occur.  Not-
withstanding, these  cases  appear  to  be  rare.  It  is
not  to  be  doubted  that  many  people  who  have  been
frequently  hypnotized  can  be  re-hypnotized  against
their  will  and  without  their  intentional  compliance
with  the  ordinary  conditions.  The  experiments  of
Heidenhain  show  that  people  can  be  hypnotized
against  their  wish.  He  hypnotized  soldiers  in  the
presence  of  their  officers,  who  had  strictly  forbidden
them  to  sleep.  Such  a  command  would  have  as
much  effect  on  a  soldier  as  the  personal  wish  not
to  sleep.  Post-hypnotic  suggestion,  of  which  I  shall
speak  later,  is  also  a  means  of  sending  persons  to
sleep  against  their  wish.  There  is  a  third  possi-
bility, namely,  that  no  wish  should  exist  in  either
direction.  The  conditions  necessary  for  hypnosis
may  occur  occasionally  by  chance,  without  the  sub-
ject being  conscious  of  them  (Max  Dessoir).  For
example,  some  one  over  his  work  is  obliged  to  look
fixedly  at  a  certain  point  ;  this  suffices  to  induce
hypnosis  (sometimes  after  earlier  fruitless  experi-
ments), without  the  person  thinking  of  it.  In  this
case  the  will  is  neither  interested  for  it  nor  against  it.
The  statement  of  Preyer,  that  persons  being  photo-
graphed sometimes  remain  sitting  rigidly  still  after
the  taking  of  the  photograph  is  finished,  may  be
referred  to  a  hitherto  unsuspected  hypnotic  state,
brought  on  by  the  fixed  attention  necessary  to  the
process.  It  is  known  that  some  of  the  inmates  of
the  Salpetriere  in  Paris  fall  suddenly  into  catalepsy
in  consequence  of  some  loud  unexpected  noise.
There  is  an  interesting  case  of  a  girl  who  had  often


46


HYPNOTISM.


been  hypnotized  by  loud  noises,  and  who  went  to  a
drawer  to  appropriate  some  photographs  out  of  it.
The  casual  beating  of  a  gong  threw  her  into  a
cataleptic  state,  so  that  she  stood  motionless  in  the
act  of  carrying  out  her  theft,  and  was  discovered.
Hack  Tuke  remarks  that  it  is  a  pity  all  thieves
cannot  be  taken  as  easily.

As  Bertrancl  related,  with  certain  persons  natural
sleep  can  be  transformed  into  magnetic  sleep.  Many
attempts  have  been  made  to  do  this  in  later  times.
Baillif,  Gschleiden,  Berger,  Bernheim,  and  Forel  have
even  made  these  experiments  on  persons  who  had
never  been  hypnotized  at  all,  or  who  had  previously
been  refractory  to  hypnotism.  I  myself  have  only
been  able  to  make  one  observation  of  this  kind.  The
person  concerned  was  a  gentleman  whom  I  had
already  frequently  hypnotized,  and  whom  I  often
threw  into  the  hypnotic  state  while  he  was  taking  his
afternoon  sleep,  without  waking  him.  It  is  doubtful
whether  such  experiments  would  succeed  with  persons
who  had  never  heard  of  hypnotism.

Still  more  to  be  doubted  appear  the  assertions  of
Pitres,  who  thinks  it  possible  to  produce  a  hypnotic
state  in  this  way  by  means  of  stimulating  the  "  zones
hypuogcnes."  Coste  likewise  asserts  that  sleep  pro-
duced by  chloroform  and  morphia  can  be  transformed
into  a  hypnotic  sleep.  Herrero  has  lately  said  that
even  any  state  of  insensibility  produced  by  chloro-
form, which  has  reached  a  certain  stage,  can  be  trans-
formed into  hypnosis,  and  that  by  this  means  persons
apparently  refractory  to  hypnosis  may  be  hypnotized.
My  experiments  in  this  direction  up  to  the  present
time  have  had  negative  results.

In  any  case,  however,  previous  consent  is  not
absolutely  necessary  to  the  production  of  hypnosis,


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


47


and,  on  the  other  hand,  there  are  people  who  are
refractory  in  spite  of  a  decided  wish  to  be  hypnotized
(Preyer,  Forel).  In  general,  however,  the  intentional
resistance  of  the  subject  hinders  hypnosis,  simply
because  a  person  who  is  willing  to  be  hypnotized
complies  more  easily  with  the  necessary  conditions
than  another.  Consequently  it  is  not  astonishing
that  patients  who  come  to  a  doctor  on  purpose  to  be
hypnotized,  particularly  when  they  come  with  full
confidence,  are  more  easy  to  hypnotize  than  others.
These  others  often  allow  an  attempt  to  be  made  with
them,  with  the  silent  resolution  to  show  that  "  they  are
not  to  be  caught,"  or  they  submit  themselves,  as
Nonne  says,  "  only  for  fun,"  and  yet  many  believe
that  susceptibility  to  hypnosis  is  a  sign  of  defective
will  or  intelligence !

As  so  many  different  circumstances  influence  the
induction  of  hypnosis,  it  is  not  surprising  that  the
proportion  of  hypnotizable  persons  should  be
differently  stated.  If  Ewald  in  the  Women's
Hospital  at  Berlin  can  only  hypnotize  two  persons,
while  Liebeault  hypnotizes  92  per  cent,  of  his
patients,  the  reason  of  this  enormous  difference
must  lie  in  the  different  nature  of  the  conditions.  The
insufficient  mental  preparation  of  Ewald's  subjects
is  particularly  to  blame  for  his  failure.  Bottey  gives
30  per  cent,  as  susceptible,  Morselli  70  per  cent.,
Delbceuf  over  80  per  cent.  His  results  appear  to  me
of  great  value,  having  been  evidently  collected  with
critical  care,  as  must  be  acknowledged  by  every  un-
prejudiced person  who  reads  Delboeuf's  works.  He
excludes  simulators  with  the  greatest  care,  and  is,
perhaps,  in  this  respect  more  sceptical  than  the  in-
vestigators at  Nancy.  Bernheim  refuses  the  right  to
judge  of  hypnotism  to  all  hospital  doctors  who  cannot


48


HYPNOTISM.


hypnotize  at  least  80  per  cent,  of  their  patients  ;  Forel
fully  agrees  with  him.

The  oftener  hypnotic  experiments  are  made  the
sooner  hypnosis  generally  is  induced.  The  first
attempt  often  takes  five  minutes  or  more,  although
on  many  occasions  a  few  seconds  suffice.  When  the
experiment  has  succeeded  a  few  times,  a  few  moments
are  nearly  always  enough  to  attain  the  result.  This
is  because  the  remembrance  of  the  earlier  hypnosis
essentially  favours  its  return.  Besides  this,  the
strongest  hindrance  has  been  overcome  by  the  earlier
hypnosis — which  is  the  belief  of  the  subject  that  he  is
not  hypnotizable,  or  that  he  can  only  be  hypnotized
by  certain  persons  ;  this  belief  often  delays  hypnosis.
The  certainty  with  which  well-known  hypnotizers
hypnotize  people,  rests  partly  on  the  fact  that  these
subjects  believe  they  can  be  hypnotized  by  one
celebrated  hypnotizer  and  not  by  another.  The
disposition  to  hypnosis  may  also  disappear  when
the  experiments  have  been  discontinued  for  a  long
time.  Thus  I  once  saw  a  gentleman  who  was  sus-
ceptible in  a  high  degree  become  refractory  again,
after  no  experiments  had  been  made  with  him  during
six  months.  I  have  observed  the  same  thing  in
several  people,  but  the  disposition  to  hypnosis  can
generally  be  reproduced  after  a  short  time,  if  a  few
attempts  are  made.

From  the  above  examples  it  appears  that  the
various  hypnotic  states  differ  much  from  one  another,
and  that  the  depth  of  the  hypnosis  varies  extra-
ordinarily. This  suggested  that  in  order  to  obtain  a
general  survey  an  attempt  at  classification  must  be
made.  The  best  known  classification  is  that  of
Charcot,  who  supposes  three  stages — the  cataleptic,
lethargic,  and  somnambulic. I  shall  go  into  more


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


49


detail  as  to  these  later,  but  will  remark  here  that  this
classification  has  no  universal  value  ;  Charcot  himself
does  not  maintain  that  it  has.  In  my  own  opinion  the
classification  made  by  Gurney,  containing  two  stages
— alert  and  deep — is  only  accurate  for  a  few  cases.  In
the  same  way  the  three  stages  supposed  by  Richer,
Fontan,  and  Segard,  are  not  sufficiently  well  marked
for  practical  use.  Nor  does  the  classification  of  Del-
bceuf  seem  to  me  entirely  admissible.  According
to  him  there  are  two  stages  of  hypnosis — a  stage  in
which  pain  can  be  felt,  and  a  stage  in  which  it  cannot
(analgesia).  As,  however,  complete  insensibility  to  pain
is  very  rare,  and  as  the  transitions  are  vague,  insensi-
bility to  pain  does  not  appear  to  me  to  be  a  suitable
distinguishing  characteristic.  The  classifications  made
by  Liebeault,  Bernheim,  and  Forel,  have  also  become
well  known.  As  they  agree  in  the  main,  only  differing
in  the  number  of  stages — according  to  Liebeault,  6  ;
according  to  Bernheim,  5  ;  according  to  Forel,  3,  I
shall  only  cite  that  of  Forel  : —

Stage  1.  Drowsiness  :  the  subject  can  resist  sug-
gestions only  with  great  effort.

Stage  2.  Hypotaxy  ("  charme ")  :  the  eyes  are
fast  closed  and  cannot  be  opened  ;  the  subject  is
obliged  to  obey  various  suggestions.

Stage  3.  Somnambulism  :  it  is  characterized  by
loss  of  memory  on  waking — that  is,  the  subject
remembers  nothing  after  waking  that  has  passed
during  the  hypnosis.

The  classifications  of  Forel,  Liebeault,  and  Bern-
heim, rest  chiefly  on  loss  of  memory,  as  a  particular
group  (Forel's  3rd  stage)  of  hypnotic  states  with  loss
or  memory  is  placed  in  contrast  with  the  others
(Forel's  1st  and  2nd  stages),  in  which  no  loss  of
memory  exists.

5


50


HYPNOTISM.


Those  hypnotic  states  in  which  loss  of  memory  exists,  are
called  somnambulism  by  the  authors  above  named.  Wienholt
also  has  already  said  that  the  magnetic  states  with  ensuing  loss
of  memory  may  be  called  somnambulism.

I  think,  however,  it  would  be  better  not  to  make
our  estimate  of  the  stages  of  hypnosis  dependent  on
loss  of  memory,  but  on  the  phenomena  which  appear
during  the  hypnosis  itself.  I  shall  show  that  memory
after  hypnosis  is  dependent  on  many  other  factors
which  have  nothing  to  do  with  the  depth  of  the
hypnosis.  A  chance  view  of  an  external  object  will
suffice  to  arouse  a  whole  chain  of  mental  images  ;  we
shall  see  that  memory  is  influenced  by  suggestion.

I  should  prefer  on  this  account  to  judge  of  the
depth  of  the  hypnosis  only  from  the  phenomena  of
the  hypnosis  itself.  Delbceuf,  who  often  experi-
mented with  profound  hypnoses,  declares  that  the
subjects  after  the  awakening  were  nevertheless  per-
fectly aware  of  all  the  hypnotic  incidents.

The  numerous  sub-divisions  given  by  Liebeault
and  Bernheim  are  not  easy  to  utilize,  because  there
exists  no  principle  for  such  classification  (Max
Dessoir).  For  example,  one  stage  is  distinguished
by  the  complete  closing  of  the  eyes,  and  a  deeper
stage  by  motor  disturbances  in  the  arms.  As  these
last,  however,  can  occur  also  when  the  eyes  are  open,
they  cannot  be  regarded  as  a  sign  of  the  deepening  of
the  stage  in  which  the  eyes  are  closed  ;  for  in  the
deepening  all  the  phenomena  of  previous  and  lighter
stages  must  also  appear.

In  order  to  avoid  these  difficulties,  Max  Dessoir
has  lately  published  a  classification  of  the  hypnotic
states  as  simple  as  it  is  comprehensive  and  clear.
According  to  this  the  states  fall  into  two  large
groups,  which  are  divided  from  each  other  by  the


GENERAL  CONSIDERATIONS.


5i


extent  of  the  functional  disturbances.  I  will  pro-
visionally accept  this  classification.  In  the  first  group
merely  the  voluntary  movements  show  changes  ;  in
the  second  group  abnormalities  in  the  functions  of
the  sense  organs  are  added.  In  the  first  group,  also,
only  those  functions  are  abnormal  which  we  attribute
to  the  centrifugal  nerves,  while  in  the  second  group
the  functions  of  the  centripetal  nerves  are  likewise
disturbed.  The  principle  of  this  classification  was
already  known  to  Kluge  also.  The  minority  of  subjects
belong  to  Group  II.  ;  if  we  take  75  per  cent,  to  be
susceptible,  then  about  55  percent,  belong  to  Group  L,
and  20  per  cent,  to  Group  II.  According  to  Kron
this  latter  percentage  is  perhaps  too  high  ;  in  his
opinion  a  relatively  smaller  number  of  persons  than
I  give  belong  to  Group  II.  He  conjectures  that
through  practice  and  other  factors  these  figures  might
vary  considerably.  It  will  be  understood  that  in
these  two  groups  many  stages  and  types  can  be
distinguished.  For  example,  we  see  that  many  a
hypnotic  state  belonging  to  Group  I.  is  merely  charac-
terized by  the  closing  of  the  eyes,  which  the  subject
cannot  voluntarily  open,  as  in  the  first  experiment
(p.  21).  As  has  been  mentioned,  this  state  used  to
be  considered  as  a  particular  stage  of  hypnosis,  but
according  to  the  explanation  given  above  it  takes  its
place  as  merely  a  particular  form  of  Group  I.  It  was
generally  represented  as  a  particular  stage,  because  in
many  cases  hypnosis  is  ushered  in  by  a  closing  of  the
eyes,  while  other  muscles  are  only  affected  later  on.
However,  this  is  really  a  pure  accident  (Max  Dessoir);
we  have  accustomed  ourselves  more  and  more  to
induce  hypnosis  by  affecting  the  eyes,  and  to  provoke
a  closing  of  them  as  quickly  as  possible  ;  but  this  is
nothing  but  a  habit,  resulting  from  the  identification
of  hypnosis  with  sleep. There  are  a  large  number  of


52


HYPNOTISM.


hypnotists  who  induce  hypnosis  when  the  eyes  are
wide  open,  as  is  the  case  in  "  fascination,"  which  will
be  discussed  later  (  cf.  third  experiment).  I  myself
have  met  many  people  in  whom  it  was  impossible  to
bring  about  change  of  movement  of  the  eye,  while
the  other  muscles  were  easily  affected.  For  this
reason  I  think  the  assertion  of  Michael  that  hypnosis
can  only  be  proved  when  the  eyes  are  completely
closed  is  mistaken.  He  is  perfectly  right,  however,
when  he  says  that  we  should  not  ascribe  to  hypnosis
the  states  of  fatigue  and  giddiness  which  ensue  after
long  attention,  unless  other  phenomena  typical  of
hypnosis  also  appear.

It  is  clear  that  the  two  groups  cannot  be  sharply
divided  from  one  another.  On  the  contrary,  gradual
transitions  are  everywhere  to  be  found.  Also  the
transition  from  a  normal  state  to  hypnosis  is  gradual,
and  certainly  not  so  sudden  as  some  think.  We  find
many  stages  even  before  we  arrive  at  the  closing  of
the  eyes,  which  certainly  does  not  indicate  a  deep
hypnosis  ;  at  first  only  heaviness  of  the  eyelids,  then
the  desire  to  close  the  eyes,  then  a  difficulty  in  opening
them,  and  finally  a  complete  closing  of  them.  All
possible  stages  are  displayed,  and  it  would  not  be  very
difficult  to  describe  a  hundred  different  ones.  Further,
a  deep  hypnosis  is  not  always  attained  at  once  ;  the
light  states  are  often  passed  through  before  the  deepest
appears.  It  is  naturally  difficult,  through  all  these
gradual  transitions,  to  decide  the  exact  moment  of  the
I  appearance  of  hypnosis.  A  deep  sigh,  which  is  often
heard  at  the  beginning  of  hypnosis,  is  by  many  wrongly
considered  as  diagnostic  of  the  important  moment,
particularly  as  this  symptom  is  easily  spread  by
imitation  (Delbceuf).  The  movements  of  swallowing
which  appear,  especially  after  long  fixation,  have
equally  little  significance.


CHAPTER  III.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.

I  COME  now  to  the  point  which  is  most  important
and  which  requires  the  fullest  consideration.  In
order  to  present  as  complete  a  survey  as  possible,
I  must  make  an  arrangement  under  headings  of
Physiology  and  Psychology.  It  must  not  be  thought,
however,  that  we  have  to  do  with  a  real  division  ;
of  that  there  can  be  no  question.  For  the  bodily
functions,  of  which  I  shall  speak  under  the  head  of
Physiology,  show  a  deviation  from  the  normal  purely  — -
as  a  consequence  of  psychical  states.  Just  as  a  man
paralyzed  by  fright  cannot  move  in  consequence  of  a
mental  shock,  and  not  in  consequence  of  an  injury
to  the  muscles,  so  people  in  a  state  of  religious
excitement  have  visions,  not  because  their  eyes  are
abnormal  in  visual  function,  but  because  they  are  in
an  abnormal  mental  state ;  thus  in  hypnosis  the
muscles,  the  organs  of  sense,  &c,  are  abnormal  in
function  only  because  the  mental  state  is  altered.
Only  from  this  point  of  view  is  the  division  made  in
what  follows.  It  is  doubtful  whether  there  exist
generally  in  hypnosis,  besides  the  primary  mental  and
secondary  physical  alterations,  any  primary  bodily
abnormalities.  Descriptions  have  often  been  given  of
them,  of  which  I  shall  speak  later ;  many  such  inves-
tigations, however,  suffer  from  the  fact  that  it  is  not


54


HYPNOTISM.


clear  whether  we  are  dealing  with  an  effect  of  the
methods  employed  to  induce  hypnosis  or  with  one  of
its  essential  phenomena.  In  order  to  explain  what  is
meant  by  this  I  will  suppose  that  a  person  looks  for
a  long  time  fixedly  at  a  button.  This  will  produce
watering  of  the  eyes  ;  but  this  comes  on  in  any  case,
whether  hypnosis  is  produced  or  not.  Consequently
the  watering  of  the  eyes  is  not  an  essential  pheno-
menon of  hypnosis,  but  purely  a  consequence  of  the
means  employed  to  engender  it.  In  consequence  of
the  close  tie  which  everywhere  exists  between  the
mental  and  bodily  phenomena  it  will  not  be
surprising  if  in  discussing  the  latter  I  am  often
obliged  to  refer  to  the  former,  and  vice  versa ;  a
thorough  separation  is  not  possible.  In  order  not
to  destroy  the  inner  unity  for  merely  external  con-
siderations, I  shall  occasionally  deviate  from  the
purely  tabular  arrangement.

One  peculiar  quality  of  consciousness  we  shall  very
often  find  in  hypnosis  :  what  is  called  suggestibility,
or,  better,  increased  suggestibility.  I  shall  so  often
use  this  word,  and  words  connected  with  it,  that  it  will
be  well  to  define  exactly  what  is  meant  by  it.  For
this  purpose  I  must  make  a  little  digression.

Every  concept  in  human  beings  has  a  particular
action,  which  is  to  be  recognized  by  an  external  or
internal  effect.  For  example,  by  the  laws  of  asso-
ciation one  concept  calls  up  another.  The  idea  of
St.  Helena  awakes  that  of  Napoleon  I.  This  peculiar
arousing  of  ideas  by  other  ideas  was  called  the  law  of
suggestion  by  a  great  school  of  Scotch  psychologists
(Thomas  Brown  and  others),  and  Paul  Janet  thinks
that  this  expression  induced  Braid  to  introduce  the
term  "to  suggest"  for  an  analogous  phenomenon — the
suggestion  d'attitude — which  will  be  discussed  further


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  55


on.  A  concept  can,  however,  produce  an  effect  by  —7*
arousing  feeling  ;  if  any  one  thinks  of  a  dead  relative,
he  feels  grief,  and  the  thought  of  a  joyful  event  awakens
a  feeling  of  happiness.  Inclinations  are  called  up  in
the  same  way  ;  the  thought  of  an  object  for  which
one  has  a  great  longing  awakens  the  desire  to  possess
it.  Sensations  can  be  also  produced  in  the  same
manner.  We  have  an  example  in  the  itching  which
many  persons  feel  directly  fleas  are  talked  of.  These
ideas,  feelings,  sensations,  and  desires,  aroused  by
another  idea,  form  internal  processes,  which  we
recognize  by  internal  experience.  But  an  idea  can
have  an  effect  which  displays  itself  externally — for
example,  thoughts  call  up  certain  movements.  ^

Let  us  here  consider  a  proceeding  which  is  called
thought-reading,  which,  as  the  "  willing  game,"  was
for  a  long  time  a  favourite  society  game  in  England
in  a  somewhat  modified  form,  and  which  became
popular  in  Germany  through  the  exhibitions  of
Cumberland.  Most  people  have  certainly  seen  it ;
however,  I  will  again  describe  the  process. A  person

A.  is  made  to  leave  the  room  ;  among  those  who
remain,  B.  is  chosen  to  think  of  some  object  present,
which  A.  is  to  find.  A.  comes  back,  takes  B.'s  hand
and  demands  that  he  shall  think  steadfastly  of  the
place  of  the  chosen  object  ;  let  us  say  it  is  the  lamp.

B.  thinks  steadfastly  of  it,  and  it  is  seen  that  A.  and  B.
go  together  towards  the  lamp,  till  A.,  pointing  to  it,
says,  "  That  was  the  object  thought  of."  Simple  as
this  process— explained  lately  by  Beard,  Gley,  Richet,
Obersteiner,  Preyer,  and  known  fifty  years  ago  to
Chevreul — may  be,  it  appeared  enigmatical  to  many
at  first.  This  is  the  explanation  :  B.  thinks  steadily
of  the  place  of  the  lamp,  and  has  at  the  same  time
slight  movements  of  the  body,  and  particularly  of


56


HYPNOTISM.


the  muscles  of  the  arm,  in  the  direction  of  the  lamp.
A.  feels  these  muscular  movements  and  follows  them,
he  permits  himself  to  be  directed  by  them,  and
finds  in  this  way  the  object  thought  of.  B.  naturally
did  not  make  the  movements  intentionally,  conse-
^ — ^quently  they  were  involuntary  and  unconscious.  All
the  same,  the  movements  were  strong  enough  to  show

A.  the  way. This  example  shows  us  the  following  ;

B.  had  a  certain  idea  (namely,  that  of  the  place  of
the  lamp)  in  his  head,  and  this  concept  called  up
movements.  The  movement  of  the  lips  which  occurs
when  one  thinks  intensely  of  a  word,  is  of  analogous
character  (Strieker).

We  see,  then,  from  the  foregoing  that  ideas  aroused
in  us  have  an  effect  which  sometimes  shows  itself
internally  as  other  concepts,  sensations,  &c,  and
sometimes  externally  as  movement  ;  in  many  cases,
perhaps  in  all,  there  is  both  an  internal  and  an  ex-
ternal effect.  What  effect  appears,  what  idea,  what
feeling,  what  movement  will  be  induced  by  the  first
concept,  depends  upon  the  individuality  of  the  person,
upon  his  mental  imagery,  upon  his  character,  his
habits,  and  upon  the  species  of  concept ;  but  a  certain
effect  always  follows.

In  many  cases  a  person  (A.)  is  able  to  attain  some
particular  effect,  which  he  intentionally  aimed  at,  by
rousing  in  B.  a  definite  concept  ;  and  this  effect  is
often  attained  independently  of  B.'s  will,  or  even
against  it.  We  see  an  example  of  this  in  a  juggler.
He  wants  to  take  some  object  or  other  without  being
seen  by  the  public :  to  attain  this  he  looks  at
another  point — for  example,  at  his  left  hand.  The
eyes  of  the  spectators  involuntarily  follow  his.  By
glancing  at  his  left  hand  the  juggler  has  caused  the
spectators  to  look  in  the  same  direction. He  has


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  57


aroused,  as  quick  as  lightning,  in  the  spectators  the
idea  that  something  is  going  on  at  his  left  hand  ;
and  this  idea  has  had  the  effect  of  making  the  spec-
tators look  at  the  left  hand.  A  juggler  is  very  often
able  to  influence  the  spectators  by  some  such  pro-
ceeding. They  are  often  thus  induced  to  look  in
the  direction  desired  by  the  juggler,  in  order  that
he  may  be  able  to  change  or  hide  some  object
unobserved.  We  see  here,  then,  that  he  produces
the  effect  he  desires — namely,  to  make  people  look
in  another  direction.  But  he  takes  great  care
not  to  tell  the  spectator  to  look  in  this  direction.
If  he  were  to  say  this  the  spectator  would  discover
his  object,  and  certainly  would  not  look  at  the
spot  which  the  juggler  wishes,  and  he  would  not
attain  his  end.  On  the  other  side  there  are  also
certain  cases  in  which  a  desired  effect  is  attained
simply  by  directly  assuring  the  person  concerned
that  the  effect  will  appear.  He  is  certainly  able  in
most  cases  to  prevent  arbitrarily  the  appearance  of
such  an  effect;  but  not  always,  however.  An  example
which  is  brought  forward  by  Bonniot  should  make
this  clear.  One  says  to  a  person  who  is  embarrassed,
"  You  are  getting  red  in  the  face  now  !  "  It  is  well
known  that  many  people  really  blush  when  the  con-
viction that  they  are  blushing  is  aroused  in  their
minds.  Now  a  proceeding  of  this  nature,  in  which
an  effect  is  obtained  simply  by  arousing  in  the  person
concerned  a  conviction  of  its  appearance,  is  called  a
suggestion.  We  shall  find  it  extremely  often  in
hypnosis,  and  I  have  already  given  above  a  number
of  examples  of  such  suggestions.  The  method  of
inducing  hypnosis  in  use  at  Nancy  is  to  be  referred  to
this  kind  of  process.  By  it  an  endeavour  is  made  to
create  in  the  subject  a  conviction  of  the  appearance


58


HYPNOTISM.


of  hypnosis,  and  through  this  to  induce  the  hypnosis
itself.

But  there  are  also  cases  in  which  the  idea  of  the
appearance  of  an  effect  is  not  aroused  by  a  second
person,  but  generated  by  the  subject  himself.  The
corresponding  effect  very  often  appears,  even  against
the  subject's  will.  Under  pathological  conditions  we
find  this  process  very  common  :  a  stammerer,  for
example,  can  often  speak  quite  well,  when  he  does  not
think  about  his  stammering  ;  as  soon  as  he  thinks  of
it,  and  as  soon  as  the  conviction  that  he  will  not  be
able  to  speak  without  stammering  takes  possession  of
him,  that  moment  he  begins  to  stammer.  Now,  as
the  idea  of  stammering  is  here  generated  by  the
person  himself,  while  the  above-mentioned  idea  of
blushing  was  generated  by  another  person,  the  last
process,  in  which  an  outsider  induces  the  idea  is
called  external  suggestion,  or  hetero-suggestion,  the
first  self-suggestion  or  auto-suggestion.

Such  auto-suggestions  are  not  very  uncommon  as
pathological  incidents.  Dread  of  open  spaces  (agora-
phobia) is  nothing  but  an  auto-suggestion.  The
patient  in  this  case  is  possessed  by  the  idea  that  he
cannot  step  across  some  open  space  ;  no  reasoning  is
of  avail  here.  The  patient  acknowledges  its  justice
without  permitting  it  to  influence  him,  because  his
auto-suggestion  is  too  powerful.  As  a  rule,  logic  is  for
the  most  part  powerless  over  these  auto-suggestions.  ~"
Many  hysterical  paralyses  are  likewise  auto-sugges-
tions ;  thus  a  patient  cannot  move  his  legs  because
he  is  convinced  that  movement  is  impossible.  If  this
conviction  can  be  shaken,  movement  is  at  once
practicable.

Auto-suggestion  may  be  called  up  by  some  external
cause  ;  this  may  affect  the  person  from  outside,  and


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


59


thus  induce  an  auto-suggestion.  Charcot  refers  some
isolated  traumatic  paralyses  to  some  such  originating
mechanism — though  this  point  is  still  in  debate.
According  to  this  view  a  violent  blow  on  the  arm,
following  on  certain  disturbances  of  sensibility,  may
produce  in  the  person  concerned  a  conviction  that  he
cannot  move  his  arm.  As  the  conviction  was  called
up  by  the  blow,  this  case  stands  somewhere  between
external  suggestion  and  auto-suggestion.  We  will  call
all  cases  in  which  the  auto-suggestion  did  not  arise
spontaneously,  but  was  the  secondary  result  of  some-
thing else,  such  as  a  blow,  indirect  suggestions ;  as
opposed  to  direct  suggestion,  which  arouses  a  certain
idea  immediately,  of  which  I  have  already  given
several  examples.  It  is,  besides,  not  always  neces-
sary that  there  should  be  a  conscious  mental  act
in  suggestion  ;  individuality  and  habit  sometimes
replace  this,  and  play  a  great  part  in  the  training  of
the  subject,  of  which  we  have  still  to  speak.  For
example,  if  some  external  sign,  such  as  a  blow  on  the
arm,  has  several  times,  by  means  of  a  conscious
mental  act,  produced  the  auto-suggestion  that  the
arm  is  paralyzed,  then  the  auto-suggestion  may  repeat
itself  later  mechanically  at  every  blow  without  any
conscious  thought  about  the  effect  of  the  blow.

A  particular  psychical  state,  disposing  to  sugges-
tion, is  a  necessary  condition  of  its  appearance.  The
disposition  to  suggestion  is  called  suggestibility  ;  it
must  be  present  and  must  precede  the  suggestion  if
the  latter  is  to  succeed  (Bentivegni).  A  person  in  such
a  state  is  said  to  be  suggestible.

We  shall  now  see  that  we  can  in  this  way  obtain
many  effects  during  hypnosis.  We  shall  also  see
that  we  can  produce  these  effects  not  only  during
hypnosis  (hypnotic  or  intra-hypnotic  suggestion),  but


6o


HYPNOTISM.


that  these  extend  to  the  time  following.  We  call
this  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  By  means  of  this  we
can  tell  the  person  in  the  hypnotic  state  that  after  his
awakening  a  particular  result  will  follow.  We  can
also  distinguish  another  kind  of  suggestion  :  some-
thing may  be  suggested  to  the  subject  before  the
hypnosis,  which  is  to  follow  in  that  state.  This  is
pre-hypnotic  suggestion.

(i)  Physiology.

We  will  now  pass  to  a  discussion  of  the  functions
of  the  individual  organs.  The  alterations  which  we
find  in  hypnosis  affect  the  voluntary  and  involuntary
muscles  as  well  as  the  organs  of  sense,  common
sensation,  the  secretions,  metabolism,  and  in  rare
cases  also  the  cell  power  of  organization.  ^

The  voluntary  muscles  show  the  most  frequent
abnormalities,  and  suggestion  exercises  a  most
extraordinary  influence  over  their  functions  during
hypnosis.  We  will  ask,  first  of  all,  what  is  the  state
of  the  functions  of  the  voluntary  muscles  during
hypnosis,  when  no  kind  of  external  influence  is
exercised.  There  are  the  greatest  differences,  ac-
cording to  the  method  of  hypnotization  selected,  and
according  to  the  character  of  the  subject.  Some  are
able  to  move  with  perfect  freedom  during  hypnosis
till  the  command  of  the  experimenter  inhibits  some
particular  movement ;  many,  on  the  contrary,  look  as
if  they  were  asleep.  In  this  case  we  see  no  move-
ments, or  very  rare  ones,  which  are  slow  and
laboured.  When  we  discuss  the  phenomena  of
suggestion  we  shall  see  that  this  incapacity  for  move-
ment cannot  in  rare  cases  be  removed  by  the  com-
mand of  the  hypnotist. It  is  to  be  understood  that


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  61


between  complete  freedom  of  movement  and  the
incapacity  to  move  at  all  there  exist  all  sorts  of
transitional  stages.  It  is  all  the  same  which  of  these
characters  has  the  preponderance  ;  muscular  activity
can  nearly  always  be  influenced  in  a  high  degree  by
suggestion.1  By  means  of  it  we  can  make  the  exist-
ing movements  impossible,  or  induce  previously
impossible  ones.

I  have  shown  (p.  22)  with  my  second  subject  how
easily  I  can  make  his  arm  powerless  to  move,  simply
by  arousing  in  him  the  conviction  that  the  arm  is
powerless.  In  just  the  same  way  the  movements  of
the  legs,  trunk,  larynx,  and  so  on,  escape  the  subject's
control.  "  You  cannot  raise  your  arm  ;  cannot  put
out  your  tongue."  This  suffices  to  make  the  for-
bidden movement  impossible.  In  some  cases  the
inability  to  move  arises  because  the  subject  cannot
voluntarily  contract  his  muscles  ;  while  in  other  cases
a  contracture  of  the  antagonistic  muscles  makes
every  attempt  at  voluntary  movement  useless
(Bleuler).  In  the  same  manner  the  leg  will  lose  the
power  of  motion  at  command.  We  have  seen  (p.  22)
in  the  second  experiment  how  the  power  of  speech
can  also  be  taken  away.  And  it  is  even  possible  to
allow  the  muscles  to  contract  for  one  particular
purpose  only.  If  we  say  to  a  hypnotic  subject,  "  You
can  only  say  your  name  ;  for  the  rest  you  are  abso-
lutely dumb,"  the  desired  effect  will  most  surely  be
produced.  In  the  same  way  it  is  possible  to  prevent
movements  of  the  arms  for  one  particular  purpose.
Thus  we  can  make  it  impossible  for  a  person  to  write,
though he will be able to do  any  other  kind

1  For  the  sake  of  brevity  I  shall  for  the  future  always  use
"  suggestion  "  for  "  external  suggestion  "  when  the  contrary  is
not  expressly  stated.


62


HYPNOTISM.


of  work.  The  subject  can  sew,  play  the  piano,
&c,  but  all  efforts  to  write  are  vain.  The
movements  only  become  possible  at  the  moment
when  the  experimenter  gives  permission.  It  is
remarkable  that  in  some  persons  one  set  of  muscles
is  easier  to  influence  by  suggestion,  and  in  others
another  set.  For  example,  we  can  make  a  person
dumb  by  suggestion,  while  all  the  other  muscles  obey
his  will  in  spite  of  suggestion.  Another,  again,
loses  the  power  of  moving  his  arms  at  once,  while  his
speech  remains  unaffected.

In  just  the  same  way  as  muscular  movements  are
prevented  by  suggestion,  so  can  movements  be
induced  by  it  against,  or  without,  the  will  of  the
subject.  We  have  seen  (p.  23)  how  the  subject  in  the
third  experiment  knelt  down,  followed  me,  and  so
forth.  I  say  to  another  person,  "You  are  lifting  your
right  arm  to  lay  it  on  your  head."  This  happens  at
once.  I  would  insist  that  it  must  be  decided  whether
these  movements  take  place  without,  or  against,  the
will  of  the  subject,  as  in  the  latter  case  an  increase  of
sensibility  is  already  demonstrated.  I  say,  "  Your
left  arm  will  now  rise  up  in  the  air."  And  the  arm
rises  as  if  drawn  up  by  a  string,  although  the  subject
makes  no  intentional  movement  ;  but  neither  does  it
occur  to  him  to  resist.  The  movements  without  the
subject's  will  can  often  be  distinguished  from  those
against  it  by  a  certain  steady  ease.  These  last  are
nearly  always  characterized  by  strong  muscular
contractions,  and  by  trembling,  which  shows  the  in-
tense effort  not  to  obey  the  will  of  the  hypnotist.  r

Just  in  the  same  way  the  hypnotic  subject  is
obliged  to  cough,  laugh,  talk,  jump,  &c,  at  command.
It  is  further  possible  to  generate  by  suggestion  the
idea  of  a  paralysis  of  one  of  the  extremities.  These


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


63


isolated  paralyses  have  a  great  resemblance  to  the
psychical  paralyses  arising  without  hypnosis,  such  as
Russell  Reynolds  described  in  1869,  as  "paralysis
dependent  on  idea  "  ;  and  Erb,  later  on,  as  "  paralysis
by  imagination."  The  pupils  of  Charcot  have  tried
to  find  objective  symptoms  of  these  paralyses  that
depend  on  suggestion.  It  cannot  be  doubted  that
such  objective  changes  may  occur  through  a  par-
ticular association  of  symptoms  ;  this  hypothesis  is
supported  by  KrafTt-Ebing  also.  We  must,  how-
ever, recognize  that  this  is  not  the  rule.  Accord-
ing to  Lober,  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  and  Richer,
the  clinical  characteristics  of  these  paralyses  are
marked  by  the  absolute  loss  of  motor  power  and
sensation,  increase  of  the  tendon  reflexes,  ankle
clonus,  wrist  clonus,  complete  loss  of  muscular  sense,
i.e.,  of  the  ability  to  control  perfectly  the  action  of  the
muscles,  and  to  be  certain  of  the  position  of  the
limbs,  changed  electrical  excitability,  and  vasomotor
disturbances  ;  these  last  are  particularly  said  to  show
themselves  by  a  bright  flush  of  the  skin  on  slight
stimulation.  These  paralyses  can  be  produced  in
both  the  hypnotic  and  post-hypnotic  states.  Be-
sides these  atonic  paralyses,  in  which  the  muscles
are  completely  relaxed,  other  paralyses,  in  which  the
muscles  are  persistently  contracted,  can  also  be  pro-
duced by  suggestion.

With  these  subjects  who  are  deprived  of  will,
besides  the  movements  described  above,  complicated
movements,  or  even  performances  (if  I  may  be
allowed  the  expression),  also  take  place  by  sugges-
tion. I  say  to  the  subject,  "  You  will  spin  round
three  times."  Or  again,  "  You  must  lift  that  thing  off
the  table  ;  you  must  go  and  do  it  ;  you  cannot  help
it." The  subject  performs  the  command*


64


HYPNOTISM.


The  suggestion  itself  is  made  in  different  ways.
The  main  point,  and  all  turns  upon  this,  is  that
the  subject  should  thoroughly  understand  what  the
experimenter  wishes.  Each  of  the  organs  of  sense
is  a  door  of  entrance  for  suggestion.  The  most
common  is  naturally  our  habitual  means  of  com-
munication— speech  (verbal  suggestion) — by  means
of  which  we  tell  the  subject  what  we  wish.  But  it  is
very  important,  and  much  more  effective  than  words
alone,  that  the  experimenter  should  accompany  his
words  by  a  performance  of  the  movement  which  the
subject  is  intended  to  execute.  Consequently  pro-
fessional magnetizers  habitually  induce  movements
by  imitation.  Heidenhain  was  at  first  by  this  led  to
the  false  conclusion  that  all  these  movements  of
hypnotics  depended  on  imitation.

Imitation  appears  particularly  in  a  hypnotic  state,
which  certain  authors  (Bremaud,  Morselli,  Tanzi)
have  thoroughly  studied,  and  which  Descourtis  calls
fascination.  I  have  shown  (p.  23)  in  the  third
experiment  a  case  of  this  kind.  A  professional
magnetizer,  Donato,  has  demonstrated  this  state
completely  ;  and  Morselli  and  others  have  on  this
account  called  this  form  of  hypnosis  Donatism.

As  I  saw  in  Paris,  Donato  uses  a  particular  process
to  bring  about  this  state.  This  process  aims  at  a
primary  forced  contracture  of  all  the  muscles  of  the
body,  in  order,  by  this  means,  to  limit  the  voluntary
movements  as  much  as  possible.  In  this  case  the
eyes  of  the  hypnotist  and  the  subject  are  firmly  fixed
on  one  another.  The  subject  finally  follows  every
movement  of  the  experimenter.  If  he  goes  back-
ward, the  subject  follows  ;  if  he  comes  forward,
the  subject  does  the  same.  In  the  same  way  the
latter  imitates  every  movement  of  the  experimenter.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  65


only  on  the  condition,  however,  that  he  knows  he  is
intended  to  do  so.  We  see  here,  as  in  the  above  third
experiment,  that  fascination  may  be  a  primary  form  of
hypnosis.  But  it  can  also  be  originated  secondarily  out
of  the  other  hypnotic  states;  and  this  is  more  usual.
When  the  experimenter  has  hypnotized  the  subject  in
some  other  way,  and  has  made  him  open  his  eyes,  he
can  fix  his  own  steadily  on  them,  and  thus  induce  the
same  phenomena.  A  variety  of  this  fascination  is  to
fix  the  eyes  of  the  subject  on  some  other  object — for
example,  on  the  finger  of  the  experimenter.  In  this
case  the  fascinated  person  follows  every  movement
made  by  the  finger.

But  imitation  plays  an  important  role  in  hypnosis,
as  well  as  fascination.  This  results  from  the  fact  that
the  sight  of  a  movement  arouses  a  much  more  vivid
mental  picture  of  it  in  the  hypnotized  person  than
does  a  mere  command  ;  this  last  is,  however,  a  neces-
sary condition  for  the  success  of  the  suggestion.

Verbal  suggestion  is  also  made  easier  by  other
gestures.  In  order  to  compel  some  one  to  kneel
down,  an  energetic  movement  of  the  hand  accompany-
ing the  verbal  suggestion  is  very  effective,  as  in  the
third  experiment.  With  this  fact  is  connected  one  of
the  phenomena  which  magnetizers  are  fond  of  exhibit-
ing, namely,  the  drawing  of  the  subject  after  the
experimenter,  who  makes  movements  with  his  hand
which  show  the  subject  that  he  is  intended  to
approach.

The  experimenter  can  also  repel  the  subject  in  the
same  way.  This  succeeds  in  particular  by  means  of
movements  of  the  hand,  indicating  that  he  is  to  go
away.  It  is  not  at  all  necessary  that  the  subject
should  see  the  movements  of  the  experimenter ;  it  is
sufficient  that  he  should  divine  them  either  from  a

6


66


HYPNOTISM,


noise  or  a  slight  current  of  air ;  thus  the  hypnotic
obeys  the  experimenter  even  when  he  has  his  back
turned  towards  him.  Upon  the  same  phenomenon
depend  the  attraction  and  repulsion  of  single  limbs
of  the  subject,  which  happen  in  the  same  way,  through
the  hypnotic's  perception  of  the  experimenter's  ges-
tures. The  experimenter  can  make  the  subject  raise
and  drop  his  hand,  merely  by  gesticulating  with  his
own  ;  he  can  also  obtain  many  effects  by  a  glance
only.  It  is  not  necessary  to  look  steadily  in  the  eyes
of  the  hypnotic,  as  in  fascination.  The  operator  looks
at  the  subject's  leg — it  at  once  becomes  powerless  to
move.  The  hypnotic  is  going  away — the  experimenter
looks  at  a  spot  on  the  floor  and  he  stands  chained  to
the  spot.  These  phenomena  vividly  recall  the  "  evil
eye,"  the  fascinating  gaze,  and  so  on,  by  means  of
which  an  evil  influence  was  supposed  to  be  exercised.

I  will  mention  here  that  not  only  speech  but  also
music  has  a  suggestive  effect.  If  dance  music  is
played  the  subject  will  dance,  following  the  rhythm,
and  when  the  dance  is  changed  to  another  he  alters
his  step  to  correspond.  The  influence  of  music
upon  human  beings  has  long  been  known,  and  is
striking  in  hypnosis.  By  means  of  music  during
hypnosis  all  sorts  of  different  moods  and  feelings
can  be  aroused  corresponding  to  the  kind  of  music.
Naturally,  the  subject  must  have  a  taste  for  music,
otherwise  it  will  have  no  influence.  Mesmer  long
ago  recognized  this  influence  of  music,  and  used  a
then  newly-invented  instrument,  the  bell-harmonica,
to  obtain  the  necessary  effect.

The  muscular  sense,  which  keeps  us  informed  of  the
position  of  our  limbs,  requires  particular  consideration
as  a  way  of  entrance  for  suggestion.  It  causes  the
phenomenon  which  the  school  of  Nancy  calls  "  cata-


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


6?


lepsy  by  suggestion  "  ; 1  which  is  also  to  be  found  in
other  states  than  hypnosis — for  example,  in  some  cases
of  typhus  fever  (Bernheim).  It  is  very  common  in
hypnosis,  and  is  shown  in  the  following  example :
I  lift  the  arm  of  a  hypnotic,  hold  it  in  the  air,  and
then  let  go  ;  the  arm  remains  as  I  placed  it,  although
I  say  nothing.  Why  does  this  happen  ?  Because  the
subject  believes  he  must  leave  his  arm  thus,  and
because  this  suggestion  was  conveyed  to  him  by  the
muscular  sense.  Another  person  lets  his  arm  fall  ;  I
raise  it  again,  and  say  at  the  same  time,  "  The  arm
keeps  still  ; "  which  happens  ;  but  only  because  the
person  now  knows  that  this  is  intended,  while  he  did
not  understand  the  simple  raising  of  the  arm.  Let  us
return  to  the  first  subject.  I  raise  the  arm  again,  say-
ing, "Now  the  arm  falls  down ;"  which, in  fact,  happens ;
evidently  only  because  the  person  believes  that  he  is
to  let  it  fall.  The  legs,  head,  trunk,  and  so  forth,  can
be  put  into  the  most  different  postures  and  maintained
there  in  exactly  the  same  way  ;  the  muscular  sense
here  is  the  only  transmitter  of  the  suggestion.  The
inclination  of  the  subject  to  maintain  cataleptic
positions  is  so  great  that  Heidenhain  considered  the
hypnotic  state  to  be  a  catalepsy  artificially  produced.
Catalepsy  by  suggestion  has  nothing  whatever  to  do
with  physical  alterations  of  the  muscles.

The  main  point  for  the  attainment  of  catalepsy  is
that  the  subject  should  accept  the  idea  of  the  corre-
sponding attitude. Consequently  the  idea  must  take

1  As  the  most  different  views  exist  as  to  what  "  Catalepsy  ;'
means,  I  remark  here  that,  for  the  sake  of  brevity,  I  shall  so
name  any  state  in  which  voluntary  movements  disappear
and  the  limbs  remain  as  they  are  placed  by  the  experimenter
— without  having  regard  to  the  length  of  time  which  elapses
before  the  limbs  move  freely  again,  or  fall  from  their  own
weight .


68


HYPNOTISM.


root  before  the  desired  result  can  be  attained.  For
this  purpose  some  means  or  other  must  be  employed
to  allow  it  to  operate  during  a  certain  period.  Words
answer  the  purpose  as  well  as  other  signs  ;  many  per-
sons can  only  be  thrown  into  catalepsy  from  suggestion
when  the  attitude  required  is  maintained  for  some
time.

The  mesmeric  passes  (p.  29),  which  I  have  mentioned
as  a  method  of  hypnotizing,  here  deserve  especial  men-
tion. These  mesmeric  passes  can  be  used  locally  in
hypnosis — for  example,  over  an  arm,  in  order  to  make
it  cataleptic.  As  far  as  I  have  been  able  to  study
these  phenomena,  it  is  unnecessary  in  their  case
to  imagine  any  special  force  as  an  explanation.
According  to  my  view  the  efficiency  of  the  mesmeric
passes  results  from  the  fact  that  by  means  of  them
the  whole  attention  of  the  subject  is  directed  to  his
arm  for  a  long  time.  By  this  means  the  idea  has
time  to  take  root.  Let  any  one  allow  his  arm  or
leg  to  be  mesmerized  in  this  fashion  and  he  will  find
that  his  whole  attention  is  directed  to  this  part  of  his
body,  and  much  more  strongly  directed  than  if  the
attention  was  concentrated  on  the  limb  in  another
manner.  From  this  it  follows  also  that  contractures
often  only  appear  when  the  mesmeric  passes  have
drawn  the  attention  for  some  time  to  the  part  of  the
body  concerned.  The  passes  with  contact  act  in
exactly  the  same  way  as  the  passes  without  contact.
In  any  case — and  this  is  important — the  effect  only
appears  when  the  individual  has  an  idea  of  what
is  intended  to  follow.  That  centrifugal  passes  call  up
contractions  and  centripetal  ones  dissipate  them,  is  a
phenomenon  frequently  mentioned  ;  but  we  appear  to
have  to  do  here  with  unintentional  suggestions.  Be-
sides, I  have  been  as  often  able  to  do  the  same  thing
with  centripetal  passes  as  with  centrifugal.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


09


We  thus  see  in  what  manner  suggestion  affects  the
movements.  A  particular  attitude  is  adopted  by  the
subject  because  the  corresponding  idea  has  been  im-
planted in  him  by  the  operator.

Such  an  implanted  idea  has  yet  another  particular
effect  in  hypnosis.  It  has  often  a  tendency  to  fix
itself  firmly  in  the  mind  and  consequently  to  exercise
a  longer  continued  effect.  This  continuation  of  the
effect  may  express  itself  in  three  ways  :  firstly,  by
the  fact  that  a  certain  state  of  contraction  is  continued
for  a  long  period — there  is,  in  fact,  a  contracture  ;
secondly,  by  a  particular  long-continued  movement ;
thirdly,  by  the  fact  that  when  the  muscles  are  relaxed
a  contraction  of  them  can  only  be  obtained  with  diffi-
culty or  not  at  all.  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion  that
these  phenomena  of  the  muscles  must  be  distinguished
from  suggestion  ;  they  certainly  produce  a  particular
function,  but  do  not  explain  its  long  duration.  Some-
times it  is  not  even  possible  to  counteract  the  effect  of
the  first  suggestion  by  a  second.

I  order  a  person  to  stretch  out  his  right  arm  stiffly.
The  arm  is  stretched  out,  and  the  subject  is  unable  to
bend  it  of  his  own  accord  ;  that  is,  the  muscles  are
in  a  state  of  contracture.  In  most  cases,  directly  I
command  the  arm  to  be  bent  it  can  be  done.  But
there  are  some  cases  in  which  the  experimenter  is
unable  to  put  an  end  to  the  contracture  at  once,
because  the  effect  of  the  earlier  idea  continues.  The
stronger  was  the  contraction  of  the  muscles  the  more
difficult  it  is  to  put  an  end  at  once  to  the  state  of
contracture.  A  particular  movement  can  also  be
continued  for  a  long  time  in  the  same  way.  The  so-
called  automatic  movements  (Liebeault,  Bernheim)
or  continued  movements,  as  Max  Dessoir  calls  them,
belong  to  the  same  category. If  we  turn  the  arms  of


HYPNOTISM.


a  hypnotic  round  and  round  each  other,  he  has  a
tendency  to  continue  the  movement  after  the  operator
has  ceased  to  compel  it.  This  happens  because  the
subject  believes  that  he  has  been  ordered  to  go  on.
In  some  cases  he  continues  turning  his  arms  passively,
while  on  other  occasions  he  makes  the  strongest
possible  effort  to  keep  them  still,  particularly  when
requested  to  do  so.  This  resistance  is  useless,  how-
ever; in  spite  of  all  exertion  of  the  will  the  movement
is  continued.  A  new  suggestion  of  the  experimenter,
that  the  arms  shall  stop,  is  enough  in  most  cases  to
arrest  the  movements.  Sometimes  the  idea  has  taken
root  so  strongly  that  the  experimenter  finds  it  im-
possible to  obtain  an  arrest  at  once  by  a  counter-
command.  I  have  often  observed  that  a  movement
has  continued  for  some  time  in  spite  of  my  order.
The  most  varied  movements  are  continued  in  this
manner  after  they  have  once  begun.  I  lift  up  an
arm  and  bend  it  gently  at  the  elbow  joint ;  directly
I  let  go  it  repeats  the  movement.  If  it  is  desired
that  the  hypnotic  shall  walk,  and  he  does  not  obey
the  command,  let  him  be  pulled  forward  a  little ;
he  will  then,  when  left  to  himself,  continue  to  walk
(Heidenhain).  The  involuntary  laughter,  which  I
have  often  heard,  is  connected  with  this  ;  it  begins
at  command,  or  on  a  slight  provocation.  It  can  be
put  an  end  to  neither  by  the  order  of  the  experi-
menter nor  by  the  will  of  the  hypnotic.  Obersteiner,
who  first  began  the  scientific  study  of  hypnotism  in
Austria,  has  observed  the  automatic  laugh  in  his  own
case,  and  has  described  it.  We  can  also  induce
alternate  movements  of  drawing  up  and  stretching
out  in  the  arm  or  leg,  and  nodding  or  shaking  of  the
head,  &c.

In  some  cases  the  passivity  of  the  subject  is  so


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  7


great  that  the  idea  of  a  movement  will  not  take  root
at  all.  In  this  case  the  suggestion  of  the  experi-
menter is  unable  to  overcome  the  muscular  relaxa-
tion. Subjects  of  this  kind  let  their  arms  drop  after
they  have  been  raised,  in  spite  of  all  suggestions.
Questions  are  not  answered,  or  only  slight  movements
of  the  lips  show  that  they  have  been  heard  at  all.
Two  different  types  of  hypnosis,  which  are  called
active  and  passive,  may  be  distinguished  by  the
presence  or  absence  of  this  muscular  relaxation.
The  passive  form  has  a  greater  external  likeness  to
natural  sleep,  while  the  active  might  be  taken  for  a
waking  state  on  superficial  observation.  Passive
hypnosis  is  not  regarded  by  some  authors  (Braid)  as
a  form  of  hypnosis,  but  is  considered  to  be  a  sleep,
because  the  especial  symptom  is  wanting  which  every
investigator  regards  as  the  necessary  characteristic  of
hypnosis,  namely,  catalepsy.  This  does  not  appear
to  me  absolutely  necessary  in  order  to  show
hypnosis.  Hypnosis  often  shows  itself  as  passive
at  the  beginning  ;  as  soon  as  the  eyes  are  closed  the
head  drops  forward,  or  backward,  while  the  support-
ing muscles  of  the  neck  are  relaxed.  There  are
many  transitional  states  between  active  and  passive
hypnosis,  and  one  often  passes  into  the  other.

The  motor  disturbances  which  appear  in  the  eye
must  here  be  particularly  discussed.  We  have
already  seen  that  many  hypnoses  are  characterized
only  by  the  closing  of  the  eyes,  while  in  many  cases
this  is  added  to  other  symptoms.  But  the  closing  of
the  eyes  can  also  be  influenced  by  suggestion,  and  an
order  of  the  experimenter  is  enough  in  most  cases  to
cause  their  instantaneous  opening.  Closing  of  the
eyes  greatly  favours  the  appearance  of  other  hypnotic
phenomena, but is not absolutely  indispensable.


72


HYPNOTISM.


There  are  persons  who  can  be  thrown  into  the
deepest  stage  of  hypnosis  by  a  fixed  gaze,  without
closing  the  eyes  at  all  (Gurney).

It  must  be  mentioned  that  Heidenhain  already  knew  and  recog-
nized the  closing  of  the  eyes  as  the  only  symptom  of  hypnosis.
It  is  so  much  the  more  astonishing  that  the  knowledge  of
this  light  hypnotic  state  was  afterwards  completely  lost.  Two
years  ago,  when  I  threw  a  person  in  the  Women's  Hospital  at
Berlin  into  this  hypnotic  state  by  means  of  the  Nancy  process,
Professor  Ewald,  who  had  made  earlier  fruitless  attempts  with
the  same  person  by  means  of  fixing  the  eyes,  believed  that  the
closing  of  the  eyes  was  simulated.  These  light  states  were
then  very  little  known.

Although,  then,  as  we  say,  closing  of  the  eyes  is  not
a  necessary  preface  to  hypnosis,  yet  the  eyes  are  in
most  cases  closed,  and  it  is  often  impossible  to  permit
them  to  open  without  ending  the  hypnosis  at  once.
Even  when  the  eyes  open  during  a  long  hypnosis,
there  is  in  many  cases  a  certain  heaviness  in  the  lids
and  a  desire  to  close  them.  Much  depends,  however,
upon  the  method  employed  ;  and  primary  fascination
in  particular  always  occurs  while  the  eyes  are  wide
open.  The  closing  of  the  eyes  is  sometimes  very
gentle,  and  not  spasmodic  ;  though  I  have  seen  the
muscles  which  close  the  eye  contract  spasmodically
in  a  large  number  of  cases.  Braid  and  Heidenhain
already  pointed  out  that  when  the  lids  close,  even  in
the  deepest  hypnosis,  the  closing  is  not  complete.
There  is  often  a  slight  chink  of  opening,  and  this  is
not  unimportant,  because  many  experiments  in  clair-
voyance, and  also  pretended  reading  with  the  pit  of
of  the  stomach,  may  be  explained  by  the  ability  to
see  through  this  small  opening.  In  any  case  the
closing  of  the  eyes  is  a  common  occurrence  in
hypnosis,  especially  when  the  Nancy  method  is  used.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


73


Everybody  will  remember  that  a  heaviness  of  the
eyelids  and  a  feeling  of  fatigue  about  the  eyes  is
one  of  the  first  symptoms  of  natural  sleep.

While  the  eyes  are  closed  the  lids  not  unseldom
have  a  vibratory,  trembling  movement ;  but  this
symptom  is  of  no  real  importance  for  diagnosis,  as  on
the  one  hand  it  is  sometimes  wanting  and  on  the
other  hand  often  appears  without  hypnosis.  We
often  see  the  eyeballs  roll  upwards  as  the  eyes  are
closing.  While  in  some  cases  this  position  of  the
eyeball  is  maintained,  in  other  cases  the  eyeball
resumes  its  natural  position  directly  the  eyes  are
closed.  If  this  does  not  take  place,  the  white  sclerotic
only  is  visible  when  the  lids  are  artificially  raised.

I  have  only  been  able  to  find  the  convergence  of
the  pupils  described  by  some  observers  in  one  case  of
hystero-epilepsy.  Borel  affirms  that  this  convergence
can  occasionally  be  obtained  by  suggestion.  If  the
eyes  are  open,  a  slight  state  of  exophthalmos  is  said
to  be  observed  ;  however,  this  symptom  appears  only
to  occur  when  the  method  of  fixed  attention  is  used.

As  we  have  seen,  the  voluntary  muscles  are  entirely
under  the  influence  of  external  suggestion  during
hypnosis.  A  further  peculiarity  is,  that  a  particular
movement  or  state  of  contraction  of  the  muscles
cannot  always  be  controlled  at  once  ;  and  finally,  we
have  seen  that  in  some  cases  muscular  contraction
can  only  be  brought  about  with  difficulty  or  not  at
all.  One  of  these  two  functional  abnormalities  of  the
muscles  exists  in  all  hypnotic  states.  Though  it
is  occasionally  confined  to  an  inability  to  open
the  eyes,  in  other  hypnotic  states  the  functions  of
other  muscles  of  the  body  are  affected.  The  different
phases  result,  then,  from  various combinations  of


HYPNOTISM.


the  above-mentioned  abnormalities,  and  from  their
different  localization  in  the  muscles.  The  various
kinds  of  catalepsy  arise  in  this  manner.  Bernheim
distinguishes  several  forms  of  this  catalepsy,  accord-
ing to  the  facility  with  which  the  cataleptic  position
can  be  changed.  Sometimes  this  is  very  easily  done,
sometimes  with  more  difficulty,  as  in  tonic  con-
tracture ;  the  flexibilitas  cerea  forms  an  intermediate
stage.  These  different  kinds  of  catalepsy  are  affairs
of  hypnotic  training  and  suggestion  (Berger).  I  have
never  clearly  seen  a  typical  flexibilitas  cerea  in
hypnosis,  except  when  the  training  of  the  subject
had  been  directed  to  that  point.  It  appears  from  a
remark  of  Nonne  concerning  the  flexibilitas  cerea,  that
he  has  collected  other  experiences  regarding  it.  On
that  account  I  would  say  emphatically  that  I  mean
here  the  typical  flexibilitas  cerea,  in  which  the
feeling  of  resistance  is  the  same  as  if  we  were
bending  limbs  of  wax  ;  this  feeling  of  resistance  must
further  be  uniform,  it  must  not  be  stronger  at  one
moment  than  at  another.  According  to  my  ex-
perience a  flexibilitas  cerea  taken  in  this  sense  is  only
to  be  obtained  in  hypnosis  by  training.  In  any  case
all  these  phenomena  are  of  a  purely  psychical  nature.

One  of  the  best  known  features  in  hypnosis  is  the
rigidity  of  the  whole  body.  There  is  sometimes
a  complete  tonic  contracture  of  nearly  all  the
voluntary  muscles,  through  which  the  head,  neck,
trunk,  and  legs  become  as  stiff  as  a  board.  A  well-
known  experiment  can  be  carried  out  in  this  state :
the  head  can  be  placed  on  one  chair  and  the  feet  on
another,  and  the  body  will  not  double  up.  A  heavy
weight,  that  of  a  man,  for  example,  may  even  be
placed  upon  the  body  without  bending  it.  It  is  not
astonishing,  after  what  I  have  said  of  the  effect  of  the


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


75


mesmeric  passes,  that  this  stiffening  should  be  more
easily  induced  by  their  means  ;  it  cannot  always  be
induced  by  mere  verbal  suggestion.  A  command  or
sign  of  the  experimenter  generally  suffices  to  put  an
end  to  the  rigidity.

We  must  now  ask  whether  any  further  abnormalities
appear  in  the  voluntary  muscles  during  hypnosis.
Changes  which  are  supposed  not  to  be  of  psychical
nature  have  often  been  assumed.  It  is  frequently
maintained  that  reflex  action  is  altered  in  hypnosis,
that  reflexes  appear  which  do  not  appear  in  normal
conditions.  Heidenhain  and  Charcot  are  particularly
to  be  mentioned  among  those  who  have  expressed
this  view.  Charcot  bases  his  classification  of  the
hypnotic  states  upon  the  alteration  of  the  reflexes  ;
so  I  will  here  briefly  give  the  chief  characteristics  of
his  three  stages.

Charcot  distinguishes  a  grand  hypnotisme  and  a
petit  hypnotisme.  The  last  he  does  not  describe  in
detail  ;  in  the  first,  which  is  found  in  hystero-epileptics,
he  distinguishes  three  stages: — I.  The  cataleptic  stage,
which  is  produced  by  a  sudden  loud  noise,  or  results
from  the  opening  of  the  subject's  eyes  while  he  is  in
the  lethargic  stage  ;  in  this  stage  the  position  of  the
limbs  is  easily  changed  while  the  hypnotic's  eyes  are
open.  Every  position  which  is  given  to  the  limbs  is
maintained  for  some  time,  but  is  also  easily  changed
by  the  experimenter  without  resistance  on  the  part  of
the  subject  ;  there  is  also  no  wax-like  flexibility
(flexibilitas  cerea).  No  tendon  reflex,  no  increase  of
muscular  irritability.  There  is  analgesia,  but  it  is
possible  to  exercise  a  certain  influence  over  the
subject  through  sight,  hearing,  and  the  muscular  sense.
2.  The  lethargic  stage. It  can  be  induced  primarily


?6


HYPNOTISM.


by  fixed  attention,  or  secondarily  out  of  the  cataleptic
stage  by  closing  the  eyes.  The  subject  is  unconscious
and  not  accessible  to  external  influences,  and  there
is  analgesia.  The  limbs  are  relaxed  and  fall  by
their  own  weight ;  the  eyes  are  closed,  the  tendon
reflexes  increased.  There  is  increased  excitability
of  the  muscles,  the  so-called  neuromuscular  hyper-
excitability.  These  increases  are  demonstrated  by
mechanical  stimulation  of  the  muscles,  nerves,  or
tendons.  For  example,  if  the  ulnar  nerve  is  pressed
a  contraction  of  all  the  muscles  which  it  supplies
follows,  so  that  a  characteristic  posture  of  the  fingers
results  ;  if  a  muscle  is  stimulated,  it  alone  contracts.
The  same  thing  is  attained  by  this  as  by  local  faradiza-
tion in  normal  states,  which  was  shown  by  Duchenne.
While  at  the  extremities  the  contraction  passes  into
contracture — that  is,  becomes  permanent— a  stimula-
tion of  the  facial  nerve  only  causes  a  simple  contrac-
tion in  the  face,  which  soon  ceases.  The  resolution
of  the  resulting  contracture  is  produced  by  exciting
the  antagonistic  muscles  ;  thus,  for  example,  a  con-
tracture of  the  wrist  is  put  an  end  to  by  excitation
of  the  extensors,  and  the  contracture  of  one  sterno-
mastoid  by  stimulation  of  the  other.  It  is  striking
that,  according  to  Charcot,  the  motor  parts  of  the
cerebral  cortex,  can  be  stimulated  through  the
cranium  by  means  of  the  galvanic  current,  so  that  the
muscles  in  connection  with  them  contract.  3.  The
somnambulic  stage.  In  some  persons  it  arises
primarily  by  means  of  fixed  attention  ;  it  can  be
induced  in  all  by  friction  on  the  crown  of  the  head
during  the  lethargic  or  cataleptic  stages.  The  eyes
are  closed  or  half-closed.  By  means  of  gentle  stimula-
tion of  the  skin  the  underlying  muscles  can  be  put  into
rigid  contraction,  but  not,  however,  by  stimulation  of


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  77


the  muscles,  nerves,  or  tendons,  as  in  the  lethargic
stage.  Also  the  contracture  does  not  disappear  on
stimulation  of  the  antagonistic  muscles  as  in  that
stage.  The  posture  of  the  limbs  produced  by  con-
tracture in  somnambulism  cannot  also  be  so  easily
altered  as  in  catalepsy  ;  a  certain  resistance  appears,
as  in  flexibilitas  cerea  ;  Charcot  calls  it  the  cataleptoid
state.  The  same  stimulation  of  the  skin  which
induced  the  contractures  also  resolves  them.  In
somnambulism  many  external  influences  are  possible
by  means  of  suggestion,  of  which  I  will  speak  later  in
their  proper  connection.

With  regard  to  these  stages  of  Charcot,  most
investigators  doubt  if  they  really  exist,  and  think  that
they  are  only  an  artificial  product,  the  result  of  an
unintentional  training  process.  It  is  certainly  strik-
ing that  since  the  school  of  Nancy  pointed  this  out,
and  since  it  has  shown  the  many  sources  of  error  that
should  be  avoided,  the  stages  of  Charcot  are  less  and
less  frequently  observed.  Wetterstrand  never  found
them  at  all  among  3,589  different  persons  (Pauly)  ;
experimenters  who  have  occasionally  observed  them,
themselves  remark  that  they  only  appear  in  certain
persons  after  numerous  experiments  (Stembo).  I
have  been  as  little  able  as  have  many  others  to
observe  the  stages  of  Charcot  in  my  experiments  ;
though  even  a  thousand  negative  results  would  not
be  able  to  overthrow  one  positive  result  of  Charcot's.
I  have  besides  often  experimented  on  several  hystero-
epileptics,  but  have  failed  to  observe  the  stages,  in
spite  of  Richer's  opinion  that  every  one  who  experi-
ments on  such  persons  will  obtain  the  same  results  as
the  school  of  Charcot.  However,  I  think  it  possible
that  in  some  few  cases  of  hystero -epilepsy  the  stages
do  exist But  let  us  confine  ourselves  to  these  few


78


HYPNOTISM.


cases  ;  let  us  give  them  no  greater  importance  than
does  Charcot  himself,  who  by  no  means  insists  that
these  three  stages  are  always  to  be  found.  Even  those
authors  who  on  the  whole  accept  Charcot's  stages
agree  that  there  are  many  exceptions .

Charcot  himself  lays  the  chief  stress  on  the  varia-
tions of  muscular  excitability  in  the  different  stages.
Dumontpallier  and  Magnin,  however,  maintain  that
the  increase  of  neuro-muscular  excitability  is  by  no
means  confined  to  the  lethargic  stage,  but  appears  in
all  of  them.  They  have  likewise  pointed  out  that
there  are  numerous  mixed  states  (etats  mixtes)  in
which  the  symptoms,  partly  of  the  lethargic  and  partly
of  the  cataleptic  stages,  show  themselves.  Richer
finds  single  cases  in  which  the  catalepsy  is  signalized
by  greater  rigidity  and  disposition  to  contracture.
Tamburini  and  Seppilli  find  a  lethargy  with  hyperses-
thesia  of  the  ovaries.  Jules  Janet  again  has  produced
a  fourth  stage  in  Wit., — one  of  the  best-known  of
Charcot's  subjects — which  is  distinguished  from  the
three  others,  both  physically  and  mentally.  Besides
which,  many  deviations  from  the  types  of  the  three
stages  are  to  be  found  in  the  writings  of  Charcot's
pupils.  Thus  Richer  describes  forms  of  lethargy,  in
which  the  subject  performs  movements  at  command,
and  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  describes  a  lucid  lethargy,
in  which  there  was  no  loss  of  consciousness.  In  any
case  the  idea  of  the  stages  has  become  somewhat
confused,  as  an  attempt  has  been  made  to  include
everything  possible  under  them.  Every  one  looked
for  the  stages  ;  when  he  could  not  find  them,  as  was
usually  the  case,  he  believed  himself  obliged  to  add
certain  new  characteristics  to  them.

The  methods  used  to  induce  the  different  stages
have  a  very  doubtful  value. Magnin  maintains  that


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  79


all  the  stages  can  be  brought  on  by  one  particular
stimulation — for  example,  by  pressure  on  the  crown  of
the  head.  Which  stage  appears,  depends,  he  says,  upon
the  duration  of  the  stimulation.  Dumontpallier  and
Magnin  have  besides  asserted  that  the  same  method
which  induces  a  stage  will  also  cause  it  to  disappear
{T  agent  qui  fait  defait) ;  for  example,  if  catalepsy  is
caused  by  a  dazzling  ray  of  light  it  disappears  when
a  new  ray  of  light  falls  on  the  eye.  Braid  formerly
maintained  something  of  the  same  kind  (Max
Dessoir).

The  main  point,  however,  is  that  Charcot  and  his
pupils  describe  specific  muscular  phenomena,  which
are  supposed  to  appear  without  a  psychical  cause.
Thus,  as  we  have  seen,  contractions  of  the  muscles
are  said  to  arise  during  the  lethargic  stage  by  means
of  pressure  on  the  nerves  ;  muscles  are  contracted
by  stimulation  of  the  skin  without  any  mental  act
taking  place  ;  that  is,  without  the  subject's  knowing
that  a  muscle  is  to  contract,  or  which  muscle  it  will
be.  Heidenhain  stated  exactly  the  same  thing,  except
that  he  found  no  contractures  from  pressure  on  the
nerves,  but  only  from  stimulation  of  the  skin.
Heidenhain  also  believes  that  these  contractures  occur
without  any  participation  of  the  consciousness,  and
that  they  are  reflexes,  which  are  set  going  by  stimu-
lation of  the  skin.  According  to  Heidenhain's  view
only  the  underlying  muscles  contract  through  gentle
stimulation  ;  by  means  of  stronger  stimulation  neigh-
bouring ones  also  contract,  and  the  consequent
contracture  spreads,  in  proportion  to  the  strength  of
the  stimulation.  In  this  manner  Heidenhain  considers
the  tonic  spasm  or  rigidity,  which  is  seen  in  hypnosis,
to  be  a  reflex.  Heidenhain  tried  to  find  new  reflexes.
By  means  of  stimulation  of  certain  tracts,  of  the  skin


8o


HYPNOTISM.


particular  movements  were  supposed  by  him  to  be
induced  ;  thus  stimulation  of  the  neck  produced  vocal
sound — as  in  Goltz's  experiments.  Born  also  be-
lieved he  had  discovered  a  series  of  new  reflexes,
which  might  be  seen  after  stroking  certain  portions  of
the  skin.

The  much-discussed  question,  whether  in  the  ex-
periments of  Heidenhain  and  Charcot  we  have  really
to  do  with  reflexes  or  not,  is  not  easy  to  answer,
because  many  physiologists  do  not  distinguish  with
sufficient  clearness  between  two  sorts  of  reflexes — the
physical  and  the  mental.  In  order  to  render  this
clear  I  must  make  a  short  digression  and  say  some-
thing about  reflex  action.  We  understand  by  reflex
action  of  the  muscles  that  particular  action  which  is
induced  by  excitation  of  a  sensory  nerve,  without  the
co-operation  of  the  will.  When,  for  example,  an
insect  flies  into  the  eye  it  closes  ;  this  closing  is
reflex,  because  it  is  involuntary.  When  on  another
occasion  the  eye  is  voluntarily  closed,  this  is  no  reflex,
but  a  voluntary  movement,  so  that  the  same  movement
may  be  performed  either  voluntarily  or  by  reflex
action.  Let  us  take  the  following  case :  I  touch  the
eye  of  a  person  (A.)  ;  the  eye  closes  in  consequence  by
reflex  action,  that  is,  without  the  participation  of  A.'s
will.  I  bring  my  hand  near  to  the  eye  of  another
person  (B.) ;  long  before  it  is  touched  it  closes,  not  only
without,  but  also  against,  B.'s  will.  The  closing  of
B.'s  eye  is  also  reflex  action  ;  the  stimulation  here
affects  the  nerves  of  sight.  And  yet  there  is  a  great
difference  between  the  closing  of  A.'s  eye  and  the
closing  of  B.'s.  While  in  the  case  of  A.  no  mental
action  is  necessary  to  produce  the  reflex,  in  the  case
of  B.  it  is  otherwise.  He  shuts  his  eye  because  he
imagines  that  it  will  be  touched — at  least,  this  is  the


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


Si


general  opinion.  If  B.  puts  his  own  ringer  near  his
eye  it  does  not  close,  because  this  idea  does  not  then
arise.  In  any  case  a  decided  mental  action  takes
place  in  B.  and  not  in  A.  On  this  account  we  call
the  closing  of  B.'s  eye  a  mental  reflex,  and  A.'s  a
physical  one.  The  mental  reflexes  are  extremely
common  ;  stooping  at  the  whistling  of  a  bullet,
laughing  at  sight  of  a  clown,  sickness  produced  by  a
disgusting  smell,  are  mental  reflexes.  The  involun-
tary muscular  action  is  caused  by  a  stimulation  of  the
eye,  ear,  or  sense  of  smell,  after  the  stimulation  has
been  interpreted  in  a  particular  way  by  the  conscious-
ness.

The  classification  of  the  reflexes  into  physical  and
mental  is  not  valueless  for  us  ;  I  think  it  better  at
present  to  keep  to  this  classification,  although  it
is  only  schematic,  and  although  an  authority  as
high  as  Lewes  supposes  a  mental  action  in  all
reflexes.  Gurney,  Max  Dessoir,  and  Hiickel,  have
directed  attention  to  the  importance  of  mental
reflexes  for  hypnosis.  Heidenhain  and  Charcot  de-
nied any  mental  action  in  the  contractures  which
they  induced  ;  the  Nancy  school,  on  the  contrary,
believes  that  it  occurs,  that  the  subject  knows  what
is  intended  to  result,  but  that  his  will  is  unable  to
prevent  the  contracture  ;•  this  is  called  a  suggestion,
and  is  only  a  kind  of  mental  reflex.  Consequently
the  question  put  forward  above,  whether  Heidenhain's
and  Charcot's  contractures  are  reflexes,  may  be  thus
modified  :  Have  we  to  do  as  these  authors  suppose,
with  physical  reflexes,  or  with  mental  ones  ?

Without  wishing  to  maintain  a  priori  that  the  views
of  Heidenhain  and  Charcot  are  mistaken,  I  should
say  that  they  would  at  least  require  careful  examina-
tion before  they  could be accepted.  Nowadays,

7


82


HYPNOTISM.


when  we  know  from  Bernheim,  Forel,  Delboeuf,  and
others,  that  these  things  can  all,  or  almost  all,  be
brought  about  by  suggestion — that  is,  by  means  of  the
hypnotic's  belief  in  their  appearance — we  are  obliged
to  suppose  that  this  is  actually  the  case  whenever
suggestion  is  not  rigidly  excluded  in  experiment.
Heidenhain's  experiments  offer  no  guarantee  on  this
point.  As  the  influence  of  suggestion  was  then
unknown,  it  was  naturally  not  excluded,  and  it  even
appears,  from  Heidenhain's  publications,  that  the
experiments  proposed  were  discussed  before  the  sub-
ject. When,  then,  Heidenhain  maintains  that  the
contractures  spread  according  to  rule,  and  even
according  to  the  laws  for  physical  reflexes  laid  down
by  Pfliiger,  my  own  experiments  oblige  me  to  doubt
it ;  according  to  these  the  contractures  progress  in
proportion  to  the  hypnotic's  comprehension  of  the
experimenter's  wish  or  command  ;  so  that  there  can
be  no  question  of  an  adherence  to  rule.

With  regard  to  Charcot's  propositions  I  will  discuss
later  some  particular  points — for  example,  the  loss  of
consciousness  in  lethargy.  I  will  only  remark  here
that  most  of  the  phenomena  can  be  explained  by
suggestion.  In  the  contractures  of  somnambulism
the  thing  is  clear.  Nothing  is  easier  than  to  cause
such  contractures  by  suggestion.  If  it  is  to  be  proved
that  these  really  occur  without  suggestion,  suggestion
must  first  be  excluded.  Only  the  publication  of  more
exact  and  detailed  accounts  of  the  first  experiments
made  with  these  subjects  would  convince  us  that  it
was  excluded.  Unconscious  and  unintentional  sug-
gestion is  the  greatest  source  of  error  in  hypnotic
investigation.  I  should  conjecture  that  the  contract
tures  of  somnambulism  are  only  brought  about  by
mental  action. This  is  also  to  be  concluded  from


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


*3


another  phenomenon.  We  have  seen  above,  in  the
fourth  experiment,  that  only  one  person,  the  experi-
menter, can  influence  the  subject,  is  in  rapport  with
him,  as  the  technical  term  goes.  Only  the  experi-
menter can  induce  contraction  of  the  muscles  ;
stimulation  by  other  persons  has  no  effect.  If  the
contractions  were  produced  without  participation  of
the  consciousness,  this  would  be  incomprehensible.
Charcot's  pupils  also  speak  of  this  phenomenon  ;
they  assert  that  in  somnambulism  certain  persons
only  can  influence  the  muscular  action  of  the  hypnotics
by  stimulation  of  the  skin  ;  those  persons,  that  is,
who  are  in  rapport  with  the  subject.  This  decidedly
favours  the  view  that  the  contractures  are  caused  by
an  act  of  consciousness  ;  though  Charcot's  pupils  have
not  drawn  this  evident  conclusion.

In  the  case  of  contractures  in  lethargy  the  question
is  rather  more  complicated,  particularly  in  those
where  a  certain  group  of  muscles — for  example,  those
of  the  ulnar  nerve — are  acted  upon,  or  those  in  which
an  isolated  muscle  is  excited.  It  would  be  well  here,
also,  if  more  exact  accounts  of  the  first  experiments
were  published.  For  it  can  hardly  be  avoided,  that
when  the  same  experiments  are  repeated  certain
indications  should  be  given,  from  which  the  subject
draws  conclusions  as  to  what  he  is  expected  to  do.
I  have  no  doubt  that  by  means  of  such  indications
even  tolerably  complicated  movements,  such  as  an
isolated  contracture  of  the  muscles  supplied  by  the
ulnar  nerve,  can  be  induced  ;  that  is,  purely  by  sugges-
tion. With  the  quick  perceptions  which  hypnotics
possess,  they  could  easily  be  brought  to  this  point.  I
do  not  think  it  at  all  impossible  to  induce  by  sugges-
tion the  few  movements  which  Charcot  shows  in  his
public  classes. I  also  should  note  particularly  that


84


HYPNOTISM.


Jendrassik,  an  adherent  of  Charcot,  who  accepts  his
classification  of  the  stages  of  hypnosis,  thinks  that  the
contracture  of  lethargy  is  brought  about  by  suggestion
only.

It  must  be  admitted  that  Richer  emphatically
asserts  that  in  these  experiments,  which  were  varied
a  thousandfold,  the  results  were  always  identical,  that
imitation  was  excluded,  and  that  the  stimulation  of
muscles  and  nerves  at  once  caused  the  corresponding
contractures  which  very  few  physicans  would  be  able
intentionally  to  induce.  But  it  may  be  concluded
from  the  statement  of  Vigouroux  that  the  thing  is  not
so  plain.  He  excepts  the  deltoid  muscle  from  the
rule.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  also  says  that  the  results
were  only  attained  after  long  previous  experiment.  I
will  not  permit  myself  to  pronounce  a  final  judgment
upon  contractures  in  lethargy  ;  in  my  opinion  it  is
not  yet  settled  whether  they  take  place  with  or  with-
out suggestion.

The  phenomena  of  imitative  speech  (echolalie),
observed  by  Heidenhain  and  Berger  belong  to  this
section.  Berger  says  that  hypnotics  will  repeat
everything  that  is  said  before  them,  like  phonographs  ;
even  what  is  said  in  foreign  languages  is  repeated
with  some  exactness.  The  notion  that  only  certain
tracts  of  the  bodily  surface  must  be  stimulated  in
order  to  produce  this  repetition  (Heidenhain,  Berger)
may  be  considered  a  mistake,  the  result  of  insufficient
acquaintance  with  suggestion  on  the  part  of  the
Breslau  investigators.  I  believe  that  the  hypnotic
echoes  what  he  believes  he  is  intended  to  echo.  It  is
certain  that  some  persons  are  able  to  perform  great
feats  in  this  way,  imitating  a  hitherto  unknown
language  quickly  and  correctly,  particularly  after  the


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  85


necessary  practice.  It  is  perfectly  indifferent  whether
the  speech  be  addressed  to  the  stomach,  or  the  neck—
this  was  supposed  to  be  the  sensitive  region — or  to
any  other  part  of  the  body.  The  main  point  is  that
the  hypnotic  should  know  he  is  intended  to  repeat
the  sounds.  Certain  reflexes,  which  are  supposed  to
be  induced  by  touching  the  head,  the  appearance  of
aphasia,  or  of  twitchings  or  contractures  in  the  arm  or
leg  on  touching  certain  parts  of  the  cranium,  should
be  understood  in  the  same  way  ;  statements  of  this
kind  were  made  by  Heidenhain,  and  have  been  re-
peated lately  by  Silva,  Binet,  and  Fere.  These  last
even  believe  that  they  can  place  single  limbs  in  the
somnambulic  state  by  stimulating  the  parts  of  the
head  which  correspond  to  the  motor  centres  of  the
limbs  concerned.  The  experiments  have  not  been
carried  out  with  sufficient  caution.  It  is  inexplicable
that  the  result  should  be  attained  by  pressure  on
the  head,  and  the  reference  of  these  authors  to  the
phrenology  of  Gall  explains  nothing.  Chalande  even
wishes  to  study  the  physiology  of  the  brain  in  this  way
(Delbceuf ).  What  would  our  physiologists  say  if,  in
order  to  stimulate  some  portion  of  the  brain,  it  were
only  necessary  to  rub  the  cranium  on  the  correspond-
ing spot  during  hypnosis  ?  The  method  would
certainly  be  practicable  on  account  of  its  simplicity,
but  unfortunately  it  is  founded  on  inexact  observa-
tions, and  is  perfectly  useless.  Braid  described
similar  phenomena,  which  he  called  phreno-hypnotic.
He  invented  explanations,  which  were  themselves  in
need  of  explanation.  One  of  Braid's  suppositions
was  that  there  was  a  kind  of  reflex  stimulus.  By
pressure  on  a  portion  of  the  skull  a  nerve  was  stimu-
lated which  by  reflex  action  excited  a  part  of  the
brain,  and  by  this  means  excited  feelings  of  benevo^


86


HYPNOTISM.


lence,  for  example ;  by  stimulating  another  spot,
another  nerve  was  excited,  which  by  reflex  action
produced  an  expression  of  piety,  &c.  Braid  appears
to  have  given  up  phreno-hypnotism  later  (Preyer).

Let  me  here  point  out  that  it  is  possible  to  induce
hemi-hypnosis,  or  hypnosis  of  one  side,  by  suggestion,
or  to  influence  each  half  of  the  body  in  a  different
way.  It  was  known  even  to  Braid  that  by  blowing  on
one  eye  the  corresponding  side  could  be  awakened.
Descourtis,  Charcot,  Dumontpallier,  Berillon,  Lepine,
Strohl,  as  well  as  Grlitzner,  Heidenhain,  and  Berger,
who  were  under  Kayser's  influence,  carried  on  these
experiments  in  various  modified  forms  ;  Berger  later
on  changed  his  views.  Though  these  authors  regard
hemi-hypnosis  as  a  physiological  condition  induced
by  the  closing  of  one  eye  or  by  friction  of  one-half  of
the  crown  of  the  head,  their  statements  do  not  now
prove*  their  point.  We  know  by  this  time  that  we  can
produce  all  these  states  by  mental  influence,  and
suggestion  must  be  excluded  before  the  experiments
can  be  considered  conclusive.  It  appears  very
probable,  from  Heidenhain's  publications,  that  the
expected  results  were  discussed  in  the  presence  of  the
subject,  who  only  needed  to  divine  the  expected
result  to  act  accordingly.  Sometimes  stroking  the
left  side  of  the  head  was  supposed  to  make  the  left
half  of  the  body  hypnotic  ;  sometimes  the  result
followed  on  the  right  side.  The  rules  which  Heiden-
hain laid  down  on  this  question  are  not  tenable.  The
main  point  still  is  that  the  subject  shall  know  what
is  intended  to  happen  to  him,  and  what  effect  is
expected  from  the  processes.

As  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said,  I  regard  the
functional  changes  which  the  voluntary  muscles  show


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  87


in  hypnosis  as  dependent  on  central  conditions  ;  a
suggested  idea  can  cause  either  paralysis  or  move-
ment of  the  limbs.  The  question  must  now  be
discussed  whether,  in  consequence  of  this  suggestive
central  action,  alterations  in  the  functions  of  the
muscles  may  appear  which  are  not  normally  to  be
found,  that  is,  whether  the  action  causes  objective
abnormalities  which  could  not  be  induced  by  the  will
of  the  hypnotic.

A  priori,  I  think  the  probability  that  there  are  such
changes  is  not  great,  for  it  cannot  be  supposed  that
an  idea  which  I  implant  in  the  subject  should  have
more  effect  than  the  idea  he  himself  originates.  If,
then,  there  are  some  symptoms  which  are  character-
istic, this  proves  that  the  idea  called  up  by  external
suggestion,  and  the  self-suggested  idea,  have  different
effects  on  the  functions  ;  or  else  that  the  muscles  are
influenced  in  hypnosis  by  something  besides  sugges-
tion, i.e.,  the  propensity  to  contracture,  of  which  I
have  spoken  above.  We  must  understand  the  objec-
tive phenomena  in  one  way  or  the  other.  I  have
already  spoken  of  the  physical  symptoms  of  suggested
paralyses.  I  will  here  mention  a  few  other  cases  in
which  suggestion  heightened  the  normal  muscular
powers.

The  cataleptic  posture  of  the  limbs  is  sometimes
maintained  for  a  very  long  time,  even  for  several
hours.  One  person  remained  for  seventeen  hours  in
a  cataleptic  posture.  Berger  mentions  the  case  of  a
young  girl  who  maintained  this  condition  without  per-
ceptible change  for  seven  hours,  during  which  she
was  continually  watched.  In  these  cases  the  fatigue
and  pain  which  ordinarily  follow  on  great  muscular
exertion  do  not  ensue.  Great  fatigue  rarely  results,
even  when  the  same  position  is  maintained  for  as


88


HYPNOTISM.


long  as  an  hour.  Some  distinctly  marked  cases  of
imitative  speech  (eckolalie)  must  be  mentioned  here.
Braid  relates  that  a  hypnotized  girl  once  imitated
some  of  the  songs  of  the  famous  Jenny  Lind  per-
fectly, which  she  was  quite  incapable  of  doing  in
the  waking  state.  Braid  attributes  this  feat  to  the
delicacy  of  hearing  and  of  the  muscular  sense  in
hypnosis.

However,  we  find  in  hypnosis  frequent  connecting
links  with  the  normal  life.  We  see  that  in  hypnosis
an  arm  remains  longer  in  the  position  commanded
than  a  leg,  for  example.  This  is  because  the  muscles
of  the  leg  are  more  difficult  to  fix  in  any  desired
posture  than  those  of  the  arm  ;  the  leg  falls  more
quickly  by  its  own  weight.

Dynamometric  investigations,  that  is,  measurements
of  the  muscular  force,  have  often  been  undertaken
during  hypnosis.  I  myself  have  made  a  number  of
such  investigations,  which  for  the  most  part  agreed
with  the  results  of  Beaunis.  The  most  important
point  appears  to  me  to  be  that  in  most  cases  the
muscular  force  is  lessened  in  hypnosis.  I  have  seldom
found  it  increased.  I  have  made  these  investigations
during  the  different  hypnotic  states,  but  have  hardly
ever  found  an  increase.  However,  there  are  variations,
and  I  have  occasionally  seen  the  strength  of  one  hand
increase  while  that  of  the  other  diminished.  I  have
also  obtained  different  results  at  different  times  with
the  same  person.  When  there  were  such  variations
they  were  always  of  small  amount,  and  they  are  the
less  important  that  all  dynamometric  investigations
suffer  from  certain  sources  of  error.

We  may  here  consider  the  electric  excitability  of
the  nerves  and  muscles,  to  which  little  attention  has
hitherto  been  paid.  Moriz  Rosenthal  finds  an  increase


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  89


of  electric  sensibility  in  hypnosis.  Tereg  also  found
changes  in  one  case,  which,  however,  was  investigated
without  the  galvanometer  ;  and  Marina  has  done  the
same  in  the  case  of  a  person  in  the  waking  state
who,  however,  had  often  been  hypnotized,  I,  for  my
part,  like  Heidenhain,  Berger,  and  Rieger,  have  been
unable  to  discover  anything  of  importance  in  this
direction.  I  have  tried  more  than  a  hundred  different
experiments  without  rinding  a  perceptible  difference
on  this  point  between  the  hypnotic  and  waking  states.
I  made  my  experiments  with  the  galvanic  and  faradic
current ;  I  always  used  Hirschmann's  galvanometer,
and  made  most  of  the  experiments  on  the  ulnar
nerve  just  above  the  elbow.  I  have  already  said
that  the  electric  susceptibility  is  decreased  in  sug-
gested paralyses  ;  it  appears  that  electric  susceptibility
undergoes  changes  in  certain  cases  from  a  mental
cause  ;  a  further  investigation  of  this  would  be  very
interesting.  I  do  not  at  all  believe  that  we  have  to
do  with  primary  changes  in  the  muscles  or  nerves.
I  may  just  mention  that  according  to  Morselli  and
Mendelsohn  the  muscles  contract  more  quickly  from
stimulation  in  hypnosis  than  in  the  waking  state.

I  have  discussed  above  a  whole  series  of  pheno-
mena, which  I,  in  common  with  the  school  of  Nancy,
consider  to  be  produced  by  suggestion,  but  which
Heidenhain  and  Charcot,  among  others,  regard  as
ordinary  reflexes,  having  no  mental  cause.  I  have
shown  that  imitative  speech  {echolalie),  many-  con-
tractures, and  the  newly  discovered  reflexes  of  Born
and  Heidenhain,  are  probably  phenomena  of  sugges-
tion.  There  appear  to  be  no  new  reflexes  in  hypnosis
independent  of  suggestion  ;  no  sure  proof  has  yet
been  offered,  at  least.  We  must  now  examine  the
ordinary  reflexes  of  hypnosis.


90


HYPNOTISM.


I  have  spoken  occasionally  of  the  tendon  reflexes,
whose  increase  we  observed  in  the  lethargic  stage  of
Charcot,  and  in  certain  paralyses  by  suggestion.
Berger  has  also  observed  an  increase  of  the  patellar
reflex.  But,  as  I  have  often  noticed,  the  increase
seems  to  depend  upon  the  kind  of  suggestion.  I
have  several  times  found  increases  when  the  muscles
were  completely  relaxed  ;  on  the  other  hand,  I  have
found  decrease  of  the  reflexes  in  cataleptic  postures.
This  is  easily  explained  ;  it  has  an  analogy  in  waking
states,  and  must  not  be  too  easily  regarded  as  a
phenomenon  peculiar  to  hypnosis,  since  apart  from
hypnosis  the  tendon  reflexes  are  more  perceptible
when  the  muscles  are  relaxed  than  when  they  are
contracted.

With  regard  to  the  pupil  of  the  eye,  Braid  has
already  mentioned  a  difference  between  its  states  in
hypnosis  and  in  sleep.  In  sleep  there  is  a  contraction
of  the  pupil ;  but  Braid  found  that  it  often  dilated  in
hypnosis.  This  is  confirmed  by  Heidenhain.  I  have
never  observed  this  dilatation  except  when  I  have
employed  the  method  of  fixed  attention  ;  at  other
times  I  have  more  often  found  contraction  of  the
pupil.  I  can  confirm  Braid's  assertion  that  oscilla-
tions of  the  pupil  appear  not  seldom  in  fixation  ;
contraction  and  dilatation  alternate  rapidly.

Spasm  of  accommodation  is  also  often  mentioned
(Heidenhain,  Cohn,  Rumpf).  The  assertion  that  the
pupil  reflexes  are  abnormal  in  hypnosis  is  often  met
with.  In  particular  it  is  said  that  a  ray  of  light  does
not  cause  a  reflex  contraction  of  the  pupil  during
hypnosis.  I  have  never  observed  a  complete  absence
of  the  reflex,  but  I  have  often  remarked  very  slight
reaction  when  I  have  used  the  method  of  fixed  atten-
tion to  induce  hypnosis, I  do  not  know  whether


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


9T


this  was  an  effect  of  the  method  or  of  the  hypnosis,
but  am  inclined  to  consider  the  method  as  the  cause.
Sgrosso  noticed  dilatation  of  the  pupils  in  his  two
subjects  on  the  appearance  of  hypnosis,  followed  by
contraction  during  the  state.

Up  to  this  point  we  have  only  studied  those
changes  which  appear  in  the  voluntary  motor  system
during  hypnosis.  The  hypnoses  belonging  to  the
first  group  (p.  50)  are  characterized  by  various  com-
binations  of  these  changes,  which  are,  notwith-
standing, also  found  in  the  second  group.  The
hypnotic  states  belonging  to  this  group  are,  however,
distinguished  by  an  increase  of  susceptibility  to
suggestion.  The  functions  of  the  organs  of  sense,  in
particular,  are  influenced  by  it.  How  these  act  in
hypnosis  without  suggestion  it  is  difficult  to  say
decidedly  ;  the  statements  of  different  authors  are
very  contradictory.  There  is  no  essential  change  in
the  functions  of  the  organs  of  sense  in  the  light
stages  of  hypnosis  ;  the  subject  sees,  hears,  smells,
&c,  normally.  According  to  Liebeault,  the  senses  of
sight  and  taste  decrease  first,  then  the  sense  of  smell,
then  hearing  and  feeling  disappear  in  turn.  But
when  the  method  of  fixed  attention  is  used,  sight  is
the  last  to  go.  According  to  my  experience  these
statements  are  not  quite  exact ;  if  we  compare  them
with  those  of  other  authors  we  find  many  contra-
dictions. I  think  that  these  contradictions  occur
because  the  condition  of  the  hypnotic  in  relation  to
various  objects  and  persons  is  not  enough  considered.
For  example,  he  hears  the  person  who  is  hypnotizing
him,  and  not  others  ;  he  feels  this  man's  touch,  and
not  another's.  For  this  reason  I  believe  that  we  must
regard  the  whole  state  from  the  beginning  as  a  purely


92


HYPNOTISM.


psychical  one.  Braid  distinguishes  two  grades,  ac-
cording to  the  functions  of  the  sense  organs ;  in  one
an  increased  activity  of  sense  is  shown,  and  in  the
other  a  diminution  of  it.  My  observations  have  not
confirmed  this.

It  is  possible  to  induce  all  kinds  of  sense  halluci-  •
nations  in  hypnosis.  The  images  produced  are  so
changing  that  any  one  who  sees  them  for  the  first
time  is  justified  in  doubting  whether  the  phenomena
are  real  or  not.  We  have  accustomed  ourselves  to
depend  so  completely  on  the  perceptions  of  our
senses,  to  think  them  such  trustworthy  witnesses  in  all
cases,  that  we  are  indeed  astonished  when  we  find
that  a  word  suffices  to  place  a  hypnotic  among  utterly
different  surroundings.

Sense  delusions  are  divided  into  Hallucinations  and  Illusions.
The  first  is  the  perception  of  an  object  where  in  reality  there
is  nothing  ;  the  second  is  the  false  interpretation  of  an  existing
external  object.  If,  for  example,  a  book  is  taken  for  a  cat,  or
a  blow  on  the  table  for  the  firing  of  a  cannon,  we  talk  of  an
illusion  ;  but  if  a  cat  is  seen  where  there  is  nothing,  we  call  it
a  hallucination.  We  have  thus  to  do  with  a  hallucination  when
an  external  object  causes  a  perception  by  means  of  association.
A  chair  on  which  a  particular  person  has  often  sat,  may  by
association  call  up  an  image  of  that  person ;  this  is  a  hallucination
called  up  by  an  external  object.

We  observe  numerous  hallucinations  and  illusions
in  hypnosis.  We  have  seen  in  Case  IV.  that  it
suffices  to  assert  that  a  dog  is  present,  and  a  dog  will
apparently  be  seen.  A  handkerchief  was  in  this
case  taken  for  a  dog,  consequently  this  was  an  illusion.
An  illusion  is  more  easily  induced  than  a  hallucina-
tion ;  in  the  absence  of  an  external  object,  such  as
the  handkerchief,  the  suggestion  very  often  fails.
When  I  do  not  offer  some  such  object  the  hypnotic


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


93


often  finds  it  for  himself.  Hallucinations  of  sight
are  more  easily  caused  when  the  eyes  are  closed  ;
the  subjects  then  see  objects  and  persons  with  their
eyes  shut,  as  in  dreams.  They  think,  at  the  same
time,  that  their  eyes  are  open,  just  as  we  are  unaware
in  dreams  that  our  eyes  are  shut.  If  we  wish  to
cause  a  delusion  of  the  sense  of  sight  at  the  moment
of  opening  the  eyes,  it  is  necessary  to  make  the
suggestion  quickly,  lest  the  act  of  opening  the  eyes
should  awaken  the  subject.  I  advise  the  use  of  fixed
attention  while  the  suggestion  is  being  made  (cf.
Experiment  IV.),  so  that  the  subject  may  not  awaken
himself  by  looking  about.  The  other  organs  of  sense
may  also  be  deluded.  I  knock  on  the  table  and  give
the  idea  that  cannon  are  being  fired,  I  blow  with  the
bellows  and  make  the  suggestion  that  an  engine  is
steaming  up.  A  hallucination  of  hearing  something,
e.g.,  the  piano,  is  induced  without  the  aid  of  any
external  stimulus.  In  the  same  way  smell,  taste,
and  touch  may  be  the  senses  deceived.  It  is
well  known  that  hypnotics  will  drink  water  or  even
ink  for  wine,  will  eat  onions  for  pears,  will  smell
ammonia  for  Eau  de  Cologne,  &c.  In  these  cases
the  expression  of  face  induced  by  the  suggested
perception  corresponds  so  perfectly  to  it  that  a  better
effect  would  scarcely  be  produced  if  the  real  article
were  used.  Tell  the  subject  he  has  taken  snuff,  he
sneezes.  All  varieties  of  the  senses  of  touch,  of
pressure,  of  temperature,  of  pain,  can  be  influenced.
I  tell  a  person  that  he  is  standing  on  ice.  He
feels  cold  at  once.  He  trembles,  his  teeth  chatter,
he  wTraps  himself  in  his  coat.  "  Goose-skin "  can
be  produced  by  the  suggestion  of  a  cold  bath
(Krafft  -  Ebing).  In  like  manner  itching  and  so
forth  can  be  induced. I  say  to  a  gentleman,  "  To-


94


HYPNOTISM.


morrow  at  three  o'clock  your  forehead  will  itch."
The  post-hypnotic  suggestion  proves  true  ;  the  fore-
head itches  so  much  that  the  subject  rubs  it  con-
tinually. It  appears  to  me  that  the  senses  of  touch
and  taste  are  the  most  easily  and  frequently  in-
fluenced. For  example,  the  suggestion  of  a  bitter
taste  takes  effect  much  sooner  than  the  suggestion
of  a  delusion  of  sight  or  hearing.  It  is  true  that
the  subjects  often  account  to  themselves  for  the
delusion  ;  they  taste  the  bitterness,  but  say  at  the
same  time  that  it  must  be  a  subjective  sensation,
since  they  have  nothing  bitter  in  their  mouths.

Sense  delusions  can  be  suggested  in  any  way.  We
can  tell  the  subject  that  he  sees  a  bird.  We  can
suggest  the  same  thing  by  gesture — for  example,  by
pretending  to  hold  a  bird  in  the  hand — particularly
after  the  subject  has  received  some  hypnotic  training.
The  chief  point  is  that  the  subject  should  understand
what  is  intended  by  the  gesture.

Naturally,  several  organs  of  sense  can  be  influenced
by  suggestion  at  the  same  time.  I  tell  some  one,
"  Here  is  a  rose  ;  "  he  not  only  sees,  but  smells  and
feels  the  rose.  I  pretend  to  give  another  subject  a
dozen  oysters ;  he  eats  them  at  once,  without  further
suggestion.  The  suggestion  here  affects  sight,  feeling,
and  taste  at  the  same  time.  In  many  cases  the
muscular  sense  is  influenced  in  a  striking  manner  by
such  suggestions.  I  give  a  subject  a  glass  of  wine  to
drink  ;  he  lifts  the  pretended  glass  to  his  lips,  and
leaves  a  space  between  hand  and  mouth  as  he  would
if  he  held  a  real  glass.  I  am  not  obliged  to  define
the  delusion  for  each  separate  sense  ;  the  subject  does
this  spontaneously  for  himself.  The  subject  in  this
way  completes  most  suggestions  by  a  process  re-
sembling the  indirect  suggestion  described  on  page


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  95


58.  The  external  suggestion  does  not  remain  an
isolated  phenomenon,  but  causes  a  series  of  other
mental  processes,  according  to  the  character  of  the
subject  and  to  the  hypnotic  training  he  has  received.
I  say  to  the  subject,  "  Here,  take  this  bottle  of  Eau
de  Cologne  ! "  He  believes  that  he  feels  the  bottle  in
his  hand,  which  in  reality  is  empty  ;  besides  which  he
believes  he  sees  the  bottle  and  smells  it,  although  I
add  nothing  to  my  original  suggestion.  In  short,  he
completes  it  independently.  This  is  a  very  common
occurrence.

Besides  which  the  deception,  if  it  is  thorough,  is
clearly  reflected  in  the  subject's  expression  and
gestures.  No  gourmand  could  wear  a  more  delighted
expression  over  some  favourite  dish  than  does  a
subject  over  a  suggested  delicacy.  Very  few  people
would  be  able  to  imitate  by  art  the  expression  of
fear  on  the  face  of  a  subject  when  he  believes  that  a
tiger  is  about  to  attack  him.  A  subject  will  drink
several  glasses  of  wine  by  suggestion,  will  become  red
in  the  face,  and  will  then  complain  of  his  head.  I
give  a  piece  of  cork  to  a  subject  for  an  onion  ;  he
smells  it  and  his  eyes  fill  with  tears.  We  can  in  this
manner  place  a  subject  in  any  situation  we  please,
and  from  his  behaviour  under  the  circumstances  draw
conclusions  as  to  his  character  (Morselli).  But  it
would  be  necessary  to  exercise  caution  in  such  a
case,  since  the  subject  nearly  always  has  some  dim
consciousness  of  his  real  surroundings,  however  com-
pletely  he  may  seem  to  be  transported  into  the
imaginary  ones.  I  shall  return  later  and  more  fully
to  these  incomplete  sense  delusions.

Some  authors  (Dumontpallier,  Berillon)  have  particularly-
directed  attention  to  the  suggestions  which  take  effect  on  one
side  of  the  body  only. For  example,  we  can  cause  a  dog  to  be


96


HYPN&frlSM.


seen  on  the  right  side,  and  a  bird  on  the  left,  and  so  forth ;  this
appears  to  be  only  an  affair  of  training  and  suggestion.  It  is
useless  to  draw  conclusions  from  this  about  the  independent
functions  of  the  two  hemispheres  of  the  brain.  The  case
mentioned  by  Magnin  is  connected  with  this ;  a  person
affected  by  weak  sight  of  the  left  eye,  of  hysterical  origin,  be-
lieved in  the  hypnotic  state  that  he  saw  with  the  right  eye  things
which  he  really  saw  with  the  left,  and  so  thought  they  were
on  his  right  side  when  they  were  really  on  his  left  (allochiria).

In  contrast  with  the  delusions  of  sense  hitherto
described,  which  are  sometimes  called  positive,  there
are  also  negative  hallucinations,  or  negative  delusions
of  sense.  The  older  mesmerists  (Deleuze,  Bertrand,
Charpignon)  published  many  observations  of  them.
This  kind  of  suggestion,  which  at  first  seemed  more
incredible  than  the  positive,  nevertheless  has  analogies
in  the  normal  state,  like  all  the  hypnotic  phenomena.
Consider  the  juggler,  who  knows  how  to  use  the  most
important  psychological  laws  for  practical  purposes.
Let  us  watch  him  carefully,  and  we  shall  see  how  he
hides  things,  how  he  makes  a  change,  how  he  sub-
stitutes one  card  for  another  under  the  very  eyes  of
the  spectators.  But  he  knows  how  to  draw  off  their
attention  by  clever  talk,  so  that  even  those  who  have
watched  him  are  unable  to  give  an  account  to  them-
selves of  his  proceedings.  For  example,  the  cards
are  changed  in  the  spectator's  field  of  view  ;  the
sense  stimulation  takes  place,  but  does  not  pene-
trate to  the  consciousness.  We  find  analogous
occurrences  in  ordinary  life.  It  has  happened  to
everybody  to  look  for  something  which  is  before  his
eyes.  In  this  case  also  the  thing  is  not  perceived,
although  it  is  in  the  seeker's  field  of  view  and  he  is
actually  thinking  about  it.  It  is  no  longer  incredible,
then,  that  we  should  find  analogous  processes  in
hypnosis. If  we  can  make  the  hypnotic  see  what


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


97


does  not  exist,  after  the  above  explanation  it  is  no
longer  surprising  that  we  can  prevent  his  seeing  what
does  exist.

Let  us  examine  such  a  case.  Mr.  X.  is  in  hypnosis.
Two  persons  are  present  besides  myself.  I  tell  him,
"  From  this  moment  you  will  only  be  able  to  see
me  ;  you  can  no  longer  see  the  other  men,  though
they  are  still  here."  X.  then  replies  to  every  ques-
tion addressed  to  him  by  these  gentlemen,  and  can
feel  them,  but  he  cannot  see  them.  This  is  a  negative
hallucination  of  sight  only.  But  a  negative  hallucina-
tion of  several  senses  can  be  induced  as  readily  as  a
positive  one.  I  say  to  X.,  "  The  two  men  have  gone
away ;  you  and  I  are  alone.  From  this  moment  X.
neither  sees  nor  hears  them,  nor  perceives  them  by
means  of  any  sense.  When  I  ask  who  is  in  the  room
he  replies,  "  Only  you  and  I."  Part  of  an  object
or  person  can  be  made  invisible  in  the  same  way.
We  can  cause  people  to  appear  headless  and  arm-
less, or  make  them  disappear  altogether  by  putting
on  a  particular  hat,  as  in  the  story  of  the  Magic
Cap.  The  situation  may  be  varied  in  any  way  we
please.

Forel  has  lately  pointed  out  that  the  insane  often
have  these  negative  hallucinations.  He  has  also
pointed  out  that  hypnotics  complete  the  hallucination
at  their  pleasure.  Thus  I  say  to  X.,  while  A.  is  sitting
on  a  chair,  "  A.  has  gone  away ;  there  is  nobody  on
that  chair."  X,  examines  the  chair,  and  as  he  feels
something  there  he  imagines  that  a  plaid  is  lying  on
it.  We  see  here  how  a  suggested  negative  hallucina-
tion passes  into  an  illusion  through  the  auto-
suggestion of  the  hypnotic  ;  this  is  very  common.
To  be  exact,  we  can  regard  every  illusion  as  the  sum
of  a  positive  and  a  negative  hallucination,  as  in  each

8


98


HYPNOTISM,


illusion  something  present  is  not  perceived  and
something  not  present  is  perceived.

Further,  it  is  possible  to  prevent  recognition  of
certain  colours,  and  to  induce  colour-blindness  by
suggestion.  But  we  have  here  only  to  do  with  a
defective  perception  of  colours,  and  not  with  an
alteration  of  the  stimulus  affecting  the  eye  ;  the
disturbance  is  purely  mental  (Schirmer).  Cohn's
assertion  that,  on  the  other  hand,  colour-blindness
sometimes  disappears  in  hypnosis,  has  been  justly
contested  by  Konigshofer  ;  at  the  most  this  could  only
be  a  hysterical  disturbance  of  the  sense  of  colour,
temporarily  removed  by  hypnosis,  and  not  a  dis-
turbance founded  on  peripheral  alterations.

An  entire  cessation  of  the  functions  of  any  sense
organ  can  be  induced  in  the  same  way  as  a  negative
hallucination.  "You  can  no  longer  hear";  "  you  are
deaf,"  or  "  you  are  dumb."  These  words  suffice  to
deprive  the  hypnotic  of  the  corresponding  sense
perceptions.  Not  only  does  he  cease  to  recognize
any  particular  object,  but  the  sense  organ  is  insuscep-
tible to  anything.  A  command  suffices  to  restore  the
functions.  It  is  certain  that  blindness,  deafness,  &c,
can  be  induced  in  this  way ;  but  the  effect  is  a
mental  one.  Exactly  speaking,  the  corresponding
organ  of  sense  performs  its  functions,  but  the  central
process  does  not  reach  the  consciousness.  In  the
same  way  the  sight  of  one  eye  can  be  prevented
though  the  other  can  see  as  usual  ;  a  one-sided
amaurosis  can  be  created  (Borel).  Even  hemianopia
has  been  observed  in  hypnosis  (Willy).

To  this  category  belongs  anaesthesia  of  feeling.  The
mucous  membranes  can  be  made  anaesthetic  by  sugges-
tion. The  fumes  of  ammonia  in  the  nose,  and  tickling
of  the  throat  are  not  felt ;  the  conjunctiva  can  be


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  99


touched  without  producing  the  corresponding  reflex,
and  even  the  cornea  may  become  insensitive  either
spontaneously  or  by  suggestion.  Preyer  quotes  a
cynical  experiment  of  the  American  physician,  Dr.
Little,  who  thrust  a  needle  through  the  cornea  of  a
subject  whom  he  suspected  of  simulation,  in  order  to
test  its  insensibility.  But  in  my  experience  these
last-mentioned  phenomena  are  uncommon.  When
this  anaesthesia  of  the  conjunctiva  and  cornea  exists,
the  eye  no  longer  closes  on  reflex  stimulus  ;  but  this
is  a  consequence  of  the  anaesthesia,  and  not  an
independent  phenomenon  (Gurney).

After  what  precedes,  it  is  hardly  necessary  to
mention  that  the  muscular  sense  can  also  be  inhibited
by  suggestion.  The  frequently  observed  absence  of
the  muscular  sense  in  a  completely  anaesthetic  arm,
of  which  the  subject  still  retains  complete  control,  is
interesting.  The  state  is  like  that  of  persons  suffering
from  locomotor  ataxy.  Such  people  are  able  to
write  correctly,  or  do  anything  else  with  their  eyes
open,  while  they  do  it  very  badly  with  their  eyes
closed  (William  James,  Carnochan).

I  have  shown  above  that  perceptions  of  each  sense
by  itself  can  be  prevented  by  suggestion  ;  but  very
important  hyperesthesias  of  the  organs  of  sense
likewise  exist  in  hypnosis.  It  is  indifferent  whether
these  come  on  from  external  suggestion  or  in  other
ways,  and  is  besides  not  always  exactly  to  be
distinguished  ;  the  main  fact  is,  that  they  do  exist.
Although  they  are  not  on  the  whole  very  common,
I  shall  here  add  some  of  these  remarkable  cases.
It  is  exactly  these  rarer  cases  which  deserve  the  most
careful  consideration,  since  they  often  offer  us  a  key
to  a  natural  explanation  of  apparently  supernatural


IOO


HYPNOTISM.


phenomena,  such  as  transposition  of  the  senses,  or
clairvoyance.

An  increased  sensitiveness  to  touch  has  been  often
observed.  The  two  points  of  a  compass  are  used
for  examining  the  least  distance  of  space  that  can
be  felt.  We  try  to  find  out  what  distance  must
separate  them  in  order  that  they  may  be  felt  as
two  separate  points.  In  this  way  an  increase  of
sensitiveness  is  found  in  hypnosis,  as  the  points  can
be  distinguished  at  a  less  distance  than  in  the
normal  state  (Rerger).  I  have  made  a  series  of
experiments  on  this  point,  and  can  confirm  Berger's
statements.  I  have  found  the  same  thing  under
pathological  conditions.  In  cases  of  locomotor  ataxy,
with  profound  anaesthesia,  increase  of  sensitiveness
has  also  been  found  when  the  patients  were  under
the  influence  of  suggestion ;  the  state  may  continue
post-hypnotically.  In  one  case  of  locomotor  ataxy,
I  found  that  on  the  right  fore- arm  the  two  points
were  distinguished  at  6*i  centimetres  distance.
During  hypnosis  the  separate  points  were  perceived
at  4*9  centimetres  distance,  and  after  waking  even  at
4*1  centimetres.

The  senses  of  pressure  and  temperature  become
sometimes  much  more  delicate.  The  hypnotic  recog-
nizes things  half  an  inch  distant  from  the  skin,  and
this  simply  by  the  increase  and  decrease  of  tempera-
ture (Braid).  He  walks  about  a  room  with  bandaged
eyes  or  in  absolute  darkness  without  striking  against
anything,  becauses  he  recognizes  objects  by  the  re-
sistance of  the  air,  and  by  the  alteration  of  tempera-
ture (Braid,  Poirault,  Drzewiecki).  D'Abundo  produced
enlargement  of  the  field  of  vision  by  suggestion.

Bergson  has  described  one  of  the  most  remarkable
cases  of  increased  power  of  vision. This  particular


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  101


case  has  been  cited  as  a  proof  of  supersensual
thought-transference ;  but  Bergson  ascribes  the  result
to  hyperesthesia  of  the  eye.  In  this  case  the  hyp-
notic was  able  to  read  letters  in  a  book  which  were
3  mm.  high  ;  the  reading  was  made  possible  by
a  reflected  image  of  these  letters  in  the  eye  of
the  experimenter.  According  to  calculation  the
reflected  image  could  only  have  been  o*i  mm.
(=2+0-  inch)  high.  The  same  person  was  able,  with-
out using  the  microscope,  to  see  and  draw  the  cells
in  a  microscopical  specimen,  which  were  only  0'o6
mm.  in  diameter.  Sauvaire,  after  some  not  quite
irreproachable  experiments,  supposed  the  existence
of  such  a  hyperesthesia  of  sight,  that  a  hypnotic
recognized  non-transparent  playing  cards  by  the  rays
of  light  passing  through  them.  A  case  of  Taguet's,  in
which  an  ordinary  piece  of  cardboard  was  used  as  a
mirror,  is  said  to  have  proved  quite  as  strong  a
hyperesthesia.  All  objects  which  were  held  so  that
the  reflected  rays  from  the  card  fell  upon  the  subject's
eye,  were  clearly  recognized.  The  same  thing  is
shown  by  a  great  increase  of  the  sense  of  smell.  A
visiting  card  is  torn  into  a  number  of  pieces,  which
pieces  are  professedly  found  purely  by  the  sense  of
smell  ;  pieces  belonging  to  another  card  are  rejected^
The  subject  gives  gloves,  keys,  and  pieces  of  money
to  the  persons  to  whom  they  belong,  guided  only
by  smell.  Hyperesthesia  of  smell  has  often  been
noticed  in  other  cases.  Carpenter  says  that  a  hyp-
notic found  the  owner  of  a  particular  glove  among
sixty  other  persons.  Sauvaire  relates  another  such
case,  in  which  a  hypnotic,  after  smelling  the  hands  of
eight  persons,  gave  to  each  his  own  handkerchief,
although  every  effort  was  made  to  lead  him  astray.
Braid  and  the  older  mesmerists  relate  many  such


102


HYPNOTISM.


phenomena.  Braid  describes  one  case  in  which  the
subject  on  each  occasion  found  the  owner  of  some
gloves  among  a  number  of  other  people  ;  when  his
nose  was  stopped  up  the  experiments  failed.  This
delicacy  of  certain  organs  of  sense,  particularly  of
the  sense  of  smell,  is  well  known  to  be  normal  in
many  animals  ;  in  dogs,  for  example,  which  recognize
their  masters  by  scent.  Hypnotic  experiments  teach
us  that  this  keenness  of  scent  can  be  attained  by
human  beings  in  some  circumstances.

The  muscular  sense  again  requires  a  few  words.
This  sense  informs  us  of  the  position  of  our  limbs  at
a  given  moment.  The  great  dexterity  of  movement,
which  is  sometimes  found  in  deep  hypnosis,  must  be
ascribed  to  an  increased  acuteness  of  this  sense.
Braid  believes  that  imitative  sounds  (echolalie)  must
be  referred  to  this,  as  has  been  already  mentioned.

With  reference  to  this  hyperesthesia  of  the  sense
organs,  I  will  quote  an  experiment  which  is  often  re-
peated, and  is  wrongly  considered  as  a  proof  of  increased
keenness  of  the  senses.  Let  us  take  a  pack  of  cards,
which  naturally  must  have  backs  of  the  same  pattern,
so  that  to  all  appearance  one  cannot  be  distinguished
from  the  other  ;  let  us  choose  any  card — the  ace  of
hearts,  for  example — hold  it  with  its  back  to  the
subject,  and  arouse  by  suggestion  the  idea  of  a  par-
ticular photograph  on  it — his  own,  let  us  say.  Let  us
then  mix  the  cards,  and  request  the  hypnotic  to  find
the  photograph,  of  course  without  having  allowed  him
to  see  the  face  of  the  card.  He  will  often  find  the
right  one,  although  the  backs  are  all  alike.  The
experiment  can  be  repeated  with  visiting  cards  or
sheets  of  paper,  if  the  selected  one  is  marked,  unknown
to  the  hypnotic.  This  experiment  makes  a  greater
impression  on  inexperienced  people  than  it  need  do.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  103


For  most  people  are  able  to  repeat  the  experiment
without  hypnosis ;  I  do  not  think  hyperesthesia  is
generally  a  condition  for  its  success.  If  the  backs  of
these  cards  and  papers  are  carefully  examined,  minute
differences  {points  de  repere. — Binet)  will  be  discovered.
I  have  myself  often  made  the  experiment  with  good
results,  without  hypnosis.  There  can  be  no  question
of  simulation  here.  Naturally,  I  do  not  contend  that
a  hypnotic  cannot  find  a  paper  in  such  a  case  better
than  a  waking  man  ;  the  hyperesthesia  is  a  fact
I  only  wish  to  point  out  that  hyperesthesia  is
not  absolutely  necessary,  though  this  experiment
is  often  used  to  demonstrate  its  presence.  I  have
seen  men  of  science  of  the  first  rank  show  astonish-
ment when  a  hypnotic  distinguished  apparently
identical  sheets  of  paper.  They  did  not  consider
that  there  are  essential  differences  in  the  sheets,
which  suffice  for  distinguishing  them  even  without
hypnosis.  Yung  justly  says,  "  It  is  surprising  to  see
that  even  scientific  people  sometimes  allow  themselves
to  be  confounded  by  apparently  marvellous  pheno-
mena." The  experiment  is  to  be  explained  thus  :  the
point  de  repere  presented  to  the  hypnotic  at  the  moment
when  the  idea  of  the  photograph  was  suggested  to
him,  recalls  the  suggested  image  directly  he  sees  it
again.  The  point  is  associated  with  the  image,  so
that  one  calls  up  the  other.  Binet  and  Fere  have
rightly  pointed  out  that  the  image  only  recurs  when
the  point  de  repere  is  recalled  to  the  memory  ;  it  must
first  be  seen.  Consequently,  if  the  paper  is  held  at  a
distance  from  the  subject's  eyes,  the  image  will  not
be  recognized,  for  the  points  de  repere  are  not  visible.
Binet  and  Fere  have  made  some  interesting  experi-
ments. They  have  caused  photographic  impressions
to  be  made  of  white  papers  on  which  a  portrait  had


io4


HYPNOTISM.


been  created  by  means  of  suggestion.  It  was  shown
that  the  hypnotic  always  took  the  copies  for  the
original,  because  the  photographed  point  de  repere
aroused  the  same  image  in  his  imagination.  Jen-
drassik  has  observed  the  same  sort  of  thing  :  if  a  "  d  "
is  drawn  with  the  finger  on  a  sheet  of  white  paper,
and  it  is  suggested  that  the  "  d  "  is  real,  the  subject
sees  the  "  d."  If  the  paper  is  turned  upside  down  he
sees  rt  p,"  and  in  the  looking-glass  "q."  This  is  because
the  "  d  "  was  attached  to  certain  points  on  the  paper,
which  were  what  the  subject  remembered,  and  when
the  paper  was  placed  in  different  positions  the  points
appeared  in  different  positions  also.

Suggestion  influences  common  sensation  in  the
same  way  as  the  functions  of  the  organs  of  sense.
Nothing  worthy  of  remark  takes  place  in  hypnosis
with  regard  to  this,  unless  suggestion  is  called  into
play.  I  may,  however,  mention  the  feeling  of
fatigue  which  many  hypnotics  experience  ;  it  some-
times appears  in  the  lightest  hypnosis,  and  may  also
exist  in  the  deeper  stages.  We  can  influence  common
sensation  very  materially  by  suggestion  in  hypnosis.
This  is  not  surprising  when  we  consider  that  it  is
exactly  the  common  sensations  which  are  most  under
the  influence  of  mental  processes.  Just  as  looking
down  from  a  tower  causes  giddiness,  as  the  thought
of  repugnant  food  produces  disgust,  so  we  can  call  up
these,  and  related  phenomena,  or  cause  them  to
disappear,  by  suggestion.  It  is  in  this  direction  that
suggestion  has  to  record  its  most  striking  successes,
since  the  common  sensations,  of  which  pain  is  one,
are  the  cause  of  most  of  the  complaints  we  hear.  As
pain,  &c,  can  be  induced  by  suggestion,  so  by
suggestion  it  can  often  be  banished. I  say  to  a


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  105


subject  who  complains  of  want  of  appetite,  "  The  loss
of  appetite  has  disappeared  ;  you  are  hungry."  I  can
cause  another  to  feel  thirst.  Feelings  of  pleasure  can
likewise  be  excited.  Debove,  on  the  other  hand,  has
induced  loss  of  appetite  by  suggestion  to  such  an
extent  and  for  so  long  a  time  that  the  person  con-
cerned took  no  regular  meal  for  fourteen  days.
Further,  it  is  possible  up  to  a  certain  point  to  satisfy
the  hunger  and  thirst  of  subjects  in  deep  hypnosis
by  merely  suggested  food  and  drink,  as  Fillassier
informs  us.  It  is  a  pity,  however,  that  this  result  can
only  be  obtained  with  a  few  persons,  and  in  a  certain
measure ;  for  otherwise  our  politicians  would  no
longer  need  to  puzzle  their  heads  over  social  questions
and  the  feeding  of  the  masses.

I  shall  here  particularly  discuss  the  feelings  of
pain.  What  effect  has  hypnosis  upon  them,  with  and
without  suggestion  ?  Apart  from  some  particular
hypnotic  states,  in  which  Berger  finds  increased
sensitiveness  to  pain,  we  occasionally  find  analgesia
in  hypnosis.  Sometimes  this  exists  to  such  a  degree
that  the  severest  surgical  operations  can  be  per-
formed during  the  state.  It  is  also  known  that
needles  may  be  run  into  some  persons  during
hypnosis  without  their  feeling  pain,  though  they  feel
the  touch.  And  yet  a  complete  analgesia  is  ex-
tremely rare  in  hypnosis,  although  authors,  copying
from  one  another,  assert  that  it  is  common.  There
is  an  immense  difference  between  pricking  the
subject  with  a  needle  and  using  the  faradic  brush.
The  pain  caused  by  the  use  of  the  latter  is  so  great,
especially  when  a  considerable  electric  force  is  em-
ployed, that  very  few  persons  in  hypnosis  can  endure
it,  even  when  they  show  no  pain  on  being  pricked
with  a  needle. In  some  cases,  where  analgesia  does


io6


HYPNOTISM.


not  appear  spontaneously,  it  can  be  produced  by
suggestion.  But  suggestion  more  easily  produces
a  certain  decrease  of  sensitiveness  to  pain.  Com-
plete analgesia  is  seldom  attained.  Many  cases
described  as  completely  analgesic — for  example,  those
of  Tamburini  and  Seppilli — proved  on  a  closer  ex-
amination not  to  be  so,  as  a  strong  faradic  current
finally  produced  pain.  I  will  just  remark  that  all
kinds  of  pain  can  be  induced  by  suggestion  ;  the
pain  caused  by  a  needle  as  well  as  that  caused  by
a  knife  or  a  burn.  The  face  of  the  subject  expresses
pain  in  such  a  manner,  that  an  impartial  person  can
hardly  decide  whether  the  pain  is  real  or  suggested.

The  state  of  mind  which  is  intimately  connected
with  common  sensations  can  also  be  influenced  by
suggestion.  It  is  consequently  easy  to  induce  either
sadness  or  cheerfulness  in  hypnosis.  We  often  find
the  view  promulgated  that  the  hypnotic  is  strikingly
grave.  My  experience  obliges  me  to  dispute  this  ;
most  people,  on  the  contrary,  seem  particularly
comfortable  in  hypnosis  (Richet).  The  method  of
hypnotization  has  some  influence  here.  The  desires
and  affections  can  be  controlled  in  hypnosis  as  well
as  the  moods.  Love  and  hate,  anxiety,  anger,  and
fear  can  be  easily  called  up,  and  produce  correspond-
ing expressions  and  postures  in  the  hypnotic.

Abnormalities  of  voluntary  movement  apart,  nearly
all  the  phenomena  of  suggestion  hitherto  described
are  the  exclusive  privilege  of  the  second  group  of
hypnotic  states.  I  come  now  to  some  other  physical
functions  which  require  a  deep  hypnotic  state  if  they
are  to  be  influenced.  I  mention,  first  of  all,  the
phenomena  of  that  part  of  the  muscular  system
which  is  normally  independent  of  the  will.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  1 07


We  will  here  particularly  consider  the  circulation
of  the  blood,  and  the  respiration,  as  these  are
essentially  results  of  involuntary  muscular  action.
A  large  number  of  physiological  observations  have
been  made  in  this  field  during  hypnosis,  in  order  to
decide  what  is  the  state  of  the  pulse  and  respiration
without  suggestion.  Of  course  the  pulse  has  been
often  examined,  since  this  is  a  simple  thing  to  do,
and  yet  the  statements  about  it  are  so  contradictory
that  we  only  dare  to  receive  them  with  caution.
Although  some  have  believed  they  had  discovered
objective  symptoms  in  changes  of  the  action  of  the
heart  and  the  respiration,  we  cannot  doubt  that  there
has  been  considerable  exaggeration.  A  great  accele-
ration of  the  pulse  and  of  the  respiration  has  been
often  observed  when  the  method  of  Braid,  or  fasci-
nation (Bremaud),  or  mesmeric  passes  (Ochorowicz)
were  employed.  The  respiration,  which  was  normally
18  per  minute  has  risen  to  50,  or  even  more.  I  have
myself  made  a  number  of  experiments  on  this  point,
and  fully  agree  with  Bernheim  and  Preyer  that  these
changes  are  not  so  much  an  effect  of  the  hypnosis  as
of  the  fixed  attention.  I  believe  that  it  is  only  the
effort  made  which  causes  these  abnormalities  ;  the
irregularities  in  the  respiration  should  probably  like-
wise be  ascribed  to  mental  excitement  and  effort.
Preyer  mentions  that  the  respiration  of  a  person
looking  at  a  microscopic  object  often  changes  ;  in  the
same  way  it  displays  abnormalities  when  a  person
believes  himself  watched.  An  experienced  doctor,
therefore,  prefers  to  examine  the  respiration  un-
observed by  his  patient.  In  any  case  I  have  seen  a
material  acceleration  of  the  pulse  and  respiration  set
in  after  long  strain  of  attention  without  a  trace  of
hypnosis  ;  the  respiration  also  became  irregular.  If


io8


HYPNOTISM.


there  is  hypnosis,  in  a  little  while  the  irregularity
and  acceleration  cease.  I  have  only  seen  a  few  cases
in  which  they  persisted,  but  am  by  no  means  inclined
to  think  this  a  sign  of  hypnosis,  as  some  persons
show  an  acceleration  of  pulse  and  breathing  on  the
smallest  provocation.  Even  a  conversation  is  enough
to  induce  acceleration.  I  have  also  seen  persons  in
whom  an  uncomfortable  sitting  posture  induced
changes  of  pulse  and  respiration.  Besides  which  it
must  be  added  that  in  many  people  there  is  an  im-
portant acceleration  of  pulse  and  respiration  in  the
strong  muscular  contractions  of  the  cataleptic  pheno-
mena (Braid),  and  also  in  tonic  contracture  (Rumpf).
If  I  made  such  persons  lie  quietly  down,  and  avoided
conversation,  physical  effort,  and  mental  excitement,
I  never  observed  any  lasting  acceleration.  On  the
other  hand,  I  have  often  found  a  deepened  and  some-
what long-drawn  respiration,  and  also  a  slight
slowing  of  pulse,  in  hypnosis.  These  were  the  cases
which  bore  a  greater  external  resemblance  to  sleep,
and  in  which,  as  I  have  several  times  mentioned
above,  there  was  no  important  spontaneous  move-
ment. It  was  also  more  difficult  to  induce  move-
ments by  suggestion  in  these  cases.  Beaunis  occa-
sionally finds  an  increased  blood  pressure  in  the
pulse,  which  he  does  not,  however,  think  of  much
importance.  Horsley  finds  no  alteration  in  the  curve
of  the  pulse  tracing.

Of  any  further  unsuggested  abnormalities  of  the
involuntary  muscles  there  is  little  to  be  said.  Moriz
Rosenthal  has  observed  vomiting,  which  he  ascribes
to  stimulation  of  the  cerebral  cortex.  Nausea  is
occasionally  observed  in  frightened  or  excited
persons  (Friedemann).

Let  us  now  ask,  To  what  extent  can  the  involuntary


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


muscular  system  be  influenced  by  suggestion  ?  The
peristaltic  motion  is  relatively  easy  to  affect  I  have
had  several  experiences  of  the  facility  with  which  the
bowels  of  some  hypnotics  are  affected  by  suggestion.
I  say  to  one  of  them,  "  In  half  an  hour  after  awaken-
ing your  bowels  will  act."  This  is  certain  to  happen.
"  To-morrow  morning  at  eight  your  bowels  will  act."
The  effect  follows.  "  To-morrow  between  eight  and
nine  your  bowels  will  act  three  times."  Exactly  the
same  result,  though  the  subject  remembers  nothing  of
the  suggestion  on  awaking.  It  is  interesting  to  note
that  the  action  of  aperients  can  be  checked  by  sug-
gestion, though  this  does  not  often  happen.  A  patient
takes  a  dose  of  castor-oil  which  is  sufficient  to  procure
copious  action  of  the  bowels.  He  is  told  in  hypnosis
that  the  medicine  will  only  take  effect  in  forty-eight
hours.  The  suggestion  is  effectual,  although  with  this
person  the  dose  habitually  acts  quickly  and  abun-
dantly (v.  Krafft-Ebing).  Or  let  a  few  drops  of  water
be  given  to  the  hypnotic  with  the  assertion  that  it  is
a  strong  purge  ;  motion  of  the  bowels  follows.  Sug-
gested emetics  act  in  the  same  way.  This  is  not
very  surprising,  as  we  know  that  these  and  other
functions,  even  though  they  are  independent  of  our
will,  are  yet  under  the  influence  of  the  mind.  Vomiting
at  the  sight  of  disgusting  things,  and  the  celebrated
mica  panis  pills  administered  as  aperients  prove  this
well  enough.

In  some  persons  the  vessels  and  the  heart  can  be
influenced  in  the  same  way,  as  several  experiments
have  proved.  Dumontpallier  has  made  some,  which
should  here  be  mentioned.  He  induced  by  sugges-
tion a  local  increase  of  temperature  of  as  much  as
3°  C.  Forel,  Beaunis,  and  F.  Myers  have  also  ob-
served local  reddening  by  suggestion. Even  this


T  IO


HYPNOTISM.


phenomenon  should  not  surprise  us  too  much,  since  we
observe  the  same  sort  of  vaso-motor  disturbance  to
result  from  mental  condition.  I  have  spoken  above
(p.  57)  of  the  blushing  which  occurs  when  any  one
is  confused.  I  will  here  mention  the  contrary  of
this — the  paleness  which  often  follows  fright.  And  as
a  curiosity  I  will  mention  the  local  reddening  of  the
skin  which  has  often  been  observed  in  spirit  mediums
(Carpenter,  Carl  du  Prel),and  which  has  been  explained
as  a  supernatural  phenomenon.  As  these  mediums
are  often  at  these  times  in  a  state  of  trance — that  is,  in
a  state  resembling  hypnosis,  and  perhaps  identical
with  it — this  phenomenon  admits  of  a  perfectly  natural
explanation.

Some  observations  have  also  been  made  upon  the
influence  of  suggestion  on  the  action  of  the  heart.  I
myself  have  often  been  able  to  produce  a  slowing  of
a  normal  or  rapid  pulse.  However,  we  should  be
cautious  how  we  draw  the  conclusion  that  the  sug-
gestion has  affected  the  nerves  of  the  heart  directly  ;
the  effect  is  an  indirect  one,  rather.  For,  inde-
pendent of  the  fact  that  the  action  of  the  heart  is
to  a  certain  degree  dependent  on  the  respiration,
it  is  likewise  under  the  influence  of  ideas,  which
affect  the  emotions.  Such  ideas  have  the  power
of  quickening  or  slowing  the  heart's  action  ;  it  is
possible  that  the  suggestion  which  retards  a  quick
pulse  only  produces  this  result  indirectly  by  a  re-
moval of  the  mental  exciting  cause,  or,  vice  versa,
quickens  the  pulse  by  excitement.  My  observations
of  the  quickening  and  slowing  of  the  heart's  action  by
suggestion  leads  me  to  take  this  view  rather  than
that  of  a  direct  influence  of  suggestion  on  the  nerves
and  nerve  centres  of  the  heart.  In  any  case  it  would
be  difficult  to  exclude  this  indirect  action,  especially


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


in


as  its  effects  are  rapid.  However,  the  method  is
of  no  consequence.  Beaunis  has  seen  a  momentary
effect  of  suggestion  in  several  people  without  change
of  respiration  from  suggestion.  He  has  seen  the
pulse  fall  in  consequence  of  suggestion  from  98  beats
to  92,  and  then  rise  to  115  beats.  He  excludes
any  direct  action  of  suggestion  upon  the  inhibitory
centre  of  the  heart,  and  thinks  himself  also  obliged  to
exclude  ideas  which  affect  the  mental  state,  such  as
are  mentioned  above,  since  the  effect  of  the  sugges-
tion was  always  momentary.  But  his  reasoning  on
this  point  is  not  conclusive.

Respiration,  which  holds  a  middle  position  between
the  voluntary  and  involuntary  movements,1  can  also
be  influenced  by  suggestion.  From  motives  of  pru-
dence I  have  never  continued  such  experiments  for
longer  than  half  a  minute.  I  suggested  to  the  subject
that  he  could  not  breathe  ;  an  apparently  complete
pause  in  respiration  followed.  Jendrassik  relates  a
case  in  which  he  inhibited  respiration  for  three  minutes,
simply  by  assuring  the  subject  that  he  could  not
breathe.

We  find  but  scanty  accounts  of  physiological  re-
searches into  the  processes  of  secretion  during  hypnosis.

Perspiration  has  often  been  observed  (G.  Barth,
Demarquay,  Giraud-Teulon,  Heidenhain,  Preyer).  I
doubt  if  the  secretion  of  sweat  depends  on  the  hyp-
nosis ;  I  believe  that  it  is  rather  a  result  of  the
straining  and  excitement  of  fixed  attention.  We
know  a  little  more  about  the  influences  of  sugges-
tion. Burot  shows  that  secretion  of  saliva  can  be

1  That  is,  it  is  generally  involuntary,  but  up  to  a  certain  point

it  is  under  the  influence  of  the  will,  and  can  be  accelerated  or  ,

retarded.


HYPNOTISM.


induced  by  suggestion,  and  Bottey  demonstrates  the
same  thing  of  perspiration.  Charles  Richet  shows
that  erection  and  emission  of  semen  can  be  effected
by  it,  so  as  to  produce  on  the  subject  an  impres-
sion of  sexual  intercourse.  I  have  mentioned
above  that  I  have  myself  seen  a  hypnotic's  eyes
water  when  it  was  suggested  to  him  that  he  was
smelling  an  onion.  Heidenhain  induced  discharge  of
urine  by  tickling  the  perinaeum.  I  do  not  think  this
phenomenon  should  be  regarded  as  a  physical  reflex  ;
I  believe  that  the  patient  emptied  the  bladder  because
he  believed  that  he  was  intended  to  do  so.  Preyer
mentions  this  as  an  example  of  secretion  ;  I  hold
a  different  opinion  ;  I  believe  that  the  patient  did  not
secrete  the  urine  in  consequence  of  the  external  stimulus
or  command,  but  merely  passed  it.  This  is,  then,  a
motor  suggestion.  I  have  often  been  able  to  produce
the  same  effect :  "  After  waking  you  must  make  water
five  times."  The  patient  is  surprised  after  the  hypnosis
that  he  wishes  to  make  water  so  often,  but  obeys.
Few  investigations  have  been  made  as  to  whether  the
bladder  secretions  can  be  influenced  by  suggestion.
However,  Wetterstrand  mentions  results  produced  in
diseases  of  the  kidneys  which  almost  justify  the  con-
clusion that  in  certain  persons  it  is  possible  to  influence
the  kidney  secretions  by  suggestion.  This  is  not  so
strange  when  wc  reflect  that  many  diseases  in  which
there  is  increased  secretion  of  urine  are  of  nervous
origin,  and  that  anxiety  and  fear  also  appear  to
influence  it.

Krafft-Ebing  draws  conclusions  as  to  the  increase
of  intestinal  secretions  from  one  experiment.  He
suggested  to  his  subject  a  profuse  watery  evacuation
of  the  bowels,  which  followed.  As  the  bladder  had
been  emptied  shortly  before,  and  only  a  small  quantity


THE  S  YMP  TOMS  OF  H  YPN  OS  IS.  1 1 3


of  urates  had  been  found  in  the  urine,  Krafft-Ebing
thinks  himself  obliged  to  consider  the  fluid  as  an
increase  of  the  intestinal  secretions.

Some  special  investigations  have  been  made  of  the
organic  changes  during  hypnosis,  but  no  sort  of  con-
clusion can  be  drawn  from  them  in  any  case.  Brock
finds  that  in  a  short  hypnosis  of  twenty  minutes'
duration,  with  partial  catalepsy,  the  sum  of  the  solid
constituents  and  the  phosphoric  acid  decreases  ;  as
Strtibing  has  described  in  catalepsy.  But  as  Brock
forgot  to  examine  his  patients  under  analogous
circumstances,  sitting  quietly  without  hypnosis
(Preyer),  his  experiments  are  not  conclusive.  In  any
case  no  conclusion  as  to  the  action  of  the  brain  must
be  drawn  from  them.  Brock  concludes  that  the
activity  of  the  brain  is  lessened,  because  the  quantity
of  phosphoric  acid  is  decreased.  Giirtler  is  much
more  cautious  in  his  conclusions.  He  also  finds  a
difference  in  the  phosphoric  acid ;  it  is  true  that  he
has  not  made  a  sufficient  number  of  comparative
experiments  with  the  same  subject  in  analogous
circumstances,  without  hypnosis.  He  refrains  from
drawing  final  conclusions,  because  to  justify  these  the
evacuations  of  the  bowels  and  the  respiration  must  be
investigated  also.

The  experiments  of  some  investigators  who  pro-
duced a  change  in  the  bodily  temperature  must  be
reckoned  to  belong  to  this  section.  Krafft-Ebing's
experiments  are  particularly  surprising.  He  succeeded
in  producing  any  temperature  he  pleased  in  his  subject.
The  most  enigmatical  point  with  regard  to  this  appears
to  me  to  be  that  the  subject  showed  the  exact  degree
of  temperature  commanded — namely,  360  C. — when
examined  by  the  thermometer. As  it  is  evidently

9


U4


HYPNOTISM.


utterly  out  of  the  patient's  power  to  influence  this
instrument  mentally,  we  must  assume  an  astonishing
capacity  for  regulating  the  temperature  of  the  body.
The  experiments  carried  out  by  Mares  and  Hellich  are
very  interesting.  They  often  succeeded  in  lowering
the  temperature  of  a  hypnotic  from  37°  C.  to  34*5°  C,
in  twenty-four  hours.  This  result  was  not  produced
by  immediate  suggestion,  but  rather  by  suggestive
influence  on  the  feelings  of  cold  and  warmth.

I  now  come  to  some  phenomena  which,  for  the  most
part,  will  awaken  distrust.  I  mean  the  anatomical
changes  effected  by  suggestion  during  hypnosis.  But
however  enigmatical  this  may  appear,  we  have  only
to  do  with  quantitative  differences  in  phenomena,
which  we  have  observed  elsewhere.  The  physiognomy
of  certain  professions — for  example,  the  type  of  the
clergy  shows  how  mental  processes  gradually  exercise
an  influence  on  organic  construction.  The  mental
moods  and  occupation  impress  their  stamp  by  degrees
upon  the  physiognomy.

The  most  general  and  frequently  repeated  experi-
ment carried  out  in  hypnosis,  is  to  induce  the  subject
to  believe  that  a  blister  has  been  applied  to  him,  and
thus  to  obtain  real  blisters.  The  whole  collection  of
observations  on  this  point  are  not  free  from  objection.
Even  when  exact  accounts  of  the  experiments  are
published,  the  sceptic  has  sufficient  cause  for  hesitation.
But  every  man  of  science  should  be  sceptical,  not  of
these  statements  in  particular,  but  of  all  statements.
The  reason  for  hesitation  with  regard  to  the  above
experiments  is,  as  a  rule,  the  insufficient  watching  of
the  subject.  But  if  the  published  experiments  are
not  convincing  they  are  at  least  worthy  of  considera-
tion. It  is  a  fundamentally  false  principle  to  dispute


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


"5


such  things  a  priori,  either  because  we  have  not
ourselves  seen  them  or  because  they  are  rare.  This
false  principle  is  far  too  much  acted  on,  according  to
my  view.  For  there  are  certain  things  which  are
rare  ;  for  example,  some  monsters,  and  triplets,  and
also  millionaires,  and  yet  they  are  none  the  less  to  be
seen  sometimes.  Every  one  believes  in  their  existence
without  having  seen  them.  Consequently,  neither
rarity  nor  the  fact  that  we  have  not  seen  a  thing
ourselves  precludes  its  existence.  For  this  reason  the
rare  observations  of  others  are  of  importance.

Among  the  experiments  in  this  direction  I  will  first
of  all  mention  the  cases  in  which  menorrhagia  is
induced  or  arrested  by  suggestion.  It  is  not  to  be
doubted  that  this  is  practicable  in  the  case  of  certain
persons.  Forel  has  made  a  whole  series  of  experiments
on  this  point,  and  has  also  partly  confirmed  the  ac-
curacy and  the  effect  of  suggestion  by  personal
investigation.  Many  other  experimenters  have  also
been  able  to  confirm  the  effect  of  suggestion  on
menstruation  (Sperling,  A.  Voisin,  Gascard,  Briand).
Liebeault's  statement  that  he  was  never  able  to  cause
abortion  by  suggestion  is  curious.  The  influence  of
suggestion  in  menorrhagia  seems  less  wonderful  and
striking  when  we  reflect  how  very  much  psychical
influences  otherwise  affect  it.  It  is  known,  for
example,  that  the  periods  often  become  irregular  in
women  who  are  about  to  undergo  a  surgical  operation.

I  have  mentioned  the  influence  of  suggestion  in
this  place  in  spite  of  the  fact  that  these  experiments
do  not,  properly  speaking,  demonstrate  an  organic
influence.  We  may  be  concerned  here  with  a  vaso-
motor disturbance,  which  secondarily  induces  the
organic  changes. This  appears  to  me  probable.

Jendrassik  and  Krafift-Ebing  obtained  marks  like


n6


HYPNOTISM.


burns  on  their  subjects  by  means  of  suggestion.  It
some  object,  such  as  a  match-box,  a  pair  of  scissors,
a  snuff-box,  a  linen- stamp,  &c,  was  pressed  upon  the
skin,  and  the  subject  was  at  the  same  time  told  that
the  skin  was  being  burned,  a  blister  in  the  form  of  the
object  resulted. The  marks  remained  a  long  time
visible. If  the  object  was  pressed  upon  the  left  side
of  a  hysterical  patient  anaesthetic  on  the  right,  the
burn  appeared  symmetrically  on  the  right  as  it  would
if  reflected  in  a  glass,  as  could  be  especially  seen  when
letters  were  used. Jendrassik  maintains  that  deception
was  absolutely  excluded  in  these  cases  of  suggested
burns. Besides  this,  a  dermatologist,  Lipp,  at  one
of  the  experiments,  declared  that  it  would  be  im-
possible to  cause  the  suggested  lesion  mechanically  or
chemically. Burns  caused  by  suggestion  have  often
been  observed  in  the  Salpetriere. The  same  may  be
said  of  the  experiments  of  Bourru,  Burot,  and  Berjon,
who  induced  bleeding  by  suggestion  in  the  same
subject as Mabille,  Ramadier,  and Jules  Voisin.
Puysegur  had  witnessed  the  same  thing. Bleeding  of
the  nose  appeared  at  command  in  the  above-mentioned
subject,  and  later  on  bleeding  from  the  skin  at  a  time
decided  on  beforehand. When  the  skin  had  been
rubbed  with  a  blunt  instrument  in  order  to  give  point
to  the  suggestion,  bleeding  of  the  skin  is  said  to  have
appeared  at  command,  the  traces  of  which  were  visible
three  months  later. It  is  interesting  that  in  the  case
of  this  person,  who  was  hemiplegic  and  anaesthetic  on
the  right  side,  the  suggestion  would  not  take  effect  on
that  side. Mabille's  observations  of  this  subject  are
particularly  interesting,  because  they  show  that  a
person  in  hypnosis  can  cause  these  bleedings  by  auto-
suggestion. Unfortunately  the  accounts  we  possess
of  such  cases  do  not  enable  us  to  draw  a  definite


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  117


conclusion  as  to  whether  contact  will  induce  bleeding
under  other  circumstances  (F.  Myers).  Meanwhile
we  must  remember  that  the  bleeding  did  not  follow
closely  on  the  contact,  which  would  have  been  the
case  if  the  effect  were  mechanical.  Berjon  reminds
us,  also,  that  precautionary  measures  were  taken  to
prevent  the  subject  from  touching  his  own  arm,  and
thereby  causing  a  wound.

Everybody  will  here  remember  the  stigmatics  of  the  Roman
Catholic  Church.  Bleeding  of  the  skin  is  said  to  appear  in
them,  generally  in  spots  which  correspond  to  the  wounds  of
Christ.  The  best  known  is  Louise  Lateau,  of  Bois  d'Haine,
near  Mons,  who  was  much  talked  of  in  1868.  It  appears  from
the  literature  concerning  her,  that  the  anatomical  process  was
rather  a  complicated  one  in  her  case  (Virchow,  Lefebvre).
Blisters  first  appeared,  and  after  they  burst  there  was  bleeding
from  the  true  skin  (corium),  without  any  visible  injury.  I  will
not  enter  into  the  question  of  simulation,  which  a  Belgian  doctor,
Warlomont,  decided  was  impossible,  after  personal  investigation.
Delbceuf  and  others  believe  that  the  phenomena  were  caused
by  auto-suggestion.  Lateau  directed  her  own  attention  con-
tinually to  those  parts  of  her  body  which  she  knew  corresponded
to  the  wounds  of  Christ,  and  the  anatomical  lesions  resulted
from  this  strain  of  attention,  as  in  other  cases  from  external
suggestion.  Virchow,  as  is  known,  thought  that  fraud  or  miracle
were  the  only  alternatives.  In  the  well-known  case  of  Catherine
Emmerich  the  bleedings  are  said  to  have  appeared  while  she
was  looking  at  the  crucifix.  Without  deciding  as  to  the  reality
of  these  phenomena,  since  no  scientific  investigation  was  under-
taken, or  was  even  possible,  I  will  remark  that  at  present  a
natural  explanation  of  the  facts  is  possible,  because  such  things
can  be  induced  by  suggestion  in  a  suitable  mental  state.  The
conditions  resemble  each  other  ;  the  ecstasy  of  Lateau  has  a
great  likeness  to  the  hypnotic  state.  Ecstasy  and  hypnosis
have  many  points  in  common,  and  are,  perhaps,  identical  con-
ditions (Mantegazza).

The  Catholic  clergy,  many  of  whom,  as  Sancha  Hervas,
condemn  hypnotism  altogether,  object  to  the  identification  of
stigmatization  with  suggested  bleeding. Merle  denies  the


8


HYPNOTISM.


possibility  of  a  comparison.  But  Meric  does  not  reflect  that
an  auto-suggestion  in  ecstasy  may  have  exactly  the  same  effect
as  an  external  suggestion.  Meric  maintains  that  stigmatics  are
certainly  not  in  an  abnormal  condition,  but  quite  awake.  But
as  far  as  Lateau  is  concerned,  she  was  evidently  not  awake  ;
that  is,  if  we  take  it  for  granted  there  was  no  fraud  in  the
case.  Lateau  'spoke  to  certain  persons  only  ;  consequently
some  rapport  existed  as  in  hypnosis.

The  experiments  of  Delbceuf  also  belong  to  the
class  of  organic  lesions.  He  experimented,  in  common
with  Winiwarter  and  Henrijean,  and  he  produced
symmetrical  burns,  and  made  one  of  the  wounds
painless  by  suggestion.  It  was  observed  in  this  case
that  the  painless  wound  showed  a  much  greater
tendency  to  heal,  and,  in  particular,  that  the  inflam-
mation showed  no  tendency  to  spread.  As,  however,
there  are  some  slight  anomalies,  the  experiments  are
not  fully  convincing.

I  now  come  to  some  experiments  in  which  the  hyp-
notic was  told  that  a  blister  had  been  applied  to  him,
which  blister  was  really  only  an  ordinary  piece  of
paper.  As  Binet  and  Fere  inform  us,  this  experiment
was  first  made  as  long  ago  as  1840,  by  the  Italian
doctor,  Prejalmini,  and  Du  Prel  tells  us  that  in  18 19
a  sloughing  of  the  skin  was  obtained  on  a  hypnotized
somnambule  of  Celicurre  de  l'Aupepin,  by  means  of
a  piece  of  linen,  although  the  linen  had  been  applied
like  a  simple  plaster.  Focachon,  an  apothecary  of
Charmes,  has  recently  repeated  the  experiment.
Sometimes  alone,  and  sometimes  in  company  with
the  Nancy  investigators,  he  has  applied  pieces  of
paper,  suggesting  that  they  were  blisters.  He  is  said
to  have  often  produced  blistering.  Beaunis  has  pub-
lished an  exact  report  of  some  experiments  of  this
kind. After  the  suggestion  had  lasted  twenty-one


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  119

hours  the  paper  was  taken  off,  and  it  was  found  that
the  skin  was  thickened,  dead,  and  of  a  yellowish
tint ;  later,  perhaps  as  a  result  of  the  pressure  of
the  clothes,  several  small  blisters  appeared.  The
reverse  experiment  has  also  been  successfully  made
by  the  Nancy  investigators  ;  the  effect  of  a  real
blister  has  been  counteracted  by  suggestion.  Meunier
has  published  an  account  of  such  an  experiment  made
at  Nancy.  Forel,  of  Zurich,  who  has  done  so  much
for  the  development  of  hypnotism  in  Switzerland  and
Germany,  has  often  tried  to  produce  organic  changes
by  means  of  suggestion.  Thus,  after  an  endeavour
to  produce  blisters  by  suggestion  little  pustules  of
acne  appeared.  Besides  this,  Prof.  Forel  has  made
some  other  experiments,  the  results  of  which  he  has
kindly  allowed  me  to  publish.

The  experiments  were  made  on  a  nurse,  twenty-
three  years  old,  who  is  not  at  all  hysterical.  She  is
the  daughter  of  plain  country  people,  and  has  been
for  a  long  time  an  attendant  in  the  Zurich  Lunatic
Asylum,  which  Forel  directs.  He  thinks  her  a  capable,
honest  person,  in  no  way  inclined  to  deceit.  The
experiments  were  as  follows  :  A  gummed  label  was
fixed  upon  her  chest  above  each  breast  ;  the  paper
was  square.  In  no  case  was  an  irritating  gum  used.
At  midday  Forel  suggested  that  a  blister  had  been
put  on  the  left  side  ;  and  at  six  o'clock  in  the  evening
a  moist  spot  had  appeared  in  this  place  ;  the  skin
was  swollen  and  reddened  around  it,  and  a  little  in-
flammation had  appeared  also  on  the  right  side,  but
much  less.  Forel  then  did  away  with  the  suggestion.
On  the  next  day  there  Was  a  scab  on  the  left  side.
Forel  had  not  watched  the  nurse  between  noon  and
six  o'clock,  but  had  suggested  that  she  could  not
scratch  herself. The  other  nurses  said  that  the  sub-


120


HYPNOTISM.


ject  could  not  raise  her  hand  to  her  chest,  and  made
vain  attempts  to  scratch.  Forel  repeated  the  experi-
ment later  ;  he  put  on  the  paper  at  11.45  a«m->  and
ordered  the  formation  of  blisters  in  two  and  a  half
hours.  Little  pain  was  suggested,  and  the  nurse
therefore  complained  but  little.  At  two  o'clock  Forel
looked  at  the  paper  on  the  left  side,  for  which  the
suggestion  had  been  made,  and  saw  around  it  a  large
swelling  and  reddening  of  the  skin.  The  paper  could
be  with  difficulty  removed.  A  moist  surface  of  the
epidermis  was  then  visible,  exactly  square  like  the
paper.  Nothing  particular  appeared  under  the  paper
on  the  right  side. Forel  then  suggested  the  dis-


appearance of  the  pain,  inflammation,  &c.  In  spite
of  this  the  place  suppurated,  and  was  discharging  for
eight  days,  and  the  scab  lasted  for  some  time.  Even
when  Prof.  Forel  related  this  to  me,  seven  weeks  later,
the  place  was  still  brownish.  The  nurse  was  a  little
annoyed  and  uneasy  about  the  experiment,  and  she
was  not  strictly  watched  while  it  lasted.

A  few  days  after  this  experiment  Forel  drew  two
light  crosses  with  the  point  of  a  blunt  knife  on  the
same  person.  They  did  not  bleed.  Another  cross
(shown  in  Fig.  1)  was  made  on  the  inner  side  of  each
fore-arm.  Several  doctors  were  present.  Forel  sug-
gested the  appearance  of  blisters  on  the  right  side.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


121


Even  at  the  end  of  five  minutes,  during  which  Forel
watched  the  subject,  so  that  fraud  was  out  of  the
question,  a  considerable  reddish  swelling  of  the  skin
had  appeared  (Fig.  2,  a)*  A  wheal,  b>  looking  like
nettle-rash,  had  formed  itself  round  the  cross,  c,  some-
what in  the  shape  of  a  cross.  On  the  left  side  nothing
was  to  be  seen  but  the  cross  that  had  been  drawn,
unaltered,  as  in  Fig.  i.

The  wheal  on  the  right  side  resembled  a  vaccination
pustule,  in  the  form  of  a  cross  ;  but  it  was  simply  a
papular  swelling,  as  in  nettle-rash.  Forel  then  sug-
gested the  disappearance  of  the  swelling  and  the
wheal,  and,  further,  the  appearance  of  a  drop  of  blood
at  the  end  of  an  hour.  At  the  end  of  this  time  a  very
small  drop  was  to  be  seen ;  but  the  wheal,  redness,
and  swelling  had  disappeared.  But  as  Forel  had  not
watched  the  subject  during  this  hour,  he  attached  no
importance  to  the  drop  of  blood,  which  might  have
been  caused  by  a  prick.

Forel  wished  later  to  watch  this  experiment  in
vesication  from  beginning  to  end.  But  the  subject
was  made  very  angry  and  excited  by  the  words  and
gestures  which  showed  her  that  she  was  mistrusted.
In  Forel's  opinion  this  caused  the  non-success  of  the
experiment.  After  this  no  more  vesication  appeared,
either  with  or  without  watching  ;  a  slight  reddening
of  the  skin  was  all  that  was  obtained.  Forel  holds
the  very  plausible  view  that  the  subject's  mental
excitement  was  prejudicial  to  her  later  suggestibility.
Among  the  above-mentioned  experiments  he  only
considers  the  one  in  which  the  papular  swelling  was
produced  to  be.  proved;  as  concerns  the  others  he
reserves  his  opinion,  since  no  strict  watch  was  kept.

Stress  must  be  laid  on  the  fact  that  Forel  only
made  a  gentle  scratch  to  give  point  to  the  suggestion.


122


HYPNOTISM,


The  injury,  such  as  it  was,  did  not  cause  the  wheal ;
for  if  it  had,  the  same  thing  would  have  appeared  on
the  other  side  of  the  subject.  It  may  be  objected
that  the  same  force  may  not  have  been  used  to  make
the  mark  on  both  sides.  However,  it  should  be  said
that  the  nurse  was  not  one  of  those  persons  who  get
a  wheal  whenever  their  skin  is  slightly  stimulated.
This  seems  conclusive  to  me.  She  showed  wheals,
only  when  bitten  by  gnats.  When  her  skin  was
scraped  it  showed  a  disposition  to  redden,  but  wheals
never  formed.  She  had,  besides,  often  been  scratched
by  insane  patients,  but  no  remarkable  result  had  ever
been  observed.

It  should  be  added  that  there  are  people  who
develop  wheals  under  mental  excitement  without
hypnosis.  A  very  trustworthy  observer  told  me  of
the  case  of  a  person  who  had  once  been  much
frightened  by  a  thunderstorm,  and  who  showed  after-
wards wheals  with  a  red  border  whenever  a  storm  was
approaching.

It  is  to  be  understood  that  great  caution  is  necessary
in  dealing  with  experiments  in  which  anatomical
injury  is  caused  by  suggestion.  This  is  all  the  more
necessary  because,  from  one  philosophical  point  of
view,  that  of  Du  Prel,  the  experiments  are  already
regarded  as  proving  that  the  soul  is  an  organizing  as
well  as  a  thinking  power.

(2)  Psychology.

In  the  foregoing  sections  we  have  studied  the
physical  changes  of  hypnosis.  We  have  seen  how
strikingly  suggestion  modifies  the  different  functions.
I  have  already  had  occasion  to  touch  upon  some
psychical phenomena, closely  connected  with  the


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  123


physical.  In  what  follows  I  shall  frequently  be
obliged  to  refer  to  the  physical  phenomena,  the
variations  in  which,  during  hypnosis,  are  purely  the
result  of  changed  central  processes.  Our  conclusions
as  to  these  central  processes  must  be  drawn,  then,
from  the  physical  functions.

We  shall  now  study  the  changes  which  the  mental
functions  undergo  during  hypnosis.  As  a  matter  of
course,  I  shall  not  note  each  individual  mental
action  ;  I  shall  only  discuss  such  as  are  characteristic
from  our  present  point  of  view.

For  practical  reasons  I  must  first  speak  of  the
memory,  because  it  determines  the  other  psychical
activities.  Without  memory  no  action  of  the  under-
standing is  possible  ;  memory  is  a  necessary  condition
for  an  independent  activity  of  the  consciousness  and
the  will.

Memory,  in  its  broadest  sense,  consists  of  three  parts :  firstly,
of  the  power  of  retaining  ideas";  secondly,  of  the  power  of  re-
producing these  ideas  ;  thirdly,  of  the  power  of  recognizing  the
ideas  and  of  localizing  them  correctly  in  the  past.  To  make
this  clear,  let  us  take  any  event  which  we  remember — for
example,  a  severe  scolding  given  to  us  by  a  teacher.  The
memory  in  this  case  acts  in  three  ways  :  in  the  first  place,  what
is  said  is  received  and  retained  in  it  ;  in  the  second  place,  the
memory  can  reproduce  the  lecture  :  and  in  the  third  place,  we
can  place  it  in  its  correct  position  in  time,  by  recalling  its  rela-
tion to  other  events,  &c.  It  will  be  made  clear  in  what  follows
that  under  certain  circumstances  these  different  processes  of
the  memory  show  abnormalities  in  hypnosis.

The  retention  of  ideas  in  hypnosis  has  been  little
investigated.  Beaunis  has  found  no  essential  differ-
ence in  this  respect  between  hypnosis  and  waking  life.
Max  Dessoir  has  also  made  experiments,  whose
results  he  has  communicated  to  me. From  these  it


124


HYPNOTISM.


appears  the  memory  is  weakened  in  hypnosis,  when
this  is  not  prevented  by  suggestion.  Dessoir  repeated
a  number  of  syllables  which  the  hypnotic  was  to  try
to  remember ;  a  suggestion  of  improved  memory  was
carefully  avoided.  Under  these  circumstances  the
hypnotized  subject  remembered  fewer  syllables  than
did  the  same  person  awake.  The  older  mesmerists,
on  the  contrary,  believed  that  the  memory  was
intensified  in  the  magnetic  sleep  ;  poems  could  be
learnt  by  heart  in  a  much  shorter  time  than  in  the
normal  state.  However,  these  investigators  did  not
avoid  suggestion.

Is  the  chain  of  memory  in  ordinary  life  broken  by
the  hypnosis  or  not  ? It  was  formerly  supposed  that
a  break  in  the  memory  occurred,  because  the  subject^
always  forgot  on  awaking  what  had  taken  place  dur-
ing hypnosis. But  this  view  has  not  proved  correct.

In  the  lighter  hypnotic  stages,  specially  in  the  first
group,  no  abnormality  of  memory  is  found ;  the
subject  remembers  everything  in  the  hypnosis  which
concerns  his  normal  life,  and  after  the  hypnosis  re-
members all  that  has  occurred.  In  the  deeper  hyp-
noses  it  is  very  different  ;  they  belong  for  the  most
part  to  the  second  group,  and  there  is  loss  of  memory^
after  the  hypnosis.  The  subject  is  much  astonished
when  he  hears  what  he  has  done  during  the  hypnosis —
that  he  has  been  running  about,  that  he  has  had
hallucinations,  &c.  Often,  however,  a  dim  memory
persists,  like  the  memory  of  a  dream.  I  suggest  to
some  one  the  hallucination  of  a  bird  flying  about  the
room  ;  the  hypnotic  tries  to  catch  it,  amuses  himself
for  a  long  time  with  it,  gives  it  sugar,  puts  it  in  an
imaginary  cage,  and  so  on  ;  after  waking  he  dimly
remembers  that  he  has  seen  a  bird,  but  that  is  all  ;  he
certainly  does  not  believe  that  he  has  left  his  seat.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  125


However,  there  are  certain  people  who  recall  every-
thing after  being  told  what  they  have  done.

In  other  cases,  associations  of  ideas  will  call  up
memory.  A  hint  is  given  to  the  hypnotic  after  the
awakening  and  everything  recurs  to  him  (Heidenhain).
There  is  something  of  this  sort  in  dreams  ;  we  very
often  remember  a  whole  dream  when  we  see  some
object  that  is  in  any  way  connected  with  it  (Del-
bceuf ).  The  same  thing  happens  when  a  person  is
able  to  repeat  a  quotation  or  a  poem  directly  he  has
heard  the  first  words.  Let  us  consider  an  example  in
hypnosis.  I  suggest  a  great  concert  to  a  subject  ;  he
hears  various  pieces,  and  among  them  the  overture  to
"  Martha  "  ;  meanwhile  he  eats  his  supper  at  the  con-
cert, drinks  his  beer,  and  talks  to  imaginary  people.
After  the  awakening  there  is  no  trace  of  memory.  I
ask  him  then  if  he  knows  the  opera  of  "  Martha "  ;
this  suffices  to  recall  nearly  all  the  events  of  the
hypnosis.  Sometimes  memory  is  aroused  in  the  same
way  by  pure  chance,  after  a  longer  or  shorter  interval.
X.  believes  in  hypnosis  that  he  sees  a  number  of
persons  at  my  house  whose  presence  I  have  suggested
to  him.  X.  goes  through  several  scenes  with  them,
but  remembers  nothing  on  awaking.  Only  when  he
meets  one  of  these  people  several  days  later  does  the
whole  thing  recur  to  him.  Delbceuf  draws  attention
to  one  method  of  making  the  memory  last  ;  he  thinks
that  subjects  remember  any  hypnotic  event  if  they
are  awakened  in  the  middle  of  it  ;  but  this  is  certainly
not  universally  true  (Gurney).  It  sometimes  happens
that  the  first  or  last  occurrences  are  remembered,
while  all  the  others  are  forgotten.  It  has  often  been
observed  that  memory  after  awakening  can  be  pro-
duced by  a  special  effort  of  the  hypnotist  (Bleuler,
Pierre  Janet). Some  persons  remember  all  the  hyp-


126


HYPNOTISM.


notic  proceedings  during  their  nightly  sleep  ;  it  is  not
rare  for  the  hypnotic  dream  to  be  repeated  in  natural
sleep.

However,  in  some  cases,  chiefly  in  the  deepest  hyp-
noses,  memory  cannot  be  recalled  by  any  of  the  above-
named  expedients,  though  some  think  that  a  carefully
directed  conversation  will  always  re-constitute  it
through  the  association  of  ideas.  In  such  cases  there
is  complete  loss  of  memory  in  the  waking  state.  Such
a  person  does  not  even  generally  know  how  long  he
was  in  the  hypnotic  state.  On  the  other  hand  the
subject  remembers  in  hypnosis  all  that  has  happened
in  previous  hypnoses.  Things  that  happened  in  hyp-
noses  dating  many  years  back,  even  as  many  as  ten,
may  be  recalled,  although  they  are  completely  for-
gotten in  the  waking  state.  Wolfart  relates  the  case
of  a  woman  who  remembered  in  the  magnetic  sleep
all  that  had  taken  place  in  a  magnetic  sleep  thirteen
years  before,  although  in  the  meantime  she  had  never
recollected  it.

Events  of  the  normal  life  can  also  be  remembered
in  hypnosis,  even  when  they  have  apparently  been  long
forgotten.  This  increased  power  of  memory  is  called
hypermnesia.  Benedikt  relates  a  case  of  it.  An
English  officer  in  Africa  was  hypnotized  by  Hansen,
and  suddenly  began  to  speak  a  strange  language.
This  turned  out  to  be  Welsh,  which  he  had  learnt  as
a  child,  but  had  forgotten.

Such  cases  as  these  recall  others  which  are  men-
tioned in  the  literature  of  hypnotism  ;  for  example,
the  famous  one  of  the  servant  who  suddenly  spoke
Hebrew.  She  also,  in  an  abnormal  state  of  conscious-
ness, spoke  a  language  which  she  did  not  know,  but
which  she  had  often  heard  when  young  in  the  house
of  a  clergyman. We  hear  of  like  cases  of  hyper-


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  127

mnesia  in  dreams.  'Maury,  whose  investigations  on
the  subject  of  dreams  are  classic,  relates  a  number  of
things  which  returned  to  his  memory  in  dreams,
although  when  awake  he  knew  nothing  about  them.
The  heightened  faculties  of  hypnotic  subjects  of
which  we  so  often  hear,  and  which  we  can  observe  in
auto-hypnosis  also,  are  a  result  of  this~  increased
power  of  recollection.  Many  apparently  supernatural
facts  may  be  explained  in  this  way.  Among  these  I
may  mention  the  carefully  constructed  religious  ad-
dresses, sometimes  supposed  to  be  inspired,  which  are
delivered  by  pious  but  uneducated  fanatics  in  a
peculiar  psychical  state  of  ecstasy  ;  and  the  elo-
quence occasionally  displayed  by  some  spiritualistic
mediums  in  trance  belongs  to  the  same  category.
Bastian  also  describes  such  increase  of  natural  powers
in  hypnosis  among  savage  populations.  In  many
cases  other  factors  may  be  at  work  besides  the  im-
provement of  memory,  such  as  hyperesthesia  of  the
organs  of  sense,  &c.

Dreams,  also,  which  have  occurred  in  natural  sleep
are  sometimes  reproduced  in  hypnosis,  although  they
may  have  been  forgotten  on  waking.  It  is  naturally
very  difficult  to  judge  of  the  accuracy  with  which
dreams  are  reported.  But  as  dreams  sometimes  lead
to  talking  in  sleep,  it  is  then  possible  to  make
observations.  I  know  of  a  case  in  which  a  person
betrayed  his  dreams  by  talking  in  his  sleep  ;  the  loss
of  memory  which  followed  on  waking  disappeared  in
hypnosis,  and  the  dream  was  remembered.  A  bed-
fellow was  able  to  confirm  the  accuracy  of  the
recollection.

But,  apart  from  these  cases  of  hypermnesia  it  is  cha-
racteristic that  in  the  deeper  hypnotic  states  not  only
the  events  that  have  taken  place  in  earlier  hypnoses


128  HYPNOTISM.

are  remembered,  but  also  the  events  of  waking  life.
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  waking  state  the  events  of
that  state  alone  are  remembered.  This  state  of  things
is  named  "  double  consciousness "  {double  conscience
in  the  broad  sense  of  the  term).  It  was  evidently
well  known  to  the  old  mesmerists — Kluge  and
Deleuze,  for  example — and  was  later  observed  by
Braid,  though  not  in  the  early  part  of  his  experience.

The  state  of  double  consciousness  is  also  found  under  patho-
logical conditions.  One  of  the  best-known  cases  was  published
by  Azam.  The  life  of  the  patient  for  nearly  thirty  years  was
divided  into  certain  periods — a,  b,  c,  d,  e,  f.  In  the  periods
a,  c,  e  (normal  condition)  she  remembered  only  what  had
happened  in  them  ;  in  the  periods  b,  d,  f  (second  condition)  she
remembered  what  had  occurred  in  these  periods,  as  well  as
what  had  happened  in  the  periods  a,  c,  e.  The  normal  state
was  a,  c,  e,  while  the  pathological  one  was  b,  d,  f.  Max  Dessoir's
thoughtful  work  on  the  "  Doppel-Ich"  contributes  much  to  the
elucidation  of  this  question  of  double  consciousness  ;  he  shows
that  indications  of  such  a  splitting  of  the  consciousness  are
much  more  common  than  has  hitherto  been  believed  ;  he  refers
us  to  examples  in  dream-life  and  in  pathological  states.  But  it
appears  to  me  that  Max  Dessoir,  perhaps,  supposes  a  greater
extension  of  these  phenomena  than  is  really  the  case  ;
Bentivegni  makes  the  same  reservation.  I  shall  return  to  the
double  consciousness  with  more  detail  in  the  theoretical  part  of
the  book.

One  phenomenon  which  I  have  often  observed
depends  on  memory  in  the  later  hypnoses.  If  a
whole  series  of  scenes  is  suggested  to  a  subject  in
hypnosis  a  very  slight  impulse  suffices  to  cause  the
whole  panorama  to  pass  before  him  again  in  a  later
hypnosis.  A  hypnotic  imagines  himself  hunting  a
lion  ;  he  kills  the  lion  and  cuts  it  to  pieces  ;  and  then
by  suggestion  he  is  turned  into  a  general,  and  then
into  a  child. In  a  later  hypnosis  he  hears  an  unex-


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  129


pected  noise,  which  he  immediately  believes  to  be  the
roaring  of  a  lion.  In  consequence  he  goes  through
all  the  scenes  again,  without  omitting  the  smallest
detail.  This  incident  may  be  counted  among  the
indirect  suggestions,  since  the  auto-suggestion  was
aroused  by  an  accidental  circumstance.  The  case
observed  and  quoted  above  by  Mabille,  in  which
a  person  induced  haemorrhage  by  auto-suggestion,
after  it  had  once  been  induced  by  external  sug-
gestion, belongs  to  the  same  category.  The  sub-
ject separated  herself,  so  to  speak,  into  two  persons,
one  of  whom  made  the  suggestion  to  the  other,  as  is
proved  by  the  conversation  she  carried  on  with  her-
self. The  subject's  recollection  of  all  that  he  has
experienced  in  earlier  hypnoses  is  most  important.
The  possibility  of  hypnotic  training  depends  upon
this,  and  it  is  also  a  frequent  cause  of  error  in  new
experiments,  since  they  are  easily  spoiled  by  memory
of  the  earlier  ones.  I  say  to  the  hypnotic  (X.),  "  You
will  now  raise  your  left  leg."  X.  does  so.  While
I  make  the  suggestion  I  unintentionally  take  hold  of
his  right  hand.  When,  in  a  later  hypnosis,  I  take
hold  of  his  right  hand,  he  again  raises  his  left  leg.
Evidently  he  remembers  the  first  event,  and  regards
the  taking  of  his  hand  as  an  order  to  lift  his  leg.  It
is  probable  that  the  new  reflexes  which  Born  thought
he  had  discovered,  and  which  I  have  mentioned
before,  came  about  in  this  manner.

I  have  hitherto  described  the  state  of  things  when
suggestion  is  not  called  into  play.  Suggestion  exer-
cises a  most  active  influence.  In  the  first  place,
hypermnesia  can  be  increased  by  suggestion  ;  though
as  far  as  I  know  no  careful  investigations  have  yet
been  made  on  this  point.  But  we  possess  many
accounts  of  careful  investigations  into  the  possibility

10


130  HYPNOTISM.

of  inducing  errors  of  memory  (paramnesia),  or  failures
of  memory  (amnesia)  ;  Bertrand  collected  many  ob-
servations on  these  points. These  memories  may
consist  of  former perceptions  ; the  suggestive  in-
fluence of  these  former  perceptions  has  often  been
observed  ;  by  means  of  them  the  subject  may  be
completely  deluded  about  his  former  experiences.
As  these suggestions  have  a certain  retroactive
force,  they  are  called  retroactive  suggestions  ;  or,  as
they  are  concerned  with  sense  perceptions  altered
by  suggestion  into  sense  delusions,  they  are  some-
times called  retroactive  hallucinations. They  are
positive  or  negative,  according  as  a  new  erroneous
memory  is  created  or  an  old  one  annulled. I  say  to
a  subject,  "  You  remember  that  we  went  to  Potsdam
yesterday,  and  took  a  drive  on  the  Havel  ? "  The
suggestion  takes  effect,  and  the  gentleman  at  once
begins  to  relate  his  experiences  in  Potsdam. This  is
a  retroactive  positive  hallucination. Again,  "  You
have  just  been  running  extremely  fast ;  you  ran  half
a  mile  as  hard  as  you  could  go." In  this  case  the
delusion  of  memory  is  so  great  that  palpitation  and
gasping  for  breath  follow,  in  consequence of  the
imaginary  race  (Delbceuf). These  are  positive  retro-
active hallucinations,  because  the  hypnotic  believes
he  has  experienced  something  which  did  not  really
happen. The following would be a  retroactive
negative  hallucination,  as  the  hypnotic  here  forgets
something  which  did  happen  :  I  say  to  him,  "  You
have  not  had  any  dinner ;  you  have  not  had  any
breakfast," Upon which he immediately  feels
hungry,  as  he  thinks  he  has  had  nothing  to  eat
since  he  got  up.

Many  motor  disturbances  of  which  I  have  before
spoken  may  be  reckoned  as  related  to  amnesia,  or


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  131

loss  of  memory.  For  example,  when  I  tell  somebody
that  he  cannot  lift  his  arm,  or  that  he  cannot  speak,
I  am  sometimes  dealing  with  loss  of  memory,  because
a  movement  is  made  impossible  if  the  memory  of  it
cannot  first  be  called  up.  This  is  the  case  in  those
paralyses  which  some  French  authors  (Binet,  Fere)
call  paralysies  systematiques — a  paralysis  for  a  special
act.  Such  a  paralysis  is  not  followed  by  total
functional  incapacity  of  a  whole  group  of  muscles  ;
the  function  is  rather  interfered  with  for  one  particular
use  only.  The  incapacity  to  say  a,  or  to  sew,  for
example,  would  be  a  paralysis  for  a  special  act ;  if  the
person  could  not  speak  or  move  his  arm  at  all,  this
would  be  a  total  paralysis.  It  is  possible  in  this  way
to  deprive  the  subject  of  all  memory  of  the  letter  a,  so
that  he  can  neither  speak  nor  write  it.  These  forms
of  loss  of  memory  become  very  clear  when  we  consider
the  disturbances  which  may  be  produced  by  sugges-
tion in  the  signs  we  use  for  mutual  comprehension  ;
that  is,  in  vocal  sounds,  gestures,  and  writing.  It  is
possible  to  produce  almost  all  kinds  of  aphasia  experi-
mentally, as  Kussmaul,  Arndt,  and  others  have
clearly  demonstrated.  We  can  cause  any  one  to
forget  a  language  he  has  learnt — French,  for  example
(Forel,  Frank)  ;  we  can  make  writing  impossible
(agraphia).  By  a  suitable  suggestion  a  hypnotic  can
be  deprived  of  the  power  of  making  himself  under-
stood by  facial  expression  (amimia).  Drawing,
sewing,  every  form  of  activity  in  fact,  can  be  pre-
vented by  suggestion.

It  is  known  that  there  is  a  particular  group  of  dis-
turbances of  speech  in  which  the  perception  of  words
is  wanting ;  this  is  called  sensory  or  amnesic  aphasia.
The  patient  still  attaches  ideas  to  words.  But  it  is
possible  by  means  of  suggestion  to  deprive  him  not


132


HYPNOTISM,


only  of  the  perception  of  a  word  or  letter  (e.g.,  the
letter  a)>  and  of  the  consequent  power  to  write  and
speak  it ;  he  can  also  be  deprived  of  the  idea  which
he  attaches  to  such  a  word  or  letter.  This  difference
will  become  clear  if  we  observe  the  behaviour  of  a
person  under  the  different  circumstances.  If  he  re-
tains the  idea  of  the  letter  he  is  conscious  of  his
inability  to  utter  or  write  it  ;  he  is  aware  that  he  is
writing  or  speaking  nonsense,  and  even  tries  to  avoid
using  words  in  which  the  letter  a  appears  (Max
Dessoir).  But  if  he  is  deprived  of  the  conception  or
idea  of  the  letter,  he  is  no  longer  surprised  that  he
cannot  write  or  speak  it.  This  becomes  still  more
interesting  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  It  is  possible
to  cause  a  post-hypnotic  loss  of  memory,  and  to  make
the  subject  invariably  replace  one  letter  by  another.
I  told  a  hypnotic  that  after  he  was  awakened  he
would  always  say  e  instead  of  a.  I  woke  him,  and
asked,  "Are  you  awake?"  "Je"  (Ja),  he  replied.
"  What  have  you  been  doing?  "  "  Ich  heb  geschlefen  "
(ich  habe  geschlafen).  The  subject  laughed,  but  was
at  the  same  time  slightly  annoyed,  and  was  perfectly
aware  that  he  was  talking  nonsense.  But  if  the  idea
a  were  also  missing,  the  subject  would  say  e  instead
of  a  without  observing  it.

I  have  shown  above  that  subjects  may  be  made  to
forget  certain  of  their  experiences  (negative  retro-
active hallucinations).

In  the  same  way  whole  periods  can  be  made  to
vanish  from  the  subject's  consciousness.  Mr.  X.,  who
is  forty-three  years  old,  was  told,  "  You  no  longer
remember  anything  that  has  happened  to  you  since
you  were  thirty  !  "  This  sufficed  to  cause  a  blank  in
X.'s  consciousness.  He  was  unable  to  answer  any
questions  about  this  period  ;  he  did  not  know  how  he


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


133


made  my  acquaintance,  nor  how  he  got  into  my
room ;  when  such  questions  were  put  to  him  he
shrugged  his  shoulders  and  answered,  "  I  don't
know."

It  is  possible  to  carry  this  still  further,  and  trans-
port the  subject  back  to  an  earlier  period  of  his  life.
In  this  case  the  subject  finds  no  gaps  in  his  memory  ;
he  believes  that  he  is  living  in  this  earlier  time,  and
brings  his  present  surroundings  into  relation  with  it.
Here  is  a  man  who  fought  at  St.  Privat  in  the  French
war.  His  age  was  forty-one  ;  I  suggested  to  him  that
he  was  nineteen  years  younger,  and  in  the  battle.
He  stood  up  at  once,  gave  military  orders,  and  com-
manded the  artillery  to  fire.  When  I  asked  him  if
he  knew  Dr.  Moll,  he  said,  "  No  ;  my  doctor's  name
is  R.  I  do  not  know  Dr.  Moll."  He  knew  nothing
that  had  happened  since  the  battle  ;  he  was  unaware
of  the  rheumatism  for  which  I  was  treating  him  ;  he
said  he  was  quite  well.  When  I  asked  him  who  I
was,  he  replied  that  he  did  not  know.  It  was  inte-
resting that  he  could  not  be  induced  to  retreat  ;  I
tried  to  make  him  take  a  few  steps  backward,  but  he
replied,  "  I  will  not  retreat  one  step  without  orders."
I  suggested  that  the  enemy  was  still  approaching,  but
nothing  would  induce  him  to  retreat.  When  I  drew
his  attention  more  and  more  upon  myself,  and  told
him  that  he  must  know  who  I  was,  the  situation
suddenly  altered.  He  recognized  me,  and  knew  his
real  age,  but  had  no  idea  of  what  had  just  passed.

I  caused  a  lady,  aet.  34,  to  believe  that  she  was
eight  years  old  again.  She  spoke  to  her  doll  in  a
childish  voice,  cried  when  she  thought  I  was  about
to  take  it  away,  and  called  for  her  mamma.

Finally,  it  is  possible  to  make  a  person  believe  that
he  has  never  been  born. Even  this  suggestion  will


134


HYPNOTISM.


be  accepted,  and  the  consciousness  will  be  an  absolute
blank.

New  memories  can  be  created  at  the  time  the  old
ones  are  cancelled.  This  is  the  case  with  the  pheno-
menon which  Charles  Richet  describes  as  objectivation
des  types.  In  this  case  the  subject  believes  himself
another  personality,  another  being;  not  only  do  many
memories  connected  with  his  own  ego  disappear,  but
he  also  endeavours  to  connect  the  remaining  memo-
ries with  his  suggested  personality.  Durand  de  Gros
was  acquainted  with  these  phenomena ;  he  appears  to
have  studied  them  in  America,  where  they  were  already
observed  in  1840.

I  told  a  certain  Mr.  X.  that  he  was  Dr.  Moll,  and
that  I  was  Mr.  X.  ;  upon  which  he  asked  me  to  take
a  seat,  that  he  might  hypnotize  me.  He  did  hypnotize
me  ;  that  is,  he  went  carefully  through  the  process
which  I  go  through  with  him,  and  did  not  forget  to
make  several  pleasant  suggestions.

I  experimented  with  another  man,  in  whom  these
phenomena  are  very  easily  produced.  He  would
represent  with  dramatic  vividness  any  character
which  was  within  the  grasp  of  his  ideas,  I  told
him,  "  You  are  Napoleon  I.,"  upon  which  he
assumed  the  famous  posture  of  Napoleon  after
the  battle  of  Waterloo,  but  spoke  German,  as  he
did  not  know  French.  As  Frederick  the  Great,  he
walked  with  a  crutch  in  the  well-known  gait,  and
knew  nothing  about  railroads.  Subjects  can  be
made  to  believe  they  are  animals  ;  they  will  bark
like  dogs,  or  croak  like  frogs.  They  can  even  be
changed  by  suggestion  into  inanimate  objects,  -  such
as  stoves,  chairs,  tables.  When  X.  thinks  himself  a
chair  he  crouches  down  on  both  legs  ;  when  it  is
suggested  that  the  chair  has  a  broken  leg,  he  sinks


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  135


his  knee  to  the  ground  and  rests  on  one  leg ;  when
he  is  a  carpet  he  lies  flat  and  motionless.  These
experiments  in  suggestion  may  be  carried  still  further.
"  You  are  made  of  glass,"  I  say  to  a  subject ;  he
stands  perfectly  still.  When  I  tell  another  that  he
is  made  of  marble,  he  stands  stiffly  and  cannot  be
moved ;  but  directly  he  believes  himself  to  be  made
of  wax  he  becomes  plastic  and  allows  himself  to  be
placed  in  any  attitude.

It  should  be  remarked  that  the  subject  always
obeys,  even  when  he  believes  himself  an  inanimate
object.  Moreover,  hypnotized  subjects  are  by  no
means  always  consistent ;  they  often  forget  their  part,
though  this  may  be  generally  prevented  by  training.
For  example,  another  person,  whom  I  had  changed
into  Frederick  the  Great,  travelled  contentedly  in  a
railway  carriage,  evidently  not  reflecting  that  there
were  no  railways  in  those  days.  Another,  whom  I
had  carried  back  into  the  year  1864,  spoke  of  the  new
German  Empire,  of  the  Emperor  William,  and  so  on.
In  spite  of  such  inconsistencies,  the  mental  images
are  much  more  consistent  with  hypnotics  than  with
many  lunatics  who  believe  themselves  to  be  kings
and  prophets.  The  inconsistencies  of  lunatics  are
much  greater,  and  hypnotics  sooner  get  rid  of  them.
Besides  this,  when  they  represent  a  new  personality,
memories  of  former  experiences  disappear  more  com-
pletely than  is  the  case  with  lunatics  (Cullerre).

/

/  The  change  of  personality  in  hypnotic  subjects  has  often  been
compared  with  the  performances  of  actors.  It  is  a  fact  that  the
actor  who  himself  creates  the  idea  of  his  part,  and  allows  him-
self to  be  governed  by  it,  will  play  his  part  the  best.  This  is
the  opinion  of  Dumesnil  ;  others — for  example,  the  famous
Clairon — held  a  different  opinion  on  this  point.  In  any  case
few  actors  are  able  to  accommodate  and  assimilate  themselves


36


HYPNOTISM.


to  their  own  idea  of  a  character,  e.g.,  that  of  Julius  Caesar,  as
thoroughly  as  a  hypnotic  subject  can  do.  The  subject  is  not
distracted  by  sense  perceptions,  while  the  most  accomplished
actor  cannot  always  avoid  being  affected  by  his  surroundings.
Some  actors,  in  order  to  play  their  parts  as  naturally  as  possible,
call  up  imaginary  objects  by  force  of  imagination,  so  as  to
place  themselves  amongst  suitable  surroundings.

These  changes  of  personality,  and  the  changing  of  hypnotic
subjects  into  animals,  remind  us  forcibly  of  the  stories  of
changing  men  into  animals  (zoanthropia),  which  was  occasion-
ally epidemic  in  the  Middle  Ages  and  later.  People  believed
themselves  changed  into  animals — usually  into  wolves.  Such
persons  attacked  and  tore  others,  and  displayed  the  fierce-
ness and  the  instincts  of  wild  beasts.  This  phenomenon  was
supposed  to  be  the  work  of  the  devil  ;  Johann  Wier  tells  us
many  strange  things  about  it.  Herodotus  and  Pliny  mention
like  phenomena.

Graphological  investigations  have  been  undertaken
in  several  quarters  in  order  to  decide  whether  the
handwriting  of  the  hypnotized  subject  changes  with
the  personality,  and  if  the  change  bears  any  relation
to  the  suggested  personality.  Changes  have  been
observed  (Lombroso,  Ferrari,  Hericourt,  Richet,
Varinard,  Mayeras).  The  expert  Hoctes,  however,
thinks  that  the  subjects'  writing  is  never  altered  to
such  a  degree  as  not  to  be  recognizable.  I  have
never  seen  changes  of  handwriting  follow  on  changes
of  personality  ;  only  when  I  placed  the  subjects  in
different  periods  of  life  has  the  handwriting  altered.
As  children  they  wrote  awkwardly  and  made  faults
of  spelling  ;  as  old  people  they  wrote  shakily.
The  trials  made  with  Krafft-Ebing's  patient,  who
wrote  different  hands,  corresponding  to  the  different
earlier  periods  of  her  life,  are  very  interesting  ;  but,
unluckily,  the  writing  could  not  be  compared  with  the
true  normal  writing  of  the  subject  at  those  periods.
Nuel's  statement  that  in  hypnosis  the  writing  always


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  137


differs  from  the  subject's  normal  hand,  and  that  con-
sequently hypnotic  signatures  may  always  be  distin-
guished from  others,  seems  to  me  too  general.  He  is
probably  right  when  he  says  that  in  many  cases  the
writing  of  hypnotic  subjects  is  irregular  and  spas-
modic.

I  will  here  remark  that  all  the  above-mentioned
suggestions  influencing  the  memory  can  also  be  made
post-hypnotic,  and  in  all  hypnoses  it  is  only  neces-
sary to  tell  the  subjects  before  awakening  them  that
they  will  remember  everything,  and  they  will  do  so.
Also,  in  some  of  the  hypnotic  states,  memory  may  be
prevented  by  command.  We  can  also  cause  loss  of
memory  of  particular  events  or  things  ;  for  example,
we  can  prevent  the  recollection  of  certain  letters,  as
we  have  seen  before.  Retroactive  hallucinations  can
be  transferred  to  waking  life  in  the  same  way.  I  say
to  a  subject  in  my  house,  "You  know  that  we  drank
two  bottles  of  wine  just  now,  and  that  we  had  roast
goose  for  supper."  When  he  answers,  "  Yes,"  I
further  tell  him  that  after  he  wakes  he  will  remember
all  about  it.  He  wakes  and  relates  it  all ;  he  declares
he  has  eaten  too  much,  and  that  the  wine  has  made
his  head  heavy ;  he  even  thinks  himself  slightly
intoxicated.  This  is  a  purely  imaginary  intoxication
produced  by  suggestion.  Hytten  relates  an  even
more  interesting  case  ;  he  says  he  has  cured  real
intoxication  by  suggestion.

These  delusions  of  memory  may  last  for  weeks  and
months.  However,  I  have  seen  them  disappear  a
short  time  after  waking.  A  man,  who  directly  after
waking  believed  he  had  seen  his  mother  at  my  house
before  the  hypnosis,  forgot  all  about  it  after  a  few
minutes.  We  had  spoken  of  other  things  in  the
meantime, and this probably caused the  rapid


HYPNOTISM.


oblivion.  Bernheim  has  lately  shown  that  in  some
cases  the  subject  forgets  not  only  what  has  taken
place  during  the  hypnosis,  but  also  what  immediately
preceded  it,  and  this  without  any  kind  of  suggestion
having  been  made.

I  shall  speak  of  these  delusions  of  memory  transferred
to  waking  life  when  I  discuss  the  legal  side  of  the  question.
Bernheim  first  pointed  out  their  great  importance,  and  rightly
called  attention  to  analogous  occurrences  in  waking  life.  For
example,  there  are  people  who  will  repeat  a  lie  so  often  that  at
last  they  no  longer  know  whether  they  are  lying  or  not.  The
mental  image  is  called  up  again  and  again  as  they  talk,  and
each  time  becomes  more  vivid.  Bernheim  also  shows  that
complete  delusions  of  memory  can  be  induced  in  certain  people
without  their  ever  having  been  hypnotized.  It  is  only  necessary
to  repeat  to  them  confidently  that  such  and  such  a  thing  has
happened,  and  they  become  unable  to  distinguish  fact  from
fiction.

I  have  already  mentioned  several  cases  in  which
changes  of  memory  in  the  waking  state  have  been
caused  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  memory
in  later  hypnoses  can  be  influenced  in  the  same  way.
For  instance,  we  can  make  the  loss  of  memory,  or
the  paramnesia  above  mentioned,  continue  in  later
hypnoses.  And  the  subject  may  be  made  to  forget
in  later  hypnoses  what  happened  in  the  earlier  ones,
just  as  he  may  be  made  to  forget  in  the  waking  state
what  has  happened  in  hypnosis.  It  suffices  to  tell
him  that  in  later  hypnoses  he  will  not  remember  this
or  that.

I  have  said  above  that  hypnotic  subjects  remember
the  events  of  earlier  hypnoses  in  later  ones.  But  this
statement  needs  some  limitation,  apart  from  what  has
just  been  said.  In  the  first  place,  we  see  that  when
there  is  a  change  of  personality,  there  is  generally
loss  of  memory  also  ;  a  subject  as  Napoleon  does


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  139


not  remember  what  he  did  as  Frederick  the  Great,
I  further  mention  some  little  unconscious  actions,
which  cannot  be  recalled  to  the  subject's  memory  ;  I
say,  for  example,  "  In  five  minutes  you  will  sayf
'  Ha! '  three  times."  The  subject  obeys,  but  remembers
nothing  about  it  later.  In  the  same  way  certain
post-hypnotic  suggestions  may  be  obeyed  in  a  new
hypnosis,  and  the  subject  may  be  unconscious  that
they  were  suggested  in  an  earlier  one.

Finally,  Gurney  supposes  two  stages  of  hypnosis,
distinguished  from  each  other  by  completely  different
memories.  The  old  magnetizers  described  such  stages.
I  have  been  unable  to  convince  myself  of  their  exis-
tence, and  think  them  a  result  of  hypnotic  training.
Gurney  distinguishes  two  stages,  a  and  b.  In  stage
a  the  subject  knows  nothing  of  stage  b  ;  and  in  b
nothing  of  a.  I  do  not  dispute  that  in  some  persons
several  sharply  divided  states  of  consciousness  may
exist,  apart  from  the  waking  consciousness  ;  this  is
also  affirmed  by  Krafft-Ebing  and  Pierre  Janet ;  I
only  object  to  speaking  of  it  as  universal.

I  have  spoken  several  times  of  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion. This  is  a  point  of  such  importance  in
medicine  and  psychology  that  it  must  be  examined
in  detail.  No  serious  observer  can  doubt  the  reality
of  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  old  mesmerists
observed  some  cases  of  it.  In  1787  Mouillesaux
ordered  a  lady  in  the  hypnotic  state  to  pay  a  visit  to
a  certain  person  the  next  day ;  the  command  was
exactly  obeyed  (Du  Prel)  ;  Kluge,  Schopenhauer,  and
Noizet  mention  other  cases.  Liebeault,  Richet,  Bern-
heim,  and  Delbceuf  have  lately  studied  post-hypnotic
suggestion  ;  Gurney  and  Forel  in  particular  have
done  so  in  various  ways. It  is  certain  that  many


HYPNOTISM,


suggestions  are  obeyed  post-hypnotically.  Jendrassik
has  seen  a  paralysis  last  several  days  in  consequence
of  hypnotic  suggestion  ;  Krafft-Ebing  successfully
suggested  to  one  of  his  patients  to  maintain  a  definite
bodily  temperature  for  a  fixed  time.  Reddening  of
the  skin  has  also  been  induced  by  post-hypnotic
suggestion.  Any  suggestion  that  takes  effect  in
hypnosis  will  also  take  effect  post-hypnotically  ;
movements  and  delusions  of  the  senses,  itching,  pain,
action  of  the  bowels,  hunger,  thirst,  &c,  can  be  in-
duced. Dreams  can  be  influenced.  "  To-day  you
will  dream  that  you  are  at  Swinemiinde  ;  you  will  go
on  the  Ostsee  in  a  boat  with  six  people  ;  the  boat  will
be  upset,  and  you  will  fall  into  the  water  and  wake."
The  subject  dreams  this  in  detail.  Dreamless  sleep
can  be  induced  in  the  same  way  ;  or  at  least  the
subjects  do  not  remember  if  they  have  dreamt.

It  is  possible  to  carry  on  suggestions  from  hypnosis
into  waking  life ;  they  are  then  called  continuative
suggestions.  I  suggest  that  my  photograph  is  on  a
visiting  card,  and  say  that  the  subject  will  continue
to  see  it  after  awakening.  The  subject  is  firmly  con-
vinced that  the  photograph  is  there.  According  to
Londe  an  illusion  of  this  kind  has  lasted  for  two
years.  This  carrying  on  of  the  suggestion  into
normal  life  happens  sometimes  by  chance,  when  the
suggestion  has  not  been  cancelled  before  the  awaken-
ing. One  of  my  subjects  drinks  what  has  been  sug-
gested to  her  as  peppermint  water  ;  I  awake  her,  and
she  says  for  an  hour  after  that  she  has  a  taste  of  pep-
permint in  her  mouth.  The  following  often-repeated
experiment  belongs  to  the  continuative  suggestions  :
I  say  to  the  subject,  "  Count  up  to  ten,  and  wake
when  you  get  to  three."  He  counts  up  to  ten,  but  is
awake  while  counting  from  four  to  six.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS,


In  other  cases  the  suggestion  only  takes  effect  after
waking.  I  say  to  the  subject,  "  You  will  not  be  able
to  move  your  right  arm  after  you  wake."  He  wakes,
and  is  unable  to  move  it,  though  otherwise  in  a  normal
state.  Exactly  the  same  effects  may  be  produced
after  an  interval  of  hours,  days,  weeks,  and  months
I  say  to  a  subject,  "  When  you  come  to  see  me  in  a
week  you  will  not  be  able  to  speak  when  you  come
into  the  room."  He  comes  to  see  me  in  a  week,  and
is  fully  awake  when  he  enters  the  room  ;  I  ask  him
his  name,  but  he  is  unable  to  say  it,  or  anything  else.
Here  we  have  an  example  of  fulfilment  of  suggestion
after  an  interval,  or  suggestion  a  echeance,  deferred
suggestion.

It  is  remarkable  that  these  deferred  suggestions
should  have  at  first  aroused  so  much  incredulity,  since
analogies  are  certainly  to  be  found  for  them  in  normal
life.  Post-hypnotic  suggestions  may  be  divided  into
two  groups ;  but  I  make  this  division  merely  for
practical  convenience  in  considering  them.  In  the  first
group  the  suggestion  is  forgotten  on  awakening,  in  the
second  it  is  remembered.  It  will  be  explained  in  the
theoretical  section  that  the  loss  of  memory  in  the  first
group  is  only  apparent.  I  shall  thoroughly  discuss
this  group  first,  as  it  is  the  more  important  and  inte-
resting.

The  moment  for  the  fulfilment  of  the  suggestion
can  be  decided  in  several  ways.  To  one  subject  I
say,  "  An  hour  after  you  wake  you  will  hear  a  polka
played  ;  you  will  believe  you  are  at  a  ball,  and  will
begin  to  dance."  To  another,  whom  I  wake  at  eight
o'clock,  I  say,  "  When  the  clock  strikes  nine  you  will
take  the  water-bottle  from  the  table,  and  walk  up  and
down  the  room  three  times  with  it.  The  moment  of
fulfilment  is  decided  differently  in  these  two  cases.


142


HYPNOTISM.


In  the  second  case  the  moment  is  decided  by  a  con-
crete external  sign  ;  in  the  other  an  abstract  term,  an
hour,  is  fixed.

The  suggestion  in  this  second  example,  where  the
moment  of  action  is  decided  by  some  external  sign,
nearly  always  takes  effect,  especially  after  a  little
hypnotic  training.  The  first  more  rarely  succeeds.
There  are  some  subjects,  however,  with  whom  such
suggestions  take  effect  punctually.  But  the  greater
number  are  not  only  unpunctual,  but  often  do  not
execute  the  suggestion  at  all,  if  some  external  impetus
is  not  given  ;  others  carry  out  the  suggestion,  but
inexactly — in  forty-five  minutes  instead  of  one  hour,
&c.

I  will  point  out  a  frequent  source  of  error  in  these
time  experiments :  this  is  the  behaviour  of  the
spectators.  They  look  at  the  clock  at  the  appointed
time,  or  make  some  other  unconscious  signal  that  the
right  moment  has  arrived.  This  has  sometimes
happened  in  my  own  experiments.

There  is  a  third  way  of  appointing  the  moment
for  the  execution  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion,
which  has  been  carefully  experimented  upon  by
Gurney  and  Pierre  Janet.  In  many  respects  it  is
like  the  first  method.  I  say  to  a  subject  (X.), "  When
I  rub  my  foot  along  the  floor  for  the  tenth  time  after
you  awake,  you  will  laugh."  The  subject  wakes,  and
does  not  remember  my  order.  I  talk  to  him,  and  rub
several  times  without  his  paying  any  attention  ;  at
the  tenth  shuffle  he  laughs.  Consequently  the  sug-
gestion has  taken  effect.  I  make  the  experiment
again,  but  at  the  fourth  shuffle  I  ask  X.  if  he  has  not
heard  the  noise.  He  says,  "  No."  Nevertheless  at  the
tenth  shuffle  he  laughs,  though  he  is  quietly  talking
to  me. In  most  experiments  the  result  was  less


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  143


exact.  The  suggestion  succeeded,  but  not  at  the
right  moment.

Many  deferred  suggestions  resemble  these  sug-
gestions in  which  the  moment  of  fulfilment  is  fixed
by  counting.  Post-hypnotic  deferred  suggestions  can
be  made  in  two  ways  ;  for  example,  on  the  3rd  of
May  I  say  to  a  person  who  sees  me  every  day, "  On
the  6th  of  June,  when  you  come  into  the  room,  you
will  see  me  with  a  black  face,  and  you  will  laugh  at
me."  The  suggestion  succeeds.  But  here  a  fixed
date  is  named  which  helps  the  subject  to  carry  out
the  suggestion,  in  the  same  way  as  the  striking  of  the
clock  in  the  case  first  quoted.  Delbceuf,  in  particular,
has  pointed  out  the  importance  of  this.  In  this
case  also  we  have  a  concrete  sign.  It  would  have
been  another  matter  if  I  had  made  the  suggestion
thus:  "On  the  35th  day,  reckoning  from  to-day,  you
will  come  into  my  room  and  see  me  with  a  black
face,"  &c.  According  to  Gurney's  observations,  sug-
gestions of  this  kind  succeed,  and  a  few  of  my  own
experiments  confirm  him.  An  example  may  make
this  sort  of  suggestion  clearer.  I  suggested  once  to
X.,  "You  will  come  to  my  house  on  the  sixteenth
Tuesday,  reckoning  from  last  Tuesday,  and  will  abuse
all  the  people  present,"  &c.  This  suggestion  suc-
ceeded completely,  although  no  fixed  time  was  named.
I  shall  return  to  an  explanation  of  this  later  on.

I  have  as  yet  only  discussed  the  manner  of  deter-
mining the  point  of  time  for  the  carrying  out  of  the
post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  question  now  is,
What  is  the  condition  of  the  subject  while  carrying
out  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  ?  So  far  as  I
know,  Dumontpallier,  Beaunis,  and  Liegeois  were  the
first  to  remark  that  post-hypnotic  suggestions  were
certainly  not  carried  out  in  a  waking  state,  even  if  the


M4


HYPNOTISM.


action  took  place  after  the  awakening  from  hypnosis.
The  question  has  led  to  lively  discussion  ;  Forel  and
Gurney  have  made  the  best  and  most  numerous  ob-
servations in  regard  to  it ;  in  particular  they  have
shown  that  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  may  be
carried  out  in  very  different  states.

To  give  the  reader  an  idea  of  these  states,  I  will
show  some  examples.  A  man  (X.),  thirty  years  old,
is  in  the  hypnotic  state.  I  say  to  him,  "  When
you  wake,  directly  I  cross  my  knees  you  will  take
the  inkstand  from  the  table  and  put  it  on  the  chair."
He  wakes  at  my  order,  and  I  talk  to  him.  After
a  time  I  cross  my  knees  ;  he  begins  to  stare  at  the
inkstand  and  hardly  answers  me.  He  goes  to  the
table,  takes  the  inkstand  and  puts  it  on  a  chair  ;  upon
which  I  suggest  to  him  that  he  sees  his  brother,  that
he  is  eating  his  luncheon,  &c,  all  of  which  sugges-
tions he  accepts.  I  am  obliged  to  re-awaken  him  to
put  an  end  to  this  new  state  of  suggestibility.  After
waking  he  remembers  absolutely  nothing.  This
case  is  characterized  by  loss  of  memory  of  all  that
happened  during  the  state,  and  further  by  suscepti-
bility to  suggestion.  I  do  not  know  how  this  state
is  to  be  distinguished  psychologically  from  a  true
hypnosis,  and  to  my  mind  Delbceuf  is  right  when  he
says  that  to  make  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  really
to  order  a  new  hypnosis  at  a  fixed  moment,  and  the
carrying  out  of  the  suggestion  in  this  new  hypnosis.
There  are  other  very  different  cases.  I  say  to  a
hypnotized  subject,  "  When  you  awake,  directly  I  rub
my  hands  together,  you  will  forget  your  name.  When
I  separate  my  hands  you  will  remember  it  again."
The  order  is  obeyed  ;  we  talk  to  one  another,  but
when  I  bring  my  hands  together  the  subject  forgets
his  own  name. He  is,  however,  completely  awake,


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  145


and  incapable  of  accepting  any  further  suggestion.
When  I  separate  my  hands  he  knows  his  own  name,
and  knows  also  that  he  had  forgotten  it  a  moment
ago.  Directly  I  bring  my  hands  together  he  forgets
it  again.  He  goes  away,  and  in  a  few  days  we  meet
again ;  but  now  he  remembers  his  name,  however  I
hold  my  hands.  But  he  remembers  perfectly  that  the
other  day  he  was  several  times  unable  to  say  his  own
name.  He  maintains  that  he  was  awake  all  the
time.

We  are  not  justified  in  calling  this  case  one  of
hypnosis.  There  was  no  mental  symptom  of  hypnosis,
no  loss  of  memory,  no  suggestibility,  no  fatigue ;  the
subject  did  not  think  he  had  been  asleep  ;  nothing
remains  but  to  consider  the  state  a  perfectly  normal
one,  except  on  one  point.  Whether  such  a  state  may
be  regarded  as  normal,  generally  speaking,  is  another
matter.  I  shall  discuss  this  when  I  come  to  the  legal
question,  for  which  these  cases  are  very  important
(Bentivegni).

It  appears  from  these  examples  that  post-hypnotic
suggestions  may  be  carried  out  in  various  different
states.  Between  the  two  extremes — the  one  case  in
which  there  were  all  the  mental  symptoms  of  a  new
hypnosis,  and  the  other  in  which  there  were  none —
there  are  many  degrees  which  will  now  be  discussed.

Here  is  another  example.  A  woman  is  hypnotized.
A.  and  B.  are  present.  I  say  to  the  subject,  "  When  A.
speaks  to  you  after  you  wake  you  will  laugh  at  him.
When  B.  speaks  to  you,  you  will  put  out  your  tongue
at  him.  Wake!"  The  suggestion  is  exactly  carried
out.  A.  speaks  to  the  subject  and  she  laughs.  I  ask,
"Why  did  you  laugh  just  now?  "  "  I  did  not  laugh."
And  she  positively  insists  that  she  did  not  laugh.  A.
speaks  to  her  again  and  again  ;  she  laughs,  and  again

1 1


146


HYPNOTISM.


at  my  question  she  denies  having  laughed.  She  puts
out  her  tongue  at  B.  when  he  speaks  to  her,  and  the
moment  after,  when  I  question  her,  she  says  that  she
did  not  do  it.  I  suggest  that  she  hears  a  barrel-
organ  ;  but  she  says  she  does  not,  and  is  insusceptible
to  other  suggestions.  She  remembers  everything  else
that  has  happened,  and  knows  perfectly  what  I  have
said  to  her.  All  that  is  forgotten  is  the  post-hypnotic
act  and  what  is  connected  with  it ;  i.e.}  the  words
which  A.  and  B.  spoke  to  her.  She  can  repeat  what
I  said  to  her,  and  her  replies  ;  everything,  in  fact,
unconnected  with  the  suggestion.  She  knows  nothing
about  the  time  during  which  she  carried  out  the
suggestion  ;  at  the  same  time  she  recognizes  no  gap
in  her  memory.

In  this  case  there  is  complete  loss  of  memory  of
the  post-hypnotic  act,  and  no  further  suggestibility  ;
the  loss  of  memory  extends  simply  to  the  post-
hypnotic act.  This  is,  then,  a  third  way  in  which
post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  carried  out,  and  it  is  not
rare.

In  other  cases  the  subject  remains  susceptible  to
suggestion  while  he  performs  the  act,  but  wakes
directly  it  is  over  and  remembers  nothing  about  it.
It  is  difficult  to  distinguish  these  cases  from  those
just  described  ;  on  that  account  I  shall  not  make  a
separate  group  of  them  ;  for  it  seems  that  subjects
like  the  person  described  in  the  third  example  are
really  always  susceptible  to  suggestion  while  they
are  carrying  out  the  act,  but  that  in  many  cases
the  act  takes  place  too  quickly  to  allow  of  a  fresh
suggestion  being  made.  The  post-hypnotic  act  is
completely  forgotten,  while  the  state  of  the  subject
before  and  after  the  action  is  quite  normal.  Liegeois
thought  this  a  separate  state,  which  he  called  "  condi-


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  U?


dition  prime."  He  gave  up  this  later,  and  now  calls
the  state  "condition  seconde  provoquee  ;  "  Beaunis  calls
it  "  veille  somnambulique"  Gurney, "  trance-waking."  I
think,  however,  that  these  states  must  be  considered
true  hypnoses  (Delbceuf ).  Evidently,  the  suggested
idea  is  so  powerful  in  them  that  it  produces  a  state
analogous  to  that  in  which  it  was  first  implanted*
When  the  idea  vanishes  the  state  also  vanishes.

Here  is  a  fourth  case.  I  suggest  to  X.  to  take  a
chair  and  put  it  on  the  table  five  minutes  after  he
wakes.  The  suggestion  is  carried  out.  While  he  is
putting  the  chair  on  the  table  I  call  out  suddenly  that
a  dog  is  biting  him,  He  believes  it,  kicks  away  the
imaginary  dog,  and  wakes  spontaneously.  He  re^-
members  moving  the  chair  and  remembers  the  dog)
but  says  the  whole  thing  was  like  a  drears

Consequently  this  state  is  characterized  by  suggesti-
bility during  the  carrying  out  of  the  post-hypnotic
suggestion  ;  but  there  is  also  memory.  It  is  true  that
X.  feels  as  if  he  dreamed  it.  He  has  a  consciousness
of  having  slept  through  the  performance,  and  of
having  waked  when  it  was  ended.  This  conscious-
ness of  having  slept  is  very  important  (Delbceuf).  We
often  have  some  life-like  experience  in  a  dream,  and
yet  know  directly  we  wake  that  it  was  a  dream.  I
think  that  the  last-described  post-hypnotic  state  must
be  considered  a  hypnosis.  The  suggestibility  is  very
characteristic.

In  order  not  to  complicate  the  question  I  will  re-
capitulate. Amongst  the  post-hypnotic  states  we  have
studied — (1)  a  state  in  which  a  new  hypnosis  charac-
terized by  suggestibility  came  on  during  the  carrying
out  of  the  suggestion  ;  loss  of  memory  afterwards,
and  no  spontaneous  waking  ;  (2)  a  state  in  which  no
symptom  of  a  fresh  hypnosis  was  discoverable,  although


148


HYPNOTISM.


the  suggestion  was  carried  out  ;  (3)  a  state  in  which
the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  was  carried  out,  with
complete  forgetfulness  of  the  act,  with  or  without
fresh  susceptibility  to  suggestion,  and  from  which
the  waking  was  spontaneous  ;  (4)  a  state  of  suscepti-
bility to  suggestion  with  loss  of  memory  following.
In  judging  of  these  states  I  think  the  chief  symptoms
are,  firstly,  the  fresh  suggestibility,  and  secondly,  the
subsequent  loss  of  memory.  Whether  the  subject
wakes  spontaneously  or  has  to  be  again  awakened,  is
of  secondary  importance,  as  spontaneous  waking  is
observed  in  ordinary  hypnoses.

Gurney  has  directed  attention  to  a  particularly
important  device  for  estimating  the  mental  state
during  the  carrying  out  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion.
We  have  seen  that  the  renewed  suggestibility  is  of
great  importance  in  deciding  whether  a  fresh  hypnosis
has  been  induced  or  not  ;  and  Gurney  has  made  use
of  this  post-hypnotic  suggestibility  for  solving  the
question.

The  subject  (X.)  is  shuffling  cards.  We  wish  to  find
out  in  what  state  he  is,  and  he  is  therefore  told  while
he  is  shuffling,  that  when  the  clock  strikes  he  will
jump  up  three  times.  He  has  finished  shuffling  and
is  quite  awake.  There  is  nothing  to  show  that  he  is
still  in  hypnosis ;  he  is  not  susceptible  to  suggestion.
He  does  not  remember  shuffling  the  cards,  and  con-
tends that  he  has  not  done  it ;  but  directly  the  clock
strikes  he  jumps  up  three  times.  From  this  post-
hypnotic susceptibility  to  suggestion  we  conclude  that
he  was  not  in  a  normal  state  when  he  was  shuffling
the  cards.  Whether  this  state  was  hypnotic,  or  was
another  peculiar  mental  state,  as  Beaunis  and  Gurney
suppose,  is  another  question.  I  incline  to  think  it
a  true  hypnosis*


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  149


Gurney  thinks  that  in  order  to  properly  estimate
and  characterize  this  state  we  must  take  memory
into  consideration  also.  We  have  seen  that  subjects
in  later  hypnoses  remember  what  has  occurred  in
earlier  ones.  If  now  the  events  of  earlier  hypnoses
should  be  present  in  the  post-hypnotic  state  we
should  consider  it  a  fresh  hypnosis.  Now  I  have
often  found  that  there  was  a  complete  recollection  of
the  events  of  earlier  hypnoses  while  the  post-hypnotic
suggestion  was  being  carried  out.  This  fact  also
favours  the  supposition  of  a  fresh  hypnosis.

Finally,  there  are  cases  in  which  physical  symptoms
may  be  found.  It  would  be  interesting  to  observe
these  during  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  The  fixed  look
and  blank  expression  often  seen  during  the  carrying
out  of  the  suggestion  also  favour  the  idea  of  fresh
hypnosis.

It  may  be  concluded  from  what  has  been  said  that
post-hypnotic  suggestions  may  be  carried  out  in
various  different  states.  This  is  the  case  not  only
when  we  compare  one  subject  with  another,  but  when
we  observe  the  same  subject  under  the  influence  of
different  suggestions.  The  questions  upon  which  it
all  hinges  are— 1.  Does  the  subject  remember  later  on
what  he  has  done,  and  does  he  remember  the  events
of  earlier  hypnoses  while  carrying  out  the  suggestion  ?
2.  Whilst  doing  what  has  been  suggested  is  he  sus-
ceptible either  to  suggestions  to  be  carried  out  at
once,  or  to  new  post-hypnotic  suggestions  ?  3.  Has
he  the  look,  the  manner,  the  physical  symptoms  usual
in  hypnosis  or  not  ?

The  question  becomes  even  more  complicated  when
we  consider  the  following  experiments  of  Forel.
Forel  said  to  a  nurse,  "  Whenever  you  say  *  Sir '  to
the  assistant  physician  you  will  scratch  your  right


HYPNOTISM.


temple  with  your  right  hand  without  noticing  it."  The
nurse  did  so,  talking  clearly  and  rationally  all  the
time.  She  did  not  notice  that  she  was  scratching  her
face.

Here  the  subject  behaves  normally,  and  yet  the
post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  executed  during  the  con-
versation with  complete  loss  of  memory.  When  the
subject  acts  once  with  loss  of  memory,  is  this  state
hypnosis  or  is  it  some  other  state  ?  I  think  it  should
be  regarded  as  a  normal  part  of  waking  life,  for  it
would  be  a  mistake  to  conclude  a  hypnosis  from  the
mere  forgetting  of  one  act,  without  susceptibility  to
suggestion.  Gurney  points  out  that  loss  of  memory
alone  cannot  be  taken  for  proof  of  an  abnormal  state,
because  in  normal  life  we  perform  actions  and  see
objects  without  remembering  them  afterwards.  If  the
action  is  a  purely  mechanical  one,  such  as  winding  a
watch,  we  often  remember  nothing  about  it.

I  have  purposely  in  the  last  section  only  discussed
movements  and  acts  executed  post-hypnotically.  But
all  sorts  of  delusions  of  the  senses,  positive  and  nega-
tive, can  be  induced  post-hypnotically  at  pleasure.  We
can  cause  whole  scenes  to  be  gone  through  ;  the  sub-
ject will  go  to  a  ball,  or  dinner,  &c.  The  state  of
the  subjects  during  the  realization  of  a  post-hypnotic
delusion  may  differ  considerably.  But  in  my  experi-
ence it  is  almost  a  rule  that  the  induction  of  a  post-
hypnotic delusion  should  induce  a  fresh  hypnosis  with
susceptibility  to  suggestion  and  subsequent  loss  of
memory.

It  is  possible  besides  to  influence  subjects  in  these
states  in  any  way  (Forel).  For  example,  we  may
make  the  suggestion  thus :  "  You  will  see  a  dog
five  minutes  after  you  wake ;  but  you  will  remain
awake and not  allow  anything  else  to  be  sug-


THE  S  YMF  TOMS  OF  H  VP  NO  SIS.  r  5 1


gested  to  you."  The  subject  may  be  in  this  way
protected  from  further  suggestion  ;  he  will  then  carry
out  the  first  suggestion,  but  for  the  rest  will  appear
fully  awake.  Messrs.  X.  and  Y.  are  at  my  house.  I
hypnotize  Y.  I  say  to  him, "  When  you  wake  X.  will
be  sitting  on  this  chair  ;  you  will  remain  awake."
When  he  wakes  he  believes  that  he  sees  X.  in  the
chair,  and  talks  to  him,  &c.  I  draw  his  attention  to
the  real  X.  and  say, "  Which  is  the  real  X.  ?  You  see
one  in  the  chair  and  one  standing  before  you."  Y,
feels  the  chair  and  the  real  X.  to  find  out  which  is  air
and  which  is  reality.  He  feels  about  and  finally  con-
cludes, "  He  is  in  the  chair."  And  yet  Y.  is  not
susceptible  to  suggestion  on  other  points.

In  what  precedes  I  have  discussed  the  state  of  the
subject  during  the  carrying  out  of  the  post-hypnotic
suggestion.  It  will  not  take  long  to  consider  the  state
between  waking  and  the  execution  of  the  suggestion.
The  subject  is  then  nearly  always  fully  awake,  and
insusceptible  to  suggestion  ;  the  state  is,  in  fact,  the
same  as  if  he  had  been  wakened  without  previous
post-hypnotic  suggestion.  However,  there  are  some
cases  in  which  the  awakening  is  not  complete  so  long
as  the  effect  of  the  suggestion  lasts  ;  this  occurs  par-
ticularly when  the  suggestion  is  repugnant  to  the
subject's  character  and  will.  Such  subjects  look  tired
and  sleepy,  and  often  say  themselves  that  they  are  not
quite  awake.  I  have  had  cases  in  which  I  was  obliged
to  cancel  the  suggestion  before  I  could  completely
awaken  the  subject.  However,  this  has  never  occurred
when  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  had  a  therapeutic
aim,  but  only  in  experiment.  I  think  the  resistance
of  the  subject  is  partly  to  blame.  In  other  cases  I
have  observed  a  subjective  discomfort  instead  of  the


152


HYPNOTISM,


feeling  of  fatigue,  till  the  suggestion  was  executed.
This  subjective  discomfort  is  sometimes  felt  without
the  suggestion  being  carried  out.  One  lady  to  whom
it  had  been  suggested  that  she  should  put  a  book  on
the  floor  woke  in  great  discomfort,  but  it  did  not
occur  to  her  to  put  the  book  on  the  floor.  She  re-
covered herself  however  when,  at  my  request,  she  had
put  the  book  on  the  floor  in  a  waking  state.  Another
subject  complained  of  a  twitching  in  the  arm  after
waking  ;  I  had  suggested  to  him  to  give  me  his  hand
when  he  woke.  He  did  not  do  it  till  I  asked  him
again  in  the  waking  state  ;  he  was  aware  of  nothing
but  the  twitching.

As  in  all  the  above  cases  of  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tion the  command  was  not  remembered,  it  is  particu-
larly interesting  to  observe  how  the  subjects  try  to
account  for  their  execution  of  the  suggestions.
Naturally,  I  shall  here  only  consider  the  cases  in
which  the  action  is  not  immediately  forgotten  ;  in  the
others  the  subjects  do  not  try  to  find  reasons  for
actions  which  they  have  forgotten.

Let  us  take  an  example.  I  say  to  a  hypnotized
woman,  "  After  you  wake  you  will  take  a  book  from
the  table  and  put  it  on  the  bookshelf."  She  wakes
and  does  what  I  told  her.  When  I  ask  her  what  she
has  been  doing,  she  answers  that  she  has  moved  the
book  from  the  table  to  the  shelf.  When  asked  for  her
reason,  she  answers,  "  I  do  not  like  to  see  things  so  *•
untidy  ;  the  shelf  is  the  place  for  the  book,  and  that
is  why  I  put  it  there."  In  this  case  I  suggested  an
action  to  the  subject  ;  she  does  not  remember  my
order  but  believes  she  has  so  acted  of  her  own  accord,
from  love  of  order.  This  phenomenon  has  often  been
observed  (Richet),  and  is  so  common  that  some  con-


THE  S  YMP  TOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  1 5  3


sider  it  the  rule.  This,  however,  can  hardly  be  said
(Forel).  Let  us  go  on  with  our  experiment.  I  suggest
to  the  re-hypnotized  subject  to  take  the  book  from
the  shelf  and  lay  it  under  the  table,  which  she  does.
I  ask  her  why  she  did  it  ;  she  can  give  no  reason.  "  It
came  into  my  head,"  she  answers.  I  repeat  the  ex-
periment several  times.  To  a  new  request  for  her
reason  she  finally  replies,  "  Something  made  me  feel
as  if  I  must  put  the  book  there."  In  this  case  the
subject,  who  at  first  believed  she  was  acting  freely,
came  by  degrees  to  recognize  the  constraint  put  upon
her ;  she,  perhaps,  suspected  the  suggestion,  but  was
not  sure  of  it.

Another  case.  I  suggest  to  a  hypnotized  man  to
use  an  insulting  expression  to  me  when  he  wakes.  He
wakes,  and  after  a  pause  of  a  few  seconds,  during
which  his  face  expresses  an  inward  struggle,  he  calls
out "  Donkey  !  "  When  he  is  asked  why  he  so  insults
me,  he  makes  many  excuses,  and  explains,  "  I  felt  as
if  I  must  say  '  Donkey  ! '  "

Here  we  have  to  do  with  a  paradoxical  action  ;  the
man  knew  at  once  that  constraint  was  being  put  upon
him  ;  the  woman  who  performed  the  simpler  act  above
described  only  perceived  the  constraint  after  several
experiments.

However,  in  a  great  number  of  cases  the  result  is
different.  I  tell  a  hypnotized  subject  that  when  he
wakes  he  is  to  take  a  flower-pot  from  the  window,
wrap  it  in  a  cloth,  put  it  on  the  sofa,  and  bow  to  it
three  times.  All  which  he  does.  When  he  is  asked
for  his  reasons  he  answers,  "  You  know,  when  I  woke
and  saw  the  flower-pot  there  I  thought  that  as  it  was
rather  cold  the  flower-pot  had  better  be  warmed  a
little,  or  else  the  plant  would  die.  So  I  wrapped  it  in
the  cloth,  and  then  I  thought  that  as  the  sofa  was


154


HYPNOTISM.


near  the  fire  I  would  put  the  flower-pot  on  it ;  and  I
bowed  because  I  was  pleased  with  myself  for  having
such  a  bright  idea."  He  added  that  he  did  not  con-
sider the  proceeding  foolish,  he  had  told  me  his  reasons
for  so  acting.  In  this  case  the  subject  carried  out  an
absurd  post-hypnotic  suggestion  ;  he  was  unconscious
of  the  constraint  put  upon  him  and  tried  to  find  good
reasons  for  his  act.  Most  experimenters  have  observed
that  their  subjects  try  to  find  reasons  for  the  most
foolish  suggested  acts.

It  is  also  to  be  observed  that  when  the  subjects  are
questioned  as  to  their  motive  they  make  different
answers  ;  they  either  believe  that  they  have  so  acted
of  their  own  accord,  and  invent  reasons  for  their
proceedings,  or  they  say  they  felt  impelled  to  act
so,  or  they  only  say,  "  It  came  into  my  head  to  do
it."  We  can  use  suggestion  here  also.  When  the
original  suggestion  is  being  made,  it  may,  at  the
same  time,  be  suggested  to  the  subject  to  believe  he
has  acted  of  his  own  free-will,  or  to  believe  that
constraint  was  put  upon  him.

When  such  a  suggestion  is  not  made,  it  depends
upon  the  subject's  power  of  self-observation  which
reason  he  gives—whether  he  perceives  the  constraint,
or  invents  false  reasons  for  his  conduct.  Something
also  depends  upon  the  frequency  with  which  the
experiment  is  made,  and  particularly  upon  the
greater  or  less  absurdity  of  the  suggested  act.

This  endeavour  of  the  subjects  to  find  a  motive  for
their  apparently  free  acts  is  very  instructive  ;  since,
though  they  believe  themselves  free,  they  are  really
acting  under  constraint.  This  mistaken  feeling  of
freedom  has  been  used  by  several  psychologists  lately
to  demonstrate  the  powerlessness  of  human  will.  A
state  has  been  produced  by  experiment,  in  which  the


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


155


subject  is  convinced  that  he  is  acting  freely,  while  in
reality  his  will  has  been  directed  in  a  particular
manner,  unconsciously  to  himself.  Ribot,  Forel,  and
others  especially  point  this  out.  Spinoza's  saying,
"  The  illusion  of  free-will  is  nothing  but  ignorance  of
the  motives  for  our  choice,"  appears  to  find  support
in  these  hypnotic  experiments  (Forel)  ;  it  is  certainly
proved  that  one  of  the  chief  supports  of  the  doctrine
of  free-will,  i.e.,  our  feeling  that  we  might  have  acted
otherwise,  is  not  enough  to  prove  free-will.  The
following  experiment,  which  I  have  repeated  in
various  ways  with  several  subjects,  shows  this.  I
suggest  a  post-hypnotic  act  to  a  subject — for  example,
I  tell  him  to  lay  an  umbrella  on  the  ground.  The
subject  now  wakes,  and  I  tell  him  to  do  anything
he  pleases  ;  but  at  the  same  time  I  give  him  a  folded
paper,  on  which  I  have  written  what  he  is  to  do.  He
does  what  I  have  suggested,  and  is  much  astonished
when  he  reads  the  paper  afterwards.  He  declares
that  this  time  he  was  quite  sure  he  would  do  some-
thing else  than  what  I  had  suggested.

However,  I  believe  that  in  spite  of  these  hypnotic
experiments,  we  should  hesitate  to  draw  general  con-
clusions about  free-will  ;  for  though  hypnosis  is  not
a  pathological  state  it  is  an  exceptional  one,  from
which  we  must  not  draw  general  conclusions.  Few
who  have  made  such  experiments  often  can  fail  to
feel  occasional  subjective  doubts  of  freedom  of  will,
but  from  these  doubts  to  scientific  proof  is  an  im-
mense step.  Further,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that
we  do  not  by  any  means  find  these  deep  hypnoses
and  subjective  delusions  of  the  judgment  in  all  sub-
jects. On  the  contrary,  such  subjects  are  in  the
minority.  Also,  after  repeated  experiments  they
begin  to  observe  themselves,  and  are  aware  of  the


156


HYPNOTISM.


constraint  put  upon  them,  particularly  when  the
suggested  action  is  opposed  to  their  natural  dispo-
sition. Before  we  can  draw  final  conclusions  we
must  find  analogous  cases  in  ordinary  life  ;  which,
indeed,  has  often  been  done.  We  will  go  back  to  the
art  of  conjuring.  A  well-known  trick  of  the  conjurer  is
to  allow  a  card  to  be  drawn  from  a  pack  and  to  guess
it.  The  trick  is  thus  explained  :  the  spectator  thinks
he  has  freely  chosen  the  card,  but  in  reality  the
conjurer  has  directed  him  to  one  in  particular,  and  com-
pelled him  to  select  it.  The  conjurer  often  attains
this  end  by  putting  the  card  he  wishes  chosen  where
it  will  naturally  be  the  first  to  be  taken  up.  It  need
hardly  be  mentioned  that  I  do  not  draw  conclusions
against  freedom  of  will  from  this  example.

We  can  then  with  certainty,  by  means  of  post-
hypnotic suggestion,  compel  many  actions  which  the
subject  in  normal  circumstances  would  refuse  to  per-
form. We  may,  in  consequence,  consider  such  acts
purely  compulsory.  I  ask  a  man  to  tell  me  some-
thing which  he  would  never  voluntarily  do;  he  replies
that  he  would  never  throw  a  sofa  cushion  at  my  head ;
all  the  same,  when  I  suggest  this  to  him  in  hypnosis
he  does  it,  after  a  short  resistance.  These  compulsory
acts  have  a  great  resemblance  to  the  impulsive  acts
which  we  sometimes  see  performed  in  pathological
states.  When  the  signal  for  the  carrying  out  of  the
post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  given  the  subject  feels  an
impulse  exactly  like  that  felt  by  many  morbid  persons,
in  whom  the  sight  of  a  sheet  of  water  arouses  a  desire
to  commit  suicide  or  murder  (Cullerre).  The  same
effort  to  resist  the  impulse  may  be  observed  in  these
patients  as  in  hypnotic  subjects.  Bentivegni  has
lately  pointed  out  the  analogy  between  these  patho^


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  157


logical  impulses  and  the  above-mentioned  post-
hypnotic suggestions.  The  patients  dominated  by
this  imaginary  necessity  are  fully  aware  of  their  un-
fortunate state,  but  are  none  the  less  impelled  to
action  (Maudsley)  ;  in  the  same  way  a  subject
dominated  by  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  often  re-
cognizes its  folly,  but  finally  succumbs.

Post-hypnotic  suggestions  are  of  especial  value  for
the  induction  or  prevention  of  future  hypnoses.  In
this  way  an  easily  hypnotizable  subject  may  be  pre-
vented from  allowing  himself  to  be  hypnotized  by
another  person.  Post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  an
excellent  means  for  protecting  susceptible  people
and  guarding  them  against  unexpected  hypnosis,  as
Ricard  pointed  out  with  regard  to  the  somnambulic
state.  Mr.  X.,  whom  I  had  often  hypnotized,  had
also  often  been  hypnotized  by  Mr.  A.  I  suggested  to
X.  that  he  should  in  future  only  allow  himself  to  be
hypnotized  by  doctors,  and  on  no  account  by  Mr.  A.
After  this  Mr,  A.  could  no  longer  hypnotize  him.
However,  I  do  not  believe  that  this  is  a  perfect  pro-
tection in  all  cases.  But  the  chief  danger,  which  does
not  arise  from  susceptibility  to  hypnotism,  but  from
susceptibility  to  hypnotism  against  the  subject's  will,
is  thereby  guarded  against.  On  the  other  hand  it  is
possible  to  throw  a  subject  into  an  unexpected  hyp-
nosis by  means  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  I  say
to  a  subject,  "  Directly  I  say  the  word  '  to-day '  you
will  fall  into  a  fresh  hypnosis."  I  then  wake  him,
and  he  remains  awake  till  I  say  "  to-day " ;  upon
which  he  is  instantly  thrown  into  a  fresh  hypnosis.

It  is  difficult  to  say  to  what  length  of  time  the
carrying  out  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  may  be
deferred,  since  this  depends  upon  the  patient's
character  and  the  method  employed. The  longest


HYPNOTISM.


post-hypnotic  suggestion  I  have  seen  was  executed  at
the  end  of  four  months  ;  no  hint  had  been  given  to
the  subject  in  the  meantime.  The  longest  which  has
ever  been  described,  as  far  as  I  know,  was  in  a  sub-
ject under  Liegeois  and  Liebeault ;  in  this  case
exactly  a  year  elapsed  before  the  suggestion  was
carried  out.  The  case  of  the  photograph,  mentioned
on  p.  140,  in  which  the  photograph  remained  visible
for  two  years,  is  rather  different,  as  it  appears  that  the
suggestion  was  often  recalled  to  the  subject's  memory
in  the  meantime.  The  case  mentioned  by  Dal  Pozzo
is,  perhaps,  of  the  same  kind  :  a  person  who  was  afraid
of  thunderstorms  was  cured  of  the  fear  by  suggestion  ;
the  effect  is  said  to  have  lasted  twenty-six  years
(Belfiore).

These  deferred  suggestions  are  not  very  common,
and  depend  upon  the  power  of  the  subject's  memory.
But  by  clever  management  of  the  association  of  ideas
they  can  often  be  obtained  ;  I  have  observed  them  in
nearly  all  hypnotic  subjects  belonging  to  the  second
group.  I  am  surprised  that  Binswanger  has  only
observed  one  such  case,  in  spite  of  his  more  numerous
experiments.

I  have  hitherto  only  discussed  those  post-hypnotic
suggestions  in  which  there  is  loss  of  memory  after
waking  from  the  hypnosis.  This  loss  of  memory
greatly  favours  the  carrying  out  of  the  suggestion.
But  loss  of  memory  is  not  absolutely  necessary ;  post-
hypnotic suggestion  succeeds  also  in  light  hypnoses,
where  there  is  complete  recollection  after  waking.
These  cases,  though  more  rare,  are  highly  interesting,
because  the  compulsion  can  be  better  observed  in
them.  The  subject  may  be  able  to  say  to  himself,
"  The  suggestion  was  made  to  me  in  hypnosis ;  I


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


159


remember  it  perfectly,  but  I  cannot  help  obeying  it."
One  of  my  colleagues,  a  doctor,  was  in  the  hypnotic
state  ;  I  suggested  abnormal  movements  to  him  with
success  ;  sense  delusions  did  not  succeed.  I  told  him
that  after  he  woke  he  would  be  unable  to  say  his
name  whenever  I  laid  my  hand  on  his  forehead,  and
further  that  instead  of  his  own  name  he  would  always
say  mine.  The  suggestion  succeeded  perfectly.
When  he  woke  from  the  hypnosis,  whenever  I  put
my  hand  on  his  forehead  he  said  his  name  was  Moll  ;
he  knew  his  right  name  also,  but  was  unable  to  say  it.
He  remembered  my  order  about  it,  and  did  not
believe  in  any  supernatural  force-;  he  knew  that  the
effect  was  mental,  but  could  not  help  himself.  It
is  the  same  thing  with  sense  delusions  ;  they  also  can
be  induced  post-hypnotically,  in  spite  of  the  fact  that
the  suggestion  is  remembered.  It  is  true  that  the
effect  of  the  sense  delusion  is  in  such  cases  often  not
to  be  seen,  because,  as  the  order  is  remembered,
reasoning  is  possible,  and  thus  the  suggestion  is  nega-
tived. Nevertheless,  sense  delusions  with  remem-
brance of  the  suggestion  are  rarer  because  sense
delusions  with  loss  of  memory  are  rarer,  even  though
memory  can  always  be  restored  by  suggestion,  as  we
have  seen.  In  any  case  the  subjects  who  remember
the  suggestion  are  always  more  conscious  of  the  com-
pulsion which  it  exercises  upon  them  than  those  who
do  not ;  these  often  believe  they  have  acted  of  their
own  accord.  Sometimes  suggestion  only  succeeds
with  difficulty  and  after  a  long  struggle,  in  conse-
quence of  the  subject's  resistance  and  control  of  his
consciousness.

We  have  now  studied  the  memory  and  the  post-
hypnotic suggestions  dependent  upon  it We  have


i6o


HYPNOTISM.


seen  that  the  faculty  of  memory  is  an  important  one
in  hypnosis  ;  it  is  also  a  chief  condition  for  the  con-
tinuance of  mental  activity.  This  is  certainly  much
circumscribed  by  suggestion  in  the  deep  hypnoses.

But  a  certain  adherence  to  rule  in  the  chain  of
ideas,  conditioned  by  the  laws  of  association,  exists
in  many  deep  hypnoses.  When,  without  hypnosis,
we  form  in  our  own  minds  a  mental  image— of  a  fir-
tree,  let  us  say — a  number  of  other  images  are  formed
in  connection  with  it :  we  think  of  Christmas  Day,
presents,  &c.  An  analogous  process  takes  place
generally  in  hypnosis.  A  suggested  idea  does  not
remain  isolated  ;  on  the  contrary,  it  at  once  awakens
new  ideas  dependent  upon  it.

I  suggest  to  A.,  "  Here  is  a  pack  of  cards."  A.
believes  it.  The  mental  picture  of  the  cards  arouses
the  idea  that  he  is  playing  a  game,  and  also  another
idea — that  he  is  at  a  restaurant  with  his  friends  B.  and
C.  The  single  suggestion  of  the  cards  has  sufficed  to
call  up  a  whole  scene  before  A.,  by  association  of
ideas.  A  new  suggestion  suffices  to  destroy  this
association  at  once.  I  tell  A.,  while  he  still  thinks  he
is  holding  the  cards,  that  he  is  in  the  train,  and  the
chain  of  ideas  connecting  the  cards  and  the  restaurant
is  at  once  put  an  end  to.  However,  in  many  hyp-
notic subjects  a  certain  rational  coherence  of  ideas
persists,  so  that  a  suggested  idea  calls  up  others  in
one  way  or  another  connected  with  it.  A  large
number  of  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  depend  upon
this  principle.  Many  mentally  induced  paralyses,  of
which  I  spoke  on  p.  63,  also  depend  upon  it ;  the  idea
of  a  motor  paralysis  produces  anaesthesia,  vaso-motor
disturbances,  &c.  I  would  emphatically  say  that  the
fact  of  their  independence  of  the  will  has  nothing  to
do  with  their  being  an  indirect  result  of  suggestion.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  161

This  mechanical  associative  process  shows  no  real
mental  activity.  The  mental  activity  only  appears
when  we  destroy  the  natural  associations,  and  see  how
the  subject  exerts  himself  to  create  a  new  sequence  of
ideas.  In  the  example  quoted  above  I  told  the
subject  as  I  gave  him  the  cards  that  he  was  in  a  train.
In  order  to  bring  these  ideas  into  some  logical  con-
nection, the  subject  A.  now  explained  that  he  had
bought  the  cards  for  a  birthday  present  for  the  friend
he  was  travelling  to  meet.

The  fact  that  the  subject  sometimes  allows  himself
to  be  persuaded  to  do  something,  if  a  reason  is  given
to  him  for  it,  shows  even  more  plainly  that  the
thinking  process  is  not  always  arrested  in  hypnosis.
It  is  often  necessary  to  suggest  a  false  premiss  to  the
subject  before  he  will  do  what  is  wanted.  X.  cannot
be  induced  to  spill  a  glass  of  water  in  my  room,  but
when  I  tell  him  that  the  room  is  on  fire  he  does  it  at
once.

On  the  other  hand  it  should  be  said  that  even
delusions  of  the  senses  are  sometimes  corrected  purely
by  a  reasoning  process.  A  subject  declines  to  believe
that  he  sees  a  wolf  in  my  room  ;  or,  rather,  he  ex-
plains that  he  sees  an  image  of  a  wolf  plainly  enough,
and  could  point  out  the  exact  spot.  But  he  knows
quite  well  that  it  must  be  a  delusion,  as  I  should
certainly  not  allow  a  wolf  to  come  into  my  sitting-
room.  Macnish  says  that  people  can  guard  them-
selves against  bad  dreams  and  control  them  in  sleep
by  a  process  of  thought.

The  following  very  interesting  phenomenon  which
I  have  observed  in  the  various  hypnotic  states,  even
the  deepest,  demonstrates  the  activity  of  the  mind
in  hypnosis.  The  subjects  say  they  know  quite  well
that  the  influence  exercised  upon  them  is  a  purely


162


HYPNOTISM.


mental  one,  even  while  they  obey  it.  One,  in  whom
all  kinds  of  sense  delusions  can  be  induced,  said  to
me,  "  I  know  quite  well  that  you  do  not  exercise  any
extraordinary  magnetic  faculty  ;  I  am  sure  it  is  my
own  imagination  which  deprives  me  of  my  will  ;  my
own  imagination  obliges  me  to  obey  you  ;  but  I  can-
not help  it."

In  a  great  number  of  cases  the  subjects  are  thrown
into  hypnosis  in  this  way.  Some  of  them,  perhaps,
are  influenced  by  their  belief  in  the  experimenter's
possession  of  a  peculiar  magnetic  force  ;  on  the  other
hand  many  are  convinced  of  the  subjectivity  of  the
phenomena,  and  yet  are  thrown  into  hypnosis.  If  it
happens  that  A.  is  easily  hypnotized  by  B.,  and  with
difficulty  or  not  at  all  by  C,  this  is  by  no  means
always  because  A.  believes  in  B.'s  peculiar  power  ;  it
is  rather  an  indefinite,  and  at  present  inexplicable,
mental  influence  which  unites  A.  to  B. — an  influence
which  reason  often  considers  imaginary,  but  which  is
none  the  less  constraining.

We  see  this  every  day  in  ordinary  life,  and  particularly  in
love  affairs.  It  happens  often  that  one  person  is  attracted  by
another  and  repelled  by  a  third,  without  being  able  to  discover
his  reasons  for  it.  Reason  often  points  out  the  perversity  of
his  inclination  ;  and  yet  be  cannot  overcome  the  strong  mental
influence  which  attracts  him.  De gustibus  non  est  di split  andum  ;
it  is  useless  to  argue  about  our  tastes,  because  they  are  not
guided  by  reason,  but  by  certain  undefined  agencies.  To  call
these  feelings  sympathies  and  antipathies  explains  nothing.

It  is  particularly  interesting,  however,  to  observe
how  the  hypnotic  subject  makes  a  logical  use  of
slight  external  impressions.  Few  people  think  of  the
existence  of  these  impressions,  which  yet  often
suffice  to  put  a  subject  on  the  right  track.  Much


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  163


apparent  "clairvoyance"  is  a  consequence  of  this
heightened  faculty  for  drawing  conclusions.  Many
subjects  are  helped  also  by  the  hyperaesthesia  of  their
organs  of  sense,  which  enables  them  to  perceive  things
ordinarily  overlooked.  Let  us  take  a  very  common  ex-
periment, often  made  to  prove  the  existence  of  animal
magnetism.  The  magnetized  subject  knows  whether  he
has  been  touched  by  his  magnetizer  or  another  person.
It  is  astounding  to  observe  the  accuracy  with  which
such  subjects,  when  their  eyes  have  been  bandaged,
can  distinguish  one  person  from  another.  Ochorowicz,
who  believes  in  animal  magnetism  on  other  grounds,
gives  a  number  of  interesting  examples  of  this.  The
hypnotic  subject  observes  the  smallest  details — the
differences  in  the  strength  of  pressure,  in  temperature,
in  the  posture  of  the  person  touching  him,  in  the
sounds  he  makes  with  his  shirt-cuffs  ;  nothing  is  over-
looked, and  a  logically  exact  conclusion  is  drawn.
Many  observations  and  much  information  as  to  the
increased  acuteness  of  the  mental  faculties  in  the
magnetic  sleep  can  be  found  among  the  old  investi-
gators of  mesmerism.  Leonard  considered  this  acute-
ness characteristic  of  the  magnetic  state.  It  may  very
well  happen  in  such  cases  that  the  subject  himself  is
not  clearly  conscious  of  drawing  his  conclusions  from
these  details.  This  phenomenon  is  very  common  in
normal  life.  Suppose  a  man  sees  another  person  for
the  first  time.  How  often  it  happens  that  at  first
sight  he  draws  a  conclusion  as  to  the  character  of  the
stranger,  and  is  at  the  same  time  unaware  of  the
details  from  which  he  draws  it.  We  often  divine  the
meaning  of  a  face  without  knowing  how :  we  think
that  it  is  a  stupid  or  a  clever  face  ;  we  recognize  an
expression  of  happiness  or  sadness  at  once,  without
realizing  the  details  of  our  impression.  Thought-


164


HYPNOTISM.


transference,  of  which  I  shall  speak  later,  may  com-
monly be  referred  to  this  ;  the  subject  reads  the  wish
and  thought  of  the  experimenter  even  in  a  gesture,
in  the  involuntary  movement  of  the  lips,  in  the
direction  of  his  eyes  (Carpenter),  particularly  when
he  has  had  some  hypnotic  training  in  this  line.

The  prophecies  and  predictions  of  somnambules
and  other  such  persons  often  depend  upon  the  logical
utilization  of  such  insignificant  impressions.  A
peculiar  mental  quickness  is  not  always  necessary,
as  is  shown  in  the  case  of  a  man  who  was  told  by
one  of  these  persons  that  he  had  lately  suffered  a
severe  loss  in  his  family.  This  was  true.  The  man
was  astonished  at  the  soothsayer's  cleverness,  till  a
friend  drew  his  attention  to  the  fact  that  he  was
wearing  crape  (Fonvielle).

This  mental  activity,  and  particularly  the  mechani-
cal associations  described  above,  show  themselves
most  clearly  when  suggested  ideas  are  changed.  New
ideas  arise  and  attach  themselves  to  the  dominant
one,  as  I  showed  above.  But  it  is  exactly  the  quick-
ness with  which  the  subject  can  be  transferred  from
one  situation  to  another,  and  with  which  he  accepts
the  suggested  idea,  which  demonstrates  that  he  is  only
the  plaything  of  the  experimenter.  Just  as  the  ideas
of  dreams  transport  us  in  a  second  from  one  situa-
tion to  another,  so  do  suggested  ideas.  Pleasure  is
changed  into  pain  in  a  moment  ;  the  moods  change
as  quickly  as  they  usually  do  only  in  children.  The
subject  now  thinks  he  is  in  my  room  ;  the  next
moment  he  believes  he  is  in  bed  ;  directly  after  he  is
swimming  ;  now  he  believes  he  is  ninety  years  old,
and  in  the  next  second  he  is  back  in  his  tenth  year.
Now  he  is  Napoleon  I.,  then  a  carpenter,  then  a  dog,
&c. This  change  of  ideas  takes  place  in  a  moment  ;


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  165


the  corresponding  ideas  arise  at  once  through  asso-
ciation. Few  people  are  able  to  do  this  in  waking
life,  even  when  they  have  a  talent  for  acting.  A
certain  opposition  is  sometimes  made  to  this  rapid
change  of  ideas  in  hypnosis,  but  this  is  rare.  When
it  happens,  the  suggestion  must  be  often  repeated
before  the  subject  will  allow  himself  to  be  dragged
out  of  his  earlier  sphere  of  ideas.  The  quick  change
of  these  dominating  ideas  is  so  common  that  I  was
astonished  to  read  (in  Malten)  that  a  legal  specialist
in  Vienna,  Ferroni,  has  been  led  by  it  to  conclude  that
thing  is  simulation.

This  dominant  idea,  which  calls  up  others,  may  be
looked  at  in  another  light.  We  may  say  that  it  is  the
idea  to  which  the  subject's  attention  is  especially
turned.  In  such  a  case  this  phenomenon  of  hyp-
nosis must  be  regarded  as  a  rapid  change  in  the
direction  of  the  attention,  caused  by  the  suggestion
of  the  experimenter,  and  not  by  the  will  of  the
subject.  In  deep  hypnoses  the  subject's  attention  is
first  directed  to  one  point  only,  i.e.,  to  the  experi-
menter, so  that  other  objects  hardly  exist  for  him.
When  this  phenomenon  is  clearly  marked,  we  speak
of  rapport.

This  rapport  is  an  important  phenomenon  of
hypnosis.  We  saw  in  the  fourth  experiment  (p.  23)
that  the  subject  only  answered  me,  and  apparently
ignored  the  other  persons  present.  This  is  the
common  hypnotic  phenomenon  called  rapport.  In
hypnotic  rapport  the  subject  responds  to  the  hypno-
tist only.  The  old  magnetizers  were  acquainted  with
this  fact,  and  some  investigators  on  the  objective  side,
particularly  Noizet  and  Bertrand,  have  tried  to  ex-
plain rapport.  They  thought  that  the  subject  fell
asleep  thinking  of  the  experimenter,  and  with  his


HYPNOTISM.


whole  attention  directed  to  him,  and  that  on  this
account  only  the  idea  of  him  remained  active  in  the
consciousness  during  hypnosis.  Consequently  he
alone  could  make  suggestions.  As  suggestions  are
most  easily  made  through  the  muscular  sense  and  the
hearing,  when  rapport  exists  it  is  made  most  clearly
evident  by  means  of  these  senses.  I  lift  up  the  arm
of  a  subject ;  it  remains  raised  in  suggested  catalepsy.
Another  person  (A.)  makes  the  same  attempt  without
result ;  the  arm  always  falls  down  loosely  {cf.  Experi-
ment IV.).  A.  now  tries  to  bend  the  cataleptic  arm,
but  is  prevented  by  its  rigid  contracture,  while  I  easily
succeed.  In  the  same  way  we  have  seen  (p.  83)  that
only  the  hypnotist  can  obtain  apparent  reflex  con-
tractures by  stimulation  of  the  skin.  The  school  of
Charcot  also  maintains  that  only  the  hypnotist  can
relax  a  continuous  contracture  in  somnambulism  by
renewed  stimulation  of  the  skin.  As  has  been  said,
this  experiment  seems  to  prove  that  these  contrac-
tures do  not  take  place  without  some  mental
action  ;  for  if  we  had  only  to  do  with  physical
stimuli,  any  one  could  produce  the  same  result.  All
this  becomes  even  clearer  in  the  transference  of
rapport.  The  command  of  the  experimenter  suffices
to  put  A.  and  B.  in  rapport  with  the  subject.  But
the  stimulus  applied  by  A.  and  B.  before  the
command  is,  from  a  physical  point  of  view,  exactly
the  same  as  they  apply  after  it  ;  and  any  explanation
of  these  things  is  impossible,  unless  we  take  refuge  in
the  supposition  that  some  mental  action  takes  place
in  the  production  of  catalepsy  and  contractures.  The
circumstances  are  analogous  in  verbal  suggestion.
The  experimenter  says  when  he  has  lifted  the  arm,
"  Now  it  bends,  now  it  falls,  now  it  is  stretched  out,"
and  the  effect  at  once  follows. The  commands  of


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


167


others  are  thrown  away  if  they  have  not  been  put  in
rapport  with  the  subject  by  the  experimenter.  Phe-
nomena like  those  of  rapport  in  hypnosis  have  been
observed  in  spontaneous  somnambulism  (Macario),

From  all  the  phenomena  hitherto  discussed  it  must
have  been  gathered  that  there  can  be  no  question  of
loss  of  consciousness  in  hypnosis.  Of  course  I  mean
loss  of  consciousness  as  it  is  understood  in  psychology.1
We  have  seen  that  the  subject  in  hypnosis  remembers
the  events  of  earlier  hypnoses.  Consequently  impres-
sions were  received  into  the  consciousness  in  these
earlier  hypnoses.  We  cannot,  therefore,  talk  of  loss
of  consciousness  because  loss  of  memory  exists  after
the  awakening  (Forel),  apart  from  the  fact  that
suggestion  in  hypnosis  will  prevent  the  loss  of
memory.  This  temporary  loss  of  memory  is  an
every-day  occurrence,  and  we  could  not  conclude  a
loss  of  consciousness  from  it  in  ordinary  life.

I  will  not  speak  of  the  daily  mechanical  actions  we
perform  without  attention  and  forget  directly.  I  will
take  quite  another  case,  in  which  we  act  with  full  con-
sciousness and  attention.  I  will  choose  an  example
out  of  my  own  experience,  a  thing  which  we  have  all
doubtless  observed  in  ourselves.  I  take  a  book  and
put  it  in  a  particular  place,  so  that  I  may  find  it  when
I  want  it.  At  last  I  want  it,  but  I  cannot  remember
where  I  put  it.  I  think  in  vain.  Only  when  I  replace
myself  in  imagination  at  the  moment  when  I  put  it
away  (a  method  which  every  one  knows)  do  I  re-
member where  it  is. And  yet,  in  spite  of  temporary

1  Psychologically,  loss  of  consciousness  is  a  state  in  which
no  kind  of  psychical  process  takes  place  ;  in  the  penal  code
abnormalities  of  consciousness  are  included  under  loss  of  con-
sciousness (Schwartzer,  Casper,  Liman).


i68


HYPNOTISM.


loss  of  memory,  I  did  not  put  the  book  away  in  a
state  of  loss  of  consciousness  ;  it  was  rather  that  I
was  at  the  time  in  another  state  of  consciousness.
This  is  in  many  respects  analogous  to  hypnosis,  the
events  of  which  are  remembered  only  when  the  sub-
ject is  again  in  the  same  state  of  consciousness,  in
a  new  hypnosis.  Thus,  in  all  these  cases,  we  have  not
to  do  with  an  unconscious  state,  since  all  impressions
remain  in  the  memory.

But  it  might  be  asked,  "  Are  there  not  perhaps
unconscious  states  in  hypnosis?"  In  my  opinion
this  question  only  concerns  the  forms  of  lethargy,
and  only  the  lethargy  which  Charcot  describes  as
such,  and  the  lethargy  which  Bernheim  calls  hyste-
rical, of  which  I  have  spoken  (p.  37).  As  concerns
the  latter,  it  must  be  absolutely  distinguished  from
hypnosis  ;  it  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  phenomena
of  hypnosis,  and  is  in  any  case  extremely  rare.  With
Charcot's  lethargy  the  case  stands  thus  :  apart  from
the  numerous  cases  of  lethargy  here  described,  and
which  even  the  pupils  of  Charcot  admit  are  associated
with  movements  caused  by  command,  there  remain
very  few  cases  worthy  of  consideration.  I  doubt,
however,  whether  there  is  the  loss  of  consciousness  in
these  cases  which  Charcot  describes.  The  cases
which  I  saw  in  Paris  convinced  me  of  the  con-
trary. The  quickness  with  which  these  lethargic
subjects  fall  into  catalepsy  when  Charcot  merely
touches  their  eyelids  makes  me  imagine  that  these
apparently  unconscious  persons  have  been  attentively
waiting  for  the  moment  in  which  they  are  expected
to  become  cataleptic.  Consequently  the  loss  of  con-
sciousness seems  to  me  more  than  questionable.
This  point  is  of  great  importance  because  Charcot's
pupils  maintain  that  the  phenomena  of  the  muscles


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  169


and  nerves  in  the  lethargic  state  are  not  induced  by
suggestion.  The  experimenters  conclude  that  the
state  is  one  of  lethargy  without  having  proved  it,
and  it  appears  from  their  statements  that,  when
demonstrating  this  loss  of  consciousness,  they  did
not  absolutely  avoid  discussion  of  the  experiments
in  the  presence  of  the  subjects.  As  a  matter  of
course  these  lose  some  of  their  evidential  force  in
consequence.

Even  the  states  mentioned  on  p.  69,  in  which  no
response  could  be  obtained  to  questions  and  com-
mands, do  not  prove  loss  of  consciousness;  for — (1)
post-hypnotic  suggestions  could  be  made,  and  were
effectual,  which  proves  that  there  was  conscious-
ness ;  (2)  these  subjects  woke  directly  they  were  told
to  do  so  (Bernheim),  which  also  shows  that  they  were
conscious.

This  was  evidently  also  the  case  with  Krafft-
Ebing's  patient.  She  sat  quite  still  so  long  as  she
was  left  alone.  "Like  a  statue,"  says  Krafft-Ebing,
"however  long  she  is  watched,  there  is  no  play  of
feature  nor  other  motor  trace  whatever  of  a  spon-
taneous mental  process."  And  yet,  in  my  opinion,
we  cannot  say  that  all  expression  of  consciousness
was  absent  in  this  subject.  The  quickness  with
which  she  responded  to  the  suggestions  of  the
experimenter,  although  in  other  cases  she  remained
passive  under  exactly  the  same  stimulations  of
sense,  shows  that  her  thoughts  were  directed  to  him,
though  perhaps  in  a  dreamily  conscious  state,  and
also  that  the  idea  of  him  was  present  in  her  con-
sciousness. However,  this  was  apparently  the  only
mental  process  in  her  case.

In  my  opinion,  therefore,  we  cannot  speak  of  loss
of  consciousness  in  hypnosis,  and  the  opinion  held  by


i7o


HYPNOTISM.


many  that  a  hypnotized  subject  is  generally  uncon-
scious is  a  mistake  ;  such  a  loss  of  consciousness  as
takes  place  in  fainting  is  never  found  in  hypnosis.

But  though  we  cannot  speak  of  a  loss  of  conscious-
ness, we  must,  however,  suppose  an  abnormal  state
of  consciousness  ;  for  if  some  one  believes  he  sees
things  that  are  not  present,  or  fails  to  see  things  that
are  present,  he  is  certainly  in  an  abnormal  state  of
consciousness.  If  a  man  forty  years  old  believes  he
is  ten  years  old,  his  consciousness  is  certainly  ab-
normal. We  find  such  phenomena  continually  among
the  second  group  of  hypnotic  subjects  ;  we  must  con-
sequently here  suppose  a  material  abnormality  of
consciousness.  It  need  hardly  be  mentioned  that
the  will  in  these  cases  is  also  not  intact,  since,
without  normal  consciousness,  free-will  is  not
conceivable.  In  the  first  group  of  hypnoses  the
case  is  rather  different.  We  must  conceive  these
states  as  involving  less  power  of  the  external
activity  of  the  will,1  i.e.,  as  a  disturbance  of  the
voluntary  movements  ;  here  there  is  no  other  abnor-
mality of  the  consciousness.  The  subject  knows
exactly  where  he  is  ;  he  knows  what  is  being  done
with  him  ;  he  makes  the  movements  commanded
because  he  cannot  help  it  ;  his  limbs  are  paralyzed
at  command.  A  complete  catalepsy  may  be  induced
by  suggestion,  and  yet  the  subject  will  be  fully  aware
of  all  that  goes  on.  Some  of  Hack  Tuke's  subjects —
for  example,  North,  a  physiologist  in  London — have
given  very  interesting  information  with  regard  to  the
interference  of  the  will  experienced  during  the  ex-

1  The  activity  of  the  will  is  of  two  kinds  :  (i)  the  subjective,
which  can  arbitrarily  arouse  certain  ideas,  pictures  of  memory,
&c.  ;  (2)  the  objective,  which  is  shown  in  the  external  move-
ments which  depend  upon  the  will.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


171


periments,  which  makes  them  unable  to  resist,  though
otherwise  fully  conscious.

In  spite  of  this  it  would  be  a  great  mistake  to  think
of  the  subject  as  an  automaton  without  a  will,  set
moving  only  by  the  experimenter.  On  the  contrary,
the  will  of  the  subject  expresses  itself  in  manifold
ways,  and  this  expression  of  the  will  presupposes
consciousness,  since  without  consciousness  there  can
be  no  will,  at  least  in  the  sense  in  which  I  here  regard
it.  We  will  now  consider  in  what  ways  the  will  of
the  subject  can  express  itself.  Its  expressions  may
naturally  be  very  complicated,  as,  though  the  will  is
always  less  powerful,  on  the  other  hand  it  is  not
abolished.

Often  the  decreased  power  of  will  shows  itself  merely
in  slow  and  lingering  movements.  In  these  cases  any
movement  can  be  made,  but  the  subject  takes  longer  to
perform  them  than  he  does  in  normal  circumstances.
An  inexperienced  person  is  easily  inclined  to  overlook
these  things,  and  to  fail  to  recognize  the  hypnosis  ;  he
generally  thinks  the  experimenter  mistaken  in  calling
this  state  a  hypnosis.  Further,  it  has  been  already
said  that  in  many  persons  only  certain  muscles  can  be
controlled  by  suggestion  (p.  61).  But  in  many  cases
it  is  necessary  to  repeat  the  suggestion  often  before
the  result  is  attained.  For  example,  a  subject  can
lift  his  arm  in  spite  of  the  command  of  the  hypnotizer  ;
but  repetition  of  the  command  ends  by  making  the
movement  impossible.  This  is  an  example  of  the
way  resistance  expresses  itself.

Expressions  of  the  will  which  spring  from  the  in-
dividual character  of  the  patient  are  of  the  deepest
psychological  interest.  The  more  an  action  is  repulsive
to  his  disposition,  the  stronger  is  his  resistance  (Forel).


172


HYPNOTISM.


Habit  and  education  play  a  large  part  here  ;  it  is
generally  very  difficult  to  successfully  suggest  any-
thing that  is  opposed  to  the  confirmed  habits  of  the
subject.  For  instance,  suggestions  are  made  with
success  to  a  devout  Catholic,  but  directly  the
suggestion  conflicts  with  his  creed  it  will  not  be
accepted.  The  surroundings  play  a  part  also.  A
subject  will  frequently  decline  a  suggestion  that  will
make  him  appear  ridiculous.  A  woman  whom  I
easily  put  into  cataleptic  postures,  and  who  made
suggested  movements,  could  not  be  induced  to  put
out  her  tongue  at  the  spectators.  In  another  such
case  I  succeeded,  but  only  after  repeated  suggestions.
The  manner  of  making  the  suggestion  has  an  influence.
In  some  cases  it  must  be  often  repeated  before  it
succeeds  ;  other  subjects  interpret  the  repetition  of
the  suggestion  as  a  sign  of  the  experimenter's  inca-
pacity and  of  their  own  ability  to  resist.  Thus  it  is
necessary  to  take  character  into  account.  It  is  often
easier  to  induce  some  action  by  suggesting  each
separate  movement  than  by  suggesting  the  whole
action  at  once  (Bleuler).  For  example,  if  the  subject
is  to  fetch  a  book  from  the  table,  the  movements  may
be  suggested  in  turn  ;  first  the  lifting,  then  the  steps,
&c.  (Bleuler).

It  is  interesting  to  observe  the  way  in  which
resistance  is  expressed,  both  in  hypnotic  and  post-
hypnotic suggestion.  Beaunis  has  observed  that
an  attack  of  hysteria  is  sometimes  the  answer  to  a
repugnant  suggestion.  I  myself  have  observed  the
interesting  phenomenon  that  subjects  have  asked  to
be  awakened  when  a  suggestion  displeased  them.

Exactly  the  same  resistance  is  sometimes  offered  to
a  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  It  is  possible  in  such  a
case  that  the  subject,  even  in  the  hypnotic  state,  will


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  173


decline  to  accept  the  suggestion.  Many  carry  out
only  the  suggestions  to  which  they  have  assented
(Pierre  Janet).  Pitres  relates  an  interesting  case  of  a
girl  who  would  not  allow  him  to  awake  her,  because
he  had  suggested  that  on  waking  she  would  not  be
able  to  speak.  She  positively  declared  that  she  would
not  wake  till  he  gave  up  his  suggestion.  But  even
when  the  suggestion  is  accepted  as  such,  a  decided
resistance  is  often  expressed  during  its  post-hypnotic
execution.  This  shows  itself  as  often  in  slow  and
lingering  movements  as  in  a  decided  refusal  to  perform
the  act  at  all.  The  more  repugnant  the  action,  the
more  likely  is  it  to  be  omitted.  In  order  to  induce
subjects  to  carry  out  post-hypnotic  suggestions  more
easily,  it  is  well  to  choose  an  external  stimulus  which
will  recall  the  idea  of  it  more  and  more  vividly  to  the
memory.  It  is  suggested  to  Mr.  X.  to  say  "  fool  "  to
one  of  the  persons  present  directly  the  clock  strikes.
X.  does  not  do  it  ;  the  idea  occurs  to  him  when  the
clock  strikes,  but  he  declines  to  carry  it  out.  But  if,
instead  of  the  striking  of  the  clock,  I  choose  some
other  more  lasting  stimulus  which  keeps  the  idea
alive,  I  attain  the  desired  result.  For  instance,  the
suggestion  succeeds  if  I  say  to  the  subject,  "  You  will
say  '  fool '  to  that  man  when  you  wake  and  see  me
rub  my  hands."  When  X.  wakes  I  rub  my  hands,
and  the  idea  arises  in  his  mind  ;  he  represses  it  for
some  time  successfully.  However,  I  go  on  rubbing
my  hands  for  more  than  a  minute  ;  X.'s  resistance
becomes  weaker  and  weaker,  and  finally  the  sugges-
tion is  executed.

In  other  cases  it  is  well  to  suggest  a  false  premiss
directly  resistance  is  offered  to  some  suggestion  (as  I
mentioned  on  p.  161,  in  discussing  mental  activity).
The  order  will  then  be  more  easily  obeyed. I  will


174


HYPNOTISM.


choose  an  example  from  Liegeois.  A  subject  was  to
be  induced  to  steal  a  watch.  He  refused.  But  when
it  was  represented  to  him  that  the  watch  was  his  own,
and  that  he  would  be  only  taking  it  back  again,  he
obeyed  the  command.  Or  the  subject  may  be  told
that  the  laws  are  altered,  that  stealing  is  no  longer
punishable,  &c.

There  are  numerous  cases  of  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tion where  the  suggested  act  is  not  performed  ;  but
the  idea,  and  the  impulse  to  carry  it  out  are  so
powerful  that  the  subject  feels  them  for  long  (Forel).
The  impulse  often  only  subsides  when  the  action  is
performed  or  the  suggestion  withdrawn.

These  explanations  concern  delusions  of  the  senses,
as  well  as  movements  and  actions,  though  subjects  in
deep  hypnosis  often  resist  delusions  of  the  senses  less
than  movements  and  actions.  However,  I  have  often
seen  unpleasant  and  improbable  delusions  resisted
when  contrary  ones  succeeded.  This  shows  the  great
influence  of  the  consciousness  and  will  ;  in  a  great
number  of  cases  they  triumph  over  the  power  of  the
experimenter.  The  following  is  an  example.  The
subject  (X.)  was  forty-one  years  old.  I  told  him,  "  You
are  now  thirteen  years  old."  He  answered,  "  No,  I
am  forty-one."  But  directly  after  he  accepted  the
suggestion  that  he  was  twelve  or  fourteen  years  old.
However,  I  failed  to  make  him  believe  he  was  thirteen
years  old  ;  he  refused  the  suggestion.  He  was  super-
stitious, and  disliked  the  number  thirteen.  His  notion
that  thirteen  was  an  unlucky  number  accounted  for
his  resistance  ;  on  that  account  he  would  not  be
thirteen  years  old.

The  experimenter  may  unconsciously  increase  the
resistance  merely  by  the  tone  in  which  he  speaks.
Fontan  and  Segard  rightly  maintain,  for  example,


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  175


that  many  hypnoses  may  be  continued  or  put
an  end  to  by  the  tone  in  which  the  operator  speaks.
When  we  say  to  a  subject,  "  Try  to  open  your
eyes ;  they  are  fast  closed,  you  cannot  possibly
open  them,"  the  kind  of  emphasis  may  alter  the
effect.  If  the  emphasis  is  laid  upon  "  Try  to  open
your  eyes,"  the  last  part  of  the  suggestion  is  more
easily  overcome,  and  vice  versa.  Here  is  an  example.
I  say  to  a  subject,  "  Try  to  lift  your  arm  ;  you  cannot,"
he  remains  motionless  ;  he  is  to  a  certain  degree
influenced,  even  though  he  believes  afterwards  that  he
so  acted  to  please  me.  But  if  I  now  add,  in  as  im-
pressive a  manner  as  possible,  "  Try  all  you  can,  try
with  all  your  might  to  move  your  arm,"  the  subject  is
all  at  once  able  to  move.  It  is  just  these  states  which
most  clearly  show  the  gradual  transitions  from  the
lightest  stages  to  the  deepest.  I  raise  a  man's  arm  ;
the  arm  remains  raised  so  long  as  I  say  nothing.
Directly  I  tell  him  that  if  he  tries  to  drop  his  arm  he
will  not  succeed,  he  does  it  nevertheless,  though  at
first  with  some  stiffness.  This  shows  that  the  state
was  not  quite  a  normal  one.  In  this  case,  as  in  many
others,  the  subject  passively  allows  his  arm  to  remain
as  it  was  fixed,  he  makes  no  effort  of  will  either  for  or
against.  But  the  moment  I  induce  him  by  verbal
suggestion  to  make  an  effort  of  will,  he  does  so,  and
shows  that  he  can  exert  the  will  against  my  orders,
even  though  the  hesitating  movement  plainly  shows
that  he  was  influenced.  It  is  the  same  thing  with
continued  movements,  which  are  sometimes  made
passively  without  an  act  of  the  will,  and  sometimes
cannot  be  inhibited  by  the  strongest  effort  of  will,  as
I  have  explaned  above  (p.  69).

Many  persons  temporarily  show  substantial  varia-
tions in  susceptibility  to  suggestion. One  declares


i76


HYPNOTISM.


at  one  moment  that  his  name  is  Moll,  and  does  what
I  command  him  ;  directly  after  he  is  himself  again,
without  any  certain  or  apparent  cause.  He  says
afterwards  that  he  perceives  two  opposing  wills  in
himself,  and  that  sometimes  one  and  sometimes  the
other  conquers.

Hypnotic  subjects  give  us  another  proof  that  they
are  conscious  to  a  certain  degree,  when  they  tell  us
they  know  they  are  asleep,  or  in  an  altered  state
(Richet,  Pierre  Janet).  This  is  also  clearly  shown  in
ordinary  sleep.  We  are  occasionally  conscious  in
dreams  that  we  are  asleep  and  dreaming.  Almost  all
hypnotic  subjects  of  the  second  group  have  this  con-
sciousness of  being  asleep,  and  it  is  remarkable  that
when  they  are  asked  if  they  are  asleep  or  awake,  they
almost  always  give  the  right  answer.  When,  as
sometimes  happens,  the  awakening  is  incomplete  they
also  rightly  say  that  they  are  not  quite  awake.  The
continuance  of  susceptibility  to  suggestion  may  then
generally  be  established.  I  have  mentioned  that
subjects  occasionally  ask  to  be  awakened  when  they
are  uncomfortable  in  hypnosis,  or  when  an  unpleasant
suggestion  is  made  to  them.

I  again  lay  stress  on  the  fact  that  many  hypnotic
subjects  are  conscious  of  an  ability  to  resist.  I  say
to  X.,  "  You  cannot  lift  your  arm  !  "  "  Yes,  I  can,"  he
answers,  and  experiment  shows  that  he  is  right.  But
the  contrary  sometimes  happens  ;  the  subject  often
knows  exactly  the  minute  when  his  power  to  resist  is
at  an  end,  when  he  must  obey  and  cannot  help  him-
self. X.  announces  after  a  time  that  he  is  at  this
point :  "  Now  the  hypnosis  is  deep  enough,"  he  says.
I  say  to  a  person  thirty  years  old,  whom  I  have  often
hypnotized,  "  Now  you  are  a  little  child."  The  sub-
ject replies,  "  It  is  not  enough  yet,  you  must  wait  a


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


177


little."  After  a  time,  when  I  ask,  he  says  that  now  he
is  at  the  right  point  Many  people  have  this  feeling
of  deficient  will  and  increased  suggestibility  in  deep
hypnosis  ;  they  often  know  the  moment  when  a
suggestion  will  succeed  and  when  not.

The  consciousness  and  will  of  hypnotics  may
express  themselves  in  other  ways,  in  the  case  of  in-
determinate suggestions  {suggestions  indetemninees,  as
Beaunis  calls  them).  In  such  suggestions  no  definite
action  is  commanded,  but  the  subjects  are  left  to
choose  among  a  number.  Here  is  a  man  with  a
violent  bronchial  catarrh.  I  suggest  to  him  in
hypnosis  to  do  something  or  other  which  will  benefit
his  health.  He  at  once  fetches  himself  some  catechu.
I  tell  another  to  do  some  foolish  action  after  he
wakes.  He  wakes  and  blows  the  lamp  out.  From
this  it  is  to  be  concluded  that  the  subject  was  to  a
certain  degree  able  to  reflect.

Although  the  above  examples  show  that  there  is
no  complete  loss  of  will  in  hypnoses,  yet  in  all  of
them  the  will  was  set  in  action  by  some  external
impulse.  Let  us  consider  whether  spontaneity,  an
independent  activity  of  thought  and  will,  may  not
exist  in  hypnosis,  apart  from  external  impulse.  To
this  question  we  must  answer  "  yes,"  so  far  as  the  first
group  of  hypnoses  is  concerned.  Only  the  second
group  need  be  considered.  Baillif,  Obersteiner,  and
others  describe  independent  hallucinations,  arising
without  external  suggestion,  in  the  first  group.  But
the  question  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  we  are
not  always  able  to  exclude  external  stimuli,  which
also  induce  many  dreams  in  ordinary  sleep.  For
example,  without  any  suggestion  from  me,  a  hypno-
tized subject  jumps  up  and  says  he  has  seen  and
heard  a  mad  dog. The  cause  of  this  is  the  uninten-

I


178


HYPNOTISM.


tional  creaking  of  the  boots  of  one  of  the  people
present.  I  had  not  observed  the  creaking,  but  as
often  as  it  was  repeated  the  same  result  followed.
The  subject  misinterpreted  an  impression  of  the  sense
of  hearing,  which  aroused  a  certain  chain  of  thought
in  him.  I  have  often  observed  such  phenomena  in
impressionable  and  lively  persons.

But  I  have  found  spontaneous  hallucinations  and
actions  in  the  deepest  hypnosis,  when  no  suggestion
had  been  made,  and  which  I  was  unable  to  refer  to
any  stimulus  of  the  senses.  In  particular,  any  events
which  had  much  occupied  the  subject  during  the
waking  state  continued  to  affect  him  in  hypnosis.
One  of  them,  for  example,  related  anecdotes  which
he  had  heard  somewhere  else  a  day  or  two  before.
While  his  mind  was  full  of  them  no  experiments
could  be  made  with  him  ;  he  was  as  uncomfortable
as  a  diner-out,  who  only  feels  at  ease  when  he  has  got
rid  of  his  whole  stock  of  stories.  I  believe  that  in
this  and  other  such  cases  we  have  to  do  with  indepen-
dent mental  activity,  because  I  could  never  discover
any  external  stimulus.  Of  course  I  cannot  mathe-
matically prove  that  these  spontaneous  actions  did  not
result  from  some  external  impulse  ;  for  the  external
impulse  might  have  been  an  almost  imperceptible
sound,  and  even  the  slight  pressure  of  clothes  on  the
skin  may  act  as  a  stimulus  and  induce  apparently
independent  actions  in  the  subject.  I  do  not  believe
that  hypnotic  subjects  in  the  deep  stage  often  have
independent  currents  of  thought.  I  have  been  much
impressed  by  observing  the  contrary.  Durand  de
Gros  has  even  made  a  classification  of  somnambulists
into  those  who  act  with,  and  those  who  act  without,
spontaneity.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


179


I  have  hitherto  purposely  avoided  much  mention
of  the  transitional  forms.  But  I  shall  now  say  some-
thing about  them,  as  certain  transitional  forms  are
of  importance  in  psychology,  and  also  in  discussing
the  question  of  simulation,  particularly  as  they  are
extremely  common.  A  hypnotized  man  makes  all
the  movements  I  command  him.  I  say,  "  Eat  this
beefsteak,"  and  he  performs  all  the  necessary  move-
ments with  hand  and  mouth.  I  say,  "  Push  that  dog
away,"  and  he  makes  the  appropriate  movements  of
the  legs.

And  yet  we  have  only  here  to  do  with  sug-
gested movements,  and  the  subject  by  no  means
believes  in  the  reality  of  the  dog  or  beefsteak,  or
thinks  he  sees  them.  Consequently  this  case  belongs
to  the  first  group  of  hypnoses.  There  are  two  ways
of  judging  correctly  of  these  phenomena  :  firstly,
from  observation,  and  secondly,  from  the  later  recol-
lections of  the  subject.  As  regards  the  last,  the  sub-
ject says  to  me  directly  I  have  awakened  him,  "  I
knew  perfectly  well  there  was  no  dog  and  no  beef-
steak ;  I  did  not  see  them  ;  however,  I  could  not  help
making  the  movements  you  commanded,  though  I
knew  I  must  look  utterly  ridiculous."  This  is,  then,  a:
case  of  lessened  power  of  the  will  without  loss  of  con-
sciousness. This  will  become  clearer  if  we  watch  the
subject  during  the  hypnosis.  The  movements  are  not
so  quick  as  they  would  be  if  produced  by  a  hallucina-
tion ;  they  have  a  clearly  marked  character  of  con-
straint. There  is  nothing  in  the  expression  of  the
face  which  points  to  a  hallucination.  The  subject
often  laughs  at  the  foolish  movements  he  is  making,
and  makes  corresponding  remarks  ;  for  example,  he
says,  "  This  is  not  a  beefsteak,"  and  shakes  his  head.
All  this  plainly  proves  that  it  is  not  a  case  of  sense
delusion.


i8o


HYPNOTISM.


Again  in  other  cases  the  subject  is  quite  passive,
and  does  everything  the  experimenter  commands
without  resistance.  When  a  sense  delusion  is  sug-
gested to  him  he  says,  "  yes  "  ;  which  is  a  sign  that
he  is  too  passive  even  to  accept  the  suggestion.  For
instance,  when  he  is  told  that  a  tiger  is  in  the  room
his  behaviour  is  not  affected  ;  he  does  not  run  away,
and  is  not  frightened,  but  simply  answers  that  he  sees
the  tiger.  In  this  case  only  the  assent  was  suggested,
and  not  a  sense  delusion,  as  the  subject's  later  recol-
lection shows.  He  says  he  only  said  "  yes  "  because
it  was  easier,  but  that  he  did  not  see  a  tiger.

Although  this  case  is  clear,  in  others  there  are
important  difficulties.  These  may  arise  from  the
fact  that  the  movements  themselves  generate  sense
delusions.  This  is  a  consequence  of  the  known  re-
ciprocal relations  of  movements  and  ideas.  We  have
already  learned  that  ideas  can  call  up  certain  move-
ments in  waking  life  as  well  as  in  hypnosis.  Now  we
have  to  show  that  particular  movements  may,  on  the
contrary,  excite  particular  mental  processes  (Dugald
Stewart,  Gratiolet).  I  choose  first  an  example  from
ordinary  life  :  an  attitude  expressing  anger  is  assumed  ;
a  real  feeling  of  anger  very  often  follows,  especially
if  words  are  also  used  ;  it  is  known  that  people  can
talk  themselves  into  a  passion.  In  this  case  a  par-
ticular mental  state  is  induced  by  movements  of
particular  muscles,  and  especially  by  speaking.
Something  exactly  like  this  occurs  in  hypnosis.
The  suggestions  made  through  the  muscular  sense,
observed  by  Braid  and  Charcot,  are  founded  on  this
(suggestions  a"  attitude,  or  suggestion  par  attitude)  ;  if
a  subject's  arms  are  put  into  the  attitude  of  prayer,
the  face  soon  wears  an  expression  of  religious  devo-
tion.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


181


The  following  is  a  favourite  experiment  of  Charcot.
If  the  subject's  hand  is  raised  to  his  mouth  as  if  he
were  throwing  a  kiss,  he  smiles.  If  the  fist  is  closed
and  raised  in  a  threatening  attitude,  he  looks  angry.
Charcot  and  Richer  maintain  that  the  experiment
may  be  reversed.  If  the  muscles  used  in  laughter
are  stimulated  by  faradization,  so  that  a  laughing
expression  is  induced,  the  movement  of  throwing  a
kiss  with  the  hand  follows.  If  the  muscles  which
produce  an  angry  expression  are  stimulated,  the  arm
is  raised  as  in  anger.  But  I  believe  it  may  be  safely
said  that  suggestions  of  this  kind  are  affairs  of
hypnotic  training.

However,  movements  may  be  used  with  advantage
to  help  the  induction  of  sense  delusions,  because
movements  influence  the  ideas.

I  give  an  imaginary  glass  of  bitter  liqueur  to  a
subject.  He  says  that  there  is  no  glass  of  liqueur,
and  that  he  has  nothing  in  his  hand.  Without
noticing  this  objection,  I  raise  his  hand  to  his  mouth,
that  he  may  drink.  He  obeys  slowly  and  hesitatingly  ;
but  when  his  hand  reaches  his  mouth  he  makes
swallowing  movements,  and  the  expression  of  his  face
shows  that  he  has  a  disagreeable  taste  in  his  mouth.
When  I  ask  him  what  is  the  matter,  he  answers
that  he  has  an  unpleasant  taste,  as  if  he  had  just
drunk  something  bitter.  Nevertheless  he  had  been
quite  sure  at  first  that  no  liqueur  had  been  given  him  ;
the  suggestion  took  effect  during  his  compulsory  move-
ment ;  without  this  movement  the  result  would  not
have  been  attained.  In  another  case  I  make  the
subject  move  his  fingers  as  if  he  were  playing  the
piano,  and  suggest  at  the  same  time  that  he  is  play-
ing. He  does  not  believe  it,  but  continues  the  move-
ment. While  he  does  this  the  idea  of  piano- playing


182


HYPNOTISM.


really  arises  by  degrees  in  his  mind,  and  at  last  he
makes  the  movements  in  the  firm  belief  that  he  is
playing  the  piano.  I  have  often  observed  that  it  was
easier  to  induce  sense  delusions  by  accompanying
movements  than  by  verbal  suggestion  alone,  and  I
would  recommend  this  as  a  means  of  deepening  the
hypnosis  in  suitable  cases,  as  I  have  often  employed
it  successfully  myself.  It  is  often  impossible  to  define
the  exact  moment  when  the  sense  delusion  supervenes  ;
it  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  decide  whether  the
delusion  was  really  in  existence  before,  or  whether  it
was  called  up  by  the  compulsory  movements.  None
the  less  are  they  a  means  of  obtaining  the  end.

The  influence  of  speech  is  especially  useful  here.
If  a  subject  refuses  to  believe  that  he  is  in  a  certain
suggested  situation  he  should  be  talked  to  for  some
time  as  if  he  were.  Speech  controls  people  more
than  sense  perceptions  do.  This  is  a  case  in  point :
I  tell  a  subject  to  look  at  a  beautiful  tree;  he  declines
to  believe  in  its  existence,  and  when  I  ask  if  he  sees
it  he  persistently  answers  "  no."  But  I  make  him
nod  assentingly  several  times,  and  the  nods  gradually
induce  the  assent  which  he  finally  utters.  The  hallu-
cination is  at  the  same  time  accepted,  and  all  its  other
phenomena  are  induced.

Besides  this  an  existing  delusion  may  sometimes
be  corrected  by  the  subject's  consciousness,  or  rather
by  his  reasoning  powers,  as  I  have  stated  above
(p.  1 6 1 ).  Although  the  delusion  sometimes  dis-
appears more  quickly  by  this  means,  in  other  cases  it
may  persist,  in  spite  of  the  correction  made  by  the
reason.  If  the  correction  is  complete,  the  delusion
will  have  no  results  ;  it  will  not  influence  the  actions
following.  And  yet  the  delusion  will  continue  in  full
force. I  ask  a  man  before  I  hypnotize  him,  to  tell


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  1S3


me  of  something  which  in  his  opinion  would  never  be
found  in  my  room.  He  says  he  would  never  believe
there  was  an  owl  in  my  room.  In  hypnosis  I  make
him  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  that  there  will  be
an  owl  in  my  room.  He  wakes  and  says  he  sees  the
owl  plainly  ;  it  is  chained  by  the  foot,  and  he  de-
scribes it  exactly.  Although  he  knows  and  says  that
the  owl  is  only  a  hallucination,  it  is  so  real  to  him
that  he  hesitates  to  put  his  finger  on  the  spot  where
he  imagines  it  to  be.

It  is  not  always  easy  to  recognize  the  mental  state
of  a  hypnotic  subject,  particularly  in  suggested  sense
delusions  ;  for  it  is  by  no  means  necessary  that  a
sense  delusion  should  dominate  the  whole  conscious-
ness. If  in  many  cases  all  thought  and  action  is
dependent  on  the  delusion,  in  other  cases  the  effects
are  less  complete.  I  even  believe  that  most  subjects
while  the  delusion  lasts  retain  a  dim  consciousness
that  they  are  in  a  fictitious  situation.  For  example,
I  suggest  to  a  subject  that  he  is  in  a  battle  and  must
fight.  An  imaginary  struggle  begins  at  once  and  he
hits  at  the  air.  When  I  suggest  that  a  cloth  on  the
table  is  an  enemy  he  strikes  at  this.  I  suggest  that
one  of  the  persons  present  is  an  enemy,  but  in  con-
tinuing the  fight  the  hypnotic  takes  care  not  to  strike
this  person.  Naturally  this  looks  like  simulation,
and  I  was  at  first  inclined  to  think  so  myself.  How-
ever, a  repetition  of  such  experiments  forced  me  to
conclude  that  these  were  real  typical  hypnoses,  in
which,  in  spite  of  the  sense  delusions,  there  was  a
dim  dream-consciousness  existing  which  influenced
the  actions  of  the  subject.  This  dim  consciousness  of
his  real  surroundings  prevented  the  subject  from
striking  a  human  being,  but  left  him  free  to  hit  a
cloth. Many  may,  perhaps,  regard  this  behaviour  of


HYPNOTISM.


the  hypnotic  as  pure  automatism.  As  we  when
walking  in  the  street  and  reading  a  newspaper  auto-
matically avoid  knocking  against  passers-by,  so  the
hypnotic  avoids  hitting  another  person,  although  he
is  only  dimly,  or  not  at  all,  aware  of  his  existence.

It  is  the  same  thing  with  negative  hallucinations.
As  in  the  positive  delusions  a  dim  perception  exists
of  their  being  only  delusions,  so  the  subject  in  nega-
tive hallucinations  really  recognizes  the  object  which
has  been  made  invisible  to  him  through  suggestion  ;
even  though  he  is  unconscious  of  the  recognition.
Binet  and  Fere  have  said  about  this  :  "  The  object
must  be  recognized,  in  order  not  to  be  perceived."
These  authors  made  a  series  of  experiments  in  sup-
port of  their  assertion,  which  I  have  been  able  to
repeat  with  success,  as  an  example  of  a  negative
hallucination.  If  ten  sheets  of  white  paper  are  taken
and  one  of  them  marked,  the  subject  can  be  made  to
believe  that  he  sees  only  nine  sheets,  even  when  the
sheet,  whose  invisibility  was  suggested,  is  among
them.  If  he  is  asked  to  give  up  the  nine  sheets,  he
picks  out  the  nine  unmarked  ones,  and  leaves  the
other,  guided  by  the  mark.  Consequently,  he  is  able
to  distinguish  it  from  the  others,  although  he  is
unconscious  of  making  the  distinction.

A  series  of  experiments  made  by  Cory  are  even
better.  I  was  able  partly  to  repeat  them,  and  ob-
tained the  same  results.  I  took  a  sheet  of  paper,  and
drew  a  rather  irregular  line  on  it.  I  then  suggested
to  the  subject  (X.)  that  the  paper  was  blank.  X.
agreed  that  he  saw  nothing.  I  then  drew  fifteen
straight  lines  on  the  paper  and  asked  X.  what  he  saw.
He  said,  "  Fifteen  lines."  I  recommenced  the  experi-
ment, but  made  the  first  line  straight,  and  then  sug-
gested its  invisibility  ;  upon  which  I  added  twenty


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.


185


more  lines  exactly  like  it  and  made  X.  count  them.
"There  are  twenty-one,"  he  said.  Therefore  the  line
suggested  as  absent  was  only  invisible  to  X.  when  he
could  distinguish  it  from  the  others.  The  following
experiment  resembles  this  :  I  took  a  match  and
marked  its  end  with  a  spot  of  ink.  I  then  suggested
that  the  match  was  invisible.  I  took  twenty-nine
other  matches  and  put  the  whole  thirty  on  the  table
in  such  a  manner  that  X.  could  see  the  ink  spot.  To
my  question  X.  replied  that  there  were  only  twenty-
nine  matches  on  the  table.  I  then,  while  X.'s  eyes
were  turned  away,  moved  the  marked  match  so  that
X.  could  not  see  the  spot.  He  looked  at  the  matches
and  said  there  were  thirty  of  them.  Thus  the  marked
match  was  only  invisible  so  long  as  X.  could  dis-
tinguish it  from  the  others.

From  these  and  other  such  experiments  it  may  be
concluded  that  the  subject  recognizes  the  object  of  a
negative  hallucination,  and  that  it  produces  a  central
impression,  even  though  there  is  no  perception  of  it.
The  automatic  writing,  of  which  I  shall  speak  further
on,  demonstrates  this  (Pierre  Janet).  Numerous  ex-
periments in  this  direction,  which  I  have  made  in
company  with  Sellin  and  Max  Dessoir,  also  confirm
it.  I  shall  not  give  them  in  detail,  as  this  would  take
me  too  long.  The  results  of  the  negative  hallucina-
tion depend  upon  the  strength  of  this  central  impres-
sion. If  the  central  impression  is  very  slight,  then
the  result  will  be  the  same  as  if  the  object  causing  it
did  not  exist.  But  if  a  certain  dim  consciousness  of
the  presence  of  the  object  exists  (and  this  is  usually
the  case),  then  it  may  influence  the  actions  of  the
subject  in  spite  of  suggestion  to  the  contrary.  I
suggest  to  a  subject  that  a  table,  which  was  between
him  and  the  door,  is  no  longer  there  ;  the  subject


HYPNOTISM.


goes  to  the  door,  but  carefully  avoids  hitting  against
the  table.  I  suggest  that  the  electrode,  which  is
armed  with  the  very  painful  faradic  brush,  is  invisible.
After  closing  the  current  I  touch  the  subject  with  the
brush  and  he  shows  great  pain.  When  I  ask  what
has  hurt  him,  he  says  he  does  not  know,  for  my  hand
is  empty  ;  but  at  the  same  time  he  takes  care  not  to
touch  the  place  where  the  brush  is  lying,  or  does  it
hesitatingly,  and  with  evident  signs  of  fear.  I  tell
another  that  I  am  going  out  of  the  room  ;  he  appar-
ently neither  sees  nor  hears  me.  Yet  every  sugges-
tion that  I  now  make  to  him  is  executed.  I  order
him  to  take  the  cushion  from  the  sofa  and  throw  it
on  the  floor.  The  order  is  obeyed  though  after  some
hesitation.  To  another,  who  also  believes  by  sugges-
tion that  I  am  out  of  the  room,  I  suggest  sense
delusions — the  presence  of  a  dog,  &c.  All  the  sugges-
tions succeed,  evidently  because  the  subject  hears
what  I  say,  though  he  believes  me  absent.  I  tell
another,  "  Now  you  are  deaf."  Upon  which  he  ceases
to  do  what  I  tell  him.  But  after  I  have  several  times
repeated,  "  Now  you  can  hear  again,"  he  obeys  every
command.  We  see  in  these  cases,  which  I  could
multiply,  that  the  organs  of  sense  act  normally,  that
a  certain  effect  is  produced,  but  that  the  impressions
are  not  received  into  clear  consciousness.  I  naturally
do  not  maintain  that  this  is  the  case  in  all  positive  or
negative  hallucinations  ;  on  the  contrary,  in  some  the
delusion  is  complete.  This  depends  on  character,
and  to  a  great  extent  on  the  manner  in  which  the
suggestion  is  made.  I  wished  merely  to  describe
the  more  incomplete  and  by  far  most  common  cases,
because  they  are  often  ascribed  to  simulation,  and  till
now  have  never  been  seriously  considered.


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  187


All  the  phenomena  of  which  I  have  spoken  hitherto
are  very  variable.  I  have  purposely  only  mentioned
the  most  common  and  most  important,  lest  my  work
should  grow  too  long.  But  hypnotic  education  or
training  needs  a  particular  discussion.  I  would  ask
every  one  who  watches  hypnotic  experiments  to  give
it  particular  attention.  All  the  phenomena  of  hyp-
nosis may  be  interpreted  falsely  by  a  mere  spectator  if
sufficient  attention  is  not  paid  to  this  point.  When
hypnotic  experiments  are  shown  to  outsiders,  subjects
are  as  a  rule  selected  who  have  gone  through  a  hyp-
notic training  in  some  particular  direction,  and  as  the
directions  are  various,  the  results  also  are  various.
The  experimenter  A.  keeps  in  view  a  particular
symptom,  a,  and  reinforces  it  at  each  experiment  ;
in  the  same  way  experimenter  B.  cultivates  symptom
b.  In  the  first  case  a  is  fully  developed  and  b  receives
little  attention  ;  and  in  the  second  case  the  reverse
happens.  The  Breslau  investigators,  for  example,
developed  the  imitative  movements,  while  others  did
the  same  with  the  effects  of  the  movements  on  the
feelings  [suggestions  d*  attitude).

He  who  only  regards  the  final  results  and  pays  no
attention  to  their  gradual  evolution  will  be  inclined
to  believe  that  the  two  parties  of  investigators  are
engaged  with  different  things  ;  though  it  is  in  reality
only  difference  in  training  which  gives  a  different
appearance  to  identical  states.  Each  experimenter
now  only  demonstrates  such  symptoms  as  he  has
cultivated  by  training,  especially  as  this  training
commonly  produces  most  interesting  phenomena ;
the  heightening  of  certain  faculties  in  particular.
The  outsider  is  unaware  that  this  is  a  mere  result  of
hypnotic  training,  and  is  easily  misled.  Children  who
repeat  to  strangers  the  piece  of  poetry  they  know


iS8


HYPNOTISM.


best,  do  exactly  the  same  thing.  Experimenters  pro-
duce certain  objective  symptoms  by  means  of  train-
ing, and  any  one  seeing  them  for  the  first  time  is  apt
to  make  mistakes.  But  every  experimenter  produces
different  objective  symptoms — one,  for  example,  a
lasting  catalepsy,  another  a  perfect  echolalie.  These
things  strike  the  stranger,  who  cannot  estimate  the
effect  of  training.  Thus  it  happens  that  different  ex-
perimenters discover  different  objective  symptoms.
The  question  of  training  is  of  immense  importance.
Many  have  suspected  simulation  because  of  the
apparent  variety  of  hypnotic  states.  This  variety  is
really  only  the  result  of  different  training,  if  we  put
aside  differences  of  character.  The  experimenter
influences  the  development  of  the  hypnosis  (Delbceuf,
Jendrassik).  Unimportant  phenomena  such  as
echolalie  are  developed  as  much  as  possible  and  are
at  last  wrongly  considered  to  be  essential  hypnotic
phenomena.

Training  is  the  great  source  of  error  for  the
experimenter  in  hypnotism,  because  the  subject  is
inclined  to  divine  and  obey  his  intentions,  and  thus
unconsciously  misleads  him.  Unknown  to  himself,
the  tone  of  his  voice  may  induce  the  subject  to
present  the  phenomena  which  he  expects.  The
subject  is  also  greatly  influenced  by  his  surround-
ings, and  by  watching  other  subjects  (Bertrand).
Imitation  is  also  of  great  importance  here.  I  hypno-
tize X.,  and  suggest  that  he  cannot  speak,  at  the  same
time  inadvertently  touching  his  left  shoulder  with  my
right  hand.  Y.,  in  hypnosis,  sees  this,  and  every  time
I  touch  his  left  shoulder  with  my  right  hand  he,  too,
is  unable  to  speak.  Y.  believes  that  this  is  the  signal
for  loss  of  speech,  and  behaves  accordingly.  Training
enables  a  hypnotic  subject  to  divine  all  the  experi-


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  189


menter's  wishes.  The  latter  need  not  speak  ;  the  least
movement  betrays  his  wish.  A  long  training  is  not
necessary  ;  Delboeuf  artificially  induced  the  stages  of
Charcot  in  one  of  his  own  subjects  in  a  few  hours.
My  object  in  making  these  remarks  is  to  warn  against
attributing  great  importance  to  demonstrations,  par-
ticularly when  these  offer  certain  symptoms  apparently
objective  and  impossible  to  imitate.  It  should  always
be  kept  in  mind  that  many  such  symptoms  can  be
produced  by  training  ;  and  can,  perhaps,  be  imitated
by  practice  even  without  hypnosis.

Hitherto  I  have  used  the  word  "training"  only  for
the  artificial  cultivation  of  certain  symptoms  ;  but  it
also  means  the  production  of  such  particular  modifi-
cations of  hypnosis,  as  are  seen  after  frequent  repeti-
tion of  the  state.

As  has  been  said  already,  it  is  sometimes  necessary
to  make  several  attempts  before  the  hypnosis  appears.
Husson,  in  i83i,said  this  with  regard  to  the  magnetic
sleep.  It  may  be  very  long  before  hypnosis  is  pro-
duced. Sometimes  deep  hypnosis  only  ensues  after
a  process  of  training  by  several  sittings.  In  one  case
which  I  have  seen  hypnosis  with  sense  delusions  only
resulted  after  eighty  attempts,  though  lighter  states
had  been  earlier  attained.  Training  not  only  makes
the  hypnosis  deeper,  but  makes  it  appear  more  quickly.
But,  undoubtedly,  a  deep  hypnosis  may  occasionally
be  induced  at  a  first  attempt;  and  Forel  is  right  when
he  warns  against  exaggeration  on  this  point.  One  of
my  relations  fell  into  so  deep  a  hypnosis  in  a  minute
on  a  first  trial,  that  I  could  at  once  induce  post-
hypnotic negative  hallucinations.  And  this  person  is
a  perfect  specimen  of  a  healthy  young  man.

But  in  most  cases  it  is  necessary,  as  I  have  said,  to
give  the  subject  a  hypnotic  training,  in  order  to  make


190


HYPNOTISM.


the  state  as  deep  as  possible.  For  this  I  wish  to
recommend  a  particular  method,  as  otherwise  the
deepening  is  not  always  attained.  Let  the  first  sug-
gestions be  simple,  so  as  not  to  shock  the  subject's,
sense  of  probability.  The  first  suggestions  should  be
possible,  and  progress  should  be  gradual.  More  will
be  attained  in  this  way  than  by  suggesting  impossible
situations  at  first  which  the  subject  will  not  believe  in.
And  if  a  suggestion  is  often  declined,  there  is  apt  to
arise  in  the  subject  the  auto-suggestion  that  he  is  re-
fractory to  this  suggestion,  or  perhaps  to  any  sugges-
tion. This  is  often  lastingly  prejudicial,  and  may
lessen  susceptibility  to  suggestion  in  all  later  hyp-
noses.  I  therefore  strongly  recommend  a  slow  and
gradually  increasing  method  for  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion. Perhaps  Binswanger's  experiments  in  post-
hypnotic suggestion  failed  because  he  overlooked  this
point.  A  man  is  in  the  hypnotic  state.  I  suggest
that  when  he  wakes  he  shall  call  me  an  insulting
name  ;  he  does  not  do  it,  but  is  perfectly  ready  to
carry  out  another  post  -  hypnotic  suggestion ;  for
instance,  to  tell  me  that  he  is  quite  well.  Here  there
is  only  a  slight  degree  of  suggestibility  at  first,  but  it
is  quite  possible  by  frequent  repetition  and  slow
increase  to  get  much  more  complicated  suggestions,
carried  out.

This  concludes  the  symptoms  of  hypnosis.  I  believe
I  have  given  a  sufficient  sketch  of  its  essential  phe-
nomena in  the  foregoing  pages.  In  the  following
chapters  I  shall  refer  again  to  the  importance  of  some
of  them.  We  have  seen  that  the  symptoms  are  of
manifold  kinds,  and  I  may  add  that  they  are  hardly
ever  identical  in  two  different  persons.  In  spite  of
conformity  to  law  one  human  body  is  never  exactly


THE  SYMPTOMS  OF  HYPNOSIS.  191

like  another,  the  mental  state  of  one  man  is  never
exactly  like  another's.  It  is  the  same  in  hypnosis  :
one  man  displays  this  symptom  with  greater  clearness,
another  that.  We  shall  never  be  able  to  find  a  sub-
ject in  whom  all  the  symptoms  are  united,  just  as
we  cannot  find  a  patient  who  has  all  the  symptoms
of  an  illness  as  they  are  theoretically  described.


CHAPTER  IV.


COGNATE  STATES.

We  always  try  to  advance  the  study  of  a  state  which
has  hitherto  been  little  known  and  examined,  by  com-
paring it  with  other  states,  with  whose  symptoms  we
are  better  acquainted.  We  will  therefore  try  to  find
points  of  correspondence  with  hypnosis.

The  cognate  states  might  be  considered  later,  after
we  had  discussed  hypnotism  in  general,  and  its  theory
in  particular.  But  as  I  shall  then  have  to  return  to
certain  points  which  must  be  discussed  in  speaking  of
the  cognate  states,  I  prefer  to  sketch  these  first.  The
name  selected  by  Braid  shows  that  there  is  a  resem-
blance between  sleep  [hypnos)  and  hypnotism  ;  and
the  Nancy  investigators,  Liebeault,Bernheim,Biullard,
as  well  as  Forel,  of  Zurich,  consider  hypnosis  an
ordinary  sleep  ;  they  think  that  a  person  who  falls
asleep  spontaneously  is  in  rapport  with  himself,  while
a  hypnotized  subject  is  in  rapport  with  the  person  who
hypnotized  him  ;  in  their  view  this  is  the  chief
difference  between  sleep  and  hypnosis.

I  believe,  however,  that  we  cannot  so  easily  agree
to  an  identification  of  the  states.  We  must  begin  by
distinguishing  the  light  and  deep  hypnoses.  We  see
that  in  the  light  hypnosis  there  is  merely  an  inhibition  ^
of  the  will,  which  affects  the  movements  ;  the  memory
is  not  at  all  affected. Now  we  always  presuppose  a


COGNATE  STATES.


193


great  decrease  of  self-consciousness  in  sleep.  But  it
is  just  this  self-consciousness  which  remains  intact  in
light  hypnosis  ;  and  in  this  state  the  subject  is  per-
fectly aware  of  all  that  goes  on,  and,  as  a  rule,  forgets
nothing  on  waking.  Consequently  I  do  not  think  we
can  make  a  close  comparison  between  sleep  and
hypnosis ;  nor  do  I  think  it  possible  to  make  a
fruitful  comparison  between  these  light  hypnoses
and  the  states  of  drowsiness  and  fatigue  which  pre-
cede sleep.  In  any  case  we  have  seen  that  a  feeling
of  fatigue  is  not  uncommon  in  these  hypnotic  states.
Besides  which  we  have  also  seen  that  the  loss  of
voluntary  muscular  movement  is  one  of  their  chief
phenomena.  There  is  hardly  a  hint  of  this  in  the
drowsy  state  ;  there  is  only  a  general  fatigue  of  the
muscles  and  heaviness  in  the  limbs.  In  spite  of  this
the  sleepy  person  can  move  as  he  pleases  ;  at  the  most
he  only  feels  dull,  but  the  lessened  power  of  the  will
shown  in  hypnosis  is  entirely  wanting.

Further,  these  light  hypnotic  states  are  distinguished
from  the  early  stages  of  sleep  by  the  decreased
activity  of  consciousness  in  these  latter.  The  current  of
the  ideas,  of  images  of  memory,  &c,  is  less  under  the
control  of  the  will,  while  in  the  light  hypnotic  states
only  the  voluntary  movements  suffer  change.  In  the
early  stages  of  sleep  sense  impressions  do  not  develop
into  conscious  ideas  in  the  usual  way  ;  much  that
generally  excites  our  interest  and  attention  is  over-
looked, while  there  is  often  reverie  independent  of
the  will.  But  almost  all  this  is  entirely  absent  in
the  light  hypnotic  states.

On  this  account  I  here  protest  against  a  termi-
nology, which  has  been  to  a  great  extent  adopted,
and  which  many  doctors  have  helped  to  propagate,
but  which  is  none  the  less  erroneous. For  example^

14


194


HYPNOTISM.


it  is  often  said  that  hypnotized  persons  are  "  asleep,"
and  the  two  states  have  been  partly  identified.  I
think  this  a  misuse  of  words,  since,  as  has  been
explained,  there  are  a  whole  series  of  hypnotic  states
in  which  not  one  symptom  of  sleep  appears,  and  mis-
taken conclusions  are  often  drawn  from  the  mistaken
terminology,  with  resulting  confusion.

The  case  in  deep  hypnosis  is  essentially  different.
It  is  characterized  by  numerous  sense  delusions,
which,  however,  are  just  the  same  thing  as  our
nightly  dreams.  In  order  to  carry  out  the  com-
parison, it  will  perhaps  be  well  to  consider  the  mode
of  origin  of  dreams  in  ordinary  sleep.  Dreams  are
divided  into  two  classes,  according  to  the  manner  of
their  origin  (Spitta)  :  (i)  dreams  induced  by  nerve
stimulation,  and  (2)  dreams  induced  by  association
of  ideas.  The  first — by  far  the  most  numerous — are
induced  by  a  peripheral  stimulus  of  the  nerves,  affect-
ing the  brain.  Here  the  nerve  stimulus  is  certainly
felt;  a  memory  picture  arises,  and  a  perception
results.  This  picture  does  not,  however,  correspond
to  the  actual  stimulus,  which  could  only  be  accurately
estimated  by  full  waking  attention.

It  is  difficult  to  say  what  memory  picture  will  be
aroused  and  what  dream  will  result,  as  it  depends
upon  several  factors  which  as  yet  escape  our  observa-
tion. Schemer's  numerous  attempts  to  explain  this
are  not  very  convincing.  The  memory  picture
aroused  by  a  stimulus  in  the  manner  sketched  above
attaches  itself  in  a  number  of  cases  to  a  previously
existing  dream.  "  When  an  orator  dreams  he  is
making  a  speech,  he  takes  every  noise  for  the  ap-
plause of  his  imaginary  hearers  "  (Walter  Scott).

Dreams  can  be  artificially  called  up  by  nerve
stimulation. If  a  sleeping  man  is  sprinkled  with


COGNATE  STATES.


195


water  he  will  dream  of  a  shower  of  rain  (Leixner).
Maury  has  made  a  number  of  experiments  on  him-
self during  sleep.  When  Eau  de  Cologne  was  held
to  his  nose  he  dreamed  that  he  was  in  Farina's  shop
at  Cairo.  Preyer,  Prevost,  Hervey,  and  many  others
have  published  such  experiments.

The  second  kind  of  dreams  are  dreams  from
association  of  ideas  ;  they  are  supposed  to  follow
on  a  primary  central  act.  The  memory  picture  is
supposed  to  be  caused  by  some  primary  central
activity,  and  not  by  a  peripheral  stimulus.  Between
these  two  classes  of  dreams  there  is  another  which  I
may  call  suggested  dreams.  In  these  no  stimulus  is
applied  to  the  nerves  of  the  subject  which  he  may
work  out  according  to  his  fancy  ;  but  a  dream  is
suggested  to  him  verbally  (Reil,  Maury,  Max  Simon).
An  acquaintance  of  mine  told  his  daughter  that  she
saw  rooks,  upon  which  she  dreamed  of  them  and
related  her  dream  on  waking.  On  other  occasions
the  attempt  failed.

It  would  seem  that  certain  stages  of  sleep  are  fitter
for  this  than  others.  Delbceuf  believes  that  the
transitional  stage  between  sleeping  and  waking  is  the^
best.  He  even  supposes  that  many  nervous  and
mental  disorders  originate  from  natural  suggestion
made  at  this  time,  and  that  they  develop  themselves
like  post-hypnotic  suggestions.  As  regards  the  mode
of  origin,  these  suggested  dreams  are  identical  with
the  suggested  sense  delusions  of  hypnosis.

But  the  mode  of  origin  of  other  dreams  in  sleep
does  not  differ  essentially  from  their  mode  of  origin
in  hypnosis.  This  is  particularly  clear  when  we
compare  the  hallucinations  induced  by  nerve  stimu-
lation mentioned  on  p.  178  with  them  ;  these  hal-
lucinations  are  identical  with  dreams  induced  by


196


HYPNOTISM,


nerve  stimulation.  Here  is  an  example.  I  hypnotize
a  person,  and  blow  with  the  bellows  close  to  him,
without  speaking.  The  blowing  causes  a  central
excitation,  and  the  subject  believes  he  hears  a  steam
engine.  He  dreams  he  sees  a  train  ;  he  believes  he
is  at  the  railway  station  at  Schoneberg,  &c.  This
is  exactly  the  same  thing  as  a  dream  produced  by
nerve  stimulation,  in  which  the  falling  of  a  chair
makes  the  dreamer  think  he  hears  a  gun  fired,  and  is
in  a  battle.  Besides,  in  hypnosis  as  well  as  in  sleep
such  stimuli  are  enormously  over-estimated  by  the
consciousness  ;  a  slight  noise  is  taken  for  the  sound
of  a  gun,  and  a  touch  on  the  hand  for  the  bite  of  a
dog.  I  have  made  many  such  suggestions  in  hyp-
nosis. I  drum  upon  the  table,  without  speaking  ;
the  subject  hears,  and  dreams  of  military  music,  and
that  he  is  in  the  street,  and  sees  soldiers,  &c.  What
dream  will  be  induced  by  the  peripheral  stimulus,  and
what  memory  picture  will  be  aroused,  either  in  sleep
or  in  hypnosis,  depends  upon  the  character  of  the
subject.  One  thing  is  clear  from  the  comparisons
I  have  made  :  it  is  a  mistake  to  think,  as  many  do,
that  no  intercourse  with  the  outside  world  takes  place
in  sleep.  The  opinion  that  by  far  the  greater  number
of  dreams  are  induced  by  sense  stimuli  gains  more
and  more  adherents  (Wundt).  This  receptivity  to
stimuli  which  reach  the  brain,  unregulated  by  the
consciousness,  and  mistakenly  interpreted,  is  a  pheno-
menon of  both  sleep  and  hypnosis.

It  is  evident  from  what  has  been  said  that  the
method  employed  to  make  external  suggestion  in
hypnosis  often  suffices  to  induce  dreams  in  sleep.
At  the  most  there  is  only  a  quantitative  difference,
since  most  sense  delusions  are  directly  suggested  in
hypnosis,  while  in  sleep  dreams  are  caused  by  some


COGNATE  STATES.


197


peripheral  stimulus,  which  undergoes  a  special  elabo-
ration in  the  brain  of  the  sleeper.

The  purport  of  dreams,  as  well  as  the  way  they
originate,  is  alike  in  sleep  and  hypnosis.  It  is
naturally  impossible  to  go  into  details.  But  as  in
sleep  we  believe  ourselves  in  another  situation,  and
encounter  all  sorts  of  sense  delusions,  so  also  in
hypnosis.  And  as  a  subject  in  hypnosis  can  be
replaced  in  earlier  periods  of  his  life,  so  in  dreams
also.  Many  habitually  dream  that  they  are  again
undergoing  the  final  examination  at  college  many
years  after.  Complete  changes  of  personality  also
take  place  in  dreams.  An  officer  who  greatly  ad-
mired Hannibal,  told  me  that  he  had  dreamed  he
was  Hannibal,  and  had  fought  an  imaginary  battle
in  that  character.  Another  man  was  even  less
modest ;  he  dreamed  that  he  was  God,  and  was
governing  the  world.

We  cannot  decide  whether  there  is  more  dreaming
in  hypnosis  than  in  sleep,  because  we  can  never  know
how  many  dreams  happen  in  sleep.  While  some  say
that  dreams  only  occur  during  a  short  period  of  sleep,
others,  like  Kant,  Forel,  Exner,  and  Simonin  go
so  far  as  to  deny  that  there  is  any  sleep  without
dreaming ;  they  say  that  dreaming  is  continuous,
but  that  most  dreams  are  forgotten.

As  we  find  that  the  origin  and  purport  of  dreams
are  the  same  in  sleep  and  hypnosis,  it  follows  that  in
all  probability  the  dreams  of  hypnosis  are  no  more
injurious  to  health  than  the  dreams  of  sleep.

In  spite  of  all  this,  we  can  find  a  difference  between
the  phenomena  of  deep  hypnosis  and  of  sleep  in
several  points — (1)  in  the  apparently  logical  con-
nection between  the  suggested  idea  and  the  hypnotic
subject's  own  thoughts  ;  (2)  in  the  movements  of  the


198


HYPNOTISM.


subject,  and  particularly  in  his  speech,  since  there
may  be  a  conversation  between  experimenter  and
subject  (Wernich).

With  regard  to  the  first  point,  we  have  seen  (p.  161)
that  a  series  of  ideas  sometimes  link  themselves
logically  to  another  particular  idea.  Consequently
the  difference  from  sleep  is  only  apparent.  As  long
as  the  suggested  idea  prevails  in  hypnosis,  other
ideas  will  often  link  themselves  logically  to  it.  This
linking  is,  however,  on  the  whole,  merely  mecha-
nical, the  result  of  habitual  association  of  ideas.
This  logical  connection  can  be  broken  at  any
moment  with  the  greatest  ease  by  suggestion,  as
I  have  shown  ;  in  the  same  way  the  whole  current
of  ideas  may  change  at  any  moment.  It  at  once
appears  from  this  that  the  consciousness  is  unable
to  unite  the  ideas  actively,  as  the  smallest  external
influence  suffices  to  tear  them  asunder  at  once.  The
logical  connection  mentioned  above  lasts  only  as  long
as  the  experimenter  permits.  Those  cases  in  which
the  dream -consciousness  carries  on  some  planned
mental  work  show  that  there  may  be  a  logical  con-
nection with  the  dominant  idea  even  in  dreams.

I  will  not  go  into  details  of  examples.  It  is  known
that  Voltaire  wrote  poetry  in  sleep, that  mathematicians
sometimes  solve  problems  when  asleep,  and  that  the
well-known  physiologist,  Burdach,  worked  out  many
scientific  ideas  in  sleep.  Maury  has  also  pointed
out  that  apparently  disconnected  dream-ideas  are  yet
related  to  each  other  by  certain  associations.

I  mentioned  the  movements  in  hypnosis  as  a
further  apparent  contrast  between  this  state  and
sleep.  But  this  assuredly  forms  no  qualitative  dis-
tinction, since  it  is  known  that  people  move  in  sleep
(Hans  Virchow). The  activity  of  the  muscles  in


COGNATE  STATES.


199


sleep  is  often  an  automatic  continuation  of  move-
ments begun  awake.  This  happens  with  people  who
fall  asleep  in  making  one  particular  movement  ;
they  continue  the  movement  in  sleep.  Coachmen
will  go  on  driving,  and  riders  will  hold  the  bridle
without  falling  off :  here  the  movement  begun  has
made  an  unconscious  impression  strong  enough  to
make  the  muscular  movement  go  on.  Birds  also  go
to  sleep  standing.

In  all  these  cases  the  muscular  action  is  very  like
the  contractures  and  automatic  movements  described
on  p.  69.  Besides  this,  certain  external  stimuli  may
cause  movements  during  sleep.  It  seems  probable
to  me  that  they  do  not  happen  without  conscious-
ness. If  part  of  a  sleeper's  body  is  uncovered,  he
will  draw  the  cover  over  it  ;  if  he  is  tickled,  he  will
rub  the  place.  Even  if  these  are  regarded  as  physical
reflexes  without  any  accompanying  mental  action,
which  is  not  proved,  the  case  is  essentially  different
with  the  movements  which  children  make  in  sleep,
at  command.  If  a  child  is  told  to  turn  over,
he  will  do  it  without  waking  (Ewald).  This  is
an  act  which,  as  Ewald  remarks,  may  fairly  be
compared  with  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis,  in  which
movements  the  same  in  kind,  if  greater  in  extent,
are  made  at  command.  It  shows  how  movements
may  be  caused  in  sleep  by  external  mental  stimuli.
These  movements  become  plainer  when  they  are  not
called  up  directly,  but  are  purely  the  consequence  of
a  dream.  Dreams  often  cause  movements.  Many
persons,  particularly  children,  laugh  in  pleasant
dreams.  The  same  sort  of  thing  has  often  been
observed.  A  lady  I  know  dreamed  that  she  was
blowing  out  a  lamp ;  she  made  the  corresponding
movements  with  her  mouth. She  jwas  awakened,


20O


HYPNOTISM.


and  related  the  dream  which  had  no  doubt  caused
the  movements  of  the  mouth.  Every  one  knows
that  children  in  especial  often  scream  when  they
are  dreaming.

The  persons  we  call  somnambulists  (sleep-walkers,
night-walkers)  show  these  movements,  which  are
characteristic.  The  resemblance  between  hypnotism
and  somnambulism  is  so  great  that  the  name  som-
nambulism is  used  for  both  (Richet).  Hypnotism
is  called  artificial  somnambulism,  and  the  other
natural  somnambulism,  or,  better,  spontaneous  som-
nambulism, since  artificial  somnambulism  is  really
as  natural  as  the  other,  as  Poincelot  insists.  All
sorts  of  movements  are  made  in  spontaneous  som-
nambulism. Three  stages  are  generally  distin-
guished— (i)  that  in  which  the  sleeper  speaks  ;  (2)
that  in  which  he  makes  all  sorts  of  movements  but
does  not  leave  his  bed  ;  (3)  that  in  which  he  gets
up,  walks  about,  and  performs  the  most  complicated
actions.  In  my  experience  the  first  two  stages  are
found  in  persons  of  sanguine  temperament  who  are
decidedly  not  in  a  pathological  condition.  It  is  not  yet
finally  decided  whether  the  third  state  appears  under
pathological  conditions  only.  From  my  own  expe-
rience I  am  inclined  to  think  that  it  is  occasionally
observed  when  there  is  no  constitutional  weakness,
especially  in  children.  If  we  want  to  show  these
states,  we  can  do  it  with  the  healthiest  subjects.  As
regards  these  movements  in  sleep,  my  own  experi-
ence is  that  the  persons  who  are  most  restless  in
natural  sleep,  who  talk,  or  throw  themselves  about,
are  the  most  inclined  to  lively  movement  in  hypnosis.
In  any  case  the  movements  are  also  displayed  in
sleep.  I  think  we  ought  to  call  the  last  states  sleep,
especially  the  two first  stages  of  somnambulism.


COGNATE  STATES.


20I


Consequently  the  movements  of  subjects  in  hypnosis
do  not  offer  a  fundamental  contrast  to  sleep,  espe-
cially when  they  are  caused  by  suggested  delusions
of  sense.

The  fact  that  a  subject  in  hypnosis  can  carry  on  a
conversation  is  not  enough  to  mark  off  hypnosis  from
sleep,  as  Werner  erroneously  supposes  ;  for  many
persons  answer  questions  and  obey  commands  in
sleep  (Lotze).  According  to  my  experience,  and  that
of  others,  certain  persons  easily  answer  in  sleep  when
some  one  they  know  wrell  speaks  to  them.  A  child
will  speak  to  its  mother,  and  bedfellows  to  one
another.  A  conversation  is  easily  carried  on  when
the  waking  person  follows  the  sleeper's  chain  of
thought  and  insinuates  himself,  so  to  speak,  into
his  consciousness  (Brandis).  A  lady  I  know  dreamed
aloud  of  a  person  (X.),  and  when  her  husband
talked  to  her  as  if  he  were  X.  he  was  answered,
but  when  he  spoke  in  his  own  person  he  was  ignored.

Finally,  there  are  many  persons  who  can  harcjiy
be  induced  to  move  in  hypnosis,  though  they  c?n  be
made  to  dream  anything.

I  hope  that  what  has  been  said  makes  ]{  clear  that
hypnosis  by  no  means  needs  to  be  inarply  distin-
guished from  sleep,  in  spite  of  its  apparent  differences.
To  my  mind  the  dividing  line  oetween  sleep  and
hypnosis  is  merely  a  quantitative  difference  in  the
movements.  Movements  in  hypnosis  are  easily  in-
duced ;  in  sleep  they  are  duller,  slower,  and  rarer.
The  resemblance  of  the  tvo  states  goes  still  further.

Even  post-hypnotic  aggestion  finds  an  analogy  in
sleep  (Liebeault).  Of  course  the  effect  of  dreams
upon  the  organism  is  not  so  easy  to  observe  as  the
effect  of  suggestion,  is  most  dreams  are  forgotten.
However,  I  will  metion  some  of  these  analogous


202


HYPNOTISM.


cases.  People  who  dream  of  a  shot,  and  wake  in  con-
sequence, continue  to  hear  the  reverberation  clearly
after  they  wake  (Max  Simon).  Others  after  waking
feel  a  pain  of  which  they  have  been  dreaming  (Char-
pignon).  I  will  merely  mention  certain  phenomena
which  resemble  these — the  dreams  which  are  con-
tinued into  waking  life,  which  may  be  compared  to
continuative  post-hypnotic  suggestions.  There  are
well-known  vivid  dream-pictures  which  are  not  re-
cognized as  dreams,  and  which  are  taken  for  reality
even  after  waking  (Brierre  de  Boismont).  It  is
certain  that  even  the  most  enlightened  persons  are
influenced  by  dreams.  Many  are  out  of  humour  the
whole  day  after  having  been  annoyed  by  unpleasant
dreams.  The  experiments  lately  made  by  Friedrich
Heerwagen,  of  Dorpat,  have  proved  that  persons  who
have  dreamt  much  are  in  an  unpleasant  frame  of
mind  the  next  day.  I  know  patients  who  are  much
worse  after  dreaming  of  their  complaints  ;  a  stam-
merer will  stammer  more  after  dreaming  about  it.
We  ^nd  analogies  with  post-hypnotic  suggestion
everywhcre-  There  are  well-known  cases  in  which
persons  have  dreamed  of  taking  an  aperient,  with
effect.

Perhaps  a  cast  mentioned  by  Fere  may  be  referred
to  here.  A  girl  i reamed  for  several  nights  that
men  were  running  aler  her.  She  grew  daily  more
exhausted,  and  the  weakness  in  her  legs  increased
till  a  hysterical  paraplegia  of  both  legs  declared
itself.  In  mental  disease,  doctors  have  often  men-
tioned an  analogous  phenomenon  ;  they  say  that  the
earliest  signs  of  mental  csorder  show  themselves
first  in  dream.  Griesingenays  that  delirium  often
begins  in  dream.  Esquirol  sa/s  that  in  acute  mania
it  has  been  observed  that  th  patient  thinks  he  is


COGNATE  STATES.


203


ordered  in  a  dream  to  do  something.  This  is  certainly
analogous  to  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  Tonnini  men-
tions a  rather  inconclusive  case  of  a  woman  who  was
induced  by  a  dream  to  do  something.  Of  course
such  cases  are  difficult  to  observe  ;  but  it  is  very
probable  that  dreams  have  an  after-effect  on  even
thoroughly  healthy  people.  Aristotle  maintained
long  ago  that  many  of  our  actions  had  their  origin
in  dreams.

The  similarity  of  the  means  used  to  induce  sleep
and  hypnosis  is  often  insisted  upon  as  a  proof  of
their  identity.  But  a  distinction  must  be  made.  It
is  said  that  monotonous  stimuli  induce  both  sleep
and  hypnosis.  Purkinje,  therefore,  thought  that
Braid's  methods  would  also  produce  sleep.  But  we
should  never  conclude  an  identity  of  states  from  the
identity  of  their  causes.  We  should  observe  whether
the  symptoms  are  identical.  To  decide  the  question,
we  should  ask,  Is  the  subject  who  is  sent  to  sleep-
by  monotonous  sense  stimulation  without  a  prinrary
mental  act  susceptible  to  suggestion  or  not  ?  Tx  have
seen  cases  in  which  the  subjects  fixed  their  gaze  but
did  not  concentrate  their  attention.  The.  subsequent
state  was  an  ordinary  sleep,  out  of  wrnVJri  the  subjects
awoke  when  I  made  verbal  suggestions  to  them,
however  softly  I  spoke.  It  is  the-  same  thing  when
we  wish  to  decide  whether  a  tedious  speaker  hypno-
tizes his  audience.  Many  people  grow  sleepy,  or
even  fall  asleep,  in  such  a  ca  ^e.  Unluckily  it  would
be  hardly  practicable  to  ma^e  a  suggestion  to  a  man
who  had  fallen  asleep  undf  ■'  such  conditions,  and  yet
this  would  be  the  only  wr/  to  decide  whether  he  was
hypnotized  or  not.  But  sleep  comes  on  without  con-
centration of  the  subject s  thoughts.  If  he  concentrates
his  thoughts  on  the  orator,  he  will  not  go  to  sleep ;  in


204


HYPNOTISM.


this  case  his  state  of  partially  strained  attention  much
resembles  hypnosis.  If  the  state  is  strongly  marked,
negative  hallucinations  may  arise  (for  instance,  with
regard  to  noises),  as  in  hypnosis.  I  know  several  cases
of  this  kind.  I  am  also  in  doubt  whether  those  states  of
loss  or  disturbance  of  consciousness,  induced  by  vertigo,
e.g.,  by  spinning  round  quickly,  should  be  reckoned
as  hypnoses.  Erdmann  has  identified  the  states  in-
duced by  vertigo  and  by  tedium  in  his  well-known
ingenious  manner.  But  I  must  repeat  that  it  does
not  matter  how  the  states  are  produced  ;  the  point
is  whether  their  symptoms  are  alike.  This  must
always  be  considered,  and  I  direct  attention  to  it
again,  although  in  discussing  the  symptoms  I  men-
tioned excitation  of  the  muscular  sense  such  as  takes
place  in  spinning  round  and  round  as  a  hypnogenetic
method.  So  much  for  the  resemblance  between  sleep
and  hypnosis.

Hypnosis  has  been  often  compared  to  mental  dis-
order as  well  as  to  sleep.  Rieger  and  Semal,  as  well  as
Hack  Tuke  (so  far  back  as  1865),  called  hypnosis  an
artificially  induced  mental  disorder.  In  the  first
place  I  wouiVi  remark  that  it  is  of  no  consequence
what  hypnosis  .is  called.  Even  in  therapeutics  this
is  a  matter  of  ?\o  moment.  Suppose  the  use  of
morphia  were  denounced  because  morphia  is  a
poison,  and  because  the  sleep  induced  by  morphia
is  an  effect  of  poisoning.  As  Rieger  justly  says,
we  need  not  trouble  ourselves  about  names.  We
might  call  hypnosis  a  n  bntal  disorder  if  we  also
regarded  sleep  and  dreamy  as  such.  And  we  find
that  when  doctors  in  psychological  practice  wish
to  discover  analogies  to  mental  disorder,  they  always
have recourse  to  dreams. This  resemblance  has


COGNATE  STATES.


205


struck  many  observers,  but  no  author  has  maintained
that  in  order  to  lose  one's  sanity  it  is  only  necessary
to  go  to  sleep.

The  most  different  mental  disorders  have  been
compared  to  hypnosis,  which  shows  what  confusion
there  is  about  it.  For  example,  Rieger  and  Konrad
say  that  hypnosis  is  nothing  but  an  artificial  madness.
Meynert  maintains  that  it  is  an  experimentally-
produced  imbecility.  Luys  compares  it  to  general
paralysis  of  the  insane,  and  others  to  melancholia
attonita.  These  different  comparisons  show  the  want
of  unanimity  among  authors,  for  the  forms  of  mental
disorder  we  call  imbecility  and  mania  are  as  unlike
as  a  pea  and  a  rose,  which  are  both  plants,  but  of
utterly  different  kinds.  No  two  states  of  mental
disorder  could  be  more  unlike  than  imbecility  and
mania.

When  hypnosis  is  thus  compared  to  mental  disorder
it  is  generally  forgotten  that  susceptibility  to  sugges-
tion is  the  chief  phenomenon  of  hypnosis.  But  it  is  a
mistake  to  think  that  susceptibility  to  suggestion  is
an  essential  phenomenon  of  mental  disorder  ;  if  it
were,  mental  disorders  could  be  cured  by  suggestion,
which  is  hardly  ever  possible.  Suggestibility  is  a
symptom  of  sleep,  and  we  have  seen  that  the  dreams
which  follow  on  stimulation  of  the  nerves  may  be
induced  by  suggestion.  By  means  of  suggestion  in
hypnosis  forms  of  hypnosis  may  be  induced  which
resemble  mental  derangement,  i.e.,  spontaneous  mania,
or  melancholia  attonita,  besides  forms  of  imbecility,
&c.  But  we  can  also  induce  paralysis  and  stammer-
ing by  suggestion,  and  yet  hypnosis  is  not  a  state  of
paralysis  or  of  stammering.  We  can  suggest  pain  in
hypnosis,  yet  hypnosis  is  not  a  state  of  pain.  And
how  the  light  stages  of  hypnosis,  in  which  only  certain


2o6


HYPNOTISM.


motor  effects  are  caused  by  suggestion,  can  be  called
states  of  mental  disorder  is  not  clear  to  me,  unless
a  person  is  to  be  called  mentally  unsound  simply
because  he  cannot  open  his  eyes.  But  even  the
susceptibility  to  suggestion  which  exists  in  such
mental  disorders  as  delirium  tremens  (Moli,  Pierre
Janet),  or  the  Katatonie  of  Kahlbaum  (Jensen),  must
not  be  without  further  ceremony  identified  with  the
susceptibility  we  find  in  hypnosis.  I  need  only  say
"  Wake ! "  to  the  hypnotized  subject,  and  the  state
ends;  but  there  is  no  disease  which  can  be  guided  and
ended  at  a  moment's  notice  like  hypnosis.

Of  course  no  author  would  call  hypnosis  a  mental
disorder  merely  because  it  may  be  occasionally  a
delusion  in  insanity.  Freud  is  right  when  he  says
that  meat  does  not  lose  its  flavour  when  an  enthu-
siastic vegetarian  calls  it  carrion  ;  why  should  a
mental  influence,  such  as  we  have  found  hypnosis
to  be,  lose  its  value  or  interest  because  it  is  sometimes
called  mental  disease  ?

A  remark  of  Griesinger  shows  how  capriciously
all  such  terms  are  used  ;  he  thinks  a  somnambulism
of  short  duration  is  a  sleep,  and  a  longer  one  a  mental
disorder.

It  is  no  new  thing  to  see  hypnosis  brought  into
connection  with  hysteria  and  regarded  as  an  artificial
hysteria  or  neurosis.  Demarquay  and  Giraud-Teulon
have  pointed  out  analogies,  and  Charcot  has  lately
called  his  three  stages  a  " grande  nevrose  hypnotique"
Dumontpallier  also  thinks  that  hypnosis  is  an  experi-
mental neurosis.  I  would  make  the  same  remark
upon  this  as  upon  the  mental  disorders.  Charcot  has
called  up  the  complete  type  of  a  neurosis,  and  specially
of  hysteria,  by  suggestion.  This  was  comparatively
easy  in his cases of  "grande hysterie"  because


COGNATE  STATES.


207


phenomena  which  are  common  in  the  subject  in
waking  life  are  more  easily  induced  in  hypnosis
than  others  (Grasset).  I  repeat,  it  would  be  easy  to
suggest  stammering  in  hypnosis,  and  then  draw  the
conclusion  that  hypnosis  is  a  state  of  stammering.
Besides,  Charcot  has  never  maintained  that  the  states,
as  they  exist  apart  from  his  three  stages,  and  as  they
have  been  observed  by  the  school  of  Nancy,  are
neuroses ;  on  the  contrary,  he  expressly  excludes
them  from  neuroses.

Other  states  have  also  been  occasionally  compared
to  hypnosis. I  may  mention  catalepsy,  a  disease,  or
symptom  of  disease,  in  which  the  limbs  keep  any
given  position  ;  and  lethargy,  a  strange  state  of  sleep,  in
which  artificial  awakening  is  difficult  or  impossible,  and
to  which  a  disease  called  hypnosia  or  sleeping  sickness,
observed  in  the  negroes  of  West  Africa,  appears  to  be
related. Thomsen's  disease,  in  which  a  contracture
follows  voluntary  movement,  is  also  compared  to  hypno-
sis, and  so  are  epileptic  disturbances  of  consciousness.
I  pass  over  the  phenomena  of  intoxication  by  alcohol,
chloroform,  ether,  opium,  and  particularly  haschisch,
which  are  often  compared  to  hypnosis  on  account  of
the  delusions  of  sense  which  occur  in  them.  Narco-
lepsy must  also  be  mentioned. In  this  disease  there
are  periodical  attacks  of  sleepiness. It  has  been
described  by  Gelineau,  Rousseau,  Ballet,  and  others.
Certain  cases  of  what  Drosdow  calls  Morbus  Hypno-
ticus,  whose  resemblance  to  hypnosis  is  unmistakable,
may  be  included  in  this  tolerably  undefined  narcolepsy.
These  states  might  be  regarded  as  auto-hypnoses.
Vizioli  has  published  an  account  of  an  auto-hypnosis,
in  which  he  succeeded  in  making  even  post-hypnotic
suggestions  to  the  subject. Naturally,  the  terminology
is  very  arbitrary  in  these  cases  ;  these  states  might


2o8


HYPNOTISM.


be  ascribed  to  spontaneous  somnambulism  arising
directly  out  of  waking  life,  and  not  in  sleep,  as  usual.
The  famous  case  of  Motet,  which  was  so  important
from  the  legal  point  of  view,  would  then  belong  to
this  class.  A  man  committed  a  criminal  act  in  a
state  of  self-induced  hypnosis,  to  which  he  was
subject.  On  Motet's  recommendation  he  was  ac-
quitted. A  case  of  Dufay's  is  nearly  identical.  It
would  be  extremely  illogical,  besides,  to  call  hypnosis
a  morbid  state  merely  because  a  morbid  imitation  of
it  is  to  be  found  in  many  forms  of  Morbus  Hypnoticus.
It  would  be  as  great  a  mistake  as  if  we  were  to  take
yawning  for  a  disease  because  there  are  people  who
suffer  from  attacks  of  yawning,  and  who  yawn  to  an
abnormal  degree  (Ochorowicz).  Lata  often  resembles
hypnosis  (Bastian,  O'Brien,  Forbes).  The  word  Lata
properly  means  the  sufferers  from  this  complaint,  not
the  disease.  The  disease  is  found  among  the  Malays ;
the  patient  imitates  every  movement  made  in  his
presence,  as  in  "  fascination."  The  same  thing  has
been  seen  in  Maine  among  the  "  Jumpers  "  (Beard),
and  in  Siberia,  where  the  sufferers  are  called  "  Mirya-
ckit"  (Hammond).

Once  more,  the  chief  feature  of  hypnosis  is  increased
susceptibility  to  suggestion.  By  means  of  this  we  can
induce  counterfeits  of  all  sorts  of  diseases,  which
appear  identical  with  the  real  thing.  But  none  the
less,  hypnosis  should  not  be  identified  with  these
diseases.  The  two  characteristics  of  hypnosis  are  sug-
gestibility and  the  power  of  ending  the  state  at  pleasure.
We  do  not  find  them  united  in  mental  disorders,
nor  in  neuroses  ;  but  we  find  them  in  sleep,  in  which
suggestion  induces  dreams  by  means  of  stimulation  of
the  senses,  and  from  which  the  subject  can  be  aroused
at  any  moment  by  an  external  stimulus.  Although  no


COGNATE  STATES.


209


identification  of  hypnosis  and  sleep  would  be  justifiable
on  the  above  grounds,  I  must  again  point  out  that,
in  spite  of  their  apparent  differences,  they  are  closely
related,  at  least  so  far  as  hypnoses  of  the  second  group
are  concerned.

The  different  phenomena  of  hypnosis  have  been
also  observed  in  normal  waking  life,  and  this  makes
a  comparison  of  the  hypnotic  states  with  other
abnormal  states  considerably  more  difficult.  For
example,  a  symptom  which  A.  shows  in  hypnosis
he  does  not  show  in  his  normal  state  ;  but  it  may
be  observed  in  B.'s  normal  waking  life.  This  may
be  referred  to  the  phenomena  of  suggestion,  which
exist  normally,  as  I  showed  on  p.  57,  but  which  arc
increased  in  certain  cases  during  hypnosis.  People
differ  greatly  in  their  susceptibility  to  suggestion  in
waking  life  ;  I  have  spoken  (p.  57)  of  suggestions  in
ordinary  life,  from  which  hypnosis  cannot  be  con-
cluded. Besides  which  a  number  of  phenomena  of
suggestion,  which  are  generally  regarded  as  a  pecu-
liarity of  hypnosis,  have  been  found  in  waking  life.
Braid,  the  American  electrobiologists,  Heidenhain,
Berger,  Richet,  Levy,  Bernheim,  Beaunis,  Liegeois,
and  Forel,  may  be  mentioned  among  those  who  have
made  observations  in  this  field.

These  phenomena  are  shown  by  subjects  who  have
been  hypnotized  as  well  as  by  those  who  have  not.
Contractures,  paralyses,  dumbness,  and  all  kinds  of
motor  disturbances  can  be  induced  by  suggestion  in
the  waking  state.  According  to  some  authors  it  is
even  possible  to  induce  hallucinations  without  hyp-
nosis. However,  many  of  the  experiments,  and  par-
ticularly the  conclusions  drawn  from  them,  seem  to
me  to  have  two  defects.  Those  who  talk  of  sugges-
ts


2IO


HYPNOTISM.


tions  in  the  waking  state  {suggestions  a  veille)  forget,
first,  that  sleep  is  by  no  means  always  indispensable
for  many  hypnotic  suggestions.  Authors  often  con-
fuse hypnosis  with  sleep  in  speaking  of  suggestions  in
the  waking  state.  We  have  seen  that  the  light  hyp-
notic stages  do  not  much  resemble  sleep  ;  con-
sequently we  must  not  conclude  that  a  state  of
contracture,  &c,  is,  or  is  not,  a  hypnosis  because  it
resembles  sleep  or  not.  The  second  point  which  these
authors  generally  overlook  is  this  :  they  think  that
hypnosis  is  excluded  in  these  cases  of  waking  sug-
gestion, because  none  of  the  usual  methods  of  inducing
hypnosis  have  been  used .  But  the  methods  are  not  abso-
lutely necessary  for  the  induction  of  hypnosis.  We
cannot  make  the  question,  whether  hypnosis  is  present
or  not,  depend  on  the  means  employed.  If  we  refused
to  believe  in  any  particular  state  unless  the  usual  means
had  been  used  to  induce  it,  we  should  revolutionize
science.  In  my  opinion  we  ought  to  consider  the
state  and  its  symptoms  separately.  For  if  we  take  a
certain  degree  of  suggestibility,  loss  of  memory,  &c,
for  a  symptom  of  hypnosis,  nothing  remains  but  to
regard  as  hypnoses  many — I  will  not  say  all — of  these
states  which  are  generally  described  as  suggestions
without  hypnosis.  The  chief  phenomenon  of  hypnosis
is  that  a  certain  accepted  idea  leads  to  a  movement
or  a  delusion  of  the  senses,  &c.  We  have  further  seen
that  the  experimenter  can  change  the  subject's  domi-
nant idea  very  quickly,  i.e.,  he  can  suggest  one  thing
quickly  after  another.  If,  then,  we  can  do  the  same
thing  without  any  previous  appearance  of  hypnosis,
we  must  call  the  state  a  hypnosis  all  the  same,  par-
ticularly if  there  is  subsequent  loss  of  memory,  which
is  generally  the  case  in  delusions  of  the  senses.  There
has  been  a  kind  of  hypnosis  in  both  cases.


COGNATE  STATES.


211


Thoroughly  concentrated  attention  is  not  absolutely
necessary  to  induce  hypnosis  ;  a  partial  concentration
is  enough.  In  these  experiments  there  is  generally
partial  concentration.  For  example,  to  produce  a
catalepsy  of  the  arm  in  the  waking  state  the  experi-
menter often  makes  mesmeric  passes  down  it.  This
leads,  as  I  have  shown  (p.  68),  to  a  concentration  of
the  subject's  attention  on  the  desired  result.  At  least
it  appears  from  many  experiments  on  this  point  that
the  attention  of  the  subject  is  so  concentrated  ;  and
this  concentration  leads  to  hypnosis.

Besides,  in  such  suggestions  the  subject  generally
remembers  an  earlier  hypnosis  ;  and  the  idea  of  hyp-
nosis is  enough  to  induce  it.  Therefore  we  often  need
only  to  repeat  a  suggestion  made  in  an  earlier  hyp-
nosis to  cause  a  new  one  (Marin).

The  fact  that  paralyses,  contractures,  &c,  can  be
produced  by  suggestion  in  this  new  hypnosis,  shows
that  it  is  as  real  as  the  first.  In  the  deeper  states,
when  delusions  of  sense  can  be  induced,  loss  of
memory  usually  follows.  The  changed  expression  of
the  subject's  face  also  shows  there  is  hypnosis.
Finally,  the  presence  of  a  real  hypnosis  is  proved  by
the  rapport  between  subject  and  experimenter.

For  the  reasons  above  mentioned  I  think  we  should
call  many  of  these  states  true  hypnoses,  not  sugges-
tions without  hypnosis.  The  school  of  Nancy,  and
particularly  Liegeois  and  Beaunis,  have  to  a  certain
extent  acknowledged  this.  But  they  certainly  have
not  given  to  the  point  all  the  importance  it  deserves.
They  thought  many  of  these  states  were  intermediate
forms  between  sleeping  and  waking,  which  they
identified  with  the  veille  somnambulique  described
above  (p.  146).

I  know  that  from  what  I  have  said  it  might  be


212


HYPNOTISM.


concluded  that  all  these  suggestions  were  made  in
hypnosis.  It  is,  in  truth,  very  difficult  to  find  clear
diagnostic  symptoms  in  certain  cases.  My  explana-
tion aims  only  at  pointing  out  that  there  may  really
be  hypnosis,  though  none  of  the  usual  methods  have
been  employed  to  bring  it  on.  I  have,  besides,  tried
to  prevent  suggestion  in  waking  life,  and  especially  to
make  delusions  of  the  senses  impossible.

It  is  often  very  difficult  to  decide  whether  there  is
hypnosis  or  not,  because  isolated  hypnotic  symptoms
are  often  seen  in  certain  people  who  are  not  in  hyp-
nosis. There  are  even  delusions  of  the  senses  without
hypnosis,  sleep,  or  mental  disorder,  when  circumstances
influence  the  mind  in  a  particular  way.  The  common
hallucination  of  smell  is  an  example.  People  often
imagine  that  they  still  smell  things  which  have  been
removed.  Delusions  of  sight  are  just  as  common.
Many  people  have  taken  trees  for  men  when  walking
in  the  twilight.  Goethe's  self-induced  hallucinations  of
sight  are  well  known.  Delbceuf  also  describes  a
waking  hallucination  of  sight ;  he  thought  he  saw  his
dead  mother,  but  corrected  his  impression  by  reason.
If  there  are  even  delusions  of  the  senses  without
hypnosis,  it  is  evidently  difficult  to  argue  the  presence
of  hypnosis  from  a  single  symptom.

I  should  call  the  following  the  chief  points  in
settling  the  question  whether  a  suggestion  is  made  in
hypnosis  or  not  :  I.  Of  what  kind  are  the  suggestions  ?
Are  they  of  such  a  kind  that  they  rarely  occur
normally?  2.  After  one  suggestion  has  succeeded,
can  other  suggestions  be  made  as  quickly  as  in  hyp-
nosis, or  is  a  long  preparation  necessary  for  each
suggestion  ?  The  quick  success  of  the  following  sug-
gestion would  be  in  favour  of  hypnosis.  3.  After
the  suggestion  has  succeeded,  can  the  subject  prevent


COGNATE  STATES.


213


further  suggestion  by  an  act  of  will,  or  not?  If  he
cannot,  it  favours  the  supposition  of  a  hypnotic  state.
4.  Is  there  rapport  ?  That  is,  can  the  subject  be
influenced  by  anybody  or  by  only  one  ?  Rapport
favours  hypnosis.  5.  Are  there  bodily  symptoms
of  hypnosis  ?  6.  Are  the  events  subsequently  for-
gotten ?  Loss  of  memory  also  favours  the  suppo-
sition of  hypnosis.

The  many  transitional  states  between  waking  life
and  hypnosis  will  often  make  the  question  difficult  to
decide  ;  none  of  the  points  above  mentioned  will
alone  suffice  to  settle  it.

It  sometimes  happens  that  we  try  to  induce  a
person  to  do  something  by  looking  at  him  fixedly ;
we  then  see  how  slight  is  the  division  between  the
hypnotic  states  and  waking  life.  A  teacher  who
thinks  his  pupil  is  lying,  looks  at  him  fixedly  to  ascer-
tain the  truth,  just  as  is  done  in  fascination.  This
fixed  gaze  affects  the  will  of  the  person  looked  at,  as
we  have  seen  in  hypnosis.  We  recognize  an  analogy
on  one  hand,  on  the  other  we  see  how  difficult  it
must  always  be  to  decide  where  hypnosis  begins  and
waking  life  ends.

States  resembling,  or  perhaps  identical  with,  hyp-
nosis, are  also  found  in  animals,  and  can  easily  be
experimentally  induced.  The  first  experiments  of
this  kind  are  referred  to  by  the  Jesuit  Kircher  ; — the
so-called  experimentuiu  mirabile  Kircheri.  Kircher
described  these  experiments  in  1646.  But  accord-
ing to  Preyer  the  experiment  had  been  made  by
Schwenter  several  years  earlier.  The  most  striking  of
these  experiments,  which  are  being  continued  in  the
present  day,  is  as  follows  :  A  hen  is  held  down  on
the  ground ;  the  head  in  particular  is  pressed  down.


214


HYPNOTISM.


A  chalk  line  is  then  drawn  on  the  ground,  starting
from  the  bird's  beak.  The  hen  will  remain  motion-
less. Kircher  ascribes  this  to  the  animal's  imagina-
tion ;  he  said  that  it  imagined  it  was  fastened,  and
consequently  did  "  not  try  to  move.  Czermak  re-
peated the  experiment  on  different  animals,  and
announced  in  1872  that  a  hypnotic  state  could  be
induced  in  other  animals  besides  the  hen.  Preyer
shortly  after  began  to  interest  himself  in  the  question,
and  made  a  series  of  experiments  like  Czermak's.
Preyer,  however,  distinguishes  two  states  in  animals —
catalepsy,  which  is  the  effect  of  fear,  and  the  hypnotic
state.  Heubel,  Richet,  Danilewsky,  and  Rieger,
besides  the  authors  mentioned  above,  have  occupied
themselves  with  the  question.

Most  of  the  experiments  have  been  made  with
frogs,  crayfish,  guinea-pigs,  and  birds.  I  myself  have
made  many  with  frogs.  This  much  is  certain  :  many
animals  will  remain  motionless  in  any  position  in
which  they  have  been  held  by  force  for  a  time.  There
are  various  opinions  as  to  the  meaning  of  this.
Preyer  thinks  many  of  these  states  are  paralyses  from
fright,  or  catalepsy,  produced  by  a  sudden  peripheral
stimulus.  In  any  case  they  vividly  recall  the  cata-
lepsy of  the  Salpetriere,  also  caused  by  a  strong
external  stimulus.  It  is  said  a  sudden  Drummond
lime-light  produces  the  same  effect  on  a  cock  as  it
does  on  hysterical  patients  (Richer).  But  in  general
the  external  stimulus  used  with  animals  is  tactile,  as
in  seizing  them.  Heubel  thinks  that  these  states  in
animals  are  a  true  sleep  following  on  the  cessation  of
the  external  stimuli,  and  Wundt  seems  to  agree  with
him.

Preyer  has  especially  shown  that  the  frog  will  re-
main rigid  when  upright,  if  it  is  kept  from  falling,  as


COGNATE  STATES.


215


well  as  when  lying  on  its  back.  The  hind  leg  of  a  frog
lying  on  its  back  may  be  pulled  out,  and  the  animal
will  not  draw  it  in  again  as  it  usually  does.  Richet,
however,  says  that  it  is  drawn  in  again  at  once,  if  the
spinal  cord  is  divided  below  the  medulla  oblongata.
It  is  interesting  that  when  a  "  hypnotic "  frog  is
placed  in  a  certain  position  it  will  at  first  move  after
a  short  time,  but  the  more  often  the  experiment  is
repeated  the  longer  the  frog  lies  without  moving.  I
have  seen  frogs  lie  on  their  backs  in  this  way  for
hours,  and  have  even  often  seen  them  die  without
turning  over.  The  deeper  the  state  is,  the  less  the
animal  responds  to  external  stimuli ;  it  ends  by  not
moving  at  tolerably  loud  noises  or  even  stimulation
of  the  skin.  Danilewsky  made  a  series  of  experi-
ments, from  which  he  concluded  that  there  were
regular  changes  of  reflex  excitability  ;  but  Rieger  was
unable  to  confirm  this.  Danilewsky  has  lately  made
some  more  deeply  interesting  experiments,  which  it
is  to  be  hoped  he  will  carry  on.  He  says  that  when
the  brain  hemispheres  are  taken  away  the  frog  as-
sumes cataleptoid  postures,  and  further  that  these
turn  into  hypnoses  in  animals  who  have  rotatory
movements  after  injury  of  the  semi-circular  canals  of
the  ear.

Harting's  experiments  also  deserve  mention  ;  after
repeated  hypnotic  experiments  with  fowls  he  observed
hemiplegic  phenomena  in  them,  according  to  a  com-
munication by  Milne-Edwards  to  the  Paris  Academy
of  Sciences.

I  will  not  try  to  decide  the  question  why  these  ex-
periments with  animals  are  undertaken.  I  do  not
think  that  they  will  help  to  elucidate  hypnotic  phe-
nomena in  human  beings.

Another  series  of  observations,  which  were  chiefly


2l6


HYPNOTISM.


made  for  practical  purposes,  may  be  mentioned  here.
They  also  may  be  regarded  as  hypnotic  phenomena.
I  speak  of  the  so-called  "  Balassiren  "  of  horses,  intro-
duced by  the  cavalry  officer  Balassa.  This  process
has  been  introduced  by  law  into  Austria  for  the
shoeing  of  horses  (Obersteiner).  It  consists  chiefly
in  looking  fixedly  at  the  horse,  just  as  in  "fascination."
The  numerous  experiments  of  Wilson  should  also  be
mentioned  ;  he  is  said  to  have  hypnotized  elephants,
wolves,  horses,  &c,  in  London,  in  1839.  Fascination
is  used  by  beast  tamers,  who  stare  fixedly  into  the
eyes  of  the  animal  they  wish  to  tame.  Many  think
that  the  charming  of  birds  by  snakes  is  fascination.
Liebeault  and  Forel  think  that  the  winter  sleep
(hibernation)  of  animals  is  an  auto-hypnosis  ;  and  so,
perhaps,  is  the  strange  sleep  of  the  Indian  fakirs,
which  sometimes  lasts  for  weeks  and  months  (Fischer).

A  number  of  trustworthy  witnesses  and  authors
(Jacolliot,  Hildebrandt,  Hellwald)  tell  us  even
stranger  things  about  these  fakirs,  which  set  any
attempt  at  explanation  on  the  basis  of  our  present
scientific  knowledge  at  defiance  ;  that  is,  if  we  decline
to  regard  them  as  mere  juggler's  tricks.  Hildebrandt
among  other  things  relates  that  he  saw  a  fakir  sitting
in  a  Hindoo  temple  ;  he  was  crouching  down  with  his
left  arm  stretched  upwards  ;  the  arm  was  dead  and  so
perfectly  dry  that  the  skin  might  easily  have  been
torn  from  it.  Another  fakir  had  held  his  thumb
pressed  against  the  palm  of  his  hand  till  the  nail  had
grown  deep  into  the  flesh.  It  is  said,  besides,  that
some  of  these  people  can  make  plants  grow  very
quickly.  Gorres  mentioned  this.  These  fakirs  are
also  said  to  have  been  apparently  buried  for  weeks
and  months,  and  yet  have  returned  to  normal  life  (?)
Of  course  these  things  must  be  listened  to  with  seep-


COGNATE  STATES.


217


tical  reserve.  Yet  even  a  scientific  investigator  like
Hellwald  thinks  that  though  no  doubt  there  is  a
great  deal  of  jugglery,  yet  some  of  the  phenomena
remain  at  present  inexplicable.

I  have  made  but  brief  mention  of  these  matters  and
of  the  experiments  with  animals  ;  details  would  take
me  too  far.  Any  one  who  is  interested  will  find
material  enough  in  Preyer's  book,  "  Die  Cataplexie
und  der  thierische  Hypnotismus."  We  can  only
mention  these  states  as  being  analogous  to  hypnotic
phenomena  in  human  beings  ;  they  have  no  further
value  for  our  subject.


CHAPTER  V.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.

It  will  appear  from  what  has  been  said  that  the  symp-
toms of  hypnosis  are  extremely  complex,  and  the
question  now  is,  "  Can  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  be
explained  ?  "  Before  we  reply  to  this,  we  must  agree
what  we  mean  by  "  explanation."  To  explain  a
hitherto  unknown  thing,  we  must  trace  it  back  to  what
we  do  know.  And  as  we  know  nothing  of  the  real
nature  of  our  mental  processes,  it  is  useless  to  expect
any  satisfactory  information  regarding  the  mental
state  during  hypnosis.  It  seems  then  that  at  present
we  must  content  ourselves  with  such  an  explanation
as  may  be  got  by  comparing  the  phenomena  of  normal
life  with  those  of  hypnosis.  We  must  settle  what  are
the  true,  and  what  the  apparent,  differences  between
hypnotic  and  non-hypnotic  life,  and  then  we  must  find
the  causal  connection  between  the  peculiar  phenomena
of  hypnosis  and  the  means  used  to  induce  it.  This
last  is  the  main  point.  An  example  will  make  this
clearer.  I  will  suppose  that  we  want  to  find  an  ex-
planation of  a  hypnotic  negative  hallucination  of
sight.  We  must  first  of  all  find  some  parallel  phe-
nomenon in  a  non-hypnotic  state.  If  we  find  a  case
in  which,  without  hypnosis,  an  object  has  not  been
perceived,  though  the  eye  must  have  seen  it,  we  must
then  ask  what  difference  there  is  between  this  pheno-


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


219


menon  and  the  same  phenomenon  in  hypnosis.  We
shall  then  find  that  in  hypnosis  objects  are  not
perceived  only  when  the  experimenter  forbids  the
perception  ;  but  that  to  forbid  the  perception  of  an
object  in  waking  life  would  be  to  ensure  its  being
perceived.  This  point  of  difference  must  be  kept  in
view  for  a  proper  explanation.  It  will  be  explained
by  the  existence  in  the  one  case  of  a  peculiar  state
of  consciousness — the  so-called  dream-consciousness  ;
and  we  must  then  ask  how  the  origin  of  hypnosis
explains  the  formation  of  this  dream-consciousness.
If  we  cannot  find  phenomena  parallel  to  the  methods
of  origination  of  hypnosis  anywhere,  we  shall  be
obliged  to  give  up  the  attempt  at  explanation  for
the  present.

I  believe  that  we  can  already  explain  many  of  the
hypnotic  phenomena,  if  "  explanation  "  is  taken  in  the
above  sense.  In  any  case,  such  numerous  analogies
to  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  have  already  been
found  that  we  need  no  longer  think  them  mystical.
We  need  no  longer  think  the  methods  of  hypnosis
incomprehensible,  as  was  the  case  a  short  time  ago.
This  progress  has  been  made  by  following  the  method
Obersteiner  recommended  ;  i.e.,  by  carefully  observing
the  transitional  states  between  hypnosis  and  normal
life.  We  have  been  able  to  connect  many  every-day
occurrences  with  hypnosis,  and  have  found  many
more  connecting  links  with  normal  life  than  is
generally  supposed.  I  even  believe,  as  I  have  said,
that  we  can  already  explain  certain  hypnotic  pheno-
mena by  means  of  analogy,  and  I  think  that  many
of  the  post-hypnotic  phenomena  are  capable  of  ex-
planation in  the  above  meaning  of  the  word.

But  much  remains  to  be  done  ;  one  method  of  in-
vestigation in  especial  should  be  more  used  ;  i.e.,


220


HYPNOTISM.


self-observation.  It  is  a  great  disadvantage  that
strict  self-observation  often  prevents  the  induction  of
hypnosis  ;  but  on  the  other  hand  I  think  that  our
neglect  of  self-observation  is  the  reason  of  our  failure
to  explain  many  hypnotic  phenomena  clearly.  It  is
true  that  some  trustworthy  investigators,  such  as
Bleuler,  Forel,  Obersteiner,  North,  Heidenhain,  and
others  have  helped  a  little  by  their  accounts  of  their
personal  experiences  in  the  hypnotic  state  ;  but  such
observations  should  be  made  oftener  by  intelligent
people  ;  they  would  be  valuable  to  investigators.  An
explanation  of  hypnosis  drawn  from  the  material
already  accumulated  cannot  be  given  in  a  few  words,
since  the  symptoms  alone  are  so  complex.  Besides,  I
think  it  probable  (and  Braid  was  of  the  same  opinion)
that  a  great  number  of  different  states  are  included  in
the  concept  "hypnosis,"  and  that  an  exact  classification
of  them  is  not  possible  at  present,  though  it  surely
will  be  later.  Under  these  circumstances  I  think  it
best  to  discuss  the  most  commonly  observed  and  best
established  phenomena  of  hypnosis  singly,  and  to
explain  them  when  possible.  I  must  give  up  any
attempt  at  completeness  and  detail  in  order  not  to
make  the  theoretical  explanation  too  long  ;  I  reserve
this  for  another  work.  The  chief  points  which  I
shall  try  to  explain  in  what  follows  are — (i)  the
phenomena  of  suggestion  as  regards  voluntary  move-
ment ;  (2)  positive  and  negative  delusions  of  the
senses  ;  (3)  rapport ;  (4)  the  phenomena  of  memory;
(5)  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  I  will  discuss  these
points  one  by  one  and  try  to  explain  them  in  the
manner  described  above.  It  may  be  thought,  on  a
superficial  view,  that  it  would  be  more  important  to
examine  the  way  the  methods  employed  induce
hypnosis  than  to  explain  the  separate  symptoms  ;


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


221


but  to  discuss  this  would  be  to  dispute  about  words,
because  hypnosis  hardly  ever  appears  suddenly,  but
rather  develops  itself  by  degrees  out  of  a  series  of
symptoms.  For  example,  the  eyes  close  first ;  then
suggestion  induces  a  heaviness  in  the  arm,  and  then
the  arm  is  paralyzed  ;  a  suggested  sense  delusion
follows.  Hypnosis  develops  itself  nearly  if  not  quite
always  in  this  way  ;  one  symptom  is  added  to  another.
Consequently  to  explain  the  separate  symptoms  is  to
explain  the  mode  of  production  of  hypnosis  ;  the
reader  will  find  that  the  one  explanation  involves  the
other.  This  fact  will  become  clear  when  the  abnormal
functions  of  the  muscles  are  explained.

We  shall  understand  the  different  symptoms  of
hypnosis  much  more  easily  if  we  first  examine  two
phenomena.  These  phenomena  might  be  laid  down
as  laws  of  the  psychical  states  of  human  beings,  though
they  would  be  laws  with  many  exceptions.  They  are
not  generally  enough  considered,  but  they  are  of
immense  importance  to  psychology,  physiology,  and
medicine,  as  well  as  to  hypnotism.  These  rules  are —
(i)  men  have  a  certain  proneness  to  allow  themselves
to  be  influenced  by  others  through  their  ideas,  and  in
particular  to  believe  much  without  making  conscious
logical  deductions  ;  (2)  a  psychological  or  physio-
logical effect  tends  to  appear  in  a  man  if  he  is
expecting  it.

Let  us  begin  by  considering  the  first  point.  There
are  people  who  believe  that  they  can  escape  external
psychical  influences  ;  but  they  are  wrong,  since  obser-
vation shows  that  every  one  is  more  or  less  influenced
by  ideas  (Bentivegni,  Bernheim).  Life  is  full  of  such
influences,  and  they  will  work  so  long  as  there  is
mental  activity  among  men. The  desire  for  society,


222


HYPNOTISM.


the  necessity  of  exchanging  opinions,  show  the  need
we  feel  of  influencing  and  being  influenced  by  ideas.
If  we  want  to  convert  a  political  opponent  we  try  to
influence  him  by  arousing  certain  ideas  in  him.  It  is
not  mentally  deficient  people  who  are  thus  accessible
to  ideas.  There  is  in  every  man  a  gap  where  these
ideas  can  enter.  It  is  well  known  that  the  greatest
people  and  most  distinguished  scholars  are  often
dominated  by  some  inferior  individual  who  has  dis-
covered the  gap  where  his  ideas  will  enter.

In  the  same  way  men  have  a  tendency  to  believe
things  without  complete  logical  proof ;  we  will  call  this
quality  credulity.^  Those  who  contend  that  men  are
not  credulous,  show  that  they  are  themselves  incapable
of  reflection  (Forel).  There  is  no  man  who  believes
only  what  has  been  logically  proved  to  him.  Our
sense  perceptions  show  us  this  in  the  clearest  way  ;
we  hardly  ever  consciously  reason  upon  them,  and  yet
the  thing  which  we  take  for  an  external  object  is
only  in  reality  an  act  of  our  minds,  which  in  no  way
corresponds  with  the  unknown  object,  the  "thing
in  itself,"  as  Kant  calls  it.  Most  people  confuse
the  subjective  idea  of  an  object  with  the  object  itself
(Spencer).  This  mistake,  which  we  make  incessantly
with  regard  to  our  sense  perceptions,  proves  that  we
do  not  use  conscious  logical  thought.  But  when  we
consider  our  behaviour  with  regard  to  dogmatic  asser-
tions, and  to  assertions  often  repeated,  this  credulity
is  made  particularly  clear.  It  leads  us  to  dogmatic
belief.  Children  are  most  influenced  by  it,  but  adults
are  also  under  its  jurisdiction.

As  children  are  particularly  credulous  of  dogmatic  assertions,
and  as  such  credulity  is  strongly  marked  in  hypnosis,  this  state
has  often  been  compared  to  childhood  (Copin,  Miescher,
Cullerre,  Wernicke). But  I  must  point  out  that  in  this  com-


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


223


parison  childhood  and  infancy  are  confused.  To  make  the
comparison  possible  we  must  choose  a  period  of  childhood  in
which  ideas  can  be  incorporated  into  the  existing  consciousness,
not  the  period  of  infancy,  in  which  consciousness  is  hardly
formed.

I  will  give  a  simple  example  of  the  credulity  of
childhood  with  regard  to  dogmatic  belief.  I  was  told
at  school  that  the  North  Cape  was  the  north  point
of  Europe.  This  was  not  logically  proved  to  me  ;
yet  I  believed  it  because  it  was  in  the  book,  and
more  especially  because  the  teacher  said  so.  Dog-
matic assertion  influences  not  only  children  but
adults ;  and  the  constant  repetition  of  an  assertion
has  also  a  great  power.  This  is  shown  in  the  clearest
way  by  an  incident  which  is  particularly  interesting  to
us.  A  few  years  ago  it  was  believed  that  there  was
really  no  such  thing  as  hypnotism,  and  that  those
who  believed  in  it  were  deceived.  But  since  that
time  opinion  has  entirely  changed.  The  representa-
tions made  by  different  people  in  authority  as  to  the
reality  of  the  hypnotic  phenomena,  and  particularly
the  repeated  assertions  of  numerous  investigators,
have  caused  a  complete  change  of  view.  Doctors  and
others  have  changed  their  minds  about  hypnotism,
not  because  it  has  been  proved  to  them,  but  ex-
clusively because  they  have  been  influenced  by
constantly  hearing  and  reading  the  same  assertions
about  it,  and  by  their  faith  in  authority.

I  hope  that  the  above  explanations,  which  every
one  can  add  to  from  his  own  experience,  sufficiently
prove  what  I  said  above — that  all  men  are  credulous
to  a  certain  degree.  Now  for  the  second  of  my  pro-
positions— i.e.,  that  an  effect  on  himself  which  a  man
expects  tends  to  appear.  We  can  find  a  great
number  of  these  phenomena  in  ordinary  life ;  they


224


HYPNOTISM.


are  mysterious  and  astonishing  only  when  we  neglect
to  consider  this  tendency.  Carpenter,  Hack  Tuke,
and  many  English  investigators  have  besides  admitted
that  these  phenomena  are  of  great  importance.  I
will  now  describe  some  of  them.

People  who  suffer  from  sleeplessness  have  often
been  sent  to  sleep  by  taking  something  which  they
were  told  was  a  sleeping  draught,  but  which  was
really  some  inert  substance.  They  slept  because
they  expected  to  do  so.  When  they  learn  that  the
medicine  is  not  a  sleeping  draught  they  no  longer
expect  sleep,  and  do  not  sleep.  It  appears  from  this
that  to  expect  a  state,  and  to  wish  for  it,  are  essen-
tially different  things  ;  which  fact  is  often  strangely
enough  overlooked.  A  great  many  people  wish  for
sleep,  but  as  they  do  not  expect  it,  it  does  not  come.
Some  other  examples  will  show  that  this  principle  is
generally  valid  ;  for  example,  the  fatigue  that  is  felt
at  the  usual  bedtime  may  be  mentioned.  We  see
how  much  habit  has  to  do  with  it  ;  when  people  have
been  long  used  to  go  to  bed  at  a  certain  time,  they
generally  feel  tired  just  at  that  time  (Forel).  The
rule  holds  good  for  the  functions  of  the  motor  organs
as  well  as  the  others.  We  will  take  a  case  of  hys-
terical paralysis  ;  it  is  well  known  that  such  a  paralysis
is  sometimes  cured  at  the  exact  moment  the  patient
expects.  Many  mysterious  effects  may  be  thus  ex-
plained. Hysterical  patients  can  often  foretell  an
improvement  in  their  paralyses.  This  gift  of  pro-
phecy need  not  astonish  us  if  we  think  of  this  rule  ;
the  connection  is  not  what  believers  in  the  gift  of
prophecy  think  ;  for  the  hysterical  patient  is  cured
at  a  particular  time  because  he  expects  to  be — the
prophecy  causes  its  own  fulfilment.

Of  course  there  are  exceptions  to  the  rule.  How-


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


225


ever  much  a  sufferer  from  severe  myelitis  may  expect
his  paralyzed  legs  to  move  they  will  not  do  so,
because  the  impediments  are  too  great  to  be  over-
come by  this  natural  tendency  of  expectation  to  pro-
duce an  effect.  There  are  other  impediments  which,
though  they  do  not  interfere  with  the  tendency  as
such,  prevent  its  taking  effect.

Another  example.  People  are  often  sick  when
they  expect  to  be  sick  at  a  particular  time,  and
particularly  if  they  think  they  have  taken  an  emetic  ;
and  they  stammer  when  they  expect  to  stammer.

Many  observations  show  that  the  above  rule  holds
good  for  the  organs  of  sense  under  particular  circum-
stances ;  the  following  case  of  Carpenter's  is  related
by  Bentivegni.  A  judicial  disinterment  was  to  be
made  ;  the  grave  was  opened,  and  the  coffin  raised  ;
the  official  who  was  present  said  that  he  already  smelt
putrefaction,  but  when  the  coffin  was  opened  it  was
found  to  be  empty.  Here  expectation  caused  a
distinct  sense  perception.  There  are  many  examples
of  this.  Yung  has  made  a  series  of  experiments,  and
has  shown  that  the  sense  of  touch  and  the  sense  of
temperature  are  particularly  subject  to  delusion,  and
that  certain  perceptions  occur  when  they  are  ex-
pected without  external  stimuli.  I  myself  have  often
repeated  the  following  experiments  of  Braid,  Wein-
hold,  and  others.  I  blindfolded  certain  persons,
doctors  among  the  number,  or  I  simply  made  them
close  their  eyes.  I  then  told  the  subject  that  he  was
going  to  be  mesmerized  ;  and  even  when  this  was  not
true,  he  generally  imagined  he  felt  the  current  of  air
caused  by  the  passes  ;  he  believed  he  knew  the  exact
moment  when  the  passes  were  begun.  Here  again
we  see  expectation  produce  a  perception.  Many
people  begin  to  feel  the  pain  of  an  operation  almost

16


226


HYPNOTISM.


before  the  knife  has  touched  them,  simply  because
their  whole  attention  is  fixed  upon  the  pain  and  the
beginning  of  the  operation.

The  principle  has  other  effects.  Forel  and  many
others  mention  that  there  are  certain  popular  methods
of  slightly  retarding  menstruation.  In  one  town
many  of  the  young  women  tie  something  round  their
little  finger  if  they  wish  to  delay  menstruation  for
a  few  days  in  order  to  go  to  a  ball,  &c.  The  method
is  generally  effectual,  but  when  faith  ceases  the  effect
also  ceases.

I  hope  that  what  has  been  said  sufficiently  explains
the  second  rule  mentioned  above.

I  go  on  to  discuss  single  phenomena  of  hypnosis  ;
the  functional  disturbances  of  voluntary  movement
first.  These  are  seen  in  every  hypnosis,  as  I  said
before  in  speaking  of  the  symptoms  ;  they  are  almost
always  the  first  symptom,  even  when  there  are  other
changes.  The  principle  just  developed,  that  an  ex-
pected functional  abnormality  comes  on  when
expected  if  it  is  not  hindered  by  mechanical  or
other  insuperable  obstacles,  best  explains  the  ab-
normalities of  the  voluntary  movements.  But  to
understand  this  thoroughly,  the  hypnosis  should  be
induced  by  slow  degrees,  as  in  this  case  the  motor
disturbances  are  plainer.

Now,  the  previous  discussion  makes  it  evident  that
to  produce  any  motor  disorder  in  a  subject  (X.)  who  is
at  present  in  a  perfectly  normal  state,  we  must  first  of
all  draw  his  attention  to  the  desired  effect,  and  make
him  firmly  expect  it;  that  is,  we  must  be  able  to  place
the  conviction  in  the  foreground  of  the  subject's
thoughts,  or,  as  Fechner  and  Wundt  express  it,  in  the
range  of  his  inner  perspective. If  we  succeed  in


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  227


capturing  the  subject's  attention  to  such  a  point  that
he  firmly  believes  something— that  his  arm  will
be  paralyzed — the  paralysis  will  generally  happen.

It  would  evidently  be  unfavourable  if  the  subject  should  re-
flect and  criticize  while  the  attempt  to  direct  his  attention  was
being  made.  If  he  does  so  an  effectual  concentration  of  his
attention  is  impossible.  Numerous  other  conditions  must  be
fulfilled  before  we  can  make  an  idea  dominate  the  subject's
attention  ;  these  conditions  are  for  the  most  part  the  same
which  I  mentioned  as  favouring  the  coming  on  of  hypnosis,
when  I  was  speaking  of  its  production.  It  is  clear,  therefore,
that  the  surroundings,  the  subject's  mental  state  as  well  as  the
manner  of  the  experimenter's  entrance,  play  a  great  part.  The
favourable  influence  of  imitation  is  also  easily  explicable  ;  for
these  things  may  greatly  influence  the  subject's  expectation  of
the  effect.  For  example,  a  person  who  has  seen  paralysis
induced  by  certain  passes  in  another  subject's  arm,  will  be
much  more  likely  to  let  the  same  phenomenon  be  induced  in
himself,  than  would  another  who  had  not  seen  it.

Supposing  such  a  paralysis  induced,  the  subject's
mental  balance  is  already  disturbed.  If  a  man  can-
not voluntarily  move  his  arm  he  feels  at  once  that
his  will  is  weakened  ;  a  mental  state  ensues  which
Pierre  Janet  often  calls  "  misere  psychique  "  ;  a  pecu-
liar feeling  of  weakened  will-power.  This  feeling  is
very  important ;  by  means  of  it  the  subject's  power
of  resistance  is  lessened  more  and  more.  When  one
limb  has  been  paralyzed  it  is  easier  to  paralyze  a
second,  because  the  subject  already  doubts  his  own
will-power.  Thus,  when  the  subject  can  no  longer
voluntarily  move  a  limb,  or  part  of  it,  very  much  has
been  gained  for  further  susceptibility  to  suggestion,
because  the  consciousness  of  weakness  favours  the
acceptance  of  later  suggestions.  The  development
of  suggestibility  need  no  longer  astonish  us,  since
we  have  found  the  clue  to  its  production.


228


HYPNOTISM.


I  have  endeavoured  to  explain  the  disturbances  of
the  muscular  functions  in  their  gradual  development,
as  it  were  ;  this  development  is  in  many  cases  nearly
identical  with  that  of  hypnosis,  which,  as  we  have
seen,  is  often  merely  an  inhibition  of  the  voluntary
muscular  functions.  Many  of  the  methods  used  to
induce  hypnosis  are  alike  in  one  particular — they
direct  the  subject's  attention  to  some  change  in  the
functions  of  the  muscles.  The  method  of  the  school
of  Nancy  consists  chiefly  in  making  the  subject  expect
the  closing  of  his  eyes  as  strongly  as  possible,  though
this  method  also  aims  at  producing  the  dream-con-
sciousness, of  which  I  shall  speak  later.  But  other
methods  induce  abnormalities  in  the  functions  of
single  limbs  in  just  the  same  way.  For  example,  an
arm  or  leg  loses  its  power  to  move  when  I  concen-
trate the  attention  of  the  subject  upon  the  loss  of
power  to  move.  In  fact,  it  is  quite  unnecessary  to
begin  with  the  eyes,  as  the  school  of  Nancy  does  ;
we  can  begin  with  any  member,  as  Max  Dessoir
rightly  insists.

As  a  fact,  it  does  not  matter  whether  the  first  motor
disturbance  is  a  muscular  action  performed  against
the  subject's  will — i.e.,  a  certain  movement  which  the
subject  makes  at  command — or  whether  it  is  an  in-
ability to  move,  caused  also  by  a  command.  The
great  thing  is  to  gain  enough  influence  over  the  sub-
ject. In  any  case  we  should  begin  with  the  disturb-
ance which  is  the  easiest  to  induce,  because  one  success
increases  the  experimenter's  influence.  Now  as  a  rule
it  is  easier  to  inhibit  an  action  than  to  cause  it,  as
daily  observation  shows.  An  example  may  make
this  clear.  We  assure  a  person  whose  arm  is  stretched
out  that  he  is  tired  and  cannot  hold  it  out  any  longer.
In  almost  all  cases  there  is  a  momentary  pull  down-


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  229


wards  ;  i.e.,  there  is  an  inclination  to  lower  the  arm.
This  shows  that  there  is  often  susceptibility  to  sugges-
tion without  hypnosis.  I  will  briefly  recapitulate  ;
the  disturbances  of  voluntary  movement  induced  by
suggestion  "in  hypnosis  are  caused  by  the  experi-
menter's directing  the  attention  of  the  subject  as
strongly  as  possible  to  the  desired  effect.  When  the
attempt  has  once  succeeded,  further  disturbances  may
be  more  easily  induced,  since  the  subject  is  already
persuaded  of  his  inability  to  resist.

This  principle  of  the  effects  of  expectant  attention
^lustrated  above  is  nowhere  shown  more  plainly  than
in  the  voluntary  movements.  It  is  even  not  always
necessary  that  a  movement  should  be  very  attentively
expected  ;  the  idea  of  the  movement  will  induce  it.
Let  a  man  bend  his  arm  at  the  elbow  at  right  angles,
and  think  that  the  arm  will  bend  quickly,  without
expecting  it  to  do  so  ;  if  he  fixes  his  whole  attention
on  this  idea  the  movement  will  very  soon  follow.
This  shows  again  how  great  is  the  tendency  to  make
a  certain  movement  when  the  subject  concentrates  his
whole  attention  on  that  one  point.  If  expectation  is
added  to  attention  the  effect  will  be  so  much  the
greater.

I  now  come  to  the  discussion  and  explanation  of
sense  delusions  ;  first  of  all,  of  the  positive  kind.
Are  we  not  exposed  to  such  delusions  otherwise  than
in  hypnosis  ?  Take  first  a  very  simple  example  of
Max  Dessoir's.  I  say  to  some  one  who  is  quite  awake,
"  A  rat  is  running  behind  you."  The  man  can  assure
himself  at  once  by  turning  round  that  there  is  no  rat,
but  according  to  experience  he  will  have  a  mental
image  of  a  rat  for  a  moment,  because  I  spoke  of  it  ;
i.e.,  there  is  already  a  trace  of  hallucination.


230


HYPNOTISM.


Modern  psychology,  following  such  men  as  Dugald  Stewart
and  Taine,  generally  supposes  that  every  idea  includes  an  image,
e.g.)  the  idea  of  a  knife  includes  an  image  of  a  knife.  As  further
every  central  image  tends  to  externalize  itself,  as  Stuart  Mill  in
particular  has  explained,  when  an  idea  is  aroused,  there  is  always
a  tendency  to  externalize  the  corresponding  image,  i.e.,  there  is
a  tendency  to  hallucination.  We  have  thus  a  tendency  to  take
the  remembered  image  of  former  sense  perceptions  for  real
objects  (Binet,  Fere').

So  in  the  case  of  the  rat  there  is  a  transitory
hallucination.  Its  persistence  is  prevented  in  two
ways.  Firstly,  the  man  could  convince  himself  by
means  of  his  senses  that  no  rat  was  there.  Secondly,
reflection  and  the  logical  grouping  of  former  pictures  of
memory  would  convince  him  that  no  rat  was  present.
The  two  factors  would  suffice  to  prevent  the  persist-
ence of  the  suggested  delusion.  A  simple  considera-
tion shows  that  sense  perceptions  are  not  always
needed  to  prevent  hallucination.  Tell  a  person  whose
eyes  are  shut  that  a  rat  is  running  in  front  of  him.
Without  opening  his  eyes  he  is  convinced  of  the  con-
trary, and  says  it  is  not  true.  Although  the  image  of
the  rat  arises  in  his  mind  for  a  moment,  it  does  not
grow  into  a  definite  sense  delusion,  because  reflection
and  memory  prevent  it.  It  is  not  the  sense  percep-
tions which  prevent  it  ;  calm,  critical  reflection  is
enough.  This  is  often  of  more  value  in  preventing  a
threatening  hallucination  than  the  perceptions.

We  have  thus  learned  to  distinguish  the  different
effects  of  a  suggested  hallucination  in  the  waking
and  in  the  hypnotic  states  ;  we  have  seen  that  in  the
latter  the  hallucinations  arise  absolutely  without  any
new  factor.  They  increase  in  strength  and  persistence
because  they  are  not  hindered  by  sense  perceptions
or  critical  reflection.  It  must  now  be  asked,  Are
there  states  analogous  to  these  also  ?


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


231


We  must  make  it  perfectly  clear  that  we  have  a
dream-consciousness  completely  distinct  from  the
waking  consciousness  (Ed.  v.  Hartmann),  in  which
feelings  and  perceptions  do  not  occur  at  all  in  the
same  way  as  in  the  waking  consciousness.  When  we
wake  from  sleep  we  are  able  to  distinguish  dream-
consciousness  from  waking  life  simply  by  recollection.
We  know  whether  what  we  dreamed  was  only  a  dream,
or  whether  it  was  real  (Bentivegni).  It  is  true  that
in  dreams  ideas  are  reproduced  and  perceptions  felt,
but  in  two  respects  (according  to  Wundt)  this  con-
sciousness differs  from  that  of  waking  life.  In  the
first  place  the  remembered  ideas  have  a  hallucinatory
character,  i.e.y  we  try  in  dreams  to  objectify  the
images  of  memory  ;  we  do  not  recognize  that  they
are  images  of  memory  as  we  do  in  waking  life,  but
believe  that  we  see,  feel,  &c,  the  real  object  to  which
they  correspond.  In  the  same  way  external  impres-
sions do  not  produce  normal  perceptions,  but  illusions.
In  the  second  place,  in  dreams  the  faculty  of  percep-
tion is  changed  ;  i.e.y  the  power  of  judging  the  experi-
ences of  which  we  are  conscious  is  essentially  altered.
It  is  just  this  peculiarity  of  the  dream-consciousness
(mentioned  by  Wundt)  which  is  found  in  the  con-
sciousness of  such  rrpphotic  subjects  as  are  accessible
to  suggested  sense  delusions.  There  is  no  need  to
enter  into  details  on  this  point,  as  it  has  been
thoroughly  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  "  Symptoms  "
and  "  Cognate  States."  The  chief  point  is  the  hallu-
cinatory character  of  the  images  of  memory  ;  faintly
indicated  in  normal  states,  in  dream-consciousness  it
is  extremely  plain,  and  appears  in  hypnosis  in  con-
nection with  illusions,  to  which  dream-consciousness  is
also  favourable.  But  we  may  be  sure  that  such  a
dream-consciousness  is  by  no  means  a  strange  and


232


HYPNOTISM.


new  thing,  since  it  is  often  found  in  ordinary  sleep  ;
or,  rather,  it  seems  to  be  habitual  in  sleep,  as  has  just
been  shown.  The  production  of  this  peculiar  dream-
consciousness  is  one  of  the  chief  points  in  hypnotizing.
The  question  is,  how  is  it  brought  about  ;  is  there
a  causal  connection  between  dream-consciousness  and
the  induction  of  hypnosis  ?  I  need  not  discuss  this  at
length,  since  we  already  know  that  children  may  be
talked  to  in  sleep.  In  adults  dream-consciousness  only
appears  in  hypnosis  when  they  have  been  sent  to
sleep  by  some  methods  like  those  used  to  induce
ordinary  sleep.  As  we  have  seen,  hypnosis  is  gene-
rally induced  mentally.  Now,  Forel,  Liebeault,  and
many  other  investigators  say  that  natural  sleep  is  the
immediate  result  of  a  mental  process — an  auto-sug-
gestion of  sleep,  in  fact.  I  do  not  contend  that  the
products  of  tissue  waste  in  the  body  may  not  produce
sleep  without  arousing  the  idea  of  it,  but  it  is  a  fact
that  in  many  cases — whether  in  all  must  be  left  un-
decided at  present — we  fall  asleep  merely  because  we
have  the  idea  of  sleep,  and  are  convinced  we  shall
sleep.  As  sleep  is  only  a  particular  state  of  con-
sciousness, it  is  not  clear  why  we  cannot  induce  cer-
tain people  to  sleep  by  telling  them  to  do  so,  when
we  are  hypnotizing  them.  We  can  talk  people  into
all  sorts  of  states  of  consciousness  ;  the  priest,  the
popular  orator  do  so  every  day.  Why  can  we  not
induce  dream-consciousness  in  a  like  way,  as  is  often
done  as  a  matter  of  fact  when  children  are  put  to
sleep  ?

It  is  true  that  in  many  cases  dream-consciousness  can
be  induced  in  hypnosis  by  means  which  have  nothing
to  do  with  the  induction  of  sleep  ;  for  example,  when,
a  hypnotic  subject  fixes  his  gaze  and  his  eyes  finally
close,  this  does  not  appear  to  be  the  induction  of  a


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


233


state  of  sleep.  Nevertheless,!  think  that  sleep  comes
on,  even  when  it  is  not  purposely  suggested.  Sleep  may
be  brought  on  by  the  feeling  of  heaviness  in  the  eyes,
through  association  of  ideas  (Forel) ;  for  some  people
are  in  the  habit  of  staring  fixedly  at  a  point  in  order
to  tire  their  eyes  and  bring  on  their  ordinary  sleep.
For  these  reasons,  about  which  I  cannot  enter  into
more  details  here,  I  believe  that  when  a  hallucination
happens  in  hypnosis,  some  means  of  inducing  dream-
consciousness  have  always  been  used.  Even  those
hypnoses  in  which  hallucinations  happen  without
previous  closing  of  the  eyes  do  not  contradict  this,
since  the  dream-consciousness  is  not  necessarily  con-
nected with  the  closing  of  the  eyes.  It  sometimes
comes  on  when  the  eyes  are  open,  as  is  seen  in  cases
of  spontaneous  somnambulism.  After  what  has  been
said  we  can  find  an  explanation  of  sense  delusions  in
the  analogy  between  these  hypnotic  states  and  sleep.
Certainly  we  do  not  know  why  sense  delusions
happen  in  ordinary  sleep.  I  have  not  space  to  enter
into  the  different  attempts  at  explanation  which  have
been  made,  and,  besides,  it  would  be  useless.  But  I
think  it  will  provisionally  help  us  in  examining  hyp-
nosis if  we  take  the  hypnotic  states  in  which  there
are  pronounced  sense  delusions,  as  completely  cor-
responding with  ordinary  sleep  and  its  dream-
consciousness.  In  both  states  certain  impressions
of  external  origin  (memory  pictures,  or  mere  stimu-
lations of  the  senses)  induce  sense  delusions.  It  is
only  necessary  that  the  impression  which  causes  the
delusion  should  affect  the  sleeper  deeply  enough.

These  conclusions  lead  to  a  discussion  of  rapport.
This  rapport  causes  the  subject  to  be  more  influenced
by  certain  impressions  than  by  others,  and  to  respond


234


HYPNOTISM.


to  them  by  corresponding  sense  delusions.  I  shall
speak  of  rapport  briefly,  as  I  am  preparing  a  detailed
publication  about  it.  According  to  Noizet  and
Bertrand,  who  have  been  joined  lately  by  Liebeault,  /
Bernheim,  Forel,  and  others,  rapport  is  a  state  of\/
sleep  in  which  the  attention  of  the  subject  is  fixed
exclusively  upon  the  hypnotizer,  so  that  the  idea  of
him  is  constantly  present  in  the  subject's  memory.
On  this  account  Bertrand  compared  these  processes  to
the  falling  asleep  of  a  mother  by  her  child's  cradle.
She  continues  to  watch  over  it  in  sleep  ;  she  hears  the
least  sound  it  makes,  but  no  other  sounds.  This
analogy  may  explain  the  peculiar  influence  which  a
hypnotizer  has  over  his  subject.  The  subject  has
fallen  asleep  with  the  thought  of  the  hypnotizer  in
his  mind,  and  hears  only  what  he  says,  as  in  the  case
of  the  mother  and  child.

It  is  also  not  strange  that  this  influence  should
increase  in  the  course  of  hypnotic  training,  as  we  see
that  the  influence  which  one  person  has  over  another
in  normal  circumstances  grows  with  exercise.  No
new  psychical  law  is  to  be  found  in  hypnosis.

When  we  go  on  to  discuss  the  negative  hallucina-
tions and  the  way  they  originate  in  hypnosis,  we
remark  two  things :  firstly,  that  the  subject  does
not  see  certain  objects  or  hear  certain  noises,  &c.  ;
secondly,  and  more  particularly,  that  the  objects  he
does  not  see  are  just  those  he  is  forbidden  by  the
hypnotist  to  see.  I  have  mentioned  that  many  things
are  not  seen  and  heard  in  normal  circumstances  when
the  attention  is  not  directed  to  them.  These  facts
are  not  astonishing,  but  the  way  they  originate  in
hypnosis  is  striking.  If  I  tell  a  waking  man  who
has  a  chair  in  front  of  him,  "  There  is  nothing  there,


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


235


neither  chair  nor  table,"  he  will  see  the  chair  in  spite
of  what  I  say  ;  but  the  hypnotic  subject  will  not  see
it,  at  least  if  he  is  susceptible  to  negative  hallucina-
tion. Now  we  can  regard  this  process  in  the  hypnotic
as  a  diversion  of  the  attention,  like  that  in  the  waking
man  who  fails  to  perceive  things  which  stimulate  his
organs  of  sense.

This  is  shown  in  particular  by  those  hallucinations
which  vanish  the  moment  the  attention  is  drawn  to
the  hallucinatory  object.  We  can  see  clearly  in  such
cases  that  the  negative  hallucination  was  caused  by
the  diversion  of  the  attention  from  the  object,  and
that  the  direction  of  the  attention  to  it  was  a  counter-
suggestion.  I  say  to  a  subject,  "When  you  wake,  X.
will  have  gone  away."  When  he  wakes  and  is  asked
how  many  people  are  present,  he  says,  "  Two  ;  you
and  I."  I  then  point  out  X.,  and  tell  the  subject  to
look  at  him.  Then  he  sees  X.,  and  the  suggestion
has  lost  its  effect.

But  in  any  case  the  mode  of  origin  is  remarkable.
For  just  because  I  told  the  hypnotic  subject  the  chair
was  not  there,  he  did  not  see  it  ;  but  if  I  told  a  man
in  the  normal  state  that  the  chair  was  not  there,  he
would  be  all  the  more  certain  to  see  it.  My  remark
would  draw  his  attention  to  it.  How  can  we  explain
the  completely  opposite  result  with  the  hypnotic
subject  ?

According  to  Binet  and  Fere,  another  factor  must
be  added  to  the  diversion  of  the  attention  ;  before  it
can  be  attained  a  conviction  that  the  chair  is  not
there  must  be  first  established  in  the  subject.  With-
out this  there  would  hardly  be  a  negative  hallucina-
tion.

It  is  a  certain  fact,  observable  without  hypnosis,  that  such  an
established  conviction  favours  negative  hallucinations.


236


HYPNOTISM.


Let  us  suppose  a  man  occupied  with  work  in  some  place
which  is  generally  quiet,  and  where  he  does  not  expect  noise  ;  let
us  suppose  some  noise  is  made  ;  the  man  will  not  perceive  it.  Yet
he  would  have  heard  the  same  noise  if  he  had  known  before-
hand that  it  would  be  made.  In  just  the  same  way  he  would
fail  to  see  a  spark  of  light  if  he  had  the  conviction  beforehand
that  no  light  was  there,  but  would  perceive  it  if  he  expected  it.
The  expectation  of  an  effect  is  very  favourable  to  its  appear-
ance. Consequently  we  have  here  another  analogy  between
hypnotic  and  non-hypnotic  processes.

We  see,  then,  that  under  normal  circumstances  the
conviction  that  a  thing  is  not  there  makes  it  probable
it  will  not  be  perceived.  If  we  make  use  of  this
principle  to  explain  negative  hallucinations  in  hyp-
nosis we  must  ask,  How  is  the  conviction  that  a
thing  is  not  there  established  in  the  subject  ?  We
must  come  back  to  his  subjective  feelings  of  weakened
will  and  dependence.  A  whole  series  of  experiments
which  have  convinced  the  subject  of  his  weakness
has  generally  been  made  before  the  negative  hal-
lucination succeeds.  When  he  is  once  convinced  that
everything  really  happens  which  the  hypnotist  says,
he  will  believe  him  more  and  more.  The  hypnotist
has  generally  made  many  suggestions  of  movement
to  him,  and  has  induced  in  him  the  positive  hallucina-
tions of  which  I  have  given  an  explanation  above.
Consequently  we  cannot  feel  surprised  that  the  sub-
ject inclines  to  believe  him  when  he  is  told  by  him
that  some  object  is  not  there.

Nevertheless  these  two  factors,  the  diversion  of  the
subject's  attention  and  the  conviction  established  in
him,  do  not  suffice  to  explain  negative  hallucinations.
However  firmly  he  believes  the  hypnotist,  without
such  motives  as  would  induce  belief  under  normal
circumstances  (as  Bentivegni  rightly  points  out),  this
does  not  alone  explain  such  mistakes  of  the  sense


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  237

perceptions  as  are  found  in  negative  hallucinations.
A  completely  changed  state  of  consciousness  must  be
added  if  we  wish  to  understand  negative  hallucina-
tions ;  the  dream-consciousness  again,  which  helped
us  to  understand  positive  delusions  of  the  senses.
For  dream-consciousness  is  not  only  distinguished  by  /
the  reappearance  of  former  memory  pictures  as  hal-/
lucinations  ;  it  is  also  characterized  by  the  fact  that
sense  impressions  which  under  normal  circumstances
become  feelings  and  perceptions  induce  in  it  no  feel-
ing or  perception.  To  recapitulate  :  there  are  three
factors  for  the  production  of  negative  hallucinations  :
firstly,  dream-consciousness  ;  secondly,  the  con-
viction established  in  the  subject  of  the  absence  of  an
object ;  and  thirdly,  the  diversion  of  the  attention
which  results  from  this.

We  can  explain  the  analgesia  of  some  hypnotic
subjects  in  a  like  manner.  It  is  known  that  an
expected  pain  is  more  acutely  felt  than  an  un-
expected one.  When  any  one  believes  that  the  effect
of  some  stimulus  will  be  painful  he  will  feel  the  pain
much  sooner  than  he  would  if  he  did  not  expect  it
and  believe  in  it.  We  see  this  in  operations  ;  the
subject  feels  much  more  pain  when  he  expects  the
stroke  of  the  knife  and  sees  it  than  when  it  takes  him
unawares  ;  in  the  latter  case  he  often  feels  hardly  any
pain.  It  is  the  same  thing  with  analgesia  in  hyp-
nosis. I  still  doubt  whether  there  is  ever  an  entirely
spontaneous  analgesia  without  suggestion,  though
I  have  mentioned  it  above.  In  any  case  analgesia  is
more  usually  induced  by  suggestion.  Here  again  we
may  take  it  that  the  hypnotic  subject  has  been  pre-
convinced  by  the  repeated  assertions  and  suggestions
of  the  hypnotist,  and  that  he  has  in  consequence  an
unreasoning  credulity. If  now  the  hypnotist  firmly


238


HYPNOTISM.


insists  upon  the  analgesia,  the  subject  will  soon
believe  in  and  expect  it,  and  this  will  greatly  help
him  to  it.

The  phenomena  of  the  memory  must  now  be  con-
sidered. Such  a  derangement  of  the  memory  as
sometimes  happens  in  hypnosis  is  certainly  very
striking,  though  it  is  clear  at  once  that  we  can  find
many  analogies  in  ordinary  life.  I  need  not,  of
course,  discuss  those  hypnotic  states  in  which  there  is
no  derangement  of  the  memory.  r

But  there  are  persons  who,  after  waking  from  hyp-
nosis, remember  nothing  of  what  has  happened.  It
is  also  a  well-known  fact  that  we  forget  certain  events,
apart  from  hypnosis.  We  entirely  forget  certain  me-
chanical actions,  such  as  the  winding  of  a  watch.  But
some  things  done  with  reflection  and  in  perfect  con-
sciousness are  occasionally  forgotten.  We  have  here,
then,  an  analogy  to  the  forgetfulness  of  the  hypnotic
subject.  But  these  analogies  by  no  means  explain
the  sudden  and  often  nearly  systematic  forgetfulness
in  hypnotic  states.  We  studied  this  phenomenon
when  discussing  the  memory  before,  and  we  also  saw
that  the  subject  in  hypnosis  remembered  all  the
events  of  preceding  hypnoses,  and  of  his  waking  life  ;
we  called  this  "  double  consciousness."  This  requires
special  consideration.  It  is,  indeed,  a  striking  phe-
nomenon that  two  complete  and  thoroughly  separate
states  of  consciousness  can  be  induced  and  distin-
guished in  a  human  being;  so  that  in  one,  the  waking
life,  the  events  of  waking  life  only  are  remembered  ;
and  in  the  other,  the  hypnotic  state,  the  events  of
preceding  hypnoses  and  of  waking  life.  If  we  think
of  the  life  of  such  a  being  as  divided  into  several
periods,  a,  b}  c,  d,  e,f,g,  in  the  periods  a}  c,  e,g,  only


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


the  events  of  those  periods  will  be  remembered,  so
that  in  period  c  he  will  remember  only  what  happened
in  a,  and  in  period  e  what  happened  in  a  and  c.  On
the  other  hand,  in  the  periods  bt  d,f>  both  what  has
happened  in  them  and  in  a,  c,  e,  will  be  remembered.
This  is  very  remarkable,  particularly  when  it  happens
spontaneously,  i.e.,  without  suggestion.

In  order  to  explain  this  double  consciousness  I
must  return  to  Max  Dessoir's  theory  of  the  "  Doppel
Ich,"  or  double  Ego  ;  I  must,  however,  describe  it
exactly  before  it  can  be  applied  to  our  subject.

Max  Dessoir  supposes,  with  Pierre  Janet,  that
human  personality  is  a  unity  merely  to  our  conscious-
ness, but  that  it  consists  really  of  at  least  two  clearly
distinguishable  personalities,  each  held  together  by
its  own  chain  of  memories.  He  chooses  several  ways
of  establishing  this  principle.  According  to  him
many  actions  are  done  unconsciously,  though  of
mental  origin.  I  do  not  notice  many  automatic
movements,  e.g.,  rubbing  the  hands  when  they  are
cold,  &c.  The  experiment  made  by  Barkworth  is
more  complicated  than  this.  He  can  add  up  long
rows  of  figures  while  carrying  on  a  lively  discussion,
without  allowing  his  attention  to  be  at  all  diverted
from  the  discussion.

This  shows  that,  in  the  first  place,  there  is  an  un-
conscious intelligence  in  men,  as  is  seen  in  the  rubbing
of  the  cold  hands,  and  in  the  second  place,  that  there
is  an  unconscious  memory  ;  for  Barkworth,  for  ex-
ample, must  have  at  least  two  groups  of  figures  in  his
memory,  to  make  a  third  out  of  them ;  he  must  retain
the  third  to  add  a  fourth.  But  this  chain  of  memory
is  independent  of  the  other  chain,  by  means  of  which
he  carries  on  the  conversation  (Max  Dessoir).  As,
according  to  Max  Dessoir,  consciousness  and  memory


240


HYPNOTISM.


are  the  two  elements  of  personality,  he  supposes  that
in  the  above-mentioned  case  of  Barkworth  there  are
the  elements  of  a  second  personality.  The  mental
processes  which  take  place  consciously  to  the  man
are  called  the  primary  consciousness,  and  those  which
go  on  without  his  knowledge  the  secondary  conscious-
ness ;  the  action  of  both  together  is  a  state  of  double
consciousness,  or  "  doubled  consciousness "  (Max
Dessoir).  Thus  in  Barkworth's  case  the  primary
consciousness  carried  on  the  conversation,  while  the
secondary  one  mechanically  performed  the  addition.

To  prevent  confusion  it  should  be  impressed  on  the  reader
that  what  has  hitherto  been  habitually  called  consciousness  will
for  the  future  be  called  primary  consciousness.  Generally
speaking  ''consciousness"  means  the  sum  of  subjectively  per-
ceived mental  processes.  We  must  now  give  it  a  wider  meaning.
Consciousness  falls  into  two  halves,  primary  and  secondary,
and  the  primary  consciousness  is  consciousness  in  the  older
sense  of  the  word.

In  the  case  above  mentioned  both  consciousnesses
exist  together,  but  they  may,  under  certain  circum-
stances, follow  one  another.  Max  Dessoir  tells  of  a
case  in  which  a  person  took  up  his  dream  on  a  second
night  where  he  had  left  off  on  the  first.  Here,  then,
the  dream-consciousness  tended  to  form  a  new  chain
of  memories.  The  same  author  puts  the  following
case  of  Macario's  with  the  last :  A  girl  who  was  out-
raged during  an  attack  of  spontaneous  somnambu-
lism knew  nothing  about  it  when  she  woke,  and  only
told  her  mother  of  what  had  happened  in  her  next
attack.  Such  cases  occur  under  morbid  pathological
conditions  (cf.  p.  128).

These  cases  in  dream  and  in  morbid  conditions
show  the  two  consciousnesses  following  one  another


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.

as  the  Barkworth  case  showed  them  co-existing.
Max  Dessoir  mentions  other  examples  in  support  of
his  view,  but  I  am  unable  to  go  into  them  here.

To  return  to  hypnosis.  We  have  now  to  explain
the  state  of  double  consciousness.  Max  Dessoir
thinks  that  hypnosis  simply  exhibits  the  hidden  half
of  our  mental  life  ;  the  part  which  is  called  secondary
consciousness  and  which  can  occasionally  be  ob-
served in  ordinary  life,  or  more  plainly  in  pathological
states.

Although  I  believe  that  Max  Dessoir  includes  too
much  in  his  idea  of  the  double  Ego  (Doppel  Ich)>  his
explanations  are  none  the  less  valuable  for  the  con-
sideration of  the  double  consciousness  in  hypnosis.
It  is  not  necessary  for  our  purpose  to  generalize  this
theory,  as,  though  double  consciousness  is  sometimes
observed  in  hypnosis,  it  is  by  no  means  so  common
as  some  authors  suppose.  I  shall  return  several  times
to  this  double  consciousness,  which,  however,  I  do  not
conceive  on  the  plan  of  Max  Dessoir.  Even  if  we
suppose  that  hypnosis  is  simply  the  demonstration
by  experiment  of  the  pre-existing  double  conscious-
ness, the  question  of  the  causal  connection  between
the  origin  of  hypnosis  and  this  demonstration  still
remains  unanswered.  Perhaps  we  may  call  in  dream-
consciousness  again  ;  it  may  be  that  it  is  induced  by
the  originating  of  hypnoses,  and  may  complete  the
secondary  consciousness.  Delbceuf,  who  by  no  means
accepts  the  sharp  division  of  the  primary  and  second-
ary consciousness,  identifies  the  hypnotic  phenomena
entirely  with  nightly  dreams,  as  far  as  the  subsequent
recollection  is  concerned.  In  this  case  we  could  ex-
plain the  causal  connection  between  the  production
of  hypnosis  and  the  appearance  of  double  conscious-
ness in  the  same  way  as  we  explain  sense  delusions

J7


HYPNOTISM.


by  the  experimental  induction  of  dream-conscious-
ness. I  will  not  go  into  further  details  with  regard
to  the  phenomena  of  memory  during  hypnosis,  as  I
have  already  mentioned  many  analogies  in  speaking
of  the  symptoms.

The  post-hypnotic  suggestions  will  occupy  us  a
little  longer,  because,  in  a  certain  sense,  they  can  be
explained  by  analogy.  For  this  purpose  I  will  choose
some  action  induced  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  and
will  suppose  it  to  be  a  case  of  hypnosis  without  sub-
sequent loss  of  memory.

Here  is  an  analogous  case  in  waking  life.  I  give  a
letter  to  X.,  who  has  called  on  me,  and  ask  him  to
post  it  on  his  way  home,  if  he  passes  a  letter-box.
This  he  does.

I  now  give  exactly  the  same  commission  to  Y.,
who  is  in  a  hypnotic  state,  without  subsequent  loss  of
memory.

In  both  cases  my  commission  is  executed.  Now
the  question  is,  What  is  the  difference  between  the
two  cases  ?  In  the  case  of  Y.,  one  circumstance
may  strike  us,  i.e.,  that  he  did  the  act  without,  or
perhaps  against,  his  will.

The  fact  that  Y.  posted  the  letter  without  willing
to  do  so  does  not  distinguish  his  case  from  X.'s.
X.  walked  home  with  Z.  and  talked  all  the  way.  He
passed  a  pillar-box,  and  though  he  continued  to  talk,
and  apparently  did  not  notice  the  box,  he  mechani-
cally threw  the  letter  into  it.  Later  it  occurred  to
him  that  he  had  the  letter  to  post ;  he  had  a  faint
recollection  of  having  done  it.  He  could,  however,
convince  himself  of  the  fact  by  feeling  in  his  pocket
for  the  letter.  We  see,  then,  that  he  executed  the
commission  without  conscious  will.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


243


It  would  be  more  striking  if  X.  should  do  some
such  action  against  his  will.  In  the  action  described
this  was  not  the  case.  He  would  not  have  executed
the  commission  if  his  will  had  not  consented.  Also,
he  would  have  remembered  the  action  if  his  will  had
opposed  it.  There  must  always  be  consciousness
when  the  will  is  exerted  to  prevent  something.  There
must  be  an  idea  of  the  action  to  be  performed.  What
is  striking  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  exactly  the
fact  that  it  is  carried  out  against  the  will,  in  which
case  the  subject  of  course  knows  what  is  to  be  done,
and  has  an  idea  of  it.  It  is  this  idea  which  causes  a
post-hypnotic  action  to  be  carried  out  in  spite  of  the
will.

The  question  now  is  whether  we  can  find  an
analogy  to  this  in  waking  life,  whether  an  idea  can
in  this  case  cause  a  motor  or  other  effect  in  spite
of  the  will. The  answer  must  be,  "  Very  commonly."

We  saw,  when  talking  of  suggestion  in  the  waking
state,  that  an  idea  is  sometimes  enough  to  cause  an
action  or  a  particular  state  in  spite  of  the  will.  This
is  a  common  occurrence.  We  will  suppose  that  A,
has  lost  a  dear  relation.  A.  is  in  consequence  sad
and  depressed,  and  cannot  refrain  from  tears.  Months
pass,  and  he  grows  calm  ;  but  when  the  anniversary
of  the  death  arrives  he  falls  again  into  the  same  state
of  mental  excitement  and  tears,  which  he  cannot
conquer.  The  vivid  idea  has  been  enough  to  throw
him,  against  his  will,  into  a  certain  state.

A  person  who  stammers  is  in  the  same  case.  Alone
at  home  he  can  speak  quite  well,  but  a  stranger
comes  in  and  he  begins  to  stammer.  He  stammers
because  he  thought  he  should  stammer,  and  his  will
is  powerless  both  over  the  thought  and  the  stammer-
ing. We  see  the  same  sort  of  thing  constantly,  and


244


HYPNOTISM.


certain  states  of  illness  are  induced  merely  by  a  vivid
expectation  of  them  ;  they  then  come  on  in  spite  of
the  will.  Accordingly  it  is  not  astonishing  that  a
post-hypnotic  suggestion  should  succeed  against  the
subject's  will.

The  post-hypnotic  movements  and  actions  carried
out  in  spite  of  the  will — or,  to  speak  more  exactly,  in
spite  of  the  wish — have  a  great  likeness  to  the  in-
stinctive movements  well  known  in  Psychology,
which  are  often  made  to  satisfy  a  pleasure  which
follows  from  the  act.  Such  instinctive  movements
are  entirely  independent  of  the  will  ;  they  take  place
in  spite  of  the  wish.  For  example,  the  raising  of  the
hand  to  ward  off  danger  is  an  instinctive  movement
(Wundt).  Here  there  may  very  well  be  an  idea
of  the  movement,  though  deeper  mental  processes
compel  its  execution,  as  in  many  cases  of  post-hyp-
notic suggestion  carried  out  in  spite  of  the  will.  It  is
the  same  thing  in  cases  of  so-called  impulsive  mania.
The  patients  act  without  clear  ideas  of  their  motives.
Their  actions  appear  to  be  impelled  by  instinct,
though  they  are  consciously  carried  out  (Schtile).

I  have  now  considered  why  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tions are  carried  out  without,  or  in  spite  of,  the  will.
I  supposed  a  case  in  which  the  subject  remembered
the  order  given  him  in  hypnosis  after  he  woke  ;  i.e.,
I  considered  only  those  cases  in  which  there  was  no
loss  of  memory  in  waking.  It  is  a  more  enigmatic
question,  why  post-hypnotic  suggestions  are  carried
out  when  there  is  loss  of  memory  after  waking,  and
the  subject  in  consequence  is  apparently  unconscious
of  having  received  the  command.

For  explanation  let  us  return  to  the  case  of  waking
life,  where  X.  was  to  post  a  letter. I  point  out  that


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  245

X.  did  not  keep  the  request  continually  in  his  con-
sciousness, and  that  he  even  apparently  posted  the
letter  unconsciously  ;  yet  he  would  not  have  per-
formed the  action  at  all  if  he  had  not  really  re-
membered my  request.

It  is  the  same  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion.  It
really  remains  in  the  memory,  and  the  unconscious-
ness is  only  apparent.  All  post-hypnotic  suggestions
are  merely  apparently  forgotten  between  waking  and
fulfilment.  To  prove  this  I  must  digress  a  little  and
go  back  to  the  primary  consciousness,  which  is  the
name  given  to  our  subjective  mentally  perceived  pro-
cesses, while  the  unperceived  ones  are  called  the
secondary  consciousness.

The  state  of  the  primary  consciousness  is  not  uni-
form, but,  on  the  contrary,  subject  to  constant
changes.  In  one  period  we  are  conscious  of  ideas
which  are  wanting  in  others.  One  period  comprises
more  than  another.  Now,  if  we  call  the  sum  of  mental
processes  perceived  in  one  state  a  sphere  of  conscious-
ness, we  may  suppose  a  number  of  such  spheres.  But
not  to  complicate  the  subject  too  much,  we  will
suppose  two  spheres,  which  will  answer  our  purpose.

We  saw,  when  discussing  the  memory,  that  the
hypnotic  subject  who  forgot  the  events  of  hypnosis
in  waking  life  remembered  them  in  later  hypnosis.
But  he  remembered  the  events  of  waking  life  also  in
hypnosis,  though  in  waking  life  he  was  only  con-
scious of  the  events  of  that  life.  We  have,  then,  two
different  spheres  of  consciousness  here :  one  com-
prises the  events  of  hypnosis  and  of  waking  life,  the
other  only  those  of  waking  life.  They  follow  one
another.

During  waking  life  there  are  only  memory  pictures
of  this  life  in  the  primary  consciousness  ;  in  the


246


HYPNOTISM.


secondary  consciousness  there  are  memory  pictures
of  the  hypnotic  state,  i.e.,  the  impressions  of  hyp-
nosis are  received,  but  do  not  rise  into  the  primary
consciousness.  But  it  must  not  be  thought  that  the
two  consciousnesses  are  completely  separated.  Im-
pressions made  on  the  secondary  consciousness
occasionally  rise  to  the  primary.  Upon  this  fact
depends  the  restoration  of  memory  through  associa-
tion of  ideas,  spoken  of  on  p.  125.  It  can  also  be
proved  that  the  impressions  of  hypnosis  by  no  means
disappear  in  waking  life,  but  are  really  firmly  estab-
lished in  the  brain.

To  prove  this  I  must  digress  again,  and  mention  automatic
writing.  I  owe  my  knowledge  of  this  to  Dr.  Max  Dessoir,
whom  I  again  thank  for  his  unselfish  and  genuinely  scientific
help  in  the  writing  of  this  book.  This  automatic  writing  is
of  great  interest  and  importance.  It  has  been  also  observed
among  uncivilized  peoples  (Doolittle,  Bastian).

I  have  had  frequent  occasion  to  speak  of  automatic  move-
ments and  actions.  To  prevent  confusion  of  ideas  it  should
be  expressly  mentioned  that  I  do  not  mean  here  by  automatic
movements,  those  so  called  by  Lie'beault  and  Bernheim,  which
Max  Dessoir  more  justly  calls  continued  movements  (cf.  p.  69).
ft>  By  automatic  movements  I  here  mean  those  of  which  we  are
unconscious  at  the  moment  they  are  made,  though  they  show
all  the  symptoms  of  a  mental  causation.  When  I  walk  my
movements  are  nearly  always  automatic ;  I  walk  without  being
conscious  of  making  the  individual  movements.

With  regard  to  automatic  writing,  it  should  be  mentioned
that  there  are  men  who  habitually  move  their  fingers  on  the
table  while  they  are  talking  or  thinking.  When  such  people
take  a  pencil  in  their  hands  they  make  all  sorts  of  scribbled
marks  without  observing  it,  while  they  are  thinking  of  other
things.  This  scribbling  may  be  regarded  as  the  beginning  of
\  automatic  writing.  It  may  take  a  certain  rational  form.  Schiller
says  that  when  reflecting  he  has  often  covered  whole  sheets  of
paper  with  little  horses  (Max  Dessoir).  Other  people  auto-
matically write  letters  and  words,  and  this  process  is  called


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


247


automatic  writing  ;  it  is  evidently  guided  by  a  species  of  in-
telligence, as  without  it  no  rational  words  could  be  written.  But
this  intelligence  resides  in  the  writer,  though  it  may  not  be
conscious  in  the  ordinary  sense  of  the  word  ;  it  is  the  secondary
consciousness,  which  carries  on  movements  and  actions  as  does
the  primary  consciousness,  although  the  person  concerned  does
not  remark  them.  In  any  case  the  intelligence  is  innate  in  the
person,  and  is  part  of  him,  and  not  an  external  force  or  spirit,
as  the  spiritualists,  who  are  also  acquainted  with  it,  and  call  it
mediumistic  writing,  say  it  is.

I  ask  the  reader  to  follow  me  through  some  experiments  with
automatic  writing.  I  give  a  person  who  is  not  in  hypnosis  a  pen
or  pencil  and  ask  him  to  answer  some  question  in  writing — for
example,  what  he  had  for  dinner  yesterday  ;  he  is,  however,  to
leave  his  hand  passive  and  not  write  on  purpose  ;  at  the  same
time  I  put  the  point  of  the  pencil  on  paper.  It  would  not  be
strange  that  the  person  should  write  down  something  he  is
thinking  of.  It  would  remind  us  of  the  experiments  in  thought-
reading  described  (p.  56).  The  person  thinks  of  roast  veal  and
the  hand  makes  corresponding  movements.  But  the  process
becomes  rather  different  when  I  talk  quietly  to  the  writer  mean-
while. I  speak  of  the  theatre,  the  weather,  &c.  ;  in  the  mean-
time the  hand  writes  "  roast  veal."  It  appears  that  this  was
yesterday's  dinner.  In  this  case  the  hand  wrote  without  con-
centration of  thought  on  the  writer's  part  ;  and  this  is  already
different  from  the  usual  thought-reading.  A  rational  and  true
answer  has  been  given  to  a  direct  question  while  a  conversation
was  being  carried  on.  As  the  writing  was  not  noticed  it  follows
that  it  was  automatic.  This  automatic  writing  is  certainly
striking.

Now,  though  the  writer  did  not  know  he  was  writing,  he  knew
the  fact  which  he  unconsciously  wrote  down  ;  i.e.,  he  knew  that
he  had  had  roast  veal  for  dinner  yesterday.  But  there  are  also
persons  who  will  answer  questions  through  automatic  writing
about  things  they  do  not  know  at  all,  e.g.,  when  somebody  is
asked  what  he  had  for  dinner  every  day  last  week,  he  will  write
down  the  whole  list  of  dishes,  though  he  does  not  know  them
himself,  i.e.,  though  they  are  not  in  his  primary  consciousness.

Such  experiments  are  very  good  when  made  in  hypnosis,  and
sense  delusions,  especially  the  negative  ones,  are  made  more
intelligible  by  them,  as  was  pointed  out  on  p.  184.  I  suggest  to
X.,  in  hypnosis,  that  A.  and  B.,  who  are  really  present,  have


248


HYPNOTISM.


gone  away.  X.  ceases  entirely  to  respond  to  A.  and  B.  ;  he
neither  hears  nor  sees  them.  When  I  ask  him  who  is  present
he  says,  "  Only  you  and  I  " ;  upon  which  I  give  him  a  pencil
and  paper  and  command  him  to  answer  the  question  in  writing.
He  writes,  "  Dr.  Moll,  Mr.  A.,  Mr.  B.,  and  myself."  Conse-
quently he  has  answered  the  question  intelligently,  without
knowing  that  he  is  writing.  This  shows  that  A.  and  B.  were
really  perceived,  but  that  X.  was  unconscious  of  the  perception.
We  will  now  return  to  the  starting-point  of  our  discussion.

By  means  of  automatic  writing  it  can  be  proved  that
the  impressions  of  hypnosis  are  really  firmly  lodged
in  the  brain  ;  Gurney,  F.  Myers,  and  Pierre  Janet
have  made  a  series  of  very  good  experiments  on  this
point.  X.,  for  example,  is  waked  from  hypnosis  and
remembers  nothing  that  has  happened  ;  but  when  he
is  ordered  to  write  automatically  what  was  said  to  him
he  does  it.  Now,  as  he  could  not  tell  these  things,
and  they  are  not  to  be  found  in  the  primary  con-
sciousness, these  experiments  in  automatic  writing
prove  that  the  impressions  exist  all  the  same.  They
disclose  themselves  in  the  automatic  writing.

We  have  now  to  show  why  the  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion is  carried  out  in  spite  of  loss  of  memory.  We
have  seen  that  this  loss  of  memory  only  exists  so  far
that  the  hypnotic  events  and  the  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion are  to  be  found  in  the  secondary  consciousness
only.  In  any  case,  as  I  have  shown,  the  loss  of
memory  is  only  apparent,  and  the  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion is  lodged  in  the  secondary  consciousness.
And  this,  as  I  have  also  shown  by  automatic  writing,
acts  with  a  certain  intelligence,  and  without  confusion
in  its  proper  chain  of  thought.

The  foregoing  explanations  show,  firstly,  why  a
post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  carried  out  without  the
will  or  in  spite  of  it  ;  and,  secondly,  why  it  is  carried


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


249


out  in  spite  of  the  apparent  forgetting  of  the  com-
mand. A  further  question  is  this — Why  is  a  post-
hypnotic suggestion  carried  out  at  the  right  moment  ?
The  answer  will  differ  according  to  the  manner  in
which  the  moment  for  the  execution  of  the  suggestion
is  decided.  We  already  know  (p.  142)  that  the
moment  may  be  appointed  in  numerous  ways  ;  either
by  a  concrete  external  sign — e.g.,  the  striking  of  the
clock — or  by  fixing  an  abstract  period,  or  by  counting
signals  or  days.

In  the  case  of  the  striking  clock  we  shall  find  no
new  mental  law ;  we  find  the  same  process  quite  com-
monly in  normal  life,  it  is  a  result  of  the  association
of  ideas.  The  striking  of  the  clock  often  reminds  us
of  something  we  wanted  to  do  at  that  particular  time.

The  same  thing  happens  when  we  tie  a  knot  in  our
handkerchiefs  to  remind  ourselves  of  something.  It
occurs  to  me  that  I  must  write  a  letter  to-morrow  ;  I
make  a  knot  in  my  handkerchief  to  remind  myself  of
it.  The  knot  and  the  letter  are  then  associated  in  my
consciousness,  and  when  I  see  the  knot  the  idea  of  the
letter  rises  from  my  secondary  into  my  primary  con-
sciousness. Memory  is  caused  by  association  of  ideas.
Now  we  see  the  same  thing  in  the  example  of  post-
hypnotic suggestion  on  p.  142.  The  striking  of  the
clock  made  the  subject  remember  to  take  the  water-
bottle  and  walk  up  and  down  with  it.  This  process
of  association  is  so  powerful  that  it  often  takes  effect
even  when  the  suggestion  is  not  punctually  carried  out.

I  hypnotize  a  man  on  Saturday  and  tell  him,  "  When
you  come  in  on  Tuesday  I  shall  cough  three  times  ;
you  will  then  give  me  your  hand  and  remark, '  That  is
too  stupid.'  "  The  man  does  not  come  till  Thursday,
but  the  suggestion  is  carried  out,  merely  because  I
cough.


25°


HYPNOTISM.


We  will  take  the  second  case  where  an  abstract
period  of  time  was  given  instead  of  a  definite  sign.
Here  the  idea  lay  in  the  secondary  consciousness  till
it  resulted  in  the  corresponding  action.  An  approxi-
mate but  inexact  calculation  took  place  in  the
secondary  consciousness.

For  this  also  many  analogies  may  be  found  in
ordinary  life.  I  say  to  A.,  "  Remind  me  in  an  hour
to  write  a  letter."  A.  is  busy,  and  thinks  no  more  of
the  letter,  but  nevertheless  reminds  me  of  it  after
some  time.  But  as  he  has  not  looked  at  the  clock,  he
is  not  punctual  :  the  case  is  quite  analogous  to  post-
hypnotic  suggestion,  where  there  is  generally  no  perfect
punctuality.

Some  people  suppose  that  in  the  few  cases  of
striking  punctuality,  some  unconscious  calculation
of  time  takes  place,  like  the  unconscious  regularity
of  our  pulse  and  breathing.  However  that  may  be,
there  are  certain  persons  who  can  calculate  time  with
some  exactitude  when  they  are  awake,  and  others
can  do  the  same  in  sleep  ;  they  can  wake  themselves
at  a  definite  time  without  hearing  the  clock  strike.  In
any  case  it  is  unnecessary  to  suppose  that  hypnotic
subjects  possess  a  peculiar  faculty  for  fixing  time  which
others  do  not.

The  older  mesmerists,  Nasse  and  Eschenmayer  for  example,
made  investigations  about  this  faculty  of  somnambulic  subjects
for  exactly  reckoning  time.  The  ancient  Hindoos  studied  it
industriously.  This  subjective  faculty  for  calculating  time  is
sometimes  called  the  mental  clock  [Kopfuhr)  (Du  Prel).

The  third  way  of  fixing  time  is  by  counting  signals
or  days  (cf.  p.  142).  Gurney's  explanation  of  this  is
grounded  on  the  division  of  the  consciousness  into
primary  and  secondary,  which  I  have  explained  above.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  251


While  the  primary  consciousness  is  busy  talking  to
the  experimenter  the  secondary  consciousness  works
on  independently.  It  remembers  the  command  and
counts  the  signals  given  ;  e.g.,  the  shuffling  of  feet,  &c.
When  the  tenth  signal  is  given  the  suggestion  is
carried  out,  just  as  other  suggestions  are  carried  out  at
an  appointed  signal  (cf.  the  example  on  p.  142).

Gurney  endeavours  to  explain  many  long-deferred
suggestions  in  just  the  same  way.  As  we  have  seen,
in  these  also  the  execution  of  the  suggestion  may
be  ordered  at  the  end  of  a  series  of  clays  and  weeks
instead  of  on  a  definite  date  (p.  142).  This  may  be
explained  in  two  ways.  Perhaps  the  subject  cal-
culates the  date  after  he  has  been  told  the  number
of  days  or  weeks.  Against  this  there  is  the  fact  that
the  subjects,  when  hypnotized  in  the  intervening  time,
cannot  tell  the  date.  On  this  account  Gurney  sup-
poses an  action  of  the  secondary  consciousness  in
such  cases.  He  thinks  that  the  subject  counts  the
days  in  his  secondary  consciousness  just  as  we  con-
sciously count  days  in  waking  life,  and  thus  is  able
to  carry  out  the  suggestion.  He  thinks  this  all  the
more  likely  because  when  the  subjects  are  hypnotized
in  the  intervening  time,  they  can  count  the  days
which  have  elapsed,  and  are  to  elapse,  before  the
suggestion  is  carried  out,  though  they  do  not  know
the  exact  date.

These  different  spheres  of  consciousness  enable  us
to  better  understand  those  post-hypnotic  suggestions
which  are  carried  out  in  a  state  of  complete  loss
of  memory  ;  for  the  suggested  command  is  always
accepted,  even  when  the  subject  remembers  nothing
about  it  subsequently.  The  punctual  execution  of
such  a  command  is  only  comprehensible  if,  besides
the  primary  consciousness,  a  secondary  consciousness
works  intelligently  in  us.


252


HYPNOTISM.


The  preceding  explanations  are  chiefly  intended
to  approximate  as  much  as  possible  post-hypnotic
suggestion  to  certain  habitual  occurrences.  There  is
no  question  of  a  complete  identification  of  them  ;
for  many  post-hypnotic  suggestions  can  apparently
be  distinguished  from  all  known  processes  of  waking
life  in  two  ways.  The  subject  does  not  remember
the  command  when  the  hypnosis  is  over  ;  he  is  appa-
rently unconscious  of  the  idea  of  executing  it ;  if  he
is  spoken  to  about  it  after  waking  the  idea  cannot
be  recalled  to  his  mind  ;  and  yet,  in  in  spite  of  this,
it  arises  at  the  time  fixed.  We  forget  much  in
ordinary  life  also  ;  but  the  recollection  of  a  thing
at  a  certain  moment,  which  no  hints  or  efforts  can
recall  in  the  intermediate  time,  appears  to  me  to  be
the  first  prerogative  of  many  post-hypnotic  sugges-
tions ;  a  second  is  that  it  is  not  the  command  itself
but  the  idea  of  its  execution  which  is  remembered.

And  yet  even  these  striking  phenomena  are  by  no
means  an  absolute  prerogative  of  hypnosis.  We  are
reminded,  in  the  first  place,  of  those  dominant  ideas
which  are  often  pathological,  and  whose  origin  is  for
the  most  part  unknown  (Bentivegni).  These  ideas
sometimes  impel  to  actions  (Krafft-Ebing)  which
the  person  concerned  becomes  under  some  circum-
stances powerless  to  control.  Sometimes  the  origin
of  the  idea  is  not  to  be  discovered  by  questions  or
by  any  other  means.  If  we  hold  fast  to  the  principle
of  Locke,  "  Nil  est  in  intellectu,  quod  non  prius  fuerit
in  sensu,"  we  shall  be  obliged  to  suppose  that  some
external  event  has  formerly  influenced  the  mind  of
the  person  concerned,  but  that  the  event  itself  is
forgotten.  None  the  less,  it  has  an  effect,  which
sometimes  takes  the  form  of  a  dominant  idea  and
sometimes  of  an  action  caused  by  it  (murder,  suicide,


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


253


incendiarism,  &c.)  (Krafft-Ebing).  Here,  exactly
as  in  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  the  external  prompt-
ing impression  is  forgotten  in  the  intervening  time,
as  well  as  at  the  moment  when  the  idea  arises  or  the
action  is  carried  out.

But  I  think  that  it  is  not  only  under  pathological
conditions  that  some  externally  induced  idea  in-
fluences our  actions,  feelings,  &c,  without  our  being
able  by  any  means  to  remember  how  the  idea  was,
so  to  speak,  implanted  in  us.  Let  us  suppose  that
a  child  two  or  three  years  old  is  often  in  the  society
of  A.  and  B  ;  A.  is  kind  and  gentle,  B  hard  and
unkind,  so  that  the  child  gradually  learns  to  like
A.  and  dislike  B.  Let  us  suppose  that  the  child  sees
neither  for  a  long  time  ;  nevertheless  when  it  does
it  will  still  like  A.  and  dislike  B.  The  child,  who
is  now  several  years  older,  will  not  know  its  own
reasons ;  it  will  not  remember  the  former  conduct
of  A.  and  B.  ;  no  questions  will  bring  this  back  to  — ^
its  memory  ;  yet  the  effect  of  the  old  impressions
remains,  and  shows  itself  in  the  child's  behaviour
to  A.  and  B.  It  is  certain  that  the  same  thing
happens  after  childhood.  Sharp-sighted  observers
think  it  likely  that  a  man  may  owe  his  preference
for  a  particular  profession — painting,  for  example —
to  some  childish  impression,  such  as  dabbling  with
colours ;  in  this  case  also  the  early  impression  is  for-
gotten by  the  adult.

Besides,  this  occurrence  is  by  no  means  confined
to  childhood.  We  are  often  influenced  by  unim-
portant expressions  we  have  heard,  though  later
we  cannot  trace  back  the  effect  to  its  cause.  Our
conduct  with  regard  to  persons,  circumstances,  and
things  is  very  often  the  effect  of  early  unconscious
impressions.


254


HYPNOTISM.


We  now  know  that  those  hypnotic  states  in  which
there  is  subsequent  loss  of  memory  are  by  no  means
unconscious  states,  but  that  the  impressions  received
are  at  the  most  only  sub-conscious.  Therefore  the
fact  that  the  impressions  received  in  hypnosis  in-
fluence the  waking  conduct  of  the  subject,  though
he  has  forgotten  them,  need  no  longer  be  an  enigma
to  us.  Like  the  waking  people  in  the  examples
given,  he  will  rather  fully  assimilate  the  external
influence,  will  forget  it,  and  act  as  if  spontaneously  ;
or  he  will  yield  to  an  impulse,  as  in  the  cases  of  a
dominant  idea,  without  being  conscious  of  its  external
cause.

I  have  hitherto  spoken  only  of  post-hypnotic  move-
ments and  actions,  and  have  endeavoured  to  explain
the  most  important  phenomena  by  means  of  analogy.
I  have  still  a  few  words  to  say  about  post-hypnotic
sense  delusions,  which  are  less  easy  to  explain.  It  is
true  that  those  which  occur  in  a  fresh  hypnosis  hardly
present  any  substantial  difficulty.  We  have  seen  that
^the  subsequent  loss  of  memory  is  only  apparent,  and
that  consequently  the  idea  remains  in  the  conscious-
ness, though  only  in  the  secondary  consciousness,  v
Consequently  it  is  not  surprising  that  the  suggested
idea  should  at  an  appointed  time  transform  itself  into
a  sense  delusion  in  a  fresh  hypnosis,  which  fresh
hypnosis  comes  on  through  association  when  the  idea
reappears  ;  we  must  then  explain  the  sense  delusion
by  means  of  the  dreamc-onsciousness,  as  I  have  shown
above.

It  is  quite  another  thing  when  the  sense  delusion
appears  without  a  new  hypnosis.  For  example,  I
say  to  some  one  in  hypnosis,  "  When  I  cough  after
you  wake,  you  will  see  a  pigeon  sitting  on  the  table  ;


THE  THE  OR  Y  OF  H  VP  NO  T1SM.  255


you  will  remain  thoroughly  awake."  The  suggestion
takes  effect ;  the  subject  sees  a  pigeon  where  no
pigeon  is  ;  but  it  is  impossible  to  make  him  accept
a  further  suggestion.  That  one  point  excepted,  he
seems  perfectly  normal.  Whether,  in  spite  of  this,  the
total  mental  state  of  such  people  is  really  normal,
will  be  discussed  when  we  come  to  the  legal  side
of  the  question.  Bentivegni  speaks  very  clearly
on  this  point.  Now,  how  can  we  explain  this  par-
ticular sense  delusion  ?  We  can  hardly  consider  the
dream-consciousness  its  cause,  as  this  apparently  is
not  present  while  the  suggestion  is  taking  effect
But  we  find  like  occurrences  under  different  circum-
stances. I  do  not  mention  the  hallucinations  of
insane  persons,  because  it  is  exactly  the  addition
of  other  disorders  to  their  sense  delusions  which  dis-
tinguishes them  from  the  above  case.  But  we  find
the  same  kind  of  sense  delusions  under  other  circum-
stances in  persons  who  for  some  reason  or  other
"  are  disinclined  to  correct  the  creations  of  their  own
imagination,"  as  Krafft-Ebing  puts  it.  This  author
mentions  the  hallucinations  of  several  famous  men—
the  case  of  Socrates  and  his  Daemon,  and  Luther,
who  threw  an  inkstand  at  the  devil,  &c.  Such  delu-
sions are  often  caused  by  strong  expectant  attention,
of  which  I  have  already  spoken.  This  is  very  clearly
seen  in  spiritualistic  manifestations,  which  may  be
ascribed  in  great  part  to  hallucinations  of  the  spec-
tators, who  think  they  see  spirits  or  other  things
in  consequence  of  abnormal  processes  in  their  own
brain.  Eduard  v.  Hartmann  has  carefully  discussed
the  theory  of  hallucination  in  spiritualism,  though
he  explains  the  origin  of  the  hallucinations  in  a
peculiar  manner.  In  any  case  there  are  persons  who
have  hallucinations  of  sight,  hearings  &c,  without


256


HYPNOTISM.


being  hypnotized  ;  they  result  from  a  particular
mental  state  which  in  some  cases  may  be  called  a
state  of  expectation.  It  thus  appears  that  the  induc-
tion of  sense  delusions  by  means  of  post-hypnotic
suggestion  brings  about  a  mental  state  when  the  idea
reappears,  which  has  a  great  resemblance  to  this  state
of  expectation,  and  is  even  perhaps  identical  with
it.  In  this  way,  perhaps,  these  cases  of  sense  delusion
may  be  classed  with  facts  with  which  we  have  long
been  acquainted.

Several  attempts  have  been  made  to  explain  hyp-
nosis from  the  point  of  view  of  psychology  ;  but  their
common  defect  is,  that  they  try  to  explain  too  many
different  phenomena  by  attention,  the  change  in
which  is  most  striking  during  hypnosis.  I  have
formerly  tried  to  explain  hypnotic  phenomena  in  a
like  manner.  As  the  different  theories  referring  to
this  are  often  met  with,  I  shall  develop  them  further
in  what  follows.  The  ensuing  explanations  are  not
in  contradiction  with  what  has  been  already  said,  but
are,  on  the  contrary,  supplemented  by  it,  particularly
by  a  careful  consideration  of  the  dream-conscious-
ness.

s^^—  Susceptibility  to  suggestion  is  the  chief  phenomenon
of  hypnosis.  We  have  seen  how  easily  a  hypnotic
suggestion  is  carried  out.  The  externally  suggested
idea  of  a  movement  induces  the  movement,  the  idea
of  an  object  causes  a  corresponding  sense  hallucina-
tion. However  strange  and  paradoxical  the  pheno-
mena of  hypnosis  may  appear  to  us  at  first  sight,
we  may  be  sure  that  there  is  no  absolute  difference
between  hypnotic  and  non-hypnotic  states.  Psycho-
logy has  lately  shown  that  a  certain  degree  of  sus-
ceptibility to  suggestion  is  normal. If  A.  tells  B.


THE  THE  OR  Y  OF  H  YPNO  TISM.  2  5  7


to  lift  his  arm  B.  is  inclined  to  do  it,  though  he  pro-
bably controls  the  impulse  by  his  own  will.  The
following  example  may  make  this  clearer.  When
two  people  look  at  each  other  they  both  often  begin
to  laugh,  if  one  assures  the  other  he  is  going  to
laugh.  But  the  idea  of  laughter  is  a  necessary  con-
dition for  its  appearance,  and  the  stronger  the  idea
the  quicker  will  laughter  ensue.  We  seek  to  prevent
the  laughter  by  arousing  in  ourselves  the  contrary
idea.  Probably  many  of  my  readers  have  made  the
following  observation  in  their  own  cases,  as  I  have
in  myself :  when  I  feel  inclined  to  laugh  I  can  pre-
vent it  by  causing  myself  some  physical  pain,  e.g.,
by  pricking  myself  with  a  needle.  The  pain  drives
away  the  idea  of  laughter,  and  so  prevents  it.  This
is  an  example  of  the  way  in  which  laughter  may
be  prevented  by  arousing  an  opposing  idea.

Now  it  appears  that  this  occurs  often  in  ordinary
life ;  the  idea  of  a  movement  results  in  a  movement
(Johann  Muller),  if  it  is  not  opposed  by  a  contrary
idea.  The  idea  of  a  movement  called  up  in  a  subject
in  or  out  of  hypnosis  has  a  tendency  to  induce  the
movement.  But  in  waking  life  this  idea  is  made
ineffectual  by  the  voluntary  idea  of  the  subject,  that
he  will  prevent  the  suggested  movement ;  the  hypno-
tized subject  cannot  do  this.  Thus  in  hypnosis
certain  ideas  are  inhibited,  and  even  the  inhibitory
ideas  can  be  inhibited.  We  have  to  thank  Heiden-
hain  for  having  first  pointed  out  the  importance  of
inhibitory  processes  in  hypnosis.  The  case  is  of
course  the  same  with  suggested  paralyses.  Here  the
idea  of  inability  to  move  is  suggested.  In  ordinary
life  we  can  oppose  this  and  make  it  ineffectual  by
means  of  voluntarily  produced  opposing  ideas  ;  but
in  hypnosis  the  suggested  idea  cannot  be  supplanted

18


258


HYPNOTISM.


by  the  voluntary  one,  and  in  consequence  the  idea  of
inability  to  move  transforms  itself  into  a  real  inability.

Let  us  see  if  the  process  in  sense  delusions  can  be
looked  at  in  the  same  light.  To  my  mind  it  is
possible.  When  we  hear  some  one  say,  "  There  is  a
dog,"  we  are  inclined  to  believe  it,  as  I  have  said
above.  Our  sense  perceptions,  feelings,  and  memory
pictures  prevent  the  suggested  idea  becoming  a  per-
ception, so  that  we  decline  to  believe  in  the  dog.
But  in  hypnosis  the  sense  impressions  do  not  change
into  feelings,  except  such  external  impressions  as  the
experimenter  allows  to  change  into  conscious  sense
ideas  ;  consequently  the  memory  pictures  in  hypnosis
do  not  follow  their  normal  course  and  are  not  justly
estimated.  The  normal  course  is  interfered  with.
This  limitation  of  the  normal  course  of  the  ideas
allows  the  idea  of  the  dog  to  become  a  perception
because  the  idea  cannot  be  corrected.  It  is  the  same
with  negative  hallucinations,  which  we  may  consider
as  caused  by  the  inability  of  the  normal  course  of
ideas  to  correct  the  suggestion.

We  may,  then,  consider  every  hypnosis  as  a  state
in  which  the  normal  course  of  the  ideas  is  inhibited.
It  matters  not  whether  the  ideas  have  to  do  with
movements,  or  with  sense  impressions.  We  have
seen  that  their  normal  course  is  always  inhibited.  In
particular,  the  subject  is  unable  to  control  the  external
ideas  or  to  put  forward  his  own  ;  the  external  ones
dominate  his  consciousness.  Psychologically  speaking,
what  we  mean  by  attention  is  the  power  of  fixing
certain  ideas  in  the  mind  and  of  working  with  them.
Consequently  we  may  say  that  there  is  an  alteration
of  attention  in  hypnosis.

But  attention  may  be  either  spontaneous  or  reflex
(Ed.  v.  Hartmann), When  by  an  act  of  will  we  choose


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  259

one  of  several  ideas  and  fix  our  attention  upon  it,
this  is  spontaneous  attention  ;  but  when  one  idea
.  among  several  gets  the  upper  hand  through  its
intensity  or  for  some  other  reason,  and  thus  represses
other  ideas,  and  draws  exclusive  attention  upon  itself,
this  is  reflex  attention.  ~~)
Now  it  is  only  spontaneous  attention  which  is
altered  in  hypnosis,  i.e.,  the  subject's  ability  volun-
tarily to  prefer  one  idea  to  another  is  interfered
with,  while  reflex  attention  is  undisturbed,  and
it  is  through  this  last  that  a  suggested  idea,  the
choice  of  which  has  not,  however,  been  left  to  the
subject,  comes  into  prominence.  Many  investigators
conceive  hypnotism  in  this  way.  The  works  of  Durand
de  Gros,  Liebeault,  and  more  lately  of  Beard,  Richet,
Schneider,  Wundt,  and  Bentivegni,  are  in  the  main
directed  to  this  point.

We  may  hope  besides  that  further  investigations  in
numerical1  psychology  will  throw  light  upon  the  state
of  the  attention  in  hypnosis.  Measurements  of  the
time  of  reaction  should  be  the  chief  point  considered  ;
they  have  hitherto  been  undertaken  in  insufficient
number.  By  time  of  reaction  we  mean  the  time  that
elapses  between  the  moment  of  making  a  sense
impression,  and  the  moment  when  the  impression
manifests  itself  by  some  external  sign  (Wundt).  It
is  known  that  a  number  of  different  processes  take
place  in  the  consciousness  during  the  time  of  reaction.
I  shall  the  less  enter  into  them,  that  the  researches
which  have  hitherto  been  made  into  the  time  of
reaction  during  hypnosis  have  given  contradictory

1  In  Max  Dessoir's  classification  of  psychology  he  calls  that
part  which  occupies  itself  with  calculating  the  time  of  reaction
&c,  "  numerical  psychology."


26o


HYPNOTISM.


results.  Marie  and  Azoulay  have  measured  the  time
of  reaction  of  suggested  sense  delusions  in  hypnosis  ;
they  found  it  longer  than  when  the  object  was  a  real  .
one.  Perhaps  this  is  because  the  points  of  recognition
{points  de  repere)  have  to  arouse  the  suggested  picture  1
before  it  can  be  received.  The  time  of  reaction,
according  to  my  experience,  may  last  so  long — to
return  to  the  experiment  with  the  photographs  on
p.  103 — that  we  might  even  speak  of  a  search  for
the  picture.  The  subject  looks  till  he  finds  the
points  of  recognition,  which  at  once  recall  the  picture
to  his  memory.  This  search  may  be  united  with  a
dim  consciousness  on  the  part  of  the  hypnotic  that
the  whole  thing  is  a  delusion.  It  is  quite  a  mistake
to  think  this  search  a  sign  of  fraud.

Other  experimenters  have  examined  the  time  of
reaction  for  real  objects.  Stanley  Hall  found  that
for  real  objects  it  was  considerably  shortened  in
hypnosis.  He  found  before  hypnosis,  0*328  seconds  ;
during  hypnosis,  0*193  seconds  ;  half  an  hour  after,
0*348  seconds.  The  time  of  reaction  during  hypnosis
is  thus  sensibly  diminished  here ;  but  William  James's
experiments  have  not  confirmed  Stanley  Hall's.  He
nearly  always  found  an  increase  of  the  time  of  reaction
during  hypnosis,  sometimes  to  an  important  extent.
He  gives  this  as  the  average  on  one  occasion  :  before
hypnosis,  0*282  seconds  ;  during  hypnosis  as  much  as
0*546  seconds  ;  after  hypnosis,  0*166  seconds.  But  as
there  are  many  contradictions  in  James's  different
experiments,  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn.  He  him-
self believes  that  the  contradictions  are  to  be  ascribed
to  the  fact  that  so  many  different  states  are  included

1  I  am  doubtful  if  in  this  case  we  ought  to  talk  of  time  of
reaction,  as  this  expression  is  generally  used  only  with  regard
to  perceptions  of  real  objects.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


261


in  hypnosis,  and  that  we  should  be  careful  not  to
generalize  from  single  observations.  Beaunis,  who
has  also  made  these  experiments,  is  just  as  cautious.
The  only  conclusion  he  draws  from  his  partly  con-
tradictory results  is,  that  the  time  of  reaction  in
hypnosis  may  be  shortened  by  suggestion.

It  should  be  already  clear  from  all  the  foregoing
explanations  that  the  phenomena  of  hypnosis  have
many  more  points  of  contact  with  ordinary  life  than
would  be  concluded  from  the  discussions  and  articles
written  to  satisfy  a  mere  longing  for  sensation.  Some
of  the  phenomena,  e.g.,  motion  without  will,  only
appear  mysterious  on  the  most  superficial  observa-
tion, for  we  have  seen  that  an  idea  of  a  movement  is
enough  to  cause  a  movement  without  an  act  of  will.
The  explanations  could  only  be  given  in  outline,  not
to  lengthen  the  chapter  too  much,  but  they  have  to  a
great  extent  approximated  hypnosis  to  waking  life,
as  well  as  to  the  nightly  state  of  dream.  The
thoughtful  reader  will  have  recognized  that  phe-
nomena which  were  often  considered  the  prerogative
of  hypnosis,  e.g.,  the  movements  without  will,  appear
spontaneously  in  ordinary  life.  I  will,  therefore,  here
express  my  conviction  that  all  good  observers  may
find  "  hypnotic  phenomena "  in  daily  life.  They
result  spontaneously  from  a  chance  concurrence  of
the  necessary  conditions.  There  are  further  analo-
gies to  hypnosis  which  can  easily  be  developed  out  of
the  preceding  discussions,  and  which  I  hope  to  present
in  the  form  of  a  monograph.  They  would  show  that
many  symptoms  of  hypnosis  often  appear  spontaneously
in  ordinary  life,  or,  what  is  the  same  thing,  that
ordinary  life  often  displays  phenomena,  which  we
find  again  in  hypnosis.  Hypnosis,  or  at  least  many
hypnotic  states,  is  merely  a  means  of  easily  and


262


HYPNOTISM.


safely  producing  symptoms  which,  under  other
circumstances,  are  not  easy  to  produce  because  all
the  necessary  favourable  conditions  do  not  concur
at  the  same  time.

An  explanation  of  one  side  of  hypnosis,  i.e.y  the
psychological,  has  already  been  given  in  part,  and  can
in  part  be  deferred  for  a  time.  But  I  do  not  believe
that  every  one  will  be  content  with  an  explanation
in  this  sense  of  the  word.  The  physiologists  in
particular  make  very  different  demands.  They  want
an  answer  to  the  following  questions  :  i.  What  is  the
state  of  the  central  nervous  system  and  the  other
organs  during  hypnosis?  2.  What  is  the  causal
connection  between  this  state  and  the  phenomena  of
hypnosis?  3.  What  is  the  causal  connection  between
this  state  and  the  methods  which  induce  hypnosis  and
put  an  end  to  it  ?

Unluckily  the  physiology  of  the  nervous  system
has  been  built  up  on  such  a  weak  foundation  that
we  can  expect  no  explanation  from  it  at  present,  or
perhaps,  as  Leixner  thinks,  for  ever.  In  spite  of
the  great  progress  which  physiology  has  made,  we
must  admit  to  ourselves  that  we  know  much  less
about  the  psychical  functions  of  the  different  ele-
ments of  the  brain  than  would  appear  from  our
physiological  text-books.  The  hypnotic  experiments
of  which  I  have  spoken  will  not  help  us  to  reach  our
goal.  However  carefully  such  experiments  may  be
made,  it  would  be  very  daring  to  draw  conclusions
from  them  about  mental  action  in  men.  Heidenhain
believes  that  hypnosis  may  be  explained  by  means  of
experiments  on  animals,  since  animals  can  be  hypno-
tized. But  we  cannot  hope  much  when  we  remember
that  hypnotism  is  essentially  a  psychical  process.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


263


The  investigation  of  mental  processes  may,  as  we
have  seen,  be  undertaken  in  two  ways — (1)  by
observing  indviduals,  and  (2)  by  calling  the  subject's
memory  to  our  aid.  This  last  could  not  be  done  in
the  case  of  animals.  But  any  observation  of  animals
must  be  very  elementary  ;  we  can  very  seldom  under-
stand the  processes  of  their  consciousness.  For  these
reasons  I  at  present  believe  that  experiments  with
animals  will  give  us  very  little  help.  We  may,  further,
be  perfectly  sure  that  the  successful  electrical  stimu-
lation of  any  portion  of  the  brain  does  not  prove  that
an  act  of  will  originates  in  that  spot  Heidenhain  and
BubhofT  have  made  a  number  of  experiments  in  elec-
trical stimulation  of  the  cortex  of  the  brain  on  dogs
poisoned  by  morphia.  But  when  these  authors  draw
conclusions  about  the  action  of  will  in  men  from  such
experiments,  I  must  pronounce  them  mistaken  till  it
can  be  proved  that  the  impulse  of  the  will  is  an
electrical  stimulation.  For  the  above  reasons  I
consider  Heidenhain's  comparison  of  these  experi-
ments on  dogs  with  hypnotic  experiments  on  human
beings  too  hazardous  ;  no  conclusion  can  be  drawn
from  them.

The  attempt  to  give  a  physiological  explanation  of
hypnotism  on  the  foundation  of  our  present  knowledge
of  physiology  has  often  been  made.

Heidenhain  must  here  be  mentioned  first,  though  I
believe  that  Heidenhain's  theory  is  built  up  on  a
mistaken  premiss.  Heidenhain  supposes  that  the
cause  of  the  hypnotic  state  is  an  inhibition  of  the
action  of  the  ganglion  cells  of  the  cerebral  cortex,
induced  by  continuous  weak  stimulation  of  certain
nerves.  Heidenhain  thinks  this  inhibition  is  analogous
to  reflex  paralyses,  as  in  these  also  the  functions


264


HYPNOTISM.


of  the  ganglion  cells  are  impaired  by  peripheral
stimuli.

But  even  if  we  take  the  inhibition  of  the  action  of
the  ganglion  cells  for  granted,  Heidenhain's  theory
does  not  explain  the  connection  between  this  and  the
means  used  to  induce  hypnosis.  For  (i),  according
to  the  views  of  most  authors,  mere  fixed  attention,
apart  from  an  idea  or  representation,  will  not  induce
hypnosis  ;  (2)  in  any  case  there  would  be  no  causal
connection  here  between  the  purely  psychical  methods
and  hypnosis.

Besides  this,  Heidenhain  starts  from  a  mistaken
premiss  when  he  supposes  an  inhibition  of  the  action
of  the  cerebral  ganglion  cells.  He  concludes  this
inhibition  from  the  lowered  state  of  consciousness
during  hypnosis.  But  consciousness  expresses  itself
in  many  ways  during  hypnosis.  The  processes  of
consciousness  seem  merely  to  be  concentrated  on  one
point,  which  is  removable  at  the  experimenter's  plea-
sure. Heidenhain  maintains,  like  Despine,  that  the
subject  is  not  conscious  of  the  external  stimuli.  This
erroneous  view  has  lately  been  taken  by  several
physiologists  ;  e.g.,  by  Landois.  Heidenhain  was  led
to  take  it  by  his  almost  exclusive  observation  of
the  movements  of  imitation.  He  supposed  that  the
subject  received  a  sense  impression  of  a  movement
and  copied  it,  though  it  did  not  result  in  a  conscious
idea  (as  in  fascination).  From  what  does  Heidenhain
conclude  that  the  sense  impression  was  unconscious  ?
From  the  subsequent  loss  of  memory  ?  But  he  says
himself  that  the  subjects  often  remember  what  has
happened  when  some  hint  is  given  them.  Even  when
this  is  not  the  case,  loss  of  memory  does  not  prove
that  we  have  to  do  with  an  unconscious  movement
(Forel). Besides,  the  subjects  generally  remember  in


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


265


the  hypnosis  the  imitative  movements  they  have
made ;  they  remember  them  also  in  later  hypnoses,
and  finally,  a  suggestion  made  during  the  hypnosis
will  cause  subsequent  memory.

In  1880,  when  Heidenhain  declared  his  views  about
the  imitative  movements,  O.  Rosenbach  explained
that  the  processes  were  certainly  mental,  and  not,  as
Heidenhain  thought,  unconscious  physical  reflexes.
Unfortunately  Rosenbach  did  not  at  that  time  explain
his  own  views  in  detail. Berger  and  others  agreed
much  later  that  these  processes  were  mental. I  also
was  enabled  to  study  the  imitative  movements.  They
only  take  place  when  the  hypnotic  subject  is  con-
scious of  them,  and  knows  that  he  is  intended  to
make  them. If  they  were  unconscious  reflexes,  the
subjects would imitate any person's  movements.
But  they  only  imitate  the  one  person  who  exists  for
them,  i.e.y  the  experimenter,  and  only  him  when  they
know  they  are  intended  to  do  so. A  clear  idea  of
the  movements  to  be  made  is  the  first  condition.  I
do  not  contest  that  when  such  experiments  are  often
made,the  imitation  may  not  become  mechanical  in  later
hypnoses,  as  happens  in  waking  life. However,  at  first
a  clear  idea  is  necessary  ;  but  we  regard  the  cerebral
cortex  as  the  seat  of  ideas,  and  there  is  no  reason
for  placing  them  in  another  part  of  the  brain  in  hyp-
nosis ;  so  that  there  can  be  no  doubt  of  the  inaction
of  the  cerebral  cortex. Forel,  who  is  one  of  the
greatest  authorities  on  the  brain,  also  holds  this  view.
But  perhaps  there  are  mental  processes  in  the  sub-
cortical brain-centres  during  waking  life,  about  whose
extent  we  know  nothing. In  any  case  there  is  no
need  to  suppose  that  mental  processes  in  hypnosis
take  place  in  another  part  of  the  brain  than  in  waking
life.


266


HYPNOTISM.


For  these  reasons  I  recur  to  the  comparison  between
hypnosis  and  the  state  of  Flourens' 1  pigeon  when
its  brain  was  removed.  It  sat  quite  still  unless  it  was
touched,  when  it  flew,  ran,  &c.  But  some  external
impulse,  some  mechanical  stimulus  probably  unaccom-
panied by  an  idea,  was  necessary.  For  this  reason  all
pigeons  behave  alike  under  the  circumstances.  It  is
otherwise  with  the  hypnotic  subject.  He  sees  the
movement  he  is  to  imitate  ;  but  the  stimulus  is  only
effectual  when  he  knows  he  is  to  make  the  movement  ;
if  he  has  seen  that  another  subject  did  not  imitate
the  movement  he  also  does  not  do  it,  because  he
does  not  understand  the  stimulus  as  a  command.  It
is  true  that  a  subject  often  continues  to  walk  forward
automatically  when  he  has  once  been  set  going.  But
this  does  not  prove  the  inactivity  of  the  cerebral
cortex,  for  he  goes  on  when  he  believes  he  is  in-
tended to  go  on  ;  if  he  continues  to  take  steps  auto-
matically, he  does  it  as  we  do  it  in  waking  life  ;  once
moving,  we  go  on,  paying  no  attention  to  our  separate
steps.  This  phenomenon,  consequently,  is  no  reason
for  supposing  that  the  cerebrum  is  less  active  in  hyp-
nosis than  out  of  it.  I  will  take  this  opportunity  to
remark  that  a  partially  paralyzed  person  whom  I  hyp-
notized, whose  capsula  interna  had,  in  my  opinion,
been  injured  by  a  fit  of  apoplexy,  made  no  imita-
tive movements  in  hypnosis  with  the  paralyzed
side,  any  more  than  out  of  hypnosis.  But  in
this  case  exactly  that  part  was  excluded  in  which
we  place  the  conscious  ideas  of  movement,  i.e.,  the
cerebral  cortex  ;  the  centres  which  cause  the  uncon-
scious reflexes  were not  excluded. As,  however,

1  Flourens  experimented  on  pigeons,  whose  cerebrum  he  had
removed.  Untouched  they  remained  quiet,  but  when  excited
they  made  all  sorts  of  movements,  as  if  to  walk,  fly,  &c.


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.


267


there  were  no  imitative  movements,  this  shows  that
without  that  part  of  the  brain  in  which  ideas  are  pro-
duced, no  imitative  movement  takes  place.  None  the
less,  I  should  as  yet  hesitate  to  say  that  Heidenhain's
theory  of  the  inhibition  of  the  cortex  was  false.  I
wished  only  to  prove  that  his  reasons  do  not  justify  it.
I  thought  these  explanations  all  the  more  necessary
as  Heidenhain's  supposition  that  the  hypnotic  subject
is  influenced  by  unconscious  sense  impression  is  often
accepted.  Even  such  a  prominent  authority  on
mental  diseases  as  Mendel  has  been  led  astray  by  this.
It  is  the  cause  of  the  mistaken  views  taken  of  sugges-
tion, the  chief  phenomenon  of  hypnosis.  There  is  no
suggestion  without  consciousness.  It  makes  no  differ-
ence whether  the  suggestion  is  made  through  imitation
(imitative  automatism)  or  by  a  command  (the  com-
manded automatism  of  Heidenhain)  (Max  Dessoir).
Mendel  (whose  symptomatology  of  hypnosis  by  no
means  corresponds  to  the  facts,  according  to  my
experience)  maintains  that  hypnosis  is  a  state  "  in
which  consciousness  is  non-existent  for  all  that  takes
place  in  it."  I  am  compelled  to  reject  this  view  as
completely  mistaken.  My  explanations  when  dis-
cussing the  consciousness  and  the  memory  will  have
made  this  clear.  I  must  insist,  in  opposition  to
Mendel,  that  there  is  consciousness  of  what  is  sug-
gested, and  that  this  is  the  main  point  in  the  matter.
A  suggestion  without  consciousness  is  to  me  incon-
ceivable. I  likewise  think  Bernheim  altogether  mis-
taken when  he  compares  certain  functions,  such  as
breathing  and  the  action  of  the  heart,  which  we
assume  to  occur  without  mental  action,  to  the  phe-
nomena of  suggestion.

My  reasons  for  not  completely  rejecting  this  opinion
of  Heidenhain  and  Mendel  on  the  inhibition  of  the


268


HYPNOTISM.


cerebral  cortex  are  as  follows.  Although  single  ideas,
single  processes  of  consciousness,  are  not  absent  in
hypnosis,  yet  the  influence  of  the  will  upon  their
course  is  limited.  According  to  the  present  views  of
physiology  the  cause  of  this  absence  of  the  power  of
the  will  must  be  sought  in  a  functional  disorder  of  the
cerebral  cortex.

Cullerre,  supported  by  Ferrier's  experiments,  thinks
there  is  a  functional  disturbance  in  the  front  half  of
the  cerebral  cortex  during  hypnosis.  He  thinks  that
though  this  is  not  the  seat  of  the  motor  centres,  the
centres  here  have  a  regulating  influence  on  the  motor
centres,  but  that  this  influence  is  removed  in  hyp-
nosis.

Others  do  not  try  to  localize  the  hypnotic  subject's
loss  of  will.  Dr.  J.  Hughes  Bennett,  who,  as  Preyer
tells  us,  put  forward  a  very  interesting  physiological
theory  as  early  as  185 1,  is  one  of  these.  He  recog-
nized more  clearly  than  many  present  investigators
that  it  is  not  the  genesis  of  separate  ideas  which  is
prevented  in  hypnosis,  but  the  voluntary  synthesis  of
them.  And  as  the  ideas  originated  in  the  ganglion
cells,  Bennett  supposed  a  functional  disturbance  during
hypnosis  in  the  nerve  fibres  which  connect  them.  We
know  that  these  nerve  fibres  are  called  the  fibres  of
association.

Jendrassik  takes  somewhat  the  same  view  at  the
present  day.  At  least  he  tries  to  account  for  hyp-
nosis by  a  disturbance  of  the  nerve  fibres  of  associa-
tion.

Other  investigators  went  further  ;  they  did  not  ask
merely  what  parts  of  the  brain  are  inactive  ;  they
tried  to  find  the  cause  of  the  inactivity.  Naturally,
one  of  the  most  probable  causes  was  a  change  of  the
circulation  of  blood  in  the  brain. Braid  thought  of


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  269


this,  and  sought  the  cause  in  the  altered  circulation
in  the  brain  and  spinal  cord.  Carpenter  supposed
cerebral  anaemia,  as  Hack  Tuke  has  more  recently
imagined  a  partial  spasm  of  the  vessels.  Rumpf
expresses  a  like  opinion.

Heidenhain  also  at  first  supposed  that  anaemia  of
the  brain  was  the  cause  of  hypnosis.  He  soon  gave
up  this  opinion,  for  two  reasons.  1.  The  investiga-
tions of  Forster  with  the  ophthalmoscope  discovered
no  sort  of  change  in  the  vessels  at  the  back  of  the  eye
during  hypnosis.  I  can  confirm  this  by  my  own
experiments.  2.  Heidenhain  saw  hypnosis  appear  in
spite  of  inhalation  of  nitrite  of  amyl,  which  causes
hyperemia  of  the  brain.  Salvioli  and  Bouchut  have,
on  the  contrary,  found  cerebral  hyperaemia  during
hypnosis.  Tamburini,  Seppilli,  and  Kaan  also  investi-
gated the  circulation  of  the  blood  during  hypnosis,  but
only  in  connection  with  the  three  stages  of  Charcot.
They  used  several  methods.  1.  Mosso's  method,
which  determines  the  volume  of  an  extremity,  and
concludes  from  a  decrease  in  the  mass  of  blood  con-
tained in  it,  an  increase  in  the  mass  contained  in  the
brain.  2.  The  action  of  cold  and  hot  compresses  on
the  head  (Kaan),  which  cause  anaemia  or  hyperaemia.
From  the  resulting  changes,  i.e.,  from  the  cessation  or
modification  of  the  hypnosis,  a  conclusion  is  drawn  as
to  the  causal  connection  between  this  and  the  mass
of  blood  contained  in  the  brain.  3.  Ophthalmoscopic
investigations  of  the  vessels  of  the  retina.  I  do  not
enter  into  the  details  of  the  different  experiments,  (1)
because  they  are  valid  for  the  stages  of  Charcot  alone  ;
(2)  because  the  influence  of  hypnotic  training  was
not  enough  regarded,  z>.,  in  the  application  of  warm
and  cold  compresses  ;  (3)  because  cause  and  effect
are  not  distinguished  clearly  enough.


270


HYPNOTISM.


The  last  point  is  often  overlooked.  Even  when
there  is  really  a  change  of  circulation  in  the  brain  it
is  a  mistake  in  logic  to  think  the  changed  circulation
causes  the  changed  functions.  As  a  muscle  needs
more  blood  when  it  is  at  work,  but  does  not  work  more
because  more  blood  flows  to  it ;  as  the  stomach  when
digesting  needs  more  blood  than  when  it  is  inactive,
it  is  also  not  improbable  that  the  brain,  or  portions  of
it,  when  they  are  active,  need  much  blood,  and  when
they  are  inactive  but  little.  Then  if  we  take  the
vasomotor  disturbances  as  proved,  it  is  by  no  means
proved  whether  they  are  the  cause  or  the  effect  of
hypnosis.

In  fact,  Cappie  takes  the  opposite  view.  He  thinks
that  the  increased  activity  of  the  motor  centres  in
hypnosis  draws  too  much  blood  to  them,  thereby  caus-
ing anaemia  of  the  other  portions  of  the  brain  which
are  necessary  to  consciousness.  Of  course  this  is  no
explanation,  apart  from  the  facts  that  the  author
arbitrarily  opposes  the  motor  centres  to  the  parts  of
the  brain  necessary  for  consciousness,  and  that  there
is  consciousness  in  hypnosis.  The  principle  from
which  Cappie  starts  is  the  one  put  forward  by  Brown-
Sequard.  He  thinks  that  hypnotism  is  a  sum  of
dynamo-genetic  and  inhibitory  acts  ;  i.e.,  that  the
increased  action  of  certain  parts  of  the  brain  (dynamo-
genetic  act)  causes  decreased  action  of  others  (in-
hibitory act).

Finally,  I  mention  the  theory  of  Preyer,  which  is
indeed  cleverly  thought  out,  but  is,  as  Bottey  insists,
in  no  way  confirmed  ;  and  Bernheim  objects  that  it
cannot  explain  the  hypnotic  states.  Preyer  puts  the
matter  thus  :  An  activity  of  one  hemisphere  of  the
brain  results  in  hypnosis  ;  fixed  attention  causes  a
rapid  accumulation  of  waste  tissues  in  the  parts  of


THE  THEORY  OF  HYPNOTISM.  271


the  brain  which  are  active,  and  by  this  a  quick  local
consumption  of  the  oxygen  of  the  blood  is  caused.
In  consequence  of  this,  favoured  by  the  failure  of  the
ordinary  change  of  stimulus  of  the  nerves  of  sense,
there  is  a  partial  loss  of  the  activity  of  the  cerebral
cortex.  The  partial  loss  of  activity  of  one  region
would  then  explain  the  increase  of  activity  of  the
other,  because  the  inhibition  would  disappear.  Bern-
heim  justly  objects  to  this  that  it  does  not  explain
a  rapidly  induced  hypnosis,  for  it  is  hardly  con-
ceivable that  waste  matter  should  accumulate  so
rapidly.  But,  in  particular,  the  sudden  termination
of  hypnosis  is  not  consistent  with  this.  As  we  have
seen,  the  one  word  "  wake "  is  enough  to  end  the
hypnosis  at  once.  We  should  be  obliged  to  suppose
that  the  simple  idea  of  waking  was  able  to  dissipate
the  waste  matter  or  make  it  of  no  effect.

I  do  not  think  that  these  physiological  theories  are
satisfactory  or  even  acceptable.  As  long  as  the
physiologists  fail  to  consider  what  an  enormous  influ-
ence an  idea,  roused  for  example  by  the  word  "  wake,"
exercises,  their  theories  will  be  unable  to  explain  the
phenomena.  It  is  by  no  means  necessary  to  show
how  the  word  acts,  or  why  it  is  enough  to  put  an  end
to  the  state.  I  even  think  we  ought  to  set  our  faces
decidedly  against  the  way  in  which  certain  physiolo-
gists play  with  words,  as  if  the  enigma  of  conscious-
ness were  child's  play  for  them.  What  must  a  layman
think  of  medicine  when  certain  persons  arrange  their
theories  to  please  themselves  and  express  them  with
as  much  confidence  as  if  they  had  given  strict  logical
proof  of  them  ?  Lotze  is  said  to  have  ironically
stated  that,  according  to  his  own  statistical  reckoning,
the  great  discoveries  of  physiology  had  an  average


272


HYPNOTISM.


existence  of  four  years  (Max  Dessoir).  This  may
not  be  exact.  I  think  better  of  physiology.  But
when  Mendel,  speaking  of  hypnotism  and  the  pheno-
mena of  suggestion,  explains  that  we  have  to  do  with
a  strong  stimulation  of  the  cerebral  cortex,  and
Ziemssen  declares  the  exact  contrary,  i.e.,  that  the
cerebral  cortex  is  too  little  stimulated  and  the  sub-
cortical centres  too  much,  we  are  startled  at  such
contradictions,  and  are  compelled  to  hope  that  in
future  less  will  be  asserted  and  more  will  be  proved.
Such  contradictions  as  those  between  Mendel  and
Ziemssen  would  be  inconceivable  if  it  were  not  for
the  presence  in  their  works  of  just  such  speculations
as  those  with  which  medicine  is  in  the  habit  of
reproaching  philosophy.


CHAPTER  VI.


SIMULA  TION.

I  NOW  come  to  the  question  of  fraud,  or  simulation.
As  is  well  known,  hypnosis  has  only  lately  been  gene-
rally recognized.  The  scepticism  which  once  reigned,
and  which  is  an  advantage  so  long  as  it  does  not  pass
into  a  priori  prejudice,  has  been  overpowered  by  facts.
But  it  took  some  time  to  attain  this  result.  At  present,
when  it  is  generally  acknowledged  that  "  there  is
something  in  it,"  it  is  not  necessary,  when  discussing
simulation,  to  consider  whether  there  is  such  a  thing
as  hypnotism  at  all.  We  have  only  to  consider  the
question  of  Ct  simulation  or  hypnosis  "  for  each  separate
case.

Those  who  believed  in  hypnosis  were  for  a  long  time  re-
garded as  deceivers  or  deceived.  It  was  occasionally  less
harshly  supposed  that  any  man  who  busied  himself  with  hypno-
tism must  be  suffering  from  some  loss  of  mental  health  or
balance  ;  which  was  said  of  some  of  our  best-known  investiga-
tors. Such  personal  attacks  are  sure  to  be  made  on  men  like
Forel,  Krafft-Ebing,  Hirt,  Mendel,  &c.  Less  celebrated  per-
sons may  console  themselves  that  they  are  in  good  company.
Accusations  of  deceit,  credulity,  or  madness,  are  luckily  not
likely  to  be  made  in  the  future.

In  the  first  place,  fraud  is  much  rarer  than  is  gene-
rally believed.  It  has  been  too  much  the  habit  to
look  for  one  physical  symptom  or  another,  and  settle

*9


274


HYPNOTISM.


the  question  of  fraud  from  its  presence  or  absence.
And  yet  this  is  exactly  the  opposite  of  what  is
generally  done  in  judging  of  mental  states ;  e.g*9
when  we  want  to  diagnose  a  case  and  decide  whether
it  is  insanity  or  not,  no  authority  on  mental  disorders
would  suppose  fraud  simply  because  some  bodily
symptom  was  absent.  He  will  consider  and  weigh
the  case  as  a  whole.  Even  when  each  symptom
taken  separately  might  be  fraudulent  they  would  be
weighed  against  one  another  and  a  diagnosis  formed
from  them.  If  the  doctor  finds  also  some  symptom
which  cannot  be  simulated,  he  will  weigh  this  too,
but  he  will  not  conclude  fraud  from  its  absence.  It
is  true  that  in  this  way  the  conviction  may  be  only
subjective,  or  rather  it  will  be  clear  only  to  those  who
have  studied  mental  disease.  The  outsider  may  often
be  able  to  raise  the  objection  that  this  or  that  symptom
may  be  feigned.  But  no  doctor  of  mental  diseases
would  allow  himself  to  be  influenced  by  this.

If  we  apply  this  to  hypnosis,  which  is  also  a  mental
state,  it  follows  that  only  he  who  has  studied  hypnosis
practically  is  in  a  position  to  diagnose  it.  The  idea
has  gradually  grown  up  that  every  one  is  able  to
judge  of  hypnotism,  and  may  express  his  opinion  and
demand  consideration  for  it,  however  ignorant  he  may
be  about  hypnotic  experiment.  Kron  and  Sperling
have  very  rightly  contested  this  supposition.  It  is  not
correct  to  diagnose  fraud  in  hypnotism  from  a  certain
bodily  symptom.  Even  when  each  separate  symptom
may  be  feigned,  the  experienced  experimenter  will
diagnose  by  summing  up  the  different  symptoms  and
comparing  their  relation  to  each  other.  It  is  satisfac-
tory if  he  finds  an  unfeignable  symptom  besides  ;  this
is  an  objective  proof,  convincing  even  to  those  who
have  no  practical  knowledge  of  hypnosis. But  it  is


SIMULA  TION.


275


to  be  said  that  objective  physical  symptoms  are  more
seldom  found  in  hypnosis  than  in  mental  diseases.
The  first  is  a  transitory  mental  state,  in  which  objec-
tive physical  change  is  less  likely  to  happen  than  in
mental  disorders,  which  last  for  months  and  years.

However,  we  must  of  course  try  to  find  bodily
symptoms  in  hypnosis.  Many  authors  have  done  so,
among  them  Charcot  in  particular,  who  threw  the
weight  of  his  name  into  the  scale  for  hypnotism.  The
school  of  Nancy  also  sought  for  objective  symptoms
and  found  them,  though  different  from  Charcot's  ;  I
mean  the  blisters,  &c,  produced  by  suggestion.  As
a  mistaken  notion  is  beginning  to  take  root,  that  the
question  of  fraud  forms  the  point  of  difference  between
the  two  schools,  because  that  of  Nancy  had  found  no
objective  symptoms,  I  will  here  point  out  the  real
difference  between  them.

To  exclude  fraud  we  look  for  symptoms  which
cannot  be  voluntarily  simulated  ;  it  is  indifferent
whether  these  are  produced  by  suggestion  or  not.
Now,  there  are  phenomena  which  are  produced  by
suggestion  and  which  are  independent  of  the  subject's
will.  And  in  these  the  chief  difference  between  the
two  schools  lies.

The  Nancy  school  believes  that  all  the  symptoms
are  caused  by  suggestion,  even  those  independent  of
the  will,  while  the  school  of  Charcot  finds  bodily
symptoms  which  are  independent  of  the  will  and  of
suggestion.  Consequently,  suggestion  is  the  main
point  on  which  they  differ.

I  shall  show  that  the  questions  of  suggestion  and
fraud  are  very  different.  The  case  of  Siemerling
teaches  us  this,  His  subject  was  hemianaesthetic,
both  with  regard  to  sight  and  feeling,  i.e.,  the  power


276


HYPNOTISM.


of  sight  was  limited  on  the  side  on  which  the  skin  was
without  feeling.  The  field  of  vision  was  concentrically
narrowed,  so  that  anything  beyond  a  certain  distance
from  the  point  on  which  the  eyes  were  fixed  could  not
be  seen.  Now  in  hypnosis  the  sense  of  feeling  on
the  hemiansesthetic  side  was  restored  by  suggestion,
and  directly  feeling  was  restored  the  eye  on  the
corresponding  side  became  normal,  without  direct
suggestion.  Westphal  and  Siemerling  thought  this
an  objective  proof  of  hypnosis,  and  I  also  believe  that
such  a  proof  might  satisfy  even  somewhat  strained
demands,  since  the  power  of  sight  is  independent  of
the  will.  And  yet  this  effect  was  produced  only  by
suggestion,  though  by  indirect  suggestion.  Krafft-
Ebing  had  a  case  like  this  ;  mental  paralyses  with
objective  symptoms  were  produced  by  suggestion,
and  the  symptoms  were  those  mentioned  by  the
school  of  Charcot  as  happening  in  mental  paralyses.

Objective  symptoms  can  be  produced  by  sug-
gestion. It  is  doubtful  whether  they  happen  without
suggestion.  We  see  that  the  suggestion  need  not  be
direct  ;  the  symptom  may  be  produced  by  an  indirect
and  partly  unknown  mental  influence.  Siemerling
said  to  his  patient,  "  Now  you  can  feel  again  "  ;  when
the  patient  recovered  sight  as  well  as  feeling,  this  was
the  effect  of  an  indirect  suggestion,  induced  by  a
certain  mental  interdependence  between  the  anasthesia
of  the  eye  and  that  of  the  skin.  Both  organs  were
functionally  disordered,  and  this  common  disorder
disappeared,  when  the  function  of  one  organ  was
restored  by  suggestion.  Krafft-Ebing's  case  is  like
those  mental  paralyses  studied  by  the  school  of
Charcot.  In  these,  when  the  subject  is  told,  "  Your
arm  is  paralyzed,"  vasomotor  disturbances  follow  on
some  mental  process,  with  which  we  are  at  present


SIMULA  T10N.


277


unacquainted.  As  the  vasomotor  disturbance  is  the
direct  consequence  of  the  paralysis  we  are  obliged  to
think  that  some  mental  communication  causes  both
phenomena.

To  return  to  the  objective  symptoms  of  Charcot.
We  see  that  there  are  certain  bodily  phenomena  in
the  three  stages.  Thus  the  point  of  difference
between  the  two  schools  is  this :  Are  these  bodily
symptoms  a  result  of  suggestion  or  not  ?  I  believe
(as  I  said,  pp.  82-83)  that  suggestion  plays  an  im-
portant part  in  most  of  the  symptoms,  but  I  by  no
means  maintain  that  they  have  no  objective  value,
though  I  am  not  quite  sure.  For  phenomena  might
be  produced  by  practice,  even  without  hypnosis,
which  at  first  sight  would  seem  impossible  to  simulate
(p.  189).  This  is  the  point  of  difference  between  the
two  schools.  I  have  discussed  it  here  in  order  to
show  that  objective  symptoms  may  be  caused  by
suggestion,  and  that,  consequently,  the  objective
symptoms  in  themselves  do  not  separate  the  two
schools,  although  the  symptoms  mentioned  by  each
are  rather  different.

Let  us  now  ask  what  symptoms  should  help  us  to
decide  the  question  of  fraud.  In  the  first  place  we
must  notice  how  the  eyes  close,  and  how  the  subject
tries  to  open  them.  This  closing  of  the  eyes  is  diffi-
cult to  describe.  The  gradual  falling  of  the  lids  is
important,  and  the  action  of  the  muscles  of  the  fore-
head when  opening  the  eyes,  in  a  way  like  that  after
sleep,  as  well  as  the  convulsive  rolling  upwards  of  the
eyeballs,  which  is  often  seen.  The  fibrillary  twitching
of  the  eyelids  is,  on  the  contrary,  of  no  importance,  as
it  often  happens  without  hypnosis.

In  cases  where  the  eyes  are  open  their  expression


278


HYPNOTISM.


is  most  important.  The  look  is  often  blank  and
meaningless,  the  mask-like  expression  and  the  atti-
tude of  the  subject  are  often  characteristic  also.  He
moves  his  limbs  slowly  and  heavily  when  com-
manded. But  I  should  mention  that  in  certain  cases,
particularly  of  light  hypnosis,  these  symptoms  are
wanting,  and  the  movements  in  especial  are  quick
and  lively.  The  expression  during  sense  delusions  is
also  very  important.  Every  one  knows  how  difficult
it  is  to  place  oneself  in  an  imaginary  situation  so  that
the  expression,  the  attitude,  and  the  actions  should
correspond  to  the  idea.  This  is  the  great  art  of
actors,  and  everybody  knows  how  seldom  an  actor
is  able  to  represent  a  scene  by  the  mere  exertion  of
his  own  will  ;  but  it  is  still  more  difficult  to  change
the  mood  in  a  moment,  and  pass  from  one  situation
to  another  in  a  few  seconds.  It  is  extremely  difficult
for  a  person  awake,  but  the  hypnotic  subject  does  it
easily.  It  is  astonishing  that  outsiders  should  regard
this  very  ability  as  a  sign  of  fraud,  as  a  competent
judge  once  did  at  Vienna  (cf.  p.  165).  It  is  surely  one
of  the  most  difficult  things  to  do,  and  it  would  be
wonderful  that  all  the  suspected  persons  should
devote  themselves  to  the  thankless  part  of  fraud,
when  with  such  talents  for  acting  a  very  different
career  would  be  open  to  them.  The  expression  of
pain,  the  smiles,  the  chattering  of  teeth  and  shivering
at  different  suggestions  of  pain,  pleasure,  cold,  &c,
would  be  no  easy  task  to  the  supposed  impostor.

The  waking  in  many  cases  is  just  as  characteristic  ;
the  astonished  face  with  which  the  subject  looks
round,  as  if  to  find  out  where  he  is.  His  behaviour
in  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  likewise  important.

The  impostor  generally  exaggerates,  like  a  person
pretending  madness. In  spite  of  the  variability  of


SIMULA  TION.


279


the  symptoms  of  hypnotism  there  is  a  certain  con-
formity to  rule  in  its  development.  The  impostor
usually  accepts  all  suggestions  very  quickly,  while  the
experienced  experimenter  knows  that  susceptibility  to
suggestion  increases  with  a  certain  uniformity.  It  is
very  easy  to  simulate  analgesia  to  slight  feelings  of
pain,  as  this  analgesia  is  mistakenly  thought  to  be
a  common  symptom.  An  unexpected  pain  causes
the  usual  reflexes  in  the  face  and  eyes,  and  yet  the
impostor  will  declare  that  he  felt  no  pain.  It  is  the
same  with  sense  delusions,  where  the  suggestion
generally  requires  to  be  emphasized  before  it  takes
effect. The  impostor  usually  exaggerates  here  also.

Let  us  consider  certain  objective  symptoms  which
have  been  said  to  be  particularly  characteristic.
Charcot  and  his  pupils  lay  great  stress  on  the
curves  of  the  muscular  contraction  and  respiration
in  the  cataleptic  stage.  Charcot  says  there  is  no
essential  difference  in  the  duration  ;  a  cataleptic
person  cannot  hold  up  his  arm  longer  than  an  im-
postor. But  when  the  curve-tracings  from  the  raised
arm  and  the  respiration  are  noted,  there  is  an  impor-
tant difference  ;  the  impostor  soon  shows  that  he
is  tired  by  irregularity  in  the  arm  and  respira-
tion curves  ;  the  hypnotic  subject,  on  the  contrary
breathes  calmly  and  evenly  from  beginning  to  end,
and  there  is  no  perceptible  trembling  in  his  arm.

Other  people  say  that  a  cataleptic  posture  is  some-
times maintained  a  very  long  time,  and  therefore
offers  an  objective  proof.

Charcot  mentions  increased  neuro-muscular  irri-
tability as  a  particular  characteristic  of  lethargy.  It
is  not  to  be  denied  that  this  is  impressive  when  seen
for  the  first  time.  It  cannot  for  a  moment  be  sup-
posed that  a  person  can  thus  bring  single  muscles,


28o


HYPNOTISM.


and  also  groups  of  muscles  supplied  by  single  nerves,
into  contraction.  But  these  contractions  would  only
be  important  if  they  appeared  instantaneously  from
the  first.

Charcot  does  not  think  that'  the  contractures
induced  by  stimulation  of  the  skin  in  the  somnam-
bulic state  are  of  much  value,  and  in  fact  they  might
easily  be  simulated.  Apart  from  these  symptoms  of
Charcot's  stages  we  must,  in  judging  of  fraud,  con-
sider some  abnormal  muscular  actions — e.g.,  the
cessation  of  the  uncertain,  staggering  gait  in  cases  of
locomotor  ataxy,  which  Berger  described  and  I  also
have  observed — and  other  like  phenomena.

Binet,  Fere,  and  Parinaud  have  made  particular
investigations  on  the  sense  delusions  of  sight.  They
say  that  a  prism  doubles  the  hallucinatory  object  as  it
would  a  real  one  ;  and  in  hallucinations  of  colour,
the  complementary  colour  is  said  to  be  seen  after-
wards. But  Charpentier  and  Bernheim  have  refuted
these  experiments,  particularly  those  with  the  prism,
which  from  the  first  seemed  very  improbable.  They
showed  that  the  apparent  doubling  of  the  halluci-
nation was  due  to  some  point  de  repere,  which  the
subject  found  for  himself.  He  first  saw  some  real
object  doubled  by  the  prism,  and  concluded  from  this
that  the  suggested  hallucination  should  be  doubled
also.  In  any  case,  the  great  point  is  that  the  prism
only  produces  the  doubling  when  a  real  object  can  be
seen  through  it.  If  there  is  no  such  point  de  repere ;
i.e.,  if  the  experimenter  is  in  a  dark  room,  or  if  he
shows  the  subject  a  perfectly  blank,  white  screen,  the
doubling  does  not  happen.

According  to  Charpentier  and  Bernheim  the
experiments  with  complementary  colours  were  not
more  exact ;  and  the  same  is  the  case  with  other


SIMULATION.


281  '


experiments  of  Binet  and  Fere  on  colours,  from
which  they  drew  the  conclusion  that  in  suggested
perceptions  of  mixed  colours  the  effect  was  the  same
as  with  real  optical  images.

The  phenomenon  presented  by  the  pupil  of  the  eye,
which  they  mention,  seems  to  me  more  valuable.  In
suggesting  a  hallucination,  e.g.,  that  of  a  bird,  the
suggested  approach  of  the  object  causes  a  contraction
of  the  pupil,  and  vice  versa.  At  the  same  time  there
is  often  convergence  of  the  axes  of  the  eyes,  as  at
the  approach  of  a  real  object.  But  it  must  be  re-
membered that  some  people  are  able  to  produce  this
phenomenon  in  themselves  by  an  effort  of  will
(Hack  Tuke,  Budge).

Bernheim  lays  great  weight  on  the  analgesia  of
hypnotic  subjects.  I  agree  with  him.  If  a  com-
pletely analgesic  subject  is  touched  with  a  faradic
brush  he  shows  no  trace  of  pain.  There  are  no
impostors  who  could  repress  the  expression  of  pain
under  these  circumstances,  particularly  if  the  contact
were  unexpected.  But  we  must  consider  that  such
a  high  degree  of  analgesia  is  very  rare  in  hypnosis.
Naturally,  this  true  analgesia  must  be  distinguished
from  the  simulated  analgesia,  which  I  mentioned  on
p.  279.  The  anaesthesia  of  the  mucous  membrane,
e.g.,  of  the  membrane  of  the  nose,  with  regard  to
ammonia,  is  to  be  tested.  There  is  no  need  to
say  that  certain  rare  phenomena,  e.g.,  secretion  of
tears  and  sweat,  flushings,  changes  in  the  heart's
action  and  organic  changes  produced  by  suggestion,
are  of  the  highest  value.  Finally,  I  shall  direct
attention  to  a  phenomenon  whose  absence  may  be
of  some  importance  ;  I  mean  the  absence  of  move-
ments which  I  should  prefer  to  call  movements  caused
by  tedium  (Langweiligkeit). As  is  known,  a  waking


282


HYPNOTISM.


man  is  unable  to  retain  any  posture  for  a  long  time,
even  when  all  his  muscles  are  relaxed.  In  the
latter  case  the  movements  cannot  be  caused  by
fatigue  of  particular  muscles  ;  it  is  rather  that  when
one  position  is  long  maintained,  a  lively  feeling
of  discomfort  ensues,  that  is  subjectively  felt  as
tedium.  This,  it  seems  to  me,  induces  certain  move-
ments difficult  to  describe,  the  movements  from
tedium.  Their  absence  is  strong  evidence  of  the
presence  of  hypnosis,  and  I  think  this  an  important
and  almost  unmistakable  symptom.  They  are  best
observed  when  the  subject  has  been  left  for  some  time
to  himself.

From  two  points  of  view,  however,  all  these
symptoms  have  only  a  relative  value.  In  the  first
place  their  presence  is  important,  and  is  in  favour  of
hypnosis,  but  their  absence  is  unimportant.  We  are
never  justified  in  concluding  fraud  from  the  absence  of
any  particular  symptom.  In  the  second  place  we  must
consider  whether  any  symptom  might  not  be  pro-
duced by  practice  without  hypnosis,  and  whether  the
subject  could  use  this  practice,  or  whether  there  may
not  be  a  special  capacity  for  the  voluntary  production
of  this  symptom.

On  the  first  point  I  should  say  that  in  some  cata-
leptic postures  there  are  perceptible  tremors,  that
analgesia  is  rare,  and  that  neuro-muscular  hyper-
excitability  is  but  rarely  found.

The  second  point  is  often  overlooked  ;  for  it  is
not  yet  decided  whether  by  practice  some  persons
might  not  produce  even  all  the  above-mentioned
symptoms  without  hypnosis.  Perhaps  there  is  no
hypnotic  symptom  which  has  not  been  observed  in
some person  or another  without hypnosis.  For


SIMULATION.


283


example,  neuromuscular  hyper-excitability  is  found
in  hysterical  patients,  so  that  it  is  not  enough  to  prove
hypnosis.  And  the  most  strained  cataleptic  attitudes
can  be  produced  by  gymnasts,  by  means  of  practice.
Some  persons  have  been  known  to  influence  the
action  of  their  hearts  without  a  change  of  breathing ;
though,  according  to  Beaunis,  a  distinction  can  be
found  here  :  the  hypnotic  obeys  suggestion  at  once,
while  out  of  hypnosis  a  short  time  must  always  elapse
before  the  will  can  exercise  its  influence.

The  local  flushings  of  Mantegazza  are  a  more
extreme  case.  Mantegazza  says  that  at  one  time  in
his  life  he  was  able  to  induce  local  reddening  of  the
skin  simply  by  thinking  intently  of  the  spot ;  he  even
adds  that  wheals  sometimes  appeared.  It  has  often
been  asserted  that  people  can  perspire  at  any  place
they  please.  Delbceuf  says  that  he  can  influence  the
secretion  of  saliva  by  his  will  or  ideas.  It  is  well
known  that  this  last  is  much  under  the  influence  of
the  ideas.

I  have  purposely  made  these  remarks,  because
mistakes  about  the  objective  symptoms  are  made  on
all  sides.  For  this  reason  I  think  that  the  first
question  to  be  decided  is  the  one  mentioned  above  :
whether  the  subject  could  not  produce  the  symptoms
by  practice,  without  hypnosis.  I  know  well  that  I
thus  lessen  the  value  of  my  earlier  explanations  ;  but
I  think  it  is  more  honest  to  say  that  we  do  not  know
enough  about  the  objective  symptoms  of  hypnosis.

I  have  as  yet  only  spoken  of  such  symptoms  as
take  the  form  of  bodily  functions  ;  but  according  to
Pierre  Janet  these  symptoms,  contractures  for  example,
are  of  much  less  importance  to  the  question  of  fraud
than  the  mental  ones  ;  the  memory  in  particular,


284


HYPNOTISM.


Gurney  also  thought  the  memory  of  great  impor-
tance here.  The  postulate  from  which  these  authors
start  is  that  there  is  loss  of  memory  after  waking
from  hypnosis,  and  that  consequently  the  subject
remembers  nothing  that  has  happened  during  the
state.  Now  this  loss  of  memory  is  to  be  used  to
decide  the  question  of  fraud.  An  example  will  make
this  clear.

I  tell  X.,  whom  I  have  hypnotized,  that  when  he  is
going  to  bed  he  is  to  dip  a  handkerchief  in  warm
water  and  tie  it  twice  round  his  throat.  When  he
wakes  he  seems  to  remember  nothing  about  it ;  upon
which  I  repeat  the  command,  but  omit  the  doubling
of  the  handkerchief.  When  I  ask  him  what  he  is  to
do,  he  answers,  "  I  am  to  dip  a  handkerchief  in  warm
water  and  wrap  it  twice  round  my  throat."  It  will
be  seen  that  I  gave  the  order  differently  before  and
after  hypnosis  ;  yet  X.  repeats  the  command  as  it  was
given  in  hypnosis.

According  to  the  views  of  Pierre  Janet  and  Gurney,
this  would  very  likely  be  a  case  of  fraud  ;  for  X.,
who  had  apparently  completely  forgotten  everything
after  waking,  yet  mentions  the  one  point  omitted  in
the  second  command.  But  must  we  really  consider
this  a  case  of  fraud  ?  I  believe  not,  and  I  appeal  to  a
long  series  of  experiments  with  perfectly  trustworthy
subjects,  in  whom  I  often  observed  objective  bodily
symptoms  also.  The  subject  may  very  well  make
such  a  statement  as  the  above  about  the  twice-
folded  handkerchief  quite  automatically,  neither  re-
membering nor  remarking  it  ;  but  he  may  also  make
it  consciously,  as  a  previously  forgotten  idea  may  be
suddenly  called  into  consciousness  by  the  law  of
association  mentioned  on  p.  12$.


SIMULATION.


285


On  account  of  their  practical  importance  I  shall
speak  of  other  symptoms  which,  according  to  ex-
perience, are  often  wrongly  considered  by  outsiders  as
proofs  of  fraud.  I  begin  by  insisting  that  there  are
very  few  hypnoses  which  really  correspond  to  the
outsider's  ideal  picture  of  a  hypnosis.  At  least  the
inexperienced  often  think  that  the  apparent  impostor
is  forgetting  his  part  when  some  symptom  appears
which,  according  to  them,  ought  not  to  appear.

First,  the  laughter  of  hypnotic  subjects.  Of  course
many  .subjects  laugh,  just  as  a  waking  man  does.  In
the  light  stages  the  subject  is  quite  aware  that  he  is
playing  a  somewhat  absurd  part,  e.g.,  he  makes  all  the
movements  of  eating  an  apple,  and  feels  compelled  to
make  them,  but  knows  quite  well  that  he  looks  rather
ridiculous  ;  therefore  it  is  not  odd  that  he  should
laugh.  But  there  is  often  a  trace  of  consciousness
even  in  deep  hypnoses  ;  the  subject  separates  himself,
so  to  speak,  into  two  parts,  one  of  which  acts  the
suggested  part  and  the  other  observes  it  and  laughs.

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  trembling  of  cata-
leptics.  I  add  that  the  subject  sometimes  makes
movements  unforeseen  by  the  experimenter,  and
which  sometimes  interrupt  the  suggestion.  I  stretch
out  a  subject's  arm  and  suggest  that  he  cannot  move
it.  It  remains  as  I  placed  it.  But  now  a  fly  settles
on  the  subject's  forehead  and  he  moves  his  arm  at
once  to  rub  the  place.  This  is  a  common  occurrence.
I  Rubbing  when  one  is  tickled  has  become  a  habitual,
rapid,  unconscious  act.  So  that  if  the  first  suggestion
has  lost  its  vividness,  the  new  impulse  causes  a  change
of  posture.  I  have  seen  people  put  their  hands  to
their  faces  when  they  sneezed,  as  we  habitually  do,
though  the  hands  had  previously  been  made  motion-
less by  suggestion. Besides,  many  movements  which


286


HYPNOTISM.


have  been  prevented  by  suggestion  become  possible
when  the  subject  does  not  think  of  the  suggestion  ;  if
he  is  forbidden  to  say  "  a  "  he  can  use  it  unconsciously  ;
he  only  cannot  say  it  when  he  thinks  about  it  (Laver-
dant,  Hack  Tuke,  Max  Dessoir).

There  are  many  phenomena  of  this  kind.  I  say  to
the  subject,  A.,  "  You  are  a  rope-dancer,  and  are  on
the  rope."  He  believes  it,  and  I  pretend  to  cut  the
rope,  on  which  he  falls  down  ;  but  he  falls  so  as  not
to  hurt  himself.  This  is  caused  by  a  normal,  me-
chanical, nearly  unconscious  process  which  is  always
going  on  in  us.  We  always  use  our  hands  to  shield
ourselves  when  we  fall.  This  habitual  mechanism
works  on  in  hypnosis  regardless  of  the  suggestion.
Hysterical  paralytics  for  this  reason  seldom  hurt
themselves  when  they  fall.  Hack  Tuke  told  a  subject
that  he  was  dead  ;  he  fell  without  hurting  himself.

I  will  further  point  out  that  the  eyes  sometimes
open  very  quickly.  I  have  seldom  seen  this,  but  can
safely  assert  that  it  happens  in  genuine  hypnoses.
An  impostor  will  also  often  open  his  eyes  when  he
thinks  he  is  not  observed  ;  the  hypnotic  subject  does
it  whether  he  thinks  he  is  observed  or  not.  I  must
also  direct  attention  to  those  sense  delusions  in  which
a  dim  dream-consciousness  persists,  which  prevents
the  full  effect  of  the  delusion.  In  such  cases  fraud  is
often  suspected  ;  e.g.,  the  case  mentioned  on  p.  183,
where  the  subject  fought  with  an  enemy,  taking  pains
not  to  hit  him.

Further,  a  complicated  suggestion  may  be  mis-
understood or  half-forgotten,  in  which  case  it  will  be
carried  out  imperfectly.  A  post-hypnotic  suggestion
can  naturally  only  be  fulfilled  when  it  is  remembered.
As  memory  is  the  first  condition  for  the  success  of  a
suggestion,  a  person  with  a  good  memory  {ceteris


SIMULA  TION.


287


paribus)  will  execute  a  suggestion  better  than  another.
If  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  badly  remembered
it  will  be  badly  carried  out,  as  the  memory  only  acts
in  a  natural  way.  I  mention  this  though  it  seems  a
matter  of  course,  because  I  have  heard  the  existence
of  hypnosis  doubted,  purely  in  consequence  of  such
mistakes.  To  a  man  whom  I  have  hypnotized  in  the
presence  of  A.,  B.,  C,  and  D.,  I  make  the  post-
hypnotic suggestion  that  when  A.  speaks  he  is  to  say
"  Ha  !  "  when  B.  speaks, "  He  !  "  when  C.  speaks,  "  Hi !  "
and  when  D.  speaks,  "  Ho  !  "  It  is  not  surprising  that
he  is  confused  in  carrying  out  the  suggestion,  and
makes  the  wrong  exclamation  to  each  person.  For
all  depends  upon  the  strength  of  the  memory,  and  its
power  to  retain  and  reproduce  the  suggestion.

Finally,  a  subject  will  sometimes  confess  to  impo-
sition, or  to  having  acted  to  please  others.  Such  a
confession  must  be  judged  with  caution.  Many  who
have  made  hypnotic  experiments  have  observed  that
subjects  will  often  say  after  the  hypnosis  that  they
have  been  pretending,  though  their  actions  were
really  compulsory.  I  need  not  say  that  there  are
people  who  think  they  show  weakness  of  will  by
allowing  themselves  to  be  hypnotized  ;  then  they
consciously  tell  untruths.  Another  group  is  more
interesting  psychologically.  Their  self-deception  is
the  same  as  we  have  found  in  some  cases  of  post-
hypnotic suggestion.  They  think  they  could  have
acted  otherwise  if  they  had  pleased  (F.  Myers).
Heidenhain  mentions  such  a  case ;  a  doctor  said,
after  the  hypnosis,  that  he  could  have  opened  his
eyes  if  he  had  pleased  ;  but  when  the  hypnosis  was
renewed  he  could  no  more  help  himself  than  the  first
time.  I  could  add  a  number  of  personal  observations.
One  case  was  that  of  a  doctor,  who  often  asserted


288


HYPNOTISM.


after  the  first  hypnosis  that  he  could  have  behaved
otherwise  ;  but  in  each  fresh  hypnosis  his  will  was
inhibited.  Finally  he  himself  became  aware  of  his
loss  of  will-power.  In  another  case  I  hypnotized  X.
at  least  ten  times  before  he  would  agree  that  the
suggested  paralysis  of  his  arm  had  really  made  him
unable  to  move  it ;  he  previously  believed  that  he  had
so  behaved  to  oblige  me.

All  this  makes  it  evident  how  difficult  it  is  to
decide  the  question  with  regard  to  fraud.  It  seems
to  me  to  occur  more  often  with  children,  but  the
transition  from  simulation  to  true  hypnosis  is  so
gradual  that  even  an  experienced  experimenter  is
sometimes  uncertain.  For  example,  when  a  subject
shuts  his  eyes  to  be  obliging,  it  is  not  the  same
thing  as  if  he  shut  them  to  deceive  ;  or  he  shuts  them
because  he  is  tired  of  fixing  them  on  something,  but
could  open  them  by  a  strong  effort,  though  he  keeps
them  shut  because  it  is  more  comfortable.  It  would
be  a  great  mistake  to  identify  this  with  simulation.
Others  do  what  the  experimenter  wishes,  to  please
him,  but  not  to  deceive  him.  This  is  not  pure  fraud
either,  for  the  wish  to  deceive  is  absent.  And  there
is  another  complication;  for  people  in  hypnosis  some-
times pretend,  just  as  it  is  known  insane  persons  do.
Thus  a  hypnotic  will  say  he  sees  something  when  he
does  not.  It  is  naturally  very  difficult  to  say  where
deceit  begins  and  ends  in  such  a  case  ;  but,  generally
speaking,  practice  will  enable  us  to  judge  the  mental
state  of  the  subject  with  some  certainty.  There  is  no
doubt  that  even  the  most  experienced  deceive  them-
selves or  are  deceived  ;  the  most  experienced  doctor
of  mental  diseases  is  in  the  same  case.  But  as  he
learns  to  diagnose  by  experience  so  will  the  experi-


SIMULATION.


289


menter  in  hypnotism.  The  fear  of  being  deceived
has  prevented  many  from  interesting  themselves  in
the  subject.  But  no  advance  can  be  made  unless  the
fear  is  put  on  one  side  and  the  question  examined.  It
is  possible  to  maintain  a  complete  scientific  reserve.
The  question  of  fraud  must  be  treated  in  a  scientific
manner,  as  mental  diseases  are  treated.  We  must
not  make  impossible  demands  in  order  to  exclude
imposition  ;  to  do  so  would  prove  neither  scepticism
nor  a  scientific  spirit  ;  it  would,  on  the  contrary,  be
unscientific.  And  yet  I  have  heard  a  "  cultivated "
man,  who  thought  himself  scientifically  sceptical,  say,
when  watching  a  hypnotic  subject,  that  he  would
believe  in  the  reality  of  the  hypnosis  only  if  the  sub-
ject could  see  through  a  non-transparent  substance  ;
e.g.,  if  he  could  see  through  a  man  as  if  he  were
glass !


20


CHAPTER  VII.


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.

It  is  certain  that  the  present  interest  in  hypnotism
depends  chiefly  upon  its  therapeutic  utility,  although
its  value  for  experimental  psychology  must  not  be
underrated.  The  attention  of  doctors  has  never  been
directed  to  it  so  much  as  at  present  ;  in  spite  of  all
differences,  it  becomes  more  and  more  clear  in
medical  circles  that  a  thorough  examination  of  it  is
necessary.

We  have  already  seen  that  Bernheim  and  Liebeault
think  that  hypnotism  means  suggestion,  and  sugges-
tion is  truly  the  chief  agent  in  it.  Bernheim's  definition
of  hypnotism  makes  its  therapeutic  value  more  com-
prehensible. He  believes  that  hypnosis  is  a  particular
mental  state,  in  which  susceptibility  to  suggestion  is
heightened.  It  follows  from  this  that  suggestibility
exists  apart  from  hypnosis,  and  that  consequently
there  is  no  contradiction  between  the  therapeutics  of
suggestion  in,  and  out  of,  hypnosis ;  one  is  the  natural
complement  of  the  other.  It  is  the  school  of  Nancy
which  has  pointed  out  that  there  are  many  sugges-
tions without  hypnosis,  and  it  was  the  first  of  all  to
recognize  the  therapeutic  value  of  purely  empirical
suggestion.

The  therapeutics  of  suggestion  are  founded  on  the


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  291


premiss  that  a  number  of  diseases  can  be  cured  or
relieved  merely  by  making  the  patient  believe  he  will
soon  be  better,  and  by  firmly  implanting  this  convic-
tion in  his  mind.  Every  able  practitioner  knows  this
suggestive  treatment,  which  is  as  old  as  disease.
Most  of  the  miraculous  cures  one  hears  of  may  be
referred  to  it ;  at  present  we  may  consider  them  the
results  of  empirical  and  often  unconscious  suggestion.
We  can  refer  many  of  the  results  procured  by  the
mesmerists  to  the  same  cause.  It  is  known  that
when  Bailly  wrote  his  report,  in  1784,  he  thought  of
the  power  of  imagination,  to  which  he  ascribed
Deslon's  phenomena.  From  ancient  times  this  mental
influence  has  been  used.  Ancient  medicine,  which
was  partly  in  the  hands  of  the  priests,  and  in  which
many  religious  ceremonies  were  used,  is  full  of  this
mental  influence.  The  temple  sleep  of  the  old  Greeks
and  Egyptians  was  a  means  to  facilitate  the  effect  of
suggestion.  The  sick  lay  down  to  sleep  in  the
temple,  and  were  told  by  the  god  in  dreams  of  some-
thing that  would  cure  them.  We  find  the  same  kind
of  thing  again  and  again.  The  belief  in  some  par-
ticular medicine  is  an  important  agent  in  healing.
There  is  no  need  to  recount  the  miraculous  deeds  of
each  century.  But  in  later  times  I  may  mention  the
well-known  Greatrakes,  whose  cures  astonished  all
England  in  the  seventeenth  century,  and  Gassner,  the
exorcist,  at  the  end  of  the  last.  The  reports  upon
them  make  it  clear  that  Gassner  used  suggestion  ;
for  though  he  spoke  Latin,  it  is  evident  that  he  made
his  patients  understand  him  ;  nobody  misunderstood
his  famous  "  Cesset "  ;  they  knew  that  the  pain,  &c,
was  ordered  to  stop.  I  was  interested  to  find  in
Sierke  that  Gassner  once  sent  a  patient  to  sleep  by
command. He  told  her  to  sleep,  and  when  to  wake,


292


HYPNOTISM.


and  in  fact  induced  what  we  should  at  present  call  a
hypnosis.

Among  other  wonder-workers  I  may  mention  Prince
Hohenlohe,  at  the  beginning  of  this  century ;  a
Catholic  priest,  who  aroused  much  attention  by  his
cures  in  Bavaria,  after  1821.  The  mesmerists  sup-
posed he  was  one  of  those  persons  who  possessed  a
peculiar  force,  while  on  other  sides  religious  faith
was  called  in  as  an  explanation.  One  school  of  mes-
merists, that  of  Barbarin,  of  Ostend,  took  up  an  odd
middle  position.  Barbarin  maintained  that  the  in-
fluence was  a  purely  spiritual  one,  and  that  the  right
way  to  induce  sleep  was  to  pray  at  the  patient's  bed-
side (Perty).  Even  to-day  many  adherents  of  vital
magnetism  hold  like  views  ;  for  instance,  Timmler
thinks  religious  faith  valuable  and  necessary  for
obtaining  the  result.

I  will  not  multiply  examples  of  suggestive  thera-
peutics. I  will  but  mention  the  authenticated  cures
which  have  occurred  at  Lourdes  and  other  holy  places
quite  recently.  Everywhere  and  in  all  times  sugges-
tion has  been  effectively  and  unconsciously  used.
When  we  see  that  it  is  exactly  those  people  who  use
suggestion  who  are  the  most  successful,  we  are  justi-
fied in  giving  it  a  high  place  in  modern  therapeutics.
For  no  one  who  reads  the  stories  with  unprejudiced
mind  can  doubt  that  Gassner  and  many  others  were
more  successful  than  many  a  scientific  physician  ;
though  they  are  unjustly  called  swindlers.  It  may  be
that  some  of  the  diseases  were  hysterical,  but  there
were  many  others.  It  is  at  least  certain  that
nearly  all  of  them  were  diseases  which  the  usual
medicinal  treatment  had  failed  to  heal.  As  has  been
explained,  if  suggestion  is  to  succeed  the  patient
must  firmly  believe  he  will  be  cured. This  belief


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  293


must  be  impressed  upon  him,  and  the  question  is  how
this  can  most  surely  be  done.  Any  patient  who  goes
to  Lourdes  with  the  certain  belief  that  he  will  be
cured,  and  whose  expectation  has  been  redoubled  by
the  reports  of  others  and  his  own  faith  as  a  Catholic,
will  obtain  quite  a  different  result  from  the  man  who
goes  without  faith.

It  is  not  always  possible  for  a  doctor  to  implant
this  idea,  however  great  his  patient's  faith  in  him  may
be.  Hypnotism  is  a  means  of  attaining  this  end,  in
spite  of  opposition.  No  patient,  be  he  ever  so  intelli-
gent, can  resist  the  influence  of  hypnotic  suggestion
if  only  the  hypnosis  is  deep  enough.  An  idea  im-
planted in  hypnosis  takes  root  like  a  dogma  in  a
faithful  Catholic.  The  idea  of  a  cure  should  be  in-
stilled into  the  patient  during  hypnosis.  If  it  is
allowed  that  the  idea  of  a  cure  effects  a  cure  in  many
cases  there  can  be  no  doubt  that  suggestion  is  an
integral  part  of  therapeutics.

We  have  to  thank  Liebeault,  of  Nancy,  for  having
been  the  first  to  use  suggestion  methodically  in
therapeutics.  It  is  true  that  verbal  suggestion  was
occasionally  used  by  the  old  mesmerists,  Kluge,
Lausanne,  Jobard,  and  others,  as  Du  Prel  and  Pick
justly  point  out.  But  method  was  entirely  wanting.
It  is  often  maintained  that  Braid  recognized  the
value  of  suggestion  in  medicine,  but  this  is  an  error.
It  is  clear  that  Braid  saw  suggestion,  but  he  did
not  recognize  it.  Whoever  will  take  the  trouble  to
read  his  works  will  find  that  he  did  not  try  to  find
the  therapeutic  value  of  hypnotism  in  suggestion.
He  believed  rather  that  certain  methods  of  inducing
catalepsy,  &c,  influenced  the  distribution  of  blood,
and  he  thought  it  likely  that  there  were  nervous
changes.


294


HYPNOTISM.


I  must  not  forget  to  notice  that  in  1880  Friedberg,
and  more  especially  Berger,  concluded  that  hypnosis
was  a  therapeutic  agent.  Berger  saw  a  hemiplegic
patient  make  movements  in  hypnosis  which  he  could
not  make  awake.  He  saw  sufferers  from  locomotor
ataxy  cease  to  stagger  during  hypnosis  and  for  a
short  time  after.  It  is  true  that  he  did  not  use
hypnosis  systematically.  The  simplified  method  of
Liebeault  was  unknown  to  him ;  he  knew  nothing
of  the  Nancy  methods,  nor  of  verbal  suggestion,  nor
of  the  great  importance  of  suggestion.  Many  people,
unknown  to  Liebeault,  had  seen  that,  from  a  medical
point  of  view,  a  state  in  which  contractures  and
paralyses,  analgesia  and  pain,  &c,  could  be  induced
and  removed,  must  be  of  immense  importance  ;  but
Liebeault  was  the  first  to  find  the  right  path,  while
Bernheim  and  Forel  developed  the  methods  and
made  them  known  to  physicians.  Liebeault  must
be  regarded  as  the  true  founder  of  systematic  sug-
gestion.

It  is  not  astonishing  that  objections  have  been
made  to  the  therapeutic  use  of  suggestion.  No
essential  progress  has  often  been  made  in  the  science
of  medicine  without  a  struggle.  Every  one  knows
how  the  use  of  quinine,  and  vaccination,  and  particu-
larly of  emetics,  especially  in  France,  was  contested  ;
and  how  the  cold-water  cure  was  rejected,  and  how
Remak  was  attacked  in  Germany  before  the  gal-
vanic battery  was  accepted  in  the  medicine-chest.
Every  one  knows  how  massage  was  laughed  at.
And  all  these  methods  have  finally  succeeded,  in
spite  of  opposition  and  childish  laughter.

The  difficulty  of  judging  of  the  therapeutic  value
of  hypnosis  is  much  increased  by  the  hazy  definition


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  295


of  "  hypnotic  suggestion."  Thus,  some  oppose  sug-
gestive treatment,  and  some  hypnotic  suggestive
treatment,  while  others  object  sometimes  to  sugges-
tion in  general  and  sometimes  to  hypnotism,  e.g.y
Ewald,  Mendel,  S.  Guttmann.  I  think  that  the  latter
are  right,  in  spite  of  their  false  point  of  view,  because
it  is  impossible  to  draw  a  sharp  line  between  sug-
gestion and  hypnotism.  I  refer  to  the  discussions
in  Chapters  iv.  and  v.,  and  again  express  my  opinion
that  hypnotism  and  suggestion  will  be  gradually
welded  into  one,  because  spontaneous  transitory
hypnoses  appear  to  be  often  found  in  ordinary  life.

It  has  often  been  asked  why  so  many  authorities  have  pro-
nounced against  suggestive  therapeutics.  There  are  three
answers — (1)  Even  an  authority  may  be  wrong,  and  generally
it  is  the  authority  which  believes  in  its  own  infallibility  ;  (2)
all  so-called  authorities  are  not  necessarily  authoritative  ;  (3)
many  who  are  authorities  in  one  field  are  just  for  that  reason
not  so  in  another.  The  last  two  points  are  important  in
medicine,  and  we  may  consider  them  further.

In  all  sciences,  besides  the  real  authorities,  there  are  men
who  are  mistakenly  supposed  to  be  so.  It  is  interesting  to
observe  in  the  history  of  culture  how  fashion  makes  "authori-
ties" out  of  those  who  have  no  real  scientific  greatness.  A
man  is  called  an  authority  ;  but  when  it  is  asked  what  he  has
done  there  is  shrugging  of  shoulders,  for  often  he  has  done
nothing.  Such  pseudo-authorities  are  much  inclined  to  pass
judgment  on  questions  they  have  not  examined.  There  have
always  been  such  persons  ;  they  are  the  drag  on  the  wheel  of
science.  Their  position  and  credit  is  due  to  a  faculty,  which  a
clever  writer,  Karl  von  Thaler,  a  short  time  ago  called  the  art
of  putting  oneself  on  the  stage.  Their  judgments  are  of  no
value.

But  I  do  not  mean  to  say  that  all  who  have  opposed  the
therapeutic  use  of  hypnotism  are  pseudo-authorities  ;  on  the
contrary,  true  authorities,  such  as  Meynert  and  others,  have
expressed  themselves  decidedly  against  it.  But  as  regards  the
third  point  above-mentioned,  I  will  say  that  because  a  man  is


296


HYPNOTISM.


an  authority  on  one  matter  it  does  not  follow  that  he  has  a
right  to  claim  authority  on  another.  A  great  historian  or
astronomer  is  not  in  a  position  to  pass  judgment  on  medicine.
Now,  many  of  those  who  have  objected  to  the  therapeutic  use
of  hypnotism  are  authorities  on  matters  that  have  nothing  to
do  with  therapeutics.  Physicians  as  well  as  laymen  often  lose
sight  of  this.  A  man  may  be  eminent  in  the  histology  of  the
brain,  and  yet  be  incompetent  in  therapeutics.  And  there  is
nowadays  no  more  connection  between  the  art  of  healing  and
the  histology  of  the  brain  than  there  is  between  it  and  astro-
nomy. If  I  may  call  the  art  of  healing  a  science,  the  histology
of  the  brain  is  something  quite  apart  from  it — at  least,  in  the
present  day.  Perhaps  a  connection  between  them  may  be
discovered  later  ;  perhaps  the  histology  of  the  brain  may  be
of  use  to  the  science  of  healing  ;  but  at  present  there  is  no  such
inner  connection.  Therefore  I  consider  the  judgment  of  a  man
who  may  be  an  authority  in  his  own  branch  as  of  little  weight
here  as  the  judgment  of  an  astronomer  would  be.  I  would  on
no  account  have  it  thought  that  I  depreciate  the  investigations
of  such  men.  On  the  contrary,  investigations  on  the  histology
of  the  brain,  for  example,  are  necessary  and  immensely  valu-
able ;  but  as  yet  they  have  not  affected  the  art  of  healing.
Whether  they  ever  will  the  future  will  show.  Feuchtersleben?
whom  no  one  will  accuse  of  dislike  to  medicine  or  anatomy,
since  he  was  their  most  ardent  admirer,  has  expressed  the
opinion  that  the  art  of  healing  should  not  be  confused  with  the
knowledge  of  anatomy.

Besides,  scientific  opposition  has  always  advanced
science.  A  serious,  unprejudiced  opposition  prepares
the  way  for  a  scientific  investigation  of  new  ques-
tions ;  only  the  investigation  must  be  permitted,  not
rejected  a  priori,  as  was  done  in  some  quarters  in  the
case  of  hypnotism.

Every  investigator  should  test  as  a  matter  of
course,  if  he  wishes  to  judge  clearly.  But  unluckily
this  is  not  done.  When  the  author  demanded  such  an
examination,  that  the  value  of  hypnotism  might  be
tested,  many  scientific  investigators  protested  against


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  297


the  demand  in  the  most  energetic  way.  He  simply
asked  in  several  reports  that  the  therapeutic  use  of
hypnotism  should  be  examined — a  demand  which
may  justifiably  be  made  to  men  of  science.  While
Virchow,  &c,  considered  a  long  and  thorough  ex-
amination necessary,  others  were  already  prepared
with  an  a  priori  judgment,  for  which  they  could
not  offer  a  shadow  of  reason.  But,  indifferent  to
condemnation,  new  observers  came  forward  to  test
the  healing  power  of  hypnotism  and  of  the  sug-
gestion and  mental  treatment  so  closely  connected
with  it.  When  it  became  evident  that  the  ques-
tion could  not  be  easily  put  aside,  and  it  was
recognized  that  the  absolute  refusal  to  examine
was  unscientific,  an  endeavour  was  made  to  support
the  original  a  priori  decision  by  false  assertions.
Those  who  had  first  defended  the  therapeutic  value
of  hypnotism  were  accused  of  having  asserted  the
discovery  of  a  universal  panacea.  It  is  a  pity  that
those  who,  as  the  representatives  of  science,  ought
to  seek  for  truth,  should  take  such  a  way  of
justifying  their  original  refusal.  These  tactics  are
pitiable,  and  deserve  to  be  branded.  Neither  the
serious  investigators  at  Nancy  nor  those  in  Germany,
Switzerland,  and  Austria,  have  ever  wished  to  make  a
universal  panacea  out  of  hypnotism.

We  will  consider  singly  the  objections  made  to
hypnotism  as  a  therapeutic  agent.

A  chief  objection  was  made  by  Ewald,  of  Berlin,
who  "  decidedly  protested  against  calling  suggestion
medical  treatment."  He  did  this  in  the  interest  of
physicians.  Forel's  reply  to  him  will  make  it  clear
what  he  meant.  It  refutes  his  objections  better  than
I  could  do.

"  Ewald  protested  against  the  expression  1  medical


298


HYPNOTISM.


treatment  by  hypnotism.'  He  said  that  medical
treatment  meant  the  medical  art  and  medical  know-
ledge, and  that  every  shepherd  -  boy,  tailor,  and
cobbler  could  hypnotize  ;  only  self-confidence  would
be  necessary.  I,  for  my  part,  think  it  right  to  pro-
test against  this  way  of  treating  a  scientific  question.
Has  not  medicine  drawn  a  countless  number  of  its
remedies  from  the  crudest  empiricism,  from  the  tradi-
tions of  the  '  shepherd-boys  '  ?  Cannot  every  cobbler
inject  morphia,  apply  blisters,  and  give  aperients  if
he  has  the  material  ?  Yet  we  do  not  despise  these
remedies,  nor  baths,  nor  massage,  &c.  But  Prof.
Ewald  deceives  himself  greatly  if  he  believes  that
a  delicate  agent  like  hypnosis,  which  affects  and
modifies  the  highest  and  most  refined  activities  of
our  minds,  could  be  manipulated  by  a  shepherd,  or
ought  to  be  handed  over  to  him.  Medical  science
and  psychological  knowledge,  the  ability  to  diagnose
and  practise,  are  all  necessary  to  its  use.  It  is  true
that  laymen  have  succeeded  with  it,  just  as  charla-
tans have  succeeded,  and  continue  to  succeed,  in  all
provinces  of  medicine.  Should  we  on  that  account
leave  the  practice  of  medicine  to  them  ?  Long
enough,  much  too  long,  science  has  left  the  impor-
tant phenomena  of  hypnosis  to  '  shepherd-boys  and
their  like ' ;  it  is  high  time  to  make  up  for  the
delay,  and  to  devote  ourselves  to  a  thorough  exami-
nation of  the  series  of  phenomena  which  can  com-
plete our  views  of  psychology  and  of  the  physiology
of  the  brain.  Medical  therapeutics  must  not  remain
behind  when  great  results  are  to  be  obtained.  But
these  results  can  only  be  obtained  by  a  thorough
study  of  the  proper  hypnotic  methods."

A  second  objection  is  the  danger  of  hypnosis.  I
long  ago  pointed this  out,  and  earnestly  warned


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  299


people  not  to  consider  hypnosis  absolutely  safe.
Mendel  and  others  have  said  the  same  thing  later,
but  have  somewhat  exaggerated  the  danger.  This
point  must  be  seriously  weighed.  But  it  is
never  asked  whether  a  remedy  might  not  be  dan-
gerous ;  we  only  ask  if  we  cannot  avoid  the
danger  by  careful  and  scientific  use  of  it.  Rust
asserts,  in  speaking  of  artificial  somnambulism,  "  the
best  assertion  that  can  be  made  about  a  remedy  or
method  of  cure,  is,  that  it  might  also  do  damage  ;
for  what  can  never  do  positive  harm  can  never  do
positive  good."  This  assertion  is  to  a  great  degree
justifiable,  though  perhaps  exaggerated ;  for  I  think
I  may  say  that  there  are  few  remedies  in  medicine
which  would  not  injure  if  carelessly  and  ignorantly
used.  There  are  even  medicines  which  may  injure,
however  carefully  used,  because  we  do  not  know
exactly  under  what  conditions  they  become  hurtful
I  need  not  speak  of  morphia,  strychnine,  and  bella-
donna, which  have  sometimes  done  injury  even  when
the  maximum  dose  was  not  surpassed,  nor  of  the
deaths  from  chloroform,  the  reason  of  which  has  not
been  explained.  Thiem  and  P.  Fischer,  with  praise-
worthy scientific  frankness,  have  quite  recently
published  a  case  of  the  fatal  after-effects  of  chloro-
form ;  death  followed  on  the  fourth  day.  These
authors  say  that  there  is  at  least  one  death  for  every
thousand  administrations  of  chloroform.  Neither  will
I  speak  of  the  dangers  of  surgical  operations  ;  I  need
only  point  out  that  an  apparently  harmless  medicine
may  have  very  likely  already  done  more  mischief
than  hypnotism.  Many  deaths  have  resulted  from
the  use  of  potassium  chloride,  and  unfortunately  this
drug  can  still  be  bought  in  retail  without  a  medical
prescription. Severe  collapse  has  been  observed  after


300


HYPNOTISM.


the  use  of  antipyrine.  I  will  add  to  these  one  of  the
most  recent  medicines — sulfonal — which  is  supposed  to
be  a  perfectly  harmless  hypnotic  drug.  A  friend  and
colleague  has  told  me  that  he  has  seen  sad  consequences
follow  from  its  use,  and  that  there  were  some  patients
to  whom  he  never  gave  it,  for  fear  this  "  harmless  "
drug  should  work  great  mischief.  And  again,  as  to
the  treatment  by  suspension,  which  has  lately  become
almost  a  fashion,  and  from  which  certain  enthusiasts
really  expect  the  cure  of  locomotor  ataxy.  It  is  now
certain  that  it  may  cause  great  injury,  or  even  death  ;
a  death  from  it  has  recently  been  published.  Many
published  reports  show  that  even  the  presence  of  a
doctor  does  not  prevent  evil  consequences.  And
Billroth  has  lately  pointed  out  great  dangers  from
carbolic  acid,  which  is  constantly  used.  If  we  gave
up  the  use  of  these  remedies  we  might  give  up
medicine  altogether,  as  everything  employed  may  do
harm.

I  need  not  enlarge  this  chapter  further,  for  whether
there  are  dangers  in  the  use  of  drugs  or  not,  is  not
the  question.  Rather  we  must  ask  :  I.  Do  we  know
under  what  conditions  the  danger  appears  ?  2.  Can
we  remove  these  conditions  and  the  consequent
danger?  3.  And  if  we  cannot,  does  the  advantage
to  be  gained  by  the  patient  outweigh  the  danger  he
runs  ?  The  answer  to  these  questions  is  in  favour  of
hypnotism  ;  we  know  perfectly  well  under  what  con-
ditions it  is  dangerous,  which  we  do  not  know  about
some  drugs  ;  we  are  able  in  certain  cases  to  exclude
these  conditions  by  using  the  proper  and  harmless
methods,  and  thereby  preventing  danger ;  and  sup-
posing that  these  perfectly  harmless  methods  fail,  we
can  ask  ourselves  if  we  shall  or  shall  not  use  the
methods  which  are  not  harmless. I  think  the  small


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  301


discomforts  to  which  the  patient  is  exposed — a  short
headache,  watering  of  the  eyes,  and  depression,  are
infinitesimal  compared  to  the  advantages  which  may
result  from  the  hypnosis.  The  future  will  decide
here  also,  but  I  will  remark  that  nearly  all  the  men
(Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  Ewald,  Mendel,  Rieger,  Bin-
swanger),  who  have  said  the  most  about  the  dangers
of  hypnotism,  and  are  in  general  against  it,  by  no
means  themselves  refrain  from  hypnotizing.  By  this
they  allow  that  it  is  not  hypnotism  itself,  but  its
misuse,  which  is  mischievous.

I  will  now  speak  of  the  different  ways  in  which
hypnotism  might  endanger  health,  and  explain  the
causes  of  the  danger,  and  the  method  of  avoiding  it.

In  the  first  place,  the  danger  has  been  enormously
exaggerated.  The  inhabitants  of  a  little  town  once
left  off  eating  potato  soup  because  a  woman  fell
downstairs  and  broke  her  neck  half  an  hour  after
eating  some.  Conclusions  have  been  drawn  in  the
same  way  here,  and  this  sort  of  reasoning  is  not  un-
common. If  a  person  was  hypnotized,  and  later  on
had  some  ailment  or  other,  straightway  the  ailment
was  ascribed  to  hypnotism.  If  we  reasoned  thus  we
should  have  to  say  that  Carlsbad  causes  apoplexy,  for
Mr.  X.  had  an  attack  of  apoplexy  a  fortnight  after  he
returned  from  Carlsbad,  &c.  Many  things  could  be
proved  in  this  way.

I  should  hardly  have  thought  it  possible  that  such
logic  should  be  used  in  scientific  circles.  It  is
true  I  have  often  heard  that  when  patients  come
back  from  a  watering-place  without  having  been
cured  —  which  must  happen  sometimes  —  they  are
dismissed  with  the  comforting  assurance  that  they
will  feel  the  effects  later.  Till  now  I  thought  this
was  a  bad  joke,  or  at  best  an  effort  to  console  the


302


HYPNOTISM.


patient  ;  I  never  believed  that  such  a  principle  was
really  credited  in  the  medical  world.  If  a  patient
got  better  or  worse  six  months  after  his  return  from  a
watering-place,  I  should  not  be  inclined  to  ascribe  the
effect  to  the  baths,  because  in  the  interval  other
things  might  have  affected  the  patient.  Like  Pauly,
I  must  on  these  grounds  reject  the  connection  found
by  Binswanger,  Ziemssen,  and  others,  between  hyp-
nosis and  ailments  long  subsequent  to  it.  Besides,
if  I  were  to  accept  their  sophisms,  it  would  be  easy
for  me  to  prove  in  the  same  way  that  modern
medicine  makes  mankind  ill  ;  for  what  medicine
might  not  produce  important  results  half  a  year
after  its  administration  ?  What  doctor  has  cver
argued  in  this  way  ?

However,  I  by  no  means  deny  that  there  are
certain  dangers  in  the  improper  use  of  hypnotism.

Mendel  maintains  that  it  induces  nervousness  ;  that
nervous  people  grow  worse,  and  sound  people  nervous
through  its  use  ;  but  Forel  and  Schrenck-Notzing
think  this  is  a  mistake  of  Mendel's,  caused  by  his
using  the  method  of  Braid  instead  of  suggesting
hypnosis  verbally.  I  agree  that  fixed  attention  too
long  continued  may  have  unpleasant  effects.  It  may
be  followed  by  nervous  debility  or  nervous  excite-
ment. But  I  have  never  seen  any  one  become
"nervous  "  whom  I  hypnotized  verbally,  and  to  whom
I  made  no  exciting  suggestions.  This  also  is  im-
portant (Bertrand).  Whoever  has  seen  the  difference
between  a  subject  who  has  received  an  exciting
suggestion  and  one  who  has  received  a  soothing
one,  will  agree  that  as  much  good  can  be  done
in  one  way  as  harm  in  the  other.  A  man  who
makes  absurd  suggestions  to  amuse  himself  and
satisfy  his  curiosity,  without  a  scientific  aim,  need


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  303


hardly  be  astonished  if  he  produces  ailments.
Sawolshskaja  is  right  in  warning  against  such  sports.
I  have  observed  that  patients  are  often  worse  on  days
following  bad  dreams,  Can  we  be  astonished  that  a
person  who  has  awaked  from  hypnosis  during  an
imaginary  fire  should  feel  ill  after  it  ?  Such  sug-
gestions should  not  be  made  at  all,  or  with  the
greatest  caution,  taking  care  to  do  away  with  the
suggestion  and  soothing  the  subject  before  the
waking.  This  is  the  most  important  point.  I  think
that  even  if  these  mistakes  are  made  it  is  of  little
consequence,  provided  the  subject  is  thoroughly  and
properly  wakened  in  the  manner  used  at  Nancy  and
by  all  who  follow  the  prescriptions  of  that  school.
I  should  like  to  ask  those  who  talk  of  the  dangers
of  hypnotism  if  they  have  taken  care  that  the
awakening  should  be  complete  ?  I  know  that  most
people  are  not  at  all  aware  that  they  should  do  away
with  the  suggestion  entirely.  They  think  it  enough
to  blow  on  the  subject's  face,  and  are  astonished  that
he  does  not  feel  well  after  it.  I  am  surprised  that
more  mischief  is  not  done  in  consequence  of  in-
sufficient technical  knowledge.  It  is  this  that  is
dangerous — not  hypnotism.  No  wonder  that  there
are  sometimes  unpleasant  consequences.  It  is  as
necessary  to  know  the  right  way  in  this  case  as
in  using  a  catheter.

To  show  how  a  suggestion  should  be  done  away
with  I  will  suppose  that  an  exciting  suggestion  has
been  made  to  a  subject,  who  is  disturbed  in  conse-
quence. One  should  say  something  like  this  :  "  What
excited  you  is  gone  ;  it  was  only  a  dream,  and  you
were  mistaken  to  believe  it.  Now  be  quiet.  You
feel  quiet  and  comfortable.  It  is  easy  to  see  you  are
perfectly  comfortable." Only  when  this  has  sue-


304


HYPNOTISM.


ceeded  should  the  subject  be  awakened  ;  and  this
should  not  be  done  suddenly;  there,  are  reasons  for
thinking  it  better  to  prepare  the  patient  for  waking
(Sallis).  I  generally  do  it  by  saying,  "  I  shall  count
up  to  three.  Wake  when  I  say  three."  Or,  "  Count
to  three,  and  then  wake."  I  add  (and  this  is  also
important),  "  You  will  be  very  comfortable,  happy,
and  contented  when  you  wake."

Further  on  I  will  give  some  other  precautionary
rules  which  should  be  used  before  the  awakening  to
prevent  disagreeable  consequences.

I  have  spoken  of  the  nervousness  which  hypnotism
is  supposed  to  produce,  and  have  tried  to  show  that  it
is  not  hypnotism  which  causes  it,  but  its  improper  use.
These  rules  should  especially  be  followed  :  I.  To
avoid  continuous  stimulation  of  the  senses  as  much  as
possible.  2.  To  avoid  all  mentally  exciting  suggestions
as  much  as  possible.  3.  To  dp  away  with  the  sug-
gestion carefully  before  the  awakening.  The  proper
method  will  not  cause  nervousness.  Hypnotism
offers  less  dangers  on  this  point  when  properly  used
than  electricity,  for  example,  which  has  made  many
people  "  nervous."  A  lady  I  knew  became  so  nervous
when  electricity  was  applied  to  her  larynx  by  a  very
competent  doctor,  that  she  was  obliged  to  give  it  up.

It  is  asserted  in  particular  that  hypnotism  causes
hysteria,  or  hysterical  convulsions  (Guinon),  even  in
people  who  have  never  had  them.  It  is  not  to  be
denied  that  hystero-epileptics  are  sometimes  thrown
into  hysterical  convulsions  in  hypnosis,  but  I  contend
decidedly  that  the  convulsions  are  not  caused  by  the
hypnosis.  The  slightest  mental  affection  causes  con-
vulsions in  such  persons  :  electricity  causes  them  ;
they  fall  into  them  even  when  they  hear  a  noise,  such
as  a  falling  book,  a  bell,  &c. But  it  is  preposterous


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  305

to  say  the  electricity  causes  the  convulsions  ;  the
mental  excitement  of  the  patient  about  the  electri-
zation is  the  real  cause  ;  timid  patients  sometimes
faint  when  they  are  electrified  (E.  Remak).  Besides,
the  main  point  is  whether  the  convulsions  of  the
hystero-epileptic  are  permanently  aggravated  or  not,
and  experience  shows  that  this  is  not  the  case.  On
the  contrary,  when  once  a  complete  hypnosis  has
been  obtained  we  have  in  our  hands  a  trustworthy
means  of  permanently  lessening  the  convulsions;  and,
in  truth,  an  attack  of  hysteria  is  not  so  important  that
it  need  be  regarded  as  one  of  the  chief  dangers  of
hypnotism.  Hysterical  attacks  are  sometimes  arti-
ficially induced  merely  for  the  sake  of  experiment
or  demonstration.

Certain  cases  of  Sperling  and  Krakauer  show  that
hysterical  attacks  are  of  no  importance,  and  do  not
indicate  the  necessity  of  stopping  the  hypnotic  treat-
ment ;  in  these  cases  there  were  attacks  at  first,  yet
cures  were  obtained  ;  and  they  also  show  that  the
attacks  are  by  no  means  permanently  aggravated,
even  when  they  take  place  at  the  first  or  second
attempt  to  hypnotize.  If  Krakauer,  in  his  case  of
hysterical  deafness,  had  allowed  himself  to  be  thus
hindered  from  making  further  experiment  his  patient
might  be  as  deaf  to-day  as  she  was  two  years  ago.
And  I  will  further  mention  that  Mesmer  and  Deslon
even  thought  the  hysterical  convulsions  {crises)  neces-
sary if  the  magnetizing  were  to  do  any  good  ;  which
was  certainly  a  mistake.  So  far  as  I  know,  in  no
single  case  has  a  person  hypnotized  according  to  the
above  rules  ever  had  convulsions  in  hypnosis,  unless
he  had  had  them  before.

But  I  should  like  to  mention  some  slight  accom-
panying ailments  which  are  sometimes  found  after

21


306


HYPNOTISM.


hypnosis,  though  they  cannot  be  thought  a  real
clanger,  and  are  often  the  result  of  auto-suggestion
(Forel),  or  of  a  bad  method.  There  may  be
fatigue  and  languor,  heaviness  of  the  limbs,  &c,
after  waking.  It  is  easy  to  prevent  these  by  sug-
gestion in  deep  hypnoses.  It  is  different  in  the
light  ones,  though  I  believe  a  clever  operator  can  do
it  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion  even  here.  In  other
cases  1  think  it  better  to  prevent  fatigue  by  sugges-
tion before  the  awakening  ;  in  any  case  it  is  a  good
plan  to  get  rid  of  it  at  the  first  sitting,  as  otherwise  it
increases  by  auto-suggestion  at  each  sitting,  and  can
finally  be  hardly  overcome.  This  feeling  of  fatigue  in
the  light  hypnoses  is  the  same  we  sometimes  have
after  an  unsound  sleep.  All  these  inconveniences  are
slight,  and  can  for  the  most  part  be  avoided.  Dros-
dow  made  of  these  phenomena  a  particular  stage  of
the  hypnotic  state,  characterized  by  headache,  pains
in  the  limbs,  faintness,  &c,  but  he  was  no  doubt  mis-
led in  1 88 1  by  the  then  want  of  knowledge  of  the
methods  of  Nancy.

The  main  dangers  of  hypnotism  are  not  those  just
mentioned,  which  appear  relatively  seldom  even  when
improper  methods  are  used.  The  real  ones  show  them-
selves more  easily  in  such  a  case.  They  are  :  the
increased  tendency  to  hypnosis,  and  heightened  sus-
ceptibility to  suggestion  in  the  waking  state,  ie.,  the
possibility  of  a  new  hypnosis  against  the  subject's
will,  perhaps  without  his  suspecting  it  (cf.  p.  45),  and
the  danger  of  his  accepting  external  suggestions  even
without  hypnosis.  It  is  just  this  too  great  suscepti-
bility to  hypnosis  which  shows  us  how  careful  we
should  be  with  the  method  of  Braid,  which  is  the
most  frequent  cause  of  this ;  for  accidentally  fixing
the  eyes  on  some  object  may  cause  a  sudden  hyp-


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  3°7


nosis,  simply  because  the  idea  of  an  earlier  hypnosis
is  thereby  vividly  recalled.

The  last-mentioned  danger  can  be  guarded  against
by  repeatedly  making  some  such  suggestion  as
follows  to  the  subject  before  awaking  him :  "  Nobody
will  ever  be  able  to  hypnotize  you  without  your  con-
sent ;  you  will  never  fall  into  hypnosis  against  your
wish ;  nobody  will  be  able  to  suggest  anything  to  you
when  awake  ;  you  need  never  fear  that  you  will  have
sense  delusions,  &c,  as  you  do  in  hypnosis,  you  are
perfectly  able  to  prevent  them."  This  is  the  surest
way  to  avoid  the  danger.  Such  are  the  dangers  of
hypnotism,  and  such  the  methods  of  meeting  them
Their  antidote  is  suggestion,  and  they  are  no  hin-
drance to  hypnotic  treatment.  They  can  be  avoided
by  a  proper  use  of  hypnotism.

But  it  may  be  objected  that  though  a  short  use  of
hypnotism  may  not  be  hurtful,  a  long  one,  involving
a  repeated  induction  of  the  state,  might  be  so.  The
objection  is  justifiable.  But  it  might  also  be  made
against  the  use  of  various  drugs,  since  we  do  not  yet
know  whether  a  long  use  of  them  might  not  cause
severe  chronic  poisoning.  Experience  is  the  only  way
to  decide  such  questions.  Now  Liebeault,  who  has
used  hypnotism  therapeutically  in  France  for  nearly
thirty  years,  has  watched  cases  for  a  long  time,  with-
out finding  bad  consequences.  Forel  has  done  the
same  thing,  though  for  a  rather  shorter  time ;  I
myself  have  hypnotized  persons  for  more  than  a  year
without  evil  results.  On  the  contrary,  the  hypnosis
grew  deeper,  and  suggestion  consequently  easier.

I  will  not  enter  into  a  purely  theoretic  discussion  of
the  dangers  of  hypnosis.  Mendel  fears  over-action  of
the  cerebral  cortex  from  it,  while  Ziemssen  and
Meynert  fear  just  the  contrary,  that  is,  a  loss  of


3o8


HYPNOTISM.


power  of  the  same  part.  The  contradictions  in
which  they  are  involved  are  evident ;  to  suppose  that
they  meant  the  same  thing  would  show  a  great  want
of  reflection.

In  the  foregoing  I  have  discussed  and  refuted  two
objections  made  to  the  therapeutic  use  of  suggestion
and  hypnotism  :  first,  the  assertion  that  hypnotism
should  not  be  called  medical  treatment;  and  secondly,
that  it  has  too  many  dangers  to  allow  of  its  practical
use.

It  is  further  added  that  its  mysterious  side  should
prevent  its  being  used.  Benedikt  maintains  this,  and
thus  contradicts  Mendel,  who  finds  its  healing  value
especially  in  the  mysterious  impression  it  causes.  I,
on  the  contrary,  believe,  as  I  shall  explain  later,  that
the  mysterious  impression  plays  a  subordinate  part,
and  that  there  is  less  mystery  about  the  matter  than
is  generally  believed.  Apart  from  this,  it  would  be
perfectly  indifferent  to  a  practitioner  whether  a  drug
took  effect  from  the  mysterious  impression  it  made,  or
through  suggestion,  or  through  chemico-physical  in-
fluence. The  point  is  that  it  shall  act,  not  in  what
manner  it  acts.

When  Benedikt  maintains  that,  in  order  to  lessen
the  impression  of  mystery,  hypnosis  should  be
induced  by  the  use  of  a  magnet  instead  of  the
ordinary  methods,  he  would  do  better  if  he  showed
how  this  is  possible.  He  should  prove  his  assertion
that  the  magnet  produces  hypnosis  by  publishing
his  experiments.  I  have  applied  the  magnet  to
hundreds  of  persons  and  never  induced  hypnosis.

If  I  believed  that  in  some  cases  a  mysterious
agent  would  be  useful  to  the  patient  I  should  not
for  a  moment  hesitate  to  use  it ;  for  were  I  to  do
otherwise  I  should  be  neglecting  my  duty  as  a  doctor,


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  309

which  is  of  more  importance  than  any  scientific  sign-
board. For  example,  I  should  think  it  right  in  certain
cases  to  send  patients  to  some  miracle-working  spot,
e.g.,  Lourdes,  if  they  expected  they  would  be  cured
there ;  and,  in  fact,  fifty  or  sixty  patients  are  yearly
sent  to  Lourdes  from  the  Salpetriere  (Constantin
James).  In  any  case,  even  if  hypnosis  was  effectual
only  from  its  mysteriousness — which  is  not  the  case
— it  would  none  the  less  be  well  to  use  it.

Among  the  remaining  objections  to  suggestive
therapeutics  the  assertion  that  they  do  not  produce
any  lasting  improvement  or  cure  may  be  mentioned.
This  may  be  answered  as  follows.  The  results  are
by  no  means  transitory  ;  on  the  contrary,  a  large
number  of  lasting  cures  have  been  observed  and
published.  The  author  has  seen  many  cases  where
there  was  no  relapse  for  years.  One  cannot  ask  for
more.  The  objection  that  the  improvement  may
be  only  temporary  is  thus  not  justified.  But  even
were  this  so  we  must  still  rejoice  to  have  found  a
way  of  procuring  even  temporary  relief  (Purgotti,
Schuster).  For  instance,  in  difficulties  of  men-
struation, it  is  a  great  thing  if  we  can  succeed  in
subduing  pain  for  a  time.  If  the  pain  returns  a  new
hypnosis  may  be  induced  ;  it  is  always  to  be  had,
and  as  it  generally  becomes  deeper  the  more  it  is
used,  it  is  less  likely  to  lose  its  effect  (even  in  relapses)
than  drugs,  which  often  do  so  quickly  (Sperling).  In
any  case  therapeutics  are  not  yet  so  far  advanced  as
to  give  us  the  right  to  reject  a  remedy  merely  because
it  only  affects  symptoms  or  has  often  merely  a  tem-
porary value.  If  we  were  to  reject  remedies  which
suppress  the  phenomena  of  disease  for  a  time  only,  we
might  abandon  a  large  part  of  therapeutics,  perhaps
the  whole, Besides,  from  some  methods  of  treatment


HYPNOTISM.


nothing  but  a  temporary  improvement  is  expected,
and  yet  this  temporary  improvement  is  considered  to
prove  the  value  of  the  method.  How  often  it  happens
that  a  patient  who  has  benefited  by  a  stay  in  Carlsbad
or  Aix,  &c,  is  recommended  by  his  doctor  to  go  back
there  when  his  ailment  returns,  because  his  health  was
improved  .  the  first  time.  Remedies  should  not  be
weighed  and  measured  by  different  standards.

Another  objection  to  the  therapeutic  use  of  hypno-
tism is  that  it  cannot  be  generally  applied  because
everybody  is  not  hypnotizable.  I  should  like  to  add
that  in  many  cases,  even  when  a  hypnosis  is  induced,
it  is  not  deep  enough  to  be  used  therapeutically.  I
pointed  out  these  two  defects  several  years  ago,
without,  however,  exaggerating  their  importance.
After  all,  it  is  the  same  with  other  remedies.  For
instance,  under  some  circumstances  a  journey  to  the
North  Sea,  or  among  mountains,  or,  perhaps,  in  some
states  of  collapse,  a  few  bottles  of  Madeira,  are  sup-
posed to  be  excellent  remedies.  I  think  that  many
more  people  can  be  hypnotized  than  can  be  sent  to
bathe  in  the  North  Sea.

A  further  objection  to  treatment  by  hypnotic
suggestion  is  that  there  may  be  suggestions  without
hypnosis.  But  this  is  exactly  the  standpoint  which
the  school  of  Nancy  and  I  myself  have  always  taken
up,  although,  as  I  have  pointed  out,  it  is  often  difficult
to  distinguish  between  hypnosis  and  suggestion.  This
is  the  heart  of  the  present  movement,  which  shows  us
how  extensive  is  the  empirical  use  of  suggestion  in
therapeutics.  It  is  also  the  real  reason  of  the  strong
opposition  to  hypnotism.  We  hereby  see  how  often
suggestion  occurs  spontaneously  in  ordinary  life  and
medical  practice.  Hypnotism,  by  means  of  which  we
can  make  suggestions  artificially,  shows  us  what  a


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  311


great  mistake  has  been  made  in  estimating  previous
therapeutics,  since  we  have  neglected  to  consider  the
mental  element  in  the  action  of  the  various  drugs.
The  physiological  effect  only  was  regarded  ;  it  was
quite  forgotten  that  many  remedies  have  only  a
suggestive  value.

Now,  when  it  is  asserted  that  there  is  suggestion
without  hypnosis,  and  that  suggestion  in  medicine  is
no  novelty,  let  it  be  remembered  what  Ewald  said  a
short  time  ago — that  suggestion  oversteps  the  bounds  of
medical  treatment  and  trendies  on  the  field  of  psychology.
We  also  see  that  some  of  the  opponents  of  suggestion
generally  fail  to  recognize  mental  treatment  as  a  factor
in  medicine.  According  to  them  suggestion  is  no
affair  of  the  physician  as  such.  I  maintain,  on  the
contrary,  that  a  physician  can  only  do  good,  only  attain
his  aims,  when  he  is  a  psychologist,  and  that  this  is  at
least  of  as  much  importance  as  what  we  call  medical
art  and  science.

There  are,  then,  as  the  school  of  Nancy  has  shown,
many  suggestions  without  hypnosis  ;  but,  in  spite  of
this,  artificially  induced  hypnosis  makes  suggestion
possible  in  many  cases  where  it  would  otherwise  fail.
Therefore  when  any  one,  in  objecting  to  hypnotic
suggestive  therapeutics,  says  that  there  is  also
suggestion  without  hypnosis,  he  is  merely  confirming
what  the  school  of  Nancy  has  always  maintained.
This  "  refutation "  of  hypnotic  therapeutics  is  as  if
one  were  to  say  that  a  doctor  is  no  longer  needed  in
confinements,  because  many  births  take  place  spon-
taneously and  very  well  without  one.

Hardly  anybody  thinks  the  temporary  loss  of  will
is  an  objection  to  hypnotic  therapeutics.  The  main
point  is  to  choose  only  an  experienced  and  trust-
worthy experimenter,  as  we  should  do  in  taking
chloroform.


312


HYPNOTISM.


About  the  indications  for  suggestive  treatment
there  is  not  much  to  be  said  with  certainty.  This
is  why  Ewald  will  not  concede  the  same  rank  to
suggestive  treatment  as  to  other  methods,  e.g.,  elec-
tro-therapeutics, treatment  by  drugs,  &c.  Mendel
decidedly  opposes  Ewald  and  thinks  the  indications
clear  ;  unluckily  he  does  not  say  what  they  are.  I
think  that  the  indications  are  not  yet  clear,  but  that
it  cannot  be  expected  they  should  be,  when  the
method  of  treatment  has  been  under  examination
for  a  time  relatively  so  short.  But  Ewald  is  certainly
mistaken  in  thinking  that  fixed  indications  are
to  be  found  in  internal  disease  at  all.  Medicine
consists  to  a  great  extent  in  trials  of  various  treat-
ments. Strictly  speaking,  there  are  indications  in  but
few  cases,  as  may  be  clearly  seen  by  comparing  various
text-books,  and  from  the  numerous  contradictions
among  different  doctors.  I  think  that  indications
for  suggestive  treatment  are  at  least  as  exact  as  those
for  treatment  by  electricity,  by  massage,  by  drugs,  by
baths,  which  are  all  supposed  to  cure  a  great  number
of  definite  diseases,  if  the  too  favourable  explana-
tions of  the  text-books  and  essays  in  journals  are  to
be  believed.  In  any  case  I  think  that  this  belief  is
to  be  found  hardly  anywhere  but  in  medical  students,
who  generally  greatly  over-estimate  the  power  of
therapeutics  (Unverricht).  Any  one  who  keeps  his
eyes  open  in  practice  may  soon  convince  himself  that
there  unluckily  are  not  many  so-called  accurate  indi-
cations for  the  treatment  of  internal  diseases,  and
particularly  for  nervous  disorders.  It  is  by  no  means
a  contradiction  to  this  that  there  are  doctors  who  in
certain  cases  can  find  the  proper  remedy  at  a  glance.
It  rather  confirms  what  I  have  said,  and  is  a  conse-
quence of  the  fact  that  therapeutics  are  less  a  science


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  313


than  an  art,  although  many  representatives  of  "  exact
medicine "  suppose  the  contrary.  Though  this  has
often  been  said  before,  it  is,  unfortunately,  not  suffi-
ciently considered  nowadays.  On  the  whole,  to
exclude  any  misunderstanding,  I  should  expressly
declare  that  I  recognize  definite  indications  in  certain
cases  of  internal  disease,  but  they  are  very  rare  when
compared  to  the  total  number  of  diseases.

So  far  as  we  have  hitherto  been  able  to  judge,
functional  neurosis  is  the  chief  field  of  suggestive
therapeutics,  i.e.,  nervous  disorders  not  founded  on
anatomical  derangements.  These  must  not  be  too
readily  confused  with  hysteria  or  with  neurasthenia,
it  is  true  that  these  ideas  are  so  blended,  and  hysteria
in  particular  is  conceived  in  so  many  different  ways,
that  we  might  almost  say,  "  What  we  cannot  define,
that  we  call  hysteria."  "Hysteria"  is  used  in  many
senses  ;  the  term  is  used  in  one  sense  or  another  at
pleasure,  and  thus  sophisms  are  constructed  which
even  many  doctors  fail  to  penetrate.  I  will  here  give
two  meanings  of  the  word  "  hysterical."

In  the  first  place,  hysteria  is  a  name  for  an  ill-
ness which  has  no  anatomical  foundation,  which  has
numerous  and  variable  symptoms— now  headache,
now  ovarian  pain,  now  pain  in  the  side,  and  now
weakness  in  the  legs.  The  patient  is  called  "  hyste-
rical "  as  well  as  the  symptoms.  As  such  patients
are  sometimes  obstinate  and  capricious,  and  like  to
make  themselves  interesting,  this  word  "  hysterical "
has  a  somewhat  unpleasant  after-taste  ;  some  authors
go  so  far  as  to  say  that  a  tendency  to  falsehood  and
hypocrisy  is  a  chief  symptom  of  such  hysteria.  This
is  evidently  an  unfair  generalization.  At  all  events,
the  multiplicity  and  variability  of  the  symptoms  are
the  main  characteristics  of  "  hysteria "  taken  in  this


314


HYPNOTISM.


sense.  Hysteria  in  the  other  sense  is  quite  different.
In  many  quarters  any  symptom  is  called  hysterical
when  there  is  no  anatomical  cause  for  it  and  it  is
merely  "  nervous,"  e.g.,  headache,  pains  in  the  muscles,
certain  tremors,  frequent  vomiting,  &c.  ;  even  when
the  symptom  is  solitary  and  constant.  Now,  if  in
such  a  case  the  patient,  as  well  as  the  symptoms,
is  to  be  called  "hysterical,"  we  have  two  entirely
different  meanings  for  the  term  "  hysterical  patient,"
from  the  interchange  of  which,  at  pleasure,  all  sorts  of
subtle  sophisms  result.  The  meanings  of  the  term
are  changed  to  suit  the  discussion.  For  example,
an  author  says  in  one  place  that  any  hysterical
symptoms  can  be  removed  by  hypnosis,  i.e.,  such
as  are  marked  by  quick  spontaneous  changes.  That
is  hysteria  No.  I.  But  as  soon  as  some  one  asserts
he  has  seen  a  person,  without  any  other  symptom
of  hysteria,  freed  by  suggestion  from  a  severe  pain
in  a  muscle — the  biceps,  for  example — then,  to  suit
the  discussion,  the  second  meaning  of  the  word
hysterical  is  adopted,  and  it  is  said  that  the  symp-
tom was  hysterical.  But  a  prudent  silence  is  main-
tained with  regard  to  the  fact  that  the  patient  suffered
from  one  merely  local  pain,  had  no  other  hysterical
symptom,  and  consequently  was  not  hysterical  in  the
first  meaning  of  the  term.  Anything  can  be  proved
or  refuted  if  the  word  "  hysteria  "  is  thus  treated.

To  give  another  proof  of  this  I  return  to  a  letter  of
Charcot,  which  has  lately  aroused  much  attention,  and  in
which  he  asserts  that  only  hysteria  can  be  treated  by  hypnosis.
If  this  means  that  hysteria  in  sense  No.  2  can  also  be  thus
treated,  there  is  nothing  to  say  against  it,  and  the  most  different
authors  would  agree  upon  the  point.  But,  in  fact,  Charcot,
as  Nonne  remarks,  understands  much  more  by  "  hysteria"  than
i§  understood  in  Germany. Thus  Charcot  says,  in  contra-


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  315


diction  to  two  German  authors,  Oppenheim  and  Thomsen,
who  think  the  variability  of  the  symptoms  the  chief  mark  of
hysteria,  that  in  his  view  this  is  not  a  characteristic  of  hysteria.

To  avoid  error  it  should  be  mentioned  that  Charcot  has  not
hitherto  advocated  suggestive  therapeutics — at  least,  publicly —
though  he  admits  them  conditionally  in  his  letter.  He  even  says
that  a  good  effect  may  be  hoped  from  them  in  hysterical  pheno-
mena. It  is  true  that  these  parts  of  Charcot's  letter  about
suggestive  treatment  are  sometimes  omitted  when  the  letter  is
repeated,  while  every  impartial  observer  must  see  in  this  pas-
sage rather  a  defence  of  suggestive  therapeutics  than  an  attack
upon  them,  if  "  hysteria  "  is  understood  in  the  second  sense  given
above.  Moreover,  while  Charcot  expresses  himself  decidedly
in  favour  of  the  hypnotic  treatment  of  hysteria,  Ziemssen,  who
is  supposed  to  have  the  same  standpoint,  maintains  that  such
treatment  makes  it  worse.

Even  though  Charcot's  authority  is  appealed  to,  if  erroneously,
against  suggestion,  it  should  not  be  forgotten  that  a  short  time
ago  Charcot  was  attacked  and  laughed  at ;  that  his  hypnotic
experiments  were  mocked  at  ;  that  Rieger,  among  others,  ener-
getically opposed  hypnotization  in  the  Salpetriere ;  that  Mendel
said  his  subjects  were  "  prepared  "  ;  that  according  to  Ewald
the  said  subjects  obtained  all  sorts  of  advantages  from  sub-
mitting to  the  experiments  (though  he  did  not  talk  of  fraud);
and  that  Ewald  expressed  himself  in  a  manner  not  altogether
appreciative  about  Charcot's  experiments  with  the  magnet ;  that
he  described  the  antecedents  of  his  subjects  unflatteringly,  &c.
From  all  which  it  appears  that  the  side  which  now  claims  him
as  an  ally  against  hypnosis  was  attacking  him  vehemently
hardly  a  year  ago.

From  this  digression,  which  was  intended  to  make
clear  what  is  meant  by  "  hysteria,"  I  return  to  the
question  of  the  indications  for  suggestive  thera-
peutics. I  will  give  them  here,  so  far  as  my  own
experience  permits,  with  the  help  of  trustworthy
authors,  especially  of  Forel.  Particularly  suitable
ones  are  all  kinds  of  pains  which  have  no  anato-
mical cause  (headaches,  stomach-aches,  ovarian  pain,
rheumatic and neuralgic pains)  ; sleeplessness  j


3r6


HYPNOTISM.


hysterical  disturbances,  particularly  paralyses  of  the
extremities  and  aphonia  ;  disturbances  of  menstrua-
tion ;  spontaneous  somnambulism  ;  uneasy  dreams  ;
loss  of  appetite  ;  alcoholism  and  morphinism  ;  neuras-
thenic ailments  ;  stammering  (Corval,  Ringier,  Wet-
terstrand,  Pauly)  ;  nervous  disorders  of  sight  (Forel,
Mollerup,  Chiltoff)  ;  enuresis  nocturna  ;  pruritus
cutaneus  nervosus ;  perverted  sexual  feeling,  when
not  inherited  (Krafft-Ebing,  Schrenck-Notzing,
Ladame)  ;  singing  in  the  ears  ;  prolonged  cases  of
chorea  ;  railway  spine  and  emotional  neuroses  (Hirt)  ;
agoraphobia  (De  Jong)  ;  writer's  cramp  (of  central
origin).

Hysteria  (in  the  sense  of  definition  No.  i)  is  not
easily  curable.  Consequently  we  try  as  much  as
possible  to  obtain  an  improvement  in  the  symp-
toms. As  far  as  our  experience  goes,  this  is  at  least
as  easily  done  by  hypnotism  and  suggestion  as  by
any  other  method.  Much  depends  upon  the  depth
of  the  hypnosis,  and  upon  the  degree  of  susceptibility
to  suggestion,  &c.  But  I  am  decidedly  of  opinion
that  hysterical  patients  are  less  susceptible  to  sugges-
tion than  others.  Forel  thinks  that  a  sound  brain
is  above  all  things  necessary  for  hypnosis ;  the
sounder  it  is,  the  sooner  we  may  hope  for  results.
In  hysterical  patients  the  brain  is  often  by  no  means
sound.  For  the  same  reason  it  is  difficult  to  treat
insane  persons  by  hypnotism.  However,  improve-
ments have  been  obtained  in  the  lighter  forms  of
mental  disease,  e.g.,  of  melancholia  and  mania  (Forel,
Burckhardt,  A.  Voisin,  Seglas,  Dufour).  But  gene-
rally the  effect  is  less  than  in  the  neuroses.  This  is
partly  because  insane  persons  are  not  good  subjects
for  hypnosis.  Even  when  the  hypnosis  is  deep,  insane
ideas  and  delusions  of  the  senses  are  much  more


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  317


difficult  to  remove  than  nervous  troubles,  such  as
sleeplessness  and  headache,  which  are  often  found
to  accompany  psychoses  (Forel).  Although  there
may  sometimes  be  organic  changes  which  cause  the
mental  disturbance,  and  which  explain  the  resistance
to  suggestion,  yet  the  chief  reason  is  to  be  found  in
the  tenacity  of  the  patient's  diseased  ideas.  These
might  often  be  rightly  called  auto-suggestions.  A.
Voisin  and  Repoud  say,  however,  that  they  have
seen  good  effects  produced  in  cases  of  severe  mental
disorder  ;  but  Forel  is  unable  to  confirm  this.

The  therapeutic  successes  which  hypnotism  has
had  in  neuroses  have  been  confirmed  in  so  many
quarters  that  a  doubt  of  the  trustworthiness  of
their  source  is  hardly  possible.  I  will  only  name
Forel,  Krafft-Ebing,  Obersteiner,  Hirt,  Bernheim.
Those  who  dispute  the  successes  do  so  generally
a  priori,  without  having  scientifically  and  patiently
tested  the  matter.  It  is  a  mistaken  assertion  that
only  such  cases  of  illness  can  be  benefited  which
could  easily  be  benefited  in  other  ways.  At  least
I  must  contend  that  this  was  not  so  in  a  number  of
cases  in  my  own  experience,  where  the  cold-water
cure,  massage,  electricity,  surgical  operations,  or
drugs  had  been  tried  in  vain,  while  suggestion,  and
hypnotic  suggestion  in  particular,  was  successful.

Besides,  even  when  one  of  the  above  methods  is
successful,  we  should  be  careful  how  we  draw  the
conclusion  that  suggestion  had  nothing  to  do  with
it  ;  for  numerous  remedies  appear  to  be  effectual
only  through  suggestion  ;  they  succeed  because  the
patient  believes  in  them,  as  even  Mendel,  one  of  the
most  decided  opponents  of  suggestion,  has  admitted.
It  is  in  the  nature  of  things  that  drugs,  even  when
they  only  act  by  suggestion,  should  sometimes  sue-


3i8


HYPNOTISM.


ceed  better  than  verbal  suggestion,  because  many
people  are  more  easily  influenced  by  something
tangible  than  by  words  only.  Some  very  practical
investigators  (Krafft-Ebing  and  others)  even  attribute
a  merely  suggestive  value  to  drugs  in  certain  diseases,
e.g.,  in  neurasthenia  and  hysteria.

With  regard  to  organic  diseases,  in  which  we  find
anatomical  changes  in  the  organs,  as  opposed  to
functional  derangements,  we  have  before  us  a  number
of  accredited  observations,  from  which  it  follows
that  important  functional  improvements  were  made
possible,  i.e. ,  the  consequences  of  the  disease  could
be  partly  removed  by  hypnosis.  Thus  in  a  case  of
tabes  dorsalis,  though  the  disease  continued,  the
severe  pains  were  subdued  (Lloyd  Tuckey).  It  may,
no  doubt,  be  objected  that  the  diagnosis  was  mis-
taken, and  that  a  functional  derangement  was  mis-
taken for  an  anatomical  lesion.  But  the  examination
of  sections  of  the  spinal  cord  contradicted  this  in  one
such  case.  Bernheim  saw  an  apoplectic  paralysis
rapidly  improved  by  suggestion.  The  patient  died  later
of  disease  of  the  lungs,  and  the  seat  of  the  original
disease  was  discovered  on  dissection.  Besides  this
confirmation  by  anatomy  there  is  another  method  by
which  we  can  sometimes  decide  a  doubtful  diagnosis.
For  example,  in  chronic  rheumatism  of  the  joints,  with
clearly  visible  and  tangible  swellings,  there  can  be
no  doubt  about  the  diagnosis.  If  suggestion  removes
the  pain,  we  have  obtained  an  important  improve-
ment in  an  organic  complaint.  But  many  such  cases
have  been  published.  I  can  confirm  it  from  my  own
experience  in  a  case  of  articular  rheumatism.

Among  other  diseases  accompanied  by  organic
injury  I  have  seen  a  very  painful  eczema  of  the  ear,
in  a  child  of  eight,  made  painless  by  post-hypnotic


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  319


suggestion.  I  observed  this  case  in  the  company  of
my  friend  and  colleague  Friedemann,  of  Copenick,
whom  I  have  to  thank  for  a  number  of  interesting
experiences  in  hypnotism.  The  child  in  question
could  not  bear  the  slightest  touch.  An  order  given
in  his  first  hypnosis  had  such  an  effect  that  he  could
afterwards  endure  even  strong  pressure  on  the  spot.

What  are  the  counter-indications  against  hypnotic
treatment,  i.e.,  what  conditions  forbid  the  use  of
hypnotism  ?  I  do  not  know  of  one.  But  it  may
be  that  when  certain  phenomena  produced  by  auto-
suggestion cannot  be  avoided  the  use  of  hypnotism
is  counter-indicated.  However,  the  therapeutic  effect
we  wish  to  obtain  is  of  so  much  more  importance
than  a  chance  attack  of  hysteria,  &c,  that  in  general
we  should  not  allow  ourselves  to  be  restrained  by  it.
In  any  case  there  are  no  more  counter-indications
against  this  treatment  than  against  any  other.

How  can  the  effects  of  hypnotism  be  explained  ?
Some  think  that  it  is  in  itself  healing  and  beneficial
(Beaunis).  The  general  view  is  that  suggestion  is  the
healing  agent.  I  believe  it  to  be  the  essential  point.
To  make  this  somewhat  clearer  I  will  take  an
example.  Suppose  we  wish  to  cure  a  headache  by
arousing  in  the  subject  the  idea  that  the  headache  is
gone.  Spontaneous  reflection  would  prevent  this  in
most  waking  people,  but  in  hypnosis  ideas  are  more
easily  established.  If  the  subject  accepts  the  sugges-
tion we  may  be  sure  that  in  the  hypnotic  state  he
does  not  feel  the  pain.  But  now  we  have  to  prevent
the  return  of  the  pain  after  waking.  Either  external
post-hypnotic  suggestion  or  auto-suggestion  will  do
this.  We  can  make  the  patient  continue  to  think  the
pain  is  gone  after  he  wakes. He  need  not  be  con-


32o


HYPNOTISM.


scious  of  this  idea  in  the  sense  of  remembering  it.
On  the  contrary,  the  less  conscious  the  idea  is,  the
more  effect  it  will  have,  because  reflexion  will  not
struggle  against  it  (Forel).  Auto-suggestion  is  the
second  plan.  The  patient,  finding  himself  without
pain  in  hypnosis,  may  convince  himself  that  pain  is
not  a  necessary  consequence  of  his  state,  and  this
idea  may  under  some  circumstances  be  strong  enough
to  prevent  the  return  of  the  pain.

The  more  easily  an  idea  can  be  established  in  the
subject,  the  quicker  a  therapeutic  result  can  be  induced.
And  the  deeper  the  hypnosis,  the  more  easily  ideas
can  be  established.  Consequently,  the  deeper  the
hypnosis,  the  better  the  cure.  I  cannot  agree  with
Schrenck-Notzing  when  he  says  the  deep  stage  is
in  general  unnecessary  ;  on  the  contrary,  the  deeper
it  is  the  better.  It  does  not  follow,  of  course,  that  the
light  stages  are  of  no  value.  Apart  from  the  fact
that  they  often  become  deeper,  they  are  often  useful
in  therapeutics,  especially  when  we  have  to  do  with
motor  disturbances.  Much  depends  upon  the  subject's
character.  For  example,  A.  may  be  as  susceptible  to
suggestion  in  the  light  stage  as  B.  is  in  the  deep  one.
However,  it  is  not  to  be  contested  that  suggestibility
increases  in  some  persons  with  the  depth  of  the  hyp-
nosis.

This  methodical  suggestion  is  the  key  to  suggestive
therapeutics.  When  the  hypnotized  subject  refuses
the  suggestion,  which  sometimes  happens,  the  mys-
terious impression  may  be  ever  so  great,  and  yet  no
therapeutic  result  will  be  obtained.  I  have  success-
fully treated  people  who  certainly  had  no  mystical
ideas  about  the  matter.  People  can  be  influenced
hypnotically  or  suggestively  though  they  do  not
believe  they  are  hypnotized  ;  they  are  often  much


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  321

astonished  when  they  wake  to  find  they  have  been
hypnotized.  But  I  do  "not  contest  that  in  certain
cases  the  mystical  impression  may  not  have  some
effect,  though  it  is  by  no  means  the  rule.

Neither  is  the  effect  to  be  attributed  to  the  patient's
confidence  in  itself,  though  it  plays  a  large  part.
Misrepresentation  has  aroused  so  much  distrust  of
hypnotic  treatment  that  in  some  cases  there  is  no
confidence  at  all.  But  the  immense  power  of  hypnotic
suggestion  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  it  succeeds  in  a
large  number  of  cases  in  spite  of  mistrust  ;  for  mis-
trust is  a  powerful  auto-suggestion,  and  auto-sugges-
tion is  the  greatest  foe  of  external  suggestion.  The
success  of  hypnotic  suggestion  will  be  greater  the
more  distrust  disappears,  and  when  it  has  been  recog-
nized that  hypnotism  properly  used  is  as  harmless  as
electricity  properly  used.  Then  only  will  the  power
of  hypnotic  therapeutics  be  practically  estimated.  I
have  little  doubt  what  that  estimation  will  be.  Hyp-
notism and  suggestion  will  outlive  many  remedies
whose  praises  fill  the  columns  of  medical  journals  at
present.

To  avoid  misunderstanding,  I  will  briefly  state  in
what  way  the  improvement  of  organic  diseases  by
hypnotic  suggestion  is  to  be  explained  (according  to
Bernheim).  I  only  mention  this  because  Binswanger
and  Seeligmiiller  mistakenly  represent  Bernheim  as
having  maintained  that  the  original  organic  injury  is
done  away  with  by  suggestion  (Corval).  Apoplexy
is  an  example.  If  a  part  of  the  brain,  a,  is  injured,
then  the  functions  of  the  nerves  served  by  a  are
interfered  with.  Now  it  is  a  well-known  experience
that  when  a  is  injured  the  functions  of  another  part
of  the  brain,  b,  are  often  influenced.  Then  the  func-
tions of  the  nerves  served  by  b  are  also  interfered

22


322


HYPNOTISM.


with;  b  itself  is  not  organically  injured,  only  its
functions  are  inhibited.  Now  suggestion  can  restore
these  functions.  It  can  sometimes  also  produce  a
functional  amelioration  in  an  organic  disease.  In  any
case  it  need  not  be  supposed  that  suggestion  has  an
immediate  influence  on  the  organic  lesion,  in  order
to  explain  the  functional  improvement  in  organic
diseases.  Bernheim's  explanation  may,  mutatis  mutan-
dis, be  called  in  for  other  cases.  Sperling  believes
that  electricity  only  does  good  in  apoplexy  by
restoring  the  inhibited  functions  of  parts  which  are
anatomically  sound.  He  is  known  to  have  experience
and  ability  in  the  field  of  hypnotism  and  electro-
therapeutics, such  as  are  possessed  by  few,  but  does
not  believe  that  the  part  of  the  brain  injured  in
apoplexy  has  ever  been  restored  by  electricity.

It  would  take  too  long  to  give  all  the  rules  for
hypnotic  treatment,  and  Baierlacher,  Bernheim,  and
Forel  have  already  done  so.  I  will  merely  mention
that  there  is  a  difference  between  preparatory  and
therapeutic  experiments.  Practice  will  enable  us  to
decide  whether  the  hypnosis  in  particular  cases  is  deep
enough  to  be  used  therapeutically,  or  whether  further
trials  are  needed  to  increase  susceptibility  to  sugges-
tion. In  most  cases  preparatory  experiments  are
necessary.  The  first  trials  should  only  be  continued
for  a  few  minutes.  If  they  are  unsuccessful  the
stronger  methods  should  be  tried,  e.g.,  fixed  attention.
As  violent  pain  often  prevents  hypnosis  it  is  better
to  choose  a  time  when  the  subject  is  free  from  it  for
the  first  attempt.  Hypnosis  will  be  easily  induced
later,  even  in  the  midst  of  violent  pain.  It  is  generally
necessary  to  repeat  the  suggestion  occasionally,  after
improvement  or  cure  has  been  obtained,  to  prevent
relapse.


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  323


Hypnotism  does  not  necessarily  succeed  at  once.
If  the  hypnosis  is  deep  a  result  may  be  very  quickly
obtained  ;  in  other  cases  patience  and  method  are
wanted,  and  the  time  the  illness  has  lasted  must  be
taken  into  consideration.  The  more  the  idea  of  pain
has  taken  root,  the  more  difficult  is  it  to  overcome.

Why  hypnotism  should  be  measured  by  a  different
standard  than  other  methods  of  treatment  is  inex-
plicable to  me.  A  doctor  is  often  satisfied  to  obtain
a  result  after  weeks  or  months  of  electro-therapeutic
treatment,  and  how  often,  after  months  of  perseve-
rance, it  fails  to  appear.  Why,  then,  should  we
expect  suggestive  therapeutics  to  succeed  in  one
day  ?  Patience  on  the  side  of  both  doctor  and  patient
is  often  required.

I  likewise  deny  that  hypnotism  should  be  regarded
as  a  sort  of  last  hope  in  the  treatment  of  diseases.
The  longer  they  have  lasted  the  more  difficult  they
are  to  cure,  because  the  idea  of  the  disease  has
established  itself  firmly.  It  is  the  duty  of  every  one
who  believes  that  hypnotism  is  harmless  when
properly  applied  to  use  it  where  he  thinks  it  will  be
of  service,  and  before  it  is  too  late.  For  some
diseases  become  incurable  simply  because  they  were
not  rightly  treated  at  first.  The  illness  develops
into  an  auto-suggestion,  more  and  more  difficult  to
overcome.  The  more  a  patient  thinks  of  his  pain  at
first,  the  less  his  attention" is  turned  from  it,  the  less
possible  it  is  to  remove  it  later.  We  might  hesitate
to  make  long  preparatory  experiments  with  people
difficult  to  hypnotize  (Grasset).  But  it  is  to  be  wished
that  hypnosis  should  be  used  when  the  hypnosis  can
easily  be  induced,  and  when  the  method  is  indicated,
rather  than  that  a  hundred  other  methods,  all  dis-
agreeable to  the  patient,  should  first  be  tried  in  vain.


324


HYPNOTISM.


It  has  been  asked  whether  hypnotism  and  sugges-
tion are  of  real  value  to  the  art  of  healing.  To
answer  this  we  must  consider  whether  a  larger
number  of  patients  are  cured  or  improved  by  this
means  than  by  exclusively  physical  and  chemical
treatment.  It  is  difficult  to  decide.  If  we  suppose
that  50  per  cent,  are  cured  or  improved  by  the  usual
treatment — which  is  by  no  means  the  case — and  that
2  per  cent,  are  cured  or  improved  by  suggestion,  these
figures  would  not  mean  much,  as  the  percentage  would
only  be  raised  from  50  to  52.  But  if  we  suppose  that  by
the  ordinary  methods  only  1  per  cent,  of  functional
neuroses  are  cured  or  improved — which  is  nearer  the
truth — and  that  2  per  cent,  are  cured  or  improved  by
suggestion,  this  would  be  a  great  progress,  since  the
percentage  would  be  raised  from  1  to  3  per  cent.,
i.e.,  the  number  of  successfully-treated  patients  would
be  tripled.  I  have  chosen  two  extreme  cases,  to  show
how  difficult  it  is  to  settle  the  question.  I  think  that
very  few  neuroses — I  will  consider  only  these  in  the
first  place — are  cured  or  improved  by  any  treatment
not  mental  ;  perhaps  one  per  cent,  is  too  high  a
figure.

Such  questions  are  hard  to  decide,  since  we  are  not  dealing
with  fixed  quantities.  I  have  spoken  on  purpose  of  improve-
ment as  well  as  cure,  because  cure  is  understood  in  different
ways.  Mendel  calls  a  disappearance  of  the  symptoms  a  cure,
without  regard  to  the  time  during  which  they  have  disappeared.
He  said  that  a  person  who  was  periodically  deaf-mute  had  been
cured  by  hypnotic  treatment,  because  he  spoke  and  heard  for
several  days,  though  a  few  days  later  there  was  a  relapse.  I
should  make  the  idea  of  cure  depend  upon  the  disappearance
of  the  tendency  to  return  of  the  disease.  But  this  is  a  scientific
theoretical  notion,  while  the  other  springs  from  practical  need.


But  I  certainly  believe,  with  KrafTt-Ebing,  F.


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  325


Miiller,  and  others,  that  no  important  effect  can  be
obtained  in  most  functional  neuroses  without  sugges-
tion. Therefore  I  consider  suggestion  an  immense
step  in  advance  in  this  direction  ;  suggestion  without,
as  well  as  with,  artificially  induced  hypnosis,  which,
however  often  materially  helps  its  effect.  I  think
that  hardly  any  of  the  newest  discoveries  are  so  im-
portant to  the  art  of  healing,  apart  from  surgery,  as
the  study  of  suggestion.  This  will  be  specially  pointed
out  in  a  later  work.  In  any  case,  the  conclusion  that
neither  hypnotism  nor  suggestion  will  again  disappear
from  the  foreground  in  medicine  is  justified.  This
hope  is  grounded  on  the  fact  that  there  are  in
Germany  a  number  of  practical  doctors,  not  carried
away  by  enthusiasm,  who  study  suggestion,  and  do
not  look  for  hasty  successes  and  "  miraculous  "  cures.
They  are  all  the  more  careful  inasmuch  as  many
opponents  of  suggestion  watch  their  cases  in  the  hope
of  forming  an  opinion  of  their  failure.  This  is  the
only  proper  and  scientific  way,  which  the  most  decided
opponents  have  not  always  followed.

Naturally,  care  must  be  taken  to  examine  character
as  in  all  therapeutics.  Men  are  no  more  alike  men-
tally than  physically,  and  I  believe  that  their  mental
differences  are  greater  than  their  bodily  ones.  There-
fore it  is  not  astonishing  that  doctors  who  have
psychological  knowledge  should  succeed,  while  others,
who  treat  by  hard  and  fast  rule,  fail.  The  investiga-
tions of  many  authors  show  what  results  may  be
obtained  by  a  clever  use  of  suggestion  ;  they  have
succeeded  in  most  unpromising  cases.  Forel  is  one
of  these.  It  is  true  that  few  have  it  in  their  power  to
experiment  as  he  has  done.  It  is  very  unscientific  to
impugn  the  successes  of  others  because  one  has  failed
oneself. Perhaps  it may  be mentioned that  an


326


HYPNOTISM.


eminent  Swedish  alienist — Oedmann — says  that  he
recognizes  the  good  effects  of  suggestion  in  alcoholism,
but  that  as  he  is  unable  to  produce  them  he  sends
such  patients  to  Wetterstrand  (Corval).

No  doubt  experience  is  the  best  teacher.  It  is  in-
comprehensible why  some  people  deny  the  thera-
peutic value  of  hypnotism  simply  because  their  own
few  experiments  have  failed.  It  is  the  same  with  all
instruments  ;  a  practised  operator  succeeds  where  an
unpractised  one  fails.  So  an  experienced  and  con-
scientious hypnotist  will  remove  ailments  by  sugges-
tion, while  an  unpractised  one  may  induce  them  from
want  of  experience.  It  is  certain  that  people  who
are  suggestible  and  easy  to  hypnotize  may  be  in-
fluenced by  any  one.  But  in  more  difficult  cases  a
doctor,  who  has  experience  and  psychological  know-
ledge, will  succeed  where  others  fail.

There  is,  of  course,  no  need  to  cease  using  other
means,  while  hypnotism  is  being  used  (Sperling) ;  on
the  contrary,  in  each  case  the  indications  must  be
followed.  No  method  of  healing  will  be  driven  out
by  hypnotism  ;  that  is,  if  it  is  accepted  in  practice.
Suggestion  will  not  supplant  other  methods  of  heal-
ing, but  complete  them  (Bourdon).

Naturally,  whatever  might  injure  the  prognosis,  or
make  suggestion  ineffectual,  must  be  avoided  in  sug-
gestive therapeutics  ;  and,  before  all,  the  fear  of  hyp-
nosis. There  is  no  doubt  that  this  may  do  more
injury  and  produce  more  unfavourable  effects  than
hypnosis  itself.  Therefore  ft  is  advisable  not  to  use
it  when  the  patient  is  excited  and  frightened  about
it  ;  Tokarski  is  of  the  same  opinion.  But  other
mental  excitements  should  be  avoided  as  much  as
possible.  Krafft-Ebing's  case  plainly  proves  that
excitement  may  make  suggestion  ineffectual.


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  327

Further,  I  believe  that  the  study  of  hypnotism  will
much  enlarge  our  point  of  view  in  other  ways.  We
shall  now  be  able  to  solve  many  a  riddle  that  has
puzzled  us.  Now  that  it  has  been  proved  that  even
organic  changes  can  be  caused  by  suggestion  we  are
obliged  to  ascribe  a  much  greater  importance  to
mental  influences  than  we  have  hitherto  done.  I
think  that  the  diseases  which  are  generally  called
imaginary  are  much  more  common  than  is  supposed.
I  think  that  improper  surroundings  cause  or  increase
many  maladies.  There  are  few  people  who  are  not
impressed  when  they  are  assured  on  all  sides  that
they  look  very  ill,  and  I  think  many  have  been  as
much  injured  by  this  cumulative  mental  process  as  if
they  had  been  poisoned.  Just  as  suggestion  can  take
away  pain,  so  it  can  create  and  strengthen  it.  It  is
small  comfort  to  call  such  pains  imaginary.  And
even  if  the  pain  is  "  only "  imaginary  it  troubles  the
patient  as  much  as  if  it  were  real.

Besides,  I  believe  this  expression  "  imaginary  pain,"
which  is  used  by  physicians  as  well  as  laymen,  is
scientifically  false.  One  author  has  excellently  com-
pared "  imaginary  pains  "  with  hallucinations.  Now
we  can  say  that  the  hallucinatory  object  is  imaginary,
but  it  is  false  to  say  the  perception  is  imaginary  ;  it
has  a  central  cause.  It  remains  the  same  whether
the  object  is  imaginary  or  not  ;  so  does  the  pain
when  it  is  felt,  i.e.,  when  there  is  a  central  process.  It
is  a  matter  of  indifference  whether  this  central  process
is  caused  by  a  peripheral  stimulus  or  by  suggestion
by  a  spontaneous  mental  act.  The  pain  exists  in
both  cases,  and  is  not  imaginary.  If  in  the  latter  case
the  patient  were  to  refer  it  to  an  external  stimulus
he  would  be  wrong,  but  the  pain  as  a  subjective
feeling  is  not  imaginary. We  may  call  such  a  pain,


HYPNOTISM.


without  objective  symptoms,  what  we  please,  but  we
may  be  sure  that  it  is  a  necessary  consequence  of
some  central  processes.  Certain  subjective  ideas
cause  pain  as  much  as  a  penetrating  thorn  causes
pain.  The  removal  of  these  is  as  much  the  doctor's
affair  as  taking  a  thorn  out  of  the  foot.

Krafft-Ebing's  case  shows  what  mental  influence
without  hypnosis  can  effect.  The  patient,  fully
awake,  thought  she  had  been  poisoned  by  bella-
donna. A  dangerous  collapse  followed,  which  was
finally  cured  by  hypnotic  suggestion.

Suggestion  is  not  only  a  key  to  the  origin  and
aggravation  of  maladies,  it  also  explains  the  working
of  drugs.  If  medicines  have  different,  effects  when
prescribed  by  different  doctors,  we  shall  not  find  the
cause  of  this  in  chemical  differences.  We  should
rather  ask  if  the  manner  of  the  prescription,  the  im-
pression made  by  the  doctor,  and  other  mental  factors
have  not  some  effect ;  it  has  been  proved  in  many
cases.  We  shall  have  to  consider  this  influence  of
unconscious  suggestion  as  of  much  more  weight  than
we  have  done.  The  powerful  mental  influence  of
surgical  operations  has  been  pointed  out,  especially
by  L.  Landau,  and  that  of  electricity  by  Mobius.
Some  ascribe  the  efficacy  of  homoeopathy  to  sugges-
tion, against  which  Roth  emphatically  protests  ;  and
I  believe  that  many  of  the  successes  and  failures  of
allopathy  may  also  be  laid  to  the  account  of  sugges-
tion. When  the  practical  importance  of  mental  in-
fluences become  more  generally  recognized  physicians
will  be  obliged  to  acknowledge  that  psychology  is  as
important  as  physiology.  Psychology  and  psychical
therapeutics  will  be  the  basis  of  a  rational  treatment
of  neuroses.  The  other  methods  must  group  them-
selves around  this;  it  will  be  the  centre,  and  no  longer


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  329


a  sort  of  Cinderella  of  science,  which  now  admits
only  the  influence  of  the  body  on  the  mind,  and  not
that  of  the  mind  on  the  body.

The  use  of  hypnotism  in  surgery  has  already  been
mentioned.  Its  use  in  inducing  analgesia  is  not  new  ;
one  inventive  genius  even  imagines  that  God  took  the
rib  from  Adam  while  he  was  in  a  hypnotic  sleep,
since  he  would  certainly  have  waked  had  it  been  a
natural  one.  The  first  methodical  surgical  operations
in  the  magnetic  sleep  were  begun  in  1 821,  by  Reca-
mier.  Such  operations  were  often  performed  in  the
Paris  hospitals  under  the  direction  of  Baron  du  Potet.
Mesmerism  has  since  occasionally  been  used  for  the
same  purpose.  Cloquet  used  it  in  1829.  He  related
his  experiences  to  the  French  Academy  of  Medicine,
but  Lisfranc,  the  celebrated  surgeon,  put  him  down
for  an  impostor  or  a  dupe.  Oudet  was  no  better
received  in  1837,  when  he  told  the  Academy  of  the
extraction  of  teeth  in  the  magnetic  sleep.

In  1846  Esdaile  performed  a  number  of  operations
during  mesmerically  induced  analgesia  in  the  hospital
at  Calcutta.  The  wounds  are  said  to  have  healed
very  quickly.  Hellwald  also  draws  attention  to  the
quick  healing  of  the  wounds  of  the  Arab  pilgrims  which
are  made  in  the  hypnotic  state.  Elliotson  at  the  same
time  was  using  mesmerism  in  London.  Braid,  who
was  much  struck  by  Esdaile's  results,  also  used  hyp-
notism in  surgery.  The  opinion  that  mesmeric  passes
perhaps  induce  analgesia  better  than  the  other  hyp-
notic methods  has  some  adherents  now.  Azam
brought  Braid's  method  of  inducing  analgesia  to
Paris  (p.  13)  ;  from  thence  it  passed  to  Germany,  but
found  little  support.  Preyer  says  that  military
doctors  and  others  appear  often  to  have  used  empi-


330


HYPNOTISM,


rical  hypnotizing  methods  for  small  operations,  such
as  tooth-drawing.  Forel,  Voigt,  Tillaux,  Le  Fort,  and
others  have  lately  performed  surgical  operations  in
hypnotic  analgesia.

The  value  of  hypnotism  for  inducing  analgesia  is
not  very  great.  Analgesia  cannot  sometimes  be  in-
duced at  all,  and  sometimes  only  after  repeated  trials.
The  excitement  before  the  operation  increases  the
difficulty.  At  all  events,  the  cases  in  which  hypnotism
can  be  used  to  make  an  operation  painless  are  very
rare ;  the  care  with  which  every  such  case  is  registered
by  the  daily  press  shows  this.  Besides  which  we
have  at  present  so  many  certain  means  of  inducing
analgesia — ether  and  chloroform,  which,  however,
occasionally  kill  the  subject — that  hypnotism  is  little
likely  to  be  much  used.  When  by  chance  a  person
who  is  to  undergo  operation  is  found  to  be  susceptible,
there  is  no  reason  why  hypnotism  should  not  be  used.
Hack  Tuke  and  Forel  think  that  hypnotism  should
be  used  in  all  cases  where  chloroform  would  be
dangerous.  Forel  believes,  besides,  that  analgesia
is  more  easily  induced  than  I  suppose  ;  it  is  pos-
sible that  a  clever  hypnotist  may  obtain  better
results  in  this  direction  than  I  have  been  able  to
do.

I  once  hypnotized  a  patient  in  order  to  open  a  boil
painlessly.  I  did  not  succeed  in  inducing  analgesia,
but  the  patient  was  almost  unable  to  move,  so  that
I  could  perform  the  little  operation  without  diffi-
culty.

Cases  in  which  analgesia  is  induced  by  post-
hypnotic suggestion,  and  the  operation  performed  in
the  waking  state,  have  a  greater  theoretical  interest
(Boursier).

The  value  of  hypnotism  in  obstetrics  is  about  the


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  331


same  as  in  surgery.  Lafontaine  and  Fillassier  among
the  mesmerists  have  put  women  to  sleep  during
labour.  Liebeault  has  done  the  same  with  hypnotism.
A  series  of  such  cases  has  lately  been  published
(Pritzl,  Mesnet,  Secheyron,  Auvard,  Thomas,  Varnier,
Voigt,  De  Jong).  The  effects  were  not  unfavour-
able. The  pains  were  regular  and  strong,  and  could
often  be  made  almost  insensible  by  suggestion.

There  is  an  interesting  statement  of  Freyer's  that
Jorg,  an  eminent  obstetrician,  at  the  beginning  of  the
century  thought  birth  impossible  in  the  magnetic
sleep  without  a  quick  awakening  ;  a  view  which  is
now  disproved.

Much  has  been  said  of  the  use  of  hypnotism  in
education.  This,  however,  belongs  rather  to  path-
ology, though  such  distinctions  are  rather  arbi-
trary. For  example,  a  child  gets  chorea  through
imitating  other  children  who  have  it.  In  such  a  case
it  is  not  easy  to  say  where  the  bad  habit  leaves  off
and  disease  begins.  The  cases  of  Berillon,  who  has
cured  various  little  tricks  and  bad  habits  in  children
by  hypnotic  suggestion,  may  be  reckoned  among
diseases.  It  is  indifferent  whether  we  say  that
hypnotism  is  used  in  such  cases  to  cure  disease
or  in  the  interests  of  education  ;  the  point  is,
to  know  what  is  meant.  But  serious  observers
have  by  no  means  wished  that  hypnotism  should  be
introduced  into  schools,  but  that  suggestive  treatment
should  be  used  by  doctors  to  suppress  the  bad
instincts  of  children.  Only  one  author — Decroix — in
spite  of  all  sorts  of  contradiction,  says  that  such  sug-
gestion should  also  be  made  by  laymen  ;  the  unani-
mous opposition  of  Forel,  Dekhtereff,  and  others
shows  plainly  that my  view  is  just. When  an


332


HYPNOTISM.


anonymous  German  author1  thought  he  made  the
thing  ridiculous,  or  refuted  French  authors  by  banish-
ing hypnotism  from  the  schools,  he  simply  refuted  an
assertion  that  was  never  made.  Other  authors  have
taken  superfluous  pains  to  do  the  same.  The  French
authors  (Berillon,  Hement,  Netter,  Leclerc,  A.  Voisin,
Collineau)  merely  mean  that  certain  faults  in  children,
which  in  my  view  and  that  of  others  are  pathological,
should  be  cured  by  medical  hypnotic  suggestion,  par-
ticularly when  other  methods  have  failed.

The  frequent  objection  (Blum,  Seeligmuller)  that
children  would  thus  become  machines  instead  of  inde-
pendent creatures  is  erroneous.  Hypnotic  suggestion
and  suggestion  out  of  hypnosis  have  the  same  aim  :
to  determine  the  subject's  will  in  a  certain  direction.
He  is  to  do  right,  not  unconsciously  and  mechanically,
but  with  conscious  will,  which  has  got  its  direction
either  from  hypnotic  suggestion  or  ordinary  education.
Suggestion  sets  the  conscious  will  in  the  right  direc-
tion as  education  does.

Education  is  only  good  when  what  is  taught  grows
into  an  auto-suggestion  ;  t.e.f  when  in  particular  cases
the  well-taught  person  must  consciously  do  the  right
he  has  been  taught  to  will.  But  hypnotic  suggestion
is  also  only  good  when  it  turns  into  auto-suggestion
(Forel)  ;  that  is,  when  the  same  thing  happens  as
without  hypnosis.  We  see  again  that  the  false  views
result  from  the  fact  that  hypnotic  suggestion  is  taken
for  an  unconscious  process — a  supposition  which  I
have  already  refuted  (p.  264).

Cases  of  chronic  alcoholism,  which  have  been  suc-
cessfully treated  by  hypnotic  suggestion  by  several
experimenters  (Forel,  A.  Voisin,  Ladame,  Widmer,
Wetterstrand,  Corval),  belong  here.

1  In  the  paper  "  Hypnotismus  in  der  Padagogik,"  published
by  Heuser.


THE  MEDICAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  333


A  decision  can  no  doubt  be  arrived  at  only  by
serious  examination,  such  as  the  men  just  mentioned
have  made.

I  shall  only  briefly  mention  other  scientific  uses  of
hypnotism.  It  will  no  doubt  be  of  great  use  to
psychology,  although  psychologists  in  Germany  seem
disinclined  to  approach  the  subject.  In  other
countries  much  psychological  work,  founded  on
hypnotism,  has  been  done.  Beaunis  goes  so  far  as
to  say  that  hypnotism  is  to  psychologists  what  vivi-
section is  to  physiologists.  Forel  and  Krafft-Ebing
think  the  same.  Max  Dessoir,  in  particular,  has  often
represented  the  great  value  of  hypnotism  to  psy-
chology.

I  believe,  indeed,  that  some  of  the  facts  are  of  the
deepest  interest  ;  e.g.,  the  apparent  freedom  of  will  of
hypnotic  subjects  in  post-hypnotic  actions.  Hypno-
tism is  a  mine  for  the  psychological  investigator,  for
hypnosis  is  nothing  but  a  mental  state.  When  we
think  that  psychologists  have  always  used  dreams  so
much  in  their  investigations  of  mental  life,  and  that
experiments  can  be  better  made  in  hypnosis  than
in  ordinary  sleep,  because  it  can  be  regulated  at
pleasure,  we  cannot  deny  the  value  of  hypnotism  to
psychology.  Krafft-Ebing  has  lately  pointed  out  how
important  it  is  in  the  study  of  consciousness.

I  will  not  enter  further  into  the  advantages  which
other  sciences  may  hope  to  gain  from  it.  I  confidently
hope  that  the  study  of  it  will  help  to  clear  up  the
hitherto  dim  field  of  mental  life,  and  that  it  will  help
to  free  us  from  the  mountain  of  superstition  instead  of
increasing  it.


CHAPTER  VIII.


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.

We  will  now  discuss  the  points  which  have  a  par-
ticular interest  in  law.  Some  of  the  old  adherents  of
animal  magnetism  recognized  the  legal  importance  of
the  subject,  though  their  point  of  view  differed  slightly
from  ours.  Thus,  the  commission  which  investigated
the  matter  in  Deslon's  time,  besides  their  official  ver-
dict, sent  in  a  private  report  to  the  king,  which,  it
appears,  came  to  light  through  the  Revolution  ;  they
thought  that  morality  especially  was  threatened.  The
mesmerists  in  Germany — Kieser,  for  example — also
touched  upon  the  legal  side  of  magnetism.  Char-
pignon  has  occupied  himself  with  the  point  lately.
Liebeault  also  thoroughly  discussed  the  question  in
his  book  in  1866,  and  his  explanations  are  very  valu-
able even  now.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  Liegeois,  and
particularly  Forel,  Reden,  Lilienthal,  and  Bentivegni
have  studied  the  legal  side  of  the  question  very
recently.

The  first  point  to  be  considered  is  the  relation  of
hypnotism  to  crime.  The  crimes  committed  on,  and
by,  hypnotic  subjects  must  both  be  discussed.  We
will  begin  with  the  first.

The  offences  against  morality  to  which  hypnotic
subjects  are  exposed,  are  important ;  few  such  cases
have  hitherto  come  to  the  notice  of  the  law. F.  C.


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  335


Miiller  supposes  that  this  may  be  because,  from  loss
of  memory,  the  subject  is  usually  unaware  of  them.
But  Ford's  supposition  seems  to  me  more  probable  ;
he  thinks  such  offences  are  rare  because  experimenters
know  that  the  loss  of  memory  is  only  temporary,  and
that  the  subject  may  unexpectedly  remember  the
occurrences  of  earlier  hypnoses.  A  number  of  such
cases  were  brought  to  justice  in  Germany  at  the  time
when  animal  magnetism  was  flourishing.  Wolfram
published  one  in  182 1.  A  doctor  is  said  to  have
assaulted  his  patient  during  the  magnetic  sleep.  He
endeavoured  to  avoid  the  consequences  by  procuring
abortion,  and  this  brought  him  to  justice  ;  however,
he  was  acquitted.

Lately  several  cases  have  been  made  known  in
France.  A  more  exact  collection  of  them  may  be
found  in  Liegeois'  book  ("  De  la  Suggestion,"  &c).
One  case  is  that  of  a  professional  magnetizer  of  Mar-
seilles, who,  in  1853,  assaulted  a  girl  in  the  magnetic
sleep.  The  experts,  Coste  and  Broquier,  with  whom
the  well-known  authorities  on  medical  jurisprudence,
Devergie  and  Tardieu,  agreed,  gave  their  opinion  that
a  magnetized  subject  might  be  assaulted  against  her
will  and  without  her  consciousness.

The  case  of  Castellan  in  1865,  reported  by  Prosper
Despine,  is  better  known.  An  assault  was  committed
on  a  subject  in  an  obviously  hypnotic  state,  though  she
retained  her  consciousness.  Liegeois  refers  the  case
to  suggestion  ;  Castellan,  the  criminal,  must  have
suggested  to  his  victim,  Josephine  H.,  to  love  him,
trust  him,  &c.  Castellan  was  condemned  to  twelve
years'  imprisonment,  upon  the  opinion  of  Roux  and
Auban,  with  whom  the  doctors  Heriart,  Paulet,  and
Theus  were  associated.

The  Levy  case,  in  1879,  is  also  interesting.  A


336


HYPNOTISM.


dentist  of  Rouen,  named  Levy,  assaulted  a  girl  in  the
magnetic  sleep.  The  case  is  remarkable  because  the
girl's  mother  was  present  and  noticed  nothing.  Levy
had  placed  his  dentist's  chair  so  as  not  to  be  seen.
Brouardel  gave  his  opinion  on  the  case  and  Levy  was
imprisoned  for  ten  years.

Bellanger  mentions  the  case  of  a  woman  who  was
assaulted  by  a  doctor,  and  a  case  in  Geneva  in  1882,
in  which  Ladame  gave  evidence,  may  be  mentioned  ;
the  supposed  offender  was  acquitted,  as  the  accusa-
tion was  possibly  false.

There  are  some  other  cases  in  Liegeois,  in  Golt-
dammer's  Archives  for  1863,  and  in  F.  C.  Miiller's
book,  "  Die  Psychopathologie  des  Bewusstseins."
The  number  would  be  slightly  increased  if  some
cases  of  auto-somnambulism  were  counted  among
them.

The  judgment  of  such  cases  would  offer  no  diffi-
culty if  the  state  of  affairs  was  always  clear  ;  the
same  legal  clauses  would  be  used  as  in  cases  of
narcosis  by  chloroform.

Among  further  offences  against  hypnotic  subjects
may  be  mentioned  intentional  injury  to  health,  which
in  some  cases  might  be  caused  by  post-hypnotic
suggestion.  All  sorts  of  paralyses,  loss  of  memory,
&c,  may  be  thus  caused  ;  even  some  paralyses  with
objective  symptoms,  such  as  the  so-called  paralyses
dependent  on  idea,  on  p.  63.  It  is  not  probable  that
these  will  ever  be  important  from  a  legal  point  of
view,  and  Lafiforgue's  supposition  that  a  man  might
try  to  evade  military  service  by  causing  a  disease  to
be  suggested  to  him  seems  to  me  even  more  im-
probable. At  all  events,  the  law  provides  for  such
cases.

I  need  hardly  add  that  bodily  injury  may  be  caused


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  337


by  inattention  to  the  proper  precautions,  nor  need  I
discuss  the  question  of  deprivation  of  will  in  cases
when  the  subject  is  hypnotized  without  his  consent

It  has  also  been  asked  (Roux-Freissineng)  whether
suicide  might  not  be  caused  by  suggestion  ;  to  which
I  say,  "  Yes,  if  the  suggestion  were  adroitly  made."

The  hypnotic  state  might  be  used  to  get  possession
of  property  illegally.  People  can  be  induced  hypnoti-
cally and  post-hypnotically  to  sign  promissory  notes,
deeds  of  gift,  &c.  I  reported  to  the  Society  of  Prussian
Medical  Officers  a  case  of  a  man  who  in  the  post-
hypnotic state  promised  a  donation  to  the  Society,
and  carefully  explained  in  writing  that  he  did  it  of
his  own  accord,  after  I  had  suggested  to  him  that  he
should  think  so.  Testamentary  dispositions  might
be  influenced  in  the  same  way.

I  shall  speak  later  of  the  significance  of  such  acts
in  civil  law,  when  quoting  Bentivegni.  I  cannot
venture  to  decide  whether  the  criminal  law  would
interpose  in  such  cases.

There  are  important  differences  of  opinion  about
the  offences  which  hypnotic  subjects  may  be  caused
to  commit.  Liegeois,  who  has  discussed  the  legal
side  of  the  question  of  hypnotism  in  a  scientific
manner,  thinks  this  danger  very  great,  while  Gilles
de  la  Tourette,  Pierre  Janet,  Benedikt,  and  others,
deny  it  altogether.

There  is  no  doubt  that  subjects  may  be  induced  to
commit  all  sorts  of  imaginary  crimes  in  one's  study.
I  have  made  hardly  any  such  suggestions,  and  have
small  experience  on  the  point.  In  any  case  a  repeti-
tion of  them  is  superfluous.  If  the  conditions  of  the
experiment  are  not  changed,  it  is  useless  to  repeat  it
merely  to  confirm  what  we  already  know. And  these

23


333


HYPNOTISM.


criminal  suggestions  are  not  altogether  pleasant.  I
certainly  do  not  believe  that  they  injure  the  moral
state  of  the  subject,  for  the  suggestion  may  be
negatived  and  forgotten.  But  these  laboratory  ex-
periments prove  nothing,  because  some  trace  of  con-
sciousness always  remains  to  tell  the  subject  he  is
playing  a  comedy  (Franck,  Delbceuf),  consequently
he  will  offer  a  slighter  resistance.  He  will  more
readily  try  to  commit  a  murder  with  a  piece  of  paper
than  with  a  real  dagger,  because,  as  we  have  seen,  he
almost  always  dimly  realizes  his  real  situation.  These
experiments,  carried  out  by  Liegeois,  Foureaux,  and
others  in  their  studies  do  not,  therefore,  prove  the
danger.

On  the  other  hand,  Liegeois  has  made  some  such
experiments  in  all  apparent  earnestness,  and  in  the
presence  of  officers  of  the  law,  by  hypnotic  and
post-hypnotic  suggestion,  and  even  by  suggestion  in
the  waking  state.  He  made  a  girl  fire  a  revolver,
which  she  thought  was  loaded,  at  her  mother ;  and
another  put  arsenic  into  the  drink  of  a  relation.  So
that  it  cannot  be  disputed  that  a  crime  may  be  com-
mitted in  this  way,  as  Liegeois  and  Forel  insist.  On
theoretical  grounds  I  believe  it  is  possible  with  some
subjects.  There  may  be  much  exaggeration.  For
example,  few  people  are  so  susceptible  as  to  accept
the  suggestion  of  a  criminal  act  without  repeated
hypnotization.  It  is  also  true  that  many  would  refuse
even  after  long  hypnotic  training  (Delbceuf).  Gilles
de  la  Tourette  insists,  besides,  that  a  criminal  who
suggested  an  offence  would  be  no  more  protected
from  discovery  than  if  he  did  the  thing  himself.  A
hypnotic  subject  is  not  a  suitable  instrument  for
the  commission  of  a  crime.  For  a  person  who
would  commit  a  crime  by  post-hypnotic  suggestion


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  339


would,  generally  speaking,  not  be  a  person  of  the
most  honourable  character,  since  morally  defective
people  are  decidedly  easier  to  affect  in  this  way  than
those  with  strong  principles  (Forel).  However,
criminal  suggestion  is  not  impossible.  Forel  thinks
the  greatest  danger  is  that  at  the  time  the  suggestion
is  made  the  subject  may  be  induced  to  believe  that
he  is  acting  without  constraint.  But  this  should  only
be  possible  in  the  case  of  morally  defective  persons.
If  such  a  case  were  brought  to  justice,  the  experts
would  need  to  consider  the  following  explanations.
As  has  been  said,  all  suggestions,  criminal  and  other-
wise, can  be  made  hypnotically  or  post-hypnotically,
and  the  legal  decision  would  differ  accordingly.

Till  now  I  have  called  those  states  "  waking  states  "  in
which  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is  carried  out  when  the  state
was  apparently  normal,  except  on  the  one  point.  But  I  only
did  this  to  avoid  complication  ;  the  question  has  been  passed
over,  but  Bentivegni  has  lately  called  attention  to  it.  I  will,
therefore,  now  consider  whether  there  is  a  mental  state  which
may  be  called  normal  in  spite  of  irregularity  on  one  point,  as
is  the  case  when  post-hypnotic  suggestions  are  carried  out  in
an  apparently  normal  waking  state.

We  will  take  a  simple  case.  I  say  to  X.  in  hypnosis,  "  When
you  wake  you  will  give  A.  a  blow  in  the  ribs."  X.  wakes,  and
instinctively  does  what  I  told  him.  He  perfectly  remembers
doing  it,  and  will  accept  no  other  suggestion  either  before  or
during  the  act.  Thus  it  appears  that  X.  is  quite  normal,  except
on  the  one  point.  But  the  modern  psychology,  and  medical
jurisprudence  in  particular,  say  that  a  man  cannot  be  mentally
abnorrrial  on  one  point  only  ;  they  rather  suppose  a  mental
disturbance  showing  itself  on  one  point,  which  is  a  symptom
of  general  mental  disturbance  (Krafft-Ebing,  Bentivegni,  Morel,
Maudsley).  Therefore  the  state  in  carrying  out  a  post-hyp-
notic suggestion  would  be  abnormal,  though  it  appeared
normal,  as  Bentivegni  insists.  But  this  author  rightly  thinks
that  this  cannot  be  supposed  in  all  cases  of  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestion, otherwise  we  should  be  obliged  to  think  every  man


34o


HYPNOTISM.


who  accepted  a  therapeutic  post-hypnotic  suggestion  was  in  an
abnormal  state  while  he  carried  it  out.  Here  is  a  case  :  Y.  is
hypnotized  in  my  warm  room,  and  I  tell  him  to  say  in  half  an
hour,  "  Your  room  is  frightfully  hot.''  Now,  supposing  that  it
is  really  hot  in  my  room,  the  carrying  out  of  this  post-hypnotic
suggestion  would  by  no  means  suffice  to  prove  the  abnormal
state  of  the  subject.

Thus  we  see  that  in  these  cases — we  are  only  considering
cases  in  which  there  is  no  symptom  of  a  new  abnormal  state —
the  suggestion  is  sometimes  carried  out  in  a  changed  mental
state,  and  sometimes  in  a  completely  normal  one.  How  can  we
decide  which  is  which  ?  A  diagnostic  point  is  difficult  to  find,
but  it  seems  to  me  that  Bentivegni's  is  the  only  practicable
one  at  present,  though  it  is  rather  vague.  He  says,  "  The  state
while  carrying  out  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion  can  only  be
thought  normal  when  the  motive  force  of  the  suggestion  is
such  as  can  also  be  explained  by  the  normal  disposition  of  the
subject,  and  when  it  is  not  so  opposed  to  reality  that  the  normal
individual  would  discover  and  correct  it."  According  to  the
last  clause,  post-hypnotic  sense  delusions  without  a  renewed
state  of  suggestibility  would  at  once  prove  an  abnormal  mental
state  ;  according  to  the  first,  an  abnormal  state  of  consciousness
must  also  be  supposed  for  the  carrying  out  of  numerous  post-
hypnotic acts,  even  when  there  is  no  renewed  state  of  suggesti-
bility. Truly,  in  many  cases  it  is  difficult  to  decide  whether
a  subject  finds  the  motive  force  for  his  post-hypnotic  act  in
his  normal  disposition  or  not.  However,  Bentivegni  has
found  a  point  of  view  from  which  these  post-hypnotic  sug-
gestions may  be  judged.  I  now  apply  this  to  the  two  above
examples.  One  post-hypnotic  suggestion  was  that  X.  should
give  A.  a  blow  in  the  ribs.  Let  us  suppose  that  X.  is  a  peaceful
man,  who  likes  A.  ;  then  the  motive  of  X.'s  act  would  be  inex-
plicable from  his  normal  disposition  ;  consequently,  according
to  Bentivegni,  his  post-hypnotic  state  would  be  abnormal.
Y.'s  remark  about  the  heat  was  different.  It  was  a  natural
remark,  supposing  that  the  room  was  really  warm.  Conse-
quently we  have  no  reason  to  conclude  a  generally  abnormal
mental  state.  The  question  is  no  doubt  difficult  to  decide,
because  "  normal  disposition "  is  hard  to  define.  However,
Bentivegni  has  brought  us  a  good  deal  nearer  to  solution.

Desjardins  in  France  expresses  the  strange  opinion


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  341


that  a  person  who  commits  a  crime  by  hypnotic  or  post-
hypnotic suggestion  is  punishable,  because  he  might
have  foreseen  the  possibility  of  such  a  suggestion.

According  to  Lilienthal  this  position  is  quite
untenable.  It  would  be  a  strange  sort  of  justice
which  punished  a  crime  committed  in  unconsciousness
and  without  intention.  The  case  would  be  different
if  the  subject  had  caused  the  criminal  act  to  be
suggested  to  him  in  hypnosis,  perhaps  with  the  view
of  carrying  it  out  more  courageously.  Lilienthal
thinks  that  in  this  case  he  would  be  punishable.  The
power  of  self-determination  would  be  normal  at  the
moment  of  decision.  The  induction  of  the  hypnosis
would  be  the  cause  of  the  act,  and  consequently  the
subject  would  be  guilty  (Lilienthal).

Campili,  who  has  thoroughly  discussed  the  different
legal  questions  connected  with  hypnosis,  distinguishes
between  the  standpoints  of  two  schools,  the  classical
and  the  anthropological.1  According  to  the  first
there  is  no  guilt  in  the  last-mentioned  case,  as  there
can  be  no  reflexion  when  the  crime  is  committed  ;
according  to  the  last  the  criminal  must  be  punished
because  he  is  dangerous  to  society.

If  hypnosis  is  considered  to  be  a  state  of  mental
disease,  then  all  actions  in  the  hypnotic  state  must  go
unpunished.  Punishment  of  an  act  committed  in  a
state  of  mental  disease  would  be  at  least  a  novelty.
It  is  not  the  custom  at  present,  even  if  the  legal  code
did  not  prevent  it.

1  It  may  briefly  be  remarked,  that  in  Italy  these  two  schools
are  decidedly  opposed  ;  the  classical  school  recognizes  freedom
of  will,  and  the  anthropological  does  not.  However,  the  last-
named  also  agrees  to  punishment  in  such  a  case  ;  but  only
because  the  person  concerned  is  dangerous  to  society,  not
because  his  will  is  free  when  he  commits  the  offence.


342


HYPNOTISM,


The  importance  of  hypnosis  in  civil  law  was  not
seriously  considered  at  first.  Most  investigators
passed  it  over,  supposing  that  hypnotism  could  only
be  important  in  criminal  law.  However,  Bentivegni
has  put  forward  the  contrary  in  a  detailed  work.  I
am,  unfortunately,  no  expert,  and  cannot  decide  the
question.  The  main  points  of  what  follows  are  there-
fore borrowed  from  Bentivegni's  work,  which  besides
puts  forward  many  new  views  in  connection  with
hypnotism.

Bentivegni,  in  discussing  hypnotism  in  its  rela-
tion to  civil  law,  distinguishes  between  responsibility
in  business  and  liability  for  damages.  The  first
means  such  a  degree  of  freedom  of  will  as  is  neces-
sary for  the  transaction  of  business  in  connection
with  legal  affairs.  Liability  for  damages  means  that
degree  of  freedom  of  will  which  causes  responsibility
for  unlawful  acts.

As  regards  responsibility  in  business,  Bentivegni
thinks  that  a  mere  state  of  hypnotic  suggestibility
is  enough  to  exclude  it,  since  in  such  a  case  the
power  to  act  with  reflection  and  reason  is  wanting.
It  is  true  he  also  takes  the  stage  of  hypnosis  into
account,  for  a  very  light  stage  would  hardly  exclude
responsibility  in  business.  It  should  be  said  that  in
opposition  to  earlier  views,  he  thinks  that  not  only
such  acts  as  are  carried  out  through  hypnotic  sug-
gestion are  invalid,  but  that  the  mere  existence  of
hypnotic  suggestibility  is  enough  under  some  circum-
stances to  exclude  business  responsibility,  even  when
the  acts  are  not  suggested.  He  thinks  the  same  about
most  post-hypnotic  suggestions,  where  he  makes
several  distinctions.  All  transactions  are  invalid
which  are  effected  in  a  post-hypnotic  state  in  which
there is renewed suggestibility. Also,  the  state


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM,  343


during  the  carrying  out  of  a  post-hypnotic  suggestion,
if  it  is  united  with  post-hypnotic  forgetfulness  of  the
act,  excludes  responsibility,  even  if  the  suggestibility
has  ceased.  But  we  saw  (p.  145)  that  a  person  may
be  apparently  quite  awake  and  yet  carry  out  a  post-
hypnotic suggestion  without  remarking  it,  without
falling  into  a  new  hypnosis,  and  calmly  talking
meanwhile.  Now  we  must  ask  whether  such  post-
hypnotic suggestions  affect  responsibility  in  business.
Bentivegni  decides  this  according  to  the  kind  of
suggestion.  When  the  post-hypnotic  suggestion  is
merely  a  movement  or  action  which  the  subject  often
does  automatically  at  other  times,  there  is  no  reason
to  question  the  responsibility.  Some  persons,  for
example,  have  a  habit  of  scribbling  on  paper.  Now,
according  to  Bentivegni,  if  he  does  this  post-hyp-
notically, he  is  not  in  an  unfit  state  for  business.
But  he  is  unfit  when  he  does  post-hypnotically  what
he  would  refuse  to  do  under  normal  circumstances.
Bentivegni  thinks  that  when  the  post-hypnotic  act
is  done  in  an  apparently  waking  state,  i.e.,  when  there
is  no  loss  of  memory  and  no  susceptibility  to  sug-
gestion, the  question  becomes  very  difficult.  He
thinks  (p.  340)  that  in  such  a  case  all  depends  on  the
nature  of  the  suggestion.  The  question  is,  Are  the
suggested  acts,  and  their  possible  motives,  of  such  a
nature  as  to  be  willingly  received  into  the  conscious-
ness of  the  subject,  and  to  be  compatible  with  the
general  content  of  his  consciousness,  or  not  ?  Ben-
tivegni gives  the  two  following  examples  :  1.  A.
owes  B.  £20,  but  has  forgotten  it ;  in  hypnosis  he  is
told  to  pay  B.  the  money  at  the  first  opportunity,
which  he  does,  post-hypnotically.  2.  C,  who  is  not
in  good  circumstances,  is  told  in  hypnosis  to  make  a
present  of  his  personal  property  to  D.,  whom  he  does


344


HYPNOTISM.


not  like.  He  wakes,  and  the  idea  occurs  to  him  when
he  sees  D.  ;  he  resists  at  first,  but  finally  formally
obeys  the  order.

According  to  Bentivegni,  in  Example  I.  neither
responsibility  for  the  particular  act  nor  the  capacity  for
business  in  general  need  be  doubted,  because  the  sug-
gestion was  acceptable  to  the  motives  pre-existing  in
the  subject's  consciousness.  But  in  Example  II.  there
must  be  a  revolution  in  the  subject's  consciousness
before  he  will  obey  a  suggestion  so  contrary  to  his
interests.  Therefore  Bentivegni  thinks  the  responsi-
bility is  doubtful,  at  least  as  far  as  the  single  act
is  concerned.

In  other  cases  the  incapacity  is  much  more  exten-
sive, because  delusive  ideas  may  be  post-hypnotically
suggested,  which,  without  doubt,  cause  incapacity  for
business  so  long  as  they  last,  in  the  same  way  as  do
the  delusions  of  the  insane.  Bentivegni  thinks  it
should  be  provisionally  supposed  that  a  subject  who
is  under  the  influence  of  a  post-hypnotically  sug-
gested idea  must  be  considered  unfit  for  business,
when  this  idea  is  of  such  a  kind  that  its  spontaneous
recurrence  would  partially  or  wholly  do  away  with
his  responsibility.

Finally,  besides  the  post-hypnotic  suggestions
which  do  not  interfere  with  consciousness,  and
those  which  alter  consciousness,  as  insane  ideas  do,
Bentivegni  discusses  a  third  category  of  suggestions.
For  example,  a  subject  might  be  told  in  hypnosis
that  a  particular  engraving  was  an  oil-painting.  In
such  a  case  the  error  must  be  considered,  i.e.,  the
inability  to  perceive  the  real  facts.  It  is  an  important
question  whether  such  a  suggested  error  is  excusable ;
Bentivegni  thinks  it  generally  is.  If  the  error  is
excusable,  there  could  be  no  claim  for  damages.


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTLSM.  345


Bentivegni  next  discusses  liability  for  damages.
This  implies  an  illegal  act  committed  in  a  respon-
sible state,  and  the  civil  law  punishes  it  with  fine.
According  to  the  Prussian  common  law  all  illegal
acts  are  irresponsible  when  the  agent  is  not  in
possession  of  his  reason  and  is  unable  to  control  his
actions.  Consequently  the  conclusions  that  Benti-
vegni draws  with  regard  to  irresponsibility  in  business
hold  good  also  for  liability  for  damages.

They  hold  good  for  all  acts  done  in  a  state  of
hypnotic  suggestibility,  such  as  in  deep  hypnosis  and
in  some  post-hypnotic  states  of  suggestibility,  and
further  for  the  post-hypnotic  states  in  which  there  is
loss  of  memory.  If  such  a  division  of  the  conscious-
ness occurs  through  post-hypnotic  suggestion  that
a  suggested  act  is  done,  independently  of  the  normal
activity,  e.g.,  if  a  subject  after  hypnosis,  but  under  the
influence  of  post-hypnotic  suggestion,  injures  some
other  person,  he  will  not  be  liable  to  damages  if  he  is
in  an  unfit  state  for  business,  as  this  state  is  described
above.  But  any  man  who  causes  himself  to  be
hypnotized,  only  that  he  may  not  be  responsible  for
his  misdeeds,  must  make  reparation  for  every  damage,
as  appears  from  a  decision  of  the  common  law
(Bentivegni).

Of  course,  I  have  been  unable  to  enter  into  detail
on  all  points.  I  have  taken  the  chief  facts  concerning
the  legal  importance  of  hypnosis  from  the  learned
work  of  Bentivegni,  "  Die  Hypnose  und  ihre  civil-
rechtliche  Bedeutung,"  as  may  be  seen  from  the
numerous  quotations.  I  recommend  the  book  to  any
one  who  wishes  to  study  the  question.

Retroactive  hallucinations  are  of  great  import-
ance in  law. They  can  be  used  to  falsify  testi-


346


HYPNOTISM.


mony.  People  can  be  made  to  believe  that  they
have  witnessed  certain  scenes,  or  even  crimes,  &c.
I  have  before  pointed  out  the  analogy  between
these  retroactive  suggestions  and  many  phenomena
of  ordinary  life.  Lilienthal  believes  that  the  training
of  witnesses  is  the  same  sort  of  thing,  and  Forel
explains  the  management  of  the  different  parties  in  a
lawsuit  by  the  counsel  in  the  same  way.  Max
Dessoir  agrees  with  him.  Bernheim  and  Motet
believe  that  the  Tisza-Eszlar  lawsuit  was  the  result
of  a  retroactive  suggestion  made  by  Moritz  Scharff
without  inducing  hypnosis.  As  a  matter  of  fact  two
parties  often  assert  the  exact  opposite  both  in  law
cases  and  in  ordinary  life  without  conscious  falsehood.
An  old  proverb  says,  "  The  wish  is  father  to  the
thought;"  and  each  party  imagines  what  it  wishes.
An  honest  delusion  of  memory  is  the  consequence.

Bernheim  insists  upon  certain  rules  of  precaution
for  preventing  witnesses  giving  false  testimony  purely
in  consequence  of  the  method  of  examination.  He
thinks  that  the  suggestibility  of  the  witnesses  should
be  tested,  and  that  this  could  be  done  by  suggesting
a  reply  which  could  at  once  be  proved  incorrect.  This
advice,  with  which  Forel  agrees,  may  seem  self-
evident,  but  it  is  practically  valuable.  Every  one
knows  how  easily  mistakes  are  made  in  legal  cases
from  mental  excitement.  Any  excited  state  lessens
the  power  of  cool  reflection  which  is  required  for
every  act  of  memory.

Bernheim's  wish  certainly  does  not  appear  super-
fluous, when  we  recollect  that  he  has  succeeded  in
inducing  complete  delusions  of  memory  by  sugges-
tion without  hypnosis  ;  he  has  made  people  believe
they  had  witnessed  thefts,  &c,  which  were  purely
imaginary.


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  347


The  next  question  is,  Can  hypnotism  be  in  any  way
made  useful  to  justice?  It  cannot  be  denied  that  the
point  may  become  of  practical  importance  at  any
moment.  Is  hypnotization  in  a  court  of  justice
allowable  at  present  ?  Lilienthal  says  it  certainly
is  under  some  conditions,  and  for  some  purposes.

To  the  question  occasionally  asked,  whether  hyp-
notism may  be  used  to  obtain  testimony  from  the
accused  or  from  witnesses  which  they  decline  to  give
in  a  waking  state,  we  must  certainly  answer  in  the
negative,  in  the  present  state  of  the  law.

The  practical  value  of  such  a  proceeding  has  been
much  exaggerated.  In  the  first  place,  very  few
people  can  be  hypnotized  against  their  will,  and  it
is  not  to  be  supposed  that  an  accused  person  would
submit  to  the  necessary  conditions.

Besides  this,  I  think  it  a  mistake  to  suppose  that
a  hypnotic  subject  would  divulge  all  his  secrets  so
easily.  This  supposition  is  copied  from  one  book
into  another,  but  is  none  the  truer  for  that.  It  is
supported  by  a  few  well-known  cases  ;  for  instance,
that  of  Giraud-Teulon  and  Demarquay,  who  were
obliged  to  wake  one  of  their  subjects  who  began  to
tell  secrets  ;  and  a  similar  case  is  related  by  Brierre
de  Boismont.  Though  I  do  not  contest  the  truth  of
these  cases,  I  must  insist  that  the  phenomenon  is  rare.
I  have  never  observed  it.  According  to  my  experience
the  subject  keeps  his  individuality,  and  what  he  does
not  choose  to  tell  he  hides.  A  further  question,
whether  the  subject  can  be  induced  to  tell  by  sugges-
tion, must  be  answered  in  the  affirmative,  in  a  few
cases.  I  have  hardly  any  personal  experience  in  this
direction.  I  once  observed  a  case  of  lock-jaw,  when
the  subject  feared  some  word  would  escape  him.  The
spasm  was  so  strong  that  it  was  impossible  to  end  it
artificially.


348


HYPNOTISM.


It  is  much  easier  to  attain  the  end  in  a  circuitous
way  than  by  suggestion  ;  by  suggesting  a  false
premise,  for  example,  as  I  have  mentioned  on  p.  161.
Let  the  subject  be  told  that  some  person  is  present  in
whom  he  would  confide,  or  that  the  people  he  does  not
wish  to  tell  are  absent. This  answers  in  many  cases.

But  all  such  statements  must  be  received  with
caution,  for  I  can  safely  assert  that  hypnotic
subjects  can  tell  falsehoods  as  well  as  if  they  were
awake,  and  that  subtle  webs  of  falsehood  are  invented
in  hypnosis.  Lombroso  tried  in  one  case  to  obtain
a  confession  of  a  crime  which  had  been  proved,
though  the  subject  had  always  denied  it.  The
attempt  was  useless  ;  the  subject  told  the  same  tissue
of  lies  as  when  awake.  Laurent  and  Algeri  give  the
same  information.  In  any  case,  a  statement  made  in
hypnosis  must  be  received  with  caution  ;  it  might  be
an  indication,  but  not  a  proof.

I  have,  however,  made  some  experiments  in  another
direction.  Interested  by  Max  Dessoir's  experiments
in  automatic  writing,  I  tried  to  obtain  results  in  the
same  way,  with  a  subject  whose  consent  I  previously
got.  I  put  a  pencil  into  his  hand,  and  ordered  him
to  answer  certain  questions,  but  not  to  write  purposely.
The  subject  wrote  everything  I  told  him,  and
answered  every  question,  betraying  many  family
secrets  without  knowing  it  or  wishing  it.  He  did
not  know  that  he  was  writing.  I  have  not  space  to
enter  into  details  of  this  case.

Thus,  in  law,  hypnotism  might  be  used  to  decide
whether  a  person  were  hypnotizable  or  not,  or  to
obtain  a  statement  which  the  accused  or  the  witnesses
cannot  give  in  the  waking  state.  Such  a  case  may
occur,  and,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  the  question  has
already  been  of  practical  importance.


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM,  349


Such  statements  in  hypnosis  would  be  valuable
because  subjects  remember  in  later  hypnoses  all  that
has  occurred  in  earlier  ones.  Now,  if  it  is  suspected
that  the  subject  has  been  the  victim  or  the  instrument
of  a  crime  which  he  forgets  in  the  waking  state,  it  is
evident  that  hypnotism  should  be  judicially  used,
for  re-hypnotization  might  clear  up  the  case.

But  according  to  Lilienthal  there  is  a  legal  limi-
tation here.  He  thinks  an  accused  person  or
subject  may  be  hypnotized  if  he  consents.  But  hyp-
notization  is  only  permissible  to  confirm  the  fact  of
hypnotizability,  and  he  thinks  a  judicial  examination
in  hypnosis  is  illegal.  However,  the  arrangement  of
criminal  proceedings  does  not  appear  to  me  so  care-
fully defined  that  a  statement  made  in  hypnosis
might  not  be  received  in  particular  cases  ;  it  is  certain
that  in  some  circumstances  such  a  statement  might
be  very  important.  For,  as  so  many  persons  are
susceptible,  a  mere  proof  of  susceptibility  to  hyp-
notism would  not  be  worth  much.  Lilienthal  thinks
that  such  a  statement  is  inadmissible,  because  the
testimony  of  unsworn  witnesses  is  only  allowed  in
certain  cases,  and  an  oath  could  not  be  administered
to  a  hypnotized  subject,  and  it  would  not  be  possible
either  to  make  him  swear  to  his  statement  after
waking.  The  statements  of  an  accused  person  in
hypnosis  are  not  admissible,  because  he  should  not  be
compelled  to  make  statements  against  his  will.  How-
ever, I  think  that  Lilienthal  here  overlooks  the
fact  that  when  an  accused  person,  who  has  forgotten
the  criminal  suggestion  in  his  waking  state,  demands
to  be  hypnotized  that  he  may  remember,  he  is  not
making  a  statement  against  his  will.  At  the  most  it
would  only  be  a  statement  without  his  will.  I  cannot
venture  to  decide  what  scruples  a  lawyer  might  have,


35o


HYPNOTISM.


neither  do  I  feel  competent  to  decide  whether  the
statement  of  a  hypnotized  witness  is  admissible  in
law.

Goltdammer  relates  that  this  question  of  the  use
of  hypnotism  in  law  called  up  a  discussion  in  a  court
of  justice  between  the  defending  counsel  and  the
counsel  for  the  crown,  in  a  suit  at  Verona  twenty-six
years  ago.  It  was  a  case  of  assault  in  magnetic  sleep.
There  was  loss  of  memory  in  the  waking  state.  The
defending  counsel  opposed  the  counsel  for  the  crown,
who  proposed  to  re-magnetize  the  assaulted  person,  but
the  court  agreed  to  his  doing  so,  as  it  considered  the
induction  of  the  magnetic  sleep  merely  as  a  method
of  proof.  The  victim  made  important  statements  in
the  sleep,  and  in  consequence  of  these  the  accused
was  condemned.

We  will  now  discuss  what  should  be  done  when  the
accused  person  pleads  that  he  has  committed  the
offence  through  hypnotic  or  post-hypnotic  suggestion,
or  when  he  says  he  has  been  the  victim  of  a  crime  in
hypnosis.  If  such  a  plea  had  never  been  made,  hyp-
notism need  never  be  judicially  considered.  The
point  requiring  consideration,  as  Forel  points  out,
is  that  when  the  crime  is  suggested  it  may  also  be
impressed  upon  the  subject  that  he  shall  think  he  has
acted  freely.  However  possible  this  may  be,  a  con-
sideration of  it  at  present  would  lead  to  the  most
monstrous  consequences.  If  any  regard  were  paid  to
it,  we  should  be  obliged  to  take  into  consideration
that  every  case  of  crime  might  be  a  result  of  hypnotic
suggestion.  This  is  always  theoretically  possible,
especially  when  the  crime  does  not  in  any  way
advantage  the  accused  (Delbceuf)-  But  at  present—
whether  rightly  or  wrongly  must  be  left  out  of  the


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  351


question — it  is  impossible  for  justice  to  weigh  this
point.  We  must  confine  ourselves  to  the  considera-
tion that  this  objection  might  be  raised,  greatly  to
the  advantage  of  the  accused  (Riant).

Let  us  suppose  that  the  accused  says  the  crime  was
suggested  to  him,  that  he  felt  a  subjective  constraint,
and  that  he  has  often  been  hypnotized,  but  that  he
does  not  remember  the  suggestion.

It  would  then  have  to  be  judicially  decided — *(j)
whether  the  accused  was  really  hypnotized  ;  (2)
whether  a  suggestion  was  made  to  him  in  this  state  ;
(3)  who  made  the  suggestion  ;  (4)  to  what  degree  he
was  suggestible  (Max  Dessoir).

Now,  if  the  statements  of  witnesses  were  insufficient,
he  could  be  hypnotized  ;  but,  as  is  easily  to  be  seen,
hypnotization  would  naturally  prove  nothing.  I  will
therefore  suppose  that  examination  and  statements
made  in  hypnosis  wrere  legally  admissible.  Making
use  of  the  memory  in  hypnosis  we  should,  first  of  all,
ask  who  made  the  criminal  suggestion.  If  no  answer
was  obtained  (since  the  originator  might  have  also
suggested  loss  of  memory)  an  indirect  method  must
be  used,  such  as  Liegeois  mentions  ;  the  originator
might  be  discovered  by  means  of  association,  if  any
one  is  decidedly  suspected.  The  subject  might  be
told  to  laugh,  cough,  &c,  when  he  saw  the  originator,
or  his  photograph,  or  heard  his  name.  I  believe  he
could  probably  be  got  at  in  this  way  ;  but  there  must
be  a  starting-point,  such  as  suspicion  of  somebody.

If  nobody  were  suspected  the  name  of  the  origi-
nator might  probably  be  got  at  in  some  other  way ;
e.g\}  by  automatic  writing.

I  think  it  certain  the  aim  could  be  attained  by
repeated  suggestions,  in  spite  of  loss  of  memory  ;  for
a  suggested  loss  of  memory  can  be  made  to  disappear


352


HYPNOTISM.


by  repeated  contrary  suggestions  in  a  new  hypnosis.
Finally,  as  I  have  said,  the  degree  of  suggestibility
must  be  ascertained.  This  could  also  be  done  by
fresh  suggestions,  which  would  have  full  play  in  a
new  hypnosis.  But  further,  the  author  of  the  crime
might  suggest  that  the  subject  should  not  be  hypno-
tizable  by  anybody  but  himself,  as  has  been  explained
on  p.  157;  this  would  complicate  matters.  Although
no  experiments  have  yet  been  made  on  this  point,  my
own  experience  makes  it  seem  probable  that  even
such  a  suggestion  might  be  made  ineffectual  by  re-
peated opposed  suggestions  in  new  hypnoses — sup-
posing, of  course,  that  a  repetition  of  the  original
suggestion  could  be  prevented.

The  case  would  be  the  same  if  a  subject  asserted
that  he  had  been  the  victim  of  a  crime ;  new  hypnoses
must  be  induced,  and  if  there  was  loss  of  memory  the
question  must  be  cleared  up  by  examination  during
hypnosis,  supposing  the  law  allowed  it.

All  this  shows  what  difficulties  would  arise  if  hyp-
nosis should  become  an  important  question  in  law.
New  hypnotization  would  only  result  in  a  certain
degree  of  probability,  since  (1)  there  is  intentional
falsehood  in  hypnosis  ;  (2)  the  assertions  may  be
influenced  by  previous  suggestions  ;  (3)  the  answers
are  readily  influenced  by  the  method  of  examination  ;
(4)  previous  suggestion  may  make  new  hypnoses  very
hard  to  induce.

All  which  shows  that  statements  in  hypnosis  might
be  indications,  but  could  never  be  proofs.  Danillo
even  thinks  such  assertions  so  completely  untrust-
worthy that  he  proposes  to  refuse  to  accept  them.
As  a  matter  of  course  all  the  other  points  should  be
weighed,  as  in  ordinary  cases  ;  such  as  who  benefits
by  the  crime  \  whether  the  subject  has  often  been


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  353


hypnotized,  &c.  This  would  be  the  only  way  when
the  person  supposed  to  have  been  influenced  by  sug-
gestion is  already  dead,  as  is  conceivable  in  a  will
case.  Such  a  case  does  not  seem  to  be  unlikely,  and
would  be  very  difficult  to  clear  up.

And  in  cases  of  legal  hypnotization  the  possibility
of  simulation  must,  of  course,  be  considered,  as  well
as  the  possibility  of  a  purposely  false  accusation
(Ladame).  In  judging  of  simulation  the  bodily
symptoms  of  the  school  of  Charcot  must  on  no
account  be  alone  considered,  as  they  are  relatively
uncommon.  Gilles  de  la  Tourette  ascribes  a  legal
importance  to  the  stages  of  Charcot  and  their  symp-
toms, which  they  by  no  means  deserve.

Finally,  Forel's  opinion  may  be  mentioned.  He
thinks  indirect  extortion  of  money  by  an  unprincipled
experimenter  a  much  greater  danger  in  hypnotism
than  direct  criminal  actions,  and  that  it  would  not  be
difficult  for  such  a  man  to  avoid  direct  conflict  with
the  law.

Many  proposals  have  been  made  for  avoiding  the
possible  dangers  of  hypnotism  to  health  as  well  as  to
morality.  Delacroix,  in  France,  demands  that  hyp-
notization should  be  legal  only  for  doctors,  and  then
only  when  at  least  two  are  present.  Friedberg  wished
in  1880  that  hypnotic  experiments  should  only  be
allowed  in  the  presence  of  a  doctor  ;  1  Grasset  and
others  agree  with  him.

1  According  to  a  short  notice  in  the  Deutsche  Med.  Zeit.  in  a
part  of  Russia  any  doctor  who  wishes  to  hypnotize  is  ordered
to  have  two  other  doctors  present.  This  proposal — about  which
I  can  find  no  further  details — plainly  shows  a  want  of  experi-
ence. On  the  ground  of  my  own  experiments  I  could  make
many  objections,  but  content  myself  with  the  following  :  (1)
Who  is  to  pay  the  two  doctors  who  are  merely  spectators  ?

24


354  HYPNOTISM.

It  would  certainly  be  well  to  avoid  all  dangers  by
means  of  a  law.  But  to  begin  with,  the  term  "  hyp-
notism "  is  vague  and  hard  to  define,  and  this  alone
would  raise  all  sorts  of  difficulties.  And  other  diffi-
culties would  be  raised  by  the  fact  that  many  people
can  hypnotize  themselves  (Preyer).

But  hypnotization  is  by  no  means  so  dangerous  as
would  be  concluded  from  many  novels,  whose  authors
have  naturally  chosen  the  rarest  and  most  sensational
phenomena.  There  are  in  reality  things  more  im-
portant than  hypnotism  from  a  hygienic  standpoint.
For  example,  it  would  be  of  great  service  if  exact
legal  directions  for  disinfection  were  given  to  both
doctors  and  laymen  attending  cases  of  diphtheria,  and  if
disobedience  to  such  directions  were  severely  punished.
This  point  seems  to  me  much  more  weighty  than  the
hygienic  importance  of  hypnotism.  How  many
people  have  communicated  diseases  by  insufficient
disinfection !  The  happiness  of  many  families  has
been  destroyed,  and  the  guilty  person  has  remained
unpunished.

I  think  it  indispensable  that  science  should  take
possession  of  hypnotism.  This  is  the  easiest  way  to
prevent  its  misuse.  When  I  speak  of  science  I
naturally  mean  psychology  as  well  as  medicine,  for
hypnotism  will  never  become  a  factor  in  medicine
without  a  scientific  psychological  basis.  Psychology
is  needed  for  the  investigation  of  mental  states  just
as  chemistry  and  physics  are  needed  for  the  testing
of  drugs  and  the  investigation  of  electricity. But  just

(2)  Should  a  doctor,  who  is  perhaps  treating  a  poor  man  with-
out any  fee,  pay  the  two  other  doctors  into  the bargain  ?

(3)  If  there  is  only  one  doctor  in  a  place  is  he  to  fetch  doctors
from  one  or  two  other  places  to  witness  an  experiment  which
perhaps  must  be  repeated  daily  ?


THE  LEGAL  ASPECTS  OF  HYPNOTISM.  355


as  medicine  is  obliged  in  part  to  leave  the  study  of
chemical  and  physical  agents  to  the  representatives
of  other  sciences,  so  it  will  be  obliged  not  only  to
leave  the  investigation  of  hypnotism  to  psychologists,
but  to  beg  them  to  undertake  it.  But  as  it  is
necessary  to  have  some  physical  and  chemical  know-
ledge in  order  to  prescribe  drugs,  so  it  is  necessary
for  a  doctor  to  have  some  psychological  knowledge
before  he  can  use  hypnotism.  In  a  time  when  the
pillars  of  therapeutics,  though  apparently  raised  on  a
foundation  of  exact  medicine,  are  crumbling  more
and  more  ;  when  the  supposed  fixed  indications —
which  many  think  are  a  prerogative  of  non-mental
therapeutics — are  more  and  more  attacked  ;  when
men  like  Unverricht,  Arndt,  and  Hugo  Schulz  dis-
cover the  errors  and  false  conclusions  of  a  system  of
therapeutics  supposed  to  be  guided  by  fixed  indica-
tions ;  when  the  "  exact "  therapeutics  of  fever  have
been  more  and  more  abandoned  during  the  last  ten
years,  and  knowledge  of  fever  seems  to  be  returning
to  the  standpoint  of  Hippocrates,  we  have  no  right
to  be  hostile  to  psychology.  Nowadays,  when  ill-
grounded  therapeutics  are  increasingly  attacked  by
doctors  as  well  as  laymen,  an  assertion  such  as  was
lately  made  is  untenable :  "  Mental  treatment  is  out-
side the  domain  of  medicine,  because  there  are  no
fixed  indications  for  mental  treatment."  But  mental
therapeutics  are  an  integral  part  of  medical  treatment,
and  as  the  study  of  hypnotism  is  a  department  of
psychology,  it  should  not  be  superciliously  rejected  ;
hypnotism  should  be  regarded  as  a  department  of
science  in  medical  circles  as  well  as  in  any  others.

From  this  point  of  view  medicine  and  psychology
should  unite  to  study  the  question.  In  any  case  the
path  is  made  plain  already. Public  exhibitions  have


356


HYPNOTISM.


called  the  attention  of  science  to  these  states,  though
on  the  other  hand  the  flavour  of  charlatanism  in  the
matter  has  repelled  many.  For  this  reason  it  is  a
good  thing  that  such  public  exhibitions  have  been
forbidden  in  Prussia.  Nothing  now  prevents  our
approaching  the  subject  in  a  scientific  manner.

I  do  not  wish  to  depreciate  the  services  of  those
who  have  drawn  attention  to  hypnotism  by  public
exhibitions.  Just  as  I  refuse  to  join  in  the  general
condemnation  of  Mesmer,  I  try  to  judge  men  such  as
Hansen,  Bollert,  and  others,  fairly.  Though  their
motives  may  not  have  been  purely  unselfish,  they
have  been  of  great  service  to  science,  since  without
them  we  should  probably  still  be  ignorant  of  the  sub-
ject. To  the  honour  of  those  mentioned,  to  whom
Donato  may  be  added,  it  should  be  expressly  stated
that  all  three  of  them  have  been  ready  to  help  the
representatives  of  science  in  the  most  straightforward
way.  Heidenhain,  Michael,  Wernicke,  Morselli,  and
many  others  have  emphatically  recognized  this.  None
the  less,  I  oppose  such  exhibitions  for  the  reasons
mentioned,  and  I  do  not  think  they  are  justified  by
Delbceufs  supposition  that  they  are  the  best  means
of  spreading  a  knowledge  of  hypnotism,  and  thus
lessening  its  dangers.


CHAPTER  IX.


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.

The  following  chapter  aims  at  giving  the  reader  an
idea  of  some  phenomena  which  are  often  mentioned
in  connection  with  hypnotism,  although  the  connec-
tion is  rather  historical  than  essential.  In  my  view
they  are  the  consequence  of  erroneously  interpreted
observations.  But  as  they  are  often  quoted,  and
it  is  necessary  to  know  at  least  something  about
them,  I  will  explain  them  in  the  following  sections.
I  do  not  think  that  the  conclusions  drawn  from  them
are  just,  but  everything  should  be  examined  without
prejudice.  A  scientific  refutation  helps  truth  more
than  a  priori  negation  ;  and  some  of  these  things
are  related  by  eminent  observers.  An  investigation
is  as  much  in  place  here  as  it  was  when  Virchow
consented  to  examine  the  case  of  Louise  Lateau
when  the  necessary  conditions  were  fulfilled.  As
Virchow  remarks  what  we  call  the  laws  of  nature  must
vary  according  to  our  frequent  new  experiences.

The  phenomena  are — (i)  animal  magnetism  ;  (2)
super-normal  thought-transference,  telepathy  {sugges-
tion mentale)  ;  (3)  certain  super-normal  acts  in  som-
nambulism ;  (4)  the  effect  of  the  magnet  on  hypnotic
subjects  ;  (5)  the  effect  of  drugs  on  approach  or
contact.


358


HYPNOTISM,


In  animal  magnetism  the  chief  part  is  played  by
a  personal  influence,  not  resulting  from  suggestion,
which  A.  exercises  over  B.  The  following  examples
will  make  this  clear  : —

A.  tells  B.,  "  You  cannot  speak."  B.  hears,  and
cannot  speak  ;  this  is  merely  suggestion.  If  A.
makes  mesmeric  passes  down  B.'s  arm,  and  anal-
gesia follows,  this  may  be  also  suggestion.  B.  knows
what  A.  is  doing,  and  the  result  may  be  produced  by
B.'s  imagination  in  a  purely  mental  way.  Let  us
suppose  that  C.  comes  on  the  scene,  and  makes
passes  over  B.'s  arm,  and  that  analgesia  does  not
follow  ;  suggestion  explains  this  too.  B.  believes
that  A.  can  induce  analgesia,  and  that  C.  cannot,
and  the  results  are  in  accord  with  his  belief.  But
the  case  is  different  when  B.  does  not  know  whether
A.  or  C.  is  making  the  passes.  According  to  the
views  of  the  adherents  of  animal  magnetism — the
so-called  mesmerists — A.  can  produce  analgesia  by
magnetizing  and  C.  cannot.  They  therefore  think
that  A.  has  some  personal  influence  which  sugges-
tion does  not  explain.  This  influence  is  an  inherent
power  in  some  people,  and  only  such  people  can
magnetize.  This  example  shows  what  is  at  present
understood  by  mesmerism  or  animal  magnetism
(vital  magnetism,  bio-magnetism,  zoo-magnetism).

The  mesmerists  think  that  a  man  who  has  this
power  can  cause  local  or  general  analgesia  or  con-
tractures, or  even  cure  diseases.  He  can  even  mag-
netize children  under  a  year  old,  and  influence  them
therapeutically.  Liebeault,  the  founder  of  the  Nancy
school  and  of  the  method  of  suggestion,  who  disputed
the  magnetic  influence  in  1866,  became  a  firm  ad-
herent of  it  later.  In  1883  he  published  a  book  in
which  he  describes  cures  of  children  under  three


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.  359


years  ;  these  cures  caused  the  change  in  his  views.
He  thought  that  though  nearly  all  might  be  ex-
plained by  suggestion,  something  remained  which
needed  another  explanation,  and  this  he  called
animal  magnetism  or  zoo-magnetism — a  name  used
by  Bartels  in  the  beginning  of  this  century.  Lately
Liebeault  appears  to  have  abandoned  his  belief  in
animal  magnetism  again.

Besides  the  effects  named — induction  of  analgesia
and  contractures,  the  healing  of  diseases,  and  its
influence  on  young  children —other  effects  of  this  sup-
posed animal  magnetism  are  mentioned  as  proving
the  existence  of  the  force.  Du  Prel,  one  of  its
decided  adherents,  gives  the  following  :  Firstly,
animals  can  be  magnetized,  in  which  case  he  thinks
suggestion  out  of  the  question.  On  this  point  I
refer  the  reader  to  the  hypnotic  experiments  on
animals  which  I  have  described.  Such  a  force  can-
not be  concluded  from  them.  In  the  first  place,  it
is  by  no  means  proved  that  animals  are  not  suscep-
tible to  suggestion  ;  e.g.,  if  an  animal  is  held  for  some
time,  why  should  it  not  be  able  to  conclude  that  it  is
unable  to  move,  even  after  it  has  been  released  ?
Many  eminent  experimenters  hold  this  view.  And
further,  certain  stimuli  applied  to  the  nerves  of  the
skin  make  movements  impossible,  though  the  stimuli
are  not  caused  by  some  unknown  force  ;  and  the  fasci-
nation which  the  rattlesnake  exercises  on  birds  cannot
be  considered  a  proof,  in  Du  Prel's  sense  of  the  word,
any  more  than  the  fascinating  gaze  of  a  man  can  be
considered  to  prove  the  possession  of  some  force
peculiar  to  himself.  Secondly,  Du  Prel  speaks  of
magnetic  experiments  on  sleeping  persons,  i.e.,  on
persons  who  did  not  know  they  were  being  mag-
netized. But  it  must  be  remarked  that  sleep  does


360


HYPNOTISM.


not  involve  an  absolute  loss  of  consciousness  ;  con-
sequently, that  suggestion,  in  the  psychological  sense,
is  not  impossible  in  sleep.  Thirdly,  the  same  author
can  magnetize  people  at  a  distance,  as  well  as  asleep,
in  which  case  suggestion  is  also  supposed  to  be  ex-
cluded. Fourthly,  he  says  that  plants  can  be  mag-
netized and  their  growth  thus  influenced,  as  is  said
of  the  fakirs  {cf.  p.  216).  Fifthly,  the  magnetic  force
can  be  passed  on  to  inanimate  objects,  which  then
have  the  same  effect  as  the  magnetizer.  Sixthly,
Du  Prel  brings  forward  the  super-normal  thought-
transference,  which  I  shall  shortly  discuss,  in  proof  of
animal  magnetism.

The  magnetic  influence  is  used  by  means  of  mes-
meric passes,  by  touch,  by  fixed  gaze  of  operator  and
subject,  by  breathing  on  the  subject  (Barety),  and
some  think  by  concentration  of  thought  and  will  on
the  desired  result  (Puysegur,  Nasse).

The  mesmeric  passes  described  on  p.  22  are  most
generally  used.  Much  information  about  the  direc-
tion of  the  passes  can  be  found  in  the  books  of  the
mesmerists.  The  effect  is  supposed  to  be  different
according  as  the  passes  are  upwards  or  downwards,
or  made  with  the  back  or  palm  of  the  hand,  apart
from  suggestion.  The  right  and  left  sides  have  diffe-
rent effects.  The  mesmerists  all  speak  much  about
the  polarity  of  the  magnet,  and  Fludd,  Hell,  and
Mesmer  supposed  there  was  a  similar  polarity  in
men.  The  same  thing  has  been  asserted  more  re-
cently by  Chazarain,  Decle,  Durville,  De  Rochas,
and  Barety.  But  I  find  such  opposed  views  among
the  different  investigators  about  the  distribution  of
the  poles  that  for  the  present  I  ascribe  the  supposed
polarity  to  unconscious  habit.

The  mesmerists  have  put  forth  many  theories  to


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


361


explain  this  personal  influence.  I  pass  over  most  of
them  for  brevity's  sake.  But  I  will  mention  those
of  Mesmer,  because  many  false  views  are  widespread
about  them.  He  says  the  whole  universe  is  filled  with
a  fluid  which  is  more  subtle  than  ether,  just  as  ether
is  more  subtle  than  air,  and  air  than  water.  This  fluid
conducts  vibrations  just  like  ether,  air,  and  water.  As
the  vibrations  of  the  light-ether  cause  light,  and  those
of  air  cause  sounds,  so  the  vibrations  of  this  universal
fluid  cause  other  phenomena.  The  mutual  influence
which  the  heavenly  bodies  undisputedly  exercise  on
each  other  and  the  earth  are  caused  by  the  vibra-
tions of  this  fluid.  One  animal  body  influences
another  by  means  of  the  vibrations  of  this  fluid.
Mesmer  called  this  animal  magnetism.

This  theory  of  Mesmer's  is  often  confused  with
another  theory  of  a  fluid.  Mesmer  was  thinking  of
a  universally  extended  fluid.  Another  theory  sup-
poses a  fluid  in  the  nerves,  which  is  called  outwards
by  movement.  This  is  the  assertion  of  Albrecht  von
Haller,  the  famous  physiologist  of  the  last  century,
who  established  his  priority  to  Mesmer,  although
their  theories  are  by  no  means  identical.  These
are  not  mere  notions  invented  and  defended  by
swindlers  and  fools.  Many  clever  men — A.  von
Humboldt,  for  example — thought  that  a  force  in  the
nervous  system  could  produce  effects  at  a  distance,
if  not  at  a  great  distance.  The  well-known  phy-
sician and  anatomist,  Reil,  held  a  like  view.  In
any  case  the  mesmerists  had  the  support  of  eminent
scientists,  who  supposed  a  nervous  fluid  surrounding
men.  Mesmerism  has  even  quite  lately  found  some
adherents  among  eminent  men  of  science.  Ed.  von
Hartmann  is  a  convinced  adherent  of  it,  and  founds
his  belief  on  personal  experience.


362


HYPNOTISM.


I  shall  pass  over  the  other  theories  of  animal  mag-
netism, merely  mentioning  that  many  persons  did
not  believe  in  the  universal  fluid.

The  mesmerists  maintain  that  sleep  need  not
always  be  induced  before  a  person  can  be  magneti-
cally influenced  ;  that  the  subjects  may  be  thoroughly
awake  ;  and  that  this  is  the  distinction  between  mes-
merism and  hypnotism.  But  it  should  be  said  that
there  is  by  no  means  always  a  true  sleep  in  hypno-
tism. It  is  evident  that  the  old  mesmerists  knew  the
light  hypnotic  stages  well  ;  they  called  them  mag-
netic states.  The  mesmerists  also  did  not  use  the
personal  methods  exclusively  ;  they  used  inanimate
objects  for  magnetizing,  such  as  the  baquet  of  Mesmer
and  Puysegur's  favourite  magnetized  tree.  They
thought  that  the  magnetic  force  passed  into  the
object  from  the  magnetizer.  But  when  this  was  not
the  case  they  were  not  at  a  loss.  When  no  magnetizer
has  touched  the  object,  as  is  the  case  in  the  method
of  Braid,  then  (as  Moricourt  thinks)  the  fluid  of  the
subject  is  reflected  from  the  object  gazed  at,  and  he
is  affected  by  his  own  fluid.

So-called  animal  magnetism  has  been  made  of  practical
importance  by  its  use  by  healing  magnetizers,  who  are  sup-
posed to  be  able  to  cure  diseases.  The  utter  lack  of  criticism
among  them,  which  makes  scientific  discussion  impossible,
obliges  me  to  renounce  the  attempt  to  give  details,  though  I
am  convinced  that  not  one  professional  magnetizer  has  yet
proved  that  he  possesses  any  particular  power  unexplained
by  suggestion.  On  the  other  hand,  many  authors —e.g.,  Goler
von  Ravensburg — have  pointed  out  great  sources  of  error,  so
that  childlike  faith  would  be  required  to  take  their  assertions
seriously.

The  phenomena  of  thought-transference,  mental
suggestion,  telepathy,  or,  as  Mayerhofer  calls  it,
telaesthesia,  are  related  to  animal  magnetism,  and


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


363


are  often  spoken  of  in  connection  with  it.  Telepathy
means  the  transference  of  thoughts,  feelings,  sensa-
tions, &c,  from  a  person  A.  to  a  person  B.  by  some
means  other  than  the  recognized  sense  perceptions
of  B.  Consequently  such  thought-reading  is  alto-
gether excluded,  in  which  one  person  guesses  the
thought  of  another  by  means  of  the  tremors  in  his
muscles,  i.e.,  by  a  recognized  kind  of  perception.
Telepathy  has  a  certain  relation  to  mesmerism
(Ochorowicz).

In  making  the  experiments,  the  person  B.,  who  is  to
guess  the  thoughts  of  A.,  is  often  mesmerized  by  A.,
as  this  is  supposed  to  make  the  transference  easier.
Some  English  experimenters,  Guthrie  in  particular,
have  made  experiments  when  both  persons  were  quite
awake.  The  transference  is  supposed  to  be  caused
merely  by  a  strong  concentration  of  thought  on  the
part  of  the  agent.  In  the  same  way  the  subject  feels
the  agent's  sense  perceptions.  If  A.  is  pricked,  B.
feels  it  ;  if  A.  tastes  salt,  B.  tastes  it,  &c.  It  is  also
said  that  A.  can  make  B.  act,  merely  by  concentrating
his  thoughts  on  what  B.  is  to  do.  Others  think  that
it  is  the  concentration  of  A's.  will  on  B.  which  causes
the  action.  Perronnet  even  maintains  that  it  is  pos-
sible to  influence  the  pulse  and  cause  vasomotor
changes  telepathically,  by  an  effort  of  will.  The
nearer  A.  is  to  B.  the  better,  but  the  phenomena  are
said  to  have  been  observed  when  subject  and  agent
were  separated  by  several  kilometres.  It  is  said  to  be
even  possible  to  hypnotize  certain  people  at  long
distances  by  concentration  of  thought  ;  such  experi-
ments are  said  to  have  succeeded  at  Havre.  Among
authors  who  vouch  for  the  reality  of  telepathy,  and
whose  experiments  deserve  consideration,  I  mention
Charles  Richet,  Ochorowicz,  Pierre  Janet,  Gibert,  F.


364


HYPNOTISM.


Myers,  A.  Myers,  Gurney,  Birchall,  Guthrie,  and  Max
Dessoir.  However,  these  experiments  raise  some
doubts.  Those  published  by  Du  Prel,  Schrenck-
Notzing,  Mensi,  and  Welsch,  contain  so  little  in-
formation about  the  conditions  of  the  experiments
that  it  is  difficult  to  weigh  the  question.

Clairvoyance  is  the  perception  of  things  distant
either  in  time  or  in  space.  Belief  in  it  is  as  old  as
history  ;  Du  Prel  reminds  us  of  the  Oracles.  The
prophecies  of  the  Pythia  at  Delphi  show  that  it  was
even  then  believed  in.  From  what  has  come  down  to
us  in  history  it  seems  that  the  state  of  the  Pythia  was
like  deep  hypnosis,  although  they  probably  used  toxic
methods  also ;  Kluge  and  Ed.  von  Hartmann  think  that
the  state  was  somnambulism.  It  was  the  same  thing
with  the  Sibyl  of  Cumae.

The  mesmerists  think  clairvoyance  and  the  trans-
position of  the  senses  of  which  I  shall  shortly  speak
are  phenomena  to  be  found  in  magnetized  subjects.
It  is  not  certain  whether  Mesmer  himself  ^knew  of  the
phenomena ;  but  it  appears  from  one  of  his  letters
(published  by  Du  Potet)  that  he  was  acquainted  with
them,  but  did  not  enter  into  them,  because  they
appeared  to  him  inexplicable.  Most  of  the  commis-
sions which  have  investigated  clairvoyance  have  failed  ;
but  some  great  minds — Schopenhauer,  for  example —
have  believed  in  it.  Even  Braid,  about  whose  views
there  are  so  many  mistaken  opinions,  believed  in
clairvoyance.  This  must  be  mentioned,  because  from
Preyer's  representation  of  Braid's  teaching  we  should
be  obliged  to  conclude  that  he  denied  clairvoyance.
I  should  explain  the  passage  in  Braid's  Neurypnology,
p.  21,  in  quite  the  opposite  sense.  Braid  thought
clairvoyance  proved,  though  he  had  never  seen  it  and


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


365


could  not  induce  it  himself ;  but  he  thought  that  a
number  of  those  who  vouched  for  its  reality  were
scientific  and  truth-loving  enough  to  be  believed  ;  he
expressly  says  so,  and  there  can  be  no  doubt  about  it.
The  magnetic  state  in  which  such  phenomena  as
clairvoyance,  thought-transference,  &c,  are  found,  is
sometimes  called  somnambulism  1  by  the  mesmerists.

In  previsional  clairvoyance  forthcoming  events  are
foretold  ;  in  spatial  clairvoyance  things  are  seen  which
are  so  placed  in  space  that  normally  they  would  be
invisible  ;  they  are  either  separated  from  the  seer  by
some  non-transparent  substance,  or  they  are  too  far  off
to  be  seen.  In  Paris,  somnambulists  are  often  made
use  of  in  diagnosing  disease  ;  this  is  a  kind  of  spatial
clairvoyance.  One  common  experiment  is  to  make
the  somnambulist  diagnose  his  own  disease,  foretell  its
course,  and  mention  the  drugs  to  be  used.

In  transposition  of  the  senses,  stimuli,  which  nor-
mally would  only  affect  a  particular  organ  of  sense,
affect  some  other  part  of  the  body.  For  example,
letters  are  said  to  be  read  by  means  of  the  skin,
instead  of  the  eyes,  without  a  heightening  of  the
sense  of  touch,  such  as  is  found  in  the  blind.  On  the
contrary,  the  part  of  the  skin  concerned  is  supposed
to  be  stimulated  by  the  light  rays,  even  without  direct
contact,  and'when  there  is  no  hyperesthesia  of  feeling.
The  supposed  transposition  of  the  senses  is  thus  dis-
tinguished from  hypersesthesia  of  the  sense  of  touch.

1  Consequently  the  word  somnambulism  is  used  in  several
senses  :  1.  One  of  Charcot's  stages  is  often  called  somnambulism.
2.  The  school  of  Nancy  calls  that  hypnotic  state  somnambulism
in  which  there  is  loss  of  memory  after  waking.  3.  Some  identify
hypnotism  with  somnambulism.  4.  Somnambulism  is  a  natural
sleep  in  which  there  are  actions  and  movements.  5.  The
mesmeric  state  described  above  is  called  somnambulism.


366


HYPNOTISM.


One  of  the  most  commonly  mentioned  phenomena  is
reading  or  hearing  with  the  pit  of  the  stomach.  I
have  seen  a  person  who  was  supposed  to  read  with  his
nose,  even  at  a  distance  of  several  feet.  When  his
nose  was  covered  with  wadding  he  failed.  It  is  toler-
ably certain  that  he  saw  with  his  eyes ;  for  though
they  appeared  to  be  covered  with  wadding  and  ban-
daged, Braid  has  pointed  out  that  such  bandaging  is
of  very  doubtful  use.

I  will  here  mention  some  experiments  of  Heiden-
hain's  which  are  generally  misunderstood,  and  which
at  any  rate  may  be  easily  misunderstood.  He  main-
tained that  his  subjects  repeated  whatever  he  said  to
them  when  a  stimulus  was  applied  to  their  stomachs  ;
it  was  necessary  to  speak  close  to  the  stomach  to
stimulate  it.  He  even  said  that  the  part  could  be
exactly  defined,  and  that  it  was  the  region  of  the
stomach.  According  to  him  the  vagus  nerve  was  set
vibrating  and  the  sound  centres  were  stimulated,  and
thus  a  sound  was  made  which  exactly  corresponded  to
the  one  heard  ;  but  he  thought  the  sound  was  heard
by  the  ear  and  not  by  the  stomach,  the  nerves  of  which
merely  stimulated  the  sound  centres  and  thus  induced
imitation  of  what  was  heard  by  the  ear.  It  might  be
concluded  from  many  accounts  of  Heidenhain's  ex-
periments that  he  thought  his  subjects  heard  with
their  stomachs,  but  nothing  was  further  from  his
thoughts.  I  have  said  on  p.  8 1  that  Heidenhain  was
probably  wrong  in  his  conclusions.

The  law  of  the  individual  capacity  of  the  sense
organs 1  would  be  violated  by  transposition  of  the
senses. But  I  do  not  think  the  thing  is  proved.

1  According  to  this  law  each  organ  of  sense  has  its  own
appropriate  stimulus,  which  has  no  effect  on  any  other  organ,
e.g.,  the  eye  is  stimulated  by  light,  but  not  the  sense  of  touch  or
the  stomach.


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


367


The  belief  in  the  action  of  the  magnet  on  human
beings  is  very  old.  The  Magi  of  the  East  used  it  for
curing  diseases,  and  the  Chinese  and  Hindoos  used  it
long  ago.  Albertus  Magnus  in  the  thirteenth  century,
and  later  Paracelsus,  Van  Helmont,  and  Kircher  also
used  it,  as  well  as  the  astronomer  and  ex-Jesuit  Hell
of  Vienna  at  the  end  of  the  eighteenth  century.
Mesmer  is  said  to  have  heard  from  him  of  its  effect
upon  men,  and  he  also  used  it  at  first  (p.  5).  Even
then  many  doctors — e.g.,  Deimann,  of  Amsterdam —
denied  the  therapeutic  action  of  the  magnet,  and
asserted,  as  others  do  at  present,  that  brass  plates  did
as  well.  Reil,  the  well-known  physician,  used  the
magnet  therapeutically  ;  in  1845  Reichenbach  asserted
that  some  sensitive  persons  had  peculiar  sensations
when  they  were  touched  by  a  magnet.  He  also  said
that  they  saw  light — the  so-called  flight — at  the  poles
of  the  magnet :  an  assertion  that  was  supposed  to  be
disproved,  but  which  has  lately  been  again  made  by
Barrett,  in  London.  Maggiorani,  in  Italy,  has  lately
contended  for  the  therapeutic  use  of  the  magnet
(Belfiore),  and  quite  recently  the  school  of  Charcot
has  asserted  the  influence  of  the  magnet  on  certain
individuals.

I  have  already  spoken  of  the  application  of  the
magnet  for  inducing  hypnosis,  as  well  as  of  the  action
of  the  hypnoscope.

With  regard  to  the  action  of  the  magnet  during
hypnosis,  the  phenomena  of  transference  must  first  be
mentioned.  According  to  the  school  of  Charcot,
transference  means  that  certain  phenomena,  influenced
by  some  sesthesio-genetic  expedient,  particularly  the
magnet,  change  the  place  of  their  appearance.  Charcot
says  that  such  phenomena  are  seen  in  hysterical
patients. Thus,  contractures  on  the  right  side  can  be


368


HYPNOTISM.


transferred  to  the  left  by  the  magnet.  Charcot,  as
well  as  a  number  of  other  experimenters,  among  them
Preyer,  thinks  these  phenomena  quite  proved,  while
in  Germany  a  mental  factor  has  been  called  in  to
account  for  them.  It  was  supposed  that  the  subject's
expectation  produced  the  effect  and  not  the  magnet  ;
and  that  (according  to  Westphal)  sealing-wax,  bones,
&c,  produced  the  same  result,  provided  only  that  the
subject  expected  it.  The  school  of  Charcot  say  that
this  transference  takes  place  in  hypnosis  as  well  as  in
the  waking  state.  The  laws  which  Binet  and  Fere
have  laid  down  about  it  are  as  follows  :  When
lethargy  on  one  side  of  the  body  and  catalepsy  on  the
other  have  been  induced  by  closing  the  subject's  eyes,
the  approach  of  a  magnet  causes  lethargy  on  the
cataleptic  side,  and  on  the  lethargic  side  catalepsy.  In
the  same  way,  when  the  state  is  somnambulistic  on  one
side  and  cataleptic  or  lethargic  on  the  other,  the  magnet
causes  transference.  But  also,  in  each  particular
hypnotic  state,  symptoms  can  be  transferred  by  the
magnet  from  one  side  to  the  other,  e.g.,  the  individual
contractures  in  lethargy,  and  particular  postures  of
the  limbs  in  catalepsy.  In  somnambulism,  contrac-
tures as  well  as  hallucinations  of  one  side,  and  hemi-
ansesthesiae,  can  be  transferred  in  the  same  way.
Binet  and  Fere  say  that  when  hypnotic  subjects
write  with  the  right  hand,  they  reverse  the  direction
of  the  writing  under  the  influence  of  the  magnet
and  write  at  the  same  time  with  the  left  hand.

Another  method  of  influencing  with  the  magnet  is
called  polarization.  It  is  a  reversal  of  a  functional
state  (Belfiore).  For  example,  the  magnet  is  supposed
to  resolve  a  contracture  induced  by  suggestion  (motor
polarization).  It  can  banish  a  suggested  hallucination
and  can  change  the  mental  pictures  of  colours  into


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


369


their  complementaries.  If  a  subject  believes  he  sees
blue,  he  thinks  he  sees  yellow  when  the  magnet  is
brought  close  to  him  (sensory  polarization).  The
magnet  is  said  to  change  happiness  into  sadness
(mental  polarization).  When  a  reversal  of  the  state
takes  place,  e.g.,  when  "  blue  "  is  turned  into  "  yellow,"
i.e.,  into  its  complementary  colour,  then  this  is  called
polarization  in  a  narrower  sense,  and  an  arbitrary
change  of  state,  i.e.,  the  changing  of  "  yellow "
into  "  red  "  is  called  "  dispolarization  "  (Lombroso,
Ottolenghi).  Binet  and  Fere  are  the  authors  of
these  experiments,  which  are  confirmed  by  Bianchi
and  Sommer,  whose  experiments,  however,  offer  no
guarantee  that  sufficient  precautions  were  taken  ;  at
least  I  have  found  nothing  concerning  this  point  in
their  publications.  Lombroso  and  Ottolenghi  also
affirm  the  phenomena  of  polarization.

The  phenomena  of  mental  polarization  were  care-
fully examined  by  a  special  committee  of  the  Medical
Congress  at  Padua.  They  were  not  confirmed  ;  at  least,
they  could  not  be  referred  to  the  action  of  the  magnet.
Tanzi  especially  opposes  them,  and  thinks  they  are  to
be  referred  to  unconscious  and  unintentional  suggestion.

Venturini  and  Ventra  made  a  therapeutical  experi-
ment in  connection  with  these  phenomena.  They  say
they  conquered  a  fixed  idea,  an  auto-suggestion  in  the
waking  state,  by  means  of  the  magnet.  Some  experi-
ments of  Raggi  belong  to  this  class  ;  he  says  that  the
approach  of  a  magnet  in  hypnosis  often  causes  sub-
jective discomfort.  In  other  cases  the  magnet  is  said
to  have  put  an  end  to  the  hypnosis.

A  third  possible  way  of  influencing  the  hypnotic
subject  by  the  magnet  is  given  by  Tamburini  and
Seppilli.  They  think  that  when  the  magnet  is  brought
close  to  the  pit  of  the  stomach  it  influences  the

25


37o


HYPNOTISM.


respiratory  movements.  Later  on,  Tamburini  and
Righi  found  that  other  metallic  bodies  produced  the
same  effect ;  the  strength  of  the  effect  depended,  how-
ever, on  the  size  of  the  metal.  The  electro-magnet
is  said  to  have  the  same  effect  whether  the  stream  is
open  or  closed  ;  Tamburini  supposes  later  that  it  is
only  the  temperature  of  the  magnet  which  has  the
effect,  and  that  the  magnetic  force  may  have  no
influence.

In  conclusion,  there  are  Babinski's  experiments,
founded  on  a  union  of  true  magnetism  and  animal
magnetism.  If  a  hypnotized  subject  and  a  sick  person
are  set  back  to  back,  a  magnet  put  between  them  will
cause  the  sick  person's  symptoms  to  pass  over  to  the
hypnotized  subject.  Hysterical  dumbness  and  con-
tractures have  been  thus  transferred.  But  symptoms
of  organic  disease,  e.g.t  of  disseminated  sclerosis  have
also  been  transferred  in  this  way.  As  a  matter  of
course  the  phenomena  must  not  be  caused  by  sugges-
tion. The  hypnotic  subject  must  not  know  what  the
sick  person's  symptoms  are.  Luys  made  such
experiments  with  the  same  result.

All  these  actions  of  the  magnet  are  very  enigmatical,
and  my  personal  conviction  is  that  the  observations
were  erroneous.  But  it  is  certainly  singular  that  the
action  of  the  magnet  should  have  been  asserted  by  so
many  authors  at  so  many  different  times.

Little  can  be  safely  said  in  explanation  of  its  effect.
Obersteiner  supposes  that  there  may  be  a  magnetic
sense,  which  may  come  into  activity  during  hypnosis,
and  which  is,  perhaps,  localized  in  certain  terminal
organs  of  perception  whose  functions  are  still  un-
known.


The  action  of  drugs  at  a  distance  is  at  the  present


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.  371


moment  supposed  to  be  disproved,  though  some
authors  still  assert  it.  This  also  is  no  new  thing.  The
belief  has  often  arisen  that  certain  persons  could  find
water  or  veins  of  metal  with  a  divining-rod,  through
some  influence  of  the  water  or  minerals  at  a  distance.
Burq's  metalloscopie  and  metallotherapie,  in  which,
however,  there  was  contact  with  the  metals,  was  the
same  sort  of  thing.

Certain  persons  were  supposed  to  be  influenced  by
particular  metals — copper,  for  example — which  even
caused  symptoms  of  disease  to  disappear.  The  later
investigations  on  the  action  of  drugs  at  a  distance
apparently  proved  that  certain  drugs  in  hermetically
closed  tubes  would,  when  brought  close  to  human
beings,  act  in  the  same  way  as  if  they  were  swallowed.
Thus,  strychnine  was  supposed  to  cause  convulsions,
ipecacuanha  vomiting,  opium  sleep,  alcohol  drunken-
ness, &c.  The  experiments  were  first  made  by  Grocco
in  Italy,  and  Bourru  and  Burot  in  Rochefort.  They
experimented  with  both  waking  and  hypnotized
people ;  Luys  repeated  the  experiments  with  hypno-
tized subjects  and  confirmed  them  ;  so  did  Duplouy
and  Alliot.  Luys  went  further  ;  he  even  found  dis-
tinctions, according  as  the  ipecacuanha  was  applied  to
the  right  or  left  sides.

It  is  known  that  these  experiments  have  been
repeated  in  other  quarters,  e.g.t  by  Jules  Voisin,  Forel,
Seguin,  and  Laufenauer,  without  result ;  Luys  brought
the  subject  before  the  French  Academy  of  Medicine,
which  appointed  a  commission  (Brouardel,  Dujardin-
Beaumetz,and  several  others)  to  test  the  question  in  the
presence  of  Luys  ;  they  came  to  a  conclusion  opposed
to  his.  Seeligmuller  has  confuted  the  experiments  in
a  much  better  and  more  scientific  way,  which  appears
to  me  the  only  proper  one  for  coming  to  a  decision.


372


HYPNOTISM.


It  consists  of  examining  the  conditions  of  the  experi-
ments ;  the  reports  of  commissions  have  no  particular
value.  When  we  consider  the  history  of  animal
magnetism  we  see  that  commissions  always  find
what  they  wish  to  find  ;  the  result  is  always  what
they  expect.  Commissions,  in  fact,  are  much  influ-
enced by  auto-suggestion.

Although  I  have  spoken  of  a  number  of  enigmatical
phenomena  in  this  chapter,  I  have  not  done  so
because  I  wish  to  maintain  their  reality;  I  should
expressly  state  that  this  is  not  the  case.  I  thought  it
necessary  to  mention  them  briefly,  on  account  of  their
connection  with  the  history  of  hypnotism.  It  was
further  necessary  to  point  out  the  many  sources  of
error  in  such  experiments.

One  important  condition  in  such  experiments  is
that  every  word  uttered  should  be  taken  down  by
some  person  present  for  the  purpose.  One  apparently
unimportant  word  may  be  enough  to  justify  the  chief
objection  made  to  such  experiments — i.e.,  suggestion.

And  there  is  an  absence  of  criticism  in  most  of  them.
When  a  subject  reads  in  a  closed  book,  and  it  is  not
proved  that  he  was  unacquainted  with  it  previously,  I
think  it  is  at  least  naive  to  speak  of  clairvoyance.
When  the  magnet  causes  transference  in  subjects  who
know  that  the  magnet  is  supposed  to  cause  trans-
ference, it  should  be  proved  that  the  subjects  could
not  know  of  the  presence  of  the  magnet  through  their
organs  of  sense.  When  the  approach  of  the  magnet
changes  a  subject's  perception  of  "blue"  into  "yellow,"
let  it  be  proved  that  he  did  not  know  the  magnet  was
near,  for  a  properly  "trained"  subject  knows  that
the  magnet  is  supposed  to  change  his  perceptions  of
colour.  When  it  is  asserted  that  drugs  in  closed  tubes


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


373


have  an  effect,  Bernheim's  conditions  should  be
observed,  the  chief  of  which  is  that  no  one  in  the
room  should  know  the  contents  of  the  tube.  When  it
is  asserted  that  some  persons  can  magnetize  others  by
means  of  a  particular  force,  let  suggestion  be  excluded.
The  impression  that  A.  makes  upon  B.  is  often  im-
possible to  calculate,  and  when  A.  can  influence  B.,
but  C.  cannot,  it  should  be  shown  that  A.  does  not
know  whether  B.  or  C.  is  magnetizing  him.  This  is
of  course  very  important  ;  for  there  is  no  doubt  that
some  people,  by  the  manner  in  which  they  play  their
part  and  by  a  thorough  knowledge  of  the  technique  of
suggestion,  can  influence  subjects  who  are  refractory
to  others.  It  by  no  means  follows  that  they  possess
a  peculiar  magnetic  force  ;  suggestion  will  explain  it.

The  chief  sources  of  error  in  the  experiments
described  in  this  chapter  are  as  follows : —

1.  Intentional  simulation  on  the  part  of  the  subject
in  or  out  of  hypnosis.  A  simulation  of  hypnosis  is  less
to  be  feared,  because  if  a  person  saw  without  using  his
eyes,  it  would  not  matter  whether  he  was  in  hypnosis
or  not ;  the  main  point  is  the  seeing.  But  even  when
there  is  hypnosis,  the  experimenter  is  not  protected
from  simulation  on  the  subject's  part,  because  lying
and  fraud  are  possible  even  in  deep  hypnosis.

2.  Unintentional  simulation,  if  I  may  use  an  ex-
pression which  is  really  contradictory.  For  example,
the  subject  hears  something,  and  is  not  conscious  that
the  impression  has  been  made  on  the  usual  organ  of
this  sense  ;  as  is  the  case  when  subjects  themselves
believe  they  hear  with  their  stomachs.  Or  trans-
ference happens,  when  the  subject  has  been  induced
by  training  to  produce  this  phenomenon  whenever  a
magnet  is  brought  near  him.  The  subject  pays  no
attention  to  the  approach  of  the  magnet,  and  is  not


374


HYPNOTISM.


really  conscious  of  it,  and  yet  the  effect  appears.  In
the  same  way  the  subject  in  thought-transference
learns  to  guess  others'  thoughts  from  many  little
signs,  but  is  not  conscious  that  he  does  so.  The
involuntary  tremor  of  the  muscles  which  every  one
has  when  he  concentrates  his  thoughts  strongly,  and
which  betrays  his  thoughts  to  the  subject,  seems  to
me  a  great  point  in  these  cases  ;  Wernicke  in  par-
ticular has  pointed  out  this  source  of  error.

It  should  be  especially  guarded  against  in  clair-
voyance, because  persons  present,  who  can  see  the
thing  which  the  clairvoyant  is  to  see  without  using  his
eyes,  may  give  indications  by  involuntary  muscular
movements,  &c.  Even  Goler  v.  Ravensburg,  who  is
generally  so  practical,  does  not  enough  consider  the
importance  of  this  point.

3.  The  probability  of  chance  success.  As  many
experiments  fail,  it  should  be  considered  whether  the
number  of  successful  ones  exceeds  probability.

4.  Coincidence.  E.g.,  a  command  given  in  thought
may  be  obeyed,  because  by  chance,  or  for  some
reason,  experimenter  and  subject  think  of  the  same
thing.  In  telepathy  the  first  order  thought  of  is
nearly  always  that  the  right  arm  should  be  raised.
This  source  of  error  is  both  great  and  interesting.  It
has  lately  been  carefully  examined  by  a  member  of
the  American  branch  of  the  Society  for  Pyschical
Research,  C.  S.  Minot.  Thus  it  has  been  discovered
that  every  one  prefers  certain  figures,  &c,  which  recur
strikingly  often,  even  when  the  choice  is  left  open.
Now,  when  in  a  telepathic  experiment  one  person  is
to  divine  a  number  thought  of  by  another,  it  would
be  necessary  to  discover  if  they  prefer  the  same
figures,  if  they  have  the  same  "  number  habit."  This
must  also  be  weighed  in  experiments  with  cards,  in


ANIMAL  MAGNETISM,  ETC.


375


which  it  appears  to  me  the  ace  of  hearts  is  very  often
chosen.  It  is  evident  that  great  care  must  be  exer-
cised in  drawing  conclusions,  and  that  the  study  of
"  mysterious  "  phenomena  leads  to  the  recognition  of
important  laws.

5.  Hyperesthesia  of  the  subject's  organs  of  sense
often  allows  him  to  perceive  things  imperceptible  to
others.

6.  The  increased  power  of  drawing  conclusions,
which  I  have  spoken  of  before,  must  be  taken  into
consideration.

Miinsterberg  supposes  that  in  thought-transference
the  agent's  strong  concentration  of  thought  may
throw  him  into  a  hypnotic  state,  and  that  in  this
state  he  may  simply  tell  the  subject  what  he  is  think-
ing of,  without  remembering  it  afterwards.  I  have
myself  made  and  watched  numerous  experiments,
and  cannot  think  the  supposition  just.  Wernicke's
supposition  is  just  as  doubtful ;  he  thinks  that  different
thoughts  induce  different  effluvia  from  the  skin,  from
which  a  properly  trained  subject  can  discover  what
the  agent  is  thinking  about.

When  the  published  experiments  are  criticized  by
the  rules  given  above,  very  few  are  left  which  are
worthy  of  serious  consideration.  These  are  chiefly
the  experiments  in  thought-transference  of  Guthrie
and  Birchall,  published  by  the  Society  for  Psychical
Research.  I  could  discover  no  sources  of  error  in
them.  As  conscious  deception  is  excluded,  the
supposition  that  the  experiments  did  not  really  take
place  as  published  is  out  of  the  question.  However,
even  here  there  was  no  regular  registrar  of  the  pro-
ceedings ;  and  besides,  I  am  subjectively  convinced
that  some  sources  of  error  were  overlooked,  and  that
suggestion  [was  somehow  or  other  called  into  play.


376


HYPNOTISM.


Perhaps  somebody  else  may  be  able  to  discover  these.
In  any  case  the  members  of  the  society  are  too  scien-
tific and  too  honourable  not  to  recognize  sources  of
error  which  are  pointed  out.

There  is  nothing  to  be  said  against  the  present
examination  of  inexplicable  things.  Almost  all  great
steps  in  natural  science  have  been  made  by  some  one
who  had  the  courage  to  contest  existing  views,  in
spite  of  the  danger  of  looking  ridiculous.  Harvey
was  obliged  to  struggle  with  the  prejudices  of  his
colleagues  for  years  before  the  circulation  of  the
blood  was  accepted.  The  fall  of  meteors  was  long
denied.  Modern  anatomy  was  founded  by  Andreas
Vesalius,  who  fought  the  prejudices  of  his  time  often
by  improper  methods.  The  fact  that  a  thing  is
contrary  to  known  laws  ought  not  to  prevent  its
being  examined.  The  contradiction  is  often  merely
apparent,  and  even  the  laws  of  nature  change  from
day  to  day,  as  Virchow  has  said.  Theories  never
precede  facts ;  observation  first,  and  then  theory.
The  electric  current  does  not  contract  muscles  because
the  book  says  so  ;  the  book  says  so  because  the
current  causes  the  contraction.  As  Herbert  Spencer
explains,  experience  comes  first,  and  then  theory.

Everybody  may  not  care  to  approach  this  subject  ;
but  they  should  not  blame  others  for  their  unpreju-
diced investigations.  So  long  as  science  does  not
examine  everything,  practically  and  without  preju-
dice, the  great  delusions  of  which  animal  magnetism,
&c,  makes  use,  will  continue  to  exist.  When  care-
ful examination  has  shown  the  sources  of  error,
charlatanism  will  have  lost  its  chief  support.  The
indifference  of  science  has  always  been  the  mainstay
of  charlatanism. The  dread  that  many  people  have


CONCLUSION.


377


of  investigating  things  of  evil  reputation  is  the  chief
support  of  imposture  and  error,  and  yet  how  much
can  be  done  to  suppress  them  by  a  careful  investiga-
tion of  even  what  is  improbable.  The  real  enlighten-
ment of  the  people  can  only  be  attained  in  this  way.

It  is  incomprehensible  to  me  that  even  scientific
men  should  call  those  who  interest  themselves  in
hypnotism  marvel-mongers.  Any  one  who  examines
the  question  seriously  will  find,  on  the  contrary,  that
the  latest  hypnotic  experiments  explain  in  a  natural
way  much  that  has  been  called  strange  and  super-
natural. Stigmatization,  for  example,  and  automatic
writing,  which  seems  to  be  almost  unknown  in  most
scientific  circles,  and  for  this  reason,  and  for  want
of  scientific  examination,  is  a  powerful  support  to
spiritualism  and  superstition.  The  spiritualists  think
that  automatic  writing  proves  some  external  force,
because  a  work  showing  design,  and  independent  of
the  consciousness  of  the  writer,  can  only  be  produced
by  an  external  force  or  a  spirit.  But  thanks  to  the
investigations  of  Taine,  F.  Myers,  Gurney,  Pierre
Janet,  and  Max  Dessoir,  automatic  writing  has  now
received  another  explanation,  as  table-turning  did
through  Faraday.  It  is  the  same  with  many  other
phenomena  which  have  been  pressed  into  the  service
of  superstition.

Whoever  reads  the  writings  of  the  magnetic  healers
and  spiritualists  will  see  how  bitter  they  are  against
the  investigators  of  hypnotism,  and  how  angry  the
professional  magnetizers  become  about  suggestion,
which  takes  the  ground  from  under  their  feet  (Forel).
Truly  great  men  try  to  avoid  dogma  and  a  priori
conclusions,  in  spite  of  scientific  doubts.  If  they  can-
not examine  themselves,  they  yet  consider  a  scientific
examination,  even  of  the  improbable,  necessary.  An


378


HYPNOTISM.


example  which  Delbceuf  brings  forward  may  be
mentioned.  Darwin  once  wished,  it  is  said,  to  ex-
amine the  influence  of  music  on  the  growth  of  plants,
because  such  an  influence  had  been  talked  of  before
him,  and  he  therefore  made  some  one  play  the
bassoon  for  several  days,  close  to  some  planted  beans.
If  this  anecdote  is  not  true,  it  is  well  invented.  Ex-
amination will  conquer  superstition  sooner  than  an
a  priori  philosophy.  The  non-recognition  of  dogma
distinguishes  science  from  blind  faith,  but  to  say  a
fact  is  impossible  because  it  is  opposed  to  the  laws
of  nature  is  to  dogmatize.

We  should  be  careful,  besides,  not  to  make  the
mistake  of  claiming  supernatural  powers  for  ourselves
and  denying  them  to  others.  When — as  happened
to  me — an  otherwise  scientific  man,  X.,  of  Berlin,  said
that  the  subjects  of  Forel  and  Bernheim  were  im-
postors, without  having  seen  them,  and  without
offering  proof,  he  made  the  mistake  of  claiming  clair-
voyance for  himself,  though  he  denied  its  existence.
I  have  often  seen  such  self-contradictions.  Knowledge
of  the  laws  of  nature  is  still  in  its  infancy.  Have  the
elementary  mental  processes  yet  been  explained  ?
Has  any  one  ever  explained  how  an  ovum,  fertilized
but  soulless,  develops  into  a  being  with  a  soul  ?  Has
it  been  explained  how  the  brain  moves  the  muscles
by  means  of  the  nerves  ?  Do  we  know  why  an  apple
falls  to  the  ground  ?  The  most  elementary  processes
are  inexplicable  wherever  we  look,  and  most  people
only  do  not  think  them  inexplicable  because  they  see
them  every  day.  Some  one  has  justly  said  that
dreams,  as  well  as  hypnotism,  might  be  called  an
extravagant  fancy,  if  they  did  not  happen  every  day.

In  spite  of  the  progress  which  the  exact  sciences
have  made,  we  must  not  for  a  moment  forget  that  the


CONCLUSION.


379


inner  connection  between  the  body  and  the  mental
processes  is  utterly  unknown  to  us.  Under  these
circumstances  we  should  not  refuse  to  examine  the
apparently  inexplicable.  Let  us,  however,  impose
severe  conditions,  and  not  accept  any  facts  on
authority  without  proof.


INDICES.


i.


INDEX  OF  CONTENTS.

The  large  figures  point  to  the  most  important  paragraphs.


Academy,  Berlin,  59
„  Bavaria,  5
„ Paris,  11,  14,  215,

3^9,  371
Accommodation,  spasm  of,  90
Acne  pustules,  119
Acting,  135,  165,  278,  279
Activity,  mental,  58,  123,  160

etc., 174, 182, 198,  212,

375

Acts,  compelled,  155,  244
„ dynamogenetic,  270
„ habitual,  171,  285
„ impulsive,  156

.Esthesiogenesis,  367

Age,  41,  133,  134,  136

Agoraphobia  (dread  of  open
spaces),  58,  316

Agraphia  (inability  to  write),
131

Aissaoua,  32
Alcohol,  207,  371
Alcoholism,  41,  316,  332
Alert  stage,  49
Allochiria,  96
Allopathy,  328
Amaurosis,  98

Amnesia  (loss of  memory),
49,  50,  123  etc.,  129  etc.,


137,  139,  141,  142,  i43>  146,
147,  149,  160,  167,  201,  210,
213,  242,  244,  247,  251,  254,
264,  284,  285,  319,  335,  336,

339,  349,  35°,  352
Anaemia,  131

Anaesthesia  (loss  of  feeling),
98,  160,  281.  See  Anal-
gesia

Analgesia  (insensibility  to
pain),  45,  49,  75,  104,  105,
116,  237,  238,  279,  281,  294,
3i3,  329,330,  33i,  359.  See

>  Surgery

Anatomy,  296,  376

Anger,  106,  181

Animals,  experiments  with,  15,
213  etc.,  263,  359

Animal- tamer,  216

Antipathy,  162

Antipyrin,  300

Aperients,  109,  202

Aphasia  (loss  of  speech),  84,


131,  132,  144,  159,


See


Stammering,  Dumbness
Aphonia  (loss  of  voice,  not  to
be  confounded  with  loss  of
speech),  316
Apoplexy,  266,  318,  321


382


INDICES.


Appetite,  loss  of,  105,  316
Articulations,  rheumatism  of

the,  318
Associations,  54,  92,  103, 160,

164,  198,  254,268,  351.  See

Reproduction
Association,  fibres  of,  268

,,  of  ideas,  dreams

from,  195
Astrology,  4

Ataxy,  locomotor,  99,  100,  280,
294,  300,  318

Attention,  26,  27,  33,  40,  44,
45,  68,  165,  167,  194,  198,
203,  211,  226  etc.,  234,  235,
256,  238,  239,  264,  270

Attention,  expectant,  256

Authority,  222,  236,  295,  296,
378

Auto-hypnosis,  28,  127,  208,
216

Automatic  movements,  120,
149,  168,  183,  238,  239,  242,
246,  247,  264,  265,  284,  287,
291.  See  Continued  Move-
ments

Automatic  writing,  185,  247
etc.,  348,  35i,  377

Auto-somnambulism  (spon-
taneous somnambulism),
283. See  Somnambulism

Auto-suggestion,  58,  59,  94,
116,  117,  129,  190,  232,  306,
307,  316,  319,  320,  323,  332,

369,  372
Awakening,  146,  147,  151,  172,
176,  207,  278. See  Waking,
method  of


Balassa's  method  with  horses,
216

Baquet,  the,  5,  6,  362
Bathing,  treatment  by,  301
Belladonna,  299
Biceps,  the,  314
Biomagnetism. See  Magnet-
ism, animal
Bladder,  the,  1 12,  1 13


I  Blindness,  98

1  Blood,  circulation  of,  109,  376
,,  contained  in  brain,  270,
271

Bowels,  secretion  of,  112

„ action  of,  109,  112,

112,  140
Braid's method, see  Fixed

attention,  method  of
Burns,  wounds  from,  115,  116
Buddhists,  31


Canals,  semi-circular  (part  of
the  internal  ear,  injury  to
which  causes  abnormalities
of  movement),  215

Capsula  interna  (series  of
fibres  in  the  brain  which
conducts  the  voluntary
motor  impulses,  among
others,  from  the  cerebral
cortex  to  the  periphery),  266

Carbolic  acid,  300

Catalepsy,  7,  13,  14,  46,  67,  68,
71,  87,  88,  90,  108,  113,  166,
168  etc.)  188,  207,  2ii,  282,
293

Catalepsy,  stages  of,  49,  75
etc.,  214,  279,  280,  367

Cataleptoid  phenomena,  78,
216

Cataplexy  (paralysis  from
fright),  214

Catatony  (of  Kahlbaum),
(mental  disorder,  with  cata-
leptic phenomena  in  the
muscles),  206

Catholic  Church,  12,  117

Centres,  sub-cortical,  263,  270,
307

j  Changes, organic, 113  etc.,
327

Character,  56,  95,  171,  325
,, differences  of,  26,

43,  172,  325
Charcot,  school  of,  15,  16,  20,
75,  76,  79,  82,  83,  275,  276,
353,  365,  367


INDICES.


383


Charcot's  letter,  314,  315

„ stages,  49,  76  etc.,
189,  206,  269,  353,  365
Charite,  la,  hospital,  Berlin,  8
Children,  41,  223, 253,  288,  331,

358,  359
Chinese,  367

Chloroform,  35,  46,  207,  299,

31 1  >  33o?  33.6
Chorea  (St.  Vitus'  dance),  316,

33i

Clairvoyance,  8,  9,  72,  99,  163,
364,  365,  372,  373,  373

Clock,  mental  (Kopfuhr),  250

Clonus,  63

Coincidence,  374

Cold-water  cure,  294,  317

Collapse  (sudden  weakness  of
the  heart),  299,  328

Colour-blindness,  98

Colour,  sense  of,  98,  280,  281

Combined  methods,  34

Commissions,  6,  11,334,  364,
369,  372

Compulsion,  153,  154,  159,350

Conclusions,  false,  301,  302,

314,  315

Congress  at  Paris,  the,  19

Conjunctiva,  98

Consciousness,  95,  98,  124,
139,  171  etc.,  179,  183,  185,
193,  199;  2i8,  222,  239,  243,
258,  263  etc.)  266,  270,  284,
285,  332,  345,  346.  See
Dream-consciousness  and
Memory-
Consciousness,  disturbance  of,
167,  170,  204

Consciousness,  double,  128,
23d  etc,  348,  350

Consciousness,  dream,  228,
231  etc.,  237,  240,  254  etc.

Consciousness,  loss  of,  76,  78,
79,  167  etc.,  170,  203,  254,
336  etc.,  339,  341,  359

Consciousness,  primary,  240,
245  etc.

Consciousness,  secondary, 240,
241,  245,  246,  248  etc.,  253


Consciousness,  severance  of,
345  etc.  See  Double  con-
sciousness

Consciousness,  spheres  of,
245

Contact,  1,  2,  5,  29,  30,  67,
163

Contractures,  61,  63,  64,  68,
70  etc.,  76  etc.,  87,  88,  108,
166,  199,  209,  257,  276,  277,
279,  283,  294,  359,  367,  370

Convergence,  29,  72,  281

Corium,  117

Cortex,  cerebral,  108,  263  etc.,
272,  307

Credulity,  221  etc.,  236,  237

Crimes  against  hypnotic  sub-
jects, 334  etc.,  350

Crimes  by  hypnotic  subjects,
337  etc.,  350

Crises,  305

Cures,  2,  4,  5,  9,  118,  308,  323,
324,  367. See  Medicine

Cures,  miraculous,  291  etc.,
325

Cures,  sympathetic,  4


Damages,  legal,  342,  343
Daemon  of  Socrates,  255
Deaf-mutism,  324
Deafness,  98,  186,  305
Deep  stage,  49
Dehypnotization,  see  Waking
Delirium  tremens,  207
Dervishes,  32
Diseases,  nervous,  207

organic,  317,  318,

321

Disease,  Thomsen's,  207

„ mental,  3,  195,  202,

204,  205,  273,  274,  316,

3i7,  339>  34i
Disgust,  104
Dispolarization,  369
Distrust,  42,  321
Disturbances,  vaso-motor,  276,

281,  283. See  Flushing
Divining-rod,  the,  371


384  INL

Dogma,  172,  293,  377
Donatism,  49

Dreams,  37,  93,  124  etc.,  140,
147,  161,  176,  177,  194  ^-j
204,  240,  262,  303,  316,  333,
378.  See  Dream  conscious-
ness

Dreams  caused  by  stimulation

of  nerves,  194,  195,  196,  204
Drugs,  7,  292,  298,  299,  300,

307,  309,  3ii5  312,  317,  321,

326,  328,  355
Drugs,  action  of,  at  a  distance,

357,  Vjoetc.
Dumbness,  22,  209,  358,  370


Ears,  singing  in,  316
Echolalie,  64
Ecstasy,  32,  117,  127
Eczema,  318

Education,  172,  331,  332.  See

Training
Egyptians,  12,  291
Electricity,  31,  89,  263,  304,

312,  317,  321,  322,  328
Electro-biology,  13,  209
Enuresis  nocturna,  316
Epidermis,  119
Epilepsy,  207
Error,  346

Error,  sources  of,  373  etc.
Etats  mixtes,  78
Ether,  35,  207,  330
Exaggeration,  279
Exhibitions,  public,  55,  355,
356

Exophthalmus  (protrusion  of
the  eyeballs),  73

Expected  effects,  223  etc.,  229,
255,  368

Experimental  Psychology,  So-
ciety for,  19

Experimentum  mirabile,  213

Eyelids,  see  Eyes

Eye,  the,  22,  23,  28,  33,  50,  51,
52,  71  etc.,  76,  93*  95)  99)
100,  175,  228,  233,  279,  286,
287,  288


Eye,  the  evil,  66
Eyes,  watering  of,  54,  95,  112,
281


Face,  expression  of,  93,  106,
131,  149,  164,  181,  211,  278
Fainting, from  electrization,

305

Fakirs,  216,  360

Falsehood,  137,  348,  352

Faradization  (mode  of  elec-
trizing), 36,  76

Fascination,  23,  49,  64,  66,  72,
107,  215,  216,  264,  359

Fatigue,  22,  34,  36,  52,  73,  87,
104,  152

Fear,  108,  122,  158

Feelings,  55

,, common,  104  etc.

Feeling,  see  Anaesthesia,  Anal-
gesia, Organs  of  sense,  Sense
of  touch

Fever,  therapeutics  of,  355

Fixed  attention,  method  of,
2i,  28,  33)  34)  37)  4°,  45)  52,
54,  72,  73,  76,  90,  9h  IQ7,
112,  203,  264,  302,  306,  322,

363

Flexibilitas  cerea,  74  etc.
Fluid,  the  universal,  4,  30,  361
etc.

Flushing,  109,  140,  283.  See
Vaso-motor  disturbances

Force,  measurement  of  mus-
cular, 88

Fraud,  confession  of,  287
„ 47,  72,  99,  165,  183,
223,  260,  273  etc.,  353,  373

Freedom,  deprivation  of,  337

Friendship,  44


Galvanism,  76,  89,  294.  See

Electricity
Galvanometer,  the,  89
Gifts  made  in  hyphosis,  337
Globus  hystericus,  38
Goetz's  vocal  experiments,  80


INDICES,


385


'Graphology,  136
'Greeks,  291


Habit,  35,  59,  224,  286
Haemorrhage,  116,  117,  121,
129

Haemorrhage  from  uterus,  1 1 5,

226

Hallucinations,  92. See  Sense

deceptions
Haschisch,  207
Havre,  experiments  at,  363
Head, stimulus applied  to

crown  of,  86
Headache,  301,  306,  315,  319
Healing  force,  358,  359
Health,  injury  to,  336.  See

Hypnotism,  dangers  of
Hearing,  the,  29,  165
Heart,  action  of,  107  etc.,  130,

268,  281,  283
Heavenly  bodies,  361
Hemianesthesia  (loss  of  feel-
ing in  one  half  of  the  body),

116,275,368
Hemianopsy  (loss  of  half  the

field  of  view),  98
Hemi-hypnosis,  86,  368
Hemiplegia  (paralysis  of  one

side),  116,  215,  294
Heredity,  39
Hesychasts,  1
Hetero-suggestion,  58
Hibernation,  216
Hindoos,  216,  250,  367
Histology,  296

History  of  hypnotism,  1  etc.)
139,  292  etc.,  329,  380,  334,
367

Homoeopathy,  328
Hunger,  105,  130,  140
Hyperamia  (excess  of  blood),

see  Blood
Hyperaesthesia (increase  of

sensibility),  92,  99  etc.,  163,

313,  321
Hvperexcitability,  75  etc.,  279,
282


Hypermnesia  (increase  of
memory),  126,  127,  129

Hypnobat,  12

Hypnoscope,  the,  12,  38

Hypnoses,  examples  of,  21
etc.

,, classification  of,  49

etc.

Hypnoses,  groups  of,  49,  50,
91,  106,  124,  158,  170,  176,
177,  178, 192  etc.,  193,  209

Hypnosia,  207

Hypnosigenesis  (induction  of
hypnosis),  26,  27,  28  etc.,
157,  161,  202,  203,  209  etc.,
218,  219,  220,  226  etc.,  231,
232,  241,  261,  263,  29r,
308

Hypnosis,  auto-,  28,  126,  207,
216

Hypnosis,  active,  69

dangers  of,  44,  157,
197,  298  etc.,  326,  337  etc.,
353

Hypnosis,  fear  of,  326
„ hemi-,  86,  367
„ passive, 70,  107,
169,  201
Hypnosis,  psychology  of,  53,

122  etc.,  218  etc.
Hypnosis,  stages  of,  48  etc.,  91
„ tendency  to,  38  etc.,
48,  306

Hypnosis,  depth  of,  49^.,  91,
105,  107,  124,  159,  189,  192,
194,  310,  320,  342,  343,
362

Hypnotisme,  grand,  75

Hypnotisme,  petit,  75

Hypnotization, mental  methods
of,  26,  27  etc.  See  Hypno-
sigenesis

Hypnotization,  legal,  347

Hypotaxy,  49

Hysteria,  37,  206,  214,  224,
283,  286,  292,  304,  313  etc.,
315,  316,  367

Hysterical  attacks,  172,  304,
305,  319


26


386  INL

Hystero-epilepsy,  14,  73,  75,
77,  206,  304


Ideas,  54  etc.,  161,  221

Ideas,  association  of,  69,  125,

126,  160,  246,  248,  249,  250.

See  Association
Ideas,  change  of,  164,  210

„ dominating, 156,  251

etc.

Ideas,  insane,  316,  345
Illusions,  see  Delusions  of  the
senses

Imagination,  4,  6,  34,  65,  162,

214,  255,  291,  327,  346,  358
Imbecility,  205,  206
Imitation,  23,  24,  26,  64,  84,

187,  188,  208,  227,  264  etc.

See  Fascination
Imitation,  automatic,  267

„ of  sounds  (echolalie),

84,  85,  89,  102,  188,  366
Imposition  of  hands,  3
Impotence,  225
Indications*  260  etc.,  303
Influence,  personal,  1,  2,  5,

44,  163,  234,  358,  359,  360,

373

Inhibition,  256  etc.,  271,  272
Injury,  physical,  336
Insane,  the,  39,  97,  135,  255,

289,  345
Instincts,  55,  106,  253
Intelligence,  39,  40
Intoxication,  137
Ipecacuanha, 371
Itching,  55


Jogis,  1

Jugglers,  56,  57,  96,  156
Jumpers,  the,  208


Kali  chloricum,  death  from,
299

Katharina  Emmerich,  117


Lata,  208
I  Laughter,  70,  257,  285

Law,  natural,  357,  376,  378
„ 9,  208,  334  etc.,  353,  354
„ civil  and  criminal,  337,
342  etc.

Lethargic  stages.  49,  76  etc.*

82,  83,  90,  168,  169,  368
Lethargy,  32,  37,  168,  208

„ lucid,  78
Life-spirit  (spirit us  vi : talis),  4
Light,  the  od,  367
i  Localization,  temporal,  123
Louise  Lateau,  117,  355
Lourdes,  292,  309
Love,  44,  106,  162


Magic  cap,  97

Magi,  the,  1 ,  367

Magnet,  5,  35,  38,  308,  315,

355,  36o,  367  etc.,  372,  373
Magnetic  force,  5,  162,  291,

361,  372. See  Influence
Magnetic  passes,  see  Passes,

mesmeric
Magnetic  sense,  371

sleep,  10,  39,  46,

124,  126,  189,  292,  329,  330,

335,  336,  350,  362
Magnetisers,  6, 29, 64,  66,

i39> l63> 362, 377.  See

Mesmerists
Magnetism,  animal,  1  etc.,  163,

329,  33o,  336,  357  etc.,  367,

372,  376
Mania,  204,  205,  317
Massage,  294,  312,  317
Medicine,  5,  13  etc.,  151,  204,

221,  290  etc.,  354,  355.  369
Medulla  oblongata,  215
Melancholia  attonita,  205
316

Menstruation,  disturbances  of,

309,  315
Mesmerists,  4  etc.,  18,  30,  37,
38,  44,  96,  101,  124,  128,  139,
163,  165,  290,  331,  334,  358.
360,  361,  364,  365


Mesmeric  passes,  22,  29,  30,
31,  35,  37,  68,  75,  107,  210,
225,  227,  329,  358,  360

Mesmerism,  see  Magnetism
animal

Metabolism,  113,  114

Metalloscopy,  371

Metallo-therapeutics,  371

Meteors,  376

Methods,  dangers  of  various
curative,  299

Memory,  22,  25,  41,  48,  49,
124  etc.,  148,  149,  167,  180,
192,  210,  220,  230,  237  etc.,
238,239,  245,  249,  251,  253,
264,  268,  284,  286,  287

Memory,  delusions  of,  see  Sug-  I
gestions,  Retro-active

Memory,  loss  of  (amnesia),  48,
49>  io9,123  etc.,  129  etc.,  1385
139,  140,  141,  144,  146,  147,
149,  159,  167,  201,  210,  213,
242,  244,  247,  251,  254,  264,
284,  285,  319,  335,  336,  339,

349,  35i,  352
Mica  panis  pills,  109
Miryachit,  208
Miscarriage,  115,  335
Misdemeanours,  responsibility

for,  345
M is  ere  psychiquc,  22  7
Morality,  offences  against,  334

etc.

Morbus  hypnoticus,  207,  208
Morphia,  46,  204,  263,  298
Morphinism,  316
Motives,  152,  153, 154,  339,
343

Mouvement  psychique,  37

Movement,  capacity  for,  21,  22,
23,  27,  50,  60  etc.,  106  etc,
112,  131,  141,  170,  179,  181,
182,  192,  198,  199,  200,  205,
209,  210,  226  etc.,  256,  257,
260,  261,  279,  2S5,  288,  330

Movements  in  sleep,  199,  200
,,  continued, 69,  j

175,  176,  199

Movements,  instinctive,  244


*ES.  387

Movements,  trembling,  285

,, hesitating,  171,
175, 277

Muscle,  deltoid  (used  in
moving  the  arm),  84

Muscles,  antagonist  (muscles
with  opposed  functions,  i.e.,
flexor  as  opposed  to  ex-
tensor),

Muscles,  involuntary,  107  etc.
,, voluntary,  60  etc.,  see
Movements

Music,  influence  of,  66

Myelitis  (inflammation  of
spinal  cord),  225

Mysticism,  8,  1 1,  219,  224,  261,
308,  309,  320,  375,  377,  378


Nerves, stimulation of,  see

Senses,  stimulation  of
Nervous  diseases,  207
Nervousness,  39,  302  etc.  See

Neurasthenia
Nervus  facialis  (nerve  of  facial

movement),  76
Nervus  ulnaris  (one  of  the  chief

nerves  of  the  arm),  "76,  83
Nervus vagus (one of  the

nerves  of  the  stomach),  366
Neuralgia,  316

Neurasthenia,  38,  3 1 3,  3 1 5,  3 1 8
Neuro-muscular  excitability,

see  Hyperexcitability
Neuroses,  emotional  (neuroses
caused by  mental  excite-
ment), 316
Neuroses (nervous  diseases
without  anatomical  causes),
207,  313,  316,  317,  324,  327
Nitrite  of  amyl,  269
Number  habit,  the,  374
Numbers,  favourite,  374


Obedience,  automatic,  267
Objectivation des types,  see

Personality,  change  of
Obstetrics,  330


388  1NL

Od  light,  367
Omphalopsychics,  1
Operations, 115, 237.  See

Surgery-
Ophthalmoscope,  experiments

with,  269
Opium,  207,  371
Oracles,  364

Organic  diseases,  318,  319,  321
„ changes,  113  etc.,  327


Pains,  rheumatic,  315
„ ovarian,  313,  315

Pain,  loss  of,  see  Analgesia
J? °3>  93>  io5>  IQ65  i4°5  186,
205,  225,  237,  257,  279,  294,
315,322,  323,327.  See  Anal-
gesia

Papyrus,  the  Ebers,  3

Paralyses,  58,  59,  63,  87,  131,
140,  160,  205,  209,  224,  227,
257,  276,  277,  288,  294,
316

Paralyses  (paralyses  for  special

acts),  131
Paralyses,  reflex,  265

,, traumatic (i.e.,  1

caused  by  external  injury),

59

Paralysis  from  fright,  29,  214
„ progressive  (severe  j
form  of  mental  disease  with
decreasing  intelligence  and  j
abnormalities  of  conscious-
ness), 205

Paramnesia (false  memory),  j

130,  139
Paraplegia  (paralysis  of  both

sides  of  the  body),  202
Passes,  de-mesmerizing,  22
Passes,  mesmeric,  22,  29,  30,

37,  68,74,  I07,  211,  225,329,
358,  36o

Pathology,  331,  332
Percentage of  hypnotizable

persons,  39,  47
Perceptions,  230
Personality,  239


Personality,  change  of,  134,
etc.,  197

Perversity,  sexual,  316

Philosophy,  12,  272

Photographs,  experiments
with,  102,  103,  140,  158,  260

Phreno-hypnotism,  85,  86

Physiognomy,  see  Face,  ex-
pression of

Physiology,  14,  60  etc.,  221,
262  etc.

Plants,  growth  of,  216,  360

Points  de  repere,  see  Points  of
recognition

Points  of  recognition,  102,  103,
260

Poison,  364

Polarization,  369,  370

Polarity,  360

Precaution,  rules  of,  302  etc.

Prediction,  1,  130.  See  Clair-
voyance

Pressure,  sense  of,  100

Prism,  experiments  with,  280,
281

Probability,  374
Processes,  judicial,  350
Promises  to  pay,  337
Property,  337

Pruritus  cutaneous  nervosus

(nervous  tingling),  316
Psychical Research,  Society

for,  19,  321
Psychology,  19,  53,  221,  290,

298,  302,  303,  311,  325,  326,

328,  333
Psychology  of  hypnosis,  53,

122  etc.,  219  etc.
Psychological  Society,  the,  19
Pulse,  107  etc.,  250,  363
Punishment,  legal,  334  etc.
Pupils  of  eye,  91,  281


Quinine,  294


Railway  spine,  318


INDICES.


389


Rapport,  25,  83,  84,  118,  165,
166,  167,  192,  2ii,  213,  220,
233>  36i

Reaction,  time  of,  259,  260

Reason,  161

Reflexes,  37,63,  75  etc.,  80  etc.,
85,  89,  90  98,  112,  130,  166,
215,  265,  266

Reflexes,  mental,  80,  81

„ physical,  80,  81,  199,
266

Resistance,  151,  166,  171  etc.
Respiration,  107, 108,  in,
130,  250,  267,  279,  280,  370
Reverie,  193

Rigidity,  convulsive,  76,  79
Rules,  precautionary,  302  etc.


Saliva,  secretion  of,  in,  283
Salpetriere,  the,  29,  45,  116,

214,  309,  315
School,  anthropological,  341
,, classical,  341
„ of  Charcot,  14,  20,  75,
76,  77,  78,  80,  275,  276,  301,

314,  315
School  of  Nancy,  15,  20,  41,

47,  77,81,89,118, 275,  276,

303,  306,  310,  312
Schools,  use  of  hypnotism  in,

33i,  332
Sclerosis, multiple  (nervous

disease  with changes  in

brain  and  spinal  cord),  370
Secretion,  in,  112,  283
Secrets,  betrayal  of,  347,  348
Self-consciousness, 169,  192,

196,  198
Self-deception,  152,  153,  287,

338,  339
Self-judgment,  176,  177
Self-observation, 154,  155,

220

Self-suggestion,  see  Auto-sug-
gestion

Sense,  transposition  of,  7,  72,
100,  365  etc.,  373


Sense,  muscular,  31,  69,  87,

94,  99,  102,  166,  204
Sense,  incomplete  delusions  of,

95,  183  etc.,  368

Sense,  post-hypnotic  delusions
of,  150,  151,  160,  254,  255,
339

Sense,  negative  delusions  of,

96,  97,  184  etc.,  204,  209,
218,  220,  23-5  etc.,  247,  258

Sense,  organs  of,  51,  64,  91

etc.,  186,  220,  366
Sense,  stimulation  of,  32,  33

etc.,  177,  178,  195,  196,  199,

214,  215,  257,  263,  264,  272,

313

Sense,  delusions  of,  24,  91
etc.,  125,  161,  174,  177,  178,
181,  182,  183,  195,  196,  197,
207,  201,  211,  220,  225,  229
etc.,  241,  255,  256,  258,  279
etc.,  316,  327,  328.  See
Dream

Sex,  41

Sibyl,  364

Sighing,  52

Signals,  counting  of,  143,
249

Sight,  disorders  of,  316

Sleep,  29,33,  35,  45,51,71,  72,
90,  108,  126,  147,  161,  176,
192  etc.,  204  etc.,  214,  224,
231  etc.,  249,  306,  307,  309.
See  Dream  and  Dream-con-
sciousness

Sleepiness,  36,  192,  193

Sleeplessness,  224

Smell,  sense  of,  91,  93,  94,
212

Somnambulism,  7,  14,  49,  139,
157,  166,  178,260,207,  233,
240,  316,  338,  355,  364,
365

Somnambulists,  199
Somnolence,  49
Sorcerers,  2
Space,  sense  of,  100
Spasm of  accommodation,
69

7


390


INDICES.


Speculation,  223
Speech,  64,  182

„ abnormalities  of,  62
Spiritualism,  no,  127,  246, 255,
377

Spiritus  vitahs,  4
Spontaneity,  177,  178
Stage,  deep,  323
Stages,  lethargic,  49,  75  etc.,

82,  83,  90,  168,  169,  368
Stages, somnambulistic,  49,

75  etc.,  82,  85,  280,  368
Stages,  Gurney's,  139,  140

„ Charcot's,  49,  76  etc.,

189,  206,  269,  353,  365
Stammering,  58,  205,  225,  243,

316

Stars,  influence  of,  3

State,  while  obeying  post-
hypnotic suggestion,  144
etc.,  287  etc.,  291,  292

State,  normal,  128
„ primary,  146
„ secondary,  129,  146

States,  transitional,  51,  52,
175)  179  etc.,  219,  287,
288

States,  waking,  145,  150.  See
Suggestion  without  hypnosis

Statistics,  38,  48

Sternomastoid  (a  muscle
used  in  moving  the  head),
76

Stigmatization,  117,  377

Stomach,  pain  in,  315

Strychnine,  297,  371

Suggestion,  susceptibility  to,
54,  60,  63, 146  etc.,  175, 190,
205,  206,  208,  209,  227,  256,
279,  290,  306,  339,  342,  345,

347,  352

Suggestion,  10,  14,  15,  16,  26,
49,  50,  56,  267,  275,276,  293,
294,  309,  3io,  319,  335,  347,
3<;8,  362,  369,  370,  373,  376.
See  chapter  on  subject,  and
sub-divisions,  especially  in
chapter  on  symptoms

Suggestion,  deferred,  141,  250


Suggestion,  cancelling  of,  303
„ continuous,  140,
202

Suggestion  d*  attitude,  54,  180,
187

Suggestion,  direct,  56

,,  indirect,  56,  94,

128,  275,  276

Suggestion,  mental,  see  Tele-
pathy

Suggestion  without  hypnosis,
56,  138,  209  etc.,  229,  243,
255,  258,  259,  286

Suggestion,  hypnotic  or  intra-
hypnotic,  59

Suggestion,  post-hypnotic,  45,
59, 63>  134,  137, 139  etc.,  169,
172,  173,  183,  190,  207,  219,
220,  242  etc.,  279,  287,  306,
3i9,  33o,  336,  338  etc.,  347,
etc.

Suggestion,  post-hypnotic,  in

sleep,  196,  201,  202
Suggestion,  pre-hypnotic,  60
„  retro-active,  130,

137,  138,  345,  346
Suggestion,  intermediate,  177
„ law  of,  54
„  catalepsy  by,  see

Catalepsy
Suggestion, therapeutics  of,

see  Medicine
Suggestion,  method  of,  189,
190

Suggestion,  verbal,  59,  94,  166,

182,  293,  317
Suggestion,  repetition  of,  171,

172
Suicide,  337
Sulfonal,  300

Superstition,  333, 377,  378.  See

Mysticism
Surgery,  13,  14,  318,  329  etc.
Suspension, treatment  by,

300

Swallowing,  movement  of,
52

Sweat,  secretion  of,  itt,28i,
283


INDICES.


39 1


Symptoms,  objective,  86,  87,
107,  188,  189,  271  etc.  See
Fraud


Tabes  dorsalis  (locomotor
ataxy),  99,  100,  280,  294,
300,  318

Table-turning,  377

Talking  in  hypnosis,  182,  198,
200

Talking  in  sleep,  127,  200,
201

Taste,  sense  of,  93,  94
Teachers,  influence  of,  44
Tedium,  sleep  from,  203

„ movements  from,  281,
282

Telepathy,  2,  164,  357,  363,

364,  374,  375
Telephone,  the,  27
Temperature,  29,  109,  113, 140
„ sense  of,  29,  30,

93,  100,  225
Temple  sleep,  291
Tendons,  reflexes  of,  58,  76,  77.

See  Reflexes
Terminology,  25,  26,  27,  54,  55,

56

Testimony,  345  etc.

Theft,  45,  174

Theory,  218  etc.,  360,  361

Therapeutics,  see  Medicine

Thirst,  105,  140

Thought,  concentration  of,  56,

360,  363,  375
Thought-reading,  55,  56,  248,

363,  374
Thought-transference,  ^Tele-
pathy

Time,  estimate  of,  142,  143,
249  etc.

Tisza-Eslar  case,  the,  346
Training,  59,  77,  79,  95,  129,

139,  142,  181,  186,  234,  269,

338,  360,  372  etc.
Trance,  no,  127
Trance- waking,  89
Transfert,  368,  373,  374


Transitional  states,  36,  51,  52,

175,  179  etc.,  219,  287,  288
Treatment  by  baths,  312
Trust,  47,  321
Tuberculosis,  39


Urine,  112

Urticaria (nettle-rash),  119,
120


Vaccination,  294

Vasomotor  abnormalities  (vari-
ations in  quantity  of  blood
circulating  in  an  organ),  63,
109,  115,  160,  269,  276

Vasomotor  disturbances  in  the
brain,  269,  270

Veille  somnambulique,  147,
211

Vegetarians,  206
Vesication,  114,  118  etc.,  275
Vespasian,  2

Vessels,  109.  See  Vasomotor

disturbances
View,  field  of,  101
Visions  (sense  deceptions  of

sight),  53
Vivisection,  333
Vomiting,  104,  225


Waking, somnambulic,  147,
211

Waking,  35  etc.,  93,  125,  140,

148,  169,  208,  303,  304,  316
Warts,  3

Wheals,  119,  120,  121,  283
Will,  28,  56,  58,  62,  80,  87,  160,
170  etc.,  192,  193,  213,  242
etc.,  257,  263,  268,  275,  281,
i 283,  287,  311,  332,  337,  338,
346,  349,  363
Will,  freedom  of,  152  etc.,  160,

333.  337,  342,  35i
Will,  weakness  of,  40
Willing-game,  the,  55


392


INDICES.


Wills,  337,  353
Writer's  cramp,  316
Writing,  mediumistic,  246
„ automatic,  185,  246
£^.,348,351,377


Yawning,  208


Yogis,  1


Zoanthropia,  136
Zones  hypnoft -matrices,  36
Zones  hyftnogenes,  30,  46
Zoomagnetism,^  Magnetism,
animal


II.


INDEX  OF  NAMES.


I  shall  be  obliged  to  anybody  who  will  send  me  information  for  the
completion  of  the  following  short  biographical  notices.

A  single  date  in  the  index  means  the  year  in  which  the  author 's  work
011  hypnotism,  or  his  most  i??iportant  work,  appeared ;  two  dates  mean
the  times  of  his  birth  and  death.  When  no  date  is  added,  the  author's
work  has  almost  invariably  been  published  during  the  last  ten  years.  A
dagger  is  placed  after  the  name  when  the  person  in  question  is  dead.  The
large  figures  point  to  the  most  important  paragraphs.


d'Abundo,  doctor,  Naples,  100
Adamkiewicz, O., prof,  of

medicine,  Cracow,  15
Albertus  Magnus,  1 193-1280,

eminent  philosopher,  367
Algeri,  G.,  Italian  alienist,  348
Alliot,  French  doctor,  371
Aristotle,  384-322  B.C.  ;  Greek

philosopher,  psychologist,

natural  scientist,  203
Arndt, Rudolph, prof.;  alienist,

Greifswald,  131,  355
Ashburner,  John A.,  about

1834,  doctor,  London,  12
Auban,  1865,  French  doctor,

335

Aupepin,  Celicurre  de  1',  mag-
netizer,  118

Auvard,  obstetric  physician,
Paris,  331

Ave  -  Lallemant,  Friedrich,
1 88 1,  jurist,  Liibeck,  4,  8

Azam,  prof.,  surgeon,  Bor-
deaux, 13,  128,  329

Azoulay,  Ldon,  French  doctor,
260


Babinski,  neurologist,  Paris,
14,  37o

Baumler,  Ch.,  prof,  of  medi-
cine, Freiburg,  Bohemia,  15,

Baierlacher,  Eduard,  doctor,
Nuremberg,!  1889,  18,  322

Baillif,  L.  E.,  1868,  French
doctor,  46,  141

Bailly,  P.  R.,  1784,  5,  290

Balassa,  Constantin,  1828,
Austrian  cavalry  officer,  216

Ballet,  Gilbert,  prof.  agregt,
of  Paris,  French  neurologist,
alienist,  and  physician,  35,
207

Balzac,  Honore  de,  1 799-1 850,
famous  French  novelist,  19

Barbarin,  Chevalier  de,  1786,
Ostend,  292

Barety,  A.,  doctor,  Nice,  360

Barkworth,  Thomas,  Chigwell,
Essex,  239,  240

Barrett,  W.  F.,  prof,  of  experi-
mental physics,  Dublin,  367

Bartels, Ernst, prof., 18 12,


394


INDICES.


physiologist, Breslau,  10,
359

Barth,  Adolph,  aural  surgeon,

Berlin,  18
Barth,  George,  1852,  doctor

and magnetizer,  London,

in

Barth,  Henry,  doctor,  phy-
sician, Paris,  14

Bastian,  Adolf,  prof,  extra-
ordinary, Berlin,  founder  of
modern  ethnology,  director  1
of  the  ethnological  museum
at  Berlin,  2,  19,  29,  127,
208,  246

Bazin,  prof.,  1859,  Bordeaux,
alienist,  13

Beard,  George  Miller,  1839-
1882,  neurologist,  New
York,  17,  55,  208,  259

Beaunis,  prof,  of  physiology,
Nancy,  15,  88,  108, 109, 1 1 1,
118,  123,  143,  147,  148,  172,
177, 209, 211, 261,  283,

319

Belfiore,  Giulio,  1887,  doctor,

Naples,  158,  367,  368
Bellanger, Nicolas, 1854,  I

doctor,  Paris,  336
Belot,  Adolphe,  French  author,

l9

Benavente,  David,  doctor,
Santiago,  12

Benedikt,  Moriz,  prof,  extra-
ordinary and  neurologist,
Vienna,  15,  35,  126,  308,
337,  285

Bennett,  John,  1812-1875,
physiologist  and  physician,
Edinburgh,  268

Bentivegni,  Adolf  v.,  jurist,
Berlin,  19,  27,  59,  128,  145,
156,  221,  225,  231,  236,  252,
255,  259,  334,  337,  339,  340,
342,  343,  344,  345,  &c.

Berend,  i860,  doctor,  Berlin,

14

Berger,  Oskar,  prof,  extra-
ordinary, 1844- 1885,  neuro-


logist, Breslau,  15,  29,  46,
74,  84,  86,  87,  89,  90,  100,
105,  209,  265,  280,  294

Bergson,  H.,  Clermond-Fer-
rand,  France,  100

Berillon,  Edgar,  doctor,  Paris,
editor  of  the  Revue  de
VHyfinotisme, 16, 86,  95,

331,  332
Berjon,  French  doctor,  116,
117

Berkhan, Oswald,  doctor,

Brunswick,  17
Berna,  1837,  magnetizer,  Paris,

Bernheim,  prof,  of  medicine,
Nancy,  15,  17,  27,  28,  33,
34,  39,  46,  47,  49>  5°,  67,  69,
82,  107,  138,  139,  168,  169,
192,  209,  221,  234,  246,  267,
270,  271,280,281,290,  294,
317,  318,  321,  222,  346,  373,
378

Bert,  Paul,  1830,  1886,  French
physiologist  and  politician,
31

Bertrand,  Alexandre,  1823,
doctor,  Paris,  10,  46, 96, 130,
165,  188,  234,  302

Bianchi,  Leonardo,  neuro-
logist, Naples,  369

Bicker,  Georg,  1787,  doctor,
Bremen,  8

Billroth,  Theodor,  prof.,  emi-
nent surgeon,  Vienna,  300

Binet,  Alfred,  prof.,  psycho-
logist,  Paris,  14,  28,  85,
102,  103,  118,  131,  184,  230,
235,  280,  281,  368,  369

Binswanger,  Otto,  prof,  extra-
ordinary and  alienist,  Jena,
15,  158,  190,  301,  302,  321

Birchall,  James,  secretary  of
the  Literary  and  Philo-
sophical Society  of  Liver-
pool, 364,  375

Bleuler,  Karl,  alienist  and
neurologist,  director  of  the
Rheinau Nursing  Institu-


INDICES.


39$


tion,  Zurich,  18,  61,  125,  172,
220

Blum,  prof,  of  philosophy  at
the  Lyceum  of  St.  Omer,  332

Bockmann,  Johann  Lorenz,
1787,  doctor,  Carlsruhe,  8

Bollert,  Theodor,f  1889,  hyp-
notizer,  Charlottenburg,  356

Bonier,  Paul,  1829 -1885,
doctor,  medical  author,  and
hygienist,  Berlin,  15

Bonniot,  Paul  de,  orthodox-
Catholic  author,  57

Borel,  Belgian  doctor,  73,  98

Born,  G.,  prof,  extraordinary
and  anatomist,  Breslau,  80,
89,  129

Bottey,  Ferdinand,  doctor,
Paris,  38,  47,  in,  270

Bouchut,  Ernest,  1875,  erQi-
nent  doctor  for  diseases  of
children,  Paris,  269

Bourdon,  doctor,  Meru  (Oise,
France),  326

Bourneville,  neurologist  and
alienist,  Paris,  14

Bourru,  prof,  of  the  naval
school  of  medicine,  physi-
cian, Rochefort,  116,  371

Boursier,  A.,  doctor,  Bor-
deaux, 330

Braid,  James,  doctor,  Man-
chester, 1795-1860,  12,  13,
26,  28,  33,  34,41,54,71,72,
79,  85,  86,  88,  92,  100,  101,
107,  108,  128,  180,  192,  209,
220,  225,  268,  293,  329,364,
366  {see  method  of  fixed
attention)

Brandis,  Joachim  Dietrich,
1 762-1 845,  prof.,  doctor  and
court  physician  in  ordinary
at  Copenhagen,  201

Bremaud,  French  naval  doctor,
Brest,  41,  64,  107

Briand,  alienist,  Paris,  115

Brierre  de  Boismont,  Alex-
andre, 1 798-1 88 1,  eminent
alienist,  Paris,  202,  347


Broca,  Paul,  1824- 1860,  emi-
nent surgeon  and  physio-
logist, Paris,  13

Brock,  H.,  doctor,  Berlin,  113

Broquier,  1853,  surgeon,  Mar-
seilles, 335

Brouardel,  prof,  (leader  in
medical  jurisprudence),
Paris,  336,  371

Brown,  Thomas,  1 778-1 820,
Scotch  physiologist,  54

Brown-Sequard,  prof.,  physio-
logist, Paris,  270

Briigelmann,  doctor,  Pader-
born,  18

Brugia,  prof.,  alienist,  Lucca,
Italy,  40

Brullard,  French  doctor,  192

Bubnoff,  N.,  1 881,  Breslau,  263

Budge,  Julius,  1885,  prof.,
anatomist  and  physiologist,
Greifswald,f  281

Burckhardt,  G.,  director  of  the
Maison  de  Sante,  of  Prefar-
gier  (Switzerland),  316

Burdach,  Carl  Friedrich,
1 776-1 847,  prof.,  Konigs-
berg,  celebrated  anatomist
and  physiologist,  198

Burdin,  junior,  1837,  French
doctor,  member  of  the
Academy  of  Medicine,  11

Burot,  prof,  of  the  medical
school  at  Rochefort,  111,
116,  371

Burq  (also  written  Burcq),
1 823-1 884,  inventor  of  metal-
lotherapie,  371

Cagliostro,  Count  Alexander
de,  1 743- 1 795  ;  well-known
adventurer,  wonder-worker,
and  spirit-seer,  1

Campili,  Giulio,  Italian  jurist,
290

Cappie,  James, M.D.,  1886,

England,  270
Carlsen,  Danish  doctor,  16
Carnochan,  M.,  Governor  in


396


INDICES.


Cambridge,  Massachusetts,
U.S.A.,  99
Carpenter, William,  1813-
1885,  physiologist,  London,

13,  101,  no,  164,  224,  225,
269

Carus,  Carl  Gustav,  eminent
doctor,  philosopher,  and
painter,  12

Casper,  Johann  Ludwig,  1796-
1864,  prof.  in  Berlin,
authority  on  medical  juris-
prudence, 167

Catlow,  English  magnetizer,
about  1845,  31

Celsus,  Roman  savant  and
physician  under  Augustus,
21

Chalande,  doctor,  Toulouse,  85
Chambard, French  alienist,
30,  35

Charcot,  Jean  Martin,  prof,  in
Paris,  eminent  neurologist,

14,  15,  16,  48,49,  59,  63,  75,
76,  77,  78,  79.  80,81,82,  83,
84,  86,  89,  90,  168,  180,  181,
189,  206,  207,  269,  275,  276,
277,  279,  280,  314,  315,  367
(see  stages  and  school  of
Charcot)

Charpentier,  prof,  of  physics,

Nancy,  280
Charpignon,  181 5-1886,  doc-
tor, Orleans,  96,  202,  334
Chazarain,  doctor,  Paris,  360
Chevreul.f 1889,  eminent

French  chemist  more  than

one  hundred  years  old,  55
Chiltoff,  doctor,  Charkow,  316
Clairon, Claire  Hippolyte,

1723-1803,  celebrated

French  actress,  135
Claretie, French  romance

writer,  19
Cloquet,  Jules,  1829,  surgeon

and  prof.,  Paris,  329
Cohn,  Hermann,  1880,  prof.

extraordinary,  oculist,  Bres-

lau,  90,  98


Collineau,  French  author,  332
Copin,  Paul,  French  author,
222

Corval,  v.,  doctor,  Baden-
Baden,  18,  316,  321,  326,
332

Cory,  Charles  B.,  Boston,  184

Coste,  1853,  director  at  the
school  of  medicine  at  Mar-
seilles, 335

Coste  de  Lagrave,  French
doctor,  46

Creutzfeldt,  Otto,  doctor,  Har-
burg,  17

Cullerre,  A.,  French  alienist,
135,  156,  222,  268

Cumberland, Stuart,  "thought-
reader,"  55

Cuvier,  1769-1832,  eminent
naturalist  and  zoologist,
Paris,  9

Cuvillers,  Henin  de,  12

Czermak,  Johann  Nepomuk,
1828-1873,  physiologist  and
laryngologist,  Leipzig,  15,
214

Danilewsky,  prof,  physiolo-
gist, Charkow,  214,  215

Danillo,  S.  N.,  Russian  lec-
turer, 352

Darling,  1850,  13

Darwin,  Charles,  1 809-1 882,
celebrated  naturalist,  foun-
der of  the  doctrine  of  evolu-
tion, 378

Debove,  prof,  agrege,  physician,
Paris,  105

Dechambre,  Amede'e,  1812-
1886,  medical  author  and
doctor,  Paris,  7

Decle,  Ch.,f  1888,  French
engineer,  360

Decroix,  French  military  vete-
rinary-surgeon, 331

Deimann,  J.  R.,  about  1775,
doctor,  Amsterdam,  367

Dekhtereff,  hygienist,  St.
Petersburg,  331


INDICES.


397


Delacroix,  Frederic,  member
of  the  Cour  d'Appel,  Besan-
9on>  353

Delboeuf,  J.,  prof,  at  Liege,
psychologist,  16,  47,  49,  50,
52,  82,  85, 118,  125,  130,  139,
143,  144,  147,  188,  189,  195,
212,  241,  283,  338,  350,  356,
378

Deleuze,  1 753—1835,  naturalist,

Paris,  10,  96,  128
Delphin,  G.,  prof,  of  Arabic

at  Oran,  Algeria,  31
Demarquay,  Jean,  181 1— 1875,

French surgeon,  14,  111,

206,  347

Descourtis,  French  doctor,  64,
86

Desjardins,  Arthur,  French
lawyer,  340

Deslon  (also  d'Eslon),
Charles,!  1786,  physician
in  ordinary  to  the  Count  of
Artois,  doctor,  Paris,  6,  291,

305>  334
Despine,  Prosper,  alienist  and
psychologist,  Marseilles,  15,

264,  335

Dessoir,  Max,  psychologist,
Berlin,  III.,  IV.,  "12,  13,  18,
19,  45,  5o,  5i,  69,  79,  81,
123,  128,  132, 185,  228,  229,
239,  240,  241,  246,  259,  267,
272,  286,  333,  346,  348,  351,
364,  377

Devergie,  Marie  Guillaume
Alphonse,  1798-1879,  emi-
nent authority  on  medical
jurisprudence,  Paris,  335

Dods,  J.  B.,  13

Donato,  Belgian  magnetizer,

64,  356
Doolittle,  246

Dreher,  formerly  lecturer  on
philosophy  at  Halle,  18

Drosdow,  W.  J.,  1881,  lecturer
at St.  Petersburg,  doctor,

207,  306

Drzewiecki,  Stephan,  teacher


of  mechanics,  St.  Peters-
burg, 41,  100

Dubois,  Frederic,  Amiens,
member  of  the  academy
of  medicine,  doctor,  1 1

Duchenne,  1806-1875,  French
neurologist  in  Boulogne  and
Paris,  founder  of  treatment
by  faradization,  76

Dufay,  doctor,  Blois,  France,
208

Dufour,  alienist  and  head  phy-
sician at  the  asylum  of  St.
Robert  (Isere),  316

Dujardin-Beaumetz,  doctor,
physician,  and  medical
author,  Paris,  371

Dumas,  Alexandre,  the  elder,
1803-1870,  French  novelist,
19

Dumesnil,  1711-1802,  cele-
brated French  actress,  135

Dumont,  1882,  director  of  the
laboratory  at  Nancy,  15

Dumontpallier,  Amedee,  phy-
sician, Paris,  15,  78,  79,  86,
95,  109,  143,  206

Duplouy,  surgeon  and  head
physician  at  the  military
hospital  at  Rochefort,  371

Dupotet,  see  Du  Potet

Duprel,  see  Du  Prel

Durand  de  Gros  (Philips),
French  doctor,  exiled  by
Napoleon  III.,  13,  134,  178,
259

Durville,  H.,  magnetizer,
Paris,  360

Eeden,  F.  van,  doctor,  Am-
sterdam, 16,  35

Elliotson,  John,  1788-1863,
eminent  London  physician,
12,  329

Ennemoser,  Joseph,  1787—
1854,  doctor  and  professor
in  Bonn  and  Munich,  11

Epheyre  (pseudonym  of  a
great  man  of  science),  19


398


INDICES.


Erb,  W.,  prof,,  Heidelberg,
eminent  neurologist,  63

Erdmann,  1852,  prof.,  Halle,
psychologist,  204

Eschemayer,  Karl  August
von,  1768  — 1852,  philoso-
pher, doctor,  alienist,  prof,
of  Tubingen,  9,  250

Esdaile,  about  1840,  surgeon
at  Calcutta,  329

Eslon,  d',  see  Deslon

Esquirol,  Jean,  1772-1840,
eminent  alienist,  Paris,  202

Eulenburg,  Albert,  prof.,  lec-
turer in  Berlin,  neurologist,
15.  31

Ewald,  K.  A.,  prof,  extraor-
dinary, and  physician,  Ber-
lin, 4o,47,  72,  199,  295,  297,
298,  301,  311,  312,  315

Exner,  Siegm.,  prof,  extraor-
dinary and  physiologist,
Vienna,  197


Fanton,  doctor,  London,  13

Faraday,  179 1— 1867,  eminent
natural  philosopher,  377

Faria,  Abbe  de,  theologist  and
philosopher,  ex-prof.  Portu-
guese, lived  in  Goa  and
Paris,  10,  12,  28

Fechner,  Gustav,  1 801-1887,
eminent  physicist  and  psy-
chologist, 226

Fere,  Ch.,  neurologist  and
physician,  Paris,  14,  28,  85,
103,  118,  131,  184,  202,  230,
235,  280,  281,  368,  369

Ferrari,  Henri,  Paris,  136

Ferrier,  David, eminent  neuro-
logist, London,  268

Ferroni,  doctor,  Vienna,  165

Feuchtersleben,  Ernst,  Frei-
herr  v.,  1 806-1 849,  doctor
in  Vienna,  296

Figuier,  Louis,  French  author,
3i

Fillassier,  1832,  105,  331


Fischer,  Engelbert  Lorenz,
1883,  Wiirzburg,  1,  17,
216

Fischer,  Fr.,  1839,  prof.,  Basle,
12

Fischer,  P.,  doctor,  Cottbus,
299

Flourens,  Pierre,  1 794-1 867,
physiologist,  Paris,  266

Fludd,  Robert,!  1637,  doctor,
mystic,  London,  360

Focachon,  apothecary,
Charmes,  118

Foissac,  P.,  1825,  doctor,
Paris,  11

Follin,  E.,  i860,  French  sur-
geon, 14

Fontan,  J.,  1887,  French  naval
doctor,  Toulon,  49,  174

Fonvielle,  W.  de,  French
author,  164

Forbes,  Henry  O.,  1886,  na-
turalist, zoologist,  traveller,
Aberdeen,  208

Forel,  August,  prof.,  alienist,
psychologist,  histologist,
Zurich,  iii,  iv,  17,  18,  19,
27,  33,  34,  35>  39,  40,  46,47,
48,49,  82,109,119, 120,  121,
131,  139,  144,  149,  150,  153,
155,  167,  171,  174,  189,  192,
197,  209,  216,  222,  224,  226,
232,  234, 264,  273,  294,  297,
302,  306,  307,  315,  316,  317,
320,  322,  325,  330,  331,  332,
333,  334,  339,  346,  350,  353,
371,377,  378

Forster,  Richard,  prof.,  ocu-
list, Breslau,  269

Fort,  le,  surgeon,  Paris,  330

Foureaux,  lawyer,  Charmes,
338

Frankel,  Danish  doctor,  16
Frankel,  Moritz,  doctor,  Des-
sau, 17

Franck,  membre  de  VJnstitut.
338

Frank,  doctor,  alienist,  Zurich,
131


INDICES.


399


Freud,  Siegm.,  neurologist,
doctor,  Vienna,  18,  206

Frey,  doctor,  Vienna,  18

Freyer,  Moritz,  district  medi-
cal officer,  Darkehmen,  331

Friedberg,  Hermann,  18 17—
1884,  prof,  extraordinary  at
Breslau,  authority  in  medi-
cal jurisprudence,  294,  353

Friedemann,  Julius,  doctor,
Copenick,  108,  319

Gall,  Franz  Joseph,  1758— 1828,
doctor,  Vienna,  later  Paris  ;
eminent  anatomist  and  phy-
siologist, founder  of  phreno-
logy, 85

Gascard,  doctor,  Paris,  115

Gassner,  Joh.  Jos.,  1 727-1 779,  1
Catholic  priest,  well-known  j
exorcist  in  Regensburg,  Ell-
wang,  &c,  291,  292

Ge'lineau,  French  doctor,  1880,
207

Gessmanri,  G.,  Vienna,  38
Gibert,  doctor,  Havre,  363
Gigot-Suard, Jaques,  i860,
dermatologist,  balneologist,
doctor at Cauterets,  Hautes
Pyrenees,  29
Gilles  de  la  Tourette,  neurolo-
gist, assistant  of  Charcot,
Paris,  14,  63,  78,  84,  301,

334,  337,  338,  353
Girard-Teulon, 18 16  -  1887,
oculist,  Paris,  14,  111,  206,
347

Gley,  Eugene,  physiologist,
Paris,  55

Gmelin,  Eberhard,  1753-1809,
physicist,  Heilbronn,  8

Godenius,  Rudolph,  1572-
1621,  doctor,  professor  of
physics,  Marburg,  4

Goler  v.  Ravensburg,  art  his-
torian, Berlin,  362,  374

Gorres,  Jak.  Jos.  v.,  1776—
1848,  prof.,  Munich,  writer
on  mystical  subjects,  216


Goethe,  Joh.  Wolfgang  v.,
1 749- 1 832,  212

Goltdammer,  Ober-  Tribunals-
rath,  336,  350

Goltz,  prof.,  Strassburg,  phy-
siologist, 80

Grasset,  prof.,  Montpellier,
neurologist  and  pharmaco-
logist, 38,  207,  323,  353

Gratiolet,  Louis  Pierre,  181 5—
1865,  doctor  and  zoologist,
comparative  anatomist,
Paris,  180

Greatrakes,  Valentine,  about
1770,  "healer,"  Ireland,  291

Griesinger,  Wilhelm,  18 17-
1868,  alienist  and  physician,
Berlin,  202,  206

Grimes,  1848,  New  England,
U.S.A.,  13

Grocco,  1882,  Italian  doctor,
371

Griitzner,  P.,  prof.,  Tubingen,
physiologist,  lecturer  at
Breslau  in  1880,  86

Gscheidlen,  R.,  1842-1889,
prof,  extraordinary  at  Bres-
lau, hygienist,  chemist,  46

Guerineau,  i860,  doctor,  Poi-
tiers, 14

Guermonprez,  prof.,  doctor,
Lille,  37

Giirtler,  1880,  doctor,  Sagan,
113

Guinon,  neurologist,  Paris,
304

Gurney,  Edmund,  1 847-1 888,
psychologist,  secretary  of
the  Society  for  Psychical
Research,  London,  17,  49,
72,  81,  99,  125,  139,  142,
143,  144,  147,  148,  149,  150
248,  250,  284,  364,  377

Guthrie,  Malcolm,  merchant,
Liverpool,  363,  364,  375

Guttmann,  S.,  doctor,  Berlin,
295

Flack  Tuke,  see  Tuke


400


INDICES.


Hahnle,  Karl,  doctor,  Reut-
lingen,  Wiirtemberg,  42

Hall,  Stanley,  prof,  of  Univer-
sity at  Clark,  United  States,
eminent  physiologist  and
psychologist,  260

Haller,  Albrecht  v,  1708-
1777,  prof,  of  anatomy  at
Bern  and  Gottingen,  361

Hammond,  prof.,  neurologist
and  alienist,  New  York,  208

Hansen,  Danish  magnetizer,
15,  39>  126,  304

Harting,  1882,  prof,  at  Utrecht,
215

Hartmann,  Eduard  v.,  well-
known  philosopher,  Gross-
Lichterfelde,  near  Berlin,
IV.,  231,  255,  258,  361,  364

Harvey,  William,  1 578-1658,
doctor  and  physiologist,
London,  376

Heerwagen,  Friedrich,  Dor-
pat,  202

Heidenhain,  August,  doctor,
Steglitz,  220

Heidenhain,  R.,  prof,  at  Bres-
lau,  eminent  physiologist,
15,  29,  45,  64,  67,  69,  72,  75,
79,  80,  81,82,84,85,86,  89,
90,  in,  112,  125,  209,  257,
262,  263,  264,  267,  269,  287,
356,  366

Heineken,  Joh.,  1761-1851,
doctor,  Bremen,  8

Hell,  Maximilian,  Jesuit  priest,
astronomer,  360,  367

Hellich,  Prague,  114

Hellwald,  Friedr.  v.,  author,
Tolz,  Bayern,  19,  32,  216,
329

Helmont,  Joh.  Baptist  van,
1 577- 1644,  celebrated  doc-
tor of  Amsterdam  and  Brus-
sels, 4,  367  _

Hdment,  Felix,  membre  du
Conseil,  superieur  de  l' instruc-
tion publique,  322

Henrijean,  surgeon,  Liege,  118


Hensler,  Philipp  Ignaz,  1795-
186 1,  prof.,  Wiirzburg,  phy-
siologist, 11

HeViart,  1865,  French  doctor,
335

Hericourt,  J.,  Paris,  136
Herodotus,  484-424  B.C., Greek

historian,  136
Herrero,  Abdon-Sanchez,  prof.

of  medicine,  Valladolid,  31;,

46

Hervas,  Sancha,  bishop,  Ma-
drid, 117

Llervey,  195

Herzog,  1853,  13

Hess,  Julius,neurologist,  Ham-
burg, 18

Heubel,  Em.,  1877,  lecturer,
Kiew,  214

Heyfelder,  Johann,  1798-1869,
surgeon  and  medical  author,
Petersburg,  14

Hildebrandt,  Eduard,  216

Hippocrates,  460-364  B.C.,
"  The  Father  of  Medicine,"
355

Hirschel,  Bernhard,  1840,  doc-
tor, Dresden,  11

Hirt,  prof,  extraordinary,  Bres-
lau,  neurologist,  18,  31,  273,

316,317
Hoctes,  136

Hosslin,  v.,  doctor,  Neuwit-
telsbach,  near  Munich,  18

Hohenlohe,  Prince,  1821,
Catholic  priest,  Bavaria,
292

Horsley, Victor,  surgeon,  Lon-
don, 108

Hublier,  1839,  doctor,  Bor-
beaux,  11

Hue,  Gabriel,  1813-1860,
French  missionary,  32

Hiickel,  A.,  doctor,  lecturer,
Tubingen,  18,  81

Hufeland,  Christoph  Wilhelm,
1762- 1836,  prof.,  Berlin,
eminent  doctor,  9

Humboldt,  Alexander  v., 1769-


INDICES.


1859,  celebrated  naturalist,
Paris,  Berlin,  361

Hunter,  John,  1728-1793,  emi-
nent English  surgeon  and
anatomist,  291

Husson,  Henri  Marie,  1831,
doctor,  Paris,  11,  189

Hytten,  137


Jacolliot,  Louis,  French  travel-
ler, writer  on  occultism  and
student  of  Sanscrit,  216

Jager,  Gustav,  zoologist,  Stutt-
gart, 375

James,  Constantin,  French
doctor,  309

James,  William,  prof.,  Cam-
bridge, U.S.A.,  99,  260

Janet,  Jules,  78

Janet,  Paul,  philosophical
writer,  membre  de  PInstitut,
Paris,  54

Janet,  Pierre,  psychologist,  pro-
fessor at  H  avre,  125,139,142,
173,  176,  185,  206,  227,  239^
248,  283,  284,  337,  363,  377

Jendrdssik,Ernst,  doctor,Buda-
Pesth,  32,  84,  104,  115,  116,
140,  188,  268

Jensen,  Julius,  alienist,  Char-
lottenburg,  206

Joachim,  Heinrich,  doctor,
Berlin,  3

Jobart,  293

Jorg, Joh., 1 779-1856,  prof.

obstetrician,  Leipzig,  330
Joly,  doctor,  London,  13
Johannessen,  Danish  doctor,

16

Jong,  de,  Dutch  doctor,  16,

316,331
Jussieu,  Antoine  Laurent,

1 748-1 836,  prof.,  physician,

botanist,  Paris,  6


Kaan, Hans, 1885,  doctor,
Graz,  269


Kant,  Immanuel,  1724-1808,
greatest  German  philo-
sopher, 197,  222

Kayser,  Richard,  1880,  doctor,
Breslau,  86

Kerner,  Justinus,  1786-1862,
lyric  poet,  doctor,  Weins-
berg,  5,  9

Kiaro,  doctor,  Poitiers,  13

Kieser,  Dietrich  Georg,  1779-
1862,  prof.,  alienist,  Jena,  8,
334

Kiesewetter,  historian,  author,
Meiningen,  1

Kircher,  Athanasius,  1601-
1680,  Jesuit  priest,  Egypto-
logist, 213,  214,  367

Kluge,  Karl,  1 782-1 844,  doc-
tor, prof.,  Berlin,  8,  51,  128,

I39»  293*  364
Koberlin,  Hermann,  alienist,

Erlangen,  18
Konigshofer,  oculist,  Stuttgart,

98

Konrad,  Eugen,  alienist,  Her-
mannstadt,  295
j  Koreff, David  Ferdinand,
j 1783-1851,  eminent  doctor,
Berlin,  Paris,  9
Krafft-Ebing,  R.  v.,  prof,  at
Vienna,  eminent  alienist  and
student  of  medical  juris-
prudence, 18, 19,  63,  93,
109,  112,  113,  115,  136,  139,
140,  169,  252,  253,  255,  273,
276,  316,  317,  318,  324,  326,
328,  333,  339
1  Krakauer,  aurist,  Berlin,  305
!  Kron,  doctor,  neurologist,  Ber-
! lin,  51,  274
Kussmaul,  former  prof,  and
physician,  Strassburg,  now
Pleidelburg,  131


Laborde,  French  doctor,  31
Ladame,  lecturer,  neurologist,

Geneva,  15,  316,  332,  336,

353


402


INDICES.


Lafforgue,  French  doctor,  336
Lafontaine,  Ch.,  French  mag-

netizer,  12,  37,  331
Landau,  Leopold,  gynaecolo-
gist and  obstetrician,  Berlin,

3^-3  .  .

Landois,  prof.,  physiologist,
Greifswald,  264

Landouzy,  prof,  agre'ge',  phy-
sician, Paris,  35

Langley,  J.  N.,  physiologist,
Cambridge,  19

Lasegue,  Ch.,  1816-1883,  phy-
sician, Paris,  14,  33

Lanfenauer,  prof.,  Buda-Pesth,
alienist,  371

Laurent,  Emile,  doctor,  Paris,
348

Lausanne,  1819,  magnetizer,
293

Lavater,  Joh.  Casp.,  1741-
1801,  theologian  and  phy-
siognomist, Zurich,  8

Laverdant,  286

Laycock,  i860,  prof,  physician,
psychologist,  Edinburgh,  13
Leclerc,  French  lawyer,  332
Lefebvre,  Ferd.,  prof.,  Lowen,

pathologist,  117
Lefort,  surgeon,  Paris,  330
Leixner,  O.  v.,  author,  Gross-
Lichterfelde, near  Berlin,
195,  262
Leonard,  1834,  163
Lepine,  R.,  prof.,  Lyons,  phy-
sician, 86
Levillain,  doctor,  Paris,  33
Levy,  E.,  doctor,  Nancy,  209
Lewes,  G.  H.,  eminent  psy-
chologist, philosopher,  and
author,  London,  81
Liebeault,  doctor,  Nancy,  14,
15,  26,  28,  34,  39,  49,  50,
69,  91,  115,  139,  158,  192,
201,  216,  232,  234,  246,  259,
290,293,294,3o7,33i»  334,
335,  358,  359
Liegeois,  lawyer,  prof.,  Nancy,
15,  27,  143,  146,  158,  174,


209,  211,  334,  335,336,  337,
35i

Lilienthal,  C.  v.,  prof.,  Mar-
burg, lawyer,  18,  334,  341,
346,  347,  349

Liman,  K.,  prof,  extraordinary
at  Berlin,  student  of  medi-
cal jurisprudence,  167,  283,
287

Lipp,  prof,  extraordinary  at
Graz,  dermatologist,  116

Lisfranc,  Jaques,  1 790-1 847,
eminent  surgeon,  Paris,  329

Little,  American  doctor,  98

Lloyd-Tuckey,  doctor,  London,
3i8

Lober,  1 849-1 888,  prof.  agreg6>
physician,  Lille,  63

Locke,  John,  1632-1704,  emi-
nent philosopher,  252

Lombroso,  Cesare,  prof., Turin,
alienist,  anthropologist,  136,
348,  369

Londe,  chemist,  assistant  to
Charcot,  no

Lotze,  Rudolph  Hermann,
1817-1881,  prof.,  Gottingen
and  Berlin,  psychologist,
201,  271.

Loysel,  1845,  doctor,  Cher-
bourg, 13

Luther,  Martin,  1483-1546,  255

Luys,alienist,neurologist,Paris,
29,  205,  370,  371

Maack,  Ferd.,  doctor,  Kiel,
18,  41

Mabille,  H.,  alienist  at  the

asylum  of  Lafond  (Charente-

Inferieure),  116,  129
Macario,  1857,  Lyons,  167,240
Macnish,  Robert,  1 801-1836,

doctor,  Glasgow,  161
Maggiorani,  Carlo,  physician

and  professor,  Rome,  367
Magnin,  Paul,  French  doctor,

78,  96

I  Maira,  Octavio,  doctor,  San-
tiago, 17


INDICES.


403


Malten,  E.,  1880,  165
Mantegazza,  Paolo,  prof.,  an-
thropologist and  ethnologist,

Florence,  117,  283
Mares,  Prague,  114
Marie, Pierre,  neurologist,

Paris,  260
Marin,  Paul,  211
Marina,  Alessandro  R.,  1887,

doctor,  Trieste,  89
Maudsley,  eminent  English

alienist,  157,  339
Maury,  Alfred,  archaeologist,

Paris,  127,  195,  198
Maxwell,  William,  about  1600,

Scotch  doctor,  4
Mayerhofer,  Austrian  doctor,

362

Mayo,  Herbert,  1854,  English
surgeon  and  physiologist,  13

Meding,  Oscar,  novelist,  19

Mendel,  prof,  extraordinary
at  Berlin,  alienist,  267,  272,
273.  295,  299,  301,  302,  307,
308,312,315,317,  324

Mendelsohn,  89

Mensi,  Alfred  v.,  author,
Munich,  364

Mdric,  Elie,  prof,  at  the  Sor-
bonne,  theologist,  118

Mesmer,  Friedr.  Anton,
1734-1815,  doctor,  Vienna,
4,  5,  6,  9,  30,  66,  305,  314,
356,  360,  361,  364

Mesnet,  Ernest,  alienist  and
physician,  Paris,  331

Meunier,  Victor,  French
author,  119

Meyersohn,  Bernhard,  1880,
doctor,  Schwerin,  15

Meynert,  prof.,  Vienna,  alien-
ist, 205,  295,  307

Michael,  J.,  doctor,  Ham-
burg, 18,  52,  356

Miescher,  F.,  prof.,  Basle,
physiologist,  222

Mill,  John  Stuart,  1 806-1 873,
English  philosopher  and
political  economist,  230


Milne-Edwards,  H.,  physio-
logist, Paris,  215

Minot,  Charles  Sedgwick,
Boston,  U.S.A.,  374

Mobius,  Paul  Julius,  lecturer,
Leipzig,  neurologist,  15,
17,  328,  351

Moli,  Karl  Franz,  lecturer,
alienist,  Dalldorf,  near  Ber-
lin, 206

Mollerup,  Danish  doctor,  316

Morand,  J.  S.,  French  doctor,
38

Morel, celebrated  French

alienist,  339
Moricourt,  J.,  doctor,  Paris,

362

Morselli,  prof.,  Turin,  alienist,

47,  64,  89,  95,  356
Mosso, Aug., prof.,  Turin,

physiologist,  269
Most, G.  F., 1842,  doctor,

Stadthagen,  1 1
Motet,  doctor,  Paris,  208,  346
Mouillesaux, 1787,  French

magnetizer,  139
Muller, F., lecturer,  neuro-
| logist,  Graz,  18,  272,  325
I  Muller,  F.  C,  doctor,  Alex-
I andersbad,  334,  335
J  Muller,  Johannes,  1801-1859,
i eminent anatomist  and
physiologist,  prof.,  Bonn  and
Berlin,  257
Miinsterberg,  Hugo,  lecturer,
psychologist  at  Freiberg  in
Baden,  19,  375
Myers,  A.,  doctor,  London,
364

I  Myers,  Frederic  W.  H.,
psychologist,  Cambridge,
17,  19,  35,  109,  117,  136,
248,  287,  364,  377

Nasse,  Christian  Friedrich,
1 778- 185 1,  prof.,  Halle  and
Bonn,  physician,  250,  360

Netter,  A.,  librarian  of  the
University,  Nancy,  332


INDICES.


Noizet,  French  general,  1820,  |
Stenay,  Paris,  10,  139,  165,
189

Nonne,  doctor,  neurologist,
Hamburg,  18,  47,  74,  3 H

North,  W.,  lecturer  on  phy-
siology, London,  170,  220

Nuel,  prof.,  Liege,  oculist,  136

Obersteiner,  H.,  prof,  extra-
ordinary at  Vienna,  alienist
and  histologist,  17,  38,  55,
70,  177,  216,  219,  220,  317,
37o

O'Brien,  208

Ochorowicz,  Julian,  psycho-
logist, Paris,  38,  107,  163,
208,  363

Oedmann,  alienist,  Lund,
Sweden,  326

(Ebers,  1 758-1 840,  celebrated
astronomer  and  doctor,
Bremen,  8

Opitz,  Wilhelm  Martin,  1880,
doctor,  Chemnitz,  15

Oppenheim,  Hermann,  alien-
ist, lecturer,  Berlin,  31 5

Ottolenghi,  Turin,  369

Oudet,  Jean  Etienne,  1837,  den-
tist, Paris,  329


Paracelsus,  Theophrastus,
1493-1541,  eminent  doctor
at  Basle  and  many  other
places,  4,  367

Parinaud,  oculist,  Paris,  280

Passavant,  Joh.  Karl,  1821,
doctor,  Frankfort,  8

Paulet,  1865,  French  doctor,
335

Pauly,  doctor,  Wiesbaden,  77,

302,  316
Perronnet, Claude,  former

prof,  of  philosophy,  363
Perty,  Maximilian,  1 804-1 884,

prof.,  Bern,  naturalist  and

philosopher,  292


I  Pe'tetin,  1787,  doctor,  Lyons,

7

Pezold, 1789-1813,  doctor,

Dresden,  8
PfarT, Christoph  Heinrich,
1817,  prof.,  Kiel,  physician
and  surgeon,  8
Pfliiger, E., prof.,  Bonn,

eminent  physiologist,  82
Pfnor,  Friedrich, 1 784-1 867,
philosopher,  Baden-Baden,
12

Philips,  pseudonym  of  Durand

de  Gros
Pick,  A.,  1885,  alienist,  prof.,

Prague,  293
Pigeaire, J., 1839,  doctor,

Paris,  11
Pincus, i860, doctor,  Gr.

Glogau,  14
Pitres, A.,  prof.,  Bordeaux,
physician, 15,  30, 35,  46,
173

Pliny,  the  elder,  23-79  A-D->
Roman  natural  philosopher,
136

Poincelot, Achille,  philoso-
pher, Paris,  200
Poirault,  Georges,  student  of

medicine,  Paris,  41,  100
Potet de Sennevoy,  Baron
Du,  doctor,  magnetizer  in
Paris  and  London,  11,  29,
37,  100,  329,  364
Pozzo,  Errico Dal, prof,  of

physics,  Perugia,  158
Prejalmini, 1840,  Italian

doctor,  118
Prel,  Du,  philosopher,  writer
on spiritualism,  Munich,
no,  118,  122,  139,  250,  293,
359,  360,  364
Prevost,  Geneva,  195
Preyer, William, prof.,  lec-
turer at Berlin,  physiolo-
gist, 15,  19,  45,  47,  55,  86,
107,  in,  113,  195,  213,  214,
217,  268,  270,  329,  354,  364,
I  368


INDICES.


40S


Pritzl, obstetrician,  Vienna,

33i

Proust,  physician,  Paris,  35
Pulido,  doctor,  Salamanca,  16
Purgotti,  Luigi,  1887,  doctor,

Padua,  309
Purkinje,  Johannes,  1787—
1869,  prof.,  physiologist,
Breslau,  Prague,  31,  203
Puysegur,  Marquis  Chastenet
de,  1784,  French  officer  at
Busancy,  near  Soissons,  7,
116, 360,  362


Radestock,  Paul,  1879,  psy-
chologist, 158

Raggi,  Antigono,  Italian  alien-
ist, 369

Ramadier,  J.,  alienist  at  the
Asylum  de  Lafond  (Charente
Inferieure),  116

Recamier,  J.  C.  A.,  1821,  prof,
of  medicine,  physician,
Paris,  329

Reden,  Benno,  334

Regnard,  French  doctor,  14

Reichenbach,  Carl  Friedr.  v.,
1 788-1 869,  naturalist,  che-
mist, Leipzig,  367

Reil,  Johann,  1759-1813,  prof.,
Halle,  physician  and  anato-
mist, 195,361,307

Remak.  Ernst,  lecturer,  neu-
rologist, Berlin,  294

Remak,  Robert,  181 5-1865,
prof,  extraordinary  at  Berlin,
histologist  and  neurologist,
founder  of  galvano-thera-
peutics,  294,  305

Renterghem,  A.  W.  van,  doc-
tor, Amsterdam,  16,  35,  41

Repoud,  alienist,  director  of
Marsens  Lunatic  Asylum,
Canton  Freiburg,  317

Reynolds,  Russell,  neurologist,
London,  63

Riant,  A.,  French  doctor,  hy-
gienist,  35  r


Ribaud,  doctor,  Poitiers,  13
Ribot,  Th.,  prof.,  Paris,  psy-
chologist, 155
Ricard,  1841,  magnetizer,  157
Richer,  Paul,  neurologist,  Paris,
assistant  to  Charcot,  14,  29
49,  63,  77,  78,  84,  181,  214
Richet,  Charles,  prof,  of  phy-
siology in  the  university  of
Paris,  14,  19,  34,  55,  106,
112,  134,  136,  139,  152,  176,
200,  209,  214,  215,  259,  363
Rieger,  prof.,  Wurzburg,  alien-
ist, 18,  89,204,205,214,215,
3oi,  315
Rifat,  doctor,  Salonica,  35
Righi,  Italian  doctor,  370
Ringier,  G.,  doctor,  Combre-
mont-le-Grand,  Switzerland,
40,  41,  263
Rochas,  A.  de,  316, 360
Rosenbach, Ottomar,  1880,
prof.,  Breslau,  physician,  37,
265

Rosenthal,  Moriz,t  1889,  prof.,
Vienna,  neurologist,  88, 108

Rossi,  E.,  i860,  physician  in
ordinary  to  Prince  Halim
Pasha,  Cairo,  1

Rostan,  30

Roth,  doctor  in  Switzerland,
35

Roth,  Mathias,  homoeopath  in
London,  328

Rousseau,  1881,  French  alien-
ist, Auxerre,  35, 207

Roux,  Jules,  1865,  naval  doc-
tor, Toulon,  335

Roux  -  Freissineng,  lawyer,
Marseilles,  337

Ruhlmann,  Richard,  i88o,prof.,
teacher  at  the  Gymnasium,
Chemnitz,  15

Rumpf,  prof,  extraordinary  of
medicine,  Marburg,  90,  108,
269

Rust,  Joh.  Nepomuk,  1775-
1840,  prof.,  Berlin,  surgeon,
248

2


406


INDICES.


Sallis,  Joh.  G.,  1888,  Baden-
Baden,  18,  304

Salvioli,  Gaetano,  1887,  his-
tologist,  Turin,  269

Santanelli,  Ferdinand,  1723,
prof,  of  medicine,  Naples,  4

Sauvaire,  C,  101

Sawolshskaja,  Russian  doc-
tor, 303

Schelling,  1 775-1 854,  well-
known  philosopher,  founder
of  the  philosophy  of  nature,
8

Schemer,  Carl  Albert,  lec-
turer at  Breslau  till  1879,
194

Schiller,  Friedrich  v.,  1759—
1805,  246

Schirmer,  R.,  prof.,  Greifs-
wald,  oculist,  98

Schleisner,  Danish  doctor,  16

Schneider,  G.  H.,  1880,  259

Schnitzler,  Arthur,  doctor,
Vienna,  18

Schopenhauer,  Arthur,  1788-  I
i860,  philosopher,Frankfort-
on-the-Main,  21,  139,  364

Schrenck  -  Notzing,  Albert,
Baron  v.,  doctor,  Munich,
18,  302,  316,  320,  364

Schiile,  Heinrich,  eminent
alienist,  Illenau,  Baden,  244

Schulz,  Hugo,  prof.,  Greifs-
wald,  pharmacologist,  353

Schuster,  doctor,  Aix,  18,  309

Schwartzer,  Otto,  1878,  alien-
ist, Buda-Pesth,  167

Schwenter,  1636,  213

Scott,  Walter,  1771-1832,
Scotch  author  and  poet,  194  I

Secheyron,  doctor,  Paris,  331

Seeligmuller,  prof,  extraordi-
nary at  Halle,  neurologist,
18,  321,332,  371

Segard,  Charles,  1887,  doctor,
Toulon,  49,  174

Seglas,  J.,  alienist,  Paris,  316

Seguin,  prof.,  neurologist,  New
York,  371


Sell,  Danish  doctor,  16
Selle,  1789,  philosopher,  doc-
tor, Berlin,  8
Sellin,  Albrecht  W.,  colonial
director (retired),  Steglitz,
near  Berlin,  185
Semal,  Francois,  alienist  at  the
asylum  of  Mons,  Belgium,
204

Senator,  prof,  extraordinary  at

Berlin,  physician,  15
Seppilli,  Gius,  1881,  Modena,

alienist,  78,  106,  269,  369
Sgrosso,  Italian  doctor,  91
Siemerling,  alienist  and  lec-
turer, Berlin,  275,  276
Siemers,  J.  F.,  1835,  doctor,

Hamburg,  1 1
Sierke,  Eugen,  1874,  writer,
Berlin,  editor  of  the  Tag-
lichen  Rundschau,  291
Silva,  B.,  Italian  doctor,  85
Simon,  Max,  junior,  alienist,
head  physician  of  the  asylum
I at  Bron  (Rhone),  195,  202
Simonin,  Amedee,  H.,  197
Simpson,  James,  1811-1870.
celebrated  obstetrician,
Edinburgh,  13
Socrates,  470-399  B.C.,  well-
known Greek  philosopher,
255

Sommer, G., Italian  naval

doctor,  369
Spencer, Herbert,  eminent
English  philosopher,  222,
376

Sperling,  Arthur,  neurologist,
Berlin,  iv,  18,  32,  35,  214,
! 274,  305,  309,  322,  326
Spinoza, 1632- 1677,  well-
known  philosopher,  155
Spitta,  H.,  prof,  extraordinary
at  Tubingen,  psychologist,

3i,  194
Spring,  31,  194

Stembo,  neurologist,  Wilna,
16,  77

Stewart,  Dugald,  1753-1828,


INDICES.


407


celebrated  philosopher,
Edinburgh,  180,  230
Stieglitz,  Johann,  18 16,  phy-
sician in  ordinary  at  Han-
over, 9

Stoll,  Otto,  lecturer  on  geo-
graphy and  ethnology  at  the
polytechnic  and  university,
Zurich,  2

Stone,  1852,  Boston,  13

Strieker,  prof.,  Vienna,  patho-
logist, 55

Strohl,  apothecary,  Fontaines,
86

Strubing,  Paul,  1880,  doctor,
prof.,  Greifswald,  113

Striimpell,  prof.,  Erlangen,
physician,  32

Sulzer,  H.  J.,  1 720-1 779,  art
critic  in  Berlin,  5


Taguet,  alienist,  director  of
the  Asylum  de  Lesvellec,
near  Vannes,  101

Taine,  Hippolyte,  French  psy-
chologist and  historian  of
literature,  230,  377

Tamburini,  August,  1881,  prof.
Modena,  alienist,  78,  106,
269,  369,  370

Tanzi,  Eugenio,  alienist,  Tu-
rin. 64,  369

Tarchanoff,  Jean  de,  30

Tardieu,  Ambroise,  1 818-1879,
authority  on  medical  jurispru-
dence, Paris,  335

Tereg,  lecturer,  Hanover,  89

Teste,  Alphonse,  1840,  doctor,
Paris,  11

Thaler,  Karl  v.,  author,  Vienna,
295

Thesis,  1865,  French  doctor,
335

Thiem,  doctor,  Cottbus,  299
Thomas,  surgeon  in  chief  of  the

naval  station  at  Toulon,  331
Thomsen, Robert,  lecturer,

alienist3  Bonn,  315


]  Tillaux,  surgeon  at  the  Hotel-

Dieu,  Paris,  330
Timmler,  Julius  Eduard,  1873,

Altenburg,  292
Tokarski,  doctor,  Moscow,  16,

326

Tonnini,  1887,  doctor,  Giri-
falco,  Calabria,  203

Topham,  doctor,  London,  13

Tourette,  see  Gilles  de  la
Tourette

Treviranus,  1 776-1 837,  famous
doctor,  physiologist,  Bre-
men, 8

Tuke,  Daniel  Hack,  eminent
alienist  and  psychologist,
London,  17,  46,  170,  204,
224,  269,  281,  286,  330

Unverricht,prof.,  Dorpat,  phy-
sician, 312,  355

Varges,  1853,  13
Varinard,  136

Varnhagen,  von  Ense,  1785-
1858,  well-known  biogra-
pher, author,  Berlin,  9
Varnier,  doctor,  Paris,  331
Velander,  doctor,  Jonkoping,
16

Velpeau,  Alfred,  1795 -1867,
; eminent  surgeon,  Paris,  14
I  Ventra,  Italian  alienist,  369
Venturi, Silvio, prof.,  alienist,
Nocera  Inferiore,  near  Sa-
lerno, 369
Vesalius,  Andreas,  15 14-1564,
doctor  and  eminent  anatom-
ist, 376

Vigouroux,  Romain,  neurolo-
gist and  electro-therapeutist,
Paris,  84

Virchow,  Hans,  prof,  extra-
ordinary at  Berlin,  anato-
mist and  histologist,  198

Virchow,  Rudolph,  prof.,  Ber-
lin, pathologist,  anthropo-
logist, 117,297,356,  376


4o8


INDICES.


Vizioli, Franc,  neurologist,

Naples,  207
Voigt, Hermann v.,  doctor,

Hochweitzschen,  Saxony,

330,331
Voisin,  A.,  alienist,  Paris,  16,

39,  H5,  3i6,  317,  332
Voisin,  J.,  alienist,  Paris,  116,

371

Voltaire,  1694-1778,  French
poet  and  author,  198

Wagner,  J.,  American  doctor,
3°

Warlomont,  Evarist,  oculist  at
Brussels,  117

Weinhold,  Adolph  F.,  prof.,
teacher  of  physics  at  the
state  institute  for  technical
education  at  Chemnitz,  15,
29,  31,  225

Weiss,  M.,  doctor,  Prague,  18

Welsch,  Hermann,  doctor,
Kissingen,  364

Wernich,  Councillor  of  Med.,
Coslin,  198

Wernicke,  Alex.,  lecturer  at
the  technical  college,  Bruns-
wick, writer  on  physics  and
philosophy,  222,  356,  374,
375

Westphal,  Karl  Friederich
Otto,  prof.,  Berlin,  alienist
and  neurologist,  276,  368

Wetterstrand,  doctor,  Stock-


holm, 16,  40,  41,  77,  112,
316,  326,  332

Widmer,  doctor,  Lausanne,  332

Wiebe,  1884,  doctor,  Freiburg
in  Baden,  17

Wienholt,  Arnold,  1749- 1804,
doctor,  Bremen,  8,  50

Wier,Johann,  1515-1558,  doc-
tor, Arnheim,  opponent  of
the  witch  prosecutions,  136

Willy,  Charles,  oculist,  Chaux
de  Fonds,  Switzerland,  98

Wilson,  doctor,  London,  216

Winiwarter,  Alex,  v.,  prof.,
Liege,  surgeon,  118

Wirth,  J.  A.,  1836,  39

Wolfart,  Karl  Christian,  1 778—
1832,  prof,  and  doctor,  Ber-
lin, 5,  9,  10,  126

Wolfram,  Johannes  (pseu-
donym), 1 82 1,  335

Wundt,  Wilhelm,  prof.,  psy-
chologist, Leipzig,  196,  214,
226,  231,  244,  259

Wurm,  Wilhelm,  1857,  doctor,
Munich,  9

Yung,  E. ,  prof.,  Geneva,  103,
225

Ziemssen,  prof.,  Munich,  phy-
sician, neurologist,  18,  272,
302,  307,  315

Ziermann,  J.  C.  L.,  1819,  doc-
tor, Hanover,  9


LITERARY  INFORMATION.


As  I  have  read  nearly  all  the  authors  I  have  quoted  in  the
original,  it  would  take  too  much  space  to  mention  them  in
detail.  There  are  catalogues  for  certain  periods— for  the  move-
ment of  1880,  those  of  Mobius  in  Schmidt's  Jahrbiichern  and
Max  Dessoir's  Bibliography  of  1888  ;  these  are  for  the  later
periods.  The  bibliography  is  continued  in  the  periodical  Revue
de  VHypnotisme.  The  following  is  a  list  of  works  particularly
to  be  recommended  : —


Belfiore,  LIpnotismo.  Naples,  1887.  (Contains  much  historical
information  which  is  wanting  in  most  French  books.)

Bentivegni,  v.,  Die  Hypnose  unci  ihre  civilrechtliche  Bedeu-
tung. Leipzig,  1890.

Bernheim,  De  la  suggestion  et  de  ses  applications  d  la  thera-
peutique.  (Shows  the  universal  importance  of  suggestion
with  and  without  hypnosis. Written  for  doctors.)

Binet  and  Fere,  Le  Magnetisme  animal.  Paris,  1887.  (Treats
hypnotism  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  school  of  Charcot.)

Dessoir,  Max,  Das  Doppel-Ich.  Leipzig,  1890.  (Short  psycho-
logical studies,  partly  connected  with  hypnotic  experiments.

ENNEMOSER,  Der  Magnelismus.  Leipzig,  18 19.  (Contains
much  historical  information  about  animal  magnetism.)

Forel,  Der  Hypnotismus.  Stuttgart,  1889.  (Short,  very  clear
work,  explaining  the  general  importance  of  suggestion.)

Gurney,  Peculiarities  of  Certain  Post- Hypnotic  States  (essay
in  the  "  Proceedings  of  the  Society  for  Psychical  Research,"
vol.  iv.,  April  23,  1887).  (Contains  classical  records  of
experiments,  like  almost  all  the  works  of  Gurney  and  his
friend  Frederic  Myers.)

Janet,  Pierre,  L  Automatisme  psychologique.  Paris,  1889.
(Detailed  psychological  experiments  on  human  conscious-
ness, its  analysis  by  means  of  hypnosis,  &c.)


4 1  o  LITERAR  Y  INFORM  A  TION.


Krafft-Ebing,  v.,  Eine  experime7itelle  Studie  auf detn  Gebiete
des  Hypnotismus,  2nd  ed.  Stuttgart,  1889.  (Contains  a
detailed  account  of  many  physical  and  mental  symptoms
of  hypnosis  in  connection  with  an  interesting  case.)

Liebeault,  Du  Sommeil.  Paris,  1866;  new  ed.,  1889.  (Psycho-
logical analysis  of  ordinary  and  hypnotic  sleep.  Much
information.)

LiEGEOlS,  De  la  suggestion  et  du  somnantbulisme  dans  leurs
rapports  avec  la  jurispncdence  et  la  medecine  legale.  Paris,
1888.  (A  rather  diffuse  book,  containing  much  of  deep
interest.)

LlLlENTHAL,  v.,  Der  Hypnotismus  und  das  Strafrecht.  Re-
printed from  the  Zeitschrift  fur  die  ges.  Strafrechtswissen-
scka/t,  1887. (Based  on  the  school  of  Charcot.)

MORSELLI,  II Magnetismo  animate.  Turin,  1886.  (An  interest-
ing book,  written  from  a  determinist  point  of  view.)

Ochorowicz,  Zte  la  suggestion  mentale.  Paris,  1887.  (Though
the  book  does  not  prove  telepathy  convincingly,  it  is
written  with  scientific  earnestness,  and  is  clever  and  in-
teresting.)


Crown  8vo,  Cloth. Price  3s.  6d.  per  Vol.;  Half  Mor.,  6s.  Qd.
THE

Contemporary  Science  Series.

Edited  by  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.

Illustrated  Volumes  containing  between  300  and  400  pp.

THE  CONTEMPORARY  SCIENCE  SERIES  will  bring
within  general  reach  of  the  English-speaking  public  the
best  that  is  known  and  thought  in  all  departments  of
modern  scientific  research.  The  influence  of  the  scientific
spirit  is  now  rapidly  spreading  in  every  field  of  human
activity.  Social  progress,  it  is  felt,  must  be  guided  and
accompanied  by  accurate  knowledge,— knowledge  which  is,  in
many  departments,  not  yet  open  to  the  English  reader.  In
the  Contemporary  Science  Series  all  the  questions  of  modern
life— the  various  social  and  politico-economical  problems  of  to-
day, the  most  recent  researches  in  the  knowledge  of  man,  the
past  and  present  experiences  of  the  race,  and  the  nature  of  its
environment— will  be  frankly  investigated  and  clearly  presented.

First  Volumes  of  the  Series:—
THE  EVOLUTION  OF  SEX. By  Prof.  PATRICK  GEDDES  and
J  Arthur  Thomson.

ELECTRICITY  IN  MODERN  LIFE. By  G.  W.  de  Tunzel-

MANN.

THE  ORIGIN  OF  THE  ARYANS. By  Dr.  ISAAC  TAYLOR.
PHYSIOGNOMY  AND  EXPRESSION. By  P.  MANTEGAZZA.
EVOLUTION  AND  DISEASE. By  J.  B.  SUTTON.
THE  VILLAGE  COMMUNITY  IN  BRITAIN. BY  G.  L.

GOMME.

THE  CRIMINAL. By  HAVELOCK  ELLIS.
SANITY  AND  INSANITY. By  Dr.  C.  Mercier.
HYPNOTISM. By  Dr.  Albert  Moll  (Berlin). [June  25.

The  following  Writers,  among  others,  are  preparing

Volumes  for  this  Series:—
Prof.  E.  D.  Cope,  Prof.  G.  F.  Fitzgerald,  Prof.  J.  Geikie,
E.  C.  K.  Gonner,  Prof.  J.  Jastrow  (Wisconsin),  E.  Sidney
Hartland,  Prof.  C.  H.  Herford,  Sidney  Webb,  Dr.  Sims  Wood-
head,  Dr.  C.  M.  Woodward  (St.  Louis,  Mo.),  etc.,  etc.


London  :  Walter  Scott,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


IBSEN'S  PROSE  DRAMAS

EDITED  BY  WILLIAM  ARCHER.
In  Four  Volumes.
CROWN  8vo,  CLOTH,  PRICE  3s.  6d.  PER  VOLUME.

The  Norwegian  dramatist,  Henrik  Ibsen,  is  at  this  moment
one  of  the  most  widely-discussed  of  European  writers.
Throughout  the  English-speaking  world  his  name  has  been
made  famous  by  the  production  of  A  DolVs  House,  in  London,
Boston,  and  Melbourne ;  in  each  of  which  cities  it  excited
an  almost  unprecedented  storm  of  controversy.  As  yet,  how-
ever, there  has  existed  no  uniform  and  authoritative  edition
in  English  of  the  plays  of  which  so  much  is  being  said  and
written.  Mr.  Walter  Scott  has  concluded  an  arrangement
with  Henrik  Ibsen,  under  which  he  will  publish  a  uniform
series  of  his  prose  plays.  They  will  be  carefully  edited  by
Mr.  William  Archer,  whose  name  will  be  a  guarantee  of  the
accuracy  and  literary  excellence  of  the  translations.


Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  3s.  6d.  each.
VOL  I.

"A  DOLL'S  HOUSE,"  "THE  LEAGUE  OF  YOUTH,"
and  "THE  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY."

VOL.  II.

"GHOSTS," "AN  ENEMY  OF  THE  PEOPLE,"  AND
"  THE  WILD  DUCK."

VOL  III.

"LADY  INGER  OF  5STRAT,"  "THE  VIKINGS  AT
HELGELAND,"  "  THE  PRETENDER." {May  2d.


London:  Walter  Scott,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


Crown  Svo,  about  350  pp.  each,  Cloth  Cover,  2s.  6d.  per  vol.
Half-polished  Morocco,  gilt  top,  $s.


COUNT  TOLSTOI'S  WORKS,


The  following  Volumes  are  already  issued —

A  RUSSIAN  PROPRIETOR.
THE  COSSACKS.
IVAN  ILYITCH,  and  other  Stories.
THE INVADERS,  and  other  Stories.
MY  RELIGION.
LIFE,
MY  CONFESSION.
CHILDHOOD, BOYHOOD,  YOUTH.
THE  PHYSIOLOGY  OF  WAR.
ANNA KARENIN A. (2  Vols.)
WHAT  TO  DO?
WAR  AND  PEACE. (4  Vols.)
THE  LONG  EXILE,  and  other  Stories  for  Children
SEVASTOPOL.
Uniform  ivith  the  above.

IMPRESSIONS OF  RUSSIA.

By  Dr.  Georg  Brandes.


London  :  Walter  Scott.  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternostci  Row,


GREAT  WRITERS.


A  NEW  SERIES  OF  CRITICAL  BIOGRAPHIES.

Edited  by  Professor  Eric  S.  Robertson,  M.A.


MONTHLY SHILLING  VOLUMES.


VOLUMES  ALREADY  ISSUED—

LIFE  OP  LONGFELLOW. By  Prof.  Eric  S.  Robertson.
"A  most  readable  little  work."— Liverpool  Mercury.

LIFE  OF  COLERIDGE. By  Hall  Caine.

"  Brief  and  vigorous,  written  throughout  with  spirit  and  great  literary
skill.  "—Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  DICKENS. By  Frank  T.  Marzials.

"Notwithstanding  the  mass  of  matter  that  has  been  printed  relating  tc
Dickens  and  his  works  ...  we  should,  until  we  came  across  this  volume,
have  been  at  a  loss  to  recommend  any  popular  life  of  England's  most
popular  novelist  as  being  really  satisfactory.  The  difficulty  is  removed
by  Mr.  Marzials's  little  book."— Athenaeum.

LIFE  OF  DANTE  GABRIEL  ROSSETTI.  By  J.  Knight.

"  Mr.  Knight's  picture  of  the  great  poet  and  painter  is  the  fullest  and
best  yet  presented  to  the  public."— The  Graphic.

LIFE  OF  SAMUEL  JOHNSON. By  Colonel  F.  Grant.
"Colonel  Grant  has  performed  his  task  with  diligence,  sound  judgment}
good  taste,  and  accuracy."— Illustrated  London  News.

LIFE  OF  DARWIN. By  G.  T.  Bettany.

"  Mr.  G.  T.  Bettany*8  Life  of  Darwin  is  a  sound  and  conscientious  work."
— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  CHARLOTTE  BRONTE. By  A.  Birrell.

"  Those  who  know  much  of  Charlotte  Bronte  will  learn  more,  and  those
who  know  nothing  about  her  will  find  all  that  is  best  worth  learning  in
Mr.  Birrell's  pleasant  book."— St.  James'  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  THOMAS  CARLYLE. By  R.  Garnett,  LL.D.
"  This  is  an  admirable  book. Nothing  could  be  more  felicitous  and  fairer
than  the  way  in  which  he  takes  us  through  Carlyle's  life  and  works."— Pall
Mall  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  ADAM  SMITH. By  R.  B.  Haldane,  M.P.

"  Written  with  a  perspicuity  seldom  exemplified  when  dealing  with
economic  science." — Scotsman.
LIFE  OF  KEATS. By  W.  M.  Rossetti.

"  Valuable  for  the  ample  information  which  it  contains."—  Cambridge
Independent.

LIFE  OF  SHELLEY. By  William  Sharp.

"The  criticisms  .  .  .  entitle  this  capital  monograph  to  be  ranked  with
the  best  biographies  of  Shelley." — Westminster  Review.

LIFE  OF  SMOLLETT. By  David  Hannay.

"  A  capable  record  of  a  writer  who  still  remains  one  of  the  great  masters
of  the  English  noveL"— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  GOLDSMITH. By  Austin  Dobson.

"  The  story  of  his  literary  and  social  lite  in  London,  with  all  its  humorous
and  pathetic  vicissitudes,  Is  here  retold,  as  none  could  tell  it  better."—
Daily  News.


LIFE  OP  SCOTT. By  Professor  Yonge.

4 4  This  is  a  most  enjoyable  book."— Aberdeen  Free  Press.

LIFE  OF  BURNS. By  Professor  Blackie.

"The  editor  certainly  made  a  hit  when  he  persuaded  Blackie  to  write
about  Burns."— Pall  Mall  Gazette.

LIFE  OF  VICTOR  HUGO- By  Frank  T.  Marzials.

44  Mr.  Marzials's  volume  presents  to  us,  in  a  more  handy  form  than  any
English  or  even  French  handbook  gives,  the  summary  of  what  is  known
about  the  life  of  the  great  poet." — Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  EMERSON. By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D.

"No  record  of  Emerson's  life  could  be  more  desirable."— Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  GOETHE. By  James  Sime.

44  Mr.  James  Sime's  competence  as  a  biographer  of  Goethe  is  beyond
question."— Manchester  Guardian.

LIFE  OF  CONGREVE. By  Edmund  Gosse.

44  Mr.  Gosse  has  written  an  admirable  biography." — Academy.

LIFE  OF  BUNYAN. By  Canon  Venables.

44  A  most  intelligent,  appreciative,  and  valuable  memoir." — Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  CRABBE. By  T.  E.  Kebbel.

44  No  English  poet  since  Shakespeare  has  observed  certain  aspects  of
nature  and  of  human  life  more  closely." — Athenaeum.

LIFE  OF  HEINE. 3y  William  Sharp.

44  An  admirable  monograph  .  .  .  more  fully  written  up  to  the  level  of
recent  knowledge  and  criticism  than  any  other  English  work."—  Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  MILL. By  W.  L.  Courtney.

44  A  most  sympathetic  and  discriminating  memoir."— Glasgow  Herald.

LIFE  OF  SCHILLER. By  Henry  W.  Nevinson.

"  Presents  the  poet's  life  in  a  neatly  rounded  picture."— Scotsman.

LIFE  OF  CAPTAIN  MARRY  AT. By  David  Hannay.

44  We  have  nothing  but  praise  for  the  manner  in  which  Mr.  Hannay  has
done  justice  to  him." — Saturday  Review.

LIFE  OF  LESSING. By  T.  W.  Rolleston.

44  One  of  the  best  books  of  the  series." — Manchester  Guardian.

LIFE  OF  MILTON. By  Richard  Garnett,  LL.D.

44  Has  never  been  more  charmingly  or  adequately  told." — Scottish  Leader.

LIFE  OF  BALZAC. By  Frederick  Wedmore.

LIFE  OF  GEORGE  ELIOT. By  Oscar  Browning.

LIFE  OF  JANE  AUSTEN. By  Goldwin  Smith.

LIFE  OF  BROWNING. By  William  Sharp.

LIFE OF BYRON. By  Hon.  Roden  Noel.

Complete  Bibliography  to  each  volume,  by  J.  P.  Anderson,  British  Museum

Volumes  are  in  preparation  by  Arthur  Symons,  W.  E.  Henley,  Hermann
Merivale,  H.  E.  Watts,  Cosmo  Monkhouse,  Frank  T.  Marzials,  W.  H.  Pollock,
John  Addington  Symonds,  Stepniak,  Moncure  Conway,  Professor  Wallace,
Lloyd  Sanders,  etc.,  etc.

Library  Edition  of  "  Great  Writers"  Demy  8vo,  2s.  6d.


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


Monthly  Shilling  Volumes. Cloth,  cut  or  uncut  etf«es.

THE  CAMELOT  SERIES.


Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.


Volumes  already  Issued-


ROMANCE  OF  KING  ARTHUR.

THOREAU'S  WALDEN.

ENGLISH  OPIUM-EATER.

LANDOR'S  CONVERSATIONS.

PLUTARCH'S  LIVES.

RELIGIO  MEDICI,  &c.

SHELLEY'S  LETTERS.

PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  SWIFT.

MY  STUDY  WINDOWS.

GREAT  ENGLISH  PAINTERS.

LORD  BYRON'S  LETTERS.

ESSAYS  BY  LEIGH  HUNT.

LONGFELLOW'S  PROSE.

GREAT  MUSICAL  COMPOSERS.

MARCUS  AURELIUS.

SPECIMEN  DAYS  IN  AMERICA.

WHITE'S  SELBORNE.

DEFOE'S  SINGLETON.

MAZZINI'S  ESSAYS.

PROSE  WRITINGS  OF  HEINE.

REYNOLDS'  DISCOURSES.

PAPERS  OF  STEELE  AND  ADDISON


BURNS'S  LETTERS.
VOLSUNGA  SAGA.
SARTOR  RESARTUS.
WRITINGS  OF  EMERSON.
SENECA'S  MORALS.
DEMOCRATIC  VISTAS.
LIFE  OF  LORD  HERBERT.
ENGLISH  PROSE.
IBSEN'S  PILLARS  OF  SOCIETY.
IRISH  FAIRY  AND  FOLK  TALES.
EPICTETUS.
THE  ENGLISH  POETS.
ESSAYS  OF  DR.  JOHNSON.
ESSAYS  OF  WILLIAM  HAZLITT.
LANDOR'S  PENTAMERON,  &c.
POE'S  TALES  AND  ESSAYS.
VICAR  OF  WAKEFIELD.
POLITICAL  ORATIONS.
CHESTERFIELD'S  LETTERS.
THOREAU'S  WEEK.
STORIES  FROM  CARLETON.
AUTOCRAT  OF  THE  BREAKFAST-TABLE


Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.
Edited  by  Will  H.  Dircks.
Edited  by  William  Sharp.
Edited  by  H.  Ellis.
Edited  by  B.  J.  Snell,  M.  A.
Edited  by  J.  A.  Symonds.
Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.
Edited  by  W.  Lewin.
Edited  by  R.  Garnett,  LL.D.
Edited  by  William  Sharp.
Edited  by  M.  Blind.
Edited  by  A.  Symons.
Edited  by  W.  Tirebuck.
Edited  by  E.  Sharp.
Edited  by  Alice  Zimmern.
By  Walt  Whitman.
Edited  by  Richard  Jefferies.
Edited  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling.
Edited  by  William  Clarke.

Edited  by  H.  Ellis.
Edited  by  Helen  Zimmern.
Edited  by  W.  Lewin.


JANE  EYRE.
ELIZABETHAN  ENGLAND.
WRITINGS  OF  THOMAS  DAVIS.
SPENCE'S  ANECDOTES.
MORE'S  UTOPIA.
SADI'S  GU  LIST  AN.
ENGLISH  FOLK  AND  FAIRY  TALES.
NORTHERN  STUDIES.
FAMOUS  REVIEWS.


Edited  by  J.  Logie  Robertson,  M.  A.

Edited  by  H.  H.  Sparling.

Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.
Edited  by  Percival  Chnbb.
Edited  by  Walter  Clode.
By  Walt  Whitman.
Edited  by  Will  H.  Dircks.
Edited  by  Arthur  Galton.
Edited  by  H.  Ellis.
Edited  by  W.  B.  Yeats.
Edited  by  T.  W.  Rolleston.
By  James  Russell  Lowell.
Edited  by  Stuart  J.  Reid.
Edited  by  Frank  Carr.
Edited  by  H.  Ellis.
Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.
Edited  by  Ernest  Rhys.
Edited  by  William  Clarke.

Selected  by  C.  Sayle.
Edited  by  Will  H.  Dircks.
Edited  by  W.  B.  Yeats.
By  0.  W.  Holmes.


Edited  by  Clement  Shorter.
Edited  by  Lothrop  Withington.
Edited  by  T.  W.  Rolleston.
Edited  by  John  Underbill.
Edited  by  Maurice  Adams.

Edited  by  Charles  Sayle.
Edited  by  E.  S.  Hartlanci
By  Edmund  Gosse
Edited  by  E.  Stevenson


London  :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


Edited  by  William  Sharp.
IN  SHILLING  MONTHLY  VOLUMES,  SQUARE  8vo.
Cloth,  Red  Edges - Is. I Red  Roan,  Gilt  Edges  2s.  6d.
Cloth ,  Uncut  Edges - Is. | Pad.  Morocco,  Gilt  Edges  -  5s.

THE  FOLLOWING  VOLUMES  ARE  NOW  READY.


KEBLE'S  CHRISTIAN  YEAR.
COLERIDGE.  Ed.  by  J.  Skipsey.
LONGFELLOW.  Ed.  by  E.  Hope.
CAMPBELL.  Ed.  by  J.  Hogben.
SHELLEY.  Edited  by  J.  Skipsey.
WORDSWORTH.

Edited  by  A.  J.  Symington.
BLAKE.  Ed.  by  Joseph  Skipsey.
WHITTIER.  Ed.  by  Eva  Hope.
POE.  Edited  by  Joseph  Skipsey.
CHATTERTON.  By  J.  Richmond.
BURNS.  Poems  1  Edited  by
BURNS.  Songs  /  Joseph  Skipsey.
MARLOWE.  Ed. by  P.  E. Pinkerton.
KEATS.  Edited  by  John  Hogben.
HERBERT.  Edited  by  E.  Rhys.
HUGO.  Trans,  by  Dean  Carrington.
COWPER.  Edited  by  Eva  Hope.
SHAKESPEARE'S  Poems,  etc.

Edited  by  William  Sharp.
EMERSON.  Edited  by  W.  Lewin.
SONNETS  of  this  CENTURY.

Edited  by  William  Sharp.
WHITMAN. Edited  by  E.  Rhya.
SCOTT.  Marmion,  etc.
SCOTT.  Lady  of  the  Lake,  etc.

Edited  by  William  Sharp.
PRAED.  Edited  by  Fred.  Cooper.
HOGG.ByhisDaughter.Mrs  Garden.
GOLDSMITH.  Ed.  by  W.  Tirebuck.
MACKAY'S  LOVE  LETTERS.
SPENSER.  Edited  by  Hon.  R.Noel.
CHILDREN  OF  THE  POETS.

Edited  by  Eric  S.  Robertson.
JONSON.  Edited  by  J.  A.  Symonds.
BYRON  (2  Vols.)  Ed.byM.  Blind.
THE  SONNETS  OF  EUROPE.

Edited  by  S.  Waddington.
RAMSAY.  Ed.  by  J.  L.  Robertson.
DOBELL.  Edited  by  Mrs.  Dobell.
DAYS  OF  THE  YEAR.

With  Introduction  by  Wm.  Sharp.
POPE.  Edited  by  John  Hogben.
HEINE.  Edited  by  Mrs.  Kroeker.
BEAUMONT  &  FLETCHER.

Edited  by  J.  S.  Fletcher.
BOWLES,  LAMB,  &C.

Edited  by  William  Tirebuck.
EARLY  ENGLISH  POETRY.
Edited  by  H.  Macaulay  Fitzgibbon.


SEA  MUSIC.  Edited  by  Mrs  Sharp.
HERRICK.  Edited  by  ErnestRhys.
BALLADES  AND  RONDEAUS
Edited  by  J.  Gleeson  White.
IRISH  MINSTRELSY.

Edited  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling.
MILTON'S  PARADISE  LOST.

Edited  by  J.  Bradshaw,  M.  A.,  LL.D.
JACOBITE  BALLADS.

Edited  by  G.  S.  Macquoid.
AUSTRALIAN  BALLADS.

Edited  by  D.  B.  W.  Sladen,  B.A.
MOORE.  Edited  by  John  Dorrian.
BORDER  BALLADS.

Edited  by  Graham  R.  Tomson
SONG-TIDE.  By  P.  B.  Marston".
ODES  OF  HORACE.

Translations  by  Sir  S.  de  Vere,  Bt.
OSSIAN.  Edited  by  G.  E.  Todd.
ELFIN  MUSIC.  Ed.  by  A.  Waite.
SOUTHEY.  Ed.  byS.  R.  Thompson.
CHAUCER.  Edited  by  F.  N.  Paton.
POEMS  OF  WILD  LIFE.
Edited  by  Chas.  G.  D.  Roberts,  M.A.
PARADISE  REGAINED.
Edited  by  J.  Bradshaw,  M.A.,  LL.D.
CRABBE.  Edited  by  E.Lamplough.
DORA  GREENWELL.

Edited  by  William  Dorling.
FAUST.  Edited  by  E.  Craigmyle.
AMERICAN  SONNETS.

Edited  by  William  Sharp.
LANDOR'S  POEMS.

Selected  and  Edited  by  E.  Radford.
GREEK  ANTHOLOGY.

Edited  by  Graham  R.  Tomson.
HUNT  AND  HOOD.

Edited  by  J.  Harwood  Panting,
HUMOROUS  POEMS.

Edited  by  Ralph  H.  Caine.
LYTTON'S  PLAYS.

Edited  by  R.  F.  Sharp.
GREAT  ODES.

Edited  by  William  Sharp.
MEREDITH'S  POEMS.

Edited  by  M.  Betham-Edwards


London :  WALTER  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


Quarto,  cloth  elegant,  gilt  edges,  emblematic  design  on  cover \  6s.
May  also  be  had  in  a  variety  of  Fancy  Bindings,


THE

MUSIC  OF  THE  POETS:

A  MUSICIANS'  BIRTHDAY  BOOK.

Edited  by  Eleonore  D'Esterre  Keeling.


This  is  a  unique  Birthday  Book.  Against  each  date  are  given
the  names  of  musicians  whose  birthday  it  is,  together  with  a
verse-quotation  appropriate  to  the  character  of  their  different
compositions  or  performances.  A  special  feature  of  the  book
consists  in  the  reproduction  in  fac-simile  of  autographs,  and
autographic  music,  of  living  composers.  The  selections  of  verse
(from  before  Chaucer  to  the  present  time)  have  been  made  with
admirable  critical  insight.  English  verse  is  rich  in  utterances  of
the  poets  about  music,  and  merely  as  a  volume  of  poetry  about
music  this  book  makes  a  charming  anthology.  Three  sonnets  by
Mr.  Theodore  Watts,  on  the  "Fausts"  of  Berlioz,  Schumann,
and  Gounod,  have  been  written  specially  for  this  volume.  It  is
illustrated  with  designs  of  various  musical  instruments,  etc.;
autographs  of  Rubenstein,  Dvorak,  Greig,  Mackenzie,  Villiers
Stanford,  etc.,  etc.

"To  musical  amateurs  this  will  certainly  prove  the  most
attractive  birthday  book  ever  published." — Manchester  Guardian.

"  One  of  those  happy  ideas  that  seems  to  have  been  yearning
for  fulfilment.  .  .  .  The  book  ought  to  have  a  place  on  every
music  stand." — Scottish  Leader.


London :  Walter  Scott,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row,


Winflsor  Series  of  Poetical  Biologies.

Printed  on  Antique  Paper. Crown  8vo. Bound  in  Blue  Cloth,
each  with  suitable  Emblematic  Design  on  Cover ;  Price  js.  6d.
Also  in  various  Calf  and  Morocco  Bindings.


Women's  Voices. An  Anthology  of  the

most  Characteristic  Poems  by  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish  Women.
Edited  by  Mrs.  William  Sharp.

Sonnets  of this Century. With  an

Exhaustive  Essay  on  the  Sonnet. Edited  by  Wm.  Sharp.

The  Children  of  the  Poets. An  Anthology

from  English  and  American  Writers  of  Three  Centuries.  Edited
by  Professor  Eric  S.  Robertson.

Sacred Song. A  Volume  of  Religious

Verse. Selected  and  arranged  by  Samuel  Waddington.

A  Century  of  Australian  Song,  Selected

and  Edited  by  Douglas  B.  W.  Sladen,  B.A.,  Oxon.

Jacobite  Songs  and Ballads.  Selected

and  Edited,  with  Notes,  by  G.  S.  Macquoid.

Irish  Minstrelsy. Edited,  with  Notes  and

Introduction,  by  H.  Halliday  Sparling.

The  Sonnets  of  Europe. A  Volume  of

Translations. Selected  and  arranged  by  Samuel  Waddington.

Early  English  and  Scottish  Poetry.

Selected  and  Edited  by  H.  Macaulay  Fitzgibbon.

Ballads  of  the  North  Countrie.  Edited,

with  Introduction,  by  Graham  R.  Tomson.

Songs  and Poems  of the  Sea.  An

Anthology  of  Poems  Descriptive  of  the  Sea.  Edited  by  Mrs.
William  Sharp.

Songs  and  Poems  of  Fairyland.  An

Anthology  of  English  Fairy  Poetry,  selected  and  arranged,  with
an  Introduction,  by  Arthur  Edward  Waite.

Songs  and  Poems  of  the  Great  Dominion.

Edited  by  W.  D.  Lighthall,  of  Montreal.


London  :  Walter  Scott,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


By  OLIVER  WENDELL  HOLMES.


The  Autocrat  of  the  Breakfast-Table.


The  Poet  at  the  Breakfast-Table.


The  Professor  at  the  Breakfast-Table.


3  Volumes,  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Top,  in  Shell
Case. Price  4s.  6d.

3  Volumes,  Crown  8vo,  Cloth,  Gilt  Top,  in  Cloth
Pedestal  Case,  5s.


Also  in  Half  Polished  Morocco,  Gilt  Top,  Antique
(in  a  variety  of  new  reproductions  of  old  tints).

London  :  Walter  SCOTT,  24  Warwick  Lane,  Paternoster  Row.


A
